Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Midnight weddings: a novel
THE
• MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS. CIIAP. I. HP 1 HE Earl of Dumbarton, Lord Vil¬ more» and Ä Гг. Browning, had returned to the Opera House as soon as they had seen the new married couple safely housed, and had even outstüid our hero and his friend, for the sake of drinking tbe bride and bridegroom's health at free cost, te which they had done so repeatedly, that neither of the three were able to walk in a per- vol. im. . u fectly
fectly strait direction, when they left the masquerade about half an hour after the much admired Turk and his faithful slave, whom they had noticed in common with every body else, and liad agreed his paste ornaments were very good substitutes for real jewels, not entertaining the slightest suspicion of the mighty Sólymán 's being the person they supposed was in bed with the bride, having previously agreed to accompany Lord Dumbarton home, and to wait at his house till they heard from the enraptured bridegroom· To Dover Street therefore they drove, talking over the wedding, and anticipating, disordered as they were, the magnificent appearance the bride would make at St. James's, and agreeing, according to their plan, to appear greatly surprised when they were informed she had not been home, where they
they were to have supposed she had been ever since midnight, having left the mas¬ querade, owing to a sudden headache, and the Lady she had gone with (who by the way only existed in their imagination) having promised to see her safe home. This excuse, as she actually had dressed at a female friend's, they trusted Mrould pass current among the servants, мЬо at ail events dare not ask any questions ; and they were all in such excellent spirits that there is no doubt but they M'ould have performed their parts to admiration ; nay, possibly, they might have exceeded the celebrated Garrick in the ghost scene in Hamlet, had they been called upon to exercise their respective talents ; but they were unfortunately not called upon to exert themselves in the way they had expected. ß 2 The
The reader already knows in what a frame of mind Lady Leonora left Alber¬ marle Street ; her joy at having, as she thought, succeeded so well, and many other reasons, had prevented her from enjoying any degree of repose. The bridegroom, from not having closed his eyes the night before, and upon whom the certainty of having succeeded to his utmost wishes had a very difierent effect, had very soon forgot himself, and thus afforded her curious Ladyship, wdio, like Psyche, expected to perceive, if not the God of Love, a second Adonis by her side, an opportunity of discovering the unfortunate mistake she had committed. Madame D'Aunois has a fai r ν tale in M'hich the heroine, equally curious, and in expectation of finding a model of per¬ fection in her husband, contrary to his express
express orders conceals a light, when, behold, she discovers a hideous monster asleep by her side. Well, even that lady's terror could scarcely have exceeded Lady Leonora's, when she recognised the fea¬ tures of Bourman, Lord Vilmore's valet, in the man to whom she had so recently plighted her faith. Without reflecting upon the strange appearance she made in her masquerade dress, and that not more than half put on, she flew, rather than walked, into Dover Street. The porter and the fťw servants who were waiting her's and their Lord's return, were lost in wonder and astonishment when she entered the hall, but easily conceived something very unpleasant must have befallen her. Without, however, speaking to any o;ie, she ran up the stairs, and shut herself in her ow n apartment The в 3 amazed
amazed servants, having Mearied them¬ selves in conjecturing M'hat could have happened to her, called up those who had retired to bed to tell them the strange tale—how her Ladyship was come on foot, her dress in the greatest disorder, and looking as if she was out of her mind; and that my Lord, though it was now past six, was not yet come home. The wondering household, expecting every succeeding moment to see my Lord brought home dead, or that some equally astonishing sight awaited them, had all assembled in the hall, and M'ere debating upon the very strange occurrence, which had occasioned an equal degree of con¬ sternation in Albermarle Street, when my Lord and his friends arrived, and thus experienced a real, instead of being oblig¬ ed to assume a feigned surprise. " Surely,"
" Surely," said Lord Dumbarton to his companions, as he alighted, gt the new-s—" he stopped, fearful of betraying the secret, and advanced into the house, observing, " Why you all seem to have rose early this morning ! Has any thing occurred to disturb you ? Where is War¬ ren, (Lady Leonora's maid) ? How is her mistress ? I hope she has not been worse since she left the masquerade !" No one ventured to answer his en¬ quiries, each by their looks referring the task to each other. <ť What does ail this mean?" cried the now impatient Peer. " I am fearful her Ladyship is very ill," said Lord Vilmore. " I can't take upon me to say how her Ladyship docs, my Lord," replied the porter; " she has not been at home more в 4 than
than half an hour; she came on foot; her dress was very much disordered, and she appeared so much agitated I am really fearful she has met Math some unpleasant accident." Had the man declared he had not seen her Ladyship since the preceding even¬ ing, Lord Duni barton would then have acted the despairing father with great success; but, tips}' as he was, this very unexpected intelligence nearly sobered him, and certainly made him start. The porter was ordered to repeat his words, while 1m Lordship mentally ejaculated, u Sure in God all is as it should bel" The man told the same story again with even more unpleasant additions. " Caii Warren this moment," said the Earl; ** my daughter left the Opera- house, as I supposed, about midnight, with
with Lady Donadue, in consequence of being tormented м ith a very bad head¬ ache ; M'here she has been from that time till now I am at a loss to guess ; I M'ish all may be as it ought to be." In this he M r as perfectly sincere; nor were Lord Vilmore and his son less so when they joined in the prayer, M'hich having concluded they entered the library to communicate the serious fears they began to entertain to each other ; M'hile the servants in the hall, who were not quite so tipsy as their master aud his friends, nor so easily duped as those gentlemen had expected would be thé case, declared his Lordship did not seem to be so ignorant as he wished to appear; they therefore fancied he knew what was in the wind. In a few minutes, however, instead of » ¿ her
her maid, Lady Leonora herself, in ä loose dressing gown, came down stairs and hurried into tlie library/closing the door after her with a degree of violence which made the very house shake. * ( Well," cried the porter, " let what will have befallen her Ladyship, her strength don't seem to fail her !" ** But it may have humbled her pride," retorted my Lord s valet, who stole near the door in hopes of overhearing what her Ladyship, they presumed, was going to relate* The Earl had given his daughter the meeting, exclaiming— " For Heaven's sake, Leonora, what does this mean ľ' The distressed fair one Hung herself into his arms, declaring she was ruined and undone; nor could they for a consi- A derahle
derable time get her to utter another word, so great was her rage, and so vio¬ lent her agitation; but at last she reduced her auditors to nearly a similar situation, by exclaiming— ť£ It was not the Duke de Valentİnois I accompanied to the altar! but Lord Vilmore's valet." <l What!" cried the nearly frantic Lord Dumbarton; " what did you say, child! —married to a valet !" A violent burst of tears confirmed her assertion. <t Perdition seize the infernal rascal!" said Lord Vilmore; " but I will soon rid you of such a husband. My valet! why, '' in the name of M'onder, how came your Ladyship to be so taken in ?" " And have you actually been in bed with the rascal ?" asked the enraged father. ,в 6 Her
Her Ladyship's silence confirmed his fears. <l Then by Heaven, my child, I will revenge your wrongs! This must have been a contrivance of that d — d French rascal's! Villain that he is! But he shall give me instant satisfaction, and I hope I shall he able to send a brace of balls either through his plotting head or cow¬ ardly heart Give mea pen and ink—But first tell me how you became the dupe of a scheme which must have originated in the prolific brain of that archetype of the great deceiver." Her Ladyship instantly related how, taking him for the Duke, she had accost¬ ed him, and'how well he had passed him¬ self upon her, by the means of his feigned voice, for that nobleman; that he had affected to be rather in liquor, but had at last
last consented to accompany her to the chapel, M'here, for the novelty of the thing, he persisted in being married in his mask; and he had appeared so per¬ fectly M'ell acquainted with every circum¬ stance relating to their former connection, that she suffered him to enjoy his whim, not having the least suspicion of his identity. Both the Peers now broke out into the most bitter execrations against our hero, upon whom they swore, let the conse¬ quence be m hat it would, they wouţd be amply revenged; but after a few minutes reflection Lord Dumbarton wondered how this imp of the devil could have learnt their intendei! plan, looking very hard at both Lord Vilmore ami his son, whose countenances stood the scrutiny without betraying
betraying the slightest symptoms of guilt; and they each solemnly declared they had not mentioned the plan they had in view to any one breathing ; even the clergy¬ man knew no more than that he was to be in waiting, and that he might or he might not be employed, but that at all events he M r ould be paid. " Did you put any one into your con¬ fidence, Leonora? You surely never mentioned it to Lady Helen Desmond?" She as firmly asserted her innocence. " Why then the rascal must have a familiar spirit at his beck and call," re¬ joined the Earl, " and so has contrived to make my poor girl the dupe of a low fellow, whom he instructed hoM' to de¬ ceive her.—He shan't, Innvever, triumph in the success of his plot" Lord
Lord Vilmore vowed, if he escaped his Lordship's aim, he would call him to as severe an account. " It was abominable, cowardly, des¬ picable! No, by Heavens!" he continued, ·' I shall think it no crime to rid the world of tlie young villain, who, I am sure, from this sperimeli of his talents at intrigue, is capable of any crime·" Mr. Browning bad had a bad opinion of him from the moment he understood he meant to support his aunt against his father. t( Why you find he has imbibed her principles," replied Lord Vilmore, *' ebe the late deception Mould never have en- i tered his head." " We are only losing time," cried the , Earl, ** and I think every moment an age
MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS. age till I have forced the base plotter to give me satisfaction. " It appeared a matter of indifference to Lady Leonora Mho, or how many, lost their lives upon her account, so long as she м -as but revenged, as she did not make the slightest attempt to dissuade her father ltom the rash resolution he had form¬ ed, and who hastily м rote a challenge to our hero, which he immediately dispatched by Mr. Browning, мЬо m^is to have the rascal awoke if he was gone to bed, and to bring him an immediate answer, as he declared he would neither eat nor drink till he had either rid the world of the worthless villain or lost his life in the attempt ; it not having entered the heads of any of the patty, that, admitting the Duke had been privy to the deception which
which had been practised upon Lady Leonora, their own iniquitous plot had rendered it perfectly fair for him to reta¬ liate, and had left them whollv at his mercy ; and a moment's serious reflection would have taught them to dread com¬ municating their baseness to his father, who would not fail, through the medium of his ambassador, of making a formal· complaint of them to the Court of St. James's, which would probably terminate in their being dismissed in disgrace from those places from which they derived their chief income·
СНЛР.
»M-
СИЛР. IL Mr. BROWNING reached our hero's hotel soon after seven, and found the friends laughing at the adventures of the night over their coffee. His recent sur¬ prise, serious disappointment, and the not liking having been selected for Lord Dumbarton's messenger, had all com¬ bined to sober him; he therefore, with¬ out speaking, having previously bowed, presented the Earľs gentle message to the Duke, who ordered a chair to be placed
for him while he broke the seal of the note, which he read with perfect compo^ sure, then said— u Pray what am I to understand, Sir, from this strange letter? I have, it should appear, though I am at a loss to guess when or where, affronted the Earl of Dumbarton, who commands me to meet him in Hyde Park ; I must, therefore, request you will inform me how his Lord¬ ship chances to think himself authorized to address me in such language ?" " The Earl feels the provocation your Grace has given him, as, it is to be sup· posed, a father anxious for the welfare of his children must do." " That is not coming to the point, Sir.—I deiy the Earl to accuse me of having violated the laws of honour, however
however he may have been tempted to transgress them." " Then your Grace don't call it a breach of honour, having dressed up my father's valet to represent you at the masquerade, and having by this means afforded him an opportunity to draw Lady Leonora M'Dougall into a con¬ nection of the most disgraceful nature." " And does Lord Dumbarton suppose me capable of having arranged such a plan?" " He certainly does, your Grace, be¬ cause no one but you could have given the rascal instructions how to deceive her Ladyship." " Indeed!" replied our hero, " then I am of opinion he is much more obliged to the Eari and your father than to mc ; return,
return, therefore, to his Lordship, and tell him I have accidentally, and since my return home, learnt what an advan¬ tage has been taken of her Ladyship's credulity; but assure him that the deep laid scheme, of which she has been the dupe, originated in himself, and not in me; and if this does not satisfy him, I will give him the meeting he demands, when he addresses me in less peremptory terms. " " The Earl is not to be trifled with, your Grace," replied the emboldened Browning, who fancied our hero was as deficient fa point of courage as himself, because he evinced that real calmness which is the sure proof of undaunted valour, and did not* hector, bluster, or threaten to cane both his Lordship ami himself, which he had rather feared would le
be the case; " he desired me to bring him a decisive answer, appointing time and place, and requests that the first may not exceed half an hour." " Then desire his Lordship to take a little longer time to reflect μΊιο is most to blame, himself or me; at the same time you may add, I am very sorry that he paved the w r ay for M'hat has befallen his daughter, and that I am ready to receive him here, or to give him the meet¬ ing in Dover Street, to explain myself still more fully, if he is at a loss to un¬ derstand my meaning." " I cannot think of returning with such a message, your Grace," said Brown¬ ing, who had chose to remain standing, and whose countenance had now a sort of malignant sneering expression, which so provoked the Duke, that starting from his
his chair he gave him a box on the ear, which made him stagger towards the door, where he gave him a kick upon a part that shall be nameless, as he was hastily trying to open it, telling him he presumed he would be able to inform the person who had sent him how much he despised both him and his messenger. tť Bravo! my dear friend," cried Lord Fitzhayman ; (( I longed to have kicked the insolent puppy down stairs, for I perceived, from the moment of his en¬ trance, that he was very much inclined to be impudent.' But could you have supposed Lord Dumbarton would have ventured to have called you to an ac¬ count?" Ir I can't say I should; I would only have him take care he don't force me to expose
expose him and his accomplice in self- defence," " And if you mention the matter to 3'our father, I think they will have reason to repent their deep laid scheme." While this matter M r as debating be¬ tween our hero and his friend, Brown¬ ing flew back into Dover Street. Lord Dumbarton was busily employed in pre¬ paring his pistols for action, when his breathless ambassador gave him an ac¬ count of the reception he had met with from that most insolent of all French scoundrels, the Duke de Valentİnois,— The Earl renewed his former impreca¬ tions against our hero, (and was warmly seconded by Lord Vilmore) vowing he would force the young rascal, in spite of all his cowardly evasions, to give him immediate
immediate satisfaction. Lord Vihnore declared himself ready to sccoud hb laud¬ able intentions. ťí Then wc will 2:0 to his lodsrinir* in a body, this very moment," cried the en- raared EarL A second pair of pistols was given to Lord Vihnore, and having thrown oif the dissernes thev had worn over their other clothes, they set out for Alhcrmarle Street, where, soon after Mr· Brov»ning\s departure, the bridegroom had been sum¬ moned to attend our hero, and was still with him when the furious trio, in spite of waiters or servants, burst into his Grace's dressing-room, and the enraged Caledonian, regardless of consequences, exclaimed— '* Scoundrel! villain! follow me this moment, or take your choice of these vol. m. с weapons,
weapons, and let us settle our accounts where you are, for satisfaction I will have before I leave thL> room !" Lord Vilmore seconded his eloquent friend. Browning prudently kept in the back ground. " This is very strange behaviour, Gen¬ tlemen!" said the Duke, approaching the half-frantic Scot; " and I shall certainly require your motives for thus intruding upon me to be explained; and also why vou. Lord Dumbarton, chose to send me a note, very much of a piece with your present language, by that insolent young fellow, who refused to return with my answer !" " He did right," cried the Scot ; " so follow me without delay, if you wish to escape manual chastisement." While the Earl was speaking, the bride¬ groom,
groom, who had retired as much out of sight as possible, endeavoured to slink out of the room, but was descried bv his master, M'ho, seizing him by the collar, began to vent a torrent of abuse against him, holding a pistol the Mİıole time so near his head that the terrified plotter begged for mercy even upon his knees, M'hile the exasperated Lord Vihnore swore he would shoot him that moment if he did not in¬ stantly confess every thing he knew. " Oh! finish him at once," cried Lord Dumbaiton ; 6i 'tis a pity all such rascals an't pistolled out of the мау. But what have vou to sav in vour own defence?" Though meaning to address the valet, his Lordship chanced to turn his eyes towards the Duke, who said— i£ Was it me you addressed, my Lord ?" с £ « I
<c I addressed both you and your ac¬ complice, young man, since you don't seem inclined to give me the satisfaction I still require from you." i( Of M*hat does your Lordship accuse me? If you can bring any charge against me to warrant your behaviour, I vvill soon convince you that my present for¬ bearance is not the result of cowardice, but a proof how sincerely I despise both you, your accomplice, and your puerile threats." " Did not you tamper with that worst of all rascals to represent you at the mas¬ querade last night, for the express purpose of deceiving my daughter?" " Did your Lordship hope to awe me intoa confession of my supposed guilt, by pointing a loaded pistol towards me? It has, however, failed of the desired effect, for
for 1 never yet felt what fear was; nor will I answer what I consider a very impertinent question, while my satisfying your curiosity might appear to be owing to your having succeeded in intimidating me." Rather awed by our hero's undaunted air and determined speech, and conscious, perhaps, that be was playing a most desperate game, he hastily pocketed the pistol. íť Ì had no intention to frischten vour Grace ; but I call upon you, as a man of honour, to declare, whether you did uot contrive the plan which enabled that das¬ tardly scoundrel to trepan my unfortu¬ nate daughter into a marriage, which must prove her ruin if it is not imme¬ diately set aside; and, as her father, I think 1 have a right to demand an instant с 3 and
and an explicit answer to my very plain question.—Only remember, if you were concerned in this infernal plot, you are no gentleman if you any longer refuse to give me satisfaction." " And so your Lordship dares to accuse mc of having been the framer of the plot of whiih your daughter has been the victim ; the mere supposition I con- rider as a very gross insult* though I am rot surprised at your judging me capable of contriving what you thought it no ¿hhonour to plan.—But there stands the man who took advantage of your daugh¬ ter's wish to draw me into a clandestine carriage, and I refer you to him for funiculars.—Come forward, Bourman— í о one will < T ftre again to molest you in my presence—and repeat to Lord Dumbarton and his-accomplices the tale you told - ^ ■ me
me not an hour ago, and force them to blush for having afforded you an oppor¬ tunity of deceiving both Lady Leonora and themstives " Completely silenced by insinuations they but too well understood, the no longer blustering trio waited iu silence the result of the Duke's appeal to t:;e bridegroom, who no longer in fear for his life, and certain of being strenuously supported, immediately de utile J how he had managed to deceive, more or less, every one present, concluding by ob¬ serving, iu Lord Vilmore's own words, the knot was now tied too fast to be undone; they had therefore best not provoke him to make their base inten¬ tions respecting the Duke de Valentİnois more public than they м т еге already; and he now informed them, he should require с 4 both
both his M'ife and her fortune of her father, whom he set, as well as his late master, at open defiance. " Are vou satisfied, Gentlemen?" ask- ed our hero; " for my own part 1 think you. Lord Dumbarton, are very justly punished; and I Mould have you, Lord Vilmore, take care how 30« again enter into any plot against me, for fear, in con¬ sequence of my implementations, my father should make you feel that he is not to be offended, iu the person of his son, with absolute impunity." The bridegroom had perfectly misun¬ derstood them both, was the very jejune defence they attempted to make, while they h umbi ν sued for ids Grace's pardon, having transferred all their wrath upon the devoted Bourman, whom Lord Vil¬ more desired to leave England with all possible
possible expedition if he wished to escape rotting in a prison. The valet replied, he should first call upon his Lordship for the wages due to him, and for his clothes, and then, if he was put in immediate possession of the five thousand pounds his wife had lately in¬ herited, he would leave her to follow the bent of her own inclinations, while he consoled himself with the money ш his own country. 14 Then now, Gentlemen," said the Duke, " I must request 1 may be left in quiet possessmu of my apartments, aud that you would think yourselves very much indebted both to my lenity and patience for not ha\ ing given you into the charge of rie peace officers.'4 r lhe trio took the 1 int, and with a very bad grace ack no u led ged they had been gredd) to bLuw; but protested Bourman с å hall
had vilely «jexaggerated their intentions, which were merely to have seconded a tery innocient r>lan Lady Leonora had in view to have regained our hero's affec¬ tions; they therefore hoped he would not, upon tLe* ;bare ; assertions of a sly designing rascal, represent them to his father as having concerted so base a scheme as that arch deceiver had laid to their charge. As the Duke did not appear inclined to set their minds at ease, nor indeed to attend to what they said, fearful of ren¬ dering him still more their enemy, they retired in far better order and with infinite more humility than they entered, and returned into Dover Street, accusing each other of being tie primary cause of the late severe mortification they hail under¬ gone, and declaring their fears of having so
so completely roused the young lion y that Lady Leonora's marriage would prove a trifling misfortune in comparison to those that might vet be in store for them. Lord Vilmore wondered how Lady , Leonora could have been so easily duped. The Earl, eager to exonerate himself, was not sparing in reproaches to his daughter, мЬо, he affirmed, must have •been blind not to have seen the difference between Bourman and one of the hand¬ somest naen of the age, even under a ¿mask. 11 r Ladyship could only answer -by her tears, though she eu treated she might never be obliged to seç the low fellow again, as <deai,h in a#y shape, would t be preferable to living with such a wietch, and she was still of opinion his .Grace had been more, in his secrets than he . chose to acknowledge. ·.. . с 6 She
She might he right ; but they dare not make any further stir in the business, having unfortunately afforded him but too much reason to retaliate upon them; t but the fears they now began to enter¬ tain, of his rendering their ill-judged scheme public, redoubled the. hatred they had all borne him from the moment they had thought it policy to humble his as¬ piring spirit. But though more to blame, in the present instance than Lord Vil¬ more, Lord Dumbarton was by no means so depraved a character Disappointed, in the fint instance, of forming a rich alli¬ ance for his daughter, and rendered nearly desperate by a variety of untoward acci¬ dents, he had wbhed to bring about a connection between her and our hero at any risk; haung however failed in his base attempt, and conscious of having forfeited
forfeited all his former pretensions to honour, he was half inclined to hide his head in some obscure village upon the Continent with his less repentant but still more mortified daughter; and this he told both her and his friend· Lady Leonora was perfectly indifferent %here she resided, or, indeed, what he- tame of her, though she wished she could be any way revenged upon the unfeeling Avreteh, who, she was cominced. en¬ joyed her having so easily become his di.pe. Lord Vilmore rather dreaded the censures of the public ; but he was too tnuch a villaiu from principle to feel any of those qualms which now assailed his frieud, and which he mcrclv attributed to their having failed in their enterprise; he therefore reminded the Caledonian that he had sworn to revenge their jo» ut 6 wrongs,
wrongs, and no one could say he bad ever departed from his word, when he had once given it; " therefore keep up your spirits," he continued; *' I will see that rascal Bourman, with whose dis¬ position I am perfectly acquainted ; and *I think I have him in some subjection ; though I believe it w ill be most prudent ito give him up the five thousand pounds her Ladyship owes to her god-mother, upon condition that he leaves the kingdom immediately, and fbst contradicts every thing he said before those two young fellows this morning; and leť us but once get him out of the way, and I fancy the proud Duke will find it a dif¬ ficult matter to substantiate any charges he may bring forward against us ; and at all events, in Italy, where, I am con¬ vinced, that knave will bend his steps, we
we may easily get rid of him,, and thus free her Ladyship from so despicable an engagement ; though, were I in her place?, 1 should not consider such a mock-mar¬ riage at all binding." j " Only let us take care," replied tlie attentive Lord Dumbarton, " we do not make bad worse; though I agree it is necessary the worthless rascal should he sent out of England, as he will certainly be considered as. my son-in-law—tlie bare idea drives me mad I The money, ill as we can spare it, he must have ; and we must make him, if possible, re- ,tract what he said this morning. Good heavens ! that ever we should lay our¬ selves opeu to the detection of such a wretch ! As for the Duke, take my word for it he is no coward ; and depend upon it he will be veiy much upon Ш* guard; thciciore
therefore let us beware how we form any Other plan to injure him : remember who he is, and what he gave us to understand ; and recollect what long arms his father has got ! There are no bastiles in Eng¬ land, I will allow ; but should we fall ^into disgrace, ме might as well, if not better, be confined at government ex- pence for life " 11 Very true ! and I own I shall live in fear of his inducing his father to make a fuss about our having undertaken to provide him with a wife ; besides, he is particularly in my way ; for my sister*s 1 health declines apace, and I have been as f u red she means to make him her heir; and he is of the same opinion, 1 suppose; for he has been down to the Abhty to pay his court to the plotting jèzabel. However, I am advised to rest upon my Q<irs
oars for a time, till we see which way her complaint turns; and should the worst happen which I can have to dread, why I must sue her heir, who, being a foreigner, will, I am assured, fail in establishing his ciaims; nevertheless I wish he was fairly out of the world. " " Aye, in a fair way !" rejoined Lord Dumbarton, who сЬоье to give his friend to understand he would never join in any plan likely to injute even the man he hated. But Lord Vilmore was too much of a Browning ever to forgive even an imaginary injury, much less what he considered a real one : he Mas, besides, like his late brother, of so obstinate a dispo¬ sition, that when once he had come to a determination, he never was known to recede, let his perseverance be never so injurious to his interest. Not, hove\er, finding
finding his friend so likely to second life last project as he had hoped, he took his leave of both father and daughter, promising to make Bourman subscribe to the proposed terms ; and, as he rather expected, he found him M'aiting his re¬ turn. Conscious that he had in more instances than one put himself very much in the power of the wary Italian, he received him with a smile, saying— *' Now we are alone, I can venture to wish you joy ; though, to blind your father-in-law, I was obliged to affcet tö see your recent marriage in the same light as he did; but, upon my soul, I give you great credit for your dexterity. The young Duke came down handsome, I suppose ; and you were right in secur¬ ing yourself such a friend. Bourman affected to be his master's dupe, though ho
he protested the Duke had been as much in the\dark as Lady Leonora, till ail was over : however, it now rested with Lord Dumbarton to make him his friend or his foe." Lord Vilmore observed, it was to the Earľs interest to make him the latter, telling him upon what terms that Noble¬ man had commissioned him to treat with him, and hinting how politic it would be in him to subscribe to his and Lady Leonora s wbhes, as his Lordship certainly might force him to go to law for the money he was willing to advance him im- mediately, or might prosecute him for the deception he had been guilty of; instead of which he made him a very fair offer, which he hoped he would not hesitate to close with. As Bourman had not been at all ac¬ tuated
tűnted by love, nay, in fact, thought her Ladyship would rather prove a torment to him, he came into the proposed plan more readily than his master expected : he was therefore put in immediate posses¬ sion of the money, and left London the same evening, having given both Peers free permission to say he had recanted every WOrd he had advanced in the morning, or to frame any other story at his expence, likely to remove the odium they feared would attach to their cha¬ racters·
СИЛР.
CHAP. III. " E must now return to our hero and his, friend, M'ho sat for some time talking over the amazing assurance of their late visitors. Lord Fitzhayman hoped his Grace meant to mention their kind in¬ tentions toward him, м -fien he wrote to his father. The Duke believed he should hint at their scheme, because he must else make a sort of chasm in his journal; nor should he be able to account satisfac« torily for the anonymous letter. They then
then separated, Octavius promising to remember his dinner engagement, when lie was to give the Marchioness and Lady Helen his opinion of the masquerade, but cautioned his friend not to mention how he came by his superb dress, be¬ cause he should not chuse to explain the motive which had induced him to accept of such a costly present. He was no sooner alone than he once more opened the talisman he owed to the Savoyard, and contemplated with increasing admi¬ ration her beautiful features. Surely he should see the charming original again ! Should he or should he not mention her to his father, it would be a convincing proof of his confidence; he therefore decided to write him a full account of every circumstance, and sat down ac¬ cordingly, but had so much to say he had
had scarcely brought his journal down to the present moment, when Wilson took the liberty of reminding him that it was past four, and that Lord Trelawney dined at five. This induced him to bring his voluminous epistle to rather a more abrupt conclusion than he had intended, having been far more particular in de¬ tailing the Savoyard's conversation, and in expatiating upon her beauty, than in his account of the Dumbarton and Vil¬ more plot; indeed, he made as light as he possibly could (consistent with truth) of their intentions, pronouncing them much more than sufliciently punished by the not only total failure of their plan upon him, but by her Ladyship's having so very unintentionally mated herself with a man, whom she must doubtless bribe to leave the kingdom at any price. Having
Having sealed and directed his packet, he sent it off to the Ambassador's before he sat down to his toilette, M'hich the lateness of the hour obliged him to dis¬ patch a la hate, as the clock struck ñvc just as the carriage drove up to the door of Trelawney-House. Little conversation therefore of course pissed before dinner, though, during the repast, the ladies told our hero they had read the praises of a most elegant Turkin several papers, declaring he ought to liave called in Grosvenor-square before he went to the Opera House, that they might have had an opportunity of seeing the most ad¬ mired mask among the motley group. " Then my eulogists were more partial to glitter than to aterling merit," replied his Grace; " for there were some most excellent characters, exceedingly well supported,
supported, and it is they who constitute the chief amusement of such places, not those who display their vanity or their folly." * ť A little of both gives a zest to the whole," said the Marquis; u but my son informs me a White Friar played his part to the greatest admiration ; the God¬ dess of the Silver Bow was not so correct in hers." The presence of the servants prevented the Duke from expatiating upon this ludicrous M'edding; but as soon as they were withdrawn, the young men gave a free loose to their mirth. The Mar¬ chioness had been most surprised at Lord Dumbarton's behaviour during the visit he had paid his Grace that morning. The Marquis thought it inexcusable, and every мау unbecoming a British Peer. VOL. lib D " But
u But does your Lordship consider the mortification he had just experienced?" replied our hero, " I do not think he Mas himself. Lord Fitzhayman and my¬ self left him at the Masquerade more than three parts tipsey: he was therefore nearly frantic when he challenged me, and, I be¬ lieve, would have stood foot to foot, had I felt inclined to give him the meeting he re¬ quired ; so that, upon the Mdiole (though I cannot pretend to say I feel myself at all obliged to him for his plan with respect to myself having proved abortive) I am inclined to pity as much as I con¬ demn him. Indeed Lord Vilmore, míio could only be actuated by private pique, was, in my opinion, much the most to blame of the two. However, in no other company shall I ever mention the visit they chose to pay me, nor even their names,
names, as I would have them tell their own story, which I am fearful thcy will find a sufficient irksome task, without being exposed to the additional misfor¬ tune of being contradicted." " Then your Grace may truly be said to fulfil the scripture," observed the Marquis; " though, upon my honour, I do not think that, were I in vour place, I should be inclined to treat them with the same degree of lenit v." Another subject was, however, now started, and the comparative beauties of France and England were very ably dis¬ cussed by Lord Trelawney, who was the most competent of the company to argue upon the subject· As the Duke's travels in both coun¬ tries had hitherto been verv circum- » scribed, he observed that he should d 2 like
like to see Bath and Bristol before he returned to Paris, as he might never have such another opportunity ; and it was positively a shame for a man to have spent onc-and-twenty years of his life in Great Britain Mdthout bavins: visited two cities, which were the resort and admiration of every foreigner. He ac¬ cordingly asked Lord Fitzhayman if he could make it convenient to take a short tour with him, as the time slipped away so agreeably his six weeks would soon be gone, and be should deem it inex¬ cusable not to be able to give some account of two such celebrated places when he returned. The Marquis, who scarcely knew how to shew this descendant of royalty suffi¬ cient respect, immediately said he was sure Lord Fitzhayman would enjoy such a tour;
tour; he only wished his duty would have allowed him to have joined their party. The Marchioness applauded the notion, and even promised to wait their return in town, as she was feaiful the Duke would not have time to visit the Mar¬ quis's principal seat in the north, м -here they usually spent their summer months. It was therefore agreed, as the weather was delightful, even for the season, that they should set out tiie following after¬ noon, as they proposed being absent about ten days, or a fortnight at most, by wliich time tliey hoped some other adventure would have made the fashion¬ able world forget the unfortunate mis¬ take the fair Diana had made when she parted with her liberty, as, during their first surprise, they were convinced they d 3 should
should (being rather considered as actors in the farce) be assailed with a thousand* questions. The Marchioness commended their delicacy, as it was ever her maxim to be silent when she must, were she to give her opinion, condemn ; and in the present instance, she observed, she could only plead ignorau ce, as she must neces¬ sarily drop Lady Leonora's acquaintance, M'hom she could much sooner have for¬ given had she married Bourman because she had loved him, than for having laid so abominable a scheme, either to trepan or to force the Duke de Valentİnois to give her his hand.
CHAP.
CHAP· IV. amuse our readers with a descrip¬ tive account of either Bath or Bristol would be truly absurd, as those who are acquainted with those places would pro¬ bably think us very incompetent to the undertaking, and those who are not would derive very little entertainment from our detailing every step our tra* vellers took; suffice it therefore to say, that having seen every thing worthy notice either city afforded, our hero and d 4 his
ГТГЧ io
' his friend arrived very safe at the Hot Wells on the fifth day, where they took up their abode at the first hotel that celebrated water-drinkmg-place afforded for the reception of people of distinction. The four follow ing days were spent in exploring the various fiue views those very picturesque environs affoid the in¬ valid or the lounger; upon the inhabi¬ tants they are nearly lost. During dinner the last day, they asked the landlord, who chose to wait himself upon such distinguished guests, what more there remained to be seen, either in the immediate vicinity, or within a dozen miles. He strongly recommended their visiting either the Old or New Pas¬ sage-House, upon the borders of the Severn, from either of which they would have a very fine view of Wales and the adjacent
adjacent country, not to mention King- Road, &c· " Had Ave known of this sooner," said the Duke, βί I would have crossed the water into Wales, by way of saying I had been there; it is not more than three miles over, I have been informed." Lord Fitzhayman wished they had made their enquiries earlier, or that his friend's limited stay would have allowed them to have prolonged their tour ; but as this was not the case, they agreed to ride to the New Passage the following day, conceiving they should have a far better view of the country on horseback than were they to go in their carriage ţ and as there was a very good inn, they would dine there, lake a full view' of Wales, and return in the eveninsr. Having thus settled their plan, they d 5 took
took a short stroll upon the hill, and when the sun declined, they came down upon the Terrace leading to the Pump- Room, which overlooks the Avon, and forms a sort of general rendezvous, morn¬ ing and evening for the water-drinkers, and other company assembled at the Wells. While they were sauntering backwards and forwards, a man, whom they had perceived for some time loitering about, and as it were dodging them, at last came towards them, hat in hand, saying, íť I heard by chance at the inn, your Honour, that you Noblemen want to go to the Passage in the morning, and that you would like to see Wales." " You are very right, my friend, ,? replied the Duke; " but what induced you to accost us ?" « Why
" Why and please your Honour, I can point out so much better a way for you to take that there jaunt. My two brothers and I, c\o you see, have got one of the nicest little pleasure-boats ever sM 7 um upon this here river ; she lays for all the Morid like a duck upon the water, and will sail in any wind, either np or down Channel. Bless, you, we have been out in her in all weathers, and never knew Mİıat fear was, because we were never in no more danger than your Honours are now; and I am sure the weather is made on purpose, if a body may say so, for such jaunts, and the water is as smooth as a mill-pond; and then the tide serves just right to go and return almost by daylight· We can be down in King-Koad in an hour, when you will have a perfect sight of all thjsm d 6 rocks
rocks the gentlefolks come far and near for to see. Squire S ------ 's fine Wood's Pill, Lamplighter's flail, and the pret¬ tiest village just above Shirehampton that ever you seed" far and near ; and once out, you will see my Lord's Pen Pole, and I can't tell you what besides; then we can take a turn round' the Dinney, from where you may see the famous Mendip-IIills in Somersetshire, Dundry Tower, our great land-mark, and down below Newport in Wales ; and we can run up with the tide to thé Black Rock in Wales, or still higher, or else we will land you at either of the Fassage- Houses on this side, either of which will afford you very good accommodations ; and you may remain on shore for four, or five, or six hours, or you may dine on board, if you prefer it; and I will insure your being
being back at the Wells by ten o'clock at the latest, for we draw very little water, so can come in with the first of the tide; and I am sure you will like it a thousand times better than going by land : we often take such trips as I have been telling you of, and, I miiy say, we have alwavs given satisfaction to our employers, except one old Lady, who squalled for the best part of an hour when she got out in King-Road, because there happened to be about as much wind as would have blown out a farthing rushlight: so what say you, Gentlemen? we will go at jour ou n hour, only eight, or half past, will be the very nick of time. We aiways trust to the generosity of such great folks as your Honours. Our little boat has just been new painted, and looks something like ; but it is get- 6 ting
ting rather too dark just now to see hef in all her glory like, though wc lie just by, always ready, M'hen at home, which is not often, for we are mostly bespoke ; but to-morrow we have nothing particular to do; only if we don't go to sea we can always find other employment ; but I like to know a. little beforehand, that I may have every thing in order. " The prolix orator having at last ceased speaking, the Duke, who had been very much amused by his elocution, asked Lord Fitzhayman what he thought of the proposal. * <fc Why, according to this good man's account, I conceive it will be a very pleasant jaunt ; in such M r eather the water is delightful." " I am quite of your opinion," replied the Duke rin French; " but we must know
know a little more about our intended pilots before we engage them. If, as this man tells us, they are accustomed to take these sort of trips, why we shall run no risk in committing ourselves, to their guidance; and I own I should prefer dining in Wales to taking that repast on this side of the water, because then I may with truth affirm I have been in that part of his Majesty's dominions. Suppose we accompany this eloquent orator to take a survey of this beautiful boat he mentions in such terms of admiration ; he says it lies at no great distance." " With all my heart," replied his Lordship. The man had stood listening, to what to him was perfectly unintelligible, in silent wonder ; but when the Duke men- tioned their wish to see his boat, he ap¬ peared
peared highly pleased, and led the M'ay to a small niche a little below Roundam Passage, where lay the vessel upon which he' had bestowed such extravagant en¬ comi Ums. Two other men were on board her, whom the friends guessed, from the strong family resemblance, were their Conductor's brothers. They could not step on board as she lay, but acknowl¬ edged she appeared to deserve the ex¬ cellent character which had been given her; and the brothers seized the oppor¬ tunity to enumerate the various heavy gales she had weathered, protesting she 'was the fastest sailer within a hundred miles ; in short, they seemed so perfectly 'masters of their trade, that the geutle- frien began to have a very high opinion of their nautical abilities. They had returned from Ilfracombe only three days
days before, where thcy had been M'ith a party of ladies and gentlemen, seven in number, and a most delightful jaunt it had been; and the same party had engaged them for the next week, to take them down to Tenby in Pembrokeshire ; enquiring how many people their Honours meant to take. " We shall be only our two selves, my friend," replied the Duke; " for I see no necessity for our taking any ser¬ vants. What say you, Fitz ?" " Oh, they would merely be a restraint upon us," was the answer. The men were therefore absolutely en¬ gaged, and it was agreed to start by half past eight at latest, by which means they should just have time to get down to King-Road, sail round the Dinney, and go up with the first of the tide to l the
the Black-Rock, or any where else their Honours chose to be landed, which would be seeing the country to advantage. " Then suppose we take the gentle¬ men to------" said one of those on board, " which is as far as we ever go, to return the same dav, and then their Honours might see them there ruins at what do ye call em Abbey ; and they may have a special good dinner at the pubiic-house just below." " Then there you shall take us, my friend," said the Duke. (i Here is some earnest," putting a guine'a iuto their conductor's hand, (i to drink our healths. We shall depend upon you to call us in the morning." Having returned his Honour a pro¬ fusion of thanks, the men promised to have every thing ready in time, and the friends
friends returned to their inn in excellent spirits, anticipating the pleasure their proposed jaunt appeared likely to afford them, and gave the men credit for hav¬ ing put them in so much a better method of seeing the coast on either side, not to mention the satisfaction the having vi¬ sited Wales would afford the Duke. By half past eight the following morn¬ ing they M'ere informed the eldest of the three brothers was in waiting to conduct them to the boat; and upon being ad· mitted, he asked if they had not better put a little basket of provisions on board ; the sea air often gave folks a surprising appetite, and he had known many regret not having taken such a precaution. The man's real motive for this sugges¬ tion was obvious ; but immediate orders were given to have a few cold delicacies, and
and something more substantial for the sailors, put up with a bottle of Madeira and two or three of liquor, as the Duke thought the man deserved to be well- treated for his manœuvre. Every thing being ready by half past eight, they stepped on board. The M'ater in the river M'as low, but owing to a strong fresh, the men engaged to be down in time, and by м>ау of facilitating their progress, two of them rowed in a little boat, M'hich had the Reuben and William in tow, the elder brother under¬ taking to steer them down Channel. They M'ere, however, too late M ; hen they got into King-Road to take the, pro 1 - posed trip round the Dinney, as the tide flowed rather sooner than they expected ; but they promised the gentlemen they should not be disappointed, as they should
should be able to go round with much more ease when they returned, pointing out the certainty of what they advanced with great precision. The morning w r as delightful, and every thing appearing in unison with the friends' feelings, they w r ere highly gratified with their excursion. The sailors pointed out every thing wor¬ thy their notice, as they sailed up the Severn with a delightful side breeze, which, the men observed, would be equally fair to bring them back again ; however, supposing it blew a hurricane, there would be nothing to fear in the Reuben and William. The gentlemen found so much to ad¬ mire, they paid but little attention to their conductor's boasting ; but as they got on much faster than they had expected, they agreed to proceed to the viUage, from
from whence they might walk to Tintern Abbey» and меге, in consequence, landed at ------ about one o'clock, M'hen they asked their pilots how long they might remain on shore, to admit their reach¬ ing the Wells again by ten, or half past at latest. The eldest began to calculate, then told them they could give them ñve hours, and they Mould not stand for a handful of minutes into the bargain, as they were the lads to fetch up the lee¬ way with a wet sail, and they would take care to keep the boat afloat. " Did they M 7 ish to have the basket of pro¬ visions brought on shore ?" As they hoped and expected, they were desired to make free M'ith its contents, the gentlemen promising to come on board by six at latest; when, having taken a snap, * and ordered
ordered their dinner to be ready at half past four,., they sat out with a guide for Tintem Abbey, and after having ex¬ plored and admired its various beauties, they visited every thing else worthy notice in the neighbourhood, ascending several hills for the sake of enjoying the truly sublime prospects which their sum¬ mits afforded; M'hen, having obtained a very keen appetite, they returned to their inn highly gratified with what they had seen ; and the Duke declared he would give the pilots an additional guinea each, besides the five he thought they would. have fairly earned, for having procured them so much pleasure. They sat over their bottle till hear six, м hen they re¬ turned on board. Their sailors had not been able to eat all the provisions, though they had managed to empty the bottles; they
they M'ere therefore rather more than in high spirits, as his Grace observed ; but the weather was so fine, they м-еге per¬ suaded they should reach the Wells in safety, even admitting they had been all dead drunk, and that they had been obliged to undertake to steer for them¬ selves. Their skill was not, however, put to the trial, as they might, had they chosen, have come to an anchor in King- Road before dark; but the men had not forgot their promise to sail round the Dinney; they therefore stood out for mid-channel, where they expected to meet the tide after they had taken the proposed trip. This Dinney, as it is named, is a small spot of land, which is always visible, even during the highest tides, and lies nearly mid-channel, though it inclines rather
rather more towards King-Road than the Welch coast. The Severn is supposed to be about fifteen miles from shore to shore at this place, and this little island appears to be about five or six miles from the mouth of the Bristol river ; and just at sun set the Reuben and William was within about two miles of this Dinney, and between that and the Welch shore, and there they proposed laying to to wait for the tide, which was to carry them in. Night, however, coming on rather sooner than they expected, the sun having gone down under a cloud, and there being no moon tij I near mid¬ night, the gentlemen advised, if it were practicable, their running nearer to the mouth of the river, which, to oblige them, thcy affected to do, though, in fact, they stood out farther than before ; vol. iii, е but
but when the Duke made the remark, they told him he M r as deceived by the appearance of things, owing to the night's closing in rather hazy. At last, however, it grew very dark, though not sufficiently so to prevent the young gentlemen from perceiving that the tide had turned, though they were unable to distinguish land on either side of them. " We shall not reach the Wells by midnight, at this rate," said the Duke; but they ail sw r ore he v T ould tell a very different story an kour hence, and that he would see land before he was aware of it. They had for some time been tacking about, and appeared to be in a much greater bustle than was necessary, having frequent recourse, as it began jto grow cold, to the gin-bottle· The two friends reprobated
reprobated tbis practice in a language they did not understand, and only won¬ dered there were not more accidents happened, than generally dkl occur, through the known partiality of sailors to this liquor, and the weather was cer¬ tainly not sufficiently cold at this season to render such repeated draughts of their favourite cordial necessary. Not being, however, themselves pro¬ vided even with great coats, they kept pacing the deck of the little bark by M'ay of keeping their blood in circulation, though their progress ivas frequently in¬ terrupted by what their conductors called trimming their sails, to stand in with the tide. During one of these bustles Lord Fitzhayman was separated from the Duke ; but as this had happened before, he did e 2 not
not turn round, though he heard a sort of scuffle behind him, till something gave a crash, and appeared to fall overboard with great force by the noise it made in the water. He started round, crying, " What is that?" but upon attempting to advance, he fell over one of the men, two of whom were down upon their faces, leaning over the side of the boat; and while he м -as endeavouring to recover his feet, the vessel gave so sudden a roll, that he nearly lost his balance the second time ; but upon looking round him, he no longer perceived the Duke ; he there¬ fore instantly exclaimed— " For Heaven's sake ! where is my friend ?" " Don't be frightened," replied one of them, who continued extended, appa¬ rently 4
rently fumbling over the side, " we shall get hold of him in a crack." %i What, villains!" he retorted: "have you . shoved him overboard?" running to the side to look over, with- out reflecting that the vessel was now upon another tack. His unguarded speech, however, nearly cost him his life ; for no longer even pretending to be anxious to recover the Duke, they started upon their feet, swearing, that if he dared to say such another word, they would fling him after him ! his friend's foot had slipped, and they were trying to get hold of him, instead of wanting to drown him : it was ail through his own obsti¬ nacy the accident had happened; they had told them both, more than once, to sit down, and keep out of their way. To describe Lord Fitzhayman's fcel- £ 3 ings
ings at this juncture would be i m pas-' sible, distracted as he was for the fate of his beloved friend, and hearing him¬ self threatened by three drunken wretches, whom he firmly believed would send him to the bottom after the Duke, if thcy thougiit such a step at all necessary to their own safety. Scarcely knowing what he did, he ran from one side of the boat to the other, from head to stern, looking every way for him, yet not daring to hope ever to see him again alive. At last he exclaimed, " There he is î I am sure I see him !" pointing to the spot ; nay, he even vowed he heard him call out. The one at the helm desired the gen¬ tleman might be obliged, declaring he would try to steer to where he pointed once more; therefore they pretended to alter tlie course of their vessel, but iu a very
very few moments not the least shade of any one appeared, nor was there any voice to be heard. Lord Fitzhayman grew half frantic; he begged, prayed, and offered' large rewards, all in the same breath; but they paid little or no attention to what he said, though they affected to be using every effort to recover the unfortu¬ nate young Nobleman, whose fate they loudly deplored ; but at the expiration of half an hour, they declared he was cer¬ tainly gone to Davy Jones's locker: he must have gone down the moment he fell into the water. Could he swim? they enquired ; though even in that case he stood but a poorish chance, they ob¬ served. " He was reckoned a very good swim¬ mer at school," Lord Fitzhayman ^replied ; e 4 " indeed,
indeed, it Mas upon that circumstance he built his gieatest hopes, when he found he had actually fallen ovcrboaid, or, more properly, been flung over the side of the vessel, which he was well convinced in his own mind had been the case, though he had not the slightest proof to bring against the perpetrators of the horrid deed ; and the more he re¬ flected, after he found his own life Mas likely to be spared, the less he could conceive Mhat could have induced these villains to make away with the Duke in so strange a manner, except they had previously robbed him. His watch was a present of his father's, and of immense value, and he ¡supposed he had no in¬ considerable sum in his purse and pocket- book, not to mention his father's picture, which he knew he wore round his neck, Mithin
within his shirt, in memory of his mother, whose hair, he presumed, was blended M'ith that of her royal lover : yet these fellows could not be aware of the intrinsic value of either that or his watch ; but situated as he was, he thought it most prudeut to keep many of his private thoughts to himself, while the brothers swore it was the lirst accident of the kind they had ever met with, and they would not have had it have happened for a hun¬ dred guineas, for, first and last, it might be that sum out of their м г ау, begging ten thousand pardons for the unguarded words they had made use of when his LortUhip had accused them so wrong¬ fully, and at the very time when they меге doing every thing in their power to recover his friend ; they therefore hoped he would not reflect upon what had e 5 escaped
escaped them when they were partly beside themselves. Thus they ran on, alleging they could not owe the gentle¬ man a grudge, since they had never seen him till the night before ; and they must be fools indeed not to know they might lose their characters even by having met M'ith such a misfortune; they would, therefore, have siven anv sum to have been able to save tbe poor gentleman·. Lord Fitzhayman was at a loss what to think or to believe. One moment he was convinced they were guilty, and the next he thought it very possible they might be innocent. He affected, how- ever, to give in to whatever they said, though he would almost as soon have scone to the bottom with his friend, as to be obliged to return without him. lie however resolved, if he did reaeh the Wells
Wells in safety, to- make these awkward MTctehes (if they were guilty of no worse crime) prove their innocence rather more to his satisfaction, or undergo the pu¬ nishment attached to their presumptive villauous intentions. They were in the Bristol river much sooner than he expect¬ ed, though he was convinced they had lost no time in endeavouring: to «ain it from the moment they had declared there were no- hopes of recovering the Duke, cither dead or alive; and if he had not had something in view, he would have requested to have been landed at Lamp¬ lighter's Hall; but had he been so in¬ clined, he thought it was an even chance whether they complied with his wishes, and it was too late for there to be many people upon the look-out ; he besides thought, that if they had iutcmlcd to e 6 have
have drowned him, they would not have brought him into the river; and to give them the least suspicion of his real inten¬ tions M'ould certainly be wantonly en¬ dangering his life, admitting them to be guilty of what he intended to charge them with : he therefore suffered them to proceed, and they reached the Punip- liDom about half past eleven, the men protesting thcy should have been there an hour before if it had not been for the shocking accident, and the delay they liad met with," as they bad left word they should return the same evening, and the sailors had even assured the ser¬ vants they should be back by half past ten at latest. The valets were looking out for their masters, though the ni¿ht was covered in, and consequently very dark, as there were
M f ere neither moon nor stars to be seen ; there was very little appearance of rain, and on shore it was absolutely warm, in comparison to what it was upon tlie water. The two brothers (for such the reader mav recollect tlie valets w ere) Mere there- fore walking backwards and forwaids under the double row of trees leading to the Hot Well House, and very anxiously expecting their return, as they began to fear, from the lateness of the hour, some misfortune (as proved to be the case) had befallen them. At last, to their great joy, they thought they distinguished the Reuben and William emerging from under the shade of the Well-House. The anxious James hardly suffered it to come opposite to where they stood, before he called out in French, " Est ce vous, Μυη~ seigneur?"—* ** Yes !" replied Lord Fi tz- ƒ bayman
bayman in the same language ; u and do you come on board the moment the boat is run on shore, with as many people as you can get together, and let them be provided to act upon the defen¬ sive." . " Something has happened !" cried the honest fellow, addressing his brother; " I did not hear my masters voice!" ťť No," was the reply; íť it was my Lord who spoke; but Ictus run to his assistance." James rather flew than ran towards" Roundam Passage, just above which there is a large livery stable ; and as they saw some of the hostlers, and several gen¬ tlemen's servants were still busied about tbe horses, they hastened to request they would accompany them on board the vessel,
vessel, promising to reward them for their trouble. The men readily agreed to their pro¬ posal, and having hastily armed them¬ selves with broomsticks, dung-forks, Sec. seven of them, headed by the two Wilsons, ran down to the beach, wrhere they arrived before the boat Mas brought to an anchor ; and as it could not come sufliciently near for those on board to be landed immediately, Lord Fitzhay¬ man repeated his former orders, which induced the party under the valet's com¬ mand to step into a small boat, that put them alongside of the large one in a few seconds : thcy instantly stepped on board, when his Lordship charged them to ьс- curc the three sailors, laying hold of the eldest himself) saying— u If you make any resistance, I shall only
only consider) ou the more guilty; but I am resolved you shall undergo a very strict examination before I lose sight of you." They all surrendered themselves with¬ out even attempting to act upon the defensive once, and with the greatest appa¬ rent indifference, the one his Lordship held saying— " This is onlv what I expected when I heard vou call to them there men in your outlandish lingo ; but as we arc all as innocent as the child unborn, we have no need to fear the examination you threaten us with, nor any thing you can do to us." This man's confidence again staggered his Lordship; but as be knew the ur¬ gency of the case justified the steps he Mas taking, he gave his assistants parti¬ cular orders to prevent auy thing from being
being thrown overboard. They pro¬ mised to be upon their guard, while James kept anxiously enquiring for his master. " Wiiere мая his Grace? Surely——" The poor fellow's heart was too full to allow him to express the serious apprehensions he now began to entertain. Lord Fitzhayman w f as at last obliged to tell him, he was afraid he would never see him more, at least alive; M'hile his tears, which were a relief that had hither¬ to been denied him, rather eased his almost bursting heart. The terrified James was too much ago¬ nised to be able to express his grief the same way, but readily joined the Earl in calling down vengeance upon the heads of those who had been the occasion of his death, not doubting, from the orders his
his Lordship had given, that these very fellows were the culprits. A light was sent for before they quitted the vessel, and the three prisoners м^еге searched from head to foot, and the vessel underwent the most exact scrutiny, to see if they could ünd any thing belong¬ ing to the Duke, as the Earl thought it very possible they might have contrived to have robbed him, and then had thrown him overboard, in order to escape detec¬ tion ; but not an article M^as found at all likely to confirm bis suspicions. His Lordship began therefore to lose all hopes of coming at the truth, for he still (not¬ withstanding he could not conceive what purpose their making away with his friend could answer) believed them guilty. He, however, gave orders to have them taken before a Magistrate. He was reminded
reminded of the hour ; but he insisted upon being obeyed, taking upon himself to give any gentleman in the commis- bioii a sufficient reason for disturbing him. One. he was informed, resided upon Sion Hill ; thither, therefore, they proceeded, and the Magistrate rose im¬ mediately upon being informed of the rank of the prisoners' accuser; and late as it was, a crowd of people was assem¬ bled to hear the examination. The Earl first stated his suspicions, &c. but the sailors declared their innocence in such strong terms, and appeared so deeply to lament the misfortune to which they were supposed to have been accessary, that, as his Lordship could bring forward no proof of their guilt, the Justice was, rather unwillingly, obliged to suffer them to remain at large, the law not allowing them
them to be detained upon the bare suppo¬ sition that they dnight have accelerated bis Grace's death: Lord Filzhayman therefore told t hem, he мач very sorry he could not even yet foi bear thinking there bad been some foul play in this melancholy adventure; though why they should enter into a league to deprive a person of his life, who never could have injured them, he could not foresee : he would, therefore, endeavour to think them innocent, giving them five guineas : they therefore declared themselves satis¬ fied with having been taken before a Justice, since it might have afforded so generous a Nobleman some satisfaction ; though God forbid that they should have intentionally hurt even a hair of his Y friends head ; and they would, poor as they were, give the five guineas they had
had just received, and every farthing they were worth, to have landed him safe and sound at the Weils.
CIIAP. V. СЮ dreadful a misfortune occasioned no small degree of consternation at the house where the friends had taken up their abode. Lord Fitzhayman, whose grief M r as unfeigned, hardly knew M'hat to do : one moment he thought of set- ting out for London with all speed ; the next he was detained by the hope, M'hich was
Mas now held out to him, that the botlv might be found in the morning, or, at all events, in the course of a few days, as the tide would inevitably wash it on shore: he therefore thought be Mould remain M'here he M'as, and send off one of the servants ; again, he was afraid of alarming his family, though they must very soon learn the untimely fate of his beloved friend, as the accident would be in every London paper, if not the next, the dav following; and Lord Vilmore, he •/O' ' conceived, M'ould be one of the only people (Lord Dumbarton and his daugh¬ ter perhaps excepted) who would rejoice M'hen they learnt that the world was deprived of one of its highest ornaments. Having» however, decided to remain at least another day at the Wells, he shut himself up in his apartment to reflect upon
upon what steps he had best take. Certain he should experience even a greater degree of mental torture in bed, he refused to undress; and having dis¬ missed his valet, who sincerely partici¬ pated in both his and his brother's afflic¬ tion, he began to pace his room, and bitterly regretted that neither his father nor any of his friends were near enough for him to consult with them upon this emergency. He would dispatch an ex¬ press immediately to the Marquis, and was preparing his writing materials* and endeavouring to collect his scattered thoughts, as his letter might even be transmitted to the Grand Monarque, мЬеп the moon burst through the clouds, and shone full in at his window. It was between two and three ; the tide, he reflected, would soon ebb, and in ima¬ gination
gin ation he beheld the lifeless body of his dearest friend washed upon those shores they had both thought so pictu¬ resque during their jaunt A phrase one of the sailors had made use of came across him: *' You M'ill see land before you are aware of it," he had told the Duke; yet how innocently might it have been said : and why should he endeavour to recollect every circumstance tending; to establish their supposed guilt, since the law had no power over them ? Fie found it, however, impossible to sit down to write a detailed account of the irreparable loss he had sustained ; therefore reflecting that it would soon be day, he rung iiis bell. His own man answered it, not having been more inclined to sleep than his master. u Send
4i Send your brother tome," said the EarL The afflicted James immediately obeved V tt the summons. " My poor fellow, I can appreciate your feelings by my own, therefore let us set out on foot, and proceed to the most likely places, according to the ac¬ counts we have heard, for our best friend to be washed on .shore, that we may prevent the corpse from being either plun¬ dered or exposed any longer than is ab¬ solutely necessary, which, I think, will only be evincing our real regard and respect for the deceased. " The honest fellow instantly fetched his hat, declaring he would with pleasure M'alk to the world's end to prevent the remains of his beloved master from meet¬ ing with any indignity. VOL. m. f u It
" It almost broke my heart,"die con¬ tinued, " when he bid me farewell for the last time, as I feared, in Portland- Street ; but I have had such additional proof* of the excellence of his disposition since I entered upon his service this last time, that I am sure I shall not long survive him ; and I question whether his father will be able to bear the shock the dreadful intelligence must srive him." Wiping his eyes, Lord I\itzhayman preceded James down stairs, and then, by the light of the moon, thcy set for¬ ward upon their melancholy errand ; they were but very imperfectly acquainted with the road ; but thought the river would serve them for a guide, and his Lordship had a very tolerable idea of the path lie intended to take, from the re¬ marks
marks and enquiries he had made the day before. As they меге crossing the famous Durdham Downs, James, who had hi¬ therto heard but a very imperfect account of the dreadful event, respectfully entreated his Lordship would inform him exactly how the accident had happened. The Earl complied Mİth his request; when James was as ready as his Lordship to condemn the sailors, M r ho, had such a thing been possible, he should have thought had been bribed by Lord Vil¬ more to make away M*ith his master, as he knew from his intriguing friend Bourman, that his Lordship M'as conti¬ nually vowing vengeance against his Grace. " I believe, indeed, he is the only real enemy my poor friend ever had," f S replied
replied the Earb <с but I conceive it next to impossible that he can have been concerned in tbis affair, as our bir¬ in sr these fellows' vessel was merely acci- dental; besides, so many things militate against the probability of Lord Vilmore having formed so strange a plan." The valet agreed tliere was very little likelihood of his being at the bottom of this Strangebusiness; but then, admitting the men were guilty, who ivas their em¬ ployer? His Lordship could not pretend to say. However, by the time they had reached the beautiful park belonging to the South¬ well family, they had acquitted the re¬ vengeful Vilmore of having occasioned the Duke's death. Daylight now broke upon them apace, and the margin of the river being per¬ fectly
fectly open a little farther on, they saun¬ tered along by its side, watching the decrease of the tide, M'hich was conti¬ nually leaving something behind it, as if to remind them of the purpose of their walk, as they now hoped, now dreaded to stumble upon the remains of him they both so truly esteemed. By the time they reached King Road the sun rose M'ith unusual brightness, as if it mocked their heartfelt woe, James observed. His Lordship paused ; he saw the Dinney, and shewed it to his companion, even pointing out the fatal t spot, as well as he was able, and the мау the tide was flowing when he missed his friend ; there¬ fore, according to the direction of the Mind, which had great influence upon the M'ater, they tried to form an idea how ΐ 3 far
' far the body might be carried before it M'as washed on shore. A neck of land, which appeared to run- a considerable way into the Channel, and which was about three miles above where they then stood, struck them as being the most likely place to meet with the object of their search. Could they have seen any person about, they would have asked the question, as they had been told that sailors and other people frequently met with similar acci¬ dents to the one they so sincerely de¬ plored in passing to and from the vessels at anchor in the road, and that there never was an instance known of the bodies not being found; they therefore presumed that any inhabitant of the neighbouring villages could have informed ťhem M'here they had best commence their search ;
search ; as it was, they were obliged to trust to their олуп observations; they therefore proceeded towards the spot they had considered as the most likely place, which they had nearly reached when they perceived a fisherman making to- M'ards one of the long rows, extending into the Channel, of what they term lapes, which are, in fact, large wicker- baskets, bearing great resemblance to those which are frequently placed to catch eels, and in which these men catch great quantities of shrimps, small plaice, soles, and now and then a salmon : they are placed upon the bed of the river at low water, and are completely concealed when the tide is at a certain height. The Earl took the shortest cut towards this man, pointing out to James where he would meet him again farther on, that f 4 he
he might not lose sight of the traces of the tide. Having come '.within call of tlie old fellow, who appeared about sixty, his Lord¬ ship wished him a good morning. "Ah, Sir," he replied, l§ I dare say, by your appearance, you are a friend of the young Gentleman's that met with the accident ; looking for him may- hap?'· " You have guessed right, my friend ! But how and when did you hear of the accident? I was the only person on board with him, who was, indeed, my dearest and my best friend, and have now come thus far with his se vant in hopes of finding his body washed on shore. Where is the most likely place for us to meet with it? But I will give a very handsome reward to the first person who
who brings me intelligence of his being found." " AVhat, dead or alive, I suppose?'* said the old man. " Ah, my good friend, could I but hope to see him again alive I would positively make the fortune of whoever brought me that intelligence, and could lead me to him. 1 * tL The old man was unbuckling a belt, which fastened a high basket to his back, and having finished his task just as his Lordship ceased speaking, he flung both basket and belt to a considerable distance, exclaiming—" Come along then ! follow me I" To pretend to describe the Earľs pre¬ sent feelings would be still more difficult than to have given our readers an idea of his sensations when he thought his г 5 beloved
MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS. beloved friend Was certainly no more* He stopped, transfixed as it were to the spot for a few seconds, while the old fisherman was measuring back his steps, which, rousing htm from his reverie, he flew after him, and seizing hold of the poor old man, in breathless agitation he demanded what he meant ? " Why, that I have caught the lucky fish at last," was the reply. i( I have trod this path four times a day, backwards· and forwards, now going on of fi ve-and- thirty years, and have found several dead men caught in my kipes (no uncommon thing) ; but I never made much money by the bargain ; for 1 never plunder any, as some of my brother-traders do, before tliey give the alarm ; I she u Id be afraid ------" " But do you say шу beloved friend è is
îs alive?" interrupted the impatient Pier. <ť Follow me, and see," was the an¬ swer, trying to release himself. As the Earl now began to entertain the most sanguine hopes, he hastily called to James, and darted forward, crying— 1 " Where is he?" The fisherman made a full stop. " I coukl once have kept pace with the best runners in our county; but mark mc, young gentleman, as your friend escaped drowning in a most provi¬ dential manner, I don't chuse you should kill him by your want of prudence, be¬ cause I might not in that case be above half rewarded ; though, God and Heaven bless and preserve him, he has already nearly made my fortune."' " My good friend, for as such I ¿hall e tí eyer
ever consider you, " replied the Earl, й £ you do not know—no, I can never make you conceive how happy you have made me ! Only tell me where my friend is,, and how he escaped, and depend upon my keeping every promise I made you,. in addition to what you have already received from him." " Weľ, a good action never goes unrewarded even in this world, I am uow well convinced. You shall know every tiling in time. Your friend lives, and that is enough for the present ; but he is asleep, and 1 M 7 ill not have him woke. He was, three parts dead when I met with hún, and was, under God, the happy means of saving Ins life ; however, 1 refused to let him talk when I got him home, as I do to let you run there, and all for his good, though he v/as very anxious
anxious about sending me somewhere; but I made him take something hot, and put a few drops into his mess, such as I take myself when I want sleepy for I know nothing makes me so fresh and so hearty as a sound nap after any fatigue ; so I am at my work much earlier than I should have been ; for I can't examine half my kipes, because I knew he would be for sending me off the moment he woke, if so be he was not able to go himself." By this time James, breathless with the haste he had made, had joined them; but Avhen he learnt the joyful tidings from Lord Fitzhayman, he burst into tears, then hugged and kissed the old man, upon whom he forced his watch as a small mark of his gratitude, though he repeatedly declared he knew his dear master
master M'ould provide for him ; in short, he appeared half frantic, so great was his j°y· The fisherman had no idea of his guest's rank, nor had he hitherto hardly understood how he had met with the accident, which had so nearly occasioned his death. His bom?, or rather cottage, was about hatf a mile from where they had met him, on the other side of what is called the Sea-Bank, which serves as a boundary to the river; it was therefore not perceivable till they bad reached the summit of the bank or wall, as it is some- ■" times termed, when he pointed it out to his companions, saying— " That is the castle which contains your friend, Sir." /' Good Heavens," exclaimed James, " how
" how little I thought I should ever see my dear master the Duke of------" " What!" cried the old man, seizing his arm, and making a sudden stop, " a Duke did you say ! Why, a Duke, I have heard say, is next to a King !" " Well, and so they are," replied James ; ' ' and my master is a greate» man than many Dukes, for he is the son ofa King." <c The Lord be good unto me!" ejacu¬ lated the astonished fisherman; " and has my cottage come to be the resting- place of so great a man, and who is as good as he is great, I will be sworn ! Why, if he had been a common sailor, he coukl not have been more thankful for the service God's Providence ordained I should have it in my power to render him. Aye, aye! royal blood, I have often
often heard, ought to be considered as sacred. He deserved to be preserved,. for I am sure, half dead as he was, he returned his thanks to the Almighty, aye, and with more sincerity than some of our Methodists pray : his prayer came from the heart. I thought he was a man of property by the money he had about him, and his watch. But what is his name ? I have heard of our beloved King's sons, but little thought I should ever see one of them, or ever liave it in İ my power to save their lives. Well, M'ell, the Lord knows how to bring good out of evil, for mine has been the best night's work I have done in the course of sixty years." Their arrival at the cottage prevented James from satisfying the old man's cu¬ riosity ; but as neither the Earl nor him¬ self
self were yet perfectly satisfied, as there w v as a chance after all of this not being the Duke, they requested almost at the same moment to be shewn where he laid* " He is in that inner room," rejoined the old man. His clothes, however, M'hich were hanging in the chimney-corner, were sufficient to convince them that they were under the same roof with him they had been lamenting as dead; and who, by listening at the door of his apartment, they could hear was in a restless sleep ; but as it was likely to be of service to him, they were even more anxious than the fisherman to prevent his being dis¬ turbed, for though what the old man had given him might not be very proper, still, since it had taken effect, they thought
thought they had better let it have its course. Both parties were now very anxious to learn from the other every thing they knew respecting the accident and almost miraculous preservation of our hero ; but the old man having heard James address the Earl· as my Lord several times, and now knew him to have been the compa¬ nion, and, it should appear, bosom friend of the son of a King, had lost all his former assurance, and in the room of asking any questions, he only thought of answering those put to himself, relating how he had happened to be particularly appointed to be the preserver of the Duke's life. u I was obliged to go to Bristol yes¬ terday on foot, to give some orders for new kipes and other tackle, and it is a long
long м г ау there and back for a man of my age—a matter of eighteen miles if it is an inch, I ought to have been back by nine, but what-with one thing and another I made it near eleven ; and though I knew I should be too late to catch much fish, I thought a little would be better than nothing, and I could still come at the upper kipes ; so I takes my lanthorn, and away I goes. I had search¬ ed the first three or four, when I heard an odd kind of a noise at the further end, where I could not go without being np to my neck; and you see by these high boots, which I am obliged to wear, that it is tight work sometimes to get one's legs out of the mud ; indeed, before полу I have thought I must have staid there and been drowned, when I have been over fatigued ; but, as I was saying, upon
upon hearing a noise, I held up my lanthorn, and called out, м hen I thought I caught the sound of a mans voice as in distress ; so I made no more to do, but plunged forward, tired as I was; and sure enough, by the time I had got in nearly as deep as my armpits, 1 saw somebody standing upright, who said, if I understood right—' Do try, my dear friend, to save me, I am sinking ľ —So I pushed on at all risks, and got hold of him ; but he stuck in the mud, as I had often done, and was holding by a piece of wood, which I also got on shore, and which, if the Duke has no objection, I will keep as long as I live, because, as he told me, it was to that and to me that he owed his life, so we ought not in jus¬ tice to be separated. So, as I was say¬ ing, w r ith a deal to do, and encouragbig the
the Duke to have a good heart, making him believe we were nearly out of the mud when we were in the very middle, why at last I got him upon dry land, where, having returned his thanks where they were certainly most due (which con¬ vinced me I had been the means of saving a very good man), he sunk down, beiug quite spent and breathless, M'hile I returned in search of the piece of wood, which, I thought, might be of great use to me, and which I had stuck upright in the mud, supported by one of my kipes; so giving up all thoughts of searching for any more fish, thinking the piece of timber, which, I believe, is a httle boom, Mould reward me for all the trouble I had taken, I shouldered that, and having assisted the stranger (who I thought was a gentleman even from the
the first moment,) to rise, and made him take hold of my arm, by degrees I got him home, for he м -as so 'numbed and so fatigued he could hardly speak, or move one foot before the other, young as he is when compared to me. Indeed I could not let him talk, as I told you, Jiut stripped him as quick as I could, and put him between the blankets into my old woman's bed, which she, having got np to assist me, warmed thoroughly. Well, there, lifeless almost as he M r as, he forced his purse upon me, though it contained more money than I have ever been master of yet at one time, and gave me to understand that that M'as not half what he meant to do for me, because he was sensible that I had come to his assist¬ ance without hope of either fee or reward : and so then my dame made him a good mess
mess of gin-hot, into which I put some of them there drops I told you of, wliich always docs me a power of good when I am over-fatigued ; and I will be bound the Duke will wake quite another man ; and my old woman and I went to sleep in our other bed, which is not near so good a one; and there, I suppose, she still remains fast asleep, for I don't hear her stirring; and this is all I know about the matter, my Lord, though I under¬ stood the Duke tliat he had fallen over¬ board from a boat in King-Road ;—so now, my Lord, will you please to accept of such poor fare as I have to offer you after your long walk ; and I dare say you had not much appetite to your supper, thinking, as you did, your friend was drowned." Convinced that his accepting his offers would.
would greatly gratify the fisherman, who appeared to live very comfortably, and M f as cheerful of his age, the Earl thanked him for his considerate offer, assuring him that the sight of his friend had made him for the first time reflect that he bad not tasted any thing since he left------. A home-baked loaf and some very good cheese мгеге therefore immediately set before him, with some picked shrimps and butter, and some excellent cyder. His Lordship made the old man and James set down Mjth him, and drink to the Duke's perfect recovery. The fisherman, though he was afraid to put the question, was very curious to know how his noble guest had met with such a misfortune. His Lordship, however, guessing his anxiety,
anxiety, told him how thcy had been induced to engage the boat, where, they hati been, ana "how the sailors had ac¬ counted for his friends accident, with¬ out even hinting his suspicions of their having been at all the occasion of it; nor did he mention having taken them before a magistrate. The old man shook his head, saying— ťí I hope in God there has been no foul play ! for it appears to me very odd that the sailors should not have been able to afford his Grace, who certainly must be a very good sM'immer, some assistance: but God forgive me if I don't think, according to your account, my Lord, that they sailed from instead of towards him. after he had fallen into the river; and yet you might not be aware of their manœuvres. But how came two such vol m, g great
great men to trust themselves entirely to the mercy of three total strangers ? and pray, if I may be so bold, for I know every Pill-man, and : tis they avIio mostly take these trips, and almost every other boat-owner that ever sailed up or down this river, what Mas the vessel called, and to whom did she belong?" cť She is called the Reuben and Wil¬ liam, my friend, and is, if the men told truth, the property of three brothers." " The Reuben and William !" inter¬ rupted the old man, while surprise not unmixed with fear was visible in cv€iy line of his countenance. " Was her mainsail what wc call a tanned one, that is, of a kind of dingy red-colour?" " You are quite right, my friend !" was the reply; i( and the owners' names are
are Reuben, 'William, and Edward Hodges." ťt The Lord keep and preserve us all !'* ejaculated the old man : u I no longer wonder at the accident. What, I sup* pose, the Duke affronted one of theni ?" Ci Not that I know of," ivas the reply. " Because if he or anv other man had set their backs up, thcy would no more mind flinging him overboard, than they would drowning a blind puppy." 44 You seem to be well-acquainted M'ith them, " said the Earl. 44 Acquainted wich them, my Lord ! why I thought all the world knew the brother Hodges's? Why they have been in all the newspapers ever so many times, and in particular not more than a month or five weeks ago." o S " That
" That is very probable, " replied tbe Earl, relating exactly how they had been induced to sail with them, and nearly every thing that had past betvveen them when they engaged their boat. " Oh, thcy told you no more than the truth in many respects," rejoined the old man ; "they frequently have been engaged to sail vrith parties up and down tbe river, and may have been to Ilfra¬ combe, and be going to Tenby, for better sailors tliere never w ere, nor greater rogues, I believe, never existed ; they are up to but every thing, and have all three of them been in the county and Bristol prisons ten times over for various crimes. They are the most notorious smugglers betwixt here and Lanďs-End. With your Lordship's ieave, I vvill tell you a story concerning them, which came
came within my own knowledge, be¬ cause I am sure you will not mention it again, for they .would no more mind murdering of me than they would bring¬ ing down a carrion-crow; and, God knows, they might do it easy enough when I am crossing that dreary common to my fishery." ** You may rely upon my secrecy," replied his Lordship ; tc and 1 own I am curious to learn a little more respecting this precious trio." " Why then, my Lord, you must know that about six months since there was a vessel (it blowing a very smart gale) that drove from her moorings, and went to pieces not far from m ν fishery. She was outward-bound, and had a vast sight of Manchester goods on board, which were washed on shore ; and, according to о 3 * law,
law, you know, every thing that can be saved, properly belongs to the under¬ writers, if so be the vessel is insured, or else to the owner ; but these three rogues think every thing is their's that they can lay tbeir bands upon ; and one night, having been upon the watch for that very purpose, tliey made off with tivo large bales of goods ; and so many people knew what a booty they had got, that the underwriters procured a search-ivar- rant, and had the house (they all three live together when the two youngest are at home) ransacked from top to bottom, but not a single article was there to be found. Well, they were all three committed to Bridewell, and examined apart ever so many times : they kept their ом'П counsel, and as no absolute proof could be brought against them, and as folks
folks can't be hanged or transported upon mere suspicion, why they меге obliged to be let loose upon the public once more, though even now I could go myself and purchase some of the very goods they have thus stole ; nay, I have known several people M'ho have bought them, under the rose, mind me. But where do you think, my Lord, they had contrived to conceal them, while their house, garden, orchard, aye, and even the neighbouring fields, were being searched, for the Underwriters had vowed they would find them if they were in their possession ; why, between the roof and the tiling, which they had taken off them¬ selves for this very express purpose, and, had put on again after they had depo¬ sited tlie goods between that and the rafters; and now they laugh with every о 4 body
body they can trust, to think how nicely they did the knowing ones. As for my own part, hitherto we have been upon pretty good terms, as I M'ish to live м-еИ with all my neighbours; though it an't for the love I bear them that I keep their secrets, only I wish to get my bit of bread in the wav I have been accustomed 10 from a boy ; and if these fellows M 7 ere only to suspect I was their enemy, they Mould not stick at any thing; and I should be put to it to get my bread any where else ; so that I may enjoy a little peace and quietness, and live as long as it pleases God to spare me, why I make it a rule to hear, see, and say nothing; for if they did not murder me, they M'ould set fire to my house мЬеп I was asleep, and fasten me in it. But were I to relate all the villanous actions they are supposed to
to have been guilty of, it M'culd take me а меск, and I should not have brought my stories to a conclusion then." " Where is their house?" asked the Earl. u It is about three quarters of a mile from hence, my Lord: it belongs, as I told you before, to the eldest, Reuben, wdio has got a wife and five children; and as folks about here say, he cer¬ tainly searched hell to find her, for, bad as he is, he is an angel when compared to her ; nay, many of their wicked pranks are supposed to be of her con¬ triving. Tis a special good house ; they rent it ofa neighbouring farmer, and 'tis not badly furnished ; and no people in the Level live better, nor make comers and goers more welcome—that's their pride." о 5 * ť But
ťť But you Mas saying their names had very lately been in the newspapers." " Yes, my Lord ! I м т Ш tell you how that happened ; oh, they were nicely painted ; I saw some of the papers. Your Lordship knows it M T as what we poor folks call a hard winter, and so, I suppose, their cash, like that of many more, began to run very taper, though rather than fail of a supply they M'ould· go to the devil for some. However, they thought of a scheme worthy Old Nick himself; for when spring came on, they a'vertised to let part of their house for the summer season ; 'tis certainly most pleasantly situated, and the Bristol folks, nay, sometimes strangers from the Wells, likes to come down to the sea¬ side for a few months in the hot weather ; and our Sea-bank is thought both a plea¬ sant
sant and a healthy walk. So a gentle¬ man, M r ho knew no more about them than you, my Lord, and the Duke did, being a stranger in these parts, reads the advertisement, and applied to the person in Bristol to whom he M r as referred for particulars about these lodgings. This man was one of their own kidney, so lie made cverv thing out ten times better than they really were, and came down. here with the gentleman to shew him the мау, who, liking the place, and knowing no harm of the people, took their apartments for four months certain, for himself, his kuly, and a servant, and the following week they took possession. Reuben, wlio, as well as his M'ife, had been all complacence when he came to look at their house, had told them he would fetch every thing they wanted « 6 from
from Bristol, and that they could supply them with garden-stuff, poultry, and so forth. However, having once got them safe, they cared very little about making things agreeable to them, as all they wanted to find out was, how rich they were ; and having some reason to suppose they had a tolerable sum of money down there, what did the brothers do (the two younger ones were in Bristol at the time, it M 7 as said) but lay a plan to rob their own house. In consequence, one night it mms beset, and broke into by three villains, properly disguised no doubt. Airs. Hodges screamed murder, rogues, for her life. Reuben fired at the rogues, but to no purpose, as they rushed up btairs, and instantly tried the lodgers* bed-room door; but this time they met Mİth their match, thougli they had taken 4 care 5
care, as they thought, to prevent this very door from being fastened withinside ; but the gentleman not having liked several things he had heard and seen after he became their inmate, had got upon his guard, and had purchased two bolts only the day before, which he had contrived to put on himself, and had, be¬ sides, taken the precaution to provide him¬ self with a brace of good pistols, which he kept ready loaded, and a stout bludgeon» Iu the first place therefore the door did not give way as they expected ; and upon hearing the noise, the gentleman called out, vowing he would shoot the first man that entered. They continued, notwith¬ standing his threats, trying to force the door, which, as God would have it, happened to be very strong ; and by the light which they had on the other side t the
the gentleman perceived a little hole, owing to a knot in the wood having fallen out, which often happens, your Lordship knows; so what does he do but discharge one of his pistols right through, and it is supposed that he pep¬ pered one of them, Mho cried out, * Oh, d — n it!' and he then told them that he had a brace and a half more at their ser¬ vice, besides another weapon, with which he thought he could do the business of a few of them, should his pistols fail him; so they knew what they had to trust to· Finding he was so much in earnest, and so well prepared to receive them, why they thought it most prudent to decamp, and the gentleman soon had the satisfaction of seeing them running down the garden; and he has declared he could take his oath William and Ned Hodges
Hodges were two out of the three. Reu¬ ben's window looked forward аз well as his lodger's, and he again fired after them, and then ran to the gentleman's door, to request he would come with him in pursuit of them ; but this his lodger very properly refused to do ; for if they could have caught him without the house, they would soon have done his business. Nor was he the dupe of Reu¬ ben's boasting, while he was talking to him through the door; and when he was gone, as he remained upon the watch and listen all night, he very distinctly heard the steps of three people, who were let in through the back-door within half an hour of this claiing attempt; but he thought it most prudent to remain quiet; and in the morning Reuben thanked him a thousand times for having frightened
MIDNIGHT M'EDDINGS. frightened the rogues away, declaring it M'ould have been the ruin of him, had they succeeded, as lie happened to have a good deal of money in the house, which was not all his own, but for which he was accountable, therefore he must have gone to gaol, for he never should have been able to make up the sum. The gentleman pretended to believe all he said, but M'alked out as soon as he had breakfasted, and took a post-chaise at the Passage-House, in which he came for his wife, servant, and baggage; and having paid for the four months, and told the disappointed Hodges and his wife that his lady had been so terrified by the housebreakers he coulil not think of sleeping another night in so lonely a house ; so off they drove, pack and bag¬ gage, Hodges rejoicing he had got some money
money out of him;—but the gentleman having told the story in Bristol, the papers have been full of nothing but cautions to strangers respecting these Hodges's since their lodger has left them, and their names are so up now, that I don't suppose a strolling vagrant would dare to sleep under their roof; but there was no absolute proof of their having planned this scheme, as no one ever knew who was ^wounded, and the gen¬ tleman would not have chose to have had them tried for life and death upon his bare evidence; so the matter ended iu their characters being a little more blackened, and in their being obliged to give up all thoughts of making their for¬ tunes by letting lodgings. But are you sure, my Lord, they were not bribed to make away with the Duke? They are such
such villains, I am sure they would cut even one another's throats for money ; besides, I am astonished thev did not first con- l' trive to rob him ; and he had both his M'atch, purse, and pocket-book about him when I undressed him, besides a picture, or some such thing, round his neck. " Why, I am at a loss to guess, my friend, what enemies, one indeed except¬ ed, his Grace can have; and even he, I cannot suppose, has any connection with these daring wretches, though my sus¬ picions меге so similar to your's that I have already had them before a Magis¬ trate, but for Mant of proof they were not taken into custody ; I therefore w r ish, M'ith all my soul, I could discover whe¬ ther their's was a concerted scheme to drown my friend, which it certainly ap¬ pears
pears to have been. Can you point out any means by which I may be able to fathom their iniquitous meaning ? At all events, you shall no longer live in fear of these hardened villains. My friend has already given you to understand he means to reward you for the service you have rendered him, and I will keep every promise 1 have made you ; therefore you> may depend, in your declining age, opon being rendered perfectly comfortable, and no longer being obliged to cross that dreary common at the risk of your life." " God in Heaven bless both the Duke and yourself, I say, " replied the fisherman ; " he gave me a matter of thirty guineas last night, enough to maintain me and my dame for a twelvemonth ; and here, this good young man has given me a gold watch. Why, I wish I may not grow proud
proud in my old age, and fancy myself a gentleman. One year with another I earn about forty pounds by tending my fishery ; but then nearly half of it goes in what I call M'car and tear, that is, new kipes, baskets, clothes, and such odd matters ; so, as my dame and I have often said, if we had but thirty pounds a year clear of all expences, why we should think there was no end to our riches, and M r e should not envy the King, God bless him ! Our neighbours have certainly always been one of our greatest troubles, else I like my little cottage, and never should M'ish to move ; but they grow so audacious, that if they M'ere to think the Almighty had been pleased to raise me a few friends, I question whether they would not knock me on the head for the sake of the plunder they Mould expect." " Yom
, €< You must therefore remove to a greater distance," replied Lord Fitzhay- man. " I will insure you the income you mention for your joint lives, inde¬ pendent of what my friend intends doing for you ; and I think I may venture to affirm he will double it, as his generosity is as unbounded as his fortune." ťť The Lord be $ood unto me ! I shall be too rich, my Lord, indeed I shall. Sixty pounds a-year ! How ever shall my dame and I be able to spend such a mint of money ! However, we can talk of that another time. You was asking me about finding out whether the rogues had any view. I can tell jou what I can do," he proceeded, after a pause ; " thpugh, if they were to find me out------" " Thcy shall not do that, I promise you," said the Earl ; " besides, you shall remove
remove out of their reach ;—so M'hat was you going to propose ?*' " Wlvy, as it is so early in the morn¬ ing, 'tis a great chance whether any of the brothers are come home, and I am a little bit of a favourite with his limb, as I call her, and I often Mdieedlc some of their mischievous pranks out of her. Νομ γ F know, as I have told you before, that she has got some plunder to sell ; so if this young man," looking at James, f ' would dress himself in one of my jack¬ ets, and go along with me, why I would tell her he was a friend of mine outward- bound, and that he wants a few hand¬ kerchiefs, or a bit of muslin, to take abroad: his ship may be lying in the road ; there are several West Indiamen lying just off Posset (Portsea), and I Marrant me she will be taken in ; but he must
must buy something, mind, as I suspect she has plenty of things yet to sell." " I perfectly comprehend your plan," rejoined James; " therefore only fetch the dress, and I will be equipped in three seconds ; delays are sometimes dangerous ; and will your Lordship condescend------" " Yes, yes!" interrupted the impa¬ tient young Peer, who was ready to come into any scheme likely to lead to a dis¬ covery of a mystery he had hitherto been absolutely unable to fathom ; he M r as therefore in the course of a few minutes metamorphosed into a complete sailor, and was the steward of the Fame West Indiaman, then lying off Posset. They crossed some very retired fields, and soon arrived at a decent well-built farm¬ house, which had a large garden in front, and an extensive orchard behind, where they
they found the lady they were come iit quest of at breakfast with her young hell· cats, the name she generally gave her chil¬ dren when any untoward accident had ruf¬ fled her naturally meek temper. They hád arranged their plan during their walk ; the old man therefore called the matron on one side, and gave her to understand what his friend was come in search of. She desired them both to sit down, and then left the house, but soon returned with a tolerable sized bundle, containing pieces of muslin, ditto handkerchiefs, and some fancy waistcoats, out of which the young man was desired to select what he liked, and she would let him have them a bargain. His Lordship began to turn them over, making choice of some, which he laid on one side, while the old man asked
asked where his neighbour was getting drunk. tl In Bristol, I* suppose," м -as the reply. " You know* he don't care what becomes of his wife and children, if he can but cram his own guts." " Why you certainly have reason to complain sometimes, neighbour. When did he leave home?" tc Whv, a little before this time ve?- v' ». tcrclay morning. He M'as going with Will and Ned to take a trip u¡> the Severn with two gentlemen. You have not heard of anv accident in King-Road, young man ? I wonder he an't come »' C' home; for he tohl mc should be back about tlie turn of tbe night ; and, bad as he is, I am always i u fear for him ; for I am sure I don't know what would become of us all if anv thing was to vol. in. и happen
happen to him; and he gets drunk so often, that, as I tell him, it M r ill surely come home to him at last. When a man is sober, he has his м -its about him ; but when he is drunk, he mav be knocked of the head, droM'ncd, or tM r cnty things may happen to him." " Why, let me see," said his Lord¬ ship, M'ith M r ell-assumed indifference, " I did hear of a bit of a bustle about nine or ten o'clock last night ; somebody fell overboard off the deck of a small pleasure- boat, but I dare say it м -as not your hus¬ band ; indeed J think I heard say it M'as a passenger." " Ah then, he is dnnvned !" M r as the reply. " No, no; it was not Reuben, I warrant me, though the accident may have happened in his boat; but I should have heard
heard of it before now if he had been dead, for bad news flies : but vou did not hear how it м -as said the accident happened?" " No, faith; but I think our mate said it M r as a Frenchman, so it is no great loss ; nay, I hardly know whether any of us M'ould have put off a boat to have saved a Mounshcer." 4t No, I believe not, my hearty!*' cried the lady with visible glee. " Curse them all, I sav ! thev never was anv good to our nation ; I would drown a hundred of them for as many guineas." 4t Bravely said !" rejoined'his Lordship inthe same tone; " I M'ish I had full employment at a guinea a head." " Ah !" said the fury, with a knowing sarcastic grin, " but your fortune M'ould и 52 be
be sooner made if you o-ot a hundred for one, ha ! then a body might finish three days* ivork before breakfast. But I should like to know whether it was on board Keuben's boat that the accident happened. He was to have but two passengers, so if he lost one, why there went half his freight. However, according to your ч ceo u nt, the best was saved ; for I heard him tell that one was an outlandish fei low, and the other an English¬ man," laughing very heartily at her own wit. ci And pray what may your husband get for these trips, as you call them?" asked the Earl. " Why, according as he can agree; from one to three guineas ; but I believe be has made a pretty good hand of* it this
this time ; though, if he has drowned the Frenchman, I am afraid his boat will get a bad name : folks will be afraid to trust themselves with him ; though, as he says, there can be no harm iu send¬ ing a Frenchman to help to fatten the salmon." " No truly ! What then, he foresaw Mouiibhecr would be very clumsy, or that our old English liquor wouki not suit his weak brain :*' " Why, 1 believe he might," was the reply; "I know him and his brother меге laughing about it from eleven o'clock, when tliey came home, till half past six, when they sat off again; though they did take a nap of a couple of hours in the while." " Why, I wonder how people can find your hibband oat, here," itjohvd n 3 ■* the
the Earl : '* he seems to be a long way from his business. Would not it be better for you to live in Bristol ?" ** No, no; that would not do for us; ha, neighbour Thomas : I should nol have many things to stíl there, I believe ; and my family is not brought up for iioîhi m?. " íť True!" saki the old man. *' for they live upon the fat of the laud." 44 Yes, God bless them ! and so thev shall while I can get it for them. The Gentleman μΊιο was here the other day, Heaven reward him ! gave them all a new outer garment, as good as I chose to buy, and left me to please my fancy ; so I was not sparing when I went to Bristol the dav before yesterday. Let me »· %r V see ; it cost him for every thing (for, as I told him, he ought to treat the father and
aivl mother as well as the children) above seventeen pounds. Now, I say, neighbour, that was a present a body would not mind what they did for so generous a friend. " " I beliei'e not," replied the fisherman ; " I w'is h I could meet with such a friend now and then ; but your's was an old acquaintance, I suppose ?" " No; to let you know, neighbour, I never saw him before the night he came to sleep here, and he went away the next day; so he м*аз not a very old acquaintance, ha, young man ?" 6( Why no," was the reply ; " but his generosity was a proof of his ability ; a very rich man, I will warrant me." " Faith," she retorted with a careless air, " so long as he could but find the u 4 money
money for what he required, gentle or simple, it was no odds to me." " I suppose you sold him a fine lot of these goods," said his Lordship, turning owr what he had pitched upon, which was chiefly muslins that he thought might be of some use to the fisherman's 11 Xo, I did not so much as shew theni to him : but have you looked out v»hat you mean to buy; because I don't chu Ne to have them lying ahout, i u ease any body should drop in." íť Fvight, neighbour, right!" said the fisherman; " that was why wc came so carlv\" »í ίς Aye, aye, you know how many. pence go to a pound, neighbour; you can be trusted, which is more than we cau ary by many a one." lit«
His Lordship begged she Mould fix; the low est price upon what he had chosen, and he would pay her for them. She immediately did as he desired, and packed up the rest, saying, wheu she took up the money— li You are something like a customer; don't stand hagelins: for an hour, and go away empty handed at last ; bul neighbour Thomas never keeps company w ith the scurvv sort ; so what will vou have to drink ? because the sooner you are off the better ; and remember, if the things are seized, they are your s ; I am off with the rest;" and away she ran. <· As the vouug fry were all present, the old man and his Lordship couM not com¬ pare notes ; so the former said— " I fancy we may be going; we can u 5 return
return if you M'ant to buy any thing else. You may wish to consider a while. Folks should not be in too great a hurry in these cases," " True," was the answer;—the pur¬ chases were therefore packed up, and the old mun took charge of the bundle, as being the least likely to be suspected, he told Mrs. Hodges when she returned ; and after refusing to taste either her Hollands or her cyder, though she spoke loudly in praise of both, they hastened back, not ťloubting, from what tliey had heard, but the supposed accident liad been the result of a concerted plot be- twcfco these villanous brothers and some secret enemy of the Dukes, whom, his Lordship now trusted, would meet with the reward his abominable treachery de* served. CHAR
CHAP. VI. A HE Duke had been awake some time, James informed the Earl when he en¬ tered the cottage, and was, all things eonsidered, much better than he could tiare to have expected, but had not yet risen, owing to his having no dry clothes to put on ; those he liad worn the over¬ night were hanging round an excellent fire, Mrs. Thomas having rinsed them out in fresh water, it being one of tho properties of salt water to render every h tí tiling;
thing ihat ímbílxs it proof against all kind of diying; tliat is, cloth, or any other article, always retains a degree of dii.iïpïiess till the sea-water ii washed ou: oi' it. The good woman, therefore, haviug taken that precaution, was uow btibiîy employed In preparing breakfast for their noble inmate, her husband having tolti her who they had had the honour to lodge, when he*went in search of his best suit for-the Earl; and she hud been in one continued bustle from the time she had learned how much their hovel had been honoured. The meeting between the friends may be better imagined than described. To Lord Fitzhaynum it appeared as if tlie Duke was risen from the dead ; nor was our hero less sensible of the almost mira¬ culous interposition of Providence in his favour.
favour. He had learned from James how sincerely the Earl had deplored his sup¬ posed death, and, in short, every thing that had occurred from the moment he had been thrown overboard (which, he had acknowledged to the honest fellow, whose transports of joy had greatly flat¬ tered him, had literally been the case) down to the Earl's and their host's de¬ parture for Mr. Hodges's. As soon, there¬ fore, as their mutual joy had subsided into that more pleasing calm which gene¬ rally succeeds all violent pleasurable emo¬ tions, the Duke, who assured his friend that, a little stitf queer lassitude excepted, he found himself perfectly recovered, requested to know whether he had made any discoveries during the visit he had been paying. " You shall hear every thing that passed
passed between me and the demon in a human form Hodges has taken for a wife. But first tell me really how the strange accident (which will make me shudder M'henever I think of it) hap¬ pened." " You may remember," replied the Duke, " that we had. several times been separatea d uring the last half hour, owing to the unnecessary bustle our boatmen had chosen to put themselves into ; and the last time the elder and the younger bro¬ thers had placed themselves exactly in the centre of the boat, evidently on pur¬ pose to impelle my progress, and di¬ rectly opposite to the only place where it was possible for a person to have fallen overloaid; not that I suppose it was left open tor tliat express purpose, as, I believe, it is a necessary precaution iu such
such little vessels to give the cording full play. Before, however, I could ask why they seemed inclined to prevent my following you, Reuben darted forward, and, assisted by the one at the helm, kicked up my heels, and threw me over the side so dexterously and so instanţa* neously that I found it impossible to catch hold of either; but in my fall I grasped the end of the boom, as the fisherman terms it, which, he told me, tliey carried for safety, in case any of their stays gave way, It had one end fixed into a kind of hoop for the purpose» and the other one was lashed to the rail¬ ing, and exactly reached the opening you must recollect, now I have described it to yon ; therefore, in trying to save myself, I made a catch ut it, and, fortu¬ nately, the lashing gave way, fey which 6 means
means I pulled it overboard with me, to which circumstance I may in a great measure attribute my life's having been so miraculously preserved; for though* I am a very tolerable swimmer, yet, encum¬ bered as I was with my clothes, if I had not had such a support, I must have perished. The rascals, no doubt, in¬ stantly put their vessel upon a contrary tack, while I was borne away with the tide: but having rather recovered my senses, I exerted all my strength, endea¬ vouring to make the nearest shore, ac*· cording to the direction of the waves, and was nearly totally spent when I was so fortunate as to perceive a light at a distance, which appeared advancing to¬ wards me, which gave me fresh strength an<l animation, ami enabled me to feel the ground at the extremity of my pre¬ server's
server's fishery, without M'hose assistance I am very well convinced I .should not have been able to have reached the shore r as it was, if possible, more fatiguing to wade through the mud than to support myself against the waves. Mine host,. honest fellow, has tolti you every thing that passed after he had, by the imme¬ diate interposition of Providence, snatch¬ ed me from a watery grave ; and I posU tively give him great credit for his skill tx$ a physician, as what he gave me not only threw me into a sound sleep, but has, I dare say, preserved me йот cold ; and I can assure you his homely couch is by no meaus so uncomfortable as it looks. But you will believe that I mean to provide him with a better habitation, and with every comfort of life, as a smull return for the service he has ren¬ dered »
dered me; as, without once reflecting upon his own danger, old as he is, and before I could allure him to my assist¬ ance by any hope of reward, he rushed forward, intent only upon relieving a &llow-creature in distress. So now let me hear the result of your visit." Some excellent tea M'as novy set be¬ fore the friends, toast and butter, and every thing else likely to afford them a comfortable breakfast, which the Duke took in bed, while Lord Fitzhayman dis¬ played his recent purchases, which he presented to their hostess, telling her, she might wear ;hem in safety, as he would declare himself the purchaser, and recapitulated every word that had passed between the fibherman, himself, and the fiend of darkness they had been to visit, who had placed beyond a doubt there having
having been a concerted scheme to drown the Duke, which appeared to have ori* ginated in the generous stranger, who had been so bountiful respecting the upper garments. Who he was, and how he found these wretches out, was the next considera* tion. 41 The late cautions in the papers against them accounts, in my opinion, for his having discovered the nest of villains/' replied Lord Fitzhayman, " and also for his having pitched upon them to execute his murderous intentions : but it is be¬ come of infinite importance to your future safety, my dear friend, to have him brought to justice; we must, there¬ fore, I think, have the rogues imme¬ diately secured, and endeavour to per¬ suade one or other of them to turn King's
King's evidence. When thcy find yoii are alive, and that you must be sensible you were purposely thrown overboard, I think they will impeach their employer." iť I hope your Honours will excuse my venturing to give my advice," said the fisherman, " but I am afraid they will never be brought to squeak, as you say ; not that any of -them would mind hangine: others, but their employer would bribe them to hold their tongues ; and ï question whether they could be hanged upon my Lord Duke's evidence alone; but if you, my Lord, could tamper pri* vatcly M'ith Keuben, 1 would lay my life that he would give up his employer for a good round sum, particularly if he thought his own neck was in danger: but if once they get *o prisou, they will harden each other, and would pet Imps die game, as they
they call it, rather than betray the person you wish to discover, who might, as he must be a main rich man, make them believe he would bring them off till the very last moment ; for even after they were condemned, he might fill their heads with the hope of a pardon, or else make his own escape the moment he hears thev are nabbed ; so I think if you, my Lord, was to see Reuben, and coukl, between threatening and waxing, worm the secret out of him. it would be vour surer method." ťí Tliere is great reason in Mİıat our old friend says," otacrved the Duke, " for we have got to do with a set of the most hardened villains that ever drew breath; I therefore think if wc could, as strangers», entice Reuben to any place under pretence of employing him, you might
might try the effect of your eloquence upon him. ľitz first, and then I, could appear, by way of threatening him into compliance." " That wouid be the very thing," re¬ joined the old mau. "As I am sure your Honours would not let me nor my dame come to any harm, I will undertake to bring him to you ; suppose at St. George's, just above Pill, on the other side of the Bristol River, under pretence that you were Guernsey men, and wanted a boat to land some smuggled goods r 4 ' {i A most excellent plan, my friend I" 1 cried the Duke. tC We will proceed thi¬ ther from hence, by which means the news of my miraculous escape will not have reached the wretches, who may, by this means, be induced to give up the principal in this iniquitous plan. What time
time do you suppose Reuben will be at home ?"' ** His wife was iu momentary expecta* tion of him when we were there," said the Earl. ťť Theu as soon as you have put us into the riííht road to St. George's, mv good friend, you shall go in search of him, as I am all impatience to learn to m hom í am indebted for шу late cold bath." * Thu<s, therefore, It was settled ; and the Duke bavins: made shift to force liimself into the clothes he had worn the oyer night, which had shrunk very much, owing to the different ablutions they had undergone, and being provided with James's shoes and hat (having kicked his own off while swimming, and lost his hat), who accommodated himself with the
tbc best belonging to tbeir landlord, they set out for Lamplightcr's-llall, where thev were to cross the water for Pill, taking the most unfrequentcrl paths, as the gentlemen particularly wished to avoid being seen, and Mrs. Thomas had been cautioned not to mention the ad¬ ventures of the night, should anv one visít her during her husband's absence. They had proceeded nearly a mile, m hen who should they meet within a few paces of a very high hedge, which had concealed them from his view, but Reuben Hodges, who stopped suddenly the moment he caught sight of our hero, μΊιο had just stepped over a style wbieh divided the hedge by wdiieh they had hitherto been concealed. It would lie impossible to give our readers even a faint idcaofthelouks of í his undaunt¬ ed
villain, who feared neither God, man, nor Devil, but Mdio, nevertheless, be lieved iu ghosts, who, he supposed, could appear by day as well as by night ; aud as the Duke, who had of course taken the lead of his party at the before-men¬ tioned style, was in consequence a few paces before them, Reuben had no doubt of its being the spirit of the departed Frenchman come to haunt his murderer, as his Grace had made almost as sudden a pause as the now really terrified Hodges. M'hose ghastly looks fully betrayed the extent of his guilt. Our hero suffered him to remain riveted, as it were, to the spot, and gazing upon him with every mark of horror, till his companions had joined him, when the fisherman broke the silence. iť Ah, neighbour Hodges, how are vol. ni. ι you?
you ? Why, what is the matter with you, man ! one would think you had stumbled upon a ghost this morning. These gen¬ tlemen came to m ν house about half an *i hour since, to ask me to shew them the nearest way to Lamplighter's-Hall ; so I brought them athwart the^c fields, to avoid going round by Broad-Pill." iieuben was unable to make an im¬ mediate answer, but at last exclaimed— (i Well, I never was so taken bv sur- prise before ! Sure enough I thought it was your Honour's Ghost! however, I am sure I rejoice from the very botton. of my soul to see you once more alive, though 'tis M'hat I never expected." " I believe you," replied the Duke; <£ but a word in your ear," taking the terrified shaking being on one side, and holding him by the sleeve of his coat, >^ which
which, he was obliged to grasp pretty tight to get him to move out of hearing, when he addressed him to the following effect :— " I know, Hodges, that you have got a M'ife and a large family, who depend solely upon you for support, and I dare say you may in the bottom be a very bonest man, though necessity obliged you to accept a hundred guineas, I need not tell you for M'hat purpose ; now for the sake of your family, and because I should really never enjoy myself were you to be hanged upon my account, which un¬ doubtedly would be the case were I to have you taken up, though I don't be¬ lieve you are at all aware of either who I am, nor of the extent of my power; therefore if you м-Ш inform me Mdio this gentleman Mas that induced you to throw л % me
me so very dexterously into the Severn, why, I M'ill not only grant you a free pardon, but 1 will also give you double the sum you received to make away M'ith me ; but remember, I am not to be tam¬ pered with ; you m ust either instantly accept my offer, or 1 take you from hence before tbe Magistrate upon Sion-Hill, M'ho will of course commit you to the county gaol, and as the assizes are very near, you will not have a long time alloM'cd you to prepare for your departure, as I am resolved, except you instantly close with my proposals, to let the law take its course ; and as for your principal accom¬ plice, I will take effectual means to pre¬ vent him from affording you any assist¬ ance, for you may depend upon my dis¬ covering M'ho he is, as I shall not mind spending twenty thousand pounds for that
that purpose; therefore two hundred guineas you shall have within these two CT v' hours, if you are inclined to give him up. I cannot allow you long to delibe¬ rate; hitherto our conversation has uot been overheard ; but I must give you into my companions, charge if you re¬ fuse to comply M'ith my request, as I own I am induced to endeavour to save you only because you have a wife and famiiy, and are not near so guilty as the person who bribed you to drown me." So unexpected an offer, and at such a moment, was a sort of cordial to the ter¬ rified Reuben, who had recovered by degrees while the Duke was speaking to him, and who now asked— " Pray who told you I had a hundred guineas from any body ?" ι 3 « This
u This is not a proper place to enter into any explanations," was the reply* u Do you chuse to accept of the money I offer you, or am I to have you led to Sion Hill ?" " Two hundred pounds, or guineas, did you say ?" ct I believe I said pounds, but I will make it guineas." " But supposing I can't satisfy you r" 61 Then you must suffer," was the reply; " for that very M'ord alone will suffice to condemn you in a court of justice." " Not it truly! I have been at the bar before now ! and pray what did I say that you could lay hold of? Besides, did you ever hear of a man being hanged for Mhat he said himself? No, no ; I am up
up to better things : however, I w T ill earn your two hundred guineas if I can ; but I will tell you what; you shall allow my two brothers to escape out of England ; they have got the means, you know, and Arili soon steer for a place of safety," ίζ No doubt," was the reply; when, having paused for a few moments, ' ť I agree to your proposal," his Grace con¬ tinued, " as it would not afford me any satisfaction to send any one of the three to the gallows, as I think you are inno¬ cent in comparison to your employer." <¿ But since vou know that we were employed to send you to Old Davy's locker (I mean to turn King's evidence, so it is no use to mince the matter), how comes it you don't also know the man ?" " I am well convinced that I do know ι 4 him,"
MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS, him," was the answer, " but I cannot convict him merely upon suspicion." ' ( Look then; for two hundred gui¬ neas, mark me, I will tell you all I know, and I will swear to the man into the bar¬ gain, if you can point him out, and so can Bets; but if you make your hun¬ dreds thousands I could not tell you his name, or where to find him ; so mind, I don't wish to deceive you." " Is that possible ?'' said the Duke. " By G — d 'tis as true as that I tried to drown you ?" " But pray who is Bets?" « Why my wife, to be sure! It w r as she as first saw the gentleman, and per¬ suaded me to listen to his proposals ; but she can't be hurt for that, you know, because we had a right to hear all he had got to say, as, you know, we might have detected
detected a villain, have put you upon your guard, and so have done the public a service, if we had not chose to come into his plan." tc Thou art truly a rascal from prin¬ ciple," mentally ejaculated the Duke; while he replied— " You appear to have been aware of every thing. But when did you first see this gentleman, and how did he make you understand what he wished you to do?" " Why, do ye see, I must have the money down before I begin to sing out— one-half at least—and 1 will trust to your honour for tlie remainder, which I sliall expect as soon as I have tolti you all." ťť I have not got so large a sum about me; but I will give you the hundred you require the moment wc reaeh the ------ i о inn;
inn : so let us hasten thither, as I am very anxious to hear how you were in¬ duced to endanger vour own neck to oblige a third person." ζ( Stop !" Mas the answer. ci í was put on board at Broad-Pill, win *c our boat now is, ready to pop out into King-Road in a moment; Will and Ned are both on board, waiting Mİıile I went to look after safe anchorage. If vou are afraid to trust me, you may go with mc to the beach with your friend and servant. You don't want old Thomas now, so send him home about his business. I hope he don't think I Mas the occasion of vour t, meeting with the accident ? But what a swimmer you must bel Ecod, our em¬ ployer Mas not up to that." " 1 suppose not; but I will send the fisherman
fisherman home, as you desire : it is to him in a great measure I owe my life." ££ Well, he is a worthy old soul, and a mighty quiet neighbour, that works hard, early and late, for a scanty meal of victuals; and 1 don't know whether his money does not prosper better than ours ; but do as vou sav, that is, send him home, and we will be jogging; but tell the old fcllow r not to blab, if you have given him any inkling of your suspicions, because if he does 1 sha'n't be so well pleased with him." This was a very gentle hint, in the Duke's opinion, after what the old mau had told him and his frieud. Calling, however, James to take charge of Hodges, lie returned to the Earl and the fisher¬ man, telling the latter that Reuben pro¬ mised very lair, but was, as might be í G supposed,
supposed, averse to criminating himself in his presence ; he therefore requested he would return home, but desired he M'ould come to the ------ inn in the evening, when he should receive the reward his kindness deserved, and hear how he meant to deal with Hodges and his em¬ ployer, whom he appeared very willing to give up, but was too м г агу a villain to come to the point at once, or to say any thing in the hearing ofa neighbour. The good old man, upon whom Lord Fitzhavman forced what money he had ./ t* about him, immediately took his leave of the friends, upon whom he called down blessings without number, promising to wait upon them according to their orders, while the Duke and Earl, having Reuben between them, and James bringing up the rear, proceeded across the fields to 4 Broad-
Broad-Pill, M'here the brothers, having seen him advancing, had already weighed anchor, and hoisted three sails, ready to put to sea, well aware that once out in the road, which they coukl reach in a few minutes as thcy lay, they might set the friends, and all the officers of justice in England, at defiance ; but Reuben beckoned to them to remain where they Avere as he drew near, perceiving how thcy were employed, and guessing their intentions; observing to the Duke they had twiggeil him by the means of their spy-glass, long before he could distin¬ guish them. Our hero having reflected as thcy walked along, that after all he might be deficient in point of evidence (admitting he did discover the secret enemy he certainly must have) if he let these fellows
fellows escape without at least hear¬ ing M'hat they had to say, proposed to Reuben, as they drew near, that he Mould desire them to relate all thev knew t, concerning the matter in bis friend's and servant's hearing, which would not render their case at all more despera! e, a> thcy must leave En irla nd whether or not : tın d ľf they did not attempt to deceive him, he would give them forty pounds, which he had in bank-notes in his pocket-book, and their having participated in the un¬ pleasant bathe he had taken the over night had by no means diminished their value. " They know nothing at all," said Reuben, " so they can't tell you any thing : Bets and 1 entered into the agree¬ ment MÌth tbe person M'ho stands so fair, a chance of dancing upon nothing : all 5 they
they had to do in the business м -as to take half the plunder between them, and to assistine in doing the job; and, let me tell you, that was doing the handsome thing by them, for thcy never so much as saw the man, so I might have fobbed them off with ten pounds a-piece ; there¬ fore e'en give me that forty pounds, to make me amends for my share in the boat, which I must give them ; besides, they have nobody but themselves to maintain ; so it would be throwing your money away to bestow it upon them." " VVJiy, if they know nothing it would certainly prove of very little avail to question theni," rejoined the Duke. They меге now Mithin call of them, and the tender-hearted Reuben thus ad- dresaid them :—- ťí All is out, by G—d! You sec how it
it is with me !" looking round him ; " but the gentlemen are very good; they have allowed me to come and tell you, you have not a moment to lose in making your escape, you know where; for the hell-hounçlsjirc already after you ; but as I am nabbed, мЬу, do you do as well as you can : should I get clear, M'hich I rather expect, as I can give up the principal, why, I will join you in a couple of months ; if not, мЬу God bless you both! mind, and don't be venturesome, nor return too soon ; your provisions will last you, if ypu have any luck at all, now I an't along with you, though it will be hard duty; but that will be better than being dangled upon yonder Dinney ; so, as I said before, God bless you both I I give you all I can, that is, my share of the boat." u How
·* How did it come out ?" cried Wil¬ liam ; " I see that is the gentleman." " I sha'n't be allowed time to tell you," was the answer ; and as the Duke guess¬ ed the MTctch would be glad of an excuse to terminate the conversation, lie made a motion for him to M r alk on. The brothers therefore instantly dropped down into the road, from whence, crowding all the sail they could carry, they steered for Guernsey» whither they were bound. This Reuben did not think it necessary to tell the Duke, who asked him no questions respecting their destination, and in less than another hour they reached the ------inn, where the Duke's very unhoped-for return occasioned no small degree of joy and consternation. As his Grace had bank-notes to a large amount in his travelling dressing-box, he
he very soon put Keuben in possessioii of the half of the promised sum, which "he devoured with his eyes before he w f as allowed to grasp it in his hands; the other half was to be paid him upon the conviction of his employer, and the forty pounds his Grace intended to bestow upon his brothers was to be given him if he M'as perfectly candid and sincere. Our hero also stipulated for his friend's being present while he told his story, to which he made no objection, and began by swearing a most solemn oath that he knew neither the name nor the quality of the person M r ho had induced him to enter into the plot against his Grace's life, and thus proceeded :— " Returning home firar night's ago, I found a gentleman, dressed like a navy captain or sailing master, along with Bets,
Bets, who called me on one side the moment I got in, and told me he had come to make some enquiries about that there wicked story as was raised against me, about I and my brothers having laid a plan to rob a lodger that I had ; ah, a d—d lie from beginning to end ; and he told Bets he had laid a wager that 'twas all a fudge ; and so Bets up and told him all how and about it, and how wrong¬ fully we had been accused. Perhaps you» gentlemen, have read something concern¬ ing the matter in the newspapers. Wei!, if I once get hold of the author of that scandalous report, why fchát is all : how¬ ever, one thing brought up another, till he told Bets he had been lately served such a trick by a d—d leersrg French rascal, that he would give any man, or woman either, a hundred guineas, who would
would play him one in return. Bets only wished she coukl earn his money, and asked whether he could put her in the way? Why, he was afraid not; a man would serve his purpose better, for it would be no matter if the rogue was shot, as he deserved to have been hanged for what he had done, though, unfortu¬ nately, he had contrived to keep his iícck out of the halter. As for a shot, Bets told him, there was not a better than myself in all England, and I will be sworn she spoke the truth, and only wished she knew how to handle a gun as well, for she should glory in shooting a jFrench dog. Well, thus they were run¬ ning on when I came home ; and Bets, having repeated to me all that had past, told me I was a greater fool than she took me to be if I did not try to cara his
his money. I said I had no manner of objection to popping a Frenchman, so long as it could be done privately; so we went into the room where the stran¬ ger was, and she told him he might speak his mind freelv, for that I was his man t/ * to frighten Mr. Soup Meager* So he repeated the story he had told Bets :— That as how a Frenchman, who called himself a Duke, though he was nothing more than a great man's bastard, had come over to England, and dashed away at ouc devil of a rate, though he did not suppose he had a shilling he could properly call his own : however, he had managed to draw his daughter into a private marriage, since which he had left her to starve, or to be maintained by her friends, while he was jaunting ahout and taking his pirn- sure with her money; and that he was just
just come to Clifton, where he was living away as usual. So believing all he told me to be true, and thinking it was a very scurvy trick, and M'hat an English¬ man would have scorned to have been guilty of, why I told him, if he could but put me in a method of coming upon this rogue unawares after dark, I would soon set his daughter free : hut I have found out since, that all he told mc was a parcel of d^— d lies, and that you are not a Frenchman in the bottom, but a very great man, and richer than my Lord here, and that you an't married. Oh ! if I had but knowu as much before, I would have put you upon your guard, I promise you, and have put you into a method of doiag him, instead of being done yourself; however, I hope he will come to be hanged, M'hich s no more than
than he deserves ; and as for myself, he would not have found me so soft, if he bad not run his rigs upon me; for I would not, for ten times the sum he gave me, have hurt a hair of an English¬ man's head." tc I am fully persuaded you Mould not," was the reply: " but piay tell me how you arranged your plan at last, for I must say you held out every temptation ■ likely to induce me to give iuto it," " Why, first it was agreed that I should try to pop you when you were upon your rambles;—he told me where you lodged, and described you so parti¬ cularly, that 1 knew you the moment you came out of the house." 4i And when was it you first saw me?" " Three mornings ago." 4i And
" And was your employer then with you?" " No, he was in some fields near the Downs, waiting for me : we came toge¬ ther from my house ; and I brought my gun along with me, which I left with him till I returned, and saw which road you took ; but as you went to the Pump- Room, and afterwards to the Library, and then only sauntered up the hill, stopping every now and then to admire the prospect, why I went and told him there was no good to be done that day, until we saw whether or not you went out in the evening. But. I described vou to him so minutely that he was con¬ vinced I should know you again, and that I was not mistaken as to your person ; and I could not help adding, I had
had never before seen so good-looking a Frenchman. Oh, you were a likely fel¬ low enough, he said, and it M r as your handsome face and smooth tongue that had enabled you to deceive his daughter, but that a greater rogue never existed. So I swore to be a match for you, if possible ; and he shewed me the money, which I was to be put in possession of the moment I had done your business. So, to make short of my story, I dodged you about every time you went out, keeping my gun ready prepared for action in a hedge very handy ; but never hav¬ ing had an opportunity to make use of it, he wanted me to try if I could not, by standing opposite to your M'indow, when all was quiet in the evening, do you that мау, and trust to my heels for making my escape. But at last I found vol, iu. к out
out where you were going yesterday, and carried him the intelligence. At first he thought I should have had you snug in some of the lanes towards the Passage ; but afterwards the idea of en¬ ticing you into my boat came across him ; for I had told him how I and my brothers often took a little trip to Jersey or Guernsey, Ireland, or no matter where, so long as we could but pick up a trifle : so he pointed out, that if we could get you on board, how nicely we might manage matters.- I came into his plan, only reminding him tliat my brothers must go snacks with ше, and that 1 expected a clear hundred to my share, according to our former agreement. If I would be answerable for their keeping the secret, he promised to give me another fifty to stop their mouths. So I made them acquainted with
M'ith all it M'as necessary for them to know, and they asked no better than to be in the money-getting way; so there only remained to get your consent to let us earn the reward ; and glad enough I was M r hen you snapped at the bait, and told me you should not take any servants ; for I should not have liked to have had α third person on board, as three, I thought, might out-swear one ; but two would have been too many for us ; so if you had taken any body along with you, we should have been obliged to have flung another besides you overboard, just in self-defence. So, to conclude, having arranged matters with Will and Ned, I told my friend how м г е meant to do you, and all that; and he thought we had schemed every thing to a nicety, and paid down the money, on the morning we к % sailed,
sailed, in one of yonder fields ; I can point out the very spot to you ; though he only chose to see mc; and he was to stand upon the high mount to see us pass St. Vincent's rocks ; 'and there I saw r him, sure enough ; for, if you re¬ member, I took my glass to look at somebody, but refused to let you have it till he had turned his back, and was very nearly out of sight : and M'hen the deed was done, I was to give him a cer¬ tain signal, to see which he was to be standing a little above Broad-Pill from ten o'clock till he saw a light on board our vessel, because, as soon as we had done you over, 1 was to light my lanthorn, and to run backwards and forwards upon deck, under pretence of enabling you to see how to make towards us, which, you may remember, I did, my Lord, though not
not for that purpose, as we put the vessel upon so different a tack м г е were not afraid of your coming up with us, and he was to answer it by flinging up a rocket, and he sent up two, one after the other, as a proof that he understood our meaning, and ivas perfectly satisfied; for he told me, when we parted in the morning, I might not see him again for some time ; but I was to look under a certain stone, which he pointed out to me in a ditch, and there I was to fmd a trifle extra to drink his health ; and there, sure enough, I found five guineas : however, God is above the Devil, so it was not to be as he-wished, and I hope he will die in his shoes in the room of your Grace," Having thus brought his story to a conclusion, the Earl told our hero in к 3 French,
French, that it would be very wrong t& lose sight of this fellow. They had both' been rather surprised M'hen he said his employer had talked of his Grace having married his daughter, and hardly knew from that circumstance whether to place the horrid attempt to Lord Dumbarton's or to Lord Vilmore's account, as, in point of figure, they м~еге nearly alike— though they both м т оге their own hair- Reuben's employer wore a vvig. Yet upon whom else could their suspicions fall ? The man who had bribed this fellow to execute so diabolical a scheme might be an agent of either of these gentlemen, or it might be one or other of them in disguise; at all events they м г еге resolved to use every means to brino- the framer */ о or framers of so atrocious a deed to condign punishment; as for the needy wretches
wretches whom they had suffered to es¬ cape, as they could not have been con¬ demned but upon their brothers evi¬ dence, they rejoiced they had permitted them to leave the kingdom ; and the undaunted villain whom they had in their power, he having turned King's evi¬ dence, they must suffer him to escape the gallows for a short time longer. The Earl thought the greater rascals generally hanged the lesser ones ; but iu the present case, bad as he thought Reuben Hodges, he considered his em¬ ployer as far more criminal, " I suppose the wretch left the Wells, or Bristol, the moment he thought his plan had succeeded," said the Duke. " No doubt," replied his Lordship; "but I think he may be traced from some of the inns, either at Bristol or Bath, as к 4f he
he certainly took his departure from one of those towns, and is most probably gone to London." The two valets therefore received im¬ mediate orders to go and make enquiries at ever}' likely place in Bristol respecting the person Hodges described very mi¬ nutely to them. They were, of course, ю do it as quietly as possible, as the Duke was fearful of making any stir, which might put those he most wished to dis¬ cover upon their guard. They then asked Hodges whether he had any objec¬ tion to accompanying them to London. Conscious he should not be allowed to have a will of his own, he instantly re¬ plied, he м -as both ready and willing, as he supposed thcy only wanted him to point out ihe person who had set him upon his late job. " They
α They wished him to go for that very purpose," the Duke replied, "as they thought they could direct him where to find those upon whom their suspicions chiefly rested." 44 Weil then, provided they paid Ids travelling expences to the great town and back again,. he cared not how soon thcy sat out ; but he must just step home to let Bets know what was in the wind." i( You may write to her," replied the Duke, <ť and I will undertake to have your letter conveyed to her; but I can't think of letting you leave us, as we may set off iu an hour, or less ; and it would take you at least four to go and come·" ie Why then it must be just as your Honour pleases; but you will please to be sure to let her have what I write, cause else she will go sniveling about to к 5 all
all the neighbours, and fancy I am in Gloucester gaol." As there w r ere writing materials in the room, his Grace told him to set about composing his letter, while he and Lord Fitzhayman made a second breakfast; and before they had done Reuben put the following production into our hero's hand, to convince him, he said, that he M'as now dealing upon the square ; for when he м -as properly treated he knew how to be as civil as another : the Duke therefore read as follows :—
'* DEAR BETS, u This is cumin to let you know I be going to Lunnun with they two gemmen that, you remember, I went up Severn 3 with
with yesterday; for after all, that there rum officer played us false ; for the gem- man he told us so many lies about is as good an Englishman as myself, and no more married than our Poll ; and I am glad as if I had found a pot of money that he wasn't drowned after all, but is alive and hearty, being a brave swimmer, and has rewarded I for trvins: to send t/ о him into t'other country, which you will. think very odd ; but 'tis true all the same for that ; so mind, and have your strong apron on when I return ; that is all I have got to say at present. Will and Ned have been obliged to make them·* selves scarce for a while, that they may keep out of harm's way; so doiťt \ou be frightened if you should bear our friend is goi n to be scragged, because he deserves it, if 'twas ouly for telling us a 6 such.
such a pack of lies ; for this here Duke İ3 a real great man ; and I question whe¬ ther it would not have gone very hard M r ith us if so be he hadn't swum on shore ; so I have engaged to lend that false chap a helping hand, as I shall be well paid for getting him carted. I don't suppose he will go up Mile Hill, else you might stand a chance of seeing him. Howsomnevcr, we have made our market of him, so it matters not where he dangles. I can't tell you when I shall be at home, but will write again if I should stop long in the great town. So this being all till we meet again, I con¬ clude, your lovin husbin till death, C( Reuben Hodges. " P.S. Keep a good look-out; mind the tiles, and the well in the dry ditch." " A very
fť A very proper good letter, " observed the Duke, who had with difficulty kept his countenance while reading it, i£ an't it, Fitz?" The Earl declared Mr. Hodges was an excellent scholar. The bell was then rung, and the waiter was desired to pro* cure a person to convey it to the gentle lady for whom it was intended ; while the flattered Ik üben said— u What I mean about the tiles, my Lord, is, that the wind is sometimes rough down .there, and them sea-breezes do us a mort of damage ; and the well in the dry ditch is one I sunk myself for my own use." The return of the valets prevented the Duke from making any reply to this candid explanation. They had discover¬ ed that the sort of naval officer they had been
been to enquire after, had gone off from the White Hart, Bristol, at four o'clock that morning, in the London coach, which went to the Angel, at the back of St. Clement's, from whence they thought he might be easily traced, lie had taken his place by the name of Brow n. tt Vety good, Wilson '/'said the Duke; " then we will follow him with all con¬ venient speed. I will just change my dress, and wc will be off; but I shall kave you behind, as I shall want to send you to the fisherman's, upon whom I promised to bestow a trifle." He is an honest deserving old fellow," said Hodges, tť and if Mr. Wilson is going there, whv be mav as well leave my letter with Bets; old Thomas will shew him the way to our house ; it an't a hundred уаш* out of his way ; and though
though I say it, she will make him as welcome as a Prince." " It shall be as you say," rejoined the Duke, who left him with the Earl while he changed his washed suit for one that fitted him rather better. He then wrote a few lines to the fisherman, and inclosed a hundred pound Bank note, giving him a direction to a Banker's at Bristol, where he desired him to call on that day week, when that gentleman would have received his order to pay him, or his wife if she was the survivor, a like sum annually, referring him to tí ' СУ Wilson for further particulars, and assur¬ ing him he was very sorry that hb hasty departure prevented him from seeing him, as he had promised, iu the evening. ι His (í race's travelling-chaise, and a hack, in which Lord Fitzhayman s valet and Hedges ¡ ΐ(
Hodges were to follow, being at the door, they set out for London, the Duke's ele¬ gant equipage and qutriders having given Reuben such an opinion of his conse¬ quence, that he wished he had, for once in his life, acted the part of an honest man, as he thought he might have been a greater gainer by betraying his employer, in the first instance, than he was likely. to be now in bringing him to the gal- tows.
CHAP.
СНЛР, VIL IS beloved master having drove from the door, James, being provided with a horse, set out for the fisherman's, who could hardlv believe he was to be so tí munificently provided for. Both he and his dame promised to pray for their benefactor, morning and evening, as long as he lived, and sincerely hoped the chief agent in the late iniquitous plan would be brought to the gallows. The old man theu accompanied James to Mrs. Hodge*,
11
WEDDINGS. Hodges, who M*as overjoyed at the receipt of her husband's letter, and would entertain her neighbour and guest, before whom she set the best her house afforded, with a long account of the vile rogue who had made her and Reuben believe that this here great Duke was a French- man. They both affected to exculpate her husband; and after spending half an hour with her, James returned to the Wells, and proceeded from thence to Bristol time enough to set off by the London mail-coach, by M'hich means he was in town not many hours after his master, who, having met with neither accident nor delav, arrived in Albermarle Street between four and five o'clock the morning after he lift the Wells. His cou¬ rier having taken the lead from Hounslow, the master of the house, head waiter,
and Jasmin and the other servants he had left in London, меге up, and upon the pavement when the chaise stopped ; and the master, who opened the door, ventured to congratulate his Grace upon his safe return. Presuming he had learnt some accident had befallen him from the courier, the Duke took but little notice of what he said, nor did he lemark Jas- ^min's visible joy; but after thanking his landlord, who preceded him into his apartment, he enquired whether any letter had arrived since the last, which had followed him to Bristol !" " None, your Grace," was the reply; " but a gentleman called here yesterday afternoon, who came to enquire whether you were returned, and appeared very much hurt when I told him you were aot; nor did I exactly know when to expect
expect you. He was very sorry, he said, as he came from a lady, who had been taken suddenly M r orse (I understood she had been ill some time) ; but she now wished particularly to see you, and an express M r as sent off for you about nine o'clock ; but it had not been gone more than an hour (for it went oft" from our door, as the gentleman came here for a proper direction) before another person called, who said he had left Bristol at four o'clock in the morning, and that a report had been prevalent the over night of your Grace having been drowned in King-Road, I think he said, where you had sailed upon a party of pleasure.** " And pray who was this officious person?'* asked our hero. " I don't recollect having ever seen bim before, your Grace ; but I am truly happy
happy to find he was either misinformed» or only came here on purpose to give us a false alarm ;—however, he succeeded in frightening us all ; and as for your Grace's servants, they were almost wild. But I hope there was no foundation for his strange story ?" " I certainly have been in some danger since I left London : but I wish you* could find out who this busy fellow was. Jasmin, did you never see him before?" " Never, Monseigneur; and I am sure I wish I had never seen him at all» for he frightened me almost to death." The Duke smiled at his warmth, while the landlord declared the fellow deserved to be horsewhipped· ? " í told him," he continued, u an еж- press was just gone off for your Grace ; and he seemed pleased when he learnt upon
upon what occasion, though why I санЧ pretend to say; but when your courier knocked us up, I thought that you had heard of the poor lady's illness, so had come to town upon that account; the express, I suppose, passed you upon the road." « Most likely," said the Duke. « But did your strange visitot wear his own hair ora wig?" " A Mig, your Grace, and a shabby naval uniform." " Thaťs the man !" cried Hodges, whom Lord Fitîdıayman's valet, accord¬ ing to the orders he had received, had just shewn into the room, as both his Grace and his master had desired him never to lose sight of him, and to bring him into the former's apartment the moment they reached London, where they
they had resolved he should remain under a guard till they could confront him with one or both of the supposed criminals. His exclamation induced the master of the house to turn round, when, surprised at his shabby sailor-like appearance, he said— " What has he done then ?" " Oh, he will find that out to his ¿sorrow, I believe," was the reply. The Duke prevented him from saying any thing more, by asking whether the lady's name who wished to see him was not Browning, as he had hb doubts whether it might not be Mentoria; ** That was the very name, your Grace, though I did not immediately recollect it," Our hero was therefore glad he had in ionie respects arrived m apropos, though
he was sorry to hear the poor old lady was M'orse, and anxious to learn whether the person had said she Mas in town. " In Portland-Place. She came to toM-n a few days ago for ail vice. Bless me ! I believe I am beside myself: but really the affliction the news of your Graces accident occasioned me made me almost forget M'hat the first gentleman said ; but I now perfectly remember he told me she was the late and the present Lord Vilmore's sister, and that she resided at what used to be called Vilmore House." " Which, I beheve, few people are better acquainted with than myself," re¬ plied the Duke, convinced the man Mas acquainted with his story· Willing, however to afford the poor old lady all the consolation in his power, he desired the master of the house to send
send bim and his friend some coffee im¬ mediately, as he believed, early as it was, he should walk into Portland-Place. Before he went to bed, the man re¬ tired to execute his orders. The overjoyed Jasmin also left the room, мЬеп Lord Fitzhayman applauded our hero'» notion of paying theoW Шу an immediate visit, promising not to lose sight of Hodges till he returned, though the fellow evinced no inclination to make his ecape; indeed, only having received half the promised reward, he was no more inclined to leave our hero, than he was to part with him. Having therefore drank a couple of cups of coffee, and seen his prisoner provided with mme sand¬ wiches and a gin-bottle, bis favourite liquor, the Duke sat out for Vilmore House, promising to return m ipţeddy vot. ju· j. ai
as possible, though some hours must elapse before there was a chance of their meeting M r ith either of the suspected persons, whom they wished Hodges to identify without, if possible, giving them any room to suspect they were detected ; for which reason they wished to keep him out of the way of entering into conversation, even with the servants; else they had no doubt of his being equally, if not more strictly guarded by them than themselves ; and they did not for that very reason like to put him nnder their care, as they rather wished he should not consider himself so much a prisoner as he really was. It was about a quarter past five when the Duke turned into Portland-Place. A carriage was in waiting at Mrs. Browrt- iug's door, which, upon a nearer approach, he
he discovered to be her physician's. This, considering the hour, had no very fa* vourable appearance, he thought. The street door was open; he therefore en¬ tered without any ceremony. Several servants, besides the porter, stood in the hall ; but of him he enquired how his mistress was. i€ But very indifferent, I believe, your Grace, Dr. W ----- has but this moment entered that parlour in his way down from the sick room, and he will be able to give you the latest and best informa¬ tion respecting her health/' flinging open the door while speaking. Tlie Duke entered with as little cere¬ mony as lie had done the house, having been very intimate with the Doctor while lie bore the name of Browning, though he had never chanced to see bim since ĺ g tlie
the day when his approaching M'edding with Lady Leonora Macdougall had been so unexpectedly interrupted ; but pre¬ sumed he had gone into this room to write some prescription for his patient: he was therefore not a little surprised to meet, as he hastily advanced, the eyes of Lord Vilmore, who started back upon his approach with a degree of trepidation, and with such ghastly looks that the Duke did not hesitate mentally to pro¬ nounce him guilty, at least of being concernid in the late plot against his life, though a moment's reflection led him to put rather a more favourable construction upon his visible consterna¬ tion, as the sudden appearance of his sisters acknowledged heir, to the great detriment of himself and his family, was certainly not likely to occasion him the most
most pleasurable sensations. Still his Grace was rather surprised to find him iti Portland-Place, knowing the rooted antipathy which Mrs, Browning had ever evinced for him, and which his recent behaviour had certainly not been calcu¬ lated to do away; still he rather 'hoped that, being sensible of her approaching dissolution, she had sent for him to ac¬ knowledge her own errors, and to pro¬ nounce the forgiveness of his, not con¬ ceiving his Lordship would have intruded himself unasked into her house. Alto¬ gether, therefore, he was rather pleased at meeting him, as he considered it a convincing proof that he was not the M'igged officer whom he had followed to London, though he could not help fear¬ ing that he was more or less connected with that scoundrel. A silent bow was, hoM'ever, all that passed between Octa¬ le 3 vius
vius and the Peer; and the Doctor hav¬ ing turned round upon hearing somebody advance, hastily rose to pay his respects to his former friend, respectfully taking his proffered hand, and declaring himself happier than he could express at their rather unexpected meeting, adding— " Why, what a most abominable false¬ hood reached Mrs. Bnnvning late last night ! Upon my word the author of it deserves to be severely punished; for it has certainly greatly increased her danger, and M'ould have rendered her truly mise¬ rable even in her last moments. Had I been consulted, she should not have been made acquainted with the iniquitous fa· brication : however, your Grace's pre¬ sence will, I trust, prove of infinite ser¬ vice to her : be that as it may, it was exceedingly ill-judged to let her hear any thing about your supposed accident till the
the truth of the report was ascertained beyond a doubt; in my opinion, it was a refinement upon cruelty." " I perfectly agree with you, Doctor," was the reply; " but pray can you in¬ form me v/ho was so kindly officious ?" " It was me, your Grace," rejoined Lord Vilmore, endeavouring to conceal his internal rage; "and notwithstand¬ ing the cruelty of the measure, though I do not think any body besides Dr. W ------ would see it in such a light, I thought it my duty, the moment 1 learned your Grace was supposed to have been drowned, to impart the intelligence to Mrs. Brown¬ ing, whom I kuew lay dangerously ill, and that she had publicly declared she had made you her heir· Consistent with. my regard for mv family, I therefore thought it necessary she should be ap- j- 4 prised
prised of what had befallen you, as I wished to give her an opportunity of ab¬ juring her errors in her last moments, and of doing justice to those she is bound by every tie of nature, relation¬ ship, and duty, to provide for, in pre¬ ference to an alien to her blood, who wants nothing she has it in her power to bestow." t% Your Lordship may have had reason on your side, but you certainly shewed yourself very devoid of feeling. But will you do me the favour to inform me from whom you learned tlie report you were so anxious to transmit to Mrs. Browning?" ' r I am totally unacquainted with the gentleman who brought me the intelli¬ gence, your Grace, merely in conse¬ quence of having learned my exact situa¬ tion
tion with respect to my sister: indeed, he did not stop* five minutes; but as he promised to call again iu the course of to¬ day, I can desire him to wait upon your Grace, if agreeable. All he told me Mas, that he had not been in London many minutes, having left Bristol at four o'clock in the morning, where he had accidentally heard, the over night, that your Grace had been drowned when out upon a party of pleasure. Some per¬ son, μΊιο slept at the White Hart as well as himself, hail mentioned it to several people in the coffee-room ; but I am now convinced he fabricated the M'ho le story on purpose to render me ridiculous ; though he declared that no¬ thing but his being intimately acquainted M r ith your Grace's supposed affinity to my late brother, and my sister's absurd tle- 15 claratious
22б* MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS clarations in vour favour, mo uld have Hi ' induced him to have come into Great- George-Street at such a time of night, as he M'as come to London to visit a sick. relation, who was anxiously expecting him ; and he came nearly a couple of miles out of his way to call upon me." A very unlikely story thought his Grace, and very badly told : but Lord Vilmore having brought it to a conclu¬ sion, he said— ** Considering he Mas so total a stran- ger to your Lordship, it was certainly being either very friendly or very offi¬ cious. But pray what sort of a man was he, as I am rather anxious to be better acquainted with him, as I conceive he deserves punishment for his wantonness, if he had no worse intentions. What time did he call upon your Lordship ?" 5 " Between
<( Between nine and ten o'clock, if I recollect right ; it might be later. I was but just come home from a dinner party, when I was informed that a stranuer re¬ quested to see me. I ordered him to» be shewn in, and he told me what I have already repeated to your Grace. In point of size he was much about my own height, but was rather stouter, and, I should suppose, was turned of fifty, if not near sixty. He wore a dark \ущ-, that I well remember; but altogether I was so taken by surprise, that í did not pay much attention either to his person or dress. Indeed he was in too much haste to allow me time to ask him any ques¬ tions; besides, as he promised to call upon mc again this morning, í was tae less anxious to detain him. Shoulu he come according to his word, your Grace ь б may
may depend upon my sendiug him into Albemarlc-Street, though I rather snppose he will not shew himself again in Great- George-Street, as he must be convinced that I should soon discover he had been attempting to impose upon me; for I suppose there was no foundation for his story." ** I certainly did meet with an acci¬ dent, my Lord, m hich might have given rise to the report; but the gentleman who visited you pronounced me no more rather prematurely, though I did fall overboard from a pleasure-boat, but pro¬ videntially was able to swim to shore. However this is no time to enter into any details respecting the matter, as I under¬ stand Mrs. Browning is in great danger, and very anxious to see me; shall I therefore trouble you, Doctor, as being most
most competent to the task, to inform her I ám now here, and in very tolerable health ; and that I should M'ish to see her as soon as die finds herself well enough to bear the interview." The physician instantly left the room, and Lord Vilmore made his parting bow, saying— Éí I am convinced I have no longer any business here ; but I thought it proper, though 1 may be deemed unfeel¬ ing, to let my sister know that there was äreport of your Grace's death in circu¬ lation; and I chose to be iu the house, that I might know what effect my com¬ munication had upon her; indeed I con¬ sidered it as a duty to my children to seek a reconciliation with her in her last moments, M'hich I hoped would have been brought about through the means of Dr,
Dr. W ------,. but- he, like your Grace; attributed what I had done to want of feeling, therefore refused to become my advocate, though he mentioned my be¬ ing here to her when he last saw her, but was informing me, as your Grace entered, that she absolutely refused to- see mc ; and vour arrival has convinced 7 tl me that I have nothing farther to hope, and of course no reason to remain any longer in this house," retiring as be con¬ cluded, the Duke not feeling at all in¬ clined to stop him, as he was more and more convinced that he was, at all events, an aider and abettor of the scheme which Hodges had been fixed upon to execute ; yet if he could not meet with the man. with the brown wig, he might never be able to punish any one of the principals. The time of tlie officer's being in Albe¬ marle-
marie Street and at Lord Vilmore's tallied; but that he should have gone round pur¬ posely to call at those two places, if he really had come to London to visit a sick friend, carried falsity upon the face of it : however, since Lord Vihnore had acknowledged having seen him, his ser- vants might be questioned, and then surely, either by some mean:* or other, he might be traced, hini brought to suffer the punishment he deserved. While our hero was making these re¬ flections the Doctor returned to inform him Mrs, Browning was all impatience to see him. ťť I will wait upon her immediately," replied the Duke. ťt You would not in¬ terfere in Lord Vilmore's behalf, he in¬ forms me. " " Ido
" I do not think he deserves to have any honest man plead his cause, your* Grace. IVIrs. Browning is perfectly con¬ vinced, and I am very much of her opi¬ nion, that the whole story, which he \vrote her M'ith every detail likely ίο M'ound her feelings, originated solely in himself, and Mas merely fabricated to in¬ duce her to make a will in his favour; it was therefore more than cruel—it was absolutely atrocious; but I will attend your Giace as soon as you please/' As they pioceeded up the stairs, the Doctor told our hero he must not 'be surprised at the Monderful alteration he would find in Mrs. Browning, a constant slow nervous fever having for some time been gradually undermining her constitu¬ tion ; and as it had resisted every effort that had been made to remove it, she was мот
worn down almost to a shadow ; nor did he think it at all likely she would last another week. The Duke was very much hurt when 'ie found there Mere no hopes of her 'Ccovery, as he had been particularly onjtl of her from a child; therefore, :hough she had in some respects lowered herself in his esteem, his affection for her appeared to increase with his know¬ ledge of her danger. She was setting up in bed, supported by pillows, when he entered, anxiously listening for'the ap¬ proach of the child of her adoption and affection, and faintly smiling, stretched out her feeble arms the moment she caught sight of him· The Duke leaned down towards her— " My dear aunt, I am very sorry to sec you so ilk" " It
" It is God's will, my dearest nephew, and I submit with patience—nay, 1 am truly grateful for all his mercies towards me ; and the hearing myself called your aunt, and seeing you once more, are not among the least favours I have received at his hands," This was uttered in a sort of audible M-hisper, as she feebly enfolded him in her arms, which he м т е11 remembered having frequently sustained him during his childhood, and being ahvays open to receive him when he came home from Eton, or from College. (i Has that wretch, Lord Vilmore, left my house?" was the first question. she asked the Duke. " He has indeed," was the reply. " I hardly know how to mention such a thing to you ; but could you have borne to
to have seen him for a few minutes, just to have pronounced his forgiveness?" ťí Kever —I never can see him, my beloved Octavius ! the sight of him would be my death. I forgive him, if that will afford him any satisfaction ; but nothing more will I ever do for him, who endeavoured to irnbitter my last moments, in hopes of leading me to alter my will in his favour. But do tell me whether you have met with any accident ? for when I first learned the horrid intel¬ ligence, I did not scruple to say he had been accessary to your fate, in hopes of either obtaining my fortune or of hastening my death, and of rendering me miserable in my last moments. So do let me know how you came to return to town at so strange an hour? Was it iu consequence of my express ? But first telL
tell me whether your life has been in any danger?" " It certainly has, my dear aunt, but I believe chiefly owing to my own awk¬ wardness, and that of some drunken sailors." " They M ? ere tutored for the purpose, depend upon it, my Octavius. You do not know what a villain in grain Vilmore is ; but if he is guilty, the vengeance of Heaven will overtake him : but I am sure he has hated you from a child; and I know he hoped the news of your death M'ould induce me to make him or his children my heirs. But I had a thousand things to say to you, and now you are here they seem ίο have all escaped my memory.*" " You fatigue yourself too much, my dear aunt. By and by you Mill have thought
thought of some of them; and I will see you again whenever you chuse, or are able to receive my visit." " But I may be called away in a mo* ment, my beloved child ; I have several times already thought myself a going; 1 am therefore very thankful I have been allowed this short interval You have long since forgiven me for my share i u what I know I shall soon be called upon to answer for at that dread tribunal from which there is no appeal ; yet I think I should feel a degree of satisfac¬ tion in hearing you repeat my pardon." " Then, if there is truth in mortal, my dear aunt, or if 1 know my own heart, I have not only long since forgiven you, but you may believe me when I assure you I shall ever gratefully remember your repeated acts of kindness towards me during
-during my childhood and youth, and that while I breathe I shall revere your memory." , "Enough, enough, my beloved child !" she faintly cried, the tears streaming down her pallid cheeks. Nor did our hero witness her agitation unmoved. Their lips met, and haviug tenderly em¬ braced the protectress of his childhood, he raised himself from the very unplea¬ sant posture in which he had remained from the moment of his entrance ; and the Doctor advised his patient to take some¬ thing to recruit her exhausted spirits, and then to try to compose herself for a short time. " Perhaps his Grace could make it convenient to see yon again in the course of the forenoon?"
He should hold himself in readiness to obey the shortest summons, Mas our hero's reply. " And can you ensure my life for those few hours, Doctor," she enquired. " Most certainly, my dear Madam ! nor do I absolutely despair of your reco¬ very. The Duke's visit has proved a most efficacious cordial/' She shook her head, but held out her hand to Octavius. "I am afraid I shall intrude too much upon your time; but I am not able to talk any more just now; you will see me again." " Whenever you chuse, my dear aunt. If you do not send for me before, I shall call here about one o'clock; you must endeavour meanwhile to take some re¬ pose," raising her hand to his lips, and leaving
leaving the room with the Doctor, wno had been giving orders to her attend¬ ants. When they reached the parlour, he told his Grace it was possible Mrs. Browning might last for a fcM r days, but that even a few hours might terminate her exist¬ ence. He should see her again about ten o'clock, M*hen he should be able to form a better judgment ; and as he offer¬ ed to set his Grace down, they drove from the door together, both leaving orders to be sent for should any unex¬ pected change take place before they came agaim
4
СИЛР.
e
СНЛР. VIH. VVITH difficulty had Lord Vilmore restrained his internal rage Mİıile in our hero's presence. The moment, however, he left the house, he sometimes ran, at others walked, and not unfrcquentiy stood still to vent his rage by statttp« ing upon the pavement, wiiich appeared to ailbrd him some relief, m the sm prist¬ ine Dukes appearance in Portland-Place had occasioned him Mas of that very unpleasant nature that a man of hk cha- vol. in. · m racter
racter must feci, M'hen, after having sup¬ posed his greatest enemy no more, he finds him, as it were, risen again from the dead, as if on purpose to blast every rising hope which he was begiuning to entertain : every thing, iu short, appeared to have conspired to increase his disap¬ pointment, he having perfectly settled how he should proceed to take possession of his sister's property, not having enter¬ tained a doubt of our hero's demise, ad¬ mitting he could neither prevail upon her to alter her will in his or his children's favour ; because, presuming she had left every thing to the Duke de Valentinok and 1ш 1Иг$, he thought there was little reason to suppose tliat his father, who wm certainly his only heir, would de¬ prive him and his family of what appeared so very much thtir right, if the matter was
was properly represented to him; and this he thought might be very easily done: he therefore was aheady, in ima¬ gination, master of Vilmore House, Vil¬ more Abbey, Alton, &c. when our hero's very unexpected appearance overturned all his airy visions, and drove him nearly frantic, for such he was by the time he reached his own house, where he raved, swore, and cursed, like а 1кчШшке ; and in the hist paroxysm of his rage he loaded a brace of piatole, which he put into Ins pockets, swearing that if ever he saw the villain who had robbed him of his inheritance again, he would shoot him, even were they to meet in the circle. His eldest son was the only person he suffered to come mar him, and even he was near an hour before he could get m й him
him to listen to reason, though it w/as a day that he was under the necessity of attending his office, as he Mas to lay some particular accounts before the Lords of the Treasury. His son, however, at last made him recollect that circumstance, which was perhaps the only one that could have brought him to himself, and induce him to reflect upon the impo- teney of his rage and execrations ; we will therefore leave his son reasoning with him upon his excess of folly while we return to our hero, who Mas set down in Albermarle-Street about seven o'clock, and heard T ord Fitzhayman laughing most immoderately as he ascended the staircase leading to his saloon, and un¬ derstood his mirth had been occasioned by his having drawn his companion on to relate some of his smuggling adven¬ tures,
turcs, anil the contrivances they had recourse to upon those occasions, not to mention the abominable tricks he con fessed they frequently played the custom house officers, excisemen, &c, which had highly diverted the Earl, though it had greatly increased the detestation in which* he held the unprincipled Keuben. The Duke s return broke in upon the fellow's d¡scourse f as his firace imme¬ diately told his friend who he had met in Portland-Place, and what had passed» speaking French of Course, ťí Vihnore is guilty, take my word for it," rejoined the Earl ; '* but I rather think the Caledonian wa* the person who arranged the plan with this fellow ; there¬ fore let us leave him under my Wibon 9 » and Jasmin's care, wliHc we have our breakfasts, and I will sally forth to make m 3 a few
a few inquiries in Dover-Street, before we proceed to action ; and do you, M'hile 1 am so employed, lay down for a few hours. " " No, I am much obliged to you; for though 1 spent part of one night in sviminitjg, ami travelled during the next, I am by no means inclined to sleep ; not that 1 will pretend to say I am in absolute health, nor that I don't feel more fatigued than I ever did before; still to go to bed merely to tumble about Mould, I am convinced, answer no one good purpose, so I Mill content myself Mİth reriringearly to night, and sleeping very late to morrow morning ; besides, of the two, I have had the most rest." u Well, you must have your own way, I bdieye," was the reply. Hodges
Hődges w^as therefore put under the care of Lord Fitzhayman's valet and Jasmin, and the friends, having recruited their spirits with an excellent breakfast, though the Duke was scarcely more inclined to eat than to sleep, sallied forth about tight, and began their enquiries at a pubiic-house in Dover-Street, from whence they had a view of Lord Dumbarton's town residence, as they were particularly anxious to discover whether he had left London, which thev were inclined to believe he had, from perceiving the house shut up : they therefore put the question to the landlord, who told them the Earl and his lately married daughter had set o$ pack and baggage, fire days before. The wife, who chose to meddle in the discourse, insisted upon it it was six. m 4 #ŕ W dk
<f Well, it matters not," replied our hero· (i But do you know where they are gone ?" tfc Why. for once, not to make a trade of it," said the landlord, attempling to be witty, " tlie Scotchman has taken tlie road home: he is moneto some dis* mal ohi castle on t'other side of tlic Tweed, to hide his own and my Lady's (I can't mind her new name) head." " \\ hy what have tliey done that they need be ashamed of?" asked Lord Fits- ba ν man. The landlord entered into a lono- detail respecting Lady Leonora's masqued wecl- einfif, and concluded bv savins:, she had brou ht her pi:rs to a fine market at last, ai ter havina: waited so Ion «χ for a husband, to be obliged to give up her whole fortune to
to the fellow she had married, to pack him off over seas : however, she might depend upon seeing him again whenever he wanted money. Having learnt every thing this man knew respecting the Dumbarton family, the fri e mis agreed to proceed to Trelaw¬ ney-House, as the servants would at all events be stirring; and they wished to consult the Marquis, and see the French Ambassador, before they made any stir hi the business. Lord Dumbarton had left town long enough to warrant their suspecting him to be the officer. Lady Leonora might have proceeded alone to Dumbarton Castle, and the Earl might have returned to London to impart his success to his confederate in iniquity,. Lord Vilmore. Lord Fitzhayman was- convinced neither one nor the other m 5 would
would be suliered to remain in their imagined securi; y any longer, as he doubled not but Government would take' the matter up very seriously, without even waiting for a requisition from the French Ambassador, though that gentle¬ man would doubtless think himself au- tlbiii-ed to make an immediate applica¬ tion ti Ministers concerning the matter. ťí I .shall certainly not try to prevent justice from taking its course," replied our hero, as they walked up the steps leading to Trelawney-House. None of the family were up ; but iheir unexpected arrival soon brought Lord and Lady Trelawney down stairs, and in a very few seconds Lady Helen came runniug in to welcome her brother and his friend.
After
After the first general compliments, the Marquis naturally enquired when ihey arrived in London, rather presum¬ ing late the over night, which had in¬ duced his son to take up his abode with his friend. The Eail therefore briefly informed him how tragically their party upon the water had been near terminating, with every other et cœtera respecting tlie Duke's miraculous escape, not forgetting to dwell upon Hodges's confession ; nor did he scruple mentioning their joint suspicious. The horrid tale had such an effect upon the IVIarchioness, that she was with difficulty preserved from fainting, and was obliged to be supported between the Marquis and her daughter into her dress¬ ing-room. Both the Duke and Earl were very m 6 sorry
sTiy they had been so abrupt in their communication. Lord Fitzhayman, in particular, blamed himself, as he ought to have recollected, he said, that his mother had very weak nerves, and was particularly alive to the distresses or dangers of any of her friends. The Marquis soon returned to them, and informing them she was very much recovered, added— 44 She really possesses too much sen¬ sibility, though in the present instance I share her feelings ; and I am resolved (nor do I doubt being ably supported by my colleagues) to discover who the wretch or wretches were who framed so diabolical a plot; therefore will your Grace (who certainly ought to see the French Ambassador as soon as possible) do me the favour to meet me with that nobleman
nobleman at the Treasury, where I am engaged to be upon business by eleven o'clock ; Lord Vihnore will be there, as he is to bring in some accounts for our examination. " I only wish his head may be suffi¬ ciently clear to go through with his task," observed the Earl. " I am afraid his head is much more to be depended upon than his heart," replied the Marquis. " He understands his business better than any man in his department, or he would have had more than a hint to resign when the masque¬ rade plot was made public ; but Lord Dumbarton's behaviour to your Grace has brought such severe animadversions upon him from his superiors in office, that he has very prudently retired from business to prevent being turned out in disgrace. 6 But
Lut I think, Duke, this Hodges ought tv) undergo a aort of official public ex¬ amination previous to his being taken before a magistrate, should that be thought necessary ; at all events he ought to he, as soon as possible, con¬ fronted with Vilmore, who will be obliged, or I am very much mistaken, to give us some clearer information respecting the officious person who brought him the news of your death, which reached him so very apropos. í think that circum¬ stance alone amounts to proof positive of his guilt; however, I will not now detain your Grace, as I am anxious to have you see the French Ambassador as soon as possible ; only remember, I shall expect to see you and him at the Trea¬ sury by twelve o'clock. Fitzhayman,, you will attend vour friend, as you are a very
a very principal evidence in this dark affair." The Earľs chariot vas therefore im¬ mediately ordered for the sake of expedi¬ tion, and the friends proceeded to the Marquis de lioehegude's, wlio was, if possible, more anxious than Lord Tre¬ lawney to bring the culprit or culprits to condign punishment, therefore readily promised to meet them at the Treasury, as the Duke and Earl thought it ne¬ cessary to make a little alteration in their dress before they proceeded thither. James had arrived in Albermarle-Street during the interim, and gave his master an account of the commissions he had been left to execute, while assisting him to change his dress, and received his orders to follow him and Lord Fitzhay¬ man to the Treasury with Hodges, who was
was summoned into the saloon as soon as the friends were reaily, and informed, the gentlemen having resolved to walk across the Parks, that he was to take a turn M'ith them, in order to afford him an opportunity of pointing out this officer thev were so desirous to discover. " If your honours will only please to lead me where there is a chance of my coming across him, why he sha'n't escape me for the Avant of an eye; if he does, why he would deceive Nick himself, that's all· I have heen used to keep watch ¡n times of danger. There, I will be bound to rake my gun up off the grouud, ready loaded, mind, to Jet fly, and bring down my bird at sixty yards dbt;.ne lour times out of five, and not be more than five seconds a* out it neither. That if lit¬ tering thing your Honour has got on the left
left side of your coat (alluding to the Duke's star) would be a nice mark ; you did not sport such a thing at the Wells, else faith—but you take me—and I ques¬ tion whether it a'n't right over the heart— for I shot at a mark fifty yards for a leg of mutton and trimmings only last week five times within the minute, and had to load, and yet put fifty-four shot into a card, four over my number; but I always do the knowing ones ; and I did the same party for a rump and dozen not a month agone : they know Reubeu Hodges, and will remember him too." The Duke looked at the Earl in silent wonder at this wretch's avowed audacity, as his remark respecting the star was certainly a very good one; nor did he doubt but he would have aimed at it had he had au opportunity while seeking hu Mìe,
life, as he appeared to set his own at nought, if he could but earn money to squander away in drunkenness and debauchery. The friends of course walked first, Ho Iges, between the two Wibons, keep¬ ing close to their heels. The latter shewed him the Queen's House and St„ James's, telling him to whom they be¬ longed. " Ah, Georgy !" he exclaimed, look¬ ing at the last, loud enough for the friends to hear, who slackened their pace purposely to profit by his queer re¬ marks; " ah, Georgy, if you had no more revenue than Keuben Hodges pays you, a shorter house might serve you !" Neither masters nor servauts could conceal their smiles, which induced him to proceed, addressing the former. « Now
" Now do you think, gentlemen, there is any harm in my calling? for I don't believe any man has a right to say I chusc to have so much out ofthat, and so much out of ťother, though might overcomes right, and I am obliged to let them have what they call their due when I can't avoid ii, that is, when I can't defend myself any longer ; but if I was to pay duty for every thing I eat and drink, why my family would be starved; though I believe George is a very good sort ofa man in the bottoms and 1 would treat him as soon as any other man living, if he was ever to come amongst us." Thus he ran on, breaking out now and theu with, " I don't see anj thing of the fellow ; that U something like tlie genus ; there goes another leering fellow miuht
might be taken for him. But if, after all, we should not fmd him, my Lord Duke, you mean to gheme the money all the same. " " Was I to tell you you should have it whether or not, you might let him escape if you were to meet him." Instantly faking upon his knees, though in the middle of the Mall, Hodges swore to point him out if ever he caught sight of him, not only for the sake of the reward, but for the pleasure of bringing him to the gallows for having made such a gudgeon of him. At last, however, they reached the Parade without his having been able to challenge any one, though he supposed they had met nearly half London, and onlv wondered how thev all lived, as he could
could not see a yard of ground even cul¬ tivated for potatoes. When they turned into the long gloomy passage leading' to the Treasury, he hoped they мтге not going to take him to Newgate, as he had heard there was such a place in Loudon as well as in Bi istol. Wilson told him he was going to the Treasury. " Then, for Gods sake, do shew me m here they keep all the money! Oh, if I had but one bag full, just as much as I could carry I but I suppose 'tis taken special good care of." They now turned up the large flight of stairs, the Earl leading the way to the Marquis's apartments, where several gen¬ tlemen were assembled, but who were all strangers to the friends, the Marquis's Secretarv
Secretary excepted, м ho t >ld them he expected him every moment; and in less than two minutes he did arrive, with three other noblemen of the first distinc¬ tion, anil the French Ambassador, who congratulated the Duke with infinite feel¬ ing and politene««* upon his late narrow escape, declaring they did not nordre to be requested, in their oiiieial characters, to strain every učive to bring the cul¬ prits, be they one or more, to justice. Hodges, μΊιο with his attendants had of course remained in the hack ground, caught the Marquis's attention, who said— *' That sailor, I presume, your Grace, is the person you mentioned to me as having undertaken to forward your ene¬ my's scheme ; I can therefore only tell him, that though he may escape the gallows
gallows in consequence of his confession, if he cannot point out the pcison who bribed him and his brothers to commit so atiocious a deed, we wid take care to prevent his entering into any other such horrid plans with people he doe» not even know. " Ilodo'c.fs confidence and gaiety both forsook him, as he was now but too well aware of the consequence of the person he had attempted to drown, and found the most vigorous measures would be taken to punUh his employer; and that should the»e great men fail iu that attempt, the least he would have to ex* pect would be transportation. He was, however, able to say, if he eould but once clap eyes upon the chap who had led him into this hobble, he would swear to him as soon as look at him, let him be
be dressed never so different to м -hat he was when he talked him over to his pur¬ pose, for be took sufficient notice of him to кпол' him again ; therefore if he escaped him, M'hy, he should indeed de¬ serve to be banged in his stead : how¬ ever, having turned King's evidence, as a body might say, he trusted their Ho¬ nours Mould not let him come to any harm. Two gentlemen had entered the apart¬ ment by another door while he was speak¬ ing ; but owing to where he stood, and to his beiıiiî nearly surrounded bv the com- pany present, he had not been able to see who they were; but the .Marquis having turned on one side to look round him, Reuben darted forward nearly at the same instant, crying— " Why, there's the man; I could swear
swear to him among a thousand, aye, and ten thousand, for all he wears his ovvn hair." To point out the consternation of every one present would be impossible, as Reuben caught Lord Vilmore by the collar as he was in the very action of bowing to our hero, and hoping ----- Hodges did not allow him to finish his speech ; and when he met the eyes of the triumphant fiend who held him, his terror baífled all description. The meet¬ ing his Grace at the Treasury had not given him the greatest pleasure ; but their first interview being over, he hoped to acquit himself better during the second. He was not, however, ab!e to make even an effort to disengage himself; nor would the fellow have left his hold, if the Duke, whom he was now ready to vou ни м fall
fall down and worship, had not made him a sign to that effect. Having been from the first convinced that Lord Vil¬ more was concerned in the base scheme, he was by no means so much surprised^ as some of the company were, when Iteuben so rudely seized the culprit, to¬ wards whom he advanced, desiring him in a whisper to seek his safety in flight, as he felt he not only forgave him, but even shuddered at tlie idea of bringing a man, to whom he hail so long thought himself related, toan untimely end : but as the wretched being ι eco ve red hib pow¬ ers of lespiiatbn, which appeared to have been suspended for a time, and while those around him were exclaiming, ' £ Is it possible ! Can it be ľ' he looked wildly round him, and the door by which he had entered being opened, he darted into the
the passage. Reuben, fearful he wished to make his escape, flew after him. The Duke called out, li Let him go!"— but the rest of the gentlemen, having recover¬ ed from their consternation, cried out—· 44 No, no !" hastening after him them¬ selves. Not more than two had been able to leave the room before the report of a pistol was heard, which appeared to proceed from the end of the gallery, and they saw the culprit fall, never to rise again. The party behind, thinking he was defending himself, меге doubly anx¬ ious to get forward ; but their doubts were soon cleared up. 44 Wretch !" exclaimed the Marquis of Trelawney, you did well not to survive your disgrace ! He was prepared to" act upon the defensive, you perceive, had it been practicable ; that not being the case, к 2 lie
he turned the deadly weapon against him¬ self." " The moment he got without the door," said Hodges, " I saw him pull something out of his pocket ; so guess¬ ing it was a popper, I slackened my pace, thinking he meant to do me. " ** Then take warning, wretch, by this villain's untimely end, lest despair drive you to commit a similar act of despera¬ tion,'* replied the Marquis. " Me kill myself! No, no, my Lord, I should not have been such a fool as that comes to, neither! and this here fellow might have lived at least two months longer; and as he was a Lord, why, lie might not have swung after all." —Then turning to the Duke, *' I sup¬ pose your Grace is satisfied now, for he is as dead as a herring; why he tried to swallow
swallow the ball, for he put the pistol into his mouth·" His Grace was, perhaps, the most shock¬ ed of any one present, when he found the impious Vilmore had rushed unbidden into the presence of his Maker ; there¬ fore turning to his friend, he said, " Let ш be going," as he found a sort of faint sickness stealing over him, which he trusted the fresh air would dissipate. Perceiving his visible agitation, which every one present thought perfectly ac¬ counted for, no one attempted to detain htm, the Marquis and the Ambassador merely telling him they should call upon him before they went home. Followed, therefore, by Hodges and the servants, the friends retraced their steps into Alber- marle-Street ; and as, before they reached the hotel, the Duke appeared to have in к 3 some
some measure recovered the shock sc dreadful an event had occasioned him, the Earl, who felt less pity for the wretched Vilmore, with a sich observed, that he had settled his accounts even more expeditiously than he should have expected· -HULL, ' ,., ...... ■„", .......... m CHAP. IX. Jks soon as they reached the Duke's saloon, he desired Wilson to pay Hodges the promised sum and his travelling ex¬ pences, and to send him about his busi¬ ness. ." But
" But advise him from me, James," said Lord Fitzhayman, " to turn an honest man, 'if he knows how, as I am of opinion he will be marked out by the adjoining magistrates, and not suffered to be the terror of his neighbourhood much longer." Having sat talking over the late horrid catastrophe for a short time, the Marquis and the Ambassador joined them, the miserable Vilmore's desperate deed having unfitted any of the gentlemen from pro¬ ceeding to business that day. They hoped the Duke wouid not allow the wretched be¬ ing s untimely end to prey upon his spirits, as, dreadful as it certainly was, he hail scarcely left himself an alternative. The Marquis believed there never was a family so decidedly obstinate as the Brownings, nor two brothers and a skter N4 who
who so cordially hated each" other, as they were even ready to sacrifice their lives to be revenged of each other, or to carry a favourite point ; and as even Mrs. Brown¬ ing, who now laid at the point of death, would, he was convinced, be more anx- k>us to deprive her surviving relations of her property, than to ensure her oivn recovery, were such a thing possible: not that he blamed her for having dis¬ posed of her estates in the Duke s favour ; it Mas only fulfilling her duty, and keeping the word she had given her bro¬ ther;—but if she had not had such an excuse, he M'as iveli convinced that none of her nepheM's and nieces would have benefited by her death ; mnd perhaps it Mas aH ordered for the best ; as the off¬ spring of such a man as the wretched suicide, and a woman of known light character,
character, might be taught humility by adversity. The Marquis was going on in this strain, meaning to reconcile his young favourite (for such the Duke was) to what liad happened, and to induce him to fulfil Mrs. Browning's last injunctions, when a servant came from Portland-Place to request the Duke's immediate presence thither. Dr. W —-~, being there, had ако sent his respectful compliments,, and had desired the servant to tell his Grace no time was to he lost if he wished to see Mrs. Browning alive; the Marquis and Ambassador therefore took their leave, but the Ear!, at hit friends request, ac¬ companied him tø Vilmore Ноше« €l Surely,** said the Duke, ü they hastened thither, " if Lord Vilmore** death has reached the ears of any of the ш $ &miiy,
family, they have not let Mfs\ Brown¬ ing know what a dreadful exit he made." " Dr. W. has prevented that being done so indiscreetly, I dare say," rejoined the Earl ; " though I think no one but the brother, whom she is going to follow, could have been so deliberately cruel." The Doctor met the gentlemen in the "hall, told them his patient was very low indeed, but did not seem to be so much aware, as he should have expected, of her approaching dissolution, though she had several times asked for his Grace, but "was averse to having him sent for, fear¬ ing he would think her too encroaching. '*"** She has even been talking of to¬ morrow," he proceeded, " when I would "mt tnmxt her life for the succeeding Tmlfhoiuv* ."Then • >*
<( Then I m ill see her as soon as you please, Doctor," replied the Duke. " I hope she has not heard of her wretched brother's death." The Doctor did not understand'his Grace, Lord Fitzhayman, therefore, en¬ tered into a short explanation. The physician appeared as he felt—very much shocked, though he congratulated tbe Duke upon being saved a great deal of trouble, and a most unpleasant task, which it must have proved to a man of his sensibility, to have prosecuted the villain. In a few minutes our hero and the physician went up stairs, leaving Lord Fitzhayman tn the library. Mrs. Brown¬ ing was in a doze, they therefore waited for her awaking, which the Doctor said she would do in a few minutes; nor wát к 6 ht
he mistaken, as, in less than three mi¬ nutes she opened her eyes, and after wiping them, and looking very stedfastly at the Duke for a few seconds, she asked— " Who is that?" The Duke made himself known to her. She put out her hand— " I was afraid it was Thomas; I be¬ lieve I have been dreaming of him ; don't let him come near me, my beloved ne¬ phew ; he wanted to kill me, and would murder you, if he dare : pray take care of him Г " I am in no danger, my dear aunt." " You don't know," she faintly arti¬ culated, falling into another doze; the gentlemen therefore left the room, but had hardly had time to inform the Earl how they had left Mrs. Browning, ere the
the nurse ran in to tell them she feared her poor dear mistress was going off; and a second messenger, whom they met upon the stairs, pronounced her no more» " God rest her departed spirit !" re· turned the Duke, w ho was preparing to leave the house with the Earl and the physician, when the steward and house¬ keeper entered the library, saying, they w r ere come, as in duty bound» to fulfil the last injunctions of their departed mis¬ tress, which were, to deliver all the keys in her's and their own possession into the Duke's hands, as soon as the breath waa out of her body, if his Grace was in the house. *' Then give me those she thought it necessary to keep herself;—neither your s, Mr. Burnham, nor your's, Mrs. Campley, can be in better hands for the present" Those
Those he demanded uere therefore put into his hands by the flati ered domestics ; and as one of them opened a bureau and bookcase, which had formerly been con¬ sidered as his own, he unlocked it to deposit the others, when the first thing which caught his eye, and which had evidently been placed purposely to attract notice, M'as a copy of her will, upon which was wrote who held the original, and where the other copies were deposited, for fear of accidents or treachery. A wish was also expressed that it might be read as soon as possible. "Then be it your care, Mr. Burn- ham," said the Duke, " to request Mrs. Browning's, or rather Lord Vilmore's lawyer, would attend me here, at six this evening, with the will, that I may con¬ form,
form, as far as lies in my power, to all her injunctions." Having, therefore, made a hasty dinner with his friend, his Grace returned to 'Vilmore House, where the Marquis of Trelawney, in consequence of a note from our hero, gave him the meeting, and was present when Mrs. Browning's Mill was read, which constituted Octa¬ vius Louis Duke de Valentİnois, &c. &c. her sole heir, if we except a few legacies to her servants. Tlie Marquis полу insisted upon the Duke's returning home, and going to bed immediately ; nor did his Grace require much pressing to conform to their wishes; and a good night's rest having nearly effected his recovery, he rose be¬ tween twelve and one, and ¿ht down once more to his journal, which he had perforce
perforce neglected since the day he sailed up the Severn. He had not heard from his father since he had sent off his detail of the masqued weddinjr, and given him his opinion of the fair Savoyard, there¬ fore presumed Louis had not chose to write till he heard he was returned to London. Having minutely detailed the recent occurrences, he requested his royal fa¬ ther's advice respecting the fortune he had so lately inherited, observing, that as it was all acquired, he was at full li¬ berty to dispose of the landed property, and to place the produce in either the British or French funds; and concluded by assuring his beloved sire, that he should be totally guided by his orders, and should either remain in England to settle the business, or delegate the trust to
to the lawyer that had made the will, as he thought best. In as short a space of time as an ex¬ press could go and return, he received a most affectionate answer, in which Louis the Weli-beloved congratulated both him¬ self and his favourite son upon his mira¬ culous rescue from a watery grave ; re¬ questing he would present the honest fisherman M'ith five hundred pounds in his name. Lord Vilmore, he thought, had very properly expiated his crime; hinting, he bad wrote to his Ambassador, to desire he M r ould request that Lord Dumbarton might undergo an examina¬ tion, as well as the widow of the deceased and honourable Peer· Respecting his re¬ cent acquisitions he gave him a carte·* blanche, though he rather advised his disposing of the houses and land, and purchasing
purchasing others in France, only re¬ questing he would finish his business as soon as possible, as he grew every day more impatient to see and embrace him ; yet did not wish him to employ a third person, as he hoped, when once he re¬ turned to France, he would consider himself fixed there for life; and con¬ cluded by assuring him that his account of the masquerade, subsequent wedding, &c. had afforded him so much amuse¬ ment, and given him such convincing proofs of the confidence he reposed in him, that he promised, in return, to allow him to reject the lady he had chosen for him, even at the altar, if she did not rival the gay Savoyarde in his good graces ; he therefore hoped he would continue to devote some part of every day to his. pen, and that he Mrould believe
believe no one was so truly interested i a every thing that concerned him, as he who subscribed himself his affectionate father. Very much gratified by his kind letter, though our hero would have been better pleased had he received a sort of sanc¬ tion to address the fair Savoyarde, should he ever meet her again, he set about disposing of Vilmore Abbey, &c. as soon as ever Mrs. Bro wiring s remains were deposited by the side of her eider brother, and the younger was buried privately at his own parish church; though, had he followed the real bent of his inclination, he would not have parted with the prin¬ cipal seat, as he felt a sort of intuitive attachment to Great Britain, which made him wish to have been permitted to spend a few months every year in the little
little seagirt isle; nevertheless he sub¬ mitted with a very good grace to intima¬ tions he considered as orders, thinking very properly, that it would be the height of ingratitude to presume to dispute his father's wishes upon the strength of his independence. He was acknowledging the partiality he felt in favour of M'hat he considered his native country one day at the Marquis of Trelawney's, hinting, that had he been absolutely his own master, he would not have parted with all the Vilmore estates, which induced the Marquis to wish he could have made it convenient to have divided his time between France and England. The Marchioness, on the contrary, thought he might glory in being a French¬ man, observing, that a lineal descendant of
of Henry of Navarre must love the brave nation for which that Frinee evinced so much regard, even while they were fight¬ ing against him, adding— '* But when once you are absolutely settled in Paris, Duke, surrounded as you will be by flatterers, and immersed, as I suppose you will be, in a constant round of dissipation, you will soon forget your English friends." " Then my own heart greatly deceives me," was the reply, turning his eyes, though really by chance, upon Lady Helen, and asking her whether she had formed so bad an opiuion of him. She assured him in a gay tone, that she was convinced he would remember her brother, even at the feet of his mistress. Neither of them had any meaning in what they said ; nevertheless it heightened the
the Marchioness's colour, who had ever appeared particularly averse to the idea of her daughter's forming a connection, which appeared so particularly eligible both to her husband and son-in-law, who inter¬ preted the Duke's speech iuto a sort of favourable omen, as they knew he M r as in habits of constant correspondence with his father, therefore might have recently received his permission to please himself in his choice of a wife; and they could not suppose, in that case, he Mould hesi¬ tate a moment in giving the preference to Lady Helen Desmond. The Duke, however, perhaps aware of the construction which might be put upon what had so unintentionally escaped him, instantly changed the conversation, and the following morning he left town with his friend, the Duke's presence being required
required at the Abbey for a few days; having, however, dispatched the business which called him thcie rather sooner than he expected, they returned to town on the third day to dinner. The Karl parted from our hero in Tot¬ tenham Court Road, promising to meet him at Trelawney House inan hour, whi¬ ther the Duke therefore, after calling at home, proceeded alone. Neither the Marquis nor Lord Fitzhayman weie at home, he was informed; but the ladies were in the drawing-room. Lady Helen was however alone when he entered—she received him with her accustomed polite¬ ness, telling him that the Marchioness would be down in a few minutes: they therefore took their stations at a window, from whence they had a full view of the Square· 4 Her
Her Ladyship enquired after her bro* ther, hoped they had had a pleasant jour¬ ney* &c. when hearing a carriage advanc¬ ing at a very furious rate, they both directed their eyes towards the Square, and in a few seconds her Ladyship said— u I believe it is our neighbour, the Earl of------------." She had scarcely made the remark ere a fine boy, about six years old, who had escaped from his attendants, with whom he M r as walking round the garden or plan¬ tation in the middle of the square, in running across towards the pavement, was struck down by one of the horses, and ran over before the coachman was able to check their speed. Lady Helen gave a faint scream, clasp¬ ed her hands, and would have fallen all her length upon the floor, if the Duke had
had not caught her m his arms; and he was bearing her towards tbe sofa when the Marchioness opened the door, which she flung to after her, and flew toivards her daughter, exclaiming-* " For Heaven's sake, Octavius, what are you about? What have you done? Is it thus you keep your word of honour ?" " Her Ladyship has been alarmed/ 1 replied the Duke, with as much compo¬ sure as he could assume. As he had participated in the shock his lifeless companion had undergone, though he was afraid to mention what had occa¬ sioned her Ladyship's fit, having had such proofs of the Marchioness's sensibility as perfectly accounted, in his opinion, for her strange address. ť< Shall I ring the bell for assistance?" vol. m. о he
he enquired, .as spon as he had placed the senseless Lady Helen upon the sojfa» <ζ No, not for thç world," cried the Marchioness, very much surprised. Our hero began to guess at Lady Tre¬ lawney's suspicions, and was preparing, in consequence, to exetdpate himself from having been at all the occasion of her daughter's illness, beginning— ' ( I fear Lady—— M \ 4t Octavius, you know not what you are about!" interrupted the agitated Mar¬ chioness, who trembled,so, much that she with,difficulty held a.smelling bottle to her daughter's nose. Totally unaccustomed to be thus strangely treated by a person lue consi¬ dered as a model of perfection, our hero took up his hat--' *ƒ 1 hope,
" I hope, Lady Trelawney, when your daughter recovers, she will be able to con¬ vince you I have neither been wanting in respect towards her or yourself;" and was leaving the room, when the Marchioness exclaimed— u Hold, I charge you. Since your arrival in England I have lived in con* stant dread of what all my precaution has not been able to prevent; for, learn from your agonized mother that Helen Des¬ mond is your sister!" The smelling-bottle fell from her bands, and she appeared to be gasping for breath; while the Duke, catching her in his arms, as he had done his sister some few minutes before, and for the same reason, gave way to his feelings upon having thus unex¬ pectedly discovered his mother in the woman he revered and respected above oS ad
all others. Having expressed tlie rapture he felt, he proceeded— " I now guess who assumed the name of Mentoria, who sent me to Paris, and íróm whom I received this pledge of her maternal affection," taking out his father's picture, and imprinting a kiss upon the hair of this tender mother, adding— " and «pon this pledge of that mu¬ tual affection, to which I owe my exist¬ ence, I swear never to mention this unexpected discovery, except to him who ought to possess my unlimited con¬ fidence." " Oh, my son, my beloved Octavius !" was all the Marchioness could faintly ar¬ ticulate, while she returned his embrace, and mingled her tears witb his, forgetting for a few seconds her darling Helen, who, though unable either to move, speak, or even
even open her eyes, had some confused idea of what was passing, and M'hen rather recovered, said— " Surely I uniterstood—but I am so bewildered I hardly know what to believe —Is the poor child killed?" The looks of both her mother and bro· ther confirmed her half-formed suspicions, though neither knew what to say. " What does my Helen mean?" asked the Marchioness—* ' What child does she allude to?" The Duke explained, observing, dread¬ ful as was the accident, he scarcely knew —how to regret it he would have said, but paused. ** Proceed, my clear son,** cried the still agitated mother; " I no longer wish to keep either of my children in ignorance of my past errors; if they keep my secret o3 it
it will be more than I deserve; though, should they expose me to suffer the pe¬ nalty due to my fault, I shall not suffer more than I have done already; for none but a mother in a similar situation can judge of my feelings during the last two months." u Oh, my best of mothers," cried Lady Helen, " I heard my beloved bro¬ ther's oath, though apparently insensible; and like him I swear never to let what I have heard escape my lips to any soul living· Octavius had a right to make one exception, in me it would be inex- cuseable. " The brother and sister now gave мау to their mutual feelings, M'hile their tear¬ ful, though happy mother, called down blessings upon their, heads, sincerely re¬ joicing that the suspicions which had induced
induced her to reveal a secret she had intended to have carried to her grave were utterly devoid of foundation. The now happy trio had scarcely time allowed them to enter into a few general explanations, and to recover some degree of composure, ere Lord Fitzhayman came running up stairs, and began to apologize to his friend for being so much beyond his time. As he dkl not mention the ac* cident, which had so dreadfully alarmed Lady Helen, neither she nor her brother chose to do it; and while the Earl was gone to dress for dinner, the Marchio¬ ness requested her beloved children to be very much upon their guard before the* Marquis and his son. * e Our love for our mother will render us as circumspect as she could wish/* replied the Duke; " hut not to accustom о 4 mvself
myself to dangerous indulgences, may I ask Lady Mentoria Trelawney after a most lovely Savoyarde?" " Hér own secret Mentoria had a right to divulge," was the reply, ei but not that of another : she therefore hopes the, son of Louis the Well-beloved will con¬ vince his father that his independence has not rendered him less obedient to his will." t' I swear it never shall," was the reply. And that very evening Octavius wrote a long letter to his father, iu M'hich he expressed his heart-felt satisfaction upon the recent discovery, yet worded it so cautiously, that had it fallen into Lord Trelawney's hands he would not have found out that this beloved motìier м -as the woman he so fervently adored, and who
who had too sincerely, lamented her juve¬ nile error not to deserve the respect her numerous virtues inspired him with·
CHAP. X. jOLNOTHER fortnight soon elapsed, during which the Marquis's family, had taken up their abode at that nobleman's villa in the vicinity of the metropolis, and there our hero, by express invitation,. spent every leisure moment. In another week he hoped to have completed tho business which had detained him in
England so much longer than he had expected. The Marchioness, though doat- ingly fond of him, looked forward with a sensation bordering on pleasure to his approaching departure; as, notwithstand¬ ing the cautious propriety м -hich marked both his and his sister's behaviour, she did not enjoy their frequent meetings, as she perceived they led tlie Marquis and Eari to form hopes which she кием* could never be realized. Lord Dumbarton had privately under¬ gone a most unpleasant examination ; and though he had, and'M'ith truth, dis¬ claimed all knowledge of Lord Vilmore's horrid attempt upon our hero's life, the league he had before entered iuto with the deceased prejudiced his judges very much against him, so much so that he found it necessary to set к a private retreat iu
in Switzerland, with the humbled and disconsolate Ladv Leonora Bournon. tt And either conscious guilt, or some other motive, induced the present Lord Vilmore to hide his head in America,- where he carried a very small sum of money, which rendered him of so littler consequence, that it was never clearly ascertained, either where he settled, or what became of him. The widow and her two remaining children were, perhaps, the only people, who really mourned tor their wretched father; and for them our hero felt a great degree of pity, though he rather suspect¬ ul the mother to have been privy to her» husbands guilt; he, nevertheless, pur¬ chased her an annuity of ňve hundred a year, ami placed a very large mm in the Funds for her daughter and tbe younger о ti ю%
son, for whom he also procured a lucra¬ tive appointment in the East India Com¬ pany 's service, where he thought he might make his way, as his uncle had done before him. Having thus, out of his oivn fortune, not chusing to disobey Mrs. Browning "% injunctions, provided for this now truly miserable family, and for every individual who had ever evinced their attachment towards him while he bore the name of Browning, in which, of course, were in¬ cluded all the domestics who liad ever lived cither with the first Ijotd Vilmore or his sister; and having disposed of both the Abbey and Alton House, and pre¬ sented the magnificent town residence of the former to Lord Fitshayman, m a smalt return for the friendly offers he had made him at Dok, he began to prepare for
for his return to Paris, being, notwith¬ standing the very large sums he had disposed of, and every other expenditure, respecting his late inheritance^ exactly five-and-twenty thousand a year richer than when he left France. Lord Fitsdiayman having no fixed plan for the remainder of the summer, he re* minded him of his promise to return to Paris with him, that he might be present at bis M r edding, which, he presumed, would soon take place. The Marquis, though disappointed in some respects, was so much gratified hy the truly magnificent present his son had received, and by his having made himself so powerful a friend, that he did not wait to have his coment asked, but expressed his entire approbation of the Dukes pro¬ posal the moment it wa« made, promping, $ unasked,
unasked, to bring the Marchioness and his daughter over in the autumn, to pay their respects to the Dutchess de Valentİ¬ nois. The hope therefore of again seeing his mother and sister reconciled our hero to the idea of leaving England, м here he offered to settle his faithful Wilson in any line of business he chose to fix upon, if he pre¬ ferred residing in his native country; but James had no idea of happiness when· unconnected witb his beloved master, he therefore absolutely refused to quit his service, though he had been particularly distinguished in Mrs, Browning's ivill, who ivishcd to ev ince her approbation of his conduct. Our hero was therefore more than ever convinced of his sincere attachment, so, after delaying several days, when he had brought all his business to
to a conclusion, he took a final leave of the Marquis, and his mother and sister, with the two latter of whom he should have wished to have correspondences but prudence forbid his making the request, and the next morning he sat out, accom¬ panied by the Earl, upon his return, and reached Paris without any marvellous in¬ cident having occurred to impede his progress, worthy an insertion in our story, and that very evening he paid his res|>ects to the Duke de St. Korentin and the Mareehal de Belzors, who both sincerely rejoiced to see him once more safe returned to Paris, hb miraculous escape having left a dread upon both his father s and their minds, which nothing short of his return could wholly remove. Early the next morning he therefore accompanied the Duke to Verkaufest una met
met with so affectionate a reception from his father, that he ceased to regret the tacit engagement he had entered into, to spend the remainder of his life in France, Louis was particularly inquisitive' re¬ specting the Marchioness of Trelawney, and very much rejoiced when he learned her intended visit to Paris, and exceedingly flattered by the animated encomiums her son bestowed upon her. They next talk¬ ed over the principal occurrences which had taken place during our hero's stay in London, when the Monarch observed, th«t had it depended upon the will or contrivance of man, he foresaw he should have been deprived of his beloved Octa- vi us (which name he bore in compliment to his mother, who was Lady Octavia Aberdour when she gave him birth), whose conduct towards the miserable remnant
remnant of the Browning family he highly applauded. He next reverted to the mar¬ riage he had had iu view for him before he left Paris, asking him, in a gay tone, whether the fair Savoyardes talisman vţould prevent him from disposing of his liberty. " As I have never seen the person you allude to, Sir, since the evening of the masquerade, it wouki be absurd in me to declare myself her lover—that she made me feel I possessed a heart I honestly confess; but Mentoria convinced me that I must not think of such an alliance: here, therefore, is the talisman, which may remind me too often of her features, and here is my hand, which 1 beg, my dear Sir, you will dispose of as you think pro· per, as I am ready, according to the custom of this country, to meet the lady you
you have selected for me at the altar to-morrow, if she is equaliy prepared for the ceremony, " " You have now convinced me, Octa¬ vius, you act from principle; but what less could I expect from Mentoria's son ? However, since you are so willing to* oblige me, why, I will accept your pre¬ sent, which I shall preserve, as being the greatest proof of your regard you can ever give me, and I think the sooner you are married the better." " To-morrow, if you please, Sir," re¬ plied our hero, rather wishing the wedding was over tLau not. " That is being in too great a hurry," replied his father, " as the lady does not yet know of your return, and she ought to have a short time allowed her for pre¬ parations, &c. ; but by this time to¬ morrow
morrow I will have fixed upon the day ; so let me see you in the evening, because, if you feel inclined to play the lover, I will procure you an interview with her, either to-morrow or next day, as I own I am fearful (for, remember, I give you full permission) that you should recant at the altar, and that would be nearly as morti¬ fying to your intended, as it was to Lady Leonora Bournon, to find how much she had been deceived." (( Your having made choice of this lady is alone sufficient to prevent my committing so gross a solecism in polite¬ ness; I am prepared to esteem her, and after I have plighted my faith, I will en¬ deavour to love her, because I am con¬ vinced she possesses many very estimable qualities." " She docs indeed, my Octavius; and I trust
I trust you will both be completely happy." The father and son now separated, and our hero repeated every thing that had passed to his friend upon his arrival at home· " Oh, it is no more than I expected," was the reply; " well, I w r ish you happy, my friend, though I cannot say I approve of French Maddings; besides, I was once ambitious enough to hope we should have been brothers." " Could such an event have increased our friendship, Fitz?" " By no means; for were you my bro* ther, I could not regard you more; and though we seem destined to reside farther apart than I could wish, our. letters will be the more entertaining to each other."
The
The next day our hero again paid his respects to his father, rather expecting he should be introduced to his bride elect ; he was, however, disappointed, as Louis informed him she, like himself, preferred meeting at the altar, where she intended to come prepared to promise to love, honour, and obey, &c. in three days from the present time. " Three days," repeated our hero in a gay tone; " and pray where is the cere¬ mony to be performed, for I must set about studying my part ?" " The Marechal de Bebors will give you every necessary instruction," was the reply; " the wedding presents I have taken upon myself to order, and they will be delivered according to the rules of etiquette; be it your care to send a bouquet
bouquet each morning to the Duke de St· Florentine, who мчИ undertake to deliver them as your part of the compliment, and to have a diamond one prepared for the grand occasion. The ceremony is to take place at the Minister's villa, as I Mish to be present incognito, м г е11 understood, and a few of the bride's friends merely are to be invited· We are to sup tète-à- tète^ as the Duke is to entertain the other guests, 'and as soon as midnight has an¬ nounced tlie approach of morning, the indissoluble knot is to be tied ; so let me see how gallantly you can conduct your¬ self upon such an occasion." " I Mill certainly study a few proper compliments, Sir, aud hold myself in readiness to commence Benedict at the time you mention." Süflice
Suffice it to say, therefore, that having made every preparation the Marechal de Jklzors thought necessary, and having duly dispatched the most elegant bou¬ quet the favourite's mtllenjçr could com¬ pose, and a diamond one of immense value on the morning preceding that on which they were to meet to plight their faith, our hero, the Marechal, and Lord Fitz¬ hayman proceeded to the elegant little mansion where he Mas to part with his liberty; and they they were no sooner arrived than the contract, to use the preuch terms, or marriage articles, were immediately presented to our hero to sign, the Mareehal assuring him he might do it blindfolded, as they had previously been honoured with the signature of his father. He then retired to dress for the ceşenıony, after
after which he supped, tête-à-tête, with Louis, who complimented him upon his personal appearance, observing, he appear¬ ed determined to make a favourable im* pression upon the lady, whatever she might do upon him ; and the Castle clock having given the signal, the Marechal de Belzors waited upon his Sovereign to let him know all was ready. Octavius felt his heart beat unusually quick, while his father, taking his arm, led him in silence into the Chapel, whispering as they en¬ tered— ** You have not forgot the fine speeches you have doubtless composed." At the altar stood a most elegant female, surrounded by several other ladies, and in the back-ground stood the Duke de St. Florentin and bis guests. Hardly
Hardly knowing what he Mas about, his father having let go his arm, our hero advanced towards his bride; but the mo¬ ment he caught sight of her countenance his own became animated, and hastily seizing her hand, he exclaimed— ^ " Am I to be so blessed! this ivas a sUprise I was not prepared to expect!" ei Why, I thought, Duke, your admi¬ ration was iv holly confined to my mar¬ motte, therefore, had such a thing been possible, I would have brought it with me." 44 I had not seen the features of the beautiful Savoyarde when I admired her marmotte; but my future life shall con¬ vince her that Soiyman became the slave of Roxalanafrom the moment he received her talisman·" voe. 11 r. f #< Bravo P*
iť Bravo Γ cried the delighted Monarch, who was well aware of tlie agreeable sur¬ prise he had in store for his son. But every thing being ready, not to keep him in waiting, the marriage cere¬ mony was immediately performed by no less a man than the Pope's Nuncio, or 1 í Ambassador, and the irrevocable knot being firmly tied, the bride and now en¬ raptured bridegroom returned into the grand saloon, where thcy received the compliments of every one present, when the first gentleman in company thus ad¬ dressed his happy son :— u You have to thank Mentoria for your former interview v ith your lovely bride; and I need not tell you how happy we both were when we found she had stolen
stolen your heart, you having some time before robbed her of her's; it now, there¬ fore, remains for me to inform you that she was, till within this half-hour, Madame La Marechal d'Armentiercs, and that she is still the daughter of your's and my best friend, the Duke dc St. Florei- tin," who advanced, while the King M'as speaking, to embrace his son-in-law. The Monarch proceeded— u But now, to account for so young a woman's having been already married. About two years ago the Mare- chai d'Armentieres, at the advanced age of seventy-two, persuaded hiui^elf, hav¬ ing accidentally seen Mademoiselle de St. Florentin, that Iíľ wa> desperately in love, and iu consequence made over¬ ture to her father : he had already been i» U man kd
married twice, but having no children, he still wanted an heir. His proposals were so extravagantly advantageous, and he was a man of such rank, that it was next to impossible to reject them ; the Duke therefore became his father-in-law, and he, as most people expected, left his beautiful M'ife a M'idow at tlic expiration of four months, since M'hich period she has, according to the custom of the coun¬ try, resided chiefly at the Abbey of Pan- themont ; and as she could never have parted with her liberty again, except in favour of a man of equal, if not superior rank to the Marechal, I can't pretend to say how long she might have remained a M'idow if I had not had a son restored to mc, to whom I resolved to uuitc her, if
if I could do so without rendering him misciable. Be it her task to tell vou *t how she and Mentoria managed matters respecting your former interview, as it grows late, and I must return to Ver* saillcs." What more, therefore, remains for us to .relate? Shall we say that our hero never had reason to repent his implicit obedience to his father's will, and that both Lord Fitzhayman and his sister were equally happy in the marriage state. Lady Trelawney's error had been se- Tcicly punished—first by the loss of her ■«on, next by her fears respecting him and her daughter; but as we know her repentance was sincere, wc trust it was acceptable
acceptable in the eyes of him M'ho alone can judge of the hearts of man. Of the inferior characters we can only say, that Reuben Hodges, being convicted of having wilfully sunk a trading vessel, to defraud the Underwriters, finished his career at the fatal tree, thus ascending Mile Hill in the room of Lord Vilmore. His brothers м-сге cast awav M'hen our hero suffered them to make their escape, and his wife and children came to the parish, while the honest fisherman and his wife lived respected, and died univer¬ sally lamented, having amply provided for all their relations. Having thus brought our tale to a conclusion, wc trust we need not point out the moral it is meant to convey, б as
as wc are convinced that it is generally supposed guilt is sure to be punished, even when most successful·
F I N I S*
Urït, MINIBVÀ'ÏAISS, LEADZNIUbl^STRZlTV
