Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Midnight weddings: a novel
THE
MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS. CHAP. I. a far different frame of mind did the delighted Octavius return to Paris with his obliging friend the Minister, who entered into various details respecting the French court and his royal father, aU cal· culated to increase his satisfaction, and to reconcile him to the idea of spending his life in France; but respecting his mother the Duke preserved the most in- vol· ?. ? . \iolablc
In
violable silence, Avhich rather gratified than displeased the young man, as it was a convincing proof she was, as he had told him, a woman of family, and of spot¬ less fame, one instance excepteel ; and as he understood she had been rather de¬ ceived than seducer! into even that, he felt the greatest respect for her memory, Avhile he felt he ought to place before his eyes * ( In every light of life, " The father and the king §*· and was truly sensible what weight of duty < £ Lay on a son fiom such a paient sprung ¡ M while he prayed reproach might transmit his name abhorred « To latest time, if his thought* were e'er " Unjust to Aliai reverence, filial love." Convinced that unconditional obedience was
was the only return he could make Lewis the bien aimée, for the favours he promised to heap upon his head, this he gaA-e the minister fully to understand, as he had been hitherto too little accustomed to converse with crowned heads to familiarize himself immediately Avith his father. The Duke applauded his resolution, anel gave him a slight sketch of the JMarechal de Belzor's character, Avho was a Frenchman of ancient times, fit to have been the companion of the great Henry and of Sully— brave, franc, et loyal, a sound Bay¬ ard, and a great favourite of the king; and to that nobleman's they droA-e upon their arrival in Paris, and Octavius felt himself greatly prepossessed in his host's favour from the moment he was intro¬ duced to him. ? 2 After
After the first compliments and congra¬ tulations, the Maréchal conducted his guest into the apartments prepared for his reception, which were so far superior, even to the boasteel magnificence of Vil¬ more-House, that our hero Avas lost in amaze at the splendour with which he was surrounded, and the variety of rooms which appeared to be appropriated to his use. The Maréchal Avas very much amused by his remarks, and rejoiced his beloved monarch had selected him for the tutor of his newly acknowledged son, whom, he was convinced, would greatly console him for the loss of his OAvn. The minister dined with them, and then left Octavius and his new friend tète-à-tète, who hoped he woulel not repine at being for a few day confined to his society, as, till he had been publicly presented to * his father,
father, and gone through those forms etiquette rendered necessary, he could not Avith propriety either appear in public or be presented to any of the young nobility· Octavius assured him he rather rejoiceel that a few days were allowed him for re¬ flection, as he was at present tempted to suppose himself under the influence of a pleasant dream. " From Avhich, I trust, you avíU never awake," replied the agreeable old man, Avho, to the captivating manners of a Frenchman of the first rank, added the sincerity of an Englishman. He next advised his young friend to write a fevvs lines to his late host and travelling com¬ panion, ai ith whom he might, at some future time, renew his acquaintance, but for the present it would be improper to touch upon the late occurrence. Octavius ? 3 followed
followed his advice, and dispatched a ser¬ vant, upon whose discretion the Maréchal could depend, with his letters, which were very politely worded, but merely gave both gentlemen to understand he was going a few miles into the country, but that he would renew his thanks in person the moment he returned to Paris, where he now expected to spend some time, inclosing a very handsome pecuni¬ ary present to settle for his board, &c. and requesting that his baggage and dog might be delivered to the bearer. Two scarcely less ci\ il answers were returned, with every thing he had left at Mr. Bach- man's, and Juba was, for the first time, divested of his collar, bearing the name öf the Honourable Edmund Browning,. which hacì hitherto been forgotten by his master,, whose head was too full of other . , . „ . and
and more important affairs to afidw him to reflect upon so trivial a circumstance,- though he supposed it hael not escaped the notice of Bachman and his friend/ however, that was of little consequence as matters had turned Out: % The first tailors, anel- a- variety of other tradespeople of the greatest note, had been sent for by the Maréchal, who, by Gela¬ vi us's desire, took upon himself to give the necessary orders respecting the eleco- ration of his person ; and our hero was candid enough to acknowleelge that the Fiench understand full dress better than the English, but was resolved to pursue the Englidi custom in his undress. " Then yem may depend upon being* copied," observed the Maréchal, «'for it becomes you so well, all our polite mai-' » * ' ^ tres*
tres avíU be anxious to imitate so good a model." NeAer had Octavius spent a shorter evening, though they did not retire till after midnight, the Maréchal requesting he woulel not hurry in the morning, but breakfast at his own hour, except he chose v to drink his chocolate with him at eleven in his dressing-room ; desiring he would consider himself perfectly at home ; and that he Avould remember he had a large suite^át his oavu orders. Two servants out of livery were in waiting to assist him to undress, which brought his favourite James to his recollection, and made him resolve to send for him over, if the Maréchal thought the measure \\ as not likely to meet his father's disapproba¬ tion, as he felt he should greatly enjoy having the honest creature about his person.
person. His new attendants Avere A*ery respectful, and perfectly au f ait of the business of the toilet ; he, hoAveA r er, has¬ tened to bed to ruminate 0A r er the pleas¬ ing occurrences of the day, and so many different ideas came across him, he found a down beel did not always ensure repose, and could have exclaimed with Shake¬ speare, that "sleep often forsakes the great;" but toAvarcls morning he forgot himself, and rose perfectly reconcileel to his new situation, and in harmony with every boely and every thing. The good Maré¬ chal received him with increasing cordia¬ lity, and was happy to hear he had en¬ joyed some repose, observing, the late agitation of his spirits had rendered it necessary to his health. They Avere still at breakfast Avhen the Marquis de Chateaufort Avas announced. BO "A
" A nephcAV of mine," said the old gentleman, addressing our hero, " Avho Avili give you a very just ielea of a French petit maitre." An elegant young man entered as he * ceased speaking, to Avhom the Maréchal introduced Octavius as his guest and particular friend, hinting, he was at pre¬ sent incognito. The Marquis was profuse in his Avishes that they might be better acquainted; and as his conversation was both lively aud entertaining, our hero was convinceel that a Parisian petit maitre is by no means so absurd a being as an English fop ; for though tliis one talked of his Avife and his mistress in a breath, still his language was totally free from any of those gross expletives so frequently in the mouths of Englishmen of fashion. The
The Maréchal hinted to him, that the young stranger haei been brought up in* England, where, though married men might now and then break their conjugal vows, they dare not tell of their arrange¬ ments respecting their mistresses, particu¬ larly in mixed company. " Then they are 'greater hypocrites» than Ave Frenchmen, " replied the Marquis,* " I dont think so," replied.tlie Maré¬ chal ; * t but be that as it may, I shall ever condemn the man wild makes his errors and follies the theme of' his discourse,. Avhatever may be his nation, as I think,* wherever nature has givdn the mind a propensity to any vice or to any passion inimical to the general l order of society, good-breeding! ought to teach him to preserve iu his behaviour and conversation the appearance, at least, of sentiments ? 6 contrary
contrary to those to which he may natu¬ rally incline." '* Nay, but my dear uncle, you are too severe ; for though Ave young Frenchmen are certainly not the depraved characters Marmontel, Cubellin ? &c. have drawn us, still, you know, we don't make that secret of our amours the English and Germans do, A French husband, if he really thinks hia wifeh*S gone too great lengths, fights the'itespoiler of his honour; an Englishman sues him for damages, ae if money could repair the evil he has sus¬ tained: whose method would you be inclined to follow, Sir?*' addressing Octavius. " The Frendi appear to be moie actu¬ ated by asente of honour," replied our hero, " and money would not make me amends for my wife's infidelity." "Nor
€( Nor is a depraved woman worth fighting about," replied the Marquis ; " to me such a proceeding appears like blazon· ing one's shame. Indeed, it nas always to me appeared particularly hard, that what¬ ever dishonour attaches to a wife's follies, is sure to fall to the share of the injured husband ------" " Whose own levity and bad example were, perhaps, the occasion of what he deplores," said the Maréchal, " as I never could conceive Avhy a man was to expect his Avife to be a pattern of conjugal fidelity, when he gloried in breaking his own vows. Depend upon it, men should remember the golden rule, * Do as you would be done by.' But joking apart, for this is a very serious subject, I am inclined to believe it is bad, thoughtless, immoral husbands» who are the ruin of their Avives, whom 4 they
MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS.' they first disgust, then render careless of appearances, and finally drive into the arms of some pleasing seducer, who has been lying in-wait for what he has foreseen will be the result of their mistaken conduct." ** " Well, my dear uncle, I shan't dispute the point with you, as I am resolved to imitate the only pleasing Frenchman Marmontel has presented to the public, namely Volanges, his Mari Sylphe, in my behaviour towards Madame de Cha¬ teaufort. " " You may have chosen an ele¬ gant model, but I should have thought your own good sense might have, pointed out the line of conduct you ought tò pursue with the Marchioness, without having recourse to tales and romances for proper examples." . Sensible
Sensible he had got the worst of the argument, the Marquis soon retired, hoping he should have the honour of seeing his uncle's friend at the Hotel ele Chateaufort, if his incognito permitted his paying any visits. The Maréchal promised to bring him thither in a few days, anel thus they parted. Octavius had been highly amuseel by their debate, as under great apparent fri¬ volity he perceived the Marquis possessed ?? small share of wit, and a degree of refined understanding he hael scarcely expected to find in a Frenchman of his age; and the Maréchal assured him he rather affected than approved of the im¬ morality, he Avas sorry to say, he some* times practised,
CHAP.
CHAP. II. DüRING the few days that Octavius remained incognito, he was favoured with several tètes-à-tites with his father, Avhose regard for him appeared to increase upon every succeeding interview, and Avho re¬ joiced as the time approached for his being publicly acknowledged, Avhich he Avas on the ninth day after their first inter¬ view, in the presence of a most splendid circle, and publicly invested with the two first orders in France, that of St, Michael and
and the Holy Ghost, it being necessary to be a Knight of the first to be admitted into the other, as the badges are blended with each other ; they consist in a silver star, or cross, of eight points, with a fleur- de-lis at each angle, and a dove, the emblem of the Holy Ghost, in the centre, which is embroidered or Avorn in jeAvels* at the option of the Knight, on the left side of the coat, to which is added a sky- blue-watered ribbon, which is Avorn sash- wise over the right shoulder, to Avhich is pendant a medallion of the figure of the star, enamelled white, with fleur de-lis, or at the great angles, having the doA'e on one side and St Michael with the dragon on the other. Having thus deco¬ rated this acknowledged son, the Monarch gaily told him he must earn his cross of St. Lewis, and to afford him an opportu¬ nity,
nity, he appointed him to the command of a regiment óf dragoons then vacant. To add, that he met' with the utmost politeness from every one present will be needless^ as every branch of the roy/al family readily acknowlcdgcel him a Bour¬ bon, and appeareel anxious to prepossess him in favour of France, which he began tb think a more agreeable residence than England, and was confirmed in his opinion when the Duke de St. Florentin presented him, the following day, with the title deeds of a very large and valuable estate in Languedoc, anel put him in possession of a most elegant little mansion, nearly opposite his own hotel, which had been prepared for his reception, and which, he Avas informed, had sometimes been the residence of his mother, and had, there¬ fore, been reserved for her son«; and though,
though, Avhen he married, he would require a much larger house, still this would serve him to entertain private parties Avhen he Avished to be incog, as it joined the И el de Belgers. He was advised to spend a good deal of his time with the worthy Maréchal, who began to love him with almost pater¬ nal affection, though he rather approved of his removal, as he conceived the young man Avould feel himself more comfortably situated in a house of his own. The money he had in the English funds, the Minister advised his removing to France, hinting he Avoulel probably be permitted to visit Great Britain for that purpose, and concluded by presenting him with a very large sum for his imme¬ diate expences, adding, he presumed he would write Mrs. Browning an account of the recent occurrences j and though she - Avas
was certainly much to blame in having connived at the deception she had ad¬ vised, the Duke de Valentinois ought to make her some return for her former kindness, and late promise of providing for him. Octavius was exactly of the same opi¬ nion, and Avas very happy Avhen informed his sending for James would certainly meet his father's approbation, avIio wished him to consider himself as much a free agent, as he had ever deemed himself during Lord Vilmore's life time. This, independent and courted as he now found nimself, Octavius could not immediately do ; but the very eA r ening he took posses* sion of his elegant little pavillion, as it ?? styled, which displayed at once the most îeiined taste, and a riiagnificence be had never seen equalled, he sat down to write
write to his supposed aunt, whom he thanked in the politest terms for the favours she had intended him, entering into various details calculated to convince her he ought to bless the hour when con- science induced her brother to deprive him of his title and estate, inclosing a draft for the two thousand pounds he had received from the deceased, which, situ¬ ated as he now was, he should consider it a robbery to retain, and adding a very handsome present in jewels, which was fonvarded with his letters to the Marquis de Rochegude, to Avhom he also wrote a detailed account of every recent occur¬ rence, as a small return for his politeness towards the unknoAvn, unacknoAvledged OctaA'ius; nor Avas James forgotten, as he Avrote him a few lines, desiring him to join him at Paris, referring him to Mrs. Browning,
EroAvning, Avho Avas requested to give him the letter, for farther particular, and in¬ closing him a present worthy the rank he now held, and the distinguished name he bore. Having thus fulfilled Avhat he consi¬ dered his duty, he found himself at leisure to enjoy the numerous diversions Avith Avhich Paris then abounded, that city being at this perioel justly deemed the paraelise of splendour and dissipation. But though his evenings Avere devoted to plea¬ sure, he studied very hard several hours in the morning, under various masters of the Maréchals selecting, avIio continuée! to act as his Governor, introducing him into every fashionable circle, and putting him perfectly au fait of French manners, and etiquette* The
The French nation Avere at this time so eminently distinguished for their polite¬ ness anel good manners, that it may be supposed Octavius found no reason to regret his having left Great Britain, as, independent of his merit and exalted qua¬ lities, Avhich gaineel him many real friends, his near connection Avith the Bourbons procured him general respect and atten¬ tion. Every other day he visiteel Ver- sailles, Avhere he became hourly a greater favourite, and as economy was not among his father's virtues, he thought his son might have inherited his propensity for extraA T agance, particularly as he under¬ stood he had never been controlled in his expences by the late Lord Vilmore; he therefore granted him a considerable pen¬ sion out of his private purse, appearing particularly anxious to evince the love he bore
bore his mother, by thus munificently providing for her son ; hoping also that this behaviour would, in some measure, expiate the deception he had practised to obtain her love, while he privately resolved to unite him to one of the first women in France, and thus by degrees render him one of the greatest subjects in that king¬ dom. As nothing was more foreign from our hero's nature than ingratitude, he took an early opportunity of making himself known to the worthy Bachman, to whom he gave some very large orders in the way of trade, as his father had desired he would wear his orders in jewels, with every other et cetera the first men in the kingdom displayed in the decora- * tion of their persons. The
The jeweller was more flattered than astonished, having from the first moiu;ut taken our hero for a great man incog. ; but was not a liitic proud to think he hud had the honour of lodging a son of the French Monarch; and never were orders executed with move zeal or ta-tc, ;? lu* trusted the Duke de Valentinois wo uhi bring him stiil more into fashion t Kan he was. Already the Genevan had lefi Paris, but ìccciveel several proofs of Octa¬ vines munificence at the time he learnt the rank ot ?? travelling companion. A fortnight had elapsed since the young Dukt 1 had wrote to Mrs. Browning, he was thcrefoie iu hourly expectation of seeing James, and rather anxious to learu how the good lady had felt when she received his packet, which had rather mortified than pleaseel her, her love for vox,, ?. c her
her supposed nephew having rather in¬ creased than diminished since her brother had deprived him of what she was fully detcrminexl to restore to hi αι. She hael remained at the Abbe ν from tbe time he left England, daily expecting, after t'ic funeral was over, cither to see or İK'ar from him, not having entertained an idea of his leaving England till his A'olumnious packet reached her expres?, tlie French Ambassador being particularly anxious to display his zeal on the occa¬ sion. To find lie was become so great a man rather reconciled her to the idea of never seeing him more ; but as she could no longer he his benefactress, she only wished to convince him how much she should have gloried in repairing the in¬ justice fortune once seemed to have done him: but then, what present could slu? make
ínaké such a man : this was a matter de·- manded rerleetion. But while she was anxiouslv devoting everv minute to the before-mentioned purpose, her Solicitor sent her w rail Lord Vilmore was instituting a suit against her, for she had connived at the fraud pui- poscly to deprive him of his brother's title and estates. Tins perplexing anel un- plcasing intelligence convinced her she ought not to neglect the present oppor¬ tunity of paying her court to this a cry- great man, v\ho might have it iu his power, her lawyer had hinted, to render her the most essential service, as his having discovered his fil lier, recent honours, &e. hael all been a¡» accurately detailed in the English papers as his sup¬ posed disgrace had been before, to the .infinite moitiíication of the Eari of Dum- c a bai ton,
barton, his fair daughter, Lord Vilmore, and the fine gentlemen our hero had so accidentally met in Bond-Street, Avho all most ardently wished they had chanced to have directed their steps any other way on that unpropitious morning. But Airs. Browning, prompted both by inclination and interest, hurried up to town the moment she received her law¬ yer's letter, where, before she alighted, she proceeded to the first coach-makers, to Avhom she gave orders to build the most elegant town coach and chariot his fancy could devise, repeatedly desiring he woulel spare no expence, though she wished them to be finished with all possible expedition. Money was no object to her; but the men must work night and ans, as she wished to have them finished in a foitnight or three weeks at farthest; respecting the
arms she meant to apply to the French Ambassador. Harness for six horses for j both carriages was included in her order, the ornaments of which Avere to be soliei silver; hammer cloths correspondent Avith the rest; tbe linings silk; lace, fringe, and tassels silver, upon wliich the Duke's arms Avere to be wove in colours. Away, therefore, she posted to the French Ambassador's before she allowed herself to enter Vilmore House, to learn what arms were annexed to the Dukedom of Valentinois. The Marquis de Roche¬ gude gave her credit for all her intentions, and wrote down the arms for the coach- maker, hinting, among the horses she intended to send his Grace, she ought to include a charger, as he had just entered the cavalry, and English horses were in particular estimation among their officers. ? 3 She
She scarcely allowed the Marquis to finish his speech before she hastened away to the livery-man, with whom her late brother had abvavs dealt, to Avlnm she gave orders for two sets of coach horses, seven in each, greys and bays ; they were to be the finest money could purchase, and lie was to provide proper grooms to take them over ; nor A-vas the charger for¬ got, as, cost Avhat he woulel, she Avas resol veel he should surpass any in the Fren cli army. A very fine horse, Avhich Octavius had used to fide, and one of equal value belonging to her late brother, Avere to accompany the others, under the care of his own groom. Having thus arranged every thing re¬ specting her intended present, she be¬ thought herself of the letter she Avas to deliver to James, Avhom she expected to have
bave found in Portland-Place, instead of Avhich, upon her arrival there, she learnt that, despairing of ever again seeing his beloved master, whom he had accident¬ ally discovered was gone abroad, he had, at the instance of the Marquis of Trelaw¬ ney's A'alct, with whom he was ???? inti¬ mate, owing to his brother being in the service of Lord Fitzhayman, gone express to Turin with letters from the Marquis to his son, but had left word that he should enter into no regular engagement till he once more saw or heard from the master Avhose loss he so sincerely deplored ; and in case anv letters arrived during his absence, they were to be given into Mrs. Browning's care, whom he intended to wait upon the moment he returned. The fact is, that the vague hope the poor fellow entertained of stumbling acci- c 4 dentally
dentally upon his master, during his journey, had been his sole reason of agree¬ ing to Lord Trelawncy's proposals, though thev were sufficiently liberal to have been readily accepted by many people, who had not the motjve which actuated James to accede to them. Though sorry in one respect he had acted so precipitately, Mrs. Browning rejoiced in another, as she considered she should now have it in her power to pay the young Duke a farther compliment, by taking upon herself to reward his faithful valet, upon Avhom she resolved to settle an annuity in return for the disinterested affection he had ever evinced for his master, to whom she found it far more difficult to write a proper letter, which she thought ought to precede her present, than had she beeu obliged to compose her own
own defence against her brother's charges, Avhich, though founded in truth, were certainly dictated by malice, as he could not hope to set aside his brother's will, Avhich had deprived him of his fortune, and which appeared formed on purpose to convince the world he bitterly regretted the law prevented him from disputing his right to his title. After repeated attempts, Mrs. Penelope at last was able to arrange her compli¬ ments and congratulations in due form and order upon paper, and to request, ia the most respectful terms, his Grace's ac¬ ceptance of the horses and carriages, Avhich were to leave London at the same time her letter did, but which would not reach Paris with equal expedition. Her thanks for the elegant jewels she should frequently wear in memory of past plea- ? 5 sures,,
sures, as she foresaw she must no longer hope to enjoy his society, were better Avorded and expressed than might have been expected ; nor was his commission respecting James forgotten, for whom she should carefully preserve a letter she doubted not would make him the happi¬ est of mortals, and whom she should send over the moment he returned ; indeed, noth'ug but her fear of his having already left Turin had prevented her from dis¬ patching an express thither with the joy¬ ful tidings of his recai. She next touched upon her perplexed situation with regard to her brother, deli¬ cately hinting, she shouhl consider her¬ self much favoured by his Grace's advice ; giving him to understand her lawyer gave her every reason to hope Lord Vilmore would be nonsuited ; enter¬ ing
ing into several details respecting that Kobleman and Lord Dumbarton, which convinced our hero they both sincerely re¬ pented they had been so very eager t> lower the once degradcil Octavius. Upon tlie whole, her letter met the approbation of tlie person to whom it was addressed, though he did not chuse to take upon himself to answer it till he had shewn it to his father, w ho was very much diverted by her remarks upon her brother and Lord Dumbarton, and who gaily declared it his firm opinion, that she had once in¬ tended to have made her beloved nephew an offer of her hand ; therefore, for fear a refusal should, added to her other vex- ?????, prey too much upon her spirits, he advised his son to accept of her pre¬ sents, w hieb a{ peared to him well chosen, and would bever, useful; permitting him ? ? also
MIDNIGHT AVEDDINGS. , also to assure her he would pay London another visit, if her lawyers thought his presence likely to prevent Loid Yilmoie from succeeding in his attempt to injure her, which ccrtiinly could be productive of no one e!csii\ble end to hinist lf. The conversation between the father and son next reverted to Lady Leonora, who, the fot mer supposed, had ere this bittet ly regi etted the maniage ceremony had not taken place before Lord Vilmoie's death. " I think I should have had much more reason to deplore my hard fate if it haei," replied Octavius, '** as I dare say she would equally have shew η herself in her true colours, the efoie I should have found myself tied to a woman I must ever (¡c>pi c e, and who would, through my means, have obtained a title she has )et
yet never dared aspire to. The more I re¬ flect upon the circumstance the more I repice at the unexpected interruption Avhich prevented our nuptials." " Well, but I hope she has not given you a dislike to the whole sex," rejoined his father, " as I should wish to see you married ; and as you find Love proveel himself absolutely blind when he rendered y/ou Lady Leonora's dupe, why, suppose you substitute Prudence in his stead the next time, aud suffer me to select a wife for you." " I had almost made'a vow/' replied Octavius, "never to give my hand but to some woman whom I could keep İn ignorance of my rank and circumstances, that I might be convinceel I owed her preference to love alone." " Why, in a novel, romance, or tale, 6' such
such ideas may be put in piactice," re¬ joined the Monarch, {i but in real life such very disintcrcsteel characters aie sel¬ dom to be found. But Marmontel has ridiculeel your notion with infinite success in his Alcibíades ; pray read it with atten¬ tion, and then tell me whether you don't think you are to the full as likely to be happy in chusing a woman of equal rank to yourself, as if ycu met with a roman¬ tic girl who flung herself into vour arms for the love of your fine eyes. I am sen¬ sible you might w ith justice retaliate upon me, Octavius, and 1 give you great cie- dit for your foibearancc; but, believe me, I am sensible of my own cirors, and wish you to avoid the etuicksand I have so often been wrecked upon. Your mother leally loud me, but I rendered myself unworthy such a woman ; however, for h.r
her sake I will allow you carte blanche respecting matrimony, though I have a lady in view, who, I am convinced, will render you happy, but to whom I can't have you introduced but as her future luu band ; theiefore reflect well upon what I have said, and recollect that' my sou and heir was not allowed that liberty of choice any more than myself; indeed, no Sovereigns are, and yet your native isian el furnishes an example of the highest con¬ jugal felicity in the persons of its king anel (jueen. The lady í am anxious to recommend has very little Fiench levity about her, and I will be answerable for her never conforming to those of our cus¬ toms I know you arc not inclined to tole¬ rate ; as, believe me, 1 elo not wish you should be driven from home in seaich of felicity, as I wish you to find it in your domestic
domestic circles, because, if banished from thence it is geneially irretrievably lost, and I think with Ph ilidir, On peut en être mieux qiC üíi sein dt sa fa?nWe\ therefore reflect upon alî I have said, and Avhen you feel courageous enough to make a sfcond offering at the shrine of the saffron-robed God, suffer me to direct you in your choice of a companion." Octavius had secretly vowed obedience to all his father's dictates, he therefore resolved not to fail when put to the test, and in consequence declared his readiness to be presented to the lady in question, though he acknowledged he was in no great haste to part with his liberty. tí Nor do I Avish to press you any more upon the subject at present; indeed I rejoice that
that I am allowed to give way to the indul¬ gence lam inclined to treat you with; only keep in mind the name you bear, and don't let love blind you a second time, as policy will not permit my counte¬ nancing your forming an ignoble connec¬ tion, though Avith one of the most beauti¬ ful daughters of Adam; so for the present fare you avcII; let mc see you in the circle to-morrow, as I mean you should join my private party at supper/'
????.
?????????????
CUM. UL
A HIS rather unexpected proposal of his father afforded Octavius ample scope for reflection during his drive back to Paris, though he required no arguments to in¬ duce him to resolve to oblige a parent whose eye ever beamed with love, anel Avhose brow never knew a froAvn ; there¬ fore calling to his aid his former resolves, and his increasing i e verence for his father, he resolved to submit to liis will, let what would
Avöuld be the consequence with respect to himself, so he diel but render his beloved parent happy; and after all he reflected, that he might be mure fortunate than many a man who married for love. To say the truth, his late narrow escape had put him quite out of conceit of the blind deity who hud absolutely hoodwinked him, else he must have perceived the in¬ sincerity of Lady Leonora; still he was not sorry, that lady having given him a great distaste to matrimony, that the evil day Avas deferred for a short time, though he determined to part Avith his liberty Avith a good grace Avhenever the sacrifice Avas required. During the ensuing week Mrs. BroAvn- îng's elegant presents arrived ; his former coachman and grooms forming part of the suit, who came over with the horses, those, to
to their infinite joy, he reinstated in their posts ; the other men he sent home again, after amply rewarding them for their trouble, and took the earliest opportunity of displaying Mrs. Browning's taste to the Monarch, avIio gave her more credit than she deserved, as the only merit she could lay claim to Avas having paid the money; and Oclavius's letter, which was very expressive of his approbation of her selection, and iu which he assured her he would come over upon the shortest notice, if his presence was likely to be of any service to her, more than repaid her for all the expence and trouble. In the post¬ script he again mentioned James, whom he grew more anxious every clay to have about him, while his father took every opportunity of bringing him forward, and giving
giving him the most public marks of his favour. Nor was the good Maréchal less anxious to promote his interest; indeed he vied Avith the Minister in friendly offices and kindness towards the youth, to whom, like his father, they grew daily more attached» therefore, soon after the arrival of the famous charger, the former assureel the Monarch that the DukedeValeutinois, who Avas one of the best horsemen he hael ever seen, a\ as perfectly capable of taking the command of his legiment, and as he was going down to Besançon, as he com¬ manded at that time in Franche Comté, he proposed taking the young Colonel Awth him, and spending a fortnight at Dole, Avhere his regiment then was, upon liis account, as he wished to give him many instructions respecting military discipline,
discipline, Avhich could only be done when he Avas with his soldiers, promising to return with him to Paris in less than a month. As the Monarch did not appear inclined to part with his favourite for any length of time, upon this condition he approvcel of the plan. The famous charger, who turned out every thing Octavias could wish, was sent forward Avith his other saddle horses, Avhile he accompanied the Marcehal to Besancon anel Salens, where the former reviewed í lie regiments then in garrison, and next proceeded to Dole, a sinaî I but very neat and fortified town at the foot of the Jurat, (part of the chain of moun¬ tains wliich separate France from Switzer¬ land) Avhere Octavius was presented in form to his regiment. His officers vied with each oilier in poliinies towards their new commander,
'commander, who acquitted himself with -infinite eclat on the day of the review; indeed he had never appeared to greater advantage than in his full regimentals, which were green turncel up with scarlet, and at that time richly embroidered iu gold. His double bullion epaulets served at once to ???? nee his rank and to con¬ fine his blue ribbon, Avhile his brilliant helmet and Avaving plumes added fresh animation to his always handsome coun¬ tenance ; and as hen the surrounding crowd s:iv/ him " iiht from the ground like fenther'd Mercury, íc A íkí vault with such ease Into his seat " As if an angel dropt down from the clouds tl To mm and wind a fitry pí-ga&ue, (t Λν,ύ witch t!ic worid with noble horsemanship/* a general murmur of applause burst from the
the multitude, while the Maréchal told one of his Aid de Camps this young Avar- rior appeared likely to emulate the first Generals of the age, as even his men secmetl proud of their commander, and exerted their utmost efforts to deserve his approbation. On the evening of this grand day-, during Avhich our hero must have been more than mortal if he had not felt rather elated, nay, perhaps, vain of die praises bestowed upon his personal appearance, horsemanship, &c. his offi¬ cers, and those of the other regiments quartered in tbe town, gave a ball ut the town house, in compliment to the much adniircd vouth, knowing tb.at the mure politely they treated him the more they paid their court to him in Avhom restai all tlieir hopes of future prell rment. Every
Every body of distinction in the toAvn and the environs Avere invitee! to grace this Avell arranged fete ; and though our hero hael not made so great a study of dancing as he had erf riding, he acquitted himself as much to the ladies satisfaction as those officers Avho had been taught bv the first masters in France ; but about midnight, the Captain upon guard at the gate lead¬ ing to Poligni sent our hero, who, being the superior officer in the garrison, had the charge of the keys, word that two English gentlemen, who had been un¬ avoidably detained upon the road, re¬ quested to be admitted into the town. Not knoAving how to proceed upon the occasion, the young Colonel applied to his friend the Maréchal, who informed him it rested solely with himself to com¬ ply with or refuse to grant the strangers vol. iu ? petition j
petition ; in peaceable times such favours Avere sometimes shewn, Avhen any acci¬ dent had befallen travellers, or when their business Avas of a very pressing nature ; but if he felt inclined to oblige the peti¬ tioners he must, in conformity to military etiquette, as being entrusted Avith the keys, go Avith a proper guard himself to the gate, and be present at the ceremony of opening and shutting it, which Avas rather a work of time. The idea of the trouble it might occa¬ sion him elid not induce Octavius to hesi¬ tate a moment how to proceed ; the strangers were Englishmen, anel notwith¬ standing the treatment he had so lately met with from some of those sons of free¬ dom, he felt the very name was a sort of letter of recommendation to his favour, ?? he Avas still more than half a Briton, and
and was absolutely rejoiced at the oppor¬ tunity chance thus afforded him of oblig- a native of his favourite island; he therefore told the Maréchal he should be very sorry to be the first Frenchman to give their neighbours a just right to com¬ plain of want of complaisance, declaring his intention of immediately proceeding to the gate in question. His Major, a most amiable young man, not much his senior, a descendant from one of the most illustrious families in the kingdom, that of the Du Plessis Pras- lins, having overheard what past between him and the Maréchal, insisted upon ac¬ companying his Grace as mere au fait of the necessary ceremonies upon such occa¬ sions, and wished he could havo been deputed in his stead, when he found it rained very hard. D % Thé
The Aveatlier ought to have A^ery lit¬ tle influence over a soldier's moA r ements, our hero observed, though he Avas sorry the polite Major should be exposed to any inconvenience upon his account; however, as they had both apartments in an hotel adjoining the town house, they/ were soon equipped in their military cloaks, boots, and helmets, anel having taken a proper guard proceeded to the gate, Avhere the travellers, they presumed, were impati¬ ently Availing their arrival, which, the Captain upon duty having received the keys, proceeded to open. As there Avere several bridges to be let down before they came to what is called the barrier or last gate, while the soldiers Avere unlock¬ ing the padlocks which confined the chains of the last, owing to the stillness of the night, and the few yards Avhich Avere now between
between them and the travellers, Octavius overheard a few Avorels Avhich 'passed be¬ tween them. " James," cried one, " are these d — d French fellows coming? I know, upon such an occasion as this, they can hardly give themselves airs enough, though I dare say the petty officer, avIio avíü preside over the stupid ceremonial they are fools enough to thiuk necessary, Avill not be offeneled if Ave Avere to slip a six livre piece into his hanel to purchase some Avood to dry his jacket ; for, el------ n me, half the inferior officers in their army are starving." " We ought to feel ourselves highly obliged to Avhoever comes down to the gate on such a night as this," replied his companion, " if we are fortunate enough to gain admittance at all; for lam sure, if Ave are doomed to sit here till day-light, d 3 and
. and the rain continues, wc shall run nr> small risk of being drowned. What an infernal old i umble! did Geneva produce no better conusance r" This was all Octavius could hear dis¬ tinctly, owing to the rattle of the chains when loosened; but the moment the bridge was down he hastened over, and while the Captain was unlocking the large gate, which still impeded the travellers progress, he called out— " I am shocked to death, gentlemen, to think your patience should have been put to such a trial ; but I can assure you the blame does not rest with me, there¬ fore I hope you will be more generous than your discourse leads me to expect, as six livres will be a trifling return for my trouble, considering the weather." As
As Octavius ceased speaking, he heard the last gentleman exclaim— " What excuse can you make for your unguarded speech? for my OAvn pai t I shall be ashamed to look the officer, who addressed us, in the face; for had he ordered his men to raise the bridges again, and left us here till morning, it Avould have been no more than many would have done in his place, and Avhat avc, in some respects, deserved." Our hero, however, lost great part of what he said, as the gate was no sooner open ere the ????? of his faithful James met his ear, crying out— " Oh, my Lord, it was my master, my dear master, that spoke to you!" running forward; and as the soldiers who surrounded their commander had got lanthorns, he Avas able, notwithstanding the alteration D 4 in
in his appearance, his helmet and cloak, Avhich was Avrapped round him, and filing over his left shoulder, to distinguish the features of the man he would readily have Avalked barefooted a hundred miles to liave seen, Avho hardly believed either his eyes or his ears Avhile he cried— i{ James, my good fellow, is it you I see here at this time of night ?" " Yes, Si;·, the Lorel be praised, and I hope you Avill never send me from you again ; but the Lord be good unto me !— Sir, are you the officer upon duty ?" " Precisely so, my honestfriend, " was the reply, calling to the postillion to advance, as it was as necessary he should see the gates shut as it had been for him to see them opened. The man obeyed the order, and the Captain began to lock, &c. assisteel by the soldiers, Avhile Octavius, avIio Avas rejoiced
rejoiced he had so unexpectedly met his faithful domestic, Avas convinced that the strangers, Avhoever they Avere, had not heard of the late alteration in his pro¬ spects, though there Avas little doubt of their having heard of his supposed degra¬ dation ; he Avas, therefore, the more gra¬ tified by James's av i sh to remain \vith him, avIio continued bv his side, as if fearful of again losing sight of him, while the bridges were being draAvn up and the last gates shut. The carriage had stopped just avi thin the toAvn, that the travellers might ansAver the accustomed interrogatories, as to Avherc they came from, Avhere they Avere going, &c. which the officers upon duty put to the gentlemen, Avho, having complied with the necessary forms, Octavius, to Avhom the keys had been restored, bid the postillion d 5 drive
drive on, when one of the gentlemen,. regardless of the weather, jumped out of' the carriage, saying, * ' Surely I recollect that voice l' —James, Avhere are you?" " Here, my Lord." "Diel not you say something about your master when you ran forward ?" By this time he Avas near enough our hero to have ? ? ? ??? good view of his face, and instantly exclaimed— " By Heavens, I was not mistaken ! it is my old schoolfellow ! How are you, my dear friend ? you don't know how I rejoice to see you, though I regret to find- you in a foreign service, as I was in hopes ------but you don't seem to recollect me." " I can't say I do at present, my Lord,'* was the reply; "hadit been daylight, I perhaps might have been less stupid, as I 4 feci
feel highly gratified at hearing myself* thus kindly greeted by one of my former friends." " My name is Fitzhayman ; need I remind you where our acquaintance commenced. " A very cordial shake of the hand fol- lovveel this acknowledgment, anel Octa¬ vius hoped this Avould excuse his want of memory, declaring he hael been so taken by surprise he hael eiuite forgot Airs. Browning hael wrote him word that James was gone express to his Lordship. The Major having approached during their mutual greetings, Octavius requested he Avould hurry home, he meant to follow him immediately ; that officer, therefore, silently bowing, evinced his respect for the 1 Duke by his immediate obedience. " But pray, my Lorel, Avith Avlionr Are you travelling? one of the British D ? Allibasi
Ambassador's messengers at the Coure of Turin ?" " My companion's equipage and polite¬ ness warrant your supposition," rejoined the Viscount, " but our acquaintance is not of more than three hours standing, and originated in two awkward French postillions having overturned my post- chaise, coming down that tremendous descent from the Jurat, leading into Po- Ugni. Fortunately I was on foot when the accident happened, but my carriage sustained so much damage I must have spent the night in an inn, the exact type of that Pope so inimitably describes, as the floors were literally plaister and the walls dung, «' The bed a flock lepaiied with straw, ft With tape ty'dcuitains nevet meant to draw/'
In
In that comfortable habitation, however, I must have reinai neel, if my polite companion had not come jolting in in a vehicle the exact counterpart of »the house, in Avhich he, Avith more civility than he displayed a fcAv minutes ago, offered me a seat to Dole, where he promised me excellent accommodations, &c. so of two evils I chose what I thought the least, anel pro- ceedcel with him ; but as he complaisantly Avaiteel till the fragments of my carriage hael been collected, some of Avhich Avere difficult to be found, Ave made it mid¬ night before we reached these gates ; and I must acknowleelge I heartily repented I had not remained at Poligni, when I fan¬ cied it was an even chance Avhether avc Avere not obligeel to remain there till morning, as the rain Avas dripping through the old machine on every side of us* Judge
Judge, therefore, how much I feel myself indebted to you, though you Avere among the last people I should have expected to have met with at Dole, notwithstanding you have afforded me and my companion ample subject for con versation from Poligni hither, as the gentleman avIio proposed to reward your politeness so liberally bears the name of Browning, to Avhich I am very sorry to say he now adds Honourable; Ave must therefore suppose the unexpecteeL addition his name has received has made him forget he Avas ever the son of a com¬ moner; however, I can assure you that here our acquaintance ends Avith our tra- A ? els, as I Avould sooner ride post all the Avay to Paris than proceed another league in such a carriage and in such company. But how have you done since Ave parted ? you don't know hoAV much I Avas hurt Avheiv
ivlíen I learnt you had been deprived of your name and fortune, not through the penitence of Lord Vilmore, for that he would have much better evinced by mak¬ ing you, instead of his sister, his heir, but, in my opinion, owing to his senses having forsaken him, as it is evident his brother will be no gainer, if we except the acquisition of a title he is unable to support, though you have been such a loser. " " There is no accounting for the secret -workings of conscience," replied our hero; tt but suppose you suffer your honourable companion to proceed, to whom you must introduce me, as I have long had a wish to see him. To what inn, are you going? I will accompany you." Lord Fitzhayman therefore ordered the ¿postillion to go on, according to the orders he
he had receiveel at the gate ; he Avould follow him. The carriage therefore drove on, and the two friends Avalked forward, the Viscount inquiring Avhy Octavius had left England so precipitately, and why he hael so immediately entered a foreign service, adding— " Sui ciy you arc still at liberty to relin¬ quish the post you hold in the French army; and I am Avell convinceel you Avill neA*er serve the Grand Monarque with the same heart anel good will you woulel our noble George; anel if necessity induced you to take this strange step, I give you my word and honour I will procure you a commission of equal rank in our service, trough I don't know what post you now hold ; but I know you are a true born Englishman, though your recent disap¬ point nient may have given you a momen¬ tary
tary dislike to your country. I need not tell you that my father, from being in the Ministry, has great power, and you also know he will exert it to oblige his son. My allowance is much more than adequate to all my own wants, and, believe mc, I shall feel myself the obliged person if you will allow mc to provide for yours. I know you have, from the noblest motives, refused much greater pecuniary offers; but this comes from a friend who would not have scrupled to have shared your for¬ tune with you had our situations been reversed. " " My best friend," cried the delighted Octavius, t4 how these proofs of the goodness of your heart and the generosity of your disposition rejoice me, as they have convinced me I possess your esteem,; and believe me I shall ever gratefully remember
tølDNIGHT WEDDINGS. remember your noble offers ; but the wheel of fortune has gone rounel once more since I left England, and I am at present amply provided for by a most in¬ dulgent father; avIicu an opportunity offers I avíU recite my late adventures more in detail, as I presume you are in haste to reach England, since you were summoned thither express. " " No, it is no longer of any signification howmany rolls I get down these French hills and I am really all impatience to learn how vou discovered this amiable father, See. Mr. Browning and James have let me into all the particulars respecting the late Lord Vilmore's death; and your behaviour upon that trying occasion greatly increased the regard I had ever felt for you, there¬ fore I was, before Ave met, rather anxious to reach England upon your account. James r
James, you already knoAv, came express to Turin to let me know my maternal grandmother, having been suddenly taken ill, Avished to see mc before she died ; of course I immediately obe) ed such a man¬ date; but at Geneva I found letters from my father containing the pleasing intelli¬ gence of her perfect recovery, I therefore spent three Aveeks there, and intend mak* ing a like stay at Paris before I proceed to England ; but I haA^e had some difficulty to persuade James to remain with me, the poor fellow having come over merely in hopes of meeting you, and having hitherto been disappointed in his expectations, he Avas very anxious to return, in hopes of obtaining some intelligence respecting ??? from Mrs. Browning, I am therefore re¬ joiced, even upon his account, Ave have met thus opportunely." While
While the friends were thus expressing their mutual satisfaction, the Honourable Mr. Browning, avIio had but imperfectly understood James's first exclamation, thought the officer Lord Fitzhay¬ man hael been so anxious to greet must be a man of some consequence by that nobleman's behaviour, desirous, therefore, to have this matter elucidated, he called James to the carriage to make his enquiries. From the moment that honest fellow had learnt he bore the name of BroAvning, Avhich he had done, soon after he entereel Poligni, from his servant, he felt he dislikeel him, of course there Avere few men he Avas inclineel to treat less politely, thinking too, as he did at the time, that his father had drove his beloved master from England ; he therefore very briefly satisfied the curious Browning, Avhose
Avliose astonishment coulel only be equalled by the pleasure he felt, Avhen he reflected that the man, Avho from his childhood he had been taught to envy, had been obliged, as a resource against starving, to enter the French service, but Avas really angry Avith Lord Fitzhayman for lowering himself, by noticing a person now so much his inferior, and whom he was convinced Avas in earnest Avhcn he maele his sort of appeal to their generosity, as he presumed the badness of the weather hael induced the superior officer to send him, as the person he could take the most liberty Avith, doAvn to the gates av ith the keys; therefore Avhat he had said Avas rather a* propos than not. While he Avas solacing himself with these agreeable reflections, the carriage stopped at the inn to which he hael ordered the
the postillion, and a fille d*aubergc shewed him, and the friends Avho entered the house with him, into a room dedicated to the use of the officers avIio supped and dined at her master's, Avhich those of infe¬ rior rank in every regiment generally did at the various inns Avhere they Avere in garrison, as being much less expensive than any other mode of living. BroAvning had fully expected the Earl Avoulel introduce him to his former cousin, but found himself disappointed, as that gentleman merely said— " Well, Sir, I think we are A r ery fortu¬ nate in being, thanks to my friends politeness, once more under shelter/* " Certainly, my Lord," Avas the reply, anxiously eyeing our hero Avhile he spoke, u and I think the least Ave can do is to wait upon the commanding officer in the morning
ftiorning to return him our thanks for having suffered the gates to be opened." (c Pray, Sir," turning to Octavius, "for I find you understand English, is there any regular commander settled here, or does the superior military officer belong¬ ing to the garrison hold that post during his stay, which I know is the case ia some of these lesser fortified towns ?*' " You seem perfectly mi fait of our îiiilitary laws, Sir," rejoined our hero, " and are very correct in your statement. The first officer upon duty in the town acts as commandant here, and as you are so well acquainted with the etiquette attached to his place, I should have pre* sumed you must have known that, except in case of illness, he is not allowed to (delegate his trust to any other person/' 4 Browning
Browning was never more at a loss; still he thought it very unlikely that this young fellow, who could not have been more than a couple of months in France, ' and who must have come unprovided with any letters of recommendation, should have, in so short a time, obtained a com¬ mission of sufficient rank in their army to entitle him to act as commandant of any town, when, to his increasing surprise, the landlord entered the room, and, re¬ spectfully bowing to the Colonel, requested, addressing him as Monseigneur, he would sufïerhim to take his cloak, that he might hang it to dry while he staid. Browning opened his eyes wider than before, and was half tempted to suppose the man and our hero were diverting themselves at his expence, though he could not conceive when
Avhen they had concerted their scheme, nor what purpose it was to answer. Lord Fitzhayman rather participated in his surprise, but Avithout entertaining the same suspicions, Avhile Octavius certainly felt a secret satisfaction, which his rank had never affbrelcd him before ; he thanked the landlord for his considerate attention, and his vanity veiling itself under the pretence of obliging this good man, he suffered him to divest him of what had hitherto completely concealed his superb regimentals, magnificent sword, and blaz¬ ing star. Browning stood for some minutes transfixed with wonder and amaze; the star anel ribbon operateci like magic on his astonished senses. Lord Fitzhayman, v\ho readily guessed the father his friend had mentioned was vol. ii. e of
of the first rank, thought his brilliant appearance perfectly accounted for, but could not forbear smiling at the vacant stu¬ pid stare Avith which Browning continued to gaze at the elegant youth, Avdio, to avoid laughing in his face, turned towards the fire, over Avhich he shook the Avet from his helmet, A\hich he had taken off for that purpose, and Avas in the act of re¬ placing it Avhen the landlord returned, and in the most respectful terms repre¬ sented how utterly impossible it Avas for him to accommodate Monseigneurs friends as he could have wished, every bed in his house having been engaged from the time of the Governor's arrival at Dole. c£ Whv then this gentleman must make the best shift he can," replied Octavius, looking at the still petrified Browning; " the
u the other avíU do me the faAOur to be¬ come my guest during his stay. " " Then 1 Avili resign my own bed, rather tkan be failing in respect to any friend of y r our Grace." **· If you do, I hope the gentleman, Avith whom I am not even acquainted, Avili reward you for your politeness.— Have you any r baggage, my Lorel? be- tause wc hael better be going." " None at all; I left every thing at Poligni, under the care of my servants, Avho I hope will join me in the course of to-morrow ; vour faithful James was the only one I brought forwarel with me. But Air. Browning is, I understand, in haste to reach England ; I therefore wish you a pleasant journey, Sir, if í should not have an opportunity of seeing you again in the morning, and shall ever consider myself as very much your debtor, e sž since
CHAR IV. JL HE Honourable Thomas Browning, who fancied his consequence was pro¬ digiously encreased since his father was become a Peer, was no sooner left alone to ruminate upon what, in his opinion, was little short of manelious, (as the landlord, who then in common with every Frenchman, idolized every person who bore any affinity to their beloved Monarch, had accompanied the young Duke to the outward
outward gate, imploring blessings upon the head of this spurious descendant of Lewis the Fifteenth, who certainly at this period might truly be said to reign in the hearts of his subjects) than he became anxious to learn how our hero had be¬ come the great man he was perforce obliged to believe he was; he therefore sent for mine host, of whom he inquired who the young officer might be, who had accompanied him and Lord Fitzhayman to his house. " What, don't you know him, Sir?" was the reply. " He gave you sufficiently to under¬ stand we were not friends, though I think I have some recollection of his person." " That I don't wonder at, Sir; for every body says he is the very image of his adored father." * e 4 " And
" And pray who is this gentleman you hohl in such high estimation ; for í don't recoilect having ever seen him r" " Then you have never been at Paris, I suppose, Sir?" replied the landlord. " Yet I daresay you see his picture often enough," pulling out a six livre piece, " for he is no less a man than our beloved Monarch; aud I do say," look¬ ing at the impression, " I should have known the Duke de Valentinois was his son only from the resemblance he bears his august father." " You surprise me !" rejoined Brown¬ ing, who was half inclined to think the man Avas laughing at him, therefore continued. " But how came he to be the commanding officer here?" " Because he is Colonel Commandant of a regiment of dragoons, the only regiment
regiment of cavalry now ?? gai ri oa here." ír Well, but how long has he been here ?" tí About a week, lie came down with the Maréchal dc Belzors, the Governor of this province." Then there is a possibility, thought Browning, this fclk) w is not endeavour¬ ing to impose upon me; but resolved to come to a certainty, he inquired how inr^r the Duke had been Colonel of this regiment. " Whv 1 can't be exact as to the very day, Sir; but 1 don't think 'tis inore than six weeks. I heard the officers uho eat at my house telling all how and about it at the time ; that cur «rood Kinsr had very lately acknowledged this vouu<r, «cen- tlcman for his son by an Englbh lady, l J I think
I think 'tis reported ; and they said he had been stolen from nurse, and that it was next to a miracle his bavins: ever been heard of availi ; however I hardlv know the rights of that part of his story yet; but I know his Majesty created him a Duke and Peer of France, and gave him the blue ribbon you perceive he wears, which none but our very great folks indeed are honoured with, and appointed him to the command of the regiment now here, who fired a feu de joie when the news came down, and the officers gave a grand ball and supper, and there is another to night at the town-house, also given in honour of their Colonel. I am sure I wonder he left the company to go down to the gates *. but he deserves to be a great man ; so said the servant who arrived with you, w ho formerly lived with him,
him, he told our folks ; and I am sure he Avon my Avarm heart, for he actually cried for joy Avhen he learnt his master's rank, and all that." " I suppose he hopeel his transpoi ts Avould reach his master's ears," replied Browning ; " but I no longer wonder the Duke's features Avere familiar to me, as I have seen him in England," (this Avas not exactly truth) " anel have heard the person concerned in his being stolen from nurse is to be tried for her crimes," This was no more than he expecteel, as he was hastening to Englanel purposely to assist his father in carrying on the law¬ suit against his aunt ; and he now enter¬ tained hopes of succeeding to the utmost of his Avishes, as he thought it by no means improbable that the business might be rendered a national concern; at all ? 6 events,
events, her having trepanned away/, or rather concealed a child of such con¬ sequence, must increase her criminality in the opinion of the world. Still he Avished he hael been acquainted with our hero's birth, kc. rather sooner, as he Avould certainly in that case have acted very differently ; presumed the recent dis¬ coveries were not yet made known to his father, else he would s u rel v have el es i reel him to have sought out this great man, and have endeavoured to have brought him over to their side, as his appearing against Mrs. Browning must prove her ruin. However, since chance had thrown him in his way, he must endeavour to turn the circumstance to their advan¬ tage; he therefore resolved, under pre¬ tence of making excuses for his imperti¬ nent speech, to pay our hero a visit in the á morning,
morning, Avhen he trusted he should be able to flatter him into those measures he thought so conducive to his interest. Having thus determined, after eating a hearty supper he laiel down upon a mattress strctcheel upon the floor, rather chusing to put up with such accommoda¬ tions than to pay an exorbitant price for his host's bed. Meanwhile our hero and Lord Fitzhavman arri veel at the former's apaitments, vvHo had an excellent spare room, which was ordered to be préparée! for his icccption, and Octavius hopeel he would remain his guest till he left Dole, which he expected to do in three or four days, and in Paris he woulel in¬ sure him much better accommodations. " I most willingly accept your offer," replicii the Viscount, ** as by the time Ave reach Paris I hope I shall have prevailed
prevailed upon you to pay England another visit, though I begin to fear you are fixed for life in France; that star and those epaulets tell me you are a man of too much consequence in this country to be permitted to emigrate," Not AAishing to keep him a moment longer in suspence, Octavius briefly re¬ capitulated the principal events whicii had occurred from the moment Lord Vilmore died. Lord Fitzhayman listened with the greatest attention to his recital, and con- gratulated him in the most feeling terms upon his having so much reason to rejoice the Nabob could not die with such a secret upon his mind ; but protested he regretted they appeared doomed to inhabit different kingdoms. " Why that circumstance avíU enliven our
our letters/' rejoined Octavius, ζί and reneier our visits to each other more piquant. But elo you feci a cry much fatigued ? ' t Not in the least/* was the reply. tí Then you must return with mc to the Town-Hal!, wheie a grand fete was given this evening, chiefly upon my ac¬ count, and the company are now in the licighth of their glee. We shall be just in time for the reveiilon* ." " Then I ret j uest I may not detaiu you another minute," cried his Lordship. " How could you think of leavinsr a ball- room to coinè down to the gates such a nio'ht as this ?*' 4í Because I did not feel myself au-
thorized
thorized to delegate any other officer in my stead." " But how few men of your rank would liave iriven themselves the same trouble, as I understood from the ceutinels it was perfectly at the commander's option to admit us or not?'' " Then thev outfit never to let the Aveatlier pi event them from granting so trilling a favour; but I akis informed I should liave it in my power to oblige two Englishmen.'' " Ah, my dear friend, I feci your kind inference, and venture to pronounce you, though the son of Lewis tbe bien ahme, a Briton in your soul ! Stiil I must say I have ever found the nobility of this country much more polite than those of the same rank on our side of the water ;
Aväter; but you sec it is absolutely im¬ possible for me to accompany you, or ï Avould do it with the greatest pleasure ; but I huve not a change even of linen." " I can provide you with that, and a pair of shoes and stockings ; every other part of your dress will do. My French valet, who fancies himself the first hair-dresser in the Avorld, shall arrange your head; he avíU have done it in uve minutes; therefore I avíU not take a denial ; at all events you either accompany me to the ball, or Ι απΊ? remain at home with vou/* " Then upon condition you make excuses for iny dishabille I will get ready to attend you ;" and his Lordshirfs toilette being completed in a very few minutes, the friends joined the company in the ball-room, where Octavius introduced the Viscount
Viscount to the Maréchal, and every other person of distinction present. They then partook of a most excellent reveiilon, after Avhich the dancing be^an again, anel Avas kept up till broad „day¬ light, Avhen the company separated with regret to sleep off their fatigues. Octavius and the Viscount breakfasted before they retired, when James, to his infinite joy, resumed his former post, the French valet being delegateel to wait upon Lonl Fitz¬ hayman, though he Avas to continue in the Duke's service, Frenchmen of his consequence having generally two or three seivants to preside at their toilettes. As Octavius Avas not required to make his appearance upon the parade, he gave orders not to be disturbed till he rang, Avhich he did not do till near one, when James
James presented himself at his bedside, and informed him he had been sent for to his inn by Mr. Browning soon after he had retired, as he had been too happy to sleep, notwithstanding he had rode post from Geneva the day before, and that gentleman had told him he could not think of quitting Dole till he had returned his Grace thanks, and made proper apo¬ logies for his very inadvertent speech, add¬ ing—" He asked me at least a thousand questions, and concluded by offering me a guinea if I would procure him an au¬ dience with your Grace. I wonder he should suppose I could venture to in¬ troduce any one unless by your express order, but promised (though I absolutely refused his bribe, as I am sure he is more in want of a guinea than I am) to mention his wishes to your Grace as soon
as vou were stirrin«; ; and thou oh I told him I did not sürgose it would be before one o'clock, he îwis been in the saloon ever çim ' eleven waiting your rising, ? hopes you Avill do him the honour to receive Lim." f< Why he seems to have prevented my putting a negative upon his request ; how¬ ever, I commend your refusing his bribe. Go and let him know' I will Avait upon him in a few minutes." While James Avas gone to execute his commission, Lord Fitzhayman,whose bed¬ room joined his friend's, called out to know how he had rested, and as the Duke was already out of bed, lie opencel the door which communicated between the two apartments, to let him know who Avas waiting for au audience in the saloon. " I give BroAvning credit for his humility,"
humility," cried the Viscount, " and Avill hasten to dress, that 1 may be present during the interview', as I long to hear how he will excuse his gross impertinence Avhile the bridges Avere letting down ; for upon my 'soul, Duke, hael I been in your place, both he anel his companion should have remained Avithoutside the town till sunrise." " Then don't you think he is more punished, as matters have turned out?" '* Why I believe he may, for I never saw a man more obsequious to his supe j i i' us. You never treated me with half the respect I met with from him while you bore the same name, anel yet I ever lo veel anel esteemed you ; and I may safely > y I despised him before we had proceded one league upon our journey." 4< Now
" Now can you blame him for making use of the most current coin iu the world, namely, flattery, though I must acknow¬ ledge that the only/ benefit Ave reap from fulsome adulation is, that hearing Avhat Ave arc not, wc are insensibly instructed as to what we ought to be." " Why then flattery might be rendered useful ; but I am the more angry aví t h this Browning, because the English lan¬ guage scarcely/ afforded him terms suf¬ ficiently energetic to express the contempt in whicii he held vou, Avhom he is now ready to fall down and worship !—that is one reason Avhy I wish to be present daring y/our interview, that I may see if he can blush." *' Come, come, he has only given into the failing of many others," replied Octavius,
Octavius, mentioning the treatment he hael experienced from several of his former friends. " And yet those A 7 ery men hael been, to my certain knowledge, among your most abject flatterers ; but Avhen they learnt you Avere elepri ved of all that rendered your friendship Avorthy their notice, they only r Avishcel to sink you still lower, had their power equalled their inclination." The friends having been dressing during this discourse, they entered the saloon together, when Mr. Browning, bowing to the Duke, then to the Viscount, said— " He could not think of pursuing his journey to England before he had in- squired whether his Grace or Lord Fitz¬ hayman had any commission they might think him Avorthy to be intrusted with." The
The Duke requested he Avould resume his seat, but was sorry he had delayed his journey upon his or his friend's account, as neither of them Avere at ail inclined to consider Lord Vilmore's son in the light of a courier. " I should feel myself honoured by being employed by either of you, gentle¬ men, though I am hurrying to Englanel to assist my father in endeavouring to punish the person Avhose machinations might for ever have deprived your Grace of those honours you at present enjoys' <ς That the late Lord Vilmore and Mrs. Browning certainly acted wrong, by put¬ ting me in the place of the deceased child, I am ready to acknowledge ; and I cer¬ tainly might have been a great sufferer from their duplicity; but even Avhile I had every reason to believe that would have
have been the case, I forgave them both ; nor would I have accepted of riches I should have considered as the price of my independence. Your father fineis himself very much aggrieveel by his brother's Avili, therefore wishes to prevent his sister from enjoying her acquisition, lie must certainly follow the bent of his own in* clinations; only I request he would not attempt to deceive the public into a belief that he wishes to avenge my wrongs, be¬ cause I shall certainly espouse tlie cause of the weakest party, of whom í have no rea* son to complain ; for h?,ú it depended upon Mrs. Browning, I should now have been Lorel Vilmore ; and Avhen her brother's confession hael deprived me of his name, she nobly offered to make over to me that fortune I had been taught to expect I should one day inherit; she therefore vol. u, r sought
sought to repair her error, and to evince her real regard for me, Avhile your father, far from respecting my feelings during the greatest trial I ever underwent, scizcel the opportunity to insult me with a degree of inhumanity, Avhich perfectly accounts for the, dislike his late brother ever felt for him." Browning's scat had been very uneasy for some time, though he repeatedly shifted his posture; but the conclusion of the Duke's speech so deranged his ideas, that he was scarcclv able to falter out something expressive of his regret for having intruded upon his Graces time, when he made his parting bow. Tlie friends wished him a pleasant journey, and Lord Fitzhayman thanked him for having brought him so far on his way· The
The mortified young man presumed Lord Fitzhayman had prejudiced the proud young Frenchman against him, therefore sincerely wished he had left himat Polioni, as a foolish hope to appear great in his cy*es had induced him to make the un¬ fortunate speech, Avhich had so greatly offen deel the royal upstart. As it was, however, of no use to remain at Dole, he gave immediate orders for post-horses, and soon set off for England, anxious tf; in¬ form his father what powerful friends his aunt seemed to have, as he began to dread the influence of a mau who 'lu\d ever, though unknown to him, been ihe. object of Ins dislike, and whom he now most cordially hated ; indeed his f-imüy were renowned for.the sincerity 7 of their hatred, their regard being for less to be depended upon. f a CHAP.
CHAP. V. OCTAVIUS Avas more than half angry Avith himself for having so openly dcclareil his dislike of the present Lord Vilmore to his son ; but there Avas something so meanly abject in BroAvning's behaviour, our hero had been unable to dissemble the con¬ tempt in Avhich he held him. The Viscount thought he had been doing both father and son a serious service, as they Avould now knoAv they must not veil their malicious
malicious proceedings against Mrs. Brown¬ ing under the pretence of revenging his cause ; he therefore thought it very likely he might drop the suit he had so lately instituted, which, at all events, would rather impoverish than enrich him. <t That was very certain," Octavius replied; tÉ still, as he was to the full as obstinate as his late brother, he was con¬ vinced he avoli Id bring the matter to a trial, eA'en if it ended in his own ruin, though he should ha\*e thought policy would have induced him to have adopted a very different Hue of conduct, since it would have been more to his interest to have remained friends Avith his sister than to have thus declared himself her open enemy." What Octavius had said concerning Lord Vilmore's treatment of him upon the v 3 demise
hav T e actuated her Ladyship Avhen she consented to accompany me to the akar ; for it is said neither her sex nor ours ever love above once." " Gh, I deny the truth of that asser¬ tion !—Excuse the remark ; but I think your father is rather an exception to your rule; but as for Lady Leonora, she never Avas in love Avith any thing but her own dear self, for I have discovered I was not the first fool she rendered her dupe ; in fact, a heart does not form a part of her composition î " She speaks, behaves, and acts just as she ought, «* But never—never reacltd one generous thought—» * f Virtue she finds too painful an endeavour j she is, therefore, tt Content to dwell in (licencies for ever l' « You
lc You appear to have formed a very just judgment of her character," replied Octavius; iC as certainly, had she ever known the real meaning of the word love, I should have fancied from these letters that you hael made as great a progress in her affections as I persuaded myself I had done." ie Oh, I was to the full as much her dupe as }our Grace can have been. The dates avíU inform vou I Avas not one-and- twenty Avhen I would have broken a lance Avith any discourteous knight who would have presumed to have thought her a mere mortal. Fortunately my father discovercel the bent of my inclinations, or I think it very possible she would have drawn me into a private marriage, as she w as perfectly aware of the objections the Marquis would have made to our ? 5 union.
MIDNIGHT AVEDDÏNGS. union. As for Lord Dumbaiton, I believe he scarcely cared to whose lot she fell, so long as she did but marry a man of foitune." ft Then you really Avere in love Avith this handsome coquette?" said Octavius. ζί In love—I was almost an idolater of her charms at the time I allude to ; but my father, Avithout pretending to have divined the situation of my heart, sent me on my travels too suddenly to allovv me to enter into any lasting engagements with the fair lady, with whom I continued to correspond till the English ncAvspapers informed me bhe Avas upon the point of marriage with Lord Vilmore's son. This quite effected my cure, as it convinced me she never had a heart to bestow, and that money was the greatest recommenda¬ tion to her fiiAOur.*' "And
(C And have vou never heard from her since our marriage Avas so unexpectedly broken off?" <t Why, she positively hael the assurance to address a letter to me that very Avcek, Avhich I returned unopened in a blank cover, and I have regretted my precipitancy ev er since, as she is capable of fancying I was actuated by pique; anel I should haA'e liked to have seen how she glossed over her conduct." " Who knows but she wished to make you believe she hael poisoned Lord Vil¬ more, in order to prevent the ceremony from taking place." (i Such an excuse avouUI have been worthy of her ; though she might have feared I should have thought she would have tried the same experiment upon me when she grew tired of me > but as matters ? 6 staue),
stand, I own 1 enjevy the idea of meeting lier again, though from my last letteis I find she has contrived to gloss over her conduct towards you so artfully that the world in general are inclined to think it "was a match wliich had never met her approbation, though duty towards her father induced her to consent to his Avishes ; at the same time she affects to deplore your misfortunes; in fact, plays her part so A>ell, she is applauded instead of blamed, and, had she money, might yet pick and chuse among our fust young- men ; but, j ou avíU lemcmbcr, my last letters from England aie of an ancient date, thcrefote I can't pretend to say how far her sentiments have altered since she has learnt how narrow ly she escaped being a dutchess, though 1 can suppose she most bitterly repents the not having foi eseen
foreseen the possibility there Avas of your becoming a duke. My sister and her Ladyship arc upon a sort of intimate footing, though Helen is much the voima'est, and of course Avas never in her confidence, either respecting her corre¬ spondence u ith me or her love for you, as she merel v learnt from rumour she Avas •h' going to be married, and the good little giri firmly believes it was a painful sacrifice she Avas making to duty, therefore rejoiceel upon her friend's account the marriage Avas broken off, though she writes mc Avord she greatly regretted that so amiable a vou n g man as Mr. Browning hai been represented to her should have been so great a sufferer through the late Lorel Vilmore's baseness. Did you ever see her?" " Once, I believe, when she was quite 6 a child.
a child, during a very short visit I paid at your fathers seat in the West ; and if I recollect right, she was beautiful to a degree I never saw equalled in a girl of her ace." íC A brother may be paitial, but I think I never saw so ime a creature as she Avas Avhen I left England, and my mother-in- law assures me she bids fair to be a first- rate belle. Hitherto she has chiefly re¬ sided at my father's villa in the. vicinity of London, where she has studied under the first masters Englanel can boast ; anel, what is much more to the purpose, all her lessons have been taken under her mother's eyes, who means to bung her out this spring, though many women of the Marchioness's age j , and with the pre¬ tensions she still and ever will have to beauty, would chuse to keep a daughtei, Avho
Avho bids so fair to rival her in point of personal appearance 4 , in the back-ground. Not so Lady Tielawney, as she has been almost a recluse from the time of my sister's birth, that she might render her mind as beautiful as her features." " I have always heard her Laelyship cited as a model for wives and mothers; but till now I thought she Avas yours as Avell as Lady Helen's mother." " No, I Avas live years olel Avhen she married my father, but she has ever shewn me such aftection, that hael she been my own mother I could not have loved her better. My mother died when I was just turncel of two years old ; she was a very rich heiress, but not of noble extraction, though of a A'ery good family in the North. The present Marchioness is the only daughter of the Earl of Castleacre, Avho
who is reckoned one of our richest Peers ; but I Avon't pretend to say he makes the best use of his immense income, as he has seldom been without a mistress since the Countess's death, Avhich immediately fol¬ lowed his daughter's birth, and even now he keeps a celebrated singer in an elegant mansion appropriated for that purpose ; nevertheless he is doatingly fond of my mothci-in-law, anei still more attached to Helen, avIio will certainly be his heiress, and a Countess İn her own right. Indeed Avith all his follies, Avhich are rather numerous, he is a most agreeable com¬ panion. But to account iu some measure for Lady Leonora's half-intimacy Avith Helen—her mother, a most amiable Avoman, if report is to be depended upon, and the Marchioness, were, like us, school¬ fellows, and, as avc shall be in future I hope,
hope, sworn friends. As they/ continucel to visit, (though my father and Lord Dumbarton have never been upon more than civil terms Avith each other) upon her dcath-beel Lady Dumbarton recom¬ mended her Leonora so strenuously to Lady Trelawney, she has ever thought it her duty to aflorei her her countenance, though her resolution to superintend Helen's education prevented her from be» coming the ensnaring coquette's chaperon Avhen she made her entree into the great world ; nor did the regard she ever bore her mother at all blind Laely Trelawney to the daughter's failings, as she more than once gave me her real opinion of Laely Leonora; but I was too much in love to see with her eyes, as 1 gave Lady Leonora credit for all those virtues Avhich she Avould,
would, I dare say, scorn to rank among tlie cat. logue of her perfections." ' £ I gave exactly into the same error,'' replied Octavius; u but I really wonder Lady Trelawney allows any degree of intimacy to prevail between the young ladies, since she has so bad an opinion of the elder of the two.*' " Oh, they arc never buffered to be ti'ic-à-tètc I am well convinced, though Helen's pimciples would certainly preserve her from imbibing any of Lady Leonora's erroneous notions ; but the Marchioness suffers them to preserve the appearance of friendship, by way of giving that degree of consequence to her friends daughter her own conduct is exactly calculated to make her loac; however, should bhe commit any flagrant error, tiie doors of Trehwney-
Trelawney*House will be among the first she Arili find shut against her. I only wish vou had seen my sister before vou were in trod u ceel to that disgrace to her sex." " Well, and. admitting I hael, and that I had found her every thing you describe her to be, do you suppose Lord Trelawney or the Earl of Castleacre would have been inclined to bestow Lady Helen upon Edmund Browning, the son of a Peer of yesterday, and the grandson of a cook-maid? Had the Marquis had a dozen children, and been as poor as Lord Dumbarton, 1 might indeed have stood a chance of being related to you ; but as it Avas, even to have raised my eyes to* wards vour sister woulel have been an excess of presumption I trust I should never have been gui It v of, as no one was muro
more sensible than myself of the blot in *■ the escutcheon of the Brownings, avIio all, more or less, take after their grand¬ mother." " Why I believe even your merits, wliich my r father woulel have been very ready to acknowledge, avouUI not have turned the scale in vour favour, as I know Lord Vilmore Avas neither among his friends nor his favourites ; and 1 remember both him and my mother, Avhen you were with me in the West, declaring they should have supposed that among his other pur¬ chases the Nabob had bought ?? beauti¬ ful boy, as you bore very little resemblance to any of your family, and uppeareel to have a sense of innate honour anel a degree of understanding they could hardly have imagined would have fallen to the share of ? descendant of the Brownings™ and
anti now I suppose your father would be quite as averse to your forming such a connection as mine would have been here« tofo re?" " Of that I am no judge 5 but I believe he has a match iu view for mc ; and as aH the return t can make him for the affection he treats me with, is to consider his will ?? law, I have made up my mind to part with my liberty to \\ hoever he has selected for my wife ; and he has assured mc I am very likely to love the lady in question : that I shall not pretend to promise, though I am resolved to perform my part when 1 do commence benedict, so as not to give her reason to complain chance had ordained we should come together." u Well then, I can only wish you may meet with a woman likely to appreciate your motives for parting with your liberty; but
but I still hope you Ayill obtain permission to revisit Great Britain Avith mc, and that you will not be obliged to give your hand to this unknown belle before vou leave France." " I eîo hope I shall be permitted to accompany you to England ; nor do I expect to marry immediately, as, were that to be the case, I must unavoidably forego the former pleasure, as I should dislike to take my wife with mc, and to leave a bride el uring the honey moon would be a solecism in politeness, which would give people room to suppose I was still a Browning, though translated into the politest nation in Europe, and deriving my birth from the first as avcII as the politest man of the court." Here their conversation Avas broken in upon by the Maréchal, avIio came to consult
consult Avith his pupil respecting their departure, and to request he and Ids friend Avould dine with him at the Bishop's, Avhere he resided. Monday 7 , by Avhich time they were informed Lord Fitzhayman's carriage woulel be put in sufficient repair, was fixed upon for their departure, and on the preceding day Octavius gave a ball to the ofiìcers, town's people, Sec. in return for the amazing politeness he had met Avith from all ranks, every one of whom participated in the hilarity, and the next morning having in due form resigned the keys aud the command to the officer whose rank entitled him to such a trust, lie set out for Paris with the Maréchal and Lord Fitzhayman, avIio made the third in the GoA-ernor's coach, fyis carriage being allotted to the use of their attendants, Thev
They reached Auxerre without any thing occurring Avorthy notice. There, Avhile stopping to change horses, the \ l iscount remarked a heap of lumber under a shed, Avhich he declared he must take a nearer survey of, ami for tliat purpose alighted Avith our hero, who was at a loss to guess Avliat had excited his curiosity 7 , when, upon inspecting the scattered fragments, he declared it was the remains of tlie very elegant equipage in which he made his entree into Dole. ζί Surely its former owner has not been so unfortunate as his A'chicle appears to have been," said Octavius, begiuning to enquire of the stable people. The postmaster, who was, in compliment to such great folks, assisting to prepare the horses, immediately told them, that only two davs before, an English gentleman and
and his servant had arrived there on foot, his carriage having literally fallen to pieces within a league of the town, though it had undergone some repair or other at every place between there anel Dole, the servant had tolti him ; so he had made an exchange with him, that is, he had sold him another carriage, and allowed him the value of the iron ???????· to the one he had left upon the road, which he was . astonished any boely could have thought of venturing their necks in. <c Upon my honour 1 begin to think I had a very narrow escape, ,, observed the Viscount; tí though Browning's reasons for making use of such a conveyance are sufficiently obvious. When y r ou borethat name, my r frienel, you travelled like a Peer's son." " Thanks to the Nabob's riches," was vol. ?. θ the
the reply. u But don't let us keep the Maréchal Avaiting ;"' and having, upon Lord Fitzhayman's account, spent a day at Fontainbleau in surveying the palace and gardens, they reached Paris in perfect safety, and Avithout OA'ertaking Brown¬ ing.
CHAP. VI. LORD FITZHAYMAN Avas in raptures Avith his friend's abode, avIìo left him to admire its beauties while he hastened to tlie Minister's to make enquiries after his father's
father's health, and to learn whether that nobleman had any letters or message for him, and had the satisfaction of hearing that the Maréchals letters had been so full of the praises of his pupil, the Monarch was impatient to see his beloved Octavius ; the Minister therefore advised his attending his father s levée (which in France literally means the king's rising) the following morning. Our hero approved of the notion, and soon returned home to enjoy a tète-à- tète with his friend, who intended to be publicly introduced to the Grand Monarque by the English Ambassador, though he rather hoped to be favoured with a private audience through the means of his friend, whom he requested would solicit permission to return to England with him, declaring he was ready to set g % off
off at a moment's warning, if Octavius could be better spared now than at any future time, though he would also readily engage to Avait his leisure, even for a month or six weeks, so anxious was he to have him for a travelling companion. Octavius promised to lay their joint petiiion before him, whose will being law for £4,000,000 of people, certainly ought not to be disputed by his son; indeed he much questioned whether the Dauphin, though so much his senior, Avas not under much greater restraints than himself; he should therefore certainly submit toa dis¬ appointment without murmuring, though he hoped-he should not be put to the trial ; and the cordial reception he experienced from Lewis, wirb whom he breakfasted in the favourite's apartment, rendered him g tí U more sanguine in his expectations. The
The solidity of judgment and surpris¬ ing quickness of apprehension, Avhich even liis enemies and traducers allovv Lewis the Fifteenth to have possessed, rendered him perfectly capable of appreciating those superior qualities Avhich distinguished this favoured son, who, in common with his father, possessed an exalted soul ; indeeel it might trulv be said that the blood of the legislator, the hero, and warrior, run in his veins, and his education had been much more attended to than that of his father's, notwithstanding the happiness of so many millions were dependant upon the justice of the latter; but unfortunately his preceptor, Cardinal Fleuri, having no great principles himself, could not instil any into the mind of his pupil ; yet 'the unequal, not to say bad education he had received, by no means extinguished ia g 3 him
him those amiable qualities which most adorn a sovereign. The goodaess of his heart was felt by all his dependants ; he was mild, affable, compassionate, and just, delighting in doing good, and a declared enemy to every thing which did not bear the stamp of honour and probity. Having asked Octavius's opinion of that part of France he had so lately visited, and being pleased with his answer, he hoped he was perfectly reconciled to hav¬ ing become a Frenchman. Without deviating from the truth, our hero professed himself proud of his ex¬ traction, at the same time doing ample justice to the English nation, to whom he hinted he still in part belonged, 11 True, therefore I am fearful you would not enjoy being present in an engagement with those sons of freedom ; for
for example, you Avould not have relished being at the battle of Fontenoy." " I hope I shall do my duty, Sir, Avhenever called upon ; and I can solemnly svs ear I Avould lay down my life for your service, though I must acknoAvledge I had rather ex,ert my skill against any other nation than the British, Avho I therefore hope avíU remain at peace Avith France Avhile I continue in the army ; though were you to require my obedience, Sir, I trust I should get over Avhat may appear absurd scruples." " They do you honour, Octavius— you are, as you justly obsen*e, half a Briton, and never while I live shall vour feelings be put to so severe a trial." A tear glistened in the Monarch's eyes while he gazed upon the enraptured youth, G 4 Avhose
whose gratitude was too powerful for utterance. " Well, but you have not told me," he continued, " how you spent your time at Dole." Octavius instantly recapitulated every circumstance worthy remark, which had occurred during his residence there, not forgetting to mention his rencontre with his juvenile friend, nor the hopes Lord Fitzhayman entertained that he would obtain permission to accompany him to England. £i This wish is very natural," replied the Monarch; " but would he have been equally pressing had Lord Vilmore's con¬ fession been productive of those con¬ sequences you once apprehended it might have been." / Octavius
Octavius Avarmly expatiated upon his friend's behaviour, Avhen they met so un¬ expectedly, declaring he Avas well con¬ vinced he was sincere in every offer which he had macle him. " Then he is an honour to the British nation, and I desire vou Avould introduce him to me in the private apartments, that I may thank him for his kinel intentions towards you. You shall return to Ens:- land with him if you Avish it, as you have business to transact there which can't be so well intru^teel to a third person. Of Avhat family diel you say he Avas?" ίζ lie is the only son of the Marquis of Trelawney, Sir, by his first Avife.' 1 tt Son to the Marquis of Trelawney," repeated the Monarch. " Has he any brothers and sisters ?" g ά " One
" One half-sister by the present Marchioness, Avho is a daughter of Lord Castleacre, a most beautiful girl/ if I am to believe my friend." " Indeed!—well, donVlet him talk you into love with her, because, as I haA'c told you before, I 1? ? ? a match in view for you; you must therefore give me your Avoid of honour you will enter into no engagements during your stay in England; as, all-accomplished as this lady may be, I hav r e unanswerable reasons for wishing you to marry a French woman, therefore remember I particularly desire you Avould steel your heart against Fitz¬ hayman's sister." " You may depend upon my obedience, Sir; and I here pledge my honour never to enter into any clandestine engagements; nor
tior will I, if I can avoid it, dispose of my heart but to her you have selected for my bride." " Enough, my Octavius, I rely upon your word. Your heart, like mine, may be rather wayward; still avoid, if possible, my errors, as the laely I have in view for you is in every respect worthy óf you. Do you wish to be introduced to lier before you go to England, by way of endeavouring to leave your heart in France r" " Then I certainly .should not enjoy my proposed excursion ; I had therefore rather defer an interview till after my return, which shall be heart-Avhole if I ' I know myself; at all events, I will coinè back a single man, and ready to lead the lady you have in view for me to the altar, as I have formed a very high G 6 opinion
opinion of her principles from Avhat you have said, and really make no doubt but avc shall be a very happy couple." " Believe me, I hope so," rejoined the Monarch ; "and a t ou reason so well upon the subject, that it shall be as you say, though I think you display veiy little curiosity." " Why, I doitt know how it is, Sir, but I am really fearful, Avere I to pay this laely a visit, with the best intentions in the Avorld e>f laying my heart at her feet, the mischievous little god woulel frustrate my excellent resolutions ; therefore instead of appearing a passionate lover I should t strike her a« being au insensible English¬ man, unworthy her notice; to avoid Avhich I think Ave had much better meet at the altar, according to the fashion of the country, as I think I shall appear to
to much greater advantage in the character of her husband than her lover." Both the King and favourite smiled at his fears; the former declaring his senti¬ ments would have been exactly similar, as he firmly believed no one had ever fallen in love because they hael been desired to doso; nay, he had his doubts whether he ought to have been so particular in prohibiting his marrying Lord Fitzhay¬ man's sister, as such measures sometimes brought about the very alliances they Avere intended to prevent. " My honour is engaged in the in¬ stance you all tuie to, Sir; therefore should I feel my heart in any danger I will not put myself in the way of temptation—that is in every one's power, to fall in love is not." " Agreed, agreeel," cried the Monarch; u I am
t u I am perfectly reconcileel to the idea of your paying your old friends a short visit. This is the finest season in the world for travelling ; but remember, I can't spare you for more than six Aveeks, or tAvo months at faithest, and that I shall expect to hear from you very often." " I will not exceed the first-mentioned period; and if my coircspondence can afford you any amusement, Sir, Ι ?? ill dedicate a part of every day to my pen.*' t£ Do so, and let me have your real opinion of Fitzhayman's sister. Suppose you are Avriting to a friend, and let con¬ fidence reimplace respect ; I shall consider it as much the greatest compliment you can pay me." ** Then I will not scruple to commit my
my most secret thoughts to paper, as I Avill endeavour to frame my actions by the rule of right ; but should I fail, I Avon't meanly palliate what I can't de¬ fend." A warm embrace Avas all the Monarch's answer, Avho suffered him at last to de¬ part, demring him to join the circle in the evening, when he supposed his friend would he presented, and advising their sleeping at Versailles, the Duke de St. Florentin having veiy good accommoda¬ tions for both, and he wished to see Lord Fitzhayman iu the morning. An hour conveyed our here home, Avhere he found his friend, who had alreaely arranged matters Avith the Ambassador for accompanying him to Versailles iu the evening, and felt very much gratified when he learnt he was to have a private audience
audience of the Grand Monarque in the morning, and still more so when Octavius informed him he had received permission to accompany him across the water, who merely added he had been ordcrccì to take care of his heart, but entered into no further details. " Why then, as London is now more brilliant than at any other season of the year, I don't care how soon we are upon the road ; I will take another opportunity of visiting Paris." " You had better decide at once to return with me," rejoined Octavius. tt Agi eed, if the Marquis has not made some arrangements for the summer our plan will derange." The fact was, Lord Fitzhayman began f ? entertain great hopes of becoming nearer related to his friend, who, on his side,
skle, Avas astonished at the strict prohibi¬ tion he had received not to connect him¬ self Avith Lady Helen Desmond, but presumed it originated in his having men¬ tioned her reported beauty, and the chance there appeared of their being often to¬ gether. In the evening Lord Fitzhayman ac¬ companied the Ambassador, liis friend, and the Duke de St. Florentin, to Versailles, Avhere, as usual, a most brilliant circle Avas assembled, among Avhom OctaA-ius shone superior; indeed the Viscount only Avonclereel he kept his priele within any bounds, Avhen he saw the general court paid him, and the favour in Avhich he stood with the King, to whom he had the honour of being introduced the fol¬ lowing morning, and of being compli¬ mented upon the friendship he had evinced for
for the young Duke, Avho, it Avas gaily hinted to him, Avas upon the point of marriage, therefore coulel not be permitted to spend more than a couple of months in England ; and as the friends hael agreed to set out on the following morning, Octavius took leave of his illustrious sire, Avho reminded him of his promise re¬ specting letters, Avhich was most cheer¬ fully reneAved ; and he vvas informed the court banker had orders to furnish him. with a letter of credit, &c. The friends therefore hastened to Paris to make their final arrangements respecting their journey. A packet of letters for Lorel Fitzhay¬ man hael been sent from the British Ambassador during their absence, one of Avhich was from a frienel of his Lordship's, who had been acquainted with his en* gagements Avith Lady Leonora, avIio, he protested^
protested, liad nearly fretted herself into a consumption since she had learnt the honours that awr.iteel the man she had so readily gÍA T en up when fortune appeared to frown upon him ; he therefore should not be surprised if he was to see her in Paris, as she already began to intimate that the air of France Avas much more salubrious than that of the foggy island she in- habiteel ; but, for his OAvn part, he feared nothing short of a tabouret* at Versailles, or a Marquisate in expectancy, would restore her bloom. The friends laughed at her Ladyship's not even being able to conceal her mor¬ tification, and at her intended journey, from Avhich she must be mad indeed if she hoped to reap any advantage; anel both
rejoiced
rejoiced at the idea of convincing her how completely they despised her. Octavius then paid a short visit to the Maréchal, Avho pointed out the suite he ought to travel with, &c. and the next morning the friends begun their journey, and reached Calais without anv thin«? occurring Avorthy a place in our history, though they had several times amuseel themselves with the idea of meeting Ludy Leonora driving post iu search of the much envied tabouret.
CHAP.
CHAR VII. UNPREPARED as the Marquis and Marchioness of Trelawney were for the reception of such a guest, Lord Fitzhay¬ man not having even wrote them word Avhen they might expect him, he could not press his friend to accompany him home; Octavius had,, therefore sent James forwarel to procure him accommodations at a hotel his Lordship had particularly re¬ commended, Avhither they drove upon their
their arrival, and out hero declared him¬ self very well satisfied with the rooms allotted for his use. Having seen him what he called com¬ fortably settled, Lord Fitzhayman pro¬ ceeded to Trelawney-House, in Grovesnor- Square, after promising to pay his friend another visit befoie he retired, though it was then near eight o'clock. Octavius requested he would not think of coming out again, as he meant to dedicate the evening to repose, though he should send the French Ambassador a few lines, to signify his intention of paying him his respects in the morning. As Lord Fitzhayman's carriage turned into Grovesnor-Square, he perceived several carriages setting 4İown arul driv¬ ing to and from his father's door, which favoured the design he had formed of 5 occasioning
occasioning his family an agreeable sur¬ prise; he therefore made the servants a si<m not to «five the alarm as he entered the hall, enquiring Avhether the Marquis Avas at borne. He Avas answered in the affirmative, and that a very large party Avere assem¬ bling, Avho had been invited to a ball, in consequence of Lady Hele -η Desmonds having been presenteei that Aery day at Court. The Earl Avas rather agreeably surprised, and particularly wished his friend could see his sister's figure in a ball-room, as he knew she was a most excellent élancer, and thought she Avoulel most likely appear to great advantage that evening, knowing few women had more taste in dress than the Marchioness, whom, he presumed, had presided at her toilette, antl been the selector
selector of her ornaments; he thcrefoie resolved to entice him to this/¿Vc, if he Avas at all oj)en to persuasion, and having so readily accompanied him to the ball at Dole, he fancied he had a kind of rkht to exact a similar favour from him; he therefore sent for his father's valet, and desired him to inform the Marquis in a Avhisper of his arrival, and his viish to see him alone for a few minutes. Lord Trelawney felt happy his son hael arrived so apropos, and immediately joined him in the library, Avhere he gave him a moot paternal welcome, and vsas entering into several details respecting his sister, Avhen the impatient Fitzhay man inter¬ rupting him, hastily related Avhen ami Avhere he hael met his juvenile friend, whom he hael accompanied to Paris, anil hy Avhom he had been introduced in private
prİA'ate to the Grand Monarque, avIio had graciously accedeel to their joint request, anel in consequence the Duke anel himself ' were just arrived in London, and he hael, fearful such a guest coulel not have been properly accommodated at Trelawney- House, left him at a hotel in Albermarle- Street. The Marquis had been one among the few who were really hurt when they learned the sudelen reverse of fortune our hero hael undergone, and Avould have been among first to have procured him some situation likely to secure him at least a competency, though he thought the Honourable Edmund Browning too much his inferior to have cr.couraged his visits in GroA*esnor-Square; it may therefore be supposed he avouUI not publicly have ad¬ mitted him after Lord Vilmore's confession, vol. ii. ? though
MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS. though privately, had occasion offered, he Avould have proved himself his friend ; nor avo u Id he have objected to Lord Fitzhay¬ man's becoming his protector, so long- as he did not lower himself by making too familiar with him in public. But now the case was totally altered; the Duke de Valentinois Avas the avo weel fa\ T ourite son of Lewis the Fifteenth, and appeared veiy likely to become one of the first subjects in France ; the acquaintance ofsuchaman, therefore, conferred honour upon every one Avho could introduce themselves to his notice ; it Avas, besides, national policy to treat him Avith every mark of respect ; and since Louis had noticed Lord Fitzhayman merely because he would have been his son's friend, had he stood in need of his assistance, it be¬ hoved him to convince the young Duke how
hoAV much he felt himself obliged to him for having represented his son in such a favourable light to the Grand Monarque ; he therefore desired Fitzhayman to return Avith all speed into Albermarle-Street, ordering his own chariot to be got ready for that purpose, Avhile he Avrote a few lines to Octavius, to request he Avould favour him and Lady Trelawney with his company to tea and supper, merely hint¬ ing he would meet a few of his former friends, as he Avas fearful he would object to joining so large a party, as being con¬ trary to etiquette, before he had appeared at Court ; butas the French Ambassador -would be among the guests, he Avould see, like everyone else, he had been taken by surprise, and would certainly rejoice could they prevail upon him to join the company· h % Fitzhayman
Fitzhayman was to seconel his father's invitation with all his eloquence, avIio promised to keep his arrival a secret, even from his mother and sister, till he re¬ turned. Away, therefore, drove the im¬ patient young Peer, who ran so ex¬ peditiously up the stairs leading into his friends apartment, he Avas quite out of breath, when lie entered the saloon, where Octavius, who, though naturally of an active disposition, felt often disposed to be indolent, laiel extended upon a large sofa, reading the news oftheekiA*. 6i Oh you lazy mortal!" exclaimed Fitzhavman as he advanced. t£ But I am come iu search of you—here is a note fremi my father—if you don't mean to break his heart you must comply Avith his Avishes ! lie Avould have come himself for he is more ? skive to etiquette than your
your father ; but I knew you could dis¬ pense with a ceremonious 'isit. Now, recollect, I made no objection, though 1 had travelled post across the Jurat, walked at least twenty miles, and come twelve in a machine certain 1 ν not calculated to remove my fatigue, to accompany you, though it Avas after midnight, to a ball ; therefore you must go home Avith me. My father's carriage is in waiting below, as I know your equipages are not yet appointed, so I will not take a denial. Γ woulel not wait to see my mother and sister—they Avere dressing, so I was · uu-, willing to derange them." tí Then I am feaiful it is more than ar friendly party you wish me to join." " Oh, I wont take upon me to say r that ; they are all friends of the family, in the rcal. t &qnsc of the Avorel,. becau^ ? 3 Lady
Lady Leonora M 'Dougall js/to be of the party.; so if you don't oblige me she will flatter herself vou dare not stand the blaze of her charms. " The bare idea made Octavius start up. " I knew I should pique your vanity," cried Fitzhayman, " so let's be going/' " You must alloAv me to make myself a little decent first/* " Then set about it immediately," ring«¿ ing the bell. *' I shall be at home, there¬ fore need not mind ; but I own 1 wish you to appear to advantage, to mortify Lady Leonora ; besides, who knoAvs, not¬ withstanding your sire's distant engage¬ ment, for do you think your father would really disapprove of your forming an alliance with an Englishwoman of rank and fortune ? He appears much too fond of you to wish to force your inclinations, and
and I am sure my father would agree to any terms ; and as for me, the bare idea of being nearer related to you gives me both life and spirits î James, take out a dress frock for your master, and every 8cc. m hile the prince of hair-dressers, for such I must stile Jasmin, puts his head to rights." Less than half an hour sufficed our hero to make the proposed alterations iu his firess, when the friends proceeded to Trelawney- House. How Lady Leonora would behave puz* ¿led them both; if she knew her own interest, she would treat the Duke with great reserve, and endeavour to bring back Lord Fitzhayman. ** But that would be proceeding diame¬ trically opposite to her principle*," ob¬ served the Earl, fl as her love rises and ? 4 falls
falls in proportion to the rank of her admirers ; and I must say there Avere Dutchesses at Versailles avIio did not fill their tabourets so gracefully as she would elo, for she certainly is a A'ery fine Avoman. " " Yes, a fìne statue," replied Octavius ; tí but I hope I shall meet with an agree¬ able companion when I do marry—I will dispense Avith my Avife's rendering herself the admiration of the Court." ' · I am fearful you will be a Spanish instead of a French husband." Λί Why, I am not of that opinion, as I have no prospect of marrying for love ; if I Avere, I believe I should be rather tormented Avith the green-eyed monster ; for the air of Versailles is not exactly that I. shoukl Avish a young and beautiful Avoman, Avhom I might adore, to breathe, as
as it is certainly more properly the séjour de ia volupté than de la virtu*" " My mother avíU be delighted with the elelicacy of your notions." The glare of flambeaux, crowd of ser¬ vants, and rattle of carriages, which he perceiveel and heard as they approached Trelawney-House, gave our hero some suspicions of the trick which his frienel hael played him, and he was taxing him with having deceived him Avhen they stopped at the door. The Marquis in full dress, as he hael been to St. James's, met them in the hall, and gave the young Duke a most flattering reception, request¬ ing he Avould allow him to introduce him to Laely Trelawney and Lady Helen Des¬ mond. There was no receding, and the Marquis gave so excellent a reason for the deception he hael himself permitted, th ( at ? 5 our
our Jiero Avas perfectly reconciled to the idea of making his appearance in the reception rooms in comparative dishabille. All the apartments upon the first floor Avere superbly illuminated, and croAvded Avith people of the first distinction. As the Marquis accompanied the young men up stairs, they entered unannounced, anel fol¬ lowed their'conductor to the upper end of the drawing-room, where the Marchioness and Lady Helen Avere seated. The former lady happened to be in very deep dis¬ course with her next neighbour, and the sort of bustle which the servants, who were handing the tea and coffee round, occasioned, prevented her noticing the approach of the strangers, till Lady Helen, having caught sight of Lord Fitzhayman, started from her chair, exclaiming ** My dear brother!" The Marchioness turned 4 her
her head, and beheld the Marquis close to her elbow, who immediately introduced her to the Duke de Valeutinois, mention¬ ing when he arrived in England, and how he and Fitzhayman had contrived to draw him into Grovesnor-Square. The Marchioness appeared very much surprised ; her colour varied several times, but at last she was able, though rather in a faul tering voice, to welcome his Grace to England, extending her hand at the same time to Fitzhayman, to whose un¬ expected arrival she attributed her visible emotion, »declaring he flid not deserve the joy she feltupoK his return, since he had immediately entered into a plot likely to make her appear both deficient in respeofc and politeness to his friend, to whom she again repeated her welcome in rather more coherent terms, 'und the Marquis pleading H ? equal
equal, guilt Avith his son, she gaily pro¬ nounced their joint forgiveness. Lady Helen was now introduced to our hero, of Avhom she retained but a very slight recollection ; but a second glance convinced her that the beautiful boy, whose late misfortunes she hael deplored, Avas grown one of the handsomest men she had ever beheld. Nor did the Duke think her brother had done her more than justice ; he was, therefore, obligeel to re¬ collect the promise he had made his father -while contemplating the lovely girl, who certainly hael every pretention to beauty her namesake of old is said to have pos¬ sessed, which made our hero resoh T e not ¿to seek a more intimate acquaintance with her, for fear, if her m inel correspondcel - Avith her features, he should be rendered miserable by a hopeless passion. The
The approach of the Marquis de Roche- srude Avas a sort of relief to him. That nobleman rejoiced very much to see him in England, and that their host had con¬ trived to make him break through the rigiel rules of etiquette, asking him his opinion of France, Bee. anel directing his eyes, by an imperceptible sign, towards Lady Leonora M 'Dougall, whose attention had been, perhaps unconsciously, fixed upon him from the moment of his entrance, which had rendered her nearly as much the object of general remark as himself, and Avhen he turned towards her she appeared with difficulty to preserve her composure, as her countenance varied incessantly/, and she sought to look every where but at the man upon Avhom she had been so intently gazing for the last ten minutes*
minutes. For a moment the Duke pitied her ; but when he recollected their last interview, and remembered hoAV she had treatetl his best friend, his heart Avas steeled against her; and as sWe was sur* rounded by several ladies, who were fre¬ quent visitors of Mrs. Browning's, some of Avhomwere present at the last dinner he had partook of in Vilmort^Hous«·, he advanced to pay his compIirtiénts f to them, and then turning towards Lady Leonora, he slightly enquired after her health. She made an effort to return the compliment— it Avas no more !—an inclination of her head was, therefore, the only indication of her having noticed his words, Avhen, purposely to increase her confusion, Lord TWzhayman drew near, and declared' his satisfaction at seeing her Ladyship look so-* well;* requesting she would remark hoAV aiuiuus
anxious her former slaves were to resume their chains ; adding, he had certainly a presentiment of the pleasure which aAvaited him at TrelaAvney-House—" Was your Grace equally fortunate?" turning to the Duke/Avhose expressive smiles were, if possible, more provoking to the high-born belle, Avhile he observed, the Earl appeareel to have been studying gallantry upon his traA r els. Had Lady Leonora dared, she would have retorted upon the handsome Duke, but she thought it more prudent, as she still aimed at making his conquest, to laugh off her vexation, and to endeavour to mix in the eom'ersation. The feeling part of the company rather pitied her, but the generality of those present merely/ thought she deserved the mortification slie harf met with, as every body was now inclined
inclined to blame her conduct towards the Duke de Valentinois, it having been rumoured that she had previously en¬ deavoured to ensnare the heir to the Marquisate of Trelawney. She was, Iioav- ever, relieved from any more of the Earl's sarcasms by the approach of a numerous boely of the Earl's friends, a great many of whom had professeel the same senti¬ ments for Edmund Browning ; and those who had not had an opportunity of con¬ vincing him that their regard depended more upon circumstances than his superior equalities, gladly renewed their acquaint¬ ance Avith the Duke de Valentinois, warmly congratulating him upon the olel Nabob's squeamish fit, and laughing at the disappointment of his successor, who was going to law to convince the Avorld that had his brother, sister, and himself, met
met with their deserts, they would long since have been all three pilloried, if nothing worse had fallen to their share. As Octavius was inclined to view the bright side of things, he returned his friends compliments with infinite good- humour, endeavouring to exonerate the deceased Peer and Mrs. Browning, par¬ ticularly the latter, who, he alledged, had only connived at what, considering the late Lord Vilmore's firm intention not to make his brother his heir, could only be termed an innocent deception, which the regard she had ever bore him had prevented her from disclosing ; declaring she had made him the most generous and unreserved offers after the discovery; though, had the late Lord Vilmore taken time to reflect, he was convinced he would never have put the scheme he had adopted into
into practice, as he could not have punished his brother more than by suffer¬ ing him to inherit an empty title. Every Avord that fell from our hero's lips met with applause, when the man of the greatest consequence among his for¬ mer acquaintance, and the one Avho had convinced him in what contempt he held him from the moment he had been deprived of the Vilmore title and estate», namely, the Marquis of DennbgtÔÔ, Söîî to the Duke of—, who had, un¬ fortunately as he now thought, met the humbled youth in Bond-Street, came forward to pay his respects to the man he sincerely wished had remained in that obscurity into Avhich he thought he bad fallen to rise no more. He felt unusually disconcerted, as he feared our hero's memory was very tenacious, and Avas conscious
conscious he should fiad it rather difficult to excuse the impertinent remaik he had made when they last met; endeavouring however *t# disguise his feelings, he pre¬ sented his hand to Octavius, inquiring after his health, and expressing his satis-' faction at seeing him once more İn Eng¬ land. " Your Lordship does me honour,** was the reply* " The last time we met you were so kind as to pity my presump¬ tion ; perhaps you are therefore now in¬ clined to instruct me how to look down upon my inferiors, as I think you com¬ plete master ofthat desirable science l* Utterly confounded by this unexpected rejoinder, the Marquis, whom octavias knew to be ? rank coward, at last stam« mered out— " He did not understand his Grace;'* aud,
and, had he dared, he would have attempted to have froAvned defiance even at this de¬ scendant of royalty ! tí I am sorry my memory is so good, Marquis, but I believe, like Henry the Fourth of France, I shall ever be inclined to speak my sentiments, though I don't pretend to say it is always consistent Avith politeness ; but I must acknowledge I felt myself hurt Avhen I discovered that Lord Vilmore's confession had deprived me of what I prized far beyond his title and estate, namely, a vast many of my friends ; though Lord Fitzhayman has convinced me it is possible for one man to esteem another eyen after Fortune has Avithdrawn ^her cherishing influence from the object of his regarei l' t¿ Good Heavens ! does your Grace allude to our rather unexpected meeting in
hi Bond-Street the day or two after the old Nabob's death, whose memory Avili be held in execration bv all honest men ? I remember the circumstance, and that I Avas in a very great hurry ; and I know I lamented that I Avas not just then at leisure to condole with you, and to offer you my services. I am shocked to death to think you should have so strangely misconstrued what escaped me, as nothing Avas farther from my intentions than either to offend orto wound your feelings." Octavius shook the humbled Peer very cordially by the hand, agreeing he might have been more punctilious just then than he should haA'e been at any other time, though he secretly rejoiced he had afforded him an opportunity of giving him a lesson which might prove of use to him. The commencement of the· ball put an cud
end to conversation, octavius Avished he could haA r e made any excuse for sitting still, but the plea of fatigue he knew Avould be deemed very insufficient, and might appear a slight to Laely Helen, who, if unengaged, he must lead out ; hoAvever, to his great joy, and to the no small mortification of his friend, the Marquis of Dennington had secured her hand before our hero joined the party ; even the Marquis of TselaAvney, Avhose vieAVSAvere become similar to those his son entertained, felt very much disappointed, and gave our hero to understand that Lord Dennington's behaviour towards him Avas of itself sufficient to exclude him from becoming his son-in-law. The heroine of the fete being thus disposed of, Octavius chose to sit still. Hi& friend could not, in his father s house, follow
follow his example ; he hoped, however, as Helen Avas a very fine dancer, she Avould make the Avished-for impression upon the Duke, Avho, as a spectator, Avas more at liberty to admire the precision of her movements and the grace she dis- played. Lorel Castleacre, avIio was among the guests, requesteel the Marquis to introduce him to our hero, Avith avIiohi he chatteel in the most lively manner till they Avere summoned to supper, soon after Avhich our hero made his parting boAV, the French Ambassador having offered to set him down ; but he Avas not suffered to depart till he hael promised to take a family dinner at Trelawney-House on the following Saturday. The Marquis, indeed, gave him a sort of general invitation Avhenever he Avas not otherwise engaged, which
Avhich the Marchioness politely seconded, though not Avith the same warmth his friend evinced, who promised to look in upon him between two and three, not supposing he Avould be stirring much earlier.
CHAP. VIII. A HE occurrences of this first evening he spent in London afforded him such ample room for reflection, Octavius found it impossible for some time to forget himself,
himself, and he now found the tiuth of Pope's maxim— " 'Tis fi om Y>l! life h'^h characters are ?????. ** A sai .t m ci?pe \? twice a saint in lawn ; t( A judge ii just, a chance! ¡or justei síül;" anel as for him, who was now the avowed son of a ninnai ch, his friends seemed to think hi. n wbiYC \\??, moie learned, moie just, more evei ? thing ; and, pei haps, had he never experienced anv iev r erse of for- tune, lie might have been inclined to fancy himself the fruitless monster the world appeared to believe hi in ; as it was, he was very much tempted to despise the herd of sycophants who hover rouud the great on purpose to countenance 4 their follies, laugh at their jests, and who, upon the slightest misfortune, are the first to slight the very man they were the day befoie ready to worship ; however, as lie vol, 1 1. ï thought
thought it Aviscst to take the Avorld as it was, Avithout troubling his head concern¬ ing Avhat it ought to be, he resol ved to be¬ lieve his friends sincere till they had, like Lorel Dennington, convinced him they had no real regard for him; and a French Vaudeville, which was much in A r oguc at Paris, seemed exactly/ to express his senti¬ ments :— ** Contentez vous åt Pappa- ence, t * Ne chei chez j» s îa quintessence j cí C¿iii vort trop voir et tiop «ivoir, " Trouve souvent plus qu'il ne pense. Having come to this determination, he composed himself to sleep, and had the house been as quiet as the pavillion he inhabited in Paris, he might possibly have slept till very late in the day ; but having been once awoke he found it impossible to forget himself again, therefore rose be¬ tween eleven and twelve, and had just begun
begun breakfast Avhen James, oi\ as he AA^as now styled, Wilson, announced Loid Vilmore and Mr. Browning, his coun¬ tenance, though respect prevented him from making any remarks, evincing his aston isiimen t at their assurance. Octavius did not attempt to restrain a smile, desiring him to show the gentle¬ men in, though, after what had passed between him and the Peer, and what he had told Mr. Bro v. ning at Dole, he was, like Wilson, rather surprised at his seek¬ ing to renew the acquaintance. In ? ????/ few seconds they n\ade their appearance. Our hero received them with politeness, but as total strangers. Lorel Vilmore's usual confidence rather forsook him, when he found himself once more in the presence of the youth he had taken such pains to humble during their last ι 2 in tei view;
interview ; he was, therefore, at a loss how to begin, but expressed his satisfac¬ tion at seeing his Grace in England, and ATnturcd to congratulate him upon ??? recent occurrences, Avhich bari restored him to his father, ke. and at last en¬ deavoured to apologize for his conduct after his brother s death, hoping his Grace would make allowances for the state of mind he was in at the time he alluded to, when, he was fearful, some worils might have inadvertently escaped him, which his Grace, considering his situation, might have deemed harsh and unfeeling, though he really, from being hardly himself, could not recollect a word of what had past ; but he coulel safely aver he should have been comparatively satisfied hael his late brother u ade him (the Duke) his heir, which woull have certaiuly been doing
doing no more than his duty, because, though his tardy confession had restored his Grace to his illustrious father, he had done him a most irreparable injury in havine: so Ions: Avithheld him from his country anel friends. He then expatiated very warmly upon the unjust hatied liis brother anel sister hael ever borne him, and upon the expectations he had foimed of the Duke's generosity w hile he supposed him his nephew, declaring that he had once, when he thought himself dying, beeu upon the point of sending for hia Giace, to whom he haef intended to recommend his children ; but he blessed God they were now able to make their wav throiurh the world, and, he hoped, he should be able to suppent his title with decency, if not with the same splendor his brother had done; indeed he v\as rather in ι 3 expectation
expectation of having his services re- Avarded w ¡th a pension— u But your Grace Avill very justly think," he continued, <t that I am intruding upon jour time for Axry little purpose, when,Jn fact, I merely took the liberty of calling upon you to apologize for my own behaviour in Poitland-Place, and for my son's at Dole, as he informs me that, very unconscious of your Grace's rank, he made use of an ewpiession, while you were having the gates opened for his admittance, he is fearful you construed into a design to affront the officer upon duty, Avho, it seems, proved to be the person, of all others, he would least have expected to have met with in Francke Comté. He tells me he waited upon your Grace the following morning, and fiom what then passed he entertains the moat sei ious fears of
of having increased your displeasure through his in aei verten ??, as you gave him to understand you meant to support Mrs. Browning in the suit I ha\e in¬ stituted against her, in which, I own, I hoped to have had )our complete con¬ currence ; therefore may I hope your Grace will condescend to accept our jon. t apologies, and u ill permit me to waif upon you with my counsel, who have ex¬ pressed a very great Avish to be favoured Avith an interview, as they are particularly desirous to avoid sa\ing any thing in court respecting your Grace, except ¡t first meets > our approbation r I therefore took the cai liest opportunity of mention¬ ing this to you, as í did not hear of your arrival in England before this morning; and I must oAvn I am very anxious to convince }ou I wish to punish my sister 1 4 more
more upon your account than mvown: indeed 1 am merely actuated by a desire to deter other families· from entérine: into .similar conspiracies against any of its mem hers." With a degree of patience he was haidly aware he possessed, (Xtraius sat listening to this very prolix harangue, and when t-oid Vilmore ceased speaking, he assured him he could very readily have dispensed with the apologies he had thought it necessary to make, as he never har¬ boured resentment against any man, and was therefore very ready to bury the past in oblivion, but must beg leave to be excused from seeing his counsel, s he could not conceive himself at all con¬ cerned in the suit he had thought fit to institute against Mrs. Browning, and must also beg leave to hint that his father ?\???1
would certainly not approve of his name being brought forward in a court of justice; nor did he think he would find it so easy a matter to punish his sifter for having, out of regard to the deceased, connived at his having adopted him in¬ stead of his own son ; and for his own part, far from conceiving himself to have been injured by that Lady, he should ever consider himself as greatly obliged to her* However, had he been in Lord Vilmore's place, he should have endeavoured to have concealed, instead of blazoning, her sliare in the deception to the world, as he had now taken a very sure method to prevent the large fortune she had at her disposal fron centering in his family— * And uki ought to recollect," he continued, " ?? ?\\1\ have it in her power to make you s ¿ cud no inconsiderable sum ia law, should 1 3 JOUy,
you, which I much doubt, be able to gain your cause. She did not remove me from Bavswater ; and in law there is a conrit'cvihle difference made between the advi<M· and tbe»- pe: petraror of a deed; Lee ause I mi;»;hr advise you to speak treason, yet you would be punished for so doing, not me. The late Lord Vilmore confessed İt was in consequence of her suggestions that he substituted me in the place of his son ; but will Lorel Dum¬ barton take upon him to affirm he was absolutely in his senses when he made that assertion ? and he is the only evidence you can bring forward. But 1 will admit the fact to be established. Mrs. Brown· ing may yet baffle all .our schemes. ???! she known who were my parents when she connived at the imposition, she would have been much more criminal ; not that it
it Avould have increased the degree of guilt you charge her with. Howev r er, to have done with the subject, I repeat what I told Mr. Browning at Dole, that I will 3ieA r er appear against the protector of my infancy, the friend of my youth, the Avoman, in short, Avho would have ( ren¬ dered me independent Avhen so many others tried to aggravate my distress; therefore gratitude forbids my ever join¬ ing in a league against her, though your Lordship may command my best services- if you thiuk, as I do, that a reconciliation Avith your sister (whom I mean to see before I sleep, if she is in London) will be far more conducive to your interest than. proceeding in a suit which must even* tually terminate in your own dishonour admitting you to have justice, law, and equity, all on your side." ι 6 Lord
Lo; d Vilmore's countenance had varied several times while listening to his sister's defender ; he was, however, able to thank the Duke with a tolerable «race for having: o cr spoken his sentiments so candidly, anel for his offers of becoming a mediator be¬ tween him and his sister, whose conduct by no means appeared to him in the same favourable light it did to his Grace ; nor diet he entertain any hope of ever bring¬ ing matters between them to an amicable issue, because, except she put him into immediate possession of his late brother's fortune, he Avould suffer the kw to take its course. " Would her compliance with your unreasonable demands, Lord Vilmore, exonerate her from her share in the al¬ leged fraud ?" askeel the indignant Octa¬ vius. ** Only take care you don't afford Mrs.
Mrs. Browning a pica to recriminate upon you, )ou are not aware of; for 1 bi lieve, to threaten any one with a law-suit in hopes of extorting money from them is reckoned rather a »erious matter." iC Your Grace quite misunderstood, me," stammered out Lord Vilmore. "No concessions my sister coulel make should divert me from my purpose ; but I will not take up any more e>f your Graces time," bowing very politely. His son followed his example. The Duke rung to have their carriage calleei up, and thus ended an interview from which the Peer had hopeel to elei ive the most material advantage. The moment, however, they drove from the door, he swore a most terrible oath, that if he last his suit through the means of that d ------ d impudent French bastard he woulel be revengeelj
revenged, though the attempt might cost him his life; and that he was too staunch a Browning to depart from his vow the foliou ing pages will convince the reader. But he now perceived, the Peer continued, Avhat hael brought the young upstart over «—he was come on purpose to support the old Jezabel, whose fortune he hoped to inherit. His son assented to all he said. It having been necessary for Lord Vil¬ more to gain the Earl of Dumbaiton, upon whose evidence much dependcel, over to his side, he hael useel such able arguments to convince the Caledonian not only of the justice of the cause», but also that he should, in all probability, be able to set aside that abominable will, and hael made such promises, that a sort of offensive and defensive league hael ???? entered into between them; indeed the Earl
Earl had particularly advised his paying this cirlv \bit to the favoured minion, as they sb led our hero, because, could Lord Vilmore win him over to his interest,, it would be a very great point ga'wied, and he could be no lo^er from courting his friendship ; indeeel, even to learn whose side he meant to be of would be of service to him. To that nobleman's therefore Lord Vil¬ more droA r e, after he had met with the A 7 ery severe mortification our hero haei indicted upon him. The Earl agreed it was very unfortunate circumstances had turned out as they had done. Had the Duke been less strongly supported, they might have hit upon some method to bring him over to their way of thinking, as it was, they must eneleavour, ditlicult as he foresaw it vould be, to invalidate his qvideuce. o Lady «
Lady Leonora, from whom they had learned our hero's arrival in England, and who of course knew of the intended visit, Avas very anxious to learn the particulars, and whether her name had been mentioned, as she Avas resolved to leave no stone un¬ turned to shine Dutchess of Valentinois. Her father was to protest it was purely in obedience to his orders she had treated his Grace so coolly during their last in- tervicAV. How far these assertions Avould coincide with their joint declarations to their friends they diel not* Ave must sup¬ pose, consider, or, perhaps, they buoyeel themselves up with tlie reflection that loAcrs are the most credulous of mortals. Her Ladyship in particular thought it Avould be an attempt worthy her talents to bring this descendant of monarchy once moie to her feet, though she Avas well aware
aware she should have many difficulties to encounter. The ii 4m ??? subsisting be¬ tween our hero and Lord Fitzhayman was all against her, as she guessed the hopes and views both him and his father entertained. Could she but have known what was the Duke's ruling passion, her conquest would have been comparatively secure. Her talents for intrigue being however well known to both her father and Lord Vil¬ more, she was admitted to the conference, when it was agreed that this acknowledged and favoured hero would be tlie most desirable husband her Ladyship could ever meet with, because, once his wife, she would have it in her power to relieve both her father and h U friend fiom those verv unpleasant embarrassments they both, more or less, laboured under. It was, theieforc,
therefore, their joint interest to accelerate so desirable an ev-ent by every means in their power. A trusty spy was therefore to be engaged to watch all his Grace's move¬ ments, that Lady Leonora might take her measures accordingly, as she enter¬ tained great hopes that three or four in¬ terviews Avould render him as much her slave as ever. These assurances helped to keep up the spirits of both her father and his friend, as the latter could not Avith any degree of honour put a stop to the suit he had com¬ menced against his sister, except she made him proposals it would be to his interest to accept, and from what the Duke had said he thought this might prove the case. Having come to these various resolutions, the
tlie council broke up, after agreeing to meet often, and to continue to be guided by circumstances, trusting they should, notwithstanding the present un¬ favourable appearance of things, yet see the Duke uniteel to Lady Leonora, and Lord Vilmore in possession of that for¬ tune he had so long and so earnestly coveted.
CHAP.
???? ??????^^?- ???????? ???????
CHAP. IX. w UR hero had scarcely got rid of Avhat he deemed his troubleaome guests, Avhen Wilson brought him a letter, the direc¬ tion of which convinced him it came from the same lady, Avho had been in a great measure the occasion of his having been so speedily able to convince the Duke de St. Floremin of his identity. *' From whence came tliis?" be de* manded Avith evident anxiety. " A chair-
" A chairman this moment brought it, your Grace, and left wot d that it required no answer," *' Very avcII," he replied, instantly breaking tlie seal and reading as follows :
tÉ TO THE CHILD ?? MY .AFFECTION, '* For such I must ever term the son of my best friend. M'ho and what I am, name excepted, you have learned from the Duke de St. Florentin, and I wish to convince vou that the hne I once bore your mother makes mc interested iu every thing that concerns the Duke ele Valentino»». Your father has nobly kept the promises he made my friend; and I rejoice to hear that you mem lo evince your gratitude by the most unconditional obédience towuiels weh a parent ; I am therefore
therefore convinceel I need not remind you that your word stands pledged to enter into no clandesti.ie engagements duiingyour sta) in England; because, in¬ dulgent as your father has, and will, I prognosticate, continue to prove himself, he will not forgive what he would j'jvjy deem a breach of honour. It is said hy a very eminent writer, that the greatest proof or' friendship is to endeavour to keep those we love to their duty, 1 therefore, avIio am inaely" actuated by the siuceic regaid I feci for you, Avish to induce you to perseveie in the right road, bear there- fuie particularly iu mind—that * f ?????** ? 5?«?? tie, tiv luv of k'iigs, ** The n- ?? miad's d^tinguibhlug pn?rfectioii, *« TU-t aids and btttn^ihens virtue w U-n it meets bfr» ** And imita'?» her uctiuui wneic she is rwt» Therefore « 0%ht not tQ ? svmteÅ with." 11 But
lt But I forget I am addressing a youth, Avho, I have been assured, never design¬ edly forfeited his Avoid ; excuse therefore my well-meant zeal, anel impute it not to mistrust, but to the anxiety I feci to render you the first of men ; be careful therefore in the choice of your friends, for on that much depends. You have already experienced that some people con¬ sider friendship as an affair of self-interest entirely, and that the proper motive for engaging in it is not in order to gratify the kind and benevolent affections, but for the benefit of that assistance and sup¬ port which is to be derived from the con¬ nection. Do not, however, fancy, because you have*, in common Avith every one else, met u ith people of that opinion, that there are no sincere friends· You possess one of your own age in Lord Fitzhayman—a very zealous
zealous Mentor in the, Maréchal ¿dc Belzors — a kíntí jiultlgenr frièml îr thé Duke4e St Florentin —not to mention myself; and that I am actuated by even more than friendship I call Heaven'to wuuess ï ** To caution you respecting Lady f lelt τ*. Desmond 1 should deem an affront. { trust lier mother, whe entertains far lets ambitious hopes than her father and bio- ther, and wb«* reitamly would never con¬ sent 'to her residing in France, w iii -nut a check to any chimerical notion» her daughter may gleau from liei brother, bv pointing out the ??? likelihood there must be ot your being permitted to select a bride from among the British belies,* at all events,, be it ywir care to raise no hope« in the charming girls bosom honour for¬ bids you to realize ; and bear wed iu-mind that virtue Itself escapes not calumnious strokes.
strokes. Avoid her presence, therefore, ???????'??^?? tlan do so Avithout affecta* &, é> P š % tion. Oh that I may live to hear your father more envied for being blest with such a son than for his rank. At present l'i „ l you are SAveet Fortune's mirror and her priele; and that yuu may ever continue so iL shall be my „constant prayer. To address * ν*Λ= *^< ^P 1 " you in ou? first baufs language, than Avhich none is more appropriate to my purpose— <* Give thy thoughts no tongue, *' N-r any öKproport'oned th»'¡glu his act. ** The frtenJs ïliou hast, and their adoption tried, ** Grappk them ta thy soul with hooks of steel. " Give every man thine ear, but &w thy vcke. " This above aH, to thine own sdf be true— *< And ît must fellow, as the night the day, " Thou can'st not then be false to any ???.** " To desire you avouUI beware of Lady vol. ? ? ? Leonora
Leonora M 'Dougall must be very need» less, as she shewed herself to you in too glaring colours ever to deceive you a seconel time, though I need not tell you she has a plotting head, and that she will be powerfully assisted, as you arc a prize she would glory in securing. But I can't refrain from cautioning yoa against Lord Vilmore—why, I haidly know, but I think that man is and ever was your ?????? He has no doubt heard of his sister's late present ; she also publicly de¬ clares she shall make you her heir : accord¬ ing to that man's character, therefore, he must hate you; let me intreat, therefore, you would be upon your guard against him, though I hardly know what you can haA'e to fear ; still I dread him as from instinct; but I don't wish to infect you with my womanish fears. To his sister I avouUI
would have vou behaA-e as your heart directs, and so adieu—but remember, I desire you will burn thisLtter the moment you have read it, if you ever expect to receive a second from u Mentoria. fr I repeat my reejuest, that you would commit this epistle to the fiâmes the moment you have looked it over, and exact from your honour that you never mention me, except to your father, as you don't know the injury you might do me were you to show my Avritin«· to any person in England ; but I trust you bear too much resemblance to Henry of Navarre Hot to comply Avith the commands of a female. "
? lì Not
Not contented with reading this friendly epistle over once, Octavius perused it the .second time ; he then rose, and with sonic reluctance committed it to the flames, though he hoped he should ever bear the contents in his memory, anel mentally offered up a prayer for the writer, resolv¬ ing to convince her her advice was not thrown away upon him, by; strictly ad¬ hering to the rules she had laid elo w n for his conduct towards Laely Helen Des¬ mond. As for Lady Leonora M 'Dougall, he despised lier too much to render any of her attempts to regain his heart suc¬ cessful ; and Lord Vilmore, how impotent must be his revenge, though he should endeavour to point out to Mrs. Browning the policy of consenting to a reconcilia¬ tion with this second Shylock, a\ ho ap¬ peared more intent upon gratifying his hatred
hatred than iu endeavouring to promote his interest. He Avas still absorbed in reflections re¬ specting this female friend, Avho appeareel so anxious to preserve his fame, when Lord Fitzhayman cnteied his apartment, telling him he shouhl have waited upon him an hour sooner if he had not been afraid of disturbing him. The Duke wished he had paid him an earlier visit, that he might haA'e had an opportunity of seeing Lord Vilmore and his travelling companion Mr. Browning, relating the heads of tlieir conversation. ít Oh what would I have given to have been piesent," replied the Earl; " how¬ ever, I rejoice you sent them away lather humbler t hali they came in.—But how do you dispose of yourself to-day ?" <r Why I am first going to the Marquis ? J de
dc liochegiule's ; from thence I mean to go into Portland-Place ; but I shall dine and sup at home. I can't ask you to favour me with your company." " Then I will give it you unasked," was the answer; " so at what o'clock do you mean to dmc ?" " Nay, if you have no better engage¬ ment, e'en walk with me to the Am¬ bassador's and into Portland-Place. My first is a mere friendly visit, and I should like to have some one present during my interview with Airs. Bfo wning." " Agreed, I am your orders." The Marquis de Rochegude was at home, and gave the friends the sort of reception they expected—settled with the Duke respecting his presentation at St. James's the ensuing week, and engaged them both to dine with him on the Sunday. From
From thence they proceeded into Port¬ land-Place. The porter, the same who had lİA'ed there in the late Lord Vilmore's life-time, informed them Mrs. Browning was at the Abbey, and had been but very poorly for the last fortnight, owing, it Avas supposed, to her fretting about the law-suit her brother had begun against her, as he never let her have a moment's peace, being continually sending letters or lawyers to perplex and worry her, in hopes of teazing her into any terms, most people supposed. He then ventured to congratulate our hero, throwing out A*arious hints expressive of the sovereign contempt in which he held the needy Peer, Avho was moving heaven and earth to get possession of what he hoped would never ^all to his share. ? 4 Having
Having irade tlie man a present hi return for the zeal he had always expressed in our hero's and Mrs Brown i n sf s defence they left the î ouse, Octavius telling him he should pay his mistress a visit at the Abbey early in the following week, and the evening was dedicated by tlie friends to laughing ever Lady Leonora's and Lorel Dennington'sdiscomfiture. The for¬ mer had taken an opportunity to give Ladv Helen to understand she found she had deceived herself, when she fancied she was merely actuated by duty, aí hen she was going to form an alliance Avith Mr· Browning, or else he Avas so much altered $οτ the better she no longer saw him with the same eyes. " Theiè she spoke truth," observed our hero. " Cut could she find no better excuse
excuse for having altered her sentiments? I am afra iel lier talent for intrigue is beginning to fail her.'* t * It may be worn out," replied the Marquis; ¿í besides, Avhat can she say, after having called heaven and earth to witness that she never diel love vou? how can she retreat with honour ?" " Oh, she is not Avorth talking about." *' That is very true. What think you of Helen?" " Why, had 1 been at liberty to make my own election, we should have been brothers; as it is, I must perforce con¬ sider her in the same light I Avould a be¬ loved sister ; however, she so exceeds my expectations I shall keep as much as possible out of her way." " Then do you suppose your father would condemn your choicer** ?. 5 <t Certainly
" Certainly not, if he had not already pitched upon another lady for my wife* ; but he is prejudiced iu favour of the French belles, and my honour is engaged, therefore 1 must avoid putting myself in the way of temptation." " Well, I believe you are right ; be* skies, my mother avouUI never consent to *her elaughter's leaving the kingdom ; this she told both my father and mc this morning ; and the Marquis is too much attached to her to think of marrying Helen without her entire approbation ; and she Avill have it that you will be happier Avith a French Avife and Helen with an English husband, as she does not thiuk Versailles, any more than you do, the purest air for a young woman to breathe ; she, besides, pointed out the impropriety of my en¬ deavouring to bring about a match betAveen you
you and my sister after Avhat your father had told me, (which by the Avay she forced me to acknoAvledge) that I was perforce obliged to confess I Avas acting Avrong in trying to seduce you from the paths of duty. My sister was not present during this conversation, and, if I judge right, you need not absent yourself from TrelaAvney-House upon Helen's account, as I fancy my mother, who I believe Avoulel not survive her absence a month, Avili keep her as much as possible out of your way, for fear she should draw comparisons, Avhich must termmate in your favour ; however, since th« Fates, repre¬ sented by your father and my mother, appear to have set their faces against our becoming nearer related, AveAvill endeavour, as friends, to emulate Homets or Virgils heroes. " ? 6 " Or
" Or the more modern Guston and Bayard,' π plied our hero. " No matter v\ hat model we take, so long as we do but act up to our mutual professions. But remember, the conversa¬ tion 1 have been, relating was not intended to be repeated to you, as my mother declared, Avere von an Englishman she should chuse you among . ten thousand ; but unfortunately, the very high favour you enjoy at Versailles is among her chief objections to your becoming her son-in- law." * t She reasons like an excellent mother," teplied the Duke, ' c and I shall feel happier at being permitted to cultivate dier ac¬ quaintance." At an early hour, as they both wanted rest, the friends separated ; but before be retired, our hero wrote a very long letter to
to his father, niinutelv <Lta : îiiu>· everv occurrence wliich had taken place since his arrival in London, and conci udi »g by promising to keep a regular journal, which he would transmit to Paris from time to time; and though he was fearful his father would often have reason to disapprove of his conduct, he assured him he would never «ti ve. him reason to blush for that son he had so greatly honoured, as he should ever remember that men of his rank tí stand at another bar than that of h\v$. tf
CHAP.
P=ji. p.. , asa
CHAP. X. JL HE next day OctaA'ius dined by ap^ pointment in Grosvenor-Square. Lady Helen had caught a slight cold the night of the fete, therefore did not make her appearance at table ; but both the Marquis and Marchioness vied with each other in civility towards their guest. The Sunday the Duke and Lorel Fitz¬ hayman spent at the Ambassador's ; and as his Grace hael no particular engagement for
for the Mondty. he requsted the Earl Avou 1 '. aocomp n y him to Vil more-Abbey, Avhich m as about fivc-and-thirty miles distant from London, upon the confines of Hertfordshire, in Avhich county the house stood, though great part of the estate Avas in Bedfordshire. He merely meant to go and return, not intending to spend more than a couple of hours Avith the good lady. The Earl, whose inclination prompted him to spenel every hour during his stay in England in his company, and Avho hael besieles receiveel an intimation from his father to deAOte his Avhole time to his friend, neeeled no entreaties to comply Avith his request, though he thought they ought to dine Avith the poor old spinster; nay, he was for their spending their even¬ ing and night at the Abbey, as he was convinced
convinced it would prolong hi r life ; be¬ sides, he should like to walk over the scene of his friend's juvenile sports. It Avas therefore agreed their stay should elepenel upon circumstances, anel by ten the next morning they were upon the road. James had ??????! leave to attend his master on horseback, in addition to those servants who generally followed him, as he was anxious to see his olel friends in that neighbourhood. His petition was readily granted, and by half past one they drove into the noble park Avhich surrounded the superb mansion, anel which, the Earl agreed, A/as handsome enough to make Loid Vilmore break the tenth commandment. James had rotte forward from Baldock to prepare Mrs. Browning for the approach 6 of
of her guests, avIio received them upon the steps, and hael our hero been her son, she coulel not have given him a kinder reception. We must acknowleelge she had for a few hours flattered herself it was possible she might figure as his bride, but the silly notion soon A*anished, and she hael resolved to support him in splendor and independence Avithout requiring any thing more than his friendship in return. She now shed tears of joy, while she thanked him again and again for this kinel, this friendly visit. Nor was she inattentive to Lord Fitzhayman. Having partook of a variety of refresh¬ ments, and agreed, at her earnest intreaty, to stop dinner with her, and finally ail night, and our hero having answered the hundred and fifty questions she hael to ßsk him concerning France, his father, &c.
kc. &c. she begun to talk about her own affairs. The Duke related his accidental meeting with Mr. BroAvning, and what had passed between them, and lastly, mentioned the visit his father and himself had paid him since his arrival in London, and tlie advice he had given, ori ering Mrs. Browning to act as mediator between them, if she hael any wish to bring the matter to an amica¬ ble issue. Not the slightest, she assured him, as he had put himself so completely in her power, her men of the law, and they were the first in England, assured her she had nothing to fear, admitting he could proA-e eveiý charge he had brought against her, aud producing a number of letters from his Lordship, all tending to threaten her into an accommodation, Avhich she vowed she never
never Avould listen to, nor should he ever touch one farthing of that fortune he was endeaAOuring to frighten her out of; alledging that, independent of his treat¬ ment of her, she had pledged her word of honour to the deceased to make a A'ery different disposition of his money ; still she felt herself very much obliged to his Grace for his considerate kind offers, but she was resolved to abide the issue of the suit, even if Lord Vilmore carried it into every court in the kingdom ; though she acknowledged that, Avhat between her own and Lord Vilmore's lawyers, she was nearly harassed to death. Indeed our hero had been astonished at the alteration her personal appea* ance had undergone since he had last seen her, and could not help thinking her great in¬ crease of wealth did not appear to have contributed
contributed to her felicity. Indeed, in his opinion, a decent competency, honestly acquired, afforded the possessor greater comforts than millions to Avhich their right Avas disputed ; not that he supposed Lord Vilmore could ever be able to set his brother's ?? ill aside, still he might prevent Mrs. Browning from enjoying those riches he so much coveted, there¬ fore, though in her place, he shoukl haA'e purchased peace at any price. The dinner Avas served in the usual style of magnificence which had ever prevailed at the Abbey during the late owner's life¬ time, after which our hem and the Earl walked over the pleasure grounds, Sec. and conversed with the gardeners, who all regretted they had lost so good a master. Nor had they anv of them reason to think him deficient iu point of generosity. At nteht
night he took up his quarters in his olel fc apartment by his own desire, Avhich afforded him such ample scope for reflec¬ tion upon the past, the present, and the future, that he did not enjoy much repose, and after an earl ν breakfast the Earl and himself took leave of tlieir hostess, who Avas drowned in tears' w hen the moment of separation arrived, as she felt a presenti¬ ment she should never sec her beloveel young frienel again— <l However, Gods vuil be done/' she proceeded. " Five days since I settled all my worldly affairs; therefore if my malicious brother should hasten my death, he will be no gainer by that event, as I have taken the liberty to appoint you, my dear Octavius, (excuse the freedom) my executor, having, iu compliance with the sacred promise I made my poor weak brother Edmund, made you
you my sole heir He extorted a voav to that effect from me Avhen he maele the w r ill under which I inherit his estates, in ca>e his heart or mine should fail us, and induce is to reveal that secret Ave had promised to carry to our graves with us. How joyfully have I fulfilled my wore!. But remember, Octavius. should you make aver even one shilling to my worthless brother or hi-* descendants, I am well con¬ vinced neither I nor the deceased shall ever rest in our graves ! Nay, I do think, were it permitted, I should visit you again to reproach you with having acted so contrary to the spirit of my will ; there¬ fore, for God's sake, for my sake, and as you vaine my peace of mind both in this world and that to come, as you wish to coimnce me you have sincerely forgiven mc, and by the love you once bore me, I solemnly
solemnly thus on my knees conjure you to comply Avith my last wishes !" " Rise, I entreat, my dear madam," rejoineel the Duke, assisting her to recover her erect posture, " and believe that, much as I feel myself obliged to both you and the deceased, I had infinitely rather you would, by making your nearest rela¬ tions your heirs, purchase at least present tranquillity." " Never, so help mc God! I know you want nothing I have to bestow upon you ; but I wish you to have it still more iu your power to follow the dictates of your generous disposition ; besides, I have sworn the money shall be youf^ Would you have me pei jure myself? If therefore you have a mind to render my last moments happy, give me your Avortl you will comply with my last desile 1" To
To calm her agitation, and by way of reconciling her to herself, the Duke pro¬ mised to confoi m to all her vvbhcs, pro* vided he could do it with honour; but he hoped she woulel yet live many years to enjoy w hat she w as so eager to bestow upon him. ** A thousand thanks, thou best beloved child of my adoption ! I know you will hold a our word sacred ; and I trust vou av ill find neither 1 nor my poor brother ever Avished you to deviate from the paths of honour ; but I repeat, avc »hould neither of us re^t even in our graves were there a possibility that Thomas should inherit any part of our fortunes. As for the suits he lungs out hi terrorens I laugh at his malici¬ ous efforts to ruin my fame, anel dishonour himsdf. You, my dear Duke, aie the only person I ever wilfully injured, since I shut
I shut both my eyes and ears to prevent my discoATiing Avho Avere your parents; but since you have forgiven me, my mind is at case. Let Thomas pursue his machi¬ nations, they will only emì in his own confusion ; and I prognosticate, mark my Avorels, Octavius, and you, my Lord, that he will come to an untimely end.'* Their carriage having been some time in waiting, they renewed their adieus, the Duke giving her h "? address, and requesting she would make as free with him as she had ever done while fie sup¬ posed himself her nephew, as he still did, ami ever should, consider her as his aunt* At last, however, he Avas permitted to depart, after promising to spend a few days with her before he left Engl uni The reception she bad given them, and the promise she had extorted from hr$ vøl. ii. ? Grace
Grace at parting, afforded the friends subject for conversation during their drive back to town, and he readily agreed to dine en famille at Trelawney-House. The Marquis and Marchioness Avere by no means astonished at the disposition Mrs. Browning intended to make of her property; and if she had entered into the engagements she said, she coulel not act otherwise ; besides, as neither she nor her brother had inherited any part of their property from their father, they conceived they were at full liberty to dispose of it how they chose. Lady Helen was present this time, and certainly appeared as beautiful as before, but she Avas rather deficient in point of vivacity, our hero thought, and apjieared, notwithstanding the excellent education she had received, to be but too sensible of her
her superior charms. Noav, as this Avas one of his own failings, he Avished the Avoman he married to admire her husband more than she did herself. A couple of hours of an CA r ening he devoted tei his journal, in Avhich he laiel his heart thoroughly open for his fathers inspection, having resolved to consider him as his confidential friend, and not to conceal a thought from him. He Avas the more inclined to be thus candid, from knowing few men Avere more likely to make alluAvunces for the follies of his age· At th'* appointed time he made his appearance at Court, after which he mixed, as heretofore, Avith the beau monde, where he now appeared Avith the greatest eelat, and, had he been so Inclineel, might have made a few conquests t hut he was more inclined to offer up a petition at the ulirtne ¿£ of
of indifference than at that of love ; and having escaped heart-free, though he hael now repeatedly encountered the bright eyes of the fair Helen Desmond, he be¬ gan to hope he shouhl return to France rather anxious to fulfil his impending en¬ gagement. His father's letters, in return for that part of his journal whieh he haei already sent over, were perfectly calcu¬ lated to make him persevere iu all his excellent resolutions ; as they were so ex¬ pressive of satisfaction, and so very enter¬ taining, he journalized with encreasing spirit, draAving the most lively portraits of the then fashionable manners, and dis¬ criminating very justly between the pre¬ valent folibs of both nations. Thus the second week of his residence m London imperceptibly passed away, and without bringing Lady Leonora s desigus upon
upon his heart to bear, because, though ha met her in many places, he never noticed her more than Avas sufficient to convince her she was viewed b v liim with the most complete indifference, while Lorel Fitzhavman addcel to her mortifica- tion by perpetual allusions to their former correspondence*
1 3 chap:
CHAP. XL Masquerades were at this period much less frequent than they are at present, but the public papers had for some time announced one, which was to be held at the Opera-House on the Thurs¬ day in the third week of our hero's residence in London—go, therelore, he must, said all his fashionable friends. He had no sent of objection to the amuse¬ ment,, but declared he Avas too Jazy to support
support a character, and,- he understood, dominos were not to be admitted. Loi d Fitzhavman vowed it woulel be a htigma upon his national character if he refused tojóin the motley throng. So said the Marchioness of Trelawney, at whose house the debate took place the preceding Tuesday. " Did she intend to be there?" he enquired. " No, she thought herself too old and her daughter too young ; but as he had no such prudential motives to keep him, at home, she requested he would bring them a very accurate description of every thing worthy notice; besides," she added in a gayer tone, " Lady Leonora M'Dou- gall vviil certainly be there/' " Then, if I could but divine what character her Ladyship will assume, I L -i would
would enact her lover," replied our hero, " as no man shines in that part except he is perfectly master of his senses; and, as I should be neither actuated hy liope or fear, 1 could p'ay my part a merveille.*' The Marchioness laughed at his notions ? of love, and thus the subject dropped ; but the Fait coming to breakfast with Lim the next morning, renewed it so earnestly, that they agreed to go and secure disguises at a celebrated warehouse in the Haymarket, where they could assume them on the night of the masquerade. The Duke said he would represent a friar ; the Earl would go as a conjurer, vowing, if he could but discover Lady Leonora, he would torment her to death, by foretelling she would certainly lead marmottes, not to say apes, iu tlie regions below. A very proper dress for a white-
white-friar was immediately shewn the Duke, who desired it might be put by for him, as he should come and dress there.. The Earl next fixed upon a dress proper for the character he meant to assume* 'which was also to be left. The master of the warehouse readily complied with their wishes, hinting, his repository was so near the Opera-House they might change their dresses halfa dozen times during the night, if they wished to puzzle their friends. No bad thought, the Earl observed, if thev found themselves tired of confessing: and telling fortunes* No one was to be made accpiainted with the secret of their disguises, as they flat¬ tered themselves they should be able, un¬ discovered, to fiud out most of their friends, with a party of whom they dined at the Stat' and Garter, but left the company L 5 eariy,
early, having .agreed to sup tète-à-tète at the Duke's lodgings, and to retire soon, that they might keep it up Avith the greater spirit the following evening, when, upon* entering his drawing-room, Wilson presented our hero with the following letter. The direction sufficed to convince him it did not come from Mentoria; but having paid the Earl the customary com¬ pliment, he broke the seal, and read as follows :—
" Your Grace will doubtless be sur¬ prised when this letter is put iuto your hand, as 1 am sure yoa aie unacquainted Avith my writing, and, I rather suppose, with my person; but I have lorg revered your excellent qualities, as I have ire- quently heard the praises of the Honourable ? Edmund
Edmund Browning, but don't suppose I shall ever hear the merits of the present honourable gentleman of that name talked of. But my reason for taking the liberty of addressing your Grace in writing is owing to the wish I entertain of giving one of your greatest enemies a specimen of my talents at plotting ; and shoukl my scheme succeed, í think I may venture to say, you A\ IU give me credit tor m v dexterity. Yet for fear it should fail, that I may neither expose myself to general ridicule, nor to- be censured for what would in that case be deen^il excess of presumption, I shall, an İth your Grace's Uw\e 3 keep my plan a profound secret even from you, though it is upon you my chief hopes rest of being able to bring it to h.ar ; and if you will deign to conform to my directions» I will point out a method by which you may l ? be
be enabled to judge Avhether I play my cards with tolerable judgment. * t I have no sort of objection to your showing this letter to Lord fitzhayman ; but I must intreat 30u would not men¬ tion having received it to any one else, anei that you would request the Earl would be equally discreet, as the sliglitest hint, nay, a single word, might overturn my whole scheme. "But to give you some reason for having* commenced plotter:—your Grace must know there is a very deep-laid plot in agitation against yourself, with which I alone (those particulari)- concerned in it excepteel) am acquainted, and they are by no means aware of having very unintcntionaliv let me into all their secrets. How this happened your Grace must excuse my now detailing. Should I succeed,
succeed, you shall know all and every thing; but upon this you may depend, that nothing was further from their in- tentions than that a hint of their villanous plan should reach your Grace's ears, or that I should have it in my power to render you, what I think you will consider a very signal service, if you will enable me to prosecute the scheme I îiave in view, the means of which I am going to point out to you. This morning, between twelve and one, your Grace and Lorel Fitzhayman Avent into the large masquerade warehouse iti the Haymarket, (if I am not correct in my infoi mation, those I mean to guarel you against have been leel into an error) Avhere you bespoke the dress of a white- friar, Lord Fitzhayman that of a conjurer, and left word that you should come anel dress there to-morrow evening. " Å s py>
" A spy/, who has been appointed to watch all your Grace's movements, fol¬ lowed von into the shop, and byentering into conversation with one of the men, learned every thing he wanted to know concerning your respective disguises, and having communicated his intelligence to liis eniployers, they framed a plot to decoy your (irace from the masquerade. Now I mean to turu their own weapons against themselves, if your Grace will, either this evening or early to-morrow morning, call again at the warehouse, and inform the man you have «líere d vour mind respecting your el less; bun a friend of yours having cxpresseel a wbìì to appear as a friar, he must, therefore, still consider that disguise as bespoke. " I should not take tiie liberty to request tins favour of your Grace, if I was not
not fearful some unforeseen incident might prevent my securing the areas I am so anxious to appear in, and if I was not conscious that the money which you have left as a deposit is unworthy your notice. Should your Grace be, therefore, inclined to favour my plan, you will be so obliging as to tell the master he is to deliver the friar's habit to the gentleman who will call for it, saying, c I am to represent Father Peter at the masquerade.' Desire him also to show that peiáou the dresses you and Lord Fitzhaj man have pitched upon, by whicii mt'ins Τ shall know you, and you will be at no loss to discover me; and if you see me accosted by a lady, habited to represent Diana, don't lose sight of us till you witness tiie conclusion of the adventure; nav, even then I nutst request you would not make yourselves known,
knoAvn, but that you would return to the masquerade, where*, the later you stay, the more you will insure my final success ; indeed a few hours must necessarily elapse before I can enter into any further ex¬ planation, admitting every thing succeeds to my utmost expectations; your Grace must, therefore, excuse my mentioning the conduct you must hold to for ware! my plan. " I shall be at the Opera-IIouse by eleven, and I should wish you would either precede or immediately follow me thither ; and I would have you take the precaution to have some disguise in readi¬ ness, in Avhich }ou and Lord Fitzhayman can follow me and my goddess on foot to where I hope to leael her. I think watch¬ men's dresses, with lanthorns and staves, would exactly answer the purpose, and these
these you may procure at the warehouse. The lady and I shall leaA'e the house in chairs. But Avhy I Avish you and the Earl to be completely disguised is, because I am certain Ave shall be Avatched by at least two other gentlemen, Avho are per¬ fectly acquainteel Avith your features. Shoukl they be unmasked, you Avill be equally able to recollect them. The road the chairman will be ordered to take ???11 lead them down Pail-Mall and up St. James's-Street. I am thus particular, be¬ cause you may lose sight of them while assuming your disguise ; but at all events pray take care not to give my other followers any suspicions that you are also dogging us. Above all, take no notice of another assistant whom I mean to engage, though, like yourself, I mean to keep him in total ignorance till I have brought matters
matters to bear; but as he will follow m unmasked, and you will indubitably know him, I thought it necessary to give you this caution. " Having now been as explicit as prudence permits me to be at present, I must trust my fate in your Grace's hands. I shall learn at the warehouse whether you agree to my plan, in which case I will take the liberty of addressing you a few more lines, just to let you know whether it Avili be needful to make any alterations in the line of conduct I have lain down for you, till when 1 remain, " Yours* &c. &c."
" Well, this is a most incomprehensible letter !" cried our hero, turning to the Earl. 4 c A goddess leagued against me ί¬ α plot formed by nobody knows who ! I dare
dare say 7 'tis a masquerade trick—or else it comes from somebody Avho Avishes to flatter me out of my dress, or to make me pay for their's. No bad notion. But do read this strange epistle, Fitzhayman, and then give me your advice respecting how I ought to act," The Earl did as he desired, and during this second lecture our hero thought there might be some truth in Avhat the Avriter advanced. He was perfectly correct re¬ specting the dresses, and he had been gÍA r en to understand by Mentoria that he had a secret enemy in Lord Vilmore, Masquerades Avere A^ery convenient places for carrying on intrigues of any nature j still, as this unknown friend of hisevielently Avished to represent him, he could not sup¬ pose he conceived himself to be in any personal danger· Lord
Lord Fitzhayman having concluded; declared he thought it the production of a friend, therefore, in his Grace's place, he should not hesitate a moment in com¬ plying with his request, particularly as he might be at a certainty of discovering who the writer Avas, as he had himself pointed out the means ; and he coulel perfectly account for his not being more explicit, as no one liked to render themselves an object of ridicule, Avhich generally hap¬ pened if they failed even in the best concerted enterprize. The Duke agreed to the justice of his friends remarks; therefore not to keep this unknown friend in suspence, they walked down into the Haymarket, gave the master the proper directions respecting the friar's dress, and then pitched upon those of a groom-jockey and a ballaet singer,
dinger for themselves, not forgeting to bespeak Avatchmen's disguises, which they surveyed, and ordered to be altered to their minds, engaging a priA-ate room in the house, Avhere they might unperceived change their dresses, and where a fire anel lights Avere to be prepared, and Jasmin stationed as their joint assistant, taking care to recommend the greatest secrecy to the master, Avho promised not even his men shoukl know they were in the house. This strange letter, and the plot it was intended to defeat, was canvassed over several times during the evening; nay, after his friend's departure, our hero could not retire till he hael wrote down the strange occurrence in hi» journal, Avhich he did not mean to dispatch before Friday, when he hoped to be able to enter iuto the promised details. Having made it late before
before he retired, he did not rise very early, as he had changed „the apartments he occupied for the first week for a much better suite upon the principal floor, which were engaged when he fir^t took up his abode there, and had now a very large quiet bed-room backwards, where he could give way to his natural propensity to dormir la grasce matinee, in other words, to lay late in bed ; twelve ? clock Avas, therefore, striking as he entereel his dressing room, where he always break¬ fasted, when the first thing that caught his eye was a very large bundle aud a bandbox. " From Avhence do these come, Wil¬ son?" he inquired. " From some masquerade Avarehouse, if I understood the porter right, your Grace; but I was not particular in my enquiries, as
as he told me they Avere sent by your orders. Here is the bill," presenting our hero Avith a letter, wafered, and addressed, in form, to the Duke de Valentinois, Hotel, Albermarle-Street, and below the direction Avas wrote, this is to be delivered to Mr. Wilson, his Grace s valet, with a bundle and a bandbox. Without making any remarks Octavius tore open the cover, ami found a letter directed—" Au bei Indifferent." " Tis from Lady Leonórái" he Avas near exclaiming ; but unfolding it, begun to read what follows, whieh was wrote in a hand he was totally unacquainted with, though evidently a female's. u May the mighty Soliman forgive one of the most humble of liis slaves for having
having ventured to provide him with a proper disguise for this evening's enter* tain ment I If he deigns to assume it, he. will render the most lowly of his hand¬ maids as completely happy as she can be, while you, most gracious Sultan, lemain undecided upon Avhom to bestow the envied handkerchief! To plead her love as a reason *vhy xûu ouffht to compir whh her w blies would he doing no more than many others of her sex could declare with equal sincerity ; nor does she hope so easily to win the heart of him v, ho is proof against Lady Leonora M'Dougalls charms; or, what is still more surprising, has seen the bright eves of Lady Helen Desmond unmoved ; still the blind deity prompts her to persevere in her intentions, as she hopes that " Witti
" With all of nature, all of art, He will '* Assist the dear design, " And ttacii a young unpractised heart '« To make hun ever mias." " Roxelana."
tt Surely w*e live in an ageof vvonelcrsi'* thought our hero, u This letter is more puzzling than the one I receiveel last night ! From Avhom can it comer" " What ! but just up !" cried Lord Fitzhayman, entering. " Why I hardly closed my eyes for, thinking of the mas- qucrade." " Pray read my morning salutation/' replied our hero, " and tell mc Avhether a ou think I ought not to be Aery much obliged to Ladv Leonora M 'Dotikali, for VOL. II. M liu
no doubt she dictated, though she was not the writer of this flattering epistle." " Hey ! hey ! why I thought------" Wilson, who had been preparing break¬ fast for his master, easily perceived he was a restraint upon the friends, therefore, hastily placing every thing before the Duke, he retired. " That fellow of your's is a treasure," remarked the Earl; li but upon my soul I thought Lady Leonora had been meddled in the other plut; but this letter seems indeed of her dictating. Let us look at the dress she has so kindly provided you with," opening the bundle, and display¬ ing the most superb Turkish dress that had perhaps ever been made, and which even the Grand Seignior need not have disdained to weir. No part of the costume was omitted* The
The belt Avas magnificently ornamented Avith a variety of precious stones; so was the A T elvet robe, Avhich was very richly embroidered, and lined Avith ermine. The turban, Avhich Avas in the bandbox, Avas still more brilliant, as a crescent in jewels of inestimable value glittered in the front, and a plume of real hern's feathers issued out of a sparkling tulip. " Take my word for it," cried the laughing Fitzhavman, " this never came from Lady Leonora—why, man, her whole fortune would not purchase the jewels Avhich glitter in that turban ! Now don't be angry ; but were I to speak my real thoughts, I should say this superb present came from the Marchioness de Pom- May I gu on ?" (i Honi sait qui mal y pemer rejoined our hero in the same gay tone ; " for I m 2 am
am well convinced I am not indebted to that udy, except indeed she acts by my fathers orders, and the ? -alue of these jewels would warrant the supposition." " Weil, but you mean to oblige the lovely lloxclana?" tt Why, 1 hardly know; I am rather averse to rendering myself so much the object of every one's gaze ; besides, may not it hinder my watching the progress of the Friar's plot l I could not walk even across the Haymarket in that dress ; be- sides, I am half of opinion Roxelana and my last night s correspondent understand one another/* " I cant believe that, because in that case he would not have desired us to fix upon other dresses. But I will tell you how wc vviil arrange matters :—we Avill go to the masquerade as a Groom and Ballad* *
Ballad-singer, follow the plotters as agreed upon, and then Jasmin, ν ho may carry the Lord of the East's dress with him to the warehouse, may there wait our return, where you can adorn for your assignation with the fair Roxelana, while I assume the habit of your confidant, or your black slave, or just what your high mightiness pleases. But let me advise you to order James to pack these superb habiliments in a trunk, and to giAx you the key, for fear the jewels shoukl lead some poor devil into temptation. Jasmin can take it with him in a coach, whh a change of linen, &c. for us." u I wish I kneAv from whom it came,** replied our hem, lf for I cannot reconcile myself to accepting a present of such enormous value/* si Oh, my stupid head!" cried Lonl u J Fiuhayman,
Fitzhayman, u Madame de Pompadour, iudecd !—whv, man. it comes from Mrs. Browning, good old soul ; she is resol veel you shall enjoy her money—so pray get your breakfast, anel rejoice to think Iioav many conquests you will make this even¬ ing." (i Do you think she means to personate Roxelana?" asked our hero, taking up an embroidered handkerchief, which com¬ posed a part of the present, out of Avhich fell a miniature picture set in immense jewels, which elepended from a chain of very large pearls. Lord Fitzhayman caught it up, ex- claiming-— " Tliis Avill— -ζ-— ds, why 'tis your father's picture!" Our hero took it from him, and perceived he Avas not mistaken. A double plat of hair
hair was let into the back, upon which was O. L. iu sparks, and round the cypher, in small letiers, ** Lc don de l amour." *' Why. what can all this mean?" con- tinned the astonished Octavius. " Here, here, is the explanation !" said Lord Fitzhayman, producing a piece of paper, which was pin neel to the hand* kerchief, upon which was Avrote, in a man's ha nd — " The jewels, which ornament the dress which accompanies this, and the picture Avrapped in this handkerchief, were be* queathed by a mother to her son l' Octavius felt his eyes glisten. Lord Fitzhay man, perceiving hisemotion,turned to the window for a few minutes, as if attracted by something then passing, and till our hero, having got the better of his m 4 emotion,
emotion, called to him to ask whether he chose to be a partaker iu his meal. The Earl agreed to take a cup of coflee Avith him; and during breakfast they arranged their plans for the evening in conformity to what Lord Fitzhayman had proposed, and were talking of paying a few morn¬ ing visits, Avhen a note was brought his Grace from his ???? night's correspondent, merely containing his thanks for the Duke's kindness in acceding to Ins request respecting the Friar's habit, and further assurances of the hopes he entertained that his plot would work as Avell as he could Avish, hinting how necessary to his succeeding it Avas that his Grace should keep his secret, and conceal himself from those Avho intended to watch the Friar, as he Avas certainly engaged in a very ticklish
ticklish business, but which he did not despair of bringing to a very favourable issue. *' You find this person is not in Iloxe- lana's confidence," said the Earl, ** Oh, no, indeed ; I was convinceel he Avas not from the moment I understood from whence Solyman's jewels came." James, therefore, receiveel his instruc¬ tions, and our hero hav ing locked up the excellent likeness of his father, and which, he supposer', had often been suspended round his mother's neck, sallied forthwith his friend, with Avhom he had engaged to dine in Grosvenor-Square, Avhere the Marchioness made him promise to hi ing her an exact account of the masquerade.
m 5
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. CURIOSITY made the young gentle¬ men punctual to this sort of tacit appoint¬ ment with the Friar. A very good room had been prepared for them to change their disguises, and there Jasmin was stationed to wait their pleasure. It was striking eleven when they crossed the way to the Opera-IIousc ; they were therefore among the first of the company, but had not taken more than three turns before 4 the
the White Friar joined the group ; but as he took no sort of notice of them the friends followed his lead, bi-snisinir. the one with the voice of a Stentor, to roar a very popular ballad, the other to expa¬ tiate upon his dexterity in taking in the knowing ones ; taking care, nevertheless, not to lose sight of Father Peter, as the rooms begun to fill apace. The Friar, to whom they both, in com¬ mon with many others, addressed them¬ selves, could not speak a word of English, but told them, both in French and Italian, he had come over by the express per¬ mission of the Pope to endeavour to convert the wretched English heretics, bitterly inveighing against Henry the Eighth for having abolished the British monasteries. His discourse convinced them he had studied his character, though m ? they
they could not form the least idea of who he was. His height perfectly agreed with the persons he represented, though he appeared infinitely more corpulent than the Duke, but as that might be supposed to be assumed to assist the disguise, they agreeel that if he eüel mean to pass himself off for our hero, he might possibly succeed, as his hair was perfectly concealed by a flesh-coloured silk cap, and his eyes, though by no means so animated as those of the person he wished to be supposed, might, from being of the same colour, pass muster, Lord Fitzhayman obser veel. They hael scarcely communicated their remarks to each other ere the Queen of the Silver Bow joined the Friar, drcsseel quite in character, and certainly appeareel a very fine woman. u I do
" I do think it is Lady Leonora," said the Earl. The Duke Avas not so certain ; he fancied she Avas taller ; her appearance however greatly increased their anxiety ; they therefore took it in turns to follow them, in hopes of overhearing their dis¬ course, which was carried on in French, and the Duke soon discovered the God¬ dess thought she was addressing him. The Friar affected tobe very much puzzled, and appeared as if he rather Avished to shun her, accusing her of having decciveel him in one of her former confessions ; it Avas, therefore, pretty clear that they supposed they knew each other, and the Goddess rallied her would-be spiritual director with infini te success, singing him the famous French Vaudeville entitled the Confiteor, in which she confessed herself guilty
guilty of loving the most amiable of men, Avhom she belie veel she had el rove to bury himself in a cloister. As she sung sotta voce, the friends could not recognize her voice, nor could they catch all the words of her song, though they undei stood that she mct.nt to turn nun except her reverend father gave her free absolution. Other masks, in dresses by no means calculateel to excite notice, appeareel as anxious as the friends to overhear what passed between Diana anel her Confessor, anel this circumstance perfectly tallied with Avhat the Friar hael said in his letter, who contin ueel to walk about with his elegant companion for near an hour, evidently seeking the most retired corners to continue their conversation unheard, till at last the father desired his daughter to follow him, for it was contrary to the rules
rules of his order to offer her his arm. She obeyed, and the Friar purposely run upagainst the Duke, Avhispering, "Now," Avhile he Avas excusing himself for his apparent rudeness. The fi iends, therefore, slid through the crowd, and making their Avay with some difficulty through the croAvds of carriages, Sec. they entered their apartment by a private door, of which the master of the house had given them the key. Jasmin hael every thing ready pre- pareel, therefore in less than ñve minutes they were equipped in Watchmen's great coats, large flapped hats, and silk hand¬ kerchiefs tieel rounel their necks, Avhich completely conceaieel the lower part of their faces, as they chose to unmask ; and being provided with lanthorns, Avhich hael been so prepared that they scarcely emitted a ray of light, they hastened, according to
MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS. to the directions they had received, into Pali-Mall. Two chairs, in which they distinguish eel the Friar and the Goeldcss, Avere just turning the corner. Three gentlemen in masks, but whose elresses appeared to have been chosen as if they had particularly wished to escape notice, Avere following tlie chairs, which the friends, having pre¬ viously separated, now passed, and the clock just then happening to strike twelve, Lord Fitzhayman called the hour, while, to the Duke's great surprise, he perceived James in his usual dress, walking before the Friar's chair. At first he thought the honest fellow might have been led to believe he was attending him by his re¬ presentative ; but again he reflected that he knew Jasmin was waiting his orders. He, however, soon took an opportunity of
of joining his companion, to vthom he mentioned the circumstance. Lord Fitz¬ hayman was surprised, but immediately presumed James was the person alluded-to in the letter as the assistant Avhom the Friar proposed engaging, and keeping in the same ignorance he had done them till he had brought matters to a conclusion. The Duke thought his conjecture a very likely one, and they continued to follow this strange group, keeping at a respect· able distance, and now and then calling the hour till thev reached the end of St. JamesVStreet, where the three masks, who had separated, again rallied ; our hero and the Earl therefore kept more than eA r er in the back-ground, communicating the strange ideas which came across them to each other, and wondering where the Friar meant to take them, when, to their increasing
increasing astonishment, the chairs stoppée! at May f air Chapel, into which the Friar, the Goddess, and James entered, and the door was immediately closed. The masks now formed a group, appearing to rejoice at having safely landed the party they had followed. The most active of the three scrambled up to one of the chapel Avindows, and called out loud enough for the pretended Watchmen to hear— " The parson is at the altar Avith his clerk, and they have got an old woman besides the pew opener, I presume !" " Then the Father and the Goddess are certainly going to make a match of it," Avhispcred Lord Fitzhayman ; " but why have been dragged all this Avay, and where is the mighty plot, for the Father cannot deceive the chaste Goddess into a belief she is going to marry your Grace?" " I should
" I should think not," replied the Duke ; t( yet why James has gone in with them I can't fathom ; however, let us remember the Friar's injunctions, and be upon our guard, as I should be sorry to derange his scheme." They therefore continued to take e\'ery precaution not to be discovered, now and then one or other of them passing the masks as if upon duty, though, from what they could overhear of their discourse, they Avere as much surprised themselves at this masquerade frolic ending in a Aved- ding. Altogether it Avas therefore very strange, as they all appeared to be in the same plot, yet none of them seemed to knoAv Avhat Avas really going forward. In about a quarter of an hour the Friar and his Goddess came out of the chapel, resumed
resumed their places in their respective chairs, and, accompanied as before by James, began to move forwarel. The masks kept following in the rear, as before, and the Watchmen continued to dodge them till, to their still greater astonish¬ ment, the chairs were carried into the very hotel in Albermarle-Street Avhere our hero lodged. ' * I wish the bride and bridegroom may not take possession of my bed, " Avhispered the Duke, but perceived they Avere shewn into the apartments he had e>ccupied upon his first arrival. This they discovereel by seeing lights in those rooms which were next the street. " Well, I presume we shall learn no more to night," replied the Earl in the same tone, " therefore suppose we return to
to the Haymarket; I am very anxious to have you keep your appointment with Roxelana." " We will be going in a minute," said the Duke: " but I wonder whv those masks continue, like us, in the back¬ ground," as one of them only had crossed the street to see the chairmen set down their fares, the other two remaining upon the pavement within a few yards of the friends. The one who had been to satisfy his curiosity rejoined them, saying, in an exulting tone— tt All is safe now I will be bound for it !—But what a pretty dauce wc have led those two old watchmen, for I could swear I saw them in Bond Street ; I suppose they never saw a mask before, so took us for housebreakers or footpads !" 41 Well,
u Well, well," rejoined one of his com¬ panions, (i they might mean well; how¬ ever, as we have had no need of their assistance, and all has ended so much to our satisfaction, let us give them a shilling a piece to drink the bride and bridegroom's health." W T ith difficulty the friends kept their countenances while they extended their hands to receive this generous donation, Lord Fitzhayman returning thanks for them both in the most humble manner, and in the true Hibernian accent wishing the dear creatures a long life and a merry one as they slowly retreated ; but the moment they had lost sight of the group they took to their heels, and soon reached their dressing-room in the Haymarket, where our hero assumed the magnificent habiliments he had received in the morning, and
and Lord Fitzhayman the disguise of a Black Slave, and chairs having been sent for, they retui neel to the masquerade, dismissing Jasmin, for Avhom they had no further occasion. So fine a figure and so superb a dress attracted general notice and admiration ; but after several turns no Roxelana ac¬ costed the Turk, who began to think that, tired of waiting, she had gone home, and was angry with himself for having suifereel himself to be led such a dance; not that he was suffered to pass unnoticed, as a variety of females endeavoured to attract his attention, when a Savoy aule, dressed in the exact costume of those he had seen in the streets of Paris, with a hurdy-gurdy and a box, accosted him, requesting permission to show the mighty Solyman her marmotte and piece curieuse, Roxelana
Roxelana had addressed him by that name ; he therefore readily acceded to her Avishes, and greatly admired a beautiful tame squirrel, which she displayed, and which Avas confined by a golel chain to her Avrist. Iler next curiosity, she said, she must reserve till she saw whether he Avas deserving of such a mark of her favours. Though rather below the middle size, she Avas a most elegant figure, and a profusion of dark hair, merely confined by a handkerchief, flowed down her back, and added new graces to her form. By way of passing the time the Duke entered into conversation with her, and was highly amused by her remarks upon the surround¬ ing group, till, turning suddenly towards him, she asked what had brought him to England ? had any of the beauties of his seraglio
seraglio made their escaper or Avas he drawn hither by liis wish to judge whether the British belles surpassed those of every other nation? but she rather thought the hope of seeing the lively Roxelana had brought him to the masquerade. " It diel indeed, fair Laely, and I fancy I have met with her." " Why then, to treat you as she did the hero you represent, I am not fair, nor Avould I be the slave even of your sublime self. I aspire, like her, to an equality ; but A r ou Turks are like the French, less gallant perhaps, but as ignorant of the real meaning of the Avord love. Your marriages, Avhen you do our sex that honour, are like their's—affairs of con¬ venience, in Avhich the heart takes no interest ; and if you are barely polite to the woman whom you honour Avith your vol. ιι Φ n name,
name, suffer to bear your arms, and to Avhom you give a seat at Versailles, Avhy it is as much as vou think she has a right to expect ; for noAv put your hand upon your heart, Louis of Bourbon, and tell me Avhcthcr you have not agreed to marry a woman Avhom vou have never seen, anel who may be an antidote to iove, because she is recommended to your notice by your father, " " I can't deny the fact ; still I hope we shall he a very happy couple; but, perhaps, Avere I to see your face I might think very differently—meamvliile, may I ask you whether I am not indebted to you for my very splendid dress ?" " Me, a poor Savoyarde !—no, on my honour, Avhich 1 hold as sacred as you do. But to return to the anonymous lady, in honour of whose charms you are doubtless ready
ready to break a lance even wirh your friend Fitzhayman—for you to be the happy couple you seem to expect, she must not possess my feelings, for, like Osmyn> I must be adored—mere civility from a husband I should idolize would drive me mad !" " Suffer meto sec your face, and I will be the first to pay due homage to your charms. " ** In that hope I will oblige you, upon condition you promise me never to men¬ tion my imprudence." €t I swear to thee by Cupjds strongest Ικην, " By his best arrow whh tbe golden head, " By the simplicity of Vsmis* doves," " and upon my honour, never to reveal your having gratified my curiosity." They therefore drew towards the side¬ board, where, seizing an opportunity when x % no
no one Avas near, she shewed him a countenance, which, though not so fair, far surpassed that of Helen Desmond's. ~ Her dark hazle eyes were the finest and most expressive he had ever beheld. She appeared not more than eighteen. Al¬ together he thought it the loveliest face he hael ever seen, anel, like Alexander, he gazeei, sighed, anel looked, till he felt he liad never loved Laely Leonora M 'Dougall, and hael almost forgot where he was, till she recalled him to his senses bv resuming her mask. His countenance Avas too much the index of bis feelings not to convince * her she hael maele the desired impression upon his heart. Giving him her hand-«- " Fare you well, most amiable of men ; but before Ave part accept this talisman, which will remind you of our interview/* putting a large shagreen case into his hand ;
hand; "remember, *tis for your private inspection, and depend upon mine antl Mentoria's best endeavours to proe ure you, if possible, liberty of choice." She then darted among the crowd, and Aras out of sight before our hero could recover from his surprise, who, upon turning round, perceived his Black Slave at his elbow, Avho begun to rally him concerning Roxelana. We have never elísguísed our hero's fail¬ ings—vanity Avas certainly among thern^ Avhich induced him to hint the elegant Savoyarde was certainly the lady who had in a manner appointed to meet him at the masquerade, but entered into no further details, as he Avas convinced, from her avowed connection with Mentoria, she was a woman of character· The talisman ? 3 she
she had given him he had concealed in his bosom, having been too much absorbed in admiration of her fritures even to thank her for her gift. His dress, he presumed, he owed to Mentoria, Avho, pei haps, Avished to bi ing about a match between this lady and himself. Should she succeed, he felt he should a second time rejoice at the idea of Avcaring chains ; he endeavoured, however, for the present to enter into the spirit of the diversion, and Avas upon the whole so well amused that it Avas half past five before he and the Earl thought of retir¬ ing. They had frequently remarked the three masks, Avho had composed a part of the bride and bridegroom s suite, as weU as themselves, and saAv them at the side¬ board a few minutes before they left the house. Their chairs had been kept in waiting,
T* aiting, not having chose to order cither of their carriages, for fear of impeding the Triar s scheme. As it Avas broad daylight, the Duke Avas no sooner upon the move than he hastened to examiue-the fair Savoyard's present ; it Avas a mcst beautiful small painting, repre¬ senting a forest, in the midst of which stood a female, drawn in the character of Armida, wIkk hekl in one hand a tablet, upon Avhich Avas inscribed O. L. and in the other a Avand, which she Avas waving OA-er a figure of love, who Avaa, ?? if by her direction, in the very act of darting an arrow, which appeared to be aimed at the person who waa contemplating the picture. Round the medallion tbe god* dess held wa$ wrote, Taspircawtre mur. Need we add, that in the features of the enchautrcoi ? 4
enchantress our hero recognized those of the beautiful Savoyarde.
■MHfowasssae
CHAP. ??. JLoRD FITZHAYMAN had ordered his chair into Alfaermarle-Street, being very impatient to Icarn something mores respecting this wedding, whicii he fully expected to do from James. The Savoyarde and her elegant present had nearly chiven the new married couple out of the Dukes head; but when the chuirs
chairs Avere set down în the hall of the hotel, the friends Avere surprised to find a very large croAvd assembled, Avho appeared to be anxiously debating upon some very strange event ; they of course broke the way for the gentlemen, Avho not chusing to ask any questions in so public a place, walked upstairs, preceded by James, whom the Duke asked, as soon as they had reached his drawing-room, Avhat had oc¬ casioned the bustle he had noticed in the iiall* 11 t T pon my honour, your Grace, though I am in some ineasue concerned in the adventure which gave rise to it, I can't satisfy your curiosity ; but Avith your leave I will call the person uho persuaded me to meddle in the business, and who has promised to explain eveiy thing to your iatbfactio% as all that I at present N 6 know
know is, that a friend of mine has been acting a strange part at the masquerade. I can only assure vour Grace that I had no intention to assist him in deceiving any onc. ? ' Ct That I am convinced of, my honest fellow ; but as I am cui ions to know what has really happened, fetch your friend if he is below stairs/' James had not far to go to execute hh master's orders, as the person he went in search of was in waiting Avithout the door, and entered the moment he Avas informed his Grace wished to see him. The Duke had no recollection of having ever seen him before, and the man seemed amazed when he contemplated the elegant youth, whose superb dicss was particularly h onnug, while he involuntarily ex¬ claimed—* <( My
" My wife may Avell be raA'ing mad!—- in her place I should hang myself!" " What! so soon after marriage, my friend," replied the Duke, again survey¬ ing him. He Avas a good-looking man, much about his own stature, but ten years or more his senior, and considerably stouter. He begged pardon for the freedom of his late speech ; Avhen the Duke asked him whether he was the person from whom he had received the anonymous letter, Avhich had induced him to accommodate him with the dress in Avhich he had appeareel at tlie masquerade. It I am, your Grace; and avUIi your permission I will immediately explain why I ventured to make- a request you must, now you know me to be Mr, Wíbmi s friend, think very presuming. You tmy f n ? per hap*,
perhaps, think mc very much to blame; and I certainly must, in some respects, plead guilty, because I might have put your Grace upon your guard, without taking the advantage î have done of what J overheard ; but I could not resist the temptation, as 1 thought I had every prospect of making my fortune, and of taking a most glorious revenge of your Grace's enemies." (i Well but do come to the point, my good friend, " cried the impatient Octa¬ vius. <fi I wish to make myself perfectly clear, your G race; so, to begin—yesterday morning, or, more properly, the day be¬ fore, I happened to want something out of my master's bed-room, so I went in search of it, and happened to stumble upon
upon the chamber-maid, Avho Avas just beginning to make the bed, Avith whom I entered into chat. So the time slipped away unheeded by either, and we were sitting upon the side of the bed when I heard my master's step upon the stairs. tt Who is your master?" interrupted the Duke. <r Lord Vilmore, your Grace; I have lived with him in the capacity of butler and valet this twelvemonth. I am a Swiss by birth." << Very well, proceed Avith your story." u Of course 1 tolel the girl who was coming ; she started up, declaring she woulel not be found alone with me by my Lorel for the w oriel, anel fairly shoved me down upon the bed, and flung the clothes over me. As the curtains Avere drawn towards the window, 1 Avas convinced that,
that, except his Lordship came to examine the bed, I should escape unseen ; and as he entered the room by one door the maiel left it by another, and I remained com¬ pletely concealed under the bed-clothes, Avhere I endeavoured to lie perfectly- still; not wishing to injure the poor girl's reputa¬ tion, nor to be the occasion of her losing her place. There was a drawer in the bed¬ room, in which I knew my Lorel kept many r papers and other things of value, deeming it a place of security in case the house Avas ever attempted, and he hap- peneel to be coming in search of something it contained, and, to m ν great mortifica- tion, having found Avhat he wanted, he took a chair, and sat down to peruse different letters. By degrees í had made myself a breathing place, and had come to the resolution to tell him 1 had been taken
taken suddenly ill, hael he discovered my hiding place ; but in less than ten minutes his most intimate frienel, Lorel Dumbar¬ ton, Avho had been informed below that he was in his dressing-room, came in. search of him, and they are upon such intimate terms he made no scruple of joining him even in his bed-room. <c Äly master seemed happy to see him, and told him he was looking for some papers belonging to his office. The Earl therefore took a chair near him, saying— * I have come to tell you some news/— * Are you/ was the reply, ' then I will »hut the door; so now for your budget.'— ' W T hy our trusty spy has just brought us Avoid how this half French Duke is to be dressed at the masquerade 4 , and as Leonora has by no means given up all hopes of filling a tabouret at Versailles, why she intends to strike a bold stroke to-morrow evening.
evening. 1 commi n d her for her spirit; and I do think, if she minds how she plays her cards, she may vet brine: the lion back into his toils.'— t 1 wish I knew how to forward her plan. Request she would remember, that if she can render either me or Thomas at all subservient to the success of her scheme, we are perfectly at herorders.' 'lv —* I will deliver your message, though I think she must depend more upon her own talents than upon any assistance we can reneier her; however, she is no novice, and I have tolei her she need not wait for my consent if' she can but bring him to terms; and as for settlements, I woulel have her trust entirely to his honour. Louis the Wtll-beloveil must support his son's widow in style/—* Undoubtedly. But how is he to be elresseel ? splendidly enough no eloubt. 1 —* No, faith, he intends going as a White Friar/—* Would to God he
lie were one in reality, ' replied Lord Vil¬ more; ' however, if her Ladyship docs but succeed, Avhy I shall not so much mind. A lucky thought has just come across me. A young clergyman, avIio is indebted to me for his livelihood, perhaps I might add, under the rose, for his existence, frequently does duty at May- fair chapel, therefore if her Ladyship can but seize the moment Avhen this young rakish Duke is getting mellow, whicii will probably be the case towards morning, to propose their immediately plighting their faith at the altar, as she can hint there are clergymen always in waiting at the place I mention, Avhy I do think the gudgeon, if he is sufficiently in liquor, might bite, and if the knot is but once tied, I don't think ?? ? ?? the Grand Monarque will be able to unloose it'—» < Not
' Not he, truly,' replied the Earl, lauglr- ing very heartily. ' I avíU mention your scheme to Leonora, as it appears to me a very good one, and may insure her success. She has bceu positively half distract ed since liis arrival in England ; nay, I believe she now fancies herself in love with him · ? and I must say he is one of the finest young fellows I ?? ? ?? beheld ; faith, Louis may well be proud of him ; and they do say he is so doatingly fond of him that there is no doubt of his forgiving his entering into a clandestine engagement, '— t Besides, this would be only renewing a former love affair/ said my master; { but a second thought has struck me. The fellow is as proud as Lucifer and as A'ain as a peacock, therefore he may object to making even Lady Leonora a dutchess; still I must suppose he would very readily form tha same
rame sort of connection Avith her his father diel Avith his mother,, therefore I think it not unlikely he might propose their pdicurning the debate to some more convenient place, and ?? doubt he is acepiainted Avith a variety of houses where they might enjoy a tète à-tète in all security ; it would, therefore, be proper Ave should not lose sight of them ; anel as her Ladyship will be at a certainty of being rescued, I Avould have her con¬ sent to every thing he proposes, and upon her giving the alarm we can rush into the room, and force him to marry her, or commence an action against him for damages for having decoyed her Lady¬ ship, under false pretences, intoa house of bad fame.—' This is a brighter thought than your last, Villy/ cried the Peer; ƒ for 1 fear the haughty boy is too well aware
aware of his own consequence to be easily drawn in to marry Leonora ; but, at all events, I should Avish the clergyman to be in readiness, as I am fearful our last scheme Avould throw a slur upon Leonora's character she might never be able to throAV off.'— ( Il must be our care to prevent that,' rejoined my master. * I think I can make the clergyman I have in view swear that he Avas appointed to be in Avaiting by an emissary of the young Frenchman's ; and her Ladyship must declare she thought she Avas going to chapel, when, instead of which, she found herself decoyed into a house of ill fame for the worat of purposes. Our fears for her safety must have induced us to folloAv her; and as I would have her give the alarm the moment they arc within the room, I think Ave may prevent her character
character from suffering/— r Certainly, certainly, as you have arranged matters. My dear Villy, Leonora avíU come into any plan to secure the prize she has in view, or, at all events, to revenge herself upon the insensible mortal.' " But I should tire your Grace Avas I lo repeat every thing that passed during ah hour or more than I continued to lie perdue, and they to talk over the di fièrent plans they had in agitation ; but at last they separated, resolved to tutor Laely Leonora either to draAv your Grace into marrying her, ~or to surfer herself to be taken Avhcrcver you proposeel, for the purpose of extorting either your consent to become her husband, or a very large sum by way of hush-money ; or, in case they failed in either of those attempts, they hoped you would have afforded them ? sufficient
sutficient grounds to commence a pro* secution against you. The clergyman Avas to be in readiness from midnight, and every other arrangement Avas entered into likely to insure their success. <e They had no sooner left the room than the housemaid, Avho, had been upon the watch, came laughing in to release me from my* confinement; but from the moment I was acquainted with the pur¬ port of the scheme that was laid to entrap your Grace, I could think of nothing else. Several times I Avas upon the point of waiting upon you, to put you upon your guard ; but the hopes I entertained of being able to make my own fortune through the means of the villanous plan they had i a agitation, made me alter my mind. I was, therefore, induceel to write your Grace* the letter which led you, in many respects uniu-
unintentionally to forward my schemes ; and I had heard enough of your former engagements with Laely Leonora to flatter myself I might tleceive her into a belief she was conversing with your Grace ; and as I Avas resolved not to speak a word of English, and not to unmask, even at the altar, I conceived it A'ery possible I might bring my scheme to bear, and then, as my r master had observeel, the knot once tieel her Laelyship Avould be as securely my/ Avife as she Avoulel have been your G race's ; anel I knew she hael A r ery lately had five thousand pounds left her by her godmother, Avhich sum was as much as I coveted, as I know I can live like a gen* tlcman upon the interest of it in my own country. So having well weighed every cir¬ cumstance in my own mind, and thinking I should
I should amply revenge your Grace, I set my brains to work, as I Avas particularly anxious to keep my intentionsa profound secret, for fear I his uhi not only be held up to general riihcute among my equals, but also h^c my chance of getting my bread ι ï ong my superiors. *' l\bw I succeeded I need not relate, since your Grace Avas iu a great measure Arit ness how Avell my scheme Avorked,— But that I may account for having per¬ suaded James to attend me to chapel : vour Grace must know I have long been upon very speaking terms with him, there¬ fore the moment I had packed off my master and his son I hastened to this hotel, where, calling him on one side, I told him I Avas going to the masquerade to meet a lady of large fortune, Atho, having taken a fancy to the cut of my face, intended
intended to do me tlrø honour of assuming ,. iny name before morning ; I should there¬ fore esteem it as a very great favour if he would bestow her upon ane, and witness jour marriage, promising him a A'ery hand¬ some bridal favour if he would but hold himself in readiness to attend us to May- fair chapel Why I pitched upon him in preference to some of my more intimate acquaintance I need not point out to your Grace, as *I knew his appearance wouM greatly facilitate my scheme. lie readily agreed to oblige me, and accompanied me to the warehouse, where I assumed my disguise. He then crossed the Avay with me to the Opera-House, where he took his station in the lobby, but Avas to join me upon my calling out in a feigned voice, Five k Roi ; and to complete the deception I meant to practise upon my vol. ?. α bride,
bride, 1 engaged, for one night, the suit of apartments your Graee had occupied upon your first arrival, telling the master of this hotel they were for a lady and gen¬ tleman, who Avere coming out of the country to the masquerade, and Avho Avould not come hither till tovvaids morn¬ ing, I presumed, as they were to dress at a friend's, with whom they were going ; and as I paid for them Avhen I took them, no further questions Avere asked. " Your Grace saw us safely housed here, where, like a polite bridegroom, I conducted the lady into the bed-room which had been prepared for us, request¬ ing she would, by extinguishing the lights, let me know when I might venture to sue for admittance. I had little doubt of her conforming to my wishes, and upon the sigual being given, I found my
tny way in the dark to the bed, Artiere 1 lay very comfortably, having fallen into a profound sleep, till day having dawned, and the shutters not being sufficiently closed to prevent the sun from peeping through the crevices, her Ladyship chose to put by the bed curtains to see how I looked after marriage, vt hen» givinga most violent scream, which made me start up, she jumped out of bed, raving in the most incoherent terms. I affected surprise^ anil, like a fond bride* groom, made use of every expression likely to console her for the severe disappoint* ment I was sensible she had experienced ; refusing, however, to listen to me, she continued to wve and weep, and kept hurrying ou her goddess's attire, vowing vengeance upon me, your Grace, James, &c» &c. I told her this was beginning ? 2 the
the honey-moon in a strange style, anel desired her not to carry the ioke too far " as »she must know she had not -only accompanied me to the altar Avith her own free will, but she had even been the proposer of our scheme, and had pointed- out Avhere we could be married Avithouti delay'. My threats were* however, as un-, availing as my endeavours to pacify her* had been, as she continued to rave, shai rn>d been basely trepanned, and that It had passed myself upon lier for your; ?????, for which deception she Avould* have me transported for life, and pro¬ secute your Grace for having connived at my abominable plot. In short, not to tire your Grace by enumerating half the extravagancies she Avas guilty of, suffice it. to say, that our debate alarmed the whole house; aud as tlie master of the hotel was
was very anxious to have peace restored before vour Grace returned, and was even clamorous for admittance, 1 was obliged to open the «loor, when out darted my bride, vowing, if I attempted to follow her, she would charge the watch with me, and away she run home, I suppose, not many minutes before your Grace's return, to whom, 1 assured the master of the house, I would satisfactorily explain the occasion of the bustle and noise which had so greatly disturbed him« M How my matrimonial adventure will now conclude I can't pretend to say ; I enly know İ must not think of returning into Great-George-Street; however, ii Lord Dumbarton will put roe in im~ mediate possession of his daughter's for* tune, I will not oblige the lady to Jiva o S with,
with me; and I will moreover agree to leave England immediately, if they chuse to comply with my terms." " Why, upon the whole, I certainly ought not to blame you," said the Duke, " though I should not have been ren¬ dered the dupe of your Master's and the Earl's wise plan, even admitting you had not undertaken to render it abortive. But under what name did you marry her Ladyship ?" i( Under my own, your Grace, Lcwi* Octavian Bournon, than which none could luve been more adapted to further my scheme. Therefore, as I Lewis Octa¬ vian took Leonora to have and to hold, and signed my i\al name in the register and certificate, which my wife secured, í defy all the lawyers in England to dispute
dispute the legality of my claim to h:r fortune " tí Why the Fates seem to have ren¬ dered every thhg propitious to your un¬ dertaking," repined the Duke, wliile the highly amused Lord Fitzhayman laughed most heartily, declaring he gave the bridegroom infinite credit for his plan,* and promising to supply liim with money to support his claims, should his fatiier-iu-law or bib wife pretend to dispute them; but as they were the frames of the plot, which had enabled him to outwit them, lie thought they would uot wish to make any great bustle. ' , u Why, Bournon certaiuly only drew them into their own snare,'* said the Duke; " however, as I may be applied to upon the occasion by the enraged 5 patties,
parties, though if they know their oavu interest they avììI endeavour to prevent their having Avished to take me in from doming to my ears, I would wish you to remain? with James till we see how they mean to proceed ; and the first tiling I would advise you to do is to write the same story to the Earl you have been relating to me, Avhich will convince him he is Aeiy much in your power, ami may prevent him from proceeding to any Violent measures against you." The bridegroom promisee! to conform to his Grace's orders, retiring for that purpose. He Avas no sooner without the room than the friends enjoyed a long and hearty kugh at Lady Leonora's masquerade Avcd* ding* €< I should
u I should haidly have thought such a^trick would have entered the head of a Swiss," observed Loi d Fitzîm man. James, v\ho was diverting his master of his splendid habiliments, and v ho duuí been at fust veiy mue h afraid hi» Gracer would have been displeased at his having been, though innocently, concerned İn his friend's plan, now said — "I do not think Bournon ? a Swiss, my Lord; it hai always been ehieudly suspected that he is an Italian, a native of Modena ; he acknowledges he Mas brought up tbeie." *' Why his late plan would lead me to suppose you are in the right, James/* re¬ plied the Duke», who, being %\o\\mim robe de chambre, desired the hontbt fellow to bring him and the £ail mm^ coffee, as they neither
neither of them found themselves inclined to court the downy god, both entertain¬ ing hi pes they r should soon learn Iioav the Eari of Dumbarton relished having been so completely foiled at his ????? weapons.
IND Of VOL« IV.
???·
