Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
"There is a secret, find it out!": a novel
ТЛ1ЕЕЕ İS A SECUET. CHAP. L W ПАТ does all that noise and shouting in thestreet mean?"saidMrs. Wheeler to her daughter, who was sitting near her, in the front parlour of a large old-fashioned house in Marsham-street, Westminster. Caroline Wheeler, who possessed an in¬ ordinate share of curiosity, flew to the window, which she had scarcely reached, ere the house nearly shook with a thunder¬ ing knock at the door, while the shouting, hissing, and hooting, grew louder and louder. Caroline, feeling seriously alarm- vol. i. в ed,
еЛ, though at she knew not what, added to the uproar without by her screams, de¬ claring she should faint, she was so fright¬ ened. <e La, child î how can you be so fool¬ ish?" cried her mother; " do go to the door." t( I dare as well put my head in the fire. Why, here are ten thousand people, I do believe, assembled under the window!" screaming again with all her might, as if in reply to the increasing noise and riot ; as the knocking at the door was incessant, as well as the shouts of mirth in the street. The servant, who had been busily em¬ ployed in the back-kitchen, finding that her mistresses were not inclined to go to the door, as they frequently did, ran up stairs, and admitted Mr. John Wheeler, the son of the old lady, and brother of the young one, who having changed to the door, bounced into the parlour, vowing vengeance upon Frank and all his accom¬ plices. Mrs. Wheeler,- owing to its being quite
quite dusk, would not have recognised her son, but for his voice ; and he had been too seriously alarmed, and was in too great a rage, to speak very intelligibly for some seconds. But having approached him, she laid hold of his arm, when, screaming as loud as Caroline had done a few minutes before, she exclaimed—·" Oh, Heavens ! he has fallen into the river ! Johnny, my dear Johnny, how could you think of coming home by water? Such a dreadful cold frosty night—you may have caught your death. What, you fell over the boat- side, I suppose ? and so amused the brutes who followed you home. They might have been ashamed of themselves. But, do go and strip off your wet clothes." Without replying to either mother or sister, who w r as also enquiring what hid befallen him, and how he came to bc m such a pickle, John hastily closed the win- dow-shutters, banging them to with such vehemence, regardless of some things w hy Ii ought to have been removed, that he biokr в 2 tv- э
two panes of glass, to the increasing diver¬ sion of those without, who were, never¬ theless, thus prevented from witnessing the farther ebullitions of his rage, while he loudly called for a light. " If the people without have been making game of you, Johnny," cried the offended old lady, " breaking the win¬ dows, and knocking the furniture to pieces, Ä cutting off your nose to be revenged of your fa^e." Johnny c—s — d the windows, d ------ d the furniture, and concluded by demand¬ ing, in a peremptory tone, whether that young gallows rascal Yates was at home ? at'ding, without waiting for a reply, " I know that it is all through him that I have been thus scandalously treated ; and, by G — d, I wilî make him pay pretty dear for having served me such a trick; for, even at the risk of being hanged, I will be the death of him. I vow I will break every bone in his skin !" The maid now appeared with a light ; and
and as the crowd without could no longer see what was passing within, the mirth soon abated, and the party dispersed, to talk over their frolic at their respective homes. Unfortunately, Jenny, in her surprise, up¬ on perceiving the ludicrous figure of her young master, placed the candlestick so near the edge of the table, that it fell to the ground. Enraged at being again iu the dark, the furious John swore at the poor girl most manfully, vowing that he had a great fancy to kick the awkward d-v-1. These threats induced Jenny, after once more replacing the light, to make a ha>ty retreat, while the curious Caroline impa¬ tiently said— á< La, Johnnv, whv do not you tell us how you came to be so wet and dirty ?" " h Frank Yates at home?—I want to know," was the retort. " To be sure*he is," replied Mrs. Wheeler ■— " He is dressing in his own room, be¬ cause he is going to sing at some concert, I believe." в 3 " Ile
,f He may sing to the d-v-I, for what ï care. When did he come home ?—that is all 1 want to know ; for 1 am sure he is at the bottom of it all." ' c At the bottom of all \vhat?" asked Caroline— ff Why, a body can't make head or tail of what you say." " You are a d ------ d fool, and always will be, Cary. Kave you no eyes? don't you see what a pretty mess 1 am in ?" " To be sure I do," was the pettish re¬ tort— (( But what has Francis Yates to do with that, pray ? You are always spitting your spite at him. 1 am sure he has been at home all the afternoon, that is, ever since school-hours; so how will you make out that he was to blame? But you don't like him, and so you lay all your misfortunes to his door." ct Am\ you are sure to take his part, Miss Pert—nay, I dare ray you encourage him in his impudence." ri Your sister speaks the truth," rejoined Mrs. Wheeler—"so pray have done wrang¬ ling, John, and make haste and change your cloaths,
г baths, except you wish to be laid up: You can tell us what has befallen you afterwards ; and I would advise your taking a glass of brandy—you have got some in your own closet." ff And there it shall remain. WTtat the deuce, would you ruin me at once? If î must take something, give me a glass of my father's gin—that will be of more service to me." " Yes, because you will drink it at free cost," muttered Caroline, while, in com¬ pliance with her mother's orders, she reach¬ ed out the cordial, who exclaimed, while pouring him out a bumper—'·' There now, for God's sake, go and strip off your things :" and as John did not wish to make his exit from this world, he left the room to do as she desired : and we will seize the opportunity to inform our readers, how he came to return home such a drip¬ ping figure. About a fortnight prior to the recent event, John Wheeler had taken a most un- B 4 warrantable
warrantable liberty with the youth, whom he had been threaten! n £ to render a vie- tim to his spirit of revenge; being well convinced in his own mind, that he had been the primum mobile of his late attack: nor was he mistaken in his conjecture·, though Francis had arranged matters so prudently, that he was as well convinced it would be next to impossible to bring the matter home to him. But to return to what had induced the youth to enter into a league against Mr. John. Our readers must know, that, though a second Elwes in point of avarice, at the early age of twenty, he had a favourite li itle dog, which, in dirty weather, was a close prisoner; indeed, he could very sel¬ dom entice it to follow him, as it was in¬ finitely more attached to young Yates, and watched every opportunity of slipping out with him ; and unfortunately, İn one of his rambles, the veut h had had the misfor¬ tune to lose him ; but/owing to his having a collai on, upon which " John Wheeler, Marsham-
Afarsham-street, Westminster," was en¬ graved, the animal was brought home the dav after he had been lost. But as the man who had found and restored him re¬ quired half-a-crown for his trouble, his avaricious master vowed he would have it out of young Yates's bones, as he had no money to redeem the dog; and had, in consequence of this kind determination, struck him not only with his cane, but with his fist. The high-spirited youth had en¬ deavoured to repay him in his own coin, but found himself very unable to cope with a stout, thick-set, young fellow, more than four years his senior, as he was not yet six¬ teen : he could only, therefore, meditate what he deemed a suitable revenge for the insult. Having, as he now termed it, the good fortune to rank among the Westmin¬ ster scholars, owing to his being one of the chorus-boys attached to the Abbev, he therefore made his grievance known to the youths upon the foundation, who, not con¬ tented with warmly espousing his cause в 5 themselves,
themselves, engaged almost all the other boys to join in the fun ; conceiving it their duty to resent an affront offered to any in¬ dividual who ranked among their compa¬ nions, and Frank Yates was a general fa¬ vourite ; and as it was the middle of Janu* ary, and there had been a great fall of snow, they only wished they had the impudent fellow in Dean's Yard ; when being in¬ formed by Yates, that he frequently re¬ turned home that way, they prepared a quantity of snow-balls, to be in readiness for the premeditated attack; and, just at dusk, they sent out spies to reconnoitre, nnd who were, by a concerted signal, to i>ive notice of the enemy's approach ; when Yates, as had been settled, ha', ing pointed him out to one of the centincis, made the bebt of his way home : and having various j canons for endeavouring to prevent him and John from coming to an open rupture, Мгч Wheeler aud her daughter had agreed in dedarin«, he had been at home much longer than he really had: and as Francis 5 had
had overheard, from the stairs, great part of what passed, he was truly grateful for their kind intentions, as he found matters had been carried a much greater length than he had expected ; since Master John having, as agreed upon, been assailed from all quarters the moment he had reached the center of Dean's Yard, had, in his fury, made shift to catch hold of one of his as¬ sailants ; and the savage brute had pro¬ ceeded to handte him so roughly, that he was instantly surrounded by the main body, vtho, having thrown him down, rolled him in the snow, till fatigue induced them to give him a little respite; but, in conse¬ quence of his vowing to be severely re¬ venged of them all, and threatening to make a serious complaint to the head mas¬ ter the next morning, they again rallied, and having dragged him under the large pump, they gave him as complete a duck¬ ing as ever pickpocket received who had been caught in the fact, and concluded by giving him another roll from one end of в 6 Dean's
Dean's Yard to the other; when, having suffered him to regain his feet, they fol¬ lowed him home, hooting, hissing, and shouting, as has been related, till, having seen him housed, and the shutters closed, they withdrew by unanimous consent, re¬ joicing in the complete discomfiture of their antagonist. Nor was Francis Yates less elated at his success ; and having made a hasty toilette, he ran down stairs, while John was stripping off his wet clothes, and with well-affected indifference, asked Ca¬ roline, what had occasioned the recent noise and uproar in the street ? Mrs. Wheeler gave him a scrutinizing look, while she declared, she hardly knew; she believed it was some of the wicked West¬ minster boys, who were making game of John, who had just come home in a ter¬ rible pickle; protesting it would soon be impossible for people to live in the neigh¬ bourhood of the College, the scholars were got to such a pass: indeed John could hardly be persuaded that he (Francis) was not
not concerned in the business, though she could not believe he was so wickedly dis¬ posed. Nevertheless, she advised him to hasten his departure, as she did not wish him and John to meet at present. " Bless me, Aia 'ana, how came he to sus¬ pect me?" asked Frank, with such well- counterfeited surprise, that the old woman was completely his dupe, and replied, she could not pretend to say, but he was in such a passion, he was ready to quarrel for straws; and as he certainly had but too often joined in those audacious boys* pranks, and he had had many words with John of late, she was rather afraid of their meeting just then; though, after what lie had said, she was convinced he was per¬ fectly innocent respecting what was now laid to his charge. " To be sure he is, mother," tried Ca¬ roline— (t 'Tis like John's malice : he is always endeavouring to make mischief ; for even the Westminster boys only meant to havfc
have some fun with him—-but he cannot take a joke." " Come, come, Cary, this was no joke to your brother ; and though I do not blame Frank, I could find in my heart to get every one at all concerned in the busi¬ ness, severely punished : But, as I am al¬ ways anxious to maintain peace and quiet¬ ness, Francis, I thought it best to let John suppose you had been at home all the evening; so, get you gone for the pre¬ sent ; Cary shall tell you all how and about it to-morrow." Francis made a suitable reply to her kind speech ; and being very anxious to hear his friends' account of the engage¬ ment, which had terminated so much to his satisfaction, he fie w into Dean's Yard, where he enjoyed a very hearty laugh at John Wheeler's expence, whose threats the scholars set at defiance, declaring he should meet with no mercy, if he did venture to prefer any complaint. Cur
Oifr hero, for such is Francis Yafes, amused them, by relating what John had done and said after his return ; indeed, be¬ ing an excellent mimic, he often diverted them at this doughty hero's expence, who had been his aversion, even from his in¬ fancy : but as it grew late, he was obliged to hasten to his duty, while John, having re-dressed, returned into the parlour, where he gave the mor^t exaggerated relation of the imminent danger he had incurred boasting of the wonderful feats he had done, till he was absolutely overpowered by numbers; protesting, that not only the black gowns, but that every boy in the school, had set upon him in the most au¬ dacious manner, though they must be rank cowards to have attacked him in such a dastardly way : However, please God, he would wait upon the head master early in the morning, and he should insist upon his father's accompanying him, as he couid point out some of the ringleaders, one of whom he had caught, and marked. Never¬ theless,
THERE IS A SECRET. theless, if they would but acknowledge that that young scoundrel, Yates, had set them on, he would in treat that they might be ail forgiven ; as he should be perfectly sa¬ tisfied if Frank was but severely punished, since no one should persuade him but that rascal had been the occasion of his dis¬ aster. Thus was he running on every now and then, peremptorii ν silencing both his mo¬ ther and sister, when Mr. Wheeler, senior, came home, to whom he repeated the oc¬ currences of the evening, with additional exaggerations, and concluding by pro¬ nouncing Frank to be the instigator of every thing that had befallen him. ťf You should not be so passionate, son John," replied the old man— ' ( Your hasty temper is always leading you into scrapes. You provoked the Westminster boys to roll and duck you, 1 dare say, by resenting a snow-ball having been thrown at you. <iod help you ! your sorrows are all to come, or vou would not have made such a fuss
a fuss about what I am sure was begun in fun, though you made them in earnest at last. Now, I have crossed Dean's Yard, during play hours, many is the time, and now and then I have had a snow-bail le¬ velled at me; and, at their age, I should have done the same. Therefore, I laughed at their pranks, often telling them, my playing days were over, or else I would have had a game with them, as I liked to see voung folks merry. This pleased them, and I was suffered to proceed unmolested. . ét Now, had vou acted as wisely, vou would have come off as well ; but you fancy you can rave and storm with as much impunity abroad, as you do at home, and that an army of fine daring young fellows would quake and shake, as our Jenny often docs, when you get in your airs : and as for Frank's being concerned in the matter, I do not believe it. I should as soon sus¬ pect your sister Caroline of having set the boys on; for Frank is a very good boy, as times go, and I do not think he ever bears malice«
malice, though you have certainly beeft very cross with him of late ; and you ought to recollect, that he is now growing into manhood, and will not take it as he has done; for a worm will turn, when trod upon. As for complaining to the head master, if you are so silly, I will not se¬ cond you ; for, if I were to join you in telling tales of such a lawless body. I should really be afraid to cross their play-ground again, as they would shew me but very lit ilo mercy in that case ; so e'en leave them alone ; and, for fear you should go to loggerheads a second time, keep out of their way, as you have provoked them." John blustered—he would not go an inch out of his road for anv such rascals, though, in future, he would take care to walk with 'a good cane, with· which he would knock down the first of them that dared even to 'look impudent at him ; concluding by al- •moot abusing his father for the cowardice he evinced, declaring, he supposed he Would not have cared had he been knocked on
on the head, and it might prove the death of him as it was, what with the bruises he bad received, and the cold he most pro¬ bably had caught. Mrs. Wheeler, who was sincerely attach¬ ed to her son, though she was not abso¬ lutely blind to his failings, offered to in¬ spect the bruises he complained of, and to rub them with some bathing spirits, in which she placed great faith ; advising him to go to bed, while she made him a bason of good wine-whey, which would effectu¬ ally preserve him from cold. John was very ready to comply with her prescrip¬ tion ; and we shall leave him to regain his composure, and his family to talk over the adventures of the evening, while we im¬ part to our readers a few other particulars respecting the Wheelers.
CHAP.
CHAP. II.
Mr.", Wheeler was the daughter of a small farmer in Surry, who having rather a large familv, very judiciously observed, as they grew up, that they ought to think of turn¬ ing out, as he could not afford to maintain them at home in idleness, much less to give them a fortune ; therefore, the sooner thev went out info the world, the less hard- .siips they would feci : and as his eldest daughter, Miss Dinah Powell, as she was sometimes called, fancied that a good situa¬ tion in a gentleman's family would be a less laborious life than what she per force led at home.
home, she readily agreed to turn out, as soon as she could hear of a place likely to suit ; and shortlv afterwards, Farmer Powell was informed, that a family in the neighbour¬ hood was in want of a housemaid: and as Dinah had a very high opinion of her abi¬ lities, her mother and she proceeded im¬ mediately to Squire Welford's; and Ma¬ dam Welford, who had heard that old Mrs. Powell was a bustling housewife, and had brought up her daughters to tread in her steps, readily agreed to make a trial of Dinah's abilities, who returned home in great glee, in consequence of her success; declaring, that as, to her certain know¬ ledge, the present cook and housekeeper had risen from scullion to her present lu¬ crative situation, she thought it would go hard indeed, if she was not equally fortu¬ nate ; as, by minding her hits, she should surelv be IadvVmaid in lime, which might lead to her marrying the land-steward, as Mrs. Cary, Madam Denham's maid, had lately done. Elated with these brilliant prospects,
prospects, Dinah made her entree into an exceeding well-regulated family ; and be¬ ing naturally of an active turn, and anxious to oblige, she soon became a favourite with Mrs. Vv elford, who was the eldest sis¬ ter of a Russian merchant, of the name of Haslemere, who was, at this period, at »St. Petersburgh, where he was upon the point of marriage with the only daughter of one of the richest merchants belonging to the British factory in that city ; and great pre¬ parations were making at Fir Grove, a seat, or rather villa, of Mr. Haslemere, which was in the immediate vicinity of Rose Hill, the name of Mr. Wclford's ru¬ ral abode; and from the resident servants at the Grove, Dinah understood that the new-married couple would quite eclipse the sober set at the Hill, as Mr. Haslemere, being in business, had also a spacious man¬ sion in Austin Friars, and kept his carriage and four. Now Dinah Powell had often heard, thai London was the best place in the we/Id to syal í
make money in, and the most likely place for young women to be courted in mar¬ riage. She, therefore, prudently resolved to leave the .sober W el fords, if she could, by any means, obtain a place in Mr. Hasle¬ mere's family ; and fortunately, as she con¬ ceived, Mrs. Haslemere, who, in due time after her arrival in England, appeared likely to increase her familv, had taken a sort of liking to her, which led to her obtaining the place, of all others she had most co¬ veted in that lady's establishment, that of nurse-maid to the son and heir; in which situation she acquitted herself so well, and the child throve so much, that Powell, as she was now styled, was in high favour at the Grove ; since Airs. Haslemere declared, in all companies, that she could not have expected a child brought up by hand would have done so well ; and as she had been forbidden to suckle, and disliked wet-· nurses, she thought herself extremely for¬ tunate, in having procured so excellent a substitute ;
substitute; and, ere twelve months had elapsed, a second son made his appearance, even before Master George could run alone. Therefore, Powell began to fear she should find her present situation more fatiguing than that of housemaid, and even had her doubts whether she should not se¬ cede from the nursery ; but when her in~ dulgent mistress gave her an assistant, and raised her wages, she grew perfectly re¬ conciled to the title of Mrs. Nurse. This second child was, however, very puny from yts birth, and no one, besides Powell, said Mrs. Haslemere, could have preserved its life for eight months, when it pleased God to take it, owing to its not having sufficient strength to cut its teeth ; while Master George Haslemere continued to excite the admiration of every visitor at Fir Grove, where he always resided, the air of Austin Friars not being deemed sufficiently salu¬ brious for a child of his age. Neverthe¬ less, Mrs. Haslemere placed his healthy ap¬ pearance
pearance entirely to Powell's management of him, who was certainly not a little proud of her child. The following year, Mrs. Haslemere gave birth to a daughter, who, like her deceased brother, appeared a very delicate child : but, as the mother's heart was set upon rearing a daughter, Powell vowed, that, if she never closed her eyes for the first six months, she would bring it up ; and having, as she observed, acquired no smallshare of experience, to her credit bc it related, that, with the blessing of Providence, she suc¬ ceeded in what was certainly an arduous undertaking. Mrs. Haslemere was, it may bc supposed, \ery liberal in her remune¬ rations for the pains she had taken, and Mr. Haslcmere declared, Powell had per¬ formed little les;» than a miracle, actuated by her great wish to oblige them ; nor was he less generous towards her than his wife had been. But, amply as Powell had been paid, she was not sorry th3t her mis¬ tress did not again put her talents to the л or. i. г proof,
proof, as Mrs. Haslemere had no more chil¬ dren; as she knew she should retain her lucrative post, forsorne years, at Fir Grove; when, should she not, ad interim, have en¬ tered the holy pale, she made no doubt of being otherwise provided for ; indeed, her fame alone, she conceived, would always insure her an equally eligible place. Thus four years elapsed; at the expira¬ tion of which time, Master George, who was now in hisse\enth year, was sent to an excellent preparatory school at Kingston, previous to his being entered at Winches¬ ter; and Mrs. Haslemere entered upon the pleasing task of educating her daughter; meaning, nevertheless, to engage a proper governess ίο assist her in her labours, as soon as her idolized Caroline emerged from the nursery : indeed she grew up so delicate, Mrs. Haslemere was very a\erse to removing her from under Powell's care, for the present. For three years more, therefore, nurse retained her enviable si¬ tuation, Caroline being remarkably fond of
of her; but a governess being now en¬ gaged for the young lady, who bid fair to grow up a first-rate belle, Mrs. Haslemere was rather at a loss how to dispose of Powell, to whom she continued very much attached ; though she agreed with her hus¬ band, that she was wofully ignorant, in many respects, and that her manners and ideas were infinitely too vulgar to allow her to associate much longer with their daughter. Fortunately, however, at this very critical juncture, their housekeeper at Fir Grove left them rather suddenly, in consequence of a death in her family, and Mrs. Haslemere kindly offered her piace to Powell, with a small increase of wages for past services. Nur -с rcadilv resigned that title, for that of lady paramount over the household, since, as she told her generous mistress, she should still reside under the same roof with her dear young ladv ; though the fact way ihat she longed ίο be fingering the perquisites which she knew were attached to her present department:
it having frequently been one of her say¬ ings— " Every one to their calling. It was nothing to the housekeeper how many clothes Miss Haslemere wore out, no more than it concerned her what went into the grease-pot, nor what the tradespeople gave at Christmas:" and as she knew her own interest, she managed matters so well, that, at the expiration of the twelvemonth, she was in as high repute as housekeeper, as she had been while nurse ; Airs. llaslemere having so high an opinion of her integritv, that she seldom minutely inspected the household accounts; and Powell having once heard Airs. Welford sav, talking of a family in her vicinity, that, owing to a quarrel among their household, they had made some useful discoveries, she had ever borne it in mind, often repeating it among her subalterns in office, which cer¬ tainly had the desired effect, of making Mr. llaslemere's family appear to be ex¬ tremely united, much to the satisfaction of both master and mistress. Aíeaiiwtiile,
Meanwhile, Master Haslemere was re¬ moved to Winchester, and Miss llaslemere appeared likely to realize her fond parents' most anxious expectations; and, having sent her picture to St. Petersburgh, to Mŕ J Haslemere's mother, Mrs. Mirvan, that lady, who died soon after the lively Caroline had entered her tenth year, left her, with the full consent of her husband, all her own fortune, which had been settled upon her when she married, amounting to thirty thousand pounds, which was to be paid her grand-daughter upon her wedding-day, or upon her becoming of age ; but, in case of her dying, either unmarried or without issue, before she attained her one-and- twentieth year, it was to devolve to her brother, or his heirs. Such was the tendr of the old lady's will, which met the entire approbation of Mr. and Mrs. Haslemere ; as Mr. Mirvan, when he gave his son-in- law fifty thousand pounds with his daugh¬ ter, merely required him. to settle a hand¬ some jointure upon her, promising ta pro- с 3 vide
vide for their younger children in due time, and this the deceased Mrs. Mirvan had now done very handsomely, and with his „entire concurrence and approbation ; and no one appeared more pleased than Powell, when informed of the circum¬ stance prognosticating that she should see her dear young lady ride in her coronet- coach before she died : and, while the fa¬ mily were still in mourning for Mrs. Mir¬ van, she was still more elated, by having, as she hoped, obtained an admirer by no means umvorthv her notice, whom she se- riously resolved to encourage, as she was now on the wrong side of thi ri y, and Mr. Wheeler was full ten years her senior; of course, he had sowed his wild oats, she said, and was, besides, a very careful man, who had, like herself, made his way in the world bv his own merit, and was reputed to have saved money : and as we are, for various reasons, obliged to introduce him more particularly to the notice of our readers, we must inform them, that he had origi¬ nally
îially been the porter to the counting- house in Austin Friars ; but, having re¬ ceived a decent education in a country charity-school, he, after a time, was admit¬ ted a junior clerk, but continued, as be¬ fore, to reside in the house, and slept in the counting-house, of which he still had the charge, for safety, as he was to be depend¬ ed upon, and stood high in Mr. Hasle¬ mere's favour. During her occasional jaunts to Austin Friars, Mrs. Powell had become acquainted with him, as he always dined at the second table; and, as she made no doubt of his being still farther promoted, should that take place, she thought she might venture to bestow her hand upon him, and a hundred and fifty pounds, the fruits of her honest industry ; though she had her doubts whether his fa¬ mily was equal to her own, as she made no small boast of her father's being a farmer, and her younger sister being very well married to an innkeeper at Kingston, with whose wife she had lived servant; her eUU c í est
her carriage ; so, who knows whether you may not be equally fortunate ? as she did not begin the world with much money ; but good friends, and a wish to please, carried her through all her difficulties." Mrs, Haslemere did not think it necessary to add, that the lady in question was a wo¬ man of very superior talents, and of a very good family, and whose husband was pri¬ vate tutor to some of the young gentlemen whom she accommodated. She had merely mentioned her name, as a sort of stimulus to the avarice of Powell ; and it had the desired effect, as the housekeeper was still ' prone to castle-building : therefore, she made no doubt of being a gentlewoman in time, as riding in her own coach would, of course, she conceived, render her such. Therefore, thanking her dear good lady- for the lucky thought, she hastened to com¬ municate what had passed to Mr. Wheeler, who highly approved of the notion ; and it was agreed, before they separated, that thev should unite their destinies, as soon as
as they could meet with a situation to their mind, as, upon comparing notes, they found that they were rich enough to fur¬ nish, even a large house, rery handsomely; and,, if they could not get boarders at irst, they could let apart mails genteelly furnish¬ ed; and Mr. Wheeler having, as in duty bound, he said, mentioned his plans to Mr. Haslemere, that gentleman, who ranked high among the honourable community of British merchants, both in point of wealth and character, commended his pru¬ dence, promising to promote him when¬ ever an opportunity occurred, or to get him a place in some of the public offices. Wheeler could not bear the idea of lea¬ ving so good a master, who was flattered by this proof of his attachment, which merely originated in self-interest, as he was sensible that he should never be al¬ lowed to want, while under the immediate protection of the generous merchant, let what would befal him ; and Powell, who was now looking forward to wealth and honours,
honours, urged her admirer to look out for a proper house for them, some where in Westminster, as she was convinced, she said, with good management (and she won'd not turn her back upon the first cook in London,) she should give greater suthfaction, and at a much less expence, than anv other people in a similar Üne. Mr. Wheeler made no doubt of her ta¬ lents, and having met with the house they still occupied in Marsham-street, Westmin¬ ster, he immediately hired it upon a lease. It was certainly at a great distance from Austin Friars, but that Powell thought was an advantage, as Mr. Wheeler sat so manv hours at his desk, that the walk would do him good : and, as Mrs. Haslemere had gaily promised to look in upon her when she was settled, and that she and Caroline should stand god-mothers to her first girl— not to mention the various handsome pre¬ sents that both mother and daughter made her, as Miss Haslemere continued extremely attached to her worthy nurse—the bride elect
elect considered herself upon the high road to happiness. Before, however, we set this amiable couple down in Marsham-street, we must beg our readers' pardon for dwelling so long upon their characters ; but they are so interwoven with our storv, we are obliged to be rather more prolix than we could have wished, in our details respect¬ ing them.
ШММ»
t HAP. HI. The wedding was kept in Austin Friars, Mr. Haslemere having chosen that his whole household should participate in the treat he gave the bride and bridegoom : and, that
that they might enjoy themselves free from all interruption, he seized the opportunity of paying Mr. and Mrs. W T elford a visit. Mrs. Haslemere and her daughter, of course, accompanied him ; and their absence from home enabled Mrs. Wheeler to invite ali the upper servants to her house-warming, at which most of the relations of the bride aud bridegroom were also present ; and the whole party were verv well satisfied with their entertainment. Having thus done what the bride deemed the handsome thing by all their friends, she busily employed herself in setriin? her household affairs, and preparing her house for the twelve boarders she proposed re¬ ceiving, as she could not have accommo¬ dated a larger number genteelly, she said ; but she soon discovered that it was not quite so easy a task to procure these said desirable inmates, as she could only boast of four at the expiration of six months ; nor did she ever muster more than six ; and that was entirely owing to her kind mis¬ tress's
tress's recommendation, as she did not give that satisfaction to her boarders she had hoped tö have done, in consequence of the more than frugality of her table ; and the Westminster boys were all, more or less, judges of good living, and by no means satisfied with the excellent management of their dame, who, when thoroughly pro¬ voked by their complaints, retorted with much acrimony and vulgarity. She gene¬ rally concluded by having them removed; and unfortunately her temper was by no means good, though she had always con¬ trived to curb it while a resident at Fir Grove, at least, she seldom gave way to it, but among the very inferior menials, who durst not report her to Mrs. Haslemere; and, while at the head of the nursery, she had never met with any contradictions or vexations : but novv, she was doomed to meet with nothing else, she conceived; since her boarders were continually leagu¬ ing together to torment and perplex her, amd her profits were by no means equal to her
her calculations, notwithstanding her daily boasts of her economy : and, as her half dozen inmates were reduced, at the expi¬ ration of the twelvemonth, to three, she foresaw that she should not be able to keep her carriage before she was eighty : and, to add to her perplexities, she began to fear she was not doomed to increase the Wheeler family, and was very angry with her husband, when he ventured to argue, " That it must be as it pleased God, vvho ordered every thing for the best." These, as he hoped, conciliating speeches, only added to her chagrin ; and, as she could be very provoking, she, more than once, made the prudent Wheeler repent not having adhered to a resolution he had once formed, of remaining a bachelor, as his better half certainly did not strive to ren¬ der home comfortable to him, scarcely al¬ lowing him to give his opinion respecting any of her arrangements : of course, he durst not interfere between her and the boarders, though he was convinced it would
would have been to their interest to have kept a better table ; but a bare hint of the kind was so deeply resented, he never ven¬ tured to doubt her skill in housekeeping again : and to his great satisfaction, as he hoped it might improve his helpmate's temper, she gave unequivocal signs of being in the family way during the second year, which induced her once more to style Wheeler " her dear Thomas," who, though very much pleased in one sense, began to fear that a family would greatly increase their expences, as his deary was already looking out for a steady nursery¬ maid ; since she could not take the sole charge of a young child, slie said» and ma¬ nage her house as she ought to do ; and, as to putting it out to nurse, that she would not hear of, as she should fear the dear little soul would be half starv ed, if not ren¬ dered a cripple for life, nurses were, in ge¬ neral, such careless drunken people. How¬ ever, in due time, to the great joy of both parents, the good Ie ' was delivered of a fine
fine boy, who w T as pronounced, by a jury of matrons, to be very likelv to live ; and the provident Mrs. Wheeler soon began to hope, the dear child would be a great com¬ fort to them in their declining years; and, in another week, she was busily employed in laying plans for the education of the infant, whom, she made no doubt, would soon surpass all the young torments she had hitherto been plagued with : at all events, even if she could get him upon the foundation, she was resolved he should ne¬ ver go to that seminary of vice and dissi¬ pation, Westminster School. Wheeler con¬ ceived it would be time enough to talk over those matters some years hence, but took no notice. Mrs, Haslemere, who had now and then honoured Mrs. Wheeler with a call, paid her an early lying-in visit, accompanied by her daughter, who brought a variety of presents for the baby ; and the lady in the straw did not fail to remind " her dear good lady" of her promise of standing godmother.
godmother. Mrs. Haslemere gaily remind- ed her, " that she had promised for a girl ; promising, nevertheless, to reflect upon it:" and, having mentioned the circum¬ stance to Mr. Haslemere, he kindly said, iC As it was a boy, he would stand god¬ father ; since, should the urchin live, he might, in time, succeed his father in the counting-house, and this would be a sort of tie upon the lad ;" and, though Thomas Wheeler would not have dared to have pre¬ ferred such a request., he was highly grati¬ fied when his kind benefactor made the proposal, vvho stood in person, never feel¬ ing above doing a generous action pub¬ licly. Mrs. Wheeler was no less profuse of her thanks and blessings, and would fain have had the child named George Ilasle- mere Wheeler, but to this the worthy mer¬ chant objected. It was, therefore, finally sett-led, that he should bc named John Powell, because Master llaslemere had been christened George Mirvan, after his mater¬ nal grandfather; and to this piece of folly Mr.
Mr. Haslemere тм!е no objection ; nor was he unmindful of his godson, to whom his daughter, in his name, made frequent pre¬ sents : but unfortunately, while Airs. Whee¬ ler was once more head nurse, as she suck¬ led her child herself, Mie paid so little at¬ tention to her boarders, that, before Afas¬ ier John could go alone, she had her house to herself. But she consoled herself for this misfortune by declaring, " that she meant, in future, to let lodgings:" and, just before she gave birth to the daughter we have already introduced to our readers, she did let her firat floor to an old bachelor of fortune, who, she hoped, would prove a great acquisition ; and Mr. Wheeler was so indefatigable in his inquiries for in¬ mates, that two merchants' clerks, with whom he was upon speaking terms, also became their lodgers. Meanwhile, Airs, and Aiiss Haslemere stood for the infant Caroline, who was named after Airs. Wheeler's sweet voung lady, and whom, she made no doubt, would be
be amply provided for as she grew up, by the generous munificence of Caroline Haslemere, now in her sixteenth vear, and whose beauty was her least merit, as she vied, in point of accomplishments, with most young women of her age; and her temper,' morals, and understanding, having been no less attended to, she was the de¬ light and pride of her parents, and the ad¬ miration of all their friends and acquaint¬ ance : and, as she had a much greater re¬ gard for her old nurse than she really de¬ served, she was extremely lavish in her presents to her god-daughter, vvho had but just entered her second year, when her maternal grandmother died : and as old Farmer Powell was very infirm, and his eldest son, who was to succeed him in the farm, was thought to be in a consumption. owing to his having neglected asevere cold which he had caught the preceding au¬ tumn, and as he was still a bachelor, and might play the fool for the sake of having a nurse, Mrs. Wheeler thought, she kindly 4 proposed,
proposed, immediately after her mother's funeral, to leave her own excellent house in Marsham-street, to take upon herself the Superintendance of the Mint Farm, not doubting, she said, of soon setting her brother upon his legs, and of consoling her father for the loss fhey had all sustained in their dear mother. Old Powell was exiremely gratified by these proofs of his eldest daughter's re¬ gard, nor was his son less pleased with his sister's determination : and as this excellent manager was no longer wanted in Marsham- street, since none of her lodgers ever did more than breakfast at home, and Mr. Wheeler had agreed to dine at a cook's shop in the vicinitv of Austin Friars, du¬ ring her absence, and was, besides, very competent, she knew, to keep Nanny (her then maid) to her duty, and to provide for her with proper frugality—she set out, with her two children and the nurserv- maid, for the Mint Farm, where they werCj of course, all maintained at free cost, which
which her other married sister by но means approved of; but, as Mrs. Wheeler had got into power, she found it impossible to drive her again from home. At the expiration of six months, the old farmer died, leaving all he was worth to his eldest son and his dear Dinah, who had certainly rendered his latter moments very comfortable. Mrs. Stubbs, her sister, ra\ e<J, and vowed it was a shame, and declared she would go to law for her share : but, as her husband had more sense, and her younger brother only laughed at her folly, at supposing Dinah would let any thing slip through her lingers, she, at last, ceased to rail at the superior cunning of her sister, who remained sole manager of her bro¬ thers house, till it pleased God to release him from all his mundane cares, within a few months after his father's death, leaving his kind sister sole heir to all he possessed ; and, as the country air particularly agreed with the children, and Mrs. Wheeler had a right, according to the lease, to hold the yoi.. ï. о farm
farm for eighteen months longer, she re¬ solved to continue in Surry, knowing Air. Wheeler was going on extremely well in town, as he cleared twenty pounds a-year by his lodgers, besides paying his rent and taxes ; and, as he dined most days in Aus¬ tin Friars, he was positively making money apace; and, as his better half prided her¬ self upon her skill in the dairy, &c. they looked forward with more sanguine hopes than ever. Indeed, Airs. Wheeler had been greatly induced to remain in Surry, owing to Aiiss Haslemere's being a constant resi¬ dent at the Grove, or at her aunt Wel¬ ford's (who was now a widow), by the or¬ ders of the Faculty; as she continued re¬ markably delicate, and so partial to her good Wheeler, that she frequently slept at the farm, by way of changing the air ; and her fond parents, and equally attached aunt, always fancied she appeared in bet¬ ter health and spirits when she returned from nurse's, as she still styled Mrs. W'heeler, who took the greatest pains to render
render every thing agreeable to her dear young lady, for whom she always cooked herself, never failing to provide various delicacies to flatter her appetite ; and, as her brother George spent his college vaca¬ tions at Fir Grove, Aîiss Haslemere appear¬ ed perfectly satisfied in the country. Air. W 7 hceler, who foresaw all the bene¬ fits which were likely to arise to his wife and children from this continual inter¬ course with Aiiss Haslemere, seldom or ever came down to the farm, for fear of breaking in upon the young lady, and ne¬ ver but by the express invitation of his wife ; giving for a reason to his friends, he dare not leave his house in town to the care of a servant, and Airs. Wheeler was confined in the country, from equallv pru¬ dential motives. But, soon after the de¬ mise of her brother, the sudden and very unexpected death of Aírs. Welford gave Aiiss llaslemere such a shock, that she was confined to her apartment for some days; as that lady had been particularly fond of υ 2 her
her from a child, and had evinced her sin¬ cere regard for her, by leaving her Rose Hill and the surrounding estate, which brought in about eight hundred a-year. To her nephew, George, she bequeathed twenty thousand pounds in the funds, of which he took immediate possession, being just of age ; but his sister's bequest was left her under the same restrictions her grandmother's had been ; and she was so frequent an invalid, her brother often fear¬ ed, he told his intimate acquaintance, she would not live to enjoy the bounty of her partial relations; not that he had ever evinced the least jealousy at her having been thus rendered independent, as he was extremely attached to her. She was no less partial to him; since, to oblige her, he was also a frequent visitor at nurse W ? heeler*s, who received a very handsome present, for mourning upon that melan¬ choly occasion, from both her dear chil¬ dren, as she styled George Haslemere and his sister: when, to the increasing grief of that
that amiable family, during their first mourning for Mrs. Wei ford, they were in* formed, by letters from Russia, that Mr. Mirvan was in u very declining state, and very anxious to see his daughter, before he departed this life for a better; of course, immediate preparations were made by Mr. llaslemere, who was also invited to St. Pe- tersburgh, for their voyage. Unfortunately, Miss llaslemere was in much too precarious a state to admit of their taking her, late in the autumn, into such a cold climate ; h\~ uceó, her medical attendants would not have suffered her to undertake such a voy¬ age. It was therefore settled, by her own desire, that she should remain Mrs. Whee¬ ler's inmate during their absence, as the farm-house was large and Commodious, and she could not bear the idea of bein«: left alone at the Grove, much less of taking up her abode at Kose Hill. Her brother pro¬ mised to be her frequent visitor ; and, as the anxious parents sailed for ÎUıssia, al¬ most immediately upon receipt of the let- D J ters
ters mentioning Air. Mirvan 's illness, they had no time to seek a more eligible situa¬ tion for their beloved Caroline ; indeed, Mrs, Haslemerc had been so affected bv the intelligence respecting her father, that she had almost mechanically given into her daughter's plans ; but, no sooner had she lost sight of the shores of Albion, than she blamed herself for not having engaged some eligible female companion for her beloved Caroline, who might have recon¬ ciled her to residing at Fir Grove. Air. Haslemere, wishing to tranquillize her, ob¬ served, Ci that, as Caroline's education was completed, spending a few months, in such a sequestered situation, might prove of material benefit to her health ; and no one would be more careful to enforce the or¬ ders of her medical attendants than Whee¬ ler, who, he made no doubt, would watch over her as tenderly as they could have done ; and, as she might visit and be visited by all her friends, and George was within a few hours drive of her, he thought, all things
things considered, they had no reason to regret having left her at the Mint Farm, where she would be able to eìijoy a milk diet in perfection." Mrs. Haslemere was rather more recon¬ ciled to her daughters situation, by this reasoning ; and, after a very quick passage, they landed safe at St. Petersburgh, where they arrived just in time to close Mr, Mir¬ va n 's eyes, who had bequeathed his whole fortune to Mr. Haslemere, which obliged that gentleman to spend the ensuing win¬ ter in Russia. Mrs. Haslemere could not think of returning alone, indeed, she re¬ ceived such favourable accounts of her daughter, that she felt reconciled to their temporary separation ; as she hoped, that the regular hours she kept, and the quiet she enjoyed at the farm, would greatly contri¬ bute to the entire restoration of her health : and, early in the spring, these anxious pa¬ rents re-embarked for England, rejoicing in the hopes of a speedy re-union with their children ; since, though owing to π 1 their
their continual dread of losing her, they were, perhaps, rather more tenderly at¬ tached ίο their daughter, their son was no less the object of their fond affection. lie gave them the meeting upon their landing; but his looks so forcibly convin¬ ced them that he Was the herald of bad news, that they both, in a breath, eagerly inquired— " How is Caroline ? We hoped she would also have given us the meeting." His evasive answers, and averted looks, soon taught them to dread the worst ; and, by degrees, he informed them, (i that she had breathed her last at the Mint Farm, about ten days before, in consequence of having caught a slight cold, which had brought on an inflammation upon her lungs, that had bafTIed all the skill of her medical attendants." Thus, at the early age of nineteen and four months, died the interesting Caroline Haslemere, who had been consigned to her mother earth, as speedily as decency per¬ mitted, to spare her parents the additional shock
shock of witnessing her funeral. Sincerely did they grieve for the amiable girl ; and George, though so material a gainer by her demise, was no less affected; and as for Airs. Wheeler, she declared, " she would much sooner have followed both her own children to the grave, than have lost her dear sweet Miss Haslemere ;" declaring her intention of immediately giving up her farm, as she could not bear to reside in a place which would so continually remind her of her beloved young lady; therefore, to· London she would return, as soon as ever she could dispose of what little she had in the country : and it may be supposed, that her grief and conduct, upon this trying oc¬ casion, greatly endeared her to Air. and Airs. Haslemere ; as they were convinced^ though by no means blind to her faults, that she would almost have laid down her own life, to have saved that of their child. The lenient hand of time rendered their sorrow less poignant; and, as their son was now become their constant inmate, all J> 5 í hear.
their hopes and affection were now center¬ ed in him. Mr. Mirvan had died immensely rich, and Mr. Haslemere would have been temp¬ ted, to have given up business, could he have done so immediately upon his returU to England ; but as this was absolutely im¬ practicable, after a time he gave up lhe idea, particularly as he soon perceived that his son bid fair to squander and dissi¬ pate the largest fortune ; and a life of idle¬ ness, he was well convinced, would only strengthen his present bad habits, and ren¬ der him a decided votary of pleasure. Iîc, therefore, made a point of his devoting .some hours of the day to the counting- house ; and, as he soon greatly diminished the handsome fortune he had come into úpon his sister's death, by his propensity fo every species of gambling, he thought it most prudent to accede to his father's wishes; as, by this means, he hoped, in time, to be able once more to give way to his partiality for racing, cards, and dice. Tn
Tn conformity to his sister's last wishes, having been with her when she died, he frequently visited the Wheelers, often de¬ claring, ir that he should always respect the old woman, for the care and attention· she had bestowed upon his dear Caroline :" and as he was blessed with an excellent constitution himself, he considered him¬ self under some obligations to her good nursing, for the robust state of his health. Little of moment ensued, during the succeeding four years. Air. and Airs, Haslemerc continued to notice the Whee¬ ler family, even more kindly than heieto- fore; the latter frequently calling in Alar- sham-streer, as she delighted in talking of her deceased Caroline ; and Mrs. Wheeler could expatiate for hours upon the mild¬ ness, patience, and sweet temper of the dear saint ; and, having always tears at com¬ mand, she never failed to shed a torrent ίο the memory of the deceased, when she had exhausted her stores oí pauegvric; not for- getting;, neverthcle-s to louud the prices L G of
of her own children, whenever opportu¬ nity OÍľercd. John, who was now in his eighth year, could, if she was to be be¬ lieved, read the hardest chapter in the Bible without spelling a word, and wratc very prettily ; and as for cyphering, his master declared he was a prodigy, consi¬ dering the time he had learnt. Caroline, though so much younger, took to her book very prettily, as well as her needle : and as Mrs. Haslemerc seldom went empty- handed, and appeared very fond of her god-daughter, her visits were doubly wel¬ come. And at her and his son's request, much about this period, Mr. Haslemerc, though conscious Wheeler was hardly com¬ petent to the piace, promoted him to a far more lucrative situation in his counting- house, than the one he then held, and in¬ creased his salary, from a hundred and twenty to two hundred a-year. Mrs. Wheeler, who took all the merit of his promotion to herself, bid him bless God he had such a wife, as she knew how 3 to
to throw in a hint â propos, and to turn every thing to account; while he, poor plodding fool, would have drudged on to all eternity, without bettering either his own or his children's fortune ; whereas, if he would be guided by her, who had more sense in her little finger than he had in his whole body, she did not despair of seeing their son's, if not his name, added to the firm of Haslcmere and Son. Mr. Wheeler shook his head, observing, *' f he was not so ambitious— to see his son succeed him in the counting-house, was as much as he expected : they were now, thank God, what with his salary, their re¬ cent savings, and what she had come into, from her father, and brother, and Miss Haslemerc's death, in possession of a de¬ cent income; and, if they kept their first iloor let, they need not care for any one :" and, to do him justice, he endeavoured, by his attention and diligence, to make amends for his deficiency in point of talents : there- fore, Mr. Haslcmere did not repent having promoted
promoted him rather against his inclina¬ tion ; and Mrs. Wheeler was foreseeing, that Afrs. Haslemere would very likely adopt her Caroline, to console her for the loss of her own, when that lady, who had enjoyed but a verv indifferent state of health since her daughter's death, was seized with a fever, which carried her off in a fortnight. Air. Haslemere was so decnlv affected by this melancholy event, thai, had 'it not been for the representations and advice of his friends, he would have resigned his commercial concerns to his son, and have retired to Fir Grove for life; but his anxi¬ ous friends were so convinced that the ne¬ cessary dissipation and employment which his counting-house would afford him, was far more likely than a life of seclusion, to lessen his grief for his departed wife, that he rather reluctantly gave up to their bet¬ ter judgment ; and the reflection that his son, though now in his twenty-seventh year, was by no means competent to suc¬ ceed
ceed him in his extensive concerns, made him resolve to rouse himself from the state of apathy into which he had fallen, by ap¬ plying more closely than ever to business. Mrs. Wheeler had been a sincere mour¬ ner for her former mistress, and so had her more feeling husband ; but, when she learnt from him that it was very dubious whether Mr. Haslemere would ever again resume his place in the counting-house, she most sin¬ cerely participated in his well-grounded alarms, as she was well aware that George Haslemere would soon be tired of what he deemed drudgery, and those who succeed¬ ed him might not retain the present clerks; and then, God knows what might be the consequence, " as i>he should never be able to get him another situation like his pre¬ sent one," she constantry told him ; " and it would be a shocking thing should he be thrown out of bread, or be reduced to be a mere dependant upon the bounty of the younger Mr. Haslemere." Great, there¬ fore, was her joy, when she understood every
every thing w T as to remain in statu quo in Austin Friars; and, either in a fit of grati¬ tude towards Heaven, upon being thus re¬ lieved from all her frights and fears, or from some other equally praise-worthy motive, she brought home, with the entire approbation of her husband, a very deli¬ cate, though fine bov, between four and five years old, whom she vowed she blush¬ ed to acknowledge, " was a natural child of her poor dear brother Frank's, whom he had recommended to her notice so strongly upon his death-bed, though he was then a mere infant, that she had promised him, poor soul, she would never see him want, but that she would put him in the way of earning his livelihood in an honest manner. Hitherto she had paid for him at nurse; but, as she was well convinced that, even in London, he would thrive better under her care, though she could not say he had been neglected, (indeed she had paid a good price for him), whv, she had brought him home, as she could not answer it to her conscience,
conscience, after the promises she had made the deceased, not to see he was well done by." Most of her acquaintance gave her great credit for her humanitv, and both the Mr. Ilaslemercs highly applauded her conduct, when they heard of the circumstance ; and though the merchant had never called in Marsham-street since the death of his wife, he sent Mrs. Wheeler a twenty pound note, with a kind message expressive of his ap¬ probation, promising, if the boy lived and did well, that he would be his friend in future. The good lady chose to go into Austin Friars, to return her thanks for this favour in person; assuring the benevolent and worthy Haslemere, that she would endea¬ vour to bring up the poor dear lamb (who was not to blame for his parents' errors) in a way likely to make him deserving of his future notice.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. About a twelvemonth after his mother's death, Mr. George Haslemere led a young city heiress to the altar, whose large fortune was certainly her greatest attraction, as she was by no means handsome, and her ac¬ complishments were of the most superficial kind, notwithstanding she had been, for many years, at one of the first boarding- schools in the environs of London ; but then she was to have, first and last, a hun¬ dred and twenty thousand pounds, admit¬ ting that her father's speculations succeed¬ ed according to his calculations ; and the fifty thousand he gave her on her marriage, though
though he took care to secure her adequate settlements, had induced George Hasle¬ mere to overlook all her deficiencies. The elder Mr. Haslemere kindly made the lady an offer of his town-house, ob¬ serving, " that he merely wished to be their guest when business confined him in London ;" but the high-spirited bride-elect declared, " she had been cooped up in the city long enough : she was now resolved to Jive at the west end of the town, where she might breathe a little fresh air, and make a few fashionable acquaintance." Mr. Haslemere said no more : therefore a very elegant house, in Baker-street, Port- man-square, was taken, and fitted up in the most sumptuous manner, for the new-mar¬ ried couple, who took up their abode there, when they returned from a short tour they had set out upon from the church-door; and as they lived in great style, and the house of Haslemere and Son was known to be upon a very firm footing, they did not want for visitors among the higher classes. Mrs
Airs. Wheeler, as having nursed the bride¬ groom, took an early opportunity of pay¬ ing her respects to the new-married couple, and of wishing them joy, &c. Airs. Haslemere was very civil to the old woman during the first visit, which induced Airs. WTieeler to repeat her enquiries so often, that she began to think the " vulgar old wretch made infinitely too free, upon the strength of having nursed her husband," which she did not fail to hint to that gen¬ tleman, who spoke so highly in Wheeler's praise, and seemed so bent upon humour¬ ing the old woman, that he highly offended his better half, who had none of that milk of human kindness in her disposition, which had so greatly distinguished both his mo¬ ther and sister, whose example he pleaded upon the present occasion, declaring, f ' she might do as she liked, but from him his nurse should always experience a kind re¬ ception," Airs. Haslemere had a very narrow mind, and was naturally of a very curious disposi¬ tion ;
tion ; and having a very high opinion of her own discernment, or rather low cun¬ ning, she soon fancied that there was more than met the eve in her husband's avowed predilection in favour of this disagreeable, loxv-lifcd, canting old gossip ; for when any body had the misfortune of falling under her displeasure, there was no vice of which she did not persuade herself thev were, or would be guilty, if the opportunity offer¬ ed : and having heard that Mrs. AVheeler had adopted a natural child of her bro¬ ther's, with the avowed approbation of both the Mr. HasJcmeres, she began to sus¬ pect there vas a mysterv relative to this base-born brat, which she fancied herself fully competent to fathom. She had heard her housekeeper say, ce that he was both a handsome and a clever boy ; and was it likely," she observed to one of her confi¬ dential friends, c ' that any relation of that dowdy old fussock's, dame Wheeler, should be either handsome, or even endowed with a common share of understanding. As for her
her own son," she continued, " you never saw a more shambling, кпоск-кпееЧ!, blear- eyed, stupid-looking animal, of ten years old ; and her daughter is a little pert minx, whose vulgarity can only be compared to her awkwardness : therefore, if the voung bastard deserves half the encomiums Kelly bestows upon him, he is no Wheeler." Her friend rather encouraged the suspi¬ cions she found she entertained, but ad¬ vised her to see the child before she avowed her doubts of his relationship to the Whee¬ lers to her husband ; and as she would have deemed it infinitely beneath a woman of her consequence and fortune to have called in Marshan-street, she chose to have Mrs. Wheeler into her dressing-room the next time she called; and after chatting in the kindest manner to the old woman for some time, she desired her, in a gay good-hu¬ moured manner, " to bring her little pro¬ tegee in her hand, the next time she came into Baker-street." Mrs, Wheeler, who was entirely the dupe of
of this unexpected condescension in the heretofore proud lady, presumed Mr. George Haslemere had made a point of her treating her with civility ; and as it was certainly very kind in her, to expressa wish to see her poor brother's bastard, to use her own expression, she hoped that she had mistaken her character, and that she would improve upon acquaintance. The following week, therefore, having adorned the child in an entire new suit, which he had made upon this occasion, she set out with him to pay this grand visit. Being extremely lively of his age, and in particular high spirits upon this memorable day, the moment the servant opened the door, and said, ee How are yon, Mr?. Wheeler ? why, who have you got here ?" he exclaimed, in a gay tone, " My name is Frank Yates, and 1 am come with my m 'am to see Mrs. Haslemere—Is she at home ?— but, if she is not, I shall stop till I see her —shan't 1, m'am?" Mrs. Wheeler desired him " not to prate so
sc fast," while the servant laughed, saying, " lie was no fool ;". and the old woman's looks convinced the child she was not dis¬ pleased with him : but, upon being in¬ formed that Mrs. Haslemere was at home, she gave the child fresh instructions re¬ specting his behaviour, while the servant asked her to walk into the housekeeper's room, while he let his lady know she was come, as he supposed the child would like something to eat before he went up stairs ; adding, " Aiy mistress is in the drawing- room." Airs. W 7 heeler readily agreed to the pro¬ posal, but had not advanced many steps, ere the lady of the mansion came tripping- down the grand staircase ; having, accord¬ ing to her constant custom* when alone, put her head out of the drawing-room door the moment she heard the knock; and, upon advancing towards the stairs, she had leant sufficiently over the banisters to overhear all that had passed ; and, being extremely impatient to see this prating, gav
gav child, she fled down stairs ; but not wishing to have it supposed she knew there was any bod v in the halí, she exclaimed, with well-affected astonishment—' f Is not that Mrs. Wheeler ?" Upon hearing herself thus addressed, the good lady turned round, and making a re¬ spectful curtsey, was advancing with Trank în her hand, when, in direct contradiction to the instructions he had been receiving, be withdrew his hand, and, springing for¬ ward to the foot of the stairs, caught a very handsome pug-dog in his arms, which had followed its mistress down stairs, bcţrinnin£[ to kiss and make of it. lîe approached Mrs, Hasîemere, saying— fi Oh, if you will but give me this pretty dog, 1 will take «Teat care of it, and buy it ;0nic uiivyer- bread." "Ofie, Frank!" cried Mrs.WhccIer — " where's your bow, Sir?—How flare лой be so rude?" while the diverted Mrs. llaslemere desired her guests to follow her into the parlour, where she told Frank. >UL. I. Е " уи-
<e she could not part with her dog, but she would give him some other plaything/' and as the Yitile pet began to growl, not being partial to children, he put him down by her desire, saying— u I could soon make him love me, if he was mine ; but will you give me a puppy, M'am, when it has any ?" Mrs. Haslemere laughed very heartily, telling him, " she should have no objec¬ tion to obliging him, only unfortunately Caro was a dog." (( But you will let me play with him when I come to see you, then may be it vill follow me, and I will bring it home again, I assure you/* Mrs. llaslemere promised she would, calling him to her, and asking him, " how he liked London ?" u Oh, not half so well as I did Ditton, where I lived with mammy nurse : there I used to run in the fields and pick black¬ berries—but there are no fields nor hedges in London." f( And
Vi And what was mammy nurse's name?" " Dame Waters." Thus did this curious lady interrogate the artless boy by no means to the satis¬ faction of Mrs. Wheeler, though she durst not interfere ; but she appeared so uneasy upon her chair, and her colour came and went so frequently, Mrs. Haslcmere was more and more convinced that there was some mystery belonging to this sprightly bov, whom she now firmly believed was her husband's. Therefore, no*t appearing to notice the perplexity of her elder guest, she proceeded to ask Fiank, " whether he knew Mr. Llaslemere?" C( О yes—he had oft«*n seen him at M'am's—he had given him some money to buy playthings." if W f ell, that w T as very good of him ; and so will I, if you are a good boy." Then turning to Mrs. Wheeler, she said, with an arch smile— %e Though this is your bro¬ ther's son, he docs not bear the slightest e 2 resemblance
resemblance cither to vou or your chil¬ dren." " I cant say he does, Ma'am—indeed he takes most after his mother." " Well—but now, my good friend, do tell me truly," rejoined the smiling Mrs. llaslemere, " for I give you my honour 1 will keep the secret ; indeed, should I have guessed how matters stand, Ishall feel very much interested for the little fellow, who is certainly a nice boy ; so tell me really and truly whether he is your bro¬ ther's natural child ?" Airs. Wheeler by no means relished this point-blank enquiry; indeed her confu¬ sion, notwithstanding the pains she tooi о conceal it, was verv visible. " La, Aía'am," at last she stammered out, (( what a strange question !—What interest could I have had to tell a falsity about the child ? Bless God, I never was accused be¬ fore of having wished to deceive anv body. Poor dear Airs. Haslemere, that is dead and gone.
«■one, had a better opinion of me, and sa lad her daughter, that is in heaven, аз sure as I sit here. Ιΐ Frank had not been mv brother's son, why should 1 have taken to him pray, Ma'am ? for I assure you, I would not have encumbered m vse i f with other people's by-blows, to have obliged the best friend I had." Mrs. Haslemere might have credited these assertions, had Mrs. Wheeler seemed less confused ; but her evident embarrass¬ ment rather increased her suspicions. " Positively, Mrs. Wheeler," she resumed in a very gay tone, " you have strangely misunderstood me, if you supposed I ac¬ cused you of having acted wrong respect¬ ing this child, since, had my conjectures proved true, 1 should have found much to admire, and nothing to blame, in your con¬ duct. The boy docs both you and Dame Waters credit ; for, though he is evidently a delicate plant, 1 am convinced he has been extremely well nursed, and 1 think r 3 he
he bids fair to become a dever fellow in time." " Thank God^ bia 'am, I have nothing to accuse myself with upon his account, nor bas his poor father, v/ho iş dead and gone ; but your suspicions rather startled me, Ma'am. Pray may I be so bold as to ask whose child you thought he %vas ?" f< I am convinced he is your brother's, Mrs. Wheeler, since your declarations have removecj all my suspicions; though had I, as I told you, guessed right, it might have been the better for the child ; at all events, I never would have disclosed any secrets which you might have thought fit to have intrusted me with : however, as I was ín the wrong, and аз I very unintentionally flurried and distressed you, why we will drop the subject; and as í am going out, I must wish you a good morning :" leaving the room without taking any farther notice of young Frank, who had already enticed Caro into, a game at play, which ended upon
upon Mrs. Haslemere's leaving the room,. as she called him to her. Mrs. Wheeler was by no means pleased with the haughty fame's abrupt termina¬ tion of the conversation, as she fully ex¬ pected she would have made Frank a hand¬ some present, instead of which, she had not even deigned to notice him, when she left the room: more than half affronted, she proceeded into the housekeeper's roo*;i. where, for the benefit of the upper ser¬ vants, she repeated nearly every word which had passed between her and Airs. Haslemere. tc I will be sworn," cried the butler, (r Aiadam fancied the bov was nearer re- lated to my master than to you, Airs. Wheeler." The matron- coloured, declaring, " she would have Airs. Haslemere know, that, if she had nursed her husband, she would not have nursed his bastards. She supposed the next crotchet she took into her head would be, that she knew the mother." д4 (ί I should*
*' I should not wonder," said that lady's woman ; ** for she is so jealous of my mas¬ ter, he can hardly speak a civil word to me without setting her upon my back." " Andjhough she had plenty of money/* added the housekeeper, " she has a very mean spirit." Thus was the ball kept up—Mrs. Whee¬ ler being among the first to condemn her, since she was convinced that she meant to affront her, as she was not, as she had said, going out; while her household foresaw she would never keep a good servant, she had such nasty, mean, suspicious, prying notions. " Aye, aye—she will soon make my mas¬ ter's heart ache," said the valet. " Ecod, she had best not shew her airs too much," replied Mrs. Wheeler ; rf for Mr. George has a spirit, and if she does provoke him, he will shew her the odds of it ;" when, having lunched, and what she deemed eased her mind, she set out upon her return home. Mrs.
Airs. Haslemere, who had guessed thafc her servants were animadverting upon her conduct, would have given some money to have known what Aírs. Wheeler had said; but unfortunately, she so often? changed her own women, she durst not place any confidence in the one now in office, else she felt that she might sooir have had her doubts either confirmed or removed ; though she was now well con¬ vinced, in her own mind, that this hand* some, well made, clever child, was no more Farmer Powell's than it was her's, since he evidently bore a much stronger resem¬ blance to the Haslemere than to the WHice- 1er family ; of course, he must be a natu» ral son of her husband's, vvho probably stili' kept the mother, whom, as Aírs* Wheeler had foreseen, she suspected îod ged in her house. The bare supposition rendered her nearly frantic, as she was jealous of every female' to whom her husband was barel ν civil; however, cost what it would, she now firmly resolved to have chapter ard verse respecting Frank; and. should hi* e 5 moi h er·
mother be still a favourite, she was deter- mincd> at every risk, to break off the dis¬ graceful connexion. A confidante, there¬ fore, she must engage, who would under¬ take to watch all her husband's movements when from home, as she must know where he spent his time, and, if possible, how he employed himself. Had the boy been her own, she felt that she should have been proud of htm; but she felt inclined to hate her husband's bastard : at all events; she, was resolved to put a stop to Mrs. Wheeler's future visits in Baker-street, even if she forbid her the house. Thus, upon the mere strength of her own con¬ jectures, she nearly fretted herself into a fever, before her husband came home to dinner, not having decided, when she heard his voice in the hall, whether she should at once tax him with being the father of Trank, or whether she should firet endeavour to be more au fait of the boy's history; and, were she to acciisc him as her heart prompted, she miglit only put him "pon his guard, and 3 thoá
thus enable him to hafHe all her private en¬ quiries. Thus do many curious people lay the foundation for their own misery, since· no woman" ever reclaimed a libertine hus¬ band by keeping spies upon his conduct,. or by making home disagreeable to him : and if Mrs. Haslemere did not absolutely break, out into reproaches during dinner, she w T as so cross and peevish, and such bad company, that her husband, who had cer¬ tainly not married for love, disgusted by her ill humour, left home immediately after dinner, and did not return till the night was so far advanced, that, tired with watching,. she had fallen asleep. As this absolute proof of indifference only increased her spleen^ she gave her present woman warning, while- dressing the next morning, declaring, that she ^ would have one less proficient in the duties of the toilette, who might, in consequence,, be less impertinent; having one in view, whom, she conceived, would answer ex¬ tremely well as a spy. Her father's house¬ keeper had а daughter now- at service,. e G * whom*.
whom she knew would rejoice at being promoted to the lucrative post of lady's maid, as her mother had often hinted a wish of the kind, both before and since Mrs. Haslemeres marriage; but she had hitherto put a decided negative upon the request, alledging, that she was much too ignorant ίο be admitted into her dressing- room ; but as she now conceived that she could make such a girl entirely subservient to her whims and caprices, she sent for her moi he r immediately after breakfast, to whom she made no small merit cf her kind intentions in hxr daughters favour, de¬ siring she would give her notice to quit her present situation immediately, as she wished her to take а few lessons under а celebrated hair-dresser, before she came into Baker-street, as she was sure her fa¬ ther would not object to her being with- her mother w hue her present maid staid ; desiring, nevcr;hek"xý. to see her daily in B aker- street. The poor gir!, elated with the idea of so unexpected
unexpected a promotion, soon made her appearance in Mrs. Haslemere's dressing- room, who having first sworn her to se¬ crecy, next desired her, during the ensuing week, to watch wherever Mr. Haslemere went, giving her full instructions how to proceed ; and, during the ensuing eight days, she followed him twice into Marsham- street, and reported ha\ing seen him at the parlour-window, playing with a sweet little boy. This was proof positive, in his wife's opinion, of Lis being the father of the child ; and as Anne had also seen him go into another house in Westminster, of ra¬ ther a mean appearance, that was, of course, the abode of the mother, since she understood Mrs. Wheeler had no ladv- lodgers: at all events, she would accuse him point blank of being related to little Francis : and, while she was settling how to commence her premeditated attack, Mrs. Wheeler, whose curiosity was fully equal to Mrs. Haslemere's, and who had, besides, private reasons for being rather anxious, as she
she told her husband, u to know how the* cat jumped in Бакег -street," proceeded thither, not meaning to see the lady of the house, though, should chance lead her into the hall, or housekeeper's room, while she was there, she meant to say, that, having come into the neighbourhood, she had just looked in to enquire how the family did ; and as she saw Mrs. Haslemere at the win¬ dow before she knocked at the door, she was prepared to make this excuse for so doing ; but, at the very moment the ser¬ vant had given her admittance, the great lady put her head out of the parlour-door, saying, in a pretty loud key, " I am not at home to any body, John." This was too pointed an insult to be overlooked by Mrs. Wheeler, who had to the full as much silly pride as the speaker,. grafted upon a degree of ignorant vulga¬ rity hardly to have been expected in a wo¬ man who had lived so many years in a well- regulated genteel family, and had been in such favour, with the female part of it. Regardless
Regardless now, however, either of the consequences, or of the respect she owed her superiors, she instantly exclaimed, " And who cares, Madam, whether you arc at home or no ?—I did not come here to eat or drink at your expence, í can assure you ; for, thank God, I need not be be¬ holden to any one for a meal of victuals. I merely called as I was passing the door, to enquire how the family did. However, as this is the return for my civility, it shall be some time before I darken these doors again." This polite, speech was delivered in a sufficiently loud accent to enable the listen¬ ing lady, notwithstanding she had closed the parlour-door, to overhear all she said. The encouraging smiles of the diverted footman had induced the provoked lady not to mince her words; when, having brought her polite harangue to a conclu¬ sion,, she bounced out of the house, and hastened down the streel, as if she had been going farther. In consequence, how¬ ever,
ever, of the mortification she had received, she walked hom* 4 very fast : and as she told the maid, when she leU Marsham-street, (i it was very uncertain whether she should return to dinner, at all events, the family were not to wait for her," the girl hail taken the opportunity, when she went for a cabbage to boil with the salt-beef, to gossip with some of her friends: Master John and Miss Cary being at their respec¬ tive dav-schools, she had taken the. kev and little Frank along with her. lier mistress therefore, after knocking twice, guessing ahe was, contrary to her express orders, chattering in the neighbourhood, felt her passion rise; as she alwavs laid a strict in¬ junction upon her servants, never to leave the house while she was out, as there was no knowing, as she verv justly observed, who might call, or what might happen, while they were all absent. Having, how¬ ever, no alternative but patience, she wa, walking up and down the street when Jane returned, who hoped, upon perceiving he», that
that bhc had not vet knocked ; and, in con- sequence of this idea, she declared, " she had not been gone three minutes," calling upon Francis to second her falsity. Her enraged mistress vowed, u she had a vast fairv to box her ears, since, not content with telling an abominable falsity herself, she must endeavour to teach a mere baby to tell lies ;" vowing, <{ that she had, after almost knocking the door down, been pacing the street for more than half an hour." Jane, who was rather tinctured with her mistress's failings, muttered, " that, if all liars were to have their ears boxed, Mrs. Wheeler's would often tingle; however, she might provide herself with another ser¬ vant, as she did not choose to be half starved, and threatened into the bargain." *"' You have only saved mc the trouble of giving you warning, you impudent hussey !—but go for the blacksmith this moment, that 1 may have a plate put over the key-hole; i.ir.cc I am resolved I will never,
never, in future, run the risk of having my house stripped, and of being shut out when I reach my own door." Jane made an impertinent reply ; and Mrs. \Vheeler having put her threat re¬ specting the key-hole into execution, the new plate caught Mr. Whccler'b attention when he came home to dinner. He, there¬ fore, guessed something was amiss, before he knocked, and his wife immediately re¬ lated to him all the provocations she had met with since he had left home. Jane's fault he made rather light of, observing, " that all girls would gossip whenever they found an opportunity ;" but as she suited them in other respects, he advised his deary to make matters up again, offering to bé the mediator between them. For once in her life, Mrs. W 7 heeler was guided by his advice ; as she agreed theirs, was a hard place, and she did not give Jenny great wages, nor was she a great eater. The old gentleman was, therefore, empowered to extend the olive branch to the offending menials
menial : he applauded her determination of never visiting again in Baker-street, since Mrs. Haslcmere had treated her very shabbily ; but he had always thought her a proud, upstart minx. However, she had better not carry her airs too far, for he fancied Air. George would be master ; and as there was no doubt of his continuing their friend, though he should scorn to make mischief between man and wife, he wished Aii*s. Wheeler to tell him how she had been treated. She vowed "she would not mince the matter, as she was deter¬ mined to put a spoke in madam's wheel :" and thus the debate ended.
СП Λ P.
CHAP. V. We will now return to Baker-street. Mrs. Wheeler had not been gone more than half an hour, before Mrs, Haslemere's maid- elect, or rather confidential spy, made her appearance, who informed her mistress, " that she had seen Mr. Haslemere that very morning, talking to a very handsome young lady in Cavendish-square, where they appeared to have met, whether by accident or design, she could not say, but they had chattered for ten minutes, or more ; and, when they separated, they had each turned to look after each other more than once, and she had followed the hdy into a milliner's shop in Bond-street." .Mrs.
Mrs. Haslemere required no farther proof, she said, of this being a rendez¬ vous, as Mr. Haslemere had, contrary to his usual custom, left home on foot; of course, for the express purpose of meeting this trollop— ff Should she know her again ?" she asked her confidante. íŕ She rather thought she should—though she could not be certain, as she wore a long white veil over a white hat, or bon¬ net." <( Why did you not follow her into the shop, where you might have cheapened something ?" The girl observed— tc She was fearful the lady might have perceived she had follow¬ ed her, therefore might have suspected she was watched ; and, had she given her any such suspicions, she might have mentioned the circumstance to Mr. Haslemere, who would ccrtainlv have left no stone unturn- ed to discover who she was, and by whose orders she was acting." Mrs. llaslemere gave her credit for her prudence ;
prudence; but, having taken down the di¬ rection of the milliners, she ordered her carriage, and proceeded thi t лег immedi¬ ately. There were several ladies m the shew-rooms, but none answering the de¬ scription of the female she wished to see. Being, however, purposely very difficult to please, the milliner rung for one of her assistants, who was desired to bring down a turban she had in hand. The voung person ihwi called upon -oon made h<r ap¬ pearance ; and, as she was a very elegant gii', and was dressed all in white, the jea¬ lous lady immediately conceived ^he was the verv female her vile husband had met in the square ; nay, so mi»ch was she pre¬ possessed with this idea, that <he even dis¬ cerned a very strong likeness between this handsome young woman, who seemed about four-and-twenty, and little Francis, as she had also auburn hair and blue eves. With some difficulty she concealed her emotion, while she gazed so rudelv at the young milliner, that she greatly increased her
her colour; which was such a proof of her «niilt, she was very much inclined to have accused her point blank, of intriguing with her husband; but prudence having sug¬ gested the impropriety of yielding thus publicly to her feelings, she merely de¬ sired, in an imposing tone, ŕí that the tur¬ ban might bc s»jnt to Airs. Hash mere's, Eakcr-strcct, Portman-square ;" meaning ш petrifv the guilty slut by the sound of her name : to her great surprise, she did not even seem disconcerted: neverthe¬ less, as she had pronounced her guilty, she was resolved to collider her so ; and re-· turned home, determined to commence her projected attack upon her husband without loss of time. Therefore, no sooner were the servants withdrawn after dinner, than, with apparent gaiety, she enquired— " Have you seen vour old nurse to-dav, George ?" " So — What induced y on to make the inquiry ?" ťf Why,
ff Why, I believe I half affronted the old lady this morning." " I am sorry to hear so, as she has long been attached to our family ; and, out of respect to my sister's memory, with whom she was a very great favourite, I have re¬ solved to continue her friend. Therefore, I regret you should have fallen out with her, as you ought to make allowances for her ignorance of the forms of good-breed¬ ing ; since, though she may not always ex¬ press herself properly, she means well." ec Upon my word, I should have been more guarded in my behaviour towards her, George, had I guessed she was such a pro¬ digious favourite. However, you may have reasons for indulging her in liberty of speech, of which I was not aware; for, to tell you the truth, I fancy she is still Mrs. Nurse; so pray confess the truth, and tell me whether it was not out of regard for his father, that she undertook the care of Frank Yates?" " I alwavs
" I always understood so," replied the evidently surprised Haslemere— u but to what do your inquiries tend, as they seem to mean more than meets the ear ? There¬ fore, in the first place, tell me what has passed between you and Wheeler?" " You are resolved to become the oM woman's champion, I perceive ; but, to tell you the truth, I am half jealous ofthat little urchin ; though, if you are perfectly sincere with me, I rather think he will soon rank among my favourite«, since he certainly bears a much stronger resem¬ blance to you than to Dame Wbeeler, or either of her brats." " You are the first person who ever made the discovery," replied the provoked husband cc since I now perceive vou fancy the child is mine. But I give you my ho¬ nour you are mistaken in your conjec¬ tures ; and I am extremely sorry that so absurd a notion should have induced you to be rude to a very worthy honest wo¬ man." voe, i. r (< O,
" O, positively î did not quarrel with her about the brat, nor had I any absolute intention of rousing her angry passions, though she is by no means sach a favourite of mine as she is of yours ; but just as she was coming in, before indeed I was aware of the circumstance, I, as I often do, put my head without the parlour-door, and *old John I was not at home, when your meek nurse not only retorted upon me in the most impertinent manner, but finally bounced off like a tragedy-queen, de¬ claring, as I have since been informed, * that she would never darken these doors again/ Therefore, if you persist in re¬ maining friends with the gentle dame, you must henceforth visit her at her own house." " I perceive you have both been to blame, Mrs. Haslemere. As Wheeler was Jn the hall when you spoke to John, you might, without lowering yourself, have given her to understand, that you did not include your inferiors in the orders you were
were giving, which she took in the literal sense ; and as she is rather pettish, and was always treated with great indulgence by my mother and sister, she felt hurt at be¬ ing slighted by a Haslemere, as she is par¬ ticularly attached to me from having brought me up, which is extremely na- mraE*' €t O, no doubt—and your children must be doubly dear to her." This was said in such a spiteful tone, that her husband felt himself, like Whee¬ ler, very much offended ; and as he was not restrained by love from retorting, he did it in so provoking a strain, that she soon found she had gone too far. She, therefore, endeavoured to rally him into a better humour ; in which having easily suc¬ ceeded, as he was naturally very good na- tured, she ventured to observe— " That jealousy was always considered as a proof of love ; and, at all events, he need not have been ashamed of acknowledging so f 2 sweet
sweet a boy. She presumed his mother was a very handsome woman." " I dure say she was—at all events, his father was a very good-looking man." " Then í am sure he bore no resem¬ blance to Nurse Dinah, his sister. But, talking of handsome people, pray tell me, my dear George, who that beautiful girl waS whom vou met this morning, and had such a long chat with in Cavendish- square ?" After a moment's pause, he replied— 4Г The beautiful girl you ailude to was an older married woman than yourself-—it was Airs. Elliot, the wife of my old friend and school-fellow, Robert Elliot, the only son of Robert Elliot, Esq. the Bank-Direc¬ tor. I like to give you chapter and verse. Thev came to town two days ago, and I have requested Airs. Elliot will pay you an early visit; so pray tell me how you came to know that I spoke to a lady in Caven- dish-square." f ' I heard
" 1 heard so from a friend; but whether she told me so with a view to make me jealous, or to prepare mc for what I might expect, 1 cannot pretend to sav: but, pray where do Mr. and Mrs. Elliot live ?" i( In Margaret-street—I have told you so before." " I believe you mav —But, do vou know, I thought they lived in Bond-street." " In Bond-street ! " repeated Haslemere —" How could such an idea enter your head ?" " That I can't pretend to say—but í mean to caution your friend Elliot, not to let his beautiful wife adorn so elegantly for her morning walks, nor to suffer her to leave home unattended." "My friend Elliot will, doubtless, feel himself highly obliged by your Officious- ness: but, though his wife is a fijie wo¬ man, she has no pretensions to beauty, nor does she dress half so much as you fre¬ quently do of a morning, and I never, to my knowledge, met her walking unattend- f3 ed
ed by a footman ; but I now recollect she told me this morning, she was going to her milliner's in Bond-street: Possibly your officious friend construed that into an in¬ vitation tome to follow her thither; but, as I was not so vain, I did not take the hint. However, if you are not satisfied with my candid statement of facts, you may draw what inferences you please from our accidental meeting, since î give you my honour I shall take no farther pains to convince you of the truth of my asser¬ tions." Mrs. Haslemere hoped he was not seri¬ ous: she had merely wished to torment him a little, in consequence of what Mrs. Treons had told her, who had, by mere chance, followed Mrs. Elliot into Bond- street ;" and thus the subject dropped, though Mrs. Haslemere, who was by no means satisfied in her own mind, resolved to have her husband watched more closely than ever the next day, as she made no doubt of his taking an early opportunity
tu
to visit Mrs. Elliot, if their meeting was premeditated instead of accidental ; and, all things considered, she conceived it by no means unlikely that this fine xcoman was Frank's mother; which perfectly ac¬ counted, in her opinion, for Mrs. Whee¬ ler's great humanity towards him, as she was doubtless well paid on both sides. But, while she was rcsoKing to fathom this mvs- tery if possible, George Haslemere was re¬ volving in his own mind the preceding conversation ; and the more he reflected upon what had passed, the less he was pleased with his wife's conduct; and the evident curiosity she had betrayed greatly provoked him, as he foresaw she would be continually perplexing him, owing to her avowed jealousy : which, so far from flat¬ tering him, made him almost resolve to af¬ ford her some reason for what was at pre¬ sent founded upon mere vague conjecture; since, if she was thus tormenting six months after marriage, what would she be at the expiration of six years, he conceived. He f 4 was,
was, besides, extremely angry with her for affronting his old nurse, and still more so, for fancying that Francis Yates was his son; not that he would have thought it any disgrace to have had a natural son, nor would he have made a m] stery of the cir¬ cumstance ; therefore he was the more of¬ fended, owing to various circumstances, at her having taken <*o absurd a fancy into her head. Håving, however, devoted longer to reflection than he generally did, he re¬ solved to let his suspicious wife both know and feel that he would be master, and to give her fully to understand what she had to expect, if she did not make home agree¬ able to him ; and, in consequence of these resolutions, he left home half an hour sooner than usual the next morning, re¬ solving to call in Marsham-street before he went into Austin Friars, as he was obliged to devote his mornings to the counting- house, since his name had been entered in the firm. Mrs. Haslemere enquired why he was in such haste ? endeavouring, but in
in vain, to detain him under various frivo¬ lous pretences, aserie feared her spy would not be at her post—nor was she mistaken ; she í he re fore did not know which way he had gone. ľ* İrs. Wheeler was rejoiced to see him; and., as she hacì determined, made a thou¬ sand complaints of his wife. He agreed she had heen much to blame, placing all her errors to the score of jcalousv, and as¬ suring his good old nursi-. ,y he styled her, he would alwavs be her friend ; observing, that it might be as weil wyre she to cease visiting in Bakerit reet, as he should make a point of looking in upon lier very fre¬ quently, and of alwavs serving her to the utmost of his power. Mrs. W ; heeler was nerfertlv satisfied with these kind promises, :y she knew, she told her dear child, that his had not been,a love- match, feeling extremely inclined toren¬ der the proud dame very miserable ; and she knew George Haslemere was naturally of-a dissipated tum, and that .he had been ï .*» a i;ad
a sad rake ; and she thought this fine rich madam would certainly drive him from home, and then she might take the conse¬ quence of her jealous fcllv, as she knew he would be master, let her carrv it with ever so high a hand : and, while she w r as thus exulting over th^ miserv she foresaw Mrs. Haslcmere had in store for her, that lady was certainly endeavouring to render her a true prophet, as she was half inclined to quarrel with her confidante, when she understood she had missed Mr. Haslemere, as she fancied that some very great disco¬ veries might have been made that very morning. Since the death of his wife, Mr. Haslc¬ mere, senior, seldom slept in Austin Friars; having, in conformity to the advice of his friends, let Fir Grove, and taken an ele¬ gant villa at the entrance of Epping Fo¬ rest, which was within a short drive of London, as he was ever punctual in his at¬ tendance at the counting-house ; and when business obliged him to spend the evening in
in town, he often dined in Baker-street, and on this verv dav he returned home with his son for that purpose ; and as few people were blessed with a greater share of penetration, he soon perceived that the voung married people seemed rather at cross purposes. Not choosing, however, to notice the circumstance, he discoursed upon general topics during dinner; but no sooner were the servants withdrawn, than Mrs. Haslemere led to the subject nearest her heart, by asking him " what time he came to town ?" " I w T as, as usuai, in Austin Friars, by eleven." " Then you had donc a vast deal of busi¬ ness I suppose, George, before your father arrived." " I cannot boast of my diligence, as í did not make my appearance in the count¬ ing-house, till some time alter my father's arrival." *' Then you must have loitered some- f 6 where
where by the way ; for I am sure you left home before nine." if And to-morrow I may make it still earlier, without thinking it necessary ei- ther to ask your leave, or to hurry into the city," replied the angry husband. 41 Certainly you are your own master— I am sorry my very natural remark should have oflended you, since, believe me, I did not mean to inquire where you spent vour time." " I cannot suppose you did—but, to sa¬ tisfy your curiosity, you must know I went into Aiarsham-street from home." " Then I hope vou made my excuses to your old nurse. Pray, how does little Yates do?" The old gentleman, who by no means approved of this kind of sparring conver¬ sation, wishing to put an end to the debate, :-aid-— " Pray, what has occurred, George, to render it necessary for you to make per¬ gonal excuses to Mrs. Wheeler?" An
An explanation ensued, which it would be needless to repeat, and which induced the old gentleman to say, " that he be¬ lieved Mrs. Wheeler to be a woman of principle: she might have failings—-but as she had never given him reason to d uub t her veracitv', and as he had a still better opin'on of her husband, he had not a doubt but the boy in question was as she had ac¬ knowledged, a natural child of her late bro¬ ther, whom ^he had humanely taken under her own care, in consequence of the pro¬ mises she had made the deceased ; and 1 do assure you, Airs, llaslemere," he went on, " that her conduct towards this deserted baby has cancelled many of her failings, in my opinion, as they are merely the re¬ sult of ignorance and want of education, while her charity and benevolence are sure indications of the goodness of her heart ; yet, do not fancy that I am prejudiced in her favour, as I have seen as much to con¬ demn as to applaud in her, and, of late, I have very seldom seen her, nor have I any 4 recollection
recollection of the child ; and as your hus¬ band has given vou his honour that he is not its father, I cannot suppose you any longer doubt his veracitv. as I am well con- Cj «, - vinc'd he would have made no scruple of acknowledging the fact, had he placed his natural child under his old nurses care; and, admitting your suspicions had not- proved erroneous, the boy's age ought to have exempted your husband from your reproaches, except, indeed, vou had had proof positive that he still intrigued with the mother; and, even then, I am fearful vou would not have taken the most likelv " tl means to have broken off such a connec¬ tion." Mrs. Haslemere burst into tears, not of contrition but of vexation, when she found herself thus condemned by her father-in- law, declaring, " that she had merely meant to joke with her husband in the first in¬ stance, but he resented her allusions re¬ specting the brat so highly, that he had made her suspect he wished to make her his
his dupe, and she could not bear the idea of being deceived by a man she loved so sincerely." f ' Such silly jokes often lay the founda¬ tion for very serious quarrels," resumed the old gentleman ; and as Mrs. Haslemere found her husband was resolved to perse¬ vere in his declarations of innocence, she afïècted great contrition for having sus¬ pected him, which led to a seeming recon¬ ciliation between them, though, in fact, George Haslemere could not brook her having in a manner appealed to his father, after previously affronting W 7 heeler, for whom she knew he had always professed the greatest regard : but what rankled more than any thing in his heart, were her suspi¬ cions respecting Francis, and he secretly vowed to make her repent having dared to doubt his honour ; while she was as much convinced as ever, in her own mind, that he was guilty of all the charges she had made against him ; and, could she but have brought them home to him, she would have been
heen comparatively happy ; and if she did but, as she fully hoped and expected, dis^- cover that he kept a mistress, she thought that must convince even his old foolish fa¬ ther, that he was the guilty wretch she sus¬ pected : but unfortunately, though her confidante assumed various disguises, she was never able to trace her master to anv house where it was at all probable he vi¬ sited any female of light character; when, had she been sincere, she would have ac¬ knowledged that, bv her mother's orders, she had ceased to follow her future master; and, upon being received into the familv, iihe strictly adhered to her parents prudent advice, never, if she could avoid it. to make mischief between<.~man and wife; and as she soon, in common with all the servants, gave the decided preference to her master, she was less inclined than ever to gratify her mistress's curiosity, though she contrived te keep in favour with that lady, by appearing to come into her views; and once, when Mrs. Haslemere was gone out
out of town for the day, she accompanied the housekeeper to drink tea in Marsham- street, being verv curious to see her mas¬ ter's reputed son ; and she agreed with Mrs. Wilson, when she returned, that he was a sweet bov, and certainlv bore no re- semblance to the Wheeler family, though that was no reason he should be a Hasle¬ merc, as they did not discern any very par¬ ticular likeness between him and their mas¬ ter ; and, at all events, they thought their mistress very much to blame, for persisting in declaring that he was her husband's son.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI. Jonyt Wheeler being now in his eleventh year, his mother proposed removing him from the day-school in the neighbourhood, where he had commenced his education, to an academy in the country, which w T as fa¬ mous for finishing young men for the mer¬ cantile line ; that is, for enabling them to fill the situation of clerks in a merchant's counting-house, with credit to themselves and utility to their employers. Mrs. Whee¬ ler, therefore, ventured to pay her respects in Austin Friars, to the elder Mr. Haslemere, thinking herself in duty bound, she said, fo inform him of the plan she had in view for
for his godson ; secretly hoping that her former master would take upon himself the directing and finishing of her sons education, and, of course, the expence. But though no man was more generous than that gentleman had ever evinced him¬ self, when he conceived he was doing a charitable action, he was bv no means in- clincd to throw his money away upon un¬ deserving objects, and he was well con¬ vinced that the Wheelers could very well afford to pay for their son's education ; and as he perfectly guessed the old woman's drift, her mean cunning rather lowered her in his esteem ; he, therefore, merely said, " he thought the boy would be best from home, and the school they had in view was a very good one, he had been told ; there¬ fore, if John was diligent, by the time he was sixteen, he might be able to take him into the counting-house, and, of course, he would then cease to be a burthen to them ;" and this was all the hope he chose to hold out, which was, ail things consi¬ dered,
dered, a very consoling one, the Wheelers agreed; though, as Johnny was his godson, they thought so rich a man might have paid for his schooling ; however, he might prove himself his friend in the long-run, which must lead to his making his fortune, and, at all events, Mr. George llaslemere was their staunch friend, (out of regard to his sister's memory, he always told his father;) therefore, should he at any future period decline business, they made no doubt of being amply provided for. But, not con¬ tented with these hopes, soon after John was settled at Tooting, Airs. Wheeler re¬ solved to trv whether she could not talk her dear Mr. George into paying for Caro¬ line's schooling ; therefore, the next time he came into Marsham-street, after men¬ tioning how she had disposed of her son, and dwelling upon the heavy expence they were incurring upon his account, she de¬ clared, she was quite at a loss what to do with Caroline. " Ah ! had your poor, dear, good mother, or sister, been living," ¡she
she #ent on. wiping her eyes, " they w r ould have paid for her at boarding-school, 1 anı well assured ; for how often have they both tokl me, they would provide for their godchild ! However, thev are in heaven, and I shall never have such good friends again ; and sixteen guineas a-year is a deal of money to pay for such a child, besides a hundred other expences; for school¬ mistresses are like wet-nurses, never satis¬ fied ; and if we spend so much upon her now, we shall have nothing in a manner to give her as she grows up : Should her fa¬ ther die, God knows what may become of her; though 1 alwavs endeavour to have a few pounds in hand, in case of a rainv dcv, and there is no knowing how soon 1 mav want my little savings." George llaslemere perfectlv understood the meaning of this prolix harangue, and having his reasons for wishing to oblige his old nurse, he cut her short, observing— 11 Why, you would almost persuade me that you are poor, nay, that you were in danger of
of coming to the workhouse; so, t%keep you above want, I will pay for Cary's schooling, as you cannot afford it. Here is a ten-pound note, as an earnest of my intention." 4f Ah ! God in heaven bless you î — You were always a free-spirited, generous soul. Sixteen guineas a-year is like a drop of water in the ocean to you, as a body may say ; therefore, since you are so kind, to school she shall go next week." That was a matter of perfect indifference to Haslemere, who very soon took his leave; and not a little did Mrs. Wheeler pride herself upon her dexterity, when her husband came home, who gave her great credit for her skilful management, " since they should hav e a mouth less to feed ; and he thought they might find a school for such a child, for less than she talked of, and they ought not to ride a free horse to death." •''You be hanged, with your qualms and scruples !—Pray, what has George Hasle¬ mere
mere done more than his duty ?—if his sister had lived, she would have done as much again : however, 1 have a very good school in my eye, which is only fourteen guineas a-year; but the other money will serve to help to clothe her; so pray let me hear no more of your nonsense, Tho¬ mas—The Lord help me !—a pretty out you would make of it, if it was not for mo!" Thomas said no more—and the ensuing week, Cary, whom they had not, of late, been able to keep in any degree of order, was sent off to st hool. Mrs Wheeler won¬ dered who she 'ook after, till she recol¬ lected her husband having said, that his grandmother was of a very violent temper; and this accounted, in a very satisfactory manner, for all her daughter's errors, as they afforded her an opportunity of conti¬ nually repeating, " She is a true Whee¬ ler ;" and as the mistress of the cheap semi¬ nary to which she was sent, was a good- tempered, easy, indolent old woman, she was
was by no means calculated to subdue the angry passions of her pupil, as she rather increased her natural perversity and impe¬ tuosity by improper indulgence ; there¬ fore, when Miss came home for the holi¬ days, neither father nor mother thought her much improved ; yet what more could they do ? since, having sent her to school, they conceived they had done even more than their duty by her; and, had she re¬ mained at home, she would probably have been the terror of Frank, who was blessed with a remarkably sweet disposition— 1< quite a Powell," she frequently told her friends and children ; often reproaching them, Cary in particular, with being true Wheelers, which merely increased their dislike of the young bastard, an appellation they had had fully explained at school : they, therefore, now declared their wonder at their mother's ever having taken a base- born child into the house, and much more, at her making the nasty little urchin their companion ; not that these amiable crea¬ tures
titres were actually speaking their own sen¬ timents, since they were merely repeating what they had heard said, in consequence of their having kindly entertained their ju- venile friends with an olio of familv anec¬ dotes, to which they had made a copious addition. Mrs. Wheeler, not being at first aware of this circumstance, said, " that as Frank was an orphan, he was very much to be pitied ; and she was resolved to do her dutv bv him, let them, or any one else, say what they pleased ; not that she loved him as she did them, but, if they cried their eyes out, she would not send him away." Master John retorted—** That every body said, such kind of children ought to be sent to a workhouse, and not made, ŕ hail, fellow, well met !* with such as him : his master would not take him into his school, if they would give him a hundred a-year :" and Miss Cary said—" Her Ma'am never took base-born children, because one scabby sheep spoilt the whole flock." voi. i. t Both
Both Mr. and Mrs. Wheeler now felt pro¬ voked, to find their conduct had been the theme of so much animadversion, owing to their children's propensity to tattling. Their mother, in consequence, called them long-tongued, nasty, little tell-tales, de¬ claring, " she would make them suffer for having prated away so fast respecting their familv-affairs—How dare they even men¬ tion Francis Yates ?" John was frightened by her threats, and readily promised to say any thing she wished, or bid him ; but the more daring Caroline said, " she would always speak the truth, and shame the d-v-1." This speech so roused the angry passions of her mother, that her rage knew no bounds, and, catching up her impertinent daughter, she made her feel the weight of her hand pretty severely ; and, had it not been for the interference of her husband, she would have sent her off to school that moment, and without a farthing in her pocket, she vowed. Frank,
Frank, vvho had hardly comprehended how the quarrel commenced, perfectly •understood the meaning of Mis, Wheeler's last threat ; therefore, pulling out his stock of cash, amounting to fivepence-halfpenny, ba\ing receded sixpence from Mr. George Haslemere the day before, he quietly slip¬ ped it into Miss's hand, desiring her not to cn, and he would give her some more when he had any ; and, notwithstanding the young lady's rage, and independent spirit, she as quietly took the proffered gift, and secured it in her pocket; nor would our hero's generosity towards her have been discovered, if Mrs. Wheeler hail not required him, in the most perempton manner, to tell her what he had done with such a mint of money ; and upon his in¬ forming her how he had disposed of it, she generously gave him a penny for having told the truth, and for his kindness to Ca¬ roline. He was not, however, sorry, when his two disagreeable companions returned to school ; and, for fear he should be ill- « 2 treated,
treated, or that some unpleasant surmises might again be formed, Mr. Wheeler un¬ dertook to teach him his letters, which he did of an evening; and as the child had but little to divert his attention from his book, he soon made great progress ; and soon after he entered his sixth year, the old gentleman began to teach him to write, as he procured pens, ink, and paper gratis at the counting-house; and Mr. George Haslemere, who was become a very fashion¬ able husband, generally brought our hero some amusing book proper for his age, or some toy, by way of encouragement, when¬ ever he looked in upon nurse; when Frank, having entered his ninth year, it was ne¬ cessary, Mrs. Wheeler said, to send him to the boarding-school, where John was coming on remarkably well, if they wished the boy to tread in his steps. She was, therefore, for sounding old Mr. Haslemere upon the subject; but, having mentioned her intentions to her fast friend Mr. George, he thought the lad had better go to sea, at a proper
a proper age : Mrs. Wheeler thought him too delicate; and it was finally settled, that, in a couple of years more, he should be articled to some light trade, when Dame Fortune, in one of her capricious freaks, interfered in hi> behalf, and rescued him from being doomed to a life cf drudgery, in consequence of Mrs. Wheeler's having, at this period, a servant, who never heard a ballad-singer in the street without be¬ coming a purchaser, not having a bad voice, had it been cultivated : therefore, whenever her mistress was from home, she indulged in her favourite study, though she generally sung when washing, even with leave from the higher powers, as she averred she got on the faster; but, in fine weather, she usually took her work into a little arbour at the bottom of their tole¬ rably-sized garden, whither Frank, of whom she was extremely fond, generally accom¬ panied her, as, in a short time, ho could not only join in chorus, but even sing most of her fa\ourite ditties; and it s<> e; lì happened,
happened, that Mr. Wheeler's next-door neighbour was a very celebrated musician ; and as he frequently, almost -per force, heard these concerts in his neighbours garden, he was soon so struck with the de¬ licate, but sweet notes of our hero, that he meditated turning them to his own ad van·* tage, having, as it may be supposed, been long acquainted with the Wheeler family history : but the flaw in Frank's escutcheon was of very little consequence to him ; in¬ deed, he was to the full as fond of money as those whom he hoped to render subser¬ vient to his wish of increasing his store : he, therefore, seized the first opportunity after he had made up his mind, understand¬ ing that Mrs. Wheeler was the principal in the firm, to address her while she was pacing her garden with little Yates; and as he verv seldom spoke to her, the old woman, who knew he was reputed to be very rich, was very much flattered, and readily entered into coincrsation; when, having chatted for spmc time, he asked Frank,
Frank, " if he had got his last new song by heart ?" Francis requested " to know which he meant, as he could sing several songs which Betty had taught him?" " Yes, he would be always at it," said Mrs. Wheeler, " if I was not to forbid him ; else, between him and my maid, I should be stunned with their noise." ft That I can suppose, Ma'am," repFe \ Mr. Corfe — ÍS but I do assure you, for a boy of his age, he has a very tolerable voice, which may improve in time. Pray, what line of life do you mean him to pur¬ sue ?" " Whv, it is not yet decided, Sir ; though, I believe, we shall bind him to some good trade, as I am sure he will never get his bread by squalling songs." Mr. Corfe merely smiled at this polite remark, saying, " I am not inclined to bc so positive-—surely you must have heard that some of our first-rate singers live in a very great style." Q к "SO
" So 1 have been tokl, Sir; but í do not think Frank will ever sing himself into a coach, or get you a matter of a hundred pounds of a night ; indeed, 'tis a shame people should fool their money away upon >uch folks, who, were thev of a saving turn, would get rich in no time." " And if I could but sing like them," obtruded Frank, t( I would sing for you till you could keep your coach, and then î would set up for myself." Mrs. Wheeler, who was very supersti¬ tious, was so struck with this speech, that she even thought it possible she might yet become a gentlewoman through Frank's means—much stranger things had come to pass—people, now-a-days, were mad after »inging and music : therefore, after a short pause, she said, « Tis a grateful little soul, and to be sure í have been all in all to him ; however, I wish you would please to have him in some day, Sir, that you might hear what he can do, and whether he is likely to make it answer, if we were to have him taught
taught music ; for he has good friends, that is, I mean my husband and me would not mind spending a little money upon him, if we were not likely to be losers in the end; and our first-floor lodger, Mr. Moreton, thinks he has an ear for music, for he has made what he calls a harp, with wires and laths, that shews great ingenuity, and has no such bad sound." Mr. Corfe did not bestow the praise she expected upon her protegee, but read il v undertook to hear him sing, desiring him to come round immediately. Francis very readily did as he wished, and remained closeted with his new friend for an hour or more, as he infinitely surpassed his mosi sanguine expectations; though he was by no means lavish in his praise, not wishing to make the boy vain, much less to disap¬ point his own views : indeed, he careful! v avoided the Wheeler familv during the en¬ suing fortnight, though he had Frank in every day, and thought the tones of hL· с Г) voice-
voice improved daily under his skilful ma¬ nagement. Mrs. Wheeler was. meanwhile, hing in wait for him, since all she could gather from the boy was, that Mr. Corfe made him sing to an organ, and often sani, " that if he paid attention, and was very diligent, he might, in time, be a tolerable singer:" the old lady thought it therefore possible, she might vet drive about London streets 'm her own coach, thanks to this urchin's voice—when having,, as he conceived, tho¬ roughly digested his plan, as he did not choose to run any risk, since boys some¬ times lost their voice before they were come to their full powers, he accompanied Frank home one evening, and was received by the old man and his wife with the great¬ est politeness. He apologized for not hav ing called sooner, alledging, " that he could not immediately judge whether the child was likely to succeed, should he ever become a candidate for public faine ; but 3 he
he could now venture to say, that he had both voice and ear ; still, as he seemed £ very delicate plant, he might lose the for¬ mer before he could be introduced to the public, which would prove a very heavy loss to them, were they, as Mrs. Wheeler had proposed, to place him under his or any other master's care ; yet, as he appear¬ ed to possess talents which only wanted cultivating, he conceived it would be a sin to suffer them to lie dormant : therefore, as he flattered himself he had sufficient in¬ terest to obtain him admission among the singing-boys, or choristers, attached to the Abbey, he would in that case, should they have no objection to his plan, be perfectly grounded in music, without putting theirt to any expence, besides having the addi¬ tional advantage of being allowed to attend Westminster-school, where he might com¬ plete his education gratis, and form many desirable connections; and, at some future period, some other arrangements might be « G made
made for theirs and the child's» ultimate* benefit.' The Wheelers listened with evident sa¬ tisfaction ίο these advantageous proposals; indeed, thev both conceived that Frank was born under a lucky ph.nct—therefore, re¬ solved not to mar Ьн fortune, thev told Mr. Corfe, whom thev rather wished would have taken the entire charge of the lad, offering to article him to him till he be¬ came of age, as they thought, by removing him from under their roof, many of the scandalous stories in ciicuhtion respecting him would die awa\ ; but t lie music-master declined taking ach antage of their kind in¬ tentions, at least for the present, having great reason to suppose, that, when Dr. —------· departed this life for a better, he should succeed to his po i t of master to the singing-boys, organist, &c.; and when that period arrived, he had resolved, if lhe child continued equally promising, to enter into arrangements more likelv to Le conducive to
to his own future plans, than those the Wheelers novv proposed, who having, as he had foreseen, readily closed with his proposals, our hero began his musical ca¬ reer before he had completed his ninth vear, and was soon pronounced to be a lad of promise by the Doctor; and even the masters' of Westminster-school, after a time, ρ greed he possessed both genius and appli¬ cation : therefore, notwithstanding the va¬ rious disadvantages he laboured under, he pccmcd verv likelv to make his way in the world, and to acquire the esteem and re¬ gard both of his masters and companions. John Wheeler was by no means so for¬ tunate, since, though his master agreed that he wrote a very good hand, and was a very good accountant, he could not pronounce him a good scholar; and his overbearing temper, and mean disposition, so often led him into scrapes, that he was ever urgent with his parents to remove him, even be¬ fore they durst request Air. Haslcmere to take him into his counting-house. As soon,
soon, however, as he had entered his six¬ teenth year, they preferred their humble petition to the old gentleman, declaring, that John's master snìd he had never turned ont a hetter scholar, enumerating the many pounds he had cost them, to render him fit for the situation they had in view for him. Mr. Haslemere, who was well acquainted with their avarice, was by no means sur¬ prised at their wishing their son to be earning, instead of spending money; v.d as he had promised to receive him into his house, he did not choose to disappoint them, though he soon discovered that their wonderfully clever son would never be fit for any thing more than an entering or copying clerk, and might have heen a far more useful member of society, had they bound him to some mechanical trade, than he ever promised to be in consequence of the education they had given him, which had rendered him so self-sufficient, that, at times, he was unbearable; and even hib father
father and mother frequently declared, that they neither could nor would put up with his insolent behaviour, as thev found 'it impossible to keep a servant longer than six weeks since he was become their in¬ mate; and it may be supposed that our hero, who was now in his thirteenth year, and who, to a most elegant figure, added a remarkablv handsome countenance, was more than ever the object of his avowed dislike, as he made a verv great progress in music, and was no less a tten five to his more serious avocations: his voice, which was already peculiarly soft and melodious, was daily improving ; and he was blessed with so good an ear, and such a genuine taste for music, that he bid fair to rival all his cotemporaries as a singer, at least so thought all the amateurs who heard him ; but neither Dr. -----------, nor his friend Corfe, ever launched out in praise of any thing but his application to the Wheelers, fearing that their avarice might deprhe them of the golden harvest they hoped to reap
reap from their pupil's future success, as he was already become a pretty sinecure to the Doctor, as the choristers are fre¬ quently engaged at one or other of the theatres, to join in chorus, and Frank was already capable of leading, and of drilling their little band ; ôf course, he was already a very great acquisition to the old gentle» man, and so universal a favourite as a reci¬ tative or chorus singer, that his presence was not only required at most οι the pri¬ vate concerts in and near the metropolis, but also at most of the country music- meetings; and as his merit and talents were amplv rewarded, he was in prodigi¬ ous high favour with the Doctor, who was certainly not sparing of his good advice to him, any more than Mr. Corfc, who, owing to the very declining health of the former gentleman, already acted as his deputy ; and, by way of winning our hero over to his interest, he frequently made him some very handsome presents, both of cloaths and money, observing, that dress became him,
him, and advising him, by his diligence and application, to render himself inde¬ pendent of his relations the Wheelers; of¬ ten promising to do every thing in his power to bring him forward in the world, if he found him docile and well inclined ; particularly cautioning him against being too much elated with his present successes, since he had much to learn ere he would rank among the first-rate singers. Francis had, fortunately for himself, suf¬ ficient good sense to feel the strength of these arguments ; therefore, though cer¬ tainly rather proud of his acquirements, he was well aware that he had much yet to learn, ere he dare venture to appear in public, except as a chorus-singer; and we must say, that John Wheeler was still more anxious to crush his too aspiring hopes, and to prevent him from growing vain ; never failing to remind him, that he was merely upon sufferance in Marsham-street, and often wondering that the Westminster bovs 4»
boys condescended to associate with such a base-born cub. Now Francis had certainly, for a time, cither severely felt the misfortune he la¬ boured under; but, as he soon gave great proofs of the quickness of his parts, and was, besides, neither vulgar in his manners nor appearance, by degrees, as he was re¬ markably good-tempered, he became a sort of general favourite; and, rather contrary to their general rules, (since there is cer¬ tainly no deficiency of pride among the Westminster scholars-)» he was, after a time, admitted to join in all their diversions ; and we may with justice add, that he soon became a sort of leader when any mischie¬ vous plan was in agitation : the more, how¬ ever, he grew into favour with his masters and companions, the more John Wlieeler found to dislike in him ; and, not content¬ ed w r ith being his avowed open enemy, he frequently endeavoured to convince his father and mother of the impropriety of their
their conduct towards the object of his aversion. te Who but them would have had such a lad brought forward, as he evi¬ dently was, upon the stage ?—every body blamed them for having thus exposed him to ruin : they had much better, as^ they once intended, have bound him to a taylor or a shoemaker, at least so thought Mr. George Haslemere, for he had heard him say as much to Mr. Webber, the head clerk." ťf You impudent, lying mischief-maker!" exclaimed the enraged Mrs. Wheeler— t{ this is of a piece with the tales you used to bring from school î —You richly deserve that I should have you face to face with Mr. George Haslemere, and then the least you would have to dread, would be being- dismissed in disgrace. Here, have not your father and I been moiling and toiling all our lives, and all for your benefit ? and now you are reproaching us, forsooth, for having endeavoured to provide for Frank, lates, without his interfering with you, vou
you ungrateful wretch í However, as we must board him gratis for a little longer, 1 am resolved, since you arc so unthankful, not to shew you the same indulgence. You have now sixty pounds a-year, and from next Midsummer, please God I live, you shall pay me thirty for your board and lodging." John bounced, raved, and swore—but he had put the old lady upon her metal, and she could be as obstinate, and much more resolute than himself; while his fa¬ ther desired him to recollect, that he was not his own master till he was of age, therefore he had a right to receive his sa¬ lary during his minority, and to lay it out as he thought proper. These serious threats induced John to lower his tone—but his submission was of no avail, as his father supported his mo¬ ther in her determination of making him, in future, contribute towards the house¬ keeping—they had expended enough upon him, and had a right to some return : and as
as he found there was no appeal from their joint determination, he resolved to re¬ venge himself upon Francis, for being thus, as he said, obliged to contribute to support him in idleness ; of course, Frank found home more disagreeable than ever. For some time, he affected not to notice John's increasing malignancy; till, finding he attributed his forbearance to cowardice, he retorted upon him so severely, that John generally had recourse to his fists, and the difference in their age and stature obliged our hero, very unwillingly, to re¬ treat from this cowardly mode of argu¬ ment. Meanwhile Miss Caroline, who had re¬ mained at the cheap school at which her mother had placed her till she was four¬ teen, was then removed by that lady to a far more eligible one at Highgate, where she was to be taught French, music, dan¬ cing, Sec. Sec. for the small sum of thirty pounds a-year : therefore the old gentle¬ man, rather than apply again to Mr. George Haslemere,
Haslemere, made up the difference, ob¬ serving, that, as Frank cost them little or nothing, he had a right to do the more for Cary, who, having spent near four years more at this fashionable seminary, had re¬ turned home for good, as her mother said, about six weeks prior to the commence¬ ment of our story ; and, in Mrs. Wheeler's opinion, her still-lamented Miss Haslemere was not a more accomplished young wo¬ man, since Cary could talk French, dance, play upon the pianna, and had done a scripture-piece in Jambs-wool, that was the admiration of all her acquaintance ; and she agreed it ought to be handsome, since it had cost her ten guineas ; however, as she made no doubt of its always fetching double the money, why, she was not sorry she had suficred her daughter to make such a display of her talents. Mr. George Haslemere, though not quite so frequent a visitor as heretofore in Mar¬ sham-street, chanced to call in a few days after her return home, and the old woman eagerly
caoerlv recapitulated the лаг«ои5 accom¬ plish mer. U of her dear Caroline, wishing he could sec her dance, or hear her play, and as for French, she had it at her tongue's end ; making him notice the beautiful spe¬ cimen of her work which adorned the best parlour. Her auditor was polite enough not to declare his sentiments respecting the de¬ lectable performance, asking, by way of changing the conversation, " How Frank came on ?" adding, iC lie will soon be obliged to resign his situation as chorister, when something must be done for him : but you will hear what your neighbour thinks of him, as, should he seem likely to make his way, he would be no despicable match for Cary." Mrs, Wheeler perfectly agreed with her kind friend ; and, the moment he was gone, she laid her injunctions upon her daughter, " to treat Frank very kindly, since there was no knowing what good luck might bc in store for him : at all events, she
she must be a greater fool than she took her to be, if she did not follow her advice, as she knew what was what, if she (Cary) was not so wise, and she would insure her riding in her coach, if she did but marry Frank." Cary was as anxious to enact the gentle¬ woman as her mother had ever been ; therefore, she instantly altered her behavi¬ our to her bastard cousin, whom she was now as anxious to please as she had here¬ tofore been to plague; often telling John, " that she wished Frank had been her bro¬ ther instead of him, since everv bodv liked him, he was so handsome and so good-na¬ tured." These speeches only served to increase Johns hatred of our hero, who had felt home very uncomfortable since John had been his father's inmate, and particularly since he had been obliged to pay for his board; since, independent of John's vile temper, he was so abominably mean, and so vulgar and illiberal, that he Îeit it im¬ possible
possible to be upon even speaking terms with him ; indeed, since he had associated with the Westminster scholars, and had been introduced into genteel society, he felt that his ideas and notions no longer assi¬ milated, even in the slightest degree, with those of the Wheelers ; of course, they did not rise in his estimation, and he looked forward to his entire emancipation from their controul with the utmost impatience, though he still feit very grateful for the past favours he had received from them,
CHAP.
СИЛР. VII. Having now brought our story down to the period of λίι*. John WJieeler's engagement with the Westminster scholars, we need not add, that he might truly be said to be the author of his own discomfiture; since, could Francis, who had repaid him the half-crown his dog had cost him, have coped with him single-handed, lie would not have applied io his friends to fight his battles; but he was now such a general favourite, that they were all anxious to punish this cowardly wretch, as they styled John Wheeler, who, had he been blessed with common sense, would have taken to his heels the moment the
the youths commenced their attack; but he had so high an opinion of his valour, trusting, besides, to his bulk and age, that he gave way to the impulse of his malig¬ nant disposition, before he was aware of his imprudence. Having paid, however, pretty dearly for his folly, he returned home, as has been related, and finally re¬ tired to bed, to plan schemes to be re¬ venged of our hero, whom he was re¬ solved, if possible, to banish from Mar¬ sham-street at every risk; since, should his father and mother oppose his wishes, he would tell them in plain terms, that he would remove himself, as he knew he could maintain himself upon his salary ; and as the old man could not take his money with him when he died, he must come in for what he had to leave, as he was well con* vinced he would never think of disinherit¬ ing him ; nor did he even suppose that he would suffer him to leave home rather ihun discard Francis, since he was but too well aware of the strength of his regard forchini ; u 2 but,
but, if he was so ill advised, sorely did this grateful son promise to make him repent of his folly, having already saved enough to purchase a bed, and he now calculated what won hi be the weekly price of an un¬ furnished garret, and the most economical mode of living, and, according to his plan, he found he should even save monev at the year's end : but when he awoke in the morning, having again reflected upon his overnights plans, he resolved not to pu¬ nish himself to be revenged of Frank, who would triumph, were he, as he had first proposed, to leave home to avoid him, resolving, nevertheless, to make one great push to rid the house of him; and, should he fail, he hoped, by making every thing more uncomfortable than ever, to render the spirited lad desperate; and, if he once withdrew himself of his own accord, he would take care to keep him withoutside the door. Therefore, in consequciice of this well-concerted scheme, he said, during breakfast, at which Francis never assisted, íť Prav,
te Pray, how long is that lazy young bas¬ tard to be maintained in idleness ; since, according to what vou make me pav, шо- ther, his board has not cost vou a trifle since he has been your inmate ?" Mrs. Wheeler, whose passions were sel¬ dom of late under anv controul, aimed a blow at him across the table, calung him " an impertinent puppy—How dare he call Frank names, or her to an account respect¬ ing him ?" ,ζ lie is a fool for interfering in what does not concern him," said the old man. " More knave than fool, husband— However, if he knew all, he would have kept his impudent tongue within his teeth; for I would have you to know, Master John, that Frank Yates has never been a burthen to us or any body else ; nay, what's more, that he never will, you sorry fellow!" Mrs. Wheeler's angry passions were so completely roused, that, as her son had foreseen, she was thrown entirely off her u 3 guard ;
guard ; and he now hoped, by continuing to provoke her, that he should make some farther discoveries. "So, so, mother! why, you never spoke ьо plain before—Pray, where was the sense of keeping me so long in the dark ?«—But 1 can spell and put together as well as most people; so you mayas well tell me the truth at once, since I guess that Frank is, as Madam llaslemere suspected, the young squire's bastard, instead of poor uncle Powell's-—Aye, aye! that makes Mr. CJcorge drop in so often ; and that was the reason you were forbid the house in Baker- street, because his wife began to smell a rat ; for I have heard a few whispers to that effect among our clerks." Old Wheeler declared, " he was a scan¬ dalous liar;" and his wife, whose rage knew no bounds, called him all the names she could recollect, sufficiently expressive i f her anger; affirming, i( that Frank Yates was no more Mr. Haslemerc's son than he was hers: therefore, if ever he dared even to
to hint such a thing again, or if she knew him to propagate a parcel of falsities, out of the house he should go ; then he would see how he could live and dress like a gen¬ tleman upon sixty pounds a-year ! But he would never have either the looks or the manners of the lad he despised." " Why, since he is a gentleman's κοη, 1 suppose he takes after papa —you know he is reckoned like him, and perhaps his mama was also a gentlewoman." John wisely made good his retreat as he ceased speaking, perceiving that his mo¬ ther had actually seized the poker, and that his father was looking round for his cane; while Caroline screamed out, i( For shame, brother !—I am sure I would not be so un¬ du ti ful for all the world—and if you go on at this rate, I shall soon love Frank Yates much better than I do vou." John did not hear what she said, or hé would, probably have returned to vent his spleen upon her, as he by no means ap¬ it 4 Droved
proved of her siding with Francis; indeed, he sincerelv wished that she was also obliged f о pay for her board, frequently hinting. that he had no notion of her being brought up in idleness, while he fagged hard in sup¬ porting her. Having, however, failed iu ridding the house of the object of his aver¬ sion, he secretly resolved to fathom the mystery his mother had, in her rage, al¬ luded to, conceiving that, if he did but once worm himself into his young master's secrets, his fortune would soon be made. While he was thus forming plans, Mr. Corfe, who had verv recently succeeded his old friend Dr.----------, was also framing schemes to effect the liberation of his fa¬ vourite pupil from his present dependent state upon the Wheelers, being well aware that he was extremely uncomfortably situ¬ ated—a circumstance he meditated turning vrry much to his own advantage, hinting to Л rank, that he had it in contemplation to propose to his relations taking him un¬ der
der his protection for the ensuing five vears, at the expiration of which time, he would bc able to make his way alone. Frank only hoped the Wheelers would agree to his proposals, as he felt that any change must be for the better; and he knew that Mr. Corfe, though extremely fond of money, kept a very good table, and was a very pleasant, good-tempered man, and had, particularly of late, been extremely kind to him : his old house a' keeper was also a very motherly good kind of woman, and had often wished that her master had just such a son. Our hero was, therefore, extremely anxious to learn the final determination of his early friends, upon whom the prudent Mr. Corfe soon waited, to inform them, " that he could not much longer retain Master Yates in his pre¬ sent situation, enquiring what were their future views for him?" adding, '* he cer¬ tainly continues to give great promise of future excellence, as his voice is improv¬ ing ; but he uow requires a first-rate mas¬ ti 5 ter.
ter, ίο enable him to render his musical talents of any avail, and he is at such age, that it may be all money thrown away : J I· wc ver, as 1 feel attached to him» and as you must wish to have him brought for¬ wards, why, I am now ready to close with your former proposals, and to take him entirely oíľ your hands, if you are now inclined to bind him to me for the ensuing five years. In two or three he may be able to earn his living ; and, though it is very possible that he may never attain any de¬ gree of celebrity—the public are very ca¬ pricious—however, if you are willing, why, I will run the risk, though I have positively been offered a hundred guineas with a very clever boy ; but I do not want money, and I flatter myself, Master Yates will do me honour—I know he is anxious to excel, and that is half the battle." The Wheelers exchanged several looks, while Mr. Corfe was thus assailing their луеак side, declaring, when he ceased speaking, if that they felt themselves greatly
greatly obliged to him, and that they would take his kind proposals into consi¬ deration, iţnd would give him a decisive answer in a couple of days ; requesting to know whether he proposed finding him in cloaths and pocket-money ?" " You know I have not been ungene¬ rous in those respects of late, my good friends, and I now propose tø take every expence upon myself: from the moment he becomes my inmate, he shall never cost you another shilling ; since, by the time he is of age, admitting ï am no gainer by his talents, he will doubtless be able to get his bread ; and he may, should he retain his voice and become a favourite, speedily make a fortune, since we have singers who now realize between two and three thou¬ sand a-year ; and as for his want of birth, that will be no impediment to his advance¬ ment in his profession, though it might prevent him from rising in many others. Bc that as it may, î merely wish to do you and the lad a very essential service, as you it G must
must be gainers whether he succeeds of not." This the Wheelers felf was an absolute fact, though, had they been aware of Mr. Corfe's views, they would certainly have stipulated for some share of our hero's fu¬ ture earnings; but as they merely wished to consult their patrons, the Haslemeres, they told him, before they closed with his proposals, he made his parting bow, very well satisfied with having so far succeeded to his wishes. The moment he was gone, Mrs. Wheeler obtened, " that old Corfe would not have ı.ıade such a generous offer, if he had not hoped to make some money by the lad; however, that was neither here nor there, as it would cost them a fine penny if they were to undertake to have the finishing- iroke put to his education ; and as he and Caroline would most likely come together, why, they should reap the.benefit intheend." Caroline " only wished he had not been to go from home," « But
" But that was what had induced her mo-* ther to give into old Corfe's plans, as they should have a little respite from John whcii Frank was removed ; and, as he would pro¬ bably be a daily visitor, they should remain better friends than ever:" so said the old man, who remarked, " that, as Frank was frequently obliged to stop out late, they should no longer waste both fire and can¬ dle, in addition to saving every other ex¬ pence by his removal." " True, husband—and the world is grown so scandalous, it will be to our ho¬ nour to send him from home—that will convince folks he is no son of Mr. Hasle¬ mere's;" and as Mr. George Haslemere was probably of the same opinion, the bu¬ siness was very soon settled, to the entire satisfaction of Mr. Corfe and his pupil, though, by way of punishing John for his recent insolence, and continual taunting speeches respecting Frank, it was resolved to keep him in ignorance of what was go¬ ing forward: he was, therefore, bound in the
the regular way to their neighbour ; and having removed to his house that very morning, John naturally enquired, upon sitting down to dinner, the second day after he had changed his quarters, " What was become of Frank ?" He had not, how¬ ever, chosen a very propitious moment to make the enquiry, as he generally con¬ trived to ruffle his mother's temper at meals, from conceiving, since he paid so large a sum for his accommodation, that he had a right to be waited upon with as much respect and attention, as if he had paid a very liberal price to absolute strangers; and having, just before he asked after Frank, swore a most vehement oath, upon not perceiving the servant in waiting, add¬ ing, " I never saw a family so badly regu¬ lated—I never can have a plate changed, except I do ix myself." rf Have patience, î i n treat," cried his provoked mother, rising from tabic and reaching a plate from the side-board, which she placed before him ; but she had scarcely resumed
resumed her seat, ere the unthankful being exclaimed— fC 1 did not want a dirty plate, and a cold one into the bargain." Mrs. Wheeler, as might be supposed, lost all patience—" Any body but him could have eat a little hash and a mutton- chop oñ' the same plate, and the one she had given him was as clean as hands could make it ; and as for its being cold, he might get up and warm it, if he was so deuced particular ; indeed, there was no living with him of late—therefore, the sooner he also left the house the better; then she might enjoy a little comfort." This oblique hint induced John to hope that the lad had left Marsham-street ; and, as he wished for nothing more earnestly, he eagerly repeated his former question. " What is it to vou, I should like to know ?" resumed the still angry matron— i f I am bure you do not wish to see him,, except for the sake of your eyes;" while Caroline told him, fi that it was his bad temper which had driven him away ;" add- jÊ\< r
ing, ςί since you have not got him to tor¬ ment, you seem inclined to spit your spite at mother, who is only too good to you by half; for I would have seen you cat a do¬ zen things off the same plate, before I would have risen from table to have reach¬ ed you one." A downright quarrel would now have ensued between brother and sister, if boîh father and mother had not interfered ; and, bv degrees, John learnt how Francis had been disposed of, Airs. W r hccler observing, *' that, in self-defence, they had been obliged to part with the poor lad, to stop his scandalous tongue, and to prevent hiiu from rendering him desperate." John defended himself, vowing, ' ( the bov had grown so impudent of late, tha , if he had not set him to rights now and then, he would soon have been master o t the whole house." " And a better one he would have made than the one who now took upon himself to govern," said Caroline. John
John was not backward in retorting— " If his mother did her dutv, she would bind her out as well as Frank. What right had she to be maintained in idleness, any more than himself?—Surely she might fol¬ low some trade as well as her favourite, who did earn his five shillings а -night as a chorus-singer, which was nine times more than he deserved, though he supposed old Corfe meant to make half the money keep him—if not, he wished him joy of his bar¬ gain." As John had no idea of anv one's earn¬ ing much money at such a trade, and as he was no judge of music, he was by no means aware of our hero's vocal powers, who, from the moment he became Mr. Corfe's inmate, never sung but while practising under him and an Italian singer of the first celebrity, who had agreed to give him in¬ structions in the way of trade, as Mr. Corfe frequently had it in his power to do him favours, and they had entered into a tacit agreement
agreement respecting our hero, which they hoped to render mutually profitable ; it was therefore to their joint interest to pre* serve his voice; and as he was extremely amenable to controul, and implicitly guid¬ ed by their joint advice, they foresaw they should have no reason to rog?ct their bar¬ gain, as he rapidly improved under their tuition, nature having endowed him with every requisite to shine as a public per¬ former ; and Mr. Corfe, byway of render-* ing him graceful, had him taught dancing and fencing : his time was, therefore, very fully employed, though a day seldom elapsed without his seeing some part of the Wheeler family, as Caroline was fre¬ quently upon the look-out for him, often inviting him in when John was from home; and though he sincerely pitied her for her ignorance and self-sufficiency, he hardly knew whether he liked or disliked her: for the old man he had always felt a great de¬ gree of regard, and he was rather attached to
to Mrs. Wheeler ; but John was still, and t»ver had been, the object of his sincere aversion. Little of moment occurred during the ensuing two years, except that Mr. liasle- mere increased Johi-'s salarv to eighty pounds а -year, upon his becoming of age; and in consequence of his long services, the increase of taxes, and the dearness of provisions, old Wheeler had forty pounds а -year added to what he already received: and it might have been supposed that this increase of income would have added to their comforts, according to the intention of the worthy donor; but unfortunately his generosity had a very contrary effect, as John's impudence more than kept pace with his increase of fortune; since, though he thought his mother could not be suffi¬ ciently saving in every thing that did not concern himself, he was never satisfied if some delicacy was not provided for him, either at dinner or supper; and as his li¬ nen was washed at home, he chose to change
change it every day, which occasioned constant wrangles between him and his mother and sister ; therefore, a more mi¬ serably uncomfortable family was scarcely to be found within the bills of mortality ; and to add to their misfortunes, Caroline, having been sent into the store-room which was upon the attic story, soon after dusk, in consequence of her mother having refused her a candle, alledging that it was too soon to light one, the angry young lady, as if on purpose to vex her avaricious mother, aciuallv fell from the top of the stairs to the first landing, where she remained, screaming out— ΐ{ She was dead ! she had killed herself!-—and all for the sake of saving half an inch of candle!" Mrs. Wheeler, though she did not be¬ lieve she was hurt, ran to her assistance, and found her still extended, unable to move : ft still she would not believe that she was hurt ; and if she was, she had only her own awkwardness to blame, she told her, for what had befallen her, as she could have
have gone blindfolded all over the house, without missing her footing." As her daughter, however, either could nöt, or would not stir, she was obliged to call the maid to assist in helping her into her own room ; when, having examined the affected part, she found she had dislo¬ cated her hip. Caroline's screams were incessant—and her now alarmed mother thought it neces¬ sarv to send for the nearest surgeon, who looked very grave, feared it might prove of very serious consequence, and even wished them to have had some farther ad¬ vice ; but as he was reputed to be a very skilful practitioner, and both father and mother thought it would be very absurd to have two doctors to pay, when one might do as well, they resolved to trust wholly to his knowledge, declaring, fi that they were confident, if any one could make a cure of their child, he was the man." W T e must suppose the good gentleman did his best, in return for such a flattering speech :
speech : nevertheless, Caroline, who was. according to her own account, the best dancer in England, was, at the end of sík months, ]> ron ou need incurable, and re¬ mained a cripple for life. Such a misfor¬ tune was truly mortifv ing, in addition to 4he very heavy charge their surgeon made, which they were obliged to pay ; though, had he not been tinctured with their own failing, he would have pronounced it a hopeless case at first, and thus have spared them a great deal of useless expence. John had foreseen, he kindly told his- mother, that the fellow had long been only picking her pocket, as he could hav e told her as well as any surgeon, that Cary would be lame for life : he therefore ad¬ vised her to make up her mind to dying an old maid, except she could persuade their bastard cousin to marry her when he was out of his time—little thinking that he w T as the very man lm mother had pitched upon for his brother-in-law ; but this had been kept a profound secret from him, he- 5 cause
cause they knew how cordially he hated the youth, as he never mentioned him ex¬ cept in terms of opprobrium, openly re¬ joicing at his having been removed from under his father's roof; frequently de¬ claring, C( that he should never, with his consent, eat or drink in the house again ;" while all his mother's fears were, that they should not now be able to bring about what she deemed a very desirable match ; and, to add to her vexation, Caroline was continually reproaching her with having been the occasion of her accident, by her farthing savings ; declaring, " that she had rather have been killed outright, than to have been so disfigured ;" and her amiable son was continually reminding her of the surgeon's charges, hinting, that if she had sent Cary from home, she would not have met with such a misfortune—had he fallen down, he must have been cured at his own expence ; but they did not care what they fooled away upon Caroline, who never had, nor ever would earn a penny towards her maintenance. CHAP.
CHAP, VIII. Oc r hero, who had heard of Caroline's fall, called daily to enquire after her health, sincerely condoling with her and the old people, when he understood she was doom¬ ed to relinquish dancing: and as he had never appeared in public since he had re¬ moved to Mr. Corfe's, John foresaw that the old miser would soon be sick of his bargain ; nay, he should not wonder if he was to offer his father a trifle to take Frank home again ; but, if ever he did again be¬ come their inmate, he would seek another abode ; and as he was now of age, no one could controul him, nor deprive him of his salary. ■ I can
« I can only tell you this, John/* re¬ plied his mother, <r that if you do not pay me forty pounds in future, you shall leave home; for, at present, I am actually a loser by you, and get no thanks into the bargain," John affected to suppose she was joking, till she threatened to appeal to Mr. Hasle¬ mere, senior, if he dare make any farther objections ; and thus, very much against his will, was it finally settled ;—-while Fran¬ cis continued to study very hard under Sig¬ nor M ------■ and his friend Mr. Corfe, who Ьла grounded him thoroughly in music, and was novv teaching him the organ; and as he also particularly wished him to excel İn the simple ballad as well as the bravura stvie, a verv favourite singer in that line became his master, and soon pronounced him inimitable as a natural musician; aver¬ ring that nature had designed him for the stage, as he was convinced that he would excel as much as an actor, as he already did as a singer. VOL. L· ι To
To Afr. and Mrs. Wheeler Frank impart¬ ed his kind master's intentions, declaring, * f that he could not be sufficiently grateful for the pains which had been bestowed up¬ on him." They were happy to hear he was so well satisfied, but purposely avoided mentioning his name before John, who was rude, even to a degree of bruta¬ lity, to him, whenever they met, even in the street, Francis forbore resenting such treatment, solely upon the old people's account, else he felt he had gained suffi¬ cient strength within the last two years, to have made him repent his insolent behavi¬ our : he knew, besides, that he was a rank coward, though, Ijke a dunghill cock, as he once told him, he could crow and make a bluster, while he supposed himself se¬ cure : he had, however, made up his mind, that, when once his own master, if Master John, did not mend his manners, he would, at everv risk, convince him that fear did not occasion his present forbearance, which certainly only increased young Wheelers overbearing
overbearing insolence, who was now con¬ vinced, he said, <( that the boy would dwindle into the state of insignificance for which his birth designed him : had his fa¬ ther had common sense, he would have given him a trade—when İt was too late, he would be sensible of .his folly ; but if he suffered his sister to be maintained in idleness, he should not be so passive re¬ specting the bastard, who should either work or starve, he was resolved." As these speeches were generally addres¬ sed to the old man, he seldom or ever made him anv answer; and, at the conclu¬ sion of the summer, the newspapers in¬ formed the public, thai a voting gentle¬ man, whose talents in the vocal line would render him a \erv great acquisition ť> the the'itre, vas engaged at Drur\-lane for the cnsuii.g season ; and, when the house was abou. ■. .-> open, the líame was made public. John, who was b\ no means pleased to find he had been mistaken in his kind prog¬ nostics, asked his father and mother, i л ι » Carol! ι, e's
Caroline's hearing, " whether they had Heard any thing about it ?" adding, <f he must suppose it was some other person : however, if old Corfe was such a fool, he made no doubt but his hopeful pupil would be hissed off the stage the very first night, and never be allowed to appear up¬ on it again." Now Mr. and Mrs. Wheeler had known of Francis's engagement from the mo¬ ment it had taken place, as he had con¬ ceived it to be his duty to let them know when he was to make his public appear¬ ance, mentioning the circumstanţe with proper diffidence, acknowledging that he had his doubts, as tlie time drew near, whe¬ ther he should succeed—he feared the pub¬ lic expectation had been too much raised : lie would, however, exert himself to the ut¬ most of his abilities, as the only return he could make Mr. Corfe for the pains and expence he had bestowed upon him, They encouraged him, and certainly both prayed and hoped that he might succeed : they were,
were, of course, by no means pleased with John's prognostics, which they were con- \inced would not be fulfilled, they tojd him, as they made no doubt of his success. " And pray, why was not I sooner told when young Hopeful was to be brought out?" " Because we knew you would much sooner have heard that he had broke his neck; and besides, we thought you very capable of making a party to go and hiss him ; we were therefore in hopes he would have made his first appearance, before you were aware of what was in agitation." *' Then take care I do not mar his tri¬ umph yet," replied John. " It will not be in your power," said Caroline— ' f and I dare say Frank will look down upon you ere long." l ' What, from the new drop before New¬ gate, Miss Cary ?—It suits you, to be sure, to side with him against me; however, I would have you try to hop into his good graces, since you may look up to him> and 1 3 no
no man in any genteel Üne mil ever marry a cripple." The old people cried ouf, shame upon him ! for reproaching his sitter with her misfortune ; the old woman adding, '* that, for her part, she made no doubt of Frank's making a fortune ; and, whether he knew it or not, many first-rate singers lived in a very great style, kept their carriage, and were reckoned company for the first peo¬ ple." (t Then the great folks must be fonder of hearing people squall than I am," re¬ joined John— ft however, if some of the old standers do dash away for a time, they generally die upon a dunghill— ť lightly come, lightly go/ is the maxim of such gentrv ; and as for Frank, he was always readier to spend than to earn—nay, I dare say he cannot produce a farthing of the money Mr. George Haslcmere used to la¬ vish upon him, while I have every far¬ thing by mc that was given me ever since I can remember." Old
Old Wheeler gave him due credit for his prudence, but did not choose, nevertheless, to blame Frank, whom John rejoiced to think would be tied bv the leg for two years more. His expected appearance was, however, the subject of daily wrangles among this family, till his name appeared in large letters in the play-bills of the day. John, when he came home to dinner, said, " he had begged a holiday, purposely to go and see him figure aw a v." " Not with any kind view, 1 am certain," said Caroline— " but I wish somebody would take me." " O, pray hop to Drury-lane alone, Miss, since there is no chance of your being run away with." W T hile his father was reproaching him for his ill-nature, Mr, Corfe's servant brought Mrs. Wheeler a very polite note from Frank, inclosing two box-orders, apologizing for not having been able to procure any more, adding, that if Mrs. and Miss Wheeler went alone, he would make ι 4 a point
a point of seeing them safe home, appoint¬ ing a place of meeting for that purpose. " Well, God bless him!" cried the old ■woman, wiping her eyes—·" he has always been very grateful ; and it was very kind fo think of me and Carv at such a time, poor fellow—however, please God, you and I will go, Cary, and no thanks to your brother, who may go alone as he intended, and pay for himself—we shall go in free, thanks to Francis î who has the spirit of a prince; and if e\er he is rich, he will do more good with his money than ever you will have the heart to do, John ; for you иге a VV heeler, every inch of you—and I will clap the dear fellow with all my might, that I am resolved." " And 1 am sure so will I," said Caro¬ line. t{ Do. child, and he shall have my goo4 wishes," added old Wheeler. The provoked John swore <( he would hiss him with all his might." Cary desired him to if take care he was not
not thrown out of the upper into the se¬ cond gallery, if he distuibed the audi¬ ence." Thus they continued to wrangle, till, having taken an eariv tea, thev did agree to walk together to the theatre ; John tel¬ ling them, when they separated, ** that he should leave their favourite to see them home, who would doubtless treat them with a coach." " No doubt," the old woman said—" and if he could but have behaved with common civilitv to Frank, he would have had an or¬ der for the boxes as well as them, and might have rode home with them into the bargain." John swore " he would not have ac¬ cepted any favours from the puppy," though he had seldom been more morti¬ fied—merelv consoling himself with the hopes of. there being a general hiss. His ıiîalicious; expectations were not, however, ful /ШеД, as, the moment Francis appear¬ ed, who was very elegantly dressed in the ι f» appropriate
appropriate costume of the character he represented, and whose graceful and ele¬ gant figure had never been displayed to greater advanrage, he was greeted by a general, loud, and continued clapping, which, though extremely encouraging, was so deeply felt by our hero, that he was obliged to turn from the audience to wipe away the starting tears. This proof of sen- sibility redoubled the applause, which only ceased upon the band's beginning the sym¬ phony of an air that had been composed expressly for Francis, and was, of course, exactly calculated to introduce him with eclat to the public. At first, his evident agitation rather influenced his voice; but, in the course of a few minutes, as the audi¬ ence were profoundly silent, he overcame his momentary dread, and astonished every one present by the compass of his voice, his taste and execution ; therefore, he was hardly suffered to conclude, before there was a general encore, added to the most thundering burst of applause, with the ex¬ ception
ception of a very few hisses from the upper gallery. Mrs. Wheeler and Caroline made no doubt of John's being of the number ; and, as his sister had foreseen, " Throw them over! Throw them over!" was loudlv vo- ciferated by their enraged neighbours, till Francis once more hushed the angry mul¬ titude to silence; and as he succeeded still better the second time than he had done the first, the applause was in proportion, and his fame was established as a singer: i\nd as, during the dialogue, " his actions were suited to the words," and he was verv attentive to his stage dutv, he гсъе greatly in the estimation of the discerning public, who ccrtainlv gave him due encourage¬ ment to persevere in the career he had clioseii : and, when his second appearance was announced, upon the falling of the curtain, he felt proud of the applause which was so kindly lavished upon him, and fancied himself the happiest being in existence; while his gratitude towards Mr, 1 6 Corfe
Corfe became unbounded, as he felt that, though nature had done much for him, he was, nevertheless, greatly indebted to his instructions for his success. Having un¬ dressed during the entertainment, he was ready at the appointed place, to meet Mrs. Wheeler and her daughter, when, to add to their joy and surprise, he handed them pito a very handsome coach, at the door of which stood a livery servant. <( Mercy upon me!" said the old lady, as she was raising her foot-—" are we right?" ft Perfectly so, my dear Ma'am," replied Francis—'* a musical friend of mine re¬ nn ested me to make use of his carriage, which has already conveyed him home, as he thought I might not so readily get a hackney-coach." The ladies were perfectly satisfied with this explanation, but no sooner were they ppon the move, than they overwhelmed pur hero with their compliments and con¬ gratulations ; the old lady declaring, " she 4 could
could not have rejoiced more, had he been her own son ;" therefore, leaning forward, she declared she must kiss him ; of course, he could do no less than return the com¬ pliment to Caroline, who was by no means abashed at receiving his salute; and he agreed, in answer to their kind speeches, that he had been more successful than he dared to have hoped ; but lhe audience had been very indulgent, and had given him such encouragement, that he resolved to study harder than ever, to deserve their future favour. The old woman commend¬ ed the notion, and choosing for once to appear generous, she actually gave the ser¬ vants haif-a-crown to drink, when she alighted at her own door, where Francis wished her a good night, promising to look in upon her the next day, and sending his respects to Mr. Wheeler, who was sitting up for them, and highly delighted when he learnt the wonderful success of his young favourite, which they were all three rejoicing over, when John thundered at the
the door, having run all the w T ay home, wishing to have had the start of his mother and sister. ft Then you must have had wings," said the former, " fori never sat behind a finer nor a swifter pair of horses." John stared, and Caroline prefacing her speech with a loud laugh, asked, " whe¬ ther he had not met their carriage at the end of the street ?" " 1 certainly met a very handsome gen¬ tleman's coach just at the corner, with the footman upon the box with the coach¬ man.'' " That was the very one we came home in," resumed Caroline, " and is just such a one as 1 will have when I keep one." tf Ave, aye—I will chalk you out just such another, Miss ; but Mr. Yates does not vet keep his carriage, though the pub¬ lic may have turned his weak brain—nor are you Mrs. Yates : he must be out of his time before he can marry ; and if he often gets fiattered, as he did to night, depend upon
upon it, he will not put up with a lame wife, except she walks with a golden crutch." His mother called him fo order, but he was so provoked and disappointed, that he did not know upon whom to vent his spleen ; he therefore told the old woman, " she was a d------ d fool for having allowed herself to be overreached by that miser Corfe —Here, by what he understood, Francis was engaged for three vears at Drurv-lane, at a most enormous salary, and was to have a free benefit, besides singing at concerts and oratorios—why, the old fellow would make a fortune by him." " That is more than we shall ever do by you," retorted the angry matron, who was, nevertheless, resolved to make an attempt to persuade old Corfe to allow them a small share of his pupil's earnings. John had no appetite for supper, and he could have burnt every newspaper the next day, they were all so full of the praises of this new performer, who, they said, " united to
to a voice equal to the most difficult exe¬ cution, a remarkablv handsome counte- nance, a most graceful gesture, and a very elegan î person—his tones were full and li¬ quid, and his cadences appropriate and manly ; there was, therefore, every reason to suppose that he would eventually prove one of the first singers upon the British stage." These praises were gall anil wormwood to John Wheeler, who began to fear this young bastard might, as his sister had told him, ere long look down upon him : for the present, however, he must fag for old Corfe, who would doubtlebs pocket all his earnings; therefore, hç might solace him¬ self with the applause of the public, and, he Would, ten to one, be laid upon the shelf by the time he came to set up for himself: and as these w s ere his.wishes, they soon be¬ came his hopes,; and, to see Yates hurled from the zenith of public favour he had now attained, he would willingly have made ару sacrifice that did, not affect his purse.
purse. Mrs. Wheeler was also very partial to money, though she wa^ certainly libera! when compared to her son—nay, even his father, who had always been renowned for his parsimony, might have been deemed extravagant, when put in competition with young miser John. The old gentleman had agreed to hiswife's making the proposed attack upon his neigh¬ bour, without expecting to reap any benefit by her sp doing, as he knew they were not entitled, in law, to require any thing at his hanţls. They had voluntarily placed the lad under his care, therefore they rousgt ^bide by what they had done. The old lady hoped better things, there*· fore watched her opportunity, as she did not visit at Mr. Corfe's, to congratulate him upon the success of his pupil; giving him to understand, as she proceeded, that she knew he had made a very beneficial engagement for him at the theatre, and that he was, besides, likely, by his singing else- where, to realize a very handsome income by
by the youth's talents ; " while, God knows," she went on, " it has cost Mr. Wheeler and me what would now make a very pretty fortune for Caroline, to bring him up ; and I must say, I think it is hard that we should not be allowed at least a slice of the cake you have the handling of, Mr. Cerfe." <f I dare say my pupil was an expence to you during his childhood, Mrs. W'hceler," was the reply, " but, like me, you volun¬ tarily took the charge of him—and 1 have truly expended a fortune upon him, to render him what he is ; and I glory in my work, for he is perfectly sensible of the obligation; and you ought to remember, that I enabled you to educate him gratis, and that I nearly kept him in cloaths while he was at school ; and, for the two last years, I have spared neither pains nor ex- pence to bring him forward with eclat~* He does me and his other masters great credit, but he still requires instruction : and pray, what w T ould have been his fate had
had you not closed with my proposals? would you have devoted hundreds to his improvement? and, as a chorus-singer, he would barely have earned salt to his por¬ ridge ; and you cannot suppose, though I am now very sincerely attached to the youth, that I should have acted as 1 have done towards him, if I had not expected to be a gainer in the end : but he will reap the most benefit from m ν exertions, as I may now venture to affirm, that it will be his own fault if he does not make a rapid fortune ; and I am well convinced, that he will always consider himself as greatly my debtor." Mrs. W ľ heeler durst not push her point any farther; she, therefore, wisely affected to be perfectly satisfied with Mr. Corfe's reasoning, " who made no doubt, he now assured her, of his pupil's soon being at the head of his profession;" and thus the conference ended. Old Wheeler observed, " they could not renew the subject, though, had they been aware
aware of Frank's turning out such a genius, they might have carried their pigs to a bet¬ ter market ; but, as there was no remedy, they had better put a good face upon the matter." Meanwhile, Francis continued to sing three times а -week to crowded audiences, and, during Lent, he had a very liberal en~ gagement from the manager of the orato¬ rios, which, with singing now and then at private concerts, in addition to his benefit, made his kind protector, for such Mr. Corfe was become, ample amends for the money and time he had devoted to his instruction; and when the theatre closed for the season* he made the tour of England with his now beloved pupil, stopping occasionally at some of the largest towns, where the ma¬ nagers οΐ the theatres made it worth his while to suffer Francis to tread their boards; and this constant change of air and scene was so beneficial to our hero's general health, who, having grown very much of late, was not very strong, that he returned to
to London early in September, extremely improved İn point of personal appear¬ ance, and perfectly able to bear the fa¬ tigues attendant upon his profession ; and, though parsimonious in many respects iu his own expences, Mr. Corfe made his pu¬ pil a very liberal allowance, and insisted upon his dressing as well off as on the stage : he also made a point of his riding to and from the theatre ; and Mrs. Hunter, his housekeeper, had always, by his order, some nice restorative ready for him when he came home : he, therefore, used to compare himself to a pet lamb, declaring, " he had ne\er experienced any comfort, much less enjoyed any luxury, before he became Mr. Corfe's inmate." During his absence from London, old Wheeler had a very dangerous fit of illness, which totally incapacitated him from at¬ tending his duty in Austin Friars; indeed, he kept his room for nearly three months, and it was rather doubtful, when our hero returned to town, whether he would ever again
again be able to resume his seat in the counting-house. Mr. Haslcmere, senior, was very much at a loss for his services, and yet felt very unwilling to displace him while there re¬ mained a chance of his recovery ; and Mr. George Haslemere, though now in his nine-aud-thirtieth year, was scarcely more steady than when he married, and was so unable to manage the business of the firm, and so averse to any exertion, that the old gentleman was more closely confined than ever during old Wheeler's illness; when, to his great relief, the son of one of his cou¬ sins, who had been brought up in a count¬ ing-house in Lixerpool, came to London in search of a situation, in consequence of his master's failure ; and being, of course, re¬ commended to his relations, Mr. Haslemere readily received him into his own house, as a sort of deputy to himself, and substi¬ tute for Wheeler : and as Mr. Kempthorne, who was just ten \ears younger than Mr. George Haslemere, was infinitely more au fait
fait of the routine of business, he proved such a valuable acquisition, that it was soon whispered, that the old gentleman meant to add his name to the firm, by way of re¬ lieving himself, in part, from the necessary attention he was now obliged to devote to so large a concern, and also by way of having a still farther check upon his thoughtless son, whose expenditure more than kept pace with the profits arising frem his share of the trade. John Wheeler, who fancied himself ex¬ tremely competent to succeed his father, felt himself cxtremeiv offended at this young man's being placed above him, and sincerely hoped he would never bc what he stv led Mr. Manager, as he soon disco¬ vered that he would neither prove so indul¬ gent as the elder Mr. Haslcmere, nor so supinely indolent as the younger, though he durst not speak his sentiments upon the subject, except to his father, who felt so grateful at not being, as he feared, super¬ seded, since his salary was continued him, that
that he merely poinťéd out fb r thé ďišcoil- t en ted John; the absolute necessity of itn- plicit obedience to his old master, err to any one in whom he placed confidence ; bid* ding him remember, that Air. Kempthorne had claims to precedency and to indul¬ gence, of which he could not boast. Such was the state of affairs when Mr. Corfe and the hero of these memoirs re¬ turned to London ; and having learnt front the worthy Mrs. Hunter, who was extremely gîad to see them, Mr: Wheeler's illness, and the general news of the neighbourhood, Francis resolved to pay the poor old man an early visit; and accordingly the next morning; soon after Mr. John had left home, he knocked at the door. The inva¬ lid, who could just crawl about the house, was overjoyed to see him; declaring, €( that he had 1 more than once feared he should never have seen him again, though he was certainly much better than he had Heen, and. hfe did*hope, in time, to gain a little strength/* Our
Our hero was absolutely shocked at the wonderful alteration in his person, secretly resolving to contribute, to the utmost of his power, towards his recovery. The old woman was not behind hand in her wel¬ come, though she declared, t{ she was al¬ most worn down to a skeleton, what with one thing and another: here her poor dear old man had been under the doctor's hands ever since he liad been gone; therefore, at Christmas they should have such a bill to pay, that she could not tell where they should ever find the money ; for no one knew how expensive illness was, but those who were afflicted with it." Miss Caroline talked in the same strain, declaring, " that she had been quite in the dumps during his absence, as his company and conversation would have consoled her under all her misfortunes." This was speaking so plain, that Francis could not avoid understanding her mean¬ ing; and with difficulty did he keep his countenance, so much did the idea of mar- vor,. ι, к ryina
rving this ignorant silly girl amuse him, being besides well convinced, that he owed her partiality to his success. The old man he had ever considered in some respects as a parent, and he by no means disliked the old woman ; but he was very far from even liking Caroline, and John he had long most cordially despised. Nevertheless, to evince his gratitude towards the old man, when¬ ever opportunity offered, and he knew him to be alone, he dropped in, and chat¬ ted with him for an hour or so, relating the news of the day, and enquiring into the nature of his complaints, and what the doc¬ tor, or rather apothecary, who attended him, ordered him to eat and drink; and as he was well convinced that the old woman would never consent to his drinking so much port-wine as his stomach required, and as he also found that she was very averse to procuring him any delicacies, to tempt his appetite, he made a point of either sending or carrying him something cither to cat or drink every day ; and as the
the old lady did not object to cooking the poultry and fish she thus obtained grafis. and even allowed Thomas to drink his pint of wine а -day at our hero's expence, the invalid told him one day, when they were alone, "he believed he should be indebted to him, after all, for his recovery, though he must not say so before his dame, who had certainly been very kind and attentive to him ; but her mutton-broth # and beef- tea would never have set him upon his legs again, as he felt he vvan ted solids, though he could not relish brisket of beef and cabbage." Francis excused Mrs. Wheeler, who, he made no doubt, had been entirely guided by the orders of his medical attendant, and some of those oentlcmen were too fond of slops—-not that we were always propc r judges of what was good for us when we were unwell; taking care, in the mea ι time, that he wanted for nothing liken either to strengthen or nourish -hi m : and we must acknowledge, that Mrs. Wheeler к c i w ns
was no less grateful for his kind attention, as she would have been exceedingly sorry to have lost her husband, for more reasons than one ; yet she could not bear the idea of buying him fowls, sweetbreads, or any thing that she thought dear : she, however, frequently told Francis, " that she was afraid he deprived himself of many com¬ forts to regale her poor Thomas." He as* mi red hcrjn return, that, thanks to Air. Corfe's liberalin, lie bad alwavs more money than he wished to spend, and he could not expend it in a way more satis¬ factory to his feelings; and there was very little merit in people gixing away what they hardly knew how to dispose of in a proper manner. Old Wheeler gave him due credit for his generosity, and his wife (i wished John had taken after him ; but you know, hus¬ band," she went on, " he is in a manner our child, and 1 protest I hope we shall be nearer related still before 1 die." Caroline wisely exclaimed, ik ' La, mo¬ ther '
ther! how you talk!"— But Francis gave a turn to the conversation, a fleeting not to have understood the genite lint, almost immediately taking leave, t es avoid a re¬ newal of the subject.
asaa.
CHAP. IX. Having resumed his situation upon the boards of old Drury, he met with so cor¬ dial a reception from the audience, that he was unable to express the gratitude he felt as he could have wished ; and İt was gene¬ rally allowed, that both his voice and style were improved since the last season ; he was, therefore, more the rage than ever, and in such favour with the higher powers, к 3 that
that he could almost command orders: he, therefore, requested Mrs. Wheeler would let him know whenever she or any of her friends wished to go to the play, as he could always procure them admittance gra¬ tis, without laying himself under any obli¬ gation, of course, they need not fancy themselves under any to him ; and they hardly required his last assurance to in¬ duce them to apply to him very fre- cjucntlv, as even John condescended to profit by his folly, as he politely termed if, and even went so far as to say, * ; that if the squalling fellow would meet him half way, he had no objection to being* friends with him, since it must make it dis¬ agreeable to the family their being at vari¬ ance, and as he had been kind to his fa¬ ther, though he made no doubt he had been baiting with a sprat to catch a her¬ ring, but that was of little consequence ; therefore, if his mother could bring matters to bear, why, he was willing to consign the past to oblivion, as he did not wish to oblige
oblige him to slink into the house like a thief when he was from home, as he had no intention of renewing their former dis¬ putes." Thus did this amiable young man en¬ deavour to make a merit of doing what he had long vainly tried to bring about, having for some time sincerely wished to be upon good terms with his bastard cou¬ sin, as he might gain, and could not lose, by their intimacy : and as the old people were rather anxious to have Francis for a son-in-law, they thought it absolutely ne¬ cessary to promote a reconciliation be¬ tween him and John : the old woman, therefore, resolved to lose no time in so doing, desiring her son, as a preparatory step, to touch his hat to Frank the next time he met him, while she would take upon herself to break the ice ; and as the youth was certainly neither vain nor proud, and had a very great regard for her and Air. Wheeler, she was convinced that he would be as ready to forget and forgive к 4 as
as he could be—and this John readily be¬ lieved : and as he had, by dint of listening and conjecturing, guessed that his mother had it in contemplation to unite his sister and Francis, self-interest therefore induced him to second her to the best of his slender abilities, notwithstanding he still even more than disliked our hero, whose great success, superior talents, and very elegant figure, had greatly increased the enmity he had always borne him ; yet, as he seemed in a likely way to make a fortune, why, he had ло objection to his taking " Hop and go one," as he politely called his sister, for better and worse, as he meant to oppose his father, should he think of giving her much money down ; and, once married, as he should then remain complete master of - the field, he trusted to his own superior cunning to have her name placed at the back of his will. These reflections had led to the recent conversation; and, as the old lady had foreseen, Francis, though he easily guessed he
he owed the pacific overture to the high estimation in which he stood with the pub¬ lic, readilv extended the olive branch, agreeing, at her request, to drink his tea the following Sunday with them ; when John made an effort to receive him with apparent politeness, assuring him, that he had long since acquitted him of having been the occasion of his fracas with the West minster boys, and expressing a hope, that they should be better friends than ever in future. This Francis much doubted, though he bowed a polite assent to the supposition ; and Mrs. Wheeler, taking it for granted that they were already so, made our hero promise (being warmly seconded by her husband, John, and Cary,) that he would dine with her on Christmas-day, which w T as her annual gala. This matter being settled to her satisfaction, she said, as he was making his parting bow, " that they should only have a few friends, Mr. Moreton, with whom he was already ac¬ quainted, Mrs. Jones, who was also no к 5 stranger
stranger to him, and their present lodger, Mr. Kempthorne, who was Mr. Iíasle m ere's relation, of course, quite the gentleman." That our hero thought very possible ; but, if he was accustomed to mix in «enteei society, he conceived he would find him¬ self very much out of his element among this party, as none of the Wheeler family had any pretensions to gentility; and Mr. Moretón was an old bachelor, who had once been their lodger, a very weak, good- tempered man, who had quitted their house upon coming into possession of what he deemed a large fortune, that is, about five hundred а -year, upon the death of a very distant relation ; and he now lodged in St. JamesVstreet, for the sake of seeing the iinc folks 2:0 to Court on the birthdavs; and as his increase of fortune had not greatly added to his respectability, he had very few friends or acquaintance; indeed, his continuing to associate with the Wheelers, was a convincing proof of his partiality to low company ; but they paid him such as* sklu ous
siduous court, in hopes of appearing in his will, that thev were in verv great favour, and were sure to be of what he styled his birthday parties : in return, Airs. Wheeler never had what she called a party, without asking her dear friend Afr. Moreton, to serve whom John often declared, " he would walk barefoot with pleasure, even to Edinburgh;" frequently dropping in upon him, to mend his pens, dust his books, or to inquire whether he wanted any thing out of the city ? Airs. Jones was some years younger, and had been fourteen years a widow, owing, it was said, to her having starved her husband, a herald painter, to death. Bc that as it may, by dint of strict economy and excellent management, she had now amassed three hundred and twenty pounds a-year—a matter of no small boast to her ; and as she was still as eager as ever to increase her store, she let out every room in her house, front parlour excepted, to single men, upon whom she waited, as she kept no maid, and, of course, not a к 6 very
very sumptuous table : her money alone recommended her to the Wheelers, with whom chance had brought her acquainted soon after they removed into Marsham- street; and as she was now growing rather infirm, aud could not follow up her tc-' nants ( being owner of several small houses) as she had used to do, when they did not bring their rent before twelve o'clock on quarter-day, John Wheeler was sure to be employed to write them threatening letters; and as he was also ready to run of all her errands, he was a great favourite ; and she had hinted, that he might not be the worse in the long-run, though she had two nieces who w f ere to have been her heirs, but, during a fit of illness, some years before having sent for the eldest to Lon¬ don, she led the poor creature such a life when she recovered, that she actually eloped with one of hgr best lodgers, a cjerk in the excise-office. " Had the jade Itone alone, she might in time," she said, ^ have forgivep her; but she had made a 4 vow,
# vow/when she learnt that she waï still liv¬ ing with the fellow, never to suffer her to darken her doors again ; of course, she was resolved not to leave her a shilling, die when she would," immediately sending for her sister to supply her place, who posi¬ tively refused to become her inmale, de¬ claring, <{ she liad rather live scullion in a gentleman's familv, than be styled her companion :" such an insult was never to be forgiven; and, bince that period, the old woman was continuuUv declaring, " that she would not work like a horse much longer, since she had no need to save for her relations; she should, there¬ fore, leave her money to those she liked best ;" and John took infinite pains to de¬ serve this envied title, paying her the most abject court, while he was daily praying for her death ; and if his vanity had not led him to hope he should certainly capti¬ vate some young and beautiful, as well as rich woman, he would positively have made her an offer of his hand; but the dread of becoming
becoming the laughing-stock of his fellow- clerks, had hitherto rendered him deaf to the suggestions of avarice. Such were the people whom Mr. Kemp¬ thorne was invited to meet—This gentle¬ man had a small independency, and some rich relations, besides Mr. Haslemere, from whom he had great expectations. George Haslemere had advised him to take up his abode at the Wheelers, whom he repre¬ sented as very good sort of people, and to whom he acknowledged himself to be ha¬ bitually attached. Mr. Kempthorne made no objections to his proposal, and, in consequence, became the Wheelers' inmate; and as the apart¬ ment was very comfortable, and the family were very civil, he found no reason to complain. Mrs. Wheeler, who was extremely anxi¬ ous to oblige a man that was said would become a partner in the house of her old master, was, it may be supposed, profuse in her thanks to Mr. George Haslemere, the
the next time he called upon her, for having recommended her so excellent a lodger, who was as regular as clock-work, and as easy to please as old Air. Aîoreton. Their patron was happy to find he suited them, adding, <( If I was you, Caroline, I would set my cap at him—he is a very smart voung fellow." The old woman observed, (t that he was not to be compared to Francis Yates, in point of figure." " What then ?" was the reply, Si he will make the best husband of the two; and Cary is not so silly as to prefer a mere boy to a man who may, in time, preside in Aus¬ tin Friars; for I shall decline business as soon as my father drops, though I shall make a point of providing for you and yours, Wlieel er; and, if Kempthorne con¬ nects himself with you, he will do the hand¬ some thing by John, I make no doubt." Novv, had Air. Haslemere given his real reasons for thus raising hopes, which he feared would never be realized, the old woman
woman would not have been so thankful for his kind wishes to sec Caroline well settled : and he was no sooner gone than she declared, " she began to think Kemp¬ thorne had set him on, to hear what they would ьау : Yes, yes—Cary had made a hole in the voung man's heart, she verily believed : however, they muU mind their hits—Frank was ccrtainlv a fine young fel¬ low, and there were reasons whv she should prefer him for a son-in-law-—but that was ncithei here nor there ; he might not wish to marrv vet, and he might turn out a rake : now Mr. Kempthorne had already a very pretty fortune; and, should he be admitted into the firm, ecod Cary need not turn her back upon my Lady Mayoress:" So thought her sapient daughter, who observed, ' e that Frank seemed more like her brother than her lover; however, she should continue to shew him the same politeness, as there was nothing like having two strings to one bow." Mrs. Wheeler commended her prudence, advising
ail vising her to put herself in Kempthorne's wav whenever he came in or went out, and to give him the meeting whenever she could upon the stairs, as there was nothing like striking while the iron was hot. Cary was an apt scholar, therefore, henceforth she always admitted her sup¬ posed admirer, who was frequently obliged to sup with the family, as the old people would take no denial, and our hero's pre¬ sents enabled them to regale him at little or no expence ; and as he construed their overstrained civility into an indirect com¬ pliment to the Mr. Haslemeres, and a wish to court his favour, he by no means sus¬ pected the honour they intended htm, nor that his commonly civil returns for Caro¬ line's attentions, were by them considered " proofs strong as holy writ," of his being deeply sniitten with her charms; but, feel¬ ing anxious to return some of the obliga¬ tions they liad lain him under, he present¬ ed them with a turkey and chine for their Chri4i»as dinner, though he would not hav e
have joined their party, if he had not un¬ derstood that their nephew Yates was in¬ vited, and he was rather anxious to be in¬ troduced to our hero, of whom old Whee¬ ler always spoke verv highly. The old woman and her daughter were more guarded in their encomiums, Caroline of¬ ten hinting, " he was like a second bro- ther," and the old woman merely saying, r " he was very grateful for past favours, and she was fond of him for her poor brother's sake." Now, from what he had picked up among the clerks and household in Austin Friars, he was rather of Mrs. George Hasle¬ mere's opinion respecting the youth, and had, in consequence, visited the theatre early in the season, on purpose to see this general favourite, and to draw his own con¬ clusions; but the stage costume, rouge, &c. though it certainly added to the per¬ sonal appearance of our hero, did not per¬ mit him to form any decisive judgment re¬ specting him ; and though he frequently røw him in public during the ensuing two months*
months, owing to Francis's wish to avoid John, he had never met him at the Whee¬ lers; but he sang so divinely, was so ex¬ cellent an actor, and had, when required, so much the appearance of a man of fa¬ shion, that he felt very much inclined to credit the sort of general report, which pronounced him* to be'the son of George Haslemere ; and on Christmas-day he thought he should be able to come to a certainty, by watching the behaviour of the Wheelers towards him. Having been repeatedlv informed that they were to dine at three, five minutes before he descended into the front parlour, where the cloth was alreadv laid, and Mr. Wheeler, his son and daughter, and Mrs. Jones, were already assembled; to her he was introduced, and informed, that Mrs. Wheeler was superin¬ tending the cook. Mr. Moreton soon made his appearance, complaining of the cold, having walked across the Park, declaring, ft he would have put on his great-coat instead of his spencer, had
had he known the air was so keen ;" when, having paid his compliments and been in¬ troduced to Mr. Kempthorne, he said, *' I hoped to have seen Air. Yates, though I dare say I shall not know him again—he was a fine lively boy, and has often made me laugh very heartily, and during the spring, I mean to go and see him upon the stage ; but, I am told the house is so crowd¬ ed when he performs, I am almost afraid to venture." tc Mrs. Wheeler has been kind enough to ask me twice to accompany her when she had orders," said Airs. Jones— i( but unfortunately I could not leave my house; however, I don't mean to confine myself as I have done, as I have slaved long enough for the benefit of strangers." John " was sure that her money would prosper in any one's hands," when a knock at the door induced Caroline, who was full-dressed, and seated next Kempthorne, to exclaim, " That's Frank!" and in less than a minute he made his appearance, extremely
extremely well dressed it maybe supposed, and in strict conformity to the reigning fashion, and his graceful general bow in¬ duced them all, mechanically as it were, to rise to β return the compliment. John Wheeler was the first to reseat himself, feeling ashamed of having been thus civil to the bastard son of a clodhopper, a defini¬ tion by which he frequently· denominated our hero, who was very kindly greeted bv old Moretón and Mrs. Jones, and intro¬ duced to Mr. Kempthorne bv Caroline. John ha\ing made it up with him, wish¬ ed to be familiarlv eivil ; but the natural malignancy of his disposition was so visible in his countenance, that Francis was amused by the constraint he c\identlv laboured under to conceal his envv and dislike of him. Caroline rallied him upon having made it so late^— Ck she supposed he had been a fine time at his toilette, he was so smart :" while John, affecting to bc witty, baid, (< The nearer
nearer the church—eh, Frank, you take mc ?" " I certainly understand your allusion, and I am sorry to say, that, though few young people have been more strictly kept to their church-duty than myself, 1 cannot boast of being over-righteous." ťí And I am afraid you are not likely to improve in your new school," rejoined John, laughing at his own wit. " Ifl am fortunate enough to please the public, I dare say they will not enquire, nor even care about my religious princi¬ ples, though I am well convinced that there are, and have been, many men, as well as women, of irreproachable character upon the stage." " So doubt, Air. Yates," said Air. Aîore¬ ton; " our great Roscius, and many others. were the boast of former times; and I dare say you will tread in their steps, and be as much courted and respected as thev were : and let me tell you, Air. John Whee¬ ler. 5
1er, Garrick was company for our. first no¬ bility," i( Oh Lord, Sir, he is vain enough al¬ ready !" replied the provoked John— " do give him a little respite, for fear, like the frog in the fable, he should burst." " You are more likely to do so, John," cried the unceremonious Airs. Jones ; while Air. Aîoreton asked our hero to come and see him, adding, " I suppose it will be no treat to you to see the fine folks go to Court, else-------" tf Not it, truly!" interrupted John— * 4 since he is often a lord or a prince him¬ self." " 1 am sure he has the presence of one, ' obtruded Airs. Jones. "Well, vou meet vour friends theWhec- lers, at my lodgings, the 18th of next month," resumed Afr. Aîoreton. " I would with pleasure, Sir, as I feel highly gratified by your invitation, ifl had not had a previous engagement." iC I am sorry to hear it—but, prav drop ш
in whenever you come ray way, that we may talk over old times." " Nay, Sir, ifl was to advise," said the witty John, cc you would not remind Frank of the past, as he has more reason to be proud of the present." Mr. Moreton was angry at being thus retorted upon, as John, in his eagerness to lower our hero, was certainly very defi¬ cient in politeness towards the old gentle¬ man, who convinced him, as Mrs. Jones remarked, that he had been playing with edge-tools, while our hero was- more amused than vexed at his puerile attempts to disconcert him. The entrance of Mrs. Wheeler with the dinner, gave a turn to the conversation : her face was a convincing proof of her having superintended the cooking; but she made very light of the fatigue she had undergone, only hoping, " that all her dear friends then present would make a hearty dinner, for a more beautiful turkey and chine she had never beheld—they were
were a present of Mr. Kempthorne's ;" be¬ ginning ίο carve them, while her guests took their seats ;— (< and my boy Frank, as I used to call him, you kríow, Mrs. Jones, has not been less generous ; for, upon my goodman's saying, last Sunday evening, * he thought he could eat a bit of mince- pie/ what does he do, but post into the city on Monday morning, to bring him some from Birch's, where he ordered a pot of mince-meat for me, w*hich, I do believe, contains a peck ; so we need not be spa¬ ring of mince-pies this Christmas :—My daughter made the crust of these, and, though I say it, she need not turn her Lack upon Mr. Birch himself—but the proof of the pudding is Ín the eating;" and, to do the old lady justice, every thing proved very good ; and the port and sherry, being- part of Mr. George Haslemerc's annual Christmas present, was as good as had evet been imported. Mr. Moreion pronounced the mince- pies excellent, which induced the old lady VOL. I. L to
to launch out once more in praise of her daughter, upon whom she had bestowed a boarding-school education, and had since made her a compleat housewife; therefore, she blessed God, no man that sought her in marriage, would have to blush for his choice," unconsciously, perhaps, looking first at Kempthorne, then at Francis, who both blushed at her folly, which her wise daughter aggravated, by exclaiming, (f La, mother, how you run on !—I wish you would not talk such nonsense." A handsome desert succeeded the repast, and Mrs. Jones, who had very easily been prevailed upon to drink a few glasses of wine during dinner, and a drop of brandy, to prevent the mince-pie from rising, be¬ came -so gay, that she more than once ex¬ cited a general laugh ; and, after the first toast, she told our hero, " that she had often kissed him when a child, and she would again, if that would bribe him to treat her with a song." Francis declared his readiness to oblige her
her upon those terms ; but, as she objected to paying beforehand, without any farther intreaty, he sung a beautiful ballad, with such genuine feeling, taste, and expression, that he delighted all his auditors, John Wheeler excepted—the old man wiped his eyes, declaring, <( he no longer wondered he w T as such a favourite with the public, for he had never heard such singing before"— nor were Mr. Moretón and Kemp'thornc less lavish of their praise; w T hiIe Aírs. Jones, having readily given him the pro¬ mised kiss, " only wished she was forty years younger for his sake, as, for such a treat every day, he should have had every shilling she was worth, if he would have led her to the altar; and there was not many of the young flirts now-a-days, who could boast of being worth seven thousand pounds—no, faith, they were all outside shew, and, God knows, but little of-that, since they are more than half naked—She blushed for them every day of her life." So did Mrs. Wheeler, « and she took j. l 2 care.
care, if her daughter did dress in the fa¬ shion, that she should not go into ex¬ tremes." "Oh ì tho men are the most modest of the two," rejoined Mrs. Jones, compli¬ menting our hero upon his dress. " Oh ! he has the presence of a prince, you know," retorted John, in a spiteful tone. i( And you," cried the now provoked dame, " have the presence of an earwig, and the corporation of a bean-straw !" This vulgar, but trite comparison, occa¬ sioned such a general laugh, John W r heeler could with pleasure have boxed the old woman's ears ; and his countenance was so indicative of his inward rage, that she told him, " she perceived he bore a greater resemblance to her late husband than she had before suspected ; as he, poor man, was always taunting others, but could not bear a joke himself." John prudently forbore making anv re¬ ply, as he found he should not be support¬ ed.
cd, were he, as he longed to be, impu¬ dent: and, by way of giving him time to recover his temper, Air. Aîoreton petition¬ ed for another song ; Francis readily obliged him—till John called for tea, po¬ litely declaring, " he was sick of music/' Mrs. Jones pitied his want of taste, but did not object to taking a hand at cards, which were soon ordered. Our hero wish¬ ed to have retired, but Airs. Wheeler de¬ clared, " she should never forgive him, if he did not stay supper;" and her husband, who liked him to ¿he hűl as well as he did his son, called him to him, saying, as he took his hand, " Are you obliged to leave us so early ?—if not, you will oblige me very much by staying supper." rt I certainly promised to join another party, my dear Sir, if I did not spend the evening here ; but, since you wish me to stay, 1 shall no longer think of going." John bit his lips, and, had he spoke, would have saitl, tť canting hypocrite !" L 3 ' Air.
Mr. Aîoreton expressed his pleasure at his acquiescence; and Airs. Jones said, " it was both kind and grateful, and she liked to see young people sensible of past fa¬ vours : as for her nieces, sorry jades, they should suffer for their ingratitude;" and was going to recapitulate how shamefully they had treated her, when old Wheeler requested ŕť she would not damp the mirth of his company by repeating old grie¬ vances, since he had not been so happy for manv months." *' Then, God forbid I should be a bar to your enioving vourself, mv old friend«-- \ have seldom spent a pleasanter day my¬ self, and neither you nor I can expect to spend many more Christmas days together —I only hope the old woman, who I have left in charge of my house, won't get tip- sey, and set herself and that on fire." if I will be bound," blundered out John, " she will not get drunk with------ ": he paused— « Oh.
* f Oh, pray out with it, Mr. Impudence ! for I am resolved you shall never get tip- sey at my expence." John only meant to have added, t( with her table-beer," but had recollected she had left off taking any in. tl Aye, aye—mighty well, Mr, John Wheeler !^—I am not your dupe.—When you have taken me in, you have but an¬ other to cheat—1 have not lived to these vears to be outwitted bv a bov —onlv take m. W У V care to play your part through life as well as I have done, though vou have a worthv industrious father and mother, who will leave a nice nest-egg." Here Caroline broke in upon her, by saying, ff the cards were ready-—inquiring whether the company chose to play at a round game, or to have two tables ?" fC A round game, by all means," said Mrs. Jones; and, in consequence, they all sat down to Pope Joan—the onlv game at which that lady ever played, as she under¬ stood no other, and was too old to learn. L 4 John
John hoped she would win. " As you will not be the better for it if I should, only take care of yourself." John was silenced, and the game began. Caroline, who was very anxious to at- tyut the notice of Kempthorne, whcnc\cr she could do so unperceived by our hero, frequenti) made blunders, which her mo¬ ther always excused, as " she blessed God, Cary had no turn for cards, and no man in his senses would like a wife that had." Caroline, upon this, thought it necessary to dedare, " she had never lost or won more than sevcnpence at any time of her life." This led John, who was also verv anxious to display his prudence, to say, " he had once won thiee and eightpence at Commerce ; but he made it a rule ne\er to play high, except he had a run of luck, and to Iea\e off the moment it turnéd." Kemnthcrnc ch:.nccd, while he was speaking» to meet the c\cs of our hero, vho, he pirccived, had some difficult) to keep
keep his countenance, as well as himself, since they, neither of them, required to be told, that John would have thought it a sin to spend money in what he would have deemed folly. At last, however, Airs. Jones remarked Caroline's amorous glan¬ ces, who made a fresh blunder while fondly gazing at Kempthorne— " Mind your cards, child !" she exclaimed—" for, take my word for it, the grapes are sour." '*' La, Airs. Jones ! what do you mean ?" said the silly and now blushing girl. " Thai v'Hir tender glances are all thrown away—It wiii not do !" No one afïècted to understand the old lady ; and, by way of changing the sub¬ ject, Airs. Wheeler observed, " it grew late, therefore she must see about supper." " Then we may as well leave off," re¬ sumed Airs. Jones, " as I approve of John's notion, and my luck appears to have taken a turn; for I had.won ninepcnce a short time since, which is now reduced to a graat." J 5 John
John affected to consider her determina¬ tion as a compliment to his superior judg¬ ment, observing, after counting his money, " that he had also been very fortunate, having won sixpenrc-halfpennv :" and as the ladies left the room with Mrs. Wheeler, Mr. Kempthorne, turning to our hero, said, " Will you do me the favour, Mr. Yates, to step into my apartment for a few mi¬ nutes ?—-1 have just received a commission from a female relation in the countrv, to send her down some of the last new songs; and í should feel myself great 1 v obliged to •'c*» О you, if you would assist me with your ad¬ vice in the selection—1 will read you what she has written me upon the subject.*' Francis, with his usual politeness, in¬ stantly acceded to the proposal; when. having reached the dining-room, flinging /o the door, Kempthorne exclaimed, ex¬ tending his hand while he spoke, " May 1 hope you will excuse the liberty 1 have taken, Mr. Yates, since I have positively drawn you from the company under a false pretence ľ *
pretence ? but the truth is, I have long been wishing to be introduced to you, since I am in great hopes we shall soon become more intimate; indeed, I should not have dined with the Wheeler family to-day, if I had not been told you were also invited." Francis shook him very cordially by the hand, assuring him, <f he felt greatly flat¬ tered by the kind wish he had expressed;" adding, " that he had already been greatly prepossessed in his favour, from the very high encomiums which the WTieelers al¬ ways bestowed upon him," íŕ Nay, nay—they were doubtless equally lavish in praise of old Moretón, while he paid them their price, and did not give them much trouble—1 wish you to form vour own iudffment of me, for ï am con- vinced, our opinions of the good folks be¬ low exactly coincide." ir I make no doubt they do," rejoined our hero— (i but, were I to visit you here, ĺ С and
and they were not to be of the party, I hardly know what they would think." " Why, John would surmise," interrup¬ ted Kempthorne, " that we were laying plans to deprive him of his father's trea¬ sures, and the old woman would suspect we were comparing notes respecting her dear Caroline—I hope I am not indis¬ creet." " You cannot suppose so, since, if ever 1 had a chance, 1 am now completely thrown into the back-ground." <f Now, 1 fancy the young lady long since discovered, that she had no chance of softening your flinty heart, so has wisely transferred her attention towards me, I am grieved to add. I fear, as Mrs. Jones po¬ litely told her, she will find the grapes are sour, as she is infinitely too accomplished and too economical to suit my turn: but, a truce to nonsense—when can 1 have die pleasure of seeing you elsewhere ?—Like myself, I know you are not absolutely your own
own master, and, to enjoy your company, we must meet at some distance from Mar¬ sham-street." " Then, suppose we say Sundav, if you are disengaged," resumed Francis, i: аз we are probably both at leisure on that d ту." :í So be it—therefore, aí half past one, I will be upon the parade in the Park." " I will certainly give you the meeting there," was the reply. At that moment they heard Caroline limping up stairs, calling out, " Supper is upon table, so come along both of v ou, if you have settled about the music." Kempthorne instantly opened í he door, saying, " We are now settling which of us shall have the advantage of leading von down stairs again." " Then, to prevent your quarrelling, ï will go down alone," she replied, hasten¬ ing down befoie them, to their infinite amusement, though they both complained of her cruelty. John, who had been upon the listen, with
vith the parlour-door in his hand, f ' hoped they did not mean to have recourse to pis¬ tols though many a duel had been fouffht upon as frivolous an occasion." " Surely never, when there was such an able mediator as Mr. John Wheeler at hand," said Kempthorne. Doth brother and sliter smiled applause, but Mrs. Jones observed, " that she be¬ lieved John was fonder of making, than of preventing mischief,'' This remark was too true to be forgiven ; indeed, the person to whom it was address¬ ed, no longer endeavoured to conceal cither his vexation or ill humour. Supper being over, our hero was re¬ quested to favour the party with one more song, Mrs. Jones declaring, " that, if he would let her know the first time he had a benefit, she would not only take a ticket, but do all she could for him among her friends." Francis made her a very polite reply, and rcadilv sang another ballad in vogue, so
so much to her satisfaction, that she de¬ clared, ,r he should never want for a friend while she lived ;" adding, with a significant lyck, ' r and í will be bound you will never want for one after 1 am dead; and so, here's health and prosperity to you," tossing off her glass: she then said, 4 ' she must be go¬ ing." Caroline protested, 4i it was very early, nnd she hoped Mr. Kempthorne would also favour thorn with a song;" and as all the company joined in the request, he readily obliged them with a very droll song of D i bd in's, which he sang with great hu¬ mour; and if he did not, like Francis, excite their admiration, he did their mirth: after which the party broke up. John, who bad aiwavs made a point of seeing Mrs. Jones home, desired the maid to bring his great-coat. ,k You need not take the trouble, JennvJ died the old lady, " as I have too great a regard for your young master to take him out in such a cold night : it is moon-light, and
and I shall not need a protector when there are so many people about." John vowed she should not go alone. " Then, to oblige him, she would re¬ quest Mr. Yates would see her home—he was going into the cold, and she was sure he would not think it a trouble." " Very much the contrary, I can assure you, Ma'am," said our hero, " as I shall feel myself the obliged person, though ϊ durst not have offered my services " " What ! you were afraid of putting your cousin's nose out of joint !—for I am sure vou do not stand in awe of his valour : however, come along, since I promise you I will be your second should he call you out ;" and thus the party separated, in ap¬ pearance excellent friends; but, in ùct, the Wheeler family were all more or less dis¬ pleased and disconcerted ; and Kempthorne ^nd Moreton being also gone, John swore, " that he would sooner have dined at a twopenny ordinary in St. Giles's, than at his father's table : he was a d — d. fool for ever
ever having made it up with the smooth¬ tongued, palavering, young bastard; how¬ ever, if it pleased God they both lived till the next Christmas, thev should not again dine at the same table." " A vast many с Langes may take place between this and then,*' said Caroline. " True, Cary," rejoined her mother— " God send they may be for the better !" while the old man told John, " he had been in his airs all the evening, as he had seen nothing to biame, and much to com¬ mend, in Francis's behaviour; since, though he was so well paid for singing in public, he made no favour of obliging his friends in pri', ate." John retorted, in tux impudent tone, ff that he saw very plainly he had won his warm heart, by making him a few pdtry presents aflate." This roused Mrs. Wheeler's angry pas¬ sions, who asked him rt how he dared to call the presents Francis had made them p:*iin ?~ not to mention the micce-moat, he
he had never let a day elapse since his re¬ turn to town, without sending or bringing poultry, game, or fish, besides two dozen of port-wine." ' ( That is very true, wife—and it is, thanks to your care and to those presents, that 1 am so well as I am." iť You are right, Mr. Wheeler—and pray, what has your son ever brought you home, that he thought likelv to do vou good or to flatter your palate ? though he was more cager th^n you were to come in for his share of whatever Frank sent; for he cares for no one but himself—nay, I make no doubt but he would rejoice if both our heads were laid low." John, who was well aware that he stood no chance, since the old people were both against him, prudently took himself off to bed ; when Caroline declared, te she was sure he had done for himself with Mrs. Jones; indeed, she should not wonder if ihe put Frank's name instead of his in her will," ' f Why,
(< Why, she is a queer, capricious mor¬ tal," replied the old woman, " and John. certainly play'd his cards very badly to¬ night ; even old Moretón, poor sapskull, was half ruffled—if he could but have let Frank alone, all would have been well." " lie never can govern his temper," re¬ joined the old man— " we have given him his head, till he thinks he can drive the world before him." While they were thus dwelling upon their son's errors, Mrs. Jones was not spa¬ ring in her comments on them to our hero : ik The old people were very weil," she agreed— " but as for their impudent son, she was not sure whether she should not smack the door in his face the next time he came to see her." Francis avoided saying any thing likelv to widen the breach, though ho did not contradict her, but spoke very Irghlr of the old Wheelers,, to whom he said '*" ho ¿hoiti ι
should always consider himself as greatly indebted." " I am not so sure of thar," was the re¬ ply—" however, if you wish to be nearer related to them than they say you are al¬ ready, why, they will give you ¿heir daugh¬ ter; but, if you follow my advice, you will have nothing to say to the little forward minx, who is ready to throw herself at the head of any man who she thinks has money, and she was ogling Mr. Kempthorne the whole evening." Her arrival at her own door put a stop to her animadversions, and, to her great joy, all was safe, and the char-woman was perfectly sober: therefore, after making Francis promise to call and see her the first opportunity, she suffered him to depart ; and, upon the whole, he was not sorry he liad accepted the Wheelers* invitation, since they were evidently glad to sc: him ; and, if their knul reception was in some mea¬ sure owing to his having risen in the public opinion,
opinion, they were by no means singular; he was, therefore, resolved to ever grate¬ fully evince his remembrance of their for¬ mer kindness towards him, when he really stood in need of friends; though he felt no ambition to aspire to the fair hand of the blooming Caroline, whom he resolved in future to treat with the most distant reserve, as he well knew that she had the happy knack of construing a mere polite address into a declaration of love; and as he felt convinced she would never be Mrs. Kempthorne, he was determined she should never bear his name.
CHAP.
CHAP. X. On the Sunday morning, according to ap¬ pointment, our hero joined Air. Kemp¬ thorne in the Park ; and, as it was a fine frosty day, they agreed to walk a little way into the country, and to dine together at some tavern in the environs of town, Francis proposed the Horns at Kennington, saying, " he knew Townshcnd." " With all my heart," was the reply, f ' as we are both bachelors, else the sign has an ominous sound to husbands ; though, were I to marry Caroline Wheeler, 1 should certainly entertain no fears for my fore¬ head,"
This brought on a discussion respecting that family ; and, as the young men per¬ fectly agreed in their opinion of them, they were very free in their remarks ; but, after dirmer, Francis having been rather unconsciously induced to relate his very simple story, in answer to some very natu¬ ral inquiries of his companion, Kemp¬ thorne said, " I am fearful you will think me very curious; indeed, I am sensible that I have been much more so in my en¬ quiries than our short acquaintance war¬ rants: in excuse I can only say, I feel greatly interested for you—what you have told mc, exactly tallies with what I have already heard from the Wheelers; still 1 cannot help thinking that they have im¬ posed upon both you and me." ** What reason can you have for such a supposition ? as I own I am anxious to learn upon what you ground so very un¬ likely a surmise." tf Have you never heard, never been told.
told, that you do not bear the least resem¬ blance to the Wheelers ?" " I certainly have—but that is no reason why 1 should not be related to them in the left-handed manner they say 1 am : my fa¬ ther was, besides, a Powell, you know; and to what other circumstance can you sup¬ lióse 1 am indebted for their care of my in¬ fancy ? why should they have in a manner adopted me, if I had not had this very re¬ mote claim upon them ? Mrs. Wheeler has, besides, frequently told me^ that I re¬ sembled my mother; and she says, it is very common for boys to take more after the mother than the father." " A good old gossip's tale that," rejoin¬ ed the laughing Kempthorne—" Now í am of opinion, that you take much more after your father than уоит mother, though í certainly never saw the latter ; but, upon my honour, there is a very strong family- likeness between you and the Mr. Hasle- meres, both father and son—this is between ϋ ourselves,
ourselves, you know, as it is a remark I should not have permitted myself to make to any other person ; though if you arc not, as many people do noi scruple to af¬ firm, the son of the younger of those gen¬ tlemen, ï see nothing impossible m yoor having such a claim upon the elder—of course, I am speaking at random." ff I must suppose so, since I cannot fancy you are right in your conjectures^—Be that as it mav, I shall continue to believe mv- seifa Powell, till some other person claims me as their son ; and as I would venture fo affirm that will never happen, í can merely rejoice at having ceased to be a burthen to the Wheelers, io whom 1 shall neverthe¬ less ahvavs consider mvself as greatly *■' * С? Ы obliged ; and even admitting for a moment your supposition to be true, 1 should have reason to be grateful both towards them and the Air. Ilaslemercs, since I might have been sent either to my mother's parish, or to the Foundling Hospital, where I might now be singing for the benefit of that eha- vou i. m ritv."
rity." Kempthorne laughed, while Francis continued-—"! have certainly frequently seen the younger Mr. Haslemere during my residence at the Wheelers; but as the old lady was his nurse, and was particularly re¬ commended to his notice and friendship by his deceased sister, 1 cannot place his visits in Marsham-street to my score ; nor did he ever appear sufficiently partial to me, to induce me to suspect he was my father: Of the elder Mr. Haslemere, 1 have merely a pleasing recollection, as he seldom visit¬ ed the Wheelers after I became their in¬ mate, which is, at least, presumptive proof that 1 am not his son : he is, besides, so excellent a man, and his chanty is so un¬ bounded, that I cannot suppose he would have suffered me to have embraced my present line of life, nor to have been so much indebted to Mr. Corfe's benevolence, had he conceived that he had any right to interfere in my concerns." i( He is certainly a most amiable man, indeed a better, take him all in all, hardly exists:
exists : still, the very best of us have their failings, and the higher a man's character stands in the opinion of the world, the more tenacious he feels of his reputation ; and what would be laughed at in the son, might be a subject of reproach to the fa¬ ther, as you were certainly born during the lifetime of his wife, which may have prevented him from giving way to the dic¬ tates of his heart in his behaviour towards you ; and as you have certainly made your own way in the world, and obtained many friends, thanks to your superior talents, he may feel justified in having in a manner forsaken you ; but I am certain, had For¬ tune not smiled upon you in your present career, he would have brought you for¬ ward in some other line; indeed, 1 oiice heard him say so, and I understood that lie did not feel satisfied with the Wheelers, for not having consulted him before they ar¬ ticled yon to Mr. Corfe." u Which they durst not have done, had he been so nearly related to me, without m 2 tøs
his concurrence : But I have been told, that it was once in contemplation to have placed me in his counting-house ; but pro¬ bably John Wheeler objected to the mea¬ sure, as 1 know it was afterwards settled that 1 should bc bound to some trade, which 1 should greatly have preferred to being doomed to spend my days writing at the same desk with him, though, from a boy, 1 have vainly endeavoured to be up¬ on friendly terms with that sordid, ill-con¬ trived being; but, in return for ray ci \i- lity, he has always treated me with the most overbearing insolence, which 1 have hitherto avoided resenting, upon the old people's account, though I am fearful that he will oblige me to treat him as he de¬ serves, if lie perseveres in his present line of conduct, since 1 was very much inclined to have taught him better manners on Christmas-day ; therefore, had we been placed in the same counting-house, one or other of us must, ere this, have left their situation." ťi John
"John is very stout, when compared to vou, mv voung friend," resumed Kemp- thorne. " Agreed— hut I know he İs a coward ; though, four years ago, he domineered over me at pleasure, as I own I could not then cope with him ; but I am well aware of my own powers now, and mere bodily strength does not insure victory ; indeed he is so heavy, so awkward, nnd so clumpy, that I am convinced 1 could make him ask for qnarter in five minutes—at all events, I would readily run the risk : therefore, vou may suppose how much I rejoice at г о longer being his father s inmate, since he has obtained such an ascendancy over both him and his mother, that, when they are alone, his will is law, except now and then, when he provokes the old woman beyond all forbearance ; indeed, they both fancy him a prod ig v, in point of partsand learn¬ ing—nay, they even boast of his regard for them, and fancy he is verv dutiful : then his prudence is a never-failing theme, It 3 and
and I believe he would go any lengths, either to increase his own or their hoards : the fear of falling under the cognizance of the law, may preserve him from commit¬ ting any real criminal action ; but, had he been in France during the late revolution, I think he would have bid fair to have ri¬ valled Marat, if not Robespierre. While the old people ľ: ve, Î shall never, of my own accord, cease visiting them; indeed I am very much attached to the old man, who, had he been better matched, would have been rather an amiable character— í know he is very fond of me, md, from my childhood, he has ever proved himself my friend, frequently, when I was a boy, slip¬ ping a few halfpence privately into my hand ; and he always made it a rule to take my part, even against his darling son. The old woman possesses all his failings, grafted upon a much worse temper; though no one can pay their court more assiduously when she thinks it is to hér interest, as she is infinitely more mean and artful than her » . husband;
husband : her fair daughter greatly resem¬ bles her, though, owing to her ignorance and self-conceit, she will never be able to play her cards so dextrously, since the old lady often boasts of having been able to turn the late Mrs. Haslemere and her daugh¬ ter round her finger—with what truth I cannot pretend to say : as for John, he has inherited the temper, and all the disagree¬ able propensities of his mother ; and the prudence of his father has, in him, already degenerated into downright avarice ; there¬ fore, whenever the old people die, I shall drop all connexion with the family." Kempthorne applauded the notion, agree¬ ing, that their opinions, in many respects, exactly coincided, giving hiV own reasons for having taken up his abode at the Whee¬ lers; and as he might have been much worse off in the city for the same money, he should be more than ever reconciled to his long walk, since he had made such an agreeable acquaintance in the neighbour¬ hood ; Miss Caroline's politeness would, m 4 he
he foresaw, prove his greatest torment; as for John, he resolved, like Francis^ to avoid quarrelling with him if possible, as he should not like to be prosecuted for an as¬ sault; and as, according to our hero'« ac¬ count, he was very deficient in point of courage, that would probably be the re¬ sult of his* knocking" him down :—indeed, the new friends-were so* pleased with each other, that they did not return to town till near nine, nor did they separate till they reached Wheeler's door, where they shook hands in silence, having previously agreed to see each other whenever opportunity offered. Afr. Corfe, with whom our herd" found Signor M-—, was extremely happy fo sfc his pupil, who had never been %o long absent from home, without his knowing where he was gone, since he had been his inmate : the old gentleman, therefore, be¬ gan f o bc uneasy about him, he said. '* I am very sorry, Sir, M *was the reply—· " but I dkl not intend, when I went out, fo have
have made it so late, though I told Mrs. Hunter I should not dine at home.*' " Oh, šinte you are returned Bafe and sound, there needs tio apolegy, my <lear boy—I make no doubt of your having been in proper company ; bet I positively entertained some fears for your safety, as there has been a great deal pf robbing of htc, and you were not prepared to act up¬ on the defensive. Signor- M -— « has been abo very anxious for your return, as the Countess of Bayfield wishes you lo sing at a private concert ßhe proposes treating hex friends with to-morrow evening/* "And I have made myself a ntwerable for your appearance," resumed the Signor — ," it was quite a sudden thought? of her Ladyship'*; and as «the has done пае the honour to Submit all the arrangements to mý direction, i háve been so busy, 1 have neither had 1 time to see or to send to you before; but, as you are merely required to sing a : bravura song and a ballad> I have pitched upori two, in which I know yon m 5 exceli
excel, and which cannot fail of giving ge¬ neral satisfaction ; so let us work, except you feci too much fatigued, as I wish you to be even more than perfect upon this occasion." Francis readily agreed to his proposal, not presuming he was guilty of a greater crime in singing in private, than had he done so in public at a Sunday concert ; and Signor M —■— maintained, that, if they Avere wrong, the sin must fall upon those whom they wished to oblige ; indeed, feel¬ ing sure of absolution himself, he thought his heretic pupil had no right to object, to running the same risk: and as our hero had never yet sung Italian in public, .though:he did so very frequently with him in private, -he wished f о convince the Eng¬ lish nobles, that they need not send to the land of harmony for performers, while their jcountrymen could do such ample justice \o the melodious compositions of Sarti, &c. &cl; of course,* he exerted ail his powers, Ло the infinite delight of both his instruc- ά . tors,
tors, who prognosticated that he would add as much to theirs as to his own celebrity, the following evening. (i The Countess was music mad," the Sig¬ ner told him—"and if she, as he both hoped and expected, became his avowed patron¬ ess, he would have reason to rejoice in his good fortune;" recommending his prac¬ tising his songs at least once more the next morning, promising to call for him in the evening ; and as soon as he was gone, Francis told Mr. Corfe where and with whom he had spent the day, bestowing some very just encomiums upon his new acquaintance, whom he had taken the li¬ berty of inviting to drop in now and then of an evening, when he was disengaged. " í shall be very happy to see Mr. Kemp¬ thorne whenever he can make it conveni¬ ent, as I wish you to associate with young men of your own age, and especially with those from whose example and con vena¬ tion voti are likely to derive so much be- m G ncíif,
noíif, as I wish you to bc respected in vour profession, nnd that, in a great measure. depends upon your private character. There are and have been manv good sing- ers, vvho have been very dissolute in their morals; of course, their career has and will be short, since bad hours and bad con¬ nections are particularly inimical to the voices therefore, I hope vou will, as much as possible, avoid gning into the first er¬ ror, and that you will be still more upon your guard respecting the fatter, as it will alwavs rest with yourself to select vour company oñ' the stage.·—But, to have done moralizing, as I am convinced you will be always guided by my advice, and by your own innate love of virtue, T desire you will call upon vour taylor. as early as you can possibly make it convenient in the топь ing, and desire he will let you have a very fashionable dressed frock, and every et ce¬ tera, by eight o'clock to-morrow evening, .ь I always wish you to pay a proper regard to
io your persona! appearance, though í should grieve to see vou dwindle into a coxcomb." Francis hoped he should never display such a proof of the weakness of his intel¬ lects, thanking him for the favours he was continually bestowing upon him ; since, though he well knew Mr. Corfe was making a great deal of money by his singing, he felt very grateful for his suffering him to expend no trifling sum upon the decora¬ tion of his person, not to mention the handsome allowance he made him for his private expences. The next evening, Signor M- -----made his appearance in Marsham-street, much sooner than he had promised, as he wished our hero fo practise once more his Italian song, the words of which he had translated for htm : and certainly, had his fortune de¬ pended upon Francis's success on this me¬ morable evening, he could not have been more anxious to secure him general ap¬ plause. About half past ten, they proceed¬ ed
cd into Portman-square, and being ushered into the music-room, they found a very fine band, consisting of some of the first performers in England, already assembled, and one other male and two female sing¬ ers, all of great celebrity, who received our hero, with whom they were already acquainted, though they had none of them engagements at Drurv-lane. with the great- est politeness; when, having taken their places, and the instruments being all tuned, precisely as the clock struck eleven, a large pair of folding-doors, communicating with the front drawing-room, were thrown open, and the band began a ven fine overture of Haydn's : the singers were stationed upon an elevated bench behind the band, as thev were to come forward in turn ; and, for the present, they amused themselves with considering the elegant group of rank and fashion whom they were assembled to en¬ tertain ; and our hero would probablv have supposed they were all titled foiks, had he rot among the gentlemen recognised Mr, George о
George Haslemere; not that he was sur¬ prised at seeing him there, as he had al¬ ways understood that he moved in the firsì circles, and that Airs. Haslemere gave as splendid ronts as any lady of much supe¬ rior rank; he knew, besides, that they re¬ sided in that neighbourhood. Wishing to see a persen whom Airs, Wheeler almost held in abhorrence, and respecting whom he had heard her relate many very absurd stories, he looked round the room, in hopes something might lead to his recognizing her, as he was too voung, during their last a' О' О interview, to have retained any recollec¬ tion of her features, and which, it may be supposed, had not embellished during the last fifteen years. Perceiving no lady, however, vvho at all reminded him of her, or who resembled Airs. Wheeler's descrip¬ tion of her, he presumed, as he knew they were a very fashionable couple, she had not accompanied her husband to lhe Coun¬ tess's, as A'rs. Wheeler often exultir.nlv declared, " that she had rendered her dear George
George absolutely indifferent to her, and herself completely miserable;" and, as it may be remembered that they began their wrangles in the honey-moon, and as Mrs. Haslemere fancied that her fortune and fu¬ ture expectations entitled her to infinitely more attention and respect than her hus¬ band was inclined to shew her, she w T as continually tormenting him upon that score ; and as she was also jealous of every female he addressed, they soon led a most uncomfortable life: she having driven him {asmight have been foreseen) from home, in search of amusement, was, nevertheless, continually reproaching him for leading so dissipated a life, declaring, "that she would follow his example," with various other equally wise threat«. During her youth, he used to provoke her, by wondering no more discerning man took pity on her ; and as she grew older, he kindly told her, that her natural bad temper had totally de¬ prived her of the slight pretensions to beauty which had fallen to her share : and 4fcS,
as, notwithstanding the dissipated life he certainly led, he continued to look ex¬ tremely young of h hs age, and was gene¬ rally admired by the fair sex, he might, at this period of our story, with justice be deemed a man à bminc fortune, Airs. Hasle¬ mere having rendered him almost regard¬ less of appearances; ami, owing to her ab¬ surd jealousy and constant suspicions, she had, of fete, not only become indifferent, but almost hateful to him, their not having had any children having greatly contri¬ buted to alienate his regard from her, and very seldom did they appear in the same parties ; indeed, the gentleman was so much better received than the lady in the circle of fashion, owing, said the scandalous chronicle, to his polite method of cancel¬ ling debts of honour incurred by the fe¬ male gamesters of ton, that she was seldom invited to accompany him, except to a con¬ cert or a balí ; of course, she was not soa- ring of her reproaches to the author of these slights who, she foresaw, would be uttcriv
utterly ruined ere long, by the heavy da¬ mages he would.be condemned to pay, for intriguing with women of rank and fashion. Possibly these kind prophecies were the means of preserving him from falling into the snare she dreaded ; but they did not prevent him from keeping a mistress, pur¬ posely, as he told his wife, to afford em¬ ployment for her spies, knowing she al¬ ways kept a few in pay ; but, at last, these said spies became so troublesome, and crossed his path so continually, that he took the matter up so warmly, the haughty dame was obliged to humble to her tyrant, as she styled him, and to have recourse to more private expedients to discover how and where he spent his time when from home ; nor durst she any longer complain of the vile wretch, except to her most inti¬ mate friends, among whom she ranked a sister of the Countess of Eayfieïd, who had suggested the idea of engaging young Yates to sing at this concert, purposely to afford the wronged Airs. Haslcmere an op¬ portunity
pjrtunity of seeing her husband's son, as she continued to assert he was, off the stage > and to enable her, we must suppose, to propagate the story pro bono publico, though, thanks to her indefatigable zeal, many people made no scruple of asserting that Francis was a Haslemere, even blaming his father for having suffered him to adopt such a line of life, as she often did, when at a loss for a subject to entertain her hus¬ band, who merely told her, inreply, " he feared her powers of invention began to *fail her, since she was obliged to revert to so stale an accusation, though he now felt proud oí being considered the father of so fine a young fellow; therefore, he should not contradict the reports she was so busy in circulating:" and when he understood the youth was engaged to sing at the Coun¬ ters of Bayfield's, he resolved, well knowing what construction would be put upon his absence, to increase the crowd he made no doubt would be assembled there. Mrs,! Meniere was rather surprised when she
she learnt his intention, though she hoped, when he was in a manner face to face with Francis, she should be a betler judge of the resemblance she persisted in having disco¬ vered when our hero was a mere infant, and, at all events, her particular friends would now have an opportunity, as well as herself, of remarking her husband's beha¬ viour upon this trying occasion. . Had our hero been aware why he had been engaged on this evening, possibly be might aave framed some excuse to have re¬ mained at home ; but, feeling really anxi¬ ous to see the hdv who had, he had aiwavs understood, treated Mrs. Wheeler very ill upon his account, he ventured to ask a fe¬ male singer, whom he was sitting next, and who seemed, from being in the habit of singing at private concerts, to know every one present, " Whether Mrs. Haslemere was among the crowd ?" '·" Yes, there she is to the left, next ta the elderly lady in the turban and purple feathers, and that is her husband who is now
now conversing with the Countess—if re¬ port is to be depended upon, they are one of the most miserable couples in London." Francis smiled, and his first introduction to this amiable lady, and subsequent game with her lap-dog, came across him ; and, upon raising his eyes to steal a glance at her, he caught hers full upon him, as well as those of several ladies who were sitting near her : He had, however, been too much accustomed to be an object of public no¬ tice of late, to be very easily disconcerted, or the bold stare of so many ladies of fa¬ shion might have had that effect; as İt was, he was merely induced to guess why they thus honoured him with their notice, and could not help thinking that Mrs. Hasle¬ mere must possess a very weak mind, or she would never have listened to, much less have encouraged the idea of his being rebted to her husband. The overture be¬ ing, however, finished, his female neigh¬ bour was called upon by Signor Aí ------ , with whom she was to sing a duet; and, though
though they both ranked very high in the musical world, and he was very much in¬ debted to the instructions of the Signor, they did not answer his expectations, as they seemed to depend more upon their skill, than upon their taste and voice, for charming their hearers, as they each intro¬ duced so many meretricious ornaments in¬ to their pauses, that they rather pained than pleased true judges of harmony; and Francis's natural taste and excellent ear, had intuitively taught him to avoid giving into those errors; indeed, Mr. Corfe had early pointed out to him what he deemed the errors of the Italian school, as he wish¬ ed him to please the multitude as wc 1 ! as the amateurs : nevertheless, as the Signor and Madame < ------ were allowed to sing re¬ markably well, there was a general clap when they concluded ; yet our hero felt it was more a compliment due to their e.:er- tions, than an absolute tribute paid to their merit. A solo upon the violin followed the duet, after which our hero was sum¬ moned
moned from his station, to sing a charming ballad which had been chosen by the Coun¬ tess, and in which he was merely accompa¬ nied by a celebrated performer on the harp: the stedfast and continued gaze of Mrs. Haslemere and her party, merely served to animate him, as he felt his own indepen¬ dence, and wished to convince both her and Afr. Haslemere, admitting he was that gentleman's son, that his vt ice and skill in music would, in future, enable him to en¬ joy nearly as many luxuries as they did; and that if he had, while a child, been a burthen to the gentleman, that he no longer stood in need of his assistance— never, therefore, did he exert himself more to please ; and as the simple style of the song was exactly consonant to his taste, never were the fine tones of his sonorous voice heard to more advantage; and, when he did make a pause, he convinced them that he was more indebted to nature than to art for his success, though both had united to render him the most enchanting singer
singer in this style, that any one present had ever heard ; and the applause he met with was more than flattering, it was almost oppressive to a feeling mind, and such was our hero's; and as, if purposely to pro¬ voke his wife, Air. George Haslemere was even profuse in his plaudits. Francis, therefore, returned to his seat, highly gratified by the reception he had met with. Aiadame------told him, be had made the company ample amends for her being rather hoarse, to which she attributed her not having succeeded as she could have wished in her duet ; and, during a full con¬ certo, they conversed in a very low voice, Aiadame —— pointing out this Duke and that Earl to our hero's notice, entertaining him with various anecdotes respecting those she desired him to remark : she next di¬ rected his attention to the female part of the guests, particularly pointing out a very elegant young woman, but who sat so much in the shade, Francis was unable to obtain a full view of her features, whom she
she told him, was a rich heiress, as she was the only daughter of a banker recently de¬ ceased, a Mr. Chedworth ; and it was sup¬ posed that she would only part with her liberty in return for a ducal coronet, though she understood she had been brought up very retired, by a maiden sis¬ ter of her father's, who «enerallv resided in Devonshire : however, as she was now of age, she supposed some man of fashion would soon prevail upon her to enter the holy pale. ' £ í wish she sat in a better light," she con'irucd, "as, 1 assure лой. she is very handsome—nay. if the age c f romance was not gone by, sufficiently .-\t to have made a good match, had she been less favoured by for f une." Our hero paid but little a fieni ion io ibis prolix account of the heiress, till he per¬ cened her during the acts of the concert, while refreshments were being handed about, not only to the companv but to tl·^ performers, in earnest coincrsation with Mr. Haslemet$. vor,, ι. ν \ fad.- 1 n y
Madame ------■ made the same remark, presuming they were upon very intimate terms, as she had been told Miss Chedworth had been a ward of his father's. The renewal of the concert put a stop to their discourse, and our hero was almost immediately called upon by Signor M ------ to sing his bravura song; and, if he had pleased and delighted by his ballad; he now absolutely astonished the company, by the compass of his voice, and his wonderful skill in managing it ; and as he was ex¬ tremely ably seconded by the band, and was certainly heard to much greater advan¬ tage than upon the theatre, he was declared by all present to be the finest singer in England ; and the applause he met with was, if possible, greater and more flatter¬ ing than before ; and as no other singer met with equal attention, the company were not sorry when the concert con¬ cluded, and they were summoned to sup- pi r : nor were the musicians forgotten, none of whom retired so well satisfied as Signor
Signor Ai ------and our hero, as the former took, and perhaps with justice, no small share of merit to himself for his success ; and as he would set him down at home, had Mr. Corfe been sitting up for him, he would have held forth for another hour in praise of their joint pupil, in whom he took the greatest pride.
a
CHAP. XL As it was near three in the morning before our hero reached home, he did not rise very early, as he was to perform in the evening. Air. Corfe was delighted with his account pf his evening, or rather night's entertainment, which he was giving him n 2 over
over his breakfast, when Mrs. Hunter (the housekeeper) burst into the parlour, de¬ claring, (t that, notwithstanding no one wished to remain friends with her neigh¬ bours more than she did, she certainly should speak her mind pretty freely to Mrs. Wheeler, if ever she caught Miss questioning Nanny (the maid under her) over the garden-wall again—What was it to her where Mr. Yates was going so late in the evening ì —but this was not the first time she had been at her mean tricks, and if she knew no better, she ought to be taught." Francis smiled at her warmth, while her master advised her (t not to trouble her head about the young lady, but to content herself with forbidding Nanny to hold any parley with her, under any pretence." Francis strongly seconded his good friend, observing, " that he should be ac¬ cused of having set her on, were she to express her disapprobation of her daugh¬ ter's curiosity to Mrs. Wheeler." This
This insinuation calmed her anger, as she was extremely attached to him ; and thus, for the present, peace was restored. Air. Kempthorne, in consequence of the polite reception which Air. Corfe gave him, seldom let an evening elapse, when he knew Francis to be disengaged, without calling in ; frequently supping with him and the old gentleman, and generally spending his Sundays with our hero and another of his friends, a young German, who played the hautboy in the Drury-lane band ; and as he also taught that instru¬ ment, upon which he was allowed to excel, he lived in a very genteel style ; and, hav¬ ing received a very good education, he was a very agreeable companion, and had undertaken to teach our hero German and- Italian : in return for which, Francis had so well grounded him in English, and paid such attention to his pronunciation, that be was now allowed to speak that language like a native—they were, of course, ex¬ tremely intimate; and as Air. Kalkreuth n 3 was
was also a frequent visitor at Mr. Corfe's, Kempthorne and him soon became ac¬ quainted, the latter often regretting that he could not enjoy the company of any of his new friends in comfort at his own lodg- ings, which induced him to make a point of their dining with him every Sunday, when they were not better engaged, at one or other of the many houses of entertain¬ ment the environs of London abound with. Soon after Christmas, old Wbeeler, thanks, as he always said, to our hero's pre¬ sents, was able to resume his post in Aus¬ tin Friars; and during the following week, Caroline, having some business in the city, called upon him at Mr. Haslemerc's, to de¬ sire he would order some coals in his way home. While she was waiting for him in the hall, the clerks not being allowed to receive visits in the counting-house, Mr. George Haslemere, who had breakfasted with his father, came down the great stair¬ case, ana naturally entered into conversa¬ tion with the flattered Caroline, who was listening,
listening, simpering, and blushing, when, to her infinite dismay, Mrs. Haslcmere drove up in her coach to the house-door, which being always open during the hours of business, she had a very good view c f her husband and his fair companion, even before she stopped; and the sillv girl hav¬ ing heard that she was jealous of every fe¬ male whom Mr. Haslemere addressed, ex¬ pecting, we must presume, manual chas¬ tisement for having dared to hold a parley with him, in her fright, actually ran up stairs; and, had she not met one of the female servants upon the landing, would probably have broken in upon the old gen¬ tleman, who was in his study upon the first floor. " Oh ! pray hide me some where V' cried the terrified girl, " for Mrs. Hasle¬ mere all but caught me with her hus¬ band!" €t All but caught you with her husband, Miss!" replied the astonished maid, mis¬ construing Caroline s wise speech— {t and n 4 prav
pray how came you here, and who arc you ?" '* Oh, î am Air. Thomas Wheeler's daugh¬ ter, and I called to see my father; and while I was in the hall talking to Air. George Haslemerc, his wife drove to the door, and put mc into such a Hurry, you cannot think ľ' " Bless us, you arc soon scared—but she is gone, î dare say—she only stopped to speak to Afr. George; for, if she had alighted, she would have come up into the drawing-room—so go down again, as I am sure you have nothing to fear;" and, as the maid had foreseen, Airs. Haslemerc had merelv called to bring her husband a letter that had been sent into Bakcr-strcet after he left home, at least such was her pre- tence, though, in fact, her curiosity to learn whether he had actually breakfasted in Austin Friars, had brought her thither herself, instead of sending a servant; and as sh,e only caught a very transient glance Qf
of Caroline, whpse instant flight she na¬ turally construed into a wish to avoid her,. she drove off, convinced that- she was the hussey her husband now had in keeping;. and who had probably breakfasted with him unknown to his father, as she knew the old 'gentleman would not connive at; any of his intrigues. George Haslemere had been very muchi provoked by his companion's absurd beha¬ viour, as his wife's countenance;, while* giving him the letter, convinced him that she had not put a very favourable construc¬ tion upon their tête-à-tête; and as she easily* learnt, from the servants in.Austin Frİarv who the female was whom she had seen in! the hall, she made no scruple of declaring, " her husband's frequent visits into Marsham- street were now perfectly accounted for— Frank was probably the son of some of the old woman's female relations, and she had brought up her daughter to tread, in. the same steps;" and as the housemaid had formed suspicions very derogatory to> n 5. Carolines
λ' Caroline's honour, in consequence of her absurd behaviour, and upon her surmises being repeated to the jealous lady by her own woman, she accused her husband point blank of having taken the little im¬ pudent limping slut into keeping. A very serious quarrel ensued, as he very justly told her, <f that he was much more likely to have to pay for her scandalous asser¬ tions than for his own intrigues/* and thus succeeded in silencing her, and by degrees the silly tale died away. Kempthorne had had it first-hand from George Haslemere, and he did not conceive It any breach of confidence to repeat it to our hero, who laughed very heartily at Caroline's discom¬ fiture, agreeing it was fortunate for Mrs. Haslemere- that her accusations had not reached Mrs. Wheeler's ears, who would have been very capable of taking legal ad¬ vice upon the matter; as it was, she had only ¿very properly, blamed Caroline for skulkfog away from her—What had she to fear, .pray ?—-But she had not the spirit of a tom-
a fom-tit, or she would have shewn the haughty dame she was not to be scared by such a one as she ; and neither old W r hec- 1er nor John understood the iiiuendoes of their fellow-clerks; therefore, the matter blew over, though George Haslemere did not grow more prudent as he advanced in yean—possibly an amiable woman might have worked a reform in his disposition ; and, since Kempthorne had been admitted into the counting-house, he became more remiss than ever in his attendance there : and as his father had ceased to hope he would ever take a sufficiently active part 'm their very large concent to enable him to withdraw from business, he thought himself very fortunate, in having met wirft so able a deputy in Kempthorne, who be¬ ing extremely intelligent, very conversant, and perfectly an fait in the counting- house, greatly relieved him from the drud¬ gery-part he had been obliged to under¬ take İn consequence of his son's indolence : he was, therefore, in very high favour with к 6. ťie
the old gentleman, and very good friends with the younger, as his diligence spared him many a lecture from his father, who, though he did not suppose he was living above his income, knew that he was ab¬ surdly extravagant in his expenditure, and that he had many private expences, which were likely to prove much more ruinous in the end, than his profuse style of living ; indeed, there were many parts of his con¬ duct which he knew to be highly reprehen¬ sible; and having, of late, rather surmised that the Wheelers were not quite so de¬ serving as he had long thought them, he seldom addressed either father or son—ne¬ ver indeed but upon business, and then he was very cool and reserved. Mrs. Wheeler mentioned the circui·- sfance to her dear Mr. George, who had his doubts whether his father's behaviour vyas not, in some respects, owing to his known aUachment to that family, and to the revived reports now in circulation re¬ specting Francis; but he felt no wish to 3 discuss
discuss the matter with the old gentleman, merely advising the old woman to endea¬ vour to remove his father's prejudices, hinting in what he supposed they origi¬ nated. In consequence, she frequently called in Austin Friars, to enquire after the health of her dear old master, e< as she could never be sufficiently grateful," she said, (e for his late kindness towards her poor dear Thomas, who had been so long un¬ able to fulfil his duty." Now, as Mr. Haslemere knew that she frequently saw his son, and that she must dailv hear how he did from her husband and John, he was by no means flattered bv her frequent visits, as he detested cant and hypocrisy ; she was, therefore, very sel¬ dom admitted into his study, owing, she was informed, to his being very busy ; and, though she was always very politely dis¬ missed, the self-sufficient haughty dame felt greatly provoked, and had she dared, she would have asked an explanation of wha,t she termed very unkind behaviour, frequently
frequently debating the matter with heT husband and son, declaring, " she could not conceive in what she had offended the old man, and that she was at an absolute loss to know how to act ;" and they were so incompetent to advise her, that she called them both stupid fools: fearing, however, that they might, one or other of them, lose their situations, should she be¬ come importunate for an explanation, she bridled her temper, i( making no doubt," she said, " but the truth would come out in time—all she feared was, that her son had said or done something during his fa¬ ther's confinement, to lower his family in the estimation of Air. llaslemere, which he had not chosen to mention, for fear of wounding her's or the old man's feelings, though it might have rendered him thus reserved and distant." John strenuously denied the charge—he had always done his dutv-—be defied his greatest enemy to say to the contrary, and he could not help the old fellow's being camici ous : JL
capricious : nevertheless, he bore all the blame of that gentleman's coolness, which involved him in daily quarrels with his mo¬ ther, who also told him, " that though he had affected to make it up with Francis, his glouting looks told the young man he was his aversion—he had no method, no com¬ mand of his stubborn, bad temper ; but the Wheeler family would never bc extinct so long as he lived:" and as our hero was no more his dupe than his mother, to avoid a renewal of hostilities, he seldom called in but when he knew he was from home; when one morning, while things remained in this situation, Kempthorne, in his way to the counting-house, knocked at Air. Corfe's door, having something to say to Francis; and upon his enquiring after the Wheeler family, Kempthorne said, " the old man was not very well, he understood ; but as he had been rather favoured, in many respects, since his illness, notwithstanding Mr. Haslemere's visible reserve towards him, he was not obliged to be so early in Austin
Austin Friars as formerly; and he fre¬ quently only walked to Charing Cross, where he mounted the roof or box of a Chelsea stage, and thus had a good long ride for sixpence, unknown to any body : John was already set off, as, owing to his stupid plodding method, and unwillingness to be taught a better, he was sure to be be¬ hind hand whenever there was any unusual press of business." Having laughed a little about the old man's private ride, Aiiss Caroline, See. Kempthorne took his leave; but had not been gone more than half an hour, when our hero, who sat composing near the win¬ dow, saw Caroline hasten by upon the full limp, and the next moment knock most violently at Mr. Corfe's door. Presuming something very extraordinary must have occurred, he ran himself to give her ad¬ mittance, when, seizing hold of him, she exclaimed, ct Come along with me this mo¬ ment, my dear Frank, or I shall die with fright !" and Francis had his doubts whe¬ ther
ther she did not mean to sham a fit in the passage, knowing she sometimes thus dis¬ played her fine feelings, as no one could be more deficient in real filial affection. In vain, however, did he enquire what had alarmed her, a^» she merely kept dragging him homewards; when, having reached their own front-parlour, she threw herself into a chair, exclaiming, " Oh, my father I —my poor, dear father !" Francis now began seriously to fear the old man was no more, and would have run up stairs, had he not been forcibly detain¬ ed by his companion, who held him so fast, he found it impossible to get away, till, as he had foreseen and expected, she fainted in her mother's arm-chair. Being now li¬ berated, he hastened to ring the bell for assistance ; but, while he was thus employ¬ ed, the tender-hearted Caroline heaved a deep sigh, gave a start, and extended her¬ self upon the carpet, taking care, never¬ theless, not to hurt herself in her fall, and there, İn a very graceful posture, she re¬ lapsed
lapsed info a second fit ; but, to his great relief, the servant made her appearance, and, between them, they raised and placed the forlorn damsel in the chair she had fallen from ; Francis, while thus employed, en¬ quiring of the girl what had happened to her master, as he felt infinitely more inte¬ rested for him than for the fainting Caro¬ line. The maid " believed he was in a fit, but her mistress was with him, and if he would please to go to them, she would take care Miss came to no harm," seeming, like our hero, very little inclined to pity her. Frank instantly flew up stairs— ic Oh, my dear child !" exclaimed the old woman, the moment he entered the room, t( how re¬ joiced I am to see you ! for here lies my poor dear husband dying, for any thing I know to the contrary î —he breakfasted in bed, and was going to rise, to walk as usual into the city, when he was seized, as you perceive, not more than five minutes ago —I suppose Caroline ran for you, poor thing*
thing, in her fright, as you were naturally the first person that came into her head, and glad I am that you were at home." " I am very happy I chanced to be so, Ala'am," replied our hero, gazing at the old man, to whom he was really attached, nnd who laid extended, to all appearance lifeless—" Have you sent for your sur¬ geon ?" he enquired. if Bless me, there has been no time— why, he was but just taken when Cary ran for you, and I hardly know what I am about even now—Where is my daughter?" Without telling her how he had left the young lady, he requested " she would in¬ form him who she proposed calling in to her husband, that he might run for them without loss of time ?" (C God bless you, my dear boy, do so— Air. Jordan attended him in his late illness, and he-------" Away flew Francis, leaving her to finish her sentence at leisure, and in less than ten minutes he returned with the surgeon, who, upon.
upon examining his patient, pronounced It a paral) tic seizure, advising Mrs. Wheeler to call in a physician, for her own and hh satisfaction. '' Since he thought it ncrcssarv, God forbid she should object!—for, if money could save him, she was resolved not to bc sparing ;" and Miss Caroline having reco¬ vered from her alarming fit, hearing her mother's feeling speech as she was coming up stairs, declared, upon entering the room, tc that, ifit cost twenty guineas, her dear father ought to have a physician," asking our hero, f ' whether he was not of the same opinion, and whether he thought ber father would recover ?" rf He hoped so," was the reply, (( as many people survived such attacks." iC Undoubtedly," said the surgeon, <£ though they are always more or less dan¬ gerous; therefore, the sooner a physician is called İn, the better." Francis immediately offered to go in search of one. " How,
' How good you are '" cried both mo¬ ther and daughter. " I only wbh," said the latter, u it may ever be in my power to make you amends." " You must do your endeavours, child ; but can you, my dear Francis, step into the city, as 1 know not who else f о send, who will not be gone halfa davy and verv likelv make fifty blunders besides, and I know, poor dear soul, like imself, he has no opinion of any other physician than the one who attends Mr. llaslemere, Dr. В ——/' giving our hero that gentleman's direction, who said " he must first step home for a few minutes, but he would then hapten in search of the Doctor;" the surgeon pro¬ mising to remain with his patient, and to administer what medicines he thought like¬ lv to afford him relief during his absence, as it was very possible he might reach the Doctor's before he set out upon his round«, in which case he would probably make it his first vi >if B Mrs.
Airs. W'heelcr made no doubt of his do- ing so, if Francis did but explain who her husband was; else, among the number of people he was in the habit of attending, he might not immediately recollect the name, nor his connection with the llaslemere fa¬ mily ; and as Francis would be so near, she would also trouble him to let Air. Hablemere know what had befallen the poor souk or he might be offended at his not making his appearance in Austin Friars, particularly desiring " he would see the old gentleman if he was at home, as he might fancy himself slighted if any other person should hear of her husband's illness, before he was made acquainted with his danger:" and as Francis perfectly under¬ stood all she meant to say, and he w T as even more anxious than she was to summon this celebrated medical man to the assistance of the sufferer, he hurried home, when, hav¬ ing told Mr. Corfe where he was going, he proceeded into the city; and, by way of making more ha^e, took a coach at the first
first stand, which he ordered to Dr. В — 's, whom he fortunately found at home ; and as he immediately recollected the name of Wheeler, when our hero told him he was in the employ of Mr. llaslemere, he pro¬ mised to see him within the hour, ordering his carriage immediately. Having thus executed his first commis¬ sion, our hero, after discharging his coach, proceeded on foot to Austin Friars. Mrs. Wheeler had requested him to ask for the old gentleman, but he thought it w r ould be more respectful to deliver his message through the medium of his friend Kemp¬ thorne. Before, however, he reached the house, he altered his mind, having long wished to see the elder Mr. llaslemere, of whom he merely retained a very pleasing recollection ; besides, he reflected that, if he went into the counting-house, he must of course see John, and as he was already behind hand, if he deranged his weak brain, he would probably be still more so ere night, which would very likely be an in- comeniencc
convenience to his master; besides, he couid not be of any service were he to go home; and much as he disliked him, he felt very averse to wantonly hurting his feelings by abruptly informing him of his father's sit nation—not that he supposed he would really grieve were he to be informed that all his family were no more, if he was but their joint heir, still he did not wish to trvM to his apparent insensibility, as he might be more shocked than the general tenor of his conduct led him to think he would ; and, at all events, there could be no harm in keeping him in ignorance till he went home to dinner, as his own family would best understand how to condole with him. Having thus decided, he ventured to knock at the private door. The servant who answered it, seemed surprised at a person so much the gentleman in point of appearance, having knocked so modestly, enquiring very civilly, tr who he pleased to want ?" 'Ms
t( Is Air. Haslemere at home?" asked Francis. " I believe he is. Sir—will you please to walk this way?" preceding him up stairs; and, having shewn him into a back draw¬ ing-room, our hero said, " If Mr. Hasle¬ mere is not particularly engaged, you will please to let him know that I have a mes¬ sage to deliver to him." " Any name, Sir?" " I have not the advantage of being known to your master," The man bowed, and retired. What Kempthorne had said to him dur ing their first ttte-à-tête resnecting the Mr. Haslemeres, came across him : he had insi¬ nuated, that if the young one was not, the elder gentleman might be his father ; at all events, if he ever frequented the theatre, he would probably recognize him : but perhaps he ought to have declared his name, which he understood was that his mother bore, therefore might be familiar to him, even after such a lapse of time: vol. i. о he
he was, therefore, lost in reflection, when the old gentleman, who, though in his six¬ ty-seventh year, was still a very fine manly figure, entered the room, and there w T as something so prepossessing in his open countenance, so truly expressive of his innate goodness, and he appeared so much the gentleman, and so exactly calculated to inspire the young with love and admira¬ tion, that our hero mentally exclaimed, 4t How proud Γ should feel, durst ϊ address such a man as my father ! " bowing very respectfully, as he advanced. <ς Take a seat, I desire, young gentle¬ man," was his first address. Francis bowed, without taking advantage of his politeness, immediately entering up¬ on his embassy, though he felt confused, and rather agitated, in, consequence of Air. Haslemere's having his eyes full upon him, and appearing to be much more attentively considering his features* than to be at¬ tending to what he said. u You come from, Mrs. Wheeler, if I understand
understand right," he 'et last replied— " Excuse my inattention, for I must ac¬ knowledge I have but imperfectly under¬ stood the purport of your message." Francis instantly recapitulated all he had said before. t( Poor old Wheeler ! he has long been ailing—how was he seized ?" Our hero concisely explained, mention¬ ing who had been called in, and where he had been previous to his coming into Au ( tin Friars, respectfully dwelling upon the distress of Aírs. Wheeler and her daughter. "They are certainly much to be pitied— but I hope Wheeler will yet recover." Still he hardlv seemed to know what he was saying, as he continued, whenever our hero lowered his eyes, to scrutinize his features. <f Had I sent in my name," thought Fran¬ cis, tc I should have attributed his strange absence of mind to that circumstance; as it is, I must suppose I remind him of some one he formerly knew; and, after all, o S Kempthorne
Kempthorne may be right in his conjec¬ tures." These reflections made him nearly as ab¬ sent as the old gentleman, who rather sud- denlv exclaimed, ( ' You reside with the Wheelers, if I am not mistaken ?" " I formerly did so, Sir; but I have been Mr. Corfe's inmate, their next-door neigh¬ bour, for the last three years—my name is Yates." *' I thought I recollected you," resumed the old gentleman, ίζ though 1 have never seen you since you were a child." Again he paused, then enquired, " Are you com¬ fortably situated under Mr. Corfe ?" if Very much so. Sir," replied our hero ; but his apparent agitation, ow T ing to the confused state of his mind, led Mr. Hasié¬ in ere to believe he was not speaking his real sentiments, which induced him to add, after once more earnestly regarding him, " 1 was not actuated bv mere idle curio- sity, Mr. Yates, when f made my enquiry; therefore, tell me sincerely whether you are
are situated as you could wish ; for, now I recollect you, I feel strongly interested in your future welfare: indeed, had I been consulted, which, all things considered, I had rather a right to have expected to have been, I should not have advised your be¬ ing taught music, much less your being brought up for the stage." " You do me honour, Sir, in thus inte¬ resting yourself in my concerns; but I do assure you, that I think myself very fortu¬ nate in being consigned to the care of Mr. Corfe, since, had I been left to my own choice, I should have fixed upon the very line of life that he has thought proper to place me in." An involuntary sigh escaped the old gentleman, while he said, fc I understand you are a great favourite with the public, which is verv flattering to a voung mind ; <J C? w Cr * but I hope it will not render you vain, since you must not place too great depen¬ dence upon your present popularity, аз a thousand unforeseen occurrences may sud- о 3 denljF
deniy blight your present brilliant and al¬ luring prospects—I do not wish, neverthe¬ less,, to dishearten you, but my age and experience have taught me how to appre¬ ciate the applause Of the giddy multitude, though I have been assured that you aie possessed of every requisite to ensure their favour and indulgence: however, should it ever be in my power to serve you, no matter how, do not scruple to put my friendship to the test. Kempthorne has frequently mentioned you to me, in terms that do you great credit—you are inti¬ mately acquainted, 1 understand?" ** Mr. Kempthorne is so obliging as to rank me among his friends." te I was pleased to hear of your intimacy, since he is a very deserving young man, and will never, 1 am convinced, lead you into bad company: his avowed regard for you, and the modest candour which is le¬ gibly written upon your open counte¬ nance, are great passports to my favour." A silent bow was our hero's reply to this kind
kind speech, when, after a pause of a mi¬ nute or more, the old gentleman resumed,. " I don't know whether Kempthorne ever told vou, but he told me one day, when talking of vou, that, in his opinion, you bore a much greater resemblance to the Haslemere than to the Wbeeler family, and î must own I think he is in the right." " Air. Kempthorne certainly did once tell me, Sir," rejoined the still rather con¬ fused Francis, " that he had heard such a remark made respecting me ; and since ï have been a candidate for public favour, many people have busied themselves with respect to my origin, the obscurity of which has afforded them some room for scandal." " So 1 have heard—and should the pub¬ lic be right in their conjectures, I should know where the blame ought to attach, as vou doubtless would." " Upon my honour. Sir, 1 huve never seen any reason to doubt the truth of Mrs. W'heeler's assertion respecting my b'' 1 '·; o 4l and
and í shall ever feel duly grateful for the kindness with which she treated me during my infancy, since few orphans, left in a similar situation, can boast of having been equally fortunate." " Such sentiments do you credit—but I dare say you have heard it hinted, by some few people, that you were my son ; but it is much more generally believed, that my son, George, is your father—his wife, for 1 one, declares it to be a fact : noW, had you borne such an affinity to me, the world should not have remained in ignorance of our relationship; since, in one sense, I should have been proud of acknowledging you, and, at all events, you should never have appeared upon the stage ; and my son, whom I have taxed with being your father, has so solemnly declared that he is not, that I must believe his assertions; but, should I ever discover that he has imposed upon my credulity, I would positively ne¬ ver forgive him. The W r heelers, I know» stick to their former tale; therefore, I must suppose
suppose they speak truth : George fre¬ quently calls upon them, out of regard, he says, for his old nurse, who certainly did her dutv both bv him and his sister; and f approve of his gratitude towards her, as I should be very loth to suppose he was ac¬ tuated by any other motive : but between ourselves, since we are upon the subject, did his conduct towards you, when a child, give you any reason to suppose he was your father ?" ťí I never entertained such an idea, Sir, though he did use to notice me in common with John and Caroline Wheeler, when I was a child, and has given me a book or a toy when he has called ; and xis I grew up ? a shilling or a sixpence, to dispose of how 1 liked-—but he was always equallv gene¬ rous towards John and Caroline, if they were at home ; and, if I understood right, he paid for the schooling of the latter, be¬ cause she was his late sisters godchild, and he had promised to supply her place to¬ wards her; yet no one, I am convinced, о à evesr
ever suspected that she was his child : there¬ fore, I do not see why Mrs. Wbeeler's hav¬ ing so kindly adopted me, should have led to the fabrication of the scandalous tale, I have been tokl, Mrs. Haslemere has suffer¬ ed to prey upon her mind. Excuse my warmth, Sir, but 1 grieve to think that such an insignificant being as myself, should, owing to a mere chance occurrence of cir¬ cumstances, have subjected your son, and much more yourself, to the absurd suspi¬ cions that are in circulation." ťl The more í know of you, my young friend, the less î am inclined to believe vou are a Wheeler, since I never found any thing to admire or applaud in any of them, and you have won my esteem, by your warm :\nd animated defence of my son ; indeed, you have placed his conduct in so favourable a point of view, that I readily acquit him of having deceived me, and í rejoice to find he has paid inch respect to the memory of his sister, whose early death I must ever deplore : he was a great 2 ai n er by
THERE IS A by her demise, and he does right itt ful¬ filling her kind intentions towards the Wheeler family : the old people, though certainly common characters, have their merits ; self-interest is too predominant a trait in their disposition ; but when I most condemn them, I can readily find excuses for their errors, which more or less origi¬ nate in the manner in which they were brought up, and, so many people mistake avarice for prudence, and cunning for good sense, they are not singular ¡n their notions: The old man has been in my fa¬ mily from a boy, and I know him to be strictly honest, and that he may always be depended upon, which is more than I can, or possibly ever shall be able to say of his son : the father is a plodding, well-mean¬ ing, diligent drudge, who has always done his duty, if not with ease to himself, per¬ fectly to my satisfaction, and was always thankful when any of his fellow-clerks gave him a kind hint, or any instruction or as¬ sistance, else he would not have suited me: о 6 now
now his son, poor süly being, fancies he is even capable of supplying Kempthorne's place, and certainly no expence has been spared to qualify him for such a situation, but it has been all money thrown away, and, owing to the absurd opinion he en¬ tertains of himself, he will never rise above mediocrity : but I am detaining you with my strictures upon his conduct—Do you return from hence into Marsham-street r* 4 Frank bowed an affirmative. " Then, tell Mrs. Wheeler I am very sorry for her husband's misfortune, and that I mean to look in upon her in the course of the morning." Our hero bowed, and was preparing to depart, when the old gentleman, looking him once more full in the face, extended his hand towards him, saving, tf Good morning—remember that you have ren¬ dered me your staunch friend—nay, posi¬ tively, I cannot help acknowledging, that the more í look at you, the more I am in¬ clined to he of the public opinion ; yet what
what you have told me respecting my son, ought to have removed all my doubts; but every varying turn of your animated coun¬ tenance seems so familiar to me, I am, spite of myself, incredulous." Francis did not venture to make any re¬ ply, though he felt encouraged to return the kind pressure of the hand ; when, hav¬ ing made his parting bow, he retraced his way into Marsham-street; but he was so lost in thought during his walk, that he more than once offended the people he met, by running against them, while he perfectly acquitted old Afr. Haslemere of having evinced even prudential neglect of him, as he was now well convinced that he was not his father, though he more than ever suspected that Air. George stood in that degree of relationship towards him, and, after his repeated declarations to the contrary, he did not conceive he could, with any degree of honour to himself, ac¬ knowledge the truth. The Wheelers had, doubtless, been bribed pretty high to keep the
the secret ; nevertheless, he thought, upon the whole, he had been verv fortunate, since he should scarcely have ranked higher as the illegitimate child of Mr. Haslemere, than he did at present, though he might, in that case, have met with more civil treatment from John Wheeler. He, how¬ ever, finally resolved not to mention, even to Kempthorne, what rnd passed between him and the old gentleman, except he led to the subject; though he meant to tell him that he had met with a very kind re¬ ception, owing, in a great measure, to the favourable manner in which he had spoken of him ; when, in turning into Marsham- street, he caught a glimpse of Dr. В ------- in a chariot that was driving past him, which inducing him to mend his pace, he fullowcd that gentleman into Mr. Whee¬ ler's. The old lady received the physician in the parlour, and was thanking him for this early visit, when Frank joined them. " Independent of my wlh to afford Mr. Wheeler every relief in the power of me¬ dicine,
d ici ne, my good ladv," replied the doctor, fi you sent so persuasive an ambassador, his feeling eloquence would have insured my immediate attendance upon a total stranger." Mrs. Wheeler could have descanted for some time upon the goodness of her dear f hild, as she stvled our hero, regardless of her husband's situation, if he had not in¬ terrupted her panegyric, by asking, " How his best friend did ? had he recovered his senses ?" ' c Why, the Lord be praised, Mr. Jordan thinks there are hopes—he is still with him ; and though he is not sufficiently recovered to speak, he seems to know those about him." The Doctor a»ked no more questions, following her up stairs, where he enquired of Mr. Jordan what had been done, and agreed that every proper method had been pursued likely to accelerate his recovery, declaring himself in hopes that, with pro¬ per care, Mr. Wheeler would not only re- 3 cover
cover his senses, but also, in some mea¬ sure, his health, though he might feel the effects of such a seizure for some time. Mrs. Wheeler promised to see he had his medicines regularly, as she meant to he head nurse ; and Dr. В ------having written a prescription, and received his fee, de¬ parted. Francis was preparing to follow him, when he recollected Mr. llaslemere's kind message, which he hastened to de¬ liver. " How glad I am you saw the old gen¬ tleman !" cried the old woman— " but arc you sure that he will come into Markham- street ?" i( I make no doubt of your seeing him in the course of the dav :" and, in cotise- quence oi this cheering hope, Mrs. Whee¬ ler forgave herold master all his late slights, " it so strongly evinced his attachment ίο her poor dear Mr. Wheeler;" but having asked our hero at least fifty questions, and overwhelmed him with thanks for having run about so to serve her, she suffered him to.
to depart, sending her compliments and thanks to her kind neighbour Corfe. CHAP. XII, Upon reaching home, our hero repeated to his kind master every thing that had oc¬ curred during his absence. Mr. Corfe was glad to hear old Wheeler was likely to re¬ cover; so was Mrs. Hunter, as he was the best of the bunch, and that was saving but little in his praise, she observed: but she having withdrawn, Mr. Corfe spoke highly in praise of Mr. Haslemere, senior; agree¬ ing with our hero, that it was of very little consequence whether or not he was the son of Mr. George, since even his acknow¬ ledging
ledging him to be such, would by no means influence his future prospects ; therefore, all he had to hope from the old gentle¬ man's suspicions, was the continuance of his friendship, which would always do him credit, and might prove of ultimate ser¬ vice to him : he then advised his practising the songs in a new opera, which was in rehearsal at Drury-lane, feeling ever anxi¬ ous for his success, and always endeavour¬ ing, to the utmost of his abilities, to se¬ cond his wonderful natural talents. While the master and pupil were thus employed, Mr. Haslemere's carriage stop¬ ped at old Wheeler's door. Mrs. Wheeler came out upon the pavement to make her first curtsey, and having preceded her dear good master into the pai lour, she endea¬ voured to express her sense of the honour and kindness he had done her: her tears had long been at command, and now they overflowed—nor did the old gentleman doubt the sincerity of her grbf, knowing how partial she was to money, and what a Iosa
loss she would sustain were she to be de¬ prived of her husbands salary. He, how¬ ever, treated her with the utmost kindness, endeavouring to condole with her under what he agreed was a very heavy affliction, though from what Dr. В ------had sai·?, he thought there was every reason to hope poer Wheeler would come round again ; and what was much more gratifying to her avarice than his kind speeches, he gave her a twenty-pound-note " tt) fee the Doctor," he said, tx to whom he meant particularly to recommend his patient." <f May the Almighty reward y Ou, Sir, for all your goodness towards me and mine ! Riches, in such hands as yours, are sure to prove a blessing, for yon are truly generous and charitable towards all your dependents." This fine speech had a very different ef¬ fect to what she hoped and expected, as it made the worthy man to whom it was ad¬ dressed, almost reproach himself for hav- ·'ing so ül bestowed his gifts, since he well knew
knew thev w;ere in no need of his charity ; yet, if the old woman's avarice should have prevented her from requesting Dr. В ------ would continue his visíts, his gift might be the means of saving her husband's life— therefore, he had certainly done a humane, if not a charitable action : but having taken a seat, understanding the Doctor had par¬ ticularly recommended his patient to be kept very still and quiet, he refused to go up stairs—he would look in again, he said, mentioning, in a casual way, the young man who had brought him the melancholy intelligence into Austin Friars. Mrs. Wheeler was rather prepared for the question he asked respecting our hero, whom she was half sorry, upon reflection, she had sent to Mr. Haslemere's ; but she was so anxious to make her deplorable con¬ dition known to that gentleman in the first instance, she had not acted with her accus¬ tomed prudence : however, as what she had done could not be undone, she had been endeavouring to make up for her late
late want of thought, by conning over in her own mind, every possible enquiry she might be assailed with, to all which she had framed proper and suitable replies ; yet she felt her colour rise, when Mr. Haslemere asked, u whether Francis Yates was then with her husband ?" She replied in the negative, mentioning why she had sent him into the city, speak¬ ing \ery highly in his praise; though, to bc sure, it was no more than his dutv to be eager to serve her, and indeed no more than she had a right to expect, since she had trained him up in the paths of wtue ; how T ever, no one rejoiced more at his well¬ doing than she did : to be sure, he had been a wonderful expence to them, first and last ; however, as the money had not been ill bestowed, she did not grudge it. *' lie is certainly a very fine young man," she went on, " and, now he is getting for¬ ward in the world, I am sure he will never see me want—while he has a loaf of bread Ishall go his halves." Mr.
Mr. Haslemere wished to hear all she had to say, but, as she paused to wipe her eyes, he said, (i I should have supposed you had, long since, been placed above any fear of want, though I rejoice to hear young Yates is so grateful for the care you formerly bestowed upon him ; but pray, have you iì vr heard the scandalous re¬ ports that are in circulation respecting him?" * ť Scandalous reports, Sir ! bless me, what do you mean ?*' tf Not to alarm you, I give you my ho¬ nour—what I alluded to has long been pretty publicly canvassed : some people have done me the favour to say he is my son, while others, wishing to keep more within the bounds of probability, have be¬ stowed him upon George. Now there is certainly no accounting for likenesses ; for instance, not many vears since, there was a butcher in---------Market, who bore so strong a resemblance to the then Lord Chancellor, that I myself once took him for
for that nobleman, in consequence of his always dressing exactly as his Lordship did of a morning, even to his hat and wig, as he prided himself upon leading people into the error I fell into in common with many more ; but I merely mentioned this cir¬ cumstance, to account for the resemblance your brother's son certainly bears to my family, to which may be placed the silly reports I have alluded to ; though, had I not been acquainted with his relationship to you, I should positively this very morn¬ ing f admitting î had met him bv chance), have thought he was my grandson, he beai s so very btrong a resemblance to my late wife." Mrs. Wheeler's colour came and went repeatedlv during Mr. Haslemerc's speech, and when he came to the conclusion, her blood appeared all to have settled in her cheeks, and what greatly increased her agi¬ tation was, the old gentleman's eyes be¬ ing full upon her ; at last she faltered out, " Well now, you have astonished me¿ Sir— I am
I am sure 1 never remarked the likeness you mention, though I know Mrs. Hasle¬ mere has taken care to spread the report— nay, she. tells every body, 1 have heard, Frank is her husband's son, and a good-for- nothing woman she is for her pains, for Tis as false as God is true." 4f 1 have very little to say in her de¬ fence," was the reply; " but 1 wonder you, who were so intimate with my wife, never remarked the likeness which struck me so forcibly." (c I vow to God, Sir, 1 never did î —and excuse the liberty, but I do not think you ever would, if it had not been for Mrs. Haslemerc's spiteful speeches." ** Well, be it so—1 mav have seen the v*outh ttith prejudiced eyes, nay. I fancy my eyes must have deceived me, since \ou persist in declaring he is not indebted to George for his existence." (i As 1 hope to be saved, Sir, he is no more Mr. George's child than he is mine—· nay, I will take my bible-oath of it, if you are
are not satisfied; and I protest, I always thought the dear lad was the very model of my deceased brother, who, bating his fond¬ ness for the girls, was a very good sort of man, and Frank has inherited his sweet temper; I am sure he is a Powell in that respect, as I have said a thousand times." Air. llaslemere found it rather difficult to suppress his inclination to laugh, while he said, " As I am not sure whether 1 ever saw your brother, having seldom been at the Alint Farm during his life-time, I can¬ not judge of the resemblance between him and his son, who had ccrtainlv a right to your protection, since you came in for all his father left behind him : you have, how¬ ever, done your duty by the lad, and, for one, I have always applauded your con¬ duct towards him-—pray, who was his mo¬ ther?" " His mother, Sir—why, a little, dirty, forward drab, vvho, upon the strength of a pretty face, was always throwing herself at the fellows' heads, and she was so artful, vor, u ρ that
that I only wonder she did not draw my brother in to marry her ; nay, I dare say she would had he lived, and then she would have taken care to spend all he had: therefore, all things considered, it was per¬ haps fortunate it pleased God to take him." Mr. Haslemere was a very attentive audi¬ tor, in hopes she would drop something which might lead to a clue to fathom the mystery, which, he was now well con¬ vinced, hung over our hero, as, the more he heard and saw of Mrs. Wheeler, the more he was convinced she was endeavour¬ ing to impose upon his credulity : her va¬ rying countenance, visible confusion, and continued hesitation, were, to him, proofs of her want of sincerity; besides, the truth is so simple, and carries such conviction with it, that the most incredulous are ren¬ dered converts to it in the end ; and Mrs. Wheeler was by no means calculated to im¬ pose upon Mr. Haslemere, who was always calm and collected, and as he formed no hasty conclusions, his judgment seldom de¬ ceived
ceived or misled him ; and he 4 now 1 re¬ sumed, with seeming indifference, ff Did vou say the woman was living or dead ?" " I am sure I hardly know, Sir, though the good-for-nothing slut may be living, for any thing I know to the contrary; still, s tis so many years since I heard any thing about her, and as she has never tormented me about her son, I dare say she is dead." <f Most probably—she lived servant in your father's house, did she not, when your brother and she became intimate ?" "'No, Sir, she lived in some family at Kingston ; but I believe, upon reflection, she was out of place When my poor bro¬ ther took it into his head to play the fool with her—nay, 1 dare say, if the truth was known, she was in keeping for some time; for Frank Powell knew how to manage such matters—he was sly enough, God for¬ give him ; you would have thought butter would not have melted in his mouth, when. as I said before, he was all agog after su h ν 2 tr u mp e ι ν
trumpery sluts : I only know, he did not leave so much behind him, by some hun¬ dreds, as I expected to have come into ; so no doubt the sorry jade feathered her nest charmingly, before she made herself scarce," " Did she leave Kingston before or after your brother's death ?" " Oh, she used to come backward and forward to the very last, till ï found out what she was, and then I forbid Aiadam the house ; and I heard, soon after, that she was gone back into Yorkshire, from whence she cama·" " Then, if she is still in existence, I should not wonder were she to come in search of her son, by whom she may, should she be in want, hope to be maintained." Mrs. Wheeler, after a pause, said, " she could not suppose she would be so daring; at all events, she thought Francis's pride would prevent him from acknowledging her, and the law could not force him ; but she
she dare say she was dead—she had heard she was fond of drinking, and that gene¬ rally shortened people's days." Not feeling inclined tö listen any longer to what he deemed absolute fictions, Air. Haslemere rose to take his leave. The old woman, fearful she had not removed the doubts and suspicions he had in a manner avowed, ff hoped she had convinced him of the falsity of those malicious reports, which she knew had originated in Airs. Haslemere." " Very possibly—but, after what you have in a manner sworn, I cannot disbe¬ lieve your assertions—send me word in the morning, by John, how your husband is—I shall rejoice to hear he is better ; and should he, upon recovering his speech, ex¬ press a wish to see me, let me know, as he may have a wish to consult me, previ¬ ous to settling his affairs." (( I will wait upon you myself, in that case, Sir, since no one can be more grate- ful for so kind a promise; but you have
always been our best friend, and God for¬ bid that we should ever take any step of importance without consulting you," fol¬ lowing him to the very steps of his car¬ riage, to make her last curtsey ; when, having waited till he had driven ofl^ she returned into the house, muttering to her¬ self, as she shut the door, " Yes, yes— you want to be pumping Thomas forsooth; but I will put a spoke in your wheel there —*he would have been at a fine loss to 1 have answered your queer questions ; however, I -will never leave you alone with him again, except indeed he recovers, and then there will be nothing to fear. I was beside myself when I thought. of sending Frank into Austin Friars, for that,vile Airs.,Hasle¬ mere has so poisoned his mind, he is ready, like her, to swear he is poor;George s son; but he grows old and suspicious, and fonder than ever, George says, of getting money, and, to be sure, he is as fond of spending ; however, that does not concern me." While she was thus running on to her¬ self,
self, Caroline gently opened the door, and perceiving her mother was alone, said, te Come, you must not fret now, for father has opened his eyes again, and knew me, nav, he even told me he was better." " Thank God !" replied the old woman — " Oh, Dr. В ------ is a wonderful clever man—what he ordered has roused him, I make no doubt." " I dare say his last medicine brought him to his senses, for the blisters cannot have risen yet." et To be sure not—but I will go up stairs «—did he ask for me, poor soul ?" " No ; he only looked round the room, but did not seem to like to talk—;but I thought Mr. Haslemere would have come up stairs." " He was afraid of disturbing your fa¬ ther." " But why did you not send for me down, mother ? 1 should have liked to have seen the old gentleman." if He never so much as asked after von, ρ 4 that
that I remember; and though he may fancy it was mighty kind and condescend¬ ing in him to come and see your father, í s-t 9 ж was not his dupe ; curiosity brought him into Marsham-street, not his regard for the poor dear soul." " Why, what did he say, mother ?" " I am sure I can hardly tell—I never saw him so stiff and queer in my life—he has been hearkening to that daughter-in- law of his, till he is grown just as mag- gotty ; but I would have him to know, I am almost as old as himself, and old birds are not to be caught with chaff." f( What ! has he any suspicions of Kemp¬ thorne ? does not he approve of the match ?" t( He never mentioned him, and I dare say 'tis the least of his concerns, who ei¬ ther he or you marries." " At all events, he has made you fine and cross, mother—Has he been saying any thing about Francis?" ťf He talked of no one else, and I know he
he is gone away not above half pleased ; for, as I said before, he is grown just like Mrs. Haslemere—fancies there are myste¬ ries and secrets, where there are none—I only wish folks would mind their own bu¬ siness." " Does he seem to like Francis ?" " I should suppose he does, by the many questions he asked me about him." " But why had not you, mother, tried to pump him about Kempthorne ? I should like to know to a certaintv, whether he has got an independency besides his salary, and whether 'tis the old gentleman's intention to take him into partnership, else I should prefer Francis: to be sure, Kempthorne may be the most prudent, as Frank has not yet sowed his wild oats ; but then Kemp¬ thorne seems so loth to open his mind, that, as John says, he may keep me in warm water for years, and marry somebody with more money at last." " Why, there is no knowing, Cary ; but I declare 1 hardly know what í am either v 5 saying
saying*^ doing—this old man's visit, and your poor father's illness, has so flurried me, í shall not he myself again all day : however, please God the poor dear soul re* covers, your mind shall be «et at ease one way or the other ; Kempthorne shall sing out—-he shall not keep you in suspense much longer, I can promise him ; though I don't wish to,quarrel with him, because iie is a good lodger, and is in high favour in Austin Friars, therefore, we must go softly to work- —but I must go and see how your father is—What is it o'clock ?" " Lord bless me î Tis upon the stroke of two, and there is nothing in the house— John will be in a fine rage." « '.J cannot help it—he must, for once, make shift with bread and cheese : he can¬ not have heard of his father's illness, or he would have been home before now ; and yet he must have supposed something was the matter, as Mr. Wheeler did not go into Austin Friars, as he intended." WTiHe they were debating this point, 4 John
John knocked at the door, when Caroline, having let him in, he exclaimed, ({ Is din¬ ner ready ? and what the deuce prevented my father from coming into Austin Friars ? —Where is he gone ?" (C Have a little patience, I desire, John/* replied the old woman—" but, in answer to your first question, dinner is not ready, nor have we any thing in the house besides bread and cheese." John here interrupted her, swearing ťí he would not put up with her make-shift din¬ ners as he had done—he pay forty pounds a-year indeed ! and dine upon bread and cheese, and sour small. beer, half the time, •—not he, truly." Airs. Wheeler, whose spirits had cer¬ tainly been greatly agitate 1 , instead, as he fully expected, of resenting his rudeness, burst into a violent flood of tears, and at last sobbed out, " The Lord have mercy lipon me, and take me out of this trouble¬ some world, where I am not likely to enjoy another moment's peace on this side the grave, since, what with one thing and the other,
other, my life will soon be a burthen to me." " You might be ashamed of yourself, brother," cried Caroline, " to behave in such a way to mother, when father may not have an hour to live." {C So he might—an ungrateful wretch !" retorted Airs. Wheeler—" he has given me a pretty specimen of what I may expect, should I be left a widow." John stood amazed, convinced now some¬ thing had befallen his father, and at last said, " Why, what the deuce has happen¬ ed ?—did you suppose I was a conjurer ?— is father worse, as he did not come into the city?" " Worse !" repeated his mother— " yes, I believe he is worse, since we thought he was dead for an hour or more—Here we have had Air. Jordan and Dr. В ------to him, while you, unfeeling as you are, are raving about a make-shift dinner." " Well, but why did not you send me word father was so ill ?" ft And, pray of what use would you have been
been of ?—I sent for Dr. В ------, and to Air, llaslemere, who has been kind enough to come and see the poor dear soul ; but, as he was ordered to bc kept very quiet, and was hardly sensible when he came, he did not go up stairs, though he stopped half an hour or more." " What! has old Air. Haslemere been here ?" demanded the more and more sur¬ prised John. " Yes—old Air. Haslemere," said both mother and sister together. " So you perceive he still has some re¬ gard for your father and me," continued the former. " Well, now you have astonished me/' resumed John— " What did he say ?—will he give me my father's place, if he should die ?" t( I did not think you had been such an unfeeling brute, for such I must call you, son John, to be thinking of stepping into your poor father's shoes before he is dead ; I am sure Afr. Haslemere would have thought I had no more feeling than your¬ self,
self, had I even hinted such a hope ; be¬ sides, Dr. В ------gives us hopes that your father may recover, though he will never be the «nan he has been." " Why no, 1 suppose not, except the Doctor can grind him young again," ex¬ claimed the tender-hearted John. ff Only mind him, mother," cried the ■angry Caroline·— " though I believe he would feel the miss of father as well as we should—though, if he was but sure of his place, I dare say he would not care how soon he was in heaven." John retorted, till he so provoked his mother, he was obliged, as usual, to lower his tone, even affecting to be grieved for his father's situation, and expressing a wish to see him. t( Molly was sitting by him," his mother told him, t( and was to ring if he wanted any thing; therefore, she did not choose to have him disturbed;" and, byway of making his peace, John eat his bread and cheese without murmuring. They had, however, scarcely finished their
their frugal repast, ere the bell rung, and they all three went up stairs. The old man had just enquired for his wife, as he was now perfectly sensible, and could speak very intelligibly, though he Ьза evidently lost the use of his left side : he had some recollection of strangers having been about him, which he mentioned, enquiring whe¬ ther he was right in his,conjectures? Mrs. Wheeler explained ; and when in¬ formed that his old master had been there, he was quite affected, and dropped some ambiguous hints, which induced his wife to hurry John and Caroline out of the room, telling them, "diking was very likely to bring on a delirium—lie appeared rather light-headed already;" desiring John to hasten into Austin Friars, where, should he see Mr. George, he was to tell him, taking care not to be overheard, she wished to see him as soon as ever he could make it con¬ venient. tf He was not in the citv this morning," said John— t( indeed, he is more frequently absent than ever, since Kempthorne has like
like taken his place—aye, he has wheedled himself into fine fa our with the old one — he is all in all with him," te 1 only wish you had been half as wise, John—had vou minded vour P's and vour Q 's, you might have stood in his shoes, having been, in a manner, brought up in the family ; bur, for all you are so fond of money, you are always standing in your own light, and quarrelling with one or other of your fei low-clerks; though you ought to be civil to the meanest servant in Austin Friars, as even they, when least ex¬ pected, have it sometimes in their power to do those they like a kindness, and those they hate an injury." " That is like your grovelling notions, mother—you are always for canting and fawning the servants where you are ac¬ quainted; though it is now necessary for people to stand upon their mettle,, if they wish to be respected : ifl was to make my¬ self as cheap as you do, 1 should be tram¬ pled under foot." ** Only mind you do not mar your for¬ tune*
tunc, John, by your obstinate foolish pride —but I do not want to quarrel with you, so go along ; and if Mr. George should not make his appearance in Austin Friars, go into Baker-street before you come home, and send in a very civil message to request he would sec you alone, as you may hint you come from the old gentleman, and then inform him that I wish to see him as soon as possible, as I have something of importance to say to him." <c Aye, about Francis—come, do tell mc, mother, what the mighty secret is—Father said, you know, he should not die easy, if he did not relieve his mind." *' Your father was light-headed, and you are an impertinent fool, so please to march —Francis forsooth ! he is the least of my concerns just now—a likely thing that I should be thinking of him, when I am in such trouble about your father ; so please to take yourself off, or I will send Francis with my message." This threat had the desired eiïtet, as he could
could not bear Francis should ever be re¬ sorted to upon such occasions ; since, though very unwilling to go a step out of the way to oblige either his father or mo¬ ther, he was still more anxious to prevent their employing any one else, since they might think it necessary to make them some amends for the trouble they gave them, which he feared would be so much cut of his pocket in the long run.
END OF VOL, I.
lane, Dailing, and Co, Lcadenhail-Sti«et,
