Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
"There is a secret, find it out!": a novel
<—— lt-~W^^^^^^^W---i ' ....... ГГГТГ-. --------=*— ™— —-.—
TEUERE IS A SECHST·
CHAP· í. W E will now return to the hero of these memoirs, whom we left in a state of pro¬ gressive convalescence, under the care of Mrs. Archer and Miss Melvin, to whom the former had more than once declared, that, had he died, she should have imme¬ diately disposed of South Lodge, as she could not have remained in a place that would have continually reminded her of so dreadful an event ; not that she could, in the first instance, haye felt any thing more than gratitude towards our Ъего, who had, vol. iv. в in
in point of appearance, never been seen to greater disadvantage, than from the mo¬ ment their acquaintance commenced. As soon as he was able to leave his bed-room, she and her sister were his constant com¬ panions, one or other of them generally endeavouring to beguile the time they feared he felt very tedious, by reading aloud to him various new and amusing publications, as Dr. Malvern had given strict orders to have him kept very quiet, and had also hinted his wishes that he might not be allowed to converse much, till his strength bore more proportion to his spirits, which even his long and pain¬ ful confinement had not greatly depressed; and, by reading to him, Mrs. Archer both insured his silence and contributed to his amusement ; and as Francis perfectly ap¬ preciated her kind motives, he felt ex¬ tremely grateful for the attention. Thus another ten days soon elapsed, dur¬ ing which the young Elizabeth was, now and then, admitted into his dressing-room, who
who had several times, in the most suniem untutored manner, thanked him for taking her out of the river; and as she was a very engaging child, they were become excel¬ lent friends, as Francis had always been very much attached to such little folks; but ¡f her mirth grew too noisy, or they got to play, nurse was immediately sum¬ moned, and the young lady was dismissed· At the expiration of a fortnight, Dr. Aíalvern recommended short airings in his carriage to the invalid, and even agreed to his taking a turn, in the middle of the day, in the garden, admitting the weather proved favourable for either—but unfortunately, the ensuing week was very much the re¬ verse; but as he was no longer absolutely confined to his sofa, he frequently stretch¬ ed his legs in the adjacent drawing-room. when his kind nurses were otherwise en¬ gaged ; and, when thus alone, he felt that he had obeyed his friends injunctions, since he began to fear he ivas positively in в 2 love ;
bve ; he had had a scratch before, but Miss Chetwynd was not to be compared to Mrs. Archer : she sung well, he agreed, but that was not the only requisite to make a good wife; now, according to his friend's ac¬ count, the fair widow possessed every re¬ quisite to render him, or any sensible man, happy ; and as she was acquainted with his want of birth, he should have no mortifv- ing explanations to make to her. Such were his reflections one morning, while pacing the drawing-room, when Mrs. Archer and Elizabeth joined him ; and the former gaily told him, " he had walked long enough, desiring him to take his usual seat upon the sofa." He conformed to her wishes; and as she made a point of his conforming, in every respect, to his physician's orders, he put his feet up, and was conversing with her upon indifferent subjects, when Elizabeth, who was now allowed greater latitude, jumped upon the sofa, and standing be¬ tween
tween his knees, patted his cheeks, remind¬ ing him of having promised her, the day before, to walk with her in the garden, He renewed his promise, kissing her very tenderly. " Then let us go," she cried, " and I will gather you a nice nosegay." " You are going to be rude, I see," said her attentive mother— ■'* Mr. Y'ates has taken sufficient exercise for the present; besides, the walks are still damp ; and, ex¬ cept the sun peeps out, I shall not suffer him to leave the house,, as he might catch cold." **N^nd would he die then, mamma?'* she innocently demanded. Without, how¬ ever, watting for an answer, she went on> " No, you must not die; because, you know, you must pull me and mamma out of the water, if we should fail in again— won't you?" ** I hope neither mamma nor her lovely little girl will ever meet with a similar mis¬ fortune/' a 3 « Elizabeth,"
*' Elizabeth," resumed Mrs. Archer, n I see I shall be obliged to ring for nurse." Again patting our hero's cheeks, she said, " You won't let me go, will you ?" " I hope mamma will suffer you to stay with me." (i Ah, I knew you loved me, and so I told nurse— Oo not you Io*ve Elizabeth ?" " Indeed I do dearly," pressing her in his arms, and repeatedly kissing her. te Then will you be my papa, as poor papa is gone to heaven, nurse says ?" Mrs. Archer, whose rising colour induced our hero to form the most flattering sug¬ gestions, rose to seize the little prater, who, unconscious of having given rise to her evident confusion, only laughed and clung round the neck of her new favourite, who certainly participated in the agitation of her lovely mether, as he found himself un¬ able to break the spell that her innocent query seemed to have cast over him and the fair widow; and, almost unconscious of what he was about, he put his hand upon
upon the one which alighted upon the child's shoulder, and his eyes met those of his confused hostess, who, equally unable to speak, made an effort to seize the child, who still kept her hold, whispering in his car, *' Don't let me go." He pressed her more closely to him, say¬ ing, " Do not deprive me of this darling* child, who has preferred a request which 1 durst not have made to her mother." "You quite spoil her, Mr. Yates—who," she continued, endeavouring to conceal her increasing agitation—" who do you think would be troubled with such a little, rude, prating daughter ?" Slackening her embrace, the child was reluctantly turning from him, when he de¬ sired her once more to intreat her lovely mamma would make him the happiest of men, by allowing him a right to call her his daughter. " Oh, pray do, mamma, let me be Mr. Y'ates's daughter, and I will be very good, indeed I will/' в 4 u Then,
" Then, as a proof of your amendment, set off* to nurse," resumed Airs. Archer. Instantly jumping down, she ran out of the room, crying, " Good bye, papa !" leaving our hero at liberty to renew his offers to her mother in rather a more cohe¬ rent manner ; and as what he said proceed¬ ed from his heart, if he did not make quite such a florid declaration of his growing pas¬ sion for the fair widow, as Air. Eastwood did to his fair enslaver, and though he did not wind up his tale by threatening to leave her house, or to die a bachelor, except she listened to his suit, he spoke infinitely more to the purpose, candidly confessing that Mr. Weldon had first taught him to respect her, and that he had that very morning re¬ solved to open his heart to her; dwelling very forcibly upon his want of birth, ac¬ knowledging that he strongly suspected he was an illegitimate son of George Hasle¬ mere, from the resemblance he bore him, and various other circumstances. The late Air. Freeman had, however, given him the right
right to assume his name, which had em¬ boldened him to prefer his present peti¬ tion. Airs. Archer, who, superior to that spe¬ cies of affectation which induces some la¬ dies to keep their admirers in suspense, assured him, that if, upon a more intimate acquaintance with her and Elizabeth, he thought they were likely to contribute to his felicity, she should not punish herself by rejecting his flattering proposals, since every woman ought, more or less, to be flattered, when she received such an offer from a man of sense, and to whom her for¬ tune could be no object; acknowledging that, though she might have felt a regard for a man in low circumstances, she should hardly ha%'e dared to have encouraged if, for fear her money should have been her chief attraction in his eyes, aud nothing could be so mortifying, she gaily observed, as to make such a discovery after marriage; " and, though we are not old acquaintance, I am already better acq!<«._::Ud with your * 5 Сепшег,
temper, habits, morals, and disposition, than I was before marriage with those of the late Mr. Archer, and this owing to va¬ rious circumstances. Mr. Weldon did you ample justice before you came down, but î was not to be talked into love with any man; but you gave mc such proofs of your humanity, and of the goodness of your heart, the first moment we met, I sincerely prayed for your recovery ; and you were so patient during your confine¬ ment, so resigned to your fate, and seemed so little afraid to die, that I was very sure no heavy unexpiated sins pressed upon your mind ; and, had you not led a most regular, temperate life, it seems you would certainly not have recovered, at least so said Dr. Malvern, who repeatedly declared to me his astonishment at your having done so, your profession, and the tempta¬ tions to which you must have been ex¬ posed, considered ; therefore, I feel that I shall not run any risk in giving my Eliza- be th such a father : so now suffer mc to retire,
retire, as you have rather unawares led me to he thus explicit. I hope, however, my candour will have the good effect of de¬ taining you longer than you proposed in. Staffordshire, since you must not think, Dr. Malvern declares, of fulfilling your thea¬ trical engagements, as such exertions would now be attended with verv dangerous con- sequences." Our hero assured her, tf that he should avail himself of so favourable an opportu¬ nity to withdraw entirely from the stage, as he should henceforth be perfectly con¬ tented with enacting the country gentle¬ man ;" and as the sun had broke out, he strolled into the garden, where he found his little favourite busily employed in making him a nosegay under nurse's di¬ rection. Miss Melvin had rode over to .Stafford to make some purchases, and did not return till it was time fo dress for dinner; during which, she thought their gue>t was in un¬ usual spirits, and that her sister seemed to е d participate
participate in his gaiety ; and, during the evening, Mrs. Archer related to her the eventful occurrences of the morning, and received her sincere congratulations in re¬ turn : and on the Monday following, as our hero's strength, appetite, and colour were all returning, he removed to Moat House, where Dr. Malvern promised to visit him at least for another fortnight, though Fran¬ cis fancied himself quite recovered. Miss Melvin, to whom he made this boast, asked him, " whether he had looked in the glass on the morning he saved her bister's life Г* ** Most likely," he gaily replied. " Then, pray cast your eyes in the one opposite, and tell me truly whether you did not look a great deal better than you do now, though you have wonderfully im¬ proved within this last week." He laughed at her remark, agreeing that Mrs. Archer must have thought him abo¬ minably vain, for having dared to hope she would accept him, while labouring un¬ der
der so many disadvantages: and as Dr. Aialvern was continually cautioning against over-heating himself, and vice versa, against exposing himself to any degree of cold, he requested him to write his real opinion of him to the managers of Drury-lane, ac¬ knowledging that he wished, if possible, to be handsomely rid of his engagement with them; and we must say, the Doctor did not make him out to be so well as he really was, feeling very anxious to preserve so valuable, though so young a member of society: he also wrote himself to those gentlemen, expressing his regret, in very polite terms, at being compelled to disap¬ point them and the public ; promising to agree to any pecuniary compensation which they might think adequate to the loss they might sustain, by his being incapacitated to resume his station. To Kempthorne he had frequently written during the last fort¬ night, and had been highly amused by his retort upon John Wheeler. Airs. Archer and Miss Aielvin accompa¬ nied
nied him home, having both a great wish to see Moat House, where ladies were sel¬ dom admitted during the Mr. Freemans* re¬ sidence there; and they both agreed it was, if not quite so pleasant, a much hrger house than the Lodge : the library wa^ the most sociable room, Mrs. Archer thought ; and our hero observed, that they could have the furniture reformed, and make any other alterations during the spring, which he proposed, if she had no objection, spending in London. Miss Melvin declared, she longed to see the great city ; and Mrs. Archer approved of the notion, observing, that a few months spent in any great town, would give addi¬ tional zest to their rural amusements. The day after his return to Moat House, our hero thought it necessary to write to Lady Bayfield, to express his regret at hav¬ ing been incapacitated from returning to town so soon as he had expected, and at riot yet being able to inform her when his medical attendants would suffer him to leave
leave Staffordshire; and concluding by pro¬ mising to wait upon her Ladv ship as soon as he was allowed to visit London. Airs. Archer, to whom he shewed his let¬ ter, was convinced that it would induce her to exonerate him from fulfilling his engagement respecting her nieces, as she must feel that, if he was forbidden to sing in public, it would be equally hurtful to him to sing duets with those ladies ; ami she positively refused either to play or sing to him herself, that she might not lead him into the temptation of correcting her errors, and she rejoiced at perceiving there was no instrument at Aîoat House. The old housekeeper there was extremely attentive to her young master, but he did not think her so good a cook as the one Airs. Archer kept, which he happened to mention while dining at the Lodge, a few days after his return home. Aiiss Melvin, who was ex¬ tremely gay, laughed at his remark, observ¬ ing, " that her sister had not verified the old proverb of * too many cooks/ since she 4 had
had not, only superintended the culinary department herself during his illness, or rather convalescence, but had also consult¬ ed two of the most famous receipt-books then extant ; and, of course, some valuable discoveries had been made by her and De¬ borah, though, since his departure, they had both slackened their efforts to please the palate." Francis was very much flattered by these details; and from that timc^. not a day elapsed but some delicacy, of which he was known to be fond, was sent to M *at House, whether he dined at home or at the Lodge; and jellies in particular, with va* rions other restoratives recommend Ί by the Faculty : it was, therefore, scon gene¬ rally surmized, and, of course, whispered in the neighbourhood, that the fair widow meant to bestow her hand upon the pre¬ server of her life. Elizabeth was now allowed greater liber¬ ties than ever with papa, as she persisted in calling our hero, to whom she frequently innocently
innocently repeated what mamma or aunt had said during his absence ; she was there¬ fore a greater favourite with him than ever, often asking, ·' Will you take me to Lon¬ don with you?—and shall mamma and aunt go along with us?—and shall we see Mr. Kempthorne there?" He therefore suspected) that Miss Melvin sometimes spoke of his friend ; and as, though by no means so handsome as her sister, he thought she would make Kempthorne an excellent wife, he never failed, when opportunity offered, to say something in his praise; frequently reading aloud those passages in his letters which were likely to amuse the ladies, particularly the anecdotes which he now and then picked up respecting the* Wheeler family ; though Kempthorne was by П9 means aware of the double marriages that were in agitation. But John had boasted to Moody of their having a coun¬ try squire in their lodgings, who was twke as rich as Master Frank Yates, and who spent his money like a prince. Miss
Miss Melvin hoped this great man was a bachelor, then Miss Wheeler would stand a chance of looking down upon the insen¬ sible writer of these tetters, who must have a very flinty heart to have refused so grace¬ ful a creature with so fine a fortune. Francis promised they should have a sight of this paragon when they went to town ; and as his increase of income alone would have induced him to have looked out for another house, he was now, more than ever, anxious to do so, having re¬ solved not to take his wife into Marsham- street; indeed, his vicinity to the Whee¬ lers had long been disagreeable to him; besides, avarice alone could now induce him to remain in such a situation, and in so small a house : he was, therefore, re¬ solved to set out for London, as soon as Dr. Malvern pronounced him strong enough to bear the journey ; when one morning, about a week after his return home, while perusing the Star, which Mrs. Archer re¬ gularly sent him, an advertisement caught his
his attention. " A gentleman, who was-go¬ ing abroad in an official capacity, wished to dispose oî his house, No. — , Devon¬ shire-place, furnished as it stood ; detailing that it had been fitted up in the most fa¬ shionable and expensive style only eigh¬ teen months before, and was fit for the immediate reception of any family of dis¬ tinction." Our hero conceived that he had very little claim to distinction ; but as he Itked the situation, and wished for a large, 3İry, and quiet abode, he drove to the Lodge fo consult with Mrs. Archer, before he wrote to Mr. Weldon, as she had never been in London. She assured him, she could have no choice as to situation, requesting he would be wholly guided by his own judgment, as she fully approved of the reasons he gave for leaving Marsham-street ; and was wel! assured, she tcld him, that Mr. W r eldon would nor make the present purchase, if he thought the house too large for them, or
or furnished in" too magnificent a style ; though she agreed that his fortune, inde¬ pendent of hers, would enable them to in¬ dulge in every luxury a prudent couple could wish to enjoy. He therefore Wrote immediately tc his friend Weldon, requesting he would see the house, &c; and, if he thought it likely to suit them, he empowered him to con¬ clude the bargain without loss pf time, as he had more money lying dead at his banker's than would make the purchase ; and as it was said to be űt for their recep¬ tion, he conceived it would save them a vast deal of trouble. He abo wrote to Kempthorne, to whom he had already de¬ tailed, as well as to Mr. Weldon, how swimmingly his affairs went on with the young widow, requesting he would also look at this house, and if it did not answer his expectations, he desired he would freely state his objections to the worthy solicitor, as he wished Mrs. Archer to be more than comfortably lodged in town* eke they might
might as well have contented themselves with the house in Marsham-street ; there¬ fore, if the furniture was not handsome and well chosen, he would not make the pur¬ chase, and he knew Kempthorne had both taste and judgment in such matters. The following mornhg, feeling himself inclined to wrlk, he strolled over his home farm, till chance directed him to the gate from whence he had sallied when going with Kempthorne to reconnoitre South Lodge: he leant over it to rest himself, and to admire the surrounding landscape, perhaps with the more satisfaction, as, on either side, the fields v**re*aH his own; some were let out to excellent tenants, and were in an excellent state of cultiva¬ tion; in others, sheep and oxen were grazing. " I was certainly born under a very for¬ tunate planet—though not in wedlock," he mentally exclaimed; "at Mr. Corfe's death I was what 1 thought a very rich man, and was perfectly contented with my lot
lot in life ; and, had not my recent acqui¬ sitions brought me acquainted with Mrs. Archer, I should have been puzzled to de¬ cide whether it would have added to my felicity." While he was thus musing, he heard the sound of horses' feet in the lane, which in¬ duced him to raise his eyes, when he saw a gentleman extremely well mounted, fol¬ lowed by a groom, advancing towards the gate upon which he was leaning, and was slowly retreating, when the gentleman, who was riding very gently, reined in his horse directly opposite to where he had been standing, which induced him to re¬ gard him mece attentively than he had O r* done before; and the next moment the stranger called ouf, " Surely that is Mr. Yates !" " The very same, my Lord," replied the rather surprised Francis, gracefully salut¬ ing the Earl of Merioneth, who advanced close to the gate, saying. ** Upon my ho¬ nour, I rejoice to see you so well—I hope you
you are not likely to feel any farther bad effects from so dreadful an accident." ft My physician assures me I shall not, with proper care, my Lord ; and I feel very much flattered by your polite enquiry, and kind congratulation." " Believe me, I am not singular, for every person I have seen since my arrival in this neighbourhood, have rejoiced at your recovery, since it would have been a dreadful misfortune had you lost your life, even in saving that of Mrs. Archer, not¬ withstanding she ranks very high in the good graces of all her neighbours: but, after having been so long confined as I understand vou have been, you should not s 'J remain stationary in the open air for any length of time, and the air is rather keen this morning. I am going » few miles fur¬ ther, and as it will not be out of my way, and I am in no great haste, I will, with your leave, walk across your home grounds, as, I am told, you have a remarkably fine breed
breed of sheep, and I pique myself not a little lipon the breed of my own." " Your Lordship does mc honour," was the reply, opening the gate ; and the Earl having dismounted, ordered his groom round to the house, and then joined the flattered Francis, who ingenuously confess¬ ed his ignorance of farming, assuring his Lordship he meant to make it his chief study, as he proposed residing at least nine months in the year in the country. The Earl commended his resolution, en¬ quiring when he left South Lodge ? tell¬ ing him that he had been his neighbour for the last eight days, having come with his family to spend a month at hir: uncle's, at Carberry Green, " which once," he add¬ ed, " as you may have heard, belonged to the father of Mrs. Archer:" and as he was rather curious to learn how his accident really happened, he drevv him on to enter into every detail he required, and then gaily congratulated him upon the reports in
in circulation ; speaking very highly in praise of the fair widow, and prognostt eating that they would'be a very happy couple. Having now reached a field, in which some of the sheep most prized by the late Mr. Freeman were grazing, his Lordühip stopped to admire them, descanting very ably upon the superiority of their fleeces, and the beauty of (heir forms ; nor was he less an fait respecting the oxen and horses. Our hero therefore declared, that he fan¬ cied himself much wiser than when he left home. Having arrived at the house, the Earl observed, that he had never before seen it but from a distance, not having been ac¬ quainted with the late owners. Our hero gladly seized the opportunity of explaining, to their advantage, many of their particularities, and of dwelling upon the excellent qualifies of his late friend. The ]_arl was pleased with the resnect hè paid their memory, and gave him due ere- vou iv # r. dit
dit for many of his remarks ; but assured him, that the neighbourhood in general rejoiced that Moat House was likely to have a mòre sociable master in future. Having walked round it, he praised the Gothic style of architecture, observing, he had not supposed it was so large a mansion. Francis requested he would do him the honour to walk over the inside. His Lordship made no objection, and found much to admire in the library ; but was still more surprised when he discover¬ ed that his companion was a very good scholar, and that he spoke several lan¬ guages; acknowledging that he had sup¬ posed music had hitherto been his chief study. Francis agreed that it had, readily ac¬ counting for his proficiency in the dead and modern languages. Having spent some time in looking over the collection of books and medals, of which there was a great choice, as it grew late, our hero ventured to request his Lordship
Lordship would take some refreshment, to which he readily consented, feeling ex¬ tremely inclined to oblige his youthful host; and hairing taken a jelly, he pro¬ nounced it excellent, declaring his house¬ keeper succeeded better than his uncle's confectioner, or his ow*n. Francis's countenance betrayed the se¬ cret ; and the Earl, in a gay tone, said, he no longer wondered at the superior fla¬ vour of the jellies, readily taking another, and declaring, that our hero -would be the envy of half the young men of rank and fortune in the county ; when, having gi¬ ven his host a very cordial invitation to vi¬ sit him İn both town and country, he took his leave, extremely prepossessed in favour of the present owner of Moat House, to whom, understanding that his physician had particularly recommended fruit, he sent a large basket ihat very afternoon, the produce of Mr. Caerwyth s hot houses : as Mr. Freeman had never gone to the ex- pence of such erections, of course, his β 2 garden
garden did not, at that season, abound in peaches and nectarines, though his or¬ chards were well stocked with apples, pears, and plumbs. The pine-apples he sent to South Lodge ; and, during his next visit there, he explained how he came by them. Mrs. Archer had always heard Lord Me¬ rioneth spoken of in the highest terms; nor was Mr. Caerwyth a less amiable man, she understood, though he had spent more than half his life in India, from whence he had returned about ten years before, with a broken constitution, and an immense for¬ tune, which he had accumulated in an ho¬ nourable manner, as his name was still held in veneration in Hindostán, and his recommendation was a sure passport to the favour of the JDirecfors ; adding, " his Fnglish agent purchased my late father's seat when it came to the hammer ; and I own, from having been born there, I have sometimes been tempted to break the tenth commandment. Mr. Caerwyth has made great
great improvements, I understand ; but he is in so bad a state of health, he chiefly resides at Bath. I have once walked over the house, which is superbly ñtttd up, and I only wish its present possessor could en¬ joy himself in so charming an abode, as the grounds are laid out with the greatest taste." Our hero wished Moat Hotrøe bore more resemblance to Carberry Green. She laughed at his serious air, pointing out various improvements which, she as¬ sured him, would render Moat House the -more pleasant abode, as Carberry Green was now only fit for the residence of a no¬ bleman. Francis was perfectly satisfied with this explanation, and the following day he was favoured with an answer from t!te Coun¬ tess of Bayfield, who, after politely con¬ gratulating him upon his recovery, assured him that she should not smffer him to en¬ danger his health, bv renewing his instruc- tions to his pupils, as she proposed en- c 3 gaging
gaging Signor M ------to supply his place, by way of convincing him that she exo¬ nerated him from the kind promises his friend Kempthorne had made in his name, though she hoped to see him as soon as he returned to town; but could never think of again receiving him as the music- master to her nieces, who joined with her in kind wishes for the perfect restoration of his health· Francis was both flattered and rejoiced at thus being relieved from what he deem¬ ed almost a sacred engagement ; nor were the managers of Drury-lane less conside¬ rate, since incapacity to oblige them had alone induced him to resign his engage¬ ment; concluding by hoping, if he ever did again appear in public, he would give them the preference. Mrs. Archer was no less pleased, when informed how honourably he had been ac¬ quitted of any breach of promise, and that he never again intended to tread the boards of Drury-lane. CHAP.
CHAP· 11.
Mn. WstDON, upon receipt of his client's letter respecting the house in Devonshire- place, immediately went to see if, and found that it perfectly corresponded with the advertisement, and seemed exactly suit¬ able to the rank in society Francis Free¬ man, Esq. of Moat House, would now move in. Kempthorne was no less pleased with it; still the attorney was by no means inclined to comply with what he thought a very exorbitant demand, not approving of paying the full price for second-hand fur¬ niture ; therefore, without appearing par- e 4 ticularly
ticufarly anxious to close the bargain, he proposed to the owner to send for the up¬ holsterer who had furnished if, or any other man in that line, to appraise the goods, offering to advance ten per cent, upon what they might say they were worth ; or the appraiser should be obliged to take every thing at his own valuation; fully convinced that this proviso would prove a sufficient check even upon the man who put in the furniture, for whom tlie owner of the house immediately sent, justly sup¬ posing that he would give the most money for what he had himself put in ; but he soon found that, even with the additional ten per cent, the appraisement fell much below his expectations; while Air. Weldon was very well satisfied with his bargain— the house he was to have upon the same terms; and Mr. Haslemere, senior, who, at Kempthc/rnc's request, walked over it, gave him great credit for his mode of deal¬ ing with the owner, as he made the pur¬ chase for three hundred pounds less than the
the first demand, and yet paid the full va¬ lue for every thing. Our hero was no less pleased, when he learnt upon what equitable terms he had acquired so good a house, and that every thing was in train to expedite his change of name; and in his next letter, Mr. Wei- don requested to see him in London, as soon as his physician and kind nurses pro¬ nounced him able to bear the fatigue of The journey : and as our hero was very anxious to make every necessary prepara¬ tion for his approaching nuptials, he wrote him word, that he proposed leaving Moat House in ten days, or a fortnight at far¬ thest, admitting his new hoirse could be ready for his reception by that time, as he did not wish to return into Marsham-street. To Kempthorne be wrote more at large, respecting what he wMied to have removed from thence. Mr, Corfe's fine organ and grand piano were, of Course, to change their quarters, and to Kalkreuth he left the charge of seeing them safely placed in с 5 their
their new situation. To Mrs. Hunter he merely wrote a few general orders, leaving many things wholly to her judgment and discretion—and all his friends were anxi¬ ous to oblige him ; and as the family gave ЛГг. Weldon, according to promise, imme¬ diate possession, every thing was ready for his reception within the given time. Therefore, having given Mrs. Archer his word of honour to attend to all the cau¬ tions Dr. Malvern had given him, and which she had strongly enforced, and not to travel more than fifty miles а -day, he leh Moat House, cn Tuesday, the twelfth of November, and arrived in Devonshire- place, by a fashionable dinner-hour, on the Friday ; and as he had particularly re¬ quested his three most intimate friends would give him the meeting, Mr. Weldon, Kempthorne, and Kalkreuth, were all at the door almost as soon as the carriage stopped, and Mrs. Hunter hastened up from below to welcome his return, having re¬ solved to live and die under the same roof 4 with
with him. She had written him upon his making her an offer to remain, rent free, in Marsham-street, where she might have greatly increased her income by letting lodgings; but, having heard a most excel¬ lent character of Mrs. Archer from Kemp¬ thorne, she chose to retain her situation as housekeeper, but had only engaged two maids, as she supposed that lady would probably wish to bring up some of tho^e she liad in the country. Having received the joint congratula¬ tions of his friends, who agreed he merely looked rather thinner than when he left town, and Mrs. Hunter having assured him that dinner should be upon table in a quar¬ ter of an hour, he proposed walking over the house, with which he was extremely wtll pleased, as it even surpassed his ex¬ pectations. Ilaung \ ¿sited all the rooms, he crossed the garden to the coach-house and stables, which ran at the back, where he found his coachman, who had arrived a few hours c (i before
befbre him with the horses, having left Moat House on the Sunday. While he was expressing his approba¬ tion of the offices, they were summoned to dinner. Mrs, Hunter had provided his, most favourite dishes, and hoped he would be able to make a good meal, as, ha\ing been bred and born in London, she fan¬ cied there were few things equally good İn ihe country, nor had she any opinion of country cooks; but she made no doubt of her master soon recovering his flesh, now he was once more safe in London. She had taken upon her-self to have all the plate, linen, and china removed from Marsham- «treer, as well as the wines, and every other article of value that there was a chance of being stolen, and had left the house and furniture in charge of a young relation, who was never to open the street-door, ei¬ ther by dav or bv ni^hf, but with the chain up, and upon no pretence to admit any .strangers of either sex: she had also en¬ gaged a very honest old woman in the neighbourhood
neighbourhood to bleep there, and who was to bring in whatever her niece wanted, who was never to go out under any pre¬ tence; and as there was no key-hole on the outnUle, she thought she had guarded against the worst that could happen, and so thought her master, who gave her due credit for her prudent arrangement«. Having made an excellent dinner, and drank Mrs. Archer's health in a bumper, Mr. Weldon gaily enquired, whether the wedding-day was fixed Ì * f I dare not press for it, my good friend, till I have changed my name." " Then I hope you will do that to-mor¬ row, as I am assured that his Majesty's li¬ cence for your doing so will be in to¬ morrow night's Gazette." " You could not have given me more pleasing intelligence—you seem to know how to hasten official business." " There is a never-failing method to which I generally have recourse, as it is a great saving both of time and trouble—a present
present, properly made, has always due in¬ fluence— generosity, you know, is sure to create gratitude." The party laughed at the apropos quo¬ tation, and Kempthorne, being called up¬ on for his toast, said, " I will give you the bride and bridegroom's health» Mr. and Mrs. John Wheeler, if you please, gentle¬ men." " Is it possible !" cried our hero— (t Pray, when were they married ?" " This morning, if nothing has occurred to forbid the ceremony." " Well, little as I like him, I shall not object to drinking his health upon such an occasion ; though I am well convinced, that it is neither in his own nature to be happy, nor to render any one else so." Having emptied their glasses, Kemp¬ thorne was requested to eater into some farther explanation. " Upon my word, I know very little more than I have already told you, good folks—The Wheeler family are renowned for
for their secrecy and love of mystery, you have long known, my friend," looking at Francis, " and I am not sufficiently in the bridegroom's good graces to be admitted into his confidence ; though, from various clever hints which he has thrown out of late, I suspected that he had it in agitation to enter the holy pale, and last night my suspicions were confirmed: Morton had remarked, that John had been unusually diligent for the last week; and just before Mr. Ilaslemere left town, he requested to be favoured with a few minutes audience. The old gentleman readily granted his pe¬ tition, when he hoped he would conde¬ scend to dispense with his services till Mon¬ day, assuring him, that he had worked very hard for the last fortnight, as he was going to be married this morning. Mr. Hasle¬ mere, who kindly repeated to me all that passed between them, said, he was rather surprised, but did not choose to ask any questions, not wishing to afford him an opportunity of expatiating upon the beauty and
and merit of his mistress: he, however, readily granted him the required holiday, and John retired very much disappointed, I dare say, in one respect, though very much gratified in another ; and Mr. Hasié¬ in ere immediately sent for me, and having repeated to me what I have been relating, he asked, * What silly woman meant to put her happiness into John Wheeler's keep¬ ing ?' 1 assured him, and with truth, that I Could not resolve his question, though í acknowledged 1 had rather suspected he was wpon the point of marriage. Mr. Hasle- mere was, of course, convinced that I had not been consulted, and almost immedi¬ ately departed, merely observing, the W T heelers were very fond of mystery." " There he was right," replied our hero —" but, have you no idea who John has married — it certainly cannot be Mrs. Smith ?" The three young men exchanged a look, seeming to doubt the propriety of being more explicit before Mr. Weldon, and for¬ tunately
lunately a smart rap at the door attracted his attention. (e Who can this be?" cried Francis— " Somebody seems to have found me out already ; and as 1 have not yet learnt to be a fashionable man, 1 must be at home/* and almost immediately Mrs. Jones was an¬ nounced. " Have the old lady shewn in here," said Kempthorne. {i By all means," cried Kalkreuth—*' she will be able to inform us who the bride is/* Francis gave orders in consequence, has-' tily telling Mr. Weldon, ** that she was a very old friend of his, or rather of the Wheelers, who had greatly noticed him during his state of dependency npon Mr. Corfe, therefore was entitled both to his esteem and gratitude ;" adding, " she is reputed to be rich, and is not without her virtues; nor is she a bad companion, as she possesses no small share of mxt i rical wit; but she is not very refined in her address, nor does 5he ever stand upon ceremony." * lie
ι* * He was prevented from saying any more, bv the entrance of his visitor, whom he rose to receive, assuring her, that he was very happy to see her in Devonshire-place; adding, " I think I never saw you look better." ft I wish I could return your compli¬ ment/* was the reply— " however, I bless God to find you so much recovered, though I suppose you would have died rather than have sent for me to nurse you ; but, if I have been rightly informed, perhaps I was as well out of the way—but I hope you are out of all danger, as I have positively been seriously alarmed about you." Francis led her to a chair placed next his own, assuring her that he was perfectly recovered; adding, '' I might have been tempted to have sent for you, if I had not known you were enjoying the fine sea- breezes, which will, I hope, greatly pro¬ long your life." "Then you will have all the merit of my longevity ; for you were the only person who
who could ever persuade me that I had been, like an old fool, making a slave of myself for many years, to hoard my money for people, who would not thank me for it when I died ; and I own I have felt much happier since I have been able to shake off* that vile passion, which renders all misers more or less despised, and I am now, by your advice, living for myself; therefore, all I have now to guard against, İs falling into the other extreme: however, now I have taken a fancy to travelling, I am not sure, if I had not found you in London, whether I should not have paid you a visit at Moat House." " I should have been very happy to have seen you there—but when did you return to town ?" " Last night—and the first visit I paid was in Marsham-street, but not to the Wheelers, believe me ; and of Mrs. Patty I learnt whither Mrs. Hunter was removed, and when you were expected home." ľ then, now I hope you wUl do us the favour
favour to make our tea, and stay supper with us." " Why, though I have emerged from my obscurity, I have not yet adopted the fashionable hours, and I drank tea before I left home, having been told that you were expected to be in Devonshire- place fo a six o'clock dinner: however, another cup will revive me after my ride, and that will serve me for my supper; and you ought to recollect, that you are removed strange¬ ly out of my beat, though I shall now and then look in upon you, at least till you marrv. since I find 1 must, however relue* tantly, give up all hopes of figuring as your bride, and 1 do not think I could bear to be introduced to my rival ; so, pray when do you commence Benedict? as I shall not give up all hopes while you re¬ main single." " I positively cannot, at present, answer your question," was the reply, in the same gay tone, " though you shall have due no¬ tice of the wedding «dav ; and if vou had not
not thus kindly have sought me out, î should not have suffered another day to elapse without calling in John-street, though my friend Kempthorne could not inform we whether you were returned to town." " Ah, perhaps he had some bad design in his head," observed the old woman, with a droll gesture—" however, I feel highly flattered to hear you even remembered me, Mr. Yates. I staid much longer at Mar¬ gate than I had proposed, but my compa¬ nions fancied they found great benefit from the sea air, and I was of the same opinion ; so, Cockney-like, we staid till the approach, or rather the beginning of winter ; and, had Mr. Kempthorne remain¬ ed with you in Staffordshire, I dare say I should have been the first to have told you the news of our neighbourhood—but his looks tell me that he got the start of me." " We had been jus* nking the new- married couple's health, when you knocked at the door," replied Francis, « though, as yet,
yet, none of us know who John Wheeler has married," relating what Kempthorne had been telling them. " Then I have a vast deal more informa¬ tion to impart," resumed the old woman, *■ since there have been two weddings in the Wheeler family on the same day." " Two weddings!" exclaimed the asto¬ nished Francis. $i Fact—I give you my honour. Miss Cary, either out of pique or revenge for your cruelty, resigned her liberty at the same time her brother did." " Surely there must have been some mistake, or some qui fro quo/' said Kemp¬ thorne. " No such thing, I assure you—Caro¬ line Wheeler has positively changed her name." *"' And, pray who has given her a right to another ?" enquired our hero—" I hope she has not thrown herself away, because her charms were overlooked by our friend Kempthorne." « And
« And pray were not you equally guil¬ ty, Afr. Yates?" gaily resumed Afrs. Jones —" However, I will tell you all I know, as your curiosity and surprise are very na¬ tural ;" when, making a momentary pause, as if to recollect herself, a tear started into her eye; instantly wiping it away, she protested she was growing foolish, as well as old. The gentlemen were surprised, as she had appeared, but a moment before, to be in excellent spirits ; but she immediately accounted for the sudden transition, by saying, " You have frequently heard me mention my nieces, Mr. Yates?" " Several times, my good Madam." " Well then, the one who resided with me when she eloped with a worthless fel¬ low, who proved her ruin, is no more. I did not intend to have mentioned the cir¬ cumstance, but as her poor child, and her penitent letter, came across me as I was endeavouring to arrange my story of the Wheelers,
Wheelers, why, I could not help displaying røy weakness ?" tf Kather that your feelings, upon such an occasion, are sure indications of the goodness of your heart," said Francis, taking her hand. " Well, since you thus kindly excuse my folly, why, I must tell you that, on my arrival at home, I found a letter sealed with black, and, but for that circumstance, 'tis a chance whether I had not thrown it into the fire, as I knew the direction was the sorry jade's hand-writing, who had sent mc at least twenty begging leiters, after the fellow had stripped her of all she bad : however, the contents of this did af¬ fect mc, as she assured me -she wrote it supported in bed, after having been in¬ formed she could not live another week, except indeed, by some miracle, her mi- scries should be prolonged : she therefore implored me to take compassion on her unfortunate little bov, whom she must b leave
leave behind her, as nis father was become such an abandoned, drunken wretch of late, that it would certainly be sent to the workhouse, except I took pity upon the poor thing : she also sued very humbly for my forgiveness, and hoped I would pro¬ nounce it in person, ere she breathed her fast. Unfortunately her letter had been lying for a fortnight in John-street, and indeed, at first, I was inclined to believe she wished to work upon my feelings, to bring about a reconciliation between us; so, resolving to be satisfied, I set out early this morning for the Borough, where see lodged, and there I learnt that she was not only dead, but buried, poor soul, and that her worthless husband, or perhaps para¬ mour, had been drunk twice а -day ever since her death, to drown sorrow, he said ; and as he had sold off what few cloaths she had left, and what little furniture they had, the child must have been sent to the work¬ house in a few days more : so, having heard enough to make me more than evar diV vou iv, о like
like the father, I asked the poor little in^ nocent, who is, by-^the-by, a fine little fel¬ low, whether he would go with me ? ' Yes, if you please/ was his reply, looking me so piteously in the face, that 1 was a greater fool then than 1 am now; and when I reached* home, who should be standing at my door but Mrs. Wheeler's maid, who took the child in her arms when the coach stopped : she had scraped an arquaintance with my girl during my absence, and had come, I found, to relate the wonderful oc¬ currences of the morning ;· and those I will now repeat, for the benefit of this good company." Our hero paid her some ^very high com* pliments upon her conduct towards her niece's child, and was so war ml ν seconded by the other gentlemen, that she felt proud of having done so praise-worthy an action ; though she dedared our hero bad made a convert of lier, ha\íng, by his judicious ad¬ vice, excellent example, and well-timed encomiums, convinced her Ihat it would be
be much more acceptable in the eyes both of God and man, were she to spend her savings, with a due regard to prudence, than were she to continue to grudge her¬ self the necessaries of life, to add to her hoards, and she was now convinced that nothing hardened the heart so much as avarice; "still yon find ï am such a novice in charity, that I am boasting of having, God help me, done no more than my dtfty —so to return to the Wheelers : Caroline is now Mrs. Eastwood, and her husband« a rich country squire, has settled five hun¬ dred а -year jointure upon her, which is se¬ cured upon his family estate in Cheshire." **" Is it possible !" one and all exclaimed, with evident marks of amazement. " So I have been assured," replied the old woman—** but, to be mote explicit, though î knew the Wheelers' girl's face, it did not immediately occur to me where I had seen her, till nvy maid asked me if I did not know Jenny, at Mrs. Wheeler's ? which led to my enquiring after the /a- i>2 mily;
mily ; but, perceiving she was adorned in a smart white top-knot, before she answer¬ ed my first question, I asked whether there had been a wedding in the family ? ( There has been two this very morning, Ma'am/ was her reply. *' Unable to credit her assertion, she laughed at my visible surprise, assuring me it was fact, and that the bridal parties had not left Marsham-street more than an hour, as they were gone to keep the weddings in the country. I desired the girl to sit down, and tell me all how and about it, declaring I thought either she or me must be out of our mind. ( Dear me, Ma'am/ said the simpering girl, * I should have thought my smart bri¬ dal favour would have convinced you that I was not joking ; but here is another proof of the truth of what 1 have been saying/ taking a piece of bride-cake out of her pocket, which she had intended for my Peggy, but which she now begged leave to give to the child, who soon eat it up, as it
it was not very large : She then told me, that Cary's husband has lodged with them for the last three months, and that he was a very great man, and had settled what I have already told you upon his wife.** " Well, 'tis passing strange !" cried our hero. "This truly accounts for John's boast, that they had a gentleman in the house far my superior," said Kempthorne—** But^ pray who has he married, Mrs. Jones ?" " A Miss Atwood, a young woman of large property, upon whom old Wheeler has made a very handsome settlement. 1 once dined with her at the old peopleV, the very day before 1 went to îifargate, and she went to Vauxhall, with the family, m the evening. The old woman got ac¬ quainted with her at Knightsbridge — they lodged in the same house." This explanation convinced the young men that Miss Λ f wood and Mrs. Smith were one and the same person; they did not, however, mention their surmises, though η 3 thev
they all presumed George Haslemere had bribed John to rid him of a mistress he was grown tired of, and our hero presumed Miss Chetwynd had rendered him unfaith¬ ful to Miss Atwood. £e Is she a woman of family ?" he asked Mrs. Jones. " So the Wheelers boast—She has an aunt living in Gower-street, Bedford- square, and an elder sister, married to an East India captain ; some great counsellor, according to Jenny, is her guardian, who gave her away, and in whose coach-and- four they are gone to the Toy, at Hampton Court ; so are Mr. and Mrs. Eastwood, and papa and mamma Wheeler, in the former gentlemans coach-and-four: they all re¬ turn to town ibis evening, and the new married people are each to take possession of their new houses—Mr. Eastwood's is in the Adel phi, and John's upon Kelson-ter¬ race, in the City road, to be near Austin Friars, 1 presume." " Surely he will never condescend to re¬ tain
tain his present situation in our house," replied Kempthorne—** and if his impu¬ dence at all increases, I shall probably re¬ quest he may be dismissed." " A house in the Adelpht, and a coach- and-four !" cried our hero—** I think Ca¬ roline's brain will soon be turned, and I could almost find in my heart to pronounce her husband insane." " Or, at all events, some drivelling jdeot," resumed Kempthorne. '* I can't pretend to say," rejoined Mrs* Jones—" but, when 1 visited your house in Marsham-street, Mr. Yates, Mrs. Fatty con¬ firmed having seen the wedding-party set oíľ in three coaches-and-four ; and she as¬ sured me she has often seen Mr. Eastwood* and that he looks and talks like a gentle¬ man." " We must suppose he has discovered charms in Mm Wheeler, which have esra- ped these young gentlemen's notice/* staid Mr. Weldoîi —** but 1 dorťt thi¿*k his «state» are in Cheshire, as I am a native of n 4 that
that county, and in habits of doing busi¬ ness for many of the great folks there; yet I never heard of the name of Eastwood ; and men of large landed property, and who keep their carriage and four, must be well known." " Jenny repeatedly told me his estates were in CheshLe, and Mrs. Patty has heard the same." *' Then he may probably have recently come into them; at all events, he may not be so rich as the Wheelers and their maid make him out to be; though he must be a man of some fortune, since I do not suppose old Wheeler could give his daugh¬ ter a fortune adequate to the settlement he has made upon her." * e Certainly not," said our hero. Kempthorne mentioned what they had in a manner offered him with Cary. " Aye, but they have done more for her now," said Mrs. Jones—*' your connection with Mr. Haslemere prevented them from boasting of so much as they would other¬ wise
wise have done: this I picked up front Cary, who makes no doubt you would have had her, could you have peeped behind the curtain; and, between ourselves, I have always suspected the Wheelers were much richer than they chose to acknow¬ ledge: therefore, they durst not let the world know from what source they have derived their money; for, according to Jenny's account, the old man has furnish¬ ed both houses, and Caroline has expend¬ ed a little fortune in cloaths: Mr. East¬ wood has presented her with some very elegant jewels, and has also been very ge¬ nerous to Jenny, who, in return, is very eloquent in his praise: as for me, I expect the bride will hardly condescend to notice me—nay, 1 much doubt whether I shall be ever again received in Marsham-street: however, please God, i will knock at the door to-morrow morning, as I am resolved not to balk my fancy; since, were I to stay away, they might imagine 1 thought them my superiors ; though, between our- » 5 selves^
selves, I should be almost better pleased were they to refuse me admittance, than to be doomed to listen to their vain boasting, and I know they will tempt me to affront them ; at all events, I am convinced they will induce me to resolve never to repeat my visits : if Eastwood is really what I have been told, he will very soon be completely ashamed of his bride ; and if the old woman cannot rule the roast in the Adelphi as she does in Aiarsham-street, they will soon be at * daggers drawn/ But now, to have done with the Wheelers, have you heard, Air. Yates-, how our old friend Air. Morton does ?—he is in St. James's- strect, I suppose ?" " unfortunately," said Kempthorne, " he has been confined at Islington with the gout ;. and as he never had so severe a ñt, he declares he will never leave London again«—It will be a charity to go and see him, my good Madam." " Oh, I proposed doing so ; however, I will first call upon the Wheelers, since, if I am
fam admitted, I shall amuse him with øn accoutit of my reception there; not that Ж shall· mention his name, as Mrs. Wheeler,. who is very superstitious* may attribute¬ his late severe seizure to a judgment uporr htm, for having broke with her and family;: and I could not bear to hear such a. sur¬ mise,, as he is a very good man> who, like- myself, has grown better since he has mix¬ ed-more with the world; and I feel so* much happier since I have turned over a new leaf, that, as I mean, to persevere, I am inclined to hope I shall be reckoned a good kind of an old woman about twenty years hence ;" then, looking at her watch, te Bless me, 'tis near nine o'clock; so I shall bid you all good-night,, as it is time- for invalids to be in bed, particularly after having just come off a long journey." Francis, assured her he was not sensible of ß-tigue, requesting she would stop sup» per with htm : but she declined his invitar üion, alledging having: drank tea. twice,. and that her coach was in. wasting, tbejte- n fr ibre¿.
fore, her regard for his health and her own pocket, warned her to be upon the move ; and, soon after eleven, his other friends departed, and he retired to sleep off* his fatigue, and found the beds in his new mansion very conducive to repose» and far preferable to those m Marsham-street, or at Moat House.
CHAP. ΙΠ. The next morning, before he had absolutely finished breakfast, not having risen very early/ Mr. Haslemere was announced, and shewn in* Francis decbred, he was ashamed of having been so* lazy, while the old gen¬ tleman assured him, he was still very unfa¬ shionable,
sh i on able, as it was not more than half past ten ; congratulating him upon his appear¬ ance, considering what he had so recently undergone ; telling him, that he had drop¬ ped in thus early, in hopes of catching him at home ; inviting him to dine with him the next day, at his villa upon the Forest ; adding, " You will merely meet some of my most intimate friends, and 1 propose keeping you all night, as there is no moon, and the evenings close in so early/' Francis readily accepted his polite invi¬ tation, and the old gentleman assured him, he rejoiced to hear he was upon the high road to matrimony, having heard a most excellent character of his intended bride, to whom he hoped to be introduced; when, having chatted away near an hour, he rose to depart, as he saw our hero's chariot was in waiting ; telling him, that he should send Kempthorne to breakfast with him the next morning, as he would accompany him down. Francis thanked him for this further proof of
of his kindness ; and having seen the old gentleman to hb carriage, stepped into his own, and was driven to Ely-place, having still much to settle with Mr. Weldon ; and in the evening, to his great joy, his Ala- jesty's licence for him to assume the name and arms of Freeman, was in the Gazette ; and he, in consequence, to his infinite satis¬ faction, dropped the name he had hitherto borne. Kempthorne breakfasted with him in the morning; and as he wished him to walk over the grounds of the villa, though, he agreed, it was a mere salt-box in compari¬ son to Moat House, and not near so plea¬ santly si f nateti as South Lodse, they left town at an early hour, and arrived, about one, upon the Forest, just as Mr. Hasle¬ mere had returned home from church, who readily accompanied them in their project¬ ed ramble, and was nappy to find Francis had a true relish for the beauties of nature; readily promising to visit Moat House du¬ ring the course of the summer. Five
Five other gentlemen joined them be¬ fore dinner—city merchants, who had houses in the vicinity, and who were very agreeable companions ; and, after a most excellent dinner, while the bottles were circulating very freely, one of the compa¬ ny, pulling a weekly paper out of his poc¬ ket, said, is 1 never read a more pompous account of a wedding-party—surely these Wheelers are your clerks, my good Sir?" looking at Mr. Ilaslemere. t! The father had been for years, but he has retired upon an annuity—the son still is, and he seems to have %vished to render himself the town-talk;," was the reply. *' Why certainly, considering his rank in life, he appears to have done things in style." " Or rather to have acted very absurd¬ ly," resumed Mr. Ilaslemere—" But, from what I understand, his sister has made a great match ; so some part of the folly may be placed to the score of the country 3 squire—
squire—and who has John married, Kemp¬ thorne ?" " A Aliss Atwood, Airs. Jones informed me and Mr, Freeman, Sir." " And is she reputed to be rich ?" * ( She seemed to say so, Sir; but she had derived her infonnation merely from her own servant, who retailed it second¬ hand from Mrs. Wheeler's ; therefore, it is not to be absolutely depended upon /'not choosing, of course, to inform the old gen¬ tleman when and where he had fit st seen the bride. *' But, is it likely Eastwood should be a man of any consequence or fortune," said Air. Haslemere, " since, independent of his wife's being lame, she is not by any means handsome, nor can she boast of her talents ? therefore, is it likely any man of sense should have made so absurd a choice, since I do not see what excuse he can al¬ ledge for having so strangely lowered him- aelf, admitting heis a man of family ?" « He
" He may be a fool," said one of the guests. * " Or he may have been led on to go such lengths," said another—" that' mar¬ riage alone could preserve the lady's repu¬ tation." Having debated this point some time longer, Mr. Haslemere said, looking at oni here, " I suppose you have heard what an excellent match my ward has lately made, as I know the Earl of Merioneth was at Car¬ berry Green at the time." €C I do not believe I mentioned the cir¬ cumstance in any of my letters," said Kempthorne, ee and I have seen so little of you since my return, I have never thought of it in your presence." " Nor did the Earl of course mention it to me," rejoined Francis, " though he did me the honour to walk over my grounds one morning, and to sit down for half an hour in my library ; still we are not upon sufficiently intimate terms fo have led to his talking of his family affairs ; and I pre¬ sume
sume the young lady you allude to, Sir, has married some relation of his." u You have guessed very right, as Miss Chedworth has bestowed herself and eighty thousand pounds upon Captain WiHough¬ by, the younger brother of the Countess of Merioneth, one of the most wild, dissi¬ pated, abandoned young rakes of the pre¬ sent age, who has long since run through the very handsome fortune his father, the late Viscount St. Yalerry, left him; but then he is in the Guards, and his red coat and fine figure captivated my infatuated ward, who, without deigning to consult either me or any other of her friends, has given him a legal right to squander away her fortune as he has done bis own, as there have been no settlements made upon her ; and I much doubt there ever being any arrangements entered into, even to secure her a maintenance, in case the dice take a run against her husband : however, I mean to apply to the Earl of Merioneth in her behalf, as I dare say he will endeavour to persuade-
persuade the Captain to make some provi¬ sion for her—You have seen Miss Cbeď- worth, or rather Mrs. WiHoughby, Free¬ man, as I know she declined going to a ball, that she might see and hear you at the Countess of Bayfield's, last winter." " She was pointed out to me on that evening, Sir; but I had a mere glimpse of her, therefore 1 positively should not know her again—I was assured that she was ex¬ tremely handsome, and very accomplish¬ ed." " And, had you also been told that she was both capricious and romantic to the most absurd degree, you would not have been misinformed : every celebrated male performer at either of the theatres, were sure to rank high İn her good graces—had she been poor, she would certainly have turned stroller ; as it was, she frequently joined in private theatricals; and as she was doatingly fond of music, and certainly a very good performer, she came home from
from the Countess's more than half in love with you, and, for a time, would only sing your songs, and made a point of attending the theatre whenever you performed ; and as her aunt, Mrs. Mortimer, had spoiled her, by the most absurd indulgence of all her whims and fancies, 'twas in vain for me to interpose—authority over her per¬ son I had none, and my being a citizen degraded me very much in her eyes, as she was convinced that I should wish her to marry for money, when she was resolved to marry for love." (< Let us hope, Sir, that her love for Captain WiHoughby will enable her to work a reform in his conduct," replied Francis— :e but pray, did you ever see a Miss Chetwynd at Mrs. Mortimer's, a pro- tegée of that lady and of Miss Chedworth, if I have been rightly informed ?" '* Never, to my recollection," was the reply— " nor did Mrs. Mortimer ever men¬ tion having a protegee of that name—she does
does not reside with the old lady, I am convinced, except indeed she is employed in a menial capacity." 4t I can't suppose she was ever considered in a lower light than that of a dependant, Sir—she resides with her aunt, a Mrs. Per¬ kins, but seems to look to Airs. Alortimer as her patroness." " Then Airs. Alortimer never chose to introduce her to me—you have seen her, 1 suppose?" £< Several times, Sir ;" candidly relating how their acquaintance had commenced« merely omitting having seen her in Mr. George Haslemere's curricle, and the anger he had felt upon that occasion ; concluding by describing her features and figure as ac¬ curately as words admitted. " My romantic ward, I am convinced !" hastily exclaimed the old gentleman ; and as instantly conscious of his indiscretion, he added, " I trust, my good friends, you will never mention what has escaped me, since, were her folly to reach Captain Wil- loughby's
loughby 's ears, it might induce him to treat her worse than I am persuaded he other* wise will do." Every one present promised secrecy, ob¬ serving, Mr, Haslemere might be mistaken in his conjectures. « I wish I could think so," was the reply ·— " but the name she assumed is alone proof positive—she is, besides, an excel¬ lent musician ; and as she was always ex¬ travagant in her encomiums of the divine Mr. Yates, it is very clear she wished to render him the hero of her romance^— What a prize you suffered to slip through your fingers, Freeman !—-indeed, I am fearful your insensibility has induced her to marry for spite, instead of love." Our hero, who had been extremely sur¬ prised by this explanation, made no doubt of the old gentleman's having formed a very accurate judgment of his ward's in¬ tentions, mentally asking her pardon for the injurious suspicions he had formeà up* on seeing her with Mr. George Haslemere, as
as he easily guessed that he had driven her home to Brompton, from his father's villa, on that memorable morning; and, more than ever, did he rejoice at not having previously made her an offer of his hand, which he made no doubt she would readilv have accepted, by way of winding up her novel in style, as he felt he should never have been happy with a woman of the cha¬ racter Mr. Haslemere described her to be : he, however, affected to differ in opinion from that gentleman, alledging, a wish to improve tinder his tuition seemed alone to have influenced her conduct towards him, presuming Captain Willonghby was a great amateur; adding, ς€ he was certainly pay¬ ing his court to her at the time Τ was teach¬ ing her, since ϊ recolleÖ*tfte Earl of Meri¬ oneth mentioning the cifeumstance at Lady Bayfield's one morning, and asking that Lady, whether Miss Chedworth was likely to work a reform in the Captain ?" (< I give you great credit for your inge¬ nious defeoce of the silly girl's conduct, Freeman ;
Freeman ; but, had you been less prudent, I dare say she would have borne your name instead of that of WiHoughby : for your sake, I am very glad you saw so little to admire in her~~for her own, I wished she had increased the sisterhood of old maids, before she had made so very absurd a choice. She is gone to spend the honey¬ moon at Brighton ; and I understand, from what George writes, they all mean to re¬ turn to town together. I am not sorry ihe Captain hasa sort of check over him, in the person of my son, who, though infinitely too fond of pleasure, considering his age, has renounced gaming, therefore may keep him from being much fleeced at Brighton." The gentlemen all said something in praise of Mr, Ilaslemere, jun. but his fa¬ ther merely shook**his head in reply ; and, soon after tea, all the company, our hero and Kempthorne excepted, took their lea**e; and as Mr. Haslemere was a great advocate for early hours, they retired soon after ι eleven ; and, after breakfasting toge¬ ther
ther the next morning, Mr. Haslemere and Kempthorne set out for London together, our hero having resolved, by way of avoid¬ ing the stones, to take the other road, and to call upon Mr. Moreton at Islington, whom he found still confined to his couch» but extremely happy to see him, and very pressing for him to stay dinner with him ; vowing he was fearful he should die of cn~ nui, if the gout granted him a fresh lease. Francis was very sorry he could not oblige him, being already engaged to dine with Mr. Weldon ; but he readilv promised to wait upon him the next day, hoping to see hím very soon in Devonshire-place. Mr. Moretón readily promised it shouî I be his first visit, reverting to the recent weddings in the Wheeler family, protect¬ ing he had never been more astonished, nor more amused, than by Mrs. Jones's account of them ; observing, it was fortu¬ nate he had broken with the family in time. else he should, in a manner, ha\e Moud pledged to have made both parties а \чч1- vot. iv. г €? : |1А .
ding-present; but wlmt he should have thought handsome, they would, doubtless, now consider as unworthy their accep¬ tance, therefore he should not run the risk of alľronting them. Our hero applauded the notion, and, be¬ ing sufficiently dressed for a morning, after consulting his coachman, who affirmed it would not be too much for the horses, he proceeded to Brompton, wishing to pay due respect to the Countess of Bayfield, who had returned thither, he understood, about ten days before, and who received him in the politest manner, and as her equal. Signor M ------wis seated at the organ, and appeared by no means sorry at having rei mpbced him ; when, having heard his former pepi Is sing a very celebiated quatuor, aud bestowed due applause upon their performance, he took a po'ite leave of the party, her Ladyship assuring him that she looked forward with impatience to being introduced to Mrs. Freeman ; add¬ ing, in a gay tone, " the Earl of Merio¬ neth
tıetîı lias let me into aH your secrets ; and, I must say, you earned the pme, since no peitr chevalier could have evinced greater intrepidity tn the cause of the fuir sei»/* Our hero assured her he was very much f lauered to find she thought him descnittg of Mrs. Archer, making his parting bow- very much pleased with the reception he had met with, and her Ladyship's expressed wishes that he would repeat his visits, not that he felt at all inclined to m\% much in the great vorld, and Mrs. Archer was still more averse, he knew» to appearing con¬ spicuous in the circle of fashion ; and he was too wetl aware of the inferiority of his birth, to wish to be indebted merely to his fortune for being suiľered to associate with his superiors, and had, besides, resolved to reside chief ! v in the count rv : he Itad in* tended to have called upon Mr?. Perkins when he waited upon the Countess, but the recent discovery induced him to alfer his intention, out of delit асу ta Mr». Wtf- loughby, ehe he was rather anxious to v - У know
"know how that lady would herself account for having made him her dupe ; and how came ľvírs. Perkins and Mrs. Hunter to join in the league ? Tbat she had fancied her¬ self in love with him, he readily supposed; still her folly might have been attended with very unpleasant circumstances, had he not been more discreet than she had any right to expect. Such were his re/lections during his drive home, where he had scarcely arrived ere Mrs. Hunter, who had learned from the footman where he had been, came into the parlour with a bason of warm jelly, which she requested him to take, as she wished him to be quite stout before he married. Francis laughed at her grave face, rea¬ dily taking her prescription, which she hoping to hear praised, remained in the room while he was eating it, as, like Mrs. Wheeler, she fancied herself a veçy supe¬ rior cook and conîeciıoner. " You have been to Brompton, Sir, William has been telling me, and I am very happy
happy to hear you did not take the trou¬ ble of calling at Mrs. Perkins's, as 1 find her niece has had the good fortune to meet with a very eligible situation: she called upon mc in Mandıatn-sîreet, to tell me so, and to express bctľi ber and her niece's gratitude for your kindness towards them ; but, upon my honour, both her visit and message, in my late hurry and bustle, had escaped my memory, till your having been to Brompton reminded me of my omis¬ sion." Francis had been stedfastly regarding the old woman while she was speaking, and had mentally pronounced her innocent of any knowledge of the late deception ; therefore said in reply—" Mrs. Perkins and the young lady are very little my debtors, and I should ver) readily have renewed my visits and my instructions, had Miss Chet¬ wynd been in need of my assistance; but, though I acquit you of having wished to deceive me, Mrs. Hunter, I am very well е 3 cominceá
convinced that, like myself, you have been the dupe of your friend." ** Bless me. Str. what can you mean?— Л*> I hope to bc saved, I know of no de¬ ception—Do, pray, Sir, explain, that 1 may clea'emy character." ° Your character has not suffered in mv estimation, my old friend ; though I re¬ peat, Mrs. Perkins has imposed upon us both, and so 1 wo u Ы have yott tell her, since, depend upon it, her countenance will convince you of the truth of my asser¬ tions, as strongly as your's convinces of your innocence." ' " Well, thank God, Sir, you acquit me of being concerned in her deceptions; and, please the Lord, I will walk over to Brompton before I sleep— 'Tis well you are going out to dinner, for 1 am sare I should have spoiled every thing, for the want of knowing what 1 was about." * f Nay, na} f , Hunter, you consider the matter in too serious a light—I am not even
even offended with Mrs. Perkins, m pray do not give her to understand so ; simply tell her, that Miss Chelwynd might have commanded my bebt services without hav¬ in«; recourse to anv disguise, and let me know what she says in reply ; as I tell you in confidence, mind, that yoixxxg lady was not her niece." tf Well, in whom тгу one place confi¬ dence now~a~days?" replied the house¬ keeper—* * However, depend upon my con¬ forming in every respect to your orders." " I shall be obliged by your so doing ; so now let me tell you, your jelly was very good ;** not that he thought it to be com¬ pared to those made ať South Lodge, but he wbhed to please the old woman, who withdrew both gratified and perplexed, and our hero went into his dressing-room to adorn for his dinner-visit ; and not choos¬ ing to take his carriage out again, fancy¬ ing, besides, a walk would do hîin good, he proceeded on foot to Mr. Weldon 's, f € when».
when, in passing a large stove-grate manu¬ factory in Ilolborn, not many hundred \ards from Ely-place, the master of which bad put in all the grates, kitchen-range, tVc. in Dcvonshirc -Ыасе, bei пя in the first line, ;uk1 also a dealer in plated and japan¬ ned goods, he called in, the back ofa very handsome half-reguter stove, in his back parlour, having flown a short time previous to his taking possession of the house, and Air. Weldon had agreed with this man to put in another ; and as our hero wished to have it done as soon as possible, he seized the opportunity to remind him of the cir¬ cumstance. Upon enquiring for Air. О ------ , he was shewn into the counting-house, the shop¬ man saying, " Air. Freeman, of Devon¬ shire-place, Sir," which induced a gentle¬ man with whom Air. О ------- w T as engaged, and who was examining a variety of very expensive plated and japan goods, to look at him rather stedfastly, while the polite tradesman
tradesman requested he would take a seat— he would attend to him in a very few mi¬ nutes. The stranger, who had the appearance of a man of fashion, bowed very politely, and then continued to cheapen some of the ar¬ ticles, which he pronounced to be exor¬ bitantly dear, desiring Mr. О ------ would recollect he meant to pay ready money, who assured him, in return, that that had induced him to ask the very lowest price, expatiating upon the excellency of the- workmanship, Sec, The stranger, indirectly addressing our hero, observed how very expensive it was furnishing a large house in the present fa¬ shion, since he supposed he had put in every requisite, and yet found he was in want of a few trifling articles, which would cost him more than fifty pounds. Mr. О ------, who had been making out the bill, now presented it to him. " Why, is it possible í —seventy pounds nine shillings!—Well, I should have thought e 5 luJf
half the money would ha%*e purchased a!M wanted ; but, as I am assured all these ar¬ ticles are absolutely required, why there is no help for it : however, I shall not pay the odd shilßngs." Mr. О ------agreed to wave his claims to those, and having once more called over his purchases, from a written list he had iri his hand, he took a very polite leave, de¬ siring the goods might be sent in that even¬ ing, or the next morning at farthest, with the bill ; and having seen this gentleman to the door, Mr. О ------ returned to our hero, telling him that he had a grate iu hand, which he hoped to send in before the end of the week,; hoping he should have the honour of serving him with any other article in his- line that he might want, as¬ suring him that his goods were all town- made, and that he was particularly reason¬ able in his charges ; instancing many of the articles then lvinsr before him. for which some men in the trade charged much higher ; adding, *' the gentleman who has 3 boud.t
Bought them is furnishing a very hand¬ some house, upon the Terrace in Ле Adet- phi—his name is Eastwood. I should have put in his grates, but, to oblige his father- in-law, he employed his ironmonger, who is renowned for the extravagance of his charges, which induced him to purchase what more was wanted of me, to whom he was recommended by one of my beet cus¬ tomers." Francis made no remarks, though con* vinced this was the very man who had so lately married Caroline W*heeler; and could not help fancying there must be some won¬ derful defect in his optics, to have render¬ ed him blind to her glaring defects, as his appearance was very much in his favour, and what little he did say, convinced- him* he was no fool ; wondering how Caroline would have looked, had she accompanied" her lord and master, whose looking so hard at him was perfectly accounted for. This rencontre having rather detained him, Mr, Weldon accused him of having *" 6 made.
made it late, blaming him for having walk¬ ed such a distance—he would have sent his carriage for him, had he supposed he would have been so indulgent to his own horses. Francis assured him the walk had given him an appetite, mentioning where he had been, and whom he had seen, giving Mr. Weldon his opinion of the bridegroom. " Well, like you, I can only suppose him an absolute Myops," replied the soli¬ citor— " however, I am resolved to be more au fait respecting him, if, as report says, his estates are in Cheshire : according to your account, he is not quite such a rustic as our poor friend Freeman, nor does he resemble the late Squire. Melvin ; however, you may depend upon hearing the result of my enquiries." Francis felt very little interested in the matter, and, after dinner, they proceeded tj discuss matters of much more impor¬ tance to his future happiness; though, much as the solicitor was attached, by vari¬ ous tie?, to Mis, Archer, he would not suf¬ fer
fer her generous admirer to follow the dic¬ tates of his own heart in the provision he made for her, declaring, that a woman who was not satisfied with three thousand a-year jointure, would find ten times that sum in¬ adequate to her wants; and as they had both agreed to leave the settlements en¬ tirely to him, he was suffered to have his .own way; and, after drinking his tea in Ely-place, Francis returned home to supper. Mrs. Hunter, who was all impatience to give in her report, followed him into the parlour; and no sooner was she alone with him, than she exclaimed, "Well, Sir, thank God I have not had my walk for my pains —no, no, murder will out, sooner or later; however, I assure you, Sir, poor Mrs. Per¬ kins meant well, and was absolutely drawn in by the young lady to tell me and you such a pack of lies; for she readily ac¬ knowledged having deceived both you and me, though she had hoped, as matterò have turned out, that you wOiild never have dis¬ covered how she had taken you in : how¬ ever,
ever, she is grieved enough to think she ever had any hand in the business, as, like me, she cannot believe that a woman can be in love with two gentlemen at the same time; though she makes no doubt Mbis married forpure spite and vexation, so cut off her nose to be revenged of her face— f suppose you know that her real name was Chedworth, and that she has married some rakish young fellow, who .will soon make her repent of her folly." " I am afraid that may be the case, Hun¬ ter, as î know Miss Chedworth has married Captain W r illoughby-—I hope for love. Be that as it ¿nay, I must request you would never mention my having visited her un¬ der a feigned name, to any one but Mrs. Perkins, as I particularly wish to have her folly consigned to oblivion, since it might be attended with very serious consequen¬ ces, were it to reach the Captain's ears." ' ( I am well convinced it might, Sir; for if I am to put any faith in what Mrs. Per¬ kins says, Miss Chcdworlh was dying in love
love for you : she saw and heard you at Lady Bayfield's last winter, and came home resolved to marry you, declaring to Airs. Perkins, that she should break her heart if you did not return her passion, and all such nonsense. Afrs. Perkins protests she en¬ deavoured to reason her out of her foolish notions, and actually did make her tear and burn several letters, which she had written you under feigned names: however, I should never have done, if I was to repeat all the follies she was guilty of; but, at last, she contrived the plan of having you to teach her music ; and for fear she should be guilty of some greater extravagance, as she was like a mad thing, Airs. Perkins con¬ nived at her folly, and led me into deceiv¬ ing you with a fine rigmarole tale of Aliss's invention : my poor friend thought you might be a gainer in the end* as she fan¬ cied you would have been a very happy couple, God help her î as I told her, I ne- лег knew any good come of such clandes¬ tine proceedings; besides a pretty wife this
this skittish love-sick Miss would have made you !—I should never have forgiven my¬ self, I vow to God, if her plan had succeed¬ ed, rich as she is; for it seems, if you had not had more discretion and modesty than she was blessed with, you must have seen that she wanted a husband more than a mu¬ sic-master : however, bless God, you were blind to her charms, which quite provoked Miss, who fancied that, had you known she was an heiress, you would soon have been at her feet, but vou had steeled vour heart against her charms—such was her vain speech, because you fancied she was poor : this piqued her to the life, as she wished to be loved for her beauty ; and, had her fine plan succeeded, she had a very agree¬ able surprise in store for you, as she sup¬ posed : but I had not patience to listen to half the follies she cither has or would have committed, since, thank God, you disappointed her views—Lord I should have gone crazy to have had such a mistress." Our hero laughed at the ludicrous ex¬ pression
pression of her countenance, assuring her he was very happy so romantic a lady had not fallen to his share ; though, so far from being angry with her friend, he was con¬ vinced she intended to have done him a great service ; and when Mrs. Hunter re¬ tired to prepare supper, he could not help reflecting how exactly her story tallied with the suspicions and opinion Mr. Hasle- mere had formed of his ward ; and as he certainly had felt a degree of preference for her, prior to his meeting her with Mr. George Ilaslemere, he sincerely hoped that she might be able to work a reform in her dissipated husband, as she was certainly both handsome and accomplished, there¬ fore might wean him from his bad habits.
(TAP
_5-
CHAP. IV. fm next day, according to promise, oar hero drove to Islington, and as he knew Mr. Moretón did not like being alone, he went early, but found Mrs. Jones, who had been invited f о meet him, had preceded him thither ; and she had succeeded in rais¬ ing the invalid's spirits, though, as she ob¬ served, this fit had so pulled him down, ibe was fearful they im^t defer their nuptials till spring ; enquiring whether Mrs. Archer had yet fixed the happy day, as she was all impatience to wish our hero joy ? He repeated his promise of giving her due notice, and Mr. Moretón protested, thai,
that if he lived and did well, he would give their joint friends a handsome dinner upon the very day ; and he would drink health and happiness to him, even if propped up in bed to do so, though he began to hope he should soon be able to remove into town ; adding, he had been very unfortu¬ nate in being deprived of both his and Mrs. Jones's society, when he stood so much in need of company ; declaring, that if it had not been for Air. Kempthorne, and more particularly Mr. Kalkreuth, he was convinced he should have died; but the former had looked in upon him as of¬ ten as he could, and the latter had spent a few hours with him most days, always read¬ ing the daily paper to him ; and as he fre- , quently picked up amusing anecdotes, his company was particularly agreeable to him; and he greatly regretted when he was obliged to attend his duty at the the¬ atre, though he only joined the band dur¬ ing the representation of musical pieces, and Air. Freeman's secession had given his friend
friend more frequent holidays than ever; observing, that he was grown very fond of listening to the hautboy, upon which he certainly excelled; declaring, he should never be able to reward him for having so greatly contributed to his amusement: he was, besides, so handy in a sick room, as he made nothing of taking him in his arms and carrying him from his bed to the sofa, and back again when he was tired, and with as much ease as he could have carried a child of six months old : however, he did hope, after a time, to prevail upon him to become his constant companion, that is, to accept of a bed under the same roof with him in town ; yet it was so delicate a sub¬ ject to touch upon, that hitherto he had been afraid to broach it during their téte-ã- tetes, for he should never be dull with such a friend for an inmate; of course, he meant to exonerate him from the charge of housekeeping, since, like Mrs. Jones, he had no one to save for. Our hero highly approved of the notion, as
as they must both be gainers were the ar¬ rangement carried into effect, oficriiig fo sound his friend upon the subject, whom he knew had little but his mu&ical talents to depend upon ; but they would always insure him a decent competency ; and he had received an excellent education, and possessed a very good understanding, and vas certainly a most droll, pleasant com¬ panion. Now our hero had had it in contempla¬ tion to put his German friend in a way to increase his fortune, as a few hundreds, properly applied, would, he knew, be well bestowed ; but if he agreed to Mr. Afore- Con's wishes, he was convinced that that gentleman would provide for him hand¬ somely in his will, which might, in the end, prove still more beneficial than were he now to go into any line of business; and, at all events, he would lead a very pleasant life with the old man, who parti¬ cularly expatiated upon his being a match for him at chess. Airs.
Airs. Jones thought Mr. Kalkreuth would be very much his, own enemy, if he re¬ fused such an oflfer ; and, before any oxxe could reply, the German made his appear¬ ance, when she exclaimed, " We were just talking of you, Mr. Kalkreuth—you know the regard I bear my gouty old friend here." (s I believe the regard is reciprocal," was the reply. ŕí 1 am well assured of that, or I should not think of putting my happiness in his keeping ; but as 1 know his spirits often flag for the want of company, and as de¬ licacy forbids my visiting him so often as I could wish, as I neither choose to set the world a bad example, nor to expose my¬ self to scandal, I must request that you would indulge him so far as to accept of an apartment in St. James's-street, as he dares not, poor dear soul, make the pro¬ posal to you, though he promises you shall be as much as ever your own master; but as I think contributing to my old friend's amusement
amusement will be at least as profitable an employment as you could devise for your leisure hours, why I feel very anxious, for both your sakes, to see you so eligibly ■settled; as you beat him at chess I find, tell an excellent story, and are the best reader of a newspaper he ever heard ; so do not bareak his and my heart, by a refusal to accede to his proposal." Kalkreuth took all the rattling old wo¬ man said as a joke, till she vowed she was in earnest, calling upon our hero to vouch for the truth of her assertion ; and Mr. Moretón joined so strenuously in her en¬ treaties, that, half jeu half earnest, every thing was at last finally settled to his en¬ tire satisfaction, Mrs. Jones taking no srr.all merit to herself for having thus speedily brought matters tt> bear. The entrance of Kempthorne changed the conversation to the news of the day ; the Lord Mavor havin s receh ed a note from one of the Secretaries of State, a few hours before, which led to a discussion upon
upon politics, till they were summoned to dinner; after which Kalkreuth asked the old lady, whetlïer she had paid the Whee¬ ler family the promised visit ? t( Indeed I have, but I had resolved not to open my budget till the company were all assembled, as the best told tale loses terribly in a repetition: however, on Sa¬ turday morning, as I had decided, I walked into Aiarsham-street, and, rather contrary to mv expectation, I was immediately ad¬ mitted, though the old people being alone, accounted for their condescension, as there was a marked difference in my present and the reception I formerly used to meet with, as Airs. Wheeler, who w T as seated in her large arm-chair opposite her husband, ne¬ ver rose upon my entrance, contenting herself with saying, ' How are you, Mrs. Jones ?—when did you return to town ?* The old man said he was glad to see me, and I attended to him without replying to his more stately wife, who drew up her head, stroked down her apron, and seemed vastly
vastly inclined to have told me to pay more respect to my superiors; but, taking no. notice of her swelling and bridling, í con¬ gratulated them upon the recent marriages which had taken place in the family, hop¬ ing their children would be happy in their respective choices. The old man was obliged to me for my kind wishes, and his better half saw no reason to doubt their being so, since their son had made a very good match, and Caroline, God bless her, had married a prince of a man, who could vie with the first people in the land in point of family and fortune, though no man was more free from pride than Mr. Eastwood ; and as my daughter/ she went on, f will have no objection to receiving your con¬ gratulations upon the occasion, if you wish it, Mrs. Jones, I will introduce you to her and Mr. Eastwood this afternoon, as I know they will be alone, as these are too early clays for them to receive visitors of rank and fashion ; but, going with me, you will certainly be admitted, though Mrs. vol. iv. f Eastwood
Eastwood will henceforth move in a very' different circle to what she has hitherto done, and many of her former friends must content themselves with meeting her now and then at my house.' Now, do not you give me great credit fdr my patience?" cried Mrs. Jones, looking round her. They all declared, they thought she had displayed great forbearance. ft Why, having been aware of the recep¬ tron I was likely to receive, I had made up my mind to bear and forbear, for the sake of hearing and seeing all I could, there¬ fore affected to agree perfectly with Mrs. Wheeler, expressing my fears that, should Γ avail myself of her kind offer, Mr. East¬ wood might feel offended, since I had cer¬ tainly never moved in the circle of fashion. Mrsí Wheeler, resolving to convince me that she was a privileged person, declared, she would not take a denial, as she wished me to see how magnificently they were lodged^ presuming that I had heard they inhabited one of the largest houses upon the
the Terrace iri the Adélpfiî. í told her Γ had beétt só informed; and as she made a point of it, I would do myself f he honour óf accompanying her, wishing time had beert allowed me to have* purchased a new" gown, as I should be shocked to death were my appearance to disgrace her. She was unconscious of my irony, assuring me, that my age rendered dréss a very second¬ ary object ; she, tò be sure; must, in fu¬ ture, pay more regard*tb her appearance, but 1 had not the same reasons for reform¬ ing my wardrobe : and thus did 1 keep up' the farce for an hour or more, listening to" her boasts of Mr. Eastwood s greatness, ge¬ nerosity, &c; till I was glad to get away, my head being quite confused with heť pompous details respecting her son-in-law, who has such power at Court. John will soon, she hopes, be Prime Minister ; but this I recollect was told me in confidence, so pray, Mr. Kempthorne, do not take any notice of what has escaped me, only do not be surprised if your clerk should soon f £ inform
inform you that he is appointed to a more lucrative situation than the one he now holds. Resolving, however, to keep up the farce, I adorned in my best bib and tucker, and, at six o'clock, I sent for a hackney-coach, in which I drove to Mrs. Wheeler's; for, as I had resolved this* should be the last visit I ever paid either niother or daughter, I was willing to break with them in style ; and though I certainly had been led to suppose the house in the Adelphi was magnificently fined up, I was positively astonished at the expence Mr. Eastwood has been at ; but I ought first to have told you, that Mrs. Wheeler was adorn¬ ed in a new brown satin, wrapped in a real Indian shawl, a present of her son-in-law's. So, now to return to the Adelphi : the happy couple were alone in the grand drawing-room, and, to do the man jtbiice, he looks the gentleman, and was very po¬ lite; as for the bride, she was so loaded with finery, that I perceived she was re¬ solved to dazzle me, though she did not give
give herself quite so many airs as her mo¬ ther still did, who proposed, as it was not yet a fashionable tea hour, we should walk over the house—the very thing I wished to do, and I knew their vanity was highly gratified, while the bride, with an assumed air of indifference, paraded from one room to another, pointing out whatever she was afraid had escaped my notice, and I cer¬ tainly admired the furniture in general; and I dare say she spoke the truth, when she said that the upholsterer's bill alone would amount to two thousand pounds; and the plate, linen, and china, to as much more, as the tea equipage is the richest I ever saw—tea-pot, coffee, and water-urn, silver, with every appendage ; and the side¬ board groans under the waiters, salvers, cups, castors, silver forks, spoons, and a variety of other articles it would be too tedious to enumerate ; all my surprise was, that a man, who could afford to fit up a house in so splendid a style, should have married such an ignorant, hopping crea- F 3 ture,
ture, whose good qualities I have never yet discovered, and whose temper is the exact counterpart of her mother's ; and never did I see two women more put of their place than in. this superb house. More than once, I protest, Mr, Eastwood had some difficulty to look serious, particularly when Mrs. Wheeler, by correcting her daugh¬ ter's blunders, exposed her to more gene¬ ral notice ; therefore, фе mişt seems tp be yljing from before his eyes, though, in his place, I should be mojre tempted fo cry than laugh at my folly ; ai?4 as *<> г & е footman, I fully expected he would have laughed out while waiting at tea. They mean to hire a vast many more servants, I understand, as their establishment dpes not at present accord with thpir house. But, sooii after tea, Цг, and Mrs. John Wheeler made their appearance, and I had to wish tl>em joy, and sp forth. The bride îiıad seen twice before, once in this very room, you may remember, Mr. Moretón ; and as she did not seem so much alarmed ín the Adelphi,
Adelphi, I thought she -would have done the honours of such a house far better than Cary ever will. John was, however, upon his best behaviour, and his wife gave me a very polite invitation to Kelson Terrace. ' Aye, you must come and see us, Mrs. Jones,' said John, with a consequential air, which induced me to resolve never to put his hospitality to the test : I therefore ob¬ served, that as the winter was setting in, í must beg leave to decline profiting by their invitation till spring. John was very well satisfied with my determination, ask¬ ing me if ever I had seen a house so mag¬ nificently furnished as Mr. Eastwood's ?~ ' Why yes,' I replied, ' I was in one yes¬ terday, in Devonshire-place, which 1 made no doubt had been ñtted up at even a greater expence/ instancing various articles of luxury which I had not remarked in the Adelphi ; adding, * Mr. Freeman bought the house very lately, and took the forniture, which was all put in new last year, at a fair f 4 valuation/
valuation/ They affected not to know what Mr. Freeman I meant, but I soon ex¬ plained to their satisfaction ; and John ask¬ ed how Frank was ? adding, f what ! you visit him still—but I have heard he is go¬ ing to be married/—* That is as much as to say that I must cease my visits when he al¬ ters his condition/ John protested I wil¬ fully misunderstood him ; and, in return, I assured him that I had been as cordially re¬ ceived in Devonshire-place the preceding evening, as 1 had ever been in Marsham- street, even before Mr. Corfe's death. Mrs. Wheeler felt the tacit reproach ; but, not to tire your patience, gentlemen, suffice it to say, that I supped, by the express invi¬ tation of the master of the house, in the Adelphi, who had the farther politeness to send me and his mother-in-law home in his carriage ; and thus has ended my connec¬ tion with the Wheeler family, who were by no means pleasant acquaintance while they fancied me their equal, but who would be
be insupportable, now they fancy Mr. East· wood's folly has given them a licence to look down upon me." The gentlemen highly commended her resolution, since none but very abject minds could court such people in prospe¬ rity. " Since John Wheeler is so soon to be in the Ministry," said Kempthorne, ** 1 no longer wonder at his wishing to affront me, as he may fear I should be tempted to ap¬ ply to him when he is in power, and he is resolved, like his sister, to break with all his less fortunate acquaintance—friends he never can have any. Yesterday morning he resumed his station in the counting- house, which, all things considered, was a great condescension : he brought with him two small paper parcels, ont of which he carried into Mr. Haslcmere s study, hoping he would do him the honour ro accept a piece of bride-cake, adding, that it was of his mothers making, of course, su pere x- cellent; and when he returned to his desk, r 5 the
the moment my back was turned, he di¬ vided the other slice between his fellow- clerks, giving them to understand why he had not chosen to give it them while I was present, as he was resolved that I should not have a morsel. Now, as they have not taken the same inveterate dislike to me, as they even fancy me a tolerably good mean¬ ing man, ever ready to serve any of them to the best of my abilities, they did not applaud his spirited resolution, thinking that mere policy would have induced him to have paid me so very trifling a compli¬ ment—but then they were not aware that he has a friend at Court : however, when I again joined them, Mr. Haslemere's old fat spaniel waddled into the counting-house after me, as she frequently does, as I stand very high in her good graces, when Nor¬ ton, winking at his companions, began to feed the old dog with his bride-cake, who has still a very sweet tooth ; and from one she was enticed to the other, till she had eaten up every morsel. I was at a loss to 4r guess
guess what they were at, though 1 saw John was bursting with rage ; and when he went home to dinner, 1 was informed why they had been so bountiful to Chloe." The party were highly amused by this anecdote, and Mrs. Jones observed, that they had evaded sending her any bride¬ cake, under the plea of her being from home : and she had been presented with some in the Adelphi, and had watched her opportunity to slip a small piece she had taken off the plate into her pocket, for her little William, which was a fresh proof of the regard she felt for the child ; and, after tea, she insisted upon returning home—it was lull time fot her admirer to retire ; and, contrary to the old gentleman's in- treaties, not wishing to fatigue him, they all took their leave. A hackney-coach had been procured for Mrs. Jones, into which Francis was handing her, when they heard % iolent screams at no great distance. "What is that?" he cried. r 6 ° Some
" Some drunken man beating his wife," replied Mrs. Jones, ivhen the screams were repeated— " There," said the old woman, taking her seat, " God bless you ! good¬ night—I-know you are fearful there should be murder, so run and part them, and let mc see you the first moment you can spare." i( I will look in upon you to-morrow, if nothing intervenes to oblige me to bend my steps another way;" and as she had previously given her coachman his orders, the moment he drove from the door, Fran¬ cis ran down the road followed by his friends, and perceived a crowd beginning to assemble, as the screams were more piercing than ever; and some one called to the coachman who was driving Mrs. Jones, who merely replied that he was hired, rather mending than slackening his pace : the turnpike-gate was within a cou¬ ple of hundred yards, and just as the friends reached the crowd, the man who had hailed the coach pursued it thither : it was, how¬ ever,
ever, too dark for them to distinguish more than the outlines of his figure; however, by the side of a house, they distinguished an elegant female, apparently supported bv two others. i( What is the matter?" enquired our hero. " Oh, Sir," replied a young girl, about fifteen, " she is dying—I am sure she will die—the cold has seized her stomach—she said it would—What must I do ?" " Only have patience," said her assis¬ tant— w the gentleman, you know, has run after the coach." Meanwhile the people of the house, having opened their door, kindly desired the sufferer might be brought into their parlour. Without any farther ceremony, our hero seized her in his arms, and bore her into the room : she screamed most vio¬ lently while he was so doing, and the by¬ standers declared she went out of one fit into another, some saying she was in bys¬ terics«
terics, others in convulsions; but, what witfc the crowd, and there being only one can¬ dle, and the lady's veil being down, her now sole supporter could not distinguish her features, while he endeavoured to keep her upright in her chair. A, medical man, who chanced to live very near, having been summoned by somev of the idlers, joined the party in the par¬ lour almost immediately, and began feel¬ ing the invalid's pulse. Francis asked him if he belonged to the lady? Before he could reply, who should force their way through the crowd, exclaiming, " Where is she ?" but John Wheeler. The astonishment of the friends can bet¬ ter be imagined" than described, and the appearance of Kempthorne, and the see¬ ing his wife supported by the man of all others he disliked, robbed the bridegroom of his small remains of colour. *' Whv mirclv/' exclaimed Kalkreuth, when
when the apothecary raised the invalid's veil, r ûs Mrs. Smith—I mean Mis. Whee* 1er." The name of Smith appeared to reani¬ mate the fainting fair one, as she almost immediately opened her eyes. (t My love/' cried John, " how do yott find yourself?—Sure she is in no danger," looking at the Doctor, as the crowd styled the gentleman who was now supporting her, who requested he would not be alarm¬ ed, the lady seemed likely to do very well, enquiring in what it was supposed her fits originated ? *' The cold seized her, Sir," exclaimed Miss Вечег, who had before addressed our hero (and who had come upon a visit to Nelson Terrace the day before)—■** at the moment she alighted, she said it would, but Mr. Wheeler would not believe her, as he said it was not five minutes walk, if we cut across, to Ì -slson Tenace, and we should be at home before the coach could drive round." "Well,
rf Well, I hope the lady will recover the use of her legs ere long," resumed the apothecary, with a look that left no doubt upon the mind of the by-standers respect¬ ing the nature of the lady's illness. John did not, however, attend td what was passing round him, merely telling his bride, that, could he have supposed she would have been such a sufferer from the cold, he would not have alighted at the turnpike-gate for a thousand pounds ; but he had been fortunate enough to overtake a coach, in which there was only one of their most particular friends, and when she was able to move, he would support her to the vehicle: and as our hero no longer felt any concern for the supposed invalid, he stepped out to congratulate Mrs. Jones upon her good fortune. " For God's sake," she replied, " let me see you in the morning, for I shall be up¬ on the fidgets till we -can compare notes, as against my will I shall now be obliged to visit Nelson Terrace." The
The approach of the tender couple in¬ duced our hero to retreat from the vehicle, while Kempthorne, having entered into conversation with the medical practitioner, learned that the lady had merely shammed a fit, to punish her husband for having obliged her to alight ; and Kalkreuth, hav¬ ing laid hold of Miss Bever, asked her very seriously, if Mr. Wheeler had not brought on his wife's complaint ? " That he had, by his mean wish to save eighteen^pence, though Mrs. Wheeler had told him, it might cost him a pound ; and certainly she was taken very bad, as you saw/* This passed in a sort of whisper, as he saw the young lady to the coach ; when, having handed her in, and taken a second leave of Mrs. Jones, they drove oft and the three friends returned to Mr. More- ton's, to amuse him with an account of their unexpected rencontre ; and they spent nearly half an hour with the old gentle¬ man, laughing over poor John's first at¬ tempt
tempt at economy in the married state, which had certam ly turned out very con¬ trary to his expectations. After taking a second leav^ of the old gentleman, they debated several minutes upon the pavement, as to the probability of Mrs. Smith having been portioned off by Mr. George Haslemere. Kempthorne was well convinced, that that gentleman was by no means partial to John. " That may be," replied Francis— " but has he taken him in to marry his mistress, or has he candidly told him upon what terms they were, and silenced his scruples by the dint of gold ?" " God only knows," resumed Kemp¬ thorne— (i Nelson Terrace líes in the direct road from Baker-street to Austin Friars, and he will always know when John is safe." Kalkreuth thought such an arrangement might eventually prove a saving. They however separated, unable to de¬ cide
eide whether John was most to be pitied or blamed; and as it was past ten, they each set out for their respective homes; and as our hero did not meet Mrs. Jones in her coach before he reached the Angel, where he turned off the contrary way, he made ßo doubt that she had been prevailed upon to alight, and probably to stop sup¬ per ; and as he was very curious to learn how John bore his brides tacit complaints of hţş avarice, having breakfasted rather early, and not having аду engagement be* fore twelve, he left home on foot, mean¬ ing to call upon the old woman before he went to his other appointment, when, re¬ collecting the child she had so recently adopted, he went into a toy-shop to make a few purchases for him ; and as he had ever gratefully remembered Mrs. Jones's generosity towards him when she thought him in need of her bounty, he resolved to return the compliment to her protegee: and happening to have a tolerable sum about him, having, among other things, purchased
purchased a set of nine-pins, he wrapped each of them in a ten pound note, and the ball in one of ñheen, which, considering his fortune, he considered no more than an equivalent for the ten pounds she had expended on his benefit night. Airs. Jones was surprised to see him so early, though she guessed, she said, she was in part indebted to his curiosity, re¬ questing he would take a seat— " But what in the name of fortune have you got there ?" alluding to the large brown-paper parcel he held in his hand. " A few play-things for your little boy —where is he ?" Before the old woman could inform him, the maid, who had been out for something, led him in, and he struck our hero, as be¬ ing a very fine little fellow of his age, and remarkably neat ; and so strongly did he remind him of his own dependent situa¬ tion at the same age, that he privately re¬ solved, if he turned out well, to prove himself his friend--—" Come here, my fine fellow,"
fellow/' he exclaimed— t( will you have some play-things ?" " If you please," said the child, his eyes sparkling with joy, while the old lady call¬ ed him a good boy for minding what she said to him, as he must always speak pret¬ tily if he wished to be loved, protesting that she should be extremely grieved now to part with him. ts I rejoice to hear you say so," replied Francis, " as I feel particularly interested in his welfare, there seems such a similarity between my former situation and his—may he prove equally fortunate !" "And only half as good," warmly ex¬ claimed the old woman, *' and then I am sure he will be the comfort of my declin¬ ing years." " I am ready to prophecy that he will do you credit," rejoined our hero, presenting him with a very smart carved horse, bridled and saddled, with which he ran in extacies to his aunt ; a handsome waggon and a troop of volunteers were next displayed ; and
and finally the box of nine-pitis, which Francis desired him to carry to htë good aunt, who would lay those by till he was a little older ; and as she \<as to the full as eager as the child to see what it contairicd, wondering how he could have laid out so much rttoney upon the urchin, and more than all, at his having troubled himself to bring them home, she began to unwrap the nine-pins, and absolutely started when she discovered that she held a bank-note— " Merciful Heavens ! what have the peo¬ ple been about ? why they------" Iler visitor's countenance betrayed the secret, and she proceeded to unfold them all, then said, et Pray, is this the use you make of bank-paper ?" <f Whr. t better use could I make of it, than to bestow it upon those who are more in need of it than I am ? I meant that trifle for this child, though I know he will want for nothing while with you ; but, should you article him at a proper age, to learn some liberal profession, that sum may suf¬ fice
fice for that purpose, and you shall never be required to curtail your own comforts to contribute to hh advancement, if you will but allow me to share in your chari¬ table intentions." " Well, God will reward you," cried the old woman— " I can only promise to ren¬ der him deserving of your future notice." " Then let us, for the present, drop all thoughts of the future," cried our hero, " as I am very anxious to hear what passed after we separated last night, and I have not more than halfan hour to spare/* • f I am sorry for that, though half that* time is sufficient to devote to the Whee¬ lers^—but, would you believe it ! I did not get home till past twelve." " Why, they made quite a rake of you." '* As you shall hear—Von may recollect* I thought the screams arose from some drunken fellow being-beating hie wife, and I let down the glass as I drove past the crowd, to hear what Was going forward, when, who should pursue me, calling out to
to ту coachman, and who actually seized the coach-doòr, as if to impede his pro¬ gress, but John Wheeler, imploring the company within to take compassion on his dear wife, who was positively dying with the cramp in her stomach, and it would not detain them a quarter of an hour to go round and set her down. Though I thought I knew' his voice, I had my doubts whether I ought to accede to his request, till he told me he lived upon Nelson Ter¬ race. Convinced now that it was the bride¬ groom, and no footpad, I pulled the check-string, and he was no less surprised upon finding whom he had been address¬ ing: he, however, repeated his dismal tale; and as I feared, if his wife died, he would not survive her, I ordered my coachman fo turn about. You rather suspected, I be¬ lieve, last night, the lady was not in any great danger, and I give you my honour it was all a take-in, as the foolish toad had not art enough to keep up the farce for a sufficient length of time, as she could even laugh
laugh before we reached home. John however either was, or affected to be her dupe, and I suffered htm to remain in his error; and I fancy this will cure him of taking his wife out to tea, as she cannot walk from the turnpike to Nelson Terrace. Be that as it may, they pressed me so much, that I alighted; and I must say, their cot¬ tage, as the bride called if, is both ele¬ gantly and expensively furnished, as I walked all over İt, and then partook of a piece of cold boiled beef and the remains of a plumb-pie—rather early, I thought, for salt meat, till I was told it had been laid in by the mother, who had what she stiled properly furnished the house: they were very thankful for the favour I had done them, and, to do the bride justice, she gave her husband to understand he ought to pay the coach. John affected to understand her, and when he saw me to my vehicle, after hoping I would repeat my visit, he did ask the man what his fare was from the turnpike and back ? I bid the vol. iv. g fellow
fellow drive on, and, by so doing, I thought I amply repaid them formy frugal supper; and not even stumbling upon the new-, married lady.again in a fit, shall induce me to renew my visits upon Nelson Ter¬ race, since, though she is a Ûxxe, handsome, shewy young woman, there is a degree of levity in her behaviour, in addition to her duplicity, which does not meet my appro¬ bation, and if she does not- make John's» heart ache, I shall wonder." Our hero affected to laugh at her prog¬ nostics, and took his Jeave, after request¬ ing she would dine with him in Devonshire- place the next Sunday, as he hoped to leave London during the course of the ensuing •week. She readily accepted the invitation, and they separated better friends than ever.
CHAP.
CHAP. V. The following day he dined by invitation in Austin Friars, with Air. Haslemere and Kempthorne ; fìve o'clock was the appoint¬ ed hour, and at the moment his carriage drew up, John Wheeler w T as descending the steps ; and as Francis was looking out, he met his eyes full upon him, and the im¬ pudent fellow remained stationary for a few seconds to have his stare out, and then stalked off without touching his hat, ap¬ pearing to wish to convince both master and servants, that he held the former in the most sovereign contempt. Francis fully returned the compliment ; g *J and
and his ironical smiles and avowed superi¬ ority were far more galling to John than his insolence had been to hini, since he felt far more inclined to laugh than to rc- sentlns impotent attempt to provoke him. Air. Haslemere and Kempthorne hap¬ pened to be at the drawing-room window, and having seen John turn down the Friars at the moment our hero was alighting, the latter asked him in a gay tone, how the bridegroom looked ? as he presumed this was their first meeting since he had caught him supporting his wife. " I had positively forgotten the circum¬ stance, having attributed his insolent de¬ meanour to the dislike, not to say hatred, he ever did and ever will bear me," telling the gentlemen how evidently he had en¬ deavoured to affront and provoke him; adding, " I am inclined to think he is aware how cordially I despise him, which has long been his best security/' " I remarked he never touched his hat," said Air. Haslemere, " insolent puppy !" * f Jealousy,
" Jealousy, Sir, is now added to envy," resumed Kempthorne. " That may be, but he shall not much longer display his airs and vile temper in my house—my friends shall not be ex¬ posed to the insults of my inferior clerks; and, of late, the fellow can hardly be com¬ monly civil to me, and is downright impu¬ dent to you, Kempthorne, not to mention his impertinent treatment of Norton and the rest of them." (i Recollect, my dear Sir. he is brother- in-law to Mr. Eastwood, the rich country squire," resumed Kempthorne. " Then let his brother-in-law support him in his insolence, and provide for his wants, for I am resolved to dismiss him at Christmas; and perhaps, what with his wife's, fortune, and what his father may have done for him, he may be able to set up gentleman." As neither of the young men wished either to become his advocates, or to in¬ crease Mr. Haslemere's dislike of him, they g 3 endeavoured
endeavoured to change the conversation, and nothing of moment occurred during the three following days. Our hero found full employment in superintending and or¬ dering the few alterations his present house required, and in making a few additional purchases, though he did not suppose his wife would choose to come to London till near the bírth-da ν ; not that he had any intention of appearing at Court on that or any other day, and by that time he was assured that a new landau, which he had bespoke, would be in readiness; and he proposed purchasing three other coach- horses, respecting which he had already consulted with Mr. Haslemere's liveryman; and the old gentleman had advised, when he understood what a large quantify of píate he had inherited from both Mr. Corfe and Mr, Freeman, his having it rendered rather more fashionable and useful than it was at present ; and it had, in consequence, been all sent to his silver-smiths, who had taken a part in exchange for what our hero immediately
immediately required, and who had pro¬ mised that every thing else that he had be¬ spoke should be ready by new year's day ; a single servant out of liver}', who was to act as butler and valet, was the only addi¬ tion he chose at present to make to his establishment : still he found full emplo} T - ment for »his days, and his evenings he de¬ voted to the society of his friends. As the weather was very mild for the season, he engaged Mr. Aioreton to dine with him on the Sunday, promising to send his carriage . for him, which alone would have sufficed to insure the old gentleman's compliance ; and on the Saturday evening, Kempthorne having dined in Devonshire-place, he pro¬ posed their walking down to Airs. Jones's, to remind her of her engagement for the next day, as he was very anxious to see her little William. Francis made no objection, and both made some purchases, going along, for the . child, who recollected our hero the mo- G 4 ment
ment he saw him, and ran to meet him, asking him, in a whisper, what he had got ¡n that paper ?—it was a very smart turban- hat : the one he had seen him in having appeared rather - shabby, he had privately measured his head, and had adorned him in his recent purchase before the old lady came bustling into the parlour, to whom the child immediately ran, exclaiming, *' Look at me, mamma !" holding up a toy in each hand, which Kempthorne had given him. u Upon my word, these gentlemen will spoil you—how shall I ever make them amends ?" " I did say, thank you, Sir," replied William, " and that nice gentleman, who brought me the horse and cart before, said I was a good boy." " You already rival me in his regard, Mr. Freeman, as you have been the con¬ stant theme of his prattle, and not a day has elapsed without his asking when you would
would come again ?—but I hope you will do me the favour to drink your tea with me." " We came on purpose," replied our hero. t£ Then I am the more obliged to you ; so do tell me whether you have seen any thing of the Wheelers since I last saw you?" Francis related when and where John and he had last met. " 1 am very happy you did not knock him down, as you must have paid for breaking his sapskull; but, had you not been going to be married, I could have given you a hint how you might have been revenged of him, as, while his deary was shewing me the house, she observed that Mr. Freeman was one of, the finest young men she had ever seen, and appeared no less amiable than he was handsome ; and as an appropriate bigh concluded the pa¬ negyric, 1 dare say she hoped I would in- G 5 form
form you how high you stood in her good graces ; therefore, I think I may venture to prognosticate she will make her deary's heart ache, though heavy damages might console him for doubling Cape Horn.** The young inen laughed very heartily at her apropos conclusion, Kempthorne ob¬ serving, that fiad hé been equally noticed by the fair lady, he could not pretend to say what might have occurred ; as it was, he believed he must have recourse to his fist to settle her impudent husband, even at the risk of being prosecuted for an as¬ sault. * I believe I did not tell you," look- iüg atPrancis, "how insolently he treated me this very inornmg. Having neglected doing something which ought to have been done, Γ ventured tò tell him, that he had been very inattentive of late; s If* you don't like it, lump it/ was the polite retort, * for I care neither for you nor tny paltry situation here.' (i I replied with great coolness, that it was
was perhaps fortunate I thought him be¬ neath my notice, though I should report him to Mr. Haslemere. * You may kiss my -—/- " The appropriate gesture was a proper conclusion to this fresh insolence, though what you had told me, Mrs. Jones, per¬ fectly accounted for this daring violation of even common decency, as I am well convinced that John Wheeler durst not thus have set even Mr. Haslemere at defi¬ ance, if he was not certain of being very soon promoted to a much more lucrative situation, since it is not in his principles to .throw himself wantonly out of bread, except indeed his wife's fortune is much larger than we supposed." " Dame Fortune can be very capricious sometimes," replied Mrs. Jones—■** but I must see John Wheeler installed in a place under Government, before ϊ shall credit he will be appointed to fill one, though rogues and fools are both sometimes al¬ lowed to prosper." c G The
The entrance of the maid with the fea*- cquipage broke in upon their discourse*, and as the old woman, with justice, piqued herself upon making a good cup of tea^ the yonng men vowed it was a treat ; and after spending a couple of hours with her, they walked back iato Devonshire-place, where Kempthorne had agreed to sup and sleep ; and as he had to go home in the morning to dress, he went thither in his friend's carriage, as he was to call for Mr. Moretón when he returned to dinner; and never had the poor old man, who was much better, been more flattered* Air. Weldon, who was also of the din¬ ner party, as well as Kalkreuth and Mrs. Jones, said, that he had written into Che¬ shire, as he was extremely anxious to know a little more respecting Mr. Eastwood, who, it appeared, had completely turned the heads of the Wheeler family. " 1 had the honour of seeing his lady at Bt. Alargareťs this morning," said Afrs. Jones—" she entered dressed in a rich pur¬ ple
pie velvet pelisse, hat and white feathers to match, white muff and tippet, just as the clergyman was beginning the first les¬ son, followed by Mr. and Mrs. John Whee¬ ler, and the footman, carrying the prayer- boob, bringing up lhe rear. For half a minute or more, the most profound si¬ lence ensued ; even the reverend gentle¬ man in the reading-desk made a long pause, so much was every one struck with this shewy party, as Mrs. John Wheeler was dressed exactly in the same style, only her pelisse and hat were ruby colour. It was soon whispered who they were, and, for a time, they were more regarded than the clergyman ; and, to judge from their looks, their vanity was amply gratified, as they evidently only came to be »tared at." " But was not Mr. Eastwood of the par¬ ly ?" demanded our hero. « No—which was certainly a proof ei¬ ther of his good sense, or that he is com¬ pletely ashamed of his bride. As for John, he strutted and swelled, and looked just like
like a trussed pigeon : however, they suc¬ ceeded in exciting general notice, and a fine crowd were assembled to see them step into the new coach that was in waiting ; and as I was among the gapers, they did each honour me with a slight inclination of the head, but we did not exchange a word ; and, from the way they went, I ra¬ ther suppose they dine in Marsham-street ; and their entrance so distracted my atten¬ tion, that I might as well have staid at home, so little was I the better for the ser¬ mon." " Then, suppose you join лпе in a piece of sacred music," replied our hero-;—" I have purchased a new instrument, which was placed in the back drawing-room only last night, and I wish to judge whether 'm tone sounds as weil there as it dia in Cle¬ menti** warehouse." " Pray, come along," cried the old lady, in a gay îone< —" I have not made a trial of my powers for some time." Mr. W 7 eldon ventured to remind bib host of
of his physician's advice, thoixgh he did not conceive there required the same exertions to sing sacred music; still he hoped he would be cautious, though he could not have proposed any thing more agreeable to him, who had never vet heard him eí- ther in public or private. t( Then you must not form yonr judg¬ ment from the attempt 1 am going f о make," replied Francis, taking his seat the moment Mrs. Jones, who had seized a pair of lights, had placed them upon a very handsome grand piano, which he meant fo send down to Moat House. Having de¬ lighted his auditors with a very fine volun¬ tary of his own composition, he ventbred to raise his voice, having selected one of Handel's finest efforts, and found, to his great joy, as he was fully conscious of *he superiority of his talents, that he rouM, had he chosen, have again a*.tonbhed ťie public; though he by no means exerted himself in the present instance, wishing to reserve his grand trial of strength for the car 5
ear of Mrs. Archer ; still he enchanted his auditors with his dulcet melodious tones, though he did not venture upon any of the difficulties of his favourite science. " There," said Mrs. Jones, when he ceased, " do not we sing something like, though 'tis wrong to praise oneself?" while Mr. Weldon declared, he never before had been so attuned to harmony—" Mrs. Archer never yet heard you—if* she ever had, and had known you were engaged to any other woman, I think she would not have thank¬ ed you for having saved her life ; as it is, I rejoice that she has still such an exquisite treat in store." Mrs. Jones protested she longed to sec Mrs. Freeman, to whom she hoped some morning to be introduced, as she felt that she should be as much out of her place among that lady's friends, as Caroline East¬ wood is in her fine house. Francis assured her, that Mrs. Archer would be happy to see any friend of his at any hour, and in any company, as merit aud
and good sense were by no means exclu¬ sively monopolized by the circle of fa¬ shion. They all agreedto the justice of the re¬ mark; but as Mr. Moretón appeared to grow languid, and our hero was fearful he might have a relapse of his complaint, about nine o'clock he sent him home in his carriage; Kempthorne accompanied him, as he wished to retire early, having a great deal of business upon his hands for the next day ; reminding our hero, that he was to be in Austin Friars, by appoint¬ ment, on the Tuesday morning. Mrs. Jones and the other gentlemen supped with Francis, Kalkreuth takin«; imon him to see the lady safe home ; and on the Monday, our hero drove to Mr. Hasle¬ mere's jewellers, as he wished f о make Mrs. Archer a few presents of value previ¬ ous to their nuptials. This he had told the old gentleman, whose maternal uncle having been in the wholesale jewellery line, he fancied himself a great judge of such
such baubles, and desired to see his selec¬ tion before he compleated his purchase, which he told the jeweller, offering to leave any deposit he might think equal to the value of the articles he fixed upon, and appointing him to be at Mr. Haslemere's by twelve the next day, when he would compleat his purchase. By that time, he should have several more fashionable combs and broaches rea¬ dy, he replied, but absolutely refused re¬ ceiving any deposit-money—he was the friend of Mr. Haslemere, that was a suffi¬ cient security, pressing him to take a great¬ er variety to submit to the old gentleman's judgment and inspection, which he did the next morning, after breakfasting with him and Kempthorne ; after the latter had left them títe~à-téte, pointing out those he pre¬ ferred, which the old gentleman was exa¬ mining with his eye-glass, and poising in his hand, Kempthorne returned; and as he entered rather abruptly, but instant¬ ly recollecting himself, apologized for rushing
rushing in without previously knocking; adding, " I have positively been so strange¬ ly surprised, I absolutely forgot Mr. Free¬ man was with you, Sir, since John Whee¬ ler has this very moment been taken into custody by Шо of the Lord Mayor's offi¬ cers, for forgery, they say." " For forgery!" exclaimed the asto¬ nished Mr. Haslemere —" wh ν, with all hb failings, and they are certainly sufficiently numerous, I did not think that he would ever have endangered his neck—is he still below ?" " The officers have him in their grasp, Sir ; and you will be more surprised when I inform you, that Messrs. ■ ■ ..... ' and Co· our bankers, are his accusers." " Then I shall take the liberty of telling those gentlemen, whether they make gooå their charge or not, that I am by no means pleased with their behaviour: they had a right to have apprised me of their inten¬ tions, and to have consulted me as to the propriety of seizing him in my house— h it
it my name he has been forging, and to what amount ?" " I have scarcely exchanged three words with the officers, Sir; but, if! understand right, we are not concerned in the busi¬ ness." " Well, I should like to hear what he has to say for himself» so desire the men to accompany him hither." Kempthorne instantly left the room, and almost immediately returned, followed by the crest-fallen John and his two guards, who were close at his heels; and even our hero felt a degree of pity for the miserable wretch, whose legs trembled under him, and down whose pallid cheeks large drops of cold sweat quickly chased each other; indeed, had he been ascending the New Drop, instead of the stairs leading to his masters counting-house, he could not have appeared, nearer his last gasp. Hav¬ ing allowed him á short time to recover his breath and speech, the old gentleman said, in a mild and impressive tone, tc How is
îs all this, Mr. Wheeler ?*—what have you done to have exposed yourself to be thus seized ?—I am shocked to hear that you are accused of forgery." A violent flood of tears having rather relieved the wretched being, he declared he was as innocent as the child unborn of the charge which had been brought against him : he certainly had got a bill discounted for his brother-in-law the Thursday before, for four hundred and seventy-eight pounds nine shillings, which was drawn upon Messrs. Abchurch and Co. of Fenchurch- street, who had, as he supposed, accepted it ; calling upon his Maker to witness his protestations, that he did not know their acceptance had been forged, as the officers who had him in custody said was the case ; and if Messrs. --------- had not been as much deceived as he had been, they would not have discounted the bill. " But who was the drawer?" asked the old gentleman. " Mr. Wilton, the great Manchester warehouseman
Warehouseman in Bread-street, Cheapside, a particular friend of Mr. Eastwood's, who asked me to get it discounted for him, be¬ cause he was in want of ready money to pay for a variety of things, and I declare I carried the whole sum, as I received it, to my brother-in-law." ' c Though what you say may be very true, Mr. Wheeler, I am fearful your mere protestations of innocence will not induce even a magistrate to liberate you-—you must send for your broth er-în-law, since he led you into this dilemma." " He went out of town on Friday > Sir ; and, though he was to have been at home to dinner on Sunday, he was not returned this morning, as I called as I came by." * f So, so!" cried the old gentleman— " he received the money on Thursday, and it should appear, went off on Friday, well knowing what he had to fear." "Oh Lord, Siri 'tis a clear case," cried one of the officers— " and t'other chap will be á á^~- d fool if he ever does put himself within
within our reach, if so be thiV young man has spoken the truth, as he has slipped his own neck out of the noose, and tied it in a double knoť round his t however, don't be disheartened, my lad, some of the gang generally suffers, and the greatest rogues generally contrive to hang the netf begin¬ ners." Poor John actually put his hand up to his neckcloth, which very probably, at such a moment, felt unusually tight—but an* other flood of tears rather relieved him. " I see no alternative," resumed the old gentleman, " as matters stand, you must be taken before the Lord Mayor." " And won't you, as I am really inno¬ cent, bail mè, Sir?" whimpered out John. " Bail you !" repeated the old gentle¬ man-—** why, you are accused of felony, consequently, were I so inclined, I could not bail you—you must endeavour to prove your innocence upon your trial." The terrified wretch would have fallen all his length, had not the officers caught him,
him, and he remained insensible for seve¬ ral minutes; and when he did recover the use of his legs, he looked round him, as if to implore the mercy of every one pre¬ sent, being as abject in distress as he had been insolent in prosperity. Our hero, who felt much the most for him, was vet aware that he could not in- terfere with any hopes of success in his be¬ half; but advised him to bear his misfor¬ tunes like a man, promising to consult with some law friend respecting the best method of proving his innocence. Therefore, more dead than alive, he was dragged away to a place of confinement, previous to his being taken before the Lord Mayor ; and before the three gentle¬ men had exchanged a word, Mr. ------, the head partuer in the banking-house, and at whose suit John had been taken up, was announced. Cf I am very glad to see you, Sir/' said Mr. Haslemere, " as I do not feel myself at all obliged fo you, for having had a clerk
clerk of õurs seized in our countí&^-höttse, without having given us any previous 'm~ timation of your intentions." " I waited upon you to ^pologhie for what has occurred, genrlemen/ J looking at Air. Haslemere and Kempthorne, *' sinete it was by no means our intention that lír. Wheeler should have been seized in Ure manner he was.; but those officers are likt; blood-hounds when in pursuit of their prey : they were to have waited till ï had seen you, and concerted means for his be¬ ing privately secured, as we feel Warranted İn delivering him up to justice, since he is connected, nay, doubtless in a league with a gang of swindlers." " You both shi*c% and surprise me," was the reply—** f as yet, I am totally in the dark;" briefly repeating what John had said respecting the bill he had discounted. <s If he speaks truth, he may have 4ieen tbe dupe of this Eastwood," resmrred the banker—" still, there are at least presump¬ tive proofs of his being ân accomplice. voi,, iv. и By
By mere accident, one of our clerks, who is very intimate with Messrs, Abchurch's ledger-keeper, chanced to mention our having discounted a bill upon their house, while they were dining together on Satur¬ day, at an eating-house they use. The ledger-keeper asserted, they had no bill out of such a date for such a sum ; our clerk maintained they had ; and each wish¬ ing to prove the other in the wrong, they applied to Aír. Abchurch, junior, who, in consequence, immediately waited upon us, and assured us that the bill in question was a forgery, as he never had had any con¬ cerns with the drawer. Wishing, however, before we took out a warrant against Mr. Wheeler, to discover who were his accom¬ plices, as he told us he had discounted it for bis brother-in-law, Mr. Abchurch and ï went to a friend of his, a counsellor, who has chambers in the Adelphi, the corner of John-street ; having previously found that tbe drawer bad left town on Friday morn¬ ing, but was expected hosne, said his clerk, on
on Sunday. Mr. Dorford, the counsellor, was not acquainted with Mr. Eastwood, though he acknowledged he had.no great opinion of him, as he understood he was in habits of intimacy with an attorney of the name of Eggleton, a near neighbour of his, and one of the greatest scoundrels Ы existence ; though he had of late set up his carriage, and been living away at an amazing rate, giving dinners, balls, and SLppers, while it was well known he was ever head and ears in debt; yet he had drawn in some brokers to furnish his house very superbly within the last few months, and had so tied them down, that they could not come upon him for the money during the twelvemonth ; and before that time ex¬ pires, he will either be off or have a sale, to prevent the goods from being seized, says the counsellor, who had merely heard that Mr. Eastwood had very lately taken possession of one of the best houses npon the Terrace, having married a very rich woman ; and that he had set out in a still и 2 greater
greater style than his friend, and was re¬ ported to be a country gentleman of large property. To oblige Mr. Abchurch, lie Sei|t his footman to Mr. Eastwood's with his compliments, and if he was at home, he Would Wait upon him, having something of importance to communicate to him re¬ specting Mr. W r ilton, of Bread-street. The servant sotm returned with Mrs. Eastwood's Compliments, and that Mr. Eastwood ivas ont óf town, having gone into the country upon business with Mr. Eggleton the morn¬ ing before» but she expected him home to dinner the next day. - . ' Depend upon it, they are both O. B. G/ (off by God) said the counsellor, ' as they are, in my opinion, three rascally swind¬ ler«} who have been playing some despe¬ rate game : you may as well, however, re- inàíft quiet, gemlemen, till We see what tomorrow t,ro*dneee ; I will keep a look¬ out for you hem—a few shillings will tn- dttf*% šotne oî" the porters who lounge abotit tfie tfoott» of the horel, to watch both bouses ;
houses ; do you, meanwhile, make inqui¬ ries respecting those W'heelers (whc* art more or less connected with thfe pree i M Uit trio) in their neighbourhood/ ·' We did so, and learnt they were aU in town, and so we found was Mr. John- Sunday, little occurred, though it began to be suspected in the neighbourhood that the aftoťnev was off, and as Eastwood had gone with hŕm, it was not much expected that he would return; and on Monday morning the doors of both were beset by duns, bringing in bills or notes for pay¬ ment and acceptance. The Wbèelei*«, that is the old woman and Mr.. John, were" con¬ tinually backwards and forwards, always calling at Eggkímťs as they returned from the Terrace, till finally, between fìte and six, there was an execution put into both houses, by a Air.---------, a tavern-teepee in —_----, street, St. James's: this our spies soon learnt, and Air. Dorford was kind enough to proceed immediately to" hie bouse ; and, in reply to his enquiries, he h 3. informed
informed him, that he had been taken in to a very considerable amount by both the scoundrels, whom he had at last threat¬ ened into giving him bills of sale, as they had not, as they had faithfully promised, settled with him when Mr. Eastwood mar¬ ried ; and as he understood they were both missing, he lost no time in securing what he could, as he made no doixht that, had he allowed them time, the women would have secreted many things of value ; and as he seemed convinced that the Wheelers were in the league, Mr. Dorford hastened to me, and strongly advised my having Mr. John taken up; and if he has been the dupe of this roguish trio, he is much to be pitted—still he must stand his trial." " A glorious set, in good truth !" cried Mr. Haslemere— " The Wheelers must have been Eastwood's dupes, as they supposed him to be a man of great landed property in Cheshire ; indeed he has half turned their brains, as he was to have made the fooľs fortune, whom he has brought per¬ haps
haps to the gallows ;" repeating what he had learnt respecting the settlements, and the promises he had held out to John. Our hero observed, that the old people were easily duped by so designing a rascal, and John was still more liable to be im¬ posed upon ; hoping that this unpleasant affair might yet be settled, since it would probably be the death of the old man, were he to hear that his son was committed to Newgate for forgery. " We must let matters take their course, Sir," resumed the banker; so said Mr. Haslemere, observing, that though they might hope John was innocent, they had no right to pronounce him so ; and it be¬ hoved the commercial wodcLin general, to act up to the rigour of the law in cases of forgery. The bill was now produced^ and even Air. Abchurch had agreed that it was a very good imitation of his hand,, as it was. very plain and stifţ and John Wheeler's writing greatly resembled it ; but* «pon a 4 comparing
comparing the forged signature with his books, the turn of the letters did not tally, though he might, upon such an occasion, have varied? his usual· writing. The banker asked Mr. Haslemere, if he wished to accompany him before the Lord Mayor ? t( By no means—the poor wretch must be committed, and I do not wish to add to Ые humiliation by my presence^—you will let me know what passes." At that moment the jeweller, who had соше by appointment, was shewn in : he had learat in the counting-house what had just occurred, as he had asked to speak with Mr. John Wheeler when he first ar¬ rived, and now informed the gentlemen, that he had equally been the dnpe of John or his employers, as he had taken a note of him in payment for his sister's jewels, for two hundred and ninety pounds, though his bill only amounted to one hundred and sixty odd ; but he had given him a check upon his banker for the remaining sum,
and he had just discovered that both dwrwer and acceptor had absconded, at it was drawn by Mr. Eastwood upon Mr. .Wilton, of Bread-street, Cheapside; and he felt extremely inclined to pronounce John an accomplice in the swindling transaction, presuming that he meant also to have gone oiT, had he been allowed time. The banker therefore departeds less than ever inclined to shew John any lenity, who* was, of course, sent to Newgate, and the parties bound over to prosecute: and our hero, by way of deprecating the jeweller's, resentment, who was, if possible, more en¬ raged than the banker, laid out a couple* of hundred pounds more in jewels than he had intended, and thus, for the present,. succeeded in banishing his ill humour; and as the old gentleman was verv mudr afraid.- that his avowed wish to serve «Ae Wtföëlers. might lead him into difficulties, lie i neis ted upon his dining in Austin Friars : ffe k%ew. Mr. Weldon was to be i« Devonshire-place- at seven, and he would not suffer him. toi u 5 departí
depart before half-past six, and then not before he had promised not to interfere, in any respect, in the Wheelers' affairs, with¬ out first consulting with him, and then only through the medium of his solicitor.
CHAP. VL
Mr. Welbon had arrived a few minutes be¬ fore him, and hardly allowed our hero to ask him how he did, ere he exclaimed, *< There m no man of any fortune in Che¬ shire, of the name of Eastwood; therefore, take my word for it, he is not the person of consequence it is supposed." '\ He is a very great rogue," replied our hero,
hero, relating what he had Heard and wit¬ nessed that morning. <( Eggleton, of John-street, the Adel* phi!" repeated Mr. Weldon — " had I heard the name in time, I might have put those worthless Wheelers upon their guard; though they are very undeserving the no¬ tice or care of any one, still I should have made it a point of conscience to have told them my opinion of that disgrace to our profession ; and as he was Eastwoodfs faenó, I should not have scrupled to pro¬ nounce him, what he has turned out to be, a swindling rascal : a fine web of iniquity will be unravelled; if ever the creditors thoroughly investigate the matter; f№ Eggleton was no fool, and had he studied for the bar, instead of all the quirks and tricks of his profession, he might have been/ one of our first counsellors. As the Whee¬ lers' credit is good, I am convinced they have made pretty free with their- name ;. though they must have been wilfully blind ; for, had they made any enquiries in* the и 6 neighbourhood,.
neighbourhood, they must have learn f what a character he bore." While he was thus running on, they heard a carriage stop, and Mrs. Jones was announced. "Now we shall hear rather more about this strange business/' said our hero, " as I attribute this visit solely to the old lady*» wish to give me the earliest infonnation respecting the Wheelers." Having welcomed her very cordially, she expressed her joy at having found him at home, hoping he had not heard the news. tc What has happened?" asked our hero, requesting she would take a seat. ***Why, such a revolution has occurred in the Wheelers' bright prospects, that I begin to hope I may yet be received in Marşham-street, if not with a smile, at least with politeness, as you know I atn renown¬ ed for sympathizing with people in afflic¬ tion» «ince positively the bridegroom, the rich country squire, is missing—fact, I give you my honour, and I own I sincerely 3 pity
pity old Wheeler ; as for all the rest, they have merely met with their deserts, which we all do, sooner or later, even in this world, and it certainly has come home to that famiiv ; but your countenance informs me that you have already heard the rogues are ofľ."* Francis again related what he had been telling Mr. Weldon. " Well, I hope that wretched John will not be hanged," she replied, " much as 1 despise and dislike him ; though, had he been suffered to enjoy a long run of pros¬ perity, he would certainly have heen knock¬ ed on the head for his insolence: but, as matters stand, I trust he will be able to prove his innocence, for I dare swear he had no hand in the forgery." Both gentlemen were of the same opi¬ nion, and our hero enquired, whether old Wheeler was aware of his son's having been arrested ? [' You shall hear all I know respecting the business: having sent my maid out about
about four o'clock to make some purchases, she stopped so much longer than I had ex¬ pected, that I was fearful something had happened to the child, whom she had taken with her, and that she was afraid to return; in short, having lost all patience, I was go¬ ing in search of them, when she made her appearance. Perceiving that I was in no very good humour, she assured me that she had such a budget of news for me, she was sure, when I heard what she had got to say, I should excuse her having made it so late : and as the child was safe, I felt in¬ clined to listen to her tale; and she began by informing me, that Eastwood and Eggle¬ ton had absconded, it was supposed, and that poor old Wheeler is left answerable forali the debts of the former; and they, have, besides, defrauded Mrs. John Wheeler of all the money that was settled upon her. I interrupted her here, by observing that, could not be, as that money was in the stocks, I understood She however de¬ clared, that Mrs. Wheeler's Jenny told her. the
the two rogues have sold ît out, mid gone off with it ; nay, it is supposed that Mrs. John Wheeler is no great things, by her having been so intimate with this Eggleton, who has carried off all the title-deeds of her houses, in short, every thing he could lay his hands on; and his accomplice, East¬ wood, has made off with all he could ob¬ tain under any pretence ; and to mend the matter, she proceeded, Mr. John Wheeler is sent fo prison, and is supposed to be concerned in forgeries to the Lord knows what amount ; and the family in Marsham- street are all beside themselves, one rav¬ ing, another fainting, trades-people conti¬ nually knocking at the door, who want the old man to ghe them security for more than he is worth, he says, and, in return, they threaten him with a prison : the old woman is, meanwhile, accusing her daugh¬ ter-in-law of having brought them into all this trouble. However, admitting that Jenny rather exaggerated facts, the Whee¬ lers are not in a very enviable situation ; and
and as I suffered my usual tea*hour to pass- over while listening to Anne's prolix tale, 1 resolved to pay you a visit, wishing to let you know how matters stood with your old friends ; and, from what you heard and saw this morning, I fear old Wheeler will find himself İn a very disagreeable predica¬ ment/' " He is greatly to be pitied/' was the reply, " since I am sure he has been com¬ pletely the dupe of these designing rascals,. and I must see what can be done for him, poor cU soul." '* 1 <rive you due credit for your humane intentions, my young friend/* said Mr. Weldon—" but you must not, in this case, suffer vour benevolence to outstrip уоиг prudence, as there is no knowing to what extent this poor old man may have com¬ mitted himself: you would have deprived yourself even of necessaries, recollect, to provide for the deceased Mr, Freeman ; and had he been like this Eastwood, a de¬ signing sharper, your good nature would ha'.e^
have been strangely imposed upon; and xvere you to step forward in old Wheeler*» behalf, till you are more acquainted with the nature of the claims that are upon him, it would be the height .of imprudence; though, like you, I feet the sincerest com¬ miseration forhim, since, had he bee» able to have seen more into, matters at first, I much doubt his having suneral himself to be thus grossly duped ; but he has let him¬ self be governed by an overbearing old woman, and an insolent son, who was un¬ bearable during his short reign of prospe¬ rity ; and this may, should he be able to accommodate matters, prove a salutary, though a severe lesson. To oblige you, I will see what can be done for hirn ; though I make no doubt, as the rogues who have duped him have absconded* but the credi¬ tors will be clamorous, and may, to their own detriment, make bad worse : at all events, 1 make no doubt the old man must make over every thing to them, as I am convinced he is very deeply involved, and I would
1 would have you reflect, my good Sir, thai you will onh be .laughed at for paying the debts contracted by such a set of swin* diers : you have, besides, pledged yourself not to interfere in the business without consulting Air. Haslemere ; and I am sure his opinion upon the subject will coincide with mine, and he will readily join you in any plan to serve the old man, who can¬ not starve while he retains the hundred а -year that gentleman will doubtless conti¬ nue to allow him." " I shall certainly be wholly guided by his and your advice, my dear Sir," was the reply-—'*' I merely wish the poor old man to feel assured that he will not be suffered to want in his old age, though I fear such a shock will shorten his days." et That will be as Providence directs; but let us w r ait till we see what to-morrow produces—he may be able to settle every Jhing amicably with his creditors, and we might be deemed officious were we to in¬ terfere prematurely, as these scoundrels have
have so blinded the weak-brained set they have had to deal with, that they may still hope they will return, and prove them¬ selves men of character ; indeed, no peo¬ ple ever fell into a snare more wilfully, bince had (as in my opinion he was in duty bound) old Wheeler mentioned their bril¬ liant prospects to Aír, Haslemere, that gen¬ tleman would have put them upon their guard ; and had 1 been told that this East¬ wood was at all connected with Eggleton, I should not have scrupled to pronounce him either a swindler or a fool : as for John Wheeler, he has merely met with his de¬ serts, admitting he saves his neck." £i Yery true, Air. Weldon," resumed Afrs. Jones, "since, had any misfortune befallen Air. Freeman, he would have triumphed in his downfall : as for the old people, they have merely acted like fools ; I had said 1 would never visit them again, but such promises are not very binding, end I should not wish to appear to desert them in their misfortunes; I will therefore knock at
at their door to-morrow, and, should their creditors have been very merciless, they shall not want for a few pounds, as 1 have a trifle by me that I should not scruple ap¬ plying to the ше cf the old man/* tf You have other uses for your savings," said Francis— if but as 1 make no doubt of your being a welcome guest, be so oblig¬ ing, if yon can do it privately, to fell the old man that you have seen me since his son has been taken up, and that I intreat he will keep up his spirits, as he may rely upon my proving myself his friend, should he, as there is reason to fear, be obliged to give up his all to satisfy the demands of his creditors." ts I will certainly cheer him with your kind message, even if I request a títe-à- tite with the poor old soul ; but I am not sorry to hear the rattle of the tea-things, as I begin to feel myself faint for the want of my afternoon's refreshment." Merely general discourse passed while the servant remained in waiting, but the Wheelers
Wheelers afforded them such ample subject for conversation, that the old ladv readilv agreed to stay supper, as Mr. Weldon pro¬ mised to set her down ; and next morning, according to promise, Francis drove into Austin Friars, to learn whether any other bills had been put in circulation by the wretched John : he found Mr. Ilaslemere surrounded by all his tradespeople, each relating how they had been taken in by Mr. Eastwood, who had been recommend¬ ed in the strongest terms to them, by Mr. Airs, and Mr, John Wheeler ; and he had, besides, told them so very plausible a story, that they had all supposed him to be a man of large fori une. Mr. Harlemére was by no means sur¬ prised at their having become his dupes, advising them to endeavour to get back at least a part of what they had sent in ; the Wheelers must become answerable for the remainder, as far as their property would go. which it could not bc expected would suffice to liquidate all their claims—they must
must therefore make the best arrangement they could: the wine-merchant was the most furious—he had sent in wine and spi¬ rits to the amount of nearly six hundred pounds, which, he foresaw, the rascally ta¬ vern-keeper, who, he was persuaded, was an accomplice, would, in consequence of having put an execution in the house, ap¬ propriate to his own use : the silversmith had sent in plate to the amount of five hundred pounds, which had probably been all carried off. They however departed, resolving to act in concert, and to oblige the Wheelers to enter into some immedi¬ ate arrangement for the settlement of their claims. When alone with our hero, Mr. Hasle¬ mere perfectly exonerated old Wheeler from being at all concerned in these swin¬ dlers' depredations, though, like the wine- merchant, he strongly suspected the ta¬ vern-keeper was an accomplice. Our hero thought it very probable, but made no doubt that he had secured him¬ self
self from detection ; relating what Mrs. Jones had told hím and Mr. Weldon the overnight, and what that gentleman pro¬ posed doing. " Why, if he will interfere in the poor old dupe's behalf, I think we could not wish him to be in better hands—he may be able fo extricate hhn from the consequence of his own folly : let him give up every thing, as every honest man ought to do in a similar case, and then (as I know you must be a party concerned) we will see what can be done for the silly beings." Having spent the best part of the morn¬ ing with Mr. Haslemere, Francis returned home to dinner, resolving to call upon Mrs. Jones in the course of the evening ; and had scarcely reached home ere Kal¬ kreuth was announced, and readily agreed to enliven his solitary meal ; he was also full of the revolution which had taken place in the Wheeler family, the newspa¬ pers having informed him of John's having been sent to Newgate, &c. and he de¬ clared
clared that both him and Air. Moretón bad rejoiced instead of grieving for his misfor¬ tune, as the old man in particular had ne¬ ver forgiven his ungenerous treatment of our hero, nor his more recent affronts to himself; adding, that he had been very busily employed in getting his old friend's apartments in St. James's-street ready for his reception, and in removing his own wardrobe, &c. as he meant to sleep aťhis new quarters, where he would be much more conveniently lodged than he had been of late ; and felt happy in the certainty that he should greatly contribute to the poor old man's comforts by becoming his in¬ mate, as even the old housekeeper re¬ joiced at his having accepted the invita¬ tion. " That I can suppose," resumed our hero, "as you will spare her many steps: how¬ ever, should you not find things so plea¬ sant as you could wish, 'tis only, as you once intended, going into partnership in some music concern, as 1 hope you will freely
freely apply to me to advance what may be wanted upon such an occasion ; and now let's walk to Airs. Jones's, as f feel very anxious respecting old Wheeler." "The evening is so damp and foggy, that I advise our riding thither, since yow have rendered it to my interest to keep vou in good health." Francis readily acceded to his wishes, observing, he made no doubt of their find¬ ing the old lady at home, as he had told her the overnight, he would look in upon her during the evening; and, as he ex¬ pected, she was at home, and, as usual, very happy to see him, declaring that she had been half inclined to have spared him the trouble of coming to seek her, but had been restrained by her fears that his ser¬ vants should think she wished to supplant Airs. Archer; ** but sit down," she went on— ff I am but just come home myself, though I left orders to be sent for, in case you came during my absence ; as, when I heard my clock strike three, I was con- voL, iv, ι vinced
vinced I should not see you tili after you had dined, therefore away I posted to the Wheelers, as both mother and daughter were out when I called in the morning, and tbe old man was so surrounded by duns, it was impossible io speak a word to him : however, I spent three hours with them this afternoon, during which my feelings underwent a very severe shock." iC What fresh misfortune has befallen them ?" impatiently demanded our hero. " The poor old man is in confinement— he was dragged away while I was there, at the suit of a Mr. Clerk, Mr. Haslemere's wine-merchant, and he is now in a spung¬ ing-house in Cary-street, Lincoln's-inn- fields. Poor soul," she went on, the tears trickling down her cheeks, " I never was more shocked—he declared that he had been Eastwood's greatest dupe, and his piteous looks would have softened harder hearts than mine — the women's raving and crying did not affect me half so much ; indeed I wished they had been sent
sent to prison; instead of the poor «old in¬ valid ; yet I did my endeavour» to contóle them, though the old woman certainly led the prisoner inta dll his difficulties, as she formed tbe connections which have proved his ruin. They wished me to have stopped tea with thern« but as 1 was in hopes of enjoying your company, and thought be¬ sides, that, all things considered, it would be'a sort óf robbery, Γ took my leave of them, advising them to go ana see thft tlie old man had a few comforts about him ; but tKey are more inclined to attend to their own ease and convenience ťban to his, else one or other of them would have gone with tlie poor old creature but I see I have depressed yonr spirits, Mr. Free¬ man, therefore we will have tea immedi¬ ately, as that often raises mine." " I ehall hot object to your proposal, as Γ am resolved to pay the old man à viet this very evening." " I shall not dissuade you from doing such an act of charity, though I hope you ι ^ will
will enter into no engagements; if you are so good as io see him comfortably settled, and to provide for his immediate wants, that is all that he can require at present; not that I suppose he is in want of money, as I know he was in the habit of carrying a large sum about him, and the bailiffs dare not search him ; still I dare say he will deny himself even necessaries rather than spend any ; therefore, if you provide Ibr his comforts and convenience, while Mr. Weldon settles his affairs, 'tis more than he deserves at your hands; since, God forgive me if I suspect him wrongfully ! but I cannot help thinking he has much more to answer for upon your account than respecting the late transactions/' Francis was of the same opinion, but did not tell the old lady so; and soon after tea, he and Kalkreuth proceeded into Cary- street, and, upon enquiry, they were in¬ formed that Mr. Wheeler was there, who had, owing to his inability to ascend the stairs,
stairs, been accommodated with a small back-parlour, into which the master of thé house preceded the friends, «aying, as he opened the door, "Come, cheer up, my good Sir ! here are some of your friends come to see you." The poor old man, who sat at the corner of a table, near a bad fire, with his face concealed between his hands, scarcely moved; and when he did raise his head, upon being addressed in the most feeling terms by Francis, it was merely for a mo¬ ment, as, bursting into tears, he again placed his hands before his face. " The poor old gentleman is very low spirited," resumed the master of the house — " I was for having him take something comfortable, but he an't willing, though his age and infirmities all help to add to his distress ; but, as I tell him, 'tis no use grieving, now the mischief is done; he an't the first, by thousands, who have been taken in by such rogues as he has had to deal with, and as he was not their accorn- 13 plier.
pike, why, his innocence ought to console him under his misfortunes, to be sure." Kalkreuth broke in upon his discourse, by desiring he would bring in some bran¬ dy and water, as he knew the old man pre¬ ferred spirits, to wine : as for our hero, he was scarcely able to give an order ; indeed his whole attention was directed to „the wretched sufferer,. whom he endeavoured, in a tremulous voice, to cønsole,, by re- pcitrd ae«rrances that he should never want a. friend ;, but his kind speeches seem- ed J merely, to increase the old mşn 's agitar tion, who,. wringing his hands, at last ex- r A claimed, in a despairing accent, " Oh that J were worthy such a friend ! for who was ever equally kind to me ?" tr Hitherto I have barely done my duty towards, you," replied Francis, " and of late we have been totally estranged ; but, tne moment I heard of your situation, I hastened to assure you, that if any arrange¬ ment can 'be entered into with your credi¬ tors, your declining years shall not be em¬ bittered
birtered by'want—Mr. Weldotf shall wait lipon you to-morrow—you will'then be more competent to talk upon business, and what he says and advises will have due weight with your credrtors;" " Your kindness at such a moment," sobbed out the old man, f * is far inore cut¬ ting than your reproaches would have been 4 because I know I dd not deserve your pitý^ yet, I may say, little as I have had it in'my power to -display my regard for you, that you have ever been as dear to me as my own son ; and, had it pleased God to 1ìavé blessed him with your, prudence and with your disposition, I* might not have been here; but the divine vengeance seems to have overtaken me and all my family." Thus did the old man run on, sometifiies speaking aloud, and then muttering to him¬ self^ till both our hero and Kalkreuth be¬ gan to fear the shock had affected his brain: at last, however, the brandy and water was brought in, and Francis made him take a hearty draught, and then ob 1 4 served
served to the master of the house, that his friend was very badly accommodated. " The old gentleman desired a room up¬ on the ground-floor, Sir." <e But he has been accustomed to such a large and airy apartment, when compared to this," said Francis, " that I am fearful his health will suffer very materially, should he remain here during the few days he may be doomed to be your inmate." " My best rooms are unfortunately all engaged, Sir," was the reply—" though I do expect to have a very commodious apartment at liberty every minute, which is only on the other side of the passage —the bed-room communicates with it ; but ------" Our hero understood the but, and de¬ sired it might be allotted his friend. " Then I may venture to assure you, fir/' resumed the bailiff, " that there you will be quite at your ease, for there is a very comfortable large arm-chair, in which many a great man has passed the night : I will
will let you know the moment it is at li- bertv; I know the Colonel will.soon take his departure—his friends and the lawyers are now with him, putting the finishing- stroke to the business." No one enquired what Colonel was in confinement, or the more than half tipsy host would readily have resolved the ques¬ tion ; but having left the room, the old man, after taking another draught of the brandy and water, by degrees grew rather more composed, and would enter into a long detail respecting Eastwood and his son, who had acted entirely of his own head, as he had never even heard of the notes he had discounted; and Eastwood and his accomplice Eggleton had cheated him out of so much money, that all he had re¬ maining would be very insufficient to co¬ ver the demands he had made himself liable to pay. He had not concluded his woeful tale ere the landlord came in to inform them that the other apartment was at liberty, ι 5 whispering
whispering our herb that it was half-a- guinea a»day. ťí Very well," was the reply, putting two guineas into his hands— ff there is for four days, and, before the expiration of that time, I hope my friend will be at li¬ berty." The polite bailiff now led the way into a very good parlour, with which a very de¬ cent bed-room communicated, and the poor old man gladly took possession of the large arm-chair. Francis rejoiced to find his spirits were so much revived, and was talking of dis- jnissing his carriage and supping with the poor prisoner, when the bailiff ushered in Mrs. Wheeler, Mrs, Eastwood, and Mrs. John, Wheeler. '- Who could have thought of seeing you at this time of night ?" cried the old man, who seemed more vexed than pleased by their visit. The ladies, who had not expected to have found him in such company, not hav¬ ing
ing remarked the chariot in Waiting, hardly knew whether to advance or retreat; at, last, however, the old woman curtsied, and. her companions did the same ; the yonng gentlemen offered their chairs, but the old man requested they would keep their-seai& —his wife and daughter must now learn to wait upon themselves. ' c I bless God, Mr. Wheeler, I never wa^ above doing so/' replied the old woman, reaching a seat and placing it near her hi\s T band. Caroline followed her example ; but Mra, John Wheeler, with more .grace and sweet- ness than ought to have fallen to her share, accepted of Mr. Kalkreuth's proffered chair, when, having squeezed out a few tears, Mrs. Wheeler blessed God that her dear Thomas's friends had not all forsaken him. tf No," was the çeply-7" though the best of them lias been in a manner driven from my house, he has found ще out, now I am in distress, little a$ I deserve ¡щ notjee." Mrs. Wheeler,durst not notice this fc- 1 6 proach,
proach, but said, with a spiteful look, fully expressive of the malignancy of her dispo¬ sition, " You will need many powerful friendíá at the rate we are going on, Mr. Wheeler; for you had not left home a pri¬ soner more than an hour, before art execu¬ tion was put into our house by Allenby the silversmith, else we should have been here long ago. Mrs. Jones had but just left us, when three men burst in with Jenny, who had gone out for the cream for our tea ; so now we may with truth say, Ave have nei¬ ther of us a bed to lay our heads upon. You and John were in a mighty hurry to give up ever} r thing upon Nelson Terrace, to Oliver the upholsterer. I wonder whe¬ ther Mr. Eastwood would have been so ge¬ nerous." " Mr. Eastwood was a rogue," groaned out the old man, " and I wish to act like an honest-man—You may still sleep at ei¬ ther of the houses, or you may share my bed here f I only wish our son," be added> with a sigh, u was as well ofl) as he must be
be in stiH more need of consolation than t am, though God knows he does not want for company." Wishing himself away, yet »ot liking to make a hasty retreat, our hero said, he hoped their affairs would be setlVd, in some respects to their satisfaction, in the course of a few days, and that their sou would also, in due course of time, be libe¬ rated. " I have already spoken to Mr, Weldon respecting the business, and I am convinced that he will see you, Sir, as early as he can make it convenient to-morrow, to consult with you respecting the best mode of proceeding: you. had better en¬ deavour to ascertain to what claims you are liable, and how far you may be able to stem the torrent ; and then------ ." (( Ah, God in heaven bless you !" inter¬ rupted the old woman, her late woeful countenance now all animation—" that is speaking to the purpose—oh how that look reminded me of your dear mother Í"
CHAP.
ffSÜS
CHAP. VII. A GEKKRAL silence of neariv a minute en- sued—the old woman, who had endeavour¬ ed to cut her last word in two, appeared extremely confused, and every eye being upon her, did not increase her self-posses¬ sion. Caroline, forgetting her own situation, stretched out her neck, opened her mouth and eyes, and seemed all impatience to hear more, having long been vainly en¬ deavouring to discover her mother's avow^ ed secret. At last, as no one else seemed inclined to speak, our hero said, viifh as mxich indifference as he could assume, " I never
never before understood, Mrs. Wheeler, that my mother ranked among your favour¬ ites." At this very critical moment, to the old woman's great relief, there was a kind of bustle in the passage, near the room-door, which drew the attention of the whole party : the first words they heard distinctly were, " Oh, d — n your miserable dun¬ geons ! I am resolved to beat up my old quarters/* and in three seconds more their door was thrown open, with a degree of violence that made the ladies start from their seats, and a very fine-loo_mns youn"* fellow rushed into the room, evidently ' m contradiction to the master of the house, and two of his followers, who had been en¬ deavouring to persuade him to content himself with the room old Wheeler had so recently vacated : as he was evidently more than three parts tipsy, he was, of course, the less inclined to listen to reason. "I t#Id you, Captain," said the master 4 of
of the house, <f this apartment was en¬ gaged." " Leave me alone, and go about yonr business," was the reply— tf I perceive you did not deceive me, and I shall make my excuses for my intrusion, Mr. Bum, as it arose solely from my wish to be t rein¬ stated in my old quarters: let me see, I was confined here four days, about nine months ago—this time, I hope, I shall not remain your inmate more than half as many hours, which is л proof that I am in the high road to reformation." The ba'Hif continued, however, to ex- pcMtulate, till the Captain actually shoved him out of the room, saying, " D — mme if I will be thus tormented—if this apart¬ ment is engaged, it is none of yours, and I am to make my excuse to those in pos¬ session, not to you," approaching the company hat in hand, appearing proud of having proved victorious over the bailiff, while he declared that he ivas shocked at having
having thus intruded upon ladies and strangers ; adding, " may I hope —/* He paused, having caught sight of the profile of Mrs. John Wheeler, when, seizing her hand, and making her face about, he ex¬ claimed, in a transport of joy, " My little sparkler, how are you? Why, who the d-v-1 would have thought of meeting you here, of all places in the world ? Come, sit you down, Anna—what the deuce aila you ?— how you tremble 1—> what ! you think, because I have been nabbed, that I cannot assist you; but cheer up, my girli 'tis not for want of the cash that yon see me here—I have plenty of that ; but this is a d ------ d debt that had escaped my me¬ mory—so you may depend upon my giv¬ ing you a lift : How is old mother Bever f you are not here at her suit, I hope? but I am afraid you have sinned against her ex¬ cellent maxim, ' above forty shillings, and under ten pounds:' but you must and shall sit down—never mind these folks— you shall sit upon my knee." Mrs.
Mrs. Wheeler tried to disengage herself from his encircling arms, stammering out, "1 desire, Sir!" ** Well, I will gratify all your desires, my Anna, so let me know what will set you afloat again—I can spare you fifty in the morning, and I shan't mind now if I am obliged to spend the night here—But, have you lost your tongue ? why, it used to run fast enough at Knightsbridge." The surprise and consternation of the rest of thé party may be easier imagined than described. Our hero felt shocked at this fresh discovery of Mrs. John Wheeler's depravity, yet could hardly refrain from laughing, so ludicrous was the expression of Airs. Wheeler and Gary's countenance, and Kalkreuth Had still more difficulty to prefeerve his" gravity—the others were struck dumb with amazement. " Well," resumed the Captain, « as no one seems inclined either to pronounce my pardon or to resent my conduct, I pre¬ sume lam forgiven : here is one, nowever, among
among this queer group, who can smile at his misfortunes, as I have ever done; so give me your hand, ^ny fine, fellow ; no friendships are so lasting, 'tis $aid, as those formed in adversity." Our hero, to whom he addressed him¬ self, took the proffered hand with a good- humoured smile, say ingi, " { wish, for your sake, Sir, our acquaintance had been form* ed under happiçr ?uspices, ¿» bam merely a visitor here." " Well, I am glad to hear уои^аге noè in durance vile/* glancing his-eyes at Ле con¬ fused Mis. John Wheeler—" perhaps she drew yon hither-r-she isa d - ■ ■ d ilice girl* and if I could have prevented it, she should not have been: driven to her shifts, a* I fear she has been oflate." . " That lady is a visitor here, like myself Sir," was the reply,, giving him a look meant to put him more npon his guard. " I rejoice to hear it—what î Ле came to see old Dame Fussock in the corner, I suppose^— h the old woman in for any large sum*
sum?-—she seems too meanly dressed for the trade/' Mis. Wheeler, whose passion had been tolerably roused before, exclaimed, " You scandalous wretch I" The person she addressed merely laugh¬ ed, and again turning to our hero, said^ " I fancy I do not see very clear this even¬ ing, else I should be tempted to believe 1 have met you before, though I cannot recollect where/* ** I am not -surprised át my features be¬ ing familiar to you, Sir, since I very lately bore the name of Yates, which I have rer cently exchanged for that of Freeman." f ' Is it possible ?" the Captain exclaim¬ ed—" then let me hope we shall, ere long, be better acquainted, for you are a very great favourite of my brother-in-law, whose friendship I have put to many a very se¬ vere trial ; and, not long since, I do be¬ lieve I could have found in my heart to have picked a quarrel with you, had we met by chance, as we have done now." "How
* f How can I have offended you V en¬ quired Francis, with an incredulous smile* " Why, have you not captivated one of the most lovely and most amiable women in the world ? and, would she have taken me for better for worse, I am sure she would have reclaimed me ; and may I be d ——d if I should ever have thonght of marrying Miss Chedworth/' Our hero smiled more expressively, say¬ ing, " Captain WiHoughby, I presume/* " That same rakish fellow, whom Mrs. Archer flatly refused ; nevertheless I shall be proud of ranking among your friends, as you have been held up to me as an еж - ample, and with great justice—Here, you Mr. Bum, by the Lord Harry we will have a bottle to drink to our better acquaint¬ ance!" seizing the bell, which he rang with such violence, that, in three seconds, two men Hew into the room. " A bottle of Madeira !" cried the Cap¬ tain—** What, you ill-looking scoundrels ! you thought it was the ladies rang to have me
me turned out—but d — mme we shall be the best friends imaginable." The men »grinned, and retired. " Now do tell me, my dear Freeman, how you< came to be cooped up here ? though, ifl understood you right, neither you nor Anna have shaken hands with ho¬ nest Bum." tf I came here to visit an old friend, Captain." * r Ah ! what, poor old Square-toes in the arm-chair? well, I respect old âge every where ;" and as a decanter of Áladéira and glasses were just then placed upon the tablc-^" Come, my old Trojan," he con¬ tinued, " take a glass, it will revive your spirits ; so here is to your speedy enlarge¬ ment-—Anna ! come, child,* take a glass, and tell me what brought you hither— What the d-v-i makes you so silent; since you are only a bird * of passage ?-^Have you left Knightsbridge ?-Mias old mother Bever got her eldest girl off her hands' ? though she is not well built for the trade, she
she will soon be a street-walker—now, you would have done me credit, if 1 could have supported you in style; Freeman might do so, but his inclinations point a different way ; and as I am still in the honey-moon, I cannot renew our connection, though 1 *hal! ever remember past favours, my lass." Francis, who reali) felt for the unfortu¬ nate young woman, said, looking at the Captain, " Let me request you will cease these jokes—-you must perceive how you distress Mrs. John Wheeler." ** Mrs. John Wheeler!" repeated the Captain, endeavouring to recollect him¬ self—** Why, now I do remember, I cer¬ tainly did hear something about your go¬ ing to be married, Anna—Is that gentle¬ man your husband?" directing his eyes towards Kalkreuth. This question so strongly reminded the German of having once enacted that par/, that he gave a free loose to his mirth, then said, " I shall refer you to thebdy, Sir, for a» answer to your question." «By
" By Heavens, there is no need í for í will be d ------ d if you would have laughed had you been her caro sposo : I besides re¬ collect your telling me, Anne, when you mentioned having an admirer who seemed likely to wear your chains for life, that he was a quizzical, miserly, obstinate, weak- brained, vulgar, self-conceited lump of a fellow, and this gentleman does not bear any resemblance to your description— You remember how we laughed, Anna, at the narrow escape we had when he popped upon you so early one morning—you got olf with flying colours, though had he been a minute sooner, he would have seen you dismissing me ; and you cannot have forgot how Mother Bever and 1 shouted while you were describing his grand pre¬ sent, the stale mutton-pie and the Chick- lane tongues—his own sheep's-head was all that was wanting to compleat the feast. But you must and shall drink with me, Anna, if you will not talk to me," rising, and carrying her a glass of wine, which she refused
Tefused to take, declariiig he was a most scandalous creature, and that she had ne¬ ver seen him before. The captain absolutely shouted, saying, ťf That is a d ------ d good one î —Come, my old dame ! as my little virgin of the sun won't drink with me, what say you to a glass ?—'tis not bad—and it may raise your spirits, and mend your temper, which seems none of the best, to judge from your look*/' Never before had Mrs. Wheeler kept her angry passions in such subjection; this provoking captain's being evidently a man of consequence, was one reason for her forbearance, and her wish to learn exactly how matters stood between her daughter- in-law and him, another : indeed, she had been so taken by surprise, that her conster¬ nation had also combined to keep her si¬ lent—She now, however, in a most indo¬ lent tone, desired the captain to take away his wine, or she would fling it in his fa*-e„ VOL, IV, К f " <θ.
i( So, so, Alada m Commode !—why, you are mounted upon stilts—ha!—then here goes to your reformation," tossing off the glass— " The wine shall not be lost nei¬ ther"—when, looking at Caroline, who sat in the back ground, between her father and mother, ff Miss or Madam, for I do not know whether you are a maid, wife, or widow, will you do me the favour to drink a glass of wine with me ?" " No, Sir, I do not choose any." " Well, Aia'am, you might have been civil," was the retort, " for never before was I in company with such a queer set of ladies; though I acknowledge myself un¬ der some obligation to them, for not re¬ questing you, Mr. Freeman, and that other gentlemani would turn me out, since I cer¬ tainly am an intruder here." " Aye, drunk as you are," said the old woman, " you know well enough what you are about, and what you deserve—you have, however, opened my eyes ; so far I am
am obliged to you^—Oh you good-for-no¬ thing jadei" looking at her daughter-in- law. 'Opened your eyes!" interrupted the captain— is why, ζ ------ ds, 1 seem to have opened both your eyes and mouth—Pray, Mr. Freeman, who is this old fury V* " That lady's name is Wheeler, Sir, and that old gentleman is her husband, and my friend, who, having been most shamefully imposed upon by a set of swindlers, is now confined for debts of their contracting, which he is unfortunately liable to pay." " Upon my soul, I pity him," resumed the captain, " for I dare say his wife, who, I perceive, is master, led him into all his errors: however, pluck up a spirit, man— you are not the first who has been plagued by a shrew, nor who has had a rogue of a son, since, now I recollect, Mr. Wlieeler. junior, is in Newgate for forgery." The old woman now raved out, ** My son is no rogue, Sir, f would have you to know, if he has married a w—- ; only к % take
take care somebcdy does not make you re¬ pent, as he will do, having married such a worthless jade—it always comes home to people, sooner or later; and I hope you will, some time or other, see somebody leaving your house at unseasonably hours: had you been a real gentleman, you would have told my son he would be taken in, if he married Miss Atwood ; but you evi¬ dently glory in having made him your laughing-stock and your dupe." ( ' Well done, my old lady !" cried the cap¬ tain— *' I would not have missed this ren- contre for a cool thousand : I commend your spirit, and thank you for your kind wishes—Anna, I beg your pardon for hav¬ ing exposed you to the gentle rebukes of this mild lady : come, wipe your eyes, and pay her off in her own coin, for yours seems to have turned out a d ------ d bad bargain at last : however, should your in¬ nocent husband be condemned, why, as he seems to be ruined, you must try again—· 1 will still stand your friend — so let the old dowager
dowager rave : if, af her age, she was the dupe of Mother Bever's sanctity, your cha&~ titi/, and Eggleton's honesty, she deserves all she has met with—Come, old gentle¬ man, take another glass; as you are the friend of Mr. Freeman, I am sure you de¬ served a better wife, aye, and befter chil* dren, for I fear you have been very scur- vily treated amongst them—Anna has hint¬ ed as much to me; so come drink, I say,- confusion to all designing villains, and particularly to those who brought you here." " I will drink your toast with all my heart," the old man faltered out, *' and may you repent, young man, before it is too late !" The captain received the glass m one hand, and took the old man's hand with* ťhe other,, saying, €t Thank you, my olé codger—I positively do mean to turn over a new leaf, now I ani married, though, up¬ on my honour, I never wilfully wrongeď any one; but my revenues have not hi- к 3 therto
therto kept pace with my expenditure, else I should noi have been here, since 1 always' pay my debts when I am in cash ; and I am now in confinement, solely owing to my own forge t fulness, and the banking-houses were shut when f was nabbed—how the blood-hounds came to know ï was Ín town, is all that puzzles me ; but I make no doubt ï shall be liberated before they lock up for the night, ebe my wife will wonder what has become of me; though, for my own part, I cpnld make shift for once in a way,** glancing his eyes towards Mrs. John Whee^ 1er, which made the old woman break bounds more than ever, as she called them all but good ; and told tier daughter-in- law, she might set off with her vile para^ mour when he was liberated, as she should never darken her doors again ; and if her son ever noticed, her after what she had heard, she wo*dd disown him for her child. « Ţha.t's right» my old dame í" cried the çaptaiıv-^" I command your spiri', and I thinli it WQukl be no bad scheme, if you were
were to disclaim all relationship with a man accused of forgery, particularly if—." A look from Francis made him pause, and turning to the now weeping Anna, " Never mind, my girl—I know this scru¬ pulous lady was almost a dead match for old Mother Bever at boasting, as young hopeful was to have ten thousand pounds, and was soon ta be junior in the house of Haslemere and Soa; so, upon my soul, Freeman, it was only tit for tat in the pre- ten t instance, and Anua comes* from a de- *s îîish deaf the best stock—I told Moiher Bever to be upon her guard, as I feared the match would fall very short of their expectations, though I did not suppose Anna would so soon be at liberty to make a no t lie r choice: however, she shall not starvs, though lte^ beauty will» for a time, keep her afø>at : but, upon my soul, I was in hopes that, like myself, she was settled for life; but here, my girl, bere is fìve guineas, and as old Madam there has turn- x 4 ed
ed ypu adrift, wby> return to old Mother Beverj, who will receive you with open arms if you do but shew her the shiners, and I will see you in the morning. I have already sent to my brother-in-law, Lord Merioneth, who I know is in town ; and, should my note have found him at home, he will be here in a few minutes; he will pass his word for the paltry debt—they re¬ quire no more : but, should I be liberated to-night, of course I must go home to my wife—you understand me, Anna." л These hints, and his knowledge of her vain boasts, were not calculated to lessen Mrs. Wheeler's rage ; and as the captain seemed to enjoy tormenting her, he was not sparing of his references respecting her famiiv, and the name of Lord Merioneth appeared, however, to have effectually si¬ lenced her ; till, rousing herself once more, she told the captain, that " if he did not leave the room, she would." " Oh, the sooner you are off, my wor¬ thy
thy lady, the better—I am fond of good' company, and do not mean to stir till I have finished my bottle." « Then, shall I see you to bed, Mr, Wheeler?" she enquired—"Nothing can* be done in our affairs to-night, and yoœ must be fatigued." <f Do you arid the girls set off/' was the reply, " I shall manage very well alone ; and, for the good you have done, you might as well have staid at home,- as you may thank yourself for, every thing that ha* occurred." " Aye, aye, shift the blame upon my shoulders—that is an old trick of yours,. Mr. Wheeler; but I have said, and I now swear, that that vile hussey shall never again darken mv doors— let her return» to Knightsbridge, or remain with her gallant. Mr. Freeman will, I dare say, be so oblig¬ ing as to see me and Caroline home, as I wish to have a little conversation witb him/' But, much as Francis felt for the old к 5 rnaiv
man* his contempt had so greatly increased for tlie oíd woman, that he wa& by no means inclined to comply with her modest request : he therefore merely said, that his servant was in waiting, and, ¿f she chose, he would send; him for a haekney--coaeh, since his friend and himself were going im¬ mediately, by appointment, to Mr. Wel¬ don 's. " Aye, he lives in Ely-place, Holborn, within a stone's throw of this house : how¬ ever, you and I can walk, Cary—God knows, we have no money to spend in coach-hire ; so I wish yon a very good evening, Mr. Freeman," curtseying very formally— ťí Sir, your most obedient," to Kalkreuth— " I will see you again to-mor-r row, Mr. Wheeler—As før you, you minx, I hope I shall never have the misfortune of seeing you again/' and away she hurried, Caroline limping after her, and who seem¬ ed to participate in her mother's pique against our hero, who, had she dared, would have e iven him a charm inst set-down : she 3 told
fold Caroline, as they walked pasi his car¬ riage, she would have reminded' him of his left-handed relationship to them, only there- were times and seasons when people must hold the candle to the d-v-1 ; while the, captain openly rejoiced at her departure, and lamented that he could not see his dear Anna to Knightsbridge, where he swore he would call upon her the next day. ** Ab, Captain, I am shocked to hear you run on so," said the old man— ff when you were both single, there were excuses for you ; but now you ought to remember the vows you have so lately made at the altar; if you ever mean to reform, surely voit ought to set about it, out of compassion to the lady who bears your name-—As for; you, young woman, you have certainly grossly deceived us, as you must have known who that rascal Eastwood was, and the character Eggleton bore—but I have no right, to thçow the first stone ; and as I do nok kiww how soon I may be called up¬ on, why, I readily forgive you your share кб in:
in the iniquitous plot, which has brought me hither—possibly we may never meet again in this world—the Almighty alone can tell what will be our future fate—may he forgive me my sins, as I forgive yours ! so God bless you ! " A pause of some seconds ensued, which the captain broke, by swearing he would never lead Anna into temptation again, who promised to return to Nelson-terrace for that night. " And in the morning, my girl, throw yourself upon the mercy of Cousin Sower¬ by ; if she refuses you absolution, why, her prudery will not appear to advantage at the bar of Heaven's Chancery—What say* you, Freeman ?" Our hero seconded the captain's ad¬ vice ; and as he did not wish to wait the r.rrival of the Earl of Merioneth, he saw Mrs. John Wheeler to a hackney-coach, and then proceeded with Kalkreuth to Mr. Wel¬ don 's, whom he wished to interest in old Wheeler's behalf. The
The German, who was a most excellent mimic, rehearsed the recent scene in so droll a way to the solicitor, that he de¬ clared he had never been more highly amused, readily promising to devote the next morning to the affairs of old Wheeler. tc If the creditors will but be satisfied with the small remains of the poor old man's savings/' said our hero, " I will suf¬ fer him to end his days in my house in Marsham-street, and will add another hun¬ dred а -year to the one I make no doubt he will continue to receive from Mr. Ilasle¬ mere." i( I shall talk that matter over with that gentleman, before I hold out any such hopes to old Wheeler," was the reply— " he will readily second my plan to serve his old servant—and I do not wish to limit your charity, my young friend ; but I feel such a dislike for Mrs. W 7 heeler and her son, that I almost grieve to think they will participate in your bounty to the poor prisoner: however, I will dine with you to-morrow,
to-morrow, and then I shall be able to give in my reporr, and to decide whether any¬ thing can be done towards liberating the victim of his wife's, and son*s folly." Having thus settled matters, Francis re¬ turned home, and, whether owing to the shock his feelings had sustained the over¬ night, or to his having taken cold, he did not find himself very well in the morning : he was therefore, not sorry he had no en¬ gagements likely to call him from home, as he proposed dedicating the day to rest and quietude. Mrs. Hunter scolded a little when she saw him in the morning, declaring, that he mubt and should remain a prisoner all· day ; and he made a merit of complying with her wishes, telling her, Mr. Weldon was to dioe with hn»* and be made no doubt but Mrs. Jones would look in upon him, if she picked up any thing new respecting tbe Wheelers. Having breakfasted, he sat down to write to Mrs. ДгсЬег,, to whom he detailed, in terms,
terms suitable to the person he was addres¬ sing, the overnight's scene, assuring her tbat he hoped to drink his tea with her on the following Wednesday, as he proposed leaving London on Monday; requesting, nevertheless, that she would favour him with an immediate answer, as he wished to know whether what he proposed doing for the Wheelers met her approbation; and concluded by assuring her, that time liad never hung so heavy on his hands as since he left Staffordshire, though he had never been less alone. Having folded up his missive, Mrs. Whee¬ ler's unguarded speech respecting his mo» ther again came across him : it had cer- tainly greatly contributed ta break his rest, as tbe longer he dwelled upon it, the more he was convinced that he was George Hasle¬ mere's son ; and this was a very favourable opportunity, he conceived, to oblige the oid woman to confirm his suspicions : but then, what honour, as he had frequently reflected, should he derive even from the relationship
relationship being publicly acknowledged ? v He had been perfectly candid with Mrs. Archer, who had informed him, in return, that Mr. Weldon was convinced, in his own mind, he was a Haslemere; but as their Staffordshire neighbours had all imbibed the same mistaken idea respecting his birth, Mr. Freeman had avowed, she thought they had better remain in their error, since there was no reason now to suppose that Mr. Haslemere, junior, would ever dare to acknowledge him, after having, even to his father, solemnly disavowed their relation¬ ship—Who was his mother, he wondered. While forming various conjectures upon this subject, Mr. Haslemere, senior, was announced, and shewn in; Mr. Weldon having called upon him before he proceed¬ ed to the spunging-house, to let him know how old Wheeler was situated, and how anxious our hero felt to have him liberated from so irksome a state of confinement.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIIL r You do not look in your usual spirits this morning, my dear Francis," remarked the old gentleman, after the first compli¬ ments were over— " You will persist in being quite strong, when your tell-tale countenance convinces me you are far from well ; yet you will be jaunting about by night, to serve those who would not have grieved had you been drowned/* " Then you know, my dear Sir, I have been fulfilling the scriptures; and as the Wheeler family might have expected to have been my heirs, there would have been some excuse for their not lamenting, had
had I come to an untimely end; but as I have since made my will, they are now likely to be greater gainers by my living than by my death." " Then, were they aware of the circum¬ stance, I think they would endeavour to insure your life—What a scene did you witness in Cary-street! I co»ld almost have wibhed to have been present—Captain Wil- loughby appeared to great advantage : in¬ deed, my ward seems to have been as for¬ tunate in her election, as Mrs., Eastwoojd and John Wheeler have been in Uieks*. since a wild, unprincipled, gambling rake, is not likely to, make a better husband than a swindler—^Did you understand for what sum the captain was in confinement ?" Francis repeated what ha had said to ac¬ count for his being m a spunging-house. The old gentleman shook his head : he was fearful the^ captain was often troubled wiih a bad memory upon such occasions, as, if he had been rightLy informed, ten thousand pounds would not liquidate his, debts ;
debts; still there would be enough left to mpport him and his wife in comparative affluence, if they did not, as he feared, launch out into every extravagance fashion licensed and folly suggested, since, when compared to Captain WiHoughby, George has. been a pattern of prudence : (tr indeed, there was a time I did hape that he would have turned out every* thing i could have wished ; and, had he been blessed with a young family, 1 am persuaded he would have acted very differently to what be has done ; though* according to ώβ number of mistresses he has kept, I dare say he haa many natural children; but them he has always been ashamed to acknowledge, as. he wishes to conceal his follies, while Capi¬ tam WiHoughby seems to glory in рвЫ lishiog his ; therefore, Louisa Chedworth will soon latterly repent having made sxxcb a precipitate. сЬ-цке— вау> she .may haxe done so already : unförtuaateíy the care of her person devolved upon Mss, Month- mer, who, having been recommended by the
the Faculty to remove for a short time to- the south of France, positively made the tour of France and Italy with her romantic niece, who was thus rendered very unfit for the wife of a sober man of sense ; but you have seen her, therefore I need not dwell upon her follies, as I fancy they struck you very forcibly." " Upon my honour, I thought her very accomplished, Sir; but will you be so> obliging as to assure Mrs. WiHoughby* that, should chance ever throw us into the same society, 1 shall meet her as a total stranger?" ** I will tell her that you wish to spare her blushes—I do hope the Earl of Merio¬ neth will persuade the captain to make some reserve for her, little as she has shewn herself deserving of my regard ; and those Wheelers, whom you are so anxious to serve, how kindly they have rewarded me for having promoted their interest, in di¬ rect opposition to my better judgment ! However, I think the mystery, which has so
so long hung over your birth, may now be cleared up to our mutual satisfaction, as ï presume you think, like me, that you are George's son/' " I must acknowledge that I do, Sir ; still you must excuse my not wishing to force Mrs. Wheeler to acknowledge the fact, as it would greatly distress Mr. Hasle- mere, were wc io attempt to remove the veil he hopes he has thrown over my birth; as I dare sav he was, in the first instance, actuated by his regard for your peace of mind, and his fear of lowering himself in your and the pi*bile esteem ; possibly he was also actuated by a wish to preserve the reputation of my mother, who, I am not in¬ clined to believe, was at all his inferior in point of birth. Mrs. Wheeler has had her unguarded moments, which have led me to form these conclusions; and possibly it may have been to oblige her that I have been brought up in obscurity. Be that as it may, as, upon these points, I am merely arguing at random, I have other and stronger
stronger reasons for not wishing to make any stir in the business just at present: the world in general have, oflate, set me down for a relation of the late Mr. Freeman, and I should wish my Stanordshire neighbours might be permitted to remain in their er¬ ror, as it would be very unpleasant to Mrs. Archer to have my illegitimate birth pub¬ licly discussed at the present juncture." m( You have rendered me a convert to your way of thinking, my dear Francis, as your reasoning upon the subject is con¬ clusive; and George has so uniformly shrunk from the discussion, though he has more than once affirmed you were not his son, that we will take no measures like¬ ly to make me blush for his duplicity ; and we will hope that the Wlieelers may have been actuated by some praise-worthy mo* tive, when they endeavoured to delude me into a belief f liat you were a natural son of their brother; still I do not approve of your doing so much for them as you in¬ tend, as Mr. Weldon thinks it very pro¬ bable
bable that the creditors will not insist upon depriving the old people of a bed to sleep upon, and, with the refuse of their furni¬ ture, let them furnish a lodging; and if you add fifty pounds а -year to the hundred I shall continue to allow the old man, they will not be to be pitied, since *tis more than they desene, and twenty times more than they would allow cither of us în a si¬ milar situation : but we must first hear what the creditors have to say, as we must remain neuter till they have come to some arrangement." " I shall always be guided by your supe¬ rior judgment, my dear Sir, except when my feelings militate against your wishes, as they did very recently, and the old wo¬ man is certainly very undeserving of our notice." ** And what have you to alledge in fa¬ vour of Airs. Eastwood, my young philan¬ thropist, that she bore her prosperity so mceklv ?" ri " No, Sir—I can merely plead ignorance and
and bad example in extenuation of her er¬ rors;" and both agreed that John was a very despicable character, though they both thought him innocent of the crime Ibr which he had been sent to Newgate ; though he might find it a difficult matter to prove himself so to the satisfaction of a jury, since he had not even mentioned the bills he had discounted to his father, nor to any of his fellow-clerks; While debating this matter, Air. Hasle¬ mere, having cast his eye upon the direc¬ tion of the letter to Mrs. Archer, which was lying upon a table near him, asked our hero when he was to wish him joy ? tf Within the month I hope, Sir," was the reply. " I rejoice to hear it, since I have heard a most amiable character of your bride- elect from a Liverpool merchant, who was in habits of intimacy with her during the life of her late husband." Before Francis could express his satis¬ faction, Airs. Jones was announced. " Airs.
" Mrs. Jones !** repeated Mr. Haslemere — te surely I have hea»d Kempthorne men¬ tion that old lady—have her shewn in by all means." " I dare say she has picked up some fresh intelligence respecting the Wheelers," was the reply. " And I am positively anxious to hear what she has fo communicate," resumed Mr. Haslemere. " Then suffer me to order your horses round to mv stables, Sir : Air. Weldon is engaged to dine with me, and if you will increase our party, I shall feel myself high¬ ly flattered." f£ You shall do as you please, as my re¬ maining with you will effectually prevent you from going out." The servant, who had gone to request Airs. Jones would walk up stairs, soon re¬ turned with her compliments, and as she did not wish f о derange Air. Freeman, sLe would look in upon him some other time. Francis therefore ran down and obliged vol. iv. L her
her to accompany him up stairs, assuring her, that Mr. Haslemere had expressed a wish to be introduced to her. The old woman was too much flattered to start any farther objections ; and having been introduced to the worthy merchant, she again apologized for her unseasonable visit, which was owing to a variety of cir¬ cumstances. " To which I feel myself greatly indebt¬ ed/' rejoined Francis, " as I shall always be happy to see you at any hour of the day —We were talking about the Wheelers when you were announced, and I told Mr. Haslemere you had most probably seen the females of that family since I had that ad¬ vantage ; we therefore wkhed to have your advice respecting our future plans in their favour, as you are better acquainted with their dispositions and expectations than we shall ever be." The old woman declared, they were re¬ solved to render her vain in her old age ; adding, " I certainly have a little news from
from that quarter; but, before I begin up¬ en my tale, I must enquire how you ! find yourself to-day, Mr. Freeman ? you do not look so well as you did yesterday." Mr, Haslemere said he had made the same remark. " 1 did not sleep very well," rejoined our hero, " owing to a variety of antisom- niferous reflections, and to that account I must place my altered looks." " Then let us hope that a good night's rest will restore your colour—But to re¬ turn to my friends the Wheelers : the eld¬ est lady of that name was at my house this morning, even before I had finished break¬ fast ; though perhaps I was rather later than 1 used to be, as I had been walking for an hour with my son and heir, which does him good and agrees with me ; and as he had finished his meal first, he, being standing at the window, told me there was a ladv coming to see me : he had never seen Mrs. Wheeler, nor probably never would, hal she remained in prosperity ; and as I feared ĺ 2 ti.e
the poor old man was either dead or dying, from so early a visit, I admitted her my¬ self, and was greeted with, * My dear Mrs. Jones, how are you ?' and í forbore to re¬ mind her oí the gentle hints I had received during her short reign of greatness, that my vibits in Marsham-street could, in fu¬ ture, be dispensed with ; nor did í recall to her memorv the insolent airs her daugh- ter gave herself no longer ago than last Sunday, when she was followed by her li¬ very-servant, and stepped into her fine carriage : poor silly being ! her reign of grandeur may be aptly compared to that of the butterfly, and she has now sunk never to rise again—But to return to my story : having taken a seat, my sincere old friend burst into a violent flood of tears; my William undertook to console her, telling her not to cry, handing her ноте tonst, and promising her some tea, and to shew her all his nice play-things, that dear, dear Mr. Freeman had given him. 1 am fearful his last attempt was the most unsuccessful, as she
she does not approve of any gifts falling to the share of any Body but her own chil* dren : however, as I joined my eloquence to the child's, at last she entered upon the tragi-comedy which took place last night in Cary-street ; and, for the life and soul of me, I could not refrain from smiling more than once, and had even some diffi¬ culty not to laugh out. Airs. John Whee¬ ler is now the vilest and most worthless of her sex, and the primary occasion of all their misfortunes; however, she lives in hopes of seeing her begging her bread, or of hearing her cry matches about the streets. Having allowed her to exhaust herself in invectives against the miserable young creature, as she had really shocked me by some of her expressions, I ventured to reprobate her conduct, and finally put her into a passion, which induced her Гф reproach me with having abandoned my niece, who tvas a paragon of perfection, when compared to the sorry jade who had been the ruin, of her famiiv, and had ь 3 brought
brought indelible disgrace upon the name of Wheeler.. I replied, that my niece had, of her own free-will, left my house with a worthless drunken rascal, who, as might have been foreseen, soon brought her to poverty—had she listened to my advice, she might now have been alive and happy ; nor had I ever been aware of her having been in such absolute distress, as it seems she had been : however, I had adopted her only child, and meant to provide for it, though I had not thought it my duty to contribute to my niece's support, while she remained the companion of her worth¬ less gallant—be that as it might, I hoped she would not prove herself less charitable should Mrs. John Wheeler be in the family way. This natural suggestion rendered her more furious than ever : she only wished she might see the trollop, with her brat strapped to her back, crying matches. I observed, that the child would bear the name of Wheeler, and that, if she did not fuccour it, she would prove herself a greater
greater disgrace than the mother to the name of Wheeler ; in short, we quité quar¬ relled, and then made it up again, as she begged my pardon, very humbly declaring, she was almost beside herself; and then asked if I would accompany her into thè Adelphi, as she wanted to call upon Mrs. Eggleton, and thought it might be neces¬ sary to have a witness of what might pass ? Now, though ľ was afraid of being dragged into a court of justice, curiosity got the better of prudence, and I agreed to accom¬ pany her since she was in trouble, making a merit, you perceive, of following the bent of my inclination. As we went along, she said she was particularly anxious to learn whether Mrs. Bever was the bad cha¬ racter Captain WiHoughby represented her to be. · I observed, that as that gentleman wás all but drunk, she ought not to place any great faith in what he said ; though, in my own mind, I made no doubt of her being at least very conveniently blind, if she had no other failings. Having reached 1.4 Mr«
Mr. Eggleton's, a porter-looking man open¬ ed the door, and told us Mrs. Eggleton no longer lived there. My companion was going to fly out, but I enquired very ci- \ illy, whither she was removed ? He asked us to walk in, and we perceived he and several others were busily employed in lotting out the furniture for sale; and the one who appeared to have the ordering of the others told us, Mrs. Eggleton and her children were gone to the--------- hotel, in —— street, St. James's, the master of which was going to sell of£ by auction, the goods they were sorting, early in the next week. To the hotel, therefore, we proceeded, where Mrs. Wheeler had pre¬ viously been to enquire Mr. Eastwood's character, and in the bar sat the still-dash¬ ing Mrs. Eggleton, who seemed more at home amidst her bowls and tumblers, than she had ever appeared, I dare say, at her late superb mansion. Having instantly re¬ cognised my companion, she requested us to step into an adjoining parlour, and in¬ stead
stead of appearing either confused or grieved, as I had fully expected, she said, the moment she had closed the door, with an air of the most undaunted assurance, * Well, Mrs. Wheeler, we have been nicely dished, faith—Oh the scurvy rascals ! had I been aware of their vile scheme, upon my life I would have given yon a hint ; for I hardly know which was the greatest rogue of the two, my keeper or your pre¬ cious son-in-law/ ' Your keeper, Madam !* screamed Mrs. Wbeeler— f Then is not your name Eggle¬ ton?' €t No, bless God ! and I dare say your daughter wishes she could as easily wash her hands of Eastwood : however, he may yet come to be hanged, that is some com¬ fort for her/ * How dare you talk in this way to me, Madam ? me, who have been a wife and a mother this ------/ ' Stop, stop, Madam Bounce/ inter¬ rupted the. other— s I am a mother as well 1 5 as
as yourself, and I have much the most rea¬ son to be proud of my children, who will not come to be hanged I hope, as your son bids fair to do : you went to church, and much good may it do you—I jumped over the broomstick; nevertheless, I have be¬ haved as well as Mrs. Eggleton, as ever you did as Mrs. Wheeler, since you govern your poor old man, and I let Eggleton go¬ vern me ; and so I was very civil to you and your family, though I was not aware of what was going forward; I only thought he was planning to procure the ways and means, little supposing how the farce was to end/ f Well, Madam/ resumed Mrs. Wheeler* whose tone she had effectually lowered^ ť to be sure you may not have been to blame; but, pray, can you tell me who my good-for-nothing strumpet of a daugh¬ ter-in-law is ?* * Why, as you ask me civilly, J may be inclined to satisfy you ; as I look upon my¬ self to be as good as you any day in the year,
year, nay, as matters stand, I should be yery sorry to stand in your shoes/ " Mrs. Wheeler renewed her excuses, again enquiring who Miss Atwood and Mrs. Bever were, as she prespmed she knew them, ' Does a beggar know his dish ?' was the polite retort—* Anna Atwood is a girl of good family, and the niece of a very rich old woman, of the name of Sowerby : she has a sister very well married, I understand, as their father left them both very pretty fortunes : some young lord, however, turn¬ ed poor Anna's head, and, when he was tired of her, why, he turned tail ; and Mo¬ ther Sowerby refused her admittance, when she came to beg pardon, and so she re¬ moved to old Pame Bever's, whose keeper was a recruiting serjeant, I think I have heard her say, who, having cheated go¬ vernment of all he could, killed himself with drinking: he left her enough, how¬ ever, to furnish a house, and she took to letting lodgings, and doing any thing be- L G sidts
sides to help to bring up her daughters, till they can shift for themselves; but the eldest is not very handsome, so she hangs in hand : the old woman has been in a few scrapes, and my rip has always brought her through in triumph : she, in return, was not ungrateful, and would have secreted his privy counsellor, Old Nick, to have obliged him : he frequently kept a girl there, and I dare say .he was as well ac¬ quainted with Anna Atwood, as your son is with his wife. I never suffered any of his trollops under my nose, else 1 suppose I should have had a dozen such inmates at times; but your daughter-in-law was among my favourites, and when she wanted to raise money, Mother Bever, of course, recom¬ mended Eggleton, who certainly procured her the supplies, and feathered his own nest most charmingly, as she was upon her last legs when she struck up to your son ; but you know the old proverb, ' When house and land are gone and spent, then learning is most excellent/ and she had plenty
plenty of that: however, if you had not boasted so egregiously of your son's being in such high favour with Mr. Haslemere, who was going to take him as partner, and of the ten thousand pounds you meant to give him, 'tis a chance if Eggleton would have thought you worth plucking ; so you may thank yourself for having set his brains to work—But I understand you had a fine blow-up in Cary-street last night, fori have seen Anna, and I dare say WiHoughby will take her in tow again ; he kept her for a long time at Knightsbridge, and Eggleton did endeavour to set a scheme on foot to make him marry her, but the captain soon made him draw in his horns, for he was not such a gull as you were; however, Anna will not want for friends if he should forsake her, for she is well known—a city merchant kept an apartment for her in Henrietta-street, Coven t-garden, at the very time WiHoughby was paying the piper at Knightsbridge; but she very seldom slept in town, 1 believe ; there she went by
by the name of Smith ; but that was pot her keeper's real name, who was a married man, Eggleton discovered, else he had hoped to have settled Anna for life there; but Smith's wife traced them to their lodg¬ ings one night, and, but for some young fellow who lodged in the first floor, a Ger¬ man musician, there would have been the devil to pay; he personated Smith, and thus prevented a blow-up that would have done for Дпп a." While Mrs. Jones was relating this inci¬ dent, she kept her eyes nxed upon our hero, who with difficulty preserved his gravity: resolving, however, to make him speak, she said, with an arch look, <r Did you ever hear of the circumstance before, Mr. Freeman, since our friend Kalkreuth was, if I mistake not, one of the actors in that scene?" " Then he is mach more likely to be au fait of the matter than myself," replied the laughing Francis, <{ so pray finish your story." "That
" That I shall soon do, as you have had, the cream of the jest : Mrs. Eggleton cer¬ tainly did not spare my companion, whose folly she reprobated in the severest terms, observing, that her anxiety to keep the impending matches a secret, had ensured the success of all Eastwood and Eggleton's nefarious schemes; observing, that the fonner was both a fine and a clever fellow ; therefore, how she could suppose that such a man. had he been as rich as he gave him¬ self out to be, would ever have married her limping silly daughter, she could not con¬ ceive: * however, you have paid pretty dear for your consummate folly, as I dare say the rogues have made a handle of your credit and credulity; the master of this house has also been a great sufferer by them ; but, I miist say, he has behaved like a gentleman to me ; for, finding how I was situated, as he was in want of a house¬ keeper, he offered me the place, and I im¬ mediately removed hither; and if I shall no longer ride in my fine landau, I shall 4 alwavs
always be able to command a hack, and I shall eat and drink of the best, and with Eâfffleton I was often put to m ν shifts for the want of credit; the rogue has, how¬ ever, secured a trifle to the children, which will keep them above w r ant—but that does not concern you ; so now, what will you have to drink ? I have the full command of the bar, so only choose, from the best Bri¬ tish to Imperial Tokay, as the man in the play says/ and, shocked as I felt, I w T as more than once tempted to laugh at her cool impudence, as her countenance and gestures were far more expressive than her words. Airs. Wheeler, though certainly rather in need of a cordial, declined her offer, and I followed her example : we then departed in peace, as we were both rather in awe of the bar-maid ; but no sooner were we out of sight of the house, than my companion gave a loose to her internal rage, threatening to bring the whole crew to the gallows, &c. till I per¬ ceived we had a mob collecting round us ; but
but she seemed to set common decency and prudence at defiance, declaring she would go to Knightsbridge, and bring an old house about Madam Bever's ears. I did not, however, choose to accompany her thither ; I therefore called a coach at the first stand, telling her I wanted to go into Bond-street, where she should set me down, and I would pay the fare on to Knights¬ bridge. She readily accepted my offer, vowing she would raise a mob about the door if the old jade was at all impudent. Having ascended our vehicle, she told me Cary was gone to Newgate, to tell her bro¬ ther what a pretty discovery they had made the overnight. I thought they might as well have deferred the information, since the poor wretch must be sufficiently mise¬ rable, as he is actually in irons, and among the common felons, not having chosen to fee the goalers, or to pay for a room ; and if he chooses thus to increase his sufferings, why, he is the less to be pitied : the old wo¬ man does not, however, despair of settling their
their affairs better than people may ex¬ pect, she told me, as she has still a friend at court, who dare not desert her upon a pinch : ť Mr. George Ilaslemere had more generosity and feeling in his little finger, than his father or Francis Freeman have in their whole bodies:' excuse my quoting her own words, gentlemen, as I wish you should know how high you stand in the worthy lady's good graces, since you in particular, Mr. Freeman, ought to have bailed her husband last night ; and, had you paid all his debts, it would have been no more than your duty. I replied, that, had you even thought of such a thing, your friends would have been justified in taking out a statute of lunacy against you, as I was surprised at your having even conde¬ scended to visit Mr. Wheeler in a spungr ing-house, to whom I made no doubt you would still prove yourself a friend, though not one young man in.ten thousand would have acted as you had done, after the treat¬ ment you had received írom them all; but vour
your generosity far exceeded their deserts, and their ingratitude seemed to exceed their folly : such were my last words, there¬ fore we did not part great friends." ft I give you great credit for your spirit¬ ed rebuke, my good Madam," said Mr. Haslemere, (i and we shall be to blame if we do not turn your information to some account, as it has ever been my maxim, when people have presumed too much up¬ on my goodness, to punish them in pro¬ portion ; and, as you very justly observe, the ingratitude of the Wheelers fully keeps pace with their folly : how durst they ex¬ pect Mr. Freeman would render himself answerable for debts they have brought upon themselves by their own duplicity and vain boasting ?" " I must say, the old lady's expectations were rather unreasonable," resumed Fran- cis^—" and, at all events, I shall now, Sir, be implicitly guided by your advice, since I wish to minister to the wants, not the follies of that family." « They
" They are undeserving our notice, my dear Frank ; but you find upon whom their great hopes rest, and I should not be sur¬ prised were my provident son to step for¬ ward in their behalf, under what plea he best can tell : for the present, however, I request we may remain in the back-ground, as I wish to allow him full scope to display his generosity." Francis assured him he would not stir another step without his full concurrence, justly conceiving that George Haslemere's conduct upon this occasion would prove how far he was in the Wheelers power— But, rather wishing to change the subject, he asked Mrs. Jones some questions re*- specting Miss Atwood, which she was an¬ swering when Mr. Weldon joined them. Having welcomed the solicitor, he told him Mr. Haslemere had been prevailed upon to dine in Devonshire-place, that he might hear him give in his report respecting the W'heelers, <( Then I will neither keep him nor you in
¡n suspense, my young friend. When I arrived in Cary-street, I found Mr. Whee¬ ler alone : Captain WiHoughby was libe¬ rated almost immediately after your depar¬ ture, he told me, proceeding to thank me for my early visit. I requested him to be as candid and as concise as possible, if he meant to state his affairs to me ; assuring him, that I would do all in my power to procure his enlargement. He was necessi¬ tated, however, to be rather prolix, to make me comprehend how he had been taken in : he had settled stock in the three per cents upon his son's wife, to the amount of a hundred and twenty-five pounds per annum, and Eggleton so word¬ ed the deed which he signed, that he and Eastwood have sold out the principal : he also secured her two houses that are re¬ building upon Milbank, and which he tied himself down to compleat according to the original plan : these Eggleton has also con¬ trived to dispose of. Eastwood received fifteen
fifteen hundred pounds down with his wife, and a bond for five hundred more, at a twelvemonth's date ; that is, of course, sold or pawned, as are securities for two thou¬ sand pounds more, after the death of him and his wife ; but, altogether, there remains between three and four thousand pounds, besides his house, furniture, and plate, and his and his wife's life-interest in the two thousand pounds he had secured to his daughter, to be divided among the credi¬ tors, and the upholsterer's bill alone amounts to two thousand five hundred of the money : it was however agreed, that I should assemble them to-morrow% if pos¬ sible, when they were to state their respec¬ tive claims, and I was to have made the best arrangement I could with them. I promised to act conscientiously in his be¬ half, as Ì wished to do both parties justice; since, between ourselves, the old man en¬ deavoured to sink a couple of thousand pounds upon me, of course, upon the cre¬ ditors :
ditors : this did not raise him in my esteem; but, as he was perfectly candid at last, I felt inclined to be his friend." " You have amazed me," cried Mr, Haslemere, " for, had I known old Whee¬ ler was near so rich, I should not have been surprised at the late marriages : they must have had means of increasing their hoards, which I have hitherto merely suspected, as I certainly should not have made him any allowance, had I known how little need they had of my bounty—But did he lead you to suppose he was in hopes of being liberated by a friend, that is, by my son?" " I cannot say he did, his greatest hopes appearing to rest upon the liberality of thè sredi tors and the generosity of Mr. Free¬ man, who had promised, he said, he should never be reduced to absolute want." " Then he is not so sanguine in his ex¬ pectations as his wife appears to be/' re¬ lating what had passed between Mrs. Jones and Mrs. Wheeler úpon that subject. u I have not concluded my tale, please to
to recollect, ray good Sir, since, just as I was preparing to depart, Mrs. Wheeler came bustling in, and requested I would resume my seat, anxiously enquiring how we had settled matters ? The old man, who seems afraid of her, referred her to me, and I briefly recapitulated all I thought it necessary she should be made acquainted with, that is, how I hoped to settle matters with the creditors, when she said, she saw no reason to be in such mighty haste to as¬ semble them ; people were sure to repent of what they did in a hurry, and Air. Whee¬ ler had still friends, who, she trusted, would not suffer him to part with his last shilling. The old man plucked up a spirit, desiring she would not apply to any one, as he made no doubt but Mr. Freeman would keep them out of the workhouse ; and, if he did prove worse than his word, he should only conceive they were justly punished ; giving his wife a reproachful look, which merely served to enrage his better half, who vowed he had taken leave of his senses, insisting upon
«pon my not assembling the creditors till I heard from them again. I assured her 1 was in no haste, nor should I have waited upon Mr. Wheeler, but at the particular request of Mr, Freeman, who wished to have proved himself their friend. ■ I am obliged to both you and Mr. Freeman, Sir/ replied Mrs. W r heeler— f but, had Mr. Freeman wished really to have be¬ friended us, he would have bailed my hus? band last night/ " Such a speech effectually steeled my heart against her; I therefore instantly seized my hat, assuring her that I should advise Mr. Freeman not to take anv far* ther interest in her affairs ; at all events, I should decline any farther interference— and thus we separated: though the old man certainly did not side with her, still I hope you will not stir another step, my young friend, to serve such unthankful beings." " Ought we to punish the innocent for the guilty?" asked our hero— u the old vol. iv. m man
man ought not to suffer, because his wife is wholly undeserving our notice." f< At all events, let him send to me or you," said Mr. Weldon, ' ( before we again offer our services." Mrs. Jones was convinced that the old woman would mar every thing she did not sanction: so thought Mr. Weldon, who observed, that Eastwood had contrived to defraud many other tradesmen, besides those recommended by the Wheelers; among others, О --------- , the. ironmonger, in Holborn—you saw him make those pur¬ chases, Mr. Freeman ; but the Wheelers will merely be answerable for the debts he contracted with their knowledge and sanc¬ tion, and they have carried off all the plate and jewels, besides many other valuable articles, to a very considerable amount." A summons to dinner broke in upon the conversation ; and it was afterwards finally resolved, that nothing more should be done till old Wheeler applied to either the solicitor
solicitor or Francis ; Mrs. Jones promising, meanwhile, to fifid out what was going for¬ ward, and to let our hero know if any thing occurred worth communicating ; and, soon after tea, his three guests departed, and, soon after ten, our hero retired, after taking one of Mrs. Hunter's cordials, which, she affirmed, would procure him a good night's rest ; and as he no longer felt the same degree of pity for the Wheelers, and had resolved not to oblige George Hasle« mere to proclaim him to be his natural son, he soon sunk into a profound slumber.
m a chap.
CHAP. IX. Fikoing himself infinitely better in the morning, and thinking a walk would do him good, as the day W2s very fine for the season, between twelve and one our hero sallied forth, but had not taken above ten steps, ere he perceived his friend Kemp¬ thorne advancing towards him, and who appeared to have walked very fast, as he held his hat in one hand, while wiping his face with the other; instantly stopping, he looked behind him, and saw his servant was still upon the steps ; therefore, making him a sign, he immediately turned back, but waited at tbe door till his friend came uo,
up, whose looks, added to the evident haste he had made, convinced him that some¬ thing important must have occurred. " What bas happened, my dear Kemp¬ thorne ?" he impatiently enquired. The person he addressed was too much out of breath to give him an immediate answer; they therefore proceeded into the front parlour, where Kempthorne desired him not to be alarmed, and he would as brieñy as possible satisfy his curiosity. " Have you heard from South Lodge ?" demanded Francis, in evident agitation. " No, upon my honour." " Then something must have befallen Afr. Haslemere/* " Have a little patience, my dear friend, and allow me a few seconds to recover my breath— Aír. Ilaslemere is in good health, though not in a very enviable frame of mind, as his son ........- ." " Has interfered in the behalf of those Wheelers?" interrupted Francis. " By no means—but 1 will not keep yon at 3 'm
in so unpleasant a state of suspense :—I need not dwell upon the little scruple Mr. George Haslemere has ever evinced re¬ specting breaking his marriage-vows, and unfortunately he formed a very intimate connection with a very beautiful young married woman at Brighton, to which may be attributed his lengthened stay there ; and, last Tuesday evening, he was disco¬ vered itte-à-tcte with Mrs. Wilkinson, by her husband's confidential senan t. Mr. Wilkinson, who was greatlv her senior, and who had married her without a for¬ tune, merely for her beauty, being con¬ fined with the gout to his own room, a handsome bribe they hoped had rendered the valet their friend ; but as they foresaw their intercourse must soon be publicly known, Mrs. Wilkinson imprudently left her husband's house that very night, which induced the valet to hint his suspicions to his master : in consequence, her steps were traced, till she was housed in very hand¬ some lodgings in the outskirts of London; and
and Mr. Wilkinson's emissary, by his orders imparted the discoveries he had made to¬ ner brother, an ofbcer in the Guards., Meanwhile Mr. Haslemere, who had, doubt¬ less, long had it in contemplation to per¬ suade her to elope with him, as the lodg^ ings must have been provided by him, pleaded business to his wife for setting out for London early on Wednesday morning : she, and Captain and Mrs. WiHoughby, accompanied him to town, Mrs. Mortimer having invited the new-married couple to take up their abode with her for the pre¬ sent. Captain WiHoughby you saw during the evening, and while he was İn confine¬ ment, Mr. Haslemere went to visit Mrs. Wilkinson—a proof that he was privy to» her flight, and 'that he knew whither she had flown : her brother had often met hint in company, and ivas unfortunately watch¬ ing his sister's door himself ; thé conse¬ quence of which was, that he yesterday sent Mr. George a challenge, and they met this morning at eight, in a field adjoining ăi 4 Chalk
Chalk Farm ; both are wounded—Mr. Hasle- mere mortally—Captain Willonghby was his second ; and when he found his friend could not be conveyed back to town, he had him removed to the nearest house of entertainment, and sent off for two sur¬ geons of the first eminence, who immedi¬ ately obeyed the summons, and who con¬ firmed what the sufferer had previously de¬ clared, that there were no hopes of his re¬ covery ; he was, therefore, very anxious to have his father apprised of his situation : as for his wife, he told Captain WiHoughby, he was convinced she would rejoice; he* therefore wished her to remain in igno¬ rance, till his fiat had gone forth. Cap¬ tain WiHoughby, who, I am convinced, possesses an excellent hearf, understanding whom he wished to see besides his father, who were the Earl of Merioneth and Mrs. W 7 heeler, galloped back to London, and came first into Austin Friars. Having ask¬ ed for me, he briefly, though with great feeling, communicated the melancholy in¬ telligence
tellŕgence to me, desmng 1 would break the news to the old gentleman, and accom¬ pany him as soon as possible to Chalk Farm, as he was going to Merioneth-house, and from thence into Baker-street, to send Mr. Haslemere s carriage for Mrs. Wheeler, after which he proposed returning to the dying man. Having taken a short time to recollect myself, I joined our worthy friend in his private counting-house — happily few men possess a greater share of forti¬ tude, or are more truly submissive to Ae decrees of Heaven. Having therefore- heard mv verv incoherent tale, he e*~ claimed— f The Lord's will be éøne î— f only wish my son had lost tits life in a more glorious cause—Order the carriage immediately, and leave me till ttm ready, to myself/ and no dmibt he had meoum? to prayer, to strengthen hi» mind for. tlie approaching interview. When the coach was at the door, I ventured to sttmmon him, and found him more calm and *.«_!- krtei than I had d íred fo hope ; and ч S were*
•were soen »pon the road, when he natu- ralfy enquired who had brought me the intelligence of hb son's danger ? * Captain WiHoughby/ I replied, * who bad been his second/ ** He shook his head, saying, * From the character I have heard of that young man, I should not be surprised were he ако to lose his Ше m a duel; but let us hope George, being thus suddenly cut off, may рипс a warning : his mttr h a mmt ex¬ cellent woman, «id who among onr nobles rani* so high in (he public esteem, as her husband, tbe Earl of Merioneth ? he was ønte the intimate friend of George, but, of bie years, I fancy they have seldom roet. 4 * I mentioned Ле wish Mr- Haslemere had now expressed to see him. f I can*t conceive what he can have of moment to say fo his Londsbip, though î hope he will obey his summon -, but J should much sooner have supposed he would have sent for old Whet 1er, in which 3 case
ease I would have bailed Ыт, and have* taken him with us/ " I guessed to what he alluded, but did not think it prudent to inform him Mrs* Wheeler had been summoned, as the dying sufferer might not choose to see her in our presence. Having reached the hill leading to Chalk Farm, the coachman was obliged to slacken his pace, and before we turned out of the great road, the Earl of Merio¬ neth passed its on horseback, followed by his groom. Mr. Haslemere instantly гф* cognised him, and seemed very happy he had so kindly conformed to his son's wishes. He preceded m to the Farai, and was al¬ ready seated by the bedside of the sufferer when we arrived, who was more calm and; composed than 1 had expected to have found him, though the appearance of his aged father rather agitated him, particu¬ larly when the old gentleman took his band, whose grief impeding his utterance, * Can yon forgive a worthless son ?* he- it о faio.ly.
faintly exclaimed—' but I will not ask yott to do so, nor even to bestow your last blessing upon me, till you are acquainted with my crimes—I ieel I am dying, and the surgeons have acknowledged that I cannot live twenty-four hours; I therefore only wish to make my peace with Heaven, and all the reparation now in my power to those 1 have so greatly injured : let every one leave the room but you, my father, the Earl, and my cousin, who will, I hope, in a great measure console you for my loss, .should you grieve for me after I have un- burthened my guilty conscience.' " Such an exordium prepared us to ex¬ pect something extraordinary, nor were we disappointed, since he revealed to¬ us ------ ." " The secret of my birth !" interrupted out agitated hero— u he has acknowledged that lam his son!" " No, on my honour—though he has certainly revealed to whom you were in- · debted
debted for your existence ; and your strik¬ ing resemblance to the Haslemere family is now perfectly accounted for." fC Am I then his brother ?" asked the perplexed and bewildered Francis—'* be brief, Kempthorne, do not keep me İn such a pitiable suspense." ft You are not the son, but the grand¬ son of your venerable friend, as you are the son of his beloved daughter, and the Earl of Merioneth is your father." Hitherto the friends had been standing in the middle of the room, but Kemp¬ thorne was now obliged to take hold of our hero's arm, and to support him to a chair. " You insisted upon my being brief/' he cried, " and I have very foolishly oblig¬ ed you ; but I shall not easily forgive my¬ self for having been so abrupt in my com¬ munication." Francis could only press the hand he held, in reply, for a minute or more, when he faintly ejaculated— (< Can it be pos¬ sible ?
«ibie ?—yet I am sure you would not trifle- with my feelings." " I must be as great a wretch as Mrs. Wheeler has proved herself, to have done so : but you must take something—your spirits are not equal to so agreeable a siu> prise." "' Nonsense !" was the reply— ff I am very well again now—joy seldom kills; but I ought sooner to have recollected that you have been running all the way from Chalk Farm, and are in a violent perspi¬ ration—ring the bell, that I may order you a change of linen and something to drink,. that you may not be a sitflerer, owing to your wish to oblige me." The servant having brought in the wine, left the room to execute the other order ; and, after each drinking a glass—" Now let me request you would enter into some further explanations," said Francis— " I hope, indeed I cannot doubt, that 1 was born in wedlock, since even the Wheelers ne vered the memory of my mother." (t You
*' You were the fruit of a private mar¬ riage, as your parents were both too young at that period, and too much in love, to act very prudently ; and the late Earl of Merioneth, though a very good man, was not blessed with so liberal a mind as his son ; he would, therefore, never have for¬ given his having married the daughter of a man in trade—the Welch are, you know, very tenacious of their family-honour, and his absurd prejudices led unfortunately to your having been brought up in such ob¬ scurity." " I will not (anxious as I feel to be made acquainted with every circumstance) listen to another word," said Francis, " till you have changed your linen." Kempthorne instantly retired, and our hero, during his absence, returned his thanks where they were most due, for hav¬ ing been thus restored to his proper rank in life ; and had scarcely concluded his mental thanksgiving, ere his friend again joined
joined him, acknowledging that he felt much more comfortable. " How came my father acquainted with my.mother?" Francis enquired. " Through the means of your maternal*- uncle, whom you may have heard was edu¬ cated at Winchester, and there he became acquainted with the present Earl of Merio¬ neth, then Lord Caerleon. Mr. Haslemere was never deficient in point of talents, and was always, I make no doubt, a most ex¬ cellent companion; and as they had both plenty of money, they were equals at school, from whence they removed, nearly at the same time, to college, where they were under still· less restraint ; therefore frequently rode over from Oxford to Fir Grove, as, Mr. and Mrs..Haslemere were al¬ ways happy to see their son in such com¬ pany, having both the highest opinion of the principles of Lord Caerleon; and as. Miss Haslemere, at this period, resided chiefly at the Grove, the y gung people soon
soon grew very intimate; and his Lordship, after a very short time, felt that he pre¬ ferred the sister to the brother, and she was no less captivated with him—But, to shorten my story, Mr. George, who was, of course, in all his friend's secrets, agreed that, by bringing over Mrs. Wheeler to second their plans, they might so manage matters as to be privately married ; and you need not be told, that self-interest render¬ ed the old woman subservient to the lovers* wishes : suffice it to say, that she contrived to have the young couple asked in church, by which means they were married at St. Margaret's, Westminster, by the then rec¬ tor, who by no means supposed that Fran¬ cis Caerwvth and Caroline Haslemere were other than relations of Mrs. Wheeler: the ceremony did not, however, take place till the young men had left college, and were, of course, more their own masters. Lord Caerleon was, however, soon sent upon his travels : this they had foreseen, and had made up their minds to being separated fdr
for at least a couple of years, hoping that, when he returned, the Earl might be in¬ duced to forgive the step they had taken, as he was doatingly fond of his son, who was an only child. About two months after his Lordship's departure, Mr. and Mrs. Hasle- mere were summoned to Russia, and their daughter, at her own request, took up her abode at the Mint Farm, then tenanted by Mrs. Wheeler, and at this said farm-house you lirst opened your eyes to the light, though no one suspected that Lady Caer¬ leon was in tbe family-way but those in her immediate confidence; unfortunately she «did not 'survive your birth many hours -—J hope that worthless old woman has no¬ thing to answer for upon' that account, as she has been sufficiently criminal, without adding murder to the catalogue of her sins; as your mother's death induced the vile wretch to enter into a farther league with your uncle, to deprive you of your birth¬ right, as he washed to obtain possession of what would have fallen to his sharç, as his sister
sister died under age, had she left no issue, namely, thirty thousand pounds, which she had inherited from her grandmother, and the Rose-hill estate, which was computed to bring in about eight hundred a-year: he therefore took upon himself to inform Lord Caerleon, that both his wife and child had paid the debt of nature, and you were brought forward as the natural son of the deceased Farmer Powell, the Wheelers having received a thousand pounds down, to induce them to second your uncle*« schemes, and who had also bound himself to allow them a hundred a-year for their joint lives, or to either survivor : this in¬ sured their secrecy for the time being, though it Seems they generally contrived to draw at least another hundred a-year from their guilty accomplice, under vari¬ ous pretences, as he was «nable to set hk face against their impositions, for he was obliged to pay for your nursing, cloaths, board when they took: you home, Caro¬ line's schooling, and a hundred etceteras, as
as they expected, Mrs. Wheeler maintained, to receive the annuity clear of all deduc¬ tions ; and when they, in a manner, forbade you their house by his desire, in hopes it would remove the suspicions he found his father entertained, he promised to give each of their children uve hundred pounds when they married, which it seems he did, and they drew another hundred from him when I removed from Marsham-street: once he had intended to have brought about a match between you and Caroline, but soon felt that that would be only putting him¬ self more in the old woman's power, to whom he mentioned me, wishing, as he said, to throw out a tub to catch a whale : but, not contented with having thus made him pay for their keeping his secret, last night he received a letter from the old wo¬ man, couched in the most insolent terms, requiring him to liberate her husband im¬ mediately, &c. &c. under the penalty of having his secret divulged to the Earl of Merioneth : he had, therefore, desired Cap¬ tala
tain WiHoughby would call at his house, and merely desire his valet to proceed in his curricle to Marsham-street, and to bring Mrs. Wheeler from thence to Chalk Farm, by his orders and appointment, she was to be told, as he wished to give her a verbal answer to her late letter, and she did arrive there about an hour after us; and you may suppose how enviable her feelings were, when she was shewn into the room where we were all assembled round the sufferer, who desiring her to advance, which she did, scarcely aware of her so doing, he told her, that the day of retribution was arrived, as he had found it impossible to depart this life without disclosing their joint crimes; and as he was fearful that, had she known his situation, she might not have obeyed his summons, he had had recourse to stra¬ tagem, to induce her to witness his repen¬ tance for hisshare İn their joint iniquities; assuring her, that he hoped her last mo¬ ments would be less embittered by remorse than his were; adding, * though I am now fully
fully persuaded that, had you been called away first, which might have been expect¬ ed, you could not have carried such a se¬ cret to the grave with you, in which case, I should have been placed in your present situation ; I therefore bless God that I am spared the mortification of surviving my dishonour— I have confessed every thing, and I desire, as you hape for that mercy which I now implore, that you will con¬ firm the truth of all 1 have advanced : you are before merciful judges, and I hope our heavenly Father will deign to forgive our joint guilt ; though I have been much the most to blame, as I suggested the plan you so readily gave into: I had been very extravagant, and Was very much perplexed about some debts of honour, at the time my sister died, and I durst not apply to my then absent father.' ťť Here his voice faltered, owing to his recent exertions, and the Earl requested him to remain quiet, and to take something the surgeon had prepared ibr him. ' Could
* Could I but see my nephew, my much injured nephew, I should yield up my life without a murmur/ te The Earl instantly requested I would go in search of you, intreating me to prepare you for the melancholy scene that awaited your arrival, declaring, that he was as impatient to see you as the dying suf· ferer could feel. Away therefore I posted on foot, forgetting that Mr. Haslemere's coach and the curricle were both in wait¬ ing; and as I ran nearly the whole way, and am not in training for such races, I perspired rather too freely/' Without replying, Francis rang the bell and ordered his carriage, observing, "While it was getting ready, that he was inclined to think with Pope, that * Whatever is, is right / " since my father has no other sons, and being bred in adversity, and to fancy myself solely dependent upon my own ex¬ ertions, has taught me many a useful les¬ son ; among others, I hope to bear pros¬ perity. The Wheelers, as my grandfather has
has often said, certainly assisted in corrupt¬ ing my penitent uncle's principles; had they, or rather the old woman, been less complying, he would have been less cul¬ pable : however, divine vengeance, as the old man feelingly observed the other night, seems indeed to have overtaken them— nav, the children seem to have suffered for the parents' iniquities." But the carriage be¬ ing at the door, the friends stepped in, our hero desiring the coachman to make the best of his way to Chalk Farm, whither we shall precede them. We left Mrs. Wheeler, when Kemp¬ thorne came away, supporting herself by the bedpost, with downcast eyes and ghast¬ ly countenance ; and she would have slunk out after his cousin, if the dying man had not made a sign to have her detained, as hitherto she had not spoken a single word. The Earl, though he had not seen her for so many years, perfectly recollected her, and seizing her by the arm, led her back towards the bed, when he asked her a va¬ riety
riety of questions, and her answers con¬ firmed the truth of all the dying man had confessed. " Possibly/' said the indignant peer, " not contented with bringing up my so» not only in obscurity, but in disgrace, yets also murdered his mother, to enable you to conceal his birth.*" She declared, as she hoped for mercy, she had, on the contrary, done all in her power to save her life, protesting that the penitent sufferer had led her into all her errors; declaring, she wished it would please God to remove her into a better world, as she could never hold up her head again in this. <f You had more need pray," cried the no less angry Mr. Haslemere, " that you may be allowed time for repentance ; and, once out of this room, I hope I shall never have the misfortune to set eyes upon you again." -" Most cordially do I join in your wish, my dear Sh*," resumed the lari—** so te¬ vor, iv, n lieve
lieve us-from your presence, you disgrace to your sex and to human nature i since you must have been dead to every sense of feeling, to have so basely injured a child of, Caroline Haslemere's, who considered you as her second mother." She instantly left the room, without even speaking to the dying man, whose advice seemed to have been all thrown away upon her; and the two young men met her, about halfa mile from the farm, returning home on foot : she chose, however, to turn her back when she saw the carriage advan¬ cing, and affected to be looking at some¬ thing across the field, while they drove by. Kempthorne was, however, convinced it was her, as he recollected her grey silk gown. The Earl, who had been upon the look¬ out, without saying why, left the room of the dying man when he caught sight of the chariot, and gave his son the meeting at the door; and, having led him into a parlour, for several seconds they were each enfolded
enfolded in the other's arms, neither being able to speak, till tears came to their relief. ft Your uncle is still alive, my dear Frank," were the Earľs first words, u and I hope you can forgive him as sincerely as I have done." " Else I should be very unworthy of such a father, and of the many blessings yet in store for me, my Lord—There are no hopes of his recovery, my friend tells me." " Not the slightest—I am only amazed he has held out so long, considering the agitation of his mind: but, as moments even are precious, I will accompany you up stairs—your grandfather is no less anxi¬ ous to see you, but I had resolved to re¬ ceive your first embrace; indeed I felt a sort of instinctive regard for you when we first met, your countenance so strongly re¬ minded me of your lovely mother; but that, I thought, the scandalous chronicle had perfectly accounted for, as I supposed, like many more, you were a natural son of n 2 your
your uncle's; yet, when I rereived hb hasty summons this morning, a .suspicion of the real truth darted across my mind, and riever were my feelings so gratified, as when he pronounced you to be the son of bis deceased sister ; since, had I been al¬ lowed to select my heir, I think I should have followed the late Mr. Freeman's ex¬ ample." Never had our hero felt more gratified. *' But I am delaying time, and I must not be too selfish ; though I have so much to say, that, were your uncle's state less precarious, I could not find in my heart to Introduce you to a third person :" but, having reached the room of the dying man, the elder Mr. Haslemere gave them the meeting, and silently folded his grandson f n his arms, mentally calling down a bless¬ ing upon his head: he then, without «peaking, led him towards the bed upon which the dying penitent was extended, who, by looks and gestures, implored his forgivenefcö, vAxïch his nephew pronounced as
as well as he was able, concluding by hop-. ing that he might recover, to be convinced of the sincerity of his assertions. " You have rendered my last moments comparatively happy," he replied, in a feeble whisper,. " and you will console my father for the loss of so- worthless a*son, for whom he has frequently had to blush, but whom he could not have supposed was so very undeserving of his regard— Would my strength second my wishes, I would again confess my errors in your pre¬ sence." " For Heaven's sake, only think of com¬ posing your agitated spirits," resumed Francis, in which request all present, join¬ ed ; but he persisted in informing hia nø:· phew, that he had written a long^ explanar tory letfer to his father, which, with his will, he had consigned to the care of Cap¬ tain WiHoughby, who had promised to de¬ liver them both, in the event of his being: lulled upon the spot, to Mr* ilaslemere, χ & senior*.
senior, and he was now gone in search ot them. Having, however, quite exhausted his strength, he fell into a sort of rcstles 55 dose; and, not to disturb him, the Earl. his newly-recovered son, and Mr. Hasle- merè, went into an adjoining apartment, where they were almost immediately join¬ ed by Captain WiHoughby, who presented the packet he had been intrusted with to the old gentleman, sincerely lamenting that such a melancholy occurrence should have preceded his first introduction to him, since the Earl had given him the meeting in town, to concert with him respecting what settlement he ought to make upon Mrs. WiHoughby, and his Lordship had pro¬ posed waiting upon Mr. Haslemere this very morning, respecting the business. The Earl could only rejoice his apropos arrival in London had enabled him to at¬ tend the dying man's summons, while Cap¬ tain WiHoughby sincerely congratulated both
both father and son, assuring the old gen¬ tleman that he meant, in future, to take Lord Caerleon for his model, therefore he hoped he would never have reason to re* pent his having married his ward. He was still speaking, when Kempthorne, who had remained in the sick-room with the surgeons, came to inform them that his cousin had opened his eyes, and had enquired whether they had left the house f and upon hearing they had not, he had ex¬ pressed a wish to see them. They instantly obeyed the summons- Captain WiHoughby told him, that he had delivered the packet he had entrusted hint with to the old gentleman, while our hero, taking his hand, endeavoured to speak comfort to the expiring penitent, who was endeavouring to give utterance to his feelings of gratitude,, when he sunk back,. and expired. Francis, who continued to hold his hand, felt the last gentle pressure, and received bis kst look· Aware of his dissolution, у 4 fromt
from these circumstances, he looked at the surgeon, who was standing on the other side of the bed, and who made him a sign to remove the old gentleman. Taking him, therefore, by the arm, he led him out of the room. ** Father of Heaven, have mercy upon me ! " ejaculated the afflicted father, as he slowly left the apartment, followed by the Earl and Captain Willonghby Kemp*· thorne soon joined them, having given a few general ordens, and left the valet of the deceased to watch by the remains of his master; when it was settled, that he should return tö town with the old gentle¬ man, who, after again calling down a bles¬ sing upon his beloved grandson, hoped he should see him during the course of the next day, though he felt that he had every reason to hold the name of Haslemere in abhorrence. * f Surely, my dear grandfather, you can¬ not doubt my having sincerely forgiven my misguided nncle ; and, were I so nnV grateful
ticed and befriended me, while yott sup¬ posed me a mere dependant upon- tfcfr bounty of Ûte Wheelers, ft would have: been far better that I had remained in ig¬ norance oi my birth, and lam aune my fo¬ tber is of the «ame opinion." The Earl eagerly seized the opportunity. to express his heart-felt thanks to the wor¬ thy mefiehaat, assuring hkn, that We paeb kindness towaidalns deserted son, had al¬ most obliterated from his tecoüecttoti tte: errors of the deceased. " Then I dure not regret his having Вееш thus suddenly and awfully called away,*/* was the reply, ** since, had he recovered,, he must have secluded himself from all his* former friends, or have gone into exile- While I have such a grandson left to con~ sole me, It would be impious to repine afe the decrees of Heaven." It was finally settled,, that Captain Wi&- loughby should drive into Baker-street im the curricle, where he was to break the* л S» melancholy»
melancholy intelligence to the widow, and to inform her of the discoveries which had so recently taken place, while Mr. Hasle¬ mere and Kempthorne returned into Aus¬ tin Friars, to the latter of whom he was to communicate what passed between him and the woman, who had certainly been the ultimate occasion of his friend's decease ; and thus the party separated, as our hero accompanied his father home to Merioneth- house, where they had resolved to spend the evening têtc-à-lcte, »
CHAP.
CHAP. X. Having made rather a hasty dinner, as both father and son were impatient to be re¬ lieved from the presence of the attending servants, who had been briefly informed by the Bari, that his companion was his son by his former marriage, Lord Merioneth entered into various details respecting his union with Caroline Haslemere; adding; * f I bless God 1 inherited none of my fa¬ ther's mistaken prejudices, with his title and estates; therefore, believe me I re¬ joice at the idea of being related, through your means, to Mrs. Archer, as I have long felt the greatest respect for her; and tixe x 6 eldest
eldest daughter of a man of Mr. Melvin's fortune, would have been deemed your equal, even by my father; though I know her being the widow of % Liverpool mer¬ chant, and having a sister married to a rich manufacturer, would have been great draw¬ backs, in his opinion ; but I think her wor¬ thy of yott, and which is, in my opinion, paying her a very high compliment. î have been thus explicit, as 1 thought you might feel impatient t<* learn my opinion of her ; so I shall only imfef upon your taking the greatest care of yourself, for all our sakes r as you have not yet absolutely recovered from the injury you sustained in her service—Now tell me how you and the fair widow ha%'e settled matfersj I under¬ stand you have lately purchased a very good house in town, and that you have been, in almost every -respect, guided by the advice of your excellent grandfather, who appears to idolize you: 1 hope we shall not entirely spoil you between us, thoitgi you bid fair to be no less a favour rife
rite with my good uncle—But соше, Ш me hear how your iove affair goes on ?" The delighted Franc», who and had M* doubts whether his father would teve feh ю much inclined to forward his match with the fair widow, read il v entened into every detail he required, mentioniag what aettfe- ments he had made upon her» and that he had hoped to have led ho* to the altar be¬ fore Christmas. " I am fearful, respect for your grand¬ father mutt oblige you te defer Ле cere¬ mony, till etiquette permiü you to leave «ift\ our mourning lor your deceased uncle ; therefore, we will not nt prezent diluas what settlements Lord Caerleon must make upon the woman to whom ite gives hie name, as i cannot yet inform yon what ad¬ dition 1 can make Ы yoer preien t income.'' " It will more than «lake fm *H тщ wants» my dem- Str— Mrs. Archer*« fortune wilt greatly uicreane it ; and as my bte «nele has made me his heir, I a« convinced that I shall be amply trovîded for ; at all 3 events»
events, I am resolved not to deprive my sisters of any part of your fortune." " You have a right to share it with them, íny beloved Frank, and I must resemble your late uncle, ware 1 to toke advantage of the generosity of your disposition—But we will not now discuss money-matters, as the recent discovery, and your uncle's death, will, ï make no doubt, be in to-moi> row's papers; and as the tale is not like¬ ly to bc very correctly told, I wish to be the first to impart the røtellt_renee to lady Merioneth and to my uncle : I shall, therefore, set off early to-morrow morn¬ ing for Carfeeny Green ; and as I shall not stop upon the road, I shall certainly get the start of the papem." " I only hope you will not overfatigue yourself, Sir—how happy I should feel* were I permitted to accompany you ! as I feel very impatient to be introduced to the Countess and my »sters; and should be no less gratified, could f be the bearer of such pleasing intelligence to Mrs. Archer ; but 1 cannot
I cannot think of leaving town, while my excellent grandfather is in such need of consolation, and after his expressed wish to see me often." ** There spoke Caroline Haslemere's son !" cried the Earl, with evident exulta¬ tion—" I rejoice you prevented me from asking you to accompany me, as it is your duty to devote your time to that worthy man, whom I shall feel proud of styling my father ; and your presence will, I know, prove the greatest cordial to his drooping mind, and will, I am sure, induce him to bear his recent loss with fortitude : I shall, therefore, travel alone; and as I am in much better health than you are, I am very able to bear up against a much greater de¬ gree of fatigue than I shall experience— Lady Merioneth will, I know, accompany me to South Lodge, as I wish to assure Mrs. Archer that I look forward with more than pleasure to seeing her united to our family •—What message shall 1 deliver from you to the
the fair widow? or do you mean to address her in writing ?" " Positivei y, my dear father, my head is too much bewildered at present, to write an intelligible letter, even to Mrs. Archer—Will you beso obiiging as to as¬ sure her, that I will dispatch a very long- one, the moment I feel competent to com¬ mitting my feelings, respecting the late wonderful events, to paper?·—But dare,I hope, as yem seem to hint, that Lady Me¬ rioneth will participate in your satisfac¬ tion, when she learns that her daughters. have a brother living ?" ,f I am sure she will, and so will my worthy -uncle, as they are both acquainted with my former marriage : I imparted the secret to Lady Merioneth during our court- ship, and she will, I know, rejoice when. -she learns that my son, by Caroline Hasle¬ mere, is still living ; and as my uncle has, like myself, greatly regretted that I had no boys to succeed to our joint pi-opeify, he wil b
will even more than participate in my feel¬ ings upon the joyful discovery ; and you may believe me when I assure you, that Lady Merioneth, if she does not possess your mother's beauty, possesses all her vir¬ tues—I cannot speak more highly in her praise : she has taken uncommon pains with your sisters, and, I flatter myself, they will do her honour. I think L told you, at Lady Bayfield's, that Caroline, so named after your mother, has a very fine voice, and í am sure she will feel delighted at having it improved under the tuition of her brother, for they are all three very good girls— But I wish, if you feel capable of holding a pen, that you would write three line's to Airs. Archer—refer her to me, who will be the bearer of your missive, for every par¬ ticular—merely prepare h%r to expect something extraordinary." Our hero instantly did as the Earl de¬ sired, who remained buried in thouirht while his son was writing, when, having read the short incoherent note Francis had penned.
penned, which would be the best introduc* tion he could have to Airs. Archer, he ob¬ served, he reverted to the Wheelers, whom he vowed he never should forgive: his adored Caroline had, from her infancy, proved herself their friend and benefac¬ tress, and, in return, they had endeavoured to deprive her son of his birthright ; and, not contented with bringing him up in ob¬ scurity, had obliged him to earn his bread, even while his unprincipled uncle had very liberally contributed towards his support— What punishment ceuld be adequate to their crimes ? Francis said, he had nothing to alledge in defence of the old woman, the old man having been entirely guided by her. " He was, in consequence, much the most to blame," interrupted the Earl, ff as he connived at her wickedness ; and there were many equally weak men, who would, nevertheless, spurn at committing a bad action." As our hero felt the justice of these re- marks,.
marks, he said no more, merely observing, that their folly and criminality had led them to ruin ; and, soon after tea, the Earl sent for his son's carriage, merely having his travelling-chaise in town, and insisted upon his returning home, and en¬ deavouring to obtain some repose, as his spirits must have been very much agitated» which, in his state of health, might be very prejudicial to him. Francis assured him, that the discovery of their affinity was much more likely to compleat than to retard his cure, and rather reluctantly departed, between nine and ten. The Earl participated in his evident re¬ gret, which he rather lessened, by promis¬ ing to write him as soon as possible, and to join him again in town in less than a week ; and no sooner had Francis driven . from the door, than he gave orders for post-horses, &c. Sec, resolving to set out immediately, as he felt that he should be unable to sleep if he went to bed, and he could
could equally reflect upon the wonderful occurrences of the day, when seated in his travelling carriage; therefore, before twelve, he was upon the road into Staffordshire. Francis had scarcely had time to reflect upon the change which had taken place in his prospects, ere he was roused by the thundering knock his servant gave at his own door, who having learned, at Chalk Farm, that his master was a lord, thus chose to display his knowledge of his great¬ ness, and his valet bowed with more than usual respect when he admitted him. Mrs. Hunter, who had hastened into the hall, followed him into the parlour, to con¬ gratulate him upon having been restored to his real rank in life, and to express her detestation of those vile Wheelers, whose crimes would not, she hoped, escape un¬ punished. Her tears were proofs how sin¬ cerely she rejoiced at the recent discovery, and our hero's kind speeches,* and request that she would prepare him some of her excellent restoratives, added to her satis¬ faction^
faction. She was leaving the room, when she hastily returned, declaring that she had been upon her knees, returning thanks where they were most due, for her dear master's having escaped the snares of that lovesick Miss, as she should never have forgiven herself, had the deceitful huss"èy become a lady through her means. Francis could not keep his countenance, her gravity was so ludicrous; though, like her, he rejoiced that his late uncle had ef¬ fectually broke the spell that this second Armida had, for a time, cast over him. Joy, our hero now truly found, was as great an enemy to repose as excess of grief, since he never forgot himself till it was nearly time to rise, and then not for more than an hour ; and as he felt very im¬ patient to know how his grandfather did, he set out on foot for Austin Friars as soon as he was dressed, meaning to breakfast there. As the counting-house was not yet •open, he knocked at the private door, and was instantly admitted by his friend Kemp¬ thorne,
IS A SECRET. thorne, who requested he would walk into the drawing-room.. Having reached that apartment— (< How is my grandfather, my dear friend ?" " I am happy to inform your Lordship, that, all things considered, he has passed a very tolerable night^—I slept upon a sofa in his room, therefore I can speak from . pretty good authority ; my fears for his health induced me to send for Dr. В -----^ as soon as we returned to town, and he prescribed a draught, which greatly helped to compose his spirits, and 1 have request¬ ed he would breakfast in bed. Now, may 1 ask how you have rested, and how the Earl is this morning ?" " I cannot say I slept much,, but I am very well, and exceedingly happy to hear my grandfather is so much better than I had dared to have expected—My father is upon the road to Carberry Green : he wishes to be the first to inform Lady Meri¬ oneth that 1 am still in existence ;" briefly relating the heads of what had passed be¬ tween
tween them, as he wished to remove the evident embarrassment he perceived Kemp¬ thorne laboured under, who did not feei himself so much at his ease in the presence of Lord Caerleon, as he had ever done in that of his friend Yates, even since he be¬ came the rich Mr. Freeman. Francis's kind intention was not, how¬ ever, abortive, as he dwelled with unfeign¬ ed pleasure upon the approbation the Earl had evinced respecting his choice ofa wife ; adding, " W r e are now only cousins, I be¬ lieve, Kempthorne ; but I do hope, in time, we shall be brothers by marriage—the late melancholy event will, of course, lead to your promotion—I promise you I will stand your friend with Emily Mel vin : so now tell me, have you heard how the wi¬ dow is ?" " First let me thank you for acknowledg¬ ing our very distant relationship, and still more so, for the kind wish you express re¬ lative to Miss Melvin, as 1 own I was afraid Lord
Lord Caerleon might not have wished to have seen me united to his sister-in-law." " Thank Heaven that 1 am in a very pa¬ cific humour this morning ! so I forgive your implied doubts that I bore some res¬ semblance, if no affinity, to the Wheelers." " Do not mention the wretches, if you do not wish to raise a storm in my bosom— So, to answer your question, Captain Wil¬ longhby, for whom even Mr. Haslemere begins to entertain some regard, came hi¬ ther betw r een seven and eight, and drank his tea with me; from him I understand Mrs. Haslemere is perfectly resigned, nay, he even affirmed that she was not absolute* ly sorry that her kind prognostics respect¬ ing her deceased husband have proved true, as she has told him, that he would either be ruined by heavy damages, or killed in a duel. She was much more hurt, the Cap¬ tain said, when she learned that you were a grandson of Mr. Haslemere's, and her husbandfe heir—but no more of the un¬ feeling
feeling being—shall I accompany you to your grandfather ? the sight of you will, I know, revive his spirits." Francis readily accompanied him into the old gentleman's room, who, raising himself in bed, and extending his hand, exclaimed, <f How much am I obliged to you, my dear grandson, for this early visit ! —How'is the Earl Г Francis told him when they had sepa¬ rated, and where his father was gone. (( And you have remained in town solely upon my account, my dear boy—but you are the counterpart of your long-lamented mother—Have you breakfasted ?" " Not yet, my dear Sir, í mean to do so with my cousin." fi How could vou venture out fasting ? —Kempthorne, why did not you insist up¬ on Lord Caerleon's breakfasting before you brought him up stairs ?—give orders im¬ mediately, and send me up a bason of tea; 1 nn ill drink it while I am dressing, as I am not inclined to lie any longer," vol. iv. ^ о The
The young men retired, and had scarcely finished their meal, when the old gentle¬ man joined them, and to him Francis те* capitulated the heads of what had passed •between him and his father. The old gentleman had much to say in praise of the Earl, whom he had greatly esteemed as Lord Caerleon ; adding, " I had hoped his excellent example would have worked a reform in mv deluded son, little supposing how basely he had requited him for having married his sister; and I fancy, like most guilty people, he has been oflate years more inclined to shun than to cultivate an intimacy with his Lordship." "1 do think Air. Haslemere would, soon-» er or later, have disclosed the secret of his nephews birth," resumed Kempthorne, ff as he told me, w r hi!e I was alone with him, that he had been thoroughly awaken¬ ed to a sense of his guilt, one day last sum¬ mer, when he accidentally saw the Earl of Merioneth İn earnest conversation with his son, near the Countess of Bayfield's, at Brompton :
Brompton : he was driving past at the time, and this incident made such an impression upon his mind, that it brought on the ner¬ vous fever for which Or, В ------ sent him to Brighton." (C I am glad he had some sense of shame remaining, poor misguided wretch î I have ¿.ven orders respecting the funeral— it will take place next Wednesday—the sooner the better: the corpse will be conveyed home as soon as the coroner has done his duty : I shall not prosecute his adversary, who is, I understand, dangerously wound¬ ed, as George provoked his fate. This evening I propose going down to my villa —¡will you dine with me there to-morrow, my dear Francis ? I will not ask you to ac¬ company me down, as I shall take Kemp¬ thorne with me, but to-morrow I shal? re¬ joice to see you," " You may depend upon doing so. Sir." if Thank you, my dear boy ; and now let me hope that you are no longer inclin- о 2 cd
ed to do any thing for those wretched Wheelers—I positively feel agitated even while pronouncing their name, since, the more I reflect upon the past, the less I feel inclined to forgive them ; nay, I could al¬ most find in my heart to wish that their punishment might be adequate to their crimes." -, ťf 1 have nothing to say in their defence, Sir—Mrs. Wheeler's conduct admits of no extenuation—her children were certainly not acquainted with the secret of my birth." u 'Tis possible," resumed Mr. Haslemere — ff but are you not convinced that old Wheeler knew you were my grandson ?" " I must suppose he did, Sir—poverty, in the first instance, possibly led him to connive at a deception doubtless planned by his wife; and, having once become her accomplice, he durst not betray their mu¬ tual guilt — he has certainly had many qualms of conscience, and----- ■-" 'J He is a villain, Francis !" resumed the old
old gentleman, " since you can never know how much the whole family have been obliged to your mother." At this moment Air.. Weldon was an¬ nounced, who, having been in Devonshire- place, in consequence of having read a very incorrect statement of Mr. George Haslemere's death, and of the discovery of his nephew's birth, in a morning paper, not finding Lord Caerleon at home, after a short conference with Mrs. Hunter, he had posted into Austin Friars, where, as he fully expected, he found him, and, after deli¬ cately congratulating his Lordship upon the recent events, slightly reverting to the melancholycircumstance which had brought about the late discovery, he declared his abhorrence of those vile Wheelers, in even stronger terms than either the Earl or the merchant had done, adroitly affixing the far greater share of guilt upon them—■ if That infamous old hussey," he went on, " to dare to expect his Lordship would have bailed her rogue of a husband Ι¬ ο 3 were
were they in prosperity, I vow I woixtd prosecute them at my own expence ; but their folly has led to their being pretty se¬ verely punished in this world — the old "people must end their days in a workhouse, and their son will probably be hanged, as he is both a fool and a knave ; as to Mrs. Eastwood, she may join her husband, or, like Eggleton's mistress, go to service : the whole Wheeler family were frequently, I understood, at Eggleton's galas, who used to hire linen, plate, china, and servants upon those occasions : had they been soon¬ er acquainted, I should not have been so jmuch surprised at Mrs. Wheeler's behave ©air towards Lord Caerleon ; as it is, she has even surpassed Eggleton in iniquity/* fC She certainly has," replied the old mán, mentioning the sums she had drawn from his son, in addition to his first bribe, and the promised annuity, tf Eggleton and Eastwood are innocent, when compared to her," resumed Mr, Wel- don, u as she might be transported for th£ Ust
last threatening letter she sent the de¬ ceased/* It was however agreed to leave them to the pangs of a guilty conscience ; and the attorney soon retired, our hero promising to look in upon him in his way home. After an early dinner, Air. Haslemere and Kempthorne set out for the Forest, and Lord Caerleon set out home. Air. Weldon, upon whom he called, was extremely happy to see him, and still more so, to find the Earl of Aierioneth approved of his marry¬ ing his former ward. Nothing farther could be done respecting the settlements, since the Earl must be consulted before anv others could be drawn ; and, after sitting near an hour with the truly worthy lawyer, he proceeded into Devonshire-place: from his valet, who was standing upon the steps*, he understood Mrs. Hunter had been in tears for the last hour, as he had neither come home to dinner, nor to dress, admit¬ ting that he dined out : she was therefore convinced that he had been way-laid, if о 1 not
not murdered, by some of the Wheeler kí gang, and that she should never see him again ; and Mrs. Jones, who had arrived only a few minutes before his Lordship, had not contributed to raise her spirits. Having heard all the man had to say, who certainly appeared very glad that the house¬ keeper's fears had proved groundless, un¬ derstanding the old women were still clo¬ seted in Mrs. Hunter's room, he sent the \ r alet down to let them know he was ar¬ rived, and to request Mrs. Jones would join him in the drawing-room. Mrs. Hun-' ter -followed her up stairs, declaring, that if it had not been for the recent discove¬ ries, she could have found in her heart to have scolded for an hour : however, so long as his Lordship was retuined safe and sound,' she .was satisfied. Francis assured her, he was sorry he had not told her where he was going, and that his return was uncertain, requesting Mrs. Jones to make tea for him. The old lady was extremely gratified by this
this kind invitation, warmly congratulating him upon having been restored to so ex¬ cellent a father ; adding, " I am sure the being able to claim an affinity to your Lordship, will console Mr. Haslemere for the loss of a son so very unlike himself : so now, having paid my compliments, I am ready to make your Lordship's tea, after which I have something more to say." Francis, in return, entered into a few details, which he was conscious she must be curious to be made acquainted with; and she w T as eagerly listening while pour¬ ing out the tea, when Kalkreuth was an¬ nounced, whom our hero advanced to meet with even more than usual cordiali tv ; re- joicing at having returned home so very apropos, as he felt that both he and Mrs. Jones might have supposed that he had given orders to be denied to them, had he really been out, and as he had resolved ne¬ ver to cut with any of his former friends, though he might not be able to see them so frequently as heretofore, yet he felt as- o ò su red
suŕecf fhatlïe shotiľd ú eVermeet with many more sincere ones in the circle of fashion ; aiid he had the highest opinion of the German's heart, head, and principles. ' fì tìow is Mr. Moretón ?" enquired our hero, " and why did not he accompany foà, my dear Kalkreuth ?" <ť He was afraid of veliíuring our so late at night, Sir=—or, perhaps I ought fo say, íny Lordi ; for he ient me hither in conse¬ quence of iny having read an account of tør. Haslemere's death in tbe Star of this evening ; and that he had, upon his death- feed, declared that yoli, my best friend, were son fo the Earl of Merioneth—may ϊ hope the editor has stated facts?"' " ïlad Lord Caerleon taken a few lessons óf Mrs. Wheeler," rejoined Mrs. Jones, ■ f and have received you sitting in his arm-chair, you would not, Kalkreuth, have doubted the truth of what you have been reading: be it our care, never tô make him repent öf his kind condescension to¬ wards lis, since ît might not be so well to have
have it publicly known, that he ever ad¬ mits-the., visits of an old woman like me, who has neither rank nor fortune to boast of, and who is. even now, often my own cook—Your talents, and his regard for you, may place yon------" " Very far beneath the only son of the Earl of Merioneth, in the scale of society," interrupted Kalkreuth—** but İ shall ever feel proud at having made myself such a friend." *' Yem seem то Tiave entirely forgotten, good folks," gaily resumed our hero, " that this said peer, no longer ago than last year, trod the boards of Drury-lane, and that you, my dear Madam, displayed your sincere regard for him, at a time when this Earl's'son had merely his talents to depend upon ; and that yon, my dear Kalkreuth, have been my preceptor and my friend, and will ever, except, perhaps, in point of rank, be my equal ; and I dare say tnany people will thiïsk I shall appear to less ad- o Q vantage
vantage in my new character, than I did~ upon the stage." " May you be as happy as Lord Caer¬ leon, as I am convinced you would have been had you remained Mr. Yates!" re¬ plied Mrs. Jones—" you will never be more celebrated, nor more admired, than you were then; and perhaps your time may hang heavier upon your hands in fu¬ ture, than it ever did heretofore, except, indeed, you get into the Ministry ; then,. indeed, I think you and I, Kalkreuth, may look forward, like poor John Wheeler, to- being promoted ; who knows but I may figure away as Mistress of the Robes, and you may be appointed Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, as you speak a variety of languages—What a wonderful acquisition you would be to Mr. C—-—, who, some malicious people say, hardly understands his own !" Thus did the old woman rattle on during tea, frequently making the young men laugh
laugh at her absurd remarksand droll com- parisons ; but, as soon as the tea-things were removed, our hero briefly related to both her and the German, every thing that had occurred during the preceding day. " How rejoiced Mr. Moretón will be!" exclaimed the German—" though I know he had his fears whether, admitting the paper stated facts, he should be allowed to continue to rank Lord Caerleon among his friends." " I find all of you good folks, even Kempthorne, fancied I was a Wheeler— but, talking of that worthy woman, have you seen her, Mrs. Jones, since her visit to Chalk Farm?" " She was always my detestation," cried Kalkreuth— (i I am only surprised the Earl of Merioneth did not order him intacusto- dy—the old man's life seems to have been spared, to afford him time for repentance ; I only hope his punishment and disgrace in this world may fit him for a better, sinee, though the shameful scheme, of which your
your Lordship was the victim, might ori¬ ginate in the deceased Mr. Ilaslemere and the oid woman, he Certainly assisted in bringing tt to bear, as he countenanced all the falsehoods they imagined, and has act¬ ed like a driveller, ever since he has al¬ lowed his wife and children to insult and ill treat you, and to threaten Mr. Hasle- mere out of any money they fancied they required : well might he declare himself undeserving your notice, when we visited him in the spungittg-housè —As for his wife, transportation would be much too lenient a punishment for her; indeed, I only Wish she may live twenty years longer in the most abject poverty, though that might lead to her, in some degree, expi¬ ating hér sins." (( I am fearful it would only lead to her Committing other crimes/' said Mrs. Jones, ' f as I am well acquainted with her disposi¬ tion; and she is, even now, more inclined to rebel against, than to submit to the will of Heaven— Uer daughter is much more to
to be pitied : she has beeri> in many re¬ spects, implicitly guided by her mother, and was, I am well convinced, perfectly ignorant of thsŕ deception respecting your Lordship, for whom, I believe, she has ever entertained a very great regard ; Eastwood, -She fancied, was a great mah, and, I must say, his personal appearance was a\\ in his favour; but his being able, as she presuni- edi to keep her a coach, was his greatest merit in her eyes. Mrs. John W'heeler is accused, and I believe with justice, of be¬ ing the priirtary cause of many of the evils that have befallen thern ; and to convince you how kindly the old woman is inclined towards her, she said, in my hearing, that she should *hink no more of strangling the worthless hussey, than of treading upon a black beetle, which she actually did while speaking. John she finds a thousand ex¬ cuses for—he may thank God, if seeîtis, for his vile temper, and all his other haíeíul propensities he has inherited from his fa¬ ther's family : he may, hgwever, reform, 5 since
since time will be allowed him for repent¬ ance : as the Old Bailey sessions were not over when he was secured, therefore he will lie in Newgate till after Christmas ; and I much question whether he will spend that holiday so agreeably as he did the last, though it was the first time he ever gave an absolute loose to his abominable temper in my presence: I know the old woman is afraid he will be hanged, as it will be a dif¬ ficult matter, it is supposed, to prove his innocence." " In his place," said Kalkreuth, " I would save the judge and jury the trouble of con¬ demning me, by putting an end to my ex¬ istence, since he can never shew his face . again, and must be more or less compelled .to support his precious rib—But, do let us hear what excuses the old mother can frame for lier conduct towards Lord Caerleon/' Our hero having also expressed a wish to know how she bore the downfall of her hopes, and the discovery of her baseness towards him, the old lady began as follows. CHAP,
CHAP. XI. " Yesterday, soon after I had dined, I pro¬ ceeded into Marsham-street, being very anxious to know whether Mr. George Hasle¬ mere had fulfilled the old woman's sanguine expectations: I was admitted by one of the men who remain in possession, who told me Airs. Wheeler was from home, but that Airs. Eastwood was above stairs ; and at the same moment she called out from the landing, requesting I would walk up— she was all alone. I did as she desired, and, having reached the dining-room, could not help remarking, that ihe widowed bride looked very cheerful ; while she assured me
me she was very happy to see me, telling nie her mother was gone out, and she did hope that, when she returned, she would bring good news. I wished she might, en¬ quiring whether she had seen either her father or brother ? Not that day, she re¬ plied—her mother was just going into Cary-street, when a particular friend of theirs sent his carriage for her, and she be¬ lieved she was gone a little way into the country ; and she had beeli so long gone, that she should not be surprised were her father to return home with her; at all events, she was sure the men below would soo n be sent about their business. I was happy to hear there was likely to be such a speedy conclusion to their troubles, en¬ deavouring to discover who this great friend was, though I made no doubt of its being Mr. Haslemere, junior. She, however, evaded giving me a direct answer, hoping I would stop with her till her mother re¬ turned. I required but little persuasion, as I was resolved not to leave the house till I was
í was rather more satisfied, as I own I began to think it probable the old man might re¬ turn thither. Hardly knowing what to say to my silly companion, I asked whether she had seen Mrs. John Wheeler since they parted in Cary-street ? * No. indeed—nor I hope I never „hall, Mrs. Jones; but we have found out she has returned to Knightsbridge, for mother sent Jenny to Mrs. Bever's last night, to ask for a nightcap she leff there, and there the worthless slut was stuck up in the parlour, and as impudent as Turpin, since she told Jenny that she Should make my brother maintain her, if he did not swing for his folly ; and Mrs. BeVev and her daughter were even more impudent, as the old wo¬ man threatens to prosecute my mother for defamation. 1 believe you have not seen mothersince she paid her a visit; and, do you know, the sorry jade actually sent for a constable, and, if my mother had not prudently set off before the man arrived, they must have gone before a justice, and God
God knows what might have been the con¬ sequence; though, as mother says, she can set such wretches at defiance—they have no character to bring them through ; an^ if she had not been too busily employed she would have placed a candle \nd lantern at the door, to have let her neighbours *ave known what sort of a house she keeps, notwithstanding she goes to meeting twice or thrice a-week.' . " That w T as no reason, I observed, why she should be better than other folks, as methodism was now a cloak for many sins, and few people of sense were the dupes of those over-righteous people. " From Mrs. Bever, Cary reverted to Mr. Eastwood, telling me, that very morn¬ ing the tavern-keeper, who had seized every thing in the Adelphi, had sent her her cloaths, which was more than she had expected, as they would have sold for a good deal of money. Then I presumed she meant to dispose of them herself, I said, since what might have been very proper to
to have worn in the Adelphi, would very ill become her, situated as they now were. She did not relish my insinuation, as she even shed tears at the idea of parting with her finery, though I fancy she will be glad *o do so ere long, as matters have turned out : hér jewels Mr. Eastwood has made free with, and he also, it seems, carried off all the plate; though she declares she had no idea of his having absconded for the first two days, as the servant told her, when she enquired why the sideboard was notset out as usual, that his master had unthinkingly taken the key of the plate-chest with him, and she thought he had done very wiselv, till she found he was gone for good, though she positively asked me, whether I did not think he would send for her when he was settled ? I had some difficulty to refrain from laughing in her face; but told her, that I made no doubt of his having left many wives in England, who might prove the priority of their claims; asking whether she had any idea whither he was gone ?
gone ? She declared she had not ; and, after giving way to a violent flood of tears, she vented her. rage in a torrent of abuse, levelled at the deceitful rogue who had thus left her to pine in want and obscurity; for it seems he contrived to get offa num¬ ber of chests and packing-cases, under pre¬ tence of sending them down into Cheshire; and the contents of many were never, to her knowledge, unpacked in the Adelphi, though she makes no doubt but the chests contained his wardrobe and the best part of the linen, besides the plate; and, on the Thursday evening, they were sent off in a cart to some inn, she understood, from whence she hopes to trace whither they are gone ; and if she does ever find out that he has another wife living, she is in hopes of bringing him to the gallows, as she has heard of people being hanged in such cases, I believed transportation was the general punishment for bigamy, though as she had married for love, I was surprised to find her so inveterate against a man she had
had hoped to join abroad. But as there was no likelihood of her doing that, she did not care how severely he was punished; he ought to be made an example of, since he had deceived all those who had trusted in him. c Thou art a true Wheeler/ I had nearly exclaimed, when we heard somebody a- scending the stairs— f Who is coming ?' I asked—' did you hear a knock at the door ? ' r No—'tis only one of those men, I dare say—my mother will return in a carriage, I make no doubt/ '* She was still speaking, when the room- door was throxvn open, and in rushed Mrs. Wlieeler. Mrs. Eastwood flew to meet her, exclaiming, ŕ La ! is it you, mother? how did you get in ? for we neither heard a carriage stop, nor the knock—have you settled matters as you expected ?■—shall wc soon rid the house of those troublesome fellows?' (( Now, had the weak girl paid the least attention
attention to her mother's looks and ges¬ tures, she must have been convinced that the men were not very likely to be dis¬ missed. Without replying, the old woman took possession of the nearest chair, and hastily * brew off her bonnet and cloak, though, upon perceiving me, she did make me an inclination of the head A indeed, she seemed incapable of speaking. For a mo¬ ment, I was doubtful whether her inability arose from fatigue or vexation ; but was soon convinced that the latter was predo¬ minant, and that matters had not been settled so much to her satisfaction cs her daughter had hoped, presuming Mr. George ilaslemere had run restiff. * Why, mercy upon me, mother, how pale you look !—what has happened ? for I can see you have been in tears—is my father dead r' ť Kö/ was the reply ; but I shall never forget her ghastly look and dreadful shud¬ der, when she added, f but somebody else is/ r 'It
fi It instantly occurred to me, that John had actually put a period to his miserable existence ; and, I must say, I was shocked at the idea of his having added suicide to his other crimes, as I cannot join wùth Mr. Kalkreuth in thinking he would have done right had he saved the judge trouble : how¬ ever, I was soon undeceived, upon Cary's screaming out, ť Oh, my brother has died in that horrid prison !* ť No such thing/ faltered out the old woman— f he is very well, for any thing I know to the contrary/ * f Washing at least to make an effort to console the wretched being, 1 rose and ap¬ proached her chair, observing, that what¬ ever fresh misfortune might have befallen her, it must be trifling, compared to those Mrs. Eastwood and I had dreaded 'having 1 occurred; hoping that this was merely some pecuniary disappointment, which she had not been absolutely prepared to ex¬ pect, as she had hinted that some friend was no more; and, even were old Mr. vor,, tv. v ilaslemere
Haslemere dead (not that I thought so), I made no doubt but the annuity would be continued to her husband. Caroline, who. was even more curious than I was, begged her mother, for God's sake, to tell her what had happened, and who was dead ? For a minute or more, her convulsive sobs ef¬ fectually prevented her from satisfy insr us, though she pressed one of my hands very fervently : at last, with a look of the wild¬ est despair, she sobbed out, ' Oh, my dear friend, my cnly friend, we are ruined and undone to all intents and purposes, since Mr. George Haslemere lies upon his death¬ bed, nay, may be no more by this time, and every thing is discovered/ falling back in her chair, she fainted as she concluded. There were some restoratives in the room, as Mrs, Eastwood has been in rather a low way of late ; therefore, I desired she would not make any bustle, as her mother would soon recover ; and I was not sparing of my endeavours to restore her once more to her senses, and I did not wish to have any one admitted,
admitted, whose presence was likely to prevent her from gratifying my curiosity. When she opened her eyes, I made hert take some hartshorn and water, and at last she came to herself; and I must own, for the first time in my life, I felt something like pity for her. Cary continued torment¬ ing her with questions, till I peremptorily called her to order, desiring her to allow her mother time to recollect herself: at last she sighed out, f Oh, a friend in need is a friend indeed ! Oh, Mrs. Jones, what will become of me and mine ? for the late discovery will even prejudice folks more against John, as it will soon be the town- talk—all the newspapers will be full of it to-morrow ; and how far I am open to the law, the Lord in heaven only knows : I, too, may end my days in a prison, if no¬ thing worse, as my enemies are all rich and powerful, and who can protect rae against their persecutions, since we shall not have a friend left, as Mr. Haslemere, senior, would not now care were wc all to ν 2 die
die ih a ditch ? so we may all beg our bread for him, admitting 1 am allowed to remain at liberty/ *' Mrs. Eastwood was sure her mother was beside herself, and I affected to be of the same way of thinking, by way of in¬ ducing her to explain. r Ah, well may you both think me mad/ she cried^—* nay, it might.be a happy thing for me if I really were ; so, then, I should not be in such dread of what still hangs over our head/ * How did you come home, mother ? who let you in ? and where have you been ?' asked Caroline. * I returned home on foot, child, from Chalk Farm—I am sure I thought I should have dropped in the street, but I could not think of spending my money in coach- hire: one of the fellows in the house was standing at the door when I arrived, and he told me where you were: I was car¬ ried to Chalk Farm under a false pretence —had I known who I should have met there
there^—but there is no withstanding one's fate—the Lord keep me ! I only wonder I retained my senses, when 1 caught sight of the Eari of Merioneth leaning over the dy¬ ing George Haslemere, who had just in¬ formed him that Frank Ya'es was his son/ " Another long pause ensued, as my head was too bewildered even to define my feelings upon thus hearing the mystery of your Lordship's birth so strangely solved : I did, however, offer up a mental thanks¬ giving to the Throne of Mercy, that Mr. Haslemere had not been permitted to carry the secret to the grave with him, for I am sure the Wheelers would ne\er have re¬ vealed it ; and when I grew rather more composed, I requested the old woman would be rather more explicit; and she, with evident reluctance, detailed the vari¬ ous events you have so kindly recapitu¬ lated to Mr. Kalkreuth and me ; making herself out an angel of light when com¬ pared to the deceased, who, she vows, would, but for her, have sent you to the ρ 3 parish
parish or the foundling. This roused all my gall, which had been rather excited before, and I told her, that, admitting she spoke the truth, she had merely brought you forward as a means of having your uncle inore in her power ; crying, shame upon her ! for having connived at any plan to injure a child of your angel-mo¬ ther's, who had been her friend, from her infancy till her death. You have often reminded me of Miss Haslemere, my Lord ; but, as I had long supposed you a son of her brother's, I never mentioned the cir¬ cumstance, I have more than once seen her at Mrs. Wheeler's—the last time was at Caroline's christening, to whom she and your grandmother stood godmothers, and I never saw so elegant, so amiable, nor so beautiful a young woman : I see her now in my mind's eye, kissing the chubby face of the baby, and promising to adopt her as she grew up; and had you seen the costly laces in which she had dressed her name¬ sake, the rich coral, and the handsome cradle
cradle she bestowed upon her, whose pa¬ rents brought up her child in penury and disgrace—Oh, shame on them ! shame on them ! I hope I probed the old woman's conscience pretty severely by my referen¬ ces to the past, as all my pity for her va¬ nished, when I learned the extent of her crimes, of which, I agree, her children are innocent ; and even Cary said, no won¬ der thev had been so cheated and wronged, since her mother had so basel ν wronged a child of her dear godmother's, whom every body loved and respected. î onlv won¬ dered, Γ assured her. the Earl of Merioneth had suffered her to depart : he might well suspect her of having murdered his wi fe¬ in his place, I would have had her taken up ; observing, that she had met with more mercy than she had ever displayed towards your Lordship. Callous as her heart na¬ turally is, I at last succeeded in making her feel something like compunction, and she roared most bitterly. Caroline, who wish- v 4 ed
rd to afford her some consolation, told her, Afr. Allworth had sent her her cloaths. * Ah, he was no betler than Eggleton and Eastwood/ she exclaimed. * You judge of every body by your own standard, Äírs. Wheeler/ said ï —not that I suppose Allworth is a man of character, but I was resolved to contradict her : how¬ ever, as she bore my reproaches rather pa¬ tiently, why, I did not choose to drive her to absolute despair. As for the old man, he has been drawn in to connive at what I am well assured he never approved of; but, having become subservient to his wife's plans, he durst not peach ; as I do believe, as far as misers ever can be so, Wheeler is an honest man, and, had he been better matched, he might have prov¬ ed a worthy member of society ; of course, he was not acquainted with Mr. George Ili-slcmcre's having confessed his share in the iniquitous plan : and as the old woman supposed he would be very uneasy if he neither*-
neither saw nor heard from them in the course of the day, she implore-"! me to break the dread tidings to him : Cary join¬ ed in her intreaties—I should be better able to prepare him to bear this fresh shock than either of them were ; and posi¬ tively much against my will, I at last suf¬ fered myself to be prevailed upon to un¬ dertake the irksome task ; since, though I did not Seel inclined to spare the worthless old woman, I was not willing to break the already bruised reed ; still, as I might be able to soften the intelligence, or, at all events, to give the weak old man some consolation and advice, I set out for Carv- street. He was all alone, and fancied, he told me, that all his friends had deserted them ; thanking me for having thus kindly looked in upon him, enquiring whether I had seen either his wife or daughter? I told him I came from Marsham-street, and that Airs. Wheeler would have accompa¬ nied me, if she had not been exceedingly fatigued, in consequence of having over- p 5 walked
walked herself, not having chosen to ex¬ pend any money in coach-hire, when every shilling was an object. He commended her prudence, asking where she had*been ? By degrees I prepared him for what was to follow; but, when I,told him that Air. George Haslemere was probably no more, and that he had made a full confession to his father and the Earl of Aierioneth, I thought the terrified old man would have flown up the chimney : forgetful of his weakness, he started from his chair, rested upon the arms of it, and looked every way but at me. f Dead!' he repeated— f Afr. George Haslemere dead!·—and he has confessed every thing, and in my wife's presence, before his father and Lord Merioneth !' Falling back in his chair, he groaned aloud. r This is what 1 have been dreading for years, though I do not think I could have departed this life with that secret upon my mind; but my wife would never have suf¬ fered me to have communicated it to those most
most interested in it—the Almighty is, how¬ ever, just : Oh, may my sincere penitence atone for my sins ! then may I be called away, no matter how soon ; since, how dare I look an honest man in the face, af¬ ter such a discovery ?—was there ever such a miserable being as myself? and how shall 1 excuse myself, when called upon to an¬ swer for our joint crimes ?—dare I alledge that I suffered myself to be governed by an overbearing ------ :* there he paused, twitch¬ ed his wig from side to side, and seemed almost bereft of his senses, till I assured him that I did not conceive he was near so much to blame, as appearances proclaimed him to be ; since I was convinced that he had been, from the first, rather an unwil¬ ling accomplice in his wife's guilt. I was very kind in thus endeavouring to recon¬ cile him to himself; but he felt that he had been greatly to blame, enquiring how his wife really was, as he should not be surprised to hear that she was not likely to survive the discovery : as for himself, if he p Q could
solild but make his peace with Heaven, the sooner he departed this life, the better, since poverty now indeed stared him in the face ; however, it was no more than he de¬ served ; requesting to know whether they had any thing to apprehend from the Earl of Merioneth, or the elder Mr. Haslemere? as he was well convinced that they had no¬ thing to fear from your Lordship, of whom he spoke in the highest terms, though he was well convinced that you must now* most cordially despise him. I told him, 1 be¬ lieved the Earl and Mr. Ilaslemere were too happy to think of re\enge, particularly as the son of the lattei* was implicated in his and his wife's crimes ; and I made no doubt but that they considered him as the least guilty of the three. f When a man only connives at the wick¬ edness of his wife, Mrs. Jones, he is equally culpable—of this I have been long con¬ vinced ; still, what could I do, situated as 1 was ? it is a hard thing to bring disgrace upon oneself and family : however, it is truly
truly said, that ill-gotten money never prospers : I did fancy we were an excep¬ tion to that rule, since our wealth has been accumulating for many years; but then we have lived m constant dread of having it known how rich we really were ; even our children have been kept in the dark re¬ specting our circumstances. I need not tell you how speedily we have got rid of all our hoards ; and when 1 reflect that Lord Caerleon, who has such reason to execrate the name of Wheeler, was the first to л isit me in my prison, and that he had evidently taken pains to procure my liberation, I could find in my heart to make away with myself: my wife, how¬ ever, took care to render his kindness abor¬ tive, and I am now truly thankful that she did so; though, as you very truly observe, her ill-timed application to Mr. George Ilaslemere, and the improper threats which she held out, have only increased her guilt in the eyes of Mr. ¡laslemere and the Bark howc\er, if it pleases God to spare me till to-morrow,
to-morrow, I will make every reparation in my power to those who have been, through my means, the dupes of Air. East¬ wood : I will send for my principal credi¬ tors, and state to them, as I have already done to Mr. Weldon, what I am worth ; and I will give up every thing, even to the coat upon my back, if that will but satisfy them, as a small atonement for my behavi¬ our to that fine young fellow, whom I have always, as God is my judge, preferred to my own son ; and the rest of my life shall be devoted to prayer and penitence, as my shame and disgrace cannot be more compleat. Aly son will perhaps suffer for a crime I am fully persuaded he never committed, but my sins have brought a heavy judgment upon him : he has, like mvself, been led on from ruin to destri* c~ tion; and perhaps it may be better that he should die innocent, than were he to survive his disgrace. Aly wife is past her labour, as well as myself; we shall, there¬ fore, end our days in a workhouse, should it
it please God to prolong our lives. Caro¬ line, poor girl, is indeed to be pitied/ " Here the poor soul paused, and I fear¬ ed his heart would have burst: I endea¬ voured to console him, assuring him that I would provide for the immediate wants of his daughter, till something could be thought of to enable her to get her own living : he called down a blessing upon my head, and I promised to see him again on Aionday, by which time he would know how far his creditors might be inclined to favour him, and then we should be better able to decide respecting his future plans : as for his wife, pray God she may be doom¬ ed to end her days in a workhouse ; but, while I am comparatively rich, the poor old man shall never be so reduced—^he cannot live long, indeed, I can hardly sup¬ pose he will ever see another Christmas- day." As the tears had more than once stole down Airs. Jones's cheeks, while dwelling upon old Wheeler's distress and sincere 5 compunction,
compunction, she had more or less affect¬ ed her auditors; and our hero, taking her hand, assured her she had never stood so - high in his esteem as she did at that mo¬ ment, agreeing that the old man was very much to be pil ied, as he had been more weak than wicked. " I dare not," he add¬ ed, u out of respect to my father and grand¬ father, who are by no means inclined to exonerate him from his full share of his wife's guilt, declare myseif his friend ; but, should the poor old fellow be liberated, if you will let me know where I may see him alone, or, at all events, оЫу in your pre¬ sence, I will look in upon him, just to as¬ sure him of my sincere forgiveness," ťí Then he will bc much more reconciled to his fate," resumed Mrs. Jones, " and I will certainly afford him an opportunity of receh ing such a fa\our: they must, of course, give up their house in Marsham- street ; and if Mrs. Wheeler immediately remove to the sti il larger one appropri¬ ated to paupers, I should not grieve; but the
the old man and Caroline shall be my in¬ mates lill they can procure a comfortable lodging, and perhaps I may extend my hospitality to the wretched old woman, for a time." Having devoted a few moments to re¬ flection, our hero said, " You know, my good friend, 1 had long sinee resolved ne¬ ver to pai t with my hou^e in Marsham- street, and I do not enjoy the idea of let¬ ting it to strangers; and it would be very absurd to suffer it to stand empty, since, though it is an old house, it is a \ery good one, and possesses many conveniences— yours is more modern built, therefore many people would give it the preference; still, if you would remove into mine, and sufier this wretched family to take possession of yours, I think you would find it much more agreeable, than were you to have them for your inmates: leave them a little necessary furniture, and, in exchange, let me intreat you would accept of what remains in Mar¬ sham-street, and the house, rent and tax free,
free, as long as you live ; as, I am sure, even Mr. Corfe would rejoice, since I can no longer reside there mysiìf, at vour having succeeded me : therefore, if you will suffer the W'heelers f о occupy your house upon the same terms, they may, by letting lodgings, and with a little assistance under the rose, be prevented from becom¬ ing a burthen to the parish : I do not wish them to enjoy luxuries, but necessaries— the old man shall never want while he lhes; when he dies* if Mrs. Eastwood can be put into some little way of business, let the old woman go to the workhouse—she ought to suíľer —the others are innocent, in comparison/' '< I readily accept your generous offer, my Lord ; though you have such a method of conferring obligations, that you double the favour : your house is worth three of mine, as it is about three times as large ; and as for my furniture, the Wheelers shall have it all, my plate, linen, china, large arm-chair, clock, and a few antiques, of no value
value but to me, excepted ; so on Aion- day, if the old man is liberated, I will con¬ vince him that he has still a comfortable home—but not a word will I say, even to Caroline, till he is released ; and I am re¬ solved to tell his worthless wife, that it is not out of regard for her that any thing- has been done for them. She will give me just as much credit as I shall deserve, when she finds what a gainer I shall be by giving them house-room ; though she will not dare to be impudent to me, except 1 de¬ sire the old man not to let her know that they are tö be lodged rent free." Francis laughed at the notion, and Kal¬ kreuth said he hardly wished the old man to put her hospitality to the test, since his jade of a wife would share in all his com¬ forts. It was however finally agreed, that e\en he should remain in ignorance of our he¬ ro's kind arrangement in his favour, till he had settled matters with his creditors; but, whether he was liberated or no, Mrs. Jones was
was to remove immediately into Aiarsham- street, and Mrs, Hunter's relation was to remove into Devonshire-place, our hero presuming the old lady could find some situ:! t ion in his household for her, as he should be obliged greatly to enlarge his establishment. Airs. Jones, who found she could not flatter his Lordship more than by conform¬ ing in every respect to his wishes, pro¬ mised to take possession of the late Air. Corfe's house on Monday ; and, should old Wheeler's creditors prove refractory, she would devise some means of bringing them to reason, even if she employed an attor¬ ney ; and readily promised to make tea for onr hero on Aionday evening, in Devon¬ shire-place, as he proposed returning to town in the morning, in hopes of finding letters from his father and Mrs. Archer, and, of course, he did not choose to visit any body but his grandfather, while his uncle remained unburiecl ; though he had not, by the old gentleman's desire, shut his hoube
house up, since he wished, if possible, to prevent there being any questions asked, likely to render the recent events still more public than they were already ; and as Lord Caerleon also wished to see Mr. Moreion, he requested Kalkreuth would bring him to meet Mrs. Jones, excusing himself from in¬ viting him in person, upon lhe plea of his uncle's death, &c. <( I will be answerable for his joining your party, my Lord, but v Love in a Ul¬ lage' will prevent me from escorting him thither : therefore, suppose you call for him, Mrs. Jones—I will, with his Lordship's permission, fetch him home." " You will greatly oblige me, Kal¬ kreuth," was the reply; and, after an early supper, the German and the old lady re¬ tired, fully convinced that his accession of rank had not en creased our hero's pride, and, more than ever, prepossessed in hi'* favour.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIL Haviko amply made up for his want of rest the preceding night, as soon as he had breakfasted, Lord Caerleon set out for his grandfather's villa. Kempthorne met him in the hall, and, after complimenting him upon his good looks, led him to his grand¬ father, who was far more reconciled and in better spirits than he bad dared to have expected : " He has long considered your Lordship as his grandson," he went on ; * f and feels so proud of the relationship, I believe he the less regrets the catastrophe which ultimately led to the discovery of your birth." Having
Having entered the library, where the old gentleman was sitting, he vose to meet them, and having silently embraced his grandson, for whom he had long felt the sincerest regard, his strong resemblance to his deceased mother struck him so forciblv, that he vainly endeavoured to disperse his tears, while expressing the pleasure he felt at seeing him. Perceiving, however, that he had communicated his agitation to the person who had occasioned İt, he again pressed him to his bosom, saying, i4 My beloved Caroline still lives in her son !— that wretched Mrs, Wheeler, I never can forgive her. You must remember, my dear boy, how much I was struck with your strong resemblance to my late wife and daughter, when you came to inform me the old man had had a paralytic stroke, —and what a farrago of lies did that vile old woman tell me, in consequence of my asking her a few very natural questions re¬ specting your family ! but she was harden¬ ed in iniquity—1 saw she was ; and, from that
that moment, I ceased to interest myself about her—so now sit you down." Francis did as he desired, and the Sun¬ day paper having been just brought in, Kempthorne started politics, by way of changing the subject ; but, soon after din¬ ner, Mr. Haslemere asked our hero, whe¬ ther he had seen Mrs. Jones since they se¬ parated the day before ? Francis said he had, and seized the op¬ portunity of relating what had passed be¬ tween her and old Wheeler, for whom he could not divest himself of a sort of re¬ gard, in hopes of softening the old gentle- * man in his favour ; nor was he disappoint¬ ed, as the worthy merchant agreed that he was a poor erring mortal, more weak, he believed, than wicked, and had certainly been a mere passive agent in his wife's ini¬ quitous plans ; though his avaricious dis¬ position had greatly facilitated her vile schemes, since he connived at what he dis¬ approved, to increase his hoards. " How¬ ever, we will not suffer hira to starve, my dear
dear Francis ; but that worthless jade shall not participate in my bounty : she wished ner daughter-in-law might beg her bread— I only hope I shall see her doing so, and also crying matches, as a farther resource." ίζ She very possibly may be so reduced when the old man dies," resumed our hero, c< since, during his life-time, Mrs. Jones proposes to give them house-room, as, at íny request, she has consented to remove into Marsham-street." (i That is, you mean to make use of her name to return good for eviì, my dear Francis." " Positively you do not do the old lady justice, my dear Sir; the idèa originated in her;" detailing what she had said, and her intention to have taken them in. (C Well, then, you may request her, in my name, to give the old man a guinea every Monday morning, should he be able to settle with his creditors, -and I shall ad¬ vise them to accept his offers; so desire her to let me know how they go on, from vol. iv. α time
time to time—Your father never can for* give them, since, doubtless, he bribed them pretty high, little thinking that their seconding his schemes would lead to their framing others so very detrimental to his son," " He told me," replied Francis, " that it had cost him, five hundred pounds io s_-> lence Mrs. Wheeler's scruples in the first instance» and to induce her to arrange matters preparatory to his marrying my mother." i( Well, thank God ! other rogues eased them of their ill-gotten wealth," was the reply. The conversation then tamed upon Cap- lain and Mrs. WiHoughby, who, the old gentleman hoped, would be a happier couple than he had expected, since the Captain had, of his own accord, resolved to make proper settlements; adding, " Mrs. Haslemere has, I understand, removed to Mrs. Mortimer's for the present, and 1 should not suppose фе would choose to continue
continue in the house in Baker-street, since. her jointure, though ample, will not en¬ able her to keep up her present establish¬ ment." This was a matter ouf hero could not debate; but having remained with his grandfather till Kempthorne, who had gone up in the morning, returned from town on the Monday, he arrived in Devonshire- place to a six o'clock dinner, and, to his great satisfaction, he found letters from his father and Mrs. Archer, and also from Mr. Caerwyth, the Countess, and his three sis¬ ters, who all expressed the greatest impa¬ tience to see him, and seemed extremely happy at being able to claim a relationship to him : he resolved to answer them all the next day, the Earl's excepted, as his Lord¬ ship proposed being in town in the course ofa very few days; and as he did not mean to make any stay, he still farther gratified his son, by promising to take up his abode in Devonshire-place, as he had no regular establishment in Cavcndish*square. q % Our
Our hero was reperusing Airs. Archer's kind congratulations, when Mrs. Jones and Mr. Aioreton were shewn in. The oíd gen- tleman had taken unusual pains at his toi¬ let, and could not divest himself of a sort of involuntary restraint, never before hav¬ ing been upon intimate terms with a titled* man. Francis however succeeded in re¬ moving his embarrassment, and chatted upon various indifferent subjects, before he asked after the Wheelers. ** Your Lordship has evinced much more christian charity in your behaviour towards that miserable family, than, I am sorry to say, 1 can boast of having displayed," said Mr. Moretón, " as I have never forgiven their having made me their dupes upon a certain occasion ; nor have 1 forgotten Aír. John's strictures upon me: however, as a sort of atonement for my petulance, I pro¬ pose doing something for the wretched Airs. Eastwood—Mrs. Jones is to let me know how best I can serve her; though my former dislike of her mother now amounts
amounts to abhorrence, as I have also seen, and, in common with every one else, ad¬ mired Miss Haslemere." <( Aye, you washed your hands of them just in time, my old friend," resumed Mrs, Jones—" I only hope that I shall not be deemed their accomplice, since it will soon- be generally known that I have, in appear¬ ance, stood their friend : however, as Lord Caerleon must and shall bear the blame of having provided for them, should the mat¬ ter be closely investigated, I am very well contented to act as his deputy-almoner upon the occasion—But, not to keep your Lordship in suspense, on Sunday morning I was favoured with a visit from Mrs. W he fi¬ ler, who informed me that the creditor's had all met on Saturday е\ептс, in Carv-street; she had not, however, been e\cn admitted into the room—nay„ her poor, old, obsti¬ nate fool had declared he would not sec her, till matters were finally settled one way or the other, of course, she was sure he would make ;some very wise arrange- Q 3 ments,
ment«. 1 observed, that he would pro¬ bably act more honestly than he had ever done, while be had allowed her to direct his conduct. She durst not resent my al¬ lusion* but thought she might have been better able to soften the creditors. I as¬ sured her she was much mistaken, as many people, much as they condemned, also agreed in pitying her husband, while she was considered as having ]ed him into all his former and recent errors. I shall not, however, tire your Lordship by detailing our debate, as it lasted more than an hour, and Airs. Wheeler was more than once in¬ clined to have cuffed me; but, having cried and raved alternately, she at last de- partcd > promising to let me know, as soon as she learnt, what her husband had done. Not choosing, however, to wait for her in¬ telligence, this morning, after parading over my new house, which Mrs. Patty, and the woman who sleeps there, promised to have ready for my reception in the even¬ ing, I proceeded into Cary-street, where I arrived
í arrived soon after twelve, having resolv¬ ed, if Mrs. Wheeler was there, not to join> her husband till she had departed : fortu¬ nately, however, she was not corner—the poor old man was all alone, and more dead than alive : he was, nevertheless, rejoiced to see me, and enquired after his wife and daughter, having given orders not to have them admitted till he had settled all hia worldly affairs, as he knew his wife and he -I should only have quarrelled, and he hoped to have settled every things İn another hour. His creditors had all met in his room on Saturday evening, and as they were all convinced that he had not wilfully led. them to become the dupes'of Eastwood, they had agreed to divide his remaining property amongst them, by which means they expected to receive between fifteen and sixteen shillings in the pound; and they had, in compassion fo his forlorn state, and from being well aware that he had no longer any hopes from Mr. Hasle- mere, agreed to allow him furniture for a q 4 couple
couple of rooms, and twelve shillings a- week while he lived, as they would not lis¬ ten to his entreaties that they would conti¬ nue it to his wife, ana his daughter, they affirmed, might get her own bread. f Thus, you perceive/ he went on, * I shall just have enough to support nature; 'tis, how¬ ever, mo-re than I deserve, and í feel I shall not long be a burthen to them/ ** I assured him that he should never want for those comforts which he had been ac¬ customed to, if he would take up his abode with me, and suffer his wife and daughter to receive the promised weekly stipend. He thanked me for my offer, but said he should merely request me to give him house-room for a few hours, till his wife could procure them a lodging ; since, as is* i.ad connived at her wicked plans, while he was to be a gainer by so doing, he had no right to throw her off, now they were reduced to poverty, particularly as he felt that he was not long for this world. I gave him credit for not wishing to turn hia back
back upon the old woman, though Γ de¬ clared I thought she had been the cause of all his errors, and subsequent misfortunes ; assuring him, that I would accommodate them all for the present, though I felt my cheeks glow while arrogating to myself ther merit of merely conforming to your Lord¬ ship's wishes; but I durst not abruptly tell him how kindly you had arranged matters. for their convenience : at last, however., after making him take a dish of chocolate, and drinking one myself, I departed, pro¬ mising to call again at three o'clock, as ther gentlemen and their solicitor were to* be there at two; and, during my absence, mv Anne and a porter had nearly removed all I proposed taking into Marsham-street, whither I had sent the child, whom Mrs. Patty had promised to take care of; but, having given every necessary order, and laid in a few necessary provisions for the Wheelers, I returned into Cary-street— Ihe creditors were not gone, but the mis- я. 3 tress:
tress of the house asked me into her par¬ lour, and, at the expiration of a quarter of an hour, her husband informed me that my old friend was at liberty to depart when¬ ever he chose, the gentlemen, who were just gone, having discharged every ex¬ pence. Mrs. Wheeler had been there dur¬ ing my absence; but had not been admit¬ ted; and upon my joining the old man, he confirmed what the bailiff had told me, adding, that, all together, he was beiter off than he'had dared to have expected ι since, it seems, the money he had about him, amounting to between thirty ami forty pounds, he either did not mention to the creditors^ or they suffered him to re¬ tain—I did not enquire toó minutely into the circumstance. I then told him how you had settled matters with me respecting your house and mine : the poor old man burst into tears, and falling upon his knees, called down blessings upon your head ; only wishing that he might be permitted, 3 in
there* is^ a in the same humble posture, to implore your forgiveness, as he felt assured that you would not refuse it him." * ť He shall receive it, I give you my ho¬ nour/' replied Francis— tc but Γ cannot see his wife : his daughter may be present — the poor thing might have turned out a good, harmless creature, for she bears some resemblance to her father, but for hermo- ther's management of her—but I am in¬ terrupting you, my good friend." " Fearing the old woman might return,, I got the old man into the coach I had 1Ш waiting, and took him home with me. Mrs. Wheeler had but just left my house 1 in tears, having fancied I had been pur¬ posely denied to her. I was happy she had' oeen thus mortified ; but; having made the- old man partake of my roast fowl, which,, by the way, I had purchased upon, his ac¬ count, I sent för his wife and" dati ghter,. but cautioned Anne not to say that Mr. Wheeler was with me : of course, they, were very agreeably surprised when they; α,χχ, arrived—
arrived—Caroline shed tears of joy, while her mother eagerly enquired how he had settled matters with his creditors ? and, when informed, made no doubt but she could have obtained better terms; how¬ ever, Caroline must now put her shoulder to the wheel, to help out. I briefly in¬ formed her, that they were henceforth to. occupy my house, rent free, as I proposed removing that very evening, with my only lodger, into Marsham-street. 1 Well, God bless him!' cried the old woman— ( give my love to him, and thank Ыт, when you see him again/ f Your love indeed Ï' cried the angry old man— * I much doubt whether his Lord¬ ship would even accept of your humble duty—remember how shamefully you have treated him, independent of having brought Ыщ up as yom* nephew, and then judge how very high you stand in his esteem— as for me, his Lordship cannot possibly despise me more than I do myself; but, while I do live, I will offer up my daily prayers
prayers for him—but for him, I should not now have been alive; indeed I am con¬ vinced that he loved me much better than my own son has ever done ; and I declare I have long preferred him to John—nay, much as the Earl of Merioneth must love him, I am convinced he is, and ever will be, equally dear to me; so here is long life and prosperity to him, and may all his enemies be confounded and punished^ as ŕ we have justly been !' tossing offa glass of port as he concluded. Cary was very humble and very thankful, and I soon left them, after giving them possession of all ray fashionable moveables—the sale of them may contribute to the old woman4 support when the old man is no more, for out she shall then turn—Caroline I таз* then take home ; but we old people, Mr, Moretón, should not dive too far into fu¬ turity." The entrance of Kalkreuth, who was come, according to promise, to supper, changed the conversation ; and as Francis did
did not expect to remain much longer in town, nor to return before Christmas, he told them he feared he should not be able to enjov much more of their company till after those holidays, as he should go down to his grandfather the next day, and should not return into Devonshire-place till his father arrived there ; but he should make a point of looking in upon them both, be¬ fore he went into the country for the ho¬ lidays. They were very much flattered by this kind promise, secretly resolving never again to intrude uninvited upon the young Peer, f,hose condescension towards them they could not sufficiently praise. Early on the Wednesday morning, the remains of Mr. George Haslemere were conveyed in a plain hearse-and-four, fol¬ lowed by two coaches-and-four, to the fa¬ mily-vault ; the old gentleman having de¬ sired that there might be as little shew as possible, consistent with the rank in life the deceased held, as he wished there might noi
not be a question asked respecting who was going to be buried. Kempthorne, to whom the management of the whole had been intrusted, officiated as chief mourner, and conformed, in every respect, to Mr. Haslemere's wishes. The few friends who had been invited assembled at an early hour in Austin Friars, from whence they proceeded into Baker- street, where all was ready ; and as the morning was wet and dark, and it was not more than nine o'clock^ very few people were upon the move, and not more than half a dozen were collected before the body was put into the hearse, after which the procession immediately set forward. Our hero had i^eniained with his grandfa¬ ther, and, soon after dinner, Kempthorne joined them. if All is over, I presume," said the old gentleman, in a melancholy tone— t( there was no bustle, I hope?" '* None at all, Sir," was the reply, briefly •rciaiing how matters had been managed; and
and our hero endeavoured to lead to other subjects, when he was agreeably surprised by the arrival of one of his father's ser - лаг- ts, who brought him a packet out of Staffordshire, and a few lines from the Earl, whom he had left in Devonshire-place, and who had there learnt, upon finding the house shut up, that the funeral had taken place that day : he therefore desired his son would not think of leaving his grand¬ father that night, though he cared not how soon he saw him in the morning; conclud¬ ing with a very polite message to the old gentleman, to whom Francis presented his letter;, and after writing three lines in re¬ ply, promising to breakfast with his Lord¬ ship, which he dispatched by the servant, he perused a very long letter from Mrs. Archer, and a verv kind one from Mr. Caer- wyth, who wrote him that his father had much to say to him. (t I will follow you to town, rny dear Frank, as I have many things to hettie with j ou and the Earl; and I will wait upon him
him in Devonshire-place, whenever he can make it convenient to receive me." Lord Caerleon thought it would be aH in good time to enter upon business a week or a fortnight hence. " I thought you were rather impatient to return into Staffordshire/' • r Then suppose you defer talking over pecuniary matters with my father, for I guess to what you allude, Sir, till we re¬ turn to town." tf What can be done tc-day, my dear Frank, should never be postponed till to¬ morrow—Your uncle has made you his heir, and his widow deserves very little fa¬ vour at our hands—had she made a better wife,, he might have been rendered sooner sensible of his crimes as I cannot find a less harsh word for his treatment of vou : •r she, however, made it I er endeavour to render him miserable, and, in consequencr, increased his guilt : she may perhaps re¬ joice at finding herself once more her own mistress—whether she will be happier than before.
before, 1 cannot pretend to decide, as she seemed to enjoy having somebody to tor¬ ment." As these reflections were not likely to raise the worthy merchant's spirits, Fran¬ cis chose to read him Mr. Caerwyth/s kind letter, and some parts of Airs. Archer's; and, at an early hour, they retired for the night, and, early next morning, our hero proceeded to town alone. Mr. Haslemere and Kempthorne proposed following him thither, as the former w T as very anxious to see the Earl, whom his son found in both excellent health and spirits; and having breakfasted together, Lord Merioneth wish¬ ing to pay every respect to the good mer¬ chant, set out on foot, with his son, for Austin Friars. Mr. Haslemere was extremely flattered by so early, and, in some respects, unex¬ pected a visit ; while the Earl assured him, that he had ever felt the greatest esteem and regard for the father of his beloved Caroline ; blaming himself very freely for having
having led her to bestow her hand upon him, unknown to her excellent parents; adding, * f could we have looked into futu¬ rity"—his Lordship paused, and the mer¬ chant, who participated in his feelings, added, fe we should not be so happy as we are now permitted to be—but let me re¬ quest your Lordship would take a seat—I have much to say to you : my son, you know, has constituted you his heir ; and, independent of his wife's jointure, which is three thousand а -year, the principal of which will revert to Lord Caerleon at her death, he has bequeathed him his house in Baker-street, and about fifteen /hundred а -year, besides his share in my business—I had supposed he was much richer. Now 1 propose, in lieu of a yearly income arising from the trade ------" " Excuse the interruption, my dear grandfather, but I am resolved that you shall not decrease your own income upon my account : my uncle's share in your trade ought to devolve to you, who have always
always done the duty; or, at all events-, you must suffer it to revert to my cousin Kempthorne·—fifteen hundred а -year, add¬ ed to my present income, will more than suffice for all my wants/' " You must sufier our boy to have his own way, my dear Sir," resumed the Earl, " as his and my uncle, whose joy has been unbounded since he has learnt that the Aie¬ rioneth title will descend in the right line, has positively made over to our beloved Francis, Carberry Green, and half the sur¬ rounding estate, amounting to seven thou¬ sand a-ycar, and, at his death, he has se¬ cured him the remainder : he also insists upon his wife's jointure being settled upon that estate, which was once her father's, and it is to be sufficiently ample to enable her, should she (which God in heaven forbid ! ) -survive our dear Francis, ίο maintain a proper establishment, and to reside in that, her jointure-house. Air. Caerwyth means to reside constantly at Bath in future—he has a very large house there, and if we will promise
promise often to visit hhn, he will be my son's and my guest in return ; and as my title and estates will, of course, center in Francis, I have suffered my uncle to pro¬ vide for his present wants." Mr. Haslemere was extremely gratified when he heard that the Melvin estate would thus revert to Mrs. Archer, whom he de¬ clared he longed to see ; but protested he would not be denied the pleasure of mak¬ ing his grandson a wedding and an annual present, adding, cc when I die, he will, of course, be my heir." It was how r ever finally settled, that Kemp¬ thorne should henceforward be joint part¬ ner with the old gentleman, in their mer¬ cantile concerns, subject to those restric¬ tions the old gentleman might deem ne¬ cessary : and, as the Earl readily agreed to dine in the Friars, Mr. Weldon was sent for in the evening; since, having been Mrs. Archer's guardian, and still acting in that capacity for her daughter,' he was the most proper person to draw up her mar¬ riage-
riage-scttlements, respecting which the Earl gave him full instructions, having brought up all the necessary papers. Mr. Ilaslemere also deputed the gratified law¬ yer to settle every thing with Mrs. George Ilaslemere, whom our hero requested might be suffered to retain the house in Baker- street; but to that the merchant would not agree—that should be sold immediately, as he was not in want of a town residence, and the Earl left every thing to his discre¬ tion. They separated at a late hour, but not . before the merchant had promised to dine in Devonshire-place the next day, during which our hero gave every necessary order respecting carriages, jewels, liveries, See. SiCr that his father advised, to whom he had given a short abstract of his life; and having, of course, mentioned Mr. Moretón and Mrs. Jones, in very high terms of esteem, and dwelled upon their having pa¬ tronized hhn during his state of depen¬ dence upon Mr. Corfe, the Earl declared he
he would pay them both a visit of thanks; and, by way of making them some return for their past favours towards Lord Caer¬ leon, it was settled, to present the old lady with an Indian shawl, and Mr. Moretón with a handsome piece of plate. The Earľs visit, and polite treatment of them, was, however, still more flattering ; and Kalkreuth, who had neither been for¬ gotten nor overlooked, was not among the least pleased : and as soon as the Earl thought it consistent with politeness to revert to Mr. liabîcmere's ward's settle¬ ments, he waited upon that genti' man with Captain WiHoughby, who requested he would give what orders he chose to his solicitor, as he would sign what he and the Earl agreed upon blindfold» They were not inclined to rake advantage of his gene¬ rosity ; he therefore found that he had studied his own interest, when he made them the umpires between hirm and his wife, who had resolved to remain with Mrs. Mortimer
Mortimer during the winter—(our hero and she met one day in Austin Friars, but as total strangers, though she had some difficulty to conceal her perturbation)— when, ha\ing settled all their business in town, the Earl talked of returning into Staffordshire, and wished Mr. Ilaslemere would have accompanied him and his son to Carberry Green, where they did not propose to make any stay, as Mr. Caer¬ wyth, Mrs. Archer, her daughter and sister, were all engaged to spend their Christmas at Caerwyth Priory, where, early in the new year, our hero hoped to receive the hand of his beloved widow ; and Mr. Hasle¬ mere, though he declined visiting Carberry Green for the present, readily promised to join them in Cheshire, previous to ihe ceremony taking place : therefore, on the Monday after George Haslemere had been consigned to his mother earth, the Earl and his son left London, Kempthorne hav¬ ing previously entreated his generous friend
friend would let hím know whether he" might venture, when they returned U* town, to pay his devoirs to Emily Melvtn.
CHAP, xm. <_»n the Sunday preceding our hero's depar¬ ture, Mrs. Jones, wrapped in her new shawl; which was far superior to the one Mr. East¬ wood had given his mothcr-îft-Iaw, and* which, having been taken iti execution, had been returned to the li nen -dra per frofrr whom it had been purchased, proceeded into John-street ; and it may be supposed she was noi sparing of her praises of the Earl ï but as for Lord Caerleon, no words could express the regard she 'felt for him, vol, iv, r who,
who, fearfbl that, had he waited upon him, he should only have hurt the poor old man's feelings, had written him a very kind letter, in which he had inclosed a fifty- pound note, informing him what Mr. Haslemere had promised to do for him, and desired him, as he valtad his future friendship, not to deny himself any com¬ fort that he might want ; and this epistle Mrs. Jones now delivered, assuring him that Lord Caerleon would renew his in¬ junctions in person, when he returned to town : and, while he was shedding tears over the friendly expressions of our truly charitable hero, Mrs. Jones was detailing to tbe envious Mrs. Wheeler, and listening Caroline, every word the Earl had said, who had walked all over her house, be* cause it had been the former residence of his son~~nay, he had even kissed her little William^ and presented him with a tea^ pound note, besides which* he ЬаЛ *ent him рце of th$ largest rockinf-hoţieş $h$ had ever s¿ ep, because jLo*d Caorieoti had told
told him he had take» a great liking td the child, owing to his having reminded him of his own situation early in life. She was proceeding tn this strain, when there was a knock at the door, which Mrs. Wheeler opened, and a sailor, evidently, as he would have termed it, half* seas over, enquired whether a Mr. Wheeler lived there ? " Yes," was the reply— <r what have you got to say to him ?—but come in—be is in that parlour." All present were mote or less cuxions to kuow what had brought hint. " I came from the Terrace, the Adelphi," said Jack; u for when I asked for Mr. East¬ wood there, they told me he was run away, and sent me to Να —, in Marsham-street, and a woman there sent me hither/' " And what did you want with Mr. East¬ wood, my friend?*' asked the old man— " do you know wbare he now k?" f< Why, I believe I may, as I have very lately bee* 'm company with hit», as you R 2 shall
shall hear: this direction/* holding out a card, cc told me where he did live, and I dare say he bitterly repents now having 'ever kft England." u So much the better!" cried Mrs. Wheeler— €f I only wish I may hear he has been hanged, and all his accomplices with him, since he has brought us to want—a vile rogue !—oh, the money he has robbed and cheated me and mine of!" f( His having robbed us cannot concern this good man/ 1 observed old Wheeler, " so let us hear what· he has to say." Jack's countenance had been more ex¬ pressive of triumph than pit}% while the old woman was recapitulating her misfor¬ tunes, and swearing a bitter oath, he ex¬ claimed, " Then I am sure you will not be sorry to hear, Eastwood and his brother- xogues have met with their match." " Pray God he may be at the bottom of the sea !—though drowning would be too good for him." *' Why, he might meet with better com¬ pany,
pany, had he gone to Davy's locker, thart mayhap he was in the habit of keeping or** shore ; but the short of the story is this^—I was engaged, about a month ago, to lend a hand in a fishing-smack, owing to one of the men who belonged to it being ill ; but behold, while we were l}ing in the River below Grávese nd, three men came on board us one night, bringing with them a fine quantity of trunks and packing-cases, and we immediately sailed, with wind and tide in our favour; and, instead of going in search of fish, I found these chaps had engaged the master of the boat to take them over to Cuxhaven ; and that, instead of be¬ ing on board a fishing-smack, I had joined a desperate gang of smugglers : however, as 1 was amongst them, why, I thought it most prudent to do my duty. W T e cleared land by day-break, but, towards evening, a sail hove in sight and gave chace, after hoisting French colours. Our captain only laughed, saying they knew him, and would not meddle with him: the three gentle- a ä mem
men insisted upon his spreading every inch of canvas, and he pretended to do so; but I saw plain enough he wished the other boat might come up with us, which they soon did, and fired a shot athwart ours. * Never mind/ cried the Captain, * we shall run away from them yet :' but a se¬ cond having damaged our rigging, he said we stood no chance ; so we lay-to, to sufier them to come along-sido, as he swore onr small-arms would not prevent them from sinking us ; and we were only five, besides the passengers, while the other boat car¬ ried twelve men : our captain hailed them in French, which one of the passengers understood." f< Ah, that was my husband ! " cried Ca¬ roline. fť Hold your tongue, girl," said the old man, i( and let us hear the conclusion of the story." " Why then, Sir, he told his compani¬ ons that they were betrayed ; and they were for fighting*, and not allowing the Frenchmen
Frenchmen to come on board. This only led to their being the more roughly hand¬ led, as the Frenchmen stripped us of every thing but our provisions, and then set tail, leaving us to pursue our voyage ; and, two days afterwards, wc landed our passengers without going into port, and from thence sailed for Holland, where we found our late enemy waiting our arrival ; for, would you believe it ? it had all beert a concert¬ ed plan between my smuggling master and the American son of b ------, a smuggler like himself, whom I took for a Frenchman; but they had agreed to divide the plunder*, which turned out better than they had ex¬ pected, though, not being one of the gang, I was not up to every thing: however*' they did the handsome thing by me, as voit perceive," displaying a handful of guineas; * e but as I longed to know who our passen¬ gers really were, I secured this direction, which stuck to one óf the packing-chests, which led me into the Adelphi ; and, as they are such rogues, why I do not so к 4 much
jnuch regret their having been landed in Denmark, with only the cloaths upon their, back, and without a shilling amongst them to pay the doctor/' concluding by fling¬ ing down five guineas, saying, t( there is a trifle towards making up your loss, and so good bye !" and away he ran. " No doubt he was one of the principals in the iniquitous plot/' cried Mrs. Jones, " who has been deputed hither by the others, to hear what you would all say/' Old Wheeler was of the same opinion, while the old woman rejoiced at the idea of the wretches being left to starve in a fo¬ reign country ; it was even better than had they been drowned. In the afternoon, Mrs. Jones drove into Devonshire-place ; the Earl and his son were at Mr. Haslemere's villa, though they were to return to town that evening, as they were to set out for Staffordshire the next morning : to Mrs. Hunter, therefore, did she communicate what she had learnt respecting Eastwood and his accomplices, and
and who repeated it to our hero, who ob¬ served, that they had, like Mrs. Wheeler, merely met with their deserts. " Such rogues are generally the dupes^ of others," said the Earl, ff since no honest men would have agreed to convey them. off in so private a way ; and no bribe they could offer could prove so tempting as the prospect of cheating them out of all they were worth ; and I make no doubt but the- smugglers enjoyed the idea of duping^ them, nearly as much as they did of rob¬ bing them/' Next morning, as agreed, the two Peer& left town : the reception they met with at Carberry Green was, as may be supposed, flattering in the extreme to the hero оГ our tale, who, after dining with all his new relations, hastened to South Lodge ; and, he had so much to say to Mr». Arr her, so* many caresses to bestow upon Eliaabert-v that it was morning before he reached Af oat House : and, after spending· a, week in a constant round of gaiety, the wruìla
party at the Green, our hero, his betroth¬ ed bride, Miss Melvin, and Elizabeth, set out for Caerwyth Priory, where they spent their holidays ; and, early in January, Mr. Haslemere had the satisfaction of bestow¬ ing the amiable Mrs. Archer upon his be¬ loved grandson. The new-married couple immediately set out upon their return to Carberry Green, now Lord Caerleon's; it having been settled that South Lodge should, in future, be appropriated to the use of Mr, Caerwyth, and Moat House, with the ad¬ joining home^farm, was to be prepared for the reception of Captain and Mrs. Wil- lnughby, who were to become Lord Caer¬ leon's tenants, as the estate was settled up¬ on his younger children ; but Lady Merio¬ neth was so anxious to withdraw her bro¬ ther from the vortex of his present dissi¬ pated set of acquaintance, she made a point of his spending at least six months in Staf¬ fordshire, for the ensuing seven years; and, on the fourteenth of January, the 3 Merioneth
Aierioneth family and Mr. Haslemere, having called for the bride and bridegroom cn passant, set out for London; and, on the ensuing birthday, Lord and Lady Caerleon made their first appearance at Court—Air. Aioreton, who had engaged Mrs. Jones to dine with him, had the pleasure of seeing them go down St. Jamcs's-street ; and as our hero, who went with his father, kissed his hand to thenb and the Earl also no¬ ticed them, they were to the full as much gratified as the former was, by the general praises which were bestowed upon his son and his fair bride. But, while our hero was thus making his enírêe into the circle of fashion, we must return for a short time to the Wheelers. Mrs. Jones had obliged the old man to al¬ low himself every comfort his age requir¬ ed : she had also, more than once, sent the hie Mr. Corfe's solicitor to John, who had, at her request, engaged two very eminent counsellors to assert his innocence upon the day of JriaL On
On Christmas-day, the wretched prisoner reflected upon the resolutions he had form¬ ed on that day the year before; and as his misfortunes had neither mended his temper nor his heart, he felt more regret at Fran¬ cis's being restored to his father, and rank in life, than even for the ruin and disgrace of his parents : to Mrs. Jones he was, how¬ ever, all abject submission, which led to her sending him a roast fowl and a plumb- pudding for his Christmas-dinner; and, on the day of his trial, this now worthy old woman devoted the whole morning to his wretched broken-hearted father, who seem¬ ed fast sinking into the grave—his distress and agitation may be conceived, bat we feel unequal' to the task of describing if : his soothing companion had prevailed up¬ on him to take a few spoonfuls of soup about three o'clock, when his wife's well- known knock rendered him almost breath¬ less. *' He is cleared î he is cleared !" cried the old woman, rushing in, regardless of what
what might prove the consequence of thus abruptly communicating such intelligence to her husband, whose hands fell from the arms of his chair, and he sunk back, never to rise ai>ain ! Mrs. Jones could only rejoice that it had pleased God to spare him, till he learnt that his son was acquitted ; while Mrs. Wheeler, ν hen too late, deplored her im¬ prudence, as she knew there was nothing secîired to her, and that those friends, who had so kindly supported her husband, would not extend their bounty to her. Caroline sincerely grieved for her father, adversity having proved a very salutary lesson to her ; and when John arrived, who had been detained that he might discharge his goal-fees, &c. he felt something like sorrow, when informed that his father had expired upon being told that he was ас» quitted, as he felt that he had had a very narrow escape ; but the known bad cha¬ racters of the men who had led him on to ruin, and their having absconded unknown to
to him, after so shamefully cheating both his father and himself, were so strongly urged in his defence, by two of the first counsel in England, whom Mrs. Jones had fee'd with our hero's money, that the jury returned their verdict— not guitti/; and were applauded by the judge, who seri¬ ously admonished John to be more cauti¬ ous, when he again attempted to discount notes for other people. Fortunately for him, the jeweller had compromized his debt with his father ; he was, therefore, now at liberty, with the wide world before him, and about forty pounds in his pocket: and as Mrs. Jones soon gave Mrs. Wheeler notice to quit her house, as she meant to let it for the benefit of Caroline, whom she took home into Marsham-street, and for whom Mr. Haslemere, Mr. Moretón, and our hero, made a very decent provi¬ sion, John found it necessary to endeavour to get some situation, to preserve himself from starving ; but, as it was in vain for him to hope to gain admittance into any merchant's
merchant's counting-house, after having appeared at the bar of the Old Bailey, and knew, besides, that Mr. Kempthorne would not degrade himself by giving him a cha¬ racter, he, at last, humbly contented him¬ self with the place of foreman, or clerk, to a master scavenger, whose dust-yards w T ere in the vicinity of Gray's-inn-lane, and where there was a dirty hovel aHotted to his use ; as it was his place to keep an eye over the men, to precede the cinder-sifters, in turning over the dust when brought in, and to keep an account of the pigs who basked upon the fragrant heaps ; and as his ruling passion, avarice, rendered him all eyes and all ears, he gave great satisfaction to his employer: but, as.if to remind him of the station in life from which he had fallen, and to cuerease his mortification, one fine morning in April, as he was busily raking a dust-heap, and fighting with the surrounding pigSj who greatly impeded his labour, our hero, who was driving Lady Caerleon and Miss Melvin in his barouche* and-
and-four, having come.up that morning from his grandfather's villa, and having, as the ladies wished to leave their cards with a friend in Guild ford-street, driven down Gray's-inn-lane, was obliged to pull up rather suddenly, owing to a train" of dust¬ carts which were coming out of the yard, directly opposite where the dirty John stood, who chancing to look up, being without a hat, was instantly recognized by Lord Caerleon, who as instantly turned his head, and soon dashed off, convinced that Heaven was just in its decrees ; and as a last resource, after her daughter left her, though, while she lived, Caroline allowed her the same sum a-week the creditors had done her father, Mrs. Wheeler took a small chandler's and green-grocer's shop ; but as she also took to drinking, her trade soon fell off, and, after going on from bad to worse, during the ensuing ten months, she, in an unfortunate moment, having made too free with lier favourite liquor, slipped down her cellar stairs and broke her leg, and
and being conveyed to an hospital, she there ended her miserable career; while the child she had reared in obscurity, lived admired and respected by a numerous set of friends and acquaintance, blessed with a wife the counterpart of himself, who, in due time, presented him with a son and heir, to the great joy of the Earl and Mr. Caerwyth, The worthy Kempthorne was favoured with the hand of Emily Melvin before the summer birthday; and, as she had none of Mrs, George Haslemere's objections to the city, they continued to reside in Austin Friars, frequently л ¡siting the old mer¬ chant, who waS spared to his friends till he had seen his grandson surrounded by a fine voung: famiiv; and when he died, no man was more sincerely lamented, even by those who inherited his property, which he divided between Lord Caerleon and Kempthorne, who continued sworn friends. Mrs. Jones lixed to see her little Wil¬ liam, after finishing his studies at West¬ minster-school, removed to college at our betot
hero's expence, as he wished hhn to study physic: his aunt's bequest rendered him a comparatively rich man, and, in due time, he became an honour to the profession he had chosen. Kalkreuth had been promoted, upon the Earl's application to Ministers, to an easy place in one of the offices annexed to the Treasury, where his perfect knowledge of French, German, and Italian, rendered him very useful ; and when Mr. Moretón died, he left him the bulk of his fortune, which rendered him perfectly independent of his place. Of the more inferior characters, little remains to be said : Mrs. George Hasle¬ mere, owing, perhaps, to her no longer having any body to torment, did not long survive her husband—a cold she caught soon after his death, brought on a cough, which baffled her physicians, and termi¬ nated her existence : Mrs. John Wheeler, whose beauty enabled her once more to emerge from obscurity, ended her career as such characters generaJly do, ia mkexy and
^ınd disgrace ; and Mrs. Bever being, for¬ tunately for her children, seized with a violent fever, soon after Mrs. Wheeler had paid her her last visit, paid the debt of na¬ ture ; and, as her daughters were noticed by some distant relations, they were thus prevented from following the example of Mrs. John Wheeler. If our faithful delineation of many cf the characters introduced into this work does but amuse our readers, and prove an excuse for our errors, we can only say, that it has ever been our wish to hold out the doctrine in which we believe, that vice is sure to meet with its adequate punish¬ ment, even in this world, since, if success¬ ful, the dread of detection, and of a future judgment, must embitter those moments undiscerning observers may fancy are de¬ voted to happiness. FJNÏS. "KO ♦. Latir, DarîİDg, and C adenhat'-Strttf.
