Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
"There is a secret, find it out!": a novel
THEME IS A SECRET.
CHAÍ\ I. WaR. George fiaslemere not having made his appearance in Austin Friars, which, indeed, he seldom or ever did of an after¬ noon, John, in conformity to his mother's orders, proceeded into Baker-street, where he arrived soon after eight o'clock, and was informed that Mr. Haslemere was en¬ tertaining a party of friends, and as thè last course was but just being removed, if it was absolutely necessary he should see him that evening, he had better wait half an hour» voi., п. в John
John made no objection—and the sa¬ voury smell of the nice dishes, which pass¬ ed under his nose, rendered him so con¬ descending, (in consequence of his having made so poor a dinner, we must suppose,) that he readily accepted the butler's invi¬ tation to join the party in the servants* hall, where he was so copiously regaled, that time slipped away unperceived by him—indeed, ten o'clock struck before he recollected that he had not delivered his mother's message. The butler advised him, except he had something of great impor¬ tance to communicate to his master, to de¬ fer speaking to him till morning, as Mr. Haslemere's head would certainly not be very clear just then—and it was, besides, ten chances to one whether he would leave his company to see any body upon bu¬ siness. John, who had, however, no mind to have another long walk in the morning, and who thought it very uncertain whether he should see Mr. Haslemere in the city the
the next day, requested that his friend the butler would merely whisper in his mas¬ ter's ear, that he wished to say three words to him, but would not detain him half a minute. Mr. Haslemere did not, however, choose to move, merely sending John word that he should be at the counting- house in the course of the morning, when he could attend to him for a whole mi¬ nute; and with this unsatisfactory answer John was obliged to set off home, rather stupiffed than exhilarated by the repeated draughts of strong ale he had been swal¬ lowing, i Mrs. Wheeler, who had been in mo¬ mentary expectation of him for the last two hours, could not conceive what had thus detained him, and was just telling Caroline " she feared he had got into some scrape," when his well-known knock dissipated her alarm—though, upon per¬ ceiving he was all but tipsy,- she was vet y much astonished, feeling well convincedthat he had not been making thus free at his к 2 own
own expence ; but her alarm having sub¬ sided, she told him in an angry tone, she supposed he had been making merry over his father's misfortune, though she trusted he was.not so near death as he might have hoped and expected ; nor would he be so great a gainer as he might expect, let him drop when he would, as while she lived, the staff*should never go out of her hands. John, though he felt and looked unu¬ sually stupid, repeated, as nearly as he could recollect, every thing that had pass¬ ed in Baker*street, dwelling upon the po¬ lite message he had sent in, and the answer he had received. " And pray," enquired the old woman, f< did you tell Mr. George's servants what a state you left your poor father in ?" " I told them he had been taken ill in the morning, but that there were hopes of his recovery." " Then, 1 suppose, they made you tip¬ sy to drown sorrow; aye, I warrant me there are flue doings in Baker-street—for one,
one, ï should not \vonder were Mr. George to have run most charmingly on th^varong side of the post, since I am sure bi& ßn# wife is a shocking manager, and the mas¬ ter and servants all get drunk at the same time." John glouted— ts He had not drank any more than had done him good." " Good forsooth 1—you have drank jusi enough to act and talk like a fool, and I make no doubt but you let your tongue run finely among the bouseh^Mr-rhowever, Mr. Haslemere may give himself aire in his cups, but I shall make him remember it when he is sober, if he does not take care/' John had sense enough to observe, ff that Mr. George could not know what had brought him jnto Baker-streets and might think he could not have any thing of consequence to aay to him tt that time of night." f * Then I will let him know, that il is of consequence for him to speak to a* son of mine, at aU time* and at any hour/* в â John
John stared, not being able to compre¬ hend his mother's meaning—but, after a momentary pause, he exclaimed, " Why did you not put me up to the gossip, mo¬ ther, then í might have sent in a second message, that would have brought Squire George out in a jiffy ?" " Do not bother me with your nonsense, you drunken fool !—put you up to the gos¬ sip, indeed 1—what do you mean, I should like to know?" " Why, did not you as good as say that you could make Mr. George do as you please ?—-aye, aye, if he runs restiff, you will make him acknowledge Frank ------" " I wish you do not provoke me to box. y oiir ears, for had you said as much before any one else, or was it ever to come to my ears, that you had circulated so scan¬ dalous a report, out of this house you should go; how dare you even surmise such a thing ?*—and I should not be sur¬ prised, were I to hear you had given your tongue fine,liberties in Baker-street." John
John vowed " he had not evert men¬ tioned Francis's name^—he was not such a fool as to make mischief, and he blew Mrs. Haslemere could not abide him." " Then you are the first drunken fool who ever knew what he either said or did ; and I can tell you this, that you have given: such little satisfaction in Austin Friars, if it was not for the regard Mr. George bears. me, and if your father had not once been, a great favourite of the old man's, you would, ten to one, have been civilly dis¬ missed ; but as I have a friend at court, if you would but curb your nasty temper, I won't say whether I might not get you; promoted, or at all events, I could almost insure your succeeding your father, whom you fancy is very rich, while lam not sure wdiether he will leave enough behind him to keep me and your sister out of a work¬ house, should I live tobe old, and she not get married; however, mind this, if I should be fortunate enough to secure you: your father's place in case he dies, or is: в 4 unable*
unable to attend his duty—mind this, I repeat, yon shall insure me something handsome out of your salary." John was ready enough to make any promises, as he knew they were not bind¬ ing in law, and if she did but procure him his father's place, he could dispute it with her afterwards; but, as his mother justly observed, he луав not sufficiently compos mentis to discuss matters of such importance^—till it луав seen лупе^ег his father was likely to retain his situation, they had better drop the subject, as he wanted rest. To which he agreed—there¬ fore, after лукпи^· his father a good night, for whose recovery we fear he did not put up the most fervent prayers, he retired to rest. Next morning the im^alid was neither better nor worse, said Mr. Jordan, who paid him a very early visit; and as Mrs. Wheeler was even more anxious than she had beejn the overnight to see Mr, George Haslemere, and had besides her reasons for
for not wishing it Го be known in Austiit Friars, that John had been the overnight into Baker-street, луЫсЬ might be disco¬ vered, should Mr. Haslemere unthinkingly ask him when he came in what* had brought him thither at so late an hour, she there¬ fore desired her son, who was now all complaisance, to proceed into Baker-street before he went to the counting-house, where, should he arrive rather later than usual, he might say he had been sitting up ^vith his lather best part of the night, so- had overslept himself. John луаз very ready to oblige herj though he луаз very anxious to know лупу she wanted to see Mr. George, vowing he would be as secret as the grave, and might besides be able to assist her луцЬ his advice. The bare surmise луоиЫ Ьал*е defeated his^ purpose, had his mother been inclined to make him her confident; therefore she only wondered at his impudence, in daring ta suppose she had any secrets to canvass Λνίίη his young master; was it not very natural, u à she-
she enquired; that she should wish to see him* after considering the precarious situ¬ ation of her husband, and the hopes she entertained of procuring him the reversion of his place? but he was like old Mr. Haslemere, fancying there were mysteries where it was all plain sailing. John was by no means satisfied, and what his mother said respecting old Mr. Haslemere increased rather than diminished his curiosity ; but as he well knew that it would be vain to urge his mother any further, as she could be as obstinate as he was curious, in hopes he should at least benefit by, the hold she had upon Mr. George Haslemere, he proceeded, as she desired, into Baker-street, and was extreme¬ ly happy, when he learnt the person he came to see was just come downstairs, and in haste, he understood, to proceed into Austin Friars, being very anxious to know what had brought John so much out of his way the overnight, who w r as immediately admitted into his dressing-room ; and the moment
moment they were alone, John informed· him, that his father had been struck for death, his mother had feared, the morning before, relating who had attended him> not omitting his ( Mr. Haslemere's) father- having visited him ; and concluding byr saying, that his mother would esteem her-^ self much obliged if he could favour her with an early visit in Marsham-street; hav¬ ing something of importance to consult him upon* Mr. Haslemere appeared both surprised! and shocked when he learnt the dangerous^ situation of old Wheeler, promising* toV see his good old nurse within the hour, as- he should make a point of calling upom her before he went into the city, regret— ting that he had not sooner known of Mr.. Wheeler's seizure, as he should certainly have looked in upon, the family, the day» before, hads he к полу n полу greatly they stood in need of consolation; adding^. " you need not mention having been here- this morning to any of the clerks. Did. a ô they.
they know you intended calling upon me last night?" ** No, Sir, I did not think it concerned them." " Certainly not—but I will not detain you now ; I shall see you again in Austin Friars before twelve." ' John had» been narrowly scrutinizing his companion's countenance during their short tête-à-tête, and he was wise enough to perceive, that his visit and subsequent message had greatly agitated Mr. Hasle¬ mere; but that by no means satisfied, though it greatly increased his curiosity, and he would have given a guinea, which he considered as a very large sum, could he, instead of hastening into Austin Friars, have returned home, and have secreted himself in the closet in the parlour, to have overheard the conversation between his young master and his mother. Un¬ fortunately this was impracticable ; but his surmises respecting this secret interview sö bewildered him, that he was more than 3 ever
ever confused in his accounts, which he attributed to his fears for bis father, whose known dangerous situation induced Kemp¬ thorne in particular to both excuse and assist him.—Meamvhile, Mr. George Hasle¬ mere, according to promise, proceeded into Marsham-street, where he arrived soon after ten o'clock, much earlier than Mrs. Wheeler had hoped to have seen him, con¬ sidering Ьолу he had spent the preceding evening; her anger therefore vanished, and having received him alone, after apo¬ logizing for the liberty she had taken in sending her son into Baker-street, she en¬ tered upon the subject uppermost in her mind. Their conference lasted for upwards of an hour; not even Caroline was hardly allowed to put her nose in, ere she луав or¬ dered to mind her father; and for the pre¬ sent we can only say, that when the tête-à- tête broke up, they separated excellent friends, as Mrs. Wheeler even went with¬ out her door to make her last curtsey up¬ on the pavement, Francis,
Francis, who, perhaps, felt to the fulE as anxious for old Wheeler's recovery as even his better half did, enquired how he had passed the night of the maid, the mo¬ ment he saw her in the garden, telling her,» he should call upon Mrs. Wheeler after breakfast, at all events, before he left home- for some hours ; and he was pulling Mr- Corfe's door after him, when he caught sight of Mr. George Haslemere advancing, towards the Wheelers', at whose door he knocked, which induced our hero to post¬ pone his visit, not wishing to meet that gentleman there; and he staid so much- longer than he expected, that he wast obliged to attend the rehearsal at Drury- lane, resolving to drop in as he returned home, which he did about three o'clock. The maid opened the door, and told him that her mistress was above stairs, and she believed her master was asleep. This was so very probable, that Francis, desiring she- would close the door very gently, said he would look in again in the course of the. afternoon.
afternoon. He thought the maid seemed vexed, and heard her sigh, as she, in obe¬ dience to his wishes, gently shut the door ; the old woman, thought he, has been abu¬ sing this honest hard-working creature, notwithstanding she is in such affliction* mentioning the circumstance to Mr. Corfe; who declared he did not believe Mrs. Wheeler луав blessed >yith much finer feel¬ ings than her son, as he was well convinced that she grieved more for herself than for her husband, when she seemed most af¬ flicted, since, луопЫ Mr. Haslemere insure her his salary, he лузб convinced, that, like Sir John Loverule, (f with pleasure she would resign him." Before, however, he went to the theatre, Francis again called at the W T heelers; and this time he vyas ad¬ mitted, the maid telling him her mistress Λν -as in the parlour, giving him a look while speaking, the meaning of which he did not understand. Mrs. Wheeler was alone when he enter¬ ed,
tá* and eoolly greeted him with u how do yo« do, Francis ?" There has certainly been a family quar¬ rel, thought our hero, and as Caroline did not make her appearance, he supposed she was in disgrace, but of course took no no¬ tice, merely enquiring after his best friend ^-adding, " that he had been prevented from calling in the morning by seeing Mr. George Haslemere knock at the door, and the rehearsal at Dntry-lane had confined him till past three, when he had ventured to knock as he went by." " So Mary told me," was the reply, without adding, that she was obliged to him for the anxiety he had displayed, or evien hinting at the trouble she had given hin) the day before: her marked coolness did not escape our hero's notice, who was nevertheless pleased to find it did not ori¬ ginate in any supposed slight on his side. " ţlow is Miss Wheeler," he next en- quircii· " Very
" Very well, all things considered." " She must have suffered so much from the natural anxiety of her mind, that she must be very unable to bear the additional fatigue of sitting up with her father, and as I know Mr. Wheeler does not like to see new faces about him, suffer me to take it in turn to do so with Mr. John, as I think I shall prove myself a very good nurse." " I am obliged to you v for your offer, Mr. Yates, but I do not choose to lay my* self under any further obligations," " Surely you are not serious, my dear Madam ; I shall feel myself the: obliged person if you accede to my wishes, since it is no more than my duty to endeavour to render myself useful to you or any of your family." " But Ι άο not wish to trouble anybody, Sir," was the reply, delivered in such a cool, haughty tone, that our hero, imme¬ diately rose to take his leave. She kept her seat, merely saying, "Good evening Sir," in return to his silent parting bow. Very
Very much at a loss to account for such strange behaviour, our hero returned home before he proceeded to Drury-lane, to re¬ late to Mr. Corfe how politely he had beert received, asking the old gentleman whe¬ ther he could form the remotest guess re¬ specting what had induced Mrs. Wheeler to treat him so cavalierly l· '* Not I, upon my honour, my dear fel¬ low; Γ have always thought her a strange capricious mortal, and she has now con¬ vinced me that I judged her right ; but it has ever been my maxim, if my own con¬ science acquitted me of having done any thing to deserve such treatment, to cease to notice those who took what I thought improper liberties with me, upon the strength of our respective situations, and they would be too much flattered, were you, by letter or otherwise, to require any farther explanation." • €t I shall certainly be guided by your advice, Sir; therefore henceforth -1 will content myself with merely enquiring of Mary*
Mary, when chance leads her in my way, how her master does." " You cannot punish them more, my dear Frank." Mrs. Hunter, who had brought in tea during the foregoing conversation, now exclaimed—" Aye, aye, let them fry in their own grease." " A good notion, Mrs. Cook," gaily re¬ sumed the old gentleman. As our hero was not sufficiently attached to the Wheeler family to feel any great chagrin at being thus in a manner discard¬ ed by them, he joined in the laugh ; and as it grew late, hastened to the theatre,. where the public convinced him that they were much more inclined to do him jus¬ tice than his only relations had ever beeik
CHAP.
СНЛР. II.
Day after day elapsed, without Francis's ever hearing, or more properly seeing, any thing of the Wheeler family, except by chance from some of Mr. Corfe's back windows ; and as even the servant appeared tO shun him, he contented himself with enquiring after the old man of Kemp¬ thorne, whom he saw as frequently as ever, and who was as much surprised as he had felt himself at Mrs. Wheeler's behavi¬ our totvards him, as he кпелу no more than Francis did in what her fit of caprice had originated, since they scrupulously avoid¬ ed mentioning the name of Yates in his beating;
hearing ; and as, like our hero and Mr. Corfe, he thought they might feel grati¬ fied were an explanation of fheir conduct to bè required, he chose to follow their lead, by never adverting, even in the most distant manner, to his friend, when in their company, though he frequently amused both him and Mr. Kalkreuth ( the German already mentioned) with their absurdities. The old man had soon been pronounced out of danger, and was slowly mending, said Mr. Jordan, at least such was Mrs. Wheeler's daily report for some time to Mr. Kempthorne, who was seldom or ever admitted into the sick room ; indeed he seldom spent his evenings at home, since on the nights Francis performed, he ge¬ nerally visited the theatre, having always an order for that purpose, either from him or Kalkreuth, frequently supping with them both, either at Mr. Corfe's, where he was always a welcome guest, or at the Ger¬ man's, who lodged, as we have already said, in Henrietta-street, Coven t Garden^ and
and who had kindly undertaken, upon his expressing a wish to learn the flute, to teach him tp blow that instrument, and of course gratis ; and this led him more fre¬ quently than ever to devote his leisure hours to him and Francis, who had already taught him some popular songs, which he had sung with great applause among his other friends ; still he never felt himself so happy as in the society of Yates and Kalkreuth, who were both equally partial to him, the German frequently declaring they formed a most harmóniám trio. Du¬ ring Lent our hero sung at the Oratorios, in addition to his theatrical engagement, and was allowed to excel as much in that line as in any other ; but Kalkreuth having caught a very bad cold in the beginning of Lent, was confined to his room for some days, and to the house for near a fortnight, a scholar of his having readily undertaken to replace him in the, band till he could with prudence return to his duty, and Kempthorne and Francis made a point of
of spending all their leisure hours with him, to prevent him, as they said, from dy¬ ing of ennui, the former even giving up the pleasure of hearing our hero on the evenings he appeared in public, that he might devote them to the flute, chess, and Kalkreuth—and one day having received a present of delicacies out of the country, he sent them to the invalid, promising to come and partake of-them in the even¬ ing. When he arrived, Kalkreuth, after thank¬ ing him for his kind present, regretted that he had not seen Francis during the afternoon, whom he had so fully expected would have called in his way to the the¬ atre, where he was upon duty that even¬ ing, that he had not sent to Mr. Corfe's to invite him, as he should otherwise have done, to partake of their regale. " Well, but as the first piece will be over by half past nine at latest," replied Kempthorne, " I will go in search of him, and bring him here to answer for his ne¬ gligence
gligence in not looking in upon you when so near." " He did call in the morning, but not having then received your kind present, I did not ask him to a bread and cheese sup¬ per—indeed I know Mr. Corfe, who is a worthy old soul, likes he should go home early when he has been performing, though he is far from wishing to be a restraint upon him^—however, as 'tis ten to one whether you will gain admittance into his lyring roohi, should you go in search of him, and may else miss him, 1 will wrap myself up very warm, and sally forth in your stead—I shall not be gone many mi¬ nutes, so you may practise during my ab¬ sence." Kempthorne made no objectiohs to his considerate proposal ; and Kalkreuth hav¬ ing found no difficulty in joining our hero, "who was preparing to return home, made him send his excuses to his good friend, as he always styled Mr. Corfe, and, taking his arm, led him away to his lodgings. It was
Was a delightful moonlight evening, and St. Paul's, Covent-garden, was striking the half hour after nine as they crossed the* way to Kalkreuth's door; and at the very moment a coach stopped there. " You expect more company," said Francis, "andhere they are." " Upon my honour I do not," was the reply. " That coach has probably brought thé master and mistress of the house home, ná 1 know they drank tea out." By the time they had crossed the Way the coachman had given a thundering knock at the street-door, and the friends made a pause upon the pavement, tò allow the party, who were alighting, to precede them in—when, to the infinite surprise of our hero, he recognised the features of Mr. George Haslemere in those of the gentleman, who, having stepped out first, was handing out a very handsome; very elegant, well-dressed young woman ; his astonishment rivetted him to the spot vol. п. с where
where he stood, till Mr. Haslemere, having turned his head, as immediately recollect¬ ed him, and seemed for a moment rather at a loss, when he hastily placed his fore finger upon his lips. Francis politely bowed acquiescence, suffering them to precede him and Kal¬ kreuth up the stairs. The German pressed the arm he had hold of, when he remark¬ ed the expressive recognition \yhich had passed between our hero and the young merchant—and the moment they were out of hearing, he said—" You are acquaint¬ ed with Mr. Smith." ' ť Very slightly, I gh 7 e you my honour," " Ah, Frank, there is a mystery," whis¬ pered Kalkreuth, "and faith I have long thought so—however, it is no business of mine; but his wife, or луЬоеуег she is, remember 1 ask no questions, is a bona roba, that you cannot deny." " I had by no means a full view of her," was the reply. The German laughed. u Then you only know
know Mr. Smith, and not his lady, who is one of the most beautiful English women I ever beheld." t( Very possibly, since I never saw her before. Do they reside here ?" " Why, you cannot be upon very inti¬ mate terms even with the gentleman, since you do not know where they reside ; but this is not their general abode, though they have apartments over mine, on the second floor; but they are not often in town, as they have a very elegant villa about eighteen miles from London, where they spend the most of their time, as they consider this lodging as a mere pied-d-terre, where thev sometimes spend a few hours in the day, but more frequently the night, when they go to any place of public en¬ tertainment." Having by this time reached Kalkreuth's apartment, Francis gave him a look to drop the subject, which he instantly did, re¬ verting to their having so opportunely met—at which Kempthorne equally re- с 2 joieed :
Joiced: but whether the maid, who had fit them up stairs, had presumed they knew more about the Smiths than thejr thought fit to acknowledge» as they had conversed merely in a whisper while ascending the stairs, or whether she hoped fo learn some¬ thing from their remarks, when she came fo by their cloth, she said, " she wished the Smiths had been further for coming home so early, they were in such a hurry íor their supper ; but as she had told them, they must wait if they expected her to cook any thing for them, as she had no idea of their being in town, though they generally came in at very odd hours—to be sure, he was a gentleman, and paid very well, or it would not be worth while for folks to put themselves out of the way for such irregular people, who did not seem to know their own minds for ñve minutes together.'* Kempthorne asked " who this gentleman and lady were ?" The girl replied— " She believed nobody knew
fcnew—they were certainly very rich, but she did not believe all they said луаз gos¬ pel when they took the apartments.** Our hero took no notice—no more did Kalkreuth — though Francis луав highly amused to think how they were all situ¬ ated, and could not help agreeing, that Mrs. Haslemere had some reason to be jea¬ lous, though, from the tenor of her cha¬ racter, he thought it very probable that she might blame herself for many of her husband's faux pas. The maid having for¬ got something, ran down to fetch it, and was, having returned up stairs, cutting some bread,, when she was disturbed by a very smart knock at the door. " Do you expect any more company^ Sir?" she asked, looking at Kalkreuth. " No." Cf Then let them wait," said she¿ conti¬ nuing to decorate the table; ff I know 'tis not my master and mistress, as they said they should not be at home before twelve at soonest," c3 While
While she was speaking, they heard the soi-disant Mr. Smith hastily descending his own fiight of stairs, and as their door was open, he stopped upon the landing, say¬ ing, in a hurried tone, " are you there, Mary ?" " Yes, Sir," was the reply,, advancing towards him. " I am not at home," said he, loud enough to be overheard ; " but let them knock again," slipping a guinea into the girl's hand, which rendered her his staunch friend—adding, " don't let those intruders come up stairs, if you can possibly avoid it, as your master and mistress are from home, I think you told me." " Yes, yes, Sir, they are safe enough, so leave it to me," perfectly n lderstand- ing, from his bribe,, looks, and gestures, what he had to apprehend. The house now resounded with the se¬ cond peal upon the knocker. " Let them knock on," cried Haslemere, who, perceiving Kalkreuth's door was open, aware
aware that he must пал^е been overheard, he put his head within the room, saying— " Excuse me, gentlemen, but permit me to request an asyjîum in this apartment for a few minutes, since"—the unexpected sight of Kempthorne prevented him from concluding his sentence, whose visible sur¬ prise, added to Mr. Haslemere's sudden pause, highly amused our hero and the German ; and as the young merchant was seldom disconcerted for any length of time, he was the first to gn r e a loose to his mirth, in which the other three joined very heartily. Francis луав, however, the first to en¬ quire, " Whether they could do or say any thin«: to serve him ?" " Upon my луо^ I Λν -as never more at a loss, since Mrs. Haslemere is actually at the door ; she has found me out, noUvith- standing all my precautions, and will; I make no doubt, raise the neighbour¬ hood, and thus afford fine paragraphs for the newspapers for at least a month to с 4 come ;
come ; I ЬеНел'е I had better let her go up stairs, ard make my escape the while." Kalkreuth hastily enquired, " Is Mrs. Smith above?" " I left her there." " Then do you remain here, Sir, while I enact that lady's husband, as I would not have Mrs. Haslemere refused admittance, since, upon discovering she had been mis¬ taken, she will certainly depart in peace." " Bless you for the thought," cried Haslemere ; f< 1 will give Mary her cue," running down the next flight of stairs, just as the girl was slovvly ascending from the kitchen, in consequence ofa third and still louder peal upon the knocker— луЫ1с Kal¬ kreuth, seizing an Evangelical Magazine, лугпсп a friend had lent him, in conse¬ quence of his having expressed a wish to read the advertisements with луЫсЬ the cov f er of those publications abound, walk¬ ed up stairs; and having, in a very few words, given the young lady to under¬ stand Λνίιο he was come to represent, he
he seated himself near her at a table,, with their backs towards the door; she, лу!ю was extremely amused at the idea of the farce that was preparing, readily pro¬ mising to second him to the best of her abi¬ lities. Meanwhile, Haslemere having hasti¬ ly returned into the dining-room, closed, the door, telling our hero and. Kemp¬ thorne, he would enter into every neces¬ sary explanation as soon as his prying wife луаБ gone, stationing himself so as to over¬ hear лупа! she would say. Mary, who had followed him half way up, that she might descend in a great bustle, flew along the passage ; and having opened the door, said— c< I beg your par¬ don, ladies—1 was at the top of the house, but from the violence of your knock,,! am* afraid I have made you wait." " This is the third time I have knocked/* replied Mrs. Haslemere; "are Mr. and: Mrs. Smith at home?" " Yes, Ma'am," was the reply. с 5 "Then
<e Then shew me into their apartment ; what part of the house do they occupy ? the second floor, I think they told me." " Yes, Ma'am, they have lodged here this year or more," preceding her up stairs. Another female followed Mrs. Haslemere, who, like her, лvalked up in silence. Mary was not absolutely aware of лvhat луа& going forward, there having been no time for explanations ; she, hxxwever, in conformity to the orders she had received, knocked at the door of the front room. Kalkreuth called out (< come in." Airs. Haslemere started, and looked at Afary, who, without seeming to notice her sur¬ prise, opened the door, just as Air. Smith was reading aloud, with due emphasis— ** * We do not put our trust in these earth¬ ly houses : луе кполу that, if our earthly house of this tabernacle луеге dissolved, луе have a building of God—an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens/'
« How
"How consoling, my dear love!" ex¬ claimed Kalkreuth, without turning his- head—adding, " why did not you wait tilt we rang, Mary ? we shall not sup yet^—we require no earthly food, while we can en¬ joy such an intellectual banquet—if ever man had a house in Heaven, the Reverend Mr. O'Sinister was the man." " La, Sir ! " cried the diverted Mary, w T ho with difficulty avoided giving a loose to her mirth, " this is always how you go on when you get hold of any of those godly books ; but I wish you would please to welcome these ladies, who are come to see you, perhaps to join you in singing hymns— for my part, I have too much to do tc* think of turning Methodist." "Lord bless me, Mr. Smith!" said his fair companion, starting from her chair,» and curtseying with well-affected surprise to the intruders. Mr. Smith was no less perfect in his part, entreating the ladies' pardon for not hav-
ing noticed their entrance, excusing him¬ self upon not having expected company at so late an hour. " We have the most right to apologise, Sir," said the confused Mrs. Haslemere, "sincea similarity of name has induced us thus rudely to break in upon your privacy —your name is Smith ?" ' f At your service, Ma'am—my dear, why do not you request these ladies to be seated ?" hastening to set chairs. if You must excuse us, Sir; indeed I was never more at a loss how to apologise for our intrusion, as I understood it луав a gentleman of the name of Smith, with whom I have been long acquainted, лу!ю resided here." " Then may I hope, Madam, that your, for us, fortunate mistake will pave the way to our becoming better acquainted ; but as yon seem averse to faл τ ouring us any longer with your company, shall I have the advantage of seeing you to my name¬ sake's, or to your carriage ?" " I must
" I mušt entreat I may not derange you, Sir ; I Avish you a very good evening." " At all events, I must insist upon see¬ ing you down stairs, Ma'am : Λν1ΐ3ί a de¬ lightful evening!" offering one hand to the lady, while he still grasped his maga¬ zine in the other ; and as they descended the first flight of stairs, he asked—" Do you take in this divine work, the Evange¬ lical Magazine?" "No, Sir." " More's the pity, Madam; let me re¬ quest that you will procure one of them, since I am convinced that луШ lead to your purchasing the whole work, and to your taking it in as long as you live; and I hooe, in pity to us poor sinful mortals, that it will not be brought to a conclusion ihese hundred years—it is my delight of an evening, when Mrs. Smith and I are alone." By this time they had reached the street- door,which the maid held wide open ; and 3 the
the moment it was closed after them, she set down the candle to have her laugh out. Mrs. Smith, who was extremely anxious to overhear all that passed, would have followed the ladies to the very bottom of the stairs, had not Mr. Haslemere, who had been reconnoitering the party from the key-hole, softly opened the door, and made her a sign to return, as he did not wish any chance should enable her to make any farther discoveries ; and fortu¬ nately, he conceived, his wife had been too much bewildered, and. too much taken by surprise, to have even dropped a hint re¬ specting her name or errand, as he had never mentioned her to his fair mistress, and had aho carefully concealed his real name, rank in life, and place of abode from her, though she of course supposed the lady, who had thus alarmed him, must be either a wife or a mistress whom he had in keeping besides herself; but she was> doomed
doomed to continue in ignorance respect¬ ing the stranger's claims upon him, as he did not choose to satisfy her curiosity. To return, however, to Kalkreuth and Mary, who, луЬеп she was able to carry the candle strait, lit him once more up stairs, declaring he would make a better Methodist preacher than half those лупо took to that trade, as she had always heard they were fine sanctified hypocrites, and she defied the best of them to have played their part better than he had done, re¬ lating to the gentlemen, when she reached the dining-room, every thing that had oc¬ curred since the admittance of the ladies— one of whom she declared seemed struck quite comical. t( Why, yes," replied Haslemere, t( I think луе quizzed my prudish cousin fa¬ mously /'—but the maid having retired, he returned his thanks with great sincerity to the German, for having so kindly extri¬ cated him from his late dilemma—adding, f< he was convinced he might rely upon their
their joint secrecy, though it would be necessary for him and Mrs. Smith to change their quarters, if they kept up their. present acquaintance much longer/' Having all readily promised to keep his secret, Kalkreuth requested to know how Mr. Haslemere came to suspect his wife's knock ? "Why, Mary not happening to be in one of her best tempers луЬеп луе arrived, left us only one light, telling us she луав busy cooking, promising, nevertheless, to bring us another in a very few minutes ; I desired her not to hurry herself, and she. seemed inclined to take adл*àntage of my civility ; and Mrs. Smith happening to* walk into the next room, tooL our soli¬ tary taper with her. The evening is, полу- ever, so remarkably clear, in addition to the full moon, that it луаз almost as light as. day ; 1 therefore went to one of the win¬ dows, and pulling by the curtain; looked inta the street, лупеп 1 instantly remarked two females, who were standing directly opposite,
opposite, and looking up at this house, which induced me to draw back, though I continued to watch their motions, but from behind a curtain. They, walked on a little way, but soon returned, evidently keeping their eyes upon this house, and upon my windows ; and as we are on the dark side of the way, and I had no candle, I had greatly the advantage of them ; and while I was rather anxiously scrutinizing them, I thought I recognized the bonnet of one of them, having chanced to remark it this very morning upon Mrs.Haslemere'sown woman, whom I met in the hall ; and as far as I could judge by the light of the moon, she was one of those curious females, and the other, upon a more minute observa¬ tion, I conceived was my wife—therefore, when Mrs, Smith was returning with the light, I desired she would leave it in the next room for a few minutes. She com¬ plied with my wishes, enquiring why I chose to remain in darkness? I candidly told her, that there were two females in the
the street, who were upon the look-out for either her or me ; and as she was con¬ vinced they луеге no friends of her's, I was now fully so that they луеге Mrs, Hasle¬ mere and Lisburne, though thev were botb in a sort of disguise ; but 1 recollected that my precious rib had been hinting to me this morning, that she was rather луЕвег than 1 supposed—nay, she even enquired whether I was acquainted w T ith a gentle¬ man of the name of Smith, Λνηο had a villa at Ewell, in Surry, луЬеге 1 believe I told the people of this house that ϊ gene¬ rally resided: at the time her malicious en¬ quiry passed unheeded ; but it now rushed upon my recollection, and led me to ex¬ pect what followed, with луТисп you, gen¬ tlemen, are as fully acquainted as I am ; and had it not been for your kindness and presence of mind, Sir, turning to Kal¬ kreuth, I should have been doomed to Ьал г е had the changes rung upon the name of Smith and his handsome wife, till, sick¬ ened by the constant alarum, I should most
ntost probably have proposed a separation from one of the most curious, narrow- minded, jealous women, this island can boast of—indeed, I only wonder we have so long remained inmates of the same house, our dispositions are so dissimilar ; but I have hitherto borne with my domes¬ tic vexations, purely to avoid becoming the town talk." Here he was interrupted by the en¬ trance of Mary with the young gentle¬ men's supper, which induced Mr.Haslemere to take a very polite leave of the friends, after slipping another guinea into Mary's hand, as from Mrs. Smith, hinting, that she need not mention the recent occur¬ rences to her master and mistress, as they might else, like his prudish relation, take the alarm. She readily promised she would not—she would almost give a golden guinea, to be as 'well amused again the next time they were from home. The friendswere no less diverted, though they agreed never, to mention the circumstance out of each other's
other's company—Kempthorne grieving his worthy old patron had so gay a son. Kalkreuth agreed he was rather too old to render such connexions excusable; while our hero observed, many people would declare that this was at least presumptive proof that he was indebted to the gallant gay Lothario for his existence—adding, " how pleased Mrs. Wheeler would have been, could she, like you, Kalkreuth, have witnessed Mrs. Haslemere's disappointment, for whom I feel no pity, since I am convinc¬ ed she is much more anxious to expose than to reform her husband's failings." Kemp¬ thorne agreed her absurd conduct afforded Mr. Haslemere some excuse for forming such improper connexions, though a Bri¬ tish merchant ought, for the honour of the nation, and the good of the community, to bear an irreproachable character. But as it grew late, the trio separated, promising to meet again the following evening at Mr. Corfe's—when Kempthorne declared, that as he did not find himself inclined to swell
swell the list of Miss Caroline's admirers, he must soon change his quarters, as she was grown so forward, and pointed in her attentions towards him, that he was almost afraid to speak to her, and dreaded to ring his bell, as she was sure to answer it. " Then let me advise you to make good your retreat," replied Frank, " lest, like poor Mr, Haslemere, you should be doomed to blush for the absurdities and ignorance of your wife, and no stratagem will be left untried to induce you to become a mem¬ ber of the Wheeler family." Kempthorne laughed at his gravity, though he promised to be upon his guard; as he knew John was very fond of mis¬ chief and very anxious to get rid of his sister, he was therefore the more surprised at the mysterious rupture which had taken place between the Wheelers and Francis, since they ought not to have quarrelled with the one till they had secured the other. Kalkreuth though* the breach had ori¬ ginated in the old people having fancied Miss
Miss was in love with her insensible cou^ sin, and as they had set their hearts upon her becoming Mrs. Kempthorne, they had of course discarded the squatter, as Mr. John, he understood, styled our hero, to induce the fair Caroline to make up to the future merchant. Mr. Corfe joined in the raillery, prog¬ nosticating the Wheelers would soon make a bold push to soften the flinty heart of, their lodger, who vowed he should bc proof against all their artifices; and thus ended the discourse, Kempthorne secretly resolving to make a very speedy exit from the Wheelers, whom he now began, the old man excepted, who had become a mere cypher, to dislike most cordially.
CHAP.
CHAP. III. Our hero continued so great a favourite with the public, and brought such crowded houses when he performed, that he was allowed to take his benefit on the Saturday preceding Passion Week, when all the fa¬ shionables were still in town ; and no sooner was it publicly announced, than demands for tickets poured in from all quarters, most of which were paid for in the most liberal manner, as the Countess of Bayfield declared herself his avowed patroness, and she had great influence in the high world. Among the rest of his kind friends, Mr. Haslemere, senior, de¬ sired
sired Kempthorne to procure him a dozen box tickets, giving him a twenty pound note to present to his friend in return. No commission could have been more agreeable to Kempthorne, who луаз ex¬ tremely interested in our hero's success, луЬо, at the expiration of three days, told his master, at the rate they луеге going on, they ought to have the house enlarged. Mr. Corfe, who had already kindly in¬ formed him that the clear profits upon this eventful evening should be entirely at his disposal, said, in reply— " Never mind, my dear fellow, sell all the tickets you can; let those who buy them take care to secure places, as they ought to remember, that first come first sensed upon these oc¬ casions. God send you may net a thou¬ sand pounds, as ï am convinced you ΛνΐΙΙ not make a bad use of it—indeed, I re¬ joice to perceive the high estimation in which you stand with the public has not ren¬ dered you vain, since you must not place too great a dependence upon the stability of
of popular favour ; therefore make hay while the sun shines, as a severe cold, or many accidents, may injure your voice-—and as a second-rate, you would be much longer in accumulating a fortune; you might, to be sure, as I have done, teach music, and with some success, since, like yourself, I began my career under the patronage of the or¬ ganist of Litchfield Cathedral ; but as I had merely voice enough to be tolerated as a chorus-singer, I had not half í he pros- spect you have of becoming a rich man— though, I bless God, were I obliged to re¬ sign my present lucrative situation lo- inorrow, î have saved enough to support me comfortably for the remainder of my days, without breaking in upon the prin- ripal ,· but while I have health, í shall con¬ tinue my labours, as I have a very agreat dislike to an idle life, though î have no relations for whom I wish to provide ; two second cousins, both bachelors, are the only survivors of my family, and they are both (no thanks to their industry) better
off than myself; nor would what I may have to leave behind me at all add to their comfort; and I am well convinced that they would not have contributed to mine, bad I stood in need of their support, as they once laughed at the poor organist, though of late they have condescended to consider me as their equal—nay, during the last twelve years, they have frequently invited me into Staffordshire, where they both reside upon their own estate, and have in return occupied an apartment in this hou.se whenever they come to town ; of course we are now excellent friends, and I never remind them of having turn¬ ed their backs upon poor Strewn, the title they honoured me with, though I would have strummed from sun-rise to sun·set, before I would have been beholden to them for a sixpence, and have lived upon a crust, which ï would have washed down with a glass'of water. Such was my dis- position, Francis; and though I am glad to find you are more liberal in your no¬ tiona
lions than I was at your age, I know you have an independent spirit, and will not squander away your money in folly and idle dissipation; therefore., if you take care of the main chance, yott will have accu¬ mulated a fortune, before I had thought of beginning to lay by a trifle out of my comparative small earnings; and no one will rejoice at seeing you grow rich more than I shall, since I shall take some merit to myself, should you, as I hope, prosper in the world—and money acquired, as mine and your's will be, redounds both to the honour and profit of its possessor. I have for many years lived, as I thought, comfortably; there are people, who may think my household arrangements are up¬ on too frugal a scale, but that is the least of my concern ; I am too old now to try to live for the world, nor would I endea¬ vour so to frame my conduct, were my time to come over again, as I had rather be reckoned too prudent than too extra¬ vagant—though î may not have hit upon r » S the
the exact medium, nor are there many that do, at least there are very few, лупо are happy enough to give general satisfac¬ tion, since you, much as you are admired, my dear fellow, arc not without your ene¬ mies—your л-егу superior talents must have created you many, independent of John W 7 heeler; but 1 make no doubt you will, ere long, look dow r n upon all those, Λνίιο would, if they could, effectually mar all your future prospects. I take very little merit to myself respecting your success ; you луеге born a musician, and have dili¬ gently laboured to attain your present ce¬ lebrity ; as to the scandalous stories re¬ specting your origin, you have done per¬ fectly right in never heeding them—like your friend Kempthorne, I strongly sus¬ pect you bear no affinity to the Wheeler family—whether you are or are not a Haslemere, I shall not take upon myself to decide—the elder gentleman of that name seems to feel interested in your con¬ cerns, and would, I am fully persuaded, as he
he gave you to understand, prove himself your friend, were you ever in need of one," Probably Mr. Corfe луоиМ have been still more profuse of his advice to his favourite pupil, if a double knock at the door had not broke in upon his dis¬ course. " That is for more tickets, Ί hope," he cried—and in a few seconds Mrs. Jones was announced, the lady лупо dined at Mr. Wheeler's on Christmas-day, and whom, we hope, our readers have not forgotten, as our hero had never suffered а луеек to elapse since that period, without looking in upon her, being always warmly pressed to repeat his visits. Mr. Corfe shook his head upon hearing the name—Francis merely smiled at his visible disappointment—while the old lady л\^1^ into the parlour, saying, as she entered, ft I am come to scold you, young man/' looking at our hero. (C I hope not, Madam," was the reply, placing a chair for her. ft But I can assure you I am," seating d 3 herself
herself while speaking. " Pray, what is the reason I have not seen you for this week past ? you had used to call now and then, never often enough, to my thinking, to enquire how I did—it is not a hundred yards out of your way—therefore, pray what have I done that you are so saving of your steps? If I was fifty years younger, I suppose, r.nd as handsome as I was allow¬ ed to be at twenty, and had as much mo¬ ney as I have now, why you would find your way offener into John-street—but this is the consequence of being in one's seventy-first year." Here Mr. Corfe interrupted her, de¬ claring, " that he must and would defend Francis from the imputation of having wil¬ fully neglected her, as he had been very much engaged ever since his benefit had been announced, what with morning re¬ hearsals and evening duty, as the Orato- rios deprived him of foui с of his accus- tomed holidays; beides, í' dare say," he went or», ,ŕ he was fearful you mischt nt- tribute
tribute his visits to interested motives at this particular -juncture, since it might seem as if he wished you to take tickets for his benefit ; and he would scorn to levy a contribution upon his friends—indeed, he has been very much favoured ; almost all the dressed boxes are already ,engaged —the Countess of Bayfield alone has dis¬ posed of forty tickets, for which he re¬ ceived as many pounds—and onlyjester- day he had a twenty pound note sent him for twelve—not fo mention the liberality of many more of his friends." " I rejoice to hear so, neighbour ; and as you have made it out, I can*only say he was more scrupulous than I should have been ; but I suppose ail the tickets are gone at this rate." (( Kot quite, my dear Madam," rejoined the smiling Francis. t( No," said Mr. Corfe; ff there are twenty pounds worth left for you, if you are inclined to have them, and I know of ό 4 no
no one who can better afford to bc gene¬ rous.' 1 ' "As to what I can or cannot afford to do. no one knows so well as myself, neighbour; but suppose 1 were inclined to be generous, it would only be enrich¬ ing those who are already rolling in abun¬ dance, since you finger the cash, I under¬ stand, Mr. Corfe, while your pupil does the work." " I certainly have put some hundreds into my pocket in consequence of my pu¬ pil's very superior talents, but he will have every advantage arising from his benefit— ï should scorn to deprive him of the re¬ ward of his acknowledged merit." " You will now judge, my dear Madam, how happy I ought to think myself in hav¬ ing been placed under the care of so libe¬ ral-minded a patron, who has even much more than rewarded me for exerting my¬ self for his interest." " Then God bless his old heart," she cried,
cried, putting out her hand to Mr. Corfe ; " I wish to God you had been my hus¬ band, and that young fellow had been our son ; we should not then have been at a loss for heirs. But talking of that—do you know, that jade of a niece of mine, w r ho ran away with the fellow, has had the assurance to write to me to ask me to lend her five pounds ; I soon answered her let¬ ter, and wrote her, that, if she would come and fetch it, I would lend her a groat, not forgetting to make a fine dash under it, so I warrant me she will under¬ stand me. No, no, I will never encourage vice, but I am always ready to encourage gratitude in young people ; and you may well remember, Mr. Yates, when we met at the Wheelers last Christmas, I told vou the first time you had a benefit, I would take a ticket or two—and I am never worse than my word; so fetch me a few of both sorts, for you must know this is one of my lucky days. A fellow who ran away from one of my houses, more than five d 5 years
years ago, five-and-twenty pounds in my debt, has been nabbed this very day, and he paid the money immediately ; I fer- rclted him out, and I was resolved to have him; so that is money properly saved out of the fire, and for which, a month ago, I would thankfully have taken five-and- twenty shillings, therefore I can the better afford to be generous, you know, as you are to Ьал'е the whole of the profits you ьлу, Mr. Yates " " I have already told you so/' replied Mr. Corfe, " and so has Yates ; but you cannot believe either of us it should seem/* counting out a quantity of tickets while speaking to her—" five-and-twenty pounds worth"—he went on, talking to himself— te boxes fifteen pounds—pit and gallery "What is the man muttering about ?" cried the old woman. Looking at her very seriously—" 1 was making the calculation/' he said. " You want
want five-and-twenty pounds worth of tickets." " Why arc you not out of your mind, neighbour ? 1 never said any such thinç." О J Ct " Then ï misunderstood you," replied the old gentleman ; f * I thought you meant to have convinced Francis thaf you are the best friend he has, by bestowing five pounds more upon him than Mr. Hasle- mere has done—though be it remembered, that that gentleman took only a dozen tickets in return for his present," tf Aye, aye—but thereby hangs a tale, vcu know, neighbour; no disparagement to 5 ou, my young friend, but, if report does not belie Mr. George Haslemere, he ou^ht to have been still more generous." " 'lhe money came from the old gentle¬ man, I give you my honour," replfed Mr. Corfe. " Well, I have always heard him well spoken of-—however, as he is at least ten times as rich as I am, why, I will convince both you and Yates that 1 have the most d 6 spirit
spirit of the two, as I will also take a dozen tickets, and there is a ten pound note to pay for them." Both our hero and his patron луеге lost in amazement at this very unexpected ge¬ nerosity; informer having thanked her in the most èxpressfre terms for such kind encouragement, advised her engaging a box, promising to take all the trouble of doing so upon himself, that she might have no difficulty in accommodating her friends. She thanked him for his kind proposal, declaring, " that she was resolved to serve him to the utmost of her power, enquiring Ьолу many the Wheelers had taken ?" " You know I have the misfortune to be in disgrace Λνίίη that family, my dear Madam," resumed Francis, " therefore I cannot expect to receive any favours from them." " Misfortune forsooth ! you mean the good fortune, I suppose, since they луеге the gainers, not you, by the intimacy— 4 nav, et
nay, was not you always sending them presents?—aye, the old man has felt the Λν3ηί of your kindness, I am sure ; but he lets himself be trampled upon, so 'tis no matter; however, I shall give them a charm¬ ing broadside, if they do not take а Гелу tickets, I can tell yoii that ; but perhaps they think as I did, that all the plunder is to fall to the share of Mr. Corfe—if so, I ΛνΐΙΙ undeceive them ; and I mean also to wait upon Mr. Moretón —he can better af¬ ford to do the handsome thing than 1 can, and, Ι Λνϋΐ warrant me, I will make him come down." Francis requested she " луошЧ not give herself so much trouble." "Pray do not talk nonsense, boy ; Ishall not go in your name, nor shall I tell the Wheelers what 1 have done ; I shall mere¬ ly boast of лупа1 I mean to do, just to spi¬ rit them up ; they did not see me coming hither, as I went round not to pass their door, and I mean to return the same way; but, please God I live till to-morrow morning,
morning, I wiïï kick up a dust among them. So now God bless you, лой shall пале my prayers for your success—I only wish you had a thousand such customers as myself." Mr. Corfe joined Francis in thanking this strange old woman ; and our hero would пале seen her home, but she would not suffer him, for fear they should bc seen together, merelv de&irinç he would not fail to look in upon her лу11спе\ег he could find time. " This ΛνΐΙΙ do/' said Mr. Corfe, as soon as they were alone ; " it is a general ob¬ sen ation, that when misers wish to appear generous, they are ahvays profuse, as they hope by such conduct to cancel all their former mean actions—though poor Mrs. Jones will ever fall легу short, лупеп the pretends io emulate or vie with the elder Mrs. ifaslemcre, whose philanthropy is as unburn ded as his means; but, as »she seems t oibcious that she cannot, accord¬ ing to the ordinary course of nature, Нле many
many years longer, I suppose she is no longer so anxious to increase her hoards, as she has no relations upon лупот she seems inclined to bestow a single guinea, either during her lifetime, or when she dies." " I am no judge," replied Francis ff of the provocations she may have re¬ ceived from her nieces· still I cannot help blamin, her for håving ьо entirely dk- carded them, bince í can hardlv su pp o e their errors wen bevond forgiveness." " They do not appear to me fo have been of а л erv venial nature, since the eldest, ti hom she had ¿ent for to town, in hopes she луоиЫ рголе a comfort to her declining years, eloped with the first follow Λνίιο put the question to her, as in defiance of her aunt, and of common decency— and the other took care to convince ha\, that she preferred her ou η ease to beari.\j for a short time w\ih her little humours, which age and her habits of life render al¬ most excusable—of course, neither of these 5 gi ľ | s
girls had the least affection for her ; and they have, I dare say, bnoycd themselves up with the hopes of her dying without a will, when they expect, as heirs at law, to seize upon her property—therefore, I think she had better leave her money to an alien in blood, or to some public cha¬ rity, rather than enrich two such worth¬ less girls; indeed, it is rather a difficult matter for many people to decide how to dispose of their property when they die. I remember a person a few years ago, who, having been very fortunate in trade, had accumulated what might be deemed a handsome independence; he had several relations, besides a sister, who were what might be deemed in comparative poverty. I was one day laughing with him about the disposal of his property, when he told me, that could he know to a certainty how long he had to live, he would spend to the very kst shilling he was worth, five pounds excepted, which he meant to leave an un¬ dertaker to bury him. I never spoke to him
him afterwards, as he actually, upon giving up his business, sunk his whole fortune in an annuity for life, and died луНЫп eighteen months afterwards." "What а лугепгп!" exclaimed Francis; ζ{ I hope he thought of the five pounds." « No—he Λν -as afraid to make a ΛνΐΙΙ, therefore his sister took possession of what trifles those,about him in his last moments had not plundered him of—and she ex¬ pended ten times more than she ought to have done, in having him laid in the ground. God forbid there should be many such selfish characters, though very few people give general satisfaction m the disposal of their fortune." Francis perfectly agreed with the jus¬ tice of this remark ; but as he луаз л г егу anxious to give general satisfaction the night of his benefit, he devoted the even¬ ing to practising two пелу songs, луЫсп had been composed for him upon this occa¬ sion.
Mrs,
Mrs. Jones was no less busily employed in framing speeches for the next day ; and so anxious did she feel to serve our hero, that she knocked at Mr. Wheeler's door before the breakfast things were removed —indeed, Mr. Kempthorne and John were standing with their hats in their hands, ready to set off for Austin Friars. " Mercy upon me !" cried Mrs. Wheeler, "who would have thought of seeing you, Mrs. Jones, so earlv?" Curiosity to know what had brought her, induced the young men to delav their de- •'C? ri part u re. " I never mind how early I am upon foot when I have a friend to serve; and I am anxious to know whether you are all provided with tickets, and what sort of a party you expect to muster ?" " Tickets!" resumed Mrs. W T eeeler; " what do you mean ?" " Why, I came to enquire how many tickets you have taken of your nephew, as next Saturday is his benefit?" " We
" We take tickets!" interrupted John, affecting to laugh; " what, to put money into old Corfe's pocket !— a d ------ d good joke!" " I was not speaking to you, Mr. John, though I have long kuown you rule the roast here." " I wish you would please to hold your tongue, John," said his mother, "and not interrupt people when they are speaking to me ; though, ht me tell you, Mrs. Jones, I am, and always will, remain mis¬ tress of my own house ; so what were you saying about tickets ? I have heard Fran¬ cis is going to have a benefit, but he will reap no benefit from it, I fancy," " Then you are very much mistaken. What say you, Mr. Kempthorne, as I know you are very intimate with Mr. Yates ?" Kempthorne having made it a rule ne¬ ver to mention our hero's name in the Wheelers* hearing, had not told them of Mr. Haslemere's generosity towards his friçnd; but was not sorry so favourable aa
an opportunity occurred to relate the cir¬ cumstance, but merely полу replied—·' I believe it is very generally understood, that Mr. Corfe has waved all his rights in favour of my friend for that evening— nay, to his still greater credit, he is using all his influence to fill the house for his ad¬ vantage." " Why, zounds!" again interrupted John, u the fellow may put three or four hundred pounds in his pocket." " I hope he will," resumed Kempthorne, rr and should not be surprised were he to clear twice that sum." ** That is a d ------ d good one !" cried John ; " why the house would not hold so much, and they are obliged to pay the expences of the night." *' Agreed, Mr. Wheeler ; but many of Mr. Yates's friends and admirers have been л'егу liberal upon the occasion ; Mr. Hasle¬ mere, senior, for instance, sent him a twenty pound note for twelve tickets." The Wheeler family seemed lost in amaze¬ ment;
ment ; and Mrs. Jones eagerly exclaimed— " There is for you 1 and please God I will also take twelve tickets, for which I will give him ten pounds." The Wheelers, nay even Kempthorne, smiled, rather incredulously, at this, as they thought, vain boast; and Jphn laugh¬ ed outright, swearing she was humming them nicely. " Mr. Yates will not be of the same opi¬ nion, Mr. John, when he fingers my note ; and I make no doubt many other people will be equally inclined to encourage him." ' % Well," resumed John, " if I had ten pounds to throw away, I think I could find means to dispose of it to better ad¬ vantage." " Very possibly, young man, since you are in a manner coming into the world, while I am going out of it ; you may have a wife and family to maintain ere long, therefore what may be generous in me, would be very imprudent in you : I am worth
Vrorth more than I shall be able to spend while I live, therefore I choose to reward merit ; and I know of no one more de¬ serving than Mr, Yates ; and since his re¬ lations have chosen to turn their backs on him, 'tis fit his friends should take up the cudgels in his defence." The enraged John would certainly have blundered out with something gross, if his mother had not cut his words, saying—" I am very sorry, Mrs. Jones, you should think Francis has been unkindly treated by us, since I give you my word you are mis¬ taken; but I will explain that matter to your satisfaction some other time ; people will invent scandalous stories, and they ne¬ ver lose in travelling; but I was always fond of my nephew, and I am sure I re¬ joice to hear Mr. Corfe means to deal so generously by him ; 'tis more than he has done by us ; but 'tis of no use to talk of the past, so to return to the present. I should like .to go to the play on Saturday —however, I will think about it, and see if
if I cannot make a party, though 1 cannot afford to be so bountiful as you mean to be, since Francis cost me too much Λνΐιεη a child, to а11олу me to bestow much more upon him now—1 must not hurt my own children to serve him." fC I believe not," said John ; " and pray Λνϊ -jat do you mean to do with all your tick¬ ets, Mrs. Jones?" " Not to bes^v them upon you, or any of your family, believe me." " Oh, pray add them to your hoards," replied the provoked young gentleman ; ff for, to let you know, I for one will ne¬ ver again, лукп my олуп good луШ, go to hear your favourite ; many a street ballad- singer pleases me better." i( No one asked you to go, John," said Airs. Wheeler, who by no means Λνΐ8Ϊ^ to quarrel ţvith the луотап, to whom they had been for years paying their court, in hopes of coming in for some of her property ; and as she had sense enough to perceive she v?as anxious to support this highly-fa¬ voured
voured singer, she thought it was much more politic to appear flattered by the zeal she evinced in his cause, than to seem offended at her officlousness; she there¬ fore endeavoured to put an end to the de¬ bate, by declaring, ' f she should make a point of sending for some tickets." " Had he wished to display his grati¬ tude," said John, " he луоик1 have sent you a dozen." " Which would have been saying, in po¬ lite terms," resumed Kempthorne, <f I ex¬ pect to be pajd for them. No, no, Mr. Wheeler, Francis Yates would scorn to be guilty of so mean an action." " You only got the word of me, Mr. Kempthorne," said Mrs. Jones, " therefore you will be married before me, for you have exactly spoke my sentiments." Mrs.Wheeler declared " John had spoken without reflection, as she was convinced that Francis was neither deficient in point of gratitude nor of spirit, and she would make a party to go and hear him; she would
would call upon Mr. Moretón in the course of the day, whom she made no doubt would exert himself to oblige bèr, as he had ahvays been fond of Francis." Mrs. Jones said " she would do very right> as she had proposed calling upon Mr. Moretón herself ; but if she meant to see him, it would answer the same end," taking her leave for the avsved purpose of ser curing her own tickets, lest they should all be gone, promising to look in again on her return home. Kempthorne reminded John that it grew late, telling Mrs. Wheeler, tf that he would have joined her party, if he had not been previously engaged to accompany Mr. Haslemere, senior, who had engaged a Λνίιο! e box." While, howeл*er, Afrs. Jones's avowed generous intention was being canvassed by the Wheelers, she луаэ amusing Mr. Corfe and Francis at their expence ; and, having readily accepted a seat at their» breakfast- table, луаэ just praising the coffee, when VOL. II. Ε M«.
Mr*, mister bpëw&ï lhe páťlotiŕ ddior, ШЩ f¥antiiš theťte wás ä fentótft lit thte l^ssageí Whö wattted thr^è hoíè tickets* Our hero immediately Wrapped three ilp, carrying thent himself tette man, who if é HüŰng mar the doòr, atìd whfr, iii return, put ú letter into his hand, saying —^My ШШ^ёз im ёМХеЫ it note for thfm, aftd desired mé nol tö wait for the chatte/' turning uptfrt His heel, and leav¬ ing tlie Rouse. Francis remained stationary for a mo¬ mmi, dubious whether he had not been taken iti ; b U t as hé knew the number of tt*# tickets né thought fte соШ prevent those Шё Ша intended todnpe him from profiting" by their kind irt teň tion, break¬ ing the seal of his letter, while making fam -ЛпЪс^ЕФА, «iá aé ÏÏé slowly return¬ ed itftlHhe páťlbtír; a second letter Ivas ttféføscli il «Ш ШШ còtèn аШ seaľéá; та Mvhvğ òjmm tAa>, à third presented iürtr« h1é fíeW, *eo¡tiálly sectiŕed, ai if purpose^ ъ* petylex him. "What
" What have you therc¿ Francis^" asked Mh Corfe ; " plenty of blank ţiaper, it should seem." " And not much else, I am of opintoiţ, Sir," tearing open the last cover. e< Not a single Kne !" hè exclaimed ; " but here is the note the servant told me was en¬ closed—and L beg his mistress's pardon for having suspected she had any intention of amusing herself at the expence of my cre¬ dulity," unfolding the note : his counte¬ nance bespoke his surprise ; but putting it into Mr. Corfe's hand, hè repeated what the servant had said, declaring he could only suppose the lady had made a mis¬ take. " Not she, truly," replied Mr. Corfe ; " remember how carefullv it was en- closed," presenting it to Mrsl Jones. " Fifty pounds, as I am alive Ï" she joy¬ fully ekčTaimed. " I knew í should bring you luck— ýóu find my prayers have been heard ; oh ! how Ì will Work those W*heel¬ ers!" e 2 Francis
Francis requested she would not, in which Mr. Corfe joined, declaring they would accuse them of having been setting her on. She agreed they were spiteful enough— however, she must tell them of Yates's good fortune, rising to depart, when a knock at the door made her pause, hoping, she said, it was for more tickets; and the maid Betty having this time answered the door, brought in a letter, addressed to Mr. Yates, telling him, a porter waited for an answer. Hastily breaking the seal, Frank perceived three notes, of five pounds each, enclosed, and read as follows :—-
" Mrs. Smith requests Mr. Yates will send her three box tickets by the bearer, and that he will accept the enclosed trifle as a tribute due to his rare talents. " Wednesday Morning, Henrietu-strect."
With
With difficulty did Francis keep his countenance whilst perusing this missive ; but hastily giving it with the notes to Mr. Corfe, he wrote a respectful note of thanks to the lady, in which he enclosed the tickets, луЫсЬ he gave himself to the por¬ ter. " Yours has truly been a lucky visit, my dear Madam," said our laughing hero, as he returned into the room. " Why so it seems ; I fancied I had been very generous, but these ladies have quite cut me out." ' ( Who is this Mrs. Smith ?" asked Mr. 'We. " A friend of Mr. Kalkreuth's, Sir, and лупот I once accidentally saw in his com¬ pany." " Then you have him to thank for her liberality," луаа the апвлуег; and thus, to the great relief of Francis, the subject dropped, as he hastened to the rehearsal of the Messiah— лупПе Mrs. Jones proceed¬ ed to Mrs. Wheeler's, to whom she impart- E 3 ed
ed what she had sq recently witnessed, producing her ov¿n tickets to convince them she had made the purchase, pleading haste for shortening her visit, as she did not, vihhy 'm consequence of what her young favourite had said, to speak her mind ко freely as she should otherwise have done ; and the moment she was gone, Mrs, Wheeler, and Caroline set out for St. JamesVstreet, Francis's good fortune af¬ fording, them full subject for conversation during their walk; and Caroline ventured, for the first time, to wonder whv her mo- ther had in a manner forbid him heir house. " vShe had her reasons for what she had done, and they did not concern her," was the reply ; " nor did she choose to be chastized by a girl of her age. Did she mean to take example by her brother, who would provoke her, some day or other, to forbid him the house also ?" Caroline was silenced, and little more passed till they reached Mr. Moretón 's lodgings,
lodgings, who w$s sitting ai hi* dwiftgT roçm window, watchifìg t^e,people ν$ψι were passing to and fro, < He gayo theıçt a ^ry kinái гэ€врИ>П ; aud as he was ever ready to do a kind aç··. lion, if the means was pointed mH t-^tdm, he said^r^ Having never brand his young friend in public, he should haw noohjec·* tion, as the .weather was very fin*» tø,apT company her and Mies Wheeler, and any of their friends, ©й Saturday evening, to Drury-lane." » ? ; : This point being settled to their tnutual satisfaction, and as the old gentleman had not heard of the breach which »had taken place between, them and Francis he asked them several questions concerning him* which obliged the, old woţiian to give him rather evasive answers«*лvhiю Caroline eagerly detailed the many liberal presents Yateş had received. " I rejoice to hear his exertions to amuse the public have been so weH ти warded," said Mr. Moreton; «<aad I am e 4 resolved
resolved tö contribute my mite upon the occasion. How many tickets do you pro¬ pose taking, Mrs. Wheeler, and what do you mean to give for them ? I have two friends, whom I shall treat, and there are six guineas for my three tickets^—you will be so kind as to send to Mr. Corfe's for them, and we will all proceed to the theatre in a body from your house ; I will pay Tor a coach to take us there and back." Mrs. Wheeler requested he would bring his friends to an early tea in Marsham- street; to which he agreed—and having partaken of some -refreshment, she and Caroline returned home very much disap¬ pointed, as old Moretón had not offered to pay for their tickets as well as the coach. The old fellow grew stingy, Mrs. Wheeler jsaid—however, she should purchase halfa dozen with his six guineas, as there was no chance of his learning how they had done him, and a guinea a ticket would be paying handsomely, and more in propor¬ tion than Mrs. Jones had done—therefore, in
in the evening, having wrapped up six shillings İn as many one pound notes, they requested Mr. Kempthorne would procure them six tickets, three of which they ob¬ served were for Mr. Moretón. He readily cxecuted their commission ; and the old woman felt gratified by the polite message. Francis sent by his friend, who, though far from wishing to court their favour,- thought it no more than his duty to evince* his gratitude for Mrs. Wheeler's sup¬ posed liberality, who, unfortunately, ne¬ ver thought of securing places, having never gone into the boxes but with or¬ ders, and having always been satisfied with a back seat, as she would have thought it very extravagant to have paid a shilling for having them kept ; and on this memo« rable evening, though Mr. Moretón and his friends were in Marsham-sfreet by five o'clock, Mrs. Wheelers good-for-nothiti£ slut of a maid <did not get the kettle to boil till near six, and was besides Ъо long
in cutting the bread and butter, and in making the olher preparations, that it \yas full halí past six before they drove from the dooľ ; and upon reaching the theatre, they found a large crowd ΛνΗηοιιΙ the doors, who could not una room—and tick¬ ets were offered for sale at less than half price ; but as Mrs. Wheeler and her party луеге going into the boxes, she made no doubt of their being accommodated, and in consequence they proceeded up stairs, when, to her infinite mortification, there was hardly standing room, even in the lobby, much less in the passages. " What is to be done?" said the ma¬ tron, who called loudly for the box-keeper -луЬо declared " there had not been a seat even in the back rows disengaged for the last three days." She insisted upon seeing Mr. Yates. <€ Then she must go in search of him behind the scenes, if she could gain ad¬ mittance, as he луаз now upon the stage." ·< Then
u Then луЬа* must she do"?** she en^ ijuired ; (t she could not remain there tó be squeezed to death." "Toprevent that, or worse, befalling her, 11 ás even the stairs луеге полу crowded; the man advised her returning home.—There^ fore, having wrangled to n'o purpose, aslon j* as she could find any one to listen to her^ and having in return perforce listened to the complaints of many who ' were in à similar situation, she looked round for her male companions, лупотп she had lost in the crowd, Caroline only remaining close to her, she having hold of her arm ; she shoved, therefore, first by one, theft by another, calling loudly for Mr. More- ton and his friends; but there was sa much noise and confusion, no one an¬ swered—therefore, after almost fainting, what Λνΐίΐι heat and vexation, she agreed it would be wisest to returh home ; John, to whom ^xe had given the third ticket, having disposed of it to one of hfe e 6 fellow
fellow clerks, who, knowing his relation¬ ship to Francis, had requested he would procure him one for a friend.—But to re¬ turn to the discomfited females. Having with some difficulty descended the stairs, they at last reached the street, and at no great distance from the theatre they saw the coach Mr. Moretón had en¬ gaged to remain in waiting for them. The coachman had never been called, he said, nor had be seen any thing of the gentle¬ men whom he had taken up in St. James's- strcet. What then could have become of them, they wondered, since they certainly had not gained admittance any more than themselves^—they were, most probably, looking for them, they conceived ; again, therefore, did they pace all the avenues leading to the boxes ; but as their search proved of no avail, about eight o'clock they set off* on foot, Mrs. Wheeler shmvd- ly observing, that if they took the coach they must discharge it; asit луав, if the gentlemen
gentlemen did not come to him, the man must go to луЬеге he took them up for his money. Having reached home, they луеге so vexed and so disappointed, that they hoth shed tears; and still more bitter would have been their mortification, had they кполуп that their duplicity respecting the tickets had, in a great measure, led to their subsequent misfortunes, since Fran¬ cis, notwithstanding he had never had less time to spare, had thought it necessary to call on the Thursday morning upon Mr. Moretón, to thank him for his kind re¬ membrance, and as the old gentleman, who was, as has been already observed, a very луеак though very good old man, had al¬ ready condemned himself for not having been sufficiently liberal, and still more so for having entrusted his commission to Mrs. Wheeler, he put so many home questions to our hero, that he soon disco¬ vered the advantage Mrs. Wheeler had taken of him, and made no scruple of inv- Ί parting
parting the circumstance to his visitor, луп4 laughed very heartily at the manoeuvre— and from whom he learnt the sort of rup¬ ture that had taken place bettveen him and that family ; and in spite of all he could »ay, the old man forced a ten pound note upon him, requesting he would, if pos¬ sible, secure him three places, no matter in лу1ш part of the house, as he did not suppose Mrs. Wheeler луоиЫ take that precaution, and she ought to be punished for the mean trick she had played him, a» he would contrive to lose her in the crowd, and thus leave her to shift for herself; and inconsequence of this plan, Francis, hav¬ ing Λνίίη some difficulty succeeded in se¬ curing three places in the last row of a dressed box for the old men, for such they all were, they very adroitly suffered their companions to precede them up the se¬ cond stairs, taking advantage of the en- ereasing crowd to gain their places ; and felt their triumph compleat upon reaching their seats, as Mr. Moretón, though he had ahvay>
always thought Mrs. Wheeler very mean, could not have supposed avarice would have carried hersuch unwarrantable lengths, as, but for Francis's visit, he should cer¬ tainly have remained her dupe ; and never had he been so well amused, since all the first performers vied with each other on this evening, so much and so deservedly was our hero beloved by his companions; and it may be supposed, that he almost surpassed himself, in return for the many favours he had received ; and he had the pleasure of perceiving that he gave gene¬ ral satisfaction, particularly in one of the songs which Signor M— ---- had composed for him, and in which he was merely ac¬ companied by his friend Kalkreuth upon the hautboy—and had the German's repu¬ tation depended upon their success, he could not more ably have seconded his· friend—and both met with the due reward for their exertions—indeed, every one present regretted the conclusion of an en¬ tertainment that liad been so truly grati¬ fying
fying to all true lovers of harmony ; and when the three old gentlemen learnt front their coachman how perplexed their fe¬ male companions had been, and that they had been obliged to return home, they actually laughed till the tears rolled с!олуп their cheeks; and though Mr. Moretón resoh'ed not to mention the discovery he had made to Mrs. Wheeler, he declared that he should пелтг forget the shabby trick she had played him; of course, in future he should endeavour to keep her at a respectable distance—though, when he saw her again, he vowed he \yould accuse her of having lost them on purpose, mean¬ ing to acknowledge, that a handsome bribe had procured them seats at a box door ; and as Mrs. Wheeler and Caroline called upon him next morning, he told them the concerted tale, dismissing them almost im¬ mediately, under pretence of being in momentary expectation of his lawyer— and, as they presumed, he remained their dupe respecting the tickets. They de¬ parted
parted very л\*е11 pleased, rejoicing that they had not sent Francis a ten pound note, as Mrs.Wheeler had given Mr. More- ton to understand she should, since three pounds fourteen would purchase Caroline a couple of handsome new gowns, which, she hoped, would compose part of her bridal finery, it having been settled to bring Kempthorne to an explanation.
CHAP. IV. In consequence of this wise determination, Mrs. Wheeler undertook to make Kemp¬ thorne speak to the purpose, giving her husband and daughter instructions how to second her well-laid plan. The
The poor old man, who, though much recovered, could hardly make shift to crawl into their garden, was of course nearly a fixture in his arm-chair; but as he felt very anxious to see his daughter set¬ tled, he (as he had more than once done before) suffered his wife to mould him to her purpose, even in opposition to his better judgment—and, by way of having Air. Kempthorne to themselves, the old woman asked him to sup with them off a couple of ducks, which had been sent her out of the country. He pleaded a pre-en¬ gagement. Caroline was sure they would keep three days, if that was all—there¬ fore, in spite of himself, he was obliged to promise for the next evening, little supposing (though he had longseen and despised the views of both mother and daughter) that there was a plan absolutely in agitation, to induce, if not force him to marry Miss Caroline, who would of late even have cleaned his boots, had he required such a proof of her regard ; and he
he had, it may be remembered, in .conse¬ quence of hor repeated works of supere¬ rogation, resolved veFy speedily to shift his quarters. The country chicles were, however, pur¬ chased, and Mks Caroline devoted nearly ihe whole afternoon to her toilet, con¬ ceiving that all heF hopes of bearing the name of Kempthorne rested upon her making a particularly favourable impression upon that gentleman, who did honour to the repast, unmindful of the tender glances of the enamoured fair one ; bat the cloth being removed, and the spirits and water being placed upon the table, the old wo¬ man took upon herself to brew (as she termed it) for Mr. Kempthorne and her husband, making some very &lrong bran¬ dy and water for the former«, and some common gin and water, which Mr.Wheeler preferred, she síid, for the latter ; as for herself, she never drank more than a wine glass of any spirits and water, and always very weak ; and Caroline, wishing to ap¬ pear
pear still more soberly inclined, professed a dislike of any strong liquors, forgetting that their guest had seen her more than once make pretty free, particularly on Christmas-day. Having compleated her task, the old woman exclaimed—" Νολυ this is what I call enjoying one's self; with just a friend or so, луп^ can be more comfortable ?" "Aye, give me my own fire-side," cried the old man, " and my children about me ; I am always happiest at home." " We have always been a very happy couple, Mr. Kempthorne," chimed in the old woman ; " and I only hope we shall live to see our grand-children added to our family circle." * f God send you may, wife ! for í can remember when that little coaxing slut used to come and scramble upon my knee; Lord bless me ! it seems but yesterday, and here now she is old enough to have children of her own." ff To be sure she is," re-echoed the лvife; "and
" and 'tis very natural, you know, Mr. Kempthorne, fpr people who are like us in years, to wish to see their children comfortably settled in life. Poor Mr. Wheeler has been at death's door, as a body may say, very lately, and God knoivs how soon it may be my turn." Kempthorne naturally assented, while the old man, seizing his glass, cried, "Here is my service to you, Sir ; I have not been a drudge all my life to no purpose, as I can come down лунп something hand¬ some on my daughter's \vedding-day, and 1 shall have a few pounds more to leave her when I die—to be sure, I must take care of the old woman ; she must nöt starve, you кполу, İn her old age." "Certainly not, Mr.Wheeler; you would be very much to blame to provide for your daughter in preference to your wife." ч " I am sure," said Caroline, " I would not have the first lord in the land, if 1 thought he wanted to marry me for my money/' "You
" You are a good and a dutiful child/' said the mother ; and the old man " bless¬ ed God they had Ыеп very fortunate in their children. John, tö be sure, л*аз ra¬ ther headstrong at times* but he had a very good heart, and луонШ not see his fa¬ ther and mother луаш while he could Work for them," "Want, indeed, Mr. Wheeler! pray, who is talking of wanting ? John is very лчеИ provided for, and boys, as I say, can shift for themselves ; but he is already hav¬ ing money, and, with what will fall to his share, he may look up to a woman of for¬ tune, and we may trust to John for mind¬ ing the main chance—he will not be easily taken in, Mr.» Kempthorne; ho One n cell be ashamed of being related tó John Wheeler—none of his -relations will ever have t b blush for his follies ; but that is «either here nor theie-j-wbat we hàvè to 'leave will hé equally divided between 4 our children^* we shall tót «Лаке chalk ι of otic ttnd cheese of t'other—share and'Share 5 alike,
alike, say I—I have no notion of boys having more than girls." " No, truly," said the old man; "and supposing my daughter marries to please me, and 1 choose to give her the most, Λνΐιο can hinder mc ? as I do not кполу that I have any right to tell my son what I mean to do with all my money ; and sup¬ posing 1 луав to say I would give her six hundred pounds down, and I chose to make it eight, луЬолУоик1Ье the лу^ьег? — and 1 could venture to promise her much more when my head is laid 1олу." " I am sure you could, Mr. WTieeler ; and e\*en eight hundred pounds is more than many people begin the world with-— лупу, the interest is forty pounds а -year î no woman can bc a burthen to a husband, if she brings him such a fortune—and it may bring in twice as much if it is thwvn into trade. Don't you think so, Mr.Kemp,- thorne?" , " Why yon neither talk nor drink, Sir," said
said the old man ; " here's your good health -—you are too bashful among friends." The person he addressed had more than once repented having accepted the invi¬ tation, as their behaviour was so gross, he hardly knew how to parry their attack with any degree of politeness, since he feared any thing short of a doлvnright refusal to marry their precious daughter, would be construed by such beings into a tacit con- bent to become their son-in-law; atlast, however, he made shift to say—" that money луав always rendered much more productive in trade than when placed out, even upon the best security at interest." " Certainly, Sir; I only Λνιβη Mr.Wheeler had gone into business, though we have done легу well, Λνίίΐι my prudent manage¬ ment ; and ϊ have brought up my daugh¬ ter to tread in my steps : but I suppose you have some intention of going into business yourself, Mr. Kempthorne, or do you mean to wait till the elder Mr. Hasle¬ mere
mere dies ? there will be a fine chance for you then." Fortunately, as Kempthorne conceived, a very smart rap a ι the door precluded the necessity of his answering this home ques¬ tion. " Ah, there is my brother," said Caro¬ line, with a glouting look; "I did not suppose he would come home before ele¬ ven o'clock at soonest." " It is more than that already,'' said Kempthorne, pulling out his watch. " Bless me !" cried the old woman, "how this evening has slipped away !" " Why, when ohe is in company that one likes," rejoined the old man, " time flies ; but as 'tis only made for slaves, лой know, take another glass, Mr, Kempthorne; John will be off to bed, I dare sav, and then we may have our chat out—come, I will join you." At this moment, to Kempthornc's great reiwf, John entered; and his eager-en¬ quiring look, as he glanced his eyes round ν0ϊ · π · r hım,
him, would have sufficed (had"he not al¬ ready made the discovery) tó convince him j that the foregoing scene had been in rehearsal for some timei and that John had been purposely sent from home, there being no part suited to his talents; but as he was resoh-ed not to afford them any farther opportunity of гепелу^ the sub* jcet, he pleaded having already sat up later than his usual hour, as an excuse for leaving the family party to compare notes respecting their лУ15е schemes; and the moment he was gone, r John eagerly cn* quired 4e how they came oh ?" The old man wished he had made it a quarter of an hour later ι before he had come home<—and his mother said, they were just in the very nutrnw of it л\*Ьеп he knocked; Ьолуел г ег> upon the Hvhole, $hey had no reason to be displeased, and bhe was not sorry she had bought the cou¬ ple of duck-s—adding, €C there is plenty left for you." "Why, I must say," resumed the old man,
зпап> " though he did not absolutely come to the point, he talked very reasonably." " To be sure he did," interrupted the old woman ; " and I make no doubt but every thing will end as'we could wish." John devoured the remains of the ducks ΛνίΗι great glee, observing*, "that Kemp¬ thorne would very likely sound him upon the subject as they walked into the city 'm the morning." But the old woman, who fancl-ed no one was so able as herareif to 'bring matters to bear, fearful he would mar her wise schemes, forbid his droppirrg a word about the matter, except Kempthorne r.yy * i quite plain, and even then, sire desìi c·: ί * would be very much upon his guard ι 5 specting what he said. Now, as John had a much higher opi- nion of his eloquence and abilities tbr r even his mother had of her talents for ir triglie, they aľl but quarrelled*before thy separated for the night—and Caroline w; sure, that if any thing hürrptócdto bren' F'/ с
off the match, it would be owing to his interference. The young man, whom they were thus planning to decoy into so absurd a con¬ nection, came to a resolution before he closed his eyes, to leave Marsham-street as soon as possible, as he knew the whole family were capable of saying and doing any thing likely to further the scheme in agitation ; as yet, he was convinced that he had not committed himself in the slightest degree^-neverthelcss, as he had no witnesses to speak in his defence, and as he knew that what one said the rest would swear to 3 and was, besides, con¬ vinced, that when once provoked, they would stick at nothing to be revenged, he began to have his doubts, whether they might not, by their erroneous statements, lower him in the esteem of the elder Mr. Haslemere, with whom, independent of his real regard for that gentleman, it was so much to his interest to stand well; still he knew their influence there was very much
ftìneh upon the decline; he, however, finally resolved to mention his intention of lea vins: Marsham-street to his kind re- lation the very first opportunity that offer- ed, which would probably lead to the de¬ sired explanation, when he meant to be perfectly candid ; and as he was as anxi¬ ous to avoid Mr. John, as that young gen¬ tleman had of late been to force himself into his company, he rose earlier than usual ; and as the family party had made it very late before they retired, Le was up¬ on the road to Austin Friars before any of them came down: Mrs. Wheeler rather re¬ joiced, when she learnt he was gone—and Caroline only regretted not haung seen him ; iiJohn swore he was in a d ------ d hurry, and would be at the counting-house before any of the other clerb. arrived. " What then ?" said his mother ; " some¬ body must be first-—and he might have more to.do than he (John) was aware of." Fortunately, as Kempthorne conceived, it so happened, thaf on this very day Mr. r 3 II asî emere
Haslemere had some business of impor¬ tance to transact with a merchant, with лч'гют he was in habits of intimacy, and Λνίιο laid extremely ill at his country house on ihe,Forest; and as he wished to have a witness to луЬа1 might pass upon the occa¬ sion, he told Kempthorne he should take him down to Snaresbrook Λνίίη him. No proposal could have been more agreeable at this precise juncture; and soon after ten they left London in the old gentleman's post- с haise ; and during their drive, Mr. Haslemere entered into some details respecting his business with Mr. Benson, observing, that any delay in set¬ tling the matter might Ue attended with легу dibagreeaMe consequences, as he un- de:*stçod he had Unen pronounced to be in great danger by his physicians. lie next took оссЫоп to remark, that their books луеге rather behindhand, ow ; ng to old Wheeler's first and last long illness—seri¬ ously asking Kempthorne, whether he thought he would ever be able to resume
his situation ?—w ? ho, in reply, said—" He much doubted his ever being again able to walk backwards and forwards into Austin Friars ; but he was even now very capable of settling his books at home, if his sou would carry them backward and forward." ** That would make h very awkward," rejoined Mr. Haslemere ; " and his wife would fancy they were in the high road to ruin, were he even to ride outside the Chelsea stage to the Change ; and as for raising his salary for that purpose, I had better at once put an abler man in his places and allow him a small annuity while he lives, as I should not wish to discard him, without providing in some measure for his future wants, for he is an old, and, I think, a faithful servant ; you have now been some time their inmate, so what is your real opinion of him and the family, I mean with respect to their probity and principles?" Kempthorne eagerly seized so favour¬ able an opportunity to enter into every f 4 detail
detail with which he wished the old gen¬ tleman to be made acquainted—who laugh¬ ed very heartily at his description of the over-night's scene, declaring, he thought the Wheelers had strangely forgotten them- .selves, even to suppose that a relation of his would marry into their family ; " they ought to have recollected," he went on —" that though you are at present only my clerk, you are also my cousin, and may be my partner: I positively wonder at their assurance—but they have all great¬ ly fallen in my esteem of late years, the oíd woman in particular—'indeed, during om* last interview, she put my patience to a very severe trial; various reasons, and, in particular, his very striking resemblance to my laic wife, induced me to ask her some vc.y home questions respecting young Yates, whom she persisted in affirming was her nephew, though the story she told re¬ specting his birth, and the details she en¬ tered into respecting his mother, were im¬ probable in the extreme; ard from what vou
you have told me, she in a manner forbid him her house the day after 1 had been with her. Did she suppose'by so doing, she ΛνουΜ remove my suspicions ?-—if so, she never was more mistaken—though I cannot fathom why she came to an open rupture with a youth, from whom she has doubtless of iate received many favours. I fear some one suggested thejdea to her, in hopes of convincing me that I have v.Tonged them by my conjectures; but it has not had the desired eíľect —and time iviii, I hope, enable me to unravel what at present strikes me as very mysterious, as his prepossessing countenance, modest demeanour, considerine his very rare ta- lents, and, above all, his striking likeness to the late Mrs. Haslemere, пале greatly interested me in the vouth's favour; and should í ever discover, no matter Ьл~ what means, that those Wheelers have been im¬ posing upon me to humour my son, they shall have full leisure to repent ha\in& been εο complaisant—indeed, 1 cannot f r ) help
help thinking- but George would have turn¬ ed out a better character, had he been less attached to those people, or rather to the (»Id woman, as 5>he makes her husband and children do just as she likes—and more young minds have been poisoned by inte¬ rested artful dependants, than by any other means. Hitherto, I have been perfectly sa¬ tisfied with your conduct, Kempthorne—I am growing old, and George neither grows >viser nor fonder of луогк, yet it will be a легу difficult matter to dispose of so large a concern to advantage—therefore, I think ï could make it answer both your and his purpose to take you in by-and-by as act¬ ing partner, with a proportionate share in the business. Are you of my opinion?" f£ I am exceedingly flattered, Sir, by )our merely expressing so kind a wish to serve me, as you are perfectly acquainted Avith my situation, and with the small ыша of money лугпсЬ I have at command." " But you have great and very proba¬ ble expectations from many branches of vour
your father's family—not to mention the probability of your marrying a woman with some money, when once your name is entered in the firm ; be that asitmay, I know you will amply make up by your diligence for what you may be deficient in iţi cash—meanwhile, as you cannot re¬ main with those Wheelers, I will have an apartment prepared for you in Austin Friars, as 1 like to sleep in the country at this season of the уеаг> and shall feel more comfortable there, when I know that ï leave a person, in whom I place so much dependance, in town—though I have a very high opinion of Lawson, who now always remains iu charge ; but I shall fancy mysejf doubly secure, when you are my inmate—and you may tell the Wheelers, your removal is merely a preparatory step to your name being added to the firm ; that must prove an effectual check to their absurd hopes." After thanking his kind relation in the most expressive terms his gratitude could f б dictate,
dicíate, Kempthorne said—" He was afraid' His Inst suggestion would have a very con¬ trary effect to Λν -hat he expected, as it луоиМ only render them more eager t\un ever to bring about so desirable a con¬ nexion—though he луоиЫ take the vcrv first opportunity of letting Mrs. Wheeler кполу that he should leave her lodgings ar the expiration of his month," enquiring whether Mr. Gcorsre Haslemere had been acquainted with his (Mr. Haslemere's) Lind intentions in his favour? ff ï have not vet mentioned the matter to him, but you may depend upon his not objecting to any proposal of mine—he docs little or nothing already, and seems daily inclined to do less, therefore he will rejoice at being* relieved from what he considers both degrading and fatiguing— namely, his visits to the counting-house; and 1 am resolved to place some farther check upon him, as his ex ira vagancc seems- to know no bounds—indeed, his луаз an unfortunate marriage, for though his wife brought
brought him a very large fortune, she was in evcrv other respect л cry ill qualified to reform a rakish young mnn—indeed, I am surprised they have continued to reside together, but I presume he is too indolent, and she is too fond of show and splendour, to propose a separation." Their arrha] at Mr. Benson's villa put an end to the conversation. Having alight¬ ed and declared their names, the old gen¬ tleman expressed a wish to see his friend. " lie was much worse," he was informed. " therefore could not receive even Mr. Haslemere;" луЬеп, fortunately, that gen¬ tleman's own physician, Dr. B——, drove up to the door, and to him the merchant applied, who readily promised to let him know how he found his patient, and whe¬ ther he was in a frame of mind to discuss matters of importance ; and while Mrs; Benson л -vas gone up stairs to announce his arrival, he candidly told Mr. Haslemere, that he did not suppose the invalid луопИ Hvc four-and-twenty hours, readily oflcr-
ing to prepare him for the wished-for in- t стелу, thinking it would be very con¬ ducive to his interest to oWjge the ţvorthy merchant, who readily accepted his kind mediation; and in consequence, he ad¬ vised the sick man not to lose any time in settling his worldly affairs, informing him that Mr. Haslemere луаэ then in the house, and very anxious to see him. The dying Benson desired he might be shewn up, and readily gave him ample security for four¬ teen thousand pounds, vyhich the merchant had very recently advanced him in the way of trade, without having taken what (in case of hisdeatli) соцЩ have been deemed sufficient care to secure the repayment; and a£ his heirs w,ere half inclined to dis¬ pute the legality of the dying man's ac¬ tion, upon the plea that he could hardly be supposed to be in his senses when so nçar dissolution, they would certainly have evaded paying tfye money, bad they been less strictly tied down tq do so—there¬ fore, the good merchant declared his had proved
proved a Iucţy visit, since $& should else ha\e been ó^efcaud^ of a. targe s\im, which he hatt advanced purely to ser y e a friend, telling Kempthorne, he şho^ld now iiave it more irţ his, power to щаке up for the dçficiencies he w;as lamenting when he mentioned taking him into partnership.
rs-a
CHAP. V; The next cyening, iterøpthorne told Fra»- cis in confidence what Mr. Haslemere pro¬ posed doing for him ; and having had a hearty laugh with our hero, while recapi¬ tulating the duck supper scene, and been no less diverted by Francis's droll anticipa¬ tions of the one that would ensue, when he declared his intention of removing, 5 they
they separated for the night; and having purposely accompanied John home the following evening, a^s he wished to men- tion his intentions when the whole family were assembled, he went into the parlour npcín Ms arrivai in Marsham-street; and after a Utile general oh at, he told Mrs. Wheeler, that Mr. Haslemere having itin contempla¬ tion to spend more of his time than he had hitherto done in the country, had requested that he would take up his abode in Austin Friars, whither, in conformity t w his wishes, he proposed removing, either the latter end of the present, or the beginning of the next week. The astonishment of the whole party may be better imagined than described, though he did not choose to add, that Mr. Haslemere proposed adding his name to the firm erelong, for fear any thing should occur to prevent what he so ardently de¬ sired, which he knew would afford them a triumph that would more than compen¬ sate for their present mortification, as tivt oil
old woman in particular began to lose all hopes of their being nearer related ; wish- \ng> however, to know the worst, she as¬ sailed her I od per with such home and such V gross questions, that, unable even to HÍ- feet to misunderstand her words, or her son's inquisitive and impertinent looks, he told her, in plain but polite terms, that he had never yet thought seriously of mar¬ riage, much less of Miss Wheeler, wishing them a very good evening. But this death¬ blow to all her sanguine hopes induced Caroline, after giving a moving scream, to fall back in her chair in hysterics, which only hastened his ïetreat; but he hai no sooner reached his own room, than he heard the parlour bell ring most violently, and hartshorn and water loudly called for ■—a general bustle ensued ; the maid hav¬ ing carried in the water, ran up stairs for the hartshorn, which was not to be found; John cursed her for a »stupid fool, de¬ siring she would bring the vinegar, and while she hurried down for it, he rari up iato
into his own room in search of some salt*?, muttering and swearing both as he went up and came down, what he would do, as Kempthorne heard nothing distinctly but the names of the restoratives, and he was resolved not to make any enquiries. By degrees quiet was once more re¬ stored, and the oid woman said in the passage, loud enough to be overheard— " That he was a good-for-nothing wretch, an un feeling monster, and that all such shabby fellows ought to be trounced for their tricks." Twenty times was he there¬ fore tempted to go down and defend him¬ self against this host of foes; but reflect¬ ing that he should stand no chance even of being heard, and that they were just in the humour to provoke him, and might endeavour to turn any thing he might say against him, and as it might be supposed he did not hear their polite speeches, he wisely resolved to remain where he was, setting about packing, having determined to remove the very next morning ; at last, however,
however, he was interrupted by the maid bringing in his supper things, and her looks, for she durst not speak, were truly ludicrous. The Wheeler family had no rest that night—indeed, they did not go to bed till past two, so busily were they employed in settling plans to be revenged of their worthless lodger, the old man alone seem¬ ing inclined to shew him any lenity, as the old woman was ready to swear he had spoken plain enough the last time he supped with them to be saddled with heavy damages. John made no doubt, had he been at home on that evening, but he could have done him for at least a thousand pounds, advising their taking counsels opinion, as matters stood. The old man shook his head—it would first be net essarv. he said, to hear what Mr. Haslemere said ίο the business, as Mr. Kempthorne was nor only a favourite, but related to the old gentleman. " That
" That is no rule," cried the enraged old woman; " I will wait upon Mr. Haslemere myself to-morrow, and lay his fine cousin out in his proper colours." The old man wished she might not get herself affronted, John proposed endeavouring first to discover whether any thing had been said in Austin Friars—adding, " suppose I was to write to the scrub, and desire an imme¬ diate answer, who knows whether he might not commit himself upon paper, ifl were to provoke him." This was pronounced to be a very bright thought, if the letter was but well worded. John conceived he was very capable of addressing even the Lord High Chancellor of England upon such an occasion ; and his mother agreed that he wrote a very good letter, but insisted upon having this one submitted to her inspection before it was dispatched. " I shall place it upon his desk," was the¬ re ply. Having
Having thus settled matters for the pre¬ sent, they went to bed ; but луеге confirm¬ ed in all their over-night's resolutions, up¬ on finding all his trunks parked when they Λνοιη into his room after his departure, луЫсп was a proof that he did not mean to return thither, from луп ich they л\чзс!у concluded that he луав ashamed of Λνηαί he had done, and afraid to see them. John of course proceeded into Austin Friars, луЬеге he learnt from the other ju¬ nior clerks, that Kempthorne had break¬ fasted with the old gentleman, and was in future to board and lodge in the house ; but as they did not know why he had hast¬ ened his departure from Aiarsham-strcct, they supposed he had removed by Mr. Haslemere's desire, with whom he entered the counting-house, merely bowing to John in common with the others; and as he was preparing to go home to dinner, he requested he vvould bring him a receipt in the afternoon for what be was indebted to his father and mother, as he should send
Tsend Lawson in a coach for his trunks in the evening. John made no reply·—nor did he bring him any receipt in the evening. Kempthorne took По notice, not wish¬ ing to come to an open quarrel with him, if he could avoid it, knowing the Wheel¬ ers were rather protected by Mr. George Haslemere, with whom he wished to re¬ main upon good terms, as that gentleman had been particularly polite and kind to him, since accident had introduced him to an acquaintance with Mrs. Smith. He, however, sent for his trunks, writing and dressing-box, in the evening, which the maid delivered to Mr. Haslemere's porter, who gave her a guinea, which Kemp¬ thorne had sent her. He supped at Mr, Corfe's, who prognosticated John would certainly challenge him, laughmg very heartily at the discomfiture his sudden de¬ parture must have occasioned the Wheeler females, and highly applauding the line of conduct he had pursued Kalkreuth,
Kalkreuth, Λνϊΐο was of the party, said, if he had been in want of eight hundred pounds, and could have borne with a lame ignorant лл^е, he w T ould have succeeded him in hh lodgings, as pique would have made the fair damsel jump at such an oiler—however, he would look out for a husband for the poor soul ; he knew a German pastry-cook, to whom she and her money would be a great acquisition, as she made such excellent pies. While thev л\еге thus resolving to con* sole the young lady under her bitter dis¬ appointment. John луах composing his Haming cpisile, which was to frighten Kempthorne into terms, fur fear of а 1алу- Miit ; and next morning, while Kemp¬ thorne л\ js gone into the strong room, he placed this chef d'oeuvre (лупкЬ he fancied would strike the person for луЬот it was intended dumb with amaze) upon his desk. Upon resuming his seat it caught his eyes, and being acquainted with the hand-writ¬ ing, he looked at the лугЦсг, Λνίιο never raised
raised his head, though he was endeavour¬ ing unperceived to watch Kcmpthorne's countenance. Fully aware of this scru¬ tiny, he broke the seal with a smile of contempt, and an emphatic shrug of the shoulders, and had nearly laughed out¬ right, while perusing this bombast epistle, which began, by expressing " the asto¬ nishment of the Wheeler family at his precipitate retreat from Marsham-street ; though, after his base conduct tou ards their beloved Caroline, they ought to have prepared for his cowardly flight; ac¬ cusing him of having, by the most artful insinuating means, won the affection of his dear sister, whom, he now supposed.. he meant to abandon to her fate ; desiring he would remember, that should her pre¬ sent illness prove fatal, her death would lie at his door—throwing out oblique hints how much he had put himself in their power, though, as they still hoped, matters might be accommodated ; hia fa¬ ther and mother were verv a\er^e to hav¬ in;*,
ing recourse to harsher measures to oblige him to do his sister justice"—concluding by informing him, that a speedy and a favourable answer could alone piment his being incontinently addressed by their lawyer. Having finished this elaborate epistle, Kempthorne calmly folded it up again, and consigned it to his pocket, presuming Miss Caroline луаз resolved to keep up the farce, expecting the next thing he should hear would bc, that Dr. В —— had been* called in to prescribe for her love-case *r and being highly amused by John's im¬ plied threat, that he should be haunted by ir Caroline's grimly ^host," лупош he had always understood had an excellent consti¬ tution, it having frequently been one of the old луотап'а boasts that she луоиМ not ruin her husband in doctor's stuff*. He, Ιιολν- ever, very speedily resolved to communi¬ cate this effusion of John's brains to the elder Mr. Haslemere, by whose advice he resolved to be guided, though he did not vol. n, a choose
choose to leave his desk, knowing he should see the old gentleman at dinner, if not before; when, to his great joy, he was sent for to attend the merchant in his study ; and there John left him Λνΐιεη he went home to dinner. His letter had met Λνίίη the general ap¬ probation of his family, and they all de¬ clared it their opinion, that Kempthorne would enter into almost any compromise •With them, rather than provoke them to make his conduct known to Mr. Hasle¬ mere ; and thev had resolved to make the best terms they could, without making the business public—though, should the луот come to the worst, Mrs. Wheeler was re¬ solved to wait upon the old gentleman herself, and to tell him Ьолу basely his re¬ lation had acted, since it would be deuced hard, she observed, if four were not to be believed in preference to one ; of course, they were all anxiety for John's return, who related how adroitly he had delivered his missive, which, he made no doubt, Kempthorne
Kempthorne would have answered, had he not been sent for by Mr. Haslemere, with Λνΐιοιη he had left him. The old man Λν^Ι^ the letter had not been given, since it was very likely owing to that Kempthorne had remained so long closeted with the old gentleman, which was by no means usual. The old woman was not much more at her ease, though she scorned to acknow¬ ledge her apprehensions, maintaining that the old man would not believe Kemp¬ thorne, merely upon his bare ΛνοΓά, before them, луп o m he had кполуп for so many years, since they might insist upon having him face to face before Mr. Haslemere. John also blustered, prognosticating, that if Mr. Kempthorne did set them at defiance, he might pay pretty dear for his folly, as he should not wonder луеге he to be dismissed—and he had never thought his being taken into the house had boded them any good, therefore the sooner he was gone the better—feeling, neverthe- G 2 less,
less, greatly alarmed lest he should turn out instead of his hated adversary ; and as Kempthorne merely made his appearance for five minutes in the counting-house during the afternoon, being busily em¬ ployed in posting some private accounts under the old gentleman's inspection, he was doomed to return home at night in the same state of uncertainty, not having been made acquainted with the advice Mr. Haslemere had given his relation, which was not to notice his letter, except he asked for his answer, and then to tell him, " he forgave his insolence, in pity to his ignorance," as the old gentleman was fully convinced that his cousin had never given the silly girl, much less the family, any reason to suppose he had an intention of becoming related to them. In consequence, the following day, Kempthorne preserved the same silence, though he seldom left the counting-house, and more than once addressed Mr. John upon business. The Wheeler family were therefore
therefore very much puzzled to decide whether his conduct was owing to his fear of committing himself, or to his having resolved to set them at defiance. Caroline was, however^ so well con¬ vinced that she had lost all chance of be¬ coming his wife, she was inclined to quar¬ rel with the whole family—and, owing to her fretting, and refusing ίο eat, as if pur¬ posely to provoke her relations, she soon displayed symptoms of serious indispo¬ sition ; but since Kempthorne would not even address John respecting his letter, Mrs. Wheeler resolved to apply to Mr. George Haslemere ; he was the staunch friend of them all, and was not to be bi¬ assed by what any one said; she would state every thing to him, and made no doubt of his setting the young gentleman to rights. The old man did not approve of thk plan—indeed, he wished the business to drop; but his wife,told him, "he was a о S tame
tame fooi, and had grown a coward since he had been confined to his arm-chair ;" persisting, For the honour of her family, she said, in having the matter cleared up through the means of her dear George. te Only take care/* said the old man, " you do not get me turned out of the roimting-house, by your endeavour to in¬ jure Kempthorne, who would scorn to do me an ill turn, except you provoke him to do so ; and at present, though I am con¬ fined to my arm-chair, my salary is going on." if There луэб no danger of his losing that, the old луотап maintained ; Mr. Ha¬ slemere was too good a man to discard an old servant, whom it had pleased God to afflict ; and if she could but oust the worthless fellow, it might be the better for John"—who was perfectly of her opi¬ nion, and even more anxious than she was to bring so desirable an event to bear. " No one was more competent than he луав to
to nndertake his father's place, which hfc would very readily resign, if he was ever able to return to his duty." " You are deuced ready to better your¬ self, John," cried his mother; " while your father retains his pay, what matters who does his business? so be satisfied as you are, till some alterations are talked of, then I may put in a word for you—meanwhile,. ï will sit me down, and write a few lines to Mr. George Haslemere," — between whom and the old woman it had been agreed during their last interview, that he should not be so frequent a visitor in Mar¬ sham-street, nor was she ever to ask to see him in Austin Friars ; the house in Baker- street had long since been forbidden her, therefore, if any thing particular occurred, she was to address him a few lines upon the subject; and if what she had to say could not be explained in writing, she was mere¬ ly to request to see him, as he would al¬ ways obey such a summons; and she had so much to say to him upon this subject, g 4 and
and was so very incompetent to the task of committing her ideas to paper, that she wisely adhered to his final instructions: and in consequence of this summons, Mr. George paid her a very early visit the next morning, though he suffered John to leave home before he called; and as Mrs,Wheeler told Caroline it Λνοι^ be extremely im¬ proper that she should be present луЫ1е she detailed Kempthorne's shabby conduct ^vards her, she took her visitor into the dining-room, where they remained in close conference for nearly an hour. Caroline луопае^ what they could have to say to keep them such а луЬНе аЬол т е stairs. The old man desired her to have patience—her mother knew v^hat she was about ; " and as you are not in her secrets, you ought to hear, see, and say nothing—that is how I have always done." " What a must not I hear, nor see, fa¬ ther ?" " Don't ask questions, child, as I can¬ not answer them—no more can your mo¬ ther ;
ther ; so do not give way to curiosity, as it would answer no purpose." While he луаз thus wisely endeavouring to allay the very baneful feeling луМсЬ. he had been exciting, the conference broke up ; and Mr. George Haslemere, having just put his head within the room to bid the old man good-by, departed, having promised his father, he said, to be in Ausa¬ tili Friars by twelve. No sooner, полуеуег, was he gone, than Caroline exclaimed—"Why, I thought you would have remained above all day, mother !" " I had a vast deal to say, child, as I Λνίβΐ^ to make him sensible полу ill we have been treated, you, in particular, by his relation ; and he acknowledges, that it is shameful in any man to hold out hopes which he does not intend to realize— therefore, the dirty fellow Λνοηί go untold of hk faults, if he does not, as he hopes, bring him to reason ; our offers луеге very liberal, he says, and he ought not to have q 5 listened
listened to them, or at all events he ought to have objected to them at the time, if they had not met his approbation;" and these were certainly Mr. George Hasle¬ mere's remarks, in consequence of Mrs, Wheeler's having widely deviated from the truth, while relating the storv of Caro- line's wrongs, though he was soon con¬ vinced she had grossly misled him, her statements were so improbable, and she cut herself so often in her answers to the few questions he thought it necessary to ask, though he was by no means inclined, as she hoped and expected, to quarrel with Xempthome, nor did he wish to do so with her—he therefore held out a degree of hope he was far from expecting to see realized, and departed, leaving the old woman in the firm opinion that he would threaten Kempthorne into becoming a member of her family. This she triumph¬ antly told her husband and daughter—add- in«?, " and should he fail in his kind cn- deavours, he has assured me Cary shall never
TiíERff IS a secret; never луап1 a friend; and he makes no doubt of her meeting with twenty better matches, should Kempthorne be such a fool as to stand in his own light ; and he has farther promised, should we have the misfortune to lose you, Mr. Wheeler, to make me and her a handsome allowance, that лч-е may not be deprived of those com¬ forts, he was pleased to say, we now enjoy —therefore, I say he is a considerate good soul." " So he is/* said the old man, " and Cod will reward him ; there is no needTor; a body to boast, else, was I to die to-mor¬ row, you would not be so much to be pi¬ tied ; but he does not know of every thing, nor is it fit he should—one good turn, as. the saying is, deserves another—you un* derstand me, лyife; you did not give him * a hint of those two houses 1 bought the other day ?" <s To be sure I did not ; Λνίιο would-have been thç fool then, since they will bring α 6 us,
us in a clear eighty pounds а -year, you say?" " At least," was the reply ; " and I mean to settle them upon you, Caroline, after your mother's death ; so, whether you re¬ main single, or whether you marry, they will be a handsome provision for you, if you do not come in for any thing more." Caroline thanked her father, " but hoped, as men were so deceitful now-a- days, that when he made his will, he would give her full power over them, married or •single." The old woman gave her credit for her prudent foresight—and the old man said "he would oblige her, though he did not like tying up a man's hands; but at all events, her husband could not blame her for what he did." Thus were the Wheelers endeavouring to encrease their hoards, and continually devising means to prevent any other per¬ son from benefiting by their good fortune —while
—while Mr.George Haslemere, from whom they were continually drawing money un¬ der one pretence or other, was proceeding into Austin Friars, where he found Kemp¬ thorne with his father; and having ex¬ changed the usual compliments, he was preparing to enter upon his usual irksome task, as he detested every thing that sa¬ voured of business, when a servant brought Kempthorne a note, saying—" the person waited for an answer." " Is it from Wheeler's solicitor ?" asked the old gentleman, in a gay tone. " No, Sir, though it comes from that quarter, as 'tis my laundress's bill ; with your leave, I will step out and discharge it." " By all means," was the reply, " as I suppose you mean in future to employ one in this vicinity." " I rejoice to find you have taken up your abode here," said Mr. George, as Kempthorne was leaving the room, " though I believe your long walk was very condu¬ cive to your health—but you must be much more
more comfortable here; but I understand you left Marsham-street rather abruptly." " In self-defence, Sir," was the reply, bowing and leavinc: the room. "And pray how came \ou to be fo wise?" asked the old gentleman, " since I do not believe you have been in Austin Friars since Kempthorne became my in¬ mate." " I certainly have not, Sir," replied the rather confused son ; " but happening to look in upon the Wheelers this morning, I was surprised to learn that their lodger had \c[\ them, after, as they said, winning the- affections of their daughter," entering into a long detail, in which a couple of ducks shone conspicuous, "as it was while par¬ taking of these said bipeds that Kemp¬ thorne either promised or talked of marry¬ ing the girl, though, I dare say, they mis¬ interpreted his praises of the birds into encomiums upon the lovely Cary." The old gentleman laughed, saying— " I thought you were ьо partial to that fa¬ mily,
mily, you would even have rejoiced to have been connected with them, through the means of your cousin." " I never was blind to their failings, Sir; my strict adherence to the promise ï made my beloved Caroline has induced me to take more notice of them than I should otherwise have done—and they consider¬ ing me as their best friend, are always eager to impart either their good or bad fortune to me ; and I naturally supposed, from what I heard to-day, that Kemp¬ thorne had merely been too polite to their silly forward girl, who positively seems in¬ clined to personnte (t Patience upon a monument"—therefore, as I find the old man does not mend very fast, I advised him, instead of going to law, as he threat¬ ened, to go to Bath with his daughter." ff You did very wisely," was the reply ; and îlempthorne having returned, the old gentleman repeated to him the heads of what had passed, and then entered into va- 'j rious
rious details, with which the reader is al¬ ready acquainted, to satisfy his son, who declared the old people were greater fools than their daughter ; and as for John's let¬ ter, it was beneath the notice of any man of sense. " I rejoice to find, George, our opi¬ nions so perfectly coincide," said his fa¬ ther, sc as, like me, you do not seem am¬ bitious to be related to the Wheelers; but as you saw them so lately, have you disco¬ vered why they have broke with young Yates?—was it for fear he should attempt to rival Kempthorne, as the old people, possibly, did not think him an eligible match for their paragon?—or were they actuated by their regard for him, and so banished him their house, for fear he should be doomed to pine a victim to hopeless love, in consequence of Miss Wheeler's having given his friend the preference ?" t( I cannot pretend to solve your ques¬ tion, Sir; they told me, upon my asking after
after the fine ГеНолу, a long story respect¬ ing his having either elighted or looked down upon them—a romance, I dare say, like the one she entertained me ΛνΗΙι re¬ specting Mr. Kempthorne." " You have judged very right, Sir," re¬ plied Kempthorne; " since I would readily affirm, even upon oath, if required, that the rupture did not originate in any dis¬ respect on my friend's side, as no man is more free from pride—indeed, he never appears in public but луИЬ a degree of diffidence, which, considering the encou¬ ragement he always meets with, is rather extraordinary in so young a man ; but he even attributes the applause he is sure to receive, more to the indulgence of the pub¬ lic than to his own ролуегв of pleasing— indeed, I frequently tell him he is deficient in proper pride, and has not a sufficiently high opinion of his talents." " I am convinced your remarks are very just,"rejoined Mr.Haslemere, senior, K as I was
ï was pleased to observe his diffidence on the evening of his benefit—indeed, policy could not have suggested a more proper mode of behaviour than the one he has adopted, to insure him a continuance of the public favour; and I am very much of opinion, that Mrs. Wheeler's conduct towards him originates in some latent cause, which it would neither be to her credit or advantage to acknowledge ;" and as he either purposely, or unthinkingly, fixed his eyes upon his son, as he con¬ cluded his speech, George Haslemere look¬ ed very much confused, but made no re¬ ply, busying himself in arranging some papers upon his desk. Kempthorne, who equally noticed his embarrassment, said-^·" He was no judge, though when he first went into Marsham- street, he had thought the old lady, and particularly the old man, had been very much attached to his friend—nay, he still believed the latter felt a great regard for him ;" adding, " and I am sure he ought to
fo do so, since I am of opinion that he is indebted for his existence to Yates's zeal and anxiety to procure him medical aid/* '< I make no doubt he is/' resumed the old gentleman, " as I know he lost no time in sending Dr. В ------ to him ; and he introduced himself to me upon that occasion ΛνΐίΓΐ such becoming modesty, and told his melancholy tale луиЬ such marks of feeling for the sufferer, that he greatly interested me in his favour ; and if ever he puts me to the test, I wilb as 1 pro¬ mised him, prove myself his friend." €t He has ever appeared to me a very deserving young man," said George Hasle¬ mere ; st some silly pique, 1 suppose, in¬ deed, I rather understood her so, has actu¬ ated the conduct of Airs. Wheeler towards him, and were I in his place, I should give myself very little concern about them ; they boast of having done great things for him during his childhood ; but if, as 1 pre¬ sume, he was : stronğty recommended to them by his father, who left them all he had,
had, they have done no more than their duty by him, though these are points I never debate with them ; upon many ac¬ counts, I have ever stood their friend, though I have often seen more to censure than to applaud in their conduct, particu¬ larly of late years; and I may, perhaps, have done them an injury, instead of a ser¬ vice, by noticing them so much; but as I have been impelled to do so by many praise-worthy motives, I hope I shall stand acquitted of having wilfully done wrong." * ( I hope you always will," replied the old gentleman, луИЬ marked emphasis; and thus the subject dropped—as Kemp¬ thorne, having concluded his task, луеп1 down into the counting-house; and during the morning, he seized an opportunity to ask John Wheeler whether he had brought him a receipt, for the money he was in¬ debted to his father, or луЬе^ег he must be under» the necessity» :of writing to the old gentleman upon the business ? John, who was evidently very muphem- barrassed,
barrassed, said—" He would mention his wishes to his mother ;" and then л entured to add—" I expected you would have an¬ swered my letter, Mr. Kempthorne." " Had I conceived you were in your right senses when you wrote it, Mr.Wheeler, I should certainly have taken the trouble of convincing you of the contempt in which I should then have held you; but as I con¬ sidered your epistle as a sort of fiight of the brain, 1 merely laughed at your ab¬ surdity ;~ and if you wish Ave should remain friends, you will never again remind me of what í am inclined to overlook, for your father's sake." John did not know what to make of this speech ; did he mean to threaten him with a challenge, a law-suit, or to deprive him of his place, as he had a very great aver¬ sion to fighting, was by no means partial to law, and was still less inclined to give up his present situation, at least till abet¬ ter was offered to his acceptance—there¬ fore, wishing to take time for reflection, and
and to consult his friends, he merely re¬ plied—" Very well, Sir, you must do as you please ; I do not suppose my mother wishes to give you any unnecessary trouble, and I will tell her what you require when I go home." Kempthorne said no more ; and when John returned in the afternoon, he pre¬ sented him with a bill, in which he was charged for ten days more lodging than he had a right to pay for, and with breaking a water jug, two glasses, and one piece of chamber ware. The latter charge highly amused him, as the misfortune had hap¬ pened under his own eye; and the maid having exclaimed—" Oh, what shall I do !" he had desired her to lay the blame at his door, as having run against her; and she had readily taken him at his word ; and as he had previously resolved not to dispute the slightest article with them, he instantly paid their certainly very unjust demand* without making a single comment, and thus provoked both Mrs, Wheeler and her son
son infinitely more than had he resolutely resisted their impositions. The old man had declared from the first, it was not the thing to charge for trifles, and might do them hurt in the long run ; but the old woman being, as usual, obstinate, declared she would make him smart for his impu¬ dence, as far as laid in her power : Still she was by no means pleased when her son brought her the money, because the old man prognosticated, that Kempthorne would stick in their skirts, if he had an opportunity, and, at all events, he would very likely shew their bill to Mr. Hasle¬ mere, who always spurned at a mean ac¬ tion—however, as it w T as done, there was no remedy, since it would be useless to return him the money, as he had not made any remarks : but though they had obtain¬ ed all they demanded, they were all dissa¬ tisfied, and quarrelled the whole evening ; and the next day, as Caroline evidently fretted and pined after the worthless fel¬ low, as the old woman styled him, by way of
of raising her spirits and changing the scene, they sent Mrs. Jones луо^ that they would drink their tea Λνίίη her, if she лvas not engaged, and could receive them ; and curiosity to learn лу»Ьа1 лч-аэ going forwards, as she had heard Mr. Kempthorne had left Marsham-street rather suddenly, in¬ duced her to send word she should be happy to see them ; of course, Mrs.Wheeler told her own tale л г егу much to her advan¬ tage, and л т егу little to that of Kemp¬ thorne ; but Mrs. Jones, Λνίιο declared that, like most lookers on, she had seen more of the game than those that played the cards had done, strenuously defended Kemp¬ thorne, declaring he had always appeared to retreat, in proportion as Miss Caroline had advanced. These assertions луеге so unpleasing, that Mrs. Wheeler took her leave sooner than she had intended ; and as she and Caroline were returning home, just at dusk, upon turning the corner into Mar¬ sham-street, they positively ran against our hero
hero and Kempthorne, who also, arm-irH arm, were proceeding to Kalkreuth's, and who луеге, at the л*егу moment of meet¬ ing, laughing about the certain piece of earthen-ware that had been placed so con¬ spicuous in the bill; and though the ladies could not have heard Francis's ludicrous comments upon the circumstance, they took it for granted that they had occasion* ed their mirth ; both gentlemen, however, instantly broke the луау, and bowing, лча1к* ed on without speaking. Caroline, who was very much agitated, clung to her mother's arm, Λνηο, feeling both surprised and provoked, was unable to speak for several seconds, when she de¬ sired Caroline " to coinè along, and not to mind the rude, impudent fellows, who kad been watching them, she supposed, and had purposely ran against them." This Caroline denied, since they had appeared equally surprised, and had evi¬ dently but just left Mr. Corfe's; and she луа$ confirmed in this opinion, upon л'оь. il π ťicir
their arrival at home, by her father's de¬ claring he had seen them pass the win¬ dows only a few minutes before she and her mother had knocked at the door. Ca¬ roline sighed deeply, and was obliged to take a glass of hartshorn and water to pre¬ vent her from fainting. The old woman wished Mr. Corfe and the two impudent puppies were a thousand miles off, since they should be continually meeting them, and she was sure they would delight in in¬ sulting them whenever they found an op¬ portunity* or even passed their windows. The old man declared they had not even turned their heads, and as they must fre¬ quently of necessity pass their door, he advised his daughter to make up her mind, as she must often see them, and in a short time they would be no more to her than any other people. Caroline was, however, so seriously dis* appointed, since the hope alone of se¬ curing Kempthorne had consoled her for the banishment of Francis, to whom she had always
always given the preference, that, as she was now convinced she should never marry either, she actually fretted herself into a slow fever, declaring, that it seemed as if it had been purposely to vex her that Mr» Yates, who had always professed an at¬ tachment for her, had been affronte J ; and they had been more anxious to quarrel with his friend, Mr. Kempthorne, titan to »secure his affections to her, and all to please John, who hated them both, and wished for her death ; and at the rate he was driving on, he would soon gain his ends. The old people sometimes soothed, but more frequently scolded her for being so silly, while the feeling John cursed and swore, and called her every provoking name he could think of; and this judi¬ cious treatment encreascd the fever which preyed upon her to such an alarming de¬ gree, that John began ίο entertain the most sanguine hopes that it would please God to put an end to ail her worldly trou¬ bles, though he affected the greatest sém¬ ii 2 blanco
blance of grief, particularly in Austin Friars, where he enlarged very copiously upon his sisters danger. Kempthorne could not suppose love for him had reduced her to such a state, as he thought her too deficient in point of sen¬ sibility ever to feel a real affection for any man. The elder Mr. Haslemere was of the same opinion, justly guessing that her illness arose more from the absurd conduct of her relations than from her fine feel¬ ings; in луЫсЬ he луаБ confirmed by Dr. В ------ , who had been purposely called in, and who assured him, that though he be¬ lieved the poor silly girl was \*ery anxious to bc married, he did not think she knew xvhich she preferred, her cousin Yates or his head clerk, who had both, he under¬ stood, overlooked her charms, assuring the Λ', -orthy merchant that she was now in a чету promising state of convalescence : as for the old man, though very much re¬ covered, he agreed with Kempthorne in declaring he would never again be able to walk
walk any distance—indeed, he had every appearance of soon becoming an absolute fixture in his arm-chair.
CHAP. VI. Joux, who had been more disappointed by his sister's recovery than she had been by the defection of Kempthorne, began togiveway to his natural avaricious and unfeeling pro¬ pensities the moment she was pronounced to be ou t of danger, ne ver visi ting her bu t ίο reproach her for her folly, and never fail¬ ing to calculate the number of guineas which had been given to Ľr. В ------, not to mentbn the apothecary's bill, which would amount to five pounds the least farthing: u 3 he
he did not, however, succeed in absolute¬ ly occasioning hev a relapse, though pos- ыЫу his having nearly reached perfection in the art of tormenting did encrease the apothecary's visits, and of course his bill, as she mended very $1олу1у; as she was, however, able to sit up, if not absolutely to leave her room, she generally seated herself near one of the front windows, as, like poor Mr. Moretón, she derwed some amusement from looking at the peo¬ ple in the street ; and Mrs. Wheeler durst not contradict her in her present weak state, not wishing, like her less feeling son, to send her out of the world, though she feared she was more anxious to see either Yates oYKempthorne, than even to be gra¬ tified With thè sight 'of any of the royal family. Be that as it iriay, as the young lady лч -as one day seated at her favourite window, from whence she commanded a full view of Mr. Corfe's door, she saw Dr. В ------ 's carriage drive past, and had just exclaimed— <c Why, the coachman has for¬ gotten
gotten the door!" when she perceived him pulling up at Mr. Corfe's. Convinced hi her own mind the man had made a mis¬ take, she was in momentary expectation of hearing the well-known knock; but, to her encreasing surprise, the chariot remain¬ ed stationary for a few minutes ; at the ex¬ piration of which time the coachman drove down the street, and having turned about, again drew up to Mr. Corfe's; and avS she knew both the carriage and the livery, she wa;convinced she could not be mistaken ; of course, somebody mrtst be ill f here, perhaps Francis—nay, there was а possibility, whis¬ pered vanity, that her illness might have occasioned his ; what would she have given to have had this flattering surmise con- Armed, since she would very readily have contributed all in her power towards his cure ! Happening to have been kft alone, she made aH these reflections before she rang the bell, which her mother answered, and fo whom she related what she had h 4 seen.
seen. Having approached the window 7 , the old woman participated in her surprise ; as it wns certainly Dr. В ------ 's carriage, who could be ill at old Corfe's, she wondered? vowing she would throw up the sash, and call the Doctor in, if he was not polite enough to look in upon his patient of his own accord, wondering, as they were so near, they had never heard who was con¬ fined next door*—it must, however, be either old Corfe or Frank, as the Doctor would not have paid old Dame Hunter so long a visit—however, if she was his pa¬ tient, she did not care how soon the bell tolled for her, as she had been a fine mis¬ chief-maker of late. At last, however, they saw the door of the chariot being opened, and Mrs. Wheeler had thrown up the sash, when she saw the Doctor advanc¬ ing on foot towards her own door; down, therefore, she hurried, and was in time to receive him in the passage, when he said, " Being in the street, I could not think of passing
passing your door without calling to en¬ quire after ray late patients; how are Mr. and Miss Wheeler?". " My husband is much as usual, Doctor, but my daughter mends but very slowly ; sometimes I hardly кполу what to make of her." " Let me see her : you should get her into the parlour ; solitude encreases every disorder upon the spirits." Mrs. Wheeler preceded him up stairs, thanking him for the favour of his visit, and requesting he would insist upon Gary's coming down, enquiring " лу!ю was ill next door?" " Mr. Corfe," was the reply. " Bless me ! I never was more sur - prised, for I never heard he луав confined." hy this time they had nearly ascended the stairs, and as Miss Caroline had come out upon the landing to listen, without re¬ plying to her mother, he told her—"She seemed doing very луеИ ; she must endea¬ vour to rouse her spirits, and take as much и 5 air
air as she could, and in time she ΛνοιιΜ re¬ cover both her colour and her strength." By this time the old man, who лузб in the .garden wlien the Doctor came in, had made shift to crawl up stairs, having learn ť from the maid \vho was above, and from whence the Doctor came, луЬот he hard¬ ly suffered to congratulate him upon his amended looks, before he begged to кполу what had brought him into their neigh¬ bourhood'. " Your next-door neighbour, my good? Sir, ÌVÌr. Coffe, Ί am sorry to say, h in a' very -dangerous state." " Well, I never was more astonished," was the reply-;· white* the old vvoman, after requesting the Doctor would take a seat, asked *' Avhat complaint he laboured un¬ der ?" wisely adding, «* but while there is Ше there are hopes." *! *11ш is atı observation I but too fre¬ quently am 'în tire habit of hearing," re- joifled'the Doctor; "but I am sorry to say, 'that, in the present case, my fears more
more than keep pace with my hopes— however, I shstll be better able to judge when I see him again in the evening." " The Lord forgive us all, poor sinners that we are," ejaculated the old woman ; " and is it really so with the poor old man ? why, he has been seized as suddenly as you were, Mr. Wheeler. Pray, Doctor, İs his a similar complaint ?" " By no means, Ma'am, as Mr. Corfe's disorder is one which but too often baffles our wisest medical men—it is a violent in¬ flammation in the bowels, and I fear, ow- ing to his not being at all aware of his situation, and consequently not having sent for advice in time, that it may prove fatal." '* # Why, I have always understood, and, indeed, I have reason to believe it, that Mr. Corfe is rather of a miserly turn ; now, I should think it a sin to be sparing when life is at stake, and you know, Sir, that I sent for yon within the hourañer my poor husband was seiaed." к б « You
" You certainly did; and, without mean¬ ing» to take any great merit to myself, I believe I may venture to affirm, that your precaution in so doing, probably (with God's will) preserved your husband's life —notwithstanding, Mr. Jordan did every thing that was proper before my arrival ; and, as I told you at the time, you could not have dispatched a more anxious nor a more eloquent messenger; the same young man waited upon me in behalf of Mr. Corfe, but he was by no means equally conscious of his patron's danger, or he would have made no scruple, as he says, of calling me out of bed, as Mr. Corfe nevei? seriously complained till towards midnight; and he has been telling me that much against his will, as he had-been greatly ex¬ erting himself in the evening for the amusement of the public, and had already retired to rest, Mr. Yates not only rose the moment he heard his bell, but persist¬ ed in watching by his bed-side till morn¬ ing, repeatedly requesting that he would allow
allow him either to come or send for mc. Unfortunately, Mr. Corfe ivas convinced that he should soon be better ; however, when he insisted upon his pupils retiring. and endeavouring to atone for his want of rest, and leaving him meanwhile to the care of his housekeeper, instead of conforming to his orders, his serious fears, and very sincere regard for the old gentle¬ man, induced him to hasten to me ; and having presented me with the usual fee, he stated Mr. Corfe's complaints to me with the greatest perspicuity, which con¬ vinced me that he had been both a feeling and an accurate observer upon the melan¬ choly occasion, requesting that 1 would, if I thought he was in the slightest danger, pay him an immediate visit—if not, he merely wished me to write a prescription likely to afford him relief, which he would get made up as he went home, as he should not let him know that he had, for his own satisfaction, waited upon me, as he could substitute
substitute what I might order for a resto¬ rative of Mrs. Hunter's preparing; and so much did he seem shocked, when I with proper caution hinted my fears to him, that I should have been tempted to be¬ lieve, had I not known to the contrary, that his fortune, nay almost his existence, depended upon the recovery of Mr. Corfe, since no son was ever more anxious to preserve the life of the best of fathers." Mrs. Wheeler looked and felt provoked, the old man having heaved a deep sigh, and Caroline appearing to devour every word the Doctor uttered ; at last, how¬ ever, she made shift to agree, " that she believed Frank Yates had never been de¬ ficient in point of feeling, and she ought 1o know, since he was her nephew, and she had brought him up, but, she was sorry to say, they had not been upon very friendly terms of late; he grew vain and proud, and fancied himself of too much consequence; however, should Mr. Corfe die^
«tie, his pride might have a fall, for when the main prop of a building gave way, the whole fabric was in danger." " I perfectly comprehend your allu¬ sion," replied the Doctor ; " but you ought to recollect that there are exceptions to all general rules* This young gentleman is, I understand, articled to Mr. Corfe, bnt as he has already attained what may be deem¬ ed perfection in his line, and as he is avow¬ edly and deservedly a great favourite with the public, ϊ think he will very probably be a great gainer in the event of Mr. Corfe's death, as real talents and acknow¬ ledged merit never go unrewarded in great Britain ; and Mr. Yates will find plenty of friends, among whom I rank myself, who will both support and encourage him." " But I do not suppose he will be his own master, Doctor," said the old woman ; " when a man dies, you know, his pro¬ perty falls to his heirs, and my nephew is as much Mr, Corfe's property till he is out ef
of his time, as the large famous organ i4 ΛνηίοΙι he has in his study — therefore f he will of course be turned over to some other master for their benefit, as I know, ovring to my having made a very foolish bargain, that he has of late been making a mint of money by the young fellow ; and, î dare say, if he had made ten times more, he would never have al¬ lowed me a guinea out of his profits/' ff Very possibly ; but admitting Mr. Yates had not proved the admiration and delight of his с о tern porari es, and that Mr. Corfe had been a loser instead of a gainer by him, would you have relieved him from the burthen, by again taking the youth under your care ?" " That is sound reasoning, Dr. В ------ ,"* said the old man; ** a bargain is a bargain all the world over; and 1 only wish our neighbour may ghe the young fellow up his time—that will be no despicable le¬ gacy." « i\i\d
" And 1 am sure so do I," said Caroline, <( though 1 shall never be the better for it." This tvise speech added strength to the Doctor's former supicions, who presumed that the old people had wished her to marry Kempthorne луЫ1е she was in love with Francis, whom they had probably forbidden their house, to prevent his taking advantage of her folly, though he could hardly suppose that a young man, so emi¬ nently gifted by nature, would ever have oŕľcred his hand to the silly ignorant girl before him ; and the old woman's evident want of feeling, both for Mr. Corfe and her nephew, quite disgusted him, as the latter in particular had evinced the greatest anxiety for old Wheeler when in danger, and had appeared sincerely to pity his wife, who полу openly rejoiced in the idea of his being at the mercy of some less kind master than Mr. Corfe had proved himself; this, however, he was resolved, if he had any influence over the invaliti, to
to prevent —- therefore, merely giving a little general advice to the father and daughter, he took his leave. The moment he was gone. " Port wine, indeed ?" exclaimed the old луотап; "yes, 'tis easy enough for these men, who сатг ride about in their carriages, and pocket poor people's guineas by wholesale, to order Λνίηο, луЬеп they rob folks of the very means of procuring such luxuries!" " That is a much лУ1зег remark, wife, than some you made while the Doctor луа8 here," said the old man ; " however, let- Caroline have a glass to raise her spirits once or twice a-day—thank God, I can now * do without it !" This the old Λνοιτκτη construed into a re¬ proach, and they wrangled in consequence rill John came home to dinner, when ih^y told him all thev had learnt, and who had been there, John listened with evident signs of de¬ light, and at last exclaimed—" Well thank God for all things, I hope we shall soou he
be rid of one of our torments, for mark my words, old Corfe once dead, Mr.Frank's greatness will all be buried with him." " 1 don't absolutely see that, John," said the old man, repealing the Doctor's re¬ marks; but the spiteful youth persisted in maintaining what he hoped would prove true, entering into a long detail respect¬ ing apprentices and articled clerks, by way of displaying his knowledge ; and as he never chose to be convinced to the con¬ trary of л\Ьа1 he asserted, he луаэ луагт1у j. debating the point with his father, or ra¬ ther contradicting the old man point blank at every third луо^, when he caught sight of Mrs. Jones passing the лv^ndow. " There is that d ------ d old mother Jones,"he cried; and as dinner was being put upon the table, " Don't be at home, she is only coming to dine at free cost." " I wish you ţvould studyyour own in¬ terest rather more than you do, John," re¬ plied his mother; "you were once her greatest favourite, and might have come in
in for some of her hoards—therefore, though you have affronted her, you ought to get round again, if you can—besides, Caroline and I were at her house last, therefore I will not be denied." " Well, well, do as you like;" but after some minutes spent in anxious expecta¬ tion of her knock, they concluded she must have proceeded to Mr. Corfe's— " having shoved her nose in," said Mrs.» Wheeler, " in consequence of what she had done on Frank's benefit." " Aye, aye, she is gone to see whether she can coax anything out of the dying man," observed John ; " and should Frank be released from his trammels, as you sup¬ pose, father, depend upon it he will go and lod;**e with the old woman—nay, ten to one if they don't make a match of it." His first suggestion was much more likely than his last, said both father and mother, the latter adding—"and then your nose will be compleatly out of joint, for Vrank seems to know on which side his brc.id
'bread is buttered, for he has been paying his court there very much of late ; now, had you played your cards well, he would never have got footing there, but your obstinate temper will be your ruin, John ; Air. George Haslemere hinted as much." * f What, 1 suppose he ΛνϋΙ soon side with Kempthorne against me." st Eat your dinner, and do not provoke mc, as I should not like to be quarrelling, if Airs. Jones does call in." " Then let's make haste and finish our dinners," resumed Johm Airs. Wheeler applauded the notion-*- and they had but just concluded their hasty uncomfortable meal, лупеп they heard a knock at the door ; the dishes and plates were all hurried into the tray, Λνΐιίοΐι was sent down before the maid луаз al^ved to admit their visitor, who was even obliged to knock a second time. Airs. Wheeler was rejoiced to see her good old friend, though she wished she had come rather sooner, enquiring лупе- ther she had dined, " though she grieved tò say
$ay she had bnly «craps to offer her, but she could send out for a steak or a chop." Airs. Jones assured her " she had dined» but having heard, just as she луав sitting down to table, that Mt. Corfe was very ill, she had been to enquire Ьолу he did.*' " And pray, ray dçar friend, how have you left him ?" asked Mrs. Wheeler. (C Why in a very bad way, 1 am afraid ; there is to be a consultation of physicians this evening, and 5 as I say, when it comes 'to that, there are very little hopes/' iC That is very true/' interrupted John, * c since the doctors are like all other rogues in trade, they make the most they can of their customers, since one of them can •only take his guinea ; but when they meet, they are ahvays doubly, if not trebly, paid, so they always contrive to play into each Other's hands when a patient is upon his last legs-—therefore, I would lay a guinea to a nutmeg the old fellow will kick the bucket, and there ΛνΐΙΙ Ы an end of him. ' Now> had John contented himself with a cutting
cutting up physicians, Mrs. Jones would have agreed to the truth of his remarks, but the conclusion of his wise speech spoil¬ ed all, as she now said—" I should be very sorry to pronounce Mr. Corfe's death-war¬ rant with as little feeling as you have done, Mr. John, though, I suppose, should you ever hear that I am obliged to call in more than one physician, you will equally say> so old mother Jones is going to kick the bucket, and there will be a good riddance of bad rubbish.' 5 Both father and mother were open- mouthed to defend their son, but their qualifying speeches did not remove the impression his want of feeling had made upon their visitor, who said—"Formerly, 1 used to think he was joking, when, as he has done now, he displayed his real 'dis¬ position, but I am now well convinced that he never speaks well of anybody be¬ hind their backs^—nor is he commonly civil to any one to their face, except when he thinks it is to his interest to be so." Xow,
Now, луЬепе\*ег John луаа provoked, he, in general, even contrary to his interest, grew more impudent, since he never had any command over his naturally very bad temper, for which his mother never failed to reproach him; he generally retorted, and with some truth, that it луав her fault ; but as he was even more than usually gross in his reply to Mrs. Jones, Mrs. Wheeler thought it necessary to take him to task pretty severely, requesting her good friend Would pay no attention to the silly fool, who луоиЫ be ready to cut his tongue out ivhen his passion cooled—again request*· ing she would tell her what she really thought of Mr. Corfe. " As Dr. B—— wishes for further ad¬ vice, he must be in a very bad way," was the reply. " And what will the old fellow do with all his money, I wonder?" said John, no¬ wise abashed by his mother's late re¬ bukes. " Leave it to you, no doubt," said Mrs. Jones,
Jones, " at least I am sure he would, if he was as able to appreciate your merits as I am." John, who perfectly understood the old woman's meaning, retorted in coin ; Mrs. Jones, however, kept her temper, and very soon took her leave ; Mrs. Wheeler then cave a free loose to her natural vindictive temper, and as she was ably seconded by her husband, who made no doubt, he said, John would soon affront every friend they had, he was obliged to fly the field ; and during the afternoon, Caroline and the old woman amused themselves with watching whoever went in or out of their next-door neighbour's, but saw no one, with whom they were sufficiently acquainted to take the liberty of calling them in to make their enquiries. At seven o'clock, Dr, В ------ and two other physicians arrived, and they would have given a trifle to have known the re¬ sult of their deliberations ; but Dr. B—— did not call again, nor did they know any vol. ιι. ι one
one from whom they were likely to gain the desired information, since it would be of no use to apply to Mrs. Hun¬ ter, and they knew she had forbidden the other servant even addressing them; how¬ ever, upon such an occasion, they thought they might stretch a point, but had not decided when John returned in the even¬ ing, and he put a decided negative upon their making the attempt, since, " what the d-v-1 was it to them whether the old man lived or died, they should be no gainers either way," They were, however, so anxious in the morning to know how the invalid had passed the night, that the maid was desired to make the enquiry at the chandler's shop; but, unfortunately, neither Mr. Corfe's Molly, nor Mrs. Hun¬ ter, had been there, of course she obtain¬ ed no intelligence ; she was, however, de¬ sired to watch for Molly when she came into the garden, to whom she might put the question, as of her own accord ; but, as if on purpose to provoke them, Molly kept
kept close within doors—therefore, after breakfast, at which Caroline had for the first time since her illness assisted, Mrs. Wheeler said— t( it луоик! be but decent, all things considered, to send in to en¬ quire how their neighbour did." t( If it would not be imputed to curi¬ osity," the old man wished she луоиЫ do so. At this very critical juncture Dr. В ------ 's carriage drove past, and he had hardly alighted, before Sir W ------ F ------ and Doctor -■ -----, whom they had seen the evening before, also drove up. " This was proof positive," the old луо¬ тап said, *' that the sick man was still ali\ r e;"and her husband remarked— ·" that if doctors could save him, they did not seem to be sparing of expence." rf Why, of what use will all his money be to him, except they can save his life r" asked his wife; íŕ and 'tis very hard, after a body has toiled and moiled for such a number of years, to be called away so sud- ι 2 denlv,
denly, and without having any one for whom he cares to leave his property to ; thank God, that will not be our fate, as we are blessed with two good children, Mr. Wheeler ; and if John was but better tempered, I should have been perfectly sa¬ tisfied with my lot in life, and I do not complain as it is." Mr, Wheeler thought every one might make a proper disposition of their money, if they were so inclined ; " perhaps Mr. Corfe луоиИ leave best part of his to pub¬ lic charities." " More fool he then, for those legacies only benefit the trustees." While they were луагт!у debating this point, they perceived Doctor------ 's car* riage d^v up to the door. " Well," said Mrs. Wheeler, " they have not stopped so long this time, so he is either better or луогее." « That stands to reason," replied the husband, " he must be either one or the other; and as they have not been long as¬ sembled,
sembled, I hope they have been able to stop the progress of his disorder. 1 ' Mrs. Wheeler felt disappointed at the suggestion, but ashamed of saying so ; " she hoped he would prove a true pro¬ phet; but, please God, she would be sa¬ tisfied," going to the door, in hopes Dr, В ------would give them another call ; bul if he did not seem so inclined, she Λ\Ήδ resolved to address him, which she did up» on perceiving him already seated in his chariot ; and it was upon the move before he perceived by whom he was hailed; pull¬ ing the check-string, he merely said, in answer to her eager enquiry—" Still in danger, Madam ;" and as he stopped the way, he made his coachman a sign to drive on. The oíd woman, therefore, returned into the house with this report—" still in danger/* said she ; " but is he in more or less danger than he was yesterday, I should like to know ?" ι 3 « Why,
if Why, since he is no better, he is un¬ doubtedly луогее," rejoined the old man. A quarrel of an hour succeeded this re¬ mark, as Mrs. Wheeler maintained that he might still be in imminent danger, and yet bc better. Their wrangles upon this point were, полуел*ег, effectually checked in the evening, as the maid, having been sent out for some candles a little before dusk, told them when she returned, " that Mr. Corfe's house луав all shut up as close as possible, and consequently he must be dead." The old man and woman went into the garden to reconnoitre, and there remained at peep-bo for some time ; there луеге no lights, as they could see, in any of the back rooms ; but at last they caught sight of Francis, sitting, leaning his head upon his hand, near one of the ţvindoţvs. " Mr. Corfe is certainly gone to his long home," said the old woman— t( and Francis is in а Ьголуп study, thinking, I suppose.
suppose, how he is to dispose of himself— though, I луопИ lay my life, he is turned over to some of the old fellow's friends ; but let us go in, 'tis no use standing any longer here," (t If John w T as not of so spiteful a dis¬ position," replied the old man, as they walked into the parlour, (( I should be very much tempted to take the poor youth home again." fC You talk like a fool," rejoined his wife; iC you know Ьолу matters have been settled, and that there are reasons лупу he must never come into this house again—I mean to be our inmate/* Caroline sighed. " Aly dear," she went on, " 'tis no use your taking on about him ; the time луаз when I did not object to your setting your mind upon him, but 'tis past." She was still speaking, when she saw Kempthorne passing the window, and who accidentally, or purposely, turned his head, and thus caught sight of the лупо!е party. ι 4 Caroline,
Caroline fell back in her chair, while her mother exclaimed—" There's impu¬ dence ! how dare he stare in at my win- doлv ! if I had been aware of his intention, 1 луоиМ have smacked the shutter to in his face." ff But then you might in your passion have broke the window, as you remember John once did," observed the old man ; f( the street is free for every one, and peo¬ ple may make use of their eyes if they choose, since, with all the wise acts of par¬ liament луЬк11 our great folks make, they have not yet made one to prevent their inferiors from looking at them." "Oh, you are mighty wise to-night," said the angry лvife; tf but never mind them, my dear Cary ; endeavour to forget them both, child ; Francis ΛνίΙΙ soon leave the reighbourhood, I make no doubt, and out of sii» ht, they say, out of mind." r * Well, but," resumed the old man, л\1ю ţvas in the humour, as the old луо¬ тап saidj to play at cross purposes, C( Ca¬ roline
roline cannot be in love w'ith them both at the same time; and I own I should have preferred Kempthorne for a son-in-law." (i You do not know what you would prefer," retorted the wife, "so I wish you would hold your foolish tongue ; I foresee this poor child will have a relapse, if she is teazed just now." " Well, well, I have done, I only want you to talk reasonably. I suppose Kemp¬ thorne is gone to condole with Francis, who always appeared to be very much at¬ tached to Mr. Corfe.'* " May-be-so ; and you once thought he was mighty fond of you—for my own part, I have no faith in so many attachments at one and the same time." " Then, 1 say, Mrs. Wheeler, you go from your own argument, as you think Caroline hardly knows which she would prefer of these two young fellows, and yet you will not allow that Francis cart have any real regard for two old men ; now, I will maintain that to be very possible, s 5 though
though I am sure he would never be iir love with two young women at the same time, and I know my own sex too well to allow of that ever happening; and you know that Till women are capricious, and· hardly know what they like or would have —for, I dare say, when 1 kept you com¬ pany, had a richer man come in your way, and had he made you an oßer, you would not have married me." " Mr. Wheeler, you are enough to pro¬ voke a stone wall to-night ; I am sure I 4vish from the very bottom of my soul that I had never set eyes on you, then I should not have been plagued with either husband or children, but might have been living like a gentlewoman, and have still had the command of Mr. Haslemere's house." * f Ah, fool that I was/' replied the old man, ťť I spoiled a good servant." A knock at the door fortunately termi¬ nated this taunting debate, which would probably not have ceased till Mrs. Wheeler had eased her mind, by throwing some- thins"
thing at her husband's head, луг-лсп she лузб in the habit of doing лупеп thoroughly pnn r oked. Their visi tor proved to be Mrs. Jones, who, having knocked at Mr. Corfe's door, had been told by the maid, ff that he had but just departed this life for a better," and she had in consequence refused to go in ; but the melancholy intelligence had given her such a shock, and her legs trem¬ bled so much, contrary to her first inten¬ tions, she knocked at the Wheelers, wish¬ ing to sit down and recover herself before she attempted to луа1к home. Perceiving she looked very pale, and was hardly able to speak or stand, Mrs. Wheeler hastily reached her a chair, en¬ quiring ' f if anything had occurred to dis¬ tress or alarm her ?" " Why, I have been very much shocked since 1 left home, as I луав told Mr, Corfe луаз no more when 1 called at his door, and only four days ago he was луеН and hearty; ι G I am
ï am much older than he was, so God knows how soon it may be my turn." " Ah ! poor soul, we thought he was gone," said Mrs. Wheeler; "but 'tis of no use your taking on ; you have no chil¬ dren to leave behind you, any more than he had." " That is as much as to say I could equally be spared j I am obliged to you, Mrs. Wheeler, for the kind hint. Mr, Corfe was a ver}* good man, but you seem 110 more concerned for his death than you would have been had you been told I had drowned my tom-cat, and have given me to understand that the sooner 1 follow him the better." " Lord bless me, Mrs. Jones, how strangely you have misunderstood me î me rejoice at yOtir death !" ** Faith I believe you would, if you were sure of coming in for what I have to leave behind me, as you have frequent¬ ly reminded me that I have no children, which
which was as much as to say, you may as л*е11 make mine your heirs ; and I might, perhaps, have done so, if I Was not con¬ vinced that your hopeful son'Would be the first to laugh at the old fool when she was dead and gone, for having suffered herself to be coaxed and canted out of her savings by such a hypocrite— полуелег, Mr. Corfe has been so suddenly called away, I ought to set about disposing of Λνίκιι I have to leave behind me, for fear I should not be allowed the same time to settle my w T orldly affairs/' " I am sure you луШ act with your ac¬ customed prudence, Mrs. Jones ; and you have certainly reason to be angry with John, though 1 declare he ahvays pt aises you to the skies when you are not by ; but that is nothing to the purpose, God forbid that I should wish you should make him your heir !—Indeed, you may outlive me and Mr. Wheeler, if not him and Ca¬ roline; only keep up your spirits—Mr. Corfe's being dead has not brought you an inch
inch nearer the gm'e. But pray have y oit heard Ьолу he has disposed of his pro¬ perty ?" " Pray Ьолу should I İme done soj Ma'am, since I only called at his door, and learnt that he had not been dead an hour. Do you suppose that I am so л ¥ егу devoid of feeling as to have asked such a question ? Please God he may have be- stoved a few thousands upon your ne- рпелу, your discarded перЬелу, then 1 shall give him credit for having been actuated by the best of motives in the disposal of his money." " I shall rejoice as much as you will do, Mrs. Jones, if he has done so," said Mrs. Wheeler, " though 'tis very unlikely ; but as for our having discarded Francis, you have been misinformed, though we may have had reasons for declining his visits, лУгасЬ wc should not wish to bc made the town-talk." ** The Юлуп -talk, indeed, Madam ! Do you take me for the parish cryer?—not that
A SECRET . that I wish to be made acquainted with any of your family secrets ; I only know that you have behaved л>егу ill to Mr. Yates, and should any misfortune ever befal him, to prevent him from earning his livelihood, he should find me a better friend than he ever did, yon take my word for it ; and as your having provoked me has made me гесолхг the use of my legs, and has roused my spirits, лупу, I am obliged to you for hav¬ ing done so, and Ι Λνίεΐι you a very good evening ; and as I do not like to depart in your debt, I think it necessary to inform you, that, should Francis Yates find it ex¬ pedient to leave his present abode, he shall always find a home in John street, as I would give my best lodger луагпи^ to- тогголу, rather than not be able to accom¬ modate him ; so once more good-night ;'* and away she walked. Mrs. Wheeler could not return her com¬ pliment; and the moment she was gone, her hitherto stifled rage vented itself in a violent flood of tears, « Things were come to
to a fine pass now," she sobbed out, " since, after all she had done for that worthless young rogue, she was now to be publicly reproached, because, thanks to her, he was become a great man—how¬ ever, his nose might yet be brought to the grind-stone, and then it would be seen what Madam Jones, with all her boasting, would do for him; she only wished he might be doomed to bear with all her fan¬ cies and caprices." Old Wheeler remained silent; he was always softened by his wife's tears, as he attributed to distress the mere effect of her ungovernable passions. John came home before she had reco¬ vered herself, and upon being told the re¬ cent occurrences, exultingly exclaimed— u I knew the old fellow would make a die of İt, and I am sure we ought to rejoice at his happy release, since Signor Frank Squalini will now be obliged to change his quarters—therefore, you will not have the mortification, my forlorn Cary, of daily seeing
seeing one or other of your supposed ad¬ mirers." " You provoking good-for-nothing, wretch," cried his mother, tr do you wish to hasten your sister's death by your spite¬ ful speeches?—nay, I believe in my heart you would not care Λνίιο went first of us three, so long as you were but a gainer in the end." te Bless me, mother, there is no speak¬ ing to please you of late; 'tis devilish hard I may not even joke with Cary now and then* just to raise her spints." " Your sister is not well enough," re¬ joined his father, " to enjoy your rude raillery." Of this no one was more sensible than master John ; but as he kindly ΛνίβΙ^ to hasten her departure from this vale of mi¬ sery, his conduct was very natural; and as he chose to defend it, they wrangled as usual till they separated for the night.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII. As Mrs. Wheeler was now as anxious to discover how Francis had been left, and what were his future plans, as she had been the morning before to learn how Mr. Corle was, she resolved after breakfast to look in upon Mrs. Jones, to enquire how she got home, since, though she was a great oddity, as she might gain, and could not lose by keeping up the acquaintance, she was resolved not to cut with her, if she could avoid it; to be sure, if she took Francis into the house, she should be obliged to decline Visiting there; but he would most probably remove to his new master's ;
master's ; or should he be left at liberty to choose his abode > луЫсп she could not suppose, he would certainly never become her inmate : owing, however, to her hav¬ ing many things to do at home, it being her луа81т^ day, the clock had struck twelve before she went up stairs to dress for her луа1к; and having brought her cloak down with her, she Λν -as putting it on be¬ fore the parlour glass, when, half scream¬ ing, she threw it upon the table, exclaim¬ ing—" Mr. Haslemere, as I am alive ! Ca¬ roline, Λνϊ^ιί a dowdy you look in your night-cap ! run up stairs and take it off, I desire." Caroline was unable to run, but she лvalked as fast as she could up stairs— лупсп, to the infinite surprise, but much greater mortification of Mrs. Wheeler, Mr, Hasle¬ mere's carriage drove by, and stopped at their late neighbour's—indeed, the mutual astonishment of the old man and his wife baffled all description, as the former луав unable to credit the old луотап'э asser- tioiiSj
tions, till he went to the window, and saw the well-known coach in waiting ; and as the footman had taken his seat upon the box, it was evident the old gentleman had gone in. " What could all this mean ?" they asked each other, as if they could either of them have solved what to them appeared so " passing strange." " Well, I never was so bewildered," cried Mrs. Wheeler. " Nor was I ever less at my ease," replied the old man. " I wonder whether Mr. George knows where his father is?" resumed the perplex¬ ed wife. " I should suppose not," said the hus¬ band. " ï am sure I ara all of a tremble. Will the old gentleman call here do you think, wife?" " La, how should I know, Mr. Wheeler ? you are enough to flurry one to death. Surely Mr. Corfe has not made him one of his executors." " How
"How came you to think of that, wife, when I do not believe they even knew each other?—no, no, this visit is to Fran¬ cis." " Well, 'tis very odd," resumed Mrs. W r heeleť, recapitulating every thing Mr. Haslemere had said during his last visit there. " I am afraid Francis told him a different story respecting his mother," said old Wheeler, " for you know, he thinks she is dead—you ought to have stuck to that, wife." " Nonsense, I tell you he was perfectly satisfied ; and if Mr. George has but kept his own counsel, pray how should he have learnt more than I chose to tell him—how¬ ever, I should not wonder (if he does be¬ lieve the reports that Mrs. Haslemere has circulated to injure her husband) if he were to take Frank under his protection, especially as he will have it he is the very model of my old mistress," " Weil, I only wish it may be no worse ■—his
—his doing so would not injure us—nay, it луоик! be a relief to my conscience." "Now do not provoke me, Mr.Wheeler." The entrance of Caroline, лупо had par¬ ticipated iirtheir surprise, but not in their alarm, prevented her mother from finish¬ ing her speech. Fearful, however, that the old gentleman ţvould, if he did visit them, be in no very pleasant humour, they sent her up again to watch his move¬ ments, which she could do better from the upper than the юлуег windows, they ob¬ served. The debate was not, however, re- neлved, each being too anxiously watting the event of this strange visit, to admit even of their usual resource of wrangling, by way of passing алуау the time ; but at the expiration of an hour, which had to them appeared of unusual length, they saw the steps of the coach let down, and soon after they caught sight of Mr. Haslemere, attended by the dejected Francis, whose hand he shook very cordially upon the pavement, readily accepting his arm to assist
assist him into the carriage. ΝοΛν ought they to remain at the windoлv to Ьолу and curtsey to the old gentleman, or ought they to retire, that they might not appear to have been watching him ? Before, how¬ ever, they had decided which would be most polite, the carriage dnn r e by, and Air. Haslemere never even turned his head, though he could not have forgotten that they were the late Mr. Corfe's next-door neighbours; and his having thus overlook¬ ed them greatly encreased their alarm, as they луеге past being provoked. " There is some storm а -brewing," said the old man ; ff this is the misfortune of having other people's secrets to keep. I should not wonder, if both me and John lose our situations, for, when Air. Hasle¬ mere does take a dislike to any one, he soon lets them know it." " Pray hold your nonsense, Air.Wheeler; must not Air. George always stand by us, except he wishes to fall himself?" f<4 And suppose he does, if his father dis¬ misses
misses us, he cannot take us in again ; and if he was to give himself airs, texx to one but the old gentleman would strike his name out of the firm ; and he has gnwn so lazy, and is so extravagant, that Ι ^0Λν he has more than once incurred his father's very serious rebukes ; and if he should be turned out in disgrace himself, pray 1юлу can he serve us?" t( You are such a screech -οΛνΙ, Mr. Wheeler, you make mc quite melancholy—· полуеуег, if anything extraordinary has oc¬ curred, 1 am convinced we shall see Mr. George in the ev r ening, so say no more till we hear from him." Caroline had remained at the front Λνΐη- dow till the carriage drove off, and л\ав coming down to relate all she had seen to her father and mother; but upon looking out at the staircase лу^олу, she had seen Francis walking in the garden, which in¬ duced her to make a pause of some length —at last, полуел т ег, she came down, and as¬ sured the old folks that he looked very 5 sorrowful,
sorrowful, and was walking with folded arms, seemingly in great grief." This intelligence rather raised the spirits of the old people, who thought, that if he had been made acquainted with what they wished and hoped he never would know, he would have appeared more chear- ful; it was, however, too late for Mrs. Wheeler to think of paying her proposed visit before dinner, and she was very anxi¬ ous to see John, from whom she hoped to learn what had induced Mr. Haslemere to visit Francis; but he did not even know that that gentleman had been in Marsham-street, nor did he suppose Mr. George did, whom he had left in Austin l-ïiars, "Should he call in Baker-street in the evening, and let him know?" " Would he dare ?" replied his mother, desiring him not even to drop a hint, as if he knew anything about the matter. "Now, why the deuce, mother, won't von let me a little into the light of things? i might be able to give you some very ^oi„ и, к good
good advice—you ΛνϋΙ repent when it is too late having kept me in the dark/' " What's the fool spelling for, I луоп- der í —xvhat do you want to кполу ? Have not I told you, I think it very possible Frank may bc takea into the counting- house?" £t Poh, he docs not лугИс а mercantile hand, nor is he competent to any situa¬ tion there—besides, at the rate he has been going on, he will make a deuced deal more money by squalling than he xvill сл г сг do by quill-driving, though, I sup¬ pose, old Corfe's death bas put a terrible spoke in his wheel." "Well, please to take yourself off," said his mother; " and if you know your own interesi, never mention bis name out of this house." John did not appro\ r e of these restric¬ tions; but there were points he dared not dispute лукЬ his mother, who soon set out fur Mrs. Jones's, but met with so very cool a ïtteption, that curiosity alone prevented her
her from departing in a huff*. However, by degrees they became rather chatty, аз Mrs. Wheeler made many concessions, be¬ ing very anxious to make up the breach. Mrs. Jones, however, could not give her any intelligence respecting Francis, whom she did not expect to see till after the funeral, nor should she call at the house till that was over. Mrs. W 7 hceler, therefore, returned home, no wiser than she left it ; and in this state of irksome suspense was she doomed to remain a whole week, as her maid, though she enquired at every likely place, " of what Mr Corfe had died, and whether he was supposed to be rich ?—to whom he had ieft his money ?—and what was to be¬ come of his apprentice?"—could gain no information; and when, by her mistress's desire, she addressed the servant over the wall, merely to ask how Mrs. Hunter did, the girl either did not or would not hear her chil question—therefore, all they were able to discover was, that Kemp- K 2 «horne
thorne *vent there every evening, as did sorae other young men—player folks they supposed, лупо v/ent to assist Francis ΛνίτΙι their advice respecting his future plans; but as Afr. George Haslemere neither came nor sent, the old people луеге convinced they had taken alarm prematurely. On the eighth morning the funeral took place ; and as the mutes had taken their station at the door before Mrs, Wheeler came down, she hurried over breakfast, and took her station Λνίίΐι her husband and daughter at the dining-room луи^олу, from луЬепсс she observed they would have an excellent view. Her maid having been out of an errand, came running up лупеп she returned, to inform them that she had seen a hearse and six horses, all dressed out in velvet and feathers, and the under¬ taker's men were very busy dressing out the horses of six coaches and four in the same луау. Aírs. Whceier could hardly be¬ lieve her; the servant, provoked at her incredulity, told her at Λν1κ*ί public-house they
they луеге standing, лупеге she might go and see them if she pleased. " Weil, she could not have supposed Mr. Corfe's executors would have gone to such an expence." " Perhaps he left orders in his луШ," said the old man, " to have a very sump¬ tuous funeral." At that moment the hearse drove up, followed, as the maid had said, by six mourning coaches. The cofíin, they agreed, was handsome. " Aye, it cost a pretty penny," re¬ marked Mrs. Wheeler ; " and do but look ΛνΙΐ3ί a sight of truncheqn-men, besides the plume of feathers." The first coach having next drawn up, three gentlemen in long cloaks stepped in ; the first of whom they were all certain луаз Francis. " I suppose he is deputed to act as chief mourner," said the old man. The other coaches were all filled with very good-looking gentlemen, they ob¬ it 3 served,
served, but whether relations or friends of ihe deceased, they could not tell ; and nine very handsome carriages closed the pro¬ cession. 44 Well, if old Corfe would not spend his moncv while he lived, his heirs ha\c done the handsome thing by him," said the old man. u \ am half inclined/' said Alrs.Whecíťr, ,r to walk as far as St. Margaret's, just to ьее him laid in the ground," But as she reflected that they had not so much as re¬ ceived a pair of gloves, and as she knew her so doing would be attributed to the real motive, she finally resolved to stay at home. Caroline lamented that such a sum of money should have been expended upon a dead corpse. " Why, after all, 'tis very silly, child," said the old man ; " though upon the whole, I never saw a more expensive, more elegant, nor a better conducted fu¬ neral ; even the late Airs. Haslemere луа -s not
not buried in greater pomp ; however, whenever it pleases God to take me, I de¬ sire you won't be so foolish, dame." The caution was very superfluous. " Well, in time," said Mrs, Wheeler, " I suppose we shall learn who are to be cur future neighbours; there will certain¬ ly be a public sale of the furniture," men¬ tioning a few articles which she proposed purchasing, if she could pick them tıpa bargain. The maid was again set to work to find out all she wanted to know ; but she prov¬ ing as unsuccessful as before, Mrs.Wheeler declared her disapprobation of such sly proceedings, kindly hoping that Frank and Mrs, Hunter were not endeavouring to de¬ fraud the rightful heirs, as they seemed to remain in possession, having been upon the watch during the whole day after the funeral, when the house was of course open, but no one could they see, except Mrs. Hunter and Molly, both in mourn- к 4 ing,
ing, and Francis, who was in as deep a^ for a father. * c Possibly Mr. Corfe has left him ten pounds for mourning," said the old man. * f That may be," replied his wife; "and Frank's vanity has made him do the hand¬ some thing upon the occasion, as his ap¬ pearance is of a piece with the funeral." It was, however, very provoking to re¬ main in such a state of suspense, whicn they were doomed to do till the next morn¬ ing, when they saw our hero pass their window. " Run this minute, Sally," screamed the impatient matron, " and see whether he calls upon Mrs. Jones—her house al¬ most lies in his road, if he is going to the play-house," Away flew Sally, and soon returned to inform her mistress that she had seen him go into the old lady's. (< Then now we shall soon be satisfied," observed Mrs. Wheeler, " for 1 will call upon
upon the old woman in the course of an hour, and 1 warrant me I will pick her brains nicely." " Do not be in too great a hurry, wife ; you would not like to meet Frank there." This was so true a remark, that she suf¬ fered an hour and a half to elapse before she sallied forth, promising to bring home a budget of news; and she certain 1 ν could not have arrived ata more propitious mo¬ ment, Francis having but just departed. Now, Mrs. Jones had been nearly as anxious as Mrs. Wheeler to learn how Mr. Corfc had disposed of his property, and what were our hero's future plans, and had resolved to look in upon Mrs. Hunter in the course of the day, when, to her great joy, Francis knocked at the door; she ad¬ mitted him herself, declaring she began to fear he had quite forgotten her He assured her in return, " that this was the first time he had been out, except to the fnnerab since Mr. Corfe's death, and that this was the first visit he had paid," к 5 » Then <
w Then 1 am the more obliged to you,* paying him a few . .npliments upon his appearance, as he looked remarkably well in mourning. ' She next adverted to the funeral, observing— t( that some people had greatly admired it, λνΙιιΙο others had condemned the executors for having q one to so great an expence ; for her part, she луаз among the former, since it луа& the highest compliment the old gentleman's heirs could have paid him, and did honour to those Λνίιο had the ordering of it, and to those Λνίιο had the conducting of it ; so, if I am not impertinent, to whom was the poor soul indebted for so splendid a funeral ?" ' f To a person, Madam, who little ex¬ pected to have been so very highly fa¬ voured in his will—nay, possibly his ex¬ treme kindness towards him will not meet with general approbation ; respecting the funeral, he did no more than his duty, as he was not actuated by ostentation, since he merely wished to evince his sincere gratitude
gratitude towards his benefactor, his more than parent, as the principal part of his property has devolved to the person who is addressing you." Λ tear of gratitude stood in his eye as he concluded, having been speaking the unaffected language of a heart which still grieved for such a friend. Mrs. Jones was so agreeably surprised, and so pleased with his speech, looks, and gestures, which all bespoke his gratitude and regret for the deceased, that, starting from her chair, she gave her visitor a most cordial embrace, saying — "I give you joy from the very bottom of my heart ; and if the good man is permitted to look down on earth, he must feel as satisfied as I do with what he has done. May I be as sincerely regretted by those to whom I leave my savings, though I shall not have a tenth part of the property to bequeath he probably left behind him." Francis took the hint, and instantly re¬ plied— ι" You have a very handsome com¬ ic 6 petency,
petency, Madam ; but Mr. Corfe was what may be styled a very rich man, and might have declined business many years ago, but he conceived it contributed to keep him ^n health; he Jiked the situation he held at the »Abbey, and as he had a vast many scholars besides, of course he could not, as he frequently said, avoid get¬ ting money; he has left behind him (as nearly as Mr. Sumner, his solicitor, and myself can judge) ¡between twenty-eight and nine thousand pounds, and he has disposed of about tise thousand in lega¬ cies, after making me his heir and residu¬ ary legatee ; and as 1 am a sort of nonen¬ tity in this world, every precaution has been taken to prevent the bare possibility of the heirs at law from disputing his will," entering into various details and explana¬ tions respecting the law as it stood con¬ cerning natural children, which, though very interesting to Mrs. Jones, might not be equally so to our readers. Having answered her numerous ques¬ tions
tions perfectly to her satisfaction, she ex¬ claimed—" In the name of wonder, what will those Wheelers say ! I should not won¬ der if some of them were -to hang them¬ selves—Cary, for example—as for John, he will die of spite and vexation, as he will not have the courage to make use of a halter: but do you intend to remain where you are, Mr. Yates?" " Probably for life, at least if no par¬ ticular occurrence induces me to alter m ν determination ; as my kind benefactor has also left me the house and furniture, not an article of which shall be removed, while they are useful.'* " I give you great credit for the notion ; it is an excellent house, and you may spenda very large income there; it is not in a very fashionable situation, but your friends will never object to visiting you upon that account : you are .of course your own master." " Perfectly so ; and though I have al¬ ready been told that I havea sufficient large 5 fortune
fortune to retire upon, 1 have no such ins¬ ten t ion, as ϊ am resolved to follow the example of my dear departed friend, who very justîy observed, that an idle life is the bane of youth, and no advantage to those of riper years ; and should Γ, like him, die childless, I shall certainly be able to dispose of my savings, at least to my own satisfaction. I neither wish to be¬ come a miser nor a spendthrift, if Γ can steer clear of both extremes; at present, my engagements alone will afford me every luxury, which any young man of my age can, or rather ought'to wish to indulge in—therefore, my fortune will accumulate, and when I am old, I shall stand more in need of many superfluities which it will then afford me." " I am delighted to find you have form¬ ed such excellent resolutions—pray God you may never be tempted to break them ! Aye, you will be an honour to your pro¬ fession. I only hope you will marry, and have children to inherit both vour fortune and
and your virtues. But how is Mrs. Hun¬ ter—I suppose her name is mentioned in the will ?" " It was—Mr. Corfe has left Iter fifty pounds а -year for life, which I am to pay her; and the kind soul has already declared she will never leave her present habitation while I remain there, and am inclined to give her house-room, as she avers she can never be better off'; and I have assured her, that she will oblige me verv much by retaining the management of my house." " Till you provide her with a mistress," gaily replied the old lady ; " and Cod send you may make a prudent choice î —as for my nieces, they are not worthy of you; and I hope that little cripple, as I call her, will never bear your name." " My opinion respecting your sex must strangely alter before I play the fool so egregiously ; but it grows late, and ï hive been so kindly excused from my theatrical duty, in consequence of the recent occur¬ rences,
rences, that I must hasten to resume it, ag* I am to perform this evening; and God forbid that prosperity should render me less zealous to please the public than here¬ tofore," taking а легу polite leave of the gratified old woman. He was hardly out of sight when Mrs. Wheeler knocked at the door, and as Mrs. Jones луаз in one of her best humours, and had a suspicion that she луав indebted to Mrs. Wheeler's curiosity for this visit, she received her very cordially, enquiring-after Mr. Wheeler and Caroline? * ( Oh, my husband is in very good health, only very cross and helpless; but as for Cary, I hardly know what to make of her ; she is sometimes better, sometimes worse." " I have long since told you," луаэ the ' reply, " that you have all overstood your market; луЫ1е trying to ensure the largest oyster, you have been left with only the shell, since your daughter might have been as happy as a princess, and have üode in her
her carriage ere long, had you all played your cards well, as you would not now be sorry to see her Mrs. Yates." Mis. Wheeler was much too eager for an explanation to feel at all offended by her hostess's polite strictures upon her re¬ cent conduct; with evident perturbation, she therefore exclaimed—" My daughter ride in her carriage, and marry Yateb !— what is it you .mean, my dear Mrs. Jones ?" " I did not say she would marry him, that I know of; I only meant to observe that you would now jump mast high if he was to make her an offer, since I suppose Frank Yates at this moment to be worth not much less than five-and-twenty thou¬ sand pounds, not to mention his talents, which will soon enable him to double, if not to treble that sum." Mrs. Wheeler's mouth had mechanically extended, and she had opened her eyes so wide, that the diverted Mrs. Jones abso¬ lutely laughed in her face, till, half breath¬ less with wonder and amaze, her guest rejicatcd^
repeated, " Five-and-twenty thousand pounds î —why, surely Mr. Corfe has not made Frank Yates his heir !" " As snre as he is your nephew ; but that, now I recollect, some people doubt ; so, assure as you are there—of course you will illuminate to-night; are \ou not sorry that you in a manner shut the door in his face—nobody knows why or therefore ?" " I have always wished to have been up¬ on intimate terms with him, Mrs. Jones, but I had my reasons for acting as I did." " That I believe ; and Yates will have his reasons now for not noticing you, though upon my honour I only speak at random, as I think he is too forgiving by half, since, if ever he does mention your names, which is not often, it is always with a reference to past íViVours; now, in my opinion, and so I have told him, you cancelled every obligation, the moment you treated him unkindly." Owing to the various sensations which ßow assailed Mrs. Wheeler, she gave way to*
to a violent burst of tears, and even wept for a considerable time. Mrs. Jones hoped her sorrow denoted repentance, with other provoking hints, to which her nuditor listened in silence. After a pause of some length, Mrs. Wheeler enquired—" From whom she had learnt what she had been telling her, and whether she absolutely believed Frank had inherited the old miser's aving*?" Being well aware that she had derived her information from the fountain head, nevertheless she wished to have it con¬ firmed, and more particularly to learn what had passed between her and Francis, which Mrs. Jones now exultingly detailed. Mrs. Wheeler sighed several times dur¬ ing her recital, hoping the young man would make a good usé of such an im¬ mense fortune. When Mrs. Jones ceased speaking— " And do you really think," she enquired, " that he will continue to reside in Mar¬ sham-street ?" " I mate
" 1 make no doubt he will, so you will have the pleasure of boasting, my nephew, or perhaps you may only choose to say, Ых Yates, the wonder of the age, lives next door to me." This continued raillery was very galling to Mrs. Wheeler, who having obtained all the information she required, took her leave, requesting her communicative friend would pay her an early visit—who pro¬ mised to look in upon her as soon as she had replenished her news budget, delight¬ ing in having so compleatly mortified her Aİsitor; but she must have been equally wise to have been aware of the different feelings which assailed Mrs. Wheeler dur¬ ing her stay, and which recurred with dou¬ ble force during her walk home; and she hud scarcely reached her own door, when, upon turning her head, she perceived her son hastening towards her. " Why surely you are before your time, John," she cried as he came near. '** I suppose you have been out gossip- ping>
ping, and the dinner is not ready," луаз the surly reply, " And pray am I to confine myself at home to pamper your appetite, you un¬ thankful being? I have brought my figs to a fine market, truly ; I only wish yòu ţvould move your quarters, then I might enjoy a little peace ; and I am money out of pocket by boarding you at the price you give. 3 * lix this лvrangling manner they entered the house together; and upon consulting the clock, it луэб proved that John was full a quarter of an hour before his time— therefore, having (for a miracle) convinc¬ ed him that he луав in the лУrong, since dinner would be ready at the usual hour, they very naturally enquired, "what had brought hiin home so soon ?" Without replying fo their question, he алуоге a most tremendous oath ; then said — <c He did not care whether he had any dinner, or whether he ever went into Aus¬ tin Friars again." His
His father, mother, and sister exchanged looks of surprise and fear; and after a momentary pause, the old man, who was the most collected, desired he would ex¬ plain his meaning, adding—" if you do m>t mean to return to Mr. Haslemere's, pray what do you intend to do with vour- sclf?" " There are more places than his in London, and my salary is no such great things," was the reply. " Only take care," resumed the father, " you do not throw yourself out of bread ;" while his mother peremptorily demanded an explanation of his strange hints. " Why then you must know, I was merely saying to Bradshaw, f that my uncle's bastard would soon find his le¬ vel again, now old Corfe was dead,' when Kempthorne flew at me open-mouthed. Mr. Yates was a gentleman, and my su¬ perior in every respect; and as he was his particular friend, he desired forsooth that I would never again annex any term of
«f reproach to his name in his hearing. Well, I fired; and just as we were in the midst of our dispute, who the d-v-1 should come in amongst us but old Mr. Haslemere, who desired to know what we were quarrelling about. Kempthorne explained, making himself out in the right of course, harping upon my hav¬ ing called that puppy Yates a bastard. So looking mighty glum, the old fellow said —- f If I were Mr. Yates, I would oblige you to prove your words, John Wheeler, as he has much more reason to blush for the supposed relationship than you have; however, as you value my future favour, never mention his name again in Austin Friars, but with the respect due to his supe¬ rior talents and innate worth/ and then away he stalked. Kempthorne said, in a provoking tone, ť So now to dinner, Mr. John Wheeler, with what appetite you may,' which made me set off in such a pet, that I ran almost all the way home," Far, however, from applauding the spirit he
he had so courageously evinced, both fa¬ ther and mother broke out at once—" He would be their bane, their utter ruin, owing to his abominable temper. How dare he mention Yates's name in Austin Friars ? he did not know the mischief he might have done, since Mr. Haslemere would very likely advise him to prosecute him (John) for defamation." " Oh that ever I should have lived lo see this day !" cried the weeping mother, who between sobbing and crying, related all she had learnt at Mrs. Jones's. " Lord, mother, how can you take on so !" cried the callous John. " Γ meant no harm in what I said to Bradshaw ; and if you persist in keeping me in the dark re¬ specting Francis, you deserve I should make mischief; but as for the tale mo-. ther Jones has been telling you, she has only been humbugging you, take my word for it." This fresh insult encrcased the old wo¬ man's rage, who desired to know what he meant
meant by humbugging, and wherø he |йсЬ- ed up such low language—" what was ; the meaning of the vulgar word ?" John, who was well aware that he had gone much farther than he ought to have done, and that if he had by his-folly pro¬ voked his parents' ruin, as * they said' he had,, he shouhl sliare* in it, now лу4&1^ to make his peace with them; he» therefore said, with affected gaiety — " Why, if I 4vas to endeavour to make Kenrpthorne, or Yates, believe that I liked them, I should be humbugging them." " Kone of your jeers, L désire, you silly oaf," replied-his mother, " for I am in, no laughing humour, so please to stop* yoiir mouth, as dinner is ready," Francis's accession of fortuno, and Mr. Haslemere's implied threat had taken away their appetite; the dishes луеге therefore removedi nearly.untouched-; and after ano*- ther violent' quarrel, John 4vas obliged to hasten алуау, " That boy," said the old røai^ as soon vou п. t as
as they were alone, " is always getting in¬ to disgrace, and in the room of mending, the older he grows the more obstinate and overbearing he is—he will certainly be turned out of the counting-house, if he goes on at this rate." Mrs. Wheeler rejoiced that "he did not take after her, and if he made himself a hard bed he must lie upon it ; as for Caro¬ line, she was a charming temper, though, God help her, she had had her share of troubles, young as she was." " Indeed she has," said the old man, * f for with all your wise management, wife, you Have not secured her a husband ; but you and Mr. George fancy you can make people think and do just as you please, and that you are up to every thing, while it strikes me, that my old master has made some discoveries, which will make us all look very foolish some of these days; for my part, I rejoice at Francis's good for¬ tune, as I dare say he will makea good use of his money." " That
" That he will," said the sobbing Caro¬ line; "and if it had not been for you,- inother, I might have been Mrs. Yates, and haverode in my coach." " Now do not provoke me, child, I acted for the best—besides, I was not ab¬ solutely my own mistress respecting Franj¬ eis; but I cannot- explain that matter to you—God knows, it lies heavy enough Upon my mind at times." "Well, well," interrupted the old man, "say no more about it now-—what is done cannot be undone ; and »I hope the secret will be buried with us, since a person can* but be happy and comfortable in any sta¬ tion—and it will be Francis's own fault if he is not so now." As they could neither think nor talk up¬ on any o-ther subject," John found them still debating the point when he came home in the evening. Kempthorne had not exchanged a word with him, and ho had not seen the old gentleman. The old man desired him, for both their sakes, to be L 2 verv
very much upon-hie guardi Kempthorne луш* almost a Haslemere» and' he ought to be the first to address hiitii Thisl· John swore he would not* do, let what woukVbe the consequences "should^he, who hod been in the eounting»-houseso much' longer than thať impudent puppy, humble to him !— he wsould see his coflin walk from Austin Friars to their house first." te Kempthorne is your senior, John, and your superior in every respect, and* you ought to knoGfcunder« to him." John was not, howievcr, to be convinced, reverting to Мл Corfe's will,, луЬо^ he swore, ts must have been insane when he made it in* Frank's favour—however, he hoped the right heirs would dispute -the. point, and them pride лУои1с\' have а. луогзо fall than ever."—But, to his en creasing» mortification, he soon learnt, through the· medium of Mrs. Jones, that Mr. Corfe's relations, if they did notí applaud,-tacitly acquiesced in the disposal· he had made of his property, , CHAP.
=-r
сидр. virt. As Mr. llàsleìtìÉife'B r visit 'to our hero Ы.в hever been accounted Шг, 'even to the sa¬ tisfaction of oiir headers, in itch less to that of Mrs. Wbeefër, %e will take a few t*etro- gradèstej» With their leaVe. KempTthoï ne, ha^hg called in Marsham- street almost imfnedíately áflêr Mr. Corfe's dearth, had s]*Cnt near áŕn hotfr Witíi thé mily afflicted Fïahcis, 4vho Was by no means aware how arnply Ьк dedèàíêd friend had provided for him, not having yet Seca that gentleman's solicitor, Шо had ţfto- mised to call in ihe course of the evening, having feared, 4vhen he bit thè house in l3 the
the morning, that Mr. Corfe had not many hours to Irve, the mortification had made such rapid progress. Kempthorne was too луеП convinced of the sincerity of his friend's grief to assail him with mere com¬ mon-place consolations ; he therefore en¬ deavoured to rouze him, by reverting to his future prospects. " 1 make no doubt/' said the dejected Yates, " to judge from the general tenor of Mr. Corfe's conduct towards me, but he has liberated me from the controul of any other master, and as I cleared upwards of eight hundred pounds by my benefit, I am amply provided for; but the immedi¬ ate possession of his whole fortune луоиЫ not console me for the irreparable loss I have sustained ; you must assist me with your advice, Kempthorne, лупеп my mind is more settled, and I am better able to de¬ vote my thoughts to self." Kempthorne's reply was that ofa sincere friend: the arrival of Mr. Sumner, Mr. Corfe's solicitor, induced him to shorten hh
THERE his visit, though he promised to call again the following day—and he thought it his duty to mention the melancholy alteration which had taken place in his young friend's situation to Mr. Haslemere, senior, the' next morning, луЬо луас extremely shocked when he learned how suddenly Mr. Corfc had been called away, " hoping that Fran¬ cis would, as he expected, be left at liber¬ ty to make the most of his talents—add¬ ing, I have of late felt myself so much in¬ terested for him, as I cannot divest myself of the idea of his being my grandson, that I believe I shall call upon him—he may stand in need of advice." Kempthorne said every thing likely to induce him to persevere in so laudable a design ; and in consequence of which the old gentleman ordered his carriage, and proceeded to Mr. Corfe's. His unexpect¬ ed visit occasioned our hero almost as great a surprise as his next-door neigh¬ bours ; but though he appeared both flat¬ tered and gratified by such a proof of the i* 4 worthy
worthy merchant's regard, that gentleman perceived that he **»s -a real «tourner for the deceased* of whom he spoke in the highest terms, dwelling with infinite gra¬ titude «pon the continued kindness with which he had treated him, from tire mo¬ ment he became his inmate, the pains he had taken to britig him forward as a singer, at a very great exspewce, even before he knew whether he was 4kkely to become a fatiou ride with ihe public ; concluding his animated miű ieelbg eulog&im «pon the deceased, by declari ng that he eouW never sufficiently deplore having been so early deprived of so valuable and sincere a friend. " You have certainly experienced a great loss, in every sense of the word, my young friend—nevertheless, you must not despond," resumed Mr. Haslemere: " when you were first received into the Wheeler family, ï promised them to be your friend as you grew u*p, should you prove deserv¬ ing of my notice; without meaning to flatter
flättferyou, yotihtìVein типу mipects far sürpa&ed ту èfx|)ec*mtitínis, thetefdrel stand bound to perform my promirse^^so now tell me how best! can serve yob ; are you released from your engagements by the death of your late patron ?" > (C Mr. Sumner, his solicitor, assures me that' I am, Sir; he has even hinted that my name is mentioned in the will, which is not to bê opened till the arrival bì two distant relations óf Mr. Corfe's, who reside in Staffordshire, and to whom he has dis¬ patched an express;'meanwhile, by his desire, I remain in possession, as it may seem ; but as hie is an executor, I cannot do Wrong in cbnformfrig to his broers." * f Certainly not ; arid I hope Mn Corfe* has proved himself your friend even be¬ yond Hie grate. 1 cannot áäy ϊ exactly ap¬ prove of the profession, or rather the linfe of life for which yon have been brought up, though your success must 'Verfter you .partial to it; ^nd as I am nöt afraid of rendering you. tain, I do not scruple to L Ü say,
say, I never before heard so pleasing a »inger, therefore I cannot ask you to give up so lucrative a line for a place in my counting-house; but should your voice fail you, or should your popularity de¬ cline, I pledge my word to place you in some situation in which you will be able to realize a fortune in time. But before we part, let me, as your friend, enquire whether you have a sufficient sum of mo¬ ney by you to answer all your immediate wants?" " And I dared to murmur," ejaculated the grateful agitated youth, " at being de¬ prived of one friend, when Providence has sent me such another ! Language is very inadequate, Sir, to express my feel¬ ings, though so far from being short of money, I think myself very rich," men¬ tioning what he had cleared by his benefit, which, by Mr. Corfe 's advice, he had placed in the funds. " Then not to brea,k into the principal sum, accept of this," said the old gentle¬ man,
man, presenting him with a check for a hundred pounds, " and let me know how you are left as soon as the will is opened ; so now adieu." Francis was unable to articulate his thanks, but recovered himself sufficiently to attend his kind friend to the carriage, whose head and heart were so full of our hero, that for a few minutes he had actu¬ ally forgotten the panic struck Wheelers, though they soon recurred to his recollec¬ tion ; but had they known how little good that boded them, they would have felt thankful had he entirely forgotten there were such people in existence. But to return to the hero of our tale. In due time the express, which had been sent into Staffordshire, returned with a let¬ ter from the elder Mr. Freeman (Mr. Corfe's cousin) to Mr. Sumner, in which he informed him, " th.it his brother w аз so extremely ill, his life was'despaired of* of course he could not think of leaving him; he had, therefore, .written to their L 6 solicitor,
•soliciter, Mr. Weldon, of Ely-placè, to ap¬ pear in their behalf, to hear Mr. Corfe's will read, and to act for them as circum¬ stances required." In consequence the will was immediately perused by Mr. Sum¬ ner, İn Mr. Weldon's and our hero's pre¬ sence, who, to his infinite astonishment, found himself sole heir to his deceased friend ; and as the arrangement of the fu¬ neral was entirely left to him, he gave im¬ mediate orders to have it as sumptuous as the rank of Mr. Corfe admitted. To his cousins, that gentleman had left two thou*· sand pounds а -piece, and one thousand to his executor, Mr. Sumner, лу!ю луа$ named joint with our hero. Mr. W T eldon, Λνηο 4 \yas very politely invited to represent his clients at the funeral, which he readily promised to do, told the heir, that from \yhat Mr. Freeman had written him re- &peõ!ing his brother's complaint, he much doubted his living many days, though it was evident Mr. Corfe had no idea of his having been ill, as they seldom corre¬ sponded
¿ponded more than twice а -year, 'merely to invite each other to London, ancl intd the country ; but his death would make no alteration in the bequest, srnee that must be paid to the survhw. He then took a very polite leave, being very much im¬ pressed in favour of Mr. Corfe's heir. <ς Freeman's death will certainly prove of no advantage to yoti now, Mr. Yatès," said Mr. Sumner, as soon- as they луеге alone, tc though it would probably have been at least two thousand pounds more in your pocket, had Mr. Corfe been aware of the circumstance " "Then upon my honour I rejoice he was not, since it may prevent the surviv¬ ing Mr. Freeman from feeling öo much disappointed at my having been nominated his heir, which I was by no means prepared to expect. How he came to display such a partiality in my favour, you must know, my dear Sir, as you made his w\\\, -since to me he never held out the slightest 4 · hint
hint of having such a thing in contempla* tion," " Then I will satisfy your very natural Curiosity. Mr. Corfe and his cousins were all great oddities, yet I have always under¬ stood they were all three very good men upon the whole ; your deceased friend was, of course, from his professional pursuits and constant residence in London, infi¬ nitely most the man of the world—indeed, he has told me, the Freemans, though men of very large property, are quite rusti¬ cated, and would not live in a greater style than they do, even had they pounds where they now have shillings—therefore, as he was convinced that they by no means live up to their present income, where was the use of leaving them more, merely to add to their hoards ?—indeed, he had ne¬ ver thought of making his will, till he was seized with the alarming complaint which carried him off; and as trifling causes fre¬ quently concur in producing unexpected events,
events, so it happened in the present case ; as he told me, that when he rung his beli in the night when first taken, not expect¬ ing to have seen Mrs. Hunter in less than a quarter of an hour—you had retired up¬ on returning from the theatre very much fatigued and exhausted, having been very unmercifully encored—you were at his bed¬ side before he had well left hold of the bell-pull, and displayed such unfeigned anxiety when he told you he was ill, and w r ere so eager to procure him immediate relief, that he wished from the bottom of his heart you had been his son ; and re¬ solving from that moment not to leave any thing fo chance, he determined ere night to render you independant of every one and every body, in case it did please God to call him ; and you will suppose that Dr. В ------ 's report of your stolen visit to him, in consequence of the fears you entertained, did not induce him to alter his resolution—indeed, as he very justly observed, he knew of no one whom he
he lö^ëd half so well as yourself, or Who were equally inclined to contribute to his comfort, gratification, and recovery — öf course, he thought vou were entitled to the best part of his property, and I perfectly agreed with him ; therefore you now know why he thus amply distinguished you." Large drops chased each other down the cheeks of Francis while listening to the attorney ; and when he had concluded, he only hoped that he should never give the world in general room to say that he had made an improper nse of his recently acquired fortune ; and Mr. Sumner having taken his leave, promising to see him again before the funeral, our hero wrote a short but very respectful letter to Mr. Hasle- mere, to whom he also sent a copy of Mr. Corfe's will, entreating that he would ho¬ nour him with his advice respecting his future plans, though he held himself bound to fulfil the engagements his late friend had entered írftò for him ; and as he trust¬ ed that his munificence would induce him to
to *kee*p a very .-strict watch over himself, for fear he should dhgrace The memory of so.'eitoelleftt a maøj he owned he ^wished for ithte present to remain a candidate for public favour; having enclosed his packet to Kempthorne, as the most respectful mode of having it delivered to the old gentleman. His friend ^instantly executed his commission, »giving his relation our heno'* letter to himself, in which· he de¬ tailed the resolutions lie had formed, which he afterwards repeated to Mrs. Jones, and which met the entire «approbation of <the ben e volai t merchant, whb sincerely re¬ joiced his young favourite was *tbus placed out of the reach of the frowns όΤ ¿brinn c¿ Not was Kempthorne and Kalkreuth less pleased—indeed, every one, with whom our hero was at all acquainted, the Wheel¬ ers excepted, were unanimous in the opi¬ nion, that-Mr. Corfe could not have made a better disposal of his property; a»d as that gentleman had no relations in Lon¬ don, Francis invited aU his -musical friends and
and acquaintance to follow him to thé grave, Mr. Weldon and Mr. Sumner ac¬ companied him in the first coach, and the other gentlemen, all of whom had hat¬ bands, scarfs, rings, and gloves, followed in proper order, the attornies and their carriages closing the procession; and every proper compliment was paid the Mr. Free* mans upon the melancholy occasion, since very costly rings, in memory of the de¬ ceased, gloves, &c. were sent down through the means of their agent, who had been extremely gratified by the personal polite- aess which he had experienced from the youthful heir. Meanwhile the Wheeler family were again discomposed, by Miss Caroline's hav¬ ing a very serious relapse of her com¬ plaint—indeed, serious apprehensions were again entertained for her life, by all those connected with her, her brother except¬ ed, whose hopes were once more raised ; but, as before, he assumed the semblance of grief/ and readily agreed to the propri¬ ety
ety of Dr. В - -'s being again called" in; as he had imbibed such a prejudice against physicians, that he always maintained they more frequently killed than cured—how¬ ever, as that skilful man set his sister once more upon her feet, so far from giving him any credit for so doing, he declared Сагу had only been shamming, just to ex¬ cite pity, and to get nursed and pitied, ai she did not care how much money was thrown away upon her fancies; his mo* ther again accused him of wishing to has¬ ten his sister's death, and he, as usual, de¬ clared he was only in jest ; but when they found that the object of their envy, so far from leaving the neighbourhood, as they had hoped, seemed fixed for life in Mar- sham-strcet, as the old woman had not lett her Jodgings since Kempthorne had quitted them, could John have carried his point, he would have made the old peo* pie have given up their house, and have taken a smaller one nearer the counting- house; but as their .present habitation was large, cheap, and commodious, the old man
man ffersisted 'm .onding his »Hays tbepé ţ and. his wife ît old their son, ín answer tb%x& eontinual teaming, " that a rolling stone gathers ino moss;" adding, " if he did tout •keep a mil tongue in hås head, niatœre might yet come round when least expect¬ ed." Now, it was by «10 means John's wish that a reconciliation should ever take place 'hetiween them and our hero, for whom his hatred had greatly »encreused; since the elder Mr. Haslemere »hail stood foitih *his ch«mŕpibn-*-theTefore,- could heý without its being either discover or sas* peCted, have, set fire to the next hotise, he would iiave thought it no sin, though he might have heen^tøteraed, öwk*g toîhts m* ability to insure his öw«> else, were a conflagration to take place in the dead of the night, it<might be ъ very süre means of getting rid of his detested neighbonr^- besides, were he to be consumed in the flames, as he would :probably die wiťhottt a will, as his nearest relations, they might come it\ for ttU old Corfe had left him ; hut
but then again, could his father and, mo¬ ther make good their claim, as he was in his own mind thoroughly convinced that Ьелуав a spurious sprig of the Haslemeres ? still, as Mr. George must keep that·a se¬ cret, he w'otild of course support their claims to his property. These reflections deprfred"? their wise plotter of many hours of repose, though he луаз soon convinced of the impossibility of having recourse to fire to satiate his malice; nor could he de¬ vise any more feasible scheme to hasten our hero's death, since he made himself sure of coming in for his share of his mo-* ney, should* he be suddenly taken off} as there was no chance of so young a mayrs making his will, since Who had he to'pro¬ vide for; and as his mother had, to please MV. George Haslemere, brouglwhim up as her nephew, of course she would tabe ad* vantage of that cireirmstance, admitting that gentleman went her halves in thé plunder. Now
Now our hero certainly was in some danger about a month after his patron's de¬ cease, as, in returning from the theatre one evening in a hackney-coach, the drunk¬ en coachman, in turning into Marsharq- s t re et, run his hind wheel upon a high stone, and in consequence overturned the carriage. Francis, however, escaped un- hurt^rneverţheless, Mrs. Hunter was furi¬ ous against the drunken rascal, who de¬ served nothing short of hanging, in her opinion, Mrs. Wheeler's. Sally heard of the acci¬ dent the n extern orn ing, and, came home full of the miraculous escape Mr, Yateş had had. John only regretted he had not broke his neck. His mother cried " shame on him," and his father declared he should have sincere¬ ly grieved had he come to* such an un¬ timely end. " Then more fool you, father," was the polite
polite retort, " since, would not you have been his heir, if the coachman had made sure work of it ?" , (< I never reflected upon the circum¬ stance," was the reply ; " nor would the idea have consoled me for his loss." " Pray God he may live, say I," re¬ sumed the old woman, " since, trust me, John, we shall never be any gainers by his death;., so ¿tarât, expose your want of feel¬ ing, particularly ш Austin. Friars." ft Now only »telLme, mother, I ask no more, ran't Francis: ! ο) ι. » / ' " Begone .this niorne-rit*. John, except you wish to provoke me to forbid you the house." Her son prudently followed her advice, wisely resolving to suffer this odious puppy to die a natural death, merely hoping that he would soon ruin, himself, since the cer* tainty of his. being again reduced to.his former state of poverty and insignificance would have greatly contributed to the hap¬ piness of the envious selfish John Wheeler* who
who always rejoiced when he heard of the failure* or other misfortunes of any per* son within the circle of his acquaintance, as he wasŕ sure then to have foreseem what would be their fátö, and he was in propor* tion miserable when their'good fortune was uninterrupted: Mrs. Hunter* meanwhile was sò anxious to prevent her young-master <from being exposed! te* similar -î^cidèniéj othal she strongly urged htm tose* ţ^idii» carriage, and was warmly seconded IçjrrrMrs. Jones, who, in additioit^e-hib'teghndfor our hero* was stimithtfiedbby a wish.-to*-add to the mortification oh the Wheelers. His theatrical friends were all of the same-way . ofi thinking, audi nòne* were more earnest in tkeir endeayotìnr to: overcome his šeru*· ples tham Kalkreuth, who> so. far fro m'en* vying his? young friend* his superiority; haď ever been the/first to admit that lié greatly surpassed all his musical* cotempo* rartes; andi was extrem ei y happy· when dame Fortune, as he said, 1 had made him such
such ample amends for het ftffnieť neglect tof hím. Sìgtioi? M ----- s under whom he continued frequently to practise, ürgéá him to the same effect, as he could keep a carriage without deviating from his 1 ori¬ ginal plân«, since hiá engagement» Would more than coveť the етсреп^е ; and wheit he observed that Mr. Cdife had »ever el«* lowed himself sneh a luxury, his friends retorted, " that he had never been exposed to the same risk of catching ¿old, and as he always insisted upon his making ше of a hackney-coach to and from the theatre, he would approve of this farther ргесачи tion." Thus ftrgűed Kempthorne, but as he did not immediately prevail, be hsd reeoimæ to Mr. Haslemere, to whose advice hø knew his friend would pay the utmost d*"H ference ; and that gentleman readily tyröte to oor hero upon the business, ci assuring' him that he луоиЫ think him greatly to Ыатсц if he snttercd his scruples tő in¬ duce hilft tc* tm flie cétítlriual risk øf Ыа ^oí/. п. м neck,
neck, by trusting to the skill of hackney- coachmen, who were but too frequently tn liquor of an evening, since, though he made no doubt many people would blame a young man of his age for setting up his carriage, he thought it a very necessary appendage to a person in his line of life, since, were he only to be obliged to lie by a few nights in the season, he might be more out of pocket, than were he to provide in time against such a misfortune —indeed, common prudence ought to in¬ duce him to recollect, that during the win¬ ter season in particular, when they were most wanted, hackney-coaches were sure to be damp and unwholesome, and as he was peculiarly liable to take cold, he ought to be particularly careful; concluding by recommending him to his own coach-ma¬ ker, who had a chariot and harness upon sale, which he thought would exactly »nit him." As Kempthorne had foreseen, his friend evinced his gratitude towards the kind writer
writer of the preceding letter, by giving immediate orders respecting both carriage, horses, and servants. Miss Caroline being again, thanks to Dr. В ------, in a convalescent state, was seated one morning bettveen ten and ele¬ ven at one of the dining-room windows, (the lodgings being still unoccupied) anx¬ iously watching whoever луеп1 in or out of the next door ; she 5алу a very plain dark green chariot, barouche box, &c. drawn by a pair of fine horses, drive up to our hero's door; as the blinds were all up, she instantly guessed to лупопл it belonged, and immediately called her mother, -who at first thought it might be in луак^ for some of Frank's friends, who had walked thither to breakfast ; but everything seem¬ ed пелу, Caroline obsen r ed, ел г еп to the coachman's livery, луЫсЬ was light drab, with black vehet collar and cuffs, and merely a silver band round his hat; for about ten minutes, however, they remain¬ ed in this state of doubtful suspense, when- m 2 a foot-
a footman, in the same livery, let down the blinds, and held the door of the carriage open for his young master, Λνίιο almost immediately stepped in ; and as both mo¬ ther and daughter w r ere too anxious and too curious to stand upon form or cere¬ mony, they both leaned half out of the window, and thus met the eves of Francis full upon them, who, guessing the sur¬ prise he should occasion his aunt and cou¬ sin, had very naturally looked up while taking his seat, and Λνΐίίι difficulty did he restrain a smile, when the astonished old woman unthinkingly exclaimed, loud enough to be heard below— <( The Lord be. praised ! well, what will this world come to!" Now, had she omitted the concluding sentence, it might Ьал г е been supposed that she was overjoyed—as it was, the coachman gave a droll leer, and the foot¬ man, with a smile of triumph, mounted behind» as the carriage dashed from the door. Mrs.
Mrs. Wheeler instantly smacked down the лvindow, saying—" My dear, you will take cold ; we ought not to have had the sash up." " Ah, mother," was the plaintive reply, " wc пал г е done many things that л\еге wrong, and which cannot be undone, else that handsome carriage and servants might have been at m ν orders." " Now don't say any more about it, Cary, since 1 can plainly see the young fellow's brain is turned ; and, take my word for it, he λυίΙΙ be ruined ere long, therefore every thing has been ordered for the best." " And I say, mother, that Francis never was" of an extravagant turn, and so have you said a thousand times—and here we might aH have rode in turns." " Now do not fret and whimper, and take on like a fool, Cary ; I have not been to blame—things went cross; had I but foreseen that old Corfe ΛνοιιΜ have done as he has done, I might have acted diiferently ж Я — lio w-
—however, keep up your spirits, and f will see what can be done, and whether we may not yet bring about a reconciliation ; so let us go and tell your father what we have seen." The old man listened to their recital in silence, then shook his head, saying—"He did not approve of Francis's launching in¬ to such expences; this did not tally with the excellent resolutions he had formed ; soon, he supposed, he would require a more elegant house, as one folly was sure to lead to many more." " Well, no matter how soon he drives to the d-v-1," rejoined his wife ; " no blame can attach to us, as we have never been consulted; but he is much too young to have the management of his own affairs, and will be over head and ears in debt be¬ fore he knows where he is. * The old man began to calculate, de¬ claring "the carriage and horses could not have stood him in ¡ess than three hundred pounds, and then there were the servants and
and horses to keep, besides additional taxes—his fortune would not stmd such extravagant doings." When John came home, his mother was beginning to tell him how she had been surprised, when he exclaimed — " Lord ! that is no news; the puppy has been into Austin Friars to display his new carri¬ age !" "Into Austin Friars!" screamed Mrs. Wheeler. " Goodness, mother, do not split the drum of my ear; yes, into Austin Friars. Kempthorne sent me out about a bill, and I saw the fine chariot was standing at the private door ; I took no notice, as there arc very often carriages waiting there; but as 1 was coming home, nay just as I reach¬ ed the door, 1 saw puppy Yates stepping in ; ecod I was astonished this time ; so, upon returning into the counting-house, I very naturally remarked—* That set a beg¬ gar on horseback, and they will ride, &c.' mentioning what I had seen." m 1 Kemp-
Kempthorne, instead of firing, as I had expec ted,about hisdear friend,said, without raising his eyes from the bills he was exa¬ mining—" It was by Mr. Haslemere's advice that Mr. Yates set up his carriage, and by his invitation that he came into Austin Friars, which may account, in a satisfactory manner, Mr. Wheeler, for what appears so greatly to have surprised you. So I think, mother, mv news is of a later date than yours." As the quarrel that ensued was a mere recapitulation of the one that hod occurred in consequence of Mr. Haslemere's severe reproof to John, we shall merely observe, that both father and mother made copi¬ ous additions to their former strictures up¬ on his impolitic conduct, and that it con¬ cluded by his flying the field; but as we mav not have perfectly accounted for our hero's apnearance in Austin Friars, we shall onlv add, that it was in consequence of a desire the merchant had expressed to see him as soon as be had launched his new
new equipage; and as his wishes were law to Francis, the first use he made of his carriage was to drive to,Austin Friars, where he met with both a kind and cor¬ dial reception ;, and having listened to some excellent advice, drank a glass of morning wine, and eat a biscuit with the old gentleman, he was suffered to depart, with strict injunctions to apply to him upon any emergency, or when¬ ever his advice could be of service to* him.
ы 5
l^jttÄť»»
•MM
CHAP. Ш. Тше daily sight of this elegant equipage was by no means conducive to Caroline's recoverv — indeed, she exhibited such strong symptoms of a decline, that Dr. B-—— ада Mr. Jordan concurred in adлiн- ing immediate change of air. John having heard that not one person out of ten recovered when once the lungs were attacked, felt all bis hopes revive, but strongly objected to their last prescription ; there had been a mint of money expended upon Cary of late, and as for change of air, 'twas all a farce; where could she breathe
breathe purer air than in their own gar¬ den? The old people were resolved, however,. not to lose their Iamb for a halfpenny worth of tar. Dr. В ------ was, therefore,. again consulted respecting this proposed removal, and it ^as decided that she ought to be within his reach, in case she* grew worse ; the summer was very far ad¬ vanced they foresaw, therefore that coun¬ try lodgings would be dear, but that could not be helped—however, instead of taking a floor, Mrs. Wheeler said they would make shift with a single room; ahd as Dr. В ------ r when applied to, advised Brompton or Knightsbridge, as places peculiarly adapt¬ ed for people who were threatened with a pulmonary complaint, Mrs. Wheeler de¬ clared that they would remove to one or other of them, as soon as she could meet with a situation to her mind. John swore the air of Westminster was preferable to that of either Brompton or Kn ig li abridge. Dr. В ------ had only con- M G suited
suited his own interest, when he filled up their heads with such nonsense, Caroline, in return, declared it was a matter of indifference to her whether she lived or died, as she said her brother only wished to follow her to the grave. The old people resolved, however, to shew him who was master, and in conse¬ quence Mrs; Wheeler set out a lodging- hunting that very day ; and after travers¬ ing both Brom ρ ton and Knightsbridge in every direction, she at last engaged a front room upon the second ff oor, aí seven shil¬ lings а -week, for a month certain, in a house of a very genteel appearance, near¬ ly opposite the end of Sloane-street, where the two roads separate. Having made every necessary arrange¬ ment, and given every necessary order, Mrs. Wheeler returned home exceedingly fatigued, to give in her report, which she did while refreshini*· herself with a dish of kJ tea. " Mrs. Bever, in whose house she had engaged an apartment, was a very good kind 3 of
tf motherly woman ; she had not been with- )ut her troubles, she found; but that was ïeither here nor there—she had engaged to urnish them with boiling water morning tnd evening into the bargain ; she did not .eep a regular servant, having one daugh- er grown up, and a younger one, who was iot above running of errands, and she nade no doubt but that they should be erv comfortably off' since there were no men in the house." When John heard how economically his mother had gone to work, he was more reconciled to the proposed removal, ob¬ serving " that he recollected the very spot ; there was a stand of coaches opposite, and a vast deal to be seen ; therefore Cary would have something better to stare at than her cousin Yates's carriage." "It would not be you, John, if you did not make some spiteful remark," resumed his mother ; " but Knightsbridge is cer¬ tainly very lively, when compared to Mar- sham-
sham-street, and I hope Cary will recover both her health, strength, and spirits there." John's hopes were ofa different nature, as Caroline was greatly fallen away, and had lost all her colour ; he did not, how¬ ever, make these remarks, merely saying—- " as we are not kept to very hard duty this warm weather at the counting-house, I will look in upon you now and then of an evening, mother." The poor old man wished he could have enjoyed the same pleasure^ but every suc¬ ceeding day merely served to convince hinv that he should never again enjoy the full use of his limbs. Caroline was for setting off the next- morning—her mother was no less anxious to be gone—but unfortunately it was Fri¬ day, which had been an unlucky day with Mrs. Wheeler through life ; she postponed their departure, therefore, till Saturday, the 14th of July, then their time would expire with the month; when, having laid in
in a provision of every thing they were likely to stand in immediate want of from their own tradespeople, as every body complained of the difficulty of procuring any thing, either good or reasonable, irt the environs of London, they set out in a coach for their temporary abode. Mrs. Bever and her two daughters re¬ ceived them with the utmost politeness, prognosticating, that in one week the in¬ valid would be quite another thing, the air of Knightsbridge was so renowned for its salubrity ; enumerating the wonderful recoveries which had come within her knowledge, of people much farther gone in a decline than Miss Wheeler appeared to be. Äírs. Wheeler readily believed such flat¬ tering prognostics, declaring " that she had not been aware how dear her daugh¬ ter was to her, till she had been in fear of losing her." " Her's was n о common lodging-house," Mrs.
Mrs, Bever resumed ; " they would be as quiet, or more so than at home, as she had no men folks coming in at all hours to break their rest ; she had only one young lady in her first floor, who had both lodged and boarded with her for some time; and as for her daughters, she flattered herself there were not two better behaved, better disposed girls to be found лупЫп the bills of mortality," Mrs.Wheeler, in return, sung the praises of her dear children—boasted of the size of their house, which, she hinted, Was their οΛνη, though they only had it upon » long lease; but she лу!зпЫ to impress Mrs. Bever with an opinion of her conse¬ quence. Miss Atvrood, that lady's other lodger, was not at home on the evening of their arrival, having accompanied a young friend of her's and the latter's aunt to the little theatre ; but they луоиШ only stay the play, said Mrs, Bever, having seen the entertain¬ ment*
ment —at ail ел*еп1$, she would come in very quietly, though she made no doubt of her being at home by ten. Thus passed the first evening. The next morning луа8 devoted to settling them¬ selves in their пелу apartment, л\ ? пеп, by луау of amusing her daughter, Mrs.Wheeler proposed asking Mrs. Bever to drink her tea with them. No proposal could have been more agreeable to the invalid, луЬо had bad a very good night ; but, she observed, thev could not ask the mother without in- •л eluding the daughters^-and then there луа& the boarder. " To be sure it was expensive treating so many/'the mother agreed; "but for once in a wnv she would not mind, since Mrs. Bevcr had spoken very highly in praise of Miss Atwood/' The invitation was readily accepted* their landlady requesting that Mrs.Wheeler would make her tea below in her front parlour, which would alwa}s be at her ser¬ vice to receive any of her friends, as she might
might not choose to have gentlemen» ín particular, shewn η ρ into her bed-room. Mrs. Wheeler wa& profuse in her thanks for this considerate offer, congratulating herself upon having, by mere chance, pitch¬ ed upon an apartment in the house of so polite а луотап, who again launched out in praise of her dear Miss Àtwood, who had an exclusive right to the dining-room, she observed ; but she v?as the most ac¬ complished and the most sweet-tempered young woman that ever came into a house, though she was perfectly her own mistress, as she was in her six-and-twentieth year* Mrs. Wheeler declared she was all impa¬ tience to be introduced to her; and be¬ tween ñve and six she went down with Ca¬ roline to join the Bever party, and cer¬ tainly Miss Atwood far surpassed both their expectations, as she was a remarkably hand¬ some young woman, and лупове elegant figure perfectly corresponded with the re* gularity of her features; and as she was dressed very handsomely, and in the exact reigning
reigning fashion, she struck Mrs. Wheeler as being infinitely more the gentlewoman than Mrs. George Haslemere had appeared to her at the same age—indeed, she strong¬ ly reminded her, she told her daughter, of her dearly beloved Miss Haslemere, who, she always averred, was an absolute para¬ gon. The compliments and introduction being, however, over, the tea-things were produced, which afforded Airs. Bever an opportunity of declaring, that Mrs.Wheeler made the best cup of tea she had ever drank, requesting a direction to that lady's grocer, with whom she was resolved to deal in future. Mrs. Wheeler was highly flat¬ tered, and still more so when Miss Atwood proposed a walk to her daughter and the Miss Bevers; and the four young people having sallied forth, the old ones entered into conversation, Mrs. Bcver kindly re¬ lated her family history for the amusement of her lodger: her grandfather had been viceroy of Ireland, and her father one of the under secretaries of state. Unfortu¬ nately-,
nately, he had a large family, and as her eldest brother, who had inherited his es¬ tates when her father died, had turned out a very dissipated character, the family had fallen in the world, which had led to her marrying a merchant, who having, owing to some severe losses, been obliged to en¬ ter into a compromise with his creditors, fell into a low way, and, in short, pined himself to death, leaving her in a very re¬ duced state, which obliged her to receive boarders, and to let out part of her house, by way of adding to her very small in¬ come. She next reverted to Miss Atwood, who had lost her mother very early in life, and her father, a West India merchant, be¬ fore she was twelve years old, who had left his fortune between her and her eldest sis¬ ter, who had married an East India captain about four years since, whom she had ac¬ companied during his last voyage, and was now upon her return home; she had wish¬ ed verv much Miss Atwood would have gone out with her, but she could not bear the
the idea of going, as it might seem in search of a husband—therefore, she bad gone to board and lodge with an elderly maiden relation during her sister's ab* sence; but not agreeing ΛνΐίΙι her cou-* sin, Miss БолуегЬу, лу1ю луаэ very rightly named, and not finding the air of Lon* don agreed with her, she had removed to Knightsbridge, and had been her inmate for the last eighteen months. " Is she rich ?" enquired her attentée auditor, C( She hasa л г егу pretty income, I should suppose," луаз the reply, " as I understand she lives very much Λνίΐΐιΐη bounds; and she certainly has not spent less than three hundred а -year since she has boarded wirlr me; she pays me л*егу handsomely, and she dresses extremely well—besides, she generally goes to some water-drinking- place in the summer months with some friends or relations; her father and guardi¬ ans spent a large sum upon her education, and it has not been money thnnvn away/ for
for she speaks French and Italian, plays* upon the grand piano and the harp, and sings divinely—indeed, no lady of quality was ever more accomplished ; but what I most admire, is her being so free from pride. You may suppose that she has not wanted for lovers, being so handsome and so clever, and withal so rich ; but she has never yet met with a man to her mind, and she will never marry, she says, till she does." " She is right,'* replied Mrs. Wheeler; " and, ï must say, I never was more struck with a young person—indeed, she greatly reminds me of a dear beautiful young creature, who has been dead these many years, and who was like Miss Atwood, beautiful, clever, and good," entering into various details respecting her own family^ though, like Mrs. Bever, she rather devi¬ ated from the truth, as her father she trans* formed into a country gentleman, who, during the latter part of his life, had cul¬ tivated a small estate of his own in Surrey, having,
having, олуш» to expensive ^v-suits, and other misfortunes, been greatly reduced, and she being of a very independent spi¬ rit, had been prevailed upon to take the management of the great Air. Haslemere's family, asking Airs. Бел г ег if she knew them ? and finding she did not, she gave луау to her natural propensity of boasting in full security; concluding by -observing, that, like many more, she had been un¬ able to withstand her fate, so had tumbled in love, and had married a very worthy man, who was at that period head clerk in Air. Haslemere's house, and who now, though unable to attend his duty, still re¬ tained his salary; and her son, who was as fine and as good a young man of four- and-twenty as ever trod in shoe of leather, had always been considered as one of the family by the Haslemeres, and she did sup¬ pose, that in a very few years his name would bc added to the firm, as his father proposed advancing him ten thousand pounds to throw into trade, which would be
bft а тегу pretty beginning; "and should we rather straiten ourselves to set him a going, why, he must help us ant while we live, and that I am sure he will do, for he is a most dutiful son." Mrs. Bever congratulated her upon hav* ing two such excellent children ; and though 4he supposed the old lady had, likt herself, rather enlarged respecting family and for¬ tune, she was convinced that she had pro* perty, and in consequence resolved to court her favour. The return of the young people broke wp the conference; and when they sepa¬ rated for the evening, it would be difficult to say which of the old women were the most gratified with having, as certainty waa the case, so egregiously imposed upon each other, each seriously resolving tö leave no stone unturned to bring their respective interested schemes to bear, Mx% Wheeler boasting to her daughter of hav¬ ing had ehapfer and verse respecting Miss Aiwood from her loquacious hostess ; and as
as she was even more credulous than Mrs. Bever, she made no doubt that all she had been saying was absolute matter of fact ; concluding by' observing, what an excel¬ lent match the young lady would be for John, if they could but bring matters to bear, acknowledging that she had rather boasted to Mrs. Bever, as she wished they should both be in the same story; pointing out to Caroline what an advantage it would bc to her, if her brother married a rich wife, as it would enable them to add to her fortune when they died. Caroline hardly needed such a stimulus, she had taken such a liking to Miss Atwood, to in¬ duce her to come into all her mother's plans. While they were thus plotting to secure so desirable a prize, Mrs. Bever was re¬ lating to her elegant boarder the discove¬ ries she had made respecting the Wheeler family ; and if they were but half as well" to do in the world as the old woman seem¬ ed to say, Mr. John would be no despi- voi« ιι. n cable
cable match. A Hussian nierehint sounded well, and better than an Bast India cap¬ tain. So thought Miss Atwood—and to judge from the mother and daughter, she saia, л she supposed Mr. John Wheeler was not much óf a man of the world, which would be an advantage; observing, that the ohi woman must be very mean to put up with hex present accommoda¬ tions, if her husband could advance any¬ thing üke the sum she mentioned, to en¬ able her son to become a partner in the кшт pf Haslemere, and yet have enough left to marry off the daughter, and to sup¬ port themselves in independence." <* The оИ man has three or four hun¬ dred а -year from the firm," said Mrs, be— Tier* # and will have m long as he Kves ;— ob, those merchants bav« nobh sprits; but let røe alone to sift matters to the bottom, if pur scheme p/o^persr-I only •wish I had talked rather farger— your sis¬ ter ha« no -children* ana Captain $о#^1цод knitl: a young man—then your maiden cousin,
cauMtb »ud ^me West Indiii rebtfen^r- ftggl^t^Ä the lawyer c^n helg u^ оц1— We Will snare ttø hiíd^ if oneştii but weH feaţheired." S^ich wa« the result of the parlour com¬ mittee; and we may safely aver, tmtt Ca* rolme >va§ the only $ae, the Miss Bevers excepted, who enjoyed a good nigh t'bre-, pose ; but she looked sa much better iii ïj.^ morning, Mrs. Bever was convinced that ttw m of KnightsferidgÄ would socui sŕt bei upon her feeü agai»; and as it bast already been observed that the young lady's eomplatiat was cbjefly upon her mind, it will not be deemed surprising tføt change Qf air and scene, gentle exer¬ cise, and agreeable companions, should soon have WÄproYed both her looks and her health ; and she fell extremely anxious tp promole her mother's schemes, sii*ee» we^e John once married, she sfe«ki have no one to contend with at home, as he would then have a house of his own, at wfeich «he cowld visit w.hen she chose* since N % MİS3
Miss Atwood was of so charming a temper —therefore, she now seriously resolved to forget both Kempthorne and the much preferred Francis, hoping, as her mother often said, that there луеге better things, or rather better men in store for her. And soon after breakfast, Miss Auvood gently knocked at their room-door to en¬ quire after the invalid, and to propose a short walk to her; the луса^ег луаз so fine, Caroline readily agreed to accompany her new friend, with whom she enjoyed a very pleasant tête-ã-tête ramble. Caroline, by her mother's desire, was loud in her bro¬ ther's praises. "Is he still single?" carelessly asked her companion. te Oh, yes—and I am sure he has never been in 1ол т е," was the reply ; " I only wish he could see you, Ai iss Aftvood, as I should delight in having such a sibter; but perhaps you are already engaged ?" Miss Atwood's reply луав exactly calcu¬ lated to raise her ignorant companion's hopes,
hopes, as she dwelled upon the many of¬ fers she had rejected, owing to her ad¬ mirers being too old, too ugly, or too dissipated. Caroline made John ont a model of perr fcction ; and M Us Atwood could not but suppose that so dutiful a son, and so kind a brother, must make a good husband— adding, in a gay tone, " but 'tis impos¬ sible, you кполу, my dear girl, for me to think seriously of a man whom I have ne¬ ver seen, and I am rather difficult; but though we may never be related, I hope we shall always remain friends—nay, луеге I to dispose of my heart in your brother's favour, he would probably object to my very small fortune, as I cannot boast of more than three hundred a-year.'*" Caroline declared her brother луа« by no» means greedy after money ; she had often heard him say, that he would please his eye when he married, even at the ex- pence of his pocket ; and for her part, she n 3 thought
thought Miss Atwood's was a tety ptfetry income. Having thus, as she conceived, seconded her mother very ably, the young ladiefc returned hotne ; and as Miss Atwood un¬ derstood that Mr. John was expected ih the evening, Mrs. Bever remained upon the watch for him ; and the moment she saw him enter the garden gate, Miss At¬ wood flew up stairs for something, pur* posely to meet him as she was Coming down again, which she did vety adroitly. John Wheeler was a man, though an abo¬ minable miser, still he thought he had never seen so beautiful a woman, while he bowed, if not very gracefully, at least Very profoundly. Thè fait lady made a fashionable return to his respectful com¬ pliment,» and pursued her way. John 4ooked after her while ascending hi silence, sirice, though Mrs. Bevet had so kindly offered her parlour, Mrs. Wheeler chose to receive her son in her ovŕŕi room, having
having much to say to him, and not wish¬ ing to be interrupted. The moment, how¬ ever, he was within the room, hè eagerly enquired, " who that devilish fine girl was whom he had met upon the stairs," de¬ scribing her dress, &c. This led to the disclosure of his mo¬ ther's wise plans respecting himself and the ffiiŕ Miss Atwood. John agreed she was very handsome; attd if she was as rich as she had given Cary to understand, Whom he congratulated with a vety bad grace upon her amended looks, why she would just suit him—" therefore, only contrive to get me introduced, mo¬ ther"—he went on—"and I will soon make up to the dear creature, for faith I do nót know whether I should not have struck up to her, even if She had not been so rich." " You must have been blind not to have- liked her, John—however, I will arrange matters with Mrs. Bever, who is a most ex¬ cellent accommodating woman, (just like к 4 myself
myself in many respects), for you to dine with us on Thursday," that day being a sort of holiday in Austin Friars, as thç clerks remained an hour later in the morn¬ ing, bnt did not return in the afternoon. John therefore promised to be at Knightsbridge to a three o'clock dinner ; and having s,pcnt about an hour with his mother, he departed, positively more than half in love with Miss Atwood, of whom hé had another glance as he went out, she being standing at the parlour window; she even kept him awake for some hours ; and he resolved to take every likely means to secure so desirable a prize. We will, however, leave Mr. John to form plans to forward so desirable an event, while we return to the hero of our tale. The theatres having closed for the sea¬ son, the managers, who had remained in a state of doubtful anxiety since the death of Mr. Corfe, thought it necessary to have an interview with Mr. Yates, as they un¬ derstood he had come into a very hand¬ some
some fortune by his late friend's decease, and was, besides, entirely his own master —of course it was with him alone that they could treat for the future; and they feared he might have it in contemplations to retire from the theatre, as soon as he became of age, which would be, they* had understood from Mr. Corfe, during the ensuing January, and he had not beea able to bind him down to fulfil his en¬ gagement for any longer time ; but they hoped to induce him, by the liberality of their offers, to enter into other arrange¬ ments. This they told him when they met by appointment; he promised, in return, to* conclude the ensuing season at his pre¬ sent terms, but did not choose to enter into any further engagements, though he assured them he had no immediate idea of quitting the stage, therefore they might depend upon his always giving their house. the preference. They were extremely grateful, readily n 5 promising
promising to double his present salary, snd assuring him that he should have a free benefit the ensuing year, ackrowledg- ing that the last season had been very pro¬ ductive, and in a great measure owing to his talents and popularity ; and they were convinced that he would long continue to be in equal favour with the public. They therefore separated, mutually satisfied vwlh each other. Francis w T as now at leisure to look into his own affairs^ and to regulate his plans for the summer, or rather for the ensuing three months; to remain absolutely idle, he thought, would be wrong, as he knew it would be greatly to his advantage to visit some one or other of the water-drink¬ ing places; and he had received several invitations from the different managers then upon the coast ; but the bands of music annexed to the provincial theatres were in general so bad, that he fancied he never succeeded so well as upon the Lon- dun boards-—besides, he did not wish to make
make himself too common: both the Dub¬ lin and Edinburgh managers had offered him very advantageous engagements for the summer, and he knew that he might command his own terms at many of the country music-meetings—he had, however, almost resolved to cross the Tweed, when one morning he received a very polite note from the Countess of Bayfield, re¬ questing to see him the next day at twelve at her ν ilia at Brompton, where she always spent her summers, except she went to some water-drinking place for a month or six weeks, as she fancied the air of that village was particularly conducive to her health—in which idea she had been con¬ firmed by her physician, Sir W. F ------; and as she did not, like John Wheeler, fan¬ cy that he was interested in the advice he gave her, she was pleased that it afforded her an excuse for remaining so near Lon¬ don, as it enabled her to procure her niece«, the Honoirrable Miss Irvans, the ad- is' б vantages
vantages of the best masters the capital af¬ forded. Having sent a polite acquiescence to her very unexpected summons, our hero was puzzled to guess what this musical lady could want with him at such a season of the year; probably she was going to give either a breakfast or a supper at her ele¬ gant retreat, as he had heard that her gar¬ dens were extremelv well calculated for rural fetes ; still he was very averse to the idea of singing in the open air, and yet more so to disoblige a woman of her rank, who had so kindly patronised him on his benefit night, his late accession of fortune having rather en creased than diminished his wish to oblige—resolving, therefore, to be guided by circumstance 1 ?, he drove to Bayfield House, Brompton, the next morn¬ ing ; and being ushered into her Lady- ship's boudoir, he met with a most flat¬ tering reception from the Countess, who, after rejoicing that he had not left Lon¬ don,
don, hoped he was under no engagement likely to induce him to do so during the ensuing three months, as she had a re¬ quest to make of him, to which she hoped he would accede, £i Her Ladyship would always have a right to command Loth his services and his greatest exertions, though he had half resolved to close with the very advantage¬ ous offer which he had received from the manager of the Edinburgh theatre, to whom he must send his final answer that evenirne î but he should ever make the calls c f interest subservient to those of duty and gratitude, entreating her Lady¬ ship would do him the honour to explain her meaning." " You are resolved to convince me, Mr. Yates, that I was not mistaken, when I observed, that to sing with the taste and feeling which you always evince, was a proof of your innate delicacy and refine¬ ment. I am, therefore, extremely rejoiced that you have not yet dispatched your answer
answer into Scotland» m I hope what I have to propose will be nearly at condu¬ cive to your interest, at were you to un¬ dertake so long and fatiguing a journey, since I wish you to undertake the instruc¬ tion of my nieces ; they are allowed to be very good lady mtricians, but they are de¬ ficient in faste and feeling when they fing, the very points in which you so eminently excel, and yo« alone can impart your al¬ lowed superi ortty to them, as I particular¬ ly wish them to exjcel in the ballad style, which is your furti, though you are no less great in your bravura songs^— now, I can procure yon two other very desirable scholars immediately—the Earl of Winter- ton s two eldest daughters, who have been tcazing my life out f о engage you to fìnhh them ; and m I shall insist upon your naming your own terms, I will not suffer myself to feur that you will put a negative upon my request." Our hero instantly, and in the most po¬ lite terms, acceded to her Ladyship's pro* posais ; „
posals ; and it was in consequence settled, that he should de%Ote three hours every morning, from е1ел*еп till two, during the ensuing three months, or rather till the theatre opened, to the instruction of these young ladies. луЬеп they might alter their hours, not to interfere with his engage¬ ments with the public ; and as her Lady¬ ship was resohed to convince her visitor that he would Ьал*е no reason to repent ha\ing so readily come into her plans, she presented him Λνίίΐι a twenty-pound- note, by way of entrance-money, for his four pupils, as Lady Jane and Lady Susan Cardonnel луеге to spend the auinmer at Brompton with their father's sister, Lady Mary Cardonnel ; and not to lose time, they should always gh*e their master the meeting at Bayfield House, since, by this means, the young people Λνοι^ bc able io practise trios, duets, &c, which would be extremely conducive to their improve¬ ment. Our hero perfectly agreed with her La- 3 dyship,
dyship, лупо rang for the Miss Irvans: two- very plain but very fine graceful girls, obeyed the summons— the one about six¬ teen, the other a year older, and whom he found were extremely well grounded in music ; and as they had both good voices, he made no doubt thev would do him ere- dit, which he candidly told her Ladyship, after hearing them sing, pointing out in what they excelled, and in what they failed. " Our opinions perfectly coincide, Mr, Yates," cried the gratified Countess; "they too plainly evince that they are the pupils of art—you will make them appear the pupils of nature, then they cannot fail of pleasing ; and I hope, as I mean to bring ' Louiba out next winter, that she will asto¬ nish the musical world of fashion—and Lady Susan Cardonnel has one of the finest voices I almost ever heard." Atlast, after a visit of nearly two hours,. Francis was suffered to depart, extremely. well satisfied with her Ladyship's liberality, as
as she had taken it$gp^nerself, he having left it entirely to her, to settle the terms upon which he was to continue his visits, and thus were his plans arranged for the summer ; and though he knew he should have made much more money had he vi¬ sited Scotland, he felt perfectly satisfied with what he had done, as he should now remain among his friends, which would be far preferable to being doomed to mix among, for the ensuing three months, to¬ tal strangers—besides, his style of singing might not have met with the same ap¬ plause in Scotland ; and he felt that he could not bear to be heard with indiffer¬ ence, as he was resolved to leave the stage the moment his present popularity de¬ clined.
CHAP.
saan-zrjyff-rmj
CtíAP. X. Mus. Hükter had greatly rejoiced when she learnt that her master had given up his intention of leaving London; nor was Kempthorne, who dropped in ih the even¬ ing, less pleased, Avhen he learned лупеге and how his friend had spent the morn¬ ing, as he made no doubt, he told Prancis, but the Countess would procure hint plen¬ ty of scholars, if he chose to devote any of his time to teaching—nay, he appear¬ ed to be in such favour with her musical Ladyship, that he should not wonder were she to propose uniting him to one of her honourable nieces, « Were.
" Wet е she to be so very absurd, '* re¬ joined the laughing Yates, " as I should eonceive her insane, I should be justified in supporting my pupils in taking out a statute of lunacy against heť~~hoWever, believe me, musical mania apart, she is à very clever, sensible woman, and 1 only wish, should I Undertake any more scho¬ lars, that 1 may never be more in the Way of temptation than I shall be with the Miss Irvans, though they may make excel¬ lent wives; but were ï aman of fashion, I should never 'put the question to them, though they treated me extremely polite¬ ly; but I shall never forget my distance there. The Ladies Cardonnel I have not yet seen ; should they be Very handsome, í hope they will be very proud, and so steel mv heart against their charms." " I shall hear of your being caught, Yates, some of these days ; you so fre¬ quently act the lover upon the stage, that I think you will be irresistible when the blind god does pierce your heart/' ^ I hope
" I hope the wicked urchin will never catch me off my guard, since what wo¬ man that I might choose for a wife лvouîd ever give her hand to Dame Wheeler's bas¬ tard nephew ?—believe me, Kempthorne, I shall never forget that blotch in my 'scutcheon." " To луЫсп no луотап of sense луШ ever revert, my dear Frank; but I came to communicate---------" A double knock at the door made him pause ; and Mrs. Jones was almost imme¬ diately shewn in, лу!\о, after asking Ιλολϋ they both did, told our hero, " that she ·» was come to ask his advice respecting a \*ery unpleasant piece of business, as she was threatened with a law-suit, the thing of all others she most dreaded, and had actually received a lawyers letter, which she immediately put into his hands. Francis having looked it over, found it was only from some attorney's clerk, who had hoped to frighten the old луотап into delivering up some goods, which she had seized
seized for rent ; and as our hero knew that she had been provoked so to do by the in¬ solence of an insolvent tenant, he request¬ ed she would make herself perfectly easy, as the low fellow who had addressed her, had so loosely and incautiously worded his epistle, that he had laid himself open to the very thing he threatened her with— namely, a prosecution ; he would, there¬ fore, take upon himself to write in her name, and send his letter by his servant, who should wait for an answer; and hav¬ ing done so, and dispatched the man, he told the old lady how he had finally settled his summer plans. f ' I am extremelv glad vou are fixed for some time in Marsham-street," was the re¬ ply, " as I should have been very much at a loss whom to torment with my petty concerns during your absence—and I have such a dread of lawyers, I would give up anything rather than fall into their clutches." 41 1 am convinced there are some very good
good men of that profession-^-Mr. Sum**- ner, for example," rejoined оцг JierQ, <l and doubtless many morc f since I must suppose that a rascally lawyer would equal¬ ly have been a rascajly apothec.ary> or a hypocritical clergyman; what say you* Kempthorne ?" " Merely» that an honest lawyer iş a fer better man than a worthy apothecary, or a good clergyman* since he has many more temptations t<? do wrojig." At this moment the servant returned with a letter of excuses from the crest¬ fallen clerk* who attributed his former epistle to his having been misinformed by the person in whose name he had writ¬ ten. The o34 woman was, however, convinc¬ ed that the rogue would havç giyen her a great de»l of trouble, if the business had под been taken up b»y a man of under¬ stating; she waf*, therefore, more than ever rejoiced that her young favourite was tie4 ky фе leg for the rest of febe sum¬ mer ;
mcr; but having sat chatting till the even¬ ing had quite closed in, Francis hopeçî she would do him and his friend the favour of supping with them, thaugh he feared Mrs, Hunter had not provided a very sumptu¬ ous repast, as he had not decided whether he should sup at home till Mr. Kemp¬ thorne liad kindly dropped iţu " Pray, no apologies—though you only mean tp laugh at me, J fenow, as уоц have heard pie spy a hundred times, that I ne¬ ver indulge of an evening in more than bread and cheese, лугис!* 1 wash d<o\m with my pint pf porter—and 1 am never so well as when 1 make one of these frugal sup¬ pers—however, 1 shall accept your offer, since I кполу 1 shall not put you out of the way, ap I forbid your ringing the bell, or giving any orders; \ кполу you always eat below, therefore we shall be sum-mooed when tţie ta*ble is decorated— ап& I dare say, your William луШ lay a knife aAd fprk for me." Knowing tb$t stø cpuL4 Apt be more flattered
fiattered than by suffering her to have her own way, Francis agreed to humour her; and in less than a quarter of an hour, they луеге* informed that supper was ready— when, to the great surprise of the master of the house, there were a very fine cou- pie of fowls smoaking upon the table, and a large dish of asparagus, besides lobsters and tarts.- "Pray, is this the way you usually live?'* enquired Mrs. Jones, " or have these fowls been dressed upon my account ?—if they have, I do not think 1 shall touch a bit." * Francis declared he had given no orders, though he rejoiced to find Hunter had ca¬ tered so well for them, helping her to a wing; he next served Kempthorne, who declared he had not tasted so good a fowl that year. *'They are certainly very fine/'re- sumed Francis. "I must ask Hunter whence they came—I fancy they are the famous Dorkings, though I am not enough of an epicure to judge;" when, happening to di¬ rect his eyes towards the footman, he in¬ stantly
síantlv guessed from the looks of the man whence they came; and resumed, "though I believe, if the truth were known, I had better apply to you, my good Madam, titan to Hunter to satisfy my queries." Mrs. Jones laughed, declaring, " she hoped to have kept him in ignorance of her having contributed to the treat; but since William had betraved her secret, Jie would make an open confession"-—adding, "both the fouls and asparagus were sent me tli«> vcrv cvenjn«; bv an old lover of mine, or at least a *n*eat admirer of vours. .Mr Yates—Mr. Moretón; now, had 1 kept them till to-morrow, they would no! ha\c impro\ed either in their flavour or ap¬ pearance; and as for inviting a pini ν of friends to have partaken of them, ^.hy, I »should have been at a terrible loss to hn\c mustered, more than two or throe, \ ou among the number, whom 1 mn posit i \e- ly ashamed to ask to conic and see me in my pug-hole, though no one h more free, from pride t hatí yourself, and \ou v îmi* vot; n ţ o ще
me because I am a queerality, and not for the sake of anything I cart either give you or leave you, though many of my pre¬ tended friends arc merely actuated by a wibh to flatter me out of what they can while I live, and all I have лупеп I die. But to return to my fowls : I instantly re¬ solved to send them to you, and to invite myself to dine %v i t h you to-morrow, by which means I should have made sure of an ι xcellent meal, \vithout having the trou¬ ble of cooking, or running the risk of spoiling my fowls; you are, therefore, very little obliged to me formy present; and Mrs Hunter having let me in, understanding you had a friend with you, I desired her to dress лу!ш I had brought for supper; so now I can enjoy my treat, therefore «ive me the other xving, and луе will drink Mr. Moretón 's health before луе separate." Francis was very much amused by her explanation, and the old lady was in such spirits, that she was by no means bad com¬ pany, telling them several droll stories re¬ specting
specting her lodgers and her char-woman, whom she had tied down, under the penalty of never coming into her house again, to drink but three glasses of gin а -day, by which means she hoped to keep her sober in future. " You were too liberal, since half the quantity would suffice to make many peo¬ ple tipsey," replied our liero. Of whom she enquired, " when he had seen Mr. Moretón?" " About a week ago I called in St. James's-strect., and had not the Countess of Bayfield detained me so long this morn¬ ing, I should have called in my way home," " Then do so to-morrow ; the poor old man has, like me, outlived most of his friends, and at our time of life it is not a very easy task to acquire new ones, at least such as suit our ta^te, and who are not actuated by interested motives; but he is extremely fond of your company, and is never so happy as when you drop о 3 in,
în, as í frequently do, and take pot-luck with him." ' f He often tells me so, still I own 1 am fearful of encroaching upon his goodness; which prevents me from calling upon him so often as 1 should otherwise do." " Commend me to vour modestv—- however, I луШ mention your scruples to my old friend, лупсп 1 call to thank him for his present, and 1 think he will con¬ vince л ou that they are very absurd ; but as 'tis time I was at home, î shall nol scruple to ask you to see me safe to my own door, as 1 have quite lost my former beau, Mr. John Wheeler, who used fo presume so much in consequence of the liberty 1 allowed him, that 1 have treated him too freely of late to suffer us to re¬ main friends; therefore 1 am sure he would rejoice most heartily, луеге 1 to break my neck, particularly if he hoped to be any gainer by mv death, which the л -vholc fa¬ mily have been living in hopes of for the last ten years, and of course they have frequently
frequently prayed for my speedy release, Λνΐίεη, Lord help them ! »I may see them all cut vet. The old man, who is much the best of the bunch, will never get over it ; you two rogues will have Gary's death to answer for, as she has been removed into the country for change of air ; the old uoman will die of grief for the lo~>s of her husband*s salary, ani John will either meet with an unlucky blow in consecpienc^ of his impudence, or else his avarice will lead him to commit some action that will bring him under the cognizance of the law ; so полу I have predicted the fate of them all, lend me your arm, as I must be »oin«·." о о The friends both chose to accompany her, she therefore took an arm of each, saying, ts may I always Ьал'с two such props in time of need ; indeed ϊ commend you, Air. Kempthorne, for not having trusted us alone." Having seen her safe housed, the friends retraced their steps arm-in-arm, our hero о 3. gaily
jEjaily reminding his companion that he was just going to communicate something to him, when Mrs. Jones broke in upon their tête~â*têtc — ff Indeed I was, since this very morning my generous relation seri¬ ously proposed taking me into the firm as acting partner, as he wishes to be excused from the very close application to business he now thinks necessary ; yet he seemed to fear that I might object to connecting myself with so extravagant and imprudent a man as his son, assuring me that he would take such measures as should secure me from becoming any great sufferer, де en were the worst that could be dreaded to happen : you may suppose what answer I made to the excellent man, since my risk would be trifling indeed, as I cannot command more than three thousand pounds, and Mr. Haslemere might require even an acting junior partner to advance at least ñve times that sum ; but he will have it, that my diligence and attention will make ample amends for my very small capital— and
and he dines to-day in Baker-street, to set¬ tle the necessary preliminaries to my name being added to the firm with Mr. George Haslemere alias Smith, and my knowledge of that addition to his name will, I know, ensure his acquiescence to his father's plans." Francis warmly congratulated his friend upon his happy prospects, offering to ad¬ vance him five thousand pounds, all the ready money he could immediately com¬ mand, if such a sum would at all facilitate such a desirable arrangement. Kempthorne was deeply impressed with the kindness of such an offer, which he resolved to mention to the old gentleman, who he knew would, like himself, ap¬ preciate the worth of such a friend, though he was well convinced that he w'ould not suffer him to take advantage of our hero's generosity, though he assured him v¿h$a they separated, that he should never scra¬ pie to apply to him in any exigency ì but he made no doubt that Mr. Haslemere had о 4 already
> THj.;tr. ıs a sı cm·. г. already settled upon what terms he was to be admitted a partner, and that he would not expect to reeene more than he knew he cotdd already command. * f Well, let mc see you again soon," i-n id Francis, "as I shall think e\ery mo¬ ment nn age till I know what has been done." Kempthorne promised to drink his tea in Marshnm-stieet tlie following ел ening, not fueling himself as yet at liberty to in¬ vite his friends into Austin Friars ; and the fûi!ou\p;j morning, Mr. George liable- mere was in the city by гел o'clock, hav¬ ing, as it was foreseen and expected, л cry rcadil) agreed to hii father's proposal, cilice the a*!»nis^ion of Kcn.pthorne into the firm would by no means diminish the income he derived from tbc businccs, and might exonerate him from so often ap¬ pearing in the couniing-Louso, as he was well assured that the junior would keep the clerks to their duty, and pay more at¬ tention to the main chance than e\er he had
had done ; it was, therefore, finally set¬ tled, and proper instructions were given to Mr. Haslemere's solicitor ir conse¬ quence, that Kempthorne should be enti¬ tled to one quarter share of the niisi ness, and, in return, he was to undertake the management of the whole, under the in¬ spection of the old gentleman, who agreed to diside the profits arising from the other three quarters of the business with his son, who was merely required t ) attend twice or thrice a-wcek for a few hours, when his father remained in the country, or felt inclined to indulge. 'J hese points being tinallyarrangcd to the entire satisfaction of the new partners, it was next agreed that the junior should be henceforth considered as the master of the house in Austin F'iars, the elder Mr. H ·- slemere merely wishing to reserve the first iloor for himself ; the present clerks were all to be retained; but it was now become necessary to replace old Wheeler, since . о 5 Kemp-
Kempthorne could no longer attend to his books. " Suppose you -place his son in his situ¬ ation," said Mr. George Haslemere, "and engage some youth to reimplace him ?" " John Wheeler is absolutely incapable of undertaking the old man's duty," re¬ sumed the elder Mr. Haslemere. " lam no judge, 1 allow, Sir, still as the poor old man has been so long attached to the firm, I could almost wish you would make a trial of John's abilities." " Which would only lead to his absolute dismissal, George, as his vanity, were we to promote him upon trial, would lead him to suppose he was very competent to the undertaking, therefore he would never agree to being again degraded—indeed, my regard for the old man alone induce» me to suffer him to retain his present situa¬ tion, for he is both ignorant, impudent, quarrelsome, and very undeserving of your and my favour ; as for the old man, he h to
to be pitied, and I do not mean to Jura him off unprovided for, as I propose -al¬ lowing him a hundred а -year for life, and with this arrangement I think he ought ito be perfectly satisfied." "Undoubtedly,"said Mr.George; "you had better, therefore, take upon you, Sir, to let the family know how yon have set¬ tled the business." " I mean to do so—meanwhile, Kemp¬ thorne, I would have vou look out for a proper successor to Wheeler." Kempthorne bowed assent. Thus the conference broke up ; and during the morning the elder Mr. Hasle¬ mere wrote a very kind note to old Wheel¬ er, informing him of wjiat had been set¬ tled, which he sent into Marsham-street by a footman. >.i The old man was, all » things con&ider- ·<€ά, ver^KweihsatÍÄŕic4^sinee t ov)ery master would nb tf*. ашта ЬЫфп equallyvjconsiderate '-he, howe**-«*/* though t it necessary to send the old gentleman^ nate toJvni«h*é· v fi bridge,
bridge; which he did by the maid ; and Sirs; Wheeler having perused it, declared Jto Caroline they had been very shabbily treated — she, however, resolved to go home immediately to consult with her bus- band, .telling'Mrs' Bcvcr that she should leave Cary under her care till her return. -*ΐ That good lady" promised to devote the whole afternoon to the invalid, and Miss Atwoôd was no less kindly disposed to¬ wards * her. r as she assured Mrs/Whecle»·, " that the d ear'girl should share her bed with her, if she could not make i t conve- inient, as she had half hinted, to return to Khïghtsbridgë'that evening," ^Then I believe, my good young lady, -Hhajl trespass upon your goodness, as 1 t&tuciitAľly wish to see ray son, who will not be at home before nine o'clock, as tbh is foreign post night." ¿Miss Atwood made a very polite an- sHvery imdat last the old woman departed. Old Wheeler was rather surprised to see her, and still more when he found she was extremely
extremely displeased луп h the recent ar¬ rangements in Austin Friars. " Mr. Haslemere might be ashamed of himself for not having promoted John ; he ought to have done that, in addition fo the triflinq* allowance he had made him." « * » » In л г ат did the old man assure her that John was very incapable of undertaking the situation he had л -acated, and Mr. Kempthorne would require even a more diligent assistant than he had been, since he was to undertake the entire manage¬ ment of the concern—besides, John had not of late endeavoured to conciliate the favour of any one, and people луеге noi inclined to promote those who did-not seem inclined to court their favour. -John returned during their debate, at whom the old woman flew like a tigress; " he had, made a fine use of his time—what had his expensive education fitted him for, if, instead, as she had hoped, of being re¬ ceived into the Haslemere firm, he was to remain an under drudge alibis life, though she
she verily believed that it was more owing to hh obstinate vile temper than to his real Λναηί of talents, that he had not been pro¬ moted. Here she had been holding out that he was upon lhe point of becoming a partner, лупеп ne might rever risc higher than he now stood ,J John felt that he must yield to this storm. The old lady having vented her spleen, grew more calm, as she resumed, in a cooler tone— tf Well, vou mav ha\c manv enemies, I do not dispute that·—however, if you do but mind )Oiir hits, you may, perhaps, ere long, be able to defy their malice, for í dare say Kempthorne is at the bottom of all this— îi owe ver, if vou are but guided by me, win you may soon resign your-situation in Austin Friars; though I have not done with the Hasié¬ in eres yet, as 1 mean to send to Mr. George before I sleep, and to let him know we ought to have been consulted, before Kempthorne had been suffered to dictate his
his orders—however, he must stand by us, sink or swim; so only you strike up to Miss Atwood, John, and your fortune is made," relating to the old man what has been already detailed to our readers—ob¬ serving, " that she and Caroline had made the way so smooth for him, he would cer¬ tainly secure the prize, if he did but set about Ü in earnest." John declared " he was half in love with the handsome girl already, and if she did but give hiin the least encouragement, he would make her Mrs. John Wheeler in the course of a month." " In a month, indeed, fool ! Do von think a fine girl, with six thousand pounds to her fortune, is to be had forasking for? —if she goes to church with you in three, î shall say you area very lucky fellow—so don't you go to mar all by being too pre¬ cipitate. Caroline and I have talked large; bless God! wc can do something handsome for you, and will, if you marry to please us; but I would have you remember, that í Miss
Miss Atwood has refused your betters; but you are young, and very good-looking, so please to bc upon your best behaviour —let us have none of your mean, low phrases; and mind and dress yourself to the best advantage, when you rome to dinner on Thursday ; have your hair dress¬ ed as Francis wears his; he alwa\s looks the gentleman, that 1 will say ; if you had but his figure гт\ address, I would stake my life upon your success." John had too much \aniry to suppose it possible he could fail, though he did noi venture, at such a critical period, to give hi'nself any of his accustomed airs, since he was absolutely eager to be introduced to this fine girl. His mother having, however, exhausted her breath, sat down to write to Mr.George Haslemere. The old man advised her to take time for reflection. She averred that he was a a old fool, since now or inner was the time to otate their grievances ; and havinsr soon iinkhed her missive, she dis- С 3 ' parche I
patched it by a porter, with ordersto give it to Air. IIaslemery's own man, if that gentleman was not at home, as she did not луЫ\ it should jail info the hands of his curious wife. Air. Haslemere w ль at home, and had been in expectation of hearing from Aiar- sham-street, in consequence of the recent arrangements in Austin Friars ; he лч -as re¬ solved, however, not to give them any hopes of John Wheelers being, at least for the present, promoted, since he had certainly said more in his behalf that morning, and without avail, than he should ever venture to say agnin, as he was quite as лусИ convinced as his father, that he was vci'y incapable of undertaking the place of head clerk; he therefore resohed to speak very plain to the old woman, bince, had John made himself more agree¬ able to his fellow clerks, attended more to his business, and could пал т е avoided quar¬ relling with Kempthorne, he might have had it in his power to have befriended him;
him : but as his fis ther had absolutely set his face against him, the Wheelers must know that he could not with propriety, or with any degree of policy, support htm in direct opposition to the old gentleman ; and this he л cry calmly told the old wo¬ man, when tete-â-tete, as usual, with her in the dining-room. She agreed that John had been very much to blame,- but main¬ tained that Kempthorne was their sworn enemy—however, as things had gone so cross, she hoped he (Mr.George) would take the matter into his consideration, re¬ calling to his memory some promises that he had once made her, which she hoped he would be so kind as to confirm, as, God knows, she had more than kept her word with him in every respect, often to her own detriment. It is with truth said, that a cord may be stretched till it breaks— and Mrs. Wheeler had very near proved the truth of this assertion, though her guest coolly agreed to fulfil every agreement he had ever entered into with her—adding, that
that he was resolved to do no more for either her or her children, hinting what might be the probable consequence of her provoking him more than she had done already. The old woman felt she had gone too far, but it луаз impossible to recede; she became, however, ver} humble, de¬ claring that she would луак his own time and leisure forali favours; but she hoped he would please to recollect, that all her dependance had long been upon him, and she blessed God she had given him no room to complain of her lack of zeal in his service, and she agreed she had been well paid for her trouble. He cut her re¬ capitulations of the past very short, by renewing his promises, and then departed extremely dissatisfied Λνίίη. the old луотап, and by no means satisfied with himself. Mrs. Wheeler was not much better pleased—she had been too urgent; she ought, as her husband again told her, to have taken time for reflection— полуеуег, if
if he άϊύ but keep his promises, they should have no reason to complain ; but as they both knew that he would not choose to mention his having been in Kardiam- street to his father, Mr. Wheeler wrote a letter of thanks to the old gentleman, who paid him up his salary to the vcrv day Kcmpthorne's name wns added to the firm, and sent him a hundred pounds in advance, thus paving the promised an¬ nuity κι the most liberal manner, since it was very possible lite old man might not survive the twelvemonth. The receipt of this sum rather consoled the old woman, uho staid dinner in Mar¬ sham-street, on purpose to vent her bpieen once more upon John, who, she affirm¬ ed, had rendered aborthe all the trouble she had been taking for \eurs to promote his interest, declaring, that if he display¬ ed any of his airs, or gave way in the slightest degree to his vile temper before Miss At wood, she would wash her hands of
of him ; he might drudge on all his life, as Caroline should inherit all their sav¬ ings. This threat was sure to render John very amenable to con troni ; and soon af¬ ter dinner the old woman set out upon her return lo Knightsbridge, resolved at every risk, and at any expence, to se¬ cure so eligible a match for her son, as her own consenuencc would be greatly Hiised bv such a connection.
( HAP. XL ('pos reaching Knightsbridge, she per¬ ceived a hackney-coach standing at Mrs. Bever's door, and a servant in a very hand¬ some liverv also in waiting, Caroline was looking
locking out of their лvindow^ and appear* ed in very high spirits, while she made her various signs as she walked up the gar¬ den, which she was unable to understand the meaning of. Mrs. Bever let her in, Λνήη a smile upon her countenance, лус1- coming her home, and assuring her that Miss Wheeler had been very well, and she hoped very comfortable, during her ab¬ sence. Mrs. Wheeler made no doubt of her having been the latter, while she had been in such good company ; but as she still continued to regard both the coach and the servant, Mrs. Bever led her into her parlour, when she told her, " Mrs. Boughton, Miss Atwood's sister, is above stairs"—adding, "she is but just come home after a nvo year's absence from England. The fleet is coming round, but she л\ т аз landed with her own maid at Portsmouth » the day before yesterday ; the captain is coming round in his ship. Mrs. Bough¬ ton of course lost no time in coming in search of her* sister, and you may suppose how
Ьолу happy this meeting has made them both, as Airs. Boughton луаз not expected in England this month or more." Mrs. Whceier having полу heard enough, after thanking her communicative hostess for the information, лvalked up stairs to her daughter, who was equally full of the great ne\vs, which she had learnt from Miss Bever —adding, she had seen Mrs. Bough¬ ton, who was extremely handsomely dress¬ ed, and though taller, луа$ very much like her sister. <c How long has she been here ?" asked Mrs. Whceier. ' f Oh, more than an hour." The old луотап made no reply, as she began to have her doubts whether the ra¬ ther premature return of this sister and her husband might not derange her well- laid plan, since they might set their faces against the connection, and would of course object to Miss Atwood's dining xv i t h them on the Thursday ; should they do so, she would defer the party, as it xvould
would be putting herself to a great ex- pence to very little purpose, if Miss At¬ wood was not bne of her guests; then again she feared that Mrs. Boughton might prevail upon her sister to reside with her, and such ζ change of habitation would prove a deai % ' low to all h-r wise schemes. She was communicating these serious fears to Caroline, when» to their joint relief Mrs. Boughton departed alone, У1Ы At¬ wood having merely accompanied her to the ccach-door ; and no sooner had it driven off* than she flew up stairs to wel¬ come Mrs. Wheeler home. After the first compliments, she told her what an agree¬ able suvprse her sister had occasioned her —addir д, " I am extremely glad she left her dcarv to come round in the ship, for he is such а quiz, we never agree; and the moment he reaches London, thev are to proceed into the north, to visit his old mo¬ ther, ^nd with her 1 dare sav thev will rc- main till he sails again for India : poor Jane, I do believe her }\*v\ing been ьо bad- Is
ly matched has made me afraid of marry¬ ing, for Captain Boughtòn mìes her witb a rod of iron* and though very rich, Ш never allows her to go into public, not, idf short, to enjoy any amusement fitted to her age and station in life, às he dread« every kind of expence ; and they are to reside at a maiden cousin of ours, who lives in Gower-street,Bedford-square, while they ua remain in town. I was Miss Sow- erby's inmate for a short time, but 1 would not spend another six months under her roof, even were 1 to be certain, by so do¬ ing, of coming in for all she was worth, şiirce a more fretful, discontented being cannot exist ; I must visit mv sister there once or twice, but even that will be doing penance/' ** Some elderly people are vety capri¬ cious, and very overbearing, particularly when they have much to bave behind them," observed Mrs. Wheeler ; " my son's godmother is just such another queer crea¬ ture as your cousin is, I cart suppose— vol. ιι. ρ however,
however, we are generally very civil to her, as, we know John stands at the head of ksr will, though God forbid we should any of us be obliged to live with the old souk But perhaps you will go down into the country with your sister, my dear young lady ?" u Heaven forbid that I should be doom¬ ed to undergo such a penance, my dear Mrs. Wheeler, as I know the Captain would fancy he had, in that case, lain me under aa amazing obligation—no, much as I love my sister, I have long since resolved never to reside under the same roof with her husband—indeed, my dislike of him alone prevented me from going out to India with her; my fortune is, thank Heaven, ade¬ quate to all my wants, and I am indépen¬ dant, even to a fault, in all my notions ; therefore I never will be beholden to any of my relations, since I never mean to place myself under their controlli, or to consult them respecting my plans or mode of life. The Captain, I know, expects that
that ï should pay great court to him, be¬ cause he has no children, therefore may make me his heir—he is twenty years older than Jane—however, till 1 have a family of my own, and that may never happen, 1 shall never humble to him for the sake of his rupees, since I am not in want of any thing he has to bestow," Mrs. Wheeler commended her for her spirit, declaring " that she greatly resem¬ bled her son, since he, from the time he was sixteen, had always insisted upon pay¬ ing for his board and lodging." Miss Atwood was delighted by such a proof of a superior mind, declaring " that she was half in love with Mr. Wheeler, merely from hearsay." (i God send you were over head and ears in love with him, my dear Miss, since I should fancy myself compleatly happy, if I could but see him so well married. Oh, how proud I should be of calling such a sweet young lady my daughter ! I hope your sister's arrival will not deprive us of p t the
the pleasure of your company on Thurs*· dav?" a' i( İ -would not break a promise, Mrs. Wheeler, tö oblige my best friend, there¬ fore ϊ shall certainly join your party on that day; 1 shall certainly call upon my sister once or ttvice, %vhile she remains in London; but I do not mean rodine, though I may drink my tea at Mrs. Sowerby's; for, as ϊ said before, neither she nor Cap- fain Boughton are f^ourites of mine : but í broke in upon you, my dear Madam, to request you and my dear Caroline would do me the favour to drink your tea with me; my sister has brought me a small packet of Pedroe souchong tea, which, «he says, is remarkably üne; you must give me your opinion of it." Mrs. Wheeler, who no longer dreaded Ihe influence of this newly-arrived sister, readily agreed fo Miss Atwood's kind pro¬ posal, who now took her leave, promising to let them know when the kettle boiled. Mrs. Wheeler had much to say in her praise after
after*he wa$ gone; and Caroline declared, that had she been her sister, she could not have been more kind to her during her absence ; *he had made her sleep with her, and as they had a great deal of chat, she had discovered that part of her money was Jent out upon mortgage, and that the rest of Iter income arose from houses, which had been rising in vainc, abe 'understood «—therefore, when some leases fell in, she expected to make a very pretty addition to her present fortune; The old woman, who had been recon¬ sidering her Thursday's bill of fare, in¬ terrupted Caroline, by declaring that she would have a lemon instead of a custard pudding, as she believed there were not three people in Engïood, who could suc¬ ceed in making the ffermer so well as she* could. A suramens to tea prevented her -front giving way to her propensity to praise lter- jseif. The tea was, of course very much» e 3, admired,
admired, and the discourse once more very naturally turned upon the donor. Mrs. Велег лу1зг*^, with an eihphatic shake of the head, she had been better matched—adding, " money did not always insure felicity, particularly in the married state." tc That is а л г егу just remark," said Miss Atwood; te but Captain Boughton is of so saving a turn, and so fond of money, he will never fancy he is rich enough while he can encrease his store; he is already олупег of a vast many houses in and about London; they pay the most interest for money, he thinks ; he bought 1луо next to one of mine, in Bloomsbury, not long be¬ fore he sailed for Madras." Mrs. Wheeler treasured this up in her memory, and as she led to the subject, by entering into a few exaggerated details re¬ specting her олуп property, Miss Atwood gave her to understand, that she луаз in -the actual receipt of three hundred and fifty
fifty pounds а -year; and with this agreed- able news she greeted her son when he made his appearance at Knightsbridge, about half an hour after two ; they were to dine at three, and never had John Wheeler taken more pains to appear to advantage— he was certainly not a bad figure, though rather too stout, and extremely awkward ;. and when dressed he always appeared unu¬ sually stiff, and very unlike the moderir man of fashion. Miss Atwood, who very soon made her appearance, did not, however, seem to remark his deficiencies;» he thought, and with truth, he had never seen so elegant nor so handsome a woman. A summons to dinner was a great relief to John, who had soon exhausted his slen¬ der stock of compliments—a leg of lamb boiled, a couple of fowls roasted, and the famous lemon pudding, smoakedupon the table—every thing was pronounced excel¬ lent ; and upon Miss A t wood's suffering herself to be helped the second time to ε Ί. pudding.
pudding, John agreed that his mother suc¬ ceeded particularly well in those compo¬ sitions, attributing her skill to his making lier keep lier hand in, as they generally had one by his desire twice a-week. Mrs. Bever declared no one was so easily pleased as her young friend, who -would never suffer her to provide more than one thing—indeed, she only studied how to make herself agreeable, wherever she was. Mrs. Wheeler ^as convinced of that. John asked the young lady to drink a glass of vane ; to oblige him, she did so, though she very seldom tasted any thing stronger than toast and water. Mrs. Bever enlarged upon her sobriety ; and John was very ready to believe every assertion in her praise, as she certainly had made him feel, that even avarice does not always steel the heart against beauty. The dessert being placed upon the table, John declared that it was the worst at¬ tempt he had ever kuown his mother make when
when she had Attempted lo -treat a íiriend. Caroline expressed herself to tbe-saroe^f- fect; and Mrs. Wheeter, i^ho had diofcted^ the observation, readily agreed io» the truth of What .they said,, alledging tharshc- луа§ not at home, and was very unwilling to* give trouble—howeл*er, as she hopied to* see Miss Atwood and Mrs. Bever in Mar¬ sham-street, she would then, make up for. her recent deficiencies» Miss Atwood. hoped they should ahvays remain friends,. and as such she should always expect to be treated. Caroline having justthe'nrit^nďrotttthfi table to put do>vu one of the^ashes at her back, had no sooner reached the window,. than she gave a sort* ©f half scream; ex¬ claiming—" Oh, mercy, only see here !'* The party all stavted 1 up at the same- moment, and луеге just in time to see our hero drive by in .his луау home from+Bayt- tfield House, where he had been detained rather late,.owing to the ladies CardouRel v.ô notr
not having understood the Countess's ap¬ pointment Caroline, who was extremely agitated, pointed to the chariot. "How could you be so silly, child?" said her mother. John, forgetful of Miss Atwood's pre¬ sence, rapped out an oath, adding—" Why the d-v-I did you derange us to look at that impudent fellow's carriage? where, I wonder, has he been driving to this way !" Miss Atwood, who had noticed the vari¬ ations Caroline's colour underwent, guess¬ ing that there was some secret cause for .her confusion, and the recent remarks, observed that she had frequently remarked that handsome chariot driving either from or to town. Now this was by no means true, but she was extremely anxious to be au fait of every thing respecting her new acquaintance, as much depended upon her being initiated into all their family secrets, and
THERE IS A SECRET. and she луэб resolved to oblige them, in the present instance, to come to some sort of an explanation. Mrs. Be\ r er, луЬо was ever a very able second, said she had noticed the carriage in question early in the spring: did the owner or owners of it reside in. Bromp¬ ton ?. \ . Mrs. Wheeler assured her she must have mistaken some other fashionable vehicle for the one in question, as the person it belonged to had but just set up his cha¬ riot; and not wishing to keep them in the dark, she added, looking at Miss Atwooçf, 11 I dare say you have heard of Yates, the celebrated singer ?*" " Oh, yes, he sings at Drury-làne, and is very intimate Λνύη a young German, who is reckoned one of the first perform¬ ers upon the hautboy in England," hastily resumed Miss Auvood. " Mr. Kalkreuth lodges at a gentleman and lady's, who occupied the room you novy have, Mrs. Wheeler, and this parlour,, ajl ^ 6 " last.
last summer; and they frequently used to mention both htfft and Mr. Yatüs," said Mrs. BmfT This perfectly accounted for what Miss Atwood had «aid, to whom Mrs. Wheeler now related our hero's family history, very much to her own advantage, it may be pre¬ sumed—concluding by hinting, that she had thought it prudent of late to drop his acquaintance, as* she should not have ap¬ proved of a player for her son-in-law. Miss Attvood looked her approbation of her spirit, though she strongly suspected that * the plat/cr had not approved of her daughter," Ъи% very judiciously changed the conversation ; and having condescend¬ ed to drink another glass of лу*пе, Mrs. Bever requested she луоик! favour the company Avith a specimen of her musical talents. Mr. John joined in the entreaty, which induced the fair lady, nothing loth, to sit down *Ь the piano ; and having run over •several popular tunes, she was easily pre¬ vailed
vailed upon to treat them with a song; and as she had a very tolerable finger, and a very pleasing voice, John declared he had never been so delighted before. Mrs. Wheeler луэъ no great judge of music, she said, though Cary once played God save the King, und some other tunes, very prettily ; but Aliss Atwood's singing pleased her better than her перпелу'э, though he being the fashion, all the луогМ луеге mad after him. John had never ad¬ mired hrm. Ai iss Atwood was of course highly gra¬ tified by these hyperbolical encomi nms; and very readily favoured them wirh ano¬ ther song, луЬеп, in her turn, she re¬ quested Mr. Wheeler λυοπΜ follow» her exr ample. John was very sorry he had no voice, though he acknowledged that he had once or twice attempted some of Dibdin ? s songs, and of course he луа« obliged 1o display his knowledge, to oblige his fair mis¬ tress, лупо protested, mretirrn, for lurving 3 been
been compared to our hero, that he sur* passed Grimaldi —in short, time slipped away so agreeably, that they did not se¬ parate till after supper, when John de¬ clared he must take a very reluctant leave. By way of affording him an opportu¬ nity of speedily repeating his visit, his mother mentioned two or three things which she wanted from home, and which she requested he would bring her the very first opportunity. John took the hint, promising to walk down with them the next evening, if he left Austin Friars in any time—adding, " I believe it will be nearest to come up Grosvenor-place." The old woman understood his mean¬ ing, as he wished her to give him the meeting and further instructions, as he was resolved to lav close siege to the heart of the beautiful and rich. Miss Atwood, and of course thought it necessary to com¬ pare notes with the old woman, who walked out soon after tea, under pre¬ tence
tence of making some purchases for Caro¬ line, and met John, as she expected, who professed downright love for their new ac¬ quaintance; and his delighted mother ad¬ vised him by all means to push his for¬ tune ; now was his time to strike a bold stroke, as Miss Atwood had told Caroline, she thought him a most agreeable com¬ panion, and a most gentlemanly-looking young man ; and as such was John's own opinion of himself, he swore she was no fool, and set off upon the full run, as he was to take the lead of his mother, who, of course, he was not to have seen. Each performed their part to admiration ; John again staid supper ; and Miss Atwood so judiciously fanned his flame, that he re¬ tired, resolved to put the question to her in a very short time.
CHAP.
ОШ». XIL The morning after our hero had so very unintentionally and so terribly discom¬ posed poor Caroline, and had in conse¬ quence led to the explanations which had» taken place at Knightsbridge, he was ex¬ tremely diverted, by perceiving Mrs. Hun¬ ter, who always mad« breakfast for him, very composedly pouring his tea into the^ slop-bason, "The Lord bless me!" she exclaimed, upon perceiving what she was about, " you might well laugh, Sir, though some people would have raved out, and with, great justice, to see me wasting good, things.
things in m shameful a manner; but the truth is, I hardJv know what I am about this morning." tr Has any thing then occurred to dis¬ turb you, Hunter ?" he enquired. " Why, to tell you the truth, Sir, I have been rather flurried, as ï have been ap¬ plied to, to ask a very great favour of vou." " Surely that need not have disturbed you, my old friend ; so let me hear what you have to say, and then you will not waste any more tea. Not long silice you ' would not have scrupled to have applied to me upon any exigency, therefore why should vou now, when I have it more than ever in my power to oblige yoa, as I give you my honour I never was more willing ?" "You are тегу good, Sir; but it was my very dependence upon your goodness which rendered me -more scrupulous, and your time of late has been so fully occu¬ pied, that I was very unwilling to preser mjr
my petition to you ; but not to tire yott with my preamble, the fact is, that hav¬ ing told a friend of mine that you pro¬ posed remaining in town during the sum¬ mer, having engaged to teach the Honour¬ able Miss Irvans singing, mentioning where they reside, she caught at the circum¬ stance, to request me to make a proposal, which she was afraid of doing." " Then only come to the point, my good friend, and rely upon the inclination I have ever felt to serve either you or your friends, since your kind interposition in my behalf in a great measure paved the way to my becoming Mr. Corfe's inmate, and of course his heir, not to mention the repeated marks οΐ favour you were always bestowing upon me, long before you had any reason to suppose I should ever have the means of returning your kindness—so pray explain your meaning." " Why then, Sir, Mrs, Perkins, who re¬ sides at Brom ρ ton, and whom you must have often heard me mention---------" " Very
u Very frequently," interrupted our he¬ ro, wishing to encourage her; "nay, I think I have seen her during the life-time of Mr. Corfe, though I do not think I should know her again, or that I ever spoke to her; but I am convinced, as she is your friend, that she is a deserving good character; so tell me how I can grant the prayer of her petition : has she any chil¬ dren whom she wishes to bring forward in the musical line?" " No, Sir, she has no children; but she has a young relation, whom she wishes to place out as a governess, but who wants, in her opinion, the finishing stroke, as to music in particular; and such perfection is now required in that line, that she can¬ not hope to secure her an advantageous situation, except " she can sing like a nightingale, and dance like a fairy," though I understand the young person in question has had a mint of money spent lipon her education ; and as she is more than of age, and has'always been making the best use of her
her time, why she ought tobe clever ; but a governess is now required to be able to teach so many things, I say none but wo¬ men of fortune can be qualified for such. places; but this young person, I under¬ stand, plays and sings very prettily, though, as 1 told Mrs. Perkins, perhaps she had better have been more ignorant in that respect, as my poor old master often had all to begin again with such forward scho¬ lars, and so may you, Sir, if yoti will he so obliging as to take her in hand ; though, as I told my friend, I feared it would be asking too gir eat a favonr, since you will doubtless soon be sought after by the first ladies in the land to instruct their children ; but even to be able to say she had been a scholar of your's, Mrs. Perkins- thinks -would be a grea* feather in her cap." " Then I -will certainly afford her that advantage, Hunter» »though J should sup¬ pose* i f «he has studied mi der any tolerable •wasters» she must «-heady be «ufficient-ly versed
versed in music to ensure her a good' salary." " Why so I should suppose, Sir; but »he is very much to be pitied, poor thing, for she lost both her parents before she entered her teens; and as they had no fortune to leave her, a lady, who had been her godmother, took charge of her, and certainly gave her a most excellent education ; but what was the use of giving her high notions, except she had intended to have provided for her, which was not the case, as this lady, having been long in a declining state, was at last advised to go abroad, and she todk Louisa Chetwynd with her—therefore, she ought to have made a wilf, if it had only been upon her account; but she, it seems, would have ic she wa» reeovering, when everybody else thought she was dying ; and, finally, she breathed her last at Nice, leaving. Louis» as much to seek as when she first-noticed ket; so she has been obliged to retur» to Üer relation*, with very little ы help her forward
forward in the world, except her stock of knowledge. Mrs. Perkins speaks, how¬ ever, very highly in her praise ; and as it is of course necessary she should turn her learning to some use, why she may, as a governess, in time secure an indepen¬ dency; and if you are sò very kind, Sir, as to put the finishing stroke like to her music and singing, why I think she will have every prospect of success." " I will very readily second her wishes to earn her own livelihood, Mrs. Hunter. Mrs. Perkins resides in or near Brompton, I think I have heard you say ?" " Yes, Sir, she rents a couple of excel¬ lent houses there, which she lets out ready- furnished, or in separate apartments, as best suits her purpose, though she always reserves a comfortable sleeping and sit¬ ting-room for herself, and can almost al¬ ways contrive to accommodate a friend— indeed, she is very well to do in the world, as she lived upwards of fifteen years house¬ keeper in the family of a maiden lady,of large
THERE IS A SECRET. farge fortune, from whence she married a very worthy man, who had a situation in the Bank, and when he died she took to letting ready-furnished houses and lodg*· ings, though, as I told her, she had enough to live upon comfortably without any fa¬ tigue ; but she is, like me, fond of a stir¬ ring active life—she is, besides, very cha¬ ritably inclined, and has, I dare say, made every thing very comfortable to her young relation, who has resided with her since her return from abroad, and who is also, I understand, greatly protected by the old lady with whom Mrs. Perkins lived house¬ keeper, who has promised to look out for a proper situation for her, and to defray* every expence of masters, &c." " That will be of great advantage to your young friend, Hunter, as well as her having been abroad, as I suppose she' speaks French and Italian ; but you must give me a proper direction, and I will call· upon Mrs. Perkins to-morrow, when I leavp Bayfield House." " You
** You are very good, Sir, though 1 do not believe 1 should have put you to the proot if Mrs. Perkins's house had not been within a quarter of a mile of the Countess's, and nøt many yards out of the road ; she resides at No. —, Michael's- place/* ct I hope, Mrs. Hunter, 1 shall never scruple putting myself even to a» incon¬ venience fo do any one a service ; I have been one of Fortune's favourites, and I am resolved to make a good use both of Ihe talente aftd money, for which I am in¬ debted to my deceased friend ; I would call upon Mrs. Perkins tfc-dayj only I think yoa had better first let her know my intentions ; therefore assure her, that Ι ΛνΐΙΙ be there to-morrow by two o'clock ; only aonetnber, that 1 shall expect in return to be allowed to contribute towarda her rela¬ tion's improvement, my small portion of Ime gratis/' M There »orw, I told Mrs. Perftins Ьолу it would be, and that was why I v?a4 so
so averse to preferring her request to you : however, if it must be so, it must; and you will receive your reward in the next world, and will deserve the prayers of all good people in this; so, with your leave, I will set out immediately, that I may be home in time to prepare dinner." Francis of course made no objection, nor did any thing occur worthy notice till the following morning, as Ae was driving through Knightsbridge in his way to Bay¬ field House, when, owing to two broad- Wheeled waggons and some carts being befoie him, his coachman was obliged to proceed very slowly, and upon turning his eyes to the right, he saw Mrs. Wheeler ad* vancing towards him with more than usual stateliness, being in pattens, there having been a smart shower, and the water having remained standing in puddles, particular¬ ly in the narrow path, within a hundred yards from where she lodged; he did not, however, know where she resided, merely having Understood from Mrs. Jones that vol. п. о. Caro-
Corelin« was gone into the country ; but the old lady, who generally of late expe- rieuccd % strange sensation whenever he crossed her path» no sooner caught sight of hero* than abe made a sort of retrograde motkm ? which'either made her hote one of her pattens, or tread upon a loose stone, àv both cause·* combined, forced h^r to measure aíl feer strength in one of the tegesi puddle»; nor did her misfor* tunes end v^ith hef EHI, sifcee * paper pnr^ cely which she h*d in her hand, flew open; and the contenta» tbree penny tarts and tw« Ы*Л«, whklr she. bod just purchased, 'We're utt screwed fa the diri. Our hero's wicked c^iâdimâtl »ed footman Umt out i laughing when they saw her prostrate, and tbe waggotter&and carmen set up an ateo4iHe«ho*t «if mirth, white some chrl- dr«n tarn to мае the tarte, A gentleman, who was passing, assisted the eld lady tor rise* but found it intpot*ibU U» look seri¬ ous, when, he £ound she wa» venting her spleen ujpan both Fmics Mid Ш servants» %vhom
•whorathö would fai« have tCon#*<! βΓ hav¬ ing witfutty tl^rj-wii her étftvtl]! btfris^ié was wefl awwcőtbtít -nich *&<m штЫ n>& be believed, the с on tem cd htw^lf Witb saving she httd been 60 ¡wv^ohed at beiiŕjf stared at Щ *fce intpödent yeatig j-tčkať napes hi the ch-triot, that *he had f^isséá her footing, whicfc had oecia^ioiied he# fall; the g-én tí d ma n merely bowed, $»4 walked on, while duť herø, who Had beêti tempted in the ñm Instance to pull thè check-string, (but fearful he should be и«- able to command his countenance, gnesfr» ing, besides, that his servante having laughed would be construed inte art ifi¿ suit), threw himiPlf back ift the cirriage, contenting himself with taking a sly poep at his aunt from the Hind window till he* lost sight of her, whkh he did befoie Ш saw where she vrent en, though he pre* so med she had taken ftp her зЕккю in thai neighbourhood, tö Carogne alone, how- eyer, did rte? öld laÄr knowledge Λνηαί haá -oŕccÄtiíinea her ftiisfomjße, attributing о 5 îî
. it tô âh awkward fellow having run against her,» and her patten having given way; she^fhowçver, escaped with merely a few slight! bruises, though she was totally covered with dirt ; nor would she have been;so candid with her daughter, if she had not mentioned having seen Francis drive by, just before her mother came in, * enquiring лупе1пег she had noticed his car¬ riage, луЫсп induced the provoked ma¬ tron once more to vent her ire in abusing both master and servants, луЬо would all have rejoiced, she averred, had she broken a limb. .Caroline could only lament hav¬ ing been deprived of her tarts ; but while she was assisting her mother to change her dress, our hero proceeded to the Coun¬ tess's, where all his pupils were assembled, and anxiously waiting for him, as the ele¬ gance of his person and address, and the having frequently seen him enact the lover very much to their satisfaction upon the stage, had rendered the four young ladies his enthusiastic admirers; and his fine voice, correct
correct deportment, and evident wish to bring his scholars forward, insured him the favour and regard of the Countess, who frequently declared she was at a loss for words to express her approbation of his method, as she persisted in believing that her nieces were already much improved. Having devoted the usual time to these la¬ dies of fashion, he made his parting bow, choosing to proceed on foot to Mrs. Per¬ kins's, having ordered his carriage, which always put up very near Bayfield House, to come for him in Michael's-place at three. Having knocked at the door, it was opened by a staid decent woman-servant, who ushered him into the back parlour, upoif enquiring whether Mrs. Perkins was at home, and who very soon joined him, and whom he immediately recognised, though he had never before addressed her; and though her manners were not quite so po¬ lished as those of the ladies he had just quitted, he soon perceived that she was in¬ finitely more the gentlewoman than his <*i 3 aunt
a.t*nţ Wheeler, ал с} seemed totally free from her servility aftd oversirainetl politeness, when she wkhed to concilia tic the favour « nil good opinion of any strangers. She began by apologising ίον the, liberty she had taken;, but he cut her ¿veryţhort, by assuring her that he considered it a,sort of duty incumbent ön him to assist the «florts of any young person, situated as he %m* fierst ood Miss Chetwynd was, to make her way jn the world; Jie liad been himself brought forward |)y the kind exertions ofa wíícVíamenied fnføid/ w 1*0^ was ever anxi- f)*4»to second the^ndfSavoulsof thoee who wjriicd,.H*fce him* to acquire ah indepen¬ dence by their talents iti the m-wúcal Üne. : u You §ttt extremely obliging, Sir ;. hut Mis» Hunter told n>e you are averse to mentioning the terms upon which you will tânvlertake tbc nation of Louisa—now, as Mis. Mortimer, røy former mistress, and $Щ kind protectress, has kindly under¬ taken to defray every expence that may \q incurred upon her account, suffer me to
to request you will place her upon the same footing with your other scholars." " I should be sorry that either Mrs.Mor¬ timer, or you, Mrs. Perkins, shouîţl sup¬ pose that I wished to lay you under any obligation, by my very natural offers, since I would have you recollect that I was in a great measure taught gratis." Mrs. Perkins shook her head, but as she did not speak, he thus proceeded—" Well, if you will not admit the justice of that argument, you imisi agree that it is a sea¬ son of the year when I have a great deal of leisure time, and Mrs. Mortimer M'ûï have many other opportunities of display¬ ing her generostty towards this young per son ; therefore you must surfer mè to con¬ tribute my mite, as I shall consider myselí aS the obliged person by yon r šo doing." Mrs. Perkins merelv enrtsted her thanks, 4f leaving the room in search of her relation. While left alone, Fraňck looked ronwi him ; there was a grand piamo ópen h* the room, and a large collection of music up- я é on
on. a stand near it, which he began to turn over, and found among the rest seve¬ ral of his most admired ,songs, and all the English operas in which he performed, in addition to a great deal of manuscript Ita : < lian music, which had evidently been se¬ lected in that country, and a few of Gret- ry's compositions, the words in French, which convinced him that no expence had been spared in the selection, presuming the whole were chiefly presents of the de¬ ceased godmother's. The instrument was in very good tune, and he was running over the keys, when Mrs. Perkins returned* followed by one of the most elegant young women, he thought, he had ever seen, though she.was not what might be deemed a regular beauty; her manners were a con¬ vincing proof that she had received, as he had been given to understand, a very su¬ perior education; and he thought she seemed sensible of the advantages she pos¬ sessed—that was very natural, he con¬ ceived; he was also conscious of his own superiority
superiority as a musician; her dress was extremely neat, and such as became Mrs. Perkins's relation—a very fine head of hair was concealed under a very plain morning cap, though enough waved over her fore¬ head to add to the interest and expression of her countenance ; she appeared rather confused, and our hero felt rather embar¬ rassed, as he neither wished to appear too free nor too reserved, as she migfy attri¬ bute his familiarity to his knowledge of her dependent situation, and his reserve to his pride ; he therefore merely bowed in return to her fashionable apology for a curtsey, and wishing at once to enter up¬ on the purport of his visit, he observed, that "she had a very large and а л т егу good collection of music." <( l am happy you approve of it, Sir; but not to trespass upon your time, l луШ convince you how much í stand in need of your instructions/' advancing towards the piano, at which she seated herself; and Mrs. PerEins. having placed a chair foi* <t ä Francis,
Francis, she «oon -eonvmced hhn thai she excel red «pon the piano, brìng selected a most difficult tiíecê of mlTsfc, to which alte tRftaittprì-e justice. впг ЪегЬ coTiYpKmeiit^f héb upon heg ŕxettírioti, assmíng : her that she already more than ^«pralted him itpoft that iwstru- menr, enqtiíring r "whether !*he played ať sights "She had done so upon the Continent; but was not vain enough ro fancy she suc¬ ceeded; if he woui$ %rmg her some new music, he would "be able to judge.*' * He promised to do so, requesting she would try a song ; sha selected a very Ihre Italian bravuraisong, îfn d as she had a very* powerful voice, and had evidently studied under thè first masters abroad, Franci» assured her he had heard many worse per¬ formers, who had faceted themselves vetV competent to undertake the instruction of others. · " You wish to encochage me, Sir; though I do hope your instructions will* enable
enable me to *ftafn soine degree of per¬ fection. She ne*t «elected $ halkd, x^bich had been composed for hernes «áster by the late Mi. Corfe; tttidf 4threh wías? ta** tremel y in vogue ţ bm iri this Ле сЫ nol succeed so well m at Ш шщт &у\е —notwithstanding, she ende^oiited t^ ilt- b trôdUce Шпу Of Ûie ei-ñhel^hiftilkts attd paUseSï ïA Which FťarrUis ЩЪ ъМечФее Ш be kıimif&bîe; hut ht, as ÎJaay Äsyfiéld^ once observed, " I« а swe«t mellow afifte join'd the leesenţ fÊt Iff, " With the accents of nature, whiclv flow'd from ifk heart ΐ' 1 , -^therefore, in the simili p^uter style, he parfífcuteŕly éxöèllëtf; #n* Withtó-í àe- ťtrttoiYíťd cartdoflf, Skibe W xMVe* ootì- descended êveü líbUhtm lhe Äl** *гЧ'пг^, or Thë Ltídw-ŕ *Oir*ortnci y lié pointed out w*rt^e Ke M)tf^hť mt ГгйЫ> íUkI waè ЬнгЧ tO peťcefrfe Й1Ы «1Ш *temwV tø htìv* e^ |ëclef а^аМЩ луаШ Ш fbû*& mmk fé condemn, thOUgtV hö ^H^itìn^l Aat in e№f H№" Φε Ш m** т'Ф Much gross α 6 adulation
adulation from her instructors, in conse¬ quence of her adoption hy her godmo¬ ther. Unwilling, therefore, to depress her spirits, he assured her and Mrs. Perkins, that he made no doubt of her soon rank¬ ing among the first performers, as she was thoroughly grounded in. music, therefore would very soon excel in what he denomi¬ nated the simple style г to which he ac- knowledged he gave the preference, as a melodious ballad was sure to please, and. perhaps most when the voice was unac¬ companied by any instrument. She agreed to the justness öf his remarks, and by his desire she again attempted the song in which she had failed, to his accompani- ment, as he took her seat at the piano,, and guided her voice sa ably, frequently, joining in with her, that Mrs. Perkins луаз delighted, and Miss Chetwynd agreed that she had never yet practised under so corn- pleat a master of the art.» Francis made a polite reply, assuring her that he should ftel gratified by having it in his power to^
make some addition to her already ample stock of musical knowledge—adding, that he was engaged for three months certain to attend daily at Bayfield House from eie* ven tifi two, from whence he would always proceed to Michael's-place, as he was con* vinced that to have the credit of euch a scholar would greatly add to his own cele¬ brity. Mrs, Perkins was profuse in her thanks, Miss Chetwynd was more silent, but not less grateful; and Francis departed in a very good humour with Dame Fortune, for having afforded him an opportunity of rendering an essential service to so fine a young woman, whom he sincerely hoped would meet with an eligible situation whea she did leave her worthy relation* The following morning, a»he wasmaking his parting bow at Bayfield House, the Countess asked him, whether he meant to walk home ? not seeing hh carriage in waiting. He told her, in reply, that he had undertaken another scholar, who had f χ - been strongly recommended to him by a friend
friend of the late Ur.€otfe\ acknowledg*-* iitg that he felt very solicitous tò bit-Ag the' yotiflg $е*Шх for^^afd, ás she í»rof>ofcéd reiiderifíg het m usi tal talents a source of ñitwre emolument, tâ a ^ritfate teacher of that sekince. " She eoiåld tidt t&ve pteced heàe*f uw- der the tuition óf a mote atee mester/' was the kind reply. Louis* Cheťw)»nä Wál İn waìtìng for him, and he thought she appeared to more aďvatifóge than she had ^аойе the day be¬ fore, as het ШШ head of hah* was fto longer concealed hy ucap; ehfcënng HtefaVoefite song With ihmritety ttieíe eut^têsslOil and pathos, ahd he Was «Veti moiiê ready to ap¬ plaud than he had been tő condem». Omr¬ ing á pause in lhe lessòti, hib pupil asfced Ыт whether fee thou^rt thè 1 MiSfe IrVať» tterè Mkely tö fulfil their aunťs eufpecta- tions, aß she had Ыша Mn. Mortimer say, that her Ladyshilp expected tfcey would' sMonM the world of Mhiótt ÄieeÄetiing Witlííerf » They
* ТЩ Ш **ery Mt to riak «mong thé åt*st-tat« *ady utíg&s" ht replied ,* * and so did the elder of the Ladies Cardonnel ; fht younger had not* stø ğööo* a ^ice, therefore seklo-m sung alone, hut %oî*e he# part CHtremély weit in trim or giees/* " Are they very hatfdbome^ she riex-r ènqnît^d. *< The Earl *# WhttertOn*s daughters Will doubtless Bòíh rank high among the belles ef feshioft ; the MissrrVans are much les« iftáefetêd to nature, but they are so truly ttftaÄeeteé, and appear to be so very ■sweet tem-pered, that í am cotivinced theť will not be without their admirers : bxxt now we a^eupon the subject, Mrss Chtjf- v^ytid, would my írieníiofring yotrr name ţ which? î have not yet done) and your musical talents to the Countess of Bayfield, be at all likely to promote your «rteresrl! er welfare?" *' By no means, Sii; though I feel 1ЙТ- self greatly obliged № you for the polite* ©Her; but Mm. Mortimer ««id her Aiate would
would feel themselves offended, were I to seek the patronage of any other woman of fashion." . Francis thought this very possible—his scholar requested his opinion of an Italian composition, which had been greatly.ad¬ mired at Milan, she told him ; and he lis¬ tened with infinite pleasure to a plaintive air, to луЫсЬ she did great justice, when the arrival of his carriage reminded him of the hour. As he was going to depart, his scholar told him, that she feared, in con¬ sequence of some previous arrangements of Mrs. Mortimer, whom she dare not of¬ fend, she could only profit by his kind in¬ structions every other day ; and as this would be giving him less trouble, she should the less regret being thus in part deprived of the benefit she would derive from his daily visits. " As I merely wished to render myself useful, Miss Chetwynd, there can need no apology for your conforming in every re¬ spect to Mrs. Mortimer's wishes : as to-day is
is Saturday, shall I wait upon you again on Monday or Tuesday ?—Only suit your own convenience, as you are possi ply less mistress of your time than I am of mine." " You have guessed very right, Sir, therefore suffer me to name Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays." Thus it was settled; though our hero could not help thinking, as he drove from the door, that it луаз strange Mrs. Morti- -nier should have thrown any impediment in the way to prevent her from profiting by his daily instructions ; possibly she had felt herself offended at his having declined being paid for his lessons ; elderly maiden ladies луеге proverbially capricious, he knew; and Mrs. Mortimer was ofthat de¬ nomination. As for Miss Chetwynd, he saw much to admire in her, and лу1^ел г ег he луав tempted to condemn, he attributed it to her, in some respects, mistaken edu~ cation, as she appeared to be of an excel¬ lentdisposition ; and if not absolutely free from affectation, her foreign education perfectly
perfectly accounted for that circumstance, and she seemed to possess a very good uit- derstanding, and of course a very good heart ; he therefore thought she was per¬ fectly calculated to remjer any reasonable man happy, though he feared her excel¬ lencies and very superior talents would be overlooked by every man likely to render her so, as she had no fortune, and appear¬ ed to have imbibed notions and ideas very much above her pres-ent situation in life ; and as marrying for love had long been* exploded among the men of rank and fashion, he feared that she had very little chance of being distinguished by any of them ; and what man in trade would choose a wife merely because she had heen well educated ï she was still less likely to suit a clerk, or a placeman—-she was therefore probably doomed to a life of celibacy ; aiid wjiat was that to him, he asked him¬ self, since he was not in love with-her?—to be sure, she was a very handsome girl, and smg Italian nerøankabiy well ; but he did
did not want a rieh wife, since be σο υ ki not avoid daily adding to hss already hand- dome fortune, and he now enjoyed every luxury that any reasonable галя could de¬ sire. Should any unforeseen circumstance induce him to relinquish his theatrical en¬ gagements, he might find full employment for his time as a master ; and he should have it amply in his» f»ower to provide for his children. But notwithstanding these reflections came across fi«n, he lelt con¬ vinced that he was not in lo\e; and as he rather wished to divert his thoughts in¬ to вада« other ebatwe!, he kept looking out, as he drew near the spot where his aunt had extemtied herself the morning be¬ fore, conceiving that she must be in lodg¬ ings somewhere near, tiii he caught sight of Caroline at her two-pair of stairs win¬ dow, who imlan try convinced him thai she had not been less quick-sighted, as she turned her h-ead, and evidently called to ноте one to join her ; but his coach¬ man Was driving too fast to allow him to catch*
catch more than a glimpse of her compa¬ nion, though that sufficed to convince him that it was not her mother, as it appeared to be a young person much about her own age. Having made it, however, rather past four before he reached home, Mrs. Hunter told him she had feared he meant to have dined out, which she should have regretted, having provided something which she knew he liked—adding, " I hope Mrs. Perkins did not detain you, Sir?" " Indeed she did not ; and I should have supposed that you would sooner have lain the fault to Miss Chetwynd." " Why, truly, Sir, I never once thought of her ; but pray is she likely to become a good musician and a good singer?" " She is both already ; and is, in my opinion, a very amiable and very deserv¬ ing young woman." " I am glad to hear yon say so, Sir ; though I should grieve very much, were you to fall in love with her, notwithstand¬ ing
ing my regard for Mrs. Perkins, as she has very few friends, poor thing, and less mo¬ ney ; you ought to look much higher when you marry." t( You wish to make me vain, Hunter— however, believe me, 1 am not in love with my scholar, лупо might not, perhaps, accept of my hand, were I to make her an offer, since, though I have ceitainly a for¬ tune to offer her worthy her acceptance, there is a stigma attached to my birth, луЫсЬ might induce her to refuse me—in¬ deed, луеге I to feel a preference in favour of any луотап, 1 should hardly dare to give луау to it upon that account, as a re¬ fusal would mortify me more than I should choose to acknoлvledge ; I shall, therefore, most probably, like my deceased friend, die a bachelor." " Not you, my dear Sir ; you are so polite to our sex, and yet no rake, that I prognosticate you will marry some de¬ serving луотап, likely to render you hap¬ py ; but there is no hurry—you are very young
young as yet, and ought to take time fot reflection, una to took about you; bnt> bless me, I am running on* forgetting the dinner is spoiling; but pray remember to send for me as soon as you have dined, as I have something to say to you." " Ver/ well/' was the reply. Having finished hte repast, Miss Chet¬ wynd again came across him while drinking his couple of glasses of wine, which hé seldom exctfeded*^nor would he have thought of disturbing Hunter, had she not made her appearance in his parlour. '* I should have told my tale when you came in, Sir,"*-Hsbc began, having by his desire taken a seat—" btrt I was afraid you would be for hurrying off before yott had dined; for, yon most know, I have had a very unexpected visitor, though he came to see you, not me, I give уом my word —old Mr. Freeman, in short, of the Moat Hoţise, in Staffordshire, the late Mr.Corfc's only surviving co*usin. rt <( Ì was rather prepared to expect a visit j or
of a letter from him. Hunter, as I have some money matters to settle with him; but why djd i*dt you prevail upen him to Ätop till Γ returned ?—are they both ω town ?" tf Yon must have heard the poor dear boul who is dead and gone, often say, that his two relations were the greatest od*- dhies upon the face of God's earth* and that you might as well have attempted to turn a pig, as either of those old men, when they had resolved to gú a contrary way." tc I certainly have ; so I suppose, from your inference, that the old gentleman ro* rWd to stop." " You have guessed very r%ht, Sir," 44 Well, I miïst own they have somé reason to feel themselves burt." " Themseîvesj Sir î— -why, tboogh we did not know it, Mr. Charles Freeman died within five days of my »pooi* master; birt I dare say, the old man bow in town ne* ver
ver informed even thejr own lawyer of the circumstance." tf That is very probable, since I dare say Mr. W r eldon would have mentioned it to me, had he known of his death. But what sort of a man is Mr. Freeman ? not very young, I already know. But did not he seem hurt upon entering a house which, 1 suppose, he thinks would have fallen to his share but for me ?" " I will describe him, Sir, as nearly as I can. You know the brothers never kept a carriage, nor never lived as men of their fortune ought to have done—that луаз, however, a family failing: bless God ! the savings of one branch of ît have fallen into good hands, for, in general, Sir, the hoards of misers seldom prosper; though Mr. Corfe луаБ a prince, in point of spirit, лупсп compared to his cousins. But to return to Mr. Freeman : he drove to the door ina hackney-coach, between one and two ; he did right to ride, for I am sure he would
лvouîd have been a fine time in walking from Piccadilly here ; he is a little short thin old man, upwards of seventy, wears a .scratch wig, and looks, as a body may say, pinched in the head; he was very much troubled Λνίίη an asthma when he was here, about four or five years ago—indeed, he looked then as if he had not above a month to live ; but he consulted a London physician, who set him upon his legs once more —however, he is pretty well off them again, I think, for 1 never saw any poor mortal look more лу^с!^11у— indeed, 1 could almost fancy one might look through him, and ϊ am sure I could carry him up and doлvn stairs as easily as I could a child, for he has scarcely an ounce of flesh upon his bones, yet he endeavours to appear brisk and lively ; but having alighted, he walked into the parlour, and though he was in deep mourning, as I was not obliged to кполу his brother луаз dead, why 1 asled after him— луЬеп he told me, he had died almost immediately after, his poor cousin, vol. π. r and
$№& be fancied that he should not iong survive them. I was perfectly of his way of thinking, though I forbore telling him so, for every time he draws his breath, he seems to be at his last gasp—you will, however, see him in the morning, if he Kves so long, for I positively think this long and fatiguing journey, as he came «p in the stage, will be the conclusion of his travels, except, indeed, he goes down again in a h«arse> as he did acknowledge, when ϊ blamed him for not having tra¬ velled in a post-chaise, that lhe coach had shook him more than he had expected— but he preferred such a conveyance to travelling alone. Now, in my opinion, it was his avarice that induced him to do so ; and I am sure I do not know for who he is saving his money, since he has not so much» at a ninety-ninth cousin to bestow it upon« Be sat and* chatted, however, during the best part of an hour; he looked father queer, ϊ thought, when he first came ia and aefeed fe* уо*Ъ hut after a while he agreed
agreed to mumble a biscuit, and to drinks glass of wine : he asked me, as you wilt suppose, a few questions concerning my late master, and then made some very na?- tural enquiries respecting my present one,. and I hope he did not leave the houser very much prejudiced against his cousin'^ heir." " That I am convinced he did not, Hunter, if he put any faith in your report, as you are prejudiced in my favour. I am very sorry, however, I was not at home, as I 11ал т е been very anxious to settle the bu¬ siness which has doubtless brought him to town, as Mr. Weldon did not hold suffi¬ cient power to enable him to receive the money which Mr. Corfe left his clients;. and I presume he did not choose to trust if in а зклууегЪ hands, as he has come to town doubtless to settle the business hina· self; but did he tell you where he had taken up his abode ?" ff Yes, Sir, he is at the White Horse r % Cellar^.
Cellar, in Piccadilly, where the coach» set him down." " I believe there are very good accom¬ modations there for single gentlemen," resumed Francis, " though I should not have supposed that an invalid, like Mr. Freeman, would have taken up his quar¬ ters there ; but I will pay him a visit, and invite him to take up his abode here ; and if he is not very perverse, I think he will accept the invitation, as he will certainly be much more comfortably off than at any hm.'* ft To be sure he will. Sir ; and I own I should rejoice if we could set him up again for a little while, at least to enable him to return; he knows I am no despicable nurse—indeed, he told me that he was sures his relation had not been lost for the want of care, which from such an oddity, I con¬ sidered as a very great compliment." " Ì think you were very rig'nt," resumed her master, taking his hat, and setting out on
on foot*for Piccadilly, not wishing to shock the poor old man with the sight o€ his carriage, as it might induce him to ar¬ raign his late cousin's last action, and as it was certainly not consonant with his prin* eiples to see money squandered awây itm silence, he might take upon him to blame what he was sure he would not applaud ; and Francis wished to become acquainted * with him, before he afforded him an op¬ portunity of censuring his conduct. Having soon reached the NeW White * Horse Cellar, our hero immediately walked into the coffee-room, where he soon re¬ cognised, from Mrs, Hunter's description* the person he was come to visit, who was sitting alone in a box, with a newspaper in his hand, apparently lost in meditation. " Your name is Freeman, Sir, if I am not mistaken ?" said Francis. " It is, Sir," was the reply; "but I cannot say í know yon." " My name isY'ates, Sir; and J am very mrvy I was from home when vou did me* r 3 tha
the honour of calling in Marsham-strec* this morning." Mr. Freeman did not immediately re¬ ply, though his eyes remained fixed upon the speaker, At last he said—" Sit down, sit down, Sir;" but the little fiurry this unexpected visit occasioned him brought on a short fit*of coughing. Our hero seated himself opposite him ; and while the old gentleman wa& endea*- votìring to recover his breath, said—" I am afraid, Sir, you have caught cold dur¬ ing your journey ?" " No, no," he wheezed out, " mine is an old complaint, which does not mend in London ; I shall be better when I get home again." "I hope you will, Sir; but 4 while you do remain in town, suffer me to entreat you will become my guest, as you will bc much quieter in Matoham-strcet than you can hope to be here. Mrs. Hunter, you already know, is an excellent nurse, and will, I am sure, do every thing in her power to con- 3 tribute
tribute to your comfort ; and I shall feel myself very much flattered by your be¬ coming my inmate." Mr. Freeman had continued to gaze at the handsome, elegant youth, who was ad¬ dressing him ; and having now recovered sufficient breath, he said, " I thank you, Mr. Yates, I thank you ; give me your hand, for your countenance bespeaks your sincerity. I had my doubts whether the door in Mar¬ sham-street would not have been closed against mc, but your polite invitation and early vibit have comineed me that Mrs. Hunter hardly did you justice this morn¬ ing, though she spoke highly in your praise." Having shaken our hero by the hand, as heartily as his strength would 'ad¬ mit, he added—" I readily accept your considerate offer, and believe me when I assure vou, that I am by no means dis- <f t « pleased with my late cousin for having preferred you to me in his will—I always wish to see merit rewarded, and Mr. Corfe was no fool." " I am
" I am extremely happy to find that you are not prejudiced against me, Sir, луЫсЬ many men of less sense, in a simi¬ lar situation, would lurve been, and I am ^till more pleased at your having so readi¬ ly consented to accompany jne home ; suffer me to have a coach called, луЫсЬ will сопл т еу us and your luggage from hence immediately." " Why, I really believe I should be choaked here in a week," was the reply ; " so I am at your orders," лупеег^ be· ¿луееп every three words* " Mrs. Hunter Λνϋΐ be able to prescribe for me—here it is impossible to get any thing dressed that one can cat, or a slop made that one can swallow ; I should have sent for a physician when I came in this ^ morning, but I thought it would be of no ш>е, having resolved to turn my back up* on London as soon as possible." " I hope you will feel inclined to pro¬ long your stay, луЬеп once you are in pos-« session.
session of a quiet cool apartment, and under the care of your former nurse/* (t Those will be great temptations," was the reply. The coach being, however, at the door, the old gentleman's portmanteau was soon placed in it, and he readily accepted Fran¬ cis's proffered arm, who, having assisted him into the vehicle, took his seat beside him, and ordered the coachman home, wondering how a man, so ill as Mr, Freeman evident¬ ly was, and so rich, should have thought of travelling in a stage, which had com¬ pelled him to spend two nights upon the road ; and he conceived that even the raw air, to which he must have thus exposed himself, was very prejudicial to his com¬ plaint, not to mention the fatigue such a rapid journey must have occasioned him. But having reached Marsham-street, he im¬ mediately rang for tea, as it was near eight, and he thought the sooner his guest retired, the more likely he was to recruit his exhausted strength, Mrs.
,' í*· Mrs. Hunter made her appearance with the tea-things, and welcomed Mr. Freeman once more into Marsham-street—adding, u You know I told you, Sir, that had my master been at home this morning, he would not have suffered you to return to vour inn." " You merely did him justice, my old friend; though 1 can assure you, that I was. well convinced that my cousin's heir must have been possessed of many amiable qua¬ lities—«first, because the poor soul had a thorough knowledge of mankind—and, se¬ condly, from what Weldon wrote me re¬ specting this young gentleman, though I thought it very possible he might not feel inclined to cultivate my acquaintance ; and he may repent having encumbered him¬ self with' such a troublesome guest before he gets rid of me. But would you be¬ lieve it !—a country attorney, whom I sometimes employ to draw up leases and agreements, advised me, when he heard of my cousin's death, to şet out for London,. obtain*
obtain possession of this house, and dis¬ pute Mr. Corfe's will in every court in England. Now, what aa old rogue I should have been, had I ever listened луйп com¬ mon patience to such rascally advice ! no, no, even poverty should never have in¬ duced me to have disputed the луШ of the dead." Mrs. Hunter cried out shame upon the rascal who лvanted to put such wicked thoughts in his head—adding, " and you could have been no gainer by following his advice, Sir, since I know my late mas¬ ter secured every thing to his beloved young friend, beyond the possibility of a dispute: but now. Sir, as you must be л 7 егу much fatigued, let me advise you to go to bed; I have prepared one for you, and I луШ make you something warm, that shall ensure you a good night ;" and as our hero seconded her very ably, the invalid луав prevailed upon to take leave of him for the night, which afforded Yates an oppor¬ tunity of joining a party Kempthorne had assembled
assembled in Austin Friars, to whom he mentioned Mr. Freeman's arrival in town, as an excuse for not, and as he had pro¬ posed, going to Windsor with him and Kalkreuth, the next day ; inviting them both to siip with him on the Monday even¬ ing, when he promised to introduce them to his diminutive guest, whom they would assist him in entertaining.
BN Π OF VOL·. II.
lane, Darling, md Co, Lcadenhall-Strett,
