Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Grasville Abbey: a romance
GRASVILLE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XXL ADVENTÜRES. u Oh, Peace ï thou fource and foul of focial life, Beneath whofe calrn-infpiring influence Science her views enlarges, Art refines, And fwelling Commerce open* all her ports ; Bleft be the man divine who gives us thee!" Tao m sox. WflEN men of honour, whofe prin¬ ciples and difpofitions are naturally juft, fall under misfortunes, and ex¬ perience adverfity and difappointment, their feeHngs fuffer a far "greater fhock than can be felt by thofe who, from childhood, have been plunged in irre- VoivH. В gularities,
gularities, and are well pradifed in the arts of meannefs and deceit. The fting of remorfe feldom lafts longer than that pumfhment which they bring upon themfelves through perpe¬ tual indifcľction and deliberate fchemes of viilany; — while the man who has been merely led away by example or youthful follies, receives with redoubled force that blow which ftabs at once his characler and reputation. Nor can he, though the clouds of defpair, which encompaffed him, may be fucceeded by the funfhine of profperity, think of dif¬ agreeable events at a iormer part uf life, but with anguifh and diftrefs. Of the numberlefs griefs and afflic¬ tions to which human nature is fubjecl, poverty is held up as one of a confider¬ able magnitude ; it generally procures contempt and ill-treatment from the 8 haughty
haughty fons of wealth ; and the opi¬ nion of tlie world in general is by no means favourable to thofe who are nót poffeffors of riches and affluence. Thefe miftaken and fhameful ideas are almoft too predominant in every country; and the child of mifery receives great ad¬ dition to his woes by the fneers and fcandal of his neighbours. Equality, though a word of terror to the great, if taken in its true meaning, implies fentiments of the moft noble and gene¬ rous kind; inftead of pulling down laws, and levelling the whole clafs of man¬ kind, it would confirm unity, peace, and good order. The rod of oppreffion too often falls npon that man who is unable, through misfortunes or peculiar circumftances, to raife himfelf againft the weight ; but, crufhed hy its power, he finks beneath the force of injuftice, and is loft to his В 2 God,
God, his family, and himfelf; whereas, in the time of his forrows, had he re¬ ceived comfort, fuccour, or afliftance, he might have continued to have proved a valuable member of fociety. Alfred Maferini meditated with pain¬ ful ideas on thofe diftreffes which had happened, through his own mifconducr, during the time they had been in Eng¬ land. He not only beheld himfelf fur¬ rounded with difficulties, but his After, who was innocent cf the caufe, equally - involved, through his errors and vices, Young, beautiful, and accompliihed, flic was but ill calculated to undergo the hardfl.ii.s of life ; \et iho fubmitted to them with refignation, and could even teach patience to him who 1 ad brought her to the prefent difquictudc. 'Ihis would cut liim to the foul ; and the fcalding tear of repentance would of¬ ten ftart from hib eye, in defiance of the
the many efforts he made to conceal it. He was impetuous, proud, and cou¬ rageous in his difpofition; yet, in feel- insrs he was a woman : nor was his pride of that nature to make him over¬ look aftliciion, although concealed in a hut of poverty and mifery. But he laid too great a ftrefs on the punctilios of honour and high birth ; he valued the name he bore, with fuch ardour as to make him refent the leaft affront offered in the family to whkh it belonged. Their arriva! at Calais was attended with difagreeable and degrading cir¬ cumftances, on account of their giving in their names» which were feigned ones, and the review of their baggage, which confifted of clothes and a few articles which Matilda had received from Mr. Milverne's valet ; that gentle- B 3 man
mm having proemia ftom fr fetera what little goods fhe fot a value on, and defired his fervant to deliver them at I>over. Their travelling through France was in e^ery refpeo extremely uncom¬ fortable, and the difficulties thev met with m confequence of their endea¬ vouring to conceal themfelves from vul¬ gar cursofity, extremely diftrefUng, Tbey hed aeariy arrived at the Alps, whenrheyhdítedforthci>ightatafia»ä щш» Tikt accoaaroodatkm wa· very în- dáfereitv ма Леу wme given to urwler- ftand by the hoftefi that fome fogliai perfons of dtftincbon were rbea iu the houfe, who took up the beft rcome. They were therefore neceffitated to pat up with die boQövenience, and, after a fcanty meal, retked to poor aad defe¬ kte apartments, Şoth Alfred and Ma¬ tilda, with Leonard, Imd, tbe faft day** journey, rode oa horfes which the for* mer
CRASVILLÍ шаг purchafed of a fmæggler at m hm price, cøtifideriøg that it would be the cheapen and f»øå fecret way of travel¬ ling. Leonard faw the cattle fafely placed in a barn ibme diftance from the houfe i the ftables being occupied by the horfes and fcrvantt of the perfons whom the landlady had mentioned : he then laid himfelf down on a fmall bed im ose comer øf the building. Leonard bad not been авеер above two hours, befe« be was awakened hy a giare of Bght which darted riçht on bis eyes through an opening on one fide of the Ьлт* He immediately ftarted up, and looked out at the deer, and perceived that the inn was in fiâmes. He hurried on his cio hes, and ran as fiift as poffible to tbe fpot» in order to affift his mufter and young lady. By the time be got there, one part of the houfe was entirely burnt down, and В 4 the
the remainder furrounded wiih flames: be was happy however to fee his ma¬ ßer and Matilda fate ; and the former delivered to him the trunks, which he tuck care to place iu Security. A number of peafants were affem¬ bled rotund, and ea^h feemed to bewail the fituation of a voung ladv and her father, who flept in thofe rooms whkh were on fire ; but no one dared to go to their affiftance, as the whole fabric was expeâed to fall in a few minutes» Nor was Ле general conjcclure wrong, for in a very httle time tlie front gave way, and fell ; whirh difcovered the in¬ ternal part of the two rooms. They could fee nothing of the gentleman ; it was therefore fuppofed that he was fuf¬ focated, and had fallen among the ruins at the back part ; but the eyes of the fpeclators experienced a moft horrid light in the other apartment : a young 6 lady
lady was ftanding in the middle of the flames. The agony fuch a fituation mufi iöfpİTe, had made her infenfible ; her hands were clafped together, ama ber eyes lifted towards heaven. The peo¬ ple cried out to give her affiftance ; but none dared try the experiment, till Al¬ fred, touched with compaffion for the unfortunate female, fprang forward with a ladder, and placed к againft the part of the building which was yet ftanding: he had afcended above hatf way, when the part where the ladder refted againft broke from his weight ; but he had rofe tar enough to perceive» to his aftonifliment, that h was lady Caroline Albourne. At this fight, Alfred forgot all dan¬ ger, and refolved to die or fave her: he accordingly, when he found the fteps fall from under him, clafped a poft which fupported the ftory, and with an В 5 amazing
«maabg a^äky fprang m the iottermg fioor of the room. Hb took krrø^ arms, bm forød ш ladde r fet for kb descents tibe people were afraid to come mar, ш mæmmt «rf ^ fisdfcg ш of tibe btßädk^» wüdb would bury them к the nri» He caUed to them ; but his cries wcte г а ш ; títí Lec^aľd, w^3 w^ reton»ed from €owåv£t'mg Matilda toa houfe a Bttk åaåtamæ кот the £р®|* feeinf his mafter in f&ch a fituatkm, гал for the båder ; tet rt was too hie* fe Alfred feM tfee f^ce o® whkh fee flood* mvru fta with them, feefce he could gtt to tbe gro^^ by that method : he therefore, with remarkable mtrepidity» jumped from the part wkh iaåy €ат> ìtnt m his arms, and fell on a feather feed which fey chance had been ihrown out at the feegmnmg of the fire. They were immediately dragged fome diftance off> and ш one minute after,
after, ñie whole fabric fcfl to t^ ground. The fituation of the unfortunate iady Carofme maty be bet^r imagined tfean åeforibed ; for erem whœfîie arf recovered from the mferfihilfiy wWcfc the thoughts of tor dagger had carfsd» к was Ыа to erperienee ^rw mrfcry. Her feher, witbo^ feuM, was bu¬ ried m the ruins ; te bad шэ£ ytt feem feer deliverer, nor knew of tbe heroic courage that had been exerted m her behalf ; for, from the moi^ľnt tht fromt of her chamber fell, fe fair nor heard no more till her recovery in the hoofe to whkh the had been conveyed.— She was now attended by feveral perftmş. and her own woman fervant, who had Sept in the back room, and leapt from the window at the firft alarm.—At this period, while all were bewailing the lo& of lord Albourne, he entered the В 6 room,
room* fupported hy two fervants. La¬ dy Caroline fainted, and afterwards fell into hyfterics, occafianed by the joy of feeing her father, whom the con- iûlered as na more, He enabrmced her» and ihed tears of paternal tendsmefii fm tb* feátty of hb child. Hk ksrdflûp, when awaked by the alarm of fire, knew It would be fome time before be could enter his daugb» fer's chamber, as fhe always bolted her door tm ihc made ; arni that the fright which fo fuíJUIen an information might give her, would тай likely present her from opening it at all ; he therefore confidi* red it would be beft io get ©ut at the back part as foon a^ puiLhk-* and fh to her afliftant e m the front, — With this idea, he attempted tu de¬ fcend the ftair-cafe, but found it in fiâmes r — this fight drove him dlfiratt- € d. — Without waiting fur help, he jumped
j шп ped from the window, and was fi» hurt hy the fall, that he iay infenfible* for fome time; when øse of hb ferva&£$ found him tn that fituauon, and coït» dueled hm to the houfe which тш oc- cupied by the ot«r ¿Ærers. Alfred Maferini, his fifter, agid Leo¬ nard» were in another apartment ; they neither of them ¡&å$zé it expedient ta appear before lord Albourne, hk daugh¬ ter, or any of the fervants, for fear a fhdden exclamation of their name fhould dlk uver them to thofe who were about* Ihey reiblved, therefore». to rtvaain prhate tiil morning* ami then have an inten iew with his brd- fhip. The hre being partly extmguiih- ed, the people difperfed» and quiet was in fomc meafure reftured» At breakfaft his lordihip inquired in what шахшег his daughter efcaped death.
éeath, *Hey were ЫА informed oí Üe círeum tances relat : ve tø tbe beha- viour of Ше γονηηζ gentleman who had fo vaiïaMly undertaken to retene her; aad heard not tbe repeated prarfcs of tbe måka wnemcemed* Ime MU bourne s heart, as weH as his daughter's, overflowed wkh gratitude, and they both requefted to foe Ыт am foon as poflible. The wrunan of the houfe faid ihe would call him direclly, for that He had defired to be alone the remainder of Ae night. She kft her noble guefs» and repaked to tht room where AMred fept. Having knocked feveral times without receiving any atrfwer, fiie open¬ ed tbe door, and, to her aftoniftmenr, found it empty. Sbe immediately en¬ tered the chamber of his fifter, and faw that was alfo deferted. Tbe ftables and loft where Leonard flept, were alfo fearched - f but neither cattle nor man confai be feen. In
ïn Alfred's deícrtíd apwtoiCB^ Aer obferved a note whkh lay oe Ae table; itwasdwecledtofordAlÍKÄin»:be»· ceived к, and the mtetlig«ioe tbat A» writer ctøål no-where be Sound. Ша lord ft ip ttzA tfie foi tewing wordt ; " то Loan ALiorajra. * »τ Loan, ~ IF your ïordbrp's curiofity mould lead you to know the name of that man who faved your daughter from ťhe fames, it may be fatisfied by perofi&g thefe Hues: the only return you tm make him, is to keep it a fecret j an шь fortunate circumftance hairing occurred, that renders a decampment (both mean and daftardly) necefiary ; the manner of which is totally inconfiftent with the character and equally againft the incli¬ nations of * Aitan» Ma$e*ini." If
КГ ките Albourne was aftoniihed at the elopement of Ыеу Caroline's Re¬ ferver, he was, V poffible, for more furprifed at Ihe contents of this note* ami although he felt die fame obliga¬ tion to him as to any other individual, yet be would rather have had lady Ca* ¡oline s Rfe íaved by any other perfon. He concluded Alfred was in debt, ind was therefore obliged to keep Conceal¬ ed. Lord Albourne was a nobleman of the niceft honour, and той generous fentiments ; be could not therefore confider hmfelf happy in being obliged to a man whofe ill qualities he had only known, attd, as a ftranger to his real characler, detefted his principies. He ftričtly obferved what was mention¬ ed in the note, and made an excufe for tbe gentleman's fudden departure. In private he acquainted hb daughter with the truth, bhc ted tears; his
ìordìhip ftarted: " I hope Caroline^ faid he with fonie warmth» * you en* courage not a partiality for a man to whom 1 have many timet declared a total diilike,** ** Your lordfhip, furely, cannot blame thefe few marks of feniibility for one who has faved my life, and by that, 1 flatter rayfclf, tkfcrvei your gratitude as well m yom daughter V 14 My moft fincere gratitude he cer« tainly deferte»,** replied hi» lordfhip; ** but yet I would father he íhould have any recompenfe in tbe world than the affections of my child. You welt know, Caroline, pride wa» never m leading trait in my characler ; I have never attempted to bias your inclina¬ tions refpecling the choice of a huiband» although you have had many noble of¬ fers, I therefore think I may reafon- ably
ably ¡require your compliance in one point, which is, never to marry a gamefter; of thb defcription Mr. Ma¬ ferini is known to be ; and by that title I never could own him a fon-in-law*** Lady Caroline fighed; her under* ftanding told her his lordihip's argu* ments were juft; but her heart in¬ formed her ihe muft fufer ш tbe acqui¬ efcence to them. bord Albourne remained near fix weeks at that pbce, till be was quite recovered, and then purfued his jour¬ ney flowly towards baly»
í
CHAPTER ХХЙ· LORD Albourne had obferved, fmra the irft evening of his daughter's røtro- duclíon at Sir Peter Pevíqulľs» a grow* mg partiality on her Ilde towards the young Frenchma»; «nd perticuJar a&- duities in his manner, which fecmed calculated to gain the affeclions or any young lady to whom they were «A» dreflbcL Hla lordihip, when thoroughly ешь vinced thefe conjeômet were well founded, determined to inquire more clofely into the characler and princi· ples of his new acquaintance : he had received hints from feveral perfons, that he was a man of no fortune ý but wealth was
was the leaft object of lord Albourne's confideration j his own income was affluent and noble, having, as an only fon, inherited the whole eftate and title of his father : he therefore wifely con» ceived that his child might find more fubftantial happinefs in a good man, though with only a fmail patrimony, than by receiving a higher name and additional luxuries, as the wife of a diflipated man of quality. Under thefe ideas his lordili i ρ fcruti¬ nifed the conduci of Alfred Maferini. He heeded not the envious tongue of calumny, but determined to be himfelf a fpectator of thofe vices that fliould render him unfit for an alliance with lady Caroline. But he found the gene¬ ral voice to be too true, and more than once faw him feated among notorious fharpers at a gaming-table. Difgufted at the fight, he refolved never to admit him
hira İn his family. Having informed his daughter of the refolution he had taken, he could perceive, by the man¬ ner of her receiving the declaration, that Love had on " Her bofom feiz*d : fhame void of guilt, The charming blufli of innocence, efteem, And admiration of her lover's flame, By modetly exalted ; even a fenfe Of ielf-approving beauty ßole acrofs Her bufy thought.** Tho m soy. Lord Albourne was now ferioufly a- larmed, and refolved on a fudden fcheme, to break off at once the con¬ nection. He had received advice to travel, on account of his health, which had been in a declining ftate for fome months. He confidered this as a good opportu¬ nity to comply with the wiihes of his friends ;
friends; and by taktag lady Caroline wiA bim, the novelties of other coun¬ tries, diftance, and feparation, might Ътк an acquaintance which threat¬ ened her happinefs for ever. He accordingly ordered the fervants to deny their young lady, whenever Mr. Maferini Ihould call that day ; and then gave immediate directions for a long journey, which he intended to take the next morning, having bufinefs of importance to tranfact in the country. Lady Caroline was aftoniihed, when fhe was requefted by her father to ac¬ company him, and prepare her ward¬ robe in as little time as poflible. <c Your lordfhip, I fuppofe, means to make no great ftay: confequently, I fhall have little occafion for many dreffes/* * If I find, Caroline," returned lord Albourne,
Albourne, " that the air agrees witb me, I may perhaps remain there fome weeks, if not months; and, m that cafe, fball without doubt wiih for your company. You had, therefore, better order the chief part of your clothes to he packed up : even your writing and drawing implements I would advife you to take with you.*' Tlie young lady was fKH more fur¬ prifed and vexed at the ftay her father intended to make; but even to wiih not to go with him, was, in her ideas, cruelty to a parent who had always been fo tenderly attached to her. The next day they took leave of Lon¬ don. Lady Caroline did not mention the circumftance of feeing Alfred at tibe turnpike-gate. At a late hour in the evening they entered Dover, and flept there that night. During fupper, his lordfhip
lordihip opened his mind to his daugh¬ ter—acquainted her with his motives for fo fuddeniy leaving town, and his in¬ tentions of travelling through France and· Italy, as he hoped change of cli¬ mate would both benefit his health and drive from her mind a man unworthy of her efteem. 44 You might, my dear Caroline," concluded his lordfhip, "have had rea¬ fon to reproach me, had I Hftened to the tales of others ; but I had the evi¬ dence of my own fenfes, and therefore could not be miftaken, İn obferving Mr. Maferini to be a perfon who would in a courfe of time bring his wife to wretchednefs." Lady Caroline made no anfwer: but her looks ihowed fhe thought her fa¬ ther's proceedings right, although they were entirely againft her own inclina¬ tions.
tions. The next morning they croffed over to Calais, and travelled flowly to¬ wards the Alps, when they ftopped at that inn where our young adventurers arrived a few hours after. It was not a wonder, that lord Al¬ bourne fliould be chagrined at the note he received; when it informed him that the very man who had given hím fo much uneafinefs, and on whofe account he left England, had in a few days* tim г overtaken them, and, by a noble act of courage and generofity, bound himfelf by the ftrongeft tics, to the gratitude of both his daughter and himfelf. His lordihip, however, was foon con¬ vinced that his fuppofition on the caufe of Alfred's departure was ill founded ; but his knowledge of the actual reafon of it ferved, it poffible, to hurt him Vol. IL С more
more than ever in that nobleman'^ opinion. It will be now neceffary to acquaint the reader with thofe circumftances that occafioned the young travellers* precipitate elopement from the inn. Leonard was a fecond time going to retire to his bed, which was no better than a heap of ftraw placed by the fide of his horfes, when a large paper, ftuck on the door of the fiable, met his eye. Fatigued as he was, curiofity prompted him to hold up the lanthorn which he had in his hand, in order to read the contents ; when, to his aftonifliment and horror, he perceived it to be an order for apprehending Alfred Mafe- rini, as a deferter from his regiment, and a large reward to be given to any one who could produce him. Aftoniihed
Aftoniihed and alarmed at ťhis intel¬ ligence, he ftood fome moments motion- lefs. Having in fome degree recovered, he ran baek to the houfe y fortunately, the entrance was not faftened, and he arrived, without difficulty, at his ma¬ ilers chamber. He knocked, and Al¬ fred anfwered. Leonard begged to be admitted» No fooner had he entered the room, than he informed him of the' advertifement which he had feen, and entreated his mafter to fet off again im¬ mediately. " I am perfeclly well ac¬ quainted, fir, with a way acrofs the Alps, and will be bound to conduct you fafe into Italy." This information was the moft fevere trial Alfred had ever yet experienced ; he now faw his characler and honour" ruined, his name branded as that of a coward, and even publicly expofed as * villain, by a reward to be given for Mr С г perfon*
perfon. « Leonard," faid he, half fran¬ tic, " take care of my fifter, ahd lwill this moment fly and deliver myfelf, up to my country : then I will explain my motives for my prefent behaviour, and die in a manner that fliall not difgrace my family/' " Alas, fir," anfwered Leonard, "confider my young lady. I am a poor man. and Httle able to afford her that protection you requeft : not but that I would die in her defence ; yet I am afraid my exertions in her behalf would be only looked on with contempt." Alfred was tortured with contending paffions y — one moment, his honour made him refolve to give himfelf up a victim to the fentence of a deferter; but then, his fifter in the power of count DOllifont, (who might recover) pre¬ fented herfelf to his fancy ; nor was the idea
idea of lady Caroline abfent from his mind. A hope, a diftant hope, feemed to infpire him with a wiih to fiy once more ignobly from purfuit, and try his fortune in that part where his parents had experienced the moft poignant diftreffes. Leonard was overjoyed at this refo¬ lution, and directly crept down ftairs to the liable in order to prepare the horfes ; and Alfred promifed to follow in à little time. Having knocked at the door of his fifter's apartment, he re¬ quefted in a low voice that fhe would rife immediately, drefs herfelf, take every thing out of the room that be¬ longed to her, and come to his chamber. Matilda was aftoniihed ; but it was not a time for inquiries ; fhe accord¬ ingly did as he defired, as foon as poffi¬ ble. In the mean time, he wrote with С 3 a pen-
a pencil thofe few lines that were de¬ livered to lord Albourne. Being joined by his fifter, he took their trunk, and led her to the ftable; when being placed on her horfe, they departed with as much expedition m the dark¬ nefs of the morning would permit. There was not a doubt but that an order from France for Alfreds return to his regiment, at a very ihort notice, had been fent a few hours after he left his lodgings 5 but ftill to advertife him as a deferter, was a method equally ftrange and uncommon.*—In fhort» count E)Oilifonťs interference feemed to appear in the affair; and they greatly fufpected that it was through his friends, fome of whom were fuperior officers, and others in great favour at court, that fuch cruel proceedings were occafioned. Alfred remained in a deep rêverie; and
and it was from Leonard that his fifter learnt the reafon for fo fudden and un¬ accountable a flight. They were fome miles from the houfe by day-light, and halted at a fmall cottage for fome re¬ freihment, before they began their jour¬ ney on the Alps. — They had here, for¬ tunately, an opportunity of changing the three horfes for two mules, and a kind of carriage which would be more convenient and fafe for Matilda to tra¬ vel in j and alfo prevent remarks, which the fight of other animals might have occafioned among the peafants. In about an hour, they again fet off, and Leonard ailed as driver the chief part of the way. Nothing particular occurred during their journey acrofs the Alps, which was extremely difficult and tedious, ex¬ cept a vifible alteration in Alfred's С 4 . health
health for the worfe, and a fettled deep melancholy in his fifter, which threat- enc^ a total decline in her conftitution. — Leonard io vain ftrove to point out to them the beauties of the country, and the romantic fcenery which furrounded them ; their own misfortunes engroffed every idea; and the cloud of mifery, which had fo long been gathering over their heads, feemed now ready to burft with full force and horror."—Their ar¬ rival in Italy was productive of Httle ¡oy or comfort, as they had every rea¬ fon to fuppofe the fame papers had l jen publiíhed through that country, 'i hev fecreted themfelves as well as polfible, at every place where they ftopped, ufing the niceft economy for ivar of exhaufting tlieir little ftore; whieh, ahhough it might laft them a confiderable time with frugality — yet, wiih extravagance, could be but of fliort duration. Alfred
Alfred had refolved in his own mind, from their firft fetting off from Dover; to vifit Grafviile Abbey ;—he now con¬ fidered it would be a place of great fer¬ vice in point of fecreting therh from* their enemies, as there was little doubt but fuperftition had kept it entirely free from inhabitants or curious vifitors, — But thefe intentions he determined to keep from the knowledge of Matilda $ for he well knew the idea of refiding there would add greatly to thofe fuffer¬ ings flie already experienced : and the circumftances of the Hght in the weft tower, — the noife which was heard by their father, — and his remarkable dif- appearance,—were fubjedts which "his fifter dwelt on with horror, whenever fhe read the manufcript of her aunt, —* But he hoped to perfuade her to re¬ main there for fome little time,, and then confidered that fhe would foon С 5 become
become comfortable in it, even as a place of abode. Leonard well knew the roads that led to the Abbey, as he had often feen ît when young, and could well remem¬ ber the hofpitality and goodnefs of the old count Maferini. To him Alfred privately conveyed his intentions, and requefted him to bring them to the manfion on a fudden, and unknown to Matilda. The man feemed hurt on account of his young lady, and begged leave to remind him that it would be cruel to diftrefs her, when fhe needed no more occafions for terror, or alarm. ** I thank you for the caution," re¬ turned Alfred coolly : ** but am not yet ίο great a villain, as to behave in the manner you fuppofe."
Leonard
Leonard looked confufed ; his mafter continued —· " I will not even propofe a favoura¬ ble argument to keep her there againft her own inclination. But you muft agree that if Matilda could diveft her¬ felf of idle terrors, and acquiefce in the plan, it would in every refpeel be par* ticularly fortunate, both in preferving our little property, and concealing us from the eye of malice or contempt." With thefe intentions they rode fome leagues each day, and on the fifth morning from their firft entering Italy, found themfelves within fix hours' tra¬ velling of Grafviile Abbey. The clouds feemed to indicate an approaching ilorm ; rain fell in large drops, and fe¬ veral claps of thunder were heard at a diftance. Matilda was alarmed, and begged they might alight at fome place С 6 where
where they might find iheltcr till the tempeft fliould in fome degree abate«— In vain they looked round for a cot¬ tage or hovel to anfwer their purpofe ; no fuch place could be feen; when their attention was called off by the fight of a young girl, feemingly about fixteen. — Her hands were clafped, and her eyes lifted towards heaven.—Her appearance' fliowed both terror and diftrefs. Leonard drove to the fpot where fhe ftood, and Alfred offered the inciter of their vehicle, which fhe ac¬ cepted with joy i and by her thanks for their kindnefs, they perceived flie was a native óf France. Matilda inquired to what part flie was going,—She anfwered with an unaffected fimplicity, " Any where."—They were both aftoniflied at the reply, but reftrained their curiofity and defired Leonard to drive on. Tbe ftorm had now blown over, though -
though the clouds were ftill gloomy and unfettled j but the latter part o£ the day they again joined, and feemed to foretell another war of elements. —^ Vivid flaflies of white lightning darted on the ground, and loud claps of thun¬ der (which was now much nearer) burft over their heads.-—Matilda de¬ clared flie would rather put up with any fituation, than travel while it lafted> and Agnes (which was the name ofthe young girl) was extremely terrified. —» At that moment they perceived the turrets of Grafviile Abbey rife above the trees which furrounded it. Alfred ordered Leonard to drive immediately to it. Matilda fliuddered, yet was aihamed to confefs her fears. It was now near¬ ly dark, and they entered a grove of ancient cedars, that led to the front gate. The lightning was horrid, and the
the thunder feemed to fhake even the centre of the earth ;—both Agnes and Matilda were nearly infenfible, when the carriage ftopped before tbe Abbey. —One wing feemed entirely in ruins, hut they had no time for obfervations. Leonard had not quitted the mule he rode on two minutes before the ani¬ mal was ftruck dead at his feet ; and each expeâed the fame fate. —Alfred flew to the gates, and being affifted by his fervant, after fome efforts, they yield¬ ed to their >ftrength, and burft open, be¬ ing unlocked. Leonard drove the carriage into the court ; having pufhed againft the hea¬ vy folding doors that led to the internal part, they eafiiy opened, but with a con¬ fiderable noife, that confirmed no one had entered this dreary manfion, for many years. Agnes and Matilda were car-
carried into the hall, and the mules and vehicle put under a piazza. Leonard having kindled a fire on the pavement with fome faggots by the help of a tinder-box which he had in his pocket, the party were in fome mea* fure recovered, and looked with horror on the gloomy and defolate appearance of the place that gave them flielter·
CHAPTER ХХШ. TERROR. Ci Light thickens, and the crow Makes wing to the rooky wood } Good things of day begin to droop and drowfe, While night's black agents to their prey do roufe, Thou marvelľíl at my words : but hold thee ftill : Things bad begun, make ftrong themfelves by ill. So pray thee go wirh me.** Macbeth; Superstition (though greatly en¬ couraged by idle converfation and fa¬ bulous tales) is natural to mankind, and often inhabits the breafts of thofe whofe valour and intrepidity in other refpe£ls have been equally known and experienced. о It
It produces terrors, of aH others, liie moft to be dreaded and ftrove againft ; — for although they cannot be entirely overcome, yet, by giving the leaft way to them, life is at once made uncomfortable and difagreeable. From childhood we are taught to be¬ lieve in the reality of preternaturalappa- ritions, by the prattle and fimple ftories of thofe, who, in general, abufe their care of children, by inftilHng into their young minds terrific and horrid ideas. As age advances, they are more likely to increafe than decline; — and the number of relations, feemingly authen¬ tic, which are continually in circula¬ tion, forvG greatly to confirm the hor¬ rors of imagination.-— Whether fuch hiftories proceed from the vifionary re- m or fe o f g uil ty con fc i en ces,— from affec- tation, or the tongue of falfehood,—from infanity, weaknefs, or oppreftion of fpi¬ rits,--*
rits,— from nervous diforders, or roman¬ tic thoughts and contrivances,—is e- qually as difficult to be afcertained, as whether fome of them are not actually true, and the works of a Supreme Dei¬ ty, for wife and unknown ends.— Ma¬ ny men of great learning and genius have differed widely on this point % and though even the immortal Addifon could not pofitively give a decifive opinion on thofe topics, yet his words on the fubjecl will ever be remembered and admired : u I know but one way of fortifying my foul againft thefe gloomy prefages and terrors of mind ; and that is by fe« curing to myfelf the friendfliip and pro- teclion of that Being, who difpofes of events, and governs futurity. He fees •at one view the whole thread of my ex¬ iftence, not only that part of it which I have already paffed through, but that which
which runs forward into all the depth« of eternity. When I lay me down to fleep, I recommend myfelf to his care ¿ when I awake, I give myfelf up to his direction. Amidft all the evils that threaten me, I will look up to him for help, and queftion not but he> wiH ei¬ ther avert them, or turn thera to my advantage. Though I know neither the time nor the manner of the death I am to die, I am not at all folicitous a- bout it—becaufe I am fure that he knows them both, and that he will not fail to comfort and fupport ine under them V Grafviile Abbey was fituated near Montferrat in Italy, and but a little diftance from the Gulph of Genoa j its lofty turrets, on one fide, commanded a view^ of Piedmont, and the profpecl was bounded by the towering and ma·
jeftíc fummits of the Alps : — the other ť wing looked over the perfpeclive fce- nery of Parma, Piacenza, Mirandola, and the river Po, while at the extre¬ mity of the profpect, in an oblique view, Venice might juft be obferved. The back front looked over Valentia, Cafal,and Vercelli, and terminated in a diftant fight of Savoy. But none of thefe countries could be feen but from the top cafements of the two towers j the lower part of the Ab¬ bey being entirely furrounded by thick foliage, pines and cyprefs-trees, with many ancient cedars. The building was in every refpeel calculated to infpire awe and folemnity, both in the external and internal ap¬ pearance. After the death of the count Maferini, many ftrange accounts were talked of by the peafants; and count
count DOliifonťs fudden departure from it, at the funeral of his uncle, feemed to confirm thofe reports that had before been circulated through the furrounding country. From that time it was fhut up, without any of the furniture being removed y and no one had been known to enter it till fignor Maferini, fon to the late count, and father to ., AJfoéd and Matilda; His fúdden and remarkable difappear- ance raifed the horror of the place, if poflible, more than ever; even thofe who had before laughed at the fuper¬ ftition of their neighbours, were ex¬ tremely alarmed at fo dreadful and un¬ common: an occurrence. No perfon ever walked beyond^ the entrance of the grove that led to the gates; and the only human habitation that ftood near it, was a cell which contained an old hermit, who had lived there ever fince the Abbey had been forfaken, and fob*
fubfifted on the charity of the neigh¬ bouring cottagers· The travellers remained in the hall till day light, when the ftorm tfbated, and they began to wifh for fome repofe. Leonard pulled two arm chairs, which ftood ¡n a recefs, towards the fire, and Agnes a^d Matilda ftrove to fleep in them; while Alfred and his fervant laid themfelves down on an old bench that ftood near the fpot. After fome hours they awoke, and found them¬ felves much refreihed. Leonard was immediately difpatched to fee that the gates were clofe in the fame manner as they were, before, to prevent fufpicion of any one having paffed them. They then opened their portmanteau, and found they had provinone for that day : this circumftance was extremely fortunate, as they could have time to 6 con*
contrive fome method of replenishing their ftore. Leonard had alfo got victuals for his furviving mule. They had now an opportunity to take a mote particular account of their fituation ; and Alfred, fmilingly aiked his fifter, if fhe had any objection to explore with him the apartments by day-light : fhe chearfully confented , but Agnes was terrified at the idea of attending them, and equally afraid of remaining in the hall by herfelf, but at laft re¬ folved .on the former. The hall was of ancient architeclure, but extremely noble, though heavy in the defign. It was fupported hy large gothic columns ; the capitais were chiefly decayed, the ihafts were com¬ pofed of ftained marble ; and though of a confiderable height, the diameters were greater than the ftriflt rules of that kind of architeclure would admit. The
Ţhe top opened in a large dome and gallery, the walls of which had exhi¬ bited beautiful paintings, that were now nearly deftroyed : a large painted Iky light terminated the height ; and ad¬ iţional light was received from four elevated cafements on different fides of the hall. Piiafters of the fame dimen¬ fions upwards ftood oppofite the pil¬ lars, between each of which were niches that held ftátues larger than life j thefe were in fome prefervation, as the count had them placed there when he firft came to the eftate. Two large fire-places ftood at each end, which feemed to fhow that hofpi¬ tality and the comforts of life had once been enjoyed in this dreary and melan¬ choly abode. The pavement was of black and white marble, the ftones of which were of a confiderable fize. In tbe front ftood a large pair of heavy folding
folding doors that led to thé apart¬ ments on the eaft and weft wings of the abbey. Two ftone ftair-cafes appear¬ ed on each fide, which wound to the chambers above. Alfred refolved firft: to examine the lower apartments, and accordingly opened the folding doors, which difcovered a fmall paffage, fup¬ ported by Tufcan pillars ; at the fur¬ ther part of it was a defcent of feveral fteps, which were in many parts broken and decayed ; at the bottom of them was a pair of large iron gates, through which they perceived the remains of an extenfive and noble chapel j this part they fuppofed had ftood nearly in the fame ftate from the firft founda¬ tion of the building, as then intended for a place of religious worfliip. They re-afcended the fteps, and difcovered in the paflage two large openings, which feemed to lead to the different Vol. IL D fuites
fuites of apartments. They firft en¬ tered thofe of the weft wing. The furniture in the firft room had been ex¬ tremely elegant, though antique; it was in tolerable prefervation, confider¬ ing the number of years it had remain¬ ed there without care; many noble paintings were yet hanging, but fo de¬ cayed by damps that it was impoflible to make out the fubjecls. The fecond room was rather larger than the firft, but in far worfe condition ; the tapef¬ try was entirely deftroyed, and both the cafements and fhutters broke nearly to pieces ; the columns which fupported it, feemed alfo rotten and decayed. From this apartment they walked through many others that were in the fame condition, and ihowed no figns of having contained any mortal within them for many years. In the laft room there
there was a ftrong door, which they per¬ ceived, by a window, opened into a court or terrace. Having returned to the hall, they entered the apartments of the eaft wing. They were fm aller though more in number than thofe they had left 5 and by the plainnefs of the internal part, they fuppofed them to have been offices for fervants. At the extent of them was a door of the fame fize with that they had obferved on the other fide, and which opened alfo to the other end of the terrace. " The fituation of this place," faid Alfred, " fhows that the inhabitants left it on a fudden ; but yet it is amaz* ing that fo noble a building, and fuch elegant furniture, fliould have been left to perifh by the ravages of time and neglect:. 1 * Ό г 4< I can-
" I cannot fay I am altogether fo aftoniihed at that," anfwered Matilda · 44 for after fuch circumftances happen¬ ing in it, for heaven's fake who would willingly choöfe it for a habitation r"— Her brother fmiled ; and having again returned to the hall, they afcended one of the ftair- cafes, but foon perceived that both terminated in one landing. The abbey here was not divided -, the chambers were confequently far more intricate:, the apartments were fpa- cious, and had been nobly furniihed ; the beds were heavy.and antique; but all nearly deftroyed, — Ί hey however, after fome trouble, contrived to change one thing with another, till they made up three tolerable beds. Two of them were in a large chamber, and the other clofely adjoining. They deferred, how¬ ever, finifhing their fearch tiil the next day, on account of airing what they were to lie on at night. Leonard ac¬ cordingly
cordingly made a good fire in the halí, and the clothes were placed before it immediately. — After another repaft, Matilda begged Agnes to relate to them thofe occurrences that caufed her to be expofed to the fury of fo terrible a ftorm. — " Alas! Mademoifelle/' re¬ turned Agnes, " I fliould even before this have related to you my little hiftory, had I not been afraid you would have condemned my conduci; butat leaft/* continued the poor girl, with tears in her eyes, u you fliall never have reafon to reproach me with ingratitude for the favours I have received from vou.'* Both Alfred and Matilda defired her, if the relation would brin^ frefli grief to her memory, to decline it, as in that cafe they would willingly fuf- pend their curiofity. Agnes declared, that, though it might D 3 raife
raife in her mind many forrows, yet it would in the end give her pleafure to make them acquainted with her lit¬ tle narrative.—The party having feated themfelves by the fire, iiftened with attention to their artlefs orator.
CHAPTER XXIV. ----------- " Vet I think My tale will move each gentle heart tn pity." Home, Agses*s Tale, MY grandfather and his wife were natives of France, and refided near Moulins·. —His cottage was fituated in the deep defcent of a beautiful valley, and his name was La Faril/* Alfred here looked at his fifter; — thev both recollected the name in their aunt's manufcript, where he was fpok¬ en of in the higheft terms, as one who preferved them, at the hazard of his own Hfe, in a cave near his houfe, from the oflicers of juftice. — They did not, however, interrupt the fair fpeaker. D 4 « They
11 They fupported themfelves com¬ fortably by their induftry and economy, and were refpecled not only by the inhabitants of their little vale, but by all who knew them even at a diftance from it. " They had a fon and daughter; the former was the eldeft, but it was to the latter they looked up for comfort and confolation in their old age. — LeoHn had manifcfted from his birth a proud and haughty difpofition, which made him rebel, againft ali controul, and be aihamed to own his parents, on ac¬ count of their inferior condition in Hfe. Both tried in vain, by inculcating hcv neft and induftrious ideas, to erafe from his bofom thofe dangerous and infa* mous principles which feemed natural to him. — All was however ufelefs :—» he refufed to be a peafant, and deter¬ mined
mined to go to Paris, and feek his for¬ tune in that city- tc He there entered into the fervice of a diflipated nobleman, as valet de chambre. In this fituation he was in¬ troduced to feenes of luxury^ villany, and diflionour ; while every trait in his characler, which had, when a child, only appeared at intervals, (though enough to alarm his parents) now blazed forth with redoubled vigour, and dettroyed thofe few good qualities he had fliown in his youth : — in fliort, he was both a gamefter and a fwindler. His father received but one letter from him during three years j but reports of his mifcondučl were continually in cir¬ culation through that part of the coun¬ try, although fo extremely retired. The health of both his parents was much injured by thefe accounts; and their only comfort was the little cabina.—* D 5 About
About four years after Leolin had left his home, he returned to it, for the firft time, one night, at an unufual hour, but greatly altered, not with the health¬ ful bloom of youth upon his cheek, but feeble, emaciated, and an olà man E in conftitution, though only twenty-one years of age. * 4 His father and mother were greatly Ihocked at the fight of him, but far more fo when he demanded to be con¬ cealed in a cave that was at the bot¬ tom of the garden ; they however loft no time in complying with ^his defire, as he faid he expected to be followed by the officers of juftice in lefs than two hours, on account of a robbery he had committed ; — nor was his conjec¬ ture wrong ; for early in the morning the cottage was furrounded by feveral men : but their fearch proved ineffec¬ tual ; for the cave was fö clofely con¬ cealed
ceaied as to prevent any difcovery. He remained at home fome Httie time, but fhortly returned to thofe vices which had already taken too faft hold on his inclhiatioris, to fuffer him to re¬ linquifli them, whiie he had health or ftrength to follow their purfuits. " " The next news they heard of him was about fix months after, when his father was conducted to Provence, where Leolin iay at the point of death, encompaffed with mifery, ^ wretched¬ nefs, and want; — eaten up with dif¬ eafe, his foul torn with remorfe for paft crimes, and fmkingjnta eternity with а confcience racked by the contending paffions of horror and difmay. He, however, furvived long enough to re¬ ceive a parents bletfing, who would, even then, liave facrificed his own life,,. to have faved that of a profligate and undutiful fon. D 6 « After
44 After feeing Lêolin decently irb terred, the good old man returned to his cottage overwhelmed with grief, yet with fonie hope of enjoying a few years of tranquillity, which might make him a recompenfe for paff mis¬ fortunes. Buť how vain is the forefight of mortals ! in a very Httle time he loft the beloved partner of his heart, who had ftruggled with him through the early part of life, and been equaHy a partaker in his adverfity and pleafures. 44 His health and fpirits fuffered now a greater fhock than ever, and every week vifibly altered him for the worfe» His daughter . Sabina had for fome months received offers of marriage from Cyril, the fon of a neighbouring cot¬ tager j and the ceremony was fhortly to have taken place, had not the fud¬ den death of her mother put it afide. But after fome time they were joined together
together în the holy bands of wedlock ; and La Faril ftill remained with his child, whofe attendance and affection he now needed more than ever., ,; ;/ " I was born about twelve months after their marriage^ and was ğreatly beloved by my parents and grandfa¬ ther. I had jufl attained my thirteenth year when my father's father died, and though every perfon had fuppofed him to be a man poffeffed of fome little pro¬ perty, yet even his fon was aflonifhed to find himfelf heir to a confiderable fortune. After the funeral, we were furprifed to find my father intended to leave his native valley and cottage, to enjoy the luxuries of Paris. This news was like a thunder-bolt to my mother, who knew it would break her parents heart to leave that place, wliere he had been born, brought up, and continued fo many years i. and fhe was certain it would
would equally diftrefs him to be robbed of her company and attendance. In vain fhe advifed her hufband to give up all ideas of abandoning their cot¬ tage for diflipation and vice ; but to purchafe fome land in that part, which would then be doubly dear to them. *' My father was deaf to all entrea¬ ties, and declared his intentions of fet¬ ting off in a fhort time. Our only hope was now that the folicitations of the good La Faril would have more effect on him :—but alas ! he was too weak, and too much fliocked, to make any exertion in the affair; and his prayers failed like thofe of his .daugh¬ ter. The poor old man was confe¬ quently obliged to be removed to the houfe of a neighbour, while bis beloved child was forced from him by a cruel hufband, whofe ambition was kindled by the poffeffion of a little wealth; The
The cottage and goods being djfpofed of, with many tears on the part of my mother and me, we took leave of my grandfather and our native vale. At the expiration of a day we found our¬ felves in the gay city of Paris :—and being fettled in handfome lodgings, the firft news we received was the death of La Faril, who furvived but a very fhort time after his daughter's depar¬ ture. It will be needlefs to enlarge on the grief that both my mother and I felt on the occafion;—we even thought we could trace fome figns of remorfe and forrow in the breaft of my father. " We were fhortly introduced to thofe gaieties and vices which are fuppofed to conftitute genteel life. Having been fettled about fix months in our apart¬ ments, my mother candidly afked my father what trade or profeflion he in¬ tended to follow, or in what manner he 3 defigned
defigned to turn his fortune to the beft advantage : <— but he told, us to enjoy our prefent bleflings*without troubling ourfelves with.painful ideas of what might happen on the morrow, Thefe pernicious principles were certainly, in one refpeel, the ruin of us ; — for he heeded not the advice of his wife or real friends, but plunged into every extravagance that feemed to gratify his wiflies. " He, however, took fome Httle care of my education, and I was inftrucled in every branch of ufeful learning. " Matters continued in this fituation for three years ; during which time my father purchafed a handfome villa, and our houfe was conftantly crowded with company. His wife molt earneftly en¬ treated him to contraa his expenfes ; but her prayers were ufeieis, and he 8 ftiU
♦ .ftill anfwered in the fame carelefs man¬ ner,. 4 Let to-morrow take care for itfelf/ We, neverthelefs, faw him at times diftreffed and unhappy, and he would return home in an evening, from fpending the day abroad, nearly in a ftate of detraction. My mother had fometimes hinted to me, the caufe of this ftrange behaviour was gambling $ and we were thoroughly convinced of it, when a man, one night, brought a note directed to him, and defired an anfwer to it immediately. Having opened it, wc found it contained aa apointnient to a gaming-houfe that evening. 41 I need not defcribe to you the frefli anxiety this information gave us, nor the rage of my father at the difco¬ very of it : — but we could now plainly tell when he was a favourite of For¬ tune, and when not, by the different turns,
turns of his temper. Among the moft intimate of his friends was a Monfieur Le Selet. This man was a well-known gambler, and withal a dangerous cha - racler in point of gallantry (as he ftyled it) among the ladies. He was a con¬ ftant vifitor; and we feldom fat down to table, but he was one of the party. Monfieur Le Selet, more than once, offended both my mother and myfelf by his behaviour to us in private ; and we complained of it to my father ; but he only rallied us on our prudery, as he called it; and declared him to be a man who had his intereft at heart 44 Thefe gloomy fits which had only appeared at intervals, now returned more and more frequently, infomuch that we really thought his brain was affected, and entreated him to have fome advice. But he would then fly into a violent paffion : — nor was it tiil three
three months after, that he confeffed the caufe of it was the entire lofs of his fortune; and not only that, but he was a debtor to Monfieur to a very confi¬ derable amount. " At the time of this confeffion, Le Selet entered the room, and requefted . to fpeak with my father in private :— we accordingly retired to an apartment fome diftance from that we left. In about two hours, while we were won¬ dering at their long conference, we were very much alarmed by hearing the bell in that room ring violently. Soon after, we heard the fervants in a ' kind of confufion, and were juft going to leave the chamber in order to in¬ quire the reafon for fuch proceedings, when we were met by the houfe- kecper. ť My mafter ! my mafter ľ was all flie could fay. In vain we afked
aiked her to explain her meaning j fhe could utter no other words. " We were therefore oblfged to run to the parlour we had before left,— when, judge our feelings at feeing my father and Monfieur Le Selet both wel¬ tering in their blood. We ran to the former:·*—he had juft recovered from a fainting fit, arid languidly looked up. We knelt bý him and wept ; he feem¬ ed affefled ; and thofe eyes which were· half clofed by death, fh ed tears of for* row and repentance when it was too late, " My wife ! my child I' he cried, ín a voice fcarcely articulate, * 1 have injured you much : —· I have taken you from the peaceful habitation of inno* conce, to be furrounded by vice and villany, to experience poverty, diftrefs, and
and oppreffion. Oh! my God!' he exclaimed with fervency, * look down upon them ; fhield them with thy mer¬ cy from the iron rod of tyranny and injuftice; nor condemn them for the wickednefs of him who now implores ihy aid.' ** His voice failed him ; he fell into convulfions, and expired. Greatly as we had to complain of his conduci, yet our grief was exceflive. A furgeon had been fent for, but all medical aid was ufelefs. The wound he received, as we afterwards underftood, was by his own hand : — a fervant had, from the hall, overheard the converfation. Monfieur Le Selet had called upon him that day for the payment of the fum he owed. My father begged the interval of a week to difcharge it ; this the for¬ mer abfolutely refufed, but told him the whole might on one condition be for¬ given.
given. He aiked with eagernefs by what method he fhould cancel the obligation - y when Le Selet gave him a paper : —- this paper the fervant had fnatched from the floor, and prefented to us : — it was a bond by which my father was to refign his child to the arms of a villain, without any ceremony or articles of ¡marriage. The horror he conceived at this propofal was too much for him to fupport, and he gave way at once to the paffions of revenge and defpair : — he feized a dagger, and plunged it into the breaft of the infa¬ mous Le Selet, — чЬеп rang the bell violently, and afterwards, with the fame hand, ftruck the bloody fteel to his own hčart. Monfieur Le Selet was removed to another chamber, but no hopes en· tertained of his recovery. " The wound, however, we were informed, feemed more favourable after a few
a few days i and we requefted that he might be taken from the houfe as foon as a removal would not endanger his life. My father's affairs were greatly involved : —but we had the happinefs to find, that, after the villa and goods with other efleds were fold, there would not only be enough to pay his debts, but a fmall fum remaining. We now determined to return to our native valley, and accordingly took leave of Paris, and foon found ourfelves before that cottage which we had once called our own, and where the remembrance of paft felicity made our prefent mis¬ fortunes more poignant. ** We were obliged to the charityof a neighbour for a lodging, till we pur¬ chafed a little hovel for our refidence. I then opened a fmall fchool, and had the greater part of the children in the place.
place. By this employment we gained a comfortable living, "Among the neighbouring villagers was one of thé name of Oliver. His characler was without reproach, and he afked my hand in marriage. ·« Neither his friends nor my mother had any objection to this match, though the latter would frequently fay, fhe thought my perfon might command a richer huiband. On the evening be¬ fore that day which was to have united us, as we were fitting before our cot¬ tage, fometimes joining in the ruftic dance, we were fuddeniy ftopped in our ainufement by the arrival of a gen¬ tleman and his fervant. The former advanced with a courteous air: — but judge of my aftonifliment and horror, when I perceived it to be Monfieur Le Selet.
Selet. He feemed perfeclly recovered, and requefted to fpeak with my mother alone. 44 I trembled at the refult of their difcourfe, which continued fome time: — but all my conjectures and my mi¬ fery were complete, when my mother informed me, that monfieur, having thoroughly repented of his former ill conduct and behaviour, now offered, as an atonement, to make me his wife. He fprang to embrace me ; but I flirunk from his arms, and fainted away. On my recovery, they were each ftanding by me, and entreated me to difcard my prefent lover ; while the artful Le Selet talked in fo infinuating a manner, as to bring over my mother entirely to his favour ; for flie fuppofed it would fe¬ cure a handfome independence for her child. But this converfation had no effect on mc,and they each retired with Vol. IL E anger,
anger, and' í with .grief arid diftrefs. But I determined that night to leave them all. Whether you will blame my conduct, I know not, mademoi¬ felle ; but I was certain that monfieur was hy no means the repentant perfon he feemed to be ; and even if he had, I never could have liked him for a huf¬ band. I was alfo fure that my mother could get a living in the fame employ¬ ment as myfelf; for it had been agreed that fhe fhould take my fchool after I was married. With thefe ideas, I packed up a few clothes, with a little money, in a bundle, and left the cottage as foon as I thought my mother was afieep. I had not yet, however, re¬ folved to what part I fliould go, but -determined to apply to a carrier whom I had known for fome time. He was to fet out on a long journey early in the morning, and he lived about a mile diftant. By the time I arrived there, he
he was juft going to fet off. The man's furprife was exceflive to fee me, who he fuppofed was to have been made a wife that day. *' I explained to him the reafons for my vifit, and threw myfelf on his pro~ teciion i he readily granted it, and told me he was going to Italy. This in¬ formation gave me great pleafure, as I thought I might there get employment, and conceal my real name and family. " We had not entered this country above two days, before Balli (the car* tier's name) was taken ill $ his diforder proved violent, and in lefs than a week he was no more. I was neceffitated to fell his cart and the whole of his goods to pay the expenfes of his funeral and illnefs. I now found myfelf in a ftrange place without money or friends. Trui people, however, at the houfe where Е г Baili
Bafil had died, informed me there was a family a few miles diftant, who want¬ ed a domeftic. I accordingly applied : — but how great was my difappoint¬ ment to find they were juft provided with one ! I found the whole of my little property would fupport me but three days longer, and began ferioufly to-repent leaving my cottage, when I was overtaken by that violent ftorm, which proved one of the happieft inci¬ dents of my life, by introducing me to your, friendfhip, care, and generofity ; to which I moft certainly owe my ex¬ iftence." — Here the poor girl burft into a flood of tears, and concluded her ftory.
CHAPTER XXV. SECRECY. " Canft thou not minifter to a mind difeafed $ Pluck from the memory a rooted forrow j Rafe out the written troubles of the br*in ; And with fome fweet oblivious antidote Cleanfe the foul bofom of that perilous fluff Which weighs upon the heart ?" $HAKSP£AKE, BOTH Alfred and Matilda thanked Agnes for the recital of her narrative : they pitied her misfortunes, and pro¬ mifed to protect her as long as it was in their power. Not only their own feelings at the time prompted them to this, but gratitude for.the afliftance their parents had received from her fa¬ mily. After fome further converfation, E3 the
the bed furniture was carried to the rooms above ; and, having partook of a flight fupper, they retired to their apartments.' The chambers; however, feemed extremely cold, and Matilda begged Leonard would make up a Ht¬ tle fire of faggots in each of them. This was accordingly done y and Agnes having lighted a wax taper, which flie placed on a large marble flab, they took leave of Alfred for the night, who, with Ms faithful fervant, entered the room adjoining. " Before we go tö reft," faid Matila da, " I will take a more particular for* vey of this chamber/' Agnes trembled j Matilda took the taper, and walked round ît. Tbe apart¬ ment was not fo large as many, but had equally the fame gloomy appear¬ ance.
ance. —The bed had formerly been noble and elegant, but was now partly decayed ; the high and heavy cornice of it feemed rotted by time ; the furni¬ ture, they could juft perceive, had been of crimfon velvet; but the curtains were now, in many parts, entirely threadbare. An old-faihioned cabinet and dreflîng-table, both of which had been ornamented with gilded figures, and ftood in a gothic recefs, by the dim light, feemed, in form, to reprefent a tomb. Matilda, in vain, ftrove to open the former; it was locked, nor could ihe find any key. The wainfcot- ting was hung round with large pic¬ tures ; but, except one, they were all nearly deftroyed, fo as to make it im¬ poflible to difcover the fubjecrs. That which was in fome prefervation wa« the portrait of a man, in an Italian ha¬ bit, at full length. He feemed of mid¬ dle fize and elegant figure; but the E 4 coun-
countenance was melancholy and de- jecled, while he refted with one arm on the fragment of a grave-ftone. Matilda gazed on it for a confiderable time 5 it was extremely like the miniature of her 1 father, which flie wore in her bofom. She ftood in fuch a fituation that the eyes feemed to look full at her. Painful and horrid ideas now arofe in her mind 5 flie almoft fancied flie faw the features move :~ the thought over¬ came her : fhe ihuddered, funk in a chair, and burft into a flood of tears. Agnes had attentively obferved her, and now joined her tears with thofe of Matilda; yet, with unaffected fimpli¬ city, ftrove to give her comfort and con¬ folation. Her efforts at laft fucceeded, and, drying her tears, the former re¬ tired to a reftlefs pillow. It was a confiderable time before Matilda
Matilda couid clofe her eyes ; the mis¬ fortunes that encompaffed her appear¬ ed now more terrible than ever. Ag¬ nes was in a ferene fleep ; all was filent and gloomy : her eyes wandered over the defolate chamber; and fhe could ftill fee by the fudden Hght of the wood fire, which was dying away, but now and then blazed at intervals, the face of the piclure, which ftill feemed to look at her. The ember was at laft en¬ tirely extinguiflied, and the room was left in total darknefs, except from the flame of the wax- taper. At length, tired out with melancholy and terrific recolleclions, flie fell into a difturbed flumber. Horrid vifions and ghaftly figures now floated on her brain. Her father approached, covered with blood ; and, with an angry tone, called on her to revenge his murder. She ftarted, E 5 turned,
turned, and again compofed herfelf ro reft ι but It was impoflible. She now faw herfelf in an apartment of the al> bey that was hung with black j in the middle of which lay a corpfe in ftate : flie walked up to the coffin : a voice whifpered her, it was her grandfather. His "countenance was black ^ and it ftruck her he was poifoned. At that moment count DOllifont appeared ; he attempted to force her from the fpot ; but, at the apparition of her father, which then afcended, with an afhy palenefs, and disfigured with wounds, he fled, and Matilda, in the ftruggle of horror and affliction, again awoke. In fhort, during the whole night, her mmd was fo entirely difordered by uneafy flurabers, that flie arofe in the morning with a confiderable degree of fever, and by no means refreihed. It was re¬ markably fine, and fhe ventured to open Ihe heavy cafement of her chamber. There
There was no danger of being obferv¬ ed ; the high trees that furrounded the building, made it impoffible fhe could be perceived but by thofe in the inner part. The air refreihed her, but the languor of her fpirits ftill continued. The breakfaft, which Agnes had pre¬ pared with the utmoft neatnefs, was ferved in the firft apartment next the hall. Leonard had got up very early, and cleaned it out ; and the room now wore a far more comfortable appear¬ ance than it had done the day before. Alfred noticedt the pale looks of his fifter, and afked, with a fmile, if fhe had been difturbed by any of the ghofts. She declared fhe had not been in the leaft alarmed; and each anfwering in the fame manner, their fears of fuper¬ natural intrufion partly vaniíhed. - They now confulted the beft method E 6 to
ABBEY.' to procure provifion, which muft be done that day, with feveral other arti¬ cles : at laft it was agreed that Leonard ihould take a bafket, and go out from the abbey fo as to be feen by no one in the way to it ; and that he fhould mix with other perfons in the public market, where he could purchafe what he wanted, and perhaps gain fome intelli¬ gence concerning their refidence, and other circumftances relative to the count: but Alfred defired him by no- jneans to force the converfation, as it might raife curiofity in the peafantry to know who and what he was* This mat¬ ter being fettled, Leonard was fhortly equipped, and fallied forth with the utmoft caution. Alfred now propofed to his fifter to examine thofe apartments they had not had time to look at the night before. Agnes faid fhe now had courage enough to
to ftay in the great hall, which fhe had much rather do, and employ herfelf ia preparing the dinner* Alfred and Matilda accordingly af¬ cended the ftair-cafe, and walked through the fuite of rooms they had before feen* They then croffed feveral others, larger and far more heavy.-— Thefe terminated in a paffage, fupport¬ ed by fmall columns, and arched over in the gothic ftyle. This place was extremely dark; they, however, with fome difficulty, paffed it, and entered, by a pair of folding doors, a mere fpa- cious apartment than they had yet feen, and, if poflible, more gloomy. It had been entirely hung with black, and, from every appearance, had contained a corpfe that had lain there in ftate at ibme former period. Several pieces of tapers were ftill ftanding in black glafles ; and, in the middle, ftood bear¬ ers
«s for the pitrpofe of ftipporting a cof¬ fin ; but there was* now onliy the re¬ mains of a large рюше of black fea¬ thers. MatUda thought of her dream, and trembled Alfred himfelf feemed at firft ftruck wkh awe, but prefently re¬ covering himfelf, laughed at his fifter, and ftrove to keep up his own fpirits, by rallying Matilda on her fears. She entreated him to return; the gloomy horror of this chamber overcame her, and flie found herfelf extremely faint. He placed her on a kind of couch, that had alfo been covered with black velvet, and made feveral efforts to open the windows: this was, however, to no purpofe ; but after fome trouble, he pulled down a part of the broken fhut¬ ters, and confequently received more light, which had before only entered from an opening at the top. Matilda
Matada in a few minutes recovered, but declared fhe would proceed no fur¬ ther.—Alfred perfuaded her to afeend the ftairs that wound rerød the weft tower i but fhe pofitively refufed. Ие wifhed much tb foe the apart¬ ment, which, by his aunťs manufcrip*, he wasi informed, terminated, as was fuppofed, fhe fearch of his father. But his fifter abfolutely refufing to go any further, they returned to the halb Ag'· nes noticed the dejected looks of Ma¬ tilda, but did not inquire the caufe· Alfred refolved within himfelf to ex¬ amine the weft tower the following day, and fatisfy his curiofity concerning the myftery of that extraordinary chamber. Agnes was in fár better fpirits than fhe had been in fince their meeting, and tried every way to comfort and en¬ tertain her dejected friends. Both felt * the
the kindnefs of her intention, and ac¬ quainted her with moft of the circum¬ ftances relative to their misfortunes: there were, however, fome/events they thought proper to conceal. Lady Caroline Albourne was, how¬ ever, ftill one of the chief objecis of Alfred's thoughts. He loved her, yet was confeious he had not even merited her efteem. — By her manner juft before he ieft England, heflattered himfelf he could perceive innocent traits of a con¬ feffion of more than a- common regard for him. But even though his conjec¬ tures fliould prove right, her prudence, her underftanding, muft have told her to tear from her heart a man, who, by the conduci he then purfued, muft bring her to wretchednefs, want, and mifery. But there was yet even a greater misp fortune to ftrike him with remorfe. His name, his characler, were tarnifhed with
with diflionour. That name, which, he had been proud to fay, had not ihamed the family it belonged to, and that nicety of honour which it had been his utmoft pride to preferve, were now, through folly and extravagance, ruined by the flanderous tongue of calumny, both in England and his own country. In the former it was moft likely he would receive the appellation of an af* faflin and a fwindler ; in the latter, he would be branded as a bafe, mean/ cowardly deferter from the fervice of his country; a difgrace to France, and the noble profeflion he had been brough up to—the defence of his country's rights. " Damned ideas!" he would exclaim in a voice of frantic rage.—His fifter and Agnes were alarmed.—He begged their pardon : — it was the recollection of former diftrefs that croffed his brain at
> at that moment. Matilda plainly per¬ ceived his impetuofity of temper broke out at every interval when the recollec¬ tion of his folly, and the mifery it had brought them to, intruded on his me¬ mory. She therefore ftudioufly avoided to mention any topic in difcourfe that might lead to a remembrance of difa¬ greeable circumftances* Her griefs were confequently buried m her own bofom ; yet they were not left poignant than thofe of her brother. She loved Mr. Milverne ;, but every hope of feeing him again appeared al¬ moft impoffibleu His letter,.which they received at Dover, mentioned that he would join them as foon as poflible in italy ; but they then had little thought of an occurrence happening, that oblig- c ihem to keep more concealed in this place, than their fituation might have lequked. them to have done, had they remained
remained in England. Nor was it likely Mr. Milverne fhould even have an idea that they were inhabitants of Grafviile Abbey. The more fhe thought on thofe fufferings flie had experienced fince her mother's death, the more flie was fur¬ prifed how fhe had furvived fuch a fe¬ ries of- misfortunes ; but İt fully con¬ vinced her that the Supreme Being conftantly fupports thofe who truft in him, though they may for a time be ordained to bear a load of adverfity and forrow. Leonard returned in about two hours, bden with the purchafes he had made* Hé acquainted them that he had beea taken no particular notice of^—but, mingling with other perfons, had bought commodities, without receiving any difagreeable queftions. This was pleafing intelligence, and tbey fat down to dinner with fome degree of cheap* fulnefs«
fulnefs. But yet there was fomething in Leonard's countenance, which fhow* ed he had been greatly chagrined, and that he had heard more than he chofe to communicate. At the latter part of the day he requefted to fpeak with his mafter alone. Alfred immediately granted his re¬ queft, and they afcended to their cham¬ ber. Matilda was a filent fpeöator of this myfterious behaviour. Agnes was ex¬ tremely alarmed ; fhe was certain, flie faid, from Leonard's behaviour, that he muft have received fome very dreadful intelligence : and, in all probability, he thought it of too terrible a nature for them to be informed of. Matilda fmiled, and ftrove to difpel her fears, but was herfelf very much hurt.
hurt. Agnes*s conjecture was by no means unlikely ; yet fhe felt herfelf flighted at not being made a confidant in the affair. Their conference lafted near two hours. When they returned to the parlour, Leonard's countenance was ftill more gloomy, while Alfred ftrove to affume a gaiety foreign to his heart. Their fupper was a filent meal j each feemed abforbed in meianchoiy reflections ; and, after forae little time, they retired to their apartments.
CHAPTER XXVL ANOTHER íkeplefs night was paffed by Matilda ·, and Agnes requefted fhe would take her breakfaft, before fhe arofe for the day. She therefore ac¬ quainted Alfred with his fifter's indif- pofition. He was extremely concern¬ ed, and far more fo to obferve her de¬ jected manner and pale countenance, when flie joined them at dinner. Leo¬ nard feemed rather more chearful than he had been the night before ; but his mafter ftill retained a gloomy fadnefs, that fhowed fomc caufe of diftrefs lay heavy at his heart. Both furveyed Ma¬ tilda with a fcrutinifing eye, and Alfred after fome little time afked with a pre¬ tended air of indifference, if flie had refted
^refted as free ífrom difturbance as the -night before. It would not have been difficult for a common perfon to have perceived he paufed with unufual anxiety for an anfwer, though he ftrove, as much as poflible, to conceal that emotion which was vifible to all.— She told him flie had.—Ihis reply feemed to give him confiderable pleafure ; and on her re¬ turning the queftion, he alfo anfwered in the affirmative. The alteration in his manner continued but a few mo¬ ments, and he again reiapfed into his former melancholy. He now mention¬ ed his intention of examining the rooms in the weft tower, and afked Leonard to accompany him in his refearches. Matilda faid languidly, that fhe alfo meant to be of the party ; — at w! ich declaration her brother looked very much chagrined. w I ra* 7
<c I rather think, Matilda/' faid he, cc you had better decline it ; the cold¬ nefs and damps of thofe deferted chambers will not agree with your health and fpirits 5 particularly now you are fo much indifpofed." She thought it might amufe her, and was certain the walk would be of fer¬ vice. Agnes attended ; and they open¬ ed the large heavy door that fliowed the winding ftone ftair-cafe of the weft tower. They found it very difagreeable to afcend, — the place having been fo Jong forfaken, that large webs of duft and dirt almoft impeded their paffage· They at length, however, arrived at the firft landing-place, where two apart¬ ments appeared, — the one to the right, the other to the left. They entered the former. It was a fmall fquare room, lighter than many they had feen in the abbey, but entirely clear from 6 furni-
furniture ; that on the left was of the fame fize, but contained feveral imple¬ ments of war, among which were fwords, fhiclds, fpears, and a few fire¬ arms, — a trumpet and drum, with other inftruments of martial mufic : but all of them were in bad repair. They again afcended the continua¬ tion of the ftone ftair-cafe, and found themfelves on the fecond landing. The apartments on this floor were of the fame dimenfions as thofe below, but had been far better furnifhed. That on the right fide, was where their fa¬ ther had fo myfterioufly vaniflied. It w 7 as hung round with tapeftry, whieh was now nearly decayed. The furni¬ ture was all Gothic, and greatly da¬ maged ; while the elevated narrow cafe¬ ments, placed at a confiderable height from the floor, gave this room a mofl dreary and folitary appearance : in Vol. IL F fliort,
fhort, it greatly refembled, and had, they fuppofed, in former times, been ufed as a place of confinement for fome unfortunate prifoner. Leonard exa¬ mined the boards; and they could plainly perceive thofe fpots of blood which had been before obferved by Edward and the phyfician.. In all pro¬ bability this blood was their father's î — the idea ftruck each of them. Agnes was greatly fhocked and terrified ; Leo¬ nard converfed with confiderable emo¬ tion in private with his mafter for fome minutes, whiie Matilda, unable to bear her own feelings, burft into a flood of tears. After an hyfteric fit of weeping, flie found herfelf much better ; and> having clofed the apartments, they de¬ fcended to the parlour. Some hours were ágain fpent by Al¬ fred and Leonard in a private confe¬ rence above. Both ftill retained a fettled melan- 3
melancholy on their features; while Agnes was more aftonifhed, and Ma** tilda more alarmed than ever. The reafon of her brother's fecrefy flie could by no means difcover:—-hitherto flie had been made acquainted with every circumftance concerning their fituationj but Alfred was now filent even on ge¬ neral topics, and only put confidence in his fervant. Her pride forbade her to afk queftions, yet her curiofity prompted her to the humiliation, as being the only means of gratifying it. Evening approached : ·**- their fupper was again a filent meal, and they retired without any converfation having pafled, Agnes was foon in a profound fleep; but Matilda's thoughts on her brother's behaviour robbed her of repofe. It was now the laft hour of the night> and flie ftrove again to compofe herfelf to reft, when (he thought flie heard her bro- F 2 titer's
ther's voice; yet fhe confidered flie muft be deceived, as both Leonard and he had. been in their apartments near two hours. The wind was extremely high f Matilda, however, ftill Iiftened, and found flie was not miftaken. — A liftener was an appellation flie deteft¬ ed ; but yet flie thought her prefent fituation took every ftigma from the characler. She w r as, however, ftill ir- refolutc ín what manner to acl, when a loud word from her brother made her de¬ termined to h^ar more. Having accord¬ ingly thrown over her a night-gown, flie crept to the door. All was filent again for fome time :—but after an in¬ terval of many minutes, flie heard her brother check Leonard for talking fo loud ; « Matilda," faid he, 44 may not yet be afieep." They then continued fo low that fhe could not even under¬ ftand one word. After another inter¬ val, Leonard anfwered to a queftion which
which Alfred afked him, that « It was not the time,'* 44 If I die in the attempt," faid Al¬ fred, " I will unravel this myftery :—· and ιΠ once—" Here a violent guft of wind rattled through the chambers, and fhe was unable to diftinguifh their difcourfe, though they ftill continued talking. At length, however, flie heard Leonard fay, w I will be very careful, fir : — уоц may depend on my fidelity." " For heaven's fake," continued Al¬ fred, follow it to the utmoft :—but at all events do not difcover—" Here again the wind drowned their voices ; and fhortly after, ihe heard them retire for the night* F3 Ma-
Matilda^ chilled vvith horror and un¬ certainty, returned to her bed, and fell into a difturbed flum ber. In the morn¬ ing fhe appeared at breakfaft, though her looks plainly told the ftate of her xninçh ч< Leonard," fáid her brother, "is this morning going again to the public market." Matilda was aftoniihed 5 fhe knew they were in want of no provb fion.—Alfred "wiíhed to procure fome wine, an article he was certain they were all in need ofľ r 4 * But furely,** anfwered his fifter, < f Leonard purchafed enough when he was laft- there." 44 True," faid he : "but we have had an accident, and broke nearly all the bottles which were full." Although
Although fuch an accident was not impoffible, yet Matilda greatly doubted the*truth of this affertion 5 and in her brother's manner flie thought flie could perceive an embarraffment, which fliow¬ ed it was merely.an excufe to keep from her the real caufe of Leonard's errand. —He, hosvever, fet off in a little tirhej equipped.the fame as when he before left the abbey, and ufing the like cau¬ tion at leaving it. After his departure they walked on the terrace which extended from the eaft to the weft end of the building. Agnes was fome diftance from them, when Matilda confidered that this would be a good opportunity to men¬ tion to her brother the great alteration fhe had noticed in him, fince his long and fecret conference with Leonard. Alfred at firft feemed only to laugh al her fears, and wifhed to perfuade her F 4 flie
fhe was miftaken ; but flie urged the matter fo clofe that he at laft confeffed Leonard's information that night had given him confiderable uneafinefs and diftrefs. 44 Then," faid Matilda with quick¬ nefs, <c let me fhare in that diftrefs, —- ' which will be far better than to remain in dus horrid fufpenfe." " That is impoflible," returned Al¬ fred : " you cannot, muft not, be ac¬ quainted with the affair." His vehemence alarmed her. 44 Is then the circumftance of fo fe¬ cret a nature, that I, who have hitherto been made a partner in the knowledge of all thofe misfortunes that have be¬ fallen us, muft not now know that winch your fervant ,is privy to, and which к
Which niay concern toe equally with yourfelf ?'* « Be not offended* Matilda, if I telí you again it is impoffible that in this cafe I fhould gratify your wifb : but be affured every method I take will be for your good and fafety 5 nor muft you be furprifed at any remarkable behaviour in me at different intervals, or terrify yourfelf at any uncommon occurrences in this abbey, as our refidence here is row more neceffary than ever." " Have you then feen any thing more than common?" faid his fifter with great emotion» u With refpeñ to this too, you muft/ excufe me," anfwered Alfred : " at all events, however, we have one confola¬ tion, that thofe who truft in the Su« F 5 preme
preme Bemg »need never fear the inters ruption of deceafed perfons." Agnes ať this moment overtook them> and he hurried from his fifter with con^ fiderable precipitation into the hall. Matilda ftood motionleft fome minutes; * c í am fure, madam," faid Agnes r 14 fignor Maferini has been faying fome¬ thing very dreadful ; for I watehed you all the time, and, though at a diftance, could perceive your countenance change feveral times/ ? Matilda wiihed to keep the laft equivocal words of her brother from Agnes, аз flie knew flie was, if poffible, more timid than herfelf ; but her looks contradicled her fpeech, and, HttloNifed to fay untruths, even the queftions of the innocent Agnes puz¬ zled and perplexed her. They return¬ ed to Alfred ш the hall. He was more melan-
oielancholý than ever,. and' Matilda v^as forry fhe had fpoken to him on thø fubjecl. After fome tiine ^Leonard returned, and produced plenty of wi^e, with part of a French newfpaper, which he told them he had by chance laid hold of. One of the paragraphs mentioned the deathof count DOllifont» &nd that, fey the-account of the phyßoinns, he was murdered by a wounď.giyen him at a mafquerade by his relation the cheva¬ lier Maferini, wbp bad filed to France 5 but that ftričt fearch was,-now* making* after him both in that country and Italy. <ç 'At all events, then/' faid Alfred, 44 we muft remain neje, till either juftice- brings my caufe to a proper crifis, or till I am crufhed, by* arbitrary power and matchlefs villany." F ó He
He feerned- much atened;. yet bora the newsi with unufual ^fortitude. í Leo-* nard requefted to fpeak to him.alone; and they retired fo their apartment. Agnès "ajahi^wondered.at-theïe private çönfe*£İYce$v and ^Matitdai was yet fibhr^; In àbout-anAour and*a¿half tficy.reU turned to the f>ariour¿ .¿ Leòíiard ililí continued gîöoiny ;-^4but tberíe^whs ά> confiÖeEåfek alteration, hi hm mafter:-^ he was now ös full of fpirits d^héhad been before mélanchofy ; )but yet they feemed forced; and it «appeared more like a madman's mirth, than the regu^ }ar fenfations of joy. He laughed, talk-; ed immoderately, but yet often fighed* 4 Matilda obferved him with anxiety and terror, while Agnes and Leonard were filent fpeclators of his ftrange be¬ haviour. SuppeMimeát length arrived ¿ when the little group formed an ex¬ prefiive
preifive fcene. Alfred atone end of thé table, firft in an exceflive fit of merri· ment, — then looking round him with horror* hardly able to fupprefs the rifing tearr·^ His fifter was feated nexbhirn, —-her colour entirely^ feded thŕotígfr diftrefs, while her fine eyes were fixed an j hTmwith ä look'of miféry thatnvel! fliowed the inw&ird<workmgşof befoul. <— Agnes wept, and looked up to Ma¬ tilda for confoìatron, who r was now un¬ able to give ît* ' ' íw The' good old Leonard was feated at a little diftance from them, furvey¬ ing each with attention, and often wip¬ ing from his aged eye the watery drop of fympathetic tendernefs. 44 Give us more light," faid Alfred, * we will make a jovial night of it ; and fet од another bottle of the laft wine." Leonard obeyed 5 two more candles Avere
were lighted, and the bottle placed be¬ fore him. * You do not confider," faid Ma¬ tilda, 4( that it grows late, and we have already had the ufual quantity." * ·* I care not," he anfwered : ** the Ţufcan grape revives me." His fifter perceived it had already taken great effect on his fpirits. The night now began to grow extremely ftormy, and the thunder rolled over the * building with confiderable noife. The room being very large, the further part from where they fat was entirely dark ; but even this fpace was at intervals il¬ lumined by the flaflies of lightning wdiich darted through the windows in that part, the fhutters being entirely de¬ cayed. Matilda and Agnes once more begged him to retire to reft; but he was
was obftinate,-—declared he would not,—and ordered another bottle, hav¬ ing drank the chief part of the former one. In fhort, he took bumper after bumper for fome time, while every mo¬ ment he became more frantic, and the avidity with which he drank confirmed him to be diftracled.—-His behaviour alfo fhowed him to be intoxicated; and the wails of Grafviile Abbey, which had fo long remained in filence, now rung again with his exclamations and noife.—Yet his voice was often drown¬ ed by the repeated claps of thunder, while the lightning became more and more dreadful. Matilda, Agnes, and Leonard, were all filent fpeclators of this fcene. It was now midnight, and they gave up all idea of perfuadingliim to retire to reft, " Fill your glaffes !" he cried : " lam going to give you a noble health."— He rofe from his feat, and fighed hea- vilv :
vily :— then holding up the fparklinjf goblet, he exclaimed, «« Lady Caroline* Albourne!" ; A moft tremendous clap of thunder f Each looked with horror : Alfred ftood in the fame pofture as when he uttered the health ; nor had he been able even to put his lips to the glafs ^ but, after the noife entirely died away, feemed to be liftening with a degree of terror, as if he then heard it.—In a few minutes he recovered himfelf. " This h a dreadful night," faid he to his fifter.· * 4 It is indeed," anfwered Matilda^ * 4 For heaven's fake, Alfred, let us retire to reft : I affure you I can hardly fup¬ port myfelf." i€ Another health !" he cried/relapfc ing
„ ing into his former manner; — " an¬ other I muft drink r —Leonard, reph> nifli the goblet." " You forget, fir, that it is now full.* " True, true," he cried, u I had for¬ got,— Here then," faid he, laughing-, <ť is to the old ghoft that inhabits this abbey. A violent crafli í All ftarted from their feats.—Agnes fhrieked, — Matilda looked wild,—* Leonard ran to their affiftance ; while Alfred was ftill unable to put the gob¬ let to his mouth, but ftood half ftupe- fied with wine, horror, and aftonifli¬ ment. The noife feemed to come from an apartment which opened by a pair of folding doors into the dark -part of the room where they were now ftanding. Before
Before any one could fpeak, a vio¬ lent clap of thunder followed, and fe¬ veral flaihes of lightning. The firft per¬ fon who broke filence, was Leonard. " Be not frightened," faid he to Matil¬ da and Agnes; buthis tongue faultered, and fliowed he was equally terrified with themfelves. " This is a terrible night," continued Leonard ; " but I will protect you to the laft drop of my blood." . « And fo will I," eried Alfred, ftag¬ gering from his feat :. " I will protect you too." u Talk not of protecting us, Alfred,' anfwered Matilda : " for if the fpirit of our father at this time walks in thefe apartments, it is but to reproach you for your prefent difgraceful fituation. —. Come, Agnes ! we will go to bed." " Ohi
41 Oh î no indeed, mademoifelle î I dare not," faid Agnes : ** I cannot move." Matildas reproach feemed to have fome effect on her brother. " My fa¬ ther 1" he exclaimed» A deep groan ! "Hark! hark! he anfwers me: it is from that room : 1*11 fee him, if I die." ** Not for worlds," faid Leonard, holding him. "There may be trea¬ chery in this bufinefs, fir: pray ftay where you are." Another groan J " Hark again !" he exclaimed, " I will go ; by heavens, I will be fatis¬ fied." At that moment he difengaged himfelf
himfelf from Leonard, who catching up a fword, followed him. They both rufhed to the dark part of the room. Alfred was firft :—he puihcd open the folding doors. An amazing flafli of lightning illumined the apartment they entered. Alfred, in a tone of horror, exclaimed, " There !" The obječb caught Leonard's eye. * In the name of the Holy Virgin/* faid the old man, " who art thou r" 44 'Tis gone, 'tis vaniíhed/' anfwered Alfred. He was right : there was no¬ thing now to bc feen. They returned to the parlour; Madida and Agnes* who had been entirely forgotten by them, were lying on the couch, nearly fenfelefs ; but the former had heard the words that pafled, diftinctly. Alfred had İn a great degree regained his rea~ fon. Matilda and Agnes after fome little
little time recovered, and, with aflift-» ance, arrived at their chamber : here they parted for the night; and thus ended an adventure which feemed in a great meafure to confirm all the terrific reports concerning Grafviile Abbey.
CHAPTER XXVIL ΤϊΛ HERMIT. w Beneath a mountain's brow, the moft remote And inacceffible by íhepherds trod, In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand, A hermit liv'd,—a melancholy man, , Who was the wonder of onr wandering fwains. Auftere and lonely, cruel to himfelf, Did they report him ; the cold earth his bed ; Water his drink : his food the íhepherds* alms. I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd With reverence and with pity. Mild he fpake, And, entering on difcourfe, fuch ftories told, As made me oft revifit his fad cell." H0M£* WHILE in the midft of bufinefs or employment, we often fuppofe, on ac¬ count of many difagreeable circum¬ ftances that are apt to impede our paf¬ fage .through Hfe, that we could with pleafure
pleafure relinquifli all commerce with- mankind, and live after the manner of a mifanthrope, totally fecluded from our fellow-creatures. — However thefe ideas may intrude at certain intervals» yet it is improbable they fhould conti¬ nue : when once brought to the trial, we ihould, like the inhabitants of Graf- ville Abbey, languifli after fociety, though our fituation might totally pre¬ clude fuch a wifli from being gratified. The agitation of Matilda*s fpirits, and her lofs of reft the few preceding nights, combined to throw her into a profound flumber ; and though flie was ftill haraffed with uncomfortable and terrific dreams, yet flie enjoyed fome repofe; but the little benefit fhe re¬ ceived from it was entirely deftroyed when flie awoke in the morning, by a recollection of the late ftrange and un¬ common circumftances. Her brother's • behaviour
behaviour was as incomprehcnfible aS the violent crafli and difmal groans which had been heard in the apartment adjoining the parlour. There was alfo another myftery to be explained, that is, what the appearance was which had drawn from Alfred and his fervant thofe exclamations of horror that flie had heard. This was a point of curio¬ fity, with refpect to which flie -in par¬ ticular wiihed to be fatisfied ; but at all events ŕhe refolved to requeft no fur¬ ther communication from her brother. Leonard, therefore, was the only perfon jhe could queftion on the fubjecl ; and to him fhe determined to apply at a proper opportunity. At a very late hour they affembled to breakfaft. Alfred feemed buried in melancholy reflections, but made an apology for his late frantic beha¬ viour. о Matilda
Matilda Ìooked extremely ill ;—Ag¬ nes feemed by no means recovered from her terror ; while Leonard's coun¬ tenance was ftill forrowful and gloomy» Matilda underftood, at the latter part of the morning, that Leonard was again going to the public market ; but it caufed no furprife, aş they were in want of provifion. He accordingly, in a little time, fct off for the purpofe of procuring fome. Alfred, after his departure, retired to his chamber, and took pen, ink, and paper with him. Agnes cooked the dinner, and Matilda took up a book. The former now began to converfe on the events of the night before. sc It does not fignify, mademoifelle," conti¬ nued Agnes, in a harangue of fome length ; " but there is fomething very unaccountable in this abbey. — I am fure I fhall now be afraid even to re- Vol. II. G maia
main in this parlour by myfelf The holy Virgin protect us !—but I fliould not wonder if we Were all to be carried away one of thefe days by ihe hobgob¬ lins that haunt the place." <x Rather one of thefe nights," an¬ fwered Matilda, willing to put off the difcourfe with a jeft. <c Indeed, mademoifelle, but father Dunftan ufed to fay fuch things have been feen, even when the fun fliined.*' Matilda could not help laughing; bţit Agnes looked more ferious, and de¬ clared father Dunftan was a man who had often convcrfed with them, and knew their tricks as well as they did themfelves. " For heaven's fake, Agnes," replied Matilda, 4( do not encourage thefe fil¬ ly ideas, or you will make your life a fcene
fcene of uncomfortable apprehenfion and terror." 44 It is a misfortune, mademoifelle ; and you muft pity inftead of blaming me. Yet," continued Agnes, with an arch look, i£ I rather think you only talk in this indiflerent manner to me, vvith the kind intent of difpclHng my fears : 1 thank you ; but you muft give me leave to fay, I think your thoughts are far different from vour words." u This remark was juft, and Matil¬ da's hefitating manner and blufli con¬ firmed Agnes that flic was right. Af¬ ter fome time, Alfred returned from his chamber. He fpoke but little, nnd fecmed to wait with a degree of impa¬ tience for Leonard's return, lie, how¬ ever, flopped longer than ufual ; and they hnd nearly finiihed their dinner wlien he entered. Ile brought with him a good flock of provifions; but ť'e G г inii* r-
information he received was by no means agreeable. The people, he faid, talked much of the death of count dOllifont, and the large reward that wás offered for the chevalier Maferini, his relation ; " and though the general voice is much in favour of you, fir,'* con¬ tinued Leonard, " yet we muft not truft to that, and forget the temptation the money will excite ;"—-an obfervation which they all agreed was very juft. In a fliort time he requefted a private conference with his mafter : and they re¬ turned to the parlour in about an hour. Alfred was then more compofed than he had been for fome time, and Leo¬ nard rather more chearful. After fupper the latter informed them that he had heard, among other things concerning the abbey, that an old hermit refided in a cave near it, which had been his habitation for a number of years. " I won-
** ί wonder/' faid Alfred, " if it would be poffible to pay him a vifit without being obferved by any other perfon." " Nothins? more eafv, fir," anfwered Leonard. ťť His cave is at the bottom of a long walk of cypreffes, on the weft fide of this building. The fituation is fo retired, and withal fo near the ab¬ bey, that it is never intruded on by any of the villagers/' « e I fhould wifh much to fee him," faid Alfred : " he may give me informa¬ tion of confiderable importance." " It is not at all unlikely, fir ; for people fay he knows more about the ftory of Grafviile Abbey than any one in this part : though he is always filent oa thefubjea." " To-morrow, then, I will vifit him,*' G j anfwered
anfwered Alfred, " firft as an indiffe- rent perfon : but, if I find hiin a man of piety, and inclined to prove my friend, I will make him acquainted with the whole ftate of my affairs." " But I hope you will firft," faid Ma¬ tilda, " be perfeclly fatisfied he deferves vour confidence." 44 That you may depend on ; but I can fee no objection to you and Agnes being of the party; and you will then, Matilda, be able to judge of my con- du&" Matilda was pleafed with the propo¬ fal, and faid ihe was certain the air would be of fervice to her. In fliort, this fcheme feemed to meet with the approbation of all ; and the evening was fpent with more fociaiity than they had enjoyed fince the fecond night of their refidence in the abbey. At
At an early hour they retired to reft; and as Agnes and Matilda left the par¬ lour, each gave a fide look at the fold¬ ing-doors on the further end, and trem¬ bled as they advanced to their cham¬ bers. Matilda refted better than fhe had for fome weeks, and rofe with more than common fpirits. She contrived to get down ftairs before her brother, pur¬ pofely to obtain an opportunity of fpeaking to Leonard alone. Accord¬ ing to her wifhes^ he was in the parlour letting the breakfaft-table, while Agnes was preparing it in the hall.—She im¬ mediately opened the fubjeci, and beg¬ ged him to difclofe to her thofe circum* ftances which had occafioned fuch myf¬ terious behaviour/* Leonard looked chagrined. " Alas ! mademoifelle," he anfwered, " it is G 4 impoflible:
impoflible: —excufe me,—but I can^ not fatisfy you." Matilda was difpleafed. " It cuts me to the heart," continued he, " it does indeed, mademoifelle, to refufe your requeft : but I am bound by a facred tie." u I would not have you break it, then," replied Matilda: "yet, though you are much older than I, Leonard, I muft caution you not to be too precipi¬ tate in entering into every fcheme my brother propofes to you. He is rafh ; nor do I, from his behaviour the night before laft, think his fenfes are in a right ftate at certain times/* ι " Heaven forbid they fhould be de¬ ranged," anfwered this faithful fervant : " for then I am fure, ------ *' here he ftopped fliort, and was filent· Matilda
Matilda confidered it as cruel to at¬ tempt to draw from him that which he had folemnly promifed to keep fecret ; and turned the difcourfe to the circum¬ ftance of his mailer's entering the apart¬ ment with him, from whence they heard the groans. She afked him to explain what he had feen to occafion thofe ex¬ clamations which fhe had heard utter¬ ed with great emotion. Leonard feem¬ ed greatly agitated and furprifed ; he had no idea how fhe could have heard thofe words, when both fhe and Agnes were to all appearance fenfelefs at the time. Matilda repeated the queftion. He was going to anfwer, but hefitateçl. Slie begged him not to keep herin fufpenfe. He again began to fpeak, when Alfred entered the room. Matilda was vexed and difappointed; — Leonard feemed happy at the intru- G 5 fion,
fion, and Alfred looked furprifed ία fee her up fo early. He, however, caft a fignificant look at Leonard, which fliowed he could partly difcover the purport of their converfation. Agnes brought in the breakfaft, and the dif¬ courfe became general. It was refolved they ihould walk to the hermit in the fore part of the morning,— that they fliould tell him they refided near, and that .curiofity brought them to his re¬ treat. Being all equipped for the journey, they fet off, walked round the weit fide of the abbey, and from thence proceed¬ ed through a quantity of thick foliage, to the grove of cyprefs, which, as they fuppofed, led to the cave. After fome time they came to a fpot entirely fur¬ rounded with trees ; and here they ob¬ ferved. an opening to a cavity which feemed to be formed out of a mountain that
that rofe a confiderable height above it» They ftood fome moments confidering whether they fliould enter : but curio¬ fity overcame their fcruples, and they ftepped foftly forward. After having gone a few yards, they found the paf- iage wound to the left, and could fee at fome diftance a lamp which gave but a dim Hght, and feemed to hang down from the roof. Agnes and Matilda again ftopped ; but Alfred laughed at their fears, and they continued to walk in filence. As thev came nearer, the paflage widened, and they could juft perceive a table covered with cloth, on which lay a human fcull and bones, with a large book and hour-glafs. Ma¬ tilda trembled, and Agnes involuntarily turned round. Alfred, however, by a. motion, begged them to be filent. They Iiftened, and h card the voice of a perfon praying.
G 6 Their
Their fears were now in fome meafure difpelled ; and they walked a little fur* ther, when a reverend form caught their eye, in a long gown, which was faftened round him by a belt : he knelt, · with his back to them, before a cruci¬ fix. Struck with a facred awe, they ftood in filent admiration, and Hftened to the hermit's prayer. " Father of mercy/* he exclaimed* ** hear the petition of thy fervant ! —* cleanfe him of thofe fins and wicked¬ neffes he has been guilty of in the fight of thee, and pour into his breaft that balm of comfort and confolation thou only canft give. Strengthen him with thy grace ; and, though immured in this recefs, grant him power, О Lord t while on earth, to be of fervice to his fellow-creatures ; that by good exam¬ ple and advice he may turn the hearts of
of the unrighteous to a fenfe of thy goodnefs and mercy.'* Here a flood of tears, which ftarted from his aged eyes, prevented him from proceeding ; he turned from the cruci* fix before him, and at that moment lifting up his head, beheld the intruders on his privacy. He gazed at Alfred, ut¬ tered a faint groan, and fell fenfelefs on the ground. Alarmed at the emo¬ tion they had caufed, each ran to his afliftance, and ftrove to recover him from fo alarming an infenfibility. Their efforts, however, for fome time proved ineffectual ; but he at laft fhowed fome figns of returning Hfe. 44 Forgive us, father," faid Alfred : u we come not with an intent to alarm you : — the fame of your pious charac¬ ter raifed imus a defire to fee fo vene¬ rable a perfon. But be affured, if we had
had known the effects our entering in fo fudden a manner would have occa¬ fioned, our wiihes fhould have remained ungratified." The hermit ftill kept his eyes fixed with a wild look, and was filent. "Indeed, father," faid Matilda, ««wc regret that you have fuffered fo much on our account/' c ' Ah ! and are you there ?" exclaim¬ ed he : " I think I know you both." Each turned afide ; — a thought ftruck them that the hermit might have fome knowledge of them ; and they were in their turn greatly alarmed. Their fears, however, foon vaniíhed, when in a more compofed manner he afked who they were, « We live not far diftant," returned Alfred,
Alfred, " and, as I before told you," were tempted by the reports of your piety and goodnefs, to pay you a vifit." " You are very young," anfwered the hermit, cc to covet the company of fo old a man.—1 have been extreme- Il, and, at prefent, am but faint: x y ali be feated.—Forgive me, if I do not obferve the laws of hofpitality, as I am fo little ufed to company, and am not quite recovered from my indif- pofition." They refufed his offer, with thanks for his kindnefs, and promifed ίο re¬ turn at the fame hour the nexr day.—« 44 You will not, I f.ippofe, father," faid Alfred, ' c have,any other vifitors." " None, my fon," replied the her¬ mit : C£ alas ! 1 feldom fee a foul in- this retired fpot. The dread of paffing yonder
yonder abbey totally precludes me from ftrangers.—I am, however, glad that there are fome, whom report has not fo far intimidated with idle fears.'* w Adieu, father !" faid they, as they came forth to the entrance, *' Adieu, my children !" anfwered he : " the Holy Lady guide you ! * Here they parted .—Father Peter (for v fuch was the hermit's name) returned to his cell, and his vifitors hurried to the abbey as foon as poffible. Their converfation at dinner was chiefly on their new acquaintance. None could account for the effect which their prefence had on him, or the particular emotion he ihowed when by chance he turned his eyes towards Alfred, There was fomething myfte¬ rious
rious in thefe circumftances, which made them rather dubious of perform¬ ing their promife the next morning» They, however, at laft refolved to rifque it, and truft to the external ap» pearance of this man, in which were combined benevolence, humanity, arid religion. Matilda, alfo, particularly no¬ ticed in his prayer the mention of the fins and wickedneffes he had been guilty of. This again raifed their fufpicions ; but Alfred obferved, that to humble ourfelves before the Supreme Deity, is a duty incumbent on every chriftian ¡ " and," continued he, u fuch was, no doubt, the idea of father Peter," Here the difcourfe dropped, and Al¬ fred and Leonard, after dinner, had another private conference. Matilda declared fhe found herfelf tauch better for the walk. This even¬ ing
ing was again fpent with fome degree of comfort, and they retired to their chambers rather at a late hour. — Ag¬ nes was foon undrefled ; but Matilda feated herfelf in the feat of one of the gothic windows, and viewed, with a mixture of pleafure and awe, the gloomy profpecl before her. The clouds were low and heavy : yet it was moon¬ light ; and the dark ihadows of the fur¬ rounding trees, which terminated the profpečt, fpread over that fpace which remained uncovered in the court. In an angle flie could juft obferve the mouldering decayed fide of the weft tower, and the two where cafements were to be perceived.—The wind was high and tempeftuous, and feemed to threaten an approaching ftorm. Matilda's fpirits were uncommonly low;— flic wept abundantly. " Alas !" thought
thought (he, 4t could I have known the forrows, the fufferings I was to have experienced, gladly would I have wel¬ comed death, and funk into an early grave, without even a wifli to furvive,— But I was then happy, — cheriflied by a tender mother, — furrounded with friends, — beloved by all, — and knew not the duplicity of mankind, or the misfortunes human nature is fubjecl to. Merciful Father," exclaimed flic with fervency, " forgive my murmuring at thy will : — ftrengthen me to fupport thofe feenes of adverfity I am deftined to go through ; and give me fortitude enough to bear that fate it is ordained I fliould experience." She found herfelf more compofed, yet did not feem inclined to fleep, but con¬ tinued watching the different changes of the fky. Her eyes wandered over the wild fcene of foliage which was in a con-
a* continual motion by the impulfe of the wind. She thought it lightened twice, and was turning from the win¬ dow, when her eye caught the cafement in the weft tower, and' a ftrong glare of Hght at that moment darted from within it. Matilda could not move. She was motionlefs with furprife and horror, but ftill kept looking at the object, which continued illumined. In about three minutes a hand feemed to wave from one fide. At that moment the light vaniflied, and all was again in perfect darknefs, Matilda, fcarcely able to fupport herfelf, ftaggered to the bed, — funk on it,—clofed her eyes through fear,— and, after a confider¬ able time, fell into a flumber.
4
CHAPTER XXVIII. AGNES was aftoniihed, when flie awoke in the morning, to perceive Ma¬ tilda was not undrefled, and immediate¬ ly inquired the caufe : the latter, who had already determined on an anfwer, told her, that, having fat up longer than ufual to finifh a book, fhe fell afleep for the night, Agnes doubted not her ve¬ racity, and chearfully went to prepare breakfaft. Matilda was perplexed to know in what manner to atl, concerning the Hght in the weft tower. The ftrange circumftances which feemed toencom- pafs this abbey with a milt of doubtful horror, every day became more uncom¬ fortable and difagreeable. It was true, 3 the
the good fenfe and inftruQions of her mother had brought her up to defpife fuperftition, and laugh at the folly of thofe who Iiftened to uncommon re¬ ports. But the occurrences flie had lately been witnefs to, gave her ftrong reafons to believe in fupernatural ex¬ iftence. The crafli and groans in the apartment, flie haH,herfelf heard di- ftinclly, and was certain both her bro¬ ther and Leonard muft have fecn fome¬ thing more than common, to have ut¬ tered fuch exclamations of furprife and horror. Her aunt's manufcript gave a particular account of a light being feen in the weft tower, not only by her father and his fervant, but by more than one of the villagers. An intervaľfrom ŕ that time had now pafled, of near one-and-twenty years; yet flie bad again feen a light in the fame build¬ ing, which had moft probably never been inhabited even when the late count Maferini
GRASVILLE ABBEY, Ï43 Maferini refided in the abbey. Such ftrange and myfterious events ftaggered all the fortitude fhe had derived from the leffons of her parent, and both alarmed and terrified her. She refolv- J ed, however, to keep the knowledge of the light to herfeif for the prefent, and watch again at the fame hour, when flie might poflibly make fome further difcovery. With thefe refolutions fhe defcended to the parlour. Her brother was al¬ ready up, and the breakfaft waited for her. In about two hours, they were ready to walk to the hermit, and left the abbey accordingly. Father Peter received them at the entrance of his * cell, and conducted them to the inner part, where he begged they would bo feated. They difcourfed on feveral JS fubjecls 3 Father Peter Ihowed himfelf to be a man of great underftanding and 7 quick
, quick imagination ; thefe gifts of na¬ ture feemed alfo to have been cheriflied by an excellent education. His man¬ ners were elegant and polifhed, while his whole deportment commanded re- fpeft and admiration. There was, however, a fettled gloom which over¬ fpread his countenance, that fhowed he had a heavy forrow at heart, which he was unable to overcome. Alfred, at the latter part of their vifit, mentioned the terror which people in general fuf¬ fered concerning Grafviile Abbey. " 'Tis a misfortune from birth, my fon/' replied the hermit, €< which is greatly increafed by the errors of edu¬ cation." α Yet furely, fuch terrors are natu* ral," faid Matilda : cc and in every fitu¬ ation, we ihould be fubjecl to their in¬ fluence." « True !"
/ « True 1 ." anfwered Father Peter: ς/ yet they are greatly encouraged by tales of horror, and terrific recitals, which curiofity prompts us to liften to, and which fo far win on our fancy, as to make us anxious after fuch entertain¬ ment." fc Your obfervations, father, are juft," fuid Alfred : β<ί yet there may, fome¬ times, circumftances happen to us of a ftrange nature, that to all human probability would confirm the appear¬ ance of fupernatural beings." Here he looked at Leonard, whofe countenance changed* while he feemed to fhudder at the ideas his mailer's w T ords had occafioned. None, except Matilda, obferved it : but flie had late¬ ly watched every look of both her bro- * ther and Leonard.—Father Peter ap¬ peared alfo difturbed : he hefitated fome Vol. IL H time
time before he anfwered ; at length, however, he gave a fhort reply, and the converfation took another turn v After a little time, they took their leave, and again walked to the abbey· Alfred, when dinner was finifhed, had a conference of fome time with Leonard; and the latter immediately after walked out. Matilda, with furprife, afked where he was gone ; Alfred anfwered her with fome confufion, that he had -fent him to try if he could, by any ftra¬ tagem, find if there were letters direct¬ ed to hini at the poft-houfe. This fhe knew to be entirely evafive : but flie faid no more ; and her brother foon af¬ ter retired to his chamber. Agnes, the moment he was gone, be¬ gan talking, as ufual, of the room that was next to that they were now in, and declared fhe expected every inftant ι fome
fome hobgoblin would ftárt through the large heavy folding doors before them* Matilda afked if fhe kne\v whether her hrother or Leonard had examined the apartment. " Oh yes, mademoifelle, the other morning before you was up." €< And, pray, did they fee any thing particular ?" " Nothing then," anfwered Agnest *' but they did that dreadful night : for you muft know I had the curiofity to liften to their difcourfe while they were fearching the place ; and though they fpoke very low, I could juft make out, mademoifelle, they had feen a ghoft." Ci I am determined to have a view of this room/' faid Matilda^ walking to that end of the parlour» Hz « Oh !
" Oh ! for heaven*s fake, mademoi¬ selle, do not enter for the world." 44 Ridiculous !" repHed Matilda, and immediately puflied againft the doors with all her ftrength, when they imme¬ diately flew open. The apartmentwasfpacious, and one of thofe they had examined at their firft coming to the abbey. The furni¬ ture was in better order than moft of the others ; hut the fhutters being clofed, the only Hght came from an opening at the top. She walked en¬ tirely round, and could perceive no al¬ teration whatever. Agnes ftood at the door, and át intervals attempted to peep in, but direclly flirunk back, and retired. Matilda, having fatisfied her¬ felf, clofed the doors, while Agnes im¬ patiently inquired if flie had feen any thing extraordinary. Matilda fmiled at
at the earneftnefs with which flie aflced the queftion, and told her ihe had no¬ thing to fear. Agnes, however, was Ьу no means divefted of her terrors ; and, after the ftrange occurrences that had already happened, and thofe which followed, it is not to be wondered at that they greatly increafed. In about two hours, Alfred defcend¬ ed to the parlour, and -fhortly after Leonard returned : he brought fome articles with him; but they were carried to the chambers above, and Matilda had no opportunity of knowing what they vvere. Supper-time arrived; when both Leonard and his mafter feemed, in fbme meafure, to have regained their ufual fpirits Tyet Alfred was impatient β to retire to reft ; at an early hour they therefore parted for the night. Matilda took up a book : Agnes, after being un- H 3 dreffed,
dreffed, wiíhed her good repofe, and was prefently in a profound fleep. Matilda now feated herfelf in the window, impatiently waiting the hour of midnight,, yet dreading a repetition of the circumftance flie had already feen. Her brother and Leonard, fhe could hear, continued in clofe difcourfe for fomc time; the purport ofit, how¬ ever, it was impoflible for her to make out, as they fpoke in a low tone of voice. At length the expected time ar¬ rived, and flie kept watching with a palpitating heart the cafement in the weft tower. The night was extremely gloomy; the moon at intervals gave a Hght j but heavy clouds continued frequently to cciipfe it, and thunder rolled at a diftance, while flaflies of ftrong lighU ning
ning darted from an illumined part of the heavens, which feemed to form a mountain of fire. Matilda ftill kept her eve fixed on the tower; but no light appeared, except that from above, which fell on its grey decayed walls, o'ergrown with ivy, and flowly tumbling to the ground through the ra¬ vages of time. She was juft going to quit her fitua¬ tion, when fhe thought fhe perceived fomething move in the court below. A few minutes before, flie had heard, as flie fuppofed, her brother's chamber-door open foftly, and a ftep cautioufly de¬ fcend the flair-cafe to the hall. At the time, fhe conceived it to be only fan¬ cy ; but her ideas were now different. A ftrong flafli of lightning gave her an opportunity to d ¡feo ver a figure walk flowly with a dark lantern acrofs the court towards the outer gates. It was H 4 elüfoiy
clofely wrapped up ; but by the height it feemed like Leonard. He now difappeared among fomc trees, but flie ftill faw the Hght through the foliage. Matilda, more and more agitated, remained at the window. . In about five minutes, the light again moved towards the abbey ; and the moon at that moment fuddeniy appearing from a heavy cloud, (lie could plainly per¬ ceive two men follow the perfon who held the lantern. Both, by their drefs, feemed Italians: but their cloaks were entirely faftened round them, and their hats flapped over their faces fo as to conceal the countenance. Aftoniihed at fuch an unexpected fight, and ready to fink with terror, flie knew not in what manner to aft. Leo¬ nard might be a villain ! She checked herfelf at fo uncharitable a fuppofition t ľ et >
ýet, why fliould he leave his bed at luch an hour, and admit two ftrangers into the abbey, where her brother had* in all probability, preferved his life through the fecrecy of his habitation*. This unaccountable adventure had fo* ftrange and dreadful an appearance,. that ihe refolved to apprife him of tlie; vifitors, as fhe had every reafon to be¬ lieve he was afleep when Leonard left the chamber : at the moment, however^ flie was going to execute this refolution^ flie heard the latter enter,.and foftly ac— coft Alfred, in a. low voice, fayingi. " They are come, fir /' and immediate¬ ly they both defcended, as flie fuppofed*., to the parlour* The idea of the light iibthe: wefb tower now vanithed fron her mind, and fhe was entirely taken up with the. occurrence that hadjuftpafh H 5 ït
It was plain to her that Alfred bnă expected thefe men, as he could not be even undrefled by his direclly leaving thejoom when Leonard came up with the information of their arrival: yet what bufinefs he could have with them, was an entire myftery ; and the moll tormenting fufpicions, which flie blufh* ed to encourage, at different intervals agitated her mind. She refolved, at all events, to watch their departure, which did not happen for nearly an hour and a half; when Leonard, with his lan¬ tern, again conduâed them acrofs the court. Soon after Alfred and himfelf entered their chamber, and, as flie fup¬ pofed^ retired to reft.—Matilda, haraffed out and perplexed with the fcene flie had been witnefs to, undrefled herfelf, and lay down on a fleeplefs pillow. The conduct of her brother was fo equivocal and fccret, that fhe was greatly
greatly at a lofs to aflign even one fingle reafon for his late behaviour, fince that period when Leonard returned from his firft journey to the market, and defired \ to fpeak with him alone. The intelli¬ gence he received that day was certain· ly the caufe of his ftrange manner of conduci fince, let it be of what nature it would. Though fhe had laughed at Agnes'» fears concerning the apartment next the parlour, yet fomething had been feen to caufe alarm and terror : for the countenances both of Leonard and his mafter, which flie even then took notice of, confirmed her they had been greatly fhocked.. The light in the weft tower had not appeared again as, ihe ex peeled; and foe might have been rather doub.ful of" being deceived by the lightnings had flie not feen an arm move withih^iV at the fame time. At length, wearied H.6 with
with.refleclion, fhe ftrove to compofe herfelf to reft, and fell into a difturbed flumber. It * ι . » -. They allembled to breakfaft at a very late hour the next day, and all ťexcépt Agnes) by no means refrefhed by the little reft they had enjoyed. They, de¬ ferred vifiting the hemûLtill the afters noon. Matilda took particular«: nat ic& of her brother, but could perceive no alteration in his maimer from the day before. Having .walked to Father : Petera cave, he received them ab the entrance- with his ufual cordiality, and fet before them fome fruits for refreihment* "I had them/* faid the old man, ζ( from a peafant in the village, whom I often-vifit, and have known for many years, but never could perfuade him to come
come near my habitatìo|i: Tòr beinjf once frightened at paflìng Grafviile АЬк bey, he has never dared to venture near it fince, not even in the day-time f*] Ί 1 All laughed at the man's frnipliciry, as they called it, yet were all confcìotii they were a prey to fimilar fears¿ * · .. - . " Indeed, father," faid Alfred, « í have heard fo much talk of this abbey, that I intend to enter it myfelf, and fá* tisfy that curiofity which has been rai& ed by the different ftories I have heard concerning it/* The hermit's countenance changed at Alfred's words ; and he in vain ftrove to conceal that agitation which worked in his heart. " By no means fulfil fuch a refolution, my fon : the attempt may be danger¬ ous»
oue. — I am şn old main, and, know more of that abbey than you do.—You muft promife you will give up all idea of ¡t.". , Alfred fixed his eyes on father Peter ; —Leonard looked chagrined ; Matilda Iiftened with attention, and Agnes trembled with emotion. , " Excufe me," faid Alfred, who was the firft that broke filence : " but you forget yourfelf, father, and in a great degree contradîcl the ufual tenor of your difcourfe.'* The hermit raifed his eyes, and wa* offended at the, remark. " I did but warn you, fignor," an¬ fwered he : ** but follow your own in¬ clination; do not, however, accufe me of difiimulation." 'Alfred
Alfred felt the rebuke, and made aa apology· Soon after» they^oo* tbeir bave, and returned to the abbey» Father Peter's behaviour appeared now more ftrange than ever ; and Al¬ fred determined not yet to truft him with the hiftory of his affairs. They took an early fuppet, and retired foon after.
CHAPTER XXIX. TERRIFIC SENSATIONS. u Avawnt ! and quit my fight ! Let the earth hide thee i Thy bones are marrowlefs; thy blood is cold;. Thou haft no fpeculation in thofe eyes Which thou doft glare with ! " Mace eth» IF, at the beginning of life, mankind in general were to be made acquainted with the misfortunes they muft fuffer in a feries of years, the greater number would welcome death, and willingly efcape miferies they -would fuppofe themfelves unable to fupport. But when the trials we are fubjecl to, appear one by one, and wc, in regular gradation, ~ get
the better of each of them, the Jaft diftrefs gives us fortitudelo go through the fucceeding one ; and by that forti¬ tude we ftruggle through the world, and thus arrive at a ftate of calm ferenity, in the decline of exiftence· ¡s Matilda had fuffered too much for want of reft the two latter nights, to have any idea of again watching the weft tower, or the unknown vifitors to the abbey; flie therefore immediately un¬ drefled, and was prefently in a profound fleep. The next morning fhe was much re¬ frefhed, and, entering the parlour, fhe once more, according to her wiihes, found Leonard alone. She directly opened the fubjecl of her former dif¬ courfe, and now requefted him to give that account which was fo critically in-» terrupted by her brother· Leonard
Leonard feemed prepared, and an¬ fwered with firmnefs, " that he hoped flie would not be offended,— but he could not." " Cannot,, Leonard 1" exclaimed Ma¬ tilda. " No> mademoifelle, indeed I can¬ not ; my mafter fufpeQed. the queftion when we were laft together, and gave me the moft pofitive orders to be filent with refpeô to every thing relative to that night.*' „ Matilda, though poflefled of the niceft ienfibiiity, and fineft feeHngs, yet had a yvarmth in her temper fomething fimi¬ lar to her brother; and though not quite fo quick to imagine an affronts flie was equally fpirited in refenting an infult to her pride.—Leonard had hard¬ ly ever fcen her fo hurt ; he looked di¬ ftreffed
ftreffed, yet appeared in every refpeel firm and refolved to keep his word^ Matilda continued forae moments in a haughty filence 3 but at length thus ad¬ dreffed him : " The caufe of the flighting behavi¬ our I have received fince our refidence here> I am at a lofs to divine, Leonard ; and heaven only knows how I have de¬ ferved it. Every queftion I have afked, though probably of no lefs importance to me than-to ray brother, has been an* fwered with equivocation and referve ; while the ftrange behaviour of Alfred, and the melancholy continually fixed on your countenance, gives every rea* fon for fufpicion and apprehenfion. u Thefe circumftances, added to the feveral occurrences that I mvfelf have lately been witnefs to in this defolate abbey* make it to me a moft difgufting and
and unpleafant abode. In fliort, though I have been taught to defpife fuperfti* tion, yet I have every reafon to believe all is not right in the gloomy chambers of the weft tower; while the words which I plainly heard you repeat on en¬ tering yonder room, confirm to me that you faw fomething of a dreadful nature : and," continued Matilda in a voice of difpleafure, yet both firm and deter¬ mined,. " thefe reafons ?dded together have made me refolve to quit this place immediately and for ever.!* Had a thunderbolt at that moment fallen at Leonard's feet, he could not have ftarted with more furprife and horr ror. " Leave the abbey, mademoifelle ï leave the abbey í — good heavens ! you will not furely leave us?"
" Before
GRASVltLË ABBEY.' l6j 44 Before two more days are paft, you may depend on it, Leonard ; dur¬ ing which time I fliall be able to con¬ fider what method will be the moft fe¬ cret for my departure, on my brother's account ; for, unlefs I am actually de¬ tained a prifoner here, I intend going; to France, and becoming a nun in the convent of N*****, where my mother and aunt were both placed in the be* ginning of life," " The Holy Lady protect us !" ex¬ claimed Leonard. ** Do not encourage thefe ideas: they will drive my poor mafter diftracled." '* You muft impart the intelligence to him, and requeft'he will contrive fome method for my conveyance." Leonard was again going to reply : but Agnes brought in «the breakfaft, and
and Alfred prefently entered. Direclly after breakfaft was over, Leonard re¬ queued to fpeak with his mafter $ and Matilda had no doubt concerning the fubjecl of this conference. When Agnes and Matilda were alone* the latter mentioned her refolution of leaving the abbey« Agnes's furprife was not lefs than Leonard's, but of a very different kind ; joy appeared in her countenance, and flie declared, of all things in the world, it was what fhe moft wifhed for—" I can then ftill attend you, mademoifelle, and yet leave this dreadful place." " But will your wifhes lead you to attend me to the place where I Ltend going ?" * Any where, mademoifelle Í" ex¬ claimed
claimed Agnes, her eyes beaming wi|h love and gratitude — '5 even to thé end of the world, with pleafure.'* Matilda ihed tears ;~lhe was greatly affected with the honeft fimplicity and good heart of this girL c * But I am going to the convent of N*****, in France, Agnes, and intend pofitively to take the veil immediately/^ Agnes turned pale. u To the convent of N*****, made¬ moifelle ! and take thè veil ! but I will follow you there too/* Here fhe burft into a flood of tears: for in that cafe all hopes of a union with Oliver, whom fte ftill loved, muft have ended. Matilda
^Matilda gueffed her thoughts, and pi». tied her fituation. She knew not how to proceed:—the little money which they had brought over from England, and which, as was before related, was the laft Alfred had to receive of his for« tune, being now nearly half expended ; and on this account it was that fhe ge* neroufly determined (fhould it be pofli¬ ble to be done, without difcovering her brother) to make over to him alíthat íhe was poffeffed of by her mother's death ; as fhe would, after once becom¬ ing a member of the holy community, be^no more in want of money to fup* port her. At all events however, flie refolved, if it was not agreeable for Ágnes to retire with her to the convent, to make her a handfome prefent, and, if in her power, fee her comfortably fet¬ tled. This propofalilie acquainted her with i but to part wkh Matilda, was nearly
GRASVILXE ABİBEY- 169 iıearly as diftreffmg to the poor girl as to lofe Oliver for ever; yet fhe rhuft confent to one or the other. In vain fhe ftroke to perfuade Matilda, by every argument fhe could think of, to give up fhe idea of going tô a convent, and live retired in France : arid little did flie fuppofe, while they were repelled with* a fteady fortitude, that Matilda had the fame tie as herfelf to make a retreat from the world miferable ; yet, with the moft elevated and noble fentiments, flie facrificed her own happinefs for the fake of a brother. Agnes ftill wavered, fighed, and wept, but was unable to come to any refolu- tion. After fome time Alfred ahd Leonard entered the parlour : both appeared di¬ ftreffed, and the latter requefted to fpeak with his fifter, alone. They re- Vol. IL I tired
tired to a chamber above. He inform- , ed her, Leonard had been telling him of her intention to quit the abbey, and retire to the convent of Ц*****, Matilda anfwered that the informa¬ tion was right, and that fuch was pofi- tivqly^her determination. He entreated her not to take fo raih a ftep, but well to confider a monaftic , life, before flie entered into it. That, flie faid, flie had already done j for the many adverfities flie had gone through fince her mother's death, had fickcned her of the world, and—— " Hold, Matilda !" exclaimed Alfred: " is there not one perfon in this world which you are fo difgüfted with, whom you may think of with a figh of ten¬ dcrnefs, and that figh bring a wifh th" ' - }'
you had never been immured within the walls of a convent ?" > Matilda felt herfelf hurt at the quef¬ tion. <ζ Let my ideas or remembrances be whatever they may, my refolution is fixed ; nor can my fituation be worfe than that I am now involved in." w Do you accufe me of unkindnefs, Matilda ?" " In forne refpeös I do.—-But this difcourfe is ridiculous ; let us confider in what manner I fliall efcape without injuring you." " Surely you do not actually intend ; leaving us ?" u After what I have faid, do you fup¬ pofe I jeft ?" I 2 «« You
" You muft not, cannot go," he ex¬ claimed, raifing his voice. ,f And pray, fir/' anfwered Matilda* her pride piqued-—" by what righťwilí you detain me ?" He feemed chagrined, 44 Indeed, Matilda, you muft think better of this affair. — Give up the idea, and confider it as romantic." " Without I am detained by force," anfwered Matilda with firmnefs, " I am determina to leave this abbey before—" <* Hold," faid Alfred, " and inform me for what reafon you have 4 thus fud¬ deniy taken fo ftrange a refolution." " For various reafons, all of which combined together fhow that it is pofi¬ tively
tively neceffary for my own happinefs, Reprefent to yourfelf my fituation,— confined within the walls of this awful, gloomy, and meianchoiy abode, the ex¬ ternal part of whieh, added to the fto¬ ries that have been circulated concern^ ing it, terrify people even from the place where it ftands ; while the myfte¬ rious and ftrange circumftances that have happened fince our refidence in it, confirm in a great meafure thofe reports ; i—yourfelf and Leonard involved in a deep melancholy, the caufe of which you both refufe to impart, though by your behaviour you give encouragement to the moft horrid and difmal fuppofi- tions.—The innocent Agnes continually terrifies herfelf and mc by thofe fears which are certainly caufed by the moft powerful reafons, and which prey lhe more on my fpirits, by my being obHg¬ ed to fupport hers, and to talk lightly of thofe ideas I feel myfelf with equ^l I 3 terror.
terror, But I will confefs my intention: was haftened by Leonards refufal to give that information I required relative to your entrance into that room next the parlour on the dreadful night of the ftorm.—When I firft requefted the ex¬ planation, we were interrupted by you ; and he now tells me, that, fufpecling the purport of our difcourfe, you for¬ bid iiim to anfwer. the queftion. Nei¬ ther would you give any fatisfaclory re¬ ply during our converfation on the ter¬ race, but loft me to think the worft in a ftate of uncertainty. In fliort, there is an arbitrary principle reigns through the whole tenor of vour conduct, which I am refolved no longer to put up with." Here her countenance glowed with anger and contempt : — flie was going to leave the chamber, when Alfred ftop¬ ped her, * 4 Hear
u Hear me in fome meafure vindicate myfelf," exclaimed he, <* though I can¬ not at prefent fatisfy your curiofity.— In the firft place, you complain of your refidence in this abbey; but confidef for a moment, Matilda, and you will find that it was my exertion in the pre¬ fervation of your honour, and the pu¬ niihment I gave the villain w T ho dared to infult you, that obliged me to fly hi¬ ther, and ignobly conceal myfelf from purfuit, while double infamy was poured upon my name, and by hellifh contriv¬ ance I was proved a deferter unknown to myfelf.—You well know, when at Dover, I had refolved to give up my perfon to my country, and ftand my trial for the crime ; but Mr. Milverne's letter altered this refolution, when he informed me that the count was riot dead, but that arbitrary power would be certain to overcome juftice in any eafe in which the wretch DOllifont I 4 was
yvas concerned. Setting this argument afide, I confefs you have had fome caufe for refentment for the concealment of what I know it would be improper to communicate 5 and I beg you to remem¬ ber, however difficult it may appear to account for my actions, I ever have your happinefs in view.— Only make me one promife, that you will remain a fortnight longer ; and then, if a part of my conduci is not explained, I fwear I will adopt fome method for your de¬ parture." " This I agree to,** anfwered Matilda ; " and to ihow you that 1 have a juft fenfe of the part you took with refpect to the count, it is my intention, when once I arrive aţ the convent, to make over the whole of the little property I am pof¬ feffed of, entirely to you." « Alas ! Matilda," anfwered Alfred, 44 that
"that will be of Httle fervice; for if fome one does not appear, to make you alter your refolution before the ftated time, I fhall have far lefs occafion for it than yourfelf/* He fighed heaviry ; — Matilda look¬ ed aftoniihed, and left the chamber. " Generous girl !** he exclaimed, (f could I but once fee thee happy, and forget tbe object of my love, — life would havţ no charms to detain me¡ and the world fliould immediately know that Alfred Maferini could laugh at its malice, and make tyranny bluih at the exertion of its own power/'
is
CHAPTER. XXX. AGNES and Leonard were foon made acquainted with the agreement that had paffed between the brother and the fil¬ ter ; and it gave both of them pleafure that the time of Matilda's departure was deferred. Agnes thought flie might poffibly, in this interval, bring herfelf to follow fo bright an example, and re¬ nounce the world forever; and all were rather more cheerful than ufual at din¬ ner. Alfred afterwards propofed a walk to the hermit ; but when they arrived at the cave, the place was deferted ; and they therefore fuppofed father Peter was gone his round among the vil¬ lagers. Having returned, Alfred read fome poetry aloud, which amufed them till near fupper-time ; and foon after a light
light repaft, they retired tö their re- fpeelivc chambers. Matilda determined to watch againt for the ftrangers, and the light in the weft tower. She accordingly took up a book, which occafioned the fame ex¬ cufe as before, to the innocent and un- fufpecling Agnes, who was foon in a profound fleep. The night was ferene and beautiful : nota breeze of wind dif¬ turbed the furrounding foliage : all was filent, tranquil, and folitary; while the heavens, covered with ftars and il¬ lumined by a full moon, gave the eye a more clear view ofthe dark groves of cyprefs, and the heavy ruins of the weft tower. Matilda watched with a palpitating; heart the upper cafement, till near mid¬ night, when a ftrong glare of light, as I 6 before,
before, appeared : but in lefs than a mi¬ nute all was again dark. In a little time after, flie heard Leo¬ nard creep foftly out of his room, de¬ fcend the ftair-cafe, and crofs the court. In about five minutes he returned, ac¬ companied by two other perfons,. whofe figures fhe now faw more plainly ; and ihe judged them to be the fame who paid the laft vifit. Alfred joined them in the parlour. — They did not remain in the abbey fo long at the former time^ but Leonard, as before, condudted them to the outer gates. Juft as they got into the middle of the court, the light in the weft tower again appeared ; and it was immediate¬ ly noticed by one of the ftrangers, who feemed to utter an exclamation of' fur¬ prife. Both his companion and Leo¬ nard immediately looked up 5 and all feemed
feemed ftruck with the utmoft aftoniih- ment. The cafement had been illuminat¬ ed about three minutes, when a figure advanced, and ftood in the front of the window.—Matilda fliuddered, and thofe Jbeiow feemed greatly alarmed. The form looked to be that of a man; but fhe could not poflibly make out either its drefs or countenance. It con-> tinued vifible but a very fhort time, when it appeared to fink down by de¬ grees, till it was entirely loft i and the Hght immediately vaniflied. Leonard and the ftrangers clafped* their hands in hgn of wonder ; the former attended them to the.gates, and then returned to the abbey : but nei¬ ther he nor Alfred re-entered their chamber, till near half an hour after. Matilda, fatigued, and terrified with what
" what fhe had feen, retired to her bed, but not to fleep. Her mind wandered over fuch ftrange events ; and the more flie thought of them, the more flie was perplexed. Myftery feemed to follow myftery, and every fucceeding one ap¬ peared more horrid than the former. The gloomy look of her chamber en¬ couraged the moft difmal ideas ; and her eyes, as if by impulfe, were continual¬ ly fixed on the picture before mention¬ ed, and which Matilda was fo ftruck with, the firft night flie fiept in the room. Direftly oppofite her bed, was placed a *pier glafs of uncommon fizc, and fur¬ rounded by a heavy gilt frame. This piece of furniture had lately been added to the chamber, it having before ftood in one of the apartments below. A fmall lighted taper was near it, and the dim uncertain light which it gave, fliowed but faintly the reflection of the 9 objetìs
objects in the glafs. Matilda, unable to reft, and tired with the continual fight of the painting, turned her eyes towards the glafs · 9 it fhowed the bed and the recefs on each fide : but the back ground of the reflection was near¬ ly dark. — She was perfeclly awake, and fighed at thofe ideas flie was un¬ able to reprefs. The figh was anfwered* She trembled, — thought it might be Agnes,—but was convinced ftie was miftaken. —She heard it again :—flie thought it certainly couid not be fancy» It was repeated a third time. At that moment flie perceived a light through the glafs, and the fame figure fhe had before feen in the weft tower, advance, bearing in the fame manner a lamp. Matilda
Matilda faw no more : fhe fcreamed, and clofed her eyes, — In about a mi¬ nute fhe opened them again ; but the appearance had vaniflied. Agnes, how¬ ever, awoke, and requefted to know if flie was ill ; while her brother knocked at her door, and afked the fame quef¬ tion. She anfwered both that flie was well, but had been dreaming : and it being a natural fuppofition that this might be the reafon of her terror, no further inquiry was made. Matilda could not be compofed : and the móre fhe ftrove to perfuade herfelf it was merely the effects of a difturbed brain, the more her own fenfes confirmed the contrary. By her fight of the fi¬ gure in the glafs, it feemed to come forward from the left hand fide of her bed. There was no opening in the room for the admittance of any human being, except by the door of the cham¬ ber j and that was bolted on the infide* —She
—She waş entirely free from fleep, nor had heard the leaft noife fince flie had firft entered the apartment in the begin¬ ning of the night. She determined to inform her bro¬ ther of this circumftance, the firft op¬ portunity on the following morning, a$ it was of too horrid ц. nature to be paffed over in filence.—She again ftroYç to reft, but it was impoffible; and fearful of even lifting her head above the bed-cţothes, íhe fuffered tbe moft tormenting and terrific fenfations. Morning at length broke in upon the roonv and the fun with glowing fplen¬ dour darted through the thick foliage of the trees, till with majeftic gran¬ deur he rofe above them, and feem¬ ed to change the face of nature to life and joy.— Matilda hailed the morn¬ ing with a hymn to that Supreme Deity who
who caufed the change, and at whofe nod the fame darknefs and horror could in a moment be returned.—Agnes foon rofe. She perceived Matilda was un¬ well, and begged flie would not get up to breakfaft : but the latter was certain this would be of no fervice to her, and fhe accordingly, after fonie Httle time, joined them in the parlour. — Alfred inquired if fhe was ill ; flie faintly an¬ fwered, " No ;" but her manner contra¬ dicled the reply.—After breakfaft fhe requefted to fpeak with him, alone. Poor Agnes had every day more and more caufe for wonder, and now de¬ clared to Leonard flie was afraid Ma¬ demoifelle was going in the fame way as he and his mafter. Matilda and Alfred afcended to the chamber of the former, and flie related to him the events of the laft night. Her
Her recital of them was fo clear and perfect, and her manner of delivery fo fteady and free from every appearance of a flighty imagination, that, however improbable the tale might feem, Alfred was flaggered at the anfwers fhe gave to the arguments by which he attempt¬ ed to perfuade her to think no more of it, and at laft became a convert to her opinion : nor is it fo much to be won¬ dered at that he fo readily acquiefced in a belief of the fact, fince he himfelf had once been witnefs to a light in the weft tower, and feen an object which made a great impreflion on him on entering the room next the parlour, and had heard Leonard, the night before the prefent morning, relate that he had (as alfo thofe that were with him) feen a light and figure in the fame cafement of the tower* Thefe circumftances, with fome others of
of a like nature, following each other in due order, were certainly in a great de* gree fufficient reafons for his belief of a fact which he otherwife would have laughed at and difregarded. After a paufe of filence for a confi¬ derable time, during whieh the counter- nances of both brother and fifter were expreffive of affliction, diftrefs, and hor¬ ror,— Alfred declared an intention,. which both alarmed and terrified Ma¬ tildas bqt \yhich he feemed obftinately .bent on executing : —it was to watch himfelf for one night in the weft tower. ** Leonard," faid he, u fhall fleep in, my room as ufual : but .by no means acquaint Agnes with this refolution." " For heaven's fake, AJfred," an¬ fwered lyiatilda, " do not admit fuch a thought: I would fooner fuffer any thing
io ,fuch a rifk." : Alfred fmiled. " Why furely, Matilda, w faid he, 'f we have nothing to fear from fupeŕ- natural beings/' SheftilH howéVeť, urged and entreât- edhim to think no more ofit. But he continued firm to hispían; and it was* in vain his fifter ufed every perfuafive argument flie could think of v to make him give up fuch a' dreadful determina¬ tion. " Who knows/' faid he, « Matilda, but one night may unravel myfteries that have been concealed for years? — who knows but by the exertion of a * little fortitude 5 —by bamflung idle fears, and fhowing fontfc degree of fpirit,~~we may
«nay defy our enemies,-—my conduci may be made clear to thfe world,—and a feries of happy years be a reward for adverfities at the beginning of Hfe ? ~-What would I not fuffer," exclaimed he, " for fuch bleffings and happinefs ! О merciful father î if the injured fpirit of my fire walks in this deferted abbey, and feeks the prefence of his fon, fliould I not ftrive for the interview, though it might chill my nature at the time ?" " Go !" pronounced a voice, follow« ed by a difmal groan. Matilda funk into a chair. — Alfred held her arm, and trembled. 44 In the name of our Holy Virgin," faid he, ** anfwer me, who and what thou art/* Ä Go,-—g 0 > — g°!" repeated the voice,
woice, three times ; and then with ano¬ ther groan it feemed to afcend and die away· ** Surely," faid Alfred, " heaven in¬ terferes in my behalf, and tells me to proceed ! — Now, Matilda, you can urge no objection," She fighed deeply. " But you are ill : we had better go down to the parlour immediately." " I am indeed," fhe anfwered—· hardly able to ftand," Her brother partly carried her down the ftairs, and placed her on a fofa ; ■— flie direclly fell into ftrong hyfteric fits, which lafted a confiderable time;·—· every method was taken for her reco¬ very i and they were greatly alarmed. At
At length, however/ fliê feemed mòre compofed, and, after fonie hours, found herfelf much better, though extremely weak. Leonards who Kad'- hitherto been made acquainted with every езйгаогШ- nary circumftance, wasnO^vJh his turn a wondering fpeclator ; and Agnes, ftill more diuretica" arid 1 ' férñ&ed, de¬ clared it would be the happieft moment of her life, when ihe once found herfelf at fome diftance from fodifrnal and hor¬ rid an abode. Alfred mufed in melan¬ choly filence ón the ftrange' voice he had heard ; nor had j he now a fingle doubt of a fupernatural being haunting the chambers of the abbey. " Surely/' thought hej 4< that room, where it is likely my father loft his life, is the moft probable place tó be vifited by his dif¬ turbed fpirit. Yet, may not my fenfes be fo far overcome by feeing the de- 7 parted
parted iliade of a parent whom I never knew, but who was fuppofed to have been bafely murdered, as to prevent my utterance at the critical moment of its appearance r" Matilda was filent and melancholy ; — îhe confidered it would now be ridi¬ culous to ftrive to prevent Alfred from watching in the weft tower, fmce fo ftrange an occurrence had ftrengthened that refolution which he had before token ; yet fears for his fafety haraffed her imagination, and almoft threw her into a ftate of-infanitv. Onlv one method flie could think of, that would in any degree alleviate her anxiety ; which was to propofe his hav¬ ing Leonard to,attend him the whole night: but then ftie fhrunk with terror from the thought of ilecping at fuch ^ di¬ ftance from any one but Agnes, and fear- Vol, IL К ed
ed again fhe might fee the figure in her chamber. Her regard, however, for her brother made her refolve to facrifice her own feelings, and at leaft make the propofal to him. After dinner they contrived to fend Agnes into the hall for a few minutes ; and Leonard was then made acquaint¬ ed with the events ofthe morning, and with the determination his mafter had taken of watching himfelf that night in the tower. Leonard turned pale, " Por heaven's fake, fir," faid he, " do not attempt it !" " But confider," replied Alfred, * ( the words which the voice repeated." Leonard could make no anfwer, but turned away with horror and furprife. *' At
*« At all events," faid Alfred,"Ag¬ nes muft not know of this affair, nor of my vifit to the deferted chamber.—We muft therefore contrive to make every thing ready without her knowledge, and in fuch a manner that I may firft go into my own room, as if to retire to reft, and after fome little time fteal to the weft tower." Matilda and Leonard fliuddered at the idea of what might happen there ; yet neither, after what had happened, could attempt — at leait they knew it would be of no avail to attempt to per¬ fuade him to relinquifli his intention.— > Agnes now entered.—Alfred and Leo¬ nard immediately afcended to their chamber, and conveyed a ta bie, with fome books, wine, and provifion, to the apartment before mentioned, where thofe fpots of blood were to be feen, К г which,
which, in all human probability, was that of Alfred's father. Leonard alfo laid a wood fire, and made the room as comfortable as pofli* ble. Having done this, they returned to the parlour, and Matilda foon found an opportunity to requeft he would let Leonard remain with him the whole night ; but her brother pofitively re¬ fufed it, though he at laft agreed Leo¬ nard fliould accompany him to the tower, but then return direcìly, Al¬ fred propofed a walk to the hermit ; biit Matilda appeared too ill to undertake it; — they therefore poftponed it till the next day. Supper-time at length arrived, and anxiety was marked on the features of all : — Alfred was occu¬ pied by the thoughts of what he might bc
be witnefs to in the ihort fpace of a few hours; and Matilda, alarmed for his welfare, and terrified at even entering her chamber,—dreading left the mid¬ night hour ihould again fliow her the phantom. — Leonard weighed in his mind the difference of their fituation : when poffeffed of a tender parent, they knew no unhappinefs, except for the misfortunes and forrows of others* which they were ever ready to pity and aflift. — Agnes was almoft afraid to turn her head, for fear of feeing fome hideous fpectre. All wifhed to delay retiring to reft, and they talked fome time after fupper on indifferent fubjecls,—but with heavy hearts;—till at length Alfred arofe«— They afcended the great ftair-cafe, and parted for the night.
K 3
CHAPTER XXXI. M V ST KR t О TS ÏVJCNlS. ·* ■ *— . — ■ Prythee, fee there í Ií^boUi! Look í Lo !—How fay you? Why, what care I f if ţhou can*ft nod, fpeak to'tj Tf tharneUhoufes and out graves tauft fend Thofe that we bury, back, — our monument» Shall be the maws of kites* SüAKSPEARE. WHEN an opinion is once formed, every fucceeding circumftance feems to confirm what our ideas have before fug¬ gefted 5 and though of a fur different nature, every object is referred to the fame point of view. . Thus it was with Matilda j — fhe no longer
longer doubted, and a dreadful certainty took place : flie did hot now hefitate whether fuch things might be, but Ыс fervently believed fuch things were ; and confequently every trivial event ftrengthened this imagination. Agnes, as*ufual, was foon in bed ; but Matilda refolved to watch the cafement of the tower. " My brother," thought flie, " will fliortly be there ; audit will be fome little comfort to fee the dial light that proceeds from his lamp." * A book was her excufe for not un- dreflmgi—and Agnes in about a quar¬ ter of an hour was afleep. f Alfred and Leonard remained in their chamber fome time. It was near-mid¬ night when Matilda heard them leave _ it ; her heart palpitated for their fit.ua- tioa, and ihe flirunk with horror from К 4 her
her own. Neither was now near : — ths fhadow ofthe preceding night pre¬ fented itfelf to her fancy, and her blood was chilled at the very thought. Thun- derrolled over the ahbey, andpaleflaflies of lightning darted on the mouldering ruins. — Matilda could not yet difcern a light ; ihe conceived they muft be a confiderable time afcending, — while her fears and anxiety made her forget that they had firft to go down the great flairs, and afterwards up thofe of the weft tower. At length a faint glimmering appear¬ ed, which was a kind of fignal to her that they had entered the chamber. The thunder became more awful, and awoke Agnes ·— ** Good heavens, mademoifelle, are you up yet ? — What a dreadful night !" " It
** It is rather ftormy," replied Matil¬ da, ftriving to be compofed. " Rather ftormy, mademoifelle I why the thunder is horrid, and the lightning too is extremely bad : you had better move from the window » — it is very dangerous to ftand fo near it." Matilda took her advice., The Hght- ' ning became much worfe $< iheTat down by the fide of the bed¿, and requefted- Agnes to. compofe herfelf to reft. " But are you not going to give up reading for the night ?" " I have juft finiihed the book," an¬ fwered Matilda, " and then ihall go to reft?' There being now a little interval in the ftorm, Agnes was foon Tn a flum¬ ber. , K s By
By this tíme fhe expected Leonard would have returned to his chamber % but flie had not yet heard him enter it. The light ftill continued in the cafe¬ ment; but the ftorm was fo very vio¬ lent as to prevent her being continually at the window. Near a quarter of an hour elapfed, jond flie heard nothing of Leonard.— Seated on the bcd^ fhe dared not turn herfelf towards the glafs, but kept her eyes fixed on the ground, terrified at the idea of even looking round the room. — At laft a noife, which feemed to proceed from the court below, made her rife, and go to the window. — ЬЬе could fee no one, yet heard a kind of knocking at the outer gates. — Who or what it could be, flie was at a lofs to imagine ; and, the noife increafing, flie became more uneafy and aftoniihed. — She was equally unable alfo to account for
for Leonard's ftay, and conceived fome¬ thing very extraordinary muft have hap¬ pened. The noife now ceafed for fome little time, but afterwards became more cla¬ morous ; and at laft, by the found,' the gates feemed to burft open. —A thought ftruck Matilda, that they might be dif¬ covered, and that the oflicers of juftice were come for her brother. —She trem¬ bled at the fuppofition, but ftill remamcd at the cafe meh t . After a fhort period, flie perceived four men armed approach the abbey : — two of them had lanterns, and the others followed direclly after. Matilda was nearly diftracled ; flie knew not in what manner to acl, Leonard might be returned, though flie had not heard him. — She tapped at the door, but re¬ ceived no anfwer.------She knocked K ó buder:
louder : — all was filent : <— fhe entered the· chamber, but it was entirely defert¬ ed. Having Hftened at the top of the ftair-cafe, and heard them enter the hall, from which they proceeded to the par¬ lour, all fears of fupernatural appear¬ ances vaniflied from her mind, and the prefervation of Alfred employed every faculty. She determined to defcend, and ftrive to make out, unpereeived, the occafion of their vifit. But then, if Agnes fhould awake, and find no one near, what would be her fituation ? —- Matilda hefitated a lit¬ tle, but at laft refolved to run the hazard for the fake of her brother. She there¬ fore took the lamp, and foftly ftepped down to the hall, which having croffed towards the door of the parlour, flie ftopped, and through the crevice could fee that they were aH feated round the fupper table, which had been left ftand-
ing in the fame place, and on which [ was fome wine : —* this they were mak¬ ing free with, and feemed in high mirth. Ready to fink with anxiety, flie fup* ported herfelf againft a column ; and the door not being quite clofed, fhe had a view of each of their countenances, at different times, as they turned round to fpeak to each other.—By their drefs and language flie found they were Ita¬ lians. " Pufti the bottle about !" cried one, who feemed to be a kind of fuperior, and whofe vifage was, if poffible, fiercer than thofe of his comrades : u nobody loves good wine better than I do, par¬ ticularly when it is got cheap." Here was a loud laugh, and a boifte¬ rous chorus of a fong ufed by banditti. — At laft filence w r as in fome meafure reftored i
reftored 5 and one who fat on the right fide of him that fpoke, reminded him not to make too free with the bottle, and forget the bufinefs they came upon. 44 True! true 1" anfwered he : " I thank you for your caution ; for faith there is a great danger of it, as you fay, when we are feated at fuçh a table as this.— But now to bufinefs ; — come, in the firft place, we are to contrive in what manner to find him 5 for my own part I propofe to------" Here a loud clap of thunder rolled over the abbev ; and flie was unable to diftinguiih what followed. After foma time ihe heard the voice of the third. " It is very true," fays he, ť< that might do well ; but I have reafon to think he is
Is in the weft tower to-night, by' tho Hght I faw in the cafement." " Piih!" anfwered the firft," that place ís haunted ; I have often feen a light in it, when nót a foul inhabited the ab¬ bey." Matilda trembled violently. " Ah ! that I know very well, fignor r but by what" Here again the thunder interrupted the diftracled Hftener, and flie loft the remainder of the fentence. — At length all was once more filent. » Well, well," faid the firft, « if that is the cafe, why we muft directly make our road to the weft tower : but the de¬ vil take me if I know which is the way to iţ." 44 Nor
u Nor I," exclaimed each of the others, rifing. <* Never mind," anfwered the firft : 44 ľll warrant we will find it." This was enough for Matilda ; — flie heard no more, but immediately de¬ parted towards the ftair-cafe that led to the tower, with an intent to acquaint her brother with the arrival of the un¬ welcome vifitors. — Had fhe been told, half an hour before, that fhe could have had the courage to proceed alone at midnight to the weft tower, — fhe would pofitively have declared it would have been impoffible : but now, though a great degree of terror was left, yet the chief part was obliterated in the idea of preferving her brother's Hfe. She hurried acrofs the hall, but, in her agitation, miftook the turning to the
the ftairs, and found herfelf before the heavy grate-work gates of the chapel. She ftopped a moment to fetch breath. — While her eyes were vacantly fixed on the ruins of this ancient place of worfliip, a faint glimmering feemed to move on one fide ofthe aifles ; and, in about a minute, a figure with a lamp glided along the body of the chapel. This brought Matilda to a recollection of her fituation ; — her tottering limbs almoft refufed their office : — flie partly flaggered from the gates, and returned to find the opening .to the ftair-cafe. This fhe fortunately found, and began to afcend the narrow ftone ftairs $ while every few minutes fhe ftopped, and thought ihe heard a footftep behind her, — then looked back, but all was quiet, except the thunder, which ftill conti¬ nued with equal violence. Matilda, faint and breathlefs, at length arrived at the firft landing. Here ftie halted, and
and feated herfelf for a moment under a cafement. The lightning darted through into the oppofite apartment, which was tliat which contained the few implements of war, and martial inftrumenls,— and fliowed the gloomy appearance of the room.—One fkiih greater than the reft illumined tbe whole fpace; and, at the fame inftant, a figure flalked acrofs, and feemed to vanifli at the fur¬ ther end. Matilda gave a faint fliriek, and hurried up the remainder of the ftairs } and, when arrived at the top, burft into the fatal chamber of thè weft tower, and there perceived her brother fitting alone at the table, his hand on his fword, —his eyes fixed on a parti¬ cular part of the room, with a wild look of horror and agony,-r-while his whole frame fhook with convulfive terror.
44 Alfred ľ*
" Alfred !" exclaimed Matilda, fink¬ ing on a chair. He turned his eyes towards her, and ilarted. <·' Ah ! who amd what art thou* that nppeareft to me in the fliape— " Matilda fell into a fainting fit.—* When flie recovered, flie found her bro¬ ther ftanding over her, and adminifter- ing fome wîne and water.-—His haggard countenance met hers when flie opened her eyes ; and with a look of difirac¬ tion he aiked her what brought hor there. 44 Anxiety for your fafety," anfwered flic, ·— and immediately related to him, in as few words as poflible, the fcene ftie had been witnefs to, concerning the men who were now in the abbey. " Merci-
* f Merciful father!" he exclaimed, u how much longer fhall I be harafled with horror and misfortunes, which fol¬ low each other fo quickly, that I am not c able to extricate myfelf. from one, before it is fucceeded by a greater, which feems at once to overwhelm me with ruin and defpair ? — What am I fay¬ ing r" continued he : " dare I to queftion the Almighty, — wretch that lam,— and repine at thofe adverfities he has ordained 1 fhould experience ?" " Stand not here," faid Matilda, 4t but leave this part of the building.—They will, I am afraid, begin to afcend the ftair-cafe before we can get down.— Pray make hafte.— If you. can but evade them fo as to attain the great ftair-cafe, you may conceal yourfelf in fome of the further apartments beyond our cham¬ bers, while they are fearching here.*'
They
They now began to defcend (Alfred having put out the lamp in the cham¬ ber), and fortunately found themfelves at the bottom, without any interruption,— hut heard fome voices at the further •end of the paffage, next the chapel by the great gates.—They ftopped not to liften, but immediately ran up the prin¬ cipal ftairs.—At the top they difcovered Leonard. *' For heaven's fake, Leonard," ex¬ claimed both brother and fifter, u where have vou been ?" tc Faith," returned Leonard," that I can hardly tell ; but, by fome means or other, I turned wrong on the ftair-cafe of the weft tower when I left my mafter to come back to my chamber.—It led me into a fmall paffage, and I there found fome ftone fteps.—Thinking that this was only an angle, and that it would
would lead me to the fame fpot as if I had continued right, I defcended them, but foon found my error, and difcover¬ ed myfelf among the ruins of the cha¬ pel. — Thefe I croffed, to read a ftone which was ereñed to the memory of the Jate count/* This explained to Matilda the figure which fhe had feen as flie was going to her brother ; fhe did not however inter¬ rupt him ; and Leonard told them that he foon found his way to the hall, but' had alfo heard ftrange voices, of perfons who feemed to be fearching the abbey ; on which account he had called Agnes, who had greatly alarmed herfelf and him when they found Matilda was ab¬ fent. They were now joined by Agnes, who fiew into the arms of her fair friend, who, her imagination had told her, was о run
run away with by the ghoft s ._ T hI »be further chambers, - A £ncs
CHAPTER XXXII. WITH folitary and filent fteps they croffed feveral apartments, till they came to the paffage which was before defcribed, and which led to the gloomy chamber that, it was fuppofed, had for¬ merly contained a corpfe lying in ftate. —Matilda dreaded to enter it ; flie well remembered the appearance of it, when with her brother fhe examined thofe rooms. But there was now no alternative : it ended the fuite, and therefore it was the moft likely one to conceal them. After crofling the paffage, they ar¬ rived at the folding doors : — Matilda and Alfred were foremoft : the latter pufhed
puflied againft them, and they flew open. — The chamber was illuminated. —All ftarted back with aftonifliment and horror : Agnes faintly fcreamed ; and it was fome minutes before they proceeded. At length, however, they advanced, and perceived that the pieces of wax tapers in the black glaffes, which they had before obferved, were now lighted, and ferved to ihow the difmal terrific fcene around them.— In exery other refpeel-the apartment was exactly the fame, nor could the trace of any foot-ftep be difcovered. Both were filent : their own reflections were fufti¬ cient. Alfred had witneffed fo much in the abbey, that he found it impotlibïe îo turn off the fubjecl with jeft, or even reafoning. Having feated his fifter and Agnes, he flood by them with his arms folded, and his eyes fixed on the floor ;~Leonard was in the fame pofture, on the other fide. Vol. H. L they
They had not remained in this fitua* tiön above ten minutes, when a loud clap of thunder rolled over the build¬ ing.— It was followed by a convulfive fhock of nature, which feemed 'o take effect on the part where they ftood ; * and at that moment the Corinthian ca¬ pital of a large column greatly decayed fell to the ground vvith a moft trerncn- ous noife. Both Matilda and Agnes were nearly infenfible ; Leonard was ftupefied with horror, and Alfred diftracled. Some moments after, when the latter per¬ ceived fomething raifed above the fliaft of the pillar, his curiofity led him to go near : he did fo, and to his furprife found it was a marble hand, holding a length of filver chain, at the bottom of which was a gold and bloody key.^— Ш called his fifter, Agnes, and Leo¬ nard, to look at it,—then clafped hold of
GRASVILLE ABBEY. 210 of it, and difentangled the chain from the hanek — A flafli of lightning, and a clap of thunder, again called their at¬ tention ; when turning from the co¬ lumn, the figure and its lamp again flood before them, lifted up its arms in token of pleafure, and van i flied through the floor from their fight. Agnes fcreamed and fell into ftrong hyfterics, while Matilda, fupported by her brothel', fainted awav. it was near an hour before they re* -covered.—The norm hnd now in foine meafure abated : and Alfred, thinking he had heard during the latter part of the time a noife like the clofing of the abbey gates, defired Leonard to look firft from the great ftairs, and then pro¬ ceed down, and fearch the lower part of the building:.
L - Loonard
Leonard having left them, Alfred began to give as much confolation as was in his power to Agnes and his fifter: but his words faultcred, as he at¬ tempted to ufe arguments of comfort, whiie ideas of mifery and diftrefs came too forcibly, to admit the bright and cheering ray of hope. — Leonard re¬ turned with the agreeable intelligence that the unwelcome vifitors had ¡eft the abbey. They therefore, after the lights were put out, made their way to their chambers, and retired ; yet though their haraffed minds received, in fome degree, the oblivion of fleep, it was of that kind which occafioned tormenting and horrid flights of fancy. Matilda appeared extremely ill at breakfaft; Alfred produced the key which in fo wonderful a manner he had obtained pofleflion of. — They were at a lofs to know to what it belonged, 8 when
when Matilda recollected the cabinet in her chamber ; and, according to the fizc, it feemed to be defigned for that lock. — They deferred, however, trying it, till another opportunity, as they in¬ tended vifiting father Peter before din¬ ner.— They were foon equipped for their little journey, and proceeded to the cave. Father Peter was feated at a table, in a melancholy pofture. On one fide of him was his crucifix, and before him feveral papers, which he put away im¬ mediately as they entered. Having teftified great pleafure at fee¬ ing them, the converfation became gene¬ ral, and they found that their fuppofition was right, concerning his being on a vifit to fome peafants, when they found him abfent from his habitation.
L 3 They
They had been in the cave about an hour, when father Peter, while talk¬ ing with unufual cheerfulnefs, was fud¬ deniy taken ill^ and fainted away in Al¬ fred's arms. Matilda and Agnes adminiftered fome cordials which they found near, while Leonard unbuttoned his veft, in order to give him air ; when they beheld fuf- pended on his breaft an elegant minia¬ ture of a lady, fct in gold, and adorned with pearls. But how great was Al¬ fred's aftoniíhment, to behold the ex¬ act refemblance of lady Caroline Al¬ bourne ! — No notice was, however, taken ; for ail except him were too much engaged to obferve the likenefs. Father Peter by degrees recovered, and thanked them for their attention. He faid he was fobjccl to fuch fits, and expected to pav the debt of nature., at
lhe approach of each of them :—" But oh I my God !" he exclaimed, " fpare me a little longer, till a mighty work is effected ! and then I die in peace." They now took their leave, and re¬ turned to the abbey. — Alfred men¬ tioned his obfervation on the miniature, iind it was the caufe of reflections the moft uncomfortable and cUftreÙìng. — The fight of a picture which refem¬ bled ia fo ftriking a manner the coun¬ tenance of a beloved obj edl, brought to his memory feenes of happinefs he had once hoped to have enjoyed, but which were now, to all human probability, for ever blafted. The charming la,dy Caroline he fup¬ pofed to be hundreds of miles diftant : and he confidered it as by no means an improbable fuppofition that flie might now be in the arms of another. — He L 4 informed
informed his fifter and Leonard that be again intended to watch in the weft tower that night ? but determinedly re¬ fufed to aecep* of even Leonard's at¬ tendance in the chamber, that he might be m readinefs to conduct her and Ag¬ ne« to the other part of the abbey, fliould they again be difturbed by the vifitors of the night before.—After din¬ ner, Leonard faid he was going to the pubKe market j but Matilda knew this was the ufual exeufe..^—Alfred advifed his fifter to examine the cabinet after Agnes was afleep : this was agreed on, and hé delivered her the key. Leonard returned in about two hours, and had a private conference with his mafter. Both feemed much pleafed with fome information they had received. Supper-time arrived ; and after a fhort repaft they retired to their apartment. \ Alfred,
Alfred, in about half an hour after, took a lamp, foftly left his chamber, and proceeded to that of the weft tower. — Agnes was not afleep fo foon as ufual : flie talked of the horrors they had experienced, and trembled for fear of a repetition of them in her dreams* At length, however, flie fell under the influence of the heavy god ; and Matil¬ da, with a palpitating heart, applied the gold key to the cabinet, when, af¬ ter a little difficulty* the folding doors flew open. It was elegantly adorned with gilt Italian figures of confiderable fize, in the habits of former times. The firft three drawers which Matilda opened, contained coins of gold and filver to a great amount. The fight of the trea¬ fure, though it for a moment elevated her, caufed, after a little reflection, but fmall degree of pleafure ; it was none of their property,, nor had they any L 5 proof
proof to the right of poffeffing it. — The fourth and fifth drawers contained jewels, the moft beautiful lhe had ever fecn, carefully preferved in gold caf- kcts.*— The fijeth drawer was full of papers ; fome of which were letters that had pafled between the old count . Maferini and his lady, in their youth, before their marriage; and feveral after, when the count was on bufinefs at the court of ¿Ipáin. —In one of thefe he mentioned his intention of purchaf¬ ing Grafviile Abbey, and in the next his having done h, and taken pofleflion of the title to that eftate. He con¬ cluded with hopes that his fon Percival Maferini might live to enjoy it after him.—There were a few fragments of memorandums, which formed the con¬ tents of the fixth drawer. 4 In the feven t h drawer flic found four miniature paintings, elegantly mounted with pearls, go!d> and jewels of great value.
value.-«»Two of them reprefented å lady and gentleman in the prime of life, whom Matilda fuppofed to be the count and his lady , the other two were children, one of whom refembled her own picture of her father : and its com¬ panion was, flie had little doubt, in¬ tended for his fifter Sifera Maferini.—- The remaining part of the drawer was filled with ornaments for women in former times. Matilda now drew forth the eighth and laft drawer, when the only articles it contained were a piece of ribband, one end of which fhowed its remainder had been parted by force,—and a fmall roll of parchment, which was fiiled with writing ,and, though in fome mea¬ fure defaced by time, with fome little pains it was eafiiy to be read.-r— The lan¬ guage was French ; but what .were Matilda's fenfations, when fhe beheld L 6 her
her father's name at the bottom! — A fudden faintnefs feized her, and flie funk into an arm chair. A flood of tears, however,, fortunately gave reliefs and 'fhe found herfelf able to perufc the manufcript* which contained the following words, and fliowed plainly the diftracled ftate of mind the writer laboured under: — " Oh t father of mercy, where,— where, Oh ! my God, is thy thunder, to crufh to the earth thofe who dif¬ grace thy heavenly image? My wife í — my after 1 — I fee ye,—I clafp ye i ·—· Ah î my foul ! they, are but figures» fent by hell to aid my tormentors, and burft my very heart-firings with grief! * * # ** Count DOllifont, where are you r 4 — dare me to fingle combat ! ufe any means but treachery. —»Damnable vil-, , л , lam!-—
lain '.—dragged from all my heart held moft dear, immured in a horrid confine¬ ment, with the dreadful expectation of an ignominious death 1 * * * u Clementina ! Sifera ! where are y e ρ —Oh î my father, if thou art per¬ mitted to look down from thy bleffed abode in heaven, on the miferies of thy fon, — will not tears, fuch as angels weep, burft forth, and thy frame, though immortal, receive a fhock of horror ? # # m CT My wife ľ my fifter ! — I am fick at heart, — appear to me, *— give me fome comfort within thefe gloomy walls ! —Oh, DOllifont ! DOllifont ! thou art planning a horrid deed!—* Thou thirfteft for my blood !— why not take thy filj at once, and end this life of torture ?
torture ï— why fhrink? — why ftay the murderous dagger from my breaft — when thy coward heart muft know I am wholly in thy power, unable to refift- the tyrannic rod of oppreftion ì m # * " Father Peter ! 1 know I have thy pity ;—but thou art entangled in the fimres of a wretch, and unable to ex¬ tricate thyfelf from the hellifh bondage. — Thou knoweft all, and thou wilt know my end. — To thee then muft I look for reparation. On thee muft it depend, to be an inftrument of al¬ mighty juftice, and give blood for blood 1 * * * " Hark ! the tormentors will foon be here j one little hour, and this in¬ jured frame is levelled with the duft. ~Oh ! my God, forgive my enemies> pro teti
protect my poor deferted wife, and the offspring of our love, if yet in this world of woe.—My After too! defend her from the enemies of our houfe.— .Alľs dark, all's cheerlefs ¿ muftì not have one ray of Hght to eafe the pang of diffolution? — Muft no wife, no fif¬ ter, no friend, nor even charitable ftran¬ ger, give one figh or parting look of pity, ere thefe eyes are clofed for ever? —Muft none but murderers, grinning at their foul-done deed, receive the qui¬ vering laft-drawn breath of Hfe г —Poi¬ fon or daggers is the choice ! — lt mat¬ ters not ; each tends to the fame great end.—Hark ! hark ! I hear them com¬ ing. The bell ftrikes one ! The hour well fuits the horrid acl,—Almighty father ! thy influence fpreads around mc, — and rays of bleffed hope give warmth to my every faculty, — I am Hght as air : all mifery vaniíhes : I die with pleafure. Yc murderers, appear I lam
I am now prepared to receive you, even with ecftafy.—Terror, diftrefs, and hor¬ ror, are no more.—Hell finks before me. —The dark and gloomy vapours of de- fpair.are difpelled by the glorious light of heaven, and the refulgent beams of a merciful redeemer. 44 I fee,—Oh! my God! my God I I mount ; —I fly ;—riiature itfelf feems gone. — The world's a mafs of matter* now to me no more t"
CHAPTER XXXIII. MIDNIGHT TRANSACTIONS, ·—— —— Now o'er one half the world Nature feems dead, and wicked dreams abufe The cumin'd fleep $ now witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murthcr, Alarum'd by his fentinél the wolf, Who howls his watch, thus with his ftealthy pace, Witli Tarquines ravittiin g ftrides, towards his de«* fign Moves Hke a ghoft. Macbeth. " UNFORTUNATE parent ! heaven will furely 4 avenge thy wrongs: the wrath of the Almighty muft at a future lime fall on him, who, with fiend-like malice, could plunge the innocent into mifery, wretchednefs, and defpair." Thefè
Thefe were the words of Matilda, as fhe dropped the manufcript from her hands, and burft into a flood of tears. Such affecling mournful complaints, fuch a piclure of horror and diftrefs, would have greatly fliocked her, had they proceeded from one not bound to her by the ties of relationfhip, or even thofe of friendfliip : but the idea of a jfather undergoing thofe fufferings, con¬ tributed greatly to increafe that grief and melancholy which fhe 4 at prefent experienced. Having wept for a confiderable time, flie found herfelf in fome degree reco¬ vered. But fhe was entirely at a lofs to know in what manner to acl with re¬ fpeel to the information flie fliould give to her brother relative to the manu¬ fcript. Matilda well knew his natural warmth of temper would not permit lam to ufe difçretion in his inquiries of father
father Peter ; and the ftrange myfteri¬ ous behaviour of this man had prevent* ed them from even trufting him with their fituation. It was true, the paper llie had found fpoke well of him : but how eafiiy might her poor father have been deceived by artful profeflions of friendfliip to hide the lurking villany of his foul, and make his punctuality to the count's orders appear in lefs in¬ famous and horrid colours. Now, fliould this man be ftill kept by D'OHi- font as a fpy upon the abbey, her bro¬ ther's impetuofity might caufe hira to .throw himfelf in father Peter's power, .without firft knowing either his charac¬ ter or inclination to ferve them. Matilda was perfectly convinced thefe confiderations were juft, and wiíhed to procure herfelf an explana¬ tion from the hermit: but to vifit him alone undifcovered, was an expedient flu*
flie was entirely ignorant how to con¬ trive any means to eflecl : —yet it was actually neceflary father Peter fliould be confulted, and that immediately. After fome ftudy, a thought ftruck her, that flie might fee him at night, after her brother, Leonard, and Agnes, had retired to reft ; but then fhe flirunk Trom the idea of walking to the cave at fo late an hour. Second reflection, however, feemed to tell her flie had nothing to fear ; and that woukl be the only method fhe could take to obtain an interview, without the knowledge of any other perfon. At length flie came to a determination to try her pro- jecl the following night; and by the time this refolution was formed, day¬ light darted through the cafement of her chamber, and fecmed to enliven nature with its cheering rays.
She
She had not yet heard Alfred enter. his room : but whenever flie had look¬ ed towards the weft tower, as flie had done feveral times in the courfe of the night, the light feemed to continue in the fame place. This trifling obferva¬ tion gave ber fome degree of comfort, as flic fuppofed every thing remained quiet. Some little time after, flie heard Al¬ fred open his chamber door, and fpeak to Leonard. Matilda felt confiderable happinefs at his fafety : and as flic was now perfeclly fatisfied in that refpecì, flie defired Agnes, when flie arofe, not to wait breakfaft fur her ; as, having re¬ ceived but little reft during the night, flie intended now to compofe herfelf to fleep. She arofe at a late hour, and found her brother, Leonard, and Agnes, in the parlour.
parlour. The former was reading ; and though his countenance was extremely pale, yet flie thought fhe could perceive an inward fatisfaction and ferenity, flie had lately beeiifoldom witnefs to. Alfred foon requefted to fpeak with heralone, and, with confiderable eager¬ nefs, afked her if flie had found any thing of confequence in the cabinet.— Matilda acquainted him with every ar¬ ticle, except the manufcript ; he feem¬ ed în fome meafure difappointed, but ihowed great pleafure at the idea of the money. Matilda was rather furprifed. " That money," t faid flie, "Alfred, vvehaveno right to; nor do 1 know, in our fitua¬ tion, that it would be of any material fervice, were it our own." " We muft at all events make free о with
with it, Matilda; I have the ftrongeft reafon to fuppofe that it does belong to us; and befides we are now in the greateft want of it." 4i How fo? M repHed his fifter, ftill more aftoniihed. *«You told me the other day we had enough to fupport us for fome time at leaft/' " True," anfwered Alfred : fi but I have now other ufes for wealth; in fliort, Matilda, this night has difcover¬ ed to me circumftances of a moft won¬ derful nature ; and the horrid myftery of this dreadful abbey is at length un¬ ravelled. Perhaps we may remain here. a fliort time longer: but I hope you will foon fee thefe gloomy feenes of adverfity and forrow transformed to days and years of tranquillity, happi¬ nefs, and comfort." Matilda ftood the image of amaze¬ ment ;
ment ; and, for a moment, flie thought her brother infane; but the glow of pleafure which overfpread his face, confirmed that his words were true ; and his features once more appeared the Tame as when in former times flie had feen him, with his own hand, re¬ lieve the fhivering famifhed beggar, and, his countenance glowing with compaffion and benevolence, watch the poor wretch recover vital warmth and ftrength from the nouriihment he had adminiftered. Matilda catched the heart-felt joy 5 but on her it took a dif¬ ferent effect, and flie burft into tears. Nor was Agn es's joy lefs, when (he was informed of the good intelligence. She wept with pleafure nt the idea of leaving the abbey, and ilill remaining with her dear young lady. Tlie good old Leonard too was fecn to wipe his eyes, and heave a figh of ecftafy
ecftafy at this unexpected tum of for¬ tone. Alfred, however, would give nofatis- factory anfwer to their inquiries con¬ cerning what he had feen in the weft tower : he only told them that the ab¬ bey muft be ftill their habitation for a fhort period í but the time would pafs away with far more comfort than it had hitherto done. Dinner-time arrivbd : but the intelli¬ gence had cloyed every appetite,; and it was removed almoft t without being tafted. Alfred, about half an hour af¬ ter, left the abbey, and faid he fhould return towards evening. Matilda had now time to confider whether, after what fhe had heard, it would be proper to conceal the ma¬ nufcript from her brother ; and, though many reafons prompted her to give it Vol. IL M to
tahim immediately, yej^ a, little reflect tion told her that the fame ill confe¬ quence fhe had before conceived, might arife from it» He might not yet be ac¬ quainted with the fufferings of his fa¬ ther, nor with the knowledge the her· mit had of his diftrefs and death. In ihort, ftie refolved to atl as flie had be¬ fore determined, and pay father Peter a vifit at midnight. But fhe wifhed not to leave Agnes without fpeaking: an excufe might ferve, that flie had left fome books in the parlour, which fhe wifhed to look over, and which might detain her fome time to procure. Alfred returned at the time he men¬ tioned, and informed them he did not intend to watch in the tower that night. The evening was fpent with fome degree of comfort, and at an early hour they retired to reft. Agnes was foon afleep, and Matilda read till near
.near midnight. During that time flic often looked at the cafement of the weft tower, but no light nor figure ap¬ peared. Having awaked Agnes, flie Informed her flie was going to look for a book fhe had left in the parlour. Agnes did not by any means like the idea of being left alone in the chamber : but Matilda reminded her that her brother and Leonard were within call, in the next room ; but fhe requefted her to itìake no noife without there was actu¬ ally a neceffity. — She waited a little time, and had the pleafure to find Ag¬ nes afleep before fhe left the apart¬ ment. Matilda took the lamp, and having foftly defcended the great ftairs, pro¬ ceeded through the hall, and from that to the firft court, which foon brought lier to the outer one. M 2 She
She now began to tremble and feel her fituation. To be entirely alone at fuch an hour of the night, was an idea in many refpečts terrific. The pale and half-obfcured moon gave but an imper¬ fect Hght; and that light was often eclipfed by dark heavy clouds, which feemed to rife from the fouth, and form a gloomy mountain of dark mill to¬ wards the weft ; while vivid flaihes of lightning darted from the horizon, and illumined the gathered clouds on the fouth with uncommon ftrength. Matilda viewed the awful fcene with emotion, and was feveral times going to turn back ; but flie chid herfelf for want of fortitude, and attempted to laugh at thofe fears, which now almoft prevented her from fupporting herfelf« She had, however, arrived nearly half way to the cave, when a found of human
human voices ftruck her ear at fome di¬ ftance. Matilda Iiftened,—thought it might onlv be a foft breeze which waved the if thick groves of cyprefs that furrounded her. But flie heard it again, and was convinced flie was right : it feemed like a chorus, or the chaunting of a funeral hymn for the foul of a deceafed perfon. She ftopped, and leaning againft a broken pedeftal which had formerly borne a ftatue, Iiftened with fome de¬ gree of pleafure to the folemn dirge; But the voicesfeemed now to approach much nearer; and fhe perceived a glare of light at fome diftance above the foliage, which informed her the perfons whom fhe had heard were near. Terror at being difcovered, now overcame every other confideration, and with eager eye flie fcrutinifed each fide of M 3 the
the grove* to find a place of conceal¬ ment. At length flie fortunately found a fmall opening in one part, which, by putting back the boughs, with fome little" trouble, admitted and clofed her from view. She now conceived herfelf to be fafe from obfervation, though there was a part through which ihe could plainly difcover whatever paffed on the other fide. Five minutes did not elapfe before a proceflion of men entered the path, ftill finging in the fame folemn manner* A prieft of holy orders proceeded firft; but how greatly was ihe aftoniihed, to fee him followed by about twelve men, who had every appearance of banditti in drefs and figure! Ί he fiift fix car¬ ried torches ; the other half followed after, with flow and melancholy fteps. Thefe were fucceeded by fix more, bearing a 'coffin on their fhoulders, which
which was covered with a black velvet pail, and adorned with trophies. Matilda could hardly fuppofe herfelf awake ; yet by the pale moon every fi¬ gure feemed perfect, and fhe thought flie could, in the faces of the laft four, difcover the vifitors to the abbey on a former night. The whole compauy halted at the pedeftal, when, to the amazement of Matilda, two of them lemoved a large ftone, which formed the cap, and part of a Corinthian bafe. The pedeftal then parted, and was let down, which difcovered the entrance to a large vault* The funeral fervice was then read by the prieft who walk¬ ed firft, after which the coffin was car¬ ried down by four of the bearers. Ano¬ ther dirge was then fung, and the pedef¬ tal was clofed, the cap, &c. being re¬ placed. The proceflion having turned, proceeded back in the fame manner, M 4 till
till fhe loft fight of-ihem at the extremi¬ ty of the grove. Though elated at the idea of having efcaped difcovery, fhe felt confiderable awe at the folemn fcene. 'In fliort, the fight of this midnight funeral, added to the ftrange dreffes of the mourners, impreffed on her mind a degree of ter¬ ror which flie was unable to overcome. Having left her fecret place of retire¬ ment, fhe paffed haftily the ftrange fe- pulchre, and with hurried and trem¬ bling fteps,* breathlefs with agitation, arrived at the cave of father Peter. His lamp "was burning, and at a diftance ihe could perceive him at his midnight devotions. His aged reverend figure was in the fame pofture as when they firft difcovered him ; and his crucifix, books, and hour-glafs, as ufual, ftood be¬ fore him.
\
CHAPTER XXXIV. MATILDA flopped a few moments to còllecl herfelf, before fhe difcovered to the inhabitant of this reel ufe cell his midnight vifitor. But while ihe was contemplating his aged form, bent on the earth, his hands clafped, and eyes Hfted towards heaven with a fervency of devotion flie had hardly ever obferv¬ ed, ideas ftruck her that by no means contributed to infpire that fortitude fhe fo much wiihed at this critical hour to poffefs. That very figure which fhe now fo fo much admired, nay almoft revered and loved, might have been an afliftant in taking away the life of her father ! — and thofe very hands which fhe faw M 5 ex-
extended in the pious action of prayer, might have inflicted tortures on her pa¬ ren t ! ** Horrid ideas !—uncharitabfe confi¬ deration !" exclaimed a voice which feemed to pafs by her, m a whifper., Matilda ftarted at the rebuke : but fhe had not even breathed her thoughts r flic was therefore certain it muft be fome¬ thing more than mortal Heaven itfelf had chid her for the fuppofition* Trembling at the thought, flie fup¬ ported herfelf againft the fide of the cave, and ftood an object of diftrefs and terror.—At length, being in fome de¬ gree recovered,, ihe ftepped forward,. and gafping with anxiety, appeared be* foie the aftoniihed hermit. His fur¬ prife may be well conceived ; and with accents of aftonifliment, nor by any 3 гаеапь
means free from horror* he aflced her bufinefs at this unufual hour. Matilda had now partly recovered her fcattered fenfes, and with a dignity and fortitude of air pecuHar to herfelf, requefted his pardon for difturbthg him at his devo¬ tions, and then begged him to liften with attention to a few circumftances ihe had to relate. Father Peter looked at her with a piercing eye. — Both being feated, and the hermit having trimmed his lamp, Matilda thus addreffed him : w Picture to yourfelf, father, a daugh¬ ter, who never experienced the embrace of paternal love, but who was yet taught to revere the name of a parent, though her eyes were never bleffed with one glance of rapture on his countenance. w Brought up with all the tendernefs a M 6 fond
*
fond mother can conceive for her father- lefs children,—their unprotected ftate ftill more endearing them to her mater¬ nal bofom, — fhe feels but little the lofs flie had fuftained, % in the comfort and happinefs of this remaining tie of duty and parental affection. Now then," * continued Matilda, burfting into tears, *' change this fcene of earthly blifs, and obferve her on the couch of ficknefs, clafping the hand of her child with looks — Oh i merciful God ! fuch looks as I cannot defcribe, nor you conceive." She turned towards her aged auditor : the drops of fympathy trickled down his faded cheeks, while he begged her to be compofed, and continue her nar¬ rative. 44 Her countenance, raifed towards heaven, brightened at the very thought of thofe glorious realms > and a chrif- t ian 's
ttari's expectation^beamed in her eye j yet when fhe turned towards her daugh¬ ter, tears would again burft forth, and ihe would clafp to her heaving breaft the weeping child, as if afraid to leave her in a world, encircled with horrid guilt, and eternal deftruction. She doubted not the goodnefs of her God ; her faith was great, but yet her feelings* could not be fubdued. She died ; and if a good Hfe procures a place of grace, •— wafted by heavenly angels, fhe reach¬ ed the bofom of a merciful Redeemer* " Now, father, behold the clouds of adverfity gathering over the heads of her offspring; the brother petitions a noble relation of his mother tr>> receive a fifter to his care, for no pecuniary ad¬ vantage, but to fliteld her from infults to which her age and fex, added to the unprotected ftate ihe was left in, every day fubjecled her. -—· The only anfwer 6 they
they obtain Is a dirtcl denial from aft artful prieft, who by bis perfidio^ ar¬ guments had poifoned his patron's mina argainft the children of a daughter whom* he hâd before forfaken when he had no advifer but a bad heart. €< They leave their native country, to accept the invitation of a diftant rela¬ tion in a foreign clime, where an afy¬ lum was yet hoped to be gained for the female wanderer, while her brother fought againft the enemies of his coun¬ try- Arrived at the principal city of England, they are plunged into diflipa¬ tion, furrounded by temptation, and forfaken by thofe who fhould have pro¬ tected them againft oppreflion. — Pic¬ ture to youKfelf a villain, a daftardly vil* lain, taking advantage of the neglect fhown to the female relation of his friend, and, at a moment when he thought himfelf free from moleftation, * employ-
employing even force to crufh her .to the earth,, and blaft: her future day» with fhame and forrow never te be erafed.*—Her brother, witnefs to the fufferings and ufage of a ufter, who, he knew, had no other friend to guard hef from a wretch unworthy to bear the image of his creator, feizes the villain* who attempts to take his life ; but the rafh, though excufable, injured youth ftrikes him to the ground, weltering in his blood» and momentarily expecting to pay that debt to nature, at the re~ ceival of which he hadnothing to hope, but much to fear. They fly from the laws of England» return to their native land, fhrinking from notice*fearful that the power of their oppreffor may over¬ take them even there* Another heavy mrsfortunejiow furrounds them ; through the curfed eontrivance of their enemies, the young officer is proved a deferter, hy not attending to an order which was fent
fent to him the night he left London, and of which confequently he was en¬ tirely ignorant. By the death of him whom he had wounded, it is rendered impoflible for him to clear himfelf of this ftigma. Concealed in a defolate habitation, they difcover the murder,— ah ! and the murderer, of their father." Matilda turned towards the hermit. His colour changed, and he gazed at her with filent awe and aftonifliment. She continued—" Yet a witnefs muft be found to authenticate the horrid deed, and give juftice to the children of the deceafed." " And is fuch a perfon living?" afked father Peter. <* He is," returned Matilda.—- <· Were you in his fituation, would you not
not promote that juftice which God and nature require ? or would you fliil fcreen the wretch, and fuffer the inno¬ cent viôims of his cruelty to Ianguifh in diftrefs and affliction ?" " Surely you cannot doubt my an¬ fwer," faid the hermit. " I would even part with Hfe itfelf to procure juftice for the fufferers you mention." t€ There is no need of fuch a facri¬ fice ;" anfwered Matilda. ** But now, father, I put your virtue to the trial. I Come to demand reparation for the mur¬ der of a fother, and that father the rightful heir of Orlando count Mafe* nni. Father Peter, though in a great de¬ gree aftoniflied, was not actually fo fur¬ prifed as might have been expected· He afked an explanation, « The
и The account is brief. —- In fhort, Percival Maferini was a prifoner in yon¬ der abbey : you pitied him, yet were privy to the deed." Father Peter feemed at a lofs to re¬ ply. At length he told her that at an early hour he would wait on her at the abbey. * f You know my refidence then V* faid Matilda. * f Perfectly," anfwered he. " Believe me you fhall have no caufe to repent this vifit ; and give me leave to foretell that the brighteft feenes of happinefs, with the Almighty's permiilion, now await you." " There is comfort in your words, father," anfwered Matilda: " heaven fend they may prove true! But the clouds
clouds of adverfity have fo long eclipfed the cheering rays of hope, that I hardly feel myfelf able to admit them to my breaft." Father Peter wiihed to fee Matilda to the abbey-gates ; but fhe pofitively refufed his offer, and parted with him at the entrance of the cave. The idea of the funeral again entered her imagination ; and fhe felt a kind of dread at paffing the fepulchre, which almoft made her repent that fhe had re¬ fufed the good old man's attendance. When flie had arrived within a few yaids of iti fhe perceived a glare of light which feemed to fpread around the part, and foon obferved feveral torches, the fame as ihe had before fcen, ftuck in the ground : the pedeftal was aifo parted, and laid on the earttu Matilda's
• Matilda's agitation ånd furprife was greater than before ; and flie ftopped, unable to refolve whether to pafs quick¬ ly by, or remain where flie was. While in this ftate of fufpenfe, flie faw two men afcend from the vault, followed by a third whofe figure excited in her ftill greater aftonifliment. He was* elegantly formed, and his clothes were entirely of the Engliíh faihion, but feemed ftrangely put ой : his hair was difhevel¬ led, and his whole frame feemed greatly difordered. -After feme Httle time they clofed the pedeftal, and taking up the torches, took that path which immediately led to the abbey. * Matilda was again at a lofs in what manner to act; but followed them, though at a diftance, with flow and cau-. tious fteps. At length flie traced them to
to the gates of the abbey. Here they halted; and Matilda, with a palpitating heart, ftopped alfo to obferve their mo¬ tions. They continued in converfation fome little time, when, to her amazement, they opened the outer gates, and en¬ tered. Matilda, ftill more alarmed, proceed¬ ed on, and ventured to pafs into the firft court ; flie here perceived no one ; but having entered the hall, flie thought ihe heard voices in the parlour. Nor was her conjecture wrong : for having half afcended the great ftairs, flie Hften¬ ed for a moment, and heard a conver¬ fation carried on, though in a very low tone: flie however could plainly difcover the fpeech of Leonard and her brother ; her fears therefore of a difcovery being at.an end, her curiofity did not prompt her
her to ftay any longer, being much fa¬ tigued, and in want of reft. She there¬ fore directly proceeded to her chamber, and was happy to find Agnes ftill under the influence of the fleepy god.
ENI) OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
