Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Grasville Abbey: a romance
GRASVILLE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XXXV. MYSTERIES ELUCIDATED. We wift removed, what íhndeth in опт light, And nature blame for limiting our %bt, Where you íbná wifely winking, that the view Of the fair profped may be always new. WAtttR. u FATHER of light! Almighty God Supreme, who, with an all feeing eye, furveyeft the tranfaftions of thv crea- tures here on earth, look down on one unworthy of thy goodnefs, though hum¬ bly foliating thy aid,—who craves thy fupport to fee thofe myfteries explain¬ ed, the elucidation of whicK may ftrike Vol, III. В " her
her foul with horror ; but let thy hea¬ venly affiftance infpire her with forti¬ tude and refignation, to liften to the dic¬ tates of thy will !" Such was the conclufion of Matilda's prayer, as ibe retired to her pillow. She enjoyed a calm and ferene repofe till a late hour in the morning, and found herfelf much refrefbed. Having defcended to the parlour, neither Leo* nard, Agnes, nor her brother» had breakfafted. u I am forry" faid Ihe, ** to have made you wait : but this morning I have been uncommonly lazy." * We have not waited for you alone," anfwered Alfred cheerfully; ·* there is another perfon our gueft to¬ day. In fliort, you no doubt recollect, that,
that, when you mentioned leaving Ae abbey, I to4d you a ftranger would foon appear* to шаке yon alter your refolu¬ tion. Tbe time is mm wcrweè that my prophecy is to be fulfilled, аш! the myftcrious behaviour ! have bees gril· ty of, ï hope, in fome meafure excufed. Look at thofe folding doors, Matilda : tbe fight of them has at a former time occafioned fenfations of the utmoft ter¬ ror : do ©ot, therefore» expeft the en¬ trance of a gboft, but a being of fleih and blood.— Come forth i** cried hr. Matilda expefted to fee the veocra* bfc figure of father Peter. Tbe doors haftily flew open, when, inftead of the zgzû fage, an elegant young man fprang forth, and caught her in his arms. Matilda ftarted back, and inftantly exclaimed, " Mr. Mil* verne î" ß г « Not
ABBEY. «Notfo/ f faid Alfred: «hedœ$»I muft confefs, greatly referable that gen· tlerøan ; but you now fee before you Archibald lord Milverne.'* *· Do not believe him, charming mife Maferini,'* anfwered the ftranger· ** i deny the title ; let me only be known to ron under the plain name of Mil¬ verne, — happy appellation, шкг which I firft became acquainted with the moft charming of her fex !" Matilda w r a s above the little arts of female coquetry, practifed by the fex in general ; ihe did not difcouragc either his lordfliip's hopes or addreffes; and after fome Utile time fpent in mutual inquiries, they feated themfelves at the bicakfaft-table. Leonard and Agnes wiflied to have taken their meal afterwards, out of re¬ fpeft
fpeÄ to lord Milverne ; but his noble foul fcorned the empty title he pd&flêd» and confidered it of no other confe- quence, than а пк^е than ufual call upon him to acl through life with bo- »our and integrity, as an example to thofe in a lower fphere, who had never received the ad vantages of a good edu¬ cation, or the rudiments of virtue from boneft and refpeâabïe parents. He infifted that no unufual ceremo¬ ny ihould be obferred on his sccotmt ; and his requeft was complied with. Matilda received the pleafing intelli¬ gence that count D'Oilifont was yet liv¬ ing» and that the news they had receiv¬ ed of his death, was merely of his own contrivance, executed by his creatures in France ; and that there was not a doubt but the cruel proceeding of prov¬ ing Alfred Maferini a deferter, was aifo В $ effecìed
cffiäed by fchemes of villany йот the f^àme quarter. Lord Milverne acquainted tberø thaï tì»e laft in td 1 tgetíce he received of the count, was that he had been fome Uttk time at Paris, but that his popuiarky m tfcu city was greatly decreafed^ on Ú»t difcovery of an aJMkarion he жш proved to be the author of, and muft certa»ry have fofoed foe the crm^e, had be mot been fereened by royal power. ** I fhall now,'' continued his lo^d- ihip, ** acqaamt you wiih my adven* tures İmce you kft England, till a cer¬ tain event happened, which will сю& røy narrative, and give room for one to be related by my friend here/* (painting to Alfred) ** who will then have an op¬ portunity of clearing up his own con¬ duft
duâ fo as entirely to obliterate every fufpkion of unkmdnefs to a fiter, who has fhown tbe mc$ nobk beart, and af* fe&kHi for her brother, m her fortitude and generous bebavkw through his m¡rfortune. n tiere be bowed to Matilda, ** On tbe sifht of the шд%аегжк, 1 bad act Ыщ hmotå Mr. fcf aferœi mm the coach, when a crowd of people be¬ gan to aSembk, co&ded by tbe re¬ peated cries of * murder ľ from the counťs ftTvattts», who kept me m hold* I was «mediately delivered mto the bands of tbe watchmen, and two coa- ftables, wk had by this time mrrivecl charged with having favoured the efcape of the murderer. I was direct¬ ly tzk^n to a watch-boufe near, but was foon admitted to find bail for my ap- В 4 pearance,
pearance, when they were informed who I was. ** The next morning I appeared be¬ fore a magiftrate: my perfon and name were foon recognifed by du» t gentle¬ man, who had been acquainted with my fonnuly. To him and the perfons aiembJed, I related tbe whok aífirir ; må made it clear that the fecond piftol was feed fear deface, sls Ле tismi firft Æfeharg e d ! his, fa šsort, D*€ïflîibBt*s ccmdušft appe^itd in fhe moft black asé infamous colours, and f was Ьсяюига* Ыу difcharged. He contmued for fome tbìse in a dangerous ftate : at times he wa* mfene ; and when thofe fits came on, it was his defire, in Ыз lucid intervals, tliat no one fliould al¬ tend him but his confident^] fervant and fteward, Rabourn* ** The news of this ih&meful unge¬ nerous
nerous tranfaftion of the cotmťs wam the general talk of the town ; and moft people allowed that punHhment had falka on tke right perfofc» ** As foon as I had fettled feme bufi¬ nefs of confequence in London, 1 ш- mediaîelv fet off for France* oo mv wav towards Italy ; two ftrong reafons arg· ing me tø take the journeys—* one to fee a dying father, who, by fetters I underftood^ îabowred tinder a fevere in* difpofirioTii whkh røcreafed upon him daily ;—the cKher, tbe hopes of finding tome emiîed frierrfs» whofe fitrerion I greatly pitied and lamented. *"* The Srft news I heard when I ar¬ rived at Park, was the death of ray pa¬ rent, and that Mr. Maferini wa* de¬ clared a deferter, for not attending ť» aa order left at bis lodgings the very night he departed from Lo^doru I В 5 macb
made к ту bufmefe to obtain an imme¬ diate audience with two of bis majef¬ ty's minuters ; and though I clearly ex¬ plained the miftake, was unable to pro* cure any redrefs. It was an order (they faid j by the royal command, and could not be rescinded. " Finding к was in vain to take any mom trouble at court, I proceeded di* reftly towards the Alps, and ftopped at the w^ry houfe where lady Caroline Albourne bad been feved from tbe fire, —as I fuppofed, by you. I immediately crofted the mountains, artd foon found myfelf ш this country. I drreftly pro¬ ceeded to the refidence of my late fa¬ ther, which was now inhabited by a friend who had accompanied Ыш hi¬ ther, %nâ his domeftics. His will was produced ; and I found myfelf polèfed of eight thouiand a year, except a few legacies, a genteel annuity fettled on the
the perfon before mentioned, and hand¬ fome prefen ts to all his fervants. ** АЙ my affairs being fettled in a ftort fpace of time, I made every cau¬ tious inquiry concerning you ; but alî proved abortive ; and I was ftill more perplexed, as you mentioned no parti¬ cular place you intended to travel to, in anfwer to the letter I fent to Dover, though it was ttryearndl requeft. This, however, I confidered as the eieft of the hurry шпа diftrefs you were then in. An idea at laft ftruck me, that I had heard fey Grafville Abbey was the refi¬ dence of your anceftors. I had often heard talk of the venerable pile, when in Italy before, and now determined to vifit it,—conceiving that you might be there concealed. I immediately fet out for Montferrat, taking with me only OI& fervant ; and, after two days* jour- nev, we found ourfelves near this ^ В б thic
thic manfion. It grew dark j imt I re- folved to fee the external part before I flept ; we at length entered the thick wood on the left fick of the building. In lofty^ tovfers began to appear above the gloomy dark foliage, and the rifing moon flione in full fplendour on its grey decayed walls. I ftood ftill fome time to admire Ae awful and beautiful fcene before ше ; after which I reviv¬ ed to Ime a nearer view of the abbey* My fervant now attempted to duTaade ше from my reiblulioa* ** My brd,* íaiá he, * we wc^s told at the inn we laft ftopped at, that ihm wood was røfefted by bandit tf:— for heaven's fake do not venture farther.* ** I laughed at tbe poor fellow's fears, and considered the report as mere¬ ly the confequence of no perfon daring to go near the abbey. I therefore in¬ fifted
fifted on riding forward ; and we pro¬ ceeded into the very hourt of tbe wood, when I began to be radier alarmed my¬ felf: for the moon being obfcured by heavy clouds, its intricacies became £» great, that I could not find tbe path we had firft followed. ** We had not contmued in thi* fitu¬ ation above a quarter of an hour, when we perceived two mai approach, whofe appearance gave fame reafons for ap¬ prehenfion. They were armed, and we alfo had weapons of defence. At length they accofted us ; and by tbe manner of their addrefs, we found they were robbers. Having aiked ж few fri* volous queftions, they began to ufe rough language, and told us we muft go no further, for that we were their prifoners. — But our number being equal, I refolved not tamely to fubmit $ and giving my man tbe hint, he engag¬ ed
ed with one, while I undertook the other* Each of the party fired a piftol, but not one fell ; when one of the men whiftled aloud, and in lefs than three minutes we were furrounded by a party of die banditti. Having difarmed us, and taken all our money, they led us in a kind of triumph ftill further into the wood, till we arrived at the opening of a targe cave. * The robbers having knocked at a heavy door almoft concealed by trees, it was opened by a youth, feemingly not above fourteen, who conducted us, by th#light of a lamp, down a fteep de- fcent, which gradually became wider, and terminated in a large fpace parti¬ tioned into feveral apartments In one of the largeft a cloth was fpread for fupper, and an elderly man ftood cook¬ ing of it in another room. * Jofceiin/ fata tbe leader of the party, * fecure thefe
thefe prifoners; but mind that they are ufed well, and give them a hot fup¬ per/ —< Signor/ continued he, turnmg to me, * your fituation is not fo bad as you may fuppofe r if you are not refrac¬ tory, we ihall be moderate/—Jofceiin conduâed us to the further part of the cave, and placed us in a fmall but clean chamber, in which was a good bed. Felix, my fervant, now began to rub his hands with pleafure» and ftrove to communicate that comfort to me, which he derived from the idea øf having a good lodging and fupper, inftead of a fpeedy death. But my diftreis was not fo eafily to be alleviated. I was now confined, I knew not for bow long, from the fight of all i held moft dear ; w (His lordfliip here looked moft tenderly at Matilda) " and I confidered that death itfelf would have been more wel¬ come than fuch an untimely delay. I could, however, blame nothing but my own
own rafhnefs, and confequently endea¬ voured to fupport my mifchance with as much philofophy as poflible. " Supper was brought us, and al¬ though I had no appetite, I tafted of it ι but Felix took care to make up for my deficiency in point of eating. f * I had but little fleep that night, mid rofe in the morning very unwell. Breakfaft was brought us early; and while I was expecting wbat would be the iflue of this ftrange treatment from men whofe behaviour I expected to find quite different, our attendant, af¬ ter a few hems, thus addreffed us : ** As you are two perfons whofe courage and manners I much admire, I ihall entirely deviate fremi the regular rule» of our fociety, and even put my- fidlf in your power, by acquainting you with
with circumftances, which were it known I related, death muft be my re¬ ward.' w Having thanked him as well as my furprife would let me, he continued : " One moon has nearly paffed, fince we loft two brothers of ош- order, which accordingly now wants that number to make к complete. It is our ufual cuf¬ tom, after fuch events, to febee on the firft travellers who fall in our way ; and that fot has happened to you ; and you are in confequence now treated in our cuftomary manner, which I am fure you have no reafon to complain of* An offer is always made to the perfons thus taken, to accept the vacant places of our fociety, and live with us after the ufual method of the brotherhood. You will both of you ihortly receive fach propofals; and though nocompulfioa may
may appear in them, yet, mark me, cer¬ tain death is the confequence of a refu¬ fal. We never chufe to enter any one aclually againft his will, as treachery may be the refult of fuch a choice. If it is therefore found that your inclina¬ tions are not agreeable to our wiflies, you are both certain to fail victims. Do not difcover the information I have giv¬ en you of our proceedings, as in that cafe I muft, as I before told you, become a facrifice to my good-will to you. Be cautious, therefore; maturely delibe¬ rate on your fituation ;—profit by the intelligence I have communicated ; nor idly throw away your lives, when you have it in your power to preferve them/ '* Piâure to yourfelves my fituation, after having heard the information of the friendly robber ; forced, as I may fay, either to follow a life of depreda¬ tion and villany, or fall a facrifice to a fet
fet of wretches who, I had now every reafon to fuppofe, were deftitute of even the common feelings of humanity. —I had hardly time for this refleftion, before the captain of the banditti en¬ tered, and prefented me with the pro¬ pofals, the contents of which I knew too well ; and having defired me to perufe them, left us alone, yet not with¬ out mentioning that he ihould call again in the evening to receive our anfwers to the offers which we ihould find fet be¬ fore us. » " I was unable to read the detefted paper j but after fome Httle time Felix rehearfed it aloud, and I liftened with attention.—It declared that we ihould fliare equally in the profits arifing from adventures, though everyone muft take his fliare in the danger, and pay impli¬ cit obedience to the captain or leader of the company. « Never/
" Never/ I exclaimed, * will I fub¬ mit to the infamou« meafures of this lhamefu! crew ; inftantaneous death is far preferable to the languifliing life of mifery I muft here endure, fruftrated in all thofe fchemes of happinefs I had planned to enjoy within a few weeks/ ** Alas! fir/ anfwered Felix, * I have always been taught, that difap- pointments are for our good: mid if we really confider them as the afts of a Supreme Being, how can they be bad? •—Why ihould we then throw away ouç Kves, and yield them up to men whom we defpife, when we may perhaps, by retaining them, recover our liberties, with thofe bleffings we before had in contemplation f ' " I muft confefs, the argument of the poor humble Felix brought a blufli into the face of his mafter.—* That man/ thought
thought I, f without fhe advantages' of a refined or liberal education, can give inftraétion to me, who have bad every advantage ín point of learning,—as well as an example, to teach me fortitude, philofophy, and refignation to the di¬ vine will.*—His words made fuch an impreflion on my difordered imagina¬ tion,, that I refolved at once to fubmit to the terms of the banditti, in fach a manner as ihould give them no room to doubt of my attachment to their caufe; as in this cafe more opportunities might offer, to releafe us from fo horrid a con¬ finement.—The captain at night again vifited us; and both Felix and myfelf teftified the greateft happinefs to accept of the offer ; and the better to give rea¬ fons for our readinefs to comply, we gave him to underftand we were men of defperate character, who knew no way of living, but by the aid of the riches of others ; * and for thofe purpo- 6 fes,'
fes/ faid I, * we take it by turns to act as fervant, and through this means have accompliihed many fchemes pro¬ ductive of profit, which at fome other time I will relate to you.'— Garbardo (for that was the leader's name) feemed highly pleafed with our willingnefs, and the account we gave him of our cha« rafters; in ihort, he determined that we ihould be entered into the order that very evening. Accordingly, the whole party were called to affemble; and, after undergoing the ufual forms, we received the drefs and arms of the two deceafed robbers; we were then congratulated, under the feigned names we had given them, as brothers of the fociety. « We foon found the good effects of conforming to their will with a feeming degree of pleafure ; for they fo far re¬ laxed from their ufual methods, as to permit
permit us to fleep together. One rule* however, they ftrictly adhered to ; for we were not fuffered to go out of the cave together upon any occafion, and were given to underftand that he who remained behind was a kind of hoftage for the other. cc It was a general cuftom for three to go together to purchafe provifion, which was procured from a man who kept a kind of ihop on the flcirts of the wood. He was well acquainted with the gang, and proved grateful for their cuftom, by providing them with the beft food, and keeping their fituation an entire fecret. The place was hardly ever in¬ truded upon by any but the banditti ; fo retired was the fpot where it ftood. ** It came to Felix's turn to go firft to the victualling booth; nothing, how¬ ever, offered, to improve the liberty of leaving
kaving the cave ; and he was accompa* niéd by two ftaunch friends to the foci- ety,—Not did my journey prove more fûçce&ful ; and I returned in fome mea- fuŕe ia defffaif of ever finding means to efcape, " Felix was again my comforter, and inspired me with hopes that at another time we might meet with more fortu¬ nate circumftances which might enable tís tó obtain a releafe from thefe heavy chains of flavery, л Thé next day when Felix walked to the Wood, he returned with a plea¬ fure in his countenance, which, I could plainly perceive, ihowed he had met with fome pleafant adventure ; nor was my conjecture wrong : for when I eagerly in¬ quired of him, the firft opportunity, if he had any good news, he informed me, to my great fatisfaQion, it was no other than
than that he had feen Leonard at the place where he had been. *Mor did cither of us/ continued Felix, * fool- iflily difcover our joy at meeting one another, as you might have fuppofed ; but he, feeing in what company I was, acted with the greateft caution. I, however, found means to whifper to him, unfeen, that on fuch a day he would fee you at the fame place/ — This relation, though for the moment it infpired me with a kind of joy, yet was but a poor preface to ahy ideas of liberty. I determined, however, to make the moft of it ; and accordingly, during the interval of time, í wrote, in a let* ter, a detail of the circumftances that had involved me in a fituation, of which I gave the defcription. This I fealed up, and put in my pocket, ready to flip in^ to Leonard's hand, when í faw him. " I vifited, as ufual, the place, attend- Vol· HL С ed
ed by A wo men, and, in one corner of the ihop, faw Leonard, as I expefted.— I found means to convey the paper un¬ perceived into his hand, and thus re¬ turned with fome degree of comfort to the cave. " I muft now," continued his lordfliip, " give up my narrative, and refign, as I before informed you, the taflc to Mr. МаГегЫ/'
CHAPTER XXXVÌ. TO lord Milverne's concluding words Alfred replied—" I own, my lord, I feel confiderable pleafure in undertaking the taik you have impofed on me, as I ihall now have an opportunity of explaining to Matilda my reafons for that my- fterious behaviour which carried in it a ftrong refemblance to unkindnefs, though I had her intereft and happi¬ nefs in view. " I ihall therefore begin from the firft appearance of that gloom and uneafi¬ nefs which feemed almoft to crufti every pleafing quality, and give a kind of morofe turn to my temper and manners, doubtlefs, difgufting. С 2 « It
€ζ It was, Σ believe, the fécond day after our arrival at the abbey, that Leo¬ nard was difpatched to procure provifion from the public market, and fet off ac¬ cordingly/ At his return, you, no doubt, recollect, he defired to fpeak with me alone, t— The fubječt he had to com¬ municate;,, was his tøving feen Felix at the place where he had ftopped, which was (as be defcribed it) extremely re¬ tired,, and confequently fuited well his purpofe <m that account. — He gave a defcription of the perfons who were with him, and of the dreffes they wore, which confirmed them in my opinion to be banditti. : * É What to make of this adventure, I knew not, and was ftill more aitoniflied when Leonard informed me Felix.had. whifpered injus car, that, if he attend¬ ed at the place the next day but one, he would fee his mailer there.—This intelligence,
intelligence, as you may fuppofe, caufed in me the greateft alarm for the fate of Mr. Milverne, By the accounts I had heard before of the banditti in thefe parts» I conjectured he was confinedby them,as he really was. To the uncomfortable fen* fation which this information gave m$ before, the next moment was added another caufe for horror, amazement, and, I may f&y> diftrefs.—The cafe- ment in my chamber above ilands op¬ pofite ray bed; as I lay upon it, I coul4 plainly perceive part of the weft tower$ nor had I retired above w hour, before I obferved a ftrorig Hght in one of the windows;—and awaking Leonard, hç plainly fåw it as well as myfelf. I de- terniined, however, to mention nothing of this circumftance, or that relative to Mr. Milverne ; and he had my or·» ders accordingly. cc Can you, Matilda, blame me for С a this
this fecrecy ?—-I well knew the fituation òf your heart, and was certain the infor¬ mation of either of thefe circumftances muft have confiderably heightened that anxiety and mifery which you then la¬ boured under.—This may account for my melancholy the next day. The un¬ eafinefs you, no doubt, obferved, when you propofed being of the party to fearch the rooms in the weft tower, and alfo on our conference together after* wards, when we confuí ted how we ihould aft concerning Mr. Milverne. We alfo, after having retired to our chamber, fpent the beft part of the night in converfation on that, and the light we had feen." Matilda well recollected that night, which was the fame when flie liftened at her brother's chamber door, and was fo alarmed at the incoherent fentences íhe
ihe heard.—She forbore, however, to interrupt her brother. " We alfo watched again for the light, and faw it ; when, who can exprefs our aftoniihment at plainly perceiving* a figure pafs backwards and forwards, which at laft feemed to vaniih with it? <c Leonard, according to the appoint¬ ment he had received from Feihc, fct off again for the market, as we inform¬ ed you, to procure wine,—the bottles we had before, being broken while hë was gone. You queftioned me on the ftrange alteration in my fpirits and be¬ haviour, and wiflied much to be ac¬ quainted with the caufe of the change? which information I refufed, though I told you I had reafons for the greateft uneafmefs/' С 4 « Leonard
rf Leonard returned, and (as you no doubt well recolleft) with the news of count D'Ollifont's death, and the fearch that was making after me, both in . France and Italy. — beonarel then aiked to fpeak with me alone : he informed me he had really feen Mr. Milverne and two other perfons, all dreffed in the fame manner as the former ones,'— and that Mr. Milverne had flipped a letter into his hand unperceived. This fee gave to me, and I eagerly opened and read k. AA my fears for Mr. Mil¬ verne were realifed ; and I found -his fituation, by his own defcription, tobe juft what I expected. In fliort, this in¬ telligence, added to what I had feen the night before, — the idea of the count's death, and my own fituation, —» drove me almoft to diftraftion, as my behaviour plainly ihowed. I drank free* Jy at fupper ; and you muft remember røy frantic cxpreflions, occafioned by the
the fumes of wine, and a diftreffed imagination. " We heard a groart from thofe fold¬ ing doors : I immediately ran to thorn : Leonard was unable to hold me back,, but followed me. I puflied them open, and faw, by the means of a flaih of light¬ ning, a figure, of a deadly pale, ftand in the centre of the apartment. The fight of it was but momentary ; for all again being dark, except from the lights«, in this room, it feemed to vanifli at the further end. — Leonard, who was clofe to me, likewife faw the fame / and it r was this which occafioned thofe excla¬ mations of horror, which, we thought*. your infenfibility had prevented you from hearing. " I found myfelf, however, greatly miftaken, when Leonard informed mc, the next day but one, that you had С $ quef-
queftioned him on the fubjeft.—I now told him, if you made any further inqui¬ ries, to fay that I had given him the moft pofitive orders to bé filent on the topic. Lord Milverne had mentioned in his letter, that, through a fortunate and unforefeen circumftance, Felix would be again at the fame place the next day r he alfo hinted he had faint hopes of gaining bver two of the banditti to his intereft. t ! * ľ ' - \ u Accordingly, the following day, in the afternoon, the time appointed, Leo¬ nard fet off, and found Felix, as he ex* pečted, with two others. They ex¬ changed notes.without being perceived - r but.Leonard could obferve the mafter of the ihop, and the two men, feemed to wonder, by their looks, at feeing him juft at the time of their arrival.— I had ordered him to read the letter be¬ fore he returned to the abbey, that if . . it
it was neceffary to procure any articles more than what we had got, he might purchafe them, and bring them with him:—he did fo, and they were car¬ ried unopened to my chamber. I was furprifed to find a dark lantern, fome winé, and eatables.—The letter, how¬ ever, which he gave me, foon explain¬ ed this: his lordfliip informed me in it, that he had brought over two of the men entirely to his wifhes, who had led that way of life but a fliort time, and who entered into it as the only means to avoid ftarving. Being informed by him, it was in his power to make thera comfortable for life, could they aid his efcape, they had both fworn to ferve him to the utmoft of their power.— He added, that one of thefe men and Felix would be at the abbey gates a little be¬ fore midnight ; Felix being, for the firft time, fuffered to go out in fearch of adventures with this man.—The mean- C 6 ins
ing of this vifit was to confult on the moft likely fcheme of efcaping from the robbers, as too frequent attendance at themarket might excite their fufpicion* " I muft own I was not by any means pleafedwith this plan : I confidered that thefe two men might act in this manner merely to fathom the inclinations of their new brother; and, in that cafe, our refidence would be difcovered to the villains alfo. — There was now, however, no alternative ; and Leonard attended át the outfide gates exactly to the time." Matilda here well recollected the furprife and terror flie had fuffered at feeing them enter the court, while ihe was watching for the light in the weft tower. 4S He having conducted 4 them to the parlour,.
parlour, I defcended ; and we betan » confultation on the ro#ft probable means- ofeffeöinglord Milveme's efcape from the banditti. Nothing that was propof¬ ed feemed to carry with it hopes of fuccefs, owing to the vigilance of the robbers, who, as was before obferved» detained one as a hoftage far the retura òf the other.*—In ihort, we were not able to come to any determination; and our little party broke up without having agreed on any plan whatever·—» Leonard again conducted them out of the abbey, and we retired to our beds*, u The following day but one, you queftioned Leonard again ; and, ac* cording to my orders, he gave no fa* tisfačVory anfwer, but was greatly fur¬ prifed to hear your determination of leaving the abbey.—This he commu¬ nicated to mej and you, no doubt, well remember our converfation on the fubjoft,
fubjeft, which ended with your con· fenting to continue a fortnight longer: and, if the myfteries were not explain¬ ed in that interval, you were immedi¬ ately to repair to the convent of N ·*** in France. — I mentioned the appear¬ ance of another perfon, to make you al¬ ter your refolution,·—hoping by that time to have invented fome contrivance for the releafe of lord Milverne. w Leonard had, during this time, brought me word that the fame vifit would be repeated at the abbey again at midnight. They were punctual at the hour ; and he accordingly conduct¬ ed them to the parlour, where I again attended. " The only method that could now be thought of, was by the application of an herb, which, if taken to a certain quantity, would occafion a deathlike
« Øeep, and was fimilar to the Türkrfh poppies, though the juice was not of fo dangerous a nature. — This idea was fuggefted by Uloff, tbe robber who.ac- companied Felix. He obferved th^ root might be eafily procured, and that» by the help of a little art, and this pro¬ perly applied, the robbers might be led to believe lord Milverne dead; which would at once effect his efcape : for it was a general rule among the banditti, to inter one another immedi¬ ately in a vault which ftood near their cave, — from which he might with çaíê: extricate himfelf, the coffins never be¬ ing faftened down. " Strange as this thought was, there feemed no other more likely to fucceed; and I found that his lordfliip had agreed to carry this plan into execution, pro¬ vided it met with our approbation, and Leonard could procure the herb, "As
(C As Leonard was condu&rag them acrofs the court when leaving the ab¬ bey, the figure again appeared in the weft tower; which greatly aftoniihed them all* fl The next morning you informed tne of the human form and lamp which you had feen reflected in the glafs that ftood in your chamber. This account, added to the ftrange voice which we both heard, made me refolve to watch in the weft tower ; which I accordingly did. €t The fame night> Felix and three others of the banditti (they having brought over one more to their inter¬ eft) came to the abbey, unknown to either Leonard or me, to fee if We had got the herb, as they were in hopes the next day to have a good opportu¬ nity of carrying their fcheme into exe¬ cution.
cution. They knocked at the outer gate, then burft it open, and proceeded di¬ rectly to the parlour. —Thefe were the perfons whom we miftook for the offi¬ cers of juftice, as their arrival was en¬ tirely unexpected, and neither Leonard nor myfelf had a fight of them. —Their intentions, therefore, proved fruitlefs; and they left the abbey, unabfe fo find us. €€ The next day Leonard attended; at the place of rendezvous, end found Fe^ lix, who communicated to Ыт their adventures the night before ; and, hav¬ ing given him the herbs Leonard un¬ derftood they intended yefterday for the trial of its effeft. cf This was accordingly done ; and by the effefts of it, and the help of Felix and his afliftants, his lordihip wa$ fliown* to the whole of the bapwiitti a$ a corpfe..
a corpfe. — A coffin was therefore pre¬ pared, and, in the evening, he was conveyed to the pedeftal, and buried with the ufual ceremony ; one of the robbers being habited like a monk," The myftery of the ftrange funeral which Matilda faw was now entirely elucidated^—^Her brother continued—» / . e' ■ ■ ; ■ j " After the interment, the company returned to the cave; but Felix and orie of the robbers were fixed on to go ııı ^ foarch of adventures.—^They imme¬ diately, therefore, repaired to the vault, and condulted lord Milverne here % after which both joined their comrades as ufual — But his lordfliip means to go to-day to a principal magiftrate fome feW'ftliléS from hence, and give an ac¬ count of thefe depredators on the pub¬ lic The whole of them will conie- quently be feized; when Felix and the ^ three
three converts to their caufe will be fe- lefted from the banditti, and the re¬ mainder left to take the due courfe of the law." Thus Alfred Maferini ended his nar¬ rative. But, though Matilda had heard many circumftances of a ftrange nature explained, which had caüfed her con- * fiderable uneafinefs, yet nothing had been faid to clear up, in a fatisfaftory manner, thofe aftoniihing events which feemed in every degree to confirm the report of the abbey being haunted. Thefe ideas had riot croffed her mind but a few minutes, before Alfred in¬ formed her that there was : yet another tale to be related by one whom he ex¬ pected every moment : —" And I $im certain," continued he, « that his ftory will clear away every mift of doubtful horror concerning this building, and obliterate every, fuperftitious thought,.
by a ekar elucidation of the myfteries that encompafs it." ín about a quarter of an hour the folding doors again opened, and father Peter flood before them. — Agnes, Ma¬ tilda, and even Leonard and lord Mil¬ verne, were afloniflied how he could enter from that part. " According to my promife laft uiglit,** faid the bermit, addreffing himfelf to Matilaa, ** I now, as you perceive, attend you here, fair lady/' ¡ Alfred's countenance was now tranf formed to ;tii£ ¿gaiïe of furprife. -**«" I find/' faid ^e,i ftniling, to his fifter, *' we haye ^Ifo to expe£t explanations frc*m you, À/fatjlàjBi", u Indeed," anívyered (he, f ' the taik is fopn performed/ She then related to them her finding thé jnanufcript, and her journey on that \ f account
account tofather Peter's cave, with the reafons for not giving it fcfer brother the next morning. ... Alfred's and the hermit's, countenan* ces glowed with pleafure at the mention. of fuch a paper having been found. " No doubt," exclaimed the latter,* ** this will be a principal proof againft the murderer of you? father," Matilda immediartely produced it, and it was read by lord Milverne aloud. — It is impojffibîe to 4^ C! "ibe the amotions of Alfred Maferini, a& he liftened to the diftrafted words of his wretched "parent; fuflke it to fay, they were equal to his fifter's at her firft perufal of the parchment. ^ ; The party being in' fome meafure compofed, father Peter was requefted by Alfred to relate thofe circumftances .concerning Grafville Abbey, which had 6 for
for years occafioned. the moft horrid reports to be fpread, and worked with terrific fenfations on the feelings even of thofe whofe good fenfe had before taught them to defpife every fuperfti- tious idea. " I ihall, by your leave," anfwered the old man, " begin from the moft early period of my life, and proceed gradu¬ ally through every event; which will all tend to fliow, that, however ftrange the ways of Providence may appear to mortal eyes, yet in a due courfe of time they will be productive of the greateft happinefs and good to thofe who are deferving the protection of the Supreme Being." All being feated, liftened with atten¬ tion to the venerable fpeaker.
CHAPTER XXXVII. Elucidations continued. — ι ——Something Pd unfold ; ■ι for fomething ШЦ there lies In heaven's dark volume, which I read through milh. Dryd. GEdip. Good unexpe&ed, evil unforefeen, Appear by turns, as fortune fliifts the fcene; Some, rais'd aloft, come tumbling down * amain, Then fall fo hard, they bound and rife again. Dryd. Vug, The Hermit's Tale. " BORN to a fplendicl fortune, and brought up in all the elegance of an Italian noble, I attained my nineteenth year.—My father, the baron Sampieno, was advifed to fend me to Madrid, not only
only to finifli a particular part of my education, but for change of air, my health being in that- ftate which gave them ferious alarm. " At the feminary to which I was fent, another young Italian, of my own age, was alfo placed by his friends. <—His name was DOliifont ; and our manners being greatly alike, gay, vo¬ latile, and diftipated, it was not to be wondered at, that a confiderable inti¬ macy took place between us :—in fliort, we plunged together into every folly and vice .Which that gay and voluptu¬ ous city offered to our view ; and, nei¬ ther of us being under the ft riet rules obferved by the general fcholars, we had greater opportunities to follow e- very wild inclination, and gratify every wifli we could form. * " The confequence of our rafli be¬ haviour
haviour was a complaint of the gover¬ nor's to each of our parents, which gave them the greateft alarm and unea¬ finefs. — A confiderable decreafe was, in confequence, made in our allowan¬ ces, and a fevere reprimand fent us, for conduft which threatened, in fome degree, to bring difgrace on our family. The reproof, though to both exceed¬ ingly mortifying, was not fo diftreffing to us as the curtailment of our falaries, which would prevent our appearing among the extravagant fociety. we had become acquainted with, as we muit be ridiculed by thofe who had more to expend in the luxuries of the place. " As I was fitting, the day after I had received this information from Ita¬ ly, meditating .on my uncomfortable fituation, DOliifont entered, and told me of his having received fimilar intel Jigence. Vol. IIL D « Do
** Doriot.give Way to defpair,' faid he ; c but let us take fome method to overcome the misfortune.' ** I at ŕjrft conceived he intended to write conciliatory letters of repentance, — and, I muft own, my proud foul did not altogether approve fuch a manner of proceeding ; I therefore remained filent. But he foon convinced me I had miftaken his ideas, by informing me, in plain terms, he intended to com¬ mence gambler, and perfuading me to follow the fame courfe.—* I have not a doubt/ he continued, c but I fliall amply make amends for what I have loft in my quarterly allowance.' ' " If I difliked the idea of making conceflion, how much more did I ab¬ hor the thought of entering into fo mean and defpicable a profeflion as D'Ollifont had propofed I—I was, in¬ deed,
deed, greatly ihocked to find that he had fuch intentions.—I expoftulated with him, on the difgrace, the infamy, of fuch a character,—and attempted, to the utmoft of my ability, to paint, in their true colours, the mean and pi¬ tiful ihifts they were obliged to have recourfe to on many occafions*-^I was, however, difappointed in my endea¬ vours to alarm his pride, and make him give up fo difgraceful a determination; *— In fliort, we parted in ërairity. <c He foon after began this direit coürfe to deftruftion, and in a little time became connected with а £апг who were well known for the defrauds of which they had been guilty. Ne¬ ceffity, for the fake of my own reputa¬ tion, now obliged me to fliun one whofe principles and morals Were uni- verfally*known and condemned,—The facrifice, was greater than I expected ; D г but
but at length, with fome refolution, I got the better of my feelings, and en¬ joyed confiderable happinefs in the thought of the danger I had efcaped, . fi My difpofition became now more fettled, and my manners entirely changed, from the wild career of youth to the more thoughtful deport¬ ment of manhood.—The confequence of this alteration was a thorough recon¬ ciliation with my friends, and a greater fupply of money than I had ever re¬ ceived before. <г It îs from this only that I can ac¬ count for the deadly hate which took pofleffion of DOliifont, againft one whom he had at a former period called his friend, and who ftill would have done any thing in his power, to have reclaimed him from fo conternptible a mode of living,—-which it might now be
be properly called ; his father having died, and left him but a fmall legacy : — the bulk of his fortune he difpofed of to a diftant relation. u Not long after this event, I had the misfortune to lofe my parent, and, by his death, found myfelf in poffeflion of his title, and the whole of his pro¬ perty, which amounted to a confider¬ able fum, — there being no other chil¬ dren, and his wife having died when I was very young. " My affections had for fome time been fixed on a lovely object, who had refided with her mother, near the aca¬ demy where I was placed. Beauty was her leaft ornament ; an amiable difpofi¬ tion, added to an excellent underftand¬ ing, made her, in my eyes, an object worthy to be the wife of a man even D 3 in
in a higher fituation than myfelf though flie had no fortune. . " After an interval of a few months from my father's death, í had the ex¬ quifite happinefs to receive Щ charm¬ ing Caflandţa as my own. Spain was her native country ; and, being unwill¬ ing to quit it, I refolved to acq^iefce with her defire of fettling there,- as I had now no particular friends or rela¬ at ions in Italy.—Seven teen years were fpent in a round of happinefs, which no mortal could enjoy in a greater de¬ gree than myfelf.—One girl and two boys were the fruits of our conftant Jove ; both of the latter died when in¬ fants, and the care of the education of the former-was mine and my Caffan- dra 's chief employment.—I need not tell you how we loved her,—your own ideas muft paint to you that affertion which poffeffed our breafts for this re¬ maining
t
.OBASVILLE matning pledge of our felicity,—when we faw in her every grace, and every virtue'which could adorn a female.— Alas í thofe feenes oţ blifs were not to laft for ever, but,after this period,-were foon ţo be changed for mifery, anguifli, and a feries . of years, clouded, with glooms of forrow and adverfity, never to be erafed/' The hermit íhed a few tears at t^e recollection, and was under the necef¬ fity of paufing for fome minutes, to compofe himfelf. « I had never feen DOliifont from * fome little timç before; my marriage tiil the time I am fpeaking of.—An inter* val of near eighteen years had elapfed : but yet his features were well known ţo me, though the greateft alteration was vifible in his whole perfon»—Lnow beheld him in the utmoft diftrefs, )ш- D 4 ing,
ing, as he faid, been obliged to fly from that part of Spain, where he had remained for a confiderable time in the utmoft difgrace, and in a ftate little better than ftarving.—He related to me how truly he repented of the vicious life he had led, and that his only wiih was now to procure, in fome way, an honeft fubfiftence by his own induftry, —I immediately offered him my houfe, as ah afylum for the prefent, which he thankfully received, and lived with us after the manner of my own family.— During this time he behaved in a moft pleafing and infinuative manner to all ; and there was not even one in the fami¬ ly but greatly refpefted and admired DOliifont. " I rejoiced much in the reforma* tion that had been effefted in him, and determined to fpare no expenfe or in¬ tereft in the procurement of an office for
for him, on the emoluments of which lie might live comfortable and happy. '* Circumftances contmued in this fituation for fome little time ; nor had any place become vacant, which I thought worthy to prefent to him : he, however, ftill remained in my houfe, and every day gained more general ef¬ teem. " One evening, having walked in my garden rather later than ufual, I cut acrofs an unfrequented path to my houfe :—»on one fide of it was a thick grove of trees, the foliage of which entirely prevented any thing from being feen behind.—It was a fpot feldom in¬ truded upon, infomuch that in fome parts it was nearly impaffable.—I had got about the middle of this place, when I heard D'Ollifont's voice men¬ tion, with vehemence, the name of my E> 5 daughter.
daughter. Though rather furprifed at his manner, yet it awakened in me no fufpicion ; and I was juft going to hail him, when words of a dreadful nature caught my ear* *' This night,' faid he to the perfon who was with him, a man of infamous character, and who had formerly been his fervant, c muft ihe be fecured,— You are fure you well know the place ?' ** Oh ľ returned the other, * let me alone for that !—and, egad ! yeu have found out an excellent fpot; for, were tfie lady Lucretia's cries to be as loud as the town-bell, the devil take me if any one can hear her but thofe who are with you ! — You will excufe me though, fignor: but I think your man- aer of proceeding is ridiculous : — why not marry her ? for then, fome time or other,
Other, you may ftand a chance to come in for fome of the baron ? s money.' <c Curfes on himfelf and-money Ρ exclaimed the villain : ' I could have plundered him of that long ago; but the lofs of it, as I told you before, would not make him half miferable enough :—it is revenge I thirft for, not gain ; nor have I fo long played the hypocrite with him, but to invent fome fcheme that may at once blaft his hap¬ pinefs.—My hatred commenced againft him when he ihrunk from the propofals I made, and turned fage moralift;· but it has, if poflible, increafed tenfold fince I have feen him flourifli, for years, in prófperity and honour, while I am doomed to live on the narrow limits of a fmall income.—You may fay, he ails nobly now; and he has it in his* power to be of confiderable iei vice to met but my proud foul is ready to burft e- P 6 very
very hour I am looked at as a depen¬ dent on his bounty ; and I am continu¬ ally become more anxious to work his downfall/ " I heard no more, but trembled with the emotions of horror and paf¬ fion.—A wretch, whom I had ihelter- ed under my roof with the trueft friend* ihip, — to plan the diihonour of my child, was too much ! — I unfortunately had a loaded piftol in my belt; and, having torn away the boughs which parted us, I ftood before the aftoniihed reptile. " He trembled, and turned pale, as did Eburne, who was with him ; but the recollection of the former ftill re¬ mained, to invent one of the raoft damnable contrivances man could be the author of.
« Vil-
« Villain!' I exclaimed, and held the piftol to his breaft, € doft thou not deferve to receive death at the hands of one whom, having the greateft ob¬ ligations to him, thou would cruih to the earth,—and, fiend-like, grin at the mifery thou had brought upon bimfelf and family ï* u During the time I uttered thefe words, a fervant from the houfe ap¬ peared in fight, though not near enough to hear what paffed. " I mean not/ I continued, feeing him ihrink from me, c to affaflinate you.—Doubtlefs, you have weapons — ftand, therefore, and defend yourfelf.' <c I have none/ he cried : * my life is in your power/ «< Daftardly
** Daftardly wretch !* exclaimed ï. ** At that moment the fervant came up —he was fent from the houfe to feek me.— Unfortunately, the laft few words of DOliifont, with my anfwer, was the only part of the converfation he heard. —'When, how was 1 aftoniihed, to hear D'Ollifont exclaim, * I will die fooner than commit fuch a defraud/ at the fame inftalit, producing a forged note on the bank of 1 Venice.—* Hereis a man' (faid he to the fervant*- poin ting to Eburne) * who can witnefs that your mafter juft now threatened my life,. unlefs 1 confented to be a partner with him in paffmgjhefe falfe notes/ u It is difficult to fay which ftood the greateft ftatue of furprife and hor¬ ror,— the fervant or myfelf; and it is probable, had 1 not been prevented by 8 him,
him, I ihould have taken away my own, life. u Being at length more compofed, I reproached D'Ollifont in the bittereit terms for his perfidy, and walked for¬ ward to my houfe ; but had not enter** ed it above an hour before I found my¬ felf arrefted on his accufation, and was that night, though all my friends inter¬ fered, dragged from my wife and child^ to experience the miferies of a gaol. " Picture to yourfelf my fituation:— the night was fpent in diftrafted rav¬ ings, and the morning brought a vifit Crom my Caffandra and her daughter, which in fome meafure reftored my fcattered fenfes; but it was only to ex¬ perience pangs the moft poignant and fevere. « DOliifont, and the wretch who was
was with him, fwore to my having flopped the former in the private walk of my own garden, when by himfelf; Eburne being then at fome» diftance, though near enough to obferve all that paffed:—that firft, with fair words, I ftrove to perfuade him to be an accom¬ plice with myfelf in a forgery on the bank of Venice, and gave him a falfe bill,«— informing him that I had many more of the fame fort ; but that, find¬ ing him continue obftinate in his refu¬ fal, I had proceeded to extremities,—* and, placing a piftol to his breaft, threatened to deprive him of life, íhould he refufe:—that my intentions were fruftrated by Eburne, who, hear~ ing thefe words, immediately came for¬ ward. f< My own fervant was examined, and confeffed, that, when at fome di¬ ftance, he faw me hold a piftol to D'Ol¬ lifont's
lifonťs breaft; and, at his arrival at the fpot, heard him fay he was unarmed; — and that I only anfwered, *Daftaró> ly wretch ľ " It was now the genesal conjeÊture ¿, that this affair would touch my. life; at all events I was doomed to a public trial.—It was in vain I pleaded my own tale, and the reafons for my beha¬ viour : — to every one, except thofe to whom I was very well known, it car¬ ried in it fomething romantic that D'Ol¬ lifont fliould with to debauch my daughter, which was fure to end in his ruin, without even one chance to be benefited by the crime. " During the interval between my imprifonment and the day of trial, DOliifont was fent for to his relation, the count Maferini, in Italy, whofe health was in fuch a ftate that his life was
was even defpaired of, owing to the falfe report of his children's death. -*· He returned, however, at the time my trial was expected to be brought on,— the pofleffor of his uncle's eftates and wealth. ' f In the time of his abfence from Spain, a number of falfe bills, the fame as DOliifont had produced, were found, by the information of one of my own fervants, buried in a fmall cheft, near a fpot I ufed much to fre¬ quent in my garden : this frefh proof, which I had every reaf#n to fuppofe to be planned by fome fcheme in which the villain Eburne was concerned,— and who, I have no doubt, bribed my fervant, added greatly to tbe horrid ac¬ cufation againft me.— T had, there· fore, entirely made up my mind to ex¬ pect no mercy, and refolved to prepare -myftlf ia that manner which would give
give me a degree of fcrt&ude in ray laft moments, that ihould imprefs eve¬ ry one with fome ideas of my inno¬ cence. " The night preceding the awful day which was to decide my fate, my pri- fon-doors flew open, and count D'Olli¬ font ftood before me. — He ftarted bajck fome ftèps, at my wretched ap¬ pearance; and a convulfive trembling íhoweď that his confcience touched him to the foul. " I fixed my eyes on him with a look which feemed to add to his con¬ fufion, and was going to upbraid him, .when Jhe interrupted me.—* Hold!' he cried : * I have even a greater pow¬ er over you than you fuppofe. — Laft night your daughter attempted to plunge a poignard in my breaft ; and there is little doubt that a fimilar fen¬ tence
tence to that which paffes death Upon you, will do the fame by Lucretfø/* <c I heard no more·-*but fainted be¬ fore him. — The keeper of the prifon was called, and after fome little time I recovered. — We were again left a- lone. ** D'Ollifont now told me there wai yet one way to fave both myfelf and child. — The conditions he propofed were for me to go to Italy, and by a facred oath promife to perform fome fervices he fliould have occafion for. — * And I/ he contmued. * will fwear, in the fame manner, that your family fhali go with you, and your fortune m every refpeft be fecured/ α Was it true that my daughter had made an attempt upon his life, I was certain the laws of Spain muft con¬ demn
demn her to death,—Had my own ex¬ iftence been only at ftake, it is proba¬ ble I fliould have fcorned the villain's offer ; knowing my Caffandra and her child were provided for by money I had placed in the hands of a friend, fo as to keep them above the frowns of for* tune, in point of pecuniary concerns. •—But the idea of my Lucretia being cut off by an ignominious death, occa¬ fioned moft probably by love for me, in her revenge againft my bittereit enemy, cut me to the foul ; and almoft any al¬ ternative would have been accepted to fave her. — I demanded, however, the nature of thofe fervices, conceiving it might be fome crime he dared not to undertake himfelf, and therefore had pitched on me to be the perpetrator of the deed. u He fwore, by the moft facred oath, that my conjeftures were ill- founded.
founded. StA! my fouì revolted îai the idea of fubmitting to the villain ¡a fo defpicable a ranneri, which would in the general opinion give teftirriony of my guilt. —I refufed the offer¿ and he left thé apartment in a,rage.;—The next objeft which prefented itfelf was my wife in a ftate of diftraftion ; my child — my Lucretia—was in the fame prifon, and fure to fall a viftrø to her rafhnefs. ** My fituation was little ihort of madnefs r*— I raved ; but it was ufelefs, and could not fave her. — Yet a way had been ihown me to preferve her; and Lhad refufed it. The keeper was called 5 I fent him to D'Ollifont ; the wretch appeared, and received, with a contemptuous fmile, my acquiefoence to his propofals."
CHAPTER XXXVIII. ** THE proceedings againft me and Lucretia,*' continued the hermit, " were now immediately ftopped.*-^I took the oath required :—no one was found to appear againft us on the day of trial ; and the fame night í embraced my wife and daughter in my own houfe. u But my joy at the event was confi¬ derably damped by the general behavi¬ our of my acquaintance, who feemed to fliun both myfelf and family :— in fhort, it was plain that the method I had taken to evade public inveftigation, was in fome degree known ; and, as I had before conceived, it was, in the common opinion, a confirmation of my confcious guilt. — This, at leaft, recon¬ ciled
ciled me to one circumftance, which I was bound to perform — that of leav¬ ing Spain immediately. *' Alas ! this country {where I had fpent years of felicity — where I had been univerfaily refpefted and efteemed by every rank of people) was now be¬ come hateful to me ; fince almoft every countenance feemed to look towards me with a gloomy eye of fufpicion, even where I had before been welcom¬ ed, whenever I appeared, with fmiles of friendfliip and confidence. — My God ! what were my fenfations î —Sen- fible of my own innocence, ten thou¬ fand deaths (could I myfelf alone have fuffered) Would have been lefs torturing to me than the prefent ignominy. — But when I faw Lucretia bow to a young lady in the ftreet where we lived, as flie penfiveiy fat in the window between myfelf and wife,·—and faw the fal u te 7 coib
contemptuoufty fmiled at, and paffed without being returned, (while ihe and her mother would burft into tears, and move from the fpot) «*- then would I utter to myfelf— f Better, had I feen my child executed with me, in the view of a gazing multitude, declaring my innocence, — than thus to be doomed to ihrink under the wounds of blafted fame, and fuppofed infamy.' ** My affairs were very foon fettled ; and, with my wife and daughter, (at¬ tended by one man and a woman-fer¬ vant) I fet out for Genoa, where, ac¬ cording to appointment, I was to meet the author of all my miferies.—Ourjour- ney was neceffarily flow, on account of the ill health of my Caffandra, who had fuffered fo fevere a fliock from our late misfortunes, that I was under the great* eft alarm for her life. Vol.IIL E « After
" After fome little time we arrived at the place of our temporary deftina- ,tion, — and applying to a perfon to whom I had a recommendation, he in¬ formed me, count D'Ollifont had been waiting for me two days, and that I might fee him that night at a certain place to which he would conduct me. — ( It is not publicly known,' faid he, * that he is in this country; confequently fecrecy is required.' " At my return to the inn, I found my wife had been taken more violently ill than ufual, info much that Luc re tia had fent for a phyfician, who had juft enter¬ ed the houfe. —1 aiked his opinion on leaving the chamber : — he declared her diforder to be a total decline,— but did not then apprehend any dan¬ ger. Towards the latter part of the day ihe grew better: — but I refolved not to mention my intended vifit ; .and I con-
contrived an excufe,~ therefore, for my departure at the hour I had fixed. cc It was fome time after the clofe of the evening, and nearly dark, when I met · the man whom I had before feen in the morning. — He told me to follow him. — I rather hefitated.— ( You have no reafon for alarm,* faid he, obferving me attentively. " I had a brace of piftols in my pock¬ et ; and, aAcr a few moments of con¬ fideration, did as he defired. " lie firft led me down a paffage, of confiderable length, at the bottom of which he halted. — Having produced a large key, he opened a fmall door, which difcovered a gloomy Gothic hall, lighted by a lamp, which was fufpend¬ ed from the top. It was fupported by heavy Tufcan columns ; and, in difle- E 2 rent
rent niches, were placed, in order, fe¬ veral fuits of armour,—At the further «end was a flight of fteps, on the top of which were a heavy pair of folding doors, arched over in the antique ftyle above, and fecured in frøn t by a grate- work of iron. M My guide, when hè got to the cen¬ tre of this place, feemed to fall back a few paces, as if thoughtful ; and then, holding up the lantern he hacì in his hand, looked me full in the race.— This behaviour I did not by any means like : — it had the appearance of aflafli- nation, and the gloom of the hall en¬ couraged the idea,— í immediately drew one of my piftoh from my pocket, 4 —* No treachery!' I exclaimed j * or, by heavens, you -die ľ <c He feemed difconcerted.— * By sill that's facred, ï mean none ; but only wiihed
wiíhed to be certain I was right in the perfon I am conducting-·' " 'Tis well Γ I anfwerecf :— c proceed/ /* He did fo — and led me up the fteps ; — then, taking from his pocket another key, he applied it to thclock of the iron grating. — It required great exertions to turn it ; but it at length yielded to the force, and divided in the middle.—The door now only remained. u Put up your piftol, fignor :' íaíd he : ' you have nothing to fear.' " This requeft I pofitively refufed.— t He then bîew a fmall horn, which he had in his belt ; when the folding doors immediately flew -open, and two blacks with drawn fabres ftood before us. c * A voice from the inner part now E ¡ - uttered
Uttered— 'Admit.' — Thcy directly drew back, and we paffed through the entrance.—The doors inflantly clofed, with fome noife; and the blacks refum¬ ed their ftation before them. " My guide walked forward, and I followed with the-piftol itili in my hand. " It was a fpacious apartment, though gloomy ; and fitted up with fome de¬ gree of elegance. — A few wax tapers were placed round the walls ; but the light they gave was dim and uncertain. — In the middle was a long table, co* vered with green cloth ; and on it were fpread various papers, pens, ink, and a few books. A company of perfons were feated round it, of about twelve or thir¬ teen, and one at the head of the table feemed a kind of prefident in the af¬ fembly.—Tlieir cloaks were all muffled round
round them ; and a black feather, which each wore in his hat, hung over'their faces, and added to the folemnity of their dark lengthened vifages. —Hc at the head, I however obferved, wore a white one. f< As I advanced, this perfon fpoke; and I recognifed the wretch D'Ollifont. — He aiked why I meafured my fteps fo cautioufly ì u Becaufe/1 anfwered, in a firm tone, * I am afraid of treachery/ ** Surely the fear is needlefs/ faid he : —» c have î not fworn — ?* . u I interrupted him — * Mention it not, DOliifont ; you have fvvorn too much/ *' He feemed rather confufed ; and I E 4 could
could perceive h is gloomy countenance- frown for the moment, though he wifli¬ ed to fmile. — * Take a feat/ he cried :. * we are all friends. — Nerone, help the fignor to a glafs of wine/ u This man, who was in waiting,.di¬ rectly ran to a large fide-board covered with fruit, cakes, and wines. He handed the glafs: — I refufed it.—* DOliifont entreated me to take it :—I determinately anfwered, ť No/ " To bufinefs/ faid he. fc With all my heart/ I anfwered.--· f J3ut, mark me, count! ftrictly adhere to the oath I have taken ; nor r in your requeft, infringe on the laws of gene¬ ral honefty, morality, or humanity ; for on thofe conditions only will I agree/ * c I mean no otherwife/ faid DOlli* font г
font : — * be judge yourfelf. — I have an eftate fituated near Montferrat ; and on it ftands the refidence of my late uncle, Orlando, count Maferini.r—The build· ing is well known by the name of Graf* ville Abbey.— This, among other pro* perties, was ч bequeathed to me,, as his fole heir ; his two children having dieci in France. — Now the country peoplo round the fpot, for many miles, have encouraged ideas, from the gloomy ap· pearance and Gothic ftrufture of this ancient pile, that it is haunted ; and it is actually neceffary, for the preferva- - rion of the furniture, papers, and other valuables, of confiderable amount, that thefe fufpicions ihould be kept alive $, which will more effectually prevent in* trufion or robbery than any other me4 thod we can put into execution ; the peafants of that part being a wild un* traftabie kind of people, and little bet-- E 5 ter
ter than general depredators on the public. · · ' Ч \т % *- fc I , ' t \ f · ». * u You perlfaps may wonder why we do not remove thefe articles; but my uncle's will particularly requefts every individual atom that was at his death in theábteey, ihould remain there, and only be ťaken from it as my neceffity maý*require. — Now there are various deeds- and memorandums, relative to his different poffeffions, that we may never have the leaft occafion to difturb ; and which, confequently, will be open to the violence of any one whofe curio¬ fity or villany may prompt him to ufe force in entering the abbey. —The fer¬ vice that I have to requeft from you, is the performance of fome trifling cere¬ mony, with a lamp, in the external part of the building, at night, either by paff¬ ing the cafements with it in your hand, or
òr fixing it for ihort 'periods of time at the different windows. This will be ' an innocent means of preventing inva- fion; and, by conftantfy' vifiting the abbey, your fcruples will be fatisfied in point of the extent of your oath. «' Your fortune will fupport you fo as to enjoy the fuperfluities of life ; and * your refidence may be fixed at any part near the abbey. — But one condition/ continued he, * goes further, — that if at any time, though many years hence, you difcover perfons to enter the ab¬ bey, and refide there, without notice from me, you ihall immediately take every means in your power to raifo in them alarms of fupernatural appear* anees, and by that means drive them from the fpot. — For your better conve¬ nience, there is a cave on one fide of ì the wood which furrounds the abbey, ν that is never intruded upon, nor indeed Е б hardly
. , hardly known by any one in the place ţ —you may go to it of an evening; and from thenfee proceed, through a fubter¬ raneous paflage, to the building.—If, after two years'conftant performance of thefe injunftions, no interruption is per¬ ceived, you will not then be confined to the ufual ceremony ; but yet it is re¬ queued that a continual watch flial 1 be kept upon it ; and, as I before obferv¬ ed, if intruded on, even fifty years to come, and both of us living, every means is to be ufed in the above-men¬ tioned, mjitiner, to terrify all vifitors to a remov# . ^ - . u I muft confefşv this requeft, ftrange its it was, feemed far more agreeable to mechan what I expected; and I conceived thût, were there any villany lurking under it, I might difcover the fource, —and, without going from my oath, be of confiderable fervice to the in* g jured;
|ured; and,^ one time or other, have it hi my power to retaliate on DOliifont* — I requefted that the agreement fliould be drawn up on paper, that I might adhere to it, in time to come, without an idea of having forgptten its ten· > dency. л This was agreed to, — and, in the courfe of an hour, it was finiihed. I care¬ fully read the paper, and found it ex¬ actly correfponded with what D'Ollb font had faid,—*and then again fwore, as I had before promifed to do, that I would punctually fulfil it. As we were ч fome miles from Montferrat, it was fet ľ tied I ihould meet one of the company at a certain fpot near the abbey, that day fortnight, who was to conduct me -^ to it through the paffage before men¬ tioned, ihow the cave, &c. and give any inftruttions I wiihed to receive. DOliifont mentioned that he ihould leave
leave Italy ori the next day, and retura to Spain! As I was leaving the apart¬ ment, following my guide, he uttered, . as if in fome meafure affeòted, * Adieu !' ce I immediately turned round, and, with a piercing look of horror and con¬ tempt, anfwered, 'Adieu !·—I hope, forever.' u He feemed chagrined, and looked as if furprifed I was not more in awe at fuch a place. — He again feated him¬ felf. — We paffed the blacks—the door clofed after us,*— and my gujde locked the grates.— We then left the hall 3 and, that door being alfo locked, I foon found myfelf at the end of the place where we entered : — mý companion ^ en wiihed me a good night, and we parted. f c <■·A heavy load now feemed to have fallen
fallen from me ; for the expectation of what D'Ollifont's requeft might be, had driven me almoft to madnefs ; and though even now I detefted the mean- nefs I had fubmitted to, — yet, in fome degree, I was reconciled, when recol¬ lection whifpered me that I had faved , the life of my Lucretia, the beloved child of my ; heart. * " Pleafed with the ideas of the plea* fure I íhould convey to Caffandra in re¬ lating the fervice I was to perform (her dread of it having been equal to my own), I ihortly found myfelf at the inn where we refided. — I foon made my way to our apartments, in one of which I found the woman-fervant, Stella, in tears, mixing a draught: — I involun¬ tarily exclaimed, * How is your lady ?* " Her anfwer, hardly articulate, pro¬ nounced * Dying, my lord.' " I heard
ír I heard no more, —· but flew, half fratític, to her chamber, —where (oh ! fight of woe !) on the bed was laid my beloved Caffandra, juft recovered from a fainting fit ; her head fupported by Lucretia, and the phyfician feated (in a melancholy pofture) on the other fide. —»I entered time enough to receive her laft breath ; and dropping on my knees, I clafped her hands, while tears flowed in abundance. —She knew me (though ftie had been infenfibie for nearly an hour),, and exclaimed, ζ My huiband, —the Almighty aid thee!'—«Then,turn- iug her eyes towards her daughter, flie feemed inwardly to fupplicate heaven in her behalf; and, heaving a foft figh,. expired in my arms.·—Lucretia fainted, and was fupported by Stella, who had juft brought the draught, while I re¬ mained loft for fome Цте in gloomy for¬ row and ftupidity.
« At
* At length, turning to the phyfician^ I defired to know why he had flattered me with hopes that flie might live for a length of time.^—He only anfwered by fhaking his head, and faying the difor¬ der had come to a crifis fooner than he expected.—He left the inn; and í (having ordered my daughter to be put to bed, and committed the care of the funeral to my confidential fervant Jaf¬ per) retired to my own room, overwhelm* ed with the moft poignant grief» *' It is ïmpofEble to defcribe the an> guiih fuffered by myfelf and child on this mournful event ; I fhall, therefore,, draw a veil over the fcene, a recollec¬ tion of which is even now álmoft too much for me.** The hermit here was conftrained to шаке a pauib of fome few minutes, while
while he paid a tributary tear to the memory of. fo beloved a wife. " Suffice it to fay,* continued he, * in the courfe 4 of a week ihe was interred near the place where we then refided, and I tore myfelf from the fpot after a few days, with 4he two fervants, and my now only remaining comfort, my dear Lùcretia, " After a long day's journey, a prey to the deepeft melancholy, we arrived at Montferrat, and ftopped at a tolera¬ bly-built cottage ; the owner of which, fortunately, had an inclination, and alfo convenience, to accommodate us with board and lodging for fome weeks. — The fituation fuited me for the prefent, as it was extremely retired. *' On the night and hour appointed, accompanied by Jafper, whom I was per·
permitted to acquaint with the circum¬ ftances I was involved in, I attended the place of rendezvous, where I was to be met by the perfon deputed by DOliifont. <c We were both punctual ; and, as I was ftill fearful of treachery from fo vile a charafter, both myfelf and fer- . vant were armed. ·— He was alone : — his figure, which I could now more fully obTerve, was noble and majeftic: his countenance very handfome, though there was a fiercenefs in his eves, added to the turn of his dark brows, which made it in forne refpefts terrific. * c Follow me/ faid he > ζ and I will conduft you to the place you have be¬ fore heard of/ " He led us to the cave I now inha¬ bit. — We entered, and he ihowed me the
the parts which you have already feen > but after fome little time he opened a? concealed door, that difcovered a fmall room. — From hence we defcended, by a trap artfully jointed to the floor, a number of fteps, at the bottom of which was an arched fubterraneous paffage, entirely dark : — our guide, however,, was provided with a lamp* by which he lighted another placed againft the. wall, —We followed him along this place for fo confiderable a length of time that I knew ,not how far he might haver taken us, and halted at the idea, * €t Continue your pace/ faid he ; * and we fliall foon be at- the end of our jour¬ ney.' " His words were true ; for,, after a few windings, it terminated at a fmall door, hardly large enough to admit one perfon ; — this we paffed, and afcended a flight
a flight of ftone ftairs. —At the top, we «entered a fmall fubterraneous room, —» in which was a ftool, a table, fome eat¬ ables and wine ; with a bed* which ihowed (though empty now) it was daily occupied.—Our guide preffed againft a fprings in a manner which he particularly explained ; and, by a kind of mecbanifm, aided by clock-work placed at the further part of the apart¬ ment, a fqúare of about five feet of the deling above gradually fell within two feet of the floor on which we ftood : —* this I jumped upon,—and, by a fé¬ cond preffurc of the foot on a certain part, it rofe in the fame manner that it fell, and clofed with equal nicety; by which means I found myfelf in that room oppofite to the one we are now in, " The night was exceeding gloomy: confiderable claps of thunder followed each
each other (though they feemed at a diftance), and faint flaíhes of lightning darted on the cafements.—Both my fer¬ vant and our conduftor were foon with me, by the fame means that I had af¬ cended ; and we all three proceeded through this room to the hall, where we were met by a mean, meagre-look¬ ing fellow, with alfo a lamp in his hand, that reflected on a countenance I did not by any means approve. ** It was now late, and a more than common .oppreflion feemed to weigh on my fpirits. — Our guide faluted this man. — * Enuchio/ faid he, c has there been any interruption fince the count laft faw you ?' * c None, fignor,' he anfwered ; ť und I have regularly performed my duty with this lamp every night.'
t л
" Thaťs
€ζ That's well,* returned the other ; * lead us to the weft tower.' " Jafper now whifpered to me, c Be careful, my lord : — wc know not who may be concealed there/ " I ftrove to quiet his apprehenfions by a nod of confidence, though- Ί felt confiderable alarm myfelf.—There was, however, no alternative, and we follow¬ ed in filence. — I underftood from the converfation of Enuchio and the other, as we were proceeding to the weft tower, that the former had attended at the clofe of every evening, to perform the ceremony now invefted on me. " In paffing through one of the cham¬ bers, Jafper (who was behind, and part¬ ly id the dark) ran againft a fuit of ar¬ mour that was placed there, with feve¬ ral implements of war, fome of which are
L
лге now in one of the rooms under tlie upper apartments, -r The craih it made in falling 4vas horrible; and it had «early deftroyed my faithful attendants be, however, fortunately efcaped, with¬ out any material blow» ** Enuchio faid, when we entered the chamber above, that lie thought hc could.fee, through one of the cafe- snents, by the frequent flaíhes of light¬ ning, fome perfon on that fide of the building. — He accordingly fliowed his Jight, and after a few minutes, paffed the cafemeiit with the lamp in his hand. «—Having looked over this room, we defcended to the lower part, where we heard feveral blows againft the outer jjates, and many efforts made to force them open." It is natural to fuppofe that this was the very night on which the late Perci¬ val
val Maferini, father of Alfred and Ma¬ tilda, firft difcovered a light and figure in the abbey ; which made him at the time (diftrafted with his own ideas) at¬ tempt, by force, to enter the building.
Voi. HI.
F
CHAP.
CHAPTER XXXIX. WE were all furprifed at the noife : — at length fignor Ranolpho (which I now found was the name of our guide) faid, he fuppofed it proceeded from the curiofity of fome travellers who were pafling that way. —I cannot fay I was by any means well fatisfied with this conjecture ; but I made no anfwer. ** After having received many İn- ftiuctions from him, concerning the dif¬ ferent pieces of mechanifm contrived in this building, I remarked,* with a look of fome aftonifliraent, that it was to me amazing, count D'Ollifont fliould have put himfelf to fuch expenfe and trouble, when the exertions of the civil power
power, under juft. claims, might have anfwered the purpoTes he wiflied to ac* compilili. " Ranolpho feemed confufed : — af¬ ter á paufe he anfwered, *; Your obfer¬ vation is juft ; but were the application made to the fuperior power of Italy, the curiofity of 'the' peafantry would be ftill more'confiderably. heightened; and I have doubts. whether the vigi¬ lance of the moft fcrutinifing perfons could proteft this place from their inva- fion. — It alfo would gain count DOlii¬ font a bad name, which might, through their ignorance, occafion fufpicions and remarks the moft injurious to his cha¬ rafter.— Befides/ he continued, * the chief part of thefe articles of machinery were erefted many years back, when this ftrufture was inhabited by the monks ; they made ufe of them to ter¬ rify perfons of different fentiments in re- F 2 ligious
ligious points to their own way of thinking, whom the chance of war had made their prifoners, and who accord¬ ingly were confined in their own abbey. By thefe arts, the viciims of their fuper- fi it ion were taught to believe the holy farthers worked miracles by their faith/ w There was a kind of equivocation in this fpeech, which I by no means liked, though I forbore to make any re¬ ply.—What he faid, however, concern¬ ing feveral of the traps, &c. being formed at a diftant period of time, I found to be true, by the general ap¬ pearance of the age of the workman- ihip ; though there was not a doubt but they had lately been repaired and put in order. * f After a little time, we all left the abbey, and îproceeded to the cave, where it wasiettled that I ihouldnieet Enuchio
Enuchio at that fpot, and at the fame hour, the following night. — Ranolpho faid he fliould leave Montferrat the next morning, and make the beft of his way immediately after D'Ollifont to Spain. " We then parted. — Jafper and my¬ felf foon arrived at the cottage, after fome converfation on the ftrange events we had witneffed. ·* l· acquainted Lucretia with even- circumftance relative to the abbey ; and, though flie expreffed a confidera¬ ble anxiety for my fafety,, yet, like my¬ felf, ihe was happy to find the requeft of DOliifont was no worfe. —I, how¬ ever,, mrade herftill moreea(y,.by affur¬ ing her I never intended to vifit the building, unaccompanied by Jafper, " In lefs than a month. I hired a F 3 houfe,
houfe, very little diftant from the cot¬ tage:— it was not large, though neat and elegant ; and, there being only my daughter and m)rfelf, a few domeftics were fufficient to form our houfehold,—> I did not, however, intend to live by any means private or retired, though *rny own wiflies prompted me to it.— Τ trembled for the health of my child : — it had been on the decline ever fince the commencement of our misfortunes — and the poignant ¿rief flie fuffered for the Jofs of her mother, now feemed fettled to a deep melancholy, which I dreaded to obferve, and which my own health and fpirits, I conceived, helped to increafe. <: It was for thefe reafons, therefore, -that I puniftied myfelf, in receiving and paying vifits to perfons of diftinftion, for fome miles round ; and I could per¬ ceive, in fome degree, it contributed to ■ leflen
leflen that weight of oppreflion which feemed to lie fo heavy on her foul. , " A month had not elapfed after my removal to my new dwelling, before a confufed report was fpread that Perci¬ val Maferini and his fifter were yet liv¬ ing, and in Italy. " This intelligence feemed, in fome refpecìs, to unravel a part of the myiÏQ- rious manner and requeft of D'Ollifont-: but I muft own, the elucidations I pic¬ tured to myfelf were by no means fa¬ vourable to him ; and dark fchemes of villany feemed to unfold themfelves to my view. —But ftill I could do nothing; I was bound by my oath; and fufpicions were of no avail.— I and Jafper vifited the abbey every night;-and, on thofe occafions, I made every fearch that was poflible, to find a clue to DOilifont's conduit, which 1 fuppofçd^ might be F 4 concealed
concealed in fome part of the buildings — my endeavours, however, proved un- fuccebful. — Enuchio itili continued near the place: and I could not but fuipoft that he was.as a kind of watch upon my conduct. — His very looks feemed to indicate the blackeft thoughts; and his manners, confirmed the idea. *· About this period, among the many foreigners who frequented my villa as they paffed through Montferrat, was lord Albourne, a young Ëngliih¬ man of rank arid confiderable fortune/ 1 Matilda and Alfred ftarted at the name ; but they forbore to interrupt the hermit, who accordingly proceeded— *' His manner pleafed both myfelf and daughter ; in ftiort, there was a kind of ßöbte fincerity in his difpofition, which*
which, on a little further acquaintance, charmed me.—I muft allow I felt a con¬ fiderable happinefs, on obferving a mu¬ tual affection take place between my Lucretia and this nobleman.—His cha¬ rafter, I underftood from correfpon- dents whom I could depend upon in England, was unblemiihed ; and I knew I could beftow on rvly child afor· tune worthy of fuch a huiband. <—Suf¬ fice*! t to fay, he declared his fentiments ; and flie, above the little arts of female coquetry, confeffed the loved him.— But itili there were fame obftacles to the marriage.—Lord Albourne had not yet been acquainted with my mis¬ fortunes, or with Lucretia's attempt on D'Ollifont's life.—-To Lucretia there was alfo another impediment: — flic muft part with me fos fome.time ; hh lordfliip had promifed>,after fettling his affairs in England^ he would return with, her, and confent to remain iu F 5 Montferrat
Montférrat during my life-time.—But •it would, at leaft, take twelve months to tranfacJ thefe aifairs.—Thefe twelve months' abfence feemed to her a centu¬ ry, and darkened every profpeft of fe¬ licity ihe might have hoped to have en¬ joyed.—At length, however, thefe ob¬ ila cies were overcome : — lord Ai- bourne was, by me, informed of the fufferings I had undergone,—and of Lucretia's impetuofity, in attempting to afľalľmate the author of my misfortunes* ,—His lordfliip fympathifed with me in my diíireíľes, awd admired the heroic love of my child, though he was forry ihe had 'thrown herfelf into,, the power of fuch a wretch* *' The latter objeclion was at length ever-ruled by him : and, I may fay, confulerably leficned by D'OUifont,from whom ať this period I received a letter in terms of the warmeft friendíhip,. and breathing,
breathing, in fome degree, a regret for the anguifli he had caufed. —The con¬ tents of it informed me, that (it having been hinted to him that my health vyas in a precarious ftate, and that travelling would, very probably, prove of infinite fervice) he would undertake that fome one fhould perform my part in the ab¬ bey, if I chofe to take a journey for two months, to re-eftabliih my confti¬ tution. — DOllifonťs character was now too well known to me, for me to conceive one favourable trait in his difpofition ; otherwife, this deception might have paffed for an act of kind¬ nefs and repentance. — I ftrangely fuf¬ pefted fome foul deeds were to be exe¬ cuted in my abfence, and at firft re¬ folved not to accept the offer : but, at> length, overcome by the tears of Lu-, cretia and the perfuafions of lord Al¬ bourne, I confented to accompany^ them to France, but determined to re- . .:; F 6 turn
turn at leaft a fortnight before the li¬ mited time, ** My fituation was critical; I dared not communicate my fufpicions to any bne, except Jafper;—my oath.forbade it.— My furprife, however, was coniL- derably increafed by finding that Per¬ cival Maferini and his fifter were actual¬ ly in Italy ; and that the latter, by the authority of the king cf Sardinia, had font to Spain, to demand the keys of Grafville Abbey from couut DOliifont, that the buildings might be fearched, to find if another will could be produced of the late count Maferini, in favour of his children before his nephew. tf An idea now ftruck me, which ï confidered' would at once give me arr opportunity of difcovering the dark machinations of DOliifont refpefting· the abbey, though abfent from Mont¬ ferrat. w I there*
GKÅSVtZLE ABBEY. TVS " I therefore wrote a\íhort anfwer to his letter* faying I fliould accept the vacation he offered me, —At the fame time I determined to leave Jafper at my houfe, concealed, that they might fuppofe he was aifo with me.—I knew I could depend on his fidelity, courage, and underftanding. To him, therefore, / I related the forebodings of my own mind, and gave him inftruttions accord*· inglyy—with a particular caution, that, thould he find any one was confined there, or any treacherous íchemes what¬ ever going forward, he ihould immedi¬ ately write to me, and (on the receipt of this token) I ihould come poft> and incognito,, to my villa. " Lord Albourne and Lucretia were ihortly united, after an acquaintance of only fix months; and; as foon as the ceremony was performed, we fet off for France.—Our journey was.pleafan^ and
( and if ever í enjoyed one gleam of com¬ fort after .my misfortunes in Spain 'and theiofs of my Caffandra, it was in this fliort, period. —A gloom, however, ftill hung over the countenance of Lucretia; the idea of leaving me proved a conti¬ nual drawbackon her felicity; and the diftreffing day was fomewhat .haftened, by a letter from Jafper¿ requefting me to return immediately. if That fortitude, however, which I conceived I fliould exert when I parted with the, only prop of my exiftence, failed me entiiely at the afflicting mo¬ ment; and (inftead of being able to fupport her through the trial) I found I in a great meafure added to her grief, by the pangs I fuffered myfelf, which were too acute to be concealed.—Lord Albourne feemed to íhare the forrows of us both j and (after fliedding tears on * my head) he, removed his wife from my arms,
f . ~ - * , * arms, that infenfibly held her to my breaft, and hurried her, in a fainting fit, to the carriage,—which with cruel fwiftnefs foon borb her from my fight. u Alas ! every beam of pleafure feemed now vaniihed, and the melan¬ choly profpefts of my mind received another tint of darknefs, horror, and mifery.—But a kw months back, I had been the happieft of mortals,—the fa¬ ther of a lovely amiable child, — the huiband of an angelic wife,—the pof- feffor of an unblemifhed reputation : — now was I an exile, though in my native country ; bereft of wife, child, and even reputation, in the eyes of the .world ; labouring under a ftigma of ihattcred fame, never to be recovered. " Tormented with thofe ideas, I fet out on my return to Italy 5 but, unfor¬ tunately, was detained, through many 3 incidents
incidents on the road, for near three days, — I, immediately on my arrival at my villa, had* a private conference with Jafper. ** His countenance firowcd he had "much to telli and that' of a dreadful nature. — He informed me, that, after my departure, he kept himfelf as fecret as poflible, according to my orders, and only went out by night, and the« con¬ cealed himfelf at a place near the cave. c Тйе fécond time of his watching, he perceived Enuchio and* three others, whom he did not by any* means like, cautioufly enter it about midnight,— and, fome time after, he faw a light pafs one of the cafements in the weft tower of the abbey; but, though he re* mained at the fame place till near day¬ break, hè never faw them return. — He attended again the next evening* at an early hour, but faw no one gp that way, though *.
■if GRASVILLE ΑΒΓΒΕΥ. I ?3 though a lightand the figure of a man moved feveral times, in the courfe ot three hours, before the different win¬ dows.— He therefore concluded that thofe whom he had feen the night be¬ fore had taken up their habitation en¬ tirely in the abbey.—He ftill, however* continued to keep a watchful eye* oa the building. fi On the eighth day fome confufion was experienced among the peafantry. A fignor Balvolio, a phyfician* with offir ccrs of juftice, and a fervant of Perci¬ val Maferini, arrived at Montferrat, to fearch for him. — He had the night bi¬ fore, according to the fervant's account, entered the abbey, while the man wait¬ ed for him ¿without; who fell afleep, and did^ot awake tUl morning; — he then entered to look after his mailer, but his exertions proved frukfefs ; be was nò where to be found. — His foot* fteps.
fteps were traced to an apartment in the weft tower; where alfo a picture which he wore next his heart, was found, the ribbon of which feemed torn by force ; but from this room no- other figns of him could be traced. " Jafper was equally aftoniihed and alarmed at this intelligence, —He had omitted to attend at the ufual place the night before, having been extremely ill'; he/ however, contrived to bø among thofe who entered with the ftrangers to fearch the building, and with them exa¬ mined that very apartment of the weft tower, where with me he had oft-times performed the ufual ceremonies with the lamp.—He then, with the reft, left the abbey, and heard it agreed on, be¬ tween the phyfician and. officers, that the doors and outer gates fliould be left unlocked. " On
« On his return home he directly font offa letter to me, acquainting me with thefe proceedings ; but, unfortunately,. I had, the day before the arrival of it at the place it was directed to, fet off for another part of France ; and Jaf¬ per, after fome time, had the mortifica¬ tion to receive it again unopened. " In this interval he was A however, by no< means idle,—and he determined, let the hazard be what it Would, to go over the abbey himfelf at midnight. -** Hè at the fame time refolved to^ enter from the principal· gates, being aware, did he attempt to pafs the fecret paf¬ fage, there was hardly a doubt but he fliould be interrupted. " This fcheme he carried inţp exe¬ cution, and proceeded, . well armed, with a dark lantern, to the hall.—He had not remained, in aivobfcure part of it.
it, above five minutes, before Enuchio» and two others came forth from that apartment; which proved they muft have been in the fubterraneous cham¬ ber, and confequently had afcendcd by means of the trap.—Thefe men had, all three* lamps, — and, ihortly after, they were followed by a figure of noble mien, muffled up in his cloak, andhis hat, in which was a white feather, flap¬ ped over his eyes. — But how was Jai- per aftoniihed,, when* by the light of . one of their lamps, which glared on his countenance, he difcovered the. fea¬ tures of D'Ollifont I ** Being now more fully convinced that the moft ho/rid treachery and vii- lany was going forward,—though every moment in danger of being difcovered, he perfifted in following them at forne little diftance.—They proceeded flowly through.the iron gate that leads to the ruins
T4iins of -a once magnificent place of worihip, .and walked.to the centre, on which.part ftands.artombto the memo¬ ry of a monk, who in former times was a fuperior of this abbey. " One of the men having.put down a fmall baiket, covered lightly over with a cloth, which feemed to-contaia fome provifion, they all four entered the tomb, — But it was impoflible for laf- per,to follow them here alfo; as the иге vwould ^hardly have admitted five perfons to keep far enough aj>art in it to prevent difcovery. 4< Me heard a kind öf noife which plainly told they were opening a large, trap, and it feemed to require the exer¬ tions v of three of them. — He heard DOliifont fpeak : —.* Take down the provifions; I will remain here.—Leave the baiket, and fay nothing/ Jafper fuppofed
'fuppofed they áld ίο ; for, after fome little time, he heard them replacé the trap; «nd they paffed by him as they returned to the apartment from whence they came. ** He immediately, by the fame me¬ thod he had entered, quitted the ab¬ bey, fliocked at what he had been wit- neis to, and entirely at a lofs in what manner to aft. — He knew himfelf to be entanged by a promife of fecrecy, fimilar to that of mine, on which terms only I had been fuffered to make him my confidant;.but yet he was certain, as well as myfelf, that it did not prevent our aid or affiftance to any one diftrefs- ed or confined in the building ; or our exertions to fruftrate any plans of wick- ednefs or cruelty which the count might form, provided we did not difcover thofe circumftances in whkh we were involved relative to the light, Sec. —Our fituations
.fituations were both extremely delicate; and though we would have riíked our lives in the fervice of the unfortunate, yet we could not but recolleft with horror, the forfeiture incurred by the breach of an awful oath.
CHAPTER XL. *' JASPER at length fixed on a fcheme, which effectually confirmed his wiihes to ferve the unfortunate, by the cou¬ rage and ingenuity he difpiayed in the execution of it.— He determined to let the much-injured Percival Maferini know (if fuch a perfon there was in the abbey, — a circumftance of which he had little if any doubt) that there was one who 4 was acquainted with his unhappy fituation, and pitied him, — nay, would run all hazards to aflift him to efcape, if he could contrive any ftratagem that carried in it the leaft nrofne^" "f fuccefs* — Words to this purpofe he wrøte on a ftieet of paper, — at
*— at the fame time , mentioning he would attend in the tomb the next night, .at an early hour, before the ufual attendance of D'Ollifont and his afliftants ; a feeble hope inducing him to think they might converfe together, though with ditHculty. " A fudden idea now ftruck htm, which had nearly over-ruled his pre¬ fent determination. —Why not imme¬ diately apply to the civil power, whom he could at once lead to the place of confinement ; and, by proof, cruih D'Ollifont and the wretches concerned ? — The pen dropped from his hand : —* he rofe with joy at the thought. — He¬ fitation and reflection again ftopped V hira : — he knew not how I would have acted in this cafe. Strong as were his fufpicions, they were as yet but fufpicions ¿ ihould he make them publicly known, —and, at this crifis, Vol. IIL G íhould
fhould they fail, (Which, though entirely improbable, was not actually an im¬ poffibility) it was uncertain in what ftate he might involve both himfelf and me. — But this might, at leaft, be done at the laft extremity,—and in two days more hc expected I fliould return. " In fliort, he proceeded as he had before intended, and accordingly finifli- ed his note, — not without, however, mentioning, at the latter part, hints of the difagreeable ties that entangled him with D'Ollifont.— Another confidera- tiör£;BOw interrupted him: — he wiflied to fign a name, but not either his own or mine ; that, in cafe the letter fliould l^e difcovered, it might not, at the firft inftant, be apparent who was the au- thor of it. — After fome little time he avrete "at the bottom, * Father Peter/ that it 'might be fuppofed to be fon^e holy man, who, difdaining the idle talk re la-
relative to the abbey, had made it a place for his meditations, and had con¬ fequently difcovered what was going forward. c< Jafper, at night, attended at a particular fpot in the chapel.*—In a ihort time he heard them enter, but could not perceive D'Ollifont. —One of them, whom he had noticed the night before, he now difcovered to be E- burne. —They immediately walked to the tomb, and followed each other in ; the baiket, as on the former night, was flightly covered with a cloth, an,d put down on the outfide of the door, while they removed the trap.— Jafper now faw the opportunity he wiflied to make ufe o£; and, while they were bufily employed, he advanced, turned the cloth on one fide from the top of die baiket, ťhruft the paper down among * the proviŞon; and replaced tlie covering G 2 as
as he found it. — In lefs than a minute after he had returned to his hiding- place, one of them came forth, and took it away: — he foon after heard the trap clofed ; and, again pafling him, they returned, as he fuppofed, to the fubterraneous room ; while he left the abbey, elated, in fome degree, with the fuccefs of his fcheme. " The ne^t night arrived ; and Jaf¬ per, with another letter, repaired, as foon as it was dark, to the chapel, with a palpitating heart for the iffue of his undertaking, — He entered the tomb, put his mouth to the trap, which, with fome trouble, he found ; then called feveral times, but received no anfwer: — he repeated the name of Maferini ftill louder, till he was afraid he had difcovered himfelf to DOlli¬ fonťs party.— Soon after, he thought he heard a kind of groaning from be¬ low;
low ; but it was indiftincì and faint : — în ihort, he was now certain the cell was fo low, it was imponible to ex* change words with any one beneath.— His difappointment, however, did not abate his perfeverance ; and he now waited to place his note, in which, he, bad related the regret he felt at not being able to hear him; and, sner begging him to fupport himfelf with fortitude, he declared his intending, if every fcheme failed, to apply to the røa- giftracy of the place. M The men, as ufual, approached 5 but D'Ollifont was again abfent. One of them carried the bafket : — unfortu¬ nately, he did not place it before the door, but took it with him into the tomb ; in confequence of which, Jaf¬ per was unable to fend the paper he had got ready. — After they left tbp chapel, he departed from the abbey, G 3 over-
overwhelmed with chagrin and diftrefs at the failure of his enterprife.—The next morning brought the letter which he had wrote to me, back again, w T ith information that no fuch perfon could be found at the place where it was di¬ rected;—Hc immediately, difpatched another, which found me át В * * *. 4t One more night he refolved to try if Fortune would favour him 5 and he determined, ihould flie nöt, to run aH hazards, and apply for juftice the fol¬ lowing day. * 4 ι * He was juft going to leave the houfe, Vrhen he obferved three meh luiking about, as if watching it ; he therefore waited fome little time be¬ fore he fet off.—About half an hour after, he perceived they were gone; and accordingly walked towards the abbey.—He had but juft arrived at one
of the folitary avenues leading to tfie principal gate, when the fame three- men, as hc fuppofed, ruihed from be-f hind fome thick foliage of cedar, and demanded his money, —They, how¬ ever, waited for no anfwer, but knock¬ ed him down: — they then rifled his pockets ; and, after giving him feveral blows on the head, and ftabs with a dagger in the fide and breaft, left him* doubtlefs with an idea that he was dead. " " In this ftate he continued till morn¬ ing, when he in fome degree reco* vered his fenfes, though unable to move, and almoft to fpeak. —His fitlir ation was dreadful : — there was little chance of any one pafling that way, it being fo near the abbey ; and he feem¬ ed to be in fuch a ftate that he could not poflibly furvive many hours. G 4 » Provi
" Providentially, however, after a con¬ fiderable length oftime, a peafent. ven¬ tured into the path, after a ftrayed mule ; he at firft attempted to run at the fight of Jafper's figure, conceiving him to be fomething fupernatural; but his feeble voice foon convinced the man, who ftood at a Jittle diftance, that he was a mortal. — He immediately jcarne up to him; but the exertion he had oifed in ftriving to make him hear, had noW^rendered him fpeechlefs.,— 'ihe poor fellow, who faw and pitied him, directly ran for another man to help; and they carried him between them to the peafant's cottage. — After fome little time he was recognifed, and they fent to the fervants at the villa, to acquaint them with the accident. " Proper affiftance was procured :— in about eight hours he recovered his fpeech ; but yet the phyfician gave no hopes
hopes of his life.— Ια ţhe courfe of four days his wounds appeared more favourable, and his fever confiderably abated,—jet ftill he continued deliri¬ ous at intervals, — In the courfe of fix more days, he recovered his fenfes en¬ tirely, and was pronounced out of dan¬ ger, — He now fat up fome hours every day, and feemed to gain ftrength as fait as could be wiíhed ; and the following week, which was лЬе time of my re* turn, he left his chamber, though ex¬ tremely low, " In this ftate I found him, and heard from him the events which had happened in my abfence* — I leave you to judge of my feelings and my fitua· tion*— There was not a doubt, in my opinion, but that the villains who rob¬ bed and fo cruelly ufed Jafper, were fome of D'Ollifont's gang, who knew of his intrufion into the abbey, and de- G 5 termined
termîhed to keep" h im awày for fome time, îf nòti tó murder him. *¿rl there- fore : ;réfòlVed; v howeve í r hazardous ft nright 'bé, to c go^tö the abbey: that nigfft; though Mperw^as unable to ac** company riíè:^-4hís refolution, I muft own, l wkVV aflí r but I î thought nor oà thé dånget; my pàifiërîswere worked up to thè higheft pifèh. ; # >. . . * ϊ. ι · t ¡ ■ < ^ Soon after it was dark, I repaired fo the cave ; nothing was altered fincè my laft vifit. *— I proceeded *long the fubterraneous paffage : — all was filent, and gfobrny. ^ In the íame manner I 'afcended"to the room; not an article appeared to be moved.*—I rofe from the trap to thefe apartments : --— I could hear nor fee nothing ; every thing feem¬ ed to fliow not a foul had entered. к imce myfelf: *— I; at length, even be¬ gan to conceive doubts whether Jaf- per's tale did not proceed from a difor- - * 6 dered
dered imagination.-^- 1 walţ£e& |IowIy to the gates of the.chapel ν and^;ffopr ping a few TOomentvftuddersd tovor luntarily atrøy own ideas.4-»Theho,rridly defolàte afpeÃ of ievèiy ^№goaTofm4 me encouraged ι íthê ^ difm^l r Utøta , of thoughts thsť ftrdcfcjonrøy/mibid.-rrl fliook offthiá weabriefsv ,^t)d wÄlke^ direaiy ţ ito thè'tòmbi'wheiteri y^slfoorj oñvinced of v lthe t^uthA>f ¿Ш$>£гЧ re¬ port, by finding tàeìotrap^lwhich anr fwered every^ defcription, he :had .given . me. — I was, however, тса£>£у& (to ■lifť it up, —and^ having fully fttisfiçd Trryíelf that the ¡'place/spas now clear* returned home. - - n i w The next day, I acquainted laff per with my vifit; atòd лveίboâh conf ceived there was not a ihadow .oí doubt but the unfortunate Percival iMaferini had been made away witb^âurimj 1Ы illnefs of Jafper. G 6 "In
" In the courfe of a week Jafper was able to .attend me to the abbey, and we proceeded together to the tomb. — > We both exerted our ftrength, and foon opened the trap, which dif¬ covered a flight of narrow ftone fteps, by which we defcended to a confidera¬ ble depth, and at the bottom entered a fmall fquare cell, arched over at top. -—This place was entirely clear, — nor could any figns of murder be difcover¬ ed, till Jafper (as we were leaving of it) by chance ftumbled over a dagger, clotted with blood, partly dried, and in fome few places begun to ruft. — This, I refolved, fliould for the pj^fent remain where it was; and, after we had performed the ceremony with the lamp in the weft tower (according to my oath, which I ft ricìly* adhered to), we returned, íhoeked at our efforts being fruftrated, relative to difcovering the
the manner in which Percival Maferini had been treated, u For about a month I was undeter¬ mined in my conjeftures on thefe cir* cumftances, and confiderations in what manner to aft. — Every law of nature and juftice, however, feemed to demand I fliould, if poflible, make what intel¬ ligence I had received known, and bring D'Ollifont to account, on the charge of Jafper. ** My refolution to this purpofe had not been fixed above a day, when the poor fellow was taken ill with a relapfe of the fever that had before been cauf¬ ed by his wounds; and one of thefe wounds which he received on the breaft, and which he had taken lefs account of than the reft, now fliowed figris of mortification. Advice from every part near was fent for j but their 9 con*
confutations proved of no avail ; for, in lefs than a week, I faw him breathe his laft, in a ftate of infanity. *< Every idea of bringing D'Ollifont to 1 juftice now vani/hed, — and the death of this faithful fervant preyed on my fpirits (which, though had at the time ¿f my leaving Spain, had gradu¬ ally grown worfe ever fince), mfomuch that; at this period, it almoft affected my fenfes at certain times.— Stili h was a kind of melancholy madnefs, which was of fliort duration in itsln- tervals ; and,'confequently, could nöt be difcovered, but by the few performs who were continually with me, — and they took no notice of it, as they ap¬ prehended no ill confequences from it on my behaviour, which was neither frantic nor outrageous. ** Seven months elapfed under thefo circum-
circumftances ; during which time I re* ceived two letters from røy daughter» who informed røe of the tendernefs and affeftion of her huiband,~-of his fettling his aflairs as quick asTpoflible, to returi with her to mö in Italy, (^ period åié moft fincerely longed for) though ihe fuppofed к would be deferred, on ac¬ count of-an addition to their party, Й1 the perfon of a near relation to my¬ felf. ^ * ' \ ^ ζζ This intelligence, at two different times, gave me the moft fincere plea- ' fure and happinefs. — Like a poor ihip? wrecked mariner, I looked forward through a gloomy profpeft to a little glimpfe of returning comfort, —- Alas I that glimpfe was foon exringuiihed, and I arrived at the crh% of my mis¬ fortunes. — At the end of near five months' expeftation after the laň letter I had received, another came from his lord-'
lordihip, —who, in the moft foothing marmer, (though himfelf, by the ap¬ pearance of his writing, nearly diftraft* cd) informed me of the death of my Lucretia, in child-birth; the infant, which was a girl, having furvived., u Excufe thefe tears," faid the old man. After a paufe of fome minutes, while he feemed ftifled with grief— " Look on them," faid he, " not as the effefts of womanifli ideas, or a fu- per^nnuated mind ; but confider them as indicating one worn down by the rod of adverfity, till fortitude itfelf feems to forfake him, and remem¬ brance even yet fills his eyes with drops of anguifli, — of regret."
CHAPTER XLI. ALFRED, lord Milverne, and Matil¬ da, venerated the grief of the hermit too much to interrupt his forrow, which, after a few minutes* indulgence, he overcame, and continued his narra* tive. " This ^intelligence, as I before ob¬ ferved, brought me to ihe very crifis of my misfortunes ; and the delirious fits I laboured under became more frequent, though not more violent,«—«My ideas were tinctured with a kind of mifan- thropy, which every day increafed, and ferved to encourage horrid thoughts that had never before gained the leaft afcendancy over me: — and the refult of what I felt was a wiih (though I fliruuk from it with affright) to put an end
end to my own exiftence. — But the gloom of my mind becoming each day more terrible, worked up every evil in¬ fluence with double ftrength. — Perni¬ cious arguments floated in my brain»; they feemed to fay I could not do v wrong in ridding myfelf of a bu'rderi- fome life'. —'in fliort, in lefs than three months, I camé to tfie dreadful deter¬ mination of drinking poifon. " I had féen no company whatever fince the laft news from England, but a reverend father belonging to a neigh¬ bouring monaftery, virith whom I fpent fome hours when perfectly collected ; but I had, for the laft month before I took this refolution, feldom even feen him. My heated imagination prompt¬ ed me to aík him to dine with me the very day I refolved to commit the crime.—In my victuals, at that meal, I intended to mix a quantity of the poi- fonous
fonous drug I had already procured. -ŕ* It is neceflary, however, to inform you, that, at this period, I was partly infane, though poffeffed in fome degree of rer colleftion. <f The day arrived \ . and father Phi¬ neas, by appointment, waited. on me. · — We, began dinner, and (1 even now tremble at the idea), before it was finiihed, I executed the dreadful pro- je£t, and took, with a feeming calnK nefs, the tinctured food.—I immediate¬ ly turned our difcourfe on the fubjeéì of religion ; knowing I had only a few hours to live, I wiihed to be fatisfied ih fome points which my difordered. in¬ tellects had latterly made me doubt " The good man anfwered my quef¬ tions with folemnity and truth.—In the courfe of his obfervations, he treated on fuicide :—I involuntarily fhuddered» With
With a fteady firmnefs, which I ihall never forget, he fpoke on the horrid a£l, v and the eternal puniihmcnt that awaited it. —I turned pale ; my lips trembled with convulsive terror at the idea of what I had done, and drops of perfpiration fell frommy face.*—»Father Phineas obferved thefe emotions, and % inquired if I was ill. — The greateft alarm prevailed over his features; he gueffed the caufe ; but delicacy forbade him to mention it, for fear his conjec¬ tures ihould be wrong.— After a few moments I burn into an agony of tears, 'and confeffed myfelf guilty of the deed, that would (as he had clearly explain¬ ed) produce everlafting deftruciion. ** He hardly heard the confeflion, but darted like lightning from the room,—In lefs than ten minutes here*' turned with a medicine which he had procured at a relation's of his, who re- fided
fided near.—I immediately took it ; but there was great doubt whether it would take the wiflied-for effeft, as I had fwal- lowed the poifon fome time.—The ago¬ ny I fuffered, in doubtful fufpenfe and horror for half an hour, could not be balanced by all my griefs put together; momentarily expefting diflblution, with no hope of forgivenefs hereafter, i' At length I brought from my fto«J mach the dreadful poifon :—the opera* tion was violent; and, when over, I found myfelf unable to ftand ; the fer¬ vants were therefore informed by fa¬ ther Phineas, that I had fuddenly been taken ill. —I was accordingly convey- ed to my bed; nor was any one ever ac¬ quainted with the real nature of the cafe, he having made an excufe even in procuring the medicine. " In the morning, after fome hours' fleep,
ι fleep, I found the good man at my bed¬ fide ; his manner was now fevere, and I received from him a fliarp though af¬ fecting rebuke ; when, after having joined with me in a thank%iving for my efcape, he departed, and I remain¬ ed alone the remainder of the dav. €( An inclination which I had before imbibed at intervals, now affailed me with redoubled force ; it was a wiih to retire entirely froml the world, and live fecluded and unknown, in the cave which led to Grafville Abbey:—by "this I fliould at once gratify my own de* líre, and (if poflible) more ftricily ad- ЪегХ to my oath, which I now more and more, as my health became impaired, confidered as a duty to my God. " The next day Icommunicated the thought to father Phineas, who at firft attempted to diffuade me from it, but nt
at laft agreed that it was a refolution iri forne degree neceffary, as a penance for the crime I had been guilty ok — I determined that no one, except himfelf, ihould know of my retirernent ; and be¬ tween us the following fcheme waa therefore contrived. r ' c I gave it out among my houfehold, that I intended to travel again to France, on account of my health ; and, if I found the climate agree with me, might perhaps continue there lome years, or entirely fettle for the remain¬ der of my life.—My domeftics were therefore ordered away at a certain time. — I, as was fuppofed, left the country; and my villa was fold by fa¬ ther Phineas. — At different times of the nigtit he had conveyed for me vari- юш utenfils- ami-conveniences, to form the neceflary articles of life, to the cave :—he likewife procured the drefs, &c.
вес. of a hermit ; and I took poffeflion * of my new abode, giving the whole amount that my villa and furniture fold for, to father Phineas, to diftribute in charitable ufes, bêfides a very handfome prefent for himfelf. " My fudden departure, and the me¬ lancholy ftate I had fo long been in, was talked of for fome time, after which I was partly forgotten, and fel· dom mentioned. f€ But it was neceffary our proceed¬ ings Ihould not ftop here : and, in the courfe of-fix months, father Phineas, (who vifited me daily) by my defire, fpread the report of my death at Paris, and wrote a letter to D'Ollifont, who was then in Spain, to the fame pur¬ port; mentioning it was my requeft, when living, that, after my deceafe, in¬ formation of it ihould be fent him. « Whether
Sf Whether he believed the account, I know not : but it is certain he might have been convinced to the contra- rys had he taken the trouble to fend and make inquiries in that city.—^But, conceiving, I fuppofe, that there were already alarms enough concerning the abbey, to keep it free from intrufion, and that the principal perfon to contend with him was, by his diabolical arts, no more ; knowing that, even if it was fearched, no material proofs could be brought againft him, he thought my death rather a releafe than a misfortune, on account of the thorough knowledge I had of his charafter. *' But, as if Providence favoured his villany, I could not bring me to difre- gard the oath I had taken, fo that his wiflies friíl continued to be fulfilled. — You may, perhaps, wonder at my ftrift adherence to it : but you muft confider Vol. HL H mv
V l
niy fituation ; every trifle fwelled in my imagination, -which had now roJiing to relax it ¡ and my fervency of reli¬ gion, in refpečt to repenting- of the crime I had been guilty of in an at¬ tempt to take away my own life, every day became more violent ; infomuch that my horror and mifery increafed, inftead of leffening, the more I thought of its fatal tendency. " The good father conftantly vifited ше during the remainder of his life, and regularly brought me food ; but he has now been dead twelve years.—Af¬ ter that period I was neceffitated to go to the public market, and upon this ac¬ count took the name of father Peter, recollecting the ugnature which Jafper put to the letter he fcnt to Percival Maferini.—Time, and the difguife I was in, totally prevented me from being known. — I have, fince my appearance at
at the town, received vifits from fome of the peafantry, who have been more courageous and more curious than their companions. " I had now but one wiih to be gra¬ tified, which was to fee lord Albourne and his child, if living.—The good fa¬ ther had, by my defire, wrote to* his lordfliip, fome time after my retirement ; but we received no anfwer.—He wrote again ; but this letter proved as fruit¬ lefs as the former. — His illnefs and death prevented a third from being fent : — the only conjecture I could form, to make me fuppofe both letters had mifcarried, was that, in cafe of his lordfliip's death, I ihould have received an anfwer to them by fome one inveft¬ ed with the management of his affairs. — Father Phineas had tranfmitted all my money to a very refpeftable relation of his in France, an eminent banker, И 2 under
under a feigned name ; and with this gentleman was alfo placed my will, wherein I had bequeathed the whole of my fortune to lord AJbourne and his child, if living,—if not, to be divided equally among fix convents in France, and a confiderable fum to be given to the poor. " Lord Albourne, his child, and the recollection of aimou c\txy one that had been dear to me, in a great mea¬ fure vaniflied from my mind, in the fpace of ten years. — Wholly abforbed in an enthufiaftic mode of living, I be¬ came indifferent to every thing in the world, and obtained a ferenity to which I had before been a flranger. — I kept a conftant watch upon the abbey, though I did not enter it for fometimes fix months together ; —yet at thefe times I could fee no one had intruded there fince my laft vifit. " I re-
" I remained in this ftate for near twenty years, when, the fécond night, as I fuppofe, that you were at the abbey, — walking rather later than ufual, meditating on the events of my paft life, which feemed like a fleeting dream to my imagination,^—my rêverie was fuddenly interrupted by a glare of light from one of the windows on the eaft fide of the building,—I ftopped involuntarily; and a kind of horror, I had long been a ftranger to, crept through every vein. — I ftood fome mi¬ nutes, as if fixed to the earth : but, knowing I could do nothing then, I made the beft of my way to the cave^ though unable to fleep the remainder of the night,,from the ideas that torment ed me, "In the morning I rofe, haraffed an£ diftreffed.—I firft determined, if poffi¬ ble, to feek out who and what the inha- ^ H 3 bi tants,
f bitanîs were, as I could more eafily find out the beft methods to terrify them from it, according to my oath, which I ftill refolved flridily to adhere to.—I went through the fubterraneous paffage to the room, and from thence afcended to the apartment above, the next to this, in which you were ail four af¬ fembled. t( I could not perceive the features of any perfon, but found you had taken up your refidence here only two nights. — I determined to begin my operations without hefitation, — and accordingly, the latter part of the evening of the fame day, repaired to the weft tower, and at midnight, in one of the cafe¬ ments, exhibited the lamp. This cere¬ mony I performed the next night, and paffed the window in a manner which I was certain muft caufe alarm, if I was feen —Having done this, I return¬ ed
ed to my cave, with fcarcely a doubt but I had frightened the vifitors from their abode. " I found myfelf, however, miftaken; for the next morning/ in the fubterra¬ neous room, I heard voices, but did not then afcend to the upper apartment. I attended rather earlier than ufual at night, found you had not retired to reft, but were at fupper.—I placed my lamp below, and waited above, though unable to obferve any one, the folding doors being quite clofed. " The night was ftormy, (you, no doubt, well recollect it) and I after¬ wards regretted the uneafinefs I had' caufed the female part of the company. — The behaviour of Mr. Maferini ap r peared ftrange and boifterous 4 . — in fliort, I immediately conjefturcd he had been drinking freely. — The concep- H 4 tioa
tton was, I believe, right ; and I muft confefs, at that time, it gave me no high opinion of his charafter. — In con¬ fequence of this idea, I did what I fliould otherwife, perhaps, have omitted. c< On my firft entrance, I heard him call for lights. — Hi? fifler in vain per¬ fuaded him to retire to reft ; he f wal¬ lowed feveral bumpers of wine after each other, with the avidity of a mad¬ man:—at length he called a name which ftruck me almoft fenfelefs. I ut¬ tered an exclamation of horror, which was drowned by a very loud clap of thunder that burft over the abbey at that time. — My flighty imagination, wounded by a degree of returning in¬ fanity, urged me to think that the name of my daughter was mentioned to hurt my feelings ; and this vague thought fpurred me to terrify the author of it with more than ufual inclination. — The
The armour that had been thrown down by Jafper at the time we were viewing the abbey with fignor Ranol¬ pho, had been gathered together, and placed in the fubterraneous room. — I defcended, and foon heard him drink to the * old ghoit that inhabited the ab¬ bey/ upon which I directly puíhed againft the pile with all my force : — it fell to the ground, — and, as it did.be¬ fore* made a moft violent craih. " I immediately afcended to hear what emotions it had caufed. — I heard all in confufion : — every one feemed by tbe noife to have removed from their feats ; upon which I immediately placed myfelf upon the trap, ready to fmk on a fudden, if required. " Mr. Maferini uttered the name of bis father — I groaned. ' J H 5 « He
" He heard it, and declared he would find from whence it came : but fome one feemed to hold him. — I re¬ peated the groan. *' Two perfons approached the fold¬ ing doors ; they flew open : — I ftop¬ ped juft time enough to be feen, and then vaniihed. *' Thus ended a night, no doubt, to you, of the greateft horror and diftrefs, — to me of the keener!: an- ,guifh and reflection* which weighng on my mind, prevented the refrefhment of ileep ;— in ihort, the next day I was unable to leave my bed, or take any account of the abbey. ** The following morning, as I was at my prayers, уоц all entered on me rather fuddenly, 1, as ufual, prayed for the forgivenefs of the fin I had been • 5 guilty
guilty of, in the attempt to deprive my« felf of exiftence.—I had an uncommon oppreflion. on my fpirits ; and tears, which I could not ftifle, flowed at the recollection of events in the early part of life. — I turned my head, and ob¬ ferved four perfons affembled round, two of whom bore fo ftrong a refem¬ blance to the picture of the late count Orlando Maferini, that, weak with in* difpofition, and overcome by rny own ideas, I fell fenfelefs on the floor. — Even on my recovery from this fit, I did not, I believe, rightly recover my Scat¬ tered fenfes :~ you took your leave, and promifed to vifit me the next day. " I fuppofed you were inhabitants of the abbey, and had but little doubt of your near relationfliip to the family of Maferini. — My very f out jfeemed to cling to you : but my oath again came to my imagmariop, , a^nd I .dreaded even -. í H 6 the
the very thought of breaking it. — I confidered, if I could but adhere to thaf ţ and ftill be of fervice to you, I might yet die with fome degree of hap¬ pinefs. — At night, as ufual, 1 difpiay¬ ed the light in the weft tower, and af¬ terwards returned to my cave. " According to promife, you were with me in the morning.-—We dif* -eourfed on feveral fubjecis:—Mr. Ma¬ ferini mentioned Grafville Abbey; I found myfelf confufed, and thought I could alfo perceive fymptoms of embar¬ raffment and terror in the countenances of all. — Indifpofition again prevented me from attending with the light in the weft tower at night. — In the afternoon of the next day you vifited me again, —and, no doubt, well remember our converfatfon. H I advifed you not to enter the ab¬ bey.
bey. —- Mr. Maferini anfwered tfte ra* ther warmly, and I found myfelf hurt i he immediately apologifed, and we parted. — I was again, at nigtit,. necef¬ fitated to defer the ceremony of the light, by an unexpected event, which I ihall hereafter make known» ** The next day you vifited mycave ; but I was abfent on the bufinefs of the preced* ing evening.—At midnight, however, I difpiayed the light in the weft tower, and could plainly perceive fome one move with a lantern in the court below.—» Suppofing by this, that you were none of you then retired to reft, I conceived, that, in a little time, I might venture through the apartment where you flepť* (turnmg to Matilda) " to one which I bave diftinguifhed by the name of the ftate-chamber, which contarne the bea¬ vers, feathers, &c. and which was for¬ merly hung with black, tø receive the corpfe
corpfe of Orlando count Maferini, for the ihort interval of time before he was interred. " There is a door artfully concealed on one fide of mifs Maferini's bed, which cannot poflibly be difcovered, on account of the tapeftry that covers it : — this opening leads to a private paf- fage that communicates immediately with the ftairs of the weft tower ; for I wiflied to get to the ftate-chamber, without appearing on the ground-floor of the abbey, where I naturally conceived you all were. — This door I foftly un- clofed.—I thought I heard a figh, and my own feelings prompted me to an¬ fwer it twice:—yet I ventured fur¬ ther, till I fuppofed the reflection of my figüre with the lamp was feen in a large pier glafs directly oppofite to where I ftood. — I heard a violent fliriek, and haftily retired. * i > M I knew
« 1 knew the key of the cabinet m this room was placed by myfelf on the remains of a decayed column in the ftate-chamber. — I had fixed the filver chain, which was hung to it, to a mar¬ ble hand, whkh I found by chance among the broken ornamenta that Ъу about the different apartments ; — the cap of the pillar, however, entirely con¬ cealed it from view. — I had examined this cabinet, and knew there was mo» ney, jewels, &c. in it, but never faw the manufcript. —The only account I can give for its being concealed there, is that it muft have been found by one of the affaflins in the abbey, who (not knowing the contents, by its being wrote, perhaps, in a different language from his own) carelefsjy placed it in an obfcure drawer of the cabinet ; and was prevented, probably, from robbing the other parts of it, by the dread of count DOllifonťs refentment, or from hafte
hafte in not examining any further than where he placed the paper. — Suffice it to fay, that, after Jafper's death, I found the keý^of it in the weft tower ; and, taking only a fuperficial view of what it contained, fixed it in the manner and place I have before mentioned, — I wiihed to put you in poffeflion of it, that, without violating my oath, I might in fome refpefts aflift you.—It was for this purpofe I was going to the ftate-chamber, wiih an intention of moving it into Mr. Maferinľs room.— Being fully convinced that all were re¬ tired to reft, I left the abbey, determin¬ ing to put this fcheme in execution the next morning. w I accordingly attended at an early hour, and walked directly to the con¬ cealed door ;when, flopping a moment to liften, I heard Mr· Maferini and his fifter in converfation, and found he re¬ folved
folved to watch in the weft tower that night, — I, at a particular part of his obfervations, interrupted him, by pro¬ nouncing three times, with an energetic voice, c Go !* to the inexpreffible hor* ror of both. " A thought now entered my imagi¬ nation, that I might bring every thing relative to the abbey, partly to a crifis, and ftill adhere to the row I had made, — I refolved to let the key of the cabi¬ net remain in the fame place, and at night appear to Mr. Maferini, in the apartment of the^weft tower ; conceiv¬ ing that if his refolution failed him in point of feizing me and difcovering the deception, I could find means to lead him to the ftate-chamber, and there difcover to him the key.—This, though at firft it may feem equivocal, I was cer¬ tain would in no degree infringe on the general tendency of my oath. ťí I entered
w I entered the abbey at midnight, but ftopped at leaft an hour in the lower rooms of the tower, before I made my appearance in the upper one. — At length, however, I afcended toit, by means of one of the fame fort of traps which are contrived in the upper part of the building. " I ftood before him about a minute; but hearing fome one on the ftair-cafe, immediately, by the fame means, va¬ niihed from his fight. a My fchepie, in fome meafure, be¬ ing fruftrated, I made the beft of my way to the ftate-chamber, through the private paffage I have before mention¬ ed : — wiihing to regain the key of the cabinet, I wanted more light than my lamp, and accordingly lighted thofe ta¬ pers that were placed in the different glaffes. — I had no fooner done this, than
фай I heard fome footfteps approach the door : — I immediately concealed myfelf behind the column that contain- tained what I have before mentioned. — The voices, 1 found, were thofe of the inhabitants of the abbey. — The night was exceedingly ftormy *, and a kind of ihock, fimilar to that of an earthquake, feemed to take effect on the room where we ftood. — I availed myfelf of this circumftance, and imme¬ diately puflied the cap of the column down, which direftlv difcovered the marble hand, and key fufpended from it. — Mr. Maferini by thefe means pro¬ cured it. — I then came forward and ftood on the trap, clafped my hands with ecftafy, and defcended through the floor. * f The next morning you all vifited me : — I was looking ovtr fome papers, of infinite confequence to your welfare ; but it was not then a time for difcovery, —I was,
— I ^as, if you recolleft, fuddenly taken ill, with a kind of fit I have for years been fubjeft to: I prayed that my life might be prolonged till a mighty work was effected, which was to procure juftice for the murder of Percival Maferini, and reftore his chil¬ dren to their rights. * c I- had no doubt but Mr. Maferini would again watch in the weft tower that night ; and I accordingly appear¬ ed there in the fame manner as before. — His behaviour anfwered my purpofe; he feized me, and difcovered my per¬ fon ; —* fecrecy, in my ideas, was now at an end : — an explanation took place : — I, however, put offa regular detail of events till another period, but gave him hopes of once more being re¬ ftored to the world aud happinefs, in a manner that would át once wipe off every ftigma that had fo long defamed his character. 6 « He
" He vifited me the next afternoon, but did not ftop long, and only received from me further proofs that I had power and will to ferve him. — I re* ceived another vifit from mifs Maferini afone, at midnight. — My furprife may well be conceived : — the interview was occafioned by her finding of the , manufcript.— I promifed to wait on her in the morning, and explain every circumflance, as far as I was capable.— This promife I have now fulfilled, by relating every principal event of my paft life, which has been chequered with feenes of happinefs contrafted with thofe of the moil poignant mife¬ ry and diftrefs/' Thus ended the hermit's tale, who, for an aft of the greateft generofity to a villain, fell under the lafliof t he fe- .vereft misfortunes« A total inconfiftency of conduct, how¬ ever,
ever,maybe obferved through the latter part of his life, — occafioned, moft pro¬ bably, by a nervous conftitution, entire¬ ly broken by adverfity ; for jt was cer¬ tainly ftrainge that a man of enlighten¬ ed underftanding, and refined educa¬ tion, fliould fo clofely adhere to an'oath, tyrannically (as it may be faid) forced on him by an act of the blackeft ingra¬ titude and injuftice ; and at the fame time reconcile himfelf to a premedi¬ tated plot of difcovering his perfon ; which he knew muft confequently de- velope every tranfaction.
CHAPTER XLII. MISCELLANEOUS OCCURRENCES, <ť Tíie love of wicked fiends converts to fear; That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both To worthy danger, and deferved death,** sha к spea re, RUharä II. THE mift of doubtful horror, which had fo long brooded over the apart¬ ments of Grafville Abbev, was now to- tally difperfed, and the gloom of fuper- ititious weaknefs difpelled by the bright rav of truth and reafon. — the inhabi- tants, in fome degree, wondered at the fears that had affailed them ; and could not, even for a moment, reflect on them, but with a mixture of contempt and vexa-
vexation at their want of fortitude to withftand the fliock of mere vifionary terrors. The baron Sampieno received the united thanks of the whole company for his recital; Matilda and Agnes dropped a tear at the misfortunes of the venerable orator.—A fenfation, how¬ ever, they had long been ftrangers to, of delight and comfort, ran through the whole affembly. — Every myftery, every fupernatural idea, was elucidated to their fatisfaciion, and at once relieved them from that load of anxiety and di¬ ftrefs they had fo long encouraged by gloomy apprehenfions. — In the courfe of the converfation, Matilda alfo un¬ derftood that the anfwer ihe fuppofed to be given to her thoughts the night before as lhe entered the cave, was nothing more than an involuntary exclama¬ tion of the hermit's, which (by the con- ftrucìion
ftruftion of the plače) echoed to the part where ibe ftood, in á kind of whifper. After having taken forne refrsfh- ments, lord Milverne declared his> in¬ tentio» of fetting off to the refidence of the magiftrate, as the critical· fitua¬ tion of Felix demanded that the bandit¬ ti fliould be immediately apprehended. — It was refolved that Leonard ihould attend him, as; inTome parts of the in¬ formation, he might be ufeful. — They accordingly departed, and were not ex- pefted to'return-tilt tlie evening, as they would be neccflitated to accom¬ pany the guards ţo the fpot, and after¬ wards be prefent ^t the examination. The baron n<m bega» y to Alfred and bis fifter,, another .tiarralive, which, though flippte v fave Аегд nearly, as rnuch furprife m4 pfeafure as the for¬ nyer. VoL.IIt. I One
One night, which hé mentioned, neg¬ lecting to ihow the light in the weft tower, he was, at an early hour, called by a voice that he had fomewhere heard, and which feemed to come from the outer part of the cave. — He immedi¬ ately repaired to the fpot, and perceiv¬ ed a man whofe countenance he direct¬ ly knew*: — he was a peafant that had fometimes vifited him, but who had lat¬ terly not fo often attended, on account of the indifpofition of a relation. — The man's features carried in them the ut¬ moft horror and affright, occafioned by three caufes ; — firft, his relation was dying, as he fuppofed ; fecondly, though he had often called upon the hermit by day-light, he had never before ventured near his habitation after dark, on ac¬ count of the path leading directly to the abbey, confequently was under con¬ fiderable alarm ; and, thirdly, that alarm was heightened beyond meafure, by
by feeing a light in one of the cafements of that building, which occafioned his calling on the hermit's name, being un¬ able to proceed any further. With breathlefs agitation the poor fellow related what he had' feen, and then requefted father Peter would ac¬ company him to his cot, as he was woe¬ fully afraid fomething lay heavy on the mind of the lick man that was there, who had expreffed a wifli to fee a con- feifor : — none, however, being there to be found, he thought of father Peter, and had even ventured, at that hour, to procure him. The baron, after fome hefitation, con¬ fented to go with him ; and they ac¬ cordingly walked to this man's home, where he was conducted to a room, in which, on a miferable bed, lay an ema¬ ciated figure extended, and feeming ïy ï % in
in the laft ftate of confumption. — His face was of a deadly palenefs ; his cheeks, funk to the very bone, were co¬ vered with a ihrivelled ikin ; while thofe parts of his eyes which had once been white were turned to a kind of pale yellow:—his nofe and mouth, which had been no bad features, now appear¬ ed predominant ones, owing to the thin- nefs of his face ; while in his whole perfon was painted anguifli and remorfe in the extreme, and a gloom at inter¬ vals, which ihowed all joy, all hope, had forfaken his foul. — What were the fenfations of the baron, when this change, great as it was, did not pre-* vent him from recognifing the wretch Eburne ! — Ah ! and what were the fenfations of that Eburne, when he be¬ held and recollected, under the garb of a hermit, the much-injured baron Sam¬ pieno!—He ihrieked aloud, and hid his face below the bed-clothes.—The cottagers
cottagers were aftoniihed : — the baron defired they would leave the room; which they accordingly did. After a few minutes, hearing every thing quiet, the wretched man raifed himfelf; but the delirious fit he had la¬ boured under for fome days before, now returned with violence. — His black ihaggy hair, difcompofed by the efforts he had made to hide from his fight the figure before hira, gave a double horror to his ghaftly locks, which carried in them every appearance of infanity. —* He raved, calied on the names of count Maferini and his children,—then the baron Sampieno,—wept, and, clench¬ ing his hands together, funk on the bed, exhaufted and fatigued. —The ba¬ ron well knew it was ufelefs to attempt to fpeak while this fit of a guilty confci¬ ence remained: — he was therefore a I 3 filent
filent fpecìator of the fcene, and great¬ ly afľečied. After the violent ravings of Eburne had ceafed, he lay panting on the bed, with his eyes fixed on a vacant, part of the chamber.—-The baron conceived this would be a good opportunity to ad¬ drefs him: — he therefore drew near the bed ; but Eburne again fhrunk from him, and put out his hand» as if irruck with horror at his approach. —The good man fpoke in lhe mildeft terms, and begged he would be compofed :—· again the Janguifhing eyes of the culprit were raifed towards the venerable com- forter ; and again he ihrunk back, as if the figure brought to'his mind ideas that rent his very foul. Two hours elapfed, during which time the baron addreffed him on fe¬ veral
veral topics relative to religion; and his difordered intellects gradually be¬ came more connected and regular, though he, almoft every five minutes, gave a convulfive fliudder, and a loud figh of anguifli and regret. At length the baron promifed to call on him the next day, and left the cham¬ ber. — He defired the cottager not to difturb his relation; but, at day-break, to fend for the moft eminent phyfician they could procure ; and he would make up to them the expenfe. — With many thanks, they promifed to do as he defired. — He accordingly left the cottage ; and, it being confiderably pail the time of illumining the tower, im¬ mediately on his return to the cave, re¬ tired to reft. The remainder of the night was fpent in a train of melancholy reflefti- I 4 ons
ons on this ftrange accident. — The fight of this man brought to his mind thofe feenes of felicity and happinefs which he and his diabolical· mafter had for ever blafted: yet, after the ftate in which he had beheld the miferable wretch, pity, in oppofition to thofe re¬ fle Ö ions, entered his bofom ; and thofe very feenes, as they the more confirmed his wicked nefs, feemed to draw from the benevolent heart of the baron greater concern and forrow for his dreadful fituation. —It was neceffary, however, if Eburne furvived till morn¬ ing (which feemed rather doubtful), that he ihould be got into as compofed a ftate as poflible, and that by perfua¬ fion (if perfuafion fliould be found ne¬ ceffary) he fliould do what juftice he could to the offspring of that family which he moft probably had aided to deftroy. —The baron confidered that he might be acquainted with the whole of DOHb
D'Ollifonťs tranfaaions; if therefore, he could be brought to give an expla¬ nation of them, his words might be taken down in writing ; and fuch a confeflion (if it could be proved by re- fpeclable witneffes who could anfwer for his being in a ftate ©f fanity) would nearly tend to anfwer every wifhed-for purpofe. Such were the baron's thoughts ; and at an early hour he repaired to the cottage. — A phyfician of fome emi¬ nence was already arrived : — he gave but little hopes of the patient, but faid he might probably furvive a few days. — Eburne had enjoyed confiderable fleep for fome hours, and feemed per¬ feftly calm. — The phyfician departed, after promifing to call again in the even¬ ing. The baron now took the man who I 5 belonged
belonged to the cottage, on one fide, and requefted to know what relation Eburne Was to him.'—The man anfwer¬ ed, he was à čoufin of his wife's; they had always underftood he led a very wicked life ; nor had any acquaintance been kept up between them for many years, till about fix months paft, when he came to their cottage, very much diftreffed in mind, and labouring under every fymptom of a decline. — He fully confeffed to them that he had been a -moft abandoned charafter, and claimed their pity. — The cottager and his wife accordingly admitted him into their houfe ; but, as his health gradually grew worfe, his melancholy increafed. — He, however, made his will, and left them the whole of the little property he was poffeffed of <ť Laft night/* continued the man, ^he was fuddenly taken much worfe than we
we had ever before feen him (though he has at times been deranged in his in¬ tellects for fome days paft), and begged I would bring him a confeffor : — I ac¬ cordingly fet off for father Leolin ; but I found he was fome miles from Mont¬ férrat. — Д then thought your prefence would anfwer the fame purpofe." The baron defired the cottager to go into the chamber of the fick man, and mildly inform him that father Peter had called to fee him ; that he would give him no uneafinefs, but rather comfort and confolation. The man did as he was defired, and in about five minutes returned. " Eburne," faid he, " is perfeftly fenfible, and wiihes to fee you : — but I am fure there is (omething ftrange about him ; for,, when I only mentioned your name, he ftart* ed, as if afraid of being murdered.'* H . The
The baron entered the room alone. »— Eburne again convulfively ihook at the fight of him ; but, being addreffed by the mild and condoling voice of the vifitor, he fo far recovered as to look on him, and liften to what he faid, with¬ out any violent emotions. The baron, after an hour's converfa¬ tion with him, which feemed entirely to compofe his mind, conceived he might venture од a topic it was before impof¬ fible for him to mention* concerning the røUrder of Percival Maferini, and alfo of thofe doubts relative to the count his father. — He opened the fubject with fuch caution and mildnefs, that, though the remembrance might be feen to work in every feature of Eburnea face, he did not fall into any fits of in¬ fanity, but continued perfeftly collect» ed during the whole of the interroga* tion. At
Åt the clofe of it, Ъе heaved a figb* ©f the moft* acute angoiíh and horror,. and in fome meafure relieved his burft- itig foul bya flood of tears.— 1 -At length he recovered ib far as to fpeak, and de¬ clared that Orlando count Maferini was poifoned ; and that Percival Mafe¬ rini, his fon, was affaftmated in Graf- ville Abbey, after having been kept there a prifoner fome little time: — " and, however/' faid he, ** I may break 'N the oath I have taken, I can no longer conceal the murderer : — it was my late mailer, the count DOliifont. — But," continued the unhappy man, "T am equally culpable with him.—I was privy to both tranfacìions, and to every plot of villany he was concerned in, parti· cularly that by which you were fo great a fufferer.—Oh, my God !" he exclaim¬ ed, cľafping his hands in agony, " thoa only knoweft what are my fufferings» — It
L
— It is thou only canft conceive the pangs which drive me to madnefs." He was near fainting : — but the ba¬ ron adminiftered a cordial, which foon recovered him. — He now informed Eburne that there was one effential way of atoning for his guilt ; and that was to do juftice to the defcendants of the deceafed; for this purpofe it was ne¬ ceffary,. as his life was uncertain, that a paper ihould be drawn up, declaring^ the fa£ls relative to both murders, which in a court of juftice would be certain to cruih the wretch that was the caufe. of them,, and give to the children of the injured thofe poffeffions they had fo long unlawfully been deprived of.— Eburne gladly and immediately confent- to the propofal, and the more particu¬ larly fo, when it was explained to him that the breaking of an oath in fuch a cafe could not be deemed an aft of wicked*
^rickednefs, or be difapproved of by the Supreme.—The baron then drew up a paper containing all the circum¬ ftances which were related to him by Eburne, before father Leolin, who was now arrived, and acquainted with the affair* In the evening the phyfician arrived; and before him and the cottager, Eburne figned the paper ; declaring it, on oath, to be the truth, of every tranfeftion it contained. — Eburne feemed confider¬ ably better, and after fome little time the whole company departed ; the ba¬ ron taking pofleffion of the paper, which was the fame he was looking over when vifited by the inhabitants of the abbey. The confeflion it held forth was partly as follows : — That he was taken into the fervice of D'Ollifont when very young, Ihortly after that gentleman com*
commenced gambler in Spain. —He was foon diftinguifhed as his confiden¬ tial fervant, and affifted him in moft of hie defrauds : — that they led that kind of Hfe till his mailer's charafter was well known in thofe part«, where he refided for fome time : — that they were necefc fitated to-fly to the place where the ba¬ ron Sampieno and his family refided, and, knowing his riches,, determined, if poflible, to make him a dupe to their artifice ^infinuating himfelf into the baron's family, though he bore a dead« ly hatred to that nobleman:—-This ha- 1 tred he refolved to gratify by a diabo* Meal fcheme of malice and villany.*-· He determined to take away by force Lucretia, the baron's only daughter; and, by ruining her honour, to make a, public difgrace and ignominy fall upon her father, which he knew would more effectually blaft his happinefs than any pecuniary fraud he could invent.—This fcheme
fcheme wa$ fruftrated by the baron's over-hearing a converfation which he and his mafter had on that fubjeft; but which gave rife to another opportunity for D'Ollifont to executes fécond fiend¬ like contrivance, which tended to the fame horrid purpofe^ and which, if pof¬ fible, exceeded the former one in inge¬ nuity and contrivance« The manner and iffue of this horrid plot againft the baron was related by himfelf, and the fuccefs of it anfwered but too well. Eburne confeffed in the teftimony, that he was the perfon who found means to bury fome of the falfe notes in the baron's garden, and who, by D'Olli¬ font's ordere, bribed one of hi« fer¬ vants to their intereft.— He attend¬ ed his mafter to Italy, where the old count Maferini was extremely alarmed, on
on account of a report which had been fpread concerning his children, who had been fome time in France. — He had been informed that Percival, his fon, had contrived to rob the convent of N***** of a young lady of family and diftinftion, and that both, with his fifter, had fled.—This report feemed the more to be credited, as an interval of fome time had paffed fince the count had heard from them. The old gentleman was extremely ill on tbe arrival of his nephew, but tefti¬ fied great pleafure at feeing him, having never heard of his mifconduft.—He ilowly recovered \ and D'Ollifont was difpatched to procure fome further in¬ telligence of his children. — It was dur¬ ing this journey that he made Eburne acquainted with his intentions, and pro¬ mifed him large rewards if he fucceed¬ ed. — They returned to the abbey with a feigned
a feigned letter, which gave informa¬ tion that Percival Maferini and his fifler were no more ; that the former fell by the hand of an oificer who was going to fecure them,—and that the latter, in a fit of infanity, had poifoned herfelf; — the letter concluded with faying that lady Clementina was confined in the Baftile, on a fufpicion of having mur¬ dered her fifter, who was found dead in her bed the morning after the elope¬ ment from the convent. The grief of the count was exceffive, and brought on a relapfe of his former diforder; — and this, added to a flow poifon, which Eburne procured, and which D'Ollifont mixed with every fmall quantity of food he partook of, put an end to his exiftence, without any figns of murder being committed. — The count made a will about two days before he died, in which he be¬ queathed
queathed the whole of his eftates and property, except a few legacies, to his nephew. — Eburne, by his mafter's or- , der, gave it out the abbey was haunted; and, the better to make this believed, D'Ofltfont himfelf left it fuddenly in the night, after the funeral of his uncle. He returned immediately to Spain, and left orders that nothing fliould be moved from the abbey. Eburne, however, was left behind, though it was fuppofed round the coun¬ try that the abbey was entirely free from inhabitants. — He each night ihowed the light in the weft tower, and fecretly employed three mechanics to puţ the traps and machinery in order. —•Thefe works he fuperintended; and finding one of thefe men, whofe name was Enuchio, fit for his purpofe, retain** ed him, by D'Ollifont's defire, to refide in the fubterraneous chamber, and ihow the
the light, while Eburne departed for Spain, to come forward on the trial on baron Sampieno. Eburne alfo confeffed that the paflage which farmed а communication be* tween the abbey; and the cave, the traps, &c. were found out by himfelf, and the fecrets conveyed directly to his mafter, from whom he received a confi¬ derable prefent. The paper next contained an account of the terms to which the baron con¬ fented, to fave the life of himfelf and daughter, which the reader has before been acquainted with ; alfo an account of D'Ollifont's entering into a fociety of depredators while in Italy, whofe birth and fituation in life were olì above the common rank, and whofe defrauds were carried to the moft confiderable amount on people of rank.»*-* It was at one
one of their places of rendezvous, at Genoa, where the baron was intro¬ duced to D'Ollifont, at the time he took his oath. — After that conference, the latter departed to Spain ; but Eburne ftill remained concealed, as his agent in Montferrat, a watch upon the ba¬ ron, and every circumftance which con¬ cerned the abbey. — He fent him infor¬ mation that Percival Maferini was aclu¬ ally arrived, though, by D'Ollifont's or¬ ders, feveral men were placed on the roads to affaffmate him. Immediately that the keys were deli¬ vered in Spain, he fet off from that country and fecre tly arrived at Mont¬ ferrat, where he kept concealed m the fubterraneous room, with Eburne, Enu¬ chio, and three men whom he had hired. — It has before been mentioned that the baron was abfent many miles; which anfwered every wifh of D'Ollifont : but he
he did. not know that Jafper was left behind. —The refolution of this party was to feize Percival Maferini and his fervant, fliould they fearch the abbey alone ; which it wae rather expected they would.— Enuchio And ihe three men were difpatched in the day-time, about three sniles -round the fpot, each taking different roads, and met at the cave at an appointed hour at dark. ît was about the fifth night, when¿ after one of thefe excurfions, Enuchio brought word that Percival Maferini, whom he perfonally knew, with his fer¬ vant, had juft called at an inn for fome refrefhment ; and, by their manner, he judged they were coming to the abbey, as they did not feem inclined to ftop, as it was now late. Every thing, therefore, was prepar* ed ; Enuchio and two of the men were planted
planted in the weft tower. — Eburne and another man were concealed in the hall ; and the count himfelf waited the iffue of the fcheme, in the tomb, in which the unhappy victim was to be fiiut up.**-Hc entered the abbey, agree¬ able to their expectations, even unat¬ tended by his fervant ; and croffed the hall without any interruption. ·—Eburne being now certain he was within their power, he and his companion joined the соцп1, while the unfortunate Perci¬ val afcended to the weft tower. On his entrance, he was immediately feized by the ruinans : — in the ftruggle, a picture of his wife was torn by force from his bofom, with a part of the rib¬ bon ; and feveral drops of bloods pro¬ ceeding from a blow which he received in the face, ftained the floor : — thefe were difcovered by Edward, his man, when he made a fearch after his mafter 8 in
in the morning ; and alfo by fignor Bal- volio, the ofhcers of juftice, and other perfons, who attended the abbey for the fame purpofe afterwards. — Percival A Ia fe ri ni was conveyed clown to the ceil defcribed by the baron, and difcovered by Jafper-, and a fliort allowance oi food was given him each night. A few days after, Jafper was difco¬ vered to be left behind in Mont fen at ; and it was determined he ihould be made away with, or at leaft fo ù\r hurt -is to prevent any interruption from him. — Kburne una two of the men affiulr- cd him in one o\ the private avenues ieading to the U\>nt gates, and leh him ù>v dead. The next ni^ht, it was !ч-Г,>лч\1 be¬ tween liburne and his mailer, thai a pe¬ riod ihould be put to the lue of their wretched prifoner, for fear of the ba- λ ol. III. К ron \
ton's return. D'Oìlifont, however, did not Wiih any one of the men to be privy to the actual commitment of the mur¬ der:—Enuchio and the others were therefore difcharged with large pre- fents, and, by his defire, departed to Spain':—there they were feized, through the agency of an alguafil with whom he was connected, put а -board a fliip of war, and fell in the firft engage¬ ment. At midnight D'Ollifont, with his own hand, ftabbed his coufin Percival Ma¬ ferini ; Eburne being unable to perpe¬ trate this laft deed of darknefs, though he affifted : — poifon was at firft offered the unhappy man ; but, on refufing to take it, he received the wound which at once releafed him from a wretched exiftence. Eburne and his diabolical employer о buried
buried the body near the tomb, in a grave which had been prepared in the day ; and then, placing every thing in the abbey as it was before they came, departed, and in difguife returned to Spain. Here Eburne received a confiderable fum from D'Ollifont, and remained in his fervice about fix months ; when he was one night fuddenly feized, and car¬ ried on board a fimilar fliip to that in which his companions were conveyed ; but, fortunately, did not meet with the fame fate. — He efcaped from the crew, after twelve months, and entered into fervice in France ; being deterred from making what he knew public relative to the count, on the idea of the ftronir oath he had taken to the contrary. — He had not a doubt but it was through his means, he was, by force, taken from Spain ; and hb very foul recoiled againft К 2 him,
him, for thofe very fchemes he had aid¬ ed him in executing. He was driven from France, by hear¬ ing of DOllifonťs arrival there, and croffed over to England, torn with re¬ morfe, and haraffed by a guilty confci¬ ence. — He was often tempted, in de¬ fiance of the oath he had taken, to im¬ peach his late mafter ; but the doubt how fuch an accufation might be re¬ ceived from him, againft one who was every day growing more popular in Pa¬ ris, prevented this act of juftice. — lie refided in England fome years, as fer¬ vant to a private gentleman ; but was again neccflitated to My, on being in¬ formed that D'Ollifont was there like- wife ; dreading the power and inclina¬ tion he had to rid the world of one who was privy to fo many of his crimes.— He therefore made tlie beft of his way back to France, and from thence foon returned
returned to Italy, where he made him- felf known to his relations, and claimed their pity ; finding his health totally declined, and his mind loaded with hor¬ ror, anxiety, and bitter remorfe. To this purport was the paper which the baron now delivered to Alfred Ma¬ ferini : — it was a precious gift ; for it would moft likely tend, with corre- fpondent evidence, to fubdue the inve¬ terate and malicious foe of their family, while it procured them that comfort and affluence which they had fo long been deprived of. ^
K 3
CHAP.
CHAPTER XLIII. THE baron further informed them, that Eburne in the courfe of two days fo far recovered as to be able to fit up for fome hours; but after his confef¬ lion, he feemed to-exprefs fuch an im¬ patience for his diflblution, as indicated his mind was in fome degree diforder¬ ed ; and on the third morning after, he was difcovered hanging by a cord, which he had found means to procure from a part of his bed, and fixed to a hook in the ceiling; thus adding an¬ other crime to the many that he had already committed, by an aft of fili¬ cide. The conclufion of this man's life held forth
forth a ftriking leffon of villany and cruelty; his deftroying of that exiftence which he had every reafon to fuppofe had nearly run its courfe, confirmed at once how much he fuffered from the horrors of a guilty confcience, and the effefts of a truly vicious mind. As there was now no doubt but the abbey, with all the poffeffions and eftates belonging to it, was the fole and lawful right of Alfred and his fifter, no fcruples of honour could prevent them from making ufe of the money and other valuables that were in the cabinet : but as the baron confidered that the whole bufinefs muft go under a regular courfe of infpeftion before the government, and count DOliifont be brought in the face of his country to anfwer for thofe crimes which could now be partly proved againft him (though the fafts did not actually amount to demonftra* К 4 tion) y
tion), they conceived it would be better to let every article remain in the fame place. The baron infifted on their receiving from him fupplies neceffary for their prefent demands. — It was, he faid, his intention, if poflible, publicly to clear that part of his character, which had for fo many years remained under the afperfions of a villain ; and bring his aecufations againft D'Ollifont, on the foundation of. Eburne's manufcript, 4Khich explained events relative to that affàifTwith as much accuracy as it did the circumftances refpefting count Ma¬ ferini and his children. The baron wrote to his banker in Pa¬ ris, who was poffeffed of his property, for remittances ; giving him notice at the fatue time, that he ihould ihortly appear in perfon, to demand the whole of
of his fortune. — The old gentleman confented to the entreaties of Alfred and his fifter to remain in the abbey, as they could eafily have a bed made up for him in a chamber next to Alfred's* In the latter part of the day, lord Milverne returned with Leonard and Felix : his lordfliip informed them that the banditti were taken, the men who had affifted him were fingled out, re¬ leafed, and received from him a hand¬ fome reward, while the others were re* ferved for a public trial. — Lord Mil¬ verne had fpoken to the magiftrate (whofe politenefs was extreme) eon* cerning Alfred Maferini's affairs 5 — he appointed to fee him, with his lordihip,. the next morning, and promifed to take every method in his power, to re» cover for them their juft and lawful right.
К 5 Hi*
His lordfliip was much furprifed and pleafed to hear the account of Eburne, and the manufcript they had got in their poffeffion. — He congratulated ' them on the hopes of a very fpeedy end to their misfortunes : — nor was the ba- Iron lefs pleafed to hear that his fon- in-law lord Albourne, and the daugh¬ ter of bis once beloved Lucretia, were both known to Alfred and Matilda. — Pleafure beamed in his countenance, when the former fpoke of her with the rapturous praifes of a lover. Leonard on his return was difpatch¬ ed with the letter. — In it the baron requeued of his banker to remit him the fum for which he wrote, by the fpeedieft conveyance.—Lord Milverne partook of Alfred's bed; another was made up for the baron, and a third con¬ trived below for Leonard and Felix.
The
4 The happy party affembled at break-- faft at an early hour the next morning;. after which they employed themfelves in taking a regular furvey of the^bbey; and the baron explained to them thofe pieces of mechanifm it contained, which now fully accounted for the ftrange things they had been witnefs to.— They alfo defcended to the fubterrane¬ ous room,, and from thence walked to* the cave, from which all the articles 4 that the baron wiflied to pteferve, were carried to the abbey by Leonard ană Felix- Alfred, lord Milverne, and the ba¬ ron, now fet off for the magiftrate, at^ tended by Leonard.—Matilda and Ag¬ nes dmed alone ; and though the latter would fometimes furvey the gothic ftrufture of the room, it was with that degree of pleafure and confidence, which confirmed how well flie was fa- K 6 tisfied
tisfied that every fear flie had before en¬ couraged was groundlefs. " I am now, mademoifelîe," faid ihe to Matilda, " happy indeed ; and I may trulyfay that this happinefs is in¬ creafed by feeing all around me fo : in íhort, I know nothing that could add to my prefent felicity, but...." Here flie ftammered ; the bluíh of true innocence glowed on her cheek, and heightened that-pleafing fimplicity which graced every feature. Matilda gueffed the caufe of this em¬ barraffment, and archly reminded her of Oliver. The poor girl burft into tears — 4 " Indeed, mademeifelle, though I own I love Oliver, yet even the pre¬ fence of my poor mother, however ihe may
may in fome refpeñs have treated nie, would add to my prefent joy." Matilda was ftruck with her grati¬ tude, and commended it. " Both your wiihes, Agnes," Táid ihe, " ihall, if in my power, be grati¬ fied.— Your mother ihall be reconcil¬ ed to your marriage with Oliver, by my making him a prefent that fliall give him importance enough to gain her good will." tc A thoufand bleffings on you, ma¬ demoifelîe 1 — I know not how to thank you, unlefs you will look on thefe tears as in fome degree an acknowledg¬ ment for your goodnefs." Felix now entered the room to take away the dinner things ; which put an end to the converfation. The
Tlie latter part of the day, Alfred and his friends returned»—They brought with them two Italian women fervants. One of the lower apartments was fixed for their kitchen, and they fìept in a fmall room next to Matilda's chamber. — The magiftrate had given them every hope of a fpeedy iffue to their caufe.'—By their orders he was the next day to fend off an arreft againft count D'Ollifont, to detain his perfon wberever found, cm three feveral charges,— firft, for the murder of his· uncle, the count Orlando Maferini,— fécond, for the murder of his coufin Percival Maferini, and unlawfully de¬ taining the property of his heirs to his own ufe. The third charge was in the name of the baron Sampieno, for falfe accufa- tions, and defamation of character.
The
The magiftrate informed them that the count's power in France was no more : he had offended the royal party by an attempt to affaflSnate one of their clafs, and in ihort Was in every refpeft no more than a prifoner4n the country, being afraid to leave it, though by no means wiihing to remain there. This gentleman's polhenefs was ex¬ treme ; he offered the fervices of hint« felf and lady to introduce them into public, under their proper names; which was now in many refpects abfo* lutely neceffary. — The next day was appointed for Matilda to vifit them.— The fore part of the following morn¬ ing the baron propofed a walk to the cottage of Eburne's relations, as he conceived both Alfred and Matilda ihould be made known to them, as well as to the phyfician and father Leolin,— They accordingly vifited thofe perfons ; and
and all of them declared their readi¬ nefs to come „forward in their behalf. After thjs walk they fet off for fignor Salvarino's, the, magiftrate's. — Agnes, however, declined the invitation to at¬ tend them, as it was her intention to fee fome things put in order by the fer¬ vants, neceffary for the reception of a Jarge party* which Alfred had refolv¬ ed to entertain^efore he left the abbeys They were received by fignor Salvari¬ no and his lady with the utmoft polite- - nefs : — fome of the principal perfons of the place were affembled, purpofely to be introduced to the baron and the young reclufes ; — and all teftified their joy that the right heirs of the Maferini family were now likely to be reftored to the poffeffions of their anceftors.— -АЬ fred was' informed that difpatches * againft DOllifonl were already fentofŢ, and
and a regular procefs in their behalf commenced againft him.— In фе even¬ ing they attended a public place of en¬ tertainment, and received confiderable applaufe from the audience; for their ftory had already fpread through the principal part of ^Montferrat. The following day was fixed on by fignor Salvarino, the baron, and Alfred, for the fet tl emen t of fome neceffary cir¬ cumftances relative to the fuit in hand* r— He waited on them at the abbey, and was taken all over it.— Every con¬ trivance was explained to him ; and he fhowed the greateft aftoniihment at what he faw. —The remainder of the day was dedicated clofely to bufinefs. __Lord Milverne was abfent on fome of his own affairs. — In the evening, fignor Salvarino took his leave, with an invi¬ tation to himfelf and lady, with moft of the perfons. who were prefent at his >. houfe,
houfe, to fpend the next day at the ab¬ bey.—The whole party accordingly met at the dinner hour: — they furvey- ed the building, and received an eluci¬ dation to every myftery. — Agnes un¬ dertook to manage the entertainment ; and it was conducted in a manner that did her infinite credit. They now began to mate prepara¬ tions for leaving Italy, as their prefence would ihortly be abfolutely neceffary in France. —It was agreed that lord Mil¬ verne ihould crofs over from that coun* try to England, as he had fome con¬ cerns to fettle ; and, at the fame time, make inquiries if lord Albourne and his daughter were in London, as they all conceived it probable he might re¬ turn immediately after the accident of the fire at the inn.*— Signor Salvarino procured them an elderly man and wo¬ man to look after the abbey, and refide there
there în their abfence; and in the courfe of a fortnight, they fet off on their jour¬ ney, with the two Italian fervants whom they had hired. Before their departure the baron re* ceived the fum he had wrote for Trom his banker, with a polite invitation to his houfe on their arrival at Paris. —» They had alfo information that the ar¬ reft was executed againft DOliifont, and that he was now a prifoner in hi$ own houfe. They travelled ttewly, and arrived m France without any particular accident. - —They engaged handfome apartments. Lord Milvenie remained with them but three days, and then tore himfelf front the happy party; not, however, with¬ out obtaining a promife from Matilda, to become hts immediately on his re* turn, — They alfo underftood that DOliifont
DOliifont had been confined to his bed fome time, and had totally loft the royal favour. — Since his arreft he had - often fliown fits of infanity j, and it was doubted by the phyfician whether he would furvive to take his trial. — Si¬ gnor Salvarino had given them letters of introduction to many perfons of fafliion and diftinftion in France ; and thofe, added to their being known before, procured them admittance to the firft parties. - Before their arrival, they were in¬ formed that the charge againft Alfred , was refcinded, even previous to the ar¬ reft againft DOliifont.—They vifited the baron's banker, who introduced them to the whole of his friends. They had been in Paris about a week, when they one evening attended the theatre : — in leaving of it, as they paffed
paffed through one of the paffages, a gentleman before them, feemingly in¬ toxicated in a fmall degree, was ad- dreihng himfelf to a young lady rather. againft her will, though perfonally he appeared to be known to her.—She had an .elderly lady with her : — they were, however, before Alfred and the baron ; confequently, their faces could not be obferved. His importunities.at length feemed to become exceeding difagreeable, and his remarks carried İn them fome im¬ propriety, — Alfred advanced, and de¬ clared the lady ihould not be infulted ! — The gentleman turned round, and exclaimed with the utmoft furprife, " Mr. Maferini I" — nor was Alfred's aftoniihment lefs to behold Henry Pe¬ viquil. — The young lady turned pale at the name of Maferini, and fat down on a feat near 5 which gave Alfred an opportunity
opportunity to recognife lady Caroline Albourne, and the baron the picture of his departed wife and daughter, in the perfon of his grandchild. Alfred, difengaging himfelf from the levity of Peviquil, ran to her affift¬ ance : but, before he could catch her in his arms, flie had fainted in thofe of the lady who was with her, and who was totally unknown to both Alfred and his fifter. » ( The baron and Matilda now ad¬ vanced.—The former clafped the hand of the inanimate yet beautiful form, with ecftafy ; but that ecftafy caufed a tear to flow at the recollection of her mother. — A confiderable crowd of perfons were now affembled round :—a gentleman who ftood by, invited them into a room in the interior part of the theatre ; which offer they gladly ac¬ cepted.
cepted,—Henry Peviquil, elevated with wine, yet haggard with diflipation, at¬ tempted to follow : but Alfred politely requefted he would defift:«— this he at laft agreed to ; but requefted his addrefs, that he might call and congratulate him on his return to France. — They accordingly exchanged cards, and he directly left the place. Matilda privately entreated the ba¬ ron that he would not difcover himfelf to lady Caroline that night, as the pre¬ fent alarm had fo greatly overcome her fpirits. Alfred hung over the charming inva¬ lid with a mixture of joy and concern. Her countenance was much altered fince he had laft feen her : though her beauty was not greatly diminiflied, yet it was of that delicate and languifliing kind which plainly told ihe had fuffer¬ ed
ed the moft heart-felt and poignant un¬ eafinefs.—He knew from Caroline Al- bourne's fincere and artlefs conduö, that flie once loved him ; but he alfo 'knew his character had fuffered the fe- vereft ihock in the opinion of her fa¬ ther.— She might now be the wife of another ! —The thought no fooner dart¬ ed on his brain, than its cffecls might be obferved in every feature. — Lady Caroline recovered, and looked round with fome furprife on the little party near her. — She clafppd the offered hand of Matilda with pleafure ; and her eyes fpoke towards Alfred, more than flie dared to utter. She had accompanied her father, af¬ ter the accident of the fire, into Italy ; but remained there a very fliort time.— They then returned to France, as his lordfliip conceived the climate to agree with, his conftitution, which ftill feemed on
on the decline.—The elderly lady who was with her, had refided in France all her life, and was a diftant relation of lord Albourne's, at whofe houfe his lordfliip now refided with his daughter. — They had heard of Alfred's arrival at Paris, with the information that the charge againft him was withdrawn, and another of a very high and criminal nature brought by him againft DOl¬ iifont— But lord Albourne was now by no means fatisfied with that part of his charafter which he liad formerly been a witnefs to, in point of gambling: nor did he give his daughter the leaft liopes of a favourable alteration in his fentiments towards the young French¬ man.— Alfred wiflied them to permit him to attend them home ; but this was abfolutely refufed, as they had their vi¬ fitors and two fervants in waiting. Alfred, therefore, had only the con- Vol. Ill, L folation
folation of finding that flie was ftill un¬ married, and declaring, as he handed her to the carriage, that in a very ihort time the whole of his conduct would, he hoped, be explained to lord Al¬ bourne fatisfaftorily, and himfelf made the happieft of men, by being permit¬ ted to folicit of her that, the very thought of which had fupported him through every misfortune. The baron requefted of the old lady his lordfliip's addrefs, having bufinefs, as he informed her, of great impor¬ tance with htm the following day ; and, after a rather confufed farewell, the whole company parted with ftill more confufed ideas.
CHAPTER XLIV. VARIOUS INTERVIEWS. Alas, l*m fore befet ! — Let never man, For fake of lucre, fia againft his foul. Eternal juftice is in this moft juft.*' Homs. Sensations of pleafure oft-times produce a train of refleftions that bring with them the recollection of paft feenes of happinefs, and prefent to us former objefts in which our very foul appeared entwined in one common ex¬ iftence, and the parting of which feems almoft to feparate ourfelves. So it was with the baron Sampieno, at the fight of lady Caroline. — He felt L z that
that enthufiaftic glow of rapture which fwells the veins of a parent at the reco¬ very of a long-loft and beloved child ; but reflection foon whifpered .that fhe was neither that beloved daughter nor wife whofe figure ftill floated in his brain, — f Every feature, every look of each of them, flione forth in the beau¬ tiful reprefentative he had feen ; and the idea of w^hat^they were, followed, and called up thofe trivial feenes of endearment, which opened wounds that fora time bad been healed by the balm of religious/renzy* Immediately on his return home, he apologifed tò Alfred and Matilda, hur¬ ried to his chamber, and gave vent to thofe paflions he had ftruggled to con* v ceal. —The baron was pofleffed^of a degree of fortitude by no means incon- fiderable : he had courage and refolu- tioji,*— a refined education and under¬ ftanding,
ftanding, — and a noble heart. — Yet there was a coniti tutional weaknefs, a fomething in his difpofition, which, by the generality of mankind, might be called a womanifli defect, — but, by others, would be looked upon as one of the excellencies of human nature.— The regret, however, for the lofs of his wife and daughter, did not leflen the tie which drew him towards his grand¬ child : he fuffcreçl that which can only be conceived by a perfon in a fimilar fituation. Alfred and his fifter met hira the next morning at breakfaft.—His countenance wás ferene, yet melancholy:—ftill,How¬ ever, they could perceive he anticipated the pleafure of dafpiilg lady Caroline to his heart, and once more embracing his much beloved fon-ii>!aw. Alfred, though he might wiih to ac- L 3 company
company him, immediately refufed the invitation ; but the baron requefted that Matilda would go with him. At rather an early hour, they were introduced by madame Bofivľs fervant to the breakfaft-room, in which were feated that lady, lord Albourne, and his daughter. — Lady Caroline was at her harjuj^d his lordfliip liftcning to her harmony, while he took his chocolate. — АЦ three rofe at the entrance of the vifitors, and madame Bofivi introduced j the baron as the gentleman whom ihe had mentioned to his lordihip the night before. ι % Lord Albourne bowed ; and, though he feemed rather ftruck with the coun¬ tenance, did not recognife the perfon : —he, however, advanced, and took the hand of Matilda.
*' Believe
f ( Believe me, mifs Maferini," faid hé, ' c however unexpected this vifit may be, the pleafure 1 receive from it is unlimited ; and I am fure Caroline will join with me in thanks for the ho¬ nour you confer on us." Matilda bowed, and returned a fuit- abîe anfwer ίο uà» poîîie compliment. During a fliort interval, the baron*s eyes were fixed, firft on lord Albourne, „ and then on his daughter ; while ma- dame Bofivi, who was the moft difen¬ gaged of the par ty, thought ibe could pe r- ceive alikenefs between thepiQureofthe late lady Albourne that hung over the fire-place, and the ftranger before her. Each being feated, lord Albourne, turning to the baron, requefted to know .his bufinefs ; and white this requeft was made, as he more earneftly obferv* L 4 ed
ed the features of the perfon to whom he was fpeaking, they feemed to i:;ake fomc impreflion on his memory ; and a fomething appeared to crofs his mind, that occafioned confiderable emotion. The baron hefitated; — a kind of fympathy worked upon both ; and, while Matilda trembled with anxiety, lady Caroline and madame Bofivi look¬ ed at each other with the utmoft fur¬ prife. — The baron, at length fpoke. " I will not fo much wrong your lordfliip, as even to fuppofe you have forgot forne feenes at an early period of life ; the tendency, and I may fay, hap¬ pinefs of which have, no doubt, ftamp¬ ed on your recolleftion fome objects to whom you were then nearly allied, and in whofe fortune you were much interefted : — but I am far from being furprifed that my face does not call , i thefe
thefe circumftances to your recollection, when I confider the alteration that time and mifery have made in my perfon." Lord Albourne heard no more : — he clafped the offered hand of the baron with an ardour that bordered on mad¬ nefs ; and, as he lifted his eyes towards- heaven, he heaved a heart-felt figh, which, in fome degree, relieved the fulnefs of his foul. Lady Caroline and madame BefivlftiU remained filent fpeftators of this af¬ fecting fcene; though, with Matilda, they were rather alarmed at the fitua* tion of his lordfliip. The baron-received lord Albourne hit his arms with a pleafure that partook of paternal love. — They were both unable''tb fpeak: — his lordlhip took the haud of his daughter, and prefent* L 5 ed
ed her to her grandfather. — Another affefting fcene now took place, and the baron almoft fuppofed he clafped the figure of his Lucretia. After fome time, he gave them a brief account of his life fince ihat pe¬ riod which he termed the crifis of his misfortunes, — his parting with his daughter. In the courfe of this relation he oft- times had occafion to mention Alfred, at whofe name his lordfliip looked re¬ ferved, and lady Caroline with anxiety. Though lord Albourne found him fo mucb prejudiced in his favour, he could not forget events he had been witnefs to, which left behind them traits very injurious to his general cha¬ rafter. — In the courfe of their con¬ verfation, they found that his lordihip 3 had
had never received any letter from the baron ; but had for anfwer to inquiries which he fent to Italy, that he was nO more ; nor could he ever gain any fur¬ ther information.— To procure, how¬ ever, fome account of his father-in-law, was one reafon, though known only to himfelf, that induced him to lengthen his journey into Italy ; but on his arri¬ vai there, finding his health worfe, he left it rather precipitately.— During. the fliort ftay he made, he ufed every* means in his power to find out fome one who was acquainted with affairs- relative to the death of the baron : but all proved ineffectual ; for he under¬ stood that he left his villa fuddenly, and fettled in France, where he died.»— His lordlhip now gave up every thought of fearching any further, and himfelf. departed for Paris. As a min ite inveftigation concerning L 6 Alfreds
Alfred's conduct could not very well be entered into before a third perfon, the baron agreed to lord Albourne's invi¬ tation to fop that evening with him Τ and, after many congratulations on both fides, they parted, — not, however, without a promife from Matilda, to fpend the next day with them. Alfred was informed of the proceed¬ ings of this vifit, and was fomewhat furprifed and hurt at lord Albourne's doubts refpefting his charafter being fo difficult to be obliterated ; — but a mo¬ ment's reflection foon ended his afto¬ niihment j he knew his lordfliip had more than once feen him deeply en* gaged in play with men notorioufly known as profeffed gamblers, and in every refpeft a difgrace to fociety. — 'I he little pique he had at firft con¬ ceived, now vaniflied, and he admired that particularity he had before con¬ demned.
demned. — The baron attended hi& lordfliip at an early hour ; while Alfred and his fifter fpent the evening among a private party of friends. The baron, on his return, mentioned that he had removed every objection lord Albourne had entertained againft Alfred Maferini, and that he had brought him an invitation to accom¬ pany Matilda and himfelf the next day, to dine with his lordfliip. — With heart¬ felt joy he returned the old gentleman a thoufand thanks, who now declared he muft ihift for himfelf, relative to any other wiih he had to gratify through the reconciliation.. The next day Alfred had the felicity to be received with the cordiality of fmcere friendfliip by lord Albourne, the utmoft politenefs by madame Bofivi, and in
in a manner that anfwered his raoft fen- guine expectations by lady Caroline. They parted at rather a late hour* with an appointment for lord Albourne, madame Bofivi, and lady Caroline, to fpend the next day but one with the baron, and, as he was pleafed to term them, his adopted children. — Alfred obtained permiffion to call at madame Bofıvî's the next morning, to inquire after their health, and, as lord Al¬ bourne laughingly added, to figh away an hour with Caroline. They found, on their return home, Henry Peviquiľs card, which mention¬ ed he ihould call on them the next day. — Tirefome as his company might be to them, common politenefs dictated they fliould receive him. — At a late hour, the figure of the once elegant and handfome Henry Peviquil knock¬ ed
ed at their door, worn out in confuta¬ tion, though, according to years, hafdly in the prime of life. — He was only the ihadow of what he formerly was ; and his appearance, in point of drefs, indi¬ cated that his pecuniary circumftances were by no means affluent ; yet ftill he was gay to a folly, and cheerful almoft to madnefs : — in fhort, he was a pro¬ feffed gambler, and a noted debauchee ; accounted an Englifhman of the firft ton in France, and a man of the firft tafte and faihion in his own country ; he was the very quinteffence of high life in London, and allowed at Paris to be poffeffed of that je ne fui quoi, which ftamped on him the real character of a fine gentleman* — Among the generality of the ladies of rank of both nations,, he was adored as a man of gallantry ; nor were their ideas wrong : a man of gallantry he certainly was ; for, to his great honour, he had feduced more wo¬ men,
ŕ« men, and afterwards forfaken them» than one half of his fex ; and, in thefe circumftances, the etiquette of both king¬ doms encouraged his noble and fpirited conduci. . The poor innocent girl whom his curfed arts had taught to love him, en¬ tangled like the defencelefs fly in the web of a fpider, falls a facrifice to the enfnarer. —Mark the refult of his enter- prife : -—. the miferable objeâ finds her¬ felf betrayed by the man whom her guiltlefs heart taught her to fuppofe as generous as he was infinuating ; the ât*. licacy of virtuous wow до 'forces them to difcard the child of aifliciion, and victim ©f unmanly cruelty ; while the author. of her difgrace receives double fplen¬ dour from the deed becoming public* and is cheriflied by that fociety, and nourifhed by thofe comforts, from, which he has hurled her for ever.— Shame*
Shameful prejudice! — though a na¬ tional cuftom, it is a difgrace to its fol¬ lowers, and ftands the criterion of a narrow mind, and unfeeling foul. Henry Peviquil, as was before men¬ tioned in the former part of this little hiftory, did not, when he found Matilda forfaken by her friends (at leaft by thofe who ihould have proved themfelves fuch), behave to her in a manner alto¬ gether confiftent with rectitude or po*· litenefs ; and his manners at laft became rude and infulting.—^He once had thcî audacity to make propofals, which gave her the moft ferious alarms while flie remained in his power.—The fcene was entirely changed ; the diftreffed or¬ phan of the Maferini family, defpifed by his mother, contemptuoufly treated by his fifter, forgot by his father, and in* fulted by himfelf, was now poffeffed or in every refpeft likely to be poffeffed of
of rank, fortune, and friends. — Even the affurance of Henry Peviquil, now quite fober, could not overcome a littfe embarraffment as he addreffed them ; he, however, foon got the better of this vulgar failing. For fear, however, that the fpirit or honour of this accompliihed gentleman. ihould be called in queftion for thus feeking to recommence an acquaint¬ ance he formerly difdained, and with perfons who received his offers of friend¬ íhip with that coolnefs which could not prompt him to go on with the purfuit, it will be neceffary to inform the reader that he had intereft in view: —befides gratifying his pride, to clafs them among other perfons of diftinftion whom he could familiarly nod at in public places of entertainment, or chat with at the rout of a woman of fafliion, he was ac¬ tuated by another motive, more power¬ ful
ful by far ; he knew Alfred had loved play ; he was himfejf a perfect mafter of the art, and was well acquainted with the powerful infatuation that encircles the votaries to that way of deftruftion ; therefore, whatever he might have heard relative to his having entirely given up the gaming-table, he conceiv¬ ed to be merely fabulous, and only raif¬ ed either to introduce him to lord Al¬ bourne's efteem, or to be of fervice in the intended trial. — Now Henry Pevî- v quii knew, if he could but once more draw him among thofe feenes he had formerly frequented, he would prove ц> very fit perfon to become a dupe to bis artifices ; and this was the more to be defired, as he had juft entered into a party fomething fimilar to that in which D'Ollifont had been engaged, and into which the baron Sampieno was intro* duced at Genoa.
With
With thefe very honourable determi¬ nations, he waited on his diftant rela¬ tions; but he had the mortification to obferve that all the advances he made 'Were received with mere civility, and that there appeared very little hopes of Alfred ever again attempting the faro table. With great coolnefs' they parted, 4 and Henry Peviquil fatisfied himfelf with declaring, at aji the fafliionable parties, that the whole trio, meaning the baron, Alfred, and his fifter, were quite outre ; and informing his new col¬ leagues, whom he had fed with hopes of bringing a new pigeon to exert their abilities on, that hc found the fellow void of all fpirit, and queftioned if he had integrity enough to pay a debt of honour before a traâefmmCs bìlL
CHAPTER XLV. Matilda now propofed a vifit which flie had in contemplation ever fmce their arrival in France, which was to the mother of Agnes. — She lived fome diftance from Paris. — Accord¬ ingly the iair fugitive and herfelf fet. off the next day, attended by one fer¬ vant; while the baron and Alfred were engaged to dine with lord Albourne.— They that morning received a letter from lord Milverne, which mentioned his having made every inquiry relative to his lordfliip and lady Caroline, but that all his endeavours proved ufelefs. Alfred had, however, difpatched a letter to inform him of their unexpect¬ ed difcovery, and his own happinefs ; which
which.he fuppofed would have come to his hands before the date of his from England. Agnes and Matilda purfued their journey, and, after a day's quick travel¬ ling, found themfelves at the place of their deftmation. —The heart of the former throbbed with various emo¬ tions:—love, fear, joy, and doubt, al¬ ternately poffeffed her bofom; while the effefts might clearly be perceived in her countenance.—The fervant knocked at the door, and a young girl, whom Agnes did not know, opened it. — She inftantly exclaimed, " My mo¬ ther is dead !" Unable to proceed further, flie near¬ ly fainted. — Matilda, with as much compofure as ihe could affume, aiked if the perfon \vho inhabited that cot¬ tage fome months paft, was living ? The
The girl anfwêrèd, " Yes, and with-* m. Agnes clafped her hands in ecftafy. —Matilda firft alighted, and entered.— A middle-aged woman Was feated knit¬ ting : íhe arofe at the entrance of the ftranger, and feemed rather confufed. « You had," faid Matilda, " a daugh¬ ter?" She changed colour, and could hard¬ ly articulate " Yes/' " And you loft her ?" She with ftill greater difficulty repeat¬ ed the fame anfwer. The converfation proceeded no fur¬ ther;—Agnes ruihed into the room, and
and was inftantly in the arms of her mother. Tears relieved them bothj and the . latter then requefted to know by what ай of providence flie was thus bleffed beyond expreffion.—Matilda related to her moft of the circumftances that had happened to her daughter fince flie left the cottage, and concluded with an in¬ quiry after M. Le Selet. The queftion confufed her greatly; and, after a few moments, ihe replied, íhe had fcen him but once fince' her daughter left her; but had heard he was dead. Matilda now turned the difcourfe re¬ lative to her behaviour to that gentle¬ man and her child. — Her words car¬ ried in them a fevere rebuke to the impru-
imprudent mother, who appeared to be perfecily convinced of her error; and declared flie had not enjoyed one moment of felicity fince her daughter's elopement, — torn as ihe was with re- morfe for her cruel conduci: towards lier. Oliver, they underftood, was well, and lived only for Agnes. — He was- fent for ; and their meeting can only be conceived — not defcribed. — Ma* tilda experienced the moil heart-felt pleafure in fettling every point wirti the old lady relative to their marriage, and rewarding this faithful and truly innocent girl with the beft gift ihe could beftow on hef, a good huiband. ι —She gave Oliver an invitation to re«* turn, with Agnes, to Paris (who was to ftay with her mother a few days), when they fliould be united, und he receive with his bride a portion fuf- Vol. IIL M ficient;
, ficient to put them into a way of iifc that with induftry would procure them every ncceflary and comfort they could with to polTefs. t Matilda remained at the cottage that night; the next day, returned alone, and joined Alfred and the baron at. madame Bofivľs, in the evening, where they were engaged to fupper. — Here ihe was informed that it had been re¬ ported the whole day that D'Ollifont w r as no more: — it was not, however, by any means confirmed. On their entering their lodgings, they were told by the fervant that a ftrange gentleman had called, who particularly wiflied to fee Mr. Maferini, or the ba¬ ron.—In vain they endeavoured to ima¬ gine who it could be ·, their efforts were fruitlefs, and they retired unfatisfied.
They
s* They had juft far down to breakfaft the next morning, when they were in* formed the fame gentleman requefted to be admitted. — He was accordingly introduced $ but he was entirely шь known to them all. — His drefs was plain j yet there was much of the gen¬ tleman in his manner, and he feemed to be in the decline of life.—They po¬ litely aiked to know his bufmefs. <c My bufinefs," he anfwered, u is ra¬ ther of a ftrange nature ; and the cha¬ racter I come under, will, I doubt, give you no very good opinion of my ho¬ nour or integrity." Alfred, Matilda, and the baron, were aftoniftied. " I am," continued the vifitor, " the fteward of count D'Ollifont." M г They
They were ftill more furprifed. " I perceive your countenances change/' faid he. ec But fufpend your exclamations for a moment, while I in¬ form you, not now of the murderer or ufurper of another's right, but the dy¬ ing guilty wretch, who waits with all the horrors of a hell before him, to re¬ ceive the awful change that plunger him into eternity." They were in fome degree affefted, and he was requefted to be feated. * c Alas J" hc cried, " I am not with¬ out my fliare of mifery, which fell on all that came within his deftroying power. — My name is calumniated for ever:—by the multitude I am called the confidant of a fiend whom I deteft as much as they, but whofe infernal fnares
filares beguiled my unfufpeftïng fouî, and hurled me to deftruftion.—Yet I now come to,fulfil his laft requeft.— Before his eyes are clofed for ever, he wiihes to behold, what I fliould fup¬ pofe would blaft his very fight, — the baron Sampieno, Mr, Maferini, and his fifter." It is impoffible to conceive the amaze¬ ment .of all three. * c The count/ 1 he continued, " four days ago made his will, in which he refigns all right to the eftates of his late uncle ; and, in fome degree, to make what poor reparation is in his power, he has bequeathed the whole of his fortune, except forne {mail an¬ nuities in charity, to bo equal!} divided between the baron and rhe two for- viving heirs of the Maferini famih,—* The amount of this property is nearly M 3 fixty
fixty thoufand pounds. — No fcruples need prevent your receiving it, fince it has not been accumulated by the frauds he has been guilty of, but by the fa¬ vour he was opee in at the court of France/* lie begged to know their determina« ' tion ; for, if they confented to the wiflies of the dying man, he would himfelf conduct them at any hour of the day they chofe to appoint. — It required fome little time to refolve; but at length compaflion for the fufferings óf the cri¬ minal D'Ollifont overcame every other argument againft the vifit, and they fix¬ ed three o'clock that day. The fteward departed, and promifed to be with them at that hour. They confidered that at all events, there could be no danger whatever in this
this requeft, as officers of juftice refided in the houfe.—They, however, deter¬ mined to take two of their own fer¬ vants.—The perfon whom thcy had juft feen, was, they had no doubt, Ra¬ bourn, whom they had heard lord Mil¬ verne mention İn no very favourable manner; but they had found, fince their refidence in Paris, that his chai after had been cleared by DOliifont*« own .con¬ feflion. At three o'clock Rabourn arrived, and aH four fet off in the.baron's car¬ riage, attended by two men, to the count's manfion.—Their ride was fliort, as he lived no great diftance from their own refidence.—During the time, how¬ ever, they underftood by the fteward that he was much worfe than in the fore part of the day, and that he left him in ftrong convulfions ; hc there¬ fore conceived (as the fight of him M 4 might
might be too great a fliock to mifs Ma* ferini's feelings) that flie had better not enter his chamber, unlefs he ihould fo far recover as to mention again 4 a wifli to fee her.—This was fettled, and they prefently ftopped at the houfe. They were conducted through a fu- perb hall info an elegant apartment :— the fervants were defired to follow, and remained here with them, while Ra¬ bourn went into the fick man's cham- ber, which was the next room.—He returned, and informed them his con¬ vulfions were gone off,, but he was a- fraid he was fpeechlefs \ though he feemed, however, to look as if he wiih¬ ed to know whether they were come. — Matilda begged to remain where flie was, unlefs,he fliould, by figns or words, exprefs a fl dcfire to fee her. * The fteward led the way; Alfred and the
tne baron followed, through a pair of folding doors, to an elegant bed-room, beautifully furniflied in the richeft tafte. — At the further end was the count's bed, of crimfon fatin, with gold trim¬ mings.—Two phyficians, two nurfes, a confeffor, and three fervants, ftood round,—and, at intervals, adminiftered cordials to their patient.—The curtains were pulled on one fide; and, extended on the bed, lay the wretched man, fur¬ rounded with'elegance, clothedJn the fineft linen, and reclined on a mattrefs of down.—But what were the luxuries, the paltry elegancies, that furrounded him ?—Could the ftrufture of the room, — the beauty of the furniture, —the ridine fs of the canopy under which he lay,—or the downy foftnefs of his bed, give to him that comfort,- thabconfola*· lion or fortitude, which the awful crifis required ? ' M 5 Aias I
Alas ! no ; every moment did the trembling victim of guilt and ambition expect to fee the gilded fcene of earth¬ ly pride vaniih into darknefs, and that > darknefs open to him he knew not what, —but which it was hell to him only to conceive. Alfred and the baron advanced flowly^ — DOllifonťs eyes turned ироц them : — a kind of cold fliivering feized him ; and drops of perfpiration appeared on his forehead, which one of the nurfes dried off with a muflin handkerchief. During the courfe of his diabolical: exiftence, many were the fighs he had wrung from the widow, the fatherlefs, and the unprotected; yet the damp muflin that received thefe guilty drops of horror and remorfe of confcience,, might be faid in fome meafure to atone for
for the innocent tears he had drawn from female diftrefs. —Who could tell his pangs, the inward workings of his f ou l?—Who could tell the convulfive terror that ihook every limb?—Who could telľhis fecret thoughts that blaft¬ ed every hope I His fenfes failed him the moment the vifitors appeared.—His convulfions re¬ turned with double force, and a fourth fervant was obliged to be called in, to affift the others in holding him, —He raved on the names of Maferini and Sampieno ; then, fpent with exertion, bit his under lip with fuch violence that blood flowed abundantly from his- mouth. Ilis ravings again returned, — By a fudden fnatch hc difengaged himfelf from hold ■ and, with a kind of exulta¬ tion in his face, which was now partly- M 6 black».
black, he tore a large root of hair from his head ; then, with a ftifled laugh, fell^ lifelefs on the pillow. Such was the end of the moft tyran¬ nical, cruel, and unexampled villain,— a difgrace to the world, — a fcourge to his fellow-creatures, and a curfe to him¬ felf. —Ambition was the bait that be¬ guiled hira :" and that ambition did but mock him, when he lay a disfigured corpfe under the hangings of an elc·* gant canopy. Alfred, the baron, and Rabourn, with¬ drew to the next apartment, all greatly fhocked.—They were infprmed that Matilda was in one of the lower rooms y the cries of the dying D'Ollifont were too'much for her. The news of the count's death was no fooner told than the whole houfe was
was in confiderable confufion, and tlie baron requefted to know who was to have the management of his affairs. — The fteward informed them, the will mentioned it fliould be jointly executed by Mr. Maferini and himfelf. — He af¬ fured them every thing was left in fo exact a manner that it would occafion them very little trouble.— The count; before their arrival, had confeffed every circumftance relative to the murders, which would, without any trial, put them at once into poffeflion of their right. Rabourn produced the will, and it contained every thing he had riiention- ed. — After having invefted him with power to give all neceffary orders rela¬ tive to the funeral and other matters, they departed to their lodgings. The difagreeable fcene they had juft witneffed,
witneffed, was repaid by the fight of lord Milverne, who received Alfred's letter the very day he fent off his own, and followed himfelf almoft immedi* ately. He congratulated them on the for¬ tunate conclufion of their affairs, though he declared he was malicious enough to wifli thefe events had happened af¬ ter his alliance with Matilda, that hc might have been able to have proved to the world the difinterednefs of his- love. That evening he accompanied them to madame Bofivľs. — Lord Albourne received him as an old friend, — lady Caroline, as an acquaintance whom flie had much efteem for, — and madame Bofivi, witK the utmoft politenefs. It is impoffible to conceive a more happy
happy party than the perfons who then fat down to fupper. —-The recolleftioa of their paft misfortunes endeared to them their prefent felicity; and they all agreed that a life tinctured with ad¬ verfity receives that glow of happinefs which an infipid medium never pro¬ duces*
CHAPTER XLVI. — Evening comes at. lait, ferene and mild ; When after the long vernal day of life, Enamouťd more, as more remembrance fwelľá With many a proof of x ecoUečted iove, > Together down they fink in focial lleep ţ Together freed, their gentle fpirits fly To feenes where love and blifs immortal reign. THOMSON» ■ Laft fcene of all, That ends this ftrange eventful hiftory. 5HAKSPEARE„ THAT virtue and vice are their own rewards, İs a proverb generally allow¬ ed ; iţ is certainly founded on truth, and exemplified in almoft: every occur* rence of life. It requires but little obfervation, to perceive that the comforts, even the fuper-
ŕuperfluities of the world, procured by means not confiftent with the moral government of mankind, lofe the chief part of thofe allurements which tempt¬ ed the pofleffor to gain them by illicit tranfačtions. —The man who partakes of a fcanty hard-earned meal by his own induftry, enjoys more than he who eats of the fumptuous repaft, at the ex¬ penfe of a fellow- c rea t ure's mifery and oppreflion. This pofition was proved in DOHi- font, and the principal fufferers by his villany, the baron, Alfred, and his fif¬ ter :—by accounts they now heard from Rabourn, the count underwent far more than they, though all three under the fevereft lafli of adverfity: for he was tortured by a guilty confcience, and haunted by phantoms of a difturbed and difordered brain. Ilia
^GRASVILLE His funeral was condufted by the fteward, who in the will was left a fmali but decent competency ; and to it, Al¬ fred, his fifter, and the baron, added a confiderable fum. — The legacies were many of them over-paid, by their joint confent, to thofe who were in want of it In a very fliort time all the affairs were properly fettled, and the children of the Maferini family became poíTefľed of all their right, by a ihort though regular procefs in law.—Agnes and Oliver returned at the time appointed ; the latter was introduced to the baron, and Alfred (now count Maferini), and received from them no inconfiderable marks of favour. Matilda conceived it would be pro¬ per Agnes's mother fliould be fent for, to be prefent at her daughter's mar¬ riage, which was confummated about a fort*
a fortnight after their arrival at Paris. — She returned the count and his fifter a thoufand thanks, and received from both a handfome prefent.—It was now determined, Oliver and his wife ihould fet off for Grafville Abbey. —Count Maferini intended to have it put in repair, and fixed upon him as a proper perfon to fuperintend them, as he had been originally brought up in that line; for Leonard, who was ftill there, was too much advanced in years to take the care upon himfelf.—It was, however, left entirely tö their own inclination, and they both gladly accepted the offer. It was about a week after their de¬ parture, when the count Maferini and lady Caroline Albourne, lord Milverne and Matilda, were on one day united. Lord Albourne and the baron fighed at the altar, and could hardly ftifle a tear» thu
the mixture of acute forrow and ex^ treme pleafure ; half of it might be faid to arife at the recollection of the time when they were together at a fimilar ceremony, the former as the enraptured bridegroom, the latter as the doating parent : the other half was occafioned by their prefent felicity, though under different characters ; the bridegroom. transformed to the parent, and the pa¬ rent to the ftill further title of grand¬ father, viewing in the child of his de¬ parted daughter, every virtue, every female accompliflimenr, he thought he had for ever loft, when deprived of the affectionate tie of parental tendernefs. Both the count and lord Milverne now faw themfelves poffeffed of every happineis they could even form a wiih to have procured; this thought, as it croffed the mind of the former, by a train of ideas incident to it,, brought to
to his imagination that moment, when, with the fword of his departed father, he was going to put an end to his ex¬ iftence in a fit of phrenfy and defpair. —He bluihed at the recollection of an event which he now almoft ihuddered to think of; it held forth to him a ftriking leflbn againft a want of forti-. tude, and a raih, unmanly precipita¬ tion. They remained at Paris but a week after the marriage, and then fet off for England, as it was their intention to fpend in London the remainder of the winter feafon (which was now juft commenced), return to France about June, and the latter end of the year proceed to Grafville Abbey, which would by that time be ready for their reception. Their arrival in this metropolis was im me*
immediately known in the fafliionable world ; and one of the firft parties that received the general whifper, was that of lady Peviquil.—They had flept in their houfe in Berkley-fquare but one night, when the next morning their breakfaft table was covered with cards of invitation and congratulations from different quarters, and among them one from fir Anthony and his lady. Moft of the perfons whofe names thcy mentioned, called in the courfe of the morning, and formed a complete groupe or levee ; the chief part of which had ihunned them with adverfe eyes in the chilling part of their misfortunes, but who now courted their acquaintance with a fycophantic earneftnefs, when they found them encircled by the warm rays of profperity and affluence. — All thefe were received with a very cool and diftant civility, and among them was
was lady Peviquil, who, with the true deceitful fimper of a courtier, defcend¬ ed from an elegant equipage, and forc¬ ing her way through a crowd of the great world to the upper end of the drawing*roöm, in the moft whining tone of tendernefs, declared herfelf " happy beyond expreffion at feeing them returned to England."—Her com¬ pliments were received as thofe of a per¬ fon whom they had never before feen ; and her ladyfliip had the mortification to return with her pride extremely hurt at the reception flie received» Having fpent the allotted time in London with confiderable happinefs and felicity, their time equally divided among feledt friends and public places of amufement,—they returned to Paris, and the hours floated away here in the fame round of enjoyment. They feveral times faw both Henry Peviquil and his 3 After h
fitter; the former every day became more low and depraved ; the latter, forfaken by the man whom ihe eloped with from her father's houfe,was now the ckèreamie of an Italian marquis, whofe charafter by no means added luftre to his title. At their return to Grafville Abbey, they found all the repairs finiihed en¬ tirely to their liking; and though the ftrufture was by no means robbed of its gothic elegance m the external part, yet it was made far more convenient and comfortable in the internal : the chapel was handfomely fitted up, and a tomb erefted to the memory of their father, mother, and aunt.—They found the good old Leonard in perfect health ; and his happinefs at feeing them was extreme. The count received л promife from lord Milverne and his fifter, that they would
would fpend three months in every year with them at the abbey.*—It was fettled the baron and lord Albourne ihould do the fame ; Paris agreed with them both far better than Italy; and they determine^ to live together the remainder of their lives. The manfion of DOliifont was fixed on for their habitation ; and madame Bofivi confented to take the çare of their houfehold upon herfelf» ;— No great diftance from it lord Milverne bought an elegant chateau, whjf h both himfelf and ^atilda ^etçrmtoed fo jnakç their generaj residence ; though his lordfliip made her promife ţo fpend fome little time every two years in England. • Both lord Milverne and the co^nt J)ad the felicity, about twelve souths after tjaeir marriagej to ^tøfp ¿θ 4hf £r Vol ЛИ. Ν , bofoms,
bofoms, under the tender title of fa¬ ther, a blooming infant ; the former a girl, the latter a boy :—the families were feldom divided; for, when lord Milverne and his lady, with the baron and lord Albourne, had fpent the allotted time with the count," both he and the coun¬ tefs, after a very ihort interval, returned the vifit at Paris. Agnes and Oliver, as foon as the re¬ pairs were entirely finiihed at Grafville Abbey, returned to lord and lady Mil¬ verne at Paris; the latter was made fteward and principal overfeer of the chateau, while his wife was the favou¬ rite and friendly attendant of Matilda. Leonard remained at Grafville Ab¬ bey ; and being too much advanced in years to take upon himfelf the, office of fu perintendant, lived in it with a fer¬ vant to attend him, received a hand- 9 fome
fome income from the count, and an annual prefent from lady Milverne. The principal perfons of this little hiftory enjoyed their prefent happinefs, by a recollection of former feenes of adverfity, which taught them to feel for the unfortunate, and at the fame time gave them the higheft gratifica¬ tion, by being enabled to alleviate their diftreffes* Sir Anthony and lady Peviquil con¬ tinued their, round of fafliionable folly, tül age impeded their courfe, and caft an infipidity on thofe feenes which had conftituted the chief pleafure of their lives. — No relief opened itfelf to their view ¿ —diflipation had been their whole ftudy; and when that failed, their ex¬ iftence became a burthen. Void of all fortitude, difgufted with N 2 each
each other, and the world in general, they funk into their grave much about the fame time, and with the fame hor¬ rors before them j leaving behind but juft property enough to pay their debts, and bury them in the pompous manner they had ordered, Henry Peviquil continued his run of gambling in France for near four years, when he became fo notorious in that country, as to be obliged to quit it for England. — From his father, however, hc could get no affiftance ; and, after a period of eight years, during which time he fubfifted by common fwindiing, he was taken up for a highway robbery, received fentence of death, but took the king's mercy by accepting tran fpor ta¬ lion, — and died on the voyage. Ilis fifter jived with the Italian mar¬ quis before mentioned, for about two \ears ;
years i when ihe eloped with his Talet de chambre into Switzerland, where he ufed her exceedingly ili ; and for an- attempt on 'his life, ihe was obliged to fly to a remote part of the country,* was fuddenly taken ill, and died in her twenty-eighth year. Oliver and Agnes led a Hfe of the utmoft fereuity and comfort,—they had feveral children, which proved a com¬ fort to their increafing years, — and all turned out valuable members of fo* cicty. The good old Leonard enjoyed but a hw years of felicity ; he however Jived to fpend fome time with every blefling he could with, and to fee all thofe feenes realifed,'that his moft fan- guine ideas could have formed. Lord Albourne died about twelve veara
years after his daughter's marriage ; the baron felt moil feverely his lofs ; in fliorr, this might be faid to be the firft- event that occafioned any confiderable damp on the happinefs of the two fa¬ milies.—The chief part of his lordfliip's fortune was left to his daughter, and a confiderable legacy to lord and lady Milverne. The baron Sampieno, after lord Al* bourne's death, refided with lord Mil* verne, as madame Bofivi died of an apo¬ plexy a few months before his lordihip. He lived to a very advanced age, bleff¬ ed with years of happinefs, that might be faid in a great meafure to repay him for former misfortunes, —He left thè whole of his fortune between the count and lord Milverne. The count and countefs of Maferini, with lord and lady Milverne, enjoyed a lonff с*
a long feries of happinefs and felicity. They had each feveral children, and lived to fee them prove an ornament to their rank, and the community at large. Time heightened their bleffings, and their declining years were like a fetting fun, which gathers frefh fplen¬ dour, as it gradually vaniihes from our fight.
THE ENØ.
