Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Grasville Abbey: a romance
GRASVILLE ABBEY. CHAPTER t MORTALITT. « ...... ■ ..... The grave, dieta thin* ! Men ibi ver, when thou*rt mará·" ??? Ga a vc. ??? bleffed Virgin aid and proteft thee ! and when this poor frame, now worn out with infirmities» «nd finking in the grave, fliall, ere to morrow's fim, rife before its Creator in an im* montai ftate, — oh! may I then be placed over thee as a guardian angel, thougb invifible to my child !—Weep not, Matilda, but**—?— Such were the words delivered by madame Maferini to har daughter, a« Voi., L ? the
the lattar held the dying hand of her mother, and in an »gony of grief liten* ed to thofe inftructions, which (he was certain would be the laft lhe ever ffiould receive, from a parent whofe maternal tendernefs må affeftion was tbe moft fincere» and of which ffie now would feverely feel the lofs. Madame Mafe¬ rini immediately afta* fell into a faint¬ ing fit, which lafted fo long» that the nurfe as well as Matilda thought die was no motet but in this they were miftaken; for to the joy of all her at« tendants flie recovered, and inquired, as fte had repeatedly done before, whe¬ ther her fon (who was an officer) was yet arrived t they anfwered her in the negative ; for as he had been informed feveral tiroes that it was thought his mother's diforder would prove fetal, it was known he might obtain leave of abfence firøm his regiment, which #as then ftationed in Flanders. Bat fome little
filile time before, ?? exprcu hnd ?? fent to him, fetting fordi that madama Maferini was much worfe, and they thought her Mfe in great danger ι they alfo mentioned that h was hot particu¬ lar defire to fee hint t he was therefore now expefted every hour; but «fter this fit Die faid Ihe Hamid not furvive that evening, and feemed extremely impa¬ tient to fee her fea; fbe faid ihe had fomething of riie greateft importance to communicate lo htm, whkh Ae re¬ fufed to relate to her daughter; imt fiill finding that he did not arrive, Ae aflted for her confeflbr, when lo her inex¬ preffible furprife and grief (he was in¬ formed that he was fent for» that morn¬ ing, by a lick relation, ten miles off, and was not yet returned i Ae called for poi and ink, ami though fo weak as hardly able to be fupported in her bed, with great pain and difficulty fte wrote feveral fines, then dropped bm
fen, clafped hoki of Matilda's hand, ano cxptrcu* The grirf of all wbo wette p refe nt m m mmA poignant ; but particukrly that or Matikla ; the mom behekl hcrklf an orphan with a very fmall íortunr, which was not fufficient to fopport hcr gen¬ teelly without fomc other addition, fbe was bereft of a mother whoie good ¿nftruciums and advice foe couid now m kmger «ie« TC -, ? fbort, few* drfjracted. Not many minutes after tibe diftbki- tion of madame Maferini, the phv fie ian came in ; he found the attendants ftu* pdfed with grief, and Matilda ? die feme pofture as fte was at the moment her mother expired; he parted her hand from that of the corpfe, whkh fre pfcfied lo her bofom, and bathed widi mn s .but. Ihe had the preîence of
ot mina lo ??? up the psiper on whkh ter mother had wrote and when fte entered ter chamber, threw it ??????? in tte efcritoire, mitİKAit ???? ? >kìng at ite wrttmg, m ffiott, ter mmà mm m fuch a ftüe lha« for ????? hour* fte ted not ste kat remembtmncc of tte Ateai half an tenar after tte deceafe ? mstdame Maferini, Alfred ter fon WTÌved. ? ten te İri heard of bis motter** ¡Unda, te would Ita«« fet off fot Pam directly, but w« prevented hy At índíípofition of a fuperior officer. Immediately ss te rece ive d tte faft ex- prefe, te obtained leave of abfence for a month» and Idi Flanders tte dav after; but, unfortunately, in one part ©f hts ¡oiirney, where te was obliged lo ride on horfeback, tte animal took fright and threw him; he was take« up for dead; but being cn!y fiur.ncd ? 3 bv
m
W
*
as
*
t
£
il
f.
h
i
t
#»
s
e
i
1
t:
*.
??
and
knotrn
1
**
ι
?
*
©f
h
re
n
*
h
h
ved
t
«i
»
i
s
which
dau
■ψ·
m
t
????
e
s
young
eft in a omvent ; and» tf poffibic, to prevail ofi. tbem to take the veil: ra this cafe, the fortune he would have been neceffitated to have given them, might be added to that of their eldcft fifter, which moft likely would procure her a hufband of great note ; he could theá have his name transferred to his fon*
♦lil*
?
?
rity, the feme as by mak afee :— îhm
unjnH marquis
an emptv
chil¬ dren *?? werf young, and ? was ro» treatment ι—»
to put htsfeheme into execution; ite ac¬ cordingly perfuaded the young bale* to he boarders for a few months, whkh they both, readily agreed to ; te accom¬ panied them himfelf to the convent of N*··*, and affected the greateft grief at parting from them ; in private he ^gg^ tKe tedy abbefs to let no op¬ poriunity pafs that might haften their defire of taking the veil—Felicia, the voungeft, feemed perfeftly contented ? 4 with
#
■ &· ? *,*τ
f
Ψ
%<
eft art ??
? uer
3rnjvei
Λ * &Wt »^
■■*!■
tneir wimes. \tt ? lemen Ima
Ψ
?
Í ¿?
*
f
tí
??????? wiia me ct*iâv«*t and it^ m<
iiahuants, that íhe coaltar.tiy replie
f
nötning tn her to leave t
ri* U.
m ψ»
***r***
r\
#
couftantlv received inte the news with the greatc but it was in fome meafure damped by ¿caring tbat Clementina had fo great a diffike
diflike to follow tex example, and ihat ftiewîlted much to te permitted to re¬ turn borne:—th» requeft te refolved not to grant ; as te thought trøe, and a little more ufe tø the rules ??! orders of the place* might work an »aure change ? bei fen timer ts. It was at this period Lomb XIV. a- fcended the throne of France ; and, a- aaong others who had bufinefs to tranf¬ aft at court on that cKc^iìoTì, was a young gentleman, the feo ot an Italian of large fortune. — He brought wiih him from Italv hk fifter, whom» bv order of hk rather, he was to place in the convent of N** # * ; the dav ffie ■at was introduced, te had an opportu¬ nity of feeing Clementina i he was ftruck with ter beauty, and delighted with ter converfarioo, and afterwards had feveral otter interviews ; for bv the orders ofthe marquk ffie was pemil* ted ? J to
tO SiASITflLE AISET. ? fee any ©ne 'm company wiih t?*» ?? abbeft, or any «cher perion whi^ni fee ??? depetó upon ; this ?? tá Uuráovr, ? thoogh^t, wmâé be mme ???? m win ber øw to their ?? pofe, tb»« by laying her under ?? reftraint ; her di^o&tioa being aati»a% ^o^, and bf fat mme inclined to vie Id to entreaty than force.-^-Signor Ma&rmi often came on vifits to bis iter, wbo was placed with hcr bdyftnp, und tl» chofen companion and friend of Cle- mentina :*—it was at thefe times, when no one was prefent svhich would often hapfjcn, the marquis's order» not ^ing ftriãly attt^nded to), that l^ wouhi de¬ clare his paffion, whkh he might plainly perceive was not liftened to* with diflike. Clementina felt a ftrong partiality for him, which foon ripened iato love ; ffie told him the ftate of her aftairs -, höt when he entreated ber to elope with him from the convent, ffie .* alwav ά
always remmded ?? that they muft cxpeft nothing m point of fortune fram tibe marquis —That* te anfwcfed* wonká not give ?? tbe ?? concern , for ? father, who had rso otter ? hu- dren except his nfter and himfeif, was wonhaconliderabie dead ofraoncv.and had often told him, prov i ded te could meet with a wife, wht*fe birth» vetnes; and aecompttihaeftii, would bring no difgrace upon ttetr honfe, that wealth would be mo obfcft to ??, as te ihou'd te able to give him enough to kerp item, not only m plenty, Imt ia af¬ fluence. Clementina*» mirm was on the rack whkh way to refolve ; if fte rejeéted tte pcopo&l, fte would ??? hkefy te obliged to continue in îte convent tor life, and te conftantly hara&d mith tte importunities of all about ter lo take tte veil; which would be worfe ? f than
than éeath $ mm the comrary, tf ffie confented to ity with fignor Maferini lo Ifaiv, fte muft mn tlie haatard of ■a Travdling ???? miks, and whem ibe arrived im ihm coufstry, would fee. n& one that ftie knew, emcepi hknfelf and his f iter f^-áie îhmig hts of leaving Fe¬ licia, d» dîfficulry «f efkapmg, and tbe îde* of what would he tbe confe¬ quence if they were dtfbøvefed» made ber ffirmk with horror from the thoughts of leaving b*r prient habâation ; thus fkc &h^^d com m g to a r efotobn §mr ?? ix Äbunths^ utett one moming, as ffie entered a eiofet belonging to the Udy aè^e&t ffie perceived on the floor * Imar directed to hew iadyffirp; it «w htr father's feal t and was broken ; fee at fir ft hefitated whether urn Ibould ftad te, but at length determined to fre the cootents, whkh were, * tbat the marquis thought the manner in which flie was treated, was too mild» g and
and begged that, for the futare fte might te clofely kept to h^ 4 «5hajnter» and ftriftcr methods had recouErfe to***—* Ready to faint, fte was to fignora * Maferini» who was equally forpr^bd at îte ifcsw, aid wi&ed ter to comply with ter brother's foiicita¬ tions —Cieroentrna, after feme little time, refolved to accept bis propofebi 'm the afternoon te was expected, and they thought that would be § good opportuniry to inform him of thek de- 1????1??·
CHAPTER IL ι oIG NOR Maferini called in lite af¬ ternoon, as was expefted ; he oniy faw* his fitter; thofe methods being already put in execution which the marquis had mentioned in his letter; fte in¬ formed her brother of the circumftances that had happened m the morning, and alfo acquainted him with Clementina's refolution to leave the convent. At thefe words, he was in raptures; but they were foon fubdued by the thoughts of what difficulties muft be furmounted lo efcape from it ; for Clementina was totally confined to her chamber; not even fignora Maferini was permitted to fee her ; thefe orders had been given about an hour before ; the young friends bad therefore only time to fix, Ihat,
that, whatever refolutions ite latter in¬ tended to put in praftice, fte was to write them down, and contrive to drop them in ite hand of the former at even¬ ing vefpers ; but both lhe brother and the fifter were al a lofs how lo elude Ihe watchful vigilance of Ite diffe¬ rent people belonging to the convent, tilt a fcheme, propofed by firnora, feemed as if it would prove favourable· She told her brother to go to the honfe of father Abfalom (a prieft), who was expected that night al a ble hour, to have a conference wkh the lady abbefs, and to tell htm ter ladyíhip could nol receive him ; he Ihould then procure a drefs as much like father Absalom's as pofiible, and, at the fame time when te was to have attended, to come lo the gate of the convent, through which he might pafs unnoticed, if he would hold up hk handkerchief fo as lo cover his face, which the reverend fetter generally
generally did in avoid the night air* by this means, te might get to the lady abbef/s apartments: tet, inftead of entering them, to tum ffiort round a contrary way, that would take him to a winding ftaircafe, which, after de¬ fcending it fome time, would terminate in a large vaulted chamber; and in this place he was ta wait ite arrival of Cle¬ mentma and hb fifter* u Bet how is it poffibfe," returned fi¬ gnor Maferini, * if you ffiould te able to meet me there, that we can eicape ì Yon will certainly be known." " Leave that to me," feid tte lady. " We ftall alfo be difguifed as friars : and when you again pafs tte attendants accompanied by us, they will naturally fuppofe you have been with ter lady- fbip, and are returned with two of your brethren -, be fure to have a carriage at a little
F*
•:*Ä
-illar
????? convey tis a few deteftaNe waJb; and evening we ftaU httle vi drcffes, remain in
mtte
that and
ill te made after iteli then journey to
»t
[gnor Maferini, after having thnniiiT hit fifter a thoufand tte^s for ter aa» sellent feterne, took his leave, in order lo prepare for ite elopement. Imme¬ diately after te was gone» the wrote down tho juft before agreed on, and tte ??«? manner in whkh Clementina ?? to aft:—at evening vefpers tbcy met ; mrf when tte ceremony was ©γι», Ute us* ceived tirom har friend ite billet without difcovery ; as loon as fbe entered ter fifter*
filter's <^11 (which was the place where ftie was confined), ihe burft into tears. Felicia, who had not been able to at¬ tend vefpers, on account of an indif¬ pofition which obliged her to keep her bed, was aftoniflied, and begged to know, in the tendereft terms, the caufe of her grief; but Clementina was un¬ able to fpeak. The convent bell had now done ringing; aU was fiknt, except the wind, whkh howled through the apart* ments; the dim lamp that hung in Felkia's cell was obliged to be re* moved, as, hanging too near a cafe* ment, it was in danger of being ex* tinguiffied. Clementina placed it on one fide of her filter's bed, and by its fight, obferved in her counteoance a death-like palenefs; fhe preffed Cle¬ mentina's hand to her bofom, and once more begged to know why ihe wept ;
the latter, by degrees, and with ite greateft circumfpeftion, informed tef of her intentions of leaving the cow» vent; horror ftowed itfelf ¡acveiyfea* lure of Felicia wbile ftie liftened m ite relation ; at length, overcome hf far» prife, grief, and weaknefs, ftie fainted. Water ftood by: her fifter, hardly able ? fupport ierfelf, applied il to her rahel, and had the prefence of mind not to make any noife. After feme minnlet ?? recovered, but was almoft too ill ? fpeak. Clementina fuppoited her in her bed, and received tte laft words of her fifter with a look of anguifli and madnefs« ** Clementina,** faid Felicia, whofe voice was hardly articulate, ** heaven preferve you in this hazardous attempt 1 Oh ! my fifter, may you fee many happy years ; and while the funíhine of pro* fperity
¿
IperİCy fheds its beams upon thee, may they never be obftructed by the chilling wind of adverfity. Almighty Father !" ffie exclaimed, (and crofted herfelf with the greateft fewency) " in this my laft hour of diffolution, wben the foul is near parting from mortal duft, to fly unfullied to a merciful and heavenly Creator, vouchfafe la incline thine ear to my laft prayer and dying fupplica¬ tion I preferve, ? Lord! my fifter, ihrøugh that path of life in which il feaü pleafe thee to place her, from tho temptations and fnares of the wicked ; and when fhe is under the rod of affile* tion, infpire her with fortitude and re¬ fignation to bear it without murmuring, Ihat with religion and piety ftie may defcend into the grave, and rife again an angel of purity, ready to fly into the arms of her Saviour, her Redeemer, and ber Godi" Clemen*
Clementina fupported her as well as flie was able ; íhe fpoke no more, but furvived about five minutes, and ex* pired in her arms·
f v
LI~i Al 1 JbK HI« THE fituation of Clementina was now dreadful beyond expreffion ; the diftant tinkling of a clock at a remote part of the monaftery proclaimed the hoar was ten ; the wind, which had been fo very high, had entirely dropped, and the moon, quite obftructed by heavy clouds, could not be difccmcd ; large drops of hail beat againft the windows, and by degrees increafed to a violent ftorm ; the moil tremendous claps of thunder followed raft on each other; flafli after flaffi of vivid lightning dart¬ ed through the (haltered cafements, which had no (hulters ; this war of elements was by far more dreadful, it being an uncommon time of the year, the
the latter end óf January. The body of Felicia lay ftill in the arms of her fifter, who, totally infenfible, refted her hand on the fame pillow, till a violent clap of thunder, which ihook the con¬ vent, roufed her from this reverie ; ftie ftarted up* and at firft hardly knew where ffie was ; but recollection foon came with redoubled force ; it wanted but one hour to the time when ihe was to meet her friend ; flie was unable to come to a refolution in wbat manner to aft : fte took up the letter the had re¬ ceived from fignora Maferini, and read it once more over. She ftill confidered that if fhe e- fcaped, flie might once more be happy $ but if flie remained in the convent, there was not the flighteft hope that lhe ffiould ever enjoy another bour of peace or comfort. She bad now no one to leave, that could anyway claim
her regard or tendernefs ; the maternal love and affection of a mother fiie had never known ; her father had not ful¬ filled that tender name by either aftidu- ity or kindnefs ; her eldeft fifter fte hardly ever faw, as ffie was placed, before her remembrance, with a rela¬ tion of her mother's in Germany, who took the care of her education. Tbe old lady vifited the marquis but once only, accompanied by his daughter, and then made but a fhort ftay ; yet in this little time, the lady Eleanor's be¬ haviour to her fifters was proud and difdainful, fo as not to call forth either efteem or fondnefs ; as to friends flic had none, except fignora, for the mar¬ quis never fuffered them to cultivate any acquaintance. Felicia would have been the only caufe that could have made her leave the convent with re¬ gret ι ftie, alas'! was now no more ; fte had conceived a fincere friendihip for fignora *·*
fignora Maferini, and her heart plainl) r told her, her affeftions were placed on her brother; fte therefore thought it would be more prudent to run the ha¬ zard of eloping with two perfons by whom fte was certainly teloved, tban remain in a place where her life wouJd be made uncomfortable. But ftill fte was chilled with horror at the thoughts of being difcovered ; and the lofs of her fitter greatly preyed upon her fpi¬ rits. It was now near the time when ffie was to repair to fignora Maferini's room: ihe put fome trinkets of her filler's, which Felicia had given her be¬ fore ffie took the white veil, into a finali filver cafket which fhe could place in her pocket, and among them the pic¬ ture of her mother ; fhe fhed a flood of tears at the thought, that if the original had lived, hovv happy ihe might now v oi, I, (j have
í »ave been ; ffie then, according to the 'directions in the letter, wrote with her pencil feigned memorandums relative to their efcape, and the names of feve¬ ral roads quite contrary to thofe they meant to take ; and dropped this book in the place where it was moft likely to be found. Eleven o'clock now ftruck, and thc hail had in fome meafure abated, though the thunder and lightning ftill conti¬ nued, when Clementina took a laft farewell of her departed fifter ; ftie em¬ braced the corpfe, wept over it, and was for fome time unable to move, till ffie at laft tore herfelf avvay from the body, and with her eyes fwimming in tears, implored the author of all events to fupport her in the few critical hours fhe muft undergo. With a trembling hand ffie then unbarred the door, vvhich opened into a long gallery, on each fide of
of which were different cells ; fte could not take the lamp, for fear of the light glancing into any of the apartments; and was therefore only guided by each flafo of lightning that came through a large window at the further end. So weak, as hardly able to walk, fte at length arrived at the cafement, and fat down on a feat under it to recover her ftrength. The way fte had already come was by far the moit dangerous on account of difcovery, there being one or more inhabitants İn each of the rooms (lie had pafled ; flie now went through feveral paflages that led- to a large vaulted chamber, and from thence began to afcend a ftone ftair-cafe that wound round the fouth tower of the convent, and took her entirelv awav from the cells below belonging to the nuns, to the fleeping rooms ofthe board* ers above. 'Ihe thunder in this place had a moft awful found : the lightning, ? 3 ? thou srh
though it could only enter a fmall painted cafement which ftood at a great height, yet ferved to fliow the gloomy horrors of the plaee. ι She was already half-way up; but terrified at the thoughts of her fituation, ihe refted for a few moments againft the old iron railing, vvhen a light ftep feemed to move on the fame ftair. Almoft convulfed vvith horror, flie fhrunk back, and was fortunately un¬ able to call out, vvhen at the fame moment a ftrong flafh of lightning -darted from the window above, and ffiowed her the figure of a man ; the fight of it was but momentary, and all again was filent and dark ; with breath¬ lefs agitation and confiderable quick¬ nefs, ilie ran up the other part of the ftair-cafe, flew acrofs two paflages, and arrived at the chamber of fignora Ma¬ ferini; flie gave the fignal they had fixed
fixed on, and the door was carefully opened by her friend, who with afto- niflimcnt received Clementina, fainting İn her arms. She foon recovered, and informed fignora of the death of her fifter, and alfo of the event that had fo much alarmed her; the former intelligence flie was furprifed and grieved at ; but the latter, concerning the perfon on the ftairs, ffie told her was her brother, who was to wait in the chamber below; this circumftance fignora had neglected to mention in the letter, which might have been the caufe of difcovery; fte infifted on Clementina's taking a glafs of wine, and helped her to drefs in the apparel of a prieft, and then made her¬ felf ready in another difguife of the fame kind. She now thought it full time to at- C 3 tend
tend her brother, and begging Clemen¬ tina to fupport herfelf through this great trial, ihe foftly opened the door ; they proceeded to the ftair-cafe, and de¬ fcended it. It was quite dark, the thunder and lightning being over.__ When they had got to the bottom, fignora, ¡n a whifper, called her bro¬ ther, who inftantly anfwered ; he was going to congratulate them on having got fo far without difcovery: hut his fifter ftopped him. « This," faid ilie, " is not a place for compliments."— They all three then re-afcended the ftair-cafe, paffed through a long paf¬ fage, and arrived at the door of the lady abbefs's apartments ; they ftopped there about two minutes, and then holding their handkerchiefs partly over their faces, they croffed a large hall, and arrived at the door at the further end ; — they here paffed two perfons, vvho made no inquiries. This door led them
themjto an inner court, and from that to an outer one, in wbich there were leverai porters; but they, fuppofing them to have returned from a confe¬ rence with her ladyíhip, aiked no quef¬ tions. They had now only to pafs the outfide gates, which they did in -the fame manner, without any obftruftions, and faw themfeives totally free from the convent. Signora and her brother were over- joyed at their good fortune ; but Cle¬ mentina, though ffie was happy in having efcaped, yet forrow ftill hung- upon her brow; they walked about half a mile, and then entered the chaife that waited for them ; fignor Maferini's fervant was on horfe-back ; they defir¬ ed the poft-boy, whom they were ob¬ liged to acquaint with the whofe aftair, to drive as faft as poffible, and he might depend on being rewarded. Signora ? 4 acquainted
acquainted her brother (who had ve¬ ry tenderly inquired after Clementina's health, and thc caufe of her melan¬ choly) of Felicia's death, and begged him not to force her to talk ; that her fpirits, vvhich within a few hours had been fo greatly fliocked, might agaiu he a little compofed. This obfervation was juft:—Clemen¬ tina had in a little time gone through a great deal of trouble: the furprife and concern which followed the finding of hcr father's letter, the grief ihe felt at thofe orders being fo foon put in ex¬ ecution, the terror and anxiety ffie was under vvhen ffie read fignora's billet, the fudden fhock of her lifter's death, the horror flie felt during the ftorm, with the alarm flie received on the ftair-cafe, and her dread of being difcovered the whole night, confpired to overwhelm her with fenfations almoft equal to mad^ nefs ;
nefs ; her looks plainly confirmed that fte was exceedingly ill, and it did nol efcape fignora or her brother. He was almoft diftrafted to know in what man¬ ner to aft. To wait for advice, would be equally as bad as to difeover them¬ feives ; yet to fee her in fuch a ftate without any aid, was diftreffing beyond expreffion. He could not perfuade her to take any nourifliment, though lie had provifions in the chaife to prevent their ftopping on the road for any thing clfe than to change horfes. Signora was extremely forry to fee her friend fo much indifpofed ; flie perceived a fever was coming on ; ffie therefore advifed her brother, about three o'clock in the afternoon, to order the poft-boy to turn out of the high road, and drive into a wild part of ffie country, which though it might take them out of the way thev intended to go, yet in fuch a place they might find fome retired ? 5 cottage
cottage where theycould ftop for fome time in fafety ; for fte was very certain Clementina would not be able to pro¬ ceed on the journey. Her brother confented, and ordered the boy accordingly, who turned into another road, which led them to a wild heath, and from that to a remote folitary foreft. They continued in one track for fome miles, till it began to grow dark, when they defcended into a deep valley, at the bottom of which was a cottage that ftood by itfelf. The chaife then ftopped, and fignor Maferini and his filler alighted; they vvere obliged to help Clementina carefully out, who, fupported by each of their arms, walked * up to the retired dwelling, vvhich feemed to be the refidence of virtue 5 contentment, and happinefs.
CHAPTER V. ADVERSITY. " Daughter of Jove, relentleís pow V, Thou tamer of the human breaft, Whofe iron fcourge, and tottring hour, The bad affright, afilia the bed ! Bound in thy adamantine chain, The proud are taught to tafte of pain, And purple tyrants vainly groan, With pangs unfelt before,unpitied and alone.** GRAY. 'WHO would not relinquifli the gaudy pomp and fplendour of a court, the coftly robe, the fumptuous feaft, the deceitful courtie**, and all the pride of empty greatnefs, to fpend their few remaining days in fuch a cot as this? The happy pair, bleffed with each other's love, whofe health and ftrength permit them to earn their daily bread, and care for no one, might here enjoy repofe, ? 6 ??? ^
and, with comfort to themfeives and others, breathe out a life of piety and virtue." Such were the thoughts of fignor Maferini, as he aided to fup¬ port Clementina to the door of the cot¬ tage ; he knocked, and it was opened by a young man who feemed not yet to have attained his twentieth year. 44 Friend," faid the difguifed prieft, 44 admit under your hofpitable roof three travellers, who for one night beg a lodging, and will repay you to the utmoft of their power, with gratitude and prayers." The young fhepherd—for fuch his drefs denoted him to be—courteoufly invited them into a fmall clean room, it * " Where, on one fide of the fire, fat a man and woimn feemingly much ad¬ vanced in years, and on the other a beautiful young girl, who looked to be about
about eighteen ; they rofe, and feemed greatly furprifed at the entrance of the priefts : the old man inftantly ordered fupper for his reverend guefts, after afluring them they were fincerely wel¬ come. Signora Maferini placed 'Clemen¬ tina next to her, while her brother went to the poft-boy, whom he liberal¬ ly rewarded, told him to make the beft of his way home, and acquaint his mafter he had been with only one gen¬ tleman, quite a different road from that they had travelled ; he then re-entered the cottage vvith Edward, whofe horfe they turned loofe in a field behind it. Clementina, fince he had been out, had fainted, and was juft recovering. Amazement might be feen in each face of the cottagers ; that three priefts fliould ride in a chaife attended by a fervant,
* fervant, was ftrangê, as fuch fort of people ufually walked ; the effeminate beauty of two of them was remarkable ; and then one of them fainting, was aftoniftiing. Signora thought it would be better to inform them of their fitua¬ tion at once, and truft to their generofity in concealing them ; flie therefore gave her brothe» the hint, and called on one . fide the old woman, whom ffie acquaint¬ ed with the whole affair ; while he did the fame to the man ; they both greatly wondered in what manner they could efcape, but readily promifed their pro¬ teftion. Clementina all this time feemed to¬ tally infenfible of what vvas going for¬ ward, and, iri fliort, was in a ftate of ftupidity ; for ffie hardly gave any an¬ fwer to thofe queftions that w T ere put to her, nor could they perfuade her to take any nourishment ; flic was there¬ fore
fore undreffed and put into a warm bed ; neither the brother nor the fifter could partake of the homely fare that ^ was fet before them; but about eight o'clock fignor Maferini left the cot¬ tage with the young ffiepherd and Ed¬ ward, and walked to a fmall cot, that belonged to the father of the former, who was acquainted by his fon with the hiftory of the gentleman he had brought. There was one bed to fpare, which fignor Maferini took poffeffion of, and Edward flept with Cyril, which was the young man's name. La Faril, the old cottager, infifted on his daughter Sabina fitting up with Clementina, and begged fignora to re¬ tire to reft, as he was fure the fatigue fte muft have undergone muft make ileep very neceffary; fte took his ad¬ vice, and lay down in a fmall room 6 next
next to Clementina's. Both La Faril and his wife gave Sabina charge to be very careful of the young lady, and then they themfeives bowed under the influence of the drowfy god. Signor Maferini was at the cottage early the next morning; he eagerly inquired after Clementina's health, and was informed by Sabina, that ffie was very ill, and had been delirious the greater part of the night ; fiie was now afleep, but was fo difturbed, ffie feared it would not refreíh her; neither his fifter nor her mother was yet up, and her father was gone out.—He had not changed his drefs, but was ftill in the difguife of a prieft. He aíked Sabina, whether there was any medical man lived near; ffie faid there was one about three miles off, who always at¬ tended their family ; he aiked her for a direction,
direction, which flie gave him ; and not confidering the hazard he ran, he re¬ folved to go to him. It was hardly light when he fet off: he had not got above a mile, when he was accofted by a man who was croff- ing the fame field. " Father," faid he, ff there is fad news/' 44 What, my foni" replied fignor Ma- fenni. w Why/* returned he, " there are two young ladies gone off with a young man, who, they fay, is brother to one of them, from the convent of N**** ; and the other, who is daughter to fome marquis, has poifoned her fifter, for fte was found dead in the morning/* He
#
He then continued to give an ac¬ count how it was fuppofed they had efcaped ; and a man, whofe chaife was hired the fame night, had fomc thoughts it went a different road from that the poft-boy informed hiin* for, upon In¬ quiry, no fuch carriage had been feen in the places through which he faid he had paffed. He concluded with faying, he fuppofed the ftrifteft fearch would be made after them, and that he heard the news from a friend who had travelled poft ali night, and ar* rived at his cottage about fix that morning. It happened well that the man was fo pleafed with his own difcourfe, as not to take much notice of his hearer j for it Would not have required a very acute obferver to have feen his counte¬ nance change feveral times ; he wiffied much to return back directly ; but then his
his companion would certainly remark .ill he therefore thought it heft to con¬ tinue walking till he Couid pari with him without being noticed. Fortu¬ nately, an opportunity ofiered about half a mile further, when the man turned ihort into a lane, and wifted him a good morning. He ran back as faft as poffible, and found breakfaft quite ready; he told them the caufe of his precipitate return ; and they all al¬ lowed it was not unlikely but the cot-. tage might be fearched ; but their per¬ plexity and horror was ftill increafed, when he informed item of the fufpi¬ cions that had fallen on Clementina, concerning Felicia's death ; bul they all agreed by no means to inform her of any part of the adventure* There was now the greateft neceflity for thetn to be concealed ; for as there were no witneffes to contradict an affair which
■" which by appearances feemed probable, he was diftrafted to think, that if they were taken, Clementina might fuffer. the punifhment of a murderer : and in fuch cafes ftrift inquiries and fearch were made through France. In what manner to aft, they knew not; Clemen¬ tina was too ill to travel ; and if flie could, there was not a doubt but they would be overtaken ; the officers might be there in three or four hours' timeV and La Faril would run a great riik in concealing them. Edward had no change of drefs; he arrived at the cot¬ tage a little while* after his mafter in the morning; Cyril, the young ffiep~ 4ierd, who, they found, was to marry Sabina, had fet off early with his father on a ihort journey, and would not re* turn till night. Both of them had pro¬ mifed fecrecy, and begged fignor Ma¬ ferini and his fervant would fleep there as long as he thought proper. None of
çf them could think of any fcheme to prevent difcovery, till Sabina faid, * 4 Father, is there not at the bottom of the garden a cave which none knows of befides ourfelves ?" La Faril inftantly turned pale, and anfwered, " Yes, my dear : burtt, will, 1 am afraid, be too damp for the fick lady." ** Is it not poffible," faid fignor Ma¬ ferini, ** to have it warmed by fires ?" They all agreed it would. " Then, for heaven's fake, my friend," anfwered her brother, "let us begin about it directly.*' All hands were fet to work ; Edward ..made a fire in it immediately, and con- vcved
veyed feather-beds, provifions, chairs» a table, candles, a lamp, oil, tinder- box, matches, and every other utenfil that could any way make it comfort¬ able. Ihe cave extended a great way back under fome hills which rofe at the bottom of La Farils garden; the en¬ trance was entirely hidden from the eye by thick mofs. and ihrubs which grew round the bottom, of'the emi¬ nence;— it feemed to have been a re¬ treat at the time Henry the Fifth con¬ quered France.—The prefent poffeffor, who by chance difcovered it, had never difclofed the fecret to any but his own familv ; — for a fon of La Farils, who turned out exceedingly wild, but was fince dead, committed a robbery about ten miles from the cottage, and for fear of being taken, begged his father to conceal him in the cave, which was accordingly done; and the officers of juftice, though they fearched every part of
of the hòufe and garden, did not per¬ ceive the entrance of it. It was at the recollection of this circumftance that La Fari! turned pale when Sabina mentioned the cave; for it was very neceifary they fliould keep the know¬ ledge of it in their own bofoms, as he would be puniflied, if it was known, for fcreening his own fon from the rigour of the law. 4 About two o'clock in the afternoon, every thing was ready : but though great fires had been kept in it ever fince ten in the morning, it was yet damp ; they therefore thought it beft not to enter that night, but early the next day ; and then fignor Maferini could inftruft Cyril and his father in what manner to aft. — Edward was placed at a window on the top of the cottage, with a glafs, fo that he could perceive any one coming that way with¬ in
in a mile ; and that notice would be time enough for them to make their efcape to the garden : he was alfo to fit up all night in the cave to keep in a large fire, that it might be thoroughly aired by the morning. Clementina was better, and perfectly, fenfible and compofed ;—fignora ventur¬ ed to inform her of the affair relative to her brother's meeting the man in the morning, carefully concealing that part concerning the death ofher fifter. She was not fo much alarmed as might have been expefted, and feemed extremely happy in the contrivance of the cave. Since the fleep ffie had in the morning, though it was much difturbed, ftie had mended, and was now able to fit up for an hour to have her bed made. She ate a little fupper ; and in fliort, through the good attendance and management of her hofteíš, Clementina feemed per- 7 fectly
feftty recovered from thofe dangerous fymptoms of a fever which appeared the night before. At nine o'clock, fignor Maferini took his leave, and walked to the cottage of Cyril and his father ; he informed them of the whole affair concerning the cave, by permiffion of La Faril, vvho knew them to be too much his friends, to dif¬ eover it.- — Signor Maferini begged both of them, if any inquiry fliould be made after him, to declare they knew nothing of him ; he conjured them to lay the fame injunctions on a young girl who was a diftant relation to them, and kept their houfe ; all vvhich they promifed faithfully to perform. The place was fo exceedingly retired, that none of them had been feen, except by La Fa¬ ril, his wife, and daughter, Cyril, his father, the young girl, and the man be¬ fore mentioned ; nor was any ftranger Vol, I. D obfervect
obferved in that part, fometimes for three months together; and the only way they had of procuring provifion, was by going to a fmall town four miles diftant. Signor Maferini thanked both the father and fon for their hofpitaiity towards him, and after wifliing them a good night, retired to his bed. 4,
CHAPTER V. lHE dejected lover had now time to recolleft his fituation ; though his fa¬ ther was exceedingly fond of him, yet there was a haughty pride and obftina- cy in his difpofition, that made him tremble left he fliould difapprove of his proceedings : — it was true, he had fe¬ veral times told him that, with refpeft to his marrying, he fliould confider wealth as no objeft ; t but ufed always to lay a particular ftrefs on his confent being firft obtained; this laft circum¬ ftance he had never mentioned to Cle¬ mentina:— he alfo knew him to be whimfical and capricious, infomuch that it would not be unlikely, ffiould they ever be fo fortunate as to arrive in Italy, but he might refufe his confent Da to
to their nuptials, though not capable of alleging any reafon for his diflike. He therefore determined to perfuade Clementina to be married to him be¬ fore they made themfeives known to his father, whom they could eafily de¬ ceive by telling him the ceremony had not been performed ; if he approved of her as his daughter, it was all very well ; if, on the contrary, he rejefted her, it would be out of his power to part them, as flie would be his by the mofl facred tics on earth ; for, fliould the worft happen, and his father totally difcard hiin,—at thc death of a brother of his late mother's, no one could pre¬ vent his taking poffeffion of a very good fortune : and, till that period, which was not likely to be long, his uncle being a man much advanced in years, he could fupport himfelf and wife, by induftry and application to his pencil, which art he was a proficient in, though he
he only learnt it as an accompliffiment. But ftill the thoughts of their being difcovered again intruded on his mind, and he fhrunk with horror from the idea that Clementina might fuffer ân ignominious death : —fleep refufed its aid, and the reft of the night was fpent in melancholy reflections on the dan¬ gers 1 they had paffed, and difagree* able con jeft ures on thofe that might ftill be to come:—he rofe about fix, more fatigued than when he retired to reft, and took the advantage of the darknefs of the morning, to walk to the cottage; he found them all up, as they had determined to enter the cave before day-light. Clementina was con¬ fiderably better; fignora Maferini was in good fpirits, but they vvere damped by feeing her brother look fo ill :—(he, however, concealed her uneafinefs, for fear of alarming Clementma, vvho had alfo taken notice of it, l) 3 After
After a hafty breakfaft, they thought it full time to proceed to the garden ; it vvas a difagreeable morning, though not fo cold as might have been ex¬ pected for the time of year ; yet, there was a chilling dampnefs in the air, which made it far more uncomfortable tlian a fevere fro ft ; and a few fmall ftars, fcattered about tlie heavens, gave the heavy black clouds which encom- pafièd a large fpace, a more dreary ap¬ pearance.—It was juft beginning to grow light, when the melancholy par¬ ty came out from the cottage. La Fa¬ ril went firft: his thoughts were fixed on the fimilarity of the prefent fcene with that when he condufted his only fon to the fame gloomy habitation. The recollection of this circumftance drew a tear from his aged eye; for the good old man could not help paying that tribute to his memory, though be had
had fhed many on account of his vices and extravagancies. Signor Maferini walked after him; he was wholly taken up with the idea of their being difco¬ vered ; and when he looked on Clemen¬ tina, who refted on one arm while his fifter laid hold on the other, he almoft curfed himfelf for leading her into fo much danger. Clementina was diftreffed to fee him look fo ill, but feared nothing while flie was under his proteftion.— Signora had no misfortunes of her own ; to fee them happy, ffie thought would make her fo; and therefore her anxiety or happinefs was heightened or decreafed 4 according to the fituation of her bro¬ ther and her friend. — Sabina and hcr mother followed, with their hands and eyes lifted towards heaven, imploring bleffings on their vifitors, and praying that they might remain undifcovered. D 4 When
When they arrived at the cave, La Faril touched the fecret fpring, and the door flew open;-*-they were re¬ ceived by Edward, who had, as he was ordered, kept good fires all night, fo that the place felt perfeftly warm : their conductor then told them that Sabina fliould come every night after it was dark, to inform them if any thing particular had happened, and to be ufeful in any way that might ferve to make them comfortable :—itgnor 'Ma¬ ferini returned him a thoufand thanks for his kindnefs and· friendihip.—La-Fa- riI ani his family then took, their leave,. and the door clofed after tbem. Jhe cave, as was before mentioned, ran a great way back ;—it was divided; into thrçe regular apartments, which,. though narrow, were each of them long : — the firft they made their fitting room ; in the fecond fignor Maferini flept ;,
flept; andin the third, Clementina and his fifter. — Edward had a fmall bed placed for him clofe to the entrance, that he might be ready to give an alarm if he heard any noife that feemed to threaten danger.— They received no light but from candles or lamps :— this, added to the antique manner in which it was fitted up, and the hollow echo that fent back every found they uttered, gave the place a gloomy and melancholy appearance ;—but, difagree¬ able as it might feem, it was to them a comfortable retreat ¿—it might preferve them from their enemies; and with thai hope, any fituation would be acceptable, though, if poflible, ten times more difgufting than that they now poffeffed. Sabina arrived at the cave about ten o'clock at night, attended by Cyril;— they informed fignor Maferini that no D* 5 in*
inquiries had been made after them that day; but they had heard thc king's officers were within a few miles ofthe place; and there was not a doubt but they would remain there until the next morning. The young lof ers flop¬ ped about an hour, and then took their leave.
CHAPTER VL IT was near twelve o'clock when fi¬ gnor Maferini, who had been reading to Clementina and his fifter ever fince the departure of Cyril and Sabina, de¬ clared he was fatigued, and propofed going to reft ; they both readily con¬ fented, and had retired to their cham¬ ber about a quarter of an hour, when Edward ran into his mailer's room,· with the news that the officers were certainly arrived, for he had heard them talking clofe to the cave. Fortunately, he did not fpeak loud; and fignor Maferini, who was juft be¬ ginning to undrefs, defired hini not to difturb the ladies, and he himfelf would come to the door and liften to their D 6 con-
converfation. —They both proceeded h> the mouth of the cave; the wind was. high, and the noife which it occafion¬ ed among the trees, prevented them from hearing but now and then a few words^The firft peifon whofe voice they could diftinguifh, was. Cyril. — Signor Maferini was very glad he was there;*—he feemed to be talking tp * one of the officers-*— ** You fee," faid he, " there are no figps of a place where we could conceal any one, even if we had ever foch an inclination." 44 Hold—not fo faff, young man,'* anfwered a ftern voice :— 44 we ffiall fearch particularly this place ¿ for I re¬ member, fome years back, being here on the fame errand, after a young thief, who, though he was feen to en¬ ter this cottage, yet could not be founds
founds—he was, I believe, that ohi man's fon.'* « Äh !" exclaimed La Faril,—" call him not by that name ; he is now na more ; and thofe epithets are ill be¬ ftowed on one who has long fince been in his grave, and ? by this time partly turned to earth again." — Here î the old man burft into tears, and, as ihey foppofed, retired to the houfes for they heard him no more. The officers ftopped about half an hour, during, which time Cyril remain·- ed with them.— Signor Maferini won¬ dered at his having ftopped fo late, but looked on it as a fortunate circum¬ ftance, as La Faril was too weak and infirm to attend them ih a proper man¬ ner.—He was exceedingly glad to think that neither his fifter nor Ciemen- s|* tina had known any thing of the mat* ter>
ter, and pleafed himfelf with the thoughts how happy they would be, when he informed them the affair they moil dreaded was now over ; nor were his conjectures wrong ; for his intelli¬ gence gave them the greateft pleafure. The following night, Sabina arrived at the cave ;—ffie told them that when Cyril and herfelf entered the cottage from feeing them the night before, the father of the former had called to tell them the officers were within two miles of them ; he had heard it at a place where he had been in the after¬ noon ; they therefore thought it would be beft for Cyril to ftay all night, in cafe they fhould come at a late hour to furprife them. It was fortunate they took that precaution ; for about mid¬ night they were knocked up by the unwelcome vifitors.—Cyril let them in; and after their coming from the gar- i den,
den, they ftopped about a quarter ef an hour, and then departed. Their only fear was now to fix in what manner they ffiould proceed to Italy without difcovery; but at aH events they determined to remain in the cave, at leaft a month, that the af¬ fair might be in fome meafure forgotten ; and they could then confult what dif¬ guife would be the moft proper for them to travel in. They had refided in their habitation near a fortnight before La Fa¬ ril dared to make them a vifit ; but re¬ ceiving intelligence that the officers were certainly returned, he took the firft opportunity to fee them, and propofed they fliouid travel to Italy in the dif¬ guife of Savoyards, as he had drefles which wou ld fit them, and every thing proper for that charafter ; they having been made for a mafquerade. — His fcheme met with the greateft appro¬ bation,
bation, and they accordingly fct about carrying it into execution. In about three weeks every thing was prepared, and the morning fixed when they were once more to ven¬ ture forth in fearch of happinefs.— Sa¬ bina and her mother attended them very early, in order to affift in putting on the drefles. — La Faril arrived foon after; and at fix o*clock they thought it full time to fet off, as it would be ne¬ ceffary they ihould get fome diftance from the cottage before day-light.— La Faril made fignor Maferini per¬ feftly acquainted with the way acrofs the country : and, in cafe any queftions were aiked them by the villagers, they were to reply they were going to Italy, the place where fuch fort of people moftly refide. — Cyril alfo attended to take his leave.—The fpring of the cave was turned, and they once more breathed
breathed in open air ;—yet the thoughts of leaving the place which had pre¬ ferved them from their enemies, cre¬ ated a pang in their breafts, and par¬ ticularly fince they knew not how foon they might once more wiih to be confined within its clofe recefs. — Si¬ gnor Maferini clafped La Farils hand? and ftammered out his gratitude, ac¬ companied with tears, while the good old man, whofe filver hairs and aged form denoted thofe pearly drops which hung upon his withered check were not the firft foft emblems of his feeling heart, preffed him to his borom ;—then, almoft overcome with weaknefs and the effect of years, he nearly funk in¬ fenfible on the earth*—This was tor> much for fignor Maferini ; —he preffed his fifter and Clementina to haften their departure, and hurried away from the fpot to which he before feemed rooted. It
It was an exceedingly cold morning, and the twinkling bright ftars which illumined the heavens, plainly ffiowed it to be a fevere froft.—They got three railes from the cave before day-light, and continued travelling without any difagreeable circumftance happening on the road, except the curiofity of the peafants, whofe homely entertainment and good nature made ample amends for their ignorance. After fome days, they had the plea¬ fure to enter Italy.- Signor Maferini hired lodgings fome miles from his fa¬ ther's refidence, and entreated Clemen¬ tina to become his, before he made himfelf known to him.—She was very unwilling to confent; but at laft, over¬ come by the perfuafions of the brother and the fifter, he had the rapture to receive her as his own, about a fort¬ night after their arrival.—The only q difficulty
difficulty that now remained was to : make it known to his father, which be determined to do in about three or four days after their marriage, but firft wrote to La Faril. — In the letter he inclofed a confiderable prefent, and fent it by a friend who was going that way, as he was certain every method would be taken to intercept any letters direfted to him, as La Faril lay under the greateft fufpicion in point of con¬ cealing his fon, as well as fignor Ma¬ ferini. The day arrived on which he was lo pay a vifit to his father ; — he begged his fifter to ftay with Clementina, as fte would be in want of company, and was a ftranger to the place.—-He fet off early in the morning, and after fome hours' quick travelling, during which time his ideas were entirely taken up in thinking of his father, and in what manner ·
manner he fhould be received, he ar- rived at the large heavy gates of the abbey. — With a trembling hand he pulled the bell, but could not hear it ring.—After another attempt, he found tKe wire wasrufty; yet it made a noife. A thought ftruck him, which chilled him with horror—his father might be dead !—for he made himfeif known to no one fince his coming to Italy, but his friend who carried the letter to La Faril;. and he coirid ; give no intelli¬ gence concerning his friends, as he ar¬ rived the fáme night as fignor Maferini, from Spain, was taken ill, and did not go out till he proceeded on his journey to England, When he promifed to leaver the letter as he went through'France.
CHAPTER VIL iHIS idea had not croffed his mind five minutes, before a man and a boy approached him: — he aiked them if they could tell the reafon why that abbey was uninhabited? 44 Heaven blefs you, mafter!" faid the man :— 4C you muft furely be a ftranger in this part, if you have not heard of ihe old gentleman's death who lived here." Signor Maferini turned pale;—the f bridle dropped from his hand, andhe muft have fallen upon the ground; had he not been received in the arms of the . villager. " You
*' You are/ not well, fir," faid the man, as he placed him on a feat under the large heavy portico of the abbey.— « Lubin, run and get the gentleman fome water from yonder fpring." The boy obeyed, and brought fome in a pitcher which he had in his hand ; he was perfuaded to drink a fmall quantity, and foon recovered.—He in¬ formed the peafant he was a diftant re¬ lation of the late count, and was come upon a vifit to the abbey : — that the hearing fo fuddenly of his death had quite overcome him. " Ah, your honour," replied the man,—" there has been ftrange doings for thefe laft fix months ; heaven knows beft ;—but one cannot be hanged for thinking, as the faying is." • v ** Strange doings ! for heaven's fake, explain
explain yourfelf, friend," faid fignor Maferini:—" for I have the greateft reafon to be interefted in the affairs of the count/' u If you will ftep with me to my cot, fignor, I will relate to you the circumftances that have happened.— My wife expects me home to dinner, as I muft return, in lefs than an hour, to my labour in yonder vine- ' yard." He readily affented ; — and having walked a fmall diftance, they arrived at his habitation. — The horfe was turned into a field.—When they en¬ tered the cottage, a neat middle-aged woman was preparing dinner : they wiffied much their gueft would par¬ take of their homely fare; but he could not eat. — They had ,not re¬ fided in that part above fix months, therefore
therefore knew nothing of fignor Mar ferinls perfon ;---he conjured the man to begin his narration ; aiid the ho¬ neft hufbandman complied, as foi-* lows— 4.' ' 44 You, 'no doubt, fignor, were ac¬ quainted with young Percival Maferim, and his filter Sifera, the only children ©f thè late count;· twelve months have not yet pafféd, fince they both took leave of their father at that very abbey,. and travelled into France, on account of fome bufineís whictv required Per¬ civals attendance at court; as Louis XIV. had juft then afcended the throne. Sifera was to be s placed in the convent ! of N****i while her brother ftáídí which they fuppofed-would not te f above four months- 1 and then they were ' to retttrn together :—the count for fonie time received letters from themboth :* but thongh the f ????? ^whîch caufed^ g- their
t
GRASVILLE ABBEY. J$ their journey was finïflted át the ¿expi¬ ration of the four months, they did nofc by any means feem inclined to return to Italy; and in a little while after, their correfpondence dropped 5—for though letters were continually fent to them, no anfwers were received.
1 í
44 This gave the count great alarm» and he wrote to a principal perfon near the place, concÀning them ι m a little time he received information that his fon had run away with a young lady from the convent of N****, where he had placed his fitter ; that flie alfo had eloped with them, as well as the fer· vant who ftopped with Percival in Franco—he concluded with faying, the ftrifteft fearch was making after them, as it was fuppofed the young lady had poifoned her fifter, who was placed in the convent with her, had taken the white veil, and was found Vol. I. E dead
dead in her bed, the mornmg after their departure. í; t > ' ' **■ .* - 1 ; j ' „ „ ? f γ * ; 4 ?·;_ - ■ L _ ' , ; ·' This news, fignor, was like a thunderbolt to the old count:—he had not a doubt but they would be taken. From that day he drooped, and in about a week after was laid up with a violent fever. Count DOllifont, his nephew, was fent for."—Here Percival trem¬ bled : he knew DOllifont to be his enemy .—The man continued— f ' He at¬ tended his uncle with the greateft ten* dernefs, infomuch that he.. recovered enough to fit up for a few hours every day, and difpatched him to find fome intelligence of his children : he accord¬ ingly fet off for France, but returned at the end of the fecond; day, with a letter which he acquainted his uncle; was given him, on the road by a mef¬ fenger, fent from France for that pur¬ pofe; it came from a friend of his who refided
GA AS VI LL Ë τ Α ΒΒ E Y. J¿ refided there, and acquainted him that both fignor and fign ora Maferini were no more; that the former had fallen in a duel with an officer ofthe guards, who was going to fecure them ; and that the latter was feized with a violent grief, which turned her brain, and ffie liad found means to poifon herfelf, un- known to thofe who had the care of hen that lady Clementina was placed in the Baftille, till it was fettled what punifh¬ ment flie ihould fuffer ; but that flie was not married to fignor Maferini. This news caufed a relapfe in the old gen¬ tleman's diforder. Nor was it he alone who fuffered :—every domeftic of his houfehold, fignor, ihed tears for the lofs of two amiable children, who were never known to give a tender parent one pang of forrow, except in this cir¬ cumftance, and that coft them their lives." Ea « Would*
** Would it had !" repeated fignor Ma¬ ferini to himfelf.-** 44 That ever I ffiould huve lived to have feèn this dav !" The wom%n %ås too much employed ;in cooking her hufoand's dinner, and the huiband too much taken up in eat¬ ing it> and telling the ftory, to take any particular notice of him ; or elfe the in¬ ward workings of his foul might eafily have been obíèrved. The man con¬ tinued— ** The old -count now grew confidera¬ bly worfe; his phyficians gave him over, and in about a week after his relapfe, he died of a broken heart. When he heard of the death of his children, he altered his will ; the fervants were áll left mourning, and a genteel legacy ; old Abfalom, a comfortable allowance for life ; his tenants a twelve month's rent ; except which, and a few other lega-
legacies, he bequeathed the whole of his fortune to count DOllifont:-— among the eftates is Grafville Abbey* which has been ffiut up ever fince the death of count Maferini ; nor has any ot the furniture been removed* 44 How happened that, my friend V* « 1 bow not, your honour, but folkt fay ftrange things;—that there has been fold play, and that the place is haunted by the father and his children ; but it is known for certain, that count DOllifont intended to fleep there the night of his uncle's funeral, but could not reft : he ftarted up about midnight, left the place with his fervants direftly, and the next week returned to Spain, where he was fent for at the time his uncle was taken ill/' Signor Maferini inquired if he him- E 3 felf
felf had ever feen 'any thing at the ab^ bey to confirm the reports of its being haunted,.and how he came to be fo par¬ ticularly acquainted vvith thofe affairs relative to its late inhabitants. . ' · - ' > -i. t( Why, by old Abfalom the fteward, fignor," anfwered the man.— " He Kved juft by here, but did not long furvive hiš old mafter; and-as to feeing any thing, as your honour talks of, I cannot fay I ever did ; but Dorothy once faid ftc'fawia light one night pafs feveral of the cafemenis in the weft tower ; this Dorothy declared flie could take her oaih of." τ " Is there any way to get to the in¬ fide of the abbey ?" " None, fignor ; each of the gate& İs well locked, barred, and bolted ; and the windows are all faftened." After
After fome further converfation, thc man's dinner-time was expired. Signor Maferini rewarded him for his trouble, and then with a heavy heart mounted his horfe and departed«
CHAPTER VIII. > " Expectation flood in horror." M I LTOK. WHEN the iron rod of adverfity falls fuddenly upon us, and misfortunes of the moft diftreffing nature unexpectedly darken our future profpects, furprife for a little time gets the better of our feelings j amazement and horror gains fuch an afeendancy over our intellects, that, in the relation of our griefs, we forget for fome time the nature and caufe of them, while we liften with at¬ tention to the frivolous ftory of the cir¬ cumftances by which they were occa¬ fioned. è Signor Maferini was in this fiate, while tlie hufbandman related to him the
the account of his father» and the vil¬ lany of count D'OUifont. His afto¬ niíhment was fo greats that the death of the former, and the total lofs of his fortune, were entirely forgotten, and he thought only on the falfehood his coufin had propagated. He left the cottage ; his horfe took his own courfe for fome time ; nor did he perceive he was en¬ tering by degrees into a thick wood, tillförne trees obftrufted his way; he leaped from his horfe, and threw him¬ felf on the ground ; the thoughts of his fituation now flatbed on his me¬ mory, and the lofs of his father he re¬ gretted with the moft fincere grief. The impofition which had been put in practice to deprive him and his fitter of their fortunes, excited both his furprife and anger; in fliort, the different emo¬ tions he felt, almoft drove him to a ftate of diftraftion. E 5 In
In this fituation he remained for near two hours, till, handled through diftrefs and fatigue, he fell into a flumber— horrid dreams difturbed him, and his fleep'was both uneafy and difagreeable; yet he remained in this ftate of forget¬ fulnefs till it was nearly dark:—he ftarted up and mounted his horfe, which had not moved from his fide; he remembered he had promifed Cle¬ mentina and his fifter to be at home early in the evening: but that would now be impoffible, as the wood was in¬ tricate, nor was he acquainted with the way out : —he wandered about in fearch of the right path for near two hours, but was unfuccefsful, till chance led him to the direct track : — he follow¬ ed it, and in a little time found himfeif clear of the labyrinth.—,He was very ill, and hardly able to ride ; the cold had feized him by being fo long in the open air; he, however, continued a good
good pace till he once more found him¬ felf before the gates of Grafville Ab· bey. The night was very dark, the thun¬ der rolled at a diftance, and faint flafties of lightning followed one after ano¬ ther with confiderable quicknefs; he ftopped once more to look at the place where he had fpent fo many happy juvenile hours, and where he had that day hoped to have been received with cordiality and tendernefs.'—He had ex¬ perienced the reverfe ; he had found his father was no more, and that he had been duped out of his right by one who was allied to him by the ties of blood, and, as he had fuppofed, by thofe of friendfhip. A tear fell from his eye while he looked on the venerable ftrufture, E 6 every
every part of which feenied deferted ι a gloomy ftillnefs reigned through the heavy pile, nor was the folemn filence broke but by the bird of night, which had taken up its habitation under one part of the portico.—The idea of the place being haunted now entered his imagination. €t Would to heaven," faid he, " the report I have heard was true, that I might be permitted to converfe, nay only to fee the fpirit of my fire I furely he would —*—" Here he was interrupted by a ftrong flaffi of lightning, which darted right on his face, and was followed by a loud clap of thunder. Though he was ftruck filent, his eye was ftill fixed on the abbey; the noife of the thunder bad not died away above three minutes, before
before a violent craft was heard at tte other part of tte building ; it feemed like the falling of armour, and conti¬ nued for fome little time. Signor Maferini was ftruck with aftoniftment ; horror and expeftation feized him at the fame moment j—he turned his horfe round, and rode to the fide whence the noife feemed to proceed $ all again was filent, yet he ftill continued looking on the place.-*- «, It was by the weft tower,—he recol¬ lected the account he had heard of the light being feen there. — At the mo- ment he was thinking on this cir. omittance, a faint glimmering pafled a fmall cafement in the very part of the weft tower the woman had defcribed ; his fituation may be more eafily imagined than defcribed ; he was a perfeft ftatue with aftonifti¬ ment; ftill he thought it might be 7 fancy ;
fancy;—but he was thoroughly con¬ vinced, when a ftronger light ap¬ peared in the fame place a few mi¬ nutes afterwards, but difappeared in an inftant : — every nerve was ftiffen- ed with horror ; he ftill drew near¬ er that pari of the abbey;—five mi¬ nutes had not elapfed before the light again appeared in the fame place ; he now plainly perceived a , figure pafs, bearing a lamp ; it va¬ niihed as quick as the former light had done; and all agam was filent and dark. His paffions were now wrought up to the higheft pitch; he gallop- ed round to the front gates, alight- ed, and in vain attempted to enter the abbey ; — every entrance was ftrongly faftened; his brain was dif¬ ordered, and he ftill continued to force the doors; but, after a long time,
time, finding his exertions all in vain, he again mounted his horfe, and rode as fait as poffible towards his own home.
CHAPTER IX. •9 SIGNORA Maferini waited with im¬ patience the return of her brother ;— ffie wiffied much to hear of her father's health, and in what manner he received the account of Clementina :—nor was Clementina lefs anxious; her fpirits were depreffed, flie trembled for fear of ill news, yet the vivacity of her fif- ter-in-law fupported her tolerably well through the day. Night approached, and the time when fignor Maferini promifed to be at home was expired :— his father might have detained him, fe¬ veral circumftances might have hap¬ pened to make him later. With thefe thoughts they in fome meafure fatisfied ^emfelves till it grew late"; they were then exceedingly unhappy at not fee¬ ing
ing him :—the roads he had to come were often infefted by banditti. A little while after mid-night, a loud rap was heard at the door : — Edward flew to open it; neither Sifera nor Cle¬ mentina could aik who it was, before fignor Maferini ftood before them: — fak appearance for a moment ftruck them motionlefs with furprife ; nor was it to be wondered at-*~tfte diforder of his drefs, and the wildnefs which dart¬ ed from his eyes» made his figure alto¬ gether horrible. « How does my father P aíked fais fitter. « Weil/' he exclaimed ; *« but if yoti wifli to know, Sifera» afk the angels in team : they beft can tell thee.*' ** Alas !" fte cried, apd burft into tears,
tears: " my father is no more: I know it by thy looks,—by the ftrange anfwers you give to my queftions." <c You are right," faid he: "our fa¬ ther has paid the debt of nature/ 1 He feemed now rather more com¬ pofed ; yet complained of violent pains in his head and limbs. Signora Mafe¬ rini grieved much for the lofs of her father :—fhe could get no further intel¬ ligence from her brother's difcourfe* which was very incoherent and dijfficult to be underftood, but that hei father was no more, and that they were duped out of their right ; but by whom, and in what manner, fte could not poffibly find out. He talked much of an ap¬ pearance he had feen in the abbey; but they looked upon it as the effeft of a difordered brain. <r _______ The
The morning found them ftill more diftreffed. Signor Maferini was in a high fever, and quite delirious, his filler almoft diftrafted, and Clementina very little better; the former immedi- diately fent for a phyfician who lived near, and had always attended their family: —foe hoped from him to re¬ ceive fome intelligence concerning her father's affairs, which the fituation of her brother prevented him from com¬ municating. Edward was difpatched, and in a little time returned with the gentleman they fo much wifted to fee. He was a charafter univerfally ad¬ mired in Italy ; his abilities were equally exerted in behalf of the poor, and thofe in a higher fphere of life ; he was a friend to the indigent and diftreffed of every clafs ; yet looked upon with ad¬ miration and refpeft by all who were fo happy as to be known by him. Such was
4.
was the man who, with all the marks of aftoniíhment and furprife in his counte¬ nance, was conducted by Edward to fignora Maferini :—-he informed her that it was fuppofed by all who knew thera„ that both her and her brother had been dead fome time ; he álfo confirmed the news of her father's death ; flie would not, however, detain him to relate to her how fuch a report had been fpread, till he had firft feen her brother:—he had fome knowledge of the phyfician; yet every anfwer he gave to their quef¬ tions, proved him in a ftate of infanity. Clementina and Sifera anxioufly in¬ quired the gentleman's opinioni he told them he had a very violent fever, and fome very alarming fymptoms ; nor could he give any fatisfaftory anfwer concerning what might be the iffue of his diforders****he however affured them, he would do all in his power to forward his recovery. They
They both returned him their fincere thanks.—Sifera begged to know how the report concerning their death could be believed; and the particulars of her father's diffolution, as ilie fuppofed he attended hirn in his iilnefs. —He anfwered in the affirmative, and re^ lated to her exactly the fame train of circumftances which the hufbandman had before communicated to her bro¬ ther^—Clementina was in the room at the fame time he mentioned the ac- .^P-count of her having been fuppofed to poifon her fifter. Her fituation is more eafily to be conceived than defcribed : — that flie ffiould be fufpefted to murder a fifter whom flie fo dearly loved, and whofe death ilie fo much regretted,—the idea was almoft too horrid for hér to fup¬ port:—an iilnefs of fome days' follow¬ ed the fudden ftock ihe felt at the phy-
phyfician's recital; for though no proof could have been brought to confirm fo terrible a charge* yet fte fliuddered at the thought of the diftrefs and horror it would have occafioned'her.-—They now wondered not at Percivals iilnefs, and fuppofed his talking fo much a- bout the light and appearance in the abbeys was occafioned by the report of its being haunted. New difficulties now perplexed them; a week had elapfed, and no figns of amendment appeared in fignor Maferini's diforder ; yet all their money wás nearly exhaufted.—In this dilem¬ ma they refolved to apply to the phy¬ fician ; he immediately lent them as much as they defired :—and if at any time they ffiould vy an t more, he beg¬ ged they would fpeak, and he would with pleafure accommodate them. -c ln
In about a month, fignor Maferini began to alter for the better; he talked more rationally, and by degrees gained ftrength ; in fix weeks he was able to leave his room, and foon after, by the affiduity and judgment of the doftor, found himfelf nearly as well as ever.—- He returned the good man a thoufand thanks for his care and friendihip, and hoped it wouJd foon be in his power to repay him the fum he had lent them : he alfo begged him to contradict, as much as poffible, the fcandalous re¬ port his coufin had propagated, and make it known he now intended to live by thepraftice of his pencil.—The phyfician promifed to comply with his wiihes, and affured him he ffiould con¬ fider himfelf happy to ferve him in any refpeft. Signor Maferini paid a vifit to the old uncle, at whofe death he was to
to receive the fortune before men- tiöned ; — he was aftoniffied at the fight öf him, railed at count DOlli¬ font for his villany, and teftified tbe greateft joy at feeing his nephew. Percival now began to apply himfeif to his profeffion; he wás foon known, but received with coldnefs by thofe who once called themfeives his friends ; his abilities, however, gained him pa¬ trons, and his induftry preferved them; he was in a little time able to difcharge his debt to the phyfician, and found he could earn not onJy a comfortable but a genteel provifion. — He deter¬ mined, however, if poffible, to retrieve fome part of his father's fortune, yet refolved not to aft raffily, but proceed by a due courfe of law.—In the firft place, he wifted much to fee *he ii> fide of the abbey ; this took up a great deal of time; he was three months be¬ fore
fore, he could get a fanction to enter it j he had then to fend to Spain for the keys, as count D'Oilifofit had them in his poffeffion, nor would give them up without great trouble; in Íhort, it was near fix months before he could gratify his wiffies, of once more feeing the ih> * fide of Grafville Abbey.—The light and figure he had feen in thè Weit 'toWer, continually haunted his imagination; and though he was not by any means fuperftitious, yet many difagreeable ideas ferved to perplex him ; he, how¬ ever, never mentioned the·circumftance to any one fince the recovery of his rea¬ fon ; not even to his wife or filter ; as he naturally fuppofed it would prey upon their fpirits, and make them fear¬ ful of his fearching the abbey, vvhich he was determined to do aJone.— -Hav¬ ing got the keys, the day was fixed for his departure,—Clementina and Sifera wiflied much to accompany him; he Vol. I. F bested
begged them riot, as he knew it would hurt his fifter extremely, to enter the family manfion under their prefent cir- cumftances, and could give no pleafure to the former. He accordingly fet off, attended by Edward; they were de- tained a long time on the road by a vio¬ lent ftorm, and did not arrive at Graf- ville Abbey till it was dark·
*
ØfcASYlLXV A1IEY. ? 't ? CtïAPTER Χ. SIGNOR Maferini did not intend to enter the building that night; yet'cu?» riofity prompted him to take a view of the weft tower; he accordingly dif¬ mounted, and told Edward to hold his horfe at the front gates, while he walk¬ ed round the abbey.—Having arrived at that part where he had before feeñ the figure iand the light, he ftood fome time obferving the window, when a faint glimmering paffed a fmall cãfe- inent a little above it. He thought it might be fancy, yet in àbowt two minutes faw it again ; his refolution was now fixed ; he refolved to enter the abbey direftly : having returned to Ed¬ ward, ^without communicating his rea¬ fon, ihe ordered him to open the gates immediately. Fã The
? ? ^©0 GRASVILLE ABBEY. * * The poor fellow was aftoniffied, and naturally fuppofed his mafter's head was again affefted.-*^ For heaven's fake, fir," faid he, " do not attempt to enter fuch å dreary place at this time of night, and in the dark." ·« Your light, Edward," returned his mafter, u will ferve rne ; therefore open the gates without delay." ^ *· ·· . - "■ ■. ? The man reluftanfly produced the keys ; great exertion was required to turn the lock ; it, however, after fome little time, yielded to force, and they beheld themfeives in the large paved court.—Edward faftened thé horfes on the outfide; at the front doors they were again detained, on account of the failenings being rufty ; hut after a little trouble, they opened them, and difco* vered the large hall,or entrance of the abbey ;—it was fupported by columns of
of the ancient orders, and arched over in the Gothic ftyle; at the farther end were a * pair of heavy folding doors, which led to an extenfive fuite of apart¬ ments; on each fide was a flight sof¬ fione ftairs, which wound round to the different rooms on both fides of the building. \ Grafville Abbey was an ancient flruc- ture, and had, in former times, been ar. place of religious worihip; fome monks," at a time when Italy was involved in war, kept themfeives concealed in this place, on account of atrocious crimes they had committed againft the ftatey by keeping up a correfpondence with the enemies of their country; they were ail difcovered except one, who fe¬ creted himfelf in an obfcure part ofthe abbey, while his companions fuffered the moil fevere puniihment that could poffibly be inflifted on them.—Their -hF 3 only
only aim was now tor deftroy the fur -? vi ving one; they accordingly found means to mix a large quantity of poifon in fome food, which he had concealed, and which they obferved he partook of every day % the fcheme fucceeded, and; he fell a facrifice to their invention, for they found thé victuals after that time were never touched^ he died, however, in that part where he ufually refided, for his body was not difcovered till many years aften and the abbey from that time was called after his name. \ The late count Maferini's fatlier pur¬ chafed the eftate juft before his marriage, and had the whole of the internal part repaired ; from him it defcended to his fon, who refided in it the remainder of his life. Signor Maferini plainly per* ëeived nothing had been moved in the hall; as every article was in the fame order as if the place was inhabited^ and • his
bis father ftill the poffeffor of it ; but tbe appearance of the furniture plainly told it had been taken no care of for fome time. He began to afcend thofe ftairs which led to the weft tower· Edward followed: but his mafter, af¬ ter fome little time, fuddenly turned round, and defired he would wait be¬ low and take care of the horfes ; the man begged of him with tears, not to go alone.—Signor Maferini was pleafed with this mark of his fidelity, and ha¬ ftily replied,—* c 'However ftrange, Ed¬ ward, my conduft may appear to you at this time* believe me, I have the moft weighty reafons to juftify my be¬ haviour ; and, if I live to return, you ihall be acquainted with them." He then ran up the ftairs, and, ftrange as it may appear, was hever feen a* gain. F 4, Edward
^ 'í Edward 'ftood for fome time fixed with -amazement ; therd was a myftery in his words and looks, which plainly told all was; not^ right ;-*- he heard; him afcend the ftairs for fome time, till the found of his footfteps died avvay, and all was again filent:—he then walked flowly acròfs the court, and feated him¬ felf under the portico; the night was not by any means cold; he therefore chofe that place in preference to the infide of the abbey, ι he was near the horfes. — Sleep in a, ihort time over¬ powered him, and Jic.did-not wake till". two in the morning :— he thought it ftrange his mafter was not returned, but waited another hour with fome degree of impatience; at the expiration of it he was ferioufly alarmed ; yet to entes the abbey without a light, would be madnefs; he therefore refolved to defer it l till day-break. Edward
Edward had heard of the abbey's be¬ ing haunted, yet he always laughed at. the idea ; his natural courage and in¬ trepidity forbid his believing fuch fa- bulous reports:—^the only reafon he could allege for his mafter's ftay, was, that the wind might have blown out the lamp when he was at fome intri¬ cate part of the building ; and in that cafe it would have been impoffible for him to have found his way back, there being feveral fuites of apartments which were never inhabited in the count's lite- time, and which fignor Maferini might hardly ever have feen. f As foon as it was light he again croff¬ ed the court, and afcended thofe ftairs whicii his matter had done before ; lie followed the marks of his feet up a con¬ fiderable height, and then traced them through feveral rooms that led to the weft tower : — one of thefe, which was F 5 rather
rather larger than the others, Was~ ccf¿ vered with footfteps of different fizesj atid in one part of it lay the pifture o¿ CÍernentina, which fignor Maferini always wore next his heart; the rib¬ band to which it was tied feemed as if it had been torn by force,- and the boards were ftained with feveral fpots 2 of blood ; there was not in any other apartment the leaft mark of a foot, nor any figns of their having been opened. Edward was aftoniflied; he almoft · fuppofed himfelf in a dream; yet every objeft realifed the fcene; he knew not in what manner to act ; te ftop any longer in the abbey was of no ufe ; yet to* whom w^s he to apply f—He at length refolved to go immediately to the phy¬ fician, and relate to him the circum¬ ftance» as he would be the propereft perfon to advife with concerning thofe meafures they ought to take relative' to
to fignor Maferini's difappearance, as well as in what manner they ihould pro¬ ceed in communicating the news to his wife and fifter. Edward took up the pifture, and placed it carefully in his pocket ; he then defcended the ftair-cafe, and clofed the doors after him ; but determined to lock neither them nor*the outfide gates. Having placed his mafter's horfe in one of the fiables belonging to the abbey, and mounting his own, he departed with the utmoft fpeed towards the houfe of the phyfician.
CHAPTER XL EDWARD found himfelf at the end of his journey in a few hours.—Fortu¬ nately, the good man was at home, and heard his recital with the utmoft con¬ fternation and furprife ; he by no means approved of either the wife or fifter being informed of this dreadful news, till it,was more fully confirmed ; and having, from the fervants account, ob¬ tained two officers of the civil power to " thoroughly fearch the building, he re¬ folved to attend them himfelf; and they fet off in lefs than three hours after Ed¬ ward's arrival. The evening was advancing, when they beheld at fome diftance the lofty towers of the abbey ; they were there¬ fore
fore obliged to defer their intention till the next morning. Neither Clementina not Sifera ex¬ pected fignor Maferini's return till the evening following the day he left his lodgings.—Edward, therefore, inform¬ ed the phyfician they* would not be un¬ happy, though they ffiould receive no intelligence from them.—As.'foon asit was light, they entered the abbey, at¬ tended by a workman who was able to remove any kind of intricate wood¬ work which might tend to a difcovery r They firft examined all thofe apartments that led to the weft tower, ahd which, by the marks ofthe footfteps, feemed as if fignor Maferini had crofled them : they plainly perceived the fpots of blood, but could difeover no other mark or clue to their wiffies, in either of the rooms. They then fearched each part on' that fide ofthe building; but their dili¬ gence
gence proved unfuccefsful; in íhort, every recefs of the abbey was looked into with the moil feruti n ifin? atten- tion; -yet not the leaft fign could be difcovered that indicated a mortal to have been in the place, except the foot¬ fteps and the blood.—They were all at a lofs vvhat to fuppofe ; and about even¬ ing they finiihed their fearch, and left the abbey, more perplexed than when they entered it.— Edward took his ma¬ fter's horfe from the ftable, and ffiut the gates, but determined to leave them, as before, unlocked. , After a hafty meal, the phyfician, two officers, and Edvvard, fct off for the former's habitation : it was very late be¬ fore they arrived there ; the men were liberally rewarded for their trouble.— Edward then confulted, what method would be the røoft prudent, to inform the ladies of this mournful event ; the old
old gentleman undertook himfelf the difagreeable office of communicating it to them the next morning ; it was therefore agreed, that he fliould remaht athis houfe till the affair was over ■:*-* they then took leave for the night, the one grieved for the lofs of his young friend, whom he had loved and admired from his infencv ; the other for an ex- eel lent mafter, whom he had revered and ferved from his cradle* To deferibe the fituation of Clemen¬ tina and Sifera at the phyfician's recitai* though he related the dreadful circum¬ ftance by degrees, and with the utmoft caution, would boggar defcription; it will therefore be neceffary to draw a veil over this affecting fcene; and fuf¬ fice it to fey, their grief was little ftort of diftraftion.—The extraordinary man* ner of fignor Maferini's difappearance left room for the moft horrid fuppofi¬ tions,
tions, whilft the faint hope which the uncertainty of his diffolution infpired, ferved to make each cruel idea more terrible and lafting.— Clementina's fi¬ tuation was, if poffible, more dreadful lhan her filter's, as ffie was in a ftrange country, and fome time gone with child. The phyfician afted like afather tolhem both* and declared; whiie he lived they ffiould never want a friend. - Ä - V + ^ The wonderful event of fignor Mafe¬ rini's difappearance was foon fpread over thé country.—Grafville · Abbey was now become a place of rniich greater terror than before, a& thofe fuf¬ picions of its being haunted, feemed in all probability to be confirmed 5 none of the peafants would go near it after dark; in fliort, every inhabitant was furprifed and terrified. Six weeks 4 had not elapfed, before fignor
„ABBEY. fignor Maferini's uncle died ; the for¬ tune now devolved to his fifter ; a more lucky circumftance could not have hap¬ pened, as flie would have it in her pow* er to fupport Clementina and herfelf in a genteel and comfortable manner, without remaining under the leaft obli- gation to any one in point of pecuniary aid ; and the phyfician undertook to fet¬ tle thofe affairs relative to the old g$n~ tleman's death. 5 In a little time? every thing was com¬ pleted, and flie found herfelf in poffefs fion of not only a moderate, t but afflu¬ ent incpme.— Signora Maferini now de¬ termined to make the life of her fifter- in-law as agreeable as poffible; fte knew that Clementina wiffied much to return to her own country ; nor had Si- fera any defire to remain in Italy, where every object reminded her of her late mis-
misfortunes ; fte therefore refolved, af* ter Clementina was brought to bed, to confult if fome method could not be taken to clear her innocence in refpeft to Felicia's death, and a reconciliation brought about with the lady abbefs ; fo that they could, without impropriety, reTide totally in France. Clementina was delivered of twins, » boy and girl ; for fome time her life was defpaired of, although the judgment of the phyfician, and the tendernefs of Sifera, were equally exerted towards her recovery ; but in fix weeks, to the jx>y of both, flie fo far mended as to be pronounced out of danger. Signora Maferini now refolved to aik the doctor's opinion concerning their appearance in France.—He offered to go himfelf to the convent of N*** # > and»
and, if poffible, fettle with her lady¬ ftip thofe difagreeable circumftanee& that had caufed her difpleafure; Sifera returned him many thanks, and accepted his friendly affiftance ; they, however, refolved to let Clementina know nothing of it, till the bufinefs was finifhed ; an excufe was therefore made for his leaving Italy, and his jour¬ ney to France faid to be on account of family affairs, wbich he had to tranf¬ aft in that country.—He was fo fortu¬ nate as to return ia å very ftort tíme, with the agreeable intelligence, that Clementina's charafter was entirely, cleared, refpecting her fifter's death, and all their affairs fettled at the con¬ vent, in an amicable manner.«—This: gave Clementina as much pleafure as it was poffible for her to enjoy; every thing was ready in a few weeks ; the parting vvith the phyfician was affeft-
ing on both fides; to fpeak of their ob¬ ligations to him would, they knevv r , be the only way to make him repent of his goodnefs : — they were therefore necef- fitated to exprefs their gratitude in as few words as poffible. A houfe was prepared for them in a private part of Parist and every thing" made ready for their reception.—In this ftate they/lived for fome years, and enjoyed as much happinefs as the re¬ membrance of thofe misfortunes they had fuffered, would permit.—The chil- fr . * "dreh were their greateft care ; they ferved in fome degree to. difpel that me-, lancholy which had taken fo deep a root in their»bofoms fince fignor Maferi¬ ni's difappearance. ? · f Grafville Abbey remained in the fame condition, exeept the gradual and flow decay of the external parti it was» taken
taken no notice of by its owners whife fear and fuperftition prevented any in¬ terruption froni thofe who refided near it*— Count D' Ollifont continued but a fhort time in Spain after the keys were returned ; he made a tour to England, andras it.was fuppofed, intended to fettle there;. ^ ? T. - ? ? Aboujt twelve treårs elapfed, and no¬ thing particular happened to diftrefs fignora Maferini or her fifter-in-Iaw, ex¬ cept fhe death of the phyfician and Ed· ward ; when fhe former was taken ill with a violent fever, and lived but a week ; during that time foe was deliri¬ ous, but had before fettled her affairs in fuch a manner, as to leave Ciernen- tina the chief part of her fortune. Alfred and Matilda were now obliged to: exert their childifli abilities, to com- fort their mother for, the. lolsloí her S only
Š only friend; ffie had often made re¬ peated solicitations to be admitted to her father's favour; but the marquis was obftinate, and complained of her elope- "*" JIB nient from the convent, as an excufe ' for his cruelty.*—Her whole attention was, therefore, paid to her children ; and through a fond yet miftaken notion, flie impaired her income, by giving them an education far fuperior to any fituation in life ffie could ever hope to procure them ; they, however, reward¬ ed her love in the tendernefs of their conduft towards her, and the quicknefs of their capacity in receiving thofe m- ftruftions that were given them. * Alfred already ihowed a wiih for the army ; his mother determined not to check his inclinations, though flie dreaded the dangers he might be ex¬ pofed to : *— fite therefore purchafed à commiflìon for him, and he foon after \ ■ · · 7 departed
departed for Flanders, where the regi· anent was ftationed* Madame Maferini had never inforrø- «ed her children of the dreadful manneria which their father difappeared ; ffie con¬ fidered it might impreis their young minds with a horror which might caft a gloom over the brighter feenes of life $ they were therefore always taught to believe fignor Maferini was killed by a fall from his horfe, when hunting; nor was there any probability to fuppofe the reai caufe would ever be difcovered to them, as neither Clementina nor Si- fera had informed any one to the con¬ trary. About fix months after her fon's de^ parture, madame Maferini was taken ill ; for fome time it was thought only a flight diforder, but afterwards con¬ firmed to be dangerous.—The moft emi¬ nent
tient phyficians were procured ; but their exertions proved fruitlefs.—She now wiffied to communicate to her fon that which ffie had fo ftudioufly kept from him; ihe determined, however, not to relate it to Matilda, as the fur* prife and ftock would be too great for her ; this caufed madame Maferini to wiih fo much to fee Alfred, which was before mentioned ; he did not, however, arrive till her diffolution.
φ
CHAPTER XII. EMBARRASSMENT. -■■■ ..... m ....... Reafon, the power To guefs at right and wrong, the twinkling lamp Of wand'ring life, that winks and wakes by turns, Fooling the follower, betwixt Iliade and filming". Conghevk. " Fortitude ís one of the nobleft virtues appertaining to human nature, and ftamps upon thofe vvho poffefs it, an unfading luftre, whicii does honour to the name of man. He vvho labours under the lafli of adverfity, and bears up againft misfortunes with a pious re* fignation, muft be pleafing to the Su- * preme Being, while his conduft is univerfal iy admired by his fellow- creatures." Vol. I. Q This
This was Alfred's argument to his filler, as he tenderly conjured her to moderate her grief, and look upon him not only as a brother, but as a guardian and protector. They both had juft entered their twentieth year;—Alfred was in his per¬ fon handfome and manlv» — Matilda beautiful and delicate :—the former's difpofition was generous and noble, his temper rather impetuous ; yet he was always ready to forgive ; there was, hovvever, a kind of haughty pride in his character, which would fometimes caft a, fhade over his other virtues, Matilda was amiable in the higheft degree ; — to give a defcription of her qualifications would be needlefs, when we fay flie was every thing a fond and tender parent could with her to be.—It was not till juft before they retired to reft,
reit, that Matilda recollected the paper her mother had wrote on ; flie took it a from the efcritoire, and gave it to her brother, who wiflied to read it alone, and promifed to inform his filler of the contents the next morning.—As foon as he entered his chamber, he eagerly opened it, and read the almoft illegible words of his dying mother :
4C To Alfred Maserini. 44 Before I depart from this ftate of mortality, and am numbered with the dead, I would wifli to inform you, my dear fon, of a circumftance that lies heavy at my heart.— The pains of death encompafs me—yet, I will, if poffible, acquaint you, your father died not in that manner you were always taught to believe:—he entered Grafville Abbey with an intent to fearch the building, G ? and
and from that fatal period was never heard of more.—Heaven forgive me, if I judge wrongfully, or condemn the •innocent! but though I have never communicated my fufpicions to any one, yet I have the ftrongeft reafons to fuppofe the chief perfon concerned in this horrid affair was------" Madame Maferini had wrote fo far, when ffie dropped her pen, and expired. Alfred was almoft petrified with afto- niftiment and horror; the fatal name, fo near being known, was not yet reveal¬ ed : his mother's fenfes might at the time be deranged ; but this idea entire¬ ly vaniihed, when he confidered how much ffie had wiflied to fee him, on ac¬ count of relating a, circumftance ffie chofe to communicate to no other per¬ fon.—He refolved for the prefent to con¬ ceal this from his filler; flie had already fuf-
fuffered enough by her mother's death: to inform her therefore of the contents of the writing, would only occafion new forrow and diftrefs. The next morning, Matilda eagerly inquired the purport of her mother's letter:—ffie was fliocked to fee him look fo ill, but naturally fuppofed he had not refted well,—Alfred told her it was a memorandum, relative to her fortune, and other matters ; but flie ob¬ ferved in him an uncommon agitation the whole evening, yet forbore to in¬ quire further, though ffie was certain there was fome difagreeable fecret he did not chufe to divulge· Alfred gave orders for his mother's funeral, and had her handfomely inter¬ red.—He then confulted with his fifter in what manner ftie meant to proceed with w the fmall fum fte'was now pof- G 3 feffed
fefled of.—Madame Maferini had equal¬ ly divided her fortune between them, but always particularly recommended Matilda to her brother's care ; he there¬ fore generoufly determined to add half of his'to his fifters income, but firft wifhed to fettle her in fome genteel fi¬ tuation before he returned to his regi¬ ment. ■ '·■■■ P Alfred, after fome perfuafions, pro¬ mifed Matilda he would write to the marquis of * * **, their grandfather, to inform him of his daughter's death, and her fituation.—-She confidered, as lady Eleanor had been dead fome timé, and his hopes concerning her marriage en¬ tirely at an end, that he might receive her with fome degree of tendernefs, though he never would look upon their mother. The young foldier felt himfelf hurt to
to write a letter of fupplication to a man who had behaved fo inhumanly to his own daughter, and flightingly to himfelf and finer;—however, the idea of Matilda's welfare quenched thofe fparks of pride vvhich had before kin¬ dled in his bofom. 4 About a week after madame Maferi- ni's funeral, he fent the following letter* in which might be obferved a kind of inward difdain, not likely to move or gain upon the feelings of a man fo ut¬ terly void of fenfibility as the marquis. From Alfred Maseri nt, to the * Marquis of ** * *. " My Lord, " Impressed with the idea that natural propriety as well as common refpeft commands me to acquaint' you with the death of my mother, I have G 4 taken
taken the liberty to trouble your lord¬ fliip with a letter, under the fanftion of communicating that information: al¬ though the diffolution of a daughter .whom you have never feen, nor perhaps heard of for many years, may fignify but little to your lordfliip's feelings, and the knowledge of it appear frivolous and impertinent, when conveyed by the hand-writing of her fon. *' But, if poffible, my lord, a more forcible reafon urged me to intrude on your patience; it is to fupplicate a fmall fliare of that favour and proteftion for my fifter Matilda Maferini, which her mother was fo unfortunate as never to receive. —Your lordffiip mufl naturally fuppofe my ftation in life prevents me from affording her that attention' (b ne- ceffary at her prefent age and fituation; the fervice of my country will, in a very fliort time, call mê to Flanders; other- wife
wife I ffiould glory to make it known to your lordffiip and the world, that I could prove myfelf hér guardiaa aud. protector, without remaining under an obligation to either relations or friends· 44 Your lordffiip, except myfelf, is. the neareft relation ffie has; it is, there-, fore, from you ffie hopes to find that countenance vvhich will prevent her being looked on with contempt, and confequently, preferve her from temp¬ tations and infults; for, when parted from her brother, deferted by her other relations, and forfaken by thofe who in the time of profperity and affluence called themfeives her friends, your lord¬ fliip muft confider ffie will ftand a fit objeft of prey for wretches whofe whole life is dedicated to the feduction of virtue, and the ruin of female inno- * cence. —The idea, my lord, almoft drives me to madnefs -, yet a horrid G 5 thought
thought will fometimes intrude, that flie may, more through neceffity thari incli¬ nation, prove a difgrace to her family, and an everlafting curfe to my happinefs* Were fuch a fufpicion by any means. well grounded, or even if I had not the moft perfeft confidence in her virtue and honour, I ffiould blefs that hand which would ftrike her to4he heart, and enjoy the moment when I beheld her at ray feet a breathkfs corpfev 44 The annuity left her by her mo¬ ther, added to that part of ray income which I mean to make over to her, will fupport her in fuch a manner that ffie will be no difgrace to your lordffiip· I only wifli to obtain for her permiffion to refide with you ι her accompliih¬ ments, manners, and behaviour, are fuch as no nobleman need be afliamed of: and permit me to fay, my lord, her natural goodnefs of heart, and gratitude for
for your protection, will make her a comfort to your declining years. 44 I hope your lordihip will take the purport of this letter into confideration; and that your lordfliip's opinion may coincide with the fupplication I have made for my fifter, is the fincere wiíh of 44 My lord, 44 Your lordfliip's obedient nephew, 44 Alfred Maserini '* « Faris." This letter was difpatched as foon as. poflible, and the meffenger ordered to· wait for an anfwer. He returned the next day, and delivered Alfred a fmall packet fealed up.—Matilda's heart beat , high with expeftation; fhe eagerly watched her brother's looks while he read a few words, which were written
on the outfide paper; but foon obferved by his countenance there was nothing be hoped for from the marquis.—She faint¬ ly aiked what were the contents.— "Short and explicit!" he anfwered, while pride and contempt were vifible in his features. — " Read (faid he), and judge of it yourfelf, Matilda." — He threw it on the table ; flie, trembling, took it up, and read the following words: 44 To Alfred Maserini. f< The marquis detefted your mo- ther; —he has alfo the fame hatred againft her children ; your childifli and romantic petition was read ;—the vio¬ lent paffion it caufed in him, has brought on a fever : — his orders were, that this note fliould be written and fent to you by " Father Laurence." 44 But
44 But what letter was that," afked Matilda, " which was inclofed in this paper?" Alfred ihowed it her; it was his own letter returned ; they had heard that a prieft was the conftant companion of the marquis ; and that it was fuppofed he vould ftand a chance for fome part of ids patron's wealth ; but the meflènger informed them that father Laurence En¬ tirely lived at the caftle, and that tbe marquis had been heard to fay, feveral times, he ffiould leave him the whole of his fortune. The only perfon they now had to ap* ply to, was a gentleman in England, a diilant relation of their mother's: he had been fent over to this country by an uncle, on affairs relative to the family- The old gentleman diedwhile he was in London, and left him a fmall fortune : after
after this event, he determined to fettle in the city, and commenced bufinefs in the liquor trade:—he firft kept wine- vaults, from that rofe a ftep higher, and was called a wine-merchant : in this line he accumulated a confiderable deal of money by importing foreign goods to this country.—To add to his good fortune he one year received a prize of ten thoufand pounds from the lottery ; and in about two years after married an heirefs whofe fortune amounted to three times that fum. The friends of the lady were at firft fo difpleafed with the union, that for fome months no notice was taken of her; but time foon brought about a reconciliati6*n ; — they determined to make the beft of her hufband, that he might not in his prefent fituation in life - difgrace their name and family; bis wife was a woman of fafliion, and had
had to her name the additional title of lady ; they therefore found means ta * get their new relation knighted; and he now was diftmguilhed by the appella¬ tion of' fir Peter Peviquil. His brother- in-law died about two years after their „ marriage, and having no family, left his fifter an income of fix hundred a year; they now thought proper to quit bufinefs entirely, and refide at the court end of the town ; their manner of living was, according to lady Peviquils wiihes, in the firft ftyle and tafte : they were noted for giving the moft fuperb and elegant entertainments of any irt London; in ftort, fir Peter and lady , Peviquil were allowed to be the firft: fafliionable coupfe in the great metro¬ polis*
CHAPTER XIII. MADAME Maferini had received re¬ peated foiicitations from her relation, to vifit him in London ; ilie, accord¬ ingly, a few months after Sifera's death, determined to fee England, confidering it might difpel the melancholy that event had occafioned her:—the chil¬ dren ffie committed to the care of a faithful fervant, during her ftay, which was about two months. Mr. Peviquil had not then quitted bufinefs: flie re¬ ceived the moil polite and friendly at¬ tention both from him and his lady, and refided totally at their houfe while ffie remained in this country. She always fmce that time had fpoken of them to Alfred and Matilda, as people well worthy
worthy their efteem, and had often re gretted their living fo far diftant as to make their fociety impoffible. Since his mother's death, Alfred had received a letter of condolence from fir Peter, who had accidentally heard the news from a friend ; this letter contain¬ ed, a kind and preffing invitation for them to fpend a few months in England; which offer they were now refolved to accept, provided Alfred could obtain leave of abfence long enough, and per¬ miffion to quit his country. This, through intereft, he accomplifhed, on condition he ffiould be ready to return at a ihort notice. Matilda, little ufed to the gaiety of the world, though flie had nearly all her life refided in a city renowned for its luxury and diflipation, confidered that if ihe was pleafed with fir Peter's family,
familj% by paying a fmall gratuity íhe could refide with them without any in¬ convenience.—This was, in fome degree,. Alfred's opinion ; but he was much bet¬ ter acquainted with mankind, arid the dangers that attended a fafhionabie life, to view this fcheme in fo pleafing a light as his fifter.—He well knew the diffipated life of intrigue, and other vices, fo clofely followed by moft of the Engliffi circles; he haé been.neceifi¬ tatcd, in fome refpects, to partake of thofe follies in Paris, which he knew were daily practifed în London; and his foul fickened at the thought of leaving Matilda expofed to fuch dangers, friendlefs and unprotected.—Poffeffed of that nice fenfe of honour which is fuppofed to conftitute the foldier and the gentleman, it in fome refpect ferved to make his life uncomfortable,—Ge¬ nerous to a great degree, he was never fo bappy as when he could make others f ? -,
fo ; but a haughty and itubborn pride hurt him when he received an obliga¬ tion.—Ready to take an affront, and as ready to refent it, he was fometimes difagreeable company; yet his perfon, behaviour, and charafter, procured him admittance to the firft parties. Matilda was totally unacquainted with the vices of the great ; her mother had only kept up the fociety of a few friends fince her return to France; yet her manners were elegant without af¬ feftation ; - her deportment graceful, yet eafy, and her accompliihments by no means inferior ?? the firft ranks of life.—Yet her ideas of the world in general were entirely ill founded ; ffie judged of others by herfelf, and had fo little notion of the villany of mankind, as to be eafily deceived by any one un¬ der the maík of flattery and diflimula- tion. Afte$
After fome perfuafions of his fifter, Alfred determined to anfwer fir Peter's letter, with an acceptance of his kind invitation ; the fame day month was fixed for their departure, and that pe¬ riod of time filled up with neceffary pre¬ parations for their journey. Matilda was all expeftation, yet a deep melancholy ftill clouded her future profpefts ; the lofs of her mother prey¬ ed much on her fpirits; and while hcr eye beamed pleafure at the idea of fee¬ ing London and gay life, a watery gem would oft intrude, and dim its luftre, when ffie confidered the diftance flie ihould be from the tomb of a parent whom ffie had fo dearly loved, and whofe memory fhe fo much revered. Alfred was filent and thoughtful; his fpirits were fled; the contents of the paper written by his mother ferved to perplex and diftrefs him, while his anxiety
anxiety for the welfare of his fifter con¬ tinually preyed upon his mind. As the time drew nearer for their leaving Paris, he became lefs pleafed with the plan on which they were going to proceed ; he had always heard his mother fpeak highly of the family; but their fituation in life at that time was entirely differ¬ ent from the prefent—Though in a ca¬ pital line of bufinefs, they .neither were confidered, nor looked upon themfeives, as people of fafliion ; their manner of living, as he now underftood, was one continual fcene of gaiety and diffipa¬ tion. Thofe reports might be falfe; and on their being fo, he entirely placed his hopes refpecting Matilda's making one of their family. Sir Peter's letter was extremely friendly ; to have refufed what he fo earneftly requefted, would not only 9 have
- have been impolite behaviour, but would, without doubt, have offended him.— This mode of reafoning, in fome degree, leffened his difquietude ; yet he refolved within himfelf not to leave his fifter in England, without being certain her fi¬ tuation was ftriftly accordant both with propriety and honour. The day of their departure at length arrived. — Matilda, as they paffed through the gates of the city, bid a me¬ lancholy adieu to her native country.— The recollection of thofe happy juvenile hours ffie had enjoyed with a parent whofe tendernefs and maternal fond¬ nefs ffie never more could experience, added to her ideas of the friendlefs fi¬ tuation and unprotefted condition flie would be left in when parted from her brother; entirely overcame that forti¬ tude flie had fliewn at the beginning of their
*
their journey; and, almoft convulfed with grief, flie burft into an agony of tears. Alfred raifed his head from a rêverie which he had been in from their firft fetting off; he conjured his fifter to be compofed, and once more tenderly af¬ fured her of his proteftion.—A poft carriage conveyed them from Paris to Calais ; an elderly man attended them, who had lived in the capacity of a fer¬ vant with their mother, fince the death of Edward ; he was by birth an Engliffi- nian, though he chiefly bad refided in France. Thev were neceffitated to wait fome time for the packet-boat ; Matilda, therefore, who was much indifpofed, retired to take a few hours' reft, while Alfred looked over fome papers of his mother's, which were in a fmall trunk. 6 Matilda
Matilda had not yet examined it, fuppofing it to be full of wafte papefs, which were of no confequence ; ffie only brought it with her to hold a few arti¬ cles pf drefs when ilie arrived in Lon¬ don. After having removed a few of the upper papers, he difcovered a minia¬ ture of his mother; it was the fame which Edward found in the abbey, and had the identical piece of ribband hanging to the ring, the remaining part of which had feemingly been broken by force, or by a, fudden fliock.—Al¬ fred iooked on the refemblance with at¬ tention ; he contemplated the features of his departed mother, with a melan¬ choly pleafure, and fighed at the idea that he never more fliould look on the original.—Clofe to it was the pifture of his father.—Alfred had always been told he was extremely like him, and for
? for the firft time thought fo himfelf.— Both he and his lifter had often feen the miniatures before their mother's iilnefs, and after her death every place was fearched for them, but to no purpofe; nor had they the leaft idea of their bé¬ ng placed in this trunks Alfred carefully looked over the pa* pers, and found none of them worth no* tice, till he had nearly emptied them all out upon the table, when a ¿roll of parchment, with the name of Sifera Maferini at the bottom, ftruck his eye. He immediately perufed it, and found it was written by his aunt, about fix months before her death .—It contained an account of their misfortunes, from his father's firft feeing his mother at the convent, till their return to France, and every minute particular relative to fi* gnor Maferini's entrance of Grafville Abbey, and his difappearance.—She Vol. I. H alfo
I46 GRASVILLE ABBEY. alfo at one part feemed to fufpect his coufin, count p'OHifont, to be privy to the affair, though he was then in Spain. Alfred's emotion and aftoniftiment were paft defcription; he burnt with ea¬ ger defire to fee the infide ofthe abbey; but that would now be impoffible, till he fliould return to France.—He knew not how to revenge the lofs of his fa¬ ther, as no proof could be brought to charge any one vvith the guilt;—yet, ac¬ cording to vvhat he had read, he could not avoid fuppofing that the count was concerned : nor was there a doubt but his mother alfo intended to have written the fame name. He carefully placed the manufcript in a private drawer of his own, and de¬ termined not to inform his fifter of the event, as her fpirits were already agi¬ tated
rated enough, without any new fource for horror or diftrefs. When ffie rofe, he agreeably fur¬ prifed her by the difcovery of the pic¬ tures, and informed her he had looked over the papers in the trunk, and could find none but frivolous fragments of no ufe or confequence. They vvere obliged to remain at the place till the beginning of the next day; they then croffed over to Dover, and flept there that night»—Matilda was yet much indifpofed, partly occa¬ fioned by fca-ficknefs.—The next even¬ ing, after a fatiguing day of poft tra¬ velling, they found themfeives at a prin¬ cipal inn at London.
CHAPTER XIV. Would you rekindle all your ancient fires? Extinguiili firil your modern vain defires: Still it is yours, your glories to retrieve ; Lop but the branches, and the tree fiiall live í With thefe erect a pile forfacrifice ; And in the midft throw all vour cards and dice! WHEN the foul is totally abforbed in melancholy reflections on paft misfor¬ tunes, we are too apt to encourage oppreflive ideas, by taking a retrofpect of the calamities that may* attend fu- turity. Thefe ideas fink our fpirits under new horrors „and diftrefs ; imagination pre¬ fents to the fancy troubles and forrovvs vve are never likely to experience. To
To be too confident of our fuccefs and abilities at the firft out-fet in life, naturally leads to extravagance and neglect ; we are difappointed at our ambition not being gratified fo early as we expected, and confequently ficken of that employment which occafions our mortification and chagrin.—Yet dif¬ fidence and timidi tv are far worfe com- panions to ftruggle with through the rugged path of life : vve continually fttmible on dangers and vexations in our hazardous voyage ; while they chiefly contribute to multiply adverfity, and paint the events that may fucceed, worfe than thofe we have already fuf¬ fered. Fortitude forfakes the breaft which is governed by terror and felf-intereft ; happinefs i v s no more, the fun-fliinc of hope is eclipfed by the heavy cloud of defpair, and vve fink into that mifery, II 3 which,
which, through courage and exertion, vve might have overcome vvith honour and refpect. Matilda did not totally defpair: and Alfred, by converfations of this nature, ftrove to difpel that melancholy which was fettled on her features durino: the latter part of their journey. — It was entirely through her perfuafion that her brother undertook the aftair ; flie was now forry flie had biaffed his opinion ; for flie even regretted leaving Paris; and the nearer ffie arrived to London, hcr pleafure in feeing it gradually de¬ creafed. Reflection had in a great degree lef¬ fened thofe expectations flie fuppofed would be gratified vvhen ffie entered this citv : and the romantic ideas flie had formed of remaining with fir Peter's family in England,.feemed now to have many
many obftacles vvhich ffie never before thought of. It was about fix o'clock,- in a wet uncomfortable evening of February, vvhen thev arrived at the inn.—After fome little time, the chief part of their baggage was put into a hackney coach, and Leonard, vvho was tolerably well acquainted vvith London, difpatched in it to Grofvenor-fquare, vvith a polite meffage, faying his mafter and mifs Maferini would pay their refpefts in perfon, in lefs than two hours. Alfred and Matilda, having ordered coffee, remained till near eight; dur¬ ing which time they made fome little alteration in their drefs. — They then ftept into a hack, and ordered it alfo to drive to fir Peter Peviquils in Grof¬ venor-fquare. H 4 Neither
Neither of them was under any em¬ barraifment concerning the Englifli language, as they both had been ufed to converfe in it from their childhood, and pronounced it nearly as well as their own language. On their arrival at the place to vvhich they had ordered the coachman to drive, the fquare was full of carriages ; nor did they obferve more than one hack¬ ney-coach in the whole train: — they flopped clofe to it, unable to proceed any farther for the crowd. ~ Alfred looked out to fee if there was any proba¬ bility of their getting nearer to fir Pe¬ ter's houfe, which he was informed was on the oppofite fide of the fauare ; when, to his inexpreffible furprife, by the light of a. footman's flambeau, who paffed at the fame time, he be^ held Leonard m the coach he bad be¬ fore
fore ncticed, feated with the baggage in the fame ftate as when he fet out from the inn. The man at the fame moment recog¬ nifed his mafter, and acquainted him that he found, from his firft entrance in the fquare, it would be impoffible for him to get to the door of fir Peter's houfe, there being a grand entertain¬ ment there in honour of his daughter's birth-day; and that the gentlemen's carriages would not permit a common hack to draw up : — he was, therefore, afraid to go himfelf in fearch of it, on account of the baggage he muft have left behind ; but he faid he had fent fe· veral meffages tb the fervants concern¬ ing his fituation, but that 'he had re¬ ceived no anfwer. Alfred was vexed, yet he could not help fmiling at the fellow's recital: they H 5 were
were now in a line of carriages leading to the houfe: he knew it would be? fome time before they could arrive* there; yet to walk would be almoft im¬ ponible, on account of his fifter, as- the- rain poured down with uncommon vio*^ lence.'—They therefore determined to, wait till the coach, in due courfe,, ffiould draw up to the door ; in about twenty minutes thay found themfeives. before the entrance, of fir Peter's: man* fion.. The coachman, by Alfred's order, knocked a fingle rap : — a footman in* a handfome livery appeared ; he aiked, in a furly manner, what was wanted I the man anfwered, a gentleman in a hackney coach wanted to fee fir Pe¬ ter Peviquil. The footman replied vvith fome info¬ lence, " His mafter could not then be r fpoke
fpoke with," and immediately ffiut thc door. Alfred's pride (who overheard this converfation), took fire;—he direftly gave the coachman a card, and ordered him to knock a double rap at the door, and defire the fervant to deliver it to fir Peter. The man at firft hefitated, but at laft complied with the requeft.—In a ftort time he returned with a polite meffage from fir Peter, requefting they would make his houfe their home; and that he himfelf would, if poflible, welcome them to England in lefs than an hour· The fervant was now all civility ; both the coaches were difcharged, and Leo¬ nard faw the baggage fafe in the houfe, while Alfred and Matilda were con¬ ti ? dufted
dufted by fir Peter'* valet, through m noble hall, elegantly adorned with lamps, and lined with fervants in wait¬ ing, to a handfome parlour. — The houfe feemed in total confufion; and the number of fafliionable company and no¬ bility that was there, was evident from their names being announced, as they afcended the great flairs leading to the: rooms of reception. Sir Peter's genteel conduft in fome degree compenfeted for the* imperti¬ nence of his porter* and baniihed that anger from Alfred's bofom,, which the infolence of the latter had occafioned.. In about two hours the gentleman him¬ felf appeared: he tenderly embraced them both, and expreffed, with the mofl pleafing affability,, his happinefs in< feeing them in London: he regretted (he faid) thc etiquette which prevent¬ ed
ed lady Peviquil arid his daughter from feàving the rooms above; to perform the duties of hofpitaiity and polite¬ nefs ; but that he was fure they would impatiently wait for the break¬ faft hour in the morning, to be in¬ troduced to their amiable relations» He, however, begged they would make themfeives happy ; order fup¬ per, and retire to, reft at what time they thought proper, as chambers were prepared for them, and alfo proper ac¬ commodation for* their fervant. —He then took his leave for the reft of the evening, and left the young travellers highly delighted with his courteous be¬ haviour. They made but a fhort repaft, thouglv the table was fpread with dainties ele¬ gantly ferved up; about twelve they defired to be condufted to their differ¬ ent
ent apartments ; but the noife of the houfe, and their own refleftions, pre¬ vented either of them from enjoying re* pofe.
t
%
CHAPTER XV. 1 HE noife and confufion in the honfe did not feem over before four in the: morning ; — Matilda heard the doors faftened half an hour after ; — and a- bout ñve, filence-reigned through every part. She once more ftrove ta drive away- na comfort able reflections, and fell into a difturbed flumber : diftreffing dreams, haraffed her imagination with horrid vifions ; the figure of her mother was conftantly before her eyes, reproaching. her for entering a houfe remarkable for gaiety and diffipation.. She awoke about ten, but little re¬ frefhed,
freihed, and hurried up for fear of de¬ taining the breakfaft-table; but to her great furprife, as fte defcended the ftair-cafe, a fervant was but juft open¬ ing the windows.. She inquired at what hour the family affembled in the break- fail parlour; the man anfwered, gene¬ rally at half paft eleven, fometimes twelve. Alfred had been up near an hourv and was equally aftoniihed with his fifter,.at the fervants intelligence : — he propofed a walk round the fquare, till. the fitting-rooms were in order ; which fte gladly accepted. Matilda feized the opportunity to< · aik her brother, confidering the little they had feen, how he liked their fitua-^ tion ; — and alfo his opinion of fit Peter. Alfred
Alfred replied, from the fhort time he had been in company of fir Peter Pe- viquil, he feemed to be a man who would intereft any one in his favour, even at a firft interview^ 44 But, Matilda," faid he, " we muft not depend too much on the fmooth, well-timed fpeeches of a man of fafliion : for though both he and the family in general were friendly and agreeable in every refpeft, yet their manner of living would kill you.—Leo¬ nard informed me laft night, that he had learnt from the fervants, the family hardly ever retired to reft before three or four in the morning ; — that they were never without company wben at home, and that their rooms are filled with the firft people of diftinction and fafliion. —* Even if their diffipation did not affect your health, you certainly mult confider bow improper a fituation this. i í ì ί
this is, for a young woman whofe for¬ tune is barely competent, to· fupport her. ¿t'* Matilda acquiefced with his obferva¬ tion, yet was hurt at the idea of her own infignificance. In about an hour they returned to the houfe ; — prepara t ions were made for breakfaft, but tbe family had not affembled. Sir Peter, in a ihort time; entered the room, and introduced his lady, daughter, and fon. Lady Peviquil was, in perfon, tall and elegant, her deportment was grace¬ ful, and in her manner ffie was the woman of faihion ; — yet a haughty pride in her difpofition was vifible, even to a common beholder, at firil fight ; and
and caft a deep iliade over thofe ??* compi iffirnents which fliowed her a lady of rank.—Mifs Peviquil had the day before entered her nineteenth year ; ffie was tall, genteel, lively, and good. V tempered ; in the ornamental part of education ffie was accompliihed, but, like her mother, a total ftranger to do¬ meftic duties. — in converfation, flie was gay and witty, and accounted, by the connoiffeurs of fafliionable manners, a tolerably fmart pretty girl. Henry Peviquil was one-and-twenty; entirely free from pride, handfome in his perfon, and pleafing in his beha¬ viour and addrefs; extremely diffipated, and fond of being thought fo. He had received the education of a gentleman, and was left a fortune of fix hundred a year by an uncle of his mother's.—He was ffiortly expefted to fct
fet out on the grand tour, and only waited till a proper companion could be obtained. The young travellers were treated in. the moft friendly manner by fir Peter.— Lady Peviquil, her daughter, and Ma¬ tildat took an airing in the coach; while Henry drove his new friend round Hyde Park in liis curricle» Cards were delivered out to form a * feleft party of friends in the evening, who were to be introduced to the young foreigners. At their return, they dreffed for din¬ ner, which was ferved up by candle* fight.—»The feleft party at night con¬ fifted of about thirty perfons pf faftiion and diftinftion.-**The formal introduc¬ tion to them all by her ladyfhip, was tøjcefume and difagreeable to Matilda ; yet
yet ffie returned the compliments of each individual with a grace which did honour even to the drawing-room of fir Peter PeviquiL Alfred had been ufed to the gaieties of Paris, and being as well verfed as his fifter in the Engliffi language, found himfelf under no embarraifment in a London company. The next day he declared his inten¬ tion of taking lodgings for himfelf and fervant; this was ftrongly oppofed by fir Peter ; but he per tiffed in his refolu¬ tion, and begged the affiftance of Mr. Peviquil in the undertaking,—-Henry with his ufual good-nature, eagerly complied with the requeft, and declared, he knew of handfome apartments that were to be let in Bond-ftreet ; which was no great diftance from Grofvenor- fquare, and made it the more agreeable, as
as fir Peter requefted he would fpend as much of his time as poffible with him and his family» The gentlemen viewed the rooms that moraing» while the ladies attended a mufiotneetmg. - Alfred approved much of their fituation and convenience; he immediately engaged them, and was to take poffeffion the next day. Henry Peviquil was engaged for the beginning of the evening, and fir Peter rather indifpofed with a cold; it was therefore agreed that Alfred ihould efcort her ladyfhip, his fifter, and mifs Peviquil to the theatre ; and a ftage-box was accordingly relamed for them. Matilda was delighted with the tra¬ gedy, which was Hamlet:-—although her knowledge of the language would not
τ not permit her to underftand every fen¬ tence, yet flie could perfeftly make out the plot and management ofthe piece j and was charmed with the ingenuity of the author.-r?Her iadyfhip paid more attention to the company than to the ftage ; while her daughter was entirely taken up in obferving Alfred, whofe attention was fixed on a lady in the op¬ pofite box.—Her figure and manner charmed him ; in fliort, the latter part of the evening he quite neglected the performance, in the notice he took of the fair incognita. At the clofe of the entertainment, Alfred inquired of lady Peviquil the name of the young lady oppofite them: her ladyíhip anfwered, "It was lady Caroline Albourn, daughter of ford Al¬ bourn, a nobleman renowned for his large fortune and good charafter; and, lady Caroline," continued her ladyfhip,
** is allowed to be a beautiful and ac¬ compliihed young lady."— <c My ideas, my lady," returned Alfred, " perfectly agree, in the former obfervation, with the opinion of the world." 4. «Lord! Mr. Maferini," faid mifs Peviquil, hurt at the compliment paid to another, u furely there are* as hand¬ fome women in the houfe as lady Caro¬ line Albourn !" <c Pardon rae, madam,'* replied Al¬ fred, " all are handfome; yet fome more beautiful than others ; nor can the remark be more fully exemplified, than when lady Caroline or mifs Peviquil make their appearance.» This well-turned compliment entirely ftifled the refentment of the lady, and flie immediately refumed her üfual gaiety and good temper. 8 As
Äs they croffed the lobby, 'tljey were met by Henry Peviquil, who, after helping Alfred to affift the ladies td their coach, ftopped him from follow¬ ing. c< Ladies," faid he, c * I muft requeft you will difpenfe with the company of your knight-errant from condufting you home, as I arreft hitu for the re¬ mainder of the night» — Therefore* my dear Maferini, take leave of the fair damfels, and follow me." Alfred begged to be excufed, and defired he would confider there were none but ladies in the coach. u Oh!" returned Henry, « 4 there is a footman behind, who is able to defend twice as many/* 'V " I do not take it kind of you," faid Vox. I. I hel»
her ladyíhip, ** to force Mr. Maferini /rom us, if you dp not like to attend yourfelfé" Matilda was anxious her brother ffiould return with them, and mifs Pe¬ viquil afraid of lofing the gallant con¬ verfation of the young Frenchman í but it availed nothing: — Henry, after begging all their pardons, and declar¬ ing he would make it up with them in the morning, clofed the coach door, and ordered the coachman to drive home He then laid hold of Alfred's arm, and told him he muft now introduce . him to a fet of friends, whofe names he did not chufe to mention, before the ladies : " for thougb," faid lie, 44 1 am not a gamefter myfelf, yet I fpend fome * of my time in the faffiionable company of thofe who love play/' Alfred
* * Alfred was rather difpjeafed at his impetuous behaviour; but confidered it as the warmth of his friendfliip, and the, confequence of his having pártákért that evening rather too freely of the bottle. They arrived, after fome time, at a well-known houfe in St. James's-ftreet, and were conducted to the room of faftiion able company. Alfred was ftruck with their appear- ance : — the horrid countenances of fome, whom fortune had not fo favoured that evening,-^-the intoxicated joy of others vvho had emptied the pockets of their friends, — and the extreme agita- tion of the whole aflembly, whofe ex¬ pectations were all on the table, made it a fcene of difagreeable reflection to thofe who had never been addifted to that deftructive vice. I ? Alfred
Ï72 GRASVILLE ABBEY. Alfred plainly perceived his compa¬ nion was well known to them; he was aiked to play, but refufed; and Alfred likewife begged to remain out, but was obliged to bet, that he might not feem particular, as all thofe who did not fit down, laid on the fuccefs of each player : — but the ftakes were not large at their part of the room. In about an hour a table was vacant, and a party accordingly muftered to fill it. Alfred was over perfuaded, and fat down with Henry Peviquil, who propofed no high play : —- this was unanimoufly agreed upon, and a fmall fum fettled, to the fatisfaftion of every perfon.— They broke up in about three hours, and Alfred found himfelf a winner of about a guinea. —;He was compliment¬ ed on his judgment of the game, and invited for the next evening,—Henry and Alfred both returned to Grofvenor- fquare,
fquare, and arrived there about four in the morning. * When the family met the next day, Henry Peviquil made his peace with the ladies; —but he found more diffi¬ culty in the undertaking than he ex¬ pected:—* his mother and fifter were ferioufly offended ; nor could Matilda, forgive him, though flie was necefli- tated to fay to the contrary. Alfred was far from being difpleafed with the company he had fcen ; ftruck as he was at firft with their appearance, the latter part of the time they feemed more agreeable to him ; and their ready acquiefcence to play for a finali fum, confirmed him in the miftaken opinion that they were not a common clafs of gamblers. —He was not averfe to meet them the following evening, nor did morning reflection by any means alter 13 his
his ideas concerning thc tranfaftion^ of the night. * Lady Peviquil informed them, flie had fummoned a numerous company for that evening, " and among the reft," added her ladyfhip, vvith a fmile, which was well underftood, 44 I expect lord Albourn and his daughter." Alfred was ftruck vvith aftonifiiment —he had engaged himfelf to the party in St. James's-ftreet; but this obftacle to His wiflies he determined to furmounr, by begging Henry Peviquil to make his excufe, as he could not poffibly be guilty of fuch impolite behaviour, as to abfent himfelf from lady Peviquils drawing-room, when flie herfelf re¬ quefted his company. — But he might have faved himfelf the trouble, as Hen¬ ry Intended to fpend the fore-part of the evening in Grofvenor-fquare; yet he
GIÊASVILLE ABBEYv l*¡¡/- he infifted on Alfred's accompanying him there, after the rooms, clofed, which, he Tuppofed, would not be very late.
*
CHAPTER XVI. MATILDA took more pains than ufual at the toilet: — flie underftood from lady Peviquil that numbers of fafhionabie people were to be there; fhe therefore confidered it would be a compliment to her ladyíhip to make fome few additions to her drefs, which confifted of white fatin. *-- She wore the picture of her father fufpended on her bofom, by a gold crofs and chain ; her appearance was beautiful, and fte received no fmall compliments from fir Peter and his fon. —Lady Peviquil and her daughter were rather cool in their behaviour, and feemed envious of her fuperior beauty and elegance. The
The rooms began to fill at nine o'clock, and many perfons of diftinc¬ tion were announced : among the reft the Spaniffi embaifador was uffiered in, and begged to introduce to fir Peter and his lady, an intimate friend, who had accompanied him from Spain to England. The gentleman was a foreign¬ er of note, rather in the decline of life ; yet his perfon was handfome, and his manners elegant and accomplifhed : — his excellency had not yet been made known to Alfred or Matilda ; fir Peter therefore introduced them both at one time, the firft as the Spaniffi embaifa¬ dor, the fecond as count DOllifont. Alfred was ftruck motionlefs with horror and furprife ; the fuppofed mur¬ derer of his father ftood before him : — nor was the count's embarraifment lefs ; for before fir Peter could mention the name of Maferini* he caft his eye on 1 s the
the picture of their father; his counte¬ nance immediately turned pale, and he ihowed the greateft emotion. Matilda, though ffie had never heard her mother fpeak 4 highly of the count, received him with politenefs ; but Al¬ fred, after a few cold compliments, joined lord Albourn and his daughter at another part of the room. ψ , The behaviour of both gentlemen was generally noticed : — but each ex- cufed himfelf, by faying it was furprife at the fudden introduction to a relation ■ almoft unknown. The count feemed ftruck with Ma¬ tilda's figure and addrefs ; he chiefly at¬ tended her the whole evening; which caufed great envy and uneafinefs in the breafts of her fair friends ; among thefe was mifs Peviquil, who was extremely hurt
GRASVILLE ABBEY. I79 hurt at being forfaken by Alfred Mafe¬ rini, and more fo at teceiving fuch a few compliments from the ambaffador and fiis friend. Alfred dedicated the whole evening to lady Caroline, nor did ffie feem by any means difpleafed at the attention paid her by the young Frenchman; her father gave him a general invita¬ tion to Sohö-fquare, as the friend and relation of fir Peter Peviquil. The agreeable converfation he had with the young lady, in fome meafure made up for the furprife, horror, and diffatisfaftion he felt at an introduction to the count. The attention paid Matilda by her relation did not pafs-unnoticed by her brother; he determined next day to hint fo his fifter his diflike of him, without 16 entering
entering into a particular detail of cie«- çumílances, which would only diftrefs. and perplex her. The rooms began to thin about twelve ; and in a little time after, lord Albourn and his daughter took their leave; Alfred condufted the latter to her carriage, then joined Henry Pevi¬ quil, and proceeded to St. James's- ftreet, The fame company was affembled,. with fome additions ; and one of the ftrangers was at the table where Henry and his friend were placed ; they played higher than the night before, and Al¬ fred, at the breaking up of the party about half pail four in the morning, found himfelf a lofer of thirty pounds ; he paid the money without the leaft chagrin, and was promifed his revenge the next evening. — Henry Peviquil was
was alfo declared a debtor to the table* of twenty guineas·,—-? They parted a little way from the houfe/—the latter for Grofvenor-fquare,—the former fo» his new lodgings in Bond-ftreet. Matilda had taken notice ofher bro* * r- iher at his introduction to the count* nor could fte conceive a reafon for his abrupt behaviour ; her furprife, how* ever, was greatly heightened at the flighting manner in which he fpoke of him, when they were alone the fol¬ lowing day.—In vain fte aiked hia meaning for the difiiké he ihowed ; the more they converfed on the fubjeft, his converfation appeared the more ftrange and intricate. — His ideas alfo feemed entirely changed concerning their refi¬ dence in London ; her fears of diffipa¬ tion and bad hours he laughed at ; de¬ clared himfelf pleafed with fir Peter's family ¿
* lêü GRASVILLE ABBEY. tamily ; and would not permit her to mention a wiffi of leaving it. < ·* ^ y \ Alfred was a conftant attendant at lord Albourn's; the fore part of the day ; the latter he generally fpent in the gay family of fir Peter; and the * night and beginning of the morning at á gaming-table : — he vvas now univer¬ sally known as a man of fafliion, and his name familiar in the firft circles, as . the diffipated, lively, and handfome Frenchman. /" His fifter faw, with concern j the ef¬ fefts of their London journey ; ffie could plainly obferve her brother's fortune would be foon exhaufted, in the man¬ ner he lived ; — his charafter, as a gambler, was conftantly made free with, and his midnight exploits and quarrels, commonly mentioned in general conver- fations.
fotions. — Her own fituation was alfa particularly . difagreeable. — Haraffed by the affiduities of the count and many other admirers, ffie was continually * plagued with their importunities and flattery. — Lady Peviquil had entirely thrown off the few amiable qualities ffie feemed to poffefs; and being fur¬ ther acquainted with her circumftances and friendlefs fituation, ffie treated her little better than a dependent on her bounty. Mifs Peviquil hated her for her jbeau- ty, and was hardly civil; in vain Ma¬ tilda begged her brother to leave Eng¬ land, and returnto France ; he laughed at her complaints ; ffie requefted him only to conduft her there, and ffie would immediately place herfelf in a convent, and caufe him no further trou¬ ble : — but her foiicitations vvere vain ; the deftructive vice of gaming had al¬ ready
jîeady taken poffeffion of him: every obftacle, difficulty, and intereft, va¬ niihed before it; even the welfare pf his fifter, Ihe honour of his family, the treatment of his father, and the defire he had to fee Grafville Abbey, was thought of no more, when the gaming¬ table appeared ; lady Caroline was al¬ moft forgot; in ftort, every fentiment of fortitude, courage, and humanity, with other virtues which ftamped on him the name of a gentleman and a fol¬ dier, were almoft fwallowed up in a curfed infatuation for a fafhionabie vice. Sir Peter, who was entirely governed by his lady, paid hardly any attention to his fair relation : — the whole family treated her with the utmoft indifference, except Henry Peviquil :— his gallantry, like that of the count, was entirely dif¬ gufting j and the moft villanous views* 8 appeared
appeared under the maik of friendly concern and pity for her fituation ; he would often hint his knowledge'of her circumftances, and the extravagance of her brother 5 which extravagance he firil introduced him to :— his difcourfe would then turn into violent protefta¬ tions of his regard for her, and admira* tion of her beauty and accomplifh* ments. Before Alfred, he fliowed no further figns of particularity m his behaviour than what common politenefs required* Affairs were in this ftate, when one evening, al a grand ball given by lady Peviquil, a ftranger was introduced un¬ der the name of Milverne, an only fon of a lord of that name : he was juft ar¬ rived from Italy, where he had attend¬ ed his father, who was in a declining ftate of health : —his elegant figure and agreeable manners were univerfally no- ticed:
ticèd :—he vtas requefted to open tbe^ entertainment with a minuet, and a lady was alfcí fixed on for that purpofe ; but the latter being rather indifpofed, de¬ clined the ceremony and fatigue attend- ing on fingle dancing : the young gen¬ tleman was therefore obliged to take another partner, and he immediately requefted the hand öf Matilda : praifes were whifpered through every part or the room, at the elegance and grace of thè young performers; nor did Mr. Milverne' s atteniion end here ; he con¬ tinued among the crowd of her admir* ers the whole evening, and greatly interrupted the foft fpeeches of the* count* Alfred danced with lady Caroline: but he was by no means fo great a fa¬ vourite with his lordffiip as at their firil interviews ; nor did he feem pleafed with his daughter's refigning her hand to
r- to him as a partner : lady Caroline her¬ felf appeared much attached to him ; and Matilda thought flie could per¬ ceive, in her eyes and manner, fome- thing more than common regard ; yet, flie never, in the feveral vifits and times flie had feen her ladyftip, which had brought on an intimacy between the young ladies, received the leaft infor¬ mation to confirm the opiniori her ideas had fuggefted, * The company broke up about five in the morning ; — Matilda, vexed with the impertinence of the count and Hen¬ ry Peviquil, yet pleafed with the con¬ verfation of Mr. Milverne : —- her bro¬ ther equally hurt at the cool manner and treatment of lord Albourn, but happy in finding his lordfliip's fenti¬ ments againft him were not imbibed by his fair daughter.
CHAPTER XVIÎ. REFLECTION. The thoughts o£ glory paft, the prefent fliame, A thoufand griefs íhall waken at the name. Pope's Ho μ e ft. THERE are , number of vieious and licentious vices, which will fo far triumph over human nature, as to fe¬ duce thofe from a track of virtue, that for years have been refpefted as valu¬ able membe|s of fociety. — Yel we fee few but what, at fome time or other, feel the moft fevere pangs from remorfe of confcience, and a retrofpeft of the fair charafter they once held in the world ; contrafted with the fcorn and flighting treatment they are neceffitated, tp fuffer frorn many, who, at an early part
Λ t, part of life, would have been proud of their efteem, yet have lived to behold their fuperiors reduced to the loweft ftate of penury and diftrefs. Reflection is never more poignant than when happy feenes, once enjoyed, #re compared with the mifery of a pre¬ fent ftate, — which mifery has been oc¬ cafioned by neglect:, indolence, or ex* travagance.—The moft abandoned ???- perience moments, when acute Feelings aflail them with redoubled force j yet thefe feelings in fome meafure ferve on¬ ly to harden them in their crimes, and -drive them to afts of defperation.— On others they lake different effeft; repentance, and ffiame for what is pail, urge them to amend for the Allure; give them ftrength and inclination to - difentangle themfeives from thofe em- barraflments they are plunged into, and
and make them more cautious and wary through the remainder of life. Alfred, atferious intervals, was nearly diftrafted with the idea of his own con¬ duct ζ yet he had no power to reform : thofe refolutions of amendment, made in a morning, were thought of no more when the gambling hour approached; his care for the welfare of his fifter would fometimes make him thought¬ ful in the midft of diffipation, sbu t he was laughed at by his gay companions, and fuffered to be melancholy no more. His pride was hurt at the beliaviour of lord Albourn ; yet he knew he me¬ rited it ; and his love for lady Caroline ftill drew him to a houfe where he was received by its owner with little cor¬ diality and- politenefs. ls or
GRASVILLE ABBEY. I04 •í . Nor did count D'OHifoñt's attention to his fifter altogether pafs his notice :-* his natural jealoufy made him believe ffie really liked his addreffes, and he in¬ ftantly miftook common civility for re 7 -turned affeftion. His hatred againft the count was the fame, yet he had feldom time to think of it; — but he now refolved to give Matilda her aunts manufcript, let the uneafinefs it might occafion her, be ever fo diftreffing : fte was accordingly told, n few days after, that her brother's fer- vant requefted to fpeak with her ; ffie was glad of this opportunity to fee Leo¬ nard alone ; having wiflied much to queftion him concerning Alfred's man¬ ner of living: and though ffie felt her» felf hurt at caufing the man to betray his mafter's affairs, yet ffie knew it to be an expedient abfolutely neceffary tin¬ der their prefent circumftances. o Thc
The poor fellow's countenance clearly fold alt was not right î Matilda was fliocked at his appearance 5 fte had feen him but once fmce he moved witl· his mafter to Bond-ftreet 5 and the vi¬ fible change in his perfon plainly dif¬ covered the effefts of irregular hours. He delivered to her the paper fealed "Up 5 — and, after inquiring her health, and telling her he was forry he had troubled her, but that he was ordered to deliver it into her own hands, he would have departed : — Matilda ftop¬ ped him, and begged to know if he had been ill. The tear almoft ftarted from his eyes. —■** No, madam, Ì thank you"—-was all he could anfwer, * ( For heaven's fake, Leonard," con¬ tinued Matilda, deeply affected with this.
í this ???? of his" attaqfhinerit, "telici? from whence this uneafmçfs p^o^e^sj I am fure you are not well :—perhaps my brother's houfe ,<foes not foit ypur COnftitUtfon, ; . ? — Leonard feemed hurt tha^t he had gone fo far, and, after ftammering an excufe, would again have withdrawn; — ¡but ffie infifted on Jiis fitting down^ and peered fome røfrefhment : f-r· that was however ufelefs; his appetite ^yas gone, and he feemed in the laftiftaere of con- (umption. —She th^n impîor'd ?? ^y the love he bore her fam^ ajjd by the regard he had fqr ; ^is,mafter and hei:· felf, to-inform t her ,ογ every ciç^ös^n^e relative to his affairs:— t 44 for I am certain," continuar] t^atilda, f 4 they are in a difagreeable fituation; the expen¬ five manner in which he lives, addai to his fopd nefš for ^lay vt ccmfirrns thofe reports which haye tøen hinted to me V.,!. K' L·
/
bjr ? many, whom Γ know to be well ac- quainted with his proceedings. ; ïhe ''man feemed ftruck with afto- niftiment at her knowledge of thofe cir· cumftances he had dreaded to commu- iiicàtë to her ; and confeffed, by the ap¬ pearance and behaviour of his mafter, the Worft "might be expefted;—that the hours he kept were unreafonable, and imit his manner often ihewed him to be diffracted. He alfo told her, he knew he had drawn on monfieur La Meciefeveral times; ' 4 in fhort, my dear Xzäv/* continued 'Leonard, * 4 he is quite an altered man ; and he fome¬ times returns home in a mornings after I have been fitting up for him. all night, in fuch ill temper* that it cuts me to the heart/' ι 4 4 Γ * ,- Matilda found herfelf incapable of bearing this interview any longer with fortitude ;
fortitude; ihe therefore difmiffed the faithful fervant, with repeated affure anees of her efteem for him, and a re¬ queft that if any other circumftances ffiould arife concerning her brother, he would immediately repair to Grof- . venor-fquare, and relate them to her. She direftly retired to her chamber, and broke open the letter : fignora Maferi¬ ni's manufcript dropped from the cover, on which Alfred had wrote a few lines. He concluded with faying, he could plainly perceive by her manner, ihe had an attachment for count DOllifont, which gave him the greateft uneafinefs ; and thoughhe had hitherto kept the in¬ clofed from her fight, through motives of tendernefs, yet the common force ornature urged hím to take every me¬ thod in his power to prevent her form¬ ing a wretched alliance with a villain, the fuppofed murderer of their father. ?? The
The paper fell from her hand, and ffie fainted in the chair.—Mifs Peviquil at that moment opened the door :—flie was aftoniffied to Tee Matilda in a fit,/ but immediately rang the beffi A fer¬ vant attended: water and ihartfliorn were procured, and flierrecovered ina fhort time ; both papers lay on the floor, but fortunately were not obferved by either of the fervants or Mifs Peviquil, during their attendance on their r fair pallenti but, at the beginning of her tecovery, they were taken up by iher own woman, who was going to deliver them to her lady, not thinking Matilda able to take tliem 2—- yet her ideas were notfo deranged but a recollection of their contents flruck her with the impropriety of their being feen by the family ; ffie therefore exerted her ut¬ moft ftrength, and, though not able to fpeak, fnatched them from the girl's hand,
■s hand, and hurried them into her pock¬ et with the utmoft precipitation. Mifs Peviquil felt herfelf hurt at the difappointment her curiofity fuffered by not feeing the letters which had caufed fuch violent emotion in her friend: flie direftly fufpefted it to be a love affair, and.malicioufly determined to be revenged on her, by relating the whole ftory in company :—» with thefe charitable refolutions ihe took leave, requeuing to fee her in the drawing- room, as Mr. Milverne and fome other gentlemen had paid them a morn¬ ing vifit, and were inquiring after her health.-—Matilda returned her many thanks for her care and attention, and promifed to join them in a few mi¬ nutes. i Mr. Milverne had been a conftant attendant at fir Peter's, fince his firft 4 K. 3 φ intro-
introduction at the ball : — his partt cular politenefs to Matilda plainly told ffie was the chief magnet which drew him to the houfe; and though lady Peviquil was not by any means pleafed with this information,, which was firft hinted to her by her daughter, yst ffie knew not how to difmifs from her parties a young gentleman of high birth, noble charafter, and elegant ac¬ compliihments. — Their only hope was that he could not poffibly entertain any ferions ideas of an honourable connec¬ tion, without his father's confent; — which confent they were partly cer¬ tain would" never be granted, on ac- count of the old gentleman's avaricious difpofition. Every one expreffed their concern at the languid appearance of Matilda, when flie entered the room : —fte ex¬ cufed
-*
ORASVlLLä ABBEY* ts§ cufed herfelf by her having been rslher indifpofed that moming. r ■í - * «* Pardon me, mifš Maferini," res- turned Mr. Milverne, w your health feems on the decline : snd though I, do not mean to alarm you, yet I think tbe country abfolutely neceffary to reftore that bloom to your countenance, which, through fine feelings, has too often va* niffied at the entrance of a fympathf- tic tear occafioned by a Tale of .woe, or a recital of the misfortunes of o- thers* ■ C 'H.. t ^ , . £ Both lady Peviqua and her daugh¬ ter fmiled with contempt. — Matilda thanked him, and faid, ffie fliortly in¬ tended to leave England, as ihe did not find the climate agree with her .conftitution· ? 4 He
^
He changed í colour inftantly ; ¿*- his furprife and emotion was vifible to »?.·—** To leave England, madam!" hè replied.-* Having recollefted him- Teff,- 'he ifi í a more compofed manner afked hér, if her refolution to that pur¬ pofe was not very fuådehly taken. Mifs Peviquil confidered this would be ä fit opportunity to exercife her ill- 'Mttire, which was greatly heightened by Mr. Mil vérñé's behaviour to Ma¬ tilda, on the etrçühiftafîce öf thé let¬ ter ; and immediately anfwered to that gentleman's queftion, by fignifi¬ cant h irttS; ihat it #as a diforder in the heátt, which Was extremely difficult tó be cured : ~ flie then, with the utmoft irony and malice, related the affair in the moft ridiculous terms, and con¬ cluded with a requeft to know the name of her admirer. Mr.
Mr. Milverne feemed petrified : — Matilda was ftruck with aftonifiiment at her converfation ; the infulting and : malicious wit of mifs Peviquil was· more than fte could fupport: —nor had íhe power to utter a word, bqt burft into á flood of tears; Her bró- ther at that moment was announced^· and entered the drawing-room* : * The ernbarraffmeht of the whole party was general : -*- the gentlemen," who, except Mr. Milverne, were chiefly ftrangers^ teftified their appro¬ bation of mifs Peviquils " recital by laughing; but the idea that their mirth had drawn tears from a beauti- ful young woman, caft" a gloom on their countenance, and gave them no very favourable opinion of her Whofe fati¬ rical talents had fo much entertained- them.
CHAPTER XVIIL ALFRED Maferini was gping to pay Ihe compliments of the morning with more than ufual gaiety, when the- fight of Matilda, ftriving to conceal her tears, ftruck his eyes ; her manner and peculiar fituation prevented his utter¬ ance,—Reflection darted on his memo¬ ry, and his late ill-treatment ofher ap¬ peared in the mofl black and villanous colours : — flie had been infulted, he could perceive ; — friendlefs and un¬ protefted, ffie had no one to take her part: —their mother had always re¬ commended Matilda to his care : —» how had he fufilied her requeft ? — by cruel indifference, when fhe was fur rounded with feducers, danger, and diffipa-
diffipation : —in ftort, every part of his behaviour, fince their refidence in London, prefented itfelf in the moft íhamefui light, and the ideas of his own bafenefs kept him motionlefs fome time· The filence was not broken,· till he himfelf, with the utmoft tendernefs, afked his fifter the caufe ofher tears,— She found he was hurt; and the recol¬ lection of his former kindnefs, contraft- t ed with his prefent conduft, threw her into another agony of w eeping. He immediately turned; and, with the greateft indignation in his looks, aiked an explanation of his fifter's uneafinefs¿ which he faid he fuppofed was occa¬ fioned by fome affront ffie was unable to refent.— w If fo," continued Alfred. "X am arrived here in proper time, to ? 6 afford
afford that protection which by duty I am bound, and by inclination I am moft willing tb give/' Mr. Milverne Wás the only gentle¬ man he had any knowledge of in the room ; he had noticed that he in gene¬ ral paid particular attention to Matilda} his wild imagination inftantly took fire, and whifpered him he was the perfori who ffiould anfwer for the injury. No « foöner had this thought fuggefted it¬ felf, than, in a refolute tone, he in¬ fifted on his refolving the queftion. Mr. Mïlverne ftàrted from a reverie, whiteh the late converfation had thrown him into,- and, with a manly compo* fúre, addreffed the diftrafted Alfred :— * 4 føéfi wiîlingîyyfir ! My carriage is at the door : *— if you will favour me with your company.round thé Park, I will inform
ι
inform you tf the whole affair 5 ahd* permit me to fey, fir, had mifeMafetii ni's brother been always ás anxious after her welfare aiid happinefs, there Would have been no caufe for him to hate requefted information; or my af¬ fiftance to have given St." This juffi reproach ftrtrck the youngs Frenchman tb thé heart ; he frowned, and they left the room together. The ¿entfernen who remained fooi* after took their leave.-«* Matilda found herfelf àfone with lady Peviquil and her daughter. <*-* The fituation was di¬ ftreffing ; but, ihe was foon relieved from it, as both retired to their dreff¬ ing rooms ; the latter making ân auk¬ ward apology for the unhappinefs foe * had occafionedv ι Mr. Milverne in the moft friendly terms
terms .informed Alfred of the cruel treatment his fifter had received, not only that morning, but at many other times, when he himfelf had in the fame manner been witnefs to it.— He conjur¬ ed him to remove her from fir Peter Pe* viquil's,— reminded him it was a houfe of diffipation, pride, and luxury,— begged him to : confider how danger·* ous many parts of the company were to a young lady but newly entered into the gaieties of life : — he even hinted his fufpicions of Harry Peviquil, and count DOllifont. — This name touched Alfred to the foul —he made no anfwer, but heaved a convulfive figh·- ?* Mr. Milverne ftill continued : α My attention to your fifter has,, I own, Mr. Maferini, been particular ; and I now' in your prefence avow that I love her, --love her to diflraftion.*' « Why
44 Why not then, fir," returned Al* fired,-*- 4 * avow it to the world, and openly addrefs her as a man pf honour? Not, fir, that I wiffi for your alliance with her, more than that of any other gentleman ; -—yet I conceive, when fen- timents of love and attachment are de¬ clared for a young woman, they found not with propriety till fanftioned by the open behaviour of an intended huf¬ band." 44 And that, fir," replied Mr. Mil¬ verne, 4 * ihould before now have been exemplified in me,, had it not been for a whimfical father whofe confent I muft, if poffible, obtain, for the fake of us both : — if this can be done, I fliall be happy to make her my wife, and think myfelf bleffed in the poffef¬ fion of fuch a treafure." ■P Alfred ftill remained thoughtful ; — 9 reflections
#
ybfteRíOtíÉ etowded on his mind, and ihey were ???? m much for his ; fenfes. — Henry Pevkjuii, he wa& hov* îhformédl, wbrè a máik of frieadffiip to eover hfe Milkiiy : hie had mpre thaÄ ???? thought ? tif him, nt his tranf* actions at 9t. James's-ftreet ; yet he was a young man of the firft feffiion, the fon of a perfon of diftinftion. —But were thefe idle pompous ornaments to make amends for the ruin of his fifter, the difgrace of his family, the curfe of himfelf?—That fifter delivered to his bare by a Foni mother, — that fifter whom he was bound to protect by eve¬ iy tie of blood,- love, and honour, — that fifter, who herfelf forefaw danger, and wiffied to efoape it, but was pre¬ vented by him, -—that fifter, whofe regard for him he knew to be fincere,—-* that filler, who had been infulted, yet had no one to defend her, but thofe who r under motives of charity, would expect
expëft a reward -that muft at ónde cruffi her to the loweft ftate of human nature !— cc Accurfed idea l' exclaimed he, ih a voice hardly articulate, pulled the check-firing, and defired the coach¬ man to flop. There was a wildnefs in hiš look, which alarmed Mr. Milverne. " You are not going f ? leave mé, Mr. Máferi- - ni?" faid he : " 1 intended tö afte you to take a friendly dinner with me.'* Ä I thank yoti, fit," returned Al¬ fréd, " bût muft beg to be eXcufed."--- He leaped from the carriage, and ' darted àcrofs the Park towards Picca¬ dilly. He had arrived at the turnpike-gate when lord Albourn's poft chariot drove through. Alfred juft perceived his lord-
lordffiip and his daughter were in it. — r The young lady's eyes met his at the fame moment ; — they both bowed ;— but her father did not obferve him. — ^He ftopped the fervant, who was on horfeback paying the toll, and afked if his lordfliip was going a little excurfion from London. * ? * - " He is going beyond a little excur¬ fion, fir," replied the man, — 44 many miles from hence."' Alfred was ftruck with aftoniuV ment. —" Many miles !" returned her u why, lady Caroline never informed me of it, although I faw her yefterday/* u Her ladyfhip," faid the man, 44 did not know of it herfelf two hours be- : fore we fet off, as it was a fudden whim of lord Albourn's/* . The
The fervant feemed in a hurry to overtake the chariot, which had got fome little diftance ; —but Alfred ftill detained him, to inquire what place they were going to, and when they were to return. The man anfwered, " He really could not tell to what part they were going ; but the diftance was near two hundred miles from town;—that his lord returned in a week, but that lady Caroline was lo be left behind."— He then fpurred his horfe, and left his hearer in a ftate little better than ftu· pefaftion. That lord Albourn had taken his daughter from London, merely to avoid any further intimacy with him, was certain; in ftort, the occurrences of the morning had overwhelmed him with defpair, and he found himfelf at hia
his own lodgings, before his recollée- * tion had reminded him he was going that way. Leonard opened the door? this faithful fervant plainly faw the agi¬ nation of his fpirits.—Alfred ftrove to difguife his uneafinefs, and afked, with fome degree of cornpofure, if any per¬ fon had called fince he left home ? Leonard anfwered, " No one, except a mean-dooking man, who had left a note for hhn, which lay in his dreffing- room."—He immediately repaired to it, and read the contents ; it wa$ from his taylör, requefting the payment of feventy pounds on the next day, — and, if difappointed, threatened an ar¬ reft. — He had, a week before, drawn úrion his banker in France, for thé laft three hundred pounds of his fortune j— this.would nbf even pay his debts. Ruin and confufion feemed to encircle him ; where was now his pride—his honour *#'?$ charafter as a gentleman and a • « - foldier?·
földier ?*-* Where was his loêve for his fifter?—-* In what 'manner was Αφ ito make good his word, of>addkig a part of his fortune to hei2S?Ä-i-tf he remained in England; difgrace and infamy muft - furround h ?? ; /*** nor *¿bukbhe ή^, f Imié like a mean and beggatìy outcaft of fo* ciety, leaving hehind bim the name ^>f afwkidler arid a Villain· Even inhis own country, he muft meet die ??* proaches of thofe to whom he ufed to preach leflbns of moraljty, and by ex¬ ample enforced his daft ri ne. Matada toó, — what was to hecene* of her ?.«- Her fort«,* would not fu Pi >oxt M,^ 44 Muft fte^ faid he., cc tlirough mý faults and follies, fink >with!me intodet ftr uction ?*— Who is to proteft iher when lath in jail?*— -Îhat villain, count D' Ollifont, \vhom· I ífufpe&to ¿be rthe murderer of my father, ^mayfeïze oh the moment to complete his accurfed inten¬ tions, and, ltkethe fiepdof hell, daugh ι at
at thofe his mifohief faas hurkd head¬ long into irremediable ruin. It is too much,'* exclaimed hei running tot a part of the room where bis fword hung: his defpair overcame him.;—he drew the. hlade fromthe fcabhardina kind of triumph, and uttered, in a voice of phrenzy, *« Now I defy them all ; even hell itfelf is better than what may ????? to-morrow# w v The gittering fteel trembled in his hand ;—his arm was in the very mo¬ tion to ftrike his heart, when he found it with-held by a perfon behind him. — He turned, gafping with convulfive madnefs ; the good old Leonard drop¬ ped before him on his knees^— " Mer¬ ciful fatter," exclaimed he, "look on him with an eye of pity l' —then turn¬ ing to Alfred with ftern afpeft,—"is this, fir," faid he, u a time to appear hefore that God, to whom you have fo much
much to anfwer for, and from whom fo little to expect: ?—Look, fir, in the mirror before you ; and confider if your figure is in a proper ftate for a dying man ; — your countenance con· vulfed and agitated, — your fenfes in a ftate of diftraftion, — the fword of your departed father lifted in your hand ready to fuperfede the power of your God, by putting an end to tbat exiftence he gaye you, and confe¬ quently has alone a right to extin* guiih/' - The fword dropped from bis hand ;■ he funk into a chair, and felt feverely. the juft reproaches of his fervant ·— 44 I thank you, Leonard," was all he could fay; but he made a motion to be alone. Leonard firft fecured the weapon, and then left him to meditate on his raffinefs. He
Hé continued for fome time in a fiate of ftupid infenfibility, but by de¬ grees recovered, and fliuddered at the danger he had efcaped. His refolu¬ tion was fixed, never more to game ; he fwore. by the moft folemn oath, ne¬ ver to play but for a trifling fom, nor any more to hazard himfelf at a place where, to 'his ???, he had <expe- rienced ihe wllapy of mankind under Ae maík of friendfliip and kindnefs. ·— With ihefe refolutions Alfred ftaid at home the remainder of the day, thanked Leonard again for his care, ??? retired to reft with more compo- fure and fatisfaftion than he had for months before. Matilda was overpowered with mis¬ fortunes. The account of her father's difappearance, and the fufpicion which refted on the count, whom fte had be¬ fore
fore diöiked, but now even fliuddered at his name, funk her into new trou¬ bles and diftrefs. The infults ffie had received from mifs Peviquil, although they had confirmed her in the idea of poffeffing the efteem if not the love of Mr. Milverne, entirely fettled her deter¬ mination of leaving England. To ac- compliih this, ihe refolved to demand of her brother a fmall part of her fortune, to carry her over to France ; and, im¬ mediately on her arrival in that country, to enter a convent, and totally feclude herfelf from a world, where, young as ilie was, fte could plainly perceive thc interefted and fordid views of mankind ; and fickened at thofe gaieties of high life ilie once languifficd to enjoy. ä
Vol. L L
CHAPTER XIX. THE MASQUERADE. To wake the foul by tender ftrokes of art, To raife the genius and to mend the heart ; To make mankind in confcious virtue bold, Live o*er each fcene, and he what they behold. Pope. WHY was fuperior ftrength, forti¬ tude, and courage, given to man ? — Why does he naturally inherit thefe bleffings in a greater degree than wo¬ man? To protect the weak and de* fencelefs from the gripe and cruelty of the wicked — to give fuccour to thofe who in their nature are lefs capable of bearing up againft impofition ; and who confequently require that aid, which, accord-
GRASVILLE ABBEY. 2ÎO > according to the laws of chriftianity,he is bound to afford them. Who is the caufe df this horrid down-. fall to infamy and fliame?—Man! he who in the book of nature was ordained to bear the image of the Supreme Be¬ ing, and created to take on him the godlike office of protector to the female part of the world ; yet doth he blunt bis feelings againft every trait of hu¬ manity, and dares deftroy that which the Almighty intended he ffiould pre¬ ferve. Of this defcription there are many : — but it Ì6 to be hoped they are greatly overbalanced by the more noble and generous part of mankind, who equally feel the effefts of beauty, yet fcorn to gratify their paffions by vil¬ lanous and deliberate fchemes of feduc¬ tion. Count DOllifont vvas ftruck with L ζ Matilda's
Matilda's charms, the firft evening he was at fir Peter's ; and, in the fev. mi¬ nutes' interval between feeing ber and being introduced, he fettled within his Own mind, if poffible, to feduce ber. Tte count was a man who expe¬ rienced no difturbanee from the intru¬ fion of honour, confcience, or feeling : Ihe milk of human kindnefs was not in any refpeft concerned, in foftening his Compofition : — the tear of compaffion was never feen in his eve, nor could the moft difmnl tale or even fight of woe procure from him an accent of pity, or even'a fympathetic figh. The gratification of his paffions was his whole concern ; nor did he ftop at any thing, to accompliffi what his wiffies prompted him to poffefs· He now en¬ joyed the whole cftates and large for¬ tune of count Maferini, grandfather to Alfred and Matilda ; he could there- o fore
fore well afford to live in the moft fplendid and elegant manner. On * riches he chiefly depended to fucceed with the ladies ; as he knew his age would almoft give him the title of an elderly man. He had juft planned in vvhat manner to make hfe attack on the beautiful young foreigner, when fir Peter Pevi- quil, as was tefore related» led him up, nnd introduced her under the name of Maferini* The pifture of her father plainly confirmed wbo fte was. A fud¬ den hoiror overéame him; he felt a fomething ftrike his heart, which he had heard defcribed as thc touch of re¬ morfe; he, however, foon recovered, arfd refumed his natural gaiety and po- KteneCs· . Yet the behaviour of Alfred did uot go unnoticed by him ; and it feemed as if be had aftuaily known L 3 thofe
thofe intentions the former had been weighing in his·mind five minutes be¬ fore, ' Reft forfook the pillow ofthe count that night ; his ideas of feduftion re* ceived a check at the mention of the name ; yet every circumftance coin¬ cided with his wiflies, except her bro¬ ther: — him he feared. Mean and daftardly inhis difpofition, hewas fear¬ ful even as a child, and would ihrink like a wretched reptile from the juft revenge of a man whom he had cringed to with meannefs, for the purpofe of deftroying his happinefs, and ruining his family. He refolved not Xo be too hafty ia the affair, but in every refpeft to make himfelf agreeable to Matilda, and wait for -an opportunity, when, by fome means
means or other, Alfred fhould be un¬ able to afford that proteftion his fifter would require. That opportunity was now arrived ; the tailor, who had threatened in a letter to arreft him, was the fame that made the count's clothes; it was he who firft perfuaded the man to take that method; fuppofing, that, not be¬ ing able in fo little a time to procure bail, he mull* be confined at kaft for one night, and during that time he could by force (finding thatnone of his perfuafive eloquence had any effect pn Matilda) convey her to fome fecret fpot, where he might, unmolefted, take advantage of her fituation. This diabolical fcheme was, accord¬ ingly, with the greateft deliberation, put into execution; and the tailor in- L 4 formed
fojimé the count tin the evenings that he had not received his money ; the latter then ordered the man, on pain of his difpleafure, and entire lofs of his ciifiom, not to foil to put his threats in practice. To add greater force to this iequeft, he prefented him with a ten pound bank-note, òv^r^a^^ bill he then paid him ƒ and received a folemn promife in returnv that híá wiflies ffiould be accomplifhed with the greatèfteiaftneísy Count D- Ollifont then proceeded to fir Peter Bevi<|uils y '—^h^ plainly per* ? ceived there had been a mifunderftaud- ing between the ladies; but it did not in any refpect alter his plan. He prefented the family with tickets for a grand mafquerade, which was to be at the Pantheon the next evening, < and
and alfp begged Mr. Milverne's accept¬ ance of pne, who entered the room -foon after him. Matilda at firft declined going ; but the count would take no refufal. «»-She feemed particularly cool in her beba* viour towards bim ; but this did not in any refpect damp his fpirits in the plot he had undertaken. In the courfe of converfation, he hinted that he fhould like Mr. Mafe¬ rini to be of the party, and pretended he ihould likewife fend him a ticket the following morning. —*>He gave them to underftand thè manager of it was pa- tronifed by himfelf, and confequently he ffiould exert his intereft as much as poffible in his behalf. The count,* Mr. Milverne* and Hen¬ ry Peviquil, efcorted the ladies to a L 5 concert:
concert:—they returned to fupper.—- Mr. Milverne feemed unhappy,—Ma* tilda extremely dejefted. — She in¬ quired how he left her brother; — he did not wifli to relate to her the man¬ ner in which Alfred flew from the car¬ riage ; but turned the converfation by faying, " He could not perfuade him to take a dinner."— She would have continued, but was interrupted by the count's aiking in what charafters they intended ' to appear» — Matilda and Mr, Milverne refolved to go in domi¬ nos; Henry Peviquil declared he fhould affume the charafter of Don Quixote ; fir Peter, a hermit ; her ladyftip, a nun ; and mifs Peviquil, a gipfy. The count faid he did not think himfelf able to fupport a charafter, and there¬ fore fhould follow the example of his fair coufin, as he was pleafed to ftyle her, and appear in no particular drefs. About one o'clock he took his leave, and .
• ànd promifed to be with them the next evening. Mr. Milverne likewife ap¬ pointed to call in Grofvenor-fquare "at Ihe fame hour. Matilda retired to her chamber, but not to ileep ; — fte diiliked even the fight of count DOllifont; yet fte had confented to be condufted by him to a mafquerade.—It was an entertain¬ ment fte had much wifted to fee ; but had heard of its being a dangerous fcene of amufement.—She however refolved, if poffible, to perfuade her 'brother to accompany them, and for once be the caufe of fpending a diffi¬ pated evening : ffie fliould then confi¬ der herfelf fafe in his prefence, and have greater enjoyment of the entér¬ inent, Alfred Maferini arofe in the morn¬ ing, more compofed than he had. be$u L ? for
V for many weeks ; havmg already ??? folved, immediately on :feceivmg the' fum he expected from M* Le Mercier,. to difcharge his debts, and retire with his lifter to France.—He fat down to breakfaft, again thahked Leonard for his care, and told him of the altera* tion in his fentiments^ he obferved on the table a letter directed to him ; hav¬ ing aiked from Whom it came, ?? was informed a tnaa brought it eariy in the morning, fcnd iaid it required no an¬ fwer : — the rontents of it were as follow :
u To Ma. Maseuikî. 44 St-rakcu&s ân ???????? letter may feem under the prefent circum* ftances, yet I conjure you, for the fake ¿f your «own happinefs and the honour tíf your fifter, to obey the dictates it contains.
coatams. Cøunt & GUifotä hás &% ^ged ftr Petar Pçviqn^s Am% to a mafquerade this evening at the Pan· theon ; and it is his intentfon m tite courfe ofthe night -tö ?????? mif* Ma- ferini, by treachery, to a houfe he has provided in the oountry f or his pur¬ pofe ; where he will take every advan¬ tage of her fituation. Heis alfo deter¬ mined ito deprive ber ofyour protection^ by keeping you away; wbich fobeme he has planned with lhe tailor who fent to you for money yefterday. The man will call this morning, and anreft you if the bill is not difcharged.—-Be not offended at feeing the inclofed hun¬ dred pound bank-note, »as you may not immediatefyibeable to procure the fum : —pay bim, and, if poffible, perfuade him to keep the knowledge of it from the count.—I have alf© fent you a , t kiket for the'mafquerade;-—fail not t© be there j —but by oomieans Æfcøver yourfelf
yourfelf to the party, whom you will recognife in the charafters of a hermit a nun, a gipfy, and Don Quixote*--- Among them will be three dominos, which are the difguifes of your fifter, Mr. Milverne, and the count ; watch diligently the latter, whom you will obferve draw the young lady to a private room, and then by force take her to a carriage that is to wait at the back-door ofthe building. I leave the reft to you. Fail not to follow minutely this letter, as you value your peace of mind for ever. ** A Friend." . Alfred's aftoniftment at reading this extraordinary epiftie, may well be con¬ ceived. He ihowed it to Leonard, and aiked his advice ; the old man begged him to attend to its contents : —"No one, fir," faid he, " could have an in¬ tereft
4erèft in writing fuch a letter $ and the bank-note fully confirms it to be no idle frolic.*—His ideas were the fame as his mafter's, and they determined to execute implicitly the direftions given. The receiving of the money hurt him ; but it was abfolutely neceflary to dif* charge the debt, as he had none of his own, till that he had fent for arrived: he, however* refolved to find out, if poffible, the'perfon, and repay him with every acknowledgment, if the fuf¬ picions were well grounded. Alfred determined, in the firft place, not to fee his fifter, and gave Leonard orders, if any of the fervants ihould come from Grofvenor-fquare, to fend word back he was not at home* About eleven o'clock, the tailor ar- rived, was introduced, and received his money. — The man was aftoniffied. Alfred
Alfred infifted on his-taking a glafs øf wine, and made him a prefent for the ttm&le he had caufed. -—He then re¬ lated to hini the fcheme whieh te had heard was to be put jn practice by the count and himfeif. Surprife, guilt, and confternation, flopped the tailor's utterance: —he believed ? muft be feme fupernatural power that had informed him of it Al* feed argued with him for fome time, explained the villany of fuch proceed¬ ings, and the ruin that might have en¬ fued. jm ftort, he worked fo much on the poor fellow's feelings, that he fell at his feet, afked ten thotffand par¬ idons, and begged to know if he could in any refpeft ferve him, to recom¬ penfe the injury he had intended to commit. Alfred took him at his word, and informed
informed him that the only way 'to make reparation, would be, to go im¬ mediately to tbe count, and fay that every circumftance had fucceeded to his wiihes, for that Mr. Maferini wa& m clofe confinement* The man pro¬ mifed to be punftual in the meffage, and, after again thanking ?? for, hia generofity, departed. As it was expefted, a fervant called from fir Peter's, to fey that mifs Mafe¬ rini wiffied much to fee her brother. Leonard told him he was juft gone out. Alfred then fent to procure his drefs with as much fecrefy as poffible: it was a plain domino, that he might not be obferved. In the courfe of the afternoon, the fervant from Grofvenor-fquare arrived a fe-
a fecond time ; but was anfwered as be¬ fore, that Mr. Maferini was not yet re¬ turned ; he left a note from his fifter> and defired it might be given him as ibon as he came home. Alfred open¬ ed it : Matilda informed him how much againft her inclination it was to accom¬ pany the count to a mafquerade ; yet fte could not decline the invitation without abfolute rudenefs. She re¬ fuelled her brother would be there, and concluded with faying, fte fup¬ pofed he had alfo received a ticket. He refolved to take no notice of the letter, but, as, the anonymous epiftie defired (the contents of which he had now every reafon to believe authen¬ tic), to go himfelf, unknown to every one. He panted for the moment when he ihould deteft the villain in the very aft of injuftice and cruelty he had long fufpefted him to be guilty of; and cruffi
cruffi that moniter to the earth, who - dared attempt the honour of his fa* miJv. The wiihed-for hour of twelve was announced ; when, having, placed ih his pocket a brace of piftols, he threw himfelf into a hackney coach, and or¬ dered the coachman to drive to the Pantheon^
CHAPTER XX. ALFRED ordered the, coaebmaii, when he flopped at tlie front doors iö Oxford-road, to drive round and wail for him at the back entrance. The Pantheon was crowded j the com¬ pany were numerous and elegant; eve¬ ry one looked happy and pleafed with each other. — 1 * I," faid Alfred, "am the only perfon who feem unfociable and alone. Several characters paffed, which he knew by their voices j but he could no-where trace thofe he wiffied to recognife ; when on a fudden a group of bacchanals ruihed by him, and a- mong them he obferved Don Quixote. Having addreffed the figure in a feigned voice, by inquiring after his Dulcinea del
a wîtry anfwer froth ä iàÉ^vk fchîdh plainly confirmed it ^ be Henry Fc* Viquil* He n*>w judged tfoe reft of ?? party muff be ift 'the rooms, and aéeotdinglf continued hïs fearch* !n about a quarter of sn hour he per« ceived the knight join Ms company ; they were dreffed exa&ly as #e letter had defcribed, except that he could obferve Only two dominof, which he found were his fifter and the cotittt ι —· but foon after heard them fpeak, as if they were furprifed al not feeing Mt# Milverne, At foppet lhe greater -patt tff fhe company nnma&ed, and Alfred was confirmed that hk conjectures on each of the characters «ere right, ^r*· He
He ftill cpntinued difguifed, with bis eye fi^ed on them :~ and it gave plea- fore to fee Matilda treat the count with Ihe utmoft coolnefs : — but yet he thought hé could perceive, in the coun¬ tenance ofthe latter, a malicious fmile, occafioned by the hope of having her ihortly in his power. — Thefe ideas made him redouble his vigilance ; and he directly after the repaft joined them almoft clofe, but ftroveasmuch as pof¬ fible to efcape notice. Henry Peviquil and his father feemed heated by the wine they had .drank ; — mifs Peviquil was chiefly, taken up in gallanting with a, gambling friend of her brother's ; and her ladyfhip in pay¬ ing compliments to her fafliionable ac¬ quaintance. — Count D' OlUfont at¬ tended to nonebut his fair relation ; —, and the inattention ; fhe received from the çthers, gave, him an opportunity , ' of
4>f continuing his politenefs.—Alfred remarked a magician who followed alfo the fteps of the count 5—his dreft was truly conformable to the part he performed, and he held in one hand a wand,. the emblem of his power. — This figure gave him fome chagrin, and he refolved to addrefs it, by aiking him in what manner he made ufe of his art : — the magician anfwered, in a voice which he thought he had fome- where heard, " That he puniihed the guilty, and gave fuccour to the inno¬ cent—I know you, young man," faid he : * c arid you are in a noble caufe ; be cautious how you execute it." Alfred was ftaggered at this reply, but yet thought they might be words of chance, and begged an explanation of the incoherent fentence. The ma¬ gician faid, he would convince him of his knowledge ; and immediately wrote
on
?? a rardtte following words.—* tt Your name'is Maferini,—your bu¬ finefs at this place is to protect the ho¬ nour of your family hi ?? perfon of yomr fifter : ·*** the time draws near ?— · be diligent, and ? not/* OBy the time he had read thefe few words, the magician was gone ; and the aftomfhed Alfred ftood for fome time motionlefs ;—he feemed in a dream, and could hardly believe his fenfes; yet he fuppofed this ftranger muft be the perfon who had fent him the letter. The count and his fifter were nearly out of fight at a different part of the Rotunda, but he quickly made up to them;*—their party had entirely difperfed, and Matilda feemed extremely uneafy. The former in vain ftrove to give her comfort; fhe could hardly conceal her tears. It was about three o'clock, the time fixed for the horrid
horrid fcheme, when Alfred obferved the count draw his fifter to another room, under the idea of feeking their friends.—He followed, and heard him inform her that he had been juft told~ they waited for them 111 their carriages at the back entrance. He led her to the door ; that being a place for chairs only, there were no coaches near.— The count conducted Matilda down the ftreet, and turned into a part where there was a chariot and one hackney- coach waiting at a little diftance. Matilda, feeing" no one in the car¬ riage, refufed tó enter it : the count entreated, but fiie ftill continued obfti¬ nate, and feemed extremely alarmed. They vvere not within hearing of any perfon but the hackney coachman and another man who flood with Aim.—Al¬ fred gafpcd for breath ; his very foul vvas convulfed with rage. — Count Vol, I. M DO1İU
D* Ollifont with fome vehemence again infifted on her complying with his re¬ queft :~.ffie anfwered, flie would die firft, and burft into a flood of tears : — he then began to force her into the carriage. 4( Your brother, now, madam," faid the.count, 4< is not here to encourage your pride, or fruftrate my wiihes."·— She fcreamed, and fainted. 44 Damnable villain !" exclaimed Al¬ fred:— 4f know thou art miftaken:-— for you now behold him ready to pro¬ tect the honour of his houfe, by cruffi- ing to the earth that wretch who dare feduce his fifter." While he uttered thefe words, Ma¬ tilda remained in the arms of one of the counts fervants, infenfible.— Leo¬ nard, who had dreaded his mafter's violence
Violence of temper by the piftols he had taken in his pockets, determined to be near at the time, to aflift his young lady ; — he accordingly waited with a hackney coach, the fame that ftood near the counts chariot,-—He immediately ran to the afliftance of Ma¬ tilda, forced her from the footman, and placed her in the vehicle be had hired. During this time count D' Ollifont was ftruck motionlefs : he coukl hardly believe himfelf awake ; but the figure . of the enraged Frenchman, who had now un ma iked, plainly confirmed the truth. - (f I was only," faid he vvith a fmile; * ( going to conduit your lifter to fir Peter's," '"Liar! villain!" exclaimed Alfred, ki thou waft going to take her to a M 2 place
place where, unprotected, ffie muft have funk beneath thy diabolical intciv tions: — nay more/'continued he, ina low voice, 4< I ftrongly fufpeft thee to be the .murderer of her father." He ftarted, ftood about a minute in a thoughtful pofture, and then uttered with a curfe,— 4f Defperate caufes re¬ quire defperate remedies i'*—pulled a piftol from his fide pocket, and fired ajt his ad verfary :.— owing to his agitation, the ball paficd, and Alfred remained unhurt: —but he inftantly difcharged one at the count, who fell, and every fpark of life feemed extinguifhed.— Tlic coachman and thc footman cried their mafter was murdered, and inf- nt- ly fecured the young foreigner, whp made no refiftance, but feemed buried in a reverie; till the magician, whom he had noticed in tbe rooms, came up. 44 I fee,'* faid he, te there has been bloody
Moody work here; —but puniihment has fallen on the right perfon."— He unmaiktd, and difcovered the features of Mr. Milverne. The men ftiil kept their hold of Al¬ fred : but no crowd.had affembled,· as thev vvere fome diftance from the tbors, ûnd \n a private ftreet — Mr. Milverne took the part of hu friend, foon difen¬ gaged him from confinement, and with the affiftance of Leonnrd, who had by this time made himfelf known, forced him to thc coach. — They promifed the* ??? a large reward, if he would drive as faft as poffible towards the firft ftage fo Dover. The horfes, whkh had not been out in the day, travelled with the utmoft fpeed; — and the driver, in hopes of the money, failed not to exert his abi- ~ J M 3 lities 4
lities in keeping up their pace, info- much that he brought them to an inn at Dartford by eight in the morning. During the time of their journey, Matilda learnt from hcr brother the whole aftair, and plainly perceived they muft be plunged into new diffi¬ culties in confequence of thc count's death. Mr. Milverne might be fufpefted as the caufe of ? ; and the idea that flie fiiould never fee him more, added new pangs to thofe flie already expe* ι ¡enced. Leonard informed them, when they had got fome diftance from town, that a packet from France had been re¬ ceived by the people of the houfe where they lodged ; who had neglect¬ ed
ed to give it till after his mailer, had fet off to the mafquerade ;■— ^he there¬ fore, having no place to put it under lock and key, determined to bring it in his pocket. This was a fortunate circumftance, as the direction confirmed it to come fromM. Le Mercier: on opening it Al¬ fred received thc money he had wrote for ; ît gaye them fome comfort, as it would fupport them with economy for fomc time. But this was of liitle con¬ fequence when he confidered his life muft be facrificed as foon as the counts* deaíh was made known in France ; his intereit being fo great at court, as to prevent any defence from faving thc perfon who had deprived him of his ex¬ iftence^ He determined, however, rather to die than cowardly ffiriok from juftice, M 4 and
and difgrace thc name of a foldier.**-*· He related to his filter his refolution ¿ but ihe conjured him not to riik his life, from a punftilio of honour. 4f You are enaged in a juft caufe," continued Matilda, 4£ -and need not be jafhamed of your conduct being known to the world/* She ufçd many other arguments, and afked him, <£ To whom flie was to look for protection^ when he was no more." ei To God," he exclaimed ; t< for a- mong mankind all honour is loft.— I am fick of the world, Matilda,— and care not how foon I leave it/*—" Sure¬ ly/' faid ffie, 44 that fortitude, courage, and patience, which were the leading traits in your charafter, and which ufed. to charm our departed mother, are va- niffied :—have you no defire to fee Grafville Abbey l*— The name ftruck; him
CRASVILLE ' hirh töthe heart.-^ 5 Who can tell but ? is ordained for you to *?????1 that myftery which has fo long hung over our family, and been the ruin,of out houfe?-* But heaven forbid, Alfred, that, I ffiould perfuade you to aft contrary to that honour which for years has been the boaft of our forefathers : —^if, there¬ fore, you refolve to make yourfelf known in France, I will cheerfully ??? ter a convent, and take leave of a world in which I have little happinefs to ex* peft." — Here ffie fighed 'deeply ; her heart reminded her that the image of Mr. Milverne would often forude amid thofe religious duties ffie would then be bound to perform. Alfred continued filent:— his curiofi¬ ty to fee the refidence of his anceftors, the hopes of finding fome clue to the myftic difappearance of his father,— M 5 urged
ürged*him to adopt the plans his fifter had ptopofed ; —- but his honour, — his character as an officer and a man, for¬ bade it. £very mile he found himfelf farther frotìr^London, his perplexity increafed; ríó¥Mas#his determination by any means ftxfed, when the coach drove up to the principal inn at Dartford.—Alfred handfomely rewarded the man, defired him to fay nothing concerning the bu¬ finefs he had been^vitnefs to, but ^give feigned anfwers "to thofe whp fliould wonder at feeingf a hack, fo far from London, — The coachman promifed faithfully to obey his orders. — They each took fome refreffiment, hired poft horfes, and fet off again in lefs than an hour towards Dover. Alfred during the journey informed ; ? ' his
his filler that his refolutions were fe^4 to, join his regiment, and throw hioifelf on the mercy of his countrymen. ** I fcorn," faidhe, " to fly ignobly from a puniihment I fiatter myfelf I do not juftly deferved fi- ■*. Matilda fhed a flood* of tears, but perfeftly acquiefced in his wiffies, and fhe ftrove to think no more of Mr. Mil*. verne; — that was.impoffible* but yet ilie confidered, the ftrift and awful ce¬ remonies of a monaftic life would» in a eourfe of time, erafe thofe thoughts from her bofom.—Alfred in fome refpefts was in a fimilar fituation j his acquaint¬ ance with lady Caroline Albourne was firft commenced in the midft of diffipa¬ tion, yet he felt many pangs at the idea of lofing her for ever, in his career of folly he had perfuaded himfeif that he was no fanther interefted mthe^aflkin, than
4hán merely the idea'of «being intimate with a* young lady of fafliion, and hav¬ ing an opportunity of toafting a beauti¬ ful girl ; but he now plainly perceived that he loved lady Caroline fo fat as to make his life uncomfortable without her. —* There was alfo another caufe for uneafinefs ; his debts in London were unpaid: «— to the name of murderer, the appellation, 1 of fwindier muft be added : *·** a title he in fome meafure merited·· His filence plainly told the ftate of his mind; while his fifter fhed many tears at thoughts of their prefent mis¬ fortunes, and at the recollection of thofe happy hours fte had experienced under the care of maternal tendernefs,—ne¬ ver, never to return. Leonard fliared the forrows of them both ; yet he received fome little com¬ fort
fort at the thoughts of returning to that country where he had fpent the chief part of his life. — They arrived rather late at Dover; Leonard was direftly difpatched to inquire what time the packet would fail, and brought word back, not till the following- evening. This intelligence was extremely difa¬ greeable to them ; as they might before that time be recognifed, taken into cuf¬ tody, and conducted back to London. They were necefli tated however to wait patiently the event; but Alfred reflefted, with fomcterror, on the hor¬ rors of a jail, in a ftrange country, and under laws he was equally a ftranger to. -—Under thefe circumftances, they re¬ mained at the ¡nn as private as poffible. About two hours before they in¬ tended to fail, a man arrived poft from London ; he aflced if any travellers were in
in that houfe, who intended, going to France, and was anfwered in the affir¬ mative. Leonard, who by chance over¬ heard the converfation, ran to his ma¬ ilét, and informed him of the affair; each conjeftured it to be an officer of juftice, and Alfred waited with forti¬ tude and cornpofure the event ; when they were agreeably furprifed, by feeing the innkeeper introduce Mr. Milverne's valet. He delivered a letter, the firft fen¬ tence of whkh contained the following words : ·« Count DOllifont is not yet dead*'* —"Thanks be to heaven!" exclaimed Alfred, and communicated the agree¬ able intelligence to his filler. Mt. Milverne informed him, that he was
was kept in cuftody till late in the morning, when he procured bail ; be¬ ing then taken before a magiftrate, he explained the whole affair, and was ho¬ nourably cleared. — He further in¬ formed him that the count's indifpofi T tion was very uncertain, and advifed him· by no means to remain in England, or make himfelf known in France, as count DOllifont had many friends in - that country, who, immediately as they knew of thc event, would, through par¬ ticular intereit at court, place him in the ßaftile fon life, even if the former fliould recover of his wound. In thc latter part of the letter he men? * tioned Matilda with tbe utrnoft tender* nefs, pitied her fituation, and entreated Alfred by no means to run hazards, through falfe notions of honour, and leave his fifter deftitute of protection.— He
He concluded vvitbfaying, he thought' they had better pafs over as quick ?? poffible to Italy, but requefted he would fend word what part they refolved to vifit, as he himfelf hoped to join them in a few weeks, Alfred wrote ah anfwer, expreffing his gratitude for the gentlemanlike and friendly treatment he had received ; in¬ formed him that he had at firft refolved to throw himfelf on the laws of his country, although he knew them"to be fevere where a courtier or man of in¬ tereft was concerned;^—but that liis letter had entirely altered his refolu¬ tions, and that he now intended· to travel as hu and as privately as poffible towards Italy ; — that lhe hope of fee¬ ing him there, and making proper apo¬ logies for the ftrange behaviour he had been-guilty of towards him, would in a great
great meafure alleviate the difagreeable manner of his journey. He concluded with his fifter's thanks for his kind- in- A quittes, and the equal pleafure ffie would enjoy with himfeif, on feeing Mr. Tollverne in a fliort interval of time» , This letter tøas given to the valet, and he fet off immediately. —The veffel fet fail a ffiort time after, and Leonard informed his mafter, while they were crofiing the Channel, that he had learn¬ ed from Mr. Milverne's fervant, that thc anonymous letter he had received was fent bythat gentleman ;---for that he, the valet, was employed by his mafter .to draw the plan of proceedings from the counts confidential fervant, whom he contrived to intoxicate with liquor, and then communicated to Mr. Milverne the intelligence he had re¬ ceived. Alfred
Alfred was vexed that Leonard did not inform him of this circumftance fooner, that he might have returned the money he received, and acknowledged the obligation. Matilda was ftiil more attached to him : ffie was happy in the change of fentiments which his letter had caufed in her brother, and looked forward with a confiderable degree of pleafure for the time when he ffiould join them abroad. After a pleafant voyage of a few hours, they found themfeives landed in their native country — but in a far dif¬ ferent fituation from that they were in when they left it : — then they were honoured and refpefted by all, and afraid of meeting no one : — now they were under misfortunes and conceal- n ment,
ment, ihrinking from the eyes of every beholder, like wretched outcafts of fo¬ ciety, and terrified at being obferved by every individual.
END OE THE FIRST VOLUME.
