Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Theodosius de Zulvin: the monk of Madrid: a Spanish tale, delineating various traits of the human mind
THE
MONK OF MADRID, A SPANISH TALE.
CHAP. XVIII. Teil me what means this mystery and gloom Thatlow'rsaround? Thomson. Orlando had not yet resolved to what part he should go, and he found himself some little distance from the city before the thought entered his mind. The morning was delightfully calm and serene. The sun was already a considerable height above the horizon, while its warm and cheering rays seemed tc enliven and ani¬ mate all nature. It was one of those periods VOL. III. в
â
which appear to inspire a universal har¬ mony throughout the creation. Orlan¬ do felt these effects, jet he was unable to enjoy them. He knew there were pleasures the most sublime to be drawn from theni, but he was excluded from a participation .of the felicity-they held forth. He could admire the beauty of the scenery which sur¬ rounded him ; but when he considered his own figure as one among the groupe, a mo¬ nitor he was unable to silence continually reminded him.of his nnworthiness. *' He who created me," 'he exclaimed, ** must surely take delight in the happiness of his creatures ; for on such a morning as this he seems to smile upon all as a common family, in w r hich his affections are equally divided. Surely, then^ if one so omnipotent and supreme thus vouchsafes to take a part in the comforts of those whom his power has brought into existence, it must indeed be temerity in them to attempt to prey upon each other." Orlando felt the full force of these argu¬ ments ; but, far from cherishing them as the lüelv nieans of bringing about a reforma-
3
tion in his own conduct, he flew from them as a dangerous relaxation of the mind* which tended to unnerve him from that pitch of daring villany he now began to con¬ sider was a worthy object of emulation. He continued to ride forward at a consi¬ derable pace, when he overtook a humble funeral slowly proceeding on the road he was travelling. Orlando more particularly noticed it, by observing that there were two coffins, and only four mourners, who appear¬ ed little affected by the solemnity of the ce¬ remony in which they were engaged ; while a bystander, that watched the procession, shed many tears as it passed him. His cu¬ riosity led him to inquire of this man whp> were the persons being conveyed to the grave. The appearance of the stranger was decent and respectable ; but no traces above a common situation in life were to be found, cither in his manner or dress. " Signior," said he in answer to Orlando's question, " it is a poor unfortunate trades¬ man and his wife : the former, in an act of desperation, occasioned by family misfor¬ tunes, destroyed himself in the prison where
4
he was confined for debt ; and the latter, who lost her senses, found means the next day, through the neglect of the people tø whom she was intrusted, to follow the 4readful example of her unfortunate hus¬ band/' Orlando trembled; his soul foreboded it was Barnarvo and his wife who were meant. " Their name ?" he exclaimed with some precipitation. " Barnarvo the jeweller," answered the man.—Orlando found himself unable to move, while the following words of the stranger seemed to chill his very heart. " Alas i signior,," continued he, " per¬ haps you see me'shed these tears with asto¬ nishment ; but I knew the unfortunate de¬ ceased in their lifetime. I knew them pos¬ sessed of a daughter, in whom every qua¬ lity, every feminine softness, which does honour to the female name was combined,;,. till a vilianous seducer, a coward wretch, took the advantage of her father's confine¬ ment, and in destroying her honour mur« dered her parents." Orlando ottered an exclamation 5 which the other miáaking for
5 the effect of severe distress at his tale, proceeded— " Ah ! signior, this unfortunate young creature, covered with shame and horror, immediately visited her parents in the pri¬ son. You appear to have a feeling heart, and may conceive their anguish, their mi¬ sery, in short their distraction. Every effort was used to draw from her the name of her seducer ; she however refused to reveal it, but on condition that they neither of them should ever disclose it. They were necessitated at last to make the most solemn assurance of acquiescence to this demand, and were informed of the wretch who had overwhelmed them with disgrace and infamy in the ruin of a beloved child. Laura, (for that was the name of the poor girl,) alarmedat the dreadful state into which her information had thrown her parents, hurried frorri the prison in a state little short of madness, and has no,t since been heaçd of. As Вапцгуо died insolvent,, his funeral expenses are defrayed by public charity, and the men whom you see as mourners, are the servants of those persons, вЗ
6 who merely attend to make up the proces¬ sion. Otto, who perceived his master was unable to answer, ventured to relieve him by asking the stranger why he was hot one of them, as he appeared to be so warm a friend to the deceased. " Alasi" said he y <f I have a large family, and was unable to sub¬ scribe towards the burial ; therefore I had mo invitation to partake of its ceremonies." " Your tale is indeed an unfortunate one," said Orlando, striving to conceal his emotions. ** Has this seducer, then, of Whom you speak, never been discovered ?" ** Ohi never," cried the man : f * the so¬ lemn promise made to their daughter on th^t subject was rigidly maintained both by Either and mother. They suffered the вате of the villain to die with them. May curses fall «pon his head !" exclaimed the indignant stranger, while Orlando shrunk írom his angry eye with a guilty conscious* tiess that those curses were called dowa Upon him. " May he live to experience the pangs which a father feels at the loss of a beloved daughter's honour î May he groan grøder those afflictions which he ha& caused
7
in others ! May he, in the last hour of disso¬ lution, reflect with agony on the misery he entailed on her who loved him! and may ¡ he feel the want of that comfort and conso- ! lation from which he has excluded her for ever 1" " You are severe, old many" said Orlando, t( in behalf of the misfortunesof your friend." w I am a father," answered the stranger. ic By the reproach, signior, I presume you are none." They parted: Orlando covered with inward shame, and the stranger deeply affected with the relation he had given. This incident again roused the feelings of the former; The curses of the man in behalf of injured innocence had sunk deeply on his heart. The figure of the once happy and lovely Laura floated before his eyes, and the idea of her miserable situation \ (ofwhichhehad been the cause) at once occa¬ sioned him the most severe pangs of remorse. But such feelings were of short duration : hfe smothered them under a dread of the con¬ sequences : he feared a retrospective view of his conduct, for retrospection pre ' his ©wn character under the glaring ч в4
8 of vice : he flew from the picture with hor« ror, but his disgust produced no reformation. <ť Was I not an outcast in society," he whispered tohimself, "when I practised those virtues on which the world lavish their most fulsome praise ? Was I not taught by my uncle to believe that the reward of the close and languid confinement I suffered would be an elevated rank in the opinion of my fel¬ low creatures ì that a perfect character like "mine would demand their respect and ad¬ miration ? that my example would become a model for their attainment* and my name a standaid for their encomiums ? How was I deceived! Flushed with aportrait so warm and animatmg to a young bosom, I rushed om the world in perfect security of success. What was my disappointment, what were щ feelings occasioned by wounded pride, when they received me as a being worthy only of their contempt ! when I discovered to røy mortification, that those whom I had been Uà to consider as insects below my notice, rose far my superior I that they even scoffed at me ! that I became a subject for their ridicale, a mere bauble for their enter-
9 rammenti that some derided me, others pitied me, and the whole laughed at me I I experienced every hour the degradation under which I laboured. I felt the con¬ viction of my inferiority with distraction·: I perceived myself unable to overcome that diffidence which I had acquired by a seclu¬ sion from the world, and my imbecility on this point produced stronger barriers against the chance of every other attainment. Oh i God ! God ! what have been the conse¬ quences of this mode of education ? It has damned me for ever. I could not brook de¬ rision from those who I expected were to worship me: they commenced hostilities, and I, by the common law of nature, have reta¬ liated. Are these then the crimes for which I so highly condemn myself? Fool that I ara thus to cavil with my own interest, under the squeamish scruples which formed a part of that tuition I have reason so greatly to rue!" Such was the train of reflexions with which Orlando travelled forward, while his conclusions were always drawn to palliate his own conduct. There were yet some в 5 -
IO
arrangements, with respect to the plan he had so precipitately pursued of leaving the castle, which he had not settled upon, and Which also occupied a part of his jour¬ ney. It was necessary Don Diego should receive the intelligence of his departure from himself, to prevent any suspicions of the causes that had occasioned it : the same plea might serve for him which he had made to the marquis, namely, his en¬ gagement to visit a friend; but it was requisite, for the sake of appearance as well as for the receipt of his quarterly remit¬ tance, that his uncle should have a direc¬ tion where to write to him : this was a more difficult task than he was at first aware of> as he had yet fixed on no part for his destination. With respect to the money, Jte considered he could request him to pay it as usual into the hands of a banker at Madrid, from whom he might by various means contrive to procure it; but he was perfectly convinced of the alarm Don Diego would feel at the idea of his so suddenly quitting the city alone, without giving any particular account of the place to which
lí he was gone. At length he determined tc write a short letter to Andalusia, wherein he could slightly mention his leaving the Castle of Olvernardo for a few days on an excursion with a friend, without saying who, or to what part ; as the insignificance of the event, related in that way, would be an excuse for his not detailing the par¬ ticulars, and yet answer the purpose, in making him the first informed of the affair. Towards the close of the evening they halted at a respectable-looking inn on the road-side, and Orlando determined to re¬ main there for the night. The landlord, a brisk good-looking man, received him at the gates, and assisted him to dismount with great courtesy. He then conducted him to a room in which were placed two persons apparently regaling themselves after the fatigues of their several occupations. The one was a tall lean man about fifty years of age, his eyes sunk, and his cheek-bones remarkably high ; he had a long nose, and large mouth, with a very melancholy con¬ tour of countenance : he was shabbily dressed, yet he occupied the principal
I place in the apartment, and seemed to pos* ŕ sess a consequence far superior to his ap- ; pearance. ι The other was a short plump man, who : looked somewhat younger; his rosy gills | and swelling corporation foretold he pos¬ sessed all the good things of this world, and enjoyed them: he had one of those faces in which is seen more good-nature than sagacity ; and while he listened with a sort of vacant stare to his companion, (whose strains were not the most cheerful,) he answered every remark by an inward ejaculation, which expressed his consent to any assertion he chose to make. Or¬ lando had not been seated above ñve mi¬ nutes, before another person entered the apartment, whose figure and manners were more remarkable than the rest of the company. He was clad in a strange habit 5 and seemed in the decline of life ; his per¬ son appeared to have been formerly hand¬ some, but was now wasted and decayed ; bis grey locks covered a pallid yet interest¬ ing countenance ; he took little notice of tbe persons assembled, and seated himself
in a solitary part of the room. Orlando' soon discovered the lean visitor was a mis¬ anthrope : he railed against the whole world with peculiar bitterness, and gene¬ rally addressed himself to his jolly compa- j nion, who did not seem inclined to take j the trouble to contradict him. " Now you j perceive," said he, (t nothing can be more plain than that mankind are naturally vi¬ cious. Have we not infants who commit thefts without any other motive but mere wantonness ? Does not every man prey upon his brother t In short,are we not all damned ; rogues ?" " Ah !" returned the lusty gentleman, ** what you say is very true. My service to you, signior." ** Oh ! it is a diabolical world," continued the other, who under great dis¬ pleasure watched his rosy-faced auditor finish his glass of liquor to the very dregs with considerable comfort : " I say it is a diabo¬ lical world. Why, even what you are now ! drinking with such goat is produced for ϊ you by the misery of your fellow creatures; ? they languish under the most dreadful tor- ; ments a while you are gratifying your unçon-
r*
Seionabîe appetite with the very commo¬ dity they have watered with their tears/' This last sentence seemed to have a more sensible effect upon the lusty gentleman than any part of the preceding discourse: he was palating the remains of the sugar that had dropped into his mouth with a large piece of lemon, which was all that was left of his quantum, and which he seemed determined not to lose, by the very careful manner in which he turned up the glass to receive them. Being however of a delicate sto¬ mach, he began to make wry faces at„ the idea of his beverage having been İn part composed of so briny a commodity as hu¬ man tears, yet declared he never recollected to have tasted such ? twang in the number¬ less glasses of mixed liquor he had enjoyed during the course of his life. The lean Spaniard now turned his eyes on his companion with more than usual contempt, and drinking in his turn ex¬ claimed, " Here is to you, signior, and God help you I" The other, mistaking this epi¬ thet for the very height of civility, was pro¬ fuse .in his thanks for the goodness of his
n Wishes, and declared he must have another glass to return the compliment. * f Why, to say the truth," cried he, stretching himself in his chair, ** I likes to make myself comfortable. I have gained a little independence, signior, byrtvy industry, and I enjoys it. As for the world, you see, I don't care a fig for it ; and, egad ! for a very good reason, because the world don't care half a one for me. I never frets and stews myself how things goes, not I ; and when they tell me the news concerning the affairs of the heads of the nation, why, I drink success to those who are honest." " Honest!" repeated the misanthrope with great emphasis, " honest !—But I heg pardon, signior, I won't interrupt you in talking about it."—." Oh 1 don't men¬ tion it," answered his lusty companion, whose glass was by this time replenished, * f I could not have left offin a better place." " Take my word for it, signior," said thè other, " honesty is a mere phantom. Where are you to find it ? Answer me that, signior. Are we not villains to ourselves ? Have we
ϊβ a singlé virtue belonging to us ? No : ^ve are lost past redemption," The lusty one answered> that he was very sorry (of it, and then declared he had not tasted a nicer drop of rum and water for many a day. - Orlando, truly sick of this discourse, walked towards the visitor at the remote part of the room, and attempted to open a conversation by observing it was a charm¬ ing evening. He answered in the affirmative. ** ϊ experience an unusual delight," con¬ tinued Orlando, * f on such a night as this." The half suppressed sigh which followed this observation told it was false; but the stranger's sigh was not relieved by such an effort. He fixed his eyes upon Orlando with pe¬ culiar earnestness, and he attempted to conceal a tear which rushed from his eye. * f I beg pardon, /ignior," he exclaimed, apparently recollecting himself, « your ob¬ servation was just r it is a delightful· even¬ ing* and to the happy must indeed occasion
17
sensations the most pleasing." " I have oft- times been tempted to suppose," continued Orlando, " that even the unhappy receive an alleviation to their sufferings from the reflexions that are naturally produced by such a night." « If that- alleviation may be traced," an¬ swered the stranger, " in an excess of soft and sorrowful remembrances, the child of misfortune, it is true, can find a luxury in them ; his wounded soul can raise in such tranquil moments shadows of imagination, the originals of which possessed his most strong and fervent affections ; but while he gazes in rapture on the outline his poor afflicted mind has.delineated* a recollection the most poignant obliterates the form witb his tears : perhaps that beloved countenance which momentary delirium presented to- him is now mouldered in the grave;. those features which were indelibly en¬ graven on his heart have long since crum¬ bled into dust. Oh, God 1 what are his. feelings when he reflects upon the virtues of the deceased, and of the ties which bound them to each other ! He seems to have los,t a parťof himself and looks towards death.
I With anxious solicitation, as the only friend Ì who can re-unite them." Thè stranger, was almost stifled with í emotions as he uttered the last words, and ; Orlando fell himself uncommonly moved-by ; his distress. The lean and lusty gentleman attended to this discourse with great atten¬ tion ; the eyes of the former were riveted on the speaker ; while the latter so far ex- ; erted himself as to push his wig from over his left ear, and incline his head in a posh- tion that he mighMose nothing of what was said ; in which situation he remained for à considerable time after the other left off i epeaknng, who soon quitted the apart¬ ment. The lusty man then replaced his wig end head in the same posture from I Which he had moved them, and declared ! ftat he believed what the stranger had said , t& be very true, though he aid not rightly ί "understand it. His companion fixed his eyes upon him with- a significant stare, and* ! shrugging up his shoulders,,exclaimed with considerable contempt— « You are á good-natured mau at aü. I&eatş». signior I'*'
TS His lusty companion still mistook hfo irony for compliments ; was again profuse in his thanks, and continued to sip his li¬ quor with great satisfaction. The landlord now entered the room, and Orlando made some inquiry after his guest who had just left them. The man said he had arrived but a few hours, that he ap¬ peared of a very melancholy turn of mind, and was, he supposed, gone to take a ram> ble towards the Hermitage, a place, indeed, well suited to encourage his malady. Hav ing asked which way would lead him to this place, and procured a direction, Orlando determined to walk there himself, glad of an opportunity to escape from the company in which the stranger had left him. There was something in this man which excited in him« more than ordinary curiosity and re¬ gard. He fek an interest in his^ apparent sorrows,, unusual at so short an acquaint¬ ance, and he wished much for another in¿ ţerview to confirm his good vvilh it was in part these feelings which urged hím to fok low to the Hermitage ; and after wishing фе lean and lusty visitors-a good· evenings
20
he proceeded immediately on his excur¬ sion. The ruins were a little distance from the i house, through a copse, in which a road had been cut by the landlord. It opened rather suddenly to an extensive space of broken ground, the under parts of which were com¬ posed of a red sandy soil, and the upper crusted with a fine green sod covered with brush-wood and wild shrubs. The boun¬ dary on each side was formed by mountains ©f considerable height,, which were adorned with fine pastures. The centre opened to the distant prospect of a beautiful country, while in an angle of the perspective might |nst be observed the clustered buildings of the city öf Toledo* A heavy fall of water rolled in torrents from a dark craggy emi¬ nence £ha,ljoined the left mountain, and fell ^vitlţ а;П awful noke into a large brook below, whiph wound to the right, and partly surrounded the ruins of an ancient buildings wbicb had bsen converted by modem, hand« info the fancied dwelling of a hermit. A worden bridge of simple construction con-i yejed bim &> the.eutrancp of this solitary
4
αϊ retreat, which, covered by moss, and en* compassed with thick foliage, inspired the beholder with the most melancholy sensa¬ tions. Orlando passed through the wicket door, and found the internal part rudely di¬ vided into two apartments : an opening of similar shape and size to the front took him to the back of the building, in which was a lonely walk; that ran through a double range of cypress trees : in one part of it, upon the fragment of a stone tablet, he read the following inscription. LINES TO MELANCHOLY *. Come, pensive power, With thy rapt gaze and mystic vision come, And consecrate the shade ! To thee belong The daik brown horrors* Melancholy, thine The sainted relic, thine the moulding bone And hermit seat! Come with the pale-eyed moon, That leads the yellow-skiried ev'ning forth To steep the vales in dew j when the duîi bat Wheels her short flight athwart the dusky bent/ Whose matted beard sheds slow the trickling drop, Meas'ring the ring-dove's dirge I Come with a train Of soft remembrances that mett the heart In love to human kind ; οι solemn thoughts That lift the soul to heaven !
.'«*■''■ 'v ■ ■■'■ ■'■'.'. ш - On a stone of similar form y at some little dištance, he observed a second inscription. Thé unaffeçted and simple beauties in the former one urged him to examipe this, with similar attention, and he read the following lines with equal gratification. * Thou who hast trac'd the'windings of the deîï, If haply hert ¿Uy wiidePd steps are led, Дела what the Genius of the rural scene. As once upon my raptured ear he pour*d Йе wildest notes upon his oaten reed, ^Spoke when he closed the song — « ——■——— '.* Not these alone, The woodbine bower, or bank with vi'letş drest ; Kot the first smile of meek-eyed morn, that wakes The carol of the groves; the water's fall ; The murmurs wasting он thé gentle gales, That breathe-on ev'ning's bosom ; not the gleam Of setting sun, thai gilds the tufted shade; Nor all the gilded charms of beauty else, That nature's lavish hand hath spread around ; JNľot these ahme delight, save when the soul Congenial meets them.—Artless, pensive power í Wiio folľwing nature in her peaceful walks, Vnenvy-d hears the din of life arise, Toils of the great, and follies ef the gay ; And, wrapp'd in calm Contenttnenťs russet robe, P^ies the pageant bUssof halfmankind!" As the evening closed, the gloomy ap-
23 pearance of the place considerably increas- d : he returned again to the front, but he could not discover the stranger he sought. The thick veil of night was spreading over the distant part of the view ; the back ground of the scenery was already obscured by misty vapours. This temporary dark¬ ness, however, was of short duration. A full moon rose slowly with majestic grandeur above the horizon, and appeared to dispel** the gathering clouds, through which it shone with peculiar lustre. Every object seemed -fresh tinted by the rays of the resplendent orb, and the whole view appeared suddenly to change by omnipotent power. Orlando, as he leaned over the railing of the bridge, was for a İew moments en¬ tranced with the sight. His quivering lips were inclined to utter a repentant prayer to that Being whose power he at фЬ moment * experienced with a conviction that struck his soul with awe. But the figure of the mur¬ dered Barnarvo, with those of his distract¬ ed wife and unfortunate daughter, floated before his eyes. The idea of the direful state into which he had fallen, from that emi-
δ* ñence of virtue he had formerly so proudly valued^ rushed upon his mind. A thousand remembrances of the early state of childhood* when he had received the commendations of his uncle for any little trait of magnani- miry, or self-denial of boyish sport not alto¬ gether consistent with the strictest tenets of morality, rapidly succeeded each other, and produced -a train of reflexions the most poignant to his feelings. He burst into tears. Orlando was fora moment virtuous. He lifted up his trembling hands in a sup¬ plicating posture towards «heaven ; he utter- *d .-picas ejaculation, and, wapt in a re- ligious fervency, was in the act of throwing himself on his knees, when the moon, escap¬ ing from a cloud which fyad for a moment -obscured it, shone its refulgent beams on the part where hè stood : suddenly turning ¿is head aţ^the instantaneous blaze of light ^rhich it occasioned, he beheld, with an ex- ^larnatiPn^ of terror, but a few paces from -him,-the pale and ghaatly figure of Theodo¬ sius the monk. His long black garments dwelled with- every breeze j his death-like countenance wa« fixed upon Orlando with
Üb
the most terrific expressions of anger; and he approached him with a slow and solemn step* ** In the name of the Holy Virgin," ex«* claimed Orlando, as he shrunk back at his advance, " why do you thus pursue me ? Why is your vengeance insatiable on a wretch who has unfortunately hlien under your power, and should therefore have,, some claim to your humanity ? If you actually possess attributes superior to your fellow- creatures, w r hich at times your actions seem to indicate, why thus exert them on one who is unequal to aid himself in a necessary defence, and who can only escape from your tyranny by obstinate and determined disobe¬ dience ľ' " Perjured fool Γ returned the monk with a contemptuous smile, " you would práy to your God, and in a whimpering rhapsody confess you are a villain. But you deceive yourself: you dare own to him what you are ashamcnuVto confess to thè world. Coward like, you are sensible ^f the punishment you deserve, but you have not the courage to receive it. If such are your puny tenets, prostrate yourself before this God, and solicit vor-, ш. , с
2ď
him to screen you from the public infamy which would follow a discovery of your crimes in Madrid : pray to him to shield you from the arm of justice, which would drag you to a common scaffold, and exhibit you before the eyes of the world suffering an ignominious punishment for the misdemea¬ nours of a common criminal." * f Oh, Heaven! 1 ' exclaimed Orlando, shud¬ dering at this picture of disgrace, " cursed be the hour in which I exposed myself to the power of such horrible anticipa¬ tions !" * c Have you not," answered Theodosius, ** marred those schemes I had projected, under a pusillanimity that would have dis¬ graced a child ? Had you not the most per¬ fect opportunity to have rendered me essen¬ tial aid, by a gratification to your own de¬ sires the most lascivious and voluptuous ?" " You know not what 1 witnessed in those moments," interrupted Orlando : « 6 yourself would have been appalled İn like circumstances." л ' Pale-hearted boy," answered the monk, «whatever might have been the appearance which disturbed you, its power was impo-
tent. M ark me 1 ." he cried, while he seized the trembling arm of Orlando with violence. " I do not so easily mean to resign my power over you. Cassandra's virtue is preserved ;— but " (he lowered his voice almost to a whis¬ per) <c you have another task. There is one who must be wrapped in everlasting sleep before to-morrow/'—(Orlando shuddered at the sentence.)—"This is a fit place for coun¬ sel on such a deed, of darkness. You have seen a traveller in a foreign dress, who has lately arrived at this inn. He Ís the victim to whom 1 allude, and it is to you I look for the completion of my project. This man, strange as it may appear to you, through circumstances the most mysterious and in¬ tricate, is a very serpent in my way, While be exists I breathe but faintly the breath-of life. Till his eyes are closed in death, mine open languidly to the light of day. Again í say he must die this very night ir+you must destroy him." '" Never !" exclaimed Orlando with an elevated voice, while he disengaged himself from the grasp of the priest, "never!—Theo¬ dosius de Zuivin," he cried in a firm tone, C2
2S
"you have, it is true, an ascendency over me the most powerful ; but, whatever may have been my crimes, these hands are not yet imbrued in the blood of a fellow-crea¬ ture. From such stain will I preserve them, although thy oppression should crush me." " Hypocrite ľ' answered the monk, (( con¬ sider but for a moment how you flatter your . own conscience. Trace thoce secret springs in the mind of your deceased friend Bar¬ narvo, which urged him to become his own assassin, and then exclaim, if you can, * / am no murderer' Are you the less inno¬ cent, as the destroyer of his existence, be¬ cause you did not openly give the fatal blow which cast him into eternity ? Can you ac¬ count yourself less culpable as the author of v the unfortunate catastrophe which closed his ■ life, because your crime has never yet been publicly discovered? Reflect on the poi¬ gnancy of his feelings, when he discovered vou to be the cause of his blighted honour ! when he beheld a beloved child lost for ever, and disgraced by your perfidy! and saw himself the dupe of pretended friend-
29
ship and artful insinuations i Unable to sus¬ tain such feelings, he annihilated his own being, but left the heavy charge of his blood on the head of him whose villany made life hateful to him. The miseries which the wretched Laura is fbomed to encounter, as well as the dissolution of her distracted mother, may be traced from the same source.—Can he then be termed innocent, against whom such charges may be brought ?" " In mercy spare me 1" exclaimed Or¬ lando ; " your words are torture to my soul." * f Why then," replied the monk, te re¬ main the puny votary of virtues you was not born to practise ? Why pretend to deceive me with the farcical semblance of morality, when you have trampled on the very essence of its laws ? In Barnarvo you destroyed your friend—a man whom you had taught to consider you as his benefactor: towards this stranger you can have no such ties ; he is the casual acquaintance of a moment ; you have not known him long enough to take any peculiar interest in his welfare, or cS
30 conceive any anxiety for his future fate,*— This powder is a poison of the most effec¬ tual kind. You must contrive to mix it with his drink, and he will not long survive the first draught. The effects will obviate any suspicions of the cause of his death : no appearance will be produced to raise con¬ jectures on that subject." Orlando still hesitated. ** On any other point," he cried, tc I would not attempt to cavil at an acquies¬ cence to your wishes ; but on this Γ have not resolution to determine." " Wretch !" exclaimed the monk with greater violence than he had ever yet s^een him exert, cc receive then the reward of your pusillanimity : from this hour shall }our name be branded with the most public infamy: every province shall resound with the description of you r hypocrisy and crimes: the inhabitants of every city shall call down curses on your head, and elevate you as a warning beacon of blasted fame. Your actions, and the secret springs from which they arose, shall be so detailed, that the vicious connexion may be conceived by
îl
children, while their lisping tongues shall utter execrations on you." Orlando was sensible of his power to execute in part this dreadful threat. An attempt to rob the marquis d'Olvernardo (from whom he had received such marked favours) would be considered by all as an unpardonable act of depravity, and stigma¬ tize his character for ever. Nor would the ruin of Laura, when classed with the tragi¬ cal events which followed as the conse¬ quences of it, fail to produce ä most de¬ cided and general detestation of his conduct. Theodosius had too well studied his cha¬ racter to be ignorant that these threats were at present the strongest hold he had upon him ; an<^ by the changes of his coun¬ tenance he entertained the most sanguine hopes of their success. " Oh God 1" he exclaimed in agony, " am I thus doomed to become the delibe¬ rate murderer? to annihilate the life of man, even without motive or interest?" Again he paused. Would the crimination of the priest, detested as he was by the multitude, be esteemed as valid agairist sq fair a cha- c4
32
racter as his? This doubt had before arisen in his mind ; but he remembered the notes which he had received from him on-the fatal night of the discovery were endorsed with his name, which was noticed by those who received them from him.. Those men might at once be brought forward as proofs of there having been some connexion between them, and consequently give reason for every suspicion. Orlando's tenacity in this respect ren¬ dered the idea of suspicion nearly as horri¬ ble as confirmation. The reflexion almost drove him to distraction: and to such a height did he carry his enthusiasm, that there is little doubt (although his actions gave but faint proofs of his resolution) that he would have preferred instant death to the loss ofthat fame he so dearly valued. The threats of the monk had the most powerful effect upon him ; and after some time he, with evident reluctance, consented to the proposed scheme. Theodosius delivered him the powder in a small phial; and, after cautioning him against a failure in this second undertaking,
S3
he disappeared. Orlando remained for some moments entranced in thought. The deed he was going to commit weighed heavy at his heart, while his ideas of the supernatural powers of the monk increased. That Theodosius should be acquainted with the route he had taken, which he had not himself determined upon when he left the castle of Olvernardo, was equally strange as that he should so suddenly appear to him in that dreary and solitary place. Every circumstance seemed contrived for their interview on this spot, which was the very situation for Theodosius's purpose. The task that Orlando had now to fulfil was very different from the former one, where his passions were to be gratified in the execution, which at once served to prevent his reflecting on the enormity of it. Premeditated murder was too sudden a step from those errors he had already prac¬ tised for him to look upon it with indif¬ ference. The regular gradations he had * undergone were not sufficient to preserve a near affinity between his last crime and that с 5
M
into which he was going to plunge. There was a chasm, that made the stride he had promised to take horrible even in idea ; and he sickened at the recollection of his agree¬ ment to fulfil it. He called on the name of the monk to recants but no one ap¬ peared. One moment he resolved to dash the phial ирод the ground on which he stood; but the next brought to his mind all the horrors of public infamy. Under this state of irresolution he walked, towards the house, and, entering the apart¬ ment he had left, found the same party at supper, and understood they were going to remain there for the night. He was rallied on having remained so Jong on his ramble^ and invited to partake of their repast. Or¬ lando's distressed state of mind was easily perceived by all present. He made a tri¬ fling excuse for it ; and attempted to eat> but was unable to swallow a mouthful. His agitation was extreme: and he in¬ wardly shuddered every time his,eyes met those of the stranger. He had assumed a fictitious name. 'Being addressed by that appellation,, to which he was unused* added .
35 to his perturbation, and made him neglect to answer to it several times in the course of the conversation. In short, his manners immediately conveyed the idea. ot con¬ scious guilt; and it was not difficult to perceive, by the countenances of the visitors, that their suspicions were raised. The room in which they sat was extensive; and his companions, having withdrawn from the table where they had taken their supper, left Orlando alone to finish his. The stranger's drink remained in the place where he had left it; and Orlando, perceiving this was not an opportunity to bç missed to execute his dreaded purpose, with trembling hands emptied the fatal contents of the phial into the glass, while he scarcely breathed through terror and apprehension. He dared not turn his head, and his hands shook so violently that he was unable to help the victuals to his mouth. The stranger called for his beverage, and the waiter had taken it to, him some minutes before Orlando removed his eyes from the part where it stood* He repented of what he had done ; but there was now no alternative: he well knew
пв
any attempt to remove the glass would create suspicions, and perhaps discover the act. Orlando had never experienced such pangs of horror as he now felt. * He mecha¬ nically followed the stranger's drink to the other table, and seated himself, without being sensible of his actions. The perspi¬ ration of guilty remorse hung upon his face, and every attempt to compose himself only increased his agony. The stranger had not yet attempted to taste his liquor since it had received the poison. The efforts of both the lean and lusty Spaniards seemed fruit¬ less to draw him into conversation: his languid eye was fixed upon vacancy : his pale yet expressive face seldom relaxed into a smile : a settled melancholy pervaded his countenance; but it was of that kind which commanded the sympathy of the beholder. <c I presume, noble signior," said the lusty gentleman, " by what you have eaten, you don't like ollapodridas ? Now I often enjoy .myself upon them vastly." "Enjoy!" cried the other: "you are made up of enjoyments : it would better become
37
you to be a little more miserable.—Shocking •times, signior!" he continued, addressing himself to the stranger. Both these observations were answered by a slight inclination of the head, and se· veral others were made with as little effect. In the mean time Orlando's distress in¬ creased. He was asked if he was unwell, but he answered in the negative. At length the stranger was taking up his glass with an intent to drink :—Orlando ut¬ tered an inward exclamation of horror. The landlord was at that moment in¬ quiring of the former in what name he should make out his bill, and the stranger answered, Alphonso de Mellas. Orlando started from his seat 5 his eyes became fixed ; a shivering sensation ran through every vein; his blood curdled with horror ; his feelings were momentary—an at« tempt to express them would have been folly : he aimed at the fatal drink which the stranger was just lifting to his lips, and dashed the goblet from his hand. The li¬ quor was lost, and the glass broken into a thousand pieces. Orlando neither heard nor saw any moie,
38 and instantly fell senseless on the floor. The whole house was in confusion ; his recovery was but slowj and he asked, before his senses were perfectly returned, if the stranger had drunk his beverage? The impropriety of the question immediately flashed upon his mind, and his distress was extreme. Before he retired to his chamber, he mentioned that he was subject to such fits ; and Otto, who had been called to assist his master, joined in this assertion. After some little time,he took leave of the company, and was supported by his servant to his apart¬ ment. Otto expressed the utmost concern for his indisposition,- and offered to remain in the room to attend upon him during the night. Orlando, however, wished only to be alone, and Otto withdrew. The emotions which he had suffered dur¬ ing the last few hours were far more vio¬ lent than he had ever remembered to have felt. He could scarcely believe himself awake, or that the whole train of events which he had witnessed were but a mere troublesome dream. He had strong reasons to suppose the stranger was his father, who
39
for many years had been considered as num¬ bered with the dead. The various reflex¬ ions to which this idea gave rise were too intricate for particular description. Mingled sensations of joy and horror, of shame and contrition, rushed upon his miqd ; and if a violent flood of tears had not occasioned him relief, it is likely they would have thrown him into a state of distraction. There was little doubt but there might be others of the name of Alphonso de Mel¬ las besides his father, and this idea for a mo¬ ment seemed to annihilate the former one : but he felt no alleviation from it : on the contrary, he w r as more miserable. The thoughts produced by having thus suddenly become possessed of a parent were capable of occasioning a ray of joy even in the bosom of Orlando. He considered what would have been his felicity, could he have thrown himself into his arms without the mortifying thought that he disgraced hirn. Never did he regret his errors with greater poignancy than at this moment ; never did they appear with more glaring deformity than when they thus stood between him
40
and his father. Although labouring under a confusion of intellect the most horrid, he had a wish, even before he left the apartment below, to have thrown himself at the feet of this Alphonso de Mellas. There was a something in his countenance and manners which convinced him it was un¬ necessary to inquire if he was his parent, and he languished to embrace him under that title. But he instantly recollected the danger of such precipitation ; his pride was hurt at the mere thought of standing, before him as a culprit. If he was anxious to con¬ ceal his crimes from the eyes of the world in general, he was even more so to secrete them from those by whom he had a still stronger wish to be respected. He was afraid the extravagance of his emotions had in part betrayed him. He dreaded the approach of day with all the terror of a guilty conscience : he knew not but it might find him a prisoner, under the charge of attempting to destroy his own fa¬ ther. Sleep was banished from his pillow ; his body was scorched with a feverish heat, and
41
his eyes wandered round the gloomy cham¬ ber in which he slept, with an almost de¬ lirious anxiety. A dim lamp burned in an obscure part of it : he was unable to bear even its faint rays, and he drew the cur¬ tains of the bed still closer round him, to shade the feeble melancholy light. After some time he fell into a disturbed slumber : his burning brain delineated ob¬ jects the most awful and terrific : he awoke with a cry of horror, and, starting up in the bed, pulled back the curtains he had so lately closed,—when he again beheld the form of Theodosius фе monk. Orlando shrunk back with an involuntary groan; he had fastened his chamber door with great care after Otto had left him, to pre¬ vent intrusion ; but neither time nor situa¬ tion was a bar against the presence of the priest. He appeared at periods when he was least expected, and when the sight of him might be considered as a miracle. His face seemed more than commonly pale, and the sound of his voice resembled the knell of death. " Again you- have deceived me !" he
tø
cried in a low tone. " In this present hour I might have left you to your destiny, and the first rays of to-morrow's sun would have shone on you charged with the attempted assassination of your own father. But I would not so soon annihilate the power I possess over you. Your fate İs in my hands, and I can wind it to the awful crisis at my pleasure. The buz of suspicion already ac¬ cuses you with a design to take life ; the pusillanimity of your manner discovered the deed you was in the act of perpetrating ; and, without an immediate escape, you will be made a prisoner in your bed. We shall meet again hereafter.." The form of the monk slowly moved to¬ wards an obscure part of the chamber, and his figure was lost in the gloom which sur¬ rounded it. Orlando could with difficulty believe the reality of what had passed. He began to conceive his senses were deranged, and he made an effort to recollect the oc¬ currences of the last few hours with some * degree of composure : but his head became dizzy with such remembrances ; a cold per¬ spiration bedewed his limbs; and he remain-
ed in a state of inexpressible torture, irre¬ solute with respect to the plans he should pursue, without mind to determine or power to execute them.
éf
CHAP. XIX. Oh, tyrant conscience î how dost thou afflict me ϊ When I iook back, "'tis terrible retreating.: I cannot bear the thought, nor dare repent : I am but man, and, Fate, do thou dispose ше. Shakespeare. Urlando was awakened in the course of an hour, from the reverie in which he had fell> by several soft taps at the door of his cham¬ ber. His distracted mind instantly pictured the officers of justice coming to seize him. He breathed short with alarm, and listened with the horrid expectation of hearing the corregidor enter the apartment by force. In a few minutes, however, his fears were in some measure relieved by the voice of Otto through the key-whole ; who, in a kind of whisper, requested he would let him in. Orlando started from his bed, and with trembling hands unlocked the door. Otto*s countenance bore all the marks of terror and affright. He informed his
45
master that he had taken up his lodging in an out-house, near which two male ser¬ vants belonging to the landlord also slept. It was but a slight partition which parted them; and Otto by this means had an opportunity of hearing their discourse, which he soon found too interesting to be neglected. It turned on the behaviour of Orlando dur¬ ing supper; and one informed the other that his master had very strong suspicions of the drink which Orlando had thrown .down ; that the remains, which had stained the floor, had been examined, and that there appeared to be some drug mixed with k# On this account he had resolved on an excuse to detain him the next morning; and was determined, if it failed, to arrest him on the charge, and in the mean time to dispatch a man to the nearest magistrate to provide proper persons to secure him. Otto had stopped to hear no more; but had carefully crept to his master's chamber, to acquaint him with the alarming informa¬ tion. Orlando now perceived the prophecy of the monk fulfilled; he appeared encom*
46 passed with horŕots the fnist * dreadful, and he listened to Otto's entreaties to fly instantly from the inn without answering or appearing to hear them. His mind was oppressed and bewildered : he sunk under its weight, and appeared to droop into that torpid state which threatened an immediate Joss of reason. Otto proposed that they should directly quit the house, which at the present moment it was easy to accom¬ plish without discovery, as the whole of the family were retired to rest, and the horses could be prepared in a few minutes. Or¬ lando gave a kind of passive consent, and by the assistance of his servant was ч soon dressed. He had discharged his bill, hav¬ ing before determined to set off at an early hour m the morning. They proceeded softly to the stable ; where Otto in a short time having prepared their horses, they left the place with considerable speed, and before day-light in the morning found themselves several miles distant from it. Orlando had consented to this arrange¬ ment, merely because it had been strongly urged by Otto. His mind was in that fer-
47
ment which disorders the whole system, and rendered him totally unable to act for himself. They took no direct road, for fear of being traced; but turned in several direc¬ tions, to keep as much as possible out of a line with the part they had quitted. Orlando rode at a considerable pace. He spoke but little during their journey. A feverish heat seemed rapidly to increase over his whole body ; his countenance be¬ came flushed with a hectic glow of colour ; and he was anxious to wet his parched and trembling lips at every brook they passed. Towards the latter part of the day he suddenly became faint and weak, com¬ plained of violent pains in his head, and cold shiverings. He was himself aware that he had every symptom of the approach of a violent fever, and desired Otto to look out for some retired cottage, where they might take up their abode for the night, in pre¬ ference to an inn. This arrangement re¬ minded him to search for his purse ; when, to his infinite chagrin and mortification, he
4$
recollected he had left it behind him. The only money he possessed was a few pistoles, which by chance had remained in >his pockets; and the circumstances under which he had departed frustrated'all hopes of ever recovering it. He now saw him¬ self reduced to poverty, and his character in danger of being publicly blasted, while his frame shook under the approach of a violent and dangerous disease, which threatened the most dreadful consequences. He communicated the horrors of his si¬ tuation to Otto; and Otto did all in his power to comfort him. He said he had a little money in his pocket, which should be heartily at his service; and that he could have no higher gratification than in sharing it with his beloved master. Orlando could only answer him with a burning tear ; he was almost incapable of holding his seat on the saddle. Otto was in part obliged to support him upon his horse ; and he per¬ ceived his master would not be able to ride many miles further. They were now on a barren heath, which
±9 proved of far greater extent than they exr pected. Not a house or hovel was to be seen in the gloomy prospect. The last rays of the setting sun had left a strong mellow light in the illuminated hori¬ zon. The heavy ^broken ground, in part covered with thick brush-wood, added to a few solitary trees placed at considerable distances from each other, gave the view a melancholy and desolate appearance. Nor were Orlando and his servant unappropriate figures in the landscape. The strong fero¬ cious features of the former, contrasted with the melancholy desponding countenance of the latter, as they gazed with bursting eyes on the glorious orb, at once rendered them a group perfectly characteristic, with - the scenery which surrounded them. They proceeded slowly forward, while Otto anxiously looked out for some hu- man dwelling to which he might convey his master; After some little time they arrived at a gradual declivity, which appeared to wind to the left. It was a rugged road, and the VOL. III. Ό
50
■termination was lost^to the view by the direction which it took. Otto resolved to follow this track, and turned accordingly. They had not pro¬ ceeded far, when they perceived slight volumes of smoke behind some dark fo¬ liage, at no great distance. They immedi¬ ately conjectured they were near a habita¬ tion, and directly rode towards the spot. They were not mistaken : a gloomy cottage, almost surrounded with trees, presented it¬ self to their sight. The building appeared to be ancient, and chiefly composed of rugged stones, with little attention either to beauty or taste. The front was almost ¿covered with ivy, which spread over the ¿windows, and seemed as if it were intended to shade the light of heaven from those who lived within. There was no time to be lost in an application to their humanity. Orlando was now so extremely ill, that it was with great difficulty he could hold the reins of his horse. Otto alighted and knocked at the door, which was opened by an old decrepit .woman, apparently
51
seventy years of ageg He desired to be informed if he could speab^it^ the "master of the cottage ; and was, answered in 4=he affirmative. After having disapt3eared T for;^ few moments, she returned, açcompafıfed by a man who seemed about fofr^ : Hlfr dress vwas extremely rude, and rustici if i$$ perfectly neat and cleanj Jbis forra rM&fà shrunk and wasted; his countenanc^paİİı melancholy, and dejected ; and bis majin^ït languid and gloomy. Otto briefly related to him the illness of his master; whfa he said, was travelling towards Toledo^ bţ$ was now incapable of supporting himself another mile. That they had entered upon the heath without being aware of ks extent* and had fortunately discovered his cottage^ where they hoped hie benevolence would prompt him to permit them to remain fo» that night. The cottager at the first mo¬ ment appeared somewhat suspicious <of their intentions; but, the looks of Orlane were sufficient to prp\fc the -, principal pari of Otto's « narrative. In ; disiiiøbinting,^ 1щ fainted in the arrrţs of, his SiSi^aut^^ atíid itj was a considerable, tinse, before ibç.,r?e<?H d2
52 Véred. After some^ttle hesitation, their féquešt ' Was agreed to \ and the horses befti^ placed Irian old barn at some little distancer Otto joined his master in the ktohéb^f the cottage, ñ was fitted up in â'rieatïarM comfortabľe manner. The old #t$rnan j was desired to prepare a chamber abWve^for their guest. He was unable to lâfeáiaMy^éfréshmênt, and was conveyed to limbed Ш^ soon «as it was ready for him. Thb'feïtówïng morning confirmed the sym- pfoináí 1 óf a violent fever, which appeared ťbéf night before^ He was in a high deli- riarfi, s and 'his removal was considered as éangferö-üs "in the extrenle. No medical advice-was : to be procured f r many miles; antľOtfo had- reasons for keeping up that ЫуесЙопР^апу being called in. The cot- fageť^eéhaved^with the utmost humanity, and assisted-himself to pay every attention Orlando sč : gteatly required. For several days T his dissolution'wa£ expected hourly. l%e old woman had "been used to attend #pon Abe sick; and she treated him with Hie utmost tenderness. Otto never quitted bis chamber: and he contrived, as well as
53
he was able, to keep?|^?th their hqsl and his servant out at those periods when kß maf· ster's insanity was at the greatest %ighAţfpr he then uttered many things he, mpst.strçı- nuously wished to conceal. The behaviour of this man during Orlando's indisposition may for the ¿moment appear contrafeţo^y to the character already given of bim : } sfo®£ it is to be considered his own interest was consulted in such- GQi^duct,:, it wa$ by no means his wish that Orlando should die ; he had still plans in view «which his recovery could only accomplish; and consequently he used every exertion in his power to save him from the ravages pf the disease under which he, suffered. * It was three weeks before h4'*was sup¬ posed to be out of danger. Nature had ία part taken its course : the medicines which had been, administered to him i>y the cot¬ tager were composed л c*f simple herbs, but his knowledge of the malady seemed uncom¬ monly correct. Orlando remained in a weak low state fora long time after the fever had quitted him, and his reflexions did not aid his recovery. He had no means of repaying υ 3
Sé his host for the troupe and expense which •be had occasioned. His pride was shocked at the idea of leaving the cottage without a reparation, even though it was not demand¬ ed ; and the consideration of what method he was to pursue after he had left it was equally tormenting. If he returned to the castle of Olvernardo, some explanation would of course be required ; nor was he certain but his behaviour to Cassandra might be by this time known. If he wroce to his uncle, he would be necessitated to give reasons for his not having returned to Madrid,· and likewise some place of address for his letters. Every plan he thought upon was equally unsatisfactory, because there was a danger in them of bk character being degraded. Jn the mean time, as he gradually grew better, he had an opportunity of observing, with some attention, the disposition and manners of his host. Under-the garb of a cottager there was easily to be perceived a refinement of manners totally unsuitable to his outward appearance; and though he at times evi¬ dently 4 endeavoured to conceal such sym- gtoms* still they had been too much grafted
ss
in his education to be entirely lost. The principal feature in his character seemed an attempt to despise the world, and rail at all that belonged to it. His conversation often turned on thi« subject, and Orlando ofttimes defended those points which he knew he would condemn, on purpose to draw his ideas more strongly upon them. He talked of the excess of vanity, the unjustness of . principles, and iUiberaiity of sentiments in mankind in general ; while he congratulated himself on the happiness he enjoyed in being placed at a distance from those scenes in which they were engaged. Yet, amidst alif this boast of enviable felicity, it was by no- means difficult to discoverne wasnot actually the happy man he in vain attempted to per¬ suade himself. If languid melancholy and gloomy listlessness could be termed happi¬ ness and serenity, he might be allowed to en¬ joy them. He read much, and he determined in himself to be gratified with the amuse« ment. But this gratification did nqt prevent his thoughts wandering from his book ; and although he believed himself highly delight¬ ed with the author, it was a chance if he о 4
56
recollected the subject of the passage he had perused ten minutes after he quitted it. He walked much, and resolved to gather entertainment from the study of nature in her most simple garb. But the continual re¬ petition of such modes of amusement at last made them irksome ; and often as he viewed the wild rose of the forest with a gaze of seeming admiration, not even a faint outline of its form was sketched on his mind, or the most trivial of its beauties considered or re¬ garded. When he spoke of the world, it is true he railed at it with peculiar bitterness ; but a tear would ofttimes start from his eye as he repeated his invectives; while his reproaches appeared like the upbraid- ings of a parent on the vices oí a beloved child, Orlando understood he had been im¬ mured in his present retirement upwards of twenty years. He was silent as to his his¬ tory before this period, and seemed studious to avoid any conversation that might lead to İt. Orlando gained strength daily : he had now been an inhabitant of the cottage six weks, and he began to think of quit¬ ting it; but the consideration of the low state
57
of his finances distressed and harassed him. To make his host amends was at present the principal use for which he needed money ; but he could think of no expedient to re¬ lieve his pecuniary embarrassments. During his reflexions one evening on this point, as he strolled across a little paddock-adjoining the cottage, he by chance took up a paper which lay before him, and read the fol¬ lowing lines. THE WITHERED VIOLET *. %< Sweet flower! and is thy blue eye closed, That open'd to the morning ray ? And are thy charms so soon expos'd To droop and moulder in decay ?—. ·* Like thee, till Julia touch'd my heart I smiled in life's auspicious morn ; Each gale that pass'd could charms impart, On every breeze my bliss was borne. '* Like thee, I flourished for a while In» Julia's smile, in Julia's eye ; But now thrown oŕT, denied that smile, Like thee I droop, like thee 1 die. '* And when thou bidd'st thy sweets expand, ' And when thou yield*st thy parting breathj D 5
ss
Τα scatter fragrance o*cr the hand tThat crops thy flower, that seals thy death— 3'Tis fyit like m<y *vho> doom'd to sigh, , Condeinn'd by Julia's frowns to smarts Vet^tìll must bless that scornful eye. Yet stffl rausťlôve that-cruel heart." Orlando-had little doubt but it belonged $p the recluse. t The composition if his, at onie/confirmed him to be a man of taste and education ; and Ke could not but won· der at the strange events which caused him to abandon the world, and screen himself from ail society in so melancholy a spot. His thoughts upon this subject caused him to wander further than usual; the dark shadows of approaching night had already diffused a gloomy tint over the surrounding scenery ¿ anoche altered his direction with an intent return towards the cottage, when Theodosius the monk suddenly stood before ' „l l''. him. Orlando felt considerably awed abhis presence : these extraordinary visita« at once perplexed апф astonished him: аД his ac¬ tions ¡seeole^ito· confirm,the popular belief of his supernatural power, and he listened to the sound of his voice with dread and
59 apprehension: his· countenance appeared less ferocious than usual. « Orlando," he exclaimed, "you again behold me : my presence is, as usual, unex¬ pected, but the circumstances under which you are concerned are not unknown to me. I am aware of the loss of your money, and the difficulties to which it has exposed you; bknow your feelings on the occasion, and am sensible of your distress. You are con-r vinced you are in my power : twice havo you failed in the services I required of you ; but there are others which I yet need : my influence must, not be forfeited ; you must still remain my slave. On these, terms you have a right to those aids which, at certain crises in your fate, from peculiar circum* stances, I am able to-bestowv Your host conceals a treasure of considerable amount near yonder pedestal in his garden; order your servant, if you can trust, him,. to dig to-morrow at midnight three feet to the eastward'of its base, and he will find atno great depth acquare metal chest of small dimensions, which contains^ upwards ' of four thousand pistoles, in current gold, com
end Шее ef large ¿Hítíúnt. İt mây bé easily fegati Фэп|еп% and be careful to coter the ground m as? to prevrat suspicions of tbe theft, Öuit the coltege on the following йжу, and repair irJimadiately to the city of $#urcia. Ton are there totally unknown, and have liberty to enjoy every pleasure With the gold you will possess. Use no pár* simony in looking forward to futurity : your resources shall not end here: various shall berbe plans you will diseover for accumulat¬ ing a capital with sums superior to the present ţ and While they are capable of pro- curing yon happiness, your felicity shall be complete. Meet me after a week from tiţit day at midnight, under tbe porch of ţh*f cathedral in Murcia, where I will im¬ part to yo$ certain events which must take place iri Jthat city, and explain to you the most safe and easy methods to execute them» Orlando f s eyes glistened with joy while the monk disclosed, the purport of his visit ; but. when the robbing of his host (from whom he had received such humanity) was
'Ш
гШ^1#АЩши^ his trér^røftgf Kps ekclaitìa^d With аоШ man¿ %^ iïl^sicknes^ yvhose humanity bas prøerved my exi^ . tencel" ν^'/Γν.·:;:^^^;---:- ; ' : --'"- ; - v" ' ^ fool i* f cried the monkl» while his fea¬ tures resumed all their austerity, "do you moralise upon the? deéd! /Were уощ £еф irigs so délicate at that moment when you seized the notes from the escritoir/ of the marquis dOlyernardo ? : Do you now re¬ flect upon theenormity^of takmg irorn* уолиг host, or reckon upoir the crime of robbing your best friend? Was not the former tlie sickly plan of your own feeble brami Can you descant upon the virtues it displayed?" These words seemed to strike to the «oul of Orlando : he promised punctually to fol¬ low^ the directions of the monk, whc^e form he suddebly lost in themidst of some Ш - : ;" -föiisge;" -.'iit^'a: little-distanòe'J' sêltlí he ^ШЙ]гаЙг<о:1Йв cottage and supped
with his host; but immediately the meal was concluded he complained^ of a violent head¬ ache, and retired to hi« chamber. Here he had an opportunity to reflect freely upon his last interview with*the monk. Althougbhe wassensible of the ingratitude of the act he was going to commit, yet he felt not that horror and repugnance in the execur rion of it which were powerful'enough-to shadow the glowing prospect of possessing the nioney of the recluse. In these reflex¬ ions the-regular progression of vice was to be traced with peculiar accuracy. The enor¬ mity of the last act which Orlando at? tempted-to commit was a principal cause to.lessen in his mind the magnitude of any other he might be inclined to pursue. He had been on the point of murdering his own father : he shuddered at the thought ; every vicious-deed, when placed in cpm pa¬ rison îwith it,, appeared trivial, andlöst the chief part .of, its^horrors. To rob his host Orlando was çousgíous was a most flagrant breach of gratitude. At a period when Ы had r never attempted a greater crime, the lignant , sensations which he experienced
m in a similar act have been already de* scribed; but now his first consideration was to place it in comparison with a deed of murder; in consequence of which it's darkest tints of atrocity vanished in the still deeper shades of that before which it was held in opposition. For these reasons» he mused upon the scheme proposed by the monk to replenish his finances with.considerable calmness, and already began to anticipate the pleasures he should enjoy at Murcia, when no check would be put upon the gratification c f them». Strange and intricate are the contrasted passions which agitate the-.human- breast. Orlando had dwelled upon the idea of leav¬ ing his host without a liberal amends for his benevolence* with all the uneasiness and re¬ gret, which would have been experienced by one possessed of the nicest sentiments of honour and the most upright principles of moral justice and general philanthropy : yet he anxiously, grasped at the opportunity to rob him of his. whole fortune, and deter* mined, with perfect satisfaction,, to make him the; pecuniary present Jae wished}: with
a ^art of the very property he* intended to procure by a daring and impious theft. He had no fears either of Otto's refusal to dig for the money, or of trusting him with his design of taking it. He had already wit¬ nessed enough of his character to know he did not stand upon punctilios when his in¬ terest was concerned ; and so greatly had the finesse of this artful domestic worked upon him, that he conceived himself perfectly safe in his power. The following morning he mentioned to his host his intention to pursue his journey the next day. The cottager appeared di¬ stressed at the idea of losing his company. Tbe reclused manner in which he lived again became the topic of conversation. Or¬ lando once more expressed his surprise at finding such an inhabitant in so desolate a spot, and was answered in the following manner :— ««I'will confess to you, Don Orlando, you are the only mortal I have seen, except one, since my residence in this part, whom I have experienced the least desire either to retain as. a friend, or to whom I would com¬ municate those few trivial events in my life
65
Which occasioned me to abandon the world, and immure myself in this cottage. We have often talked of the inconsistencies, the follies, and the vices of mankind, and our opinions have been nearly the same. We have both condemned them, and viewed them with perfect contempt. To you, then, I may surely impart the circumstances which forced me into retirement. There is nothing in them either striking or uncom¬ mon ; they were merely a few of the general occurrences of life, which every mortal is born to encounter, though there are some better calculated for the task than others. I confess my insufficiency in this respect* Reared with an unusual indulgence through the first few infant years of my existence, I became unable to brook disappointment or endure adversity, when I felt them inflicted by instruments equally base and contemp- * tibie." The cottager then began his little narra* tive in the following manner.
€в
MEMOIRS OF DON FRANCIS VALVARD. I am the only child of a respectable citi¬ zen of Madrid, who, by an uncommon se¬ ries of good fortune, in receiving a large dowry with his wife, and several good lega¬ cies from different relations, added to a very flourishing business, found himself enabled at an early period to quit the fatigues of a mercantile lire with a competency sufficient to support his family, not only with comfort but splendor. He accordingly retired to a beautiful estate some distance fi om the city. Don Alan (for such was my father's nameì was accounted a proud and hatíghty Spaniard, From the common multitude an appellation of this kind was by no means new, and his behaviour might at times give too great cause for such an opinion. He possessed extreme nice notions of. honour ; laid the greatest stress upon forms and ceremonies of every description ; and in his capacity as a magistrate (to which station he was ele¬ vated soon after he quitted business) he was always severe in his punishments of vice*.
67 and as liberal in his rewards of virfcie. But even these qualifications were not sufficient to make him a man of the people : he never flattered or fawned before them in public ; he never made flourishing promises which he had no idea of fulfilling, or talked loudly of considering their interests while he thought and acted only for his own. He seldom distributed his charitable benefac¬ tions himself; and consequently those whom he employee! to convey his good deeds to the world shared the principal part of the credit in bestowing them. In short, Don Alan was a good man without being thought so : he practised virtues, yet never received in return thegratitude of his fellow- creatures : he often heard the highest praises lavished upon the man whom he had made the almoner of his benevolence, while his own character was attacked with a scurrility equally cruel and disgraceful. About this period I had attained my twentieth year: considerable pains had been taken with my •education, and I was already allowed to be a scholar of no inconsiderable merit. For боте 'time past I had observed, perhaps-with
68
more .penetration and reflexion than was usual for one at my age, the little popula¬ rity which my father derived from the many worthy deeds he performed. I thirsted to become a distributor of his charities ; for I had even yet studied human nature enough to perceive that the very essence of his goodness was lost by the manner in which he circulated it. I discovered that, to be idolised by the world, it was not only re¬ quisite that a man should be privately cha¬ ritable, but that he should himself conde¬ scend to be the executor of his beneficence, and relieve the miseries of his fellow crea¬ tures rather with his own hand than by that of another. I requested my father to Jet me be his almoner ; I languished to share the encomiums which I was certain his con¬ tributions, when concentrated in one giver, would produce ; and I likewise encouraged a hope, that by sucb, means I might be able to convince him my hypothesis was correct, to which I had often in vain at¬ tempted to make him a convert. It would be useless to describe the pleasure I received in this task. Far from taking pains to ira-
69 press on the minds of the objects whom I assisted, that the gift they received was intended to demand from them an abject or slavish submission to the donor, I took every opportunity to convey contrary senti¬ ments, and that the pleasure of rendering others happy was the chief felicity I derived from their relief. I need not say that I re¬ mained but a short time without reaping the fruits of my exertions ; my name was uttered with a general buz of admiration for many miles round our dwelling; I became universally respected and adored: when I walked out, blessings were called down upon me by both men and women of vari¬ ous ages and conditions, and they even taught their children to lisp forth prayers in my behalf. I will confess to you, Don Or¬ lando, this kind of public glare on my character gratified my vanity 5 and I in¬ quired of my father, with some degree of exultation, if I had not proved my asser¬ tions with respect to the distribution of his wealth. I however by no means perceived that satisfaction in his countenance which I expected, and after some little time he
: t® add rêáaséd rue às near as I can recollect ín the following manner. ^ţrancis, your conduct of late^ has not been fost upori me : I have watched it with all the arixjety of a parent: I have striven to trace your actions to the most favourable source* and attempted to dive into the secret recesses of your mind with more than ordi¬ nary care and attention. I am confident it will surprise and hurt your feeliţygs 'töj say, I ám by ho mean s gratified with my discoveries. I can .■■well. ^anticipa te your disappointment, after hayjng deceived ypurseif^with false no¬ tions of your owri worthiness, to be told by one, who you are certain wpuld comrnend if he could, that you aregradyallý railing under thembst egregious errors, arid perhaps ap* pr4>áching,t by imperceptible degrees, to a character ;equajjy mean and despicable." ; ,.и : Щу ЩШеЬш£ е changed at these words ; a r fainţ flush, of r anger;Spread о ver my, cheek ;. but it instantly;became pale again,; and,! could scarcely содсеа! my tears. .;■. ; My father cqntinued without interrupt tion :-^ ť I observes these words affect you. ^pu^feel not more anguish than J who deli-
71 ver them ; but, as it is a duty incumbent on me to explain to a beloved son those errors which by experience İ am more competent to judge upon, as to their consequences* than himself, I will endeavour, however irksome the task may be, to convince you that your conduct for these last few months, although considered by yourself as highly meritorious, will in the abstract prove to be extremely reproachable. Be assured that the essence of charity consists not in the publicity of its donations. He who relieves the sufferings of his fellow-creatures prin¬ cipally with a view of the applause he may procure from the act, neither experiences the true sensations of a benevolent heart, nor possesses that philanthropy which his actions seem to indicate. The true reward of the good deeds of a good man is the inward satisfaction he experiences 'm allevir ating the sorrows of those whose misfor? tunes demand his aid : it signifies but little to him, whether the thanks of the object are publicly delivered, or delivered at all ; he only wishes to know that their misery is decreased ; he is indifferent as to the knowţ*
ledge they may have of his services ;—such Ш idea> doçiS not evén slightly intere st him . ^1 ¿heard with concern the observations ^otiymadeo to me respecting the little public praise L received from my benefactions. I forbore at the moment to rebuke your opinrøns with that warrnth which should tend to aniiihilate them/ I resolved to let youv proceed farther with your experiment, that I might gain stronger proofs to con¬ vince you of yèur erroK ■ Cari you say that you would have given the sums which you have lately circulated for me, with equal pleasure, had you been convinced that the world would never have been acquainted with your giftSj arid even the persons reli e ved remained ignorant of their benefactor ? Surely not; You well knew your principal aim was tó acquire popularity, to be adored by the multitude, to be publicly held up as ä model to your fellow-creatures. Even policy would not countenance such modes of proceeding« You aré little aware, my son, how transient are the encomiums for which you languish ; you have not ã conception by what trivial circumstances they may bc p ■
1$ lost. He who attempts to please all, must acquiesce to very different sentiments and opinions : he must resign every prin¬ ciple of his own, and become the mean pretended assentor to those of another. Believe me, it is the duty of a man to stand unprejudiced an independent mem¬ ber of the community into which he is classed. Let him boldly assert those motives by which he regulates his conduct, with sin¬ cerity and truth ; let no lurking equivocal thoughts rankle in his bosom ; let his words come from his heart, and he will never fear a repetition of them. Such a man, should he possess erroneous notions, by a free confession will be open to conviction, and by candidly viewing the arguments on each side will be always sure to correct them. No one has a right to form his actions to the dictates of others, unless he feels a conviction in his mind that they are соп/ч sistent with his own good and that of so¬ ciety. It is surely a folly too often to be seen both in the religion and politics of a country, for a particular axiom to be lájd VOL. III. E
τ*
db wn by a certain class of men 9 which is to be immediately assented to, without the v most slight investigation to prove that it is correct. Do we not daily hear tenets of faith solemnly, affirmed to be believed by those» who are even ignorant of the grounds upon which they are formed ? Can such be termed true believers ?—No : they deceive themselves and the world by pretending to be so, and insensibly act with a duplici¬ ty which under other circumstances they would despise. Take but time to consult your own heart, and you will find that your motives often vary materially from those which your actions would indicate. When such isr the case, fly not from an examina¬ tion of the causes ; rather search deeply into them, and abide by none but what will bear the result of every charge. Had you taken such precautions on your first onset m your charitable career, you would soon have discovered (though perhaps with re-» luctance) the fallacy of your supposed be^ »eficence : you would have been unable to· brook the idea of acting in a man»
75
ner degrading to your feelings, and your errors would of course been reformed < Be assured, my son, that to study only ай acquirement of the name ofirirtue, is a pursuit equally dangerous and deceiving, which tends to the worst consequences* and may be productive of the most alarm* ing conclusions. When interest is any way concerned in the donation of charity, where gratification or reward is expected separate from the genuine felicity of doing a good act, or where the tributes of friendship and respect are practised under selfish hopes of future advantage, how despicable does the vender of such offerings appear î how paltry are his views! how insignifi¬ cant and passive do those deeds seem, which for the moment are considered аз so animating and brilliant ! Reflect, Francis, seriously reflect on your own fcen* sations : I am persuaded the erroneous parts of your conduct will instantly become too glaring for defence, and that you will ac¬ cede to the opinion of your father, that private charity is the principal legitimate. offspring of a benevolent heart." e 2
16 ·
Such was the substance, as near as I can recollect, of the rebuke of Don Alan. I had little to say in my behalf ; his observa¬ tions flashed on my mind with the strongest conviction, and I retired to my chamber overwhelmed with distress and confusion. In our next interview I confessed my error : he clasped me to his heart with fervency, while tears of affection started from his* eyes. For the future my conduct became more similar to that of my father: I was still the donor of his charities, but did not take so much t pains to be considered as such. I began to pay less attention to the opinions ©f the world, and regulated my conduct chiefly by the dictates of my conscience. My father would now often advise me to be careful of extremes in either point. Ile would sometimes say, " Although I do not wish you to be the slave of the world, at the same time by no means despise it, I cannot more plainly elucidate the system I wish you to pursue than by its similitude to an acquaintance whom I would not have you take to your bosom vvith enthusiabtic
77 warmth, nor at the same time throw oil· with supercilious contempt." - ч Although my father cautioned me against * such extremes, it is certain he himself rather inclined to the latter one. I was at that crisis in life when a medium is seldom preserved. I gradually imbibed an affected distaste for society, although I had not the resolution to abandon it. In the course of a few years I had the misfortune to lose the best of parents, and I inherited the chief part of his wealth, except some legacies to very distant relations. I had now no oppor¬ tunity of receiving any checks to the notions I had acquired. I became surrounded by a set of flatterers, who commended every whim or prejudice I conceived, and who always made a point to say as I did. Upon those wretches I squandered away a consi¬ derable part of my property, and looked upon the rest of the world as far below my notice. About four years after the decease of my father, I happened, by chance, (for such condescensions were not common with me) to visit one of my tenants: I became suddenly struck with the beauty of his ьЗ
78 daughter. I instantly perceived this girl had made an impression upon me not easily to be erased. It was in vain I attempted to overcome it : Julia was constantly before my eyes. My peace of mind appeared flown : I became wretched and dejected. At times I reflected on the probability of my being able to possess her without mar¬ riage: but my soul recoiled at the idea, when I considered the misery I should bring on a worthy family ; when I thought upon the tears I should draw from the eyes of her aged parents, and the wretched situ¬ ation to which I should reduce her whom I loved. I abandoned the idea with horror ; and at length came to the resolution of sacrificing to my pride, and placing the ridicule of my acquaintance at defiance, by offering her my hand. This offer, I will confess to you with shame, Don Orlando, was made in that manner which seemed to convey a sense of the obligation I con¬ ferred; but how shall I express my chagrin and disappointment when Julia, far from being elated at the golden proposal, ap¬ peared distressed at the question, and at
19
last positively refused the honour which I profered ! My astonishment was equal to my distress : I had not entertained a doubt of her readiness to grasp at so advantageops a match, and 1 flattered myself her conduct might perhaps proceed from mere diffidence. But I was soon undeceived in this sugges¬ tion. I understood from her parents I had a rival. The old people seemed to regret much the obstinacy of their daughter ; and although they did not wish publicly to interfere with her inclinations t I could easily perceive I had in them most power¬ ful advocates for my wishes. I found the lover of Julia was a poor country lad, whom her father had taken into his house to assist him with his little farm. My pride was most severely wounded at her refusal to my addresses. For the moment I deter¬ mined never to repeat them: but I soon discovered such resolves would be impossi¬ ble ; the idea of her becoming the wife of another distracted me; and I at length dwindled into the humble and importunate suitor. My assiduities, seconded by the £ 4
во
continual entreaties of her parents, seemed to shake her constancy ; and after thirteen months,close courtship I had the felicity to call Julia my own. During three years, in which time my wife presented me with a son, I enjoyed uninterrupted happiness; and had every reason to suppose I should experience both comfort and satisfaction in the choice I had made. Oh God ! how was I de¬ ceived ! May my fate prove a sufficient caution to you, Don Orlando, never to attempt to alter the fixed affections of a woman ! Julia, neglectful of the vows , which she made at the altar, unmoved by my tenderness, and insensible to those affections she should have experienced for her infant, still languished for her first choice ; fled from both me and my child to fly into his arms; and refused all attempts to cover her infamy» by abandoning her paramour, and secluding herself from the world. It would be a folly to attempt to describe the agonies under which I suffered at the conduct of my wife : my love for her
81 was not of that flimsy texture which made me careless* of my own honour or her repu¬ tation ; nor could I tear her image from my bosom, ungrateful as she was, without the most strenuous and agonising efforts. At length I resolved to fly from society, where I conceived myself pointed at for the frail¬ ties of Julia, and abandon the world, in which my prospects appeared the most cheerless and gloomy. In meditating a seclusion of this kind,' I acted perhaps with rather a pettish precipitancy. I conceived 1 had means of enjoyment in the resources of my own mind; and I considered man as so independent a being, that he was Capa¬ ble not only of existing, but even possess¬ ing those sweets which make existence desirable, without the aid or society of his fellow-creatures. Under these motives, cherished by wounded pride and flagrant ingratitude, I immediately commenced ar¬ rangements to fulfil my scheme ; and the little activity that it required seemed in a great measure to relieve me from the op¬ pression under which I laboured. I placed ray infant son with a female domestic, who e 5
M
had been in my family for many years, ой whose care and tenderness I could perfectly rely ; and having purchased this cottage, I removed to İt with only one servant, the woman who is at present with me. She had lived İn the service of a friend for a long time. I was well convinced of her honesty and sobriety: her understanding and apprehension it was said were not acute. For those very reasons she ap¬ peared to me the most proper person I could select for my purpose. She was willing to accept the situation. I agreed with her accordingly, and have since found my reasons in the choice verified. Perhaps I might be considered by some as a happy man ; perhaps I thought myself so. I have however received but three visits during my seclusion, and I have paid none. Reading, music, writing, and drawing, have by turns employed me. But, to be sincere with you, there were moments when I could derive pleasure from neither. There were moments, Don Orlando, when I re¬ flected on the domestic comforts I had experienced, even in the little time I might
83
be termed a married man ; and a retrospect of the short-lived felicity was embittered by that of my retirement, which I contrasted with it. In the gratification of my spleen I sup¬ posed myself in some measure revenged on the world in withdrawing from it. But this was indeed a mistaken notion ; / was in reality the sufferer, while I ridiculously conceived I inflicted punishment on others. I placed my son at one of the first semi¬ naries in the province. His progress in his studies answered my fullest expectations; and I even so far retracted from the system I had adopted, as to put up with his com¬ pany for about a week every summer. It is true, the countenance of his mother (who a few years after she flew from me paid the debt of nature) shone in his face. It might be weakness, but I often shed tears on the recollection of her fate, and clasped my boy to my bosom with even greater warmth at the remembrance. Although in the few visits he paid I con¬ ceived I should gratify him at the expense
'■ 'v..'.'-'" '■''.l-ft*'., : V -,v :: ; i èf:^my ;=qwr|;^apr% /í^¿^¿p!ínije^ to bring;-- him to íny arms, asheexpecfedthe hourto ■>■ erøbiaffihis 'father^ /^.-ν^^Η^'■..^■■■ΐ3. .'.''■■ £ϊν '^î^i^ţhş^^ ¿Ш&Щф óf ^otí^nd^twer^y^ í ;:\^ş he had not ibeérií brouwt ^ .apd. t niy' tí$r^ \ШФШ føuka 'Ща^ЩЩЩРШ Щ*Ш Ъ*Щ e qu al to 4Ье-тй1#ег>йП€;е o|a family under a genteel ■^tajblkİıaıejıti,. J^o far e&er ; ţe4,mysel,f-aş ; to ^nd^him ; До ene ; whom;,; I had .formerly iknown^ jndsW^ /;$¡^;.¿sd^ 'M^W/^incé; I had ; .л íjÖif .frigndslup of tjiis gentleman § ut me щ ,аЛ# tter humpur/With ; mankind. He re^ cMved m^ kindness, and, 'тШе, M#m)Cñ$:;few°neeks> ¿¿or* ;hi.nv^aj> pointedrfor^fJu^^ b; one of .-од] v ffie$t*ï ñdia ^tlerne^ntş. Imuşţcoriiess I parted with him not merely witîi relue- tance- ЬЩ agpny : he had become my only ^ОШрдада the/şoîaçe of my solitude^
85 short, the support oí toy life. I soon felt his absence' with uncommon force, my retire¬ ment lost all its charms, while his image was ever present to my mind. It was in vain I strove to deceive myse If: I languished for society 5 I had experienced the sweets of domestic sociality, and I could not resign them with philosophy, . But I had arrived at that age when the idea of returning to a busy world* and esta¬ blishing new connexions, appeared a task of too great magnitude to be attempted. I had no relatives in Spain in whom I could obviate this difficulty. I still remained in m v cottage, anxiously waiting for a letter from my son, which should inform me of his safe arrival at his, place of destina¬ tion; 1 This, after some months, I had the hap-f piness to receive. His epistle gave me con¬ siderable pleasure.. I understood from it he wasJikely in a short time to be promoted to» a more profitable situation. It was about this period that my old servant returned one evening from her weekly visit to the'town, and told me she had heard great talk of a í
í
w
ЛШШ WlSeb, Mfe$teå the$e parts* arid -whfcb if was likely; would, by the report of rnytóiu^poties^öi of some fortune, make « attempt upou our dwelling. ftftta Шй Mut I 4etermined to bury the principal ^йаг% of my property in a certain spot in my garden* which I could describe by letter to my son. This scheme I soon ac- wmpIÄhed» aud gave him the necessary in¬ formation. 1 am* however, rather apt to think the tale was recited by the town*s people in jest, With Щ intent to alarm us both, for I have never received the least molestation. My sog Jbeld his new station but four years, When ϊ heard from him, with con¬ siderante coacem, that, owing to a change in the higher orders of government in the part Where Ы was settled* be had lost it ; and tbm circurustance I considered as still mom unfortunate, when I heard of the death of еду friend at Madrid by whose interest be had procured thè situation. Clement had likewise married, soon after hk arrival, the daughter of a respectable bot mot a pcb mau $ aud there was the pro-*
8?
^eet of a latge family being the cønm quence of this union. ч Afters somé ioHcitationhe was placed in á post the emoluments of which barely supi ported himself, wife, and two children» and was necessitated to submit to the most in¬ sulting treatment from those who gleaned the profits he should have received. Under these circumstances, I began to consider, whether my own life, and that of my son's and his family, might not be ren¬ dered far more comfortable by a little altera¬ tion in my present system. Be assured, Don Orlando, that he who conceives society as not materially connected with his happiness, deceives himself. The ties of kindred and friendship are not to be severed without difficulty, and the wounds are seldom healed, A man may contemplate alone the starry firmament with awful cu¬ riosity; he may reflect by himself on the beauties of vegetation; and trace the works of nature with an inquiring and philosophic eye ; he may find jhe various resources against ennuU to which a cultivated mind can always fly : but there is yet a something
SS
tvanted to give a zést to all these various modes of pleasure ;~¿4ie must have some be¬ ing to whom he can convey his thoughts on the subjects which pass his mind. They must tiotbe confined ; they must not lie dormant in his own breast: his Creator formed him with powersto enjoy society, and his desires for it are not to be,annihilated. I experienced this truth in its full force. The coftipany of my son had revived the re¬ membrance of the social hours I had former¬ ly experienced, T and when he left me I re¬ lapsed into my usual melancholy state of de¬ spondency. Æ It4s certain my appearance did not indi¬ cate any violent-grief* and many enthusiastic admirers of seclusion might have termed it a happy one. Long have I bestowed on it myself the same appellation ; but I am at length'necessitated to be more sincere, and confess, that, far frqm being a Very happy many I was a v^ry miserable one. I conceived it would be a folly not to at- tempt to\ alter ; my condition. I was not pop¡r¿ I had yet the means of rejoining the watJd, and partaking in its pleasures ; but
во for those gratifications which are termed its pleasures I had little relish. I languished only for a domestic establishment. I have arrived at that time of life when indulgencies arising from such a state are most felt and most wanted. After some consideration, I determined to request the return of my son and his family. The property which I possess is adequate to support us all with comfort, though not splendor ; and by these means I shall in all probability pass the remainder of my days in the bosom of my family. I wrote to him several months past on this subject, and offered him to share my fortune hi the way I have mentioned. - By his answer, a few weeks since, I understood he was making immediate preparations for his departure, and I now expect hourly to embrace him. Thus, Don Orlando, I have informed you of the principal events of my life; and although they are not very striking in them¬ selves, yet they tend in some measure to discover the fallacy of ostentatious charity, and a pretended disgust with the world. Believe me, signior, however happy
. ; .·.■■.:. ■ ■■"■.' " ■ ■. ■■: : ■ * ■ Й:-.:Ш.^·-^ ;,. : #^|Йи^;ад í^^U^Ing; Iftémsèïyes from their fellow- 'cm&nţşsţ ¥$$&f have alii in my opinion, l^^ri^ucedî í tfese moments which have еп^Щгеай theenjoymentş they pretended /to derive ifrörn such a mode of exis- 1шее, and have béén Conscious that they decfeiyed themselves ih the plan they pur- ι A mah of higb spirit and superior in- telleçtSj if he meets with di sappointments, foelt ЩшеЙ gáMiöl widi uncommon acute- ues^ l^cause the stress which he lays upon |Щ^Ш1ш rpáŕkes him conceive he deserved ■vb^tíejr ;:>treatmenf.¿::; : Such a man generally nd^trtctş what he supposes a disgust for the ■■a^é$é¿ m d coàceives this little pique is ШиШйшпЖ tö a wish to abandon it for ^v^j |uja course of time, however, he dis- pqvers his notions are erroneous, and lan- igiiisjieş for those scenes he quitted with : :;1ш1етре.-.-;:у.Д : : ;■■;■:■: ■ с Шш ended the little history of Don 4 Î&gţfe Valvard. Orlando listened to his narrative with attention. It produced both ^ţepeptî and example, on points to hira
'S!
more than usually interesting, and his cheeks were overspread with a blush at many of the observations» it introduced. He must have been perfectly convinced how valuable his host's little treasure was to him, when he heard the plans that were determined upon for its use. But Orlando's heart was not now susceptible to an anticipation of the misery he would occasion in robbing him of it. He considered not the horror which the old man would in all probability expe¬ rience, in finding himself, his son and fa¬ mily, reduced to extreme poverty, after sending for the latter under the promise of bestowing on them a comfortable subsis¬ tence. The soul of Orlando was not to be touched by what he had learned to term such puny feelings : they might have affec* ted him at the commencement of his career towards vice, but it was now too late ; he had acquired a perfect indifference to those acts, at the names of which he would then have shuddered with disgust. He parted with Don Francis, and sum¬ moned Òtto to his apartment, under the
92 appearance of preparing for their journey on the morrow. He opened the plan of the robbery to this man with less- diffidence than might perhaps have been expected : both master and" servant began more clearly to under¬ stand each other ; the traits of their charac¬ ters gradually developed themselves; and they soon found İt would be to their mutual interest to act with more sincerity^ Otto, as usual, heard his master's harangue and request to him with apparently consi¬ derable qualms of conscience, ejaculations, distortions of countenance, and- pious ex¬ clamations ; but these as usual ended with an acquiescence to the plans proposed, * Otto knew where to find implements to dig, how to go about the work with remark¬ able facility, and hoped to bring it to a happy termination. It was resolved that he should retain fifty pistoles, which Orlando would want before ¿e left the cottage ; and shoukl carry the remainder to a convenient hiding-place about a league distant, as it would be im¬ possible for them to convey it away with
m
their luggage without being liable to dis¬ covery. These circumstances being settled, Or¬ lando again returned to his host, whose conversation chiefly consisted on the fer¬ vency of his expectations İn the comfort and felicity he should enjoy on the arrival of his son. 6i Never, Don Orlando," said he, u did t know the value of my little fortune till this period : I could now almost count it with the ecstasy of a miser; and in my mind divide it into fancy shares, for each of our little community. An independence, how¬ ever small, is a blessing. Although it will not procure us the luxuries of life, still in health it will preserve us from wants, and in sickness nourish us with comforts/* They retired at an early hour. The win¬ dow in Orlando's chamber looked towards the place where the treasure was buried. He watched the approach of midnight with considerable expectation. It was dark and gloomy 5 yet he perceived the ñgme of Otto glide towards the spot. He saw him after some time return loaded with the contents
#4
pf Ле chest, which he hád placed in a bok he carried for the purpose. Orlando was now satisfied* and retired to his bed. About jive .o'clock Otto knocked at his door, and brought him fifty of the pistoles from the treasure, which be had deposited in the place they had fixed upon. He informed his master he had managed to replace the earth from whence he had taken it in the garden, so that there was no probability of discovery. Orlando commended him for his inge¬ nuity» and desired he would directly make ready for their journey. His host had prepared breakfast at an early bour* and Orlando now offered to make bim a pecuniary recompense for the trouble and expense he had occasioned, by a v^ry liberal present from the store of which be had plundered him· Don Francis, however, positively refused it, ,He declared every obligation was can- cejţed by the pleasure he had derived from bis company ? and requested some address by which he might perhaps hereafter be en* able4 f to renew such a gratification.
95
Orlando, on bis arrivai at the cottage, re¬ sumed his real name, as the circumstancesr under which he quitted the inn made it ne* 1 cessary he should abandon the fictitious one* he had taken ; but he had determined not to mention in what family he resided at Madrid, the castle of Olvernardo being so well known through the province* that a confession of his being an inhabitant would most likely have tended to various questions he greatly wished to avoid. For these reasons he had casually and slightly informed Don Francis, that, by the desire of his uncle, he had remained some time in the city, and was now continuing his tour for amusement and improvement. He observed, that as his next place of desti¬ nation was at present actually unknown to him, he would do himself the happiness to write, and give him information of his route. His host returned him thanks for his civility, anddeclared heshould behighly pleased with his correspondence. These points being set¬ tled, Orlando, after making the old woman a considerable present, took leave of Don Francis, and, mounting his horse, departed with Otto from the reclused cottage.
96 They soon arrived at the place where the money was deposited. It was some distance from the road, in a thick copse, the foliage of which 4 totally screened them from obser¬ vation* even if a traveller had by chance passed ihat way. Orlando, after loading himself and Otto with the contents of the box, ordered the latter to bury it some di¬ stance in the earth by means of a spade which had been left for that purpose over¬ night. They then proceeded on their jour¬ ney—while Orlando reflected in what man¬ ner he should pursue his future conduct. On his arrival at Murcia he was aware it would be necessary for him to place in some secure situation the property he possessed, that-^-supposing the worst—should he be suspected or accused of the robbery, no large sums might be found in his possession. Various were his schemes for obviating this difficulty; .various were the plans he pro¬ posed in his own mind, and as quickly re¬ jected, The most easy method was to open an account with a banker : but there were some objections even to this scheme ; for, as a stranger, it might lay him open to cu¬ riosity. At length he determined, however,
t7
todispose of apart in this way, andretain the remainder for his immediate expenses. Im- |ñediately on recovering from his late indis* position he wrote to his uncle at Andalusia, and, after slightly mentioning his illness^ and 1 the place where he then was, informed him it was his intent to proceed to a sea¬ port, where he should in all probability re¬ main some time. In this epistle, he most artfully evaded giving any particular rea-* sons for leaving the castle of Olvernardo* more than his inclination to See other parts ; while the whole of the letter was made rip of such protestations of gratitude, duty, and affection to Don Diego> that he had no doubt of its counteracting any little reports he might have heard to his prejudice. Orlando, however, with all his successful plans, had not forgotten the interview with his father. That strange event still dwelled upon his mind; and the remembrance of the dreadful act he had nearly committed even yet made him tremble with horror. His cu¬ riosity to know what had become of Don Al- phonso'since the night he quitted the inn, oc¬ casioned him many anxious moments. He VOL. III. 4?
í
.98
conjectured it was most probable he had by this time reached the castle of „Olvernardo, anoi. embraced Jhis bother ; while he was an outcast arid a wanderer, who must never more appear in his presence, for fear of being recognised as his attempted assassin. The very thought of his seeing Os*mund gare him the greatest cause for apprehensions on that head, as ît was nio&t likely their great resemblance to each other would lead to the detection he so greatly dreaded. It was true he had made -адр his mind to abandon his family connexions; but he did not wish to lose any advantage he might gain by retain¬ ing some kind of correspondence with them. It was those considerations which urged him to write to his uncle; and it was such views which likewise prompted him to act in the same manner towards the marquis and his brother. He wrote to each of them at the end of his first day's journey from the cot¬ tage, and mentioned his indisposition in, a, similar manner to that in which he had made it known to.Don Diego. He desired their * answers might be directed to the post-house at Murcia.
99
He had just concluded these letters, when a genteel young man and woman entered the inn for the night. He soon found it was the son of his late host, with his family, who had landed a few days before at Carthagena, and were proceeding to the cottage of the recluse. Orlando anticipated the disappointment they were destined to receive, perhaps with some emotion ; but when he considered his secure possession of the property, and the various gratifications he could purchase with it, his regret vanished $ his soul become cal¬ lous to any pity for the unfortanate sufferers by his perfidy5 and, wrapped up in his own selfish and interested views, he stifled every feeling of humanity which had formerly glowed injiis bosom. In the course of a few days they reached the city of Murcia. Orlando put up at the most capital inn; where he had not remained many hours before he hired "handsome apartments in one of the principal squares. In the course of the second and third days he pur¬ chased a very handsome carriage and mules, hired three male domestics, whom he put f 2
ÏÖO
under .Otto's direction% end immediately placed lhe chief párt of his ч money in the bandst of, two^ differeut bankers. He soon found he had little occasion for precautions against ¿авттШу ^fhis theft. A news- paper ^formed hirn that his late host, a few bourn before the arrivuî of his son, had died suddenly under very Violent emotions which were supposed to have been occasioned by baving.missed his treasure. Ws^oid domestic survived him but a short time; She was supported by public charity ; the 'greatest donation to which Was given by Orlando, whose name appeared at the head öf the humane list, with the sum which he had-given marked in ostentatious capitals. So generous a stranger, whose rank seem¬ ed öf no common stamp, was immediately admitted into the first parties. He made no secret of his name and family. He gave elegant and expensive entertainments. His house became a publicresört for fashion and поШйу. His taste was the criterion of the city;; bh munificence and morality the con¬ stant theme both of the elevated and vulgar. 3?hese<encomiurns, however, were acquired
îöl more from arets than manners. Orlando Was still the bashful» diffident man. Although a part had worn off since his introduction to the world, he still retained enough to make himself uncomfortable, and to let the world know that he was so. Otto received a thousand pistoles as his share of the booty, and was now admitted to the entire confidence of his master. But Otto knew too much to be regarded otherwise than for motives of interest. Or¬ lando secretly looked upon him with distaste and horror : at times his very heart yearned at the sight of him, and he shuddered at the recollection that he was in his power. He was punctual to his appointment with father Theodosius under the porch of the cathedral. To his great relief the priest, who appeared in the usual way, laid no new demands upon him, and only required that he should not for the present move from the city. Orlando readily acquiesced to so slight a request, and ventured to inquire concern¬ ing his father. The displeasure of the monk instantly arose at the name, and he suddenly disappeared under considerable anger. F 3
Î02 Orlando soon contrived secretly to gratify every inordinate appetite he possessed, with-r out injuring hiš public character : he seern¬ et to have arrived at thè very height of the happiness for which he had languished. He was considered as one of the best mea in the world, While he possessed every en¬ joyment which could be purchased by being a bad one. j
ir
шз
CHAP. XX. How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night; Like softest musio to attending ears ! SH4Î5SPEARE. τ i\ Л now be necessary to give some ac¬ count of the inhabitants of Olvernardo since the departure of Orlando from the castle. The surprise of both the marquis vtnd Os¬ mund, upon the receipt of their several let¬ ters on that morning, was, perhaps, not so great as might have been expected. Orlan¬ do had of late entirely detached himself from every part of the family. That he should have been invited to spend some days with a friend was by no means improbable^ and that he should not have thought it necessary to let them know it before (according to his usual behaviour), was a matter of little astonish¬ ment. Osmund received the miniature w i th peculiar satisfaction, as he could with pro- Ϊ' 4
Ké
priety keep his appointment with Leonéra ? but he determined to fulfil his promise, by making Albert acquainted with their inter¬ view. For this pwpose s he requested his com¬ pany in his chamber before he descended to breakfast; and -having openly related the whole of his? conversation, w>th } Dorma Leo¬ nora af themasquerade^and slightly mention¬ ed the circumstances by means of which he -had .before ' seen her, he requested 1. Jbeft would freely satisfy Mm, as a friend, with re¬ spect to his intentions concerning this fair in¬ cognita. Albert was embarrassed ; the oath which had been drawn from him by his father prevented him from being explicit on the subject. JHe, however, answered enough to relieve Osmund from ail inquietude : he de¬ clared he could never love any other but Cassandra; and that,however certain events had forced him for a short time to contradict this assertion by his actions, yet to him he could uot deny his feelings, nor dissimulate Upon a point which now appeared so mate¬ rially to concern them both. Osmund re¬ turned him thanks for his candour. They were interrupted from further conversatiøA
105
by a summons from the marchioness for her son to attend her in her dressing-room. He immediately repaired to his mother, who informed him of the intelligence she had just received from her waiting-woman, of Cassandra's being found under an alarming* state of indisposition in one of the deserted .chambers. Albert's astonishment was equal to that of his mother's. She had, however, resolved in her own mind that he was a principal concerned in the affair ; and when the mar¬ chioness once formed an opinion, it was no easy task to convince her it was erroneous, Albert declared most solemnly that he was totally unconscious of her having at¬ tended the masquerade ; while his concern, which the information of her indisposition and the cause of it occasioned, was, accord¬ ing to his mother's mode of judging, a sure proof of his guilt. Her anger and reproaches increased. She anticipated thè rage of the marquis, and dreaded the discovery which must be made to him of the particulars. Albert, hurt at the false accusations which were brought against him, retired f5
1Ό6*
abruptly and immediately hurried to the house-of Don Everard, where the answer to his inquiries concerning Cassandra confirm¬ ed the outline of the tale he had heard. Distracted with the intelligence, he again returned to the castle; aňd-mentioned the events to Osmund; Osmund advised him in¬ stantly to seek an interview with his father, before- thé intelligence was conveyed to him in any other way.. Albert accordingly pro*· 4 céedëd tţ> his apartment, and informed him of the circumstances he had heard. His fa¬ ther appeared much chagrined at the ac¬ count. He was aware of the resentment of Don Everard, whom it would be im¬ possible to persuade but some perfidy had been exerted against his daughter·. After reflecting-for a few minutes,.he suddenly demanded; of'Albert his acquiescence to marry Donna» Leonora that morning, which would at once frustrai every obstacle that irnight hereafter arise; Albert, equally surprised and" distressed at the requests declared he could not accede to iţi The marquislremonstrated withcon- siderablecho^^ rnan con-
ιοί
tinued firm în his refusal, till his father or? 'dered him from his presence, and .desired that he should instantly quit the castle under his displeasure. Albert retired, and, again seeking Osmund, related to him vthe re¬ sult of his interview, . He determined to visit a friend who resided several miles from Madrid. He now declared that he had most resolutely given up all idea of submitting to the sacrifice which was, de¬ manded of him, and begged that Osmund would convey his sentiments on that point to Leonora, in as delicate a manner as possible : he also requested that he would write to him daily an account of Cassandra's health, and any circumstance which might occur at the castle in which he was in¬ terested. These matters being settled, he soon after took leave, of his mother and sister, and hastily departed with his own servant from the city. Osmund was punctual to his appointment on the terrace, and was gratified in an inter¬ view with Leonora. He presented to her the casket and its contents, and declared
im hîrrraeïf mosi happy ш Ше opportunity he had of restoring H* * €Ф To a mind Йке yours^ Donna Leono¬ ra,** he exclaimed, ť * those compliments ^rhicb ase in general poured forth at the shrine of superior beauty and fascinating manners must appear superficial, and un¬ worthy of your regard. I can only offer my services to you in the plain simple language of my hearts and declare that your claim 'tîpoţ* them will occasion me the highest gra¬ tification." Leonora, in her thanks-—although she gave him no hopes that she should ever request his aid***s$ill expressed herself with peculiar energy. Osmund had penetration .enough io> observe his offers were far from disagree¬ able. It was not in his nature to lose the favourable impressions he had made. He ventured to regret the reclused life which. she led ; to express some surprise at her dis- a^pearaîţee from the solitary cottage, and at her nightj^/walk upon the terrace. * ť Signior 4>on Osmund,'* answered Leo- •ftòrai ** concurring ckcumstances, equally
str^ng^ànd une^^ct^ tö elucidate some of the mysteries which surround me. You Teno w I arr* the daughter ■of jiather Theodosius die monk. While the contents of the casket,: and your discovery of rny habitation in the solitary cottage, con¬ vinced you that I was unhappy; and pro¬ duced those offers of services for which 1 j am not ungrateful, your conduct demands, that on certain points, where I am hot de- \ nied f he power^ I should be ingenuous. fť I am now an inhabitant-of the east part I of the castle. My father by some meansi was. acquainted that our abode in the cottage" was discovered. Early on the following evening after the death of Ursula* he hád the chief of the furniture moved (to what .part I know not) 1 ; and immediately demand¬ ed that X shoiild repair with him to the de* solate chambers of Olvernardo." " Good heavens !" exclaimed Osmund* " can you thus submit to the cruel tyranny which appeals to be imposed upon you ? to^ be sequestered from the world; prohibited from' all society ; aad surrounded by the
• imo melancholy gloom which pervades this cheer- Jess spot?" * ť It is ťhe commands of a parent," an¬ swered Leonora in a manner which indicated she felt some displeasure at his questioning her obedfer e to his will. "Oh, Donna Leonora," exclaimed Os¬ mund, " however I may admire your ready acquiescence to such demands as a principle of dui^ T ;Æ cannot butregret that they exist." After some further conversation he in¬ formed her of the chief occurrences which had happened in the castle : of Cassandra's indisposition, the cause of it, and Albert's departure. In mentioning the last part of this information, Osmund watched the effects which it might have upon Leonora with a scrutinizing eye. He felt himself highly interested in the result of his obser¬ vations ; and he perceived,, with infinite sa¬ tisfaction, . that her countenance, on receiv¬ ing the intelligence, betrayed nothing which might be considered as marks of affection. After an-hour's uninterrupted conversa-
Mi
tion, Osmund took his leave, not, however, without gaining permission to see her again the following evening. In this interview he had found the manners of Leonora as ele¬ gant and accomplished, as her person was beautiful. The delicacy of her sentiments on various points was delivered with pecu¬ liar grace and feeling, and confirmed her mind to have been highly cultivated. Osmund soon discovered his admiration was superior ta what he had ever felt for any other female. He endeavoured in vain to persuade himself to the contrary. He languished for their next meeting, with an impatience he had never before experienced, and he anticipated various little events which might prevent it with unusual cha¬ grin and uneasiness. He reflected with concern on the heavy charge he possessed against her father, while his astonishment in¬ creased when he considered the mysterious manner in which she was confined. Theodosius was not of a stamp to be inti¬ midated at the idea of discovering to the world he had not maintained the celibacy required for his clerical character, There
ш ¿appeared a line of separation between him and other men, which seemed to put their opinions and approbation a t defiance. He was perfectly indiffèrent either to the tenets or costume of the order to which he had belong¬ ed, and ia which he had become a member by such extraordinary means. He stood alone as a being apparently independent of those customs which regulated the general laws of the society of his fellow creatures, and preserved the sociality of man. That he should wish his daughter to be allied to the heir of the house of Olvernardo was not, perhaps, so extraordinary a circumstance : but why the marquis should be equally strenuous for such an arrangement could not be accounted for. The following day brought the, most alarming accounts of Donna Cassandra de Gosmond. Her father returned in the fore part of it, and found his daughter in a most dangerous state ofindisposition, and entire¬ ly delirious. In her ravings, she accused Albert d'Olvernardo of perfidy and cruelty y asserted it was by his appointment she vi¬ sited the castle, and through his arts she had
113
entered the deserted chambers. At intervals she shrinked with horror, as if some dreadful spectre crossed her sight; and after the vio¬ lent exertions which her delirium occasion¬ ed, she sunk into a state of fainting weak¬ ness which threatened iaamediate dissolu- - tion. The grief and rage of Don Everard drove him almost to distraction ; he even threatened to procure an audience with his sovereign, and lay a personal charge against the marquis and his son for the injuries he had sustained. The marquis so far descended from his dignity as to request an interview with hirn> that the circumstances between them might be adjusted and explained : but Don Eve¬ rard would not hear of reconciliation, and would give no other answer than that the insult he had received should be revenged. Albert's absence from Madrid appeared to strengthen the accusations that were publicly and generally brought against him. His father* although he saw the impropriety of it, would not consent to recall him, as no request of* that kind had been made froru the young mau himself.
,·■ ^à^ii'pp^sandra * s; iiosàïiit^ still : : cùbû- -, У-й)^^;^эдФ : /^Г „Jast ; -in- iiltjé^s^ef éébétçvét reisoveriüg her reason. Г: ^;^rîb'g ;> itttfe : period ÖSiffî und had become rø coriÄftt ţiightîy attendant on the terrace. Mia iö^ervlews v^ith ll^ön tfe ¿ result of them ; аде those interviews #hkfeforme;d th^ basi$ '^jF:^;r^^^afc--s¡ffec*- tíönv In chairacţe^ Leonora differed in iňarjy ^ het sex, ;4^^tert-^kctí:h:\jc^!tbp$e:jp.cj.d>^n.tš jn her^ life t^Hicäi at dis^rentintervals she conveyed to ©smunti mM se rve to, confirm that she iniígbt"c&ÄtoisticaJ termed the child ^f imisfortunevi ;ľ'- : -;^Jtóršiťy- had taught her fortitude. A ^|гЙ№^Ьа1о^еопога*5> highly cultivated, ; -ψ&$ capable^ of gleaning instruction from hét aistresses; and reflecting with phiioso- jjJiiøacutfness on those events which ooca* jotted her miseryij : Aìtìiough not yet twenty,, she had often been necessitated to think and act for herself.
*rs
She had not experienced the comfort of a tender maternal parent to regulate her ideas and guide her conduct. The powers of her mind had been called into action at an age when their exertions are seldom demanded 1 ! and the gloomy prospect with which she was surrounded, although at intervals it de* pressed, yet inspired her with a courage arid perseverance-to endure those difficulties and discomfits* it fell to her lot to encounter. The strongest efforts of Leonora's recol* lection could only trace the faint remem¬ brance of her early childhood, when she re¬ sided with a female companion of about her own age, whom shewas taught to consider as her sister, and whose name was Lucretia-, under the care of a woman past her meridian; called Ursula ; who instructed them in- the first branches of education with a tenderness and assiduity which would have given every reason for the supposition that she was their mother, had she not taken considerable pains to impress the contrary on their minds. But Ursula, although she satisfied them on one point, left another, equally interesting, ^determined ; namely, who was their mo*
Ί16
ther. On this Subject she maintained a ge¬ neral silence ; and when youthful curiosity sometimes forced the question, they imme¬ diately received an equivocal answer, and were earnestly requested not to renew it. . They resided in a neat comfortable cot¬ tage a few miles from the city of Oviedo. At the age of twelve years they were first introduced to Theodosius de Zuivin. The sensations which Leonora experienced when aie was informed he was her father, whom die had so long and anxiously expected to see,-Were never to be forgotten. In this in¬ terview she discovered Lucretia was but her foster-sister, and that in a few days they were to take leave of Ursula, and quit the cottage for ever. This information, added to the strange and terrific appearance of her parent,„served to impress the meeting ín such strong colouring on her imagination, that time had no power to obliterate it. The most forcible conceptions of filial duty she had imbibed with peculiar strength from the laborious efforts of Ursula, and her continual instruction and admonitions on this -point seemed to indicate she had or-
117
ders to exert them for particular purposes. They were ordered to prepare themselves for a journey of many miles, and were given to understand, that they were to v be placed under the protection of the abbess of the convent of A------ , on the borders of the pro-» vìnce of Leon. There appeared a considerable degree of mystery couched in the form of this arrange* ment ; and the excessive grief of Ursula at parting with them seemed a prophetic warning that their happiness was at an end. The manners of Theodosius were as ec¬ centric as his appearance. He betrayed none of those symptoms of parental affec¬ tion which might have been expected from one who beheld a daughter after a conside¬ rable absence, possessed of every requisite his fondest wish could have anticipated. To Lucretia he "behaved with a~ coolness bor¬ dering on severity ; and to their inquiries after some particulars of their family, he gave them a denial in words which made them tremble. They parted from Ursula with that regret which might be expectei
11« from the affectionate care she bestowed upon them, and she appeared equally distressed at the separation. lEhey were accompanied by Theodosius thfe whole of their journey. His manners continued equally forbidding and gloomy. He seldom addressed them ; and when their wondering admiration at various objects which they passed occasioned them to ask him some trifling and unimportant questions, they were rebuked by answers equally mo¬ røse and unsatisfactory. On their arrival atthe convent of A ■, at rather a late hour of the night, they were immediately introduced to the abbess. She seemed a woman of much dignity of manners. She .was reading by a lamp at the further end of a very large apartment. On the ap¬ proach of the priest and his companions she rose.with surprise and agitation, and gazed on the countenance of Theodosius with con¬ siderable terror. He presented Leonora and Lucretia to her, with a few words re¬ specting the manner of their treatment, which were delivered in too low a voice for them distinctly to hear what he uttered.
119
The abbess looked upon the girls with a pitying aspect. Theodosius appeared to lay great «tress upon certain points of his con¬ versation, and on his departure declared his. intention of visiting them again in a short time. In- the abbess of the convent of A — ■ they found a truly valuable friend. Peculiar care was taken of their education. Persons whose abilities were of the first rank in every elegant accomplishment were provided to assist in their tuition, and the,progress in their studies was beheld with astonishment. The tenderness of her manners at once served to place her in the maternal character under which ihey had considered their much- beloved Ursula. The awe which they first experienced at the dignity of her situation vanished by degrees in the affability and· mildness of her manners, and they soon sought her company with anxious solicitude. Theodosius was not punctual in his pro¬ mise of visiting them. Six years elapsed, during which period he was not seen at the convent. Leonora and Lucretia, whose curiosity had increased with their age, made various inquiries concerning their family:,
и»
but this abbess, though indulgent c«n eVfry other point, maintained the usual taciturnity they had experienced on this ; and not only declared hetself incapable 4 of gratify ing their curiosity, but confessed to them the men¬ tioning of it occasioned her considerable uneasiness. It was about this time she re¬ ceived a letter from Theodosius, the con¬ tents of which served greatly to distress her. Leonora and Lucretia were summoned to attend her in her closet. They were no sooner alone, than, endeavouring to collect her utmost fortitude, she thus addressed them :~— ** I flatter myself, my dear children, you are aware of that affection I have felt for you since I have had the happiness to re¬ ceive you under my care, and in some mea¬ sure possessed the power to alleviate those discomfits which, from peculiar circum¬ stances, you have unmerirediy experienced. The contents of this paper, which I have re¬ ceived from Theodosius de Zuivin, do, I con¬ fess, cause me infinite chagrin. It contains a request almost bordering upon compul¬ sion—that Lucretia shall immediately rc- ceivC'tbe white veil."
ш Theyhad been so used to consider their des¬ tinies the same, and accede together to every arrangement which the priest planned* that they had no doubt but this likewise wa£ in¬ tended for their mutual performance. The renouncing of the world appeared to them a sacrifice of no considerable' magnitude, provided their separation was not the conse¬ quence. With the lady abbess they had by no means been considered as recluses. She .received at times company of the highest rank, and her boarders were always of the party». They had not therefore been kept entirely from temptation to mix with general society. Their amazement and grief were equally excited, when they heard the abbess quote thepart of the epistle she spoke upon ; s which, after demanding that Lucretia should obey in making the convent her habitation for life, particularly required that Leonora would form no wishes to follow her exanv ple, but hold herself in readiness to quit it whenever it might suit her father to make such a demand. vol. m. g
The abbess attempted to,comfort them, but her distress was nearly equal to their own. Lucretia declared she never could consent to become immured within those watts which did not contain her Leonora : that, as Theodosius wa« not her parent, she conceived herself under no ties of duty to render her whole life miserable by submit- ing to an arbitrary and cruel decree. The abbess had no sooner left them, than, falling on her knees before a figure of the Virgin, she most solemnly swore never to re¬ ceive the veil but in company with Leo¬ nora, Theodosius requested an answer to his ktter. The abbess received Lucretia's refusal with reluctance. She desired her to consider the consequence of irritating Theodosius de Zuivin, and begged her not to put a negative upon his desire. Lucretia, however, whose secret oath over¬ came every argument urged by the ab¬ bess, continued firm in her determination ; which was immediately conveyed to the priest. A few days brought him to the
123
convent. A private interview with the ab¬ bess was his first demand, and the most dreadful consequences the result of it. She was taken suddenly ill, and died in a few hours. Her senses failed her immediately her indisposition commenced ; on which accoui t neither Leonora nor Lucretia were permitted to see her. The priest did not leave the convent till after her dissolution ; he said he should soon return, and commanded that Leonora and Lucretia should be then ready to quit it. The loss of the lady abbess occasioned them the most poignant grief; while a con¬ fused report ran through the community, that, to ail appearance, she had been poison¬ ed. Leonora, who was sensible that a su¬ spicion of that kind must ultimately fall upon her father, was almost distracted with apprehension and alarm. Theodosius was punctual to his word in re¬ turning to the convent. He was made ac¬ quainted with the murmur? which had been circulated respecting the death of the abbess, and he discovered some few of the faction formed against him on that point, which were 0 2
12*
chiefly composed of some of the members of a neighbouring order of monks. He instant¬ ly insisted on a meeting of their principals being convened, and that the facts should be impartially judged by them. Such a meeting was accordingly held ; and no proofs being brought against him, the reports were declared to be false, and the propagators of them threatened with punishment. The power and popularity of the monk ap¬ peared to increase after this event, and he was a principal instrument in raising a suc¬ cessor to the dignity of abbess, which was then waiting to be filled. No sooner had this woman entered on the functions of her holy office, than Lucretia was summoned to at¬ tend her, and the request of Theodosius re¬ specting her taking the veil was again men¬ tioned in a manner very different from that in which she had formerly received İt. The demands of the priest she attempted to en¬ force in a peremptory manner by her own threats, and declared that violent measures must be the consequence of a refusal. Al¬ though terrified and disti essed, Lucretia continued; firm to her first resolve. The re-
125 - collection of lier oath urged her to be deter*· mined, and she most solemnly declared Ber¬ thing should prevail upon her to break it. Theodosius himself in vain attempted to al¬ ter her resolution. The terror of his aspect and manners failed to intimidate or awe her into obedience; and, after several private in¬ terviews with her, he left the convent in a rage. From this time the treatment of the new abbess became a regular system of cruelty. It commenced by separating Leonora and her adopted sister. The former continued in her usual situation, but the latter was confined in one of the chambers which had belonged to her departed friend the late ab¬ bess. It was soon whispered, that in this chamber she discovered papers which eluci¬ dated some matters equally surprising and horrible. It is certain, that Lucretia *was never more suffered to converse with Leono¬ ra, and that she was afterwards confined for some months in a remote cell. During this period the monk visited the convent but once ; and it was then supposed he was sent for on the discovery which Lu- g3
€teth had made* He-quitted it a:g^i|ï, ^emîiïgîy in much agitation, after a few hours conversation with the abbess, without speaking to any other person. beonora received two letters from him, one of which was that found in the casket ¡by Osmund. The subject of them was to inform her that his reason for not suffering her to take the veil was his intention that she should marry, he already having plans arranged for that purpose. One morning, at an early hour, she was suddenly informed her father was at the convent, and that it was his desire she would be ready to attend him in a few hours. At the first moment of this information jshe was severely distressed at the idea of quitting it without Lucretia, but soon un¬ derstood she was to accompany them. Oyerjoyed with this information, she pre¬ pared for their departure with alacrity. In a short time she was summoned to the gates of the convent, and was there joined by her father, who handing her into a post-carriage, they departed with much expedition. Leonora, after recovering from her sur-
VÀI prise and disappointment at not seeing Lu¬ cretia, ventured to inquire for her. t She was answered with great severity by tfie priest,, not to make herself uneasy upon her account » that she followed them in another carriage» Leonora for some time supposed this assertion was made merely to satisfy her: but she afterwards found it was true ; for at the first inn where they stopped to change horses she gained a sight of her friend in a vehicle, which drove up soon after. She %vas prevented from running into her arrns by her father, who forcibly drew her back,, and declared, if she made another attempt of a similar nature, she would experience his most violent displeasure. Leonora was infinitely distressed. In the few moments she had beheld Lucretia she perceived her greatly altered ; her form appeared wasted with distress and sufferings. Leonora once more asked her father when she might be permitted to embrace Lucretia. He answered with great relue« tance; but at last said, at the end of their journey. This reply again in §ome measure comforted and satisfied her. Theo* G 4
tm ейщщ шШ moùmmnn ту Ып к sleep,, aiîéthééefréshn^nti which they took were i&jpW0«$bi$&gat ШХЬЬ éairriage. * On the evtóffgofthétkird^day^jöuméf it bega« to grow dark^ábout the time thďy entered a thick wood, the roads through which appear¬ ed extremely Intricate. Leonora dared to Mrrtber alarm of bafiditti, but was soon si· lericed by^ rebuke from* her father. In & short time the darkness of the night render¬ ed fee way difficult to discover; arid the muleteer, w-ho grumbled exceedingly at their not bebig^accommodated with a guide, declared heíârove entirely at random. Theo- 1 dositts still persisted-in going on, and seem¬ ed little disturbed ât their sitdation. Leono¬ ra, who had listened for some time, could not hear the noise of the carriage behind. She mentioned, this to her father ; but he made light of her anxiety, and said, he sup¬ posed they were following at some distance. The muleteer likewise said he would wish to wait till the other carriage came up ; but Theodosius would not hearken to the propo¬ sal. They again proceeded, but in less than an hour entirely lost their track, and the
im
driver declared it was impossible to go on any further till day-light. The priest ap-* peared even then unwilling to stop ; but, as there was no alternative, he was necessitated to submit. Leonora now fully expected that the carriage behind would shortly over¬ take them ; but it did not arrive- She ex* pressed her alarm for the fate of Lucretia. Theodosius bade her be sil#nt, in extreme anger, and seemed neither concerned nor surprised that it had not joined them. At day-break they found they were hut a little distance from the road they should have taken ; but the other carriage jwas not within either the call or whistle of their driver. Theo¬ dosius now observed, that he supposed they had mistaken their path, and got into some of the intricacies of the wood—but that no danger could be apprehended for Lucretia, who Was guarded by an out-rider. The ill looks of this man Leonora had noticed when they first commenced their journey. They travelled slowly along the skirts of the wood for some hours. The road was extremely private. They passed but one poor house of public entertainment. Hav« g 5
ISO ífigbÄltiá^r^CreshrneritSi Theodosius te·* mtímè mxm ém&> under expectation (as Ы ща) of Lujíiretia*s rneeting them aţthis jlhic^ Mo one, however, appeared ; and Leonora was inconsolable. They again en* tema the çtrria|e^ and towards the close of the ev&crîmj arrived* at the solitary inn al* jrea% ascribed· The priest declared he W&s determinai to wait there till he heard some news of their companion* Such a re¬ solution çaw Leonora considerable satis- fecjrjôriv^a&d she heard him give directions to the landlord for sending out some of his people t^gairr information. She arose at a vety early hour the next morning to attend her father, who was ready to depart. Her first inquiry was,, on descending from her chamber, if they had heard any thing of her friends She perceived that the countenance of tbe landlord was overshadowed with ei¬ ther a real or pretended concern, and that her father was in some measure ruffled. She immediately conjectured fatal intelligence had been received of Lucretia ; and she anti¬ cipated rightly. She was informed that Basi}, the out-rider» had returned at a
ısı late bout on the last night, andbrought m- telligçnee of Lucretia being murdered ; tbaV owipg to the darkness of the evening, they had mistaken their road, and found they were not following the other carriage* In this dilemma they were at a loss in what manner to act, and were shortly overtaken by ñve men, whose appearance confirmed them to be banditti. Basil was necessitated to surrender, and the robbers had the fullest expectation of a very large booty. Their disappointment in this respect added ţo their natural brutal ferocity. They began to insult Lucretia with the most dreadful freedoms, while Basil was tied hand and foot to a tree. Lucretia, in her struggle with them, suddenly pulled a pistol from one of their belts, and wounded him who appeared to be their chief. Enraged at this act, one who stood near gave her a violent blow on the neck with the hilt of his sword, which struck her to the ground, and the other instantly stabbed her to the heart. In their confusion, they totally forgot Basil, the carriage, and mules, and directly made off with the wounded and the body of the deceased,
tè#$W ШШйа é ríoV tMe with a« the horror ^àtât-ir*%bt haire been ^pöcteti. Hfeŕ gňáTíst tbi tód f -ef l^icfrfeťm wai the most jMgbabt/ Bftebad Ыеп thi^ompatibn and а&ег&1Ъ&%&тШШ f&ksA' their separation, a^lhé siíflferingâ bf tbe farmer for thé last few months* served, if possible, to increase beraÄíctbrft hê¥ ftrøiety for hér welfares and apipfehfen^íófí« for her situation, had occaéríoneâ her the 5 most severe* distress : aM àie bëbetó ЩЬ Vt&Wň éf each new day with tío other pleurae, bbt the hope that rťm%ht, by sorne chance or other, restore her to her friend. * After hef agony had in some degree abated, she askeďwhat became of the mule- tfe'tí who drove them, and was answered» thai he fled on the first appearance of the robbers. Leonora was hurried into the carriage, #hich waited for them, by her father, with ¿meri resentment. His anger seemed to be .occasioned at the concern she expressed for the accident (as he coldly termed ît) which had happened*. Basil appeared on horseback behbd 4 them. He seeraed no ways con-
cerned. Leonora shuddered át Ып foròeidôí teoks, ârtd could not help doubting the pro* tection which the unfortunate Lucretia had received from him. > They proceeded with increased speed the remainder of their journey. No material circumstance occurred before the conclu¬ sión of it 5 when the carriage stopped at a late hour of the night, near the end of a bj*e and solitary lane in the suburbs of Madrid. Here they .alighted ; and Theodosius Con* ducted his daughter, by an unfrequented path^ to that cottage in which, as has already beea related, Osmund discovered her. To her surprise and joy Ursula opened the door. Leonora flew into her arms. The old woman was equally gratified and affected· The priest left them in a short time. Leonora related to her, in an agony of grief, the loss of her friend. Ursula elevated her eyes toward heaven j her hands were clasped together; and she Sunk almost senseless into a chair which stood near her* Leonora was called from her own sorroWstö relieve Ursula from the situation in which the information had thrown her. She bathed
ţ^rţe^p^ used every ex- ев^Д ìt& tííiCôvier her., It was a cortsiderable tí^ x \)iowevery''.beiorè:'th€!y< had the desired effect. Leonora attem pted to give her com- ^srtì but the words died upon her lips, and she çòujd only weep at the recollection of the subject which required it. She inquired of VrSula how she had fared since they had been parted; The old woman informed her, she hád resided in her cottage, as formerly, till within the last six months, when she whs one day called upon by Theodosius to remove to the suburbs of Madrid. The idea of; so long a journey in some measure alarm¬ ed hier, and she begged to remain and die on the spot where she then was. But the father would be obeyed ; and, to incite her to the task,, told her, it was not improbable but she might be -visited by Leonora and Lucretia. This was indeed a spur to Ursu«. lat she undertook the journey with pleasure, and arrived without any accident at her pre¬ sent dwelling,whereevery thing wasprepared for her reception. Leonora informed her in her tarn of the events which had happened щ herselfaiid Lucretia during their residence
irt the convent òf A****·» dna related ţhâ circumstances of their fatál joürney,,in which she had lost her adopted sister. . Ursula listened to her narrative with grief and horror, and embraced her remain-, ing charge with, if possible, more than usual warmth, under the distressing idea that her tenderness could not now be divided. , They resided together uninterrupted for some months, the priest occasionally vi¬ siting them about once a fortnight: he then said but little, and remained only a short time. He,however,in these interviews, more than once hinted he should shortly call upon Leonora to marry ; which event would immediately take her from the re* clused life she had hitherto led, and place her in society of a high and eminent rank. Leonora received this information not only with indifference but distaste; while Ursula, whose health had rapidly declined for some time, still lectured her on obedience to the will of her father. Leonora listened perhaps to her advice with more attention, from the idea that she should not long receive the benefit of it, Ursula's constitution seemed entirely decay·
.; : ; : ШагАГсШеёвд^ gr^ätlgi^^ ; : ^ШгЙ|€.ШгаЙ^^^ ÍÄeretiá*sr ' '■'. ■X^ ï ^p^^heÏ'% Ursula was extrerheiy averse to this pro- ßöla^änd the priest appeaţed by no means fo» pr^it/ % night ©^ ^ЙШ suddenly became ] : : -:0ШЁ^ё$Ш^Ш^-Щ^^ easy to perceive her" Ш1§о1иаой^Ш ■flieuï at ä laté hour. He was well convinced of Uriuia's situation, büthe would not listen tôany advice being prbcured. The reader is acquainted with the further particulars of her death, in a description of Osmund's visit to the cottage at that critical 'period.' "'■ The next morning the monkarrived at an early hour, and commanded Leonora, in a severe tone, to be ready to attend him as sootì as it was dark in the evening. Her situation may well be conceived. Every exertion of her fortitude was neces¬ sary tö support her under the discomforts of
ш her situation. There was nora befåf in the world Ш whom she could look for eonsola> tion* The presence of her father occasioned her only anxiety and terror : it seemed his study to impress himself on her mind with awe and affright, to be obeyed with fear, and looked upon with disgust. % In the middle of the day, two ill-looking men arrived ; one of whom she soon disco* vered to be the same that attended Lu¬ cretia at the time she was murdered. They said they had orders from the monk to move every article of furniture the cot¬ tage contained, and they had a small Waggon for that purpose. They returned again at the close of the day, and the priest arrived at the same time. He told Leonora she need not make herself uneasy at leaving the body of the deceased, as he would take care itshould have interment with its due rites, There was no alternative : Leonora ac* quiesced, and followed him in silent agony. She was scarcely able to walk, and support* ed herself on the offered arm of her father. After some time they arrived without no¬ tice at the eastern parts of Olvernardo. Leonora was alarmed at the gloom which
Î3S
surrounded herr her father encouraged her with assurances of perfect safety, but they were deiiveredwith severity and ill humour. They entered by the way Osmund disco- 1 vered, hut did not take the same route. After traversing a few gloomy chambers y they arrived at one, at the end of a long pas^. sage* which was completely furnished with every necessary of life. A smali door in one part lea to another room^ in which was placed a neat bed. ** These apartments," said the priest, ft must be your abode for a short time : you shall not be without a companion ι to-mor¬ row I will bring you a young girl, whom I have procured to attend upon you. Be not discomforted at the idea of this situation ; in a very short period it shall be altered to one the most enviable ; riches, rank, and power, with every attribute that confers hap¬ piness on the human mind, shall be yours. You will then remember with gratitude that you possess a father who has ever studied your interest with the most assiduous care." These words had but little effect in alle¬ viating the grief and terrors of Leonora. She ventured to confess she dreaded to remain ini
that place alone. The priest, however, paid little attention to her complaints, and, after some general admonitions, left her in the midst of her distress. She passed a sleepless night, and observed the first rays of day dart through the case¬ ments of her chamber with the most heart¬ felt joy. She soon discovered the lattices of her apartment opened to a return part of the terrace, which continued round the eastern wings of Olvernardo, and was entirely sur¬ rounded with thick shrubs, which spread to a considerable distance. On this place her father had given her leave to walk ; but she had orders not to pass beyond the return, which was not only more clear from trees, but exposed to observation from the inha¬ bited parts of the castJe. It was in one of these rambles, when she trespassed upon the bounds prescribed, that Osmund first noticed her, through the infor¬ mation of Cecil. Theodosius was punctual to his appoint¬ ment the following morning. He brought a young.girl about niteen, of a very pleasing
åéø
app^amnce á td attend upqn her. He remain-* ed but a short tirne* She understood from Nanette,, that she was an orphan, having lately lost her parents from the ravages pf a m&iignant fever> that the monk had sent for her from Uzeda, near which town they bad resided ; that soon after her parents were buried, he had by chance called at the cot¬ tage of a distant relation, who had taken charge of her ; and it had been settled be¬ tween them, that when the priest wrote for her she should be immediately sent off ac¬ cording to the direction he had left. This was accordingly done ; and she arrived on the preceding night at an inn in the suburbs of the city, where she was met by Theodo¬ sius, who ordered that she should remain there that night, and be ready to go with him the next morning at an early hour. Це arrived at the time he mentioned, and con¬ ducted her the same way he had taken Leonora to the eastern rooms. The unaffected simplicity of 4 " this girl's person and manners was irresistibly pre¬ possessive. Leonora soon found in her a pleasing and affectionate companion. She
léi beguiled the tedious hours she was doomed to spend in the melancholy abode, with every exertion she was capable of to sooth and comfort. The priest in a short time in¬ formed her the period was arrived in which the "plans for the change of her situation would commence. He told her of the preparations making for the masquerade which was to be given by the marquis, and which he hinted was arranged pur¬ posely for her introduction. He acquaint¬ ed her it was with the heir of Olvernardo to whom it was his intention she should be allied. He brought her a dress for the occasion, and gave her particular instruc¬ tions with respect to the interview. Leonora listened to him with passive obe¬ dience : but her soul recoiled at the idea of being bartered for under the views and in¬ clinations of another : yet she had ever been taught to consider her rather with that awe and terror which for a time precluded direct disobedience to his will. The person of Osmund, and the delicate manner in which he offered his services on the distressing night of Ursula's dissolution ^
İM
had made a strong impression on her mind* She wished fand she could not account for the cause of it) that he had been the youth to whom her father was going to introduce her. He was the only person she had seen, except the monk and a few rustics, since she had quitted the convent of A—-— ; and his figure and manners had, from that period, been continually present to her imagination. - She was to recognise Albert by her mo¬ ther's picture, which he was to present to her. The result of this interview, and the various consequences which the masquerade pro¬ duced, have already been related. Leonora was conducted back to her apartmerts by her father, and did not see him for some days after. In the interval she had an interview with Osmund on the terrace. Informed of the affairs which were going forward in the castle, she found that Albert loved another, and she discovered she derived happiness from the information. In the' next visit she received from her father, he mentioned she would be neces¬ sitated to remain in her present state some
143
üttle time longer, as the plans he had form* ed were in some measure impeded. Osmund became no longer indiffèrent to her. The imaginations of both were warm and romantic. Vows of love and ñdellty were mutually exchanged, and the confi¬ dence which such a connexion produces followed as usual. Each, however, knew more than they had hitherto disclosed. Os¬ mund could not reveal to her his possession of the fatal paper which aimed at the life of her father; and there was every reason to suppose by the contents of it, which called upon Leonora as a witness against him on the charge of Lucretia's murder, that she had in her narrative (even from Osmund)con¬ cealed some circumstances which would serve to impeach her own parent as an ac¬ complice in the dreadful tale she had related. In whatever terrific light she had been used to behold him ; however she shudder¬ ed at his name, or trembled in his presence, Leonora still considered he was her parent. To have stood at the tribunal of j ustice a prin¬ cipal evidence against one whose life must have been the forfeiture for those crimes
with which sj^é chatted him> would have. been a ttie t rÄir^diFiuJljí.' /séVercìvibi^^I^oitòra^ : 'HÄ.pÄyí :éithéri ; from;. ties of blood or personal íntiniãçy ; ;bpt tb behold her fathér inr such a ^luatiofe éonďep я^огШ ?ŕf hieb her lips might utterý was too b^ridfep her ţo support éven in idea. r ι Tfelŕ?IÄr>íe^ were held with thevut·^ most ilearand caution. Al though they had not yet been discovered by thé monk, there was every ι reason to apprehend they would kiotiong remain a secret from him.
145
CHAP. XXI. What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus ? This torture should be roarM in dismal hell. Shakespeare. ¡Эоме weeks now elapsed, in the course of which signior Zadok Belizenip received a letter from Don Diego de Mellas. This epistle was in part an answer to one he had written, containing the information of Orlando's sudden departure from the castle. Don Diego mentioned having had one from the young man himself, with which he was perfectly satisfied. He observed, that he intended to in* crease his income, and remit it as usual to Madrid. With the behaviour of the tutor he like* wise expressed himself much pleased, and concluded by saying, that, as he flattered himself Orlando was now capable of keep* ing a wary eye upon his own conduct, he had only to return him thanks for his assis* VOL. Ill, h
146 tance in introducing him into life, and to beg bfc acceptance of an enclosed draft for five hbndre4 testóles, as a small recompense forhi^^t^tes." Siofor Şadok, however he might admire the genetoèîty of the donor of this present, derived no^pleasure in the receipt of it. He was aware how greatly Don Diego was de- eeived m anticipating the good effects ©f bts systern o£-edueation i he well knew the poignant sensations he would expe¬ rience in a. disappointment of them ; and he at times considered himself as blame- аЫе hi allowing him ţo remain under an error« But tbe idea of alarming him on so delicate a point, when there was a chance that Orlando might reform, and make most ampié amends for his past conduct, was the reason which deterred him from the commu- cation, and which, by the letter he now re¬ ceived from Don Diego, he had hopes were in some measure confirmed. Signier Zadok could not prevail upon himself to accept the five hundred pistoles so liberally bestowed by his patron ^ and afiaÉlrøuch consideration he again enclosed
ш İt in a letter to Don Diego* urith^mar^y: thanks for his goodness» and various apolo- - gies for returning it. With Osmund he now considered his station as a sinecure, and in another tetter to Don John declared himself entirely use* less in the situation with which he had ho* noured him,; that he had understood it was at first his intention Don Osmund should pro¬ ceed ift his route through France and Eng¬ land, under which arrangement he might possibly have been of some service; but, as those plans seemed for the present laid, aside* he could not consider himself as justified in any longer intruding on his ge-^ nerosity. Don John, in reply to this epistle, most politely declared he should account himself obliged if signier Zadok would remain with his pupil some little time longer. He con* fessed his own wishes had prompted him fo j hope his nephew would himself have ex* pressed a desire to see other countries^ m4 that he had intended his visit to Ma* drid as merely a first introduction^ to the worldľ Osmund, however, (щ $ят Hg
148
shewing such a desire, had lately by hjs letters rather intimated a distaste to it ; and Don John was not of a disposition to bias his inclination, even by strongly ex¬ pressing his own wishes on the -subject. Signior Zadok of course readily acquiesced with the request, and was informed that Don Diego had settled the ñve hundred pistoles he returned upon his parents. His feelings on the information of this ge¬ nerous act may well be conceived : he im¬ mediately dispatched a billet expressing the effusions of them-to Don Diego. Signior Zadok now felt a heavy pressure takenfrom his heart. His constitution was naturally weak, sickly, and delicate. He Bad ever considered it as by no means im¬ probable but his parents might survive him : the idea was agony to his soul. It presented them indigent, forsaken, and unprotected. While he had power to procure them the necessaries of life, he valued their existence above all earthly blessings : 'when that power failed, he could'net but utter a melancholy grayer, that he might be permitted to follow Шет to the grave.
149
Zadok was a man of strong understand* ing. The infirmities of his body were'a strange contrast to the vigorous conceptions of his mind. The indecent ridicule upon his person, which often reached his ears from the heedless exclamations of the unfeeling and the vulgar, although at times they stung him, never forced from him a vindictive re¬ ply ; and when his casual advances to so¬ ciality at public places led hira to address his unknown companion on some general topic of conversation, he often received a chilling answer of reserve, while his deform¬ ed figure was surveyed with evident marks of aversion and contempt. It was curious to observe how those obstacles at times gra¬ dually vanished, by the power of that pe¬ culiar art which signior Zadok had acquired of making himself agreeable. It sometimes happened, that the person addressed so far overcame his prejudice as to answer him by a slight remark, which good manners demanded he should return. The assertion, let it be what it might, instantly received an acquiescence, with additional proofs of its accuracy. The effects were instantaneous :
150 he no longer wanted a companion ; he wa$ a sensible little gentleman^ and not quite so deformed as he at first appeared. He had a tolerably good face, if it was not quite so pale ; and although his hump would perhaps have been better out of the way, yet it did not disfigure him as it would have done many others. His hump, however, and every untasty thing about him, was by de- - grees forgotten ; and he always concluded bis conquests by securing the epithet of one of the most entertaining little men in the city of Madrid. Nay, a certain lady of high rank was heard to declare, she should not be surprised if a prominence between the shoulders was to become fashionable, out of compliment to signior Zadok ; and a friend, to whom she had conveyed the hint, had it in contemplation to lead it off in a short time, by adopting one himself, and -calling it the Zadokian rise. The correspondence between Albert and Osmund continued without interruption. The former congratulated his friend on the good opinion in which he appeared to stand with the fair Leonora. Every epistle can-
151 rained inquiries concerning Cassandra, ana Osmund satisfied him as far as he was able. His information, however, on that subject was confined. Don Everard suf¬ fered but few visitors to approach her; and those few he selected were such as had no intimacy with the marquis of Olver¬ nardo, or any of his family. Cassandra had considerably recovered, but her melancholy still continued. Con¬ firmed in the idea that it was Albert by whose cruel conduct she had suffered so much, she could not but reflect with poi¬ gnant regret that she yet loved him. ' She carefully concealed within her own bosom the particulars of the interview by which she had been so greatly imposed upon; or otherwise the relation of the picture having been delivered to her, would, in all probabi¬ lity, have elucidated the mystery of the event, and at once have cleared Albert of those suspicions which now so strongly rest¬ ed upon him, by a full discovery of Orlan¬ do's guilt. Fortitude was not a distinguishing feature in Cassandra's character. Unused to disap- H 4
152
püintment or sufferings of any description, she was but ill calculated to bear the sud¬ den shock she had received : her delicate frame appeared slowfy to droop under its ravages, and the exertions of her mind were insufficient to withstand those reflexions which daily tormented her. Her intervals of insanity were not entirely removed ; and change of air and scenes were advised as the most probable means of her recovery. Don Everard had distant relations who re¬ sided at Murcia. He resolved to visit them, accompanied by his daughter, whom he could there introduce into company and amusements with more satisfaction than at Madrid. The family of Olvernardo had made every exertion fo discover the masque who had occasioned the catastrophe on the night of the entertainment at the castle : but their attempts were fruitless ·, while Don Everard remained fully convinced that Albert was the author and executor of the plot. The interviews between Leonora and Osmund still continued uninterrupted. Os¬ mund had more than once endeavoured to
153
persuade her to fly with him from her gfoomy solitude, and become his by those ties which would defy the world to separate them. Leonora, however, would not listen to his arguments on this subject. Implicit obe« dience to the will of the monk had acted as a spell upon her actions from the earliest state of infancy to the present hour : cruel as his injunctions had sometimes been, even a thought of not obeying them never en¬ tered her mind : he had worked upon her feelings under a system of terror, which at once rendered his tyranny absolute and powerful. Those by whom she had been in¬ structed took every method to create a pas¬ sive consent to the demands of Theodosius. His actions had generally inspired her "with awe, and often with horror. It would be a fastidious mockery of the human passions to assert that Leonora was bound to the priest by those affections she would have ex¬ perienced towards a tender indulgent parent, upon whom she could have gazed without terror, and have conversed without restraint. At the same time it İs but justice to declare that she was sensible of those ties which the h5
154 Ьшше of parent demanded, and would hava Hashed to have loved Цт with that fervor which euch close link$ of consanguinity m ^ge^eral produce. There wete moments when Theodosius in some measure lost a part of his usual ferocity. It was in these intervals she felt all those throbbing sen*- étions of filial affection, which her father trríghť so easily Imve cultivated, but which iu the next moment he would freeze by his peculiar austerity. As Osmund and Leonora were one even¬ ing slowly pacing the obscure part of the terrece, the latter observed the monk glide through the gloom at a distant part. He approached thenl by degrees. It was pro¬ bable Osmund r might have been able to escape unseen. But he did not wish to avail himseifof the opportunity. It had been his intention for some time past openly to de¬ clare his views to Theodosius, and demand tbe hand of his lovely daughter. The priest arrived at the spot where they stood. He started back at perceiving them % hisJfe&tures were distorted with rage; his whole trarne shook with convulsive passion»
155
"Gracious Godi" he exclaimed/ "what is it I witness? Are my plans thus to be blasted by my own child ? Are they to be frustrated by the interference of a romantic love-whining boy ?" Osmund felt the glow of anger burn on his cheek, while he supported the fainting form of Leonora on his arm. The monk rushed between them. He violently disen¬ gaged his daughter from Osmund $ and giving her to the care of her young attend¬ ant (who had by this tirne arrived at the porch which opened to their apartment), she w r as led to her chamber. Osmund would have followed ; but the monk placed himself before the entrance. (i Young man," he cried in a voice of peculiar strength and hollow solemnity, " you are not aware with whom you con¬ tend. You trespass on the concerns of one whose power can hurl you to destruction." " Theodosius de Zuivin," answered Os¬ mund with a cool fortitude which at once surprised and disconcerted the priest, "I am not to be intimidated by a bombast pre¬ tence to more than the ordinary attributes
of yoör v fellow-creatores. I am not to be blinded by superstitious terror, or deprived of røy powers of reason by the crafty insi* .rmations of a more crafty mind. I love, 1 adore your daughters and I flatter myself Leonora has not received the declaration of rny affection with indifference. Your con- åerit is only wanting to make her mine by those ties which the laws and customs of $ur country so rigidly demand," * 4t Never," exclaimed the priest, while his whole frame appeared agitated by the anger which beamed in his countenance. He sud¬ denly clasped his hands together with a fran-" tic enthusiasm, and raised his bursting eyes towards a full and refulgent moon, which at that moment majestically appeared from a dark cloud that had for some time eclipsed its lustre. " By him," he continued, iC who created that bright orb, which now pursues its course through his omnipotent power, #X swear, most fervently swear, neverto con¬ sent to such an union. Sooner, oh God ! would I behold my child sink under the ac¬ cumulated ills of every dire misfortune which Лой hast inflicted on the human race·
157 Sooner would I see her body slowly con* sumed by the perpetual rays of a burning sun, and watch the last quivering breath of life play round her clay cold lips. Sooner would I see her pine away her existence in perpetual celibacy, or even deprive her with my own hand of a life of painful languishment, than I would behold that day which should make her yours." <f Monk," exclaimed Osmund, while he shuddered at his words, " cease thy impious profanations, nor appeal to that God whose avenging power might crush you, while your trembling breath is, yet warm with the blas¬ phemy you have uttered. But you are the father of my Leonora ; you gave her being whom fate has ordained I should adore* That thought still draws me towards, you with a magnetic power of attraction, and creates a wish that I may not consider you as my enemy." "Sentimental fool," answered Theodosius, " dost thou suppose I am either to be soften¬ ed or intimidated by the puny exertions of an insignificant boy r" Osmund, whose warmth of temper at this
IS8-
^M*m§at (occasioned by the taunting çx* pressions of the monk) overcame his pru- dence, Suddenly seized him by the arm. ^Theodosius/* he cried in a half whisper* w lam not to be insulted with impunity. My heart bleeds while I tell you that I have strong reasons to suspect you are a villain— a murderer!" The pale moon-beams fell upon the fea¬ tures of the monk at this moment; they were convulsed with various emotions. * f Lucretia de Ravellina," continued Os- mund, «was destroyed by thy machina- tmm* 1 The monk heard no more ι he struggled violently to release himself from the nervous grasp of his young accuser, and at the same moment he suddenly drew forth a dagger me aimed it at bis heart. Osmund fortu¬ nately frustrated the intended blow, and wrested the instrument from his hand, Leonora, having in some degree reco¬ vered» alarmed by the cries of her attendant, who had witnessed their struggle, now rush¬ ed between them* and fainted on the bosom, of her father. i
159 " DønOsrmrød," he exclaimed, as he bore the lifeless form of Leonora to tbe internal part óf the porch, " you will rue this hour. The moment will arrive when you shall re¬ pent our interview of to-night, and reflect on the consequences with horror* I am in¬ vulnerable to your power ; and as a specimen of the superiority of mine own, maţk these fatal words." At this moment the clock in the east tmv ret of the castle struck twelve ; the sounds appeared more than usually awful. The group on the terrace were highly interesting. Leonora was supported by her father and Nanette. Osmund, with the dagger still trembling in his hand, listened with an anxiety he could hardly have supposed himself capable öf feeling for the prophe¬ tic information of the monk. He gazed on them alternately with tenderness and horror; while the dreary sounds which had interrupted the priest, during the time they were repeated, occasioned a death-like silence. The face of Theodosius received the pale and uncertain light of the half-obscured
1Ö0
moon. His eyes moved with apparent »dentai agony; his body, which was bent forward, as if to approach nearer to the ear of Osmund, seemed writhed with excru¬ ciating tortures, and his uplifted hand clench¬ ed by the pangs he endured. The vibration of the last sound of the clock had scarcely died away, when, 'm an inward whisper, he thus addressed the distressed and astonished Osmund:— ** Those sounds are the death knell of your best friend. At this instant the bosom of your uncle Don John is pierced by the dagger of an assassin : at this moment the blood flows from his heart, and he expires on the dreary margin of a forsaken heath, without comfort or assistance." A smile of exultation played upon the face of the monk, while he observed the ef¬ fect which these words had upon the asto¬ nished Osmund, whose eyes were riveted on bis fornt and that of Leonora, till they were lost in the gloom of the interior part of tbe porch.' Whatever might have been his opinions of the supernatural powers of Theodosius,
161 к is certain he experienced* extreme horror on hearing the assertion which he had utter¬ ed as a specimen of them. He walked slowly from the terrace, and proceeded to the inhabited part of the castle ; where he had no sooner gained his own cham¬ ber, than he gave himself up to reflexions on the events of the night. He had as yet ever been free from the trammels of superstition : he was neither of an age nor disposition to be fettered by its shackles; yet, under his pre¬ sent circumstances, he was conscious he felt those sensations which proved that he laid some stress on the horrid forebodings of the monk. Osmund could not divest himself of the melancholy imagery 1 it had implanted on his mind. It was in vain he attempted to rally his spirits on the subject, and con¬ demn his credulity for suffering a moment's uneasiness from so ridiculous a source. He was attached to his uncle Don John with that warmth which he might have been sup¬ posed to have felt for an affectionate and indulgent parent. The treatment which he had received from him demanded no lesa a return ; aud no one could bemore sensible
162 er graterui for^ those benefits which had been heaped uponhim than Osmund. Leo¬ nora was not banished from his thoughts. He- considered almost with distraction it was herfathçr who had attempted to take liisUife ; it was her father against whom he had a chargé of murder. To endeavour to bring Theodosius to justice was an act which both the moral and political laws of his country demanded ; yet to hazard sacri¬ ficing the parent of her whom he adored, was a dreadful, a horrible task to fulfil. , Under such torturing reflexions Osmund passed a sleepless morning. He met the family at breakfast ; but his altered manners foretold his anxiety and distressed state of mind. Their friendly exertions were useless to dissipate the gloom which overcast his countenance. He retired to his chamber soon afţeţf he had .finished his meal, and wrote fo Albert the intelligence that Cas¬ sandra, was about to be removed from Ma¬ drid to Murcia. This information he had contrived to ac¬ quire by the industry of Ceci!, although the plan of her intended journey was kept as.
ш
secret às possible. Osmund waited Ϊού th® evening With the utmost impatience, that he might hazard another interview with Leono¬ ra. Йе was not certain but the warmth of Ms conduct on the las| night to her father might in some measure have incurred her displeasure. He knew not what arts the priest might have practised to withdraw her affections ; and he trembled at the recollec¬ tion of the very great ascendency which he appeared to have over her actions. At the usual hour of their meeting he de¬ termined to brave the chance of again see* ing the monk, and proceeded immediately to the terrace f from whence he entered the porch which led to her apartments, He found them entirely deserted. The chief , part of the furniture was removed, Osmund was almost distracted : he blamed himself for not setting a watch upon the actions of the priest, who had not dined with them that day, and who, there was little doubt, had conveyed his daughter many leagues from Madrid. In what manner to trace their flight he was totally at a loss todisçover \ nor were there any persons from whom Ы
ie#
could hope to derive the least information but the marquis^» and from him there was little probability of success. In the first moments of his surprise and distress he re¬ solved to-demand an immediate interview with him ; but a little reflexion soon con¬ vinced him such a mode of conduct would be equally abrupt and impolitic* He paced the terrace a considerable time with a hurried and disordered step, He called upon Leono¬ ra : at intervals he fancied he saw her meetv him with her uuual tenderness ; while the ghastly form and pro¡ h etic whisper of the monk still weighed heavy upon his soul, and almost deeded him with a belief of a re¬ petition of their horrors. Having retired to his chamber, he began to consider what means would be most likely to trace the priest and his daughter; but there appeared none which held forth any probability of success, and he could only resolve Upon setting Cecil to make as many inquiries as possible among the servants— although there was little chance of his de¬ riving any information. He was dubious of (ponfemng with the marquis on the subject i
the peculiar circumstances under which he appeared to stand with the monk apparently rendered the mention of his name unpleasant and distressing. For these reasons he deter¬ mined to wait the event of Cecil's operations, to whom he gave immediate instructions. Cecil had in part been in the confidence of his master during his late visits to the terrace i and although his loquacity among the ser¬ vants of the castle might have rendered him a suspicious person for such a trust, yet he had never in any way betrayed it. His exer¬ tions, however, in questioning them about the monk proved fruitless; no one knew any thing more of him than either he or his master ; namely, that he did not dine at the castle the day before. Osmund's impatience and chagrin increa¬ sed every hour. Cecil was again dispatch* ed with an order to go round to the different roads which led from the city, and make slight inquiries, from persons who lived hear, if Theodosius had lately been noticed to pass that way. He was too well known to escape observation even in the busy streets of the metropolis.
ш Cecil was again unsuccessful. All whom he addressed crossed themselves with great devotion, and returned thanks to the Holy Lady for not having seen the wizard monk for a considerable time. The following day elapsed, and Osmund was still irresolute in what manner to act, when at a late hour of the night a loud knocking at the outer gates of the castle in some degree alarmed the inhabitants* Os¬ mund had just finished a letter to Albert, and was delivering it to Cecil that it might be dispatched to him early in the morning, when the noise occasioned them conside¬ rable surprise and consternation. They heard a horse enter the court, and they could distinguish the voices of several of the ser¬ vants of the castle* seemingly in much hurry and confusion. A few moments after Ce¬ cil's bell was rung violently from below, and he left his master to obey the summons with trembling expectation. Osmund felt an unusual dread of the information he might bring. He anticipated news from Seville ; he recollected the words of the monk ; he was ashamed to shudder at them, but he
m
could not avoid it. Cecil re-appeared with a ghastly countenance of grief and horror. He held ia his extended trembling hand a letter. Osmund snatched it from him, and, with a palpitating heart, read the following contents ¿—
<c To Sigmar Don Osmund De Mellas. <( Honoured Signior, " Excuse the liberty I take in addressing to you these few lines, with the dreadful in¬ formation that our good master, your worthy uncle, is no more. He went out yesterday morning to dine with some friends a few miles from Seville \ and on returning late at night over a desolate heath, he was cruelly murdered by a banditti who infest that neighbourhood. This horrid deed was dis¬ covered by some travelling merchants a little before twelve o'clock. Don John breath¬ ed his last a few moments after they came up to him, but he did not speak. The re¬ mains of our dear master were brought home by the merchants. I immediately sent off
Ш8 for Don Diego de Mellas, and likewise con¬ ceived it necessary to dispatch a messenger for you, as your presence, will, no doubt, be wanting on this melancholy occasion. I hope you will excuse the hurry of this epistle, and consider it as the consequence of my very severe distress. " I am, signior, " Your most respectful ** and obedient servant " Fabian." Osmund's emotions on perusing this let¬ ter were more severe than hé had ever be¬ fore experienced : he sunk senseless on a chair, and it was some time before the exer¬ tions of Cecil, and of several other servants who had assembled round, could recover him. The family were alarmed ; and signior Zadok, among the rest, was acquainted with the death of his patron. This infor¬ mation occasioned him considerable distress. The very liberal behaviour of Don John, both to himself and parents, was deeply impressed upon his heart, and called forth that gratitude he was so very capable of feeling. His exertions were at the present
mø
f*erlø& called töwarés Osmunds wrho Ш&к greatly in' n#ed r of consolation om thb me* latóioiy ţwmL Theprodictiorí of the monfc ар|^ашй verified with J^e most min^l^ ex# àcttìeissi ' ©femlind* tremblée at the recoltei^ tion of iti 7 '- ч ** This røaiV* he^uddenly exeíáime5étohim^ iself, "must have been concerned in theassasN si nation, by the very: peculiar knowledge he had of the hour it was committed/* The idea almost drove him to madness; 2 hi* mimd was in that state- of perturbatioa which annihilated all reflexion, and oniy pre* sent'ed the action of the moment as desirable* without any consideration of the come* quences which might result from it/ ' Th& suspicion that Theodosius, was concerned in the murder of his beloved uncle pre-« eluded, for a time, the recollection that he was the father of Leonora ; he thought only of bringing him to^ an-ignominious punishment; and he sudidefnly demandedaa immediate interview with the marquise * The marquis, on receiving tm? intelligenèft which the messenger brousrnt^readily agreed toOsmund's request* Ofemuaoíwascandiiétedi vol, uu ι
ITO
4 to hkdibrary. His appearance was wild artd^terrifie; Grief was not the only passion utarkéd in his eaUnţenanee; horror *was equaify/rpredonlåmift.f, The marquis rose» aui^ookhls hand. ' α My young friend," said he, u I am most sincerely grieved at the melancholy, the dreadful news you have received." A 'Osmund raised his eyes, and fixed them upon the fee,cf the marquis* » u Dreadful, my Ima í" he exclaimed: " it is horrible. Are we afone, my lord ?" His eyes wandered round the Voorn in a manner which made the question useless. " Cer¬ tainly/' «answered the marquisi * c I surely should mot have received you under these ¿ireumstamoes in company." ,** Mylord," continued Osmund with increased impetuosity, ** Γ have reason for being secret: Theodosius de Zuivin, my , lord, the monk of Madrid— " , The marquislstarted back with horror. 4t What of him ? M he exclaimed in a tone øf much alarm. ** He is a murderer,** cried Osmund. I The marquis's agitation appeared rather
''■;. ■ ■% o Åimipisb |hãh : 4ncrea^'Í>y|;tÍ^ ■,.,;$ейГ^щ^е^А ■■■■ : : '; : ltty^ytp^:'^nip^e^ yourself : Ще ; : . щМщ ■ \ nevçs of; this urifortunate affair has greatly ! affected yõ%'* r --^y vH f "^ud¿erj, my lord!" answered Osmuríd: ** I was informed of it some days past î it was whispered, in My ear at the very mo¬ ment к was committed, by the prophetic tongue of Theodosiusv* v ■ The marquis, who Was now. still more convinced that Osmund's brain Was de* rangedi again untreated him to return to hi$ apartment; while the little attention hç paid í to thak part pf Й) e discourse which related to the monfc served to increase his irritation and distress. ; ; *f My^lord^- he continued^·.■*'you are not aware of the character of the man whoni yøurth us cherish hi· the very bosom; of yout í^mily. % heavens 1 he is á viper who will Ы some unguarded moment sting you to th^ soul. At the very hour which, accordİAg 12
• f fi ld>lh^Ä^I^í# vk «el'e^iMt Îl aisiı$sîiöted; ^f &ва^шй£шЫа) actually informiifd mø of ^ШйЫШаШщтуЛоЩЫШ^Ми^ le фШшвФ$Ш& more tha^ JfUflEmtS^r that tøi* ^o^^rn^^wìtb^^^spérfedires^who deprived Don John of existence*" ïfcè Etát' Ша ratîbnal· máöner ¡à which iheše Words* wefè delivered made the mar¬ ţul^ stoppose hö wa^ 'deceived with respect to ©SruulKPs dëFtog^a¥iit of intellect. He r requested he would тш& fully explain him- Í ttìi* by"reitting the eircmmtmees ^hich ^ gave rise Ш the interviews hi which the ¡ топШ Må< cteîiverêé the' fatal inforbăeoil \ ^tôenrtouêd. ι . ^ * f *< * Calmund, Щ*ее$ his p^sent^ di^tťefes and ф.тщ mm й€й чаять Латышей α>ά*Α*ηά was most,likely to follow the relätio^ofhis îtüle to îM marquis md Ue now^ perfectly fere^Wfffiat & must ih^We atí-a^eouuf^of Ш nìghtì^ineetmgs Wiát аша^га^ or bt Ш brekas 0Ш ^ncénA^cted^ that it would give *tötfa ú ^èppo^fhe prfWfe^t^d^ and was uot perfe^y cleat m Ш cfiar^,
M 9
The thought-, pf Leonora almost mads him repent the interview he had o^tame^ ! jţnd the accusation М^Ыф ^ready uttered· He was perhaps ţakiug the most effectua^ means jţo bring ţo au ignoruinious death. him whp g^ye her being., Could he eve/ hope to call her hi& when she would view j in hira the destroyer ;pf her father, ths \ accuser of his crimes, and the publisher of ¡ his disgrace? But Osmund was gone too ! far to retract. Of a disposition naturally j open and candid, he resolved at once to cqu* I fess to the marquis hiš Jove for Leonora* \ and relate to, Ыгд the progress of their af»! fections. The marquis listened to him with at* tentiqn. It was not difficult to perceiv» he was distressed at the recital ; but ori his mentioning the manuscript he had dis- ! covered, by means of the old woman iß the solitary cottage, his agitation visibly increased ; and when l\e uttered the name pf Lucretia, the female .whose murder jt disclosed, his emotions 'overcame bim, fee fell back Щ bis chair, and здиЩ ойу efc- I
; èlaím, ; ítt á fainïr and faltering voice, " My ^au¿hté^Ph GodF*rn^ J duughter !" Os- muríd\ Wtoárstíràènt Ш à few momenta prevented his afrèridìng to thè situation of hfejf auditor, who r ecøvered 'soon enough ta preveril Mm from ringing for assistance^ "Tbtíňg nian," he exclaimed in à: voice of mtích severity, " you have undesignedly drawn from me a secret which I would hot 'have disclosed for .worlds. Perhaps your possession of it may tend to destroy me : it may coyer me with public infamy—it may v bíašt iftý name for ever :*—but mark me, sig- Sior/' lie continued, while he suddenly seized the arm of Osmund with violence, **dare but to breathe it tò any human being, either by direct information or otí- 4 î^juehînts^ and, by'the firmament of heaven I Wear, my whole power shall bé exerted - to crush you !" «Unhand me, my lord," cried Osmund with much firmness : " I am not to be iriti- mìdated by the magnitude of your power, or thb threats of your oppression. Your high rank and station in Madrid, niy lord^
may»halre giveri yb^pertaim degrees of sufrid rbrity over the general class of yopr féttpw^ citizens, .whfcfcneiêher justicb^an s^pţrorf^ nor even the öi^aligovernmeatoCtheworlé establish upon a firm basis. I must tellyou^ marquis, that the less this extension, of pre¬ rogative is seen to be exertşoV the глоте honour is reflected upon him who forfeit! his arbitrary claim to it. * That тащ 'whè would attempt to shackle- the mind oè another, by the aid of those actions through^ which he is capable of distressing him, deserves to feel the poignant j Sensations 37vhich one free born experiences when ho* к galled by- the chain of tyranny, and dis¬ covers hknself to be a slave/* ^ The marquis seemed most sensibly to feel this rebuke. " Don Osmund," he exclainreo^ " you have but little conception of my suf¬ ferings : you know not the tortures whicb agitate my ^oul/' , , He burst into tears as he uttered the last words. « Heaven forbid r my lor4i^ an¬ swered Osmundy " that my conduct should for a moment add to your distress^ $ ?апг sensible of the obligations whickmyselfaad
17P b^the^>Of^e fòt ^ ^ery noWe andrens-ron* hos^it^Kt^ ţve ha>ve re^eiyed ; and I here ţm& .fi^wmìy MWMm % never to reveal the ^sseÄp ЫгЫ* Л &Щ£ jusi heard yoa - « Msrlf 4bai|kt йо you^' answered tfee marquis, .recovering in some degree from hi* paroxysm of grM« ** I sincerely beg your $щ$ц&ь A few .rnoniejuts >past й forgot «myself, Iàajve^ranmione, sigmior, which at ^rø^drjv© jne l# madness. Father of $№№&? .im exclaimed» ** why am I thus #tófoted^>drag on a,miserable existence! Why jam X dauy ^permitted to view the ray» ^fjthaf sun, whose gferious pendor aerves but to increase -the horrors of my soul i ЩГМ thou ntat ikten to my never-ceasing prayer, and shade me in the gloomy pre- 4Încţs i>f the grave ì Jint I ta& wildly : the grirve пшу he heli to me, к is worse than hell* it is all uncertainty, it is horrible i* Oh# y£>ung man 1" he continued, while Ы ig^şped Osmund's hand with violence, «< jif iyoÄJknessr how the fe«er ,of my brain <:oj3tsiimed me, you штйА pity me* It ^ошЫ
И7
even pronppt you tg wish that there w$$ state of annihilation^ &at шсЬ a wrejcb Щ$ I might profit-by it." 4€ indeed, my hr$" answered, Osmunds * c these are wild and incoherent *words. I mow repent Uhat í b$ve in part bffin the opcaaion of thera. Şut this ntoufc^rtbí^ Theodosius de Zuivin—-^-" " Don Osmund," cried the marquis, u it I have any claim on your compassion,- men*- tion not that name again: 'tis a dagger which inflicts upon me the most excruciat¬ ing tortures. Suppose him not accessary ţq the murder of уоцг uncle because he int formed you of it at the moment it was committed. Be no ^surprised at his actions,. however, different from those of other men* Avoid him as one whose very breath is pqi$ ( on-^whose touch may blast you." Osmund now c^aqged the subject of their discourse by speaking of his journey to Seville, and that he intended tp quit the castjp ip the course cţf şl fow hours, " The circumstances which call you^* said the marquis* " will not permit rue tc attempt to alter your resolution^ jl jhşp i5
178 only ţo say, Dob Osmund, that I hope you will ever consider the castle of Olvernardo as your home : the inhabitants, 1 am certain; will always be hâţppy to recognise you with that title." Osmund could scarcely speak : he clasped the offered hand of the marquis with fervor. ** My lord," he cried, (t your goodness is not lost upon me—I feel it ; but my mind is at present in that state which 'precludes my returning' you suitable thanks. The differ rence of our situations renders it improba¬ ble I should ever be able, by actions, to cíemonstrate to your lordship my gratitude for the favors we have received. I can only 'say, that in whatever state it is my destiny hereafter to be placed, I shall ever cherish them in my bosom, and consider the castle of Olvernardo as one of the brightest objects lean trace, in á retrospection of past scenes ahd^past enjoyments.'^ J Osmund retired to-' his chamber, and wrote -farewell billets to the marchioness and Isabella, às he intended commencing üs journey some hours before the time of 'thçir 4ish%. Cecil was desired immedl-
1*79 (Г ately to procure post horses ;. and the ser^ vant, who brought the letter from Seville, was ordered to remain, to pack and follow with the luggage. In a very short time the carriage which was to convey him to .Se¬ ville was announced ; and the disponsolate Osmund, accompanied by Zadok, after taking leave of several of the chief domes¬ tics (who were assembled in the court-yard for that purpose), threw himself into it, and quitted with considerable regret the gloomy towers of Olvernardo.
ISO
'·" ,," /CHAP. XXII. "ЩсМ my resolves Ъееп wkvering und doubtful, "røs ifmU côííftrm tkem, ишке th«iü fi^M -ач Fate* Thomson vßsa&vjsj} de Mellas wa&buried in reflexions ' ťhe chief part erf the journey. They were complicated and confused : at intervals the tender remembrance of his deceased uncle called forth the most poignant sensations at the idea of his loss : he had ever looked up to him as a father, and considered him as the most affectionate of parents. Don John's general behaviour was such as to endear him to all with whom he had any concerns : his affability and pleasantry of manners render¬ ed him a general favourite. But Osmund had far stronger ties to call forth his regard» To him he was indebted for the elevated rank he held in society; from him he received an education which at once enabled him either to support with propriety a superior staüonj or maintain a manly independence
181 under the frowns of a#versity. Perhaps, by a general observer^ he v^ould have been considered as incapable of such reflexions £ there was a vivaci ty â a volatility bt ^^ап* ners 9 which at once served to dejfe^ate lu# character toa strarrger asa jay, diss%>a|edr and thoughriess young n£an, who $еЫош troubled himself to think, and whose ideas> when he did, were hardly worth the time they took to collect them. Such traits, how« ever, were by no means the characteristic of Osmund de Mellas : his mind was strong* vigorous, and penetrating. At rimes he exerted those qualities in their full force*-^ not at particular periods > which made it necessary he should be seated alone* in a dark room to court their influence-«—they visited him voluntarily, and on that ac* count were the more vivid and powerful ; insomuch that, perhaps, at the very moment his lips uttered ajeuďgsprit, his mind rnade^ the most penetrating remarks on the subject which called it forth. The recollection of the monk still ha¬ rassed und perplexed him* The words of the marquis ¿elative ito Thepdosius were all
ш mysíeVyi ûey might be applied to severaf dpirrioh^ and tended 4o excite various suspi^ clòns/ ^nitfïïd had ever been the first to lattgh at tBo^e ? tales óf wbnder which gave to ari r> individual superior power and attri- butoitd Ьп feîlèw-imortaîs. He had always been taught to ridicule the idea/and openly to'scoff aťany attempts which might be made to iitrttøse upon his understanding by such ridiculous relations. The prediction of the*monk/ however, was a circumstance of no trifling consequence to stagger his belief OU this point : the specimen of his power was a dreadful one—its v effects the most awful and terrible. He was necessi¬ tated to suppose Theodosius either more than human, or one chiefly concerned in the murder of his uncle. If the latter sup¬ position was cfohfirmed, he was bound by the strongest ties to avenge the deed, and to act às a principal in causing him to be publicly* sacrificed for the crime. This reflexion instantly brought to his mind the lovely figure of Leonora: he beheld her weeping for the unhappy fate of her only remaining parent s - and fly from Ыт with*
183 horror, as the cause of his disgraceful deatht In Leonora he discovered all that was ai¬ mable. Her misfortunes Served ofíly to endear her to him. He was well aware that an alfb» ance with her would not in general be com sidered as an act of prudence г hei*^want of 'fortune, and still more her very near 1 rela* tionship to the monk, at once formed the most powerful objections, and his disregard of them would be considered"as no proof of his abilities by the world. Osmund was mot yet philosopher enough to look upon the opinions of what he called the world with contempt. There was a degradation in the idea of being pointed at by the mul¬ titude as one whose inferiority of under¬ standing had made him public, which he could not very well brook : yet his love for Leonora would have overcome such obsta¬ cles, with whatever magnitude they might at first have appeared : but there was now another point open for reflexion, still more alarming:—her poverty and kindred'to'the monk were trifling impediments, When placed in competition with the thought that her father was the murderer of his
а$ф
^FÎtJk hmw, mí tmßei Äe i;o4^qitiencejs ^^^•И^ ** ^i^w Z^îiîfe, î^ho .wa$ i^^dMA «p an" the #f*p#áte oo^per of di^jt^|^ıe|rstf^bb r &t^ıs ^Шеэсе, Ay^^vajp It js*ttemi>ted ^^gi^èí# #ome ^@ns%ţ^a .op #e 4eath pf Dm John j(for be wa& Япцсдащ!^! with any other source which Osm^ftdrhad for ^ae#s¿B?sss)^ but tte words falterei! ßu his torţgue, and the stifled te^ar which burst from hb eye совг jprmed be w»s by no mems competent to ibe tæsk;. Signior Za$òk, although he was a tutor, ■fvaf «# stoic» Ш well fcnew that mo# jö^eiş Щ his profession would have strove to şm$m the grief *ог their pupil> by the «Kmsf litary remerribrance of the targe for^. „tıtifebş was МШу fc> t inherit by the цфНц- mt&£$eţ&. But signior jSadofc was not a ' Viitor 0^щ©4е*в fashion ; Ы couJd hejther le^4 Ък charge iat^ those scejaes: which т&$1$9щйу hfe рцт and ruin : hî^^o«&ti* 4»tì^i> rjør^ftgratujate him onJhje 4ea^ uf - Mfcløtt f#pa brause ^t ţwp Ыт posses ^îon ^pf й# ««b|t«№· life ftriSkfcs JRdjOgi-
т$щ virem perhaps $тШт$ hf+møj they f щ1фж have been eo^idered a# coj^ ^mpÉiJMe s imt ЖшаоЬ Nd acquired Фш0 m âhe «chøiol. ^f r ;adver#it^ ţ In pornttf щ£ ^bfprtţwie k& jhad tetrrød ^feP сЬ^Ш>,^# Jove those wboigav^ Ыш beinti mß* t^å be in affluence Jiveen terø^lf ßf At Ш%% tha| there weJ-e .øthej^ în tbe w^lá ^wfe^ felt similar sensations ,$& ,tho^e îpoiııt^ wíA bimself, 'He^xperiejacedíh^ $аше topeftír nent crøosity during tWs joţ№n#y a^ jn vhe former one from Seville to Madni Ή>$ eyìes of the vulgar were feed npon Ыгд at every place »where be allied fxom the РШ*г riage. The children were d^sir^ bf feek" more childish parents, to/obse#i^e Ьда дай attention* Their satirical ¿*e»trk£ upop J# filtre were by some njttered iu his, hearing» and their imitation of kh gmt rninŕake^ before bis ^yes, JZkdok observed them wi$i coolness and unconcern ; but the cheek, <|i his pupil glowM.;wUh iniigoaiioa at ike iliiberality of hţs oputntrymen, Osmund, on » his arriva) 4 at S^ville^ found his uncle Don Diego already t^ere· ,^ be røtered the bause of mownirţg ^isjrøisa^
tm 1$Шт w^e tfee most severe. It 4 was not tbe tl&c^ion of grief* they wer^ the genuine ti&êbgp of his-souh In one of his first |sti5e$tio»^he*aske4 if the assassin had been ^|сой!Щ|* Hte^ undertood that one of the %a^itt^wa^apprebended on suspicion, and .would èe' trîêct or* the charge, Osmund mmeWeå, that if the monk had been in any way privy to the deed, he should, in ¿Jl probability, bê able to discover it by this mafV аш$ he «resolved to question hira on^thatéubjè^t himself. He found Bon-Diego was the executor of Don John*s will, in which he (Osmund) 'was left thè principal part of his fortune. -Uè remainder was divided into various ■"bgaeies of diferent magnitudes, and distra bated in· the most benevolent manner among those to whom they would be of "essential service. Sgnior Zadok was not ? forgottèn, bis name was mentioned with a 'remembrance of five hundred pistoles· Osmund received the most kind and feendly behaviour from his uncfe Don Diego» fte found his^advice, with respect *to tìhe management of his new-acquired.
í 8? fortune, extremely acceptable, while the old gentleman wras equally pleased with bis docility i« : rec0ivi&¿ ft, ' v -\ * - '* f l - , The fufterať o¥ Don John; from hrs own request, was conducted without anyfíompí His hearse was m>i adorned wi*h> tbe tro* phies or armorial bearings of his family dignity; but the recollection of his virtues was embalmed in the minds*of those who knew him ; and if their tears demonstrated their affection, such tributes were pienti* fu!· ' Signior Zadok had the felicity to clasp té his bosom his aged parents: the comforts of life had helped to restore, in some degree, their constitutions; and he beheld with ecstasy the declining years of their'exis¬ tence tinged with those warm rays of pro¬ sperity so necessary to their age and infir¬ mities. ч * * Don Diego conceived it necessary that Orlando should be immediately informed of Don John's death. He accordingly wrote to him at Murcia ; as also did his brothers who gave him a pressing invitation to Seville·.* Au* answer from Orlando was*very $o©au
188
received by each. He was most lavish in his -expressions of sorrow for the loss of Don John, in both .epistles. In that to Don, Piego he expressed his hope that Osmund would make a good use of the wealth he possessed by. the unfortunate event* Цс talked .much of tbe immorality of yoeng men in genera], and sincerely prayed that his brother might prove au exception to the generality of them. He confessed his mode of living was better ad* apted to his taste in Murcia tban at Madrid ε the dissipation to which he was introduced İn tbe castle of Olvernardo was to him totalfyidisagfeeable j he was not fitted for such a life. At Murcia he could follow his own wishes; observe and moralise upoa the various busy scenes which passed his eyes, without becoming a performer ia their follies. He was retired and unknown. He beheld the errors of mankind and pitied them* and he prayed -that he might never become a copyist pf their vices. Don Diego read this letter with, rapture. He conceived his system of education was now proved to be successful ; he reflected ¿with peculiar
m
satisfaction on his management of the expe¬ riment, and the perfect confirmation of his hypothesis* Don Diego only wanted the idea, that the one pursued by his brother* was false, to make him perfectly f satisfied with himself. The letter of Orlando seemed obliquely to hint that Osmund was not free from juvenile indiscretions; and the peculiar melancholy which pervaded his features, although he had every reason to suppose it might originate from the loss of Don John, yet served, in th6 sanguine mind of Don Diego, to corroborate the insinua* tions of his adopted son. Hè immediately conjectured he was unhappy, because he might be under pecuniary embarrassments, which would perhaps take a great part of his fortune to discharge; or that he lan¬ guished to return to the city of Madrid before the usual time which respect to the deceased demanded he should remain in Seville. In short, Don Diego conjured up various reasons for supposing what he wished to be convinced of, that his late brother's system of education had failed; which had not the least probable founda-
190
tìon but in the wild conjectures of his own brain. At the same time it is but justice to рЬцег/е* ho wever averse he might be to the mariner ia wbfoh Osmund was educated, b&/did>nøb possess those cruel prejudices tøhieh would have urged- htm to behave with any "degree of resentment to the young man himself. No one laid greater stress* upon his own opinions tbnn Don Diego«;-but they never hurried' him into a line of-conduct that disgraced them. He was positive in his assertions, and main¬ tained them with remarkable obstinacy ; yet he^entertamed no malicious spleen against those who differed from him, or recollected their tenets ;{however they might disgust him), when he had it in his power to serve them. Orlando, in his answer to his bro¬ ther's letter^ returned him many thanks for his invitation tö Seville, but positively de¬ clined it. His reasons were, his great par¬ tiality for the- part where he then resided ; and the causes for that partiality were explained.in a similar way as in the one to his uncle. Two months now elapsed, in the course
191
-of which time Don Diego quitted Seville, after using every exertion to settle the affairs of Dön John to the utmost advantage for his heir. In the course of this period, like¬ wise, the trial of the assassin came forward. The charge being fully proved, he was con¬ demned to die. Osmund requested an in¬ terview with him before his execution. He had confessed the deed, and appeared a sin¬ cere penitent. Osmund solemnly request¬ ed him to answer a single question, which should in no respect tend to criminate him farther on the crime for which he was to suffer, or any other he might have commit¬ ted ; at the same time declaring, that he would grant him any boon he should require, consistent with justice or humanity. The culprit listened to his offer with rapture, and, clasping his hands with ecstasy, ele¬ vated them towards heaven. " I take you at your word, signior," he exclaimed. " I have a wife and child. The former is on a bed of sickness, occasioned by the horrors of my situation ; the latter is not yet old enough to maintain her mother
ш
ty the exertions of her labour. They are in¬ nocent.. Promise me that you will preserve th^Difroni: perishing for'the common neees- sarjes of life¿ and I will answer any· question« yrifh that veracity which raustbe expected írom one who'has but a few days to live." - Osmund gladly accepted the proposition, and instantly demanded, if he had any know¬ ledge *of a man called Theodosius de Zul- vin>a,reputed monk of the order of St. Mark at Madridy and> well known in that city for a ¡suspicion of his knowledge in witchcraft and magics .Osmund watched most care¬ fully the couritenance of the assassin ; but he cøuJd not discover the least alteration in it, ţo make .him suppose the man knew the person to whom he alluded. He said, he recollected to have heard of such a person, ,who was termed the monk of Madrid ; but he most solemnly affirmed, that to his know¬ ledge he.néver saw him, and was even igno¬ rant pf' bis name; nor was he, ever con¬ nected with any person whom he had heard mention him, otherwise than as a public cha¬ racter·
193 Osmund's astonishment increased at this declaration. Theodosius seemed totally unimpeached with respect to being con¬ cerned in the murder; while his prophetic whisper at the moment it was committed gave every reason for believing the wild and uncommon reports which were circu¬ lated concerning him. Osmund left the cjlprit, and returned in a maze of doubt and perplexity. This man had been secured in an attempt to rob two travelers the very night after he had assassinated Don John. He knew that, under the circumstances in which he was taken, there was no hope of pardon. The hiding-place of his ассоиь plices was discovered. Fearful that either of them should suffer unjustly for the mur¬ der of Don John de Mellas, he declared himself the author of the bloody deed. By his confession, it appeared that Don John had refused to deliver him his money, and had even struggled to deprive him of one of his pistols; in which struggle he suddenly drew his stiletto, and stabbed him to the heart. According to this account, it seemed by no means a premeditated affair; ада VOL. ill. к
ím к was probable, that if Don John had tame¬ ly given up his purse, his life would have been paved. The remainder of the banditti had evacuated their habitatton before the officers of the police arrived at it. The culprit was executed according to bis sentence. His behaviour at the awful period was penitent and commendable. Osmund faithfully fulfilled his promise by relieving the wants of his wife and child. Although greatly oppressed at the recent «melancholy circumstances which had sur¬ rounded him, he was not languid in his ^exertions to discover Leonora» He wrote ^o several of his friends, who were dis¬ tributed at different parts of Spair. for that purpose ; but mentioned no reasons for his curiosity, nor gave any particular detail of the events which occasioned it. His efforts, however, were useless: their an* swers proved unsatisfactory ; and he still re¬ mained irresolute in what manner to act. He receivéìì about this period a letter from Albert, who had left his former retreat, and 'was at the time of his writing at Mur¬ cia, to which city he repaired soon after he
ш
heard Cassandra had removed there. *He informed him he kept as private as possible, for fear of alarming the suspicions of Όρη Everard, who never suffered his daughter to go out unaccompanied by himself. That part of his epistle which mentioned Orlando was thus worded :-— " I must^ not forget to tell you, J have seen your brother several times since my % ar- rival at this place, although I believehe o!id not discover me. I must confess, 1 wish rather to avoid him under ray present circumstances. He lives in much аШиепсе» His piety, virtue, and so forth, are the talk of the city. His uncle must greatly have increased his establishment since he quitted Olvernardo." Albert concluded with a strong invitation tb his friend to join him. These few lines concerning his brother occasioned Osmund considerable surprise. Don Diego had mentioned to him but a short time before^ that he had not then increased his quarterly remittance, although he had it in contemplation to do so. How Orlando could afford to live in ihe шаппег hinted at ç 2
196 by Albert,^was а ¿щш$у "he could in йоге - speet unravel. He was лгегу certain his bro¬ ther was not rich when he left Madrid^ ai- thougb>hë -waè ?nformed the few debts vi^hich he-had contacted were honourably discharged. He knew that he had gamed, and was confident he generally lost. Or¬ lándolas nét calculated to exist by gam¬ bling, and, according to Alberťš account, he must in that respect have entirely re· formed. The souroe Ifrormwhich his great amHiencewasdëriveàrwiàs a subject of won¬ der. Osmund in vain attempted to form some idea that might elucidate it ; but his -exertions were useless. However Orlando might haye shunned those advances towards mVfriendship he had often made, yet he still felt an affection towards him. that made him anxious for his welfare. He was not en¬ vious of the*e!evated state in which his bro¬ ther lived ι but, according to the observa- tiøns he ha4 made upon Orlandoľs character, he would have been much 5 more happy if the intelligence had explained some satis- . factory method by which he attained:!t. He ^onceivied, however* that this might perhaps
be easily answered, but that Albert had mr opportunity or desire to search for sucb information, Osmund found himself inclined to ac¬ cept his friend's proposal of meeting him at Murcia. He greatly needed some relief to his present ennui. It was in vain he mixed with the fashionable and gay society of Seville. The figure of Leonora still haunted him^ the mysterious r the terrific monk, was continually before his eyes ^,his fatal prophetic whisper on the terrace of Olvernardo at intervals he could almost be¬ lieve again sounded in his ear. , " * He at length resolved upon the jouraiey«j and, after settling his affairs at Sevjlk) and leaving the care of his house and principe concerns to signior Zadok, Belizenipp aud Fabian, departed for Murcia.
& 3
Х»8
chap. xxm. Mow many frightful stops would conscience make In some sott Ьеаф, to undertake like me? Come, tîtt><&n$etettCë Ы a%onvenient scare-crow í It guards thelîritţt wbioii priests and wise men taste, "Who never set İt »p to Right themselves* Tffcey lemHir 4Ss'№g» 4 and gather in the face on't; While hftlf-siarv'd sh*Uo\v dàWsOïto 4 ^r are honest. » /* * * SliAKSťEAKE. J t i' v/à'iAHpoV moder óf Conduct after his ar- tìfàSTU )фзвгс& Was entirely díŕTerent from flfat S ШшкЩ ľ k wa^ more congenial to bis, tastei rnôré suitable tø his purpose, and better, ^aîëifefed to answer those expecta¬ tions he had long cherished-, aad which he could not under any circumstances resign. Orlando found in his servant Otto an able instructor in the art of finesse :. it was an in¬ gredient he much wanted, to rectify and im¬ prove those natural qualities he possessed to Impose upon the world, and prey ирод that ciedulity he had formerly so amply
possessed htrhselfi and whicb he was nowr> sb ready to tateáö^ántage of in others. His penetràlion hadí led him to ob^rve that all ' men dMİ hotf eneráis were ; that thek public and private actions greatly ¿offered, and couM by no means^^b^ traced tö th^^ aecpunted for on the same principles. O^hadpitched this truth in rnbst öf his daily lectures to his mastery for Ötíö cbutó now preach to his master without fear: or hesiţatiori. Their fest act of coalition in the robbery of thé pooi recluse had boun^ them together by the strongest ties, and their different degrees in station from that period must be considéra ed merely as a superficial dress of thè «Aa^ racteŕs they performed in Ше theatre öf Ше; Orlando soon discovered the hinte he te* ceived from Otto answered to his wishes. İfe now regretted he had not acted with rnore caution ât Olvernardo. Hp need got to have gone openly to a gaming-table, or been seen, by those whom he wished to avoid, sur¬ rounded by men of infamous character. He, however, yet congratulated himself that points of still greater magnitude were con- it 4 .
i<m
created j and, tiróse few indiscretions which, t^ere known would hereafter be considered^ así juvenile ioíbleé, aud^ allowances made for ther** accordingly^ , Iu Murcia he^resol- ved to Ы more cautious irt his pleasures * to gratify tbeju in secret, while thø 'purity of his public character might prevent his pri¬ vate oue jfrom, being m rigidly scrutinized. He Affi dwelled, hpou hia late interview with his father .under sensations the » most -r various and distressing. He trembled at tb§ recollection of his escape from imbruing bis bands Inhis blood * and white he traced the comfort&he might have experienced ins embracing hirn under the name of parent, he reflected on his acquiring a knowledge pf ßis «^worthiness with distraction. The whole of the events relative to his father i#ere a mystery he found it impossible to develop* He dreaded.his brother or un¬ cle baviog a knowledge of his existence % it might discover him as his assassin by the very great resemblance he bore to the former î but, to. his astonishment, the let* ţerg he received from them made no men- tìou of .their having seen or beard any
201
intelligence of Don Alphotiso* Orlan¬ do was necessitated to let his cwiosîty remain ungratified, as even an attempt to satisfy it called forth the reşentroent^of the monk. A short time after his arrival at Murcia^ he hired a handsome house in the principal part of the city, engaged several domestics, and fixed a considerable household esta*» blishment, of which Otto was head? He* assumed his own name, visited all the places - of public entertainment, religiously attended the cathedral, gave public? alms to the poor,, and sumptuous feasts to the rich. He di¬ splayed his learning, was listened to-with* attention, and always applauded.. The general talk· was of Don Orlando de Mellas, the new inhabitant of Murcia* Hfs afflu¬ ence, his generosity, Jiis religion, his erudi¬ tion, were universal topics of conversation ¡ and Orlando at last obtained something like that reputation, for which he had so long languished. Still he was not the easy man of fashion ; his unconquerable diffidence re¬ mained. At times he felt its effects with full force, and despaired of ever overcom . к 5
ш feilte ]Ш$е&ик* Ш occtísioríea: There Ш^Ша^аШЬк àitkih joints of con- ferèfiorî Wífcl hirn to^ the soûl, and his ЗЙЦ[)^Гв&^ to conceal the blush which they occasioned. He could rM ШШ thé хеШШ, that the wealth tvlth whiëh hè was so profuse, so liberal, audi unbounded, Was the produce of a base ìheft / by wftfch he had destroyed the man ^vho Mad notrrished him in moments when he was unable to assist himself, and to wnom he had most villanously repaid these acts" of genuine hospitality by ingratitude of flf€f darkest dye* He could discover no antidote for such thoughts : they were spon¬ taneous* and were not to be smothered. Nor cQ'ûld he listen to the various compli¬ ments #hic 4 b were paid him for his gene- roslty, benevolence, religion, &c. with per¬ fect 'composure: conscious how little he merited them, he Was éven at times suspi¬ cious they were intended as oblique hints at Ms former conduct, although the person w|vo ütteted them had known him but a fetv days. Å short ťrnie after his settlement at Mur·
£03 cia he gave a dmner to щ tege pa#f* *» * style of much splendor. The windows of the room in which they took their whø# and dessert opened tp a large square. Their good cheer was made public to every men¬ dicant as he passed. A man and woman,, seemingly not above thirty, accompanied by- two children, suddenly stopped before the plentiful scene. Their clothes were rhucb worn, and their general appearance bespoke them objects of charity ·, yet there was ar* inexpressible 'something im their counte¬ nances and manners, which Jed the observer to believe they were far above the common class of beggars. One of the guests, a tall thin gentleman, who had been lately ap* pointed one of the magistrates of the city» had a great antipathy to beggars of all kinds.. He could only account for it by his mother having, been frightened by one at the time she was pregnant with him. This gentleman,, with averted eyes, waved his right hand with great solemnity for them to withdraw,, at fke same time informing the company h would be impossible for him to support their approach* The young шщ
|ŞS^ which ; ^аЖСйЩ Ша w^o^-lift¿Í^ Up his lianids iá İ^g р^цШ аШ ï^ to the Ё|Уйа*эдэд^:;Йшг Ие- JÎisrîêf ri^#émedfo spread Щ^ ; pirt of the assembly I ^ftŕ^íiViVialtty^^^ be intruded upon §ф:Ш$ feifes^f the distressed was not tö be er^im%#i ^iCe did not prévit isuch encroachments, $o уе1^*Щ^ the comät^m^^ St^ fo ipr^^^r^hd ^ to the sö^dciÄ^i#f í^h astonishment at his аШас^шаШ^^ á í*^ I ia^ öÄ he crie^: ^ ГоЬ1у-е^Ш from the «ирегАЩШМШЬ surr^uud yoűí tó raise these #^ v He pointed löÄs^ l^r^m^teari^í iS#^^'^Síä':^ l -í : '- :i : :iV:.f*vO^;;;sígnidÄ;ľ r ^b^ you
#05
have all experienced those ties ff л Pø№& which unite ypu^ with irresistibly stralci, to the bosoms pf your ramily ;i %Ш : $Ш* ibeheld the dimpled smile of infont адссег^е in the child you have ado^^i andyx>u hâve gazed with ecstasy -øn ifôsrnother : but уогд have never beheld tr^rri fainting for the common npurishrnents of exis^nce^ you have never seen them droop before you for that sustenance уощ ť waa unabje to p*Q? cure. Such are the pangs which ring soul at thisinstañt,>and urg^e metp>ir4errupt you by my complaints." :п>л</'.Г^/ : Orlando now rose : his eyes had been fixed upon the mendicants from their first arrival, and he thus acldresşed his guests: ţ 'iSigniprs, will you permit; me fo graţifir a momentary impulse ? I have · the; strongest inclination tp relieve these pç^r wretches with my own hand ι, they shall·,i^pi r ¡ηΐΓμιίρ upon you but for an instant. , ^^ ishaìl take the charge of them/' ¿~А;-^У, Tie ad vaneed fowardf the^ claíss of wine^andrspme^Ыiш ï :.,òí^tt¿.v■í.^ïí■ husband elevated his hands, än^eye^ towards heaven with astonishrnenţ; and raptnre/Cy
so^
Can the guests, who were seated round ^he hospitable board of Orlando, be charged with simplicity or want of penetration, in the general ideas they experienced, that suçjh conduct could proceed only from the ^benevolence and goodness of his heart ?—· Surely not ι it was a probable supposition, and they felt as he intended they should feel. 'It is necessary however the readec should not fall into the same error, and that the secret springs which operated in this Instarice in the mind of Orlando should be laid open. *" Immediately he glanced his eyes on the group which approached the windows, he discovered in the countenance of the female à degree of exquisite beauty and sensibility,. which fifed those passions he was now less than ever able to controul. Orlando saw aH the probable advantages or disadvantages ^hich might occur in an amour of this kind,. in the short space of time he remained. áilent, wliich was occupied with the volu¬ bility of the magistrate who had so. strong à dislike to beggars. It may be conceived strange that such a
£07 man as Orlando should become enamoured of an apparent common mendicant : but his taste was not so delicate or refined as might have been expected; his passions were strong, and his gratification of them indis¬ criminate. There Was likewise another convenience arising from connexions of this kind—he was able to keep them more private; a consideration of some conse^ quenoe under his present mode of conduct. As he stretched out his hand with the salver which held the refreshment for the almost famished beggars, he by chance observed more attentively the features of , the man, which were in part disfigured by the little attention he seemed to have paid to cleanliness, and discovered, with infinite astonishment and some degree of remorse, the son of the late unfortunate recluse, the rightful heir to the wealth which purchased him his present luxuries. The salver nearly dropped from his hand, and he started back with an involuntary exclamation of surprise. He soon however recovered his composure, and apologised for the sudden indisposition he felt. Otto was called, and ordered to take care
of the mendicants. He proposed placing ťherrjL in a small hovel which stood near* the house, arid which might be easily rendered comfortable for their reception. Orlando approved óf the thought; and, to the great relief of the company (and particularly the magistrate)^ they were conducted from their presence. However they might dislike the intrusion, this act of Orlando's had its full effect: his fine feelings, his benevolence, his great charity and philanthropy, were soou whispered through the city, and this event quoted as an instance of it. No sooner were his guests departed than Orlando had a conference with Otto. Otto had disco- * Ivered the features of the beggars, but he managed to conceal his surprise muc h better than his master. Orlando informed him of the passion he had conceived for Helen (which he now understood was the name of the female), and seemed to think there was little danger in gratifying it. Upon this point Otto and his master differed : the former was rather doubtful of his safety in such an attempt, but he gave it up to the superior judgment of the latter. Their plans were laid accordingly. the
%№
mendicants were furnished with other clothing, and the man informed he would be required to make himself useful to his benefactor in overlooking some labourers, who were employed in altering the course of a small canal which ran near the back part of his house. By this arrangement Helen was left alone with her children» and Orlando often (as if by chance) passed that way, and looked in to see if they Were well treated. He found her manners deli* cate and refined. The tale of their misfor¬ tunes was not kept from him. With the principal parts he was too well acquainted. They had not left the West Indies rich ; and the whole of the little property they had saved to bring with them to their native country was plundered» in com¬ mon with other valuables, by an Algerine corsair, who boarded the vessel, and whp would in all probability have made the crew prisoners, had not a violent storm necessitated them to return 'all hands to their own xebeck, while by day-light the fol¬ lowing morning the vessel which they had abandoned was too far а -head of her enemy
2 IQ to stand, støy chance of being taken. This toss was sustained with some degree of for¬ titude, when they supposed the necessaries of life were already provided for them in Spain by Dou t Francis, and would enable them, at all events, to subsist comfortably until young Valvard could procure some ac¬ tive employment which might add to their mcome. But how great were their disap¬ pointment and despair when, having ex¬ pended their last rial to gain the cottage of the recluse, they found he had expired a few hours, before their arrival, and left scarcely sufficient property to defray the expenses of bis« funeral I Clement was not without his errors. He had a proud soul. He well knew there were persons who in all probability would have asslstedhim, had he chosen to have made tbe application ; but he wished to avoid them. He considered, if he could once get with his, family to Murcia, he could find em¬ ployment. He knew it to be a place noted for the residence of several merchants, and reconsidered it was to a man in such a pro¬ fession he couM make himself useful. Un-
sn
der these ideas they commenced their jour¬ ney, with money barely sufficient to support them with food during the time it might take them to arrive there by casual convey¬ ances. One of their children was taken sick on the road. They were obliged to remain some days at an obscure inn, the ex¬ penses of which entirely beggared them ţ and they were even obliged to part with some of their clothes to satisfy the landlord for the necessaries they had received for their sickly infant. They recommenced their traveling with all the horrors of absolute distress for that allowance of food actually requisite to sup¬ port theiľ existence. In the parts through which they continued their journey tbey were totally unknown even by name, and were obliged to depend on the charity of those whom they met for the stinted meals which they procured. Under these dreadful circumstances they arrived at Murcia, and had tasted little for three days, when they entered the city¿ which urged the forcible application of Cíe-
21$
mepţ tú Orlando , wfcoj was* the first person they ş^w likely to give succour to their wants. Orlando would listen to this tale of woe related by ţieleu with all the apparent sympathy to be distinguished in one of the most fine feelings. He declared he would himself make a point of procuring Valvard some employment more suitable to his abi¬ lities than the task in which he was at pre¬ sent engagţd. He caressed their children i with ая unusual warmth of affection, and he gazed on their mother with more than com¬ mon attention. Helen's conduct towarda her benefactor was such as the most heart- feltgtatitude inspired. Orlando's penetra¬ tion failed him. Bis full confidence in his own abilities, to please fired him with the idea that his conquest over her virtue would be easily achieved, and under these mis¬ taba considerations he made the attempt monet than he would otherwise have thought prudent. it was biit a few days after his protection - ţo the unfprtunate mendicants that he call¬ ed on Helen, апф as usual, found her alone # Otto having taken care that her husband
У13 should be absent from her aş mticbf as pos¬ sible. His advances towards a cdnfessiou of his passion were slow, and uttered wit^ some degree of hesitation. Orlando had not yet acquired confidence to become a bold and daring villain. His .whole' career ín vice was characterised by a cowardly con* sideration of his personál safety. In the gratification of every d<ţsire, dastardly and selfish motives only couM make him cau¬ tious. Helen heard his confession with horror ; for a moment she was speechless with the surprise and agony it occasioned. Orlando took advantage of this short period, and clasped her to his breast. She struggled with uncommon power, and disengaged herself from his embrace. *' Villain !" she exclaimed, while the anger which flashed from her eyes abashed and discomposed him, Åi is it for such motives as these that your charity and religion are held up as models of perfection in Murcia ? Have you similar views under all those boasted acts which adorn your name, and
Ще щщиШуоп a rnore than common degree of popularity }" r : **JB© prudent/^answered Orlando, in some de/greereeovering himself: **you are not per¬ haps aware of file power I possess either to reí ie ve or ще you«.. Reflect but for a mo¬ ment: the fate of those little ones (pointing ţo her children) in part depends upon your- aelf; be not crue} then, Helen, either to them or me. They shall be reared in afflu¬ ence ; every advantage which fortune is ca¬ pable of pnrchastng shall be lavished on their education. Are these gifts which should be forfeited by a mother, under the false and idle punctilios of the world ?" *f Should they be purchased," answered ^Heleri bursting into tears, " by the infamy, the disgrace of their parents ?" u Oh God 1" she exclaimed, ** thou art ac¬ quainted with my affection towards these babes ; thou only knowest the rapture, the f ecstasy, with which I first held them to my breast* .Yet was their very existence to de¬ pend upon my acquiescence to an act which would make them hereafter blush at the
Й15
name of her who gave them being, I would watch with joy the last breath oflife trem¬ ble on their lips, and view with rapture their beloved forms wrapped in eternal sleep/* u Come, come," said Orlando, u these are mere romantic airs : I must not listen to them. This glorious opportunity must not be lost. Your cries are useless : no one is near to heed them." With these words he grasped her with the most brutal violence. Her shrieks were loud. Orlando was mistaken in his as¬ sertion of no one being near to an¬ swer them : the injured Clement burst into the cottage, and stood before his astonished trembling benefactor. He seized Orlando : a struggle ensued, during which they got outside the door. Orlando's nerves were weakened with conscious guilt; those òf his opponent braced by a sense of his injuries, and a recollection of the justness of his cause. A conquest over Orlando at this moment re¬ quired no great efforts. He sunk at the feet of Clement, who at the moment elevated a pOiiiardhehad seized from the side of his
me adverearyj and am>ed it athiíí heart. Helen followed them, seized his arni 4 atndsunk oft the bosom of her husband. ','ν^-ι , ; Ä labouring; man beheld the scene orr the outside of the cottage at some distance.. Or¬ lando èbse^edrhîm ; advancing фетоге be fell. Although his. courage had forsaken faim» his mind was perfectly alive both to his personal danger and reputation. He sud¬ denly drew his purse from his pocket, and /ţ}niew4^i^ time ^di^o#^ |рпуей ?#1да $ej£ijíg¿ Orlando jittered the ■ А1о^ш|щ^ .--те .. л I '^ ^^ngr^íeful y^r^^yl· •^^■it; not^ enough iţh#5l АЩ -MM* ppver- :^^nä#is^|S wW^ I .^;suj^>lié^ ^ощ^Ш;Щ1у. wi# the necessaries, ,г#г4Й1ЩШ^¥
ши
the most extreme agony* informed the tnan he was mistaken, that there were other rea» sons for her husband's conduct j but he* paid little attention to her cries or entreaties, and only uttered reproaches for their black ingratitude to so kind and good a benefactor. Orlando, after receiving his poniard, re¬ turned to his house. Otto soon arrived at the spot. The unfortunate man was secured> and, with his wife and children, imme¬ diately conveyed to the prison of Mur¬ cia; where he was separated from them, and thrust into one of the most gloomy cells it contained. Helen and her infants Were placed in another at a considerable distance. Their expostulations were in vain; they were answered only by the most taunting and severe reproaches ; while Clement was: given to understand, death was the certain consequence of his conduct. The affair was in a very short time made known through the city* Congratulations to Don Orlando poured in from every part, while the most bitter epithets were lavished against the wretch who had attempted ϊ® destroy him.
VOL. III.
h
M È ïbe following rñomíngan examination <rf the«circumstances took place before the magistrate who had-so great an antipathy to beggars, ι He declared it made him nervous tolobk : at the culprit. He could perceive theword murdererwritten upon his forehead inletters of blood; whife he shook in his chairas if he had been-agitated by an earth¬ quake. This same gentleman had lately re¬ ceived some considerable honours from his ^sovereign for his very great exertions in iquelling a faction which had more than once attenrpted'to rise in opposition to his Will: Indeed, the learned magistrate was at times rather petulant : but he was never IknoWn to "make any grand mistake in his professional capacity but once, when he sent a respectable citizen to the house of correction because he looked like'a rogue— and was unfortunately obliged publicly to retract his opinion, and acknowledge his error by paying for it. It may be supposed Valvard had not a very merciful judge. His defence, however, was firm and spirited ; but it was useless. When he attempted to relate the behaviour
шт
of Orlando to his wife, so shocking, so de* praved a lie could not be endured. It oc¬ casioned the auditors to lift up their eyes to heaven ; while it made those of the poor pri¬ soner glisten with a sense of his oppression. He was fully committed for trial before a higher tribunal, whose decision would be definite. This ceremony took place a few days after his first examination. The circumstances which were to be brought forward were well known to most present. Immediately Orlando appeared in court he was complimented п Ъу several judges of the tribunal, and requested to be seated on their bench. The prisoner was beheld with eyes of disgust and horror. The women almost fainted at the sight of him, and pointed him to their children as an example of the most base depravity. The trial commenced. Orlando's charge was rather faltering. In spite of his efforts to annihilate such ideas, the reverend figure of the prisoner's father was fixed upon his mird : he saw his coun¬ tenance beam with benevolence, ao at those momerits when in the intervals of the delirium Ы2
то
under which be had laboured at the cottage, he remembered to have seen him administer medicines made up by his own hand, and speak "words of comfort to his disordered and agitated mind. It was the son, the be¬ loved son of that man, whose life he was then sacrificing. He dared not look at the prisoner : the spirit of his departed parent glared in his eyes ; and he sunk from the re¬ flexions it inspired. His distress, his confusion, and terror, the effects of his guilt, were universally al¬ lowed to arise from his very fine feelings. The gentlemen offered their assistance ; the ladies offered their smelling-bottles. The wife of the culprit, who had supported her children for a considerable length of time, was observed to faint. No lady offered her a smelling-bottle; no one attempted to give her assistance but her husband. The scene was at length closed with the awful sentence of death being passed upon Valvard. It was true he was asked for a defence, and he attempted to make one ; but the principal points on which it rested were$cout£d at in a similar manner as on
221 his examination before the magistrate who had so great an antipathy to beggars. The females could not hear the relation : it made them blush—it made them weep ; and the idea of such falsehoods being uttered against so good a man made them angry. No sooner was sentence passed upon the unfortunate prisoner, than silence was order* ed in the court ; and Orlando, who had reco* vered considerably from his indisposition, gracefully rose, and addressed them in a speech of much eloquence, which he had well studied for the occasion before he came to the tribunal. The subject of it was, that the culprit at the bar condemned t® die, might, in his name, be humbly recom* mended to the mercy of his most catholic majesty. He begged, he entreated as one of the greatest favors that could be besžow* ed upon him, that it might be urged with all possible force:—as his life had been pre*· served, he by no means wished to retaliate by sacrificing the man who had attempted to deprive him of it. A buzz of admiration ran through tbe cQurt. How merciful ! how generous ! how L 3
222
magnanimous 1 He was highly compliment¬ ed by the judges, and universally applauded by the assembly. A petition the following day was dispatch¬ ed to the king in Orlando's name. His ma¬ jesty was pleased to pass several encomiums upon him, and, as it was his peculiar de¬ sire, pardoned the culprit provided he should be condemned to the galleys, under the same regulations to which the criminals were usually subject who were sent there. Cle¬ ment accepted this grace in sullen silence. His wife and children were permitted to accompany him ; but, during the time they remained at a sea-port, under the most rigo¬ rous confinement, Valvard was seized with a fever which raged among the prisoners, and of which he died in the course of a few days ; while the unfortunate Helen and her infants did not survive hirn six months. Or¬ lando, by means of this incident, gained a degree of popularity in Murcia which he would otherwise perhaps have never ac¬ quired. His name was a general theme for praise and commendation: in short, it be¬ came fashionable to admire him. He was
industrious to maintain so enviable a state of, pre-eminence. It was well suited to his disposition, and what he had long most ar¬ dently coveted. He distributed numberless sums of money among the poor in the most public manner, while he artfully contrived to insinuate he did not wish such acts to be made known. He subscribed to various public charities, and mementos of such sub¬ scriptions were generally found in the rooms where visitors were introduced. He daily attended mass, gave dinners to the priests, and voluntarily offered his mite towards their funds and institutions. Under these cloaks, Orlando found means to gratify his passions with perfect security. He con¬ trived to game with those who were equally tenacious of their characters as himself. They met in an obscure part of the city, ge¬ nerally disguised, in a house which they supported, and in which they placed a rigid devotee as the inhabitant. This man prayed from sun-rise to sun-set, and sung hymns two hours morning and evening. He con¬ sequently had no time to procure a dwelling by his own industry : the providing of all L 4
Ш4 №temmk& was kft to his saint. He ëoôn fornài howeveť, his saint Was but a bad ca¬ terer. He grew thin ι his prayers were redu¬ ced to a whisper ; and he could only sing his hymns in β feeble tenor, lie discovered one night, after praying and singing in his usual way, that he had no lodging to which he could retire He again trusted to his saint; but she gave hini only the highway for a resting-pkce. The devotee conceived this to be rather ill treatment, and he deter¬ mined ht the future to go to market for him¬ self. He was fixed upon to keep this house. It was considered by the proprietors that the sanctity of his deportment would at once screen from the eves of the world the me they intended to make of it. The de¬ votee Was reduced to that situation which made him gladly accept the offer. His time was so much taken up in the adoration of his saint, tbit, whatever scenes passed in the house, he was always unacquainted with them. The place was found useful for other purposes as well as gaming. The premises were spacious ; and a number of chambers were ňtted up for the reception
of the visitors, and those females whom they might wish ίο introduce. Nothing couiá be conducted with more privacy : no parade of servants or waiters : each had a key of bis- own apartment, by which he could enter it at any hour of the night, without notice or observation. Few who attended used their real names, and were chiefly Bnknowa to each other. Orlando was one evening coming out of the cathedral, to which he had been, as ustrøl, to attend vespers. The serenity of the sky tempted him to pace the portico for sorn^ time after the congregation had dispersed. It was already twilight, and'the gloom of the place rendered the objects which at in¬ tervals passed him ratîur indistinct; when the form of Theodosius de Zuivin, the monk, suddenly stood before him. Orlando had not seen him since his fiçst arrival at the city of Murcia. He beckoned him to follow to an interior aisle in the cathedral. They soon arrived at the spot, and Theodosius thus addressed him :— ь 5
226 /** Signior Don Orlando, you perceive I have net forgotten you. For your present mode of existence, so truly congenialto your taste, I conceive I have some demand upon your gratitude.*' Orlando bowed assent to the assertion. <ç Your gratitude," he continued, " is a feeble tie : Idisdain to hold it. You well know I have other powers to enforce my demands. " Cassandra de Gosrnond is arrived at Murcia, I well knew she was destined to visit this city, which urged me to lay so con¬ siderable a stress on your taking up your abode within* its walls. You failed in your first attempt on this beauty ; but the com¬ pletion must not be given up." The eyes of Orlando glistened with joy. His passion for Cassandra revived with the idea that a probability of gratification yet remained. " We must act with caution," continued Theodosius. " You must discover the resi¬ dence of Don Everard, visit him, and insi¬ nuate yourself into his favour· In the mean
тч time Some scheme shall be invented to* sev cure his daughter :—this shall be my task~ In the course of a few days we meet again/** u When and where?" exclaimed Orlando with eagerness. " Perhaps at a moment," replied the priest, " when you will least expect to^ see me. Our interviews are sudden and unex¬ pected : it is necessary they should be so." As he uttered these words, Orlando lost his figure in the gloom of the distant part of the aisle. He proceeded slow T ly home, ruminating on the information he had receivedv Otto was immediately dispached to one of: the principal hotels, to look at the list of arri¬ vals from Madrid, and soon found the namesr of Don Everard and his daughter. He was told by the landlord that they had takea a" handsome house at no great distance fronx that of his master. Otto instantly returned., with this agreeable intelligence to Orlando- Don Everard, they found, had not entered * the city above twelve hours ; and Orlando was certain* before he passed a> many more¿.
тв
that public герой wøuld whisper hfe cha¬ racter under the most favourable description. líe therefore wished that the father of Cas¬ sandra should receive those impressions be¬ fore he paid him a visit, which he deter- miñeá to delay for a day or two. Orlando, directly he had formed this reso- hrtìon, dressed and proceeded to the gaming¬ table. Íľortune was in his favour : he won considerably, and remained even longer than uáual. It was day4>reak when he quitted the rendezvous. He generally contrived to gain his ©wn house before the morning light, which rendered him liable to discovery, by being met in the streets at so early an hour. He wrapped his cloak close over him, and proceeded with great caution towards his habitation, through most of the by-streets i^hkh led to it. One of these took him to thè market-place, and he was necessitated to cross an angle of it; which be would ra¬ ther have avoided, a number of persons having already assembled. He had not proceeded many paces through the crowd, when he felt his cloak
Ш9 suddenly pulled by some one behind, and on turning round he discovered the gro¬ tesque figure of Don Esau de Cavet. He was mounted upon a lean mule, and muffled up in an old rough surtout, which had the appearance of a blanket. A long thick stick, which he held in his hand, seemed aptly de¬ signed to belabour the ribs of the beast on which he rode ; and both he and the mule looked as if he had used great exertion ш that way. Orlando, although astonished at seeing him, and not insensible to considerable re¬ sentment against him for his conduct the last time they played (in which he bank¬ rupted him of the money belonging to the marquis of Olvernardo), could not refrain from smiling at the strange situation in which he now discovered him. "In the name of heaven," cried he," what could bring you to this city, and пате occa¬ sioned you to appear under so strange a cha¬ racter as that in which I now behold you ?" " Don't care what character I appear in," replied Don Esau, Ci to get money. Don't you see those caravans yonder?" pointing
MB
With bis fingerlo two of the worst, with the taost miserable cattle in the whole market. Orlando said be did. ** They belong to me," continued Don Esau, ** and are loaded with jars of olives, wbicb I was tokt by a correspondent sold at a^very high price in this market : so J pack¬ ed up, in the twinkling of an eye ; purchased the twp f caravans and mules, a bargain, of ai old jew a who was,sent to the Inquisition ,for comparing the pope*s head to a pum* kin: hired but one driver; got him for half price ; not quite perfect to be sure, wants a kg and an arm, but will serve my turn all the same for that ι took the mule which I ride for a bad debt, and purchased my sur¬ tout from, the body of a watchman who dropped down dead on his duty. It has been a cheap journey altogether ; kept the man ; upon soup and eggs ; told him it was good for his body,, and the limbs which he had, left; let my mules feed upon hay which we found by chance in, the road, and treated t them with a few meals of grass which we saw in some reared fields as we çajne along.. Have tested nothing nayseJf Ä but some old
S» i crusts which I put in my pocket when^. left Madrid—excellent food for travelings.' besides, servants can't gnimble when they see their masters live worse than them¬ selves. " But what the devil have you been at> my boy, all this time ? Popp'd out of Ma¬ drid all on a sudden—nobody knew where. Very happy to see you thought upon my soul L Where do you live ì Call upon you after the market is over. Sold severaljars of my olives already : touched them pretty high,, and did not warrant them. A few rotten ones at the bottom ; but don't mind that,, rub it all off by confession when I get home." Orlando's greeting to his old friend was not very warm. He could not forget his conduct on the fatal night on which he won the two thousand pistoles. Don Esau ob¬ served it. " You look devilish grave, Don Orlan¬ do," said he. " Methinks you recollect with some degree of spleen our last meeting. Never mind it ; I will give you your revenge now. Play you at night for what you like ;
132 never flinch ; always like to make things agreeable." Such a hint was enough to raise in the mind of Orlando a hope that he might yet retaliate : at all events the prospect of play¬ ing was with him too tempting an offer to be refused. Ше appointed to meet him at an hotel near the market-place in the even¬ ing. He did not at present wish to give him an invitation to his house, and stood upon no ceremony to apologise for not do¬ ing so. At this moment Don Esau's one-legged driver approached towards him as fast as he was able, to say that there was another customer for some more of his olives. Don Esau, after laying a considerable stress upon the appointment which he had made with Orlando, precipitately departed ; while the blows which he laid upon the ribs of the poor animal he rode produced sounds that well foretold the emptiness of his belly. However Orlando might have conceived himself injured by this man, in the iUibera¬ iity of his conduct the last time they played,
233 yet he was a companion in his favourite, passion of too much consequence to be given up oh such grounds^ Don Esau had plenty of money : Don Esau would hazard it on the dice. These were qualifications of no mean degree in the eyes of Orlando, His play with Don Esau might be kept as secret as his general visit ίο the subscript tion- house. On one point he still remained undetermined for some time, whether he should introduce him to that house. There was one strong reason against it : Don Esau might engage with others as well as him j by which means he would lose many chances of fleecing him. Still he considered, were their meetings held at any other place, such consequences were equally probable ; and he at length determined, after laying on him a strict charge of secresy, to present him as a friend at his nightly place of rendezvous*
<2$ê
CHAP, XXIV. What, shall we wear thçse glories for a day ? Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them ? Shakspeare» VyRLANno waited most anxiously for the hour of his appointment with the miser. His manner of living was affluent ; which added to ? the money he was necessitated to give away to support that character for liberality which he had acquired, as well as his casual losings at the gaming-table, rendered a re¬ plenishment of .his income as a point to which it was necessary he should look for¬ ward. . Orlando wisely considered it would not ' be policy to defer it.so long ; that he might Ьедп danger of becoming distressed for money; and although the present state of his pecuniary affairs rendered such precau¬ tions by no means necessary for a conside¬ rable time, yet he determined even now ta bse no,opportunity that might lead to such arrangements.
235
His meeting with Don Esau was an event which gave him at least a chance to enrich? himself. There was little doubt but he was wealthy : there was no doubt but he would play as long as Orlando would keep him company ; and the payments of his debts of honour were perhaps more strictly adhered to than any other debts. Orlando was punctual, and so was Don Esau. They met each other entering the hotel, and they immediately adjourned to the house already described. Fortune this evening was on Orlando's side. He left off ! a winner of fourteen hundred pistoles. They parted at an early hour of the morn¬ ing, under an appointment of meeting again the following evening. Orlando the next day determined to fulfil" the instructions of the monk, and wait upon Don Everard de Gosmond. Don Everard received him with more- than usual warmth : he had heard his bene¬ volence, his charity,¿kc.ikc. loudly echoed. through Murcia. "I was certain," said,he to bis daughters
UBÒ u the virtues of this young man would some day or other shine conspicuous in the world." Orlando was a public character ; Orlando lived like a prince. It was impossible but Don Everard should be happy in his acquaint¬ ance, and he was almost angry because his daughter was not as happy as himself upon the occasion. Cassandra had heard Albert's opinion of Orlando : she could not admire him with the enthusiasm of her father. The name of Albeit was silently cherished in her bosom. She dared not either name him or the family of Olvernardo. But Don Everard could not command her thoughts. The fi¬ gure of her adored Albert, cruel as she might conceive his conduct, was continually be¬ fore her· Cassandra was of a disposition to suffer injuries with too placid a natures there w r as not a being in existence whom she would have rendered unhappy, or have wished to have been so. She had the strong¬ est reason to believe Albert had most shame¬ fully forfeited all right to her affections—but tbe ааесгдаш (á Cassandra were not to be
237 ι forfeited ; they would have remained under far greater insults : in short, they were not to be annihilated by any insults whatever. Such traits, perhaps, are not to be ad¬ mired ; but it must be considered they were errors of the mind, not of the heart. Don Everard accepted Orlando's invita¬ tion to dine with him the following day. Both he and his daughter were astonished at the sumptuous manner in which they were entertained. The rooms of reception were fitted up in the utmost style of elegance,, and the repast consisted of every delicacy which could be procured. There was other company. Don Everard considered such an arrangement as a high mark of respect and friendship. Several incidents occurred dur' ing the visit to give the guests an idea of Orlando's charity and benevolence. Otto, in a half whisper, yet loud enough to be heard by the visitors, requested to know if he was to continue paying the last pensioner on his bounty as usual. A petition from a poor family was presented, and Orlando blipped some thing into the hand of Otto,
%hich Otto artfully contrived to insinuate ^vas six pistoles, Don Everard was charmed with his host. He found himself unusually comfortable. Cassandra was languid and depressed. Don Everard in a part of his discourse mentioned the inhabitants of Olvernardo with conside¬ rable chagrin. <f They have used me cruelly, Don Orlan¬ do,** he exclaimed. " The wrongs which I have received can never be forgotten or for¬ given/* * Orlando pretended to be greatly affected : he condoled with him on the subject. He confessed, he was sorry to say, that the pro¬ ceedings of some parts of the family were not> in his opinion, so consistent with morality as was necessary. He could not help ob¬ serving-it was on this account he quitted Madrid. It was not his place to censure : at the same time, had he continued under their roof, his character would have been in danger of suffering those stigmas which them conduct occasioned. He owned thus much was spoken in confidence ţ but he
ъзд
knew it was to a friend, and he hoped, he trusted, it would go no farther. "Noble youth," cried Don Everard, "how few are there to be found in this frail world like you, w T ho can give lessons to the old which they would do well to profit by î í can conceive the gratification which your Uncle Don Diego must experience in being thus permitted to see so full, so convincing a proof of success in his system of education." Orlando was gratified, highly gratified, with the effects which he had produced upon Don Everard. But his eyes in vain searched for similar ones in Cassandra. He watched her countenance during his recitals to her father with the most scrutinising attention ; - but he could trace from it nothing which he wished : although she made no objections to his assertions, he could perceive she did not entirely agree with them : he could plainly discover Albert still possessed her heart, and he had sagacity enough to enter¬ tain little hopes of an alteration in her sen¬ timents. He in vain attempted to dispel her melancholy by various little attentions or assiduities during the day ; but she ap-
240
peared indifferent to„ his efforts to please, and scarcely attended to the conversations which he wanted to engage her. Orlando had before this interview encou¬ raged a hope, that her affections towards Albert/might by recent events have been shaken ; and, under those circumstances, he rested with some confidence on the probability of his being able to make him¬ self agreeable to her. But he was now convinced such hopes were vain, and that Cassandra must again be assailed by a simi¬ lar act of perfidy to that which he had al¬ ready attempted without success. He experienced, however, considerable satisfaction in the behaviour of Don Eve¬ rard, with whom he plainly foresaw he could establish that kind of intimacy which would almost daily introduce him to his daughter. He took his leave greatly pleased with the entertainment he had received, and gave Orlando a general and pressing invita¬ tion to his house. Orlando immediately on their departure proceeded to meet Pon Esau. Don Esau, however, to his astonishment, was not at the
«Ж place of rendezvous. He inquired for him ; but no such person had been there* He waited impatiently some hours. Don Esau, however, never appeared. He was at length extremely disconcerted and cha¬ grined, and suispected the miser had found some other house for play, where it was probable he might be reduced to his last pistole before an opportunity could be gain¬ ed to share in the booty. At an early hour in the morning he re¬ turned home without having received any news of Don Esau. Otto was instantly dispatched to discover, if possible, the place of his abode, or (which was not un¬ likely) meet with him disposing of his olives. Otto hurried accordingly into the midst of the market, but could not find Don Esau in any part of it. He inquired concerning him : everyone knew him, but they could not tell where he resided, till by chance a carrier, re¬ collected he had the morning before convey¬ ed some articles to a house in which Don Esau said he lodged. The circumstance was vol. m. m
perfectly impressed upon the man's memory, for Don Esau had contrived to pay him only half price for his labour. Otto directed the man to lead to the place. He followed him to a miserable part of the city, about halfa league distant, where they turned down a small lane, the houses in which were inhabited only by the very lower orders of the people. The man suddenly stopped before one of the worst of them. " Is it in the upper part of this house that Don Esau lives ?" asked Otto, while he sur¬ veyed it with the utmost contempt. " He lives in the basement," answered the man, "to which these steps will take you." Otto's surprise increased, and at that mo¬ ment a woman ascended from the place. He asked if a person of Don Esau's de¬ scription resided there. The woman answer¬ ed him in the affirmative. " He is," said she, " I believe, at death's door. I sat up with him last night. He seems very poor, and deserves compassion, but he will not hear of a doctor or medicine ; the mere nan
2*3
of them throws him into a rage. - JHe seems a stranger to this city, and hireďlbe room below but three days past." Otto said he wished to see him. The woman conducted him down some dirty wooden steps, at the bottom of which she opened a small door that swung with pullies. " He is, I believe," said she, " now a- sleep." They entered a dark gloomy apartment, paved with flag stones. A lamp was sus¬ pended from the ceiling, the faint beams of which discovered the miserable appearance of the chamber. There was no furniture of any kind but an old bed and a broken chair. The walls were uncovered, except in parts where some madrigals and paltry prints were pasted against them. Otto observed the figure of Don Esau ex¬ tended on the bed. He seemed asleep, and they approached cautiously. The cloaths in which he had traveled to Murcia were still on his back. His face was ghastly pale, his eyes but half closed, and he breathed with difficulty. Otto observed his arms m 2
Ä^FÍP
*vere enlwined round something which he grasped against his heart. ** That," said the woman, observing he noticed it, " is a small box which he con¬ tinually holds in this manner. We are at a loss to conjecture what it can contain." <?tte wa> at no loss upon this point. He immediately conceived it held his money ; but he thought it most prudent to keep the suspicion to himself, while he pretended to join with his companion in ignorance on the subject. After acquainting her that he had some knowledge of her patient, he declared she should be no loser by her attention to him, and gave her strict orders not to qu.t him or admit any person to supply her place until his master arrived. The woman readily agreed to this arraÄgement. Otto made the best of his w T ay with the intelligence to Orlando, who, immediately be received фе information, determined himself to visit Don Esau, and directly pro¬ ceeded, according to the direction received from Otto, to the miserable dwelling of the
245 miser. Don Esau had by this time awoke* He beheld Orlando with surprise. He stretched out his hand to him y burning with fever, and he greeted him in a low and in¬ ward voice, "I am very ill, signior Don Orlando,'* said he, while he attempted to raise himself, but sunk almost lifeless on his bed through the exertion. ■ Orlando made some inquiries concerning his indisposition, which Don Esau answer¬ ed at intervals, and with great difficulty. He understood, that, after they had sepa¬ rated on the morning on which Orlando'» successful play had taken from him fourteen hundred pistoles, he repaired to the market¬ place, in order to dispose of the small re¬ maining quantity of his olives. To sell them to as much advantage as possible, he tra¬ versed the market for a considerable time through several showers of rain. He had discharged the man whom he had brought with him from Madrid, and sold the cara* vans and mules, intending to return him* self on foot. He neglected to change his clothes; but being extremely fatigued whea m 3
24?б Ы arrived at his lodgings, he fell fast asleep with them «for* bis back. He awoke aboiut nine in the тогшгф and found him¬ self very Ш. His complâte^^îdly increased, and at night his fever was at an alarming height." /ШпаЫе to move from his bed, the woman ащЫу mentioned by chance disco¬ vered him. She proposed sending for me¬ dical assistance, but the very mention of it served almost to drive him to distraction, He deemed delirious, and humanity prompt¬ ed her to attend him that night, although 4 there was no probability of her being re¬ compensed for her trouble. Orlando slightly spoke of procuring an apothecary. Don Esau raved as loud as he was able at the name. He appeared perfect* iy sensible, but his disorder seemed every moment to increase. Cold perspirations be¬ dewed his face; his eyes were sunk, his lips in parts black 5 while violent shiverings, every two or three minutes, shook his whole frame, and were strong symptoms of approaching dissolution. It may be asked why Orlando but slightly mentioned the procuring of medical assist-
247
ι
ance. It was not because the idea seemed to distress Don Esau, or that he conceived his situation was such as to render all aid of that kind superfluous : Orlando had other motives in view. The moment he entered the miserable chamber of the dying mi¬ ser, his eye caught the box, which was still pressed by both arms to his heart: he, as well as Otto, had little doubt but it contained considerable treasure; Don Esau, he well knew, would not have been able to have quitted Madrid without taking with him the chief part of his wealth. However strange it may appear, this conception was perfectly accurate ; there was not a man in that city in whose hands he dared to trust his money: he was aware of the danger of traveling with it in such a journey, and had numberless struggles with himself on this point before he left the city: he placed it in various houses, and drew it out again; if he had it at his lodgings he could not sleep forwatching of it. If he dreamed of it, it was, that he had lost it; and he was distracted till he had again counted the ^sAirn. Don Esau at length determined to m 4
24β place it in the Spanish bank: he accord¬ ingly dia so, and began his journey towards Murcia ; in the evening, however, a raven croaked under the window of a hovel where they halted. Do» Esau immediately con¬ strued it as an omen of poverty : he began to doubt the safety of the Spanish bank: on a sudden he turned his mule again towards Madrid; made his attendants follow him, and posted with all speed back to the capi¬ tal, regained his wealth, reckoned it with ecstaey, placed it in a small box, and once more recommenced his journey· He was necessitated, on account of the size of this box, to take notes on the national bank : he never quited it ; when out, he always had it under his arm ; when at his lodgings, he still grasped it; and when he slept, it yet remained close to his heart. Orlando's aims were at this treasure; he conceived he should have some difficulty if it was not procured before Esau's dissolution ; there was not a moment to be lost, and he re¬ solved to exert his utmost in the experi¬ ment. He suddenly pulled a box of dice from
$49
his pocket, and rattled thera with the mo¬ tion of a throws the eyes of the miset opened with quickness; he struggled faintly to rise; his whole body appeared electrified by the sound; every feature, even in the hour of death, underwent a slight altera¬ tion. Orlando propped him up in his bed with a pillow, and then placed a hundred pis* toles as a stake. Don Esau instantly pro- duced a key which was tied round bis wrist. Orlando offered to unlock the box, but he would not suffer him to approach; after some time, he succeeded in opening it himself, and threw a similar sum on the bed to that of his opponent. Orlando threw first: Don Esau was un* able to shake the box, but he would suffer no assistance; he feebly threw the dice from it—his stake was lost ; he counted the odds with difficulty, and nearly fainted in the exertion. Orlando proposed doubling the sums; Don Esau assented, and again lost. Orlando now placed ñve hundred pistoles upon the bed. The miser gazed upon the m 5
UBÒ
money, and again paralleled it with five hundred morei Orlando threw first; he contrived to cog the dice without being per¬ ceived, and once more swept away the stakes. Don Esau groaned with agony; the last few moments of expiring life ebbed quickly; he drew forth a quantity of notes arid gold, which he was unable to count: Orlando understood him, and did the same. Don Esau had now little chance * Orlando turned the dice as he thought proper, and seized the money which the miser still held, whose hands were too weak to retain it. Don Esau no sooner saw it wrested from him than his whole frame became convulsed ; his face turned black ; he grasped the residue- of his treasure still closer to his heart, while his eyes glared on Orlando with the re¬ proaches of a dying man, and in a few mo¬ ments he sunk lifeless on the bed. Orlando instantly, with considerable precipitation* secured the contents of the box,* which he disentangled from the arm of the corpse, leaving about twenty pistoles in gold coin; and having locked it, placed the key round his wrist as before. He then called the
251
people of the house, appeared much hurt at Don Esau's dissolution, and tesired the last duties might be paid him with the ut¬ most decency. One of the women mentioned the box which the deceased had so carefully kept, and proposed that it should be opened in the presence of the worthv Don Orlando. He agreed to this arrangement, and it was accordingly unlocked;—the twenty pistoles were discovered: this fully accounted to the assembly for Don Esau's care of it. They considered him as a poor man, and supposed it was his only treasure: it was presented to Orlando, who declared the expenses of his funeral should be defrayed out of it, and the remainder divided between the woman who had attended him, the landlord, and the lodgers of the house. The highest encomiums were passed upon him by all present; he was a pattern for the young men of the city—so hu¬ mane, so generous; his kind attention to the deceased could have proceeded only from disinteres led motives. He took his leave, and promised to send his servant to superintend the interment of Don Esau,
2δ2
and dispose of the trifling property which he had left* Orlando, highly gratified with his morn¬ ing's adventure, returned immediately to his own house, and, having bolted the door of his apartment, began to count bis new ac¬ quired wealth. He found, in notes and cash, it consisted of upwards of forty thousand pistoles: he beheld the treasure with ec- stacy, and congratulated himself on the dexterous manner in which he had pro¬ cured it. He had no doubt but Don Esau, in some way or other, possessed considera¬ ble more, and he welt knew he had relations in very distressed circumstances; he there¬ fore determined himself to send the intelli¬ gence to Madrid of his death, under the artful insinuation of giving them an oppor¬ tunity to collect his property, as such a mode of conduct he considered would at once annihilate any suspicions which might arise of his being able to give an account of it. Otto was shortly informed of his good fortune, and received six thousand pis¬ toles as his share of the booty. He imme¬ diately repaired to the place which con¬ tained the remains of the miser, and gave
253 orders for his funeral. Jn a few days the body was decently buried; Otto officiated as chief mourner, who, having paid the ex¬ penses, divided the remaining pistoles a&his master had ordered. Orlando wisely determined for the present to content himself without increasing htj| domestic establishment or expenses in suât a manner as would occasion public notkß of the alteration, which he considered might cause inquiries he greatly wished to avoid ; for although he saw no possible means of any charges being proved against him, still he wished to avoid the slightest imputation of them. His intimacy with Don Everard increased according to his wishes. He mentioned to him his visit to Don Esau in the hour of dis¬ solution, carefully concealing his former concerns with him. Don Everard expressed much concern for his fate, and wondered if he had left much money behind. Then dropped the conver¬ sation, and thought of it no more. Cassandra still remained melancholy and dejected. The exertions and tenderness of her father were useless to restore her to her
254
usual spirits ; while she received Orlando's attentions with a coolness which rather in¬ creased than diminished. As he was one evening sitting with them at the theatre, he beheld on a sudden, at some distance, Albert d'Olvernardo. Orlan¬ te observed his eyes were turned towards the box in which they sat. He attempted to conceal himself behind some persons who stood in front, and resolved not to mention his discovery either to Cassandra or her fa¬ ther. In the course of a quarter of an hour he quitted them, under a promise of return¬ ing in a short time. Having proceeded to the lobby, he resolved, if possible, to meet Albert, as if by chance, and strive to draw from him the cause of his visit to Murcia. In passing along a passage which led to it his arm was suddenly laid hold of by a fe¬ male, whose manners perfectly evinced the unfortunate class to which she belonged. Orlando thought he knew the voice, but the light was too imperfect for him to view her features distinctly. They turned into an anti-room, in. which there were but few persons, and hè beheld with astonishment, in the figure of his companion, the poor
255
remains of the once innocent and blooming Laura Barnarvo. Her dress was fantastic and elegant, but voluptuous and indelicate^ her person was wasted and decayed *; and, although she was highly rouged, the effects of dissipation were easily to be observed in the faded bloom which it attempted to cover. Her eyes sparkled with a false, a destruc* rive fire. She was evidently in a state* of slight intoxication. They had no sooner entered the apart¬ ment than she gazed upon Orlando with wild amazement, and, bursting into an hysteric laugh, pressed his hand with un¬ usual violence. Orlando, alarmed at the idea of being discovered by one of her appearance, which might at once cast a slur on his pure and im¬ maculate character, began to reflect howhe could for the present get rid of her. Laura still held his hand, although her emotions prevented her utterance. Alas J pobr fallen victim, her looks were sufficiently impressive to have worked upon his feelings ; but he was callous to every tie of humanity. Had the least impulse of hu-
ÜSS
ШШ kindness throbbed in his bosom at this moment, the sight of the lost, the ruined Laura would have increased the sensation with irresistible efforts; and the reflexion that he was the cause of destroying so fair a work would have occasioned pangs that might in some degree have been considered as a retribution for his guilt. " Be calm," he exclaimed with much agi¬ tation. ** Your emotions in this public place may injure me beyond reparation. Give me your address. I will see you to* morrow, and: then do any thing you desire. But I must not remain here." Laura's eyes spoke her reproaches. ** Answer me but one question," she ex¬ claimed, " and I will trouble you no more ; Do my parents live ? or is my present mise¬ ry to be augmented with the horrid thought that I have murdered them." " They are no móre," exclaimed Orlando with brutal unconcern. " Your father fell by his own hand, and your mother did not survive him many hours." Laura heard no more. She dropped sense¬ less at his feet.
'257 He instantly called some persons to his assistance. He informed them that ťhe un¬ fortunate girl had addressed him as he was proceeding to the lobby ; and that, in ex¬ horting her to amend her life, his words had taken so great an effect as to occasion her present situation. He declared she should be directly conveyed to her lodgings at his expense. Some women who stood near selling refreshments knew her habitation. A carriage was immediately procured, and before she was thoroughly recovered Laura was placed in it. Orlando would suffer no- one to attend her but himself. He was con¬ scious this conduct appeared strange ; but he was alarmed at the discoveries which Laura might make in her present state to any other companion. Before they arrived at her lodgings, although too languid to an¬ swer his injunctions on keeping their for¬ mer amour a secret, she was perfectly ca¬ pable of understanding them ; while, as an incitement to her acquiescence on this point, he faithfully promised to see her again the next night, and render her situation as comfortable as she could wish·
Laura raised her eyes, and fixed them upon him in a manner which seemed to say; Such assunmces were vain—her happi¬ ness was destroyed beyond reparation; her prospects were dark and gloomy—they pre¬ sented nothing but misery and a grave. Laura, in a St of distraction, had quitted her parents after the fatal discovery to them of her ruin, and, almost insensible of her actions, departed from Madrid under the wild idea of claiming the protection of a distant relation for herself and parents. Before the end of her second day'b journey the whole of the money which she had in her pockets was expended; she was sur¬ rounded by those who were ready to take every advantage of her situation; she be¬ came the dupe of artifices the most cruel, and at length sunk into a professed state of prostitution. She dared not return to her parents, of whose dissolution she remained ignorant j their name occasioned her the most agonising sensations, while her in- j quiries concerning them had in part been j withheld under a dread of the information I they might produce.
259 Orlando hurried back to the theatre ; he purposely paraded the lobby several times on his return; related the same story as to Laura's sudden indisposition that he had before propagated ; received high praises for his great philanthropy, and many com¬ pliments on his benevolence and goodness ' of heart: he again joined Don Everard and Cassandra, who had not moved from their box, and from the former received similar commendations on his conduct. The following night he was punctual to his appointment, and traced out the lodg¬ ing of Laura Barnarvo; which was in a large house in a private street, and divided into separate apartments for the frail sister¬ hood of the city. Orlando disguised himself as much as possible ; and having inquired of a dirty girl, who opened the door, for Laura, under the name he found she had assumed, he was informed that she was then engaged, but that he might see her in a short time if he chose to walk up stairs. To this he assented, and was conducted into a small room* meanly fitted up with little furniture of a tawdry
$6®
and inferior quality. He had not waited many minutes before he heard the voice of Laura from the next apartment, in conversa¬ tion with some one, whom he immediately supposed to be a male visitor. At times she, was noisy and boisterous, sung and í laughed hysterically, while her discourse was gross and indelicate. Orlando could scarcely believe it was her whom he had once known the mild, mo¬ dest, and unaffected child of nature. # In a short time the visitor departed : the door which led from her apartment to the room where he sat was thrown open by the girl who conducted him up stairs. She de¬ sired he would be pleased to walk in, and Orlando immediately followed. This chamber was similar to the one he had left—dirty, tawdry, and in parts out of repair. Every thing seemed to inspire the idea of brutal sensuality, without cleanli¬ ness, or respect to the common forms of de¬ cency and regularity. Laura was seated upon a sofa, in a loose half dirty night dress: her hair was dishe¬ velled, and the rouge in parts taken from her
2оТ face, while her eyes glared with a wildness on Orlando, which for a moment daunted and oppressed him. Several bottles stood before her ori a small table : he soon per¬ ceived she was intoxicated : she was drink¬ ing a large glass of spirits when he entered, while she motioned the servant to with¬ draw. Orlando took her hand ; it was burning with fever. " Signior Don Orlando," she exclaimed with an apparent forced gaiety, " so you are punctual to your appointment. I think I saw you at the theatre last night? yes, I did ; and you told me news, dreadful news ! that my parents were dead, that I murdered them !—and-^-but what is this to me, signior ? I am happy, you see 1 am very happy." As she grasped his hands at these words with uncommon force, she dropped upon them a scalding tear—sad emblem of the assertions she was making. She kissed it away, and, as if wishing to annihilate those sensations which produced it, instantly be¬ gan singing vvith a mock frantic merriment u You observe," said she, after sinking
2m on his arm t weakened with the violent ex¬ ertions of her wild behaviour, u I do all I can to entertain you. Don Orlando I loved you once, but my parents are dead since that. I saw them last night in my sleep : they were pale, ghastly pale. Oh God î Oöd ! I know not what I say ! this brain of mine is burning ! but indeed signior I was happy once : when I lived at Madrid with my poor parents, I loved one who de¬ stroyed me: but I forgive him, most heartily forgive him, though he has broke my heart!" Her attempts to stifle her tears produced hysteric weeping. Orlando during this visit felt something like remorse. Laura slowly recovered ; he requested she would be calm ; declared it was now in his power to support her with splendor, and said he would settle upon her an indepen¬ dence which would at once place her in com- fort and affluence. Laura still gazed wildly upon hmi : she seemed not rightly to under¬ stand his offers, and at intervals looked as if she did not even recollect his person. It was npt merely the effects of liquor which
26$
appeared to have disordered her brain : Or¬ lando plainly perceived, independent of its effects, her senses were deranged. He repeated _his offers, and took consi¬ derable pains to make her understand them. After some consideration, during which her eyes were raised towards heaven, she sud* denly turned to Orlando, and exclaimed with much earnestness, <c Can you give me back my parents ?'*— This question occasioned him some emo¬ tion, while it confirmed the deranged state of intellect in her who asked it. *' Oh 1 signior/* she exclaimed, pressing his hand to her head, you have no concep¬ tion of what passes here : I strive to gain some alleviation from a recollection of past scenes, but I cannot. I forget ; and if by chance a shadow of them crosses my mind, it drives me to distraction." Whether Orlando actually felt some stings of remorse at this conversation, or whether he considered it as too te Jious for endurance, is uncertain ; he however suddenly left her, after promising to see her again ; and, pro¬ ceeding to the lower apartments, called for the person who kept the house.
£64;
He was requested to be seated in a par¬ lour, decorated much in the fashion of the rooms above ; and after waiting some time, an extreme lusty woman introduced herself, under that appellation. Her dress was tawdry and glaring, but particularly dirty. She appeared about sixty; and if her face had been perfect¬ ly clean, it is probable the remains of some beauty might have been discovered : her eyes were red and swoln, while the other parts of it were sunk, withered, and wrinkled. Some blotches of rouge, which she had rubbed on in a hurry, when told that a cavalier, apparently of some conse¬ quence, wished to speak to her, were but fruitless attempts to conceal the ghastly pallidness of her complexion. Her nose and handkerchief bore plentiful proofs to the slovenly manner in which she took her snuff, and was not one of the least causes to render her figure disgusting. Orlando rose at her entrance: she desired in a coarse voice he would keep his seat, and, placing herself opposite to him, re¬ quested to know, with much seeming cour¬ tesy, what might be his business with,her?
265 Orlaudo, with a preface of some sanctity, began to name her lodger, whom be had just quitted. The procuress, whose liberty to joke with her visitors she considered as one of her dearest privileges, now exerted herself with peculiar brilliancy ; and casting a most ele* gant glance at her companion, uttered many double entendres, which, according to her ideas of expression, were devilish smart things r but which were not received with any gratitude by himl whom they were h> tended to entertain. Orlando with increased solemnity declared he was totally disinter¬ ested both in his inquiries and the arrange¬ ments he wished to make for her greater comfort and convenience. The old lady burst into a loud fit of laugh* ter, which she did not attempt to restrain· Orlando was still more displeased, and re¬ quested she would seriously attend to him. He desired to know whether Laura could not be better accommodated, requested she would procure medical assistance, and offered to guaranty the expenses such pro*· ceedings might occasion. vol* nu n
üßß i ** She might have done better herself if she had taken my advice," said the pro¬ curess; « but she is always in the dismals; aud that dörrt suit our company: she was it for nothing till she placed herself under my care; it was I who first persuaded her to seek comfort from a cheering glass of spirits, and wonderful was the alteration which it occasioned. By these means she became passable, though never much admired: hardly make my money of her, *and for these last few weeks, on my con¬ science, I believe the girl is mad ; she is continually talking of her father, of her mo¬ ther, of her lover, and such stuff as that." ** Can you have a heart," continued Or¬ lando, who wished to impress upon the old woman an idea of his benevolence, " to talk thus of a poor young creature, whose mis¬ fortunes appear to have overcome her, and who is sinking to the grave under the most accumulated horrors and distress ?" : , " A fiddle-stick of your mock-modesty!" answered the procuress, who in her tura I *aow found herself offended, while she placed I her arms a-kimbo in a posture of defiance :
mı (t Who the devil cares for you, Mr. Sancti¬ fication ? Who was it brought her to her present horrible state, as you are pleased to term it, but some such whimpering* preach¬ ing prig as yourself, whom she supposed could not. do a bad act, because he always talked of good ones ì I dare swear now he will hold forth on the crime of seduction, and look as demure as you do. Why you poor, paltry ------" Orlando now found it would be neces¬ sary to quell, as soon as possible, her tor¬ rent of abuse by some conciliating apo¬ logy ; this he immediately began, and sea¬ soned it by a never-failing specific of two , pistoles, which he dropped into her hand as an earnest of what he intended to do for her lodger, who he begged might be taken care of, and said he should call again the following night. He then precipitately with¬ drew, while the procuress, with a low curtsey and simpering smile, hoped she had said nothing that he had taken amiss, wished him many good nights,and,as she closed the door, balanced them with as mapy curses, which she continued to repeat with peculiar quick- к 2
«ess, Щ1 % draught from the favourite bottle stopped ber articulation, and at once pro¬ cured her that happy state of forgetfulries* which proved a certain antidote to all ani¬ mosity.
1KB Of vol, uu
StfepHrfflv PifeW# ?ak*M3*i*t, ffcft-Stiwtb
