Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
More ghosts
MORE GHOSTS!!!
CHAP. L TN a certain part of the northern ex- -*- tremities of Yorkffiire, there is a very old pile of building, called ------ Abbey, fuppofed to be one of the largeft ever erected in England. It had formerly contained within its walls a convent of barefooted friars and another of thofe veftals ufually denominated nuns* befide a church of great magnitude. The
lie v^& of Шш venerable píe ave ifosg, tbkåc, and black ; шша whoever m^bt tewg теш the ibimef с^-^шш^^ен! oŕita begtt^r, it m now only remarkable fe the difrøa! gløorø which overfprcads İt. Ghois, as ancieat legends tell, may therefore have delighted io making this fpot their favourite haunt; fbr all is uni¬ formly hå and melancholy, whether we vfeir the convent, nunnery, or chapel. fior în the account of this Gothic ftruc- tíare fhould be omitted the fpacious and awful cymetery, where many an abbot and many a nün had mouldered into duft ; Íluť Who yet, as thoufands will affirm, appear in the fame ftate as that in which they were buried ; ay, and clad in the fame fhrouds tbat entrapped their clay- cold bodies, and are fcen as regular as the
. - ШЖЕ ØHOOTd. Öie- .emi- * -&Ш1Ш*е%; ißaäy'otp-W'-fbtui^ .iPOvte dioasto éoumeraî^ шт^ттжжШ^СШ. mention ; but ■ -чййе!^':-" myaeÄus ;; 'Äte; (wÎM>fe: ways .every Ш^^Ьоек.а^'\ : Шт: mfcrmiabi% тШ atibe tíme <ehe«:tSÄ; heroes are ferutMriiig moft efef^ ifeié them) hiis doomed the following paged to dévelope*
This Abbey belonged to a worthy, good kind of gentleman, who could tracé his genealogy fmm the time of the Con^ queft, as the title-deeds of his eftate wül Wåify. 'The-Abbey was given to himi ot rather bis anceftors, during thé uftrrpa* tion óf Cromwell, whofe uther had ЪеЩ; a domeftic in the family. It w^ theft aš eafy, with a little intereft, to ftep into é larg*ş
large böïtfe, as now it m to get into a coimtry-box» However, in addition to the obferva- ' tkm once made by a celebrated auc- tioueer ftom his roftrum, " Ladies and tfemen, thmgs will wear ŕ may be add- ed, that they will alfo grow·—- out of fa¬ ffiion. This Abbey was a cafe in point. Upon ita firft becoming private property, it was adorned with rich hangings, gilt furniture, and all the appendages the cuftom of thofe days rendered the necef¬ fary decorations ofa great man's houfe ; it røuft confequently have made a very handfome, faihionable appearance in the eyes of our poor anceftors, who are only deemed fo from their notions, not from their poverty, and becaufe the moft ex¬ alted
aîted of them never pofiefíèd the elegant and refined ideas, we, their more enlight¬ ened offspring, feem to inherit fiom the moment of our birth» They, indeed, foor ibuls ! thought clean ftraw not only a comfort, but even a luxury, to lay under the feet of Dukes and the higheft Nobles ; whereas in our days, fcarcely a cobler throughout the country will hire a lodging-room that is not carpeited! But, good Reader, let us come back to the Abbey; the cobler's lodging is an interruption to4>ur ftory; in,truth, it would nothing lefs than mar it, by pre¬ venting the defcription of a pile of build¬ ing, as pretty a difmal pile as ever pen has
bm delineated, and wbich may never ^gain be found *n the moft luxuriant ttmn of deferi^ive ideas. Perfectly to reprefent the whole would he a fŕuitJeís attempt, the following is but fe-ft imperfect fketch, Tbat part of the flifnitnire fhe Worm of time had decayed, vms in part repaired, part replaced ; and Ш to the rooms themfelves, many were Iirø4nhabited, fome ¿я -habited, but all of them haunted, at leaft, if the people in its vicinity fpoke the truth. But ftrange to tell, nor yet lefs ftrange than true, Mr. Morney would never be¬ lieve in ghofts ; it is certain, indeed, he was- mé a very learned man ; and what İb more furprizing, tbe Vicar, who acted as
as Chaplain, and moftly refided at the abbey, bad no more belief in them than himielf though efteemed as a man of fuperior education, and a good Chrif¬ tian,
***
CHAP.
«ι .......... i -mďg #--%*^'(atHp» ' 1 '· " 1 ' ' " CHAK IL r ï"^HE Gentleman had a name, arul -*■· that a very ancient creditable one, Reginald Morney. He bad two fons and one daughter. The youths were gifted with every manly grace, and the daughter's beauty was heightened by an amiable dÍrJ)ofition and all tbe winning attractions of female fweetnefs. It had often excited wonder tbat ffie bad not been difiinguiffied by a name more ex¬ preffivc of both her mental and perfonal accomplifhments ; as no heroine of either play
play or romance could poflèii a jufter claim to tbe pre-eminence, though pic¬ tured in alî the glowing colours of the moft enraptured poet« But, on the con¬ trar}*, Mifs Morney received the moit common name at the baptifinal font.— She was called Molly by her father, Mary by her brothers, and Madam by every body clic. The young Mr. Morney s were fcnt ίο college at a fuitable age, but Mils bad private tutors at home, owing to her Ci¬ ther's irrcconcileable hatred to a board- ing-fchool education. He did not, bow- ever, reftrain her from companions in her ftudies, left, as he obferved, want of ex¬ ample and emulation might occafion want of diligence. She appeared not to ivant
want for any thing ; and her proficiency far exceeded the expectations of her maf¬ ters. Mifs Bolton, the Vicar's daughter, took lefions with Mifs Morney, but by no means kept pace with hen in the pro¬ grefs ffie made. They were, notwith¬ ftanding, good friends, and tbe mutual confidants of each other; tbey always parted witb regret, and met with joy ; and when feparated by indifpofition, or any other circumftance, (which fre¬ quently happened, from Mifs Bolton's being fubječt to t he tooth-ache) the\noft affectionate letters pafled between tbem. The other juvenile companion was Thomas Grey, a youth about eighteen, at which period my hiftory commences, He was mild and well-behaved ; and learned -
learned pretty well, not only thofe things in vvhich Mifs Morney excelled, fueh as French, nmfic, and dancing, but like- wife in the more mafculine ftudies : he was, indeed, no phenomenon, nôr pof¬ fefled that brilliancy of talents which might augur a future hero. Young Grey was r generally efteemed, and that for many reafons. Firft, he was a favourite with Mr. Morney ; fe- condly, he had a civil and polite deport¬ ment. To be fure, it was poffible to put him into a paffion, and then he was un¬ governable. Thirdly, he had a hand¬ fome face, and bid fair to become a fine figure. There was a ftriking refemblance in feature between him and Mifs Mor¬ ney, which every body noticed;, and vol, z. С what
what made it more remarkable was, that even a mole upon ker dimples was only the counterpart of one on kis. Ill-na¬ tured people would fometimes infinuate that there were family reafons for this refemblance, and that probably Mr. Momey had not always been a Jofeph. But tho.% were mere furmifes and J idle conjcciare ; it would therefore ill become an impartial biographer ferio uíly to re¬ port them. Whenever thefe fìories reached Mr, Morney's ears, be would exclaim againil the cenforioufnefs ofthe world, and lament that even a man's beil actions fliould be mifconflrued or wilfully mifreprefented by the malevo¬ lent ; and as often would he proteil tbat Mr. Grey Vas not his fon ; and one day in particular, when prefled hard upon the
ffie fubječt by fomc witty ladies, who were little fcrupulous of what they iaid, he frankly declared, that fù far from Mr. Grey's being his fon, he intended him for his fon -in-law. Mifs Bolton, who was prefent, feemed* confufed, and turned pale on this decla¬ ration. Probably ftie thought Mifs Mor¬ ney might become a formidable rival, when encouraged by her father's fanction, together with tbe prevailing argument of a large fortune in expectancy ; for tho* a daughter, ffie was heirefs to tbe Abbey eftate. It had paifed for fome time in the female line ; and it was poffefled by her aunt before it devolved on her fa¬ ther, who had repeatedly declared tbat Molly and the Abbey ffiould go toge- C 2 ther,
ther, as he had enough for the boys in¬ dependent of it; and would fome times facetioufly obferve, that daughters were children as well as fons, and haď equal claims on paternal affection. Mifs Bolton had no great pretenfions to beauty; but ffie was a neat, fmart figure, bad a cunning look, and a little turn-up nofe. She, however, vvas a com¬ plet miftrefs of every wheedling art, and infinuating manners. Certainly her friendihip for Mifs Morney became ftron¬ ger and ftronger, which afforded fome proof of her difintereftednefs,as there was little doubt but ffie felt an attachment towards young Grey.
Indeed,
Indeed, flie was now very feldom from the Abbey, and moftly flept witb her dear Mary. In this fociety, ffie made herfelf fo agreeable, tbat the whole family, even Grey hirøfelf, were charmed with her fenfe and good humour. Among the other occafional vifitors at, the Abbey was a Mifs de Burgh, who was frequently there, and likewife mt^ch efteemed by Grey and Mifs Morney; but all of a fudden, and without any caufe being afligned, ihe difcontinued her vi¬ fits, except wben fhe came in great form, with her father and mother, once a month ; and on thefe occafions tbe young people could never get her, as formerly, from her mother's fide, either to chat, walk, or romp ; and if Thomas fat by С 3 her,
her, feeroingîy with a with to entertain ber, cither Mr v Momey or Mr. de Burgh would call bim away upon fome pretence or other ; not tbat Grey had conceived any aftcâion,or formed any defign upon ber ; tbe conduct of ffie old folks, bow* ever, arofe from fuch a fufpicion on their part ; it was too apparent not to be re¬ marked by him ; in confequence of which be ceafed to pay her any other attention than wbat tbe laws of good- breeding and politenefs required—- fini- ply a bow upon her entrance, and ano¬ ther at her departure.
CHAP.
"■««se·«·;
CHAP. IIL
ISS BOLTON wa« fo very friendly to Tom, that it was not poffible for him to deny her his confidence, of which ffie availed herfelf to fee in bis mind fufpicions of the conduct of his be¬ nefactor, Mr. Morney.
Tom had been educated fo entirely at borne, tbat no wonder need be excited from his'being credulous to excefs, par¬ ticularly inclined to the miraculous, and С 4 eafily
eafily impofed upon by" the artful and defigning. He was not, therefore, one of tbe unbelievers of the family; for though as yet no fpirits had difcovered themfelves to kim } yet he could not doubt tbe wefbattefted ftories, in the report of wbich there was a general concurrence of opinion throughout the houfe* Hi¬ therto he had only heard ftrange noifes, which Mifs Bolton aflured him muft mean fomething. She gave many ihrewd hints that certain circumftances relating*- to bim would be elucidated one day or other, either by tbe living or by tbe dead. 99 1 myfelf," faid ffie one day, if could inform you, but you would blab—and your
your father—blefs me! I mean Mr. Mor¬ ney—would forbid me the houfe, and I fliould be deprived of your fociety." 99 Could you tell me, my clear Bet¬ fey," faid Grey, " you would not only oblige me, but I will fwear never to bo tray you." " Nor do any thing," faid ffie, « with* out confulting me." " I do promife—nay, more, will fwear, and that moft folemnly." " Well then, firft, tell me who you believe yourfelf to be, where ycnir pa¬ rents are, and wbat are your expecta* tions, as we are here ftrangers totbefe С 5 particulars.
, particulars, from the circumftance of your having been bred in obfeurity, and generally confidered ε d an object of cha¬ rity." " Why,'* replied Grey, « on thefe points I cannot fatisfy you, for they are a myftery to myfelf. I never faw, to my remembra$cc*,,any other home than this Abbey ; relations I was never bleffed •with, nor did I ever feel tbe want of them ; Mr. Morney has acted the part ofa father by rne." 99 How ominous are your words!" faid Mifs Bolton, " but go on." After changing coutenancc, and flar¬ ing with furprize, Grey continued— " I have
99 1 have been in a particular manner diftingüifiied by bim : his own fons are fent out for their éducation, while 1 am the happy companion of Mary Morney,- Swcct girl ! liow I pitied her brothers when they gave her a farçwel embrace. , No, I would not change my fituation to- be Edward Morney, the wealthy heir to¬ ten thoufand a year." "Beware of inceft !" faid Mifs Bolton^ in a tremulous voice. Grey would have teftified his furprfee and horror bywords as well aş by looks, '- but ffie difappeared fo fuddenly, that he* could not, ■.·■''■■*
С б " Ominoûf
99 Ominous words !" faid he to himfelf, and " beware of inceft !"■—-What can ffie mean ?-— Is it poifible tbat I ?—Oh, no, it is not poffible,—Mr. Morney is the beft of men, therefore I cannot be brother to Mifs Morney—my angelic Mary !" exclaimed be. Mere a bell founded thrice, deep and hollow. He ftarted, and was leaving the room'to feek Mifs Bolton, but met her returning ; the reft of tbe family were soneto Holt, upon a vifit to the De Şurghs. What is the matter ?" faid ffie, per¬ ceiving horror in bis countenance, " have my words already made fo great an im¬ preffion j?«--Alas ! I was overcome myfc% and
and forced to withdraw, in hope of gain* ing ftrength of mind fufficient for this folemn occafion. Grey would willingly have excufed her from thefe kind exertions ; he dreaded to learn what he could not bear to think of; but fuppofmg that it would look un¬ manly, or even worfe, to remain in igno* rance of thofe things that concerned himfelf to know ; be kept his eyes fixfed upon her countenance, as if expecting her to begin, but his tongue was filent. <ť Know then," faid flie, looking round her, " that three times I have dreamt a female, in a white ffiroud, came to my r bed-fide, and faid^ " Warn Thomas Grey, warn Thomas Grey ; bid him beware of inceft!"
inceft ľ' —Now, my dear Grey, I fliould not haye difturbed you with my dreams, though three" times repeated, only that laft night ffie again came, frowned as fhe appeared to me, and iaid, " Why do you hefitate to warn my fon ? He is fur¬ rounded by tbofe whofe miftaken love will plunge him into ruin. Rife to-mor¬ row, look behind your bed, raife the ta¬ peftry, open tbe door, and in the next room you will find my picture concealed beneath fome lumber ; let the evidenee of tbat induce you to remember what I bave faiei, and warn Thomas Grey I" 99 1 have moved tbe bed and raifed the tapeftry, and iâw a door, but I was afraid to open it, and enter by myfelf, as it evi¬ dently appears to be more immediately your
your duty to explore, and, if poffible* difcover the myftery. You will not í am fure, refufe to accompany rne." 99 No, certainly," replied he, pale as affies, " but not to-night" " To-morrow the family will-return, and may difcover us ; now is our time." Reluctantly dkl Grey take up a light to attend the refolute Bolton, who fol¬ lowed, but, in fpite of all her courage, trembled very much. When they ai% rived at her chamber, tbey moved the great old-faffiioned teafter bed with diffi¬ culty. Grey obierved it with furprizc, and faid— Mifs
№ Mifs Bolton, you informed me you had done this yourfelf—Whence is it that we both now find it a tafk of fo much difficulty ?" 99 Xt is all amazing," faid ffie, ** but, in the name of Heaven, let us proceed." They went to· work agauv an d*· fuc¬ ceeded. They found the tapeftry as de¬ fcribed to Mifs Bolton in her dream ; this was raifed, and thçn the wonderful· door appeared in view; it is natural to fuppofe great confteraation was excited in, them both by tbe difcovery. Mifs Bolton firft recovered from« the effects of the furprize, (indeed ffie was was always a girl of fpirit and refolution) and
and encouraged her companion to aid her efforts in obtain an entra* 1 ^e: it waß was not very difficult to open as much of the door as would admit them fingly, but their united ftrength was infuffieient to open it wide enough to admit them both at once, and this adventurous pair wifh* ed to go in together, left, it may be ftip- pofed, any frightful appearance ffiould overcome the refolution of whichever ventured fingly. They, therefore, made another effort, more violent than the for¬ mer, upon which a moft violent noife was heard, juft as if a fuit of armour Jiad fal¬ len on a ftone pavement; tbe craffi frightened them both fo much, that they again united their ftrength to ffiut the door, gazing filentiy and piteoufly om one another. The
The armour made no more noife; and/ Grey now felt a ftronger defire to explore the myftery. Curiofity fometimes ftrong¬ ly predominates even in tbe breaft of a man ; but, perhaps, young Grey might in a more particular manner have felt its influence, from the eircurnftance of bis having been educated with girls, and moftly in the habit of af&eiating in fe¬ male company. Their refolution began to ftrengthen ι the door was again half opened, and Grey entered firft, ciofely followed by Mifs Bolton. Three defcending fteps led to the room, which was ftately and fpacious. When at the bottom, they gazed around, though.
though not without főmé degree of tre¬ pidation ; the 'candle did nót feem te> give them a fight of the whole room ţ they kept clofe by the wall while endea¬ vouring to explore its extent, holding íbmetimeš hy pieces of ragged tapeftry in thofe places where iţ had remained* Their fteps were neither firm nor quicks but they at length got to a heap of rub- biffi in a corner of the room ; it confift- ed chiefly of rotten tapeftry, plaifter, mortar, and broken glafs. Mifs Bolton? was rejoiced at this circumftance, as her anxious mind foreboded it would lead t# fome important difcovery. « Here," faid fhe, 9( tbis muft be the 1 fpot—let us fearch here," * Grey
Grey looked timidly round/ and fet¬ ting down the candle, began to ftir the mbbiib about with his foot; but after being a few minutes thusoccupied, which his timidity had magnified into fo many hours, he manifefted a ftrong inclination· ţo retire. tc There is not any thing here, (quoth» he) Betfey,, it is time to be gone." u Let me try/* faid Betfey, and went to work more refoluteiy. In a fhort time íhe called out—" Bravo î I was right ; we have got our treafure, and produced to Tom's aftonifhed eyes the miniature q£ a beautiful lady.
*' This," continued Mifs Bolton, « is the exact copy of thofe features which have fo often appeared to me— O Grey, how much like you are they!—the eyes, the nofe, the mole on the temples—only there is a noble, or rather haughtinefs of expreffion, that is much foftened in your's," Grey gazed at the picture in his turn, and examined it with the minuteft at¬ tention— 99 Well," faid he, " this may be my mother's picture, but how ftrong a re¬ femblance does it bear to Mary Mor¬ ney ?—Her eyes, her nofe, and tbe raole on ker temple,—It İs not at all like Mrs. Morney; I remember her very well; and I am
I am at a lofs to thbk how this picture can prove Mr* Morney to be my father. No, f will not believe a word of it." Mifs Bolton looked difappointed, but <. turned towards the door of her apart¬ ment, carrying a light with her. All at once a piece of -tapeftry, which ffie held in her hand, gavc^way, apd the poor girl fell down, and extinguifhed the candle. The room being thus rendered dark, and no guide to direct their trembling fteps 5 Mifs Bolton, in attempting to raife her¬ felf up, caught hold of one of Tom's legs, and pulled fo hard, as to bring him to the ground with a viilenee that bruif¬ ed him, and prevented his exertions for a few minutes. When he would have got up, he felt fomething hard under his hand*
hand, which judging to be tbe picture, he put it into his pocket, apoftropbizing rather ungraciouily upon tbe trouble it had occafioned bim, when the bell again tolled three times, juft as if it were over his head. " Tbis is aftoniihing," faid he, very ioftly, and then he called loudly for lights, having entirely forgot the delicacy of his fltuation, and the fecrecy it was indifpenfably neceffary he ffiould ftrictly obferve. It was, however, fortunate for Grey tbat none of the fervants ŕ were within hearing; but even if they had, not one of them would have ventured into a room againft which their prejudices were fo
fo ftrong, from an idea that it was the abode of ghofts 1 Mifs Bolton, who got up at the very inftant Grey fell, had fortunately got out ofthe chamber before the difmal tolling of the bell, and was by this time returned with a light, for the purpofe of conduct¬ ing him to the more chearful parts of the Abbey. On her entering the apartment, flie found him groping about, panting with fright, and moving in quite a contrary direction to the right one. Ile poured forth the ftrongeft effufions of gratitude fbr her timely affiftance in extricating him from his troubles, and returned with her to the parlour. It
It was now near midnight, and Mifs Bolton prudently obferved, it w"*uld not be proper for them to remain longer to¬ gether, but promifed to meet him early in the morning.
VOL, ι.
D
CHAP.
'i^ê
CHAR IV.
"^CTOUNG Grey bad enough now to -*~ occupy bis attention. Wlien be had retired to bis own apartment, be took the precaution of defiring his man to fleep in· the adjoining apartment, and left tbe door unlocked which communi¬ cated between them ; anci wben be fup¬ pofed the follow was afleep, he took tbe picture from bis pocket more minutely to examine it, upon wnich tbe more at¬ tentively he looked tbe more be was be¬ wildered. "it
a It is fomething like Mary," faid he, ίζ but not enough fo to be her's—on this brow fits pride, but upon Mary's, love and tendernefs. Arc you my mother, or are you but fome fictitious refem¬ blance thrown in my way to deceive my fenfes and difturb my quiet ?" <( How happy are thofe," he would again fay, c ' who are blefled with pa¬ rents? But, above all, how happy tbe youth, who in difficulty or diftrefs, has an affectionate mother to confole hirø, and on whofe tender bofom he can rc¬ pofe bis aching head ?—-To whom he can with confidence 4 * and fecurity open tbe fecrets of his burfting heart—look up with tbe fond emotion of filial love to her anxious, maternal countenance, D 2 beaming
beaming comfort to bis foxû, while her lips give utterance to the ibothìng con- dolance of heavenly advice. Oh, mo« ther! wert thou now in being, tbou, furely, wouldft not look with fuch haugh¬ tinefs on your fon as mark the features of this picture !" 99 After a momentary paufe, be again exclaimed—" But what has tbis to, do with Miis Moraey ?-—I muft endeavour, without betraying Betfey, to found her father." Sueli was the refult of Grey's delibe¬ rations ; till, at laft, wearied vvith reflec¬ tion and fatigue, be endeavoured to com¬ pofe himfelf to fleep, in the vain hope of enjoying its balmy comfort." In
He arofe in the mc ling betimes, but not fo early as Mifs*Bolton, who he found waiting for him. She took hold of his hand with all the tendernefs of friend¬ ihip, and earneftly enquired about his health. Grey withdrew his hand, and faid— " Pray, Betfey, keep your dreams to yourfelf in future ; by revealing them you have made me unhappy, fufpicious, and done no good." " What," faid ffie, " can you ftill doubt, after fb many fupernaturai to¬ kens ? When do fuch wonders happen, but to throw a ligbt on fome myftery ? And when fuch information is given us by the means of divine agency, for the D 3 Ature
future regulation of our lives ; it is our duty to avail ourfelves of it." 99 Tbat there is more than nature in tbe events of laft night is certain," faid Grey, " but no dial pointed at Morney; tbc fpirit might as well have meant Mif$ de Burgh, or }ùu." 99 Fie upon you !" interrupted ffie, 99 me, whofe father is a clergyman ! bow can you have fuch profane fufpi¬ cions ?" 99 1 do not, indeed, fufpect it. Bet¬ fey," faid Grey, " I wifh not to fufpect any one ; but a clergyman is only a man, and Mr. Moraey is a good man, which, furely gives bim as juft a claim to be ex¬ empt
empt from fuipicion. Then, you know Mary Morney is fuch an angelic crea¬ ture ! how ffiould I be brother to fo much perfection !" 99 Ah !" faid Betfey, " there's the rub —-you have conceived an affection for Mifs Morney wbich you would vainly endeavour to conceal ; but I fear it is a love finful in its nature, and fuch, as if perfíílçd in may terminate in the mifery of you both ; and Heaven knows I would gladly lay down my life to ferve either you or Mifs Morney." The tears which rolled clown her cheeks bore ample teftimony to the truth of her tender expreffions, end melted the D 4 L heart
heart of Grey, who promifed that he would do nothing raffily, but,- in future, bebave lefs like a lover to Mifs Morney, waiting for time and circumftances to elucidate the wonderful events of the night.
C/tiAir,
>β^Κ§<ϋΊΜΐ —
CHAP. VL
MR. MORNEY returned before? dinner. Grey was haftily running to hand Mifs Morney from the chariot, but got a check from Mifs Bolton. •ι " Reftrain your ardour," iaid flie> tr and whenever you forget yourfelf, be¬ hold in me your fécond confeience to warn you, if but by my looks, againft error and every injurious propenfity yoa may occafionally feel.'*
© S Grej
Grey would much rather his fécond confeience had not held him fo tight, or io inaptly enforced an obfervance of her injunctions; and the Morney's, there¬ fore, entered the room without any ce¬ remony. He did not faiute Mifs Mor¬ ney with bis ufual compliments, but paf¬ fing her witb a low bow, he went and laid hold of her father's hand, wbich was not ufual when both were in company„ There could be no doubt wbich hand he wiihed to prefs, but he was not here left [ to the freedom of his choice. 99 1 believe our Grey is a little affront¬ ed, Papa," faid Mary, if fee bow dif¬ dainful he looks. What ails you, Tom¬ my ?—What bavç you done to bim in my abfence, Betfey ?" "No
íc No harm, I promife you," replied Mifs Bolton. 99 Well then, fit down both of you, and liften to my cargo of news, and you fhall hear a true and particular account of wbat detained us all night. Was you afraid, Grey, that I ffiould never re¬ turn ?—-Who could leave a place where the fenfes were confounded, if not en¬ chanted, by the divine power of mufic I —You think that I, filly girl as I am, play the fortepiano well, and ring charm¬ ingly ; but, Lord help you, you have no tafte ; I do not play in tbe leaft -like Mifs Holden ; befides, I beard a gentleman tell her tbat ffie excelled every thing be ever beard ; and Mr. de Rough himfelf laid it was charming. To be fure, it was D б not
MORB GHOSTS. J ' not her fault if fhe did not play correct ; for whenever a difficult pafíàge occurred ihe began again. She, played Alley Croaker, and roared it fo audibly, that the children in the nurfery were all frightened, and roared too, which added fomething to tbe concert, I can affure you. 9( Then the three Mifs Tofts, from, Sheffield, vvhere they have been tor their education, ftood up vvith their hands be¬ fore them, and fung together ibmething about love, but the faces they made were wonderful ; they began in piano, whieh, it feems, means to itretch the mouth gradually to its greateft power of cxtenfion, and from time to time ifiue a murmuring notic, which I could not hear
hear diftinctly ; and when all their mouths were opened together, they gave a fad-* den fquall, as if they had been ftuck at the fame inftant, and that they kept up nobly, wbich it feems was forte. What pleafed me moft was the modeft, yet af¬ fumed dignity, with wbich they received the aoplaufes of the company; fome others played and fung more in my own way, fo I pafs them by." 99 And you !" 99 Yes, Tommy, I played, and fung your favourite air ; fome honeft, well- meaning men were about to compliment me on my performance ; but in this I ftopped tbem, obferving, tbat after the Mifs Tofts and Mifs Holden, it could only »
only be flattery to me, as I was confcious of my own inferiority. u The Gentlemen fmiled, and Mifs Holden faid, in a condefcending man¬ ner, " Oh, Mifs, you play very well."— After tbis we began dancing, then to iuppcr, tben to bed, then home, and here we arc not welcome—Ah ! Grey—" He took her band, and was raifing it to his lips, wben Mifs Bolton flared in bis face, and be dropped it. Mary felt a little chagrined as well as Grey ; and many fimiiar things of a nature equally unpleafant to tbe young couple happened in the courfe ofthe day, from the looking hints of liis felf appointed monitor. At
At laft, after fupper, Mifs Morney faid, " Surely, Grey, you will not con¬ tinue this odd humour any longer. If it really vexes you that I was amufed out of your company, be aflured I am only quite happy when in it. I never thought you could be fo naught—Come, make hafte and be good, left I too catch tbe infection, and become füllen fbr a week." She held out her band, wbicb he rap- turoufly kified, and, having once broke bounds, almoft devoured. Wbile the young folks were engaged in this tender dalliance, Mr. Morney was diverting himfelf in play witb bis favourite dog Rover; Mifs Bolton looked at them with anger, but Grey would not return a fingle
ftngîe glance, and Mary feemed quite confounded. Mr. and Mifs Morney then retired, happy and comfortable within them¬ felves, while Grey and Mifs Bolton were downright wretched, though from diffe¬ rent caufes; for one wiffied to make mifchief to which the other was already half a victim. ?
+
<t
$
CHAP.
CHAP. VI. NEXT morning Grey Was up by day¬ break, and, with his mother's pie- lure in his hand, he fauntered into the garden. Old John, the gardener, who had been always accuftomed to early rifing, was examining fome alterations which had been recently made, It ftruck the mind of our youth, tbat fervants, notwithftand¬ ing their menial condition, might pofíèfa a reafoning faculty equal to their fupe¬ riors,
riors, and therefore, that this John, hav¬ ing lived all bis life in the family, might be able to give hirn fome information re¬ fpečting bis parents. Impreflèd with this idea, he entered into a familiar conver¬ fation with his old acquaintance. a John, how did you reft laft night ?" 99 Why, rather better, Meafter Grey, than the night before : one would 'moft 'magine tbat thefum gboafts knowd as how tbat meafter was abroad t'other night, they kept ap fuch а ringing, and the houfemaid heard them cry murder, and we heard a clinking of chains, and the dog barked—Oh dear ! oh dear I therr*. have been fad doings, folks do fay, in this here houfe ; but once in, there's no
{ no getting out, not that I wants to go, not I—Meafter İs very good, and my work a pieafure, and—" " What doings do you mean have been in tbis houfe ?—You need not fear Mr. Morney's anger, I will not divulge what you may fay," " Why then, Meafter Grey, come further from the alcove·—Speak foftly, for fear of lifteners, and I'll tell fom'at." " Here then I have removed ; and do not wiffi to fpeak at all, or by any means in the world interrupt you, if you, dear John, will but fatisfy my im¬ patient curiofity,"
«Why
" Why then, I have heard from very fenfible people that a lady was raviffied in the very room next to where Mifs Bolton fleeps. I am fure I would fooner lie in the garden than fleep there all night ; for if fo be the gboft has taken a fpite to mankind, as mayhap flie has, ffie might do un an ill turn." Grey was fo thunderftruck, that he paid but little attention to the gardner'g fimple obífervâtions— íť Could my father," he exclaimed, íŕ be fueh a vil —, bad man !" « Your father knowu nothing of it, as I verily believe; nor, for that matter, can he be blamt,"
" And
a And my poor mother, what has be¬ come of her ? Tell me, dear John, is not this her picture ?—Alas ! what ад unfbr* tunate child am I, only to have known one of my parents, and that one to be fo faulty !" The gardener looked at the picture with marks of aftoniihment, then fted- faftly at Grey, and at laft exclaimed—* 99 So the fecret is now out; I always faid you would get 'fpicioui-, and that they muft tell you—Ay, it is the very moral of her, poor woman; fhe was mortal proud'though, if I may take the liberty of iaying as much, but there was odd goings on about her too—Why, would you think it, Meafter Grey, they were forced
forced to take her off in a coach, and, indeed, carried her to it, and conveyed her into fome foreign land } —What a-do there was one night, ay, about one in the morning, ffie did fo ftruggle, and grind her teeth, and moan, and feream— -My hair ftood an end 1 * κζ And was that all you did for her ?" faid Grey. €< "Why, Lord, Meafter Grey, what wouid you have ?■—I did pity her, to be fure, but I believe ffie frightened me moft ; and there was her hufband and her brother both agreed upon it, and fo, who could gainfay it ; befide, tbey were 'fear'd ofthe lad." Oh!
"Oh! the cruel men!" faid Grey» " Her brother too !—What could he fay Г " He faid as how ffie was a difgrace to the family ; and fomething, I cannot rightly fay, about forae one's being hang¬ ed—" 99 Her huiband faid you ?—Then ffie was married ?" quoth Grey, " Ay, fure,' 9 faid the gardener, " that is tbe worft part ofthe tale, for—" Here Mifs Bolton was feen approach¬ ing, and John ftopped bis converfation, begging young Grey to keep it a fecret, and went about bis bufinefs, Mifs
much difordered, and almoft unable to fupport himfelf to a feat. She procured him fbme water to bathe his forehead, 'applied her faits, rubbçd his hands, and was glad to fee him burft into tears, which probably was the only thing which faved him from fainting. (e What is the matter, Grey ?" faid ffie, e< is your attachment to your fifter fo very ftrong, that you almoft faint at the idea ?" " Believe me, Betfey," replied Grey, " when I tell you, that at the time you met me I had not a thought of Mary, dear as ffie is to my heart. Oh, no, mo¬ ther Γ looking at the picture, " you alone
, alone engrofied my whole ideas at that moment." He again burft into tears. 99 Tell me, Grey, has ffie really ap¬ peared to you ?" " Oh, no ; would I could fee her, if only for a moment, I ffiould have nó fearful apprehenfion from the fpirit of one fo dear to my iorrowing mind,— Oh, mother, if indeed you are permitted to vifit the earth, fhew that favour to your afflicted ion !—It will afluage the forrow of my diftractëcÎ mincis and öpen a ray of comfort to my cheerleis hope-*^ It will alleviate the painfiil recollectiori of your fufferings on earth, in cdntera- plating the happinefs yoii now enjoy in the regions of everlaftihğ blifs i" '■-■; VOL.I. ; . Ц :-:,:, : '■■..МШ- :
Mifs Bolton wiffied to know what gave rife to thefe ejaculations, but he re¬ fufed to gratify her curiofity, faying he was notat liberty to inform her$ and befides the fecret was of fueh a nature^ as to render it equally imprudent and improper to make a difciòfiirc to an/ perfon.
CHAP.
CHAP VIL POOR Grey was much to be pitied«-* his heart was rent in the fevere conflict it had to fuflain between difap¬ pointed love and parental misfortunes. Sometimes he thought himfelf criminal, in that, notvvithftanding Mr. Momey'a atrocious behaviour to his mother, he could not help loving him, and even felt m abhorrence at the thought of taxing him with his Ш ufage of tbe Lady, or his fubftîquent conduct in meditating a marriage fo very finful. At other times E a he
he would wifh he had been kept in pro¬ found ignorance ofthe matter, and even endeavour to convince himfelf that there was no crime in marrying a fifter, and that the Scripture did not abfolutely for¬ bid it in all cafes ; and that in our days, by turning Roman Catholic, the thing was rendered perfectly eaiy. At all events he would try to make himfelf comfortable in the idea that he might ftill love her, and as to marrying, he would endeavour to banifh it from his thoughts. But, alasi foon was he convinced of the weaknefs of his reiblutions—the thoughts of bis dear Mary he eould not baniih from his mind, and the uncertain fate of his mother was ftill a fource of perplexity
perplexity and uneafinefs to him. One moment he would determine to require an account of Mr. Morney, and the next deem it beft to do nothing raffily. He at length determined to feign ficknefs, and keep bis room ; accordingly he did not appear at breakfaft tbe following morning, which, though noticed, was not fpoken of; but wben at tbc dinner hour he fent a meflage, informing tbat iilnefs occafioned his abfence, the whole family were thrown into the greateft confirmation, " Sick! and I not know it!" exclaim¬ ed Mifs Morney. A fimiiar ejaculation was uttered by Mr. Morney, who was at a lofs to con- E 3 ceive
ceive why he had not been fooner ap¬ prised ofthe matter. Mifs Bolton rightly gueffed h was his mind that was difordered, and felt fome forrow in having been the caufe of in¬ terrupting the innocent mirth and con¬ viviality which ufually prcfided at that hofpitable table. " I'll go and fee him/' faid Mifs Mor¬ ney, rifing,* " Ho, I vviil go," faid her father, be¬ ing a bit ofa phyfician, u I am the only proper perfon, and will brmgyou a true account. You know wben Tom is ai little indifpofed, which, thank my ftars, is feldom the cafe, he always is low fpi- fpirited.
fpirited, I ffiould not wonder to fee him with his foot on a cufhion, if only a nail had run into it. n Ah, Papa," replied Mary, *' you are happy in never having fuffered much througb ilbiefb ; and, therefore, you do not know how much poor Thomas may actually fuffer at thofe times when you fuppofe him hipped — Ώο go fee him Ра·* pa, or let me." Mr. Morney fmiled at his beloved Molly, and went to fee his patient, whom he found fitting in a window, confider¬ ing within himfelf whether Mifs Morney would feel any concern for his abfence. The features ofthe old gentleman were marked witb benevolence, though he ad« E 4 dreffed
drefied him in ftrains of tbe greateft pka- fahtry— \ *·* Are you lame again in your toe, Thomas ?—Or have you another fprain in your little finger, that you fit here in foiitary fiate ?■—Come down, I pro¬ nounce, tbat chearful company and a good dinner will do you more fervice than &ny uoftrum in my noftrum cheft. u No, Sir," faid Grey, " î am unable to appear below to-day—Fray excuie me." "No, Sir/' repeated Mr. Morney, " methinks you arc unufually polite, but ftill, I muft know your complaint, or have your affiftance to entertain tbem wild
wild girls, who will pull me to atoms, if î do not procure an helpmate to fupport rne, I fuppoie if I had allowed Molly to come fbr yon, you would have been eafier prevailed upon, but I would look in upon you firft myfelf* 9 Grey fuffered himfelf to be led off, un¬ willingly, as he wiihed it to be thought ; but when he met Mifs Morney, with ex¬ tended hand, and foftened, fympathetic countenance, he vainly endeavoured to conceal his fatisfaction ; he forgot his ficknefs while anfwering her kind en- enquiries ; his eyes, before fo dim, again fparkled with love and tendernefs, till Mifs Bolton, by treading on his toe, re¬ called his recollection to tbe conditions he had impofed upon himfelf} notwith,- E 5 ftanding
ftanding the attention of Mifs Morney, and the facetious jokes of the old gen¬ tleman, to divert him. An efteemed Poet has with much juf¬ tice obferved, that Men are but children of a larger growth. This was truly illuftrated in the conduct of Grey, who proved himfelf fo much of a child, that all their coaxing and caref¬ ling only tended to continue his perfe- ver-ancè in the melancholy part he had afiumed ; and îhe whole family noticed that bis dullnefs increafed in proportion as they exerted themfelves to difpel it. Mifs Morney played on her forte piano moft exquifitely, but even the power
»♦* power of mufle feemed to have no influ¬ ence on the fpirits of Grey, who ftill kept up afl the folemn dignity of űlent thoughtfulnefs. At fupper, Mifs Bolton took an op¬ portunity, when Mils Morney had turn¬ ed her head afide, to flip the following note into Grey's hand·*- 99 Meet me to-night at eleven at the " end ofthe long gallery." * " Will you meet me ?" ffie whifpered,, and prefled his hand. Grey, fearful of being overheard, only faid Yes, and then repented ; for the long gallery was a frightful place ; it led to Е б the
the great aifle of the ChapeÇimd* there were dungeons under it; but Betfey was poflefled of undaunted courage, and could be intimidated by no kind of dan¬ ger. At half after ten tbis regular family al¬ ways retired to their apartments, fo that Grey had no difficulty in going unper¬ ceived to the long gallery^ excepting an accident wbich frightened him a little, as it might have done any other perfon. He was going up a ftaircafe, when looking below, he faw a glimmering light ; he knew the paflage formed no part of the houfe which was lighted in common ; he therefore flopped to con¬ fider whether he ffiould retreat or go forward.
forward. While in this perplexing di¬ lemma, he heard an awful voice fay— " You ffiould have done it to-night." " I had not the heart," replied another boarfe voice ; kill him yourfelf to-mor¬ row, fince Mr. Morney ordered it ; but I am fure Mifs will be mortal forry ľ' "Oh, Heavens í " faid Tom, "what can all this mean ?" and was about to go back ; but hearing a trampling of feet behind him, he was rooted to the fpot, and in a moment difcovered two figures at the foot of tbe ftairs, clad in white, when his ears were faluted witb the found of « Mafter Grey ! Mafter Grey Г from the mouth of the cook, who had thus alarmed him by talking with the under game-
game-keeper, concerning the death ofa favourite hind, which had been bred by Mifs Morney. Grey made fome trifling excufe for being feen fo far diftant from his cham*«· her at that hour ; the cook was eafily fa* tisfied, and our hero proceeded along the gallery. The undertaking, however, required all Tom's fortitude. The place of ren¬ dezvous was, in fome degree, calculated to infpire melancholy, at leaft in the breaft of one like Tom, who had no great pretention to courage. On tbe one fide were large, old-fa¬ shioned window-frames, filled with mo¬ dern
dem faflies ; the oppofite fide was cor vered with whole lengths of Knights iit armour, others in wigs, and ladies with ruffs and fardingales, or fome lefs an¬ tique, with large ruffles down to their wrifts. They were fpread all over the wall, and formed rather a grotefque ap-* pearance; Grey, however, pafled thefe without difcompofure, and fafely arrived nt the place of appointment. Miis Bolton was waiting for him» Her firft action was to blow out the light he brought with hini, by wbich he was difconcerted, until he perceived that ffie was provided with a fmall lanthorn; this ffie thought would anfwer their purpofe better--" For," faid ffie, « 1 propofe to walk along tbe Chapel, where we fhall
ffiall be in leis danger of difcovery thane in any other part of the houfe ; and we are fo ciofely watched in the day time> that there is no fpeaking to you." 99 Nay, Betfey," faid Grey, " I never perceived that any one was watched at Morney Abbey. Formerly fufpicion was a ftranger to us all. But wbat have you now to fay to me, that we muft wander about the Chapel before you can difclole it. Oh ! that you never bad communi¬ cated to me what you have !—Before that I was happy, but ièar I never ffiall be fo again." 99 1 underftand you," faid Mifs Bol¬ ton, difdainfully, 9ζ you wiih to marry her whom you ought not to think of." « True,"
" True," faid he, "I fliøald not think of her, for a wounded confeience would be worfe than a wounded heart. But tell me now wbat I am to bear, though í almoft dread to liften," " Why," faid Betfey, without any re¬ ferve, " I can think of nothing but you —no wonder the fame image ffiould haunt my drčami.** f( You are too partial," replied Grey, with a low bow. " Not fo, but very faithful. Liften then— Laft night, after fitting up until midnight, I was leaning upon the little table with both bands, when my wearied head dropped upon them, and I fell afleep,
afleçp ş thus for a few minutes did I for¬ get my cares, till I was awoke by a deep founding bell, wbich founded thrice." 91 Ah!" fakl Grey, « thaťs tbe bell I heard, though not laft night." (ζ YevS, İt was your bell" interrupted Mifs Bolton, in folemn tones, " but founded Iaft night only for me, Judge^ however, røy furprize and horror, when I faw lying before me, nay, under my hand, a writing in a iupernatural band, the words— 9ζ Let Thomas Grey fhun his fifter, until be finds a wife that ffiall eomfort him." Here is the paper. I ftaggered to» the door to fee ifit was faf~ tejtted, and found it carefully bolted as I myfeif ¡ted made it when I entered the^ room.
room. You know the windows are fo high, that it was impoifible to fuppofe human beings could find entrance by them ; fo wbat cduld I think but that your dear departed mother cannot find reft for her fpirit, wbile you are in dan¬ ger of aggravating her crime by your own conduct." " Let me tell you," faid Grey, " that my mother was no criminal ι fhe wa« married," " To whom," faid Mifs Bolton* " I do not know," hefitated Gmy^ <c but I fuppofe to my father, whoever Ы was." ' - « Tben r ,ťŕ
" Then you will not believe Mr. Mor¬ ney to be your father, for be was pub¬ licly known to be huiband to tbe late Mrs. Morney for years before you were born, and his eldeft fon is older than you by two years." " I declare/* faid Grey, £í t am fo be¬ wildered with different ftories, that I ihall lofc my fenfm* What do you iay, that I am to leave this place, and not to fee the friends I have always loved ? Was a brother eyer before prevented from fee¬ ing his fifter, allowing her, according to your account, which is very improbable, to bc fo ?—The conditions you prefcribe to me are harfli and fevere—What Ì to leave every friend ?" « No,
Χζ No, not every friend," faid Betfey, preffing his hand very kindjy, " you have one that will follow you in all your misfortunes, who will fupport you amidft your virtuous ftruggles, chear you in your diftrefs, and ftill be fatisfied if but able to make you comfortable." 99 Who, who is this good creature?" iaid Grey ; but no, it cannot, muft not be Mifs Morney." 99 Oh, no," faid Betfey, tc it is no com¬ mon love will prompt fuch exertion— But in me behold one who would riik tbe greateft danger for you," Here ffie would have thrown herfelf into his arms had flic found them ready to
to receive her ; but finding the reverfe ftie embraced him in her's, vvhich Grey reluctantly endured. Mortified by the coldnefs with vvhich Grey received her embrace, Mifs Bol¬ ton gave a feream, and complained ^of being hurt. He for fome time ftood confounded, but was at length moving to retum to the houfe, when his fteps were fuddenly checked by the appear¬ ance of a fpe&re, vvhich almoft petrified him. He faw diftinetîy ifiue from a fmall grove that adjoined the cymetery, a figure robed in white, and luminous; its mouth was open, its eyes flaring ; one- hand fupported the robe, while the other was
was held up in a pofture that conveyed the idea ofa threat. After the interval of a few féconds, a I» hoarfe and dreadful voice called out, in flow and deliberate words, " Shun Mor¬ ney Abbey !" Betfey fainted on tbe fpot ; and poor Grey, ftaggering to aflift her, fell down likewife without ienfe or motion. Bet¬ fey foon revived, and ufed her beft en¬ deavours to recover Grey, who opening bis eyes, and beholding the ghoft com¬ ing towards him, as he thought, he gave a loud cry, and again fainted. Mifs Bqlton was much alarmed, being incapable of bringing him into the houfe herf-èlÇ
herfelf) and afraid of alarming the fa¬ mily; ffie rubbed his temples and his hands, called upon him, uttered Mifs Morney's name, but all without effect ; his pulfed feemed not to beat ; arid be¬ lieving him to be actually dead, ffie ran to awake the fervants.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. THE chambermaid, in tbe greateft agitation, and trembling like an af- pen leaf in the wind, awoke Mr. Mor¬ ney, and told him ffie much feared that Mr. Grey was dead, juft by tbe Chapel wall. The good man ftarted up, put his feet into his flippers, and ran out of his room towards the long gallery. On his way he was met by two fervants, attended by Mifs Bolton, bearing the body of this un- voh. i, F fortunate
fortunate young man, which he ordered to be carried to the bed he himfelf had juft left, and diipatched one of his do¬ meftics for a furgeon. He fat down by tbe bed-fide, fincerely lamenting the fate of Grey, and dreading the effect it might have on the mind of his beloved Mary, emphatically obferving—"I-ihall lofe her too!" By the time the furgeon arrived, un¬ equivocal figns of life appeared ; and upon being bled, his returning fenfes diffufed univerfal joy among his lament¬ ing friends ; be looked around wildly, but did not fpeak. The furgeon defired he might be kept quiet, as on that bis fpeedy recovery would
would chiefly depend, and attributed his diforder to fome fudden and powerful emotion of the miiid, which poffibly might have produced a fatal termination, had he not been fpeedily attended to. Every one now became folicitous to trace the caufe óf poor Tom's difafter. The chambermaid was interrogated as to her knowledge of the matter, it appear¬ ing fingular.fhe fliould be on tbat ijiot at fo late an hour, and in fo critical a moment. The chambermaid bad been tutored by Mifs Bolton what anfwer to give fliould any enquiry be made of her.— She, therefore, accounted for her being prefent by faying, that being in bed, F 2 and
and faft afleep, ihe dreamt that Grey was dying juft by the old Chapel wall ; flie awoke in a fi'ight, and tried to compofe herfelf again, as ihc recolbcted the but¬ ler had faid, that Mr. Morney did not allow any of bis fervants to believe in dreams, apparitions, or fuch Hke things; but, at laft, thinking ihe heard fome per¬ fon groan, fhe rofe up, and going to the place ffie had dreamt of, ffie beheld Mr. Grey lying dead as ffie thought, and in¬ ftantly ran to get affiftance. Such was the* fubftance of Sukey's de¬ pofition ; but Mr. Morney aiked her bow ffie came to be fo compleatly drefied, as even to have on her day-cap, and every thing elfe the fame as if it had been day¬ time, when ffie rofe in fuch a fright ? The
The girl being little prepared for fuch clofe interrogation, hefitated a good deal in her anfwer, and faid ffie was fo much frightened vVhcn putting on her cloath?, that fhe knew not what ffie was about. Mr. Morney aiked her where ftie got a light ì Sukey faid that ffie had no light, and intimated a belief that her cloaths had been put on by forne wonderful means, føhich ffie could not account for, Mr, Morney then aiked what wages were due to her; of wbicb being inform¬ ed, be paid them down, with fomething over, at the fame time ordered the butler to keep her in fight till day-light, and F 3 then
then fend her out of the houfe, as he obferved flie muft be a hardened impof- tor to perfift in fuch a ftory of deception, with fb affecting a fcene immediately before her eyes. Poor Suícey, with tears in her eyes, begged forgivenefs, but ftill perfifted in the fame ftory, though Mifs Bolton took her by the hand, and in the prefence of all the company begged ffie would fay nothing but the truth. She was, however, fent away next morning, to the grtat grief of her fel- low-fervants, who could not help believ¬ ing the plaufible ftory ffie had told, to¬ gether with many additional circum¬ ftances ffie was continually recollecting, to
to the iatisfaction of her credulous audi¬ tors, who obferved that it was very hard upon a poor fervant to lofe her place for telling the truth, and faying a fellow- creature's life. Indeed feveral in the family, befides the domeftics, could not help giving fbme degree of credit to Sukey's relation of the ftory, though they would not ven¬ ture to fay fo, knowing Mr. Morney to be only inflexible where he thought he had juft reafon to be fo. Next day Grey was better ţ no fever, but great languor, and fuch a fadnefs feemed to overpower him, that he could hardly bear the light ; he kept his eyes- moftly xlofe, except when Mifs Moraey F 4 happened
happened to come into tbe room, tben he would half open them to take a glance at her ; which was obferved with fatis¬ faction by every body. One time, in a gentle tone of voice, flie faid to him—" My dear Qrey 9 what is the matter witb you ?"—His anfwer fliocked and furprized her. ťí I am dying ofa broken heart I" re¬ plied he. 99 My goodnefs! dear Grey," rejoined «ffie, " what diftrefles you ? Is it poffible that you have changed either your opi¬ nion of my love for you, or altered your mind vvith regard to the object of your fifreâkms ?" "Oh,
" Ob, no, indeed, Магу, neither One nor tbe other ; but I am an unhappy youth; if I live, I ihall caufe unhappinefs to thòfe I love, and be myfeif wretched —I therefore wiih to die. 1 * Mifs Bolton, who was in tbe room, obliged tbe lovers to feparate, though vvith evident reluctance on both fides, by reminding them of the iurgeon's pro¬ hibition. 99 You are very imprudent," iaid ffie to Mifs Morney, to allow him to con¬ verfe at all, when his health, nay, his very life is at flake ; and, befides, don't you perceive it difturbs him, and tbat be is quite incoherent in his expreffions* ?"
F 5 "^Ye^
* 99 Yes, indeed, I hope fo," replied the weeping young Lady, " even tkat is bet¬ ter than to believe lie fpeaks truly. But now let me return to watch by the bed- fide ; indeed, Betfey, I will not difturb him by fpeaking." Betfey knew, however, that if flie did not fpeak ihe would look, and that Grey could not be eafy while be faw her ; fo at laft flie prevailed on Mifs Morney to permit ker to return and fit with the nurfe, giving many promifes of attention and diligence, and that ffie would in¬ ftantly bring an account of any change that might happen, whether for tbe bet¬ ter or the worfe, and to relate minutely the moft trifling circumftance that ffiould take place ; and, above all, particularly to
ίο note every word or expreffion that might efcape his lips, and report them with fidelity and exačtnefs to Miis Mor¬ ney. Prevailed upon by tbefe affiirances^ Mary agreed to retire, and went to ac¬ company her father, to whom ffie moil religioufly communicated every fyllable that paflèd in converfation between her and Grey. Mr. Morney agreed in opinion with Mifs Bolton, that Grey's mind was ra¬ ther deranged by his ficknefs; but, at the fame time, he entertained an opinion that the whole had been produced by iome hidden caufe, which he conceived, Fu if
if once developed, might tend to facili¬ tate his recovery, Wbat impreffed tbe old gentleman^ mind with tbis idea was tbe melancholy difcernible in Grey on the preceding day, the cook's account of meeting him, and his being found near the Chapel wall. Tbefe feveral circumftances confidered^, in his mind, denoted there was fome- fomething at the bottom which Grey wiihed to conceal from Maiy, till tbe oppreffion of his mind had overpowered his ftrength. At other times, Mr. Morney was in¬ clined to believe tbe whole had arifen from an intrigue between Grey and tbe chamber-
chambermaid, and would not be furpriz- ed at bearing of poor difcarded Sukey's being İn a ftate of pregnancy. Grey was, however, perfectly innocent of this fufpečted crime ; but fo it is, that ill-grounded fufpicion will fometimes unci an entrance into the beft of minds«
tt
*
CHAP,
■UJľiii.1: . Ιλ» THe enfuing night was a melancholy one to all parties ; but Grey is now tbe more immediate object of con¬ fideration. He, in order to be tbe lefs interrupted in his meditations feigned to be afleep, until he heard the nurfe fnor- ing, and found even the attentive Mifs Bolton faft afleep. Tom took the advantage of the tor¬ pid ftate of his fatigued attendants, and raifing himfelf in his bed, he began, as*
as it were, more freely to employ --his thoughts. He had not forgotten the ap¬ parition he had feen over night, nor yet the paper Mifs Bolton had fo good-na¬ turedly put into his hand, This paper he guefied to be ftill in his pofieffion ; for he had clenched it in hk hand while in the üt, and when his mur¬ cies became more relaxed, he dropped it in the bed, unnoticed by thofe who at¬ tended him. When, therefore, he felt a fcrap of paper İn tbe bed, he readily con¬ jectured what it was, and ihuddered whilft he kept it concealed during the remainder of the day, while the light was carefully excluded from the room, be¬ fides, had it been otherwife, it would have been impoflible for him to read it unob¬ ferved ;
ferved ; but now, as opportunity offered, he determined to perufe tbe fcrawl wbich had been fo fatal to him. The glimmering lamp did not fuffii- ciently enlighten the part of the room where the bed was. Tom gently ftole out of bed, not being near fo weak as had hem thought, 'and ftepped gently towards the lamp. There, by a pale glaring light, he faw the writing, but it was not written with ink, The letters were marked in blood, and turned the contrary way to the ufual manner offorming thenK On viewing this bloody fcrawl, the fpi¬ rits. of Tom were fo violently agitated, that,
that, forgetting tbe delicacy of his fltua* tion, he fo vehemently exprefled his ter¬ ror and aftonifhment, as co awake both tbe nurfe and Mifs Bolton ; the nurfe ffiriekccl aloud ; and it was fome time before Mifs Bolton could obtain her af¬ fiftance to put tho half-recovered 'youth into bed again. x Mifs Bolton picked up the paper, and burned it unperceived, fo that every thing was re-adjufted before any enquiries could be made concerning the caufe of tbe noife, Mifs Morney, however, having heard the fcreams, ruihed into the room, de¬ manding an account of wbat had given rife to them, Mifs Bolton, witb the prompt
prompt readinefs of female invention, told her that Grey having attempted to walk İn his fleep, the nurfe, in her en¬ deavours to force him into bed, bad awoke bini, when be cried out in fo vio¬ lent a manner, that they were both ex¬ tremely terrified. The tender-hearted Mifs Morney, notwithftanding, would not quit the room without firft creeping up to tbe bed-fide, and gently feeling bis forehead ; when he clapped his hand upon her's, and groaned piteoufly, though he looked moft affectionately. <e My poor Grey!" faid ftie, fighing, * fat down by him, and, in fpite ofthe en¬ treaties of Mifs Bolton, watched all night without
without fpeaking or moving, only wheu. he made attempts to fpeak, ffie would tenderiy iay her hand on his mouth, and fay, 9i Hufh ! or I certainly will leave you again," This gentle admonition from one, the found of whofe voiee thrilled the very foul of poor Tom, generally produced the defired effect ; though at one tirae he fomething trefpafied, by begging of her to be more careful of herfelf, and not to wafte her time and attention on fo unwor hy an object as him, the devo¬ tion of whofe life could not repay her kindnefs. The picture of the fcene, though dif- treffing in one refpect, was ftrangely di·** verfified.
veťfífied. — The nuďc faft afteep in on© corner, and Mifs Bolton, her breaft fluc¬ tuating with a variety of contending paf¬ fions, in another ; while Mary was at¬ tentively watching, vvith the rnoft affec¬ tionate tendernefs, every motion of Grey, who had alraoft refigned himfelf a prey to melancholy, though he had eveiy en- couragement to expect happineis in the arms of a fair one he loved with all the ardour of youthful affection. The night being thus exhaufted, Miis Morney returned to her father, who was more than ever convinced that an eclair- ciifement was abfolutely eflèntial to the recovery of Grey, and this he determin¬ ed to attempt after breakfaft. He gently chid his daughter for yielding fo much to
to dcfpondency about a little fiekneis, and made her promife to retire to her chamber, and take that repofe ffie fo evi¬ dently ftood in need of. Mr. Morney tben repaired to Tom's room, and after feating himfelf, and difmiffing the at¬ tendants, began as follows.
CHAP.
■wn. ii.'iwgna-^s.-gap-·-» 1 — CHAP. X. « p'| ^OM, you may, by the great con- -*" fternation your iilnefs has occa¬ fioned, perceive the affection with which you are regarded by every one of the fa¬ mily. As for me, my dear lad, I believe my actions make it unneceflary to de¬ clare, that in my heart you are regarded as a fon. Speak tben to me with the fame freedom tbat you would to your moft valued friend. I hog of you, there - fore, to difclofe v\hat weighs thus hea¬ vily on your mind, that, if poffible, I may
may contribute to the reftoration of your tranquillity, or, at leaft, alleviate your forrow by the beft counfel in my power to give." 99 Sir," faid Grey, (c I have wiflied for this converfation, however dreadful; but as you have taught me not to flirink from duties, even the moil trying, I am obliged to tell you, my friend and father, that power is oftener fhewn in wound¬ ing than healing. My forrows can ne¬ ver ceafe ; and even you, who love me fo well, cannot, in all the world, find a remedy to affuaf e my wretchednefs— Yet, would you anfwer me a few quef¬ tions—
"Why,
99 Why, I am all attention, Tom/' faid Mr. Morney. " Propofe your quef¬ tions ; but 1 muft at tbe fame time ex¬ prefs my furprizc at your manner. You call me, as indeed you juftly may, your father, for fo you have found mc in af¬ fliction ; and yet, if I bear aright, you add in the fame breath, tbat J deftroy your happinefs—" <€ Do you, Sir," faid Grey, " deny your relationffiip to me ?" íC Ah 1" replied Mr. Morney, " vvho has then unfolded to you what I thought not fit to reveal as yet ?" 99 Heaven itfeif," faid Grey, " reveal¬ ed it unto mc, and my unfortunate mo¬ ther's
thevY wrongs !—Wrongs that penetrate my very foul." 99 Wbat! young man," faid Mr. Mor¬ ney, bis eye beaming with indignation, do you tax me vvitb wronging your mo¬ ther ?—Is tbis my recompence for tbe tendernefs I have fliewn her fon ?—Is it compatible with tbe tenor of my con¬ duct througb life ?-—With my generous intention, fo ftrictly purfued, of bellow¬ ing my daughter, and u handlome eftate, upon you ?—Fie ! fie ! young man, to join a cenforious world in villifying my beft actions—I wrong your mother!" 99 Pardon me, Sir," faid Grey (as pale vvith agitation as the other was red with anger) " had I not been warned by fu¬ ro l. i. G pcrnatural
pernatural appearances, thb vvbole world ffiould never have made me run thus counter to all my hopes of happincfs,— See, Sir 5 this picture—Was not this tbe woman you deceived into marriage, when you had -already a wife and chil¬ dren ?—-Did you not force her from her country, to prevent her taking a legal courfe againft you:" "Hey!" faid Mr. Morney, " your accufations come thick ; and thus I an¬ fwer tbem—-Heaven forbid that I fliould have married your mother, cither firft or fecoftd, for ffie was my own fifter. I joined in compelling her to quit tbe kingdom, for ffie bad not only diigraced herfelf and family, but merited the fever- eft punifliment the laws could inflict. í ftiîl
ШИ however felt fbr you, as an unfortu¬ nate infant, who could not be fuppofed to participate in- your mother s crimes, I therefore took you under my protec¬ tion, bred you as my own, with my own, and would ftill have done more for you ; but your ingratitude has ftung me tc the quick, and we will reft where we are at prefent. When your ficknefs leaves you, Ì fhall confider about your future refi¬ dence. Good day, Mr. Grey." " Oh, good dear Sir/' faid Grey, 99 only ftop to hear me ; and let me en¬ treat your forgi venci s of my weaknefs, in having mifconeeived the warnings given me from the dead."
G2
4r The
69 The dead, Mr. Grey," replied Mr. Morney, " have nothing to do witb the affairs of the living. You muft excufe me if I refufe my aflcnt to fo groíš an impofition. I would rather wiffi to be informed what artful perfon has deceived you by this tale, and what part of my conduct has induced you to fuppofe me a villain capable of crimes of the deepeft turpitude." ** If you refufe me your belief, Sir," fatd Grey, " at ieaft hear me. Perhaps the day may come when you will have reafon to fuppoie me not fo abandoned as to accufe my benefactor vvith fictions of my own raifing."
Grey
Grey then repeated all thathetbought himfelf at liberty ţo divulge, vvbichy im fact, amounted to every; tbing that çŞd not involve Mifs Bolton's name. He, mentioned that, being warned in his- dreams^ be went into the baunţedroom, where he found the picure ; he alfo told : Mr. Morney of the dreadful ringing of the bell, the apparition by the Chapel wall, and the fatal paper, ffie letters of wbich evidently appeared to have been written in blood. 99 Now, Sir," iaid Grey> ff is there not fomething in all this ?—Does it not inv, pry the reftlefs condition of my mother's difturbed ipirit i ?—-And might not any one in rny fituation have been mifleel aş well as me?" v ; -,-■, ,. ; *. .'"'■"fi¥: v ''■·■ Mr,.
- Mr. Morney was rather foftened by this relation, ** Why, Tom," faid hé, 9i you have dettamiy been impofed upon bj? fome artifice ; for, I aflhre you, it is the exuct counterpart of the ftories fu- perftitioufly circulated about the appari- tíoris, which are never feen but by weak and Ignorant people. But, pray tell me, how ydu came to think of walking out Ьу the Chapel wall ? You have not ac- counted for that circumftance yet." " Dear Sir, I am not at liberty to dif¬ clofe tbe -reafon of my being there, but even that has fomething awful in it.— Now then, Sif; I throw myfdf upon your mercy, only requeuing you to be- lieve, tbat death in its worft fhape had been preferable to tbe tafk of believing any
any thinj^ »derogator -tøypur" ch^àe^er^ or tbe thoughts of giving up MffsnMorf ney." 99 Mifs? Morney, ι yočtngv Депаешапу lettine tell you, is?not to be fported with. Gi -Уе her up > indçédí! I father/ imagine you wiE· never htèífefsr her \> ,1 1 have not in* my gëiarofttfito.you clomê her quite juftice ; h was intent upon bleffing you^ and overlooked the many advantages ffie might enjoy in a different еоппе-ваоп. With that intent ffie has been fecluded from tbe iworld, left, among ^* variety of as-worthy objtects,'ffie migbtibaye chofen otb^rwjfethautJ/in my.mfaţuation ,vyiffi- ed?; ЬШ iyon ше* too weak¿ Mn Grey, .tøp.-wegkhtø guide yourfelf,· much'lefs Ш' foexp^r^^edijrømigivvoman like. my ■} f «· G4 daughter.
díFttghteb No^ во-;чЬ find I muft change my plan. 4 ,. ¥ť Oh, Sir, good Sir," faid Grey, while every limb and feature was^marked with the trepidation he inwardly felt,* " now I too fenfibly feel niy juft puniffinientH* Uret, is there no pofliWity of f expation ? Am\I to forego the love of her?**-Of Miß Morney ì Is there no other mffic** tion, however cruel, that could be fuhr Aitateci for my punifliment?" * „' Mr, Grey," anfwered the old Gentle¬ man, ц I 'never fty-any thing J do^ not purpofe to -perform. Yo% weakly, one minutò 'renounce a woman on a fålfe fup¬ pofition, raåVly шпЬгжгее* and as eafily relinqWiíheéfanil the·' next *(for yóu ha^e 1 . I * ^ only
only my word againft the ghoft's) you expect this forfaken girl to drop into your mouth. No, Sir, my daughter fhall now have a free choice ; I will in¬ troduce her to tbe company of her equals, and if, after three years fepara¬ tion, it ihouid be your mutual deñre to tinite your fortunes, I will not oppofe it, but until then I fhall, by all fair means, keep you from the fight of each other, If t - for I am not difpofed to act the part ofa novel father, who lays plots, and pub¬ lishes faife reports, in order to accom¬ plifh that by crooked means which might be eafier done in a ftraigbt way. Yo« may therefore rely, that I fhall not tell her of your death, while I believe you to be alive ; married, wbile I fuppofe you to be fingle ; or inconftant, until ffie G 5 herfelf
herfelf difeovers it ; neither ffiall I force her to wed any of the numerous train of admirers who may poffibly addrefs ber ; but, neverthdefs, I ffiall hold it my in- difpenfibJe duty to give fuoh advice as the circumftances of her fituation may require, So, Sir, as you find yourfelf able to undertake a journey, I hope it will not be thought unreafonable, if I fend you to travel or ftudy, for my inten¬ tion is not by anyjneans to defert you." " Sir," rejoined Grey, " your good¬ nefs is infinitely beyond my deferts, í will not again believe even the dead, fhould^ their communications be unfa¬ vourable to you, for, furely, no one but the Devil himfelf eould have fo deluded me. if I am
Mfiiısdfomerfdm^l^d^i who hådja^ti- Oula^mjbfexaf Д1Ьг ^oWn -to. anfvver.^- Have any of my female fervants ever tampered with you ?" " No, I proteft," replied Grey. " Well, I cannot now fathom it; nor is it of any great confequence ; but I have difcharged the iady who dreamt fo conveniently for yoh ttie other night ; I will not have any -ffieh artful or fuperfti-- tious people in my houfe. As to you, Sir, I ffiall immediately collect a few papers relating to your birth and your mother's fate, which will fully exonerate me from your ill-grounded fufpicions; and I truft you will have prudence . G б enough-
enough to keep, thafc'a" Jbbret^ which, if maderpublic, Hvould o^Lyrbringcfharøe upon* your ovvn'jfamäy/lmidďprroyviiDte 'afíothdf,* b ' · ! / /u» ' г ,,, » . *" * *ľ í fi« * ' " * 'WT* I ' $0 uying Mr. Morney withdrew.
CHAP.
CHAP. XI. TUST as Mr. Morney had retired •^ from Grey's chamber, he found two ftrangers alighting at tbe door, already known to tbe Reader by name, but who have not yet appeared as actors in the preceding feenes. The worthy old Gen¬ tleman was rejoiced to fee tbem ; and prefently after in jumped Mifs Morney, to faiute her brothers, for they wtrejke ßrangers at kome. Their mutual con¬ gratulations occupied form time,, and joy animated tbe countenance of each, on
on a meeting fo felicitous, which hacì been, long wiffied by ajl the parties. This ceremony over, the young men enquired after Grey, when Mary inform¬ ed them of the particulars of his indif- pofition, « How is he now ?" added ffie, taking hold of her father's hand, and looking wiíhfully in his face, as if to fay—Give me а favourable account. 99 How is he ? repeated Mr. Morney, 99 why, very filly girl, I would wifh you to*know it, and as your brothers are pre¬ fent, methinks the opportunity moft fa¬ vourable ; I will therefore relate the ac¬ count he has juft given me," The
The old Gentleman then concifely related the feveral inftances of Tomrs ti¬ mid credulity, the bare recital of which almoft convulfed Edward and Charlies with laughter. Their minds, cultivated by education, and ftrengthened by ftudy,, foared above the weaknefs of fuperftition, and they had no belief in* aught but what could be accounted^ fbr by natural cawfès,. Mifs Morney bad more faith, or,, at leaft, lefs confidence of felf knowledge ; ffie did not laugh ; on the contrary, ffie turned very pale, and reclined her head upon the ffioulder of her youngeft bro¬ ther. At the conclufion of her father's nar¬ ration, i( Pray, Papa," faid ffie, iS what is
is your determination refpečting poor Thomas ľ" ťť You might have gathered that, I think," replied he, from roy declaration to himfelf. I find tbat in keeping you both fo reel ufe, I have done wrong : be muft learn to think and act in the world, and you, in the fame fchool, muft acquire experience and judgment. Your love for one another has been forced upon you by my too fedulous precautions. I fee tbe confequence will be, perhaps, productive of unhappinefs to you both. So, Molly, if you are hot frightened at the thought of three years conftancy, у и ought to thank me for my intentie** of faewiñg you tbe world bifore you are indiflblubly united to any one perfon." I always
" I always underftood," faid Miû Morney, " that Grey was not even to fpeak to me of—of—of—I mean of any thing particular thefe three years ; and as to conftancy, that is what we are both very certain of; fo, dear Papa, why need we fee the world feparately ?—Are you not of my opinion, Charles ?" turning to her brother, who fmiled, and prefled her hand, quaintly obíerving****- - . " I cannot fay, my dear Mary, your reafons are conci ufi ve; though they nììgbt have appeared more forcible had you fpoke in plainer language. You, however, fhew yourfelf a little coward, in talking of conftancy, yet dreading ab¬ fence. Believe me, Mary, our fathers plan is the beit ; Tom wants the know¬ ledge
ledge ofthe world, and that you cannot teach him. If after a long abfence you approve of one another, how much more fatisfaction muft you derive from a love founded upon judgment, than a blind paffion haftily conceived, becaufe you had not -the alternative of any other choice.? " Ay/* faid Edward, iC and ffie may fee others ib much his fuperior İn for- time, .tøtets, -and-öccompliihments, that J doubt not'tbis baftard coufin of ours will be rejected in his* turn," €i Dear Edward, do not talk foľ faid Mifs Morney, " Papa will not puniffi Mm for an involuntary fault ; nay, not a fault, for he acted according to the beft of
of his belief^ only that there muft have been much deception pračtifed upon* him." 99 Ay, ay, Mary," faid the younger Morney, " no doubt you will prove bini a moft virtuous, grateful youth, for cal¬ ling our father a rogue." " Stop children," faid Mr. Morney, " let us not contend^-tny refolution is, well meant ; and even Molly herfelf, I truft, will thank me at a future period, whatever ffie may think of it at prefent. I cannot entertain an idea of giving feer for a Lord, mafter, and advifer, one whofe * weak credulity would ever expofe him to the defigns ofthe crafty. Experience will improve each party, and I ihall en¬ deavour
deavour to difcharge my duty. Let us, however, for the prefent, change the converfation." The young men had much to tell— the father many queftions to aik ; but the mind of Mary was occupied by more diftračting thoughts. The propofed de¬ parture of Grey was a fource of infinite uneafinefs to her ; and his rejection of her, and walk by tbe Chapel wall, were myfteries flie could not account for.— Sbe, in confequence, refolved to aik no more queftions before Edward, notwith¬ ftanding the ftrong propenfity ffie bad to be fatisfied in many particulars, as flie perceived fomething in his looks and manner unfavourable to the object of her tendereit regards. In
In truth, Edward had always been ini¬ mical to the match, and that merely through a brotherly affection for his fif¬ ter, whom he confidered to bc worthy a fuperior connection. f '
·:
CHAP.
CHAP XII. Tå IjľR. MORNEY ftriaiy enjoined -Lt -Д. p 0or ]>д аГ у by n0 means- to con¬ verfe privately vvitb Tom hereafter; add¬ ing, that ffie had always been accuftcm- ed to fo much love and indulgence from Jher relations, as 4 fcarcely to feel any re¬ ftraint in their prefence, and from tbis circumftance ffie might think more hard¬ ly of the reftriction he had thus impofed upon her ; her brothers, however, would accompany her in his abfence, that from their experience, converfation, and fea- fonable
íbnable admonition, ffie might acquire much ufeful knowledge and val^^le improvement. Though there was nothing of unfeel¬ ing feverity in tbis injunction, Mifs Mor¬ ney could not help complaining of tbe cruel condition it impofed, It is certain their former converfations had ever been fuch, tbat the world might have witnef¬ fed them without raifing a blufli on tbe face of cither ; and, in general, ibme or other of the family had been prefent at moft of them ; but now there was an ob¬ ftacle in the way, tbe cafe was quite al¬ tered ; ffie fancied ffie had much to fay, tmd much to hear, wbich would be im¬ proper fbr other ears than her own and her lover's. In
In this mjmner was the mind of Mary agitated ; ftill, her father muft bc obey¬ ed, and yet flie wiihed not that poor Grey ffiould fall a haplefs victim to the pangs of grief. Mifs Bolton was then fent for, as the fuppofed common friend of both, and informed ofall that had paffed, which, it is certain, ihe was prepared to receive without aftoniihment, though fhc feign¬ ed otherwife. Maryj having opened her mind to Mifs Bolton, fhe charged her with a meflage to Grey, which too plainly indicated the feelings of her heart.— " Tell him, Bet¬ fey," fáid ffie, " that Ì forgive his error, but wonder he could betray fo much cre¬ dulity
dulity in a matter that, in its confe¬ quences, was likely to involve his own happinefs.—But I freely forgive him, be¬ caufe he is fick and unhappy—I muft only fee him in company for the future, and may from thence, perhaps, often feel embarraflhient—but let him not miftake conftraint fbr coldnefs or neglect. I will form no engagement without my father's approbation—But, notwithftanding my obedience to his will, thf conftancy ihall prove itfeif unalterable/* ^ This was repieated twenty times to Mift Bolton ; but; alas 1 , vorhat trbachçröüs me¬ mories do fome péopb poflèfi î -^-Ву the time fhe had reached Grey's chamber, ihe had forgot the greateft pan øf iţ, and conclodítf^lphať it woïâà be of no ν4& # и ^ Η fervice
fervice to report the ftory incomplete, determined on a fuppreffion ofthe whole. Befides, ffie had bufinefs enough of her own upon hand, for ffie roundly made a declaration of her love for Grey, and ex¬ prefled a willingncfs to follow his fortunes through tbe world. Grey now called to mind her loving fpeeches on the fatal night tbat had brought him fo much grief, but which had efcaped a memory occupied with ideas fo much more congenial to his feel¬ ings ; and now the ungrateful youth, inftead of being much obliged by fuch kind treatment, anfwered her in Lhe moft repulfive manner, taxing her with con¬ triving plots to deftroy his peace ; and, in fact, he prompt declarations had an appearance
appearance that in fome meafure jufti¬ fied his fufpicions ; but let that be as it may, witb many tears and protections, ffie endeavoured to convince him that no creature could be more innocent than herfelf; that ffie had long loved him in fecret, and would yet have kept her paf¬ fion undivulged, had not his haplefs ftate, perhaps too much, foftened her tender heart, as her foul Was filled with only one wifli—-and that was to fee bin. happy. She appealed to himfelf whether there could be any deception in thofe appear¬ ances he himielf had witnefíed. Ha had obtained a picture, which was acknow¬ ledged to be that of his mother ; furely, there was ibmething in tbat ; the warn¬ ing to beware of inceft might betoken H 2 fomething
fomething that time would beft eluci¬ date ; and, meanwhile, he ought to act with care, to prevent the explanation of tbefe myfteries being too terrific· The poor innocent creature, vvith her grief and fincerity, melted Grey into be¬ lief. In truth, it was impoflible for him not to be perfnadcd of tbe reality ofthe apparition ; a, d tbe difcovery, in confe¬ quence, of bis mother's picture, and Mr. Morney's acknowledgment of her crimes, and promife of her hiftory, all tended to carry conviction to his mind. Grey ear¬ neftly wiffied to have the particulars of tbis hiftory, and yet dreaded to learn tbem ; fearing left the feveral dreadful warnings fhould b r found al lufi ve to ber own mifcouduct, when that ffiould be properly
properly explained ; for ghofts are as much given to ambiguity in what they convey to mortals, as the Oracle of Del- phos of old. Betfey was fo overcome with joy and gratitude at his returning kindnefs, that nothing would ferve but ffie muft throw herfelf on the bed to give bim a kiis of reconciliation ; when, as tbe Devil would have it, the door opened, and tbe two young Morney's entered, one through friendihip, and the other becaufe his fa¬ ther defired that no refentment might be kept up*" " Well done, well done, Mifs Bol¬ ton," faid Edward, "that is a moft *f- fectionate hug, you are giving Grey a, H 3 moft
moft convincing proof of your attach¬ ment*—I beg pardon for the unfeafortable interruption," 99 Not at all," faid ffie, " I was only faftening his night-cap, becaufe the poor fellow is too weak to help himfelf." **' Faith," replied Edward, " his fitu¬ ation was perilous enough—You arc a devil ofa girl, Betfey." Mifs Bolton felt fome confufion, and bluffied, a mark of ffiame which ffie very rarely evidenced ; but, indeed, it was not to be wondered at, confidering tbe im- modeft leer with wbicb young Morney regarded her, and wbich ultimately in¬ duced her to quit the room—though, out
out of pure good-nature, ffie wiihed to ftay a little longer, and congratulate the two young gentlemen on their return home. The converfation that followed was loofe and defultory, and of an import too trifling to deierve any particular no¬ tice. Each feemed to adopt a behaviour fuitable to their refpective feelings. Grey was deprefled, and bis mind harrowed with various reflections on his fituation ; Edward was freely indulging in a vein of farcaftic humour; while Charles, mor« kind and companionate, was adminifter- ing confolation to poor Grey. Edward rallied him a good deal about his belief in ghofts, and hinted his fuf- H 4 picione
picions about the conduct of Mifs Bol¬ ton ; Charleston the contrary, tried to foot he him, and foften down the fatirical obfervations of his brother ; till feeing tbe diftrefled invalid fatigued and ex- hfiufied, they both departed,
CHAP,
CHAP. XIII. GREY got up next day, and fb^y Mifs Morney along with the reft of the family, bnt ffie now looked ra¬ ther cool upon him ; only Charles and Mifs Bolton, kept up the former warmth of affection that had made his life pafs fo> delightfully. Mr. Morney was kind ; hut it was exprefled in a way that cut him* more- than reproaches could do. He told him» that he fliould enter the Üniverfity as» H 5 fooni
foon as his health would permit; tbat his allowance ffiould be ample, and that whether he was eventually married to his daughter or not, he ffiould ever confider and treat him as a fon. ** You ffialj moreover, Tom," added Mr. Morney, " to-morrow be put in poffeffion of tbofe papers, which I did intend to keep from your knowledge a- few years longer." ** Oh, Sir," faid Grey, « would that you might ftill act by me, and,, if poffible, think of me, as in thofe days when I was happy in my ignorance. The irrefiftibie impulfe, of fupernaturai agtncy con¬ founded røy fenfes, and the weaknefs of my nature put falfe interpretations on the
the communications fo made to me¬ hut on your goodnefs I rely for my par¬ don." 99 1 do not accufe you," faid Mr. Morney, a and will always endeavour to act by you, and think of you, as my lif¬ ter's fon, of courfe next to my own.— The weaknefs you have manifefted in your conduct is, I appreheèd, the effect of your reclufe education, .which I am fanguine enough to hope a knowledge of the world will remedy." " Mifs Morney too," faid Grey, "have you condemned me ?" ťí I am tou fenfible of my own imper¬ fections," anfwered ffie meekly, " to be- H б com»«..
tbat to thejr own hearts." "If'you look fo unkindly," replied 0my x " my confcicBçe will accufe me of much unworţhine% but none that is intentional," Mifs IVtørney çou)4 not well anfwer what Grey had ia$* without difclofing that her fecret anger -arpfe from bis fup¬ pofed negiert 'щ not anfwering her mef¬ fage, fent by the faithlefs Mifs Bolţoţş, who had fo cruelly betrayed her con T feerice. Mary, therefore, contented herfelf with teljijpg hm %Ы% íb.® íh ol lJd always ЬЬ Ьцрру ţo fear şf Ш Welfarç.-r-Grcy only
only anfwered with % figh, but which conveyed more io the mind of the fym¬ pathetic fair one than words could ex- ^ prefs. —Mary fighed too, and uttered fbme expreffions of good-will towards ·. him, which emboldened his. prefumption to requeft permiflion to correfpond with her, 99 No, Sir/* faid Mr. Morney, "tbt would be entirely to defeat the object I have in view. I mean to continue your guardian in every refpeel: î and having gone fo, far as to promife you the hand of my daughter, I will Jiot now retract what I have faid, nor "hereafter oppofe your union, provided that, after the time pf allotted feparation, you fbonkt both continue agreeable to iţ. I щиД affure you,
yon, however, that I yet feel fomething ofefètítment within me. I do not al¬ together wifh to fee Molly beftow her¬ felf upon a man who has once rejected her, and traduced me, upon fach ridicu¬ lous grounds. Your correfponding would only be a means of perpetuating an en¬ gagement, which I only confent not to break by violence. I therefore muft ex¬ act your ftrict obedience to my will, or, in cale of your hefitating compliance, I fhall propofe conditions wbich may be lefs accordant with your wifhes." Charles, pitying the diftrefs of peor Grey, ffiook him heartily by tbe hand, and affured him he ffiould not be for¬ faken by all, for he would keep up a correfpondence with him." Mr.
Mr. Morney very readily affented to this, only premifing, that nothing more ffiould pafs in the letters concerning Mifs Morney than general enquiries and common compliments. In this ftipula- tion he perfifted, in fpite of the earneft entreaties of Grey, and the befeecliing , looks of his daughter." Edward apparently thought his father too condefcending ; while Charles, on the other hand, approved of his determina¬ tion, yet would have rejoiced more in having been able to foften the rigour of the fentence, for he bad a feeling heart, tbat commiferated vvith all who bad a claim on his pity, and was himfelf not infenfible to the influence of ¿г belle paf- ßonl The
The meaning of this French firap mil Ы readily underftood by ffie female part of our Readers, who are more prompt in the tranflation of trifles from the original, and have greater facility of expreffion in conveying their ideas than the male part of creation. Hence a mo¬ dern educated young Lady will, without Űudy, at once give you the true mean¬ ing of a, trench bagatelle, while a man who has been poring unnumbered terms at the Üniverfity, will wafle many hours ef ftudy in mifinterpreting the poignancy of a Latin epigram. But this is digref- üve from the main point; our ftory muft be refumed. Young Mr. Morney made many fe¬ vere and ludicrous obfervations in deri¬ fion
fion of the credulity of thofe people who believe in ghofts, which greatly tended to promote the hilarity of the company, İn which even Mifs Bolton partook. It muft however be obferved, that 'm thefe jocular effufions he was furrounded by company, in the full meridian of day, which circumftances might tend to give fpirit to thefe vauntings of courage and incredulity. Nothing is more true than the •obfer¬ vation, that diftant dangers are Hghtly confidered. Perhaps, had this young fpark been enveloped in the difmal gloom of a foiitary refidence, at the filent hour of midnight, his temerity would have found fome abatement from the feclufion of his abode, if his fears had not operat¬ ed
ed to the abandonment of his opinion. Here, perhaps, according to the regula¬ rity of novel divifion, the chapter fliould clofe, but left it ihouid thereby become too fhort, it is only made to end a para¬ graph. On the fucceeding night, Grey was woke from his perturbed ileep by the en¬ trance of Mifs Bolton into his chamber, tout en deßaMIL· Whether by miftake or defign was not clearly afcertained ; but true it is that in her fright, either real or afiumed, fhe flung herfelf acrofs his bed, fighing and fobbing piteoufly, and only ufing inarticulate expreffions. The re¬ fult of this bufinefs, however painful to ftate, was evidenced beyond the power of contradiction ; but whether it arofe from her
het boldneís, or his weaknefs, was doubt¬ ful, though the certainty waa no lefs that, in the fervor of paffion, he had fbr a mo¬ ment forgot Mifs Morney, and all her charms—and, oh, ffiame to tell! effec¬ tually triumphed oyer the willing facri¬ fice of Mifs Boltons virtue]
■LpJpjLíVJp. ·
«Mir··«
CHAP XIV
"AD any one witneffed Miis Bol¬ ton's behaviour the next morn¬ ing, tbey would have been ready to fwear ffie was a paragon of virtue, and tbat no¬ thing but the røoft confummate artifice on the part of Grey could have under¬ mined the principles of fo pure a heart. Indeed, our hero was fo loft in amaze¬ ment, that he had but little to advance in his own juftification. He felt the fe¬ vereft compunction at having been drawn into a breach of tbat fidelity towards Mifs
Mifs Morney he had hitherto preferved inviolate. He did not even attempt to con iole Mifs Bolton ; but beheld her di- ffievelled hair, and heard her cries and groans with an indifference, that evinced he had no affection for her. After the firft emotions of grief and anger had fubfided, ffie became more tender, and footh ingly aiked him how he could bring himfelf to feek the ruin of a too fond girl, whofe virtue was the in¬ heritance ffie prized moft ; but of that be bad deprived her, and ffie was un¬ done! Tom coldly anfwered, that, on the contrary, it was ffie who had undone him. "Tor yoo-know/' added he, "that I never
I never thought of you but as a friend, or, indeed, almoft a mother." 99 A mother 1" interrupted ffie, almoft choaked with rage, " wbat ! is every wo¬ man to be efteemed aged tbat happens to be a year or two older than Mary Morney ? How dare you affront me fo grofsly ? But I will be revenged ; tbe whole family ffiall be informed of your barbarous treatment of me, botb before and fince the accompliíliment of your wicked purpofes." Grey was now overwhelmed indeed ; and melancholy as be thought his fitua¬ tion tbe day before, it appeared a flate of blifs compared with what he now en¬ dured. He wiflied to remonftrate with the
ì the undone maid, but found himfelf un¬ able to fpeak ; when fuddenly raifing his head while ffie was toffing her*s about in great agitation, tbey unluckily camp in fuch unfortunate contact together, that the blood guffied violently out of her nofe, and changed her note into a loud involuntary icream, which brought young Morney into the room to fee what was the caufe of it. It would be difficult to defcribe the amazement and confufion of the ícene. Mifs Bolton concealed her head under the cloaths ; and Tom, actuated by the fame impulfe, without reflection, drag¬ ged them off her to bide himfelf fo that in turns both were vifible to the unwel¬ come intruder, 99 Heavens !
** Heavens ! Grey, what are you about r" faid young Morney. " Who have you wounded ? And wbat brought Betfey Bolton here h —Is this conduct becoming the man who afpires to my fif¬ ter ?—Of one who has been nurtured under my father's roof with parental ten¬ dernefs ?-**-For ffiame !" " Oh, Morney, Morney," faid Grey, " røy heart is broken—do not expofe me—I have offended unintentionally—I have been feduced into error—Do not telf your brother or fifter, and I will give up ail pretenfions, for I am not worthy of her¿ but do not inform her of my mis¬ fortune, for it would be worfe than death to be even the remote caufe of uneafinefs to her." Tben
Then turning to Mifs Bolton, he faid, 99 Betfey, why did you thus come to de¬ ftroy me ? and immediately fainted, to tbe great terror of young Morney, who felt much alarm for his fafety. Mifs Bolton, however, afluring him ibe had fcen him in as bad a condition when he faw the ghoft, he affifted her in ufing tbe beft means they could for bis recovery ; wben feeing him again open his eyes, ftie quietly retired to her own apartment. Morney remained with Grey* wb -э feebly thanked him for bis prefent atten¬ tion, but declared tbat he would rather die than live. ίζ For now," faid bc, u I muft live in confiant dread of being vol. 1, I difcovered,
difcovered, and thereby lofing the good opinion of ber whom I adore more than life ; befides, I am rendered miferable from the thought of that imprudent girl, whom, I affure you, I never meant to injure." Morney fat by his bed-fide, and bid the young man take comfort. " You will get over this affair," (aid be, " much fooner than you imagine. Certainly my fifter can now be nothing to you ; and upon your promifing to refign all thoughts of her, I will give you my af- furance of not divulging the difcovery I have made. Appearances are much againft you from the fituation in which I found you ; and I fear your behaviour to Betfey has been cruelly unkind." Grey,
Grey, with a view to the juftification of his own chaßiiy, gave Morney, a par¬ ticular account of the whole affair ;—the forwardness of Betfey was not omitted in the narration, nôr the reluctance with which he became a participator in her guilt. Thus nothing of the truth being dif¬ guifed or concealed by Grey, the Reader will naturally conceive the effect it muft have produced on the rifible faculty of a volatile young man, like Morney. He did not confine it to a fmile, for his very fides ffiook with laughter, to the great «aftoniihment of Grey, who, at firft, felt ftocked at the indifference he efcprefled, and at lait found himfelf unable to re¬ prefs bis indignation. 12 « WeE,
" Well, Sir, well, Mr, Edward Mor¬ ney," iaid he, " you arc the only one of your whole family who would rejoice at the wretchednefs of others. But know, Sir, I will be under no obligation to one of your difpofition—No, I will go to your father, my uncle, tell him the ftory you now laugh at, and implore his pa¬ rental admonitions ; and if it muft be puniihment, I will endeavour to collect fortitude to enable me to fubmit vvith re¬ fignation to the fevere fentence of lofing Mary Morney." {C Pardon mc, Grey/* faid Morney, a I only laughed at your qualmiffi fcruples about a filly affair with an amorous girl ; befides, you know reparation is eafy; for really I fee no ferious objection tp your
yoür marrying Mifs Bolton, as it would î be uncharitable to eonftrue an excefè of affection into a crime' óf moral turpi¬ tude, as I think flie would ftill make a good wife." " No, no," faid Grey, 9i I am too well convinced I can be happy with no other woman than Mary ; and if compelled to renounce her, for her fake,, I will re¬ nounce the whole fex-." 99 In that," iaid Morney, with a fneer, " you muft ufe your difcretion. I ihall certainly inform my fifter of your real character ; and, I truft, bufile every at¬ tempt you can make to feduce either her affection or compaffion towards you. Nay, ffiould I find you even loiter in I 3 this
this hoüfe beyond your appointed time of departure, or take one ftep % tcjwards making her your's, depend upon my fe¬ vereft refentment, for, by Heavens, I will never confent to the match. You know my mind, Mr. Grey, fo I bid you adieu.
CHAP.
CHAP. XV. jT^i REY was fo alarmed at the threats ^~J of Edward Morney, and fo mife¬ rable at the thoughts of beholding Mifs Bolton, that be determineel, weak as he was, to exert every power, in order to quit the houfe, which had been both the fouree of his happinefs and misfortunes. Warmly imprefied with this idea, he im- mediately got up, and after dreffing him¬ felf, crawled into the garden, thinking he ffiould derive benefit from the air, and feating himfelf in the alcove neareft to 14 where
MORE GHOSTS. where the gardener was at work, he beckoned the old man to come to hirn. John s flowly approaching, exprefled great furprize at the altered looks of the poor invalid« /* Old man," faid Grey, " you are one of tbofe who have added to the heap of misfortunes that now overpower and diftrefs me." " As how, Sir ?" faid John. i9 Did you not tell me, a few days ago, that Mr. Morney was concerned in tbe cruel treatment of my mother, and tbat lie afterwards dragged her, in fpite of her t^ars and cries to a carriage, and tbat ffie
flîe vvas conveyed to a diftant country, left ffie ffiould appeal to the juftice of the law ?" " О Lord! О Lord!" faid John, "bow a poor mau's words may be turned about ? Why, I faid as how a nun, about two thouiand years agone, was ill ufed by an elderly fat prieft ; and I faid as how tbat yw mother was married; and that her brother, Mr. Morney, and her huiband, Mr. Wbat d'ye Calľum,iound out fad doings, and fo fcnt her 'yond feas ; but I was a great fool 'to tell any thing, ana fo I never will again." Grey waxed in fuch a paflion wif 1 John, tbat the man was quite aftonifbed ; for he averred, and really believed, that 15 he
he now only forced a meaning on the tale he had formerly told him, fbr which he was convinced there muft be fome terrible reafon, fome deep plot againft his peace. Grey, therefore, not only en¬ treated, but commanded John to dif¬ clofe the names of his adyifers and abet¬ tors. John was proteftmg hie innocence, when Mr, Morney entered the alcove, "with fome papers in his hand, 99 Tom," faid he, " I have reflected that it will be beft íbr ail parties to avoid a formal parting. The weather is fine, and I would have you depart ; but that your health may fuftain no injury, you may ftop on the road, fo as to make your
your journey pleafant and agreeable,-— Immediately after breakfaft, I ffiall take Molly out witb me on a vifit, to give you the opportunity of getting ready, and quitting tbe houfe without the formality of ceremony. Here are tbe papers I pro¬ mifed you, but defire you will not read tbem till you have left the houfe. And whenever you are want of money or ad¬ vice, let me know, and you ffiall be pro¬ vided with both, according to the beft of my ability. I wiih you not only health, but erøy good that can tend to make you eaiy ana comfortable. I hope you will profit by what you hav$ already experienced, and hereafter prove yourfelf deferving—you underftand me. Adieu, my dear fellow !—Nay, do not follow me." 1 6 Mr.
Mr. Morney prefled Grey's band af¬ fectionately at parting, and hurried back to the houfe, leaving tbk defponding young man a prey to grief and melan¬ choly. After remaining fome time in a kind of ñopor, Grey returned to his chamber, which overlooked tbe great со art-yard, in order to fee his bebv^d Ma.y once more, as ffie got into the chariot. His breakfaft was untai t ed near two hours, while he flood dole on tbe watch at ib- window ;— but when at Iaft be be¬ held the object his foul held moil dear driven avvay, without one tender adieu to fwceten the long interval that muft pals before tbey fhould again meet, it was
was more than he bad refolution to bear witb any degree of fortitude ; nay, even be himfelf dreaded/that 'm the conflict of contending paffions be might fuftain a privation of intellect. Indeed, but for the precaution of Ed¬ ward Morney, tbis moft likely would' have have been tbc cafe, as be prevented Mifs Bolton from vifiting Grey, from an appreheniion tbat fuch a meeting might give rife to fomething tbat would tend to retard bis departure, which be bad urged bis father by all means to accelerate. To further bis object, be himfelf went to Grey, and partly by perfuafion, but more by fevere remonftrances, he fo far prevailed on Grey, as to obtain bis con¬ fent
fent to fet off immediately for the next inn, whither he was accompanied by Charles Morney, there to wait for the arrival of his fervant and baggage, and proceed on his journey the next day.
CHAP.
'■■ ! ■' »et^ -igM .......... ■■ * CHAP. XVL ■ТПНЕ converfation of Charles and -**■ Grey was chiefly eked out with mutual promifes of friendffiip. Charles engaged to manage the affair with his fifter, though Grey entertained no hope of his fuccefs ; nor could he think of en¬ trancing his friend with the events ofthe preceding night, left he too ffiould with¬ draw his friendffiip, and thereby pre¬ clude him from every hope of reconcili¬ ation with the family, or happinefs with Mary. * ■frrey
Grey, with his fervant fet off tbe next morning ; they took tbe great fouthern road ; nor did they ftop tül three o'clock in the afternoon ; bis mind was fo ab¬ forbed in reflect ion on tbe unpleafant, if not difgraceful manner in which be lefl his family, that he had no thought of re¬ freíhment ; nor, notwithftanding tbc en¬ treaties of his fervant, would he tben have ftopped had the horfes been able to proceed, Now, however, he alighted, and or¬ dered a dinner, cf which be previoufly determined not to eat ; but gave tbe or¬ der merely in compliance with the cuf¬ tom of travellers, and for the accommor dation of his fervant, whofe appetite was fomething keener than his mailer's. Grey
Grey bad fat down in ferious contem¬ plation on bis fituation, wben putting his hand into his pocket, he found the packet Mr, Morney had given him be¬ fore, which he had entirely forgot. His other cares were novv overcome in his anxiety to know about his mother ; he therefore determined to flay where he was for the remainder of the day, and immediately fet himfelf about examining the contents, having difcovered the firft iheets to be in bis mother's own band* writing.
THE
* THE rACIŒT. и ι Write шоте to difburthen my mind of part of the load tbat opprefie* it* than fbr the fatisfaction of him í őd- drefi^ j he deferves no föch favour from me. î write, i*ï Order that, hy a review of my conduct, I myfelf may be enabled to pafs judgment upon it. I write to difclaim, in the name of my fex, the yoke impofed upon them by the tyranny of man. Men, wbat are they P —The ßrong ; there done lies their boafted pre¬ eminence. Their ctißoms, are they not at perpetual variance with laws, which. are only made to bind women ! ! !-—wo- mea vvho had no voice ia making them, and
and therefore a free woman ought not t& be ffiackled by them. With fuperior Jirength of mind, ffiall I be curbed by one who is my fuperior only in mere animal ftrength ?·—No, no ; I will con·*-« vince my fex that we have both thè right and .power, were we unitedly to maintain them, to make our tyrants bow> to the fame yoke with which they en- ilaved our mothers. " I am free in thought— that I inhe* rited from my father. You, brother, t& whom I now write, may remember how difterent our parenta were; my mother all that a man could wifh in a wife ;. meek, virtuous, aftd religious—How V?a& ffie requited ! Ì I —My Either, though he loved, yet defpifed her. He was coura^ geous*
geous, fcnűbíe, and a freethinker f but the liberty he gloried in pofiefling him¬ felf be condemned ia my mother ; an ad¬ herence to principle in her was deemed obftinacy by him ; yet be entrufted her with the management of bis s ftairs, and left the children entirely to her care, as if it had been of no confequence what prin¬ cipie tbey might imbibe. I well remem¬ ber the many ferious Icflòns (lie v\ouid have taught me, bad not chance favoured me. From my infancy I was lively and handfome, and tbe only daughter of three children. You and George were well enough for boys, but there being two, parental affection was divided be¬ tween you ; tbat for tbe daughter cen¬ tered wholly in me. This often procured røa an indulgence which you were de^ niccL
nied. Wbile you two were reading a chapter, conning a lefton, or writing a copy, in the nurfery, I was liftening to my father's improving converfation, which ufually ran in a rich vein of hu¬ mour. With what poignant wit would he attack my mother, who, poor woman, poflefled no great deal, though ffie was fometimes happy in a retort. But from this flie feldom got much credit, as my father generally checked her by ridicule, or contempt for her opinions, which would require the full exercife of her pa¬ tience to put up vvith, for he could bear no repartee that made againft him.—So much for the tyranny of man ! 99 1 foon adopted my father's opinion, that every thing my mother faid was nonfenfè ;
nonfenfe ; and that I ffiould fuppofe my¬ felf wifer was a very natural confequence. Her lefions I neglected, her advice I laughed at, her threats I defpifed (for ffie never put them into execution) though then only nine years old. After my fa¬ ther, who was indulgent even to my faults, I continually fought ; for in the company of his afiociates, his convería- tion was lively, pleafant, and u n retirai ri¬ ed. My youthful mind was influenced by their example, and my determination fixed to adopt their principles whenever î became emancipated from the con¬ ftraint of obedience to parental authority. From them I learnt there was nothing to be dreaded from a future ftate, and that the firft object of life was to promote the felicity of the prefent moment. Little did
did my parents conceive the turn of my thoughts ; the time fbr revealing them was not yet come. My mother had long withdrawn herfelf from a fociety whofe fentiments were fo uncongenial to her own, and trufted my father would not in- ftruct me in tenets that could tend to the debafement of my morals. But he was fond of my company, and put no reftraint on his converfation in my prefence, little tiiinking I was capable of combining ideas fo abilrufb. Indeed I bad recourfe to one of thofe vices my father termed reli¬ gious —namely, kypocrify. Hence my perverfenefs to my mother pafled for a fprightlinefs of difpofition, difficult to controul ; and as I was prompt in the ac¬ quirement of external accomplifhments, my father was indifferent to the reft. " This
ζζ Tbi*3 conduci; vvas the natural refult of a Η veiy genius, wbich had imbibed ibe ideas ofa favourite parent ; for I afpired to be man's equal in thought and privi- vilege, and abhorred lbe idea of reftraint, either moral or religious, Befides, from whence arifès the obligation of dutv to parente, abitraeìed from religious belief? Is it not an cxtenfion ofthe law of β rong and weak f —It has not Hs foundation in mutual confent. It is forced upon a creature, without the ttitmt of *\ elf are to him, who may hereafter curie tbe hour of hi* exiftence. Once braucht into the worid, natural inftincT prompts parental nouriíhmcnt during the helplefs age of infancy, and fometimes it is given in hope of receiving fupport in turn. From tbis negative merit parents exact what they Cidi
call filial duty, though fomeof them too often [confider the addition of a child only as the acquifition of a flave. Hence who can difpute my right to free myieif when I can ?—I write partly in anfwer to what I think my mother would fay if ffie was alive, and hold my conduct juf¬ tified by her own rule. The hufband is the head and lawful governor of his fa¬ mily ; therefore I was to copy him, and fuppoie him right—-How was I to difcri¬ minate ?—But tbe care с r tbe children was left to her.—Why then teach us to defpife that very care ? Could I refpect wbat he derided ?—If, therefore, guilt at¬ taches to me, I owe it to the example of my father. Different ideas direct us through the journey of life, and thoie who act up to the beft of their reafon and yoL-, ι. К belief
belief, cannot, in ftričt juftice, be ac¬ countable for the incidental errors of their conduct. But to return to my mo¬ ther. 99 When you and George went to col¬ legei íhe vifibly declined, and often faid every comfort was gone, for ffie had no child left to confole her—Wbat confola¬ tion could I offer ?-—I fometimes fpent an hour with her, but foon grew tired of her unvarying tone of good advice, and always embraced the firft opportunity of Tetreating to my father's library, not that fuch permiifion was given me, but I had procured a key, by which I could get ac- cefs at any convenient opportunity. I was moft partial to thofe books I had heard my father approve, and fancied they
tbey both enlarged and improved my mind ; and any thing was preferable to my mother's convention. She, poor woman, was never chearful in the ab¬ fence of her boys, and evinced no parti¬ ality for me in her conduct. Though it was ufelefs for her to make any com* plaints of me to my father, as my influ¬ ence over him left me nothing to dread on that head ; fometimes I was difguft- ed with her marked partiality towards her boys, for ffie feemed to fulfil her % duty to me without any expectation tbat I ffiould deferve it. I remember how tenderly ffie took leave of George and you on your return to fchool. She laid her hands upon the heads of her vveeping boys, and, with ftreaming eyes, uttered a pious ejaculation for your prefent wel·* К % fare
fare and future happinefs. My father efiayed to fmile, but in vain—his eyes were involuntarily brimmed with tears, and for once he forgot the boafted dig¬ nity of man. From bim I caught the con¬ tagious weaknefs, and ffied a flood of tears. My mother threw her arms around us, bleffed us all, then withdrew, and you departed. 99 My mother feemed pleafed with me for a little while, but we foon fell into our old ftrain, which I ufed to denomi¬ nate old ßyle ; but even then my mind was ductile enough to have received an¬ other impreffion, had my parents deter¬ mined on what that ought to be ; for impreffions on young minds, like thofe on fand, though deep, are eafily effaced. lhad
I had fenfibility and capacity, but the latter was acquired at the expence ofthe former. I really loved my mother, but would not fubmit to doctrines that were unpleafant, and, as my father faid, ridi¬ culous. Indeed, after this, when my mo¬ ther was pronounced in danger, I re¬ proached myfelf for all* I might have done amifs, and vowed within myfelf to amend, if Heaven fhould liften to my prayers for her recovery, and devote my¬ felf to its fervice. My prayer was not granted, and then I began to entertain the moft prefumptuous doubts of Divine goodnefs. My mother, however, did not wifh for life ; fhe feemed not to beftow a thought upon this world ; all her difcourfe was К 3 about
about a future ftate. She would have converted us all, had not my father kept fteady. But even he would fometimes appear moved, but that might be with affectionate grief for her fufferings, κ ï promifed to remember behefts, and f& ï intended ; but ffie died, and there being-nobody left to remind me of them, they gradually wore out of my recollée- tkm. ,f '
CHAP.
CHAP. XVIL " ΊΓ Broke off at the mention of my 1 mother's death ; which melancholy cireumftötiee did not long opprefe ,my mind. Theépînions I imbibed at this early period of life I took fome pains to fix, and now retain tbem from a eonvie- tion of their being right ; and glory in pofleffing a freedom of foul, that foars above tbe fhackles of felfiffi man's inni- tutions. My father, for the fake of de¬ cency, obferved fomething* of tbe forrow cuftom has prefcribed on fuch occafions. К 4 But
But this laft duty difcharged, he was fel¬ dom at home, and I was too young to be made the partner of his purfuits. Nor was this much regretted by me, as his abfence afforded me the full range of his library. My mother's books were given to me fpr my own ufe, but thefe I feldom looked into, as they were moftly of â religous kind. It was, however, very perceivable that I made progrefs ia nothing hut my growth 5 and after hav¬ ing fpent about a year in this wild way, my father engaged a governefs, the wi¬ dow of an attorney, who died infolvent, and left her and two daughters expofed to the greateft diftrefs. She was ftrongly recommended, and certainly her appear¬ ance indicated much in her favour. My father told her that ihe would probably find
find fome difficulty in her engagement at firft, from having been fo long my own miftrefs ; but that he would not have me curbed all at once, as at my age, with a good underftanding, every thing might be rendered eafy without feverity. Mrs. Meadows aequiefced ; and under this good lady I poflefled as much li¬ berty as before, excepting only one hour every day after breakfaft, which time my father ufually fpent at home ; that hour we fpent in ftudy in my late mother's clofet,furrounded with books and globes; but no fooner was he out of the gate than my lefions were over. Mrs. Mea¬ dows had vifits to pay, letters to write, or novels to read ; and I had my favou¬ rite ftudies to purfue. Thus were we fatisfied on all fides ; and to render my К 5 life
life more comfortable, I was permitted to receive the vifits of the two Mifs Mea¬ dows, who being about my own age, were very agreeable companions to me, and entirely fubfervient to my will. My father too approved of them, and defir¬ ed they would prolong their ftay both on my account and his own, as he faid it Would eftabliih a fociety in his houfe, that would prevent his being forced fo often to fetk for it elfewhere. I was ra¬ ther hurt at this obfervation, as it argued an inferiority on my part. However, that little pique got over, I found many pleafant effects arifing from it, as when*** ever my father dined at home, he moftly invited fome ofthe neighbouring gentry. Upon thefe occafions, young as I was, I prefided, and thus early in life was flat¬ tered
tered with an homage intoxicating to ths vanity of a youthful mind. ct Beauty, which I poflefled no incon r fiderable ihare of, as I was led to believe, from the many compliments I received on account of it, operated little witb me; though in that I ranked the foremoft of the furrounding neigh' ourhood, I valued myfelf more on my endowments, and at the age of fourteen was perfuaded I pof¬ fefled all the ftrength of ma&uline un-- dcrftanding ; and tbe dignity of my man¬ ners, and the ftyle of my drefs, attracted* notice and admiration, and more parti¬ cularly the approbation of my father,, which he called a digr fied referve, and charged me to continue tbe fame line of" conduct until I ffiould meet with a per- K б foni
fon worthy of me, hinting, at the fame time, that he had fuch a perfon in his eye. This communication was no way unpleafant to me, though I had deter¬ mined that the felečtion" of the object ffiould reft with myfelf ; for it war con¬ trary to the principles I had imbibed, to fubmit, in fo momentous a matter, even to the controul of parens! authority.-— He might recommend the perfon he ap¬ proved, but it refted with me alone to fanctify the engagement.
?
CHAP.
ί ........iine^ft-as»·-"-— CHAP. XVIIL u Ç\ OON after the arrival of my Go- ^-^ vernefs's daughters at the Abbey, I perceived my father took particular no¬ tice ofthe eldeft Mifs Meadows. Tho* young and inexperienced, I had fufficient difcernment to obferve he had conceived a paflion I did not wifh to fee ftrength¬ ened into a permanent affection. He, however, one day lefíèned my uneafinefs on this head, by declaring that, ^on ac¬ count of his children, he had formed a refolution never to wed a fécond wife, Mifs
Mifs Meadows bluffied violently, as if the declaration had militated againft the realization of her hopes ; and my father feemed to view her cmbarrafsment with a fatisfaction I could not account for. Шег confufion was encreaied by my aik¬ ing what was tbe matter ?—This incon- fiderate queftion flurried her fo much, that, in compaffion to the evident agita¬ tion of her fpirits, I requefted her to re~ tire to my apartment, where ffie might recover her fpirits, as ffie appeared to be much difordered. She looked mildly,, yet rather reproachfully at me-^ (i How can you talk fo^ Mifs Morney ?" was all ffie faid, and withdrew» (C My father and Mrs. Meadows left us foon after ; I then began to exprefs my
morb GHosTSv aof my difapprobation of Miň Meadows' conduct, ¡as I thought ffie afpired to tbe honour of becoming my father's wife,—*· In this opinion her fifter concurred with me ; but ffie feemed to be actuated prin¬ cipally from an idea that her fifter would thereby acquire too great a fuperiority over, her. This little envy I knew to be the natural workings of a female mind ; but conceiving I could make Letitia's humour fubfervient to my views, I by all means in my power endeavoured to ftrengthen her in it. She too, in her turn, had a wifli to excite my refentment againft fuch a match, by hinting ? that if her fifter ffiould ever become my ftep- mother, I ffiould find her a very fevere ruler. As to that matter, I was perfectly eaiy, knowing my own fpirit would pre¬ ferve
ferve my independence, and being deter¬ mined that on the fame day he took a wife I would have a huiband. " My fubfequent behaviour to Mifs Meadows was in the true fpirit of female refentment; I flighted or checked her upon every occafion, till, at length, my father chid me for the peeviffinefs of my behaviour, wbich ferved only more effec¬ tually to confirm my hatred of ber. I contrived, notwithftanding to keep Leti¬ tia warmly attached to my intereft, who one day brought me the tranfeript of a letter her fifter had fent to a country coufin, of which the following is an ex¬ act copy ι
"MY
" МУ »EAR JANE, 99 1 believe that in proportion to ex¬ pected happinefs is tbe bitternefs of dif¬ appointment, I am now fo deprefled, that life is burthenfome to me, yet I dare not own the caufe of my forrow.— I have buoyed myfelf up with vain hopes, yet they were not prompted by ambi¬ tion. I have deceived my heart with the weak iliufion of gaining one fo valuable, that I believe there is hardly a woman of, fufficient merit to deferve him. I was too prefumptuous, and now my hopes are fled, my ipirits gone, and no comfort is left me in tbis world. Recurring to my former delufions would only embit¬ ter the fucceeding moments of reflection. On your frriendly confolations I can alone
alone rely ; for my fifter diflikes me, and to my mother I am aihamed to be ex¬ plicit on the fubječt, notwithftanding flie evinces the moft unbounded mater^ nal affection towards me ; but I cannot Ibrgct the* reverential awe with which ffie onee infpired me, and the reft ofthe inhabitants ofthe Abbey are nothing to me* 49 1 have been here a twelvemonth.·**-^ What happinefs did I feel during the firft űx months of my refidence! My young heart rejoiced upon tbe change · of fitua- lionato be brought from a cheap lodg^ ing in the next town to tbe Abbey, not like fervants, as we might at one time have expected, but as vifitors. Mifs Mor* ney ïhews no affability in her behaviour to
to me, but tbat is amply reeompenfed hy my mother's attentive regards. Her anxiety for our welfare and fupport wag the occafion of wbat I have often thought unkindnefs ; but now that caufe is re¬ moved, fo is tbe effect. She calls me her dear girl, and fays that in me centers all her happinefs fince my father is dead. Can I do too much for fo good, fo ten¬ der a parent. But to refume my щад*· tive. <c Mr. Morney (whofe very name pal- * pitates my heart wbile I repeat it) 'm much older than me ; tbey tell me he Jg about forty, but he does not look any thing like that age; tben he his fo hand¬ fome in his perfon, fo agreeable in his manners, and engaging in his converfa¬ tion,
tion, that my yielding heart could not withftand the influence of his united perfections ; nor do I think that even you, my ' dear Jane, blefled as you are with female prudence, could be often in his company without, like me, feeling your heart partially incline towards him* " At firft, I only thought of bim as the &ther of Mifs Morney, to whom we were all under manifeft obligation ; but foon the time feemed heavy when his ib- eiety was wanting ; and, on the con¬ trary, all was pleafant and agreeable if he was at home. Any little compliment paid to me by him would keep me awake the* whole night. You would be iur- prized at the progrefs I have made in mufic, becaufe he likes it, I ftand be¬ hind
hind Mifs Morney's chair while ffie takes her lefions ; and when her mafter is gone, and flie withdrawn, I practife with avi¬ dity what Mr. Morney pointed out as pretty, that is, I ufed to do fb ; but ffiall now drop every thing that can remind me of my folly. It is to be fure an in¬ nocent pieafure I take in playing his fa¬ vourite airs, while he feems pleafed with my execution, and looks fo kindly, I fometimes think, as a lover would do. " One day he brought a piece of mu¬ fic to Mifs Morney, and begged of her to play a particular ariette. She tried it, and threw it afide, faying that it was heavy, I wiffied to oblige him with it, but dared not ; however, next morning, as ibon as I was up, I ftole into the room, and
and in the fofteft, tone played över the eriette, then in the fame piano way fung it, and was fo loft in thought and occu¬ pied with the mufic, that upon turning round, and beholding Mr. Morney with hiö eyes fixed upon me, I was frightened, and offered to withdraw haftily ; but he took my hand, and made me fit by him, while he thanked me for the pieafure I had afforded him, in fuch fuch a tender manner, that I was reconciled ; and he has many times fince prevailed on me to play the fame air, unknown to the reft ofthe family, without any thought of its being wrong; but, however pieafing to myfelf it might be, I will not recapitulate the many little incidents which have brought us privately together, when his converfation moftly took a teader turn, without
without any reply from me btit in fighs and downcäít looks. 99 1 will not fay I was without thoughts of the fplendour to which I imagined he would fome day raife me; but theffe were nöt the fole motives of m/attach- ment ; I loved him becaufe I Could not help it; and when I made the difcovery of his paffion for me, my mind was fluc¬ tuated with an idea of the benefit it might enable me to render my mother and fifter; for being his own mafìer, I conceived he had a right to difpoíè of his hand in fuch manner as he might think would be rnoft conducive to his happinefs—^and I thought myfelf the happy object. 'I hád no fortune, but I knew he was richj, and too generous in difpofition.
difpofition, to let money ftand between him and happinefs, I pow fee things in another light. u But you will naturally aik what has brought me to my fenfes ? I will tell you —I was ftanding fome days ago at the window which looks into the court-yard, and fàw Mr. Morney mount his horfe—-* a handlome man^ you know, looks to great advantage on horfe-back—I fighed and looked—I could not help it. He obferved me, and feemed ftruck with the tendernefs of my regards, kified his hand, and rode off. My eyes involuntarily followed him up the avenue, till he came to the turning which would have obfcur¬ ed him from my fight, when he fuddenly checked his hor% and returned. I was weak
weak enopgh then to fuppofe this arofe from his inclination for my company. It was, indeed, to me he came, but for a purpofe very different to what I imagin¬ ed. It feemed only for the purpofe of checking my prefumption, as in the courfe of our converfation, when we were all fitting together, he faid, " I have made a vow, for the fake of my children, never to marry a fécond time." He feemed concerned while he fpoke, and looked very ferioufly al me, as did alfo the reft. Mifs Morney feemed pleafed with his declaration, and my mother'« enquiring looks were alternately directed at Mr. Morney and me, Letitia too, who is always againft me, enjoyed what ffie thought a check to my hopes. I was extremely agitated, and quitted the room vol* 1, L as
at foon as opportunity offered» My mo¬ ther followed, and endeavoured to con- fole me in my affliction, though ffie, at the fame time, gave me a check for the folly of my behaviour. She added, not¬ withftanding, that ffie really believed Mr. Morney loyed me; and advifed me to af¬ fume a coldneis of manner, which would ffioner lead him to a difcovery of his heart. To ufe artifice was contrary to my difpofition, but I judged it expedient, to avoid any particular interviews, tho* even that might only tend to expofe the weaknefs I wiffied to conceal. I dread difcuffingthe point with my mother; for, notwithftanding I have told her the whole tr ; h, and am fenfible of her par¬ tiality towards me, yet, even now the йгй conflict is over, I cannot mufter courage
courage ţo converfe witii heron the fuV ject ; but ffiall endeavour to make myieif as happy as I ean. I am every day happy in his fociety; he calls me his little friend ; and were I his wife, perhaps I might not fee him oftener than I do at prefent; but then I ffiould have the hap¬ pinefs of knowing him to be my own, and Mifs Morney's hauteur towards me would be abated. " Mr. Morney is more tender than ever ; perhaps he fees and pities my weaknefs. Yefterday, as I went into my mother's apartment, I faw them both in earneft converfation, which they difcontinued upon my entrance; and Mr. Morney, after killing my hand, withdrew. I judg¬ ed I had been the fubječt of their dif- L· 3 courfe,
courfe, which my mother did not deny, but would not particularize ; ffie only faid that Mr, Morney was to be pitied from forue circumftances, which pre¬ vented his being able to marry—" But," faid flie, " his love for you is fincere." 99 She extolled him for many qualities, tbat, infatuated as I am, I could not help thinking my poor mother's gratitude outran her prudence ; at leaft, I am my¬ felf too apt to think well of Mr. Morney without her partiality ftrengthening my weaknefs. I am, dear Jane, Your's affectionately, Harriet Meadows."
CHAR
CHAP. XIX. " Д bTER having read this letter, •^ "*" perhaps, with all your boafted' benevolence, you will admit fbme refent¬ ment was due from me to the imperti¬ nent authorefs. I flew to Mrs* Mea¬ dows' apartment, in fpite of Letitia's per¬ fuafion, with the fcrawl in my hand, and tofled it difdainfully into her lap, defiring that Mifs Meadows might be inftantly turned out of my father's houfe. She read the letter with compofure, entreat¬ ed me to he pacified, and I ffiould have L 3 immediate
immediate fatisfaction. On faying tbis^ ffie took it to my father, who was in his library, informing him of my orders, that her daughter ffiould quit the Abbey as a puniihment due to her prefumptuous fentiments, wbich ffie acknowledged to be romantic and ambitious, but ftill ffie was her child, and if turned out difgracc- fully for writing confidentially to her friend, fhe would accompany her. " Be it fo," faid L, " neither my years nor underftanding require a governefs, you will, or I am much deceived, find fufficient employment in teaching your young lady humility." " My father perufed the lettet with provoking marks of fatisfaction in his countenance,
countenance, and enjoined me to re¬ turn it to the place from whence I had purloined it, obferving tbat no per¬ fon of any morals would thus diffioneftly come at the thoughts of another ; and it was but common juftice not to take the leaft advantage over the unfufpečting writer, to whom ber gratitude was due for her good opinion of him, and if any of bis family ffiould infult her delicacy on tbat account, be ffiould hold himfelf obliged to make her reparation by tht offer of his hand, which otherwife, he folemnly protefted, he would not do. There was time for us, he obferved, to adjuft every thing ; accordingly, as ffie bad taken a walk with one of his tenant's daughters that day, and probably would not return very foon ; and be concluded L 4 by
hy faying we knew his mind, and muft mutually agree fo as to keep what had paflèd a fecret for our own fakes. What¬ ever reafon I had to be offended, in my father's prefence I concealed my paffion, but when I left it, conceiving myfelf lowered in the eyes of the others, I would not remain with them ; I retired to my chamber, and kept it for a week, under pretence of iilnefs. Mrs. Meadows was frequent in her vifits to me, with a view to ingratiate herfelf in my favour, as was alfo Letitia ; tbe latter I did not blame ; and ffie was thenceforth my favourite and confidant, which diftinction flie ftudi- oufly laboured to deferve ! through her I received an account of every procedure of my father refpečting her fifter ; and was mortified by the reflection, that while
he was practifing every fedučtive art upon her, to me he was conftantiy giving lec¬ tures on the dignity and modefty. a wo¬ man ought to preferve, the morals necef¬ fary for her obfervance, and, on the other hand, the ffiame and infamy that attach¬ ed to her character, if, in deviating from thefe, ffie gave a loofe to her own paf- fions. It is not neceflary to detail the maxims of a parent, who, in his own con¬ duct, violated them all. I muft how¬ ever obferve, that Harriet was never pre¬ fent at any of thefe admonitory lectures, " My father no fooner difcovered the weak partiality of Harriet towards him, than he determined upori making it fubfervient to his own mercenary defigns. With this view he thought of founding L 5 Mrs,
Mrs. Meadows, in whom he had per¬ ceived fomething of a mercenary difpo¬ fition § nbr Was he much deceived in this opinion. She at firft made a ftand for her daughter's honour and her own* and feemed tö hint that nothing lefs than marriage would receive her concurrence ; but at length, finding my father as obfti- Itate againft it, ffie abated fomething of herdernând, and merely ftipuiated for a fettlement of two hundred pounds per rnmuin on herfelf, and as much for Har¬ riet, as an indiipenfible preliminary tô the obtaining of her confent. So now, Inftead of cheriffiing the notion of her daughter becoming my father's wife, ffie dwelt upon his love and generofity, with hints of the fplendour and happinefs ffie ■might enjoy 'm being bis wife in all but the
fhe name, which the peculiarity of his fituation would not admit of, at ieaft for the prefent. " Mifs Meadows had been educated by a grandmother, who had early inftİlîed into her mind the principles of virtue and religion ; and tbefe fo far for a while feemed to operate upon her, that ffie could not believe it poffible her mother was ferious in the advice ffie gave her ; at leaft, if Harriet was not really actuat¬ ed by thefe motives, ffie aflected to be fo ; though poffibly the ftrength of her affection might overcome the weaknefè of her refolution, and induce her to be¬ lieve, that yielding to the impulfe of her paffion ffie ffiould not tranfgrefs againft the decorum of virtue. L 6 " From
* ( From whatever motive, however, her conduct might arife» it is certain ffie fbr fome time refifted the diffionourable attempts of my father to advantage him¬ felf of her partiality; though, confidered in a pecuniary point of view, flie had nothing equal to expect in the way of marriage. Every circumftance that tran- fpired was faithfully reported to me by my trufty fpy, Letitia. From her infor¬ mation I regulated my own conducts but was afraid of ffiewing my refentment left my father ffiould actually put his threats into execution. Notwithftand¬ ing the fqueamiffinefs of Harriet, I found a vifible alteration in her behaviour, and that ffie daily affumed freih airs, in pro¬ portion as my father «ontinued his affi¬ duities towards her. " But,
99 But, however elate Mifs Meadows t might feel herfelf in the contemplation of her proffered ftate of aggrandizement, her fcruples were not fo readily over¬ come as her mother expected, or my father wiffied. Thus diiappointed, they concerted meafures for tbe accompliffi- ment of their wicked purpofe, in which they were finally but too fuccefsfuL-— Thus do we find parents, from motives the moft mean and unworthy, facilitating the ruin of their own children, and tram¬ pling upon all laws moral and divine. Mifs Meadows was at firft very unhappy from her matrimonial fchemes being ren¬ dered abortive, though my father ufed every affiduity to tranquillize her mind. Though fomething vexed at the little re¬ fpect ffiewn to me by the traňfaction, I was
was glad that * here was an end of all their fchemes of legal union, and that fhe was reconciled to the idea of her con¬ nection being a marriage in the fight of Heaven. ** My father-, conceiving my being in the houfe a reftraint upon his actions, in which he preferved the decency of appear¬ ance, announced to me my emancipation from a governefs, but hoped Mrs. Meadows would favour me witb her company while at the Abbey ; and, during my abfence, if ihe would undertake the fuperintend- ance of the family, it would greatly add to his other obligations, as he had re¬ folved to fend me to London, in order to my improvement by the beft mafters^ and his fifter^ Lady Trevor, expečled me to
to pafs the winter with her. I chear- fully coincided in the plan, only ftipu¬ lating for Letitia as my companion ; this was at firft oppofed on Lady Trevor's account, as fhe might not wiih to en- creafe her family vvith an unexpected gueft ; but I was refolved not to go with¬ out my friend ; and as I had been ac- cuftomec' to be indulged, and my ab¬ fence was now wiihed for-, this was granted, and preparations made for my departure within the week."
IUL «1
CHAP.
CHAP. XX.
" II ЛрГ father was fond of me ftill, ХтЖ. though rather carried away by his young miftreis, who began to accept of his pre&nts very cordially, and to de¬ mean herfelf vvith a fort of impertinent compofure, inftead ofthe dovvneaft bluih- ing looks that ufed to exprefs the ihame fhe had felt. Indeed, her mother did all fhe could to infpire her vvith confidence, fo what could be expecìed. But to re¬ turn to myfelf.
"My
« My father likewife was generous, and gave me a very handfome allowance for my pocket, befides ibme trinkets tbat had been my mother's. He opened her caiket, in which were laid up the fuperb jewels that in former times he had deco¬ rated her with» " Thefe," faid he, 99 witb many other tokens of my affection, ffiall be your's the day that fees you wedded, provided 'my confent goes along with it. If you mind Lady Trevor's example and advice, and recollect your mother's, you will do well. Girls are not to take their male relations as patterns ; their moral and relative du¬ ties are far different." I had not then fortitude enough to brave my father, but i thought—And then follow my mo¬ ther's
ther's example î 1—What, to meet her reward ί ! !—-No, not to fave mankind from perdition. " But I concluded tbat much of this good advice was only for form fake, fo from the fame good motive I made fuit¬ able anfvvers ; I felt gracious to the whole world, from the overflowings of my own fatisfaction in a full purfe, and the prof¬ pects of pieafure that were opening be¬ fore me. Letitia and my fervant both uifured the conquefts I ffiould make, and vanity inclined me to believe them. I had my father's coach and four, with two fervants attending, befide the two fe¬ males, alî fubfervient to my commands. I foon wiped away the few tears that dropped oa leaving the Abbey, and felt my
my dignity and independence. I looked upon myfelf as nearly emancipated from all authority, and determined by my con¬ duct to make thofe who knew me know that alfo. 99 Thefe reflections branched into many others While on the road, and, of courfe, I converfed but little. Adven¬ tures on the highway have feldom much worth recordings and are now exploded even in novels. I did not expect to meet any, and fo it turned out, till *on the fourth evening after quitting Morney, I found myfelf at my aunťs tea-table in Grofvenor-fquare, 99 It required my ftock of dignity not to feel abaffied at the appearance of my aunt
aunt and coufin, and the looks of afto¬ nifhment they caft upon me, who fo lately fet the faffiion at Morney. In¬ deed, being accuftomed to know my own confequence, had prevented my caring about the mode, fo that if what I wore was rich and becoming it was enough ; and as my fociety was only made up of the Meadows, what opportunity had I of learping the variations of folly ; but here the whole evening was fpent in con¬ verfing upon the neceffity of drefs, and other faihionable trifles, to make the leaft figure in the polite world ; and then it ,was gently intimated to me what a dreadful object I was. * c I remember that my fhape was un¬ di fguifed, my ftays being made only to fit
fit me, but that would not do, for it was the waift two inches lower than the hips, with a peak tapering down behind, which in a ffiort woman almoft reached to the calf of her leg. Luckily I was tall, and thence looked better than many, and actually preferved an appearance of legs, which in fome were concealed by thefe hideous-ffiaped ftays. The head- drefs was no lefs ridiculous and unnatu¬ ral, but not very difficult to adjuft ac¬ cording to the mode, as moft ladies were provided with têtes, drefied by barbers, which, by tying over the hair, concealed all its imperfections. Thus encumbered with ftays, têtes, hoops, and long treble ruffles, to adorn the great negligees, were women of faffiion disfigured, and " the modefty of nature overftepped." (C Deipifing
" Defpifing this trumpery of faffiion r I notice it merely by way of apology for the fteadinefs with which I refifted thi* monftrous fafliion, as it could only tend to hide the charms Nature had beftowed ■upon me—my eafy fliape and glofly nut- brown hair; conceiving that by adhering to my own mode, I ffiould be admired no lefs for fenfe than beauty by the men, fo that all the difcourfes of my aunt and coufin were fet down to the fcore of envy*"
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME»
