Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The Castles of Athlin and Dunbayne
THE CASTLES OF ATHLIN AND DUNBATNE,
CHAPTER I. UN the north-eaft coafl of Scotland, in the moil romantic part of the High¬ lands, ftood the caftle of Athlin ; an edifice built on the fummit of a rock whofe b;»fc was in the fea. This pile was venerable fiom it ? antiquity, and fiom irs Gothic ilruduic; but more venerable fiom the virtues which it enclofed. It was the refidence of the ftili beautiful widow, and the children, ? of
( 2 ) of ihe noble Earl of Athlin, who was flain by the hand of Malcolm, a neigh¬ bouring chief, proud, apprenne, re¬ vengeful; and ftill refiding in ail the pomp of feudal greatnefs, within a few miles ofthe caftie of Athlin. Encroach¬ ment on the domain of Athlin, was the occafion of the animofity which fubfifted between the chiefs. Frequent broils had happened between their clans, in ? Inch that of Athlin had generally been vidorious. Malcolm, whofe pride was touched by the defeat of his people; whole ambition was cut bed by the authority, and whofe greatnefs uas rivalled by the power of the Earl, conceived for him thai deadly hatred which oppofition to its favourite paffions naturallv excites in a mind like İiis, haughty and unaccuftomed to control ; and he meditated his deiiruc¬ tion. He planned his purpofe vvith all that addrefs which fo eminently marked his charader, and in a battle which
ν S ì which was attended by the chieh of each party in perfon, he contrived, by a cu¬ rious finefle, to entrap the Earl, accom¬ panied by a fmall detachment, in hh wiles, and there flew him. A generai rout of his clan enfued, which uas fol- lowed by a dreadful flaughter; and a few only efcaped to tell the horrid cata- ftrophe to Matilda. Matilda, overwhelm¬ ed by the news, and deprived of thofe numbers which would make revenue fuc- cefsful, forbore to facrifice the lives of her few remaining people to a feeble at¬ tempt at retaliation, and fhe was con¬ ftrained to endure in filencc her forrows and her injuries. Inconfolablc for his death, Matilda had withdrawn from the public eye, into this ancient feat of feudal govern¬ ment, and theic, in the lv f-ai of her people and her family, had devoted her¬ felf to the education of her children. One fon and one daughter were all that ? 2 furvived
( 4 ) furvived to her care, and their growing virtues promifed to repay all her ten¬ dernefs. Oibert was in his nineteenth year : nature bad given him a mind ar¬ dent and fufceptible, to which educa¬ tion had added refinement and expan- fion. The vifions of genius were bright in bis imagination; and his heart, un- chilled by the touch of difappointmenr, glowed with all the warmth of bene¬ volence. When firft we enter on the theatre-of the world, and begin to notice the ob¬ jects that furround us, young imagi¬ nation heightens every fcene, and the warm hearr expands to all around ir. The happy benevolence of our feelings prompts us to believe that every body is good, and excites our wonder why every body is not happy. We are fired with indignation at the recital of an act of ínjuftice, and at the unfeeling vices of which we are told. At a tale of diftrefs ι our
( 5 ) our tears flow a full tribute to pity· At a deed of virtue our heart unfolds, our foul afpires ; we blefs the adion, and feel ourfelves the doer. As we advance in life, imagination is compelled to re¬ linquiih a part of her fweet delirium í we are lcd reludantly to truth through the paths of experience; and the ob¬ jeds of our fond attention are viewed with a feverer eye. Here an altered fcene appears ;—frowns where late were fmiles ; deep fhades where late was fun¬ íhine : mean paffions, or difgufting apa¬ thy, ftain the features of the principal figures. We turn indignant fronda pro¬ fped fo miferable, and court again the fweet illufions of our early days ; but ah ] they are fled for ever! Conftrained, therefore, to behold objeds in their more genuine forms, their deformity is by degrees lefs painful to us. The fine touch of moral fufceptibility, by fie- quent irritation, becomes callous; and too frequently we mingle with the world, ? 3 till
( 6 ) riil wc are added'to the number of its votaries. Mary, who was juft feventeen, had the accompliihments of riper years, with the touching fimplicity of youth. The graces of her perfon were inferior only to thofe of her mind, which illumined ber countenance with inimitable expref¬ fion. Twelve years had now elapfed fince the death of the Earl, and time had blunted the keen edge of forrow· Ma¬ tilda's grief had declined into a gentle, and not unpleafing melancholy, which gave a foft and interefting íhade to the natural dignity of her character. Hi¬ therto her attention had been foiely di¬ rected towards rearing thofe virtues which nature bad planted with fo liberal a hand in her children, and which, under the genial influence of her eye, bad ilou- rifhed and expanded imo beauty and ftrength.
( 7 ) ftrength. A new hope, and new foli- cituclcs, now arofe in her breaft: thefe dear ehildi en were arrived at an age, dangerous from its tender fufceptibility, and from the influence which imagination has a: that time over the parlions. Im¬ preffions would fojn be formed which would ftamp their deftiny for life. The anxious mother lived but in her children, and (lie had yet another caufe of appre¬ henfion. When Oibert learned the ftory of his father's death, his young heart glowed to avenge the deed. The late Earl, who had governed with the real dignity of power, was adored by his clan; they were eager to revenge his injuries; but oppreiTed by the generous compaffion of the Countefs, their murmurs funk " into filence : yet they fondly cheriíhed the hope, that tbeir young Lord would one day lead them on to conqueft and revenge. The time was now come when ? 4 they
( s ) they ¡ooked to fee this hope, the folace of many a cruel moment, realized. The tender fears ofa mother would not fuffer Matilda to riik the chief of her lafl remaining comforts. She forbade Of¬ bert to engage. He fubmitted in filence, and endeavoured, by application to his favourite iludies, to ftifle the emotions which roufed him to arms. He excelled in the various accompliihments of hi s s rank, but chiefly in the martial exer- cifes, for they were congenial to the nobility of his foul, and he had a fecret pleafure in believing that they would one time aflift him to do juftice to the memory of his dead father. His warm imagination direded him to poetry, and he followed where flie led. He loved to wander among the romantic feenes of the Highlands, where the wild variety of nature infpired him with all the enthu¬ fiafm of his favourite art. He delighted in the terrible and in the grand, more than in the fofter landfcape; and wrapt in
( 9 ) 'm the bright vifions of fancy, would of¬ ten Iole himfelf in awful folitudes. It was in one of thefe rambles, that having flrayed for fome miles over hills covered vvith heath, from whence the eye was prefented with only the bold outlines of uncultivated nature, rocks piled on rocks, cataracts and vaft moors unmark¬ ed by the foot of traveller, he loft the path whicb be bad himielf made; he looked in vain for the objects which had direded him ; and his heart, for the firft time, felt the repulfe of fear. No vef- tige of a human being was to be fecn ; and the dreadful filence of the place was interrupted only by the rear of diftant torrents, and by the fcreams ofthe birds which flew over bis head. He fhouted, and his voice was anfwered only by deep cchos from the mountains. He remained for fome time in a filent dread not wholly unpleafing, but which was foon height¬ ened to a degree of terror not to be ? 5 endured i
( io ) endured ; and he turned his fteps back¬ ward, forlorn, and almoft without hope. His memory gave him back no image of the paft; and having wandered fome time, he came to a narrow pafs, which he entered, overcome with fatigue and fruitlefs fearch : he had not advanced far, when an abrupt opening in the rock fuddenly prefented him with a view of the moft beautifully romantic fpot he had ever feen. J t was a valley almoft fur- rounded by a barrier of wild rocks, whofe bafe was íhaded with thick woods of pine and fir. A torrent which tumbled from the heights, and was feen through the woods, ruihed with amazing impetuofity into a fine lake, which flowed through the vale, and was loft in the deep receffes of the mountains. Herds of cattle grazed in the bottom, and the delighted eyes of Oibert were once more blefled with the light of human dwellings. Far on the margin ofthe ftream were fcattered a few neat cottages. His heart was fo glad¬ dened
( ιι ) dened at the profpect, that he forgot he had yet the way to find which led to this Elyfian vale. He was juft awakened to this diftrefling reality, when his attention was once more engaged by the manly figure of a young Highland peafant, who advanced towards him with an air of benevolence, and, having learned his diftrefs, offered to conduct him to his cottage. Ofbert accepted the invitation, and they wound down the hill, through an obfcure and intricate path, together· They arrived at one cf the cottages which the Earl had obferved from the height; they entered, and the peafant prefented his gueft to a venerable old Highlander, his father. Refreíhments were fpread on the table by a pretty young girl ; and Oibert, after having ??? - took of them and refted awhile, departed, accompanied by Alieyn, the young pea¬ fant, who had offered to be his guide. The length of the walk was beguiled hy converfation. Oibert was interefted. hy ? ? , dil-
( ia ) difcovering in his companion a dignity of thought, and a courfe of fentiment fimilar to his own. On their way, they paffed at fome diftance the caftle of Dun¬ bayne. This object gave to Oibeit a bitter reflection, and drew from him a deep figh. Alieyn made obfervations on the bad policy of oppreffion in a chief, and produced as an inftance the Baron Malcolm. " Thefe lands", faid he, i( arc his, and they are fcarcely fufficient to fup¬ port his wretched people, who, fmking under fevere exactions, fuffer to lie un¬ cultivated, tracts which would otherwife yield riches to their Lord. His clan, oppreffed by their burdens, threaten to rife, and do juftice to themfelves by force of arms. The Baron, in haughty con¬ fidence, laughs at their defiance, and is infenfible to his danger; for fliould an infurrection happen, there are other clans •who would eagerly join in his deiiruc¬ tion, and puniih with the feme weapon the tyrane and the murderer." Surprifèd at
( 13 ) at the bold independence of thefe words, delivered vvith uncommon energy, the heart of Oibert beat quick ; and " ? God! my father!" burft from his lips. Alieyn ftood aghaft ! uncertain of the effed which his fpeech had produced. In an inftant the whole truth flaihed into his mind : he beheld the fon of the Lord whom he had been taught to love, and whofe fad ftory had been impreifed upon his heart in the early days of childhood : he funk at his feet, and embraced his ' knees vvith a romantic ardour. The young Earl raifed him from the ground, and the following words relieved him from his aftonifliment, and filled his eyes with tears of mingled joy and forrow : " There arc other clans as ready as your own to avenge the wrongs of the noble Earl of Athlin ; the Fitz-Henrys were ever friends to virtue." The countenance of the youth, while he fpoke, was over¬ fpread with the glow of confeious dig¬ nify, and his eyes were animated with the
( H ) the pride of virtue. The breaft of Of¬ bert kindled with the noble purpoie, but the image ofhis weeping mother crofled his mind, and checked the ardour of the impulfe. <c A time may come, my friend,'* faid he, " when your generous zeal will be accepted with the warmth of gratitude it deferves. Particular circum¬ ftances wiU not fuffer me, at préfet, to fay more." The warm attachment of Alíeyn to hîs father funk deep in his heart. It was evening ere they reached the caftle, and AUeyn remained the Earls gueft for that night.
CHAJ-
φ
( '5 )
CHAPTER U. J. HE following day was appointed for the celebration of an annual feftival given by the Earl to his people, and he would not fuffer AUeyn to depart. The hall was fpread with tables; and dance and merriment refounded through the çiftle. it was ufual on tlut day for the clan to aflemble in arms, on account of an at¬ tempt, the memory of which it was meant to perpetuate, made, two centuries be¬ fore, by an hoftile clan to furprife them in their feftivity. In the morning were performed the martial exercites, in which emulation was excited by the honorary rewards beftowed on excellence. The Countefs and her lovely daughter beheld from the ram¬ parts
? 1? ) parts of the caftle, the feats performed on the plains below. Their attention was engaged, and their curiofity excited, by the appearance of a ftranger, who managed the lance and the bow with fuch exquifite dexterity,as to bear off each prize of chivalry. It was Alieyn. He re¬ ceived the palm of victory, as was ufual, from the hands of the Earl ; and the modelt dignity with which he accepted it, charmed the beholders. The Earl honoured the feaft with his prefence, at the conclufion of which, each gueft arofe, and feizing his goblet with his left hand, and with his right ftriking his fword, drank to the memory of their dcpaiicd Lord. The hall echoed wiih the general voice. Ofbert felt ic ftrike upon his heart the alarum of war. The people then joined hands, and drank to the honour of the fon of their late mafter. Oibert underftood the fignal, and overcome wiih emotion, every con¬ fideration
( '7 ) fideration yielded to that of avenging bis father. He arofe, and harangued the clan with all the fire of youth and of in¬ dignant virtue. As he fpoke, the coun¬ tenance of his people ilafhed with impa¬ tient joy; a deen murmur of applaufe ran through the .embly; and when he was filent, each man, croffing his fword with that ofhis neighbour, fwore by that facred pledge of union, never to quit the caufe in which they now engaged, till the life of their enemy had paid the debt of juftice and of revenge. In thé evening, the wives and daugh¬ ters of the peafantry came to the caftle, and joined in the feftivity. It was ufual for the Countefs and her ladies to ob¬ ferve from a gallery of the hall, the various performances of dance and fong; and it had been a cuftom of old for the daughter of the caftle to grace the oc¬ cafion by perforili ing a Scotch dance with the viilor of the morning. This vidor
( »s ) victor now was Alieyn, who beheld the lovely Mary led by the Earl into the hall, and prefented to him as his partner ia the dance. She received his homage with a fweet grace. She was dreifed in the habit of a Highland lafs, and her fine auburn treffes, which waved in her nevk, were ornamented only with a wreath of rofes. She moved in the dance wkh the light fteps of the Graces. Profound filence reigned through the hall during the performance, and a foft murmur of applaufe arofe on ks conclu¬ fion. The admiration of the fpectators was divided between Mary and the vic¬ torious ftranger. She retired to the gal¬ lery, and the night concluded in joy to all but the Earl, and to AUeyn; but very different was the fource and the complexion of their inquietude. The mind of Oibert revolved the chief occur¬ rences of the day, and his foul burned with impatience to accompliíh the pur¬ pofes of filial piety ; yet he dreaded the effect
( »9 ) effect which the communication of his defigns might have on the tender heart of Matilda ; on the morrow, however, he refolved to acquaint her with them, and in a few days to rife and profecute his caufe with arms. Alieyn, whofe bofom till now had felt oniy for ofhers' pains, began to be confeious of his own. His mind, uneafy and reftlefs, gave him only the image of the high-born Mary; he endeavoured to exclude her idea, but with an effort fo faint, that it would ftill intrude ! Pleafed, yet fad, he would not acknow¬ ledge, even to himfelf, that he loved : fo ingenious are we to conceal every appearance of evil from ourfelves. He arofe with the dawn, and departed from the caftle full of gratitude and fecret love, to prepare his friends for the ap¬ proaching war. The Earl awoke from broken num¬ bers.
( SO ) bers, and fummoned all his fortitude to encounter the tender oppofition of his mother. He entered her apartment with faltering fteps, and his counte¬ nance betrayed the emotions of his foul. Matilda was foon informed of what her heart had foreboded, and overcome with dreadful fenfation, funk lifelefs in her chair. Ofbert flew to her af¬ fiftance, and Mary and the attendants foon recovered her to fenfe and wretch¬ ednefs. The mind of Oibert was torn by the moft cruel conflict : filial duty, honour, revenge, commanded him to go ; filial love, regret, and pity, -entreated him to ftay. Mary fell at his feet, and clafping his knees with all the wild energy of woe, befought him to relinquiih his fatal purpofe, and iave his laft furviving pa¬ rent. Her tears, her figlrs, and the fofc fimplicity of her air, fpoke a yet ftronger language than her tongue : but the filene grief
( ai ) grief of the Countefs was ftill more touching, and in his endeavours to footh her, he was on the point of yielding his refolution, when the figure of his dying father arofe to his imagination, and ftamped his purpofe irrevocably. The anxiety of a fond mother prefented Matilda with the image of her fon bleed- ? ing and ghaftly ; and the death of her Lord was revived in her memory with all the agonizing grief that fad event had impreifed upon her heart, the harfli- cr charaders of vyhich, the lenient hand of time had almoil obliterated. So lovely is Pity in all her attitudes, tlut fondnefs prompts us to believe flic can never tranfgrefs ; but flie changes into ? vice, when ilie overcomes the purpofes of ftronger virtue. Sterner principles now nerved the breaft of Üibert againft her influence, and impelled him on to deeds of arms. He fummoned a few of the moft able and trufty of the clan, and
( " ) and held a council of war; in which ίε was refolved that Malcolm íhould be attacked with all the force they could affemble. and with all the fpeed which the importance of the preparation would allow. To prevent fufpicion and alarm to the Baron, it was agreed it ftiould be given out, that thefe preparations were intended for affiftance to a Chief of a diftant part; that, when they fct out on the expedition, they fliould purfue, for fome time, a contrary way, but under favour of the night ihould fuddenly t hange their route, and turn upon the raille of Dunbayne. în the mean time, Alieyn was ftre¬ nuous in exciting his friends to the caufe, and fo fuccefsful in the under¬ taking, as to have collected, in a few days, a number of no inconfiderable confequence. To the warm enthufiafm of virtue, was now added a new motive of cxemori. It was no longer Amply an
( *3 ) an attachment to the caufe of juftice, which roufed him to adion ; the pride of d.ílmguiíhing himfelf in the eyes of his miftrefs, and of deferving her efteem by his zealous fervices, gave combined force to the firft impulfe of benevo¬ lence. The fweet thought of deferving her thanks operated iecretly on his foul, for he was yet ignorant of its in¬ fluence there. In this ftate he again ap¬ peared at the caftle, and told the Earl, that himfelf and his friends were ready to follow him svheneverthe fignal fhould be given. His offer was accepted vvith the warmth of kindnefs it claimed, and he was defired to hold himfelf in readinefs for the onfet, ín a few days the preparations were completed, Alieyn and his friends were fummoned, the clan afltmbled in arms, and, with the young Earl at their head, departed on their expedition. The parting between Oibert and his family may
( ? ) may be eafily conceived ; nor could all the pride of expected conqueft fup¬ prefs a figh which efcaped from Alieyn when his eyes bade adieu to Mary, who, with the Countefs, ftood on the terrace of the caftle, purfuing with achmg fight the march of her beloved brother, till diftance veiled him fiom her view ; ilie then turned into the caille, weeping, and foreboding future calamity. She endeavoured, however, to afiume an appeal ance of tranquillity, that (lie might deceive the fews of Matilda, and footh her í 01 row. Matilda whofe mind was ili on g as her heart was tender, fmce ftie couki not prevent this hazardous under¬ taking, fummoned all her fortitud v to íeíift the impreflions of fruitlefs grief, and to iearch for the good which the oc- cafion might prefent. Her effoits were not vain ; flie found it in the profpect which the enter pi í fe affoided oí honour to the memory of her mutdeied Loid, and
and of retribution on the head of the murderer. It was evening when the Earl de¬ parted from the caftle; he purfued a contrary route till night favoured his defigns, when he wheeled towards the caftle of Dunbayne. The extreme darknefs of the night aflifted their plan, which was, to fcale the walls, furpriie the centi neis, burft their way into the inner courts fword in hand, and force the murderer from his retreat. They had trod for many miles the dreary wilds, unaflifted by the leaft gleam of light, when fuddenly their ears were ftruck with the difmal note of a watch- bell, which chimed the hour of the night. Every heart beat to the found. They knew they were near the abodi of the Bai on. They halted to confuit concerning their proceedings, when it was agreed, that the Eail, with Al¬ ieyn and a chofen few, ihould proceed ? to
( ?? ) to reconnoitre the caftle, while the reft ihould remain at a fmall diftance await¬ ing the fignal of approach. The Earl and his party purfued their march with filent fteps ; they perceived a faint light, which they gueifed to proceed from the watch - tower of the caftle, and they were now almoft under its walls. They paufed a while in filence, to give breath to expectation, and to liften if any thing was ftirring. All was in¬ volved in the gloom of night, and the filence of death prevailed. They had now time to examine, as well as íhe darknefs would permit, the fitua¬ tion of the caftle, and the height of the walls j and to prepare for the affaulr. The edifice was built with Gothic mag¬ nificence upon a high and dangerous rock. Its lofty towers ftill frowned in proud fublimity, and the immenfity of the pile ftood a record of the ancient confequence of its poffeffors. The rock was furrounded by a ditch, broad, but not
í 37 ) not deep, over which were two draw- bridges, one on the north fide, the other on the eaft; they were both up, but they feparated in the centre, one half of the bridge remaining on the fide of the plains. The bridge on the north led to the grand gateway of the caftle ; that on the eaft to a fmall watch - tower : thefe were all the en¬ trances. The rock was almoft per¬ pendicular vvith the walls, which were ftrong and lofty. After furveying the fituation, they pitched upon a fpot where the rock appeared moft acceflible, and which was contiguous to the principal gate, and gave fignal to the clan. They approached in filence, and gently throw¬ ing down the bundles of faggot, which they had brought for the purpofe, into the ditch, made themfelves a bridge, over which they paffed in fafety, and prepared to afcend the heights. It had been refolved that a party, of which ? 2 AUeyn
( 28 ) Alieyn was one, fliould fcale the walls,fur- prife the centinels, and open the gates to the reft of the clan, which, with the Earl, were to remain without. Alieyn was the firft who fixed his ladder, and mounted ; he was inftantly followed by the reft of his party, and with much difficulty, and fome hazard, they gained the ram¬ parts in fafety. They traverfed a part of the platform without hearing the found oí a voice or a ftep: profound fleep feemed to bury all. A number of the party approached fome centinels who were afleep on their poft; them they feized; while AUeyn, with a few others, flew to open the neareft gate, and to let down the drawbridge. This they accomplifhed; but in the mean time the fignal of furprife was given, and inftantly the alarm-bell rang out, and the caftle refounded with the clang of arms. All was tumult and confu¬ fion. The Earl, with part of his peo¬ ple,
( *9 > píe, entered the gate; the refl were fol¬ lowing, when fuddenly the portcullis^ was dropped, the bridge drawn up, and the Earl and his people found them¬ felves iurrounded by an armed multi¬ tude, which poured in torrents from· eveiy recefs of the caille. Surprifed, but not daunted, the Eari ruíhed for¬ ward fword in hand, and fought with' a defperate valour* The foul of AUeyn feemed to acquire new vigour from the conflict ; he fought like a man panting for honour and certain of victory ;' wherever he rufhed > conqueft flew before him. He, with the Earl, forced his way into the inner covins in fearch of the Baron, and hoped to have fatisfied a juft revenge, and to have concluded the conflict with the death of the murderer; but the moment in which they entered the courts, the gates were clofed upon them ; they were environed by a band of guards ; and after a fliorc ? 3 refift-
( 30 ) lefiftance, in which AUeyn received a flight wound, they were feized as pri· ioners of war. The flaughter without was great and dreadful ; the people of the Baron, infpired with fury, were infatiate for death; many were killed in the courts, and on the platform; many, İn attempting to efcape, vvere thrown from the ramparts; and many were deftroyed by the fudden railing of the bridge. A fmall part, only, of the brave and adventurous band who had engaged in the caufeof juftice, and who were driven back from the walls, furvived to carry the dreadful tidings to the Countefs· The fate of the Earl remained unknown. The confternation among the friends of the flain is not to be defcribed, and it was heightened by the unaccountable manner in which the vidory had been obtained ; for it was well known that Malcolm had never, but when war made it neceflary, more foldiers
( 31 ) foldiers in his garrifon than feudal pomp demanded ; yet on this occafion, a number of armed men ruftied from the receffes of his caftle, fufficient to overpower the force of a whole clan. But they knew not the fecret means of intelligence which the Baron poflefled ; the jealoufy of confeience had armed him with apprehenfion for his fafety ; and for fome years he had planted fpies near the caftle of Athlin, to obferve all that pafled within it, and to give him immediate intelligence of every warlike preparation. A tranfadion fo ftriking, and fo public, as that which had oc¬ curred on the day of the feftival, when the whole people fwore to avenge the murder of their Chief, it was not pro¬ bable would efcape the vigilant eye of his mercenaries : the incident had been communicated to him with all the aggravations of fear and wonder, and had given him the fignal for defence. ? 4 * The
( ν ) The accounts fent him of the military preparations which were forming, con¬ vinced him that this defence would foon be called for ; and, laughing at the idle tales which were told him of diftant wars, he haftened to ftore his garrifon with arms and vvith men, and held him¬ felf in readinefs to receive the affailants. The Baron had conduded his plans with all that power of contrivance which the fecrecy of the bufinefs demanded ·, and it was his defign to fuffer the enemy to mount his walls, and to put them to the fword, when the purpofe of this deep - laid ftratagem had been nearly defeated by the drowfinefs of the cen¬ tinels who vvere pofted to give fignal of their approach. The fortitude of Matilda fainted under the preifure of fo heavy a cala¬ mity; flie was attacked with a violent illnefs, which had nearly terminated her
( 33 ) her forrows and her life, and had ren¬ dered unavailing all the tender cares of her daughter. Thefe tender cares, how¬ ever, were not ineffedual ; ihe revived, and they aflifted to fupport her in the fevere hours of afflidion, which the unknown fate of the Earl occafioned. Mary, vvho felt all the horrors of the late event, was ill qualified for the poft of a comforter ; but her generous hearr, fufceptible of the deep fufferings of Matilda, almoft forgot its own dif¬ trefs in the remembrance of her mo¬ ther's. Yec the idea of her brother,, furrounded with the horrors of im¬ prifonment and death, would often obtrude itfelf on her imagination, with an emphafis which almoft over¬ came her reafon. She had aîfo a ftrong degree of pity for the fate of the brave young Highlander vvho had aiîlfted, with a difintereftednefs fo no¬ ble, in the caufe of her houfe; flie ? 5 wiihed
( 34 ) wiíhed to learn his further deftiny, and her heart often melted in compaifion at the pidure which her fancy drew of his fufferings.
CHAP-
( İS ) CHAPTER ΠΙ. χ HE Earl, after being loaded with fetters, was conducted to the chief pri¬ fon of the caftle, and left alone to the bitter reflections of defeat and uncertain deftiny ; but misfortune, though it might fhake, could not overcome his firmnefs; and hope had not yet entirely forfaken him. It is the peculiar attribute of great minds, to bear up with increaf¬ ing force againft the fhock of misfor¬ tune; vvith them the nerves of refiftance ftrengthen with attack; and they may be laid to fubdue adverfity with her own weapons. Reflection, at length, afforded him time to examine his prifon : it was a fquare room, which formed the fummit of a tower built on the^eaft fide ofthe caftle, round which the bleak winds ? 6 howled
( ?? ) howled mournfully; the infide of the apartment was old, and falling to decay : a fmall mattrafs, which lay in one corner ofthe room, a broken matted chair, and a tottering table, compofed its furniture \ two fmall and ftrongly grated windows, which admitted a fufficient degree of light and air, afforded him on one fide a view into an inner court, and on the other a dreary profped of the wild and barren Highlands. Alieyn was conveyed through dark and winding paifages to a diftant part of the caftle, where at length a fmall door, barred with iron, opened, and difclofed to him an abode, whence light and hope were equally excluded. He fhuddered as he entered, and the door was clofed upon him. The mind of the Baron in the mean time was agitated vvith all the direful paffions of hate, revenge, and exulting pride.
( 37 ï pride. He racked imagination for the- invention of tortures equal to the force of his feelings; and he at length difco¬ vered that the fufferings of fuipenfe are fuperior to thofe of the rnoft terrible evils, when once afcertained, of which the contemplation gradually affords to ftrong minds the means of endurance. He de¬ termined, therefore, that the Earl fhould remain confined in the tower, ignorant of his future deftiny ; and in the meant while fhould be allowed food only fufiU cient to keep him fenfible ofhis wretch* ednefs. Oibert was immerfed in thought, when he heard the door ofhis prifon unbarred, and the Baron Malcolm ftood before him. The heart of Oibert fwelled high with indignation, and defiance flaihed in his eyes. " I am come," faid the infulting vidor, " to welcome the Earl of Athlin to my caftle ; and to ihow that I can re¬ ceive my friends vvith the hofpitality they deferve i
( ?? ) deferve ; but 1 am yet undetermined what kind of feftival I ihall beftow on his arrival." " Weak tyrant/' returned Oibert, his countenance impreifed with the firm dig¬ nity of virtue, " to infult the vanquiihed, is congenial to the cruel mean nefs ofthe murderer ; nor do í exped, that the man who flew the father will fpare the fon ; but know, that fon is nerved againft your wrath, and welcomes all that your fears or your cruelty can impofe." " Rafli youth," replied the Baron, €i your words are air ; they fade from fenfe, and foon your boafted ftrength ihall fink beneath my power. I go to meditate your deftiny." With thefe words he quitted the prifon, enraged at the unbending virtue ofthe Earl. The light of the Baron roufed in the foul of Oibert all thofe oppofite emo. tions
( 39 ) tions of furious indignation and tender pity, which the glowing image of his father could excite, and produced a moment of perfed mifery. The dread¬ ful energy of thefe fenfations exafpe¬ rated his brain almoft to madnefs ; the cool fortitude in which he had fo lately gloried, difappeared ; and he was on the point of refigning his virtue and his life, by means of *a ftiort dagger, which he wore concealed under his veft, when the foft notes of a lute furprifed his at¬ tention. It was accompanied by a voice fo enchantingly tender and melodious, that its founds fell on the heart of Oibeit, in balmy comfort : it feemed fent by Heaven to arreft his fate :— the ftorm of paflion was hulhed within him, and he diffolved in kind tears of pity %nd contrition. The mournful ten¬ dernefs of the air declared the perfon from whom it came to be a fufferer; and Oibert fufpeded it to proceed from a prifoner like himfelf. The mufic Ä CCafcd :
( 40 ) ceafed : abforbed in wonder, he went ti> the grates, in queft of the fweet mufi- cian ? but no one was to be feen ; and lie was uncertain whether the founds arofe from within or from without the caftle. Of the guard, who brought him his fmall allowance of food, he in^r quired concerning what he had heard ; but from him he could not obtain the information he fought, and he was con¬ ftrained to remain in a ftate of fuf¬ penfe. ín the mean time the caftle of Atrw lin, and its neighbourhood, was over¬ whelmed with diftiefs. The news ofthe Eatl's imprifonment at length reached the ears of the Countefs, and hope once more illumined her mind. She imme¬ diately fent offers of immenfe ranfom to the Bátron, for the reftoration of her fon, and the other prifoners; but the ferocity of his nature difdained an in* complete triumph. Revenge fubdued ι his
( 41 ) his avarice; and the offers vvere rejected with the fpurn of contempt. An addi¬ tional motive, however, opciated in his mind, and confirmed his purpofe. The beauty of Mary had been often reported to him in terms which excited his cu¬ riofity; and an accidental view he once obtained of her, raifed a paffion in his foul, which the turbulence of his cha¬ racter would not fuffer to be extin¬ guiihed. Various were the fchemes he had projected to obtain her, none of which had ever been executed : the poifeffion of the Earl was a circum¬ ftance the moft favourable to his wiflies; and he refolved to obtain Mary, as the future ranfom of her brother. He con¬ cealed, for the prefent, his purpofe, that the tortures of anxiety and defpair might operate on the mind of the Coun-' tefs, to grant h m an eafy confent to rhe exchange, and to refign the victim the wife of her enemy· The
( 42 ) The fmall remains ofthe clan, unfub¬ dued by misfortune, were eager to aflem¬ ble; and, hazardous as was the enter¬ prife, to attempt the refcue of their Chief. The hope which this undertak¬ ing afforded, once more revived the Countefs; bur, alas! a new fource of forrow was now opened for her: the health of Mary vifibly declined; ihe was filent and penfive ; her tender frame was but too fufceptible of the fufferings of her mind; and thefe fufferings were heightened by concealment. She was ordered amufement and gentle exercife, as the beft reftoratives of peace and health. One day, as íhe was feeking on horfeback thefe loft treafures, ihe was tempted, by the fmenefs of the evening, to prolong her ride beyond its ufual limits; the fun was declining when ihe entered a wood, whofe awful glooms fo well accorded with the penfive tone of her mind. The foft ferenity cf evening, and
( 43 ) and the ftill folemnity of the fcene, con¬ fpired to lull her mind imo a pleafing forgetfulnefs of its troubles; from which (he was, ere long, awakened, by the approaching found of horfes' feet. The thicknefs ofthe foliage limited her view; but looking onward, ihe thought fne perceived, through the trees, a glittering of arms : íhe turned her palfrey, and fought the entrance of the wood. The clattering of hoofs advanced in the breeze; her heart mifgave her, and flie quickened her pace. Her fears were foon juftified; ihe looked back, and beheld three horfemen, armed and dif» guifed, advancing with the fpeed of purfuit. Almoft fainting, flie flew on the wings of terror; all her efforts were vain; the villains came up; one feized her, horfe, the others fell upon her two attendants: a ftout fcuffle enfued, but the ftrength of her fervants foon yielded to the weapons of their adverfaries ; they were brought to the ground, draggecf intu
( 44 ) into the wood, and there left bound to the trees. In the mean time, Mary, who· had fainted in the arms ofthe villain vvho feized her, was borne away through the intricate mazes of the woods; and her terrors may be eafily imagined, when ihe revived, and found herfelf in the hands of unknown men. Her dreadful fcreams,, hertears, herfupplicatfons, were ineffec¬ tual; the wretches were deaf alike to pity and to inquiry ; they preferved an inflexible filence, and ihe faw herfelf conveying towards the mouth ofa horri¬ ble cavern, when defpair feized her mind, and ihe loft all figns of exiftence : in this· ftate (lie remained fome time; but it is impoffible to defcribe her fituation, when ihe unclofed her eyes, and beheld Al¬ ieyn, who was watching with the moft trembling anxiety her return to life, and whofe eyes, on feeing her revive, fwam in joy and tendernefs. Wonder, fearful joy, and the various fliades of' süngled' emotions, paffed in quick fue» ceífion.
( 45 ) celïion over her countenance: her fur¬ prife was increafed, when flie obferved her own fervants ftanding by, and could difcover no one but friends. She fcarcely dared to truft her fenfes ; but the voice of AUeyn, tremulous with tendernefs, diflolved in a moment the illufions of fear, and confirmed her in thè fur¬ prifing reality. When flie was fuffi¬ cientiy recovered, they quitted this fcene of gloom ; they travelled on in a flow pace, and the ftiades of night were fallen long before they reached the caftle: there diftrefs and confuiion ap¬ peared. The Countefs, alarmed with the moft dreadful apprehenfions, had difpatched her fervants various ways in fearch of her child, and her tranfports, on again beholding her in fafety, pre¬ vented her obferving immediately, that it was AUeyn vvho accompanied her. Joy, however, foon yielded to its equal wonder, when the perceived him, and in the tumult of contending emotions ihe
( 46 ) íhe fearce knew which firft to interro¬ gate. When ihe had been told the efcape of her daughter, and by whom effeded, íhe prepared to hear with im¬ patient folicitude, news of her beloved fon, and lhe means by which the brave young Highlander had eluded the vigi¬ lance of the Baron. Of the Earl, Al¬ ieyn could only inform the Countefs, that he was taken prifoner with himfelf, within the walls of the fortrefs, as they fought fide by fide; that he was con¬ duded, unwounded, to a tower, fituated on the eaft angle of the caftle, where he was ftill confined. Himfelf had been imprifoned in a diftant part of the pile, and had been able to colled no other particulars of the Earls fituation, than thofe he had related. Of himfelf, he gave a brief relation of the following circumftances ; After having lain fome weeks in tiie horrible dungeon allotted him, his mind involved
{ 47 ) involved in the gloom of defpair, and filled with the momentary expedation of death, defperation furniihed him with invention, and he concerted the fol¬ lowing plan of efcape :—He had ob¬ ferved, that the guard who brought him his allowance of food, on quitting the dungeon, conftantly founded his fpear againft the pavement near the en¬ trance. This circumftance excitsd his furprife and curiofity. A ray of hope beamed through the gloom of his dun¬ geon. He examined the fpot as well as the obfcurity of the place would per¬ mit : it was paved with flag ftones, like the other parts of the cell, and the paving was every where equally firm. He however became certain, that fome means of efcape were concealed beneath that part, for the guard was confiant in examining it, by ftriking that fpot, and treading more firmly on it ; and this he endeavoured to do without being ob¬ ferved. One day, immediately after the
( 48 ) the departure of the guard, AUeyn fet himfelf to unfaften the pavement ; this, with much patience and induftry, he effected, by means of a fmall knife which had efcaped the fearch of the foldiers. He found the earth beneath hard, and without any fymptoms of being lately difturbed ; but after digging a few feet, he arrived at a trap-door : he trembled with eagernefs. It was now almoil night, and he was overcome with wearinefs; he doubted whether he fhould be able to penetrate through the door, and what other obftrucYions were behind it, before the next day. He therefore threw the earth again into the hole, and endea¬ voured to clofe the pavement ; with much difficulty, he trod the earth into the opening, but the pavement he was unable exactly to replace. It was too dark to examine the ftones; and he found, that even if he fliould be able to make them fit, the pavement could not be made firm. His mind and body were
? 49 ) were now overcome, and he threw him¬ felf on the ground in an agony of de¬ fpair. It wasXmidnight, when the return of his ftrengthVnd fpirits produced ano¬ ther effort. Hè tore the earth up with hafty violence, cut round the lock of the trap-door, and raifing it, unwilling to hefitate or confider, fprung through the aperture. The vault was of con¬ fiderable depth, and he was thrown down by the violence of the fall: an hollow echo, which feemed to murmur at a diftance, convinced him that the place was of confiderable extent. He had no light to dired him, and was therefore obliged to walk with his arms extended, in filent and fearful examina¬ tion. After having wandered through the void a confiderable time, he came to a wall, along which he groped with an;tious care ; it conducted him onward for a length of way ; it turned ; he followed, and his hand touched the cold iron-work of a barred window. i> He
( 50 ) He felt the gentle undulation of the air upon his face; and to him who had been fo long confined among the damp va¬ pours of a dungeon, this was a moment of luxury. The air gave him ftrength ; and the means of efcape, which now feemed prefented to him, renewed his courage. He fet his foot againft the wall, and grafping a bar with his hand, found it gradually yield to his ftrength, and, by fucceilive efforts, he entirely dis¬ placed it. He attempted another, but it was more firmly ñxed, and every effort to Ioofen it was ineifeduai; he found that it was faftened in a large ftone of the wail, and that to remove this ftone was his only means of dif- placing the bar; he fet himfelf there¬ fore again to work with his knife, and, with much patience, loofened the mor¬ tar fufficientiy to effed his purpofe*-— After fome hours (for the darknefs made his labour tedious, and fometimes inef¬ fedual), he had removed feveral of the bars.
( ? ) bars, and had made an opening almoft fufficient to permit his efcape, when the dawn of light appeared ; he now dif¬ covered, with inexpreflible anguiih, that the grate opened into an inner court of the caftle, and even while he hefitated, he could perceive foldiers defcending flowly into the court, from the narrow ftaircafes which led to their apartments. His heart fickened it the fight. He refted againft the ill in a paufe of defpair, and was on the point of fpring¬ ing into the court, to make a defperate effort at efcape, or die in the attempt, when he perceived, by the increafing light which fell acrofs the vault, a mafly door in the oppofite wall; he ran to¬ wards it, and endeavoured to open it ; ic was faftened by a lock and feveral bolts. He ftruck againft it with his foot, and the hollow found which was returned, convinced him that there were vaults beyond ; and by the diredion of thefe d 2 vaults*
? 52 ) vaults, he was certain that they muft ex¬ tend to the outer walls of the caftie : if he could gain thefe vaults, and penetrate beyond them in the darknefs of the en¬ fuing night, it would be eafy to leap the wall, and crofs the ditch; but it was impoífible to cut away the lock, before the return of his guard, who regularly vifited the cell foon after the dawn of day. After forne confideration, there¬ fore, he determined to fecrete himfelf İn a dark part of the vault, and there await the entrance of the guard, who, on ob¬ ferving the deranged bars of the grate, would conclude that he had efcaped through the aperture. He had fcarcely placed himfelf according to his plan, when he heard the door of the dungeon unbolted ; this was inftantly followed by a loud voice, which founded down the opening, and * 6 AHeyn" was ihouted in a tone of fright and confternation. After repeating the call, a man jumped into the
? 53 ) rhe vault. Alieyn, though himfelf con¬ cealed in darknefs, could perceive, by the faint light which fell upon the fpot, a foldier with a drawn fword in his hand. He approached the grate with execra¬ tions, examined it, and proceeded to the door; it was faft: he returned to the grate, and then proceeded along the walls, tracing them with the point ofhis fword. He at length approached the fpot where Alieyn was concealed, who felt the fword ftrike upon his arm, and inftantly grafpirig the hand which held it, the weapon fell to the ground. A ftiort fcuffle enfued; Alieyn threw down his adverfary, and ftanding over him, feized the fword, and prefented it to his breaft. The foldier called for mercy. AUeyn,, al¬ ways unwilling to take the life of another, and confidering that if the foldier was ilain, his comrades would certainly follow to the vault, returned him his fword. " Take your life," faid he ; " your death can avail me nothing;—take it; and if d j you
( 54 ) you can, go tell Malcolm, that an inno¬ cent man has endeavoured to efcape de¬ ftruction." The guard, ftruck with his conduct,arofe from the ground in filence; he received his fword, and followed Al¬ ieyn to the trap-door. They returned into the dungeon, where Alieyn was once more left alone. The foldier, un¬ determined how to act, went to find his comrades : on the way he met Malcolm, who, ever reftlefs and vigilant, fre¬ quently walked the ramparts at an early hour. He inquired, if all was well. The foldier, fearful of difcovery, and unaccuftomed to diflemble, hefitated at tlie queftion; and the ftern air aflumed by Malcolm compelled him to relate v. hat had happened. The Baron, with much harihnefs, reprobated his neglect, and immediately followed him |to the dungeon, where he loaded Alieyn wkh infult. He examined the cell, defcended into the vault, and returning to the dun¬ geon, ftood by, while a chain, which had been
( SS ) been fetched from a diftant part of the caftle, was fixed into the wall : to this Alieyn was faftened. " We will not long confine you thus," faid Malcolm, as he quitted the cell \ " a few days ftiall reftore you to the liberty you are fo fond of; but as a conqueror ought to have fpeciators of his triumph, you muft wait till a number is collected fuffi¬ cient to witnefs the death of fo great an hero."— <tf I difdain your infults," re¬ turned Alieyn, i( and am equally able to,fupport misfortune, and to defpife a tyrant." Malcolm retired, enraged at the bold nefs of his prifoner, and utter¬ ing menaces on the careleflhefs of the guard, who vainly endeavoured to juf¬ tify himfelf. " Ilis fafety be upon your head," feid the Baron, The foldier was fhocked, and turned away in fulien filence. Dread of his prifoner's effect¬ ing an efcape, now feized his mind ; the words of Malcolm filled him with refentment, while gratitude towards AU » 4 leyn,
( 5* ) leyn, for the life he had fpared, operated vvith thefe fentiments; and he hefitated whether he íhould obey the Baron, or deliver Alieyn, and fly his oppreifor. At noon, he carried him his cuftomary food ; Alieyn was not fo loft in mifery, but that he obferved the gloom which * hung upon his features ; his heart fore¬ boded impending evil : the foldier bore on his tongue 'he fentence of death. He told Alieyn, that the Baron had appointed the following day for his execution; and his people were ordered to attend. Death, however long con¬ templated, muft be dreadful when it arrives: this was no more than what Alieyn had expected, and on what he had brought his mind to gaze without terror; but his fortitude now funk be¬ fore its immediate prefence, and every nerve of his frame thrilled with agony. " Be comforted," faid the foldier, in a tone of pity; " I, too, ? no ftranger to mifery; and if you are willing to riik
( 57 ) rifk the danger of double torture, I will attempt to releafe both you and myfelf from the hands of a tyrant." At thefe words, Alieyn ftarted from the ground in a tranfport of delightful wonder: " Tell me not of torture," cried he; " ail tortures are equal, if death is the end, and from death I may now efcape; lead me but beyond thefe walls, and the fmall poifeffions í have fliall be yours for ever." — te I want them not," replied the generous foldier; "it is enough for me, that 1 fave a fellow-creature from deftruciion." Thefe words overpowered the heart of Alieyn, and tears of gratitude fwelled in his eyes. Edric told him, that the door he had fcen in the vault below opened into a chain of vaults which ftretched beyond the wall cf the caftle, and communicated with a fubterraneous way, anciently formed as a retreat from the fortrefs, and which terminated in the cavern of a foreft at fome diftance. ? ς If
( 58 ) . If this door could be opened, their efcape was almoft certain. They con¬ fulted on the meaiures neceflary to be taken. The foldier gave Alieyn a knife larger than the one he had, and di¬ rected him to cut round the lock, which was all that withheld their paf¬ fage. Edric's oiBce of centinél was propitious to their fcheme, and it was agreed, that at midnight they fliould defcend the vaults. Edric, after hav¬ ing unfaftened the chain, left the cell, and AUeyn fet himfelf again to remove the pavement, which had been already replaced by order of the Baron. The near profpect of deliverance now glad¬ dened his fpints ; his knife was better formed for his purpofe; and he wot ked vvith alacrity and eafe. He an ived at the trap-door, and once more leaped into the ^nulí. He applied himfelf to the lock or the door, which was extremely thick, and it was with difficulty he fepa¬ rated them; with trembling hands he undrew
( 59 ) und re vv the bolts: the door unclofed, and' difcovered to him the vaults. It was evening when he finiilied his work. He was but juft returned to the dun¬ geon, and had thrown himfelf on the ground to reft, when the found of a diftant ftep caught his ear; he liftened to its advance vvith trembling eagernefs. At length die door was unbolted ; Al¬ ieyn, breathlefs with expectation, flarted up, and beheld not his foldier, but ano* ther: rhe opening was again difcovered, and all was now over. Tlie foldier brought a pitcher of water, and cafting round the place a look of fullen fcrutiny, departed in filence. The ftretch of hu¬ man endurance was now exceeded, and AUeyn funk down in a fiate of torpidity. On recovering, he found himfelf again enveloped in the horrors of dark-iefs, filence, and defpair. Yet amid all his fufferings, he dildaned to doubt the integrity of his foldier : we naturally re¬ coil from painful fenfations, and İt is r> ó one
(6ο.) one of the moft exquifite tortures of a noble mind to doubt the fincerity of thofe in whom it has confided. AUeyn concluded, that the converfation of the morning had been overheard, and that this guard had been fent to examine the cell, and to watch his movements. He believed that Edric was now, by his own generofity, involved in deftruction ; and in the energy of this thought he forgot for a moment his own fituation. Midnight came, but Edric did not appear : his doubts were now con¬ firmed into certainty, and he refigned himfelf to the horrid tranquillity of mute defpair. He heard from a dif¬ tance the clock of the caftle ftrike one : it feemed to found the knell of death ; it roufed his benumbed fenfes, and he rofe from the ground in an agony of acuteft recolleciion. Suddenly he heard the fteps of two perfons advancing down the avenue ; he ftarted, and lif¬ tened.
( 6i ) tened. Malcolm and murder arofe to his mind ; he doubted not that the fol¬ dier had reported what he had feen in the evening, and that the perfons whom he now heard were coming to execute the final orders of the Baron. They now drew near the dungeon, when fud¬ denly he remembered the door in the s vault. His fenfes had been fo ftunned by the appearance of the ftranger, and his mind fo occupied with a feeling of defpair, as to exclude every idea of efcape; and in the energy of his fuffer¬ ings he had forgot this laft refource; it now flafhed like lightning upon his mind ; he fprung to the trap-door, and his feet had fcarcely touched the bot¬ tom of the vault, when he heard the bolts of the dungeon undraw : he had juft reached the entrance of the inner vault, when a voice founded from above; he paufed, and knew it to be Edric's : apprehenfion fo entirely poffeffed his mind, that he hefitated whether he ihould
( 6* ) íhould difcover himfelf; but a moment of recolledion diffipated every ignoble fufpicion of Edric's fidelity, and he an¬ fwered the call. Immediately Edric defcended, followed by the foldier whofe former appearance had filled Al¬ ieyn vvith defpair, and whom Edric now introduced as his faithful friend and comrade, vvho, like himfelf, was weary of the oppreffion of Malcolm, and vvho had refolved to fiy with them, and efcape his rigour. This was a moment of happinefs too great for thought! AUeyn, in the confufion of his joy, and in his impatience to feize the mo¬ ment of deliverance, fcarcely heard the words of Edric. Edric having returned to faiten the door of the dungeon, to delay purfuit, and given Alieyn a fword which he had brought for him, led the way through the vaults. The profound filence of the place was interrupted only by the echoes of their footfteps, which running through the dreary chafms
( 63 ) chafms in confufed whifperings, filled their imaginations vvith terror. In tra- verfing thefe gloomy and defolate re¬ ceffes, they often paufed to liften, and often did their fears give them the dif¬ tant founds of purfuit. On quitting the vaults, they entered an avenue, winding, and of confiderable length, from whence branched feveral paffages into the rock ; it was clofed by a low and narrow door, which opened upon a flight of fteps, that ied to the fubterra¬ neous way under the ditch of the caftle. Edric knew the intricacies of the place : they entered, and clufing the door, be¬ gan to defceiid, when the lamp which Edric carried in his hand was blown out by the current of the wind, and they were left in total darknefs. Their feelings may be more eafily imagined than expreffed ; they had, however, no way but to proceed, and grope with cautious fteps the dark abyfs. Having continued to defcend for fome time, their
( «4 ) their feèt 'reached the bottom, and they found themfelves once more on even ground; but Edric knew they had yet another flight to encounter, before they could gain the fubterraneous paffage under the foffe, and for which it re¬ quired their utmoft caution to fearch. They were proceeding vvith flow and wary fteps, when the foot of AUeyn ftumbled upon fomething which clat¬ tered like broken armour, and endea¬ vouring to throw it from him, he felt the weight refift his effort: he ftooped to difcover what it was, and found in his grafp the cold hand of a dead per¬ fon. Every nerve thrilled with horror at the touch, and he ftarted back in an agony of terror. * They remained for fome time irt filent difmay, unable to return, yet fearful to proceed, when a faint light which feemed to iffue from the bottom of the laft defcent, gleamed upon the walls, and difcovered to them fbe fecond ftaircafe, and at their feet · the
( 6 S ) the pale and disfigured corpfe of a man in armour, while at a diftance they could diftinguifli the figures of men. At this fight their hearts died within them, and they gave themfelves up for loft. They doubted not but the men whom they faw were the murderers; that they belonged to the Baron; and were in fearch of fome fugitives from the caftle. Their only chance of con¬ cealment was to remain where they were; but the lighi appeared to ad¬ vance, and the faces of the men to turn towards them. Winged with terror, they fought the firft afcent, and flying up the fteps, reached the door, which they endeavoured to open, that they might hide themfelves from purfuit among the intricacies of the rock : their efforts, however, were vain; for the door was faftened by a fpring lock, and the key was on the other fide. Com¬ pelled to give breath to their fears, they ventured to look back, and found them¬ felves
( 66 ) felvés again in total darknefs; they paufed upon the fteps, and liftening, all was filent. They refted here a confi¬ derable time; no footfteps ftartled them; no ray of light darted through the gloom; every thing feemed hulhed in the filence of death t- they refolved once more to venture forward ; they gained again the bottom of the firft dé¬ firent, and íhuddering as they ap¬ proached the fpot where they knew the corpfe was iaid<, they groped to avoid ks horrid touch, when- fuddenly the light again appeared, and in the fame place where they had firft feen it. They ftood petrified with deipair. The light, however, moved ilowly onward, and difappeared in the windings of the ave¬ nue. After remaining a long time in filent fufpenfe, and finding no fui ther obftacle, they ventured to proceed. The hcriit had difcovered to them their fitu- auon, and the ftaircafe; and they now moved with greater certainty. They reached
( 6 7 ) reached the bottom İn fafety, and with¬ out any fearful interruption; they lif¬ tened, and again the filence of the place was undifturbed. Edric knew they were now under the fofle, their way was plain before them, and their hopes were renewed in the belief that the light and the people they had fcen, had taken a different direction, Ed¬ ric knowing there were various paf- faoes branching from the main avenue which led to different openings in the rock. They now ftepped on with ala¬ crity; the profped oi deliverance was near, for Edric judged they were now not far from the cavern ; an abrupt turning in the paffage confirmed at once this fuppofition, and extinguiflied the hope which had attended ? ; for the light of a lamp burft fuddenly upon them, and exhibited to their fickemti£ eyes, the figures of four men in an aui- tude of menace, vvith their í word* pointed ready to receive them. Alley ? drew
( 68 ) drew his fword, and advanced : " We will die hardly," cried he. At the found of his voice, the weapons inftantly dropped from the hands of his adverfa- ries, and they advanced to meet him in a tranfport of joy. Alieyn recognifed with aftonifliment, in the faces of the three ftrangers, his faithful friends and followers; and Edric in that of the fourth, a feUow-foldier. The fame pur¬ pofe had affembìed them all in the fame fpot. They quitted the cave together ; and Alieyn, in the joyful experience of unexpeded deliverance, refolved never more to admit defpair. They con¬ cluded, that the body which they had paffed in the avenue, was hat of fome perfon who had periihed either by hun¬ ger or by the fword in thofe fubterranean labyrinths. They marched in company till they came within a few miles of the caftIe,of Athlin, when AUeyn made known his defign
C 6 9 ) defign of colleding his friends, and joining the clan in an attempt to re¬ leafe the Earl: Edric, and the other foldier, having folemnly inlifted in the caufe, they parted; Alieyn and Edric purfuing the road to the caftle, and the others ftriking off to a different part of the country«, AUeyn and Edric had not proceeded far, when the groans of the wounded fervants of Matilda drew them to the wood, in which the preceding dreadful fcene had been aded. The furprife of Alieyn was extreme, when he difcovered the fervants of the Earl in this fituation ; but furprife foon yielded to a more poignant feníation, when he heard that Mary had been car¬ ried off by armed men. He fcarcely waited to releafe the fervants, but feiz¬ ing one of their horfes which was graz¬ ing near, inftantly mounted, ordering the reft to follow, and took the way which had been pointed out as the courfe of the raviuiers. Fortüftateíy it was the 4 right
( 7° ) right direction; and Alieyn and the foldier came up with them as they were haftening to the mouth of that cavern, whofe frightful afpect had chilled the heart of Mary with a temporary death. Their endeavours to fly were vain; they were overtaken at the entrance ; a fliarp conflict enfued, in which one of the ruffians was wounded, and fled ; his com¬ rades, feeing the fervants of the Earl ap¬ proaching, relinquiihed their prize, and efcaped through the receffes of the cave. The eyes of Alieyn were now fixed in horror on the lifelefs form of Mary, who had remained infenfible during the whole of the affray; he was exerting every effort for her recovery, when flie unclofed her eyes, and joy once more illumined his foul. During the recital of thefe particu¬ lars, which Alieyn delivered with a mo¬ deft brevity, the mind of Mary had fuf- iered a variety of emotions iympathetic to
( 7' ì to all the viciffitudes of his fituation. She endeavoured to conceal from herfelf the particular intereft flie felt in his ad¬ ventures; bqt fo unequal were her ef¬ forts to the 'ftrength of her emotions, that when AUeyn related the fcene of Dunbayne cavern, her cheek grew pale, and ihe relapfed into a fainting fit. This circumftance alarmed the penetra¬ tion of the Countefs; but the known weaknefs of her daughter's frame ap¬ peared a probable caufe of the diforder, and repreifcd her firft apprehenfion. Ir gave to Alieyn a mixed delight of hope and fear, fuch as he had never known before; for the firft time he dared to acknowledge to his own heart that he loved, and thac heart for the firft time thrilled with the hope of being loved again. He received from the Countefs, the warm overflowings of a heart grateful for the prefervation of its child, and ι from
( 7» ) from Mary a bluíh which fpoke more dian her tongue could utter. But the minds of all were involved in the ut¬ moft perplexity concerning the rank and the identity of the author of the plan, nor could they difcover any clue which would lead them through this in¬ tricate maze of wonder, to the villain who had fabricated fo diabolical a fcheme. Their fufpicions, at length, refted upon the' Baron Malcolm, and this fuppofition was confirmed by the appearance of the horfemen, who evi¬ dently aded only as the agents of fupe¬ rior power. Their conjedurcs were indeed juft. Malcolm was the author of the fcheme. It had been planned, and he had given orders to his people to execute it long before the Earl fell into his hands. They had, however, founà no opportunity of accompliihing the defign when the caftle was furprifed, and in the confequent tumult of his mind,
( 73 ) mind, the Baron had forgot to withdraw his orders. Alieyn expreffed his defign of col¬ lecting the fmall remnant of his friends, and uniting wkh the clan in attempting the refcue of the Earh " Noble youth,** exclaimed the Countefs, unable longer to reprefs her admiration, * c how can I ever repay your generous fervices ! Am I then to receive both my childreu at your hands ? Go—my clan are now col¬ lecting for a fecond attempt upon the walls of Dunbayne,—go ! lead them to conqueft, tnd reftore to me my fon.'" The languid eyes of Mary rekindled at thefe words; flie glowed with the hope of clafping once more to her bo¬ fom her long4oft brother ; but the fuf- fufions of hope were foon chafed by the chilly touch of fear, for it was Alieyn who was to lead the enterprife, and it was AUeyn who might fall in the at¬ tempt. Thefe contrary emotions un- E veiled
( 74 ) veiled to her at once the ftate of her affections, and íhe faw in the eye of fancy, the long train of inquietudes and forrows which were likely to enfue. She fought-to obliterate from her mind every remembrance of the paft, and of the fatal knowledge which was now tiifclofed to her ; but (he fought in vain ; for the monitor in her breaft conftantly prefented to her mind the image of Al¬ ieyn, adorned with thofe brave and manly virtues which had fo eminently diftin¬ guiihed his conduci;: the iníignifícance of the peafant was loft in the nobility of the charafter, and every effort at forget¬ fulnefs was baffled. Alieyn paffed that night at the caftle, and the next morning, after taking leave of the Countefs and her daughter, to whom his eyes bade a refpeciful and ? mournful adieu, he departed with Edric, for his father's cottage, impatient to acquaint the good old man wifh his 4 ufety,
( ?s ) fafety, and to roufe to arms his num¬ bering friends. The breath of love had now raifed into flame thofe fparks of ambition which had fo long been kindhng in his breaft ; he was not only eager to avenge the caufe of injured virtue, and to refcue from mifery and death, the fon of the Chief whom he had been ever taught to reverence, but he panted to avenge the infult offered to his miftrefs, and to achieve fome deed of valour worthy her admiration and her thanks. . Alieyn found his father at breakfaft* with his niece at his liefe; bis fece, was darkened with forrow, and he did not perceive Alieyn when he entered. The joy of the old man almoft overcame him, when he behdd his fon İn fafety, for he was the folace of his declining years; and Edric was welcomed with the heard- nefs of an old friend.
E 2
CHAP-
( 7« )
CHAPTER IV. MEANWHILE the Eari.remained a folitary prifoner in the tower; un¬ certain fate was yet fufpended over him; he had, however, a magnanimity in his nature which bafiled much of the cruel effort of the Baron. \He had ??* pared' hb mind by habitual contempla¬ tion^ for the worft; and although that worft was death, he could now look to ie e^én with feremty. Thofe violent franfßoHs which hadaíMed him on fight of the Baron, were, fince he was no longer fubjed to his prefence, re¬ duced within their proper limits; yet he anxioufly avoided dwelling on the memory of hts father, left thofe dread¬ ful fenfations İhoiiîd threaten him with returning torture. Whenever he per¬ mitted himfelf to think of the fufferings of the Countefs and his fifter, his heart melted
( 77 ) melted with 'a forrow that almoft un¬ nerved him ; much he wiflied to know how they fupported this trial, and much he wilbed that he could convey to them intelligence of his ftate. He endea¬ voured to abftrad his mind from his fituation, and fought to make himfelf artificial comforts even from the barren objeds around him : his chief amufe¬ ment was in obferving the manners and cuftoms òf the birds of prey which lodged themfelves in the battlements of his tower, and the rapacity of their na¬ ture furniihed him with too juft a parallel to the habits of men. As he was one day ftanding at the grate which looked upon the caftle, obferving the progrefs of thefe birds, his ear caught the found of that fweet lute whofe notes had once faved him from deftrudion; it was accompanied by the fame melodious voice he had formerly heard, and which row fung £ 3 . with
( 73 ) with impaffmned tendernefs the follow¬ ing air : When fir íl lhe vernal morn of lift Btantd on my infaut eye, Fond Ì fumy*«! the fouling ????, Nor ùw the tempeft nigh. Hope's bright iîîtîibîîs touched my foul, My young ideas led j Aud Fancy's vivid tints combin'd» And feiry profpeets fpread« My gui kiefs heart expanded widcj Widi filial fondnefs fraught; Paternal love that heart fupplied With ail iis fondnefs fought. But O î the cruel, quick reverfe ! Fate aì! I iov'd invoiv'd; Pale Grief Hope's iremblfog rays difpers'd, And Fancy'*» dreams diflolv'd. Loft in furprife, Ofbert ftood for forne tirøe looking down upon an inner coun, whence the founds feemed to arife ¿ after a few minutes he obfeived a lOtme
( 79 ) a young lady enter from that fide or* which the tower arofe ; on her arm refted an elder one, in whofe face might be traced the lines of decaying beauty ; but ? was vifible from the melancholy which clouded her features, that the unger of afflicìion had there anticipated the ravages of time. She was dreffed in the habit of a widow ; and the black veil which íhaded her forehead, and gave a fine expreffion to her counte¬ nance, devolved upon the ground in a length of train, and heightened the na¬ tural majefty of her figure. She moved with flow fteps, and was fupported by the young lady, whofe veil half difclofed a countenance where beauty was touched with forrow and inimitable expreflion ; the elegance of her form, and the dig¬ nity of her air, proclaimed her to be of diftinguiflied rank. On her arm was hung that lute whofe melody liad juft charmed the attention of the Earl, who was now fixed in wonder at what he ? 4 beheld»
( »? } beheld, that was equalled only by his admiration. They retired through a gate on the oppofite fide of the court, and were feen no more* Ofbert fol¬ lowed them with his eyes, which for fome time remained fixed r.pon the door through which they had difap¬ peared, almoft infenfible of their de¬ parture. When he returned to himfelf, he difcovered, as if for the firft time, that he was in folitude. He conjedured that thefe ftrangers were confined by the oppreflive power of the Baron, and' his eyes were fufllifed with tears of pity· When lie confidered that fo much beauty and dignity were the unrefifting vidims of a tyrant, his heart fwelled high with indignation, his prifon became in¬ tolerable to him, and he longed to be¬ come at once the champion of virtue, and the deliverer of oppreffed innocence. The charader of Malcolm arofe to his mind, black with accumulated guilt, md aggravated the deteftation with which
( Si ) which he had ever contemplated it : the hateful idea nerved his foul with a con* fldence of revenge. Of the guard, who entered, he inquired concerning the ftrangers, but could obtain no pofi- tive anfwer,· he came to impart other news; to prepare the Eari for death; for the morrow was appointed for his execution. He received tht intelligence with the nrm hardihood of indignant virtue, difdaining to folicit and difdain- ing to repine ; and his mind yet grafped the idea of revenge. He drove from his thoughts, with precipitation, the tender idea of his mother and fifter; remembrances which would fubdue his fortitude without efTecìing any bene ? c i al purpofe. He was told of the efcape of Alieyn : this intelligence gave him in« expreffible pleafure, and he knew this faithful youth would undertake to avenge his death. When tlie news of Aileyn*s flight had ? < reached
( bz ) reached the Baron, his foul was ftung with rage, and he called for the guards of the dungeon ; they were no where to be found ; and after a long fearch it was known that they were fled with their prifoner ; the flight of the other captives was alfo difcovered. This circumftance exafperated the paflion of Malcolm to the utmoft, and he gave orders that the life of the remaining centinél íhould be forfeited, for the treachery of his com¬ rades, and bis own negligence; when recollecting the Earl, whom in the heat ©f his refentment he had forgot, his heart exulted in the opportunity he af¬ forded of complete revenge; and in the fulnefs of joy with which he pro¬ nounced his fentence, he retracted the condemnation of the trembling guard. The moment after he bad difpatched the meflenger with his refolve to the Earl, his heart faltered from its purpofe. Such is the alternate violence of evil paffions, that they never fuffer their fubjefts
( ? ) fubjects to act with confiftency, bur, torn by conflicting energies, the gra¬ tification of one propenfity is deftruc¬ tion to the enjoyment of another; and the moment in which they imagine happinefs in their grafp, is to them the moment of difappointment. Thus it was with the Baron ; his foul feemed to attain its full enjoyment in the con¬ templation of revenge, till the idea of Mary inflamed his heart with an op¬ pofite paflion ; his wiíhes had caught new ardour from difappointment, for he had heard that Mary had been once in the power of his emiffaries; and perhaps the pain which recoils upoa the mind from every fruitlefs effort of wickednefs, ferved to increafe the ener¬ gies of his defires. He fpurned the thought of relinquiihing the purfuit; yet there appeared to be no method of obtaining its object but by facrificing his favourite paflion; for he had little doubt of obtaining Mary, when it ihould be £ 6 knoWA
( ß4 ) known that he refolved noc to grant the life of the Earl upon any other ranfom» The balance of thefe paffions hung in his mind in fuch nice equilibrium, that it was for fome time uncertain which would preponderate; revenge, at length, yielded to love; but he refolved to prcferve the torture of expected death, hy keeping the Earl ignorane of his reprieve till the iaft moment. The Earl awaited death with the fame ftern fortitude with which he received its fentence, and was led from the tower 10 the platform of the caftk, filent and unmoved. He beheld the preparations for his execution, the inftrumsnts of death, the guards arranged in files, with an eye undaunted. The glare of exter¬ náis had no longer power over his ima¬ gination. He beheld every objeft with indifference» but that on which his eye now refted î it was on the murderer, 2 who
( »s ) who exhibited himfelf in all the pride of exulting conqueft : he ftarted at the fight, and his foul flirunk back upor» itfelf. Difdaining, however, to appear difconcerted, he endeavoured to refume his dignity, when the remembrance of his mother, overwhelmed wkh forrow, rufhed upon his mind, and quite un¬ manned him; the tears ftarted in his eyes, and he funk fenfelefs on the ground. On recovering, he found himfelf in his prifon, and he was informed that the Baron had granted him a refpite. Mal¬ colm miftaking the caufe of diforder in the Earl, thought he had ftretched his fufferings to their utmoft limits; he therefore had ordered him to be recon· veyed to the tower. A fcene fo ftriking and fo public 4 as that which had juft been performed at the caftle of Dunbayne, was a fubjeci of difcourfe
( 36 ) difcourfe to the whole country ; it was foon reported to the Countefs vvith a va- riery of additional circumftances, among which it was affirmed that the Earl had been really executed. Overwhelmed with this intelligence, Matilda relapfed into her former diforder. Sicknefs had rendered Mary lefs able to fupport the ihock, and to apply that comfort to the aflhdions of her mother, which had once been fo fuccefsfully adminiftered· The phyfician pronounced the malady of the Countefs to be feated in the mind, and beyond the reach of human ikill, when one day a letter was brought to her, the fuperfcription of which was written in the hand of Oibert ; íhe knew the charaders, and burfting the feal, read that her fon vvas yet alive, and did not defpair of throwing himfelf once more at her feet. He requefted that the remains of his clan might im¬ mediately attempt his releafe. He de¬ fcribed in what part of the caftie his prifon
( 8 7 ) prifon was fituated, and thought that by the afliftance of long fcaling-ladders and ropes, contrived in the manner he di¬ reded, he might be able to effed his efcape through the grate. This letter was a reviving cordial to the Countefs and to Mary. AUeyn was indefatigable in colled- ing followers for the enterprife he had engaged in. On receiving intelligence of the fafety of the Earl, he vifited the clan, and was ftrenuous in exhorting them to immediate adion. They re¬ quired little incitement to a caufe in whtch every heart was fo much inte¬ refted, and for which every hand was already bufied in preparation. Thefe preparations were at length completed. AUeyn, at the head of his party, joined the aflembled clan. The Countefs for a fecond time beheld from the ramparts the departure of her people upon the fame hazardous enterprife; the prefent fcene
í 88 ) fcene revived in her mind a fad remem¬ brance of the paft; the fame tender fears, and the fame prayers for fuccefs (he now gave to their departure ; and when they faded in diftance from her fight, íhe returned into the Caftle dif¬ folved in tears. The heart of Mary was torn by a complex forrow; and incapable of longer concealing from herfelf the intereft fhe took in the de¬ parture of AUeyn, her agitation became more apparent. The Countefs in vain endeavoured to compofe her mind. Mary, affected by her tender concern, and prompted by the natural inge¬ nuoufnefs of her difpofition, longed to make her the confidant of her weaknefs, if weaknefs that can be termed which arifes from gratitude, and from the ad¬ miration of great and generous qualities; but delicacy and timidity arrefted the half-formed fentence, and clofed her lips in filence. Her health gradually declined under the fecret agitation of h£?
( 89 ) her mind i her phyfician knew her dif¬ order to originate in fuppreffed forrow, and advifed, as the beft cordial, a confi¬ dential friend. Matilda now perceived the caufe of her grief; her former pafling obfervations recurred to her me¬ mory, and juftified her difcernment. She ftrove by every foothing effort to win her to her confidence. Mary, oppreffed by the idea of ungenerous concealment* refolved at length to unveil her heart to a mother fo tender of her happinefs. She told her all her fentiments. The Countefs fuffered a diftrefs almoft equal to that of her daughter ; hei affedionate heart fwelled with equal withes for her happinefs; flie admired wuh wamieft gratitude the noble and afpirmg vir¬ tues of the young Highlander ; but the proud nobility of her foul repelled with quick vivacity every idea of union with a youth of fuch ignoble birth ; ihe regarded the prefent attachment as the pafling impreflion of youthful fancy» and
( 90 ) and believed that gentle reafoni ng, aided by time and endeavour, would conquer the enthufiafm of love. Mary liftened with attention to the reafonings of the Countefs; her judgment acknowle'dged their juftnefs, while her heart regretted their force. She refolved, however, to overcome an attachment which would produce fo much diftrefs to her family and to herfelf. Notwithftanding her endeavours to exclude Alieyn from her thoughts, the generous and heroic qua¬ lities of his mind burft upon her me¬ mory in all their fplendour ; ihe could not but be confeious that he loved her ; ihe faw the ftiuggles of his foul, and the delicacy of his paflion, which mado him ever retire in the moft profound and refpectful filence from its object. She folicited her mother to affift in ex¬ pelling the deftrudive image from her mind. The Countefs exerted every ef¬ fort to amufe her to forgetfulnefs ; every hour except thofe which were given to exercifes
( 91 ) exercifes neceflary for her health, was devoted to the cultivation of her mind, and the improvement of her various ac¬ compliihments. Thefe endeavours were not unfuccefsful. The Countefs with joy obferved the returning health and tran¬ quillity of her daughter ; and Mary al¬ moft believed İhe had taught herfelf to forget. Thefe engagements ferved alfo to beguile the tedious moments which muft intervene, ere news could arrive from Alieyn concerning the probable fuccefs of the enterprife. Mifery yet dwelt in the caftle of Dun¬ bayne ; for there the virtues were cap¬ tive, while the vices reigned defpotic. The mind of the Baron, ardent and reftlefs, knew no peace : torn by con¬ flicting paffions, he was himfelf the vie«» tim of dieir power. The Earl knew that his life hung up¬ on the caprice of a tyrant: his mmd waa
( 9* ) was nerved for the worft; yet the letter which the compaifion of one of his guards, at the riik of his life, had un¬ dertaken to convey to the Countefs, afforded him a faint hope that his peo¬ ple might yet effed his efcape· In this expedation, he fpent hour after hour at his grate, wiihing with trembling anxiety to behold his clan advancing over the diftant hills. Thefe hills be¬ came at length, in a fituation fo barren øf real comforts, a fource of ideal plea¬ fure to him. He was always at the grate, and often in the fine evenings of fummer, faw the ladies, whofe 'appearance had fo ftrongly excited his admiration and pity, walk on a terrace below the tower· One very fine evening, under the pleaf¬ ing impreflions of hope for himfelf, and compaflion for them, his fufferings for a time loft their acutenefs. He longed r ? awaken their fympathy, and make known to them that they had a fellow- prifoner, The parting fun trembled on
( 93 ) on the tops of the mountains, and a fofter íhade fell upon the diftant land- fcape. The fweet tranquillity of even¬ ing threw an air of tender melancholy over his mind ; his forrows for a while were huíhed ¿ and under the enthufiafm of the hour, he compofed ths following fonnet, which, having committed it to paper, he the next evening dropped upon the terrace, SONNET, Hail ! to the hallow'd hill, the circling lawi> The breezy upland, and the mountain ftream! The laft tall pine that earlieft meets the dawn, And gliftens lateft to the weftern gleam ! Hail ! every diftant hill, and downland plain ! Your dew-hid beauties Fancy oft unveils, What time to ihepherd's reed, or poet's ftrain, Sorrowing my heart its deftin'd woe bewails. Bleft are the fairy hour, the twilight iliade Of Ev'ning wand'ring through her woodlands dear; Sweet the ftili found that ftealb along the glade; 'Tis Fancy wafts it, and her votries hear. 'Tis
( 94 ) Tis Fancy wafts it !—and how fweet the found î 2 hear it now the diftant hills uplong ; While fairy echoes ftom their dells around, And woods, and wilds, the feeble notes prolong f He had the pleafure to obferve that the paper was taken up by the ladies, who immediately retired into the caftle.
CHAP
( 95 )
CHAPTER V. ? -INE morning early, the Earl difcern¬ ed a martial band emerging from the verge of the horizon; his heart welcomed his hopes, which were foon confirmed into certainty. It was his faithful people, led on by Alieyn. It was their defign to furround and attack the caftle; and though their numbers gave them but little hopes of conqueft, they yet believed that in the tumult of the engagement they might procure the deliverance of th? Earl. With this view they advanced to the walls. The centinels had defcried them at diftance ; the alarm was given ; the trumpets founded, and the walls of the caftle were filled with men· The Baron was prefent, and directed the pre¬ parations. The fecret purpofe of his foul was fixed. The clan furrounded the fofle,
( 9<5 ) foife, into which they threw bundles of faggots, and gave the fignal of attack. Scaling-ladders were thrown up to the window of the tower. The Earl, invigo¬ rated with hope and joy, had by the force ofhis arm alçioft wrenched from its fat¬ tening one ofthe iron bars ofthe grate; his foot was lifted to the ftanchion, rçady to aid him in efcaping through íhe opening, when he was feized by the guards of the Baron, and conveyed pre* cipitately from the.prifon. He was led, indignant and defperate, to the lofty ramparts of the caftle, from whence he beheld ????? Rod his clan, whofe eager eyes were once more blefled with the fight pf their Chief ;^they ι were blefled but for % motìaent; they beheld their kord in chains, fumounded with guards, And with the inftrurnentsiBÏ death. ' Ani* røated^hørøeveir, vvith a laft hope, they renewed the attack with redoubled fury, wben the trumpets of the Baron founded α padey* ,?? ??? fufpended their arms. The
( 97 ) The Baron appeared ón the rampart's; Alieyn advanced to hear him. '* The moment of attack," cried the Baron, ** is the moment of death to your Chief. IPyou wifh to preferve his life, défift: from the affauk, and depart in peaces and bear this meffage to the Countefs, your miftrefs :—The Baron Malcolm will accept no other ranfom for the life and the liberty of the Earl, than her beauteous daughter, whom he now fues to become his wife. If flie accedes to thefe terrhš, the Earl is inftantly libe- ratea, —if íhe refufes—he dies." The emotions of the Earl, and of Alieyn, oa hearing thefe words, were inexpreflible. The Earl fpurned, with haughty virtue, tne bafe conceflîon. <t Give me death,'* cried he with loud impatience; u the houfe of Athlin ihall not be diíhonoured by alliance with a murderer : renew the attack, my brave people ; fin ce you can¬ not fave the life, revenge the death of your Chief; he dies contented, fince his f death
( 98 ) death preferves his family from dilho¬ nour." The guards inftantly furrounded the Earl, Alieyn, whofe heart, torn by con¬ tending emotions, was yet true to the impulfe of honour, on obferving this, mftantly threw down his arms, refufing to obey the commands of the Earl; a hoftage for whofe life he demanded, while he haftened to the caftle of Athlin with the conditions of the Baron. The clan, following the example of AUeyn, refted on their arms, while a few pre¬ pared to depart with him on the em- bafly» in vain were the remonftrances and the commands of the Earl ¡ his peo¬ ple loved him too well to obey them ; and his heart was filled vvith ,anguifh when he faw Alieyn depart from the »alls. The fituation of AUeyn was highly pitial/e ; all the firm virtues of his foul vveie,
( 99 ) were calkd upon to fupport it. He was commiifioned on an embafly, the alter¬ nate conditions of which, would bring deftrudion $ft the woman he adored, or death to the friend whom he loved. When the arrival of AUeyn was an¬ nounced to the Countefs, impatient joy thrilled in her bofom; for ihe had no doubt that he brought offers of accom¬ modation ; and no ranfom was prefented to her imagination, which ihe would not willingly give for the reftoration of her fon. At the found of Alleyn's ¡ voice, thofe tumults which had' begun to fubfide in the heart of Mary were again re¬ vived, and ihe awoke to the mournful certainty of hopelefs endeavour. Yec íhe could not reprefs a ftrong emotion of joy on again beholding him. The foft blufli of her cheek íhowed the colours of her mind, while in endeavouring to ftiade her feelings ftie impelled them into ftronger light. f ? The
i IOO ) The agitations of Alieyn almoft fub¬ dued his ftrength, When he entered the prefence of the Countefs í and his vt- iàge, or* which were impreflfed deep dif¬ trefs anc the palenefs of $ar> betrayed the inward workings of his foul. Ma¬ tilda wás inftantly feized with âj>pre- henfion for the fafety of her fon, and in a tremulous voice inquired his fate. Alieyn told her he was well, pro¬ ceeding with tender caution tó acquaint her With the bufinefs of his embaffy, and with the fcéne to which he had lately been witnefs. The fentence of the Baron fell И?? the ftroke of death «pon the heart of Mary, who fainted at the words. Alieyn flew to fupport her. bì endeavouring to revive her daugh¬ ter, the Countefs was diverted for a time from the anguiih which this intel¬ ligence muft naturally impart. It was long ere Mary returned to life, and ihe returned only to a fenfe of wretched¬ nefs. The critical fituation of Matilda 4 can
( 10 * ) can fcarcely be felt in its full extent* Torn by the conflid of oppofite inte- refts, her brain was the feat of tumult and wild difmay. Whichever way ihe looked, deftrudion clofed the view! The murderer of the huíband now fought îo murder the happinefs of the daugh¬ ter. On the fentence of the mother hung the final fate of the fon. In re¬ jecting thefe terms, ihe would give him inftant death; in accepting them, her condud would be repugnant to the feelings of indignant virtue, and to the tender injured memory of her mur¬ dered Lord. She would deftroy for ever the peace of her daughter, and the honour of her houfe. To effed his de¬ liverance by force of ams was utterly jmpradicable, fince the Baron had de¬ clared, that " the moment of attack íhould be the moment of death to the Eari. ;î Honour, humanity, parental tendernefs, bade her fave her fon; yet by a ftrange contrariety of interefts, the f 3 fame
( »?? ) fame virtues pleaded with a voice equally powerful, for the reverfe of the fentence. Hitherto hope had ftill illumined her mind with a diftant ray; íhe now found herfelf fuddenly evolved in the darknefs of defpair, whofe glooms were inter¬ rupted only by the gleams of horror which arofe from the altar, on which was to be facrificed one of her beloved children. Her mind fhrunk from the idea of uniting her daughter to the mur· derer of her father. The ferocious cha¬ rafter of Malcolm was alone fufficient to blight for ever the happinefs of the wo* man whofe fate íhould be connected with his. To give to the murderer the child ofthe murdered, was a thought too hor¬ rid to reft upon. The Countefs rejected with force the Baroni uffer of exchange, when the bleeding figure of her beloved fon, pale and convulfed in death, ftarted on her imagination, and ftretched her brain almoft to frenzy. Meanwhile
( >? 3 ) * Meanwhile Mary fuffered a conflict equally dreadful. Nature had beftowed on her a heart fufceptiblç of all the fine emotions of delicate paffion j a beai t which vibrated in unifon with the fweeteft feelings of humanity; a mind, quick in perceiving the niceft lines of moral rectitude, and ftrenuous in en¬ deavouring to act up to its perceptions'» Thefe gifts were unneceffary to make her fenfible of the wretchednefs of her prefent fituation, of which a common mind would have felt the mifery ; they ferved, however, to fharpen the points ôf affliction, to increafe their force, and to difclofe in ftronger light the various horrors of her fituation. Fraternal love and pity called loudly upon her to refign herfelf into the power ofthe man, whorri from the earlieft dawn of perception ihe had contemplated with trembling averfion and horror. The memory of her murdered parent, every feeling dear to virtue, the tremulous, but forceful f 4 voice
( 104 ) voice of love, awakened her heart, and each oppofed with wild impetuofity every other fentitnent. Her foul İhruntc back with terror from ¿he idea of union with the Baron. Could ihe bear to re¬ ceive in marriage that hand which was ftained vvith the blood of her father ?—*· The polluted touch would freçzç her heart in horror !—Could ihe bear to paf» her life whh the man who had for ever blafted the fmiling days of him wbp gave her being?—With the man who would ftand before her eyes a perpetual monument of mifery to herfelf, and of diíhonour to her family; whofe chilling afpeft would repel every amiable ??4 generous affection, and ftrike them back upon her heart only to wound it ? To cherub the love of the noblç virtues, would be tc cheriíh the remembrance of her dead father, and of her hying lover. How wretched muft be her fitation, when to obliterate from her memory the image of virtus, could alone afford her
( 105 ) her a chance of obtaining a horrid tran¬ quillity; virtue, which is fo dear to the human heart, that when her form for- fakes us, we purfue her íhadow. Where- ever in fearch of comfort ihe direded her aching fight, Mifery's hagard countenance obtruded on her view. Here ihe beheld herfelf entombed in the arms of the murderer ;—there, the fpec- tacle of her beloved brother, encircled with chains, and awaiting the ftroke of death, arofe so her imagination: the fcene was too affeding ; fancy gave her the horrors of reality. The refledion, that through her he fuffered, that ilie yet might fave him from deftrudion, broke with irrefiftible force upon her mind, and inftantly bore away every op- pofing feeling. * She refolved, that, fince ihe muft be wretched, fhe would be no^ bly 'wretdhedt 4înC^ l mifery » demanded one fafdíficêjí ?e wouM ? evOte» herfelf the Vidini» ^ v > ' ! '' M ' f / ?И f 5 : * : * With
i ?? ) With thefe thoughts flie entered thç apartment of the Countefs, whofe con¬ currence was neceflary to ratify her refolves, and, having declared them» awaited in trembling expectation her decifion. Matilda had fuffered a diftrac¬ tion of mind, which thç nature of no former trial had occafioned her. On the unfortunate death of a huíband ten¬ derly beloved, lhe had fuffered all the forrow which tendernefs, and all the fliock which the manner of his death could infpire. The event however, (hocking as it was, did not hang upca circumftances over which íhe had an influence; it was decided by an higher power j—it was decided, and never coukl be recalled ; (he had there no dreadfdl choice of horrors, no evil ratified by her own voice, to taint with deadly recoil left ions her declining days. This choice,, though forced upon her by the power of a tyrant, ihe would ftill confider as in parí her own ; and the thought that (he wa*
í «07 ) was compelled to doom to deftrudion one of her children, harrowed up her foul almoft to frenzy. Her mind, at length exhaufted with excefs of feeling, was now fallen into a ftate of cold and filent defpair; ihe be¬ came infenfible to the objeds around her, almoft to the fenfe of her own fufferings; and the voice, and the propofal of her daughter, fcarcely awakened her powers of perception. " He fliall live," faid Mary, in a voice broken and tender; " he íhall live, I am ready to become the facrifice." Tears prevented her pro¬ ceeding. At the word " live," the Countefs raifed her eyes, and threw* round her a look of wildnefs, which fet¬ tling on the features of Mary, foftened into an expreflion of ineffable tender¬ nefs, ihe waved her head, and turned to the window. A few tears bedewed her cheek ; they fell like the drops of hea¬ ven upon the withered plant, reviving f ? and
( tos i and expanding its dying foliage; they were the firft her eyes had known fince the fatal news had reached her. Reco¬ vering herfelf a little, İhe fent for Al- levn, vvho was ftill m the caftle. She wiihed to confuk with him whether there was not yet a poffibility of effed- ing the efcape of the Earl. în afflic¬ tions of whatever degree, where death has not already fixed the events in cer¬ tai -.y, the mind íhoots almoft beyond the fphere of poffibility in fearch of hope, and feldom relinquiihes the fond illufion, till the ftroke of reality diifolves the enchantment. Thus it was with Matilda; after the grief produced by the firft ftroke of this difafter was fome- wHat abated, flie was inclined to think that her fituation might not 'prove fo defperate as íhe imagined ; and her heart was warmed by a remote hope, fhat there might yet be devifed fome rnethod of procuring the efcape of the íöuL Alieyn carie ; he came in thé ^ * v - trembling
( m ) trembling expedation of receiving the decifion of the Countefs, and in the in¬ tention of offering to engage in any en¬ terprife, however hazardous, for the enlargement of the Earl. He repelled with inftant force, every idea of Mary's becoming the wife of Malcolm; the ■thought was too full of agony to be en¬ dured, and he threw the fenfation from his heart as a poifon which would deftroy the pulfe of life. To preferve Mary from a mifery- fo exquifite, and to fave the life of the Earl, he was willing to encounter any hazard; to meet death itfelf, as an evil which appeared lefs dreadful than either of the former. He came prepared with this refolution, and it ferved to fupport that fortitude which afflidion had difturbed, though it could not fubdue. When he came again to the Countefs, diis diftrefs was heightened by the fcene before him ; he beheld her 'leaning on a fofa, pale and filent; her unconfcious eyce <were fixed on ?? op* * > pofite
( »? ) pofite window; her countenance was touched with a wildnefs expreffive of the diforder of her mind, and ihe re- ' mained for fome time infenfible of his approach. Sur h is the fluctuation ofa mind overcome by diftrefs, that if for a moment a ray </ hope cheers its dark¬ nefs, it vaniihes at the touch of recollec¬ tion. Mary was ftanding near the Coun¬ tefs, whofe hand fhe held to her bofom. Her prefent forrow had heightened the natural penfivenefs of her countenance, and ihaded her features with an intereft¬ ing languor, more enchanting than the vivacity of blooming health; her eyes fought to avoid Alieyn, as an objeci; dangerous to the refolution flie had formed. Matilda remained abforbed i q thought. Mary wiihed to repeat the purpofe of her foul, but her voice trem¬ bled, and the half-formed fentence died away on her lips. AUeyn inquired the commands of the ( Countefs. '* I am ready," bid Mary, at length,, in a low and
im) and tremulous voice, " to give myfelf the victim to the Baron's revenge.—I will fave my brother·" At thefe words the heart of Alieyn grew cold. Mary, overcome by the effort which they had occafioned her, fcarcely finiihed the fen¬ tence; her nerves (hook, a mift fell over her eye, and ihe funk on the fofa by which lhe ftood. Alieyn hung over the couch in filent agony, watching her return to life. By the affiftance of thofe about her, fhe foon revived. Alieyn, in the joy which he felt at her recovery, forgot for a moment his fituation, and prefled with ardour her hand to his bofom. Mary, whofe fenfes were yet fcarcely recollected, yielded unconfci^ oufly to the foftnefs of her heart, and betrayed its fituation by a fmile fo ten*» der as to thrill the breaft of AUeyn with the fweet certainty of being loved. Hi¬ therto his paffion had been chilled by the defpair which the vaft fuperiority $f her birth occafioned, and by the mo* a defty
( ?? ) defty which forbad him to imagine that he had meric fufficient to arreft the eye of the accornpliíhed Mary. Perhaps, too, the diffidence natural to genuine love, might contribute to deceive him. It was not till this moment, that he ex¬ perienced that certainty which awakened in his heart a fenfe of delight hitherto unknown to him. For a moment he forgot the diftrefles of the caftle, and his own fituation; every idea faded from his mind, but the one he had fo lately acquired; and in that moment he feemed to tafte perfect felicity. Re¬ collection, however, with all its train of black dependencies, foon returned, and plunged him in a mifery as' poig¬ nant as the joy from which he was now precipitated. The Countefs was now fufficientiy compofed to enter on the fubject neareft her heart, Alieyn caught with eager¬ nefs her mention of attempting th« deliverance
í ,"3 )
deliverance of the Earl, for the poffibility of accpmplifliing which, he declared himfelf willing to encounter any danger : he feeonded fo warmly thè defign, and fpoke with fuch flattering probability of fuccefs, that tjie fpirits of Matilda began once more to revive ; yet flie trembled to encourage hopes which hung on fuch perilous uncertainty. It was agreed, that Alieyn ihould confuit with the moft able and trufty of the clan, whom age or infirmity had detained from battle, on the mews moft likely to enfure fuccefs, and then proceed immediately on the expedition : having firft delivered to the Baron a meffage from the Countefs, requiring time for deliberation upon a choice fo important, and importing that an anfwer ihould be returned at the ex¬ piration of a fortnight. Alieyn accordingly aflembled thofe whom he judged moft worthy of the council t various fchemes were propofed, none
( n* ) none of which appeared likely to fuc¬ ceed; when it was recollected that the Earl might poftibly have been removed from the tower to fome new place of confinement, which it would be neceffary firft to difcover, that the plan might be adapted to the fituation. It was there¬ fore concluded to fufpend further confut¬ ation till AUeyn had obtained thè re¬ quifite information; and that in the mean time he íhould deliver to Malcolm the meflage of the Countefs : for thefe pur¬ pofes Alieyn immediately fet out for the caftle.
CHA>-
( iî5 ) CHAPTER Vi. X HE caftle of Dunbayne was ftill the fcene of triumph, and of wretchednefs. Malcolm, exulting in his fcheme, already beheld Mary at his feet, and the Earl retiring in an anguiih more poignant than that of death. He was furprifed that his invention had not before fupplied him with this means of torture : for the firft time he welcomed love, as the inftru¬ ment of his revenge ; and the charms of Mary were heightened to his imagination by the ardent colours of this paífion. He was confirmed in his refolves, never to relinquiih the Earl, but on the con¬ ditions he had offered ; and thus for ever would he preferve the houfe of Athlin- a monument of his triumph. Oibert, for greater fecurity, was con¬ veyed from the tower mto a more cen¬ trical
( "? ) t rical part of the caftle, to an apartment fpacious but gloomy, whofe Gothic win¬ dows partly excluding light, threw a folemnity around, which chilled the heart almoft to horror. He heeded not this ; his heart was occupied vvith hor¬ rors of its own. He was now involved in a mifery more intricate, and more dreadful, than his imagination had yet painted. To die, was to him, who bad fo long contemplated the near approach of death, a familiar and tranfient evilj but to fee, even in idea, his family in* volved in infamy, and in union with the rnarderer, was the ftroke which pierced his heart tó its centre. He feared that the cruel tendernefs of the mother would tempt Matilda to accept the offers of the Baron; and he fcarcely doubted that the noble Mary would refign herfelf the price of his life. He would have written to the Countefs to have forbidden her acceptance of the terms, and to liave declared his fixed reiolutioa
( 117 ) refolution to die, but that he had no means of conveying to her a letter; the foldier who liad fo generoufly under* taken the conveyance of his former one, having foon after difappeared from his ftation. The manly fortitude which had fupported him through Ins former trials, did not delèrt him in this hour of darknefs; habituated fo long to ftruggle with oppo fing feelings, he had acquired the ait of managing them; his mind attained a confidence in its powers ; refiftance ferved only to increafe its ftrength, and to confirm the magnani¬ mity of its nature. Alieyn had now joined the clan^ and was ardent in purfuit of the neceflary intelligence. He learned that the Earl had been removed from the tower, but in what part of the caftle he was now confined he could not difcover : on this point all was vague conjeäute. That he was alive, was only judged from the policy
( «β ) policy of the Baron, whofe ardent paf¬ fion for Mary was now well under itood. Alieyn employed every ftrata¬ gem his invention could fuggeft, to dif¬ cover the prifon of the Earl, but with¬ out fuccefs: at length, compelled to deliver to Malcolm the meflage of the Countefs, he demanded, as a prelimi¬ nary, that the Earl ihould be íhown to his people frorn the ramparts, that they might be certain he was ftill alive. Al¬ ieyn hoped that his appearance would lead to a difcovery of the place of his imprifonment, purpofing to obferve narrowly the way by which he íhould retire. The Earl appeared in fafety on the ramparts, amid the ftiouts and acclama¬ tions of his people; the Baron, frown¬ ing defiance, was feen at his fide. Al¬ ieyn advanced to the walls, and deli¬ vered the meffage of Matilda. Oibeit ftarted at its purpofe; he forefaw that deliberation
( "9 ) deliberation portended compliance :—* ftung wirii the thought, he fwore aloud he never would furvive the infamy of the conceifion; and addreffing himfelf to Allen, commanded him inftantly to return to the Countefs, and bid her fpurn the bafe compliance, as (lie feared to facrifice both the children to the murderer of the father. At thefe words, a fmile of haughty triumph marked the features of the Baron, and he turned from Oibert in filent exultation. The Earl was led off by the guards. AUeyn endeavoured in vain to mark the way they took ; the lofty walls foon concealed them from his view. AUeyn now experienced how ftre- nuojjfly a vigorous mind proteds its fa¬ vourite hope; wayward circumftances may fliock, difappointment may check it ; but it rifes fuperior to oppofition, and traverfes the fphere of pofllbility to accompliíh its purpofe. AUeyn did not yet
( 120 ) vet defpäir, but he was perplexed in what manner to proceed. In his way from the ramparts, Oibei t was furprifed by thé appearance of two ladies at a window near which he pafled: the agitation of his mind did not prevent his recognifing them as the fame he had obferved from the grates of the tower, with fuch lively admiration, and who had excited in his mind fo much of pitý and of curiofity. In the midft of his diftrefs, his thoughts had often dwelt on the fweet graces of the younger, and had fighed to obtain the itory of her forrows; for the melan¬ choly which hjng upon her features proclaimed her to be unfortunate. They now ftood obferving Oibert as he paffed, and their eyes exprefled the pity which his fituation infpired. He gazed ear¬ neftly and mournfully upon them, and when he entered his prifon, again in¬ quired concerning them ; but the fame inflexible
( "i ) inflexible filence was preferved on the fubject. As the Earl fat one day mufing in his prifon, his eyes involuntarily fixed upon a pannel in the oppofite wainfcot ; —he obferved that it was differently formed from the reft, and that its pro¬ jection was fomewhat greater: a hope ftarteà into his mind, aad he quitted his feat to examine it. He perceived that it was furrounded by a fmall crack, and on puíhing it with his hands it íhook under them. Certain that it was fome· thing more than a pannel, he exerted all his ftrength againft it, but without producing any new effect. Having tried various means to move it without fuccefs, he gave up the experiment, and returned to his feat melancholy and dif¬ appointed. Several days parted with¬ out any further notice being taken of the wainfcot ; unwilling, however, to rclinquifti a laft hope, he returned to σ the
( 121 ) the examination, when, in endeavouring to remove the panne!, his foot acci¬ dentally hit againft one corner, and it fuddenly flew open. It had been con¬ trived that a fpring which was concealed within, and which faftened the partition, fhould receive its impulfe from the preifure of a certain part of the pannel, which was now touched by the foot pf the Earl. His joy on the drfeovery cannot be expreffed. An apartment wide and forlorn, hke that which formed his prifon, now lay before him; the windows, which were high and arched, were decorated with painted glafs; the floor was paved with marble; and it feemed to be the deferted remains of a place of woríhip. Oibert traverfed, with hefitating fteps, its dieary length, towards a pair of folding doors, large and of oak, which clofed the apartment : thefe he opened; a gallery, gloomy and vaft, appealed beyond; the windows, which were in the fame ftyle of Gothic archi-
{ 1*3 ) architecture with the former, were íhaded by thick ivy that almoft ex¬ cluded the light. Oibert ftood atbthe entrance, uncertain whether to pro¬ ceed; he liftened, but heard no foot¬ ftep in his prifon, and determined to.gb on. The gallery terminated on the left in a large winding ftair-cafe,- oíd /'and apparently neglected, which led to a hall below ι on the right was a door, low, aiid rather obfcure. Oibert, ap¬ prehenfive of difcovery, pafled the ftair¬ cafe, and opeqed the door, when a Xuite of noble apartments, magnjficendy fur¬ niihed, was difclofed to his wondering eyes.* He proceeded onw,ard' without perceiving ,any perfon, but, having paffed the fecond room, heard thefai^t fobs of a perfon weepings lie ftoodjox a moment, undetermined whether f to proceed, but an irrefiftible curiofity ira- pelled him forward, and he entered an apartmerit, t in which were featçc), the beautiful ftrangers, whofe appearance & % had
( iä4 ,) *?? fo much interefted his feelings. -T4ie -éàet of the ladies was diflblved in ítears, and a caiket and fome papers lay -open oft a table befide her. The younger --was fo intent upon a «drawing, -which ihe t feemed to-beímiíhmg, as not to obferve -tfeeb entrance of the Earl. The elder ikdvyiQn.pereeivbg him, arofe in fome confufion/and the furprife in her eyes ,feemed to demand an explanation ôf fo unaccountable a vifit. The Earl, fur¬ prifed at* what he beheld, Pepped-back, ^wkh an intention of retiring ; but recoî- 'îééHng that the intrufion demanded an apology, he -returned. The grace whh which 1 he excufed himfelf, confirmed ,the impreífion' 'which his ^gure had al¬ ready made on the mind ôf Laura, iffhîch was the name óf 'the younger 4ådy ; who, on looking np, difcovered a "¡countenance in which dignity and fweet- 'ftefs were happily blended. ' She ap¬ peared to be'about twenty ;* her perfon ivas *>f,the middleHftature, extremely ? u delicate,
( **5 l· delicate, and very elegantly formed. The bloom of her youth was Ihaded by a foft and penfive melancholy, which communicated an expreffion to her iine blue eyes, extremely interefting^ Her features were partly concealed by the beautiful luxuriance of her auburn hair, which curling round her face, defended s in treffes ori her bofom ; every femipimíí grace piayed around her; and ther'fimplfe" dignity of her air declared the ferity; and*the nobility, of her mind* Om:per**\ ceiving the EafV *' faincibluih animated 1 her cheek, and ihe involuntarily quitted f the drawing upon which ftie had been engaged. If the former imperfed view he had caught of Laura had given an impref¬ lion to the heart of Oibert, it now re·* ceived a ftronger chara&er from the op¬ portunity afforded him of contemplat¬ ing her beauty. He concluded that the Baron, attraded by her charms, had g 3 entrapped
( IZÓ ) entrapped her into his power, and de¬ tained her in the caftle an unwilling prifoner. In this conjedure he was confirmed by the mournful caft of her countenance, and by the myftery which appeared to furround her. Fired by this idea, he melted in compaflion for lier fufferings; which compaflion was rîtidbürod and increafed by the paffion which now s glowed in his heart. At that moment he forgot the danger of his prefent fituatiotì ; he forgot even that he was*' &' prifoner ; and awake only to the wiih of alleviating her forrows, he rejeded cold and ufelefs delicacy, and refolved, if poffible, to learn the caufe of her misfortunes. Addrefling himfelf to the Baronefs, « f If, Madam/' faid he, 46 1 could by any means foften the af¬ flidion which I cannot affed not to per¬ ceive, and which has fo warmly inte¬ refted my feelings, 1 ihould regard this as one of fhe moft happy moments of my life; a life marked, alas! too ftrong- ■ . iy
( ï*7 > ly with mifery í but mifery has not been ufelefs, fince it has taught me fympa¬ thy." The Baronefb was no ftranger to the charaâer and the misfortunes ofthe Earl. Herfelf the vidim of oppreflion, ihe knew how to commiferate the fuffer¬ ings of others. She had ever felt a tender compaifion for the diftrefles of Oibert, and did not now withhold fincere ???* preffions of fympathy, and of gratitude, for the intereft whicb he felt in her for¬ row. She expreifed her furprife at feeing him thus at liberty j but obferving the chains which encircled his hands, íhe fhuddered, and gueifed a part of the truth. He explained to her the difco¬ very of the pannel, by which circum¬ ftance he had found his way into that apartment. The idea of aiding him to efcape, ruihed upon the mind of the- Baronefs, but was reprelfed by the con¬ fideration of her own confined fituation ; and íhe was compelled, with mournful reluctance, to refign that thought, which g 4 reverence
( 128 ) reverence for the charader of the late Earl, and compaflion for the misfortunes of the prefent, had infpired. She la¬ mented her inability to aflift him, and informed him that herfelf and her daughter were alike prifoners with him¬ felf; that the walls of the caftle were the limits of tbeir liberty ; and that they had fuffered the preifure of tyranny for fifteen years. The Earl expreifed the indignation which he felt at this reci¬ tal, and folicited the Baronefs to confide in his integrity; and, if the relation would not be too painful to her, to ho¬ nour him fo far as to acquaint him by what cruel means ihe fell into the power of Malcolm. The Baronefs, apprehen¬ five for his fafety, reminded him of the riik of difcovery by a longer abfence from his prifon; and, thanking him again for the intereft he took in her fuf¬ ferings, affured him of her warmeft wiíhes for his deliverance, and that if an opportunity ever offered, İhe would acquaint
( *w ? acquaint him with the fad particulars of her ftory. The eyes of Oibert made known that gratitude which it was diffi¬ cult for his tongue to utter. Tremu¬ loufly he folicited the confolation of fometimes revifiting the apartments of the Baronefs ; a permiflion whCch would give him fome intervals of comfort amid the many hours of torment to which he was condemned. The Ba¬ ronefs, in compaflion'to i his fufferings,. granted the requeft. The Earl de-' parrud, gazing on Laura with eyes of mournful tendernefs ; yet he was pleafed with what had paffed, and retired to his prifon in one of thofe peaceful inter¬ vals which are known even to* the wretched. He found^ all quier, and clofing the panne! in fafety, fat down to confider the paft and anticipate die fu¬ ture. He was flattered with hopes, that the difcovery of the pannel m%ht aid him to efcape ; the glooms of defpond¬ ence which had lately enveloped hii ? 5 mind
( 4 Q ) mind gradually difappeared, and joy once more illumined his profpeets; but it was the funíhine of an April morn, deceitful and momentary. He recol¬ kcìed that the caftle was befet with guards, whofe vigilance was infured by the feverity of the Baron ; he. remem¬ bered that the ftrangers, who had taken fo kind an intereft in his fate, wfere pri¬ foners like himfelf; and that he had nO generous foldier to teach him the fecret wirings of the caftle, and to accom¬ pany him in flight. His imagination was haunted by the image of Laura; vainly he ftrove to difguife from him¬ felf the truth ; his heart conftantly be- Jied the fophiftry of his reafoning. Un¬ warily he had drunk the draught of bye, and he was compelled to acknow¬ ledge the fatal indifcretion. He could ???, however, refolve to throw from his heart the delicious poifon; he could not refolve to fee her no more. The painful apprehenfion for his fafety, which
( ÏJl ) which his forbearing to renew the vifit* he had fo earneftly folicited, would oc¬ cafion the Baronefs; the apparent dif- refped it would convey; the ardent curiofity with which he longed to ob¬ tain the hiftory of her misfoi tunes; the lively intereft he felt in learning the fituation of Laura, with refped to the Baron ; and the hope, the wild hope, wiih which he deluded his reafon, that he might be able to affift them, deter¬ mined him to repeat the vifir. Under thefe illuiion^, the motive whicn princi¬ pally impelled U\m to the interview was concealed. In the mean time Alieyn had re¬ turned to the caftle of Athlin with the refolutions of the Earl; whofe refolves ferved only to aggravate the diftrefs of its fair inhabitants. Alieyn, however, unwilling to cruih a laft hope, tenderly concealed from them the circumftance of the Earls removal from the tower ; g 6 filently
( ?* ) filently and almoft hopeléfsly meditating to difcover his prifon 5 and admini¬ ftered that comfort to the Countefs and to Mary, which his own expedation would not fuffer him to participate. He retired in hafte to the veterans whom he had before aflembled, and acquaint¬ ed them vvith the removal of the Earl ; which circumftance muft for the pre¬ fent fufpend their confultations. He left them, therefore, and inftantly re¬ turned to the clan ; there to profecute his inquiries. Every poflible exertion was made to obtain the neceflaiy intel¬ ligence, but without fuccefs. The moment in which the Baron would de¬ mand the anfwer of the Countefs, was now faft approaching, and every heart funk in defpair, when one night the cen~ linels of the camp were alarmed by the approach of men, who liailed them in unknown voices : fearful of furprife, they furrounded the ftrangers, and led them to Alieyn ; to whom they related, that
( m ) that they tita from the capricious tyran* ny of Malcolm', and fought refuge in the camp of his enemy ; whofe misfor¬ tunes they bewailed, and in' whofe caufe they enlifted. Rejoiced at the circum¬ ftance, yet doubtful of its truth, Alieyn interrogated the foldiers concerning the prifon of the Earl. From them he learned that Oibert was confined in a part of the caftle extremely difficult of accefs; and that any plan of efcape muft be utterly impracticable without the affiftance of one well acquainted with the various intricacies of the pile. An opportunity of fuccefs was now prefent¬ ed, vvith which the moft fanguine hopes of Alieyn had never flattered him. He received from the foldiers ftrong affur¬ ances of afliftance; from them, like- wife, he learned, that difcontent reign¬ ed among the people of the Baron; who, impatient of the yoke of tyran¬ ny, only waited a favourable oppor¬ tunity to throw it off, and refume the
( 134 ) rights of nature ; that the vigilant fufpicions of Malcolm excited him to puniih, with the harfheft feverity, every appearance of inattention ; that being condemned to fuffer a very heavy pu¬ nifhment for a flight offence, they had eluded the impending mifery, and the future oppreffion of their chief, by de¬ fertion. AUeyn immediately convened a coun¬ cil, before whom the foldiers were brought ; they repeated their former affeitions; and one of the fugitives added, thr r *ie had a brother, whofe place of guard over the pei fen of the Earl on that night had made it difficult to elude obfervation, and had prevented his efcaping with them; that on the night of the morrow he ftood guard at the gate of the leffer drawbridge, where the centinels were few ; that he was himfelf willing to riik the danger of converfing with him; and had little doubt
f 135 ) doubt of gaining him to affift in the de¬ liverance of the Earl. At thefe words, the heart of Alieyn throbbed with joy : he promifed large rewards to the brave foldier and to his brother, if they un¬ dertook the emerprifc. His companion was well acquainted vvith thefubteira- neous paflages of the rock, and ex¬ prefled himfelf defirous of being ufeful. The hopes of Alieyn every inftant grew ftronger; and he vainly wiihed at that moment to communicate to the Earls unhappy family the joy which dilated his heart. The eve of the following day was fixed upon to commence their defigns ; when James mould endeavour to gain his brother to their purpofe. Having adjufted thefe matters, they retired to reft for the remainder of the night ; but ileep had fled the eyes of Alieyn ; anxious expectation filled his mind ; and he faw ia the waking vifions of fancy, 1 the
( 136 ) the meeting of the Earl with his family^ he anticipated the thanks he ihould re¬ ceive from the lovely Mary ; and he fighed at the recolledion, that thanks were all for which he could ever dare to hope. At length the dawn appeared, and waked the clan to hopes and profped s far different from thofe ofthe preceding morn. The hours hung heavily on the expedation of AUeyn, whofe mind was filled with folicitude for the event of the meeting between the brothers. Night at length came to his wifhes. The darknefs was interrupted only by the faint light of the moon moving through the watry and broken clouds which en¬ veloped the horizon. Tumultuous gufts of wind broke at intervals the filence of the hour. AUeyn watched the move¬ ments of the caftle; he obferved the lights gradually difappear. The bell from tfee watch-tower chimed one; all was
( *37 ) was ftili within the walls; and James ventured forth to the drawbridge. The drawbridge divided in the centre, and the half next the plains was down ; he mounted it, and in a low yet firm voice called on Edmund. No anfwer was re¬ turned; and he began to fear that his brother had already quitted the caftle. He remained fome time in filent fuf¬ penfe before he repeated the call, when lie heard the gate of the drawbridge gently unbarred, and Edmund appeared. He was furprifed to fee James, and bade him inftantly fly the danger that furrounded him. The Baron, incenfed at the frequent defertion of his foldiers, had fent out people in purfuit, atid had promifed confiderable rewards for the apprehenfion of the fugitives. James, undaunted by what he heard, kept his ground, refolved to urge his purpofe to the point. Happily, the centinels who ftood guard with Edmund, overcome with the effed of a potion he had admi- 4 niftered
{ *3* ) niftered to favour his efcape, were funk in flceps and the foldiers conduded their difcourfe in a low voice, without inter¬ ruption. Edmund was unwilling to defer his flight, and pofleffed not refolution fuffi¬ cient to encounter the hazard of the en¬ terprife, till the proffered reward con¬ foled his felf-denial, and roufed his num¬ bering courage. He was well acquaint¬ ed with the fubterraneous avenues of the caftle ; the only remaining difficulty was that of deceiving the vigilance of his feilow-centinels, whofe watchfulnefs made it impoífible for the Earl to quit his prifon unperceived. The foldiers who were to mount guard with him on the following night, were ftationed in a diftant part of the caftle, till the hour of their removal to the door of the prifon; it was therefore difficult to adminifter to them that draught which had fteeped in forgetfulnefs the fenfes of
( 139 ) of his prefent affociates. To confide to their integrity, and endeavour to win them to his purpofe, was certainly to give his life into their hands, and pro¬ bably to aggravate the difaftrous fate of the Earl. This fcheme was befet too thick wkh dangers to be hazarded, and their invention could furniih them with none more promifing. It was however agreed, that on the follow¬ ing night Edmund ihould feize the moment of opportunity to impart to the Earl the defigns of his friends, and to confuit on the means of accompliih¬ ing them. Thus concluding, James re¬ turned in fafety to tne tent of Alieyn, where the moft confiderable of the clan were aflembledy there awaiting with im¬ patient folicitude his arrival. The hopes of Alieyn were fomewhat chilled by the report of the foldier; from the vigilance which befet the doors of the prifon, efcape from thence appeared im¬ practicable. He was condemned, how¬ ever,
( î4<& ) ever, to linger in fufpenfe till the third night from the prefent, when the return of Edmund to his ftation at the bridge would enable him again to commune vvith his brother. But AUeyn was unfuf¬ picious of a circumftance which would utterly have defeated his hopes, and whofe confequence threatened deiiruc¬ tion to all their fchemes. A centinél on duty upon that part of the rampart which furmounted the drawbridge, had been akrmed byhearmg the gatetmbar, , and approaching, the wall, had perceived a-man ftanding on the half of the bridget which was dropped, and in converfe with fome perfon on the caftle walls. He drew as near as the wall would per¬ mit, and endeavoured to liften to their difcourfe. The gloom of night pre¬ vented his recognifmg the perfon on the bridge; but he could clearly diftinguifli « the voice of Edmund, in that of the man to whom he addreffed himfelf. Ex¬ cited by new*wonder, he*gave all his attention
( Hi ) attention to difcover the fubjecl: of their converfation. .The diftance occafioned between the brothers by the fufpended half of the bridge, obliged them to fpeak in a fomewhat higher tone than they would otherwife have done; and the centinél gathered fufficient from their difcourfe to learn that they were con¬ certing the refcue of the Earl; that the night of Edmund's watch at the prifon was to be the night of enterprife ; and that fome friends of the Earl were to await him in the environs of the caftle. All this he carefully treafured up, and the next morning communicated it to his comrades. On the following evening, the Earl, yielding to the impulfe of his heart, once more unclofed his partition, and fought the apartments of the Baronefs. She received him with expreflions of fatisfaciion; while the artlefs pleafure which lighted up the countenance of jLmUra,
( 42 ) Laura, awakened the pulfe of rapture in that heart which had long throbbed only to mifery. The Earl reminded the Ba¬ ronefs of her former promife, which the defire of exciting fympathy in thofe we efteem, and the melancholy pleafure which the heart finds in lingering in the feenes of former happinefs, had induced her to give. She endeavoured to com¬ pofe her fpirits, which were agitated by the remembrance of paft fufferings, and gave him a relation of the following circumftances.
CHAP-
? '43 ) CHAPTER VII. JLOUISA, Baronefs* Malcolm, was the defcendant of an ancient and ho¬ nourable houfe in Switzerland. Her father, the Marquis de St. Claire, inhe¬ rited all thofe brave qualities and that ftern virtue which had fo eminently dif¬ tinguiihed his anceftors. Early in life he loft a wife whom he tenderly loved, and he feemed to derive his fole confo¬ lation from the education of the dear children íhe had left behind. His fon, whom he had brought up to the arms himfelf fo honourably bore, fell before he reached his nineteenth year, in the íervice of his country; an elder daugh¬ ter died in infancy; Louifa was his fole furviv ing child. His chateau was fitu¬ ated in one of thofe delightful vallies of the Swifs cantons, in which the beauti¬ ful and the fublime arefo happily uni¬ ted; where the magnificent features of the
< 144 ) the fcenery τ- contrafted, and their ef¬ fect heîghîcïicd, by tic blooming luxu¬ riance of woods and pafturage, by the gende windings of the ftream, and die peaceful afped of the cottage. The Marquis was now retired from the fer¬ vice, for gray age had overtaken him. His refidence was the refort of foreigners of diftinction, who, attracted by the united talents of the foldier and the philofopher, under his roof partook of the hofpitality fo characteriftic of his country. Among the vifitors of this de¬ fcription was the late Baron Malcolm, brother to the prefent Chief, who then ¿ravelled through Switzerland* The beauty of Louifa, embelliíhed by the elegance of a mind highly cultivated, touched his heart, and he folicited her hand in marriage. The manly fenfe of the Baron, and the excellencies of his difpofition, had not paffed unob¬ ferved or unapproved by the Marquis í while the graces of his perfon, and of his
( 145 ) his mind, had anticipated for him in the heart of Louifa, a pre-eminence over every other í ukor. The Marquis had but one objection to the marriage ; this was likewife the objection of Louifa: neither the one nor the other could en¬ dure the idea of the diftance which was to feparate them. Louifa was to she Marquis the laft prop of his declining years; the Marquis was ro Louifa the father and the friend to whom her heart had hitherto been folely devoted, and from whom it could not now be torn but with an anguifli equal to its attach¬ ment. This remained an infurrnount¬ able obftacle, till it was removed by the tendernefs of the Baron, who entreated the Marquis to quit Switzerland, and reííde vvith his daughter in Scotland. The attachment of the Marquis to bis natal land, and the pride of hereditary dominion, were too powerful to fuffer him to acquiefce in the propofal without much ftruggle of contending feelings. h The
( «4β ) The defire of fecuring the happinefs of his child by a union with a character fo excellent as the Baron's, and of feeing ber fettled before death fliould deprive ber of the protection of a father, at length fubdued every other confidera¬ tion, and he refigned the hand of his daughter to the Baron Malcolm. The Marquis adjufted his affairs, and con- figning his eftates to the care of trufty agents, bade a laft adieu to his beloved country;—that country which, during fixty years, had been the principal fcene of his happinefs, and of his regrets. The courfe of years had nöt obliterated from his heart the early affections of bis youth : ne took a fad farewell of that grave which enclofed the relics of his wife, from which it was not his leaft effort to.depart, and whither he ordered that his remains fliould be con¬ veyed. Lbuifa quitted Switzerland with a concern fcarcely lefs acute than that of her father ; the poignancy of which, ι however,
( 147 ) however, was greatly foftened by - the tender affiduities of her Lord, whofe affectionate attentions hourly height¬ ened her efteem, and increafed her love. They arrived at Scotland without any accident, where the Baron welcomed Louifa as the miftrefs of his domains* The Marquis de St. Claire had apart¬ ments in the caftle, where the evening of his days declined in peaceful happi¬ nefs. Before his death he had the plea¬ fure of feeing his race renewed in the children of the Baronefs, in a fon who was called by the name of the Marquis, and in a daughter who now ihares with her mother the forrows of confinement. On the death of the Marquis it was neceflary for the Baron to vifit Switzer¬ land, in order to take pofteffion of his eftates, and to adjuft fome affairs which 1» long abfence had deranged. He attended the remains of the Marquis to h % their
{ 1 4« ) ïheir laft abode. The Baronefs, defirous of once more beholding her native coun¬ try, and anxious to pay a iaft refpect to •the memory of her father, entrufted her children to the care of a faithful old fer¬ vant, whom fhe had brought with her . from the Valloİs, and who had been the nurfe of her early childhood, and accom¬ panied the Baron to the conunent. Hav¬ ing depofited the remains of the Mar- fjuis, according to his wifli, in the tomb of his wife, and arranged their affairs, they returned to Scotland, where the firft intelligence they received on their arrival at the caftle, was the death of their fon, and of the old nurfe his at¬ tendant. The fervant had died foon after their departure; the child only a fortnight before their return. This dif¬ aftrous event affected equally the Baron and his lady, who never ceafed to con¬ demn herfelf for having entrufted her fon to the care of fervants. Time, how¬ ever, fubdued the poignancy of this affliction,
( 49 ) afflicìion, but came fraught vvith another yet more acute ; this was the death of} the Baron, who, in.the pride of youth,, conftituting the felicity of his family, and of his people, was killed by a fall? from his horfe, which he received in? hunting. He left the Baronefs and an only daughter, to bewail with unceafing forrow, his lofs. The paternal eftates devolved, of courfe, to his only brother, the prefent Baron, whofe charader formed a mourn¬ ful and ftriking contrail to that of the deceafed Lord. AU his perfonal pro¬ perty, which was confiderable, with rhe eftates in Switzerland, he bequeathed to his beloved wife and daughter. The new Baron, immediately on the demife of his brother, took poffeflion of the caftle, but allowed the Baronefs, with a part of her fuite, to remain its inhabitant till the expiration of the year. The Baronefs, abforbed in grief, ftill loved to h 3 recall,
( *5° ) recall, in the feenes of her late felicity, the image of her Lord, and to linger in his former haunts. This motive, toge¬ ther with the neceffity of preparation for a journey to Switzerland, induced her to accept the offer of the Baron. The memory of his brother had quickly faded from the mind of Mab colm, whofe attention appeared to be wholly occupied by fchemes of avarice and ambition« His arrogance and boundlefs love of power embroiled bim with the neighbouring Chiefs, and engaged him in continual hoftility* He feldom vifited the Baronefs ; when he did, hb manner was cold, and even haughty. The Baronefs, Chocked to receive fuch treatment from the brother of her deceafed Lord, and reduced to feel herfelf an unwelcome -gueft in that caftle which ihe had been accuf¬ tomed to confider as her own, deter* mined to fet off for the continent imme¬ diately,
( '5> ) diately, and feek in the folitudes of her na¬ tive mountains an afylum from the frown of infulting power. The contraftof cha¬ racier between the brothers drew many a figh of bitter recollection from her heart, and added weight to the forrows which already oppreiTed it. She gave orders, therefore, to her domeftics, tp prepare for immediate departure; but was foon after told, that the Baron had forbidden them to obey the command. Aftoniflied at thjs circumftance, flie had not time to demand an explanation, ere a meifage from .Majcolm required a fevy moments private converfation. The meflenger was followed almoft inftantly by the Baron, who entered ?? apart T ment with hurried fteps, his counte* nance overfpread with the dark purpofes of his foul. " I come, Madam/' fakji he, in a voice ftern and determined*, " to inform you, that you quit not this caftle. The eftates which you call yours, are mine ; and think not that I h 4 íhall
( »5* ) fliall negled to profecute my claim. The frequent and ill-timed generofities of my brother have diminiihed the va¬ lue of thofe lands which are mine by inheritance; and I have, therefore, an indifputable right to repay myfelf from thofe eftates which he acquired with you. In point of juftice, he poffeffed not the right of devifing thefe eftates, and I (hall not fuffer myfelf to be de¬ ceived by the evafions of the law ; re¬ fign, therefore, th€ will, which remains only a record of unjuft wimes and in¬ effedual claims* When the receipts írom your eftates have fatisfied my de¬ mands, they ihalí again be yours. The apartments you' now inhabit ftiall re¬ mairi your own; but beyond the wall of this caftle you ihall not pafs ; for I ihall not, by fuffering your departure, afford you an opportunity of contefting thofe rights which í can enforce without oppofition." Over*
( 43 ) Overcome with aftonifliment and dread, the Baronefs was for fome time deprived of all power of reply. At length, roufed by the fpirit of indigna¬ tion, " I am too well informed, my Lord," faid íhe, " of my juft claims to the lands in queftion ; and know alfo too well the value of that integrity which is now no more, to credit your bold aflertions ; they ferve only to un¬ veil to me the darknefs of a characier, cruel and rapacious; whofe boundlefs avarice trampling on the barriers of juf¬ tice and humanity, feizes on the righe of the defencclefs widow, and on the portion of the unrefifting orphan. This/, my Lord, you are permitted to do ; they have no means of refiftance ; but think not to impofe on me by a fophifti^ cal aflertion of right, or to glofs the vil* Jany of your conduct with the colour« of juftice: the arurke is beneath the def¬ perate force of your character» and is not fufficientiy fpecious to deceive the h 5 difcern^
( 44 ) difcernment of virtue. From being your prifoner, I have no means of efcap¬ ing ; but never, my Lord, will I refign into your hands that will which is the efficient bond of my rights, and the lafl: /ad record of the affection of my de¬ parted Lord." Giief clofed her lips. The Baron, denouncing vengeance on her refiftance, his features inflamed with rage, quitted the apartment. The Ba¬ ronefs was left to lament, with deepening anguiih, the ftroke which had deprived her of a. beloved huíband ; and reflec¬ tion/gave her the wretchednefs of her fituation in yet more lively colours. She was now a ftranger in a foreign land, deprived by him of whom íhe had a right to demand protection, of all her pofleffions; a prifoner in his caftle, without one friend to vindicate her caufe, and far remote from any means of appeal to the laws of the country. She wept over the youthful Laura, and while ihe prefled her with mournful fondnefs
( *$i ) fondnefs to her bofom, ihe was con¬ firmed in her refolve never to relinquiih that will by which alone the rights of her injured child could ever be afcer¬ tained. t The Baron, bold in iniquity, obtained by forged powers, the revenues of the foreign eftates; and, by thèfe means, ef¬ fectually kept the IJaronefs ί τι his power, and deprived her of her laft refource. Secure in the poíTefíion of the eftates, and of the Baronefs, he no longer re¬ garded the will as an object of import¬ ance; and as (he did not attempt any means of efcape, or the recovery of her rights, he fuffered her to remain undif- turbed, and in quiet pofleflion of the will* The Baronefs now pafled her days in unvaried forrow, except in îhofe inter¬ vals when (he forced her mind from its* melancholy fubjecl, and devoted herfelf h 6 to
( »S* ) to the education of her daughter. The artlefs efforts of Laura io affuage the forrows of her mother, only fixed them in her heart in deeper impreflion, fince they gave to her mind, in ftronger tints, the cruelty and oppreffion to which her tender years were condemned. The progrefs which ihe made in mufic and drawing, and in the lighter fubjects of literature, while it pleafed the Baronefs, who was her foie İnftrucirefs, brought with it the bitter apprehenfion, that thefe accompliihments would probably be buried in the obfcurity of a prifoi: ; ftill, however, they were not ufelefs, fince they ferved at prefent to cheat af¬ fliction of many a weary moment, and would in future delude the melancholy hours of folitude. Laura was particu¬ larly fond of the lute, which me touched wkh exquifite fenfibUky, and whofe ten¬ der notes were fo fweetly in unifon with the chords of forrow, and with thofe plaintive tones with which íhe loved to 4 accom-
( 157 ) accompany it. While íhe fung, the Baronefs would fit abforbed in recollec¬ tion, the tears faft falling from her eyes ; and ihe might be faid to tafte in thofe moments the luxury of woe. Malcolm, ftung with a fenfe of guilt, avoided the pretence of his injured cap¬ tive, and fought an afylum from con¬ feience in the bufy feenes of war. Eighteen years had now elapfed fince the death of the Baron, and the confine* ment of Louifa. Time had blunted the point of afflidion, though it ftiil re¬ tained ii s venom ; but íhe feldom dared to hope for that which for eighteen years had been withheld. She derived her only confolation from the improvement and the tender fympathy of her daugh· ter, who endeavoured by every foothing attention to alleviate the forrows of her parent. It
( iS» ) It was at this period that the Baronefs communicated to the Earl the ftory of her calamities. The Earl liftened with deep attention to the recital. His foul burned with in¬ dignation againft the Baron, while his heart gave to the fufferings of the fair mourners all that fympathy could aik. Yet he was relieved from a very pain¬ ful fenfation, when he learned that the beauty of Laura had not influenced the conduci: of the Baron. Her opprefled fituation ftruck upon his heart the fineft touch of pity; and the paffion which her beauty and her fimplicity had in¬ fpired, was ftrengthened and meliorated by her misfortunes. The fate of his father, and the idea of his own injuries, rufhed upon his mind ; and, combining with the fufferings of the victims now before him, roufed in his foul a ftorm of indignation, little inferior to that he had
( 49 ) had fuffered in his firft interview with the Baron. Every confideration funk before the impulfe of a juft revenge ; his mind, occupied with the hateful image of the murderer alone, was har¬ dened againft danger, and in the firft energies of his refentment he would have ruihed to the apartment of Mal- colm f and ftrikipg the fword of juftice in his heart, have delivered the earth from a monfter, and have refigned him¬ felf the willing facrifice of the action, " Shall the monfter live ?" cried he, rifing from his feat. His ftep was hur¬ ried, and his countenance was ftamped with a ftern virtue. The Baronefs was alarmed, and following him to the door of her apartment, which he had half opened, conjured him to paufe for a moment on the dangers that furround¬ ed him. The voice of reafon, in the accents of the Baronefs, interrupted the hurried tumult of hib foul ; the illu¬ fions
( i6o ) fions of paflion difappeared ; he recol¬ lected that he was ignorant of the apart¬ ment of the Baron, and that he had no weapon to affift his 1 purpofe; and he found himfelf as a traveller on enchant¬ ed ground, when the wand of the ma¬ gician fuddenly diifolves the airy fcene, and leaves him environed with the hor¬ rors of folitude and of darknefs. The Earl returned to his feat hopelefs and dejected, and loft to every thing but to the bitternefs of difappointment. He forgot where he was, and the latenefs of the hour, till reminded by the Baronefs of the dangers of a longer ftay, when he mournfully bade her good night; and advancing to Laura with timid refpect, preifed her hand tenderly to his lips, and retired to his prifon.
CHAP-
( 1?' )
CHAPTER VIII. UE had now opened the partition, and was entering the room, when by the faint gleam which the fire threw acrofs the apartment, he perceived, in¬ diftinctíy, the figure of a man, and in the fame inftant heard the found of ap¬ proaching armour. Surprife and hor¬ ror thrilled through every nerve ; he re-* mained fixed to the fpot, and for fome moments hefitated whether to retire. A fearful filence enfued : the perfon whom he thought he had feen, difappeared in the darknefs of the room ; the noife of armour was heard no more ; and he be¬ gan to think that the figure he had feen and the found he had heard were the phantoms of a fick imagination, which the agitation of his fpirits, the folemnity of the hour, and the wide defolation of the
( l6» ) the place had conjured up. The low founds of an unknown voice now ftart¬ ed upon his ear; it feemed to be almoft clofe befide him : he fprung onward, and his hand grafped the fteely coldnefs of armour, while the arm jt enclofed ftrug¬ gled to get free. ** Speak ! What wretch art thou ?" cried Oibert, when a fudden blaze of light from the fire difco¬ vered to him a foldier of the Baron. His agitation for fome time prevented his ob* ferving shat there was more of alarm than of defign expreffed in the counte* nance of the man ; but the apprehenfion of the Earl was quickly loft in aftoniih¬ ment, when he beheld the guard at his feet. It was Edmund who bad entered the prifon, under pretence of carrying fuel to the fire, but fecretly for the pur¬ pofe of conferring with Oibert. When the Earl underftood he came from ?? leyn, his bofom glowed with gratitude towards the generous youth, whofe fteady and active zeal had never relaxed fince the
( i6 3 ) the hour in which he firft engaged in his caufe. The tranfport of his heart may be eafily imagined, when he learned the fchemes that were planning for his deli¬ verance. The circumftance which had nearly defeated the warm hopes of his friends, was by him difregarded, fince the knowledge of the fecret door open¬ ed to him, with the afliftance of a guide through the intricacies of the caftle, a certain mean of efcape. Edmund was well acquainted with all thefe. The Earl told him of the difcovery of the falfe pannel ; bade him return to Alieyn with the joyful intelligence, and on his next night of watch prepare to aid hira in efcape. Edmund knew well thet apartments which Oibert defcribed, and the great ftaircafe which led into a part of the caftle that had long been totally for¬ faken, and from whence it was eafy to pafs unobferved into the vaults which communicated with the fubterraneous paifages in the rock. AUeyn
( *δ 4 ) Alieyn heard the report of James with a warm and generous joy, which impelled him to haften immediately to the caftle of Athlin, and difpel the for¬ rows that inhabited there ; but the confi¬ deration that his fudden abfence from the camp might create fufpicion and invite difcovery, checked the impulfe ; and he yielded with reludance to the neceffity which condemned the Countefs and Mary to the horrors of a lengthened fufpenfe. The Countefs, meanwhile, whofe defigns, ftrengthened by the fteady determination of Mary, were unfliaken by the meffage of the Earl, which íhe confidered as only the effed of a mo¬ mentary impulfe, watched the gradual departure of thofe days which led ta that which enveloped the fuie of her children, with agony and fainting hope* She received no news from the camp % no¿
( i6¿ ) tio words of comfort from Alieyn ¿ and flie faw the confidence which had nou* riíhed her exiftence flowly finking in defpair. Mary fought to adminifter that comfort to the affiidions of her mother which her own equally demand¬ ed·; flie ftrove, by the fortitude with which ihe endeavoured to refign her¬ felf, to foften the afperity of the fuffer¬ ings which threatened the Countefs; and ihe contemplated the approaching ftorm vvith the determined coolnefs of a mind afpiring to virtue as the chief good. But ilie feduloufly fought to ex* elude Alieyn from her mind : his difin¬ terefted and noble condud excited emo¬ tions dangerous to her fortitude, and which rendei ed yet more poignant the •tortures of the approaching facrifice· Anxious to inform" the Baronefs of his approaching deliverance, to aílure her of his beft fervices, to bid adieu to Laura,
( i66 ) Laura, and to feize the laft opportunity he might ever poflefs of diíclofíng to her his admiration and his love, the Earl re« vifited the apartments of the Baronefs. She felt a lively pleafure on the profped of his efcape; and Laura, in the joy which animated her on hearing this intel¬ ligence, forgot the forrows of her own fituation; forgot that of which her heart foon reminded her, that Oibert was leaving the place of her ? confinement, and that ihe fhould probably fee him no more. This thought caft a fudden íhade over her features, and from the enlivening expreflion of joy they re¬ fumed their wonted melancholy. Oibert marked the momentary change, and his heart fpoke to him the occafion. " My cup of joy is dafhed with bitternefs," (aid he; '* for amid the happinefs of ap¬ proaching deliverance, I quit not my prifon without fome pangs of keen re¬ gret;—pangs which it were probably ufelefb
( »6 7 ) ufelefs to make known, yet which my feelings will not fuffer me at this mo¬ ment to conceal. Within thefe walls, from whence I fly with eagernefs, I leave a heart fraught with the moft ten¬ der paflion ; a heart, which while it ' beats with life muft ever unite the image of Laura with the fondnefs of love. Could I hope that íhe were not infenfible to my attachment, I ihould de¬ part in peace, and would defy the obfta¬ cles which bid me defpair. Were I even certain that ihe would repel my love with cold indifference, I would yet, if flie accept my fervices, effed her refcue, or give my life the forfeiture.*' Laura was filent; ihe wiihed to fpeak her gratitude, yet feared to tell her love ; but the foft timidity of her eye, and the ' tender glow of her cheek, revealed the fecret that trembled on her lips. The Baronefs obferved her confufion; and, thanking the Earl for the noble fervice he off&ed, declined accepting it; flie befought
( *68 ) befought him to involve ho farther the peace ofhis family and of himfelf, by attempting an enterprife fo crowded widi dangers, and which might proba¬ bly coft hira his life. The arguments of the Baronefs fell forcelefs when op¬ pofed to the feelings of the Earl; fo warmly he urged his fuit, and dwelt fo forcibly on his approaching departure, that the Baronefs ceafed to oppofe, and the filence of Laura yielded acqui- efcence. After a tender farewell, with many earneft wiíhes for his fafety, the Earl quitted the apartment elated with hope. But the Baron had been in¬ formed of his projected efcape, and had ftudied the means of counteracting it. The centinél hád communicated >his dif¬ covery to fome of his comrades, who, without virtue or courage fufficient to <juit the fervice of the Baron, were de¬ firous of obtaining his favour, and failed not to feize on an opportunity fo /lat- tering as the prefent, to accompliíh their
( ih ? their purpofe. They communicated to their Chief the intelligence they had received. Malcolm, careful to conceal his know^ ledge of the fcheme, from a defign to entrap thofe of the clan who were to meet the Earl, had fuffered Edmund to return to his ftation at the prifon, where he had placed the informers "as fecret guards, and had taken fuch other pre¬ cautions as were neceflary to intercept their flight, ihould they elude the vigi* lance of the foldiers, and likewife to fe¬ cure thofe of his people who ihould be drawn toward the caftle in expectation of their Chief. Having done this, he prided himfelf in fecurity, and in the ^certainty of exulting over his enemies^ thus entangled in their own ftratagem. After many weary moments of impa¬ tience ?? Alieyn, and of expectation to the Earl, the night at length arrived on ï which
( 17° ) which hung the event of all their hopes. It was agreed that AUeyn, with a chofen few, íhould await the arrival of the Earl in the cavern where terminated the fubterraneous avenue. Alieyn parted from James with extreme agitation, and returned to his tent to compofe his mind. it was now the dead of night ; pro¬ found fleep reigned through the caftle of Dunbayne, when Edmund gently unbolted the prifon-door, and hailed the Eari. He fprung forward, and inftantly unclofed (he panne!, which they faf¬ tened after them, to prevent difcovery ; and pafling with fearful fteps the cold and filent apartments, defcended the great ftaircafe into the hall, whofe wide and dark defolation was rendered vifible only by the dim light of the taper which Edmund carried in his hand, and whofe vaulted ceiling re¬ echoed their fteps. After various wind¬ ings
( «71 ) ings they defcended into the vaults ; in paffing theii dreary length they often paufed in fearful filence, liftening to the hollow blafts which burft fuddenly through the paffages, and which feemed to bear in the found the footfteps of purfuit. At length they reached the extremity of the vaults, where Edmund fearched for a trap-door which lay al¬ moft concealed in the dirt and darknefs $ after fome time they found, and with difficulty raifed it, for it was long fince it had been opened ; and it was befides heavy with iron-work. They entered, and letting the door fall after them, defcended a narrow flight of fteps, which conduâed them to a winding paffage clofed by a door that opened into the main avenue, whence Alieyn had before made his efcape. Having gained this, they ftepped on with confidence, for they were now not far from the ca¬ vern where AUeyn and his companions were awaiting their anrival. The heart ι ? of
( «7* ) of AUeyn now fwelled with joy, for he perceived a gleam of diftant light break upon the walis of the avenue, and at the fame time thought he heard the faint found of approaching footfteps. Im¬ patient to throw himfelf at the feet of the Earl, he entered the avenue. The light grew ftronger upon the walls; but a point of rock, whofe projection caufed a winding in the paffage, concealed from his view the perfon his eyes fo eagerly foughr. The found of fteps was now faft approaching, and Alieyn gaining the rock, fuddenly turned upon three foldiers of the Baron. They inftantly feized him their prifoner. Aftoniih¬ ment for a while overcame every other fenfation ; but as they led him along, the horrid reverfe of the moment ftruck upon his heart wich all its confequences, and he hud no doubt that the Earl had been feized and carried back to his pri¬ fon. As he marched along, abforbed in this reflection, a light appeared at fomc
{ 173 ) fome diftance, from a door that opened upon the avenue, and difcovered the figures of two men, who, on perceiving the party, retreated with precipitation, and clofed the door after them. Alieyn knew the Earl in the perfon of one of them. Two of the foldiers quitting Alieyn, purfued the fugitives, and quickly difappeared through a door. AUeyn, finding himfelf alone with the guard, feized the moment of opportu* nity, and made a defperate effort to re¬ gain his fword. He fucceeded ; and it* the fuddennefs of the attack, obtained alfo the weapon of hi$ adverfary, who, unarmed, fell at his feet, and called for mercy. Alieyn gave him his life* The foldier, grateful for the gift, and fearful of the Baron's vengeance, defired to fly with him, and enlift in his fervice. They quitted the fubterraneous way to¬ gether. On entering the cavern, Alieyn ' found it vacated by his friends, who on hearing the claih of armour, and the 1 3 loud
( 174 ) loud and menacing voices of the fol¬ diers, underftood his fate, and appre¬ henfive of numbers, had fled to avoid a fimilar difafter. AUeyn returned to his tent, ihocked with difappointment, and loft in defpair. Every effort which he had made for the deliverance of the Earl, had proved unfuccefsful ; and this fcheme, on which was fufpended his iaft hope, had been defeated at the very moment in which he exulted in its com¬ pletion. He threw himfelf on the ground, and, loft in bitter thought, ob¬ ferved not the curtain of his tent un¬ draw, till, recalled by a fudden noife, he looked up, and beheld the Earh Ter¬ ror fixed him to the fpot, and for a mo¬ ment he involuntarily acknowledged the traditionary vifions of his nation. The well-known voice of Oibert, however, awakened him to truth, and the ardour with which he embraced his knees, im¬ mediately convinced him that he clafped reality. The
( r;j ) The foldiers, in the eagernefs of pur-* fuit, had miftaken the door by vriiich.· Oibert had retired, and had entered one below it, which, after engaging them irt a fruitlefs fearch through various intri¬ cate paffages, had conducted them to a remote part of the caftle, from whence, after much perplexity and lofs of time, they were at length extricated. The Earl, who had retreated on fight of the foldiers, had fled in the mean time to regain the trap-door; but the united ftrength of himfelf and of Edmund was in vain exerted to open it. Compelled to encounter the approaching evil, the Earl took the fword of his companion, refolving to meet the approach of his adverfaries, and to effect his deliver¬ ance, or yield his life and his misfor¬ tunes to the attempt. With this defign he advanced deliberately along the paf¬ fage, and arriving at the door, ftopped to difcover the motions of his purfuers : all was profoundly filent. After re- i 4 maining
( 176 ) maining fome time in this fituation, he opened the door, and examining the avenue with a firm yet anxious eye, as iar as the light of his taper threw its beams, difcovered no human being. He proceeded with cautious firmnefs towards the cavern, every infiant ex¬ pecting the foldiers to ftart fuddenly upon him from fome dark recefs*— With aftoniihment he reached the cave without interruption ; and unable to ac¬ count for bis unexpecìed deliverance, haftened with Edmund to join his faith? ful people» The foldiers who watched the prifon, being ignorant of any other way by which the Earl couid efcape, than the door which they guarded, had fuffered Edmund to enter the apartment without fear. It was fome time before they difcovered their error i furprifed at the length of his ftay, they opened the door of the prifon, which, to their utter afto- « niihment,
( 177 ) niihment, they found empty. The grates were examined ; they remained as ufual;, every corner was explored; but the falfe panne! remained unknown; and having finiihed their examination without difcovering any vifible means by which the Earl had quitted the pri¬ fon, they were feized with terror, con¬ cluding it to be the work of a fuper¬ natural power, and immediately alarmed he caftle. The Baron, roufed by the tumult, was informed of the fad, and dubious of the integrity of his guards, afcended to the; apartment ; which hav¬ ing himfelf examined without difcover¬ ing any means of efcape, he no longer hefitated to pronounce the centin els ac- ceflfary to the Earls enlargement. The unfeigned terror which they exhibited was miftaken for artifjce, and their fuppofed treachery was admitted and puniihed in the fame moment. They were thrown into the dungeon of the caftle. Soldiers were immediately dif- í 5 patched
( 178 ) patched in purfuit; but the time which had elapfed ere the guards had entered the prifon, had given the Earl an oppor¬ tunity of efcape. When the certainty of this was communicated to the Baron, «very paflion whofe fingle force is mifery, united in his breaft to torture him ; and his brain, exafperated almoft to madnefs, gave him only direful images of revenge. The Baronefs smd Laura, awakened by the tumult, had been filled with appre¬ henfion for the Earl, till they were in¬ formed of the caufe of the general con¬ fufion ; and hope and dubious joy were ere long confirmed into certainty, for they were told of the fruitlefs fearch of the purfuers. It was now the laft day of the term in which the Countefs had ftipulated to return her anfwer; íhe had yet heard nothing from Alieyn; for Alieyn had been bufied in fchemes, d the event of which
( 179 ) which he could fend no account, for their fuccefs had been yet undetermined. Every hope of the Earls deliverance was now expired, and in the anguifli of her heart, the Counted prepared to give that anfwer which would fend the devoted Mary to the arms of the murderer. Mary, who aifumed a fortitude not her own, ftrove to abate the rigour of her mother's fufferings, but vainly ftrove; they were of a nature which defied con¬ folation. She wrote the fatal agree¬ ment, but delayed till the laft moment delivering it into the hands of the mef¬ fenger. It was neceffary, however, that the Baron ihould receive it» on the fol¬ lowing morn, left the impatience of re¬ venge íhould urge him to feize on the life of the Earl as the forfeiture of delay. She fent, therefore, for tjie meffenger, who was a veteran of the clan, and with extreme agitation delivered to him her anfwer ; grief interrupted her voice ; flie was unable to fpeak to him ; and he was ι 6 awaiting
( ifo ) awaiting her orders, when the door of the apartment was thrown open, and the Earl, followed by Alieyn, threw himfelf at her feet. A faint feream was uttered by the Countefs, and ihe funk in her chair« Mary, not daring to truft herfelf with the delightful vifion, endea¬ voured to reftrain the tide of joy which hurried to her heart, and threatened to overwhelm her. The caftle of Athlin refounded with tumultuous joy on this happy event; the courts were filled with thofe of the clan who had been difabled from attend¬ ing the field, and whom the report of the Earls return, which had circulated with aftonifliing rapidity, had brought thither. The hall re-echoed with voices; and the people could fcarcely be re¬ ftrained from rufhing into the prefence of their Chief, to congratulate him on bis efcape. When
( »8i ) When the firft tranfports of the meet¬ ing were fubfided, the Earl prefented AUeyn to his family as his friend and deliverer; whofe fteady attachment he could never forget, and whofe zealous fervices he could never repay. The cheek of Mary glowed with pleafure and gratitude at this tribute to the worth of Alieyn ; and the fmiling approbation of her eyes rewarded him for his noble deeds. The Countefs received him as the deliverer of both her children, and related to Oibert the adventure in the wood. The Earl embraced AUeyn, who received the united acknowledgments of the family with unaffeded modefty* Oibert hefitated not to pronounce the Baron the author of the plot; his heart fwelled to avenge the repeated injuries of his family, and he fecretly refolved to challenge his enemy to fingle combat. To renew the fiege he confidered as a vain projed ; and this challenge, though a very inadequate mode of revenge, was the
( t» ) the only honourable one that remained for him. ' He forbore to mention his de¬ fign to the Countefs, well knowing that her tendernefs would oppofe the meafure, and throw difhcuities in his way, which would embarrafs without preventing his purpofe. He mentioned the misfortunes of the Baronefs, and the lovelinefs of her daughter, and excired the efteem and the commiferation of his hearers.. The clamours of the people to behold their Lord, now arofe to the apartment of the Countefs, and he defcended into the hall, accompanied by Alieyn, to gratify their zeal. An univerfal İhout of joy refounded through the walls on his appearance. A noble pleafure glowed on the countenance of the Earl at fight of his faithful people ; and in the delight of that moment his heart bore teftimony to the fuperior advantages of an equi¬ table government. The Earl, impatient to teftify his gratitude, introduced Alieyn to
( i»3 ) to the clan as his friend and deliverers and immediately prefented his father with a lot of land, where he might end his days in peace and plenty. Old Al¬ ieyn thanked the Eari for his offered kindnefs, but declined accepting it ; al¬ leging, that he was attached to his old cottage, and that he had already furft- cient for the comforts of his age. On the following morning a meflenger was privately difpatched to the Baron, with the challenge of the Earl. The challenge was couched in terms of haughty indignation, and expreffed that nothing but the failure of all other means could have urged him to the condefcen¬ fion of meeting the affaffm of his father, on terms of equal combat. Happinefs was once more reftored to Athlin. The Countefs, in the unex- peded prefervation of her children, feemed to be alive only to joy. The 4 Earl
( 1 84 ) Bari was now for a time fecure in the bofom ofhis family í and though his im¬ patience to avenge the injuries of thofe moft dear to him, and to fnatch front the hand of ????????? the fair fnfferers at Dunbayne, would not allow him to be tranquil, yet he aifumed a gaiety un¬ known to bis heart, and the days were fpent in feftivals and joy.
????·
( «3 5 )
CHAPTER IX. İT was at this period, that, one ftormy evening, the Countefs was fitting with her family in a room, the windows of which looked upon the fea. The winds burft in fudden fqualls over the deep, and dafhed the foaming waves againft the rocks with inconceivable fury. The fpray, notwithftanding the high fituation of the caftle, flew up with violence againft: the windows. The Eari went out upon the terrace beneath to contemplate the itorm. The moon íhone faintly by in¬ tervals, through broken clouds, upon the waters, illumining the white loam which burft around, and enlightening the fcene furficienriy to render it vifible. The furges broke on the diftant íhores in deep- refolding murmurs, and the folemn paufes between the ftormy gufts filled the mind
( i86 ) mind with enthufiaftic awe. As the Earl ilood wrapt in the fublimity of the fcene, the moon fuddenly emerging from a heavy cloud, ihowed him at fome dif¬ tance, a veflel driven by the fury of the blaft towards the coaft. He prefently heard íhe fignals of diftrefs ; and foon after, fhrieks of terror, and a confufed uproar of voices were borne on the wind. He haftened from the lerrace **¿ order his people to go out with boats to tbs affift¬ ance of the crew, for he doubted nit that the veflel was wrecked ; but the fea ran fo high as to make the adventure impraticable. The found of voices ceafed, and he concluded the wretched mariners were loft, when the fcreams of diftrefs again ftruck his ear, and agam were loft in the tumult of the ftorm ; ia a moment after, the veflel ftruck upoa the rock beneath the caftle; m univer¬ fal ihriek enfued. The Earl, with his people, haftened to the affiftance of the crew; the fury of ihe guft was now abated,
( i«7 ) abated, and the Earl jumping into a boat with AUeyn and fome others, rowed to the fliip, where they refcued a part of the drowning people. They were conducted to the caftle, and every com¬ fort vvas liberally adminiftered to them. Among thofe whom the Eari had re¬ ceived into his boat, was a ftranger, whofe dignified afpect and manners be¬ fpoke him to be of rank ; he had feve¬ ral people belonging to him, but they were foreigners, and ignorant of the language of the country. He thanked his deliverer with a noble franknefs that charmed him. In the hall they were met by the Countefs and her daughter, who received the ftranger with the warm welcome which compaffion for his fitua¬ tion had infpired. He was conducted to the fupper-room, where the magnifi¬ cence of the board exhibited only the ufual hofpitality ofhis holt. The ftran¬ ger fpoke Engliih fluently, and dif¬ played in his qonverfation a manly and vigorous
( iM ) vigorous mind, acquainted with the fciences, and with life ; and the caft of his obfervations feemed to characterize the benevolence of his hearr. The Earl was fo much pleafed with his gueft, that he prefled him to remain at his caftle till another veffel could be procured; his gueft, equally pleafed with thé Eari, and a ftranger to the country, accepted the invitation. New diftrefs now broke υροη the peace of Athlin ; feveral days had ex¬ pired, and die meffenger who had been fent to Malcolm, ¡did not appear* ? was almoft evident that the Baron, dif¬ appointed and enraged at the efcape of his prifoner, and eager for a facrifice, has feized this man as the fubjeft of a paltry revenge. The Ear!, however, refolved to wait a few days, and watch the event. The ftruggles of latent tendernefe and
( **9 ) and aifumed indifference, banifhed tran¬ quillity from the bofom of Mary, and pierced it with many forrows. The friendihip and honours beftowed by the Earl on Alieyn, who now refided folely at the caftle, touched her heart with a fweet pride ; but, alas ! thefe diftinc- tions ferved only to confirm her admira¬ tion of that worth which bad already attached her affedions, and afforded him opportunities of exhibiting in brighter colours the various excelien· cies of a heart noble and expanfive, and of a mind whofe native elegance melio¬ rated and adorned the bold vigour of its flights. The languor of melancholy, notwithftanding the efforts of Mary, would at intervals fteal from beneath the difguife of cheerfulnefs, and diffufe over her beautiful features an expreffion ex¬ tremely interefting. The ftranger was not infenfible to its charms, and it ferved to heighten the admiration with which he had firft beheld her into fome· thing
( *9° } thing more tender and more powerful. The modeft dignity with which ilie de¬ livered her fentiments, which breathed the pureft delicacy and benevolence, touched his heart, and he felt an intereft concerning her which he had never be¬ fore experienced. Alieyn, whofe heart, amid the anxieties ?nd tumults of the paft feenes, had ftill fighed to the image of Mary — that image which fancy had pi&ured in all the charms of the original, and whofe glowing tints were yet foftened and ren¬ dered more interefting by the íhade of melancholy with which abfence and a hopelefs paffion had furrounded them— found amid the leifure of peace, and the frequent opportunities which were afford· ed him of beholding the object of his attachment, his fighs redouble, and the glooms of forrow thicken. In the pre¬ fence of Mary, a foft fadnefs clouded his brow; he endeavoured to affume a cheer-
( *9* ) cheerfulnefs foreign to his heart ; but en¬ deavoured in vain. Mary perceived the change in his manners ; and the obferva¬ tion did not contribute to enliven her own. The Earl, too, obferved that Alieyn had loft much of his wonted fpirits, and bantered him on the change, but thought not of his fifter. AUeyn wifhed to quit a place fo de- ftrurtive to his peace as the caftle of Athlin; he formed repeated refolutions of withdrawing himfelf from thofe walls which held him in a fort of fafci nation, and rendered ineffectual every half-form¬ ed wiíh, and every weak endeavour. When he could no longer behold Mary, he would frequently retire to the terrace, wh" h was overlooked by the windows of her apartmetpt, and fpent half the night in traverfmg, with fdent mournful fteps, that fpot which afforded him the melancholy pleafure of being near the object of his love. Matilda
í 192. y Matilda wiflied to queftion Alieyn concerning fome circumftances of the late events, and for this purpofe or¬ dered him one day to attend her in her clofet. As he paffed the outer apart¬ ment of the Countefs, he perceived fomething lying near the door through which ihe had before gone, and examin¬ ing it, difcovered a bracelet, to which was attached a miniature of Mary. His heart beat quick at the fight; the temptation was too powerful to be re¬ fifted ; he concealed it in his bofom, and pafled on. On quitting the clofet, he fought, with breathlefs impatience, a fpot where he might contemplate at leifure that precious portrait which chance had fo kindly thrown in his way. He drew it trembling from his bofom, and beheld again that countenance, whofe fweet ex¬ preffion had touched his heart with all the delightful agonies of love. As he prefled it with impaflioned tendernefs to his lips, the tear of rapture trembled 1 in
( *93 ) tn his eye, and the romantic ardour ofthe moment was fcarcely heightened by the adual prefence of the beloved objed, whofe light ftep now ftole upon his ear ; and half turning, he beheld not the pidure, but the reality!—-Surprifed 1— confufed ! — the pidure fell from his hand. Mary, who had accidentally ftrolled to that fpot, on obferving the agitation of Alieyn, was retiring, when he, in whofe heart had been awakened every tender fenfation, lofing in the temptation of the moment the fear of difdain, and forgetting the refolution which he had formed of eternal filence, threw himfelf at her feet, and prefled her hand ?? his trembling lips. His tongue would have told her that he loved ; but his emotion, and the repul¬ five look of Mary, prevented him. She inftantly difengaged herfelf with an air of offended dignity, and cafting on him a look of mingled anger and concern, withdrew in filence. Alieyn remained L· fixed
( 194 } fixed to the fpot; his eyes purfuing lier retiring fteps, infenfible to every feeling but love and defpair. So abforbed was he in the tranfition of the moment, that he almoft doubted whether a vifionary illufion had not croíled his fight to blaft his oniy remaining comfort—the con¬ fcioufnefs of deferving, and of poflefling the efteem of her he loved. He left the place with anguifli in his heart, and in the perturbation of his mind forgot the picture. Mary had obferved her mother's brace¬ let fall from his hand, and was no longer in perplexity concerning her mi¬ niature; but in the confuiion which his behaviour occafioned her, (he forgot to demand it of him. The Countefs had mifled it almoft immediately after his departure from the clofer, and had caufed a fearch to be made, which prov¬ ing fruitlefs, her fufpicions wavered upon him. The Earl, who foon after pafled the
( m ) the fpot whence Alieyn had juft departed, found the miniature. It was not long ere Alieyn recollected the treafure he had dropped, and returned in fearch of it. Inftead of the pidure, he found the Earl. A confeious bluíh croffed his cheek ; the confufion of his countenance informed Oibert of a part of the truth; who, anxious to know by what means he had obtained it, prefented him the picture, and demanded if he knew it. The foul of Alieyn knew not to diflemble; he ac¬ knowledged that he had found and con¬ cealed it; prompted by that paffion, the confeffion of which no other circum¬ ftance than the prefent could have wrung from his heart. The Earl liftened to him with a mixture of concern and pity; but hereditary pride chilled the warm feelings of friendihip and of gratitude, and extinguiflied the faint fpark of hope which the difcovery had kindled in the bofom of Alieyn. ** Fear not, my Lord," íaid he, " the degradation of your houfe κ ζ from
( *9* ) from one who would facrifice his life in its defence; never more fliall the paflion which glows in my heart efcape from my lips. I will retire from the fpot where I have buried my tranquillity."—" No," replied the Earl, " you ihall remain here; I can confide in your honour. O! that the only reward which is adequate to your wonh and ¿o your fervices, Ihould ■be impoffible for me to beftow !** His voice faltered, and he turned away to conceal his emotion with a fuffering little inferior to that of AUeyn. The difcovery which Mary had made did not contribute to reftore peace to her mind. Every circumftance confpired to affure her of that ardent paflion which filled the bofom of him whom all her en¬ deavours could not teach her,to for¬ get; and s this convidion ferved only to heighten her malady, and confequently her wretchednefs. The
( m ) The intereft which the uranger difco¬ vered, and the attention he paid to Mary, had not pafled unobferved by AUeyn. Love pointed to him the paffion which was rifing in his heart, and whifpered, that the vows of his rival would be pro¬ pitious. The words of Oibert confirm¬ ed him in the torturing apprehenfion; for though his humble birth had never fuf¬ fered him to hope, yet he thought he dif- covered in the fpeech of the Earl, fome¬ thing more than mere hereditary pride. The ftranger had contemplated the lovely form of Mary with increafing ad¬ miration fince the firft hour he beheld her: this admiration was now confirmed into love; and he refolved to'acquaint the Earl with his birth and with his paf¬ fion. For this purpofe, he one morning drew him afide to the terrace of the caftle, where they could converfe without inter¬ ruption; and pointing to the ocean, over which he had fo lately been borne, thank· ?? ed
( ·98 ) ed the Eail, who had thus foftened the horrors of ihipwreck and the defolation of a foreign land, by the kindnefs of his hofpitality. He informed him, that he was a native of Switzerland, where he poffeffed confiderable eftates, from which he bore the title of Count de Santmorin ; that inquiry of much moment to his in¬ terefts had brought him to Scotland, to a neighbouring port of which he was bound, when the difafter from which he had been fo happily refcued, arrefted the progrefs of his defigns. He then related to the Earl, that his voyage was undertaken up¬ on a report of the death of fome relations, at whofe demife confiderable eftates in Switzerland became his inheritance : that the income of thefe eftates had been hi- thetco received upon the authority of powers which, if the report was true, were become invalid. The Earl liftened to this narrative in filent aftoniihment, and inquired, with much,
( l 99 ) much emotion, the name of the Count's relations. " The Baronefs Malcolm/* returned he. The Earl clafped his hands in ecftacy. The Count, furprifed at his agitation, began to fear that the Earl was difagrceably interefted in the welfare of his adverfaries, and regretted that he had difclofed the affair till he obferved the pleafure which was diffufed through his features. Oibert explained the caufe of his emotion, by relating his knowledge of the Baronefs ; in the progrefs of whofe ftory the charader of Malcolm was fuffi¬ cientiy elucidated. He difcovered the caufe of his hatred towards the Baron, and the hiftory oí his imprifonment; and alfo confided to his honour the fecret of his challenge. The indignation of the Count was ftrongly excited ; he was, however, pre¬ vailed on by Oibert to forego any imme¬ diate effort of revenge, awaiting for a while the movements of Malcolm. ? ± The
( ???? )> The Count was fo abforbed in wonde? and in new fenfations, tharhe had almoft forgot the chief objed of the interview. Recolleding himfelf, he difcovered his paflion, ard requefted permiflion of the Earl to throw himfelf at the feet of Mary. The Earl liftened to the declaration with a mixture of pleafure and concern ; the remembrance of AUeyn faddened his mind ; but the wiíh of an equal con¬ nexion made him welcome the offers of the Count, whofe alliance, he told him, would do honour to the firft nobility of his nation. If he found the fentiments of hrs fifter in fympathy with his own on this point, he would welcome him to his family with the affedion of a bro¬ ther ; but he wiihed to difcover ihe fima* tion of her heart ere his noble friend difclofed to her his prepofleflion. The Earl, on his return to the caftle r inquired for Mary, whom he found in the apartment of her mother. He opened
( 201 ) opened to them the hiftory of the Count ; his relationfhip with the Baronefs Mal¬ colm, with the objed ofhis expedition; and clofed the narrative with difcovering the attachment of his friend to Mary, and his offers of alliance vvith his family. Mary grew pale at this declaration : there was a pang in her heart which would not fuffer her to fpeak ; ihe threw her eyes on the ground, and burft into tears. The Earl took her hand tendei ly in his : " My beloved fifter/' faid he, " knows me too well to doubt my affec¬ tion, or to fuppofe I can wiib to influ¬ ence her upon a fubjed fo material to her future happinefs, and where her heart ought to be the principal diredrefs. Do me the juftice to believe that I make known to you the offers ofthe Count as a friend, not as a diredor. He is a man, whom, frota the (hort period of our ac¬ quaintance, I have judged to be dc' erv¬ ing of particular efteem. His mind appears to be noble, his heart ex pan¬ ic 5 five;
( ??? ) five ; his rank is equal with your own ; and he loves you with an attachment warm and fincere. But with all thefe advantages, I would not have my fifter give herfelf to the man who does not meet an intereft in her heart to plead his caufe." The gentle foul of Mary fwelled with gratirude towards her brother ;. íhe would have thanked him for the tendernefs of thefe fentiments, but a variety of emo¬ tions were ftruggling at her heart, and ftopped her utterance ; tears, and a fmile foftly clouded with forrow, were all íhe could give him in reply. He could not but perceive that fome fecret caufe of grief preyed upon her mind, and he fo¬ licited to knovv and to remove it. " My dear brother will believe the gratitude which his kindnefs------ u She would have finiihed the fentence, but the words died away upon her lips, and íhe threw herfelf on the bofom of her mother, con¬ cealing
ceafing her diftrefs, and wept in filence. The Countefs too well underftood the grief of her daughter; ihe had witneffed the fecret ftruggles of her heart, which- all her endeavours were not able to erafe, and which rendered the offers of the Count difgufting, and dreadful to her imagination. Matilda knew how to feel for her fufferings ; but the affedion of the mother extended her views beyond the prefent temporary evil, to the future welfare of her child; and in the long perfpedive of fucceeding years ihe be¬ held her united to the Count, whofe cha- rader diffufed happinefs and the mild dignity of virtue to all around him : íhe' received the thanks of Mary for her gen¬ tle guidance to the good ihe poflefled ;. the artlefs looks of the little ones around her fmiled their thanks, and the luxury of that fcene recalled the memory of times for ever paft, and mingled wirh the tear of rapture the figh of fond regret. The fureft method of erafing that affec- % 6 tion.
( zot ) tion which threatened ferious evil to the peace cf her child, if fuffered to conti¬ nue, and to fecure her permanent felicity, was to unite her to the Count, whofe amiable difpofitions would foon win her affections, and obliterate from her heart every improper remembrance of Alieyn. She determined, therefore, to employ ar¬ gument and gentle perfuafion, to guide her to her purpofe. She knew the mind of Mary to be delicate and candid ; eafy of conviction, and firm to purfue what her judgment approved; and flie did not defpair of fucceeding. The Earl ftili preffed to know the caufe of that emotion which afflicied her, " lam unworthy of your folicitude," faid Mary ; u I cannot teach my heart to fub* mit." — <c To fubmit !—- Can you fuppofe your friends can wifh your heart to fub¬ mit on a point fo material to its happinefs to aught that is repugnant to its feelings ? If the offers of the Count are difpleafmg to
ï 205 ) to you, tell me fo, and I will return hint his anfwer. Believe that my firft wiih is to fee you happy."—" Generous Ofibert! How can 1 repay the goodnefs of fuch a brother I I would accept in gratitude the hand of the Count, did not my feelings affure me I fliould be miferable. I ad¬ mire his 'character and ????? his good¬ nefs; but, alas!—why ftiould I conceal ? from you ?—my heart is another's* whofe noble deeds have won its involun¬ tary regards; one who is yet unconfcious of my diftínclion, and who fliall forever remain in ignorance of it." The idea of Alieyn flaihed into the mind of the Earl, and he no longer doubted to whom her heart was engaged. " My own feu- timents,'* faid he, u fufficientiy inform me of the object of your admiration. You do well to remember the dignity of your fex and of your rank; though 1 mult la¬ ment with you that worth like Alleyn's is not empowered by fortune io take its ftandard wkh nobility." At Alleyn's name,
( ??? ) name, the bluíhes of Mary confirmed Oíbert in his difcovery. " My child," faid the Countefs, " will not refign her tranquillity to a vain and ignoble attach¬ ment. She may efteem merit wherever ic is found, but ihe will remember the duty which ihe owes to her family and to herfelf, in contracting an alliance which isto fupport or diminiih the ancient con¬ fequence of her houfe. The offers of a man endowed vvith fo mbch apparent excellence as the Count, and whofe birth is equal to your own, affords a profpect too promifing of felicity to be haíl ily re¬ jeded. We will hereafter converfe more largely on this fubjeci "— tl Never íhall you have reafon to bluíh for your daugh¬ ter," faid Mary, with a modeft pride;, " but partion me, Madam, if I entreat that we no more renew a fubjecl; fo pain¬ ful to my feelings, and which cannot be productive of good;—for never will I give my hand where my heart does not accompany it.*' This was not a time to prefs
( 2? 7 ) prefs the topic ι the Countefs for the pre¬ fent defifted, and the Earl left the apart¬ ment with an heart divided between pity and difappointment. Hope,, however, whifpered to his wiflies, that Mary might in time be induced to admit the addreffes of the Count, and he determined not wholly to deftroy his hopes.
CHAP*
( 20$ )'
CHAPTER Χ. X HE Count was walking on the ram¬ parts of the caflle, involved in thought* when Oibert approached ; whofe linger¬ ing ftep and difappointed air fpoke to his heart the rejedion of his fuit. He told the Count, that Mary did not at prefent ieel for him thofe fentiments of affedion which would juftify her in accepting his propofals. This information, though it ihocked the hopes of the Count, did not entireiy deftroy them ; for he yet believed that time and aifiduity might befriend his wifhes. While ihefe noblemen were leaning on the walls of the caftle, en¬ gaged in earneft converfation, they ob¬ ferved, on a diftant hill, a cloud emerg¬ ing from the verge of the horizon, whofe duíky hue glittered with fudden light t
( 209 ) light; in an inftant they defcried the glance of arms, and a troop of armed men poured, in long fucceflion over the hill,. and hurried down its fide to the plains below. The Earl thought he recognifed the clan ofthe Baron* It was the Baron himfelf vvho now advanced at the head of his people, in fearch of that revenge which had been hitherto denied him ; and who, determined on conqueft, had brought with him an hoft which he thought more than fufficient to over¬ whelm the caftle of his enemy. The meflenger who had been fent with the challenge, had been detained a prifoner by Malcolm; vvho, in the mean time, had haftened his preparations to furprife the caftle of Athlin. The de¬ tention of his fervant had awakened the fufpicions of the Earl, arid he had taken precautions to guard againft the defigns of his enemy, lie had fummoned his. clan to hold themfelves in readinefs for a fudden
( aio ) fudden attack, and had prepared his caftle for the worft emergency. He now fent a meflenger to the clan with fuch orders as he judged expedient, arranged his plans within the walls, and took his ftation on the ramparts, to obferve the movements of his enemy. The Count, clad in arms, ftood by his fide. Alieyn was pofted with a party within the great gate of the caftle. The Baron advanced with his people, and quickly furrounded the walls. With¬ in ail was filent : the caftle feemed to re¬ pofe in fecurity; and the Baron, certain of vidory, congratulated himfelf on the fuccefs of the enterprife, when obferving the Earl, whofe perfon was concealed in armour, he called to him to furrender himfelf and his Chief to the arms of Malcolm. The Earl anfwered the funi· irions with an arrow from his bow, which, miffing the Baron, pierced one of his attendants.
( au ) attendants. The archers who had been planted behind the walls, now difcovered themfelves, and difcharged a ihower oi arrows; at the fame time every part of the caftle appeared thronged with the fol¬ diers of the Earl, who hurled on the heads of the aftoniftied befiegers lances and other miflile weapons with unceafing rapi¬ dity. The alarum-bell now rung out the fignal to that part of the clan without the walls, and they immediately poured upon the enemy, who, confounded by this nn^ expeded attack, had fcarcely time to de* fend themfelves. The clang of arms re¬ founded through the air, with the ftiouts of the vidors and the groans of the dy¬ ing. The fear of the Baron, which had principally operated on the minds ofhis people, was now overcome by furprife and the fear of death ; and on the firft; repulfe, they deferted from the ranks in great numbers, and fled to the diftant hills* In vain the Baron endeavoured to rally
( 2?α ) rally his foldiers, and keep them to the charge : they yielded to a ftronger im¬ pulfe than the menaces of their Chief, who was now left with lefs than half his num¬ bers at the foot of the walls. The Baron, to whom cowardice was unknown, dif¬ daining to retreat, continued the attack. At length the gates of the caftle were thrown open, and a party iffued upon the affailants, headed by the Earl and the. Count, who divided in queft of Malcolm. The Count fought in vain, and the fearch of Oibert was equally fruitlefs ; their ad¬ verfary was no where to be found. Of¬ bert, apprehenfive of his gaining admit¬ tance to the caftle by ftratagem, was re¬ turning in hafte to the gates, when he re* ceived the ftroke of a fword upon his (boulder ; his armour had broke the force. ofthe blow, and the wound it had given. was flight. He turned his fword, and fa-, cing his enemy, difcovered a foldier of Malcolm's, who attacked him with a def¬ perate
( ülj ) Tate courage. The encounter was fu¬ rious and long; dexterity and equal valour feemed to animate both the com¬ batants. Alieyn, who obferved from his poft the danger of the Earl, flew in¬ ftantly to his aífiftance; but the crifis of the fcene was paft ere he arrived; the weapon of Oibert had pierced the fide of his adverfary, and he fell to the ground. The Earl difarmed him, and holding over him his fword, bade him aík his life. " I have no life to aik," faid Malcolm, whofe fainting voice the Earl now difcovered ; " if I had, 'tis death only I would accept from you. ? ! curfed í —■" He would have finiilied the fentence, but his wound flowed apace, and he fainted with lofs of blood. The Earl threw down his •fword, and calling a party of his people, he committed to them the care of the Baron, and ordered them to proceed and feize the caftle of Dunbayne. Under« ftanding their Chief was mortally wounded,
( 214 ) wounded, the remains of Malcolm*s army had fled from the walls. The peo¬ ple of the Earl proceeded without inter¬ ruption, and took poffeflion of the caftle without oppofition. The wounds of the Baron were exa¬ mined when he reached Dunbayne, and a dubious fentence of the event was pro¬ nounced. His countenance marked the powerful workings of his mind, which feemed labouring with an unknown evil; he threw his eyes eagerly round the apartment, as if in fearch of fome objed which was not prefent. After feveral at¬ tempts to fpeak, " Flatter me not," faid he, " with hopes of life ; it is flitting h\ away; but while î have breath to fpeak let me fee the Baronefs." She came, and hanging over his couch in filent horror, received his words. '* I have injured you, Madam, I fear beyond reparation. In thefe laft few moments let me endeavour to relieve my con¬ feience
( 2>? ) feience by difcovering to you my guilt and my remorfe." The Baronefs ftart¬ ed, fearful of the coming fentence. " You had a fon." —" What of my fon ?"—" You had a fon whom my boundlefs ambition doomed to exile from his parents and his heritage, and who I caufed you to believe had died in your abfence."—** Where is my child ?" ex¬ claimed the Baronefs. " I know not," refumed Malcolm ; " I committed him to the care of a man and woman who then lived on a remote part of my lands ; but a few years after they difappeared, and I have never heard of them fince. The boy pafled for a foundling whom I had faveu from periihing. One fervant only I entrufted with the fecret; the reft were impofed upon. Thus far I tell you, Madam, to prompt you to in¬ quiry, and to affuage the agonies of a bleeding; confeience. I have other deeds—-—." The Baronefs could hear no more ; (lie was carried infenfible from %, the
< ??? ) the apartment. Laura, ihocked at her condition, was informed of its caufe, and filial tendernefs watched over her with unwearied attention. In the mean time the Earl, on quit¬ ting Malcolm, had returned immediate¬ ly to the caftle, and was the firft meffen¬ ger of that event which would probably avenge the memory of his father, and terminate the diftreffes of his family. The fight of Oibert. and the news he brought, revived the Countefs and Mary, who had retired during the affauk into an inner apartment of tlie caftle for greater fecurity, and who had fuffered during that period all the terrors which their fituation could infpire. They were foon after joined by the Count and by AUeyn, whofe condud did not pafs unnoticed by the Earl, The cheek of Mary glowed at the relation of this new inftance of his worth; and it was Alleyn's fweet reward to obferve her
( *i7 ) her emotion. There was a fentiment in the heart of Oibert which ftruggled againft the pride of birth ; he wiihed to reward the fervices and the noble fpirit ofthe youth, wkh the vil tues of Mary ; but the authority of early prejudice filenced the grateful impulfe, and fwept from his heart the characters of truth. * The Earl, accompanied by the Count, now haftened to the caftle of Dunbayne, to cheer the Baronefs and her daughter with their prefence. As they approached the caftle, the ftillnefs and defolation of the fcene befpoke the fituation of its Lord ; his people were entirely difperfed : a few only of his centinels wandered before the eaftern gate; who, having made no oppofition, were ? ffercd by the Earls people to remain. Few of the Baron's people were to be feen; thofe few were unarmed, and appeared the effigies of fallen greatnefs. As the Eari croifed the platform, the remembrance i* of
( 2iZ ) of the paft crowded upon his mind. The agonies which he had there fuffered —the image of death which glared upon his fight, aggravated by the bitter and ignominious circumftances which attend¬ ed his fate; the figure of Malcolm, mighty in injuftice, and cruel in power; whofe countenaiice, fmiling horribly in triumphant revenge, fent to his heart the ftroke of anguiih ;-—each circumftance of torture arofe to his imagination in the glowing colours of truth ; he ihuddered as he paffed ; and the contrait of the prefent fcene touched his heart with the moft affecting fentiments. He faw the innate and active power of juftice, which pervades all the circumftances even of this lifelike vital principle, and fiiines through the obfcurity of human actions, to the virtuous, the pure ray of Heaven; —to the guilty, the deftruclive glare of lightning. On inquiring for the Baronefs, they were
( 2l 9 ) were told íhe was in the apartment of Malcolm, whofe moment of diffolution was now approaching. The name of the Count was delivered to the Baronefs, and overheard by the Baron, who defired to fee him. Louifa went out to receive her noble relation with all the joy which a meeting fo defirable and fo un- looked for, could infpire. On feeing Oibert, her tears flowed faft; and flie thanked him for his generous care, in a manner that declared a deep fenfe of his fervices* Leaving him, (he conducted the Count to Malcolm, who lay on his couch furrounded with the ftillnefs and horrors of death. He raifed his languid head, and difcovered a countenance wild and terrific, whofe ghaftly afpect: was overfpread with the palenefs of death. The beauteous Laura, overcome by· the fcene, hung like a drooping lily over his couch, dropping faft her tears/ a My Lord," faid Malcolm, in a low tone, " you fee before you a wretch, ? a anxious
( 2Z0 ) anxious to relieve the agony of a guilty mind. My vices have deftroyed the peace of this lady—have robbed her of a fon¿ —but fhe will difclofe to you the fecret guiit, which I have now no time to tell. 1 have for fomc ye&is received, as you now well know, the income öf thofe foreign lands which are her due; as a fmali reparation for the injuries ihe has fuftained, ί bequeath to her all the poifeffions which I lawfully inherit, and refign her into your protection. To aík oblivion ofthe paft of you, Madam, and of you, my Lord, is what I dare not do; yet it would be fome confolation to my departing fpirit, to be affured of your forgivenefs." The Baronefs was too much affected to reply but by a look of afíent ; the Count affured him of forgivenefs, and befought him to com¬ pofe his mind for his approaching fate. * f Compofure, my Lord, is not for me ; my life has been marked with vice, and my death with the bitternefs of fruitlefs remorfe.
( 2.2.1 ) remorfe. I have underftood virtue", but I have loved vice. í do not now lament that I am puniihed, but that I have de¬ ferved puniíhment." The Baron funk on his couch, and in a few moments after expired in a ftrong figh. Thus ter¬ minated the life of a man, whofe under¬ ftanding might have reached the happi¬ nefs of virtue, but whofe actions difplay¬ ed the features of vice, From this melancholy fcene, the Ba¬ ronefs, with the Count and Laura, re* tired to her apartment, where the Earl awaited their return with anxious foli¬ citude« ' The fternnefs of juftice for a moment relaxed when he heard of Mal¬ colm's death; his heart would have fighed with compaffion, had not the re¬ membrance of his father croffed his mind, and checked the impulfe. t< f can now, Madam," faid he, addreffing the Baronefs, " reftore you a part of thofe pofleffions which were once your L 3 Loixlb,
( 222 ) Lord's, and which ought to have been the inheritance of your fon ; this caftle from henceforth is yours; I refign it to its lawful owner.** The Baronefs was overcome with the remembrance of his fervices, and could fcarcely thank him but with her tears. The fervant whom the Baren had mentioned sli the confi¬ dant of his iniquities, was fent for, and interrogated concerning the infant he had charge of. From him, however, little comfort was received ; for he could oniy tell, that he had conveyed the child, by the orders ofhis mafter, to a cottage on the furtheft borders of his eftates, where he had delivered it to the tare of a woman, who there lived with her huíband. Thefe people received at the fame time, a fum of money for its fupport, with a promife of future fup¬ plies. That for fomc years he had been pundual in the payment of the funis entrulled to him by the Baron, but at length he yielded to the temptation of with-
( ?? ) withholding them for his own ufe ; and on inquiring for the people fome years after, he found they were gone from the place. The conditions of the Baronefs's pardon to ihe man, depended on his endeavours to repair the injury he had promoted, by a ftrid fearch for the peo¬ ple to whom he had committed her child. She now confulted with her friends on the bcft means to be purfued in this bufinefs, and immediately fent off mef- fengers to different parts of the country to gather information. The Baronefs was now releafed from oppreffion and imprifonment; flie was reinftated in her ancient poffeflions, to which vvere added all the hereditary lands of Malcolm, together with his perfonal fortunet íhe was furrounded by thofe whom flie moft loved, and in the midft of a people vvho loved her ; yet the confequence of the Baron's guiit had left in her heart one drop of h 4 gall
( 224 ) gali which embittered each fource of happinefs, and made her life melancholy and painful The Count was now her vifitor ; íhe was much confoled by his prefence ; and Laura's hours were often enlivened by the converfation of the Earl, to whom her heart was tenderiy attached, and whofe frequent vifits to the çaftlg were devoted to love and Jier. The felicity of Matilda now appeared as perfed and as permanent as is confift¬ ent with the nature of fublunary beings. Juftice was done to the memory of ber. Lord, and her beloved fon was fpared to blefs the evening of her clays. The father of Laura had ever been friendly to the houfe of Athlin, and her delicacy felt no repugnance to the union which Ofbert folicited. But her happinefs, whatever it might appear, was incom¬ plete; flie faw the fettled melancholy of Mary,
( ?$ ) Mary, for Iove ftill corroded her heart, and, notwithftanding her efforts, ihaded her afped. The Countefs wifhed to produce thofe nuptials with the Count, which me thought would re-eftabíiíh the peace of her child, and infure her future felicity. She omitted no oppor¬ tunity of prefling his fuit, which fhe managed with a delicacy that rendered it kfs painful to Mary; whofe words, however, were few in reply, and who could feldom bear the fubjed to be long continued. Her fettled averfion to the addreffes ofthe Count, at length baffled the expedations of Matilda, and íhowed her the fallacy of her effoits. She thought it improper to fuffer the Count any longer to nouriih in his heart a vain hope ; and fhe reludantly commiifioned the Earl to undeceive him on this point. With the Baronefs, month after month flill elapfed in fruitlefs fearch of L 5 her
( 226 ) her fon ; the people with whom he had been placed were no where to be found, and no track was difcovered which might lead to the truth. The diftrefs of the Baronefs can only be imagined ; (he refigned herfelf in calm defpair to mourn in filence, the eafy confidence which had entrufted her child to the care of thofe who had betrayed him. Though happinefs was denied her, flie was un¬ willing to withhold it from thofe whom it awaited ; and at length yielded to the entreaties of the Earl, and became his advocate with Laura, for the nuptials which were to unite their fate. The Earl introduced the Countefs and Mary to the caftle of Dunbayne. Similarity of fentiment and difpofition united Matilda and the Baronefs in a lafting friendihip. Mary and Laura were not lefs pleafed with each other. The dejection of the Count at fight of Mary, declared the ardour of his paflion, and
( ft*7 ) and would have awakened in her breaft fomething more than compaffion, had not her heart been pre-occupied. Al¬ ieyn, who could think of Mary only, wandered through the caftle of Athlin a folitary being, who fondly haunts the fpot where his happinefs lies buried. His prudence formed refolutions which his paffion as quickly broke ; and cheat¬ ed by love, though followed by defpair,. he delayed his departure from day to day, and the illufion of yefterday con¬ tinued to be the illufion of the morrow. The Earl, attached to his virtues, and grateful for his fervices, would have beftowed on him every honour but that alone which could give him happinefs, and which his pride would have fuffered him to accept. Yet the honours which he refufed, he refufed with a grace fo modeft, as to conciliate kindnefs rather than wound generofity. In a gallery, on the north fide of the h 6 caftle,
V 225 ) caftle, which was filled with pictures of the family, hung a portrait of Mary. She was drawn in the drefs which ihe wore on the day of the feftival, when fhe was led by the Earl into the hall, and prefented as the partner of Alieyn. The likenefs was ftriking, and expref¬ five of all the winning grace of the ori¬ ginal. As often as Alieyn could fteal from obfervation, he retired to this gal¬ lery to contemplate the portrait of her who was ever prefent to his imagina¬ tion : here he could breathe that figh which her prefence reftiained, and ftied thofe tears which her prefence forbade to flow. As he ftood one clay in this ^ place, wrapt in melancholy mufing, his ear was ftruck with the notes of fweet mufic; they feemed to iffue from the bottom of the gallery. 1 he inftrument was touched with an exquifite expreffion, and in a voice whofe tones floated on the air in foft undulations; he diftinguiihed the following words, which he remem¬ bered
( 229 > bered to be an ode compofed by the Earl, and prefented to Mary, who had let it to mufic the day before. MORNING. Darknfss! through thy chilling glooms, Weakly trembles twilight gray ; Twilight fades—and rnornin« comes, And melts thy ihadows fwift away ! She conies in her æthereal car, Invoiv'd in ???? a varying hue; And through the azure fhooïs afar, Spirit—light—and lire anew ! Her breath revives the drooping flowers, Her ray diiToIve;» the dews of night ; Xecalls the fpriph ly-moving hours, And the green fcene unveils in hght l Hers the frefli gale that wanders wild O'er mountain top, and woodland glade? And fondly fteais the breath, beguii'd, Of ev'ry flow'r hi ev'ry ihade*
Mother
( 230 ) Mother of rofes !—bright Aurora !—hail ! Thee lhall the chorus of the homs falute r And Cong of early birds from ev'ry vale, And bHthíbme horn, and fragrant zephyr mute ï And oft as rifing o'er the plain, Thou and thy rofeate Nymphs appear, This fimple fong in choral ftrain, From rapturing Bards fliall raeef thine ear* ? HO RVS, Dance ye lightly—lightly on ! *Tis the bold lark through the air Hails your beautifb with his fong;. Lightly—Hgbdy fleeting air I Entranced in the fweet founds, he had proceeded fome fteps down the gallery, when the mufic ceafed. He flopped* After a fliort paufe it re¬ turned, and as he advanced he diftin¬ guiihed thefe words, fung in a low voice mournfully fweet ; In folitude I mourn thy reign, Ah ï youth belov'd—but lov'd in vain í
The
( ?* ) The voice was broken, and loft 'm fobs ; the chords of the lute were wildly ftruck ; and in a few moments filence enfued. He ftepped on towards the fpot whence the founds had proceeded ; and through a door, which was left open, he difcovered Mary hanging over her lute diflblved in tears. He ftood for fome moments abforbed in mute admi¬ ration, and unobferved by Mary, who was loft in her tears, till a ligh which efcaped him, recalled her to reality; ihe railed her eyes, and beheld the object of her fecret forrows. She arofe in con¬ fufion ; the blufli on her cheek betrayed her heart ; ihe was retiring in hafte from Alieyn, who remained at the entrance of the room the ftatue of defpair, when ftie was intercepted by the Earl, who entered by the door (lie was opening 5 her eyes were red with weeping; he glanced on her a look of furprife and difpieafure, and pafted on to the gallery followed by Alieyn, who was now awak¬ ened
( 232 ) ened from his trance. " From you, Alieyn/' faid the Earl, in a tone of dif * pleafure, " I expeded other condud ; on your word I relied, and your word has deceived me/*—-" Hear me, my Lord," returned the youth : " your confidence 1 have never abufed; hear me.'*— sí I have now no time for parley," replied Oibert, " my moments are pre¬ cious ; fome future hour of leifure may fuffice." So faying, he walked away with an abrupt haughtinefs, which touched the foul of AUeyn, who dif- dained to purfue him vvith further ex¬ planation. He was now completely wretched. The fame accident which had unveiled to him the heart of Mary, and the full extent of that happinefs which fare withheld, confirmed him in defpair. The fame accident had ex* pofed the delicacy of lier he loved to a cruel fhock, and had fobjeded his ho-y nour to fufpicion ; and to a fevere rebuke from him, by whom it was his pride to ι be
( m ) be refpected, and for whofe fafety ?? had fuffered imprifonment, and encoun¬ tered death. Mary had quitted the clofet diftrefled and perplexed. She perceived the mif¬ take of the Earl, and it ihocked her. She wifhed to undeceive him, bul ho was gone to the caftle of Dtwbayne, tc* pay one of thofe vifits which were foor* to conclude in thç nuptials, and whence he did not rtturn till evening· Th« fcene whicji ?? had witneiîisd in thei morning, involved him in ? |???1( of diftrefs. He confidered the mutual paf¬ fion which filled the bofom of his fifter and AUeyn ; he had furprifed them in a folitary apartment; he had obferved the tender and melancholy air of Alieyn, and the tears and confufion of Maryj and he at firft did not hefitate to believe that the interview had been appointed. In the heat ofhis difpieafure he had re¬ jected the explanation of AUeyn with % haughty
( m ) haughty refentment, which the late fcene alone could have excited, and which the delufion it had occafioned alone could excufe. Cooler confideration, however, brought to his mind the delicacy and the amiable pride of Mary, and the integrity of Alieyn ; and he accufed himfelf of a too hafty decifion. The zealous fervices of Alieyn came to his heart ; he repented that he had treated him fo rigoroufly ; and on his return inquired for him, that he might hear an explanation, and that he might foften the afperity of his former behaviour·
????-
( ?? )
CHAPTER XL -A.LLEYN was no where to be found» The Earl went himfelf in queft of him, but without fuccefs. As he returned from the terrace, chagrined and difap¬ pointed, he obferved two perfons crofs the platform at fome diftance before him ; and he could perceive by the dim moonlight which fell upon the fpot, thac they were not of the caftle. He called to them ; no anfwer was returned ; but at the found of his voice they quickened their pace, and almoft inftantly difap¬ peared in the darknefs of the ramparts* Surprifed at this phenomenon, the Earl followed with hafty fteps, and endea¬ voured to purfue the way they had taken. He walked on filently, but there was no found to direcl: his fteps. When he came
( ?? ) came to the extremity of the rampart, which formed the north angle of the caftle, he ftopped to examine the fpot, and to liften if any thing was ftirring. No perfon was to be feen, and all was buflied. After he had ftood fome time furveying the rampart, he heard the low reftrained voice of a perfon unknown ; but the diftance prevented his diftin¬ guiihing the fubjed of the converfation. The voice feemed to approach the place where he ftood. He drew his fword, and watched in filence their motions. They continued to advance, till fuddenly flopping, they turned, and took a long furvey of the fabric. t Their difcourfe was conduded in a low tone ; but the Earl could difcover, by the vehemence of their gefture, and the caution of their fteps, that they were upon fome defign dangerous to the peace of the caftle. Having finiilied their examination, they turned again towards the place where the Earl
( m ) Earl ftill remained : the iliade of a high turret concealed him from their view, and they continued to approach till they ar¬ rived within a ihort fpace of him, when they turned through a ruined arch-way of the caftle, and were loft in the dark re- celfes of the pile. Aftoniftied at what he had feen, Oibert haftened to the caftle, whence he di' patched fome of his peo¬ ple in fearch of the unknown fugitives; he accompanied fome of his domeftics to the fpot where they had laft difap¬ peared. They entered the arch-way, which led to a decayed part of the caftle ; they followed over broken pave¬ ment the remains of a paffage, which wás clofed by a low obfcure door, almoft concealed from fight by the thick ivy which overíhàdowed it. On opening this door, they defcended a flight of fteps which led under the pile, fo, ex*« tremeiy narrow and broken as to make the defcent both difficult and dangerous. The powerful damps of long-pent-up* vapours
( ?* ) vapours extinguiihed their light, and the Earl and his attendants were com¬ pelled to remain in utter darknefs, while one of them went round to the habitable part of the caftle to relume the lamp. While they awaited in filence the return of light, a fliort breathing was difiincUy heard at intervals near the place where they ftood. The fervants íhook with fear, and the Earl was not wholly unmoved. They remained en¬ tirely filent, liftening its return, when a found of footfteps ilowly ftealing through the vault ftartled them. The Earl demanded who pafled ;—he was anfwered only by the deep echoes of his voice. They ciaíhed their fwords and had advanced, when the fteps haftily retired before them. The Earl rufhed forward, purfuing the found, till over¬ taking the perfon who fled, he feized him ; a (hort fcuffle enfued ; the ftrength of Oibert was too powerful for his anta- goaift, who was nearly overcome, when the
( 49 ) the point of a iword from an unknown hand pierced his fide ; he relinquiihed his grafp, and fell to the ground. His domeftics, whom the activity of their mafter had outrun, now came up; but the affaffins, whoever they were, had accompliftied their efcape, for the found of their fteps was quickly loft in the diftance of the vaults. They endea¬ voured to raife the Earl, who lay fpeech¬ lefs on the ground ; but they knew not how to convey him from that place of horror, for they were yet in total dark¬ nefs, and unacquainted with the place. In this fituation every moiuent of delay appeared an age. Some of them tried to grope their way to the entrance, but their efforts were defeated by the dark¬ nefs and the ruinous fituation of the place. The light at length appeared, and difcovered the Earl infenfible, and weltering in his blood. He was con¬ veyed into the caftle, where the horror of the Countefs on feeing him borne into
{ Mo ) feito the hall may be eafily imagined. By the help of proper applications he was reftored to life; his wound was ex* amined, and found to be dangerous ; and he was carried to bed in a ftate which gave very faint hopes of recovery. The aftoniihment of the Countefs on hearing the adventure was equalled only by her diftrefs. All her conjedures concern¬ ing the defigns and the identity of the aflaifin were vague and uncertain. She knew not on whom to fix the ftigma ; nor could difcover any means by which to penetrate this myfterious affair. The people who had remained in the vaults to purfue the fearch, now returned to Matilda. Every recefs of the caftle, and every part of the ramparts, had been explored, yet no one could be found ; and the myftery of the proceeding was heightened by the manner in which the men had effeaed their efcape. Mary 4 watched over hei brother in filent
t *4i ; íilent anguiih, yet íhe ftrove to conceal her diítrefs, that (he might encourage the Countefs- to hope. The Countefs endeavoured to refign herfelf to the event with a kind of defperate fortitude. There is a certain point of mifery, be¬ yond which the mind becomes callous, and acquires a fort of artificial calm, Excefs of mifery may be faid to blaft the vital powers of feeling, and by a natural confequence confumes its own principle. Thus it was with Matilda: a long fucceffion of trials had reduced ber to a ftate of horrid tranquillity, which followed the ñrík fhock of the prefent event, it was not fo with Laura ; young İn misfortune, and gay in hope, íhe faw happinefs fade frotn her grafp with a warmth of feeling untouched by the chill of difappointment. When the news of the Earls fituation reached her, ihe was overcome with afflidion, and pined in filent anguiih. The Count m haftened
( Mä .) liaftened to Oibert, but grief fat heavy ^t his heart, and he had no power to 'offer to others the comfort which he wanted himfelf. A fever, which was the confequence of his wounds, added to the danger of «he Earl, and to the defpair of his fa¬ mily, . During this period, Alieyn had not been feen at tlie caftle ; and his ab¬ fence at this time raifed in Mary a va· riety of o^ft^fting apprehenfions. Of- bert inquired for him, and wiihed to fee him. The fervanî who had been fent to his father's cottage, brought word that it was fome days fince he had been there, and that nobody knew whither he was gone. The forprife was univerfal, but the effect it produced was various and oppofite. A collection of ftrange and concomitant circumftances now forced a fufpicion on the mind of the Countefs, which her heart, and her remembrance of
( ?? ) of the forrøer condud of.AUeyn, ,at once condemned. Sh^ had heard of what pafled between the Earl and him in the gallery ; his immediate abfence, the event chicli followed, and his fu bie» quent flight, formed a chain cf evidebne which compelled her, wuh the utmoft; reludance, to believe him concerned in the affair which had onr^ more involved her houfe in mifery* Mary had too much confidence in her knowledge of his charadcr to admit a fufpicion of this nature. She rejeded with inftant difdain the idea of uniting AUeyn with diíhonour ; and that he fhould be guilty of an adion fo bafe as the prefent, foared beyond all the bounds of poffibility. s Yet flie felt a ftrange folicitude concern- ipg him, and apprehenfions for his fafety tormented her inceffantly. The' anguiih in which he had quitted the apaitment, her brother's injurious treat¬ ment, and his confequent abfence, all m a con*
( 244 } confpired to make her fear that defpair Had driven him to commit forne ad öf -violence on himfelf. The Earl, in the delirium of the fever, raved continually of Laura and of Alieyn ; they were the fole fubjeds of his rambiings. Seizing one day the hand^of Mary, Who fat mournfully by his bed-fide, and looking for fome time penfive! y in her face, " Weep not, my Laura/' faid he ; u Malcolm, nor all the powers on earth, ihall tear you from me ; his walls — his guards------ what are they ì ?И wreft you from his hold, or perifli. J have a friend whofe valour will do much for us;-— a friend-^O í name him not ; thefe are ftrange times ; beware of trufting. I couïd have given , him my very life— it not-—I will not name him." Then ftarting to the other fide of the bed, and looking earaeftly towards the doo- vith an ex¬ preflion
( us > preffion of forrow not to be defcribed·* " Not all the miferies which my woiil enemy has heaped upon me ; not all tht* horrors of imprifonment and death, have ever touched my foul with a fting fo fliarp as thy unfaithfulnefs." Mary was fo much fhocked by this fcene, that ftie left the room, and retired to her own apartment to indulge the agony of grief it occafioned. The fituation of the Earl, grew daily more alarming; and the fever, which had not yet, reached its crifie, kept the hopes a.nd fears ofhis family fufpended. In one pf his lucid intervals, addrefling fiimfelf to the Countefs in the moft pathetic manner, , he requefted, that, as death might probably ¡(???», fenarate him for ever from her he »moft, loved, he might fee Laura once again before he died. She came, and weeping over him, a fcene of anguifli enfued top poignant for deferi p- * t M 3 tion.
( 34*5 ) tion. He gave her his laft vows; fhe took of him a laft look ; and vvith a breaking heart tearing herfelf away» was carried to Dunbayne in a ftate of danger little inferior to his. The agitation he had fuffered during this interview, caufed a return of frenzy more violent than any fit he had yet fuffered; exhaufted by it, he at length funk into a fleep, which continued without interruption for near four and twenty hours. During this time his re¬ pofe was quiet and profound; aiid af¬ forded thé Countds arid ?&??; wid watched over him* alternately, the con» folations of hope; Whefi hé awoke ? was perfedly fenfible, and in a very al¬ tered ftate from that he had been in ä few hours before. The crifis of thé diforder was now paft, and from that time it rapidly declined till he was re* ftored to perfed health.
( 247 ) The joy of Laura, whofe health gra¬ dually returned with returning peace* and that of his family, was fuch as the merits of the Earl deferved. This joy, however, fuffered a íhort interruption from the Count of Santmorin, who, en¬ tering one morning the apartment, of the Baronefs, with letters in his hand, came to acquaint her that he had juft received news of the death of a dittano. relation, who had bequeathed him fome eftates of values to which it was acccf- iary he ftiould immediately lay claim ; amd that he was therefore obliged, how¬ ever reluctantly, to fet off for Switzer¬ land, without delay. Though the Ba¬ ronefs rejoiced with all his friends at his good fortune, flie regretted with them the ncceflity of his abrupt depar¬ ture. He took leave of them, and par¬ ticularly of Mary, for whom his paífion, was ftill the fame, with much emotion ; *ßd ? W4S fome tirøe ere the fpace he m 4 had 1
( M ) had left in their fociety was filled up, and ere they relumed iheir wonted cheerfulnefs. Preparations were now making for íhe approaching nuptials, and the day of their celebration was at length fixed. The ceremony was to be performed in a chapel belonging to the caftle of Dunbayne, by the chaplain of the Ba¬ ronefs. Mary only was to attend as bride-maid ; and the Countefs alfo, with the Baronefs, was to be prefent. The abfence of the Count was uni¬ verfally regretted ; for from his hand tfee Eari was to have received his bride- The office was now to be fupplied by a neighbouring Laird, whom the fa¬ mily of the Baronefs had long efteemed. At the earneft requeft of Laura, Mary confented to fpend the night preceding the day of marriage at the caftle of Dunbayne. The day fo long and fo anxioufly
( Ä49 ) anxioufly expected by the Earl at length'arrived. The morning was ex¬ tremely fine, and the joy which glowed in his heart gave additional fplendour to the fcene around him. He fet off, accompanied by the Countefs, for the caftle of Dunbayne. He anticipated the joy with which he ihould foon re¬ trace the way he then travelled, with Laura by his fide, whom death alone could then feparate from him. On their arrival they were received by the Baronefs, who inquired for Mary; and the Countefs and Oibeit were thrown into the utmoft confternation, when they learned that (hv had not been feen at the caftle. The nuptials were again deferred ; the caftle was a fcene of univerfal confufion. The ???1 re¬ turned home inftantly, to difpatch his people in fearch of Mary. On in¬ quiry, he learned that the fervants who had attended her had not been m 5 heard
( aso ) heard of fmce their departiré with their lady. Still more alarmed by this intelligence, he rode himfelf in purfuit, yet not knowing which courfe to take. Several days were employed in ä fruitlefs fearch; nø footftcp of htr flight could be traced*
CHAP·»
? hi ) CHAPTER ?И. .MARY, in the mean time, fuffered all die terror which her fituation ???? excite. On her way to Dunbayne (he had been overtaken by a party of armed men, who feized heir bridle, and, after engaging her fervants in a feigned refiftarfce, carried her off fenfe¬ lefs. On recovering, flie found her¬ felf travelling through a foreft, whofe glooms were deepened by the fliades of night. The moon, which was now up ? glancing through the trees, ferved to ¡(how the dreary afpetì of the place, and the number of men who furrounded her ;, and ftie was feized vvith a terror that almoft deprived her of reafon. They travelled all night, d tiring which a pro¬ found filence was obferved. At the dawn.of day the found fyerfelf on the M 6 Ikirts
( ?? ) fkirts of a heàth, to whofe wide defola- tion her eye could difcover no limits. Before they entered on the wafte, they halted at the entrance of a cave, formed in a rock, which was overhung with pine and fir ; where, fpreâding their breakfaft on the grafs, they offered re¬ freíhments to Mary, whofe mind was too much diffracted to fuffer her to par¬ take of them. She implored them in the rooft moving accents, to tell her from whom they came, and whither they were carrying her; but they were in¬ fcnfible to her tears and her entreaties, and ihe wa* compelled to await in filent terror the extremity of her fate. They purfued their journey over the wilds, and towards the clofe of day approached the ruins of an abbey, whofe broken arches and lonely towers arofe in gloomy grandeur through the obfcurity of evening. It ftood the folitary inha¬ bitant of the waftes,—a monument of mortality and of ancient fuperftition» and
( m ) and the frowning majefty of its afped feemed to command filence and vene¬ ration. The chilly dews fell thick, and Mary, fatigued in body, and haraffed in mind, lay almoft expiring on her horfe, when they ftopped under an arch of the ruin. She was not fo ill as to be infenfible to the objeds around her ; the awful folitude of the place, and the folemn afped of the fabric, whofe effed was heightened by the falling glooms of evening, chilled her heart with hor¬ ror; and when they took her from the horfe, flie ihrieked in the agonies of a laft defpair. They bòre her over loofe ftones to a part of the buildings which had been formerly the cloifters' of the abbey, but which was now Killen to decay, and overgrown with ivy. There was, however, at the extremity of thefe cloifters a nook, which had withftood with hardier ftrength the ravages of time ; the roof was here entire, and the Chattered ftancheons of the cafements ftill
( 44· ) ftîll remained. Hither they carried Mary, and laid her ajmpft Ufelefs qn the grafly pavement, w, hile fprae of the ruf¬ fians haftened to light a fire of the heath and ftİGks they could pick up- They took out their provifions, ancl placed themfelves round the fire, where they bad not been long feated, when the foun,4 of diftant ttiunder foretpld an' approaching ftorm. A violent ftorm, accompanied with peals which jfhoojc the pile» came on. They vvere Sielr tered from, the he&vinefs of ?? rain; bqt the long and vivid flafhes of light¬ ning, which glanced through the cafe¬ ments, alarmed them all· The (briefs of Mary were loud and continued; and the fears of the rufíians did not pre¬ vent their uttering dreadful impreca¬ tions at her diftrefs: one of them, in the fury of his refentment, fwore (he fliould be gagged ; and feizing her re* fiftlefs hands to execute the purpofe, ber aies redoubled. The fervants who had
( 4i ) had betrayed her were not yet fo en¬ tirely loft to the feelings of humanity, as to ftand regardlefs of her prefent dif¬ trefs; though they could not refift the temptations of a bribe, they were un¬ willing their lady ihould be loaded with tmneceffary mifery. They oppofed the ruffians ; a difpute enfued ; and the violence of the conteft arofe fo high, that they determined to fight for the decifion. Amid the peals of thunder, the oaths and execrations of the com¬ batants added terror to the fcene. The urength of the ruffians were fuperior to that of their opponents ; a id Mary, be¬ holding victory deciding againft herfelf, uttered a loud feream, when the atten¬ tion of the whole party was furprifed by the found of a footftep in the cloifter. Immediately after a man rufhed into the place, and draw%ig his fword, de¬ manded the caufe of the tumult. Mary, who lay almoft expiring on the ground, now raifed her eyes; but what were her
her fenfations, when lhe raifed them to Alieyn î — who now ftood before her petrified with horror I Before he could fly to her affiftance the attacks of the ruffians obliged him to defend himfelf; he parried their blows for fome time, but he muft inevitably have yielded to the force of numbers, had not the trampling of feet, which faft approach¬ ed, called off for a moment their atten¬ tion. In an inftant the place was filled with men. The aftoniihment of AUeyn was, if poflible, now increafed ; for the Earl, followed by a party, now en¬ tered. The Earl, when he perceived Alieyn, ftood at the entrance aghaft! — But fefuming his firmnefs, he bade him defend himfelf. The loud voice of Oibert recalled Mary, and obferving their menacing attitudes, ihe collected juft ftrength fufficient to throw herfelf between them. AUeyn dropped his fword, and raifed her from the ground ; røhen the Earl rudely puihed him away, and
( 47 ) and fnatched her to his heart. Si Hear me, Oibert," was all flie could fay. *« Declare who brought her thither," faid the Earl fternly to AUeyn. " ï know not," replied he ; " you muft afk thofe men whom your people have ic¬ on cd. If my life is hateful to you, ftrike ! and fpare me the anguiih of de¬ fending it againft the brother of Mary." The Earl hefitated in furprife, and the generofity of Alieyn called a bluíh into his face. He was going to have replied, but was interrupted by fome of his men, who had been engaged in a tharp conteft with the ruffians, two of whom they had fecured, and now brought to their Lord ; the reft were fled. In the perfon of one of them the Earl dif¬ covered his own fervant, who finking in his prefence with confeious guilt, fell on his knees imploring mercy. " Wretch," faid the Earl, feizing, him, and holding his fword over his head, " declare by who r e authority you have aded, and all y Ola
( *5δ ) ^ou know of the afiair ; — remember your liíe depends on the truth of your aflertions."*—" ?И tell the truth, my Lord,'* replied the trembling wretch, ** and nothing elfe, as 1 hope for mercy. About three weeks ago,—no, it is not fo much; about a fortnight ago, when 1 was fent on a meflage to the Lady Mal¬ colm, the Count de Santmorin's gentle¬ man—— " *< The Count de Sant- morin !" re-echoed ihe whole company. " But proceed/ 1 laid Oibert. " The Count de Santmorin*s gentleman called me into a private room, where he told me to wak for his mafter, who would foon be tnem.'**— " Be quick," uid the Eail, a proceed to fads.'*—" I will, my Lord ; the Count came, and faid tc* rae, * Robert, I have obferved you, and I think you can be faithful/—he faid fo, my Lord, —^God forgive me!** — i{ Well, well, proceecV — (( Where was J ?—Oh ! he faid, t I think youh ? be ?????'?-·" Good God î this
( ^59 ) is beyond endurance ; you trifle, rafcal, vvith my patience, to give your afio« ciates time for efcape % be brief, or you die."— iC I will, my Lord, as I hope for life. He took from his pocket a hand¬ ful of gold, which he gave me ;—* Can you be fecret, Robert l faid he ;—* yes, myLordCount/íatd I, God forgive me f — ζ Then obíèrve what I fay to you. You often artcfd your young lady ¡a her rides to Dunbayne' l*— " What, then it was the Count de Santmorin who commiflïoned you to undertake this* fcheme !'*-—** Nor me only, my Lord/** " Anfwer my queftion ; Was the CounC the author of this plot ?"—**< He was* my Lord."— t( And where is he ?" faid Oibert, in a ftern voice. ** I know not» my Lord."—"** You know not î Wretch ! remember—your life.*'—" I know not, as I am a living creature. He em¬ barked, as you know, my Lord, not far from the caftle of Dunbayne, and wq were travelling to a diftant part of tho coaft
( 2?? ) coaft to meet him, when we were all to have fct fail for Sw^^cHand. 11 —" You cannot be ignorant of the place of your deftination,*' faid the Eail* turning to the other prifoner ; " where is your em¬ ployer ?"—" 1 hat is not for me to tell/* faid he, in a füllen tone. " Reveal the truth,** faid the Earl," turning towards him the point of his »fword, " or we will find a way to malA you/'—* r The place where wc were to meet the Count had no name.*'—" You know the way to it.*'—" I da**—" Then lead me thi- thcr. w — " Never ! w —" Never ! Your life ibail anfwer the refufal," faid Oibert, pointing the fword to 1m breaft. f ' Strike !" faid the Count» throwing off the cloak which had concealed him; *< ftrike ! and rid me of a being which paflion has made hateful to me; — ftrike !—and make the firft moment of my entering this ?1?? the laft of my guilt." A faint feream was uttered by Mary; the fmtl! remains of her ftrength forfook
( Q.6t ) forfook her, and ihe funk ön the pave¬ ment. The Earl ftarted a few fteps back, and ftood fufpended in wonder. The looks of the whole group defy defcription. u Take a fword," faid the Earl, recovering himfelf u and defend your life,"—" Never, my Lord, never î Though I have been hurried by the force of paflion to rob you of a fifter, I will not aggravate my guilt by the murder of the brother. Your life has already been once endangered through my means, though not by my defign; Heaven knows the anguiih which that accident coft me. The impetuofity of paflion impelled me onward with irre¬ fiftible fury ; it urged mc to violate the facred duties of gratitude—^of friend¬ ihip—and of humanity. To live in íhame, and in the confcioufnefs of guilt, is a living death. With your fword do juftice to yourfelf and virtue, and fpare nie the mifery of long comparing what I am with what I wat·"·-»" Away:
i sl6z ) you trifle,*' faid the Earl, u defend yomfelf." The Count repeated his re¬ fufal. " And you, villain/* faid Oibert, turning to the man who had confeífed the plot, " your pretended ignorance of the prefence of the Count, your per¬ fidy, ihall be rewarded/'—" .As I now plead for Jaercy, my Lord, 1 knew not he was here."-—" The fellow fpeaks truth,*' faid the Count ; " he was igno¬ rant of the place where he was to meet me· I was tappmaching this fpot to difcover myfelf to the dear objed of my paflion, when your people furprifed and took*me. n Mary confirmed the tefti- mmy of the Count, by declaring that (he4má not» rill that moment feen him ince fhe quitted the caftk of Dunbayne« She pleaded for his life, and aifo for the fervants ^who had oppofed the cruelty of their comrades. u I am no afläffin/* faid the Earl; " let the Count take a fword, and fight rae on equal terms/* ·<-■*■» " ShaU virtue be reduced to an equality
( ??? ) equality with vice ?" faid* the Count* " No, my Lord-^-------plunge your fword in my heart, and expiate my guilt " Tiie Earl ftili urged him to defence; and the Count ftill perfifted in refufal. Touched by the ????И????? of paft friendihip, and grieved that a foul like the Count's fliould ever be under the dominion of vice, Oibert threw down his fword, and, overcome with a fort of tendernefs — " Go, my Lord, your perfon is fafe ; and if it is neceffary to your peace," ftretching forth his hand, '* take my forgivenefs." The Count, overcome by his generofity, and by a fenfe of his own unworthinefs, flirunk back : *' Forbear, my Lord, to wound by your goodnefs a mind already too fenfible of its own ^«deba?few¥ent ; nor excite by your generofity a r%ntôrfe too keen to be endured. Your're¬ proaches I can bear, — your vengeance I folicit, — y but your kindnefs bflicìs a torture too exquifite for my foul. 4 -Never,
( 2^4 >
jtfever, my Lord," continued he, thè big ttar fwelling 'm his eye, — ** never more íhail your fiiendihip be polluted by my unworthinefs. Since you will not f&tisfy juftire by taking my life, I go to loie it in the obfcurity of diftant regions. Yet, ere I go, fuffer me to make one laft rtqueft to you, and to that dear lady whom I have thus injured, and on whom my eyes now gaze for the iaft time ;-*fuffer me to hope that you will blot from your memory the exift¬ ence of Santmorin." He concluded the fentence with a groan, which vibrated upon the hearts of all prefent; and ^without waiting for a reply, hurried frpm the fcene. The Earl had turned away his bead in pity, and when he agaiö ????? round to reply, perceived thit »ibe Count was departed ; he fol- Jowcd his fteps through the cloifter, — he calkd—but he was gone. Alieyn had obferved the Count with a mature of pity and admiration ; and he
( ? ) he fighed for the weaknefs of human nature. " How," laid the Earl, return¬ ing eagerly to Alieyn, " how can î recompenfe you for my injurious fufpi¬ cions, and my injurious treatment ? — How can you forgive, or I forget, my injuftice ? But the myftery of this affair, and the doubtful appearance of circum¬ ftances, muft fpeak for ??. 1 ' —" ? I let us talk no more of this, my Lord/* re«- plied Alieyn with emotion ; " let ? only rejoice at the fafety of our dear lady, and offer her the comfort (he is fo much in want of." The fire was rekindled, and the Earls fervants laid before him fomë 'wine and other provifions. Mary, who had not tatted any food fince fhe left the caftle, now took fome wine ; it revived her, and enabled her to take other nou· riíhment. She inquired what happy cir* cumftance had enabled the Earl to trace her route. €i Ever fince I difcovered your flight," faid he, " I have been in purfuit of you. Chance directed me over ? thrfe
( ??? ) thefe wilds, when í was driven by the ftorm to feek (helter among thefe ruins. The light,and an uproar of voices drew me to the cloifter, where, to my unutter¬ able aftoöiíhment, I difcovered. you and AUeyn Γ fpare me the remembrance of what followed/' Mary wifhed to inquire what brought Alieyn to the place, but delicacy kept her filent. Oibert, how- tver, whofe anxiety for his fifter had hi¬ therto allowed him to attend only to her, now relieved her from the pain of length¬ ened fufpenfe. ** By what ftrange acci¬ dent was you brought hither ?" faid he to Alieyn ; " and * what motive has in¬ duced you fo long to abfent yourfeff from the caftle?" Ac the laft queftion Alieyn bluíhed, and an involuntary figh efcaped him. Mary underftood the bluíh and the figh, and awaited his reply in trembling emotion. " I fled, my Lord, from your difpieafure, and to tear myfelf from an objeft too dangerous, alas ! for my peace. I fought to weir away in ab· í. fence
( *67 ) fence a paflion which muft ever be hope¬ lefs, but which, I now perceive, is inter¬ woven with my exiftence.—But forgive, my Lord, the intrufion of a fubjed which is painful to us alk With fome money r and a few provifions, I left my father's' cottage ; and fince that time have wan¬ dered over the country & forlorn and miferable bemg, faffing' my nights iri the huts which chance threw in my way* and defigninjg to travel onward, and td enltft myfelf in the fervice of my coun* try. Night overtook me on thefc waftes, and as I walked on comfoitlefs and be¬ wildered, i was alarmed by diftant cries of diftrefs. I quickened my pace ; but the found which ihould have direded my fteps was ce&fed> and a chilling filence enfued. As 1 ftood mufing, and uncertain which courfe to take, I ob* ferved a feeble tight break through the gloom; ? endeavoured to follow its rays; it led me to thefc ruins, whofe folemn appearance ftruck me with a momentary ? s dread.
( * 68 ) dread. * A confufed murmur of voices from within ftruck my ear; as I ftood , negating whether to enter, I again heard thofe íhlíeks which had alarmed me. I followed the found ; it led me to the en¬ trance of the cloifter, at the extremity oí which I difcovered a party of men engaged in fight ; I drew my fword and ruihed forward ; and the fenfations which I felt, on perceiving the Lady Mary, can¬ not be exprefled !"—" Still, ftill Heaven dcftincs you the deliverer of Mary !" fakl the Earl, gratitude fwelling in his eyes ; <* ? ! that I could remove that obftacle which withholds you from your juft re¬ ward l* A refponfive figh ftole from Alieyn, and he remained filent. Never was the ftruggle of oppofing feelings more violent, than that which now agi- - tated the bofom ofthe Earl. The worth of AUeyn arofe more confpicuouily bright from every íhade with which misfortune veiled it. His noble and difinterefted enthufiafm in the caufe of juftice had attached
( *6 9 ) attached him to the Earl, and had en-" gaged him in a courfe of enterprifes and- of dangers, which it required valour to undertake, and ikill and perfeverance to perform; and which had produced fer¬ vices for which no adequate reward could be .found* He had refcued the Earl from captivity and death, and had twice preferved Mary in dangers. AU thefe circumftances' arofe in. ftrong refledion to the mind of Oibert,; but the dark neis of prejudice and ancient pride oppofed their influence, and weakened thek effed* The joy which Mary felt on feeing- AUeyn in fafety, and ftill worthy of the efteem ihe had ever borne him, was daíhed by the bitternefs of refledion ; and refledion imparted a 4 melancholy which added to the languor of illnefs.. At the dawn of day they quitted the abbey, and fet forward on their return to the caftle; the Earl infifting upon AUeyn's accompanying them. On the æ 3 way,
( 270 ) way, the minds of the patty were va-. riouíly and filently engaged. The Earl ruminated on the condud of Alieyn* and the late fcene ; Mary dwelt chiefly on the virtues of her lover, and on the dangers íhe had efcaped; and Alieyn mufed on his defeated purpofes, and an· ticipated future trials. The Earls thoughts, however* were not fo wholly occupied as to prevent his queftioning the fervane ^who had been employed by the Count, concerning the further particulars of his fcheme. The words of the Count, im¬ porting that he had once already endan¬ gered his life, had not efcaped the no¬ tice of the Eari; though they were ut¬ tered in a moment of too much dif¬ traaion to fuffer him to demand an ex¬ planation, Me now inquired of the man concerning the myfterious fcene of the vaults» ** You, I fuppofe, are not ig¬ norant who were the perfons from whom ï received roy wound. 1 *— cf I, my Lord, had no concern in that affair; wicked
s
( *7i ) as I am, I could not raife my hands againft your life."—" But you know who dick w «« I—I—ye—yes, my î ,ord, I wus afterwards told.—But they did not mean to hurt your Lordfhip."—" Not mean to hurt me ! — What then were their defigns, and vvho were the people ?"—» " That accident happened long before the Count ever fpoke to me of his pur¬ pofe. Ind eed » my Lord, I had no hand in it ; and Heaven knows how I grieved for your Lordihip ; and-*—~" " Well * —well, inform mc, who were the per¬ fons in the vaults, and what was their defign/ 1 -^" I was told by a fellovv-fer* vant; but he made me promife to be fecret; but it is proper your Lordfliip ihould knovv all ; and I hope your Lordftiip will forgive me for having liftened to it,~< Robert,' faid he, as we were talking one day of what had happened ;~ ' Robert/ faid he, * there is more in this matter than you, or any body thinks; but it is not for me to N 4 tell
( *7* ) teil all ï know/ With that, î begged he would tell me what he knew ; but he ftili kept refufing, I promifed him faithfully I would not tell ; and fo at laft he told me.—* Why, thcie is my Lord Count there, he is in love with our young lady ; and to be fure as fweet a lady íhe is as ever eyes looked upon ; but flie don't like him ; and fo finding himfelf refufed, he is determined to marry her at any rate ; and means fome night to get into the caftle, and carry her ofTV'— " What, then !—was it the Count who %voundcd røe ? — Be quick in your relation.*'—** No, my Lord, it was not the Count himfelf—^but two of his people, whom he had fent to examine the caftle; and particularly the windows of my young lady's apart· ment, from whence he defigned to have carried her when every thing was ready for execution. Thefe ??? were let within the walls through a way under ground which leads into the vaults by my
( ^73 ) my fellow-fervant, as I afterwards u-as told í and they efcaped through the fame way. Their meeting with your Lord¬ ftiip was accidental, and they fought only in felf-defence ; for they had no orders to attack any body."·*—" And who is the villain that connived at this fcheme ?"—" It was my fello w-fer vant, who fled with the Count's people, whom he himfelf let within, the ramparts. Forgive me, my Lord ; but I did not dare tell; he threatened my life, if X betrayed the fecret. ,f After a journey of fatigue and un¬ pleafant reflections they arrived, on the fecond morning, at the caftle v of Athlin. The Countefs, during the abfence of her ion, had endured a ftate of dreadful fufpenfe. The Baronefs, in her friend¬ ihip, had endeavoured to footh 1? díftre/s by her qopftímç prefence ; t lhe ^as engaged in -this amiable office when tb$ sampling of horfes in thecqus N s cached
( ^74 ) reached the ears of Matilda. ** ît is my fon/' faid íhe, rifing from her chair; —~ tf it is my fon ; he brings me life or death !" She faid no more, but ruftied into the hall, and in a moment after clafped * her almoft expiring daughter to her bofom. The tranfport of thé fcene repelled utterance ; fobs and tears were all that could be given. The geneial joy, however, was fuddenly interrupted by the Baronefs, who had followed Ma¬ tilda into the ball, and vvho now fell fenfelefs to the ground ; delight yielded to furprife, and to the bufinefs of afftft- ihg the objed of it. On recovering, the Baronefs looked wildly round her;*-* ** %4L· It a vifion thai I faw, or a reality?" 1 tic Whole 'company moved their eyes round the hah,''but could difcover no¬ thing extraordinary· 4( It was ????; Ìris fary* air; hls features; that ???? couritèri$áce, which í have fo often fccta*- ????^??* Hi îmagmandn !° ??? eyes ? ïeerrieà in larch öf İorne'irjfâl «É>- 5 İ ç &î
( ? 75 ) jed ; and they began to doubt whether a fudden frenzy had not feized her brain* " Ah, again !" faid ihe, and inftantly relapfed. Their eyes were now turned towards the door, on which flie had gazed; it was AUeyn who entered, with water which he had fetched for the Countefs, and on whom the attention of all prefent was now centred. He approached, ignorant of what had hap¬ pened ; and his furprife was great, when the Baronefs reviving, ñxed her eyes mournfully upon him, and aiked him to uncover his arm. " It is,*— it is my Philip !" faid ihe, with ftrong emotion; " I L^ve, indeed, found my Jong-loft child ; that ftrawberry on his m'm confirms the decifion. Send for the man who calls himfelf your father, and for my fervant Patrick." The fen¬ fations of the mother and the fon may be more eafily conceived than defcribed ; thofe of Mary were little inferior to theirs^ and the whole company awaited vvith
? 276 ) with trembling eagernefs the arrival of the two perfons whofe teftimony was to decide this interefting affair. They came. ** This young man yon call your fon ?" faid the Baronefs. " 1 do, an* pleafe your Ladyfliip," he replied, whh a degree of confufion which belied his words. When Patrick came, hie inftant furprife on feeing the old man declared the truth. ** Do you know this perfon ?" faid the Baronefs to Patrick. '* Yes, my Lady, I know him too wellj it was to him I gave your infant fori." The old man ftarted with furprife. " h that youth the fon qf your Ladyfliip ?"— " Yes l'—'« Then God forgive me for having thus long detained him from you ! but I was ig¬ norant of his birth, and received him into my cottage as a foundling, fuc- coured by Lord Malcolm's companion.*' The whole company crowded round them» Alieyn fell at the feet of his mother, and bathed, her hand with his tears«
( 277 ) tears.—" Gracious God ! for what bail* thou referved me l* He could lay no more. The Baronefs raifed him, and again prefled him in tranfport to her heart. It was fome time before either of them could fpeak ; and all prefent were too much affecied to interrupt the filence. At length the Baronefs pre¬ fented Laura to her brother, r " Such a mother! and have. I fuch. a fifter l'* faid he* Laura wept filently upon his ñeck the joy of her heart;. The Earl was the firft who recovered compofure fufficient to congratulate Alieyn ; and embracing him-—*< ? ! happy moment, when I can indeed embrace you as my brother !" The whole company now poured forth their joy and their con«· gratulations ; — all but Mary, whofe emotions almoft overcame her, and were too powerful for utterance. The company now adjqumed to the drawing-room, and Mary withdrew to take
( ? 7 8 ) take that repofe íhe fo much required * She was fufficientiy recovered in a few hours to join her friends in the ban- quetting-room. After the tranfports of the fcene tøere fubfided«—** I hate yet!much to hope* and much to fear, 1 ' faid Philip Mai* colm, who was yet Alieyn ia every thing but in name. " You,- Madám/' addreffing the Baronefs, " you will willingly become my advocate with her whom I have ib long and fo ardently loved. ~ May I hope," continued, he, taking tenderly the händ of Mary, who ftood trembling by, ** that you have Dot been iöiènfiblc to my long attach¬ ment, and that you will confirm tfee happinefs which is now offered me ?" A fmile of ineffable fweetnefs broke through- the mekacboly which had long clouded her features, and which even j the prefent difcovery had not been abls eattrely to diffipate, aad her eye gavs the
C m ) the confent which her tongue refufed to utter. The converfation, for the remainder of the day, was occupied by the fubjecl; of the difcovery, and with a recital of Mary's adventure. It was determined, that on the morrow the marriage of the Eari ihould be concluded. On this happy difcovery* the Earl ordered the gates of the caftle to be thrown open ; mirth and feftivity re¬ founded through the walls, and the evening clofed in univerfal rejoicings. On the following morn, the chapel of the caftle was decorated for the mar¬ riage of the Earl; who, with Laura, came attended by Philip, now Baron Malcolm, by Mary, and the whole fa¬ mily. When they approached the altar, the Eari addrefling himfelf to his bride, — tf Now, my Laura," faid he, * ς we may
( ?8? ) may celebrate thofe nuptials which have twice been fo painfully interrupted, and which are to crown me with felicity. This day fliall unite our families in a double marrbge, and reward the worth of my friend. It is now feen, that thofe virtues which ftimulated )iim to profe¬ cute for another the caufe of juftice, jnyfteriotaly urged him to tlie recovery of his rights. Virtue may for a time be purfued by misfortune,—and juftice be obfcure4 by the tranfient triumphs of vice;—but the Power whofe peculiar attributes they are, clears away the clouds of error, and even in this world eftabliihed bis THRONE OF JUSTICE." The Earl ftepped forward, and joining the bands of Philip and Mary, " Surely," faid he, " this is a moment of perfect happinefs !—I can now reward thofe vir¬ tues which I have ever loved ; and thofe fervices to which every gift muft be in* adequate, but this I now beftow/*
THE END*
