Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The romance of the forest: interspersed with some pieces of poetry
" ■аацаиД»ЙЦ1Й1МД 1 - || 1 | '!ЭД ' | 1 ! ' .....l'l|» l IW l "^ ll !ШWåJ | J ■ Ц |l ■J l iЯaИ^ l l I Ш!W!ίΐL ' lИ ľ ' I UJW iU TRE ROMANCE • F TBI FOREST. ■ —— W ' "* CHAPTER I. ** ï am а шап, ·' So weary with difafters, t«gg*d with fortune, ** Thar I would fet my life on any chance, ** To mend it, or be rid on't. 1 * * King Jomr. W HEN once fordid intereft feizes 44 on the heart, it freezes up the fourcc of 44 every warm and liberal feeling; it is an " enemy alike to virtue and to tafte — this 44 it perverts, and that it annihilates. The A4 « time
ί » j ** time may come, my friend, when death ** fhaîî itíffolve the «'i news of A\.trice, Λέ and Jufiirc be permitted to rcfume ** her rights. v Such were the word« of Ihr Advocate Nemours to Piene de τ ι Motte, ач the kıtır flept aí midnight into the carriage which was to bear Lim far from Paris, from hb creditors and the nciftrution of the laws. De la Motto thanked him for this laft inftancc oí his kindnefs the af¬ flila nee he ľ id given him in efoipe, and, when the carnage drove aw av, ut- tered a iad adieu ! The gloom of the hour, and the peculiar emergency of his circumfiances, funk him in filent re¬ verie. Whoever has read Guvot de Pitaval, the moil faithful of thofe writers who re¬ cord the proceedings in the Parliamen¬ tary Courts of Paris, during the feven- tccnth century, muft furely remember the ftriking ftory of Pierre de la Motte, and the Marquis Phillipe de Montalt : let
L 9 j let all furh, then forc ; he informed, that the p' rio n here intioduccd to then notice v\dN that individual Purre dc 1<* Motte, V> Madaiiie dc L· Motie kan« Λ fami the čuje h window, and give a bfi look to the waiUof Pans— Рлп^, thei en of her tornier !iap])inei^, and tht refidence ot many dvitr it ivii J-— tiu fortituJe, which had till now fupported her, \u 1 æd ίο the torce oí grief. *' Farewell all Г* fighed ilte, " thi> lati look—and we are ·* feparated for ever !" Tears followed her words, and, fink tug back, the re¬ figned hcrfclf to the ftillncls of forrow. The recollection of former times prcfled heavily upon her heart : a few months before, and fhe was furrounded h\ h iends, furi une, and confequence ; now, thewae deprived of all, a miterahlc exile from her native place, without home, without comfort—almoft without hope. It was not the leaft of her afflictions that ihe had been obliged to quit Paib without bid¬ ding adieu to her only fon, who was now A 5 on
t io 1 - .j en duty "Äith hh regiment io Gerrasmy - and fuch had been the precipit incy of this removaîj that had iht eren known v- herr he \ч аз (rationed, ihe bad no tim^ to infann him of it, or of the alteration in bis father's Circ mttanre*. Pierre de Ja Motte *\а* a gentleman, dcKcndec! from an ancient îioufe oí Franc«. He was a man whole pallions often o\ en ame ln·, rcafon.aiid. for a time, lilencrdhb coTifcience; but, though the image of virine, which Nature had iin- prcíľcd upon htb heart, \\ .o fometimrs obft urcd by the pa fang influence of vice, it was nt ver wholly obliterated. With itrenscth of mind fufricient to have with- ttood temptation, he would have been a good man ; as it was, he was always a weak, and fometimes a vicious member of fociety : yet his mind wa< aclive, and his imagination vivid, which, co-opera¬ ting with the force of pattion, often daz¬ zled his judgment and fubdued prin¬ ciple. Thus he was a man, infirm in pur-
parpóte and vi fi o пя ι y íu uriuc : İn л word, hi* condu r *rıs lu?'efitilb\ Lrl* ing, гд + Ьт tiun pri. »'«j-h" ; an ! his Vir- ŕ'4\ f л h ns ft tt *ч f ííul 1 n« »t ii an d thi* pr< 1Гтг ç.î η л li» »η Гаг! ι hu hchn Ipn^ *.ï O »ufi mee Va 1 v i;t\. л be uit «f. il and rlegvit uo¬ min. at'.iCÎıeÎ í »lui fanìib anıl b» 1 ı\ed b\ them. lier hırfh was e<pıaî, he r for¬ tune ύψ* ποτ t j h»-. ; aisl th *ír nupt ; ab had bei n **« h hr.ıt(4İ in i τ the ai fpıces s f an approving and îi ittcrin£ world. 1 ïf-r in лп w as dr\ oled to La Muite, and, far to. ne time, flie found in hirn an nf~ fci'tioihite huiband; but, allured bvthc £r:»i' iii > of Paris, he waa Ico.i devoted to it*' hixiîTîc^, and iti 'i few years Ы* for¬ tune л Jul afteelûm were equally loft îti diili pation. A falfe pride had fiilî ope¬ ratid aL T .infi h\» interrii, and withhrld him from honourable retreat while it wa* yet in his jiower: the habits which 4»e had acquired, enchained him to ihe ilene of his former pleafure; and thus A 6 he
С « ] he had continual an cxpcnfive füle of lit- till tiic iucatns of pn»hingii)g it were cxliaufuxL He at 1« ugth au «At irom this lethargy of kvurity; hut и w ¿ч only to plunge into iifxv error, ami to aiti mpt lei ¿ето for îhe repara hon of his tortune, win« h terved to link him deeper in de- firuv non. The confluence oía t m n f* aci юн, iii \\Jj:th he thus cn23£:cd, now dro\v' hiin, wah the fm.: U wreek of his prupeny, into dangerous and igoomi- nk>u> exile* li u as his defign to paf» into one of the bouthern Province>, and there letk, шаг the border« of the kingdom, an afyh:iTi in fonic ohfoure village. His family confitted of his wife, and two faithful domoftics, a man and woman, who followed the fortunes of then* matter. The night was dark and tcmjxrttuous, and, aí about í be uittanee of three leagues from Pai i?, Peter, u ho nowaŕlcd a^ poftillion, having drove for fomc time
Е 'з 1 over a wild beai li wlice raany way$ crofild, Hopped, and acquainted De la Mi* e vtith hinp rptexit). Tilt* ludden fio.Hîï «ií ífb i jri»j n r roufidthe latter frum ? - recite· and tilled the uhole party win) i'it* teror oí purluit ; he was una Ле to fup. ·! y tlie пгсч'Нап dire«, hon, and lhe extreme dark nef*? make İt dan- gfr.íu- to pr< еча without out-. During thi*» period of iliiircb, a light w a* per¬ ceive*! at fome diftance, and after much doubt ii\d l» fitatioïi, Тл Motte, in tlie ho;«* *»í obtaining aflift anee, al'¿ t 4ed an.' îv.meed ton ard«? it ; he proceeded ihm \ ıı^üi the fear oí" unknown pits. The hüjit jífued f»o:n the window of a fmall and ancient houfe, whieh flood aloae on the heath, at the diftance of half a mile. Having reached the door, he flopped for ihmemomenb, hileiiing 'm npprehen- ibc anxiety—no found was heard but that oť tiie wind, which fwept in hollow guils over the waftc. At length he ven¬ tured
ini fured to knock, and, having waifedf íbmctime, during which he indiű«n* r tly he^rd leverai voices in converfation, feme oue within inquired '\hat he wanted? Li Motte aniwired, that he w n - í ι d\ ι Чсг « îıo had lofi lus w iv , and dt. rt J t« j * »ι* d\ » ¿ied to the ncarcít town. **lhaî,* fa. d ϊ',ο petti)»*, *м* í<*vcn ** miles .ff, ard the r^ad bad enough, ťí еле*» if \ΐΛΐ спи!»' fee ì* i if 30u only *' uant a bed, you ma} have it here, <c and fiad bt iter ruv ** The " piîîief^ peîtir^f* of the iìorm, which, at this time, beai w idi inovaţii g fur) upon La Motte, int lined him ίο give up the attempt of proceeding far¬ ther till da}-li«jht ; but, defirous offer¬ ing the pei fon with whom he converfed, Ixrfore he ventured to cxpofe his family b v callinc: up the carriage, he aiked to be admitted. The door was now opened by a tall figure with a light, who invited La Motte to enter. He followed the шап through a paiïage into a room al¬ inoli
[ '5 J moft unfurnifhed, in one corner of wbicia a bed røa«* û π ad upon the floor. Ihe forlón· and defolate afpeét of this apart¬ ment made La Motte ihrink invultm- tarilv, and he \\аь ι« ming to go out when the num fudiicnly puflied him back, and he heard the door lot ked Upon am : hin heart tailed, yet hi made a defperafr», though vain, effort to force the door* and tulle J loudly for reléale. No anfwer w a- reí un ied ; bul Le diftin¬ guilhed ihe \üîces oİ s menin the room above, a».d, not doubting hut theirinten- tion waUuroL and murder hím, his a«nta- tton, at firí'r, nearly overcame his rcaíòn. By the light of fomc almoft-expiring cm- bers, he perceived a window, but the hope wh'eh this difeovery revived, was quickly loft, when he found the aperture guarded by ftrong iron" bai s. Such pre¬ paration for fecurity furprized him, and confirmed his worft apprehenfions.— Alone, unarmed—beyond the chance of aífiftance, he law himfelf in the power of
τ ie ι øf people, whofe trade was apparently rapine !—murder their meatb !—-After revohing every pi>flibilUy of ell ape, he ende ι voured to aw ait the **v< nt with for- tituctc ·, bui La Mutte coukl boafi of no fuch virtue. The voices had ccafrd, and all re¬ mained full tor a quarter of an hour, when, between the paufes of the wind, he th.mght he diftinguilhed the fobs and moaning of a female ; hr liftened atten¬ tively and became confirmed in h\> con¬ jecture; it wa< too evidently the accent of difirefs. At this conviction, there* mains of his courage foribnk him. and a terrible furmife darted, with the rapidity of lightning, croil his brain. ît w as pro¬ bable that his carriage had been difco¬ vered by the people of the houfe, w ho, with a defign of plunder, had fecured his fervant, and brought bitiu r Madame de la Motie. He was the more inclined to believe this, by the lì illnefs which had, for fome time, reigned in the houfe, pre¬ vious
f «7 ] rions to the founds he now heard. Or it was poflible that the inhabitants were not robbers, but perfem to whom he hail been betrayed by his friend or fervant, and who were appointed to deliver him into the hands of juftice. Yet he hardly dai ed to doubt the integrity of his friend, who hat! been entruftcd \\ ith the fecret of his flight and the plan of his route, and had procured him the carriage in which he had efcaped. *' Such depravity," exclaimed La Motte, " cannot furely 44 exift in human nature; much lets m " the heart of Nemours!" This ejaculation was interrupted by a noife in the paflage leading to the room : it approached—the door was unlocked— and the man who had admitted La Motte into the houfe entered, leading» or ra¬ ther forcibly dragging along, a beautiful girl, who appeared to be about eighteen. Iler features were bathed in tears, and fhe feemed to fufter the utmoft diflrets. The man faftened the lock and put the key
Γ »8 ] key in his pocket He then advanced to La Motte, who had befor 1 obfer.ed other perfons in the paflage, und point¬ ing a piftol to his breaft, ts You are " wholly in our power,"iaid ht, w no 44 afliftance can reach you ; if you wifli *· to fave your life, fwear that you will " convey this girl where I газу never 46 fee her more ; or rather confent to 44 take her with you, for your oath I * 4 would not believe, and I can take ** care you fliall not find me again.— " Anfwer quickly, you have no time to • " lofe." He now feized the trembling hand of the girl, who íhrunk aghaft w ith terror, and hurried her towards La Motte r whom fiirprize ftill kept filent. She funk at his feet, and with fupplicating eyes, that ftrcatned with tears, implored him to have pity on her. Notwithftand- ing his prefent agitation, he found it im¬ poflible to contemplate the beauty and diftreis of the object before him with in¬ difference.
С «9 ] difference. Her you tli, her apparent innocence—the artlefs energy of her manner forciblv afľaiíed his heart, and he was going to fpeak, when the ruffian, who miftook the filence of aftoniihment for that of hefitation, prevented him. 44 1 have a horfe ready to take you from 44 hence," feid he, " and I will direct " you over the heath. If you return " within an hour you die : after then, 44 you are at liberty to come here when 44 you pleafe." La Motte, without anfwering, raifed the lovely girl from the floor, and was ib much relieved from his own apprehen¬ fions, that he had leifure to attempt dtf* íipating her's. " Let us be gone/' faid the ruffian, 44 and have no more of this " nonfenfe ; you may think yourfelf well 44 offiťs no worfe. ITI go and get the 44 hoďe ready." The laft words roufed La Motte, and perplexed him with new fears} he dreaded to mention his carriage, leib
C 20 I lett it might tempt the handiüt Ut plunder; and to depart on horfchack with this man might produce a confe¬ quence yet morr to he dreaded. Ma¬ dame La Motte, weaned with appre- henfkon, would, probably, lend ihr her huiband to the houfe, *hen ail the former danger would be incurred, with the additional evil of being íêparated from his family, and the chance of being detected by the emittaries of juttice in endeavouring to recover them. As thcfe refìecìions patted over his mind in tu¬ multuous rapidity, a noife was agahı beard in the paifage, an uproar and fcufHe enfued, and in the íàme moment he could dittinguifh the voke of his íèrvant* who had been fent by Madame La Motte in fearch of him. Being now de¬ termined todifcîolè what could not long be concealed, he exclaimed aloud, thai a horfc was unneceíľary, that he had a carnage at fome dittance which would convey
t a« ] convey them from the heath, the man, who was feized, being his fervant. The rurfian, fpeaking through the door, bid him be patient awhile, and he fhould hear more from him. La Motte now turned his eyes upon his unfortu¬ nate companion, who, pale and ex- hauflcd, leaned for fupport againft the wall. Her features, which were delicately beautiful, had gained from diftrefs an ex* prcftion of captivating fweetnefè : íhe had " An eye, * ** Ач when the blue fky trembies thro* a cloud " Of purtil white." A habit of grey camlet, with ihort İla flicd flee ves, íhcwed, but did not adorn, her figure : it was thrown open at the bofom, upon which part of her hair had fallen in diforder, while the light veil hafiily thrown on, had, in her confufion, been fuffered to fail back. Every moment of farther obfervation heightened the furprize of La Motte, and
[ Ы J Miferefted him more warmly in her fa¬ vour. Such elegance and appâtent re¬ finement, contrafted with the defoktion of the houfe, and the favage manners of its inhabitants, teemed to him like a ro¬ mance of imagination, rather than an oc¬ currence of real life. He endeavoured to comfort her, and Iris fenfe of companion was too lineere to be mifunderitood. Her terror gradually fubiided into grati¬ tude and grief. ťť Ah, Sir!" faid liie, * l Heaven has fcnt you to my relief, and ** will furely reward you for your pro- 4ς teel ion ι I have no friend in the ft world, if I do not find one in you." La Motte afíiired her of his kindnefs, when he was interrupted by the entrance of the ruffian. He defired to be con¬ duced to his family, ft All in good * f time," replied the latter ; " I have u taken care of one of them, and will " of you j pleaíè St. Peter ; fo be com- M forted/' Thefe confortable words re¬ newed the terror of La Motte, who ι now
t ÍJ ] now eameftly begged to know if his fa* mily were fafe. " О ! as for that mat- " ter they are fafe enough, and you will <c be with them prefonily; but don't ** fiand partying here all night. Do you " chufe to go or fiay Ì )ou know the " conditions." They now bound the " eyes of La Motte and of the young lady, whom terror had hitherto kept filent, and then placing them on two horfes, a man mounted behind each, and they immediately galloped off. They had proceeded rn this way near halfan hour, when La Motte entreated to know whither he was going ; " You will know that by and bye," faid the ruffian, " fo be at peace." Finding in¬ terrogatories ufelefs, La Motte refumed filence till the horfes fiopt. His con¬ ductor then hallooed, and being an¬ fwered by voices at fomc diftance, in a few moments the found of-carriage wheels was heard, and, prefently after, the words of a man directing Peter which way
t н 1 >vay to drive. As the carriage ap¬ proached, La Motte called, and, to his inexpreifible joy, was anfwered by his wife. * ť You are now beyond the bordere 44 of the heath, and may go which way <c you w ill,'* faid the ruffian ; 44 if you ** return within an hour, you will be 44 welcomed by a brace of bullets." This was a very unneceflary caution to La Motte, whom they now releafed. The young ftranger fighed deeply, as ihe entered the carriage; and therutfians, having beftovved upon Peter feme direc¬ tions and more threats, waited to fee him drive off. They did not wait long. La Motte immediately gave a ihort relation of what had pafled at the houfe, including an account of the manner in which ihe young ftranger had been in¬ troduced to him. Duringthis narrative, her deep convulfive fighs frequently drew the attention of Madame La Motte, whofe compaflion became gradually in~ terefled,
í ч 1 terefted in her behalf, and who now endeavoured to tranquillize her fpirits. The unhappy girl anfwered her kindnefs in artlefs and fimple expreífions, and then relapfed into tears and filence. Madame forbore for the prefent to aik any quef¬ tions that might lead to a difeovery of her connections, or feem to require an explanation of the late adventure, which now furniihing her with a new fubject of reflection, the ienfc of her own misfor¬ tunes preffed lefs heavily upon her mind. The difirefs even of La Motte was for á while fufpended ; he ruminated on the late feene, and it appeared like a vifion, or one of thofe extravagant fixions that fometimes are exhibited in romance: he could reduce it to no principle of probability, or render it comprehmfiule by any endeavour to analize it. The prcfent charge, and the chance of future trouble brought upon him by this adven¬ ture, occafioned fome diifatisfaction ; but the beauty and feeming innocence Vol, L В of
L »б J of Adeline, united with the pleadings of humanity in her favour, and he deter¬ mined to protect her. The tumult of emotions which had paífed in the bofom of Adeline began now to fubfide; terror was fofteticd into anxiety, and defpair into grief. The fympathy fo evident in the manners of her companions, particularly in thofe of Madame La Motte, foothed her heart, and encouraged her to hope for better days* Difmally and filently the night pafied on ; for the minds of the travellers were too much occupied by their feveral fuf- ferings to admit of converfation. The dawn, fo anxioufiy watched for, at length appeared, and introduced the ftrangcrs more fully to each other. Adeline de¬ rived comfort from the looks of Madame La Motte, who gazed frequently and attentively at her, and thought fhe had feîdom feeti a countenance fo interefting, or a form fo ftriking. The languor of forrow
[ *7 ] íbrrow threw a melancholy grace upon her features, that appealed immediately to the heart; and there was a penetrating fweetnefs in her blue eyes, which indi¬ cated an intelligent and amiable mind. La Motte now looked anxioufiy from the coach window, that he might judge of his fituation, and obferve whether he was followed. The obfcurity of the dawn confined his views, but no perfon appeared. The fun at length tinted the eaftern clouds,, and the tops of the higheft: hills, and foon after burft in full fplen- dour on the fcene. The terrors of La Motte began to fubfide, and the griefs of Adeline to foften. They entered upon a lane confined by high banks, and over¬ arched by trees, on whofe branches ap¬ peared the firft green buds of fpring glittering with dews. The frefh breeze of the morning animated the fpirits of Adeline, whofe mind was delicately fen¬ fible to the beauties of nature. As flic viewed the flowery luxuriance of the Β ζ turf,
L *8 ] turf, and the tender green of the trees, or caught, between the opening banks, a glimpib of the varied landfeape, rich with wood, and fading into blue and difiant mountains, her heart expanded in momentary joy. With Adeline the charms oí external nature were height¬ ened by thofe of novelty ; ihe had fel¬ dom fcen the grandeur of an extenfive profpečt, or the magnificence of a wide horizon—and not often the pičturefquc beauties of more confined feenery. Her mind had not lofi, by long oppreffion, that elaftic energy, which refills calami¬ ty ; elfe, however fufceptible might have been her original tafte, the beauties of nature would no longer have charmed her thus eafily even to temporary re¬ pofe. The road, at length, wound down the üde of a hill, and La Motte, again bob in^ anxioufiy fBorn the window, faw be¬ fore him an open champaign country, through which the road, wholly uníhel- tcrcd
[ 2 9 ] tered from obfervation, extended almoft: in a direct line. The danger of thefe circumflances alarmed him, for his flight might, without difficulty, be traced for many leagues from the hills he was now defecnding. Of the firft neafant that palľed, he inquired for a road among the hills, but heard of none. La Motte now funk info his former terrors, Ma¬ dame, notwithfianding her own appre¬ henfions, endeavoured to rc*aflure him, hut, finding her efforts ineffectual, fhe alfo retired to the contemplation of her misfortunes. Often, as they went on did La Motte look back upon the coun¬ try they had pafled, and often did imagi¬ nation fuggeft to him the found of dif¬ tant purfuit. The travellers flopped to breakfaft ín a village, where the road was at length ob- feured by woods, and La Motte's fpirits again revived. Adeline appeared more tranquil than fhe had yet been, and La Motte now aiked for an explanation of В 3 the
t 30 ] ihe fcene he had witneffed on the pre¬ ceding night. The inquiry renewed alt her diftrefs, and with tears ihe entreated for the prcfent to be ipared on the fubject. La Motte prefled it no farther, but he ob¬ ferved that for the greater part ofthe day fhe feemed to remember it in melancholy nnd dejection. They now travelled among the hills, and were, therefore, in lefs danger of obfervation; but La Motte avoided the great towns, and flopped in obfeure ones no longer than to refrefti the horfes. About two hours after noon, the road wound into a deep valley, watered by a rivulet, and over¬ hung with wood.. La Motte called to Peter, and ordered him to drive to a thickly embowered fpot, that appeared on the left. Here he alighted with his family, and Peter having fpread the provifions on the turf, they feated them¬ felves, and partook of a repafl, which in other circumftances would have been thought delicious, Adeiine endeavour¬ ed
[ з' 3 ed to fmile, but the languor of grief was now heightened by indifpofition. The violent agitation of mind, and fiitigue of body, which fhe had fufFered for the laft twenty-four hours, had overpowered her ftrength, and, when La Motte led lier back to the carriage, her whole frame trembled with illnefs; but fhe uttered no complaint, and, having long obferved the dejection of her companions, ihe made a feeble effort to enliven them. They continued to travel throughout the day without any accident or inter¬ ruption, and, about three hours after fun- fet, arrived at Monvillc, a fmall town, where La Motte determined to pafs the night.· Repofe was, indeed, neceflary to the whole party, whofe pale and hag¬ gard looks, as they alighted from the carriage, were but too obvious to país unobferved by the people of the inn. As foon as beds could be prepared, Ade¬ line withdrew to her. chamber, accom¬ panied by Madame La Motte, whofe В 4 concern
L Ъг ] concern for the fair ftranger made her exert every effort to footh and con fole her. Adeìine wept in filence, and taking the hand of Madame, prefled it to her bofom. Thefe were not merely tears of grief—they were mingled with thofe which flow from the grateful heart, when, unexpectedly it meets with fympathy. Madame La Motte underftood them. After feme momentary filence, ihe re¬ newed her aflurances of kindnefs, and entreated Adeline to confide in her friendihip; but ihe carefully avoided any mention of the fubject, which had before fo much afíècted her, Adeline, at length, found words to expreis her fenfe of this goodnefs, which ihe did in a manner fo natural and fincere, that Madame, finding herfelf much aífečted, took leave of her for the night. In the morning, La Motte rofe at an early hour, impatient to be gone. Every thing was prepared for his departure, and the breakfaft had been waiting feme time,
[ зз 3 time, but Adeline did not appear. Ma¬ dame La Motte went to her chamber, and found her funk in a difturbed flumber. Her breathing was ihort and irregular—* ihe frequently ftarted, or fighed, and fometimes flie muttered an incoherent fentence. While Madame gazed with concern upon her languid countenance, flie awoke, and, looking up, gave her hand to Madame La Motte, who found it burning with fever. She had paífed a refllefs night, and, as ihe now attempt* ed to rife, her head, which beat with in- tenfe pain, grew giddy, her ftrength fail¬ ed, and ihe funk back. Madame was ranch alarmed; being at once convinced that it was impoffible fhe could travel, and that a delay might prove fatal to her huiband. She went to inform him of the truth, and his diftrefs may be more eafily imagined than de¬ fcribed. Hefa w all the inconvenience and danger of delay, yet he could not fo far diveft himfelf of humanity, as to aban- B 5 don
С 34 ] don Addine to the care, or rather to the ncglecl of ttrangers. He font immedi¬ ately for a phyfician, who pronounced her to be in a high fever, and faid, a re¬ moval in her prefent ftate mutt be fatal. La Motte now determined to wait the event, and endeavoured to calm the tranfporis of terror, which, at times, af- failed him. In the mean while, he took fuch precautions as his fituation admitted of, patting the greater part of the day out of the village, in a fpot from whence he had a view of the road for fome dittance ; yet to be expofed to de- ttrueiion by the illnefs of a girl, whom he did not know, and who had actually been forced upon him, was a misfortune, to which La Motte had not philofophy enough to fubmit with compofure. Adeline's fever continued to inčreafe during the whole day, and at night, when the phyfician took his leave, he told La Motte the event would very foon be de¬ cided. La Motte received this hint of her
C 3š ] herdangerwtth real concern. The beauty and innocence of Adeline had overcome the difadvantageous circumftances un¬ der which ihe had been introduced to him, and he now gave lefs confideration to the inconvenience ihe might hereafter occafion him, than to the hope of her recovery. Madame La Motte watched over her with tender anxiety, and obferved, with admira ion, her patient fweetnefs and mild rcfignation. 'Adeline amply re¬ paid her, though fhe thought fhe could not. " Young as i ara," flic would fay, 4( anddefertcd by thofe upon whom " 1 have a claim for protection, I can ** remember no connečlton to make me 64 regret life fo much, as that i hoped " to form with you. If! live, my con- 44 dual will beft exprefs my fenfe of your " goodnefs ;—words are but feeble tefti- (t monies/' The fweetnefs of her manners fo much attracted Madame LaMotte, that fhe В 6 watched
С зб 1 watched the crifis of herdiibrder, with a foiicitude which precluded every other intereft. Adeline pafled a very diftur¬ bed night, and, when the phyfician ap¬ peared in the morning, he gave orders that fhe ihould be indulged with what¬ ever ihe liked, and anfwered the inquiries of La Motte with a franknefs that left him nothing to hope. In the mean time, his patient, after drinking profufely of forne mild liquids, fell afleep, in which ihe continued for le¬ verai hours, and fo profound was her re¬ pofe, that her breath alone gave fign of exiftence. She awoke free fromfever, and with no other diforder than weaknefs, which, in a few days, ihe overcame fa well, as to be able to fet out with La Motte for В ------, a village out of the great road, which he thought it prudent to quit. There they pafled the following night, and early the next morning com¬ menced then journey upon a wild and woody
t 37 ] woody tract of country. They flopped about noon at a folitary village, where they took refreihments, and obtained directions for pafling the vaft forcft of Fontanville, upon the borders of which they now were. La Motte wiihed a t flríl to take a guide, but he apprehended more evil from the difelofure he might make of his route, than he hoped for benefit from afliftance in the wilds of this uncultivated tract. La Motte now defigned to pafs on to Lyons, where he could either feek con¬ cealment in its neighbourhood, or em¬ bark on the Rhone for Geneva, ihould the emergency of his circumftances here¬ after require him to leave France. It was about twelve o'clock at noon, and he was deiirous to haften forward, that he might pafs the foreft of Fontanville, and reach the town on its oppofite borders, before night-fall. Having depoflted a freih ftock of provifions in the carriage, and
С 38 3 and received fuch directions as were ne¬ ceffary concerning the roads, they again fet forward, and in a ihort time entered upon the foreft. It was now the latter end of April, aad the weather was re¬ markably temperate and fine. The balmy freftineisof the air, which breath¬ ed the firft pure effence of vegt tation, and the gentle warmth of the fun, whofe beams vivified every hue of nature, and opened every floweret of fpring, revived Adeline, and infpired her with life and health. As ihe inhaled the breeze, her ftrength feemed to return, and, as her eyes wandered through the romantic glades that opened into the forefi, her heart was gladdened with complacent delight : but when from thefe objects íhe turned herregard upon Monfieur and Madame LaMotte, to whofe tender at¬ tentions ihe owed her life, and in whofe looks ihe now read cfteem and kindnefs, her bofom glowed with fweet affections, and
[ 39 3 and ihe experienced a force of gratitude which might be called tubi ime. For the remainder of the day they con¬ tinued to travel, without feeing a hut, or meeting a human being, It was now near fun-fet, and the profpečt being clofed on all fides by the foreft, La Motte began to have apprehenfions that his fervant had miitaken the way. The road, if a road it could be called, which afforded only a flight track upon the grafs, was fometimes over run by luxu¬ riant vegetation, and fometimes obfeureel by the deep fhades, and Peter at length flopped, uncertain of the way, LaMotte, who dreaded being benighted in a feene fo wild and folitary as this foreft, and whofe apprehenfions of banditti were very fanguine, ordered him to proceed at any rate, and, if he found no track, to endeavour to gain a more open part of the foreft. With thefe orders, Peter again fet forwards, but having proceeded feme way, and hib views being flill eon- Д fined
С 40 3 fined by woody glades and foreft walks, he began to defpair of extricating him¬ felf, and flopped for farther orders. The fun was now fet ; but, as La Motte looked anxioufiy from the window, he obferved upon the vivid glow of the weftern ho¬ rizon, feme dark towers rifing from among the trees at a little diftance, and ordered Peter to drive towards them. " If they belong to a monaftery," faid he, " we may probably gain admittance " for the night/* The carriage drove along under the fhade of " melancholy boughs," through which the evening twilight, which yet coloured the air, difTufed a folemnitythat vibrated in thrilling fenfations upon the hearts of the travellers. Expectation kept them filent. The prefent feene recalled to Adeline a remembrance of the late terrific circumfiances, and her Blind refponded but too eafily to the apprehenfion of new misfortunes. La Motte
I 41 J Motte alighted at the foot of a green knoll, where the trees again opening to light, permitted a nearer, though imper¬ fect, view of the edifice.
CHAP.
L 4* ]
CHAP. IL " Wlìat a^ful filence ! How thefe antique tower% " And vacant courts, chill the fufpended foul t ** Till expectation wears the face of fear ¡ " And fear, half ready to become devotion, " Mutters a kind of mental orifon, ** It knows not wherefore. What a kind of being %i Is circumftanee!" Horace Wai^ole. İTİ E approached, and perceived the Gothic remains of an abbey : ?t ftood on a kind of rude lawn, ovcrftiadowed by high and fpreading trees, which feemed coeval with the building, and diffufed a romantic gloom around. Тле greater part of the pile appeared to he finking into ruins, and that, which had withftood the ravages of time, fliewed the remain¬ ing features of the fabric more awful in decay. The lofty battlements, thickly enwreathedwith ivy, were half demoliih¬ ed,
t 43 ' ] cd, and become the rettdcnce of birds of prey. Huge fragments of the eattem tower, which was almott: demoliihed, lay fcattcred amid the high grafs, that waved flowly to the breeze. " The thittle ŕí ihook its lonely head ; the mofs whif- " tied to the wind." A Gothic gate, richly ornamented with fret-work, which opened into the main body of the edi¬ fice, but which was now obttrucled with brufh-wood, remained entire. Above the vafl: and magnificent portal of this gate arofe a window of the fame order, whole pointed archesrftill exhibited frag¬ ments of flaincd glafs, once the pride of monkiih devotion. La Motte, thinkinír it poíľible it might yet ih el ter fome hu¬ man being, advanced to the gate and lifted a m^iTy knocker. The hollow founds rung through the emptinefs of the place. After waiting a few minutes, he forced back the gate, which was heavy with iron work, and creaked harihly on its hinges. Ho
[ 44 ] He entered what appeared to have been the chapel of the abbey, where the hymn of devotion had once been raifed, and the tear of penitence had once been ilied ; founds, which could now only be recalled by imagination—tears of peni¬ tence, which had been long fince fixed in fate. La Motte paufed a moment, for he felt a fenfation of fublimity riling into terror—afufpentton of mingled atto* nimment and awe ! He furveyed the vaflnefs of the place, and as he contem¬ plated its ruins, fancy bore him back to paft ages. rc And thefe walls," faid he, " where once fuperttition lurked, and " aufterity anticipated an earthly purga* <c tory, now tremble over the mortal re- <f mains of the beings who reared them 1" The deepening gloom reminded La Motte that he had no time to lofe ; but curiofity prompted him to explore far¬ ther, and he obeyed the impulfe. As he walked over fhe broken pavement, the found of his fteps ran in echoes through the
I 45 ] the place, and feemed like the myfterious accents of the dead, reproving the facri- legious mortal who thus dared to difturb their precincts. From this^ chapel he pafled into the nave of the great church, of which one window, more pei feci than the reft, opened upon a long villa of the foreft, through which was feen the rich colour¬ ing of evening, melting by imperceptible gradations into the lolemn grey of upper air. Dark hills, whofe outline appeared diftinčt upon the vivid glow of the ho¬ rizon, clofed the perfpeciive. Several of the pillars, which had once fupported the roof, remained the proud effigies of finking greatnefs, and feemed to nod at every murmur of the blaft over the frag¬ ments of thofe that had fallen a little before them. La Motte fighed. The comparifon between himfelf and the gra¬ dation of decay, which thcfe columns exhibited, wa's but too obvious and af¬ fecting, « A few years/* faid he, " and ·' I ihall
L 46 ] íť I fliall become like the mortals on « e whofe reliques I now gaze, and, like «« them too, I may be the fubject of me- *« ditation to a fucceeding generation, 44 which ihall totter but a little while «« over the obječl: they contemplate, e'er 44 they alfo fink into the duft." Retiring from this fcene, he walked through the cloifiers, till a door, which communicated with a lofty part of the building, attracled his curiofity. He opened this and perceived, acrofs the foot of a fiair-cafe, another door ;— but now, partly checked by fear, and partly by the recollection of the furprize his family might feel in his abfence, he returned with hafty fteps to his carriage, having wafted feme of the precious mo¬ ments of twilight, and gained no infor¬ mation. Some flight anfwer to Madame La Motte's inquiries, and a general direc¬ tion to Peter to drive carefully on, and look for a road, was all that his anxiety would
[ 47 ] ■would permit him to utter. The night iliade fell thick around, which, deepened by the gloom of the foreft, foon rendered it dangerous to proceed. Peter flopped, but La Motte, perfifting in his firft de¬ termination, ordered him to go on. Pe¬ ter ventured to rcraonftrate, Madame La Motte entreated, but La Motte repro¬ ved—commanded, and at length re¬ pented ; for the hind wheel rifing upon the flump of an old tree, which the dark¬ nefs had prevented Peter from obferving, the carriage was in an inftant overturned. The party, as may be fuppofed, were much terrified, but no one was materially hurt, and having difengaged themfelves from their perilous fituation, La Motte and Peter endeavoured to raife the car¬ riage. The extent of this misfortune was now difcovered, for they per¬ ceived that the wheel was broke. Their diftrefs was reafonably great, for not only was the, coach difabţed from proceeding, but it could not even afford a flielter from
[ 48 ] from the cold dews of the night, it being impoflible to prcferve it in an upright fituation. After a few moments filence, La Motte propofed that they fliould return to the ruins they had juft quitted, which lay at a very ihort dif¬ tance» and pafs the night in the moft ha¬ bitable part of them; that, when morn¬ ing dawned, Peter ihould take one of the coach horfes, and endeavour to find a road and a town, from whence afliftance could he procured for repairing the car¬ riage. This propoial was oppofed by Madame La Motte, who ihuddered at the idea of paifing fo many hours in dark¬ nefs in a place fo forlorn as the monas¬ tery. Terrors, which flic neither endea¬ voured to examine, or combat, over¬ came her, and flie told La Motte ihe had rather remain expofed to the u n whole- feme dews of night, than encounter the defolation of the ruins. La Motte had at firft felt an equal reluctance to return to this fpot, but having fubdued his own feelings,
E 49 3 feelings, he refolved not to yield to thoie of his wife. The horfes being now difengaged from the carriage, the party moved for¬ wards the edifice. As they proceeded^ Peter, who followed them, ftruck a light, and they entered the ruins by the flame of flicks, which he had collected. The partial gleams thrown acrofe the fabric, feemed to make its defolation more fo- lcmn, while the obfcurity of the greater part of the pile heightened iH fublimity, and led fancy on to feenes of horror. Adeline, who had hitherto remained »filent, now uttered an exclamation of mingled admiration and fear. A kind of pleafing dread thrilled her bofom, and filled all her foul. Tears ftarted to her eyes:— íhe wiihed, yet feared, to go on ; ihe hung upon the arm of La Motte, ¿md looked at him with a fort of hefi- tating interrogation. He opened the door of the great hall, and they entered : its extent was loft in Vol. i. С gloom.
t S« ] gïconv. 4C Let us ftay here," faid Ma¬ dame de la Motte, 44 1 will go no far* £( ther." La Motte pointed to the bro¬ ken roof, and was proceeding, when he was interrupted by an uncommon noife, ■which pafled along the hall. They were -all filent —it was the filence of terror, Madame La Motte fpoke firft. 4( Let 44 us quit this fpot," faid fhe, " any evil 4s preferable to the feeling which now oppreíľes me. Let us retire inflantly." The flill nefs had for fome time remained .undifturbed, and La Motte, aíhamed of the fear he had involuntarily betrayed, now thought it neceflary to affect a bold» nefe, which he did not feel. He, there¬ fore, oppofed ridicule to the terror of Madame, and infiftcd upon proceeding. Thus compelled to acquiefee, ihe tra- verfed -the hall with trembling fteps. They came to a narrow paflage, and Peter's flicks being nearly exhaufted, fhey awaited here, while he went in search of more. The
C Ji í The almoft expiring light flamed faintly upon the walls of the paifage, ihewing the reeefs more horrible. Acrois the hall, the greater part of which was concealed in íhadow, the feeble ray fpread a tremulous gleam, exhibiting the chafm in the roof, while many namelefs objects were feen imperfectly through the duik. Adeline, with a fmile, inquired of La Motte, ïf he believed in fpirits. The quefiion was ill-timed, for the pre¬ fent fcene impreffed its terrors upon La Motte, and, in fpite of endeavour, he ft It a fuperftitious dread ftealing upon him. He was now, perhaps, ftanding over the aihes of the dead. If fpirits were ever permitted to revifit the earth, 4his feemed the hour and the place moft fuitable for their appearance. La Mottle remained filent. Adeline faid, " Were I s" inclined to fupcrflition"—She was in¬ terrupted by a return of the noife, which had been lately heard : it founded down the paifage, at whofe entrance iliey ftood, С 2 and
Ci*]· and funk gradually away. Every heart palpitated, and they remained hfiening in filencc. A new fubjecl of apprehen- iion feized La Motte :—the noife might proceed from banditti, and he hefitated whether it would be fafe to proceed. Peter now came with the light : Ma¬ dame refuíêd to enter the parlagé —La Motte was not much inclined to it ; but Peter, in whom curiofity was more pre¬ valent than fear, readily offered his fer- vices. La Motte, after forne hefitation, fuffered him'to go, while he awaited at the entrance the refult of the inquiry. The extent of the paflagc foon concealed Peter from view, and the echoes of his footficps were lofi in a found, which rufhed along the avenue, and became fainter and fainter, till it funk intofilence. La Motte now called aloud to Feter, but no anfwer was returned ; at length, they heard the fuund of a difiant foot- ftep, and Peter ibon after appeared, brCriihlefs, and pale wilh fear. When
E 53 1 When he came within hearing of La Motte, he called out, " An* pjeafc your " honour, I've done for them, Î believe; " but ľve had a hard bout. I thought " 1 was fighting with the devil. ,T -~ " What are you fpcaking of?" iaid La Motte, u They were nothing but owls and rooks after all/" continued Peter ; but the light brought them all about my ears, and they made fuch a confounded clapping with their wings, that I thought at ñrU I had been befet with a legion of devils. But Ï have drove them all out, Matter, and you have nothing to fear now." The latter part of the fentence, inti¬ mating a fufpicion of his courage, La Motte could have diípeníèd with, and, to retrieve in fome degree his reputation, he made a point of proceeding through the paifage. They now moved on with alacrity, for, as Peter faid^ " they had " nothing to fear." С 3 The
[ 5+ 3 The paflage led into a large area, on one fide of which, over a range of cloif¬ iers, appeared the weft tower, and a lofty part of the edifice ; the other üde was open to the woods. La Motte led the way to a door of the tower, which he now perceived was the fame he had formerly entered ; but he found feme difficulty in advancing, for the area was overgrown with brambles and nettles, and the light, which Peter carried, afford¬ ed only an uncertain gleam. When he un- clofed the door, the difmal aipect of the place revived the apprehenfions of Ma¬ dame La Motte, and extorted from Ade- line an inquiry whither they were going. Feter held up the light to ihew the nar¬ row fiaircafe that wound round the tower 5 lut La Motte, obferving the fécond door, drew back the ruily bolts, and en¬ tered a fpacious apartment, which, from its fiyle and condition, was evidently of a much later date than the other part of the firuéìure : though dcfolatc and for¬ lorn,
[ ss ] Ioni; it was very little impaired by time ; the walls were damp, but not decayed ; and the glafs was yet firm in the win¬ dows, They pafled on to a fuite of-apart¬ ments refembling the firft they had feen, and exprcfled their furprife at the in¬ congruous appearance of this part of the edifice with the mouldering walls they had left behind. Thcfe apartments con¬ ducted them to a winding paflage, that received light and air through narrow cavities, placed hizbin the wall; and was at length c! J by a door barred with iron, which being with feme dif¬ ficulty opened, they entered a vaulted room. LaMotte furveyed it with a fern- tinizing eye, and endeavoured to conjec¬ ture for what purpofe it had been guarded by a door of fuch ftrength ; but he faw little within to aflift his curiofity* The room appeared to have been built in modern times upon a Gothic plaiv Adeline approached a large window that С 4 formed
С 56 ] formed a kind of reeefs raifed by one ftep over tho level of the floor ; flic ob¬ ferved to La Motte that the whole floor \\as inlaid with Mofaic work ; which drew from him a remark,, that the fl yle of this apartment was not ftrietly Go¬ thic, He pafied on to a door, which appeared on the oppofite fide of the apartment, and, unlocking it, found himfelf in the great hall, by which he had entered the fabric. He now perceived, what the gloom had before concealed, a ipiral ftaircafe which led to a gallery above ; and which, from its prefent condition, feemed to have been built with the more modern part of the fabric, though this alfo af¬ fected the Gothic mode of architecture t La Motte had little doubt that thefe ftairs led to apartments, correfponding with thofe he had pafled below, and hefitated whether to explore them ; but the en¬ treaties of Madame, who was much fa¬ tigued, prevailed with him to defer all farther
Г 57 ! farther examination. After fome delibe¬ ration, in which of the rooms they ihould pafs the night, they determined to return to that which opened from the tower. A fire was kindled on a hearth, which it is probable had not for many years be¬ fore afforded the warmth of hofpitality; and Peter İta ving lpread the provitton he had brought from the coach, La Motte and his family) encircling the fire, par¬ took of a rcpatt, which hunger and fa¬ tigue made delicious. Ap^reheiitton gradually gave way to confidence, for they now found themfelves in fome¬ thing like a human habitation, and they had leifure to laugh at their late ter¬ rors ; but, as the blatt Ihook the doors,, Adeline often ttarted, and threw a fearful glance around. They conti¬ nued to laugh and talk cheerfully for a time ; yet their merriment was tranfient, if not affecìed, for a fenie of their pecu¬ liar and diffreffed circumttances prettcd C j upoa
[ S8 ] upon their recollection, and funk each individual into languor and penfivc filence. Adeline felt the forlornnefs of her condition with energy ; ihe reflected upon the paft with aftoniihment, and anticipated the future with fear. She found herfelf wholly dependent upon ftrangers, with no other claim than what diftrefs demands from the common iym¬ pathy of kindred beings ; fighs fwelled her heart, and the frequent tear ftarted to her eye ; but flie checked it, ere it betrayed on her cheek the forrow, which ihe thought it would be ungrate¬ ful to reveal. La Motte, at length, broke this me¬ ditative filence, by directing the fire to he renewed for the night, ,and the door to be fecured : this feemed a neceflary precaution, even in this íblitude, and was effected by means of large ftones piled againft it, for other faftening there was none. It had frequently occurred to La Motte, that this apparently forfaken edifice
С 59 ] edifice might be a place of refuse tø banditti. Here was folitude to conceal· them ; and a wild and extenfive foreft to affift their fchemes of rapine,, and to perplex, with its labyrinths; thofe who i might be bold enough to attemj t pur¬ fuit. Thefe apprehenfions, however, he hid within his own bofom, faving his companions from a ihare of the uncafi¬ nefs they occafioned. Peter was ordered' to watch at the door, and, having given the fire a ronfing ftir, our defolate party drew round it, and fought in ileep a ihort oblivion of care. The night paffed on without diftur- bance. Adeline fiept, but uneafy dreams fleeted before her fancy, and ihe awoke at an early hour : the recollection of her furrows arofe upon her mind, and yield¬ ing to their preffure, her tears flowed filently and faft. That ihe might in¬ dulge them without reftraint, ihe went to a window that looked upon an open part of the foreft ; all was gloom and filence ; С 6 íhe
[ бо "j íhe ftood for fome time viewing the iha- dowy icene, # The firft tender tints of morning now- appeared on the verge of the horizon, ftealing upon the darknefs ;— So pure, fo fine, fo ætherial î it feemed as if Heaven was opening to the view. The dark mifls were feen to roll oft* to the weft, as- the tints of light grew ftronger, deepen¬ ing the obfcurity of that part of the he- miiphere, and involving the features of the country below ; meanwhile, in the eaft, the hues became more vivid, dart¬ ing a trembling 4ftre far around, till a ruddy glow, which fired all that part of the Heavens, announced the rifing fun* At firft, a fmall line of inconceivable* jplendour emerged on the horizon, which quickly expanding, the fun appeared in all his glory, unveihng the whole face of nature, vivifying every colour of the landfeape, and fprinkling the dewy earth with glittering light. The low and gen* tie refponfes of birds, awakened by the % morning
L- б, ] morning ray, now broke the filence of the hour ; their foft warbling rifing by degrees till they fwelled the chorus of univerfal gladnefs. Adeline's heart fwel¬ led too with gratitude and adoration. The fcene before her foothed her mind, and exalted her thoughts to the great Author of Nature ; ihe uttered an involuntary prayer : <e Father of good, 44 who made this glorious fcene ! I re- 44 fign myfelf to thy hands : thou wilt 4ζ fupport me nader my prcfent forrows, 46 andprotecf me from future evil." Thus confiding in the benevolence of God, ihe wiped the tears from her eyes, while tbe fweet union of confeience and reflection rewarded her truft ; and her mind, lofing the feelings which had lately oppreifed it, became tranquil and compofed. La Motte awoke foon after, and Peter prepared to fet out on his expe¬ dition. As he mounted his horfe, '* An* 44 pleafe you, Mafter,'* faid he, " I 44 think we had as good look no farther "for
C tt 1 tr fot an habitation till better times bit it' ** up ; for nobody will think of looking ** for us here ; and when one fees the " place by day-light, its none fo bad, " but what a little patching up would* " make it comfortable enough." La Motte made no reply, but he thought of Peteťs words. During the intervals of the night, when anxiety had kept him- waking, the fame idea had occurred to him ; concealment was his only fecurity, and this place afforded it» The defolatiorľ of the fpot was repulfive to his wiihes ; but he had only a j choice of evils—a fo- Fett; with liberty was not a bad home for ene who had too much reafon to expect a prifon. As he walked through the apartments, and examined their condW tion more attentively, he perceived they might eattly be made habitable -, and' now furveying them under the cheer- fulnefs of morning, his dettgn firength- ened ; and he mufed upon the means of accompliihing it, which nothing feemed: ft
I h J fo much to obftrudt as the apparent dif¬ ficulty of procuring food. He communicated his thoughts to Madame La Motte, who felt repug¬ nance to the fcheme. La Motte, how¬ ever, feldom confulted his wife till he had determined how to act ; and he had already refolved to be guided in this af¬ fair by the report of Peter. If he could difcover a town in the neighbourhood of the foreft, where provifions and other neccifaries could be procured, he would feek no farther for a place of reft. In the mean time, he ipent the anxious interval of Peter*s abfence in examining the ruin, and walking over the environs ι they were fweetly romantic, and the luxu¬ riant woods, with which they abounded, feemed to fequefter this fpot from the Teft of the world. Frequently a natural vifta would yield a view of the country, terminated by hills, which, retiring in diftance, faded into the blue horizon. A ftream, various and muficai in its courfe, 3 wound
ί' б 4 ] wound at the foot of fhe lawn, on which ftood the abhey ·, here it filently glided beneath the flmdes, feeding the flowers that bloomed on its hanks, and diffufing dewy freftinefc around ; there it fpread Í№ broad expanfe to-day, refle<ting the fyl- van fcene, and the wild deer that tailed its waves. La Motte obferved every where a profufion of game ; the phea- fants fcarcely flew from his approach, and the deer gazed mildly at him as he pafled. They were ftrangers to man í On his return to the abbey, La Motte afcended the flairs that led to the tower. About half way up, a door ap¬ peared in the wall ; it yielded, without re- fiftance, to his hand ; but a fudden noife within, accompanied bya cloud of duft, made him ftep back and clofe the door. After waiting a few minutes, he again opened it, and perceíved a large room of the more modern building. The re¬ mains of tapeflry hung in tatters upon the walls, which were become the refi¬ dence
L б 5 ] dencc of birds of prey, whofe ludden flight on the opening of the door had brought down a quantity of duft, and occafioned the noife. The windows were ihattcrccl, and ahrioil without glafs; but he was furprifed to obfervc fonie remains of furniture ; chairs, whofe faihion and condition bore the date of their antiqui¬ ty ; a broken table, and an iron grate almoft confumed by ruft. On the oppofitc fide of the room was a door, which led to another apartment, proportioned like the firft, but hung with arras fomewhat lefs tattered. In one corner ftood a fmall bedftead, and a few ihattered chairs were placed round the walls. La Motto gazed with a mix¬ ture of wonder aud curiofity; u 'Tis ťí ftrange,'* fiid he, " that thefe rooms, (i and t hele alone, ihould hear the marks "of inhabitation: perhaps, ibme wretch- ζί ed wanderer, like imfclf, may have * c here fought refuge from a perfeeuting 6t world i aud here, perhaps, laid down " the
С 66· ] 44 the load of exiftence : perhaps, foo, " I have followed his footficps, but to 44 mingle my duft with his!" He; turned fuddenly, and was about to quit the room, when he perceived a door near the bed ; it opened into a clofet, which was lighted by one finali win· dow, and was in the fame condition as the apartments he had pafled, except that it was deiiitute even of the remains of fur¬ niture. As he walked over the floor, he thought he felt one part of it ihake be¬ neath his fteps, and examining, found a trap door. Curiofity prompted him to explore farther, and with feme difficulty he opened it : it difelofed a ftair-cafe which terminated in darkneis. LaMotte defeended a few fteps, but was un w il* ling to truft the abyis ; and, after won¬ dering for what purpofe it was fo fe¬ cretly confiručted, he clofed the trap, and quitted this fuite of apartments. The ftairs in the tower above were ib much decayed, that he did not attempt to
L б 7 ] to afcend them : he returned to the halí, and by the ipiral ftaircafe, which he had obferved the evening before, reached the gallery, and found another fuite of apartments entirely unfurnifhed, very much like thofe below. He renewed with Madame La Motte his former converfation refpecting the abbey, and ihe exe r .cd all her endea¬ vours to difluade him from his purpofe, acknowledging the folitary fecurity of the fpot, but pleading that other places might be found equally well adapted for concealment, and more for comfort. This La Motte doubted : befides, the foreft: abounded with game, which would, at once, afford him amufement and food ; a circumftanee, confidering his fmall ftock of money, by no means to be over¬ looked : and he had fuffered his mind to dwell fo much upon the fcheme, that it was become a favourite one. Adeline liftened in filent anxiety to the difeouríè, and waited with impatience the iffue of Peter's
С 68 J Peter s report. The morning paffed, but Peter did not return. Our folitary patty took their dinner of the provifion they had fortunately brought with them, and afterwards walked forth into the woods. Adeline, who never fuffered any good to pafs unnoticed, becaufe it came attended with evil, forgot fora while the defolation of the abbey in the beauty of the adjacent feenery. The pleaiantnefs of the ihades foothed her heart, and the varied features of the landfeape am ufed her tancy ; ihe almoft thought fhe could be contented to live here. Already ihe began to feci an intereft in the concerns of her companions, and for Madame La Motte ihe felt more ; it was the warm emotion of gratitude and affection* The afternoon wore away, and they returned to the abbey. Peter was ftill abfent, and hi^ abfence now began to excite furprife and apprehenfion. The- approach of darknefs alfo threw a gloom wpon the hopes of the wanderers : ano* ther
t 69 ] ther night muft be pafled under the fame forlorn circumfiances as the preceding one : and, what was ftill worfe, with a very fcanty ftock of provjfions. The fortitude of Madame La Motte now en¬ tirely forfook her, and ihe wept bitterly. Adeline's heart was as mournful as Ma- dame's ; but ihe rallied her drooping fpirits, and gave the firft inftance of her kindnefs by endeavouring to revivé thofe of her friend. La Motte was reftleis and uneafy, and, leaving the abbey, he walked alone the way which Peter had taken. He had not gone far, when he perceived him between the trees, leading his horfe; <e1 V\hat news, Peter?" hallooed La Motte. Peter came on, panting for breath, arid faid not a word, till La Motte repeated the quefiion in a tone of fomewhat moie authority, " Ah, bleis 46 you, Mafter," taid he, when he had taken breath to anfwer, '* i am glad to fee you ; i thought i Ihould never have 44 got
[ 70 ] ** got back again ; ľve met with a world 44 of misfortunes." 44 Well, you may relate them hereaf- 44 ter ; let me hear whether you have 44 difcovered ------" " Difcovered !*' interrupted Peter* 44 Yes, Ï, am difcovered with a ven- ** geance ! If your Honour will look at 44 my arms, you'll fee how I am difeo- 44 vered.'* 44 Difcolourcd ! I fuppofe you mean,*' faid La Motte ; " But how came you in " this condition ?" " Why, I'll tell you how it was, Sir; 44 your Honour knows I learned a fmack *' of boxing ofthat Engliíhman that ufed ** to come with his mafter to our houfe.'* " Well, well—tell me where you 44 have been/* 4i I fcarcely know myfelf, Mafter; 44 Tve been where I got a found drub- ** bing, but then ît was in your bufinefs, ' s and fo I don't mind. But if ever I 44 meet with that rafcal again 1 " 44 You
[ 7* ] * c You feem to like your firft drubbing *< fo well, that you want another, and " unlefs you fpeak more to the purpofe, " you ihall foon have one." Peter was now frightened into me¬ thod, and endeavoured to proceed: «« When I left the old abbey," faid he, " I followed the way you directed, and " turning to the right of that grove of " tr¿es yonder, ï looked this way and i( that to fee if I could fee a houfe, or a " cottage, or even a man, but not a "foul of them was to be feen, and fo I " jogged on, near the value of a league, íť I warrant, and then I came toa track ; " oh f oh ! fiiys I, we have you now ; " this will do—paths cant be made '* without feet. However, f was out in i( my reckoning, for the devil a bit of a "faul could I fee, and, after following " the tract this way and that way, for " the third of a league, I loft it, and Л( had to find out another."
« la
t 7» ] %i h it impoflible for you to (peak 44 to the point ?" faid La Motte : omit 44 thefe feoliih particulars, and tell whe- 44 ther you have fucceeded." " Well, then, Mafter, to be ihort, *' for that's the neareft way after all, I u wandered a long while at random, I 44 did not know where, all through a xr foreft like this, and I took fpeeial care 44 to note how the trees ftood, that I * 4 might find my way back. At laft I * ( came to another path, and we., fure I <· ihould find fomething now, though I ** found nothing before: for I could 44 not be miflaken twice ? fo, peeping 44 between the trees, I fpicd a cottage, *< and I gave my horfe a laftı, that ** founded through the forefl, and I was 4i at the door in a minute. They told <* røb thircwusa town about half a 44 league off, and bade me follow the <ť track and it would bring me there ; fo 44 it did ; and my horfe, I believe, fmelt 44 the com 'm the manger, by the rate «he
L 73 ] " he went at. I røquired for a .wheel* Λί wright, and w*s told there wat» but " one ra the place, and he could not be «* found. ï waited and waited, fof ï **« knew it wasf in vain to think of return- " ing without doing my bufîneie. The <*« ma« at laft came home ftom the coun- " try, and I told him how long I bad " waited ; for, fays J, I knew it was in *' vain to return without my bufinefs." " Bo-be îëfs tedious," faid La Motte, 1 ·" if it is in thy nature." "It is in my nature," anfwered Peter, €t and if it was more in my nature, your *" Honour 'ihould have it all. Would " you think it, ISir,' the fellow liad the *' impudence to aik «a lonis-d'or for " mending the coach wheel ? I believe " in my confeicrice he faw 1 wás in a "hurry, and could not do without him. u A louis-d'oi ! fays I, my mailer ihall " give no fuch^rke ; he fhaVt be ira- 4 * pofed upon by no fuch rafcal as you. <f Whereupon, the feljow looked glum, Vol. L D «* and
[ 74 ] 44 and gave me a doufe o'the chops : with " this, I up with my, ñu and gave him 44 another, and ihould have beat him *· prefently, if another man had not tí come in, and then i was obliged to " give up." " And fo you are ret (fined as wife as 44 you went." " Why, mafter, I hope 1 have too 44 much fpirit to fubmit to a rafcal, or *' let you fubmit to one either : befides, " I have bought ibme nails, to try if I f* can't mend the wheel myfelf—-I had u always a hand at carpentry." " Well, I commend your zeal in my " caufe, buton this occafion it was ra- 44 ther ill-timed. And what have you 44 got in that baiket ?" " Why, Mafter, I bethought me that 44 we could not get away from this place 44 till the carriage was ready to draw us, 44 and in the mean time, fays I, nobody 44 can live without victuals, fo ГН e*en "lay
í n ] u layout the little money I have, and Cf take a bafket with me." « Thaťs the only wife thing you have " done yet, and this, indeed, redeems " your blunders." '* Why now, Mafier, it does my heart €< good to hear you fpeak ; I knew I was * { doing for the heft all the while : but " Fvc had a hard job to find my way " back; and here's another piece of Щ т íť luck, for the horfe has, got a thorn, in " his. foot." La Motte made inquiries concerning the iowii 9 and found it was capable } of fupplyinghim with provifion,>an4 what little furniture was nccefihry to render the abbey habitable. This intclügeij.ce -ab moft fettled his plans, and he- ordered Peter to return on the following morning and make, inquiries, concerning r th$ abbey. If the -anfwers were favourable to his wiihes, he.œirmiiffioncd hint* to buy a cart, and load it with tome furni¬ ture, and fonie materials neceflary .for ,, D 2 repair-
С 7« ] repairing the modem apartments. Petet flared : «* What, does your Honour " mean to liveliere ?" *« Why, fuppofe 1 do Г *« Why then your Honour bas made % 44 wife determination, according to my ·* hint ; for your Honour ¡knows İ « faid"— ** Well, Peter, it is not neceflary to «* repeat what you faid ; perhaps, I had ** determined on the fubject before." ** Egad, Mafter, you're in the right, 44 and I'm glad of it, for, I believe, we 44 fliall not quickly be difturbed here, 44 except by the rooks and owls* Yes, *« yes— j warrant I'll make it a place fit *« for a king ; and as for the town, one 44 may get any thing, I'm fore of that ; 44 though they think no more about this ** place than they do about ìndia or * England, or any of thofe places:* They now reached the abbey, where Peter was received with great joy ; but the hope« øf his тйхф and Adeline were
С 77 ] were reprefíèd, when» they learned that he returned, without having: executed his comraiffiön* zná heard his account of the town. La Motte*s orders to Peter were heard with almon equal eoneetiaby Madame and Adeline ; but the latter concealed her wneafinefs, stnd ufed all her efforts to overcome that of her friend» The fwectnefs of her bchaviorø, and the air of fatisfaciiôn fhe aflumed, fenfìbly affecìed Madame, and difcovered to her a fourcc of comfort, which ihe had hi¬ therto overlooked. The affectionate at¬ tention» of her young friend promi&d to confole her for the want of other fociety, and her converfation to enliven the horn's, which might otherwife be paífed in painful regret. The obfervations and general beha- vtom of Adeline already befpoke a good Hnderihmdmg and an amiable heart, but ihe had yet naore*-fhe had genius* She was now in her nineteenth year ; her figure of· the middling um, anu turned I>3 to
t 78 ] to the moft exquifite proportion ; her hair was dark auburn, her eyes blue, and whether they fparkled with intelligence, or melted with tendernefs, they were equally attractive ; her form had the airy lightnefs of a nymph, and, when flie fmiled, her countenance might have been drawn for the younger fifter of Hebe : the captivations of her beauty were heightened by the grace and fimplicity of her manners, and confirmed by the intrinfic value of a heart " That might be lhrin'd in cryibtl, '* Aad have all its movements fcamťd." Annette now kindled the fire for the night : Peter's baiket was opened, and fupper prepared. Madame La Motte was ftill penfivc and filent. " There is 44 fcarcely any condition fo bad," faid Adeline, " but we may, one time or ** other, wifh we had not quitted it. Ho- *' neft Peter, when he was bewildered '* in the foreft, or bad two enemies to S 4 encounter inftead of one, confeifes he ·' wiihed
[ 79 ] * wiihed himfelf at the abbey. And I 44 am certain, there is ησ fituation fo ** deftitute, but comfort may be ex- " tracked from it. The blafce of this fire w flfines yet more cheerfully from the 44 contrafted drearinefsof the place; and 44 this plentiful repaft is made yet more ** delicious, from the temporary want we " have fuffered. Let us enjoy the good "and forget the evil." " You fpeak, my dear," replied Ma¬ dame La Motte, " like one, whofe İpi- 44 rits have not been often depreflcd by 44 misfortune, (Adeline fighed) and 44 whofe hopes are, therefore, vigorous.'* " r-Long fuffering," faid La Motte, *' has fubdued in our minds that elaftic 44 energy, which repels the preffure of ** evil, and dances to the bound of joy. 44 But ï fpeak in rhapfody, though only 44 from the remembrance of fuch a time. ** I once, like you, Adeline, could ex* ** tract comfort from moft fituatkms." D 4 4 < And
[ 8ο ] " And may now, ту àeat Sir,* &íd ** Adeline : «« Still believe it poffihle, '* and yotŕ will find it is' fo." « c Tlie Шййоп is gone—fcf can no lon- *« ger deceive myfelf." «« Pardon me, Sir, if I fay, it is nów> «« only you deceive youďelf 9 by fuffering «« the cloud of forrow to tinge e^efy ob- «« ject you look upon." «« It may be fo," faid LaMotte, '« but le let us leave the fubject." After fupper, the doors were fecured, as before, for the night, and the wan- derers refigned themfelves to repofe* Onthefollowingmorning, Feter agáití fet out for the little town of Atíböíne, and the hours of his abfence were again fpent by Madame La Motte and Ade¬ line in much anxiety and feme hope ; for the inťelíigence he might bring concern¬ ing the abbey, might yet releafe them from the plans of La Motte. Towards the clofe of day he was defcried coming flowly on ; and the cart, ışhich accom¬ panied
í 8' 1 ßamed'bim, too ceŕtaifííyôenÄťméd their fears. He brought materials for repair¬ ing the place, and fbmc furniture. Of the abbey he gave- ött äeesouM, of Which the following is the ftife&ancé ?—» It belonged, together with a laf ge part of the adjacent foreft, to a nobleman, who nour refided with his* family on a temóte eftate. He inherited it in right: of his wife, from his father-m-îav/, who had caufèdthe mòre modern apartments to be erected, and had refided in them feme patt of every year, tor the purpolb of ihooting and hunting. It was re¬ ported, that fome per/on was, ibon after it came to the prefent pofleflor, brought fecretly to the abbey, and confined in thefe apartments ; who, or what he was, had never been conjectured, and what became of him nobody kne#* There· port died gradually away, and many perfons entirely difbelieved the whole óf it But however this,affair might he, certain it was, the prefent owner hid 30 S -tífited
С 8* ] vifited the abbey only two fummers, fince his fucceeding to it ; and the furniture, after ionie time, was removed. Thiscircumftance had at firft excited furprize, and various reports arofe in confequence, but it was difficult to know what ought to be believed. Among the reft, it was faid, that firange appearances bad been obferved at the abbey, and uncommon noifes heard ; and though this report had been ridiculed by fenfible perfons as the idle fuperilition of igno¬ rance, it had fattened fo ilrongly upon the minds of the common people, that for t he latt: feventeen years none of the peafantry had ventured to approach the ípot. The abbey was now, therefore, abandoned to decay. La Motte ruminated upon this ac¬ count. At íiríi-, it called up unpleafant ideas, but they were íbon difmifíèd, and confiderationsmoreinterefiingtohiswel- fare took place : he congratulated him¬ felf that he had now found a ipot, where he
t 83 ] he was not likely to be cither difcovered or difturbed ; yet it could not efcape hint' that there was a ftrange coincidence be¬ tween one part of Peter's narrative, and the condition of the chambers that opened from the tower above ftairs. The remains of furniture, of which the other apartment's were void—the folitary bed—the number and connection of the rooms, were circumftances that united to confirm his opinion. This, however, he concealed in his own breaft, for he already perceived that Peter's account had not aflifted in reconciling his family to the neceifity of dwelling at the abbey. But they had only to fubmit in filence, and whatever difagrceable apprehenfion might intrude upon them, they now appeared willing to fiipprefs the expref¬ iion of it Peter, indeed, was exempt from any evil of this kind 5 he knew no fear,, and his mind was now wholly oc¬ cupied with his approaching bufineis. Madame La Motte 3 with a placid kind D 6 of
С *4 J of deipair, endeavoured to reconcile her¬ felf to that, which no effort of under- ftanding could teach her to avoid, and whiehţ an indulgence in lamentation could only make more intolerable. In¬ deed/ though a fenfe of the immediate inconveniences to be endured at the ab¬ bey, had made her oppofe the fcheme of living there, íhe did not really kr*ow how their fituation could be improved by removali yet her thoughts oñen wan¬ dered towards Paris, and reflected the retrofpect of pail times, with the images of weeping friends left, perhaps, forever. Theaifectionate endearments of her oniy fon, whom, from the danger of his fitua¬ tion, and the obfcurity of her's, ihe might reafonably fear never to fee again, arofe upon her memory, and overcame her fortitude« *' Why f why was I re- " ferved for this hour ?" would ihe fay, 44 and what will be my years to come? 1 * Adeline had no retrospect of pail de¬ light to give emphafis to prefent cala- 3 mity
f n í mity— ho weeping friends— ^ňo ¿ear re¬ gretted objects tò point the edge of for¬ row, and throw a ftckly hue upon her future profoects'; ihe knew ttot yet the pangs of disappointed hope, or the acuter fling oťfeff-áccuŕatíoô; ihe had no mi¬ fery, but what patience Could afluage, or fortitude overcome. At the dawn of the following dajr Peter arofe to his labour : he yroceeéà / with alacrity, and, ín á téW days, two of the tower apartments Were fô much al¬ tered for the better, that La Motte began tó exult, and hià fami! ƒ tO |>eŕc«íive tha*t theiriîiuatiohwouldndtbefomiferabfeas théý had imagined, ^The furniture Petet had already brought was dilpofed in thefe rooms, one of which was thé vaulted apartment. Madame La Motte fnrniíhed . this as a fitting room f preferring it for its large Gothic window, that defeended almoft to the floor, admitting a profpect: ofthe lawn, and thepictureique feenety of the íurrounáing woods. Petet
f & 1 Peter having returned to Aubomç ţor a farther fupply, all the lower apartments were in a few weeks not onlytiabitable, but comfortable. Thefe, however, being infufficient for the accommodation of the family, a room above ftairs was pre¬ pared for Adeline : it was the chamber that opened immediately from the tower, and ihe preferred it to thofe beyond, be¬ caufe it was leis diftant íŕom the family, and the windows fronting an avenue of the foreft, afforded a more extenfive profpečt. The tapeflry, that was de¬ cayed, and hungloofely firoro the walls, was now nailed up, and made to look leis defekte; and, though the room had ftill a iblemn afpect, from its fpaciouf- neis, and the narrovvnefs of the windows, it was not uncomfortable. The firft night that Adeline retired hither, lhe flept little : the folitary air of the place afiècted her ipirits; the more io, perhaps, becaufe ihe had, with friendly confideration, endeavoured to fup-
f «7 3 fupport them in the prefence of Madame La Motte. She remembered the narra¬ tive of Peter, feveral circumftances of which had imprefled her imagination in fpite of her reafon, and ihe found it difficult wholly to fubdue apprehenfion. At one time, terror fo ftrongly feized her mind, that ihe had even opened the door with an intention of calling Ma¬ dame La Motte ; hut, liftening for a moment on the ftairs of the tower, every thing feemed ftill ; at length, ihe heard the voice of La Motte ipeaking cheer¬ fully, and the abfurdity of her fears ftruck her forcibly ; ihe bluihed that ihe -had for a moment fubmitted to them, and returned to her chamber wondering at herfelf.
;*
CHAR
ï
e ií à p. m, * 44 Д|* net tbefe wöftd» " More free from peril than tbe envious court ? u Here feel we but the penalty of Adam, 11 fix féaíori*s differirla, aa the ícgr feng " АЫ tíiurfiíh cbidíngof âb winter's wind." SaAJCESrjMRI. JLrA little åttans* Biè littfe ^an of^ Kvtngi Hie mornings were игпайу %ent in ihooting, ot fifhing, and the dinner, Au* provided by his rodüflry, hè reîiihed with a keener appetitethan had ever at¬ tended Ыш at the luxuriou« tables of Paris. The afternoons he pafled with his family : fometimes he would felecl: ; a book from the few he had brought with him, and endeavour to fix his at¬ tention to the words bis lips repeated :— but his mind fuffered little abstraction írom
[ «9 ] from its owrf cures, and the fentimént he pronounded left no trace behind it· Sometimes he converfed, but.oftener ûtt írt gloomy fifefce, mufitig «spon the; paft, or anticipating the future* At thefe momenta, Adeline, with a fweetnefs almoft irrefiftibie, endeavoured to enliven his ipirits, and to withdraw him from himfelf. Seldom ihe fucceed¬ ed, fent when ihe did* the grateful looks of Madame La Motte, and the bene* volent feelings of her own bofom, re¬ alized the checrfulnefs ihe had at firft only aflumed. Adeline's mind had the happy art, or, perhaps, it wem more juft to fay, the happy nature, cdľ accommodating itfelf to her fituatk>nv Her prefent condition, though forlorn, was not devoid of comfort, and this com¬ fort was confirmed by her virtues. So much flie won upon the affections of her protectors, that Madame La Motte loved heras herehild, and La Motte him¬ felf,
t 90 ] felf, though a man little fufceptibîe. gif tendernefs, could not be infenfible to her folicitudes. Whenever he relaxed from the fullennefs of mifery, it was at the in¬ fluence of Adeline. Peter regularly brought a weekly fupply of provifions from Auboine, and r on thofe occafions, always quitted the town by a route contrary to that leading. to the abbey. Several weeks having pafled without moleftation, La Motte difmiífedall apprehenfion of purfuit, and at length became tolerably reconciled to the completion of his circumftances. As habit and effort ftrengthened the for¬ titude of Madame LaMotte, the features of misfortune appeared to foften. The foreft, which at firft feemed to her a frightful folitude, had loft its terrific af- pečt ; and that edifice, whofe half de» moliíhed walls and gloomy defolation liad ftruck her mind with the force of melancholy aoddhmay, was now beheld
[ 9' ] as a domeftic afylum, and a fafe refuge from the ftorms of power. She was a fenfible and highly accom- pliíhed woman, and it became her chief delight to form the rifing graces of Ade¬ line, who had, as has been already fhown, a fweetnefs of difpofition, which made her quick to repay infiruction with improvement, and indulgence with love. Never was Adeline fo pleafed as when flie anticipated her wiihes, and never fo diligent as when ihe was employed in her bufinefs. The little affairs of the houfehold ftie overlooked and managed with fuch admirable exactneft, that Ma¬ dame La Motte had neither anxiety, nor care, concerning them. And Adeline formed for herfelf in this barren fituation, many amufements, that occafionally ba¬ niihed the remembrance of her misfor* tunes. La Motte's books were her chief confolation. Wilh one of thefe fhe would frequently ramble into the foreft, to
[ 9* J to where the rivet, winding through a glade, diíFufed coolnefs, and with its murmuring accents, invited repotet there ihe would feat herielf, and refigned to the illufions of the page, рай many hours in oblivion of ibrrow. Here too, when her mind was tran¬ quillized by the furrounding feenery, ihe wooed the gentle mufe, and indulged in ideal happinefs. The delight of theie moments ihe commemorated in the fob lowing addrcfg To Tins VtsroN* o# Fancv. Bear, wild illutiona of creative mind ! Whofe varying iraes arife «о· Faecy's aft^. And by her magic fore« are fwifc combin'd In forms that pfóa(ë,an4 feenes that touch the heart : Oh ! whether at her voice ye foft aØame The ptrifive grace of Sorrow drooping low ¡ Chr. riíe futøsrae on Terrors lofty piumff, And fliake the foul witb wildly tlirUling ( woe \ ©r, fweetly bright, your gayer» tints yfrfpreatf,* Bid feenes of pleafere-ftealupon my view, Love wave his purple pinions o*er my head, •Aud wake the tender thought to paflion true ? O! ШЩ—
С 93 ] О! ftill—-ye ihadowy forras! attend ray lonely hours, Still chafe my real cares with your illufivje powers ! Madame La'Motte had frequently ex¬ preifed curiofity concerning the events of Adeline's life, and by what circum¬ ftances ihe had been thrown into a fitua¬ tion fo perilous and myfterious as that in which La Motte had found her. Adeline had given a brief account of the manner in which ihe had been brought thither, hut had always with tears entreated to be fpared for that time from a particular relation of her hiftory. Her ipirits were not then equal to retroťpection, but now that they were foothed by quiet, and ftrengthened by confidence, íhe one day gave Madame La Motte the following narration.
44 1 am ¿he only child," faid Adeline, *' ¡of Louis de St. Pierre, a chevalier of л reputable family, but of finali fortune, 44 who
[ n 3 <c who for many years refided at Paris. " Of my mother I have a faint remera- ** brance ; I loft her when I was only feven ic years old, and this was my firft misfor- " tune. At her death, my father gave up <c houfe-kceping, boarded me in a con- ** vent, and quitted Paris. Thus was Í, * ¿ at this early period of my life, aban- t( doned to ftrangers. My father came íť fometimes to Paris; he then viiited ** me, and I well remember the grief I *- ufed to feel when he bade me farcwcl. " On thcfe occafions, which wrung my * * heart witligrief, he appeared unmoved ; " fo that I often thought he had little " tendernefs for me. But he was my fa- " ther, and the only perfon to whom I " could look up for protection and love. " In this convent I continued till I was " twelve years old. A thoufand times I " had entreated my father to take me e * home, but at firft motives of prudence, tf and afterwards of avarice, prevented " him. I was now removed from tfiis " convent,
[ *95 J ** convent, and pkeedJn another, where ** I learned my father intended I ihould ** take the veil. I will not attempt to ** exprefs my furprize and grief on this 44 occafion. Too long I had been immu- 44 red in the walls of a cloifter, and too ** much had I feen of the füllen mifery 44 of its votaries, not to feel horror and 44 difguft at the profpečt of being added " to their number. «« The Lady Abbefs was a woman of " rigid decorum and fevere devotion ; *' exact in the obfervance of every detail *« of form, and never forgave an offence *' againft ceremony. It washer method, 44 when ihe wanted to make converts to ' * her order, to denounce and terrify rather 44 thantoperfuade and allure. Her's were . '* the arts of cunning pradtifed upon fear, , *' not thofe of fophiftication upon reafon. *· She employed numberlefs ftratagems 44 to gain me tp her purpofe, and they . * 4 all wore the completion of her charac- 44 ter. But in the life to which ihe wpuld «' have
[ 9« 3 ** have devoted mè, ïfawioo many forms *« of real terror, to Ъе overcome by the 44 influence of her ideal hoft, and was re- "folutehi rejecting the veil. Herelpaf- 44 fed feveral years of miferablerefiftànce 44 againft cruelty and fuperftitîon. My ct father ï feldom faw ; when I did, I en*» 44 treated tóm-to alter my deftination, but 44 he objected that his fortune wasinfufit- fC cient to fupport me in the world, and " at length denounced vengeance on my 44 head if I perfifted in difobedience. 44 You, my dear Madam, can form lit- ** tie idea of the wretctiedneis of my fitu* ** ation, condemned to perpetual impri- ** ionment, and imprifonmentof the moft "dreadful kind, or to the vengeance of 44 -a father, from whom I had no appeal. ' ,$t My refelution relaxed—^for feme time 44 1 paufed upon the choice of evils—but i44 at length the horrors 4 of a monaftie life 44 rofe fo folly to my view, that fortitude **gave way before them. Excluded *^om4hecheeïfttl inteteourfe of fociety ·'—from
С 97 1 f —from the pleafant view of nature — c almoft from the light of day—-con- ς demned to filence—rigid formality—* ί£ abftinence and penance—condemned < to forego the delights of a world, which ŕ imagination painted in the gayeft and ť moft alluring colours, and whofe hues * were, perhaps, not the lefs captivating ' becaufe they were only ideal :—fuch ;ζ was the ftate to which I was deftined. :¿ Again my refolution was invigorated : :( my father's cruelty fubdued tendernefs, ' ( and roufed indignation. Since he can ; < forget, faid I, the affection of a pa- ' ( rent, and condemn his child without ;( remorfe to wretchednefs and defpair— u the bond of filial and parental duty * no longer fubfifts between us—he has * himfelf diffolved it, and I will yet ť firuggle for liberty and life." " Finding me unmoved by menace, ( the Lady Abbefs had now recourfe to e more fubtle meafures : ihe conde* '« fcended to fmile, and even to flatter; Vo¿. L E « but
I 9« ] 44 but her's wag the diftoïted finile of cu»- " ning, not the graciousemblem of kind- 44 nefs ; it provoked diiguft, inftead of in- ** fpiring affection. She painted the cha- st racter of a veftal in the moft beautiful * 4 tints of artrits holy innocence*—its " mild digni,ty.r"4ts fublime deyotion. ï * c ň^ied ås flie fpoke. This ihe regarded 44 as % favourable fymptom, ^nd pro- 44 ceeded on her piftpre with more ani- ^щаДоп. She defcribed thpferenlty of a 44 mpmftiçlife^tsfecority froçpt thefe- 44 ductivecharrøSj rçflleís ^paifions, and €t forrowful ınciflîtudes of the world-^ 44 tl№ rapturous deljgh^of religion, and *' tbe^et reeiprocal aifeéÎion of the 44 So highly fte&ŕibed ihp piece, that 44 Æ&lurlsingJines pi cunning wonl^to 44 an mexperienced eye, have efcaped de- ** tçctipn. Mine wmjw forrowfnlly in- **{щт<1% T&Q 9&m WI witnefledthe * 4 (eerettejrand.bnrftişg%h i of v^inre^ * ( and
t 99 ] ♦ and the mute anguiih of defpair. My 44 filence and my manner affured her of 44 my incredulity, and it was with cfifli* 44 culty that ihe preferved a decent com· * pofure. " My father, as may be imagined, 44 was highly incenfed at my perfeve- 44 ranee, which he called obftinacy, but, 44 what will not be fo eafily believed, he 44 foon after relented, and appointed a 44 day to take me from the convent. О I 44 judge of my feelings when I received " this intelligence. The joy it occafioned ** awakened all my gratitude ; I forgot 44 the former cruelty of my father, and 44 that the prefent indulgence was lefs u the effect of his kindnefs than of my 44 refolution. ï wept that I could not *< indulge his every wiíh. 44 What days of blifsful expectation ·" were thofe that preceded my departure! 44 The world, from whieh I had been hi- 44 therto fecluded—the world, in which 44 my fancy had been fo often delighted &2 « tO
[ 100 ] 44 tö roam— whofe paths were ftrewn wiíH 44 fadelefs ro fes— whofe every fcene fmiled 4( in beauty and invited to delight—where 44 all the people were good, and all the 4C good happy—Ah ! then that world was 44 burft ing upon my view, Let me catch 44 the rapturous remembrance before it 44 vanifli ! It is like the pafling lights of fi autumn, that gleam for a moment on 44 a hill, and then leave it to darknefs. 46 I counted the days and hours that with« 44 held me from this fairy land. It was in " the convent only that people werede- 44 ceitfifl and cruel : it was there only 44 that mifery dwelt. I was quitting it " all! How I pitied the poor nuns that 44 were to be left behind. I would have 4 ( given half that world I prized fo much, 41 had it been mine ? to have taken them 14 out with me, * " The long wiihed-for day at laft ar- " rived. My father came, and for a mo* 44 ment my joy was loft in the forrow of 44 bidding farewel to my poor cornpa^ *· nions,
С io. j ** lirons, for whom I had never felt fucTi u warmth of kindnefs as at this infiant. '* I was foon beyond the gates of the con- a vent. I looked around me, and viewed u the vaft vault of heaven no longer u bounded by monañic walls, and the é * green earth extended in hill and dale " to the round verge of the horizon ! My " heart danced with delight, tears fwelled " in my eyes, and for fome moments I ** was unable to fpeak. My thoughts " rofe to heaven in ientimenţs of grati- " tude to the Giver of all good ! " At length, I turned to my father ; * c dear Sir, faid I, how I thank you for <ζ my deliverance, and howl with I could * ť do every thing to oblige you. <c Return, then, to your convent, faid " he, in a harih accent. I fhuddered ; " his look and manner jarred the tone of 6e my feelings; they ftruck difcord upon u my heart, which had before relpondcd *' only to harmony. The ardour of joy ** was in a moment repreíľed, and every E 3 « object
t î02 3 " ohjeet around me was faddeneď witb * f the gloom of difappointment. It was ** not that I fufpected my father would " take me back to the convent ; but thafe ** his feelings feemed fo very dhTonant " to the joy and gratitude which I had ** but a moment before felt and expreifed *· to him.—Pardon, Madam, a relation 44 of thefe trivial circumftances; the 44 ftrong viciflitudes of feeling which 44 they imprefled upon my heart, make 44 *ne think them important, when they 44 are, perhaps, only diígufling." " No, my dear/' faid Madame La Motte, "they are interefting to me; 44 they illuftrate little traits of character 14 which I Jove to obferve. You are 44 worthy of all my regards, und from 44 this moment 1 give my tendereit pity 44 to your misfortunes, and my affection " to your goodnefs/* Thefe words melted the heart of Ade¬ line j ihe kifled the hand which Ma* dame held out, and remained a few mi- nules
ľ ios 3 Alites filent. At length íhe faid, " May <ť I deferve this goodrtefe! and may I « ever be thankful to God, who, in giv- *' ing me fuch a friend, has raifed me 44 to comfort and hope I 44 My father's houfe was fitüated a few 44 leagues on the other fide of Paris, and 44 in our way to it, wc pafled through 44 that city. What a novel fcene ! Where ** were now the folemn faces, the demure 44 manners I had been accuftomed to fco *** in the eonvent? Every countenance 44 was here animated, cither by bufinefs 44 or pleafure ; every ftep was airy, aud 44 every fmile was gay· All the people 44 appeared Üke friends ; theylookedand " fmiled at me ; î fmiled again, and 44 wiihed to have told them how pleafed " 1 was. How delightful, faid I, to ** live furrounded by friends í 44 What crowded ftteets! Whatmag- "niftcent hotels I What fplendid equi- 44 pages î I fcarcely obferved that the ** ftreets were narrow, or the way dan- E 4 gerous.
[ Ю4 ] -««gerous. What bufile, what tumuli, ' ť what delight 1 I could nevei be fuifi- 44 ciently thankful that I was removed *« from the convent. Again, I was go- 44 ing to exprefs my gratitude to my fa- 44 ther, but his looks forbad me, and I 44 wa: lent. I am too diifufe; even «« the faint forms which memory refleűs 44 of pafled delight arc grateful to the ** heart. The íhadow of pleafure is fiili fc gazed upon with a melancholy enjoy- 44 ment, though the fubftance is fled be- *« yond our reach. «« Having quitted Paris, which I left 94 with many fighs, and gazed upon till «« the towers of every church diflolved 44 in diftance from my view ; we entered «« upon a gloomy and unfrequented road. 44 It was evening when we reached a ** wild heath ; I looked round in fearch «« of a human dwelling, but could find ** none ; and not a human being was to 44 be feen. I experienced fomething of 44 what I ufed to feel in the convent ; 44 my
[ ï0 5 j 44 my heart had not been fo fad fincc Γ ** left it. Of my father, who ftill fat in 14 filence, 1 inquired if we were near 44 home ; he anfwered in the affirmative. 44 Night came on, however, before we ťí reached the place of our deftination ; 44 it was a lone houfe on the wafte ; but 44 1 need not defcribe it to you, Madam. 44 When the carriage flopped, two men <c appeared at the door, and aflifted' us " to alight ; fo gloomy were their coun* 44 tciianccs, and fo few their words, I 4i almoft fancied myfelf again in the 44 convent. Certain it is, ï had not feen 44 fuch melancholy faces fincc ï quitted 44 it. ís this a part of the world I have 44 fo fondly contemplated ? faid L " The interior appearance of the houfe 44 was defolate and mean ; I was fur«· 44 prifed that my rather had chofen fuch " a place for his habitation, and alfo that 44 no woman was to be fecn ; but í knew 44 that inquiry would, only produce re- 44 proof, and was, therefore, filent. At E j "luppes
[ «об J * с fupper, the two men I had before feeif w ^t down with us ; they faid little, bot ** feemed to obfervc me much. I was ** confuted and difpleafeé, which, my « ť ßither noticing, frowned at them with * f a look, which convinced me he meant * c more than I comprehended. When * * the eloth was drawn, my father took u my hand and conducted me to the ««door of my chamber; having fat ** down the candle, and wiihed me good ** night, be left me to my own folitary *' thoughts. " How different were thty from thofe ** I had rødulged a few hours before ! ** then expectation, hope, delight, dan- *< ced before me ; now melancholy and *« diiappointment chilled the ardour of " my mind, and difcolourcd my future *' profped. The appearance of every " thing around com'ueed to deprefs me. *' On the fioor lay a fmall bed without *< curtainű or banging; two old chairs •♦and
í to) 3 * c and atable were all the remaining fur- ** ìiiture in the room. I went to the u window, with an intention of looking €C out upon the furrouiiding fcetie, and u found it was grated* ï was ftodked " at this circumftanee, and, comparin; f f it with the lonely fituation, and the 4t ftrange appearance of the àouíè, tòge- u ther with the countenances and beha* ** vrour of the men who had flipped *· with us, I was loft: in alabyriiith of H conjecture. ** At length I laid down to fteep ; but 9t the anxiety of my mind prevented re- «* pofe ; gloomy, unpleafing images flit- w ted before my fancy, and I fell into a «' fort of waking dream г I thought that 4f I was in a lonely forcft with my father ; 4i his looks were fevere, and his geftures lf menacing ; he upbraided me for leav- " ing the convent, and while he fpoke, ** drew from tm pockvït a mirror, which ** he held before my face ; I looked in it E 6 " and
С îo8 ) " and faw, (my blood now thrills as I re- 44 peat it) I faw myfelf wounded, and 44 bleeding profufely. Then I thought 44 myfelf in the houfe again ; and fud- 44 denly heard thefe words, in accents fo 4( difiinct, that for feme time after I 44 awoke, I could fcarcely believe them 44 ideal, 4 Depart this houfe, deftructxoa " hovers here.* f c I was awakened hy a footflep ou 44 the ftairs ; it was my father retiring to 44 his chamber ; the latcnefs of the hour -*f furprifed me, for it was paft mid- " night. 44 On the following morning, the party 44 of the preceding evening aftbmbled at 44 breakfaft, and were as gloomy and 44 filent as before. The table was fpread / f by a boy of my father s ; but the cook ."and the houfe-maid, whatever they 44 might be, were invifi ble'. 44 The next morning, I was furprifed, 44 øn attempting to leave my chamber, "to
t *ô9 ] iç to find the door locked ; ï waited з u confiderable time before I ventured to *' call ; when I did, no anfwer was re- " turned; í then went to the window, ic and called more loudly, but my own i( voice was flill the only found 1 heard. <c Near an hour 1 pafied in a ftate of fur- u prife and, terror not to be defcribed : vi at length, I heard a perfon coming up ct ftairs, and I renewed the call ; I was " anfwered, that my father had that " morning fet off for ,Раф, whence he " would return in a few days ; in the ", meanwhile he had ordered me to be " confined in my chamber. On myex.- c ' fiing furprife and apprehenfion at * tuis circumftancc, I was aifurcd 1 had '* nothing to fear, and that I fiio.uld live i( as well aş ifi was at liberty. " The latter part of this fpeechjeemed " to contain an odd kind of comfort ; " I made little reply, but fubmitied to ic necefiity. Once more I was aban- ťí doned
С «» I 94 doned to íbrrowful reflection ; what ж ** day was the one I now pafled S alone* ** and agitated with grief and apprehen- ** fion. I endeavoured to conjecture the * 4 caufe of this harih treatment ; and, at ** length concluded it was defigned by 44 my father, as a puniihment for my for- <* mer difobedience. But why abando» ** røe to the power of ŕcrangers, to men, 44 whofe countenances bore the ftamp of « villainy fo ffrongly asto mipreíe even ·* my inexperienced mind with terror î ** fiîrmife involved me only deeper in 4 ** perplexity, yet ï found it impoffibîe to «* forbear purfuing the fubject ; and tHe «* day was divided between lamentation' 44 and conjecture. Night aťlcngth came, 44 and fuch a night Ì Darkneis brought 44 new terrors : I looked round the cham« ** bcr%ior fome mearte of faftening my *' door on fhe infide, but could perceive * 4 none ; at bft I contrived to place the «back
t '» 1 çt back of a chair in an oblique direction^ « fo as to render it fecure. " I had fcarcely done this, and Iai<f tc down upon my bed ia my cloaths> " not to ileep, but to watch, when ï «' heard a rap at the door of the houfe, *' which was opened and ftiut fo |uick- " ly, that the perfon who had knocked, 44 feemed only to deliver a letter, or mef* " fage. Soon after, I heard voices at in- 44 tervals in a room below ftairs, fome^ 44 times fpeaking very low, and ibme- " times rifing all together, as if in dif- 44 pute. Something more excufable than 44 curiofity made me endeavour to dif- " tinguiih what was faid, but in vain ţ i( now and then a word or two reached # * røe, and once I heard my name re- u peated, but no more. " Thus paífed the hours till midnight, * tf when all became ftill. I had lain for 44 fome time in a ftate between fear and «hope, wheal heard the lock of шу " door
С US 7 и door gently moved backward and for- " ward ; I ftarted up, and liftened ; for 44 a moment it was ftill, then the noife 44 returned, and I heard a whifpering 44 without ; my fpirits died away, but I " was yet fenfible. Prefently an effort 44 was made at the door, as if to force it ; 41 1 ihrieked aloud, and immediately 44 heard the voices of the men I had feen 44 at my father's table : they called 44 loudly for the door to be opened, and 44 on my returning no anfwer, uttered se dreadful execrations. Ihadjufi ftrength 44 fufticicnt to move to the window, in 44 the defperatc hope of efcapingthence; 44 but my feeble efforts could not even 44 fliake the bars. О ! how can I recol- *' Icct thefe moments of horror, and be tc fuificiently thankful that I am now ia 44 Safety and comfort 1 " They remained feme time at the 44 door, then they quitted it, and went a down ftairs. How my heart revived «at
[ **3 ] 44 at every ftep of their departure ! I fell «« upon my knees, thanked God that he 4C had preferved me this time, and im* «« plored his farther protection. I was 44 rifing from this ihort prayer, when «« fuddenly 1 heard a noife in a different 64 part of the room, and, on looking 44 round, I perceived the do. r of a fmall 44 clofet open, and two men enter the 44 chamber. ** They feized me, and l funk fenfe- «« lefs in their arms ; how long I re- 44 mained in this condition 1 know not, 44 but, on reviving, I perceived myfelf tr again alone, and heard feveral voices 44 from below fiairs, I had prefence of «« mind to run to the door of the clofet, " my only chance of efcape ; but it was 44 locked ! I then recollected it was pof. 44 fiblo, that the ruffians might have for- 4S got to turn the key of the chamber «« door, which was held hy the chair ; "but here, alfo, I was difappointed. I tÉ clafped
[ lr 4 1 f * cíafpeďmy hande in an agony of de¿ ** fpair, and ftood for fome time im* " moveable. 44 A violent noife from below ronfeat 94 me, and ibon after í heard people? * 4 aicending the ftairs : I now gave my* ** felf up for ion. The fteps approached, * ť tårn door of ^he clofet was again un- u locked. I ftood cahnly, and again* *' iaw the men ester the chamber ; î nei· ** ther ipoke, or rcfifted : the faculties- ** of щ Ami were wrought up beyond i€ Ûıc power of feeling -, as a violent blow 44 on the body ftuns for a while the fenfe 44 of pain» They led me down ftairs ţ * 4 the door of a room below was thrown ** open, and I beheld a ftranger ; it was 44 then that my fenfes returned; ííhriek- 44 ed, and »efifted, but was forced along· 44 It is unncceifary to uy that this ftranger ** was Monfieur La Motte, or to add, " that I ¿hall for ever bleis him as my **- deliverer*** Adeline
E "5 J Adeline ceafed to fpeak; Madame La Motte remained filent. There were feme circumfiances in Adeline's narra¬ tive which raifed all her curiofity. Sho aiked if Adeline believed her father to be a party in this myfterious affair. Ade¬ line, though it wr*s impoffiblc to doubt that he had been principally and mate¬ rially concerned in feme part of it, thought, or faid ihe thought, he was in¬ nocent of any intention againft her life. ** Yet, what motive," faid Madame La Motte, " could there be for a degree of ** cruelty fo apparently unprofitable ?" Here the inquiry ended ; and Adeline confefled ihe had purfued it, till her mind fhrunk from all farther refearch. The iympathy which fuch uncommon misfortune excited, Madame La Motte now expreifed without referve, and this exprefiion of it, ftrengthened the bond of mutual friendfiiip. Adeline felt het? fpirits relieved by the difelofure ihe had made
С Мб J made ίο Madame La Motte ; and the latter acknowledged the value of the conñdence, hy an increafe of aftèc- lionate attentions*
CHAP,
í ll 7 1
CHA P. IV. u , , ι ! My May of life " Is falľn into the fear, the yellow leaf." • Macbeth, íť Full oft, unknowing and unknown, íť He wore his endlefs noons alone, " Amid th' autumnal wood ; ** Oft was he wont» in hafty Ht, * ť Abrupt the fecial board to quit." Wharton. АлА Motte had now paffed above a month in this fcclufion ; ajid his wife had the pleafure to fee him recover tran¬ quillity and even checrfulnefs. In this pleafure Adeline warmly participated; and ihe might jnflly have congratulated herfelf, as one caufe of his reft oration ; her cheerful neh nnd delicate attention had effected what Madame La Motte's greater anxiety had failed to accomplifli. La Motte did not feem regardlefs of her amiable
t »5 î amiable difpofition, and fometimes thanked her in a manner more earneft than was ufual with him. She, in her turn, confidered him as her only protector, and now felt towards him the affection of a daughter. The time ihe had fpent in this peace¬ ful retirement liad faftened the remem¬ brance of paft events, and reftored her mind to ŕts natural tone: and when memory brought back to her view her former ihort and romantic expectations of happînels, though ihe gave a iigh to the rapturous ilhifion, ihe lefs lamented the diiappointment, than rejoiced in her preíênt íecurity and comfort. But the fatisfaction which La Mo!te*s cheerfulness dŕffufed around him was of ihort continuance ; he became fuddenly gloomy and referved s the fociety of his family was no longer grateful to him ; and he would fpend whole hours in the tnoft fecluded parts of the foreft, devoted to melancholy and fecret grief. He did not,
t »9 1 grøt, as formerly, indulge the humour of his fadnefs, without reftraint, in the pr«- fence of others ; he now evidently endea¬ voured to conceal it, and affected a cheerfulness that was too artificial to efcape detection. His fervant Peter, either impelled by curiofity or kind neis, fometimes followed him, unfeen, into the foreft. He ob* fcrved him ftequently retire to one parti¬ cular fpot, in a remote part, which having gained, he always diíàppearcd, before Peter, who was obliged to follow at a 4iftauce> could екаеНу notice where. All his endeavours now prompted by mmder, and invigorated by difappoint* ment, were unfircce&ful, and he was ftill compelled to endure tlie tortures of un- fatisfied curiofity. This change in the manners and ha¬ bits of her huiband was too conlpicuous to pafs unobferved by Madame La Motte, who endeavoured, by all theftra* iagems which affection could fuggeft, or 3 iemale
С ï2 ° ] female invention fupply, to win him to her confidence. He feemed infenfible to the influence of the firft, and withftood the wiles of the latter. Finding all her efforts infufHcient to diifipate the glooms which overhung his mind, or to pene¬ trate their fecret caufe, the defifted from farther attempt, and endeavoured to fubmit to this myfterious diílreís. Week after week elapíêd, and the fame unknown cauíè íèaled the lips and corroded the heart of La Motte. The place of his vifitation in the forell had not been traced. Peter had frequently examined round the fpot where his maf- ter difappeared, hut had never difcover¬ ed any reeefs, which could he fuppofed to conceal him. The aftonifhment of the fervant was at length raifed to an in- fupportable degree, and he communi¬ cated to his miftrefs the fubjeel: of it. The emotion, which this information excited, íhe difguiíèd from Peter, and reproved him for the means he had taken 4 to
L ■*« I to gratify his curiofity. But fhe revolved this circumftanee in her thoughts, and comparing it with the late alteration in his temper, her uncafinefs was renewed, a n d h er perplcxi ty confi derably i ncreafed . After much confidcration, being unable to aifign an> other motive for his con- duel, the began to attribute it to the in¬ fluence of illicit paífion ; and her hearts which now out-ran her judgment, con¬ firmed the fuppofition, and roufed all the torturing pangs of jealoufy. Comparatively fpeakîng, fhe had ne¬ ver known aifliciion till now : fhe had abandoned her deareft friends and con¬ nections—had rclinquiihed the gaieties, the luxuries, and almoft the neeeíľaries of life ;—fled with her family into exile, an exile the moft dreary and comfortlcfs ; experiencing the evils of reality,. and thofe of apprehenfion, united : all thefe ihe had patiently endured, fupported by the affection of him, for whofe fake ihe fuftcred. Though that afteciion, indeed, Vol. L F had
L I22 J had for fomc time appeared to be aba¬ ted, íhe had borne its decreafc with for¬ titude; but the laft ftrokc of calamity, hitherto withheld, now came with irre- fifiiblc force—the love, of which fhe lamented the lois, ihe now believed was transferred to another. The operation of ftrong paflion con¬ fufes the powers of reafon, and warps them to its own particular direction. Her ufual degree of judgment, unop- pofed by the influence of her heart, would probably have pointed out to Madame La Motte fome circuin francés *ipon the fubject of her diftreis, equivo¬ cal, if not contradictory to her fufpicions. No inch circumfiances appeared to her, and ihe did not long hefitatc to decide, that Adehne was the object of her huf- band's attachment. Her beauty out of the quefiion, who clfe, indeed, could it be in a ipot thus fecluded from the world ?
The
[ 1 ч 3 Tne fame caufe deftroyed, almoft at the fame moment, her only remaining comfort ; and, when flic wept that ihe could no longer look for happinefs in the affection of La Motte, ihe wept alfo, that ihe could no longer feek folacc in the friendihip of Adeline. She had too great an cfteem for her to doubt,*at firft, the integrity of her conduct, but, in ipite of reafon, her heart no longer ex¬ panded to her with its ufual warmth of kindnefs. She íhrunk írom her confi¬ dence, and, as the fecret broodings of jealoufy cheriihed her fufpicions, ihe became lefs kind to her, even in manner. Adeline, obferving the change, at firft attributed it to accident, and after¬ wards to a temporary difpleafure, arifing from ibme little inadvertency in her con¬ duct. She, therefore, increafed her af- fiduities ; but, perceiving, contrary to ail expectation, that her efforts to pleafď failed of their ufual confequence, and that the referve of Madame's manner ra- F a ther
С 1 ч ] ther increafed than abated, ihe became ferioufly uncafy, and r fol ved to ft ек an explanation. This Madame La Motte as feduloufly avoided, and was for fome time able to prevent. Adeline, however, too much interefted in the event to yield to delicate fcruples, prefled the fubject fo clofely, that Madame wah at firfl agitated andconfufed, bulat lengthinvenicd fome idle excufe, and laughed oft" the aftair. She now faw the neceifity of fubduing all appearance of referve towards Ade¬ line j and though her art could not con¬ quer the prejudices of paflion, it taught her toaflume, with tolerable fuccefs, the afpect of kindnefs. Adeline was de¬ ceived, and was again at peace, indeed, confidence in the fincerity and goodnefs of others was her weaknefs. But the pangs of flifled jealoufy ftuck deeper to the heart of Madame La Motte, and ihe refolved, at all events, to obtain fome certainty upon the fubject of her fu ipi- dons. She
t î2 5 ] She now condcfcendcd f о an aci oť meanncfs, \v hieh ílie had before delpifed, and ordered Peter to watch the fteps of his Mafier, in order to difcover, ifpof- fible, the place of his vifitation ! So much did paífion win upon her judgment, by time and indulgence, that fhe fometimes ventured even to doubt the integrity of Adeline, and afterwards proceeded to believe it poffible that the objecl of La Motte's rambles might be an aifignatton with her. What fuggefted this conjec¬ ture was, that Adeiine frequently took long walks alone in the foreft, and fometimes was abfent from the abbey for many hours. This circumftanee, which Madame La Motte had at firft attributed to Adeline's fondnefs for the piclurefque beauties of nature, now operated forci¬ bly upon her imagination, and fhe could view it in no other light, than as afford¬ ing an opportunity for fecret converfa¬ tion with her huiband.
F a P<'tcr
[ «β 3 Peter obeyed the ordei> of Lis mifrrcf? with alacrity, for they were warmly fe- conded by his own curioiity. All his endeavours were, however, fruitlefs ; he never dared to follow La Motte near enough to obferve the place of his laft retreat. Her impatience thus heightened by delay, and her paífion ftimulated by difficulty, Madame La Motte now re¬ folved to apply to her huiband for an explanation of his conduct. After fome confideration, concerning the manner moft likely to fuccced with him, ihe went to La Motte, but when ihe entered the room where he fat, for¬ getting all her concerted addreís, ihe fell at his feet, and was, for fome moments, loft in tears. Surprifed at her attitude and difirefs, he inquired the occafion of it, and was anfwered, that it was caufed by his own conduct. " My conduct ! 44 What p\~+ of it, pray ?" inquired he. 44 Your referve, your fecret forrow, 44 and frequent abfencc from the abbey." 4. " I&-
í I2 7 3 44 h it then fo wonderful, that a man, i4 who has loft al mot! everything, ihould 44 fometimes lament his misfortunes ? or 44 fo criminal to attempt concealing his u grief, that he muft be blamed for it by 44 thofe, whom he would fave from the " pain of iharing it ?" Having uttered thcfe words, he quitted the room, leaving Madame La Motte loft in furprife, but fomewhat relieved ftom the preflure oť her former finan¬ cions. Still, however, flic purfued Ade*. line with an eye of ferutiny ; and tlie mafk ©f kindnefs would fometimes fall off, and difcover the features of diftruft, Ade¬ line, without exactly knowing why, felt lefs at eafe and lefs happy in her pre¬ fence than formerly ; her fpirits drooped, and ihe would often, when alone, weep at the forlornnefs of her condition. For¬ merly,, her remembrance of paft fu Her¬ ings was loft in the friendihip of Madame LaMotte; now, though her behaviour F 4 * ^vas
t »18 ] was too guarded to betray any linking inírance of imkindneíš, there was fomc- thing in her manner which chilled the hopes of Adeline, unable as the was io anaîyfe it. But a circumftancc which foon occurred, fufpended, for a while, the j calo u fy of Madame La Motte, and ronfed her huiband from his ilatc of gloomy ítupefaction. Peter, having been one day to Ati¬ bóme, for the weekly fupply of provi- iiom, returned with intelligence that awakened in La Motte new apprehen- iion and anxiety. " Oh, Sir ! I've heard fomething that lf has afloniihed me, as well it may," cried Peter, *' and fo it will you, when " you come to know it. As I was fíand- ťť ing in the blackfmitlťs fhop, while " the fmith was driving a nail into the u horfe's ilioe (by the bye, the horfe loft " İt in an odd way, I'll tell you, Sir, 14 how it was)*'—
« Nav,
[ î*9 ì "Nay, prithee leave it till another u time, and go on with your ftory." " Why then, Sir, as ï was Handing ce in the blackfmith's fhop, comes in a " man with a pipe in his mouth, and a ct large pouch of tobacco in his hand"— ~ " Well—what has the pipe to do with " the ftory }" Nay, Sir, you put me out ; I cant i( go on, unlcfs you let meteli it my own ' c way. As I was faying—with a pipe " in his mouth— I think î was there, 4t your Honour !" %ť Yes, yes," « He fets himfelf down on the bench, « and, taking the pipe from his month, " fay s to the blackfmith, Neighbour, " do you know any body of the name of " La Motte, hereabouts ?—Blefs your « Honour, í turned all of a cold fwent <s in a minute !—Is not your Honour " well, íliall I fetch you any thing ?" " No—but be brief İn your narra- « tive." F 5 « La
[ ïjo 3 44 La Motte ! La Motte ! faid the 44 blackfmith, I think Fve heard the 44 name." — 4( Have you ?" faid I, 44 you re cunning then, for there's no 44 fuch perfon hereabouts, to my know- " ledge." 44 Fool !—why did you fay that?" 44 Becaufe i did not want them to know 44 your Honour was here ; and if i had 44 not managed very cleverly, they 44 would have found me out. There is " no fuch perfon, hereabouts, to my " knowledge, fays I,**—" Indeed ! fays 44 the blackfmith, you know more of the *' neighbourhood than I do then."------ ** Aye, fays the man with the pipe, ** that's very true. How came you to 44 know So much ofthe neighbourhood ? 44 1 came here twenty-fix years ago, come 44 next St. Michael, and you know more 44 than 1 do. How came yon to know 44 fo much ?** 44 Witlf that he put his pipe in his *' mouth, and gave a whiff full in my 44 face.
С rçı. 1 Vriace. Lord ! your Honour, I trem- 44 bled from head to foot; Nay, as for " that matter, fa; s í, ï dont know morc 4í than otlicr people, but Ym fure I ťf never heard of fuch a man as that."—· 44 Pray,· fays the bhekfinith, flaring mc ' c full in the face, ant you the man that " was inquiring fume time linee about "Saint Clair's Abbey?'* —" Well, " what of that ? fays 1 ;· what does that "prove?**-—"Why, they fay, fomc- Cť body lives in the abbey now, faid the 44 man, turning to the other; and, for " aught I know, it may be this fame La "Motte." — "Aye, or for aught I " know either, fays the man with the ** pipe, getting up from the bench, and 44 you know more of this than you'll " own. I'll lay my life out, this Mon- 44 fieur La Motte lives at the abbey."- — (4 Aye, fays I, you are out there, for he 44 does not live at the abbey now." 44 Confound your folly !'* cried La Motte ; " but be quick—how did the У matter end ?" ve ;«My
[ w 3 " My Mafier does not live there now, 44 faid I."—Oh ! oh í faid the man with 44 the pipe, he is your Mafter, then? 44 And pray how long has he left > the 44 abbey—and where does he live now }" 44 Hold, faid I, not fo faft—1 know 44 when to fpei ?c and when to hold my 44 tongue—but who has been inquiring ťť for him ?" 44 What ! he expected fomebody to t( inquire for him ì fays the man.'*- ----- £ * No, fays 1, he did not, but if he did, " what does that prove? — that argues 44 nothing." With that, he looked at the 44 blackfmith, and they went out of the 44 fliop together, leaving my horfe's ftioe « undone. But I never minded that, for 44 the moment they were gone, ïmount- " ed and rode away as faft as I could. 4e But in my fright, your Honour, I for- " got ta take the round-about way, and 44 fo came ftraight home." La Motte, extremely íhocked at Peter's intelligence, made no other re- Р*У
С чз ] ply than by cu rung his folly, and im¬ mediately went in fearch of Madame, who was walking with Adeline on the banks of the river. La Motte was too much agitated to foften his information by preface : " We яге difcovered ľ* faid he, " the King's officers have been u inquiring for me at Auboine, and " Peter has blundered upon my ruin ľ" He then informed her of what Peter had related, and bade her prepare to quit the abbey. ts But whither can we fly ?" faid Ma¬ dame La Motte, fcarcely able to fupport herfelf—~" Any where !" faid he; i4 to u flay here is certain deftruction. We u muft take refuge in Switzerland, I u think. If any part of France would " have concealed mc, furely it had been « this !" 44 Alas, how are weperfecuted !" re¬ joined Madame. ts This fpot is fcarcely " made comfortable, before we are ob~ ťť liged
í χ 34 ] u liged to leave it, and go we know not " whither." ť£ I with wc may not know whither," replied La Motte, " that is the leaft u evil that threatens us. Let us efcape ** a priibn, and I care not whither we u go. But return to the abbey imme- (i diately, and pack up what moveables u you can." A flood of tears came to the relief of Madame La Motto, and ihe hung upon Adeline's arm, filent and trembling. Adeiine, though fhe had no* comfort to beftow, endeavoured to com¬ mand her feelings and appear compofed. " Come/' faid La Motte, ** we waft e a time ; let us lament hereafter, but at' " prefent prepare for flight. Exert a lit- " tie of that fortitude, which is fo ne- ** cefiary for our preibrvation. Adeline" '* does not weep, yet her fiate is as " wretcheiias your own, for ï know not ** how long İ ihall be able to protect « her.**
Notwith*
С 135 ] Notwithftanding her terror, tins re¬ proof touched the pride of Madame La Mutte, who dried hev tears, but dif¬ dained to reply, and looked at Adeline with a ftrong exprefiion of difpleafure. As they moved filently toward the ab¬ bey, Adeline afked La Motte if he was fure they were the King's officers, who inquired for him.— 4i I cannot doubt *' it," he replied ; 44 who clfe could pof- 44 fibly inquire for me ? Befides, the be- *' haviour of the man, who mentioned 44 my name, puts the matter beyond a " quefiion " 44 Perhaps not," faid Madame La Molte : ťí let us wait till morning ere i( we fet off. We may then find it will u be unneceflary to go." 4i We may, indeed; the King's of- 44 ficers would probably by that time *' have told us as much." La Motte went to give orders to Peter.—·*' Set off "in an hour!" faid Peter, "Lord blefs 44 you, Mafter î only confider the coach *' wheel :
С »з« 3 êt wheel : it would take me a day at " leaft to mend it, for your Honour " knows I never mended one in my « life." This was a circumftanee which La Motte had entirely overlooked. When they fettled at the abbey, Peter had at firft been too bufy in repairing the apart¬ ments, to remember the carriage ; and afterwards, believing it would not quickly be wanted, he had neglected fo do it. 'La Motte's temper now entirely forfook him, and with many execration« he ordered him to go to work imme¬ diately : but on fearching for the mate¬ rials formerly brought, they were no where to be found, and Peter at length remembered, though he was prudent enough to conceal this circumftanee, that he had ufed the nails in repairing the ab¬ bey. It was now, therefore, impoffible to quit the foreft that night, and La Motte had only to confider the moft probable plan of concealment, ihould the officers of
С '37 ] of juftice vint the ruin before morn¬ ing; a circumftancc, which the thought- lejľneítí of Peter, in returning from Au¬ boine by the ftraight way, made not un¬ likely. At fir(l, indeed, it occurred to him, that, though his family could not be re¬ moved, he might himfelf take one ofthe horfes, and efcape from tiie foreft before night. But he thought there would ftill be fome danger of deteclion in the towns through which he muft pafs, and he could r.ot well bear the idea of leaving his family unprotected, without know¬ ing when he could return to them, or whither he could direct them to follow him. La Motte was not a man of very vigorous refolution, and he was, per¬ haps, rather more willing to fuffer in company than alone. Aftçr much confideration, he recol¬ lected the trap-door of the clofet belong¬ ing to the chambers above: it was in¬ vinole to the eye, and, whatever might be
ί i3¡* 3 be its d "η ¿ι ion, it would fecnrcly fil citer Ltn, iű leaft, from difeovery. Having deliberated farther upon the fubjeel, he determined to explore the recels to which the fiairs led, and thought it pof- fibîo, that for a ihort time his whole fa¬ mily might be concealed within it. There was little time between the fug- gcfiion of the plan and the execution of his purpofe^ for darknefs was fpreading around, and, in every murmur of the wind, he thought he heard the voices of his enemies. He called for a light and afcended alone to the chamber. When he came to the clofet, it was fome time before he- could find the trap-door, fo exactly did it correfpond ч ith the boards of the floor. At length, «e found and railed it. The chili damps of long-confined air rufhed' from the aperture, and he fiuod for a mo~ ment to let them pats, ere he defeended. As he ftood looking down the abyfs, he Açcollcclcd the report, which Peter had brought
С 49 J * brought concerning the abbey, and it gave him an uncafy fenfation ; but this foon yielded to morc preiiing intereft». The flairs were fteep, and in many places trembled beneath his weight* Having continued to defcend for fome time, his feci touched the ground, and he found himfelf in a narrow paifage ; but as he turned to purfue it, the damp vapours curled round him and extin- guiihed the light. He called aloud for Peters but could make nobody hear,, and, after feme time, he endeavoured to find his way up the ftairs. In this, with difficulty, he fucceeded, and, paf* fing the chambers with cautious fteps, defeended the tower. The fecurity, which the place he had juft quitted feerøfd to promile, was of too much importance to he flightiy re¬ jected, and he determined immediately to nuke another experiment with tho light ;—having now ñx^d it in a lan¬ thoni, Ы defeended a fccond time to the paiiage»
í H© ] pafìagc. Tlie current of vapours orca<~ fioned by the opening of the trap-door \vas abated, and the frefh air thence ad» mittcd liad began to circulate : La Motíe paífed on unrnoîeiled. The paíľagc was of confíderable length, and led him to a door, which was faftened. He placed the lanthorn at tòme di fi ance, to avoid the current of air, and applied his ilrength to the door i it ihook under his hands, butdid not yield. Upon examining it more clofely, he per¬ ceived the wood round the lock was de¬ cayed, probably by the damps, and this encouraged him to proceed* After fome time it gave way to his effort, and he found himfelf in a fquare ftone room. He flood for fome time to furvcy it. The walls, which w ere dripping with un- whoîcfome dews, were entirely bare and afforded not even a window. A fmall iron grate alone admitted the air. At the farther end, near a low reeefs, was another door. La Motte went towards it>
L t4i 3 ît, and, as he pafled, looked into the re¬ eefs. Upon the ground within it, ftood a large cheft, which he went forward to examine, and, lifting the lid, he faw the remains of a human ikeleton. Horror ftruck upon his heart, and he involun¬ tarily ftepped back. During a paufe of fomc moments, his firft emotions fub¬ fided. That thrilling curiofity, which objects of terror often excite in the hu¬ man mind, impelled him to take a fe· cond view of this diunal fpecìacle. La Motte flood motionlefsashegazed ; the object before him feemed to confirm the report that fome perfon had formerly been murdered in the abbey. At length lie clofed the cheft, and advanced to the fécond door, which alfo was faft¬ ened, but the key was in the lock. He turned it with difficulty, and then found the door was held by two ftrong bolts. Having undrawn thefe, it difclofed a flight of fteps, .which he defeended: they terminated in a chain of low vaults, or
t H* ] «r rather cells, that, from the manner of their construction and prefent condition, feemed to have been coeval with the mod ancient parts of the abbey. La Motte, in his then depreffed ttate of mind, thought them the burial places of the monks, who formerly inhabited the pile above ; but they were more calcu¬ lated for places of penance for the li¬ ving, tha» of wed for the dead. Having reached the extremity of thefe cells, the way was again clofed by a door, La Motte now hefitated whether he ihould attempt to proceed any farther. The prefent fpot feemed to afford the fecurity lie (ought. Here he might pafs the night unmoletted by apprehenfioit of difeovery, and it was mott probable, that if the ofiicers arrived in the night, and found the abbey vacated, they would quit it before morning, or, at lead, be¬ fore he could have any occafion to «merge from concealment. Thefe con- fiderations rettored his mind to a ttate of .greater
ΐ ИЗ I greater compofure. His only immediate care was to bring his family, as foon as pofíible, to this place of fecurity, left the officers ihould come unawares upon vthcm ; and, while he ftood thus muftng, he blamed himfelf for delay. Butan irrefiftibie delire of knowing to «what this door led, arrefted his fteps, and he turned to open it : the door, .however, was faftened, and, as he at¬ tempted to force it, he fuddenly thought he heard a noife above. It now occur- -red to him, that the officers might al¬ ready have arrived, and he quitted the cells with precipitation, intending to Hilen at the trap door. " There,*' faid he, " I may wait in ie- ** curity, and perhaps hear fomething 44 of what parles. My family will not " be known, or, at leaft, not hurt, and « ť their uncafinefs on my account, they 44 they*muft learn to endure." Thefe were the arguments of La Motte, İn which, it muft be owned, felfiih
I 44 ] felfiih prudence was more confpicuouø than tender anxiety for his wife. He had by this time reached the bottom of the flairs, when, on looking up, he perceived the trap-door was left open, and afcend- ing in hafte to clofe it, he heard foot¬ fteps advancing through the chambers above. Before he could defcend entirely, out of fight, he again looked up and perceived through the aperture the face of a man looking down upon him. 44 Mafter," cried Peter ;— La Motte was iomewhat relieved at the found of his voice, though angry that he had occa¬ fioned him fo much terror. " What brings you here, and what is 44 the matter below ?" " Nothing, Sir, nothing's the matter, ** only my miftrefs fent me to fee after 44 your Honour." " There's nobody there then," faid La JS lotte, ** fetting his foot upon the fiep."
44 Yes,
С HS ] Cť Yes, Sir, there is my miftrefs and 44 Mademoifelle Adeline, and"— « Well—well,*' faid La Motte, briík- ly —" go your ways, 1 am coming." He informed Madame La Motte where he had been, and of his intention of fecrctinghimfelf, and deliberated upon the means of convincing the ofiicers, ihould they arrive, that he had quitted the abbey. For this purpofe, he order¬ ed all the moveable furniture to be con¬ veyed to the cells below* La Motte him¬ felf afliflcd in thebufinefs, and every hand was .employed for difpatch. ïn a very íhort time, the habitable part of the fa¬ bric was left almoft as defolate as he had found it. He then bade Peter take the horfes to a diftance from the abbey, and turn them loofe., After farther con· flderation, he thought it might contri¬ bute to miflead the officers, if he placed in fonie confptcuous part of the fabric an inferiptton, fignifying his condition, and mentioning the date of his departure Vot. L G from
[ hő ] from the abbey. Over the door of the tower, which led to the habitable part of the ftručture, he, therefore, cut the following lines : ** O ye ! whom misfortune may lead to this fpot; " Learn that there are others as miff rable as your- " felvés." p__ L — M— — a wretched exile, fought within thefe walls a refuge from perfecution, on the 317th of April, 1658, and quitted them on the χ ath of July in the íkme year, in fearch of a more convenient afylum. After engraving thefe words with a knife, the finali ftock of provifions remaining from the week's fupply (for Peter, in his fright, had returned unloaded from his laft journey) wab put into a baiket, and, La Motte having aftbmbled his family, they all afcended the ftairs of the tower, and pafled through the chambers to the clofet. Peter went firft with a light, and with fome difficulty found the trap-door. Madame La Motte íhud- dead
[ 47 I dered as flie furveyed the gloomy aby fe; but they were all filent. La Motto now took the light and led the way ; Madame followed, and then Adeline. " Thefe old monks loved good " wine, as well as other people," faid Pe¬ ter, who brought up the rear, 4t I warrant 44 your Honour, now, this was their cel- " lar ; I fmell the cafks already." " Peace," faid La Motte, 4< referve ζ{ your jokes for a proper occafion/' " There is no harm in loving good wine, 44 as your Honour knows." ** Have done with this buffoonery," faid La Motte, in a tone more authorita¬ tive, '« and go firft." Peter obeyed. They came to the vaulted room. The difmal fpectacle he had feen here, deter¬ red La Motte from pafling the night iu this chamber ; and the furniture had, by his own order, been conveyed to the cells below. Ile was anxious that his family fliould not perceive the ikeleton ; an ob¬ ject, which would, probably, excite a G 2 degree
[ 143 ] » degree of horror not to be overcome du¬ ring their fiay, La Motte now paffed the cheft in hafte; and Madame La Motte and Adeline were too much engrofiedby their own thoughts, to give minute atten¬ tion to external circumfiances. When they reached the cells, Madame La Motte wept at the neceifity which condemned her to a fpot fo difmal. *' Alas," faid flie, " are we, indeed, thus " reduced í The apartments above, for- " merly appeared to me a deplorable ha- ** bitation ; but they are a palace com* " pared to thefe." u True, my dear," faid La Motte, " and let the remembrance of what you * c on ĺ e thought them, foothe your dif- " content now ; thefe cells are alio a *' palace, compared to the Bicetre, or the u Befalle, and to the terrors of farther ** puniihment, which would accompany ** them : let the apprehenfion of the " greater evil teach you to endure the *' lefi» ;
[ *49 ] " lefs ; I ám contented if we And here ** the refuge I feek." Madame La Motte was filent, and Adeline, forgetting her late unkindnefs, endeavoured as much as ihe couldto con¬ fole her; while her heart was iinking with the misfortunes, which ihe could not but anticipate, ihe appeared campofed, and even cheerful. She attended Ma¬ dame La Motte with the moft watchful foiicitude, and felt fo thankful that La Motte was now fecreted within this re¬ céis, that ihe almoft loft her perception of its glooms and inconveniences. This ihe artleffly exprefted to him, who could not be infenfible to the ten¬ dernefs it difcovered. Madame La Motte was alfo fenfible of it, and it renewed a painful fenfation. The eftufions of grati¬ tude ihe miftook for thofe of tendernefs. La Motte returned frequently to the trap-door, to liflen if any body was ia the abbey ; but no found diilurbcd the ftiUndsof night; at length they fat dowa Gj to
t 'So ] to fupper ; the repaft was a melancholy one, " If the oificcrs do not come " hither fo night," faid Madame La Motte, fighing, " fuppofe my dear, Pe- 14 ter returns to Auboine to-morrow ; he 44 may there learn fomething more of *' this aftair ; or, at leaft, he might pro- 44 cure a carriage to convey us hence." « To be fure he might," faid La Motte, pcevifhly, ff and people to attend * ť it alfo. Peter would be an excellent ** perfon to ihew lhe oíficers the way " to the abbey, and to inform them of * { what they might clfc be in doubt * about, my concealment here." '* How cruel is this ironry !" replied Madame La Motte, " I propofed only <( what I thought would be for our mu· ** tual good ; my judgment was, per- * ( hap, wrong, but my intention was " certainly right." Tears fwelled into her eyes n$ ílie fpoke thefe words. Ade¬ line wiihed to relieve her; but delicacy kept her filent. Ja Motte obferved the efiect
[ ·ί« ] effect of his fpcech, and fomething like rcmorfe touched his heart. He ap¬ proached, and taking her hand, " You " muft allow for the perturbation of my " mind," faid he, u \ did not mean to " afflict you thus. The idea of fending ** Peter to Auboine, where he has already '* done fo much harm by his blunder*, " teafed me, and I could not let it pafs " unnoticed. No, my dear, our only *' chance of fafety is to remain where we " are while our provifions laft. If the " officers do not come here to-night, " they probably will to-morrow, or, " perhaps, the next day. When they <( have fearched the abbey, without ñnd~ u ing me, they will depart ; we may " then emerge from this reeefs, and take *' mcafurcs for removing to a difiant " country." Madame La Motte acknowledged the juftice of his words, and her mind being relieved by the little apology he had made, fhe became tolerably cheerful. G 4 Supper
L 's* ] Suppen* being ended, La Motte fiationed the faithful, though fimple, Peter, at the foot of the fteps that afcended to the clofet, there to keep watch during the night. Having done this, he returned to the lower cells, where he had left his little family. The beds were ipread, and having mournfully bade each other good night, they laid down, and im¬ plored reft. Adeline's thoughts were too bufy to fuffer her to repofe, and when flie be¬ lieved her companions were funk in flum¬ ber, flie indulged the forrow which reflection brought. She alfe looked for¬ ward to the future with the moil mourn¬ ful apprehenfion. " Should La Moite * 4 be feized, what was to become of 44 her ì She would then be a wanderer 44 in the wide world ; without friends to 44 protect, or money to fupport her ; the u profpečt was gloomy—was terrible !" She furveyed it and fhuddered ! The dif- treíľes too of Monfieur and Madame La Motte,
С чз 1 Motte, whom ihe loved with the moft lively affection, formed no inconfiderable part of her's. Sometimes ihe looked back to her fa¬ ther ; but in him ihe only faw an enemy, from whom ihe muft fly : this remem¬ brance heightened her forrow ; yet it was not the recollection of the fuffering he had occafioned her, by which flie was fo much afflicted, as by the fenfe of his un¬ kindnefs: fhe wept bitterly. At length, with that artlefs piety, which innocence only knows, ihe addrefled the Supreme Being, and refigned herfelf to his care. Her mind then gradually became peace¬ ful and re*afl*ured, and foon after ihe funk to repofe.
G *
CHAP.
Γ 154 3
CHAR V. A Surprize- — An Adventure — A My fiei у, гтгл A HE night patted without any alarm ; Peter had remained upon his poti, and heard nothing that prevented histteeping. La Motte heard him, long before he faw him, moft mufically fnoring ; though it mutt: be owned there was more of the bafs, than of any other part of the gamut in his performance. He was foon roufed by the bravura of La Motte, whofe notes founded difcord to lus ears, and deftroyed the torpor of his tranquillity. " God blefs you, Matter, what's the 4C matter?" cried Peter, waking; " ure " they come ?" " Yes, for aught you care, they might « be
í 45 ] ** be come. Did I place you here to " ileep, firrah ?" "* Blefs you, Mailer^' returned Peter, " flecp is the only comfort to be had <% here ; Vm fure Ì would not deny it to " a dog in fuch a place as this." La Motte fternly queftioned him con¬ cerning any noife he might have heard in the night, and Peter full as folemnly proteiled he had heard none ; an aíľer- tion which was finely true, for he had enjoyed the comfort oť being afleep.the whole time. La Motte aíceitded to the t rap-door and liftencd attentively. No founds were heard, and, as he ventured to lift it, the full light of the fun burft upon his fight, the morning being now far ad¬ vanced ; lie walked foftly along the chambers, and looked through a win- dow ; no perfon was to be teen« En¬ couraged by this apparent fecurity, he ventured down the fiairs of the tower, and entered the firft apartment. He was G 6 proceeding
[ '5б ] proceeding towards the fecond, when, fuddenly recollecting himfelf, he firft peeped through the crevice of „the door, which ftood half open. He looked, and difiinct ly faw a perfon fitting near the window, upon which his arm refted. The difeovery fo much íhocked him, that for a moment he lofl ail prefence of mind, and was utterly unable to move from the fpot. The perfon, whofe back was towards him, arofe, and turned his head. La Motte now recovered him¬ felf, and quitting the apartment as quick¬ ly, and, at the fame time» as filently as poflible, afcended to the clofet. He raifed the trap-door, but before he clofed it, heard the footfleps of a perfon enter¬ ing the outer chamber. Bolts, or other faflening to the trap there was none; and his fecurity depended folely upon the exact correspondence of the boards,, The outer door of the ftone room had no means of defence ; and the faftenings of the inner one were on the wrong flde to
[ χ 57 3 to afford him fecurity, even till fome means of efcape could be found. When he reached this room, he pau* fed, and heard diftinctly, perfons walk** ing in the clofet above. While he was liftening, he heard a voice call him by name, and he infiantly fled to the cells •below, expecting every moment to hear the trap lifted, and the footfteps of pur¬ fuit ; but he was fled beyond the reach of hearing either. Having thrown him¬ felf on the ground, at .the fartheft ex¬ tremity of the vaults, he lay for fome time breathlcfs with agitation. Madame La Motte and Adeline, in the utmoft terror, inquired what had happened.- It was fome. time before he could fpeak j when he did, it was almoft unneceíľary, for 4 the diftant noifes, which founded from above, informed the family of a part of the truth. The founds did not feem to approach, but Madame La Motte, unable to com¬ mand her terror, ibrieked aloud ï this re¬ doubled
[ '58 ] doubled the diftrefs of La Motte. t4 You ** have already deftroyed me," cried he ; " that ftiriek has informed them where ** I am." He traverfed the cells with clafped hands and quick fteps. Adeline ftood pale and ftill as death, fupporting Madame La Motte, whom, with diffi¬ culty, ihe prevented from fainting, " O! 44 Dupras ! Dupras ! you are already ·* avenged !" faid he, in a voice that feemed to burft from his heart: there was a paufe of filence. " But why 44 ihould I deceive myfeif with a hope ** of efcaping ?" he refumed, " why do I " wait here for their coming ? Let me ** rather end thefe torturing pangs by 4€ throwing myfelf into their hands at 44 once." As he fpoke, he moved towards the door, but the diftreis of Madame La Motte arrefted his fteps. " Stay," faid lhe, *' for my fake, ftay ; do not leave 44 me thus, nor throw yourfelf voluiv* ** tarily upon deftruction !" 44 Surely,
[ 159 1 " Surely, Sir,'* faid Adeline, <e you 4i are too precipitate; this defpair is ufe- ť< lefs, as it is ill-founded. We hear no " perfon approaching; if the oíficers " had difcovered the trap-door, they ** would certainly have been here before 4i now." The words of Adeline Allied the tumult of his mind : the agitation of terror fubfided : and reafon beamed a feeble ray upon his hopes. He liftened attentively, and perceiving that all was filent, advanced with caution to the ft one room, and thence to the foot of the ftairs that led to the trap-door. It was clofed ; no found was heard above. He watched a long time, and the filence continuing, his hopes ftrengthen¬ ed, and, at length, he began to believe that the officers had quitted the abbey ; the day, however, was fpent in anxious watch fulnefs. He did not dare f o un- clofe the trap-door ; and he frequently thought he heard diftant noifes. It was evident, however, that the fecret of the clofet
[ i«o ] clofet had efeaped difeovery; and on this circumftanee he juftly founded his fecurity. The following night was paf¬ fed, like the day, in trembling hope, and inceffant watching. But the neceifities of hunger now threatened them. The provifions, whieh had been difi ribu ted with the niceft eco¬ nomy, were nearly exhaufted, and the moll deplorable confequences might be expecìed from their remaining longer in concealment Thus circumftanced, La Motte deliberated upon the moft pru¬ dent method of proceeding. There appeared no other alternative, than to fend Peter to Auboine, the oniy town from which he could return within the time preferibedby their neceifities. There was game, indeed, in the foreft; but Peter could neither handle a gun, or ufe a fiihing-rod to any advantage. It was, therefore, agreed he ihould go to Auboine for a fupply of provifions, and at the feme time bring materials ΐοτ χ mending
С 1б| ] mending the coach wheel, that they might have fome ready conveyance from the foreft. La Motte forbade Peter to aik any queftions concerning the people who had inquired for him, or take any methods for difcovering whether they had quitted the country, left his blunders ihould again betray him. He ordered him to be entirely filent as to thefe fub- jects, and to finiih his bufinefs, and leave the place with afi poflible difpatch. A difficulty yet remained to be over· come—Who ihould firft venture abroad into the abbey, to learn whether it was vacated by the officers of j u fi ice ì La Motte confidered, that if he was again feen, hii fliould be effeâually betrayed ; which could not be^ö certain, if one of his family was obferved, for they were each unknown to the officers. It was neceflary, however, that the perfon he fent ihould have courage enough to go through with the inquiry, and wit enough to conduct it with caution. Peter, per¬ haps,
[ ι** 3 haps, had the firft i but was certainly deft ilute of the laft. Annette had nei¬ ther. La Motte looked at his wife, and aiked her, if, for his fake, ihe dared to venture. Her heart íhrunk from the propofal, yet ihe was unwilling to re¬ fufe, or appear indifferent upon a point fo cflential to the fefety of her huiband» Adeline obferved in her countenance the agitation of her mind, and, furmounting the fears which had hitherto kept her filent, flie offered herfelf to go. fl They will be lefe likely to offend 44 me," faid ihe, " than a man.'* Shame would not fuffer La Motte to accept her öfter; and Madame, touched by the magnanimity of her conduct, felt a mo¬ mentary renewal of all her former kind¬ nefs. Adeline prefled her propofal fo warmly, and feemed fo much in earneft, that La Motte began to hefitate. " You ** Sir," fajd flie, " once preferved me Ci from the moil imminent danger, and 4i \'om kindnefs has lìnee protected me. "Do
L i«3 ] ** Do not refufe me the fatişfaciiou of 4t deferving your goodnefs by a grate- " ful return of it. Let me go into the u abbey, and if, by fo doing, I ihouìd w prcferve you from evi!, I fhall be fuf- £i ücicutly rewarded for what little dan- <r gcr I may incur, for my plea fure will " be at ícaft equal to your's." Madame La Motte could fcarcely re* íraíii from tears as Adeline fpoke i and La Motte, fighing deeply, faid, "Well, w be it fo ; go, Adeline, and from this €t moment coniider me as your debtor." Adeline flayed not to reply, but taking a light, quitted the cells, La Motte following to raife the trap door, and cautioning her to look, if pofïible, into every apartment, before fhe entered it. " if you ßou/ä he íêcn," faid he, " you "muil account for your appearance fo " as not to difcover me. Your own pre- ťí fence of mind may aÜül you, I cannot, "— Godblcfsyour
W hea
í 164 ] When ihe was gone, Madame La Motte's admiration of her conduct began io yield to other emotions. Diftruft gra¬ dually undermined kindnefs, and jea¬ loufy raifed fufpicions. «« It muft be a 4t fentiment more powerful than grati- '« tude," thought ihe, «« that could 44 teach Adeline to fubdue her fears. 44 What, but love, could influence her ** to a conduci: fo generous 1 " Madame La Motte, when ihe found it impoftible to account for Adeline's conduct, without a Hedging feme interefted motives for it, however her fufpicions might agree with the pracľtice of the world, had furely for¬ gotten how much ihe once admired the purity and difintereftedneís of her young ftiend. Adeline, mean while, afcended to the chambers : the cheerful beams of the fun played once more upon her fight, and reanimated her fpirits ; ihe walked lightly through the apartments, nor ftoppcd till ihe came to the ftairs of the tower.
[ i«5 3 tower. Here íhe flood for fome time, but no founds met her ear, fave the figh¬ ing of the wind among the trees, and, at length, ihe defeended. She pafled the apartments below, without feeing any perfon ; and the little furniture that remained, feemed to fland exaclly as ihe had left it. She now ventured to look out from the tower : the only animate objecis that appeared were the deer, quietly grazing under the ihade of the woods. Her favourite little fawn diftin¬ guifhed Adeline, and came bounding to¬ wards her with ftrong marks of joy. She was fomewhat alarmed leftSthe animal, being obferved, ihould betray her, and walked fwiftlyaway through the eloiflers. She opened the door that led to the great hall of the abbey, but the paflage was fo gloomy and dark, that ihe feared to enter it, and ftarted back. It was ne¬ ceflary, however, that ihe fhould exa¬ mine farther, particularly on the oppofite űde of the ruin, of which ihe had hitherto had
L »66 ] had no view: but her fears returned when fhe recollected how far it would lead her from her only place of refuge, and how difficult it would be to retreat. She hefitated what to do ; but when flie recollected her obligations to La Motte, and confidered this as, perhaps, her only opportunity of doing him a fervice, fhe determined to proceed. As thefe thoughts pafled rapidly over her mind, flie railed her innocent looks to heaven, and breathed a filent prayer. With trembling fteps fhe proceeded over fragments of the ruin, looking anxioufiy around, and often ftarting as the breeze r ufi led among the trees, miftaking it for the whifperings of men. She came to to the lawn which fronted the fabric, but no perfon was to be feen t and her ipirits revived. The great de-v of the hall ihe now endeavoured to open, but fuddenly remembering that it was faftened by La Motte's orders, fhe proceeded to the north end of the abbey, and, having fur¬ veyed
[ i6 7 ] veyed the profpečt around, as far as the thick foliage of the trees would permit, without perceiving any perfon, ihe turn¬ ed her fleps to the tower from which ihe had iifued. Adeline was now light of heart, and returned with impatience to inform La Motte of his fecurity. In the cloifiers lhe was again met b) her little favourite, and Hopped for a*moment to carets it. The fawn feemed lenfi ble to die found of her voice, and difeovcrcd new joy ; but while flie fpoke, it fuddenly itartcd from her hand, and looking up, ihe perceived the door of thepaflage, leading to the great hall, open, and a man in the habit of a foldier illue forth. With the fwiftnefs of an arrow fhe fled along the cloifiers, nor once ven¬ tured to look back ; but a voice called to her to flop, and the heard ft eps ad¬ vancing quick in puvfuit. Before ihe could reach the tower, her breath failed heb and file leaned againft a pillar oí the
C i68 ] ttie ruin, pale and exhaufted. The man came up, and gazing at her with a ftrong exprefiion of furprize and curiofity, he aifumed a gentle manner, afiured her fhe had nothing to fear, and inquired if ihe belonged to La Motte : obf erving that ihe flill looked terrified and remained filent, he repeated hisaflurances and his qucfiion. " I know that he is concealed within " the ruin," faid the ftranger ; the oc- u cafion of his concealment I alfo know; " but it is of the utmoft importance I " ihould fee him, and he will then be " convinced he has nothing to fear from * * mc." Adeline trembled fo exceifivety, that it was with difficulty fhe could fup¬ port herfelf—ihe hefitated, and knew not what to reply* Her manner feemed to * confirm the fufpicions of the ftranger, and her confeioufnefs of this İ ncreafed her embarraifment : he took advantage of it to prefs her farther. Adeline, at length, replied, that, " La Motte had feme
[ ««9 3 <« fome time imce refided at the abbey." « —And does ftill, Madam," faid the ftranger ; " lead me to where he may **. be found—I muft fee him, and—" "Never, Sir, 1 ' replied Adeline, "and *« I folemxáy aflure you, it will be in vain «* to fearch for him." " That I muft try," refumed he, "-fince " you, Madam, will not affift me. I (( have already followed him to fome " chambers above, where I fuddenly '* loft him î thereabouts he muft be con- <e cealed, and its plain, therefore, they u afford fome fecret paifage." Without waiting Adeline's reply, he fprung to the door of the tower. She now thought it would betray a confeiouf¬ nefs of the truth of his conjecture to€ol- low him, and refolved to remain below. But, upon farther confidcration, it oc¬ curred to her, that he might ileal filently into the clofet, and poflibly fiirprize La Motte at the door of the trap. She, therefore haftçned after him, that her Voi*. Ι· H voice
[ i/o ] voice might prevent the danger ihe ap¬ prehended. He was already in the fé¬ cond chamber* when ihe overlook him ; ihe immediately began to fpeak aloud. This room he fearched with the moft ferupulous care, but finding no private door, or other outlet, he proceeded to the clofet : then it was, that it required all her fortitude to conceal her agitation. He continued the fearch. *' Within ".thefe chambers I know he is con- 44 cealed," faid he, i4 though hitherto " I have not been able to difcover how. 44 It was hither I followed a man, whom " I believe tobe him, and he could not 44 efcape without a paflage ; 1 ihall not ** quit the placj till i have found it.'* He examired ■ he walls and the boards, hut without ditî overing the divifion of the floor, w huh, indeed, foexady cor- refponded, thai La Motte himfelf had not perceived İ h> the eye, but by the trembling of ihe floor beneath his feet. <* Here h fomc шуйсгу/* feid the ftran¬ ger,
L 17« J ger, " which I cannot comprehend, and " perhaps never fhall." He was turning to quit the elofet, when, who can paint the difirefs of Adeline, upon feewg the trap-door gently raifed, and La Motte himfelf appear. " Hah 1" cried the uranger, advancing eagerly to him. La Motte fprang forward, and they were locked *in each other's arms. The aftoniihment of Adeline, for a moment, furpafied even her former dif¬ trefs ; but a remembrance darted acrois her mind, which explained the prefent feene, and before La Molte could ex¬ claim, " My fen !" ílie knew the ft ran¬ ger as fuch, Peter, who ftood at the" foot of the fiairs and heard what paffecî above, flew to acquaint his miftrefs with the joyful difeovery, and, in a few mo¬ ments, ihe was folded İn the embrace of her fon. This fpot, fo lately the manfion* of deipair, feemed metamorphofed into thepalaceofpleafure, and thewallsechocd H % only
C *7* ] only to the accents of joy and ccmgra* tu lation. The joy of Peter on this occafion wsa beyond expreitton : he acled a perfecl pantomime—he capered about, clapped bis hands^—ran to his young matter— fhook him by the hand, in fpite of the frowns of La Motte ; ran every where, without knowing for what, and gave no rational anfwer to any thing that was faid to him. After their firtt emotions Were fub- fided, La Motte, as if fuddenly recol- lecling himfelf, refumed his wonted fo- lemnity : " I am to blame,*' faid he, " thus to give way to joy, when I am * c ttill, perhaps, furrounded by danger. ** Let ш fecure a retreat while it i<- yet in " от power," continued he, " in a few ** hours the King*s ottkers may fearch « for me again.'* Louiscomprehended his father's words, an ' immediately relu ved his apprehen- fioiib ly the following relation : «A
Л *73 ] " A letter from Monfieur Nemours, * ť containing an account of your flight "from Paris, reached me at Peronne, " where I was then upon duty with my "regiment. He mentioned, tbat you " was gone towards the fouthof France, " but as he had not fince heard from " you, he was ignorant of the place of " your refuge. It was about this time '* that I was difpatched into Flanders ; * and, being unable to obtain farther in* u telligence of you, I pafied fome weeks "of very painful foiicitude. At the 4( conclufion of the campaign, I obtained " leave of abfence, and immediately fefe u Out for Paris, hoping to learn from "Nemours, where you had found aft и afylum, " Of this, however, he wjas equally "ignorant with myfelf. He informed " me that you had once before written " to him from D------ , upon your fécond " day's journey from Paris, under an a& " fumed mme, as had been agreed H 3 ' ť upon %
L ! 74 ] 44 upon ; and that you then faid the fear 44 of difeovery would prevent your " hazarding another letter : he, there- " fore, remained ignorant of your í e abode, but faid, he had no doubt you S 4 had continued your journey to the 44 fouthward. Upon this ilender infor- 44 mation I quitted Paris in fearch of 44 you, and proceeded immediately to « V------ , where my inquiries, concern- '* ing your farther progrcis, were fuc- 44 ccf^ful as far as M ------. There they ** told me jou had fiaid feme time, on 44 account ofthe illnefs of a young lady ; 44 a circumftanee which perplexed me 44 much, as I could not imagine what , 44 young lady would accompany you. I 44 proceeded however to L ----- ►; but ** there all· traces* of you feemed to be * c loft. As I fat mufing at the window 44 ofthe inn, I obferved feme feribbling *' on the glais, and the curiofity of idle- 44 nefs prompted me to read it. 1 thought '* I knew the characters, and the lines I "read
[ '7J 1 ** read confirmed my conjeclure, for I 4i remembered to have heard you often " repeat them. ť< Here I renewed my inquiries con* *' cerning your route, and at length í " made the people of the inn recollect '* yon, and traced you as faras Auboine. " There I again lofi you, till upon my *' return from a fruit lei's inquiry in the '*neighbourhood,thelandlordofthelittle " inn where I lodged, told røe he believed " he had heard news of you, and immedi* " ately recounted what had happened at * c a blackfmith's ihop a few hours before» ' xi i s deícription of Peter was ίο *' exači, that I had not a doubt it was *« you who inhabited the abbey ; and, ' £ as I knew your neceiììty for conceal- *« ment, Peter's denial did not fhake my "confidence. The next morning, with * c the alfifiance of my landlord, I found « my way hither, and, having fearched «every vifible part of the'fabric, I H 4 «be-
С 17« ] " begarî to credit Peter's aflertion : your "appearance, however, deftroyed this " fear, by proving that the place was Ubili u inhabited, foryou difappeared foinftan- " taneoufly, that I was not certain it was "you whom I had ieen. I continued " feeking you till near the clofe of day, " and till then fcarcely quitted the cham- ** bers whence you had difappeared. I " called on you repeatedly, believing that " my. voice might convince you of your « røiftake. At length, I retired to pafs ** the flight at a cottage near lhe border of " irtó foreft. 44 I came early this morning to renew * 4 ray inquiries, and hoped that, believ- 44 ing youríèlf fafe, you would emerge "from concealment. But how was I " difappointed to And the abbey as filent 44 and folitary as I had left it the pre- " ceding evening ! I was returning once " more from the great hall, when the 44 voice of this young,lady caught my ear, " and
[ »77 1 " and effected the difeovery I had fo 44 anxioufiy fought." This little narrative entirely diflipated the late apprehenfions of La Motte; but he now dreaded that the inquiries of his fon, and his own obvious defire of con¬ cealment, might excite a curiofity amongft: the people of Auboine, and lead to a dif¬ eovery of his true circumftances. How¬ ever, for the prefent he determined to dif- mifsall painful thoughts,and endeavour to enjoy the comforts which the prefence of his fen had brought him. The furni¬ ture was removed to a more habitable part of the abbey, and the cells were again abandoned to their own glooms. The arrival of her fen feemed to have animated Madame La Motte with new life, and all her afflictions were, for the prcfent abforbed in joy. She often gazed filently on him with a mother's fondnefs, and her partiality heightened every improvement which time had H 5 wrought
L »7» J wrought in his'perfon and manner. He was now in his twenty-third }ear; his perfon was manly and his air military ; his manners were unaffected and graceful, rather than dignified ; and though his features were irregular, they comppfed a countenance, which, having feen it once, you would feek again. She made eager inquiries after the friends flie had left at Paris, and learned, that \\ ilhin the few months of her abfencc, feme had died and others quitted the place. La Motte alfo learn¬ ed, that a very ttrenuous fearch for him had been profecuted at Paris ; and, though this intelligence was only what he had before expected, it íhocked him fo much, that he now declared it would be expedient to remove to a dittant country. Louis did not tt ruple to fay, that he thought he would be as fafe at the abbey as at any other place : and repeated what Nemours had faid, that the King's offi¬ cers
[ 179 J cers had been unable to trace any part of his route from Paris. " Befides," refumed Louis, 44 this 44 abbey is protected by a fupcrnatural 44 power, and none of the country peo- <4 pie dare approach it." " Pleafe you, my young maficr," faid Peter, who was waiting in the room, " we " were frightened enough the firft night· 44 we came here, and 1, nvyfelf, God for- 44 give me ! thought the place was inha- 4t bitcd by devils, but they were only 44 owls, and fuch like, after all." " Your opinion was not ailed/* faid La Motte, " learn to be filent. ,î Peter was abaihed. When he had quitted the room, La Motte aiked his fon with feeming carelcilhcfs, <vìiat were the reports circulated by the country people? tc О Sir," replied Louis, " I i( cannot recollect half of them. I re- " member, however, they faid, that, many 44 years ago, a perfon (but nobody had * ( ever feen him, fo wc may judge how Ы 6 « far
[ »8ο ] " far the report ought to be credited) " was privately brought to this abbey, a and confined in fome part of it, arid " that there were ßfong reafons to be- *' lieve he came unfairly to his end/* La Motte fighed. t( They farther " faid,'* continued Louis, *· that the ** fpecìre of the deceafed had ever fince " watched nightly among the ruins : * f and to make the ilory more wonderful, a for the marvellous is the delight of the ** vulgar, they added, that there was a H certain part of the ruin, from whence « no perfon that had dared to explore *' it, had ever returned. Thus people, * f who have few objecls of real iutereft i( to engage their thoughts, conjure up «* for themfelves imaginary ones." La Motte fat muting. i( And what " were the reafons, ,p faid he, at length awaking from his reverie, " they pretend- ft ed to affign, for believing the perfon 5* confined here was murdered î"
'J They
I I8i J « They did not ufc a term fo pofitive ** as that," replied Louis. " True," faid La Motte, recollecting himfelf» " they only faid he came unfairly " to his end/* " That is a nice diftinčtion, " faid Adeline. 44 Why 1 could not well comprehend 44 what thefe reafons were," refumed- Louis ; " the people, indeed, fay, that *· the perfon who was brought here, was " never known to depart, but ï do not " find. it certain that he ever arrived ; 44 that there Was ftrange privacy and " myuery obferved, while he was here, " and that the abbey has never fince " been inhabited by its owner. There 44 feems, however, io be nothing in all 44 this that deferves to be remembered.'* La Motte raifed his head, as if to reply, when the entrance of Madame turned the difeourfe upon a new fubject, and it was not refumed that day. Peter was now difpatched for provi¬ fions, while La Motte and Louis retired to
t ιί» ] to confider how far it was fafe for them to continue at the abbey, La Motte, notwithfianding the affurances lately given him, could not but think that Peter's blunders and his fen's inquiries mi^ht load to ,i Jifeovcr} oí his refidence. He revolved this in his mind for feme time, but at length a thought ftruck him, that the latter of thcfe circumftances might confidcrablycontrihutc to his fecu¬ rity, '* If ) ou," feid he to Louis, " return- 44 to the inn at Auboine, from whence 44 you were directed here, and with- 44 out feeming to intend giving i nielli« ťť gence, do give the landjord an account . i( of your having found the abbey un-« " inhabited, and then add, that you had 44 difeovered the refidence of the perfon 44 you fought in feme diftaiit town, it " would fupprefs any report- that may " at prefent exift, apd prevent the belief ** of any in future. And if, after all " this, you can truft yourfelf for pre- ** fentje of mind and command of counte-
ťc nance, fo far as to defcribe fome dread- " ful apparition, I think .thefe circum- " fiances, toget her with the diftance of the " abbey, and the intricacies of the foreft, " could entitle me to confider this place " as my caille." Louis agreed to all that his father had propofed, and on the following day ex- excuted his commiflion v\th fuch fue* cefs, that the tranquillity of the abbey may be then faid to have been entirely refiored. Thus ended this adventure, the only one that had occurred to difturb the fa¬ mily during their refidence in the foreft. Adeline, removed from the apprehenfion of thofe evils, with which the late fitua¬ tion of La Motte had threatened her, and from the deprcflion which her intereft in his occafioned her, now experienced a more than ufual complacency of mind. She thought too, that ihe obferved in Madame La Motte a renewal of her for¬ mer kindnefs, and this circumftanee awa¬ kened
С »84 ] kened all her gratitude, and imparted to her a pleafure as lively as it was innocent. The fatisfaciion with which the prefence of her fon infpired Madame La Motte, Adeline miftook for kindnefs-to herfelf, and fhe exerted her whole attention in an endeavour to become worthy of it. But the joy which his unexpected arri¬ val had given to I a Motte quickly began to evaporate, and the gloom of defpon- dency again fettled on his countenance. He returned frequently to his haunt in the forcft—the fame myfterious fadnefs tinciured his manner and revived the an¬ xiety of Madame La Motte, who was refolved to acquaint her fori with this fubjeel: of diftrefs, and folicit his aflïft- Ш!се to penetrate its fouree. Her jealoufy of Adeline, however, ihe could not communicate* though it again tormented her, and taught her to mifconftrue with wonderful ingenuity every look and word of La Motte, and often to miftake the artkû ехигеДкшв of
t i«* I of Adeline's gratitude and regard for thofe of warmer tendernefs. Adeiine had formerly accuftomed herfelf to long walks in the foreft, and the defign Ma¬ dame had formed of watching her fteps, had been fruftrated by the late circum¬ fiances, and was now entirely overcome by her fenfe of its difficulty and danger. To employ Peter in the affair, would be to acquaint him with her fears, and to follow tier herfelf, would moft probably betray her fcherae, by making Adeline aware of her jealoufy. Being thus re- il-rained by pride and delicacy, ihe was obliged to endure the pangs of unecr*· fainty concerning the greateft part of her fufpicions. To Louis, however, íhe related the myfterious changa in his father's temper. He liftened to her account with very earneft attention, and the furprife and concern impreffed upon his counte¬ nance fpoke how much hi» heart was interefted. He w as^ however^ involved I in
С «86 ] în equal perplexity with herfelf upon this fubject, and readily undertook to obfervc the motions of La Motte, be¬ lieving his interference likely to be of equal fervice both to his father and his mother. Ite faw, in fome degree^ the fufpicions of his mother, but as he thought fhe wiihed to diiguife her feel¬ ing-, he fuffered her to believe that flie fucceeded. lie now inquired concerning Adeline, and liftened to her little hiftory, of which his mother gave a brief relation, with great apparent intereft. So much pity did he expreis for her condition, and fo much indignation at die unnatural con- duet of her father, that the apprehenfions which Madame La Motte began to form, of his having difcovered her jealoufy, yielded to thofe of a di fièrent kind. She perceived that the beauty of Adeline had already fafcinated his imagination, and ihe feared tbat her amiable manners Would foon impreíš Ш hemt Had her firft
С »«7 I . firft fondnefs for Adeline continue d, flic would ftill have looked with difpleafure upon their attachment, as an obftacle to the promotion and the fortune íhe hoped to fee one day enjoyed by her fon. ön thefe ihe refted all her future hopes of profperity, and regarded the matrimo¬ nial alliance which be mislit form as the only means of extricating his family from their prefent difficulties. She, therefore, touched lightly upon Adeline's merit, coolly joined with Louis in compaflìon- ating her mÌ4fortunes, and with her ccn- fure of the father's conduct, mixed an implied fufpicion of that of Adeline's. The ηκ ans ihe employed to reprefs the paifions of her fon, had α contrary effect. The indifference, wlrich ihe exprcfled towards Adeline, mereafedhis pity foi her defti tute condition, and the tendernefs, with which fhe affected to judge the fa¬ ther, heightened his honeft indignation at his character. As he quitted Madame La Motte, he faw his father croîs the lawn and* enter
С '88 ] the deep ihade of the foreft on the left. He judged this to be a good opportunity of commencing his plan, and, quitting the abbey, flowly followed at a diftance. La Motte continued to walk ftraight forward, and feemed fo deeply wrapt in thought, that he looked neither to the right or left, and fearcely lifted his head from the ground. Louis had followed him near half a mile, when he few him fuddenly íl r ike into an avenue of the foreft, which took a different direction from the way he had bitherU gone. He quickened his fteps that he might not lofc fight of him, but, having reached the avenue, found the trees fo thickly interwoven, that La Motte was already hid from his view* He continued, however, to puďu· tbe way before him ; it conduclcd him through the moft gloomy part of the foreft he had yet fcen, till at length it terminated iu an obfeure recefe, over· arched with high trees, whofe interwo^ vea brandies excluded the direct raya л* nf
C «8 9 ] of the furi, and admitted only a fort of folemn twilight, Louis looked around iri fearch of La Motte, but he was no where to be feen. While he ftood fur¬ veying the place and confidering what farther fliould be done, he obferved, through the gloom, an object at fome difi ance, but the deep íhadow that fell around prevented hisdiftinguiihing what it was. On advancing, he perceived the ruins of a fmall building, which, from the traces that remained, appeared to have been a tomb. As he gazed upon it, '* Here," faid he, " are probably depo· f ' fited the aihes of feme ancient monk, 44 once an inhabitant ofthe abbey ; per- 44 haps, of the founder, who, after ha- 4i ving fpent a life of abftinence and " prayer, fought in heaven the reward of 44 his forbearance upon earth. Peace " be to his foul ! But did he think a life 44 of mere negative virtue deferved an " eternal reward ? Miftaken man 1 reafon, 44 had you trufted to its dictates, would
С »9° ] 44 have informed you, that the active 44 virtues, the adherence to the golden 44 rule, * Do as you would be done unto,' " could alone deferve the favour of a 44 Deity, whofe glory is benevolence." He remained with his eyes fixed upon the fpot, and prefently faw a figure arife under the arch of the fepulchre. It ftarted, as if on perceiving him, and im¬ mediately difappeared. Louis, though unuicd to fear, felt at that moment an uneafy fenfation, but it almoft immedi¬ ately fi ruck him that this was La Motte liinifelf. lie advanced to the ruin and called him. No anfwer was returned, and he repeated the call, but all was yet ftill as the grave. lie then went up to the arch-way and endeavoured to exa¬ mine the place where he had difappeared, but the ihadowy obfcurity rendered the attempt fruitlefs. He obferved, how¬ ever, a little to the right, an entrance to the ruin, and advanced fome fteps down a dark kind of paifage, when, recol¬ lecting that this place might be the haunt of
E »91 3 of banditti, his danger alarmed him, and he retreated with precipitation. He walked towards the abbey by the way he came, and finding no perfon followed him, and believing himfelf again in fafety 9 his former furmife re¬ turned, and he thought it was La Motte he had feen. He muled upon this ftrange poifibility, and endeavoured to aifign a reafon for fo myfterious a con¬ duct, but in vain. Not with (landing this, his belief of it ftrengthened, and he entered t lie abbey under as full a con- νίβίοη as the circumfiances would admit of, that it was his father who had appeared in the fe, ulchre. On entering what was now ufed as a parlour, he was much fur¬ prifed to find him quietly feated there with Madame La Motte and Adeline, and converfing as if he had been re¬ turned fome time. He took the firft opportunity of ac¬ quainting his mother with the late ad¬ venture, and of inqniring how long La Motte had been returned before hira, when,
С «9» ] when, learning that it was near half an hour, his furprife increafed, and he knew not what to conclude^ Meanwhile, a perception Of the grow¬ ing partiality of Loins co-operated with the canker of fufpicion, fo deftroy in Madame La Motte that affection which pity and efteem had formerly excited ibr Adeiine. Her unkindnefs was now too obvious to efcape the notice of her to whom it was directed, and, being no¬ ticed, it occafioned an anguiih which Adeline found it very difficult to endure. With the warmth and candour of youth, íhe fought an explanation of this change of behaviour, and an opportunity of ex¬ culpating heďeif from any intention of provoking it. But this Madame La Motte artfully evaded, w hile at the lame time ihe threw out hints, that involved Adeline in deeper perplexity, and ferved to make her prefent affliction more intolerable. " i have loft that affection/* ihe would fey, " which was my all. It was my * ť only
[ J 93 3 44 <jnïy comfort— yet I have loft it—and 44 this without even knowing my offence. " But I am thankful 1 have not merited " unkindnefs, and though ße has aban- " doned me I ihall always love herľ Thus diftrefled, ihe would frequently leave the parlour, and, retiring to her chamber, would yield to a defpondency, which ihe had never known till now. One morning, being unable to Ileep, ihe arofe at a very early hour. The faint light of day now trembled through the clouds, and, gradually ipreading from the horizon, announced the rifing fun. Every featureof the landfeape was flowly unveiled, moift with the dews of night, and brightening with the dawn, till at length the fun appeared, and flied the full flood of day. The beauty of the hour in¬ vited her to walk, and ihe went forth into the forefl to tafle the fweets of morning. The carols of new-waked birds fainted her as ihe pafled, and the freih gale came feented with the breath of flowers, whofe Vol, L I tints
C *94 ] tints glowed more vivid through the dew drops that huag on their leaves. She wandered on without noticing the dittance, and, following the windings of the river, came to a dewy glade, whofe woods, fweepingdown to the very edge of the water, formed a feene fo fweetly romantic, that ihe feated herfelf at the foot of a tree, to contemplate its beauty. Thefe images infenfibly foothed her for- row, and infpired her with that foft and p leafing melancholy, fo dear to the feel¬ ing mind. For feme time fhe fat loft ia a reverie, while the flowers that grew on the banks bettde her, feemed to ánile in new life, and drew from her a comparifon with her own condition. She mufed and fighed, and then, in a totee whofe charming melody was mo· aüîated by the tendernefs of her heart, lhe dmg the following words ι
SON*
t *9J 3 SONNET, To the Lilly. ©oft filken flowVI that in the dewy vaîe Unfolds thy modeft beauties to the morn, And breath'ft thy fragrance on her warid'riag gale, O'er earth's green hills and fttadowy vallies bom; Л#Ъеп day has clofod his dazzling eye, And dying gales ünk foft away; When Eve fteals down the weftern iky, And mountains, woods, and vales decay 5 Thy tender cups, that graccftil fwelî, Droøp tad beneath her chilly dews ; Thy odours feek their filken cell, And twilight veii& thy languid hues. Uut foon» feir flow'r ! thtì morn fliall rife, And reáť again thy penfive head ; Agn'm unveil thy fnowy dyes, Again thy velvetfoliage fpread. Sweet ctiild of Spring ! like thee in forHow'e íhíade, Full of; I mourn in tears, and droop forlorn : And О ! like thine, may light my gloom pervade, And Sorrow fly before Joy's living morn î
I 2
A dif-
[ «9б 3 A difiant echo lengthened out her tones, and ihe fat Hfiening to the foft refponfe, till repealing the laíl lianza of the Sonnet, flie wasaufucredbya voice almoft as tender, and lets aillant. Slie looked round in furprife, and faw a young man in a hunter's dree, leaning againft a tree, and gazing on her with that deep attention, which marks an en* raptur'd mind. A thoufand apprehenfions ihot athwart her bufy thought ; and flic now firft re¬ membered her difi ance from the abbey. She rofe in hafte to he gone, when the il ranger refpcéìfuHy advanced ; but ob- fcrving her timid looks and retiring fieps, he paufed She purfued her way towards the abbey ; and, though many rcafons made her anxious to know whether ihe was followed, delicacy forbade lier to look back. When ihe reached the ab¬ bey, finding the family was not yet aí- fembîed to break fail, ihe retired to her chamber, where her whole thoughts were employed
L *97 J employed in conjectures concerning the ftranger ; believing that fhe was interen- ed on this point, no farther than as it conocrned the fafety of La Motte, ihe indulged, without feruplc, the remem¬ brance of that dignified air and manner Which fo much diftinguifhed the youth ihe had fetn. After revolving the cir- c umil ance more deeply, ihe believed it impoffible that a perfon of his appearance ihould be engaged İn a firatagom to be¬ tray a fellow creature ; and though fhe was deiiitute of a iinglc cirenmftanre that might afìiiì her furmifes of who he was, or what was hib buíinefs in an un¬ frequented foreft, ihr rejerled, iincon- fcioufly, every fufpicion injurious to his character. Upon farther deliberation, therefore, ilio refolved not to mention thb little eireumilancc to La Molle; well knowing, that though his danger might be imaginary, his apprehenfions would be real» and would renew all the fuftcrings and perplexity, from which I 3 he
Г 19B ] he was-but juft releafed. She refolved, however, to refrain, for feme time* walking in the foreft. When fhe came down to brcakfaft, ihe obferved Madame La Motte to be more than ufually referved. La Motte entered the room foon after her, and made feme trifling obfervations on the weather; and, having endeavoured to fupport an effort at cheerful neis, funk into his ufual melancholy. Adeline watched the countenance of Madame with anxiety ; and when there appeared in İt a gleam of ktn4ne&, it was as fun- filine to her foul ; but ihe very feldom fuffered Adeline thus to flatter herfelf» Her converiation was refirained, and often pointed at fomething more than could be underftood. The entrance of Louis was a very feafonable relief to Adeline, who almoft feared to truft her voice with a fentence, left its trembling accents ihould betray her uneafmefs. " This
С m î "'This charming morning drew yotl 11 early from your chamber," faid Louis, addreifing Adeline.—" You had, no fl doubt, a pleafant companion too," faid Madame La Motte, " a folitary *< walk is feldom agreeable." " I was alone, Madam," replied Ade¬ line. " Indeed ! your own thoughts muft: '* be highly pleafing then." ** Alas ľ* returned Adeline, a tear, fpite of her efforts, ftarting to her eye, M there are now few fubjecSls of pleafure « left for them. 1 * " That is very furprifing," purfued Madame La Moite. * * Is it, indeed, furprifing, Madame,* « for thofe who have loft their laft friend " to be unhappy ?" Madame La Motte*s confeience ac¬ knowledged the rebuke, and fheblufhed. ** Well," refumed ihe, after a ûıort paufe, " that is not your fituation, Adeline ;" looking eameftly at La Motte. Ade- I 4 line.
Γ 2°° ] line, whofe innocence protected her from fufpicion, did not regard this circum¬ ftanee ; but, finii in g through her tears, faid, " She rejoiced to hear her fay fo,* 9 During this converfation, La Motte had remained abforbed in his own thoughts ; and Louis, unable to guefs at what it pointed, looked alternately at his mo ther and Adeline for an explanation. The latter he regarded with an exprcifion fo full of tender companion, that it re¬ vealed at once to Madame La Motte the fentimçnts of his foul ι and flie immedi¬ ately replied to the laft words of Ade¬ line with a very ferious air : 44 A friend " is only eftimable when our conduct 44 deferves one ; the friendihip that fur- 44 vives the merit of its object, is a dif- 44 grace inftead of an honour, to both 44 parties." The manner and emphafis with which flie delivered thefe words, again alarm¬ ed Adeline, who mildly faid, " She 44 hoped flie ihould never deferve fuch " cenfure/'
L гог J u ecnfure.'* Madame was filent ; but Adoline was fo much f hooked by what had already paffod, ihat tears fprnng from lier oyes, and íhe hid her face with her handkerchief. Louis now rofe with fome emotion ; and La Motte, roufed from his reverie, inquired what was ihe matter ; but, be¬ fore lie could receive an anfwer, he icemed to have foiyot that he had atked a quedion. ** Adeline may give you " her own account," faid Madame La Motto.— u I have not deferved this," laid Adeline, rifing, i( but fincc my prc- <f fence is difj)loafing, I will retire." She moved toward the door, when Louis, who was pacing t he «room in ap¬ parent agitation, gently took her hand, faying, '* Пеш is fonie unhappy mif- C( take," and would have led her to her feat ; but her fpirits were too much de¬ preffed to eirlure longer rciìraint ; and, wittidrawing hoi hand, " Suffer me to " go f faid ihe, " if there is any miilake, I 5 t4 1 am
u I am unable to explain it." Saying this, ihe quitted the room. Louis fol¬ lowed her with his eyes to the door; when, turning to his mother, « Surely, « Madam," faid he, " you are to blame : " my life on it, ihe deferves your warm- u eft tendernefs." " You are very eloquent in her caufe, « Sir," faid Madame, " may I prefume " to aik what has interefted you thus in 41 her favour ?" " Her own amiable manners," re* joined Louis, " which no one can ob*· * ť ferve without eftecming them." ** But you may prefume too much on ** your own obfervations ; it is poflible *< thefe amiable manners may deceive « you·" « Your pardon, Madam 5 I may, " without prefumption, affirm they can- « not deceive me." " You have, no doubt, goodreaibne " for this aíTertion, and I perceive, by <* your admiration of thisartleÊ iwocent 9 "ihe
L 20 3 J 44 ihe has fucceeded in her defign ofen- 64 trapping your heart." 44 Without defigning it, ihe has won 44 my admiration, which would not have " been the cafe, had ihe been capable of 44 the conduct you mention/' Madame La Motte was going to ré*- ply, but was prevented by her huiband, who, again roufed from his reverie, in¬ quired into the caufe ofdifpute ; 4t Away 44 with this ridiculous behaviour," faid he, in a voice of difpleamre. " Adeline 44 has omitted feme houfehold duty I· <* fuppofe, and an oftencc fo heinous 44 deferves fevere puniihment, no doubt; " but let me l>c no more difturbed with fr your petty quarrels ; if you müft be 44 tyrannical, Madame, indulge your hu* ** mour in private." Saying this, he abruptly quitted the ' room, and Louis immediately following, - Madame was left to her own unpleafant ' reflections. Her ill-humour proceeded ftom the ufual caufe. She had heard of L 6 Adeline's ^
[ 204 ] Adeline's walk ; and La Motte having gone forth into the forefi at an earlyhour, her imagination, heated by the broodings of jealouíy, fuggefted that they had ap¬ pointed a meeting» This was confirmed to her by the entrance of Adeline, quickly followed by La Motte; and her percep¬ tions thus jaundiced by paífion, neither the prefence of her fun, or her ufual at¬ tention to good manners, had been able to refi rain her emotions. The behavi¬ our of Adeline, in the late fcene, flie confidered as a refined piece of art ; and the indifference of La Motte as affected. So true is it, that --------- " Trifles, light as air, Are to the jedlom, confirmations ftrong, As proof of Holy Writ." And fo ingenious was ihe " to twifi the 44 true caufe the wrong way/* Adeline had retired to her chamber to weep. When her firft agitations were fubfided, ihe took an ample review of her conduct t and perceiving nothing of which fhe could accufe herfelf, ihe be¬ came
L *°5 J came more fatisfied, deriving her beft comfort from the integrity of her inten¬ tions. In the moment of accufation, innocence may fometimes be opprcffed with the puniihment due only to guilt ; but reflection diíľolves the illufions of terror, and brings to the .aching bofom the confolations of virtue. When La Motte quitted the room, he had gone into the forefl, which Louis obferving, he followed and joined him, with an intention of touching upon the fubject of his melancholy. ec It is a fine 44 morning, Sir," faid Louis, 4i if you 4i will give me leave, I will walk with " you." La Motte, though diflatisfied, did not object ; and after they had pro¬ ceeded ibme way, he changed the courfe of his walk, flriking into a path, con¬ trary to that which Louis had obferved him take on the foregoing day. Louis remarked, that the avenue they had quitted was "more ihady, and,there- 44 foxe, more pleafant." La Motte not feeming 4
[ zoé J fteming to notice this remark, " ît lead» « to a ungular ipot," continued he, f * which I difcovered yefterday."* La Motte raifed his head ; Louis proceeded to deicribe the tomb, and the adventure he had met with ; during this relation, La Motte regarded him with earnett; at¬ tention, while his own countenance fuf¬ fered various changes* When he had concluded, " You were very daring," ' faid La Motte, " to examine that place,. ** particularly when you ventured down * «* tnc paflage r I would adviiè you to be 11 more cautious how you penetete the *« depths of this forettr. I, myfelf, have «* not ventured beyond a certain boun- « dary; andam, therefore, uninformed *< what inhabitants it may harbour. Your " account has alarmed ше>" continued he, " for if banditti are ia the neigh-» * 4 bourhood, I am not fafe from their ** depredations : *tis true, Ï have but lit* f* tie to lofe, except my life." f And the lives of your family,'* rejoined
[ αο 7 ] rejoined Louis. —" Of eourfe/' faid La Motte. «« It would be well to have more cer* «« tainty upon that head," re}oined Louis, «« I am confidering how we may obtaia «« it." «« Tis ufelefs to confider that/' faid La Motte, '* the inquiry itfelf brings «« danger with it ; your life would, per- 44 haps, be paid for the indulgence of 44 your curiofity ; our only chance of 44 fafety is by endeavouring to remaia 44 undifcovered. Let us move towards 44 the abbey." Louis knew not what to think, hut faid no more upon the fubjecì. L& Motte foon after relapfed into a fit of mufing ; and his fon now took occafion to lament that depreifion of fpirits, which he had lately obferved in him. " Rather " lament the caufe of it," faid La Motte with a figli ;—" That I do moft fincerely 44 whatever it may be. May i venturo ft to inquire, Sir, what is the caufe ?" à i' Are,
[ αοδ ] " Are, then, my misfortunes fo little 44 known to you," rejoined La Moite, " as to make that quefiion neceflary ? 44 Am i not driven from my home, from 44 mv friends, and almoft from m ν conn- 44 try; and fliall it be aiked why 1 am 44 afflicìcd ?'—Louis felt the juftice of this reproof, and was a moment filent : 4ζ That you are afflicled, Sir, does not 44 excite my furprife ;" refumed he, " it 44 would, indeed, be ftrange, were you 44 not." 44 What then does excite your fur- " prife ?" " The air of checrfulnefs you wore '· when I firft came hithci.** 44 You lately lamented that 1 wa* « aíRicied," faid La MUtc, " and now 44 fenn not very well pleafed that 1 once 44 was í heerful. What is the meaning ««of thl· Г " You much miftake me/ 1 faid his fon, *' nothing tould givt me fo much fatif- 44 faction as to fee that checrfulnefs re- 44 ne wed ;
С 20 9 3 te newcd ; the fame caufe of forrow * r exifted at that time, yet you was then " cheerful." " That I was then cheerful," faid La Motte, " you might, without flattery, " have attributed to yourfelf ; your pre- " fence revived me, and I was relieved " at the fame time from a load of appro- " heniions." " Why,'then, as the fame caufe exifts, " are you not fiil) cheerful ?" " And why do you not recollect that i{ it is your father you thus fpeak to ?" *' I do, Sir, and nothing but anxiety if for my father, could have urged me " thus far : it is with incxpreffible con- 4i cern I perceive you have fome fecret íť caufe of uncafinefs ; reveal it, Sir, to " thofe who claim a ihare in all your il affliction, and fuffer them, by parlici- ** pation to foften its feverity." Louis looked up, and obferved the countenance of his father, pale as death : his lipa trembled while he fpoke. " Your pe- " nctration A
i aio ] ** 44 netration, however, you may rely upon 44 it, has, in the prefent inftance, de- 44 ccived you. I have no fubject of di£- 44 trefs, but what you are already ac- 44 quainted with, and I delire this conver- *' iation may never be renewed.** " if it is your defire, of courfe, ï <c obey,*' faid Louis ; u but, pardon 44 me, Sir, if-----" ** I will not pardon you, Sir," inter¬ rupted La Motte, 4i let the difeourfe end 44 here." Saying this, he quickened his fteps, and Louis, not daring to purfue, walked quietly on till he reached the abbey. Adeline pafled the greateft part of the day alone in her chamber, where, having examined her conduct, flie endeavoured to fortify her heart againft the unmerited difpleafure of Madame La Motte. This was a taűc more difficuU than that of felf acquittance; She loved her, and had relied on her friendihip, which, notwitb· ftandingthe conductor Madame, ftill ap¬ peared
С ги ] peared valuable. It was true, flie hadf not deferved to lofe it, but Madame was fo averfe to explanation, that there was little probability of recovering it, - however ill-founded might be the caufe of her diflike. At length, flic reafoncd, or rather, perhaps, perfuaded herfelf into tolerable compofure j for to refign a real good with contentment, is lefs an effort of reafon than of temper. For many hours ihe bufied herfelf upon a piece of work, which ihe had lindertaken for Madame La Motte; and this fhe did, without the leaft intention of conciliating her favour, but becaufe flie felt there was fomething in thus re¬ paying unkindnefs, which was fuitable to her own temper, her fentiments, and her pride. Self-love may he the center, round which the human affections move, for whatever motive conduces to felf-gratifi* cation may be refolved into felf-love; yet fomeof thefe affections are in their nature fe refined—that though we cannot den/ their
L * î!î ] t. their origin,they almoft deferte the nam« of virtue. Of this fpecies was that of Adeline. ín this employment, and in reading, Adeline pafied a» much of the day as poflible. From books, indeed, ihe had conftantly derived her chief informa¬ tion and amufement ; thoie belonging to La Motte were few¡ but well chofen ; and Adeline could find pleafure in read¬ ing them more than once. When her mind was difcompofed by the behaviour of Madame La Motte, or by a retro- fpeétion of her early misfortunes, a book was the opiate that lulled it to refpofe. La Motte had feveral of the hen Englifh poets, a language which Vdiline had learned in the convent ; their beauties, therefore, flie was ел pable of tafting. and they often infpired her with enthuhaftic delight. At the decline of d -лу, flie quitted her chamber to enjoy the fweet evening hour, but ftrayed no farther than an avenue near
[ 213 j 3>sar the abbey, which fronted the weft* She read a little, but, finding it impof¬ fible any longer to abftračt her attention from the fcene around, ihe clofed the book, and yielded to the fweet compla¬ cent melancholy which the hour in¬ fpired. The air was ftill, the fun, fink¬ ing below the diftant hills, ipread a pur¬ ple glow over the landfeape, and touched the foreft glades with fofter light. A dewy freflinefs was diifufed upon the air. As the fun defeended, the duik came filently on, and the fcene aflumed a folcmn grandeur. As ihe mufed, ihe recollected and repeated the following fianzas ; NIGHT. Now Ev'jimg fades t her penfive ftep retires Antl Night leads on the dews ý and ihadowy hours j Her awful pomp of planetary fires, And all her train oí vííioiiary powers, Thefe paint with fleeting Oiapes the dream of ileep, Thefe fwell the waking foul with pleafing dread ; Thefe through the glooms in forms terrific fweep, And roufe thç thrilling horrors of the dead ! Queen
С **4 ] Cgeéft €Í Ле folemn thöu^u>-fnyfterioiis Ntgfit ! Whofe Йер is darknď«, and whofe voice is fear f Thy ihtdcs I welcome urith fevere delight, . Ånd hail thy hollow gales, that figh fo drear ! When, wrapt in clouds, una riding in the blaft» Tbou roil'ft tbe ftorm along the founding lhore, ï iove to watch tlie whelming billows caft On rocks below, and Itfteu to the roar. Thy milder terrors Night, I frequent woo» Thy fitei* lightnings, and thy meteor's glare, Thy northern fires, bright with cnümguiııe hue, That fight in heat^m's high vault the fervid air. Ønt chief I love thee, when thy lucid car Shtds through the ieecy clouds a trembling gleatty ÀJid Őtewt the mifty mountain from afar, The nearer foreft, and the valle) 's ftream t And namelefs objecls in the vale below, That floating dimly to the mufing eje, Allume, at Fancy*s touch, iantafHc ihew, And r&ife her fweet romantic vinöns high. İTheıî let me íland amidft thy glooms profound On fome wild woody Йеер, and hear the bree if That fwells in mournful melody around, And &îatîy dies upon the diítant trees. What melancholy charm fteals o'er the mind ! What hallow'd tears the rifing rapture greet ì l^hile many a viewlefs f¡ kit in the wind SJghf 4o the lonely Jiour in accents fweet !
ЛЪ ! who the dear illufions pleas'd would yield, Which Fancy wakes írom filence and from íludcí, For ali the fober forms of Truth rcveaľd, For all the feenes tliat Day's bright eye pervades ! Ön her return to the abbey ihe was joined by Louis, who, after fome con¬ verfation, faid, ** X am much grieved " by the fcene to which I was witneűí 44 this morning, and have longed fot an ** opportunity of telling you lb. My 44 mother's behaviour is too myfterious fbr 44 me to account for, but it is not diru- ** cult to perceive ihe labours under fome ** miftake. What I have to requeft is, '* that whenever I can he of fervice to ** you, you will command me," Adeline thanked him for his friendly offer, which ihe felt more lenfibly than Hie chofe to exprefs. " I am uncon- " fcious," faid ihe, " of any oiFence ** that may have deierved Madame La * Motte's difpleafure, and am, there- " lore, totally unable t^ account før it· *' í have repeatedly fought an explana- 44 йощ
i íl6 3 44 tion, which íhe has as anxioufiy ** avoided ; it is better, therefore, to 44 prefs the fubjeel no farther. At the 41 fame time, Sir, fufter me to aflure u you, I have a juft fenfe of your good- 44 neis." Louis fighed and was filent.— At length, ** ï wiíh you would permit 44 me," refumed he, «« to fpeak with «« my mother upon this fubjeci. I am «' fure I could convince her of her 44 error/* 44 By no means," replied Adeline ; 44 Madame La Motte's difpleafure has 44 given me inexpreifible concern ; but 44 to compel her to an explanation, would 44 only increafe this difpleafure inftead of *« removing it. Let me beg of you not 44 to attempt it." ** I fubmit to your judgment," faid Louis; «' but, for once, it is with re- u luci ance j I ihould cfteem myfelf moft «« happy, if Icould be of fervice to you." lie fpoke this with an accent fe tender, ihat Adeline, for the firft time, per¬ ceived
C s*7 ] ccived the fentiments of his heart. A mind more fraught with vanity than her's, would have taught her long ago to regard the attentions of Louis, as tho refult of fomething more than well-bred gallantry. She did not appear to notice Äis laft words, but remained filent, and involuntarily quickened her pace. Louis faid no more, but feemed funk in thought ; and this filence remained un- interrupted, till they entered the abbey.
Vou L К СИЛР.
I ·«» J
CHAP. IV. ** Henoe, horrible iliadow ! ** Unreal mockery, Ivcnce 1" Macbets. ^1 EAR a month elapfed without any remarkable occurrence: the mclan* choly of La Motte fufFered little abate¬ ment; and the behaviour of Madame to Adeline, though fomewhat foftened» was ftili far from kind. Louis, by num¬ berlefs little attentions, teftified his growing affection for Adeline, who con¬ tinued to treat them as pairing civilities. it happened, one ftormy night, as they were preparing for reft, that they were alarmed by a trampling of horfes near the abbey. The found of feveral voices fucceeded, and a loud knocking at the great gate of the ball foon af «r 4 eon-
ί 219 ] Armed the alarm. La Motte had little doubt that the officers of juftice had at length difcovered his retreat, and the perturbation of fear almoft confounded h?s fenfes; he, however, ordered the lights to be extinguiflted* and a profound fllence to be obferved, unwilling to neg¬ lect even the flighteftpoflibiiiiy of fecu¬ rity. There was a chance, he thought, that the perfons might fuppofe the place uninhabited, and believe they had mif¬ taken the object of their fearch. Hi# orders were fcarcely obeyed, when the knocking was renewed, and with in¬ creafed violence. La Motte now re-^ paired to a fmall grated window in the portal of the gate, that he might obferve the number and appearance of the* ftrangers. The darknefs of the night baffled hia purpofe; he could only perceive a group of men on horfebaHk ; but Uf- tening attentively, he diftinguifhed a part of their difeourfe. Several of the К 2 men
[ йго J men contended, that they had miftaken the place ; till a perfon, who, from his authoritative voice, appeared to be their leader, affirmed, that the lights had iifued from this fpot, and he was po- fitive there were perfons within. Having faid this, he again knocked loudly at the gate, and was anfwered only by hollow echoes. La Motte's heart trembled at the found, and he was unable to move. After waiting fome time, the ft rangers feemed as if in confultation, but their difeourfe was conducted in fuch a low tone of voice, that La Motte was unable to diftinguifh its purport. They with¬ drew from the gate, as if to depart, but he prefently thought he heard them amongft the trees on the other fide of the fabric, and foon became convinced they had not left the abbey. A few mi¬ nutes held LaMotte in a ftate of torturing fufpenfe; he quitted the grate, where IrfOtfis now fiationed himfelf, for that part of
L azi J of the edifice which overlooked the fpot where he fuppofed them to be waiting. The ftorm was now loud, and the hol¬ low blafts, which ruihed among the trees, prevented his diilinguifhing any other found. Once, in the paufes of the wind, he thought he heard diftinct voices; but he was not long left to con¬ jecture, for the renewed knocking at the. gate again appalled him ; and rega reliefs of the terrors of .Madame La Motte and Adeline, he ran to try his laft chance of concealment, by means of the trap-door. Soon after the violence of the a flail- lants feeming to increafe with every guff of the tempeft, the gate, which was old and decayed, burft from its hinges, and admitted them to the hall. At the mo¬ ment of their entrance, a feream from Madame La Motte, who flood at the door of an adjoining apartment, con¬ firmed the fufpicion of the principal ftranger, who continued to advance, as fan as the darkneiš would permit him,- K q Adeline
Γ 222 j Adeline had fainted, and Madame la Motte was calling loudly for afllfiance, when Peter entered with lights, and dif¬ covered the hail filled with men, and his young miftrefs fenfelcfs upon the floor. A Chevalier now adianccd, and fohcit- iug pardon of Madame for the rudenets of his conduct, was attempting an apo¬ logy, when perceiving Adeline, he haf¬ tened to raife her from the ground, but Louis, who now returned, caught her in his arms, and defired the flranger not to interfere. The perfon, to whom he ipoke this, wore the ftar of one of the firft orders in France, and had an air of dignity, which declared him to be of fuperior rank. He appeared to be about forty, but, per¬ haps, the fpirit and fire of hh counte¬ nance made the impreflion of time upon 1 as feat ures lefs pereepti bl e. His foftened afpecl and infinuating manners, while f regardleis of himfelf, he feemed atten¬ tive only to the condition of Adeline, gradually
ΐ * 2 3 J gradually diflipated the apprehenfions of Madame La Motte, and fubdued the fudden refentment of Louis. Upon Adeline, who was yet infenfible,he gazed with an eager admiration, which feemed to abforb all the faculties of his mind. She was, indeed* an object not to be con¬ templated with indifference. Her beauty, touched with the languid delicacy of illnefs, gained from fentiment what it loft in bloom. The negligence of her drefs, loofened for the purpofe of freer refpiration, difeovered thofe glow¬ ing charms, which her auburn treffes, that fell in profufion over her bofom, lhaded, but could not conceal. There now entered another firangcr, a young Chevalier, who, having fpoken haftily to the elder, jorncd the general group that furrounded Adeline. lie was of a perfon, in whieh elegance was happily blended with ftrength, and had a countenance animated, but not haugh¬ ty ; noble, yet cxpreffive of peculiar К 4 fweet-
L 2*4 ], ťwcef neis· What rendered it at prefent more interefting, was the compaífion he feemed to feel for Adeline, who now revived and faw him, the firft object that met her eyes, bending over her in filent anxiety, On perceiving him, a bluih of quick furprize pafled over her cheek, for ihe knew him to be the ftranger fhe had feen in the forett. Her countenance inftantly changed to the paleneis of terror, when flie obferved the room crowded with people. Louis now fupported her into another apartment, where the two Che¬ valiers, who followed her, again apolo¬ gized for the alarm they had occafioned. The elder,turning to Madame La Motte, faid, ** You are no doubt, Madame, " ignorant that I am the proprietor 'Of this abbey," She ftarted; " Be *« not alarmed, Madame, you are fafe ťí and welcome. This ruinous fpot has i4 been Jong abandoned by me, and if it *' has afforded you a íhelter, í am happy, v Madame
ι **$ J Kîadame La Motte expreifed her grati¬ tude for this condefeenfion, and Louis declared his fenfe of the politenefs of the Marquis de Montalt, for that was the title of the noble ftranger. «« My chief refidence/* faid the Már-' quis, *«is in a difiant province, but I '* have a chateau near the borders of the «' foreft, and in returning from an ex- «« curfion, I have been benighted and f " loft my way. A light, whieh gleamed 44 through the trees, attracted me hither, 44 and, fuch was the darknefs without, 44 that I did not know it proceeded from 44 the abbey til! I came to the door*" The noble deportment of the ftrangers, the fplendour of their apparel, and, above all, this fpeech, diflipated every remain¬ ing doubt of Madame's, and ihe was giving orders for refiefh ments to be fet before them, when La Motte, who had liftened, and was now convinced he had nothing to fear, entered the apartment. К 5 He
He advanced towards the Marquis with a complacent air, but, as he would have fpoke, the words of welcome fitul* tered on his lips, his limbs trembled, and a ghafily palenefs overfpread his counte¬ nance* The Manquis was little lefs agi¬ tated,, and, in the firft moment of futi- prize, put his hand upon his fwöfd; but, recollecting himfelf, he withdrew it, and endeavoured to obtain a eoni* mand of features. A paufe of agonizing filence enfued. La Motte made fomc motion towards the door, but his agi¬ tated frame refufed to ilipport htm, and he funk into a chair, filent and ex¬ haufted. The horror of his countenance, together with his whole behaviour, * ex¬ cited the utmoft furprize in Madame, whofe eyes inquired of the Marquis more than he thought proper to anfwer : his look« increafed, inftead of explaining the xnyftery,and expreifed a mixture of emo¬ tions, which ihe could not anaîyfe. Meanwhile, íhe endeavoured to foothe and
t **7 ] and revive her lmíbandjbut herepreíľcd her efforts, and, averting his face,covered it with his hands. The Marquis feemed tò recover his prefence of mind, flepped to the door of the hall where his people were aflem- bled, when La Motte, ftarting from hi* feat, with a frantic ah', called on him ta return. The Marquis looked back and. flopped, but ftill heii tating whether to proceed ; the fupplications of Adeline,' who was now returned ì added to thofe of La Motte, determined him, and he fat down. "Î rcqueft of yon, my Lord," faid La,Mòtte, "that we may convert ** for a few moments by ourfelves." " The rcqueft is hold, and the indul- " gence, perhaps, dangerous," Yaid the Marquis : " it is mote alfo than I wilt " grant. You can háve nothing to íày, " with whicjh your family ate not ac- " quainted—fpeak your pürpofe atid be "brief." La Motte's complexion va-f ried to every fentence of this fpeech* Кб « Im»
[ "3 ] " Impoflible ! my Lord," faid he ; 4( my 44 lips ihall clofe for ever, ere they pro- 4t nounce before another human being 44 the words referved for you alone. I 44 entreat—I fupplicate of you a few mo- " ments private difeourfe/' As he pro¬ nounced thefe words, tears fwelled into his eyes, and the Marquis, foftened by his diftrefs, confented, though with evi¬ dent emotion and reluctance, to his re¬ queft. La Motte took a light and led the Marquis to a fmall room in a remote part ] ofthe edifice, where they remained near an hour. Madame, alarmed by the length of their abfence, went in queft of them : as ihe drew near, a curiofity, in fuch circumftances, perhaps, not unjufti- fiable, prompted her to liften. La Motte juft then exclaimed— i4 The phrenzy of t4 defpair 1"—Some words, followed, de>- fivéred in a low tone, which ihe could not underftand.— 44 1 have fuffered more 44 than I can expreis/' continued he ; " tbe
С Ä29 I 44 the fame image has purfued me in my «« midnight dream, and in my daily wan- *« derings. There is no puniihment, *« íhort of death, which I would not have *« endured, to regain ¿ne ftate of mind «« with which I entered this foreft. I '« again addrefs myfelf to your com- <« paflion." A loud gufi: of wind, that burft along the paifage" where Madame La Motte ftood, overpowered his voice and that of the Marquis, who fpoke in reply : but ihe ibon after diftinguifhed thefe words,-— '« To-morrow, my Lord, if you return 44 to thefe ruins, i will lead you to the «« fpot." 44 That is fcarcelynecefTary, and maybe 44 dangerous," faid the Marquis. "From «* you, my Lord, I can excufe thcfe '« doubts," refumed La Moite; «« but I '« will fwear whatever you fhall propofe, « c Yes," continued he, " whatever may be 44 the confequence, I will fwear to fubmit 44 to your decree !" The rifing tempeft: again
t *3° Ì tgarn drowned the ibund of theiť voices and Madame La Motte vainly endea¬ voured to hearthoie words, upon which, probably, hung the explanation of this myfterious conduct. They now moved towards the door, and flie retreated with precipitation to the apartment where ihe had left Adeline, with Louis and the young Chevalier. Hither the Marquis and La Motte foon followed, the firft: haughty and' cool, the latter fomewhat more com* pofed than before, though the imprelfion of horror was not yét faded from his countenance. The Marquis parted on to the hall where his retinue awaited :· the ftorm was not yet fubfided, but he feemed impatient to be gone, and or¬ dered his people to be in readinefs. La с Motte obferved« a füllen filence, fre¬ quently pacing the room with hafty fteps, and fometimes loft in reverie. Meanwhile, the Marquis, feating himfelf' by Adeline, directed to her his whole attens
С *з* ï attention, except when fuddeh fits of aB*^ fence came over his mind and fufpended him iti filence : at thefe times the young ChevaHeraddrcfTed his Adeline, who, w ith diffidence and fome agitation, fhrunk from the obfervance of both. u The Marquis had been near two hours at the abbey, and the tempeft flill con*· tinuing, Madame La Motte offered him a bedì A look from her huiband made her tremble for the confequence. Her/ offer was, however, politely declined, the Marquis being evidently as impa¬ tient to he gone, as hts tenant appeared diftréfltød by his prefence. He often re¬ turned to- the hall, and from the gates raifed a look of impatience to the clouds* Nothing was to be feen through the darknefs-of night—nothingheard but the how lings of the ftorm. The morning dawned before he de¬ parted. As he was preparing to leave the abbey, La Motte again drew him« afide, and held him for a few moments in
í Ч* ì к clofe converfation. His impaflioneď geflures, which Madame La Motte ob¬ ferved from a remote part of the room» added to her curiofity a degree of wild apprehenfion, derived from the obfcu¬ rity of the fubject. Her endeavour to diflinguiih the correiponding words was baffled by the low voice in which they were uttered. The Marquis and his retinue at length departed, and La Motte, having him* felf faftened the gates, filently and de¬ jectedly withdrew to his chamber. The moment they were alone, Madame feized the opportunityof entreatingher huiband ' to explain the fcene ihe had witncffed. 44 Aik me no queftions," faid La Motte, fternly, " for I will anfwer none, I have 4( already forbade your ipeaking to me * 4 on this fubjeel/* « What fubjea Г faid his wife. La Motte feemed to recollect himfelf.— 4ς Nø 44 matter—I was miftaken—I thought 44 you
L m j " you had repeated thefe queftions be-* "fore." «' Ah !" faid Madame La Motte, << it u is then as I fufpečtcd : your former {< melancholy, and the diftrefs of this (t night have the fame caufe." " And why ihould you cither fufpeet '* or inquire ? Am I always to be pcrfe* t£ cuted with conjectures ?" " Pardon mc, I meant not to perfecute " you ; but my anxiety for your welfare " will not fufter mc to reil under this ** dreadful uncertainty. Let me claim " the privilege of a wife, and ihare the " affliction which oppreíľes you.. Deny " me not.*'— La Motte interrupted her, "Whatever may be the caufe of the " emotions which you have witncffed, I 4< fwear that I will not now reveal it. A " time may come, when I fhall no Ion* " ger judge concealment neceflary ; t'Ai " then be filent, and defift from impor- "tunity; above all, forbear toremark " to any one what you may have feen " uncon>
[ *34 } 44 uncommon in me. Bury your furmife ** in \our own bofom, as you would ** avoid my curie and my dcflrucTion/* The determined air with which he fpoke tins, while his countenance was over¬ fpread with a livid hue, made his wife fliuddir; and íhe forbore all reply. Madame La Motte retired to bed, but not to reft· She ruminated on the paft occurrence ; and her furprize and curio¬ fity» concerning the words and beha¬ viour of her huiband, were but more ftrongly ftimulated by reflection. One truth, however, appeared; flie could not doubt, but the myfterious conduct of La Morte, which had for fo many months oppreifed her with anxiety, and the late fecne with the Marquis, originated from the fame caufe. This belief, which feemed to prove how unjo Üly ihe had fufpected Adeline, brought with it a pang of felf-accnfation. She looked for¬ ward to the morrow, which would lead the Marquis again to ihe abbey, with im-
[ m 1 impatience. Wearied nature at length refumed her rights, and yielded a ftiort oblivion of care* At a late hour, the next day, the fa¬ mily aftembied to brcakfaft. Each in¬ dividual of the party appeared filent and abftracted, but very different was the af- pect of their features, ana ftill more the complexion of their thoughts. La Motte feemed agitated by impatient fear, yet the fullennefs of defpair c^erfpread his countenance. A certain wildnefs in his eye at tirr** i expreifed the fudden ftartof horror, and again his features would fink into the gloom of defpondence. Madame La Motte feemed harrafted with anxiety; ihe watched every turn of her huíbanďs countenance, and impa¬ tiently waited the arrival of the Mar¬ quis, Lorn*, was compofed and thought¬ ful. Adeline feemed to feel her full ihare of uncafinefs. She had obferved the behaviour of La Motte tlie pre¬ ceding night with much furprize, and the happy
[ а 3 6 ] happy confidence íhe had hitherto re- pofed in him, was ihaken. She feared alfo, left the exigency of his circumftan¬ ces fliould precipitate him again into the world, and that he would be either un¬ able or unwilling to afford her a flielter beneath his roof. During breakfaft, La Motte frequently rofe to the window, from whence he caft many an anxious look. His wife under¬ ftood too well the caufe of his impa¬ tience, and endeavoured to reprefs her own. In thefe intervals, Louis attempted by whifpers to obtain feme informa· tion from his father, hut La Motte al¬ ways returned to the table, where the prefence of Adeline prevented farther difeourfe. After breakfaft, as he walked upon the lawn, Louis would have joined him, but La Motte peremptorily declared he in¬ tended to be alone, and foon after, the Marquis having not yet arrived, proceed¬ ed to a greater diftance from the abbey, Adeline
C m ] Adeline retired into their ufual work¬ ing room with Madame La Motte, who affectedan air of checrfulnefs, and even of kindnefs. Feeling the neceifity of offering fome reafon for the flriking agi¬ tation of La Motte, and of preventing the furprize, which the unexpected appear¬ ance ofthe Marquis would occafion Ade¬ line, if ihe was left to connect it with his behaviour of the preceding night, fhe mentioned that the Marquis" and La Motte had long been known to each oťher, and that this unexpected meeting, after an abfence of many years, and under cir- cumflapces fo altered and humiliating, on the part of the latter, had occafioned him much painful amotion. This had been heightened by a xonfckmfnefs that the Marquis had formerly mifinterpreted feme circumftances in his conduct to¬ wards him, which had caufed a fuipen- fion of their intimacy. This account did not bring convic¬ tion to the mind of Adeline, for it feemed inadeouate
С *38 ] inadequate to the degré« of emotion, the Marquis and La Motte had mutually* betrayed. Her furprize wasexcited, and her curiofity awakened by the words, which were meant to delude them both. hut fhe forbore to exprefs her thoughts. Madame proceeding with her plan, faid, <ť The Marquis was now expecìcd, **and fhe hoped whatever deferences re- ** mained would be perfecily adjufted." Adelincbluftied, and endeavouring tore- ply, lier lips faltered. Confcioüs of this agitation, and of the obfervance of Ma¬ dame La Motte, her confufion increafed, and lier endeavours to fiipprefs ferved only to heighten it. Still fhe tried to renew the difeourfe, and ftül ihe found it impoffible to collect her thoughts. Shocked left Madame ihould apprehend the fcntiment, which had till this mo¬ ment been concealed almoft from hcr¬ fclf, her colour tied, fhe fixed her eyes.* on the ground, and, for fome time, found it difficult to гефке. Madame La Motte
[ 49 I Motte inquired if ihe was ill, when Ade¬ line, glad of the excufe, withdrew to the indulgence of her own thoughts, which were now wholly engrofl'ed by the ex¬ pectation of feeing again the young Che¬ valier, who had accompanied the Mar¬ quis. As the looked ftom her room, ihe faw the Marquis on horfeback, with feveral attendants, advancing at a diftance, and fhe haftened to apprize Madame La Motte of his approach. In a ihort time, lie arrived at the gates, and Madame and Louis went out to receive him, La Motte being not yet returned. He en¬ tered the hall, followed by the young Chevalier, and accofting Madame with a fort of ftatcly politenefs, inquired for La Motte, whom Louis now went to feek. The Marquis remained for a few mi¬ nutes filent, and then aiked of Madame La Motte, how her fair daughter did ?" Madame underftood it was Adeline he meant,
[ «4· ] meant, and having anfwered his in¬ quiry, and (lightly faid that flie was not related to her, Adeline, upon fomc indication of the Marquis's with, was íènt for: ihe entered the room with a raodeft blufti and a timid air, which feemed to engage ail his attention. Hh compliments ihe received with a fweet graee, but, when the younger Chevalier approached, the warmth of his manner rendered her*s involuntarily more refer¬ ved, and íhe fcarcely dared to raife her eyes from tîıe ground, left they fliould encounter his. la Motte now entered and apologi¬ sed for his abfence, which the Marquis noticed only by a flight inclination of his head, exprefting at the íàme time by his looks, both diftruft and pride. They immediately quitted the abbey together, and the Marquis beckoned his attendants to follow at a diftance. La Motte for¬ bade his fon to accompany him, but Louis obierved Ы took the way into the thicieft
[ w 3 thiekcft part of the foreft. He was loft: in a chaos of conjeclure concerning this affair, but curiofity and anxiety for his father induced him to follow at fome diftanee. In the mean time, the young ftranger, whom the Marquis addrefled by the name of Theodore, remained at the ah- bey with Madame La Motte and Ade¬ line. The former, with all her addrefs, could not conceal her agitation du¬ ring this interval. She moved invo¬ luntarily to the door, whenever ihe heard a footflep, and feveral times ihe went to the hall· door, in order to look into the foreft, but as often returned, checked by difappointment. No perfon appeared. Theodore feemed to addrefs as much of his attention to Adeline, as politenefs would allow him to withdraw from Ma* dame La Motte. His manners fo gentle, yet dignified, infenfibly fubdued her ti¬ midity, and baniihed her referve. Her converfatioii no longer fufiered a pain- Vor. L L ful
С *4* ] fol conftraiîit, but gradually difelofed the beauties of her mind, and feemed to pro¬ duce a mutual confidence. . Afimilarity of fentiment foon appeared» and Theo¬ dore, hy the impatient pleafure which animated his countenance, feemed fre¬ quently to anticipate the thoughts of Adeline. To them the abfence of the Marquis was ihort, though Song to Madame La Motte, whofe countenance brightened, when ihe heard the trampling of horfes at the gate. The Marquis appeared hut for a mo¬ ment, and pafled on with La Motte to a private room, where they remained for fome tirøeincnnference, immediately after which he departed« Theodore took leave of Adeline, who, as well as La Motte and Madame, attended them to the gates, with an exprefiion of tender regret, and» often as he went» looked back upon ihe abbey, till the intervening bunches
[ *43 3 branches entirely excluded it ftom bis view. The tranfient glow of pleafure diffufed over the cheek of Adeline diikppeared with the young ftranger, and fhe fighed as ihe turned into the hall. The image of Theodore purfued her to her chamber ; ihe recollected with exactnefs every par¬ ticular of his late converfation—his fen¬ timents fo congenial with her own—his manners fo engaging—his countenance fo animated—fo ingenuous and fo noble, in which manly dignity was blended with the fweetnefs of benevolence— thefe, and every other grace, ihe recol¬ lected, and a foft melancholy ftole upon her heart. " I ihall fee him no more," fiiid ihe. A figli, tliat followed, told her more of her heart than ihe wiihed to blow. She bluihed, and fighed again, and then fuddenly recollecting hcrfelf, ihe endeavoured to divert her thoughts to a different fubject „ La Motte's con¬ nection with the Marquis for fome time ** 2 engaged
[ *44 ] •ngaged her attention, but, unable to develope the myflçry that attended it, ilne fought a refuge from her own reflec¬ tions in the more pleafingones to be de¬ rived from books. During this time, Louis, íhocked and furpriztëd at the extreme diflrefs which his father had manifefled upon the firil appearance οΐ the Marquis, addrefied him on the fuhjeéh He had no doubt that the Marquis was intimately con¬ cerned in the event which made it ne- cefìary for La Motte to leave Paris, and he fpoke his thoughts without difguife, lamenting at the fame time the unlucky í hance which had brought him to feck refuge in a place, of all others» the leaft capable of affording it—the diate of his enemy. La Motte did not contradici: this opinion of his fon*s, and joined in lamenting the evil fate which had con¬ ducted him thither. The term of Louis's ahfence from his regiment was now nearly expired, and he
[ *45 3 he took occafion to exprefs his forrow, that he muft foon be obliged to leave his father in circumfiances fo dangerous as the prcfent. " I fhould leave you, Sir, 44 with lefs pain," continued he, " was " í fure I knew the full extent of your * e misfortunes. At prefent 1 am left to " conjecture evils, which, perhaps, do " not exift. Relieve me, Sir, from this " ftate of painful uncertainty, and fufter 44 me to prove myfelf worthy of your " confidence." " 1 have already anfwered you on this 44 fubje&," faid La Motte, " and for- " bade you to renew it. I am now obli- 44 ged to tell you, I care not how foon 44 you depart, if I am to he pcrfecuted " with thefe inquiries." La Motte walked abruptly away, and left his fen to doubt and concern. The arrival ofthe Marquis had diftl* patedthe jealous fears of'Madame La Motte, and ihe awoke to a fenfe of her cruelty towards Adeline. When ihe L 3 confidered
С чб } confidered her orphan ftate-—the uni¬ form arTcčlion which had appeared in her behaviour~~*the mild nefs and pa¬ tience with which fhe had borne her in¬ jurious treatment, fhe was íhocked, and took an early opportunity of renewing her former kindnefs. But ihe could not explain this ieeming inconttttency of conduci, without betraying her late fuf- piebns, which fhe now bhiíhed to re¬ member, nor could ihe apologize for her former behaviour, without giving this explanation. She contented hcrfclf, therefore, with exprcifing in her manner the regard which was thus revived. Adeline was at urn furprifed, but ihe felt too much plcafure at the change to be fcrupulous in inquiring its caufe. But, notwithttanding the fatisfaclion which Adeline received from the revival of Madame La Motte's kindnefs, her thoughts frequently recurred to the pe¬ culiar and forlorn circumfiances of her conditio!)·
С «47 3 condition. She could not belj) feeling lefs confidence than ihe hv\ formerly done in the friendihip of Madame La Motte, whofe eharacier now appeared lefs amiable than her ипад ; ' «itiön had re- prefented it, and feemed ftrongly tinc¬ tured with caprice. Her thoughts often dwelt upon the ftrange introduction *rf the Marquis at the яЬЬеу, and o¿ the mutual emotions and apparent diflike of La Motte and himfelf; and, under thefe circumflances it equally excited her furprife that La Motte ihould chufe, and that the Marquis ihould permit him, to remain in his territory. Her mind returned the oftener, per¬ haps, to this fubject, becaufe it was con¬ nected with Theodore; bjt it returned unconfeious of the idea which attracted it. She attributed the intereft ihe felt in the affair to her anxiety for the wel¬ fare of La Motte, and for her own future deftination, which was now fo deeply involved in his. Sometimes, indeed, L 4 íhe
[ П8 1 fhe caught hcrfelf bufy in conjecture as to the degree of rclaiionfiiip in which Theodore flood to the Marquis, but ihe immediately checked her thoughts, and feverely blamed herfelf for having fuf¬ fered them to firay to an object, which fhe perceived was too dangerous to her peace.
CHAP,
L a 49 ]
CHAP. Vii. «« Prefent ills 11 Are lefs than horrible imaginings." Julius Cæsar. A FEW days after the occurrence rela¬ ted in the preceding chapter, as Adeline fat alone in her chamber, fiie was rou¬ fed from a reverie by a trampling of hoďcs near the gate, and, on looking from the cafement, ihe faw the Marquis de Montait enter the abbey. This cir¬ cumftanee furprized her, and an emo» tion, whofe caufe ihe did not trouble her¬ felf to inquire for, made her infiantly re¬ treat from the window. The fame caufe, however, led her thither again as haftily, but the object of her fearch did not ap¬ pear, and fhe was in no Imfie to retire· As íhe ftood mufing and difappointed, the Marquis came out with La Motte» L 5 and,
I г $* ] and, immediately looking up, faw Ade¬ line and bowed. She returned his com¬ pliment refpectfully, and withdrew from the window, vexed at having been feen there. They went into the foreft, but the Marquis's attendants did not, as be¬ fore, follow them thither. When they returned, which was not till after a con¬ fiderable time, the Marquis immediately mounted his horfe and rode away. For the remainder of the day, La Motte appeared gloomy and filent, and was frequently loft in thought. Ade¬ line obferved him with particular atten¬ tion and concern ; ihe perceived that he was always more melancholy after an interview with the Marquis, and was now furprifed to hear that the latter had ap pointed to dine the next day at the abbey. When La Motte mentioned this, he added fome high eulogium on the cha¬ racter of the Marquis, and particularly praifed his generofìty and noblenefs of foul. At this inftant, Adeline recol¬ lected
С ч* ] Je&ed the aneedotes íhe had formerly heard concerning the abbey, and they threw a íhadow over the brightnefs of that excellence, which La Motte now celebrated. The account, however, did not appear to deferve much credit ; a part of it, as far as a negative will admit of demonu ration, having been already proved falfe ; for it had been reported, that the abbey was haunted, and no fu- pernatural appearance had ever been ob¬ ferved by the prefent inhabitants. Adeline, however, ventured to in¬ quire, whether it was the prefent Mar¬ quis of whom thofe injurious reports had been raifed ? La Motte anfwered her with a fmile of ridicule ; M Stories of « ghofts and hobgoblins have always * ( been admired and cheriihed by the " vulgar," faid he. " I am inclined to " rely upon my own experience, at leair, u as much as upon the accounts of theib " peafants. If you have feen any thing α to corroborate thcfe accounts, pray L 6 ** inforna
[ Ч* ] " inform me of it, that î may eflabliih « my faith/' 44 You miftake me, Sir," faid flie, 44 it was not concerning fupernatural tť agency that I would inquire : I al- 44 luded to a different part ofthe report, " which hinted, that feme perfon had " been confined here, by опЗег of the " Marquis, who was faid to have died 44 unfairly. This was allcdged as a rea* 44 fon for the Marquis's having abandon- " ed the abbey," " All the mere coinage of idlenefs," iaid La Motte; 4C a romantic tale to ex- 44 cite wonder : to fee the Marquis is " alone fufttcient to refute this ; and if 44 we credit half the number of thofe " ftories that fpring from the fame fouree, Si we prove ourfelves little fuperior to 44 the fimpletons who invent them. 44 Your good fenfe, Adeline, I think, " will teach you the merit of dííbelief," Adeline bluihed and was filent ; but La Motte's defence of the Marquis ap¬ peared
[ чъ ] peared much warmer, and more diflufe, than was confluent with his own difpo¬ fition, or required by the occafion. His former converfation with Louis occurred to her, and ihe was the more furprifed at what pafled at prefent. She looked forward to the morrow with a.mixture of pain and pleafure; the expectation of feeing again the young Chevalier occupying her thoughts, and agitating them with a various emotion : now ihe feared his prefence, and now fhe doubted whether he would come. At length ihe obferved this, and bluihed to find how much he engaged her atten¬ tion. The morrow arrived—the Marquis 1 came—but he came atone; andthefun- ihine of Adeline's mind was clouded, though ihe was able to wear her ufual air of cheerfulnefe. The Marquis was polite, affable, and attentive : to man¬ ners the mofteafy and elegant, was added the laft refinement of poiifhed life. His converfation waø lively, amufing, feme- times
C *54 ] times even witty ; and difeovered great knowledge of the world; or, what is often miftaken for it, an acquaintance with the higher circles, and with the to¬ pics of the day. Here La Motte was alfo qualified to converfe with him, and they entered into a difcuifion of the characters and manners of the age with great fpirit, and fome humour. Madame La Motte had not Seen her huiband fo cheerful fince they left Paris, and fometimes flie could almoft fancy ihe was there. Adeline liflened, till the cheerfulnefs, which lhe had at firft only aflumed, became real. The addrefs of the Marquis wa& fo infi- nuating and affable, that her referve in¬ fenfibly gave way before it, and her na¬ tural vivacity refumed its long loft em¬ pire. At parting, the Marquis told La Motte he rejoiced at having found fo agreeable a neighbour. La Motte bowed. ** I ihall femetimeavififcyou," continued he,
C 4S ] be, " and I lament that I cannot at pre* 44 fcnt invite Madame La Motte and her 44 fair friend to my chateau, but it is un¬ dergoing fome repairs, which make it 44 but an uncomfortable reftdence." The vivacity of La Motte difappeared with his gueft, and he foon relapfed into fits of filence and abftraction. " The "Marquis is a very agreeable тап, я faid Madame La Motte, — 4( Very agreeable," replied he.—"And feems to have an " excellent heart," ihe refumed.—" Aa " excellent one," faid La Motte, '* You feem difcompofed, my dear; ** what has difturbed you ?" "Not in the leaft—I was only think- 44 ing, that with fuch agreeable talents, " and fuch an excellent heart, it was a 4i pity the Marquis ihould"— "What? my dear," faid Madame with impatience : " That the Marquis " ihould—ihould fuffer this abbey to fall ** into ruins," replied La Motte. "Is
[ *s¿ ] " Is that alî 1" faid Madame, with dif¬ appointment.—" That is all, upon my '* honour/* faid La Motte, and leu the room. Adelines fpirits, no longer fupported by t he animated converfation of the Mar¬ quis, funk into languor, and when he departed, flic walked penfively into the foreft. She followed a little romantic path that wound along the margin of the ft ream, and was overhung with deep fli ades. The tranquil lií y of the fcene, which autumn now touched with her fweeteft tints, foftened her mind to a tender kind of melancholy, and ihe fuflèred a tear, which, flie knew not wherefore, had flolen into her eye, to tremble there unchecked. She came to a little lonely receût formed by high trees ; the wind fighed mournfully among the branches, and as it waved their lofty heads feat tered their leaves to the ground. She feated herfelf on a bank beneath, and indulged the melan¬ choly
[ 41 ] choly reflections that preífed on her roind. О ! could 1 dive into futurity and "behold the events which await me !" faid fhe ; " I fliould, perhaps, by con- " ftant contemplation, be enabled to " meet them with fortitude. An orphan <f in this wide world—thrown upon the "friendihip of ftrangers for comfort, " and upon' their bounty for the very " means of exíftence, what but evil have " I to expect ! Alas, my father ! how " could you thus abandon your child.—^< " how leave her to the ftorms o/life—to " fink, perhaps, .beneath them } Alas, "I have no friend !" She was interrupted by a milling among the fallen leaves; fhe turned her head, and perceiving the Marquis's young friend, arofe to depart. " Par- " don this intrufion," faid he, "your " voice attracted me hither, and your " words detained me: my offence, how- " ever, brings with it its own puniihment, " having
С 25« ] α having learned your forrows-^howcau " I help feeling them myfelf? Would " that my fympathy, or my fuifering, u could refcue you from them !"—He hefitated—" Would that I could dcferve * f the title of your friend, and be thought u worthy of it by yourfelf !" The confufion of Adeline's thoughts Gould fearcely permit her to reply ; ihe trembbd, and gently withdrew her hand, which be bad taken, while he fpoke. " You have, perhaps, heard, Sir, more Cť than is true : 1 am, indeed, not happy, " but a moment of dejection has made " me unjuft, and I am lefs unfortunate " than I have icprefented. When 1 faid " I had no friend, I was ungrateful to ζ( the kindnefs of Monfieur and Madame " La Motte, who have been more than " friends—have been as parents to me." " If fo, I honour them," cried Theo¬ dore with warmth; "and if I did not " feel it to be prefumption, I would aik "why you are unhappy ?·—But"—He paufed.
[ 49 3 paufed. Adeline, railing her eyes, faw him gazing upon her with intenfe and eager anxiety, and her looks were again fÌKed upon the ground. " I have pained 44 you," faid Theodore, " by an im- 44 proper requeft. Can you forgive me, " and alfe when I add, that it was an " intereft in your welfare, which urged 44 my inquiry Ì" 44 Forgivenefs, Sir, it is unneceflary 44 to aik. I am certainly obliged by the 44 compaflion you exprefs. But the even* 44 ing is cold ; if you pleafe, we will " walk towards the abbey/ 1 As they moved on, Theodore was for feme time filent. At length, 44 It was but 44 lately that I folicited your pardon/* faid he, * r and ï fliall now, perhaps, 44 have need of it again ; bu£ you will do 44 mc the juftice to believe, that i have a 44 ftrong, and, indeed, a prefling reafon 44 to inquire how nearly you are related 44 to Monfieur La Motte,"
44 We
[ ««о ] ** We are not at all related," faid* Adeline ; " but the fervice he has done " me 1 can never repay, and I hope my '* gratitude will teach mc never to for- *' get it." " Indeed !" faid Theodore, furprifed : <c and may 1 aik how long you have ** known him Г' si Rather, Sir, let me aik, why thefe €ζ qucttions ihould be neceffary ?" c< You are jutt," faid he, with an air offelf-condemnation, " my conduct has u deferved this reproof; I ihould have " been more explicit,'* He looked as if his mind was labouring with feme- thing which he was unwilling to exprefs* " But you know not how delicately lam %i circumfìanced," continued he, u yet " I will aver, that my quettions arc ťí prompted by the tendered İntereft in " your happinefs—and even by my fears " for your fafety."—Adeline darted. " I " fear you are deceived," faid he, " I '* fear there^s danger near you/* Adeline
[ s6i ] , Adeline flopped, and, looking car- neflly at him, begged he would explain himfelf. She fufpected that feme mif- chief threatened La Motte ; and Theo¬ dore continuing fdent, fhe repeated her requeft. 4t If La Motte is concerned in "this danger," faid ihe, "let me en- 44 treat you to acquaint him with it im- . ** mediately. He has but too many mif- " fortunes to apprehend/' " Excellent Adeline!" cried Theo¬ dore, (< that heart muft he adamant that 4i would injure you. How fliall I hint " what 1 fear is too true, and how for- (i bear to warn you of your danger with- 44 out."—-He was interrupted by a ftep among the trees, and prefe Uly after faw La Motte crofs into the path they were in. Adeline felt confufed at beinjr thus feen with the Chevalier, and was haftening to join La Motte, hut ТЫ о* dore detained her, and entreated a mo¬ ment's attention. i4 There is now no 4i time to explain myfelf," faid he ; 44 yet
[ Д&» ] * 4 yet what I would fay is of the utmoft: ** confequence toymrfelf 44 Promife, therefore, to meet me in 44 fome part of the foreft at about this "time to-morrow evening, you will 44 then, I hope, he convinced, that my 44 conduct is directed, neither by cora- 44 mon circum fiances, nor common re* 44 gard." Adeline ihuddered at the idea of making an appointment ; ihe hefi¬ tated, and at length entreated Theo¬ dore not to delay tilt to-morrow an ex¬ planation which appeared to be fo im¬ portant, but to follow La Motte and inform him of his danger immediately. " It is not with La Motte ï would fpeak,** replied Theodore ; I know of no dan- " ger that threatens him-—but he ap- " proaches ; be quick, lovely Adeline, * c and promife to meet rae.*' " I do promife ;" feid Adeline, with a faltering voice ; " I will come to the 4 * fpot where you found me this evening, 44 to-morrow an earlier hour.** Saying ι this,
[ **3 ] this, íhe withdrew her trembling hand, which Theodore had prefled to hiá lips, in token of acknowledgement, and he immediately difappeared. La Motte now approached Adeline, who, fe^'ng that he had feen Theodore, was in fome confufion. " Whither is " Louis gone fo faft ?" faid La Motte. She rejoiced to find his miftake, and fuf¬ fered him to remain in it. They walked penfively towards the abbey, where Ade¬ line, too much occupied by her own thoughts to bear company, retired to her chamber. She ruminated upon the words of Theodore, and the more ihe confi¬ dered them, the more ihe was perplexed. Sometimes fhe blamed herfelf for having made an appointment, doubting whe¬ ther he had not iblicited it for the purpofe of pleading a paflion ; and now delicacy cheeked this thought, and made her vexed that ihe had prefumecL upon having inipired one. She recollected the ferious eameftneíè of his voice and manner,
[ 2б 4 ] manner, when he entreated her to meet him ; and as they convinced her of the importance of the fubjeel, fhe fhuddered at a danger, which fhe could not com¬ prehend, looking forward to the morrow with anxious impatience. Sometimes, too, a remembrance of the tender intereft he had expreifed for her welfare, and of his correfpondent look and air, would ileal acrofshcr memory, awakeningaplcafingemotionandalatent hope that ihe was not indifferent to him. From reflections like thefe ihe was roufed bya fummons to fupper,: thcrcpaftwas a melancholy one, it being the laft even¬ ing of Louis's ft ay at the abbey. Ade¬ line, who efteemed him, regretted his departure, while his eyes were often bent о 4 her, with a look which feemed to ex¬ prefs that he was about to leave the ob¬ ject of his affection. She endeavoured, by her checrfulnefs, to re-auimate the whole party, and cfpecialiy Madame La Motte, who frequently filed tears. « We
L *б 5 ] 44 We fliall foon meet again," faid Ade¬ line, «« I truft, in happier circumfiances," La Motte fighed. The countenance of Louis brightened at her wards, «« Do you « c wiíh it ?" faid he, with peculiar em¬ phafis. «« Moft certainly I do/' ihe replied. «« Can you doubt my regard «* for my beft friends ?" «« I cannot doubt any thing that is «* good of you," faid he. '* You forget you have left Paris,** iàid La Motte to his fon, while a faint fmile crofted his face, «« fuch a compii- 44 ment would there be in character with > *' the place—in thefe folitary woods it is f '* quite ouêrè* L4 The language of admiration is not. (t tű wajh that of compliment, Sir," faid, Louis. Adeline, willing to change the difeourfe, aiked, ία what part of France he was going. He replied, that his regi¬ ment was now at Peronne, and he fliould go immediately thither. After feme mention of indifferent fiibjeels, the fa- Vox.. L M mily
[ 266 ] m!ly withdrew for the night to tlţeîr fe¬ veral chambers. The approaching departure of her fon occupied the thoughts of Madame La Motte, and fhe ap*peared at breakfaft with eyes fwoln with weeping. The pale countenance of Louis feemed to in¬ dicate that he ha,d refted no better than his mother. When breakfaft was over, Adeline retired for a while, that ihe might not interrupt, by her preience, their laft converfation. As ihe walked on the lawn before the abbey ftie returned in thought to the occurrence of yefterday evening, and her impatience for the ap¬ pointed interview increafed. She was foon joined by Louis. '* It was unkind 44 of you to leave us,** faid he, ** in the ** laft; moments of røy ftay. Could I hope ** that you would ibmctimes remember "me, when I am farawaj, I ihould *' depart with lefs forrow." He then expreifed fits concern at leaving her, and though he had hitherto armed him¬ felf
L" Z&7 ] felf with refolution to forbear a dire# avowal of an attachment, whieh muft be* iruitlefe, lúa heart now yielded to the force of paflion, and he told what Ade¬ line every moment feared to hear. 44 This declaration/' faid Adeline, en¬ deavouring to overcome the agitation it excited, 4t gives me incxpreifible con* 44 cern/* " O, fay not fo !" interrupted Louis, '* but give me feme fiender hope to fup* 4 i port me in the miíèries of abfencc. 44 Say that you do not hate me—Say "— 14 That I do moil readily fey/* replied Adeline, in a tremulous voice ; 4t if İt Si will give you pleafure to be afiured of 44 my cfteem and friendihip—receive this C( aflurance :—as the tou of my heft be- 44 nefacìors, you are entitled to"------ 44 Name not benefits," iaid Louis, «« your merits out-run them alt ; and 44 fuffer me to hope for a fentiiftent left i£ cool than that of friendihip, as well as 44 to believe that I do not owe your ap-, M 2 "probation
[ *б8 ] и probation of me to the actions of u others. I have long borne my paflion 44 in filence, becaufe I forefaw the diffi- *? cullies that would attend it, nay, I i£ have even dared to endeavour, to over- 44 come it : I have dared to believe it " poflible, forgive the fuppofition, that 44 1 could forget you—and" ------ 44 You diftrefs mc," interrupted Ade¬ line ; 4i this is a converfation which I ** ought not to hear. I am above dif- * r .guife, and, therefore, aflure you j 44 that, though your virtues will always if command my eficem, you have no- *' thing to hope from my love. Were ** it even otherwife, our circumfiances 41 would effectually decide for us. If a you arc really my friend, you will re* " joice that i am fparcd this ftruggle 14 between afteciion and prudence. Let % * me hope alfo, that time will teach 44 you to reduce love within the limits 4i of friendihip« 1 * 44 Never!**
С *б9 ] * с Never Г cried Louis vehemently : « Were this poiïible, my paífion would " be unworthy of its object." While he fpoke, Adeline's favourite fawn came bounding towards her. This cîr- cu m fiai ice aŕľečied Louis even to tears, " This little animal," faid he, after a ihort pa ufe, ' f firfi conduclcd me to you: ' c it was witnefs to that happy moment *>' when 1 ñrñ faw you furrounded by at- " traci ions too powerful for my heart ; rW that moment i* now frcfli in my me- *' mory, and the creature comes even ίο *< witnefs this fud one of my depart ure*** Grief interrupted his utterance. When he recovered his voice, he faid, " Adeline ! when you look upon your " little favourite and carefs it, remember u the unhappy Louis, who will then be « far, from you. Do not deny røe ** the poor confolation of believing «this ľ' " I ttiali not require fuch a monitor to w remind me of you,*' faid Adeline with M 3 a findei
ΐ »JO J a imiïe : 4t your excellent parents and 44 yont own merits have fufficieht claim 44 upon røy remembrance. Could î fee lf your natura! good fenfe rcfume its in- *< fluence over paflion, my fatisfaction ff would equal my efteem for you." 44 Do not hope it," faid Louis, "nor 44 will I with it—for paflion here is vir- * f tue." As he fpoke, he faw La Molte turn round an angle ofthe abbey. * # The " moraents are precious," faid he, *' I ** am interrupted. Ö! Adeline,farewell! 44 and fay that yon will fometimes think * ¿ ofme." 44 Farewell/* iaid Adeline, who was nďeaed hy hb diftrefs—" farewell I « and peace attend you. I will think of ** you with tbe affection of a fiflet/ — He fighed deeply» and preifed her hand ; when La Moite, winding round another projection of the ruin, again appeared, Adehne left them together, and with¬ drew to her chamber, opprefled by the fcene* Louies paflion nná her efteem were
[ *7* 3 were too finceŕe not to infpire her with â ftrong degree of pity for his unhappy attachment. She remained in her cham¬ ber till he had quitted the abbey, unwil¬ ling to fubject him or herfelf to the pain of a formal parting. As evening and the hour of appoint- meni drew nigh, Adeline's impatience in¬ creafed ; yet, when the time arrived, ht r refolution failed, and the faltered from her purpofe. There was fomething of inde¬ licacy and diflîmulation in an appointed interview, on her part, that fhocked her. She recollected the tendernefs of Theo¬ dores manner, and feveral little circum- t fiances which feemed to indicate that his heart was not unconcerned in the event. Again ihe was inclined to doubt, whether he had not obtained her confent to this meeting upon fomc groundlefs fufpi¬ cion ; and flie almoft determined not to go ; yet it was poflible Theodore's afi> feriion might be fincere* and her danger real $ the chance of this made her de- M 4 licate
С *п 3 ficaie ferupîes appear ridiculous; íhe wondered that fhe had for a moment fuftcred them to weigh againft fo ferious an intereft, and, blaming herfelf for the delay they had occafioned, haftcned to the place of appointment The little path which led to this fpot was filent and folitary, and when fhç reached Che reeefs, Theodore had not ar¬ rived. A tranfient pride made her unwilling he fliould find that flic was more punâuaî ίο his appointment than himfelf; and íhe turned from the reeefs into a track, which wound among the trees to the right. Having walked fome way, without feeing any perfon» or hear¬ ing a footflep, ihe returned ; but he was not come, and ftie again left the place. A Second time ihe came bacfc» and Theo¬ dore was flill abfent. Rccolleeing the time al which ihe had quitted the abbey, fl\e grew uneaty, and calculated that the hour appointed \%as now much exceed¬ ed. She was offended and perplexed ;
c -m j but flie feated herfelf on the turf, and was refolved to wait the event. After remaining here till the fell of twilight iri fruitlefs expectation, her pride became more alarmed ; flie feared that he had difeovered fomething of the partiality he had infpired, and believing that he now treated her with purpofed neglect, flic quitted the place with difguft and felf- accufation. When thefe emotions fubfided, and reafon refumed its influence, ihe bluihed for what ihe termed this chİldıİh effervef- cenceof felf-love. She recollected, as if for the firft time, thefe words of Theodore : " I fear you are deceived, and that fome ** danger is near you/' Her judgment now acquitted the offenders and ihe faw only the friend. The import of thefe words, whofe truth fhe no longer doubt* cd, again alarmed her. Why did he troublé himfelf to come from the cha¬ teau, on purpofe to hint her danger, if he did not with to preferve her ? And if M j he
[ *74 ] he wiihed to prefer?e her, what but ne¬ ceifity could have withheld him from the appointment Ì Thefe reflexions decided her at once. She refolved to repair on the following day at the fame hour to the reeefs, whi¬ ther the intereft, which ihe believed him to take in her fate, would no doubt con¬ duct him in the hope of meeting her. That fome evil hovered over her ihe could not difbclievc, but what it might be, fhe was unable to gueis. Monfieur and Madame La Motte were her friends, and who elfe, removed, as fhe now thought herfelf, beyond the reacli of her father, could injure her Ì But why did Ibeodorc fay fhe was deceived ? She found it im poffible to extricate herfelf from the labyrinth of conjecture, but en¬ deavoured to command her anxiety till the following evening. In the mean time flie engaged herfelf in efforts to amufe Madame La Motte, who required fume relief, after the departure of lier fon. Thus
í a 7S ] Thus òpprcfíed by her own cares, and interefted by thofe of Madame La Motte, Adeline retired to reft. She foon loft her recollection, but it was only tö fall into liarrafled fiumbers, íuch as but too often haunt the couch of the unhappy. At length her perturbed fancy fuggefted the following drearm She thought ihe was in a large old chamber belonging to the abbey, more ancient ahcf defolale, though in pari fur» niíhêd, than any ihe had yet feen. It was ftrongty barricádbeci, yet no perfon appeared. White ífie flood mufing and furveying thè apartment, íhe heard a low foice call her, and, looking towards the pľace whence it came, flie perceived by the dîm liğhi of a lamp a figure ftretehed on a bed that lay on the floor. The voice called again, and approaching the bed, fhe diftinctly faw the features of a man who appeared to be dying. A ghaftly palenefs overfpťcad bis counte¬ nance, yet there was an exprefiion of M 6 mild*
[ V 6 ' l· miîdncfs and dignity in it, which ftrongly intercflcd her. While ihe looked on him his features changed and feemed convulfed in the agonies of death. The fpectacle fliock- cd her, and flie ftarted back, but he fud¬ denly fl retched forth his hand and feiz¬ ing her's, grafped it with violence : flic, ftruggled in terror to difengage hcrfelf, and again looking on his face, faw a man, who appeared to be about thirty,. with the lame features, but in full health, and of a moft benign countenance. He ftniled tenderly upon her and moved his lips, as if to феак, when the floor of the chamber fuddenly opened and he funk from her view. The effort flic made to fave herfelffrom following, awoke her.— This dream had fo ftrongly iınprefîed her fancy, that it was fome time before flie could overcome the terror it occa¬ fioned, or even be perfectly convinced flie was in her own apartment At length,
[ *77 I length, however, fhe compofed her felf tct ileep ; again fhe fell into a dream. She thought flie was bewildered in fome winding paflages of the abbey ; that it was almoft dark, and that flie wandered about a confiderable ti mey without being able to find a door. Sud¬ denly ihe heard a bell toll from above, and foon after a confufion of diftant voices. She redoubled her erTorts to ex¬ tricate herfelf. Prefently all was ftill, and, at length, wearied with the fearch» íhe fat down on a ftep that croíľed the paflage. She had not been long here, when ihe faw a light glimmer at a dif¬ tance on the walls, but a turn in the paf- fage, which was very long, prevented her feeing from what it proceeded, it continued to glimmer faintly for fome time, and then grew ftronger, when ihe faw a man enter the paflage, habited ín a long black cloak, like thofe ufually worn by attendants at funerals, and bearing a torch. He called to her to follow him,. and
í *78 1 and led her through a long páíľáge td the foot of a ftaircafe. Here íhe feáreá to proceed, and was running back, when the man fuddenly turned to purfue her, and with the terror, which this occafion¬ ed, ihe awoke. Shocked by thefe viíiofts, and more fobytlieir feeming connection*, which now flriick her, ihe endeavoured to cbri- tinue awake, left their terrific imagee ihould again haulit her mind : after feme time, however, hét harráfíêd fpltits again iuiik into flumber, though not to re¬ pofe. She now thought herfelf in a large old gallery* and faw at one end ôf it a chamber door flanding a little open, and á light within : ihe went towards it, and perceived the man fhe had before feen, ftanding at the door, and beckoning her towards him. With the inconfiftency fo common in dreams, íhe no longer endea¬ voured to avoid him, but advancing, fol¬ lowed him into a fuite of very ancient j apart-
í m 1 apartments, hung with black, and light¬ ed up as if for a funeral. Still he led her on, till ihe found herfelf in the fame chamber ihe remembered to have ieen in her former dream : a coffin, covered with a pall, ftood at the farther end of the room ; fome lights, and feveral perfons furrounded it, who appeared to be in great diftrefs. Suddenly, ihe thought thefe perfons were all gone, and that ílie was left alone ; that ihe went up to the coffin, and while ihe gazed upon it, ihe heard a voice fpeak, as if from within, but faw nobody. The man ihe had before feen, foon after ftood by the coffin, and lifting the pall, ihe faw beneath it a dead per¬ fon, whom ihe thought to be the dying Chevalier ihe had L~n in her former dream ; his features were funk in death, but they were yet ferene. While ihe looked ut him, a ftrcam of blood gufhed from his üde, and defcend ing to the ftoor, the whole chamber was overflow¬ ed;
С *8о 3 ed; at the fame time fome words were uttered in the voice ihe heard before ; but the horror of the feene fo entirely over¬ came her, that ihe ftarted and awoke. When ihe had recovered her recollec¬ tion, ihe raifed herfelf in the bed, to be convinced it was a dream íhe had wit- neffed, and the agitation of her fpirits was fo great, that ihe feared to be alone> and almoft determined to call Annette. The features of the deceafedperfon, and the chamber where he lay, were ilrongly impreffed upon her memory, and ihe ftill thought fhe heard the voice, and iaw the countenance which her dream reprefent* ed. Tlie longer ihe confidered thefe dreams, the more ihe was furprized r they were fo very terrible, returned fo often, and feemed to be fo connected with each other, that fhe could feared/ think them accidental; yet; why they ihould be fupcrnatural, íhe could noť tell. She fiept no more that night.
CHAR
С *βι 3
CHAP. VUL ■ ' ........ ц W hen thefe prodigies Do fo conjointly meet, let not men fay, Thefe are t 'eir reafons i they are v atur al ; For I believe they are portentous things." Julius Сл,заи# \ύΗΕΝ Adeline appeared at break* faft, her harrafted and Lugn i d counter nt nee ftruck Madame La Motte, who inquired if ihe was ill \ Adeline, forcing a fmile upon her features, faid ihe ha4 not refted well, for that ihe had had very difturbed dreams; ihe was about to de* fcribe them, but a ftrong and involun¬ tary impulfe prevented her. At the fame time La Motte ridiculed her concern fo unmercifully, that ihe was almoft afhamed to have mentioned it, and tried to
t *8 2 ] to overcome the remembrance of its caufe. After breakfeft, fhe endeavoured to employ her thoughts by converfing with Madame La Motte; but they were really engaged by the incidents of the laft two days : the circumftanee of her dreams, and her conjectures concerning the in- . formation to be communicated to her by Theodore. They had thus fat for feme time, when a found of voices arofe from the great gate of the abbey; and, on going to the cafement, Adeline faw the Marquis and his attendants on the lawn below. The portal of the abbey ctín- èeaîed feveral people Írom her view, and àmofìg thefe it ivás poffible might bè Théodoré, who had nòt fel appeared : flie continued to look for him wiih great anxiety, tilt the Marquis entered the hall with La Motte, and feme other perfons, foon after which Madame La Motte went to receive him, and Adeline retired ίο faer own apartment. A mef*
[ *83 ] А meíľage from La Motie, however, ibon called her to join the party, where fhe vainly hoped to find Theodore. The Marquis arofe as ihe approached, and, having paid her feme general dom- plimcnts, the converfation took a very lively turn. Adeline, finding it impof¬ fible to oounterfeit checrfulnefs, while her heait was finking with anxiety and difappointment, took little part in it ; Theodore was not once named. She would have aiked concerning him, had it been poflible to inquire with pro¬ priety ; but ihe was obliged to content herfelf with hoping, firfl, that he would arrife before dinner, and then, before the departure of the Marquis. Thus the day pafled in expeclatîon arid difappointment. The evening was now approaching, and the was condemned to remain in the prefence of the Marquis, apparently liftening to a converfation, which, in truth, ihe fcarcely heard, while the opportunity was, perhaps, efcaping, that
[ a84 I that would decide her fate. She was> fuddenly relieved from this ftate of tor¬ ture, and thrown into one, if poflible, ftill more diftrcfling. The Marquis inquired for Louis, and being informed of his departure, men¬ tioned that Theodore Pcyrou had that morning fet out for his regiment in a diftant province. He lamented the lofs he fhould fufiain by his abfence ; and exprcfled feme very flattering praife of his talents. The fliock of this intelligence overpowered the long-agitated fpirits of- Adeline ; the blood forfook her cheeks, and a fudden faintnefs came over her, ftom which ihe recovered only to a con¬ feioufnefs of having betrayed her emo¬ tion, and the danger of relapfing into a fécond fit. She retired to her chamber, where, being once more alone, her oppreifed heart found relief from tears, in which flie freely indulged. Ideas crowded fo faft upon her mind, tbat it was long що flie
í **S ] flie could arrange them fo as to produce any thing like rcafoning. She endea¬ voured to account for the abrupt depar¬ ture of Theodore. " Is it poifi ble," faid ihe, 44 that he fliould take an intereft in " my welfare, and yet leave me expofed " to the full force of a danger which " lie himfelf forefaw 1 Or am I to be- " lieve that he has trifled with my fim- 44 plicity for an idle frolic, and has now << left me to the wondering apprehenfion 44 he has raifed ? Impoflible ! a counte* 44 nance fo noble, and manners fo amia- 44 able, could never difguife a heart ca- 44 pable of forming fo defpicable a de- " fign. IS!o !—whatever is referved for 44 nie, let me not rclinquiih the pleafure 44 .of believing that he is worthy of my " cfteem/' She was awakened from thoughts like thefe by a peal of diftant thunder, and now perceived that the gloomincfs of evening was deepened by the coming ftorm ; it roUed onward, and foon after the
[ ги J the lightning began to flafli along the chamber. Adeline was fuperior to the affectation of fear, and was not apt to he terrified ; but íhe now felt it unpleafant to be alone, and, honing that ihe Mar¬ quis might have left the abbey, ihe went down to the fitting-room; but the threatening aipect of the heavens had hitherto detained him, and now the evening tempeft made him rejoice that he had not quitted a ihejter. The ftorm continued, and night came on. La Motte prefled his gueft to take a bed at the abbey, and he, at length, confented; a circumftanee which threw Madame La Motte into fomc perplexity, as to the accommodation to be afforded him. Af¬ ter feme time flie arranged the aftair to her fatisfaction, refigning her own apart¬ ment to ihe Marquis, and that of Louis to two of his fuperior attendants; Ade¬ line, it was further fettled, ihould give up her room to Monfieur and Madamo La Motte, and remove to an inner cham-
С =37 ] chamber, where a fmali bed, ufually oc¬ cupied by Annette, was placed for her. At fupper the Marquis was lefs gay than ufual; he frequently addrefled Ade¬ line, and his look and manner feemed to exprefs the tender intereft which her in¬ difpofition, for ihe ftill appeared pale and languid, had excited» Adeline, as ufual, made an effort to forget her anxiety, and appear happy ; but the veil of aifumed cheerful nefs was too thin to conceal the features of forrow ; and her feeble fmiles only added a peculiar foftncfs to her air. The Marquis converfed with her on a variety of fubjeâs, and displayed an ele¬ gant mind. The obfervations of Ade¬ line, which, when called upon, flie gave with modeft reluctance, in words at once Ample and forcible, feemed to excite his admiration, which he fometimes betrayed hy an apparently inadvertent exprefiion, Adeline retired early to her room, which adjoined on one fide to Madame La Motte's, and on the other to the clofet
[ 28$ ] clofet formefly mentioned. It was fpa-' cious and lofty, and what little furni¬ ture it contained was falling to decay ; but perhaps, the prcfent tone of her ipirits might contribute more than thefe circumfiances to give that air of mclan· choly which feemed to reign in it. She was unwilling to go to bed, left the dreams that had lately purfued her ihould return ; and determined to fit up till ihe found hcrfclf oppreifed by ileep, when it was probable her refi would be pro¬ found. She placed the light on a fmall table, and, taking a book, continued to read for above an hour, till her mind rc- i'uivd any longer to abil raci itfeîf from its own care% and ihe fat for fume time leaning pen lively on her arm. The wind was high, and as it whittled through the defolate apartment, and ihook the feeble doors, fhe often darted, and fomcttmes even thought fhe heard fighs İn the paufes of the gufi; but ihe checked thcic illufiona, which the hour
C z%9 ì hour of the night, and her own melan- cholv imagination conipired to raife. As íhe fat muting, her eyes fixed on the oppoflte wall, ihe perceived the ar¬ ras, with which the room was hung, wave backwards and forwards ; ihe con¬ tinued to obfervc it for fomc minutes, and then rofe to examine it farther. It was moved by the wind, and flic bluihed at the momentary fear it had excited ι but ihe obferved that the tapeflry was more iirongly agitated in one particular place Ihan clfewerc, and a noife that íoenií'tl lomcthing more than that of the wind, iifued thence. The old bed ft caci which La Motte had found in this apart¬ ment, had been removed to accommo¬ date Adeline, and it was behind the place where thb had ftood, that the wind loomed to ruth with particular force; cu- iioftty prompted her to examine ftill far¬ ther; fhe felt about the tapeflry, and perceiving the wall behind ihake under her hauti, £hc lifted the amis, and dif; Vor,. I. N covered'
[ *9° ] covered a fmall door, whofe loofened hinges admitted the wind, and occa¬ fioned the noife ihe had heard. The door was held only by a bolt, having undrawn which, and brought the light, ihe defeended by a few fteps into another chamber : ihe inflantly remem* bered her dreams. The chamber was not much unlike that in which ihe had fecn the dying chevalier, and afterwards the bier; but it gave her a confufed re¬ membrance of one through which ihe had pafled. Holding up the light to examine il more fully, ihe was convin¬ ced by its ftručture that it was part of the ancient foundation· A ihattered cafe¬ ment, placed high from the floor, feemed to be the only opening to admit light. She obferved a door on the oppofite fide ofthe appartrøent; and after feme mo¬ ments of hefitation, gamed courage, and determined to purfue the inquiry. 4t A 44 myuery feems to hang over thefe f с!шаЪда/* iáid flie, 4( which it is, ** perhaps,
ΐ а 9* ] " perhaps, my lot to develope ; I wiu% *« at leaft, fee to which that door leads/* She flepped forward, and having un- clofed it, proceeded with faltering tteps along a fuit of apartments, refembling the flrft in fry le and condition, and ter¬ minating in one cxaciîy like that where her dream had repreiented the dying perfon. The remembrance ftruck fo forcibly upon her imagination, that fhe was in danger of fainting; and looking round the room, almott expecied to fee the phantom of her dream. Unable to quit the place, fhe fat clow η ori fome old lumber to recover hcrferf, while her fpirits were nearly overcome by a fupeittitious dread, fuch as fhe had never felt before. She wondered to what part of the abbey thefe chambers belong¬ ed, and that they had ib long efcaped deteclion. The cafements-were all too high to afford any information from without. When fhe was fuirkicntly corøpofed to confider the direction of N г the
L m ì the roomt, aad the fituation of the abbey, there appeared not a doubt that they formed an interior part öf the original building. Afi .thefe reflections paífed over her mind, a fudden gleam of moonlight feli ирод fome objecl without the caibment. Being now fuificiently compofed to with to purfue the inquiry, and believing tlm object might afford her íome means of learning the fituation of thefe rooms, flic combated her remaining terrors, and in order to difitöguifti it more clearly, removed the light to an outer chamber; îmi before íhç could return, a heavy cloud was driven over the face of the moon, and all without was perfectly dark î ihe ftood for fome moments wait¬ ing a returning gleam, but the obfcurity continued. As íhe went foftly back for the light, her foot ftumbled over fome¬ thing on the floor, aad while flie ftooped to examine it, thrmooo again ihone, fo that ihe could diftinfuifti, through the caibment,
[ щъ ] rarement-, the eaftern towers of the ab- l>ey. This difeovery confirmed her for¬ mer conjectures concerning the interior fituation of thefe apartments. The ob¬ fcurity of the place prevented her difco¬ vering what it was that had impeded her fteps, hut having brought the light for¬ ward, ihe perceived ou the floor an old dagger: with a trembling hand the took it up, and upon a* clofer view per¬ ceived that it was fpotted una ftained with ruft. Shocked and furprifed, ihe looked round the room for forne object that might confirm or deftroy the dreadful ibfpicion which now ruihed upon her mind ; but ihe faw only a great chair, with broken arms, that ftood in one cor* ner of the room, and a table in a con* dition equally fliattered, except that in another part lay a confufed heap of things, which appeared to be old lurø* ber. She went up to it, and perceived a broken bedftead, with fome decayed N 3 rem-
[ m ] remnants of furniture, covered with duft and cobwebs, and which feemed, in* deed 9 as if they had not been moved for many years, Deiirous, however, of ex* amining farther, ihe attempted to raife what appeared to have been part of the bedftead, but it flipped from her hand, and, rolling to the floor, brought with it feme of the remaining lumber. Ade¬ line ftarted afide and feved herfelf, and * * when the noife It made had ceafed, ihe heard a fmall ruftimg found, and as ihe was about to leave the chamber, faw fomething falling gently among the Jumber. ît was a fmall roll of paper tied with a firing and covered with duft, Ade¬ line took it up, and on opening it per¬ ceived an hand writing. She attempted to read it, hut the part of the manufeript ihe looked at was fo much obliterated, that ihe found this difficult, though what few words were legible impreffed her with curiofity and terror, and induced her
[ *9$ ] her to return with it immediately to her chamber. Having reached her own room, ihe faftened the private door, and let the arras fell over it as before. It was now midnight. The ftillncfs ofthe hour, in¬ terrupted only at intervals by the hollow ítghings of the blaft, heightened the fo* lemnity of Adeline's feelings. She wiihed fhe was not alone, and before ihe pro¬ ceeded to look into the manufeript, lif¬ tened whether Madame La Motte was yet in her chamber : not the leaft found was heard, and ihe gently opened the door. The profound filence within al* moft convinced her that no peďon was there; but willing to be farther fatisfied, ihe brought the light and found the room empty. The latcnefs of the hour made her wonder that Madame La Motte was not in her chamber, and ihe proceeded to the top of the tower ftairs, to hearken if any peďon was ftirring* N4 She
С »9б ] She heard the found of voices from below, and, amongtt: the rett, that of La Motte fpeakîng in his ufual tone. Iking now fattsfled that all was well, fhe turned, towards her room, when ihe heard the Marquis pronounce tier name with very unufual emphafis. She paufed. ** Î ** adore her,** purfued he, '* and by ** îıeaven** —^Hc was interrupted by La Motte, «' My Lord, temeuaber your ** proroife. * \ do,** teplled the Mattpiw, "and î ί# will abide by it. But we trifle. To* * morrow I will declare myfelf, and ï «· fhall theft know both what to hope and ** how ίο acЪ ,, Adeline птшЬЫ fo excettively, that ft« could fcarcely fup* port herfeîf : ihe wifhed to return to her rhara1>er ; yet #te was too much itit^ retted in the wordt fbe bad heard, not to Ы anxious to hmre them more^JMfy explained. There was an interval of ttlence, after which tliey coøwrfeé m a lower tone. Adeline remembered the hintti
t m J hinta of Theodore, and determined,, if pofíible to be relieved from tb& terrible fufpenfe ihe now fuffered. She ftole ibftly down a few fteps that fhe might catch the accents of the fpeakesfc; but they were fo low, tliat ihe could only now and then diftinguifh a few worde. " Her father, fay you ?" fitid the Mar¬ quisi " Yes, my Lord, her father. I ** am welt informed of what 1 fay." Adeline shuddered at thö mention of her father î a new terror feized her, andwUh increailng eagerne& jffee endeavoured to diftinguiih tlieir word% but ibi? fome time found this tobe impoftible. "Here " is no time to be loft,** faid the Mar*. qub, " to morrow then.** She heaicd La Motte riiè, and, believing il wa» to leave the room, ihe hurried up the flepa, and having reached her chamber, funk almoft lifelefs in a chair. ft was her father only of whom flic thought. She doubted i|øt that 1мз had purfued and difcovered her retreat, and, N 5 though
I M ] though this conduct appeared rery in* confluent with his former behaviour iö abandoning her to drangers^ her fears Ibggeded that it would terminate in fome new cruelty. She did not hett tate to pronounce this the danger of which The« odore had warned her; but it was im* pofttble to furmife how he had gained his knowledge of it, or how he had be¬ come diffidently acquainted with her Äory f except through La Motte, her apparent friend and protector, whom fhe was thus, though on willingly, led to fuf- peet of treachery. Why, indeed, ihould La Motte conceal from her only his knowledge of his fathers intention, un- кй he dcttgned to deliver her into his hands Ì Yet it was Jong ere fhe could bring berfelf to believe this conduttori pottìbìe. To difcover depravity in thofe whom we hate loved, if one of the mod exquifite tortures to a virtuous mind, and the conviction ¡i oden rejected before it ш anally admitted. The
L 2 99 J The words of Theodore, which told her he was fearful ihe was deceived, confirmed thismoft painful apprehenfion of La Motte, with another yet more diftrefiiing, that Madame La Motte was alfo united againft her. This thought for a moment fubdued terror and left her only grief; ihe wept bitterly. '« ís this *' human nature ?" cried ihe. «' Am I «' doomed to find every body deceitful V* An unexpected difeovery of vice in thofe, whom we have admired, inclines us to extend our cenfure of the indivi¬ dual to the fpecies ; we henceforth con¬ temn appearances, and too hafiily con· elude that no perfon is to-be trufted. Adeline determined to throw herfelf at the feet of La Motte on the following morning, and implore his pity and pro* teétion. Iler mind was now too much agitated,-by her own interefts, toperrøk her to examine the manufeript, and ihe fat muftr»g in her chair, till ftie heard the fteps of Madame La Molte,, when ihe N 6 retired
C 3®o 3 Tetîred to bed. La Motte foon after rame tıp to his chamber, and Adeline; the mild, pcrfecuted Adeline, who had now pafled two days of torturing anxi* cty, and one night of terrific vifions, en¬ deavoured to compote her mind to flcep. Γη the prefent ftate of her fpirits, íhe quickly caught alarm, and íhe had fcarcely fallen into а ítumber, when íhe was roufed by a loud and uncommon noife. She liftened, and thought the found came feom the apartments below, but m a few minutes there was a hafty knocking at the door of La Motte's chamber. La Motte, who had juft Mien afleep, was not eafily to be roufed; but the knocking inereafed with fueh violence, that Adeline, extremely terrified, arofe and went to the door that opened from her chamber into his, with a defign to call him. She was flapped by the voice of the Marquis, which ute now clearly dfftinguifhedattheoutordoor» He cal¬ led
[ 301 ] led to La Motte to arife immediately, and Madame La Motte endeavoured at the fame time to roufe her huiband, who, at length, awoke in much alarm, and foon after, joining the carquis, they went down fiairs together. Adel ine now dreffed herfelf, as well as her trembling hands would permit, and went into the adjoin¬ ing chamber, where fhe found Madame La Motto extremely furprifed and ter¬ rified. The Marquis, in the mean thne t told La Motte, with great agitation, that he recollected having appointed fomc per¬ fons to meet him upon bufinefs of im¬ portance early in the morning, and it was, therefore, neceflary for him to fet off for his chateau immediately, As he faid this, and defired that his fervants might be called, La Motte could not help obferving the aftiy patenefs of his countenance, or exprefting fome appre¬ henfion that his Lordfhip was ill. The Marqui$ affnred him he was perfectly
well, but deiired that he might fêt out immediately. Peter was now ordered to call the other fervants ; and the Mar- quis, having refufed to take any refrefh- mcnt, bade La Motte a hafty adieu, and as foon as his people were ready, left the abbey. La Motte returned to his chamber, mu- fing on the abrupt departure of his gucft, whofe emotion appeared much too ftrong to proceed from the caufe affigned. He appeafed the anxiety of Madame La Motte, and at the fame time excited her furprife by acquainting her with the oc¬ cafion of the late difturbance. Adeline, who had retired from the chamber, on the approach of La Motte, looked out from her window on hearing the tram¬ pling of horfes. it was the Marquis and his people who juft then paífed at a little diftance. Unable to diftingiiiíh who the perfons were, ihe was alarmed by obferv- ing fuch a party about the abbey at that hour, and, calling to inform La Motte of
C 3<>ž ] of the circumftanee, was made acquaint¬ ed with what had pafled. At length ihe retired to her bed, and her flumbers were this night undifturbed by dreams. When ihe arofe in the morning, ihe obferved La Motte walking alone in the avenue below, and flie haftened to feize the opportunity which now oifered of •pleading her caufe. She approached him with faultcring fteps, while the pale- *- nefs and timidity of her countenance difcovered the diforder of her mind. Her firft words, without entering upon any explanation, implored his compaf- fion. La Motte ftopped, and looking earneftly in her face, inquired whether any part of his conduci towards her me¬ rited the fufpicion which her requeft im¬ plied» Adeline for a moment bluihed that lhe had doubted his integrity, but the words ihe had overheard returned to her memory. 44 Your
С 304 ] «« Your behaviour, Sir/* faid flie, <« I ** acknowledge to have been kind and M generous, beyond what I had a right " lo expecì,buf' —and ihe paufed. Slie knew not how to mention what ihe bluih¬ ed to believe. La Motte continued to gaze on her in filent expeéìation, and at length defired her to proceed and ex¬ plain her meaning. She entreated that he would protect her from her father. La Motte looked furprifed and confufed. *« Your father Г faid he.—«« Yes, Sir," replied Adeline, ** I am not ignorant 44 that he has difcovered my retreat. 1 '* have every thing to dread from a pa- ** rent, who has treated me with fuch ** cruelty as you was witnefs of; and I *' again implore that yon will fave дае ** from his hands.** La Motte flood fixed in thought, and Adeline continued her endeavours to in¬ tereft his pity. ** What reafon have you " to fuppofe, or rather, how have yon «« learned, that your father purfues you Г Tlie
С зч ] The quefiion confufed Adeline, who bluihed to acknowledge that ihe bad , overheard his difeourfe, and difdained to invent, or utter a falfity : at length ihe confefled the truth. The countenance of La Motte inftantly changed ta a fa¬ vage ficrcenefs, and, iharply rebuking her for a conduci, to which fhe had been rather tempted by chance, than prompt¬ ed by defign, he inquired what ihe had overheard, that could fo much alarm her. She faithfully repeated the fub- ftance of the incoherent fentences that had met her car; while ihe fpoke, he regarded her with a fixed attention. 44 And was this all you heard* r" Ts üt " from thefe few words that you draw «« fuch a pofitive conclufion ? Examine «' them, and you will find they do not ««juftify it." She now perceived, what the fervor of her fears had not permitted her to ob¬ ferve bcibre, tbat the words, unconneči- edly a* îhe heard them, imported little, and
С зоб ] and that her imagination had filled up the void in the fentences, fo as to ftiggeft the evil apprehended. Notwithfianding this, her fears were little abated. " Your 44 apprehenfions are, doubtlefs, now re- ««moved," refumed La Motte; ««but 44 to give you a proof of the fincerity «< which you have ventured to quefiion, 44 ï will tell you they were juft. Yon 44 feem alarmed, and with reafon. Your ** father has difcovered your refidence, 44 and has already demanded you. ît is *' true, that from a motive of compaífion 44 1 have refufed to refign you, but I " have neither authority to withhold, <* or means to defend you. When he ** comes to enforce his demand, you ** will perceive this. Prepare yourfelf, 44 therefore, for the evil, which you fee ** is inevitable." Adeline, for fome time, could феак only by her tears. At length, with a fortitude which deťpair had roufed, ihe find, «« I refign myfelf to the will of f « Hea»
С 307 ] " Heàven !" La Motte gazed on her in filence, and a flrong emotion appeared on his countenance, He forbore, how¬ ever, to renew the difeourfe, and with¬ drew to the abbey, leaving Adeline in the avenue abiorbed in grief. A fummons to brcakfaft haflencd her to the parlour, where fhe paffed the morning in converfation with Madame La Motte, to whom ihe told ali her ap¬ prehenfions, and exprcfled all her forrow, Pity and fuperficiåi confolation were all that Madame „La Motte could offer, though apparently much affected by Adeline's difeourfe. Thus the hours paffed heavily away, while the anxiety of Adeline continued to increafe, and the moment of her fate feemed fail approach¬ ing. Dinner was fearcely over» when Adeline was furprifed to fee the Mar¬ quis arrive. He entered the room with hi* fualeafe, and apologising for the difturbance he had occafioned on the 4 - " F c ^
t 30s ] preceding night, repeated what he had before told La Motte. The remembrance of the converfation ihe had overheard, at flrtt; gave Adeline ibme confufion, and withdrew her mind from a ibnfe of the evils to be appre* bended from her father. The Marquis who was. as uíhal, aüentive to Adeline, íeemedafľecledhy her apparent indiípo- iitioi^, and exprcfled much concern for that dejeclion oí fpirits, which, not wit it- fiai iding every ettort, her manner betray 1 * cd. When Madame La Motte withdrew, Adeline would have followed her, but rJie Marquis entreated a few moments attention, and led her back to bet feat» 1л Motte immediately dííappeared. Adeline knew too well what would be the purport of the ftf arquia*s difcourfe, må hit woRJte foon iöcreafcd the confu¬ fion which her fairs had occafioned. White he was declaring the ardour of Ms pattlommfttchterais,^böttoooftea eiaka уеЬстшсе »aft for finceriîy, Ade* line,
С 309 ] line, to whom this declaration, if ho¬ nourable, was diftreffmg, and if difho- nourable, was fhocking, interrupted him, and thanked him for the offer of a diftinčtion, which, with a raodeft, but determined air, fhe faid ihe muft refufe> She rofe to withdraw. ťí Stay, too love- " ly Adeline !" faid he, " and if com« " paífion for my fuftcrings will not inte- " reft you in my favour, allow a confi- <ť deration of your own dangers to do " fo* Monfieur La Motte has informed * ( me of your misfortunes, and of the ** evil that now threatens you ; accept " from me the protection which he can- « not afford." Adeline continued to move towards the door, when the Marquis threw him¬ felf at tier feet, and feizing her hand, imprefied it with kifles. She ftruggcd to difengage herfelf. *' Hear me, " charming Adeline ! hear rae," cried the Marquis; **I exift hut for you* '* liften to my intrcate, and my fortune x " fhall
f. 3*° ] €t (hall be your's. Do not drive me ίφ ςί dcípair by ill-judged rigour, or, be- *< caufe—" (ζ My Lord" interrupted Adeline, with an air of ineffable dignity, and ttill aŕľccVmg to believe his propofal honour¬ able," Ϊ am fenttblc of the gcncrotttyof ** your conduci, and alfo flattered by the ** diftinétion you offer me. I will, there- ** fore, fay fomething more than is ne- 4e cefiary to a bare expreitton of thede- u niai which Ï mutt continue to give. I *·* can mt bcttow my heart. You can not " obtain more than my ctteem, to which, *' indeed, nothing can fo much contri- '* bute as forbearance from any fimilar * ( offers in future/' She again attempted to go, but the Marquis prevented her, and, after fome hetttatkm, agam urged his fuit, though in terms that would no longer allow her to mifunderttand him. Tears fwelled into her eyes, but ihe endcavoumUo check them, and with a look, in which grief and
[ з 11 3 nnd indignation feemed to ftruggle for pre-eminence, íhe íkid, *' My Lord, 44 this is unworthy of reply, let me pafs " For a moment he was awed by the dignity of her manner, and he threw himfelf at her feet to implore forgivenefs. But ihe waved her hand in filence, and hurried from the room. When ihe reached her chamber, flic locked the door, and, finking into a chair, yielded to the forrow that preífed at her heart. And it was not the leaft of her íbrrow, to fuf- peci that La Motte was unworthy of her confidence ; for it was almoft impoffible that he could be ignorant of the real defigns of the Marquis. Madame La Motto, ihe believed, was impofed upon by a fpecious pretence of honourable at¬ tachment ; and thus was flie fparcd the pang which a doubt of her integrity would have added. She threw a trembling glance upon the profped around her, On one fide was her father, whofe cruelty had already $ been
[ зд* ] been too plainjy manifefted ; and on the other, the Marquis purfuing her with infult and «cious paífion. She refolved to acquaint Madame La Motte with the purport of the late cbnverfation, and, iu the hope of lier protection and fympathy, ihe wiped away her tears, and was leav¬ ing the room juft as Madame LaMotte entered it. While Adeline related what had pafied, her friend wept, and appear* t:d to furľer great agitation. She endea* voured to comfort her, and promifed to ufc her influence in perfuading La Motte ίο prohibit the addreflcá of the Marquis. ** You know, my dear/' added Ma¬ dame, *' that our prefent circumftanee* *' oblige us to preferve terms with the * E Marquis, and you will, therefore, fui- f< fer as little refentment to appear iu 4i your manner towards him as poflible ; 4( conduci yourfelf with your ufual eafo 11 in his prefence, and ï doubt not thb 44 affair will país over, without (iibjcrt- 4i you to farther iblicitation."
[ З'З ] <ť Ah,Madame !" faid Adeline, "how Cť hard is the taflc you aifign me ! I en- 44 treat you that I may never more be " fubject ed to the humiliation of being " in his prefence ; that, whenever he 44 vifits the abbey, I may be fuffered to 4( remain in my chamber." 44 This," faid Madame La Motte, " I 44 would moft readily confent to, would 44 our fituation permit it. But you well " know our afylum in this abbey de- <( pends upon the good-will of the Mar- 44 quis, which we muft not wantonly 44 lofe ; and furely fuch a conduct as ** you propofe would endanger this. Let 41 us ufe milder meafures, and we ihall 44 preferve hw friendihip, without fub- 44 jecling you to any ferious evil, Ap- * g pear with your ufual complaifance ; " the taik is not fo difficult as you ima- 44 gine." Adeline flghed. 4t Ì obey you, Ma- 44 dame," faid ihe; " it is my duty todo 44 fo ; but 1 may be pardoned for faying Ши L O 4( —it
[ ЯН ] €С —it is with extreme rel u Л ance." Ma¬ dame La Motte promifed to go imme¬ diately to her huiband, and Adeline de¬ parted, though not convinced of her fafety, yet fomewhat more at eafe. She foon after iaw the Marquis de¬ part, and, as there now appeared to be no obftaclc to the return of Madame La Motte, fhe expected her with extreme impatience. After thus waiting near an hour in her chamber, ihe was at length fummoncd to the parlour, and there found Monfieur La Motte alone. He arofe upon her entrance, and for feme minutes paced the room in filencc. He then feated himfelf, and addreifed her : " What you have mentioned to Madame *' La Moite," faid he, « would give 44 me much concern, did I confider the £i behaviour of the Marquis in a light fo li ferious as fiie does. I know that " young ladies arc apt to mifconftrue *< the unmeaning gallantry of faihion- " able manners ; and you, Adeline, can a K(i never
L 3*$ ] · f( never bc too cautious in diftinguiih- ts ing between a levity of this kind, and * fi a more ferious addrefs." Adeline was furprifed and offended thai La Motte ihould think fo lightly both of her undcrftanding and diipofi* tion as his fpcech implied. " Is it pof- " fible, Sir," iaid ihe, « that you have " been appritcd of the Marquis's con- " duct r" 4i It is very poftibie, and very cer- '* tain," replied La Motte, with fome afperity ; " and very pofïible, alfo, that " I may fee this aftair with a judgment ' f Ids difcolourcd by prejudice than you 4( do. But, however, 1 fhall not dif- " pute this point. I fliall only rcqueft, ťí that, fince you arc acquainted with " the emergency of my circumfiances, " you will conform to them, and not, 46 by an ill-timed refentment, cxpofe me 44 to the enmity of the Marquis. lie is 44 now my friend, and it 'm nccefihry to 46 my fafety that he ihould continue О 2 '«fuch;
C 3i6 ι " fuch ; but if 1 fuitlr any part of my " family to treat him with rudencis, İ " mull expect to fee him my enemy. *< You may furely treat him with com- * ť plaifance." Adeline thought the term rudenefs a harih one, as La Motte applied it ; but file forbore from any exprefiion of difplcafurcr ** I could have wilhed, €t Sir," faid íhe, ** for the privilege of " retiring whenever tlie Marquis appear- ,ť ed ; bul fince you believe this conduci ** would aŕTeél your intereft, ï ought to f ' fubmit.* 1 ** This prudence and good- wil I de- " light me," faid La Motte, * f andfincc tí у ОЦ w |n l ţ 0 ç crvc røe^ know that you 11 cannot more effectually do it, than by ** treating the Marquis as a friend." The word friend» as it ftood connected with the Marquis, ibundcd diffonantly to Adeline's ear ; flie hefitated and looked at La Molte. íť As your friend, Sir,*' fitid ihe, " I will endeavour to"—treat him as mine, ihe would have added, but ilie
L зп ì flic found it impoftible to finiih the fen¬ tence. She entreated his protcélion from the power of her father. " What protection 1 can aflorei is «« your's," iaitl LaMotte, ««hut you know «*how deiiitute I am both of the right ««and the means of refilling him, and «'•alfu how much I require protection *« myfelf. Since he has difcovered your cf retreat, he is probably not ignorant of '« the circumllauccs whieh detain mc "here, and if I oppofe him, he may '«betray me to the officers of the law, <s as the furcii method of obtaining pof- " feflion of you. We are cııcompaifed " with dangers," continued La Motto; i( would I could fee any method of ex.- 44 1 ricat ing ourfelves í" íť Quit this abbey," faid Adeline, "and feek an uiylum in Switzerland or 44 Germany ; you will then he freed 9i from failherobligatiom to the Marquis, *« and from the perfecution you dread. ь Pardon mc for thus oflering advice* O j ** which
L 318 ] 44 which is certainly, in fome degree, ** prompted by a íènfeof my own fafety, <f but which, at the fame time, feems ** to afford the only means of enfuring 44 your's/* " Your plan is rcaibnable,** fàid La Motte, "had I money to execute it. * 4 As it is, I muft be contented to remain 44 here, as little known as poflible, and 44 defending myfelf by making thoie who " know me my friends. Chiefly î muft ** endeavour to preferve the favour ot *4hc Marquis· He may do much, 44 ihould your father even adopt defpe- •*rate meafures. But why do 1 talk ** thus ì Your father may ere this have "commenced thefe meafures, and the " егГевв of his vengeance may now be 44 hanging over my head. My regard ** for you, Adeline, has expofed meto i€ this ; liad I rengned you to his will, I *' mould have remained fecure.** Adeline was fo much aftected by this inftance of La Motte*« lindne# $ which ihe
L 3*9 ] íhe could not doubt, that ihe was unable to exprefs her fenfe of it. When fiie could fpeak, ihe uttered her gratitude in the molt lively terms. " Are you fin- " cere in thefe cxpreifions ?" faid La Motte. " Is it poffible I can be lefs than fin- " cere ?" replied Adeline, weeping at the fuggeflion of ingratitude.-—" Senti- u ments are eafily pronounced," faid Lie Motte, 4 * though they may have no " connection with the lieart ; I believe " them to be fincere fo tar only as they 14 influence our actions." " What mean you, Sir ?*' faid Ade* line, with furprife. t6 1 mean to inquire, whether, if an « opportunity ihould ever öfter of thu» " proving your gratitude, you would ad* " here to your fcntiraents ?" " Name one that I fliould refufe," faid Adeline with energy. " If, for inflance, the Marquis ihould ƒ'hereafter avow a ferioua paflion for t' yo»*
[ № 3 44 you, and offer you his hand, would nõ 4S petty refentment, no lurking prepoflcf- 44 fion for feme more happy lover, prompt 44 you to refufe it î" Adeline bluihed and fixed her eyes on the ground. " You have, indeed, Sir, * ť named the only means I ihould reject "of evincing my fincerity. The Mar- '* quis I can never love, nor, to fpeak * fincerely, ever efteem. I confeíš the 44 peace of one's whole life is too much "to facrifice, even to gratitude."—La Motte looked difpleafed. 44 'Tis as I 44 thought," faid he ; " thefe delicate 44 fentiments make a fine appearance in ,f fpeech, and render the perfon who 44 utters them infinitely amiable : but 44 bring them to the teft of action, an J ** they diflblve into air, leaving only the 44 wreck of vanity behind." This unjuft farcafm brought tears to her eyes. ** Since your fafety, Sir, de> " pends upon my conduct," faid ihe, 44 refign me to my fattier. I am willing 44 to
Г з** "i 44 to return to him, fincc my ftay here 1 44 muft involve you in new misfortunes. *-Let me not prove myfelf unworthy of 44 the protection ï have hitherto experi- 44 enced, by preferring my own welfare 44 to your*s. When I am gone you wilt 44 have no reafon to apprehend the Mar- 44 quis's difpleafure, which you may pro- " bably incur if I ftay here : for I feel it " impoffible that 1 could ever confent 44 to receive his addrefles, however 4 honourable were his views.** La Motte feemed hurt and alarmed. " This muft not be," faid he ; *' let us 44 not harrafs ourfelves by ftating poßbh 44 evils, and then, to avoid them, fly to "thofe which are certain. No, Ade- " line, though you are ready to facrifice 44 yourfelf to my fafety, I will not fufter " }ou to do fe, I will not yield you to 44 your father, but upon compulfion* Be "fatisfied, therefore, upon this point. " The only return I aik, is a civil de- 44 portment towards the Marquis.'* 44 1 will
[ 3** ] fť l will endeavour to obey you, Sir,*'' faid Adeline.—Madame La Motte now entered the room, and this converfation rcafed. Adeline paifed that evening in melancholy thoughts, and retired, as feon as poflible, to her chamber, eager to feek in ileep a refuge for forrow·
ftfO OF VQU h
