Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The romance of the forest: interspersed with some pieces of poetry
THE
ROMANCE OP THB FOREST.
CHAPTER XV. * Hail, awful feenes, that calm the troubled breafl, ** And woo the weary to profound repofe !" Βελττιβ. jHLDELINE, mean while, and Peter, proceeded on their voyage, v/ithout any accident, and landed in Savoy, where Peter placed her upon the horfe, and himfelf walked befide her. When he came within fight of his naf ^c moun¬ tains, his extravagant joy burft forth into frequent exclamations, and he would of¬ ten afli Adeline if flic had ever feen fuch hills in France. " No, no," faid he, " the Vol. Πί. β « hills
IC hills there are very well for French * c hills, but they are not to be named on f * the fame day with ours." Adeline, loft in admiration of the aftoniihtng and tre¬ mendous fcenery around her, aifented very warmly to the truth of Peter's ai¬ fertion, whicii encouraged him to expa¬ tiate more largely upon the advantages of his country ; its difadvantages hc totally forgot ; and though he gave away his lait fous to the children of the peafantry that run bare-footed by the fide of the hoife, he fpoke of nothing but the hap¬ pinefs and content of the inhabitants.. His native village, indeed, was an exception to the general charafter of the country, and to the ufual effeft s of an atbitrary government; it was flourifhing, healthy, and happy ; and thefe advan¬ tages İt chiefly owed to the activity and attention of the benevolent clergyman whofe cure it was. Adeline, who now began to feel the efíe&s of long anxiety and fatigue, much wifhed
[ з 3 wiflied to arrive at the end of her jour¬ ney, and enquired impatiently of Peter concerning it. Her fpirits, thus weak¬ ened, the gloomy grandeur of the feenes which had fo lately awakened emo¬ tions of delightful fublimity, now awed her into terror ; ü\t trembled at the found of the torrents rolling among the cliffs, and thundering in the vale below, atid ihrunk from the view of the preci¬ pices, which fometimes overhung the road, and at others appeared beneath it. Fatigued as íhe was, fte frequently dif¬ mounted to climb on foot the fteep flinty road, which ftie feared to travel on horfe¬ back. The day was clofing when they drew near a fmall village at the foot of the Savoy Alps, and the fun, in all his even¬ ing fplendour, now finking behind their fummits, threw a farewell gleam athwart the landfcape, io foft and glowing, as drew from Adeline, languid as ihe was> an exclamation of rapture. В 2 The
С 4 J The romantic fituation of the village next attracted her notice, lt flood at the foot of feveral ftupendous mountains, which formed a chain round a lake at fome little diftance, and the woods that fwept from their fummits almoft embo¬ fomed the village. The lake, unruffled by the lightHt air, rcflecied the vermi! tints of the horizon with the fublime fcenery on its borders, darkening every inftant with the falling twilight. When Peter perceived the village, he burft into a ibout of joy : « Thank God!" faid he, " we are near home ; there is '* my dear native place. It looks juft fi as it did twenty years ago ; and there *' are the fame old trees growing round " our cottage yonder, andthe huge rock ** that rifes above it. My poor father «* died there, Ma'amfclle, Pray heaven u my fifter be alive; it is a long while ' f fmce I law her." Adeline liftened with a melancholy pleafure to thefe artlefs expreffions of Peter, who, in retracing the
f 5 3 the feenes of his former days, feemed to live them over again. As they ap¬ proached the village, he continued to point out various objefts of his remem¬ brance. " And there, too, is the good " pallor's chateau; look, Ma'amfclle, '* that white houfe, with the fmoke cur- M ling, that ftands on the edge ofthe lake " yonder. I wonder whether he is alive *' yet. Hc was not old when I left the " place, andas much beloved as ever roan ** was; but death fpares i.obody P' They had by this time reached the vil¬ lage, which was extremely neat, though it did not promife much accommodation. Peter had hardly advanced ten fteps be¬ fore he was accofted by fome of his old acquaintance, who fhook hands, and feemed not to know how to part with him. Ие enquired for his fifter, and uas told flie was alive and well. As thcv paff¬ ed on, fo many of his old friends flocked round him, that Adeline became quiie weary of the delay. Many whom he had
[ 6 j had left in the vigour of life, weie row tottering under the infirmities of age, while their fons and daughters, w hom he had known only in the playfulnefs of in¬ fancy, weregrown from hb remembrance» and in the pride of youth. At length they approached the cottage, and were Hiet by his fifter, who, having h caïd uf his arrival, came &rtâ welcomed him with unfeigned joy. On feeing Adeline, flie feemed fur¬ prifed, but affifted her to alight, and con¬ dufting her into a fmall but neat cottage, received her with a warmth of ready kindnefs which would have graced a bet¬ ter fituation. Adeline requefted to fpeak with her alone, for the room was now crowded with Peter*s friends, and then acquainting her with fuch particulars of her circumftances as it was neceffary to communicate, defired to know if fhe could be accommodated with lodging in the cottage. ** Yes, Ma'amfelle," faid the good woman, " to fuch as it is, you ' c are
Γ 7 ] ·* are ï'eartiïy welcome; I am only forry * f it is not better. But you feem ill* " Ma'am к lie ; what ftiall í get you ?*' Adeline, who had been long itrug- ghngwuh fatigue and indifpofition, now yielded ίο their preffure. She fa id,ihe was indeed, ill; but hoped that reft would reftore htr, and defired a bed might be immediately prepared. The good wo¬ man went out to obey her, and foon re¬ turning, ihewed her io a little cabin, where ihe retired toa bed, whofe clean- linefs was its only recommendation. But, notwithftanding her fatigue, fhe could not fleep, and her mind, in fpite of all her efforts, returned to the feencs that were paffed, or prefented gloomy and imperfect vifions of the future. The difference between her own con¬ dition, and that of other perfons, educa¬ ted as ftie had been, ftruck her forcibly, and ihe wept. " They," faid ftie, « have " friends and relations, all ftriving to ** fave them, not only from what may « hurt,
С 8 3 • hurt, but what may difpleafe the»; ** watching not only for their prefent ·* fafety, but for their future advantage, ** and preventing tbem even frora in- " jurmg themfelves. But during my " wholelifi-I have never kno« n a fnend; ** have been in general furrounded by " enemies, and very feldom exempt ** from fome circumftance either of dan- * f ger or calamity. Yet» furely I am not * f born to be for ever wretched; the • c time will come when"------She began to think flie might one time be happy ; but recollefting the defperate fituation of Theodore, " No,** faid fhe, " I can ** never hope even for peace!'* Early the following morning, the good woman cf the houfe came to enquire how flie had refted, and found flie had flept little, and was much worfe than on the preceding night. The uneafinefs of her mind contributed to heighten the feverifli fymptoms that attended her, and in the courfe of the day her difordet be¬ gan
f 9 1 gan to affame а ferious afpeü. She ob¬ íèrved its progreis with compofure, re¬ figning herfelf to the will of God, and feeling littie to regret in hie. Her kind hoftefs did every thing in her power to reiie\e her, and there was neither phy¬ fician nor apothecary in the village, fo that nature uas deprived of none ofher advantages. Notwithftanding this, the diforder rapidly increafed, and on the third day fiom its firft attack ihe became delirious ; after which, flie funk into a ftate of ftupefa&ion. How long ihe remained in this de¬ plorable condition ihe knew not ; but, on recovering her fenfes, ihe found her¬ felf in anapmment very different from any ihc remembered. It was fpacious and almoft beautiful, the bed and every thing around being in one itile of elegant fim¬ plicity. For fome minutes ihe lay in a tranceof furprife, endeavouring to recol¬ lect her fcattered ideas of the paft, and almoft fearing to move, ieft the pleafing vifion ihould vaniih from her eyes. В 5 At
С »о 3 ß t length flbe ventured to raife herfelf, when fhe prefently heard a foft voice fpeaking near her, and the bed curtain on one fide was gently undrawn by a beautiful girl. As fhe leaned forward over the bed, and with a fmile of min¬ gled tendernefs and joy enquired of her patient how íhe did. Adeline gazed in filent admiration upon the moft: intereft¬ ing female countenance fhe had ever feen, in which ire expreffion of fweet«* nefs, united with livelv tenfe and refine¬ ment, was chaftened by fimplicity. Adeline at length recollefted herfelf fuftkiemly to thank her kind enquirer, and begged to know to whom fhe waa obliged, and where fhe was ? The lovely girl prefled her hand, " 'Tis we who are u obliged,'* faid fhe. " Oh ! how í re- ° joice to find that you have recovered " your recolleftion." She laid no more, but flew to the door of the apartment, and difappeared. Ina few minutes flie returned with an elderly lady, who, ap¬ proaching
С ι« 3 proaching the bed with an air of tender iniereft» afked concerning fhe ftate of Adeline, to which the latter replied, a: well as the agitation of her fpirits would perm.t, and repeated her defire of know¬ ing to whom fhe was fo greatly obliged. fl Vou fhalî know that hereafter," laid the lady ; " at prefent be affured, that * f you are with thofe who will think their *' care much overpaid by your recover}'; *' fubmit, therefore, to every thing that • f may conduce to it, and confent to be " kept as quiet as poffible." Adeline gratefully fmiled, and bowed her head in filent affent, The lady now quitted the room for a medicine ; having given which to Adeline, the curtain was clofed, and fhe was left to repofe. But her thoughts were too bufy to fuffer her to profit by the opportunity. She con¬ templated the paft, and viewed the pre¬ fent, and, when flie compared them, the contraft ftruck her with aftoniihment. The whole appeared like one of thofe fudden
С * 2 3 fudden tramili on,« fo frequent in dreams in which we pafs from grief and defpair, we know not how, to comfort and de¬ light- Yet ihe looked forward to the future with a trembling anxiety, that threatened to retard her recovery, and which, when fhe remembered ihe words of her gene¬ rous benefaärefs, fhe endeavoured to f upp refs. Had fhe bette r к now n t h e d i f* pofition of the perfons in whofe houfe fhe now was, her anxiety, as far as it re¬ garded herfelf, muft in a great rneafure have been done away ; for La Luc, its owner, was one of thofe rare chara eteri to whom misfortune feldom looks in vain, and whofe native goodnefs, confirmed by principle, is uniforming and unaflu¬ ming in its acb. 1 he following little piÛure of his domeftic life, his family and his manners will more fully illuf¬ trate his character: it was drawn from the life, and its exacUiefs will, it is hoped, compenfate for its length.
[ iS ] TKE FAMILY OF LA LUC. « Bat Kalf тапкЫ, lite Handeľs foo?, dclîroţv " Tbrtugh rage ana ígaonJiSce, tbe íírain of py % * l Irregskrly witó their paffions roll ** Through Katute's fiaeñ iaÔrerocnt, the ibol : * 4 While mes of fenfe, wiih Handeľs happier fkill» *« Cjrre-ñ the tafte and haiinonize the wii ; *« Teach their ai^étious, like Ыь notes, to fiow, «* Nor rais'd too high, nor ever funk to low i " Till ev'ry virtue, meaiiirM and rçfin*d, " As åts lhe concert of the mafter mind, ** Meİıs in its kindred foaods, and pours along ** Th f according îcujîc ofthe шога! fong," Cawthork*.
In the village of Lelencourt, cele¬ brated fur its picturefque fituation at the foot of the Savoy Alps, lived Arnaud La Luc, a clergyman, defcended from an ancient family of France, whofe de¬ ca) ed fortunes oc. a fioned them to feek a retreat in Swit?erland, in an age when the violence of civil commotion ieldom fpared the conqueied. He was minifter ofthe village, and equally loved for the piety
f н ] pietv and benevolence of the Chriftian, as refpeBed for the dignity and elevation of the philofopher. His was the philo¬ fophy of nature, directed by common fenfe: he defpifed the jargon of the mo¬ dern fchoob, and the brilliant abfurdirics off) items, which have dazzled without enlightening, and guided without con¬ vincing, their difciples. His mind was penetrating ; his views extenfive; and his fyftcms, like his re¬ ligion, were fimple, rational, and fub¬ lime. The people of his pariih looked up to hirn as to a father; for while his precepts direčled their minds, his exam¬ ple touched their hearts. In early youth La Luc loft a wife whom he tendeily loved: this event threw a tincture of foft and interefting melancholy overhischaračter, which re¬ mained, when time had mellowed the remembrance that occafioned it. Phu lofophy had ftrengthened, not hardened, his heart; it enabled him to refift the pref-
ί '5 3 preffure of affliction, rather than to over¬ come it. Calamity taught him to fee! with pe¬ culiar fympathy the diftreffes of others* His income from the pariih was fmall^ &nd what remained from the divided and reduced eftates ofhis anceftors did not much increafe it; but, though he could not always relieve the neceffities of the indigent, his terader pity and holy con¬ verfation fddom failed in adminiftering confolation to the mental fufferer. On thefe occafions the fweet and exquifite emotions of his heart have often induced him to fay, that could the voluptuary be once fenfible of thefe feelings, he would never after forego ·· the luxury of doing " good.**— ,f Ignorance of true plea- " fure," he would fay¡> ** more frequent- u ly than temptation to that which is " falfe, leads to vice." La Luc had one fon and a daughter, who were too young, when their mother died, to lament their lofs. He loved them
С 'б ] them with peculiar tendernefs, as the children of her whom he never ceafed to deplore j and it was for fome time his fole amufement to obferve the gra¬ dual unfolding of their, infant minds, and to bend them to virtue. His was the deep and filent forrow ofthe heart; his complaints he never obtruded upon others, and very feldom did he even mention his wife. His grief was too fa¬ cred for the eye of the vulgar. Often he retired to the deep folitude of the mountains, and amid their folemn and tremendous fcenery, would brood over the remembrance of times paft, and re¬ fign himfe'f to the luxury of grief. On his· return from theie little excurfions,he was always more placid and contented." a fweet tranquillity,which arofe almoft to happinefs, was diffufed over his mind, and his manners were more than ufually benevolent. As hc gazed on his chil¬ dien, and fondly kiffed them, a tear would fometimes fteal into his eye, but it
[ '7 ] it was a tear of tender regret, unmingled wkh the darker qualities of forrow, and was rnoft precious to his heart. On the death ofhis wife he received into his houfe a maiden fifter, a fenfible, worthy woman, who was deeply inte¬ refted in the happine r s of her brother. Her affectionate attention and judicious conduct anticipated the effect of time in foftening the poignancy of his diftrefs, and her unremitted care of his children, while it proved the goodnefs of her own heart, attracted her more clofely to his. It was with inexpreffible pleafure that he traced in the infant features of Clara the refemblance ofher mother. The fame gentlenefsof manner, and the fame fweetnefs of difpofition, foon difplayed themíêlves; and as ihe grew up, her ac¬ tions frequently reminded him fo ftrong¬ ly of his loft wife, as to fix him in reve¬ ries, which abforbed all his foul. Engaged İn the duties of his pariih» the education of his children, and in philo-
С '8 ] phiiofophic refearch, his years paffed in tranquility. The tender melancholy *ith which affliûion had t i nå u reti his mind, was, by long indulgence, become dear to him, and he would not have re¬ linquiihed it for the brighieft dream of airy happinefs. When any paffing inci¬ dent difturbed him, hc retired for con¬ folation to the idea ofher he fo faithfully loved, and yielding to a gentle, and what the world would call, a romantic fadnefs, gradually reaffumed his compo¬ fure. This wasthe fecret luxury to which he withdrew from temporary difappoint¬ ment— ebe foHtary enjoyment which dif¬ fipated the cloud of care, and blunted the fting of vexation—which elevated his mind above this world, and opened to his view the fublimity of another. The fpot he now inhabited, the fur¬ rounding fcenery, the romantic beauties of the neighbouring walks, were dear to La Luc, for they had once been loved by
[ «9 J by Clara; they hzd been the feenes of her tendernefs, and of his happinefs. His chateau ftood on the bordersofa fmall lake that was almoft crv ironed by- mountains of ftupendous height, which, mooting into a variety of grotefque forms, compofed a fcenery fingularly folemn and fublime. Dark woods, in¬ termingled with bold projections of rock, fometimes barren, and fometimes cover¬ ed with the purple bloom of wild flowers, impended over the lake, and were feen in the clear mirror of its waters. The wild and alpine heights which rofe above were either crowned with perpetual fnows, orexhibited tremendous crags and maffeâ of folid rock, whofe appearance was con¬ tinually changing as the rays of light were varioufly reflecied on their furface, and whofe fummits were often wrapt in impe¬ netrable mifts. Some cottages and ham¬ lets, fcattered on the margin ofthe lake» orfeated inpicturefque points of view on the rocks above, were the only obj eus that
Γ ι® ì that reminded the beholder of huma¬ nity. On the fide of the lake, nearly oppo¬ fite to the chateau, the mountams re¬ ceded, and a long chain of Alps were ilen ftretching in perfpe&i ve. Their in¬ numerable tints and ihades, fome veiled in blue mifts, fome tinged with rich pur¬ ple, and others glittering in partial light, gave luxurious and magical colouring to the fcene. The chateau was not large, but it was convenient, and was characterifed by an airof elegant fimplicity atid good order. The entrance was a fmall hall, which, opening by a glafs door into the garden, afforded a view of the lake, with the magnificent fcenery exhibited on its bor¬ ders. On the left of the hall was La Luc*s ftudy, where he ufually pafled his mornings; and adjoining was a fmall room fitted up with chymical apparatus, aftronornical inftruments, andother im¬ plements of fcience. On the right was the
f 2' ] the family parlour, and behind s t a roora which belonged exclufively to Madame La inc. Here were depofited various medicines and botanical diftillatkms, to¬ gether with the apparatus for preparing them. From this room the whole vil¬ lage was liberally fupplied with phyfical comfort ; for it was the pride of Madame to believe herfelf ikilful in relieving the diforders of her neighbours. Behind the chateau rofe a tuft ofpinc5, and in front a gentle declivity, covered with verdure and flowers, extended to the lake, whofe waters flowed even with the grafs, and gave frefhnefs to the aca¬ cias that waved over its furface. Flow¬ ering fhrubs, intermingled with moun¬ tain afh, cyprefs, and ever-green oak, marked the boundary of the garden. At the return of fpring it was Clara's care to direct theyoung fhoots of the plants, to nurfe the budding flowers, and to fheher them with the luxuriant branches of the fhrubs frora the cold • blafts
Γ « 3 blafts that defcended from the moun¬ tains. In fummer íhe ufually rofe with the fun, and vifited her favourite flow¬ ers while the dew yet hung glittering on their leaves. The freihnefs of early day, with the giowing colouring whieh then touched the fcenery, gave a pure and exquifite delight to her innocent heart» Born amid feenes of grandeur and fub* limity, íhe had quickly imbibed a tafte for their charms, which tafle was heigh¬ tened by the influence ofa warm imagi¬ nation. To view the fun rifing above the Alps, tinging their fnowy heads with light, and fuddenly darting his rays over the whole face of nature—to fee the fiery fplendor of the clouds rcflecied in the lake below, and the rofeate tints firfl (teal upon the rocks above—were among the earlieft pleafures of which Clara was fufceptible. From being delighted with the obfervance of nature, ihe grew pleafed with feeing her finely imitated, and foon difplayed a tafte fox poetry 2 and
[ 23 J and painting. When flie was about fix¬ teen flic often felečted from her father's library thofe of the Italian poets moil celebrated for p čturefque beauty, and would fpend the firft hours of morning in reading them under the iliade of the acacias that bordered the lake. Here too ihe would often attempt rude íketches of the furrounding fcenery, and at length by repeated cflbrts, affifted by fome in- ftradion from her brother» íhe fucceeded fo well as to produce twelve drawings in crayon, which were judged worthy of decorating the parlour of the chateau. Young La Luc played the flute, and flie liftened to him with exquifitcdelight, particularly when he ftood on the margin of the lake, under her beloved acacias. Her voice was fweet and flexible, though not ftrong, and fitc foon learned to mo¬ dulate it to the inftrument. She knew nothing of the intricacies of execution; her airs were fimple, and her ftyle equally fo i but (he foon gave them a touch-
С ч 3 touching expreffion, infpired by the fen- iihiiity of her heart, which feldom left thofe of her hearers unaffected. It was the happinefs of La Luc to fee his children happy, and in one of his excurfions to Geneva, whither he went to vifit fome relations of his late wife, he bought Clara a lute. She re¬ ceived it with more gratitude than ihe could exprefs ; and having learned one air, flie haftened to her favorite acacias, and played it again and again, till ilie forgot every thing befides. Her little domeftic duties, her books, her draw¬ kig, even the hour which her father dedi- » cated to her improvement, when fhe met ker brother in the library, and with him partook of knowledge, even this hour paffed unheeded by. La Luc fuffered it to pafs. Madame was difpleafed that her niece neglefled her domeftic duties, and wiflied to reprove her, but La Luc begged fhe would be filent. " Let ex~ tí perience teach her her error/' faid he ; 3 . €< precept
[ 2 5 ] " precept feldom brings convicìion to ť< young minds.' 1 Madame pbjecied that experience was a flow teacher. ** Itis a fure one," re¬ plied La Luc, " and is not unfrequently " die quickcft ofall teachers; when it " cannot lead us into ferious evil, it is " well to truft to it.". The fecond day paffed with Clara as the firft, and the third as the fecond: ihe could now play feveral tunes ^ ihe came to her father and repeated what fhe had learnt. At fupper the cream was not drefled and there wab no fruit on the table : La Luc inquired the reafon ; Clara recol¬ leded it, and bluflicd. She obferved, that her brother was abfent, but nothing was faid. Toward the conclufion of the repaft he appeared ; his countenance ex¬ prefled unufual fatisfacìion, but he feated himfelf in fiiencc. Clara inquired what had detained him from fupper, and learnt that he had been to a fick family Vol. HL С in
С 26 ] in the neighbourhood, with the weekly allowance which her father gave them. La Luc had intrufted the care of this family to his daughter, and it was her duty to have carried them their little al¬ lowance on the preceding day, but flie had forgot every thing but mufic. " How did }0u find the woman?" faid La Luc to his fon. — <c Worfe, Sir," he replied ; ** for her medicines had not " been regularly given, and the chil- ft dren had had little or no food to- " day." Clara was fliocked, " No food to- " day!" faid flie to herfelf, " and I have " been playing all day on my lute under Cf the acacias by the lake!" Lier father did not feem to obferve 1 er emotion but turned to his fon. " I left her bet- e< ter," faid the latter; "the medicines w I carried eafed her pain, and I had u the pleafure to fee her children make ff a joyful fupper/* Clara,
С 2 7 з Clara, perhaps, for the firft time in heť life, envied him his pleafure; her heart was full, and flic fat filent. " No food " to-day !" thought flie. She retired penfively to her chamber. The fweet ferenity with which flie ufually went to reft was vanifhed, for fhe could no longer reflcci on the paft day with fatisfaBion. " What a pity,** faid flie, " that what ** is fo pleafing fhould be the caufe of fo " much pain 1 This lute is my delight, * f and my tormenti" This reflection oc¬ cafioned her much internal debate ; but before fhe could come to any refolution upon the point in queftion, fhe fell afleep. She awoke verly early the next morn¬ ing, and impatiently watched the pro¬ grefs of the dawn. The fun at length appearing, fhe arofe, and determined to Imake all the atonement in her power •for her former neglect, haftened to the cottage. С 2 Here
[ *S ] Here fli e remained a confiderable ti me, and when fhe returned to the chateau her countenance had iecovered all its ulual fcrenity ; flie refolved, however, not to touch her lute that day. '1 ill the hour of breakfaft flie bufied herfelf in binding up the flowers, and pruning the fhoots that were too luxu¬ riant, and fhe at length found herfelf fhe fcarcely knew how, beneath her beloved acacias by the fide of the lake. " Ah !" faid fhe, with a figh, " how fweetly ·* would the fong I learned yefterday, € * found now over the waters!" But fhe remembered her determination, and checked the ftep fhe was involuntatily taking towards the ch «teau. She attended her father in the library at the ufual hour, and learned, from his difcourfe with her brothei on what had been read the two preceding days, that fhe had loft much entertaining know¬ ledge. She requeued her faiher would inform her to what thib conveifation al¬ luded ;
С 29 ] luded; but he calmly replied, that fhe had preferred another amufement at the time when the fubjeft was difcuffed, and muft therefore content herfelf with igno¬ rance. "You would reap the rewards u of ftudy from the amufements of idle— fi nefs*' faid he ; " learn to be reafon-» " able—do not expeü to unite incon- 41 fiftencies." Clara felt the juftnefs of this rebuke, and remembered her lute. " What mif- " chief has it occafioned!" fighed íhe. " Yes, 1 am determined not to touch it " all this day. I will prove that I am " able to control my inclinations when I " fee it neceifary fo to do/* Thus re^ folving, fhe applied herfelf to ftudy with more Jian ulual affiduity. She adhered to her refolution, and to¬ wards the clofe of day went into the garden to amufe herfelf. The evening was ftili and uncommonly beautiful. No¬ thing was heard but the faint ihivering of the leaves, which returned but at inter¬ vals,
[ зо ] > als, making filence more folemn, and the diftant murmuis of the torrents that rolled among the cliffs. As flie ftood by the lake, and watched the fun flowly finking below theAlps, whofe fummits were tinged with gold and purple ; as ilie faw the laft rays of light gleam upon the waters whofe fui face was not curled by the ligheft air, flie fighed, ,( Oh ! how " enchanting would be the found of my ** lute at this moment, on this fpot, u and when every thing is fo itili around "me!" The temptation w T as too powerful for the refolution of Clara : She ran to the chateau, returned with the inftrument to her dear acacias, and beneath their fiiade continued to play till the furrounding objecis faded in darknefs from her fight. lìut the moon ι rofe, and, fhedding a trembling luftre Qn the lake, made the fcene more captivating than ever. It was impoflible to quit fo delightful a fpot j Clara repeated her favourite airs again
C 3i 3 again and again. The beauty of the hourawakencd all her genius ; ihe never pia) ed with fuch expreffion before, and fhe liftened w ith increafing rapture to the tones as they langu i flied over the waters and died away on the diftant air. She was perfcOly enchanted, " No! nothing ci was ever fo delightful as to play on ,f the lute beneath her acacias, on the Ci margin ofthe lake, by moon-light!" When ftie returned to the chateau» fupper was over. La Luc had ferved Clara, and would not fuffer her to be interrupted. When the enthufiafm of the hour was paifed, ihe recollected that flie had broken her refolution, and the refleciion gave her pain. " I prided myfelf on <f controling my inclinations," faid ihe, u and I have weakly yielded to their " directions. But what evil have I in- <ť curred by indulging them this even- * f ing? I have neglected no duty, for I " bad none to perform. Of what then " have
С 32 ] "have 1 to accufe myfelf? It would *' have been abfurd to have kept my ** refolution, and denied myfelf a plea- u fure when there appeared no reafon u for this felf denial." She paufed, not quite fatisfied with this reafoning. Suddenly refuming her inquiry, u But how" faid fhe, t( am ** 1 certain that I fhould have refifted " my inclinations if there had been a *· reafon for oppofing them? if the u poor family whom 1 neglefted yefter- îf day had been un fupplied to-day, I u fear I ihould again have forgotten ** them while I played on my lute on " the banks of the lake." She then recollected all that her father had at difleient times faid ou the fub¬ jeft of felf-command, and fhe felt fome pain. " No,'* faid fhe, " If I do not con- *« fider that to preferve a refoiution, " which I have once folemnly formed, " is a fuflicient reafon to control my in- " cHnations,
С зз ] ** cHnations, I fear no other motive " would long reftrain me. I ferioufly « determined nor to touch my lute this " whole day, and I have broken my re- " folution. To-morrow perhaps I may " be tempted to neglect fome duty, for " I have difcovered that i cannot rely * c on my own prudence. Since I cannot " conquer temptation, I will Uy from " it." On the following morning fhe brought her lute to La Luc, and begged he would receive ît again, and at leaft keep it till fhe had taught her inclinations to fubmit to control. The heart of La Luc fwelled as fhe fpoke. ť * No, Clara," faid he, "itis «* unneceffary that I ihould receive your «Mute; the facrifice you would make " proves you worthy of my confidence. u Take back the inftrument ; fince you "have fufheient refolution to refign it " when it leads you from duty, I doubt * f not that you will be able to control С 5 « its
С 34 ] " its influence now that it is reftored to " you/' Clara felt a degree of pleafure and pride at thefe words, fuch as ihe had ne¬ ver before experienced ; but fhe thought, that to deferve the commendation they beftowed, it was neceflary to complete the facrifice fhe had begun. In the virtuous enthufiafm of the moment, the delights of mufic were forgotten in thofe of afpiring to well-earned praife ; and when flie refufed the lute thus offered fhe was confeious only of exquifite fen¬ fations. if Dear Sir/' faid ihe, tears of pleafure fwelling in her eyes, " allow " me to deferve the praifes which you be- u ftow, and then I ihall indeed be " happy." La Luc thought ihe had never refem¬ bled her mother fo much as at this in¬ ftant, and, tenderly kiffing her, he for fome moments wept in filence. When he was able to fpeaks " you do already " deferve my praifes," faid he, " and " I reftore ζ
С 35 ] rr I reftore your lute as a reward for the " conduci which excites them." This fcene called back recollections too ten^ der for the heart of La Luc, and giving Clara the inftrument, he abruptly quitted ^he room. La Luc*s fon, a youth of much pro¬ mife, was defigned by his father for the church, and had received from him an excellent education, which, however, it. was thought neceflary he ihould finifh at an univerfity; that of Geneva "was fixed upon by La Luc. His fcheme had been to make his fon not a fcholar only; he was ambitious that he íhould alfo be enviable as a man. From early infancy he had accuftomed him to hardi¬ hood and endurance, and, as he ad¬ vanced in you-th, he encouraged him in manly exercifes, and acquainted him with the ufeful arts, as well as with abftraci; fcience. He was high fpirited and ardent in bistempeiv but his heart was generous and
С зб ] and affeftionate. Не looked forward to Geneva, and to the new world it would difclofe, with the fanguine expeftations of youth ; and in the delight of thefe expectations was abforbed the regret he would otherwife have felt at a feparation from his family. A brother ofthe late Madame La Luc, who was by birth an Englifhwoman, re¬ fided at Geneva with his family. To have been related to his wife was a fuffi¬ cient claim upon the heart of La Luc, and he had, therefore, ahvays kept up an intercourfe with Mr. Audley, though the difference in their characters, and mannerof thinking, would never permit this aflbciation to advance into friend¬ fliip. La Luc now wrote to him,íigní- fying an intention of fending his fon to Geneva, and recommending him to his care ; to this letter Mr. Audley returned a friendly anfwer ; and a fliort time after, an acquaintance of La Luc's being call¬ ed to Geneva, he determined that his fon
С 37 ] fon fhould accompany him. The fepa¬ ration was painful to La Luc, and almoft infupportable to Clara. Madame was grieved, and took care that he fhould have a fuificient quantity of medicines put up in his travelling trunk ; fhe was alfo at fome pains to point out their vir¬ tues, and the different complaints for which they were requifite ; but fhe was careful to deliver her le Qu re during the abfence of her brother. La Luc, with his daughter, accompa¬ nied his fon on hor Ге -bac к to the next town, which was about eight miles from Leloncourt, and there again enforcing all the advice he had formerly ^tven him refpecìing his conduct and purfuits, and again yielding to the tender weaknefs of the father, hc bade him farewell. Clara wept, and felt more forrow at this part¬ ing than the occafion could juftify ; but this was almoft the firft time fhe had known grief, and Ше artlcfsly yielded to its influence. La
С 3» ] La Luc and Clara travelled penfively back, and fhe day was clofing w hen they came within view of the lake, and foon after the chateau. Never had it ap¬ peared gloomy till now ; but now, Clara wandered forlornly through every de¬ ferted apartment where ihe had been ac¬ cuftomed to fee her brother, and recol¬ lected a thoufand little circumftances, which, had he been prefent, flie would have thought immaterial, but on which imagination now ftamped a value. The garden, the feenes around, all wore a me¬ lancholy afpečt, and it was long ere they refumed their natural charačter,and Clara recovered her vivacity. Near four years had elapfed fince this feparation, when one evening, as Ma¬ dame La Luc and'her niece were fitting at work together in the parlour, a good woman in the neighbourhood defired ro be admitted. She came to afk for fome medicines, and the advice of Madame La Luc. " Here is a fad accident hap- " pened
С 39 3 • с pened at our cottage, Madam," faid flie; " I am fure my heart aches for the " poor young creature."—Madame La Luc defired ihe would explain herfelf, and the woman proceeded to fay, that her brother Peter, whom ihe had not feen for [o many years, was arrived, and had brought a young lady to her cottage, who ihe verily believed was dy¬ ing. She defcribed her diforder, and acquainted Madame with what particulars of her mournful ftory Peter had related, failing not to exaggerate fuch as her companion for the unhappy {Langer and her love of the marvellous prompted. The account appeared, a very extraor¬ dinary one to Madame ; but pity for the forlorn condition of the young fufferer induced her to enquire farther into the affair. w Do let me go to her, Madam/' fiiid Clara, who had been liftening with ready compaffion to the poor woman's. narrative: " Do fuffer me to go—^fhe <c muft want comforts, and I wifh much « to
i 40 ] " to fee how fhe is." Madame afked fome farther queftions concerning her difordcr, and then, taking off her fpec- tacles, flie rofe from her chair and faid flie would go herfelf. Clara defired to accompany her. They put on their hats and followed the good woman to the cot¬ tage, where, in a very fmall, clofe room, on a miferable bed, lay Adeline» pale, emaciated, and unconfeious of all around her. Madame turned to the woman and aflced how long fhe had been in this way, while Clara went up to the bed, and taking the almoft lifeiefs hand that lay on the quilt, looked anxioufly in her face. " She obferves nothing," faid flie, " poor creature 1 I wifh ftie was at the « chateau, fhe would be better accom- " modated, and I could nurfe her there/* The woman told Madame La Luc, that the young lady had lain in that ftate for feveral hours. Madame examined her pulie, and ihook her head. " This c * room is very clofe," faid ihe.—*" Very " clofe,
С 4' ] " clofe, indeed/* cried Clara, eageily ; €t furely ihc would be better at the cha- " teau, if íhe could be moved.*' " We will fee about that,'* faid her aunt. " In the mean time, let me fpeak " to Peter ; it is fome years fince I faw " him.'* She went to the outer room, and the woman ran out of the cottage to look for him. When ilie was gone, " This is a miferable habitation for the u poor ftranger/* faid Clara j " fhe will * ( never be well here : do, Madame, let " her be carried to our houfe ; I am * c fure my father would wifh it. Be- " fides, there is fomething in her features, w even inanimate as they now are» that u prejudices me in her favour.'* * f Shall I never perfuade you to give " up that romantic notion of judging " people by their fices ?" fatd her aunt : ** What fort of a face fhe has is of very " little confequence—her condition is la- " mentable, and I am defirous of amend- ** то* - * и а
С 42 3 <r ing it; but I wifh firft to afk Peter u a few queftions concerning her." tc Thank you, my dear aunt," faid Clara ; w flie will be removed then ?" Madame La Luc was going to reply, but Peter now entered, and, exprefling great joy at feeing her again, enquired, how Monfieur La Luc and Clara did. Clara immediately welcomed honeft Pe¬ ter to his native place, and he returned her falutation with many expreffions of furprife at finding herkti much grown~~> " 1 hough I have fo often dandled you» *' in my arms, Ma'amfelle, I fhould 4{ never have known you again. Young· * f twigs fhoot faft, as they fay." Madame La Luc now enquired into the particulars of Adeline's ftory, and heard as much as Peter knew of it, be¬ ing only that his late mafter found herin a very diftreffed fituation, and that he, had himfelf brought her from the Abbey to fave her from a French Marquis* The
С 43 1 The fimplicity of Peteťs manner would not fuŕľer her to queftion his veracity» though fome of the circumftances he re¬ lated excited ail her furprife, and awa¬ kened all her pity. Tears frequently ftood in Clara's eyes during the courfe of his narrative, and when he concluded, ihe faid, " Dear Madam, I am iure, u when my father learns the hiňory of " this unhappy young woman, he will " not refufe to be a parent to her, and " I will be her fifter." t{ She deferves it all," faid Peter, *' for ihe is very good indeed." He then proceeded in a ftrain of praife, which was very unufual with him.—" I " will go home and confult with my " brother about her," faid Madame La Luc, rifing : iC flie certainly ought to " be removed to a more airy room. ** The chateau is fo near, that 1 think " flie may be carried thither without " much riík,*' c< Heaven
С 44 } " Heaven biefs you ! Madam," cried Peter, rubbing his hands, u for your " goodnefs to my poor young Lady." La Luc had juft returned from his evening walk when they reached the chateau. Madame told him where fhe had been, and related the hiflory of Adeline and her prefent condition. " By u all means have her removed hither/* ¿aid La Luc, whofe eyes bore teftimony to the tendernefs of his heart. " She " can be better attended to here than in ** Sufan's cottage." €l I knew you would fay fo, my dear « father," iaid Clara; «« I will go and f * order the green bed to be prepared for « her." " Be patient, niece/* faid Madame La I uc j " there is no occafion for fuch " hafte: fome things are to be confi- M dered firft; but you are young and* ** romantic^ 1 — La Luc fmiled -—*' The " evening is now clofed," refumed Ma¬ dame ;
[ 45 ] dame; " it will, therefore, be dangerous « to remove her before morning. Early " to-morrow a room fliall be got ready, " and íhè İhall be brought here; in the <ζ mean time I will go and make up a * f medicine, which í hope may be of fer- " vice to her."—Clara reluäantly affent¬ cd to this delay, and Madame La Luc retired to her clofet. On the following morning, Adeline, wrapped in blankets, and iheltered as much as poffible from the air, was brotight to the chateau, where the good La Luc defired íhe might have every attention paid her, and where Clara watched over her with unceafing anxiety and tender¬ nefs. She remained in a ftate of tor¬ por during the greater part of the day, but towards evening ihe breathed more freely; and C lara» who ftill watched by her bed, had at length the pleafure of perceiving that her fenfes were reftored. It was at this momenr that ihe found herfelf
С 46 D herfelf in the fituation from which we have digreffed to give this account of the venerable La Luc and his family. The reader will find that his virtues and his friendihip to Adeline deferved this notice.
CHAPTER
t 47 ]
CHAPTER XVL ** Still Fancy, to herfelf unkind, " Awakes togiief the foften'd mind, ** And points the bleeding friend." Collins» ADELINE, affifted by a fine confti¬ tution, and the kind attentions of her new friends, was, in little more than a week, fo much recovered as to leaVe her chamber. She was introduced to La Luc, whom flie met with tears of grati¬ tude, and thanked him for his goodnefs, in a manner fo warm, yet fo artlefs, as in¬ terefted him ftill more in her favour· Duri ng the progrefs of her recovery, the fweetnefs of her behaviour had en¬ tirely won the heart of Clara, and greatly interefted that of her aunt, whofe re¬ ports of Adeline, together with the praifes
[ 48 ] praìe r beftowed by Clara, had excited boïh efteem and curiofity in the breaft cf La Luc ; and he now met her with an expreflìon of benignity, which fpoke peace and comfort to her heart. She had acquainted Madame La Luc with fuch particulars of her ftory, as Peter, either through ignorance, or inattention, had not communicated, fuppreffmg only, through a falfe delicacy, perhaps, an acknowledgement of her attachment to Theodore. Thefe circumftances were repeated to La Luc, who, ever fenfible to the fufferings of others, was particu¬ larly interefted by the fingular misfor¬ tunes of Adeline. Near a fortnight had elapfed fince her removal to the chateau, when one morn¬ ing La Luc defired to fpeak with her alone. She followed him into his ftudy, and then, in a manner the moft delicate, he toîd her, that, as he found ftie was fo unfortunate in her father, he defired flie would henceforth confider bim as her pa¬ rent,
С 49 3 rent, and his houfe as her home. tt Yoä " and Clara fliall be equally my daugh- *< ters," continued he ; " I am rich in ha- *· ving fuch children.*'—The flrong emo¬ tions of furprife and gratitude for fome time kept Adeline filent.—" Do not thank <c me,*' faid La Luc ; 4t I know all you " would fay, and I know alfo that I am. <c but doing my duty. I thank God 4t that my duty and my pleafures are u generally in unifon.*' Adeline wiped away the tears which his goodnefs had ■excited, and was going to fpeak ; but La Luc preffed her hand, and, turning away to conceal his emotion, walked out ,of the room. Adeline was now confidered as a part of the family, and in the parental kind¬ nefs of La Luc, the fifterly affeftion of Clara, and the fteady and uniform re¬ gard of Madame, ftie would have beea happy as flie was thankful, had not un¬ ceafing anxiety for the fate of Theodore, of whom in this folitude ihe was lefs Vol. IIL D likely
С δο з likely than ever to hear, corroded her heart, and embittered every moment of refledion. Even when fleep obliterated for awhile the memory of the paft, his image frequentiy arofe toher fancy, ac¬ companied by all the exaggerations of terror. She faw him in chains, and ftruggling in the grafp of ruffians, or faw him led, amidft the dreadful prepara¬ tions for execution, into the field : flie faw the agony of his look, and heard him repeat her name in frantic accents, till the horrors of the fcene overcame her, and fhe awoke. A fimilarity of tafte and characler at¬ tached her to Clara, yet the mifery that pteyed upon her heait, was of a nature too delicate to be fpoken of, and flie never mentioned Theodore even to her friend. Her illnefs had yet left her weak ind languid, and th. perpíjtual anxietv of her mind conti ibuted to pro¬ long this ftaie. She endeavoured, by ftrong, and almoft continual efforts, to abltraQ:
С δ' J abftračt her thoughts from their mourn¬ ful fubject, and was often fuccefsful. La Luc had an excellent library, and the inftruciion it offered at once gratified her love of knowiedge, and withdrew her mind from painful recolledions. His converfation, too, afforded her another refuge from mifery. But her chief amufement was to wan¬ der among the fublime fcenery of the adjacent country, fometimes with Clara, though often with no o ŕ ' r companion than a book. There we, indeed times when the converfation ofher friend im¬ pofed a painful reftraint,and, when given up to reflection, flie would ramble alone through feenes, whofe folitary grandeur affifted and foothed the melancholy of her heart. Here fhe would retrace all the conduci of her beloved Theodore, and endeavour to recollect his exact countenance, his air, and maimer. Now fhe would weep at the remembrance, and then, fuddenly confidering that he had, D a perhaps,
í 5^ 3 perhaps, already fuffered an ignominious death for her fake, even in confequence of the very aftion which had proved his love, a dreadful defpair would feize her, and, arrefting her tears, would threaten to bear down every barrier that fortitude and reafon could oppofe. Fearing longer to truft her own thoughts, ihe would hurry home, and by a defperate t ffort would try to lofe, in the eonverfation of La Luc, the remem¬ brance of the paft. Her melancholy, when he obferved it, La Luc attributed to a fenfe of the cruel treatment ffie had revived from her father ; a circum¬ ftance m hich, by exciting his compaffion, endeared her more ftrongly fo his heart ; while that love of rational converfation, which, in her calmer hours, fo fre¬ quently appeared, opened to him a new fource of amufement in the cultivation of a mind eager for knowledge, and, fufceptible of all the energies of genius. She found a melancholy pieafure in lif¬ tening
С 53 ] teningto thefoft tones of Clara*slute,and would often foothe her mind by attempt¬ ing to repeat the airs ihe heard. The gentlenefs of her manners, par¬ taking fo much of that penfive cha¬ racter which marked La Luc's, was foothing to his heart, and tinciured his behaviour with a degree of tendernefs that imparted comfort to her, and gra¬ dually won her entire confidence and af¬ fedion. Sh**, faw with extreme concern, the declining ftate of his health, and uni¬ ted her efforts with thofe of фе family to amufe and revive him. The pleafing fociety of which ilie partook,, and the quietnefs of the coun¬ try, at length reftored her mind toa ftate of tolerable compofure. She was now acquainted with all the wild walks of the neighbouring mountains, and, never tired of viewing their aftonifliing icenery ; flie often indulged herfelf in traverfing alone their unfrequented paths, where now and then a peafant from a neighbouring vil¬ lage
С и 1 îage was all that interrupted the profound folitude. She generally took with her a book, that if ßie perceived her thoughts înrlined to fix on the one object of her grief, ihe might force them to a fubječt lefs dangerous to her peace. She had become a tolerable proficient in Engliih while at the convent, where fhe received her education, and the inftruBion of La Luc, who was well acquainted with the language, now ferved to perfect her. He was partial to the Engliih; he ad¬ mired their character, and the conftitu¬ tion of their laws, and his library con¬ tained a collection of the beft authors, particularly of their philofophers and poets. Adeline found that no fpeeies of writing had power fo effectually to withdraw her mind from the contempla¬ tion of its own mifery as the higher kinds of poetry, and in thefe her tafte foon taught her to diftinguiih the fuperiority of the Engliih over that of the French. The genius of the language, more, per- haps %
С ss } haps, than the genius of the people, if, indeed, the diftinciion may be allowed, occafioned this. She frequently took a volume of Shakefpeare or Milton, and having gain¬ ed fome wild eminence, would feat herfelf beneath the pines, whofe low murmurs foothed her heart, and confpired with the vifions of the poet to lull her to forget¬ fulnefs of grief. One evening, when Clara was en¬ gaged at home, Adeline wandered alone to a favorite fpot among the rocks that bordered the lake It was an eminence which commanded an entire view of the lake, and of the ftupendous mountains that environed it. A few T ragged thorns grew from the precipice beneath, which defcended perpendicularly to the water's edge; and above rofe a thick wood of larch, pine, and fir, intermingled with fome chefnut and mountain afh. The evening was fine, and the air fo ftilli that it fcarcely waved the light leaves of the
С je J the trees around, or rîmpïed the broad expanfe of the waters below. Adeline gazed on the fcene vvith a kind of flilt rapture, and watched the fun finking amid a crimfon glow, which tinted the bofom of the lake, and the fnowy head* of the diftant Alps, The delight which the fcenery infpiied, ·* Soothing each guft of paflion into peace, ** All bat the fwellings of the foften*d heart, * * That waken, nor difturb, ' Ы tranquil mind i'* was now heightened by the tones of a French hc¿n, and looking on the lake, ftie perceived, at fome diftance, a pleafure boat. As it was a fpeciacle rather un¬ common in this folitude, ihe concluded the boat contained a party of foreigners come to view the wonderful fcenery of the country, or perhaps of Genevois, who chofe to amufe themfelves on а 1аке ж almoft as grand, though much lefs exten¬ five, than their own,- and the latter con¬ jecture was probably juft. As
[ 57 ] As /he liftened to the mëiow and en¬ chanting tones of the horn, which gra¬ dually funk away in diftance, the fcene appeared n*ore lovely than before, and finding it impoflible to forbear attempt¬ ing to paint in language what was fo bea" ti ful in reality, fhe compofed the following STANZAS. How fmooth that lake expands its ample breaft ! Where fmiles in foftenM glow the fummer flcy r How vaft the rocks that o*er its furface reft ! How wild the feenes its wLdbg ihores fupply ! Now down the weftern fteep flow finks the fun, And paints with yellow gleam the tafted woods : While here the mountdin-íhadows, broad and dun, Sweep o'er the cryftal mirror of the floods* Mark how his fplendour tips with partial light Thofe ihatter'd bactlements ! that on the brow Of yon bold promontory burit to fight From o'er the woods that darkly fpread beîow.
Dì
U
Γ 5» ľ în the foft blufli of iighťs reflected power, The ridgy rock, the woods that crown its fleer*,, Th* illumin'd battlement, and darker tower, On the fmooth wave in trembling beauty ileep. But lo ! the fun recalls his fervid ray, And cold, and dim, the waťry vifions fail ; While o*fer yon cliff, whofe pointed craggs decay, Mild Evening draws her thin empurpled veil ! ' How fweet that ftrain of melancholy horn! That fioats along the flowly-ebbing waves And up the far-receding mountains borne, Returns a^dying cîöfe from Echo's cave ! Hail ! íhadowy forms of fiilî, expreffive Eve ! Your penfive graces ftealing on my heart, *- Ша ali the fine-attun'd emotions live, And fancy all her lovelieft dreams impart« ·
La Luc, obferving how much Adeline way charmed with the features of the country, and defirous of amufing her melancholy, which, notwithftanding her efforts, was often too apparent, wiihed to* fhew her other feenes than thofe to which her walks were circumfcribed. He
î 59 1 He propofed a party on horfeback to take a nearer view of the Glaciers; to attempt their afcent was a difficulty and fatigue to which neither La Luc, in his prefent ftate of health, nor Adeline, were equal. She had not been accuftomed to ride fingle, and the mountainous road they were to pafs, made the experiment rather dangerous ; but fhe concealed her fears, and they were not fufficient to make her wifh to forego an enjoyment fuch as was now offered her. The following day was fixed for this excurfion. La Luc and his party arofo at an early hour, and having taken a flight breakfaft, they fet out towards tha Glacier of Montanvert* which lay ai a few leagues diftance, Peter carried a fmall bafket of provifions ; and it was their plan to dine on fome pleafant fpoti in the open air· It is unneceflary to defcribe the high enthufiafm of Adeline, the more com* placent pleafure of La Luc, and the tranfports
С εο j tranfports of Clara, as the feenes of thi« romantic country flu fied to their eyes. Now frowning in dai к and gloomy gran¬ deur, it e<\hibitcdonly tremendous rocks, and cataracts rolling from the heights into fome deep and narrow valley, along which their united waten roared and foamed, and burft away to regions inac¬ ceffible to mortal foot ; and now thô fcene arofe lefs fiercely wild ; ** The pomp of groves and garniture of fields'* were intermingled with the ruder fea¬ tures ornature, and while the fnow froze on the fummit of the mountain, the vine blufhed at its foot. Engaged in interefting converfation, and by the admiration which the country excited, they travelled on till noon, when they looked round for a pleafant fpot where they might reft and take re¬ freíhment. At fome little diftance they perceived the ruins of a fabric, which had once been a caftle ; it flood nearly on
С бт ] ôn a point of rock that overhung a deep valley; and ifs broken turrets rifing from among the woods that embofomed it, heightened the piBurefque beauty of the obj eel. The edifice invited curiofity, and the fhades repofe—La Luc and his party advanced» ** Deep ftruck with awe, they mark'd the dome ** o'erthrown, ·* Where once the beauty Ыоот'З, the warrior ** ihone: ** They faw the eaßi/s mouldMng tow'rs decay'd, ** The loofe ftone tottering o'er the trembling " ihade." They feated themfelves on the grafs, under the filade of fome high trees, near the ruins. An opening in the woods afforded a view of the diftant Alps—the deep filence of folitude reigned. For fome time they were loft in meditation. Adeline felt a fwect complacency, fuch as flie had long been a ftranger to. Looking at La Luc, ilie perceived a tear
С 62 ] teať ftealing down his cheek, while the elevation of his mind was ftrongl> ex¬ prefled on his countenance. He turned on Clara his eyes, which чеге now filled with tendernefs, and made an effort to recover himfelf. " The ftillnefs and total feclufion of €t this fcene," faid Adeline, " thofe flu*. u pendous mountains, the gloomy gran- w deur of thefe woods, together with f * that monument of faded glory on * r which the hand of time is fo empha- n tically imprefled, diffufe a facred en* " thufiafm over the mind, and awaken «* fenfations truly fublime."' La Luc was going to fpeak ; but Peter coming,forward, defired to know whe¬ ther he had not better open the wallet, as he fancied his honour and the young ladies muft be main hungry, jogging on fo far up hill and down before dinner. They acknowledged the truth of honeft Peter's fufpicion, and accepted his hint. Refreih-
С бз 3 Refťefhments were fpread on the grafs, and having feated themfelves under the canopy of waving woods, furrounded by the fweets of wild flowers, they inhaled the pure breeze of the Alps, which might be called fpirit of air, and partook ofa repaft, which thefe circumftances rendered delicious.. When they arofe to depart, " I am *' unwilling," faid Cl, ra, f * to quit this <€ charming fpot. How delightful would " it be to pafs one's* life beneath thefe fi fhades, withthe friends who are dear to " one !"—La Luc fmiled at the roman¬ tic fimplicity of the idea; but Adeline fighed deeply to the image of felicity, and of Theodore, which it recalled, and turned away to conceal her tears. They now mounted their horfes, and foon after arrived at the foot of Monian- vert. The emotions of Adeline, as fhe contemplated in various points of view the aftonifhing objeds around her, fur- gaffed all expreffion ,* and the feelings of
С б 4 ] of the wbole party were too ftrong to admi. of converfation. The profound ftillnefs which reigned in thef* regions of folitude, infpired awe, and heightened the fublimity of the icenery to an exqui¬ fite decree. " It feems," faid Adeline, <f as if we ** were walking over the luins of th« *' world, and were the only perfons who * ť had furvived the wreck. I can fcarce- *' ly perfuade mvfeif that weare not left *' alone on the globe." " The view of thefe objefts," faid La Luc, '* lifts the foul to their Great Cf Author, and we contemplate with a flf feeling almoft too vaft for humanity—- "the fublimity of his nature in the * c grandeur of his works."—La Luc raifed his eyes, filled with tears, to hea¬ ven, and was for fome moments loft in filent adoration. They quitted thefe feenes with ex¬ treme reluäance; but the hour of the day, and the appearance .of the clouds, which
Γ % 3 which feemed gathering for a norm t made them haften their departure. Ade¬ line almoft wifhed to have witneffed the tremendous effect ofa thunder ftorm in thefe regions. They returned to Leloncourt by a dif¬ ferent route, and the fhade of the over¬ hanging precipices was deepened by the gloom ofthe atmofphere. It was even¬ ing when they came within view ofthe lake, which the travellers rejoiced to fee» for the ftorm fo long threatened was now faft approaching; the thunder murmur¬ ed among the Alps, and the dark va¬ pours that rolled heavily along their fides heightened their dreadful fublimity. La Luc would have quickened his pace» but the road winding down the iteep fide ofa mountain, made caution necef¬ fary. The darkening air and the light¬ nings that now flafhed along the horizon terrified Clara, but flie withheld the ex¬ preífion of her fear in confideration of ber
[ 66 ] her father. A peal of thunder, which feemed to fhake the earth to its founda¬ tions, and was reverberated in tremen¬ dous echoes from the cliffs, burft over their heads. Clara's horfe took fright at the found, and fetting off, hurried her with amazing velocity down the moun¬ tain towards the lake, which wnfhed its foot. The agony of La Luc, who view¬ ed her progiefs in the horrible expeda¬ tion of feeing her daflied down the pre¬ cipice that bordered the road, is not to be defcribed. Clara kepther feat,but terror had al¬ moft deprived her of fenfe. Her efforts to preferve herfeif were mechanical, for ilie fcarcely knew what fhe did. The horfe, however, carried her fafely almoil to the foot of the mountain, but was making towards the lake, when a gen¬ tleman who travelled along the road caught the bridal as the animal endea¬ voured to pafs. The fudden flopping^ ©f tlie horfe, threw Clara to the grounds and*
c e? : and, impatient of reftraint, the animal burft from the hand of the ftranger, and plunged into the lake. The violence of the fall deprived her of recollection ; but while the ftranger endeavoured to fupport her, his fervant ran to fetch water. She foon recovered, and unclofingher eyes, found herfelf in the arms ofa che¬ valier, who appta-ed to fupport her with difficulty. The compaflìon expreffed in his countenance, while he enquired how fhe did, revived her fpirits, and fhe was endeavouring to thank him for his kind« nefs when La Luc and Adeline came up. The terror impreffed on her father's fea¬ tures was perceived by Clara j languid as fhe was, fhe tried to raife herfelf, and faid, with a faint fmile, which betray¬ ed, inftead of difguifing her fufferings, " Dear Sir, I am not hurt." Her pale countenance, and the blood that trickled down her cheek, contradieed her words. But La Luc, to whom terror, had fug¬ gefted;
С €8 ] gefted the utmoft poflible evil, now re¬ joiced to hear her fpeak; he recalled fome prefence of mind, and whiie Ade¬ line applied her falts, he chafed her temples. When íhe revived, fhe told him how much ihe was obliged to the ftranger. La Luc endeavoured to exprefs his grati¬ tude; but the former interrupting him, begged he mighr be fpared the pain of receiving thankò for having followed only an impulfe of common humanity. They were now not far from Lelon¬ court; but the evening was almoft ihut in, and the thunder murmured deeply among the hills. La Luc was diftreffed how to convey Clara home. In endeavouring to raife her from the ground, the ftranger betrayed fuch fymptoms of pain, that La Luc en¬ quired concerning it. The fudden jerk which the horfe had given the arm of the chevalier, in efcaping from his hold,had violently fprained his flioulder, and
Γ 69 J «nd rendered his arm-almoft ufelefs. The pain was exquifite, and La Luc, whofe fears for his daughter were now fubfi- dmg, was fhocked at the circumftance, and preffed the ftranger to accompaay him to the village, wheie relief anight be obtained. He accepted the invitation, and Clara^ being at length placed on a horfe led by her father, was conduded to the chateau. When Madame, who had been loolt* îng out for La Luc fome time, perceived the cavalcade approaching, fhe was alar¬ med, and her apprehenfions were confirm med, when {he faw the fituation of her niece. Clara was carried into the houfe, and La Luc would have fent for a utr- geon, but there was none within feveral leagues of the village, neither werethere any of the phyfical profeffion within the fame diftance. Clara wa« ajfiited to her chamber by Adeline,, and Madame La Luc undertook to examine the wounds. The refult reftored peace to the family ;
Ι ι° ] for though ftie was much bruifed, ftie had efcaped material injury j a flight contufion on the forehead had occafion¬ ed the bloodfhed which at firft alarmed La Luc. Madame undertook to reftore her niece in a few days, with the afliftance ofa balfam compofed by herfelf, on the virtues of which ihe defcanted with great eloquence, till interrupted by La Luc, who reminded her of the condition of her patient. Madame having bathed Clara's bruifes, and giving her a cordial oî incomparable efficacy, left her, and Adeline watched in the chamber of her friend till {he re~ dred to her own for the night. La Luc, whofe fpirits had fuffered much perturbation, was now tranquil¬ lized by the report bis fifter made of Clara. He introduced the ftranger, and having mentioned the accident he had me: with, defired that he might have immediate affiftance. Madame haftened to her clofet, and it is perhaps difficult to deter-
С 71 3 determine whether íhe felt moft concern for the fuiferiigs ofher gueft, or plea¬ fure at the opporrun ty thus offered of difplaying her phyfical fk'll. However this mi^ht be, íhe quitted the room with great alacrity, and very quickly return¬ ed with a phial containing her inefhma^ He balfam, and having given the necef*. fary direction for the application of it, ihe left the ftranger to the care ol hi* fervant. L » Luc infifted that the chevalier, M, Verneuil, ihould not leave the chateau that night, and he very readily fubmit¬ ted to be detained. His manners during the evening were as frank and engaging as the hofpitality and gratitude of La Luc were fineere, and they foon entered into interefting converfation. M. Ver¬ neuil converfed like a man who had feen much, and thought more; and if he difcovered any prejudice iulmopiníons¿ it was evidently the prejudice ofa mind which.
Г 7* ] schieri, feeing objects through the me¬ dium of its own goodnefs, tinges thera .vith the hue of its predominant quality* La Luc was much pleafed, for, in his re¬ tired fituation, he had not often an op¬ portunity of receiving thepîeafure which refults from a communion of intelligent -minds. He found that M. Verneuil had ¿ravelled. La Luc having aíked fome ^queftions relative to England, theyfeJi into difcourfe concerning the national characters of the French and Englifh. и If it is the privilege of wifdom/* faid M. Verneuil, « c ţo look beyond happi- « c rittst I own I had rather be without it, ** When we obferve the Englifh, their ** laws, writings, and converfations, and *' at the fame time mark their counte- *' nances, manners, and the frequency * f oí in k ide among them, we are. apt to ** believe that wifdom and happinefs ** are incompatible. If, on the other * f hand, we tum to their udghfeours, the ** Freneh, 3
С 73 3 и French, and fee* their wretched po« u licy, their fparkling, but fophiftical «' difcourfe, frivolous occupations, and, u withal, their gay animated air, we " fhall be compelled to acknowledge ** that happinefs and fojly too often <c dwell together." " It is the end of wifdom," faid La Luc, " to attain happinefs, and I cati ** hardly dignify that conduci or courfe ** of thinking which tends to mifery " with the name of wifdom. By this " rule, perhaps, the folly, as we term M it, of the French, deferves, fince its " effecl is happinefs, to be called wif- " dom. That airy thoughtleífnefs, which α feems alike to conttmn reflection and " anticipation, produces all the effect of ** it, without reducing its fubjecis to the " mortification of philofophy." Difcourfing on the variety of opinions that are daily formed on the fame con-
Voi. IIL E dua.
Γ 74 3 duét, La Luc obferved how much that which is commonly called opinion, is the refult of paflion and temper. " True," faid M. Verneuil, " there *' is a tone of thought, as there is a key- u note in mufic, that leads all its weaker M affections. Thus where the powers of ° judging may be equal s the difpofition <f to judge is different at different times, * f and the actions of men are at leaft but * € too often arraigned by whim and ca- " price, by partial vanity, and the hu- * f mour of the moment." Here La Luc took occafion to repro¬ bate the conduB of thofe writers, who, by ihewing the da» к fide only of human na¬ ture, and by dwelling on the evils only which are incident to humanity, have fought to degrade man in his own eyes, and to raake him difcontented with life. « What fliould we fay of a painter," continued La Luc, u who colleded in 4< his piece obje6h of a black hue only, *< who prefented you with a black man» '* a black
[ 75 3 4i a black horfe, a black dog, ¿cc. Sec, ** and cells you that his is a picture of Ki nature, and that nature is black ?— " 'Tis true, you would reply, the ob- (t jeČts you exhibit do exift in nature, ** but they forra a very fmall part of her ft works. You iay that nature is black, ** and, to prove it, you have collected on " your canvas all the animals of this *' hue that exift. But you have forgot " to paint the green earth» the blue íky f " the white man, and objects of all thefe a various hues with which creation * f abounds." The countenance of M. Verneuil light¬ ened with peculiar animation during the difcourfe of La Ijíc. —" To think well «* ofhis nature," faid he, " is neceflary *< to the dignity and to the happinefs of 4f roan. There is a decent pride which " becomes every mind, and is conge- u nial to virtue. That confcioufnefs of « c innate dignity, which ihews him the u glory of his nature, will be his beft E 2 * f pro«
С 7δ ] * protedion from the meannefs of vice. * f Where this confcioufnefs is wanting," continued M. Verneuil, u there can be " no fenfe of moral honour, and confe- * c quently none of the higher principles ** of aftion. What can be expeded of " him who fays that it is his nature to be ec mean and felfifh ? Or who can doubt if that he who thinks thus, thinks from " the experience of his own heart, from ** the tendency of his own inclinations ? * r Let it alway* be remembered, that he ff who would perfuade men to be good, " ought to fhew them that they may be u great.*' ** You fpeak,** faid La Luc, " with ** the honeft enthufiafm of a virtuous ** mind5 and in obeying the impulfe of ** your heart, you utter the truths of ** philofophy ; and, truft me, a bad * heart, and a truly phiiofophic head, * have never yet been united in the ** fame individual. Vicious inclinations * «ot only corrupt the heari, but ¿he ** under*·
[ 77 3 cf underftanding, and thus lead to falfe e< reafoning. Virtue only is on the fide * of truth.'* La Luc and his gueft, mutually pleafed with each other, entered upon the dif¬ cuflion of fubjecis fo interefting to them both, that it was late before they parted for the night.
CHAPTER
С 78 3
CHAPTER XVIL ** 'Twas fuch a fcene as gave а kird relief '* Tomemor), in fweetly-pen five grief.*' Virgil's Toms. " Mine be the breezy bi 1 }, that íkirts the down, ** Where a green graíľy turf is aH I crave, " Willi here and there а \ю\с% beflrown, (i Feft by a brook or fountain's murmurirg wave, * c And many an evening fun filine fweetly on my * f giave," The MiNbTRfcL. REPOSE had fo much reftored Clara, that when Adeline, anxious to know how flie did, went early in the morning to her chamber, flie found her already rifen, and ready to attend the family at breakfaft. Monfieur Verneuil appeared alfo, but his looks betrayed a want of reft, and indeed he had fuffered, during the night, a degree of anguifli from his arm, which it was an eifort of fome re¬ folution
С 79 3 folution to endure in filence. It waa now fwelled and inflamed, and this might in fome degree be attributed to the effe ft of Madame La Luc's balfam, whole reftorative qualities had for once failed. The whole family fym¬ pathifed vuth his fufferings, and Ma¬ dame, at the requeft of M. Verneuil, abandoned her balfam, and fubftituted an emollient fomentation. From an application of this, he, in a fliort time, found an abatement of the pain, and returned to thé breakfaft table with greater compofure. The happinefs which La Luc felt at feeing his daugh¬ ter in fafety was very apparent, but the warmth ofhis gratitude towards her pre- ferver he found h difficult to exprefs* Clara fuoke the genuine emotions ofher heart w ilh ai tlefs, but modeft, energy, and teftified fincere concern for the fufterings which fhe had occafioned M. Verneuil, The pleafure received from the com¬ pany ofhis gueft, and the confideration of
С 8о ] of the eifential fervice he had rendered him, co-operated with the natural hof¬ pitality of La Luc, and he preifed M. Verneuil to remain fome time at the cha¬ teau.—** I can never repay the fervice " you have done me/' faid La Lucj " yet 1 feek to increafe my obligations " to you by requefting you will prolong * c your vifit, and thus allow mean op- " portunity of cultivating your acquaint- ic ance." M. Verneuil, who, at the time he met La Luc, was travelling from Geneva to a diftant part of Savoy, merely for the purpofe of viewing the country, being now delighted with his hoft, and with every thing around him, willingly ac¬ cepted the invitation. In this circum¬ ftance prudence concurred with inclina¬ tion j for tohave purfued his journey on horfeback, in his prefent fituation, would have been dangerous, if not impradi¬ cable. The
С 8' ] The morning was fpent in converfa¬ tion, in which M. Verneuil difplayed a mind enriched with tafte, enlightened by fcience, and.enlarged by obfervation. The fituation of the chateau, and the features of the furrounding fcenery, char¬ med him, and in the evening he found himfeffable to walk with La Luc, and explore the beauties of this romantic re¬ gion. As they paffed through the vil¬ lage, the falu tations of the peafants, in whom love and refpeft; were equally blended, and their eager enquires after Clara, bore teftimony to the charafter of La Luc, while his countenance expreffed aferene fatisfačtion, ariíingfromthe con¬ fcioufnefs of deferving and poffeffing their love.— ct 1 live furrounded by my <f children,'* faid he, turning to M. Ver¬ neuil, who had noticed their eagernefs, " for fuch I confider my pariihioners : u in difcharging the duties of my office, *' I amrepayednotonly bymyowncon- 11 fcience, but by ι heir gratitude. There £ 5 « is,
С 82 3 * f is a luxury in obferving their fimple ** and honeft love, which I would not ** exchange for any thing the world calls " bleffings.*' w Yet the world, Sir, would call the *' pleafures of which you fpeak roman- ff tic/* faid M. Verneuil ; w for to be ** fenfible of this pure and exquifite de- ·' light, requires a heart untainted with f * the vicious pleafure» of fociety—plea- *' fures that deaden its fineft feelings, * c and poifon the fource of its trueft en- ·' joyments/ 8 —-They purfued their way along the borders oi the lake, fometimes under the fhi.de of hanging woods, and fometimes over hillocks of turfs, where the fcene opened in all ks wild magni¬ ficence. M. Verneuil often ftopped ín raptures to obferve and point out the lingular beauties it exhibited, while La Luc, pleafed with the delight his friend exprefled, furveyed with more than ufual fatisfadion the obječb which had fo of¬ ten charmed him before. But there wa» 3 a ten-
С 8з 3 a tender melancholy in the tone of his voice and his countenance, which arofe from the recolleclion of having often traced thefe feenes, and partook of the pleafure they infpired, with her who had long fince bade them an eternal farewel. They prefently quitted the lake, and* winding up a fteep afcent between the woods, came, after an hour's walk, to a green fummit, which appeared among the favage rocks that environed it, like the bîoffom on the thorn. It was a fpot formed for folitary delight, infpiring that foothing tendernefs fo dear to the feeling mind, and which calls back to memory (he images of paífed regret, foftened by diftance, and endeared by frequent re- collecìion. Wild flirubs grew from the crevices of the rocks beneath, and the high trees of pine and cedaj* that waved above, afforded a melancholy and ro¬ mantic iliade. The filence of the fcene was interrupted only by the breeze as it rolled over the woods, and by the foli¬ tary
С »4 ] tary notes of the birds that inhabited the cliffs. From this point the eye commanded an entire view of thofe majeftic and fub¬ lime Alps, whofe afpečt fills the foul with· emotions of indefcribable awe, and feems to lift it to a nobler nature. The village and the chateau of La Luc appeared iw the bofom of the mountains, a peaceful· retreat from the ftorms that gathered on« their tops· All the faculties of M. Ver¬ neuil were abforbed in admiration, and he was for fome time quite filent; at length, burfting into a rhapfody, he turn¬ ed, and would have addreffed La Luc,, when he perceived him at a diftance x leaning againft: a ruftic urn,, over which drooped, in beautiful luxuriance, the weeping birch. As he approached, La Luc quitted his pofition, and advanced to meet him,. while M. Verneuil enquired upon what occafion the urn had been erefted. La. Luc, unable to anfwer, pointed to it,, and.
and walked filently away, and M. Ver- neuii, approaching the urn, read the following infcription % TO THE MEMORY OF CLARA LA LUC, THIS URN I* ERECTED ON THB SPOT WHICH SHE LOVED r IN TESTIMONY OF THE AFFECTION O* A HUSBAND.
M. Verneuil now comprehended the whole, and feeling for his friend, was. hurt that he had noticed this monument ofhis grief. He rejoined La Luc, who. was itanding on the point of the emi¬ nence, contemplating the landfcape be¬ low with an air more placid, and touch¬ ed with the fweetnefs of piety and refig¬ nation. He perceived that M. Ver¬ neuil was fomewhat difconcerted^ and he fought to remove his uneafinefs. "· You. " will confider it," faid he, if as a mark * € of ray efteem, that I have brought you. * to this fpot. It is never prophaned. "by.
Γ »6 ] ·* by the prefence of the unfeeling. ft They would deride the faithfulncfs of ** an attachment which has fo long fur- ,f vived its objeft, and which, in their w own breafts, would quickly have been " loft amidft the diffipation of general * 4 fociety. 1 have cherifhed in my heart ** the remembrance ofa woman, whofe ** virtues claimed all my love. I have ** cherifhed it as a ti calure to which I * f could withdraw from temporary cares л and vexations, in the certainty of find- ·* ing a foothing, though melancholy> ** comfort." La Luc paufed. M. Verneuil expref- fed the fympathy he felt, but he knew the facrednefs of forrow, and foon relap¬ fed into fiiencc. " One ofthe brighteft * hopes ofa future ftate," refumed La Luc, *' is, that we fhall meet again thofe ·* whom we have loved upon earth. And ** perhaps our happinefs may be permit- ·' ted t?o confift very much in the fo- ** ciety of our friends, purified from the "fraiL*
t 87 J * frailties of mortality, with the finer " affeftions more fweetly attuned, and " with the faculties of mind infinitely w more elevated and enlarged. We fhall f€ then be enabled to comprehend fub- ** jefts which are too vaft for human u conception; to comprehend,perhaps, u the fublimity of that Deity who firft * f called us into being. Thefe views of 4t futurity, my friend, elevate us above *' the evils of this world, and feem to- ·* communicate to us a portion of the * c nature we contemplate f * Call them not the allufions ofa vifio- *· nary brain," proceeded La Luc : ** I H trailed their reality. Of this I am cer- € * tain, that whether they are illufions or ** not, a faith in them ought to be che- u riihed for the comfort it brings to the r< heart, and reverenced for the dignity ·' it imparts to themind. auch feelings *' make a happy and important part 0 of our belief in a future exiftence t " they
Γ w I ** tÍKV give energy to virtue, and {tabî- w lity to principìe. , ' ** This, 0 faid M.Verneuil, cr is what I " have often felt, and what every inge— w nuous mind muft acknowledge/* La Luc and M. Verneuil continued irr converfation till the fun had leftthe fcene. The mountains, darkened by twilight, aflumed a fublimer afpeÜ, while the top& of fome of the highefl Alps were yet il¬ lumined by the fun's rays, and formed a ftriking contrail to the íhadowy obfcu¬ rity of the world below. As they de¬ fcended through the woods, and travei*- fcd the margin of the lake, the ftillnefs- and folemnky of the hour diffufed a pen- live fweetnefs over their minds, and funk them into filence. They found fupper fpread, as was ufual^ ín the hall, of which the windows open¬ ed upon a garden, where the flowers might be faid to yield their fragrance in gratitude to the refreftiing dews. The windows were embowered with eglantine and
C 8 9 ] ^and other fweet flirubs, which hung ín wild luxuriance around, and formed a beautiful and fimple decoration, Clara and Adeline loved to pafs the even¬ ings in this hall, where they had acqui¬ red the firft rudiments ofaftronomy, and from which they had a wide view of the heavens. La Luc pointed out to them the planets and the fixed ftars, explain¬ ed their laws, and from thence, taking occafion to mingle moral with fcientific inftrudion, would often afcend towards that great firß Caufe, whofe nature foars beyond the grafp of human comprehen¬ fion. '* No ftudy," he would fometimes fay, " fo much enlarges the mind, or im- " preffes it with fo fublime an idea of " the Deity, as that of aftronomy. When " the imagination launches into the re- *' gions of fpace, and contemplates the *' innumerable worlds which are fcatter- " ed through it, we are loft: in aftonifh- u ment and awe, This globe appears as " amab
С 9° 3 " a mafs of atoms in the immenflty of u the univerfe, and man a mere infect: tf yet how wondert ul ! that man, whofe u frame is fo diminutive in the fcale of ' f beings, ihould have powers which f( fpurn the narrow boundaries of time '* and place, foar be) ond the fphere of ** hibcxiftence, penetrate the feerct laws * c of nature, and calculate their progref- " fiveeffefts." ** О ! how expreffively does this prove f< the fpirituality of our being! let the " Mateiialift confider it, and bluíh that ·' he has ever doubted." In this hall the whole family now met at fupper, and during the remainder of the evening the converfation turned upon general fubjefts, in which Clara joined in modeft and judicious remark. LalLuc had taught her to familiarize her mind to reafoning, and had accuftomed her to deliver her fentiments freely: fhe fpoke them with a fimplicity extremely enga¬ ging, and which convinced her hearers, % that
С 9» ] that the love of knowledge> not the va¬ nity of talking, induced her to com erfe. M. Verneuil evidently endeavoured to draw forth her fentiments, and Clara, in¬ terefted by the fubjeâs he introduced, а ftranger to afleclation, and pleafed with the opinionshe expreffed, an five re d theni with franknefsand animation. The) re¬ tired mutually pleafed with each other. M.Verneuil was about fix and thirty; his figure manly, his countenance Irank and engaging. A quick, penetrating eve, whofe fire was foftened by benevolence, difelofed the chief traits of his charac¬ ter; hc was quick to difcern,but gene¬ rous to excufe, the follies of mankind ;, and while no one more fenfibly felt art injury, none more readdy accepted the conce fhon of an enemy. He was by birth a Frenchman. A for-*/ tune lately devolved to him, had enabled him to execute the plan, which his active and inquifitive mind had fuggefted, of viewing the rnoft remarkable parts of the cotb
Γ 92 I continent ofEurope. Hewas peculiariy fufceptible of the beautiful and fublime in nature. To fuch a tafte Switzerland, and the adjacent country, was, of all others, themoft interefting; and he found the fcenery it exhibited infinitely furpaif¬ ing all that his glowing imagination had formed ; he faw with the eye of a paint-. er, and felt with the rapture ofa poeu In the habitation of La Luc he met with the hofpitality, the franknefs, and the fimplicity, fo charafteriftic of the country ; in his venerable hoft he faw the ftrength of philofophy united with the fineft tendernefs of humanity ; a phi* lofophy which taught him to correct his, feelings, not to annihilate them ; in Cla¬ ra, the bloom of beauty, with the moft perfeft fimplicity of heart; and in Ade-* line, all the charms of elegance and grace, with a* genius deferving of the higheft culture. In this family picture the goodnefsof Madame La Luc wasnot unperceived or forgotten. The cheer^ fulnefs*
[ 93 ] íulnefsand harmony that reigned within ahe chateau was delightful; but the phi¬ lanthropy which, flowingfrom the heart 40Î the paftor, was diffufed through the whole village, and united the inhabitants in the fweet and firm bonds of focial compact, was divine. The beauty of its fituation confpired with thefe circum¬ ftances to make Leloncourt feem almoft a paradife. M. Verneuil fighed, that he muft fo foon quit it. <e I ought to feek g€ no farther," faid he, "for here wif- * c dom and happinefs dwell together/* The admiration was reciprocal; La Luc and his family found themfelves much interefted in M, Verneuil, and looked forward to the time of.his depar¬ ture with regret. So warmly they prefi¬ xed him to prolong his vifit, and fo powerfully lus own inclinations fecond¬ ed the r's, that he accepted the invita¬ tion. La Luc omitted no circumftance which rnight contribute to the amufe¬ ment of his gueft, who having in a few
С 94 3 few days recovered the ufe of his arm, thçy made feveral excui fions among the mountains. Adeline and Clara, whom the care of Madame had reftored to her ufual health, were generally of the party. After fpending a week at the chateau, M Verneuil, bade adieu to La Luc and liis family; they parted with mutual regiet, and the former promifed that when he returned to Geneva, he would take Leloncourt in his way. . As he faid this, Adeline, who had for fome time ob¬ ferved with much alarm, La Luc's de¬ clining health, looked mournfully on his languid countenance, and uttered a fe¬ cret prayer that he might live to receive the vifit of M- Verneuil. Madame was the only perfon who did not lament his departure j fhe faw that the efforts of her brother to entertain his gueft were more than his prefent fiate of health would admit of, and fhe rejoiced
í 95 3 rejoiced in the quiet that would now re¬ turn to him. Bat this quiet brought La Luc no re¬ fpite irom illnefs ; the fatigue lie Lad fuffered in his late exertions ieemed to háve increafed his diforder, which in a ihoit time affumed the afpečt of a con¬ fumption. Yielding to the folicitations of his family, he went to Geneva for ad¬ vice, and was there recommended to trv the air of Nice· The journey thither, however, was of confiderable length, and believing his life to be very precarious,, he hefitated whether to go. Hewas alfo unwilling to leave the duty of his parifh unper¬ formed for fo long a period as his health might require ; biat this was an objec¬ tion which would not have withheld him from Nice 3 had his faith in the climate been equal to that of his phyfi¬ cians» His parifh ioners felt the life of their paftor to be of the utmoft confequence to
í 96 ] to tliem. It was a general caufe, and they teftified at once his worth, and their fenfe ofit, by going in a body to folicit bim to leave them. He was much af- feăed by this inftance of their attach¬ ment. Such a proof of regard, rejoined with the entreaties ofhis own family, and a confideration that for their fakes it was a duty to endeavour to prolong his life, was too powerful to be with¬ ftood, and he determined to fet out for Italy. It was fettled that Clara and Adeline, whofe health La Luc thought required change of air and fcene, ihould accom¬ pany him, attended by the faithful Pe¬ ter. On 'the morning of his departure, a large body of his parifhioners affembled round the door to bid him farewell. It was an affefting fcene ι they might meet no mote. At length, wiping the tears from his eyes, La Luc faid a w Let us ** truft in God, my friends; he has power
С 97 ] ' ( power to heal all diforders both of «* body and mind. We fhall meet again, * c if not in this world, I hope in a beu «' ter, Let our conduft be fuch as to " enfure that better." The fobs of his people prevented anyî reply. There was fcarcely a dry eye in the village; for there was fcarcely aa inhabitant of it that was not now affem¬ bled in the prefence of La Luc. Hè fhook' hands iwiib tbem ' all¿ " Farewell* «* my friends// faid he, "we fhall meet «'again-—»"God grant we may!** йЫ. they, with once voice of fervent ptett* tion. Having mounted his horfe, and Clara and Adeline being ready, they toolt a lail' leave of Madame La 1 Luc, and quitted tlie chateau. The people, un-¿ willing** to leave La Luc; the greater part оЙЬ em accompanied him to fome diftance frofø the village'. As he moved ftow iy on, he caft a Ungeri »g look at his little home, where hc had fp«nt fo Vol. III. F many
[ 98 ] many peaceful years, and which he now gazed on, perhaps, for the laft time, and tears rofe in his eyes; but he check¬ ed them. Every fcene of the adjacent country called up, as he paffed, fome tender remembrance. He looked to¬ wards the fpot confecrated to the me¬ mory of his deceafed wife; the dewy vapours of the morning veiled it. La Luc felt the difappointment more deep¬ ly, perhaps, than reafon could juftify; but thofe who knew from experience how much the imagination loves to dwell on any objeft, however remotely connefted with that of our tendernefs, will feel witli him. This was an objeft round which the affeftions of La Luc had fettled themfelves : it was a me¬ morial to the eye, and the view of it awakened more forcibly in the mind every tender idea that could aflbciate with the primary fubjeft ofhis regard. In fuch cafes fancy gives to the illufion» of ftrong affedion, the ftamp of reality and 3
С 99 ] and they are cherifhed by the heart with romantic fondnefs. His people accompanied him for near a mile from the village, and could fcarce¬ ly then be prevailed on to leave him ; at length he once more bade them fare¬ well, and went on his way, followed by their prayers and bleffings. La Luc and his little party travelled flowly on, funk in penfive filence—a fi¬ lence toopleafingly fad to be foon relin-, quifhed, and which they indulged with. out fear of interruption. The folitary grandeur of the feenes through which they paifed, and the fmoothing murmur of the pines that waved above, aided this foft luxury of meditation. They proceeded by eafy ftages ; and after travelling for fome days among the romantic mountains and paft or al vallies of Piedmont, they entered the rich coun¬ try of Nice. The gay and luxuriant views which now opened upon the tra* vellers as they wound among the hills, F 2 appeared
[ JOO ] appeared like feenes of fairy enchant¬ ment, or thofe produced by the lonely vifions of the Poets. While the fpiral fummits of the mountains exhibited the fnowy fet v л ty of winter, the pine, the cyprefs, the olive, and the myrtle, fhaded their fides with the green tints of fpring, and groves of orange, lemon, and citron, fpread over their feet the full glow of au¬ tumn. As they advanced, the fcenery became ftili more diverfified; and at length, between the receding heights, Adeline caught a glimpfe of the diftant waters ofthe Mediterranean, fading into the blue and cloudlefs horizon. She had îţever till now feen the ocean ; and this tranfient view of itroufed her imagina- tk^», and made her watch impatiently for a nearer profpeci. It was towards the clofe of day when the travellers, winding round a» abrupt pro- )i ftion ofthat range of Al^s which crowns the amphitheatre thatenvirons the city of Nicc s looked down upon the green hills 5 that
[ io' ] that ftretch to the fhores, on the city and its ancient caftle, and on the wide waters of the Mediterranean ; with the mountains of Corfica in the fartheft diftance. Such a fweep of fea and land, fo varied with the gay, the magnificent, and the awful, would have fixed any eye in admiration : for Adeline and Clara, novelty and enthufiafm added their charms tò the profpect. The foft and falubrious air feemed to welcome La Luc to this fmiling region, and the ferene atmofphere to promife invariable fummer. They at length defcended upon the little plain where ftands the city of Nice, and'whkh was the mofl •extenfive piece oflevel ground they had paffed fince they entered the country. Here, in the bofom of thß mountains, iheltered from the north and the eaft, where the weftern gales alone feemed to breathe, all the blooms of fpring and the riches of autumn were united. Trees of myrtle bordered the road, which
[ 102 ] which wound among groves of orange, lemon, and bergamot, whofe delicious fragiance came to the fenfe mingled witn the breath of rofes and carnations that bloffomed Ín their ihade. The gemly-fwcllmg hills that rofe from the plain were covered with vines, and crowned w'th cypreífes, olives, and date trees ; beyond there appeared the fwecp oí lo r ty mountains w hence the travellers had defcended, and whence flows the lit¬ tle river Pagi ion, fwoln by the fnows that melt on their fummits, and which, after meandering through the plain, waflies the walls of Nice« where it falls into the Mediterranean. In this blooming region, Adeline obferved that the coun¬ tenances of the peafants, meagre and difcontented, formed a melancholy con¬ traft to £he foce of the с лигу» and flie lamented again the effects of an arbi¬ trary government, where the bounties of nature, which were defigned for all, are monopolized by a few, and the many
[ '03 ] many ate fuflered to ftarve, tantalized by fui rounding plenty. The city loft much of its enchantment on a nearer approach: its nanow ftreets and fhabby houfes, but ill anfwered the expedation which a diftant view of its rampai ts, audits harbour, gay with vef¬ fels, feemed to authorife. The appear¬ ance of the inn, at which La Luc now alighted, did not contribute to foften his difappointment; but if he was furprifed to find fuch indifferent accommodation at the inn of a town celebrated as the refort of valetudinarians, he was ftill more fo when he learned the difliculty of procuring furniihed lodgings. After much fearch, he procured apart« ments in a fmall but pleafant chateau, fituated a little way out ofthe town: it had a garden, and a terrace which over¬ looked the fea, and was diftinguifhed by an air of neatnefs very unufual in the houfes of Nice. He agreed to board with the family, whofe table Iikewife ac¬ commodated
С 104 ] rommodated a gentleman and lady, their lodgers; and thus he became a temporary inhabitant of ihis charming climate. On the following morning, Adeline rofe at an early hour, eager to indulge the new and fublime emotion with which a view of the ocean infpired her, and walked with Clara toward the hills that afforded a moft extenfive profpect. They purfued their way for fome time between high embowering banks, till they arrived at an eminence, whence ·* Heaven, earth, ocean, fmiled!" They fatdown ona point of rock, over¬ íhadowed by lofty palm trees, to contem¬ plate, at leifure, the magnificent fcene. The/fun was juft emerged from the fea, ■over which hi« rays fhed a ñooá of light, -and darted a thoufand hrilliant tints on the vapours thai afcended the horizon, and floated there in light clouds, leaving the bofom of the waters below clear as cryftal, except where the white furges were
ΐ Ό 5 3 were feen to beat upon the rocks ; and difcovering the diftant fails of the fifh¬ ing boats, and the far diftant highlands of Corfica, tinted, with ætherial blue. Clara, after fome time, drew forth her pencil, but threw it afide in defpair* Adeline, as they returned home through a romantic glen, when her fenfes were no longer abforbed in the contempla¬ tion of this grand fcenery, and when its images floated on her memory, only, in foftened colours, repeated tire following lines: SUN-RISE : A SONNET.
Oft 1st me wander, at the break of day, Thro' the c:ol vale overhung with waving woods, Drink the rich fragrance of the budding May, And catch the murmer of the diftant ßaodsj Or reft on the freíh bank of limpid rill, Where fleeps the vi'iet in the dewy ihade, Where op'ning lilies balmy fweets diftil, And the wild -raufk-rofe weeps along the glade: F ¿ Or
С »об ] Or climb the eaftern cliff, whofe airy head Hangs rudely o'er the blue and mifty main ; Watch the fine huea of morn through æther fpread, And paint with rofeate glow the cryftal plain. Oh ! who can fpcalc the rapture of the four When o'er the waves the fun firft fteals to fight, And all the world of waters, as they roll, And Heaven's vail vault unveils in Hving light i So life's young hour to man enchanting fmiles, With íparkling health, and joy, and fancy's fairy, wiles !
La Luc, in his walks, met with fome fenfible and agreeable companions, who, like himfelf, came to Nice Jn fearch of health. Of thefe he foon formed a fmall but pleafant fociety, among whom was* a Frenchman, whofe mild manners,, marked with a deep and interefting melancholy, had particularly attracted La Luc. He very feldom mentioned himfelf, or any circumftance that might lead to a knowledge of his family, but on other fubjeBs converfed with fiank- nefs and much intelligence. La Luc had
[ 107 3 had frequentiy invited hirn to his lodg¬ ings; but he had always declined the invitation, and this in a manner fo gentle as to difarm difpleafure, and con¬ vince La Luc that this refufal was thr confequence of a certain dejeftion of mind, which made him reluctant to meet other ftrangers. The defcription which La Luc had given of this foreigner, had encited the curiofity of Clara ; and the fympathy which the unfortunate feel for each other called forth the commiferation of Adeline; for that he was unfortunate fhe could not doubt. On their return from an evening walk La Luc pointed out the Chevalier, and quickened his- pace to overtake him. Adeline was for a moment impelled to follow, but deli¬ cacy checked her fteps ; ftie knew how painful the prefence of a firaager often is to a wounded mind, and forbore to intrude herfelf on his notice, for the fake ©fonly fatisfying an idie curiofity. She turned
ί , *°s ] turned therefore into another path ; but the delicacy which now prevented the meeting, accident in a few days defeat¬ ed, and La Luc introduced the ftranger. Adeline received him with a foft fmile, but endeavoured to reftrain the expref¬ fion of pity which her features had invo¬ luntarily aifumed; fhe wiihed him not to know that flie obferved he was un¬ happy. After this interview he no longer re- je&ed the invitations of La Luc, but made him frequent vifits, and often ac¬ companied Adeline and Clara in their rambles The mild and fenfible con¬ verfation of the former feemed to footh his mind, and in her prefence he fre¬ quently converfed with a degree of ani¬ mation which La Luc till then had not obferved in him. Adeline, too, derived from the fimilarity of their tafte, and bis intelligent converfation, a degree of fatisfačtion which contributed, with the compaflìon his dejection infpired, to win het
C I0 9 ] her confidence,and fhe converfed with an eafy franknefs rather unufual to her. His vifits» foon became more frequent· He walked with La Luc and his family; he attended them on their little excur¬ sions to view thofe magnificent remains of Roman antiquity which enrich the neighbourhood of Nice. Wlien the la¬ dies fat at home and worked, be enli¬ vened the hours by reading to them, and they had the pleafure to obferve his fpi¬ rits fomewhat relieved from the heavy melancholy that had oppreffed him. M. Amand was paifionately fond of mufic. Clara had not forgot to bring her beloved lute ; he would fometimes ftrike the chords in the moit fweet and mournful fymphonics, but never could be prevailed on to play. When Ade¬ line or Clara played, he would fit in deep reverie, and loft to every objccl; around him, except when he fixed his eyes in mournful gaze on Adeline, and a figh would fometimes efcape him. One
С IIÜ ] One evening Adeline, having excufed herfelf from accompanying La Luc and Clara in a vifit to a neighbouring fami¬ ly, retired to the terrace of the garden, which overlooked the fea, and as ihe viewed the tranquil fplendour of the fet¬ ting fun, and his glories reflected on the polifhed furface of the waves, íhe touch¬ ed the firings of th., lute in fofteft har¬ mony, her voice accompanying it with words which flie had one day written after having read that rich effufion of Shakefpeare's genius, " A Midfumtner " Nighťs Dream." TITANIA TO HER LOVE*
О ! fly with me through diftant air To ifles that gem the weftern deep !' For laughing Surømer revels there, And hangs her wreath, on every fteep*. As througb the green tranfparent fea Light floating on the waves we go,. The nymphs (hall gaily welcome jne,. Far in their coral cavee below, ; Hop
For oft upon their margin fands, When twilight leads the frefh'ninghoars, I come with all my jocund bauds To charm them from their fea-gft 5 m. bow'rs*. And well they love our fports to view, ' And on the Ocean's breaft to lave ; And oft as we the dance renew, They call up mufic from the wave». Swift hie we to that fplendid clime, Where gay Jamaica fpreads her fcene, Lifts-the blue mountain—wild—fublime Í. And fmooths her vales of vivid green» Where throneď high, in pomp of ihade,. The. Poteer of Vegetation reigns, Expanding wide, o*er hill and glade, Shrubs of all growth ------ fruit ofall ftains i. She fteals the fun-beam's fervid glow, To paint her flow'rs of mingling hue ; And o'er the grape the purple throw, Breaking from verdant leaves to view, There myirtle bow'rs, and citron grove, Q'ercanopy our airy dance ; And there the fea-breeze loves to rove,. When trembles day's departing glance. And
[ in ] And when the falfe moon ííeaís awav, Or o*er the chafing mem doth rife, Oft, fearlefs, we our gambols play * By the fire-worm's radiant eyes, And fuck the honey'd reeds that fwell In tufted plumes of filver white ; Or r-brce the cocoa's milky cell, To fip the nedar of delight ! And when the ihaking thunders roll, And lightnings ftrike athwart the gloom. We {heiter in the cedar's bole, And revel 'mid the rich perfume! But chief we íove beneath the palm, Or verdant plantain's fpreading leaf. To hear, upon tlie midnight calm, Sweet Philomela pour her grief. To mortal fprite fuch dulcet found, Such blif&ful hours, were never known ! О ! fly with me my airy round, And I will make them all thine own î
Adeline ceafed to fing —when ihe im¬ mediately heard repeated, ina low voice, " To mortal fprite fuch dulcet found, « Stich blifsful hoers were never known !" and
and turning her eyes whence it came, fhe faw M. Amand. She blufhed and laid down the lute, which he inftantly took up, and, with a tremulous hand, drew forth tones *' fhat might create a foul under the ribs of Death." Jn a melodious voice, that trembled with fcnfibii'ty, he fang the following SONNET. How fweet is Love*s firft gentle fway f When crown'd with flowVs he foftly fmilei 1 His blue cyts fraught vvith tearful wiles, Where beams of tender tranfport play ; Hope leads him on his airy way, And Faith and Fancy ftill brguiles— Faith quickly tangled in her toils- Fancy, whofe magic forms fo gay The fair Deceiver's felf deceive— ** How fweet is Love's firlt.gentlefway!'* Ne'er would that heart he bida to grieve From Sorrow's foft enchantments ßray— Ne'er—till the God exulting in his art, Relentlefs frowns, and wings th' envenom'd dart. Mon-
C IH J Monfieur Amand paufed : he feemed much oppreffed, and, at length, burft into tears, laid down the inftrument, and walked abruptly away to the farther end of the terrace. Adeline, without feeming to obferve his agitation, rofe and leaned upon the wall, below which a group of fifliermen were bufily emploved in drawing a net. In a few moments he returned, \-vith a compofed and foftencd countenance. u Forgive this abrupt con- *' dučt," faid he : "I know not how to e< apologize for it but by owning its ** caufe. When 1 tell you, Madam, that * r my tears flow to the memory of a ct Lady who ftrongly refembled you, t% and who is loft to me for ever, you ** will know how to pity me."—His voice faultcred, and he paufed. Adeline was filent. " The lute," he refumed, *< was her favourite inftrument, and when u you touched it wich fuch melancholy ft expreífion, 1 faw her yery image be- " fore
C "s 3 " fore me. But, alas! why do I diftrefs " you with a knowledge of my forrows! '* ilie is gone, never to return! And u you, Adeline—you"------He check¬ ed his fpeech, and Adeline, turning on him a look of mournful regard, obfer¬ ved a wildnefs in his eyes, which alarm¬ ed her. " Thefe recolleciions are too " painful," laid ihe, in a gentie voice; '* let us return to the houfe ; M. La Luc " is probably come home."— ,f О no I" replied M. Amand ; " No—this breeze u refrefhes me. How often at this hour " have I talked with her> as I now talk with u you! Such were the foft tones ofher " voice—fuch the ineffable expreffion of " her countenance."—Adeline interrupt¬ ed him: "Let me beg of you to con- €t fider your health—this dewy air can- u not be good for invalids." He ftood with his hands clafped, and feemed not to hear her. She took up the lute to go, and paffed her fingers lightly over the chords.
С чб ] chords. The founds recalled his fcatter¬ ed fenfes ; he raifed his eyes, and fixed them in long unfettled gaze upon her's. ** Muft I leave you here ?" faid ihe, fmiling, and ftanding in an attitude to depart—" I entreat you to play again the *' air I heard juft now,'* faid M. Amand, in a hurried voice."— <f Certainly ;'' and ihe immediately began to play. He leaned againft a palm-tree in an attitude of deep attention, and as the founds lan¬ guiihed on the air, his features gradu¬ ally loft their wild expreffion, and he melted into tears. He continued to weep filently till the fong concluded, and it was fome time before he recovered voice enough to fay,"Adel i ne, I fincerely thank ■* you for this goodnefs. My mind has ** recovered its bias; you have foothed * f a broken heart. Increafe the kindnefs *' you have fhewn me by promifing ne- *' ver to mention what you have wit- ** neffed this evening, and I will endea- <s vour
С 117 ] ** vour never again to wound your fen- 11 fibility by a fimilar offence."—Ade¬ line gave the required promife : and M. Amand, preffing her hand, with a me¬ lancholy fmile, hurried from the gar¬ den, and fhe faw him no more that night. La Luc h 3d been near a fortnight at Nice, and his health, inftead of amend¬ ing, feemed rather to decline ; yet he wifhed to make a longer experiment of the climate. The air, which failed to reftore her venerable friend, revived Adeline, and the, variety and novelty of the furrounding feenes amufed her mind, though fince they could not obliterate the memory of paft, or fupprefs the pang of pre fent afüiftion, they were ineffectual to diffipate the fick langour of melan¬ choly. Companv, by compelling her to withdraw her attetition from the fubjeft of her forrow, aftorded her a tranfient re¬ lief, but the violence of the exertion ge¬ nerally
С ηβ ] nerally left her more depreffed. It uas in the ftillnels of folitude, in the tran¬ quil obfervance of beautiful nature, that her mind recovered its tone, and indul¬ ging the penfive inclination now become habitual to it, was foothed and foi tified. Of all the grand objefts which nature had exhibited, the ocean infpired her with the moft fublime admiration. She loved to wander alone on its ihores, and, when llie could efcape fo long from the duties or the forms of fociety, ihe would fit for hours on the beach, watching the rolling waves, and liftening to their dying mur¬ mur, till her foftened fancy recalled long loft feenes, and reftored the image of Theodore, when tears of defpondency too often followed thofe of pity and regret* But thefe vifions of memory, painful as they wet e, no longer excited that phrenzy of grief they formerly awakened in Savoy; the iharpnefs of mifery was paffed, tho' its heavy influence was not, perhaps, lefs powerful*
С »9 J ¡powerful. To thefe folitary indulgences generally fucceeded calmnefb, and what Adeline endeavouied to believe was re¬ signation. í She ufually rofe early, and walked down tothe fhore to enjoy, i n the cool and filent hours of the morning, the cheer¬ ing beauty of nature, and inhale the pure fea-breeze. Every object then fmiled in frefh and lively colours. The blue fea, the brilliant fky, the diftant fifliing boats with their white fails, and the voices of the fifhermen, borne at intervals on the air, were circumflances which re¬ animated her fpirits, and in one of her rambles, yielding to that tafte of poetry which had ieldom forfaken her, ihe re~ peated the following lines :
MORNING,
[ 120 ] MORNING, ON THE SEA-SHORE,
What print of fairy feet is here On Neptune*s fmooih and yellow fands? What midnight revel's airy dance, Beneath the moon-beam's trembling glance Has bleft thefe ihores i —What fprightly bands Have chacM the waves uncheck'd by fear f Whoe'er they were they fied from morn, For now, all filent and forlorn, Thefe tide-forfaktn fands appear- Keturn, fweet fprttes î the fcene to cheer I In vain the call !—Till moonlights hour .Again diffufe ics fofter pow'r, Titania, nor her fairy loves, Emerge from India's fpicy groves. Then, when thefhad'wy iwur returns, When filence reigns o'er air and earth, And ev'ry ftar in aether burns, They come to celebrate their mirth ; In frolic ringlet trip the ground, Bid Mufic's voice on Silence win, Till magic echoes anfwer round—· Thus do their feftive rites begin. О fairy
[ 121 J O fairy forms! fo coy to mortal ken, Vour myftic fteps to poets only ihewn ; О ! lead me to the brook, or hollow'd glen, Retiring far, with winding woods o'ergrown ! Where'er ) e beft delight to rule ; If in fome forefťs lone retreat, Thither conduci my willing feet To the light brink of fountain cool, Where, flseping in the midnight ¿ew, Lie Sprirg'? young buds of ev'ry hue, Yielding their fweet breath to the air; .. To fold thdr filken leaves from harm, And their chill heads in moonihine warm, Is bright Titania's tender care. There, to the night-bird's plaintive chaunt Your carols fweet ye lovs to raife, With oaten reed and paíťral lays; And guard with forceful fpell her haunt, Who, when your antic fports are done, Oft lulls ye in the lily's cell, Siveet flow'r ! that fuits your flumbers well, And ihields ye from the rifing fun. ' When not to India's fleeps ye fly After twilight and the moon, In honey buds ye love to He, While reigns fupreme Light's fervid noon % Nor quit the cell where peace pervades, Till night leads on the dews and ihades« Vol. HI. G Е'еи
[ 122 j E'en now your fcenes enchanted meet my fi^ht ! I fee the earth uncîofe, thep3lacc rife, The high dome fwell, and long arcades of light Glitter among the deep embow'ring woods, And glance refieaing from the ticmbliog floods ! While to foft Jutes the portals wide unfold, And fairy forms, of fine ætherial dyes, Advance wtth frolic ibp and laughing eyes, Theirhair\vuhpear!,thcirgarnientsdeck-d wiih gold; Pearls that in Neptune'j, briny waves tbey fought, And gold from India's deepeft caverns brought, '1 hu<? your light vino «s to my eye¡> imv il, Ye fpoitive pleafures fweet, illufion, hail! But ah! at morn's firft bluih again ye ràde! So from youth's ardent gaze life's landfcape gıy, And forms in Fancy's fummer hues array'd, DîiTolve at once in air at Truth's refplcndent day !
During feveral days fucceeding lhat on which M. Amand had difelofed the caufe of his melancholy, he did not vifit La Luc. At length, Adeline met him in one of her folitary rambles on the ihore. He w*as pale and dejecied, 2nd ieemed much agitated when he ob¬ ferved
C «j ] ferved her; ihe therefore endeavoured to avoid him, but he advanced with quickened fteps and accofted her. He faid it was his intention to leave Nice in a few days. <( 1 have found no benefit " from the climate," added M. Amand; u Ala^l what climate can relieve the " ficknefs of the heart ! I go to lofe, in (i the variety of new feencs, the rcmem- " brance of paft happinefs; yet the ef- " fort is vain; I am every where equally (t reftlefs and unhappy." Adeline tried to encourage him to hope much from time and change of place. " Time ť< will blunt the iharpeft edge of for- " row," faid ftie ; " I know it from expe- li ricuce." Yet, ubile flie fpoke, the tears in her eyes contradiQcd the aifer¬ tion ofher lips. f< You have been un- " happy, Adeline!—Yes—I knew it I! from the firft. The fmile of pity * which you gave mc, affuied me that * you knew what it was to fuffer." The Icfponding air vvith which he fpoke re- G 2' newed
С '24 ] newed her apprehenfion of a fcene fimi¬ lar to the one fhe had lately witneffed, and flie changed the fubjecl, but he foon returned to it. u You bid me hope <c much from time I—My wife !—My * c dear wife!"-----his tongue faultered. —" It is now many months fince I loft « b er —yet the moment of her death " feems but as yefterday.'* Adeline faintly fmiled,—** You can fcarcely judge " of the effect of time yet, you have ** much to hope for/*—He fiiook his head—* f But I am again intruding my <c misfortunes on your notice; forgive " this perpetual egotifm. There is a c< comfort in the pity of the good, fuch " as nothing elfe can impart; this muft ci plead my excufe; may you, Adeline, " never want it. Ah ! thofe tears------" Adeline haftily dried them. M. Amand forbore to prefs the fubjecl, and imme¬ diately began to converfe on different topics. They returned towards the cha¬ teau, but La Luc being from home, M. Amand
[ '25 ] M. Amand took leave at the door. Ade¬ line retired to her chamber, oppreffed by her own forrows and thoie ofher ami¬ able friend. Near three weeks had now elapfed at Nice, during which the diforder of La Luc feemed rather to increafe than to abate, when his phyfician very honeftly confeffed the little hope he entertained from the climate, and advifed him more to try the effe6l of a fea voyage, adding, that if the experiment failed, even the air of Montpellier appeared to him more likely to afford relief than that of Nice. La Luc received this difinterefted a:lvice with a mixture of gratitude and difap¬ pointment. The circumftances which had made him reludtatu to quit Savoy, rendered him more fo to protract his abfence, and increafe his expences; but the ties of affedion that bound him to his family, and the love of life, which fo feldom leaves us, again prevailed over inferior confiderations, and he deter¬ mined
С '2б з mined to coaft the Mediterranean as far as Languedoc, where, if the voyage did not anfwer his expeftations, he would land and proceed to Montpellier. When M. Amand learned that La Luc defigned to quit Nice in a few days, he determined not to leave it before him. During this interval he had not fufficient lefolution to deny himfelf the frequent converfation of Adeline, though her pre¬ fence, by reminding him of his loft wife, gave him more pain than comfort—He was the fecond fon of a French gentle¬ man of family, and had been married about a year to a lady to whom he had long been attached when fhe died in her lying-in. The infant foon followed its mother, and left the difconfolate father abandoned to grief, which had preyed fo heavily on his health, that his phyfi¬ cian thought it neceflary to fend him to Nice. Frora the air of Nice, however, he had derived no benefit, and he now determined to travel farther into Italy» though
[ 127 j though he no longer felt any intereft ¡n thofe charming feencs which, in happier óá) s, and with her whom he never ceafed to lament, would have offered him the higheft degiee of mental luxury—now, he fought only to efeape from himfelf, or rather fiom the image ofher who had once conftituted his trueft happinefs. La Luc having laid his plan, hired a fmall veffel, and in a hw days embarked with a fick hope, bidding adieu to the fhores of Italy and the towering Alps, and feeking on a new clement the health which had hitherto mocked his purfuit. M. Amand took a melancholy leave ofhis new friends, whom he attended to the fea fide. When he affifted Adeline on board, his heart was too full to fuffer him to fay farewell ; but hc ftood long on the beach purfuing with his eyes her courfe over the waters, and waving his hand, til) tears dimmed his fight. The breeze wafted the veffel gently from the coaft, and Adeline law herfeif furround¬ ed
[ "8 ] ed by the undulating waves of the ocean. The fhore appeared to recede, its moun¬ tains to leffen, the gay colours of its landfcape to melt info each other, and in a fhort time the figure of M. Amand was fcen no more : the town of Nice, with its caftle and harbour, next faded away in dif¬ tance, and the purple tint of the moun¬ tains was at length all that remained on the verge of the horizon. She fighed as íhe gazed, and her eyes filled with tears : u So vaniihed my profpeci of happi- u nefs," faid ihe; "and my future €C view is liké the wafte of waters that u furround me." Her heart was full, and ihe retired from obfervation to a remote part of the deck, where íhe in*· dui "ed her tears as flie watched the vef- fel cut its way through the liquid glafs. The water was fo tranfparent that fhe faw the fun beams playing at confide¬ rable depth, and fifh of various colours glance athwart the current. Innume¬ rable mai ine plants fpread their vigorous leaver
C I3 9 ] leaves on the rocks below, and the rich¬ nefs of their verdure formed a beautiful contraft to the glowing fearlet of the co¬ ral that branched befide them. The diftant coaft, at length, entirely difippeared. Adeline gazed with an emotion the rnoft fublime on the bound¬ lefs expanfe of waters that fpread on all fides: fhe feemed as if launched into a new world; the grandeur and immen- fity of the view aftonifhed and over¬ powered her: for a moment fhe doubted the truth of the compafs, and believed it to be almoft impoflible for the veffel to find its way ovci the pathlefs waters to any fhore. And when fhe confidered that a plank alone feparated her from death, a fenfation of unmixed terror fu- perfeded that of fublimity, and fhe haf¬ tily turned her eyes from the profpeft». and her thoughts from the fubjeft.
G 5 CHAP Z
С 'Зо ]
CHAPTER XVIII. " Is there a heart that mufic cannot melt ? iC Alas! how is that rugged heart forlorn! ·· Is there who ne'er that myftic tranfport felt, " Of folitude and melancholy born ? H He need not woo the Mufe —hc is her fcorn.* r Beattie. X OWARDS evening the captain, to avoid the danger of encountering a Bar¬ bary corfair, fleered for the French coaft, and Adeline diftinguiflied in the gleam ofthe fetting fun the fliores of Provence, feathered with wood, and green with paf- turage. La Luc, languid and ill, had retired to the cabin, whither Clara at¬ tended him. The pilot at the helm, guiding the tall veffel through the found¬ ing waters, and one folitary failor, lean¬ ing with croffed arms againft the maft, 3 and
[ *3* J and now and then finging parts of a mournful ditty, u ere all of the crew, except Adeline, that remained upoa deck ; and Adeline filently watched the declining h\n t which thiew a faffron glow upon the waves, and on the fails, gently fwelling in the breeze that was now dy¬ ing awav. The fun, at length, funk below the ocean, and twilight ft ole over the fcene, leaving the fliadowy fliores yet vifible, and touching with a 'olemn tint the waters thui ili etched wide around. Shcfketchcd the ¡ icture^but it was wiih a faint pencil. NIGH T. O'er tî e dim brean cf Осе ui 's u\r. j Night fprt..ď> af.r her g'ooniy v,irg% And penfive thought, and fi 'ento biii-gs, Save when the -di,iur. t w; t ttisíave. Or when the m^iinci'j ItMie voice S\stHs faliul) in the pifli'igg 1 , Or when the fci earning (ca-^ulb ρ >ife O'er the tall null ¿nd fwelling ftil, PojrJípí*
Γ '32 ] Bounding the grey gleam of the deep, Where fancy'd forms aroufe the mind, Dark fweep the fhores, on whofe rude fteep Sighs the fad fpirit of the wind. Sweet is its voice upon the air At ev'ning's melancholy clofe, When the fmooth wave m„fihmce flow э! Sweet, fweet the peace its ftealing accents bear! Bleft be thy ftiades, О Night ! and bleft the fong Thy low winds breathe the diftant Ihores along I As the fhadows thickened, the fcene funk into deeper repofe. Even the fai¬ lor's fong had ceafed ; no found was heard but that of the waters, daihing be¬ neath the veffel, and their fainter mur¬ mur on the pebbly coaft* Adeline's mind was in unifon with the tranquillity of the hour : lulled by the waves, (he refigned herfelf to a flill melancholy, and fat loft in reverie. The prefent mo¬ ment brought to her recolleclion her voyage up the Rhone, when, feeking re¬ fuse from the terrors of the Marquis de CJ · ** Montais íhe fo anxioufly endeavoured to
[ 133 ] to anticipate her future deftiny. She then, as now, had watched the fall of evening and the fading profpeft, and fhe remembered what a defolate feeling had accompanied the impreffions which thofe objects had made. She had then no friends —nb afylum—no certainty of efcaping the purfuit ofher enemy. Now fhe had found affcčtionafe friends—a fecure re¬ treat—and wasdelivcrcd from theterrors flie then fuifered—but ftili ilie was un¬ happy. The remembrance of Theo¬ dore—of Theodore who had loved her fo truly, who had encountered and fuf¬ fered fo much for her fake, and of whofe fate ihe was now as ignorant as when fhe traverfed the Rhone, was an inceflant pang to her heart. She feemed to be more remote tban ever from the poffibi¬ lity of hearing of him. Sometimes a faint hope croffed her that ihehad efeaped themalice of his perfecutor; but when flie confidered the inveteracy and power of the latter, and the heinous light in whkh
Γ '34 ] Tvhich the law regards an aíľauľt upon a fuperior officer, even thi.s poor hope va¬ niihed, and left her to tears and an¬ guiih, inch as thib reverie, which began with a fenfation of only gentle melan¬ choly, now led to. She continued to rnufe till the moon arofe from the bofom of the ocean, and ihed her trembling luftre upon the waves,diffufing peace, and making filence more foicmn; beaming aloft light on the white fails, and throw¬ ing upon the waters the long ihadow ©fthe veflcJ, wdiich now feemed to glide a^ay unoppofed by any current. Her tears had fomewhíM relieved the anguifli ofher mind, ar \ flie again repofed in placid melancholy, w hen a ftrain of fut h tender and enhancing fweetnefs ftole on the filence of the hour, that it íccmçd moie hke celeftial than mortal mufic— fo foft, fo foothing it funk upon her ear, that it recalled her fiom mifery to hope and love. She wept again—— but thefe were tears which fhe would not ι have
С 135 ] have exchanged for mirth and joy. She looked round, but perceived neither fhip nor boat; andas the undulating founds fwelled on the diftant air, fhe thought they came from the fliore. Sometimes the breeze wafted them away, and again returned them in tones of the rnoft lan¬ guifliing foftnefs. The links of the air thus broken, it was mufic rather than melody that ftie caught, till, the pilot gradually fleering nearer the coaft, fho diftinguifhed the notesofa fong familiar to her ear. She endeavoured to recol led where fhe had heard it, but in vain : yet her heartbeat almoil unconfeioufly with a fomething refembling hope. Still fhe liftened, till the breeze again itolo the founds. AVith regret flie now per¬ ceived that the veflel was moving from them, and at length they trembled faint- lyon the waves, funk away at a diílance, and were heard no more. She remained upon the deck a confiderable time, un- wilUng to relinquiih the expectation of hearing
hearing them again, aud their fweetnefs ftill vibrating on her fancy, and at length retired to the cabin oppreffed by a degree of difappointment which the occafion did not appear to juftify. La Luc grew better during the voy¬ age, his fpirits revived, and when the veffel entered that part ofthe Mediter¬ ranean called the Gulf of Lyons, he was fufficiently animated to enjoy from the deck the noble profped which the í weep¬ ing fhores of Provence, terminating in the far diftant ones of Languedoc, ex¬ hibited. Adeline and Clara, who anx¬ ioufly watched his looks, rejoiced in their amendment j andthe fond w ifhcs ofthe latter already anticipated his per¬ fect recovery. Difappointment had too often checked the expectations of Ade¬ line, to permit her now to indulge an equal degree of hope with that of her friend, yet fhe confided much in the ef¬ fect of this voyage.
[ '37 ] La Luc amufed himfelf at intervals. with difcourfitig, and pointing out the fituations of confiderable ports on the coaft, and the moutjis of the rivers that, after wandering thiough Provence, dif- embogue themfelves into the Mediterra¬ nean. The- Rhone, however, was the only one of much confequence which he paifed. On this objeft, though it was fo diftant, that fancy, perhaps, rather than the fenfe, beheld it, Clara gazed with peculiar pleafure, for it came from the banks of Savoy; andthe wave, which fhe thought flie perceived, had waflied the feet of her dear native mountains. The time paifed with mingled pleafure and improvement as La Luc defcribed to his attentive pupils the manners and commerce ofthe diiľcrent inhabitantsof the coaft, and the natural hiftory ofthe country ; or as he traced in imagination the remote wanderings of rivers to their fource, and delineated the charafteriftic beauties of their fcenery. After
[ »з» 3 After a pleafing voyage ofa few da) я 3 tlie ih e res of Provence receded, and that of ] anguedoc, which had long bounded the diflancc, became tbe grand object of the fcene, and the failors drew near their port. They landed in the after¬ noon ata imall town fituated at the foot ofa woody eminence, on the right over¬ looking the fea, and on the left the rich plains of Languedoc, gay with the pur¬ ple vine. La Luc determined to defer his journey till the following day, and was directed ro a fmall inn at the extre¬ mity of the town, where the accommo¬ dation, fuch as it was, he endeavoured to be contented with. In the evening the beauty of the hour» and the defire of exploring new feenes, invited Adeline ίο walk. La Luc was f uigucd, and did not go out, and Clara remained with him. Adeline took her way to the woods that rofe from the mat gin of tlic fca, and climbed the wild eminence on which they hung. Ohen
[ *39 ] ns flic went fhe turned herc)cs to catch between the dark foliage the blue watcis of the bay, the Mİıite ía:l that flitted by, and the trembling gleam of the fetting i\in. When ihe reached the fummir, and looked down over the dark tops of the woods on the wide and various prof- pea, fhe was feized with a kind of ftil» rapture impoflible to be expreffed, and ftood unconfeious of the flight of time* till the fun had left the fcene, and twi¬ light threw its foicmn iliade upon the mountains. The fea alone reflected the fading fplendor of the Weft; its tran¬ quil furface was partially difturbed by the low wind that crept in tremulous lines along the waters, whence rifing to- the woods, it íhivered their light leaves, and died away. Adeline refigning herfelf to the luxury of fweet and tender emo» tions, repeated the following lines;
Sl'N-SLT»
[ 140 3 SUN-SET.
Soft o'er the mountain's purple brow Meek Twilight draws her Ihadows grey : From tufted woods and valKes low, Light's magic colours fteal away. Yet flill, amid the fpreading gloom, Refplcndent glow the weftern waves, That roll o'er Neptune's coral caves, A zone of light on Ev'ning's dom«. On this lone fummit kt me reft, And view the forms to Fancy dear, Tiif on th? Ocean's darken'd breaft The ftars of Ev'ning tremble clfear; Or the moon's pale orb appear, Throwing her line of radiance wide, Far o'er the lightly-curling tide, That feems the yellow fands to chide. No founds o*er filence now prevail, Save of the dying wave below, Or failor's fong borne on the gale, Or oar at diílance ftriking flow. So fweet 1 fo tranquil î may my ev'ning ray Set to this world^—acd riie in future day.
Adeline
[ 141 ] Adeline quitted the heights, and fol¬ lowed a narrow path that wound to the beach below; her mind was now parti¬ cularly fenfible to fine impreflions, and the fwect notes of the nightingale amid the ftillnefs of the woods again awakened her enthufiafm* TO THE NIGHTINGALE.
Child of the melancnuly fong ! О yet that tender rtrain prolong 1 Her lengthens ihade when Ev*ning flings, From mountain-cliffs, and foretts green, And failing flow on filent wings, Along the glimm'ring Weft is feen; I love o*cr pathlefs hills to ftray, Ör trace the winding vale remote, And paufe, fweet Bŕd ! to hear thy lay Whiie moon-beams on the thin clouds f|oat, Till o*crthe mountain's dewy head Pale Midnight fteals to wake the dead. Far through the Heav'ns' ætherial blue, Wafted on Spring's light airs you come, With blojrøs, and flow'rs, and genial dew, From climes where Summer joys to roam, О I welcome to your long Ш home ! « Child
C 4i ] « Child of the melancholy fong !" Wholov'it the lonely woodland-glade To mourn, unfeen, the boughs among, When Twilight fpreads htr penfive ihade» Again thy dulcet voice I hail ! О ! pour again the liquid note That dies upon the ev'ning gale ! For Fancy loves the kindred tone ; Her griefbihe pbintive accents own. She loves to hear thy mufic float At folemn midi ight*s Ihllcft hour, And think on friends for ever loft, On }оуь by difappointment croft, And weep anew Love's charmful pow'r î 'J hen Memory wakes the magic fmile, Th* impaffion'd voice, the melting eye, That won't the trufting í eart beguile, And iiakťi again the h< peiefs figh ! Uct iki 1 che glowi g tints revive Oi feenes thai Ί ime had bade decay : She bids the foíun'd Paflions live— '1 he Paffions urge again iheir fway. Yeto'ei the iong-regi etted fcene Thy fc ng the grace of forrow throws ; A melancholy charm ferenc f More rare than all that mirth beflows. Then höU, fweet Bi d í and hail thy penfwe tear ! To Taile, to Fancy, and to Virtue dear ! The
С нз J The fpreading duik at length remind¬ ed Adeline of her diftance from the inn, and that fhe had her way to find through a wild and lonely wood : flie bade adieu to the fyren diat had fo long detained. her, and purfued the path with quick fteps. Having followed it for fome time, flie became bewildered among the thickets and the increafingoarknefi»did not allow her to judge of the direition ! ihc was in. 11er apprehenfions height— I cned her diflicuities: lhe thought ftie Idilhuguiih d the voices of men at fome í little diílance, and ihc in -rea fed her fpeed [till the found heifeif ол the fea fands, ¡over wluch ihe woods impended. Пег breath was now exhaufted—flic paufed ! a moment to recover herfelf, and fear- ¡fully liftened; but, inftead of the voices of men, flie heard faintly fueiiingin the breeze the notes of mournful mufic— Her heart, ever fenfible to the imprcfV fions of melody, melted with the tones, and her feájrs were for a moment lulled in
C *44 ] in fweet enchantment. Surprife was foon mingled with delight, when, as the founds advanced, fhe diftinguiflied the tone ofthat inftrument, and the melody ofthat well-known air, flie had heard a few» preceding evenings from the fliores of Provence. But fhe had no time for conjedure—footfteps approached, and fhe renewed her fpeed. She was now emerged from the darknefs ofthe woods, and the moon, which ihone bright, ex¬ hibited along the leve fands the town and port in the diftance. The fteps that had followed now came up with her, and fhe perceived two men, but they pafled in converfation without noticing her, and as they paffed flie was certain flie recol¬ lefted the voice of him who was then fpeaking. Its tones were fo familiar to her ear, that fhe was furprifed at the imperfeft memory which did not fuffer her to be affured by whom they were uttered. Another ftep now followed, and a rude voice called her to flop, Ae 2
[ 45 ì As flie haftily turned her eyes ihe faw imperfectly by the moonlight a man in a failor's habit purfuing, whiie he re¬ newed the call. Impelled by terror flie fled along the fands, but her fteps were ihort and trembling—thofe of her purfuer's ftrong and quick. She had juft ftrength fufficient to reach the men who had before paifed her, and to implore their protection, when her purfuer came up with them, but fuddenly turned into the woods on the left, and difappeared. She had no breath to anfwer the in¬ quiries of the ftrangers who fupported her, tilt a fudden exclamation, and the found of her own name, drew her eyes attentively upon the perfon who uttered them, and in the rays which ihone ftrong upon his features, ihe diftinguifhed M. Verneuil!—Mutual fatisfačtion and ex¬ planation enfued, and when he learned that La Luc and his daughter were at the inn, he felt an increafed pleafure in con- Vou IIL II ducting
С чб ] duftingher thither. Не faid that he had accidentally met with an old fiiend in Savoy, whom he now introduced by the name of Mauron, and who had pre¬ vailed on him to change his route and accompany him to the fliores of the Me¬ diterranean. They had embarked from the coaft of Provence only a few prece¬ ding days, and had that evening landed in Languedoc, on the eftate of M. Mau¬ ron. Adeline had now no doubt that it was the flute of M. Vei neuil, and which had fo often delighted her at Leloncourt, that flic had heard on the fca. When they reached the inn they found La 1 uc undergreat anxiety for Adeline, in fearch of whom he had fent feveral people. Anxiety ν ielded to fui prize and pleafure, when he perceived her with M. Verneuil, whofe eyes beamed with unufual animation on feeing Clara. Af¬ ter mutual congratulations, M.Verneuil ebfeived, and lamented, the very indif¬ ferent
[ 47 ] ferent accommodation which the inn af¬ forded his friends, and M. Mauron im¬ mediately invited them to his chateau, with a warmth of hofpitality that over¬ came every fcruple which delicacy or pride could oppofe. The woods that Adeline had traverfed formed a part of his domain, which extended almoft to the inn ; but he infifted that his carriage fhould take his guefts to the chateau, and departed to give orders for their re¬ ception. The prefence of M. Verneuil, and the kindnefs of his friend, gave to La Luc an unufual flow of fpirits; he converfed with a degree of vigour and Hvelinefs to which he had long been un¬ accuftomed, and the fmile of fatisfaftion, that Clara gave to Addi ne, exprefled how much fhe thought he was already bene¬ fited by the voyage. Adeline anfwered her look with a imile of lefs confidence, for flie attributed his prefent animation о a more emporary caufe.
II 2
About
[ 48 ] About halfan hour after the departure of M. Mauron, a boy, who ferved as wait¬ er, brought a meflage from a Chevalier then at the inn, tcquefting permiflion to fpeak with Adeline. The man who had purfued her along the fands inftantly oc¬ curred to her, and flie fcarcely doubted that the ftranger was fome perfon belong¬ ing to the Marquisde Montait, perhaps the Marquis himfelf, though that he fliould have difcovered her accidentally, in fo obfcure aplace, and fo immediately upon her arrival, feemed very improbable. "With trembling lips, and a countenance pale as death, fhe enquired the name of the Chevalier. The boy was not ac¬ quainted with it. La Luc afked what fort of a perfon hc was ; but the boy, who underftood little of the art of deicribing, iiave fuch a confufed account of him, îhat Adeline couid only learn he was not large, but only of a middle ftature. This ch cumftance, howe\er, convincing her it was not the Marquis de Montalt who
ί 49 1 who defired to fee her, Ше afked, whe¬ ther it would be agreeable to La Luc to have the ftranger admitted ? La Luc faid, " By all means ; " and the waiter withdrew, Adeline fat in trembling ex¬ pectation till the door opened, anii Louis de la Motte entered the room. Lie advanced with an embarraffed and melancholy air, though his countenance had been enlightened with a momentaty pleafure when he firft beheld Adeline- Adeline, who was ftiil the idol of his heart. After the firft faluutions were over, all apprehenfions of the Marquis being now diffipated, flie enquhed when Louis had fecn Monfieur and Madame La Motte. *' I ought rather to afli you rhat quef- <c tion," faid Louis, in fome confufion, " foi 1 believe you have feen them fincc " I havej and the pleafure of meeting t( you thus is equalled by my furprize. " I have not heard from my father for ** fome time, owing probably to my re- ** giment-
[ iso ] *' giment being moved to new quar- " ters." He looked asif he wiihed tobe inform¬ ed with whom Adeline now was; butas this was a iubject upon which it was im¬ poflible flie ihould fpeak in the pîefence of La Luc, ilie led the conveifation to general topics, after having faid that Monfieur and Madame La Motte were well when fhe left them. Louis fpoke little, and often looked anxioufly at Ade¬ line, whilehis mind feemed labouring un¬ de; ftrong oppreflion. She obferved this, and recolleBing the declaration he had made heron the morning of hisdeparturc from the Abbey, (he attı ib· ι ted his prefent embarraffment to the effect of a paflion yet unfubdued, and did notappear to no¬ tice it. After he bad fat near a quarter of an hour under a ftruggle of feelings which he could neither conquer nor con¬ ceal, he rofe to leave the room, and as he paffed Adeline, faid, ina low voice, " Do permit me to fpeak with you alone « for
[ Ч* ] л fbr five minutes." She hefiiated in fome confufion, and then faying there were none but friends prefent, begged hc would be feated----" Excufe me," faid he, in the fame iow accent ; (C What I " would fay nearly concerns you, and " you only. Do favour me with a few " moments attention." He faid this with alook that furprifed her; and hav¬ ing ordered candles into another room fhe went thither. Louis fat for fome moments filent, and feemingly in great pertubation of mind. At length he faid, " I know not whether fi to rejoice ortolamentatthisuncxpeit- " ed meeting, though if you are in fafe " hands, I ought cei tainly to rejoice, €< however hard the ta fli that now falls " tomy lot. I am not ignorant of the ** dangers and perfeeutions you have fuf- * f fered, and cannot forbear exprefling u my anxiety to know how you are €< now circumftanced. Aie you indeed « with friends ?~« I am," faid Ade¬ line;
С 152 j line ; "M. La Motte has informed you/* ----- ~ u No>" replied Louis, with a deep figh, " not my father.*'—-He paufed.— *' But I do indeed rejoice," refumed he, ,f O î how fincerely rejoice ! that you 41 are in fafety. Could you know, lovely " Adeline, what I have fuffered ľ*- — He checked himfelf.— cc I underftood *' you had fomething of importance to ** fciy, Sir," faid Adeline,- " you muft ·* excufe me ifi remind you that I have ** not many moments to fpare/* t( It h indeed of importance," replied Louis j " yet I know not how to mention *' it—how to foften——-This tafk is too ** fevere. Alas! my poor friend !'* " Who is İt you fpeak of, Sir?" faid Adeline, with quicknefs. Louis rofe from his chair, and walked ahout the room. " I would prepare you for what i( I have to fay," he refumed, " but " upon my foul I am not equal to it." u I entreat you to keep me no longer ci in fufpenfe," faid Adeline, who had a wild
С 153 ] a wild fufpicion that it was Theodore he would fpeak of. Louis ftill hefitated. ** Is it^— О is it ?—I conjure you tell me " the worft atonce/* faid fhe, in a voice of agony. " I can bear it—indeed I u can." "My unhappy friend!'* exclaimed louis! ,( 0Theodore Y' « Theodore!" faintly articulated Adeline, " he lives «· then!'*----- u He does,*' faid Louis, » but'*—He ftopped.—"But what?'* cried Adeline, trembling violently; " ïf *" he is living, you cannot tell me worfe c * than my fears fuggeft; I entreat you, « therefore, not to hefitate."-----Louis refumed his feat, and, endeavouring to affume a collefted air, faid, ** He is " living, Madam; but he is a prifoner, ** and—for why íhould I deceive you ? «« I fear he has little to hope in this " world.** u I have long feared fo t Sir," faid Adeline, in a voice of forced compo¬ fure: <f you have fomething more t e Γ¬ Η ¿ . " rible
С ЧА J " rible thífn this tp relate, and I again- " entreat youwill explain yourfelf.'* €< He has every thing to apprehend " from the Marquis de Montalt," faid Louis. ct Alas! why do I fay to appre- u hend ? His judgment is already fixed *' —he is condemned to die.** At this confirmation of her fears, a death-like palenefs diffufed itfelf over the countenance of Adeline : fhe fat motionlefs, and attempted to figh, but feemed almoft fuffocated. Terrified at her fituation, and expefting to fee her faint, Louis would have fupported her, but with her hand fhe waved him from her, unable to fpeak. He now called for afliftance, and La Luc and Clara, with M. Verneuil, informed of Ade¬ line's indifpofition, were quickly by her fide. At the found of their voices flie look¬ ed up, and feemed to recolleft herfelf, when uttering a heavy figh flie burft into tears. La Luc rejoiced to fee hex. weep,
[ »55 ] weep, encouraged her tears, which, after fome time, relieved her, and when fhe was able to fpeak, fhe defired to go back to La Luc's parlour. Louis attended her thither;, when fhe was better hc would have withdrawn, but La Luc begged he would ftay. " You are, perhaps, a relation of this " young lady, Sir/' faid hc, ** and may '" have brought newb of her father?" —- " Not fo, Sir,** replied Louis, hefitdt- ing___ <f This gentleman," faid Ade¬ line, who had now íecollcČted her diffi¬ pated thoughts, u is the fon of the M. *' La Motte, whom you may have heard u me mention."—Louis feemed fhocked to be declared the fon of aman that had once atted fo unworthily towards Ade- line, who, iníiantíy perceiving the pain her words occafioned, endeavoured to foften theireffeQ, by fayingthat La Motte had faved her ťiom imminent danger, and had afforded heran afylum for many months. Adeline fat in a ftate of dread¬ ful
С Ι5β· J ful folicitude to know the particulars of Theodore*s fituation, yet could not ac¬ quire courage to renew the fubjeft in the prefence of La Luc; fhe'ventured, how» ever, to aik Louis if his own regiment was quartered in the town. He replied, that his regiment lay at Vaceau, a French town in the frontiers of Spain; that he had juft croffed a part of the Gulph of Lyons, and was on his way to Savoy, whither he fhould fet out early in the morning. "*' We are lately come from thence,** faid Adeline; " may i afli to what part of ' e Savoy you are going ?'*—" To Lelon- €t court,*' he replied.—To Lelon- €f court!" faid Adeline, in fome fur¬ prize.—*'I am a ftranger to the country/* refumed Louis ; " but I go to ferve my fi friend. You feem to know Lelon- f « court."—" I do, indeed,** faid Ade¬ line.-—" You probably know then that * M. La Luc lives there, and will guefs " the motive of my journey." ι « О hea-
Г *57 Ì ** О heaven ! is ît poffible ?" exclain*- ed Adeline— c< is it poifible that Theo- c * dore Pey rou is a relation of M. La " Luc!" <ť Theodore í what of my fon ?" afk¬ ed La Luc, in furprize and apprehen¬ fion.—" Your fon í" faid Adeîine, in a trembling voice, " your fon !" The aftoniihment and anguifh depiciured on her countenance increafed the appre¬ henfions of this unfortunate father, and he renewed his queftion. But Adeline was totally unable to anfwer him ; and the diftrefs of Louis, on thus unexpect¬ edly difcovering the father of his un¬ happy friend, and knowing that it was his tafk to difclofe the fate of his fon, deprived him for fome time of all power of utterance, and La Luc and Clara, whofe fears were every inftance height¬ ened by this dreadfut filenee, continued to repeat their queftions. At length a fenfe of the approaching fufferings of the good La Luc overcoming every
С 158 ] every other feeling, Adeline recovered ftrength of mind fuificient to try to fof¬ ten the intelligence Lo.îis had to com¬ municate, 'and to conduci Clara to ano¬ ther room. Here ftie collefted refolution to tell her, and with much tender confi¬ deration, the circumftances of her bro¬ ther's iituation, concealing only her knowledge of his fentence heing already pronounced. This relation neceffarily included the mention oí their attach¬ ment, and in the inend of her heart, Clara difcovered the innocent caufe of her brother's deftručtion. Adeline alfo learned the occafion ofthat circumftance which had contributed to keep her igno¬ rant of Theodore's relationfhip to La Luc; fhe was told the former had taken the name of Pcyrou, with an eftate which had been left him about a year before, by a relation of his mother's upon that con¬ dition. Theodore had been defigned for the church, but his difpofition inclined him to a more active life than the clerical habit.
C l & τ habit would admit of; and on his accef¬ fion to the eftate, he had entered into the fervice of the French king. In the few and interrupted interviews which had been allowed them at Caux, Theodore had mentioned his family to Adeline only in general terms, and thus, when they were fo fuddenly feparated, had, without defigning it, left her in ignorance of his father's name and place of refidence. The facrcdnefs and delicacy of Ade¬ line's grief, which had never permitted her to mention the fubječt of it even to « Clara, had iince contributed to deceive her. The diftrefs of Clara, on learning the fituation of her brother, could endure no reftraint; Adeline, who, by a ftrong effoit of mind, had commanded her feelings fo as to impart this intelligence with tolerable compofure, was now almoft overwhelmed by her own and Clara's accu-
Γ ι6ο J accumulated fufferings. While they wept forth the anguiih of their hearts, a fcene, if poifible, more affecling paffed between La Luc and Louis,whoperceived it was necefiary to inform him, though cautioufly and by degrees, of the full ex¬ tent of his calamity. He therefore told La Luc, that though Theodore had been firft tried for the offence of having quit¬ ted his poft, he was now condemned on a charge of affault made upon his gene¬ ral officer, the Marquis de Montalt, who had brought witncffes to prove, that his life had been endangered by the circum- ltancej and who having purfued the pro¬ fecution with the moft bitter rancour,, had at length obtained the fentence which the law could not withhold, but which every other officer of the regiment de¬ plored. Louis added, that the fentence was to he executed in lek than a fortnight, and that Theodore being very unhappy at receiving
[ »βι 3 receiving no anfwers to the letters he had fent his father^ wifhing to fee him once more, and knowing that there was now no time to be loft, had requefted him ta go to Leloncourt, and acquaint his fa¬ ther with his iituation. La Luc received the account of his fon's condition with a diftrefs that admit¬ ted neither of tears nor complaint. He aiked where Theodore was, and defiring to be conducted to him, he thanked Louis for all his kindnefs, and ordered poft-horfes immediately. A carnage was foon ready, and this unhappy father, after taking a mournful leave of M. Verneuil, and fending a compliment to M. Mauron, attended by his family, fet out for the prifon ofhis fon. The journey was a fiicnt one; each individual of the party endeavoured, in confideration of each other, to fupprefs the expreffion of grief, but was unable to do more. La Luc appeared calm and com-
Г 1б2 3 Complacent; he feemed frequently to be engaged in prayer; but a ftruggle for refignanon and compofure was fometimes viable upon his countenance, notwith¬ ftanding the efforts ofhis mind to con^ ceal it.
CHAP-
[ '(>з ] CHAPTER XIX.
" And venom'd with difgrace the dart of Death.'* Slwar»·. E now return to the Marquis dc Montait, who having fecn La Motte fdfely lodged in the prifon of D— y, and learning that the trial would not come on immediately, had returned to his villa on the borders of the foreft, where he expefted to hear news of Adeline. It had been his intention to follow his fervants to Lyons; but he now deter¬ mined to wait a few days for letters, and he had little doubt that Adeline* fincc her flight had been fo quickly pur¬ fued, would be overtaken, and probably before fhe could reach thrit city, in this expectation he had been rnilerably dif¬ appointed; for his fervants informed him, that
W
С iu* ] that thoııçrh they traced her thither, they had neither been able to follow her route bej ond, nor to difcover her at Lyons. This efcape flie probably owed to hav¬ ing embaiked on the Rhone; for it does not appear that the Marquis's people thought of feeking her on the courfe of that river. His prcfence was foon after required at Vaceau, where the coutt-martial was then fitting; thither, therefore, he went, with paffions ftill more exafperated by his late difappointment, and procured» the condemnation of Theodore. The fentence was univa fidly lamented, for Theodore was much beloved in his regi¬ ment; and the occafion ofthe Marquis's* peí fonal refentment towards him being known, every heart was interefted in his caufe. Louibde la Motte happening at this time to be ftationed in the fame town, heard. an imperfect account of his ftory, and being convinced that the prifoner was the young-
L" »65 3 young chevalier whom he had formerly feen with the Marquis at the Abbey, he ^was induced, partly from compaflìon, and partly with a hope of hearing of his parents, to vifit him. The compafïionate fympathy which Louis exprefled, and the zeal with which he tendered his fer¬ vices, affected Theodore, and excited in him a warm return of friendfhip. Louis made him frequent vifits, did every thing that kindnefs could fuggeft to alleviate his fufferings, and a mutual efteem and confidence enfued. Theodore at length communicated the chief fubject of his concern to LouiSj who difcoveredj with inexpreflìble grief, tbat it was Adeline whom the Marquis had thus cruelly perfecuted, and Adeline for whofe fake the generous Theodore was about to fuffer. He foon perceived alfo that Theodore was his favoured rival; but he generoufly fupprefled the jealous pang this difcovery occafion¬ ed, and determined that no prejudice of paflion
С 'бб ] paffion íhould withdraw him from the duties of humanity and friendfliip. He eagerly inquired where Adeline then re¬ fided. " She is yet, I fear, in the power " of the Marquis,'* faid Theodore, figh¬ ing deeply. fí О Godi— thefe chains!'* —and he threw an agonizing glance upon them. Louis fát filent and thought¬ ful; at length, ftarting from his reverie, he faid he would go to the Marquis, and immediately quitted the prifon. The Marquis was, however, already fet off for Paris, where he had been fummoned ίο appear at the approaching trial of La Motte; and Louis, yet ignorant of the late tranfa&ion s at the Abbey» returned to the prifon, where he endeavoured to for¬ get that Theodore was the favoured rival of his love, and to remember him only as the defender of Adeline. So earneft¬ ly he preffed his offers of fervice, that Theodore, whom the filence ofhis father equally furprifed and afiličled, and who was very anxious to fee him once again, accepted .
С ibi ] accepted his propofal of going himfelf to Savoy. '* My letters 1 ftrongly fuf- " peel to have been intercepted by the " Marquis," faid Theodore ; "if fo, xt my poor father will have the whole u weight of his calamity to fuftain at w once, unlefs I avail myfelf of your fff kindnefs, and I fhall neither fee him ' f nor hear from him before I die. Louis] tc there are moments wlien my fortitude " fhrinks from the conflit!, and my fen- íť fes threaten to defert me." No time was to be loft ; the warrant for his execution had already received the king's fignature, and Louis imme¬ diately fet forward for Savoy. The let¬ ters of Theodore had, indeed, been in¬ tercepted by order of the Marquis, who, in the hope of difcovering the afylum of Adeline, had opened and afterwards de¬ ftroyed them. But to return to La Luc, who now drew near Vaceau, and who his family >obferved to be greatly changed in his looks
C v68 ] looks fince he had heard the late cala¬ mitous intelligence; he uttered no com¬ plaint ; but it was too obvious that his dif¬ order had made a rapid progrefs. Louis* ^ho, during his journey, proved the goodnefs of his difpofition by the deli¬ cate attention he paid this unhappy par¬ ty, concealed his obfervation of the de¬ cline of La Luc, and, to fupport Ade- iine*s fpirits, endeavoured to convince her that her apprehenfions on this fubječt: were groundlefs. Her fpirits did indeed require fupport, for ihe was now within a few miles of the town that contained Theodore; and while her increafing per¬ turbation almoft overcame her, ihe yet tried to appear compofed. When the car¬ riage entered the town, ihe caft a timid and anxious glance from the window în fearch of the prifon; but having paffed through feveral ftreets without perceiving any building which correfponded with her idea of that fhe looked for, the coach {topped at the inn. The frequent change« in
C i% 3 in La Luc's countenance betrayed the violent agitation ofhis mind, and when he attempted to alight, feeble and ex¬ haufted, he was compelled to accept the fupport of Louis, to whom he faintly faid, as he pafled to the parlour, " I am *< indeed fick at heart, but I truft the pain et will not be long." Louis prefled his hand without fpeaking, and haftened back for Adeline and Clara, v/ho were already in the paffage. La Luc wiped the tears from his eyes (they were the fiift he had ihed) as they entered the room* " I would go immediately to my (t poor boy," faid he to Louis ; ** your's, €< Sir, is a mournful office—be fo good * f as to condud me to him." He rofe to go, but, feeble and overcame with grief, again fat down, Adeline цпа Clara, united in entreating that he would com¬ pofe himfelf, and take fome refreíhment and Louis urging the neceifity of pre¬ paring Theodore for the interview, pre¬ vailed with him to delay it till his fon Voi. III. I íhould
[ i/o 3 fhould be informed of his arrival, and immediately quitted the inn for the prifon of his friend. When he was gone, La Luc, as a duty he owed to thofe he loved, tried to take fome fupport, but the con¬ vulfions of his throat would not fuffer him to fwallow the wine he held to his parched lips, and he was now fo much difordered, that he defired to retire to his chamber, where alone, and in prayer, he paifed the dreadful interval of Louis's abfence. Clara on the bofom of Adeline^ who fat in calm but deep diftrefs, yielded to the violence ofher grief, ' f I fhall lofe " my dear father too/* faid ihe ; "I fee "it ,· I Ihall lofe my father and my bro- " ther together-*' Adeline wept with her friend (or fome time in filence ; and then attempted to perfuade her that La Luc was not fo ill as (he apprehended. α Do nor jniflead me with hope/* fiie repUed, ** he will not furvive the w ihock of this calamity—I faw it from "the
[ »7i 3 fl the firft.'* Adeline knowing that La Luc*s diftrefs would be heightened by the obfervance of his daughter's, and that indulgence would oniy increafe its poignancy, endeavoured to roufe her to an exertion of fortitude, by urging the neceflity of commanding her emotion in the prefence of her father, '* This * f is poffible/* added fhe, " however " painful may be the effort. You muft " know, my dear, that my grief is not " inferior to your own, yet I have hi- * f therto been enabled to fupport my (t fufferings in filence ; for M. La Luc " I do, indeed, love and reverence as a ** parent." Louis meanwhile reached the prifon of Theodore, who received him with an air of mingled furprize and impa¬ tience. ц Wbat brings you back fo '* foon?** faid he; "have you heard " news of my father ?" Louis now gradually unfolded the circumftances of their meeting, and La Luc's arrival at I a Vaceau»
[ 172 ] Vaceau. A various emotion agitated the countenance of Theodore on receiv¬ ing this intelligence. ** My poor fa¬ ther!** faid hc, " J he has then followed ** his fori to this ignominious place ! 1 ,it- " tie did 1 think when laft we pai ted he u would meet me in a prifon, under con- tf demnation ľ* 1 his reflection roufed an impetuofity of grief which deprived him for fome time of fpeech. " But where (t is he ?" faid Theodore, recovering him¬ felf; " now he is come I ifirink from * r the interview I have fo much wiihed * f for. The fight ofhis diftrefs will be 4t d read iul to me. Louis ! when I am " gone —comfoi t my poor father." His voice w**as again interrupted by fobs; and Louis, who had been fearful of acquainting him at the fame time of the arrival of La Luc, and the difco¬ very of Adeline, now judged it proper to adminifter the cordial of this latter intelligence. The
С 173 ] The glooms of a prifon, and of ca¬ lamity, vaniflied for a tianficnt mo¬ ment ; thofe who had fcen Theodore, would have believed this to be the in¬ ftant which gave him life and liberty. When his firft emotions fubfided, " I " will not repine," faid he, " fince ** I know that Adeline is preferved, "¡and that I fhall once more fee my ** father, I will endeavour to die with *' refignation." He inquired if La Luc was then in the prifon ; and was told he was at the inn with Clara and Adeline. "Adeline! Is Adeline there " too !—This is beyond my hopes. Yet ** why do I rejoice ? I muft never fee her ** more : this is no place for Adeline." Again he relapfed into an agony of diftrefs—and again repeated a thoufand queftions concerning Adeline, tiil he was reminded by Louis that his father was impatient to fee him—when, fhock¬ ed tint he had fo long detained his friend, he entreated him to conduft La
[ 174 3 La Luc to the prifon, and endeavoured to recollecì fortitude for the approaching interview. When Louis returned to the inn, La Luc was ftili in his chamber, and Clara quitting the room to call htm, Ade¬ line feized with trembling impatience the opportunity to inquire more parti¬ cularly concerning Theodore, than fhe chofe to do in the prefence of his un¬ happy fifter. Louis reprefented him to be much more tranquil than he really was : Adeline was fomewhat foothed by the account; and her tears, hitherto re¬ ftrained, flowed filently and faft, till La Luc appeared. His countenance had recovered its ferenity, but was im· preffed with a deep and fteady forrow which excited in the beholder a mingled emotion of pity and reverence* " How " is my fon, Sir ?" faid he, as he entered the room. "We will go to him imme- " diatcly. Clara
Γ '7í 3 Clara renewed the entreaties that had been already reje£ted, to accompany het father* who perfifted ín a refufal. €i To- " morrow you fhall fee him," added he ; " but our firft meeting muft be <c alone. Stay with your friend, my fi dear; fhe has need of confolation/* When La Luc was gone, Adeline, un¬ able longer to ftruggle againft the force ©f grief, retired to her chamber and her bed. La Luc walked filently towards the prifon, refting on the arm of Louis. It was now night; a dim lamp that hung above thewed them the gates, and Louis rung a bell; La Luc» al¬ moft overcome with agitado», leaned againft the poftern till the porter ap¬ peared. He inquired fbr Theodore, and followed the man; but when he reached the fecond court-yard, he feeme4 ready to·faint, andagain ftopped* Louis defired the porter would fetch fome wa¬ ter; but La Luc, recovering his voice, faid
С *7б 3 faid he fhould foon be better, and would not fuffer him to go. In a few minutes he was able to follow Louis, w ho led him through feveral dark paffages, and up a flight of fteps to a door, which being unbarred, difelofed to him the prifon of his fon. He was feated at a fmall table, ©n which ftood a lamp that threw a fee¬ ble light acrofs the place, fuificient only •to fhew its defolation and wretchednefs. When he perceived La Luc, he fprung from his chair, and in the next moment was in his arms, "My father!" faid he, in a tremulous voice.—" My fon ľ' exclaimed La Luc ; and they were for fome time filent, and locked in each other's embrace, At length Theodore led him to the only chair the room af¬ forded, and feating himfelf with Louis at the foot of the bed, had leifure to obferve the ravages which illnefs and calamity had made on the features of his parent. La Luc made feveral ef¬ forts to fpeak, but unable to articulate, laid
C m 3 laid his hand upon his breaft, and fighed deeply. Fearful of the confequence of fo affefting a frene on his fliattered frame, Louis endeavoured to call off his attention from the immediate object of h is di ftrefs, and interrupted the filenccj but La Luc fhuddering, and complain¬ ing he was very cold s funk back in his chair. His condition roufed Theodore from the ftupor of defpair; and while he flew to fupport his father, Louis ran out for other afliftance.—" 1 fhalî f * foon be better, Theodore," faid La Luc, unclofing his eyes, " the faintnefs " is already gone off. 1 have not been «* well of late ; and this fad meeting!"—- Unable any longer to command himfelf, Theodore wrung his hands, and the dif¬ trefs which had long ftruggled for utter¬ ance, burft in convulfive fobs from his breaft. La Luc gradually revived, and exerted himfelf to calm the tranfports of his fon : but the fortitude of the latter had nosy entirely forfaken him, I 5 and.
I 17» 3 and he could only utter exclamation and complaint. " Ah ! little did I think ·* we fhould evâr raeet under circum- u ftancesfo dreadful as the prefent! But * c I have not deferved them, my father! u the motives of my conduft, have ftill w been juft." ** That is my fupreme confolation/* faid La Luc, €f and ought, to fupport * f ' you in* this hour of trial; The Al- ** mighty God, who is the judge of u hearts, will reward you hereafter» e * Truft in him, my fon;„ I look to w him with no feeble hope^, witha firm " reliance on his juftice!" La Luc's voice faultered ; he raifed his eyes to heaven with an expreffion of meek de¬ votion» while the tears of humanity fell flovvlv on his cheek. Still more affected hf his laft words, Theodore turned from him,. and paced the room with quick fteps : the entrance of Louis was a very feafonable relief to La Luc, who, taking a cordial he had brought,.
[ 49 ì brought, was foon fufficiently reft'oreď to difcourfe on the fubjeci rnoft interefts ing to him. Theodore tried to attain a* command of his feelings^ and fucceed¬ ed. He converfed with tolerable com¬ pofure for above an hour, during which La Luc endeavoured to elevate, by re¬ ligious hope, the mind of his fon, and to enable him to meet with fortitude the* awful hour that approached; But the appearance of refignation which Theo¬ dore attained^ always vaniihed when he reflected that he was going to leave his· father a prey to grief, anď his beloved- Adeline for ever. When La Luc was about to depart, he again mentioned her. u Afflicting as an interview muft'be in « f our prefent circumftances," faid he, « I cannot bear the thought of quitting. " the world without feeing her once " again; yet I know not how to afk " her to encounter, for my* fake, the " mifery of a parting fcene. Tell her w that my thoughts never, fer a mo- " menti,
С ito ] *ment, leave tør ¡.that"------ La Lu· interrupted, and affured him, that fince he fo much wifhed it, he fliould fee her, thoiigh a nieeting could ferve only to heighten the mutual anguifli of a final feparation. ** 1 know it—I know it too well," faid Theodore ; "yet I cannot refolve * ( to fee her no more, and thus fpare her ** th« pain this interview muft inflict. " О my father! when I think of thofe *' whom 1 muft foon leave for ever, my *' heart breaks. But I will indeed try w to profit by your precept and exam- ft pie, ancţ fliew that your paternal care '* has not been in. vain. My good iC Louis, go with my father------he has if need of fupport. How much 1 owe " this generous friend/* added Theo- " dore, ** you well know, S^r."—" I do,. ·« in truth/' replied La Luc, " and can '* never repay his kindnefs to you. He ** has contributed to fupport us alls but " you require comfort more than my- « felf
C *8t ] Ä felf —he ihall remain with you—I will *· go alone." This Theodore would not fuffer; and- La Luc no longer oppofing him, they affecìionately embraced, and feparated for the night. When they reached the inn, La Luc confulted wkh Louis on the poffibility of addreffing a petition to the fovereign time enough to fave Theodore. Ι ï is.» diftance from Paris, and the ihort inter¬ val before the period fixed for the exe¬ cution of the fentence, made this defign) difficult; but believing it was practica¬ ble, La Luc, incapable as he appeared of performing fo long, a journey, deter¬ mined to attempt it. Louis, thinking that the undertaking would prove fatal. to the father, without benefiting the fon,, endeavourcd,.though faintly, to diffuade him from it—but his refolution was fixed—" If I facrifice the fmall remains ·* of my life in the fervice of my child,'* faid he,," 1 fhali lofe little; if I fave « him,
Г '8а ] rt him¿ 1 fhall gain every thing. There w is no time to be loft'—I will fet off im- w mediately.** He would have ordered poft-horfesi but Louis, and Claras who was now come from the bed-fide of her friends urged the neceffity of his taking a few hours repofe: he was at length com¬ pelled to acknowledge himfeif unequal 1 to the immediate exertion which paren¬ tal anxiety prompted^ and confented to feek reft. When he had retired to his chamber, Giara lamented the condition of her fa¬ ther.— " He will not bear the journey/ r faid fhe ; " he is greatly changed within *' thefe few days.*'· ------ Louis was fo en¬ tirely ofher opinion, that he could nor difguife it¿ even to flatter her with a hope. She added, what did not contri¬ bute to raife his fpirits, that Adeline was fo much indifpofed by her grief for the fituation of Theodore, and the fufferings ofi
С 1*3 3 •f La Luc» that fhe dreaded the confe* quence. It has been feen that the paffion of young La Motte hadi fuffered no abatement from* time or abfence ; on the contrary» the perfecution and· the dangers which had purfued. Adeline awakened all his tendernefs, and drew her nearer to his heart. When he had difcovered that Theodore loved her» and was beloved again, he experienced all the anguiih of jealoufy and difap¬ pointment;. for though ftie had forbade liim to hope» he found it too painful an effort to obey her, and hadiecretly che¬ rifhed the flame whictbhe ought to have ftifled. His heari was»,however, too no* ble to. fuffer his zeal for Theodore ta abate becaufe he was his. favoured rival, and his mind too ftrong not to conceal the anguifh this certainty occafioned. The attachment which Theodore had teftified towards Adeline even endeared him to Louis, when hc had recovered from.
Γ »8 4 ] from the firft fhock of difappointment ι and that conqueft over jealoufy whkh originated 'm principle, and \sas purfued with difficulty, became afterwards his pride and his glory. AVhen, however, he again faw Adeline—faw herin the mild dignity of forrow more interefting than ever—faw her, though finking be¬ neath its preffure, yet tenderand folici¬ tous to foften the afflictions of thofe around her—it was with the utmoft dif¬ ficulty hc preferved his refolution, and forbore to exprefs the fentiments fhe in¬ fpired. U hen he farther confidered that her acute fufferings arofe fiom the ftrength of her affrrtion, he more than ever wiflied himfelf ihe object ofa heart capable of fo tendera regard, and The¬ odore in prifon, and in chains, was a momentary objeft of envy. In the morning, when La Luc arofe from fliort and difturbed flumbers, he found Louis, Clara, and Adeline, whom indifpofition could not prevent from pay¬ ing
f >85 3 ing him this teftimony of refpcQ and af- fecìion y affembled in the parlour of the jnn to fee him depart. After a flight breakfaft, during whieh his feelings per¬ mitted him to fay little, he bade his friends a fad farewell, and ftepped into the carriage, followed by their tears and prayers.—Adeline immediately retired to her chamber, which fhe was too ill to quit that day. In the evening Clara left her friend, and, conduded by Louis, went to vifit her brother, whofe emo¬ tions, on hearing of his father's depar¬ ture, were various and ftrong·
*
CHAP-
C iw 3
CHAPTER XX. " 'Tis oniy when with inbred horror fmote* * f Of fome bafe *ä, or done, or to be done, ** That the recoiling foul with confcioua dread, ·' Shrinks back into iďelf.** M A SO IT r W E return now co Pierre de la Motte, who, after remaining forne weeks in the prifon of D ------ y, was removed to take his trial in the courts of Pari*, whither the Marquis de Montalt followed to pro- iecute the charge. Madame de la Motte accompanied her hufband to the prifon of the Chatelet. His raind funk under the weight of his misfortunes, nor could all the efforts of hi&wife roufe him from the torpidity of defpair which a confi¬ deration of his circumftances occafioned* Should he even be acquitted of the charge
С »87 J charge brought againft hím by the Mar¬ quis (which was very unlikely) he was now in the fcene of his former crimes, and the moment that fhould liberate him from the walls of his prifon, would probably deliver him again ¡nto the hands of offended juftice. The profecution of the Marquis was too well founded, and its objects ofa na¬ ture too ferious, not to juftify the terror of La Motte. Soon after the latter had fettled at the Abbey of St. Ciair, the fmall ftock of money which the emer¬ gency of hia circumftances had left him being nearly exhaufted, his mind be¬ came corroded with the moft cruel an-* xiety concerning the means of his future fubfiftence. As he was one evening ri¬ ding alone in a remote part ofthe foreft, mufmg on his diftreffed circumftances, and meditating plans to relieve the exi¬ gencies which he faw approaching, he perceived among the trees, at fome dif¬ tances chevalier on horfeback, who was ridin-g
[ i83 ] tiding deliberately along, and feemed wholly unattended. A thought darted acrofs the mind of La Motte, that he might be fpared the evils which threat¬ ened him, by robbing this ftr&nger. His former pračtifes had paffed the boundary of honefty—fraud was in fome degree familiar to him—and the thought was not dtfmified* He hefitated------ > every moment of hefitation increafed the power of temptation—the opportunity was fuch as might never occur again, He looked round, and as far as the trees opened faw no perfon but the chevalier, who feemed by his air to be a man of diftinciion. Summoning all hfs courage, La Motte rode forward and »attacked him. The Marquis de Montalt, for it "was him, was unarmed, but knowing that his attendants were not far off, he refufed to } ield. While they were ftrug¬ gling for viOory, La Motte faw feveral horiemen enter the extremity ofthe ave¬ nue, and, rendered defpeiate by oppo¬ ni ton
[ 1 8 9 ]
fition and delay, he drew fiom his poc¬ ket a piftol (which an appre he n fio n of banditti ma.dc hnn ufually carry when he rode to a diftance froiu the Abbey) and hrcd at. the Maiquis, who ftaggeicd, and fell fenielels to the ground. La Motte had time to fteal from his coat a brilliant ftar, fome diamond ring*from hisfijigcis, and to rifle his pockets, he¬ fore hts attendants came up. inftead uf purfuing the robber, tliey all, in their firft confufion, flew to aflift their lord, and La Motte eh aped. He (topped before he reached the Ab¬ bey, at a little ruin, the tomb formerly mentioned, to examine his booty. It confifted of a purfe, containing feventy louis-d'ors ; ofa diamond ftar, three í rings of great value, and a minature, fet with brilliants, of the Marquis himfelf, which he had intended as a pi efen t for his favorite miftrefs. To La Motte, who but a few hours before had feen himielf nearly deftitute, the view of this treafure
C W ] treafure excited an almoft ungovernable tranfport ; but it was foon checked, when he remembered the means he had em¬ ployed to obtain it, and that he had paid for the wealth he contemplated the price of blood. Naturally violent in his paflions, this reflection funk him from the fummit of exultation tothe abyfs of defpondency. He confidered himfelf a murderer, and, ftartled as one awakened from a dream, would have given half the world, had it been his, to have been as poor, and, comparatively, as guiltlefs, as a few preceding hours had feen him. On examining theportrait, he difcovered the refemblance, and believing that his hand had deprived the original of life, he gazed upon the picture with unutter¬ able anguifli. To the horrors of re¬ morfe fucceeded the perplexities of fear. Apprehenfive of he knew not what, he lingered at the tomb, where he at length depofited hie treafure, believing, tbat if hU offence íhould awaken juftice, the Abbey
С '9' ] Abbey might be fearched, and thefe jewels betray him. From Madame La Motte it was eafy to conceal his increafe of wealth; for, as he had never made her acquainted with the exacl: ftate of his finances, İhe had not fufpected the extreme poverty which menaced him, and as they continued to live as ufual, Ihe believed that their expences were drawn from the ufual fupply. But it was not fo eafy to difguife the workings ¡of remorfe and horror : his manner be¬ came gloomy and referved, and his ire- quent vifits to the tomb, where hc went partly to examine his treafure, but chief¬ ly to indulge in the dreadful pleafure of contemplating the picture of the Mar¬ quis, excited curiofity. In the folitude of the foreft, where no variety of objects occurred to renovate his ideas, the hor¬ rible one of having committed murder, was ever prefent to him.——«When the Marquis arrived at the Abbey, the afto* niihment and terror of La Motte, for, at firft»
[ *9* ] firft, he fcarce knew whether he beheld the ftiadow or the fubftance of a human foim, wcic quickly fucceeded by appiè« henfion of the punifliment due to the crime hc had really committed. When his diftrefs had prevailed on the Marquis to retire, he informed him that he was by birth a chevalier: he then touched upon fuch parts of his mibfortuues as he ihought would excite pity, expiefltd fach аЫншспсе of his guilt, and volun-» tarily mured fuch a folemn piomife of letuining the jeweb he had yet in his polieilion, for he had ventured to dif¬ pofe only ofa fmaU pau, that the Mar¬ quis at length liftened to him with iome degiee of compaffion. This favourable fentiment, feconded by a felfiih motive, induced the Marquis to compromiie with La Motte. Oi quick and inflammable paffions, he had obferved the beauty of Adeline with an eye of no common re¬ gard, and he refolved to fpare the hfe of La Motte upon no other condition than the 3
[ *93 ] the facrifice of this unfortunate girl. La Motte had neither rcfolution nor virtue fufficient to reject the terms—the jewels were reftored, and he confented to be¬ tray the innocent Adeline. But as he was too well acquainted with her heart to believe that ftie would eafily be won to the praftice of vice, and as he ftil* felt a degree of pity and tendernefs for her, he endeavoured to prevail on the Marquis to foi bear precipitate meafures, and to attempt gradually to undermine her principles by feducing her affections. He approved and adopted this plan ς the failure of his firft fcheme induced him to employ the ftratagems he after¬ wards purfued, and thus to multiply the misfortunes of Adeline. Such were the circumftances which had brought La Motte to his prefent de¬ plorable fituation. The day of trial was now come, and he was led from prifon into the court, where thebMarquis ap¬ peared as his accufer. When the charge Vot. IIJ # К was
was delivered, La Motte, as is ufual, pleaded Not Guilty, and the Advocate Nemours, who had undertaken to plead for him s afterwards endeavoured to make it appear, that the accufation, on the part of the Marquis de Montalt, was falfe and malicious. To this purpofe he men¬ tioned the circumftance of the latter ha¬ ving attempted to perfuade his client to the murder of Adeline: f ie farther urged that the Marquis had lived in habits of intimacy with La Motte for feveral months immediately preceding his arreft, and that it was not till he had difap¬ pointed the defigns of his accufer, by conveying beyond his reach, the unhap¬ py object of his vengeance, that the Marquis had thought proper to charge La Motte with the crime for which he ftood indicted. Nemours urged the im¬ probability of one man's keeping up a friendly intercourfe with another from whom he had fuffered the double injury pf affault and robbery; yet it was cer¬ tain
í *95 ] tain that the Marquis had obferved a frequent intercourfe with La Motte for fome months following the time fpccified for the commiflion of the crime* If the Marquis intended to profecute, why was it not immediately after his difcovery of La Motte ? and if not then, what had influenced him to profecute at fo diftant a period ? To this nothing was replied on the part of the Marquis; for as his conduci on this point had been fubfervient to his defigns on Adeline, he could not juftify it but by expofmg fchemes which would betray the darknefs ofhis character, and invalidate his caufe. He, therefore contented himfelf with producing feve- ■ral ofhis fervants as witnefles of the af¬ fault and robbery, who fwore, without fcruple, to the perfon of La Motte, though not one of thera had feen him otherwife than through the gloom of evening and riding off at full fpeed. On a crofs ex¬ amination moft of them contradicted К 2 each
C '9 6 J each other; their evidence was of courfe rejected; but, as the Marquis had yet two other witnefles to produce, whofe ar¬ rival at Paris had been hourly expected, the event of the trial was poftponed, and the court adjourned. La Motte was ic-conducled to his pri¬ fon under the fame preffure of defpon¬ dency wiih which he had quitted it. As hc walked through one of the avenues, hc paffed a man who ftood by to let him proceed, and who regaulcd him with a fixed and earneft eye. La Motte thought he had fcen him before; but the imper- fetì view he caught of lm features, through the dufkinefs ol the place, made him un¬ certain as to this, and his mind was in too pertui bed a ftate to fufter him to feel an intereft on the fubject. When he was gone, the fti anger inquired of the keeper of the prifon who La Motte was¡ on being told, and receiving anfwers to fumé fai ther queftions he put, he defired he might be admitted to fpeak with him. The
[ »97 J The requeft, as the man wjs only a debtor, was granted; but as the dooi* were now ihut for the night, the intei¬ view was defe ι red till the morrow. La Motte found Madame in ris room, w bei e fhe had been waiting for ionic hours to hear the eventof the ttial. They now wiihed more carnefllv than ever to fee their fonj but they were, as he had fufpefted, ignorant ofhis change of quar¬ ters, owing to the letters which hc had, as ufual, addrefled to them, under an af¬ fumed name, remaining at the poft-houfe of Auboin. This circumftance occa¬ fioned Madame La Motte to addrefs her letters to the place ofher fon's late refi¬ dence, and hc had thus continued igno¬ rant ofhis father's misfortunes and remo¬ val. Madame La Motte, furprized at receiving no anfwer to her letters, fent off another, containing an account of the trial, as far as it had proceeded, and a requeft that her fon would obtain leave of abfence, and fct out for Pans inftantly. As
í lyS J As ihc was ftill ignorant of the failure of her letters, and had it been otherwife, would not have known whither to have fent them, flic diieftcd them as ufual. Meanwhile his approaching fate was never abfent for a moment from the mind of La Motte, which, feeble by nature and ftill more enervated by habits of in¬ dulgence, refufed to fupport him at this dreadful period. While thefe feenes were paffing at Paris, La Luc arrived there without any acci¬ dent, after performing a journey, during which he had been fupported almoft en¬ tirely by the fpirit ofhis refolution. He haftened to throw himfelf at the feet of the fovereign, and fuch was the excefs of his feeling, on prefenting the petition» which was to decide the fate of his fon, that he could only look filently up, and then fainted. The king received the paper, and giving orders for the un¬ happy father to be taken care of, pafled on* He was carried back to his hotel, where
[ 199 I where hc waited the event of this hh final efibrt. Adeline, meanwhile, continued at Vaceau, in a ftate of anxiety too power¬ ful for her long-agitated frame, and the illnefs, in· coniequence of this, confined her almoft wholly to her chamber. Some¬ times ihe ventured to flatter herfelf with a hope that the journey of La Luc would be fuccef&ful: but thefe ihort and illu¬ five intervals of comfort feemed only to heighten, by contraft, the defpondency that fucceeded, and, in the alternate ex¬ tremes of feeling, ihe experienced a ftate more torturing than that produced either by the fharp fting of unexpected cala¬ mity, or the füllen pain of fettled de¬ fpair. When flie was well enough, flie came down to the parlour to converfe with Louis, who brought her frequent ac¬ counts of Theodore, and who paffed every moment he could fnatch from the duty of his profeflion, in endeavours to fupport·
f 2O0 ] fhpport and eonfole his affliftcd friendo Adeline and Theodore both looked to him for the liuie comfort allotted them, for he brought them intelligence of each other, and, whenever hc appeared, a tranfient melancholy kind of pleafure played round their hearts. He could not conceal from Theodore Adeline's indif¬ pofition, fince it was neceffary to account for her not indulging the eairneft wifh he repeatedly expreffed to fee her again. To Adeline he fpoke chiefly of the fortitude and refignation of his friend, not, how¬ ever, forgetting to mention the tender affeftion he conftantly expreffed for her. Accuftomed to derive her fole confola¬ tion from the prefence of Louis, and to obferve his unwearied ftiendfliip towards him whom fhe fo truly loved, fhe found her efleem for him ripen into gratitude, and her regard daily increafe. The fortitude with which he had faid Theodore fupported his calamities was fomewhat exaggerated. He could not fufficiently
С 201 j fufficiently forget thofe ties which bound him to life to meet his fate with firmnefs; but tliough the paroxyfms of grief were acute and frequent, he fought, and often attained, in the prefence of his friends, a manly compofure. from the event of his father's journey he hoped little, yet that little was fuificient to keep his mind in the torture of fufpenfe till the iffue ihould appear. Qn the day preceding that fixed for the execution of the fentence, La Luc reached Vaceau. Adeline was at her chamber window when the carriage drew up to the inn; fhe faw him alight* and wirh feeble fteps, fupported by Peter, enter the houfe. From the lan¬ guor of hib air fhe drew no favourable omen, and, almoft finking under the violence of her emotion, Ihc went to meet him. Clara was already with her father when Adeline entered the room. She approached him, but, dreading to receive from his lips а confirmation of К 5 the
f 202 ] the misfortune his countenance feemed to indicate, fhe looked expreffively at him and fat down, unable to fpeak the quef¬ tion ihe would have aíked. He held out hishand toher in filence, funk back in his chair, and feemed to be fainting under oppreflion of heart. His manner con¬ firmed all her fears; at this dreadful conviftion her fenfes failed her, and flie fat motionlefs and ftupified. La Luc and Clara were too much oc¬ cupied by their own diftrefs to obferve her fituation ; after fome time ihe breath¬ ed a heavy figh, and burft into tears. Relieved by wceping,her fpirits gradual¬ ly returned, and íhe at length faid to La Luc, " It is unneceffary, Sir, to afk the * f event of your journey ; yet, when you <f can bear to mention the fubjeft, I «< wiih*' ------ La Luc waved his- hand—" Alas ľ* faid he, " I have nothing to tell but what ·* you already guefs too well. My poor «« T heodore !—Iiis voice was convul¬ fed
С 203 ] fed with forrow, and fome moments of unutterable anguiih followed. Adeline was the firft who recovered fufficient recollection to notice the ex¬ treme langour of La Luc, and attend to his fupport. She ordered him refrefh¬ ments, and entreated he would retire to his bed, and fuffer her to fend fbr a phy¬ fician, adding, that the fatigue he had fuffered made repofc abfolutely neceffary.· " Would that f could find it, my dear et child/* faid he; "it is not in this· a world that I muft look for it, but in a * r better, and that better, I truft, I ihall cr foon attain. But where is our good· €t friend, Louis La Motte ? He muft lead ' f me tomy fon." — G rie fagain interrupt¬ ed hisutterance,and the cntranceof Louis > was a very feafonable relief to them all. Their tears explained the queftion he would have afked; La Luc immediately inquired for his fon, and thanking Louis for all his kindnefs to him, defired to be conduded to the prifon, Louis endea¬ voured'
[ 204 3 voured to perfuade him to defer his vifis till the morning, and Adeline and Clara joined their entreaties with his; but La Luc had determined to go that night.— " His time is ihort," faid he; "afew " hours and I fliall fee him no more, at " leaft in this world ; let me not neglect *' thefe precious moments. Adeline ! I *' had promifed my poor boy that he 4t ihould fee you once more ; } ou are not *' now equal to the meeting, I will try to *' reconcile him to the difappointment ¿ ** but if 1 fail, and you are better in the 4i morning, I know you will exert your- <c felf to fuftain the interview." 1 —Ade¬ line looked impatient, and attempted to fpeak. Li Luc rofe ro depart, but could only reach the door of the room, where, faint and feeble, he fat down in a chair. <c I muft fubmit to necef- ** fity," faid he, "I find I am not fi able to go farther to-night. Go to ** him, I a Motte, and teU him I arn * ibmewhat difordered by my journey, "but
С 20 5 ] ** but that I will bc with him early in " the morning. Do not flatter him " with a hope; prepare him for the ft worft."---------There was a paufe af filence; La Luc at length recovering himfelf, defired Clara would order hi* bed to be got ready, and fhe willingly obeyed. When he withdrew, Adeling told Louis, what was indeed unneceffary.. the event of La Luc's journey j *' I " own, continued fhe, * c that I had ** fometimes fuflered myfelf to hope, and " ï now feel thiò calamity with double ť< force. I fear, too, that M. La lue " will fink under its picffurc; he is * f much altered for the worfe fince he if fct out for Paris. Telí mc your opi* <ť nion finceiely." The changQwas fo obvious, that Louis could not deny it, but he endeavoured to footh her apprehenfion, by afcribing this alteration, m a great meafurc, to the temporary fatigue of travelling. Ade¬ line declared her refolution of accoui- puniing
[ аоб ] pan) ing La Luc to take leave of Theo¬ dore in the morning. ° I know not how f * I ihall fupport the interview," faid flie : " but to fee him once more İs a " duty I owe both to him and myfelf. * c The remembrance of having ncglect- ** ed to give him this laft proof of aifec* w tion, would purfue me with inceffant *' remorfe." After fome farther converfation on this fubjeci Louis withdrew to the prifon, ruminating on the beft means of impart¬ ing to hb friend the fatal intelligence he had to communicate. Theodore re¬ ceived it with more compofure than he had cxpecied ; but he aflced with impa¬ tience, why he did not fee his father and Adeline ? and on being informed thai in¬ difpofition withheld them, his imagination feized on the worft poflibiiity, and fug¬ gefted that his father was dead. It was a confiderable time before Louis could con* vince him ofthe contrary, and that Ade¬ line wasnot dangerouily ill5 when,how>- fcveiv
[ 207 ] ever, he was aflured that he fliould fée them in the morning, he became more tranquil. He defired his friend would- not leave him that night. M Thefe are the laft hours we can pafs together," added he ;. <e I cannot fleep ! Stay with w me and lighten thefe heavy mo- " ments, I have need of comfort,, " Louis. Young as I am, and held " by fuch ftrong attachments, I cannot " quit the world with refignation. Γ '*' know not how to credit thofe ftories< w we hear of phiiofophic fortitude ; wif- " dom cannot teach us cheerfully to re- w fign a good, and life in my circum- «* ftances is furely fuch." The night was pafied in embarraffed convcrfation; fometimes interrupted by\ long fits of filence, and fometimes by the paroxyfms of defpair; andthe morning of that day which was to lead Theodore to death, at length dawned through the grates of his prifon*
La Luc meamvhile paffed a fleeplefs and dreadful night. I fe prayed for for¬ titude and refignation both for himfelf and Theodore ; but the pangs ornature were powerful in his hea'rt, and not to be fubdued. The idea of his lamented vife, and of what ftie would Iiave fuffer¬ ed, had fhe lived to witnefs the ignomi¬ nious death which awaited her fon, fre¬ quently occured to him. It feemed has if deftiny had hung over the life of Theodore, for it is pro¬ bable that the king might have gi anted the petition of the unhappy faiher, had it not happened that the Marquis de Montait was prefent at court when the paper was prefentcd. The appearance and fingular diftrcf -ь of the petitioner had intcrefled the monarch, and, inliead of putting by the paper, he opened it. As fee threw his eyes over it, obferving that the criminal was of the Marquis dc Montalt's rrgiment, hc turned to him, and inquired tbc nature of the offence fór л\ hich.
[ 20 9 3 which the culptit was about to fuffer. The anfwer was fuch as might have been expefted from the Marquis, and the king was convinced that Theodore was not a proper objccl of mercy. But to return to La Luc, who was called, according to his order, at a very early hour. Having paffed fome time in prayer, he went down to the parlour, where Louis, punctual to the moment, already waited to conduft him to the prifon. He appeared calm and colleft¬ ed; but his countenance was impreffed with a lixed defpair ihat icnfibly affecied his young friend. While they waited for Adeline he fpoke little, andfecmed ftrug¬ gling to attain the fortitude neceifary to fupport him through the approaching fcene. Adeline not appearing, he at length fent to haften her, and was told flie had been ill, but was recovering. She iiad, indeed, paffed a night of fuch agi¬ tation, that her frame had funk under it, and ihe was now endeavouring to re¬ cover
[ аю ] cover ftrength and compofure fufficiení to fuftain her in tliis dreadful hour. Every moment that brought her neaier to it had increafed her emotion, and the apprehenfion, of being prevented feeing Theodore had aíoneeiiabled her to ftrug¬ gle againft the united preflure of illnefs and grief. She now, with Clara, joined La Luc, who advanced as tbey entered the room, and took a hand of each in filence. Af¬ ter fome moments he propofed to go* and they ftepped into a carriage which conveyed them to the gates of the pri¬ fon. The crowd had already began to aftemble there, and a confufed murmur arofe as the carnage moved forward; it was a grievous fight to the friends of Theodore. Louis fupported Adeline vhen flic alighted; flie was fcarcely able to walk, and with trembling fteps ilie followed La Luc, whom the keeper led towards that part of the prifon where bit» fon was confined. It was now eight o'clock*
С *" ] o'clock, the fentence was not tobe exe¬ cuted till twelve, but a guard of fol¬ diers was already placed in the court, and as this unhappy party paffed along the narrow avenues, they were met by feveral officers who had been to take a laft farewell of Theodore. As they af¬ cended the ftairs that led to his apart¬ ment, La Luc's ear caught the clink of chains, and heard him walking above with a quick, irregular, ftep. The un¬ happy father, overcome by the moment which now preffed upon him, ftopped, and was obliged to fupport himfelf by the banifter. Louis fearing that the con¬ fequence ofhis grief might be fatal, fliat¬ tered as his frame already was, would have gone for aififtance, but he made a fign to him to ftay. " I am better," laid La Luc ; " О God ! fupport me и through this hour ľ' and in a few minutes he was able to proceed. As the warder unlocked the door, the haríh grating of the key ihocked Ade- line*
[ ** 2 1 line, but in the next moment flie was in the prefence of Theodore, who fprung to meet her, and caught her in hi* arms before fhe funk to the ground. As her head reclined on his ihoulder, he again \iewed that countenance fo dearto him, which had fo often lighted rapture in his heart, and which, though pale and in¬ animate as it now was, awaked him ta momentary delight. When at length ilie unclofed her eyes, ihe fixed them in long and mournful gaze upon Theodore, who preffing her to his heart could an¬ fwer her only with a fmile of mingled tendernefs and defpair; the tears he en¬ deavoured to reftrain trembled in his eyes, and hc forgot for a time every thing but Adeline. La Luc, who had feated himfelf at the foot of the bed, feemed unconfeious of what paffed a- round him, and entirely abforbed in his own grief; but Clara, as ihe clafped the hand of her brother, and hung uecping on his arm, expreffed aloud all
[ 2 *з 3 Ы1 the anguifli of her heart, and at length recalled the attention of Ade¬ line, who, in a voice fcarrHy audible, entreated ihe would fpare her father. Her woids roufed Theodore, and, kip- porting Adeline to a chair, he turned to La Luc. " My dear child!" faid La Luc, grafping his hand, and burfting into tears, " My dear child !" They "wept together. A fter a long interval of filence, he faid, " I tho"ght I could " have fupported this hour, but I am fi old and feeble. God knows my ef- u foits for refignation, rny faith in his «* goodnefs." Theodore, by a ftrong and fudden ex¬ ertion, aíľumed a compofed and firm countenance, and endeavoured,b> every gentle argument, to footh and comfoi t his weeping friends. La Luc at length feem¬ ed to conquer his fufterings · drying his eyes, he faid, " My fon, í ought to € « have fet you a beiter example, and ** pradifed the precepty of fortitude I " have
С 2 ч ] € « have fo often given you. But it is *· over ; I know, and will perform, my €t duty." Adeline breathed a heavy figh, and continued to weep. *' Be ** comforted, my love, we part but for * f a time," faid Theodore, as he kiffed the tears from her cheek ¡ and uniting her hand with that of his father's, he earneftly recommended her to his pro¬ tedion. " Receive -her," added he, ** as the moft precioia legacy I canbe- w queath; confider heras your child» ** She will eonfole you when 1 am gone, ** flie will more than fupply the lofs of 41 your fon." La Luc affured him that he did now, and fliould continue to, regard Adeline as his daughter. During thefe afflicting hours he endeavoured to diflipate the terrors of approaching death, by infpir¬ ing his fon with religious confidence* His converfation was pious, rational, and confolatory : he fpoke not from the cold diäates of the head, but from the feel- 8 ings
C 2I 5 ] ings of a heart which had long loved and practifed the pure precepts of Chriftia¬ nity, and which now drew from them a comfort, fuch as nothing earthly could beftow. " You are young, my fon,'* faid he, * € and are yet innocent of any great * ( crime ; you may, therefore, look on *' death without terror, for to the guilty ** only is its approach dreadful. I feel 4t that I fliall not long furvive you, and u I truft in a merciful God, that we ftiall ** meet in a ftate where forrow never * c comes ; where the Son of Righleoufnefs **Jliall rije ùith healing infus wings!*' As be fpoke he looked up ; the tears ftill trembled in his eyes, which beamed with meek, yet fervent devotion, and his coun* tenance glowed with the dignity of a fuperior being. " Let us not neglect thefe awful mo* " ments/' faid La Luc, rifing; '* let * ť our united prayers afcend to Him who «aUtøecaa comfort and fupport us!" They
[ 2ÍÕ ] They all knelt down, and he prayed w itli that fimple and fublime eloquence which true piety infpires. When he rofe, hc embraced his children feparate¬ ly, and when he came to Theodore, he paufed, gazed upon him with an ear¬ neft, mournful expreffion, and was for fome time unable to fpeak. Theodore could not bear this; he drew his hand before his eyes, and vainly endeavoured to ftifle the deep fobs which convulfed his frame. At length recovei ing hh voice, he entreated his father would îea\e him. ct This mifery is too much r fer us all," faid he, "let us not pro- * { long it. The time is now dtawing <f on ------leave me to compofe myfelf. fi The iharpnefs of death confifts in *' pai ι mg with thofe who are dear to fi us; when that b paffed, death is dif- и armed." " I will not leave you, m> km" re¬ plied La Luc, " my poor girls ihall go, " but for me, I will be with you in your « Iaft
С 217 ] " iaft moments/' Theodore felt that this would be too much for them both, and urged every argument which reafon could ' fuggeft to prevail with his father to re¬ linquiih his defign. But he remained firm in his deiermination. " I will u not fuffer a felfiih confideration of the " pain I may endure/' faid La Luc, "to " tempt me to defert my child when he " will moil require my fupport. It is 11 my duty to attend you, and nothing " ftiall withhold me." Theodore fei /ed on the words of La Luc—" As you would that I fliould be " fupported in my lait hour," í a id he, " I entreat that you will not be witnefs " ofit. Your prcfence, my dear father, ts would fubdue all my fortitude—would *' deftroy wdiat little compofure I may " otherwife be able to attain. Add not ** to my fufferings the view of yourdif- * c trefs, but leave me to forget, if pofti- " hie, the dear parenti muft quit for " ever." His tears flowed anew. La Vol. III. L Luc
Lqc co,ntinue4 to gage on. bim ¡n , filent agony,; at length he faid, " Weil, be it "»fo. If¿ indeed», my prefence,would *' dftreff you, I will not go." Hk voiqc,wasbro}cen,and interrupt^. Af¬ ter a paufe ofj fome moments, he again embraced¡T.hqodqre—** Wc muft part:," fa4 he, \ l ¡кещууфап,, but it is,only for > u щ time—we ftiall foon be re-united in "¡a higjw world!----p-O God! thpu <( .feeft,my heart^-thou feeft, д11 its feeJ« *' ings in thii, bitter hour !'*-—Grief again overcame hýn, í¡le pi effed Theodoie inhis arips } and, at length, feeming to fumroçn alljtiis foitituJc, he again.faid, *\ ¡We mußOan^-Qh I my fon, farewell- u t ^oficyer in thjs world 1—The mçrey of' Et nimighty Qo& fuppQrťandWefsyouľ' He turned arçay to leuve the prifon, but, quite worn out with grief, funk intp a chair-near the 4oor he would haye opened. Theodore gazed, with a de¬ tracted countenance, alternately on his Uther, on Clara, and on Adeline, whom be
[ ^9 ] he preifed to hb throbbing heart, and their tears flowed together. w And do *· I then," cried, he ** for the laft time, ** look upon that countenance I —Shall Ci I never—never more behold it?----- *' О 1 exquifite mifery ! Yet once again * f —once more," continued he, preffing her cheek, but is was infenfible, and cold as marble. Louis, who had left the room foon after La Luc arrived, that his prefence might not interrupt their farewell grief, now returned. Adeline raifed her head, and perceiving who entered, it again funk on the bofom of Theodore. ' Louis appeared much agitated. La Lue arofe. " We' muft go," faid he: a Adeline, ' ray ' love, e&ert yourfelf—. "' Clara—my children, let us depart. c< —Yet' one laft —Ml· embrace, and 4t tiren !*'^— Lotti š ädVancéd, und took hfcÜkitö 5 "*My dear'Sir, 1 I have' forata «* ť thing tó iay ; yWÏ tettthó tell W-~* €i What db yód гйсШ" 4Ш'1а tèe, La with
[ 220 ] with quicknefs : " No new misfortune *' can have power to afflici me at this * f moment. Do s ot fear to fpeak "— *· 1 r<joice that î cannot put you to the ** proof," replied Louis; ** ï have feen ° you fuftain the moft trying affliction " with fortitude. Can you fupport the u tranfports of hope?'*—La Luc gazed eagerly on Louis-—" Speak,** faid he, ina faint voice. Adeline raifed her head, and,trembling between hope and fear, lookedat Louis as if flie would have fearched his foul. He fmiled cheerfully upon her. " Is it— О ! is it poflible !'* fhe exclaimed, fuddenly re-animated-— 11 He lives! He lives Í" —She faid no more, but ran to La Luc, who funk in his chair, while Theodore and Clara, with one voice, called on Louis to relieve them from the tortures of fufpenfe» He proceeded to inform theov thaf ))& haj$obtaînen\ from.iţte comraanq*ingof,j fieer, a refpiî^for.Ţ^dore, till the kţpg'& ^rifţer pleafure could be known, and $y. , this
[ 221 ] this in eonfequence ofa letter received that morning from his mother, Madame dela Motte, in which fhe mentioned fome very extraordinary circumftances that had appeared in the courfe ofa trial lately condufted at Paris, and which fo materially affecied the charafter ofthe Marquis de Montalt, asto render it pof¬ fible a pardon might be obtained fo/ Theodore· Thefe words darted with the rapidity of lightning upon the hearts of his hearers. La Luc revived, and that pri¬ fon, fo lately the fcene of defpair, novv echoed only to the voices of gratitude and gladnefs. La Luc, raifing his clafp¬ ed hands to Heaven, faid, *« Great God! " fupport me in this moment as thou «' haft already fupported me!—If my %t fon lives, I die in peace." He embraced Theodore, and remem- beting the anguifh of his laft embraéŕ, teers of thankfulnefs and joy flowed to the contraft. So powerful, indeed, was the
[ 222 ] the cffecì of this temporary reprieve, and o{ the hope it introduced, that if an abfolute pardon had been obtained, it could fearcely, for the moment, have diffufed a more lively joy. But when the firft emotions were fubfided, the un- cei tainty of Theodore's fate once more appeared. Adeline forebore to exprefs her fenfe of this, but Clara, without fcruple, lamented the poffibility that her brother might yet ,be taken from them, and all their joy be turned to forrow. A look from Adeline checked her. Joy was, however, fo much the predominant feel¬ ing of the prefent moment, that the ihade which reflection threw upon their hopes paffed away like the cloud that is spel¬ led by the ftrength of the fun-beam ; and Louis alone was penfive and abftračted» When they were fufficiently compofed, he informed them that the contents of Madame de la Motte 's letter obliged him to fet out for Paris immediatel) ; and that the intelligence he had to com¬ municate
[ 2*3 ] manicate intimately conccrncd'AdcMnc, who would undoubted/judge ir nrccf- fary to go thither alfo as foon as her health would'permit. He rhen' react to his impatient auditoťs f U tíH ' paÏÏli ίϊ c s ih th¿ lettor, as were neceffary tó cxrSiaíh his meaning; *but as madame de la Motte had omitted to mention ibmc circumftances of importance to be unv derftood, the following is a relation ' ? of the occurrences that had lately happöflèd at Pärisi It may be remembered, that on the firft d&y ot his trial; La Motte, in pann¬ ing from the courts to his prifon, faw a perfori, wbofe ! features,though imperfect¬ ly feen through the duik, he thought he recolieded; and that this fame perfon, after inquiring the name of La Motte, defired to be admitted to hirtti On the following day the warder complied with his requeft, and the furprize of La Motte may be imagined, when, in the ftronger light ofhis apartment, he diftinguiflied the
С 224 J the countenance of the man from whofe hands he had formerly received Adeline. On obferving Madame de la Motte in the room, he faid he 'had fomething of confequcrçce to impart, and defired to be ieft alone with the prifoner. When fiie was gone, he told De la Motie that he underftood he was confined at the fuit <?f the Marquis de Montalt. La Motte affented.— " I know him for a villain.*' faid the ftranger boldy.—" Your cafe ·' İs defperate. Do you wifti for life ?*· «* Need the queftion be aiked !" <c Your trial, I underftand proceed« * f to-morrow. I am now under eoii- " finement in this place for debt; out 11 if you can obtain leave for me to go ' ( with you into the courts, and a con- * ( diiion from the judge, that what I re- " veal ihall not criminate myfelf, I will «* make difcoveries that ihall confound « c that fame Marquis ; I will prove him " a villain; and it ihall then be judged «* how far his word ought to be taken и againft you." La
[ »ч ] La Motte, whofe intereft was now ftrongly excited, defi ed he would ex¬ plain hinfilf; and the man proceeded to relate a long hiftory of the misfor¬ tunes and confequent poverty which had tempted him to become fubfervient to the fchemes of the Marquis, till he fud¬ denly cheeked himfelf, and faid, "When " I obtahi from the court the promife I " require, 1 will explain myfelf fully; ·* till then, I cannot fay moie on the " fubjed '* La Motte could not forbear exprefling a doubt of his fincerity, and a curiofity concerning the motive that had induced him to become the Marquis's accufer.«— «« As to my motive, it is a very natural " one," replied the man; " it is no " eafy matter to receive ill ufage with« ** out refenting it, particularly from a " villain whom you have ferved."—La Motte, for his own fake, endeavoured to check the vehemence with which this was uttered. 4i I care not who hears L 5 « me,
С 22β 3 и me," continued the ftranger, but at the fame time he lowered his voice ; " I <f repeat it—the Marquis has ufed me ill « c —1 have kept his fecret long enough. * c He does not think it worth his while to ** fecure my filence, or he would relieve ** my neceffities. 1 am in prifon for * c debt, and have applied to him for re- ,l lief; fince he does not chufe to give it, u let him take the confequence. I war- * f rant he fhali foon repent that he has ** provoked me, and 'tis fit he íhould.**' Thè doubts of La Motte were now diffipated; the profpect of life again* opened upon him, and he affured Du ßoffe (which was the ftranger's name/ with much warmth, that he would com-' miflion his Advocate to do all in his power to obtain leave for his appearance on the trial, and to procure the neceflary condition« After fome farther conver¬ fation they parted.
CHAP-
С 22 7 3
CHAPTER XXL
" Drag forth the legal monfter into light, ť< Wrench from his hand Opreffion's iron rod, " And bid the cruel feel the pangs they give. 1 ' JLeAVE was at length granted for the appearance of Du Bofte, with a promife that his words ihould not criminate him, and he accompanied La Motte into court. The confufion of the Marquis de Mon¬ tait, on perceiving this man, was obferv¬ ed by many perfons prefent, and parti¬ cularly by La Motte, who drew from this circumftance a favourable prefage for himfelf. When Du Bofte was* called upon, he inforraed the court, that, on the night ufi tke.
f 228 3 the twenty-firft of April, in the preced¬ ing year, one Jean D'Aunoy, a man he had known many years, came to his lodging. After they had difcourfed for fome time on their circumftances, D'Au¬ noy faid, he knew a way by which Du Boffe might change all his poverty to riches, but that he would not fay more till he was certain he would be willing to follow it. The drftreffed ftate in which Du Boffe then was, made him anxious to ìearn the means whirh would brmg him relief; he eagerly inquired what his friend meant, and, after fome time, D'Aunoy explained himfelf. He faid he was em¬ ployed by a nobleman (whom he after¬ wards told Du Boffe was the Marquis de Montalt) to carry offa young girl from a convent, and that fhe was to be taken to a houfe a few leagues diftant from Paris. " I knew the houfe he defcribed' " well," faid Du Boffe, "for I have been " there many times with D'Aunoy, who w lived tiiere to avoid his creditors* ·* though
[ 229 ] €< though he often paifed his nights at " Paris. He would not tell me more ** of the fcheme, but faid he ihould want ** affiftants, and if L and my brother who " is fmce dead, would join him, his em- *' ployer would grudge no money, and " we fliould be well rewarded. 1 defired * c him again to tell me more of the plan ; *' but he was obftinate ; and after I had M toťd him I would confider of what he ** faid, and fpeak to my brother, hc went *' away. * f When he called the next night for " his anfwer, my brother and í agreed *« to engage, and accordingly we went " home with hira. He then told us, that * the young lady he was to bring thither «' was a natural daughter of the Marquis и de Montalt, and of a nun* belonging. ** to a convent of Urfalines: that his " wife had received the chikl immedí- " ately on its birih, and had been al- €l lowed a handfome annuity to bring it ** up as her own, which fhe had done '* till lier death. The child was then ·' placed
Γ 23° ] '* placed in a convent, and defigned for ** the veil ; but when fiie was of an age ** to receive the vows, ilie had fteadily' ** perfifted in refufing them. This u circumftance had fo much exafperated ,c the Marquis, that in his rage he or- " dered, that if file perfifted in her ob- ** ftinacy, ftie ihould be removed from ** the convent and got rid of any way» ■* fince, if íhe lived in the world, her ** birth might be difcovered, and, in " confequence of this, her mother, for n whom he had yet a regard, would be u condemned to expiate her crime by a И terrible death.*' Du Boífe was interrupted in his nar¬ rat ive by the counfel of the Marquis, who contended that the circumftances alledged tending to criminate his client, the proceeding was both irrelevant and illegal. He was anfwered, that it wa s not irrelevant, and therefore not illegal; for that the circumftances which threw light upon the charaÛer of the Marquis, aftected
[ 231 3 affecied his evidence againft La Motte· Du Bofte was fuffered to proceed. " D* Au noy then faid, that the Mar- ** quis had ordered him to difpatch her, " but that, as he had been ufed to fee " her from her infancy, he could not ** find in his heart to do it, and wrote- " to tell him fo. The Marquis then " commanded him to find thofe who " would, and this wa» the bufinefs for ** which he wanted us. My brother and* " I were not fo wicked as this came to, " and fo we tolďD'Aunoy ; and í could " not help afking why the Marquis re- " folved to murder his own child, rather «* than expofè her mother to the rifque " of fuffering death. He faid, the M ar- ** quis had never fecn his child, atid that,' *' therefore, it could not be fuppofed he ** felt much kindnefs towards it, and ftilL " lefs that he could love it better than! *' he loved its mother*" Du Boffeproceeded*to relate how much he and his brother had endeavoured to foften
[ 232 ] foften the heart of D* Aunoy towards the Marqub's daughter, and that they pre¬ vailed with him to write again and phad for her. D'Aunoy went to Paris to await the anfwer, leaving them and the young girl at the houfe on the heath, where the former had confented to remain, feem¬ ingly for the purpofe of executing tbe orders they might receive, but really with a ckfign to fave the devoted victim from «he facrifice. It is probable that Du Bo fie, in this inftance, gave a falie account of his mo¬ tive, fince, if he really was guilty of an intention fo atroi ious as that of murder^ he would naturally endeavour to conceal it. However this might be, he affirmed that, oo the night of the twenty-fixth of Apriche received an order from D*Au¬ noy for the deftručtion of the girl, whom he had afterwards delivered into the hands of La Motte. La Motte hftened to this relation in aitomfhment ; when he knew that Adeline wa«
Г *зз 3 was the daughter of the Marquis, and remembered the crime to which he had once devoted her, his frame thrilled with horror. He now took up the ftory, and added an account of what had paffed at the Abbey between the Marquis and himfelf concerning a defign of the for¬ mer upon the life of Adeline; urging, asa proof of the prefent profecution ori¬ ginating in malice, that it had com¬ menced immediately after he had effect¬ ed her efcape from the Marquis. He concluded, however, with faying, that as the Marquis had immediately fent his people in purfuit of her, it was poffible fhe might have yet fallen a viftim to his vengeance. Here the Marquis's counfel again in¬ teifeied, and their objeftions were again over-ruled by the court. The uncommon degree of emotion which his countenance betrayed during the narrations of Du Boffe and De la Motte, was generaľy obferved. The court fufpended the fen¬ tence
С Чг 1 tence of the latter, ordered that the Marquis mould be put under immediate arreft, and that Adeline (the name given by her fofter mother) and Jean D' Aunoy -ihould be fought for. 4 The Marquis was accordingly feized at the fuit of the crown, and put under confinement till Adeline ihould appear, όγ proof could be obtained that ftie died by his order, and till D*Aunoy fhould confirm or deftroy the evidence of De la Motte. Madame, who at length obtained in¬ telligence of her fon's refiJence from the town where he was fo'ťmerly ftationed, ìmd acquainted hinrwith his father's fitu¬ ation, and the proceedings of the trial ; and as flie believed that Adeline, if flie had been fo fortunate as to efcape the Marquis's purfuit, was ftill in Savoy, fhe defired Louis would obtain leave of abfence, and bring her to Paris, ^here her immediate prefence was rcquifhe, to
С 235 3 to fubftantiate the evidence, and, proba» biy, to fave the life of La Motte. On the receipt of her letter, which happened on the morning appointed for the execution of Theodore, Louis went immediately to the commanding officer, to petition for a refpite till the king's far¬ ther pleafure fliould be known. He founded his plea on the arreft of the Marquis, and ihewed the letter he had juft received. The commanding officer readily granted a reprieve, and, Loni«» who, on the arrival of this letter, had forborne to communicate its contents to Theodore, left it fhoufd torture him with falfe hope, now haftened to him with thia- comfortablc news.
CHAP·
C 2 3 6 ]
CHAPTER XXIL
ff Low on Kis fun'ral couch he lies f ·' No pitying heart, no eye, afford *' A tear to glace hi« obfequies," Gray, C/N learning the purpofe of Madame de la Motte's letter, Adeline faw the ne¬ ceflity of her immediate departure for Paris. The life of La Motte, who had more than faved her's, the life, perhaps, of her beloved Theodore, depended on the teftimony flie could give. And flic who had fo lately been finking under the influence of illnefs and defpair, who could ГсагсЫу raife her languid head, or fpeak but in the fainteft accents, now, re¬ animated with hope, and invigorated by a fenfe of the importance of die bufinefs before
[ 47 ] hefore her, prepared to perform a rapid journey of fome hundred miles. Theodore tenderly entreated that flie would fo far confider her health as to delay this journey for a few days; but with a funic of enchanting tendernefs flic aflured him that (he was now too happy to be ill, and that the fame caufe which would confirm her happinefs would con¬ firm her health. So ftrong was the effec! of hope upon her mind now, that it fuc* ceeded to the mifery of defpair, that it overcame the ihock fhe fuflered on be¬ lieving hcrlelf a daughter of the Mar¬ quis, and every other painful refletfion. She did not even forefee the obftacle that circumftance might produce to her union with Theodore, fhould he at laft be per¬ mitted to live. Ic was fettled that ftie fhould fct off for Paris in a t few hours with Louis, and at¬ tended by Peter. Thefe hours were paífeä by La Luc and his family in the prifon. When
[ 538 ] When the time of her departure ar¬ rived, the fpirits of Adeline again for¬ fook her, and the illufions of joy difap¬ peared. She no longer beheld Theodore as one refpited from death, but took leave of him with a mournful ρ rc-fc n ti¬ ment that ftie ihould fee him no 'more. So ftrongly was this prefáge impreffed upon her mind, that it was long before flic could fummons refolution to bid him farewel ; and w heti ftie haii done fo t and even left the apartment, flie returned to take of him a laft look. As ilie was once more quitting' the toom, her me¬ lancholy imagination reprefented Theo¬ dore at tlie place οΐ executkm,'pa!e and convulfed in ddath; flie again turned her ling ring eyes upon him ; but fancy af- f.òtcd her fenfe, for flie thought," as íhe now gazed, t hat his countenance changed, and affirmed v ghaftly hue; All her Mb- lution vaniihed, and fuch was the añg'uiíh -of her heart; fhafíhè réťolŕeb tó defer her journey till the morrow, though fhe røuft
t 2 39 3 muftfby ţl]is nţeanslofe theprotcòìion of l f ouis, whofe impatience to meet his fa·* ther wotild not fuffer the delay. The triumph of paffion, however, was tran¬ fient;, foothed by the indulgence fhe promifed herfelf, her gnef fubfided, rea¬ fon affumed its influence; fhe again faw the neçeffiiy ofher immediate departure, and recolletted fufficient refolution to fubmit. La Luc would have accompa¬ nied her for the purpofe of again foli¬ citing the Kim* in bchajfof his fon, had not the extreme; weaknefs and"laflitude to vv hich Ik* was reduced made travelling impraticable. At Ipn^th, Afleline, witţi л ha vy heart, quitted Iheodore, notwithftand¬ ing his entreaties, that fhe would,not un¬ dertakt the journc} İ u her prefent weak fiate, and was accompanied by Clara and La Luc to ,ihe ши. The former parted from her fnend with many tears, and much anxiety iur her welfare, but under a hope of ioon meeting again. 3 Should
С 2 40 J Should a pardon be granted to Theodore, La Luc defigned to fetch Adeline from Paris ¡ but fliould this be refufed, flie was to return with Peter. He bade her adieu with a father's kindnefs, which flie repaid with a filial affeBion, and in her laft words conjured him to attend to the recovery of his health ¡ the languid fmile he affumed feemed to exprefs that her folicitude was vab, and that he thought his health pail recovery. Thus Adeline quitted the friends fo juflly dear to her, and fo lately found, for Paris, where'fhe was a flranger, al¬ moil without protection, and compelled to meet a father who had purfued her with the utmoft cruelty, in a public court of juftice. The carriage, in leaving Va¬ ceau, paffed by the prifon, flie threw an eager look towards it as fhe paffed : its heavy black walls, and narrow-grated windows, feemed to frown upon her hopes-*—but Theodore was there, and leaning from the vwndow, fhe continued to
C 2 4 i ] to gïuc upon it till an abrupt turning in the ftreet concealed it from her view. She then funk back in the carriage, u s d yielding to the melancholy of her heart, wept in filence. Louis was not difpofed to interrupt it ; his thoughts were anxi¬ oufly employed on his father's i;tttøuon» and the travellers proceeded many miles without exchanging a word. At Paris, whither we fliall nov/ return* the fearch after Jean D'Aunoy was pro* fecuted without fuceefs. The houfe on the heath, defci ibed by Du BofTe, was found uninhabited, and to the places of his ufual refort in the city, where the oificers of the police awaited him, nt, no longer came. It even appeared doubtful whether he was living, for he had abfented himfelf from the houfes of his cuftomary rendezvous fonie time be¬ fore the trial of La Motte ; it was there~ fore certain that his abfence was not oc¬ cafioned by any thing which had pafled in the courts. Vot, III, M In
С чь 3 In the folitude of his confinement the Marquis de Monrak had leifure to reflect on the paft, and to repent of his crimes; but reflečh'on and repentance formed as yet no part of hi? difpofition. He turned with impatiencefromrecoilečiions which produced only pain, and looked forward to the future with an endeavour to avert the difgrace and punifliment which he faw impending. The elegance of his manners had fo effedually veiled the depravity of his heart, that he w r as a fa¬ vourite with bis iv>\ oreign ; and on this circuniftance he refted his hope of fecu¬ rity. He, however, feveicly repented that he had indulged the baity fpirit of revenge w hich had urged him to the pro¬ fecution of La Motte, and had thus un- exptcledl) imolved him in a fmiation dançcrous —if not fatal—fince if Adeline could not be found he would be con¬ clude! guiliy of her death. But the appearance of D'Aunoy was the cir »im¬ itante he moft dreaded; and to o^yofe rhe
С 2 43 ] the poffibility of this, he employed fe¬ cret emiffaries to difcover his retreat, and to bribe him to his intereft. Thefe were, however, as unfuccefsful in their refearch as the officers of police, and the Marquis at length began to hope the man was really dead. La Motte meanwhile awaited with trembling impatience the arrival of his fon when he fliould be relieved, in fome degree, from his uncertainty con¬ cerning Adeline. On her appearance he refted his only hope oflife, fmce the evi¬ dence againft him would lofe mudi of its validity from the confirmation fhe would give of the bad charafter of his profecu¬ tor; and if the Parliament even con¬ demned La Motte } the clemency ofthe king m»ght yet operate in his favour. Adeline arrived at Paris after a jour¬ ney of feveral days, during which ihc was chiefly fupported by the delicate at¬ tention of Louis, whom fhe pitied and revered, though fhe could not love. M % She
С 244 ] She was immediately vifited at the hotel by Madame La Motte: the meeting was affecting on both fides. A fenfe of her paft conduct excited in the latter an em¬ barraifment which the delicacy and good¬ nefs of Adeline would willingly have fpared her; but the pardon folicited was given with fo much fincet ity, that Ma¬ dame gradually became compofed and re-affured. This forgivenefs, however, could not have been thus eafily granted, had Adeline believrd her former conduci; was voluntary; a conviction of the re¬ ftraint and terror under which Madame had acted, alone induced her to excufe the paft. in this firft meeting they for¬ bore dwelling on particular fubjeûs; Madame La Motte propofed that Ade¬ line fhould remove from ihe hotel to her lodgings near the Chatelet, and Adeline for whom a refidence at a public hotel was very improper, gladly accepted the offer* Madame
L 245 J Madame there gave her a circurnffan~ tial account of La Motten fituation, and concluded with faying, that as the fen¬ tence ofher hufband had been fufpended tiil fome certainty could be obtained concerning the late criminal defigns of the Marquis, and Adeline could con¬ firm the chief part of La Motte's tefti¬ mony, it was probable that now fhe was arrived, the court would proceed imme¬ diately. She now learnt the full extent of her obligation to La Motte ; for fhe was till now ignorant that when he fent her from the foreft, he faved her from death. Her horror of the Marqui«, whom flie could not bear to confider аз her fa¬ ther, and her gratitude to her deliverer redoubled, and flie became impatient to give the teftimony fo neceffary to the hopes of her preferver. Madame then laid ihe believed it was not too late to gain admittance that night to the Chate¬ let ; and as íhe knew how an\iouI!y her huíband wiíhcd to fee Adeline, fhe en¬ treated
[ чь ] treated her confent to go thither. Ade- Ime, though much harrafled and fatigued, complied. When Louis returned from M. Nemours, his father's advocate, whom hc had haftened to inform ofher arrival, they all fct out for the Cnatetet. The view of the prifon into which they were now admitted fo forcibly recalled to Adelines tnind the fituation of Theo¬ dore, that flie with difficulty fup¬ ported herfelf to the apartment of La Motte. When he faw her a gleam of joy paifed over his countenance; but again relapfing into defpondency, he looked m urn fully at her, and then at Louis, and groaned deeply. Adeline, in whom all remembrance of his former cruelty was loft in his fubfequent kind¬ nefs, exprefled her thankfulnefs for the life he had preferved, and her anxiety to ferve him in warm and repeated terms. But her gi atitude evidently diftreffed him ; inftead of reconciling him to him¬ felf, it feemed to awaken a remembrance of
E 2+7 ] of the guilty defigns he had once affiftcd> and to ftrike the fangs of confcience deeper in his heart. Endeavouring to conceal his emotions, he entered on the fubjeft of his prefent danger, and in¬ formed Adeline what teftimony would be required of her on the trial. After above an hour's converfation wiih La Motte, fhe returned to the lodgings of Madame, where, languid and ill, fhe withdrew to her chamber, and tried to obliviate her anxieties in fleep. The Parliament which conduded the trial re-affembled in a few days after the arrival of Adeline, and the two remain¬ ing witnefles of the Marquis, on Whom he now refted his caufe againft La Motte, appeared. She was led trem¬ bling into the court, where almoft the firft objeft that met her eyes v was the Marquis de Montait, whom fhe now beheld with an emotion entirely new to her, and which was ftrongly tinfturcd with hoi ror. When Du Bofte faw her he immediately fwor
С »48 ] íwore to her identity ! his teftimony was confirmed by her manner; for on per¬ ceiving him fhe grew pale, and a uni¬ verfal tremor feized her. jean D'Au¬ noy could no where be found, and La Motte was thus deprived of an evidence which effentially affé tied his intereft. Adeline, when called upon, gave her little narrative with clcarnefs and preci¬ fion ; and Peter, who had conveyed her from the Abbey, fupported the teftimony ihe offered. The evidence produced was fuflicient to criminate the Marquis of the intention of murder, in the minds of moft people prefent ; but it was not fufficient to affect the teftimony ofhis two lait wit¬ ncffes, who pofitively fu ore to the com¬ miflion of the robbery, and to the perfon of La Motte, on whom fentence of death was accordingly pronounced. On re¬ ceiving this fentence the unhappy crimi¬ nal fainted, and the compaffion of the affembly, whofe feelings had been un¬ ufually
[ 249 ] ufually interefted in the decifion, was expreffed in a general groan. Their attention was quickly called to a new obječl —it was Jean D'Aunoy who now entered the court. But his evi¬ dence, if it could ever, indeed, have been the means of faving La Motte,. саше too late. He was re-condučied to prifon ; but Adeline, who, extremely fliocked by his fentence, was much in¬ difpofed, received orders to remain in the court during the examination of D'Aunoy. This man had been at length found in the prifon of a provincial town,- where fome of his creditors had thrown him, and from which even the money which the Marquis had remitted to him for the purpofe of fatisfying the craving importunities of Du Bofïb, had been in¬ efficient to releafe him. Meanwhile the revenge ofthe latter had been roufed* againft the Marquis by an imaginary negleft, and the money which was dc- M 5 figned
С чо 3 figned to relieve his neceffities was fpent by D*Aunoy in riotous luxury. He was confronted with Adeline and with Du Boffe, and ordered to confefs all he knew concerning this myfterious affai r,or to undergo the torture. D* Aunoy, who was ignorant how far the fufpicions concerning the Marquis extended, and who was confeious that his own words might condemn him, remained for fome time obftinately filent; but when the qu efl ion was adminiftered, his refolution gave way, and he confefled a crime, of which he had not even been fufpefted. It appeared that, in the year 1642^ D'Aunoy, together with one Jacques. Martigny,and Francis Balliere, had way¬ laid, and feized, Henry Marquis de Montalt, half brother to Phillipe; and after having robbed him, and bound his fervant to a tree, according to the orders they had received, they conveyed him to the Abbey of St. Clair, in the diftant foreft of Fontanville* Here he v\as confined
C 2 5* ] confined for fome time, till farther clireA tions were received from Phillipe de Montalt, the prefent Marquis, who was then on his eftates in a northern province of France. Thefe orders were for death, and the unfortunate Henry was affaifi- nated in his chamber, in the third week ofhis confinement at the Abbey. On hearing this Adeline grew" faintj ftie remembered the MS. fhe had found, together with the extraordinary circum¬¬ ftances that had attended the difcovery ; every nerve thrilled with horror, and raifing her eyes, ihe faw the countenance of the Marquis overfpread with the livid palenefs of gui It. She endeavoured, how¬ ever, to arreft her fleeting fpirits, whiie the man proceeded in his con feffion. When the murder was perpetrated, D'Aunoy had returned to his employer, who gave him the reward agreed upon, and in a few months after delivered into his hands the infant daughter ofthe late Marquis, whom he conveyed to a dif¬ tant .
L 252 ] tant part of the kingdom, where, affum¬ ing the name of St. Pierre, he brought her up as his own child, receiving from the prefent Marquis a confiderable an¬ nuity for his fecrecy. Adeline, no longer able to ffruggle with the tumult of emotions that now ruflied upon her heart, uttered a deep figh, and fainted away. She was carried from the court, and, when the confu¬ fion occafioned by thiscircumftance fub¬ fided, Jean D'Aunoy went on. He re¬ lated, that on the death ofhis wife, Ade¬ line was placed in aconvent,from whence fiie was afterwardvS removed to another» where the Marquis had deftined her to receive the vows. That her determined rejection of them had occafioned him to refolve upon her death, and that ihe had accordingly been removed to the houfe on the heath. D'Aunoy added, that, by the Marquis's order, he had miiled Du Boffe with a falfe ftory of her birth. Having, after fome time, difcovered that his
ί чг J his comrades had deceived him con¬ cerning her death, D'Aunoy feparated from them in enmity; but they unani¬ moufly determined to conceal her efcape* from,the Marquis, that ihey might enjoy the recompenfe of their fuppoled crime. Some months fubfequent to this period, hovvever, D'Aunoy received a letter from the Marquis, charging him with the truth, and promifing him a large reward if he would confefs where he had placed Adeline- In confequence of thib letter, he acknowledged that ihehad been given into the hands of a (hanger; but who he was, or where he lived, was not known. Upon thefe depofitions Phillipe dc Montait was committed to take his trial for the murder of Henry, his brother; D'Aunoy was throw n into a dungeon of the Chatelet, and Du Bofte was bound to appear as evidence. The feelings of the Marquis, who, in a profecution ftimulated by revenge, 3 lud
C m ] had d\us unexpectedly expofed his crimes to the public eye, and betrayed himfelf to juflice, can only be imagined. The paflions which had tempted him to the commiffion of a crime fo hoi rid as that of murder-—and what, if poffible, heigh*· tened its atrocity, the murder of one connected wuh him by the ties of blood; and by habits of even infantine affocu ation—the paffion which had ftimulated him to fo monftrous a deed were ambi¬ tion, and the love of pleafure. The fii ft was more immediately gratified by the title of his brother; the latter by the riches which would enable him to indulge his voluptuous inclinations. The late Maiquis de Montait, the fa¬ ther of Adeline, received frum his an- ccíioísa patı imony very inadequate to fupport the fplendour of his rank ; but he had married the heirefs of an illuf¬ trious family, whofe fortune amply fup¬ plied the deficiency of his own. He had the misfortune to lofe her, for flie was amiable
С ч$ 3 amiable and beautiful, foon after the birth of a daughter, and it was then that the prefent Marquis formed the diabo* lical defign of deftroying his brother. The contraft of their characters pi event¬ ed that cordial regard between them which iheir near relationíhip feemed to demand. Henry was benevolent, mild, and contemplative. In his heart reigned the love of virtue; in his manners the ftricknefs of juftice was tempered, not weakened by mercy ; his mind was en¬ larged by fcience, and adorned by ele¬ gant literature. The characler of Phil¬ lipe has been already delineated in hisac- tionsi ib nicer fhadcb were blended with fome ihining tints ; but thefe ferved only to render moie finking, by contraft, tho* general datknef» of the portrait. He had married a lady, vvho, by the death of her bt other, inheiiced con¬ fiderable eftates, of which the Abbey of St. Clair, and the villa on the bordeis of the
í 2 5 6 ] the foreft of Fontanville, were the chief. I lis paifion for magnificence and diiiipa¬ tion, however, fion involved him in dif¬ ficulties, and pointed out to him the com- vemency of poflefling his brother's wealth. His brother and his infant daughter only ftood between him and his wiihes; how he removed the father has been already related : why he did not employ the fame means to fecure ihe ehild, feems fome¬ what furprizing, unlefs we admit that a defliny hung over him on this occafion, and that İhe was fuffered to live as an in¬ ftiument to punifh the murderer of her parent- When a relrofpeei is taken of the viciifuudes and dangeis to which flie had been expofed from her earlieft in¬ fancy, it appears as if her prefervation wa*» the effed of fomething more than human policy» and afford» a ftriking in- ftance, that Juftice, however long delay¬ ed, will overtake the guilty.
While
C *57 ] While the late unhappy Marquis was fuffering at the Abbey, his brother, who, to avoid fufpicion, remained in the north of France» delayed the execution of his horrid purpofe from a timidity natural to a mind not yet inured to enormous guilt. Before he dared to deliver hi» final orders, he waited to know whether the ftory he contrived to propagate of his brother's death, would veil hb crime from fufpicion. It fuceeded but too well; for the fervant, whofe life had been fpared that he might relate the talc, naturally enough concluded that his Lord had been murdered by a banditti ; and the peafant, who, a few hours after, found the fervant wounded, b!t4-ding,and bound to a tree, ancl knew alio that this fpot was infefted by robbers, as natura'ly believed him, and fpread the report ac¬ cordingly. From this period the Marquis, to whom the Abbey of St. Clair belonged, in right of
С «58 ] of his wife, vifited it only twice, and that at diftant times, till after an interval of feveral years, he accidentally found La Motte its inhabitant. He refided at Pa¬ ris, and on his eftate in the north, except that oncea year he ufually paifed a month át his delightful villa on the borders of the foreft. In the hufy feenes of the Court, andin the diflipations of pleafure, he tried to lofe the remembrance of his guilt; but there мете times when фе voice of confcience would be heard» though it was foon again loft in the tu¬ nnuit of the world. It is probable, that, on the night ofhis abrupt departure from the Abbey, the folitary filence and gloom of the hour, in a place which had been the fcene of his former crime, called up the remembrance of his brother with a force too powerful for fancy, and awakened horrors which compelled him to quit the polluted fpot. If it was fo, it is however certain that the fpečtres of confcience vaniflied with the dark*
I
t 49 3 darkneís ; for on the following day, he returned to the Abbey, though it may be obferved, he never attempted to paf« another night there But though terror m as roufed for a tranfient moment, nei¬ ther pity nor repentance fuceeded, fince, when the difcovery of Adeline's birth excited apprehenfion for his own life, he did not hefitate to repeat the crime, and would again have ftained his foul with human blood. This difcovery was ef¬ feded by means of a feal, bearing the arms ofher mother's family, which was imprefled on the note his fervant had found, and had delivered tohim at Caux. It may be remembered, that having read this note, he was throwing it from him in the fury of jealoufy ; but that, after examining it again, it was carefully de¬ pofited in his pocket-book. The violent agitation which a fufpicion of this terri¬ ble truth occafioned,deprived him for a w Iıİle of all power to act. V\ hen he was well
f 2бО ] well enough to write, he difpatched a ktter to D*Aunoy, the purport of which has been already mentioned. From D'Aunoy he received the confirmation of his fear. Knowing that his life muft pay the forfeiture of his crime, fliould Adeline ever obtain a knowledge of her birth, and not daring again to confide in the fecrecy ofa man who had once de¬ ceived him, he refolved, after fome deli¬ beration, on her death. He imme¬ diately fet out for the Abbey, and gave thofe directions concerning her, which terror for his own fafety, ftill more than a defire oí retaining her eftates, fug. gefted. As the hiftory of the feal which re¬ vealed the birth of Adeline is rather re¬ markable, it may not be amifs to men¬ tion, that it was ftolen fiom the Mar- qiiif, together with a gold watch, by Jean UWunoy: the watch was ioon dif¬ pofed of, but the teal had been kept as a \>vcuy
[ 2βί ] pretty trinket by his wife, and at her death went with Adeline among her clothes to the convent. Adeline had carefully preferved it., becaufe it had once belonged to the woman whom fhe be¬ lieved to have been her mother.
CHAP*
С - β2 ]
CHAPTER XXIII. « While anxious doubt diflraås the tortur'd heart." E now return to the courfe of the narrative audio Adeline, who was car¬ ried from the court to the lodging of Madame de la Motte. Madame was, however, at the Chatelet, with her huf¬ band, fuffering all the diftrefs which the fentence pronounced againft him might be fuppofed to inflift. The feeble frame of Adeline, fo long harrafled by grief and fatigue, almoft funk under the agi¬ tation which the difcovery of her birth excited. Her feelings on this occafion were too complex to be analyfed. From an orphan, fubfifting on the bounty of others, without family, with few friends, and
W
С 2б 3 ] and purfued by a cruel and powerful enemy, fhe faw herfelf fuddenly tranf- formed to the daughter of an illuftrious houfe, and the heirefs of immenfe wealth. But fhe learned aifo that her father had been murdered—murdered in the prime ofhis days—murdered by means ofhis brother, againft whom flie muft now ap¬ pear, and in punifhing the deftroyer of her parent doom her uncle to death. When fhe remembered the manufcript lo fingularly found, and confidered that when fhe wept to the fufferings it de¬ fcribed, her tears had flowed for thofe ofher father, her emotion cannot eafily be imagined. The circumftances at¬ tending the difcovery of thefe papers no longer appeared to be a work of chance, but ofa Power whofe defigns are great and juft. "Omy father!" fhe would exclaim," your Iaft wiíh is fulfilled*— " the pitying heart you wiihed might " trace your fufferings fhall avenge t( them." On
[ 2^4 ] On the return of Madame La Motte, Adeline endeavoured, as ufual, to fup¬ prefs her own emotions, that fhe might footh the afllidion of her friend. She related what had paffed in the court af¬ ter the departure of La Motte, and thus caufed, even in the forrowful heart of Madame, a momentary gleam offatif- faftion. Adeline determined to recover, if poffible, the manufiript. On inquiry fhe learned that La Motte, in the con¬ fufion of his eparture, had left it among other things at the Abbey. This cir¬ cumflance much diftrefled her, the more fo, becaufe fhe believed its appearance might be of importance on the approach¬ ing trial; fhe determined, however, if file fhould recover her rights, to have the manufcript fought for. In the evening Louis joined this mournful party: he came immediately from his father, whom he left more tran¬ quil than he had been fince the fatal fen¬ tence was pronounced. After a filent and
[ 2б 5 ] and melancholy fupper they feparated for the night, and Adeline, in the foli¬ tude of her chamber, had leifure to me¬ ditate on the difcoveries of this eventful day. The fufterings of her dead father, fuch as {he had read them recorded by his otvn hanå % preffed moit forcibly to her thoughts. The narrative had for-. merly fo much affecied her heart, and interefted her imagination, that her me¬ mory now faithfully reflected each parti¬ cular circumftance there difelofed. But when ftie confidered that fhe had been in the very chamber where her parent had fuffered, where even his life had been facrificed, and that fhe had probably ieen the very dagger, ken it ftained with ruft, the ruit of blood ! by which he had fallen, the anguiih and horror of her miud defied all control. On the following day Adeline received orders to prepare for the profecution of the Marquis de Montalt, which was to commence as foon as the requifite wit- Voi,. IIL N ncifes
t *66 3 nefíes could be collefted. Among thefe were the Abbefs of the Convent, who had received her from the hands of D'Aunoy; Mad me La Motte, who was prefent when Du Buffe compelled her hufband to ¡eccive Adeline ; and Peter, who, h id not only been witnefs to this circumftance, but who had conveyed her from the Abbey that fhe might efcape the defigns ofthe Marquis. La Motte, and Theodore La Luc, were incapaci¬ tated by the fentence of the law from appearing on the irial. When La Motte was informed of the difcovery of Adeline's birth, and that her fathei had been murdered at the Abbey of St.'Clair, he inftantly remembered, and mentioned to his wife, the fkeieton he fottiid in the ftone room leading to the fubterranean cells. Neither of them doubted, from the fituation in which it by hid in a cheft in an obfcure roora ftrongly guarded, that La Motte had fcen the remains of the late Marquis. Madame,
[ 2б7 J Madame, however, determined not to Ihock Adeline with the mention of this circumftance till it ihould be neceifary to declare it on the trial. As the time of this trial drew near, the diftrefs and agitation of Adeline in¬ creafed. Though juftice demanded the life of the murdeier, and though the tendernefs and pity which the idea of her father called forth, urged her to avenge his death, flie could not, without horror, confider herfelf as the inftrument of difpenfing that juftice which would deprive a feilow-bting of cxiftence ; and there were times when ibe wiihed the iecret of her birth had never been re¬ vealed, If this fenfibility was, in her peculiar circumftances, a weaknefs, it was at leaft an amiable one, andas fuch deferves to be reverenced. The accounts ihe received frora Va- ceau of the health of M. La Luc did noi contribute to tranquillize her mind* Thefymptomsdcfcribed by Clara feemed N2 to
С а68 ] to fay that he was in the laft ftage of a confumption, and the ? rief of Tneodore and herfelf on this occafion was expref- fedinherleuerswiththelivel) eloquence fonatural to her. Adeline lovedand re¬ vered La Luc for his own worth, and for the parental tendernefs he had ihewn her, but he was flill dearer to her as the faiher of Theodore, and her concern for hh declining ftate was not infeiior to that of his children. It was increafed by the reflection that flie had probably been the means of fliortening lm life; for ihe too well knew that the difl refs occa¬ fioned him by the fituation in which it had been her misfortune to involve Theodore, had (hauet ed lm frame to its picfent infirmity. The fame caufe alfo withheld Utu fiom feeking in the climate < f Vontpellier the relief he had fot merly been taught to exţtct there. When flie looked round on the con¬ dition ofher friend*, her heart *as al - ший overwhelmed wuh the pıufpeâ* İt
Γ ^9 1 к feemed as i f flie w as de fti n ed to i n vol ve all thofe moft dear to her in calamity. With refpečt to La Motte, whatever were his vices, and whatever the dehgns in which he had formerly engaged againft her, flie forgot them all in the fervice he had ftnally rendered her, and coniidered it to be as much her duty, as flie fJt it to be her inclination, to intercede in his behalf. This, however, in her prefent fituation, ihe could not do with any hope of fuceefs; but if the fuit, upon which depended the re-eftablifhment of her rank, her fortune, and confequently her influence, fliould be decided in her favour, fhe determined to throw herfelf at ihe king's feet, and, when fhe plead« ed the cauie of Theodore, afli the life of La Motte. A few days preceding that of the trial, Adeline was informed a ftranger defired to fpeak with her, and on going to the room where he was, fhe foutid M. Ver¬ neuil. Her countenance expreffed both furpnfe
t 2 7° ] furprife and fatisfacìion at this unex- pc^ed meeting, and file inquired, though with little expetiation of an aflirmative, if he had hem d of M. La Luc. u I " have fecn hiin," faid Λί. Verneuil; <c 1 am juP. come from Vaceau. But í 11 am fony I cannot give you a better ac- tť count of his health. He is greatly aU " tered fince 1 faw him before." Adeline could fcarcely refrain from tear* at 4hc recollection thefe words re¬ vived ofthe calamines which had occa¬ fioned this lamented change. M. Verneuil delivered her a packet frum Clara ; as he prefented it he faid, " Befide this intro- ** duction to your notice, 1 havca claim " ofa different kind, which I am proud *' to affťit, and which will, perhaps, juf- " t if\ the penni ilion l aík of fpeaking H upon your aifairs."—Adeline bowed, anil \í. Verneuil, w uh a countt nance ex¬ preffive ofthe moll render folicitude, ad¬ ded, that he had hcaid uf the late pro¬ ceeding of the pailiament of Paris and of
[ 2 7 l 1 of the difcoveries that fo intimately con-* cerned her. " f know not," continui d he, * f whether I ought to congratulatcoi con- u dole with you on this trying occafion. " That 1 fincerely fympathize in all that ft concerns you, I hope you vvill beiieve, " and I cannot deny myfelf the pleafure <c of telling you that I am related, though f< diftantly, to the late Marchionefs, уоик ft mother j forthat fhe was your mother, l· 4t cannot doubt," Adeline rofe haftily and advanced to¬ wards M. Verneuil j furprize and fatif· fuciion re-animated her features. "Do I, *' indeed, íee a relation?" faid fhe, in a fweet and tremulous voice, " and one " whom I can welcome as a friend?" Tears trembled in her eyes; and fhe re-» ceived M. VerncuiPs embrace iu filence· It wa-s fonie time before her emotion would permit her to fpeak. To Adeline, who from her earlieft in¬ fancy had been abandoned to ftrangers % % forlorn and helplefs orphans who had never
[ Ч* ] never till lately known a relation, and who then found one in the perfon of an inveterate enemy, to her tins difcovery was as delightful as unexpected. But after rimming for fome time villi the various emotions thai prefled upon her heart, ihe begged M. Vcrneuiľs permif¬ fion to withdraw till fhe could recover compofure. Hc would have taken leave, but ihe entreated him not togo. The intereft which M. Verneuil took in the concerns of La 1 uc, which was ftrengthened by his increafing regard for Clara, had drawn him to Vaceau, where he was infoi mcd of the family and pecu¬ liar circumftances of Adeline. On re¬ ceiving tiiis intelligence he immediately fet out for Paris, to offer his protedion andaififlance tohisnewly-difcoveredre¬ lation, and to aid, if poflible, the caufe of Theodore. Adeline in a fliort time returned, and could then bear to converfe on the fubject ofher family. M.Verneuil ofllred her hi» iuppor£
С * -л ] fyndort ai»fl affı' 1 ance, if diey fliould bc fm d »кг lîır\. ,( Им 1 tmft " ,ulde d he "to ihe ι 'lnr ч «>f nnir с ufe, and " hoj е и will no» KqtiiK any ad\enti- " tiois.i'd. Ίο thoh' vho ren ember " the late Mırchîmıfs, vour features " btmgfi licicnti videnceofyouï 4 irth. u As a proof that шу judgment in this ** inflance ib not biaffed by picjudicc, " the refemblance fliuck me whtn I uas * f in Savoy, though 1 knew the Mar- ** chioncfsonly by her portrait; and I " believe I mentioned to M. La Luc, w that you often reminded mcofade- ** ceafed relation. You may form fome и judgment of this уош felf," added M. Verneuil, taking a mini aure hom his po ket. " 'Ihis was ; our amiable «* mother/' Adeline's countenance changed ; fhe received the pulure ( ageily, g ved on it fora longtime in tileuce, and hei eyes iilled with teai&. It wa% not the reiem- blancc fhe ftudied, but the counte iwiih e N 5 —-the
C 4i ì —the mild and beautiful countenance of her parent, whofe blue eyes, full of ten¬ der fweetnefs, feemed bent upon her's ; while a foft fmile played on her lips. Adeline preffed the picìure to her's, and again gazed in fiUntreveiie. At length, with a deep figh, fhe faid, " This w furely г 'ui my mother. Had fhe bul ** lived, О my poor father! you had ** been fpared." This rcflcâion quite overcame her, and flic bui ft into tears. M. Verneuil did not interrupt her grief, but took her hand and fat by her, with¬ out fpeaking, till fhe became more com¬ pofed. Again kiffing the picture, flie held it out to him with a heli tating look. ef No," faid he, " it is already with its €f true owner." She thanked him witk a fmile of inefiable fweetnefs, and after fome convcrfation on the fubjeci of the approaching tiial, on which occafion flie requefted M. Verneuil would fupport hen by his prefence, he withdrew, having begged
í 2 75 J begged leave to repeat his vifit on the follovving day. Adeline now opened her packet, and faw onee more the well known characters of Theodore; for a moment ihe felt as if in his prefence, and the confeious blufli overfpread her cheek; witii a· trembling hand fhe broke the fcal, and read the tendereft affurances and folici¬ tudes of hislove; íhe often paufed, that flic might prolong the fweet emotions· which thefe affurances awakened; but while tears of tendetnefb ftood trembling on her eye-lids, the bitter recolleftion of lus fituation would return, and they fell in anguifh on her bofom. fie congratulated her, and with pe¬ culiar delicacy, on the profpefts of life whieh were opening to her; faid every thing that might tend to animate and fupport her, but avoided dwelling on his ow n circumftances, except by exprefling his fenfe of the zeal and kindneis of his commanding officer, and adding, 3 that
Г *7* ] that he did not defpair of finally obtain¬ ing a pardon. Thiv hope, though but faintly expref¬ fed, and w t itten evidently for the purpofe of confoling Adeline, did not entirely fail of the defired eflečb She yielded to jts enchanting influence, and forgot for awhile the many fubjefts of care and anxiety which furrounded her. Theodore faid litde of his fatheťs health ; what he did fay was by no means fo difco u raging, astheaccountsof Clara, who,lefs anxious to conceal a truth that muft give pain to Adeline, expreffed, without referve, all her apprehenfion and concern»
СНЛР-
E 277 3
CHAPTER XXIV, «.,., .τ ..... ..« « ÍTeavcn is juft ! «« And when tbc mcafure ofhis crimes b fnlî, *« Will bare its red right arm, and launch itj* " lightnings.** Τ HE day of the trial fo anxioufly, awaited, and on which the fate of fo> many perfons depended, at length ar¬ rived. Adeline, accompanied by M,> Vei neuil, and Madame la Motte, ap¬ peared as the profecutor of the Marquis de Montait; and D'Aunoy, Du Boífe r Louis de ia Motte, ai*d fevei al other perfons, as witncffes in her caufe. The judges were fonie of the rnoft diftin- gu ihed in France; and the advocates on both fides men of eminent abilities. On a ttial of fuch importance, the court, as
as may be imagined, was crowded with perfons of diftinciion, and the fpečtacle it prefented was ftrikingly folemn, yet magnificent. When ftie appeared before the tribu¬ nal, Adeline's emotion furpaifed all the arts of difguife, but adding to the natu¬ ral dignity of her air an expreffion of foft timidity, and to her downcaft eyes a fweet confufion, it rendered her an object ftill more interefting,* and ibe attracted the univcrfi ' pity and admira¬ tion of the aflembly. When flie ven¬ tured to raife her eyes, flie perceived that the Marquis was not yet in the court, and while flie, awaited his appear¬ ance in trembling expectations confufed murmui$ng rofe in a diftant part of the hall. Her fpirits now almoft forfook her; the certainty oí feeing immedi¬ arely, and confcioufly, the murderer of her father, chilled her with honor, and flie was with difficulty préfet ved hom fiinting. A low found now ran through the
С 279 ] the court, and an air of confufion ap¬ peared, which was foon communicated to the tribunal itfelf. Several of the members arofe, fome left the hall, the whole place exhibited a fcene of difor¬ der, and a report at lengtli reached Adeline that the Marquis de Montalt was dying. A confiderable time elapfed in uncertainty ; but the confufion conti¬ nued ; the Marquis did not appear ; and at Adeline's defire M. Verneuil went İn queft of more pofitive informa¬ tion. He followed a crowd which was hur¬ rying towards the Chatelet and with fome difficulty gained admittance into the prifon ; but the porter at the gate* whom he had bribed for a paffport, could give him no certain information on the fubject: of his inquiry, and not being at liberty to quit his poft, fur¬ niflied M. Verneuil with oniy a vague diteciion to the Marquis's apartment. The courts were filent and deferted, but
С ï8o 3 bat ns hc advanced, a diftant hum of voices \ia him on, i ill p, iccivinp, leve¬ rai perlons running towaids a flairtafe which appeared beyond the archway of a long palf.ge, he híľmwed thither, and learned that tie Muinais was certainly dying. The ftaircafe was filled with people; lb' endeavoured to prefs dirottigli the crowd, and after much ftruggle anď difficulty, he reached die door of an anti- room which communicated with the apartment where the Marquis lay» and whence feveral perfons now iffued. Here hc learned that the object of his inquiry vas already dead. M. Verneuil, how¬ ever, paffed through the anti-room to the chamber, where lay che Marquis ou a beduini ounded by oflicers ofthe law, and two notaries, who appeared to have been taking down dtp filions. Fi is countenance was fu ff ι fed with a black, and deadly hue, ďid lj preifed with the horrors of death ; M. Verneuil turned away, Clocked by the fpeciacle, and on inquiry
[ 2Sl ] inquiry heard that the Marquis had died by poifon. It appeared that, convinced he had nothing to hope from his trial, he had taken this method of avoiding an igno¬ minious death. In the Lift hours oflife,, while tortured with the remembrance of his crime, he refolved to make ali the atonement that remained for him, and having fwallowed the potion, hc imme¬ diately fent for a confeffor to take a full confeffion of his guilt, and two nota¬ ries, and thus eftabliihed Adeline be¬ yond difpute İn the rights of her birth; alfo bequeathing her a confiderable le¬ gacy. In confequence of thefe depofitions flie was foon after formally acknowledged as the daughter and heirefs of Heniy Mar¬ quis de Montalt, and the rich eftates of her father were reftored to her. She im¬ mediately threw herfelf at the feet of the king in behalf of Theodore and of La Motte. The chaiafcler of the former,
Γ 282 ] former, the caufe in which he had rifqued his life, and the occafion of the hue Marquis's enmity towards him, were circumftance» fo notor ous, and fo for- cible, lhat it was more than probable the monarch woultl have granted his pardon to a pleader lefs irreiiftible than was Adeline de Montait. Theodore La Luc not only received an ample pardon, but in confideration of his gallant conduci towards Adeline,he was foon after raifed to a poft of confiderable rank in the army. For La Motte, who had been con« demned for the robber) on full evi¬ dence, and who had been alfo charged widi the crime which hsd formerly com¬ pelled him to quit Paris, a pardon couid not be obtained í but at the earneft fup¬ plication of Adeline, aad in confiderà* tion of the fervice he had finally render¬ ed her, hib fentence was foftened fiora death to banifhment. This indulgence, however, would iiave availed him little, had
Γ 28 3 ] had not the noble generofity of Adeline filenced other profecutions that were preparing againft hiin, and beftowed on him a fum more ıhan fufficient to fupport his family in a foreign country. This kindnefs operated fo powerfully upon his heart, whieh had been betray¬ ed through weaknefs rather than natural depravity, and awakened fo keen a re¬ morfe for the injuries he had once medi¬ tated againft a benefaftrefs fo noble, that his former habits became odious to him, and his charafter gradually recovered the hue which it would probably always have worn, had he never been expofed to the tempting diflipations of Paris. The paffion which Louis had fo long owned for Adeline was raifed almoft to adoration by her Lite conduft; but he now relinquiihed even the faint hope which he had hitherto almoft uncon¬ feioufly cherifhed, and, fince the life which was granted to Theodore ren¬ dered this facrifice neceflary, he could nut
C *Н ! not repine. He refolved, however; to feek in abfence the tranquillity he had loft t and to place his future !i ppinefs on that of two perfons fo defervedly dear to him. On the eve of his departure La Motte and his family took a very affefting leave of Adeline; he left Paris for Englands where it was hts defign to fettle ; and Louis, who was eager to fly from her en¬ chantments, fet out on the fame day for his regiment. Adeîine remained fome time at Paris* to fettle her affairs, where fbe w T as intro¬ duced by M. V------to the few and dif¬ tant relations that remained of her fa¬ mily* Among thefe were the Count and Cou tefs D —— andthe Monfi Amand, who had fo much engaged her pity and efteem at Nice. The lady, whofe death he lamented, was of the family of De Montait j and the reftmblance which he had traced beiwcen her features and thofe of Adeline, Ucr coufin, was fomething more
ΐ **5 1 tnore than the effeA of fancy. The death of his elder brother had abruptly recalled him from Italy; but Adeline had the fatisfačtion to obferve, that the heavy melancholy which formerly op- preifed him, had yielded to a fort of placid refignation, and that his counte¬ nance was often enlivened by a tranüent gleam of cheerfulnefs. The Count and Countefs D ------ , who were much interefted by her goodnefs jand beautv, invited her to make their hotel her refidence while fhe remained at Paris. Her firfl care was to have the remains of her parent removed from the Abbey of St. Clair, and depofited in the vault of his anceflors,—D'Aunoy was tried, condemned, and hanged, for the murder. At ihe place of execution he had de¬ fcribed the ípot where the remains of the Marquis weie concealed, which was in the itone room already mentioned, be¬ longing to the Abbey. M. V------ac¬ compa-
Г 286 ] companied the oificers appointed for thç fearch, and attended the aihes of the Marquis to St. Maur» an eftate in one of ihe northern provinces. There they were depofited with the folemn funeral pomp becoming his rank; Adeline at¬ tended as chief mourner; and this laft duty paid to thememory of her parent, ilie became more tranquil and refigned. The MS. that recorded his fufferings had been found at the Abbey, and deli¬ vered to her by M. V------ , and flic pre¬ ferved it with the pious enthufiafm fo fa¬ cred a relique deferved. Ön heţ return to Paris, Theodore Là Luc, who was come from Montpellier* awaited her arrival. The happinefs of ihis meeting was clouded by the account he brought of his father, whofe extreme danger had aione withheld him from haftçning the moment he obtained his liberty to thank Adeline for the life fhe bad preferved* She now received him m ihc firiend to whom ihe was indebted for
С *«7 3 for her prefervation, and as the lover who deferved, and poifeifed, her tendereft affection. The remembrance of the cir¬ cumftances under which they had laft met, and of their mutual anguiih, ren¬ dered more exquifite the happinefs of the prefent moments, when, no longer op- prefled hy the horrid profpect of ignomi¬ nious death and final feparation, they looked forward only to the fmiling days that awaited them, when hand in hand they fliouïïLtrtad the flowery feencs of life. The contrail which memory gave of the paft with tlie prefent, frequently drew tears of tendernefs and gratitude to their eyes, and the fweet fmile which feemed ftruggling to difpel frora the countenance of Adeline thofe gems of forrow, penetrated the heart of Theo¬ dore, and brought to his recolledion a little fong which in other circumftances he had formerly fung to her. He took jap a jute that lay on the table, ano» touch¬ ing
[ 288 3 ing the dulcet chords, accompanied it with die following words : SONG. Tîıe roffe that weeps with morning dew, And glitters in the funny ray, In teâft of fmiles refembles ynu, When Love breaks Sorrow's cloud away. The dews that bend the blüíhíng flow'r, Enrich the fcent—renew the glow ; So Lovers fweet tears exalt his pow'r, So blifs more brightly fliines by woe !
Lîer affeftion for Theodore had in¬ duced Adeline to rejeft feveral fuitors, which her goodnefs, beauty, and wealth, had already attrafted, and who, though infinitely his fuperiors in point of for¬ tune, w T ere many of them inferior to him in family, and all of them in merit. The various and tumultuous emotions whkh the late events had called forth in the
[ **9 ] the bofom of Adeline, were now fub¬ fided; but the memory of her father ftill tinftured her mind with a melan¬ choly that time could only fubdue ; and fhe lefufed to liften to the fupplications of Theodore till the period fhe had pre¬ fcribed for her mourning ihould be ex¬ pired. The neceffity of rejoining his regiment obliged him to leave Paris within the fortnight after his arrival ; but he carried with him affurance of receiv¬ ing her hand foon after fhe fhould lay afide her fable habit, and departed there¬ fore with tolerable compofure. M. La Luc*s very precarious ftate was a fource of inceffant difquietude to Ade¬ line, and ftie determined to accompany M. V ------, who was now the declared lover of Clara, to Montpellier, whither La Luc had immediately gone on the liberation of his fon. For this journey fhe was preparing when flie received from her friend a flattering account of his amendment; and as fome farther feu Vot· HL O tîement
С 3 9° 3 tîement of her affairs required her pre¬ fence at Paris, flie deferred her defign» and M. V------departed alone. When Theodore's aflairs affumed a more favourable afpeci, M. Verneuil had written to La Luc, and communicated to him the fecret of his heart relocat¬ ing Clara. La Luc, who admired and efteemed M. V——, and who was not ignorant of his family connections, was pleafed with the propofed alliance; Clara thought flic had never fcen the perfon whom fhe w T as fo much inclined to love; and M. V—— received δώ an¬ fwer favourable to his wiflies, and which encouraged him to undertake the prefent journey to Montpelier. The reftoration of his happinefs, and the climate of Montpellier,did all for the health of La Luc that his moft anxious friends could wiih, and he was at length fo far recovered as to vifit Adeline at her eftate of St» Maur. Clara and M. V------ accompanied him, and a ceffation of hof- tiiitks
í 2 9* ] tilitics between France and Spain foon after permitted Theodore to join this happy party. When La Luc, thus re¬ ftored to thofe moil dear to him, looked back on the miferies he had efcaped, and forward to the bleflings that awaited him» his heart dilated with emotions of ex¬ quifite joy and gratitude ; and his vene¬ rable countenance» foftencd by an ex¬ preflìon of complacent delight, exhibited a perfect picture of happy age.
О a CHAP-
[ 20fi ]
CHAPTER XXV.
** Laá came Joy*s ecftatic trial : '* They would have thought who heard the ftrain, <f They faw in Tempe*» vale her native maids " Amtdít the feflal founding (hades, " To fome ön weary'd miniarci dancing, ** While as his flyicg fingen ktfs'd the ftring«, * r Love iram'd wkh Mirth ж gay fanuilic round." Ode to the Passions. AdFXINE, in the fociety of friends fo beioved, loft the impreffion .of that melancholy which the fate of her parent had occafioned 5 flie recovered all her natural vivacity ι and when fhe threw off the mourning habit which filial piety had required her to affume, fhe gave her hand io Theodore. The nupriate» which were celebrated at St* Maur, were graced by the prefence of thr Count and Coun- teft
Γ 293 ] tefs D——, and La Luc had the fu¬ preme felicity of confirming on the fame day the flattering deflinies of both his children· When the ceremony was over, hc blelfed and embraced them all with tears of fatherly affection* " I thank u thee, О Godi that I have been per· 11 mitted to fee this hour/* faid he, ** whenever it ftiall pleafe thee to call <* me hence, I will depart İn peace.** *' Long, very long, may you be <· fpared to blefs your children," replied Adeline. Clara kiifed her fatheťs hand and wept: " Long, very long ľ* ftie re¬ peated in a voice fcarcely audible· La Luc fmiled cheerfully, and turned the converfation to a fubječt lefs affeÛing. But the time now drew nigh when La Luc thought it neceflary to return to the duties of his paridi, from which he had fo long been abfent. Madame La Luc too, who had attended him during the period of his danger at Montpellier, and thence returned to Savoy, complained mueh
С *94 J much of the foihude of her life ; and this was with her orother an additional motive for his fpeedy departure. Theo¬ dore and Adeline, who could not fup¬ port the thought of a feparation from this venerable parent, endeavoured to perfuade him to give up his chateau, and to refide with them in France; but he was held by ftrong ties to Lelon¬ court« For many years he had confti- Uited the comfort and happinefs of his parimionere ï they revered and loved hira as a father—he regarded them with an affection little ihort of parental. The attachment they difcovered towards him on his departure wai not forgotten either, it had made a deep impreffion on his m hid, and he couid not bear the thought of foriaking them now that heaven had fhowered on him his abundance. ° It is ff fweet to live for them faid he, ** and ** I will aifo die amongft them," A fen* timent of a ftill røore tender nature— (and let not the ftoic prophane it with
C *95 ] the name of weaknefs, or the man of the world fcorn it as unnatural;—a fentiment ftill mote tender attrafted him to Lelon¬ court—the remains of his wife repofed there. Since La Luc would not refide in France,Theodore and Adeline, to vvhom the fplendid gaities that courted them at Paris were very inferior temptations to the fweet domeftic pleafures and refined fociety which Leloncourt would afford, determined to accompauy La Luc and Monfieur and Madame Verneuil abroad. Adeline arranged her affairs fo as to ren¬ der her refidence in France unneceffary; and having bade an affeftionate adieu to the Count and Countefs D—-, and to M. Amand, who had recovered a tolera¬ ble degree of cheerfulnefs, fhe departed with her friends for Savoy. They travelled leifurely,and frequent¬ ly turned out of their wa> to view what¬ ever was worthy of obfervation. Aftet a long and pleafant journey, they came once
Ι ίφ ] once more within view of the Swifs mountains, the fight of which revived a thoufand intercfting recolledions in the mind of Adeline. She remembered the cii cumftances ancl the fenfations under which flie had Îiî íl fcen thcni—when an orphan, flying from perfecution to feek flicker among ftrangers, and loft to the only perfon on earth whom flie loved^— flic remembered this, and the contraft of the prefent moment ftruck with ail its force upon her heart. The countenance of Clara brightened into fmiles of the moft animated delight as Oi e drew near the beloved feenes of her infant pleafures; and Theodore,often looking from the windows, caught with pauiotic enthufiafm the magnificent and changing fcenery which the receding mountains fucceflively difelofed. ft was evening when they approached within a few miles of Leloncourt, and the road, winding round the foot ofa ftu¬ pendous cragg, prefented them a full view
[ 297 3 view of the lake, and of the peaceful dwelling of La Luc. An exclamation of joy from the whole party announced the difcovery, and the glance of pleafure was reflecied from every eye. The fun's laft light gleamed upon the water that re¬ pofed in ** cryftal purity" below, mel¬ lowed every feature of the landfcape, and touched with purple fplendour the clouds that rolled along the mountain tops. La Lnc welcomed his family to his happy home, and fent up a filent thankf¬ giving that he was permitted thus to re¬ turn to it. Adeline continued to gaze upon each well-known object, and again reflecting on the viciftitudes of grief and joy, and the furprifing change of fortune, whicii ilie had experienced fince lail ftie faw them, her heart dilated wiih grati¬ tude and complacent delight. She look¬ ed at Theodore, whom» in thefe very feenes fhe had lamented as loft to her for ever | who, when found again, was about Ο β to
Γ 2 9 8 ] to be torn from her by an ignominious death, but who now fat by her fide her fecure and happy huiband» the pride of his family and herfelf; and while the fenfibility of her heart flowed in tears from her eyes, a fmile of ineffable ten¬ dernefs told him all ftie felt. He gently preffed her hand, and anfwered her with a look of love. Peter, who now rode up to the car¬ riage with a face full of joy and of im¬ portance, interrupted a courfe of fenti¬ ment which was become almoft too inte¬ refting. **Ah! my dear maileri'* cried he, u welcome home again. Here is H the village, God blefs it ! It İs worth <* a million fuch places as Paris. Thank « f St. Jacques, we are ail come fafe back ** again !" The effufion of honeft Peter's joy was received and anfwered with the kindnefs к deferved As they drew near the lake mufic founded over the water, and they prefently faw a large party of the villa¬ gers
[ 299 J gers affembled on a green fpot that floped to the very margin of the waves, and dancing in all their holiday finery. J t was the evening of a feifival. The elder peafants fat under the fhade of the trees that crowned this little eminence eating milk and fruits, and watching their fonsand daughters frifk it away to the fprightly notes of the tabor and pipe, which was joined by the fofter tones of a mandolin. The fcene was highly intercfting, and what added to its pifturefque beauty was a groupe of cattle that flood, fome on the brink, fome half in the water, and others repofing on the green bank, while feveral peafant girls, dreffed tn the neat fimplicity of their country, were difpenf¬ ing ihe milky feaft. Peter now rode on firft, and a crowd foon colleded round hím, who, learning that their beloved mailer was at hand, went forth to meet and welcome him. Their warm and ho¬ neft expreffions of joy diffufed an exqui¬ fite
Γ 3^0 ] fite fatisfaftion over the heart ofthe good La Luc, who met them with the kindnefs ofafather,and who could fcarcely for¬ bear fhedding tears to this teftimony of attachment. When the younger part of the peafants heard the news of his arrival» the general joy was fuch, that, led by the tabor and pipe, they danced before his carriage to the chateau, where they again welcomed him and his family with the enlivening ftrains of mufic. At the gate of the chateau they were received by Madame La Luc, and a happier party never met. As the e veiling was uncommonly mild and beautiful, fupper was fpread in the garden. When the râpait was over, Clara, whofe heart was all glee, propof¬ ed a dance by moonlight. ** It will be *· delicious," laid fhe ; *' the moon* * f beams are already dancing on the wa- *« ters. See what a flream of radiance fi they throw acrofs the lake, and how ** they
С 301 ] " they fparkle round that little promon- " tc*ry on the left. The freihnefs of the " hour too invites to dancing." They all agreed to the propofal.—— " And let the good people who have " fo heartily welcomed us home be cal¬ led in too." faid La Luc: " they fliall " all partake our happinefs. There is " devotion in making others happy, and ťt gratitude ought to make us devout, " Peter, bring more wine, and let fome " tables under the trees." Peter flew, and while chairs and tables were plac¬ ing, Clara ran for her favourite lute, the lute which had formerly afforded her fuch delight, and which Adeline had often touched with a melancholy expref¬ fion. Clara's light hand now ran over the chords, and tlrew forth tones of ten¬ der fweetnefs, 1 ?*· voice accompanying the following
A % R»
С 302 ] Л I R. Kûw # at Müonljght*« fairy hour, Whcfi fainily gleams each dewy rtecp, Лпа vaie and Mf untain, lake and bow*r, In folitary grandeur ficcp ; Wben flouîy finki tbe evening breeze, Th^t lulls the mind in penfive care, And Fancy loftier vifions fees, Bid Mufic wake the filent air, Bid tbe merry» merry tabor foand, Ana wkh the Кау«оПд»Уя or gîade» In tripping cïrcîet beat the ground, Under the high trees* trembling fliadi*· ** Kow, at Moonlight** £űrv boar/ 1 Shall Mufič breathe ber dulcet voice» And o'er the wavei, uiïh m?gk ¡pow'r, Call on Echo to rejoice.
Peter, who could not move in a fober flcp, had already fpread refrefhments under the trees, and in a fliort time the Uw n was encircled with pcafaniy. The rural ã
C 80J ] rural pipe and tabor were placed, at Clara's requeft, under the Ihade of her beloved acacias on the margin of the lake ; the merrv notes of mufic founded, Adeline led off the dance, and the mountains anfwered only to tlie (train:* of mirth and melody. The venerable La Luc fdt among the elder peafants, and as he furveyed the fcene—his children and people thus af¬ fembled round him in one grand compact of harmony and joy—the frequent tear bedewed his check» and he feemed to «afte the fulnefs of an exalted delight. So much was every heart roufed to gladnefs, that the morning dawn begati to peep upon the fcene of their festivity, when every cottager returned lo his home, bleifing the benevolence of La Luc. After paffmg fome weeks with La Luc, M.Verneuil bought a chateau in the vil¬ lageof Leloncourt, and as it was the only ©ne notaJready occupied, Theodore look¬ ed
[ 304 3 ed out for a refidence in the neighbour¬ hood. At the diftance ofa few leagues, on the beautiful banks ofthe lake of Ge¬ neva, where the waters retire into a fmall bay, he purchafed a villa. The Chateau was chara&ized by an airof fimplicity and tafte, rather than of magnificence, which, however, was the chief trait in the furrounding fcene. The Chateau was al¬ moft encircled with woods, which, form¬ ing agrand amphitheatre, fwept down to the water* s edge, and abounded vvith wild and romantic walks. Here nature was fuffered to fport in all her beautiful luxu¬ riance, except where here and there the hand of art formed the foliage to admit a view of the blue waters of the lake, with a white fail that glided by, or of the diftant mountains. In front ofthe Chateau the woods opened to a lawn, and the eye was fuifered to wander over the lake, whofe bofom prefented an ever- moving picìure, while its varied margin, fprinkled with villas, woods, and towns, aud
C 3°s ] and crowned beyond with the fnowy and fublime Alps, rifing point behind point in awful confufion, exhibited a fcenery of almoft unequalled magnifi¬ cence. Here, contemning the fplendour of falfe happinefs, and poflefling the pure and rational delights of a love, refined into the moft tender friendfhip, fur¬ rounded by the friends fo dear to them, and vifited by a felečt and enlightened fociety—here, in the very bofom of fe¬ licity, lived Theodore and Adeline La Luc. The paffion of Louis de La Motte yielded at length to the powers of abfence and neceffity. He ftill loved Adeline, but it was with the placid tendernefs of friendihip, and when at the earneft invi¬ tation of Theodore, he vifited the villa, he beheld their happinefs with a fatisfač¬ tion unalloyed by any emotion of envy. He afterwards married a lady of fome fortune at Geneva, and refigning his cam-
[ Зов ] commiffion in the French fervice, fet¬ tled on the borders ofthe lake, and in¬ creafed the focial delights of Theodore and Adeline. Their former lives affoidcd an exam¬ ple of trials well endured—'—-and their prefent, of virtues greatly rewarded ; and this reward they continued to deferve -——for not to themfelves was their hap¬ pinefs contrafted, but diffufed to all who came withinthe fphere of their influence· The indigent and unhappy rejoiced it* their benevolence, the virtuous and en¬ lightened in their friendihip, and their children in parents whofe example im¬ preffed upon their hearts the precepts offered to their underftanding«·
FINÍS*
