Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The romance of the forest: interspersed with some pieces of poetry
THE
ROMANCE OF IKE FOREST.
CHAP T E R IX. i% Full many я melancholy night 44 He watched the flow return of lì^br, ** And fought the pow'rs of ileep; *' To ipicad ά momentary cdm *' O'er bis ùd couch, iind İn rhe b,i! n ťt Ofblandobluicn'sdt wshbburnin^eyesto fleep.' 1 WARTON. ХНЕ MS. found by Adeline, the preceding night, had feveral times oc¬ curred to her recolledion in the courfe of the day, but fhe had then been eitlier Vol. if, В too
[ 2 ] too much interefted by the events of the moment, or too apprehenfive of inter¬ ruption, to attempt а perufal ofit. She novv took it from the drawer in vvhich it had been depofited, and intending only to look curforily over the few firft pages, fet down with it by her bed-fide. She opened it with an eagernefs of in¬ quiry, which the difcoloured and almoft obliterated ink but ilowly gratified. The firft words on the page were entirely loft, but thofe that appeared to commence the narrative were as follow.
44 Oh ! ye, whoever ye are, whom 44 chance, or misfortune, may hereafter 44 condud to tliis fpot—to ye I fpeak— " to ye reveal the ftory of my wrongs, 41 and aflc you to avenge them. Vain 44 hope! yet it imparts fome comfert to 44 believe it poffibk that what I now 44 write may one day meet the eye of a 44 fellow creature; that the words, which 44 tell my fufferings, may one day draw 44 pity from the fed ng heart. « Yet
[ з 3 44 Yet ftay your tears—your pity now 44 is ufelefs : long fince have the pangs " of mifery ceafed ; the voice of com- ** plaining is paffed away. It is wcak- 44 nefs to wiih for compaffion, which can- " not be excited till I ihall fink in the <c repofe of death, and tafte, I hope, the " happinefs of eternity. " Know then, that on the night of tiie 44 twelfth of Odober, in the year 1642, " I was arrefted on the road to С aux, 44 and on the very fpot where а column " is ereded to the memory of the im- 44 mortal Henry, by four ruffians, who, 44 after difebling my fervant, bore me 44 through wilds and vvoods to this abbey. 44 Their demeanour was not that of com- 44 mon banditti j and I foon perceived 44 they were employed by a fuperior 44 rower to perpetrate fome dreadful pur- 44 poie. Entreaties and bribes were 44 vainly offered them to difcover their " employe*·, and abandon their defign : 44 they would not reveal even the kail " circumftance oÇ their intentions. В 2 44 But
í 4 ] *" But wlien, after a long journey» ** they arrived at this edifice, their bafe Λί employer was at once revealed, and " his horrid fcheme but too well under- " flood. What a moment was that ! " AH the thunders of Heaven feemed 4t launched at this defencelefs head ! О лс fortitude ! nerve my heart to"— Adeline's light was now expiring in the focket, and the palenefs of the ink, fo feebly flione upon, baffled her effort to difcriminate the letters j it was impof¬ fible to procure a light from bdow, with¬ out difcovering that flie was yet up \ a circumftance, whicii vvould excite fur¬ prife, and lead to explanations fuch as flie did not wifli to enter upon. Thus compdled to fufpend the inquiry, which fo many attendant circumftanceb had ren¬ dered awfully interefting, flie retired to her humble bed. What fhe had read ofthe MS. awak- ined a dreadlul intereft in the fate ofthe vuiter, and called up terrific images to her
[ 5 I her mind. " In thefe apartments !"— faid ihe, and fhe ihuddered and dofed her eyes. At kngth fhe heard Madame La Motte enter her chamber, and the phantoms of fear beginning to dİlHpate, left her to repofe. în the morning flie was awakened by Madame La Motte, and found, to iier difappointment, that fhe had fb pt io much beyond her ufual time, as to b- unable to renew the perufal of the ¡SIS. —La Motte appeared uncommonly gloomy, and Madame wore an air of me¬ lancholy, which Adeline attributed to the concern ihe felt for her. Breakfaft was fcarcely over, when the found of horfes feet announced the arrival of a ftranger; and Adeline, from the oriel recefs ofthe hall, few the Marquis alight. She retreated with precipitation, and forgetting the requeft of La Motte, was haftening to her chamber ; but the Mar¬ quis was already in the hall, and feeing her leaving it, turned to La Motte witli B j a look
[ 6 з a look of inquiry, La Motte called her back, and by a frown too intelligent, re¬ minded her of her promife. She fum¬ moned all her fpirits to her aid, but ad¬ vanced, notwithftanding, in vifibk emo¬ tion, while the Marquis addreffed her as ufual, the fame eafy gaiety playing upon his countenance, and directing his man¬ ner. Adeline was furprifed and fliocked at 'his carelefs confidence, which, however, by awakening her pride, communicated to her an air of dignity that abaffied him. 1 le fpoke with hefitation, and frequcndy apeared abftraded from the fubjed of difcourfe. At length arifing, he begged Adeline would favour him with a few moments converfation. Monfieur and Madame La Motte were now leaving the room, when Adeline, turning to the Marquis, told him, " ihe would not hear " any converiation, except in the pre- c< ¿fence of her friends." But ihe faid this in vain, for they were gone; and La Motte,
t 7 ] Morte, ль he withdrew, expreffed bv αι- I ,'>ks, how much an attempt to follow would difpieafe him. She fet for feme time in fikncc, and trembliug expedation. " í am fenfible," laid the Marquis at length, ft that the fi condud to whit h the ard >ur of my ** paffion lately betrayed me, has m- Si jured me in your opinion, and that 41 you will not eafily reftore me to your ** efteem : but, I truñ } the offer which í 44 now make you, both ofmy tiue and ** fortune, will fufficiently pro* e the fm- 44 cerity ofmy attachment, and atone " for the tranfgrtffion which love only 44 occafioned." After this ipecimen of common*place vcrbofity, which the Marquis feemtd to confider as a prelude ro triumph, he at¬ tempted to imprefs a kifs upon die hand of Adeline, who, vvithtirawing it haftily, feid, " You are already, my Lord, ac- 44 quainted with my fentiments upon this Cf fubjed, and it is almoft unneceffary В 4 4i for
t s 1
ii>r rre now to rej car, thar 1 cannot ■"* avctpt the iionour you ofTt r me." ** f \pîıi í UHTÍt il, lovtly Adeline! vi I am it;nnraiţ that, üli now, f ever * v Piade vou t jr s offer." €t Moi! mit, ^;r,"frid Adtlinr, "and st v m do u ell to ι enunci me of this, if f ; ice, ãizer having heard your former u ι ro¡. oíd, I сап lillen for а moment to <c 2Л} oriit r." She rofe to quit the room. « St u*, Madam/' faid the Marquis, with a I .ok, in whkh offended pride ftruggled f о conceal itfelf ; " do not fufFer an ex- '* travagant refentment to operate againft £i \v*-:r true interefts ; recoiled the dan- "■ ¿ers that fin round you, and confider íť the value of an offer, whicii may afford * £ you at leafl ãn honourable afylum." " My misfortunes, my Lord, what- " ever tliey are, I have never obtruded " upon you ; you will, therefore, excufe " my obferving, that your prefent men- " tion of them conveys a much greater £< appearance of infult than compaffion." The
t 9 3 The Marquis, though with evident confufion, was going to reply ; but Ade¬ line wodd not be detained, and π fired tt) her chamber. Deftitute as ffie was, her heart revolted from the propofal of ihe Marquis, and flie determined never to accept it. To her diflike of his gene¬ ral difpofition, and the averfion excited by his late offer, vvere added, indeed, the influence of a prior attachment, and of α remembrance, which fhe found it im¬ poflible to erafe from her heart. The Marquis ftaid to dine, and, in confideration of La M^te, Adeline ap¬ peared at table , where the former gazed upon her vvith fuch frequent and fiknt earneftnefs, that her diftrefe became in¬ fupportable ; and when the cloth was drawn, ffie inftantly retired. Madame La Motte foon followed, and it was m>t till evening that ffie had an opportunity of returning to the MS. When Mon¬ fieur and Madame La Motte were in their chamber, and all was ftill, fhe drew iorth В 5 the
L ÍO 3 tir narrative, and, trimming her lamp, Ut down îo read аь follows : ** The ruffians unbound mc from mv + ' horfe, and kd me thn»ug u the halí uj» #< the fpiral ftaircafe ofthe аЫэеу : refill 14 ance was ufelefs ; but 1 looked around 4Í m the hope of feeing fome perfon leis ** obdurate than the men who brought " mc hither; fomc one who might be ** fenfibk to pity, or capable, at ieast, 14 of civil treatment. 1 looked in vain; " no perfon appeared : and this circum- 44 ftance cor ^rmed my worft apprehen- *' fions. The fecrefy of the beginning *' foretold a horrible conciufion. Hav- 44 ing paifed fome chambers, they ftop- íf ped in one hung with old tapeftry, 44 I inquired why we did not go on, and " was told, I ihould foon know. 44 At that moment, I expeded to fee " the inftrument of death uplifted, and I " filently recommended myfelf to God. 44 But death was not then defigned for " me ; they raifed the arras, and difco- " vered
t " ] 44 Ytftå a door, which dity then opened. * £ Seizing my arms, they h-â me du ough ** а fuite of dì 'ma I chambrrs bevond. tf Having reached the fartheft of thefe, ** thev again flopped : the horrid gle^m " of the place feemed congenial to mur- " ¿vT t and infpired deadly ťioughb. ** Altai n í looked round rLr the inftru- " ment of dcflnictkn, and agiin 1 waa tť respited. I fupplicated c«> know what ** wa*« defi'^ned me , it л as now unnecef- i€ fary t-j aik whu vws the author oi the " defign. Thry were filn.tto the quei- ťí ti '-n, but λι length told me* this cham- ,A ber w аь my pnfon. I laving laid thib, " and let ύον,η a jug of water, they ¡vn <£ the room, and I heard the d мг bai red " up ' me. ** О found of defpair ! О moment of * f unutterable a*igui.ii ! The pang of ** death itfelf is, furely, n>t fuperior to " that I then fuffered. Shut out from day, " from friends, from Yife—for/tuh J muß " foretell //—in the prime of my years, В 6 « ¡n
ί »- ] *' ι ч tîıt height of îY\ tranfgreffions, and - 4 Kn t^ miacrinr horrors пюге ten ible* * ıhan anv, perhaps, w4Ji cernínrv sí «oliki gi* с— I fink bcntuťi che" — I h '-e leveni pages ot the manuicri¡ t wtre. dt cavtd wirh damp, and totiľy ille¬ gible. With much difficulty Adel' ne made out the following lines: " Three davs have now paffed in to- " litude and filence : the horrors of " drath are ever before rny еуеь ; let me tť «n ka vour to prepare for the ikcadfel tS change ! When 1 awake in the mom» " İng» l think ϊ fluii not live to fee ano- " tliťr night ; and, v.hen night returns, ** t h.» t 1 muít never undo fe my eyc^ ťí on morning. Why am 1 brought hi- u ther—why confined thus rigoroufly— " but for death ! Yct vvhat aaion of my " life has deferved thib at the hand ofa " fellow creature !—Of— ******
" Om>
t 13 3 4Í O my children! О friends fer ďď- 44 cant ! I fhall oever fee you more— <ť never more rec* ive the parting look of " kindnefe—never beftow а parting * ( bleffing !—Ye know not my wretched " ftate— olis I ye cannot know it by hu- 44 man means. Ye believe me happy, or ci yc would fiy to my relief. I know that " what I now write cannot avail me, yet 44 there Ls comfort in pouring forth my 44 griefs ; and I blefe that man, lefs fevage ťť than hi: fdlows, who has fupplied me 4i thefe mean' of recording them. Alad 44 he knows full vvell, rhat from diis in- ' £ dalgencc he has nothing to fear. My '* pen can caff no friends to fuccour me, a nor reveal my danger ere ¿t is too late. 44 О ! ye, who may hereafter read what ťC I now write, give а tear to my fuff e r- u ings : I have wept often for the dii— " trefies ofmy fellow creatures!" Adeline paufed. Here the wretched writer appealed diredly to her heart; he ípoke in the energy of truth, and, by а ftrong
t 14 3 ftrong illufion of fancy, it feemed as if his paft fufferings were at this moment prefent. She was for fome time unable to proceed, and fat in mufing forrow. ** In thefe very apartments," feid ihe, " this poor fufferer was confined—here « he"—Adeline ftarted, and thought fhe heard a found í but the ftiilntfs of night was undifturbed.—" In thefe very clutn- 44 bers," feid íhe, " thefe lines vvere " written—thefe lines, from which hc 44 then derived a comfort, in believing 44 they would hereafter be read by fome " pitying eye : this time is now come. " Your miferies, О injured being ! are " lamented, where they were endured. " Here, where you fuffered, I weep for 44 your fufferings ľ* Her imagination was now ftrongly im¬ preffed, and to her diftempered fenfes, the fuggeftions of a bewildered mind ap¬ peared with the force of reality. Again ffie ftarted and liftened, anel thought lhe heard 4l Here'* diftindly repeated by а whifper
[ ч 3 whifper immediateiy behind her. The terror of the thought, however, was but momentary, íhe knew it could not be : convinced that her fancy had deceived her, ihe took up the MS. and again be¬ gan to read. 44 For what am I referved ! Why this " delay ? If I am to die—why not " quickly ? Three weeks have I now " pafled within thefe walls, during whicii " time, no look of pity has foftened my " afflidions ; no voice, fave my own, has " met my ear. The countenances of the " ruffians vvho attend me, are ftern and " inflexible, and their fikncc is obfti- " nate. This ftillnefe is dreadful ! O, ye " who have known what it is to live in the " depths of folitude, who have paiľed " your dreary days without one found to " cheer you; ye, and ye only^ can tell " what I feel now ; and ye may know " how much I would endure to hear the " accents of a human voice I " O dire
[ ι« 1 ťt Ο dire extremity ! О ftate of living " death! what dreadful ftillnefe! AU " around me is dead ; and do I really " exiff, or am I but a ftatue ? Is this a " vifion ? Are thefe things real ? Alas, I " am bewildered !—~this tkath-Jİke and " perpetual filence—this difmal cham- « ber —the dread of farther fufferings— * £ have difturbed my fancy. О for fomc " friendly breaft to lay my weary head " on! ibme cordial accents to revive my « f oli j г -4- * * . * ****** " I write by ftealrh. He who furniihed t( me vvith the means, I fear has fuffered " for fome fymptoms of pity he may 44 have difcovered for me ; I have not " feen him for feveral days : perhaps he " is inclined to help me, and for that 44 reafon is forbid to come. О that hope ! 44 but how vain ! Never more muff I " quit thefe walls while life remams. " Another day is gone, and yct I live ; " at
[ 17 3 ťc at this time to-morrow night, my fuf- * f ferings may be feakd in deatk I will «« continue my journal nightly, till the * c hand that writes fhall be flopped by if death : when the journal ceafes, the ťt reader will know I am no more. Per- 44 iiaps thefe arc tlie híí lines I ffiall ever 44 write." # * # * # Adeline paufed, while her tears fell faft. " Unhappy man!" ffie exclaimed, 44 and was there no pitying foul to fave 44 thee ? Great God ! thy ways are won- 44 derful !" While fiie fat mufing, her fancy, which now wandered in the re¬ gions of terror, gradually fubdued reafon. There was а glafs before her upon the table, and ffie feared to raife her looks towards it, left fome other face than her own fhould meet her eyes ; other dread¬ ful ideas and ftrange images of fentaftk thought now croffed her mind. A hollow figh feemed to pafs near her. 44 Holy Virgin, proted me !" crkd ihe, and
[ »8 ] and threw а fearful glance round the room ; " this is furely fomething more * c than fancy." Her fears fo far over¬ came her, that ihc was feveral times upon tiie point of calling up part of the femily ; but unwiilingnefs to difturb them, and a dread of ridicule, withheld her. She was alfo afraid to move, and almoft to breathe. As flic liftened to the wind, that murmured at the cafe¬ ments of her lonely chamber, ihe again thought fhe heard a figh. Her imagina¬ tion refufed any longer the controul of rea¬ fon, and, turning her eyes, a figure, whofe exaft form flic could not diftin¬ guiih, appeared to pafs along an obfcure Part of the chamber : a dreadful chilnefs came over her* and flie fet fixed in her chair. At length, a deep figh fomewhat relieved her oppreffed fpirits, and her fenfes feemed to return. AH remaining quiet, after fome time, ihe began to queftion whether her fancy had not deceived her ; and ffie fo far con¬ quered
[ '9 3 quere 1 her terror as to defift from calling Madame La Motte : her mind was, however, fo much difturbed, that ihe did not venture to truft herfelf that night again wdth the MS.; but, having fpent fome time in prayer, and in endeavouring to compofe her fpirits, ffie retired to bed. When ihe awoke in the morning, the cheerful fun-beams played upon the cafe¬ ments, and difpelled the illufions of darknefs: her mind, foothed and invigo¬ rated by fleep, rejefted the myftic and turbulent promptings of imagination. She aroie refreihed and thankful ; but, upon going down to breakfaft, this tran¬ fient gleam of peace fled, upon the ap¬ pearance of the Marquis, whofe frequent vifits at the abbey, after what had paffed, not only difpleafed, but alarmed her. She few that he was determined to perfe¬ vere in addreffing her ; and the boldnefs and infenfibiiity of this conduft, while it excited her indignation, increafed her difguft. In pity to La Motte, ffie en¬ deavoured
[ « 3 deavoured to conceal thefe emotions. though flie now thought that he required too much from her complaifance, and began ferioufly to confider how iht might aveiid the neceffity of continuino* it. The Marquis behaved to her vvith the moft refpedful attention ; but Adeline was filent and referved, ani feized the firft opportunity of withdrawing. As ffie pafled up the fpiral ftaircafe, Peter entered the hall below, and feeing Adeline, he flopped, and looketl earneftly at her : flic did not obferve him ; but hc called her foftly, and fhe then few him make a fignal, as if he had fomething to communicate. In the next inftant, La Motte opened the door of the vaulted room, and Peter haftily difappeared. She proceeded to her chamber, ruminating upon this fignal, and the cautious man¬ ner in which Peter had given it. But her thoughts foon returned to their wonted fubjeds. Three days were now paffed, and fhe heard no intelligence of
[ *« 3 ©f her father ; fne began to hope that he had relented fion. ihe violent meafures hinted at by La Motte, and that he meant to purfue а milder plan ; but when fhe confidered his charader, this appeared improbable ; and ihe π lapfed into her former fears. Her refidence at the ab¬ bey was now become painful, from the perfeverance of the Marquis, and the condud which La Motte obiiged her to adopt; yet fhe could not think, without dread, of quitting it, to return to her fether. The image of Theodore often intrud¬ ed upon her bufy thoughts, and brought with it a pang, which his ftrange depar¬ ture occafioned. She had a confufed notion, that his fete was fomehow con¬ neded with her own ; and her ftruggles to prevent the remembrance of him, ferved only to fhew how much her heart was his. To divert her thoughts from thefe fub¬ jeds,
t 22 ] jeds, and gratify the curiofity fo ftrongly excited on the preceding night* ihc now took up the MS. but was hindered from opening it by the entrance of Madame La Motte, who came to tell her the Mar¬ quis was gone. They pafled their morn¬ ing together in work and general conver¬ iation ; La Motte not appearing till dinner, when he feid little, and Adeline kfs. She afked him, however, if he had heard from her father ? " I have not " heard from him," feid La Motte ; 44 but there is good reafon, as I am in- " formed by the Marquis, to believe he 44 is not fer off." Adeline was fliocked, yet ihe was able to reply with becoming firmnefs. 4i I 44 have already, Sir, involved you too 44 much in my diftreis, and now fee that " refiftance will deftroy you, without " ferving me; I am, therefore, con- 44 tented to return to my father, and thus 44 fpare you farther calamity," 44 This
C n 3 44 This is a raih determination," re¬ plied La Motte, " ?,nd if you purfue it, 44 I fear you will feverely repent. I 44 fpeak to you as a friend, Adeline, and 44 defire you will endeavour to liften to " mc without prejudice. The Marquis, 44 I find, has offered you his hand. I " know not which circumftance moft " excites ray furprife; that a man of his 44 rank and confequence ffiould íblicit a 44 marriage with 2 perfon without a fbr- 44 tune, or oftenfible connedions ; or 44 that a perfon fo circumftanced fhould " even for a moment rejed the advan- 44 tages thus offered her. You weep, 44 Adeline ; kt me hope that you are 44 convinced of the abfurdity of this u condud, and will no longer trifle with 44 your good fortune. The kindnefs 1 44 have ffiewn you muft convince you of 44 my regard, and that I have no motive 44 for offering you this advke but your 44 advantage. It is neceffary, however, " to
[ M ì 44 to fay, that, fhould your fether not ¡n- " fift upon your removal, I know not how " long my circumftances may enable " me to afford even the humble pit- " tance you receive here. Still you arc 44 filenr." The anguifh which this fpeech excited, fuppreffed her utterance, and ffie con¬ tinued to weep. At kngth fhe faid, " Suffer me, Sir, to go back to my " father ; I íhould, indeed, make an ill " return for the kindnefs you mention, " could I wifli to ftay afte r vvhat you now " tell me ; and to accept the Marquis, I " feel to be impoffible." The remem¬ brance of Theodore rofe to her mind, and flie wept aioud. La Motte fet for fome time mufing. * f Strange infatuation!" feid he, " Isit " poffible that you can perfift in this he- 4( roifm of romance, and prefer a father, 44 fo inhuman as your's, to the Marquis " de Montalt ! A deftiny fo full of dan- " ger, to a life of fplendour and delight !" 44 Pardon
[ »5 3 " Pardon me," feid Addine, 4C a 44 marriage with the Marquis would 44 be fpiendid, but never happy. His 44 charafter excites my averfion, and I 44 entreat, Sir, that he may now no more 44 be mentioned,"
Vol. II. С С ПАР-
t аб 3
CHAPTER Χ. * f Nor arc thofe empty-hearted, whofe low found * ( Reverbs no hollownels." Lľar. гтр IHE converfation related in the laft chapter was interrupted by the entrance of Peter, who, as he left the room, looked fignificantly at Adeline, and almoft beck¬ oned. S he was anxious to know vvhat he meant, and foon after went into the hall, where flie found him loitering. The moment he few her, he made a fign of filence, and beckoned her into the recefs. 44 Well, Peter, vvhat is ir you would 44 fey ?" faid Adeline. " Huih, Ma'amfelle ; for Heaven's cX lake, fpeak lower : if we ftiould be " overheard, we are all blown up."— Adeline begged him to explain what he meant.
E 27 3 meant. 4t Yes, Ma'amfelle, that is wlnt " I have wanted all day long. I have 44 watched and watched for an oppor- 44 tunity, and looked and looked, till I 44 was afraid my mafter himfelf would fee cf me : but all would not do ; you would <c not underftand." Adeline entreated he would be quick. 44 Yes, Ma'am, but I'm fo afraid we 44 fhall be feen : but I vvould do much 44 to ferve fuch a good young lady ; for I 44 could not bear to think of what threat- * f ened you, without telling you ofit." 44 For God's fake," feid Adeline, 44 fpeak quickly, or we fliall be inter- 44 rupted." " W'dl, then ; but you muft firft pro- 44 mife by the HoJy Virgin never to fey 44 it was I that told you. My mailer " would"— « I do, I do I" feid Adeline. 44 Well, then—on Monday evening, 44 as I— hai к ! did not I hear д ftep? " Uo, Ma'amfelle, ¡uft flep this way to С 2 « the
L 28 ] " the cloifters. I wouid not for the " world we fliould be feen. I'll go out " at the hall door, and you can go " through the paffage. I would not for " the world we ihould be feen."-—Ade¬ line was much alarmed by Peter's words, and hunied to the cloifters. He quickly appeared, and, looking cautioufly round, refumed his difcourfe. " As I was fay- " ing, Ma'amfelle, Monday night, when " the Marquis flept here, you know he " fat up very late, and I can guefs, per- " haps, the reafon of that. Strange " things came out ; but it is not my " bufinefs to tell all I think." " Pray do fpeak to the purpofe," faid Adeline impatiently ; " what is this dán- " ger vvhich you íày threatens me ? Be <r quick, or we fliall be obferved." " Danger enough, Ma'amfelle," re¬ plied Peter, " if you knew ail; and " when you do, 'what will it fignify ? for " you can't help yourfelf. But that's " neither
[ 29 ] ' f neither here nor there : I was rdolved " to tell you, though I may repent it." <c Or rather you are refolved not to 44 tell me," feid Adeline, « for you have 44 made no progrefs towards an explana- " tion yet ! But what do you mean ? 44 You was ipeaking of the Marquis." 44 Hufh, Ma'am ; not fo loud. The 44 Marquis, as I feid, fat up very late, 44 and my mafter fat up with him. One 44 of his men went to bed in the oak " room, and the otiier ftaid to undrefs " his Lord. So as we were fitting to- 44 gether—Lord have mercy ! it made " my hair ftand an end ! I tremble yet. 44 So as we were fitting together—but u as furc as I live, yonder is my mafter : 44 I caught a glimpfe of him between 44 the trees ; if hc fees me, it is all over 44 with us. ľll tell you another tirae." So faying, he hurried into the abbey, leaving Adeline in a ftate of alarm, curiofity, and vexation. She walked out into the foreft, ruminating upon Peter's C j words,
[ Зо ] words, and endeavouring to guefs to what they alluded i there Madame La Motte joined her, and they converfed on various topics till they reached the abbey. Adeline watched in vain through that day for an opportunity of fpeaking with Peter. While he waited at flipper, ihe occafionally -obferved his countenance with great anxiety, hoping it might afford h-r fome degree of intelligence on ithe fubjed ofher fears. When ihe retired, Madame La Motte accompanied her to· her chamber, and continued to converfe with her for a eonfiderable time, fo that flie had no means of obtaining an inter¬ view vvith Peter—Madame La Motte appeared to labour under fome great affiidion ; and whea Adeline, noticing this, entreated to know the caufe of her dejedion, tears ftarted into her eyes, and lhe abruptly left the room. This behaviour of Madame La Motte concurred with Peter's difcourfe to alarm
[ 31 J akrm Addine, who fat penfively upon her bed, given up to refledion, till flie was roufed by the found of a clock which ftood in the room below, and which· now ftruck twelve. She was preparing for reft, when flie recolleded the MS, and was unable to conclude the night vvithout reading it. The firft words flic could diftinguifh were the fol¬ lowing : 44 Again I return to this poor confola- 44 tion —again I havi? been permitted to 44 fee another day. It is now midnight ! 44 my folitary lamp burns befide me ; 44 the time is awful i but to me the filence 44 of noon is as the filer»ce of midnight : 44 a deeper gloom is all in which they " differ.- The ftill, unvarying hours 44 are numbered only by my fufferings ! " Great God ! when ffiall I be releafed ! 44 But whence this ftrange confine- 44 ment ! I have never injured him. If С 4* i( death
[ з* 3 " death is defigned me, why this delay ? " and for what but death am I brought " hither? This abbey—alas!"—Here the MS. was again illegible, and for fe¬ veral pages Adeline could only make out disjointed fentences. " О bitter draught ! when, when " ihall I have reft ! О my friends ! " will none of ye fly to aid me ? will " none of ye avenge my fufferings ? " Ah ! when it is too late—when I am " gone for ever, ye will endeavour to " avenge them. ******* 44 Once more is night returned to me. <c Another day has paffed in folitude and " mifery. I have climbed to the cafe- " ment,thinkingtheviewof nature would " refrefh my foul, and fomewhat enable " me to fupport thefe afflidions. Alas ! " even this fmall comfort is denied me, " the windows open towards inner parts " of this abbey, and admit only a por- " tion of that day which I muft never " more
[ зз 1 44 more fully behold. Lail night ! Iaft 44 night! О fcene of horror!" Adeline ihuddered. She feared to read the coming fentence, yet curiofity prompted her to proceed. Still ihe paufed : an unaccountable dread came over her. " Some horrid deed has been Cf done here," feid fliej " the reports 44 ofthe peafants are true/ Murder has " been committed." The idea thrilled her with horror. She recolleded the dagger which had impeded her fteps in the fecret chamber, and this circumftance ferved to confirm her moil terrible con¬ jedures. She wiíhed to examine it, but it lay in one of thefe chambers, and fhe feared to go in queft of it. 44 Wretched, wretched vidím !" ilie exclaimed, " could no friend refcue thee 44 from deftrudion ! О that I had been 44 near ! yet what could I have done to " fave thee ? Alas ! nothing. I forget 44 that even now, perhaps, I am like thee, " abandoned to dangers, from which I С 5 « have
t 34 I 44 haVe no friend to fuccour me. Too 44 furely I guefs the author of thy mife- " ries !" She ftopped, for ihe thought ihe heard a figh, fuch as on the preceding night had paffed along the chamber. Her blood was chilled, and ffie fat mo¬ tionlefs. The lonely fituation of her room, remote from the reft ofthe femily (ihe was now in her own apartment, from which Madame La Motte had re¬ moved), who were almoft beyond call, ftruck fo forcibly upon her imagination, that ihe with difficulty preferved herfelf from fainting. She fat for a eonfiderable time, but all was ftill. When flic was fomewhat recovered, her firft defign was to alarm the family; but ferther reflec¬ tion withheld her. She endeavoured to compofe her fpi¬ rits, and addreffed a fliort prayer to that Being, who had hitherto proteded her int every danger. While ihe was thus em¬ ployed, her mind gradually became ele¬ vated and re-affured ; a fublime compia* cency
[ 35 ] cency filled her heart, and lhe fat down once more to purfue the narrative. Several lines that immediately fol¬ lowed were obliterated.— * 4( He had told me I ihould not be " permitted to live long, nor more than " three days, and bade me chufe whether α I would die by poifon, or the fword. 44 О the agonies of that moment ! 44 Great God î thou feeil my fufferings ! 44 I often viewed, with а momentary 44 hope of efcaping, the high-grated 44 windows of my prifon—all things " within the compafs of poffibility I ef was refolved to try ; and with an eager *■ defperation I climbed tovvards the te cafements, but my foot flipped, and, iC felling back to the floor, I was ftun- 44 ned by the blow. On recovering, the <c firft founds I heard were the fteps of " a perfon entering my prifon. A recol- 44 kftion ofthe pafl returned, and deplor- " able was my condition. I ihuddered С в 4( at
С зб 3 " at what was to come. The feme man " approached; lie looked at me firfi " with pity, but his countenance foon re- " covered its natural ferocity. Yet he " did not then come to execute the pur- " pofe of his employer : I am referved " to another day—Great God, thy will " be done!" Adeline could not go on. All the circumftances that feemed to corrobo¬ rate the fate of this unhappy man crowded upon her mind ; the reports concerning the abbey—the dreams which had forerun her dilcovery of the private apartments—the fingular manner in which flie had found the MS. and the apparition, which ffie now believed flie had really feen. She blamed herfelf for having not yet mentioned the dilcovery of the manufcript and chambers to La Motte, and refolved to delay the dif- clofure no longer than the following morning. The immediate cares that had occupied her mind, and a fear of lofing the
[ 37 ;i the manufcript before íhe had read it, had hitherto kept her filent. Such a combination of circumftances ihe believed could only be produced by fome fupernatural power, operating for the retribution of the guilty. This re¬ fiedion filled her mind widi г degree of awe, which the lonelinefe of the large old chamber in which fiie fat, and the hour of the night, foon heightened into terror. She had never been fuperflitious, but circumftances fo uncommon had hi¬ therto confpired in this affiiir, that flie could not believe them accidental. Her imagination, wrought upon by thefe re¬ fledions, again became fenfibk to every impreffion; ffie feared to look round, left fhe fhouki again fee fome dreadful phan¬ tom ; and llie almoft fancied fhe heard voices fwell in the fiorm wliich now ihook the fabric. Still fhe tried to command her feelings fo as to avoiel difturbing the family; but, they became fo painful, that even the dread
Г Л8 J dread of La Motte's ridicule hud hardly power to prevent her quitting the cham¬ ber. Her mind was now in fuch a ftate, that ihe found it impoffible to purfue the Itory in the MS. though, to avoid the tortures of fufpenie, flie had attempted it. She laid it down again, and tried to footh herfelf to compofure. " What have I " to fear?" feid fhe, " I am at leaft inno- " cent ; and I fliall not be punifhed for " the crime of another." A violent guit of wind,, that now ruíhed through the whok fuite of apart¬ ments, íhook the door that led from her late bedchamber to the private rooms fo forcibly, that Adeline, unable to re¬ main longer in doubt, ran to fee from whence the noife iffued. The arras, which concealed the door, was violently agitated, and ilie itood for a moment obferving it in indefi ribablc terror, till beHeving it was fwayed by the wind, flie mack a fudden effoit to overcome her feelings, and ftooped to raife it. At that
t 39 7 that inftant, íhe thought lhe heard a voice. She flopped and Hftened, but every thing was ftill ; yet apprehenfion fo far overcame her, that fhe had no power, either to examine, or to leave the chamber. In a few moments the voice returned: llie was now convinced ihe had not been deceived, for, though low, flie heard it diftindly, and was almoft fure it re¬ peated her own name. So much was her fancy affeded, that flie even thought İt was the feme voice flie had heard in her dreams. This convidion entirely fubdued the fmall remains of her cou¬ rage, and, finking into a chair, flie loft all recolledion. How long fhe remained în this ftate flie knew not; but when flie recovered, lhe exerted all her ftrength, and reached the winding ftaircafe, where fhe called aloud. No one heard her, and ffie haf¬ tened, as fail as her feeblenefs would per¬ mit, to the chamber of Madame La Motte.
[ 4P 3 Motte. She tapped gently at the door, and was anfwered by Madame, who was alarmed at being awakened at fo unufual an hour, and believed that fomc danger threatened her huiband. When ihe un¬ derftood that it was Adeline, and that ffie was unwell, ffie quickly came to her relief. The terror that was yet vifibk in Adeline's countehance excited her inqui¬ ries, and the occafion of it was explained to her. Madame was fo much difcompofed by the relation, that fhe called La Motte from his bed, vvho, more angry at being difturbed than interefted for the agitation he witneffed, reproved Adeline, for fuf¬ fering her fancies to overcome her rea¬ fon, She now mentioned the difcovery fhe had made of the inner chambers and the manufcript, circumftances which roufed the attention of La Motte fo much, that he defired to fee the MS. and refolved to go immediately to the apart¬ ments defcribed by Adeline. Ma-
[ 41 3 Madame La Motte endeavoured to diffuade him from his purpofe ; but La Motte, with whom oppofition had always an effed contrary to the one defigned, and who wiihed to throw farther ridicule upon the terrors of Adeline, perfifted in his intention. He calkd to Peter to at¬ tend with a light, and infified that Ma¬ dame La Motte and Adeline Ihould ac¬ company him ; Madame defired to be excufed, and Adeline, at firft, declared lhe would not go ; but he would be obeyed. They afcended the tower, and entered the firft chamber together, for each of the party was reludant to be the laft ; in the fecond chamber all was quiet and in order. Adeline prefented the MS. and pointed to the arras which con¬ cealed the door. La Motte Hfted the arras, and opened the door; but Ma¬ dame La Motte and Adeline entreated to go no farther^—again he called to them to follow. All was quiet in the firft
t 42 3 firft chamber ; he expreffed his furprife that the rooms fhould fo long have re¬ mained undifcovered, and was proceed¬ ing to the fecond, but fuddeniy ftopped. " We will defer our examination tiil if to-morrow," feid he, 4( the damps of 44 the apartments are unwholefomc at 44 any time ; but they ftrike one more 44 fenfibly at night. I am chilled. Peter, " remember to throw open the windows " early in the morning, that the air may 44 circulate." 44 Lord bkfs your honour,'* feid "Pe¬ ter, w don't you fee I can*t reach them Ь 44 Befides, I don't believe they are made 44 to open ; fee what ftrong iron bars 44 there are; the room looks, for all the u world, like a prifon ; I fuppofe this is " the place the people meant, when " they faid,. nobody that had been ia " ever came out." 4 La Motte, who, during his fpeech, had been looking at¬ tentively at the high windows, which, if he had feen them at firft, he had certainly not
[ 43 3 not obferved, now interrupted the elo¬ quence of Peter, and bade him carry the light before them. They all willingly quitted thefe chambers, and returned to the room below, where a fire was lighted, and the party remained together forfome time. La Motte, for reafons befl known to himfelf, attempted to ridicule the dif¬ covery and fears of Adeline, till fhe, with a ferioufnefs that checked him, entreated he would defift. He was fiknt, and foon afo?r, Adeline, encouraged by the return bf day-light, ventured to her chamber, and, for fome hours, experienced the bleffing of undifturbed repofe. On the following day, Adeline's firft care was to obtain an interview with Pe¬ ter, vvhom lhe had fome hopes of feeing as ffie went down ftairs ; he, however» did not appear, and ihe proceeded to the fitting room, where ihe found La Motte apparently much difturbed. Adeline afked him if he had looked at the MS. " I havo.
С 44 ] 44 I have run my eye over it," faid he s 44 but it is fo much obfeured by time 44 that it can fcarcely be decyphered. ît 44 appears to exhibit a ftrange romantic ' f itory; and I do not wonder, that after 44 you had fuffered its terrors to imprefs 44 your imagination, you fancied you fev^ " ípedres, and heard wonde rous noifes." Adeline thought La Motte did not chufe to be convinced, and lhe, there¬ fore, forbore reply. During breakfaflv fhe often looked at Peter (who waited) with anxious inquiry ; and, from his countenance, was ftill more affured, that he had fomething ofimportance to com¬ municate. In the hope of fome conver¬ fation with him, fhe left the room as foon as poffibk, and repaired to her favourite avenue, where ihe had not long remained. when he appeared. " God bkfs you ! 44 Ma'amfelle," faid he, " lam forry I 44 frightened you fo laft night." 44 Frighted me," faid Adeline, c< how ** was you concerned in that ?" Hc
[ 45 3 He then informed her, that when he thought Monfieur and Madame La Motte were afleep, he had ftole to her chamber door, with an intention of giv¬ ing her the fequel of what he had begun in the morning; that he had calkd fe¬ veral times as loud as he dared, but re¬ ceiving no anfwer, he believed ihe was afleep ; or did not chufe to ípeak with him, and he had, therefore, left the door. This account of the voice flic had heard relieved Adeline's ipirits ; lhe was even furprifed that ihe did not know it, till re¬ membering the perturbation of her mind for fome time preceding, this furprife difappeared. She entreated Peter to be brief in ex¬ plaining the danger with which ffie was threatened. <f If you'll kt me go on my 44 own way, Ma'am, you'll foon know it ; 44 but if you hurry me, and afk me quef- " tions, here and there, out of their 44 places, í don't know what I am fay- " ing." "Be
I 4б 3 44 Be it fo ;" feid Adeline, " only rc- 44 member that we may be obferved." " Yes, Ma'amfelle, I'm as much 44 afraid of that as you are, for I believe 44 I ihould be almoft as ill off; however» 44 that is neither here nor there ; but ľm <c fure if you ftay in this old abbey 44 another night, it will be worfe for " you ; for, as I faid before, I know all 44 about it." " What mean you, Peter?" 44 Why, about this fcheme thaťs go- " ing on." 44 What, then, is my fether?"------ <c Your father," interrupted Peter, 44 Lord blefs you, that is all fudge, to 44 frighten you ; your father, nor nobody 44 elfe has ever fent after you ; I dare fey ci he knows no more of you than the Pope 44 does—not he." Adeline looked dif¬ pleafed. « You trifle," feid ihe ; « if 44 you have any thing to tell, fay it 44 quickly; I am in hafte," " Blefs
t 47 1 * c Blefs you, young Lady, I meant no * f harm, I hope you're not angry; but 44 I'm fure you can't deny that your fa- *» ther is cruel But, as I was faying, 44 the Marquis de Montalt likes you ; 44 and he and my mafter (Peter looked 44 round) have been laying their heads 44 together about you," Adeline turned pale—ffie comprehended a part of the truth, and eagerly entreated him to pro¬ ceed. " They have been laying their heads if together about you. This is what < c Jacques, the Marquis's man, tells me : -" Says he, Peter, you little know what is 44 going on—I could tell all, if I chofe <f it; but it is not for thofe who are trufted 44 to tell again. I warrant now your 44 mafter is clofe enough with you. Up- " on whicii I was piqued, and refolved " to make him believe I coulel be trufted 44 as well as he. Perhaps not, fays I, 44 perhaps I know as much as you, " though I do not chufe to brag on't ; α and
t 48 3 " and I winked.-—Do you fo ? fays he, " then you are clofer than I thought " for. She is a fine girl, fays he, mean- " ing you, Madamfelle j but íhe is no- " thing but a poor foundling after all " —fo it does not much fignify.—I " had a mind to know farther what he " meaut—fo I did not knock him down. " By feeming to know as much as he, I ce at Jaft made him difcover all, and he " told me—but you look pale, Ma'am- " felle ; are you ill ?" " No," faid Adeline, in a tremulous accent, and fcarcely able to fupport herfelf; " pray proceed." " And he told me, that the Marquis " had been courting you a good while, " but you would not liften to him, and " had even pretended he would marry " you ; and all would not do. As for " marriage, fays I, I fuppofe fhe knows " the Marchionefs is alive ; and Pm fure " fhe is not one for his turn upon other " terms." " The
С 49 ] " The Marchionefs is really living 4 J then!" faid Adeline. " O yes, Ma'amfelle ! we all know " that, and I thought you had known it « too."—« We fliall fee that, replies 44 Jacques; at leail, I believe that our 44 mafters will outwit her."— î itared; í " could not help it.—" Aye ? lays he, 44 you know your mafter has agreed to 44 give her up to my Lord." " Good God, what will become of " me !" exclaimed Adeline. " Aye, Ma'amfelle, I am forry for 44 you ; but hear me out. When Jacques " faid this, I quite forgot myfelf. I'll " never believe it, faid I ; I'll never be - " lkve my mafter would be guilty of " fuch a bafe adion : he'll not give her " up, or I'm no Chriftian."—." Oh! faid " Jacques, for that matter, I thought " you'd known all, elfe I ihould not " have faid a word about it. Howevei', 44 you may foon fiitisfy yourfelf by going <c to the parlour door, as I have done ; Vol. II. 1) « they're
[ so 3 " they're in confukation about it now, I 44 dare fey." t4 You need not repeat any more of <c this converfation," feid Adeline; "but 44 tell me the refult of what you heard 44 from the parlour." 44 Why, Ma'amfelle, when he feid 44 this, I took him at his word, and vvent " to the door, where, fore enough, I 44 heard my mafter and the Marquis talk- " ing about you. They faid a great 44 deal, which I could make nothing of: 44 but, at laft, I heard the Marquis fey, 44 You know the terms : on thefe terms *' only will I confent to bury the pafl in 44 ob — ob —oblivion -----that was the 44 word. Monfieur La Motte then told 44 the Marquis, if he would return to cc the abbey upon fuch a night, meaning 44 this very night, Ma'amfelle, every 44 thing ihould be prepared according to 44 his wiflies; Adeline ffiall then be " your's, my Lord, feid he—you are 44 airea' y acquali ted with her chamber," At
[ 51 3 At thefe words, Adeline clafped her hands, and raifed her eyes to Heaven in filent defpair,—Peter went on: 4t When 44 I heard this, I could not doubt what 44 Jacques had feid.—" Well, faid hc, 44 ^hat do you think of it now ?" " Why, that my mafter's a rafcal, feys « j # »>—cc j t > s we ji y 0U don't thmk mmc " one too, fays he."— <c Why, as for f( that matter, fays I"------Adeline, in¬ terrupting him, inquired if he had heard any thing farther. " Juft then," fei I Peter, " we heard Madame La Motte 44 come out from another room, and fo 44 we made hafte back to the kitchen." " She was not prefent at this conver~ " fation then?" feid Adeline.— 4( No, 44 Ma'amfelle, but my mafter has told " her of it, I warrant." Adeline was almoft as much fliocked by this appa¬ rent perfidy of Madame La Motte, as by a knowledge of the deftrudion that threatened her. After mufing a few D 2 moments
I sí 3 moments in extreme agitation, " Peter," * faid ftie, " you have a good heart, and " feel a juft indignation at your maf- " ter's treachery—will you affifl: me to ** efcape?" " Ah, Ma'amfelle !" faid he, " how " can I affifl you ? befides, where can we " go ? I have no friends about here, no ·" more than yourfelf." " O ľ' replkd Adeline, in extreme emotion ; " we fly from eneraies I 4ζ ftrangers may prove friends : affift me " but to efcape from this foreft, and you " will daim my eternal gratitude : I have " no fears beyond it." " Why, as for this foreft," replied Peter, " I am weary of it myfelf; " though, when we firfi came, I thought 4i it would be fine living here, at leaft, I " thought it was very different from any " life I had ever lived before. But thefe " ghofts that haunt the abbey—I am no " more a coward than other men, but I " don't like them ; and then there is fo " many
I ss 3 44 many ftrange reports abroad ; and my " mafter—I thought I could have ferved 44 him to the end of the world, but now " I care not how foon I leave him, for 44 his behaviour to you, Ma'amfelle." " You confent, then, to affift me in " efcaping ?" faid Adeline with eager¬ nefs. 44 Why as to that, Ma'amfelle, I 44 would willingly, if I knew where to 44 go. To be fure I have a fifter lives 44 in Savoy, but that is a great way off; 44 and I have faved a little money out of 44 my wages, but that won't carry us fuch ** a long journey." 44 Regard not that," faid Adeline, " if I was once beyond this foreft, I " would then endeavour to take care of 44 myfelf, and repay you for your kind- 44 ncfs." * <f О î as for that, Madam"-— u Well, well, Peter, ktus confider how 44 we may efcape. This night, fey you, " it is night—the Marquis is to return ?" D 3 « Yes,
t 54 3 44 Yes, Ma'amfelle, to-night about " dark. I have juft thought of a fcheme. " My mafter's horfes are grazing in the " foreit; vve may take one of them, and 4( fend it back from the firft ftage : but 44 how ihall we avoid being feen ? be- l< fides, if vve go off in the day-light, hc if will foon purfue and overtake us ; and t4 if you ftay till night, the Marquis will ťf be come, and then there is no chance. " If they mifs us both at the fame time <c too, they'll guefs how it is, and fet off 44 diredly. Could you not contrive to 44 go firft, and wait for me till the hurly- 44 burly's over ? Then, while they're " fearching in the place under ground 44 for you, I can flip away, and we ffiall 44 be out of their reach before they 44 think of purfuing us. Adeline agreed to the truth of all this, and was fomewhat furprifed at Peter's fagacity. She inquired if he knew of any place in the neighbourhood of the abbey, where flie could remain con¬ cealed
[ SS 3 cealed till he came with a horfe. cc Why, 44 yes, Madam, there is a place, now I " think of it, where you may be fefe 44 enough, fer nobody goes near : but € « they fey it's haunted, and perhaps 44 you would not like to go there." Adeline, remembering the laft nighr, was fomewhat ftartled at this intelligence ; but a fenfe of her prefent danger preffed again upon her mind, and overcame every other apprehenfion. " Where is " this place?"faid fhe, <e if it vvilicon- 44 ceal me, I fhall not h^firate to go." 44 It is an old toml it fiands in the 44 thickeftpart of the foreft, aboutaquar- 44 ter of a míle off the neareft vvay, and 44 almoft a mile the other. When my 44 mafter ufed to hide himfelf fo much in 44 the foreft, I have followed him fomc- 44 where thereabouts, but I did not find 44 out the tomb till t'other day. How- 44 ever, that's neither here nor there i if 44 you dare venturero it, Ma'amfelle, ľll 44 fhew you the neareft way." So feying» D 4 he
I 56 J he pointtd to a winding path on the right. Adeline, having looked round, without perceiving any perfon near, di¬ refted Peter to lead her to the tomb. They purfued the path, till, turning into α gloomy romantic part of tlic foreft, almoft impervious to the rays of the fun ? they came to the fpot whither Louis hai foi mei ly traced his father. The ftillnefs and folemnity of the fcene ftruck awe upcm the heart of Adeline, who paufed, and furveyed it for fome time in fikncc. At kngth, Peter kd her mto the interior part of the ruin, to which they defcended by feveral fteps. " Some old abbot," feid he, " was for- " merly buried here, as the Marquis's 44 pcople fey ; and it's like enough that <* hc belonged to the abbey yonder. But 44 I don't fee why hc fliould take it in his 44 head to walk ; ke was not murdered, 44 furely ?" " I hope not," feid Adeline. « That's
[ 57 3 " That's rnore than can be faid for all * f that lies buried at the abbey though, « and"——Adeline interrupted him ; " Hark ! furely I hear a noife ;" faid ihe : " Heaven proteft us from difco- " very !" They liftened, but all was ftill, and they went on. Peter opened a low door, and they entered upon a dark paffage, frequently obftruded by loofe fragments of ftone, and along which they moved with caution. " Whither " are we going ?" fuel Adeline.—" I " fcarcely kn<ow myfelf," faid Peter, " for I never was fo far before ; but the " place feems quiet enough." Some¬ thing obftruded his way; İt was a door, which yielded to his hand, and difco¬ vered a kind of cell, obfeurcly feen by the twilight admitted through a grate above. A partial gleam fhot athwart the place, leaving the greater part of it in ihadow. Adeline fighed as íhe furveyed it,— " This is a frightful fpot," faid fhe ; D 5 « but
Г 58 3 " but if it will afford me a flicker, it is " a palace. Remember, Peter, that my " peace and honour depend upon your " feithfulnefe ; be both difcreet and rc- " fohlte. In the dufk of the evening I " can pafs from the abbey with leait " danger of being obferved, and in this " cell I will wait your arrival. As foon " as Monfieur and Madame La Motte " are engaged in fearching the vaults, " you will bring here а horfe ; three " knocks upon the tomb fliall inform mc if of your arrival. For Heaven's feke, " be cautious, and be punftual !" " 1 will, Ma'amfdk, let come what " may." They re-afcended to the foreit, and Adeline, fearful of obfervation, direfted Peter to run firft to the abbey, and invent fome excufe for his abfence, if hè had been miffed. When fhe was again alone, five yielded to a flood of tears, and indulged the excefs of her diftrefs. She faw
[ 59 3 few herfelf without friends, without rela¬ tions, forlorn, deftitute, and abandoned to the worft of evils. Betrayed by the very perfons to whofe comfort ftie had fo long adminiftered, whom ihe had loved as her protectors, and revered as her parents ! Thefe refledions touched her heart with the moft afllifting fenfa¬ tions, and the fenfe of her immediate danger v\as fbr а while abforbed in the grief occafioned by a difcovery of fuch guilt in other.s. At length flic roufed all her fortitude, and, turning towards the abbey, endea¬ voured to await with patience the hour of evening, and to luihin лп appearance of compofure in the prefence of Monfieur and Madame La Mütte. hor the prefent íhe wiíhed to avoid feeing either of them, doubting her abiiicy to difguife her emo¬ tions : having reached the abbey, flie therefore paffed on to her chamber. Here íhe endeavoured to direft her atten¬ tion to indifferent fubjeds, but in vain ; D 6 the
С бо з the danger of herfituation, and the fevere difappointment ihe had received, in the charafter of thofe whom íhe had fo much efteemed, and even loved, preffed hard upon her thoughts. To a generous mind few circumftances are more afllift¬ ing than a difcovery of perfidy in thofe whom we have truite cL even though it may fail of any abfolute inconvenience to ourfelves. The behaviour of Madame La Motte in thus, by concealment, con- fpiring to her deft, adion, particularly fliocked her. " How has my imagination deceived " me 1" feid fhe, " what a pidure did " it draw of the goodnefs of the world ! " And muft I then believe that every " body is cruel and deceitíul ? No—let " me ftill be deceived, and ftili fuffer, " rather than be condemned to a ftate of " fuch wretched fuípicion." She now endeavoured to extenuate the conduft of Madame La Motte, by attributing it to a fear of her huiband. " She dare not « oppofe
[ 6ı ] « oppofe his will," faid íhe, « elfe fhe " would warn me of my danger, and " affift me to efcape from it. No—I " will never believe her capable of con* " fpiring my ruin. Terror alone keeps « her filent." Adeline was fomewhat comforted by this thought. The benevolence of her heart taught her, in this inftance, to fo- phiftkate. She perceived not, that by afcribing the condud of Madame La Motte to terror, ihe oniy foftened the degree of her guilt, imputing it to a mo¬ tive kfs depraved, but not lefe felfifh,» She remained in her chamber till fum¬ moned to dinner, when, drying her tears, flie defcended with faultering fteps and a palpitating heart to the parlour. When lhe few La Motte, in fpite of all her ef¬ forts, fhe trembled and grew pale : flic could not behold, even with apparent in¬ difference, the man who, fhe knew, had deftined her to deftrudion. He ob¬ ferved her emotion, and inquiring if fhe was
[ 6i I was ill, flic faw the danger to which her agitation expofed her. Fearful leíť La Motte íhould fufpeft its true caufe, ihe rallied all her fpirits, and, with a look of complacency, anfwered flie was well. During dinner ffie preferved a degree of compofure, that effeftually concealed the varied anguiih of her heart. When: ihe looked at La Motte, terror and in¬ dignation were her predominant feel¬ ings; but when flie regarded Madame La Motte, it was otherwife ; gratitude for her former tendernefs liad long been confirmed into affedion, and her heart now fwelled vvith the bitternefs of grief and difeppointment. Madame La Motte appeared depreffed, and faia little. La Motte feemed anxious to prevent thought, by affuming a fiftitious and unnatural gaiety : he laughed and / talked, and threw off frc quent bumpers of wine : it was the mirth of defperation. Madame became alarmed, and would have re¬ ftrained him ; but hc perfifted in his li¬ bations
[ H 3 bations to Bacchus, till refledion feemed to be almoft overcome. Madame La Motte, fearful that in the careleffnefs of the prefent moment he might betray himfelf, withdrew with Adeline to another room. Adeline recol¬ leded the happy hours ffie once paffed with her, when confidence baniflied re¬ ferve, and fympathy and efteem didatecl the fentiments of friendihip : now thofe hours were gone for ever ; flie could no longer unbofom hergriefs to Madame La Motte ; no longer even eiteem her. Yet, notwithftanding all the danger to which ihe was exj^ofed by the criminal filence of the latter, fhe could not converfe with her, confeioufly, fbr the lait time, without feeling a degree of forrow, which wif¬ dom may call weaknefs, but to which benevolence will allow a fofter name. Madame La Motte, in her converfa¬ tion, appeared to labour under an almoft equal oppreffion vvith Adeline : her thoughts
Γ 64 3 thoughts were abftraded frora the fubjeft of difcourfe, and there were long and fre¬ quent intervds of filence. Adeline more than once caught her gazing with a look of tendernefs upon her, and few her eyes fill with tears. By this circumftance flie was fo much affeded, that lhe was feveral times upon the point of throwing herfelf at her feet, and imploring her pity and protedion. Cooler refledion ihewed her the extravagance and danger of this con¬ duci : íhe fuppreffed her emotions, but they at length compelled her to with¬ draw from tlie prefence of Madame La Motte.
CHAP-
Г"б5 3
CHAPTER Χ. Thou ! to whom the world unknown With allits fliadowy ihapcs is íhown 5 Who fteil appallM th' unreal fcene, While fancy lifts the veil between ; Ah, Fear ! ah, frantic Fear î I fee, I fee thee near ! I know thy hurry'd Hep, thy haggard eye ! , Like thee I ilari, like thee diforder'd fly ! COLLINS.
ADELINE anxioufly watched from her chamber window the fun fet behind the diftant hills, and the time of her de¬ parture draw nigh : it fet with uncom¬ mon fplendour, and threw a fiery gleam athwart the woods, and upon fome fcat¬ tered fragments of the ruins, which flic could not gaze upon with indifference. " Never, probably, again fhall I fee the " fun
" í\m fink belovv thefe hills," feid íhe, " or illumine this fecne ! Where ffiall I 44 be when next it fets— where this time " to morrow ? funk, perhaps, in mifery I" She wept at the thought. fC A few 44 hours," refumed Adeline, * f and the " Marquis will arrive— а few hours, and fC this abbey will be a fcene of confufion iC and tumuk : every eye will be in " fearch of me j every recefe will bc ex- " plored." Thefe refleftions infpired her with new terror, and increafed her impatience to be gone. Twilight gradually came on, and ffie now thought it fufficiently dark to ven¬ ture forth ; but, before ffie went, ffie kneeled down and addreffed herfelf to Heaven. She implored fupport anel protection, and committed herfelf to the care of the God of Mercies. Having done this, flie quitted her chamber, and paffed with cautious fteps down the wind¬ ing ftaircafe. No perfon appeared, and ffie proceeded through the door of the ».ower
[ 67 3 tower into the foreft. She looked around ; the gloom of evcniűg obfeured every objeft. With а trembling heart fhe fought the path pointed out by Peter, which kd to the tomb ; having found ic, fhe paffed along forlorn and terrified Often did flie ftart as the breeze fliook the light leaves of the trees, or as the bat flitted by, gambling in the twilight; and often, as fhe looked back towards the abbey, thought fhe diftinguiíhed, amid the deepening gloom, the figures of men. Having proceeded fome way, ffie fud¬ deniy heard the feet of horfes, and foon after a found of voices, among which fhe diftinguiffied that of the Marquis : they feemed to come from the quarter ffie was approaching, and evidently ad¬ vanced. Terror for fome minutes ar¬ refted her fteps ; flie ftood in a ftate of dreadful hefitation : to proceed, was to run into the hands of the Marquis ; to return,
[ 68 ] return, vvas to fell into the power of La Motte. After remaining for fome time uncer¬ tain whither to fly, the founds fuddeniy took adifferent direâion, and the party wheeled towards the abbey. Adeline had a ffiort ceffation of terror. She now un¬ derftood that the Marquis had paffed this fpot only in his way to the abbey, and flie haftened to fecrete herfelf in the ruin. At kngth, after much difficulty, flie reached it, tlie deep fhades almoft concealing it from her fearch. She paufed at the entrance, awed by the folemnity that reigned within, and the utter dark¬ nefe of the place ; at kngth ihe deter¬ mined to watch without till Peter fhould arrive. " If any perfon approaches," faid flie, " I can hear them before they 44 can fee me, and I can then fecrete my- " felf in the cell." She leaned againft a fragment of the tomb in trembling expedation, and, as ihe liftened, no found broke tbe filence of
[ *9 ] òf the hour. The ftate of her mind can only be imagined, by confidering that upon the prefent time turned the crifis of her fate. " They have now," thought fhe, " difcovered my flight ; even now " they are feeking me in every part of " the abbey. 1 hear their dreadful " voices call me; I fee their eager " looks." The power of imagination almoft overcame her. While ihe yet looked around, fhe faw lights moving at a diftance ; fometimes they glimmered between the trees, and fometimes they totally difappeared. They feemed to be in a diredion with the abbey ; and flie now remembered, that in the morning flie had feen a part of the fabric through an opening in the foreft. She had, therefore, no doubt that the lights fhe faw proceeded from people in fearch of hen who, flie feared, not finding her at the abbey, might di¬ red their fteps towards the tomb. Her place of refuge now feemed too near her
[ /о 3 her enemies to be fafe, and flie woul! have fled to a more diftant part of the foreft, but recollefted that Peter vvould not know where to find her. While thefe thoughts paffed over her mind, fhe heard diftant voices in the wind, and was haftening to conceal her¬ felf in the cell, when flie obferved the lights fuddeniy difappear. All was foon after huíhed in filence and darknefs, yet flie endeavoured to find the way to the cell. She remembered the fituation of the outer door and of the partage, and, having paffed thefe, ihe unclofed the door of the cell. Within it was utterly dark. She trembled violently, bu: entered » and, having felt about the walls, at kngth feated herfelf on a projection of ftone. She here again addreffed herfelf to Heaven, and endeavoured to re-animate her fpirits till Peter fhould arrive. Above half an hour elapfed in this gloomy re¬ cefs, and no found foretold his approach. Her
£ 7i 3 Her fpirits funk ; flie feared fome part of their plan was difcovered, or interrupted, and that he was detained by La Motte. This conviftion operated fometimes fo ftrongly upon her fears, as to urge her to quit the cell alone, and feek in flight her only chance of efcape. While this defign was fluctuating in her mind, ihe diftinguiflied through the grate above a clattering of hoofs. The noife approached, and at kngth flopped at the tomb. In the fucceeding moment ffie heard three ftrokes of a whip ; her heart beat, and for ibme moments her agitation was fuch, that íhe made no ef¬ fort to quit the cell. The ftrokes were repeated; ffie novv roufed her fpirits, and, ftepping forward, afcended to the foreft. She called, "Peter!" forthe deep gloom would not permit her to dif¬ tinguiffi cither man or horfe. She was quickly anfwered, "Huih! Ma'amfelle, " our voices will betray us," They
[ 7* 3 They mounted and rode off as feft as the darknefs would permit. Adeline's heart revived at every ftep they took. She inquired what had pafled at the abbey, and how he had contrived to gen away. α Speak foftly, Ma'amfelle; 44 you'll know all by and by, but I 44 can't tell you now." He had fcarcely fpoke ere they few lights move along at а diftance ; and coming now to a more ©pen part of the foreft, he fat off on a full gallop, and continued the pace till the horfe could hold ir no longer. They looked back, and no lights appearing, Adeline's terror fubfided. She inquired again what had paffed at the abbey, when her flight was difcovered. ff You 44 may fpeak without fear of being " heard," feid ffie; « we are gone be- 44 yond their reach, I hope." 44 Why, Ma'amfelle," feid he, 44 you 44 had not been gone long before the " Marquis arrived, and Monfieut La 44 Motte then found out you was fled. " Upon
[ 73 ] « Upon this a great rout there was, and " he talked a great deal with the Mar- M quis." - " Speak louder," faid Adeline i " I " cannot hear you. « I wilt, Ma'amfelle."----- " Oh Heavens !" interrupted Ade¬ line, " What voice is this ? It is not " Peter's. For Gocťs fake, tell me who " you are, and whither I am going ?" " You'll know that foon enough, " young Lady," anfwered the ftranger, for it was indeed not Peter ; "lam " taking you where my mafter ordered." Adeline, not doubting he was the Mar¬ quis's fervant, attempted to leap to the ground; but the man, difmounting, bound her to the horfe. One feeble ray of hope at length beamed upon her mind : fhe endeavoured to foften the man to pity, and pleaded with all the genuine elo¬ quence of difirefs ; but he underftood his intereft too well to yield even for a mo¬ ment to the compaffion, whkh, in fpite of v °l. И. E him.
L 74 ] himfelf, her artlefs fupplication infpired. —She now refigned herfelf to deipair, and, in paffive filence, fubmitted to her fete. They continued thus to travel, till a ftorm of rain, accompanied by thun¬ der and lightning, drove them to the covert of a tiiick grove. The man be¬ lieved ihis a fate fituation, and Adeline was now too carelefs of life to attempt convincing him of his error. The ftorm was violent and long ; but as foon as it abated, they fat off on a foil gallop ; and having continued to travel for about two hours, came to the borders of the foreft, and, foon after, to а high lonely wall, which Adelinecould juft diftinguiih by the moon-light, which now ftreamed through the parting clouds. Here they flopped; the man dif¬ mounted, and having opened a fmall eloor in the wall, he unbound Adeline, who ihrieked, though involuntarily and in vain, as he took- her from the hor.'e. The door opened upon а narrow paffage, dimly
[ ıs 3 dimly lighted by a lamp that hung at the ferther end. He kd her on till they came tj another door, which opened, and difclofed a magnificent faloon, fplendidly illuminated, and fitted up in the moil airy and elegant tafte. The walls were painted in frefco, re¬ prefenting feenes from Ovid, and hung above with filk drawn up in feftoons, and richly fringed. The fofas were of a filk to fuit the hangings. From the center of the cieling, which exhibited a fcene from the Armida of Taffo, defcended α filver lamp of Etrufcan form i it diffufed a blaze of light, that, refleded from large pier glaffes, completely illuminated the faloon. Buffs of Horace, Ovid, Ana- creon, Ti bulks, and Petronius Arbiter, adorned the receffes, and ftands of flow¬ ers, placed in Etrufcan vafes, breathed the moft delicious perfume. In the mid¬ dle ofthe apartment ftood a finali table, fpread with a collation of fruits, ices, and liqueurs. No perfon appeared. The Κ ι whole
t 7« I whole feemed the work of enchantment, and rather refembied the palace ofa fairy than any thing of human conformation. Adeline was aftoniffied, and inquired where ihe was ; but the man refufed to anfwer her queftions, and, having defired her to take fome refreihraent, left iier. She then walked to the windows, from which a gleam of moon-light difcovered to her an extenfive garden, where groves and lawns, and water glittering in the moon¬ beam, compofed a fcenery of varied and romantic beauty. " What can this 44 mean!" feid lhe; 4< Is this a charm 44 to lure me to deftrudion ?" She en¬ deavoured, with a hope of efcaping, to open the windows, but they were all faftened : fhe next attempted feveral doors, and found them all fecured. Perceiving all chance of efcape was re¬ moved, íhe remained «for fomc time given up to forrow and refledion ; but was at length drawn from her reverie by the notes of foft mufic, breathing fuch dulcet and
• î 77 3 and entrancing founds, as fufpended grief, and waked the foul to tendernefe and penfive pkafure. Adeline liftened in furprife, and infenfibly became foothed and interefted ! a tender melancholy Hole upon her heart, and fubdued every harfher feeling : but the moment the ftrain ceafed, the enchantment diffolved, and ihe returned to a fenfe of her fitu¬ ation. Again the mufic founded— 14 Mufic, fuch as charmeth Песр." — And again ffie gradually yielded to its fweet magic. A female voice, accom¬ panied by a lute, a hautboy, and a few other inftruments, now gradually fwelled into a tone fo exquifite, as raifed atten- tion into ecftacy. It funk by degrees, and touched a few fimpk notes with pa¬ thetic foftnefs, when the meafure was fuddeniy changed, and in a gay and airy melody, Adeline diftinguifhed the follow¬ ing words : E 3 song.
[ 78 ] SONG. I ire's a varied, bright illufion, Joy and forrow—light and ihade; Turn horn forrow's dark fuffufion, Catch the pleafures ere they fade. Fancy paints with hues unreal, Smile of blifs, and forrow's moodj If they both are but ideal, Why rejeft the feeming good? Hence ! no more ! 'üb Wifdom calls ye, Bids ye court Time's prefent aid j The future truft not—Hope enthrals ye, *' Catch the pleafures ere they fade." The mufic ceafed, but the founds ftill vibrated on her imagination, and ihe was funk in the pleafing languor they had infpired, when the door opened, and the Marquis de Montalt appeared. He approached the fofa where Adeline fat, and addreffed her; but fhe heard not his - voice—ihe had feinted. He endeavoured to recover her, and at kngth fucceeded ; but when ihe unclofed her eyes, and again beheld him, fhe relapfed into a flate
С 79 3 α ftate of infenfibiiity, and having in vain tried various methods to reftore her, he was obliged to call affiftance. Two young women entered, and, when ¿he began to revive, he left them to pre¬ pare her for his re-appearance. When Adeline perceived that the Marquis was gone, and that fhe was in the care of women, her fpirits gradually returned ; íhe looked at her attendants, and was furprifed to fee fo much elegance and beauty. Some endeavour ihe made to intereft their pity, but they feemed wholly in¬ fenfible to her diftrefs, and began to talk of the Marquis in terms of the higheft admiration. They affured her it would be her own fault if flie was not happy, and advifed her to appear fo in his prefence. It was with the utmoil difficulty that Adeline forbore to exprefs the difdain which was rifing to her lips, and that flie liftened to their difeourfe in fikncc. But íhe few the inconvenience E 4 and
[ 8° 3 and fruitleffnefe of oppofition, and flie commanded her feelings. They were thus proceefiing in their praifes of the Marquis, when he himfelf appeared, and, waving his hand, they immediately quitted the apartment. Ade¬ line beheld him with a kind of mute defpair, while he approached and took her hand, which ihe haftily withdrew, and turning from him with a look of un¬ alterable difirefs, burft into tears. He was for fome time filent, and appeared foftened by her anguifh. But again approaching, and addreffmg her in a gentk voice, he entreated her pardon for the ftep, which defpair, and, as he calkd it, love had prompted. She was too much abforbed in grief to reply, till he folicited a return of his love, when forrow "yielded to indignation, and lhe reproached him with his conduft. Hc pleaded that he had long loved and fought her upon honourable terms, and liis offer of thofe terms he began to repeat ;
С, β» 3 repeat; but, raifing his eyes towards Ade¬ line, he few in her looks the contempt vvhich, he was confcious, he deferved. For a raoment he was confufed, and feemed to underftand both that his plan was difcovered, and his perfon deipifed; but foon refuming his ufual command of feature, he again preffed his fuit, and folicited her love. A little refection ihewed Adeline the danger of exafpe- rating his pride, by an avowal of the contempt which his pretended offer of marriage excited ; and íhe thought it not improper, upon an occafion in which the honour and peace of her life was concerned, to yield fomewhat to the policy of diffimulation. She few that her only chance of efcaping his defigns depended upon delaying them, and flic now wilhed him to beHeve her ignorant that the Marchionefs was living, and that his offers were deiufive. He obferved her paufe; and, in the eagernefs to turn her hefitation to his E 5 advan-
[ 82 3 advantage, renewed his propofal with increafed vehemence.—" To-morrow 14 fhail unite us, lovely Adeline ; to- 44 morrow you fliall confent to become " the Marchionefs de Montait. You will " tc then return my love and"— 44 You muft firft deferve my efteem, " my Lord." " I will—I do deferve it. Are you 44 not now in my power, and do I not 44 forbear to take advantage of your 44 fituation ? Do I not make you the " moft honourable propofals ?" Adeline fliuddered :—" If you wiih I fhould " efteem you, my Lord, endeavour, if 44 poffibk, to make me forget by what " means I came into your power; if your " views are, indeed, honourable, prove ť£ them fo by rekafing me from my 44 confinement." 44 Can you then wiffi, lovely Adeline, 44 to fly from him who adores you ?" re¬ plied the Marquis, with a ftudied air of ( tendernefs. f< Why will you exaft ioj " fevere'
[ ь ] " fevere a proof of my difintereftednefe, a " difintereftednefs which is not confiftent tc with love ? No, charming Adeline, " let me at Jeaft have the pleafure of be- iC holding you, till the bonds of the " church fhall remove every obftacle to 44 my love. To-morrow"------» Adeline few the danger to which flie was now expofed, and interacted him. " Deferve my eiteem, Sir, and then you 44 wdl obtain it : as a firft ftep towards " which, liberate me from a confine- 44 ment, that obliges me to look on you " only with terror and averfion. How 44 can I believe your profeffions of love·, 44 while you ihew that you have no in- 44 tereft in my happinefs ?" Thus did Adeline, to whom the arts and the prac¬ tice of diffimulation vvere hitherto equally unknown, condefcend to make ufe of them in difguifing her indignation and contempt. But though thefe arts were adopted only for the purpofe of fel í -pre¬ fervation, flic ufed them vvith reludance, . E 6 ^ and
[ 8 4 3 and almoft with abhorrence: for her mind was habitually impregnated with the love of virtue, in thought, word, and adion ; and, while her end in ufing them was certainly good, ihe fcarcely believed that end could juftify the means. The Marquis perfifted in his fophiftry. " Can you doubt the reality of that love, " which, to obtain you, has urged me to " rifque your difpleafure ? But have I not " confulted your happinefs, even in the " very condud which you condemn ? I " have removed you from a folitary and " defolate ruin, to a gay and fpiendid " villa, where every luxury is at your " command, and where every perfon " ihall be obedient to your wiffies." " My firft wiffi is to go hence," faid Adeline : " I entreat, I conjure you, my " Lord, no longer to detain me. I am " a friendlefs and wretched orphan, ex- " pofed to many evils, and, I fear " abandoned to misfortune ; I do not " wifli to be rude; but allow me to " fey>
[ 8 5 3 " fey, that no mifery can exceed that I 44 fliall feel in remaining here, or, in- 44 deed, in being any where, purfued by tf the offers you make me !" Adeline had now forgot her policy : tears pre¬ vented her frora proceeding, and fhe turned away her face to hide her emo¬ tion. " By Heaven ! Adeline, you do me 44 wrong," feid the Marquis, rifing frora his feat, and feizing her hand ; " I love, " I adore you ; yet you doubt my paf- <f fion, and are infenfible to my vows. 44 Every pleafure "poffibk to be enjoyed 44 within thefe walls, you fhall partake, 44 but beyond them you fhall not go." She difengaged her hand, and in fiknt anguifli walked to a diftant part of the faloon ; deep fighs burft from her heart, and, almoft fainting, lhe leaned on a window frame for fupport. The Marquis followed her ; " Why " thus obftinately perfift in refufing to cc be happy?" faid he; « Rccolkft 44 the
t »б 3 " the propofal I have made you, and tc accept it, while it is yet in your power. 44 To-morrow a prieft fliall join our hands. 44 —Surely, being, as you are, in my 44 power, it muft be your intereft to *' confent to this ?" Adeline could an¬ fwer only by tears; ffie defpaired of foftening his heart to pity, and feared to exafperate his pride by difdain. He now kd her, and ihe fuffered him, to α feat near the banquet, at which he preffed her to partake of a variety of confedion- aries, particularly of feme liqueurs, of vvhich he himfelf drank freely : Adeline accepted only of α peach. And now the Marquis, vvho inter¬ preted her filence into a fecret com¬ pliance with his propofal, refumed all his gaiety and fpirit, while the long and ardent regards he beftowed on Adeline, overcame her with confufion and indig¬ nation. In the midft of the banquet, foft mufic again founded the moft ten¬ der and impaffioned airs ; but its effed on
[ «7 3 on Adeline was now loft, her mind be¬ ing too much embarraffed and diftreffed by the prefence of the Marquis, to admit even the foothings of harmony. A fong was now heard, written with that fort of impotent art, by which fome voluptuous poets believe they can at once conceal and recommend the principles of vice. Adeline received it vvith contempt and difpleafure; and die Marquis, perceiving its effed, prefently made a fign for ano¬ ther compofition, which, adding the force of poetry to the charms of mufic, might withdraw her mind from the prefent fcene, and enchant it in fweet delirium.
SONG
[ »« 3
SONG of a SPIRrT. In the fightbfs air I dwell, On the Hoping fan-beams play ; Delve the cavern's inmoft cell, Where never yet did day-light ftray. Dive beneath the green fea waves, And gambol in the briny deept» ; Skim every ftiore that Nepume laves> From Lapland's plains to India's ileepe. Oft I mount with rapid force Above the wide earth's ihadowy zone ; Follow the day-ftar'* flaming coorfe Througb realms of fpace to thought unknown ; And liften to celeftul founds, That İ well the air, unheard of mc«, As I watch my nightly rounds O'er woody fteep* and filent glen. Under the ihade of waving trees. On the green bank oi fountain clear, At penfive eve I fit аь eafe, While «lying mufic marmors near. And oft, on point of airy clifr, That hangs upon the weftern mam, I watch the gay tints paíTmg fwift, And twilight veil the liquid plain. Then,
E »9 3 Then, whe« the breeze hat» funk away, And otean fcarce i& heard to lave, For me the fea nymphs foftly play Thtir dukct ihells beneath the wave, Theii dulcet ihells ! I hear them now ; Slow (WelL the ftrain upon mine ear; Now faintly f.ills—now warbles low, Till rapture melcs into a tear. The ray that filvers o'er the dew, And trembles through the leafy iliade* And tints the fcene with jTofter hue, Calls mc to rovg the lonely glade 5 Or hie me to fome ruin'd tow*r, Faintly fhewn by moon-light gleam, Where the lone wand'rer ownb my pow*r In ihadows dire that fubftance feem j In thrilling founds that murmur woe, And paufing Шепсе makes more dread ; In mufic breathing from below Sad, folemn ftrains, that wake the dead. Unfeen I move—unknown am fear'd ! Fancy's wildeft dreams 1 weave ; And oft by bards my yoke ib heard To die along the gales of eve*
When
[ 9° I When the voice ceafed, а mournful ftrain, played with exquifite expreffion, founded from a diftant horn ; fometimes the notes floated on the air in foft un¬ dulations—now they fwelled into full and fweeping melody, and now died faintly into filence : when again they rofe, and trembled in founds fo fweetly tender, as drew tears from Adeline, and exclamations of rapture from the Marquis. He threw his arm round her, and would have preffed her towards him, but ihe liberated herfelf from his embrace, and with a look, on wliich was impreffed the firm dignity of virtue, yet touched with forrow, ihe awed him to forbearance. Confcious of a fupe¬ riority, which he was afhamed to ac¬ knowledge, and endeavouring to defpife the influence whkh he could not refift, he ftood for a moment the flave of virtue, though the votary of vke. Soon, however, he recovered his confidence, and began to plead his love -, when Ade¬ line,
[ 9« 3 line, no longer animated by the fpirit flic had lately ihewn, and finking beneath the languor and fatigue, vvhich the various and violent agitations of her mind produced, entreated he would leave her to repofe. The palenefs of her countenance, and the tremulous tone of her voice, were too expreffive to be mifunderftood; and the Marquis, bidding her remember to-morrow, with fomc hefitation, with¬ drew. The moment fhe was alone, lhe yielded to fhe burfting anguifh of her heart, and was fo abforbed in grief, that it was fome time before lhe perceived lhe was in the prefence of the young women, who had lately attended her, and had entered the feloon foon after the Marquis quitted it : they came to conduft her to her apartment. She fol¬ lowed them for fome time in filence, till, prompted by defperation, fhe again endeavoured to awaken their compaf¬ fion : but again the praifes of the Mar¬ quis were repeated ; and, perceiving that all
[ 92 ] all attempts to intereft them in her fa¬ vour were in vain, ihc difmiffed them. She fecured the door through which they had departed, and then, in the languid hope of difcovering fome means of efcape, fhe furveyed her chamber. The airy elegance with which it was fitted up, and the luxurious accommo¬ dations wkh which it abounded, feemed defigned to fafcinate the imagination, and to feduce the heart. The hangings were of ftraw- cokured filk, adorned with a variety of landfcapes and hiftori- cd paintings, the fubjeds of which par¬ took of the voliJtptÍoiS^haráfter of the owner; the chimney-piece, of Parian marble, was ornamented with feveral repofing figures from the antique. The bed was of filk, the colour of the hang¬ ings, richly fringed with purple and fil¬ ver, and the head made in form of a canopy. The fteps, which were placed near the bed to affift in afcending k, were fupported by Cupids, apparently of folid filver.
[ 93 3 filver, China vafes, filled vvith perfume, ftood in feveral of the receffes, upon ftands of the feme ftrudure as the toilet, which was magnificent, and ornamented with a variety of trinkets. Adeline threw a tranfient look upon thefe various objeds, and proceeded to examine the windows, which defcended -to the floor, and opened into balconies towards the garden lhe had feen from the faloon. They were now faftened, and her efforts to move them vvere in* effedual ; at length fhe gave up the at¬ tempt, A door next attraded her no¬ tice, which fhe found was not faftened ; it opened upon a drefling-clofet, to which ilie defcended by a few fteps : two win¬ dows appeared—fhe haftened towards them; one refufed to yield, but her heart beat with fudden joy when the other opened to her touch. In the tranfport of the moment, fhe forgot that its diftance from the ground might yet deny the efcape fhe meditated. She
[ 94 ] She returned to lock the door of the clo¬ fet, to prevent a furprife, which, how¬ ever, was unneceflary, that of the bed¬ room being already fecured. She now looked out fiom the window ; the garden lay before her, and ihe perceived that the window, vvhich defcended to the floor, was fo near the ground, that flie might jump from ic with eafe : almoft in the moment flie perceived this, flie fprang forward, and alighted ûxfely in an extenfive garden, refembling more an Engliffi pleafure ground, than a feries of French parterres. Thence flie had little doubt of ef¬ caping, cither by feme broken fence, or low part of the wall j flu tripped lightly along, for hope played around her heart. The clouds of the late fiorm were now difperfed, and the moon-light, which Л -pt on the lawns, and fpangkd the fi jw- ers, yet heavy with rain-drops, afforded her a diftinft view of the furrounding fce¬ nery. She foilovved the diredion of the high
[ 95 ] high wall that adjoined the chateau, till it was concealed from her fight by a thick wildernefs, fo, entangled wirh boughs, and obfeured by darknefs, that flie feared to enter, and turned afide into a walk on the right ; it conduded her to the margin of a lake overhung vvith lofty trees. The moon-beams dancing upon the waters, that with gentle undulation played along the fliore, exhibited a fcene of tranquil beauty, which would have foothed an heart lefs agitated than was that of Adeline : fhe fighed as flic tran¬ fiently furveyed it, and pafied haftily on in fearch of the garden wall, from which fhe had now fliayed а confiderablc way. After wandering for fome time through alleys and over lawns», without meeting with any thing like a boundary to the grounds, flie again found heifelf at the hke, and now travcrfed its border widi the footfteps of defpair: tears rolled down her checks. The fcene around exhibited only images of peace and de¬ light i
[ 96 3 light; every objeft feemed to repofe; not a breatii waved the foliage, not a found ftole through the air ; it was in her bofom only that tumult and diftrefs prevailed. She ftill purfued the wind¬ ings of the ffiore, till an opening in the woods conduded her up a gentk afcent : the path now wound along the fide of a hill, where the gloom was fo deep, that it was with fome difficulty ihe found her way: fuddeniy, however, the avenue opened to a lofty grove, and Jhe per¬ ceived a light iffue from a recefs at fomc diftance. She paufed, and her firft impulfe was to retreat; but liftening, and hearing no found, a feint hope beamed upon her mind, that the perfon to whom the light belonged, might be won to fevour her efcape. She advanced, vvith trembling and cautious fteps, towards the recefs, that ffie might fecretly obferve the per¬ fon, before ihe ventured to enter it. Her emotion increafed as ihe approached, and having
t 97 3 having reached the bower, ihe beheld, through an open window, the Marquis, reclining on а fofe, near which ftood а table, covered with fruit and wine. 1 Ie was alone, and his countenance was flufhed with drinking. While ihc gazed, fixed -to the fpot by terror, he looked up towards the cafe- ment; the light gleamed full upon her face, but flie ftayed not to learn whether he had obferved her, for, with the fwift¬ nefs of found, ffie left the place and ran, without knowing whether fhe was pur¬ fued. Having gone a eonfiderable way, fatigue, at length, compelled her to ftop, and ihe threw herfelf ttpora the turf, al¬ moft feinting with fear and languor. She knew, if the Marquis dcteded her in an attempt to efcape, he would, probably, burft the bounds which he had hitherto preferibed to himfelf, and that fhe had the moft dreadful evils to exped. The palpitations of terror were fo flrong, that the could vvith difficulty breathe. Voi,. II. F She
í 98 3 She watched, and liftened, in trembling expeftation, but no human form met her eye, no found her car ; in this ftate lhe remained a eonfiderable time. She wept, and the tears ffie ffied relieved her oppreff¬ ed heart. " О my father!" feid ffie, "why 44 did you abandon your child ? If you 44 knew the dangers to which you have 44 expo r ed her, you would, furely, pity " and relieve her. Alas! ffiall I never find 44 a frknd ? am I deftined ftill to truft 44 and be deceived ?—Peter, too, could 44 he be treacherous ?" She wept again, and then returned to a fenfe of her pre¬ fent danger, and ïo a confideration of the means of efeaping it—but no means ap¬ peared ч To her imagination the grounds were boundlefs ; ffie had wandered from lawn to lawn, and from grove to grove, with¬ out perceiving any termination to the place ; the garden wall ffie could not find, but ihe refolved neither to return to the chateau, nor to relinquiffi her fearch. As
[ 99 3 As flie was rifing to depart, fhe per¬ ceived a ihadow move along the ground at fome diftance; ffie ftood ftill to obferve it. It flowly advanced, and then difappeared ; but prefently flie few a perfon emerge from the gloom, and approach the fpot where ihe ftood. She had no doubt that the Marquis hael obferved her, and ihc ran with all poffibk fpeed to the fhade of fome woods on· the left. Footfteps pur¬ fued her, and ihe heard her name re¬ peated, while ihe in vain endeavoured ta quicken her pace. Suddenly the found of purfuit turned, and funk away in a different diredion ; ihe paufed to take breatii ; ihe looked around, and no perfon appeared. She now proceeded flowly along the avenue, and had almoft reached its cermination, when ihc few the feme figure emerge from the woods, and dart acrofs the ave¬ nue; it inftantly purfued her, and ap¬ proached. A voice called her, but flie was gone beyond its reach, for fhe had F 2 funk
[ «oo 3 funk fenfdcfs upon the ground : it was long before ftie revived, when ihe, did, flic found herfelf in the arms of a ftran¬ ger, and made an effort to difengage her¬ felf. f< Fear nothing, lovely Adeline." feid hc, " fear nothing : you are in the arms " of a frknd, who will encounter any 44 hazard for your fake ! who will pro- " ted you with his life." He preff¬ ed her gently to his heart. " Have you 44 then forgot mc?" continued he. She looked earneftly at him, and was now convinced that it was Theodore who fpoke. Joy was her firft emotion; but, recolleding his former abrupt departure, at a time fo critical to her fefety, and that he was the friend of the Marquis, a thou¬ fand mingled fenfations ftruggled in her breaft, and overwhelmed her with mif¬ truft, apprehenfion, and difappointment. Theodore raifed her from the ground, and while he yet fupported her, " Let us 4i immediately fly from this place," feid he;
[ ïöï ] hc ; 4( a carriage waits to receive us ; it 44 ffiall go wherever you dired, and con- ** Vey you to your friends." This lail fentence touched her heart : " Alas, I 44 have no friends !" feid fhe/ " nor do 44 I know whither to go." Theodore gently preffed her hand between his, and, in a voice of the fofteft compaflion, feid, " My friends then fhall be your's ; " fuffer me to lead you to them. But I " am İn agony while you remain in this " place j let us haften to quit it." Ade¬ line was going to reply, when voices were heard among the trees, and Theo¬ dore, fupporting her with his arm, hur¬ ried her along the avenue j they continued their flight till Adeline, panting for breath, could go no farther. Having paufed a while, and heard no footfteps in purfuit, they renewed their courfe : Theodore knew that they were now not far from the garden wall -, but he was alfo aware, that in the interme¬ diate ipace fevcral paths wound from re- F 3 mote
[ S02 3 mote parts of the grounds into the walk he was to pafs, from whence the Mar¬ quis's peopk might iffue and intercept him. He, however, concealed his ap¬ prehenfions from Adeline, and endea¬ voured to footh and fupport her fpirits. At kngth they reached the wall, and Theodore was leading her towards a low part of it, near which ftood^the carriage, when again they heard voices in the air. Adeline's fpirits and ftrength were nearly exhaufted, but ihe made a laft effort to proceed, and ffie now few the ladder at fbme diftance, by wnich Theodore had defcended to the garden* 4i Exert your- 44 felf yet a little longer," faidhc, "and " you will be in fefety." He hdd the ladder while ffie afcended ; the top of the wall was broad and level, and Ade- line, having reached it, remained 1 , mere till Theodore followed, and drew the lad* der to the other fide. When they had defcended, the car¬ riage appeared in waiting, but without the driver. Theodore feared to call, left his
[ i°3 I his voice ffiould betray him ; hc there¬ fore put Adeline into the carriage, and went himfelf in fearch of the poftiiion, whom he found afleep under a tree at fome diftance ; having awakened him, they returned to the vehicle, whicii foon drove furioufly away. Adeline did not yct dare to believe herfelf fefe; but, after proceeding a eonfiderable time without interruption, joy burft upon her hearty and fhe thanked her deliverer in terms of the warmeft gratitude. The fympathy expreffed in the tone of his voice and manner, proved that his happinefs, on this occafion, almoft equalled her ovvm As refleftion gradually ftole uposi her raind, anxiety fuperfeded joy: in the tu¬ mult of the late moments, fhe thought only of efcape ; but the circumftances of her prefent fituation now appeared to her, and ihe became filent and penfive : flie had no friends to whom flie could fly, and was going with a young Chevalier, almoft a ftranger to her, ihc knew not F 4 whither.
[ *°4 3 whither. She remembered how oftes fhe had beendeceived and betrayed where ihe trufted - off, and her fpirits funk : ihe remembered alio the former attention which Theodore had' fhewn her, and dreaded left hk conduft might b« prompted by a feififli paffion. She few this to be poffibk, but fhe difdained to believe it probable,, and felt that nothing could give her greater pain than to doubt the integrity of Theodore. He interrupted her reverie, by recur¬ ring to her late fituation at the abbey. " You would be much forprifed," faid he, " and, I fear, offended, that I did " not attend my appointment at the ab- t4 bey, after the alarming hints I had 44 given you at our kft interview. That " circumftance has, perhaps, injured mc " in your efteem, if, indeed, I was ever fo " happy as to poflcfe it >. but my defigns i( were over-ruled by thofe of the Mar* 44 quis de Montalt ι and I think I raay 44 venture to affcrt that my diftrefe « upoa
[ «os ] ** upon this occafion was, at leaft, equal " to your apprehenfions. Adeline faid, « She had.been much " alarmed by the hints he had given her, ç< and by his failing to afford farther in- * г formation concerning the fubjed of 44 her danger ; and"—She checked the fentence that hung upon her lips, for ffie perceived that ihe was unwarily dif¬ clofing the intereft he held in her heart. There were a few moments of filence, and neither party feemed perfeftly at cafe. Theodore, at length, renewed the converfation : " Suffer me to acquaint " you" faid he, " with the circum- " ftances that withheld me from the in- " terview I folicited ; I лт anxious to " exculpate myfdf." Without waiting her reply,, he proceeded to inform her, that the Marquis had, by lome inexpli¬ cable means, learned, or fufpeded, tlie fubjeft of their lafl converfation ; and, perceiving his defigns were in danger of being counteraded, had taken effedual F 5 means
[ toS ] means to prevent her obtaining farther intelligence of them. Adeline immedi¬ ately recolleftcd that Theodore and her¬ ielf had been feen in the foreft by La Motte, who had, no doubt, fufpefted their growing intimacy, and had taken care to inform the Marquis how likely he was to find a rival in his frknd. 44 On the day following that, on which ff I laft faw you," faid Theodore, «' the *' Marquis, who is my colonel, com- 44 manded rac to prépaie to attend ray 44 regiment, and appointed the foHowing 44 morning for my journey. This fudden 44 order gave me fome furprife ; but I " was not long in doubt concerning 44 the motive of it : a fervant of the " Marquis, who was attached to me, 44 entered my room foon after I had " lek his Lord, and expreffing concern 44 at my abrupt departure, dropped fomc " hints refpeding it, which excited my " furprife. I inquired farther, and was 44 confirmed in the fufpicions I had fbr 44 forae
t 107 3 « fome time entertained of the Marquis's 44 defigns upon you. " Jacques farther informed mc, that 44 our late interview had been noticed, Cf and mentioned to the Marquis. His i{ information had been obtained from 44 a fellow-fervant ; and it alarmed me 44 fo much, that I engaged him to fend " me intelligence from time to time, 44 concerning the proceedings of the " Marquis. I now looked forward to 44 the evening which would bring me " again to your prefence with increafed " impatience : but the ingenuity of the 44 Marquis effedually counteracted my 44 endeavours and wiflies» He had mack 44 an engagement to pafe the day at the ťC villa of a nobleman fome leagues dif- " tant, and, notwithftanding all the ex- 44 cufes I could offer, I was obliged to " attend him. Thus compelled to obey, u I paffed a day of more agitation and " anxiety than I had ever before expe- " rienced. It was midnight before we F б " re-
[ юб 3 cf returned to the Marquis's chateau. I " arofe early in the morning to com- 44 mence ray journey, and refolved to " feck an interview with you before ï 44 left the province. ct When I entered the breakfaft room, " I was much furprifed to find the Mar- " quis there already, who, commending 11 the beauty of the morning, declared " his intention of accompanying me as " far as Chineau, Thus unexpeftedly " deprived ofmy laft hope, my counte- 4 nance, I beiieve, expreffed what I " felt, for the fcrutkizing eye of the 44 Marquis inftantly changed from feem- 44 ing careleffnefs to difpleafure. The 44 diftance from Chineau to the abbey 44 was, at kaft, twelve leagues ; yet ľ 44 had once fome intention of returning u frora thence, when the Marquis íhould * 4 have rae, tiil I recollefted the very 44 remote chance there would even then 44 be of feeing you alone, and alfo, that 44 if I was obferved by La Motte, it 4{ would
I 100 ï **· wotild aWaken all· his fufpicions, and « caution him againft any future plan I 44 might fee it expedient to attempt. I 44 therefore proceeded to join my regi- *' ment. 44 Jacques fent me frequent accounts of a the operations of the Marquis ; hut his 44 manner of relating them was fo very 44 confufed, that they only ferved to-per- " pkx and diftrefs me; His kft letter, " however, alarmed me fo much* that 14 my refidence in quarters became İnto- " lerable ; and, as I found it impoflible <( to obtain leave of abfence, I fecretly 44 left the regiment, and concealed my- 44 fdf in a cottage about а mik from the u chateau, that I might obtain the ear· * c lieft intelligence of the Marquis's " plans. Jacques brought me daily in- 44 formation, and, at laft, an account of 44 the horrible plot that was laid for the 44 following night. " I few little probabiHty of warning 44 you of your danger. If I ventured *' near
t **° J 44 near the abbey, La Motte raight dif- ** cover me, and fruftrate every attempt 44 on my part to ferve you : yet I deter- * f mined to encounter this rifk for the 44 chance of feeing you ; and towards ci evening I was preparing to fct out for 44 the foreft,, when Jacques arrived, and 44 informed me, that you was to be " brought to the chateau. My plan was " thus rendered kfs difficult. I learned 44 alfo, that the Marquis, by means of * ( thofe refinements in luxury, with 44 which he İs but too well acquainted, 44 defigned, now that his apprehenfion of 44 lofmg you was no more, to feduce you Cf to his wiihes, and impofe upon you 44 by a fiftitious marriage. Having ob- " tained information concerning the " fituation of the room allotted you, I 44 ordered a chaife to be in waiting, and 44 with a defign of fealing your window, tf and condufting you thence, I entered 44 rhe garden at midnight." Theodore having ceafed to ipeak, (4 I " know
[ "' 3 Ä know not how words can exprefe my 44 fenfe of the obligations I owe you," faid Adeline, 4€ or my gratitude for your <c generofity." 44 Ah ! call it not generofity," he re¬ plkd, iC it was kve." He paufed. Ade¬ line was filent. After fome moments of expreffive emotion, he refumed : u But " pardon this abrupt declaration: yet " why do I call it abrupt, fince my ac- 44 tions ha^e already difclofed what my 44 lips have never, till this inftant, ven- 44 tured to acknowledge." He paufed again. Adeline was ftiU fiknt. 4< Yet " do me the juftke to beiieve, that I am 44 fenfibk of the impropriety of pleading 44 my love at prefent, and have been 44 furprifed into this confeflion. I pro- 44 mife alio to forbear from a renewal of 44 the fubjed, till you are placed ina 44 fituation, where you may freely accept 44 or refufe the fincere regards I offer tc you. Ifl could, however, novv be " certain
С ϊΐα 3 ** certain that I poffefs your efteem, it 44 would relieve rae from much anxiety." Adeline felt furprifed that he ffiould doubt her eiteem for him, after the fignal and generous fervice he had rendered her ; but lhe was not yet acquainted vvith the timidity of love. 4( Do you then," faid flic, in a tremulous voice, 44 believe 44 me ungrateful ! Is it poflibk I can H confider your friendly interference in 44 my behalf without efteeming you ?" Theodore immediately took her hand, and preffed it to his lips in filence. They were both too much agitated to converfe, and continued to travel for fomc miles without exchanging a word.
CHAP-
[ IJ 3 3
, CHAPTER XL «' And Hope enchanted smil'd, and wav'd her golden lui r : tf And longer had she sung—but with a frown, ** Revenge impatient rose." ODE TO THE FAS5J0N9· IHE dawÄ of morning now trem«- bled through the clouds, when the tra¬ vellers ftopped ata fmall town to change horfes. Theodore intreated Adeline to alight and take fome refreíhment; andto this fhe at kngth confented. But the people of the inn were not yet up, and it was fomc time before the knocking and roaring of the poftiHon could roufe them· Having taken fome flight refrefhment, Theodore and Adeline returned to the carriage. The only fubjeft upon which Theodore could have fpoke with in¬ tereft, delicacy forbade hira at this time ta
t »4 3 to renew ; and, after pointing out feme beautiful fcenery on the road, and mak¬ ing other efforts to fupport a conver¬ fation, he relapfed into filence. His mind, though ftili anxious, was now re¬ lieved from the apprehenfion that had long oppreffed it. When he firft few Adeline, her lovelinefs made a deep im¬ preffion on his heart; there wus a fenti¬ ment in her beauty, which his mind im¬ mediately acknowkdged, and the effeft of whkh her mariners and converfation had afterwards confirmed. Her charms appeared to him like thofe fince fo ňntly defcribed by an Engliih poet i *' Oh ! have you íren bauYd in the morning dew, «« The budding rofe its infant bloom dilplay; *' When iirft its virgin tints unfold to view, *' Jt ihrinks, and fcarcely trulls the blaze of day? « So foft, (o delicate« (q fwect fhe саше, " Youth's damaflt glowjuit dawning on her cheek ; " I gaz'd, I figh*d, I caught the tender flame, « Felt the fond pang, and droop*d, with paflion « weak**· A know-
[ »s 3 A knowledge of her deftitute condi¬ tion, and of the dangers with which lhe was environed, had awakened in his heart the tendereft touch of p.y/, and af¬ fifted the change of admiration into love. The diftrefs he fuffered, when compelled to leave her expofed to thefe dangers, without being able to warn her of them, can only be imagined. During his refi¬ dence with his regiment, his mind was the conftant prey of terrors, which he faw no means of combating, but by re¬ turning te/ the neighbourhood ofthe ab¬ bey, where he might obtain early intellb gence of the Marquis's fchemes, and be ready to give his affiftance to Adeline« Leave of abfence he could not requeft, without betraying his defign where moil he dreaded it ffiould be known ; sind, at length, with a generous rafhnefs, which, though it defied law, was impelled by virtue, he fecretly quitted his regiment· The progrefs of the Marquis's plan he had obferved with trembliug anfckty» till
[ иб 3 till the night that was to decide the fate of Adeline and himfelf roufed all his mind to adion, and involved him in a tumult of hope and fear—horror and ex¬ pedation. Never, till the prefent hour, had hc ventured to believe ffie was in fafety. Now, the diftance they had gained from the chateau, without perceiving any pur¬ fuit, increafed his befl hopes. It was impoffible he could fit by the fide of his beloved Adeline, and receive affurances of her gratitude and efteem, without ven¬ turing to hope for her love. He con¬ gratulated himfelf as her preferver, and anticipated feenes of happinefs when fhe íhould be under the proteftion of his fa¬ mily. The douds of mifery and appre¬ henfion difappcared frora his mind, and left it to the funihine of joy. When a fhadow of fear would fometimes return, or when he recolleftcd, with compunc¬ tion, the circumftances under whieh he had left his regiment, flationed, as it was*
t "7 3 ^as, upon the frontiers, and in a time of war, he looked at Adeline, and her countenance, with inftantaneous magic, beamed peace upon his heart. But Adeline had a fubjeft of anxiety from which Theodore was exempt ; the profpeft ofher future days was involved in darknefe and incertitude. Again ffie was going to claim the bounty of ftran¬ gers—again going to encounter the un¬ certainty of their kindnefs ; expofed to the hardfliips of dependance, or to the difficulty of earning a precarious liveli¬ hood. Thefe anticipations obfeured the joy occafioned by her efcape, and by the affeftion which the condud and avowal of Theodore had exhibited. The deli¬ cacy of his behaviour, in forbearing to take advantage of her prefent iituation to plead his love, increafed her efteem, and flattered her pride. Adeline was loft in meditation upon fubjeds like thefe, when the poftiiion ftopped the carriage ; and pointing to part
[ "8 3 part of a road, which wound down the üde of a hill they had paffed, faid, there were feveral horfemen in purfuit ! The¬ odote immediately ordered him to pro¬ ceed with all poffible fpeed, and to ftrike out ofthe great road into the firft obfcure way that offered. The poítilíon cracked his whip in the air, and fct off as if he was flying for life. In the mean while Theodore endeavoured to re-animate Adeline, who was finking with terror, and who now thought, if fhe could only efcape from the Marquis, ihe could defy the future. Prefently they ftruck into a bye lane, fcreened and overihadowed by thick trees : Theodore again looked from the window, but the ck fing boughs prevented his feeing far enough to determine whe¬ ther the purfuit continued For hib fake, Adeline endeavoured to diiguife her emotions. " This lane," faid Theodore, " will certainly lead to a town or vil- " lage, and then we have nothing to <ť appre-
[ И9 3 " apprehend ; for tliough ray finglc arm " could not defend you againft the num- 44 ber of our purfuers, I have no doubt 44 of being able to intereft fome of the 44 inhabitants in our behdf." Adeline appeared to be comforted by the hope this refleftion fuggefted, and Theodore again looked back, but the windings of the road clofed his view, and the rattling of the wheels overcame every other found. At kngth he called to the poftiiion to ftop, and having lif¬ tened attentively, without perceiving any found of horfes, hc began to hope they were now in fefety. «« Do you know 44 where this road leads ?" feid he. The poftiiion anfwered, that he did not ; but he few fomc houfcb berween the trees at a diftance, and believed it kd to them. This was moil welcome intelligence to Theodore, vvho looked fonvard, and per¬ ceived the houfes. The poftiiion fet off, 41 Fear nothing, my adored Adeline," feid
t I2 ° 3 feid he, íf you are now fefe ; I will pafl xc with you but with life." Adeline fighed, not for herfelf only, but for the danger to which Tlieodore miglit be expofed. They had continued to travel in this manner for near half an hour, when they arrived at a fmall village, and foon after {topped at an inn, the beft the place afforded. As Theodore lifted Adeline from the chaife, hc again cntrcalted her to difmifs her apprehenfions, and fpoke with tendernefs, to which ihe could reply only by a fmile that ill concealed her anxiety. After ordering refrefh¬ ments, he went out to ipeak with the landlord, but had fcarcely left the room, when Adeline obferved a party of horfe¬ men enter the inn yard, and ihe had no doubt thefe Were the perfons from whom they fied. The feces of two of them only were turned tovvards her, but Jhe thought the figure of one of the others not unlike rhat of the Marquis. Her
t 121 ] Her heart was chilled, and for fome moments the powers of reafon forfook her. Her fidt defign was to feek con¬ cealment ; but while ilie confidered the means, one of the horfemen looked up to the window near which flie itood, and ipeaking to his companions, they en¬ tered the inn. To quit the room, with¬ out being obferved, was impoffible ; to remain there, alone and unproteded as lhe was, vvould be almoft eqtu'ly dan¬ gerous. She paced the room in an agony of terror, often fecretly calling on Theo¬ dore, and often wondering he did not return. Thefe were moments of inde- feribabk furie riner. А Ъи Ì and tumul- tuous found of voices n >\v arofe froai a diftant part of the houfe, and ihe i') m dhtinguiíhe Ì the word* of the clifp-i- tants. « I arreft you in the King's " name," faid one ; " and bi i y m, at " your peril, attempt to go fr лп hence, " except under a guard,"
Vol. II. G The
[ 112 3 The next minute Adeline heard the voice of Theodore in repiy. " I do not " mean to difpute the King's orders," feid hc, " and give you my word of 44 honour not to go without you; but 44 firft unhand me, that I may return to 44 that roorn ; I have а fi iend there whom 44 I wiffi to fpeak with." To this pro¬ pofal they at firft objeded, confidering it merely as an excufe to obtain an oppor¬ tunity of efcaping ; but, after much al¬ tercation and entreaty, his requeft was granted. He fprang forwards towards the room where Addine remained, while a ferjeant and corporal followed him to the door ; the two foldiers went out into the yard of the inn to watch the windows of the a] ai tment. With an eager hand he unclofed the door, hut Adeline haftened not to meet him, for flie had fainted almoft at the bcrç.nrkîï cf the difpute. Theodore called kutiîy for affiftance, and the mif- Litib c f die inn foon appealed vvith her ftock
t 123 3 ftock of remedies, which were adminif¬ tered in vain to Adeline, who remained infenfible, and by breathing alone gave figns of her exiftence. The diftrefe oí Theodore was in the mean time height¬ ened by the appearance of the officers, who, laughing at the difiovuy of his pretended friend, declared they wonld wait no longer. Saying this they v, ould have forced him from the inani nate form of Adeline, over vvhom he hung in unut¬ terable anguiffi, when fiercely turning upon them, he drew his fword, and fwoie no power on earth ihould force him away before the lady re covereil. The men, enraged bv the raion ànd the determined au* of Theockií, ex¬ claimed, " Do you oppofe tlie King'* 44 orders ?" an Ι α Ivanced ra lei' * hi ù , bat he prefen-ed tiie point oí hib fword, an 1 bade them at their peril appr > ich. One of them immediately drew, The л - clore kept his g uid, but dii η : <\d~ G 2 ν dace
L 1=4 3 vanee. " I demand only to wait here " till the lady recovers," feid he: " you 44 underftand the alternative." The man, already exafperated by the oppofition of Theotlore, regarded the latter part of his ipeech as a threat, and became deter¬ mined not to give up the point : he preff¬ ed forward, and vvhile his comrade called the men from the yard, Theodore wounded him flightly in the flioulder, and received himfelf the ftroke of а febre on his head. The blood gufhed furioufly from the wound ; Theodore, ffaggering to а chair, funk into it, jufl as the remainder of the party entered the room, and Adeline un¬ ci о fed her eyes to fee him ghaftly, pale, and covered with blood, bhe uttered лп involuntaiy feream, and exclaiming, 44 they have murdered him," nearly re- l;j fed. At the found of her voice he miied his head, and fmiling, held out his hand co i er. " 1 am not much hurt," iaiti hc faintly, 44 and fliall ibon be bct- 44 ter,
t I2 5 ] " ter, if indeed you arc recovered." She hatlened towards him, ;uid gave her hand. "Is nobody gone for a furgeon ?" faid ffie, with a look of agony.—" Do 4t not be alarmed," faid Theodore, " I iC am not fo ill as you imagine;" The room was now crowded vvith people, vvhom the reporc of the affray had brought together; among thefe was a man, vvho aded as phyfician, apithecpry, and furgeon, to tlie village, and who now ftepped forward to the affiftance of The¬ odore. Having examined the wound, he declined giving his opinion, but ordered the patient to be immediately put to bed : to which the officers obj eded, alledging, that it was their duty to carry him to the regiment: " That cannot be done, " without great danger to his life," re¬ plied the dodor ; " and"— " Oh! his life," faid the ferjeant; " we Jiave nothing to do with that; wc " rauft do our duty." Adeline, who G j had
[ 126 1 had hitherto flood in trembling anxiety, could novv no longer be filent. " Since 44 the furgeon," feid flie, " his declared " it as his opinion, that this gentleman u cmnot bc lemoved in his prefent con- " diti<m, v\ithe»ut endangering his life, " you will iemember, that ifhe dies, *' youi о probably will anfwer it." " Ye. 1 ," rejcdned the furgeon, vvho was umvilling to relinquifh his patient, te 1 declare before thefe witneffes, thathe 44 cannot be removed with fafety : you " vrill ilo wdî, therefore, to confider the " confequences. lie has received a 14 ver) dangerous wound, which requires α the moft careful treatment, and the iť event is even th< n doubtful ! but, if 4£ hc ttavcls, а f -er may enfue, and the 14 wound will then be mortal." Theo¬ dore heard this fcntence with compofure, but Adeline could vvith difficulty conceal the anguifli of her heart : flie fummoned all her fortitude to fupprds the tears that ftrug-
[ I2 7 J íliugglecl in her eyes ; and though fiie wiflied to intereil the humanity, or to awaken the fears ofthe men, in behalf of the un fortunate prifoner, flie dared not to trull her voice with utterance. hrom this internal ftruggle flie was re¬ lieved by the compaffion of the peopk who filled the room, and becoming cla¬ morous in the caufe of Theodore, de¬ clared the officers would be guilty of murtler, if they removed him. " Why, « he muft die at any rate," faid the fer¬ jeant, " for quitting his poft, and dra w- " ing upon me in the execution of the " King's orders." A faint ficknefs came over the heart of Adeline, and fhe leaned for fupport againil Theodore's chair, whofe concern for liimfelf was for a while fufpended in his anxiety for her. He fupported her with his arm, and forcing α fmile, faid in a low voice, v/hich flie only could hear, " This is a mifrepre- " tentation j I doubtnot, when the affair G 4 "is
I tas 3 " îs inquired into, it will be fettled " without any ferious confequences." Adeline knew thefe vvords were uttered only to confok her, and therefore did not give much credit to them, though Theodore continued to repeat fimilar affurances of his fefety. Meanwhile the mob, whofe compaffion for him had been gradually excited by the obduracy of the officer, were now roufed to pity ' and indignation by the feeming certainty of his punifhment, and the unfeeling manner in which it had been denounced. Tn a fliort time they became fo much enraged, that, partly from a dread of fer¬ tilii* confequences, and partly from the fhame which their charges of cruelty oc¬ cafioned, the ferjeant confented that The¬ odore ihould be put to bed, till his com¬ manding officer mightdireft what was to be done. Adeline's joy at this circumitance overcame for a moment the fenfe of her misfortunes and of her fituation. She
f *ч ] She waited İn an adjoining room the fentence of the furgeon, vvho was now engaged in examining the wound ; and though the accident would in any other circumftances have feverely affli :te 1 her, fhe now lamented it the more, becaufe fhe confidered herfelf as the caufe of it, and becaufe the misfert me, by illuffrat- ing more fully the affection of her lover, drew him clofer to her heart, and feemed, therefore, to fiV.rpen the poignancy of her afllidion. The dreadful affertion that Theodore, fhould he recover, would be punifhed with death, flie fcarcely dared to confider, but endeavoured to believe, that it was no more tlian а cruel exagg-ration о " " antagonift. Upon the whole, Theo lore's prefent danger, together with the attendant cir¬ cumftances, awakened all her tendernefs, and dilcovered to her the true fiate of her affedions. The graed'al form, the noble, intelligent countenance, and G 5 the
[ »ЗО 3 tìic engaging manners, which flic had at firft admired in Theodore, became after¬ wards more interefting by that ftrength of thought, and elegance of fentiment, exhibited in his converfation. His con¬ dud, fince her efcape, had excited her warme ft gratitude, and the danger which he had now encountered in her behalf, called forth her tendernefs, and height¬ ened it into love. The veil was removed from her heart, and ftie few, for the firft time, its genuine emotions. The furgeon at length came out of Theodore's chamber intothe room where Adeline was waiting to fpeak with him. She inquired concerning the ftate of his wound. 4( You are a relation of the " gentleman's, I prefume, Madam; his 44 filter, perhaps." The queftion vexed and em ban affed her, and, without an¬ fwering it, flie repeated her inquiry. 44 Perhaps, Madam, you are more nearly 44 related," purfued the furgeon, feeming alio to diiregard her queftion, " perhaps 44 you
• [ '31 3 44 you are his wife." Adeline blufhed, and was about to reply, but he continued his ipeech. 4C The intereil you take in ťí his welfare is, at leaft, very flattering; " and I would almoft confent to ex- 14 change conditions with.him, were I cf fore of receiving fuch tender com- 44 paffion from fo charming a lady." Saying this, he bowed to the ground. Adeline^ affuming а very referved air, feid, 4i Now, Sir, that you have con- " eluded your compliment, you will, 44 perhaps, attend со my queftion; I 44 have inquireel how you left your pa- " tient?" " That, Madam, is, perhaps, a quef- ** tion very difficult to be refolved; and 44 İt is likewife α very difegreeabk office <c to pronounce ill news—I fear he will 44 die." The furgeon opened his fiiuff- box and prefented ic to Adeline. 44 Die !" ffie exclaimed in a feint voice, 4t Die !—" " Do not be alarmed, Madam," re¬ fumed the furgeon, obferving her grow G 6 pak,
[ ij* 3 pak, " do not te alarmed. It is poffibk " that the wound may not have reached « the------," he ftammered ; " in that " cafe the------," ftammering again, " is " not affeded ; and if fo, the interior " membranes ofthe brain are not touch- " ed: in chis cafe the wound may, per- " heps, efcape inflammation, and the " patient may poffibly recover. But if, " on the other hand,------" " I befeech you, Sir, to fpeak intelli- " gibly," interrupted Adeline, " and not 44 to trifle with my anxiety. Do you " really believe him in danger ?" " In danger, Madam ?" exclaimed the furgeon, " in danger ! yes, certainly, in " very great danger." Saying this, he walked away with an air of chagrin and difpleafure. Adeline remained for fome moments in the room in an excefe of Ibrrow, which fhe found it impoffible to reftrain, 'nd then drying her tears, and endeavouring to compofe her counte¬ nance, ihe went to inquire for the mif¬ trefs
[ w 3 trefs of the inn, to whom íhe fent a waiter. After expeding her in vain for fome time, ihe rang the bell, and fent another meffage fomewhat more preffing: ftill the hoftefe did not appear, and Adeline, at kngth, went herfelf down ftairs, where ihe found her, furrounded by a number of peopk, relating, with a loud voice and various gcfticuktions, the particulars of the late accident. Per¬ ceiving Adeline, ihe called out, " Oh 1 44 here is Mademoifelle herfelf," and the eyes of the affembly were immediately turned upon her. Adehne, \*> horn the crowd preventeel from approaching the hoftefs, now beckoned her, and wasgoing to withdraw ; but the landlady, eager ín the purfuit of her ftory, difregarded the fignal. In vain did Adeline endeavour to catch her eye ; it glanced every where but upon her, who was unwilling to attraft the farther notice of the crowd by calling out. 44 It
[ IJ4 3 tc It is a great pity, to be fure, that " he ihould be fliot," faid the landlady, " he's fuch a handfome mani but they " fay he certainly will, if he recove ri. " Poor gentleman ! he will very likely " not fuffer though, for the dodor fays " he will never go out of this houfe " alive." Adeline now fpoke to a man who ftood near, and defiring he wouki tell the hoflefb flic wiflied to fpeak with her, left the place. In about ten minutes the bndlady ap¬ peared. " Alas ! Mademoifelle," faid fhe, " your brother L· in a fad condition ; " they fear he won't get over it." Ade¬ line inquired, whether there v\as any other medical perfon İn the tovvn than the fur¬ geon whom flie had 'een. " Lord, Ma- tc dam I this is a rare healthy place ; vve <f have little need of medicine people " herei fudi an accident never luqi- " pened in it before. The dodor has " been here ten years, cr thereabout j " but there's very bad encouragement « for
[ *35 3 <£ for his trade ; and I believe he's poor <f enough himfdf. One of the fort's <c quite enough for us." Adeline inter¬ rupted her to afk fome queftions con¬ cerning Theodore, whom the hoftefe had attended to his chamber. She inquired hovv he had borne the dreffing of the wound, and whether he appeared to be eafier after the operation , queftions to which the hoft.fs gave no very fatisfadory anfwers, She now inquued, whether there was any furgeon in the neighbour¬ hood of the town ? and was told there was not. The difirefs vifibk in Adeline's coun¬ tenance feemed to excite the compaffion of the landlady, vvho now endeavoured to confok her in the befl manner flie was able. She advifed her to fend for her friends, and offered to procure a meffen¬ ger. Adeline fighed, and feid it was un¬ neceffary. " I don't know, Ma'amielk, " what you may think neceflajy," con¬ tinued the hoftefs; 4i but í know I ihould " think
[ «3« î ·* thînk İt very hard to die in a ftrange 44 place wich no relations near me, and I Cf dare fey the poor gentleman thinks fo cc himfelf; and, befides, vvho is to pay 44 for his funeral, if he dies ?" Adeline begged flie would bc filent, and, defir¬ ing that every proper attention mighc be given, flie promifed k r a reward for her trouble, and requefted pen and ink immediately. 4i Ay, to be fure, Ma'am- ** felle, that is the proper vvay : why your 44 friends would never forgive you, if you " did not acquaint them \ I know it by fC myfelf. Affd as for taking care of ct him, he ihail have every thing the *' houfe affords ; an 1 I warrant rhere is " never а better inn in the provìnce 1 , 94 thou.' h the town is none of the big- 44 gcít." Ade лае was obliged to r- peat her requeft for pen and ink, before the loquacious hoftefs would quit the room. The thought of fending for Theo¬ dore's friends had, in the tumult of the late feenes, never occurred to lier, and fhe
[ 137 3 fhe was now fomewhat confoled by the profped of comfort which it opened for s him. When die pen and ink were brought, fhe wrote the following note to Theodore : 44 In your prefent condition, you have 44 need of every comfort that can be <ť proe» :i ed you, and furely there is no 44 cordial more valuable in Ulncfs, than 41 the prefence of a fiiend: fuffer me,, 44 therefore, to acquaint your femily with 44 your fituation ; it will be a fatisfadion 44 to me, and, I doubt not, a confolation. 44 to you." In a ffiort time after fhe had fcnt the note, ffie received α meffagc from Theo¬ dore, entreating moft refpedfully, but earneftly, to íèe her for a few minutes. She immediately went to his chamber, where her worft apprehenfions were con¬ firmed by the knguor expreffed in his countenance ; and the fhock flie received, together with her ftruggle to difguife her emotions, almoft overcame her. u I 44 thank
[ 133 3
" thank you for this goodnefs," faid he, extending his hand, which Л)е icecived, and, then fitting dow n by tht bed, iht L»ui ft into tears. Wiien her agitation had fome¬ what fubfided, ilie removed her hand¬ kerchief frorn her еуеь, an 1 again looked on Theodore ; a fmile of the tendereft love expreffed his fenfe of the intereil flie took in his welfaie, and adminiftered а temporary relief to her heart. " Forgive this weaknefs" feid fhe; 44 my fpirits have been of late fo vari- " oufly agitated"—Theodore interrupt¬ ed her—" Thefe teai s are mdt fla tte- 1 - " ing to my heart. But, for my fake, 44 endeavour to fupport yourfelf: I " doubt not 1 fliall foon be better i the " furgeon"— " I do not like him," faid Adeline : " but tell me hovv you find yourfelf?" He affured her, that he was now much eafier than he had yet been, and men¬ tioning her kind note, he kd to the fub¬ jed, on account of which he had folicited to
[ 139 1 to fee her. " My family," feid he, " refide at a great diilance from hence, " and I vvell know their affedion Is fuch, " that, were they informed of my fitu- " ation, no confideration, however rea- " fonable, could preveire their coming " to my afliltance ; but before they can " arrive, their prefence will probably be " unneceflary "(Adeline looked earneft¬ ly at him), " I ihould probably be we'll," purfued he, fmiling, " before a ktter " coukl reach them ; it would, there- " fore, occafion them unneceffary pain, " and, more-over, a fruitlefs journey. " For your lake, Adeline, I could wiih " they vvere here, but a few days will " more fully ihew the confequences of " my wound : kt us wait, at leaft, till " then, and be direded by circum- " ftances." Adeline forbore to prefe the fubjed farther, and turned to one more immedi¬ ateiy interefting. " I much wifh," faid fhe, " that you had a more able fur- " geon;
[ i 4 o ] " geon ; you know the geography of the 44 province biter timi I do; are we f< in the nddib iiirnood of any town " likeiy to affoul you other advice ?" 44 I believe пот," feid h", 4< and this 44 is an affair of littk confequece, for 44 my wound is fo inconfi îenble, th.it а Cí vciy moderate ffiare of fe ill ììì? у iuf- 44 fice to ciîie i:. But why, my beloved " Adeline, do you give way to this 44 anxiety ? Why fuffer yourfelf to be 44 difluí bed by thib tendency to forbode 44 the worft ? I am willing, perhaps pre- 44 fumptuoufly fo, to attı ibute it to your 44 kindnefs; and fuffer me to affure <c you, tliat, while it excites my grati- 44 tude, it increafes my tendereit efteem. " О Adeline ! fince you wifh my fpeedy " recovery, 1er me fee you compofed : " while I believe you to be unhappy, I 44 cannot be well."—She affured him ihe would endeavour to be, at leaft, tram- quil; and fearing the converfation, if pro-
[ Hi 3 prolonged, would be prejudicial to him, ilie left him to repofe. As flie turned out of the gallery, ihe met the hoftefs, upon whom certain words of Adeline had operated as a talifman, transforming negled and impertinence into officious civility. She came to in„ quire whether the gentleman above ftairs had every thing that he liked, for íhe was fure it was her endeavour that he ihould have. (C I have got him a nurfe, <c Ma'amfelle, to attend him, and I dare " fay fhe will do very well ; but I will " look to that, for I ihall not mind help « <c ing him myfelf fometimes. Poorgen- " tleman ! how patiently he bears it ! " One would not think now tliat he be- " lieves he is going to die; yet the doc- " tor told him fo himfelf, or, at leaft as " good/'Adeline was extremely fhocked at this imprudent condud of the fur¬ geon, and difmiffed the landlady, after ordering a flight dinner. Towards
I ч* 3 Towards evening the furgeon again made his appearance, and, having paifed fome time with his patient, returned îo ŕ the parlour, according to the defire of Adeline, to inform her of his condition. He anfwered Adeline's inquiries vvith great folemnity. " It is impoffible to 41 determine pofitively at prefent, Ma- <c dam, but I have reafon to adhere to 44 the opinion I gave you this morning. tť I am not apt, indeed to form opinions <c upon uncertain grounds. I will give <f you а remarkable inftance of this : <f It is noc above a fortnight fmce í 44 was fcnt for to a patient at lome leagues " diftance. I was from home when the 44 meffenger arrived, and the cafe being u urgent, beibre i could reach the pa- 44 tient, anc ther phyfician was confulted, ** who had ordered fuch medicines as he 14 thought proper, and the patient had ** been apparently relieved by them. 44 His friends vvere congratulating them- 44 felvés upon his improvement when i " arrived,
Е чз 3 " arrived, and had agreed ín opinion cc vvith the phyfician, that there was no " danger in the cafe. Depend upon it, 44 feid I, you are miftaken ; thefe medi- " cines cannot have relieved him ; the 44 patient is in the utmoft danger. The " patient groaned, but my brother phy- 44 fician perfifted in affirming that the re- 44 medies he had preferibed, would not 44 only bc certain, but fpeedy, fome good 44 effed having been already produced 44 by them. Upon this I loft all pa- 44 tience ; and adhering to my opinion, " that thefe effeds vvere fallacious, and <£ the cafe defperate, I affured.. the pa- 44 tient himfelf thac his life was in che ut- 44 moft danger. I am not one of thofe, 44 Madam, vvho deceive their patients to 44 the laft moments ; but you ihall hear " the conciufion. " My brother phyfician was, I fup- 44 pofe, enraged by the* firmnefs of my 44 oppofition, and he aflumed a moit an- 44 gry look, which did not in the leaft " affed
t 144 3 * l affed me, and turning to the patient, 4< defined he vvould decide, upon which " of our opinions to rely, for he muft * f decline ading with me. The patient " did me the honour," purfued the fur¬ geon, with а fmile of complacency, and fmoothing his ruffles, " to think 44 more highly of me than, perhaps, I ft deferved, for he immediately difmifled " my opponent. I could not have be- rf lieved, feid he, as the phyfician left ** the room, I could not have believed <e thata man, who has been fo many years * f in rhe profeffion, could be fo wholly 44 ignorant of İt. 44 I could not have believed it eitlier, " feid I.·—I am aftonifhed that lie was 44 not aware of my danger, refumed the fc patient.—I am aftonifiied likewife, re- 44 plied I—I was refolved to do what I 44 could for tlu* patk t, fir he was a man *' of underftanding, asyou perceive, and *' I had a regard for him. I, therefore, 4t altered the preferiptions, and myfelf 44 admi-
[ hs 3 44 adminiftered the medicines ; but all " would not do ; my opinion was veri- 44 fied, and he died even before the next 44 morning."— Addine, who had been compelled to liften to this long ftory, fighed at the conciufion of it. "I don't " wonder that you are affeded, Madam," feid the furgeon ; " the inftance I have 44 related is certainly a very affeding one. 44 It diftrefled me fo much, that it was 44 lome time before I could think, or cf even fpeak concerning it. But you 44 muft allow, Madam," continued he, lowering his voice, and bowing with a look of felf-congratulation, <c that this 44 was a ftriking inftance of the infelli - 44 bility of my judgment." Adeline fliuddered at the infallibility of his judgment, and mack no reply. 44 It *' was a ihocking thing for die poor 44 man," refumed the furgeon.—" It 44 was, indeed, very fhocking," faid Ade¬ line."—« It affeded me a good deal when <f it happened/' continued he.—" Un- 44 doubtedly, Sir," feid Adeline. - νΛ ' " _. Η « But
[ нб 3 " But time wears away the moft pain- " ful impreffions." " I think you mentioned it was about " a fortnight fince it happened.'" " Somewhere thereabouts," replied the furgeon, without feeming to under¬ ftand the obfervation.-—" And will you " permit me, Sir, to аж the name of " the phyfician, who fo ignorantly op- t£ pofed you ?" " Certainly, Madam, itis Lafance." " He lives in the òbfcurity he de- " ferves, no doubt," faid Adeline. " Why no, Madam ;—he lives in a " town of fome note, at about the dif- " tance of four leagues from hence, and " affords one infiance, among many " others, that the public opinion is gc- " neraliy erroneous. You will hardly " believe it, but I affure youdtisafad, " ihat this man comes into a great deal " of pradice, while I am fuffered to re- " main here negleded, and, indeed, " very little known." D uri fig
[ 147 I During his narrative, Adeline had been confidering by what means (he could dif¬ cover the name ofthe phyfician; forthe initance that had been produced to prove his ignorance\ and the infallibility of h"«. opponent, had completely fettled her opinion concerning them both. Sîıe now, more than ever, wiíhed to deliver Theodore from the hands ofthe furgeon, and was mufing on the poflibility, when he, with fo much felf fecurity, developed the means. She aiked him a few more queftion«, concerning the ftate of Theodore's wound, and was told it was much as it had been, but that fome degree of fever had come on. " But I have ordered a " fire to be made in the room," conti¬ nued the furgeon, " and feme additional " blankets to be laid on the be 1 ; thefe, " I doubt not, will have a proper effect. " In the mean time, they muff be care- ? ful to keep fibm him every kind of " liquid, except fome cordial draughts, На " which
E H« ] 44 which I fliall fend. He will naturally <f aik for drink, but it muft on no ac- 44 count be given to him." 44 You do not approve, then, of the 44 method, which I have fomewhere 44 heard of," faid Adeline, 44 of attend- " ing to nature in thefe cafes." " Nature, Madam!" purfued he— 44 Nature is the moft improper guide in cc the world. I always adopt a method " diredly contrary to what flie would " fuggeft í for what can be the ufe of " Art, if ffie is only to follow Nature ? 44 This was my firft opinion on fetting 44 out in life, anel I have ever fmce ftridly " adhered to it. From vvhat I have faid, 44 indeed, Madam, you may, perhaps, 44 perceive that my opinions may be eie- 44 pended on j what they once are, they * 4 always are, for my mind is not of that 44 frivolous kind to be affeded by cir- 44 cumffaiices," Adeline was fatigued by this difcourfe, and impatient to impart to Theodoie her
[ »49 I her difcovery of a phyfician ; but the fur¬ geon feemed by no means difpofed to leave her, and waá expatiating upon va¬ rious topics, and adducing new inftances of his furprifing fagacity, when the waiter brought a meffage that fome perfon de¬ fired to fee him. He was, however, en¬ gaged upon too agreeable a topic to be eafily prevailed on to quit it, and it was not till after a fecond meffage that he made his bow to Adeline, and left the room. The moment he was gone, íhe fent a note to Theodore, entreating his permiflion to call in the affiftance of a phyfician. The conceited manners of the furgeon had by this time given Theodore a very imfavourable opinion of his talents, and the laft prefcription had fo fully con¬ firmed it, that he now readily confented to have other advice. Adeline immedi¬ ately inquired for a meffenger ; but re¬ colleding that the refidence ofthe phyfi¬ cian was ftill a fecret, ihe applied to the H 3 hoftefs,
С 1 5° I h- ík fi, who, being really ignorant of it, 01 pretending to be fo, gave her no in¬ formetion. What farther inquiries ihe ibi de vere equally intílcdual, and íhe puffed fomc hours» in extreme diftrefs, while the diforder of Tlieodore rather iiicnafed than abated. When fupper appeared,, flie aiked the boy vvho waited, if he knew a phyfician of the name of Lafance in the neigh¬ bourhood. " Not in the neighbour- tc hood, Madam -, but I know Doftor " Lafance of С hancy, for I come from the f{ town,"—Adeline inquired farther, and received very fatisfadory anfwers. But the town was at fome leagues diftance, and the delay this circumftance muft oc¬ cafion again alarmed her; fhe, however, ordered a meffenger to be immediately difpatched, and, having fent again to in¬ quire concerning Theodore, retired to her chamber for the night. The continued fatigue fhe had fuffer¬ ed for the laft fourteen hours overcame anxiety,
t '5' 3 anxiety, and her haraffed fpirits funk to repoie. She ilept till late in the morn¬ ing, and was then awakened by the land¬ lady, who came to inform her that Theo¬ dore was much worfe, and to inquire what fliould be done. Adeline, finding that the phyfician was not arrived, im¬ mediately arofe, and haftened to inquire farther concerning Theodore. The hof¬ tefs informed her, that he had paffed a very difturbed night; that he had com¬ plained of being very hot, and defired that the fire in his room might be extin¬ guifhed: but that the nurfe knew het duty too well to obey him, and had ftridly followed the dodor's orders. She added, that he had taken the cordial draughts regularly, but had, not* withftanding, continued to grow worfe, and at laft became light-headed. In the mean time the boy, who had been fent for the phyfician, was ftill abfent:—» 44 And no wonder," continued the hof¬ tefs; " why, only confider, it's eight PI 4 " leagues
Γ 42 3 " leagues ofľ, and the lad had to find " the road, bad as it is, in the dark. ** But, indeed, Ma'amfelle, you might i{ as well have trufted our doctor, for " vve never want any body tife, not we, " in the tovvn here; and if I might u fpeak my mind, Jaques had better t( have been fent off for the young gen- " tkman's friends than for this ftrange " dofter that nobody knows." After alking fome further queftions concerning Theodore, the anfwers to which rather increafed than diminiihed her alarm, Adeline endeavoured to com¬ pofe her ipirits, and await in patience the arrival of the phyfician. She was now more fenfibk than ever ofthe forlornnefe of her own condition, and of the danger of Theodore's, and earneftly wiíhed that his friends could be informed of his fitu¬ ation ; a wiíh which could not be grati¬ fied, for Theodore, who alone could ac¬ quaint her with their place of refidence, was deprived of recolledion. When
[ чз 3 When the furgeon arrived, and per¬ ceived the fituation of his patient, he expreffed no furprife ; but having aiked fome queftions, and given a few general diredions, he went down to Adeline. After paying her his ufual compliments, he fuddeniy affumed an air ofimportance, " I am forry, Madam," faicl he, " that 44 it is my office to communicate dif- 44 agreeabk intelligence, but I wifh you 44 to be prepared for the event, which, 4t I fear, is approaching." Adeline com¬ prehended his meaning ; and though fhe had hitherto given little faith to his judgment, fhe could not hear him hint at the immediate danger of Theodore without yielding to the influence of fear. She entreated him to acquaint her wich all he apprehended j and he then pro¬ ceeded to fey, that Theodore was, as he had fore feen, much worfe this morning than he had been the preceding night ; and the difor 1er having now affeded his head, there was every reafon to fear it H 5 would
t 44 ] would prove fetal in а few hours. " The * ( worft confequences may enfue," con¬ tinued he ; " if the wound becomes in- 44 flamed, there will be very litde chance 44 of his recovery.*' Adeline liftened to this fentence with a dreadful calmnefs, and gave no utter¬ ance to grief, cither by words or tears. " The gentleman, I fuppofe, Madam, 44 has friends, and the fooner you inform " them of his condition the better, if 44 they refide at any diftance, it is indeed 14 too Jate ; but there are other neccf- 44 fery—you arc ill, Madam." Adeline made an effort to fpeak, but in vain, and the furgeon now called loudly for a glafs of water : fhe drank it, and a deep figh that ffie uttered, feemed fomewhat to relieve her oppreffed heart: rears fucceeded. In the mean time, the furgeon perceivingflie was better,though not well enough to liften to his con¬ verfation, took his leave, and promifed to return in an hour. The phyfician was
С 45 ] was not yet arrived, and Adeline awaited his appearance with a mixture of fear and anxious hope. About noon he came, and having been informed of the accident by whkh the fever was produced, and ofthe treat¬ ment which the furgeon had given it, he afcended to Theodore's chamber : in a quarter of an hour he returned to the room where Adeline expeded him. " The gentleman is ftill delirious," faid hc, " but I have ordered him a compof- " İng draught "—" Ь there any hope, "Sir· 3 " inquired , Adeline.—" Yes, " Madam, certainly theie is hope ; the " cafe at pre lent is fomewhat doubeful, " but a few hours may enable me t> " judge with more certainty. In the " mean time, I have direded that he " ihall be kept quiet, and be allowed to " drink freely of fotne diluting liquids." He had fcarcely, at Adeline's requeft, recommended a furgeon, inltead of the one at prefent employed, when the latter H 6 gen-
t ii« ] gentleman entered the room, and, per¬ ceiving the phyfician, threw a glance of mingled furprife and anger at Ade¬ line, who retired with him to another apartment, where fhe difmiffed him with a politenefs which he did not deign to return, and which he certainly did not deferve. Eariy the following morning the fur¬ geon arrived, but either the medicines, or the crifis of the diforder, had thrown Theodore into a deep fleep, in which he remained for feveral hours. The phyfi¬ cian now gave Adeline reafon to hope for α favourable iffue, and every precaution was taken to prevent his being difturbecl. He awoke perfeftly fenfible, and free from fever, and his firft words inquired for Adeline, who foon learned that he was fc out of danger. In a few days he was fufficiently reco¬ vered to be removed from his chamber to a room adjoining, where Adeline met him with a joy, whkh ihe found it im¬ poffible
i 47 ] poffible to reprefs ; and the obfervancc of this lighted up his countenance with pleafure ; indeed Adeline, fenfibk to the attachment he had fo nobly teftified, and foftened by tlie danger he had en¬ countered, no longer attempted to dif¬ guife the tendernefe of her efteem, and was at kngth brought to confefs the in¬ tereft his firfi appearance had impreffed upon her heart. After an hour of affeding converfation, in which tlie happinefs of a young and mutual attachment occupied all their minds, and excluded every idea not in unifon witli delight, they returned to a fenfe of their prefent e m barrali ments : Adeline, recolleding that Theodore was arrefted for difobedience of orders, and deferting his poil ; and Theodore, that he muft Ihortly be torn away from Ade¬ line, who would be left expofed to dl the evils from which he had fo lately refcued her. This thought overwhelmed his heart with anguifli; and, afferà long paufe,
E ıs« 3 paufe, hc ventured to propofe, what his wiihes had often fuggefted, a marriage with Adeline, before hc departed from the village. This was the only means of preventing, perhaps, an eternal fepa¬ ration; and though he few the many dangerous incemveniencies to which ffie would be expofed by a marriage with a man circumftanced like hır leii, yet thefe appeared fo unequal to thoie ihc would ctherwife be left to encounter alone, that his reafon could no longer fcruplc to adopt what his affeftion had fuggefted. Adeline was for fome time too much agitated to replv ; and though ihc had litde to oppofe to the arguments and pleadings of 1 he odore ; though flie had no friends to controul, and no contra¬ rier of intereft to perplex her, flie could not bring herfelf to confent thus haftily to a marriage vvith a man, of whom ffie had httk knowledge, and to whofe family and conneftions flic had no
t 49 3 no fort of introduftion. At kngth íhe entreated he would drop the fubjeft; and the converfation for the remainder of the day was more general, yet ftill interefting. That fimilarity of tafte and opinion, which had at firft attrafted them, every moment now more fully difclofed. Their difccHirfe was enriched by elegant litera¬ ture, and endeared by mutual regard. Adeline had enjoyed few opportunities of reading; but the books to whkh flic had accefs, operating upon a mind eager for knowledge, and upon a tafte pecu¬ liarly fenfible of the beautiful and the elegant, had impreffed all their excel¬ lencies upon her underftanding. Theo*» dore had received from nature many of the qualities of genius, and from edu¬ cation all that it could beftow ; to thefe were added, a noble indepen kney of fpirit, a feeling heart, and manners which partook of a happy mixture of dignity and fweetnefs. In
Ι ιβο 3 în the evening, one of the officers^ who, upon the reprefentation of the fer¬ jeant, was lent by the perfons employed to profecute military criminals, arrived at the village, and entering the apart¬ ment of Theodore, from which Adeline immediately withdrew, informed him, with an air of infinite importance, that he íhould fct out on the following day for head-quarters. Theodore anfwered, that hc was not able to bear the journey, and referred him to his phyfician ; but the officer replied, that he ihould take no fuch trouble, it being certain that the phyfician might bc inftrufted what to fey, and that he ihould begin his journey on the morrow. 4< Here has been delay ■* enough," feid he, «< already, and you 44 will have fufficient bufinefs on your ** hands when you reach head-quarters ; 44 for the ferjeant, whom you have fe- ** verely wounded, intends to appear " againft you, and this, with the offence " you
t i6i ] " you have committed by deferting your " poil—" Theodore'seyes flafhed fire, " Defert- " ing!" feid he, rifing from his feat, and darting a look of menace at his ac¬ cufer, " who dares brand me with the " name of deferter ?" But inftantly re¬ colkfting how much his condud had ap¬ peared to juftify the accufation, he endea¬ voured to ftifle his emotions, and, with a firm voice and compofed manner, faid that when he reached head-quarters, he ihould he ready to anfwer whatever raight be brought againft him, but that till then he ihould be filent. The boldnefs of the oflicer was repreffed by the fpirit and dignity with which Theodore fpoke thefe words; and muttering a reply that was fcarcely audible, he left the roorn. Theodore fat mufingon the danger of his fituation ; he knew that he had much t<^ apprehend frora the peculiar circum¬ flances attending his abrupt departure from his regiment, it having been fla¬ tioned
t Ife ] tioned in a garrifon town upon the Spanifh frontiers, where the difcipline was very fevere; and from the power of his colonel the Marquis de Montalt, vvhom pride and difappointment would now roufe to ven¬ geance, and, probably, render indefati¬ gable in the accompliffiment bf his de¬ ftruftion. But his thoughts foon fled from his own danger to that of Adeline, and, in the confideration of this, all his fortitude forfook him : he could not fup¬ port the idea of leaving her expofed to the evils he foreboded, nor indeed, of a feoaration fo fudden as that which now threatened him ; and when ihe again en¬ tered the room, he renewed his folicita¬¬ tions for a ipeedy marriage, with all the arguments that tendernefe and ingenuity codd fuggeft. Adeline, when ihe learned that he was to depart on the morrow, felt as if be¬ reaved of her laft comfort. All the bor-* rors of his fituation arofe to her mind, and ihe turned frora himin an unutterable an-
[ i«3 3 anguiih. Confidering her filence as a favourable prefage, he repeated his en¬ treaties that íhe ihould confent to be his, and thus give him a furety that their fe¬ paration ihould not be eternal. Adeline fighed deeply to thefe words : " And who " can know that our feparation would " not be eternal," faid fhe, " even if I " would confent to the marriage you pro- " pofe ? But while you hear my deter- " mination, forbear to accufe me of in- f e difference, for indifference towards -" you, would, indeed,- be a crime, after " the fervices you have rendered me." - " And is a cold fentiment of gratitude " all that I muft exped from you?" faid Theodore. " I know that you are going ? to diftrefs me with a proof of your in- " difference, which you miitake for the " fuggeftions of prudence j and that I " fhall be reduced to look, without re- " ludance, upon the evils rhat may 4( ihortly await me. Ah, Adeline ! if 4< you mean to rejeft this, perhaps the « laft.
[ 1б4 3 " laft propofal which I can ever make " to you, ceafe, atleaft, to deceive your- " felf with an idea that you love me ; 44 that delirium is fading even from my 44 mind." " Can you then fo foon forget our 44 converfation of this morning," replied Adeline ? " and can you think fo lightly " of me as to believe I would profefs a ** regard whkh I do not feel? If, in- 44 deed, you can believe this, I ihall do 44 well to forget that I ever made fuch an 44 acknowledgement, and you, that you « heard it." 44 Forgive rae, Adeline, forgive the 44 doubts and inconfiftencies I have be- 44 trayed : let the anxieties of love, and " the emergency of ray circumftances, 44 pkad for me." Adeline, fmiling feintly through her tears, held out her hand, which hc feized, and prefled to his lips. " Yct do not drive me to defpair 44 by a rejeftion of my fuit," continued Theodore; " diink what I rauft fuffer to 44 leave
t its 3 ťC leave you here, deftitute of friends and 44 protedion." " I am thinking how I may avoid a 44 fituation fo deplorable," feid Adeline. 44 They fey there is a convent, which 44 receives boarders, within a few miles, C( and thither I wifli to go.'* 44 A convent !" rejoined Theodore, " would you go to a convent ? Do you 44 know the perfecutions you would bc " liable to ; and that if the Marquis 44 fhould difcover you, there is little pro- 44 babUity that the fuperior would refill " his authority, or, at kaft, his bribes ?" 44 All this I have confidered," feid Adeline, " and am prepareel to encoun- 44 ter it, rather than enter into an en- 44 gagement, which at this time, can bc " produftive only of mifery to us both." 44 Ah, Adeline! could you think thus " tf you truly loved ? 1 fee myfelf about " to be feparated, and that, perhaps 44 for ever, from the objeft of my ten- 44 dereft
t iS6 ] * c dereft affedions — and I cannot but " exprefs all the anguifh I feel—I can- " not forbear to repeat every argument, " that may afford even the flighteft pof- " fibility of altering your determination. " But you, Adeline, you look with com- " placency upon a circumftance which " tortures me with defpair. Adeline, who had long tried to fup¬ port her fpirits-in his prefence, vvhile ihe adhered to a refolution which reafon fug¬ gefted, but whkh the pleadings of her heart powerfully oppofed, was unable longer to command her difirefs, and burft into tears. Theodore was in the fame moment convinced of his error, and fliocked at the grief he had occafioned. He drew his chair towards her, and, taking her hand, again entreated her par¬ don, and endeavoured in the tendereft accents to footh and comfort her.— " What a wretch was I to caufe you tins " diftrefs, by queftioning that regard " wkh which I can no longer doubt you " honour
t 167 ] w honour me ! Forgive me, Adeline ; 44 fay but yoıı forgive me, and whatever 44 may be the pain of this feparation, I ,c will no longer oppofe it." 44 You have given me Tome pain," feid Adeline, 4( but you have not offend- 44 ed me."—She then mentioned fome farther particulars concerning the con¬ vent. Theodore endeavoured to con¬ ceal the diftrefs which the approaching feparation occafioned him, and to con¬ fult with her on thefe plans with compo¬ fure. His judgment by degrees prevail¬ ed over bis paffions, and he now per¬ ceived that die plan ihe fuggefted would afford her the beft chance of fecurity. He confidered, what in the firft agitation of his mind had efcaped him, that he might be condemned upon the charges brought againft him, and that his death, ffiould they have been married, would not only deprive her of her protedor, but leave her more immediately expofed to the defigns of the Marquis, vvho vvookl, eloubt-
t '68 ] doubtlefe, attend his trial, and by this means difcover that Adeline was'again within his reach. Aftoniihed that he had not noticed this before, and ffiocked at the unwarinefe by which he might have betrayed her into fo dangerous a fituation, he became at once reconciled to the idea of leaving her in a convent. He could have wiflicd to place her in the afylum of his own femily ; but the circumftances under which flic muft bc introduced were fo awkward and painful, and, above all, the diftance at which they refided, would render a journey fo highly dangerous for her, that he forbore to proppfe it. Pie entreated only that ihe would allow him to vvrite to her; but recollecting that his letters mi^ht be a means of betraying the piace of her refi¬ dence to the Marquis, he checked liim¬ felf: " I muft deny myfelf even this me- 44 lancholy pieafurc," feid he, " left my 44 letters fhould betray your abode ; yet u how íhali I bc able to endure the inv 44 pa-
[ í6 9 ] и patience and uncertainty to which pru- " dence condemns mc ! If you are in " danger, I fliall be ignoranr of it ; " though indeed, did I know it," faid he, with а iook of defpair, " I could not " fly to .fave you. O exquifite mifery! " 'tis now only I perceive all the horrors " of confinement—'tis now only that 1 " underitand all the value of libeny." His utterance was interrupted by the violent agitation of his mind ; he rofe from his chair, and walked with quick paces about the room. Adeline fir, overcome by the ckferiptio» which The¬ odore had given of his approaching fitu¬ ation, and by the confidcration that ihc might remain in the moft terrible fuf¬ penfe concerning his fete, She few him in α prifon—pale—emaciate 1, and in chains:—ihe few all фе vengeance of thr MurquL defcending upon him ; and this, for his noble exertions in her caufe/The- oiore, alarmed by the placid defpair ex¬ preffed ш г ксгсодаепап e, threw himfelf Vow II. 1 int.»
[ !7о ] into a chair by her's, and, taking her hand, attempted to fpeak comfort to her, but the words faltered on his lips, and hc could only bathe her hand with tears. This mournful filence was interrupted by the arrival of a carriage at the inn, and Theodore, arifing, went to the win¬ dow that opened into the yard. The darknefs of the night prevented his dife tinguiihing the objeds without ; but a light now brought from the houfe ffiew¬ ed him a carriage and four, attended by fevcral fervants. Prefently he few a gen¬ tleman, wrapped up in a roquelaurc, alight and enter the inn, and in the next moment he heard the voice of the Mar¬ quis. He had fiown to fupport Adeline, who was finking with terror, when the door opened, and the Marquis, followed by the officers and feveral fervants, en¬ tered. Fury flafhed from his eyes, as they glanced upon TIkodore, who hung over Ade ine with a look of fearful foli¬ citude—*
Ι ι?' ] citu ie —" Seize that traitor," faid he, turning to the officers j " why have you " fuffered him to remain here fo long ?" £t I am no traitor," faid Theodore, wkh a firm voice, and the dignity of con¬ fcious worth, " but a defender of inno- " cence, of one whom the treacherous " Marquis de Montalt would deftroy." " Obey your orders," faid the Mar¬ quis to the officers. Adeline ihrieked, held feiter by Theodore's arm, and en¬ treated the men not topart them. " Force " only fliali effed İt," faid Theodore, as he looked round for Ibme inftrument ■of defence, but he could lee none ; and in the fame moment they furrounded and feized him. " Dread every thing " from my vengeance," faid the Mar¬ quis to Theodore, as hc caught the hand of Adeline, who had loft all posver of refiftance, and was fcarcely fenfible of what paffed ; " dread every thing *< from my vengeance ; you know you " have deferved it," I 2 « I defy
t »72 3 tf I defy your vengeance," crieel Theodore, " and dread only the pangs " of confcience, whkh your power can- " not infiiduponme, though your vices " condemn you to its tortures." 44 Take him inftantly from the room, " and fee that he is ftrongly fettered," feid the Marquise « he ffiall foon know 44 what a criminal, who adds infolence " to guilt, may fuffer."—Theodore, exclaiming, " Oh Adeline ! farewell !" was now forced out of the room ; wliile Adeline, whofe torpid fenfes were roufed by his voice and his lait looks, fell at the feet of the Marquis, and with tears of agony implored compaffion for The*· odore ; but her pleadings for his rival feemed only to irritate the pride and exafperate the hatred of the Marquis. He denounced vengeance on his head, and imprecations too dreadful for the fpirits of Adeline, whom he compelled to rife j and then, endeavouring to ftifle the emotions of rage whkh the prefenc e οΐ
[ *73 ] of Theodore had excited, he began 1 1 addı efe her with iıis ufual expreflions of admiration. The wretched Adeline, who, regard¬ lefs of what he faid, ftill continueel to plead for her unhappy lover, was at length alarmed by the returning rage which the countenance of the Marquis exprefled, and, exerting all her remain¬ ing ftrength, llie fprung from his grafp towards the door of the room í but he feized her hand before fhe could reach it, and regardlefs of her fhrieks, bring¬ ing her back to her chair, was going to fpeak, when voices were heard in the paffagi, and immediately the landlord and his wife, whom Adeline's cries had alarmed, entered the apartment. The Marquis, turning furioufly to them, demanded what they wanted ; but not waiting for theii anfwer, h с bade them attend him, and quitting the room, flic Iieard the door locked upon her. I 3 Adeline
[ 174 3 Addine now ran to the windows, vvhich were unfeftencd, and opened into the inn-yard. Without, all was dark and filent. She called aloud for help, but no perfon appeared ; and the windows were fo high, that it was impoffible to efcape unaffiffed. She walked about the room in an agony of terror and diftrefs, now flopping to lifteiii and fancying flic heard voices difputing below, and now quick¬ ening her fteps, as fufpenfe increafed the agitation of her mind. She had continued in this ftate for near half an hour, when flic fuddeniy heard a violent noife in the lower part of the houfe, which increafed till all was uproar and confufion. Pcppk paffed quickly through the paffages, and doors were frequently opened and fliut. She called, but receiveel no an¬ fwer. It immediately occurred to her, that Theodore, havingheard he*· fcreams, had attempted to come to her affiftance, an 1 that the bufile had been occafioned by
[ ï75 3 hy the oppofition of the officers. Know¬ ing their fiercenefs and cruelty, fhe was feized vvith dreadful apprchenfions for the life of Theodore. A confufed uproar of. voices now founded from below, anel the fcreams of women convinced her there was fighting; flie even thought ihe heard the claffiing of fwords; the image of Theodore, dying by the hands of the Marquis, now rofe to her imagination, and the terrors of fulpence became almoft infupportable. She made a defperate effort to force the door, and again call for help ; but her trembling hands were powerlefs, and every perfon in the houfe feemed to bc too much engaged even to hear her, A loud fhriek now pierced her cars, and, amidft the tumult that followed, flie clearly diftinguiíhed deep groans, 'f his confirmation of her fears deprived her of all her remaining fpirits, and growing feint, ihc funk almoft lifelefs into a chair near the door. The uproar gradually I 4 fub-
t 176 3 fďffic'ed till all was ftill, but nobody re¬ turned to her. Soon after flic heard voices in the yard, but flie had no power to vvalk acrofs the room, even to aik the qaeftions íhe wiflied, yet feared, to have anfwered. About а quarter of an hour clapfed, when the door was unlocked, and the hoftefs' appeared with a countenance as pale as death. cc For God's fake," feid Adeline, " tell me what has happened Ì 44 h he wounded ? Is hc kilkd ?" 44 He i^ not dead, Ma'amfelle, but—" 44 He is dying then ?—Tell me where he ** is—kt me go»" 44 Stop, Ma'amfelle," cried the hoftefs, 44 you are to ftay here ; I only want the 44 hartfliorn out of that cupboard there," Adeline tried to efcape by the door, but the hoftefs, pufliing her afide, locked it, and went down ftairs. Adeline's diitrefs now entirely over¬ came her, and flic fat motionlefs, and fcarcely confcious that ffie cxifteef, till roufed
[ 177 ] roufed by a found of footfteps near thé door, which was again opened, and three men, whom ihe knew to be thé Mar- quis's fervants, entered. She- had fuffi¬ cient recolledion to repeat the queftions fhe had afked the landlady, but they anfwered only, that flie muft come with them, and that a chaife was waiting for her at the door. Still fhe urged her quefe tions. " Tell me if he lives," cried íhé. 44 Yes, Ma'amfelle, heisalive, but he is <c terribly wounded, and the furgeon is " juft come to him." As they фоке they hurried her along the paffage, and, with¬ out noticing her entreaties and fupplica¬ tions to know whither (he was gomg, they had reached the foot of the ftairs* when her cries brought feveral peopk to the door. To thefe the hoftefs related, that the lady was the" wife of a gentieman juft arrived, who had overtaken her in her flight with a gallant ; an account which the Marquis's fervants corrobo¬ rated. « 'Tis the gentleman who has I 5 44 jufl
[ »73 3 " juft fought the duel," added the hof- tefej " and it was on her account." Adehne, partly difdaining to take any notice of this artful ftory, and partly from her defire to know the particulars of what had happened, contented herfelf with repeating her inquiries; to which one of the ipcftators at laft replied, that the gentleman was defperately wounded*. The Marquis's pcople would now have hurried her into the chaife, but fhe funk lifekfe in their arms, and her condition fo much interefted the humanity of the fpedators, that, notwithftanding their belief of what had been feid, they op¬ pofed the effort made to carry her, fenfelefs as íhe was, into the carriage. She was at kngth taken into a room, and, by proper application, reftored to her fenfes. There flic fo earneftly be¬ fought an explanation of what had hap¬ pened, that the hoftefs acquainted her with fome particulars of the late ren¬ counter. " When the gentleman that " was
[ 179 3 " was ill heard your fcreams, Madam," feid fhe, " he became quite outrageous, " as they tell me, and nothing could « pacify him. The Marquis, for they " fey he is a marquis, but you know 44 befl, was then in the room with my 44 huiband and I, and when he heard 44 the uproar, he went down to fee what 44 was the matter ; and when he came " into the room where the Captain was, 44 he found him ftruggling with die fcr- ce jean t . Then the Captain was more 44 outrageous than ever; and notwith- 44 ftanding he had one kg chained, and 44 no fword, he contrived to get the fer- " jeant's cutfefe out of the fcabbard, and " immediately flew at the Marq» '*, and " wounded him defperately; upon which " he was fecured,"—" It is the Marquis *' then who is wounded," feid Adeline, w the other gentleman is not hurt." " No, not he," replied the hoftefs, 44 but hc will fmart for it by-and-by " for ihc Marquis fwears hc will do for lé " him."
t ιβο ] ŕt him." Adeline, for α moment, forgot all her misfortunes and all her danger in thankfulnefs for the immediate efcape of Theodore ; and flie was proceeding to make fome farther inquiries concernkg him, when the Marquis's fervants en¬ tered the room, and declared they could wait no longer. Adeline, now awakened to а fenfe ofthe evils with which flie was threatened, endeavoured to win the pity of the hoftefs, who, however, was, or affeded to be, convinced of the truth of tlic Marquis's ftory, and, therefore, in¬ fenfibk to all flie could urge. Again flic addreffed his fervants, but in vain ; they vvould neither fuffer her to remain longer at the inn, or inform her whither ffie was going: but, in the prefence of fevcral perfons, already prejudiced by the inju^ rious affertions of the hoftefs, Adeline was hurried into the chaife, and her con^ dudors mounting their horfes, the whok party was very foon beyond the village. Thus
[ ιβι 3 Thus ended Adeline's ihare of an ad¬ venture, began with a profped not only of fecurity, but of happinefs ; an adven¬ ture, which had attached her more clofely to Theodore, and fhewn him to be more worthy of her love ; but which, at the feme time, had diftrefled her by new difappointment, produced the imprifon¬ ment of her generous, and now adored lover, and delivered both himidf and her into the power of a rival, irritated by delay, contempt, and oppofition.
CHAP-
[ «ía 3
CHAPTER XII. ·· Nor fea» nor iliade, nor íhield , nor rock, nor cave». ·· Nor filent dcfarts, nor the fullen grave, " Where fiame^ey'd Fury meani to frown—ca» tc fave." гтрч -1 HE furgeon of the place having examined the Marquis's wound, gave him an immediate opinion upon it, and ordered that he fhould be put to bed : but the Marquis, ill as he was, had fcarcely any other apprehenfion than that of lofing Adeline, anel declared, he ffiould bc able to begin his journey in a few hours. With this intention, he had be¬ gan to give orders for keeping horfes in readinefs, when the furgeon perfifting moft ferioufly, and even paffionately, to exclaim, that his life wodd be the facri¬ fice of his rafhnefs, he was carried to a bed-
[ 1*3 I bed-chamber, where his valet alone was permitted to attend him. This man^ the convenient confidant of all his intrigues, had been the chief in¬ ftrument in affifting his defigns concern¬ ing Adeline, and was, indeed, the very perfon who had brought her to the Mar¬ quis's villa on the borders of the foreft. To him the Marquis gave his ferther diredions concerning her; and, forefee¬ ing the inconvenience, as well as the dan¬ ger of detaining her at the inn, he had ordered him, with feveral other fervants, to carry her away immediately in a hired carriage. The valet having gone to ex¬ ecute his orders, the Marquis was left to his own refledions, and to the violence of contending paffions. The reproaches and continued oppo¬ fition of Theodore, the favoured lover of Adeline, had exafperated his pride, and roufed all his malice. He could not for a moment confider this oppofition, which was in fome refpefts fuccefsful, without feeling
[ i8 4 3 feeling an excefs of indignation and in¬ veteracy, fuch as the profped of a fpeedy revenge could alone enable him to fup¬ port. When he had difcovered Adeline's efcape from the νΐ!1α Λ his fin prife, at firft, equalled his difappointment, and, after exhaufting the paroxyfm of his rage upon his domeftics, he difpatched them all different ways in purfuit of her, going himfelf to the abbey 3 in the faint hope that, deftitute as flie was. of other fuc- cour 7 flie might have fled thither. La Motte, however, being as much furprifed as himfelf, and ignorant of the route whkh Addine had taken, he retuined to the villa, impatient of intelligence, and fotmd fome of his fervants anived, without any news of Adeline, and thofe who came afterwards were as fuccefslefs as the firft. A few days after, a letter from the Lieutenant-colonel of the regiment in¬ formed him, that Theodore had quitted his
[ 1*5 3 his company, and had been for fome time abfent, nobody knew where. This ' information, confirming a fufpicion, which had f equently occurred ro him, that Theodore had been, by fome means or other, inftrumcnml in the efcape of Adeline; all his other paffions became, for а rime, fubfervient in his revenge, and he give orders for th¿ immediate purfuit and apprehenfion of Theodore ; but Theodore, in the mean time," had been overtaken and fecured. It was in confequence of having for¬ merly obferved the growing partiality between him and Adeline, and of intel¬ ligence received from La Motte, who Had noticed their interview in the foreft, that the Marquis had refolved to remove a rival fo dangerous to his love, and fo likely to be informed of his defigns. He had; therefore, told Theodore, in a man¬ ner as plaufible as he could, that it would bê neceflary for him to join the regb ment ; α »otice which affefted him only as
[186 I as it related to Adeline, and which feem¬ ed the kfs extraordinary, as he had al¬ ready been at the villa a much longer time than was ufual with the officers invited by the Marquis.Theodore, indeed, very well knevv the charader of the Marquis, and lud accepted his invitation rather from an unwiilingnefs to ihew any difrefped to his Colonel by a refufal, than from a fanguine expedation of pleafure. From the men who had apprehended Theodore, the Marquis received the in¬ formation» which had enabled him to purfue and recover Adeline ; but, though he had now effeded this, he was inter¬ nally a prey to the corrofive effeds of difappointed paffion and exafperated pride. The anguifli of his wound was almoft forgotten in that of hb mind, and- every pang he felt feemed to increafe his thirft of revenge, and to recoil with new torture upon his heart. While he was in this ftate, he heard the voice of the innocent Adeline imploring protec¬ tion t
t 187 3 tion ; but her cries excited in him nei¬ ther pity or remorfe ; and when, foon» after, the carriage drove away, and he was certain both that lhe was fecured, and Theodore was wretched, he feemed to feel fome ceffation or mental agony. Theodore, indeed, did fuffer all that a virtuous mind, labouring under oppref¬ fion fo fevere, could feel ·, but he was, at leaft, free from thofe inveterate and malignant paffions, which tore the bofom of the Marquis, and which inflift upon the poffeffor a punifliment more fevere than any they can prompt him to ima¬ gine for another. What indignation he might feel towards the Marquis, was at this time fecondary to his anxiety for Adeline. His captivity was painful, a» it prevented his feeking a juft and ho¬ nourable revenge ; but it was dreadful, as it withheld him from attempting the refcue of her whom he loved more than life. When,
[ i88 ] When he heard the wheels of the car¬ riage that contained her drive off, he felt an agony of defpair which almoft over¬ came his reafon. Even the ftern hearts of the foldiers who attended him were not wholly infenfibk to his wretchednefs, and by venturing to blame the condud of the Marquis, they endeavoured to confok their prifoner. The phyfician, vriw was juft anived, entered the room, during this paroxyfm of his diflVefe, and both feeling and expreffing much con¬ cern at his condition, inquired with ftrong furprife why he had been thus' precipitately removed to a room fo very unfit for his reception ! Theodore explained to him the reafon of this, of the diftrefs he fuffered, and of the chains by which he was difgraced ; and perceiving the phyfician liftened to him with attention and compaffion, he became defirous-of acquainting him with fomc farther particulars ; for which pur¬ pofe
t ^9 ] pofe he defired the foldiers to kave the room. The men, complying with his requeft, flationed themfelves on the out¬ fide of the eloor. He then related all the particulars of the late traniadion, and of his connec¬ tion with the Marquis. The phyfician attended to his narrative with deep con¬ cern, and his countenance frequently expreffed ftrong agitation. When The¬ odore concluded, he remaineel for fomc time fiknt and loft in thought; at length, awaking from his reverie, he faid, 4( I 44 fear your fituation is defperate. The " charader of the Marquis is too well 44 known to fuffer him eitlier to be loved " or refpeded ; from fuch a man you 44 have nothing to hope, for he has 44 fcarcely any thing to fear. í wifli it 44 was in my power to ferve you, but I 44 fee no poffibility of it." " Alas!" feid Theodore, " myfitua- " tion is indeed defperate, and—for that 44 fuf-
t 19° 3 ч< fuffering angeľ'—- deep fobs interrupt¬ ed his voice, and the violence of his agi¬ tation would not allow him to proceed. The phyfician could only exprefs the fympathy hc felt for his diftrefs, and en¬ treat him to be more cahn, when a fer¬ vant entered the room from the Marquis, who defired to fee the phyfician imme¬ diately. After fome time, he feid he would attend the Marquis ; and having endea¬ voured to attain a degree of compofure, which he found it difficult to affume, hc wrung the hand of Theodore and quitted the room, promifing to return before he kft the houfe. He found the Marquis much agitated both in body and mind, and rather more apprehenfive for the confequences of the wound than he had expefted. His anxi¬ ety for Theodore now fuggefted a plan, by the execution of whkh hc hoped he might be able to ferve him. Having felt his patient's pulfe, and aíked fomc queftions, he affumed a very ferious look, when
[ 19' 3 when the Marquis, who watched every turn of his countenance, defired hc would, without hefitation, ipeak his opi¬ nion. " I am forry to alarm you, my Lord, " but here is feme reafon for apprehen- " fion : how long is к fince you received " the wound ?" " Good God ! there is danger, then !" crkd the Marquis, adding fome bitter execrations againft Theodore.—" There " certainly is danger," replied the phy¬ fician ; " a few hours may enable me to 44 determine its degree." " A few hours, Sir!" interrupted the Marquis; " a few hours !" The phy¬ fician entreated him to be more calm. 44 Confufion !" crieel the Marquis. " A 44 man in health may, with great com- " pofure, entreat a dying man to be calm. " Theodore will be broke upon the wheel " for it, however." 44 Youmifbkeme, Sir," faid the phy¬ fician, " if I believed you a dying man, " or,
L i9 2 ] . cc or, indeed, very near death, I íhould " not have fpoken as I did. But İt is of " confequence I ffiould know how long " the wound has been inflifted." The Marqui&'s terrors now began to fubfide, and he gave a circumftantiai account of the affray vvith Theodore, reprefenting that he had been bafely ufed in an affair where his own condud had b^er* per¬ fedly juft and humane. The phyfician heard this relation vvith great coolnefs ; and when it concluded, without making any comment upon it, told the Marquis he v/ould prefcribe a medicine, whkh lie wiíhed him to take immediately. The Marquis, again alarmed by the gravity of his manner, entreated he would declare more ferioufly, whether tie thought him in immediate danger. The phyfician hefitated, and the anxiety of the Marquis increafed : <c It is of CQiife- <e quence," faid he, " that I ffiould know " my exad fituation." The phyfician then faíd, that if he had any worldly af¬ fairs
Ι *93 Ì .fairs to fettle, it would bc as well to at · tend to them, for that it was impoffibk to fey what might be the event. He then turned the difcourfe and feid, he had juft been with the young officer under a w rreft, who, he hoped, would not be removed at prefent, as fuch a proce¬ dure muft endanger his life. The Mar¬ quis uttered a dreadful oath, and curf¬ ing Theodore for having brought him to his prefent condition, feid, he ihould depart with the guard that very night. Againft the cruelty of this fentence, the phyfician ventured to expoftulate ; and endeavouring to awaken the Marquis to а fenfe of humanity, pleaded earneftly for Theodore. But thefe entreaties and ar¬ guments feemed, by difplaying to the Marquis a part of his own charader, to roufe his refentment, and re-kindle all the violence of his paffions. The phyfician at length withdrew in defpondency, after promifi.ig, at the Marquis's requeft, not to kave the inn. Vol. II. к He
[ *94 ] He had hoped, by exaggerating lm danger, to obtain fome advantages, both for Adeline and Theodore ; but the plan had quite a contrary effed, for the ap¬ prehenfion of death, fo dreadful to the guilty mind of the Marquis, inftead of awakening penitence, increafed his defire of vengeance againil the man who had reduced htm to fuch a fituation. He determined to have Adeline conveyed where Theodore, Ihould he by any acci¬ dent efcape, could never obtain her; and thus to fecure to himfelf, at leaft, fome means of revenge. He knew, however, that when Theodore was once fafely con¬ veyed to his regiment, his deftrudion was certain : for ihould he even be acquitted ofthe intention of deferring, he would be condemned for having affaulted his fupe¬ rior officer. The phyfician returned to the room where Theodore was confined. The violence of his diftrefs was now fubfided into
[ m 3 into a ftern defpair, more dreadful that! the vehemence which had lately poffeffed him. The guard, in compliance with his requeft, having left the room, the phyfician repeated to him fome part of his converfation with the Marquis. The¬ odore, after expreffing his thanks, feid, he had nothing more to hope. For himfdf he felt little ; it was for his fa¬ mily, and for Adeline, he iuffcred. He inquired what route ihe had taken ; and though he had no profped of deriving advantage from the information, defired die phyfician to affift him in obtaining it; but the landlord and his wife either were, or-affeded to be, ignorant ofthe matter; and it was in vain to apply to any other perfon. The ferjeant now entered with orders from the Marquis for the immediate de¬ parture of Theodore, who heard the mef¬ fage with compofure, though the phyfi¬ cian could not help expreffing his indig¬ nation at this precipitate removal, and Κα his
[ 19* 3 his dread of tlie confequences that might attend it. Theodore had fcarcely time to declare his gratitude for the kindnefs of this valuable friend, before the foldiers entered the room to conduft him to the carriage in waiting. As hc bade him farewell, Theodore flipped his purfe into his hand, and turning abruptly away, told the foldiers to kad on ; but the phy¬ fician ftopped him, and refufed the pre¬ fent with fuch ferious warmth, that hcwas compelled to refume it : he then wrung ehe hand of his new friend, and, being unable to fpeak, hurried away. The whok party immediately fet off* and the unhappy Theodore was left to the re¬ membrance of his paft hopes ami fuffer¬ ings ; to his anxiety for the fete of Ade¬ line ; the contemplation of his prefent wretchednefs ; and the apprehenfion of what might be referved for htm in future. For himfelf, indeciî, he few nothing bur deftruciion, and was only relieved from total dtfpair, by a fccbk liope that ilie, whom
C W 3 #hom he loved better than himfdf, might one time enjoy that happinefs, of which he did not venture to look for a participation.
M j CHAP-
[ 198 ]
CHAPTER ХШ. 11 Have you t he heart i When your head did but ach, ** J knit tny handkerchief about your èrwvs, *' And with my hand at midnight held up yourhead; *' And, like the watchful minutes to the hour* M Stili and anon cheer'd up the heavy time." KING JOHN.
fl If the midnight hzll " Did with his iron tongue, and Ьгагеп mouth, ·· Sound «ue unto the drowfy race of night t «· If this fam; were a church-yard where we fland, 11 And thou poíTeflèd with a thoufand wrongs ; ·· Or if that furly fpirit Melancholy, " Had bak*d thy blood and made it heavy, thick ; *' Then, in defpite of broad-eyed watchful day, *· I would into thy bofom pour my thoughts." KING JOHU. JVlEANWHILEtfceperfecutedAde- line continued to travel, with little inter¬ ruption, all night. Her mind fuffered fuch a tumult of grief, regret, defpair, and
[ *99 3 and terror, that íhe could not be feid to think. The Marquis's vakt, who had placed himfelf in the chaife with her, at firft feemed inclined to talk ; but her in¬ attention foon filenced him, and left her to the Indulgence of her own mifery. They feemed to travel through obfcure lanes and bye-ways, along which the carriage drove as furiouffy as the darknefe would permit: when the dawn appeared, ffie perceiyed herfelf on the borders of a foreft, and renewed her entreaties to know whither flic was going. The man replied, hc had no orders to tell ; but ihe would foon fee. Adeline, who had hi¬ therto fuppofed they were carrying her to the villa, now began to doubt it ; and as every place appeared lefs terrible to her imagination than that, her defpair began to abate, and fhe thought only of the devoted Theodore, whom ffie knew to be the viftim of malice and revenge.
К 4 They
i 20α ] They now entered upon the foreft, and it occurred to her that flie was going to the abbey ; for though flie had no re¬ membrance ofthe fcenery through which íhe paffld^ it was not the lefs probable that this was the foreft of Fontanvİlk, whofe boundaries were by much too extenfive to have come within the cir¬ cle of her former walks. This conjec¬ ture revived a terror, little inferior to that occafioned by the idea of going to the villa ; for at the abbey flie would be equally in the power of the Marquis, and ufo in that of her cruel enemy, La Motte. Her mind revolted at the pifture her fancy drew ; and as the carriage moved under the fliades, íhe threw from the window a look of eager inquiry for fome objeft whkh might confirm, or deftroy her prefent furmife : fhe did not long look, before an opening in the foreft: fhewed her the diftant towers of the abbey-—" I am, indeed, loft then !" faid lhe, burfting into tears. Thev
Г 20 * J They were foon at the foot of the lawn, and Peter was feen running to open the gate, at which the carriage ftopped. When he few Adeline, he looked fur¬ prifed, and raade an effort to ipeak ; but the chaife now drove up to the abbey, where, at the door of the hall, La Motte himfelf appeared. As he advanced to take her from the carriage, an univerfal trembling feized her ; it was with the utmoft difficulty fhe fupported herfelf, and for fome moments ffie neither obferved his countenance, or heard his voice. He offered his arm to affift her into the abbey, which ihe at firft refufech but having tottered a few paces, was obliged to accept; they then entered the vaulted room, where, finking into a chair, a flood of tears came to her relief. La Motte did not interrupt,the fikncc, which continued for fome time, but paced the roora in feeming agitation. When Adeline was fufficiently recovered to notice external objefts, ihe obferved К 5 Ыа
[ Ï02 ] his coun' с nance, and there read the tu¬ mult of his foul, while he was ftruggling to affume a firmnefs, which his better feelings oppofed. La Motte now took her hand, and would have kd her from the room ; but ihe ftopped, and, with a kind of defpe¬ rate courage, made an effort to engage him to pity, and to feve her. He inter¬ rupted her i " It is not in my power," faid he, in a voice of emotion; " I am " not mafter of myfdf, or my condud ; " inquire no farther—it is fufficient for 44 you to know that I pity you ; more I 44 cannot do," He gave her no time to reply, but taking her hand, led her to the ftairs of the tower, and from thence ţo the chamber ihc had formerly occu¬ pied. " Here you muft remain for the pre- 44 fent," feid he, " in a confinement, " which is, perhaps, almoft as involun- " tary on my part as it can be on yours. 44 I am willing to render it as eafy as pof. 44 fibk,
Е зо;? 3 44 fibk, and have, therefore, ordered 44 fome books to be brought you." Adeline made an effort to fpeak, but he hurried from the room, feemingly aihamed of the part he had undertaken, and unwilling to truft himfelf with her tears. She heard the door of the cham¬ ber locked, and then, looking tovvards the windows, perceived they were fe¬ cured : the door that kd to the other apartment was alfo feftened. Such preparation for fecurity fliocked her, and hopelefs as flie had long believed her¬ felf, flie now perceived her mind fink deeper in defpair. When the tears ffie ffied had fomewhat relieved her, and her thoughts could turn from the fubjeft of her immediate concern, flic was thankful for the total feclufion allotcd her, fince it would fpare her the pain flie muft feci in the prefence of Monfieur and Ma¬ dame La Motte, and allow the unre¬ ftrained indulgence of her own forrow and refleftion ; refleftion which, how- К 6 ever
[ 204 3 ever diftreffing, was preferable to the agony inflifted on the mind, when agi¬ tated by care and fear, it is obliged to affume an appearance of tranquility. In about a quarter of an hour, her charaber door was udocked, and An¬ nette appeared with re frefh ments and books : ihe expreffed fatisfaftion at fee¬ ing Adeline again, but feemed fearful of ipeaking, knowing, probably, that it was contrary to the orders of La Motte, who, flic feid, was waiting at the bottom of the ftairs. When Annette was gone, Adeline took fomc refreíhment, which was indeed neceflary ; for ihe had tafted nothing fince flic kft the inn. She was pkafed, but not furprifed, that Madame La Motte, did not appear, who, it was evident, fliunned her from a confcioufncíš of her own ungenerous conduft ; a confciouf¬ nefs, which offered fomc prefumption, that ihc was ftill not wholly unfriendly to her. She reflefted upon the words of LaMotte, " lam notraafter of myfelf, or " my
t 205 ] 44 my conduft ;" and though they afford¬ ed her no hope, ffie derived fome com¬ fort, poor as it was, from the belief that he pitied her. After fome time fpent in miferabk refleftion and various conjec¬ tures, her long agitated fpirits feemed to , demand repofe, % and ffie laid down to ikep. Adeline flept quietly for feveral hours, and awoke wkh a mind refreffied and tranquillized. To prolong this tempo¬ rary peace, and to prevent, therefore, the intrufion of her own thoughts, ihe examined the books La Motte had fcnt her : among thefe ffie found fome that, in happier times, had elevated her mind and interefted her heart ; their effeft was now weakened ; they were ftill, however, able to foften, for a time, the fenfe ofher misfortunes. But this Lethean medicine to a wound* cd mind was but of temporary effeft ; the entrance of La Motte diffolved the illufions of the page, and awakened her to
[ 20б 3 to a fenfe of her own fituation. He came with food ; and having placed it on the tabk, left the room without fpeaking. Again íhe endeavoured to read ; but his appearance had broken the enchantment —bitter refledion returned to herminei, and brought with it the image of Theo¬ dore—of Theodore, loft to her for ever I La Motte, meanwhile, experienced all the terrors that could be inflided by a confcience not wholly hardened to guilt. He had been kd on by paffion to diffipa¬ tion—and from diffipation to vice ; but having once touched the borders of in¬ famy, the progreffive fteps followed each other feft, and hc now few himfelf the pander of a villain, and the betrayer of an innocent girl, whom every plea of juftice and humanity called upon him to proteft. He contemplated his pidure— he ihrunk from it, but he could change its deformity only by an effort too nobly daring for a mind already effeminated by habitud indulgence. Hc viewed the dan¬ gerous
t 20 7 ] gerous labyrinth into which he was kd*. and perceived, as if for the firft time, the progreffion of his guilt ; from this laby¬ rinth he weakly imagined farther guilt could alone extricate him. Inftead of employing his mind upon the means of faving Adeline from deftruftion, and himfelf from being inftrumental to it, he endeavoured only to lull the pangs of confcience, and to perfuade himfelf into a belief, that he muft proceed in the courfe he had begun. He knew himfelf to be in the power of the Marquis; and he dreaded that power more than the furc, though diftant puniihment that awaits upon guilt. The honour of Ade¬ line, and the quiet of his own confcience, he confented to barter for a few years of exiftence. He was ignorant of the prefent illnefs of the Marquis, or he would have per¬ ceived, that there was a chance of efcap¬ ing the threatened puniihment at a price lefe enormous than infamy, and he would, perhaps»
[ 208 ] perhaps, have endeavoured to feve Ade¬ line and himfdf by flight. But the Mar¬ quis, forefeeing the poffibility of this, had ordered the fervants carefully to conceal the circumftance which detained him, and to acquaint La Motte, that he ffiould bc at the abbey in a few days, at the feme time direfting his valet to await him there. Adeline, as he expeded, had neither inclination or opportunity to mention it, and thus La Motte remained ignorant of the circumftances which might have preferved him from ferther guilt, and Adeline from mifery. Moft unwillingly had La Motte ac¬ quainted his wife with the adion, which had made him abfolutely dependent upon the will of the Marquis ; but the pertur¬ bation of his mind partly betrayed him : frequentiy in his fleep he muttered in¬ coherent fentences, and frequently would ftart from flumber, and call, in paffionate exekmation, upon Adeline. Thefe in¬ ftances of a difturbed raind, had alarmed and
I 2 °9 ] and terrified Madame La Motte, who watched while he flept, and foon gathered from his words a confuted idea of .the Marquis's defigns. She hinted her fufpicions to La Motte, who reproved her ior having entertained them ; but his manner, inftead of reprefs- ing, increafed her fears for Adeline; fears which the condud of the Marquis foon confirmed. On the night that he flept at the abbey, it had occurred to her, that whatever fcheme was in agita¬ tion would then moft probably be difcu£- fed, and anxiety for Adeline made her ftoop to a meannefs whkh, in other cir- cumftances, would have been defpica* bk. She quitted her room, and, con* cealing herfelf in an apartment adjoining that in which fhe had left the Marquis and her huiband, liftened to their dif¬ courfe. It turned upon the fubjeft íhe had expefted, and difclofed to her the full extent of their defigns. Terrified for Adeline, and fhocked at the guilty w^k-
[ 210 ] weaknefs of La Motte, íhe was for fome time incapable of thinking, or determin¬ ing how to proceed. She knew her huf¬ band to be under great obligations to the Marquis, whofe territory thus afforded him a fheltet from the world, and that it was in the power ofthe former to betray him into the hands of his enemies. She believed alfo that the Marquis would do this if provoked; yet ihe thought, upon fuch an occafion, La Motte might find fome way of appealing the Marquis, without fubjefting himfelf to diffionour. After fome ferther refleftion, her mind became raore compofed, and ffie returned to her chamber, where La Motte foon followed. Her fpirits, however, were not then in a ftate to encounter either his difpleafure or his oppofition, which flie had too much reafon to expeft, whenever íhe ihould mention the fubjeft of her concern; and ihe, therefore, refolved not to notice it till the morrow. On
[ 211 ] On the morrow ihe told La Motte all he had uttered in his dreams* and mentioned other circumftances, which convinced him it was in vain any longer to deny the truth of her apprehenfions. She then reprefented to him how pof¬ fibk it was to avoid the infamy into which he was about to plunge, by quit¬ ting the territories of the Marquis, and pleaded fo warmly for Adeline, that La Motte, in fifflen filence, appeared to me¬ ditate upon the plan. His thoughts were, however, very differently engaged. He was confcious of having deferved from the Marquis a dreadful punifhment, and knew that if he exafperated him by refufing to acquiefce with his wiffies, he had little to expeft from flight ; for the eye of juftice and revenge would purfue him with indefatigable refearch. La Motte meditated how to break this to his wife ; for hc perceived that there was no other method of counteracting her virtuous compaffion for Adeline, and the
ΐ 212 ] the dangerous confequences to be ex¬ peded from it, than by oppofing it with terror for his fefety; and this could be done only by fliewing her the full extent of the evils that muft attend the refent¬ ment of the Marquis. V ice had not yet fo entirely darkened his confcience, but that the bluih of fhame ftained his cheek, and his tongue faltered, when he would have told his guilt. At kngth, finding it impoffible to mention particulars, he told her that, on account of an affaitv which no entreaties fhodd ever induce him to explain, his life was in the power of the Marquis. 4t You fee the altcrna- « tive," feid he, 4i take your choice of fi cvilsj and, if you can, tell Adelmc of * 4 her danger, and facrifice my life to u fave her frora a fituation, which many " would bc ambitious to obtain."—Ma¬ dame La Motte, condemned to the hor¬ rible alternative of permitting the feduc- rion of innocence, or of dooming her huiband to deftruftion, fuffered a diftrac¬ tion
t 2Ï3 3 tion of «thought, which defied all con¬ troul. Perceiving, however, that sm op¬ pofition to the ckfigns of the Marquis would ruin La Motte, and avail Adeline little, ihe determined to yield and en¬ dure in filence. At the time when Adeline was plan¬ ning her efcape from the abbey, the fig¬ nificant looks of Peter had led La Motte to fufpeft the truth, and to obferve them more clofely. He had feen them fepa¬¬ rate in the hall in apparent confufion, and had afterwards obferved them converfing together in the cloifters, Circumftances fo unufual, left him not a doubt that Adeline had difcovered her danger, and was concerting with Peter fome means of efcape. Affeding, therefore, to be informed of the whok affiiir, hc charged Peter with treachery towards himfdf, and threatened him with the vengeance of the Marquis, ifhe did not difclofe all he knevv. The menace intimidated Peter, and, fuppofing that all chance of aflifting Adeline
t 214 I Adeline was gone, he made a circum¬ ftantiai confeffion, and promifed to for¬ bear acquainting Adeline with the difco¬ very of the fcheme, In this promife he was feeonded by inclination; for he fear¬ ed to meet the difpleafure vvhich Adeline, believing he had betrayed her, might exprefe. On the evening of the day on which Adeline's intended efcape was difcover¬ ed, the Marquis defigned to come to the abbey, and it had been agreed that he fhould then take Adeline to his villa. La Motte had immediately perceived the advantage of permitting Addine to re¬ pair, in the belief of being undifcovered, to the tomb. It would prevent much diiturbance and oppofition, and fpare himfelf the pain he muft feel in her pre¬ fence, when flie ihould know that he had betrayed her. A fervant of the Marquis might go at the appointed hour, to the tomb, and, wrapt in the dif¬ guife of night, might take her quietly thence,
[ aij ] thence, in the charader of Peter. Thus, without refiftance, íhe would be carried to the villa, nor difcover her miftake till it was too late to prevent its confe¬ quence. When the Marquis did arrive, La Motte, who was not fo much intoxicated by the wine he had drank, as to forget his prudence, informed him of what had hap¬ pened and what he had planned; and the Marquis approving it, his fervant was made acquainted with the fignal, which afterwards betrayed Adeline to his power. A deep confcioufnefs of the unworthy neutrality ihe had obferved in Adeline's concerns, made Madame La Motte anxi¬ oufly avoid feeing her, now that ihe was again in the abbey. Adeline underftood this condud, and rejoiced that fhe was fpared the anguifh of meeting her as an enemy, whom fhe had once loved as a friend. Several days now paffed in foli- tude,m miferabk retrofpedion,and dread¬ ful expeftation. The perilous fituation of Theo-
[ 216 ] Theodore was almofl: the conftant fub¬ jeft of her thoughts. Often did íhe breathe an agonizing wiih for his fafety, and often look round the iphere of poffi¬ bility in fearch of hope : but hope had almofl: left the horizon of her profpeft, and when it did appear, it hovered only over the death of the Marquis, whofe vengeance threatened moft certain de¬ ftruftion. The Marquis, meanwhile, lay at the inn at Baux, in a ftate of very doubtfui recovery. The phyflcian and furgeon, neither of whom he would difraife, nor fuffer to leave the village, proceeded upon contrary principles, and the good effeft of what the one preferibed, was frequently counteracted by the injudi¬ cious treatment of the other. Humanity alone prevailed on the phyflcian to con¬ tinue his attendance. The radady of the Marquis was alfo heightened by the impatience of his temper, the terrors of death, and the irritation of his paffions. One
t 2*7 ] one moment hc believed himfelf dying, another hc could fcarcely be prevented frora attempting to follow Adeline to the abbey. So various were the fluctuations tff his raind, and fo rapid the fchemes that fucceeded each other, that his paflions were in a continual ftate of conflid. The phyfician attempted to convince him, that his recovery greatly depended upon tranquility, and to prevail upon him to attempt, at leaft, fome command of hii feelings ; but he was foon filenced, in hopekfe difguft, by the impatient anfwers of the Marquis. At kngth, the fervant who had car¬ ried off Adeline, returned; and the Mar¬ quis having ordered him into his cham¬ ber, aiked fo raany queftions, in a breath, that the man knew not which to anfwer. Hc pulled a folded paper from his pocket, which he faid had been drop¬ ped in the chaife by Midemoifdk Ade¬ line; and as he thought liis lordihip щоМ like to fee it, he had taken care of Vol. If. L iu
[ *** ì it. The Marquis ftretched forth his hand with eagernefs, antl received a note addreffed to Theodore. On perceiving the fuperfcription, the agitation of jealous rage for a moment overcame him, and he held it in his hand unable to open it. He, however, broke the feal, and found it to he a note of inquiry,, written by Adeline to Theodore during hb ill¬ nefs, and which, by fome accident, fhe had been prevented from fending him. The tender folicitude it expreffed for his recovery ftung the foul of the Marquis, and drew frora him a comparifon ofher feelings on the illnefs of his rival and that of himfelf. " She could be folici- 44 tous for his recovery," faid he; " but " for mine, ihe only dreads it." As if willing to prolong the pain this litde billet had excited, he then read it again. Again he curfed his fete, and execrated his rival, giving himfelf up, as ufual, to the tranţorts of hb paflion, Hc was going
I fti9 ϊ gwng to throw it frora hira, when his eyes caught the feal, and he looked ear¬ neftly at it. His anger feemed now to have fubfided, he depofited the note carefully in his pocket-book, and was, for forae tirae, loft in thought. After many days of hopes and fears, the ftrength of his conftitution overcame his illnefs, and he was well enough to write feveral letters, one of which he immediately fent off to prepare La Motte for his reception. The feme policy, which had prompted him to conceal his illnefs from La Motte, now urged him to fey, what he knew would not happen, riiat he ftiould reach the abbey on the day after his fervant. He repeated his injunftion, that Adeline fhould be ftriftly guarded, and renewed his promifes of reward for the future fervices of La Motte. La Motte, to whom each fucceeding day had brought new furprife and, per¬ plexity concerning the abfence of the L 2 Marquis,
t 220 ] Marquis, received this notice with un¬ eafinefe; for he had begun to hope, that the Marquis had altered his intentions concerning Adeline, being either engag¬ ed in fome new adventure, or obliged to vifit his eftates in fome diftant pro¬ vince : he would have been willing thus to have got rid of an affair whkh was to refleft fo much diftionour ^n liimfelf. This hope now vaniihed, and he di¬ reded Madame to prepare for the re¬ ception of the Marquis. Adeline paffed thefe days in a ftate of fufpenfe, whkh was now cheered by hope, and now darkened by defpair. 'Phis delay, fo much exceeding her expedation, feemed to prove, that the illneis of the Marquis was dangerous ; and when ihe looked forward to the confequences of his re¬ covery, flie could not be forry that it was fo. So odious was the idea of him to her mind, that fhe vvould not fuffer her lips to pronounce his name, nor make the
the inquiry of Annette, which was of fuch confequence to her peace. It was about a week after the receipt of the Marquis's ktter, thac Adeline one d^y few from her window a party of horfemen enter the avenue/ and knew them to be tîie Marquis and his atten¬ dants. She retired frora the window in a ftate of mind not to be defcribed, ma> finking in a chair, was for fomc time fearcely confcious of the objeds around hen When ihe had recovered from the firft terror, which his appear¬ ance excited, fhe again tottered to the window ; the party was not in fight, but flie heard the trampling of horfes snd knew that the Marquis had wound round to the great gate of the abbey. She ad¬ dreffed herfelf to Heaven for fupport and protedion; and, her mind being now fomewhat compofed, fat down to wait the event. . La Motte received the Marquis widi escpreifiotis of furprife at his long ab- L з fence;
t 112 3 fence, and the latter merely faying, he had been detained by illnefs, proceeded to inquire for Adeline. He was told flie was in her charaber, from whence fhe might be fummoned, ifhe wifhed to fee her. The Marquis hefitated, and at length excufed himfelf, but defired fhe might bc ftriftly watched cc Per- 44 haps, my Lord," feid La Motte, fmiling, 44 Adeline's obftinacy has been 44 too powerful for your paffion; you 44 feem kfs interefted concerning her 44 than formerly." 44 O, by no means I" replkd the Mar* quis, <f ffie interefts rac, if poffible, 44 more than ever; fo much, indeed, 44 that I cannot have her too clofely 44 guarded; and I, therefore, beg, La if Motte, that you will fuffer no body " to attend her, but when you can ob* 44 ferve them yourfelf. Is the roora " where ffie is confined fuffickntly fc* 44 cure ?" La Motte affured him it was; but at the feme time expreffed his wiih that
[ 223 ] that fhe was removed to the villa. " If ţc by any means," faid he, " ihe ihould" " contrive to efcape, I know what I " muft expeft from your difpleafure; " and this refiedion keeps my mind in " continual anxiety." " This removal cannot be at prefent," íàid the Marquis ; " fhe is fafer here ; " and you do wrong to difturb your- " felf with any apprehenfion of her " efcape, if her chamber is really fo 44 fecure as you reprefent it." " I can have no motive for deceiving « you, my Lord, on this point." 44 I do not fuipeft you of any," faid the Marquis ; " guard her carefully, and, " truft me, ihe will not efcape. I can " rely upon my valet; and, if you wifh " it, he íhall remain here." La Motte thought there could be no occafion for hira ; and it was agreed that the man ihould go home. The Marquis, after remaining about half an hour in converfation with La L 4 Motte,
t 224 î Motte, kft the abbey, and Adeline few him depart, with a mixture of furprife and thankfulnefs that almoft overcame her. She had waited in momentary ex¬ pedation of being fummoned to appear, nnd had been endeavouring to arm her¬ felf wkh refolution to iupport his pre - fence. She had liftened to every ^voice that founded from below -, and at every ftep that croffed the paflage, her heart had palpitated wkh dread, kft it fliould he La Motte coming to lead her to the Marquis. This Шт of fuffermg had been prolonged aknoil beyond her power of enduring it, when íhe heard vokci under her window, and, rifmg, Ãw the Marquis ride away. After giving utter¬ ance to tfie joy md thatikfulnefe that fwelled her heart, ihe endeavoured to ac¬ count for this circumftance, #hkh, con¬ fidering what had pafled, was certainly very ftrange. It appeared, indeed, wholly inexplicable 1 and, after much fruitlefs inquiry, fhe quitted the fubjeft, endea¬ vouring
t m ì vouring to perfume heifelf that ît could portend only good· The time òf La Wane's uuial vifita- tion now draw near, aiid Adelhie ex¬ pefted it in the trembling hope of hear¬ ing rhat the Matquis had ШЫ his per¬ fecution; hut he was, as ufual, füllen and filent; and it was not till he was about to quit the room, that Addine had the courage to inquire, when the Marquis was expefted again ? La Motte, opening the door to depart, replkd, " Ott the followihg day," and Adeline, whom fear and ddkaoy embarraffed, few fhe could obtain no intelligence of Theodore but by a direft queftion ι íhe looked earneftly, as if flie would have fpoke, and La Motte flopped ; but ffie blufhed, ami was ftill flknt, tiil, upon hif iigam attempting to leave the room, ihe faintly called him back. " I wcrøld afk," fed Che, t( after that " unfortunate chevalfer who Ы$ ыь 44 curred the refentment of the Marquis L 5 "by
[ Û26 J u by endeavouring to ferve me. Has " the Marquis mentioned him ? " He has," replied Là Motte ; c * and 4 * your indifference towaids me Marquis " is now fdly explained." " Since I muft fed refentment towards ** thofe who injure me," íàid Adeline, *< I røay furely be allowed to be grate- " fid to thofe who ferve me. Ша <€ the Marquis deferved my efteem, he ** would, probably, have poffefled it." « Wd2, well," aid La Motte, « this €€ f oung hero* chis Theodore, who, it u feems, has been brave enough to Ш α hk arm againft his Colonel, is taken €f aire ofj and, I doubt not* will foon c * be fenfibk of the value of his quixo- " tifm." Indignation» grkt and fear^ ftruggled in the boiom of Adeline ; ihe difdained to give La Motte an opportu¬ nity of agam prophaning the name of Theodore; yet the uncertainty under which ihe laboured, urged her to in* quire* whether die Marquis had heard o£
t w ì of hira fince he left Baux ? « Yes," faid La Motte, « * he has been fafeiy car- 44 ned to his regiment, where he is con- * f fined till the Marquis can attend to 44 appear againfl: hira." Adeline had neither power or in¬ clination to inquire farther, and La Motte quitting the chamber, ihe was kft to the mifery he had renewed. Though this information contained no new circuraftance of misfortune (for flie now heard confirmed what ihe had always expefted), a weight of new ibr¬ row feemed to fall upon her heart, and ihe perceived that ffie had unconfcioufly cheriihed a latent hope of Theodore's efcape, before he reached the place of his deftination. All hope was now, however, gone ι he was fuffering the miferies of a prifon, and the tortures of apprehenflon, both for his own life and her fefety. She piftured to herfelf the dark, damp dungeon where he lay, loaded with chains, and pale with flck- L 6 ncfs
t *rt ì nefs and grkf; íhe heard hıra, in z voice that thrilled her heart, call upon her narae, and raife his -ye& to Heaven in filent fupplication : fhe few the an¬ guiih of his countenance, the tears that fell flowly on Ы$ check ; and remem¬ bering, at the ferae time, the generous conduft that ¡md brought him to this abyfe of mifery, and that it was for her fake he fuffered, grkf refolved itfelf ¡nto dcípair, her tears ceafed to flow, and flie funk filently into a ftate of dreadful torpor. On the morrow the Marquis arrived, and departed as before. Several days then elapfed, and hc did not appear, till, one evening, as La Motte and his wife were in their ufual fitting roora, he entered, and converfed for foine time upon general lubjefts, frora whkh, how¬ ever, hc by degrees fell into a reverie, and, after a paufe of Шепсе, he rofe, and drew La Motte ш the window. " I * £ wouM фсак vrith уоиаюйе," feid he,
Ľ 229 ] " if you are at ldfure; if not, feme other « time will do." La Motte, afluring hira he was perfeftly fo, would have condufted hirn to another room; but the Marquis proofed a walk in the foreft. They went out together, and when they had reached a folkary glade, where the fpreading branches of the beech and oak deepened the íbades of twilight, and threw a fokmn òbfcurity around, the Marquis turned to La Motte, and addreffed him: " Your condition, La Motte, is un- " happy; this abbey is a melancholy " refidence for a man, like yoa, fond of " fociety, and, like you, alfo qualified to " adorn it. (1л Motte bowed.) I " wiíh it was in my power to reftore " you to the world," continued the Mar¬ qub ; " perhaps, if I knew the partr- " culars of the affair whkh has driven " you from it, I might perceive that " my intereil could effeftually ferve u ущ I think I have heard you hint « it
44 k Was an affair of honour." Li Motte was filent. " I mean not to dif- f * trefe you, however; nor is it common €C curiofity that prorapts this inquiry, - " but a fincere defire to befriend you. 44 You have already informed me of 44 fome particulars of your misfortunes. 44 I think the liberality of your temper " led you into expences which you af- 44 terwards endeavoured to retrieve by " gaming." " Yes, my Lord," faid La Motte. 44 'Tis true, that I diflipated the greater " part of an affluent fortune in luxurious 44 indulgences, and that I afterwards 44 took unworthy means to recover it: 44 but I wiíh to be fpared upon this fub- 44 jeft. I would, if poffible, lofe the " remembrance of a tranfaftion which " muft for ever ftain my charafter, -and ß 4 the rigorous effeft of which, I fear, 44 it h not in your power, ray Lord, to 44 foften." #*Доп
C n* 1 44 You may be raiftaken on thb point," replied the Marquis ; " ihy intereft at " Court is by no raeans inconfiderable. 44 Fear not from rae any feverity of cen- 44 fure; I am not at all inclined to judge 44 harfhly of the faults of others, I well " know how to allow forthe emergency " of circumftances ; and, I think, La 44 Motte, you have hitherto found me " your friend." 44 I have, ray Lord." 44 And when you recolleft, that I 44 have forgiven a certain tranfeftion of « late date------ " , " It is true, ray Lord » and allow 44 me to fay, I have a juft fenfe of your *' generofity. The tranfaftion yqu al- " lude to is by far the worft of ray life; 44 and what I have to relate cannot, 44 therefore, lower rae in your opinion-· ·* When I had diflipated the greater ** part of ray property in habits of vo- " luptuous pkafure, I had recourfe to ; fi gaming, to fupply the raeans o£ con- " tinuing
С *з* ] 11 tinning them. A run of good юск 44 for fome time.enabled me to do this, " and encouraging my moft fanguine " expeftations, i continued in the fione 44 career of fuccefs. 44 Boon after, thik a fudden шш of " fortune deftroyed my hopes, and re- " duced me to die moft defperate ex- 44 tremky. Ы one night ray money was " lowered to the fum of two hundred " louis. Thefe I reiolved to flake alfo, 44 and with tbem my life ; for it was 4t my refeiucion not to fiırvîve their " lofe. Never fhall I forget the Ыгюп 44 df diat moment mi which hutig my 44 fete, nor tiie deadly ajiguiih that " feized ray heart when ray lafl; flake " was gone. I ftood for fome «me in 44 a íbtcof ftupefaftion, till, roufed to a 44 feéSt of my misfortune, my paflion 44 made «le pour forth execrations an 44 my more fortunate rivals, and aft 44 аШ tte phrenzy of defpair. Dofing " tiiis paroxyfm of raadmfs, a ge#tk*- " raan^
[ *33 ] « man, who had been a fiknt obferver 44 of all that paffed, approached me. « —You arc unfortunate, Sir, feid he 44 —I need not be informed ofthat, Sir, " I replied. " You have, perhaps, been ill ufed," refumed he.— t€ Yes, Sir, I am ruined, 44 and therefore, it may be faid I am 44 ill ufed." " Do you know the peopk you have 44 played with ?" 44 No ; but I have met them in the w firft circles.' 1 44 Then I am, probably, raiftaken* " faid he, and walked away. Big lafl: K words roufed rac, and raifed a hope 44 that ray money had not been fairly " 'loft. Wifhing for ferther information, " I went in fearch of the gentleman, 44 but he had left the roora ; I, how- 44 ever, ftifled ray tranfports, returned 44 to the tabk where I had loft my 44 money, placed myfelf behind the «« chair of one of the peďons who had « won
[ 2J4 ] ·* won it, and clofely watched the ,f garac. For fomc time I faw nothing 44 that could confirm my iuipicions, but " was at kngth convinced they were " juft. u When the garac was ended, I called " one of ray adverfaries out of the 44 roora, and telling him what I hael ob- " ferved, threatened inftantly to expofe w hira, if hc did not rettore my property. *« The man was for fomc time as po- " fitivc as myfelf; and, affuming the " bravo, threatened me with chaftife-* " ment for ray fcandalous affertions. I 44 was not, however, in a ftate of raind 44 to bc frightened, and his manner fcrv- «« ed only to exafperate ray temper, al- 11 ready fufficiently inflamed by misfor- <f tune. After retorting his threats, ! « was about to return to the apartment 5« we had left, and expofe what had 44 paflèd, when, with an infidious fraile « c and a foftened voice, he begged I «« would favour Ыга with a few rao- * ( mcnts
[ *J5 3 " ments attention, and allow him to " fpeak with the gentleman hts partner. " To the latter part of his requeft I " hefitated; but, in the mean time, the " gentleman himfelf entered the room. " His partner related to him, in a few " words, what had paffed between us, 44 and the terror that appeared in his " countenance fufficiently declared his 44 conicioufnefe of guilt. 44 They then elrew afide, and remain« " cd a few minutes in converfation to- «« gether; after which they approached '* rac with an offer, as they phrafed it, 44 of a compromife. I declared, how« »" ever, againft any thing of this kind, *« and fwore nothing kfs than the whok * e fum I had loft fhould content mc,— " Is it not poffibk, Monfieur, that you 44 may be offered fomething as ad- " vantageous as the whole ?—I did not " underftand their meaning ; but after «* they had continued for fome time to ,ť give
С чь 3 ff give diftant hints of the feme forty 44 they proceeded to explain. " Perceiving their charaders to be ** vvhdly in my power, they wiffied to 4i fecure my intereft to their party, and 44 therefore, informing mc, that tliey bc- " longed to an affociation of perfons, " who lived upon the folly aîîd incx- 44 perience of others, they offered me 44 а ffiare in their concern. My for- 44 tunes were defperate, and the propo- 44 fu now made mc would not only pro- 44 duce an immediate fupply, but enable " me to return to thofe feenes of diffi*· " pated pkafure, to which paffion had " at firil, and tong habit afterwards* 44 attached rac. I cbfcd with the offer, 44 md thus funk frora diflipation into 44 infamy." La Motte paufed, as if the recolkc- tíon of thofe times filled hira with re~ smrfe* The Marquis underftood his fedings. <c You judge too rigoroufly « of yourfelf," fetdhe ; 4t there are few « per*
[ 2*37 3 c< perfons, kt their appearance of ho- 44 nefty be what it may, who, in foch cir- 44 cumftances, would have afted better 44 than you have done. Had I been in 44 your fituation, I know not how I 44 might have afted. That rigid virtue " which ftiall condemn you, may dig- 44 nify itfdf with the appellation of 44 wifdom, but I wifh not to poffefs it ; 44 let it ftili refide, where it generally is cc to he found, in tlie cold bofoms of " thofe, who, wanting feeling to be men, ** dignify themfelves with the title of 44 philofophers. But, pray, proceed." 44 Our fuccefs was for fome time un- *' limited, for vve held ű\e wheel of 44 fortune, and trufted not to her ca- ťf price. Thoughtlefs and voluptuous " by nature, my cxpences fully kept 44 pace mth my income. An unlucky 44 difcovery of the praftices ofour party 44 was at kngth made by a young no- ** bkman, which obliged us to aft for 94 fome tirae with the utmoft circum- 44 fpeftion.
t Φ 3 414 fpeftion. It would be tedious to re- * c late the particulars which made us at 44 length fo fufpefted, that the diftant " civility and cold referve of our ac- w quaintance rendered the frequenting " public aflerabiks both painful and un- 44 profitable. We turned our thoughts " to other modes of obtaining money; 44 and a fwindling tranfaftion, in which ' f I engaged to a very large amount, " foon compelled me to leave Paris. 44 You know the reft, ray Lord." La Motte was now filent, and the Marquis continued for forae tirae mu¬ fmg. " You perceive, ray Lord," at length refumed La Motte, " you 44 perceive that ray cafe is hopckfe." " It is bad, indeed, but aot entirely 44 hopelefs. Frora my foul I pity youj 44 yet, if you ihould return to die world, 44 md incur the danger of profecution, 44 I think ray intereil with ike Minifter 44 might fave you frora any fevere pu- 44 iïiihmeiït. You feem, however, to 44 have
t W ] :t hnve loft aU relifh for fociety, and, ι pau; ps, -io not wifli to return to it." ö< On ! my Lord, сап you doubt this ? « — Bit í am overcome with the excefs " of your goodnefs : would to· heaven it u were in my power to prove the gra- " titude it infpires !" " Talk not of goodnefs," faid the Marquis : " I will not pretend that my " defire of ferving you is unalloyed by " any degree of felf-intereft. I will not " affeft to be more than man, and, truft " me, thofe who do are lefe. It is in " your power to teftify your gratitude, " and bind mc to your intereft for " ever." He paufed.—" Name but the " means," cried La Motte, " name €C but the raeans, and if they are within 44 the compafs of poffibility, they fhall *« be executed." The Marquis was ftill fiknt. " Do you doubt my iincerity, " my Lord, that you are yet fiknt ? Do ** you fear to repofe a confidence in the 44 man whom you have already haded u with
[ но j tť with obligations ; who lives by your c< mercy, and almoft by your means !" The Marquis looked earneftly at him, but did not fpeak. * c I have not de- 44 ferveei this of you, my Lord; fpeak, 44 I entreat you." " There are certain prejudices attach* 44 ed to the human mind," feid the Marquis, in a flow and fokmn voice, " vvhich İt requires all our wifdom to * f keep from interfering with our hap- " pinefe ; certain fet notions, acquired " in infancy, and cheriihed involuntarily ** by age, which grow up and affume a 44 giofs fo plaufible, that few minds, in α what is cdled a civilized country, can 44 afterwards overcome them. Truth is *' often perverted by education. While 44 the refined Europeans boaft a ñmdard 44 of honour, and a fublimity of virtue, ** which often leads them from pkafure * c to mifery, and from nature ro error, 44 the fimpk, uninformed American fol- 44 lows the irapdfc of his heart, and " obeys
E *4i ] ŕť obeys the infpiration of wifdom." The Marquis paufed, and La Mottč continued to liften in eager expedation. " Nature, uncontaminated by falfe " refinement," refumed the Marquis, " every where ads alike in the great " occurrences of life. The indian dif *' covers his friend to be perfidious, aid « he kills him \ the wild Afiatic does " the feme ; the Turk, when ambition " fires, or revenge provokes, gratifies " his paffion at the expence of life, and " does not call it murtler. Even thr *< poliihed Italian, direded by jealouiy, 44 or tempted by a ftrong circumftance " of advantage, draws his ftiletto, anel " accompliihes his purpofe. It is the 44 firft proof of a fuperior mind to li- 44 berate itfelf from prejudices of coun* " try, or of education. You are fiknt, " La Motte ; are you not of my opi- 44 nion ?" " I am attending, my Lord, to your 44 reafimng" Vot. IL M " There
[ 2 4 2 3 ft There are, I repeat it," feid the Marquis, " people of minds fo weak, 44 as to flirink from afts they have been ** accuftomed to hold wrong, however " advantageous. They never fuffer " themfelves to be guided by circum- 44 ftances; but fix for life upon a certain 14 ftandard, from which they will, on " no account, deprrt. Self-prefervation 44 is the great law of nature : when a " reptile hurts us, or an animd of prey 44 threatens us, we think no farther, but ** endeavour to annihilate it. When my 14 life, or what may be effential to my 44 life, requires the facrifice of another ι " or even if fome paffion, wholly un- " conquerable, requires it, 1 ihonkl bc " a raad- man to hefitate. La Motte, I " think I may confide in you—there »* arc ways of doing certain tilings— ** you undcrftand me. There are times, " anil circumilances, aad opportunities " — you comprehend ray racanmg." " Explain yourfelf, ray Lord." " Kind
t 243 ] " Kind fervices tint—in fhort there * l are fervices, which excite all our gra- <ť titude, and whicli wc can never chink " repaid. It is in your power to plat с 44 me in fuch а fituation." " Indeed, my Lord ! name the " means." " I have already named them. This " abbey well fuits the purpofe ; it is ihi t 44 up from the eye of obfervation, any " tranfadion may be concea'ed within <c its walls i the Iiour of midnight may ** witnefs the deed, and the morn mj " íhall not dawn to difclofe it; thefe 44 woods telino tales. Ah ! Li Motte, " am I right in trufting this bufiacis 44 with you ? may I believe you are dc- <4 fi rous of ferving me, an 1 of prcferv- " ing youi feif?" The Marquis p iufc'1, -and looked ftedfaftly at La M itt¿, wh^le countenance was almait с oncéale* Ì by the gloom of evening. " My Lord, you may truft me la лпу 44 thing; expl/m yomfe'f moie fully." M 2 44 Wha
С 2 44 ] « What fecurity will you give mc fo^ " your faithfulnefs ?" " My life, my Lord ; is it not al- " ready in your power ?" The Marquis hefitated; and then faid, " To-morrow, " about this time, I ihall return to the " abbey, and will then explain my " meaning, if indeed you fhall not al- 44 ready have underftood it. You, in " the mean time, will confider your cc own powers of refolution, and be 44 prepared either to adopt the purpofe 44 I (hall fuggeft, or to dedare you will 44 not.*' La Motte made fome confufed reply. " Farewell till to-morrow," feid the Marquis ; " remember that freedom " and affluence are now before you." He moved towards the abbey, and, mounting his horfe, rode off with his attendants. La Motte walked flowly home» mufing on the late converfation.
CHAP-
[ 245 ]
CHAPTER XIV. ·* Dmger n whofe İimbj of giint mold *' What mortal eye cm fix'd behold ì ** Who ftalks his round, an hideous form ! *' Ho mli ftg am'ulß the midtight fiorm /—-— ** And with him thoufand phantoms join'd, 4t Wbo f r empty to deeth aauri*d t the mind! »» ' "" u On whom that raving brood of Fate, ·· Who lap the blood of Sorrow, wait ; " Who, Fear ! this ghaftly train can fee, *' And look not madly wild like thee!" COLLIN*, T' HE Marquis was punftual to the hour. La Motte received him at the gate, but hc declined entering, and feid, he preferred a walk in the foreft. Thi¬ ther, therefore, La Motte attended him. After fome general converfation, " Well," faid the Marquis, " have you confidered ·' what I feid, and are you prepareel to « decide ?" M 3 "I have,
[ 24« 3 " I have, my Lord, and will qukkly " decide, vvhen you fliall fiirther explain " yourklf. Till then I can form no " refolution." The Marquis appeared difiiitisfied, and was a moment filent. " is it then poffible," he at length re- " fumed, " that you do not underftand ? " This ignorance is furely affeded. La " Motte, I exped fincerity. Tell mc, " thi refere, is it neceffary í fliould fay «t mvlx ?" " It is, my Lord," faid La Motte immediately. " If you fear to confide " in me freely, how can I fully accom- <f pli ih yonr purpofe r" " Btfore 1 proceed farther," faid the Marquis, " let me adminifter fomc* oath if vvhich fhall bind you to fecrefy. But tf this is fcarcely neceflary ; for, could l< I even doubt your word of honour, Ct the remembrance of a certain tranf- u acrion wouid point out to you the ne- *' ceffty of being as filent yourfelf as " you
[ ^47 ] " you muft wifli me to be," There was now a paufe of filence, during v/hich both the Marquis and La Motte betrayed fiime confufion. " I think, La Nťotte," faid he, " I have given you fufficient " proof that I can be grateful ; the fer- " vices you have already rendered me, " with refped to Adeline, have not been " unrewarded." " True, my Lord, I am ever willing " to acknowledge this, and am forry it 44 has not been in my power to ferve " you more effectually. Your farther " views refpeding her I am ready to " affift." " I thank you.—Adeline"-----the Marquis hefitated.—" Adeline," rejoin. ed La Motte, eager to anticipate his wiihes, " has beauty worthy of your " purfuit. She has infpired a paflion, of " which flie ought to be proud, and, at " any rate, (he fliall foon he your's. Her " charms are worthy of "—— M 4 " Yes,
[ Ηδ ] " Yes, yes," interrupted the Mar¬ quis ; " but"——He paufed.- -----" But " they have given you too much troubk <c in the purfuit," feid La Motte ; " and ·' to be fure, my Lord, it muft be con- " fevTed they have ; but this trouble is " all nver—you may now confider her as " your own." " I would do fo," faid the Marquis, fixing an eye of earneft regard upon La Moue —" I would do fo*" " Name your h ur, ray Lord ; you tC ihall no t be interrupted.—Beauty, fuch " as Adeline's------ " Watch her clofely," rejoined the Marquis, " and on no account fuffer her " to leave her apartment. Where is ilie " now ?" " Confined in her chamber." " Very well. But I am impatient." " Name your time, my Lord----- *o- " morrow night."
[ 249 ] * β Τϋ -morrow night," faid the Mar¬ quis —" to-morrow night ! Do you un- " derftand me now ?" " Yes, my Lord, this night, if you % " wiíh it fo. —But had you not better " difmifs your fervants, and remain " yourfelf in the foreit ? * You know the " door that opens upon the woods from " the weft tower. Come thither about " twelve—I will be there to condud you " to her chamber. Remember, then, " my Lord, that to-night"------ "Adeline dies!" interrupted the Marquis, in a low voice, fcarcely hu¬ man. " Do you underftand me now ?" ------La Motte íhrimk aghaft—" My " Lord!" " La Motte!" feid the Marquis— There was a filence of feveral minute?, in which La Motte endeavoured to re¬ cover himfelf.—" Let me afk, my Lord, ;i the meaning of this ?" fkki he, when he had breath to fpeak. " Why ihould M 5 « you
[ чо 3 u you wiíh the death of Adeline—of if Adeline, vvhom fo lately you loved ?" ie Make no inquiries for my motive," feid the Marquis ; 4i but it is as certain " as that I live that íhe you name muft 44 die. This is fufficient." The fur¬ prife of La Motte equalled his horror. * f The means are various," refumed the Marquis. " I coukl have wifhed that " no blood might be fpilt; and there 44 are drugs fure and fpeedy in their 44 effeft, but they cannot be foon or 44 fafeiy procured. I alfo wiffi it over « ----- it muft be done quickly ------ this 44 night." " This night, ray Lord !" " Aye, this night, La Motte ; if it ťť is to be, why not foon ? Have you 44 no convenient drug at hand ?" 44 None, my Lord." " I fearsd to truft a third perfon, or « I ihould have been provided," faid the Marquis, " As it is, take this poig- ** nard;
[ 251 ] ťí nard ; ufe it as occaflon offers, but « be refolute." La Motte received the poignard with a trembling hand, and con¬ tinued to gaze upon it for fome time, fcarcely knowing what he did. " Put 44 it up," feid the Marquis, 4C and en- " deavour to recoiled yourfelf." La Motte obeyed, but continued to mufe İn fikncc He few himfelf entangled in the web which his own crimes had woven. Be¬ ing İn the power of the Marquis, hc knew he muft cither confent to the com¬ miffion of a deed, from the enormity of which, depraved as he was, he Ihrunk in horror; or facrifice fortune, freedom, probably life itfeli] to the refufal. He had been kd on by flow gradations from folly to vice, till he now faw before htm an abyfe of guilt, which ftartled even the confcience that fo long had flumbered. The raeans of retreating were defperate —to prccccd was equally lb. M 6 When
I *s* 3 When he' confidered the innocence and the hdpkfíhefs of Adeline, her or¬ phan flate, her former affeftionate con* duft, and her confidence in his protec¬ tion, his heart melted with compaffion for the diftrefe he had already occafioned her, and Ihrunk in terror frora the deed he was urged to commk But when¿ on the other hand, he contemplated the de¬ ftruftion that threatened htm from the vengeance of the Marquis, and then confidered the advantaf л that were of¬ fered hira of fevour, freedom, and, pro¬ bably, fortune—terror and temptation contributed to overcome the pleadings of humanity, and filence the voke of confcience. In this ftate of tumultuous uncertainty he continued for forae tirae filenr, until the voice of the Marquis roufed him to a conviftion of the necef¬¬ fity of at kail appearing to acquiefce in his defigns. " Do you hefitate ?" feid the Mar¬ quis.—" No, ray Lord, my refolution " is
[ 4i ] 44 is fixed—I will obey you. But, me- 44 thinks, it would be better to avoid 44 bloodihed. Strange fecrets have been 44 revealed by ........ ■ ■" " Aye, but how avoid it?" inter¬ rupted the Marquis*—" Poifon I will " not venture to procure. I have given 44 you one fure inftrument of de^th. 44 You alfo may find it dangerous to " inquire for a drug." La Motte per¬ ceived that he could not purchafe poi·* fon without fubjeding himfelf to very dangerous fufpicions, and he immedi¬ ately replied, " You are right, my Lord, " and I will follow your orders implicit-* " ly." The Marquis now proceeded in broken fentences, to give farther direc¬ tions concerning this dreadful fcheme. " In her fleep," faid he, " at mid* " night; tfie femily will then be at reft." Afterwards they planned a flory, which was to account for her difappearance, and by which it was to feem that flie had fought an efcape, in confequence of
t 254 ] of her averfion to the addreffes of the Marquis. The doors of her chamber and of the weft tower were to be left open to corroborate this account, and many other circumftances were to be contrived to confirm the fufpicion. They ferther confulted how the Marquis was to bc informed of the event ; and it was agreed that he ihould come as ufual to the Abbey on the following day. 44 To- 44 night, then,'* faid the Marquis, 4ζ I " may rely upon your refolution." " You may, my Lord." " Farewell, then. When we meet " again"—- " When we meet again," feid La Motte, " it will be done." He followed the Marquis to the Abbey j and having ken him mount his horfe, and wiíhed him a good night, he retired to his cham¬ ber, where he ihut himfelf up. Adeline, meanwhile, in the folitude of her prifon, gave way to the defpair which her condition infpired. She tried to
[ чь 3 to arrange her thoughts, and to argue herfelf into fome degree of refignation ; but refleftion, by reprefenting the pail, and reafon, by anticipating the future, brought before her mind the full picture of her misfortunes, and ffie funk in de¬ fpondency. Of Theodore, who, by a condud fo noble, had teftified his at¬ tachment, and involved himfelf in ruin, fhe thought with a degree of anguiih, infinitely fuperior to what fhe had felt upon any other occafion. - That the very exertions,which had de¬ ferved all her gratitude, and awakened all her tendernefs, ffiould be the caufe of his deftrudion, was a circumftance fo much beyond the ordinary bounds of mifery, that her fortitude funk at once before ir. The idea of Theodore fuf¬ fering—Theodore dying—was for ever prefent to her imagination, and frequent¬ iy excluding the fenfe of her own dan¬ ger, made her confcious oniy of his. Sometimes the hope he had given her of being
С »5Í 3 being able to vindicate his conduft, or at leaft to obtain a pardon, would re¬ turn; but k r was like the faint beam of an April morn, tranfien; and cheerlefs. She knew that the Marquis, ftung with jealoufy, and exafperated to revenge, would purfue him with unrelenting ma¬ lice. Againil fuch an enemy what could Theodore oppofe ? Confcious reditude would not avail him to ward off the blow which difappointed paflion and powerful pride direfted. Her diftrefs was confi¬ derably heightened by reflefting that no intelligence of him could reach her at the Abbey ; and that ihe muft remain, flie knew not how long, in the moft dreadful fuijience concerning his fate. From the Abbey íhe faw no poffibility of efcaping. She was a prifoner in a chamber inclofed at every avenue : íhe had no opportunity of coiwerfmg with any perfon who could afford her even a chance of reikf ; and íhe few herfelf condemned
[ 257 3 condemned to watt in paffive filence the impending deftiny, infinitely more dreadful to her imagination than death itfdf. Thus circumftanced, ihc yielded to the preffure of her misfortunes, and would fit for hours motionlefs, and given up to thought. 44 Theodore !" fhe would frequently exclaim, 4t you cannot hear 44 my voice ; you cannot fly to help mc s. " yourfelf a prifoner and in chains."— The pifture was too horrid. The fwel¬ ling anguiih of her heart vvould fubdue her utterance—tears bathed her cheeks —and ihe became infenfible to every thing but the mifery of Theodore. On this evening her mind had becn> remarkably tranquil ; and as ffie watched from her window, with a ftill and melan¬ choly pkafure, the fetting fun, the fa¬ ding fpkndour of the weftern horizon, and the gradual approach of twilight, her thoughts bore her back to the tirae when, in happier circumftances, ffie had viewed
С 258 3 viewed the feme appearances. She re¬ corded alio the evening of her tempo¬ rary efcape from the Abbey, vvhen from this feme window fhe had watched the declining fun—how anxioufly fhe had awaited the fell of twilight—how much ffie had endeavoured to anticipate the events of her future life —with vhat trembling fear flic had defcended from the tower and ventured into the foiefl. Thcfc reflections produced others that filkd her heart with anguiih and her eyes with tears. While ihe was loft in her melancholy reverie flie few the Marquis mount his horfe and depart from the gates. The fight of him revived, in all its force, a fenfe of the mifery hc inflifted on her beioveel Theodore, and a confcioufnefs of the evils whkh more immediately threatened herfelf. She withdrew from the window in an agony of tears, which, continuing for a confiderablc time, her frame
t 259 ] frame wa<, at length, quite exhaufted, and flie retired early to reft. La Motte remained in his chamber till fupper obliged him to defcend. At tabic, his wild and haggard countenance, which, ín fpite of all his endeavours, betrayed the diforder of his mind, and his long and frequent fits of abftradion, furprifed as v/ell as alarmed Madame La Motte. When Peter left the room, flic tenderly inquired what had difturbed him, and he, with a dillortcd fmilc, tried to be gay ; but the effort was beyond his art, and hc quickly relapfed into filence; or when Madame La Motte fpoke, and he ftrove to conceal the abfence of his thoughts, he anfwered fo entirely from the purpofe, that his abftradion became ftill more apparent. Obferving this, Madame La Motte appeared to take no notice of his preient temper ; and they continued to fit in uninterrupted filence till the hour of reft, when they retired to their chamber. La
[ 2бо J La Motte lay in a ftate of difturbed watchfulnefs for &ηκ time, and his fre¬ quent ftarts awoke Madame ; who, how¬ ever, being pacified by fome trifling ex¬ cufe, foon went to fleep again. This agitation continued rill near midnight ; when recolkfting that the time was now paffmg in idle refleftion, which ought to be devoted to aftion, he ftole filently from his bed, wrapped himfelf in his night gown, and, taking the lamp wiiich burned nightly in his chamber, paffed up the fpiral ftaircafe» Aş he went, he frequently looked back, and often ftart¬ ed and liftened to the hollow fighings of the blaft. His hand fhook fo violently, when he attempted to unlock the door of Ade¬ line's chamber, that he was obliged to fet the lamp on the ground, and apply both his hands. The noife he made with the key induced him to fuppofe he muft have awakened her ; but when he opened the door, and perceived the ШП- nefe
[ 26t ] nr f tii" t reigned wirhin, he vvas con- VIÜ t ! ihc waa afleep. W r hen he ap- pîimıed the bed, he heard her gently fo rathe, and foon after figh—and he it 'ppcd; but filence returning, he again a'va.iced, and then heard her fing in her fleep. As he liftened, he diftinguifh¬ ed fome notes of a melancholy little air, which, in her happier days, fhe had of¬ ten fung to him. The low and mourn¬ ful accent in which the now uttered them expreffed too weli the tone of her mind, La Motte now ftepped haftily towards the bed, when, breathing a leep figli, flie was again filent. lie undrew the curtain, and faw her lying in a pro¬ found fleep, her cheek, yet wet with tears, refting upon her arm, Hc ftood a moment looking at her; and ashe viewed her innocent and lovely counte¬ nance, pale in grief, the light of the lamp, which flione flrong upon htr eyes, awoke her ; and, perceiving a man, ihe uttered
ť 2б2 3 littered α feream. Her recolledion re* turning, ihe knew him to be La Motte ι and it inftantly recurring to her that the Marquis was at ha*id, flie raifed herfelf in bed, and implored pity and protec¬ tion. La Motte ftood looking eagerly at her, but without replying, The wildnefs of his looks, and the gloomy filence he preferved, increafed her alarm, and, wkh tears of terror, flie renewed her fupplication. " You once 44 feved me from deftruftion," cried flie; " О five me now! liave pity upon mc 44 -—1 have no protedor but you." iC What is it you fear ?" feid I л Motte, in a tone fcarcely articulate.—" О fave fí me—feve me frorn the Marquis!" 44 Rife then," feid he 9 " and drefs 44 yourklf quickly-—I ffiall bc back *' a^ain in α fevv minutes." He Uditeci a candle tnat flood on the table, and left the chamber. Adeline immediately arofe, ami endeavoured to drefs, but her thoughts were fo bewildered, that fhe fcarcely
[ ^з 3 fcarcely knew what ffie did, and her whole frame fo violently agitated, that it was vvith the utmoft difficulty ffie pre¬ ferved herielf from fainting. She threw her clothes haftily on, and then fat down to await the return of La Motte. A eon¬ fiderable time elapfed, yet he did not appear j and, .having in vain endeavour¬ ed to compofe her ipirits, the pain of fufpence at kngth became fo infupport¬ able, dut fhe opened the door of her chamber, and went to the top of the ftaircafe to liften. She thought fhe heard voices below \ but, confidering that if the Marquis was there, her appearance could only increafe her danger, flie checked the ftep fhe had almofl invo¬ luntarily taken to defcen 1. Still flie Hf¬ tened, and ftíll thought ihe diftinguiflied voices. Soon after, ilie heard a door fhur, and then footfteps, and flic haftened back to her chamber. Near a quarter of an hour elapfed, and La Motte did not appear > when again ihc
í 2б 4 3 fhe thougiit flic heard a murmur of voices below, and alfo paffing fteps ; and at kngth her anxiety not fuffering her to remain in her room, ihc moved through the paflage that communicated with the fpiral ftaircafe ; but aU was now ftill. In a few moments, however, a light flaihed acrofs the hall, and La Motte appeared at the door of the vaulted room. Hc looked up ; and feeing Ade¬ line in the gallery, beckoned her to de¬ fcend. She hefitated, and looked towards her chamber ; but La Motte now approach¬ ed the ftairs, and, with faultering fteps, ihc went to meet hira. ** I fear the ** Marquis may fee mc," feid flic, whif¬ pering ; 4t where is he ?" La Motte took her hand, and kd her on, affuring her flie had nothing to fear from the Marquis. The wildnefs of his looks, however, and the trembling of his hand, feemed to contradift this affurance, and ihc inquired whither he was leading her, « To
[ а6 5 3 ^ Го the fordi," feid La Motte, « that 44 you may efcape from the Abbey— а 44 horfe waits for you vvithout. 1 can 44 feve you by no other means." New terror feized her. She could fcarcely believe that La Motte, who had hitherto confpired with the Marquis, and ha I fo clofely confined her, fliould novv himfelf undertake her efcape, and ihe at this moment felt a dreadful prefentiment, which it was impoffible to account for, that he was leading her out to murder her m the forell. Again ihrinking back, flic fupplicated his mercy, I Ie afiuvcd lier he meant only to proteft her, and de¬ fired ihe would not wafte time. There was fomething in his manner that fpoke iincerity, and flie fuffered him to conduft her to a fide door that opened into tiie fbrdt, where fhe could juft dif¬ tinguiih through the gloom а man on horfeback· Thib brought to her re¬ membrance the night in which flie had quitted the tomb, when trufting to the Vol. Π. N perfon
[ Л66 ] perfon who appeared, flie had been car¬ ried to the Marquis's villa. La Motte called, and was anfwered by Peter, whofe voice fomewhat re-affured Adeline. He then told her that the Marquis would return to the Abbey on the follow¬ ing morning, and that this could be her only opportunity of efcaping his defigns j that ilie might rely upon his (La Motte 's) % word, that Peter had orders to carry her wherever flic chofe ; but as he knew the Marquis wouid be indefatigable in fearch after her, he advifed her by all means to leave the kingdom, which ihe might do with Peter, who was a native of Savoy, and would convey her to the hoiife of his fifter. There flie might remain till La Motte himfelf, who did not now think it va ould be Ые to ccntinue much longer in France, ihould join her. He entreat¬ ed her, whatever might happen, never to mention the events which had paffed at the AÎ bt y. " To fave you, Adeline, I " have riiked игу Hfe i clo not increafe " n.y
[ *67 3 " my dinger and your own by any un- " neceffiiry difcoveries. We may nc " ver meet again, but I hope you will " be happy ; and remember, vvhen you " think of me, that I am not quite ib " bad as I have been tempted to be." Having faid this, he gave her fome money, which he told her would be ne¬ ceffary to defray the expences of her journey. Adeline could no longer tloubt his fincerity, and her tranfports of joy and gratitude would fcMcely permit her to than!; him. She wifhed to have bid Madame La Motte farewell, and indeed earneftly requefted it; but he agtin told her ffie had no time to lofe, and, having wrapped lur in a large сючк, he lifted her upon the horfe. She bade him adieu with tears of gratitude, and Peter fet ofF as feft as the darknefs would permit. When they vvere g it fome way, " I 44 am glad, v/ith all my heart, Ma'am* " felle," feid he, " to fee you agahı. " Who would ¡улус tho.ight, afier all, N 2 " that
I 2Ó8 ] " that my mafter himfelf would have " bid me take you away Î— -Well ! to " be fure, ftrange things come to pafs; " but I hope we fhall have better luck " this time." Adeline, not chufing to reproach him with the treachery of which flie feared he had been formerly guilty, thanked him for his good wiflies, and íàid íhe hoped they fliould be more for¬ tunate ; but Peter, in hîs ufual ftrain of eloquence, proceeded to undeceive her in this point, and to acquaint her with every circumftance which his memory, and it was naturally a ftrong one, could furnifh. Peter expreffed fuch an artlefs i nte rdl in her welfare, and fuch concern for her former difappointment, that flie could no longer doubt his faithfulnefs ; and this conviftion not only ftrengthened her con¬ fidence in the prefent undertaking, but made her liften to his converfation wirh kindnefs and pkafure. " I fliould never " have ftaid at the Abbey till this time," faid
[ ^9 1 feid he, " if I could have got away ; " but my mafter frightened me fo about " the Marquis, and I had not money M enough to carry me into my own " country, fo that I was forced to ftay* " It's vvell we have got fome folid louis- " d'ors novv ; for I queftion, Ma'am felle, " whether the peopk on the road would " have taken thofe trinkets you formerly " talked of for money." " Poffibly not," feid Adeline : " I 44 am thankful to Monfieur La Motte ♦* that we have more certain means of 44 procuring conveniences. What route " ffiall you take when we leave the fo- " reft, Peter ?"—Peter mentioned very correftly a great part of the road to Lyons ; " and then," faid he, " we can 44 eafűy get to Savoy, and that will bc 44 nothing. My filter, God blefe her ! 44 I hope is living ; I have not feen her 44 many a year ; but if ihe is not, all " the peopk will be glad to fee me, " and you wiU eafily get a lodging, N 3 " Ma'am-
С 270 3 " Ma'amfelle, and every tiling you 44 want." Adeline refolved to go with him to Savoy* La Motte, who knew the cha¬ rader and defigns of the Marquis, had advifed her to leave the kingdom, and Lad told her, what her fears might have fuggefted, that the Marquis would be indefatigable in fearch of her. His nw- tive for this advice muft bc a defire of ferving her ; why dfc, when flic was al¬ ready in his power, ihould hc remove her to another place, and even furniíh her with money for the cxpences of a journey ì At Lckncourt, where Peser faid he was well known, ihc would be raoft likdy to meet with protection and com¬ fort, even fliould his filter bc dead ; and its diftance and folitary fituation were circumftances that pleafed her. Thefe reflections would have pointed out to her die prudence of proceeding to Savoy, had íhe been kfs deftitute of refources in
[ 27ï 3 in France ; in her prefent fituation they proved it ro bc neceffary. She inquired ferther concerning the route they were to take, and whether Peter was fufficiently acquainted vvith the road. " When once I get to Thiers, " I know it well enough," feid Peter ; " for I have gone it many a time in my " younger days, and any body will tell " us the way there." They travelled for feveral hours in darknefe and filence, and it was not till they emerged from the foreft, that Adeline few the morning I'ght ftreak the eaftern clouds. The fight cheered and revived her ì andas İhc travelled filently along, her mind re¬ volved the events of the paft night, and meditated plans for the future. The pre¬ fent kindnefs of La Motte appeared fo very difierent from his former condud, that it aftonifiied and perplexed her, and ilie could only account for it by attribu¬ ting it to one of thofe fudden impulfes N 4 of
С 27α 1 »f humanity, which fometimes operate even upon the moit depraved hearts. But vvhen fhe recolleded his former words, " that he was not mafter of him- ** felf," fhe could fcarcely believe that mere pity ffiould induce him to break the bonds which had hitherto fo ftrongly held him ; and then, confidering the al¬ tered conduft of the Marquis, fhe was inclined to think tiiat flic owed her liberty to fomc change in his fentiments towards her; yct the advice La Motte had given her to quit the kingdom, and the money witli whkh hc had fupplied her for tiiat purpofe, fee mcd to contradift this opkion, and involved her again in doubt. Peter now got dircftions to Thiers, which place they reached without any ¡'cridrnt, and there ftopped to refrefh themfdvts. As foon as Peter thought the horfe fufficiently refted, they again fet forward, and from the rich plains of the Lyonnois, Adeline, for the firft time, caught a view of the diftant Alps, whofe majeftic
L *73 J majeftic heads, feeming to prop the vault of Heaven, filled her mind with fublime emotion« In а few hours they reached the vale, in which ftands the city of Lyons, whofe beautifel environs, fiud led with villas, and rich with cultivaţi on, withdrew Ade¬ line from the melancholy contemplation of her ovvn circumftances, and her more painful anxiety for Theodore. When they reached tiiat bufy city, her firft care was to inquire concerning tht paffage of the Rhone ; but fhe forbore to make thefe inquiries of the people of the inn, confidering that if the Marquis ihould follow her thither, they might ena¬ ble him to purfue her route. She, there¬ fore, fent Peter to the quays to hire a boat, while flie herfeif took a flight re¬ paft, it being her intention to embark immediately. Peter prefently returned, having engaged a boat and men to take them up the Rhone to the neareit part or Savoy, from whence they were to proceed
t 274 ] proceed by land to the village of Leľen- court. Having taken fome refreíhment, íhe ordered him to conclud her to the veflel. A new and ftrikiag fcene prefented itfdf to Adeline, who looked with furprife upon the river, gay with vdlds, and the quay, crouded u ith bufy faces, and fek the contrail vvhich the cheerful objects around bore to herfelf—to her, an or¬ phan, defolate, helplefs, and flying from perfecution and her country. She fpoke witli the raafter of the boat ; and having fcnt Peter baek to the inn for the horfe (La Motte 's gift to Peter, in lieu of feme arrears of nvages), they embarked. As they flowiy paffed up the Rhone, whofe fteep banks, crowned with moun¬ tains, exhibited the raoft various, wild, and romantic fcenery, Adeline fat in penfive reverie. The novelty of the fcene through which ihe floated, now frowning with fevage grandeur, and now failing in fertUity, and gay with town» and
[ 275 3 and villages, foothed her mind, and her ibrrow gradually foftened into а gentle and not unpleafing melancholy. She had feated herfelf at the head of the boat, where llie watched its fides cleave the fwift ftream, and liftened to the dafli¬ ing of the waters. The boat, flowly oppofing the current, paffed along for fome hours, and ae length the veil of evening was ftretched over the landfcape. The weather was fine, and Adeline, regardlefs of the dew$ that novv fell, remained in the open air, obferving the objeds darken around her, the gay tints of the horizon fade away, and the ftars gradually appear, trem¬ bling, upon the lucid mirror of the wa¬ ters. The fcene was now funk in deep ihadow, and the fikncc of the hour was broken only by the meafured daffiing of the oars, and now and then by the voice of Peter fpeaking to the boatmen. Ade¬ line fat loft in thought ; the forJornnefe of
[ 2y6 J of her circumftances came heightened to hev imagination. She faw herfelf furrounded by the darknefe and ilillnefs of niglit, in a ftrange pkce, far diilant from any friends, going ihe fearcdy knew whither, under the guidance of ftrangers, and purfued, perhaps, by an inveterate enemy. She piftured to htrfelf thf rage of the Maiv qnh, now tha-: he had difcovered her flight; and though flie knew it very un¬ likely he íhould follow her by water, for which reafon ihe had chofen that manner of travelling, ihe trembled at the por¬ trait her feney drew. Her thoughts then wandered to the plan flie fliould adopt after reaching Savoy ; and much ts her experience had prejudiced her againft tlie manners of a convent, lhe faw no place more likely to afford her a proper afylum. At kngth flie retired to the little cabin for a few hours repofe. She awoke with the dawn, and her »iiad being too much difturbed to fleep again*.
I 277 J ■again, ffie arofe and watched the gradual approach of day. As ihe mufcd, fhe expreffed the feelings of the moment ia the following SONNET. Morn's beaming eyes at length unclofe t And wake the blu fhe» of the rofe, That all night long opprefs'd with dc*vs» And veiľd in chilly ihade Its hues, Reclin'd, forlorn, the languid head» And fadly fought itu parent bed ; Warmth from her ray the trembling flow*r derives, And, fwtfctty blufhing through its tear.», revives. *' Mom's beaming eyei at length uncloie,** And melt the tean that bend the rofe; Bat enn thm charms iipprcf» fheiîgh, Or duce tâc tesi from Sorrow*·» eye ? Сгп all their la it jw light iuipait One iay of peace to forrow's heait ? Ah ! no ; their Агеь her fainting foul opprefs«——· Eve**, penfive fttiUtø more fottìi« htrr meek d'Jrefc!
When
t »7· 3 Λ\Ίκ·η Addine left the Abbey, La Motte had remained for fome time at the gate, liftening to the fteps of the horfe that cai ried her, till the found was loft in diflancc ; he then turned into the hall with a lightiicfe of heart to which he luid long been a ftranger. The fatisfadion of having thus preferved her, as he hoped, fiom ihc defigns of the Marquis, over¬ came for α while all fenfe of the danger in w hich this ftep muil involve him. But when be returned entirely to his ovvn fitti- ation, the terrors of the Marquk4 re¬ fi inn. i пг ilruck their full f í reo upon hh mil-d, and he confidered hovv he ndglit befl dviq r it. It nas jiow pafl midnight— the Mir- qub was * %'prctcJ early on the following day ; :i.j ул thb interval it at firil appear¬ ed pro 1 . Л !c to him tlut he might quit f 1 ic foııiî. Thete was only one horfe; but Lc tobfi Ч-яЛ whether it would be befl ro fet ofi immediately for Auboiiie, w herr a cat ri ige might bc procured to convey
L */9 J convey his family and his moveables from the Abbey, or quietly to await the arrival of the Marquis »nd endeavour to impofe upon him by а forged ftory-of Adeline's efcape. The time which muff elapfe before a carriage could reach the Abbey, would leave him fcarcely fufHcient to efcape from the foreft ; what money he h^d remaining from the Marquis's bounty would not carry him far; and when it was expended, he muff probably be at a lofs for fubfiílence, fhould hc not before then be tkteded. By remaining ñt the Abbey» it would appear that he was un¬ confcious of deferving the Marquis's re¬ fentment, and though he could not ex¬ peft to imprefe α Ы tief upon him that his oiders had been executed, he might make it appear that Peter only had been acclfeiy tti tlv dcape of Λ îdine ; an account Wideli would kvm the more pro¬ bable, from Pt-u r's kividir been former¬ ly detefted in a fimilai fcheme. 1 f r be¬ lieved
I »"О ] heved alfo, that if the Marquis ffiould threaten to deliver him into the hands of juftice, he might fave htmfdf by a menace of difclofing die crime hc had commiffioned him to perpetrate. Thus arguing, La Motrc refolved to remain at the Abbey, and await the event of the Marquis'", difappointment. When the Marquis did arrive, and was informed of Adelines flight, the ftrong workings of his foul, wliich appeared in 1ш countenance, for a while alarmed and terrified La Motte, Hc curfed h'műelf anã her in terms of fuch coarfencfe and vehemence, as La Motte was aftonifiied to hear from a man whofe manners were ge¬ in rally amiabk*, whatever might be the vkkuu* аш! criminality of his paffions. Tt» invent and exprefe thefe terms feem¬ ed to give him not only relief, hut dc* light ; yet he appealed more ffiocked at tiic с ire uiu flanee of her efcape than ex¬ afperated at the cardeffticfe of !л Motte, md rccoJkamg at kngth that hc wafted time,
t *«i 3 time, he left the Abbey, and difpatch¬ ed fevcral of his fervants in purfuit of her. When hc was gone, La Motte, be¬ lieving his ftory had fucceeded, returned to the pkafure of confidering that hc had done his duty, and to the hope that Adeline was now beyond the reach of purfuit. This calm was of ihort conti¬ nuance* In a few hours the Marquis re¬ turned, accompanied by the officers oí juftke. Tfie affrighted La Motte, per¬ ceiving him approach, endeavoured to conceal himidf; but was feized and carried to the Marquis, who dte w him afide. " I am not ta be impofed upon," feid he, " by fuch а fuperficial ftory as you <* have invented ; you know your life к *' in my hands ; tell me inftantly wher« 44 you have fecreted Addine, or I will í 4 charge you widi the crime you have 44 committed againft me ; but, upon 44 your difeloffng the plate of her con- *' ccalment, I will difmifs the oificcrs, О i( ami,
f 1%1 ] 44 and, if you wifli it, aflift you to leave " the kingdom. You have no time to 44 hefitate, and may know that I will 44 not bc trifled with." La Motte at¬ tempted to appeafe the Marquis, and affirmed that Adeline was really fled he knew not whither. 4f You will remem - 44 ber, my Lord, that your charader is 44 alfo ín ray power ; and that, if you 44 proceed to extremities, you will com- 44 pel me to reveal in the fece of day, <c that you would have raade me a mur- « derer." 44 And who will believe you ?" faid the Marquis. The crimes that baniffi- 44 ed you from fociety will bc no tcfti- 44 mony of your veracity; and that with 44 which I now charge you, will bring 44 with it a fufficient prefuraption that 44 your accufation is raalickus. Officers,, 44 do your duty." They entered the roora and feized Lá Motte, whom terror now deprived of all power of refiftance, could refiftance have availed
с m з availed him, and in the perturbation of his mind, he informed the Marquis that Adeline had taken the road to Lyons. This difcovery, however, was made too late to ferve hirafelf; the Marquis feized the advantage it offered, but the charge had been given, and, with the anguiih of knowing that he had expofed Adeline to danger, without benefiting himfeîÇ La Motte fubmitted in filence to his fate. Scarcely allowing him time to colleft what little effefts might eafily be carried with him, the officers conveyed him from the Abbey : but the Marquis, in confidera¬ tion of the extreme diftrefs of Madame La Motte, direfted one of his fervants to· procure a carriage from Auboine, that ftie might follow her huiband. The Marquis, in the mean time, now acquainted with the route Adeline had taken, fcnt forward his faithful valet to· trace her to the place of concealment, and return immediately with intelligence to the villa. Aban-
C 28 4 1 Abandoned to defpair, La Motte and his wife quitted the foreft of Fontan- vilk, which had for fo many months af¬ forded thera an afyium, and embarked once raore upon the tumultuous worid, where juftice would raeet La Motte in the form of deftruftion. They had en¬ tered the foreft as a refuge, rendered ne¬ ceffary by the former crimes of La Motte, and for fome time found in it the fecu¬ rity they fought j but other offences, for even in that fequeftered fpot there hap¬ pened to be temptation, ibon fucceeded; and his life, already fufficiently marked by the puniffiment of vice, now afforded him another inftance of this great truth, 4 That where guilt is, there peace can- * not enter.'
END OF VOLUME U.
