Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Manfroné: or, The one-handed monk: a romance
MANFRONÉ.
CHAPTER I. . OSALINA» for some time lost in thought, rested her head on her white arm, till the increasing gloom of her chamber made her look to her expiring lamp; hastily she arose to trim it, for sh-** feared to be kft in the shades of darkness, as her thoughts were sorrow¬ ful, and sleep seemed not inclined to " steep her senses in forgetfulness.** Her apartment was spacious md lofty; vol. i. ; ? the
R
the wainscoting was of d-ark cedar, and tbe ceiling was formed of the same. The uncertain light of the lamp, which doubtfully fluttered round the wick, scarcely shed its fdnt lumen farther than the table on which it was placed. An almost nameless sensation, but in which terror held a share, disturbed Rosalina ; for, as she gazed around, she almost fancied the distant shades as the shrouds of spectral forms, gliding along with noiseless pace; and fancy made her listen in idea to the hollow tones of their sepulchral voices. She had some time dismissed her ser¬ vant, who had retired to her bed ; and whether it was the effect of the tale she had been perusing, or some presenti¬ ment of ill which arose in her breast, and which filled her bosom with a secret dread, is uncertain ; but she was going to
to summon her domestic to remain with her during the night, when a noise at the further extremity of her chamber fixed her, trembling, to her seat. The sounds seemed to be occasioned by the sliding of a panel through its grooves, and which appeared to move witb difficulty, as if long disused. Ter¬ ror deprived Rosalina of the power of action or speech ; her lamp grew every moment more dim, and the gloomy shades which filled her apartment more dense. The noise, however, soon ceased, and Rosalina began slowly to recover from her terrors. She was not naturally of a fearful disposition; but her imagination, heated by her disturbed ideas, made her that night somewhat timid; true it was, that the apartment she was in was soli¬ tary, and the lumen of her lamp served ? 2 rather
rather to make the darkness visible, than to chase away its solemn shades. Rosdina, after some time spent in endea/ouring to penetrate through the gloom, and listening for the renewal of the noise that had so much disturbed her, summoned up suffident courage to advance to the lamp to trim it; having so done» she held it up, in order to ex¬ amine the remote parts of the chamber, when, to her terror-struck vision, ap¬ peared a tall figitre ? a salde mantle, advancing towards her with a noiseless pace, whose features were not percepti¬ ble, for they were shaded by the dark plumage he wore in his barette. Rosdina started back, for at the first glance she imagined the form before her was that of some supernatural visitant: her senses were fast congealing with horror, and the lamp dropped from her trembling hand; but, in a moment after she
she was terribly convinced to the con¬ trary, for she felt herself seized by a firm grasp, from which she was unable to disengage herself. The lamp, when it fell to the floor, was extinguished; and thus, in utter darkness, Rosalina was at the mercy of some unknown assailant, whose base purposes soon be¬ came no matter of doubt. Her piercing shrieks re-echoed thro' the vaulted corridors of the castello, and soon were heard by the duca di Rodolpho, her father, who, hastily tak- ing his sword, rushed towards her cham¬ ber, the portd of which he burst open, and beheld his daughter in the arms of the daring intruder, her strength nearly exhausted* and her voice becoming every moment more faint. Without laying down his lamp, he rushed on the unknown, who, leaving ? S the
the trembling Rosalina, defended himself against the furious attack of the duca. The lamp which the duca held was soon struck out of his hold, and they fought in utter darkness, till at length the stranger was disarmed, and, groan¬ ing deeply, fled ; the duca would have pursued him, but could not discover what way he had gone, for his footsteps became suddenly silent and nothing was now heard but poor Rosalina, who lay on the floor, gasping for breath, and unable to speak. The servants, därmed at the clashing of swords, and the screams of Rosalina, at length rushed into the chamber» where stood the duca, resting against the table, covered with blood, for he had been wounded in the violent contest; the sight of her father in that situation completely roused Rosalina from her in¬ sensibility,
sensibility, and she tottered forward to support him. fi ' My father !" she exclaimed, " my dear father! you are wounded.—Oh, Pietro! Gulienoi hasten away to procure assistance !" " There is no occasion for your alarms, Rosdina,*' replied the duca ; " my hurts * are» I trust, not dangerous : but where could the villain have escaped? Search instantly the chamber, for I am almost certain he did not go out at the portd." The servants instantly obejed the command, but nowhere could they discover any trace of the person they sought ; but Rosalina, who by this time was perfectly returned to her recollec¬ tion, mentioned the circumstance of the noise she had heard; from which they concluded that there was a private en¬ trance into the chamber, and on exa- B 4 mining
mining in the direction she pointed out» a loose panel was discovered, which» being forced from its holds, disclosed a small passage which terminated in a flight of steps; the drops of blood on the floor shewed that the unexpected visitant had certainly gone that way, and the servants were immediately or¬ dered to descend the stdrs, and to trace his steps. In this» however, they did not succeed; for after descending them, they found that they led into the sub¬ terraneous apartments of the castello, whose intricate turnings and windings they for a long time paced, till at last, satisfied that the object of their pursuit must have left the precincts of the cas¬ tello by some concealed entrances to the vaults, they returned to Rosalina*s chamber, to report their ill success to the duca. After the departure of the servants, Rodolpho, faint with the loss of blood, had
had retired, and Rosdina Was left with her favourite servant Carletta. Though repeatedly assured by him and father Angustino, confessor to the castle, who was greatly skilled irt chirurgicd know¬ ledge, that none of his hurts were dan¬ gerous, yet she was not able to dismiss her fears on her parents account, and sat in tears by the side of her couch, till a violent scream from Carletta, who was arranging the furniture of the apart¬ ment, which had been thrown into con¬ fusion during the late mysterious occur¬ rence, made her start from her seat to inquire into the cause, when she beheld her attendant standing with her eyes fixed on some object on the floor, and her hands clasped together, while her trembling frame bespoke the agitation she endured. ** What is the matter, Carletta?*' said she, advancing—" what atarms you so mvdh?" ? 5 Scarcely
Scarcely had she conduded her ques- tion» when her eyes rested on the object that liad caused the exclamation of af¬ fright from her attendant and which, with horror» she perceived to be a hu· man hand, blood-stained., and apparent¬ ly but lately severed from its limb. She sickened and turned pale at the sight and, sinking into a chair, covered her eyes with her hands, lest she should again behold so unpleasant an object; while Carletta, whose fears »were still greater than tliose of her mistress, fdnt ed away 5 and lay inanimate on the floor, close to the cause of her alarms. In this situation tliey were found by the domestics» on their return from their fruitless search. Lupo, the castellani, entered first» and Rosalina, when she beheld him, gathered sufficient courage to point out to him the bleeding hand, which he immediately took up, and ex· aminedi it was large and muscular, but
bat no rings being crø the fingers, they were at ? ?? to ecrøceiw wbåeewwa 1 coukl be. ** At any máje* said Lupo, ** it will be easy to recogntae h¡m ^??» slMwld be be any one bdoiigiiig to tbe castello, and vhich I should almost eor,cnve to be the case» by hm being so wdl ac¬ quainted with the private passages of it. As to his bandt tady»"* eontmued he. " it shdl no longer alarm y * Thus having said» the casteliam, open¬ ing a casement whfch overlooked the wide waters of the take ??????» threw out the h.and of the mysterious intruder, and having fastened the pannel depart¬ ed with his followers to the apartment of the duca, to acquaint liim with this last circumstance. Carletta, meanwhile» liad been re¬ fi 6 covered
covered from her state of insensibility, and Rosalina, who could not sufficiently compose her spirits as to remain any longer in that chamber, immediately left it The next morning various were the inquiries throughout the castello; the re¬ sult of which was, that no one was miss¬ ing, nor was any person able to give the least information which could throw any light on the events of the past night; neither could it be discovered where the person had left the subterraneous recess, for no outlet was found where he could possibly have had egress. Tlie duca was involved in a labyrinth of conjectures, but his suspicions rested on no one ; for if, even for a moment, he harboured any, the person suspected having both his hands, was a certain proof that he was wrong. Rosalina
Rosalina could not enter her chamber for some time, Without shuddering at the recollection of the bloody hand ; and so much did the remembrance disturb her, that she removed to another wirig of the castellò; but at length the lovely view that her former apartment com¬ manded induced her to live there again, particularly as she had little reason to fear that another attempt would be made by the person who had paid so dearly for his temerity. There was, perhaps, another reason why she preferred those chambers, for from them were seen the proud turrets of tbe residence of the marchese Mont¬ alto, whose son Rosalina had long loved» and who returned her tender passion with the sincerest adoration. In order to disdose the commence¬ ment of that attachment, it will be necessary
necessary to look back some years, and to relate events which took place both before and after the arrival of the duca at his castello, from which he had been absent on an expedition agdnst the com¬ bined forces of the northern states of Itdy.
CHAP-
CHAPTER II.
The sun, arising from the bosom of the western waters, had just tipped with his golden reflexes the lofty turrets of the castello di Colredo, when, through the wide-stretched valley over which they proudly towered, echoed the mar¬ tial tones of the shrill clarions; and from the extensive ramparts were a party of .mio» see» winding amon¿* the the well-known ensigns of the duca di Rodolpho. Spurring his fiery courser over the pldns,
plains, a horseman hastened to the castle gates, and procldmed aloud the arrival of the lord of the vast pile. Hastily the tarder ascended the highest turret, and blew his sounding horn, which, borne on the early breeze, was heard by the duca and his nume¬ rous retinue, who soon made the vallies resound with the merry notes of their trumpets, while the hollow drums and dashing cymbals increased the warlike tufftoony. Awakened bf the blasts of the shrffi- toned horn, the lovely Rosalina raised her head from the pillow, and sum¬ moned her attendants, to know the cause of the urrasud disturbance which seemed to be in the casteUo. " The dux» is approaching, signora," replied
replied Carletta ; " he is now entering the valley." Delighted at this intelligence, Rosa¬ lina hastily arose, and prepared to re¬ ceive her father, who had been absent some months with hia vassals, in re- dudng to subjection the bands of fero- dous marauders, who had taken their residence amongst the impenetrable re¬ cesses of the Pyrermean mountains, and their strength ddly increasing, had threatened to carry thè sWord of deso¬ lation over Italy. Alarmed for their generd safety, the sovereigns of the ödghbotítíng Ståtes imited their forces, and at length» though not without much ëffilsiöri of blood, re¬ duced them to obedience. Art was not requisite to adorn a form on which Nature had been truly lavish. Rosalina's
Rosalina's rigure was rather above the common height ; her black glossy ring¬ lets sported over a bosom feirer than the Alpine snow; her dark eyebrows form- ed a beauteous arch over her expressive eyes; and on her lovely cheeks the blushing roæ and pde lily dwelt -------„-------- , . , , , „ « Whf*«e red ??! white NatttîVs own s^oet and canning hand laid ??" Scarcely had she numbered seventeen summers» each of which had strove to bring to perfection the loveliest of created beings. Such was Rosalina di Rodolpho, who now quitting her apartment, hastened on the eastern ramparts, which over¬ looked the valley» mid from whence her eyes were greeted with the sight of her father. The soldiers who had been left to guard
guard the castello bailed with delight their comrades» who were returning, laden with tiie spoils of the well-earned fields of sanguine strife; and the huge folding gates were soon thrown open to admit them. Rosdina from the ramp-arts heard the hoofs of the neighing steeds clatter¬ ing on the ponderous drawbridge, and looking into the court of the castello, saw the troops enter it preceded by the duca» by the side of whom rode a per¬ son unknown to Rosalina, but who, from the great attention pdd him» she concluded was of high rank. While she was leaning over the stone parapet, she attracted the gasse of the stranger, whose beaver being up, she for an instant saw his features; they were not those, how¬ ever, which could cause admiration» for they looked dark and gloomy, and as his large expressive eyes were fixed on her»
har, an unaccountable sensation made her draw back, and leaving the rampart, she hastened to the grand hdl, to receive her fatiier. Hhe had not long waited there, whai he entered,, ????????? by the stranger. w Advance» my dear Rosdina," sdd the duca» " mid wdeome the prince di Mantroné, wbo has condescended to ho¬ nour my castello with his presence." Rosdina obeyed, bmt as her eyes met the glance of tiie prince» she trembled, and her faltering voice could hardly ar¬ ticulate her forced weleome. To m coiossd figure, in Manfrone was added a forbidding countenance; his black eyes rolled beneath his bushy ex¬ uberant brow^ and seemed an index to the dark thoughts of his heart. With¬ out
out seeming to attend to the faltering speech of the beauteous Rosdina, he employed those moments in gazing on her lovely features» tül» deeply blushing, she turned aside to seek her father» but who had already left her, and was en- gaged i» deep converse with Lupo. Thus situated» she was obliged to at¬ tend to the speech of the prince» who, with an appearance of forced condescen¬ sion» replied«— i( A welcome from you» fair signora, greatly adds to the pleasure I antidpated ki my sojourn with your father: report, 1 find, has only done Ins charming daughter that justice which is her due." The arrivd of the duca at the mo¬ ment relieved Rosalina from the un¬ pleasant dtuation she felt herself in. " I con-
" I congratulate you," said Manfroné, " on possessing such an inestimable trea¬ sure as you have in so fair a daughter." " Your highness does me much ho¬ nour," replied Rodolpho. " Rosalina will endeavour, with me, to prevent the time hanging heavy while jou honour us with your presence—will you not, my child?" " Certainly, my dear father," said the agitated Rosdina ; " your wishes are ever my pleasure." Thus having sdd, she departed from the hall with her attendant, and look¬ ing behind» as the portal was closing» saw the prince*s eyes earnestly fixed on her. The happiness she had anticipated from the return of the duca was en¬ tirely clouded by his having brought so unwelcome a visitor ; for an inquietude agitated
agitated her bosom, for which, indeed, she could scarcely account, at the sight of the prince, but which, fatdly for her, was a foreboding of evil, which, as the ensuing pages may perhaps shew, was not without reason. The castello di Colredo was a pile of buildings of immense extent, almost surrounded by the spacious lake of Ab¬ ruzzo, whkh washed the craggy rocks on which it was erected, both on the northern and western sides. Fronting the east was the frowning walls of the barbacan, the embattled summits of whose towers, far projecting over the base, defended the passage to the gates ; and round the southern and eastern sides, a precipice denied dl access to the walls, over whose yawning chasm a bridge was thrown, which communi¬ cated with the gates.
Thus
Thus situated, the castello reared its frowning walls above the neighbouring hills, in stem defiance of the attack of an enemy, from which it w«as so amply secured both by nature and art. From the gates a path, winding among the rocks, descended to the vde below; on one side of which the wide waters of Abruzzo reflected the splen¬ dour of the sun on its wavy surface; on the other an extensive forest waved its lofty summits with the blast whose thick embowering shades denied access even to the meridian beams, and stretch¬ ing over a large tract of country, was bounded by a large chain of moun- tdns. A monastery and convent, dedicated to the Santa Maria, rose in the valley, from which was a subterraneous com¬ munication with the castello, to afford the
the means of escape and protection for the inhabitants, in case the -oops of banditti, who infested the mountains» should dare to offer violence to them in hopes of plunder. The shrill chmons and merry trum¬ pets now proclaimed the hour of re¬ past. Rosalina trembled at the sound, for it summoned her to the hall, where she must agdn be exposed to the mean- ful glances of the prince. Hastily she arrayed herself in a long robe of white, which was confined to her slender waist by a circlet of diamonds, and her lovely hair, adorned with a band of the same, sported in glossy ring· lets over her ivory neck. She then descended to the hall, which having entered, the first object sbe beheld was the prince de Manfrone, who hastily advancing, took ber hand, vor, i. ? and
and kd her, covered with blushes, that bespoke her innate modesty, to the splendid board, where he placed* her between bimself and the duea t There ¿he was obliged to attend to the speeches of the prince, who sought to engage her attention by his unpleasant flatteries. The table was crowded with the prin¬ cipal oflicers belonging to the prince and the duca, who» as the minstrels swept the sounding chords of their lutes, and in their verses celebrated the mar¬ tial deeds of heroes of other days, while at intervals the hollow timbrels and the warlike trumpets resounded through the hall, with stern and haughty look re¬ called to their remembrance their own prowess in the sanguine pldns. High was raised the goblet spark¬ ling with the ruby draught, and joy reigned
reigned itt every heart» save those of the duca and Rosalina: far different indeed was the cause, but great w«as the grief of both. Affliction had found a passage to the heart of Rodolpho in the early death of the amiable duchesa, and fatally, in or¬ der to divert his grief, he had abandon¬ ed himself to every species of dissi¬ pation, which, at last had made him commit deeds of sable hue, which dark¬ ened all his future days, and rendered him a slave to the horrors of an^wusiug conscience. Rosalina had often noticed the wild and distracted sentences which the duca would at times utter» and tbe gloomy expression of bis features; there were other circumstances too, which she al¬ most dreaded to recall to her recollec¬ tion. Lupo, the castellani, was the ? 2 only
only person in the castello who seem¬ ed to be in his confidence; frequently was he closeted with him» and once Rosalina beheld them at midnight from the ramparts, when she was walking to enjoy the refreshing breeze, steal¬ ing along an unfrequented courtyard, apparently as if wishing to escape obser¬ vation. At length, when the disturbance that nad some time been caused by the northern banditti, had called the at¬ tention of the duca and the sovereigns of the neighbouring states, to arm their vassals in order to quell those danger¬ ous insurgents, Rosalina indulged a hope that his present occupation would lull the sorrows and agitations of his mind, and which indeed made her the less regret his departure; but when from the ramparts of the castello she beheld his troops winding down the vale,
vale —lieard the sound of the martial music, wbicb sweetly floated in soit cadences, as its echo reverberated from the distant hills—and saw tbe depart¬ ing beams of tbe sxm glitter on tlie arms of bis followers, as the train en¬ tering the extensive forest were lost to her view, then mournfully she turned around, and tears of heartfelt grief coursed each other down her lovely cheeks. Her faithful Carletta remarked her deep sorrow, and as she attended her back to her apartments, with kind solicitude endeavoured to comfort.her afflicted mistress. At length the lenient hand of timo calmed the excess of her grief, and at¬ tended by Carletta, she would often wind down the road that descended from the gates of the castello, to the valley, and enjoy the cool breeze of ? 3 evening,
evening, as it floated over the ruffled surface of the spacious lake. The monastery of Sante Maria was a venerable pile, and had been erected be¬ fore tbe castello de Colredo. Rosalina felt a melancholy pleasure in pacing the long and lofty aisles of its chapel» and in viewing the monuments of departed worth. The tombs :of her ancestors here rose in proud magnificence, adorn¬ ed with all that human art could bestow» wbile their inmates had long since re* turned to their original eartb, as in a few revolving years would the time* worn marble that served to record their virtues to their posterity. Frcsb» however, were the adornments of the monument of her mother, tbe duchesa de Rodolpho—Æesh were the characters which were engraved on the marble»
r&arble, a small tribute to tbe numeroi:*. virtues she possesied when alive—and fresh was the recollection of them İn all who had known her. By the side of the tomb, often woiud Rosalina kneeling raise her lovely eyes tothe abode of the Ruler of the Uni¬ verse, while a fervent prayer for thé repose of her mother's soul would be breathed from hç* coral lips, whicb» Waft¬ ed in the bosom of the rosc*seented ze¬ phyr, ascended to heaven. Rosalina, invited by the beauty of tbe weather, attended by Carletta, st/ayed one evening along the verdant mamin of the lake, till she found herself on the skirts of the forest. The sun had some time sunk behind the mountains which bounded the western horizon, and was gladdening other worlds with his bright yearns—-the grey-robed twilight descend- ? 4 ed
ed around, and Rosalina, who bad been deeply ruminating on her parents, at length became sensible of tbe increasing gioom, and somewhat alarmed, began hastily to retrace her steps towards the castello. A sudden rustling amongst the under¬ wood caused Rosalina to turn around 3 when to her fear-struck eyes appeared two men» who instantly darted towards her. Screaming with affright, she fled on the wings of terror towards some pea¬ sants' huts which were near the en¬ trance of the forest ; but the distance was great, and one of the men had just got her in his firm grasp, when he was struck to the earth by an un¬ seen hand. Rosalina turning round, beheld a ca¬ valier
valier fiercely engaged with the other man, who at length fled into the forest» and was soon lost in its mazy intri* cacies. Scarcely believing wliat she saw, and supporting herself on the trunk of a fallen tree, sbe gazed on the ferocious countenance of the man who lay ex¬ tended on the earth, groaning in a dreadful manner, for the sword of her deliverer had been deeply sheathed in his body, and the current of life was fast streaming from the wide gaping wound. Sickening at the horrid sight, Rosa¬ lina, nearly fainting, was sinking on tlie ground, wben the stranger came to her assistance.—" How happy am I, sig¬ nora," said he, " to have been so for¬ tunate as to be near you at so impor¬ tant a moment ! Those men who pur- c 5 sued
sued you had certainly some other motive than the hopes of plunder; their appearance is not that of common ban* ditti. Yonder wretch seems still to breathe; humanity must, however, make mc wish to preserve his life» though he bas so richly deserved to forfeit it." Having said this, he left Rosalina to the care of Carletta, who had arrived at the place» and proceeded to the wound¬ ed man, who appeared to be nearly life¬ less. Hastily he raised him up, and endeavoured to stop the sanguine stream of life; he at length succeeded, and the man opening his eyes, in a feeble voice said— ít Your endeavours, signor, are useless—I am dying; yet I would do one good act before I depart this world. The signora Rosalina has a secret enemy ; bid her to beware of— of ----- M
Here,
- ????, without allowing him to con¬ clude the important information he was on the point of disclosing» death I O' stopped his further speech» and the signor remained in uncertainty as to tbe person, - Rosalina had listened in breathless expectation to the* speech of the man» tahich filled her with dread. That it was true she could hardlv doubt ; for what motive could the dying man bave to deceive her? But she bad not the most distant idea wbo could be the perion < he alluded to, for hither! ? ?\? knew not what it was to have an enemy. ? ** Signor," said tibe trembling Rosa¬ lina, as soon as sbe was able to speük, **tne important service you bave render¬ ed me deserves my most grateful thanks. To whom is the daughter of the diic$ ? (î de
de Rodolpho indebted for her deliver¬ ance ?** Tlie stranger turned pale at the con~ elusion of her speech . e awhile he seem¬ ed to be plunged in a deep reverie; then he raised his eyes on her, and deeply sighed, while Rosdina heard him say in a low Voiee~~" Cruel· fete !" Again hb eyes were sunk on the ground, mia agdn did a sigh escape his Hps. Rosalina, on finding that an answer was not returned» raised her eyes <m the cavalier, and noticed the agitation he was in at her question, which she felt sorry had proceeded from her; the remark of Carletta, however, served to recover her from the confusion she felt " Dear signora, only see how dark it is getting, and we are so far from the
the castello. Holy Virgin ! I am terri¬ fied to death.'* ** There is no reason for your fears» Carletta,** replied Rosalina ; " the pea* sänts* huts are near, and we can easily have an escort to the castle.*' '* Permit me, signora," said the ca* valier» '* to attend you there ; it is like* ly the peasants are »oW retired to resté Reflect on the danger you have escaped» and do not make me unhappy by a re¬ fusal.'* * t Was ray father at his castello,*' re* plied Rosalina, " I should accept your courteous offer—happy would he ?? to eritertain the protector of his daughter; but in his absence, I must decline your kindness." The stranger sighed, and Rosalina» as she
slie raised her. eyes for b tópmetì t/behelû his expressive features assuáie a melario choly look. She was sorry that she had refttâed *his réquest-^-he to wbÄ 'She was so grieatly jtodebied» áhflithat régmï came from herfheart* '*?. -?:??, " In rescuing you, signora, I merely did rriy duty " saie the stranger,*¥ and for wfeidh the happiiiessiÆ cfeeì feum ample return* Rtíleet ïaenteat *yo«C that one of your assailants ;m yet in dl probability lurking about thislsspot or gone to seek his confederates; m such a situation» excuse my earnest¬ ness in again troAjbling you* wi? my request" > \ ? - :! ? "l í Rosalina, whose feamsfere eiDcitedby his last woivLs did Εφ ihinfc itípmdeiit to refuse his oïFer, ancl leaniftg' jortnthe arm of Carletta, proceeded towards tlie castello, the cavalier wdbing by Jier side .
side. Frequently was his discourse in¬ terrupted by deep sighs, which he ap¬ parently strove in vain to suppress. Concerning who he was, he was silent, - but from some part of his conversation, Rosalina judged his habitation was not far distant. When he had conducted ?? to the castle4bridge» he took his leave, but he lingered on the road» till entering tho gates, she was hid from his view. Rosalina sighed as, from the rauw parts she beheld his interesting figure gliding down the path. Often he stop¬ ped, and turning, gazed on the lofty battlements, till the condensing shades of night wrapped, him in their murky veil. Her memory, however, still retained his manly graces and his interesting converse ;
converse; she remembered him also with gratitude as her preserver, and often sighed because she recollected that he had done so. From that time she used frequently to wander along the verdant margin of the lake, and ponder on the words of the dying man, which fhe more she considered, the more she was inclined to put less confidence in. From them» her thoughts would carry her to the confusion so visible in the countenance of the stranger when she disclosed her name, and requested his.^—- M There must certainly,** she thought, '* be some great cause for his conceding it, for his air is noble, and bespeaks him of an origin he should te proud to own. 9 * One evening she saw the object of her thoughts walking with a melan¬ choly p.ace near the lake; his arms were folded,
folded, and his eyes bent on the ground. Once he stopped» and raised them on the lofty wdls ofthe castello de Colredo, and then again cast them down» and de¬ jectedly continued his walk. But when he saw Rosalina, his whole frame seemed agitated by emotions of ihe 2£0£t violent natures and which he appeared to have great difficulty to sub¬ due sufficiently to enable him to ad¬ dress her. Their conversation at first turned on the beauties of the surrounding scenery, and while thus engaged, their steps al¬ most insensibly led them towards the venerable walls of the monastery. The monks were then chaunting the vesper service» and they entered the chapel, mid there staid till it was concluded. The nuns md monks then withdrew» and
and Rosalina, attended by Carletta, still remdned with the stranger» pacing the long and lofty aisles, which now echoed with their footsteps. A monk with his cowl drawn closely lover bis face» sud¬ denly crossed the aisle they were in ; he seemed intently to direct his gaze on them, and as if shocked with some sud¬ den récollection» started away, md left th&SpOt » .L 4 »«; * Ci, t * * Rosalina could not help remark* ing to the stranger his singular con¬ duct 4*1 *" H If I mistake not» signora," said he, " I have seen that mysterious form be* fore, and under circumstances which make me anxious to know whether it really ? one of the fathers, ,or a spirit that hasísomè;âime attendëdmy steps, and embittered the dearest hope which f&y bosom Imd'dared to eritertain." t I, Thus
Thus having said, he cast his eyes on Rosalina, and deeply sighing, darted after the monk. The gloom of evening soon obscured him from tbe view of the astonished Rosalina» who listened to his receding paces till she heard a distant portal hastily close. All was then silent; once, indeeel, she thought she heard a hollow voice» bitt it J might have been only imaginary, or the effect of some distant echo. She was now going to leave tbe cha¬ pel» when an approaching footstep made her turn round, and she soon recognized the form of the stranger; his counte¬ nance was pale, and his eyes were dilated to tbdr utmost She started at behold¬ ing his agitation, when in hurried a<s cents he thus addressed her ;—
" The
u The form has eluded my pursuit, but again have I heard its warning voice—you, signora, are implicated in its threats. At present, I am unable to relate the particulars» but if you will meet me to-morrow at sunset in the valley, Montalto will unfold to you the cause that agitates his bosom. Till then adieu !" Having said this, he suddenly left the astonished Rosalina, and hastened out of the chapel. Astonished indeed she was, for tlie name of Montalto she had he^rd before, and tliat in a way that again hearing it caused sensations of the deep¬ est terror and agitation to take posses¬ sion of her bosom. She leant for a few moments on the «arm of Carletta to recover herself, while she fearfull) looked around, expecting again to see the monk størting from the concealment
concealment of some of the columns which supported the fretted roof of the diapel. No such object, however, met her view ; all was silent, and the increas¬ ing gloomy obscurity of tho chapel, terrifying Rosalina, she exerted her strength, and slowly left it. It was some time before she could reach her apartments in the castello, when sinking into a seat, she again ru¬ minated on tbe events of tbe past even¬ ing, and also other circumstances, wbicb, fatally for her peace of mind, were too deeply imprinted on her memory to be eradicated from it while she existed. She would often endeavour to chase them from her mind, and to consider what sbe had heard as a delusion of her imagination. She now longed anxious¬ ly for tbe next evening, when the mys¬ teries whicli for some time bad been clustering
clustering around her might perhaps be elucidated. Slowly wore away the tedious hours of that night, for Rosalina could not close her eyes—sleep would not lull to rest her perturbed senses; and scarce¬ ly had the beams of the morning shone over the eastern hills, when she arose and inhaled the early zephyr, impreg¬ nated with the fragrance of the opening flowers. Rosalina that day thought the sun unusually tardy in his progress, and with impatience watched the lengthening shadows of the lofty turrets of Colrcdo, a§ he slowly declined from his meridian altitude. At length his beams faintly bright¬ ened the summits of the distant moun¬ tains, and Rosalina, throwing a thin veil
veil over her, attended by Carletta left her chamber, and entered the ex¬ tensive corridor wbich communicated with the apartments in that wing ofthe castello. The bright reflexes of the clouds, tinged with the beams of the departing sun, shone on the casements of the corridor,, and dispersed the sombrous gloom which reigned in its interior. At the further extremity of it was a passage to the staircase, which rose from the hall vestibule. Rosalina de¬ scended the îiiarbte steps, and as she was crossing it, for the first time be- ga$ to reflect on the improper step she was taking, in thus attending the wishes of a stranger, and which was not only derogatory to her high rank, but also inconsistent with the strict rules of propriety. His name might not be Montalto; and even supposing it was» the
the way in which she had heard it mentioned on a former period ought rather to cause her to shun the con¬ ference, than by an ill-timed curiosity to embitter her life, and look with horror and detestation on the source from which she sprung. She had nearly determined on not going, when sbe again reflected on the mysterious words of the stranger, in which he seemed to infer that she was implicated in tbe threatenings of the form whieh he in vain pursued in the chapel of Santa, Maria; and she also brought before her visual senses his interesting figure, the candour and sincerity which appeared in his countenance, her pro¬ mise given to meet him, and lastly» that she certainly ought not to regard as a stranger one who, at the hazard of his own life, had preserved her from the dark designs of some secret enemy, and which, in all probability, from
from the converse she should have that evening with him» die would be en¬ abled to trace to its source, and guard agamst further attempts. The im-» pulse of all these reflections was ir¬ resistible, and Rosalina» who, while thus employed, had continued pro¬ ceeding through the hall, now found herself near the castle gates, which she soon passed through, and winding down the road, arrived on the banks of the lake. The evening was beautiful. The clouds had lost their borrowed lustre, and now resuming their fleecy hue, floated gently through the vast aerial expanse; the evening breeze just end¬ ed the wide spreading-waters of the lake, and cooled the sultry glow of day. It was án evening thét disposed the mind to en}oy #fe beauties éf nžtfure, and the ¿pleasures -cí medita¬ vo!., i. d tion,
tion, and lulling the ever r increasing cares of life, left the senses in that sweet tranquil state, which is so dan* gerous to a heart endued with sensi¬ bility. Rosalina soon beheld the interesting form of her preserver approaching. She was greatly affected at the melan¬ choly which was but too cleiurly por¬ trayed in hie countenance» and which indeed .so much agitated her, that she could hardly reply to the expressions which he made use of to shew his gra· tituderfor her kindness. Seated on the trunk of a fallen tree» he thus addressed the astonished Ro¬ salina :—* ? You» no doubt, dgnora» were sur¬ prised at røy hrøty departure from the chapd of Santa Maria, but tiie distract¬ ed
#d state of my ideas at that moment must be røy excuse; those only whose CAtiiKØ (UV ŠIV UtwMAV «**1·ν«ν^Τ·νν··«* «KJ» İUİUV are, must be my judges. It is noir three months since I .arrived in these parts to take possession' of yonder cas¬ tello, wJbich belonged to my father, the marchese di Montait^ who has been dead near two yesffs." Rosalina here turned pale.; her limbs trembled beneath her, and she could scarcely prevent herself frora falling to the earth. The stranger was, however, so tdeeply engaged in the relation of his tale, *that, fortunately indeed for her, he did not notice it, and thus pro-. ceeded:— "The grief I endured for the loss of my father was excessive, and which was greatly increased by the nn fortunate way in which he met his d 2 death-
èéeth. A jHöasftrit wa$ returning home fertë mè fcvërtîfig, when he saw him ürUggtîrfg #ìtìì %? Waves, erid^vonr* ?$ tù étosH a fiítd, which had been mdérèd ?^???? by reason of some ???? MM. Th$ mari was unable to assist liira, «id he perished; the horse é?è ?????? thè ëhdrè, bot the body of my father never could be found, îK)twithstanding nevery exertion was tókflè tò ^??^?? ît B<m its itatery |??. ^uèh w^ tlie report of the ÉÉwå; íítlt *liei?e Wtî?ê stt^piciofis,øtsp- ?? tof tìtó ttuth <tf hfe relatif ?!|? Whëh î -arriva öt the ostello 1 ??4? éVêry îh^üiry; imi in vtóri, fbt f|< |to ??? Account could ?? obtained, $ψ could the peasant be found. Indul¬ ging my melancholy thoughts, I have éftën wandered «long tìie skirts of tìrè fbrtSt må thè bölitós <rf ?? löke. Ih those solitary Walks I ^t tieheid ý? 9 signcñra-*ftf#t sm ??? beauties which
which from that moment have liever been absent from my recollection*-^ Fearful of creating suspicion by my inquiries, and ever wanting resolu¬ tion to address you, I was ignorant of your name; nor did I even kïtow that the duca di Rodolpho possessed so incomparable a treasure as yourself Thus did the time pass away, till, near a week ago, as I was concealed behind a myrtle hedge, watching you as you passed dong, deeply engaged in tliat dear occupation, I did not notice a person in the dress of a monk» who w.as standing by my side, intently ob¬ serving my actions. When, howcyer, yon liad passed, suddenly a deep sigh was breathed near my ear. I turned round, and then beheld the monk. Greatly surprised at that circum¬ stance, I was on the point of question¬ ing him concerning his motives, when he suddenly glided from tlie spot, and i) S left
left me full of wonder at his singular conduct As I expected that on your return from your walk, you would again pass by the place where I was, I «till remained there, ?nd in that sweet expectancy the recollection of the monk faded away. You again approached, signora; again I viewed your lovely form—again beheld those fascinating graces. Lost in delight I remained rivetted to the spot, but was roused from my reverie by the following .words» which wero uttered in a deep hollow •voice ? n, * * f And does the son so little regret the loss of his parent? Can the heir of Montalto rest in peace, while hk death is involved in mystery?. De¬ generate boy ! sbun the house of Ro«- dolpho, and all the scions of that ac cursed stock.*
* I looked
" I looked around me, struck with terror and amazement, and again saw the form of the monk gliding away. I followed, resolved to make him ex¬ plain the meaning of his ambiguous sentences ; but he eluded my pursuit, and was lost in the increasing gloom of evening. - " It was but a few days, after that circumstance had occurred that I Was so fortumte, signor^ as to be near you when.you,were pursued by the two ruffians. How happy did I feel at so fortunate an opportunity of mak- İBg myself known to you ! But when you disdosed to me your name—when I found tlmt you» whom I so much adored, *was the person whom I. had been so mysteriously cautioned to avoid, bow great was my sorrow and distress! You, no doubt, observed it, and that I concealed from you my name, for I n 4 wished
wished to meet the monk again, and to ferce him to disclose his reasons for his mysterious warning, before I should .again behold you. I frequented the ehapel of the monastery of Santa Maria, to which order, by his dress, he be¬ longed; but amongst the whob train of fathers, I did not observe any one whose form seemed like his. You were present the next time I saw him, w lien in ate chapel; and you will now easily account for my conduct on that occasion. I hastily followed him down tlie grand aisle» and saw him pas& tbrough an opened portal at the ex* tzretoity. 1 was then but a very short distance from the object d my pur* suit ; and scarcely had the door closed on him when I threw it open, «and entered a brge gloomy apartment. All was silent within. I looked around; no other door met my view wbich could have afforded to my tormentor the
the means of departure from the eham- * ba& which however contained him not. My imagination already had made me condu de him some supernatural visitant, when again the welkremembered voice hollowly gave utterance to the follow¬ ing words : * The caution you received you have neglected. You love the daughter of Rodolpho—Rodolpho, who leagues with the midnight assassin. Vengeance shall pursue hirø. Rosalina shall 5o the victim which shall appease the wrath of the injured-^-that Rosalina whom you love.' Here Montako stopped. Rosalina fainting had sunk on the earth. Car- letta was at some distance; hastily he raised her up, and supported her in his arms, wbile she ran to the lake to procure some water. Slowly did the D 5 suspended
suspended powers of animation return to their natural functions; Rosaline at length began to breathe; meanwhile Montalto in silent ecstacy gazed on her beautiful features» where the pale lily usurped the place of the rose. Gentle deity of the tender passion»! even in that moment when his bosom was agitated by the recital of his tale» and the terrible denunciation of ven¬ geance which was hollowly breathed in Ins ears by the monk, how deep¬ ly did the tender emotions of love and sympathy take root in his heart!' He pressed her to his bosom, and kissed her unconscious cheek; when at that moment again did- the gloomy form of his tormentor appear before him— Montalto started. Had Rosalina been able to assist herself, or had Carletta been near to take care of her mistreès, he would have satisfied himsdf who the person was that thus watched hiš steps and
and actions ; but to leave her was im¬ possible. <* Reware !" said the well remember¬ ed sepulchral tones, as rø threatening gesture the form raised its arm, and in¬ stantly retired to the shady concedment of the forest. While it was visible, Mon¬ tdto pursued its course with his eyes ; and when the gloom of evening and the clustering foliage hid it from his view, he deeply sighed, as turning round to Rosalina, who was now fast recover¬ ing. Sbe opened her beauteous eyes, but on finding herself in the arms of Montalto, a blush crimsoned her lovely cheeks, as she endeavoured to disengage hersdf. 44 Leave me" she faintly exclaimed— " leave me to my own sad fate. I fear not the vengeance of your mysterious monitor, for Rosalina is innocent; be ? 6 then
then directed by its warning voice, and shun the daughter of Rodolpho.** " Shun you !" exclaimed Montalto, as he threw himself at her feet. " Lovdy Rosalina, why should I shun you? Oh, recall those cruel words! Supposing even tliat it were true what the monk seemed so darkly to hint at» you are innocent" " Indeed I am,** returned Rosalina, overcome at that moment with the cruel recollection of past events ; " I am in¬ deed innocent" " From the inmost recesses of my heart I believe you," said Montdto: if perbaps, after dl, the monk is only the instrument of mdice—some enemy to the duca, your father, who thus wishes by his dark insinuations to hurt his fair fame.** Rosalina
Rosalina trembled, for again was she tortured with the remembrance of circumstances which liad continually preyed upon lier spirits, and which made the sight of Montdto painful to her: but were it indeed true what she feared, she reflected, that perhaps it might be in her power to make some compensation for his wrongs. At that time she found it impossible to sup¬ port the increasing agitation of ber hosorø, and she determined to end the conference. * *' Heaven knows all things, signor," the replied; ** its retributive ven¬ geance will doubtless soon or kte fall on tfae guilty, and disclose their evil deeds to tlie worid. The high sta¬ tion of life which the duca my fa¬ ther holds, doubtless has made him many enemies; be cautious therefore how you judge of his conduct» or listen
listen to the secret whisperings of ma¬ lice. Their secrecy is surely a proof that he is innocent; for if it were otherwise, what cause could there he for the accuser to shun you? Woidd he not rather step boldly forward, and blazon his crimes to the world, than thus endeavour secretly to rouse filial vengeance, and to witness the effects of his insinuation? without increasing the danger of being called to an ac¬ count for them when their fdsity is discovered?" Tims spoke Rosalina, but while she spoke she deeply sighed, for her heart was full of sorrow and melancholy fore¬ bodings. She arose from her seat and was departing when Montdto restrained; her. ** Lovely mdd! you have spoken the sentiments of my own breast Rosalina
never
never can be the offspring of one who is capable of a bad act; the Heavens would not have dlowed him so great a blessing. Ko, sweet possessor of my affections ! your father is innocent; but his accuser shall* be found—he shall be made publicly to recant his base assertions; I will not rest till he has ample satisfaction of this secret enemy. Meantime, permit me, dearest possessor of my heart ! to see yon, that I may inform you of the event of my researches.*' <fi I feel too much interested in them, signor," replied Rosalina, " to refuse your request Adieu ! the dews of evening are descending, and my mind, ill at rest, has communicated its agitation to- my trembling frame." Thus saying, ill indeed at rest, both in her mind and body» the hapless Ro¬ salina,
salina, leaning on her domestic, return¬ ed to the castello. '* Ah !" said she, as reclining on a seat she was ruminating on the eventa of the evening, w what I so much dread¬ ed is about to come to pass. Still, how¬ ever, there is hope, and while that re- maim, I will not abandon myself to misery. Montalto, though noble «and gaierous, as are his sentiments, would turn from me wkh horror and detes¬ tation» and the moving finger of scom would point me out as the daughter* w.a—— /lhe word sbe was* going ta îltt^r proceeded mt frpm her lips. She shuddered as she ponderad on its dread¬ ful meaning, Tears bedewed lier love¬ ly cheeks» for an aftection, besides that she fostered for her parent was now taking root ia 1? heart» and whieh hourly
hourly increased. Tbe subtle deity of love had hitherto in vain dmed his arrows against her bosom» but watch¬ ful of an opportunity, he now began slowly to twine around her gentle heart his golden toils: at first she imagined it was no more than friendship which she cherished for Montalto, and which she thought he so well deserved, but she was soon convinced to the con¬ trary* Often did they meet on tlie verdant margin of the lake, «and pursue its winding course, or «ascending tbe hills together, admire the lovely prospecta which presented themselves to their admiring gaze; but though fascinated with the beauties with which an indul¬ gent Creator has adorned tbe surface of the globe, yet in each other they beheld those graces, those charms which ri¬ vetted their kindred spirits in the sweet
sweet bondage of love. Their views and sensations were alike : if Rosalina heaved a sigh at the suspicions which seemed to be attached to the conduct of the duca, her fether, Montalto sigh¬ ed also- to tliink that the slightest im* putation should rest on him» and at length began to conclude it impossible that it could be so*. Still, however, whenever he thought of his return to his castello he could not form a reso¬ lution of calling on him» or soliciting from one on whom so dark an accusa¬ tion seemed to hang, even so great a blessing as the hand of his daughter Ro-sdina. „ Montalto hid often wandered in the precincts of the monastery of Santa Maria» and often had he lingered in the lofty aisles of its chapel long «after the hour of vesper service, in hopes of again seeing the monk ; but his endeavours to
to meet him were fruitless, for he either avoided him as being aware of his in¬ tention» or else was not there : thus he was unable to ascertain the reasons which had induced him to make use of those mysterious expressions which had so much disturbed both himself and Rosalina. So passed the days that brought on the arrival of the duca at his castello ; and thus have we partly accounted for the unhappiness which disturbed both him and his daughter, while all around them were joyous, and indulging in the pleasures of the festive board. Even the dark meaning countenance of the prince di Manfrone had begun to assume a gayer tint» as in full bumpers he drank to the healths which echoed round the hall. At length, when the voices of the banqueters
banqueters had incre^ed in frequaicy and sound, Rosalina «arose to depart; the prince starting up, followed her to the hall portal» «and as he rudely press¬ ed her hand» endeavoured to raise it to his lips» but by a sudden effort she disengaged it» and darting a look at him» which expressed her dislike of his conduct, opened herself the portal, which hastily closing, shut the prince from her view. Rosalma, fatigued with tbe occur¬ rences of the day» gladly sought her chamber; but no quiet awaited her there. One time she sat down and in¬ dulged the thoughts which arose in her bosom concerning Montalto; then when she thought of the miseries and impu¬ tations which seemed so directly to point at her father, and also of the prince, who seemeci almost licensed in his conduct by him, she would start up and pace the
the confines of her chamber with a dis¬ ordered hasty step.
j
C5H APTER III.
After some time so unpleasantly em¬ ployed, the beauty of the evening in¬ duced Rosdina to walk on the castle ramparts. Passing by the portals of tbe grand hall, she heard the bud voices of the revellers, who had not yet Yen their brimming goblets. Fear- ful that the portal might be opened, and she should be discovered there, she hastily left the spot, and entered the dde of the hdl into the courtyard» from whence she could gain the ram¬ parts· Having passed through it» she ascended
ascended the walls, and slowly travers¬ ed them, till the increasing gloom and damp mists that began to hover over the vallies warned her to depart. She was retiring the same way she had come, when» just as she was passing the portals of the gre^ hall» they were sud¬ denly thrown open, and the prince di Manfroné staggered -out, apparently overcome with wine. As soon as he saw Rosalina, he attempted to seize her hand» but greatly frightened, she has¬ tened away as swiftly jis sbe was able, the prince pursuing her. Rosalina, hardly conscious of «what she did» fled dong the passage till she came to the foot of the grand staircase» which led to the corridor that commu¬ nicated with her apartments. ? ??? ments consideration made lier determine pot to ascend the stairs, but to con¬ tinue dong some of the numerous pas* sages,
sages, íöxiongst whose intricate windings «he doubted not she should soon escape her pursuer. The echo of her steps, however, betrayed her, and Manfrone was severd times on tbe point of seiz¬ ing ha?. Rosdina began to repent that sbe Imd fied at aU, since ?? was now doubtless traversing some of the unin¬ habited parts of the castello,, where die would be tlie mom ex^posed to tiie insólense of the cprince» the apparent natural ferøaty df whose disposition, when beated with wine, might induce him to insult her more than ?? bad already done by his pursuit. That &? "mide her increase her spæd» atid she aeon distanced her follower» when arriving at the extremity øf m kug dark passage, ?? suddenly stopped, fm she was mot able to discover my way % vriiich sbe ¡canid leave it, other thtm by retracing her steps, which «she omild not do without dwger <rf being seen
seen by Manfrone. Tremblingly she listened if she could hear him ap¬ proach; no sound, however, broke on the silence of those dreary passages, and Rosalina begmi to hope that he had taken a wrong direction, and had miss¬ ed her. After waiting some time, and «tiH not hearing any thing of Jtóm, she be¬ gan to be more composed» and to tum her steps towards her own apartments. This however was a tnatter of more difficulty than she imagined, for unac¬ quainted with the part of the castello she was in, the more she wandered about, tiie more she was perplexed to find her right road» and she was fearful of calling out, lest the sounds of her voice should guide the prince to ber· The gloom around her wm fast in-
creasirig, afid tlie surrounding objeets « became every moment more indisoinet. < Rosalina began to be much alartned at . her situatioiii and oiideuvoured, but in i^aiïî, to recdi to her* memory tit© pas^ , sages die had passed through. While she was wandering about» she ' beheld at the farther extremity of a chamber» the portali of! which wm open, a casement vvhich was sufficiently near the ground to allow hets to- høk out of it Hastily she approached it, and loosing the rusty fastenings, threw it back», and founishe had nearly traverse edi the, whole of the southern wte$ må that whai she had got rid of ?? prirtøeV pursuit,. mstead of returning, she had unknowingly increased her dis» fmce from her apartment*. The case¬ ment opened on" a part of t the ramparta erected on the verge of the precipice, the base of whidi wa^ *mheåby the water«
fø&ceessibié ?^????, M ur^uatdted; ór dseRošáfina could' ÌMve ptoéhred alist¬ anee from the soldiers. While she was ????????!^ wMt cóuèe to' take> she heard some persons* f^prdachlrig on the ramparts. It was now so dark that she ootild ????? Uiéiti talking before she dis¬ covered their features, whfcn her own jnáme* proriotiíaced madie lier Ïisten to thetr cènvérs'âtion, which shë soon found proceeded from thè duca het fethet and Lupo the çastelldn. Curious to r know* wÏait it ¿óuld bé about aie withdrew^ áréin thé casement» and standing dose by the side, heard the following discourse, as they dowly paced the ramparts 2—- " And you aré certain»** sai# the duca» " that Rosalina is accjudnted wit-fl Montalto ?** ii % « Perfectly
" Perfectly so," replied the çastelldn; ** I have often seen them wdking to¬ gether in the valley." * How long is it since his first com¬ ing ?" said Rodolpho· " It was not long after you left the castello. He has made frequent in«· quiries about the marchese; ouv pre¬ cautions in sending away Parozzi have left us in security, but he sus- *' Ha! suspects, did you say» Lupo? What cause can he have of suspicion? No earthly being but yourself knows the events of that dark hour*" *' Rumours have gone abroad, your excellenza: 'tis true, be can have no confirmation» but——"
"But
"Rut what? You torture me," said the duca hastily : " proceed." ** Passing along the forest late one evening, I saw at no great distance the signora Rosalina and the young mar¬ chese in earnest converse; curious to know what was the subject, I conceded myself behind ??? thick underwood, and—*' Here distance prevented Rosalina from hearing the remdnder of Lupds speech, and she was about to retire from the casement, when she thought she heard tiiem returning« " *Tis very strange,** sdd the duca. * Lupo, there ia somewhat to be feared in this: mark me-—Montalto must—-*" The concluding words of his speech ? 3 were
irøre spoke in so ?? a tone, that Ro¬ sdina could not distinguish >yh$t was said. She now drew back, for hcr fa* tl\e? and Km jcppfident >vere passing has- Uly breath thç caserrie$t Tliey did uot spciifc to e^sdi ptlier in her hearing» and she cprichlAed thpt tiiey had made tlieir determîpdàon» aî)4 werç ïipw mr turwJng to ¿he lia|). Greatly agitated, Rosalina leant on tii? sfone fraine of the easement for support. $he 4id not entertain a, doubt but that ??? dark plan was 'm agitation which threatened i m fover? and that idea rnadp 1?? tmiy miserable How to avert the impending danger she ???? ignorât for it wpul4 ? a matter of sepie difficulty for her to obtain arr interview 5*4tli 1?» without danger of being discovered. Perliaps it was not till this moment that Rosalina felt how wry ?? Montalto was to ber, for the thought
thought of any duister event befalling ?? was more tlian she could support ; tears at length came to her relief, and wheu slie had formed a resolve to ac- qudfct Montdto with tlie occurrence of tliat evening, she felt somewhat com¬ posed» and even begau to think the con* duct of the prince fortunate» since it h«ad given her an opportunity of bang of service to her lover. Tbe knowledge sbe had gained from the casement» of har situation, enabled her to find out the way to the grand hdl» imd from thence she ascended to her owrf apartments» where Carletta had long waited for her» «and had begun to be very uneasy at her absence. T . Rosalina, miserable about Montalto, could not sleep; she pondered, during the remdnder of that night» on the best means of seeing bim» unknown to her ? 4 father
father or the vigilant Lupo. The con* versation she had heard, and the darb hints thrown out against the old mar¬ chese di Montalto, could hardly leave her iu doubt as to her fonner suspicions, and which made her truly miserable. Pide «and ill, she arose in the morning, and was sitting deeply absorbed in pen¬ sive ruminations at her casement, which overlooked part of tlie courtyard,- when she saw the duca crossing it, in earnest conversation with the prince di Man¬ frone. By their gestures, they appeared tø be arranging some important «affair, and once or twice the eyes of the prince were directed towards that win|j of the castello which contained her apartments. She hastily withdrew fcorn the casement, for the sight of Manfrone was from the first unpleasant to her, and his rude con¬ duct the preceding evening had render¬ ed it doubly so. In order to divert her thoughts, she took up the ancient mar nuscript
nuscrïpt of Legendary Tdes, and was going to peruse it» when the duca en¬ tered her chamber. Impressed with the recollection of the conversation she had. overheard between him and Lupo, «and fearful that he was going to tax her with her acquaintance with Montalto^ Rosalina's agitation was so great that she had scarcely power to receive hhn. Her surprise was, how¬ ever, greatly excited* when instead of beholding his countenance covered with frowns, she saw it fit up with a smile o£ satisfaction. * I have news for you, Rosalina," said hej ** which doubtless you will be happy to hear; it has given me the greatest pleasure. The prince di Manfrone has declared himself your lover, and has so- licited your hand, which I have pro¬ mised he should possess." ? & Kosalma
RosaUna at the first mention of the hated prince trembled and titmed pale f but when her father had concluded his speech» her emotion was so great, that she was obliged to hold by her seat to prevent' her sinking on the floor. The duca frowned. *-* You do not receive thk intended honour. Rosdina» as you oiight; or per¬ haps you have dready disposed of your affections? Tell me in one word, have you been so unmindful of your duty m a daughter, during my absence from the castello?*' • ; ** The conduct of the prince last night,** said the terrified Rosalina» '* was sufficient not only to make me dislike him» but also to rouse tbe anger of the duca di Rodolpho.** " My anger P'said the duca. "Wbat is
is it you mean?-*-what h^ Manfrone done ?" Rosdma then informed him of the prince's rude behaviour on the preceding evening, and the terrors she underwent at losing herself in the gloomy intri* cate passages of that part of the castello. She was, however» greatly distressed to find her relation produced no other ef¬ fect on her father than a smile of con* tempt. * And this, Rosalina, fe tîie ifiîghty reason you have for disliking tbe prince di Manfrone—because he wished to speak to you, and you, like a giddy girl, ran away ? No, Rosalina* do not think to deceive me; I have heard of your prudent conduct in making an acquaint* ??? with a stranger. Of* that subject, I shalt talk to you further, if you do itot comply with iríý wishes and those of e 6 the
the prince, whom I order you to com sider as your future husband," Thus having sdd, he hastily left the chamber, without deigning to hear Ro¬ sdina's reply, had she been able to make one ; but his last words robbed her of all power of action, and she h«ad but just strength to totter to her couch, on which she sunk, insensible for a while to the miserable anticipations of her care-worn bosom. The duca di ^Rodolpho was greatly disturbed at the dislike his daughter evinced to the proposed dliance, for to support the wild extravagance of his dissipated hours, he had borrows im¬ mense sums from Manfroné» in order to pay which he must have disposed of a large portion of his territories: but the dark-meaning prince, who litó be¬ fore, by accident, ??? Rosdina» was struck
struck with her charms, and knowing how unwiUing the duca would be to give up any of his lands, now made a proposal of cancelling the pecuniary obligations he was under to him, if he 4 would give* him Rosalina in marriage; To such a request the duca with joy acceded» and hastily informed his daughter of it; and conceiving that the rank of Manfrone wouid obliterate all partiality she might have entertained for any other person, he little dreamt that any resistance would- be made on her part; In this, as has ???? stated, he wa» mistaken;, and he began to fear that his> new-formed hopes of aggrandise¬ ment, and emancipation from his pecu¬ niary difficulties, would r in consequence of her seemingly rooted aversion, or her partiality for Montalto, vanish, and he should be in a worse situation than before, for he knew suflident of the prince's
prince's disposition, to be wdl assured that he would ill brook a refusd, and that he should have every thing to fear from his dark resentment. One while he determined to drag his daughter to the altar, and force her to accept the hand of the prince ; but he then feared that Manfrone would object to such compulsive measures. Another time he was going to Rosdina, to lay open hk dtuation to her» to state the immense pecuniary claims the pince had on him, and to entreat her compliance with liis wishes; but this step, which would have prcvdled on the gentle and affec¬ tionate heart of his daughter, his pride forbade him to do. The third and fest thougkt that entered his bosom was, to do a deed which would remove the ob¬ ject whom he had every reason to sup¬ pose had gained the affections of his daughter, «and in dl probability was the chief obstacle tohis wishes. There were dso
also other reasons which made this last step necessary, perhaps» even to his per¬ sonal safety» and he instantlv formed his dark resolutions. Ι ι The prince di Manfroná, anxious ta know how Rosalina had received the in¬ timation »of his wishes, now entered his apartments; he started when he saw the confused manner m which the duca re¬ ceived him, and the dark characters which were but too legible in his coun¬ tenance, as he rendered on a deed at which human nature starta with horror. '* The |ady Rosalina, I fear» duca," said* Manfroné, * # is averse to the ???? jected alliance?!* The <??? attempted to sroiip* - ** Your highness must make .allow* ???? for the timidity of afemde; but I trust
I trust my daughter knows her duty too well to disobey my wishes. At first some allowances must be made; she is young, and marriage is perhaps what she has littie thought of. Your high¬ ness may rely on my promise, that Ro¬ sdina shall be yours " Manfrone appeared satisfied, «and after a short conversation he retired; the duca then sent for Lupo, who remained a long time with him in his apartments, during which time no one was permit¬ ted to enter- Meantime Rosdina slowly recovered from tiie state of insensibility into which the unwelcome intelligence brought by the duca had thrown her. She opened her lovely eyes» «and gazing around her apartment, found herself the sole inha¬ bitant of it Tears bedewed her cheeks, while imkind memory made her long ponder
ponder on the harsh commands of her parent. What to do to evade his de* termination she knew not, for unfor¬ tunately she was but too well acquaint* ed with his inflexible disposition, and that he little recked the means, so that by them he could obtain his ends. Hei* anxiety about Montalto increased every moment, for in the conversation the duca bad held with Lupo» she liad heard enough to make her fear the worst. Thus was the unfortunate Rosalina rendered doubly miserable, through her fears for her father's ty¬ ranny, and the safety of her lover. Con¬ cerning the prince di Manfroné, sho had little hopes thnt he would relax from his suit, or that her candidly explaining the situation of her affections would have any weight on a heart that appeared hardened to the perpetration of any act of cruelty.
She
She found herself unable to attend in the had at the hour of the banquet, and therefore sent an excuse, at hearing which the duca frowned, and tiie prince looked displeased. Neither of them could at that time express their senti¬ ments, as the hall was ftill of the officers and other signors who had attended the prince and duca to tlie wars, and both sat down sullenly at the splendid board» for each, though from far different causes, was vexed. When Rosdina, according to her usud custom» w«as tdung her evening wdk on the ramparts, lamenting her unfortunate situation» and considering how she should extricate herself from it, she saw «advancing towards her tlie duca» twrompanied by the prince : to avoid them was impossible, for in an instant the gigantic figure of Manfroné stood by her side. ** Lady
dark meaning smite illuaained his sdlo^ countenance, tjC I mi ?^??? to find you are so ??? recovered fronì tìie r indis- position wbicb prevented me the plea¬ sure pi seeing ??? at tliß banquet. 1 ' " Your highness is kind, to concern yourself about me» wlio bave so little pretensions to sueh a distinction," re¬ plied Rosalini, in ? ?&? distant tone of voice, and w.as going to mntinue ber walk, when the prince, striving to un¬ bend from his natural haughty deport¬ ment detained hcr hand» wbite ho ??? — *' The duca, fair Rosdina» has sltmuy acquainted you with the sentiments I entertain for you, and he has given me his solemn promise that you should be the princess di Manfrone. I tritst that your inclinations go dong with our joint wishes ?" * The
" The shortness of the time that hatf elapsed, since my father first informed me of your highness^ interest in' my favour, will, I hope, be my excuse for not directly answering your question in a point of so much importance," replied the trembling blushing Rosalina* " At least" said the prince, " dlow me to entertain the hope that you wffl soon overcome your scruples. The duca is as impatient as myself for so desirable m end." α No doubt she will," said the duca, who had joined them during their dis¬ course; "your, highness will remember my words of this morning. In three days I promise you your fdr bride.'* " Rosalina," sdd he, in a low tone, unheard by the pince, whUe his eyes glared darkly on his hapless daughter, * % beware
,#ί beware of my eterød; heaviest curse, tf you do not eomply." Having said this, taking the arm of Manfroné» he left his beauteous off¬ spring a prey to unutterable distress. A feverish glow pervaded her trem* bling frame, and with an uncertain step* after,much exertion, she gdned her apartments, where, a prey to the deep* est misery» she sunk on her couch, and but for a timely flood of tears, which relieved her bursting heart her senses might have been endangered. Rosalina at length began to be her-, self. Sorrowing and lamenting would avail but little ?? so desperate a ease as hers was. It required all her energies to ward off so terrible a blow to her earthly happiness» and to contend witb the furious dispositions of two such men as the prince and her father, who were
-mie ??? bént otr tiie aftainment ?? one object, to whieft ?? was to be saw- ficed. After a sl^ilé^ r^gfit, ^a^ed fti-rtl· riiinating on whtvt cMr^e die should töké,* she' at têtvgfâk ???1? to adeteímí- ???? r W see the ftìtoèé, and acquaint hith wfth hei* refbsd^ öf ? s^*t, and tftroW Herself tM hié' geri'eröáity, if he fmetoeå ññf, b áfiáý thfe fary wliich lîel* condili w^uld ???? tó tbe duca; -? Thus resölveâ, ?? İrmuag shë ¿hould succeed, she endeavoured to compose her Stated spirita siifTfeíierrtly to alfov^ lie* to' ^tend iti' the lidi that da;y; aildwhért at tength tite hour came, she dmcejítdod thé gmné' stab-case^ ut thé foot of which the prince, who had ob- s^ved ha*»» Wažn wdttag ????1? $? vm seated b&Weën' Manfroné and
observé, thut the traces of sorrow, which were bdbre but; voo apparent on tier lovely chfeeks» had mw gåvett Way to ? delibate tíht wft*ch her liopes^ df suc¬ cese bad strfïbsed over them«! The prince was in high 4 sparita, and oncfe or" twice hiáted hisr impatience fbr the arrivd of the appdrrted 1 day, on 1 Which he Was to lead Rosalina to the altar. When át føngtiV tiie bansqüet waá eoftdüdfed, Kosdtóa retired, glàd tpbe éüt öfthe presence of the detested prince, ^d> fearful lest iate should* meet hitó if die Went out, cfetterrriined to ro- mdn that evening in her apartments. 1?he nfctt ??????*^ die had fixed on for her" ibtettøieW wttíi Mhnfroné, and With riiuCb* anxiety shé uwáited ita ^· itval,t Wlitehwöulå iriífolffi to her wbiW àie ïtaâ ; to eïiootmter, to avoid the mi¬ series
^vries that were impending over her* Of Montalto she frequentiy thought and often west© ha? ejres directed ta where the lofty turrets of his castello rose in φ roud iiragnificence over the summit of the aurrounding forest ; hut in ??? ¿id her earnest gaze endeavour to pierce its dark recesses» for his in¬ teresting form was not tq be seen, Kight that shares with day the em¬ pire of the worlds now spread ber «sable mantle over the hemisphere; and Ro¬ salina, weary and exhausted, sunk on her couch» and gladly resigned tier senses to,ttø eontposhsg influence erf. the som¬ nific deity. The next morning Rosalina sent a message to the prince, to request his ??« sence in her apartments, and when sbe heard his approaching steps along Oie ????? notwithstanding she h$d sum¬ moned
moneti up all her resolution, she trem¬ bled, and the roseate hue forsook her downy cheek. The prince, struck with the visible agitation of Rosdina, was going to in¬ quire the cause, when she thus ad¬ dressed him— * I sent for your highness on a sub¬ ject of the utmost importance to both of us» and I hope for your indulgent hearing. My father has acquainted me with your prediLßtion in my favour, and without ? er consulting my incli¬ nation, has peremptorily ordered me to prepare for our union. I attempted to remonstrate against his sudden disposal of me, but in vdn ; and he has threaten¬ ed me with his heaviest curse if I do not comply. Your highness*s generosity will doubtless pity my situation, and cense from your m$t, or else you will vol. i. f render
render me wretched, and the object of my fathers hate ; for to be candid, I do confess that my affections ore already disposed of, and such is my hapless situation, that I cannot even indulge a hope that the duca will ever consent to my union with the object that pos¬ sesses them. Thus situated» to wed you while my heart was another's, would be acting ungenerously towards you» and would make us both miserable, I hope that your kindness wui induce you to conceal this candid avowal from my fa¬ ther» m it coui ' mswer no end than that of increasing his anger against me," The dark meaning countenance of Manfrone blackened» as the trembUng Rosalina addressed him ; his brows pro¬ tended over his scowling ???, whose gasse wfis bent on the ground; his lips were of a livid hue, and closely pressed together. He seemed to be revolving in
in his mind» and determining on the commission of some dark deed. When she conduded her speech» he raised his eyes on her, and endeavoured to assume a calm look. " Your candour» fdr Rosdina» does you honour, and makes me doubly la¬ ment my unfortunate situation in being deprived of so much excellence ; but as it is so, I will cease my suit» and en¬ deavour to recondle the duca to my so doing; but tlie hints you have thrown out, respecting the engagement of your affections, I must confess» somewhat surprises me, for surely the daughter of the duca di Rodolpho has not placed them on a low-born or undeserving object. May I know» 1 tasalimi, who itis?** '*."'· Full of gratitude at the seeming ready acquiescence of the prince to her wishes» i F 2 and
and feeling her bosom lightened òf a load of care» Rosalina did not hesitate in her answer. " Your highness," she replied,, "> is right in your ideas, for no unworthy person could for a moment engage my affections. The ïmrehese di Montalto." " Montalto !" furioudy exclarniedttthe prince, starting from his seat his eyes gleaming with rage; ' 6 hated name~ Montalto my rival ! Rosalina» I retract my words; I stidi hold tlie duca to his sdemn promise» and though Montalto has your, affections» Manfroné will pos¬ sess your person: to-morrow is the day appointed for the nuptials; tlien shall 1 triumph over Montalto ; bpt that is not all» for my hatred shall pursue him white he exists." Having said this* he. lett the apart¬ ment»
ment, and Rosalina in a state of agony not to be described | even hope, that consoler to the afflicted, had deserted her, aiid now grim md black despair pervaded her bosom. To add to her sorrot fror» lier casement she beheld Manfroné in earnest conversation with the duca, and from the vehemence of his manner, she little doubted but that he was relating what she had so im¬ prudently confided to him. She was not long left in suspense, for shortly after the door of her apartment was rudely thrown back, and the duca en¬ tered. He looked at his trembling' daughter for some moments, while his brows were contracted into a dreadful frown» and 4 then waved his hand for htftr to follow him. Rosalina with difficulty obeyed» for her limbs were scarcely able tosup- F 3 port
port her, and she expected every mo¬ ment to fdl to the floor. The duca leaving the apartment, en¬ tered on one of the corridorsi which led to the east side of the castello, followed by Rosalina, who mournfully anticipated some dreadful event to be on the eve of taking place. At length, after having traversed a long range of intricate passages, the ???? at the extremity of one opened a door. " This," said he, in a voice of thunder» " is your abode, till at the dtar you be¬ come the princess di Manfrone. My resolution is fixed, and since you are bhdto_„.l*n«ith_ sary that I should force you to be ob¬ servant of it" "Oh,
u Oh, my father í" said the weeping Rosalina, %i have pity on me ! I cannot love the prince; and would you wish your daughter to be made miserable du¬ ring her life ?" " Idle tdk !" vociferated Rodolpho; '* it is to Montalto's cursed arts I am in¬ debted for having a disobedient child ; but dearly shdl he rue tVs' j?essons he hâs given you, Rosalina. Now mark my words: I give you two more days to consider whether you will go willingly to the altar, or be dragged to it." The furious Rodolpho, without await- and fastening the portd, the hapless Rosalina became a prisoner. She sunk on a seat, and gave vent to her sorrows in a flood of tears, lifting up her swollen eyes to the azure canopy of f 4 the
the world.—-" Good Heavens !" she ex¬ claimed, * what crime, what deed so dreadful have I committed» that røy whole life is to be one scene of wretehed T ness? Ah, Montalto! dearly have I purchased the few hours of happiness I enjoyed in thy society—hours which I fear are destined never to return! Ever shall thy Rosdina be faithful to thee; for never with my owii consent» though these waUs were to become my tomb» will I wed the crud deceitful Manfroné." When the first emotions of tumul-, tuous sorrow had somewhat subsided, Rosalina surveyed the apartment; it was of great size, and lighted by case¬ ments which were so high that éhe could not reach them. The chamber had apparently been long in disuse, for the walls were damp, and the ivy was fast creeping round the stone frame¬ work of the casements, which obscur*· ing
iog tbe little light that even in mid¬ day pierced through the tinted panes, now covered with the snaring labours of the spider*rnade it gloomy and cheer¬ less. The furniture was old, and some of it seemed almost dropping to pieces. A large mirror at the further extremity ofthe chamber attracted her notice! she approached it, but started back with terror, for as she was looking at it whe¬ ther her fears made her imagine it, or what she saw was a dreadful reality, but the glass reflected a tall figure gliding along the further end of the chamber opposite to it, and which instantly vanished ; for as die turned round» no sound of footsteps could she hear, or discover any place where the person» if such it was, had left the chamber. Again she stopped and listened, but the silence around wás only disturbed by her agi¬ tated breathings. Superstition with her ominous voice» had never breathed her f 5 fearful
fearful tales into Rosalina's ear» for" her natural good sense made her reject what could only have effect on the weak and credulous; but wbat she had just wit¬ nessed staggered her belief, that spirits were not allowed to visit the world. Rosalina slowly approached the seat she had so lately quitted» on which she remdned some time» gazing fearfully on the spot where the singular figure hac 1 been in a moment hid from her sight; but nothing occurring which could oc¬ casion her the least «alarm» her terrors somewhat subsided, and she began to thmk that her disturbed imagination, and her sight dimmed by her frequent tears» might have formed the alarming vision* ' İ ' "Λ å t » 'r' -i Her mournful thoughts were now in¬ terrupted by the sound of paces Jn the corridor, and presently after the door of her
her apartment was opened» and a do¬ mestic entered carrying a basket. " The duca» signora» has ordered me to bring you some refreshments,** said the man» laying dov* n his burden on a, large marble table, " and he wishes to know if there is any thing else you want before to-morrow morning." Rosalina at that moment first reflect¬ ed that she was to p.ass the night there» which» influenced m her ænses had been by the ided or real spectral figure she had seen, became a circumstance of terror to her, and in a faint voice she replied-— ** The duca» Pietro» surely does not mean I should pass the night here» for there is no bed in this chamber?" " But there is one in the next, f 6 signora,
signora, of which he has given me tlie key." , .uf Thus saying, he advanced to apportai of ancient construction» which was con¬ ceded in a dark recess at that end of the chamber where Rosalina» by means ofthe mirror, had behdd the object that 1 had so much därmed heri * The door easily opened» and disclosed to her view another chamber, somewhat similar to the one she was in. A lofty canopied bed, tlie hangings of which w^re green velvet, fringed with gold» but iná.de- 1 caved and tarnished condition, stood at the further end ; a few old chairs and a table were the rest of the forbiture. This room was much darker than the öne she was in, for the mantling ivy had completely grown ov^r thé case¬ ments. ** I have brought you a lamp, signora," ■ said
sdd Fíetrb, ^?????? this is a gloomy pláe£ to stay in at adg^st, for ?? øm ha$ liveïi al thk end of the castello tor tmm, ye.ars," »'«'n».«»! 4,* ( , tr . , , , * » if » »' Rosalina sighed, but replied not; and when tlie ???? repeated' his former question, she answered ir>tberiegativ^ when ba wètihBrew and joined, ätós con»-* pariion, ,whé>^vtø ^raitnig ä for>him^lh^ portal. * ,(l * \\' t( '.. :i tl ^i if*,' ,»í f Of » thàt> mdi Rosalina (had φ· dight glimpse, Jmt the p^itid view sbe bed of bis teaitures was mirfidtot ; to alarm í her» for she was almost certain tlmtl she had seen them before ; and though it was at aitimi when ?? was ubarne tke influence of teito^ yet ihe malign dark expression of his eountenanee, though viewed but for à moment could not be obliterated from her recollection ; yet m ί? certainly appeared vety improbable^ #fere he hv deed
deed the person she suspected, that he should hold «any situation in the castello, she resolved not to tiiink more about it till she haa made some inquiries con¬ cerning hira. i: In her gloomy apartments, the shades of evening soon condensed into the sable mists of night ; Rosdina then lighting hot lamp, retired into the bedchamber, .and having locked the door which communicated with the outer apartment, threw herself on the couch, not to sleep, but to ruminate on the miseries that seemed gathering around her. In this melancholy employ the hours slowly rolled away, which brought on midnight, Rosdina, fatigued, ??? her senses harassed by her miserable reflec¬ tions, at length .slumbered, but unquiet dreams still agitated her bosom, and the long
long tolling of the tašt hour of night awoke her. During her sleep, her tamp had gone out, but the moon, pde rolling dong the heavens, darted her silver beams through the ivy clad casements, «and partially illumined her chamber; and as Rosalina cast her gaze around, her eyes were caught by the soul-harrowing appearance of a tall form» which stand¬ ing on the side of her couch that was involved in darkness, with threatening gestures brandished in its grasp a naked dagger. ·" J ' Rosalina groaned as suddenly die raised her hand to prevent the seem* ingly intended blow of death» hut at the sound of her voice the form glided avtmy, and with noiseless paces retiring into the distant gloom, was lost to har view. This
This waa «nø illusion of ber ænses— no cloud-formed spectre of her .imagi¬ nation ; she no longer doubted but she wfw.con^eypd injtøitbosø remote a^rt- ments. for ft pmfp^se she shuddered to reflect on f /When $he r remembered that it was her fatiier who thought her to thqm, *BMt, from bet? death wbât he~ nefit could t he rmp? ι On? the, ^nta&ry, he .would destroy: hisi seemingly fong- formed plein, of her union with the prince. Unable, tbæreforfci to reconcile such ? eontradíe^n, she at length con¬ duded ber fiitìber; innocent of røy design agdnst her life. t In proportion as the difficulties and terrors øl· hm situation increased, Ro- sattns*$ fortiede also increased; she trusted ia %\mt Albseeing, All-beneficent PoWerinWh^FwatohfuIo^erihis creatures witìi uoceatíng care» protects tihem from ί í ' the
the dark plots and tóse machinations of the wicked. The long wished4or morning at length dawned, ??& Rosalina arose as soon m her chamber was sufficiently light for her to examine the wainscot¬ ing, where, if the person w«as an inha¬ bitant of this world, she was certain he must have passed tturough, for she had 1 kept her aching eyes steadfestly fixed on thfe receding form till it sud¬ denly vmi$he4 Witik diligent inquiry, she gassed on Ithe panels, > and asi her hand wandered over tihe fiftoies, she touched a spring, which on $?? histant silently released oáe of them frørø its holds, and it ran back m the groove. Rosalina started, for she could scarcely believe but some person had opened tlie panel on the otlier side, ao gentle \\m its motion. No one* however, ap¬ pearing, she took courage* and looking into
into the aperture, beheld a small closet. Rosalina paused before she ventkired in it, till at length, convinced that had the nocturnal intruder intended to take her life, he would not have delayed his dreadful purpose, and that from him she had not now any thing to fear, she took courage, and entered the apartment, which was entirely destitute of furni¬ ture. A cavity, which seemed formerly to have been covered bya 1 doopr^hich was lying near it» attracted her atten¬ tion; a tong flight of stone steps led down from it to some place below, but whither she was afraid to examine at that time, «and leaving the closet, entered the bedchamber, and closed the panel, carefully marking the secret spring which opened it Rosalina's spirits were somewhat elated by this discovery, for she reflected that as that concealed passage probably led to
to some subterraneous outlet, should the duca persist in his unnatural reso¬ lution to unite her to the nrînr»p. sbe could by it effect her escape, and seek the protection of the convent of Santa ???, which in such a case she thought she would be weU warranted in doing, and she determined, as soon as it was night, when there would be little danger of her having left her apartments being discovered, to examine that conceded passage. About the close of the day, Pietro entered the chamber; he brought with him a fresh supply of provisions. " The duca," said he, " desired me to acquaint you, signora, thd he intends seeing you to-morrow rooming." Rosalina, who too weU knew the pur¬ port of his coming, sighed deeply, and the
the man was going to qtiit the chamber, when suddenly recollecting the question she wished to «ask him eoncerning the man who accompanied him on the preceding day» she beckoned bim to return. *< Was the person who was with you yesterday» Pietro» a vassal of my fa¬ ther's ?" " No» signora; he is one of the prince's attendants." ' { Good Heavens ! how long has he been with him?** hastily demanded the agitated Rcsalina. « More than a year, signora, to my knowledge, for he was with us at the wars." a Tliat is suffident»* said the trem¬ bling
bling Rosalina. " Good Pietro, let my present inquiries be kept a seeret from the subject of thom; I have rea¬ sons for tliis request* and as you faith¬ fully observe it, to you will be re¬ warded;" í' The man bowing, quitted the cham¬ ber, aad ifeft Itesalina deeply involved in ^distressed rumínatiom, för the gloc^FMpeet befoi* Wwa* g*^ ly darkened fr<»n thé result of lier inquiries. ι It however inspired her with that resolution land courage Which it was necessary she should possess, to assist her while traversing the subterraneous passag.es and dreary dungeon-vaults which were beneath the castello. Night now came rolling on in all ter sable mists,, and rested over the silent
silent hemisphere. Rosalina having lighted her lamp» prepared for her un¬ known wanderings. She listened» but no sound came to her ear ; even the breeze of evening softly slumbered, and the clouds hung motionless on its tran¬ quil bosom. With a trembling but cautious pace, Rosdina descended the steps within the cavity in the doset; they wound round a large stone column, and terminated in a passage seemingly of great extent» for as Rosalina raised her lamp, she could not perceive «any of its boundaries. Un¬ certain which way to direct her steps, Rosdina advanced, and after she had proceeded some way» the passage be¬ came narrow, and at the extremity were several doors. Concluding that one of them might communicate with the passage that led to
to the mon-astery» she\cfrew back the bolts of one, and examined, the interior; but the gloomy walls of a vaulted cham¬ ber met her view, and as she was re¬ tiring, her eyes glanced on a bundle of straw. She momentarily paused, for she thought she heard some one breathe. At first, greatly alarmed, she was has¬ tening from the place, but at length, taking courage—" If the breathing I hear," thought she, " proceeds from a human being, it must be some wretched captive, who in this dreary cell is doom¬ ed to linger out a miserable existence, and Providence has doubtless sent me to his rescue." Thus saying, she slowly advanced, and as the reflexes of her lamp flashed on the straw, she saw a man stretched on it, apparently asleep. His features were nearly hid by his cloak, but as she stood by his side, and lowered her hi a-} kra P
lamp with trembüng agony, she recog¬ nized the welÜnown coimtenance of Motitelte» ï * \
CHAP-
CHAPTER IV.
The gudden glare of fhe lamp which Rosalina Md awoke Montalto, who started up, and gazed cm her. « Are my senses deceiving me, or do I really behold my adored Rosa¬ lina?" sdd he* " 'Tis indeed too tnift** ifcped the hapless fair: " aks! that we should mm meet in the dungeøhs of my father's castello!" "How, Hoödina! Recallyo\ir words voi. i. q —or
—or am 1 indeed the victim to Ro- dolpho's arts? Till now, I knew not tny secret enemy; he is then indeed the infamous, base» midnight assassin» who -----" " Hold !" smd the agitated maid ; " do not add to the anguish of a breaking heart. Though my father may be guilty, spare his daughter the pain of hearing his actions called in question, Let these tears shew you my heartfelt sorrow, and let my being the instrument of your deliverance atone in some measure for bis cc?d?ît. t, " Dry» my Rosalina, dry those tears," returned the agitated Montalto; " your wishes shall be complied with. But you» my love, how came you to visit these gloomy subterraneous abodes at this si¬ lent hour, when doubtless the inhabi¬ tants of the castello are buried in sleep ?" The
t< The detail of my present melancholy situation is long,** replied Rosdina, w nor suits it with your situation té waste the precious moments; suffice it to say, that my father wishes me to marry the prince di Manfroné, and in consequence d my resistance has con¬ fined me in some ap.artmente in the eastern wing of the castella, under which we now are. Through a mys¬ terious circumstance, 1 discovered the entrance to a private passage which led me to this place; my intention was to find the means of escape, should it be necessary.*' " To escape! Oh, my angel,*' said Montdto, " let me be your protector¬ ies us haste tothe monastery» and there repeat those de«ar vows which will make me the happiest—4he most blest of men."
g 2 " No,
" No» Montdto, without a parents consent Rosalina will never dispose of her hand ; but this I promise you, that unless force is made use of» no one else shall possess it than Montalto. If by my father's conduct I am obliged to fly these walls, I shall, I trust, find a shelter in the convent; but never will I forget that I am a daughter," " åk! how unworthy he proves himself of such a treasure !*' sdd the marchese, deeply sighing. ** Spend not the time in useless re¬ grets,'* said Rosdina, " but let us hasten f!rom this pkee; perhaps» after aü, we may not be able to find an outlet and you may still remdn in my father's power.*? " Part of the way I well recollect,** replied Montdto» *' for though I was conducted
conducted to the castello with a ban¬ dage over my eyes, it was taken off as soon as the gate was closed on me» which I imagine opened mto tlie pas¬ sage leading to these dungeons. Our way lies to the right: but, dear Rosalina, Jet me conjure you to proceed» now that you have it in your power, to the con¬ vent Oh ! wliat tortiwee will r,ack my soui when I reflect that you are left here, the destined victim to an am¬ bitious parent and the ferocious ???? froné! —Base, unmanly wretch? would that I could meet thee face to face l By Heavens, the last drop of thy liearts blood should hardly serve to appease my just revenge !" While he thus spoke, the furious con¬ flict of contending passions that warred within his breast shook his frame, and his intelligent countenance at one time was flushed with a crimson tint, g 3 while
while he thought of the prince and the duca, and the next moment it be¬ came pde and sorrowful, as he re¬ flected on the dangerous situation of Rosdina. He now, followed by that trembling maid» left hk kte dreary abode» and passing along the passage at the extre¬ mity, descended a long flight of steps ; these led into other vaulted communi¬ cations» till their progress was stopped by an iron portal. Hitherto they had preserved a pro*· found silence ; but now Montalto» as be drew back the ponderous bolts which, forced deep into the stone frame, se¬ cured the gate, agiha conjured Rosa¬ lina to leave the castello; she, how¬ ever, was deaf to his earnest solicitation, and when the portal was thrown opein and to her delighted gaze appeared the
the silver lamp of night, and the fir¬ mament thickly glowing with myriads of scintillating stars, she thus address¬ ed himj-~ w Montalto r I conjure you, before we part tc promise me that you will not seek te ¿revenge yourself on my fether ! such a step would separate us for ever. For my sake r bear your wrongs patient¬ ly ; and if you love me as much as you have often declared to me you do, you wiH find little difficulty in acceding to my request" Montalto fdthfully promised, and deeply sighing, took his leave. Rosa¬ lina then closed the heavy portal, and slowly began to retrace her steps, for her heart was sad, while she reflected on the unprincipled conduct of her father; she was, however, pleased be¬ yond measure tlmt she had thus for- G é tunately
tunatdy been dde to counteract bis plans respecting Montalto» whicb from the conversation she h&d overheard between him and Lupo, threatened little less than his life. While thus ruminating» die had nearly gained the bottom of the spiral staircase which led to her apartments, when ttie light of her lamp flashed on a distant form slowly moving in the gloom. The view she had cf it wm momentary* for it soon became indistinct but nom the height and appearance of it, she was almost convinced that it was the same that had twice so greatly alarmed her. She hastened up the steps» and exerting her strength» drew the door over the cavity in the doset, and passing through the pfnel, she closed that and placed some of the furniture of the chamber against it, in such a manner that the slightest movement of the pane! would cause them to fdi* and the noise woidd prepare
prepare hsr for the approach of the noe- turnai visitant This done, fatigued with her exertions, Rosdina now lay down, and sleep dosed her eyes till morning agdn dawned brightly on the earth. Ueither the panel nor the tmp-door had been disturbed» and Rosalina hm» ing replied the furniture» sat in her outer apartment waiting with anxious expectation for the arrivd of the duca, and pondering in her mind what she should say to induce him to change his cruel intention. While thus ruminating» the noise of footsteps along the passage indicated the approach of her father. Notwith¬ standing all the resolution and forti¬ tude she had armed herself with to encounter the coming storm» she trem- g ? bled
bled wid turned pde when she saw him enter* « Well, Rosalina," Said he, « I hope you have by this time learned to com¬ port yourself «according to your father*» will, and that you will now freely and joyfully consent to mine and the prince's ardent wishes.** ° My dear fkther, how great would be my delight were it in my power to make you happy ! but you, who have been so kind a parent to me, would not surely wish to see your Rosalina for ever miserable ? such would be my case were I to wed the prince. Oh, my fa¬ ther, urge me no more on this subject ! indeed I cannot—cannot love him/* ' Rosalina, hear me: he who pos¬ sesses your love, whom you dared to meet
meet without a parents sanction, now lies a captive in the dungeons of this castello. The moment you are united to the prince^ he is free; but if you obstinately refuse his hand, Rosalina, mark my words—then Mon¬ talto dies." Rosdina*s eyes were ati tfie conclu^ don of the duca'fr speech raised to heaven, full of gratitude for lier having so happily rescued her lover from the fate that awaited him,- for she was but too well assured» whether she was united to the prince or not, his- death, would have been certain; Fearful,, however, lest her father should have any idea that she was privy to his escape» she affected tobesh^edathisspeeä. ** Surely," said she, " you would not, could not be guilty of so dreadful a G 6 deed?
serve it?" * No matter, such is my resolve," hastily replied the duca, while the varying colour in his cheeks bespoke the sudden agitation of his mind: " now Rosalina, your fimd determi¬ nation?" *' My dear father, believe ?? it makes me miserable to refuse you, but never willingly will I wed the prince; and should force compel me to the altar» that hour shall be my kst" 4 Then is your last hour soon," sai4 the frowning Rodolpho, u for before midnight you shaU he the prince's bride." Thus havmg said, he kft the cham¬ ber
ber and bis hapless daughter, who d* most repented that die had not made her escape to the convent the preceding. nigbt when she might securely have done it under the protection of Mon¬ talto; now, there might be both danger and diificulty in the attempt, for if his flight should have been discovered» the vaults and subterraneous recesses might be more strongly ????????, «and it would therefore become beyond her power to release herself. She opened the panel, intending to remove the trap-door, but to her asto¬ nishment, that had been already done. She listened, but could not hear the sound of any p^es below; that the mysterious person h«ad been there she could not doubt, and in all probability,. but for tbe duca's being in the apart¬ ments at tbe time» she would again liave beheld him» Her present miser¬ able
able situation prevented her from re¬ flecting long on that circumstance; her escape from the castle was now become a matter of necessity, and she waited with the greatest «anxiety for the evenings When Vietto brought the provfc sions» Rosalina observed that he omit¬ ted the usual supply of ?? for the lamp, a circumstance which greatly distress¬ ed her, as the small quantity which remained, she feared, would not be suf¬ ficient to enable her to una her way through the subterraneous* passages; she however forbore to make any remarks to Pietou, ftarful lest they should create' a suspicion of her in¬ tention. As soon as the sombrous hue of even- ing darkened her chamber, Rossina prepared for her escape. Trembling, and anxious
anxious for the result, she fervently pe¬ titioned the Guardian of the oppressed to aid her at that perilous moment A ¿tow of increasing confidence animated her frame, rød rising' from her knees she illumined her lamp. Scarcdy had she done so» when Pietro again made his appearance, bringing a bundle of clothes with himv " The duca desires, signora, that your will lose no time in dressing yourself, as he will be here in less than an hour to conduct you to the chapeL** Thus saying, leaving his parcel on the table, he departed, and Rosalina casting her eyes on it, found that it contained a most elegant dress, with a casket, which held her most valu^ able jewels. Till now, it never had occurred to her that she was without the
the means of procuring adrpission mfo tbe convent, and this unexpected cir¬ cumstance» which so amply put it in her mwer s animated her with a hope that blie should succeed in her attempt to escape* ?? momenta were now precious, fcr should she use her utmost speed, her flight must be discovered before she could have traced the extremity of the subterraneous passages, and she might, in her hurry and anxiety to escape, miss her way, or be otherwise detained. Taking up her lamp and her jewels, she hastily opened the panel, and de¬ scended the spiral staircase. Scarcely* however» had she proceeded many paces, when a light flashed along the extremity of the passage» and she distinctly heard the sound of mmy voices and steps» which seemed advancing towards her. Terror-
Terrør-J^mck, Rosalina fled, «and her sudden motion extinguished her lamp. The footsteps approached, and Ro¬ salina, who had observed some large columns near her, which «erved to support the roof, concealed herself be* hind one while tliey passed, and from their discourse found that ihey were caused by «ome of tfae domestics, who had but just discovered the escape of Montalto, and were proceeding to the duca io inform him of that circum¬ stance. Dreadful was the situation of %?? hapless Rosalina, and scarcely could she prevent herself from fainting. The p-arty* howfcv^r* passed on without observing her, and «oon quitting tht pk.ce elie was in, left her involved in darkness.
Rosalina
Rosdina endeavoured fo recollect the way she had come, but in the dark she found if utterly impossible. Deeply did she repent not having proceeded- with Montdto to the con¬ vent; she would now have-been safe from the cruel wishes of hfer father, and the dark designs of thé hated Man¬ froné. Her regrets now,, however» were too late, her agitation increased every moment; the visible darkness of the place» the deathlike silence that reign¬ ed throughout these subterraneous pe¬ sages, the dampness of which coldly struck on her trembling frame» made her almost wish to return to her chamber, there to await the coming of the duca, and trust to an All-pro¬ tecting Power to avert the impend¬ ing storm ; but she waa as unable to dfo that as to escape fremi the castello, having, in her fears of being discovered by the people who had so lately passed her*
her, w.andered into several to her un* known passages. She bird been in this distressing situa¬ tion some time, when she heard a confused noise at a distance, and her name repeated several times; the light ef torches gleamed on the distant walls of the extremity of the passage» and she now plainly recognized the duca's voice. " Merciful Powers !" said she, mourn¬ fully, " have pity on me í and if ever my lips gave utterance to the pious effusions of my heart, aid me at tiiis dreadful crisis of my fate !*' At that moment Rosdina beard a gentle rustling near her; she started, arjå looked around, but the gloom was so deny?, no object could be discovered, while
while in her ears was breathed» in £ deep hollow voice— u Rosalina, Hear not—I wiH protect thee," * And who art thou ?" said the trem¬ bling Rosdina. M Alas ! I am indeed in want of a friend, but thou who shun* nest the light whose deeds are dark and mysterious what confidence can I place in thee?" * Thou shdt again see me, ??????? be not afrdd," returned tiie voice· The duca now approached, and the light of the torches his people carried quickly darted through the gloom. Rosdina gazed around, fbr though astonished «and terrified, yet she was - somewhat comforted by tbe import of the
tlie words she had heard, and wished to see the person who had uttered them; but when the place was suf¬ ficiently light, she could not discover him; and while thus employed, her white garments had attracted the no¬ tice of her father, who starting for¬ ward* seized her by her trembling arm. " Disobedient girl," he exclaimed, " have I at last found thee? Tell me tliis instant, where is Montalto ?" * I know not," replied Rosalina, ** but I trust in safety " 44 Not if he is within the walls of this castello," said Rodolpho, gloomily. * e Dread, Rosalina» dread my utmost vengeance if you hesitate to inform me where you left bim !" 4 * Indeed,
** Indeed, dear father, I have not seen him this night,"' she replied. " Well, it matters not," returned the duca, * fi the prince now waits. Mon- talto's escape shall not impede his nup¬ tials. Come," said he, dragging dong his feeble unresisting child, " come to the chapel : to-morrow I will think of Montalto." Preceded by the domestics, the hap¬ less Rosalina, impelled on by her un¬ natural father, hastened dong the sub¬ terraneous passages, and .at length, ascending a long flight of stairs, en¬ tered a corridor which led to the chapel. A lamp on the dtar was the only light in the chapel, and as Rosalina anxiously gazed around, sbe saw the prince
prince slowly pacing the dsle; he hastily advanced towarus her, and atternnted to take her hand, which she drew quickly away, and collecting all her fortitude, she thus addressed him : *' My hand, prince, can never be yours but by unwarrantable force, nor will Rosalina ever live to cdl Man¬ froné her husband. You have un¬ generously taken advantage of the confidence I unsuspectingly placed in you, to incense my father against me, who little knowing your red charac¬ ter, or the base means you formerly employed to get me in your power, has consented that I should be your bride.*' M Your words astonish me,** said Manfroné. *' What can you mean ?* M Would you wish me to tell you» prince?
prince? Would you wish to have Bertoldo called to relate how he w^ foiled in his mission, when by your ordem he lav in wdt near the forest with his companion, to sense me as I was taking my evening wdk ?*' ** What is M this discourse about?** mid the duca, impatiently.-** 4 Where, Pietro,** said he to the man who at¬ tended him·*-**' where is father Augus- tmo?-*4s he able to come?** " I went to his apartment, your ex- cellemsa*" replied Pietro ; " but he was too ill to attend, and I sent Paolo to the monastery as you ordered me.** During this discourse the prince fixed his stern glances «at the trembling Rosalina. «* Why» siffera/ sdd he* in a low tone,
tone» " would you accuse me falsely. You know I am innocent of the trans¬ action you allude to.'* " What if the man sldn by the mar¬ chese di Montalto owned it with his dying breath?** replied Rosalina. " Ha! did the caitiff betray me?*' said the prince, put off his guid by the answer of Rosalina; " then am I glad he met his reward." " You have betrayed yourself, prince,'* said Rosdina ; " the man would have done it but death stopped his fur¬ ther utterance: the ruffian features of Bertoldo remdned in my recollection, and thus your daring insolence became known to me. And do you really ima¬ gine that I will ever become your bride? My father may drag me to the dtar, but never shall the lips of Rosalina vol. ι. H utter
utter other than vows of constant detes¬ tation and abhorrence of the prince di Manfroné." The duca, who had during their dis¬ course been pacing the dsle of the chapel, awaiting anxiously the arrivd of the monk, having heard Rosalina's last words, drew her aside, and with a look of determined ferocity» whieh made the life blood of Rosalina trickle coldly through her veins» breathed against her the most horrible imprecations, if she did not consent to be united to the prince. Rosalina replied only by her tears and imploring looks, for her heart was ready to burst with the agonizing sensations she endured, må which denied imr the power of speech. Paolo now entered the chapel» ?????- panied
panied by i monk» at tbs first gla?# øf whom, Rosdina, recovering the power of speech, sunk on her knees before ber father» «??! in the most piteous manner implored him to delay the time tiU she cmild conquer her aversion to tbe prince; but the duca sternly denied her wen ? day's preparation, and seizing her arm, forced her dong tiie aisle, the sav$g& Manfrone foUowing with deep exulting malice portrayed an hk dark features. " Father»" sdd Rosalina» addressing the monk, " I solemnly conjure you not to wed mø agwrot my will, m y W hope for mercy at the last dreadful day of re¬ tribution.'* The monk» who with dow and mea- suied t»$e$ was proceeding dong the d#e with his ????? folded, and 1? be^d cover¬ ed with Ins cowl, seemed not tø psy tj^e maallesi attention tø the words of Re¬ ii 2 sdina,
salina, but placed himself at the altar at which she now stood, supported on one side by her implacable parent, and on the other by the stern Manfrone. One domestic only remained in the chapel, who held a torch to dispel the dark gloom of its interior, and the duca, who was standing next to the monk, becoming impatient at his seeming neg¬ ligence, for he had not as yet made any preparations for the ceremony, said in a hasty angry tone— " Father, why this delay? Proceed in¬ stantly with the service.** " No» duca di Rodolpho, I will not proceed in such a cruel act; nor, as you dread my re-appearance, do you dare attempt to unite your daughter to Man¬ frone,'* said a hollow voice which pro¬ ceeded from beneath the cowl, which the
the mysterious utterer now slowly rais¬ ing, disclosed to the duca, and to him only, his features. Dreadful W.as the effect the sight of them had on Rodolpho: his eyes gra¬ dually dilated to their greatest extent; his mouth opened, «and his lips quivered, as if he would have spoke, but wžmted the ability. A terrible convulsion seized his limbs; he staggered back from the altar, and fell on the pavement. Forgetful of her own dreadful sensa¬ tions, Rosalina hastened to the «assist¬ ance of her father, as did also the prince di Manfrone, while the man who bore the torch ran out of the chapel to sum¬ mon the domestics to it. The senses of the duca had fled, nå- tulre was not able to sustain the waning conflict of contending emotions which H S agitated
agitated ?? bretet The trembling Ro^ salina, whilst tìm wätad anxiomly for the arrival qf the domestics, onoe ven¬ tured to raise her eyes, «and look around tbe chapel, but her mysterious pretmrer wm no longer to h* mm. The attendants now entering the chapel, conveyed aw«y the inanimate htm ofthe duca to his chamber, whither Rokalina Mowed, while Ihe prince» mad with his disappointment» which evinced the force it liad on his mind in his dis¬ turbed gestures «?? pile quivering tips, fot mmm time continued pacing the gloomy aisle. Life slowly revisited the form of the duca, and as soon as Ms recollection re¬ turned, he opened his eyes, .and with evident sensations of horror, looked around him. The object which he sought, however» met not his gaze, må he
he appeared to be somewhat less agi¬ tated. " Rosalina," said he, in ? voice scarce¬ ly audible, «* ? that horrible spectre gone?—or was ? only a delusion of my imagination» which shaped to my men¬ tal view that dreadful well-remembered form? But no—it w-as real, the same tone of voke as when «alive, the——" Here Rosalina» who began to fear lest .airy unguarded expressions should escape the duca in the hearing of the several attendants who were in tbe apartment» hastily dismissed them, and when she was aione with tiie duca she endeavour¬ ed to compose his disturbed senses, un¬ der the idea that the words of the mys¬ terious being would have the desired efiect on the duca, to prevent him from uniting her to the prince. She conceal¬ ed ber having before seen hira» but H 4 dwelt
dwelt strongly on his threats of again appearing» should her father persist in his intentions; and she conduded her discourse with an earnest entreaty that he wouid not; and then, for the first time, disclosed to him the circumstance of M antroné's having sent two men dur- ing his absence from the castello, to seize her; adding, that it was on that event she first became acquainted with Mon¬ talto. Whoever it was, whether belonging to this world, or the air-formed resem¬ blance of some departed being which had disclosed its features to the view ofthe duca» and hollowly breathed those threatenings in his ears, cannot at this time be unravelled; but certdn it is» that the dread of his «Mippeanmce, and that restless monitor conscience, which loudly and unceasingly vexed the soul of Rodolpho, made him resolve to com¬ ply
ply with its demands respecting his daughter» for he felt he could sooner dare all the rage and vindictive malice of the prince» than «agdn behold that terror-striking form. The disclosure that Rosalina now had made of Man* froné's former insulting conduct to her served as an ostensible reason for his de¬ clining his alliance, though from the evident alteration in his features, and contraction of his brows when Rosalina pronounced the name of Montalto» it was evident the duca was vexed that it was to him she was indebted for her safety. He now assured the delighted Rosa¬ lina that she should not be allied to Manfroné, words which caused such a sudden sensation of heartfelt rapture to pervade her frame, that for some mo¬ ments she was not mistress of her ac¬ tions; «and whUe she was in that de¬ lf S lirium
litium of joy, a domestic entered the apartment announcing the approach cf the prince di Manfroné. Unwilling to be present «at their meet* ing» Rosalina requested permisdon to tetire to an adjommg chamber, to which the due« consented, whose strength hav* ing» by this time, in some measure re* turned» was slowly prang the «apartment» revolving in his mind the probable con- sequeneas of bis refusing the prince's dliance.
CHAPTER V.
When the prince di Manfroné en¬ tered the duca's apartments, and saw him pacing his chamber, the dark frown of disappointment which had contracted his brows gradually di.sap- peared. ** I am glad to see you so soon re¬ covered," sdd he, addressing himself tq Rodolpho. " Have you any idea who the insolent monk was, that «tared to dictate to you? He shewed you, I think» his features?'*
h 6
«He
*' He was no monk," replied the duca, greatly agitated, " nor is he an inhabi¬ tant of this world. Would to God he were!*' The prince started. " Your senses,'* sdd he, " are surely wandering.*' " No,'* returned Rodolpho, deeply sighing, " it could be no deluden of my imagination. You heard the words it uttered, and saw the form, which only to me unveiled its ghastly too weïï-re- membered countenance." " Well," said the prince, in an im¬ patient tone, "it is now gone: cannot you send to the monastery for a father to perform the ceremony? The night is fast w r earing away."
"It
rt It is impossible," returned the duca. " Impossible ! why so—Wliat is your reason?" said M-anfroné. " My daughter is averse to the union." " How ! averse, duca?-— Am I to re¬ mind you of your solemn promise—-a promise which may not be broken with impunity?" 46 When I made you that promise» prince," said Rodolpho firmly» " I was under the influence of my private in¬ teresi— I looked on you as one who would not do a dishonourable æt; and that I meant to perform my promise, you certainly must «allow, had I not been prevented by that awful soul-har¬ rowing form." «Which
"Which doubtless," saki Manfroné indigmmtly,»" was some trusty agent of your own, in order to give a colour to your proceedings " " They who are guilty of base acts aie ever ready to suspect others. You, prince, are one of those; Rosalina has informed me of the attempt you made to seize her person during my absence, «and ihat conduct, joined with the awful warning voice, has made me de¬ termined that she shall never be your bride." Tbe countenance of- the prince, as the duca spoke the preceding words, assumed each moment a darker tint; his eyes darted their infuriated glances on bim» and Ms band firmly grasped the hilt of hia sword; but soem tbe ideas that were generating in his dark plotting soul made him loose his hold, anã he then,
then, in a voice almost rendered inarti¬ culate by rage, replied»«· " 'Tis well—Manfrone disdains to sue. Reflect, duca, from this moment I am your bitterest enemy* Rosalina only can repair the breach between us; and while you withhold her, dread my most deadly hatred and revenge.*' Before the duca could reply, the prince had left the chamber, and Ro¬ salina leaving the apartment from whieh she btød heard the conversation be¬ tween him mid her father, and which had filled her with a thousand name¬ less alarms for his safety» entered the chamber in which he was, pale «and terrified. « My dear father," she tenderly ??- claimed, * how miserable it makes me to think that I should be tiie cause of so
so much uneasiness to you ! But surely you cannot blame me for my mvindble aversion to the prince, now that you see his real character ?** The duca, involved in thought re- plied not for some time, but at length, without adverting to what his daugh¬ ter had been saying, he thus «address¬ ed her:— * Rosalina, I charge you, as you fear my heaviest resentment, that you never more hold converse with Montalto: if I once find you disobey my orders, the prince di Manfroné may perhaps obtain his wishes. Retire now to your apart¬ ments.** Rosdina sighing obeyed, and enter¬ ing her own chamber» threw herself on her couch» where sbe remained till the morning beams entered her case¬ ment
ment» deeply pondering on past events, when a confused noise in the court- y.ard of the castello made her hastily arise to see what it was occasioned by, and she perceived the numerous attendants of the prince, some mount¬ ed on their horses, and others getting ready to do the same. Shortly after, Manfroné appeared, and vaulting on his steed, rode through the gates, cast¬ ing on the lofty towers of the castello, ¡*s he passed, a look of black deter¬ mined malice. Rosalina watched with ple.asure his train winding through the valley, till at length» entering the forest» they were hid from her sight in its um¬ brageous recesses; .and her mind» not¬ withstanding the cruel mandate of her father respecting Montalto, gradually recovered a degree of composure, since she had escaped so horrible a misery as
as would have been her certain lot had she been imited to tiie savage Manfrone. The duca di Rodolpho long paced his chamber, while the reflections pro* duced by the mysterious appearance which» in the habiliments of a monk, had so much akrmed him, togetlier with the dark threatenings erf* the prince, left not a vacancy m his mind unfilled by dismd presages. The im¬ mense sums he owed to him would take more than the vdue of half his estates to liquidate» and the expence of hb deranged affairs in being obMged to dispose of tiiem, was a circumstance too humiliating fæ him to reflect on witii¬ out the greatest vexation. Nor was that all, for as his vassals would be consigned with his territories to the purchaser, he would thereby so mudi weaken Ms troops» tliat his hdpless condition would subject
subject bim to the attacks of tlie neigh¬ bouring potentates and most of di» to the prince di Manfroné» who doubtless would avdl himself of the opportunity, and wreak on him his thr Jtoncd ven- geance. . He therefore determined to subject himself to any imputation whkh might be made on his honour in not dis¬ charging the sums he owed the prince» than to leave himself destitute of the means øf defence agdnst hk dreaded adversary. The unfortunate escape df Montalto from the dungeons of his castello had dso given him another enemy» but from him in the strong wdb of Colredo he had littie to fear, aa his resources were contracted, He however deter· mined to attack the CasteUo di Montalto» in order to take him, rince the marchese had
had eluded the search of Lupo and his confederates, who had diligently sought him from the moment that his escape was discovered ; for from his conduct to Montdto, he could not but be well as¬ sured that he had made him his bitter enemy ; his motives for it were perhaps known only to himself and Lupo, though conjectured by Rosalina from the too weU-remembered events of a former night. Some days now passed in melancholy tranquillity. Rosalina, unable to make any inquiries concerning Montalto» was no less miserable about his situation than he was about hers; the dreadful idea continually tormented her that perhaps he was a second time confined in the dungeons of the castello» from which he would in él probability be emandpated only by death. The first two days «after the prince's dep^ure, she saw little of
of the duca; he scarcely ever left his chamber, in which no one but Lupo w«as admitted. On the third, he took his usud repast in the hall. He con¬ versed a little with Rosdina, but never once mentioned the name of the prince, or any of the past events ; his faculties seemed absorbed in dark ruminations, the melancholy effects of which were too plainly evinced by his pallid coun¬ tenance, and the frequent sighs which escaped him. It was not till the evening of the fourth day that Rosalina ventured to leave the castle. Deeply did she sigh while retradng those well-remembered walks where she had enjoyed the con¬ verse of Montalto—where she had lis¬ tened to the sweet dedarations of his sincere attachment The agonizing sen¬ sations, which since that period she b-ad endured, made her think on those happy
h»ppy moments with increasing regret. Alas! she had every reason to fear that they would return no moi-e-thirt they were like the pesceful visions of the slumberer, disturbed by the mid¬ night tempest who, while he imagined himself revelling in ecstatic scenes of delight—while pleasure hovered over him with her airy pinions, suddenly is «»woke by die howling blast; hie dream oi joy ie fled, but the remembrance of it painfully vibrates on his soul» whUe he contrasts his Ided scenes of tranquil delights with tihe furious conflict of elementd warfare. Alas! Bosalma had still greater evils to experience. The path she had to tread in her weary pilgrimage was full of craggy rocke, precipices, and quick- wtnds, where the least false «step would consign lier to destruction; the tempie ef happiness appeared far, eût distent
and at times seemed but a doud-formed fabric. The beauty of the eveninfr*~the sweet tranquillity of nature—the crimson tints of departing day» fast sinking into the meditative gloom of twilight—the gen¬ tle cooling zephyr—the last soft twitter¬ ing of the feathered race» as extending their wings over their downy nesta, tiiey protected their young from the dump nriets of appwaching night_4he pde nocturnd regent» slowly rising above the rustling summits of the forest, as yet nearly rayless» but each moment increasing in her borrowed beauty, with here and there a twink¬ ling star momentarily visible—the busy hum of creation dissolving into solemn silence—all served, in some measure, to lull the sorrow» of Rosdina. She was seated on tbe trunk of that well- remembered tarée wheæ ñmt Montdto had
had avowed to her his love; and so deeply was she involved in ruminations, that she became unconscious that the gloomy mists of night were thickly roll¬ ing over the hemisphere» shrouding the objects around in their sable inves¬ titure. At length the cold chill of night warned her to depart. She started as she gazed «around» and beheld the shades of night; but now the clouds» which had some time intercepted the rays of the moon, sailing swiftly dong, she darted her silver radiance on the earth, brightening the frowning walls of Colredo, md trembling on the un¬ dulating surface of the wide waters of Abruzzo. Rosalina, vexed that she had strayed out so late, was hastening onwards to the castello» ?? had «almost gained the
the winding road whkh led up to its entrance, when three men darting from the covert of a thicket, caught her rudely by her arm, and at the same moment another prevented lier screams by putting a handkerchief before her mouth. Rosalina struggled for liberty, but her efforts were of no avail ; the men dragged her along towards the thicket, where they seated her on a mule, one of them still holding her hands, and keep¬ ing the handkerchief so close as to pre¬ vent her breathing» only removing it now and then for a moment, that she might not be stifled. In this manner the party proceeded some time, till the harassed senses of Rosalina became for a while suspended, and she dropped inanimate into the vol. ι. ι arms
arms of the man who had held her on the mule. The party immediately stopped ; Ro¬ salina was placed on the rugged rock which formed one side of the road, and one of the men was sent to eet some water from the lake below. The path which they had taken» as¬ cending from the valley» wound along the sides of a lofty ridge of rocks, at the foot of wliich rolled the waters of the lake ; and wliere they now had stopped, the road was formed on a part of the rock which far overhung its base. Thi' moon brightly shining, disclosed the dangers of the place» and shewed tbe lofty summits of the rocks which rose above the road, and the various paths made to facilitate the pursuit of the izard, or bounding chamois» by the hun¬ ters»
ters, whose cabins were erected on some of the verdant spots which were scatter¬ ed about. The cool gale of night tended to re¬ animate Rosalina, whose recollection re¬ turning as she opened her eyes, she wildly shrieked doud, and attempted to leave the place, but her feeble limbs trembled beneath their burthen, and denied her the power. The tall figure of a man now hastily approached her. " Rosdina,'* said he, " your screams are useless ; you are now in my power, and far from the hearing of Rodolpho or his myrmidons.** Affrighted at the sound ofthat dread¬ ful voice, Rosalina looking up saw the countenance of Manfrone, on which the ï 2 moon
moon shining, disdosed the revengeful smile of exultmg malice which played darkly on his features» while he gazed on the trembling form of his intended victim* The cold chill of terror had nearly a second time stagnated the vital current wliich slowly crept through the veins of Rosalina as she beheld her most dreaded enemy, atid reflected that she was in his power. " Oh, merciful Power !" said she, rais¬ ing her lovely eyes to the blue vaulted firmament of heaven, '* have pity on me, and confound tlie base plans of the wicked !" While thus employed» her eyes were attracted by the form of a man who wm slowly winding dong one of tlu* rocky paths above ; and when Manfrone, impatient
impatient of delay, hastily approached, and taking her in his arms» was placing her on the mule» she agdn screamed aloud» and Echo, with her busy respon¬ sive train, long repeated the sounds of her voice amongst the recesses of the rocks. That the person whom Rosdina had perceived had heard her cries was evi¬ dent, for she now beheld him rushing down the path with inconceivable ve- lodty. Somewhat comforted by the hopes of assistance, Rosalina gained fresh strength, and loosing her hands from the grasp of tiie prince, ran towards the path which wound up the rocks, at the same time loudly supplicating for as¬ sistance. Swift as the meteor glides along the vaulted firmaments so rushed the solitary wanderer on the prince» who hastily de- i S sisted
sisted from pursuing Rosdina, to defend himself from his furious attack, while his attendant ran up to his assistance. Though opposed to two, the unknown declined not the combat: quickly he sheathed his sword in the bosom of the domestic, who sunk groaning on the blood-stained rock; and now the prince singly opposed him, but unable to bear up agdnst his furious assauit, terrified he began to retreat. The unknown pressed on, and now they both approach¬ ed the verge of the dreadful declivity ; the prince was ignorant of his danger, for his back was to it and as the stranger aimed at him a death-dooming thrust» he started back, and his foot slipping» he fell down the precipice. Rosalina, who had attentively sur¬ veyed the combatants» uttered a scream as the prince disappeared» and then listen¬ ing
ing for a moment» heard his body dash among the waters of the lake. The stranger now hastily approached her, when the light of the moon gleaming on each other's faces, she instantly recog¬ nized her beloved Montalto, and lie his adored Rosalina. To describe the sensations of either would be impossible. Overcome with the excess of deLght at being rescued from the prince, and that by Montalto, she almost sunk insensible in his arms, while he, no less transported with joy, hung over her enamoured, and as he exclaimed—" My angelic Rosalina!" pressed her doser to his bosom» and touched with his trembling lips her lovely cheek. Rosdina's feelings sympathized with his. Theirs was indeed the union of souls and sentiments; each was to each ié a dearer
a dearer self—love in dl its heavenly purity glowed in their bosoms, un¬ mixed with the base «dross of semud passions. " The enemy of our peace»' 1 said Mon¬ talto» as Rosalina, gently disengaging her¬ self from his arms, rested her agitated frame on a projecting rock» ** is now no more ; you are happily for ever safe from his malicious intents/ 4 u The sdnts be praised for It!* replied Rosalina; "but tali me, Montalto, by what wonderful circumstance was I so fortunate as to meet with my preserver in a situation so wild and remote as this appears to be ?'* " Alas !" replied Montalto, " you can¬ not, my dear Rosdina, but know that the emissaries of the duca di Rodolpho are busily employed in endeavouring to find
find me. To evade them» I retired to this sequestered spot» whc ^e I have in¬ dulged the «sadly-increasing griefs of my bosom; for ignorant of your dtuation, I surmised the worst, and conduded that the duca had forced you to accept the hand of the base Manfroné; your present dtuation« however, has filled me with hopes that my fears were unfound¬ ed. TeU me, loveliest Rosdina, am 1 right ? Oh ! relieve me from a suspense too painful for me long to support !" " When dragged to the altar by pa¬ rental tyranny,'* said Rosalina, " and no hope was left of escaping» but by death, from the cruel fate that awdted me, the mysterious monk who so much disturbed your peace of mind, who warned you not to hold acquaintance with the daughter of the duca» was bimself my pi ^server; his countenance, which my father ???? beheld, and the 1 5 mysterious
mysterious words he uttered, had the desired effect; attd the prince, unable to prevail on the duca to complete his pro¬ mise, left the castello, and» as I conclude, secreted himself near it in order to carry me off, in which, but for you, he would too surely have succeeded. The great service you have rendered me will doubtless be the means of reconciling the duca to you, and make him* desist from his unjust and groundless perse¬ cutions.** Montalto sighed, while a frown at the recollection of his unmerited wrongs momentarily contracted his brow.— u My injured feelings,*' said he, ie unceasingly impel me to demand that satisfaction from the duca di Rodolpho which I am fully entitled to from his unprecedented conduct ; but the promise I made you, my adored Rosalina, alone restrains me. Could I but see that mysterious bang —he
,
—he doubtless is well acqu-ainted with the reasons of Rodolpho's seeking my Ufe. Alas ! I do but too strongly sur¬ mise the cause.** Here his agitation became so great that he stopped, and Rosalina looking at him, beheld his eyes raised to the heavens, while a tear silently rolled down his pdlid cheek. Alas ! she knew too well to what he dluded not to feel emotions dmost as acute as his. For some time both were silent, till at length Montalto interrupted it. " And what, dearest Rosdina," said he, ** are your present intentions ? Do you mean to return to Colredo, or seek the more certain protection of the con¬ vent?** f ' The prince being no more,** return- 1 6 ed
ed Rosalina, tí there can be no danger attendant on my return to tbe castello ; I hope too, that my father, impressed 4 with a sense of gratitude for the impor¬ tant services you have rendered me, will seek to make you ample amends for his conduct," Montalto sighed, while sudden re¬ collections creased his mind. F calina heard bim faintly utter—*' Oh, impos¬ sible ! What amends can be made for such a deed?" Then turning away, he walked forwards a few «tep*, seemingly greatly agitated» till the sight of the body of the prince's attendant disturbed him from his mournful ruminations : he examined it, but tbe spark d lifo was extinct. The moon now began to be obscured by a fleecy veil of clustering clouds, and the breath erf meming cbUly sighed around.
«around. Rosalina arose from hef seat, and 'Montdto instantly joined bar. " Wffl you ascend yonder patii* lovdy Rosalina»*' sdd he» " which will conduct you to my bumble abode? The pea¬ sant and his wife who inhabit it will procure you refreshments, which are ab¬ solutely necessary for you in your pre¬ sent weak state» and in the morning you can proceed towards Colredo." ** The anxiety of my father concern- ing me must be grrnC replied Rosalim, " and I therefore am anxious to return immediately to end his fears on my ac¬ count; I am able to ride on tiie mule the short distance we have to go." 11 It is nearly two leagues from tins to the castello, 1 * replied Montalto. Thk information greatly surprised Rosdina,
Rosalina, but she concluded that her senses had been so harassed, that she was totally ignorant of the distance she had travelled» and which having 'tore- turn made her the more anxious to proceed without further delay. Mon¬ talto» at her solicitation, brought the mule, which she mounted, and slowly wound down the road which led to Colredo. The ruddy streaks of morning soon began to illumine the eastern horizon, and the lively strains of the feathered creation echoed around; the mists of night yet hung over the lake and dis- tmt valley of Abruzzo, but soon the sun, red rising from the wide wrorld of waters» chased away the nocturnal va¬ pours» and gladdened the face of nature with hiè orient beams. Swiftly passed the fleeting moments in
in the sweet interchange of their mutud sentiments of love, for Rosalina forgot the duca's stern mandate that she should not hold any converse with Montalto, and enjoyed without alloy the present opportunity. At length the lofty turrets of Colredo rose to the view, and Montalto righing, took his leave of Rosalina, who» as she w.as proceeding to the gates of the cas¬ teUo, saw an armed party emerging nom therfl, headed by the duca. At the returned to the castello, which she soon entered, and received a message from her father to attend him instantly in the hall. Though greatly fatigued» Rosalina immediately obeyed his summons. He was alone; his countenance was pde and agitated ; he seemed to have antidpated what
what had bappaied to Rosalina, for he hastily asked her if the prince had a large party with him? " No,*' replied Rosalina, " ?® ?? but two domestics.** " Only two! and which w.ay did he go? Doyou think there is a possibility of overtaking him?—This is indeed a glorious opportunity," sdd the duca, hasting forwaid to the hdl portal which opened to the castle courtyard, where the troops were still waiting Ins orders. " The prince di ManfroneV' replied Rosalina, " has met the due reward of his atrocious acts—he is no more." ** No more!^—dead, say you?" re¬ turned the duca. " Repeat those words again. Dead Í— is it possible ?—-are you certain?" *« The
" The waters of Abrussso now flow ever his remdns," returned Rosalina: " he was thrown from the precipice of Sderno into the lake." " From Sderno !—a dreadful height! Then «are all my fears over. Rosdina, my child, embrace me—my bitterest enemy is no more. But tdl me, how did it happen^—was it the effect of chance, or were you rescued Τ ** Yes, by one who had little reason to interfere in behalf of the daughter of the duca di Rodolpho, w replied Rosalina, in a mournful tone. * Why did he not attend you to the castello V sdd the duoa. "The pre¬ server of my daughter should have been loaded with honours and rewards.** 11 Your daughter's preserva*,'* said Rosalina,
Rosalina, firmly, " wants only justice, and that he requires from the duca di Rodolpho." " From me !" said thr duca. " Who is he ? Let me know his name ?" 44 You will be sorry to hear it," re¬ turned Rosalina. " -Tis Montalto." A slight suffusion was indeed per¬ ceptible on the countenance of Rodol- pho, for he remembered but too well the injurious treatment Montalto had received from him—he remembered how greedily he had sought his life, who had twice rescued his daughter from the base designs of the prince, and above all, had released him from a thou¬ sand fears in the destruction of his most bitter enemy. There were perhaps other ideas which crossed his mind, but those he forbore to dwell on, for his con¬ science
science too often brought them to his recollection. s * Perhaps," said he, «after a pause of some minutes, " I have been too hasty with respect to the marchese Montalto; perhaps his conduct has been misre¬ presented to me. Re it as it may, in consequence of the important services he has rendered me, I will no longer seek his life; nay, I would even wish to be on terms of friendship with him. You may inform him of my words» Rosalina." It was not without sensations of the greatest delight that Rosalina heard her fathets resolution, and she blessed the happy circumstance that was likely to produce a reconciliation between Mon¬ talto and the duca; nay, she fondly an¬ tidpated more, and that with a parents approving consent her life would be passed
passed in blissful union with the beloved of her heart. The duca now questioned her about the particulars of her escape» and Ro¬ salina felt the greatest delight in expa¬ tiating on the valiant conduct of Mon¬ tdto in attacking the prince and his do¬ mestic She dwdt perhaps on that loved theme longer th-an pleased the duca, fbr his brow was contracted with a frown, and he moved towards the portd to dis- miss his armed followers. Ab he threw it back, a confused noise was heard m the oourt. A crowa of people were heard advandng trough the gates. The duca repeatedly desired to know the occasion of thr disturbance, but the centinela who guarded the fiali entrance were ignorant of it Rosdirø» røxious to lesrø what it was» advanced to fhe edge of the marble steps whicb led
led to tlie portal, «and looking forw^d, saw, environed by a crowd of her father's people, «and ignorainiously confined by- heavy chains, her preserver, her beloved Montalto. A party of the duca's people who had been sent out in search of Rosa Una, on their return amid the passes of those mountains which she had so lately travelled over, found the mar¬ chese di Montalto, who, weary with his late exertions, had thrown himself on a grassy knoll, where he was slum- tiering. In that situation they easily secured him with chains, and knowing how ac¬ ceptable the capture of Montalto would be to the duca, returned exultingly to the castello ; while he, indignant at the base treatment be received, regarded his conductor
conductors with a fierce and threatening look, .which awed them into some re¬ spect for their unfortunate captive.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VI.
Tue duca, from the sudden exclamation of Rosalina, as soon as she recognized her deliverer, learning who it was, in¬ stantly issued orders for his liberation, and retired from the hall, leaving his daughter to receive him. The stern looks with whieh Montalto had regarded his conductors instantly vanished at the sight of Rosalina, while that lovely maid, animated with the sweet hope of that day being the com mencement of happier hours, received him with a smile. " I did
" I did not expect, lovely Rosalina," said he, *' that I should so soon have the pleasure of seeing you again." <t Nor I, signor, to be the bearer of so pleasing a message as it is my father's desire I should deliver to you; he wishes you to forget What is past, assures you that his conduct was occasioned by misrepresentations, «and hopes that the friendship which once existed between him and your father may be revived in you." At the first pïwrt of Rosalina's speech, Montalto's intelligent countenance spoke the joy of hia heart, but when she men¬ tioned his father, a sudden melancholy seized him. " Impossible !" said he, with a deep sigh, " dearest Rosalina, it is impossible: you know, or you perhaps conjectured, what
what I would say—that inexplicable mystery—tiU that is solved, oh, Ro¬ salina, I must be a stranger to these towers.'* Rosdina w.as affected even to tears, for all the past rose to her remem¬ brance. She took the hand of Mon¬ tdto— u But not to Rosalina," sdd she in a low trembling voice—"you will not be a stranger to your grateful Ro¬ sdina ?** How much were the feelings of Mon¬ talto agitated by her tender reply ! " A stranger to you," said he, " sweet maid of my heart! Ok no, no—-your dear image is too deeply implanted in my bre-ast ; your fasdnating manners— all, dl» Rosdina, dwell in my soul · but for you» how different would be vol. ι. ? my
my conduct! You have disarmed me— you have rendered me incapable of pursuing those measures which filid^ duty and my unmerited wrongs re¬ quire. This forbearance my Rosalina well knows is no small proof rf my love." 64 As such I consider it," replied Ro¬ sdina; n perhaps tke cloud that hitherto has enveloped your father's fate may be at last dispersed ; and may Heaven grant that your present suspicions be wrong placed !" 4i To find the mysterious monk," returned Mentatto» ** shali be now my care ; doufefless he is acquainted with the circumstances of my father's death." ** He knows the whole of that hor¬ rible
rible transaction," said the monk's welt remembered voice. Roth started and looked around, but no one was near them ; they were walk¬ ing beneath one of the galleries which were erected on each side of the hdl. A door which was close to them attract¬ ed the notice of Montdto, and imagin¬ ing that the monk might be concealed in the place to which it communicated, he hastily threw it open. Nothing, however» but a long empty corridor met his view: disappointed, he turned to Rosdina. €i This incomprehensible bdng," said he, M hm surely tbe power of 1 render¬ ing tómsdf invidble; the voke ap- peared dose to my ears, but nowhere can I discover the utterer* His keep¬ ing himself concealed almost makes me thmk that he is some enemy of ? 2 the
the duca*s, and through fear of punish¬ ment obliged to have recourse to pri¬ vacy to effect his plans: yet his con¬ duct has been # so contradictory; he has warned me to shun you, my be¬ ioved Rosalina, but he prevented your being united to Manfrone, an event which, had it taken place, would have completely done away any possibility of our further acquaintance. To re¬ concile these circumstances is dmost impossible; time alone will unfold the mystery.'* * s And may that time be not far distant!" replied Rosalina, who had during the speech of Montdto reco¬ vered from the alarm occasioned by the voice of the monk; tí for to exist in this state of torturous uncertainty is worse than the knowledge of the reality itself. Adieu» Montalto!" said she» holding out to him her lily hand; "let
" let us pray for happier times. We will meet sometimes in the chapel of Santa Maria, where thou mayest make me acqudnted with the results of thy researches.** Montalto put her hand to his lips» and deeply sighing left the hall, and crossing the courtyard, wrapped in me¬ lancholy ruminations, proceeded to his castello. Weary and miserable, Rosalina re¬ tired to her chamber. It was, how¬ ever» some consolation to her» amidst dl her accumulating distresses» that Manfroné could no longer disturb her» though she rather wished that desirable circumstance had been effected by other means than the forfeiture of his life by the hands of Montalto. The duca di Rodolpho, in the death ? % of
of the prince, seemed to have attain¬ ed the summit of his wishes : he was now freed from the distresses tlmt threatened him» in being obliged to repay the immense sums he was in* debted to Manfrone; and that he might be entirely secure in every quarter» he hoped that Montalto would accept of his proffer-ed friendship, «and bury ell past transactions and present surmises in oblivion; but in that he was mis¬ taken. Montalto, though he adored hk daughter, yet could not forget that he was a son.. Happy indeed would it have been for ffcl duca œuld he have taken a Lethean draught, for his past deeds were green in his re¬ collection, «and took eaeh hour deeper root in his bosom, while the sharp piercing thorn of an accusing con¬ science rankled to ?? heart's ?????, em- bittering his most festive hours; and when at night be slumbered» horrid dreams
dreams would disturb his repose, and the momentary gleam of happiness he enjoyed at the destruction of the prince soon faded away, and left him as mise¬ rable as ever. It was at this period that the event which is recorded in the first pages of this work took place, and which gave rise to such a variety of conjectures. After many attempts to fix her suspicions, Rosalina at last concluded that it could be no one but the monk who had refused to unite her to Man¬ froné» but when she communicated har ideas to the duca, he replied, in rather a confused manner, that it was impossible it could be bim, as from the circumstance of the daring in¬ truder's having lost his hand» there was little doubt but that in time he ? 4 would
would be discovered. Rosdina con¬ tented herself with awaiting in pa¬ tience the disclosure; and having had the secret communication with her apartments closed up» she again resided in them. For some time nothing material oc¬ curred. Montalto, though indefatigable in his endeavours to see the monk, did not, however, succeed. He frequently now had opportunities of seeing Rosa- Una, and each interview served but to increase their mutud love. The venerable father Angustino, who for many years was confessor to the inhabitants of the castello di Colredo, had for some time been confined through indisposition to his chamber; and now his soul seemed impatient to quit its mortal tenement, and to wing its
its flight to those blessed regions where it would meet the bright reward of a well-spent life. Every one who knew him mourned his approaching dissolution, but none more than Rosalina; she often visited the old man's couch, and by her ten¬ der assiduities antidpated his few wants, till, resigned to the will of Heaven, with¬ out a groan he sunk into the arms of death. What a pleasing, soul-elevating sight it is to behold the last sighs of the just! No painful retrospections cloud their hopes of eternal joys ; with con¬ fidence they look forward to their last sigh» as the welcome passport to heaven¬ ly bliss. It was father Augustínou last re¬ quest, that his remains might be en- ? 5 tombed
tombed in tbe chapel of Santa Maria» and Rosdina determined to see his wish performed herself. The çeromorry took place at midnight, wben tbe mournful train, lighted by torches, issued from the castle gates. At the bottom of .the rocks they weie met by the monks of the monastery of Santa Maria. A kmg black veil cover¬ ed the lovely form of Rosdina, who» leaning on the arm of Carletta» accom¬ panied the procession» which now enter¬ ed the diapel, and arranged themselves round the grave. Rosalina dropped a tear over the senseless remdns of the iather before the ceremony wm concluded, and* satis- fied in having performed his ? re- quest, she raised her eyes to observe if among the monks she could perceive that mysterious person who had ere- ated
ated her so much uneasiness, and had dso been so materially her friend; but after she had» as she supposed» seen all of them, she met not his well-feQiem- bered form; and while thus deeply en¬ gaged in her scrutiny» she dy not no¬ tice one of the fathers, who, with his cowl closely drawn over his face» and arms folded within' his long garmenta, had stationed bimself by her side, and seemed intently viewing her through the narrow aperture of his cowl. The unusual height of the monk, his silent motionless posture, made Rosalina start, whicli it was apparent lie observed, for turning round, he slowly traversed the dsle, and was soon lost to the sight in the surrounding gloom. At first she thought that this person must be the monk that Montalto so much wished to find» but on recollec- K ? . tion»
tion, the height and figure of the fa¬ ther she had just seen wem so widely different from his, that she was well assured he was not the one who had preserved her from her union with Manfrone. The attendants being now ready, Ro¬ salina returned to the castello, and re¬ paired to her chamber, where she sat some time before she retired to rest, ru¬ minating on the singular conduct of the monk. Tli£ crimson tints of approaching morning at length warned her to seek repose. Soon she closed her eyes, but her ira-agination rested not; the events of the past evening again appeared be* fore her mental view. She thought she saw the monk whose conduct had so much surprised her, again standing by
by her side» his features still obscured by his cowl ; he w.as seemingly engaged in contemt>latin£f a manffled corpse, which appeared to afford him the great¬ est satisfaction. Suddenly the scene changed, and she imagined herself in a small boat, with the monk seated by her side, gliding dong a muddy lake; torrents of water falling dl around her from the heavens obscured the view. Agdn, by one of those transitions so natural in dreams» she conceived herself dragged by the monk across an im¬ mense hall, and forced down a long flight of stairs into a subterraneous dun¬ geon. He then was slowly withdraw¬ ing his cowl, but at that moment Car- letta knocking at the door awoke her from her uneasy slumbers» and dispersed her mental visions. She arose pale and unrefreshed» and sat for some time endeavouring to col¬ lect
leet ^ the fárcumsteneea wliich had oc- currcd in her dream, for there was a con* sktency m tton which made her re¬ gard it as if sent to warn bar írom some evil designs of the monk, «and abe la¬ mented her having been disturbed at tbe vay moment when tbe sight of his features might perhaps have explained thé whole Her regret« wore» however, now of no avail; but in order to satisfy her curiosity, she determined to attend the service in the ehapel that evening, when she would possibly «again behold him, and learn from some of the fathers who he was; " though, after alî," thought sbe, * the dream may be merely tbe re¬ sult oi my mind, disturbed by the me* lancholy scene I had just witnessed, .and the sirijsniar conduct of the monk, which, however, might not be occa¬ sioned by ?? other motive than cu- riöÉity."
Such
Such wem tiie idea« of Rosalina, who, when it was near the time that the vesper service commenced again* repaired to the chapel; but her cu¬ riosity to see the monk had brought her there before the fethers had en¬ tered it. The beams of the setting sun faintly penetrating the saint-enciphered glass, illuminated with a mellow liglit the dusky aide. The chapel presented a scene well cdcuiated to inspire holy meditation ; itsr long aisles aiid lofty columns, that in some places were worn by the crumbling hand of time, which long since had consigned to dust the relics d the mitred saints, whose sta¬ tue» mouldered in the gloomy ; niches» where the marble, no longer fiûthful to the efforts of tiie sculptor, bad long ceased to record to posterity their vir¬ tues; and mm nameless were they m the
the crowd who had craved their bene¬ dictions» and who, like them» had long since sunk to rest. Rosdina» whose heart, softened by love and the ideas produced by the surrounding objecta, wrapt in serious musing, had strayed to the further end ofthelrandablefwhere.beneathadeep and gloomy archway rose the monument ei the illustrious chieftain who had been the founder of that religious edifice; and while she surveyed the fragments of the mouldering tomb, she could not help reflecting on the instability of hu¬ man grandeur, *· Ah! what avail him now," thought she» " his crowding vassals and wide extending domains» his train of hardy valorous blights, or Ms castle, whose towering tunets divided the air-bome clouds, and, deemed invincible» frown¬ ed
ed defiance on the desperate foe, though now perhaps» conquered by time, the fabric, as well as the founder» are level¬ led with the dust? There, where once the lyre or lute gave their soft harmo¬ nious sounds to the air, now perhaps the solitary owl, or harsh croaking raven, foul birds of discord, dwell; and where rødety with «all her laugh¬ ter-loving crew—where beauty with her train of graces dwelt, now eternal soli¬ tude has fixed her dreary cefi. How vdn in man to raise the lofty pyramid ! how vain the sculptor's labour on the mottoed stone! for soon the hand of time confounds the monumental tro¬ phies with the crumbling bones. The peasant's head» beneath the lowly turf, rasts as soft as his who once ruled over him with despotic sway, though inurned in the laboured tomb: the grim tyrant Death levels «aU distinctions ; beyond the grave
grave no vrøsal owns his lord—no haughty ruler demands obedience from the peasant" The vesper service was now com¬ mencing; Rosalina desisted from her melancholy ruminations, and joined in the chord ??. She looked around her, but did not see tiie tdl figure of the monk amongst the fathers; but as imr eyes were wandering about, she thought ehe saw him kneeling before an altar whicb -wm placed in an ob' scure cornar of the diapel; his mo¬ tionless posture and figure made im at last certain tbt it was him, and die w&tohed bis form» till slowly riring he glided amidst ??? tombs, whicb thick * ly rising around, obscured ?? from her sight. When the service wm concluded, Rosalina,
Rosalina, as vvas her constant custom» passed on to the tomb of her lamented mother; there» while as she w«as silently offering up her usual prayer, she hap¬ pened to glance her eyes around, they again encountered the figure of the monk : his coiossd form standing eroct and motionless in the dark shadow of a large column, his features still conceded, his arms folded, smd the solemn silence he st? preserved» was more than tiie sprits of Rosalina, weakened try the mournful reflections she had been so long indulging, could support; and hastily arising from the suppliant pos** ture in which she had directed to Hea¬ ven her prayers for the repose or har mother's soul» she left the retired part of the chapel she was in, and seeing the venerable abbot at a short distance, advanced towards hhn» in order to make the inquiry she so much wished concerning that mysterious monk» whose actions
actions had taken such hold of her recollection as to make him the sub¬ ject of her thoughts when her slumber¬ ing senses gave place to the imagery of fancy. The abbot of Santa Maria had num¬ bered near a century ; he had been the tried and esteemed friend of the late duchesa di Rodolpho, and as such Rosalina considered him to herself.— The venerable father possessed that pleasing garrulity natural to years, but bis conversation was both amusing and instructive, and Rosalina dways attend¬ ed to it with pleasure. He smiled when he saw her approaching; but when he beheld her pallid countenance, and con¬ cluded that something unpleasant had taken place, the smile instantly was ba¬ nished» while with a look of concern he questioned her about it #
Fair
" Fair daughter," said he, *' I am sorry to see you look so pale: has any circum¬ stance taken place to cause it which I can remove ?'* ** Nothing of very particular import, holy father,** returned Rosalina, "but yonder monk has roused my curiosity; twice have Ì beheld him gazing on me: you can inform me who he is, and per¬ haps also his reasons for his silent mys¬ terious deportment?'* " I know but little of him, daugh¬ ter,*' returned the abbot ; " he has not been amongst us very fong. I believe he has met with many misfortunes, which have caused him to withdraw from the world. His manners are sin¬ gular; he never mixes with us at the hour of repast, but takes' his food to his own cell,, where in solitude he eats it. He does not even pray with us, but
but dways retires to a private dtar, which you might perhaps have taken notice of this evening. With none of the fathers has he scarce ever exchanged a word ; he wanders by himself in the gardens, and never admits any one to his apartment. In his devotional ex¬ ercises he is most exemplary; all his thoughts seem directed to heaven, and to have excluded for ever worldly mat¬ ters. Perhaps in you he may have traced a resemblance to some regretted object whicb doubtless was the reason of his regarding you so particularly, a circumstance which I observed myself ?? the interment of our lamented bro¬ ther Augustino; but that is mere con¬ jecture. Strange as you may suppose it it nevertheless is true, that there is not one of us who have as yet seen his fece. " It was late one evening," continued the
the communicative abbot, " as I was sitting beneath the cloisters, that I te- held approaching me a tall figure en¬ veloped in a large mantle.'* 4 Holy abbot,' said he, t a man weary of the world wishes here to find that repose which hitheito has been denied to his researches. Want of the means of existence is not my motive for seeking an asylum here ; but I wish to detach my thoughts from tbe world, to dedicate my re¬ maining days to Him who gave me being. With my treasures I will en¬ dow the monastery, for 1 shdl no longer need them. I fly from society with a heart torn by contending pas¬ sions. You shall know my history, but all I entreat is, to allow me to live agreeable to røy own wishes, and to act as I please/
There
" There was something," continued the abbot " so singular in the request of the person, who seemed to have such laudable motives for retiring from the world, that I granted his request, and admitted him into the monastery, since which time he has ever conducted him- ^self with the greatest propriety; he seems to be consumed with some inward grief which we respect and as he ap¬ pears to dislike society, we do not force ours upon him, or even seem to take the smallest notice of him; for when¬ ever spoke to he betrays an evident un¬ easiness» and a wish to be left to his own thoughts.** " Do you know his name, father?" demanded Rosalina. ** Grimaldi is timt by which he is distinguished here»** returned the abbot; ** his red name is Romellino.** "You
** You know his history then ?" said Rosdina. ** Your pardon, father, for be¬ ing so inquisitive, but I must own that this monk has roused my curiosity so much, that I have even dreamt of him." The abbot smiled. " Since it is so witii you, my fair daughter, you shall be satisfied. I will bring you the manuscript he left with me, which you may peruse at your lei¬ sure ; that done» let me again have the papers. Wait here awhile, and I will enter the monastery» «and procure them for you." Rosalina expressed her gratitude to the abbot for his goodness, who leaning on the arm of an attendant left the chapel. While Rosalina wm awaiting his return» she again directed her gaae after the monk who had beai the sub* vw~ i. L jeet
ject of her conversation» but he was not tobe seen; once indeed she had imagined she saw a form like his slowly retiring amongst tlie shades of the columns tliat supported the fretted roof of the chapel; but the increasing gloom ren¬ dered it impossible to distinguish any distant object The abbot Was not long before he agdn returned, bringing with liim a small roll of papers» which he presented to Rosalina. ** In this manuscript» my daughter,'* add the venerable superior, u you will find the history of the father whicli you m rauch desire to lenni; ard I hope/* added be* with a smile» ** that you wiU not let their contents disturb your slum- bera. It is not my wish that it should be known that I have submitted them to your perusal» yet as the father Gri¬ maldi
maldi did not restrict me in that respect, I conclude that there is no impropriety in what I am doing." Rosalina promised that not only the contents, but also her having the papers, should be kept secret by her ; «and pleas¬ ed witli the success of her attempt to discover who the monk t»nîü«* ? wm * she took leave of the abbot, and listen¬ ed out of the chapel. The shades of evening were fast con¬ densing into the gloom of night» as Ro¬ sdina» unaccompanied, contrary to her usud custom» even by Carletta, was winding up the rocky path which led to the castle bridge, when again she en¬ countered the fixed motionless form erf Grimaldi, who wm standing in a recess in the rock close by which she wm ob- liged to pass.
?2 If
If Rosalina bad not had the conversa* tton above related with the abbot» her again seeing him still in the same mo¬ tionless posture might dmost have made her suspect that he was some su¬ pernatural attendant on her footsteps» As it was, the lonely place she was in, almost out of hearing of tİK* w~¿* *"?? wateneci at the gates of the castello, and witliout any domestic with her, made her susceptible of fear, and she hastened dong the winding ascent, without even daring to tum her eyes to where fhe monk was standing. She, however» took courage when she had passed the recess in the rock» and looking back» saw him still apparently gazing on her; he made a feint indmation of his head when he observed ttot she stopped, rød then slowly pursued his way towards the monastery. Rosalina watched bis tdl figure till the
the mists of evening obscured him from her view ; that he had placed himself in the recess m the rock for the purpose of seeing ber she couid not doubt» for he had not had sufficient time to reach the castello, while she was engaged in conversation with the abbot; and she began to conclude that he had some ¿nister designs respecting hert yet she bamshtu the thought almost as soon m it had taken pkoe ρ her mind; and wbat tbe abbot had sdd concerning the miscible solitary lite he led, and hi» opinion that he was labouring under some heavy calamity, now occurred te ber. Fity for the unfortunate ever found a ready place in her bosom. • t It is probable," thought she» « be mourni a fidend departed from this world» or some ???» wbich, tliough perhaps involuntarily committed, caik for years of penance to extenuate: per¬ haps løve ? the cause ef his imàinelmly —» passion
—a passion unreturned, slighted by the object he adores. Ah Γ thought Rosalina, while the loved remembrance of Mon- taito rose freshlv in her mind, w if that is his situation» I do indeed pity him." The packet she had obtained from the abbot would in all likelihood solve the mystery which attended his conduct and she continued on her way to the castello, intending that night to per* use it In the hall she met the duca, 'who detained ter in conversation to a late hour: he had of late been more kind and attentive to her thrø she had ever recollected him -, but he never, from the day that the prince had attempted to carry her off, and she was rescued by Montalto, mentioned her deliverer's name—-a circumstance which gave her the greatest unmsincss, for though, un¬ der
<ler the drcumstances which she too weU recollected, she could not imagine tliat tiU the imputation whidi had been cast by the monk on her fathets character, and his subsequent conduct to Montalto, should be done away and forgot, tliat he would even enter the castello» yet she thought her father bound to repair his injurious treatment by every concilia¬ tory measure he could adopt, particular¬ ly as not only justice but gratitude call¬ ed fbr it, since he had rid him of his bitterest enemy, and had saved her from impending destruction. When the duca retired it was too late for Rosalina, fatigued by her evening's excursion, and the unquiet niglit she had passed, to peruse the manuscript; she therefore carefully deposited it in her cabinet, and sought the gentle deity of slumbers» who» propitious to her wishes, steeped her senses hi forgetful¬ ness,
ness, till fong after the Jark, the early precursor of day, had soared on the fresh breath of morning, and had hailed with his blithe notes the sun» as he rose ¡« majestic splendour frora the eastern «vave.
END OF YOh. I.
ass
PrintCit by 3* Darling, Letdcnhall-Street» London.
