Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The old English baron: a gothic story
i H E
OLD ENGLISH BARON: л GOT JIH' STORV. ------- »«.J ДГ OI imu ------- I\ tlie nfiıuîiîv of Hens v the Sixth, King uf Î- ng! 'id, wlien the luuvvned John, Duke oî flcdiud, w. t i Ketent of ríame, and Humphiv, thv. goovl Duke oi (»butt eiler, was Pi'iiUctur oi S ugland, a woiihv Knight, tailed Sir Philip Пан lav, leturned from bih triads ti> Lngland. hLs native country. He hat! ferv¬ ed under the gloriou;» King Henry the hiftJi with diilinguiihed valour, had acquired an ho- nt/uiable fame, and was no leb efteemed for Chriftian viilues than fbr deed^ of chivalry. Aner tlie deatl» uf hib Prime, he entered into ihe feivice of the Greek Emperor, and diftin¬ guiihed liis courage againft the eiieroaehnients of
of tlie XnauîK In л bu*:îc tbou. he it* к pùlonoi a (ut.un gentleman, bv name M. ZidiíJsx, oí < »Rti c xiuíilon, bwt bioujîit un bv α гшасеп villi« ei , ibis пып îte convelli. cl to the Chriftün faìtlì ; after which he bound him to lunkit bv the iíc -ч of fiiendlhip and cutïtude, and b^ ith»l\ed Io t ojuínue with his İkncJdCioı. Xťivr îiiitfv % cuito n,ntl .md w ai like ici v ií ť. în. ù'tt tmirii'd lo н iurn ίο his η,,ΙΐΗ' land, and to ipi nd the renuindvr »>f hi> iik in реле«; , 4vfid, b\ devuiing ionHcïr to woiks t»! pitiv and chaiit%, prépaie iot л bet¬ ter ftate hereafter. '1 his noble Knight \уаа> in his early youth, contracted a flriď friendihip wiíli the onlv fon ofthe Lord Loxcl, a gentleman of eminent virtues and accomplishments. During Sir Philips tefuience in foreign countiies, he had frequently wt itten to his friend, and had for a time rece i\ ed anfwers; the laft informed hira of îhe death of old Lord Loveh and the marriage of the voung one ; but from that time he had heard no more from him. Sir Philip imputed it not to neglect or foigtt- fulneisu but to the difficulties of intercourfe, common, at that time, to all travellers and adventurers.
ad ч enturéis. When he was returning home. he jcfohcd, afier looking into his family af¬ fairs, tn vint the (aille of Lovel, and inquire into ihe íltuaüon of his friend. He landed in Kent, attended by hh (»reek fiiend, лпа two faithful U rv.mts, one of which was maimed bv the wuundb he had received in the deience of his mafter. Sir Philip went to LL· familv-feat i*i Yoik- ihire , he found his mothei and finer wcie dead, .md his eftates fequciieied in the bandì vf Commiffionets appointed by the Protector. He was obliged to pr.ne the icalitv of his claim, and the identity of his perlon (by the teftimony of iome of the eld fej\.uii.s of his family) after v.-hieh every thing was reftored to him. He took poflèilîon ofhis own houfe, eftabliftied his houfhold, fettled the old fer¬ vants in their former fiations, and placed thofe he biought home in the upper offices of his family. He then left his friend to fuperintend his domeftic aifahs ; and, attended bv only one of his old fervants, he fct out for the caftle of Lovel, in the weft of England. They travelled by eafy journeys ; but, to¬ wards the evening of the fecond day, the fer¬ vant
\ant was fo ill and fatigued he could go no further; he flopped at an inn» wliere he grew worfe everv hour, and tîıe next dav expired. Sir Philip was under great tuieem for the lofs of his fervant, and fume ft и himfelf, being alone in a ihange place ; huvcxer, he took courage, ordered his iervanfs funeral, attend¬ ed it himfelf. and, having ihed a tear of hu¬ manity o\er his gnu e, proceeded alone or. US. journey. As he drew near the citate of Lis friend, he began to enquire of everv one lie met, whe¬ ther the Lord Lo\el refided at the feat ofhis amcilors? lie was anfweicd bv one, he did not know;—by another, he could not tell ;— by a third, tha* he never heaid of fuch a perion, bir Philip thought i. ftrange that a mai: of Lord Loveľs conlequence ihould be unknown in his own neighbourhood, and where his anceilors had ufually ι elided. He luminatcd on the uncertainty of human hap¬ pinefs : '■ 'Ihis world," faid he, " has nothing for a wife man to depend upon. 1 have loll all my relations, and moil of my friends ; and am even uncertain whether any are remain¬ ing: 1 will, however, be thankful for tht blefling!
bleifings that are ipared to mc ; and 1 vvill endeavour to icplaee thofe that l luve loft. if my friend live«». Jie ihall ihare my fortune with me; his children fluii have the reverfion of it, and 1 wiil ihare his eonifoits in return. But peihaps my friend ina ν have met with troubles that have made him diigufti d with the woild : Perhaps he has buried his amiable wife, or bis promifing children ; and, tired of public life, he has retired into a monaftery. At leaft, I will know what ail this filence means." When he came within a mile ofthe Caftle if Lovel, he ftopped at a cottage, and aflced for a draught of water : A Peafant, mafter of the houfe, brought it, and aiked if his Honour would alight, and take a momenťs refrefh¬ ment. Sir Philip accepted his offer, being refolved to make farther inquiry before he approached the Caftle. He aiked the fame queftions of him that he had before of others. -—Which Lord Lovel, Cad the man, does your Honour enquire after?—The man whom 1 knew was called Arthur, faid Sir Philip.— Aye, faid the Peafant, he was the only furviv- ing fon of Richard, Lord Lovel, as I think. —Very
Verv true, fncnâ, he was fo,— Abs, Mr, faid the in.iii. he is dead ! he furvived his « ither but a ihort iene. Dead ' uy you : how h ις imce *— Vbout fifteen years, to the beft of mv icmembramc.—Sir Philip fighed deeply— А1аь, faid he, vvhat do we bv living long, but furvive ali our fiiends » But pray tell me how he died '—'f will, Sir, to the heft of my know¬ ledge. An't pleafe your Honour, I heaid Ľv, that he attended the King when he went againft the Welíh rebels, and he ieft his Lady big with child , and fo there was a battle fought, and the King got the better of the rebels : There came firft a report that none of the Officers wcre killed ; but a few days after there came a meflènger with an account very different, that feverai were wounded, and that the Lord Lovel was flain » whieh fad news overfet us all with forrow, for he vvas a noble gentleman, a bountiful mafter, and the delight of all the neighbourhood.—He was, indeed, faid Sir Philip, all that is amiable and good ; he was my dear and noble friend, and I am inconfolable for his lofs : But the unfoitunatc Lady, what became of her !-------Why, an*t pleafe your Honour, they fay fticdied of grief for
tor the hits of hei huiband . but lier dertli was kept piiutc fu a lime, and we did not know it for teıîain tül ionie weeks afterwards. • -The will of Пелин be obe\ed : f/.id Sir Philip, but who fuţ reeded to the title and г fiale ŕ 'ihc next hur, faîd the Peafant, a kiniman ofthe dueaied, Sir Walter Lovel by name,—I have fcen him, iaid Sir Philip, for¬ merly, but where was lie when theie events happened ; —At the Caftle of Lovel, Sir; he tame there on a vifit to the Lady, and waited there to receive my Lord, at his return from Wales. When the news of his death arrived, Sir Walter did every thing in his power to comfort her, and fome faid he was to marry hcr ; but ihe refufed to be comforted, and took it fo to heart that fhe died.—And does the prefent Lurd Lovci refide at the Caftle? -—No, Sir.—Who then?—The Loid Baron Fitz-Owen.—And how came Sir Waiter to leave the feat of his anceftors r —Why, Sir, he married his fifler to this laid Lord ; and fo he fold the Caftle to him, and went awav, and built himftlf a houfe in the north countrv, as far as Northumberland, I think they call it. — Lhat is very ftrange, faid Sir Philip.—So İt is,
R pîea 4 . ^ чп' Iîontnir. but ílu i, all î мт -w abou! iu- î :Ьапк л οι;, irìnid. f· ! \our intei- ht enee I hue taken n !o:l 4>игпс\ tono P'.ip íu .<nd he, e md witii j»- tluu ï\t «.ιοί-* accidents. I h : 4 oie İs, indeed, a pi^^im-.^· ' l\av ťf í ι ci ru íhe nuiul v..\ 1*. t'.c ne\i Nh'tuouiy.— N.'bie v "r. Ld«! the Ferùoit. iî is î<^ l u e n;·!u oŕľ, the jii;;hl i>t«.niing en, and tbc w.r. -> au bad ; I лт b Λ .ι р\*<чг man, and cannot eníciUín y<»ur Пепеш as you are ufed to, but if uni will enur mv poor cottage, that, and c\erv thinp, in it, arc ut vour feivice. My honeft friend, I thank \ou heartily, faid bîr Philip; your kindneis and hofpitu'itv might fhame many of higher birth and breeding; I will accept your kind offer : hut pray ìet me know the name of my lulfù —John W vatt, Ыг ; an honeft man tiiougli a poor one, and a Chriiiian though a finful one.— \\ hole cottage is this'—It heh „,s to the Lud ritz (bm. — H hai farnih have vou "'-- \ wife, two fons und a d.ugbti r, uho wili all be proud to wait Upon \our Honour, k t me luid \our Ho¬ nours i'ii rup wî idi vou uiigiit. 1 le ieconded theie words by the proper action, лрл\ having afiiitcd his gbeft to diimuunt, he londiuled him
'dm into ho houle. í alk d his wife ti ui eed him, and then ied hr buie undei a i í tbc h that fes v td lun us ,· ì ahle. v n l\ i u иаъ fat i (i . ied in ! vd ч and umd. did w.h ^L^^u lepóle hhruii α» v n jljc. lhe < »ui uv oi his !n»t í iu ívd ¡ıs aüuitu'ï, and falbfted lus wrSiUî. líe íví n rtííti n lui ned, foliovvttl bv a v<îu'ï ¡O ub o* u^h'un vt ,u —Make haft*., foh.n. i„ij ' be ia hti, aui lx iute v.»u í.t\ v ithei nuie nor кч Jian what 1 tave lojd vou. 1 wiii, íaUí!, bid the Ld, t .nd u iu! diait ¡s it L o, f, um hk*, a bi.ú .шил the fields, and w.s out ol fie г in an mfuni. - 1 hop«., tuend, i tid ^j' ľuup, -o U luvt, not luit ν ΐι,ι ion to pi » li. ι »t г , uìuitaia- iiiein, 1 π a ío'dieu ük d о 1 / e iul 1~л\с ha'd, ynd, Ίι íl vve* e o* huw ¡i ¡-u n»uiUiv and kind.«el aooìJ ^i^, a u ìli!, o.» ù,e n.oit oulinaiy fi od -I \\ ih heauh, iai.' \uati. it was ¡iı mv powei to enteitaiii \oui Honour as um ouglit to be, but, as 1 cannot do io, I will, when mv ion utuins, acquaint \ou with the enaml 1 lent hiin on. Aite t thus ihev j' converfed together en common fuojeus, ükc fellow-Lieatures ofthe iame natutal ioimand endowments, though different kincb of edu¬ cation
cation had given a confcious fuperiority to the one, a confcious inferiority to the other; and the due refpeft was paid by the latter, without being exafted by the former. In about half an hour young John returned.-— Thou haft made hafte, faid the father.—Not more than good fpeed, quoth the fon,— Tel) us, then, hovv you fpeed.—Shall I tell all that paflèd? faid John.---All, faid the father; I don't want to hide any thing. John ftood with his cap in his hand, and thus told his tale.—I went ftraight to the Caftle as faft as I could run ; it was my hap to light on young mailer Edmund firft, fo I told him juft as you bade me, that a noble Gentleman was come a long journey from foreign parts to fee the Lord Lovel, his friend ; and having lived abroad many years, he did not know that he was dead, and that the Caftle was fallen into other hands ; that upon hearing thefe tidings he was much grieved and difappointed, and wanting a nighťs lodging, to reft himfelf be¬ fore he returned to his own home, he was fain to take up with one at our cottage ; that my father thought my Lord would be angry with him, if he were not told of the ftranger's jour¬ ney
ney and intentions; rfpccially to let fuch a man lie at oui cottage, where he could neither be lodged nor entertained according to his qualitv. Here John ftupped, and his father exclaimed—A good lad f you did your errand very well, and tell us the anfwer. John pro¬ ceeded—Mafter Edmund ordered me fomc beer, and went to acquaint my Lord of the meflage ; he ftayed a while, and then eame back to rae. —John, faid he, tell the noble ftranger, that the Baron Fitz-Owen greets him weii, and defires him to reft affured, that though Lord Lovel is dead, and the Caftle fallen into other hands, his friends will al¬ ways find a welcome there ; and my Lord defires that he will accept of a lodging there, while he remains in this country—fo I came away direftly, and made hafte to deiner my errand. Sir Philip exprefled forne diifatisfaftion at this mark of old Wyatťs refpeft—I wiih, faid he, that you had acquainted me with your in¬ tention before you fent to inform the Baron 1 was here. I choofe rather to lodge with you ; and I propofe to make amends for the trouble I ihall give you.—Pray, Sir, don't mention
mention it, faid the Peafant, you are as wel¬ come as myfelf; 1 hope no offence; the only reafon of my fending was, becaufe 1 am both unable aud unworthy to entertain your Ho¬ nour.—I am forry, laid Sir Philip, you fhould think me fo dainty ; I am a Chriftian foidlcr . and Him Ì acknowledge for my Prince and Mafter, accepted the invitations of the poor, and vvaihed the feet of his difeiples. Let us fay no more on this head ; 1 am lcfolvcd to ftay this night in vour cottage, to-morrow 1 will wait on the Baron, and thank him for his hofpitable invitation.—'fhat fhall be as your Honour pleafes, fince you will condefcend to ftav here. John, do you run back and ac¬ quaint my Lord of it.—Not fo, faid Sir Philip ; it is now almoft dark.—"Pis ι matter, fai J John, I ean go if blindfold. Sir Philip then gave him a meflage to the Baron in his owh name, acquainting him that he would pay his refpefts to hini in the morning. John rlew back the fet ond time, and foon returned with new commendations from the Baron, and that he would expeft him on the morrow. Sir Philip gave him an angel of gold, and praifed his fpeed and abilities. He
He fupped with \\ f yatt and his family upon new-laid садъ and raftiers of bacon, with tite higheft relilh. 'Ihey praifed the Creator for his gifts, and acknowledged they were un¬ worthy of the leaft of his bleifings. Tiiey gave the l>cft of thcir two iofts up to Sir Phi¬ lip, the reft of the family ilept in the otlier, the '*>ld woman and her daughter in the bed» the father and his two fons upon clean ftraw. Sir Philip's bed was of a better kind, лпа yet much inferior to his ufual accommodations í neverthelefs, the good Knight ilept as well ia Wyatťs cottage as he could have done in a palace. During his ileep, many ftrange and inco¬ herent dreams arofe to his imagination. He thought he received a meffagc from his friend Lord Lovel, to come to him at the Caft'e , that he ftood at th.c gate and leceived him , that he ftrove to embrace him, but could not, but that he fpoke to tins effeft:— though 1 have been dead thefe fifteen j ears, í ftill com*. maud here, and none can enter thefe gate*· without my permiifion ; know that it is 3 that invite, and bid you weleome , the hopes of my houfe ieft upon you.—Upon this he В bid
bid Sir Philip follow him; he led him through •many rooms, till at laft he funk down, and Sir Phil-p thought he ftill followed him, till he eame into a dark and frightful rave, where he difappcarcd, and in his flead he beheld a complete fuit of armour ftained wilh blood, which belonged to his friend, and he thought he heard difmal groans from beneath. Pre¬ fently after, he thought he was hurried away by an invifible hand, and led into a wild heath, where the people were enclofing the ground, and making preparations for two combatants ; the trumpet founded, and а voice railed out ftill louder—Forbear ! it is not permitted to be revealed till the time is ripe for the event ; wait with patience cm the de¬ crees of Heaven.—He was then tranfported to his own houfe, xvhere, goi л g into an un¬ frequented room, he was again met by his friend, who was living, and in all the bloom of youth, as when he üïn knew him ; he ftarted at the fight, and awoke. The fun filone upon his curtains, and, perceiving it was dav, he fat up, and recolkfted where he was. The images that impreffed his fleeping fancy remained ftrongly on his mind waking ; hut
hul his reafon ilrove to difperfe them ; it was natural that the ftory he had heard ftiould create thefe ideas, that they fliould wait on him in his fleep, and that every dream fhouid bear fomc relation to his deceafed friend,— The fun dazzled his eyes, the birds fcienadcd him and diverted his attention, and a wood¬ bine forced its way through the window, and regaled his ienfe of fmelling with its fra¬ grance. He arofe, paid his devotions to Hea¬ ven, and then carefully defcended the narrow ftairs, and went out at the door of the cot- n tage. There he faw the induftrious wife and daughter of old Wyatt at their morning work, the one milking her cow, the other feeding her poultry, lie afked for a draught of milk, which, with a ilice of rye-bread, ferved to break his faft. He walked about the fields alone ; for old Wyatt and his two Ions were gone out to their daily labour. He was foon called back by the good woman, who told him that a fervant from the J3aron waited to conduft him to the Caftle. He took leave of Wyatťs wife, telling lier he would ice her again before he left the country. The daugh¬ ter fetched his horfe, which he mounted, and В 2 fet
fet forward wiih the fervant, of whom he aik¬ ed many queftions concerning his mailer's fa¬ mily.—How long have you lived with the ikiron r —Ten years.—is lie a good mafter ? Yes, Sir, and alfo a good hufband and father. —What family has he ?—Three fons and a daughter.—What age arc they of!—The ■eldeft fon is in his feventcenth year, the fe¬ cond in his fixtcenth, the others feverai years younger ; but befide thefe, my Lord has fe¬ deral young gentlemen brought up with his own fons, two of which arc his nephews ; •he keeps in his houfe a learned clerk to teach ahem languages; and as for all bodily exer- ■cife, none come near them ; there is a fleteher to teach them the ufe of the crofs-bow ; a mafter to teach tliem to ride ; another the ufe of the fword ; another learns them to dance ; and then they wrcftlc and run, and have fuch activity in all their motions, that it docs one •good to fee them ; and my Lord thinks no¬ thing too much to beftow on their education. —Truly, fays Sir Philip, he does the part of a good parent, and I honour him greatly for it ; but are the young gentlemen of a promif¬ ing diíjpofition ?—Yes, indeed, Sir, anfwered the
the fervant, the young gentlemen, my Lord's Ions are hopeful yuiths ; but yet thei с is one who is thought to exceed them all, though he is the fon of a poor labouier.— And who is he ; faid the Knight—One Fdmund Twyford, the ion of a cottager in our village ; he is to be lure as fine a youth as ever the fun fhone upon, and of fo fweet a difpofition, that no¬ body envies his good foi tunc.—What good ίοι tunc dues he enjoy ?—Why, Sir, aluuttwo years ago, my Loid, at his fons' requeft, took him into his own family, and gives him the fame education as liis own children ; the young Lords doat upon him, efpecially Maf¬ ter William, who is about his own age: it is fuppofed that he will attend the young Lords when they go to the wars, which my Loid in¬ tends tlicy fnall bye and bye.—What you kIL me, faid Sir Philip, incrcafes everv minute iny refpeft for your Lovd ; he is an excellent fa¬ ther and mailer, he leeks out merit hi nb'cu- rity, he diiiiuguilhcs arid rewauis iu 1 ho¬ nour him with all my iieart. in this manner they eonveifed together till tiiey eame within view of the caftle. lu a field- near Lhe iioufe they iaw a company of youths, I> 'd with
. with croîs bows in their hands, fhooting at a maik. --Theie, laid the ferv.irit, are our voung gentlemen at their excrcifis. Sir Philip flop¬ ped his horfe to obferve theni, he lieard two or three vf them ery our—Kdmund is the vic¬ tor ' lie wins the prize' — í muft, faid Sir Philip, take a view of this Fdmund—Iic jumped oif his horfe, gave ihe bridle to the- fervant, and walked into the field, 'f he young gentlemen came up, and paid their refpefts to him ; he apologr/ed for intruding upon their fports, and afked which was the viftor ? Upon which, the youth he fpoke to beckoned to anotlıer, who immediately advanced, and made his obcifancc ; as he drew near, Sir Phi¬ lip fixed his eyes upon him, with fo much at¬ tention, that he feemed not to obferve his courtefy and addrefs. At length he recollect¬ ed himfelf, and faid,—What is your name, young man ?—Fdmund Twyford, replied the ronili ; and I have the honour to attend upon the ford Fit/.-Owcn*s fons. —Pray, noble Sir, faid the youth who firft addreffed Sir Philip, are not you the ftranger who is expefted by my father ?—1 am, Sir, aniwered he, and I go to pay my refpefts to Ыш. —Will you cx- i'lllt*
rufe our attendance, Sir? we has e not yet iiniihed our exercifes.—Xif^Vkai youth, fail -Sir Philip, no apology is uccellài y ; but will· you favour me with your proper name, that í may know to whofe courtefy I am obliged ?— Aiy name is William I'itz-Owcn , that gen- tleman is my eldeft brother, Mafter Roheit , that other my kinfman, Mafter Richard Wen¬ lock.—Very weil , I thank you, gentle Sir; I beg you not to ili r another ílť p, vour íeivant holds my horfe.—Karewcll, Sir, laid Abater William ; I hope we íhall have the pleafure of meeting you at dinner.—The youths re¬ turned to their fports, and Sir Philip mounted his horfe, and proceeded to the Caftle ; he entered it with а deep figli, and melancholy rceolleftions. 'J'he Baron received hiin with the utnioft refpect am' courtefy. He gave л brief account ofthe principal events that had happened in the family of Lovel during his abietici- , he fpoke of the late Loid Lovel with refpeft, ofthe prefent with the affeftion of α brother. Sir Philip, in return, gave а brief recital of his own adventures abroad, and of the difagreeable ciicumfhinces he liad met with fincc his return home ; he pathefi- \ В I cally
uìU lamented í iielofi of all his friend";, no. toigettiug that orms faithful fervant on the Vvay , fav in;.; he couîd he eenlenied to give up the world, and relire to a îeiigious houie, but that he was wiih-heid by the confidera¬ tion, thai ionie who depended enlirelv upon liim vvouid want his presence and affiilance , and befide that, he thoneht he mirht be ot * v) t^ ierviee to many others. The faion agreed with hiin in opinion, that a iuu was of much moie feivice to the world who continued in it, than one who retired from it, and gave his fortune to the Church, whofe fervants did not f.lways make the beft ufe of it. Sir Philip then turned the convcifation, and congratulat¬ ed the Baron on his hopeful family; he praif¬ ed their pei fons and addrefs, and warmiy ap¬ plauded the care he bellowed on tbeir educa¬ tion. The Baron liftened with pleafure to the honeft approbation of a worthy heart, and en¬ iovcd the true happinefs of a parent. Sir Philip then made fin ther enquiry con¬ cerning Edmund, whofe appearance had ftruck him with an impreffion in his favour. 'J hat boy. iaid the Pai on, is the fon of a collager in this neighbourhood : his uncommon merit and
'and gentlenefs of manners, diftinguiih him from thofe of his own clafs; from his child¬ hood he attrafted the notice and affeftion oi all that knew him; he was beloved every vriierc but at his father's houfe, and there it ihould feem that his merits weie his crimes; for the Peafant, his father, hated him, treated him feverely, and at length threatened to turn him out of doors ; he ufed to run here and there on errands for my people, and at length they obliged me to take notice of him ; my ions earneftly defired I would take him into niy family ; 1 did fo about two years ago, in¬ tending to make him thcir fervant ; but his extraordinary genius and difpofition have obliged me to look upon him in a fuperior light : perhaps i may incur the cenfure of many people, by giving him fo many advan¬ tage 4 , and treating him as lhe companion of my children ; his merit muft juftify, or con¬ demn, my partiality for him ; hovvever, I truft that I have fecured to my children a faithful iervant ofthe upper kind, and an ufeful friend to my family. Sir Philip warmly applauded his generous boil, and wiíhed to be a fluirei iu his bounty to that fine youth, whofe appeal - Β r ) uu-
unce indicated all the qualities that had en¬ deared him to his companions. At the hour of dinner the young men pre¬ fented themfelves before their Lord and his gueft. Sir Philip addreffed himfelf to Ed¬ mund ; he aiked him many queftions, and re¬ ceived modeft and intelligent anfwers, and he grew every minute more pleafed with him. After dinner the youths withdrew with their tutor to purfue their ftudies. Sir Philip fat for fomc time, wrapt up in meditation. After fome minutes, the Barou alked him, if he might not be favoured ivith the fruits of his contemplations ?—You lhall, my Lord, an¬ fwered he, for you have a right to them, í Was thinking, that when many bleffings are loft, we íliould cheriih thole that remain, and even endeavour to replace the others— My Lord, I have taken a ftrong liking to that youth whom you call Edmund Twyford : I have neither children nor relations to claim my fortune, nor ftiare my affedions ; your Lordfliip has many demands upon your gene¬ rofity: í can provide for this promifing youth without doing injuftice to any one ; will you give him to me ?—He is a fortunate boy, faid the
the Baron, to gain your favour fo foon.—My Lord, faid the Knight, I will confefs to you, that the firft thing that touched my heart in his favour, is a ftrong refemblance he beai s to a certain dear friend 1 once had, and his manner refembles him as much as his perfon ; his qualities defcrve that he ihould be placed in a higher rank ; í will adopt him for my fon, and introduce him into the world as my relation, if you will refign him lo mc: What fay you?------Sir, faid the Baron, you have made a noble offer, and ï am too much the young man's friend to be a hindrance to his preferment. It is true, that I intended to provide for him in my own family ; but I cannot do it fo effeftually ashy giving him to you, whofe generous affeftion being unlimit¬ ed by other ties, may in time prefer him to a higher ftation, as he fhall deferve it. 1 have only one condition to make ; that the lad fliall have his option , for 1 would not oblige him to leave my fervice againft his inelina¬ tion.—You fay well, replied Sir Philip ; nor vvould i take him upon other terms.—Agreed then, laid the Baron ; let us fend for Edmund hither, A fervant was fent to fetch him ; he B G eame
came immediately, and his Lord thus befpoke him :—Edmund, you owe eternal obligations to this gentleman, who, perceiving in you a certain refemblance to a friend of his, and liking your behaviour, lias taken a great af¬ feftion for you, infomuch, that he defires to receive уоц into his family : í cannot better provide for vou than by difpofing of you to him ; and, if you have no objection, you fhall return home with him when he goes from hence. The countenance of Edmund under¬ went many alterations during this propofai oí his Lord ; it exprefled tendernefs, gratitude, and forrow, but the Iaft was predominant ; he bowed rcfpeftfully to ilie Baron and Sir Phi¬ lip, and after fomc hefitation, fpoke as fol¬ lows :—I feci very ftrongly the obligations I owe to this gentleman, for his nobie and ge¬ nerous offer ; I cannot reprefs the fenfe I have of his goodnefs to me, a peafant boy, only known to him by my Lord's kind and partial mention : this uncommon bounty claims my eternal gratitude. To you, my honoui ed Lord, 1 owe every thing, even this gentle¬ man's good opinion ; you diftinguiihed me when nobody clic did ; and, next to you, your fons
funs arc my beft and deareft benefactors, they introduced me to your notice. My heart is unalterably attached to this houfe and family, and my utmoft ambition is to fpend my life in your fervice : But if you have perceived any gieat and giicvous faults in me, that inake you wiih to put me out of your family ; and if you have zccommended me to this gentle¬ man in order to be lid of me, in that 4 cafe I will fubmit to your pleafure, as I would if you ihould fentence me to death. Dining this fpeeeh the tears made them¬ felves channels down Edmund's cheeks : and his two noble auditors, catching the tender infection, wiped thcir eyes at the conclufion. —My dear child, laid the Baron, you over come me by your tendernefs and gratitude 1 I know of no faults you have committed, that I íhould wiih to be rid of you : I thought to do you the bcft fervice by promoting you to that of Sir Philip Harclay, who is both able and willing to provide for you ; but if you prefer my fervice to his, I will not part with you. Upon this Edmund kneeled to the Ba¬ ron ; he embraced his knees—My dear Lord ! I am, and will be your fervant, iu preference to
to any man living ; I only afk your permiffion to iive and die in your fervice.—You fee, Sir Philip, faid the Baron, hovv this boy engages the heart ; how can I part with him'—I can¬ not afk you any more, anfweted Sir Philip, í fee it is impoifible ; but I efteem you both ftill higher than ever ; the youth for his gra¬ titude, and your Lordihip for youi noble mind and true generofity ; bleffings attend you both ! —Oh, Sir, faid Edmund, prefling the hand of Sir Philip, do not think me ungrateful to you, I will ever remember your goodnefs, and pray to Heaven to reward it ; the name of Sir Phi¬ lip Harclay fhall be engraven upon my heart, next to my Loid and his family, for ever. Sir Philip raifed the youth and embraced him, faying,—If ever you Avant a friend, remember me ; and depend upon my proteftion, fo long as you continue to deferve it. Edmund bowed low, and withdrew, with his eyes full of tears of fenfibility and gratitude. When he was gone, Sir Philip faid, I am thinking, that though young Edmund wants not my aftiftance at prefent, he may hereafter ftand in need of my friendihip. I ihould not wonder if fuch rare qualities as he poífeífes, íhould one day create
create envy, and raife him enemies ; in which cafe he might come to lofe your favour with¬ out any fault of yours or his own.— ï am obliged to you for the warning, ftrid the Ba¬ lon, I hope it will be unneceffary ; but if ever í parc with Kdmund, you ihall have the refu¬ fal of him, I thank your Lordihip forali your civilities to me, faid the Knight ; I leave my bcft wiihes with you and your hopeful family, and I humbly take my leave.—Will you not ftay one night in the Caftle ? returned my Lord ; you ihail be as welcome a gueft as ever.—I acknowledge your goodnefs and hof¬ pitality, but this houfe fills me with melan¬ choly recollections ; I came hither with a heavy heart, and it will not be lighter while 1 remain here. I ihall always remember yonr Lordfhip with the higheft refpect and efteem ; and I pray God to preferve you, and increafe your bleffings ! After fome further ceremonies, Sir Philip depai ted, and returned to old Wyatťs, rumi¬ nating on the viciffitudc of human affairs, and thinking on the changes he had feen. At his return to Wyatťs cottage, he found the family aifembled together. He told them he
he would take another night's lodging there, which they heard with great pleafure ; for he had familiarized himfelf to them in the laft evening's converfation, infomuch, that they began to enjoy his company. He told Wyatt of the misfortune he had fuftained by lofing his fervant on the way, and wiihed he eouid get one to attend him home on his place,— Young John looked earneftly at his father, who returned a look of approbation. I per¬ ceive one in this company, faid he, that would be proud to ferve your Honour ; but I fear he is not brought up well enough.— John coloured with impatience, he could not forbear fpeaking.—Sir, I can anfwer for an honeft heart, a willing mind, and a light pair of heels ; and though I am fomewhat auk¬ ward, I ihall be proud to learn to pleafe my noble Mafter, if he will but try mc.—You fay well, laid Sir Philip, I have obferved your qualifications, and if you are defirous to ferve me, I am equally pleafed with you : if your father has no objection, I v/ill take you.—- Objection, Sir! faid the old man ; it will be my pride to prefer him to fuch a noble gentle¬ man; I will make no terms for him, but leave it
ií to your Honourto do for him as he fliall deierve.—Very well, faid Sir Philip, you filali he no lofer by that; I will charge myfelf vvith tiie care of the young man. The bargain was ftruck, and Sir Philip purchafed a horfe for John of the old man. The next morn¬ ing they let out ; the Knight left marks of hib bounty with the good people, and depart¬ ed, laden with their blefling and prayers. Me Hopped at the place where his faithful iervant was buried, and caufed maifes to be faid for the repofe ofhis foul ; then, purfuing his way by eafy journeys, arrived in fafety at home. His family rejoiced at his return ; he fettled his new fervant in attendance upon his per¬ fon ; he then looked round his neighbourhood for objefts of his charity ; when he faw merit in diftrefs, it was hie delight to raife and fup¬ port it ·, he fpent his time in the fervice of his Creator, and glorified him in doing good- to his creatures. He 'reflefted frequently upou every thing that had befallen him in his late journey to the weft; and, at his leifure, took down all tho particulars in writing.
î IL r s
[Ilercjolícivs nn int t rva i oj *\jttr years, as ly ihe пипш/и i pt ; and ihis on.tjjion feems in¬ tended by the Wiiter. What foilbun is in n diffeient hand j and the e ¡uu a ein 'a mom mo¬ dern. * ■#■ * -л -* * -iŕ -ŕ --г -Jt % -f. ABOUT this time the progiioftics of Sir Philip Hai clay began to be verified, that Edmund's good qualities might one day. excite envy and create him enemies» The fons and kinfmen of hb patron Ьщт to feek occafion to find fault with hún, ancl to depre¬ cíate him with others. The Baron's eldeft fon and heir, Mafter Robert, had fcvcral con- tefts with Mafter- William, tlic fecond fon, upon his account : this youth had a warm affeftion for Edmund, and whenever his bro¬ ther and kinfmen treated him ftighlly, he fupported him againft their malicious infinu¬ ations. Mr. Richard Wenlock, and Mr. John Markham, weie the fifters fons of the Lord litz-Owen; and there were feverai other more diftant relations, who, with them, fe¬ cretly envied Edmund's fine qualities, and ftrove
flrove to leffen him in the efteem ofthe Ba¬ ron imd his family. By degrees they excited a diilike in Mafter Robert, that in time waa fixed iato habit, and fell little fhort of aver¬ fion. Young Wenlock's hatred was confirmed by an additional circumftance : he had a grow¬ ing paflion for the Lady Emma, the Baron's only daughter; and, as love is eagle-eyed, he faw, or fancied he faw her caft an eye of pre¬ ference on Edmund. An accidental iervtce that íhe received from him, had excited her grateful regards and attentions towards him. The inceffant view ofhis fine perfon and qua¬ lities, had perhaps improved her efteem into a ftill fofter fenfation, though ihe was yet ig¬ norant of it, and thought it only the tribute due to gratitude and friendihip. One Chriftmas time, the Baron and all his family went to vifit a family in Wales ; crof¬ fing a ford, the horfe that can ied the Lady Emma, who rode behind her coufin Wenlock» ftumbled and fell down, and threw her off into the water : Edmund difmounted in a mo¬ ment, and flew to her affiftance ; he took her out fo quick, that the accident was not known to
to fome part ofthe company. From this time Wenlock ftrove to undermine Edmund in her efteem, and ihc conceived herielf obliged, in juftice and gratitude, to defend him againft the malicious infinuations of his enemies. She one day aiked Wenlock, why he in particular ihould endeavour to recommend himielf to, her favour, by fpeaking againft Edmund, to whom ihc was under great obligations ? He made but little reply i but the impreftion funk deep into his rancorous heart ;, every word in Edmund's behalf was like a poifoned arrow that rankled in the wound, and grew every day more inflamed. Sometimes he would pretend to extenuate Edmund's fuppofed faults, in order to load him with the fin of ingrati¬ tude upon other occafions. Eancour woiks deepeft in the heart that ftrbes to conceal it ; and, when covered by art* frequently puts on tlie appearance of candour. By thefc means did Wenlock and Markham impofe npon the credulity of Mafter Robert and their other re¬ lations : Mafter William only flood proof againft all their infinuations. The fame autumn that Edmund completed hh eighteenth year, the Baron declared his intentio«
intention of fending the young men of his houfe to France the following fpring, to learn the art of war, and fignalize their courage and abilities. Their ill-will towards Edmund was fo well concealed, that his patron had not difcovered it ; but it was whifpered among the fervants, who are generally clofe obfervers ofthe man¬ ners of their principals. Edmund .was a fa¬ vourite with them all, which was a ftrong prefumption that he deferved to be fo, fcr they feldow ihew much regard to dependents, or to fuperior domeftics, who are generally objefts of envy and diilike. Edmund was courteous, but not familiar with them ; and, by this means, gained thek aifeftions without foliciting them. Among them was an old ferving man, called Jofeph Howell ; this man had formerly ferved the old Lord Lovel and his fon ; and when the young Lord died, and Sir Walter fold the Caftle to his brother-in- law, the Lord Fitz-Owen, he only of all the old fervants was left in the houfe, to take care 4>f it, and to deliver it into the poifeffion of the new proprietor, who retained him in his fei- ■vkc : he was a man of few words, but mucli refleftion ;
refleftion ; and, without troubling himfelf ab^ut other people's affairs, went filently and properly about his own bufinefs ; more foli¬ citous to difcharge his duty, than to recom¬ mend himfeif to notice, and not feeming to afpire to any higher oifice than that of a ferv¬ ing man. This old man would fix his eyes upon Edmund, whenever he could do it with¬ out obfervation ; fometimes he would figh deeply, and a tear wouid ftart from his eye, which he ftrove to conceal from obfervation. One day Edmund furprized him in this tender emotion, as he was wiping his eyes with the back of his hand :—Why, faid he, my good friend, do you look at ше fo earneftly and af- ieftionately ?—Becaufe I love you, Mafter Edmund, faid he, becaufe I wifh you well—I thank you kindly, anfwered Edmund ; I am unable to repay your love, otherwife than by returning it, which I do fincerely.—I thank you, Sir, faid the old man ; that is all I de¬ fire, and more than I deferve, —Do not fay fo r faid Edmund ; if I had any better way to thank you, I would not fay fo much about it ; but words are all шу inheritance. Upon this he ihook hands with Jofeph, who withdrew haftily
haftily to conceal his emotion, faying, God blefs you, Mafter, and make your fortune equal to your deferts ! I cannot help thinking you were born to a higher ftation than what you now hold.—You know to the contrary, faid Edmund;—but Jofeph was gone out of fight and hearing. Tlie notice and obfervation of ftrangerş, and :the affeftion of individuals, together wkh that inward confcioufnefs that always attends fu¬ perior qualities, would fometimes kindle the ■flames of ambition in Edmund's heart; but he checked them prefently, by reflecting upon his low birth and dependent ftation. He was mo¬ deft, yet intrepid ; gentle and courteous to all, frank and unreferved to thofe that loved him ; difcreet and complaifant to thofe who hated him ; generous and companionate to the di- ftVefles of his fellow-creatures in general ; humble, but not fervile, to his patron and fu¬ periors. Once, when he witli a manly fpirit juftified himfelf againft a malicious imputa¬ tion, his young Lord Robert taxed him with pride and arrogance to his kinfman. Edmund dented the charge againft him with equal fpi¬ rit and modefty. Mafter Robert anfwered him iharply
iharply-—How dare you contradift my cou¬ fins ? Do you mean to give them the lie ?— Not in words, Sir, faid Edmund ; but I will behave fo as that you ihall not believe them. Mailer Robert haughtily bid him be filent, and know himfelf, and not prefume to con¬ tend with men fo much his fuperiors in every refpeft. Thefe heart-burnings, in fome de¬ gree, fubfided by their preparations for going to France. Mafter Robert was to be prefented at Court before his dcpartuie, and it was ex¬ pefted that he would be knighted. The Ba¬ ron defigned Edmund to be his Efquire ; but this was fruftrated by his old enemies, who perfuaded Robert to make choice of one of his own domeftics, called Thomas Hewfon ; him did they fet up as a rival to Edmund, and he took every occafion to affront him. All that Mafter Robert gained by this ftep was the contempt of thofc who faw Fdmund's me¬ rit, and tliought it want of difcernment in him not to diftinguiih and reward it. Edmund requefted ofhis Lord that he might be Mailer William's attendant ; and when, faid he, my patron ihall be knighted, as I make no doubt he will one day be, he has promiied that 1 ihall
fliall be his Efquire. The Baron granted Edmund's requeft; and, being freed from fcivitudc to the reft, he was devoted to that ofhis beloved mafter, William, who treated him in public as his principal domeftic, but in private as his chofen friend and brother. The whole cabal of his enemies confulted together in what manner they íliould vent thcir refentment againft him ; and it was agreed tliat they ihould treat him with in¬ difference and ïiegleft, till the] ftiould ar¬ rive in France: and when there, they fliould^ contrive to render his courage fufpefted, and by putting him upon fome defperate enter¬ prife, rid themfelves of him for ever. About this time died the great Duke of Bedford, to the irreparable lofs of the Englifh nation. He was fucceeded by Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, as regent of France, of which great part had revolted to Charies the Dau¬ phin. Frequent aftions enfued. Cities were loft and won ; and continual occafions offered to exercife the courage, and abilities, of the youths of both nations. The young men of Baron Fitz-Owen'« С houfe
houfe were recommended particularly to the Regent's notice. Mafter Robert was knight¬ ed, with feverai other young men of family, who diftinguiihed themfelves by their fpirit and activity upon every occafion. The youth were daily employed in warlike exercifes, and frequent aftions ; and made their firft eflay in arms in fuch a manner as to bring mto notice all that deferved it. Various arts were ufed by Edmund's ene¬ mies to expofe him to danger ; but all their contrivances recoiled upon themfelves, and brought increafe of honour upon Edmund's head : he diftinguiihed himfelf upon fo many occafions, that Sir Robert himfelf began to pay him more than ordinary regard, to the in¬ finite mortification of his kinfmen and rela¬ tions. They laid many fchemes againft him, but none took effeft.
% % % % * % * ******
From this place the characters in the manu¬ fcript are effaced by time and damp. Here and there fome fentences are legible., but not fufficient Jto purfue the thread of the ßory. Mention is madi of feverai anions İn which the young men were engaged ------ that Kdmund dißinguifli- ed himfelf by intrepidity in anion r by gentlenefs humanity, and modeßy in the eeffations — that he attracted the notice of every perfon of obferva- iion, and alfo, that he received perfonal comment- dation from lhe Regent. The following incidents are clear enough to be tranfcribed; but the beginning of the next fuc¬ ceeding pages is obliterated : However we may ■guefs at the beginning by what remains.
- T * * * * 'S- * * # * -S': *
Q 2
AS
* -*- ********** AS foon as the cabal met in Sir Robert's tent, Mr. Wenlock thus began :—You fee, my friends, that every attempt we make to humble this upftart, turns into applaufe, and ferves only to raife his pride ftill higher. Something inuft be done, or his praife will go home before us, at our own expence ; and we ftiall feem only foils to kt off his glories. Any thing would I give to the man who íliould exe¬ cute our vengeance upon him. Stop there cou¬ fin Wenlock, faid Sir Robert ; though I think Edmund proud and vain-glorious, and would join in any fcheme to humble him and make him know himfelf, ï will not fuffer any man to ufe fuch bafe methods to efFect it. Ed¬ mund is brave ; and it is beneath an Englifh¬ man to revenge himfelf by unworthy means ; ïf any fuch are ufed, I will be the firft man to bring the guilty to juftice ; and if 1 hear another word to this purpofe, I will inform my brother William, who will acquaint Ed¬ mund with your mean intentions. Upon this the
he cabal drew back, and Mr. Wenlock pro¬ filed that he meant no more than to mortify iis pride, and make him know his proper lation. Soon after Sir Robert withdrew, and .hey refumed their deliberations. Then fpoke Thomas Hewfon : There is a party to be fent out to-morrow night, to in¬ tercept a convoy of provifions for the relief if Rouen ; I will provoke Mr. Edmund to [nake one of this party, and when he is en¬ gaged in the aftion, I and my companions will draw off, and leave him to the enemy, who I truft will fo handle him, that you ÍhaU no more be troubled with him.—This will do, faid Mr. Wenlock ; but let it be kept from my two coufins, and only known to ourfelves ; if they offer to be of the party, I will perfuade ihem off it : And you, Thomas, if you bring his feheme to a conclufion, may depend upon my eternal gratitude.—And mine, faid Mark- bam ; and fo faid all. ΊΊιο next day the af¬ fair was publicly mentioned ; and Hewfon, ts he promifed, provoked Edmund to the trial: r cveral young men of family offered thçm- felves : among the reft, Sir Robert, and his С 3 brother
brother William. Mr, Wenlock perfuaded" them not to go, and fet the danger ofthe en¬ terprife in the ftrongeft colours. At laft Sir Robert complained of the tooth-ach, and was confined to his lent ; Kdmund waited on him ; und judging by the ardour ofhis own courage of that ofhis patron, thus befpoke him:—-! am greatly concerned, dear ián; that we can- jaof have your company at night ; but as I know what you will iuffer from being abfent, I would beg the favour or you to let me ufe your arms and device, and I will promife not to difgrace ihem. — No, Edmund, I cannot confent to that : I thank you for your noble offer, and will remember it to your advan¬ tage ; but 1 cannot wear honours of another man's getting. You have awakened me to a fenfe of my duty ; I wiil go with you, and contend with you for glory ; and William ihall do the fame. In a few hours they were ready to fet out. Wenlock and Markham, and their depend¬ ants, found themfelves engaged in honour to go upon an enterprife they never intended ; and fct out, with heavy hearts, to join the paity.
party, 'fhey marched in filence in the hor¬ rors of a dark night, and wet roads ; they met the convoy where they expefted, and a flraip eng-agemem enfued. The viftory was fomc time doubtful ; but the moon rifing on the backs of the Engliih, gave them the advan¬ tage. They faw the difpofition of their ene¬ mies, and availed themfelves of ît. Edmund advanced the foremoft of the party ; he drew out the leader on the French fide ; he flew him. Mr. William prefled forward to aflift: his friend ; Sir Ro' , to defend his brother ; Wenlock and Maijuani, from ihame to ftay behind. Thomas Hewfon and his aflbciates drew back on their fide ; the French perceived it, and purfued the advantage. Edmund pufhed them in front ; the young nobles all followed him ; * they broke through the detachment, and ftopped the waggons. The officer who commanded the party, encouraged them to go on ; the defeat was foon complete, and the provifions carried in triumph to the Englifli camp. Edmund was prefented to the Regentas the C -b man
man to whom the viftory was chiefly owing. Not a tongue prefumed to move itfeif againft him ; even malice and envy were filenced. Approach, young man, faid the Regent, that I may confer upon you the honour of knighthood, whieh you have well deferved. Mr. Wenlock could no longer forbear fpeak¬ ing : knighthood, faid he, is an honour be¬ longing to gentlemen, it cannot be conferred on a peafant.—What fay you, Sir ! returned the Kegent is this youth a peafant ?—He is faid Wenlock, let him deny it if he can. Ed¬ mund, with a modeft bow, replied—It is true indeed I am a peafant, and this honour is too great for me : I have only done my duty. The duke of York, whofe pride of birth equalled that of any man living or dead, fheathed his fword immediateiy.— Though, faid he, I can¬ not reward you as I intended, 1 will take care that you fliall have a large ihare in the fpoils of this night ; and, I declare publicly, that you ftand firft in the lift of gallant men in this engagement. 'i bomas I lewfon and his aifociates made a poor figuie on their return; they were pub¬ licly
licly reproved for their backwardnefs. Hewfon was wounded in body, and more in mind, for the bad fuccefs of his ill-laid defign. He could not hold up his head before Edmund ; who, unconfcious of their malice, adminifter¬ ed every kind of eomfort to them. He fpoke in their behalf to the commanding officer, imputing their conduci: to unavoidable acci¬ dents. He vifited them privately ; he gave them a part of the fpoils allotted to himfelf; by every aft of valour and courtefy he ilrove to engage thofe hearts that hated, envied, and maligned him : But where hatred arifes from envy of fuperior qualities, every difplay of thofe qualities ineieafes the caufe from whence it aiifes. Another paufe enfues here. The young nobles and gentlemen who dif¬ tinguifhed Kdmund, were prevented from raifing him to preferment by the infinuations of Wenlock and* his afìòeiates, who never failed to fet before them his low defcent» and his pride and arrogance in prefuming to rank with gentlemen. С 5 Here
Here the manufcript is not legible for feverai pages. There is mention, about this time, of the death of the Lady Fitz-Owen ; hut not the caufe. Wenlock rejoiced to find that his fchemes •took effeft, and that they ihould be recalled at the approach of winter. The Baron was glad of a pretence to fend for them home ; for he could no longer endure the abfence of his children, after the lofs of their mother.. The manufcript is again defaced for many leaves; at length the letters become more legible, ond the remainder of it is quite pcrfeff. ******** ir * -a- * * χ * * щ * Τ? ROM the time the young men returned -*- from France, the enemies of Kdmund employed their utmoft abilities to ruin him in the Baron's opinion, and get him difmiflčd from the family. They iufinuated a thoufand things againft him, that happened, as they faid, during his refidence in France, and there¬ fore could not be known to his mafter ; but, when
when the Baron privately enquired of his two elder fons, he found there was no truth in their reports. Sir Robert, though he did not love him, fcorned to join in untruths againft him. Mr. William fpoke of him with the warmth of fraternal affeftion. The Baron perceived that his kinfmen difliked Edmund ; but his own good heart hindered him from feeing the bafenefs of theirs. It is faid, that continual dropping will wear away a ftone ; fo did their inceffant reports, by infenfible de¬ grees, produce a coolnefs in his patron's be¬ haviour towards him. If he behaved with manly fpirit, it was mifconftrued into pride and arrogance ; his generofity was impru¬ dence ; his humility was hypocrify, the better to cover his ambition. Edmund bore patiently all the indignities that were thrown upon him; and, though he felt them feveiely in his bofom, fcorned to juftify his conduft at the expence even of his enemies. Perhaps his gentle fpirit might at length have funk un¬ der this treatment, but Providence interpofed in his behalf; and, by feemingiy accidental circumftances, conduftcd him imperceptibly С 6 towards
towards the crifis of his fate. Father Ofwald, ivho had been preceptor to the young men, had a ftrong affeftion for Edmund, fiom a thorough knowledge of his heart; he faw through the mean arlifiees that were ufed to undermine him in liis patron's favour; he watclied tlieir machinations, and ftrove to fruf¬ trate their defigns. This good man ufed frequently to walk out with Edmund ; they converfed upon various fubjefts ; and the youth would lament to him the unhappinefs of his fituation, and the pe¬ culiar circumftances that attended him. The father, by his wholefeme advice, comforted his drooping heart, and confirmed him in his refolution of bearing unavoidable evils with patience and fortitude, from the confcioufnefs of his own innocence, and the afTurance of a fui ure and eternal reward. One day, as they wcre walking in u wood near the Caftle, Edmund aiked the father, what meant thofe preparations for building, the cutting down trees, and burning of bricks? ■—What, faid Ofwald, li3ve you not heard that my Lord is going to* build a new apart¬ ment
ment on the weft fide of the Caftle ?—And why, faid fdmund, fliould my Lord be at that expence when there is one on the eaft fide that is never occupied ?—That apartment, faid the friar, you muft have obferved, is always fliut up.—I have obferved it often, faid Edmund, but 1 never prefumed to afk any queftions about it.—You had then, faid Ofwald, lefs cu¬ riofity, and more diferetion, than is common at your age.—You have raifed my curiofity, faid Edmund ; and if it be not improper, I beg of you to gratify it.—We are alone, faid Of¬ wald, and I am fo well affured of your pru¬ dence, that Ì will explain this myftery in fome degree to you. You muft know that apartment was occu¬ pied by the laft Lord Lovel when he was a bachelor. He married in his father's life-time, who gave up his own apartment to him, and offered to retire to this himfelf; but the fon would not pei mit him ; he chofe to fleep here rather than in any other. He had been mar¬ ried about three months, when his father, the old Lord, died of a fever. About twelve months after his marriage, he was called upon to
THE OLD ENGLISH ВЛЯОК : to attend the King, Henry the Fourth, on an expedition in Wales, whither he was attended by many of his dependants. He left his Lady big with child, and fuü of care and anxiety for his fafety and return. After the King had chaűifed the rebels, and obtained the victory, the Lord Lovei was ex¬ pected home every day ; various reports were fent home before hini; one meffenger brought an account of his health and fafety ; foon after another came with bad news, that he was flain in battle. His kinfman, Sir Walter Le* s vel, came here on a vifit to eomfort the Lady ; and he waited to receive his kinfman on his return. It was he that brought the news of the fad event of the battle to the Lady Lovei. She fainted away at the relation; but when ihe revived, exerted the utmoft refolution, faying, it was her duty to bear this· dreadful ftroke with Chriftian fortitude and patience, efpecially in regard to the child fhe went with, the laft remains of her beloved huihand, and the undoubted heir of a noble houfe. For fe¬ verai days ihe feemed an example of patience and refignation ; but then, all at once ihe re¬ nounced
uounced them, and broke out into paífionate and frantic exclamations'; flie faid, that her dear Lord was bafely murdered ; that his ghoft had appeared to her, and revealed his fate : She called upon Heaven and earth to revenge her wrongs ; faying, ihc wouid never ceafe complaining to God, and the King, for vengeance and juftice. Upon this» Sir Walter told the fervants that Lady Lovel was diftrafted from grief for the death of her Lord ; that his regard for her was us ftrong as ever ; and that, if ihe recovered, he would himfelf be her comforter, and marry her. In the mean time flie was confined in this very apartment, and in lefs than a month the poor Lady died. She lies buried in the family vault in St. Auliin' s church, in the vib- lage* Sir Walter took poffeffion of the Caftie, and all the other eftates, and aifumed the title of- Lord LoveL Soon after, it was reported that the Caftle was haunted, and that the ghofts of Lord and Lady Lovel had been fecn by feverai of the fervants. Whoever went into this apartment wcre temfied by uncommon noifes and ftrange appearances ;
appearances, at length this apartment was whoiiy fhut up* and lhe f ei vants were forbid to enter it, or to talk of any thing relating to it: However, the fiory did not ftop hcic ; it was vvhiipeied about that the new Lord Lovel was fo diftuibed every night, that he could not fleep ín quiet ; and, being at laft tired of the place, he fold lhe Caille and eftate of his anceftors to his brother-in-law, the Lord Fitz- Owen, who now enjoys ii, and left this eoun¬ try. All this is news io nie, faîd Fdmund; but father, tell me what pounds tiiere were fin- the Lady's fufpicion that her I ord died un¬ fairly ?-—Alas ' find Ofwald. that is only known to God. There were ftrange thoughts in the minds of many at lhat time ; 1 had mine; but I will not difclofe them, not even to you. I will not injure ihofe who may be innocent ; and 1 leave it to Providence, who will doubt¬ lefs, in its own bell time and manner, puniih the guilty. But let what 1 have told you be as İf you had never heard it. 1 thank you for thefe m.irks of your efteem and confidence, faid Edmund ; be aflured that I will
I will not abufe them ; nor do I defire to pry into feerets not proper to he revealed: I en¬ tirely approve your diferetion, and acquiefce iu your coneiufion, that Providence will in its own time vindicate its ways to man : If it were not for that truft, my fii nation would be in¬ fupportable. 1 ftrive earneftly to defcrve the efteem and favour of good men ; î endeavour to regulate my conduft fo as to avoid giving offence to any man ; but I fee, vvith infinite pain, that it is impoifible for me to gain thefe points.— f fee it too vvith great concern, faid Ofwald; and every thing that I ean fay or do in your favour is mifconftrued ; and, by feek¬ ing to do you fervice, l lofe my own influence : But 1 will never give my fanftion to afts of injuftice, nor join to opprefs innocence. My deur child, put your truft in God: He who brought light out of darknefs, can bring good out of evil. —1 hope and truft fo, faid Kdmund ; but, father, if mv enemies ihould prevail, if my Lord fliould believe (heir ftories againft: iw\ aud I fhould be put out ofthe houfe with di liti ace, what will become of me ? I have no¬ lhing but my liharafter to depend upon; if I loie
lofe that, I lufe every thing ; and i fee they feek no lefs than my ruin.—Truft in my Lord'» honour and juilice, replied Ofwald ; he knowa yoar virtue, and heis not ignorant of thcir ill- will towards you.— I knovv my Lord's juilice too vvell to doubt it, iaid Kdmund ; but would it not be belici to lid him of this trouble, and his family of an incumbrance? i would gladly do fomtthing ior mvTeif, but cannot without my Lord's recommendation; and, fuch is my fituation, that-1 fear the aiking for a difmiffion would be accounted bafe ingratitude : Befide, when I think of leaving this houfe, my heart faddens at the thought, and tells me I cannot fee happy out of it : Yet, I think 1 could re¬ turn to a peafanťs life with chcarfulnefs, ra¬ ther than live in a palace under difdain and contempt.— Hav© patience a iittle longer, my. fon, faid Ofwald ; I will think of fome vvay to ferve you, and io reprefenţ your grievances to my Lord, without offence to either: Perhaps the caufes may be removed. Continue to ob¬ ferve the fame irreproachable conduft ; and be affured that heaven will defend your innocence, and defeat the unjuft defigns of your enemies« Lei,us now uinui home. About
About a week after this conference, Edmund walked out in the fields, ruminating on the difagreeable circumftances of his fituation. Infenfible of the time, he had been out feverai liours without perceiving hovv the day wore away, when he heard himielf called by name leverai times ; looking backward, he law his friend, Mr. William, and hallooed to him. He camp running tovvards him ; and leaping over the ftile, ftood ftill a whiie to recover his bieath—What is the matter, Sir, faid Ed¬ mund ; your looks bcfpeak fomc tidings of importance ? With a look of tender concern and afteftion, the youth preifed his hand and fpoke : —My dear Edmund, you muft come home with me direftly ; your old enemies have united to ruin you with my father ; my brother Robert has declared, that he thinks there vvill be no peaee in our family till you are difmiffed from it, and told my father, he hoped he would not break vvith his kinfmen rather than give up Edmund.— nut what do they lay to my charge ? faid Edmund.-—! can., not rightly underftand, anfwert d William, for they make a great myftery of it; fomething oť
of great confequence, they fay; but they will not teli me what: However, my father has toid them that they muft bring their accufa¬ tion before your face, and he will have you anfwer them publicly. I have been feeking yqu this hour, to inform you of this, that you might be prepared to defend yourfelf againft your accufers.—God reward you, Sir, faid Edmund, for all vour goodnefs to mc ! L* fee they are determined to ruin me, if poffible : I fhall be compelled to leave the Caftle; but whatever becomes of me, be affured you íhall have no caufe to bluih for your kindnefs and partiality to your Edmund.—I know it, I am fine of it, faid William ; and here 1 fwear io you, as Jonathan did to David, I befeech Heaven to blefs me, as my friendihip to you fliall be fteady and inviolable!—Only fo long as í fhall deferve fo great a bleffing, interrupt¬ ed Edmund-—I know your worth and honour, continued William : and fuch is my confidence in vour merit, that I firmly believe Heaven defigns vou for fomething extraordinary ; and 1 expeft that forne j;reat and unforefeen event will raife you io the rank and ftation to which you
you appear to belong : Promife me, therefore, that whatever may be your fate, you will pre¬ ferve the fame friendihip for me that I bear to you.—Kdmund was fo much affefted, that he could not anfwer but in broken fentences. —Oh, my friend, my mafter ' I vow, I pro¬ mife, my Iieart promifes ! He kneeled down with clafped hands, and uplifted eyes : Wil¬ liam kneeled by him, and they invoked the Supreme to witnefs to their friendihip, and implored his bleffing npon it : They then rofe up and embraced each other, while tears of cordial affeftion bedewed their checks. As foon as they wcre ahle to fpcak, Ed¬ mund conjured his friend not to expofe him¬ felf to the difpleafure of his family out of* kindnefs to him. I fubmit to the will of Hea¬ ven, faid he, I wait with patience its difpofai of me.; if 1 leave the Caftle, I will find means to inform you of my fate and fortunes.-—! hope, faid WiUiam, that things may yet be accommodated ; but do not take any refolu¬ tion, let us aft as occafions arife. in this manner thefe amiable youths con¬ ferred, till they arrived at the Caftle. The Baron
Baron was fitting in the great hall, on a high chair with a footftcp before, with the ftate and dignity of a judge : before him ftood father Ofwald, as pleading the caufe for himfelf and Edmund. Round the Baron's chair flood his eldeft fon and his kinfmen, with their princi¬ pal domeftics. The old fervant, Jofeph, at fome diftance, with his head leaning forward, as liftening with the utmoft attention to what paficd. Mr. William approached the chair. My Lord I have found Edmund, and brought him to anfwer for himfelf.—You have done well, faid the Baron. Edmund, come hither ; you are charged with fome indifcretions, for I cannot properly call them crimes : I am re¬ folved to do juftice between you and your ac¬ cufers ; I ihail therefore hear you as well as them ; for no man ought to be condemned unheard.—My Lord, faid Edmund, with equal modefty and intrepidity, I demand my trial ; if I ihall be found guilty of any crimes againft: my Benefaftor, let mc be puniflied with the utmoft rigour: But if, as I truft, no fuch charge ean be proved againft me, I know your goodnefs too well to doubt that you will do juftice
juílice to mc, as well as to others ; and, if it ihould fo happen, that by the mifreprefenta- tions of my enemies (who have long fought my ruin privately, 'and now avow it publicly) if by thcir artifices your Lordfliip ihould be induced to think me guilty, I would fubmit to your fentence in ftlenee, and appeal to another tribunal.—See, faid Mr. Wenlock, the con¬ fidence of the fellow ! he already fuppofes that my Lord muft be ia the wrong if he con¬ demns him ; and then this meek creature will appeal to another tribunal : To whofe will he appeal ? I -defire he may be made to explain himfelf.^—That I will immediately, faid Ed¬ mund, without being compelled ; I only meant to appeal to Heaven, that bcft knows my in¬ nocence.— 'Tis true, faid the Baron, and no offence to any one ; man can only judge by appearances, but Heaven knows the heart: Let every one of you bear this in mind, that you may not bring a falfe accufation, nor juf¬ tify yourfelves by concealing the truth. Ed¬ mund, I am informed that Ofwald and you have made very free with me and my family ; in fome of your converfätions, you were heard to
to cenfure me for the abfurdity of building a new apartment on the weft fide of the CaftJe, when there was one on the eaft fide uninhabit¬ ed : Ofwald faid, that apartment was íhut up becaufe it was haunted ; that fome ftiocking murder had been committed there ; adding many particulars concerning Lord Loveľs fa¬ mily, fuch as he could ftot know the truth of, and, if he had known, was imprudent to re¬ veal. But further, you complained of ill- treatment here ; and mentioned an intention to leave the Caftie, and feek your fortune elfewhere. I fhall examine into all thefe par¬ ticulars in turn. At prefent, I defire you, Ed¬ mund, to relate all that you can remember of the converfation that paifed between you and Ofwald in the wood laft Monday.—Good God' faid Edmund, is it poffible that any perfon could put fuch a co; ¿ftruftion upon fo innocent a converfation ? Tell me then, faid the Baron, the particu- culars of it.— I will, my Lord, as nearly as my memory will allow me. Accordingly he re¬ lated moft of the converfation that pafled iw the wood ; but, in the part that concerned the family
family of Lovel, he abbreviated as much as pofllble, Ofvvakľs countenance cleared up» for he had done the fame before Edmund came. The Baron called to his eldeft fon, — You hear, Sir Robert, what both parties fay : I have queftioned them feparateiy ; neither of them knew what the other would anfwer, yet their accounts agree almoft to a word.—I con¬ fefs they do fo, anfwered Sir Robert ; but, Sh, it is very bold and prefuming for them to fpcak of our family affairs in fuch a man¬ ner.; if my uncle, Lord Lovel, ihould come to know it, he would punifh them feverely ; and if his honour is reflefted upon, it becomes us to refent, and to puniih it. Here Mr. Wenlock broke out into paffion, and offered to fwear to the truth of his accufation. Be filent, Dick, faid the Baron ; I ihall judge for myfelf.'—I proteft, faid he to Sir Robert, I nevcr heard fo much as Ofwald has now told me concerning he deaths of Lord and Lady Lovel ; I think it is beft to let fuch ftories alone, till they die away of themfelves. I had, indeed, heard of an idle ftory of the caft: apartment's being haunted, when firft I came hither, and my brother advifed me to íhut it
ip till it íhould be forgotten : but what has iow been faid, has fuggefted a thought that nay make that apartment ufeful in future. I lave thought of a punifliment for Edmund hat wili ftop the mouth of his accufers for .he prefent ; and, as I hope, will eftablifli his credit with every body. Edmund, will you jndertake this adventure for me ?—What ad¬ venture, my Lord ? faid Edmund : There is nothing I would not undertake to ihew my gratitude and fidelity to you. As to my cou¬ rage, I would ihew that at the expence of my malicious accufers, if refpeft to my Lord's blood did not tie up my hands ; as I am fitu¬ ated, I beg it may be put to the proof in whatever way is moft for my mafter's ierviee. That is well faid, cried the Baron : As to your enemies, I am thinking how to feparate you from them effeftually ; of that I ihall fpeak hereafter. I am going to try Edmund's cou¬ rage ; he flmìl fleep three nights in the eaft apartment, that he may teftify to all whether it be haunted or not ; afterwards I will have that apartment fet în order, and my eldeft fon ÍhaU take it for his own ; it will fpare me fome expence, and anfwer my purpofe as well, or better :
better: will you confent, Edmund?—Withall my heart, my Lord, faid .Edmund, I have not wilfully offended Ood or man ; I have, there¬ fore, nothing to fear.—Brave boy I faid my Lord ; I am nöt deceived in you, nor ihall you be deceived in your veliance on me. You ihail ileep in thaf apartment to-night, and to¬ morrow I will have fome private talk with you. Do you, Ofwald, go with me ; I want to have fome converfation with you. The reil of you, retire to your ftudies and buiinefs ; I will meet you at dinner. Edmund retired to his own chamber, and Ofwald was íhut up with the Baron ; he de¬ fended Edmund's caufe and his own, and laid open as much as he knew of the malice and defigns of his enemies. The Baron exprefled much concern at the untimely deaths of Lord and Lady Lovel, and defired Ofwald to be circumfpeft in regard to what he had to fay of the circumftances attending them ; adding, that he was both innocent and ignorant of any treachery towards cither of them, Of¬ wald excufed himfelf for his communications to Edmund, faying, they fell undefignedly into D 2 the
the fubjeft, and that he mentioned it in con¬ fidence to him only. The Baron lent orders to the young men to come to dinner ; but they refufed to meet Edmund at table ; accordingly he ate in the fteward ! s apartment. After dinner, the Baron tried to reconcile his kinfmen to Edmund ; but fojund it impoifible. They faw their de¬ figns were laid open ; and, judging of him by themfelvcs, thought it impoffible to forgive or bç forgiven. The Baron ordered them to keep in feparate apartments ; he took his eldeft fon for his own companion, as being the moft rea¬ fonable of the malcontents ; and ordered hie kinfment to keep their own apartment, with a fervant to watch tlieir motions. Mr. William had Oiwald for his companion. Old' Jofeph was bid to attend on Edmund ; to ferve hitn at fupper ; and at the hour of nine to conduft him to the haunted apartment. Edmund de¬ fired that he might have a light and his fword, left his enemies fhould endeavour to furprize him. The Baron thought his requeft reafon¬ able, aud complied with it. There was a great fearch to find the key of
ie apartment ; at taft it was difeovcred by dmund himfelf, among a parcel of old rufty eys in л lumber-room. 'I'he Baron Ïcnt the oung men tlieir fuppers to thcir refpeciive partments. Edmund declined eating, and de- red to be conducted to his apartment. He ras accompanied by moft of the fervants to ie door of it ; they wiflied him fuccefs, and rayed for him as if he had been going to ex- cution. The door was with great difficulty unlock- d, and Jofeph gave Edmund a lighted lamp, nd wiihed him a good night ; he, returned is good wiihes to them all with the utmoft; hcerfulnefs, took the key on the infide of the oor, and then difmiffed them. Ile then took a furvey ofhis chamber ; the imitine, by long neglect, was decayed and topping to pieces ; the bed was devoured by lie moths, and occupied by the rats, who had uilt tlieir ncib there with impunity for many encrations. ЧЪс bedding was very damp, or the rain had forced its way through the ieling; he determined, therefore, to lie down n his clothes. There wcre two doors on the urtlicr tide of the room, vvith keys in them : 15 'Ò being
being not at all fleepy, he refolved to examine them ; he attempted one iock, and opened it with eafe ; he went into a large dining-room, the furniture of which was in the fame tattered condition ; out of tins was a large clofet with fßme books in it, and hung round with coats of arms, with genealogies and.alliances of the houfe of Lovel ; he amufed himfelf here fomc minutes, and then returned into the bed-cham¬ ber. He recolkfted the other door, and refolved to fee where it led to ; the key was ruftcd into the lock, and refifted his attempts·; he fet the lamp on tlie ground, and exerting all his. ftrength, opened the door, and at tlie fame in¬ ftant the wind of it blew out the lamp, and left him in utter darknefs. At the fame mo¬ ment he lieard a hollow ruftling noife, like that of a perfon coming through a narrow paf¬ fage. Till this moment not one idea of fear had approached the mind of Edmund ; but, juft then, all the concurrent circumftances ot his fituation ftruck upon his heart, and gave him a new and difagreeable fenfation. He paufed a while ; and leeolleftiiig himfelf, cried out aloud—What ihould 1 fear ? I have not wilfully
wilfully offended God or man ; why then ihould I doubt proteftion ? But I have not yet implored the divine afliftance ; how then can ï expeft it? Upon this he kneeled down and prayed earneftly, refigning himfelf wholly to the will of Heaven ; while he was yet fpeak¬ ing, his courage returned, and he refumed his ufual confidence : again he approached the door from whence the noife proceeded ; he thought he faw a glimmering light upon a ftaircafe before him. If, faid he, this apart¬ ment is, haunted, I will ufe my endeavours to difcover the caufe of it ; and if the fpirit ap¬ pears vifibly, I vvill fpeak to it. He was preparing to defcend the ftaircafe, when he heard feverai knocks at the door by which he firft entered the room; and, ftepping backward, the door was clapped to with great violence. Again fear attacked him, but he refifted İt, and boldly cried out—Who is there ?—A voice at the outer door aniwered —It's I; Jofeph, your friend;—AVhat do you want? faid Edmund—I have brought you forno wood to make a fire, faid Jofeph.--·! thank you kindly, iaid Edmund ; but niy lamp is gone oui; 1 wiii try to find the door, however. Af- i) f ter
ter fonie trouble, he found, and opened it ; and was not fairy to fee his friend Joieph, with a light in one hand, a flagon of beer ia the other, and a faggot upon his íhoulder. —1 eome, faid the good old man, to bring you fomething io keep up your fpirits ; the evening İs cold ; I knovv this room wants airing; and befide that, my^Mafter, I think your prefent undertaking ι equi res a little affiftance. My good friend, faîd Edmund, I never ihall be able to deferve or requite your kindnefs to me.—My dear Sir, you always deferved more than I could do for you ; and I think I fliall yet live to fee you defeat the defigns of yonr enemies, and acknowledge the fervice of your friends. Alas! faid Edmund, I fee little prof¬ peft of that !~-I fee, faid Jofeph, fomething that perfuades me you are defigned for great things ; and I pei ceive that things are working about to fomc great end : Have courage, my Mafter, my heart beats ftrangely high upon your account !-—You make me fmile, faid Ed¬ mund.—I am glad to fee it, Sir ; may you fmile all the reft of your life?—I thank your honeft affeftion, returned Kdmund, though it is too partial to me. You had better go to bed,
bed, however; if it is known that you vifit me here, it will be bad for us both.—So ï will prefently ; but, pleafe God, 1 will come here again to-morrow night, when all the family are а -bed; and I will tell you fome things lhat you never yet heard.—But pray tell me, faid Edmund, where does that door lead to ? —Upon a paffage that ends in a ftaircafe that leads to the lower rooms ; and there is like- wife a door out of taat paffage into the din¬ ing-room. And what rooms are there below flairs, faid Edmund ?—The fame as above, replied he.—Very well; then I wifli you a good night, wc will talk further to-morrow. —Aye to-morrow night : and in this place, my dear Mailer,—Why do you call me your Mailer ? i never was, nor ever can be, your mafter.—God only knows that, faid the good old man ; good night, and Heaven blefs you .' —Good night, my worthy friend ! Jofeph withdrew, and Edmund returned to the other door, and attempted feverai times to open it in vain ; his hands were benumbed and tired ; at length he gave over. He made a fire in the chimney, placed the lamp on a table, and opened one of the window-ihut- D 5 ters
ters to admit the da\-light, he tlien recom¬ mended himielf to the divine protection, and ihiew himfelf upon the bed; lie prefently fell aileep, and continued in that fiate, till rhe fun faluted him with his orient beams ilirough tlie window he had opened. As ioon as he was perfeftly awake, he Oiove to iceoilect his dicams. He ihough! that he heard people coming up the ftaîreale that he liad a gl impfe of: that the door open¬ ed, and there entered a Warrior, leading a Lady by the hand, who was young and beau¬ tiful, but paie and wan: The man was dreff¬ ed in complete armour, und his helmet down. 'ihey appioached the bed ; they undrew llie curtains. He thought the man faid,-—Is this onr child ? 'Lhe woman replied,—It is ; and the hour approaches that he fliall be known for fuch. They then feparated, and one ftood on eaeh fide of the bed ; their hands met over liis head, and tliey gave Jiim a fo¬ lemn benediction. He ftrove to rife and pay them his refpects, but they foi bad him : and the Lady faid,—Sleep in peace, oh, my Ed¬ mund ! for thofe v>ho are the tiue pofièftôrs of this apartment aie employed in thy pie- fer vat i en ·
fervation : Sleep on, fweet iıope of a houfe that is ihought paft hope !—Upon this, they withdrew, and went out at the fame door by whieh they entered, and he heard them de¬ ie end the ftairs.—After this, he followed a funeral as chief mourner ; he faw the whole proccftion, and heard the ceremonies per¬ formed. He was fnatched away from this r.u'.nuful feene to one or a contrary kind, a fLtely feaft at whidi he prefided, and he lieard himfelf contrraüıiaÎcd as a huiband, ancl a rather ; his fiiend Wiiik.ru fat by his fide , and his happi nefs was complete. Every fuc¬ ceeding idea was happinels without alloy; and iiis mind was nor idle a moment (İli the morning fun awakened him. Ue perfectly remembered his dicams and meditated on what all thefe things ihould portend. Am I then, faid he, not Fdmund Twyford, but fome¬ body of confequence, in whole faie fo many people are interefted? Vain thought, that muft have arifen fi о ni the palliai fuggeftions of my two friends, Mr. William and old Jo¬ feph. He lay thus reih cling, when а fervant knocked at the door, and told hini it was palt OG fi к
fix o'clock, and that the Baron expefted him to breakfaft in an hour. He rofe immedi¬ ately ; paid his tribute of thanks to heaven for its proteftion, and went from his chamber in high health and fpirits. He walked in the garden till the hour of bicakfaft, and then attended the Baron.— Good morrow, Edmund ! faid he ; how have you refted in your new apartment ? — Ex¬ tremely well, my Lord, anfwered he.—1 am glad to hear it, faid the Baron ; but I did not know your accommodations were fo bad, as * Joieph tells me they are.— 'Tis of no confe¬ quence, faid Edmund ; if they were much worfe, I could difpenfe with them for three nights. Very vvell, faid the Baron ; you are a brave lad ; I am fatisfied with you, and will excufe the other two nights.—But, my Lord, f vvill not be excufed ; no one fhall have rea¬ fon to fufpeft my courage ; I am determined togo through the remaining nights upon many accounts.—That fhall be as you pleafe, faid my Lord, i think of you as you deferve ; fo well, that I ihaii aik your adviee bye and bye in fome affairs of confequence.—My life and 'drdn c s are yours, my Loid ; command them freely.—
freely,—Let Ofwald be called in, faid my Lord ; he ihall be one of our confultation. He came ; the fervants were difmiffed ; and the Baron fpoke as follows :—Fdmund, when iirft 1 took you into sny family, it was at the requeft of my fons and kinfmen ; 1 bear wit¬ nefs to your good behaviour : you have not deferved to lofc their eftceni ; but, neverthe¬ lefs, I have obferved for fomc years paft, that all but my fon William have fet their faces againft you : 1 fee their meannefs, and I per¬ ceive their motives : but they arc, and muft be my relations ; and 1 would rather govern them by love, ihan fear. 1 love and efteem your virtues : I cannot give you up to gratify their humours. My fon William has loft the affections of the rell, for that he bears to you; but he has incrcaied my ι egard to him: I think myfelf bound in honour to him and you to provide for you ! I cannot do it as I wifhed, under my own roof. If you ftay here, I fee nothing but confufion İn my familv ; yet I cannot put you out of it difgracefully. I want to think, of fomc way to prefer you, that you may leave this houfe with honour ; and I de¬ fire both of you to give mc your advice in this
this mailéi. If fdmund will tell me u v, hut vuy 1 can employ binilo his own hou «urLiid nn advantage, 1 am nudy todo it, le, i. un pulule it, and Olwald ihali moderate be¬ tween us. Here he flipped ; and Fdmund, whofe fighs almoft iked him, threw himfelf n the Daion's ial, and wet his h. nd wldi his teais. Oh, my noble, generous benefactor ! do you condi fcead to confuit huh ι one as me upon the italt < f youi Lmiiy : D ics uur nioft amiable anu beloved fm bv in the iii will ot his brothers and f/nfmen for uv fake ? What am 1, that I fliould diiìuib the peace v-f tiiis noble famiiv - Oi», m\ Lord, lemi ше away direuy ! ί 'hould be umvoiihv u ¡ive, iî I did notearneíily cndeavou-ioit-.toie jour happinefs. You hav e given ше a noble edu¬ cation, and í truft I fliall not diígrace it. If you will recommend me, and give me a cha¬ rafter, I fear not to make my own fortune. 'i he Baron wiped his eyes ; I wiih to do this, шу child, but in what way ? —My Lord, faid Edmund, I will open my heart to you. I have ferved with ciedit in the army, and I fliould prefer a foidiei's life,—You pleafe me weil,
weil, faid the Baron : 1 will fend you to France, and give you a recommendation to the Regent ; he knows you perfonally, and will prefer you, for my fake, and for your own merit.—My Lord, you overwhelm me with your goodneis ! 1 am but your creature, and mv life filali be devoted to your fervice. —But, faid the Baron, how to difpofe of you till the ibring ; —That, faid Ofwald, may be thought of at ieiiuie ; I am ¿lad that you have refohed, and í congiatulaie you both. The Baron put an end to the converfation by de¬ firing Edmund to go with him into the Mc-- nage to fie his horfes. He ordered Ofwald to acquaint his fon William with all that had paficd, and to try to perfuade the young men to meet Edmund and William at dinner. Ί he Baron took Edmund with him into his Menage to fee fome horfes he had lately pui- ehafed ; while they were examining the beau¬ ties and defefts of thofe noble and ufeful ani¬ mals, Edmund declared that he preferred Ca- rodoc, a horfe he had broke himfeif, to any other in my Lord's ftables. Then, faid the Baron, I vvill give him to you ; and you ihali go upon him to feek your fortune. He made new
new acknowledgements for this gift, and de¬ clared he wouid prize it highly for the giver's fake. But 1 fhall not part wilh you yet, laid my Lord ; I will firft cany all my points with thefe faucy boys, and oblige them to do you juftice.-—You have already clone that, faid Edmund ; and I will not fufler any of your Lordihip's blood to undergo any fui ther hu¬ miliation upon my account. I think, with humble fubmiflion to your better judgment, the fooner I go hence the better. While they were fpeaking, Ofwald came to them, and faid that the young men had ab¬ folutely refufed to dine at the table, if Ed¬ mund was prefent.— 'Tis well, faid the Baron ; I fliall find a way to punifh their contumacy hereafter : 1 will make them know that I am the mafter here. Edmund and you, Ofwald, fhall fpend the day in my apartment above ftairs. William fhall dine with me alone ; and 1 will acquaint him with our determina¬ tion : My fon Robert, and his cabal, ihall be prifoners in the great parlour. Edmund ihall, according to his own defire, fpend this and the following night in the haunted apartment; ind this for his fake, and my own ; for if I ihould
ftiould now contradift my former order, it would fubjeft us both to their impertinent re¬ fieftions. He then took Ofwald aiide, and charged him not to let Edmund go out of his fight ; for if he fliould come in the way of thofe im¬ placable enemies, he trembled for the con¬ fequences. He then walked back to the fiables, and the two friends returned into the houfe. 'f hey had a long converfation on various fubjefts; in the courfe of it, Edmund ac¬ quainted Ofwald with all that had paffed be¬ tween him and Jofeph the preceding night, the curiofity lie had raifed in him, and his promife to gratify İt the night following, I wifli, faid Ofwald, you would permit me to be one of your party,—How can that be? faid Fdmund : wc fliall be watched, perhaps ; and, if dilcovered, what excufe can you make for coming there ? Belide, if it were known, I fhall he branded with the imputation of cowardice ; and though 1 have borne much, I will not promife to bear that patiently.— Never fear, replied Ofwald, I will fpeak to Jofeph about it; and, after prayers arc over, and
and the family gone to bed, I vvill fteal away from my own chamber and come to you. I am ftrongly interefted in your affairs ; and I cannot be eafy unlefs you will receive me into your company : I will bind myfelf to fe¬ crefy in any manner you fhall enjoin.—Your word is fufficient, faid Edmund ; I have as much, reafon to truft you, father, as any man living ; I fliould be ungrateful to refufe you any thing in my power to grant ; but fuppofe the apartment ihould really be haunted, would you have refolution enough to purfue tlie ad¬ venture to a difcovery ?—I hope fo, feid Of¬ wald;: but ha.ve you any reafon to believe it iş ?<—I have, iaid Jïdmund : but I have not opened my lips upon this fubjeft to any crea¬ ture but youifelf. This night I purpofe, if Fleaven permit, to go all over the rooms ; and though I had formed this defign, I will con¬ fefs that your company will ftrengthen my re¬ folution. I will have no referves to you hi anv refpeft ; but I muft put a feal upon your lips. Ofwald fwore fecruy tiil he ftwuld he permitted io difclofe the myfteries of that apartment; und both of them vuhed, in fo¬ lemn
lemn expectation, the event ofthe approach¬ ing night. In the afternoon Mr. William was allowed to vifit his friend : An affecting interview paf¬ fed between them : he lamented the neceffity of Edmund's departure, and they took a fo¬ lemn leave of each other, as if they foreboded it vvould be long ere they fhouid meet again. About the fame hour as the preceding even¬ ing, Jofeph came to conduci EdmuAd to his apartment. You will find better accommo¬ dations than you had laft night, faid. he, and ali by my Lord's own order.——I every hour receive fomc new proof of his goodnefs,, faid Edmund. When they arrived, he found a good fire in the chamber, and a table covered with cold meats, and a flagon of ftrong beer. ------Sit down and get your fupper, my dear Mailer, faid Jofeph ; 1 muft attend my Lord ; but as foon as the family are gone to bed, I will vifit you again,— Ποίο, faid Ldmund ; but firft, fee father Ofwald ; he has fomething to fay to you ; You may truft him, for I have no referves to hini.—AVell, Sir, I will fee him if you defire it, and I will come to you as foon
foon as poftible. So faying, he went his way ; and Edmund fat down to fupper. After a moderate refrefliment, he kneeled down, and prayed with the greateft fervency ; he refigned himfelf to the difpofai of Heaven : I am nothing, faid he, I defire to be nothing but what thou, О Lord, pleafeft to make me : If it is thy will that I ihould return to my for¬ mer obfcurity, be it obeyed with chearful- nefs ; and, if thou art pleafed lo exalt me, I will look up to thee, as the only fountain of honour and dignity. While he prayed, he felt an enlargement of heart beyond what he had ever experienced before ; all idle fears were difperfed, and his heart glowed with di¬ vine love and affiance ; he feemed raifed above the world and all its purfuits. He con¬ tinued wrapt up in mental devotion, tiil a knocking at the door obliged him to riie, and let in his two friends, who came without fhoes, and on tiptoe, to vifit him. Save you, my fon f* faid the friar ; you look cheerful and happy.-----I am fo, father, faid Edmund ; I have refigned myfelf to the dif¬ pofai of Heaven, and I find my heart ftrength- eutd
ened above what I can exprefs,—Heaven be praifed ! faid Ofwald : I believe you are de¬ figned for great things, my fon :—What ' do you too encourage my ambition ? fays Ed- .mund ; ftrange concurrence of circumftances ! Sit down, my friends ; and do you, my good Jofeph, tell me the particulars you promifed laft night. They drew their chairs round the fire, and Jofeph began as follows.^------ You have heard of the untimely death of the late Lord Lovel, my noble and worthy Mafter ; perhaps you may have alfo heard, that, from that time, this apartment was haunted. What paifed the other day, when .my Lord queftioned you both on this head, brought all the circumftances fiefh into my mind. Youthen faid, there were fufpicions that he came not fairly to his end. I truft you both, and will fpeak what I know of it. There was a perfon fufpefted of this murder ; and who do you think it was ?—You muft fpeak out, faid Ofwald.-----Why then, faid Jofeph, it was the prefent Lord Lovel.—You fpeak my thoughts, faid Ofwald ; but proceed to the proofs.—1 will, faid Jofeph. From the time tliat my Lord's death was reported, there wcre
were ftrange whifperings and confultations be¬ tween the new Lord und fonie ofthe fervants; there was a deal of private bufinefs carried on in ibis apa ri ment : Soon after they gave out that my poor Lady was diftrafted ; but ftie threw out ftrong expreflions that favoured no¬ thing of madnefs ; fhe faid, that the ghoft of her departed Lord had appeared to her, and revealed the circumftances of this murder. None of the fervants but one, wcre permitted to fbc her. At this very time, Sir Waiter, the new Lord, had the cruelty to offer love to her,; he urged her to marry him ; and one of her \yomen overheard her fay, flic would fooner tlie than give her hand to the man who caufed the death of her Lord : foon after this, we were told my Lady was dead. The Lord Lovel made a public and fumptuous funeral for her.—That is true, faid Ofwald ; for I was a novice, and aflifted at it. Well, fays Jofeph, now comes my part of the ftory. As 1 was coming home from the bu¬ rial, I overtook Roger, our ploughman. Said he, AVhat think you of this burying ? What ihould ï think, faid I, but vve have loft the beft Mafter and Lady that wc fliall ever know ? God he knows,
knows, quoth Roger, whether they be living or dead ; but if ever I law my Lady in my life, 1 iaw her alive the night they fay fhe died. I tih d to convince liim that he was miftaken ; but he oftered 'о \л ] п his oath, that the very night they faid íl. e died, lie faw her eome out at the garden -»».ď into fhe fields: that ihc often flopped, like a ee-fm in pain, and then went forward again untd he had loft fight of her. Now it is certain that her time was out, and ihc expefted to lie down every day ; and they did not pretend that fhe died in child-bed. I thought upon what I heard ; but nothing í faid. Roger told the fame ftory to another fervant ; fo he was called to an account ; the ftory was huihed up, and the fooliíh fel¬ low faid, he was verily perfuaded it was her ghoft that he faw. Now you muft take no¬ tice that, from this time, they began to talk about, that this apartment was troubled ; and not only this, but at laft the new Lord could not fleep in quiet in his own room ; and this induced him fo fell the caftle to his brother- in-law, and get out of this country as fail as poifible. He took nioft of the fervants away with him, aad Roger among the reft. As for me,
. me, they thought I knevv nothing, and fo thev left me behind ; but 1 was neither blind nor deaf, though 1 could hear, and fee, and lay nothing. This is a dark ftory, faid Ofwald.—It is fo, faid Edmund ; but why ihould Jofeph feem to think it concerns mc in particular ?—Ah, dear Sir ! faid Jofeph, I muft tell you, though 1 never uttered it to mortal man before, the ftriking refemblance this young man bears to my dear Lord, the ftrange diilike his reputed father took to him, his gentle manneis, his generous heart, his noble qualities fo uncom¬ mon in thofe of his birth and breeding, the found of his voice—You may fmile at the ftrength of my fancy, but 1 cannot put it out of my mind but that he is my own Mailer's fon. At thefc words Edmund changed colour, and trembled ; he clapped his hand upon his breaft, and looked up to Heaven in filence ; his dream recurred to his memory, and ftruck upon his heart, lie related it to his attentive auditors, fhe ways of Providence are won¬ derful, faid Ofwald. If this be fo, Heaven iu its own time will make it appear. Hue
Here a filence of feverai minutes enfued; wiien, fuddenly, they were awakened from thcir reverie by a violent noife in the rooms underneath them. It feemed like the claih¬ ing of arms, and fomething feemed to fall down with violence. They ftarted, and Edmund rofe up with α look full of refolution and intrepidity.·— d am called, faid he ; I obey the call ! He took up a lamp, and went to the door that he had opened the night before. Ofwald followed with his rofary in his hand, and Jofeph laft with trembling fteps. The door opened with eafe, and they defended the ftairs in profound filence. The lower rooms anfwered cxaftly to thofe above ; there were two parlours and a large clofet. They faw nothing remarkable iu thefe rooms, except two pifturcs, that were turned with their faces to the wall. Joieph took the courage to turn them : Thefe, faid he, are the portraits of my Lord and Lady.—Father, look at this face ; do you know who is like it ?—I íliould think, laid Ofwald, it was done for Ed¬ mund !— I am, faid Edmuud, ftruck with the refemblance myfclf: but let us go on ; 1 feel E myfelf
myfelf infpired wilh unufual courage.—Let us open the clofet-door.—Ofwald flopped him fliort :—-Take heed, faid he, left the wind of the door put out the lamp, 1 will open this door. He attempted it without fuccefs ; Jo¬ feph did ihe faine, but to no purpnfc ; Edmund gave the lamp to jofeph ; he approached the door, tried the key, and it gave way to his hand in a moment.—This adventure belongs, faid he, to me only ; that is plain ; bring the lamp fonvard. Ofwald repealed liis pater- nofter, in which they all joined, and then en¬ tered the clofet. The firft thing that prcft ated itfelf to their view, was a compiete fuît of armour, that - feemed to have fallen down on an heap. Be¬ hold ! faid Kdmund, this made the noife we heard above. They took it up, and examin¬ ed it piece by piece ; the infide of the breaft- plate was ftained with blood.—Sec here, faid Edmund ; what think you of this ì —'Tis my Lord's armour, faid Jofeph ; I know 't well : Here has been bloody work in this cloiet ! Going forward, he ftumbled over fomething ; it was a ring, with the arms of Lovel engraved upon it.—This is my Lord's ring, faid Jofeph ; I have fecn him wear it ; I give it to you, Sir, as
as tîıe right owner ; and moil religioufly do I believe you his fon, —Heaven only knows that, faid Edmund ; and, if it permits, I will knpw who was my father before I am a day older. While he was fpeaking, he ihifted his ground, and perceived that the boards rofe up on the other fide of the clofet ; upon farther examination they found that the whole floor was loofe, and a table that ftood over them concealed the circumftance from a cafual ob¬ ferver.—I perceive faid Ofwald, that fome great difcovery is at hand.—God defend us ! faid Fdmund, but I verily believe that the per¬ fon that owned this armour lies buried under us. Upon this, a difmal hollow groan was heard, as if from underneath. A folemn filence enfued, and marks of fear were vifible upon all three ; the groan was thrice heard ; Ofwald made figns for them to kneel, and he prayed audibly, that Heaven would direct them how to act ; he alfo prayed for the foul of the de¬ parted, that it might reft in peace. After this he arofe; but Edmund continued kneeling-: he vowed folemnly to devote himfelf to the difcovery of this fecret, and the avenging the death of the perfon there buried, FIc then E 2 rofe
rofe up.—It would be to no purpofe, faid he, for us to examine further now ; when 1 am properly authorifed, I will have this place opened : I truft that time is not far off.— 1 be¬ lieve it, faid Ofwald ; you are defigned by Hea¬ ven to be its inftrument in bringing this deed of daiknefs to light. Wc are your creatures; only tell us what you would have us do, and we are ready to obey your commands.—I only demand your filence, faid Edmund, till I call for your evidence ; and then you muft fpeak all you know, and all you fufpeft.—Oh, faid Jofeph, that I raay but live to fee that day, and I ihall have lived long enough !—Come, faid Edmund, let us return up ftairs, and we will confuit further how I ihall proceed ; fo faying, be went out of the clofet, and th>y followed him. He locked the door, and took the key out :—I will keep this, faid he, tiil I have power to ufe it to purpofe, left any one ihould prefume to pry into the fecret of this clofet: I will always carry it about mc, to re¬ mind me of what I have undertaken. Upon this they returned up ftairs into the bed-chamber; all was ftifl, and they heard nothing more to difturb them. How, faid Edmund,
Edmund, is it poffible that I fliould be tlie foa of Lord Lovel ? for, however circumftances have feemed to encourage fuch a notion» what reafon have I to believe it ?—I am ftrangely puzaled about it, faid Ofwald. It feems un¬ likely that fo good a man as Lord Lovei íhould corrupt the wife of a peafant, his vaflãJ ; and, efpecially./ being fo lately married to a Lady vvith whom he was paflionately in love.—Hold there! faid Jofeph; my Lord was incapable of fuch an aftion : if Mafter Edmund is the fon of my Lord, he is alfo the fon of my Lady.—How can that be ? faid Edmund.—I don't know how, faid Jofeph ; but there is a perfon who can tell if ihe will : I mean Mar¬ gery Twyford, who calls herfelf your mothe?. —You meet my thoughts, faid Edmuhd ri had refohed, before you fpoke, to viflt her, and to interrogate her on tiie fubjeft : í will afk my Lord's permillion to go this very day. That is right, faid Ofwald ; but be cautious and prudent in your inquiries—If you, faid Edruund, would bear mc company, I ihould do better : flie might think herfelf obliged to anfwer your queftions : and, being lefs inte¬ refted in the eventi you would be more dif- E 3 erect
creet in your interrogations.—That I will moft readily, faid he ; and I will afk my Lord's permiffion for us both. This point is well de¬ termined, faid Joieph ; I am impatient for the refult j and I believe my feet will carry me to meet you whether I confent or not.—I am as impatient as you, faid Ofwald ; but let us be filent as the grave, and let not a word or look indicate any thing unknown or myfterious. The day-light began to dawn upon their conference ; and Edmund, obferving it, beg¬ ged his fnends to withdraw in filence. They did fo, and Jeft Edmund to his own recollec¬ tions. His thoughts were too much employed for fleep to approach him ; he threw himfelf upon the bed, and lay meditating how he ihould proceed ; a thoufand fchemes offered themfelves, and were rejefted ; but he refolv¬ ed, at all events, to leave Baron Fitz-Owen's family the firft oppoitunity that prefented it¬ felf. He was fummoned, as before, to attend my Lord at breakfaft; during which, he was filent, abfent, and referved. My Lord obferved it y and rallied him ; inquiring how he had fpent
my Lord, and in laying plans for my future conduct. Ofwald took the hint, and alked permiffion to vifit Edmund's mother in his company, and acquaint her with his intentions of leaving the country foon. He confented freely : but feemed unrefolved about Edmund's departure. They fet out direftly, and Edmund went haftily to old Twyford's cottage, declaring that every field feemed a mile to him. Reftrain your warmth, my fon, faid Ofwald ; compofe your mind, and recover your breath, before you enter upon a bufinefs of fuch confequence. Margery met them at the door, and aiked Edmund what wind blew him thither?—Is it fo very furprifing, faid he, that I ftiould vifit my parents ?—Yes, it is, faid ihe, confidering the treatment you have met with from us; but fince Andrew is not in the houfe, I may fay I am glad to fee you : Lord blefs you, what a fine youth you be grown ! 'Tis a long time fincc I faw you ; but that is not my fault : many a crofs word, and many a blow, have I had on your account : but I may now venture to embrace my dear child.—Edmund came
ing tears, on both fides, evinced their affec¬ tum. And why, faid he, ihould my father for¬ bid you·· to embrace your child ? what ha\e I everdone to v ferve his hatred?—Nulling, my dear boy/! you wcre always good and ten¬ der-hearted, and defeivcd the love of every body.—It is not common, faid Edmund, for α pavent to hate his firft-born fon without his having deferved it.—Thb is truci* faid Ofwald ; it is uncommon ; it is unnatural ; nay, I am of opmion it ie almoft impoifible. I am fo ewrnnced of this truth, that I believe the man who thus hates and abules Edmund cannot be bis father. In feying this, he obferved her countenance attentively ; fbe changed colour apparently.—Come, faid he, let us fit down ; and do you, Margery, anfwer to what I have faid.— Bleflèd Virgin ! feid Margery, what does your Reverence mean ? what do you fufpect > *-I fufpeft, faid he, that Edmund is not the fon of Andrew your hufband,—Lord blefs mc ! faid ihe, what is it you do fufpeft ?—Do not evade my queftion, woman ! I am come here by authority to examine you upon this point. The woman trembled every joint :—Would to heaven! faid ihe, that Andrew was at home Ì
home I—It is much better as it is, faid Ofwald : you are the perfon we are to examine.—Oh, father, faid ihe, do you think that 1—that I— that I am to blame in this matter ? what have 1 done ?—Do you, Sir, faid he, aik your own queftions ? Upon this, Edmund threw himfelf at her feet, and embraced her knees.—Oh, ^iy mother ! faid he, fer as fuch my heart owns you, tell me, fer the iove of Heaven ! tell me, who was my father ?—Gracious Heaven.' faid ihe, what will become of me I—Woman I faid Ofwald, confefs the truth, or you fliall be compelled to do it : by whom you had this youth ? —Who, I ? faid ilie ; I had him ! No, father, I am not guilty of the black crime of adultery ; God he knows my innocence : 1 am not worthy to be the mother of fuch a fweet youth as that is.—You are not his mo¬ ther, then, nor Andrew his father ?—Oh, what ihail I do ? faid Margery > Andrew will be the death of me !—No, he fliall not, faid Ed¬ mund ; you ihall be protected and rewarded for the difcovery.—Goody, faid Ofwald, con¬ fefs the wiiole truth, and I will protect you from harm and frora blame ; you may be the means of making Edmund's fortune, in which E 5 cafe
cafe he will certainly provide for you : on the other hand, by an obftinate filence you will deprive yourfelf of ail advantages you might receive from the difcovery ; and, befide, you will foon be examined in a different manner, and be obliged to confefs all you know, and nobody will thank you for it.—Ah 1 faid ilie, but Andrew beat me the laft time I fpoke to Edmund ; and told me he would break every bone in my ikin, if ever I fpoke to him again. —He knows it then ? faid Ofwald—He know it ι Lord help you, it was all his own doing.·— Tell us then, faid Ofwald ; for Andrew ihall ne¬ ver know it, till it is out of his power to punifh you.— 'Tis a long ftory, faid ihe, and cannot be told in a few words.—It will never be told at this rate, faid he ; fit down and begin it in¬ ftantly.—My fate depends upon your words, faid Edmund ; my foul is impatient ofthe fuf¬ penfe ! If ever you loved and rheriilied me, ihew it now, and tell while I have breath to aik it. He fat in extreme agitation of mind ; his words and aftions were equally expreflive of liis inward emotions.—I will, faid íhe ; but I muft try to recollect all the circumftances. You
- You muft know, young man, that you are one-and-twenty years of age.—On what day was he born ? faid Ofwald.—The day before yefterday, faid fhe, the 'ilft of September. —A remarkable æra, laid he.—''Lis fo, in¬ deed, faid Kdmund : Oh, tliat night ! that apartment '—Be filent, faid Ofwald ; and do you, Margery, begin your ftory. 1 will, faid ihe. Juft one and twenty years ago, on that very day, I loft my iìrft-born fon : 1 got a hint by over-reaching myfeif, when I was near my time, and fo the poor child died. And fo, as I was fitting all alone, and very melancholy, Andrew came home from work : fee, Margery, faid he, I have brought you a child inftead of that you have loft.. So he gave me a bundle, as I thought ; but fure enough it was a child ; a poor helpiefs babe, juft born, and only rolled up in a fine handker¬ chief, and over that a rich velvet cloak, trim¬ med with gold lace. And where did you find this ? faid L—-Upon the foot-bridge, faid he, juft below the clay field. 'Phis child, faid he belongs to fome great folk, and perhaps it may be inquired after one'day, and may make ouï fortunes; take care of it, faid he, and I' б bring
bring it up as ifit was your own. The poof infant was cold, and it cried and looked up to me fo pitifully, that I loved it ; befide my milk was troublefome to me, and I was glad to be eafed of it ; fo I gave it the breaft, and from that hour I loved the child as if it were my own, and fo I do ftifl if I dared to own it.— And this is all you know of Edmund's birth ? faid Ofwald. No, not all, faid Margery ; but pray look out and fee whether Andrew is coming, for I am all over in a twitter.—He is not, faid Ofwald ; go on, I befeech you í — This happened, faid ihe, as I told you, on the 2lft. On the morrow my Andrew went out early to work, along with One Robin Roufe, our neighbour ; they had not been gone above an hour when they both came back feem¬ ingiy very much frightened ; fays Andrew, go you, Robin, and borrow a pick-axc at neigh* bpur Styles's. What İs the matter now ? faid I—Matter enough ! quoth Andrew ; we may come to be hanged, perhaps, as many an innocent man has before us. Tell me what is the matter ? faid L I will, faid he -, but if ever you open your mouth about it, woe be to you I İ never wiii, faid i : but he made me fwear
fwear by aH the bleifed Saints in the calender; and then he told me, that, as Robin and he were going over the foot-bridge, where he found the child the evening before, they faw fomething floating upon the water ; fo they followed it, tilt it ftuck againft a ftake, and found it to be the dead body of a woman ; as fure as you are alive, Madge, fatd he, this was the mother of the child I brought home.— Merciful God ! faid Edmund ; am I the child of that haplefs mother ?—Be compofed, faid Ofwald : proceed, good woman, the time ¡9 precious.—And fo, continued ihe, Andrew told me they dragged the body out of the river, and it was richly dreifed, and muft be fome¬ body of confequence. I fuppofe, faid he, when the poor Lady had taken care of her child, ftie went to find fome help ; and, the night being dark, her foot flipped, and ihc f eli into the river, and was drowned. Lord have mercy 1 faid Robin, what ihall we do with the dead body ? we may be taken up for the murder; what had we to do to meddle with it ? Aye, but fays Andrew, we rauft have fomething to áo with it now ; and our wifeft way is to bury it. Robin was &dly frightened,
frightened, but at iaft they agreed to carrv it into the wood, and Ьш y it there ; fo they came home for a pick-axe and ihovel. Well, faid i, Andrew, but will you bury all the rieh clothes ycu fpeak of? Why, faid he, it would be both a fin and a fliume to ftrip the dead. So it would, faid I ; but 1 will give you a flieet to wrap the body in, and you may take off her upper garments, and any thing of value ; but not ftrip her to the ikin for any thing. Well faîd, wench ! faid he ; I will do as you fay. So ï fetched a ihect, and by that time Robin was come back, and away they went together. They did not come back again till noon, and then they fat down and ate a morfei to¬ gether. Says Andrew, now we may fit down and eat in peace. Aye, fays Robin, and fleep in peace too, for we have done no harm. No, to be fure ! faid I ; but yet I am much con¬ cerned that the poor Lady had not Chriftian burial. Never trouble thyfelf about that, faid Andrew : we have done the bcft we could for her ; but let us fee what we have got in our bags ; we muft divide them. So they open¬ ed their bags, and took out a fine gown and a pair
pair of rieh flioes ; but, befide thefe, there Was a fine necklace with a golden locket and a pair of car-rings. Says Andrew, and wink¬ ed at me, 1 will have thefe, and you may take the reft. Robin laid he was fatisfied, and fo he went his way. When he was gone, Here, you fool, fays Andrew, take thefe, an ' keep them as fafe as the bud of your eye : If ever young Mailer is found, thefe will make our fortune.—And have you them now ? iaid Of¬ wald. Yes, that I have, anfwered flic ; An¬ drew would have fold them long ago, but I aU ways put him off it.—Heaven be praifed ! faid Edmund.—Huih, fiiîd Ofwald, Jet us not lofe time ; proceed, Goody :—Nay, laid Margery, I have not much more to fay. We looked every day to hear fome enquiries after the child, but nothing paffed, nobody was miffing, —Did nobody of note die about that time ? faid Ofwald.------Why, yes, faid Margery, the widow Lady Lovel died that fame week : by the fame token, Andrew went to the funeral, and brought home a 'fcutcheon, which I kept unto this day. Very well ; go on. My huf¬ band behaved well enough to the boy, till fuch time as he had two or three children ofhis own, and
and then he began to grumble, and fay, it was hard to maintain other folks' children, when he found it hard enough to keep his own : I loved the boy quite as well as my own : often and often have I pacified Andrew, and made him to hope that he ihould one day or other be paid for his trouble ; but at iaft he grew out of patience, and gave over ail hopes of that kind. As Edmund grew up, he grew fickly and tender, and could not bear hard labour ; and that was another reafon why my huihand could not bear with him. If, quoth he, the boy coukl earn his living, I did not care ; but I muft bear aH the expence. There came an uld pilgrim into our parts ; he was a fcholar, and had been a foldier, and he taught Edmund to read ; then he told him hiftories of wars, and Knights, and Lords, and great men ; and Kdmund took fuch delight in hearing him, tliat he would not take to any thing elfe. To be fure Edwin was a pleafant compa¬ nion ; he would tela old ftories, and fing old fongs, that one could have fat all night to hear him ; but, as I was faying, Edmund grew more and more fond of reading, and leis of work ; however,
however, he would run of errands,, and do many handy turns for the neighbours ; and he was lo courteous a lad, that people took no¬ tice of him. Andrew once catched him alone reading, and then told hini that if he did not find fomc way to earn his bread, he would turn litui out of doors in a very ihort time ; and fo he would have done, furc enough, if my Lord Fitz·Owen had not taken him into his fervice juft in the nick. Very well, Goody, faid Ofwald ; you have told your ftory very well j, I am glad for Ed¬ mund's fake that you can do it fo properly ; But now, can you keep a fecret ?—Why, an't pleafe your Reverence, I think 1 have ftiewed you that I can.—But can you keep it from your huíband ?—Aye, faid fhe, furely I can ; for I dare not tell it him.—That is a good fe¬ curity, faid he: but I muft have abetter: You muft fwear upon this book not to difclofe any thing that has pafled between us three» till we defire you to do it. Be aflured you will foon be called upon for this purpofe ; Ed¬ mund's birth is near to the difcovery ; he is the fon of parents of high degree ; and it will be
be in his power to make your fortune, when he takes poifeffion ofhis own. Holy Virgin ! what is it you tell me ? How you rejoice me to hear, that what I have fo long prayed for will come to pafs ; ihe took the oath required, faying after Ofwald. Now, faid he, go and fetch the tokens you have mentioned. When lhe was gor.?* Edmund's paffions, long fuppreifed, broke o»t in tears and excla¬ mations—he kneeled down, and, with his hands clafped together, returned thanks to Heaven for the difcovery. Ofwald begged him to be compofed, ieft Margery ihould per¬ ceive his agitation, and mifconftrue the caufe. She foon returned with the necklace and ear¬ rings: They were pearls of great value ; and the necklace had a locket, on which the cy¬ pher of Lovel was engraved.—This, faid Of¬ wald, is indeed a proof of confequence: Keep it, Sir, for it belongs to you,—Muft he take it away? faid íhe. —Certainly, returned Ofwald ; we can do nothing without it : but If Andrew íhould aik for it, you muft put him off for the prefent* and hereafter he will find his account in
in it. Margery confented reluftantly to part with the jewels ; and, after feme further conver¬ fation, they took leave of her. Edmund em¬ braced her affectionately.— i thank you with my whole heart, faid he, for all your goodnefs to me ! Though I confefs, I never felt much regard for your huíband, yet for you I had al¬ ways the tender affeftion of a fon. You will, I truft, give your evidence in my behalf when called upon : and I hope it will one day be in my power to reward your kindnefs : In that cafe, I will own you as my fofter-mother, and you fliall always be treated as fuch. Mar¬ gery wept.—The Lord grant it ! faid fhe ; and I pray him to have you in his holy keeping. Fatewell, my dear child! — Ofwald defired them to feparate for fear of intrufion ; and they returned to the Caftle. Margery ftood at the door ofher cottage, looking every way to fee if the coaft was clear. Now, Sir, faid Ofwald, I congratulate you as the fon of Lord and Lady Lovel ; the proofs are ftrong and indifputable.—To us they are fo, faid Kdmund ; but how ihall we make them fo to others ? and what are we to think of the funeral of Lady Lovel ? As of a fiftion·» fuid
iaid Ofwald ; the work of the prefent Lord, in fecure his title and fortune.—And what means can we ufe to ditpoflefs him ? faid Ed¬ mund ; he is not a man for a poor youth like me to contend with,—Doubt not, faid Of¬ wald, but Heaven, who has evidently con¬ ducted you by the hand thus far» will complete its own work ; for my part, I can only wonder and adore 1—Give me your advice then, faid Edmund; for Heaven alfifts us by natural means. It feems to me, faid Ofwald, that your firft ftep muft be to make a friend of fome great man, of confequence enough to cfpoufe your caufe, and to get tliis affair examined into by authority. Edmund ftarted and croffed him¬ felf; he fuddenly exclaimed—A friend ' yes; I have a friend ! a powerful one too, one fent hy Heaven to be my protecior, but whom I have too long neglefted.—Who can that be? faid Ofwald.—Who ihould it be, faid Edmund, but that good Sir Philip Harclay, the chofeu friend of him, whom I íhall from hencefor¬ ward call my father.—'lis true, indeed, faid ofwald ; and this is a frefh proof of what i before obferved, tliat Heaven aififts you, and will
will eomplete its own work.—I think fo my¬ felf, iaid Edmund, and rely upon its direftion. I have already determined on my future con¬ duft, whieh I will communicate to you. My firft ftep fliall be to leave the Caftle. My Lord has this day given me a horfe, upon which 1 propofe to fet out this very night, without the knowledge of any of the family. I will go to Sir Philip Harclay ; I will throw myfelf at his feet, relate my ftrange ftory, and implore his proteftion : With him I will coniult on the moft proper way of bringing this murderer to public juftice ; and I will be guided by his ad¬ vice and direftion in every thing.^—Nothing can be better, faid Ofwald, than what you propofe : but give me leave to offer an addi¬ tion to your fcheme. You fliall fct off in the dead of night, as you intend ; Jofeph and I will favour your departure in fuch a manner as to throw a myftery over the circumftances of it : Your difappearing at fuch a time from the haunted apartment will terrify and con¬ found all the family ; they will pirzľle them¬ felves in vain to account for it, and they will be afraid to pry into the fecrets of that place. You fay well, and I approve your addition, replied
replied Edmund. Suppofe, Iikewife, there was a letter written in a myfterious manner, and dropped in my Lord's way, or fent to him af¬ terwards, it would forwaid our defign, and frighten them away fiom that apartment.— That lhall be my care, faid Ofwald ; and I will wai rant you that they vvill not find them¬ felvcs difpoíed to inhabit İt prefently.—But hovv ihall I leave my dear friend, Mr. Wil¬ liam, without a word of notice of this fepa¬ ration ?—1 have thought of that too, faid Of¬ wald ; and I wili fo manage, as to acquaint him with it in fuch a manner, as he ihall think out of the common courfe of things, and which fliall make him wonder and be filent. —How will you do that? faid Edmund.— I will tell you hereafter, faid Ofwald ; for here comes old Jofeph to meet us. He eame, indeed, as un as his age would permit hıra. As foon as he was within hear¬ ing, he afked them what news? They related all that had paflèd at Tvvyford's cuttagc ; he heard tliem vvith the greateft eagernefs of at¬ tention, and as foon as they eame to the great event™! knew it ' I knew it ! exclaimed Jo¬ feph; I was fure it would prove fo ! Thank God
God for it ! But I will be the fiift to acknow¬ ledge my young Lord, aud I will live and die his faithful fervant î Here Jofeph attempted to kneel to him, but Edmund prevented him with a warm embrace : My friend ! my dear friend ! faid he, I cannot fuffer a man of your age to kneel to me ? Are you not one of my beft and trueft friends ? I wiil ever remember your dif¬ interefted affeftion for me ; and if Heaven re¬ flores me to my rights, it ihall be one of my firft cares to render your old age eafy and happy. Jofeph wept over him, aud it was fomc time before he could utter a word. Ofwald gave them both time to recover their emotion, by acquainting Jofeph with Edmund's fcheme for his departure. Jofeph wiped his eyes and fpoke.—I have thought, iaid he, of fomething that vvill be both agree¬ able and ufeful to my dear mafter. John Wyatt, Sir Philip Han lay's fervant, is now upon a vifit at his father's , I have heard that he goes home foon ; now he vvould be both a guide and companion on the way. That is, indeed, a happy circumftance, faid Edmund ; but how ihall we know certainly the time of his departure ?—Why, Sir, 1 wiil go to him, and
and enquire, and bring you word dİrc&ly.-— * Do fo, faid Kdmund, and you will oblige me greatly.—But, Sir, faid Ofwald, Ithink it will be heft not to let John Wyatt know who i> lo be his companion; only let Jofeph tell him that a gentleman iô going to vifit his mafter ; and, if poifible, prevail upon him to fet out this night.—Do fo, my good friend, faid Ed¬ mund ; and tell him, further, that this perfon has bufinefs of great confequence to commu¬ nicate to his Mafter, and cannot delay his jour¬ ney on any account.—I will do this, you may depend, faid Jofeph, and acquaint you with my fuccefs as foon as poifible ; but, Sir, you muft not go without a guide, at any rate.—I truft I fhall not, faid Kdmund, though I go alone ; he that has received fuch a call as i have, can want no other, nor fear any danger. Ihey converfed on thefc points till they drew near the Caftle, when Jofeph left them to go on his errand, and Fdmund attended his Lord at dinner. The Baron obferved that he was filent and referved ; the converfation lan- guiilied on both fides. As foon as dinner was ended, Kdmund aiked permiifion to go up into his own apartment, where he packed up fomc neccífaricí,
neceffaries, and made a hafty preparation for his departure. Afterwards he walked into the garden, re¬ volving in his mind the peculiarity ofhis fitu¬ ation, and the uncertainty of his future prof¬ pefts ; loft in thought, he walked to and fro in a covered walk, with his arms croiibd and his eyes caft down, without perceiving that he was obferved by two females, who ftood at a diftance watching his motions : it was the Lady Emma and her attendant who were thus engaged. At length, he lifted up his eyes and faw them ; he ftood ftill, and was irrefolute whether to advance or retire : they approach¬ ed him ; and, as they drew near, fair Kmma fpoke—You have been fo wrapt in meditation, Kdmund, that 1 am apprehenfive of fome new vexation that I am yet a ftranger to : Would it were in my power to leifen thofe you have already! But tell me if 1 guefs truly? He ftood ftill irrefolute, he anfwered with hefita- tation.-—Oh, Lady—I am-—I am grieved, I am concerned, to be the eaufe of fo much confufion in this noble family, to whieh I am fo much indebted : I fee no way to leifen thefe evils but to remove the caufe of them__ ^ Meaning
Meaning youifelf r faid file.-—Certainly, Ma¬ dam ; and 1 was meditating on my departure. But, faid ilie, by your departure you will not remove the caufe.—liow fo, Madam?—Be¬ eaufe you are not the caule, but thofe you will leave behind you.—Lady Emma .'—How cau you aflcdi. this ignorance, Kdmund? You know well enough it is that odious Wenlock, your enemy and my averfion, that has cauied all this mifchief among us, and will much more, if he is not removed.—This, Madam, is a fub¬ jeft that it becomes ше to be filent upou : Mr. Wenlock is your kinfman ; he is not my friend ; and for that reafon I ought not to fpeak againft him, nor you to hear it from me : If he has ufed me ill, I am recompenfed by the generous treatment of my Lord your fa¬ ther, who ís all that İs great and good ; he has allowed me to juftify myfelf to him, and he has reftored me to his good opinion, whieh 1 prize among the bcft gifts of Heaven : Your amiable brother W illianı thinks welt of me, and his efteem is infinitely dear to me ; and you* excellent Lady, permit me to hope that you honour me with your good opinion : Arc not thefc ample amends for the ill-will Mr. Wenlock
tVcnlock bears me ?-— My opinion of you, '.dmund, faid ihe, is fixed and fettled : ii is lot founded upon events of yefterday, but ipon long knowledge and experience ; upon our whole conduft and charafter.—You no¬ tour me, Lady ! Continue to think well of ne, it will excite me to deierve it. When I m far diftant from this place, the remem¬ brance of your goodnefs will be a cordial lo uy heart.—But why w r ill you leave us, Ed- uund ? Stay and defeat the defigns of your nemy ; you ihall have my wiflies and alfift- uce.-—Pardon me, Madam, that is among he things I cannot do, even ifit wcre in my iower, which it is not. Mr, Wenlock loves ou, Lady, and if he is fo unhappy as to be our averfion, that İs a puniihment levere notigli. For the reft, 1 may be unfortunate •y the wickednefs of others, but ¡f I am un¬ worthy, it muft be by my own fault.-—So then ou think it is an unworthy aftion to oppofe dr. Wenlock r Very well, Sir: 'ihen 1 fup- lofe you wiih him fuccefs ; учш wiih that 1 nay be married to him ?■— L Madam! faid idinund, confufed ; what am I, that 1 ihould ive my opinion on an afluir of fo much con- 1·' u frtjuence ?
fequence ? You diftrefs mc by the queftion. May you be happy ; may you enjoy your own wiihes I He fighed, he turned away. She cal¬ led him back ; he trembled, and kept filence. She feemed to enjoy his confufion ; íhe was cruel enough to repeat the queftion.—Tell mc, Edmund, and truly, do you wifh to fee me give my hand to Wenlock ? I infift upon your anfwer. All on a fudden he recovered both his. voice and courage ; he ftepped for¬ ward, his perfon ereft, his countenance affur¬ ed, his voiee refolute and intrepid. Since Lady Emma infifts upon my anfwer, fince ihe avows a diilike to Wenlock, fince flic condeíêcnds to aik my opinion, I will tell her my thoughts, my wiihes. The fair Emma now trembled in Iter turn ; flie bluihed, looked down, and was aihamed to have ipoken io freely. Kdmund went on:—My moil arde it withes are, that the fair Kmma may lefcrve her heart and hand till a ceriain perfon, a fiiend of mine, is at Ji- beuv to folicit them ; whofe utmoft ambition is, fiift to deierve, and then obtain them.— Your fiiend, Sìr ' faid Lady Emma, lier brow clouded, her eye difdainfui. Edmund proceed¬ ed : —Mv fiend h fo particularly circum- jlanced,
ftanced, that he cannot at prefent, with pro¬ priety, aik for Lady Kmma's favour ; but as foon as he has gained a caufe that is yet in fufpence, he will openly declare his preten¬ fions, and if he is unfuccefsful, he will then condemn himfelf to eternal filence. Lady Kmma knew not what to think of this decla¬ ration ; ihe hoped, the feared, ftie meditated : but her attention was too ftrongly excited to be fatisfied without fome gratification : after a paufe, ihe purfued the fubjeft.—And this friend of yours, Sir, of what degree and for¬ tune is he ? Kdmund fmiled ; but, command¬ ing his emotion, he replied, his birth is noble, his degree and fortune uncertain. Her eoun¬ tenanee fell, ilie fighed ; he proceeded.—It is utterly impoftible, faid he, for any man of inferior degree to afpire to Lady Kmma's fa¬ vour ; her noble birth, the dignity of her beau¬ ty and virtues, muft awe and keep at their pro¬ per diftance all men of infeiior degree and merit; they may admire, they mayicvcre; but they muft not prefume to approach too near, left thcir prefumption íliould meet with its puniihment.—Well, Sir, faid ilie, fuddenly, and fo this fiiend of youis has commiilioncd ¥ 'Δ you
you to fpeak in his behalf ?—He has, Madam —Then I muft teU you, that I think his afTur¬ ance is very great, and yours not much lefs. —I am forry for that, Madam,—-Tell him,, that I ihall referve my heart and hand for the man,to whom my father ihall bid me give them.—Very well, Lady ; I am certain my Lord loves you too well to difpofe of them againft your inclination.—How do you know that, Sir ? But tell him, that the man that hopes for my favour muft apply to my Lord for his.—That is my friend's intention, his re¬ folution, I ihould fay, as foon as he can do к with propriety ; and I accept your permiffion for him to do fo.—My permiffion did you fay! I am aftonifhed at your afTurance ! tell me no more of your friend : But perhaps you are pleading for Wenlock, all this time ? It is all one to me ; only, fay no more.—Are you of¬ fended with me, Madam?— No matter, Sir.— Yes, it is.—I am furprized at you, Edmund !— I am furprized at my own temerity ; but for¬ give me—It does not fignify ; good bye Pye, Sir,-—Don't leave me in anger, Madam ; í cannot bear that : Perhaps í may not fee you again for a long lime. He looked affiled ; iht
the turned back —I do forgive you, Edmund : I was concerned for you ; but, it feems, you are more concerned for every body than for yourfelf. She fighed: faicwcll! find ihe. Ed¬ mund ga?xd on her with tendernefs ; he ap¬ proached her, he juft touched her hand ; his heart was fifing to his lips, but he recollefted ids fituation ; he checked himfelf immediate¬ ly ; he retired back, he fighed deeply, bowed low, and haftily quitted her. The Lady turning into another walk, he reached the houfe firft, and went up again to bi;i chamber; lie thiew himfelf upon his knees ; prayed for a thoufand bleifings upon every one ofthe family of his benefaftor, and involuntarily wept at mentioning the name of the charming Emma, whom he was about to leave abruptly, and perhaps for ever. He then. endeavoured to compofe himfelf, and once more attended the Baron, wifhed him a good night ; and withdrew to his chamber, till he was called upon to go again to the haunted apart¬ ment. He eame down equipped for his journey, and went haftily for fear of obiervation ; he paid his cuftomary devotions, aud foon after F 4 Ofwald
Ofwald tapped at the door. They conferred together upon the interefting fubjeci that en- groűed their attention, until Jofeph came to them ; who brought the reft of Edmund's bag¬ gage, and fome tefreíhmení for him before he fet out. Edmund promifed to give thera the earlieft information of his fituation and fuc¬ cefs. At the hour of twelve they heard the fame groans as the night before in the lower apartment ; but,, being fomewhat familiarized to it, tliey were not fo ftrongly affected : Of¬ wald croffed himielf, and prayed for the de¬ parted foul ; he alfo prayed for Edmund, and recommended him to the divine protection : lie then arofe, and embraced that young man ; who, alfo, took a tender leave of his friend Jofeph. They then went, with fdence and caution, through a long gallery ; they defcend¬ ed the ftairs in the fame manner ; they croffed the hall in profound filence, and hardly dared to breathe, left they ihould be overheard : they found fomc difficulty in opening one of the folding doors, which at laft they accom- pliihed ; they were again in jeopardy at the outward gate ; at length they conveyed him fafely into the itables : there they again em¬ braced him, and prayed for his profperity.
He then mounted his horfe, and fet forward to Wyatťs cottage ; he hallooed at the door, and was anfwered from within : In a few mi¬ nutes John came out to him.·—What, is it you, Mafter Edmund ?—Hufh 1 faid he ; not a word of who I am : I go upon private bufi¬ nefs, and would not wiih to be known.—Ii you will go forward, Sir, I will foon overtake you : He did fo ; and they purfued their jour¬ ney to the north. In the mean time, Ofwald and Jofeph returned in filence into the houfe ; they retired to thcir refpeftive apartments without hearing or being heard by any one. About the dawn of day Ofwald intended to lay his packets in the way of thofc to whom they were addreifed ; after much contrivance, he determined to take a bold ftep, and, if he were difeoverc , „.j frame fome excufe. En¬ couraged by liis iate fuccefs, he went on tip¬ toe into Mafter William's chamber, placed α letter upon his pillow, and withdrew unheard. Exulting in his hçart, he attempted the Baron's apartment, but found it faftened within; find¬ ing this fcheme fruftrated, he waited till the hour the Baron was expefted down to break¬ faft, and laid the letter and the key of the haunted apartment upon the table. К 5 Soon
Soon after, he faw the Baron enter the breakfaft-room ; he got out of fight, but ftaid within call, preparing himfelf for a fummons. The Baron fat down to breakfaft ; he faw a letter direfted to himfelf, he opened it, and, to his great furprize, read as follows : " The guardian of the haunted apartment *' to Baron Fitz-Owen. To thee I remit the ** key of my charge, until the right owner *' ihali come, who will both difcover and *' avenge my wrongs ; then, woe be to tlie " guilty ! But let the innocent reft in peace, " In the mean time, let none prefume to ex- <* plore the fecrets of my apartment, left they " fuffer for their temerity." The Baron was ftruck with amazement at the letter : he took up the key, examined it, then laid it ctewn, and took up the letter ; he was in fuch confufion of thought, he knew not what to do or fay for feverai minutes : at length he called his fervants about him ; the firft queftion he afked was,—Where is Ed¬ mund ?—They could not tell.—Has he been called ?—Yes, my Lord, but nobody anfwer¬ ed, and the key was not in the door—Where is Jofeph?—Gone into tlie ftables.—Where is
is father Ofwald ?—In his ftudy,—Seek him, and defire him to come hither. By the time the Baron had read the letter over again, he came. He had been framing a fteady countenance to anfwer to all interrogatories ; as he came in he attentively obferved the Baron, whofe features were in ftrong agitation : as foon as he faw Ofwald, he fpoke as one out of breath. —Take that key, and read this letter !—He did fo, ihrugged up his fliouiders, and remain¬ ed filent.—Father, faid my Lord, what think you of this letter r —It is a very furprifing one, —The contents are alarming ; where İs Ed¬ mund ?—I do not know.—Has nobody fcen him ?—Not that I know of.—Call my fons, my kinfmen, my fervants.—The fervants came in. Have any of you fcen or heard of Edmund ? No, was the anfwer.—Eather, цер up ftairs to my fons and kinfmen, and defire them to come down immediately. Ofwald withdrew ; and went, firft, to Mafter William's chamber. My.dear Sir you muft come to my Lord now direftly : he has fome¬ thing extraordinary to communicate to you.— And fo have I, Father ; fee what I have found F G upon
upon my pillow !—Pray, Sir, read h to mí before you fhew it to any body ; my Lord is alarmed too much already, and wants nothing to increafe his confternation. William read this letter, while Oiwald looked as if he was an utter ftranger to the contents, wliich wcre thefe :------ ** Whatever may be heard or feen, let the " feal of friendihip be upon thy lips. The ** peafant Edmund is no more ; but there ftill " hves a man who hopes to acknowledge, and " repay, the Lord Fitz-Ovven's generous care " and proteftion; to return his beïoved Wil« 44 liam's vowed afteftion, and to claim his " friendfhip on terms of equality.'* What, faid William, can this mean ?—It is not eafy to fay, replied Ofwald.—Can you tell what is the caufe of this alarm r—ï can tell you notliing, but that my Lord defires to fee you direftly, pray make hafte down ; I muft go up to your brother and kinfmen : nobody knows what to think or believe, Mafter William went down ftairs, and Fa¬ ther Ofwald went to the makcontents : as ioon as he entered the outward door of tlie apwtmeai, Mv. Wenlock called out—Here comes
cornea the friend ·, now for fome new propo¬ fai !— Gentlemen, faid Ofwald, my Lord de¬ fires your company immediately in the break¬ faft parlour !—What ! to meet your favourite Kdmund, I fuppofe ? faid Mr. Wenlock.—No, Sir.—What then, İs the matter ? faid Sir Ro¬ bert.—Something very extraordinary has hap¬ pened, Gentlemen: Edmund is not to be found ; he difappearcd from the haunted apart¬ ment, the key of which was conveyed to my Lord in a ftrange manner, with a letter from an unknown hand : my Lord is both furprifed and concerned, and wiihes to have your opinion and advice on the occafion.—Tell him, faid Sir Robert', wc will wait upon him immedi¬ ately. As Ofwald went away, he heard Wenlock fay,—So Edmund İs gone, it is no matter how, or whither.—Another faid, I hope the ghoft has taken him out of the way. The reft laugh* ed at the conceit, as they followed Ofwald down ftairs,—They found the Baron and hie fon William, commenting upon the key and the letter. My Lord gave them to Sir Robert, who looked on theni with marks of furprife and confuűon. Tlve Bason addreifed him: —Is
—Is not this a very ftrange affair ? Son Ko¬ bert, lay afide your ill humours, and behave to your father with the reipeft and affeftion his tendernefs deferves from you, and give me your advice and opinion of this alarming fub¬ jeft.—My Lordy faid Sir Robert, í am as much confounded as yourfelf: 1 caa give no advice : let my coufins fee the letter ; let us have their opinion. They read it in turn ; they were equally furprifed : but when it came into Wenlock's hand, he paufed and meditated iome minutes ; at length------1 am indeed fur¬ prifed, and ftill more concerned, to fee my Lord and uncle the dupe of an artful contrivance ; and, if he will permit me, I ihall endeavour to unriddle it ; to the confufion of all that are concerned in it—Do fo, Dick, faid my Lord, and you ihall have my thanks for it.—This letter, faid he, I imagine to be the contrivance of Edmund, or fome ingenious friend ofhis, to conceal fome defigns they have againft the peace of this family, which has been too often difturbed upon that rafcaľs account. But what end could be propofed by it ? faid the Baron.—Why, one part of the fcheme is to cover Edmund's departure, that is clear enough ;
enough ; for the reft, we can only guefs at it r Perhaps he may be concealed fomewhere in that apartment, from whence he may rufll out hi the night, and either rob or murder us ; or at leaft, alarm and terrify the family. The Baron fmiled !—You fhoot beyond the mark, Sir, and overfhoot yourfelf, as you have done before now ! you ihew only your inveteracy againft that poor lad, whom you cannot men¬ tion with temper : to what purpofe ihould he íhut himfelf up there, to be ftarved ?—Starved ! no, no ! h'». Las fiiends in this houfe (looking at Ofwald) whu will not fuffer him to want any thing : thofe who have always magnified his virtues, and extenuated his faults, will lend a hand to help him in time of need ; and per¬ haps to affift his ingenious contrivances. Of¬ wald ihrugged up his ihoulders, and remained filent. This is a ftrange fancy of yours, Dick, faid my Lord : but I am willing to purfue it ; firft, to difcover what you drive at ; and, fe¬ condly, to fatisfy all that are here prefent ofthe truth or falfehood of it, that they may know what value to fet upon your fagacity here¬ after. Let us all go over that apartment to¬ gether ; and let Jofeph be called to attend us.
us thither. Ofwald offered to call him, but Wenlock ftopped him.—No, father, faid he, you muft ftay with us ; we want your ghoftly counfel and advice : Jofeph ihall have no pri¬ vate conference with you.—What mean you, faid Ofwald, to infinuate to my Lord againfl: me or Jofeph ? But your ill-will fpares no¬ body, lt will one day be known who is the difturber of the peace of this family ; I wait forthat time, and am filent Jofeph came ; when he was told whither they were going, he looked hard at Ofwald. Wenlock obferved them :-—Lead the way, fa¬ ther, iaid he ; and Jofeph ihall follow us. Of¬ wald fmiled :—We wiil go where heaven per¬ mits us, faid he ; alas ! the wifdom of man can neither haften, nor retard, its decrees. They followed the father up ftairs, and went direftly to the haunted apartment. The Baron unlocked the door ; he bid Joieph open the ihutters, and admit the lay-light, which had been excluded for many years. They went over the rooms above ftairs, and then defcend¬ ed the ftaircafe, and througli the lower rooms in the fame manner. However, they over¬ looked the clofet, in which the fatal fecret was
was concealed ; the door was coveied with tapeftry, the fame as the room, and united fo well, that it feemed but one piece. Wenlock tauntingly defired father Ofwald, to introduce them to tlie ghoft. The father, in reply, afked them where they ftiould find Edmund ? ■—Do you tliink, faid he, that he lies hid in my pocket, or in Jofeph's ?— 'Tis no matter, anfwered he ; thoughts are free.—-My opinion of you, Sir, faid Ofwald, is not founded upon thoughts : I judge of men by their aciions ; a rule, I beiieve, it will not fuite you to be tried by.—None of your infolent admonitions, fa¬ ther ! returned Wenlock : this is neither the time nor the place for thera.^—That is truer than you are aware of, Sir; I mean not to enter into the ftibject with you juft now. Be filent, faid my Lord, I ihall enter into this fubječt with you hereafter ; then look you be prepared for к I In the mean time, do you, Dick Wenlock, anfwer to my cjueftions. Do you think Edmund is concealed in this apart¬ ment?— No, Sir.—Do you think there is any myftery in it? — No, my Lord. — Is it haunted, think you ?—No, I think not.------ Sliould you be afraid to try ?—In what man¬ ner,
ner, my Lord í —AVhy, you have fliewn your wit upon the fubjeft, and I mean to Ihev; your courage ; you, and Jack Markham your confidant, ihall fleep here three nights, as Ed¬ mund has done before.—Sir, laid Sir Robert, fov what purpoie ? I ihall be glad to under¬ ftand why.—I have my reafons, Sir, as weH as your kinfmen there.—No reply, Sirs ! I in¬ fift upon being obeyed in this point. Jofeph, let the beds be well aired, and every thing made agreeable to the Gentlemen : lf there is any contrivance to impofe upon me, ihey, I am fure, will have pleafure in defefting it ; and, if not, I ihail obtain my end in making thefe rooms habitable. Ofwald, come with rae ; and the reft may go where they lift till dinner-time The Baron went wiih Ofwald into the par- bur. Now, tell n?-», father, faid he, do you disapprove what i liave done?—Quite the con¬ trary, røy Lord ; faid he ; I entirely approve of it,—But you do not know all my reafons for it. Yefterdav Edmund^ behaviour was different from what 1 luu ever ilen it ; he İs naturally frank and open in ali his w jys ; buthe was then fileni» thou^htiuL abfent; he fighed decph'i
deeply, and once I faw tears ftand in his eyes , Now, i do fufpeft there is fomething uncom¬ mon in that apartment; that Kdmund has dif¬ covered the fecret : and, fearing to difclofe it, he is fled away from the houfe. As to this letter, peihaps, he may have written it to hint that there is more than he dares reveal ; I tremble at the hints contained in it, though I ihall appear to make light of it : but I and mine are innocent ; and if Heaven difclofcs the guilt of others, I ought to adore and fub¬ mit to its decrees.—That is prudently and pi- oufly refolved, my Lord ; let us do our duty, and leave events to Heaven.—But, father, I have a further view in obliging my kinfmen to ileep there : if any thing ihould appear to them, it is better that it ftiould only be known to my own family ; if there is nothing in it, I ihall put to the proof the courage and veracity of my two kinfmen, of whom I think very in¬ differently. I mean ihortly to enquiie into many things I have heard lately to their dif¬ advantage ; nnd if i find them guilty, they fliall not efcape with impunity.—My Lord, Ldd Ofwald, you judge like yourlelf, Ì whh uni rn, make inquiry concerning then», лпА believ;
believe the ycfult wi'l bc to their confufion, and your Lordihip will be enabled to re-efta- bliih the peace of your family. During this converfation, Ofwald was upon his guard, left any thing ihould efcape that might create fufpicion. He withdrew as foon as he could with decency, and left the Baron meditating what all thefe things fliould mean : 'he feared there was fome misfortune impend¬ ing over his houfe, though he knew not from what caufe» He dined with his children and kinfmen, and ftrove to appear chearful ; but a gloom was perceivable tlirough his deportment Sir Robert was referved and refpeôful i Mr. Wil¬ liam was filent and attentive ; the reft of the family dutifully alfiduous to my Lord : only Wealock and Markham were füllen and cha~ grined. The Baron detained the young men the whole afternoon ; he ftrove to amufe and to be amufed ; he ihewed the greateft affec¬ tion and parental regard to his children, and endeavoured to conciliate iheir affections, and engage tlieir gratitude by kindnefs. Wen- lock and Markham felt their courage abate as the night approached ; at the hour οΐ nine, old
-
old Jofeph came to conduft them to the haunt¬ ed apartment ; they took leave of their kinf¬ men, and went up ftairs with heavy hearts. They found the chamber fet in order for them, and a table fpread with provifion and good liquor to keep up their fpirits,—It feems, faid Wenlock, that your friend Edmund was obliged to you for his accommodations here. —Sir, faid Jofeph, his accommodations were bad enough the firft night ; but, afterwards, they were bettered by my Lord's orders,— Owing to your officious cares, faid Wenlock : —I own it, faid Jofeph, and I am not aihamed of it.—Arc you not anxious to know what is become of him ? faid Markham. —Not at all, Sir ; I truft he is in the beft proteftion ; fogood a young man as lie is, is fafe every where.— You fee, coufin Jack, faid Wenlock, how this villain has ftole the hearts of my uncle's íèr¬ vants : I fuppofe this canting old fellow know» where he is, if the truth were known,—Have you any further commands for me, Gentle¬ men ? faid the old man.—No, not we,—Then I am ordered to attend my Lord, when you have done with me,—Go, then, about your bufinefs. J ofeph went away, glad to bedifmifted. What
AVhat ftiall we do, coufin Jack, faid Wen¬ lock, to pafs away the time ? it is plaguy dull fitting here.-^Dull enough, faid Markham ; I think the bcft thing we can do is to go to bed, and ileep it away.—Faith, fays Wenlock, I am in no difpofition to ileep ! Who would have thought the old man would have obliged us to fpend the night here ?—Don't fay us, I beg of you; it was all your own doing, replied Mark- ham.—I did not intend he íhould have taken лае at my word.—Then you ihould have fpo¬ ken more cautiouily. I have always been go¬ verned by you, like a fool as 1 am ; you play the braggart, and I fuffer for it : But they be¬ gin to fee through your fine-fpun arts and con¬ trivances, and I believe you will meet with your deferts one day or otlier.—What now ? do you mean to affront me, Jack ? Know, that fome arc born to plan, others to execute ; I am one of the former, thou of the latter ; Know your friend, or—Or what? replied Markham ; do you mean to threaten mc ? If you do !—What then, faid Wenlock.—Why, then, I will try which of us two is the beft man, Sir I Lipon this Markham arofe, and put himfeif into a pofture of defence. Wenlock perceiving
'perceiving he was ferious in his anger, began to foothe him ; he perfuaded, he flattered, he promifed great things, if he wouid be compof¬ ed. Markham was füllen, uneafy, refentful ; whenever he fpoke, it was to upbraid Wenlock with his treachery and falfehood. Wenlock tried all his eloquence to get hini into a good humour, but in vain ; he threatened to acquaint his uncle with all that he knew, and to excul¬ pate himfelf at the other's .expence. Wen¬ lock began to find his choler rife ; they wcre both almoft choaked with rage ; and, at length, they both rofe with a refolution to fight. As they ftood with thcir fifis clenched, on a fudden they wcre alarmed with a difmal groan from the room underneath. They ftood like ftatues, petrified by fear, yef liftening with tiembling expectation ; A fecond groan in¬ creafed their confternation ; and, foon after, a third completed it. Ihey ftaggered to a feat, aiid funk down upon it, ready to faint ; pre¬ fently, all the doors flew open, a pale glim¬ mering light appeared at the door, frbm the ftaircafe, and a man in complete armour en¬ tered the room: He ftood with one hand ек - tended, pointing to the outward doo» they took
took the hint, and crawled away aş faft as fear would let them ; they ftaggered along the gal¬ lery, and from thence to the Baron's apart¬ ment, where Wenlock funk down in a fwoon, and Markham had juft ftrength enough to knock at the door. The fervant who ilept in tlie outward room alarmed his Lord : Markham cried out—For Heaven's fake, let us in í Upon hearing his voice, the door was opened, and Markham approached his uncle in fuch an attitude of fear, as excited a degree of it in the Baron. He pointed to Wenlock, who was with fome difiiculty recovered from tîıe fit he was fallen into ; the fervant was terrified, he rung the alarm-bell ; the fervants came running from all parts to their Lord's apartment : The young Gentlemen came Iikewife, and prefently all was confufion, and the terror was univerfal. Ofwald, who gueffed the bufinefs, was the only one ihat could queftion them ; he afked feve¬ rai times,—AVhat is the matter ? Markham at laft anfwered him :—We have fcen the ghoft ! —Ail regard to fecrefy was now at an end ; the echo ran through the Vhole family :— They have feen the ghoft ! The
The Baron defired Ofwald to talk to the young men, and endeavour to quiet the dif- turbaneci He came forward ; he comforted fome, he rebuked others ; he bade the fervants retire into the outward room : The Baron, with his fons and kinfmen, remained Sn the bed-chambe/.—It is very unfortunate, faid Ofwald, that this affair ftiould be made fo pub¬ lic ; furely thefe young men might have re¬ lated what they had fcen, without alarming the whole family ; I am very much concerned upon my Lord's account.—I thank you, father, faid the Baron ; but prudence was quite over¬ thrown here : Wenlock was half dead, and Markham half diftrafted ; the family were alarmed without my being able to prevent İt : but let us hear what thefe poor terrified crea¬ tures fay. Ofwald demanded,—What have you fecn, Gentlemen ?------The ghoft ! faid Markham. — ln what form did it appear ?—A man in armour.—Did it fpeak to you '—-No. What did it to terrify you fo much ?—It flood at the fartheft door, and pointed to the out¬ ward door, as if to have us leave the room ; we did not wait for a fecond notice, but came away as faft as we could.—Did it follow you ? G Να.
No.—Then ycu need not have raifed fuch a difturbance. Wenlock lifted up his head, and fpoke;— d believe, father, if you had been wilh us, you would not have ftood upon cere¬ monies any more than wc did. I wiih my Lord would fend you to parley with the ghoft ; for, without doubt, you are better qualified than wc. My, Lord, faid Ofwald, I will go thi τ ther, with your pcrmiluon ; 1 will fee that every thing is fafe, and bring the key back to you : Perhaps this may help to difpel the fears that have been railed ; at ieaft, I will try to do it.— I thank you, father, for your good of¬ fices ; do as you pleafe. Ofwald went into the outward room. 1 am going, faid lie, to íhut up the apartment ; The \oung gentlemen have been more fright¬ ened than they had occafion for; 1 will try to account for it. Which of you will go with me r They all drew back, except Jofeph, who oftered to bear him eompany. They went into the bed-room in the haunted apartment, aud found every tiling quiet there. They put out the fire, extinguifhed the hghts, locked the door, and brought away the key. As they returned,—I thought hovv it would be, faid Jofeph.
Jofeph. Hufh ! not a word, faid Ofwald ; you find we are fufpefted of fomething, though they know not what. Wait till you are called upon, and then we will both fpeak to purpofe, 'fhey carried the key to the liaron. All is quiet in the apartment, faid Ofwald, as wc can teftify.—Did you aik Jofeph to go with you, faid the Baron, or did he offer him¬ felf?—My Lord, I afked if any body would go with me, and they all declined it but he ; I thought proper to have a witnefs befide my¬ felf, for whatever might be fecn or heard.— Jofeph, you was fervant to the late Lord Lo¬ vel : what kind of man was he ? —A very comely man, pleafe your Lordihip —Should you know hini if you were to fee him?—I cannot fay, my Lord.—Would you have any objection to fleep a night in that apartment ? -I beg,—I hope,—I befeech your Lordihip not to command me to do it '—You aie then afraid ; why did you offer yourfelf to go thi¬ ther '—Beeaufe I was not fo much frightened as the reft.—I wiih you would lie a night ihere ; but I do not infift upon it,—My Lord, 1 am a poor ignorant old man, not fit for fuch лп undertaking; befide, if I fhould fee the О : ghoft,
ghoft, and if it íhould be the perfon of my Mafter, and if it ihould tell me any thing, and bide mc keep it fecret, I ihould not dare to difclofe it ; and then what fervice fliould I do 5 our Lordfliip ?—That is true, indeed, faid the Baron. This fpeeeh, faid Sir Robert, is both a fimple and an artful one : you fee, however, that Jo¬ feph is not a man for us to depend upon ; he regards the Lord Lovel, though dead, more than Lord Htz-Owcn, living; he calls him his Mafter, and promifes to keep his fecrets. W lut fay you, father ? Is the ghoft your mat¬ ter, or vour friend ? Are you under any obli¬ gation to keep his fecrets ?--- Sir, faid Olwald, i aniwer аь Jofeph does; I would fooner die tiun difcover a feciet revealed iu that man¬ ner,— ï thought as much, faid Sir Robert ; theie is a myftery in Lather Ofvvakľs beha¬ viour, whieh 1 cannot comprehend.—Do not refieft upon the father, faid the Baron, I have no (.aule to complain of him; perhaps the my iles v may be too foon explained; but let us not anticipate c\Hs. Ofwald and Jofeph have fpoken like good men , 1 am fatisfied with tlieir anfwers: k t us, who are innocent, reft
\td in prace ; and let us endeavour to reftore peace in the family ; and do you, father, af¬ fili us.—With my heft fervices, faid Ofwald. He called the fervants in : let noihing be men¬ tioned out of doors, faid he, of what has lately paifed within, efpecially in the eaft apart¬ ment; the young Gentlemen had not fu much reafon to be frightened as they apprehended ; a piece of furniture fell down in the rooms un¬ derneath, which made the noife that alarmed them fb much : but I can certify that all thing» i u the rooms are in quiet, and there is nothing to fear. All of you attend me in the chapel in an hour ; do your duties, put your truft İn God, and obey your Lord, and you will find every thing go right as it ufed to do. They difperfed ; the fun rofe, the day came on, and every thing went on in the ufual courfe ; but the fervants were not fo eafily fa¬ tisfied ; they whifpered that fomething was wrong, and expefted the time that ftiould fet all right.—The mind of the Baron was em¬ ployed in meditating upon thefe circumftances, that feemed to him the forerunners of fome great events : he fometimes thought of Kd- G 3 mund j
mund ; he fighed for his expulfion, and lament¬ ed the uncertainly of his fate ; but, to his fa¬ mily, he appeared eafy and fatisfied. From the time of Kdmund's departure, the fair Emma had many uneafy hours ; ihe wiih¬ ed to inquire after him, but feared to fliew any folicitude concerning him; Ehe next day, when her brother William came into hcr apartment, ihe took courage to aik a queftion.—Pray, brother, can you give any guefs what is be¬ come of Edmund ?—■ No, faid he (with a figh) ; why do you aik me ?—Becaufe, my dear Wil¬ liam, 1 ihould think if any body knew it muft be you ; and I thought he loved you too well to leave vou in ignorance ; but don't you think he left the Caftle in a very ftrange manner ?— 1 do, my dear ; there is a myftery in every circumftance of his departure: neverthelefs {I will truft yon vith a fecret) he did not leave the Caftle without making a diftinftion in my favour.—I thought fo, faid ihc ; but you might tell me what you know about him.—Alas · my dear Emma ! I know nothing : When I úw him laft, he feemed a good deal affefted, as İf he were taking leave of me ; and I had a foreboding thai we parted for a longer time than
than ufual. Ah ! fo had I, faid fhe, when he parted from me in the garden.-—What leave did he take of you, Emma ?—·She bluihed and hefitated to tell him all that paifed between them ; but he begged, perfuaded, infifted ; and at length, under the ftrongeft injunclions of fecrefy, ilie told him all. He faid, that Ed¬ mund's behaviour on that occafion was as myf¬ terious as the reft of his conduci ; but now you have revealed your fecret, you have a right to know mine. He then gave her the letter he found upon his pillow ; ihe read it with great emotion. Saint Winifred affift mc I laid fh© : what can I think ? " The peafant Edmund is no more, but there lives one r —that iss to my thinking, Edmund Hvcs, but is ño peaffant.-— Go on, -my dear, faid William ; I like your explanation,·—Nay, brother, i only guefs; but what think you ? I believe we think alike in more than one refpeft, that he meant to recommend no other perfon than himfeif to your favour ; and, if he were indeed of noble birth, I would prefer him to a Prince for a huihand to my Emma !—Blefs me, faid ilie, do you think İt poifible that he ftiould be of cither birth or fortune ?—It is hard to fay what G l· is
is poffible 1 we have proof that the eaft apart¬ ment is haunted : ït was there that Edmund was made acquainted with many fecrets, I doubt not ; and, perhaps, his own fate may be involved in that of others. I am confident that what he faw and heard there, was the caufe of his departure. We muft wait with patience the unravelling this intricate affair ,¬ Ι believe 1 need not enjoin your fecrefy as to what I have faid j your heart will be my fecu¬ rity.—What mean you, brother ?—Don't af¬ fect ignorance, my dear ; you love Edmund, fodol: itis nothing to be aihamed of; it wouid have been ibange, if a girl óf your good fenfe had not diftinguiflied a fwan among a Ôock of geefe.—Dear William, don't let » ivord of this efcape you ; but you have taken a weight off my heart. You may depend that ï will not difpofe of my hand or heart till I know the end of this affair. William fmiled : Keep them for Edmund's β tend: 1 fliall re¬ joice to fee liim in a fituation to aik them.— Hufh, my brother ! not a word more ; 1 hear footfteps. They were her eldeft brother's, who came to afk Mr. William to ride out with him, which iiniihed their conference. The
The fair Kmma from this time aifumed an air of fattsfaaion ; and William frequentiy ftole away from his companions to talk with his lifter upon their favourite fubjeft. While thefe things paffed at the Caftle of Lovel, Kdmund, and his companion John Wy¬ att, proceeded on their journey to Sir Philip Harclay's feat; they converfed together on the way, and Kdmund found him a man of underftanding, though not improved by edu¬ cation ; he alfo difcovered that John loved his Mafter, and refpečted him even to vene¬ ration ; from him he learned many particulars concerning that worthy Knight. Wyatt told him, that Sir Philip maintained twelve old foldiers who had been maimed and difabled in the wars, and had no provifion made for them ; alfo ûx old officers, who had been un¬ fortunate, and were grown grey without pre¬ ferment; he Iikewife mentioned the Gr^ek Gentleman, his mafter's captive and friendes a man eminent for valour and piety ; but, be¬ fide thefe, faid Wyatt, tiiere arc many others who cat of my mailer's bread, and drink of his cup, and who join in blelfings and prayer to Heaven for their nobie benefactor ; hi* G 5 ens
ears are ever open to diftrefs, his hand to re¬ lieve it, and he fhafes in every good man's joy» and bleifings,—Oh, what a glorious cha¬ rafter I faid Edmund : how my heart throbs with wiihes to imitate fuch a man ? Oh, tliat I might rcfemble him, though at everfo great a diftance ! Edmund was nevcr weary of hear¬ ing the aftions of this truly great ma«, nor Wyatt with relating tliem ; and, during three days journey, tliere were but few paufes in their converfation. The fourth day, when they came within view of the houfe, Edmund's heart began to raife doubts of his reception.—If, faid he, Sir Philip ihould not receive me kindly, if he ihould rcfent my long negleft, and difown my acquaintance, it would be no more than juftice. He fent Wyatt befoie, to notify his arrival to Sir Philip, while he waited at the gate, full of doubts and anxieties concerning his recep¬ tion. Wyatt was met and congratulated on his return by moft of his fellow-fervants ; he aiked,—where is my Mafter?—In the par¬ lour.—Are any ftrangerş with him? — No, only his own family.—Then I will ihew my¬ felf to him. 1 le prefented himfelf before Sir Philip.—
Philip.—So, John, faid he, you are welcome home ! I hope you left your parents and rela¬ tions well.—All well, thank God 1 and fend their humble duty to your Honour, and they pray for you every day of their lives ; I hope your Honour is in good health.—Very Well.— Thank God for that ! but, Sir, I have fome¬ thing further to tell you ; I have had a com¬ panion all the way home, a perfon who comes to wait on your Honour, on bufinefs of great confequence, as he fays.^—Who isthat, John ? —It is Mafter Edmund Twyford, from the Caftle of Lovel—Young Edmund ! fays Sir Philip furprifed : Where is he ?—At the gate, Sir—Why did you leave him there ?—^-Becaufe he bad me come before, and acquaint your Honour, that he waits your pleafure.—Bring him hither, faid Sir Philip ; tell him I ihall' be glad to fee him. John made hafte to deliver his meiîàge, and Edmund followed him iu fdence into Sir Phi¬ lip's prefenee : he bowed low, aud kept at a* diftance. Sir Philip held out his hand, and bad him approach. As he drew near, he was feized with an univerfal trembling; he kneel¬ ed down, took his hand, kiffed it, and preffed it to his heart in filence.
You are welcome, young man ! faid Sir Philip : take courage, and fpeak for yourfelf, Edmund fighed deeply ; he at length broke filence with difficultv.—I аф come, thus far, noble Sir, to throw myfelf at your feet, and implore your proteftion. You are, under God, ray only reliance.—I receive you, faid Sir Philip, with all my heart ! Your perfon is greatly improved fmce I faw you laft, and I hope your mind is equally fo ; I have heard a great character of you from fome th¿; knevr you in France. I remember the promife I made you long ago, and am ready now to ful¬ fil it, upon condition tliat you have done no¬ thing to difgrace the good opinion 1 formerJy entertained of you ; and am ready to ferve you in any thing confiftent with my own ho¬ nour. Edmund kiífed the hand that was ex¬ tended to raife him. I accept your favour, Sir, upon tliis condition only ; and if ever you find me to impofe upon your credulity, or en* croach on your goodnefs, may you renounce me from that moment!—Enough, faid Sir Philip ; rife, then, and iet me embrace you : You arc truly welcome !—Oh, noble Sir, faid Jtdmund, I have a ftrange ftory to tell you ; but
but it muft be by ourfelves, with only Heaven to bear witnefs to what paifes between us,— Very vvell, faid Sir Philip ; I am ready to hear you : but firft, go and get fome refreihment after your journey, and then come to mc again ; John Wyatt will attend you. I want no re-* frcihment, faid Edmund ; and I cannot eat or drink till I have told my bufinefs to your Ho¬ nour. Well then, faid Sir Philip, come along with me. He took the youth by the hand, and led him into another parlour, leaving his fiiends in great furprife, what this young man's errand could be : John Wyatt told them all that he knew relating to Edmund's birth, cha¬ rafter, and fituation. When Sir Philip had feated his young friend, he liftened in filence to the furprifing talc he had to tell him. Edmund told him briefly the moft remarkable circumftances of his life, from the time when he firft faw and liked him, till his return from France ; but from that ara, he related at large every thing th^î had hap¬ pened, recounting every interefting particular, which was imprinted on his memory in ftrong and lafting charafters.—Sir Philip grew every moment more affefted by the recital ; fomc- tipics
times he clafped his hands together, he lifted tíiem up to Heaven, he fmote his breaft, he fighed, he exciaimed aloud; when Edmund related his dream, he breathed ihort, and feem¬ ed to devour him with attention ; when he defcribed the fatal clofet, he tremb'ed, fighed, fobbed, and was almoft fuffocated with his agitations : but when he related alt that had pafled between his fuppofed mother and him¬ felf, and finally produced the jewels, the proofs of his birth, and the deatli of his unfortunate mother—he flew to him, he prefled him to his bofom, he ftrove to fpeak, but fpeech was for ibme minutes denied : He wept aloud ; and at length, his words found their way in broken exclamations—Son of my deareft friend !— dear and precious relic of a noble houfe !— child of Providence i —the beloved of Hea¬ ven I —welcome ! thrice welcome to my arms I — to my heart I—I will be thy parent from henceforward, and thou ihalt be indeed my child, my heir 1 My mind told me from the firft moment I beheld thee, that thou wert the image of my friend I my heart then opened itfelf to receive thee, as his offspring. I had a ftrange foreboding that I was to be thy pro- tcftor.
te&öi% I would then have made thee my own ; but Heaven orders things for the beft ; it made thee the inftrument of this difcovery, and in its own time and manner conduced thee to my arms. Praife be to God for his wonder¬ ful doings toward the children of men ! every thing that lias befallen tliee is by his direc¬ tion, and he will not leave his work unfinish¬ ed ; I truft that I ihali be his inftrument to do juftice on the guilty, and to reftore the orphan of my friend to his rights and title. I devote myfelf to this fervice, and will make it the bufinefs of my life to effect it. Edmund gave vent to his emotions, in rap¬ tures of joy and gratitude. They fpent feverai hours in this way, without thinking ofthe time that paffed ; the one enquiring, the other ex¬ plaining and repeatmg, every particular of the interefting ftory. At length they were interrupted by the care¬ ful John Wyatt, who was anxious to know if any thing was likely to give trouble to his mafter.—Sir, faid John, it grows dark, do you want a light ?—We want no light but what Heaven gives us, faid Sir Philip ; I knew not whether it was dark or light.—I hope, faid John,
John, nothing has happened, I hope your Ho¬ nour has heard no bad tidings,—I—I— i hope no offence.—None at all faid the good Knight ; I am obliged to your folicitude for me : I have heard fome things that grieve me, and others that give me great pleafure ; but the forrows are paft, and the joys remain.—Thank God * faid John ; í was afraid fomething was the matter to give your Honour trouble.—I thank you, my good fervant ! You fee this young gentleman ; I would have you, John, devote yourfelf to hiíä fervice : I give you to him for an attendant on his perfon, and would have you ihew your affection to me by your attach¬ ment t» him. Oh, Sir ! faid John, in a me¬ lancholy voice, what have I done to be turned out of your fervice ?—Xo fuch matter, John, faid Sir Philip : you will not leave my fervice, —Sir, faid John, I would rather die than leave you.—And, my lad, I like you too well to pait with you ; but in ferving my friend you will ferve me : Know that this young man is my fon. Your fon, Sir I faid John. Not my na¬ tural fon, but my relation ; my fon by adop¬ tion» my heir !—And will he live with you, Sir?—Yep, Johni and I hope to die with him. Uh,
Oh, then, I will ferve him with all my heart and foul : and I will do my beft to pleafe you both.—1 thank you, John, and I wili not for¬ get your honeft love and duty : I have fo good an opinion of you, that I will tell you of forno things concerning this gentleman that will en¬ title him to your refpeft.— 'Tis enough for me, faid John, to know that your Honour re¬ fpečts him, to make me pay him as much duty as yourfelf. But, John, when you know him better, you will refpcér. him ftiU more ; at prefent I fhall tell you what he is not, for you think him only the fon of Andrew Twyford. And is he not? faid John.—No, but his wife nurfed him, and he palled for her fon. —And does old Twyford know it, Sir ?-—He does, and will bear witnefs to İ* ; but he is the fon of a near friend of mine, of quality fuperior to my own, and as fuch you muft ferve and refpeft him.—I ihall, to be fure, Sir г but what name (hall I call him?—You ihall know that hereafter ; in the mean time bring a light, and wait on us to the other parlour. When John was withdrawn, Sir Philip faid, that is a point to be confidered and determin* •d immediately : It is proper that you fhould affume
affume a name tiil you can take that of your father ; for I chooíe you fliould drop that of your fofter-father ; and I wouid have усш be called by one that is refpeftable.—-In tiiat, and cvciy other point, ï will be wholly go¬ verned by you, Sir, faid Edmund.—Well, then, I will give you the name of Seagrave : I fliall fay tliat you are a relation of my own ; and my mother was really of that family. , John foon returned, and attended them into the other рагюиг : Sir Philip entered with Ed¬ mund in his hand.—-My friends» faid he« this gentleman is Mr, Edward Seagrave, the fon of a dear friend and relation of mine : He was loft in his infancy, brought up by a good wo- ¿nan out of pure hutnanity, and is but lately re¬ ftored to his own family. The circumftances ftiall be made known hereafter : In tlie mean time» I have taken him under my care and proteftion, and will ufe all my power and in¬ tereft to fee him reftored to his fortune» which is enjoyed by the ufurper who was the caufe of his expulfion, and the death of his parents. Receive him as my relation and friend ; Za¬ diiky» do you embrace him firft. Edmund, you
vou and this gi. л tleman muft love each other for my fake ; hereafter you will do it for your own. They all rofe, each embraced and con¬ gratulated the young man. Zadiiky faid, Sir, whatever griefs and misfortunes you may have endured, you may reckon them at an end, from the hour you are beloved and protefted by Sir Philip Harclay.—I firmly believe İt, Sir, re¬ plied Edmund j and my heart enjoys, already, more happinefs than I ever yet felt, and pro¬ mifes me ail that I can wiih in future : his friendihip is the earneft Heaven gives me of its bleifings hereafter, They fat down to fupper with mutual chcar¬ fulnefs ; and Edmund enjoyed the repaft with more fatisfaftion than he had felt a long time. Sir Philip faw his countenance brighten up, and looked on him with heart-felt pleafure.—- Every time I look on you, faid he, reminds me of your father ; you are the fame perfon I loved twenty-three years ago : I rejoice to fee you under my roof. Go to your repofe early, and to-morrow wc will confuit farther. Ed¬ mund withdrew, and enjoyed a night of fweet undifturbed repofe, The next morning Edmund arofe in perfeft health
health and fpirits ; he waited on his benefaftor. 'They were foon after joined by Zadiiky, who ihewed great attention and refpeft to tht youth, and oftered him his beft fervices with¬ out referve. Kdmund accepted them with equal refpeft and modefty ; and finding him¬ felf at eafe, began to difplay his amiable qua¬ lities. They breakfafted together ; afterwards, Sir Philip defired Edmund to walk out with him. As foon as they were out of hearing, Sir Philip faidy—I could not ileep iaft night for tliinking of your affairs ; I laid fchemes for you, and rejected them again. We muft lay our plan before we begin to aft. What ftiall be done with this treacherous kinfman ! this inhuman monfter 1 this aífaífin of his neareft relation ? I will riik my life and fortune to bring him to juftice. Shall I go to court, and demand juftice of the King ? or ftiall I accufe him of the murder, and make him ftand a public trial ? if I treat him as a Baron of the realm, he muÛ be tried by his peers ; if as a commoner, he muft be tiled at the county affize : but wc rnuft ihew reafon why he fhould be degraded from his title. 1 lave you any thing to pro - pofe ?-—Nothing, Sir ; I have only to wiih that
it might be as private as poffible, for the fake of my noble benefador, the Lord Fitz-Owen, upon whom ibme part of tlie difgrace would naturally fail ; and that would be an ill return for all his kindnefs and generofity to mc. That is a generous and grateful confideration on your part ; but you owe ftill more to the memory of your injured parents. However, there is yet another way that fuits mc better than any hitherto propofed : I will challenge the traitor to meet me in the field ; and, if he has fpirit enough to anfwer my call, I will there bring hmi to juftice ; if not, I will bring him to à public trial. No, Sir, faid Kdmund, that is my province. Should 1 ftand by and fee my noble, gallant friend expofe his life for me, I fliould be un¬ worthy to bear the name of that friend whom you fo much lament. It will become his fon to vindicate his name, and revenge his deatli. I will he the challenger, una no other.—And do you think he will anfwer the challenge of an unknown youth, with nothing but his pre¬ tenfions to his name and title? Certainly not. Leave this matter to me ; I'll think of a way that will oblige him to meet mc at the houfe of
of a third perfon who is known to all the par¬ ties concerned, and where wc will have au¬ thentic witnefles of all that paffes between him and me. I will devife the time, place, and manner, and fatisfy all your fcruples. Edmund offered to reply ; but Sir Philip bad him be filent, and let him proceed in his own way. I le then led him over his eftate, and ihewed him every thing deferving his notice : he told him all the particulars of his domeftic ceco- ■nomy ; and they returned home in time to meet their friends at dinner. They fpent"feverai days ia confulting how to bring Sir Walter lo account, and in im¬ proving their friendfhip and confidence in each other. Edmund endeared himfelf íb much to his friend and patron, that he declared him his adopted fon and heir before ail his friends and fervants, and ordered (hem to refpeft him us iuch. He every day improved their love and regard fjr him, and became the darling ofthe whole family. After much confideration, Sir Philip fixed his refolutions, and began to execute his pur¬ pofes. 1 le fet out for the feat of the Lord Clifford, attended by Edmund, M. Zadiiky, and
and two fervants. Lord Clifford received them with kindnefs and hofpitality. Sir Philip prefented Edmund to Lord Clif¬ ford and his family, as his near relation and prefumptive heir : they fpcrţt their evening in the pleafures of convivial mirth and hofpitable entertainment. The next day Sir Philip be¬ gan to open his mind to Lord Clifford, inform¬ ing him that both his young friend and him¬ felf had received great injuries from the pre¬ fent Lord Lovei, for which they were reiblved to call him to account ; but that, for many rea¬ fons, they were defirous to have proper witnef¬ fes of all that fliould pais between them, and begging the favour of his Lordfliip to be the principal one. Lord CHiford acknowledged the confidence placed in him ; and befought Sir Philip to let him be the arbitrator between them. Sir Philip aflured him, that their wrongs would not admit of arbitration, as he fhould hereafter judge ; but that he was unwilling to explain them further till he knew certainly whether or not the Lord Lovel would meet him ; for, if he refufed, he muft take another method with him. Lord Cliiford was defirous to know the grounds
grounds ofthe quarrel ; but Sir Philip declin* ed entering into particulars at prefent, affuring him of a full information hereafter. He then fent M. Zadiiky, attended by John Wyatt, and a fervant of Lord Clifton!, with a letter to Lord Lovel ; the contents were as follows : " My Lord Lovel ! " Sir Philip Harclay earneftly defires to fee *' you ut the houle of Lord Clifford, where he ** waits to call you to account for the injuries ** done by you to the late Arthur Lord Lovel, ** your kinfman ; İf you accept his demand, 4 * he will make the Lord Clifford a witnefs ** and a judge ofthe caufe ; if not, he will cx- ** pofe you publicly as a traitor and a coward. ** Pleafe to anfwer this letter, and he will ac- ** quaint you with the time, place, and man- ** ncr of the meeting. " Philip Harclay.'' Zadiiky prefented the letter to Lord Lovel, informing him that he was the friend of Sìr Philip I iareíay. He feemed furprifed and con¬ founded at the contents ; but, putting on au haughty air ; I know nothing, faid he, of the bufinefs this letter hints at : but wait a few hours, and I will give vent an anfwer. He gave
gave orders to treat Zadiiky as a gentleman in every refpeft, except İn avoiding his company ; for the Greek had a ihrewd and penetrating afpeft, and he obferved every turn ofhis coun¬ tenance. The next day he came and apolo¬ gized for his abfence, and gave him the an¬ iwer, fending his refpefts to the Lord Clifford. The meftengers returned with all fpeed, and Sir Philip read the anfwer before all preient. " Lord Lovel knows not of airy injuries " done by him to the late Arthur Lord Lovel» " whom he fucceeded by juft right of infierì- tť tance ; nor of any right Sir Philip Harclaý " has, to call to account a man to whom he '*is barely known, having fcen him only ** onee, many years ago; at the houle of his «* uncle, the old Lord LcVei : Neverthelefs; " Lord Lovel will not fuffer any man to call " his name and honour into queftion with im-i 4i punity ; for which reafon he will meet Sir '' Philip Harclay at any time, place, and in ** what manner he ftiall appoint, bringing the " fame number of friends and dependents, that 44 juftice may be done to all parties. " Lovel."
II
"Tis
'Tis well, faid Sir Philip: I am glad to find he has the fpirit to meet me ; he is an enemy worthy of my fword. Lord Clifford then pro¬ pofed, that all parties ihould pafs the borders, and obtain leave of the warden of the Scotüfh marines to decide tlie quarrel in his jurifdic- tton, with a icleft number of friends on both fides. Sir Philip agreed to the propofai -, and Lord Clifford wrote in his own name to afk permiffion of the Lord Graham, that his friends might come there; and obtained it, on condition that neither party ihould exceed ii limited number of friends and followers. 1лаа Clifford fent chofen meiTengers to Lord Lovei, acquainting him with the conditions, and appointing the time, place, and manner of their meeting, and that he had been defired to accept the office of judge of the field. Lord Lovei accepted the conditions, and promifed to he there without fail. Lord Clifford noti¬ fied the fame to Lord Graham, warden of the marihes, who caufed a piece of ground to be enclofed for the lifts, and made preparations againft the day appointed. In the interim, Sir Philip Harclay thought proper to fettle his worldly affairs .* he made Zadiiky
Zadiiky acquainted with every circumftance of Edmund's hiftory, and the obligation that lay upon him to revenge the death ofhis friend, and fee juftice done to his heir. Zadiiky en¬ tered into the caufe with an ardour that fpoke the affeftion he bore to his friend. Why, laid he, would you not fuffer me to engage this traitor ?—Your life is of too much confe¬ quence to be ftaked againft his : but though I truft that the juftice of your caufe muft fuc¬ ceed, yet, if it ihould happen otherwife, I vow to revenge you ; he fhall never go back from us both : However, my hope and truft is, to fee your arm the minifter of juftice. Sic Philip then fent for a lawyer, and made his will, by which he appointed Edmund his chief heir, by the name of Lovel, alias Seagrave, alias Twyford : he ordered that all his old friends, foldiers, and fervants, ihould be main» tained in the fame manner during their lives ; he left to Zadiiky an annuity of an hundred a year, and a legacy of two hundred pounds ; one hundred pounds to a certain monaftry ; the fame fum to be diftributed among difband- ed foldiers, and the fame to the poor and fieedy İn his neighbourhood, ■H 2 He
He appointed Lord Clifford joint executor with Edmund, and gave his will into that no¬ bleman's care, recommending Fklmund to his favour tnd proteftion. If I live, faid he, I will make him appear to be worthy of it ; if I die, he will want a friend. I am defirous your Lordihip, as a judge of the field, fliould be unprejudiced on cither fide, that you may judge impartially. If I die, Edmund's pre¬ tenfions die wjth me ; but my friend Zadiiky will acquaint you with the foundation of them. I take thefe precautions, becniife I ought to be prepared for every thing ; but my heart is warm with better hopes, and I truft J ihall live to juftify my own caufe, as well as that of my friend, who is a perfon of more confequence than he appears to be. Lord Clifford accepted the truft, and expreficd the greateft reliance upon Sir Philip's honour and veracity» While thefe preparations wcre making for the great event that was to decide the preten¬ fions of Edmund, his enemies at the Caftle of Lovel were brought to ihame for their beha¬ viour to him. The difagreeraent between Wenlock and Markhara
Markham had by degrees brought on an ex¬ planation of fome parts of their conduri. Fa¬ ther Ofwald had often hinted to the Baron, Wenlock's envy of Edmund's fuperior quali¬ ties, and the artifices by which he had obtained fuch an influence with Sir Robert, as to make him take his part upon all occafions. Ofwald now took advantage of the breach between thefe two incendiaries, to perfuade Markham to juftify himfelf at Wenlock's expence, and to tell all he knew of his wickednefs; at length he promifed to declare all he knew of Wenlock's conduft, as well in France as fine« their return* when he ihould be called upon ι and, by him, Ofwald was enabled to unravel the whole of liis contrivances againft the ho¬ nour, intereft, and even life of Kdmund. He prevailed on Hewfon, and Kemp, his affociate, to add their teftimony to the others, I lewfon confciïèd that he was touched in his confcience, when he reflected" on the cruelty m\a injuftice of his behaviour to Edmund, whofe behaviour towards him, after he had laid a fnare for his life, was fo noble and gene¬ rous, that he was cut to the heart by it, and *; 4d fuffered İo much pain and remorfe, that Η 3 ho
he longed for nothing fo much as an opportu¬ nity to unburden his mind ; but the dread of Mr, Wenlock's anger, and the effefts of his refentment, had hitherto kept him filent, al¬ ways hoping there would come a time, when he might have leave to declare the whole troth. Ofwald conveyed this infoimation to the Baron*s ear, who watted for an opportunity to make the proper ufe of it. Not long after, the two principal incendiaries came to an open rupture, and Markham threatened Wenlock that he would flicw his uncle what a ferpent he had harboured in his bofom. The Baron arrefted his words, and infifted upon his telling all he knew : adding, if yon fpeak the truth, I will fupport you ; but if you prove falfe, I will puniih you feverely : As to Mr, Wenlock, he ihall have a fair trial ; and, if all the accu¬ fations ï have heard are made good, it is high time that I fhould put him out of my family. The Baron, wifh a ftern afpeft, bade them fol¬ low him into the great hall ; and fent for all the reft of the family together. He then with great folemnity told them he was ready to hear all fides of the queftion. He declared the whole fubftance of his infor¬ mations,
mations, and called upon the accufers to fup¬ port the charge. Hewfon and Kemp gave the fame account they had done to Ofwald, offer-, ing to fwear to the tiuth of their teftimony; feverai of the other fervants related fuch cir¬ cumftances as had come to their knowledge, Markham then fpoke of every thing, and gave a particular account of all that had paifed on the night they fpent in the eaft apartment ; he accufed himfelf of being privy to Wenlock's villainy, called himfeif fool and blockhead, for .being the inftrument of his malignant dif¬ pofition, and aiked pardon of his uncle for concealing it fo long. The Baron called upon Wenlock to reply to the charge: who, inftead of anfwering, flew into a paifion, raged, fwore, threatened, and finally denied every thing. The witnefles per¬ fifted in their affertions. Markham defired leave to make known the reafon why they were all afraid of him ; he gives ît out, faid lie, that he is to be my Lord's fon-in-law ; and they, fuppofing him to ftand firft in his favour, are afraid of his difpleafure,—I hope, faid the Baron, 1 ihall not be at fuch a lofs for a fon-in-law, as to make choice of fuch a one Π 4 as
as him, he never but once hinted at fuch a thing, and then I gave him no encouragement. i have long fcen there was fomething very wrong in him ; but I did not believe he was of fo wit ked a difpofition : It is no wonder that Primes ihould be fo frequently deceived, when 1, a private man, tould be fo much im- pofed upon within the circle of my own fa¬ mily. What think you, fon Robert ?— Ϊ, Sir, have been much more impofed upon ; and I take fliame to myfelf on tlic occafion. Enough» my fon, faid the Baron ; a generous confeflion is only a proof of growing wifdom : You are now fenfible, that the bcft of us all arc liable to impofition. The artifices of this unworthy kinfman have fct us at variance with each otlier, and driven away an excellent youth from this houfe, to go 1 know not whither : But he ftiall no longer triumph in his wicked¬ nefs : he ihall feet what it is to be baniihed from the houfe of his protecior. He ihall fct out for his mother's this very day; I will write to her in fuch a maimer as ihall inform her that he has oftendcd me, without particularii'- ing the nature ofhis faults: I will give him an opportunity of recovering his ciedit with his
his own family, and this ihall be my fecurity againft his doing further mifchief. May he repent, and be forgiven ' Markham deferves punifliment, but not in the fame degree.— i confefs it, faid he, and will fubmit to whatever your Lordfhip ihall enjoin.—You fhall only be baniihed for a time, but he for ever. I will fend you abroad on a buiinefs that lhall put you in a way to do credit to yourfelf, and fervice to mc. Son Robert, have you any objecìion to my fen¬ tence?—My Lord, faid he, 1 have great rea¬ fon to dirtruft myfelf; lam fenfible of my own weaknefs, and your fuperior wifdom, as well as goodnefs; and I vvill henceforward fubmit to you in all things. The Baron ordered two of his femmts to pack up Wenlock's clothes and nceeifaries, and to fct out with him that very day ; he bade fome others keep an eye upon him, left he ihould efcape ; As foon as they were ready, my Lord wiihed him a good journey, and gave him a letter for his mother. He departed without faying a word, in a füllen kind of re¬ fentment ; but his countenance flicvvcd the inward agitations of his mind. И 5 At
As foon as he was gone, every mouth was opened againft him ; a thoufand ftories came out that they never heard before : The Baron and his fons were aftonifhed that he íhould go on fo long without detection. My Lord fighed deeply at the thoughts of Edmund's expul¬ sion, and ardently wiihed to know what was become of him. Sir Robert took the opportunity of coming to an explanation with his brother William ; he touk ihame to himfelf for fome part of his paft behaviour. Mr. WiUiam owned his affec¬ tion to Kdmund» and juftified it by his merit and attachment to him, which were fuch, that he was certain no time or diftance could alter theni. He accepted his brother's acknow¬ ledgment, as a full amends for all that had paffed, and begged that henceforward an en¬ tire love and confidence might ever fubfift bo- ween them, Thefe new regulations reftored peace, confidence, and harmony, in the Caftie of Lovei. At length the day arrived for the comba* tants to meet. The Lord Graham, with twelve followers, gentlemen, and twelve fervants» wa* ready at tlie dawn of day to receive them* The
The fiift that entered the field was Sir Philip Harchiy, Knight, armed completely, except¬ ing his head-piece; Hugh Rugby, his Efquire, bearing his lance ; John Barnard, his page, carrying his helmet and fpurs ; and two fer¬ vants in his proper livery. The next came Ed¬ mund, the heir of Lovel, followed by his fer¬ vant, John Wyatt ; Zadiiky, followed by his fervant. At a fhort diftance came the Lord Clifford» as judge of the field, with his Efquire, two pages, and two livery -fervants ; followed by his eldeft fon, his nephew, and a gentleman his friend, each attended by one fervant : He alfo brought a furgeon of note to take care of the wounded. The Lord Graham faluted them ; and, by his order, they took their places withont the lifts, and the trumpet founded for the challen¬ ger, ît was anfwered by the defendant, who foon after appeared, attended by three gentle¬ men, his friends, with each one fervant, be¬ fide his proper attendants. A place was erecìed for the Lord Clifford, as judge ofthe field ; he defired Lord Graham would ihare the office, who accepted it, on H 6 condition
condition that the combatants fhould make no objection ; and they agreed to it with the greateft courtefy and refpeft. They confulted together on many points of honour and cere¬ mony between the two combatants. They appointed a marinai of the field, and other inferior officers, ufually employed on thefe occafions. The Lord Graham fent the marihal for the challenger, defiring him to declare the caufe of his quarrel before liis enemy. Sir Philip Harclay then advanced, and thus fpoke : «» i Philip Harclay, Knight, challenge ·* Walter, commonly called Lord Lovel, as a ** bafe, treacherous, and bloody man, who by " his wicked arts and devices, did kill, or «raufe to be killed, his kinfman, Arthur *' Lord Lovel, my dear and noble friend. I V am called upon, in an extraordinary man- ** ner, to revenge his death; and I will prove 4t the truth of vvhat I have affirmed at the pe- «· ril of my life." Lord Graham then bade the defendant an¬ iwer to the charge. ţ,erd Lovel ftood forth before his followers, and thus replied ; ** I Walter, Baron of Lovei, do deny the ** charge
" charge againft me, and affirm it to be a bafe, " falfe, and malicious accufation of this Sir *' Philip Harclay, which I believe to be in- " vented by himfelf, or elfe framed by fome " enemy, and told to him for wicked ends ; ** but, be that as it may, I will maintain my " own honour, and prove him to be a faife " tralor at the hazard of my own life, and to " the puniihment ofhis prefumption." Then faid the Lord Graham,—Will not this quarrel admit of arbitration ?—No, re¬ plied Sir Philip ; when I have juftified this charge, I have more to bring againft him. t· truft in God and tlie juftice of my caufe, and defy that traitor to the death ! Lord Clifford then fpoke a few words to Lord Graham, who immediately called to the Marinai, and bade him open the lifts, and deliver their weapons to the combatants. While the Marihal was arranging the com¬ batants and thcir followers, Edmund approach¬ ed his friend and patron ; he put one knee to the ground, he embraced his knees with the ftrongeft emotions of grief and anxiety. He was dreifed in complete armour, with his vifor down ; his device was a hawthorn, witli a graft
graft of the rofe upon it— This is not my true parent; but Sir Philip bad him take thefc words— E f rutin arbor cugmfcitur. Sir Philip embraced the youth with ftrong marks of afteftion : Be compofed, my child ! faid he ; I have neither guilt, fear, nor doubt in me ; lam fo certain of fuccefs, that I bid you be prepared for the confequence. Za¬ diiky embraced his friend, he comforted Kd¬ mund, he fuggefted every thing that could con¬ firm his hopes of fuccefs. The Marinai waited to deliver his fpcar to Sit Philip ; he now prefented it with the ufual form.—Sir, receive your lance, and God de¬ fend the right !—Sir Philip anfwered, Amen ! in a voice that was heard by all prefent. He next prefented his weapon to Lord Lo¬ vel with the fame fentence, who Iikewife an* fwered Amen ! with a good courage. Imme¬ diately the lifts were cleared, and the comba¬ tants began to fight. They contended a long time with equal Ikill and courage ; at length Str Philip unhorfed his antagonift. The judges ordered, that ei¬ ther he (hould alight» or fuffer his enemy to remount ; he chefe the former, and a fhort combat
tombât on foot enfued. The fwrcat ran off their bodies witli the violence of the exercife. Sir Philip watched every motion ofhis enemy, and ftrove to weary him out, but i¿ot to kill him, unlefs obliged for his own fafety. He thruft his fwòrd through his left arm, and demanded whether he would confefs the faft ? Lord Lovel, enraged, anfwered, he would die fooner. Sir Philip then pafled the fword through his body twice, and Lord Lo¬ vel fell, crying out that he was flain. I hope not, faid Sir Philip^ for I have a great deal of bufinefs for you to do before you die; Confefs your fins, and endeavour to atone for them, as the only ground to hope for pardon» —-Lord Lovel replied, You are the viftor» ufe your good fortune generoufly ! Sir Philip took away his fword, and then waved it over his head, and beckoned for af* fiftance. The judges fent to beg Sir Philip to fpare the life of his enemy.—1 will, faid he, upon condition that he will make an honeft confeffion. Lord Lovel defired a furgeon and a confef* for.—You ihall have both, faid Sir Philip ι but you muft firfl: aafwer roe a queftion or ? yo. Did you kill your kinfmaja or not ?—
It was not my hand that killed him, anfwered the wounded man.—It was done by your own order, however ? You ihall have no afliftance till you anfwer tliis point.—It was, faid he, and Heaven is juft ?—-Bear witnefs all prefent, faid Sir Philip, he confeifes the fa& ! He then beckoned Edmund, who approach¬ ed.—Take oif your helmet, faid he : look on that youth, he is the fon of your injured kinf- man.'—It is himfeif, faid the Lord Lovel, and fainted away, . Sir Philip then called for a furgeon and a prieft, both of which Lord Graham had pro¬ vided ; the former began to bind up his wounds, and his afhftants poured a cordial into his mouth.—Preferve his life, ifit be poifible, faid Sir Philip, for much depends upon it. . He'then took Edmund by the hand, and prefented him to all the company.—In this young man, faid he, you fee the true heir of ihe houfe of Lovel ! Heaven has in its own way made him tlie inftrument to difcover the death of his parents. His father was affalfi- natcd hy order of that Wicked man, who now receives hie puniihment; his mother was, by Ids cruel treatment, compelled to leave her i own
own houfe : ihc was deliveied in the helds, and periihed herfelf in feeking a ilielter for her infant. I- have fufficient proofs of every thing I fay, which I am ready to communi¬ cate to every perfon who delires to know the particulars ; Heaven, by my hand, has chaf- tifed him ; he has confeifed the faci I accufe him of, and it remains that he make reftitu¬ tion of the fortune and honours he hath ufurp* ed fo long, Edmund kneeled, and with uplifted hands returned thanks to Heaven -that his noble friend and champion was crowned with vie« tory !—The Lords and gentlemen gathered round them, they congratulated them both ; while Lord Loveľs friends and followers were employed in taking care of him. Lord Clif* ford took Sir Philip's hand,—You have a&ed with fo much honour and prudence, tliat it is prefumptuous to offer you advice ; but what uican you to do with the wounded man ?—I have not determined, faid he ; I thank you for the hint, and beg your advice how to pro¬ ceed.—Let us confuit Lord* Graham, replied he.—Lord Graham infifted upon their going all to his caftle ; there, faid he, you will havç impartial
impartial witneffes of all that pafles. Sir Philip was unwiUing to give fo much trouble. The Lord Graham protefted he fliould be proud to do any fervice to fo noble a gentle¬ man. Lord Clifford enforced his requeft, fay¬ ing, it was better upon all accounts to keep their prifoner on this fide the borders till they faw what turn his health would take, and to keep him iafely till he had lettled his worldly afiairs. This refolution being taken, Lord Graham invited the wounded man and his friends to his caftle, as being the neareft place where he could he lodged and taken proper care of, it being dangerous to carry him furtlier. They accepted the propofai with many acknowledg¬ ments ; and, having made a kind of litter of boughs, they all proceeded to Lord Graham's caftle, where they put Lord Lovei to bed, and the furgeon dreflèd his wounds, and defired lie might he kept quiet, not knowing at pre¬ fent whetlier tliey were dangerous or not. About an hour after, the wounded man complained of thirft ; he aiked for the fur* geon, and enquired if his life was in danger ? The furgeoa anfwered him doubtfully. He aíked, —
aiked,—Where is Sir Philip Harclay ?—In the caftle.—Where is that young man whom he calls the heir of Lovei ?—He is here, too.— Then I am furrounded with my enemies. I want to fpeak to one of my own fervants, without witneffes ; let one be fent to me. The furgeon withdrew, and acquainted the gentlemen below,—He ihall not fpeak to any man, faid Sir Philip, but in my prefenee. He went with him into the fick man's room» Upon the fight of Sir Philip, he feemed in great agitation.—Am I not allowed to fpeak wfth my own fervant, faid he ?—Yes 9 Sir, you may, but not without witnefles.—Then I am » piifoner, it feems Î— No, not fo, Sir ¡ but fome caution is neceifary at prefent : but com¬ pofe yourfelf, I do not wiih fcr your death.— Then why do you feek it ; I never injured you ?—Yes,, you have, in the perfon of my friend, and I am only the inftrument of juftice in the hand of Heaven i endeavour to make atonement while life is fpared to you.—Shall I fend the prieft to you ? perhaps he may con¬ vince you of the neceffity of reftitution, ia order to obtain forgiveneis of your fins. Sir Philip lent for the prieft and the fur¬ geon,
geon, and obliged the fervant to retire with him. I leave you, Sir, to the care of thefe gentlemen ; and whenever a third perfon is admitted, I will bi hîs attendant : I will vifit you again within an hour. He then retired, and confulted his friends below ; they were υΐ opinion that no time ihould be loft.—You will then, faid he, accompany me into the fick man*s apartment in an hour's time. . Within the hour, Sir Philip, attended by Lord Clifford and Lord Graham, entered the chamber. Lord Lovel was in great emotion i the prieft ftood on one fide of the bed, die furgeon on tlie other; the former exhorted him to confefs his fins, the other defired be might be left to his repofe. Lord Lovel feem* ed in great anguiih of mind ţ he trembled» and was İn the utmoft confufion. Sir Plfilip entreated him, witli the ptety of a confeifor, to confider his foul's health before that of his bedy. He then alked Sir Philip, by what means he knew chat lie was concerned in the deatli ofhis kinfman ?— Sir, replied he, it was not merely by human means this hă was difcovered. There is a certain apartment in the caftle of Lovel, that has been fhut up thefe one.
one-and-twenty years, but has lately been opened and eximined into. Oh Heaven ! exclaimed he, then Geoffry muft have betrayed me !—No, Sir, he has not, it was revealed in a very extraordinary man¬ ner to that vouth whom it nioft concerns.— How can he be the heir of Lovel ?— Lïy being the fon of that unfortunate woman, whom yon cruelly obliged to leave hcr own houfe, to avoid being compelled to wed the murderer of her huiband : we arc not ignorant, morcov er, of the fictitious funeral you made for her.— ЛИ is difcovered, and you will not tell us any more than wc know already ; but wc defire to liave it confirmed by your confeffion.-—The judgments of Heaven arc falling upon me ' faid Lord Lovel. I am ehildlefs, and one is arifen from the grave to claim my inheritance. < —Nothing then hinders you to do juftice and make reftitution ; it is for the eafe of your confcience : and you have no other way of making atonement for all the mifchief you have done. You know too much, faid the cri¬ minal, and I will relate what you do not know. You may remember, proceeded he, that I iaw you once at my uncle's iioufe ?—I wefi re¬ member
member it.—At that time my mind was dif¬ turbed by the baleful paifion of envy ; it was from that root all my bad ačlions fprung.— Praife be to God ! faid the good prieft : he hath touched your heart with true contrition, and you ihew the effect of his mercies ; you will do juftice, and you will be rewarded by the gift of repentance unto falvation.——Sir Philip defired the penitent to proceed. My kinfman excelled mc in every kind of merit, in the graces of perfon and mind, in all his exercifes, and in every accompliihment. I was totally eclipfed by him, and I hated to be in his company ; but what finiflied my averfion, was his addreffmg the lady upon whom I had fixed my affections : I ftrove to rival him there, but ihe gave him the prefer¬ ence í that, indeed, was only his due ; but I could not bear to fee or acknowledge it. The moft bitter hatred took poífeífion of my breaft, and I vowed to revenge the fup- poicd injury as foon as opportunity would offer. I buried my refentment deep in my heart, and outwardly appeared to rejoice at his fuccefs $ I made a merit of refigning my preffenfions to Ыш, but I couid not bear to be prefent
prefent at his nuptials : I retired to my father's feat, and brooded over my revenge in fecret. My father died this year, and foon after my uncle followed him j within another year my kinfman was fummoned to attend the king on his Welíh expedition. As foon as I heard he was gone from home, I refolved to prevent his return, exulting in the profpeft of pofleifing his title, fortune, and his Lady. I hired meftengers who were con¬ ftantly going and coming to give me intelli* gence ofall that paffed at the caftle ; I went there foon after, under pretence of vifiting my kinfman. My fpics brought me an account of all tliat happened ; one informed me of the event of the battle, but could not tell whether my rival was living or dead ; he hoped the latter, that I might avoid the crime I medi¬ tated : I reported his death to his Lady, who ťook it very heavily. S'oon after a meifenger arrived with tidings that he was alive and well, and had obtained »eave to return home immediately. I inftantly difpatched my two emiflaries to intercept him on the way. He made fo much •fcafte to return, that he was met within a mile cf
of his own caule; he had out-rode his fer¬ vants, and was alone : tliey killed him, and drew him afide out of the highway. Thev then came to me with all fpeed, and defired iny orders ; it was then about funfet : I fent them back to fetch the dead body, which they brought privately into the caftle : they tied it neck and heels, and put it into a trunk, whieh they buried under the fioor in the clofet you mentioned. The fight of the body ftung mc to the heart ; 1 then felt the pangs of remorfe, but it was too late : I took every precaution that prudence fuggefted to prevent the difco¬ very ; but nothing can be concealed from the eye of Heaven. From that fatal hour I have never known peace, always in fear of fomething impend¬ ing to difcover my guilt, and to bring me to ihame : at length I am overtaken by juftice. I am brought to a fevere reckoning here, and I dread to meet one more fevere hereafter, Knough, faid the prieft ; you have donc a good work, my fon I truft in the Lord ; antl now this burden is off your mind, the reft will be made eafy to you. Lord Lovei took a minute's repofe, and then went
went on.—1 hope by the hint you gave, Sir Philip, the poor Lady is yet alive ?—No, Sir, ilie is not : but ihe died not till after ihe brought forth a fon, whom Heaven made its Inftrument to difcover 'ind avenge the death of both his paicnts. They are well avenged ' faid lie. I have no children to lament for nic ; all mine have been taken from nie in the bloom of youth ; only one daughter lived to be twelve years old ; I intended her for a vvife for one of my nephews, but within three months 1 have buried her. He fighed, wept, and was Aleni. The gentlemen prefent lifted up their liands and eyes to Heaven in filence. 'i he vvill of 1 leaven be obeyed ! faid the prieft.— My pe¬ nitent has con fei led all : what more wouid you req uh e ·*-—Thathc make atonement, faid Sir Philip , that he йигеыкг the title and eftate to the rialti heh, and difpofe ofhis own proper foi tunc to iiis neauft и lations, and re i'gn himfelf to pini U nee лпа pıcparatîon for a future iiate. Ioi tliis time i leave him vvith vou, iather 5 and vvill join шу prav ers with voc'S fot his repentante. îîo faying, he leit the ι oom, and was follow ed by the Bannis, and the fuigeou , the ¡nie' 1 Potu rc maini ng with hnn. As foon as thev
were out of hearing, Sir Philip queftioned the fui geon concerning his patient's fituation ; who aniwered, that at prefent he faw no figns of immediate danger, but he (ould not yet pro¬ nounce that there was- none ; if he *veie mor¬ tally wounded, faid he, he could not be fo well, nor fpcak fo long without faintnefs ; and it is my opinion lhat lie will foon recover, if nothing happens to rt tard the cure. 'Ihen, faid Sir Philip, keep tliis opinion from him ; for 1 would fuffer the fear of deatli to operate on him until he hath peiíomicd fome necci- fnv n¿H of juftkc : let it onlv be known to thefe noblemen, upon whofe honour I ean ι elv. and 1 truft they will approve my requeft to you. S'o.~ -I join in ii, faid Lord Clifford, from the fame motives.—I infift upon it; faid Loid Graham ; and 1 ran anhvtr for my fuigeon's diferetion.—My Lords, faid the furgeon, \ou muy depend on mv fidelity ; and, after what f have juft heard, my confcience is engaged in this» noble gentleman's behalf, and í will do t veiy thing in my power to fecond your in¬ tentions. 1 thank you, .Sir. laid Sir Philip, and you may depend on mv gi atitude in ι etuni. 1 prefume you will fit up with him to-night ; if any danger ihould aiife, l défit с to be called iiumediatch ,
immediately; but, otherwife, I would fuffer him to reft quietly ; that he raay be prepaied for the bufinefs ofthe following day.—I ihall obey your dircftions, Sir ; my neceifary at¬ tendance will give me a pretence not to leave him, and thus I ftiall hear all that paifes be¬ tween him and all that vifit him.—You will oblige me highly, faid Sir Philip, and I ihall go to reft with confidence İn your care. The furgeon returned to the fick man's chamber, Sir Philip and the Barons to the company below : 'diey fupped in the great hall, vvith all the gentlemen that were prefent at the combat. Sir Philip and his FMmund retired to their repofe, being heartily fatigued ; and the company ftayed to a late hour, com¬ menting upon the aftion of the day, praifing the courage and generofity ofthe noble Knight, and wifliing a good event to his undertaking. Moft of Lord LovcPs friends went away as foon as they faw him fafely lodged, being afliamed of him, and of their appearance in his behalf; and the few that ftayed wcre in¬ duced by their defire of a further information ofthe bafe aftion he had committed, and to juftify their own charafters and conduft. The next morning Sir Philip entered into I 2 confutøuiou
confultation with the two Barons, on the me¬ thods he fliould take to get Fdmund received and acknowledged as heir of the houie of Lovel. fhey were all of opinion, that the luminal ihould be kepi in fcav tiJl he had fet¬ tled his worldly affairs, and they had refolved how to difpofe of him. W ith this determi¬ nation they entered his room, and inquired ofthe furgeon how he had [wffvd the night? He ihook his liead, and faid but little. Lord Lovel defired that he might be re¬ moved to his own houfe. Lord fhaham laid, he could not confent to that, as there was evident danger in icmoving liim; and ap¬ pealed fo the fin geon, who confumed his opi¬ nion, Loid Graham defired he would make himfeif eafy, and that he ihould have every kind of uiftance theie. bv. Philip then propofed to lend for th« Lord Fitz-Owen, wlio would ice that all poi¬ fible eare was taken of his biothcr-in-law, and wouid affiir hini in iitiiing his affaits. Lord Lovel \\аь againfl it, he was peuiih and uneafy, and deiiied to be left with oniy his own itivants ίο atletul him. Síi Philip quitted the room Anh. a fignificant look , and the two Lords endeavoured to leconcilc him to
ro his fituation. 1 Ie interrupted them.—it ís eafy for men in your fituation to advife, but it is difficult for one iu mine to pruftife ; wounded in bodv and mind, it is natural that 1 ihould ftrive to avoid the extremes of ihame ancl puniihment : í thank you for your kind oilkes, and beg I may be left with my own fervants.— W ith them, and the furgeon, you ihall, iaid Lord Graham ; and they both re¬ tired. Sir Philip met them below.—My Lords, faid he, I am defirous that my Lord Fitz- Owen ihould be fent for, and that he may hear his brother's tonfeiiion: for I fufpect that he may hereafter deny, what only the fear of death has extorted from him: with your permiffion, I am determined to fend meiTengers to-day. They both expreffed ap¬ probation ; and Lord Cliifoid propofed to write to him, faying, a letter from an impar¬ tial perfon will have the more weight: I will fend one of шу princ ipái domeftics with your own. 'litis incallire being refotved upon, Lord Clifloul retiied to wiite, and >ir Philip to pre¬ pare his teivants foi inftant departure, kd¬ mund defired leave to write to Father Ofwald, and John W vatt vvas ordered to be the bearer I 3 of
of his letter. When the Lord Clifford had finiíhed his letter, he read it to Sir Philip and his chofen friends, as follows : " Right Hon. my good Loid, u I have taken upon me to acquaint your " Lordfhip, that there has been a folemn *' combat at aims between your brothcr-in- ** iaw, the Lord Lovel, and Sir Philip Har- ** clay, Knt. of Yorkihire. It was fought in *' the jurifdičiion of the Lord Graham, who, ·* with myfelf, was appointed judge of the *' field ; it was fairly won, and Sir Philip is *' the conqueror. After he had gained the ** victory, he declared at large the caufe of ** the quarrel, and that he had revenged the ** death ef Arthur Lord Lovel, his friend, ·' whom the prefent Lord Lovel had uffäffi- *< nated, that he might enjoy his title and ** eftate. Ί iıe wounded man confeifed the ** ua : and Sir Philip gave him his life, and ** only cui lied oft hi* fwotd as a trophy ofhis * 4 viaorv. Both tlie \\¿un and the vanquiihtd ** weie convev ed to Loid Graham's Caftle, ** wheie the Lts: d Lovci now liu in great dan- *· i;ci. He ¡h dcihous lo fctlic his woi Idly af- ** f.iiis, and to make iii.·. peace with God and " nun.
4 · man. Sir Philip Harclay fays, there is a " male heir ofthe houfe. of Lovel, for whom 4i he claims the tille and eftate; but he is " very defirous lhat your Lordihip fliould be " prefent at the difpofai of your biother's pro- ťí perty, that of ι ight belongs to him, of which *' your children are the undoubted heirs: he " alfo wants to confuit you in many other " points of honour and equity. Let me in- *« treat you, on the receipt of this letter, to fet " out immediately for Lord Graham's Caftle, " where you will be received with the utmoft " refpeft and hofpitality, Ycu vvill hear things *· that will furprife you as much as they do 44 me; you will judge of theni with that juf- " lice and honour which fpeaks your charac- «< Ler; and you vvill unite with us in wonder- '* ing at the ways of Providence, and fubmit- *' ting to its decrees, tu puniíhing the guilty, " and doing juftice to llie innocent and op- " preifed. My bcft wiihes and prayers attend *< you and your hopeful family. My Lord, I '· remain your humble iervant, '* Clifford." Lvery one prefent expreffed the higheft ap¬ probation of thib letter. Sir Philip gave or- I l dors
ders to John Wyatt to be very circumfpcČr. in liis behaviour, to give Kdmund's letter pri¬ vately to bather Ofwald, and to make no piention of him, or his pretenfions to Lovel Caftle. í ord Clifford gave his fervant the requifite fit t aurions. Lord Graham added a note of hv. nation, and fent it by a fervant of his own. As foon as all things were ready, the mef- f<ngers fet out with all Ipeed for the Caftle of Lovel. They ftayed no longer by the way than to take fomc refrefhment, but rode night and day tili tiiey arrived there. Lord Fitø-Owen was in the parlour with his children. Father Ofwald was walking in the avenue before the houfe, when he faw three meffengers, whofe horfes feemed jaded, and the riders fatigued, like men come a long jour¬ ney. He came up, juft as the firft had deli¬ vered his meflage to the porter. John Wyatt knew bim, he difmounted, and made figns that he had fomeihing to fay to him , he retiie.' back л few fteps, ynd John, with great dux- teiity, flipped a ici'.er into his hand, 'i he father gave him his bleíľmg, and a vvelrom«:. —Who do you tume from ? fa İd he aloud.—
From the Lords Graham and Clifford, to the Lord Fitz-Owen ; and we bring letters of con¬ fequence to the Baron. Ofwald followed the meftengers into the hall, a fervant announced their arrival. Lord Fitz-Owen received them in the parlour ; Lord Clifford's fervant delivered his mafter's Jetter, Lord Graham's his, and they faid they would retire and wait his Lordihip's anfwer. The Baron ordered them fomc refreihment. 'fhey retired, and he opened his letters : he read them with great agitations, he ftruck his hand upon his heart, he exclaimed—My fears are all verified ! the blow is ftruck, and it has fallen upon the guilty. Ofwald eame in a minute after.—You are come in good time, faid the Baron. Read that letter, that my children may know the con¬ tents. He read it with faultering voice, and trembling limbs. They were ail in great fui¬ prife. WiUiam looked down, and kept a ftudied filence. Sir Robert exclaimed—Is It poifible ? can my Uncle be guilty of fuch an action?—You hear, faid the Baron, he has confeifed it!—But to whom ? faid Sir Robert. —His father replied, Lord Clifford's honom
is imqucitîonable, and 1 cannot doubt what he affirms. Sir Robert leaned his head upon his hand, as one loft in tliought : at length he feemed to awake—My Lord, 1 have no doubt that Edmund is at the bottom of this bufinefs. Do you not remember that Sir Philip Harclay long ago promifed him his friendihip ? Edmund difappears ; and, foon after, this man chal¬ lenges my I 1 nclc. You know what paifed here before his departure ; he has fuggefted this affair to Sir Philip, and inftigated him to this action. This is the icturn he has made foi the favours he has received from our fa¬ mily, to which he owes every thing.·—Softly, my fon ! faid the Baron ; let us be cautious of reflecting upon Edmund : there is a greater hand in this bufinefs. My conjecture was too tiue: it was in that fatal apartment that he was made acquainted with the circumftances of Lord Loveľs death ; he was perhaps, enjoined to reveal them to Sir Philip Harclay, the bo¬ fom friend of the deceafed. The myftery of that apartment is difclofed, the woe to the guilty İs accompliflied. There is no reflec¬ tion upon any one ; Heaven cfleits its purpofes in
in its own time and manner. I and mine are innocent; let us worfliip aud be filent ! But what do you propofe to do ? faid Sir Robeit.—To return with the mcifengcrs, an¬ fwered the Baron. I think it highly proper that i íhould fee your Uncle, and hear what he has to fay : my ehi idre n are his heirs ; in jufKee to theni, í ought to be acquainted with every thing lhat concerns the difpofai of his fortune—Your Lordfliip is in the right, an¬ fwered Sir Robert, it concerns us all. I have ouly to aik your permiffion to bear you com¬ pany.—With all my heart, faid the Baron: I have only to aik of you in return, that you will command yourfelf, and not fpeak your mind haftily; wait for the pi oofs before you give judgment, and take advice of your reafon be¬ fore you decide upon any tiling : if you reflect: upon tlie paft, you will find reafon to diftruft yourfelf. Leave all to me, and be aflured I will proteft vom iionour and my own.—I vviil obey you in all things, my Lord; and will make immediate preparation for our depar¬ ture. So fa> i rig, he left the room. As foon as he was gone, Mr. William broke filence.—My Luid, laid he, if you have no great objection, I beg leave alio to accom- I u pany
panv you both.—You fliall, my fon, if you defire it ; I think I can fee your motives, and your brother's alio ; your coolnefs will be a good balance to his warmth : You lhall go with ib. My fon Walter ihall be his fifter's protector in our abfence, and he fliall be maf¬ ter here till we return.—1 hope, my dear fa¬ ther, that will not be fong ; I ihall not be happy till you come home, faid the fair Em¬ ma.—it ihall be no lonjrer, my deareft, thau till this untoward affair is fettled. ЧЪс Baron defired to know when the meftengers were ex¬ pected to return. Ofwald took this opportu¬ nity to retire ; he went îo his own apaitment» and read the letter, as follows: ** The Heir of Lovdy io hii dear anduve- ** rend β mid, Idi: her ([fwidJ. ** Let my fiiends at the Caftle ol Lovei ** know, that l live in hupes one day to Ue 4i them there. If you could, by any means, ** return with the mcílèngeib, your teftimony ** would add weight to mine ; perhaps you " might obtain permiffion to attend the lïa- " ion : í leale it to you to manage this. John 14 Wyatt will inform you of all that has pafled '* here, and that hitherto my fuccefs has out- u run my expeftation, and, almoft, my wiihes. " i и m
" í am in the high road to my inheritance ; " and truft that the Power who hath conduft- Ci ed mc thus far will not ieave his work un- " finiftied. Tell my beloved William, that I (t live, and hope to embrace hini before long. " I recommend myfelf to your holy prayers " and bleffing, and remain your fon and fcr- " vant, Edmund." Ofwald then went to the mcifengcrs ; he drew John Wyatt to a diftance from the reft, and got the information he wanted : he ftaid with him till he was fent for by the Baron, to whom he went direftly and prevented his quef¬ tions, by faying,— I have been talking with the meftengers: I find they have travelled night and day to bring the letters with all fpeed ; ihey ouly reipiiic one nighťs reft, and will be ready to fet out with you to-morrow.— 'Tis well, faid the Baron ; we will fct out as fbon as they ave ready.—My Lord, faid Ofwald, I have a favour to beg of you ; it is, that I may attend you : I have fetn the progrefs of this wonderful difcovery, and I have a great de¬ fire to fee the conclufion of it ; perhaps my pre¬ fenee may be of fervice in the courfe of youi bufinefs.·—Perhaps it may, faid the Baron ; I have no objection, if you defire to go.·—They then
then feparaicJ, and went t<i prepare for their ţomnev· Oiwald had a piivate interview with Jofeph, u horn he informed of all that he knew, and his resolution to attend the Baron in his jour¬ nev to the noıîh.— í go, faîd lie, to bear wit¬ nefs in behalf of injuud innocui«, с : if it be needful, I fhall call upon > ou , theiefore hold \ Oui ielf in leadineis İn cafe you ihould be fent for.— 'ihat 1 vviil, faid Jofeph, and fpend my lait ıtmaias of life лıìd iheiigtb, to help my λοιη.μ Lud to hib light and title , but do they no; begin to fiííptčt who is the Heir of" Le¬ vel — λυί in the leaf!, faid Oiwald; ihev think him conterned hi the difcoveiy, but have no idea of his being inteıeüıd in the event.--Oh, father! laid Jofeph, 1 ihail think every dä\ a week till you return, but 1 vvill no longei keep you from your reptile.—Oood night, faid Ofwald ; but 1 have another vifit to pay before I git to reft. He left Jofeph, and went on tip-toe to Mi. William's toom, and tapped at his door : he came and opened it.—-What news, father'— Kot muí h ; 1 have only oiders to tell you that Edmund i«t well, and as much your fiiend as ever.—1 gucfild, faid \\ illium, that wc fhould hear
hear fomething of him : 1 liave ftili another guefs.—What is that, mv child ?—That wc lhall fee or hear of liim where we are going. —Jt is veiy likely, find Ofwald ; aud I would have you be prepared for it : l am confident we null hear nothing to his difeiedit.—I am certain of that, faid William, and I ihall re¬ joice to iee him : 1 conclude that he is under tlu· protection of Sir Philip Harclay.—He is fo, faid Ofwald ; 1 had my information from Sir Philip's fervarU, who is one ofthe meiicn- gers, and was guide to the others in their way hither. After iome further converiation, they fepaiaied, and each went to his repofe. The next morning the whole puty fet out on their journey; they travelled by eafy ftages on account of the Baron's health, which be¬ gan to be impaired, and arrived in health and fpirits at the Caftie of Lord Graham, where they were received with the utmoft refpeft and kindnefs by the noble Mafter. 'I'he Lord Lovel had recovered his health, and ftrength as much as pofiible in the time, and was impatient to be gone from thence to his own houfe» He was furprifed to hear of the arrival of his brother and nephews, and expreifed no pleafure at the thoughts of feeing them.
them. When Sir Philip Harclay came to pay his refpefts to Baron Fitz-Owen, the latter received him with civility, but with a coldnefs that was apparent. Sir Robert left the room, doubting his refolution. Sir Philip advanced, and took the Baron by the hand.—My Lord, faid he, 1 rejoice to fee you here. I cannot be fatisfied with the bare civilities of fuch a man as you. 1 afpiie to your efteem, to your fiiendfhip, and 1 lhall not be happy till I ob¬ tain them. I will make you the judge of every part of my conduft, and where you fhall con¬ demn me, I will condemn myfelf. 1 he Baron was foftened, his noble heart felt its alliance with its counterpart, but he- thought the fituation of his brother demanded fome referve towards tìw man who fought hie life ; but, in fpite of himfelf, it wore off every moment. Loid Clifford related all that had paifed, with the due regard to Sir Philip's ho¬ nour ; he remarked how nobly he concealed the caufe of his refentment againft the Lord Lovei till the day of combat, that he might not prepoiïèfs the judges againft him. He en¬ larged on his humanity to tlie vancjuiihed, on the defire he expreifed to have juftice done to his heirs ; finally, he mentioned his gteat re¬ ipect
ipeft for the Lord Fitz-Owen, and the folici¬ tude he ihewed to have him come to fettle the eftate of the fick man in favour of his chil¬ dren, Lord Clifford alfo employed his fon to foften Sir Robert, and to explain to him every doubtful part of Sir Philip's behaviour. After the travellers had taken fome reft, the Lord Graham propofed thatthey ihould make a vifit to the fick man's chamber. The Lords font to acquaint him they were coming to vifit him, and they followed the meffenger. The Lord Kite-Owen went up to the bedfide ; he embraced Ids brother with -ftrong emotions of concern ; Sir Robert followed him ; then Mr. William. Lord Lovel embraced them, but faid nothing ; his countenance ihewed his in¬ ward agitations.—Lord Fitz-Owen firft broke filence.—1 hope, faid he, I fee my brother better than 1 expefted.—Lord Lovel bit his fingers, he pulled the bed-clothes, he feemed almoft diftrafted : at length he broke out—I owe no thanks to thofe who fent for my rela¬ tione} Sir Philip Harclay, you have ufed un- yeneroufly the advantage you have gained over nie ' you ipared my life, only to take away im reputation. You have expofed me to ih.mgers; and, wliat is worfe, to my deareft fiiend-' ,
friends : when 1 lay in a ftate of danger, you obliged me to fay any thing, and now you take advantage of İt, to ruin me in my friends' affeftion : But, if I recover, you may repent it. Sir Philip then came forward.—My Lords, I ihall take no notice of vvhat this unhappy man has juft now faid; I íhall appeal to you, as to the honourable witnciîès of all that has pafled : You fee it was no more than neceffary. I appeal to you for the motives of my treat¬ ment of him, before, at, and after our meet¬ ing. I did not take his life, as I might have done ; ï wiihed him to repent ofhis fins, and to make reftitution of what he unjuftly pof¬ fefles. I was called out to do an aft of juf¬ tice ; I had taken the Heir of Lovel under my proteftion, my chief view was to fee juf- riee done to him ; what regarded this man was but a fecondary motive. '1 his was my end, and I will never, never iofc fight of it. Lord Lovel feemed almoit choaked vvith paffion, to fee every one giving fomc marks of approbation and icfpeft io Ыг Philip. He called out,— í demand ίο know who is tiiis preíendetl heir, whom he brings out in claim my title and fouune: —My noble auditois, faid Sir Pii ilip, I íhüil appeal to vour ]udg- Hifiit,
ment, in regard to the proofs of my ward's birth and family ; every circumftance fliall be laid before you, and you ihall decide upon them. Here is a young man, fuppofed the fon of a peafant, who, by a train of circumftances, that could not have happened by human con¬ trivances, difcovers not oniy who were his real parent«, but that they eame to untimely deaths. i le even difcovers the different places where their bones are buried, both out of confecrated ground, and appeals to their afhes for the truth ofhis pretenfions, He has aifo living . proofs to offer, that will convince the moft in¬ credulous. I have deferred entering into par¬ ticulars, till the arrival of Baron Fitz-Owen ; I know his noble heart and honourable cha¬ racter, from one that has long heeu an eye- vvitnefs ofhis goodneis ; fuch is the opinion I have of his juftice, that I will accept him as one of the judges in his brother's eaufe. I and my waul will bring our proofs before him, aud the company here prefent ; in the courfe of them, it will appear that he is the beft qua¬ lified iîf any to judge of them, becaufe he can aiceriahi many of the fafts we fhall have oc¬ cafion
-' cafion to mention : I will reft our caufe upon tlieir dcufion. Lord Graham applauded Sir Philip's appeal, affirming his own impartiality, and calling upon Lord Clifford and his fon, and alfo his own nephews, who were prefent. Lord Clif¬ ford find, Sir Philip oífeis fairly, and like him¬ feif ; theie can be no place, nor perfons more impartial than the preient, and 1 prefume the Lord Lovel can have no objection.—No ob- jeftion ! anfwered he ; what, to be tried like a criminal, to have judges appointed overme, to decide upon my right to my own eftate and title î I will not fubmit to fuch a juriiUiftion ! —Then, faid Sir Philip, you had rather be tried by the laws of the land, and have them pronounce fentence upon you ? lake your choice, Sir; if you refufe the one, you fliall be certain of the other. Lord Clifford then faid»—You will allow Lord Lovel to confider of the propofai ; he will confuit his fiiends, and be determined by their adviee. Lord Htx Owen faid,«~4 am wv much furpriíed at what I have heard. 1 ihould be glad to know л\1 ihat Sir Philip Harclay has to fay for hh ward, that I may judge what my biother has
to hope or fear ; I will then give my beft ad¬ vice, or offer my mediation, as he may ftand in need of them.—You fay weil, replied Lord Graham ; and pray let us come direftly to the point : Sir Philip, you will introduce your ward to this company, and enter upon your proofs. Sir Philip bowed to the company ; he went out and brought in Edmund, encouraging him by tiie way ; he prclentcd him to Baron Fitz- Owen, who looked very ferious.—Edmund Twyford, faid he, arc you the heir of tlic houfe of Lovel ?—I am, my Lord, faid ICdmund, bowing to the ground ; the proofs vvill appear; but 1 am, af the fame time, the moft humble and grateful of all your fervants, and the ier¬ vant of your virtues. Sir Robert i oie up, and was going to .leave the room.--Sou Kobert, ftay, faid the Baron: lf there is any fraud, you will be pleafed to deleft it, and if all that is affirmed be true, you vvill not íhut your eyes i.gainft the light ; you are concerned in this bufinefs : hear it in filence, and let reafon be arbiter in your caufe. He bowed to his fa¬ ther, bit his lip, and retired to the window. William nodded to Fdmund, and was filent. All the company had their eyes fixed on the young man, who ftood in the midft, eafting down
down his eyes with modeft refpeft to the au¬ dience : while Sir Philip related all the mate¬ rial circumftances of his lifc, the wondcrfui gradation by whieh he came to the knowledge of his birth, the adventures of the haunted apartment, the difcovery of the fatal clofet, and the prefumptive proofs that Lord Lovel was buried there. At this part of his narra¬ tion, Lord Fitz-Owen interrupted him.— Where is this clofet you taîk of; for I and my fons went over the apartment fince Ed¬ mund's departure, and found no fuch place as you defcribe.—My Lord, faid Edmund, I can account for it ; the door is covered with tapc- ftry, tlic fiime as the room, and you might eafilv overlook ir ; but 1 have a witneis here, faid he, and putting his hand into his bofom, he drew out the key. If this is not the key of that clofet, let me be deemed an impoftor, and all I fay a falfehood ; I will rifk my pre¬ tenfions upon this proof. And for what purpoie did you take it away ? faid the Baron.-—To prevent any perfon from going into it, replied Edmund ; 1 have vowed to keep it till I lhall open that clofet before witnefles appointed for that puipofe.—Pro¬ ceed, Sir, faid the Baron Fitz-Owen.—Sir Phi¬ lip
lip then related the converfation between Ed¬ mund and Margery Twyford, bib fuppofed mo¬ ther.—Lord Eitx-Owcn feemed in the utmoft furprize: He exclaimed—Can this be tiue? ftrange difcovery !—unfortunate child ?—Ed¬ mund's tears bore witnefs to his veracity ; he was obliged to hide his face, he lifted up his clafped hands to Heaven, and was in great emotions during all this part ofthe relation ; while Lord Lovei groaned, and feemed in great agitation. Sir Philip then addrefled himfeif to Lord Fitz·()\\ en. My Lord, tiiere was anotlıer per¬ fon prefent at the converfation between Ed¬ mund and his fofter-mothcr, who ean witnefs to nil that patied ; perhaps your Lordfhip can tell who that was ? «—lt was father Ofwald, replied the Baron ; I well lemember that he went with him at his requeft, 'let him be called in. He was fent for, and came immediately. The liaron defired him to relate all that paifed be¬ tween Edmund and his mother. Ofwald then began. Since I am now pro¬ perly called upon to teftify what I know eon- t erning this young man, I will fpeak the truth, without four or favour of any one ; and I will fwear by the rules of my holy order, to the truth
truth of what I fhall relate, He then gave a particular account of all that pafled on that oc¬ cafion, and mentioned the tokens found on both the infant and its mother.—Where arc thofe tokens to be fcen ? faid the Lord Clif¬ ford.—I have them here, my Lord, faid Ed¬ mund, and I keep them as my greateft trea¬ fures. He then produced them before all the company.—There is no appearance of any fraud or collufion, faid Lord Graham ; if any man thinks he fees any, let him "peak.—Pray, my Lord, fuffer me to fpcak a word, faid Sir Ro¬ bert. Do you remember that I hinted my fuf- •picions concerning father Ofwald, the night our kinfmen lay in the caft apartment ?—1 do, laid the Baron.-—Well, Sir, now it appears that he did know more than he would tell us ; you find he is very deep in all Edmund's fe- t íets, and you judge what were his motive» for undertaking this jourhey.—I obferve what you fay, anfwered his father, but let us heai all that Ofwald has to fay : I will be as impar¬ tial as poffible,—My Lord, returned Ofwald, \ beg you alio to rccolleči what 1 faid, on the «light your fon fpeaks of, concerning fecrecy m ceriain matters.— ï remember that alfo, faid the Baron ; but proceed.—My Lord, continu¬ ed
ed OfwaH, I knew more Mian I thought my¬ felf at liberty to difclofe at that time ; but I will now tell you every thing. I faw there was fomething more than common in the ac¬ cidents that befell this young man, and İn his being called out to fleep in the eaft apartment; î earneftly defired him to let me be with him on the fecond night, to which he confented reluctantly, we heard a great noife in the rooms underneath ; we went down ftairs to¬ gether ; I faw him open the fatal clofet, I heard groans that pierced me to the hcarr, I kneeled down and prayed for the repofe ofthe fpirit departed ; I found a feal P with the arms of Lovel engraven upon it, which I gave to Edmund, and he now has it in his pofieffion; He enjoined me to keep fecret what I had fcen and heard, till the time ftiould come to de« clare it. I conceived that I was called to be a witnefs of thefe things ; befides, my curio¬ fity was excited to know the svent ; I, there¬ fore, defired to be prefent at the interview be¬ tween him and his mother, which was affect¬ ing beyong exprefiion : I heard what I have now declared as nearly as my memory per¬ mits me. f hope no impartial perfon will blame mc for an) p .rt of my conduit ; but if H tiiey
they ihould, 1 do not repent it : ifi ftiould for¬ feit the favour of the rieh and great, I fliall have acquitted myfelf to God and my confci¬ ence. I have no worldly ends to anfwer : I plead the cauic of the injured orphan ; and I think, aifo, that I fecond the defigns of Provi¬ dence.—You have well fpoken, father, faid the Lord Clifford ; your teftimony is indeed of confequence. Itis amazing and convincing, faid Lord Gra¬ ham ; and the whole ftory is ib well connect¬ ed, that 1 can fee nothing to make us doubt the truth of it: but let us examine the proofs. Iùlmund gave into their hahds the necklace and car-rings ; he fhewed them the Locket with the cypher of Lovel, and the feal with the arms; he told them the cloak in which he was wrapped was in the cuftody of his fof¬ ter mothe**, who vvould produce it on demand. He begged that fome proper perfons might be commiflioned to go with him to examine whe¬ ther or no the bodies ofhis parents wcre buri¬ ed where he affirmed ; adding, that he put his pretenfions into their hands with pleafure, re¬ lying entirely upon their honour and juftice. During this interefting fcene, the criminal covered his face, and was filent, but he fent forth
forth bitter fighs and groans that denoted the anguifh of his heart. At length, Lord Gra¬ ham, in compaffion to him, propofed that they ihould retiie and confider of the proofs ; add¬ ing, Lord Lovel muft needs be fatigued ; we tvill refumc ihe fubjeci; in his prefenee, when he ь difpofed to receive us. Sir Philip Har¬ clay approached the bed : Sir, faid he, 1 now ieave you in the hands of your own relations ; they arc men of ftiict honour, and T confide in them to take care of you, and of your con¬ cerns. '1 hey then went out of the loom, leaving only the Lord Fitz-Owen and his fons with the criminal. They difeourfed ofthe wonderful ftory of Edmund's biith, and the piineipul even's ofhis life. After dinner, Sir Philip requefted another conference with the Lords, and thcir pnncipal friends. There wcre prefent alio, father Of¬ wald, and Lord Graham's confeftbr, who had taken the Lord Lovci's confufion, Kdmund, and Zadiiky. Now, gentlemen, faid Sir Phi¬ lip, 1 defne to know your opinion of our proofs, and your advice upon them. Lord Graham replied, I am defired to fpeak for the reft ; We think there arc ftrong pre¬ fumptive proofs that this young man is the К ¿ tiu**
true heir of Lovel ; but they ought to be con¬ firmed and authenticated. Of the murder of the Ые Lord, there is no doubt ; the criminal hath confefled it, and the circumftances con¬ firm it ; the proofs of his crime are fo con¬ nected with thofe of the young man's birth, that one cannot be public widiout the other. We are defirous to do juftice ; and yet arc un¬ willing, for the Lord Hlz-Oweif s fake, to bring the criminal to public ihame and puniihment. We wflh to find out a medium ; we therefore defire Sir Philip to make propofals for his ward, and let Lord Fitz-Owen anfwer for himfelf and his brother, and we will be moderators be¬ tween tliem. Here every one expreifed ap¬ probation, and called upon Sir Philip to make his demands. If, faid he, 1 were io demand ftrift juftice, I fliould not be fatislied with any íhing lr;k than the life ofthe emuinál ; but I аш a Chrif¬ tian foldier, the diiupíe of Him who eame into the world to fave finners : for his fake* conti¬ nued he (crofling himfelf) I forego my re¬ venge, I fpare the guiliy : lfl leaven gives him time for repentance, man fliould not deny it. it is. my ward's particular requeft, that I will not bring ihame upoa the houfe of his bene¬ faftor,
factor, the Lord Fitz-Owen, for whom he hath a filial affeftion and profound veneration. My propofals are thefe : Firft, that the criminal make reftitution ofthe title and eftate, obtain¬ ed with fo much injuftice and cruelty, to the lawful heir, whom he ihall acknowledge fuch before proper witnefles. Secondly, that he ihall furrender his own lawful inheritance and pu fonal eftate into the hands ofthe Lovd Fk'¿- Owen, in truft for his ions, who are his heirs of blood. Thirdly, that he fliall retire into a religious houfe, or elfe quit the kingdom in three months time ; and, in cither cafe, thofe who enjoy his fortune ihall allow him a decent annuity, that he may not want the comforts of life. By the Iaft, I difable him fiom the means of doing further mifchief, and enable him to devote the remainder of hia days to penitence, Thefe are my propofals, and I give him four- and-twenty hours to confider of them î if he refufes to comply with them, I ihall be obliged to proceed to fevcrer meafures, and to a pub¬ lic profeeution : but the goodnefs of the Lord FiU-Owenbidsme expeft, from Ids influence ivith his brother, a compliance with propo¬ fals made out of refpečt to his honourable charafter, К ¿ ford
Lord Graham applauded the humanity, pru¬ dence, and piety of Sir Philip's propofals. He enforced them wiih all his iufluencc and elo¬ quence. Lord Clifford feconded him ; and the reft gave tokens of approbation. Sir Robert Kitz- Owen then rofe up—I beg leave to ob¬ ferve to the company, who are going to dif¬ pofe fo generoufly of another man's property, that my father purchafed the Caftle and eftate ofthe Houfe of Lovel : Who is to repay hini the money for it ? Sir Philip then faid, I have alfo a queftion to aik. Who is to -pay the arrears of my waid's eft.te, wliich he has unjuftly been kept out of thefe one-and-twenty years ? Let Loyd Clifford anfwer to both points, for he is not interefted in cither.—Lord Clifford fmiled— I tliink, returned he, the firft; queftion is an¬ fwered by the fecond, and that the parties con¬ cerned fhould fet one againft the other, efpe¬ cially as Lord Fitz-Owen's children will in¬ herit Uie fortune, which includes the purchafe· tnoney. Lord Graham faid, This determi- nation is both equitable and generous, and I hope will anfwer the expectations on all fides. I have another propofai to make to my Lord Fitz-Qwen, faid Sir Philip ; but í firft wait f for
for the acceptance of thofe already made.— Lord Fitz-Owen replied, 1 fliall report them to my brother, and acquaint the company with his refolution to-morrow. They then feparated ; and the Baron, with his fons, returned to the fick man's chamber: there he exhorted his brother, with the piety of a confeifor, to repent ofhis fins, and make atonement for them. He made known Sir Philip's propofals, and obferved on the won¬ derful difcovery of his crime, and the puniih¬ ment that followed it. Your repentance, con¬ tinued he, may be accepted, and your crime may yet be paidoned : If you continue re¬ fractory, aud refufe to make atonement, you will draw down upon you a fevcrer puniih¬ ment. The criminal would not confefs, and yet could not deny, the truth and juilice of his obfervations. The Baron fpent feverai hours in his brother's chamber ; he fent for a prieft, who took his confeflion ; and they both fat up with him all night, advifmg, perfuading, and exhorting him to do juftice, and to com¬ ply with the propofals. He was unwilling to give up the world, and yet more fo to become the objeft of public fliame, difgrace, and pu¬ niihment. К 4 The
'lhe next day Lord Fîtz-Owcn fummoned the eompany into his brother's clumber, and there declared, iu his name, that he accepted Sir Philip liar, lay's propofals; that, if the voting тлп eouid, as lie promifed, direft ihem to the plau. where his parents were buried, and if his biith ihould be authenticated by his fofter-parents. he ihould be acknowledged the beli of the Houfe of Lovel. That, to be cer¬ tified of theie things, they mufl commiffion proper perfons ίο go with him for this pur¬ pofe ; and, in cafe tlie truth ihould be made plain, they ihould immediately put him in poifeflion ofthe Caftle and eftate, in the ftate it was. He defired Lord Graham and Lord Clifford to chufe the commiifioners, and gave Sir Philip and Kdmund a right to add to them, each, another perfon. Lord (/rahani named the eldeft fon of Lord Clifford ; and ihc other, in return, named his nephew ; they alfo rhofc the prieft, Lord Graham's eonfeilor, and the eldeft fon of Ha- ion Htz-Owen, to his great mortification. Sir Philip appointed Mr. William Fit%»Üwen> and Edmund named Father Oiwald : They clmlc out the fervants to attend them» who were alfo fu be wiíiieilès ofall lhat ihould pd*. Lord Cuf¬ fia d
ford propofed to Baron F'itz-Owen, that as foon as the eommiffioners were fet out, the remain¬ der of the company fhould adjourn to his feat in Cumberland, whither Lord Graham ihould be invited to accompany them, and to ftay till this aflair was decided. After fome debate» this was agreed to ; and, at the fame time, that the criminal ihould be kept with them till every thing was properly fettled. Lord Fit'/.-Ovven gave his fun William the charge to receive and entertain the eommif¬ fioners at the Caftle ; But, before they fct out, Sir Philip hud a conference with Lejjtd Fitz- Owen, concerning the furreadcr ofthe Caftle; İn whieh he infifted on the furniture and ftock of the farm, in confideration of the arrears. Loid Fitz-Owen flightly mentioned the young man's education and expences. Sir Philip an¬ fwered, you are right, my Lord, I had not thought of this point ; we owe you, in this re¬ fpeft, more than we can ever repay : But you know not half the refpeft and affeftion Ed¬ mund bears for you. When reftitution of his title and fortune is fully made, his happinefs will ftill depend on you. How on me ? faid the Baron.—Why, he will not be happy unlefs you honour him with your notice and efteem ; К a but
but this is not all; I muft hope that you will ftill do more for him.—Indeed, faid the Ba¬ ron, he has put my regard for him to a fevere proof; what further can he expeft from me ? My dear Lord, be not offended, I have only one more propofai to make to you ; if you refufe it, I can allow for you ; and I confefs it requires a greatnefs of mind, but not more than you poflbfs, to grant it.—Well, Sir, fpcak your demand.·—Say rather my requeft ; it is this cafe : Ceafe to look upon Edmund as the ene¬ my of your houfe ; look upon him as a fon, and make him fo indeed.—How fay you, Sir Philip? My fon !—Yes, my Lord, give him your daughter : He is already your fon in filial affeftion ; your fon William and he are fworn brothers ; what remains but to make him yours ? He deferves fuch a parent, you fuch a fon ; and you will, hy Ulis means, ingraft into y^ur family, the name, title, and eftate of Lo¬ vel, which will be entailed on your pofterity for ever. Ihis offer requires much confide¬ ration, returned the Baron.—Sufler me to fug¬ geft fouie hints to you, faid Sir Philip» This match is, 1 think, verily pointed out by Pro¬ vidence, which hath condufted the dear boy through fo many dangers, and brought him within
within view of his happineft ; look on him as the precious relic of a noble houfe, the ion of my deareft friend 1 or look on him as my fon and heir, and let me, as his father, implore you to confent to his marriage with your daughter. Ί he Baron's heart was touched, he tinned away his face.—Oh, Sir Philip Har¬ clay, what a friend are you ! Why fhouid fuch a man be our enemy ?—My Lord, faid Sir Philip, we arc not, cannot be enemies ; our hearts are already allied; and I am certain we fliall one day be dear fiiends. The Baron fup- preilbd his emotions, but Sir Philip faw into his heart. I muft confuit my eldeft fon, re¬ turned he.—Then, replied Sir Philip, 1 fore- fee much diificulty ; he is prejudiced againft Edmund, and thinks the reftitution of his in¬ heritance an injury to your family : Hereafter he will fee this alliance in a dilferent light, and will rejoice that fuch a brother is added to the family ; but, at prefent, he will fct his face againft it. However, we will not defpair; virtue and refolution will furmount all ob¬ ftacles. Let mc call in young Lovel, He brought Kdmund to the Baron, and ac¬ quainted him with the propofai he had been making in his name, my Lord's anfwers, and К С the
the objcftions lie feared on the part of Sir Kobert. Edmund kneeled to the Baron ; he took bis hand and prefted it to his lips. Bcft of men 1 of parents ! of patrons ? faid he, I will ever be your fon in filial affeftion, whe¬ ther I have the honour to be legally fo or not ; not one of your own children can feci a ftronger fenfe of love and duty,— Fell mc, fia*d the Baron, dc» you love my daughter ?—1 do, my Lord, with the moft ardent affeftion ; í never ioved any woman but her ; and, if 1 am ib unfortunate as to be refufed her, I wih not marry at ali. Oh, my Lord, reject not my honeft fuit 1 Your alliance will give me con¬ fequence with myfclf, it will excite me to act woi thy of the ftation to which 1 am exalted ; if you refufe me, I ihall feem an abjeft wretch, difdaincd by thufe whom my heart claims re¬ lation to; Your family arc the whole world to mc, Give mc your lovely daughter; give me alfo your fon, my beloved William ; and let me lhare with them the fortune Providence beftows upon me; but what is title or foi tune, if 1 am depiived of tlie fociety of thoie I iove ? Edmund, faid the Baron, you have a noble friend : but you have a ftronger in my heart, wliich I think was implanted there by Heaven to
to aid its own purpofes : I feel a variety of emotions of different kinds, and am afraid to truft my own heart with you. But anfwer me a queftion: Are you affured of my daughter's confent? Have you folicited her favour? Have you gained her affeftions?—Never, my Lord ! I am incapable of fo bale an aftion : I have loved her at an humble diftance ; but, in my fituation, I ihould have thought it a violation of the laws of gratitude und hofpitality to İıave prefumed to fpeak the fentiments of шу heart. 'J'hen you huve afted with uiujueftionable ho¬ nour on this, and, İ muft fay, on all other oc¬ cafions.—Your approbation, my Lord, is the firft wiih of my life : it is the feal of my ho¬ nour and happi neis. Sir Philip fmiled : My Lord Fitz-Owen, I am jealous of Kdmund's preferable regard for you ; it is juft now the fame as formerly. Kd¬ mund came to Sir Philip, lie threw himrelf hito his arms, he wept, he was overpowered with the feelings of his heart ; he prayed to Heaven to ftrengthen his mind, to fupport his inexpreffible fenfations. I am overwhelmed with obligation ! faid he ; oh, beft of friends, teach mc, like you, to make my aftions fpeak for mel— Enough» Kdmund, I know your heurt,
heart* and that is my fecurity. My Lord, fpeak to him, and bring him to himfeif, by behaving coolh to him, if you can. The Ba¬ ron faid, 1 muft not tiuft myfclf with you, you make a child of mc ! I vvill only add, Gain my fon Robert's favour, and be affured of mine : I owe fomc refpeft to the heiv of my family ; he is brave, honeft, and fincere; your enemies are feparated from him, you have William's influence in your behalf; make one effort, and let me know the refult. Kdmund kiflcd his hand in tranfports of joy and gra¬ titude.—1 will not lofe a moment, faid he ; I fly to obey your commands. Edmund went immediately to his friend William, and related all that had palled be¬ tween the Baron, Sir Philip, and himfelf, William piomifed him his intereft in the warmeft manner: he recapitulated all that had paifed in the Caftle fince his departure ; but he guarded his fifter's delicacy, till it ihould be refolved to give way to his addrefs. They boih confulted young Cliifoid, who had con¬ ceived an affeftion lo Edmund for his amiable qualities, and to William for his generous friendihip for hira. He promifed them his afliftance, as Sir Robeit feemed defirous to cultivate
cultivate his friendfliip. Accordingly, they both attacked him vvith the whole artillery of friendfhip and perfuafion. Clifford urged the merits of Edmund, and the advantages of Ыз alliance : William enforced his arguments by a retrofpečt of Edmund's paft lifc ; and ob¬ ferved, that every obftacle thrown in his way had brought his enemies to fliame, and in¬ creafe of honour to himfelf.—I fay nothing, continued he, of his noble qualities, and af¬ feftionate heart ; thofe who have been fo many years his companions, can want no proofs of it. Wc know your attachment te* him, Sir, laid Sir Robert ; and, in confequence, your partiality.—Nay, replied WiUiam, you are fenfible of the truth of my aflcrtions; and, 1 am confident, would have loved him your¬ felf, but for the infinuations of his enemies : but if he ihould make good his affertions, even you muft be convinced ofhis veracity.—And you would have my father give my fifter upon this uncertainty ?™~-No, Sir, but upon thefc conditions.—But fuppofe he docs not make them good ?—Then I will be of your party, and give up his intereft,—Very well, Sir ; my father may do as he picales ; but I cannot agree to give my fifter to one who has always flood
flood in the way of our family, and now turns us out of our own houfe. 1 am fony, brother, you fee his pretenfions in fo w-ivng a light ; but if you think there h any impoiluie in the cafe, go with us, nnd be a witnefs of all that paifes.—No, not 1 ; if Fdmund is to be mailer of the Caftle, I will nevei moie let my foot in it.—This matter, i.dd Mr. Cliifoid, muft be left to time, which has hi ou^i t ftrange things to pais. Sir Re- ben's honoui and good ienfe will enable him to fubdue his f lejudiics, And to judge impar¬ tially, ihey took leave, and went to make pu parafions foi their joui nev. Fdmund made his repoit of Sir Kobcit's in¬ flexibility to his father, in piefent t of >ir Phi¬ lip , who, again, ventured to uige the Baron en his favouiite fubjeft·— H becomes mc to wait for the fui ther pi oofs, faid he ; but, if they aie as elear as i expeft, I will not be in¬ exorable to your withe»: fay nothing more on this fubjeft till the return ofthe commiifioners. Thev лею profufe in theh acknowledgments ef his goodnefs. Edmund took a tender leave of his two pa¬ ternal fiiends:— H hen, faid he, Ì t.*ke poffef¬ fion of my inheritance, I muft hope for the company
company of you both to eomplete my happi- ηνίϊ. —Of me, faid Sir Philip, you may be cer¬ tain ; and, as far as my iniluence reaches, of the Baron.—-He was filent. Edmund affured them ofhis conftant prayers fm- their happinefs. Soon after, the commiifioners, with Ed¬ mund, fet out for Lovel Caftie ; and the fol¬ lowing day the Lord Clifford fct out for his own houfe, with Baron Fitz-Owen and his fon. The nominal Baron was carried with them, very much againft his will. Sir Philip Harclay was invited to go with them by Lord Clifford, who declared his prefenee neceffary to bring things to a conclufion. They all join* ed in acknowledging their obligations to Lord Graham's generous hofpitality, and befought him to accompany them ; at length he con¬ fented, on condition they wouid allow him to go to and fro, as his duty ihould call him. Lord Clifford received them with the great¬ eft hofpitality, and prefented them to his Lady and three daughters, who were in the bloom of youth and beauty, They fpent their time very plcafantly, excepting the criminal, who con* tinued gloomy and referved, and declined com¬ pany, in the mean time» the commiifioners pro* ceeded
ceeded on their journey. When they were within a day's diftance from the Caftle, Mr. William and his fervant put forward, and ar¬ rived feverai hours before the reft, to make preparations for «thcir reception. His fifter and brother received them with open arms, and inquired eagerly after the event of the journey to the North. 1 lc gave them a brief account of every thing that had happened to thcir uncle ; adding, but this is not all : Sir Philip Harclay has brought a young man, who he pretends is the fon ofthe late Lord Lovel, and claims his eftate and title. This perfon is on his journey hither, with feverai others, who are commif¬ fioncd lo inquire into certain particulars, to confirm his pretenfions.—If he make good his claim, my father will furrender the Caftle and eftate into his hand.—Sir Philip and my Lord have many points to fettle, and he has pro¬ pofed a compromife, tlut you, my fifter, ought to know, becaufe it nearly concerns you.— Me ! brother William, pray explain yourfelf. —-Why, he propofes that, in lieu of arrears and other expectations, my father fliall give his dear Emma to the heir of Lovei, in full of ail demands.—She changed colour:—Holy Mary * faid fhe ; and docs my father agree to hib
his propofai ?—He is not very averfe to it ; but Sir Robert refufes his confent : However, I have given him my intereft with you.— Have you, indeed ? What ! a ftranger, per¬ haps an impoftor, who comes to turn us out of our dwelling ?—Have patience, my Emma ! fee this young man witlumt piejudice, and perhaps vou will iike htm as well as 1 do.—I am fm pi i fed «t you, William '—Dear Fmnrut, I cannot bear to fee you uneafy. Think of the man who of all others you would wiih to fee in a fituation to afk you of your father, and expeft to fee your wiihes realized.·—Impof¬ fible I faid flic.—-Nothing is impoffible, my dear ; let us be prudent, and all will end hap¬ pily. You muft help me to receive and enter¬ tain thefe eommiffioners, I expect a very fo¬ lemn fcene , but when that is once got over, happier hours than the paft will fucceed, Wc ihall fiift vifit the haunted apartment ; you, my fifter, will keep in your own till I fliall fend for you, I go now to give orders to the fervants. He went and ordered them to be İn waiting; and himfelf, and his youngeft «bro¬ ther, ftood in readinefs to receive them. The found of the horn announced the ar¬ rival of the commiflioneis t at ìhe fame in¬ ftant
ftant a fudden guft of wind arofe, and the out¬ ward gates flew open. They entered the court¬ yard, and the great foiding-doors into the hall wcre opened without any afliftance. 'The mo- recnt Kdmund entered the hall, every door in the houfe rlew open ; the fervants all ruflied into the hall, and fear was written on their countenances: Jofeph only was undaunted.—■ Thefe doors, faid he, open of their own ac¬ count to receive their mafter ! this is he in¬ deed! Edmund was foon apprifed of what had happened.—I accept the omen ! faid he. Gen¬ tlemen, let us go forward to the apartment ! let us fìntili the work of fate ! I will lead the way. He went lo the apartment, followed by all prefent.—Open the ftmtters, faid he, the day-light ÍhaU no longer be excluded here ; tlie deeds of darknefs ihall now be brought to light. They defcended the ftaircafe ; every door was open, till tliey came to the fatal clofet. Дdmund called to Mr. William:—Approach, шу friend, snd behoid the door your family overlooked I They came forward ; he drew the key out of his bofom, and unlocked the door ; he made them obferve that the boards were all loofe -, he then called to the fervants, and bid them remove every thing out of the clofe».
clofet. While they were doing this, Edmund ihewed them the breaft-plate, all ftained with blood ; he then called to Jofeph :■—Do you know whofe was this fuit of armoui ?—It was my Lord's, faid Jofeph, the late Lord Lovel ; I have feen him wear it. F:dmund bade them bring ihovels and re¬ move the earth. · While they were gone, he defiled Ofwald to repeat all that paffed the night they fat up together in that apartment, which he did till the fervants returned. They threw out the earth, while the by-ftanders in folemn filence waited the event. After fomc time and labour, they ftruck againft fomething. They proceeded till they difcovered a large trunk, which, with great difficulty, they drew out. It had been corded round, but the cords wcre rotted to dun. They opened it, and found a fkcleton, whieh appeared to have been tied neck and heels together, and forced into the trunk.—Behold, faid Edmund, the bones of him to whom I own my birth ! 'J he prieft from Lord Graham'? advanced.—This is un¬ doubtedly the body of the Lord Lovel ; I heard his kinfman confefs the manner irţ which he was interred. Let this awful fpeftaele be a kifon to all prefent, that though »ickedneis uiay
may triumph for a feafon, a day of retribution wili come í Ofwald exclaimed,—Behold the day of retribution 1 of triumph to the inno¬ cent, of ihame and confufion to the wicked. The young gentlemen declared that Ed¬ mund had made good his aflcrtions ; what then, faid thev, remains? I propofe, faid Lord Gra¬ ham's prieft, that an account be written of this diíêovcry, and figned by all the witnefles pre¬ fent; that an attefted copy be left in the hands of this gentleman, and the original be fent to ilie Ikmmsand Sir Philip Harclay, to convince ihem of the truth of it. Mr. Clifford then defired Edmund to pro¬ ceed in his own way —The firft thing I pro- pole to di>, faid he, is to have a coffin made for theie honoured remains ; ï truft to find the bones of my uther parent, and to inter them all together in confecrated ground. Unfortu¬ nate pair ! you íhall at laft reft together 1 your fon fhall pay the laft duties to your aflics! lie flopped to ihed teais, and none prefent but paid this tribute to their misfortunes. Ed¬ mund recovered his voice aad proceeded—My next requeft is, that Father Ofwald and this reverend father, with whoever the gentlemen filali appoint, will fead for Andrew and Mar- gcry
gery Twyford, and examine them concerning the circumftances of my birth, and the death and bin ial of my unfortunate mother.—It lhall be done, faid Mr. William ; but, fiift, let mc entreat you to come with me, and take fome rcfrcíhinent after your journey, for you muil be fatigued : after dinner wc will pioeced in the inquiry. 'fhey all followed him into the great hall, where they were entertained with great hofpi¬ tality, and Mr. William did the honours ín his father's name. Kdmund's heart was deep¬ ly affefted, and the folemnity of his deport¬ ment bore witnefs to his fincerity ; but it was a manly forrow, that did not make him negleft his duty to his friends or himfelf. lie inquir¬ ed after the health of the Lady Kmma.—She is well, faid William, and as much your friend as ever. Edmund bowed in filence. After dinner the commiifioners fent for An¬ drew and his wife. They examined theni fe¬ parateiy, and found their accounts agreed to¬ gether, and were in fubftance the fame as Ol¬ wald and Kdmund had before related fepa¬ rateiy alfo. The commiifioners obferved, that there could be no collufion between them, and that the proofs were indifputable. They kept the
the fofter parents all night ; and the next day Andrew direfted them to the place where the Lady Lovel was buried, between two trees, which he had marked for a memorial. They collected the bones, and carried them to the Caftle, where Edmund caufed a ftately coffin to be made for the remains of the unfortunate pair. Fhe two priefts obtained leave to look into the coffin buried in the church, and found nothing but ftones and earth in it. The eom¬ miffioners then declared they wcre fully fatis¬ fied ofthe reality of Fdmund's pretenfions. 1 he two priefts were employed in drawing up a ciieumftantial account of thefc difcove¬ ries, in order to make their report to the Ba¬ rons at thcir leturn. In the mean time, Mr. William took an opportunity to introduce Fd¬ mund to his fifter.—-My Emma, faid he, the heir of Lovel is defirous to pay his refpefts to you. They were both in apparent confufion ; but Edmund's wore off, and Emma's increaf¬ ed.—! have been long defirous, faid he, to pay my refpefts to the Lady whom I moft honour, but unavoidable duties have detained røe , when thefe are fully paid, it is my wifh to de- voie tîıe remainder of my lifc to Lady Emma ' —Arc you, then, the heir of Lovel?—I am, Madam,
Madam ; and am alfo the man in whofe behalf 1 once prefumed to fpeak,— 'Tis very ftrange, indeed í —Tt is fo, Madam, to myfeif; but time, that reconciles us to all things, will, I hope, render this change in my fituation fami¬ liar to you. William faid,—You are both well acquainted with the wiihes of my heart ; but my advice is, that you do not encourage a far¬ ther intimacy till my Lord's determination be fully known.—-You may difpofe of mc as you pleafe, faid Edmund ; but I cannot help de- daring my wifhes ; yet I will fubmit to my Lord's fentence, though he fliould doom me to defpair. From this period, the yourg pair behaved with folemn refpeft to each other, but vvith apparent referve. The young Lady fometimes "appeared İn company, but oftener chofe to be in hcr own apartment, where ihe began to be¬ lieve and hope for the completion of her wiihes. The uncertainty of the Baron's deter¬ mination threw an air of anxiety over Kd¬ mund's face : his friend William, by the moil tender care and attention, ftrove to difpel his fears, and encourage his hopes ; hut he waited with impatience for the return of the eommif¬ fioners, and the decifion of his fate. E While
While thefe things pafled at the Caftle of Lovei, the nominal Baron recovered his health and ftrength at the houfe of Lord Clifford: In the fame proportion he grew more and more fhy and referved, avoided the company of his brother and nephew, and was frequently Unit up wilh his two fervants. Sir Robert Fitz- Owen made feverai attempts to gain his con¬ fidence, but in vain ; he was equally fhy to bim as the reft, M. Zadiiky obferved his mo¬ tions with the penetration for whieh his corni¬ ti ymen have bten diftinguiihed in all ages: He communicated his lufpieions to Sir Philip and the Barons, giving it as bis opinion, that the criminal was meditating an efcape. They aiked, what he thought was to be done ? Za- diiky offered to watch him in turn with ano¬ tlıer perfon, and to lie in wait for him ; he alfo propofed that horfes ftiould be kept in readinefs» and men to mount them, without knowledge of the fervice they were to be em¬ ployed in. The Barons agreed to leave the whole management of this affair to Zadiiky. He took his meafures fo well, that he inter¬ cepted ihc three fugitives in the fields adjoin¬ ing to the houfe, and brought them all back prifoners. They coafined thero feparateiy, while
while the Lords and gentlemen confulted how to difpofe of them. Sir Philip applied to Lord Fitz-Owen, who begged leave to be filent : 1 have nothing, fatd be, to offer in favour of this bad man ; aud I cannot propofe harf her meafures with fo neai a relation. Zadiiky then begged to be lieard. You can no longer have any reliance upon the¬ word of a man who has forfeited all pieten- fions to honour and fincerity. I have long wiíhed to revifit once more my native country, and to enquire after fonie very dear friends I ieft there ; 1 will undertake to convey this man to a very diftant part of the world, where it will be out of hts power to do furthf; mifchief, and free his relations from an ungrateful t hai ge, unlefs you fhould rather chufe to bring him to puniihment here. Lord Clifford ap¬ proved of the propofai ; Lord I'ib.-Owcn re¬ mained filent, but ihewed no marks of difap- probation, Sir Philip objected to parting with his friend ; but Zadiiky afiured him he had par¬ ticular reafons for returning to the Holy Land, ef which he ftiould be judge hereafter. Sir Philip defired the Lord Fitø-Owcit to give him his company to the criminal*« apartment, L 4 faying,
Ltying, we will have one more converfation with him, and that ihall decide his fate. They found him filent and füllen, and he refufed to anfwer their queftions.—Sir Philip then be¬ fpoke him—After the proofs you have given of your falfehood and iniincerity, wc can no longer have any reliance upon you, nor faith iu your fulfilling the conditions of our agree¬ ment ; I will, theicfoie, o.ice more make you «i propofai that filali ftill leave you indebted to yyr clemency- You ihall baniih yourfelf from England for c\er, and go in pilgrimage to the Holy Land, willi fuch companions as we lhall appoint, or, fecondly, ycu ihall en¬ ter directly into a monaftry, and there be íhut up for life; or, thirdly, if you icfufe both thefe offers, I will go directly to Court, throw myfelf at the feet of my Sovetcign, relate the whole ftory of your wii ked life and actions, and demand vengeante on your head. The King Ь too good and pious to kt hah villainy go unpunished, he will bring you to public ihame and punifliment: And be you afluicd, if ï begin thit piofecuüon, I will purfue it to die utmoft. î appeal to your worthy brother fur the juftice of my proceeding. I reafon no mue uith \ou. I unly dulare my refolution. I wait
I wait your anfwer one hour, and tlu n xi 1 put in exeeution whatever you ihall oblige me to determine. So faying, they retired, and left him to reflect and to refolve. At the ex¬ piration of the hour they fent Zadiiky to re¬ ceive his anfwer; he infinualea Lo hiin tlic generofity and charity of Sir Philip ancl the Lords, and the certainty of theîr refolution:. and begged him to take care what anfwer lu returned, for that his fate depended on İt. 1 ie kept filent feverai minutes, refentme;H аь J defpair were painted on his vifage ; at length he fpoke : Tell my proud enemies that I prefer baniih- ment to death, infamy, or a life of folitude. You have chofen well, faid Zadiiky. 'f о a wife man all countries aie alike ; it fhall be my care to make mine agreeable to you,— Aie you then the perfon chofen **or my compa¬ nion ?—I um, Sir ; and yen mav judge by that «'ircumftance, that thofe whom you call your enemies, are not fo 'm efieci. 1-are wel, Sir, I go to prepare for our depaituic. Zadiiky went and made his repoit, and then '<*f immoJiatcly about his preparations. He thoie two active young men for his atten¬ dants ; and gave them dircftions to keep a L ] fiiift
,1ı ; d г λ с upon their <. hargo, for tliat they ihouo oe ,im ountabh; if he ihould efcape them. h: *J" j mean time, the Bai on Fit/.-()wcn h.4d lo * ul ( onfercnces with his b'otho : he endeavoured to make him fcniibic ot his irimii, aud of tlie juftice and clemency of his vuji-juciui, , but lie uas moody and iefei\ed to him ль io the ieft. Sir Philip llarclav vbiiud him to iu lender his worldly citate* irt > the h md* of Loid Fiu-Owcn : Л writing •vab duwn up for that purpofe, and executed in the pretence of them all. Lord Fitz-Owen tngaged to alio"· him an annual fum, and to advance money for the expences of his voyage. He fpoke to him in the mofl affec¬ tionate manner, but he refufed his embrace :—- You will hive no hing to regret, iaid he, haughtily ; for the gain is yours. Sir Philip conjuied Zadı fky to return to him again ; who anfvveied,-—I will either return, or gise fut h reaions for my ftav, as you ihall approve. í will к nà a mefilngei to acquaint you with niy arrival in Sviia, and with fin h other paiticulai s as 1 íhaíí ji.dge in'ei elling to you and youi*. J n the mean time icmember me in \ our pi in - eis, and ja efei ve for me thofc fentiments oí f.kndíhip and eftceni, that 1 have . way» d » » -ned
deemed one ofthe chief honours and bleffings of my life.—Commend my iove and duty to your adopted fon ; he will more than fupply my abfence, and be the comfort of your old age. Adieu, heft and nobleft of friends !— I hey took a tender leave of each other, not without tears on both fides. The travellers let out direftly for a diftant fea-port, where they heard of a ftiip bound for the Levant, in vvhich they embarked, and proceeded on thcir voyage. The Commiifioners arrived at Lord Clif¬ ford's a few days after the departure of the ad¬ venturers. They gave a minute account of their commiffion, and expreifed themfelvcs entirely fatisfied of the juftice of Edmund's pretenfions ; they gave an account in writing of all that they had been eyc-witntftes to, and ventured touige the Baron ritz-Ovven on the fubjeft of I'dmund's wiihes, The Bartin was already difpofed in his favour ; his mind was employed in the future cftabiifhnicnt of h's family, Duiing their refidence at Loid Clif- fouľs, hit. eldeft fon, Sir Roheit, had udì his eye upou the eldeft daughter of that nobleman, and he befought his father to afk h< r in mar¬ riage for him 'Jhe Baro« was pleak d with L i the
the alliance, and took the fiift opportunity to mention it to Lord Cliifoid, who anfwered him plcafantly—I will give my daughter to yeur fon, upon condition tîiat you will give yours to the Heir of Lovel. 'ľhe Baron look¬ ed ferious: Lord Clifford went on—1 like that young man fo well, that I wouid accept him for a fon-in-law, if he aiked mc for my daugh¬ ter : and if I have any influence with you, I will ufe il în his behalf.— Λ powciful folicitor indeed ! faid the Baron ; but you knovv my eldeft fon's reluftanee to it; if he confents, fo will I.—He lhall confent, faid Lord Clifford, or he fliaU have no daughter of mine. Let him fubdue his prejudices, and then I will iay afide my fcruples.—But, my Lord, replied the Baron, if I ean obtain his free confent, it will be the bcft for all : 1 vvill liy once moie, and if he will nul, I will leave İt wholly to your ma* nagemenl. Whea the noble company were all aflèm- hkd, Sir Philip Harclay revived the fubjeft, mid befought the Lord Fitz-Owen to put an tnd to the woik he had begun, by eonfismi.ig Edmund's happinefs. The Baron rofe up, and thus fp'ikc :--1 he proofs of Edmund's noble buth, the ftiil ftronger ones of his ex¬ cellent
cellent endowments and qualities, the folici¬ tations of fo many noble friends in his behalf, have altogether deterniined me in his favour j and í hope to do juftice to his merit, without detriment to my other childten: 1 am refolved to make them all as happy as my power will allow me to do. Lord Clifford has been fo gracious to promife his fair daughter to my fon Robert, upon certain conditions, that I vvill take upon me to ratify, and vvhich will render my fon worthy of the happinefs that awaits him. My children are the undoubted heirs ot my unhappy brother, Lovel ; you, my fon, fhall therefore immediately take pofleffion of your uncle's houfe and eftate, only obliging you to pay to each of your younger brothers the fum of one thoufand pounds ; on this con¬ dition, I will fecure that eftate to you and your heirs for ever. I will, by my own aft and dced^ furrender the Caftle and eftate of Lovel to the right owner, and at the fame time marry him to my daughter. ï will fettle a proper allow¬ ance upon my two younger fons, and difpole of vvhat remains by a will and tcftameut: and then I ihall have done all my bufinefs in tips world, and fliall have noihing to do but pre¬ pare for the uixt. L s Oh,
Oh, my father ! faid Sir Robert, I cannot bear your generofity ; you would give away all io others, and referve nothing foi yourfelf. — Not fo, my fon, faid the Baron : 1 vvill re¬ pair my old caftle in Wales, and refide there. 1 will vifit my children, and be vifited by them : 1 will enjoy their happinefs, and by thai means increafe my own ; whether 1 look bad,wards or forwards, I lhall have nothing to do but rejoi* t\ and be thankful to Heaven •hat has gi\en mc fo many bleifings; 1 fhall liave the comfort ubi с reflection of having dif¬ charged my duties as a citizen, a hufband, a f ither, a friend; and, whenever I am fum¬ moned away from this world, 1 fliall die con¬ tent. *vr Robert came forward with tears on hi«« cheeks; he kneeled to his fallier.- lieft oí VMcaîs, r.nd of men ' faid he ; you have fub drid д hearl thai has been too refraftory to yon-will: you have this day made me feu bide how much 1 owe to your goodneis and forbt.uame with me. Forgive me all that e p.:!i, and frum henceforward diipofe of me ; I wi'l have m» will but yours, no ambition btn tu be woithy of the name of your iim.—- i;.J íhi'. d »у, Lad the Baron, do 1 enjoy the true
true happinefs of a father' Rile, my fon, and take poífeífion of the iirft place in my affeftion without referve, 'fhey embraced with tears on both fides: Thecompany roië, and con¬ gratulated both father and fon. The Baron prefented his fon lo Loid Clifford, who em¬ braced him, and faid—You ihall have my daughter, for 1 fee that you defcrve hcr. Sir Philip Harclay approached; the Baron gave his fori.·» hand to the Knight .-—fov e and refpeft that good man, faid he; deferve his friendfhip, undyou-wilt obtain it. Nothing but congratulations were heaid on all fides. "When the joy was in fomc degree reduced to computine, Sir Philip propofed that thev ftiould begin to execute the fchemes of happi¬ nefs they had planned. He propofed that my Lord Fitz-Owen ihould go with him to the Caftle of Lovel, and fettle the family there. The Baron confented ; and both together in¬ vited fuch of the company, as liked it, to ac¬ company them thither. It was agreed that a nephew of Loid Graham's, another of Lord Clifford's, two gentlemen, friends of Sir Philip Harclay, and Father Ofwald, fhould be ofthe party , together with feverai of Sir Philip's de¬ pendants and domeftics, and the attendants on L 6 the
the reft. Lord I it/. Owen gave ordeis foi their fjcidy departure. Lord Graham and his friends took leave of them, in order to teturn to his own home ; but, befoie he went, he en¬ gaged his eldeft nephew and heir to the fecond daughter ofthe Lord Clifford : Sir Robert of¬ fered himfelf to the eldeft, who modeftly re¬ ceived his addrefs, and made no objection to hîs proj ofal. The fathers conf rmed their en¬ gagement. Lord Fitz-Owen promifed to return to the celebration of the marriage ; in the mean time he ordered his fon to go and take pofleffion of his uncle's houfe, and to fettle his houfehold : He invited young Clifford, and fomc other gentlemen, to go with him. The company feparated with regret, and with many promifes of fiiendfhip on all fides ; and the gentlemen of the North wcre to cultivate the good neigh¬ bourhood an both fides of the borders. Sir Philip Harclay and the Baton Fitz- Owen, with their friends and attendants, fct forwards for the Caftle of Lovel ; a fervant went before, at full fpeed, to acquaint the fa¬ mily of thcir approach. Edmund was in great anxiety of mind, now the crifis of his fate was near at hand : He enquired of the meffenger, ttho
who were of the paity ? and fiuding that Sir Philip Harclay was there, and that Sir Robeit Fitz-Owen ftaid in the North, his hopes role above his fears, Mr. William, attended by a fervant, rode forward to meet them ; he de¬ fired Edmund to ftay and receive them. Ed¬ mund was under fomc difficulty with regard to his behaviour to the lovely Emma : a thoufand times his heart rofe to his lips, as often he fup¬ preflcd his emotions ; they both fighed fre¬ quently, faid little, thouglit much, and wiihed for the event. Mafter Walter was too young to partake of their anxieties, but he wiihed for the arrival of his father to end them. Mr. William's impatience fpurred him on to meet his father ; as foon as he faw him, he rode up direftly to him : My dear father, you arc. welcome home ! faid he.—I think not, Sir, faid the Baron, and looked ferious.—Why fo, my Lord ? faid William,—Beeaufe it is no longer mine, but another man's home, an¬ fwered he, and I muft receive my welcome from htm,—Meaning Edmund? faid William. Whom elfe can it be ?—-Ah, my Lord ! he is your creature, your fervant ; he puts his fate iuto your hands, and will fubmit to your plea¬ fure in all things f—Why comes he not to meet
meet us ? find the Baron.—His fears prevent him, faid William ; but fpeak the word, and I will fetch him.—No, faid the Baron, we will wait on hitn.—William looked confufed : Is Edmund fi» unfortunate, faid he, as to have incuncd your difpleafure ? Sir Philip Harclay advanced, and laid his hand on William's fad- die.—Generous impatience í noble youth í íàid he, look round you, and fee if you can difcover in this t ompany any one enemy of your friend! Leave to your excellent father the time and manner of explaining himfelf; he only can do juftice to his own fentiments. The Baron fmiied on Sir Philip ; William's countenance cleared up ; they went forward, and foon arrived at the Caftle of Lovel. Edmund was walking to and fro in the hall, when he heard the horn that announced their arrival; his emotions were fo great, that he «ould hardly fupport them. The Baron and Sir Philip entered the halí hm\d in hand ; Edmund threw himfelf at thcir ket, and em¬ braced their knees, but could not utter a word. They raifed him between tbcm, and ftrove to encourage him ; but he threw himfeif into the arms of Sir Philip Flarclay, deprived pf ftiength, and almoft of life. Ihey fupported him
him to a feat, where he recovered by degrees, but had no power to fpcak his feelings ; he looked up to his benefactors in the moft af¬ fefting manner, he laid his hand upon his bofom, but was ftill fdent. Compofe your¬ felf, my dear fon, faid Sir Philip ; you are in the arms of your belt friends. Look up to the happinefs that awaits you ; enjoy the bleifings that Heaven-fends you ; lift up your heart in gratitude tothe Creator, and think leis of what you owe. to the creature ! You will have time enough to pay us your acknowledgments here¬ after. 'i'he company came round them, the fer¬ vants flocked into the hall, ihouts of joy wete heard on all fides ; the Baron eame and took Kdmund's hand : Kiie, Sir, faid he, and do the honours of youi houle ; it is yours from thia dav : We are your guefts, and expect from you our welcome · kdmund kneeled to the Baron, he fpoke with a faultering voice— My Lord, 1 an» yours i all lhat I have i.s at your devotion ! difpofe of me as İt pleafes you beft. The Baron embraced him with the gieateft affeftion : Look round you, faid he, and falute your friends ; thefe gentlemen came hither to do you honour. Edmund revived, he
he embraced and welcomed the gentlemen. Father Ofwald received his embrace with pe¬ culiar affeciion, and gave him his benediâion in а moft affeíting manner. Ldimind exclaim¬ ed—Pray for mc, f ither, that I may bear all thefe blcflTings with gratitude and moderation 1 He then faluted and ihook hands with all the fervants, not omitting the meaneft ; he di¬ ftinguiihed Jofeph by a cordial embrace, he called liim his dear fiiend: Now, faid he, I can к turn yonr fiiendlhip, and 1 am proud to bckintwlcdgc it ' 'I he old man, with a faul- tuin« \oji e, cm d out—Now I have lived long enough ] 1 have (cen my mafter's Ion aeknow- Icdud fuv tîıe heir of Love! ' the hall echoed sudi hij» wolds : Long live the heir oí Lovel ! 'Ihe Haron took F.dmund's hands in his own : Let us retiie from this crowd, fiid he ; we lune bufinefb of a more piivate nature to transit. 1 ie led to tiie parlour, followed by hii Philip aad the other gentlemen. Where ше my other children ? faid he. William uthed, and picfently returned with his bro¬ ther una filler. They kneeled to theii father, who raifed and embraced them.—He then called out, William '—Kdmund ! —come and re«, elve гну Ыс fling alfo: Ihey appioached hand
hand in hand, they kneeled and he gave them a folemn benediction— Your friendfliip de¬ ferves our praife, my children; love each other always; and may Heaven pour down its choiceft bleifings upon your heads ' 'fhey rofe and embraced in filent raptures of joy. Edmund prefented his friend to Sir Philip : I underftand you, faid he ; this Gentleman was my fiift acquaintance of this family, he has a title to the fecond place in my heart : I fliall tell him, at more leifure, how much I love and honour him for his own fake as well as yours. He embraced the youth, and defired his friendihip. Come hither, my Emma ! faîd the Baron, She approached with tears on hcr cheek, fweetly bluihing, like the damaik rofe, wet with the dew of the morning, í muft afk you a ferious queftion, my child ; anfwer me with the fame fincerity you would to Heaven. You fee this young man, the Heir of Lovel! You have known him long ; confuit your own heart, and tell mc whether you have any ob¬ jection to receive him for your huiband. I have promifed to all this company to giveyou to him ; but upon condition that you approve him : I think him worthy of you ; and, whe¬ ther
ther you accept him or not, he ihall ever be te» mea fon; but lieaven finbsd that 1 Ihould compel my child to give her hand wheie lhe cannot beftow her heait ' Speak fieely, and decide this point for me .ind for yourfelf. '1 he fair Kmma blufhed, and was under fomc eon- fiiiloii ; her viigin modefty prevented her fpeaking for fonie moments. Edmund trem¬ bled ; he leaned upon William's flioulder to fupport himfelf. Emma caft her eye upon him, ihe faw his emotion, and haftened to re¬ lieve hirø ; flie thus fpoke, in a foft voice which gatliercd ftrength as íhe proceeded—My Lord and father's goodnefs has always prevented щу wiihes ; 1 am the happieft of all children, in being able to obey his commands, without offering violence to my own inclinations : As 1 am called upon in this public manner, it is but juftice io this gentleman's mci it to de¬ clare, that, were 1 at liberty to choofe a huf- biud from all the world, he only should be my choice, who, i can fay, with joy, is my father*» alfo. Edmund bowed low, he advanced to¬ wards her; the Baron took his daughters hand, and pidemed it to him ; he kneeled upon one knee, he took her hand, kiffed it, and puffed it to Ids bofena: die Baron embuetd and bkfled
Melled them ; he prclentcd them to Sir Phi¬ lip Harclay—Receive and acknowledge your thihhen ! faid he.—1 do receive them as the -iti of Heaven ! faid the noble Knight ; they are as much mine as if I had begotten them : All that 1 have is theirs, aud ihall defcend to thcir children for cvet. A fteih kenc of con¬ gratulation enfued; and the hearts of all the auditors were too much engaged to be able loon to return to the cafe and tranquility of common life. After they had refreflied themfelves, and rc* cohered from the emotions they had fuftained on this interefting occafion, Edmund thus ad¬ dreifed the Baron :—On the brink of happi¬ nefs I muft claim your attention to a melan- t holy fubjed. The bones of both my parents lie unburied in this houfe ; pet mit me, my ho- hoiired Lord, to perfouu my laft dutíťb to them, and the remainder of my hfe ihall be devoted to you and yours,- Ceilainlv« (aid the Baron; why have \ou not intetud them >~~My Lord, 1 waited for vunumivah that you might be m tilled of the leaiity, and that no doubts mislit icuuitii.— 1 have no doubts, laid the Baron - Aiui ' both the etime aud puniihment of
of the offender leave no room for them !— I le lighed. — Let us now put an end to this affair: und, if poifible, finget it for ever. If it will not be too painful to you, my Loid, 1 would entreat you, with thefe gentlemen our friends, to follow mc iuto the caft apart¬ ment, the fcene of my parents' woes, and yet the dawning of my better hopes. They rofe to attend him ; he committed the Lady Kmma to the care ofher youngeft bro¬ ther, obfen ing that the fcene was too folemn for a Lady to be prefent at it. They proceed¬ ed to the apartment ; he ihewed the Baron the fatal clofet, and the place where the bones were found, alfo the trunk that contained them ; he recapitulated all that pafled before their ar¬ rival; he ihewed them the coffin where the bones of the unfortunate pair were depofited : he then defired the Baron to give orders for their interment, No, replied he, it belongs to you to order,and every one here is ready toper- form it. I* dmund then defired father Ofwald to give notice to the Friars of the Moiuftry of St Auftm, that, with their permiifion, the fu¬ neral fhould be folcmni/ed there, and the hones interred in the church, lie alio gave orders
orders that the clofet fliould be floored, the apartment repaired, and put in order. He then returned to the other fide of the caftle. Preparations being made for the funeral, it was performed a few days after. Kdmund at¬ tended in perfon as chief mourner, Sir Philip Harclay as the fecond; Jofeph defired he might affift as fervant to the deceafed : they wcre followed by moft people of the village. The ftory was now become public, and every one bleft Edmund for the piety and devotion with which he performed the laft duties to his parents.—Kdmund appeared in deep mourn¬ ing ; the week after he affifted at a mafs for the repofe ofthe deceafed. Sir Philip Harclay ordered a monument to be crcftcd to the memory of his friends, with the following infeription :— '* Prave for the foutes of Arthur Lord Lo- «* vele and Marie his wife, who were cut off " in the flowerc of thcire youthc, by the <« trccheryc and crucltic of thcire nearc kin- * ť nefmanne. Kdmund thcire onlic fonne, one *« and twentie yeares after thcire deathe, by " the direction of Heavenc, made the difco- " vcryc of the mannere of thcire deathe, and " at the fame tíme proved his own bivthe. He 11 coUefted
sí colleftcd thcire bones together, and intened ** them in this place :—A warning and proofc ** to late pofteritie, of the juftice of Providence, " and the certaintie of Retribution." The Sunday after the funeral, Edmund threw off his mourning, and appeared in a drefs fuit¬ able to his condition. He received the com¬ pliments of his friends with eafe and cheerful¬ nefs, and began to enjoy his happinefs. He afked an audience of his fair miftrefs, and was permitted to declare the paflion he had fo long ftifkd in his own bofom. She gave him a fa¬ vourable hearing, and in a ftiort time confeif¬ ed that ilie had fuffered equally in that fufpenfe that was ίο grievous to him. They engaged themfelves by mutual vows to each otlier, and only waited the Baron's pleafure to complete thcir happinefs ; every cloud was vanifhed from thcir brows, and fwcct tranquility took pofteiHon of thcir bofoms. Their friends fhar¬ ed their happinefs ; William and Edmund re¬ newed their vows of everlafting friendihip, and promifed to be as much together as VV il- liam's other duties would permit. The Baron once more fummoned all his com¬ pany together; hetoldF.dmundali that had paff¬ ed relating to his hr«ther-in-law, his exile, and the
the pilgrimage of Zadiiky ; he then related the circumftances of Sir Robert's engagement to Lord Clifford's daughter, his eftabiifhment in his Uncle's feat, and his own obligations to return time enough to be prefent at the mar¬ riage : but before Igo, faid he, 1 will give my daughter to the heir of Lovel, and then I ftiall have discharged my duty to him, and my pro¬ mife to Sir Philip Harclay. You have nobly performed both, faid Sir Philip, and whenever you depart ï fliall be your companion.—What, faid Kdmund, am I to be derrived of both my fatheis at once? Mv honoured Lord, vou have ςΐνοη awav two houfes, ubere do you in'uid to refide >—-No matter, faid the fiar >n ; I know f íb ill he wel¬ come to both.—My dear Lord, ibid Kdmund, ftay here and be ftill the mafter , 1 fhall be proud to be under your command, and to be your fervant as well as your fon f— No, fd¬ mund, faid the Baron, that would not nmv be proper; this is your Caftle, you are its Lord and Mafier, and it is incumbent on you to fhew yourfelf worthy of the great things Pro¬ vidence hath done for you.—How ihall 1, a young man, acquit myfelf of fo many duties as will be upon me, without the advice and affiilance
aftiftance of my two paternal friends ? Oh, Sir Philip ! will you too leave mc ! once you gave mc hopes—he ftopped, greatly aífečicd. Sir Philip faid, tell me truly, Edmund, do you really defire that I íliould live with you ?—As truly, Sir, as I defire life and happinefs !——- Then, my dear child, 1 will live and die with you î They embraced with tears of arfečlion, and Edmund was all joy and gratitude. My good Lord, faid Sir Philip, you liave difpofed of two houfes, and have none ready to receive you ; will you accept of mine ? It is much at your fervice, and its being in the fame county with your eldeft fon, will be an inducement to refide there. The Baron caught Sir Philip's hand—Noble Sir, I thank you, and I will cm- brace your kind oifer ; 1 will be your tenant ΐον the prefent ; my Caftle in Wales fliall be put in repair, in the mean time ; if 1 do not ι efide there, it will be an eftabliihrnent for one of my youngeft fons .* but what will you do with your ola foldiers and dependants ?^—My Lord, I will never caft them oif. There is anotlıer houfe on my eftate that has been íhut up many yeais i I will have it repaired and furnilhed propcily for the reception of my old men : I will endow it with a certain fum to be paid
fmid annually, and will appoint a fteward to manage their revenue ; I will continue it dur¬ ing the lives of the firft inhabitants, and after that I ihail leave it to my fon here, to do as he pleafes.——Your fon, faid Kdmund, will make it the bufinefs of his life to act worthy of fuch a father.—Enough, faid Sir Philip, I am fatisfied that you will. I propofe to re¬ fide myfelf in that very apartment which my dear friend your father inhabited ; I will tread in his footfteps, and think he fees me a£Ung his part in his fon's family. I will be attend¬ ed by my own fervants : and whenever you defire it, f will give you my company ; your joys, your griefs ihall be mine, I fhall hold your children in my arms, and their prattle fhall amufe my old age : and, as my laft earthly wiih, your hands ftiall clofe my eyes.—Long» very long, faid Edmund (with eyes and hands iifted up) may it be ere I perform ΐο fad a duty !—Long and happily may you live toge¬ ther, faid the Baron ! I will hope to fee you fometimes, and to claim a ihare in your bíeíľ- ings. Put let us give no more tears to forrow, the reft fliall be thofe of joy and tranfport. The firft ftep we take ihall be to marry our Edmund i I will give orders for the celebra* M tion,
tion, and they ihall bc the laft orders I fliall give in this houfe. They then feparated, and went to prepare for the approaching folemnity. Sir Philip and the Baron had a private con¬ ference concerning Edmund's afluming the name and title of Lovel. I am refolved, faid Sir Philip, to go to the King ; to acquaint him briefly with Edmund's hiftory ; I will requeft that he may be called up to parliament by a writ, for there is no need of a new patent, he being the true inheritor ; in the mean time he ftiall affume the name, arms, and title, and I will anfwer any one that ihall difpute his right to them. Sir Philip then declared his refolu¬ tion to fct out with üıe Baron at his departure, and to fettle aU his other affairs before he re¬ turned to take up his refidence at the Caftle. A few days after, the marriage was cele¬ brated to the entire fatisfaftion of all parties. The Baron ordered the doors to be thrown open, and the houic free for all comers ; with every other token «f joy and fcftivity. Ed¬ mund appeared full of ' ^y without levity, of mirth, without extravagance ; he received the congratulations of bis friends, with cafe, free¬ dom, and vivacity. Ik fent for his fofter fa¬ ther and mother, who began to tliink them¬ felves
felvés neglefted, as he had been fo deeply en¬ gaged in affairs of more confequence, that he had not been particularly attentive to them ; he made them conic into the great hall, and prefented them to his Lady. Thefc, faid he, are the good people to whom I am, under God, indebted for my piefent happinefs ; they were my firft benefactors ; í was obliged to them for food and fuftenance in my childhood, and this good woman nou¬ rifhed my infancy at hcr own breaft. The Lady received them gracioufly, and faluted Margery. Andrew kneeled down, and, with great humility, begged Edmund's pardon for his treatment of him în his childhood. 1 heartily forgive you, faid he, and I will excufe you to yourfelf; it was natural for you to look upon mc as an intruder, that wps eating your children's bread ; you faved my life, and after¬ wards you fuftained it by your food and rai¬ ment: I ought to have maintained myfclf, and to have contributed to your maintenance. But, befides this, your treatment of me v/as the firft of my preferment ; it recommended mc to the notice of this noble family : every thing that happened to me fincc, has been a ftep to my prefent ftate of honour aud happt- M 'i nefs.
nefs. Nevcr man had fo many bcncfaftors as myfelf; but both Üıey, and myfclf have been only inftruments İn the hands of Providence lo bring about its own purpofes : Let us praife God for all ' I fliared your poverty, and you will ihare my riches ; I will give you the cot¬ tage where you dwell, and the ground about it ; I will alfo pay you the annual fum of ten pounds for the lives of you boüı ; 1 will put out your children to manual trades, and affift you to provide for them m their own ftation j må you arc to look upon this as paying a debt, má not beftowing a gİE : I owe you moie than I can ever pay : and, if there be any thing further in my power Uiat will con¬ tribute to your happinefs, you can aik nothing in reafon tbat I will deny you, Andrew lud his face : I cannot bear it ! (aid he ; oh what a brute was 1, to abufe fuch a child as this ! I ihali never forgive myfelf ! —You muft indeed, my friend ! for I forgive and thank you. Andrew retired back, but Margery came forward ; flie looked earneftly on Edmund, flie then threw her arms about his neck, and wept aloud—My precious child ! my lovely babe î thank God 1 have lived to kc tliis day ? I will rejoice in your good for* tune,
4 Uwe, and your bounty to us, but I muft afk one more favour yet ; that I may fometimes come hither and behold that gracious countenance, and thank God that 1 was honoured fo faras to give thee food from my own breaft, ancl tobring thec up to be a blefling to mc, and to all that know thee ! Edmund was affefted, he returned her embrace ; he bade her come to the Caftle as often as flic pleafed, and fhe fhould always be received as his mother ; the bride faluted her, and told her the oftener flic came, the more welcome ihe ihould be. Margery and her huf¬ band retiied, full of bleffings and prayers for their happinefs ; fhe gave veni to fier joy, by relating to the fervants and neighbours every circumftance of Fdmund's birth, infancy, and childhood : many a tear was dropped by the auditors, and many a prayer wafted to Heaven for his happinefs. Jofeph took up the ftory where ihc left it; he told the rifing dawn of youth and virtue, darting its rays through the ciouds of obfcurity, and how every ftroke of envy and maiignity brufhed away fome part of the darknefs that veiled its luftre; he told the ftory of die haunted apartment, and all the confequences of it ; how he and Ofwald conveyed the youth away from the Caftle, no M 'd more
more to return till he came as mafter of it : He clofed the tale wilh praife to Heaven for the happy difcovery, lhat gavefueh an heii io the houfe of Lovel ; tc* hi> dependents fuel» a Lord mid Mafter ; to mankind a friend and benefaftor. Theie was truly a houfe of jov ; not that falfe kind, in the midii of whieh there is heavinefs, but that of rational creatures, grateful to the fupieme Benefaftor, railing their minds, by a due enjoyment 'f earthly bleffings, to a preparation for a more perfeft ftate hereafter, A few days after the wedding, the Lord Fitz-Owen began to prepare for his journey io the north. He gave to Edmund ihe plate, linen, and furniture ofthe Caftie, the fanning ftock and utenfils ; he woidd have added a fum of money, but Sir Philip ftopped his hand : We do not forget, Lid he, that you have other children, we will not fuffer you to În¬ jure them; give us your blefling and paternal affeftion, and we have nothing more to afk : I fold you, my Lord, that you and I fhould one day be fincere friends,—We muft be fo, anfwered the Baron ; it is impoffible to be long your enemy ; Wc are brothers, and ÍhaU be to our lives end. They
They regulated the young man's houfhold ; ihe Baron gave leave to his fe-i vants to choofe tlieir mailer; the elder ones followed him (except Jofeph, who defired tu live wilh ΥΛ* mund, as the chief happinefs of bib life) ; moft of the younger ones chofe the fervice of the vouthful pair. Lhere was a tender aud affectionate parting on all fides. Edmund befought his beloved William not to leave him. The Baron faid, he muil infift on his heing at his brother's wedding, as a dţ'C at¬ tention to him ; but after that he fliould re¬ turn U) the Caftle for fome time. The Baron and Sir Philip MarcĽy, witli thcir train, fet foi ward. Sir Philip went to London, and obtained all he defired foi his Ldmund ; from thence he went into Yoik- ihite, and fettled his affairs there, removing his penfioners to his other houfe, and putting Lord )*itz-Owin in poíľeíhon of he» owu. They had a generous eontentton about the terms ; but Sir Philip infilled on tiie Baron'» accepting the uk of every tiling there: You hold it in truft for a future grandchild, Uid he, whom í hope to Uve tu endow with it. During Sir Philip's abfence, the young Lord Lovci ciuíwd tbc haunted apartment to
he ^paired and furnifhed for the reception of his father by adoption. He placed his friend Jofeph over all his men fervants, and ordered him to forbear his attendance ; but the oíd man would ahvays ftand at the fide-board, and feaft his eyes with the countenance ofhis own Mafter's fon, furrounded with honour and happinefs. John Wyatt waited upon the perfon of his Lord, and enjoyed his favour without abatement. Mr. William Fitz-Owen accompanied Sir Philip Harclay from the north country, when he returned to take up his refidence at the Caftle of Lovel. Edmund, in ihc arms of love and friendfliip, enjoyed with true rdííh the bleffings that fur¬ rounded him, with an heart overflowing with benevolence to his fellow-creatuics, and rap¬ tures of gratitude to his Creator. His Lady and himfelf were examples of conjugal af- ГеШоп and happinefs. Within a year from his marriage íhe brought him a fon and heir, whofe birth renewed the joy and congratula¬ tions of all his friends: The Baron Fitz- Owen came to the bapiifm, and partook of his children's blcifmgs. The child was called Arthur, after tîıe name of its grandfather. Ihe year following was bom a fecond fon, who
who was called Philip Harclay; upon him the noble Knight of that name fettled his eftate íu Yorkihire ; and by the King's permiifion, he took the name and arms ofthat family. The third ion was called William ; he in¬ herited the fortune of his uncle of that name, who adopted him, and he made the Caftie of Lovel his refidence, and died a bachelor. The fourth fon was called Edmund ; the fifth Owen ; and there was alfo a daughtei called Emma. When time had worn out the prejudices of Sir Robert Fitz-Owen, the good old Haron of that name propofed a marriage between his eldeft fon and heir and the daughter of Ed·. mund Lord Lovci, which was happily con* eluded. The nuptials were honoured with the prefenee of both families ; and the Old Baron was fo cievateu with this happy union ofhis defcendants, that he cried out—Now I am ready to die ! I have lived long enough ! this is the band of love that unites alt·my children to me, and to eaeh other! lie did not long furvive this happy event ; he died full of years and honours, and his name was nevcr mentioned but with the deepeft mark» of gratitude, love, and veneration. Sweet is the
the remembrance of the virtuous, and happy are the defcendants of fuch a father ! they will think on him, and emulate his virtues ; tliey will remember him, and be afliamed to degenerate from their anccftor. Many years after Sir Philip Harclay fettled at the Caftle, he received tidings from Jiis fiiend Zadiiky, by one of the two fervants who attended him to the Holy Land. From hím he learned that his fiiend had difcovered, by private advices, that he had a fon living in Paleftinc, whieh was the chief motive of his leaving England ; that he had met with va¬ rious adventures in purfuit of him : that at length he found him, converted him to the Chriftian religion, and then perfuaded him to retire from the world into a monaftry by the fide of Mount Libanus^ where ho intended to ťnd his days. That Walter, commonly called Lord Lovel, had entered into the fervice of the Greek Em¬ peror, John Paleólogos, not bearing to un¬ dergo a life of folitude mul retirement : that he made up a ftory of his being compelled to leave his native country by his relations, for having accidentally killed one of them, and that he was treated with great cruelty and in- juft iee ;
juftice ; that he had accepted a poft in the Emperor's army, and was foon after married to the daughter of one of the chief officers pfit. Zadiiky forefaw, and lamented the down¬ fall of that empire» and withdrew from the ftorm he faw approaching. Finally, he bade the meftcnger tell Sir Philip Harclay and his adopted fon, that he ihould not ceafe to pray for them, and defired their prayers in return. Sir Philip defired Lord Lovel to entertain this meflènger in his fervice. That good Knight lived to extreme old age in honour and happinefs, and died in the arms ofhis be¬ loved Edmund ; who alfo performed the laft duties to his faithful Jofeph. Father Ofwald lived many years in the fa¬ mily as chaplain ; he retired from thence at length, and died in his own monaftry. Edmund Lord Love! lived to an old age, in peace, honour, and happinefs ; and died in the arms of his children. »Sir Philip Harclay caufed the papers relat¬ ing to his fon's hiftory to be coUefted toge¬ ther ; the firft part of it was written under his own eye in Yorkftvirc, the fubfequent parts by
by Father Ofwald at the Caftle of Lovel. AU thefe, when together, furniih a ftriking leflbn to poiierity, ofthe over-ruling hand of Provi¬ dence,and the certainty of Rétribution.
FINIS.
