Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
A Suffolk tale: or, The perfidious guardian
mc rUtriDIOUS GUARDIAN.
( ΙΙΛΡ X\ I 1 lie r ílit o ıs g i U ılıat ntıoccrre rrquirç. РгоЧс! üıc g Kidut .s wh th ılıt multe« inspire " ľni \ so ni ainut! at Portsmouth, and Mtiul к poi I. .1 himself to tin General < HVu tlnn umıııniKİıııg in that ¡ţai- iisoi funn «lioin lu uu iteti orders to ♦ ıkı Ins ρ iss nje in ι ti iiisport ippomt- <d to mutu, ι sın 11 .1 c u lum nt ot Ins lOrps tın liti ııtl ι tili \πηι l)opôt, İslı ot \\ ıjjlıt ı\ ııtııı, au nppoiUi nity to pom tin iloinnut
ili. ...„ΙΟΙ llling Ol.llllll tO Sill Ml ι Ιι« ılııs ılı ι Altiul uiiiiii ıh it« ly ıtpıutd on houd to unkt thi hist po-ılılı m ıııgı nu ut toi tin ι upturn anıl dilişini, mı ot lus nıııoıınl «ılı, no« ılı slınnl t., (M İlin, 'I ll.l pi III tul honu Ι. ι th. .1 u,. ıs ..Ι , ¡ııs atlının tot , .....I il si ll ,, ι ι urinili (lints It ι к 1 п.. ni ι ι, 1 ιη,Ι ι ι II 1,1 II Ι isllll, ,ι Ihı III« sun. 11 tl I ll ι slllll, lul Usili to tin tu » ol I unsi both .1. isul and suipii-id Ικ ι Ι η ι, , us loin,,I to ins I lllll tl, η si h it lin intuí silla,·! hni piiii.u-ls tlh iiliil „ 1.....sllllldll, noi ..ubi ui.bs.it lllll I tl» iliiiis, l„,l « ms „„I -umnimi- in, on in, titul lut t.. uu itası ln ι
lins ind mu LSineiss lhe ippeaiance ol Ihı h libimi lllll licet «as truly plı aşınır ind , nip stu , set she dicagli! tin ulta ot ,Ι,ι sosaiTí and a colise¬ um nt sep nation tiom those frunţi* sli. nudi ily lund, it ııas ιΐ,ο lit r I i-t ilişimi futni a ¡icatetut home, «lui. si« İnil spnit Ien uliisi dos, and tin hopt s ot retili ııııiıf to it, alone mon. dul hn to th. dulu ultiis inil ilamiLis she sı ,s on tlu point ot shai- in.'ttith hır „mous oul lovul \ltrul. II). -1,'iul bini" inul. toi -uhnir, lb. v .it li u, ih ıııb.ıkııl aud tlıı l lllllll llllľlllll Itili i,ilt lllllll I Hl), iiiii t isolimi bs t nıopıtıoııs gık, stood do« n tlu I tisrlish ( lianu, I noi «tu this nuns hi us ııııtıl pri -ıııtıd «ith a siolit ot tin Sully Islands, nul li 1
a consequent p.liting s iest ot the hippi shores of Britain During the fust fisv ssciks ot tlicu voyage, Louısı fi.lt \eiy unionitoit ablt, and suffen lincessmtls uitb si sickness, but from that pinoti she became more familnr with lur sitin tuin, and ot course liss suhjiit to illness. The afttition Hi Utud s ıs iver ıttentıse and wat litui m sııppls ing all İki wants and pi osud uti dh ou bis pait, iii|owd ι good st iti ot health Dm timing sin suitului ou dcik dilling a ptrlut talin nul mis highly iW Inflitti! b) tlu pe iu lul setn* and «aten ek. men t illudi surn nudul tinin «bui almost lost,,, ulmii uu, tl e works, I Dis nu l'un „I, nu tb, v u suijiiibtd bv an unuinmion ııı ni
tni of poi ponies silixh approached, anıl uuıe seen in all ıh' eft ions, sunn ining around the transport A blat к cloud hovered oser the west, lunged with a borih r of deep gloomy red, \ihdo the last tints of tht setting sun were expiring, fraught with sulpln , it broke, and moved slou Is i' )ng the wide expansion ot hiasiu gndudly it again colletti il, and blinding to- gethi ι , toi med one gr nul ( m tain, tint excluded, almost totally, the small le- nuins of light Ί he shades of tvpnuig had arisen around, and the mantii of darkness spiead over the whole tace of heaven Eiery thing poi tended an awful tem¬ pest, and it already began to lighten, vheii Alfied and Louisa retired to 11 3
tluu t ıhın to lillut til I nuti II to thun sunniigls in. I pinions Ihı Inni ıl ıslı svinili puiului » ıs nls I pulluli It I t!, II!, Ill ins ll l|l t I lllllll du agam il ι. .Imi in ini|istn nun iiiiiis aloni,' a .list mt put ol tin ski, uhui a kit litaiy diops ot iam de¬ slindei! I lit sadoij nimbly flciv to thin posts uni iirctully sicinid the ftlnps ng4ing, tin nini lonuniniid blotting ι titnundous gilt, mil tlu y iudtaiouiid to sunt undu ilosi ıtılıd tops nis sı Ink this lonteuiplatul the appioadi ot tht stoini in suuiity In ılııs slıoıt interi il tin llislus 111- ciiisul in stunglh and vili nils It grew duk, ind not ι stu puiitiatid tin tun к HinosphiK Vltitdii as. end- «1 tht ships ihtk to ohsuii the
.Milisini, Ih, hluk .1. mis lu. .1 1114 thun up. u ill ipiutus ot th. 11. unis Nr w ..on th. tl nul. . i .llul i-m tulsün' 11- dup .lun. nt hi' u md In ittľinul Io puits till ll us 111 Ills I musi ' Do not ln il uinui, mv losi , tiu uhoinir p( il anuounies our sltltv ' İhı tinindir no ι began to roll it я (listinu, ι td the stonu scınıcl to pass atvu W lı it a dıeadtul night' how hru İs t'ıı i un iltectniluľ- Oh ' haul is tht tite ut thi hi ııı hut patnnt пипни, ilmu hed to thi skin lis tin toiunts sıhııh poni upon Inni ht Sdks ms intti sii, ρ, , « „hout tumbling, In susth, t,ll|,st ρ,„„„Ι, „ul lu us Ч howl ululi tin Innstill, tl inulti
slııkıs tilt ht uni-, ι, η ι ,11- okí I. ŕ diluiu 1. -s lu ul N> band unni, tu« luin comfoit, no h· ait S) nıpaüıııcıs with hım m lua sufferings, jet he considers lus situation, though dread- fu' not dispera*( , lastuig himself be¬ fóle the thrum ot meres, he apjieal» foi proteitioii to Hun is ho directs the svhcil ot PiosuliiKi sshu «atibe« oier the nuiocuit and hel[.less, s»ho Mipcsasıaş tin tiai otnnsuy, and is mver deat to ihe votte ot tht sufkin bull tht run loutiiiutd to bi it sio- lintls, and it bglitund ixie-iseli, though ibi t'uniti ι lied it ι gu tt. distami db bou mint ibis sııtlı ι «lio lait hi ui ums d lo snut , I lo ti ι,ι ' «hu. ľ bu-b ml (li-ps lu, ill ialiti .1 »ne ι.) h, ıhı dibin bo, ni
«bib bn lu л t hils mor» tor the liaulships hi (mount, is, th .11 tor Ι τ onn Duetul are th« .ipprclunsions tint-hake lu 1 tortimi! Imast, ťit siat ot punis ,1 stringi! to orleiKe, -lu ipp. d- to ıbit l'otti r «bu ei ι r -milt¬ on ηιηοιι net tt ih kind legird, to pulut tinnì 111 -ıhtı lion the pa--
D, .tul t. ',, „Ο,,.Ι .,,„ ,, lır Ιι. Su ρ, nil \ иг I Sml 1» li, ,Ι Ли Ι te »»Ιι ι ; ti 11 pi ·Ι 11 ısı· ıslı, Ι, V. ı.lst.l ι ιι uliini, I .11 Ull liur ι s . A1.1l kl ..... Il ,ΙΙ,Ι ,Γ I 11 Isimu,
Tin t, niput it Ui gil. -pint if. It, md tin distant illiniums ot tht tinni¬ tili dud awas tins now glatit ally
ai knott lulgid Ihı kuul II uni tli it pu sinul ıhım nul lusınlls solum,! a unitmu ill, С ol Ills tınını md pio tei tion supporti d bs sıhıdı tini tu u cq ııllı smiri in ill plue» nul ııı curs situ Uu n DlUIltg till IlllUUldl! (if th( s,s ag( lh(> surt fun und sııtlı ıı ildn Ululili ind (ii|i,s(d tb.msdus is nun h ıs p -ibi. until no, , ,.r tb, buiks of Ν.« I ninill ι id tını ,s pendici Ι ι siku g ılı ml « lrc gri HİS llHOIlKlllinCld bs tlıı fons tllll 111 11 ti ills -lllllll in und those linn ι usi b Ilks ot sind π, tbı , Ιι м ıırıts .t «lııb tini pulid doni iin „шип Ib, Mun, ,η sb,,,, İni ısı r, som ιριι.κ,Ι d mg « buh tb, ι (hiteted tilt ir юты, till, iiiisttl u ı'ıı
His ol lunds lins hid to tniountu llu upni tul. s ss huh . ,.ριι,, tiu al- 'i uls d ιηι,ι unis η inginim along that bu to llu uts ot St Iiiiiii, Ni sv lluuisiwik «bui this it lingth ar usul dtu ι lul on, pissagi ot neailşŢ I ur months Ilıt susi ol Ibi tits on tlmi ap¬ pi uh « ıs dthghttıılls ι binning ti) Ulmi ind Ins louls siti «bo tn loud tiun dus in tlu thoughts ot going ι I, shoi, noi Mill tlu S liss tunisul bs tbt sight ot s „,ι Indians, wh i.siii minidül thi ti inspuit in ıhın t umu bunging supplus „f tuut and ,ι u ipiintitus oi «ibi I .«Is ss bub ıh, s « lunds ι \i lungul «ith tlu sol (bus ind tlu slups um,, ins toi thai siltulpiosis „ıs Il b
Orelcrs sveie sent down the iievr morning, fron) the Conimandanr of the citadel to elisemhaik, when Alfied and Louisa landed «ith the de tae linnut, and svere consesid to a gtnteet loibj;- ing-house, svhen apanine uts Ι,,,,Ι | a ,n piesiously ingage .1 loi tlnn i.up tion , ulule the .soleheis maitiini ini· jrarrisoii at Fort IIovvi
< II \p xvir ------" flow thŕv lov ii, SS ilne - ve di, s ,η.! п.ц -ht. ind all von hoor» II ι lane t! it. ty voih down lipun ılıtır lee!, Λ s I ). nr b. -n c, «ere lo u um tb«ir passron ' No so uu r Ind thes landed and mre miu dni,. 1 lo tbc Cornin indanr, than In ml и mcl Miu d his ordeis «ere to sınıl lum n. ıh, heud-(|inıi(is ,,t tlıc ui,"» n .' ľutleiKtoul ıs ith lu- de¬ in İm ι nt ıs sonu hs tlıeş had arni cd, anıl tıııt ıu sloops apponimi t.. (on¬ us tb, m tin it, «„uld ben uls ti sail ab s uni, uli Is Tlu distante «as tm H mit,, inn the pissage, silnih «is on tb, ι nu .St John, tould be |(itoiintd m two dais, their ııı iv sos-
il;, tilintóte pioniisi d tin ııı înmii pl, ısım on au omit ol tlıı ı'dıjıuut sı ison uıd Ihı Iıı ıııtılul su nu s ıtlıııb It .ill i lllS |l,s,„t, Us, || ı„ till Ulti til t 111 isi Itili ,\pl,|, Ibi uui.'nU's ot Ihn sd. ut tllll Ulli mínu· D.ıııııı. i t bu .liss tliit Vinul nul louis, шиит. 1 t s ι it Μ ns til S IVplllUllllI uus nuil· ot uni lllll nul b. s, II 11,11 II. m till Ull llbll Illist Γ .111(1 till (institutul tu Ilın. Ilus „Ι Ibi. II Ultlll Ult llllll ld dl miks «ι ι t ..ι ııı llıııı pohti niss sibili nus ι us и s.unul los, III .ninni lill 11 ι , il ι η nunii ,ιι,Ι bl uiti ons Luns, ubisi pusoi, ll İt tı.u lions Uld . Il 111 s bu lllll thi u ustalit llu t ol κΙ I uno bad sun
liri .r silin Indiu lid ,1t hli lllll ll m ibepiiiiipu nm miu tims gi nth nun wh, I ul bui, und Mtie.li ılı uonıplı nuit ıı snit I, ss , I, suons „t „I,t nu¬ il , thi mios nu nt ol lus snutts tiil¬ iini, tiu limiti tl puiul lu sva» illusi ul to iuiu.il mu n st tinin llu sunni ns m dipirt it length .'.,ιιμ. I.s, , pus,,,,t ,|„ , I. ısınış t ıs SI, II ll,|,Slll{. mil tlu sund ot illi lugli lunoıuıud ι u ıs ,1 III, 111 ι, ului, ss sili, n Uliul and lus tuldü «iti took ι (in mils It ι ι .1 illusi by 1.111 tlltS bul bulls, h.,S||| „ds ll- llSlll in 1 pionul, I on bl ι Ι ť II ,Ι Op dl stili, d t unis, linn, Ihı siglili bum, muli suu, ИК, Ι ,ι sul и g Idis , t on tluu ss ıs ııııl II s ııırıd with ipltasantlnuzt ıııııul it
rudei litem m two da)s, altci cx- puitncing a chimung passage Presious to their liai ing the citv of Saint John, Alfud it rote to Ins anx¬ ious parents gis mg tliem u nimiite detail of ι ve ι ν ...cunune that pisstil from tin pin.dol hi- emli irkatmu it I'ortsnioutli until In- aun il in \nn пса sobillili r Iu- 'uliu m lin must lentin ni unu ι not to be unhipps lum ,dl nor to sutl.r mv ol Ins finn, Is to bt untisi on Ins in unit is Ins p , s|)C(ls p .iul t, soul ıblı lotbl ld (1111- I 1 Iiiii, nt ol .un « ıslı nutrid viilii¬ ni lı bosim ot In- tinnii Ih il-o aililtts-td a litui to William gis mi; hım ι disiiiptiun et all tb it took plut ılınıl, g ılı, ms ige as sull as upon Ins arris al at bault Johns, aud iiitiiattd
hım ııott merin t n piling to bis '-ttcf, when hr» tithıı would sına, t ni hoa bt ťcdrredhim tor ful tiur nırtıuıljrs. He also melosul to ι İham a tew line <br the senerddi puent» of Louisa, stating to thiui his sate aritsal with tbur innocent (laughter at th« place of their destination, requesting it should be punctiiilly cj J ι ver od as soon as rtreired, and such further informa' tion granted to tht honest cottagers, as they would nirurally require m Леи aniiety and a.lecuon for tlitir only child Immediately on tlieír áruval at Frc- dencton Altud and I,ouisa were mtt by the Genimi and his Staff is will as by the officers ot tht rtgunent, who congratulateti tut.u upon tin n
sait misal m the pos nur ind eon duetul thtni to the guns, n, «luie thes had till homur ot bung intm dun.I to tin lidies ot tin olhe ι ıs ıs will ıstlıı pi ıııı ıpıl lulus 1 1 tht tmın ind Us y inuits, nul «eu Ite ι sı ards ivuniptiioiisly enttrt lined it tlıı Cíe lıcıal s house, where a numerous piity Ind betu preiiousls engagid to intit them isotliing tould possibls i\c(ed Jie attentions thev txperu need, apart¬ ments wert also picsiously pmvideil foe their reception, to whith thiv li¬ tiu 1 ttaniaily bout in the einung, to ci jos a nights ripo-i it then new cptiitei- lias mg t lit ıı tinnii- in a stili ol к st u s -laiLilv to he ıle- siiibtd, I n ali su u ot tilt san ι opi D on iispet ung their loiidutt and
iu inni ıs, sibili this suinul lost in tbur atinin ılı m nul tin pi usi s tbev In stouul upon tn, buls and lliniiiuit I musi, I и to tlu m Γι r r linu f in Uin I и I >bl«l J im<cl< Μα u. Iure« « kb) umil к Jus " Somelli ι g unseen о tr sil lier fotni Did mnıılçss gnce imp trt, A secret charm thit won the way At once into ll,c heart ' The next div a reneual of ceiemomes and imitations commenced, which continued tor moie than a month liter thin unsal, nor muld tbejdiiott' tlitu tunt Io ms otbtr pit isute tluiing th untumi tlnn tint ot iiiriving imi litinnuig tin nuuitious s isits snth silnih tlu v wilt bun, unul Aliud bilami highlv iisj ettid
VV Iule ht rtndircd limisi It I tion d hv the ollut rs of lus u 41mi nt ind thi Ornerai who tuininaiidud it his open, generous, and nittnlv hihai mur it- tracted immusii notni, and hi» so ciety waseageil} courted no« onlv by his supcuors, but by th fust rank in the province, yyho retened him as an intelligeat ollici r, and a classical scholar Indeed, he well considered dl bis plcasuies as dependent upon his osni conduct for thiir continuance, while lie constantly ictlected, that ----- ·« The suffrage of the wlie The pratte that a worth ambition .я attain d В/ sense alone, and dignity of mind Nor could he in the midst of his plea- siii.s ioiget the pains taken with htm ш his early days by lus doating pa
rent, nor tesisi the impulse that taught lum to exclaim, cien in his happiest moments, " Gì od and generous fatlier' how am I hound to respect and bless j our nunc, for making nie w hat I am, tor the sentiments vou have instilled, for the nici distinctions of honour) on lus с inculc ited, and for the know- Ittlge you hut taught me' When I torgit libit I one to jour gonilni ss, οι bei onu unmindful ot it, may mv ingra.itudt htinvsiourgc' hut should tht chand ot war or donato nit short ,tn (\ istence made valuable tome bv tint gooeliuss may the celestial agent that w uts for my fleeting spuit m the hour o' death, yvlu-per an issur- intc that Alfred CMilted m the ι ause st viituï, wluih sccurtd to hım an
inistiin ıblı ititi, tlllt lu ,ouriieied m the inu к ot lu, noni, inukul out Itn luni b) lus linul p in nt and tint in bis list »igb In bmiihula pi им tor bulb' Ob' lit nu pun, that I am not unsiol tin sudi piu mus gifts toi with sudi potinini mı ılı muil, < m I lie otlu I M Isı tinn siiKisstul lb, pl, dg, it ıı s ι udu s ι stum shall In lhe uh ,η ol ins hon nu, slullniakt in, ingin , m ms ptilsiuts .ılttı t mu mi мит s tint ms und unitul soul ts .1. s no d nt,., unisistuit Willi nis unís mis no ,,,,ι, „uit lor «huli 1 uit luu ltd blusli İlıı until sı ist η at Ιιιη,ΐΐι situi .id Ilıt ııı ııı ι s ι ning pirtu s (tumul dugouts in Ninth Umilia), md tin limits, ! ,(l (iiiiiiiiiuid mum
ions insinuons ucu ııı enedin Altıcı! ııııl Lıuısa, and ut .di souetıts tbes mı ııı ıblı Iıı ι une submits ot the most I 1. ısım; ıcııııı ks not oidi tor tin u inn ılık m nun is, buttili ititi tum tliit inni. n mli subsisti d md silnih nas eni niisin ıblı bnıemtiKiıı \ uıtvsıuıı ııı nou pu stilted to tlim notiu ind thi ııııı il ot ι tubi . I Indi insti. lill till pullulinoti iilldl 4 illlt 1,11111 to SI Ulti 1 u I udì IH toiO iHoulul no sin dl du, .col pi. ısını nul annisiniult to tlt о li. us ot tlu ιι,ι ıı.ııt anıl putu id ist, lhos, ubo Ull 1 lill Ot s Ulinj, IS tlltS lllll not sumut ,1 1 IS si ison into llu u oods but nut и |iiiu u than İndi m I n tb, u giudi ubo nol unis ion¬ mu 1-. ihiui sat.ls tliinii,ţli tilt lunst
but leads thtni to tht ilifiuuit places where tiles can bait most spurt, and to u huh tht gime most gincial 1 ) it- sort Tbl unions appeal ini e ot solirge n bods ol n itin u η ι mı s, tinir petu- li.ii uistoms nul thtn biluts, suie stuk u, to tl ι ob π- itiön of those ιι Ιι ι biti not su η nul sisiiul tarions nations and ι um ılı s Imi to ıhı ι, mount ııııı .1.1 I m sı tluu uıııduct w ıs trilli sii uı,t, b tb on ttioiiiit of tbur (bunku I dus uni nusiiablt apptji- inu in su tu uld not Ix satisfied un til slu pinului upon \llrul to mute aparts oi them sııtlı tbur ıhıldım to bis (puutui, tint she might hase au oppiiuuiuts ut imputing into thiir wants «hık she would administu to
tlıı u iiitcssitiis and ι omförts, and tinsi huniam intuitions she sers soon t unid into elint hs prot uring it inn ilotlung to losu then h Ipless nul ılmost nıkıd duldun tlom the smuts . I tint iniliinint sı ısım of tbt к u Muis sn ıı tin tısı s she mili.uit nu inbils ι i lins mollis tulu , ,,,,,Ι Ihın d. putun lion. hl. pu¬ sin t without illi t llllll lllll sullll- n,s anıl ι o ılı bııtın.. t ι llıııı « uıts llıııı d ınt sili ι lıbıslın, n SI „s noss lllll istil bl İlıı ι Idilio,) , t 1 bitli \ι„ι ι iii puu lus d lis Ionisi loi t« .bund.id doliu,, «liipioiida ,ιι il lupnsiti ni liomtbi pun,take.ito institut hi ι m housibold allai! s, ulule nu u с
Alfred rendered himself lomfortable bj the services of in old Siotch sol dier tiken from the rinks to perform all the duties ittachtd t > the situition of an orlicors servant The pleasures and the hippine s they experienced kept pice with tbeir fondest c\f editions mil time passed gaily on its stuftest pinions Tht Grcgoncs bec íme morc fieqiieiit and splendid the parties being glad dened on all occismns bj then pn sence ind the hours rolled by m soft delusion as their business sennit! but to cheiish their passion while their dijs and nights could ilone witness ι re turn of the most ardmt lose The j v s of every pel son seemed complete »nd the news yylnih at this period was 5
aiinounictl, of tbc arruai of a mail from 1 ugland, tended nota little to m- ireasi tin pliasurcs of those uho were in expectation of btaiiniţ tiom their relatives Alfred appeared amongst this joyous group, and eagerly sought tor communications, nhicli on rcceit t proved but too dctp a source ol sorrow, and tin banu, jet ut pltasurc now chang¬ ed its appcaranti to a house of mourn· ing, and bicanic a seine of tin ut- mukt contusion and heartfelt guef'
< II \ľ X\ III Γ r t iro, ulun ang. ι,ΐιΐ 11 Is ılı Ι eit П£ heart, ( ill nil. Iir Ы wlui [ U ılı Wit n nnun iiilUio«.,! JÍT1 1 I in tni it Untili»! till (je Ulli 'll.d. III ti idi. t. I Wnn tho in η I rot ( it oil thon ippotio.l ι pirtti tor \ltml tml lirttud Its Willi u ι M ith nptuious ,ld u lit ho IllStl IK (1 til pOIUSl till M.llOIIK Ulli «ill I now n haml «litin,' · lu u tiis' th. minuits, alti ..... Ji .отпиши iteti «uh ι luuli nu,S |l| < n tins OU IslOIl «luh ι nolhu lirisill uul.l h ni SI UllK 'SU t.lui \tt Inu t liki ulip ol llnm.lt ι ' loi in th. puni tluu ippt nul il, ılıt listi pistit ht uml.l imi ¡ansı. ti ли ln, I. Mli titilli, « 111)
hul pu I lin ,ί. i .1 bt n η iliiii and luin 111, III Ullllll m »1 I ' Ml 1)0 « Illl 1,1 M , Ull bis - |,s lllll tion« sim ıu | it ι n .sul li n lum his I'ltUC-t- Ul till- « 1 I 1 (lllll ill Hist tot tils о ssolu I the hen «t tin, I li¬ dt r pi nt sn- iiiid hi «lut inel ti¬ ki ιι pl .u ml h. .ml. ют. . I toi li¬ ll ll İt- lllllll 11- lllll 1 lll-l llisllt, ilion icnind ι «ısın -huk md suli ıs lu lilt totin Iustinul pu ul ot lus ι \. istilli l Stili .1- tU 1- Ils «lllllll, 1 g In ilili pnniitted lu utilului to tne iiili ιι sts nul tin hippinessol his Al¬ iiul nul «luit ht su u ud his o« u tt iv- Ικ tutit mimul to b lush the .tiniu- «İmli lu- tumli ...uld hut dl ionu il
It was iilioiiti month iftir Alfiuls tl(| irtun fum I iifţliml, th it tin fa milv ut Mr Dt (Innige »in sum пкше.1 1 1 Ins diambil Ilı liad unir ont ι bien confined to lus bid that day Ik мая latlnr elicci tul, and ritired tonst bout nme oıloık He noon fill osle, ρ , but between ten and ikven hi awoke a sudden and gre it ılı inga took plai e , and titling limiseli it tlie point ol death, and but just ibk to raise himsill from Ins pillo« be looked around lum, u lien tlu first ob|u t llt.it piesented itself wis hu const nit at tendant, his caie worn w ılı, w itli gi nt and despair on hır eounteninu Mie vaınK endcunuied to sooth his sufici ıngs in \ am did she -ittcmpt to ille vi ite luspnnijs I b it ι not ι moment to lose як! lu mu ( li Ικ nul (
iene tlıt list hlissii.g ut jour deput¬ ing husimul lit gintls prissui her lund к itimi lus onn, ııııl bıııstıııg into teus, thus iddi tssed hls allhctid paitnci Lndeasour to fortify your mind and listin to me tor the last tune I has с now u rived at that hour, from sıhııh niturt sliuuks bat in tllll trembling niomtnt ot I n d si p iratioii ta tinsi! oi ld, 1 uu not u uh uit strongion sotatuin 1 liait long antiiipatttl tins hour— Di itti is not stiangt to mt —I hau nuh пони .1 to tundíame this sune uıd hait linked liniarii to it isitli nuny hiatt linthitg apprchtn sums — \nd nosi my beloved tuli ni? I ist (uthls ionmu ıs tor s uursi It and ms \ltııd l'ıosııluıu lıısuıahlıd ine ti) pioiidi loi s ou 'nth anti 1 tuist it ι i
Mill bi found tint I Ins. disi biu'c.l tills list, luts u ns, linliolisls 1 tl , 11 kının till ill,, lion ol s, u h, IH — lit lit ι miu ııı t', ι hi ľi ituni s—hi mi unpl t ıhı si list „.Olili.. I, Ilidi înting şııııı attention to Ilım ubo Millin sour tunul w lun Ishall slup ııı tbc dust ot tb nb'— W t sinil nuit .L'un mı Ion, mil «lun sm do su sbill put m, mon \ , u I, s, ıs, r bun thi ttnılıı un punon ol ins liti — Ut ms list sun.I, sink dup ι ..... sum muid— u, lituni, to los, ms M- íltll Milli ,11, lb,4,1 .11,1,1,11, (bilişil lus inte lists, and punul hım to !.. joui Intuii piotu toi tinón, h hk Iaiititll' sm sball, I tuist mul ,, un' His unic tulul Iııııı— lu hosu il lus bıaıl aud м alunit i stiiu_ д!( ispind'
Ib, UU. HH sil
11,1 ,s ,1 Is I l I
Ibltnioiiiuit u lio I III llllll ι. ι ι hunbil ot un ıslını intuit slups ut ıs III ud but ılıt I lllll Ilı, uııııııl-ıtt , Iıı iMii_ tulli ιιυ,ιιι ' ι in. II ılı. sol,,. .1 „ ι ιι tlu tl upni, I, ,11 I 1 loi, I illlS- I ι 1,1 ill, ρ lui, ss Ol II ill I I. I SU Ι b ,',ρι lul' Ι . sil ,Ιι ι , ι Ι lus , Ι < ι, Ι Ι Ι Ι , , ,Ι 111
1 ,4 η. .1 i , „U
as -»ell .ıs gııııdnn to Mtrcıı be¬ queathing to lum tbt .guttu put.'" Improntiti to be bild in tuist, until Allred aıııi((l it Ins tuciiti litibsi u, vvbui Ik tias to bi pul inuunplcti possession limisi It ni thi iman tunc hi (inpowíiid lus gu udi in topas bun a şıırly aıuuııts , η sus uu; tlıı ninni n t ot it to his min dm return ırv judg¬ ment 'ibi nm undt ι ol lus (stilt lie »Útiul upon bis sub ,1nın, g tbc pırıodofhır lik, iftn «Inibitili» to be added to Alliuls pıtımı, >n> isithout usu nut mil to unum ,t lu« dispos. I 'Uksi mdınıl.ols u,bii;.s nul tbc uruimstuiu s itt. nd nil upon tiun, of unnsi ou isu nul Willums j le¬ semi at thi onu hipps mansion ot
the 1 itt Mr De ( I iriib;e indispensably uu ess η ι , whin bt ч1юп appeared, anıl ши uutti, until hr possi sscıi hımstif (uŢidalilv to tlu tinoin oí the will) ol iun put ot Ins piopuh, and be limili pri ι adui upon Mrs IV ( I uitlul to luonipiui hun toLiigland, to llsllll undi r lus piotittioii, until slu undd U mı \ltıuls »ıslın and dttıtmın mon m up!) to tin Utter» lu ittuittl upon this uiilaniholy Mll)|llt •'I r »lu η ılı η ir Ггш"1)1 hrirt ta lui d и uh uu-r, Αι I -viiy I , ı ipi, ¡r. t b, i. dup-ıır, Л, ,1. Im, , ц|, in , f hru „lv ., ilort ill, All J lut i ч ul II „,|¡I t ш.к Ы. Ъ 1,| İt ıı ıs ııııdıı an impression ot bise ul. ıs md ι moliu ı t Ibe high opııuuu ıııtuUmıd ot V, illiam bs bir ι 6
d.put ,1 1 , shınd ihn \I.S I), (Ii 1Hİ41 ι .us, und lol. ıu Iııı onu |„l,d (Illusili Illl \l, „I, 1 ,l„,s,U,(slul Usili to ll.l Illl III ill,! lllllll lllljlt pi.ll.lUl İH II, lllllll tl sitili 111 I Ugl Uld III I situ Ilo' II, t 1,1 .lisi ml lioin Ii sfumimi ii.l supp. s, ,1 ι,,,,,,Ι sli, , Isoin ollit u ,lil„ msi,is ,Ιι, , ν (sinini <1 on tin ! ,11 ot I l.l ι lol V, ıu' Inn ни и .di , I I..... Ilus ,| Hint!. m .1 mint,I ι , ι, , ι ι ι , lil li liilit........ in. . ι i it, ι ι nihil ι , pun ,1.1 VU II ι, .1 hit, I.l II sn s, ι out „,Ι „, , ρ, III I till tllllllll III ι Minti to I ii.li ч «I.....I ,, 'u,I lo „,ιιιιη iiiii Ishi ,,,,,,,Ι l„ ,, ι,,.ι,ι lu, :
pil edifices md nuiositiis of tin city, and m sisiting tlicdnrii bit inslilii- tions to man) ot w ludi sin «astound a hhcid piliuncss In this niuuitr she risolini to piss lnr tını, until tin unions moment uııııd vihensht could iiiuit mounts tiom Vllud, in rıplı to the ell-Hissing luteis lor- yvaidnl to him on tin sulijict ol lus fUhusdeecasi Distie-scel lusonil utteiance, the yoiithlul burl ot Vitrei! indcaiourtd to bin u|i igainst this bittir niislor tunc nuli nuni) lurtitu.li thou,h Ins feelings neu ilieply .ll.iiul «uh those ot his con | а -si n Ul I oui- 1, vini «ıu lus attempts Io ijiim ir gu, and as u-ual in lhe sou ty ot Ins friiiids and brotlicr-olhiers, ш yam
did lu ru· ni thou nun nions to those iss. iubii, s nou disutili bs lus píe¬ seme Silinti ıııtl guit ip] bid to Ins ıııııul tlıı pliu ot auıusuı tnt and ninth vsh.lt Sat on Ins fi itd the. к vei ui der bro'« Ot ılı unties* courage and Loiisukiau pridi L lie u t urn oi tin mail to H>t;l,uul l«mj> .uinoiincul, Affitti h.i4ttiu(l tt) dtltlKv. Ins u «lowed mot lnr, ,iml alvo ìtb ti und, w lio luti now assumed a luw t ijuciU towaids Inni, ami in tilt nui^t (et liii^ mannt г lit ţKiitravtd to flit m tbc u^Mivh >i )h, mind nut Ins sulki iPiü> ti) ou tlıc the nitul nd nm \\tvt kd suliin t ot tlıtıt tomımını* citions İn th most tender in inner did bc entieat Ыа motÍM.r to fetl com-
posed, and to ion-ulti lui-, Il ıs p. t ....... s happ} uıııld sml. tuumi¬ si nui-, «Iıııı pumi tul l.s -' go..,l U tlllllll, .1- III lOllsllldltl lu- 'inai, I, in t. hi . a-i....., Ini lini In ι ο,,,,Ι ol, tain İnsi ol „li-, п.. lioin In, n, ııııı t, and Illuni «illi İli, I oıııs, lo I ,ι,Ι,ιι.,'. as som ıs p.s.,h', .„„Ι „, II ,,ι,,, Ι« -ρ,«!- Ilt 111,1 t lllIUİ lo soolh |, , allını,,,,,· „ι , „,,,ι n , ¡„,, 1η, ,, ι!,· tul η»- anıl lllll .. - 1.1- ,ιιι tın lu¬ ll. ..İt In lus lıttı I I .V, llll.ll-, l„ ,| ¡,, dui 111 llu stinlllK-t · „ I, I ' . I. - il I, - -hin and liilii' s ,,,ι» ont I......st ill III. . ,. η mill, ι io hl, , .„. I ПН И,, , II llolll S,- U-l id and hi|pi in ll, , , u.· I ,, latim liai, madi, lis .i] pointin» hım
Ills ,1, lllll in uu, ι, , I ' I t lu dd o tu pul Ils, „ι I, ,1 pillimi Ins lu , ,,Ι , , ,, In nuns «uda , s ', ,.,, sdii ι 1 on uinui to di, u, ulu , —th. ι t > ιι llvi I, uiiil to wu ¡
си vr XIX м ТЫ» md Ay MiTowi now ure ill it peace t But I have woe«, uunumber d woes, io come If any uk, w lose armi bave neter clasp d A dying father m a last embrace— Jf any aik whose eyei are fore d to »ее, Unbdllow d view ' a dying ingel ■ corie— If any ask wh it orpJun « tongue mutt charm Ihr gl st. f Borrow------ Conduct \\ tm liert—In me bihold that wretch % Tbe u-ene л Л antre ot Л\ human Ь гкГ Tuf stvcrKv oí tlie w t ittitrd iitng tlie long Minte ι at I icdtiitton, u ts stnsiblv ítlt İh bnıısı, uli*» uiiu^ttt to sf) cititi a (Innatt, began to tl« eimt ııı hei lualth noi wis tins uimoiutd b> Allieti, ulmsı txisttncc ¡»itinttl to l»c »lont until Ί m bus
One etenmg thev «ere out lati, «ulici« slu ri tui ned «canid, and com¬ plained of told Ih( ntxt morning, α slight teser snth plcuritit simptomi appeared, but notnmg of consequence seemed to threaten their peace she apparentls' recovered but a cough, at first unnoticed, fixed too deeply on her tender lungs, ever to be removed 1 Hu appetite lmpeiieptibly decayed, and the colour faded slowly i om her (heek, cie anv ipprehensions ot danger were entertained lhus, «hen in insi¬ dious si nun snutes the root of n flo« er, it reclines its lu lutitiil head, ind the blooming ceileiuis tairas the tints of the inorning loi el) as the luxuiiant ibis .1 th, r mimu tule by slo« de (jiiis till tim elisi) piar fin ner'
Ihı m mun hu Imi blın tits It t then Insti uni thin inilti r ulunu sbolli .buh Mtu 1 md lus liiiiiils lilt IIKSp issbl, d uni nul м itli 111 χ. ms ι ııı nn nul hu ui tin ι iti ot itt Jolin to tıs tbc beucht of tin sea air 1 hi, tailing eins placc Minili memory could piisciit m skill point out iras tind but without siiciiss \ph\ sınan mullid stub tin in Sin fiium ι tis, dinilip hu ıllnıs , ι ons 1 1 sul ab. ııı lui suni . lili points md ıtspuluı,' UKI tim Mtubl Ut stinn slu ulkul ot lias ing bu low d Mlini ılıt t. u ot it¬ in tum ¡Jıslıuul in İni im οι stoli not uiipt uinui dösin bu ln unions hul, 1Ы м u thin sun bu s u u ould b n e s ul tint siti up md liki in η,ιΐ ıhımı lo t kt hu l , li ι i li ι i
M length tlu malignity of tin dis orili ι suinul h tilli d uni its vióleme to mid totin poner ol mulinili The rolóin ıı tmın d pııtı illi to hır ι huk, anıl hu t su u sum, d suun tiniu, of tbur lust« İt timin filini llu Ι,.,-ο,η of (vus ι (ison mil tbı ((iiiMimptmn ippi.lind.d lin s Intuid tli« m,, Is, s lud ıı I t ılı η ι I ιι. İhı phi sn ι in (Il Ul IIIIUll Illl .lit Ol lllll.'. I hilt i'is U wis hki I Ik luusi, ul hi i/o ,1 ,ni\|iiiii4 tipei —Shi e\piisscil ■III sil tU II llllll tO I U (In ll toll tlllllll ıı is ι si nils 1 ((did I), !S İki ıhı stun u idul tluu mil ippi.isul .1 till il iii.i s 11 lllll iblttll ip] Ititi ■ n h. I „UV ll, Uld SO II Illl IltU.il tou I sh. u ís iii.i ц lm own ılvull-
mg, but at the house of a friend, who was in waiting tosicltoinc dieir return, and w ho judgul it most proper not to disturb lier fiirthti that nu/ht, intend¬ ing to tonduct hır tht next morning to htr muth-loved horni hut tht fa¬ nul) were called up, soon aftn the s had retired to rest, and tre the da) dawned, the once btauttous Louisa was a corpse ' '« Yr iawy protpfcti llien Ye bed· of roses, and ye boweri of jut/. Faret. ell' ye gleanungs oi diparti-! price, Sbme oot your Ian ' Tor stanei) could the ss reti heel \1- fietl press liei colti lips to Ins otin, when, risting her litui upon a ho-oin that bled with anguish for hır loss— a lonvulsion shook her dung İrime —. -he closed her e) es— tht tluead ut life
buret—and her spint took iti flight to hei\en' Thus were the fondest, the happiest expectations blasted Hardly alive, and a prov ta incessant grief, tht heart hrokrn Alfred was conducted to his o*n π sidenet, there to hew ad — — " th*. loss of het That, like a jewel hung ibout bit neck Yet ne\urlost htr lustre,------ Ot her that Indimi» th that excellenc· That angels love good mc ι ith Tht hod) of Louisa was also rc- mo\td, and prtpired foi mtei nient ac- coidmg to tht ustgts and customs uť tlit pimnuc On tlıc diy in which her funeral ,}»., i ^ » or C ( ^{ .iied, the proces¬ nou t ould huidig ddvaiKC tht pnhhc nnds, tht trees, the churthj ird, were th.on^td tht pooi, with tht naked
αιιιΙ untaitglit Indian, wipt aloud, aud iiintiniialli ialini upon tluu lunil.ii- tnss ι luldren stuised bu gi ısı with flossus, wind tilts ι usul thin utlu, hunds to Inaim tlu w boli pini uu с wipt ou lu ai mg tt tlu untimi l\ tue ,1 tins im slim iblt limili Ilıt ot ..... s ot tlu u, ııı. ι ut in tlu p mourning föl- loss ul to tlie pliu 1 1 mu πι t tu tims, silu. ss.u most m un.·, s id Altiul, In 1,1 'd, pill, wlui, Hui ,11 sl.ui mis »mi tlu u mains ot liuu dipulul im nd I St İS piOlls g. Id. lis LoU.s 1, fl„- - Ц' bums, «id dose soung pus, ши lu, liung anti dum «do tollo« tlij ,χ,ηι,,Ι. inad in ılıt foobtıps aud au um usli d ııı tlıı tu oui ni tbr (...d'
Let us есаье this afltcting narrative, *md draw a \cil o\er this heart rending si t ne, while we mingle our tear», for tlie loss ot tins excellent w oman, and the sorrows of lici afflicted Alfred ' ()\cr the remains of the once Unely I ' nisi \\ is elevated a plain but hind- s une monument, bearing the following nisciiption fm тогу оПошч ( . it of L em---------------------, of H * Mijest) » N л- Brunswick Ruimen!, »1 ι departed ihtsUfo \.ugii t 1 18(X5, A"eJ -OjLir» (1 _,oiMÌn *s infili te ' g MKİncss ımm"iHp ' м Ι , »1 it puseul kno-AluigL 1 — Wurds ve Lume t hui, ixraEbsne iillvci, mux mı
S L II O
Thus wis lost to her furnds ati'l tlu m orbi for ein a most amiihle Λκιηηπ, л I itrcm of sırtın ind t\ celli τικ Asutun to ron|uţ;il ıflı r- tmn, she pi iishul on be distant sborrs ol m uncultis itid and rude cotintu , Irasını; ι disioiisol iti bibb ind to di ploii thi IlllsUirs <t lus o« u lllpll ss Sltll HIDU, Ol l ISlolltd bl Ills || |( |, |, |b| e loss' Uut it is thi 1 ,t of İnimin bliss t > lu unst ıblı (»untunes alis u lu u su (oıisıılu oni iii|osmints most 111 tını nul sırın, m nulou su η mil su I (1(11 bion Stllkis (Ull 111 nul lllll , tlu obj (t tit oui tondi st Ικιρι On nuh ııı ι sı nt, ill tin pl. ısım t I nm hus φρι us tobi loi rsu i \linj;iiisli s.,1 ,.nl ıhı un unihii, (bul u n
discit and foilom, «hile almost every thing sst bihold, tscitcs tenor and ıhsın is Un inns of Γι midship are no« ni i un ι sttıııl d to cıubıııc the tin ud tint ıs u ι moio in ι un thr' sim it fondness iitiiiilitts tiu bc I sn! n unt ibi -up llu sull kuosin sup „uus , udd uli t i -tul ι upon our I tının, ι η t h.ııııllıı tııııııııtııpn-r-, ,1ı!, smul - ,ιη,Ι, „, ]„ „,Ι „, u ι. dl i- bu-b, 1 1 11 md ht, Ι, ,¬ ιι ι ι und du -I ııı tu ıblı ot ısı, mı gı .1 a] pms „.usus ,ι,Ι, ı Itn nun, 1 ut s i blu«, ıh, itti ııı ı ..ı'ıııı, Ilı mu t liung oi it li s anul j uit ııı tin hour i ıı ju ti n pu udt u, tlllt lib ι tion i ııııl tlu· « ι ι t i o loug»'
ijiiiih of 'o\ in", or of Ικ in^ lirlo\tcl tiid to ilitait thit his ont t tasted the s\mpitlms ofhno Ijk without aflit- tion ib delti, tlu moat hoinhlt ' ihe imfoitunatc hting, thortffio, \\)iO his t) fvptiientc thii» mistr\ ( is ti ul v dtscmn«; of tommiscration loi in thcM. nionunts, in this» sudiku ti oisition fi nm tht height of hippinoss to the di 1 1 est misen no ptison cm Ik t ìpiblt nt forming m adequi t с ulti il suth ilistií ss, or tht gntf which л loss uf this kind inflitte hut th< uuhipp\ In ing wlio his tu conti nd vith Miihsufluin^s ^ tt in tins stih ь tht \outhtul Mfml now pl «id l)ist]>])ointcd in tht pltisuit ot 14 un imi 1 itmg his b\td tathti, he is left lo икр onci the tomb of lib lost
I musi Sudi soneni s must unitul Ικ pri r it, tilling to tin hum Ins cup ol iitllu'ion, anil exhibiting, in hi» fate, " the siene and centre of all hu¬ man guef
D 3
<ΊΙΛΙ'. NX. «' If e'er I blot her memory from my mind. May all my songs severest censure prore, And Vate relentless scal.ei lo the tund My bojies of fame, of fortune, and of loie. Мишины and hapless Alfud' how many toi mi uts, alas' aie there, that he concealed fiom the oh-eisation of the world, sıhııh sic must lc.iin to bear yvithin our own bosoms, and ss Inch can only be softened by time, under sufferings like jouis ' To a heart torn, by too ligotons a destin), fiom tin bosom that was opened foi its icrep- tion, fiom a bosom in ss lui h it fondly dinit, fiou, an ohjut that it ılı ally los ed, at a lo« w licit to t',4 its all'io
(1(1) l lOIlllllllllll itim. of its itiling» ι in alone iihnuibtir loiiitort , toi, m surlninçs tht most ditlicult to suppoit, tlitie still remain resources and con¬ solations in making known the cause riaid incisure ot oui afíhctions- A talin lesıgıutiüiı undu itici it bit mial.ıı·- tpuis «ill uatuiall'. tunti ıbute to protuic ıılıtf, and the mind silnih adlu.rcs to vutut tan unir ht so far overcome by a sense ot dilution, as Hot to luilcuvour to vanquish tht ful¬ ings, hy a rtlıüıl ot ılıtır sufltıııys. Inıprısscd ıııtlı suiti ıılıas, nul as the fust pangs ot ılı p.ut, ug .ıtlıılıuu sub- suini, Altltd iililiesscd lus unliappy niothtr in a langu ige, and ıı ith fetl¬ ings ss huh do credit to ha joutiitul hiart 04
Το Μ ι·: Dl Ci iiujk i Hl I lAllrSi ПОТИШ, " 4 lien I hid the mortifica tum toieeuie the dismal tidings of my lined tubers dereasi, and address¬ ed jiu in u pis upon that sub|cct, I lotild sinttly t\piit to hist hien ovn t iken -o sudili nls b) anothc i af¬ li« tion, |iitl-ţr, then, ot my present suflcriiijţs (in addition to those )oui letter occasioned), »kn I infoi m soir that ni) Louısı, ms los ed I musa no longer hsis on ruth 1 \ sutun to her constant aficttion tor your son, she was umble to en. luu tht ri',itlits of tins fro/en climate, ind no« si. eps in dl ith ' A phiuitic lomplamt which genu ills pious 1 ital to the m lie ite
Ι inopi in stho scntuics upon a resi- il. п. ι ш this pl ici, has dtpriied me t ,ι ei ι r of this inestimable, ticasure' biihmittin^ ts ith pious resign ıtıon, to -ill tin dispensiti ms of Ileaien she ust lined isny dilution sııtlı muh¬ ii ıııislud fortitudi Mild, good, and te nein, licinduicd Ικ r uiicssant suf- t ι ι ^- «illi tut i mumun oi a sigh, tinini md usund, slit disclosed all tin t t lilies ol hır soul sııtlı ι kuul d lil tl iiithusiasni —of this disi np- t η si ib the superior iliaruttr of m ioni I no« wiiti , ι ι h irai tır «ho om uu ul uk, h) lui toi titudt mitler the sııcrist sı tinini,s, hoıv unu h stringili urtile ι- ııpıblcııf conni tu, to the n ιηιΐϋ enn of tin In bli t Iııııı- υ 5
' Ditii.lt ı t ol bu o« η pimi ıs sin ıchııl ssııb Ilı, ino t pulut u idi dim upon (.od «İni, s|„ gln ,l<ıl Insili 111 (МП thin ' bs ins pi upts langin lis ins ispinuui submitting to ins ,u Lniint, sill lilt 1 1 II l till nio-t indut din lu « nil ss libout mv piOtlssltlls, sill I OIlS lllll 1 ill hs lur aıtlollb ot its sum ills MiMingls would 1 btSl MU lud US lltl to -ısı bei, un In ,ι ι uld lus, p ,su, buo« , Ι , ι ι \l ,1 III 111 «lill bli U „st, tl t II I s ,| insci! llu M s u, ,ι , , , ml .11,1 Ι S s ,' ρ s, Ι , , duls ,1 1,1 ,, lui , , Ι ,,, ... , lu ,η „, ms Π tu,, ,, ,, , tint 1,1 Ι ι u .1 , ' 1, S S 1 'ul, Humu, luul bud mı on i kum
bifou lliav n, to unplnit hei rccosery; uinu ıllııt iin l.ibngs tmi» liti ob- siliatuin, .dthiiugh sinsiblcot İlci dan¬ gıl, tu hu (Iıııy aud approailung .1 ssomtıou Кити ι 'n tous to tht tyt , ut to tht last шопи nt ol hu bit slit 1 11 sı ι s ul a 11 1 unt) upi il to tlu piut- 1 1 ss ot bu nunti and the atltttionatu tuuliini ss ot bu bunt ' I should ln unuoilh) this blight • simpli attır basın,· uitiiissul tho sı sı ust pings sust unul bv a fcnialt in lb, tulu st ι« nod ol lm bli, it 1 u mulul bil lllllll s to шини unno t iul, oi ms i un muid lo bi too inutil 1 , Hed a tinnii, un ,, inului tbt u,uish ot пич, rtssible torments, ni¬ su ι (II lltt.d tilt sl^ll . f lOlnpl.llllt to • stapt 1 1 om hır lips, but subuuttul
svitli -lient к sı, η ıtıon tu tl» sullot H. .un Sin ss ıs mı ititi tmu iti, nu ıı Idi mild uıd ılıt us t onıp ι¬ κ ıı ılı tu tlıı hum ι- t t ι tlnn Nud inisin «lm luse I i ite ι ııı ι st s tili ubimi ts in, le ululi a chimin this Mi'iioiib iiiil pitiint has Riveli us „η, , tie lussi,,, . f af ,td (liscisi, -Hilti, li no il (oiihniul mei bittu ajóme ri tu«.«, 1 > submit to ι tu shut οι tinse- distres ι ij; tioublt« «itli« ut making -onu indi ivíiur to ор[н)м tin stomis of fos um, bv tlu (xoliim ol eouri«<i ol to lupure Ihn pi'iinu and ¡(Konation «nuli a ( nihil ısı mm ıtıııt ol « ur ,vi. hints md ι ι İn t ton nıuıııoıı svilii God must cci tainly aflord " \ et tht unfoi 'un ite binig « Ί< ¡l(
pl ns tin I rts ot ι tındır nitt or nn afiei tiiii iti h. ι, I.uıd his to ι nıountır ill tin son ısı «bu lı ıflhıtıon fistens irjKiii the In ırt Vııh ι, tin ( tunal sip ulion ot stiiMbh mil bilouil tin nils л sı pal ıtıon ııııı grıcıoııs nini tırıılıııg ıhın tin I til jıeııotl it self «buh lırnı nıtıs ısısttniı toi tht soul ι, li in sulh ııı. nlı nııd tlıı sns ,ιοηικί ι ιι ıtlıııb w. t nd чин t, mk hm ub iur tul «ben this honil I.· ml lulden eti nt ıbııılıs us t. m ihosi ubo bul bem шоп than bl. lits in ibis sınıl.! whose me¬ in ıs ıı ith. ι tune nu aicidint iau sı ipi tt ıs nil s bose ahminee alone, ri uli ι, ill tbı j Ί ısınış ot tht tıorlıl ...I.Ol s tl 111 sight Il ip Mi| iimils hipps antilopi
who knots tin sahn ot ι liti ρι-,ι,Ι tn siitue ά\\Λ ti iiitjuillit), and «lio au ( ıpıhlı ut cujos ing tht к lin Hons ol thin onn lu irt i lit viul niu-t tinn tastı ı«lı-tııl pl, i-uiis, nen UUllir till llliptst llllpllssions ot sol- roti and ılı ju non tlu ι u ι ııı llıııı li ok «uli su ulmi -up, n tlu ti insu nt sulh nuts ot ılıstısı ilıı ıııııul no 1. ngtr lul- ι tbt ul ol ι tun it «bili su kun to uillii it. .lunn,' thi u mundu d mn bus, , I ul . I ,e -ι-, tun „ound tin tomb ι I .1. uh' "Mimili tinsi idi is mı ılı η mo¬ tu ι bt blindili suth tin sulkiin, s ot yom luut, I shall tvpiiii ıııı , mimi niv min и stiy, a pie ı-ıııe supin η to¬ ii S u , sloi tum-, siluit I Ыц ol sou
tobcboir in tin fullest sense ot tbe c\pu ssii ıı tint I am ' \ our Unii ititi tinnite, " l'ut distilssul son, " Auutn * Tin 1 Umun.; ıflı t ling Utti r sns ,,Ν) uu' ,,Ι, ulin sul to Willum, u il . .upi s tlu niin . t Ins prisilit III, S, s. Iu, IS, Ij \\ UIUM Ot нит İtli 11 sı 1 Kil M) İt ıs ııupnssıblı foi m. t.. « s| ıı s m tullios ..n llu sub|(,t ol tl,,s,|„,l, ни,,,,«) toi, ,„„,„„[ an ıdupiıtı ıdtu.t im sııtlı ungs upi u tlu (unt «I ub mises nu I uldlus ι ni it ι iisiiit I Inn nul. ul lb s
in ι lcttci to in) mil, ipp) motlier, Minili contains tlu paiiiuilais ol m intill, gfllll ПО ltss tllstussing th in td( tidings of ni) hi loud I 0111,1s dissolution' Dh, im di.iiist Wil¬ liam' ss bat İnsi 1 not lost, m be¬ ing deprind ,it so culi and urn 4- putul a piruni, ot tlu lowly idololiny Inai I, tin amiabli ion ρ ininn 1 I mi id, ssllosi dipaniti spun still liotus aioiuid ınt ılıt ttiulu u .. Huti, ui ot allth.it sin was to nu , ili, .u,u ling iiiiKiribriiuc ot illtb.it she sull, к d (ii 11 у ас ι omit, ıs ut 1 pu, ι nt lo mv шин! tillit pui its aud înnoit iu ι ' sth it nıllıltııss and allıbılıts ' llu d( itli was as , din ııııl 11 sığınıl, as bir bfı «as pur, uni sulu. us' llu last woiils bu ulmi blıssıııgs on all
hu fi itiids md wink resting hei lirut mı nn Ixľinm я» her eyelids gently с toimi, I rctu\cd a labt tartutit, a Ust look of aŕh< n trom hri, which would ha\c pierced v soul, had) ou bun pustiit' She low lues, no longer on tarth, *\(opt in the bosoms ot ι hose who Undtrl) loved hu, wlidt in inj hurt slie tin nt\tr txpiic' Ihr mtmury will nevtr ce ist to ht thought otin tl ν и collet tion ot those who estøenud her as л distiuguibhed chaiatttr, nor tan tliiÄ sen г to convey an adequate description ot a female whose excel¬ lente thcwoildw is unatqiiainttd with, toi slie w is only know n to those iiitudt, whom she has ittt bthmd to btu ul hn iaf«
" Л1у miæries aie now, iudeul, ıııııı· plete, and that wounded, )U liludinij Ikcurt, whitli lud but tonmicniul ita ■orrosrs for the loss of a departed fuller, haa now to mourn its dearer lost. —'' Mrghtjr fSoil · Wbel ht4 1 «toii« to акта ţicii afu.cljon ì ' For «mels, an accumulation of hu¬ man misdi, sin h ih mme, mver Ικ> fore tell to thi lot of an individual to sustain' " Adieu ' Let me entreat уон to eom- rmmicitc to the 'voithj cottiire pa- icnts ot this inestimable departid svo- man the lamentablt fitt ot then ome losch but lost uautrhte,, to jour tenderest rcdtil I si,II intiust tin sul iiitilhjrinii, tnd ss hilt I к fi r sou t»
ni) .Uar tuotin г for негу othir pai- tinilai u I iting to tins nu lanchols »ub- jt rt, 1 toni ludi', by Miming you I itmam " Your aflfcctionate, " But truly afflicted friend, "Autu».*
СНЛР XXI ——" I leek Thi i unfrequented place, to fiad nome case, Eato to the body some none to (ht πι n¿ From rwtleii thoughts that like я Jeidlj =\лзгт Of hornets arm d no iooner found j) i с Than rubli U[ion me thn ugtng and j»rt,m.i t Times ^ist, uhat oiitt I was, and what mow ' Tmf som oh s of Alfied cxlnbitid «-uch poi^nanc\, is to juli t the obsen ıtıon of t\ery friend, uıd thv, lujilj stoic ■who couM with ho mudi philosophy and ftthn^ aiUibtlns hapless mother to\amjuish liti !>ufìtnngs,is now found inc ipable f f sustaining lus он n lhe ми ic t) oí his liiothu otìutrs and the pande whtrc hi w ıs wont to ipptar in graceful minimes, bet une нК-оше
to hun, and he obtained lease to ab¬ sent himself tritili hts reiŕ,iment.il duties, ıh it hi n ıjrht the inon f rt epu nth in¬ dulgi n nisi İt in -ohtıu'ı and in gıııf Ills p. .'u cenni- liso Ικ ι ши .ısı ıkrn- «il 1. his -ill ring-, and in ihe pic m- iiifle ol lus ntiifmeit ıhı tollov mg t ili/ ıs ıııst ıs-ııtd iıı.nı his | . ıı ON 1НГ DbSIII ОГ İOLI-S
l ı bound· ıl ŕtodness. tlıouglıts by v>rtue frım Jj Io nt ι b* г mums in a lıejv nI, ¡ıı«.< I )is if ι !.. d brr « hum * v rv t-m nd h 1 1 π л» d Пк ıı ι vlit« t lur sex i raet
Л Ut 1 mil v, lut π J.,.iaiit!-ml, H . lil ... ..ur, .11 .Hill ,11 »Oll, I' ıııı. ιι J.l lu Iiiii , in I Ι ι i.wring llllll ItiJi itik,_,JI,kc, rmrkaiivrl i her onn '
S«fftir triroiiph hh, n in her (k-ith rfiignM, Ihr aitioni, чроке л pure and ardent bn. üt > F ut fui to Odi j ft κ nd Inhuman kuut, i In friends n \ cr H, and all her fjmil) biet.
T^t t t anti pni p tlıc ς* neni io « b"ili «f, SS I 1 pulil t. II. .lumi .nr -, um ,, Ы II J J -, veri r tu rniisl b, the fu*· «,ŕ th«.-e, \S !,., «I, I. I f.iol iti«·, l.unour J, lot .1 ll C ! ,nJ
7') . no i. precept, lill I II Uit, in u и ys Ι ι I, Ihon h Ы oli untili .1 into my minil , Iht ρ it, nl vinterm" m ike ruv Mini n» w r, p. 1 or m ıl.ı mnísi ι f p .m snil ihou licu snij
1 . (. .1 r 'Ilesini ılı I il.) niinJ nupre, ľtl It... U bl. alı 1Ыг „,s ,11 ,ι,, ,ι,,Ι, \SI, ι ,ι, ι,ι, ши« 1 .jwlbv lıreiıl. vspin, ih) unut, mili aimot ıl Ul„s mu ııouı, i
sti ţ irewcll ' O thou most temler best etanoli 1 II a ,ldr ıs thy rcrocmbrance to ray bearti II « vor I f, rget ti) a igeile strnie*, M i> ılı. pınjı nous God forsakı ıı.y p .rt · Α. ι r 10 1КЮ Mlıııl sı ıs t'ınpıcntls ohstrsul t* tlıı ılıseot rs ι uıng to hind lu, st ps to« uls the burial giound, md hr . s |o.!i( tilus agun pioniptiil ¡.un clubit his feeling· m th( telloııınt; ^rsN/ss г, nui» ,/.;/, \i«tm¿ tht '1 ом ιι ,/ I οι iss Πι -h ,ιι mı езг|,е«г I, f« bereft Ol tni ll))Sııııl,l, Λ ,11 г, 11« ln leid I '.ft il ,e fucilisi, r »li mt .rail liiat r ' Ι Im, , ιΐ,,ι -ifur all m> sluti, M v. .r I irt u Ιιηι,ιΙι slutul 1.4 , li I t η. , π ι 11 tv tv ■- I ll Iiii ibi ι n Luusi > biij,t
Tlial breast so \nrrn with lo\e inil truth, So bright « ith honour s pu vst ray, So lovely, yrt, ία tendere»! youlh, From me, alai ' wat torn away 1 saw her ţouthful tout «pitid In blooms of genius nur* d by tjue , Ню e \ irme, w ith a fost ring hand, Upon Ьлг brow her chapUt plat, ύ I saw lier gntlual op nmg inmd J-nnchd b) ill ıhc çratt.*, dnr I »lighten d snen) «İKİ η fin d, 1 1 friendship finn, in lute iinccif Such wis the girl I lo\ d ы> м -W, Such wen Iht hopta that fite dtiı l ! V ĺ İt» d-but ıh ' I could лог tell. How deep, bou dearly, till bhe dud По« is the fo, dest ltnks could strj 11, Tu ш d with my \ cry 1и art the gr ν , And b) tint fate w huh Ьгеякч t lu c.1 ι, 1 ht heart и ntarl) broken u о ' Srrr 2, fŕ06
Oni nioiiiiiig \ltittl sı is uiissul at an (uls buiu tının bis ipiutus mil not ippt nmg ıs usu il lo ibiuici it the ini ss lus lulliini seis ınt sı ıs dis- pilt lu d m рш siur of bun to a kıtın Iı ııı iil|oiningtht toust ulun hi is is kumin tııi|iıcııtlı to \ ısıt II Ills ılının, ibis pinoti ol ıısoıt ti ι sı iliklimi η spot nm runk rul din t ι bis ıınagnuiııııı, ılıat bi ют ρ sul the loll iiiiiij; tit sı ıi|itııı bius, bub tun but pist finişimi at the ııınmıvıt gitoti oltl Dtmı ııı unsul to coiului t lus mistir to a soi ron tul
Tili: SOLDIER.
De.·., ,ιι ılı«- 1
llli-.l
Itľl.inkM
ι, ,ι
,,,,ι
>
ll,(..,„Ki„sl,,,ll„
l.lJ
S
ι
II
Ľ Ι ι.· ,1
Wliii-li ııutvl,.'i,ı:ıif,l„.,.İ4-.ıı- Ι.,,,ιι -i | al.
ľ,·
Ιι,Ι ι
Olt
Or pluck .1 II,.· .....iluTiy troni .1, vrij..,,! sulk.
Ι,.ι,.,Κ-Ι.,ιιιιι.,Γπ,·;!
1.1
\S'
A..JN
11
• ΊΙι(·ιι1,.ιιι.Ιί.ι1.,.η.'.,ιι.ι1ιί.ι, ııjslıııılormır ,·.,ι:,|.·, \SV ve bein „u ,ic|,s t.ntjr.l. II,.· loicls Ι ,,Ι, Ν.,Γ.-..ιιΙΊιι.·*ι,Ι. ..... 4·ιιΙιιιι.·.ιι, !.. Ind.-, ľ,·,- ..Il »su uiiiiii, alu.4i.iii, ,ι nj s .)...: «,ΙΙ
• Γ , Hik of ılı igt tulil me ihe ofl lic·™ , \iilll u li г ,. H nuni ni) ,miW il I mote 'I к ι Ih,, ικ ι I bli, lliy Gil Ottan' It. noir ill ılın, spil my mm шч luu¬ lin lm pu« greit Γ, »ľ lum rttrac* í. ne, „ul, „,Ι, , j,,,,, virt.nturn Duini к ılı ro, mir ml fl it nI) lue, Andi ft m, heri m lin, ,î„,ıaır 1 1 monni ' Tlit Ь IJ ι pim 1— in 1 »c|,t it lu. sid lol , λ ι ι ul 1 ,ujı teir, lu, unni) li tri d. trn.k j \l Ih f II ri ц lı| hel Ulli tt II kl, in , pot, lil Ι,ιρρ. trd a ılıdı' d ,, ii i ä Ijl »ιιτ u isoe İhı tuntu stisnil it hustli liidin to su in again nul tin (.luroiiis' nul ıhı ılımış uıımııuıud is usual, bit n» lı. ılloıd plı ısuıı to Al¬ lı. I ııı \ un w ı, be solnılıd to join . ı'ıı lístiu İHiaıd aud ııı ıhı danu, ıhı l.uıılr, ud, il,s' suini hım α» я J. U
plan ot aı-ıusınunt, ııııl tlıııt lu sias Kııoıı n to spuiil шип ol those hours, omi (luotu) to llllilil ııııl ibi sonify ot hu it hos,· tomb lu Impuntii u- silul and supt mn It nas on one ol tbosi imbuii boli ou isioiis, and by tlu moons iilulgint light, ili.it be uniti tin Miming bt unitul ΜΙ.ΙΠ 11101 (.HT· H.w oft ninni ii.llumiitisi.il Obsrurcs il.it luslilnl liglil. Uliul, »een» somrak sili Μ ,ι, il Alone tin staste nt N L,lıt ' T ıs Ihm ılır »οι 1.1 , ums ι« »rongl Oliscili» »ith nulu, k n Some Idling linn, »li, I, oni) Ioii c t Ίο lltl Hill üli Unsrill '
And upon a sinului oicasii η Mil .d also diinposeil lllb İt \Π» Ontieb.fs, . Uil m n чип slı[ t, Ли leh Ilı ti ıs tlıı ııııdıı Jit iţi «im \\ Iiiii by ıhı d imp ¿ι III Mind ts.pl Ah it nas lov d Louisa ι tomb Λ ıvtrm tear gii h J lhe « nur) ur l mire il d u ι, ι rl , tv i Huy, At ıı Jıl nil) ıı L di pthırc S, m trn it ¡,Ι uer tim Ih rıı An Ιιιι,ιΙ pass пц Ir mini ι Is, IltbLlt lllubr Ji' mi Пог, ngını, I p,l) ,,t, 111 , J u r It, 1 ir Sml | U 1 t ıı lu dul ıı Ост 2 ifüb lllll- İt tl is tlllt \ltl. 1 pissed his .11. Ullllll, III tl Is ι tl I t 1
tlıt mosi unlu ipii nt ,1 pl., IV «Uh hl« timimin- Им d upon Iki . ll IU , tl lioso unu. -u,nul to I tion „о, („did II ι ι-ι .itilir loi Ιη¬ .1.1,1 ,ιρρ wils lili'll lind .1 nulii but ι,ι ıı innullit, «md lllllll imisjiig her puist'
t II VI' Wil ------· Ιι mr- tl ι I t I, I U 1!, t r r. ..inns ι lb, ılı ir. . li. ι 1 Uk nunnin «fint. .lijs о. ...с linul), I n »orruw made m) suiniii.r haute atı ij Tul seterin and Ilumine (»licersiho comııınıılul ılıt u, incut to sıhııh Mtiul bclougul hid long ohsdi.d his md im bols mel unhipps solu¬ tion, ind (onsiiln nig tint a irnios nl funn tin sum of lus snik ung- «ould tind to all.iuti the m, is mil ıs pu¬ sun his hi iltli («huh sumid to lit stis niuih diihnul. hi iuhngls up¬ linil loi i h u, „I ılıştın« ot sii moi. ıhs toi hım io к Iııııı to 1 ugl in,I an.l llu an-« ıı to In- ιρρίιι ıtıon his
ui,' untul ¿linting tin lupiist be bul inadı lit numidi m h suit toi MIh d to (onni и nu m with bun upon lilt sullKlt So lusts ι missis fiom Ins С ι in inindin,; Oflun ι ιι ι I tiu in\iit\ ot Mirul s ti ublid muid list it should pion tin bubin^ir of more disticsbing tuiuiús lin mul bad ,ust -ıııııul, anıl li ıı inj; nanul ι littus tioni bis mutlu ι lis il lis ti ison hu ıı ι omit bi, m to pupi mli uti md be instanti) Iustinul ti Iııııı tiu putl (ulus 11 a luisuit ss tint ιη,ηηηΙ lus шиш di iti pu sinu it tiu , ins η Λ lu tuli mu niti Hıkını bun, soon liliputul to bun his ,i itiliuli on tin nu is in si is tl ill ι l spi II ıs andin ipuiiLH ìiboliul unitili ul
\m ot lus (oloiul to ipiit a placc u mit ud misu ıblı to bim bv lus nus (minnis Ut tlu ιι fuit ılı tu nunul to pi nud iinniidutels to U ılıt ix and iu ıı ılı ııtııın ot tbt pukit for 1 ι J ml tluu t uk those pleisuics ni llu s ι ti ι i I ıs unions mother, sib ılı ι ι du ι Ilı bun it tin ipiar I, s .1 Ι ι ni nul b unj; it Ι , ι 1 lb ι ι ι lb 1 mini ss so Ι huj . si ilıı ml bun bi¬ lo k ι u ] u I I ııı uıd uliu mil f bis,ml. |,t Ι ι I n I, [i, pi lit Ills t I ills ,1 , Utili Nimi lilts S l tht sı İS II. lllll „Oll to llllll I llllll I I Ullllll isstiid lunn hs ,i Uli I b| tu ln ρ issiti tht nunii . t bs .tilitt n¿ tUllllls llllll} ut itlimi siq t Ul "'t
»lip mui , nol м ıs the loss ol lus sn¬ ui ts liss „undid I.s lus Imuin i olb- eus who tilt iqiulli i;iii nil on lu il¬ ing ot 1 is mundu! dışımı fiom ainoii,st tinin IL lud lumini, aiiotbci η,Ι ι nuit inliious 11, к to pcrfnıın, tint ol puling tumi tlie spot tint umt imul tiu moiildtiin., islus o! lui мЬоы nn ,ι ıs ıs ısıl pıısınt UI lllS 111111(1 lllll Stillisi u in Ulls «ne luid ıs sund is lui nu im u hud Mithin liisbosoni' Ilı ,ρ ιηΙηΙ,Ιιιι,-Ιι bun,' it h t osu. n li ,'is. tlu lit. li iii_ţii)t,ul(t h I m ι lu Im «1 ....., as ι η« ml tu tit lil litt nul att ulu κι t -h lu« , İd t, Ι tm , ds lill List Misir s- II I III I |,r 1 ll 11.1 somi pustiit í.' Ills 1 llllltlll.ld III u t Dum ııı, ln dip ι tul ti nn tl ι ρ' iu
, ι -ııı, ılı. .stum uıd ıfln tum . ι Ih, lho t II Ills issouľis lllll thi Ilı s, ,,Ι mint pooi iiiil lu Ipl, s, bm д- «Ιι bid Ion., bun liti d bs hi. itsot Iun muls ml bun toluld tin In, nut il it II hi is Iu tomul thi pil kil 11 ull i ι I lllllll III ,111 bu,.d ml pi undi ..... ι hi- ι л ige, mil ι ini «iiiii it bit ıı t ıılıın.dl tin III li, tlnn I in. lltll ll ll ( 1 s bill .pultul till 1 lilt II. sb 11 1 I ,( ll . I lliit ins sslu'i dill- lot n,u ,p pi lllll on llu t' unti II lllll ι I Illl pis S.U., ! lllll Militi Stillini ll> l.s, msi. us thin II» ust Ю s.l lus toot un, 111 ,1, on 1 nidon, s tui I .. Dining ılıt ιι nuııdıı t I tlmi tol Igl tilt moi n slmili « tli 11 spi, Ull, lit bl 1 it lllll Mlldl tt s „ι 1 (ι
wtul on tlu slups duk to İKİıoltl t small pomon ol lb. it oıks nI ı Dışım ľiosidiiKi Ilın lu iiiulil umtun- pilli ni assilli sili nu tin salions sums tlu t lungi s .ııııl ι Intuì ι s ol lit, tt, ssluılı bu.ııın bungs .ш . \- posiil nul thi bud spukhng bil loMs sı liiili mowil ni slo« nul ıpıııt piticissimi Utsi un ílu slup and lili land tog, tim «itd tin still,,,,, .md solitud, bs ulmii bi was iliogilhu sıı.ıııııııdıd Inougbt to bis „1.1.1 till told.« mg sublimt and lu utitt I li¬ llutuin hom tlu «niks ol on ol tlu most ι li gaut ol om niodt ι η , »b' Sc lii.sv Iıı nntli (ho »iui nix mı ,, uni, \. n lini. bill, w luts., .is bu fl, AııdlııJııı, ıııtl bnırklıs l,.r i wink Alut imu nun ng then , ululili·, lo rist
Г' u mm. Ih. sport ufi li,, injur,, Ι ι-,, un inni ,,ι,,,ι,,ιΐ -., Anıl h mı,,: ıb.lt , n mc ul»,,·, llu, mıh, ml,ui,n,). Ilus soou altını u Is hud, ,1 at I limonili uni Muu! liuu muting «ill, ,, mı .ınt, Iııııul s lu, h d ílu , Ml 111 Ull Ol l I ıptlf « Il Sibilìi « ,, , ι Ibi ι ......... i s, ι, ing lo, 1', run util, , ionului s uh hım to ,ι ,ι ,οι, „,,Ι h.u ıh, plu, ..... ,ι unduk nu, sutl, ll I s Ιι ,, ι ι u,« iiuilombul IUI .1 td 'l t 'l ll l'IU llllll lllSllll ld 11 11 İM I,I I ,111 „'s ,1, liions II, muld I,..... , . , shp lu lud t kt 11 ,11 lus « dl, ss Ub lu, .1111 ll m , ι,ι ιι md I ,ll UU I ni „Isillluiugs, bn sud, „tb inlliii ut t Is noti upon llu iiiiiii' ι I -usídli dun,, tliit we
LU, I ills lllld 111,11 „i 111 hill st ,ΙΙΙ,Ι bliius η,Ι „ust („Illl lt., I Ullllll sl non 's disumi I, s, I iludi undu .Ulun I m ılı, m.,t sul,ıı .1 mu.ki ,tl 1,1 sıl «t m t ım.l,t I,s i« "I ι η d, si p U, lo 1,1, un I m ,ιι ' I, ,Щ, silu, Ιι, od
i I II .n ι ι il li ι I l h , , t ,, |, t k, U ill, ľ, lu s ll I I Ι, ι Ι ι, ,1ı Ilı, ti i, u ..... „nul .,' ,1s M md , ι utun,, li.smo'hii in ill ıhı Imu 1 ıı ll, I , ι l', il husl, „,ι ind bis uu η , , I, hold ι s usul ι и un u ms II, hu ο,,η ut 1 I. .s I, о ■ ,ιι,Ι ,: t,, d'il lo
huhuin lönn unlun lu, ninni With .Mismus lush lu tilintou ι, ρ, ..... ι„ th. Η-ι,Ι,ιιι, „t lu, Ι,,ιη,ιιιο ,,,,,,,ι and pus, nltd I niisi II to bu Siili Pılı uni tumbling lu unin nul lu ι , and «bdi pits,in, Ιι, ι loud lit,,,,,,, η, lu, llllll ,1, hl n id, I up. It l OUI, ι s nulli libit,, on Ini ' Mi, l)i ( 1 ι u ''...... 1st
i.l lu
s.ip-
I ,-. llu.,, ol ll I t , Int, Ι,,ι, s. ¿Hit .1 ll SI ll.l III M. Ulltllllllt lllll, llg Ι ι „ЦИП ipp 1 Ulli, lllll Ol IUI II 'ι ι ■ II- Mltlltinll is tl. Ill ll,l hu · ι,ι 1 ,t ,,| uııılnıg stub Iiiiii Ιι , ,1 In, .,,.
lll.l -ll « IS kllOlll IlltO. Ulli ııılı D ısıl nn (..... I Ib mus 1 null «Illl liplll.l tonili 1 Inti lilimu, lussili into suu ums ,,,ι \[|Π,1 tllll , 111 pilli III, S' III I.IIUs ι II -Iııııul 111.
,Ι ,11 II - (Il
II, η it no. . и ult uit. ill il, 111 tid 1.1 tlu dup. sl ,!, ,ι,Ι,ιι ,l,,pillg OU, Ills t I lllllll lllllll II hsid his , si- щи. ι hir- .md sutl, a look ot
ti udì u ,t ssmpitbs nuli ısının d to SOOtlll bu .Hill, tlt.ll-, lllllll In, til tiniig mue loulil sı an ι iş allinditi this, «„ul, ------ In nie ılımı do.t ui.l.s i I I 1,1 tl 1 ι rt m ι η, ol besmi ι ie ulmi. d Ih intimul I ni) ι1ΐ),ι-ιιηικ dua ) lor biırotv mide my eumıııtr İusIl aw ) Slu endi ısouıııl to loiiipo-e lus ıııııul, and as sb, aguu pussid linn to hu thiobbing bosom, sud ' lii hipps nis Insul Min d, [ (Oiııag( int.. s. ui sı oundi d heul, I «ill hi tin kuul ununum ol ..Il soin -ııllı , mg, aul tou lo su| pi u tlu in . Ι'ηιι,Ι, tlu um ml. nm ol ,...... ss tunn som numi in di unu ,uı,ılııbtş
I m, ιι ι,ι ııı.l Ι, , „,,Ι lout sou Ιο nI no« Ini ι I'm ılı. lunini , 1 pis M " ^ '......'' ^ ^ "' |)i<i«|)ts Ίοιι -b M nit mı ılloıd issisi ııııı ..... и nul «ι «ill η id, think lul, and bli up oin binds togitbii ııı misons to (,od I mil codeas oui to (luim ι« ıs Ilıt silmu ol ılı,gu,t by ıntııt lining (oıııeıs ıtıon ııııl, «bin tıııııpıılhts ııtııın- u.llııt toı sou dl tbı II,«, ıs «bub uloin huniul lik, discoiii ( tulli ion upon tbc di nins of sutui think oi sou «ith lose, tu it sou sulh tuuliini ss nul uls upon SOU Stilli (Dlllldl IUI I lllll limosi li,,,,, soni ıııııul dl insuls il.out domisli, (onum- do (sü) thing t. ulus. mil pli ist ) ou, uıd,
«İnli indi u om ing Ιο sınırı to sou 11 tli. h .ppm. ss ot in ıı s Innpill I li sou sin» pusun to UH hv till issist mu ot (,ο,Ι ιη,Ι som own u lints Ihı lutnu iıhııtııs ot lllllll, it lllll ııı slııll uniti mu end, u ι ı.ı s to ıfldid toıısol ıtıon to tlıc .ıllhıtıd, and snemur to thi distitssed "Oh 1 mj lund, nis piolu ting ino¬ thti ' he rcphid, ' I am nosv taught to ids upon soni kindniss toi tulurt happiness, m y oul bosom only 1 u ill seek a rilugi foi my sııtlı ungs theic I slull lomb it in sicuuts my using gi iels, mil 'e u n to suppi u my distins 4ith hemming toititudi mil tını louiagc
( I! \1' Will lull İlli. ii il ii uut t. u ,ιι the I ut II. w i i unn o¡h u whom I bu It Лиши чти ppiisul Μ,ΙΙι,,,η ofins .um il in th, Ι',ιιΙ.,Ιι nu Impolis nul ol lus hinn;·; t km up α usul, nu in tin lions, ot lus moth, ι r\[ii.ssinir, .il Ih. suu tun. in însuti to urun mıhı ut ih. umpiunin ot Ins touth, ıınıluul sull „Uli <l( Il t., Inni >s tilt 'il i.'l li ,1 111- I .min II, ι,Ι,Ικ,,,,Ι ıh ...... . Ut 'JUS I .. n.,1 (11,1, ι ,. Ι Ι , π, Il ι n, ul, lo till ι ! ıh. In. ι s,,,! ι ,,Ι „ „mu tinin
,11.1 llllll .din lion ,„n |o U , I Idun s till igni pinni, ol lu, l„t lom,, Ilt- ils,, u, ι, ,ι,,Ι td, η uu pt ,ηκ „I α ,11 .11 IIII. Ulit 111 ПО« ( lllsltl It, III „ľ lul „pm tiun, toi liti, as , t. ! ui Ol 11 s, slu 1,1 In i.pls lo lu, ullus Iu musul th. η .sl ul. ni piu!, „mn,..! ,ltU,l,H lion tl,,„ Innubi, bul «.uliii I mp'. Slllll pi. I, l-ullUStl 1,1, ,<tll s kliul II, ss lo Ih I ll ...Il . Il, I Ills 1, „Iti lui ...„„di ι , ili,, s, lus «lul, Ilus iss,,,ul Ιι ι ι ι t ι I tins |,1 - ,,,,Ι td ι hli ιι dun I „nd t" pioduui , lu, i I lim lu Ion. doniti (ll, ,s ill, , I K u nun 'i^i ısı llu ull I M uln ι ι spudtly ,u knots It tigni lilt llllipl ο! Mfi' d
Mı I i ıh , u nI insu l\ m t h lui .11 ml lus Ululili ι ti li,. i,„, m sml, ,lk n In I к ıhtı м, uld lu ι u ι ,,Ι s , „, , „Ι,,,ιΙ,,ι ,η, 's ,, . „,,,„, „pou tl„ „ll,|U \ Ι Ul И is 111,1 l Usuiti». ),, IU. I I Us III bip, Uss ,,,,, (III. | Hi' pin, ni ι 1 1 is Înmiitul t ıllııt
Mis 1), ( I !,„|,( 1)1,1 1 11. .....Illl, ,1 lul u íl n In u η.Ιιι,Ι ..I hu sons 1 1 1 1, lo ,,|s 1, ι , „,Ι oll sutul iun, ,1 , , ,,,ι il, lust, m.th.1.1 Ι ι ,ι,,Ι ,„ , „ ,„ lum sill ol III, , ,, , ,ι Ι, ι ,1, pulul husimul h, I, Ι ıh, ,,,η,,η sh, I .unul .11 < ,1 ι ш,| ılın ulu 'İl 'Ibu n ul. bu ι,,ι,ΐκιη,η, il
nul, ΜιΙ,.ιι Μι, ι oul Ι ,, il tb l.l.lll ι .nil lum III a lit ,ιιι ,.Ι. pomi ol iul' . and mus. ipil util dulliini. ,ΙΙ bu pin ll ..... llllllü.l im. ιι lu luin. ιι Па ι , ι η. ,Ιι, mm, Ι Ю Unul ín η ..„.ι ...... ι,.Ιι ι ι.- Ιι ,ι .Il ol l,„ , ,,,ι I, „,ΙΙΙ Ι ι, до l'.Inn, и S ill 1, lo In ι ...I I in ι I Ullg Ins n n . -ιΐι,'ιι I . t ılım >,,. intuit and i m „g s|], «a- ,ι,ι.ι,ι lliit I I.....; n, will..I ... in ,ι,Ι',ι,η,Ι Ι.,,««,,, lb. ι III.....I.I.I, bit nil 11 nil. „1 ι. - I,-t ι - ult ι it ui, - Imn I.I I,· Ι.' ι o. in l ninnili. I . nh.ltllU' О t. η. ι ή, ιι ι l.lld III IHI ,ΟΙΙ in Im "lippo-Ui Iııııul . ındat ıhı ,.ηηι tun«
Ibu slu u ıs unions t,, „, Un,, Ι „, till tllll pisslsslOll <l| bis (llllll s pi tınımın sbı t u!,) nol liiit b. h ulu' Ibu it bul untomul п. Ιι bu tn Husiul lo ibi < ut ol ni ι ,ιρ iiiii ipli, I idlllltlllU Mu u notu İllisi nul ï Ullllllllllg In lllllll lllllll ni loi) Usti 1 ШШП1 Ι Ι» I ills, los,,,, ol bu su|lll lill lo ЯП Ilt tlu II sull ol ln, л ısıt ulun slu unii,! ιι nn ι more , omit idi ι ot (SUS I m umst um, t llllll till К polts İHI SOU tl Dllld III ıkı, aml bt gnidi il bs th. ni к loidmglj Altiul ll„llltl(l bis inolili lsd, tu unn ıtıon ιι t toan onıp ms hun dining tıs intended (Мишин aiul uithuilt uupui ing ılıt . lllsı bi Ult tonn ııııl n pani d to tlıı Ksidi'iiii nI his
guardian, silicic hi sı ıs rcıuıctl anıl eınbractd, as usu d ıs ith dl the tims ports of a seeming jos aud congi itu litcd both bs M ilhim ind I hzi upon his saft n tui n to Inalimi and tht prospei ts of tutuit li ippmcss u huh, tothciinietlingnuiiilol the tonni i nul ıs hi txpressi I Inmsilt, had it length ,ρρι nul foi his ııuptıııu Hippv I .lit bun foi tlıc ıııısıısp« rtııı, Mtiul, hid hi ι iiitiiiiisly ol.suvul sulh ins unii pps mothei th. inul. nun tot h s publiions tunul li sı unul thin illSl |>( insul hls dt uns ι,, lut, ------' Didin ıhı on d« I As al her hoin , mu > mL Ik, tur Nothuij; hut jim s md tiastii, ι ould bi ıhs nul ıı uhm ılı. s. dl .1 Sul 11 1
lu giniihuis Iı ısı wimb ippened to biti tındı 1,0,1, Itoti! tllllstollll - tun and no« u sunblul Ibi ι .....sum ol ι titlul oss nu nu u th m the hundid dssilbiigol ι л ill ι,ι iptitbu us İlıı spi its ol Ihı lu 1 uıd tlıı plı ısım s ol 4 1KİS «lllll 111 till l ll|OS Illl Ilt t t Ills bolli, still ,ρ,« md ,,ι Hitung lo Mil lum Idi 1 ill,. In inulti u t uli uu tunn ι ι ılmost umst uit ust lit so tint Mi ul w s ii. t,m uls I md i > 11 III tulli Illl titillili lllll sunt md ,<p„, I. Id, (tttig. ol lus t, „ll,, liiui.ls «lun lu ss. uld mingii ni Idi t, l. ol so,,,,« wild lliun ln th, loss <t tim. dipulul ilnl,I Ile bid luminili ni uls i monili in Siitfoll dining « U h ριικ,,Ι m upi u tdK solu itu! ι st iti Dunt ol Ins u Φ
counts, but ııı suu tirisuy thing stemn! lo gist tni sutil lus guardi ui to iiitutaiiunints ıııtl intoxit ıtıon, so thit lu ıs ri pi nulls ılı tu ltd tlıı pio- dui tion ol tinnì ubili lu attımptcıl ti uihuili ıhı isnitiuss ot blinds ult is upon i sub|ctt bt utiuld tam lin loiisiilutd is ol buli uiusei|Ui nio bi tunn thun but Viind bad arrııcıl at sı irs ot ıhs( ittioli and ııı ıturıts , uıd ılthoıı^lı Iıı uıııld stilinizi) pl tt ııı ııııluıııtıd ııııl absoluţi tuist iu tlıı ıntıgııts ot his supposed fuind, sit hi insili uiiisi.lirul, that the mi¬ su iblc btni^, m uhosi bosom thccor- uiptioiis ot tin uoıld bad distrasei! uus pinions ¡,' 11 'd intuit, siho kinu no otliu plı ıstın, Sils sınsıblo tuuoothtı hıppıntss, than sı Int laıds,
ur tbc lu\uı\ of i ııılıls furnished t, bli affordi d м lio disclaim d ill e\- iiiisc of tbe iindiistinding consuli ıctl all (Uličici ot suitnncnt unnitiiiil, and, b) a luutihts ılmost linoni in¬ alili coniti laugh it thi sund mmc of sdisilnhts, must bi lost to s n tue, and tot dh unfit to т -soci ite sutii as ,ι future mmpantoii, In tlieiitou pu ,ιιιιιΙ loi lus letuin to tossii, ss lul' lu utrun solicited α , loiluitioii ot lus u ıııııııts, lb it tilis nullit lu inspuud jircMiius t . lus deputine 'Ílu aittul Milium at !< iigll. bigin toiul d inmd at tlu c η ικ st m unici ni isimli Mticd ılı mindül ι st dement <1 lus ati ms, but, willing to postpı in tlu ,s......in is Ion» .is possibl,, lu icipiistul that a sliuit pinoti inigbt bi
¡, un I и ti ui η,ί iiiii pimimi ill t ι ι . . Il - Ullis 11} Oll till Oll ι ι «lu h issimi it Altud tint » .η ι 11 it ni ir should hi ininutil} lit ltd it tin s nu tunt hi ttiulırfil it lum ι st impui pipir tor his signu- t ıı tl at lit di namın itcd а matter ot Ι η (i ailsiioiilid^incnt foi tlıı ılıt incut sums he had furnished to bun, «hırlı hung signed hy Alfred, he pro¬ li bed to luu every thing ready for 11- inspection m a veiy short period tiom that date С iidulous and unsuspecting Alficdi join hurt posstsstd too niuth of hu¬ man s niue, to suppost }our guardian t ıpıhlı ot duels ingj ou, the milk of huiinn Kindness flowed ш too much punts ssithm yo ir soul, to suspect ι 3
tliit ils m lu, ui lo b, luutui »id ittin οι ıhıl lu ι id 1. ı-ıls uitnp tiu nihtiin ι I In-lb,,nun untul t , Il II It 1 I lill ut ton 1, ist 1Ч| tl I Mlltlll lll.l 111 Insti Uld s, ( , (, J , ,„ ,|, ,Ι, ,,ι m, „„t bum ııı Ιι ii_s ,1, „, I t ι plu, nur -ι intuii tu uimii nd , I iibiih ibi ìiioiistir minili ¡u intui liidon joui signing as sprubls irmosul luun лош sight to pnsrnt τ disiosus ot the imposition lie lud рг к Used' li ip liss Vltuď ulut misi ι к s snu smuld thin luse noului it sou bid butu llu tul upon tlıı uisin unitul Iroin soul lnotbu on putin.· tillin llu lllll had pi irtisid it ' ЛОНГ SIKIltl SVIS lio l(lll¿U (OUS! (lend a jilnsuii bs som pi ilidioiis
simili m lu b ul îiosv suitul bis pul¬ losi s lis vou, md, tiartui sou should uinun, to lì hni İhı gu llvl «к, I r tuli sı ,11 ,ρ il, IhüuJ, lm b ,ıs s, tr.uulıı» Iıı Iustinul soni di pulun, ululi thi módnu Iago, with ι duplum uii- paıallıled in tin ann ils it ml uns, and sibili bc mined tunn um tin baml nt liitiiilsbip on puting sulidul tinsi run ι k. dd uu, is lo ıssuse Iloni lıispıijuıed uıd pol utul lips ' Mind 111) tının] t ıııııul' Miietiwn n r i, y,huit, I sı ) il 1 hv n t Iluni t In p.ssnıg ıh, dimoi ih, un,, ilde ι »Itigli s lu ι insul tb, ι η и ige to stop im iti sv inolili nts, м bili ln alighted ι t-
io imbiace tlu in, svlun on [n,tm«r, his fuhiii;- ouitame inni, and he u uld luit utlei a lunt ,ιιΐιιιι, a- he ipiittul thu.., imi pion nltd on lu- I .11! in s to tuvv n
til AP XXIV " Híj tomi kind nurd op d tlıc bu J , And lini ind «ι ; lalı n ; lıeır! 1,1 i ir t, V hin n bi ieil.li 11« «I & v, ι Ilıııt «uli r ^ On Altiul s uus il m t.. sn, the ansiity ot lus mother unu ι ni to leam the pirtiiulars ot his rtuplion, as siellas the tesnit of Ins sisit to Ins guattitali. Hei inijuiiiis on all subjects were ge¬ nual .md minute, and she appeared uncommonly solicitous to find out the situatior ot tlıtıı aıcounts, but who can dtsi i ıhı lit ι ( onsti m ıtıon, or fancy to themsilies tin shot к sustained by th s anxious paient, ou linning honi lu ι son, th it hi had signed ι iletid.
the piupuit ol «ludi li. «h 1 , sit ìgiiinint ni iii.l «ithout Imiig Mıh to sittlt his mounts' Ilı, -„, puions ıı.ıe nmt unitul stu ııgth cm, I ind -lu (ould pl uu's piiiuu tint all bu b u- upon this -uhuit tllll but I ..) |ll-tll llllllltll tutl. pu ns¡ „ι sb. (.»ild ılmost Inn gin -nI St till (UUSI ipil 111 ι s tliit «ould insin nt uu« illiii, to (Miti unpl, ıs ınt lllllll lis 111 111 i S ,l| S llllilil S , 1 iti İŞ th( s, it of ihippinrs, sb, -uliini) bus Κ Ιο -ink uiiiiii tb, luijit.i lur an uiM.li bold ilyg iij on '1' sp ur »hi bu .mı i u. tiiii t . Iıı ι sulii nn.-, and « ıs sus soon ι onimi d ti hır ıh iiiii n bs ι disunitili tlliitss IU
Aliud was uin onuuiinli uimous to ıbspıisit ..... tud Ílu 11111 „miss ot bir iniii.l I.s sibilìi it «isouisionul, and uinuin,, I. .1 ι ι, iduin ,η tilt U. II.IIS SlOlllll lu ι 11. u.n inul t., bu lu illli, ind .tl ,, lu tiu nu nis ol usi unj. Ii impilimi tuhu mind he sunul t, ulm nu,! ml, ,si, linn t,it¬ li, u. Ut II SS 'l lil tins ll tlt, «111, Ulllk niss, thllilOll, Il Ulti. utul lu tos tili bu ι и i lupon ι iitnul .omi¬ tís h, , ulun sin «ould hi 11 ui tui. tlOIll ',. I. ist t Ot Ih, «Oll.l, l.ll ,\ pi ,1.1 ,1, Ibis (ll „.(I, ll, İII.II1„İS ıh nul tu I u ' İhı nil «hub ol,
1lu sull ι misli tbepiinful bindin w Im li seems to oppıess >our soul will be alleviatiti md we sball no longer Mrcstle sutil im,iiittines, no longtr miiniiui igunst the dispinsitions ot Pi(sidriK( but π İlıı t sutit ς ılınness and s( runty up, η tbc bi|piness t oui itu itiön hen c »nıparcd svitli that 1 1 tl his mils 1 1 oui It How. icitii \V ι sb d , in η t,renient lul ( onten ι d, .indilli lunts will lupine tbe lulu s ι ι ρ itu nu , ι ,ι ly uiriodiiig ure ss dl II) tinnì un bu isis ıııtl on ısı ıs suli ıgıtııblı ind nıtılıstıug sı us will pusdit ıhımsılsts to our su«, İhı 1 ııllı ınt sun, sıııkııı„ luhu d ıhı 1 Its mount uns tinging tin ir sn « u «ned sun nits sui ι ¡ııbl, tlu Ι ι tb ud ihon Iustinii σ tottuu n y
home», the proud crosving ot tbc ai tomus coik the slow maicii ot the oxen ntuining f ioni then daily tod, tbc noble aitiiitv ot tbt gencious stetti all ss ill unite ind temi to tUe- uati the greitest of sufli ungs Wc slnll thin ruene tin visits ut ni tinders sııtlı in opin an ind prolidul tiny ılı not too frcipitntli inti rriipt the plnsiuis ot oui rtticit lit sbdl ruonult our lunts to dl ııı uikuni Пи ti irs ol dilution Mill soon drv un miilu ni sui patlu/mg butti) nt puu lul /i|bus tilt litui «ill tx- p-iiiil и linli tul ι ti mij id sorioiv , ılıt bl i ınt \ itin« sull pusun usi It 11 t in isis i u ıs di mil in the fll| ııı t it I Is ti ui mt ut lllll Iul ului umi uu ιι ι luis sul
anıl -опои tul ulu iiill ¡,Ί ulu ills dn appi u , tin mind sull uu Innirii li|ut lonsoliion umi, t ilions and ıs tilt (iıııın,' nui diso, 1 s tin damp ι ιρ nus ol 1 l ins il ıs a hipps ti ııııpııllıty «ill dissipili thi tU Uliks ,1 thi Sdii lllll dl pils, „s tO,, |OS tilisi lll,sslll,S iiiili «ludi ΙΊ. udd 11 his s„ ,Ι,,ιιι dill ll su, pind „S l noi, e. ns,, ,ιι , η liki illisi lıııt Ρ I til 111 ,| К V lill Ι tli« tO KlllOV, ЛИ, ul lo a tu 11,1 ılı- ,11u lion, tili -nins md sulin uu lub Is ot lus L'Ulllllll «İKİ UOVI lipilll.lt.) Ml Dl ( İIIIIİLI III Ins It ll ,1,11 ,Ι,,Ι slu (ons. utid to In. iliinai piop. sul bi lltl s „, 1л„| il,, noe t llu tu ills to fruiiil ,η,,,,-! , ,,„, Impilili into (UlllSl bitlin 11 lllllll sin lısul ı.pt 1,
tht l-h ol W ι Jit ι- ι tiituirir-i.lt im ııııl ιιι,ιιΐ!· ıhı nı((--ıts ol an alın ı-t ıııunıılııtt unios il, slı« pıoposıılhnın,- lo.li.in:;- it ( ırı-lııook uut I ıhı s ., Jıl lis up. η . шоп pi ι ııı ılınıl к sult nt t Aliiul tlu u Ιοιι ι imunmu iti d thi ir intuiţii ıı- ı.ı «ill ι ι mini lin most ( nulul ni um. ι ınt ..... iul Inni, tuit his motin ι hippini - nul till пнищ of lui İn ılı ilıı nI <l lu- чти ilini non nul 111,1 t lllll m ι 11 ni un· ,ι h - ıııııul tO Itili llllll t пы 'li,,, llllll III III lltll Slltlll 1 1 1 I It (I, lian. h. 11 «Inn lilt ι ι su ι, ι¬ οί lu- ,πι, uh in ,ι ι tul, n ШИШ US llllll In ι -, I \ r m- lus ι, 'ii.l lı- -h ,.i . ι ι .ul (lunn·.' Ins liti -nt ilıı ι 1 ut Wil
lum had almost totali) foi- ıkın the conjugal embraces of a suit, b) ivhosc patnmony he was raised liiiiu in¬ diğime to a state ot nidi pi ink нее, but ss huh he si as now basils appro¬ priating to the vile purposis ot sup¬ porting a prost ıtutt iiithuiiLiirhboming hainlit; to «hose barriu and niriupt bosom lu murt truuımtl) repanid lor idial pliasuus, than ht с uurtui lial happini-s m tho ¿flic lionati -nuli- t.t hisinjuiid 1 b/a In (ut, ıhı -ums (xliihitid to the invi ol \llud by M ilhanı, tu,tthıı tulli In- ,. m ι d bul ıhar.ııtıı, ııııl tilt nu ııı . stuıu- tıoıı η, «nuli In « ι, b, „I, .un m lus oui ι.ι,,Ι, bombo ,1, ind, Imn an \ious lor thi arı ıs , I ol t ι it июни nI svinili sn uld plaıc Ins puputi and
..flans m Ins osiu 1 -. ι i ud til. Ulii tl lllllll 111 ill I . Ill ,| -, Id In tuhou uh ıı Kill,- , il¬ luni uts lo Ins чип' ι ι η ι II κ ι ',- -Ullllll to tU .st sh, I o К, ,1 o„ ν bkt un ısımı, nul, V 1(1, „t II, tid Ικ -ıtatınıı, lit con« ittil t) a lu', io íisidinct at, anıl an cai ly s ısıt to tho spot chosen hs hci In tht npls gisen by Milium to Aliiul- (oinnmtuiation upon this »uhm t hi ııttııli) pi. tunini to li¬ gn 1 ln- ,'j ι ıu« Ι ut inou putu κ- Ι ils Ilı I t I s sn »del I. situili 1 It -I) ι. il u -lu. lioin, uhoili , svio, I tudi it „nul t.. llillii hnii sııtlı lb ll. , suu s itiu.,1 „,' thiir muting, , I U1.İ011 «hill hi |.IO| „ ,1 shot, I I» Пицшп u I s 'h „, τ Jt· li .
nil iu' , ι , , .hul , , ι Ι ' Ι', ( 1 'Ι ιι
Ι ι .1 ι luh pu, „Ι Ι,,, ,, , , , ,, ,, ,, ,„ | ι ' ι Inn, ι In. ss ,ц „,,Ι ,, ,|, till .tillid th, dissolut, Il И Ills III, '" ' '"Ί"' l-t pi , tl, ..... uttu ms .İlli,, Ih, I, ,s ,1 Mind ι un _ uhuul u ul I. u md ııı -------- 1 I Is il t I I 1 II μ I L 111 il II , , , Ι , ΜΙιΙι m di. idul tl, Iıı ıs tli . ,Ι I Ills pillis is, I, r ,, tO I I , t ι ι d, j ,sion in ! ui tb, muls· .
ρ, s Ilı
с ил ľ. xxv. V-loty II. I sİmUmiii ılı..· ..,1" -' . — Л Я.1» nıı.k· ll.r.iiL-li the emit I ) « l..· . il, •IV)·»·. iL! ,.,ι« .:,..! t!, ч ·:.. >·,,.· ·.,.... ■ Mus. De Π. ·,ι :,;.· li.'.'ui;; 1и'р]м:у ex¬ ilu· ¡ni|m: it ..... , «4·|·ι· le .u «v.l. .U·'. tb. c! iv ni i.ii-'.li li\c'il upon l'or tlie ¡ι «lip.lltlil.: «bn the;, «ι le lav.H.lc! «ill, л ν, π Muil letlel II. Ml U'illuill, Ι.ιιιιΙηιι -.- .■ |·- -τι t tl.-l.iy, f..i- ¡I.. piii[."-e t.t' M,l.lllitt.p.r hi, .in. .ши» fin ¡n-pt-ľ- liiill; «li., h İKİIIJT sali.:'.;, LillK sl-t- tlt-,1. he «miki Invi. tin-, pleiturt: »t' л
ţ „ι , imlimi rires mus to timi , . ι n. Ι- nilon br lliiiipsbili \ m i. I'S tilt tim pt HUS post nist ■η. ruing ils. η (..lined them it his mi il ,1 tbr Nur 11 minium- ( omit ( ι , , η «'nn ΛΊιιιΙ nist-mils ıı , ι ,,ι t,, nuet ιη,Ι conduit In, tiu iui ι.. 1 ι ıtlırı , π -d. nt. Hut ni ,Ι, ι ,, ιι W mı ι Ί nltd in .ι t« nut , ι pis lit lllll in t , t„ ul ι ι ι , . s İmli M.nil.l о ii| I , tn ιι lltl dillini bom ilıı Ml . 1 li ul ,м bin nul -p.nl 1. м ıı tu b Ι ι li ni .1 ibi b ι-ι тын mt Ι,Ι ,,- ι ll ΙΙΙ-Ι1-|( ting Ml ι I ı ılı ţ ı lili u, t ι η ич ι ut insili, ol ιι -pi' ι nul
•Humus to , xpuu n, , tin ,,Ι, ısın, s nI ι u, il sin İnmiş Imi, Iul lo tiu risiili 111 (ИГ l s, II, t U I, IIS s, till „Ulit Ol III! soils И, „lints hull ul, lill nu ısın, to di puni upon lu in» ι u il.lul to sutut ss tiu luomi llsllll u ot this bu lust «ıslı .md sb, ıl.ı uls lu j. in ,., UltUip.l, |,l, ■„.Usinions,,,,,,,,,, lus, ,lu ss is but t„> İndis doomt,. ms, ι lo, sp, ru nu lb, ll uu ol ιρρ,ι nimmt th, fol¬ lowing dis suou unsul ml , ι 11- .Mllid Ιο nuit lus Iııııul Hut imiği, t) II, nuis ol ılı, , un Minili now , Usimi \S s.,,11, s Ih, , „Ι,,,, .Ι·»»! « ıs .puiul, ,η, I tin li mil ut Uliul
4IH -ι In ιι ι- -. i/ul bi ι ninnili ι и llllilil-, «III. ,|| Ι,',,Ί.Ι bill, «lib 111, U! Ill, I .1. posli,, I h,,,, III I d- lup,,,' Im ι ! lu lo m di in ........ unnt st HU I, Ulls! lun .1,1 , |„ и «Indi l lill lllll bun , s . ,1 tl. sı I il lus >i« \llutl ín lb ilt ι I sl,si not lus lllll hn„- Ih ıhı in n İt ılı- ,ρ, lllll, ıh ıııdı.ı uu iııı i ılııt lılı I" lıııl -o III tlİKlOUslV , II, lui toi lllll llUt ll' .1 II 1 t ,, İO III, U.|,I1,'S, ur lıllı η «I. ι ule ılı ol the sutlu „us , 1 th. lu ι Ι lil ,Ι,.ιι Mis Di' ( luid.,. η.« οΙ.Ιι,ιιΙ ii « in ss lui ámul I sı η t. in li u lui pu- m. 1 ι il , ι ι ,, «n , hi ι nul Ut ol
a - marinii ıı ν uni iiuiiilt-s шоп ln st Ιι ι h.,1 ι n-n urd hun I.s the hl ,. krši lillun İhı silo, к « ι- too sudili ıı md um spei tul to li.· supponili uni lui timin (nim ıhı uli homi ılının hi Ihe most loiiothn,' _;,,((- (oultl no hugd - th-tuid tht u < uinui iti d ınısıı u s tint villini Io hi ditalini ui on lm, uniin the elints ot st lin h hei -pints sunk in tin hitku -t agonies .ml s hılı -lu s nuls ni ,. isolimi t) tillo« lui -on to tllf ihn t. Ins. ıplıtılı hli 1,11,1,1 filili! -hook Imii uh Ilı. pussun ot sııtlı с ılıııııtıı- ın.llııı tul.l. lınılı- ıunıl.1 not -(lit In ionics İlli lllllll tilt lıtıl I ot N tın. -unu, I ılso to tullini th. ııı «1 h ..... un Illumini¬ si h, и ι s, olmt tumulili.. - i/id Iıı ι,
nul α plis su un stas sent foi, bul ut¬ lu uıııld aııııe. or slie agam be¬ lliid bu Minti, ber ticlui, genţii ι losi d, and tun sudili ııly ovcıspread b) tiu slup ol di ith Mi r, ι ht г« Il s, ho ■ ni) seek, for trimet, Ι li it ,1lı ııı iv t ir Inn and rei inn lhe pnilts, « oul I diang tur u imu, al ι „ 4 *l Л*. Un Hist st mist mtut' lamsot seines like tinsi t binge sour uiirilcnting and bonul nunii \s itt uninoseilb) tbe uus sou lusi pioduud, ab' trunk nil tlu α« ıkı nul pos· ι r ot justiie s .11 stt osutiki md punisb sinii ui- iuiul .luds wink tlu dung widow s ι ч «itli tin sun., siul ι ompi unt ot' n . nupi. ,ι η. 1 t itin il, s,, Mill not be u", ml in ι un iiiii will thi ir appui ' , tin tin nu ol Ilı iun rı.ı.aııı un-
Juciid' 111 rom merd, eniri aml por- jidious wretth, that a ti ly 'il rétribu¬ tion »ill Sbon arrive, when jour pıı- ni^hintnt will brir a propoitinnite αηιίομ-ν to tin tjt rith < í ^oıır nuiitloltl inmrs' Ли sufi I URS Ot \lflltl Ik m f past titsnip-i. n Mml up within ti t wills of In, prison ' »w h< lit ı.s ι lllttcnst llltrillsll . 1 tilt smili, II ,ηιΐ I 1 hippv titt ot li s lost m.tlii. m thi diopcst t sti Util 11 1 I sllltts t ι İl III thi anionul foi «huh lu nupu nui, antl to 41111 pumi s n t j j ι ss ι 1 tho list tuni lur 1 il I lips to Ins o\ 1 will is to piitoun tin list sul «lut s to« mis lui ıs ι s, , im ,ι, t „η I, supplii iti s sutii ι 11\ 11 ti 1 his 1 iq ds .111 ılı il to ıhı 11 ui it luun mı't
-lun lu arts не posses nl of no kindreel feeling ind hu тек de ss guardian, to whom done hi ι an nosv ipply for iiiciC) mil unpl. rt ι nleise Aon) his ι plints, lu- (lcd to the m msum of lus infuus tu pie pire, prrlnps nuv ι mies tm thi innocent and allin tul sutun ut lu« pertids Distillled lis linciri silnic lus lıtaıt Muls m ıılcnt ıtıgıush fır the ıın- isjiititl ııııl sitildin lo-s ot ч tentit r ııı tin tiom silmin hi Ins bun s > inhiiiii mis sepai ited, Utud ippi ils t ι Iltasin t ι rtliihiiiist Justin upon ι η ι 1. s, Inni 1 ubul mli, , ,h- nuts his tint d,, in ,1 hunt his 11 t , iilhls ι. litisi ml «lin Is ι puh ly .npnalliini his ds,, , „,sı uni ti г l um m obj, tli « ıs bound to pio·
tut and chtri-h, suth tiplitted and streaming ejts he pris s for ч mitigí- tion of such manifold «ois «lult in plaintise strains lit (inli isoius to g sı Utterini с to tinse sı oi ds ------ Juti O. I W I il w U beome , t ine n u , tt retched mortui ' Shut tıp t* ıhın the tt tiis , f , pu,, n \,i Ineml, ml p. ги. kind.ťd wtsp for mc ' Almist no grate illütt d mc — Lik, ıh. I İt, That onn tus m,tn«, f tl, 6,М, 1 ΙΠπης Tin held, and [irish
( II \P WVI ' Ilı « ¡merev ι nel r ) f ¡gl t thnt mnrtfl 1 1 ere ι inorty m rich brent'i uf u r th it mort il 1 pi eti di\tW( Tlwie * теку bvıüı for Ь\тЛ nud Ьел«, m God » indulgent ρ' πι There · mercy l t eneh creeping tl mg,— lut man /UU » M ,J«T MU, Pissien to thi minci us ot his situa tun mil uimi us to hui it ııı bl 1 HUI III Ultlll s tlıı tunu d utos ot lu ρ unit puhumu! no other ulei ι uld uitu tbt i und ot Viind, but tint of bűnit mihli il t) odu to bu к m uns t'lt hst diitiisot m illumin¬ ati son In unişi ipii nu lu detil unnt d to uiitt t bis I utilii ss 41U11I1111
iijon Ilus ııı ısıtın, rupi mg in li ll.lintion Ol Ills uu lllll tou lds 1 111, lus sudd ..... ul uu i] u Iı d ι ιι tints, lu thus ,ψμ -calul n u ui) uno j iu siiasive Uiıgıı. ¡,ι, to Ins tniin¿s To W 1ШАМ O Coi.ioa. " The nanit of fi lend can пл longer exist bttiieen us, sou base b atonduitas ule js it is unpiei uluitul deprived yourself ot tint tule m ι bo¬ som whtrc you hid Ьиц' aml ibsol iti К reigned "Torn from the piiseini if in it fcitiointi mollici, u bo nou sluj s щ ilidtb, а tutuu to мни minim nuls I tull )it soluit юн limitin in. «orli ι l' sa ι , t p, III II И s t II-
ι,ι» mg tin list rites ot human nature pulinniul ι pon lur remains, ι tit isc me 'hnitou Ironi ms svitti lied coii- tuiiment, I uiniuu sou, nul il sou hase it in jour pomi to gne a reason for the barbarity ot your conduct to¬ ward« me, oh' let me quickly heat your excuse. Barbed аз jour hands nave been, in heaping the most dread¬ ful calamities upon mssilt, and m taiisiiig tlit pun atuii dissolution ot inj 1 st tuthlj tie, I launot suppose sou s ill uou lltenipt to out ι igt tmn tb. saued tuist u pusul m sou by thi I, nou uithol ol niş iMstınıı. Oh' il ι not pioti ki tlıı lltıtın., spint t 1 ins intombili titliu to risi indignant igunst sou nul pıouoııntc a I it d
pussor' 1 ul, I I 11' ind glllltl nun ι a fintini ikim ι .Honol ,ηιι l>( toni (.b|llt ill t', I lllll - in, h, I, I 111, I dipnt, iu Ot , l,S| ,lllll II.' 1 r nk Illl t ılı il. .lllllll. 11.1 S İH) IIII ploies ihu ι tl ι dom ot beiitto- 1сп(Г, th iu toltine ine longer in such cruci susptusi 'lake f ioni me csciy thing 1 possiss saldatile in this sıoılıl, »avı íny iharaitír, and lit me in re¬ turn, and toi the last time bihold niy dead inothti ' Do not sntlir long« ι under the tortuiis of a gmlty i«"- »ciencc, ubidì must aflbtt jou foi join ciuelties, but consider ------"Vint ısı ılr ıs ÇIIIİI λ\ li.net if tini g aljrnutť — 1 il-i aientii.l M I. , ilt, ι s up ti 1 .» t. llu ., I t. Itr ι buni a b ι ilh of « ml
Itiflcct upon this, ind think also it η ------" Better be Willi the tin I \S 1, m ton ι gam tilt ir sett hate sent to peace, I'll in , ıı ılı.· K.rtines of ibe mind to in III rulli »Π«,« I Open ms pusi n doois, therefore, I ;in шиши sou, nul sise yomsilt tue du iilli I p m,s ι I ul citing, that tin onu hi! py Aliud, vıhosı „undian jm iin.leit.uk to 1. ι, novi nu ι, ı.ı itu! ııı ι iptlilts ll lin suit ot tllll ms midi ııı, svin. lu- ι u nei bin selt umi .ml pumi, ustnimi Oh' Iliink ni tin-, .nil soin u llu Hons sml li I Uu un'ini u tl il iin it un ,η- bu. t siii„li -pirk ol bum mily sul uu ioni 'uidiiiid bu ı-t tlu mut ul N , tun «dl lonipil j.m to iilm- ipiisli ioni unnaliu il puisu t-,
" But sboulil j ou pci>i»t ııı j our con- tumii atı ınııltııs, antl surlei tbe tl. - formiti ot ¿uur tutun to remici jou still ullons to tlu ines ot tlıc ııııtclı- fil, tin n let me supplicate )ou İ4 mi r' \, ulut h Jt drappelli ai tli cetili, r, ιι, ίιυ,,ι íí.aven tpon llu j Ια Iı,,, ılı ll ι. t» ,cll ч| It bitit, li, Ыт üı t ytcı. aiul lum tb.it uka ' "Murv will non Ιχ> an esibii to Alfieri tin (ют lus ορριιν,οι , anti cons ıhını·; tlıı multitud! ot ıııııı t ıııııı s uru vt llu ııı tim o' ι umu ılın lııl pıriıdt ι oıı in ı> sooiiu .r litu, tiel tbı ııı ι svity ol ıııi| lor 'iı^ tms ntııbııtıu blıssmg lor joiu¬ si 'I do ut thuift ir, compii that br гм, uhi sits u[ ou tilt jtidgmtnt- seat of ull miiť.t, to tur* trujo
jou indignant, and at tbc final mo- intntof siparauon trom this lite, svhen jou au talltd upon to .tuonut for aH sinu litmus, taust Him, silloin tila trull puutuit miu supplii ¿ted in ııııı to tbiuidtr upon ş oui rillution in Miitliful stngiauu, these empiu¬ ti, d u, uils — Hv in»l ll „ Ικ pe f, r Hiraj , tU »di ι . , num» — Ibink . t ¡ms »luk tluu· ís jet¬ tiini I, U mu I u ml. ι lion anil lit ııııı thoughts noi ι msi yuto ren du ι ıı' mu s sı ,ι udi s. st nul in si u mb ind ι ,, t. soin supplii atını; ııııl u itti bed •••VinuD brui to lus bası purposes, thtì in- liiiiniii mitih ]iiusitl tus litter, о О
м almut a single straggle, the tender impith lauf fiirnil-hip had long fieri, «in ncsei ihcnshcd within lus 1 I ind h irdcncd hrcist and he nls din-lilt to return the fo! lii.iin. upli to tin Keling epistle ni Ind Hcnidl / \ii in ' 1 hue ordinii sour <»r ' tagt rainin to UK nd tin liinti 1 of your duiiscn niillir and «hen }( u ак di-pi sul to | iv tin uni unt 1 1 som (hot to ne 1 sii it ft v, i .1 to be ir from you ll }ou i.lsdit t) pirlcit ι hind I -lull Ь ısı nia. ι out foi my den nid ι unst stu 1 «ill, immediately on join so iloni hl«i m you " tV IIXIAJU Q ( ( s SOJI
Shocked h) the hai hai itv ind in justice ol this repls, \lfiid İncimi almost fi mtit nuli disippointniint and astom, lin t nt Ικ noti sni - b gu inhan as ι t Hm it Г Л dcsırıptıoıı, «hılı n ms anguish mulus hım il bli to himself nil tau-t- I u 1,1 the bitit ι,,ι ss of his heut to esci um Oiiiiupitint (....ľ to ilici I now ι pi . il toi lint mı rt ν 1 liase m s un s ι i,ht luun ıhı stulul heurt of ıııııı О tluu wise Dısposır ot ill tuut¬ ii li ıs( mı I Insilili thee, fiom tin impist gi ,-p of in aiiuised fiend «ho his dipiitul me of iicrj eirtl.lv lnppiniss «İnli he seeks ins distiu. tiun within th- sial's of a pus m
Λ II U liiiii, pul God' m JI Ibe d, Immiti ol bu mitilini silitului s, "Λ ¡m fine ,1,-iuur ,11 jl„ ιι ι,ι tlie luve ol II, ,t „' VhU I.,,...... ll.l!; mi ılı Ι,ι, 'Ih İt Iı ıııı, s , ,, lus inli' ' il' Αι чищу »uli ι ... ι, , iiiii, ,,Ι „,ιι, M „I, ,„ intti, ,t .....I Amont t ., .....In......... "fl - I"·b, Анит.! to.l ııııı in m' I'ı.ıuıs.l lodıı.ıu ,,,! m.', Iı, ' .. ,n ' II,' ll n,l lini situiti ııı Ιι n' I -------------------.--------- lil ,Ι ι I,., , J 1,1, in lluowna μ arti«,)
(ΙΙ\Ι· \\ vır. Il 1 III il, s un , ч . Il ' I I II ,ι I mı I oni, ι j ι I, lut llll| οι ti il unjustly ' A< ı.ı ι nu to tin piiip.nt oi thit pait „I ill, 1 Ut ι pivtll unind lun. Wil bun silnih ulittil tU till U,lt..„(l, iiiii nulltolli .muid lim ι ml \ tud nul ıııtııı bis m I i u latiti to tin intiimint ι I n I t m. tini, «bub being anon ,,Ι,-Ι,,,Ι tir, ν still av ut lus hnilici nu ss, π, .„d bung »biigul, ι (insisti mij with tin la«-, to union bom his pıısınt jiIjk
of ..minemi nt, to tb. hun,\ İlımlı p. iso,, ibis pup... Ihı i.russos .Ullin il- lol Ills Ulti ПИ, Ulto tills lu.pl ,.Ι. ,Ι tl. innoitun Ui \ sm И llllilil 111 IİIS pi.,,,,, u is til. K f ,.. pil) sided loi tin Ιι pl. „ Vinul t,, t I i, b bi и ıs (ondi ι tul Ι,ι ////, / τ Ι,ιι (Ills (Hu |,IS Г, ,ϋ,,ι slllll ,1 MIH II. Ii¬ tti, ι onıp Uld l llllll ol lllllll 111 III ι. .s'lllt Olit lllllll tl. Illist I ,l,|, bl llgs ulunu ι blind tondi Ini „luittliul ,ιι ..bod. 1.1 to Vilu. I Ih. h limi¬ tmu sunul I" los, dl ils tuim, • S, ι „,Ι Ι ι ll. ı;ırl. .1 W I.I 'кч SS1„„ . ,ι I) V ru . Ιι,Ι. ι. ι,ι ιι. Ι il). ΙΙιι,ι. ι ι,,ι ,',. .milli. . ι nivo» ικ.ι lo hu иы ь . m, .s Ilı thinfnn uitu, lus nui raptı- vit), siluit ш siluit anguish he en·
.. ,ι „s loe utonili lu- scirro (- « Π II lus „n, bosom md Ins (ulm,- < e ι ...,ηι In ,η, ess Hit ,',,(! «mild sea teli 11 «ι Iiiiii ι ι utu ul ile t i hnusí Ι 11 · I . ni il ıı ı'ıı t mis I, lime υπ car Ί, и » rul. ir. baie Guilty at mec, of iscr.lege to Hiat .. And of peiñdioui robbery lo man ' " -Ah ' it seems to me that mine is a peculiar destins the rest of the st oil.l nu hipj ,, and I am tin oiils our si ho ь (insid (.ruions linini' uhri« mil th« it hi a cc-s ıtıon ot nu soi roils' I could no« rend asumin this hc.it, I uıııld dash ins ι It to pici ι s «hen I anı (lısappoıntııl in unbosoming ms¬ silt to othds, si lun 1 (onimunii iti nn itle ıs <ı\\t\ sınsıtıııns to those «İn. au ıı. ip ille ol ι Iim -ııııpatlıs No
ont tau ilıı u lor« li insilisi into ms numi ılıat ddıglıt, uıduııı <n pit ι •uu, wbiib it dins not liattu dli ж tis¬ si ss noi ian 1, though I .n*) anti t) «11 tilat is tllulu>ii,ic and nnpissioncd, rommnr.iiatc to another that sensibi¬ lity winch his organization ıs incapable of rccııvıng My mental reflections alone ian administer coinfoit under my accumulated gilefs These aie plu- suiis, « 1 u b ol ( oin si all men, ol ss lut¬ isi! luuiLtion mil upull) put.ike , this tin« I, om imi to tin otbii lin uliiam oj \s lm Ii ss ι lusi most tu «piuiţii tastiti, losis iu ulur its II ıs our noi it, sıılııı, lut (inn aıuuııts ni w ι b ums, and u mis s atilin ini plti »uu. tlu ш ııı 1 . , η nils i ıs tistul 'Hu »ulunt oi ul , к s ,ii, . a.
... b. iiiiil. tl i, Ihı u ,'u it luuli u (siinsin a- thi ituild a- mihu ,tts' as tin Dışını jııılııtıon İh- ıııııı (.util plıa-ıııı- tlıı tton arı um'. ıııoıt dui ıbit Ihın ull uthus İhı. ıııulıu (hsappcaı sııtlı the light ot ılıy, nor change sııtlı the external forms ol 'hinge, nor descend svitli otu bodııs to the tomb, but continue sı hile «с exist accompani us un<kt all tlıı ι к l-situdts, not nils ot oui uioit.il liti but ' t that «hul) ıs to come sııuıı us in tlıt d ıı km ss ι I ıhı ni,lu and ι umpu ,atı toi dl thi nu-nit s tu ııı (looıııul to sutlu Hut tol ibu, ıı ι,ι ubi, ti ııtoı, Il . ι ..... ι ll t I a , 1 vi ι ik I. I) I 1 in I on I Ik k n «I I ».nj » .J ,« J war «ill. uı.,v,.bJİ uil '
"Thou Inst miuiul und m pus, n,,' an obiti t sou Mere bound 11 ¡notu t luit ıs Mm d(sp sc ι I m nul listin lui«, bo usc t .к in do ııntlıııı,' tint Is unitili. Ot Imi I ,t pi USC In lini the min ic ; mi baie insultiti tuli In remembered with ıılîcctıoıı whin ι ours will be forgot. Monstei! Iloignc sou ·· Keep thy own wicked leeret, sntl be mft If thou rt|icnt SI I ime gii n J л t Ютии, And anı in ťiil riwarded lomi) mete) , Il ll.uuı immisi lubt IU umr, i .„littnisliniiulllimiblttobn.l'am "Mankind ıs ıııoıt il It ь ι ıstın to .ıdıııınıstıı I .ıtrisini ss Nolliin,' cm Mound tin sul loti ol tint lutisi «İmli luis no ıhsın lm ниш thin it possibsis, w bili nuil nu «ill loin t ıııııı, wlio aıts Mitli siniıııtj ot lu ut,
to riuut upon bis nun dibits, and to 111 llllll st .1 lou ol iustin to till inuit ..thlS supt „.US • llu ul.t oi I ishi. iiilili bit, till S| I, 11,1.11 , lit (OUI s tbr 1 1 Ι¬ Ι,,,,, I, ot posn ind m indin, bitr 111 Illl I.OS. .1. llllt Ulld lllll lOllltOli- l.SS p|. ISU,,,, th, I -, pllltlUS „| haud, lals(li,„„l lis pm rist md pm r к t null, s udi but n ulu .-i nil (iistroy tbt mind siluit tuni luuloni pro- 1 t ııııl ninou nu sn 1 nomisi! tust ι,ι, ıs, and ııı onult it to .|„ lit of biini mils It is lin, alun, tint uiU su uu us tioiii tit aspi 'sums „ι hobt aud tuinhuis iiiiuds tiom till iiniust , outi nipt and hi sb ludgnunt , I tin r US III s, pu silting us Iroin till' . luting s·... t ılr of Mins umus, iiiil tiiisiiits, ι Unitimi η.· tilt Im·
.1 thosi p usions u lm h au loo lisely iul a.du.t nul isiihlisliuig pia(c itimi ·ιι. Ini m ht ut ι Mil nt "im timon tutli illudi ι in doni in¬ spiri us «ľh truth tht I no ot iustin, . .1 . I s n tue liiasi n his vvis ( lv ,ΙκιιιιΙ t it ınınkınıl should In ridul ns ııı ι· Our g iod and suu uhi. M. nudi has, hippi't foi In, р.ор| ч pırfııtul this iluiu 1 ) Lis I m , ihcru.nc I hots sııtlı rosin ικ ι mil iibinission Lit pi isirs Ik ollerul up t n hi uts ot a gl iti tul pu.pli, ot 11 «ihon le has nilul, t.. ultinál, stub thun, Ilus losóos, f, stu, s,,. ------" Mil Ih Inel I I «in„cr ıhın Ilı iv,' mne ι,,ι, II In, jm.' 1 ..r li« luv I, and lui,„ 5 ma) It . rul, L ' Ni I s li ii.l.l tum sinili 1 1 luin ι |,„ ι ' ι oodiitssanj He tilt up one nul um m
ι Λ ι 1 ι « ll t il у ι I ¡1,1
Γ ıs. Ilıt VII ul pul ι ι ! Ιι ι lu ull d ι ropo, il n i I Ul t I .bliniin, bis · , il ι M It tush ί ι I t ι I b, ılım Ims hit li lit ΙΊ dud ι ι ululi li I I I id unul Ins uuni 1 dilli Ilı unt ııı ıl t s lib lm 1 bun lis , ln, in nI , η f I'll I ll tllll ι III ubili U is II pi ibid Ι ι Mis 1), ( lull,·. . ll ibis in list, binds also ι tl ι 1 n I tin suflu in· Vilu ι t.
w hoin il should unit on lui dimise 11, bis thud m lututultht nu isu.c ot his „inputs and pun bunds d,scils .m ob|,it lu st ,s bound to , I |,,t llllt Sill 111 111 |,,s ,, ,„„ ,„.| ,,u| „ lu dis, ' I, n. I οι s (,ι I,,,,, dui III I ll ι , ι,,ιιΐ l'ut nus lu g llllll till ,11 . I · 1,11 1 1,1 ill.S, ill,..,' İIUU U,, U 111- (Ml u i, lit. sinks L' id Ι ι lins « ,1 , „ „si,, „I |„. ,l,„,,plUU I It 141,1 lut ts st,,, , Dn, „,,Ι ι, ,, ,, ш ,| |„ |„,, „„, .11 „11 tb,,, ■ Ibi lun „s, utlmili „t ıhı ssoild I, sull lul ui uus «t p m 'ıkı s tlıı. uji I I aud lubu, ,1ı ιι suıtnıı Ilt III « .1 llllll
lun lu vntiuind u-l nl
Tlie lottagers al me now attend to the wants of Alfred , and this pleasing nlhte tlicy perform with a tendi moss and sincerity of disposition equal to his own But in this state of exist cuce without pisiion, after e*i>e- ricncing the most ardent affection, confinement becomes the death of the soul, the tortures of a wounded heart. The oppression of domestic misfor¬ tunes now vaaqtushes the mind of Aided, and teems to render it in¬ sensible to every other concern, and while he receives the tender duties of the cottagers vntli a sense of un¬ bounded gratitude, the world appear? to contain nothing that can interest ' im eiceptonl) the secret object of HI II 11
lu, ung.,,, vi „b d, kups (los.ll ' „ul sm, ι Ιι., blu, dug Ιι, ut In tins Siuntion tlu b, pl, ss Minti uni. nul lui suual un ι ds. w bt II t I Itili I tl Ills l.oius.1 till ,οο,Ι , ld I, ll Itlllllll Ills I ,111, „|„ ,11,11, ., dut . 1 mou il. ,11(1 bun IS lil, 1110 hipps, lin „unis ml 11 soluti Aliiul lit « is 111 II Us, „id Ills I Ullllls ,11,ml to lust tl, .1 I 111, Willi. HI I 111 lllllll ıhı I , si , il.n .l,„ls, uni boul, „,, ,,,,,, IHUS I. idus au. stul lu, s, . ,l„ luuni llu .„,.„. , Il UU lltl s. It Ь„„ ,, I su, , , „,, ,1, ι ,
..... "Hi »„ι u, "" " ' " s| pin , n s loi, s , , I ' Id ι ι¬ ι ι W Iiiii 1 ι lu, ι im iu i" Ι,,,,η ,, „,,,.,,, .1 ss. .i' ι Li b m-s ι bu I, s, Milu, . t Ни. - b' 'i"«
I ,ιη, .h, ılı, ,11 us li Ulu Ml.il , ,„,„ -Ihıl „llıs. lul til ιι ...I, , I,,,,, ,,,,,,,, Milk „ι , su .kuis, Sil, II Ιι, ι,,,ιιιιι, tinnì U III lllll lu ısım ı.l Ilit ,Ιη tın ol Ulj ıs nu 1,1, Ol un ılıt uu uit ol misili lu u usi ,, dis b uusii I ni Ins ,ιο, u-, -nI wind b. ıs lllul sulh till ll ,L . mu, ıtıbis, lu ι, uitu ι idit be I s U IUI. U tO ll , O.I, III I I
ЛЬ Hulluus 1 mj good and ien« ι lu fin tul, 1 now compare ins. ftel ι igs to thost sıhııh mustliaseagilattd 1lu poor sirt-dehes «ho sure formeilv supposed to be possessed of dei ils Vi-iige propensities ıı d « ild startings Moteur Ties m ni ithei linn pun taor pission but ι lull in, sinilirtise η·ι «hub stull, л, ms h. M. ind alnı. st ob-lrı.t, nit îfspu umu Ík „g tlıııs itti, Ird I nmt ,.,s bul ınhıste to su к rı Iıı t m nantit ııııjf tt nıııhliL' t nıon,'t!ı (hr irs rl ırk sı ini s İS sı hu hi ini sum undid Iınsıoııı jıllul to take tlu- -tep list nı,-ht 1 du ınt tint the uier Simt 1, İm lud , te, H. tud its lunks -,,,Ι tint tb. ,ι. un I tiom our ι ott ige it fu ılı utón I ııs lı ıııı İt ,ıusı .uıd ,Ι. ι ill. s
kis inundatul 1 f tiu ud that I it lift at elc\cn oıloık tili miu «,' uvful ami (lisn al tin n m w u 'ul by tlmk il mı, lut ni . n ι¬ οί its seatluid beams ς itu ι il un tl о foaming waters as tint, «einitil t ι burst over the meadows, nid tUshtil against the bankb intl lntlsţfs Ilıt whole vaHey resemblctl ü ι unqiuit sea, agitated by a hot 'intr Umpest the moon, now throwing ori hır «laik mantre, »hone resptendently , jnd pre¬ sented more perfectly the picure of convulsed Nature echo replied to odio and redoubled the roaring« of tbe »nuls ind waves I thought ihar tin fiaiul 1 jIIs of Niagara, at the »tstirn ixtrcmity of tin» enchanting nvir, p isiinél tliiinscUes i crept
s ur ι ι Ιι ll -nou ibis fisul to tin spol —Wb u ,11 nor ini¬ bì u tlu t m i I t im n m ι, s 111, 1, is η ns d η t ι I ıs ts „ ni —ПН llllll is Ult nt ι un, Oh hO« lipunilisls U Ould 1 ll,t l' Util ,. , 1 , ι, t I, Is t u,., ui ι' .d- ml ',ι Ι, ι ť d· ] ' I Ii, lul I ,η tl „ s , . s ,1,
Ι,ι ihe » itei, tint mils ılı tu t .uld m put ht m-' i, ui-In. 1 1 ıh.ıı·, lu¬ nt ins old pi us о ......, I 1. nn , on, юн g, (I mi ...,¬ ιι. Illl. IS, till ll I faiouute sulk,, ι 1 pul ι I.. I siaste and mu I h tin ťnti.t ail tht «itiK-sts oi u . t pi nous ho in- the moliu tmn ot « luti) liungs mail m,s to ins I, ut lb. si . nu | ι sou ι, Ιι ι m., m I, , .I.,.,in«, it mi possesses .11 ι hose h'.- t.- m . h ni ml. t ht IS li, ,, Itili I pııısul, liiit no sill iipioaih ıs ι un, , loi Ι ι·η not ılımı ı..dc, .iul ibi- ι- « lut 1 ought All I u „nihil no« ısa sink, to'il Illl,' Oİ I VI 1)111 111 SV 111) |)ll ks l,p -I k, bv tb, hui,, suli, and asks for 1ms I л dooi ti ibti, to luigtli.n
out 111 IXIStllllC of w ri (ılıtılın SD lllll penury ' Alı liai tl, ni- ni) numi sd uunin- iinactoiint d i) ılı langui O „uuroiis lousa' —Had I esti a tuit ııı n у love for thee that was not most citaste and holy —VI as not my passion that of a husband tor his angeht sviti — Dul my bıeast ever colicene a svish that was dishonour ible —Oaths might attest this, but I nctd not u sort to them And now—again a d ream'— Surely they speak rationally who attribute the conflict of passions to external powers The last night—my head trembles—1 feel convulsed as I speak— esen last night I folded her in these arms I pressed he ι to ni) doat ng bosom, and on hirduvs lips snij iinteil
ardent kisses In her авюгом eye» love sat luxuriously playimç —mine tuinkled with ecstacy I« recalling to memory these imagm ırv transports· ot bliss, am I guilts of a crime — O I/misa, Louiàd' —nt) tate ıs seaicd — my inam ıs too vsi к to sustain this txrturbatii.il, tins insiisioii ot ill oitir ι I am (iisliatttd, tor ι whole nek I luse not btcn msailt 'l«ars ilon hoin niy C)cs, and lieastn, is a last f ıs oui, tenis phased to grant nit the « olisolatio ι 11 s lidding tiltro ЛЬ to ınt ili plaies aie now the samı, loi the) ue all devoid ot pean I am in w ınt ot nothing, ytt I desne mou th m tina svorld can gise Alas it «tu litttr tar to unit this scene et iiu-i is ss tin ut c' 'as Heaven«
Ы. ss von mt ,1, „ „,,Ι „,,,,,η.Ι. in. ml пич \ ι . iv il! |i„ |,|, ,s von I; , , г m ,, 1
Ih. ι I t 1 11 III 1 <l I
.11 I, , si,
<m„ ι ι ι Ι ι I
11. noti hii.lt ui illotl tol.au tbc ООН, I ,1 a I, udi Minpatlii ik t lllllll Iiiii ι ι l'oli uimi .-umidii diu tul , ,Ι, ι, ιι , ' Ι ι ι ,1, , ., Mţ-li ащ! moi,
СНЛР. XXIX. " Saw jrou Ibe hupien Alfred ι bed > No marbl« decki h.s bleed.og breast} H.l ip.nt now, alas ' has fled t His soul is now at peace and reit, «* No tears embalm h«a preooua tomb. None bol (1)« dewi by tw.hgfat ({iven ι No Ughi disturb lhe ι lent gloom. None but the whup ting winds of Heaven ' Рьасе to thy repentant ash(s' thy spirit has tied, and t'.y soul is gone to mett th) Cicator Miy He in his gnat meuy, icciiic ıhtı, mil ustou to tlict " that ptact ii luth tlu «oud cannot give Tht un' appy youth passed the ic- rraınder ot the dıy m silent «It jiition; with incisini·,t slips lit stalked in the pııson yarıl tossirti
-" the close of tin esdung hut soon re- tin ned, and retired silenti} ind alone to lus chamber lie svas soon after¬ wards heard to si сер, and talk s»)th great eaiiKstniss st hilt he pacid has-- tils up and dotin hts room He then thresv himsill undusstd on his hed here his passions ι ululiate«! svitli each otlu ind he lonvuısısely exclaimed ' Ah ' my distraiti il soul ' thou art hur ned hy a thousand t meies— a thousand puyeits rush sutiessiiely through mv «enini brain, thin comes the last list oik, otti n the suhject of former (iintemplation hut now of unaltir thh (tension— Death 1 It is not despair, hut tin assurance that life, for me ι ontains nothing si orthy of poHessing lhc cup ot «oc ıs full, the measun
ot im sufimu,', ıs un ipli n nul ıııııı' 1 puput m p„s tint iss tul h unn, Inni ss In nu no Ιι istilli 1111111 s loi ıhı I ist tmu 1 un th,,. ,u, ills' tU thtlll (dl suil «ill insu lis, ig un— l lililí,, ||ll| unti II. Illist ,s spil ul l„ Ime it Mı 1 ins, sum tlKS (.111 Illl I 1111.11 ll, Ml. Imitili ss İtil till Miglili lllllll III \ttll I , Ut ,11 mom muti ful toni lut 11(1 ι „ι ι Ιι , lllllll. Mill Vlfllll is 111 Illl S, _l ll tbt ,ıw tul alis ss Disili W luu di ill. I itibntiiig slu p' ll.l lin lom . ι tins «minuut Mt «i ui I suil ι, bour pi lhl| S IS η s I t 1 (Luk I uu in .idi« .im Mì 1 ulut mı tu,i 1 , «oul hst 'lodis 1 sund ιι,ιιι,ι ι, III ul thi pildi ot pi ilutlon, li nu nos u Ul and ninnolili ss I lit isUniWdin
the, ub' Wb t ,s Otlllll lu 'n m I Inn sun I I , ul , tin 1 u inn I '- ıl t \t İlıı nun nt I lus dit ill 1 st ,,ι , si ,ι,,ι ! ι ri il ι u ' Ι,,ι ,ι. „o I, „ıs, ,1 ms, ιι ,ι,' , ι ν ı ısını , м, ,,„ , Ι , „,η ,t U III II I il I Ilus Ulli ll I I l t US les¬ si n.t I. n «hit is и lo mv ,1! II II li HUVS Ull Oll.l 1,1, 1 tl|„l umpi - uni d. lill— bi in nud 1,1 l die, (lllk (ol.l il .i. ' Huie it ι, ι tın« t 'un 1 lud Luut ι ti mv
ılı umilul ituni.
friend, the solace and delight of my former das s —she died ' oh, gracious Ciod '—I tollosvcd hır hearse—I stood bv 1İH side ot tlie grave, wlitn her coffin was let down, and heard the creaking of the cords as it rested on them Tlie first shovel full ot eaith th.it was thrown on the cotim, pro duced a hollow sound, the suiienling oms 1 heard more faintly ind it 1 ist tin gıavı svas filled up Then it « is that 1 threw myseli upon tin giouiul, while mj heart was buakmg, si snui, overwhelmed with sorrosv Hut I si as as insensible to what iiapptntd, as ig¬ norant of what wa» U) hupptn l.ri cious Ood' «huo am 1—D.ath'— (uavť Unintelligible words Ah'Lou¬ isa, thy sulTtliugs, thy v u tut' that
hi muls s ntui wluih ciused tint to sındı on deatl makes me to smile also upon ¡t m I as a friend embrace it It u ıs nou past eleien о clock, aud all stas still, -xtept the whittling ot the sunds The wild expreuions of Alfied u ere only noticed by those who beard him, as the svanderrag« of a distressed and troubled mind, few theic are, who pity tlie distresses of melancholy grief, svhen exhibited with¬ in the walla of a suettlied captivity, where almost every indis ulual has bis tale of misery to unfold О man! thy vindiitne and relentless nature, thy barbaııty to thy Rllow cieature, is unknown, until visited in captu its Ί here, thy vengeance is felt, and in fbctid with all tlie feiocity ot ί proud ai d sas age opprtssoi
Agun tin ..uh, ι ps ,Ι . ,Ι " No« is ill u. »unii l III ,Ι M, ns soul is. dm İlmin im il , ι inul 1 it In ι i ι tbs , . , sisi ii, mg ins li t in mı , ob,, Ι, ι,,Ι inul ill an "'jlirougli mv svinimi 1 latih α glimpte ot tin stun, as tlit Inokia clouds irne unpitt οι sij dut in by tin wind. Vi liodi s .( estul yt «ι,Ι lllVCl 1 111 till f tt П. U 11 atı I s ippoll» both s ou md nn \ι d ι nv tli it ni ist Uliutitiil ot all ι nist IliUoiis posent, itsclt to η s si„h it ι,ιχίη luu lull on ou) dooi— hoi oltuihin 1 str. tih td out ins minis t «aids il uni in soktil it ıs tlıt sviti ι ., ol .ην It nus ' Ah Кошм 1 ıslı ι ι ilt in, tint 1 am nit ien u itn il '1 < u.sii ιιηαι,ι·
111 I I UM
II ,
• \ , I , I, ll I, III 'l u I bun iďi 4 1,(1 Ιι n ц luun mv Ικ ut I now pıt ρ η- "ι I 't· I m· sttiiutmt, ши do I tul on ttrior. Mill not niv ılı ill) icton nu to tuce, .mil ¡.is |. in in 1 Ί i.|uillit\ t , mv Mouıulııl bli, ling Ι. ι,οιη- Mı' it и usus, I „nis lo ib, ι,ιι to siul ılı ir l lood t. Ιι .nib .lu u un t inn lu¬ ido, s hi -i di 11 1 to tb ι tını «.-.ıstın ι —Hu· pist ilt α ι lı med— ,ΐ| „ ,,. Ι—·Ιΐι .1 ík , ι Ι,ι, tsi.lt.— Ι „к Ι ., ,ιη nn -Ικ isid ns
f' 1
antl he ird tin к poi t ni lhe pisto' ljut as it ixiitid no fuitbei daini, hi piss¬ ed it unnotuid U sı, in tin nun n intr Ins suvam tunt into tb. moni and found bun i\teiiiled on tin Ilo ι, weltering in his blood, be raised lum up and spoke to him, but lecened no answer Imagining he was not w holly dead, he ran to telili a surgeon, and then went to the dwelling ot the ve¬ nerable ĽJithius, who instintly hur¬ ried on his clothes, and Hew to the fatal room, but by the time In bid arrived, the unfortunate youth w as ι о more' the surgeon, proviens to hi. coming, had found a faint moti m in lus pulse, and had opened я ι cu , but all was raeffcctuil The ball enti r ed tl e temple, jUit above tiu iv
The blood which surrounded his chair, makes it probable that he committed the fatal ait is he sat at his writing- desk, anil '' I thence upon the floor lie had drank onlv on glass of nine, and on his buriau the tollouing letter -и as I) ing open * VritlMBlJ- All) UnOSEn DSRTHHS, " \\ ben you behold thi% I thall be no mon ' Tired ot tnis world, I (put it svitli pltasiirc, becautc in it 1 hase nothing lift worthy of retain¬ ing, nils that I odupv a space which ι in bett« r be filled svhen I am dead. "should it be possible to icsvard >ou, m ins part, in a bitter woild, I shall indeed think of sou there und hasm¿
Holding Ιο bľipi, ul, but ms pooi ik -αιΙ bnih, ssııb thi diai minutan ol nis I χι 'sa v lunn I now go to mid, pi.,1 nune I, nu in, I» th .It that nigh 01 id, duin hi ml SVİ11I ll looks low lldstlu nu ulosis lint siiiiouud muu p' ii.tiil totligi, an Isso SUİİI.«,— ill 1. Ill 11, bl l', lb |,s sınır ılı snut ( bils',,,,, „ns lurt dill ol «c-t to bi nm.ml Ilt n tlu ιο.,,,ι of siiili a one as I „lull soon lu , ,1 „i tii, η I musl br bunul in llu high «as, tint the pinst md ılıt I.ı s ılı , м lu ıı 1lu s pass ms I. n b, mis ι ι,. timi sm unul looks to lb ism, u„l b- tl.inkiul l'ut Ilus ui not SO dull· -I С .'s uu uitau sull stop and ť.,.,, tlu n u ,,| pits loi ms ta!. \l ıs n. ( . ' ι <l us boll ju.it t ml
j ичиг ми, ind k. cp mu u, a pu¬ lul stati ot liippuifss until tnix sinil di потоп 1. lussili imu giat, tul Μ ι iun ' Ίο, I, put th, h,iiis„,ol tlu ι,»,. r, 1,1t mitli, ι s nubi b, impossible lins mis I» hutu uu, us,,1 thin lil s, ,, bul \t night tlu bods ss ..... „liuti I stilb sili ut sili limits without pirul,, tO till lllltll listii, ss o) t],, ,,,„„, „ul İmin lb, П., WIS UUS, SUİ 1 ,tbl s, ţ s h ,1ı Mtiul b .1 b n -ıh .li „ui Ν , , m · It'tlll'ul ll.l ds w , t lins ni I s III, , η,Ι u I 111,1 ,fl,,tl lllll Dillini , 1,,1 İH, 1,1. tins SS, U bıl!, Uİ lb, uu, s , i Hu ulunn, I south S lill I lb ul, „, 1,1-1 .
Thus perished Alfred, the once liappy son of De Claridge, sviio, dusen to a state of desperation by the perfidy of his vile guardian, and iiupusonui Without a hope of bung released, could only U hold his life gliding asiay in nothingness, si hile Ins sorrosvs foi Louisa sverc tnd) pitiable, and pm- du(ed that suspension of' faculty, si hu h caused lum to think upon death, and finally drove lum to remme beyond the confinis of this nuked sıoılıl'
('II \P XXX ' blhei ot li^hl and lift' Ilmu Gool supreme' (Ihı lei.li nie «Iní н g.K.J ' tudı m. lliyieil · Чие ηκ trom lullt tum» inj pri,U trom t,..'. Jiul ,uii Um pur.u ť imi (adm. «lill W itti ItııoMİtılg. ııbıııuî peact anJ vinile pur, Sitie 1 .uMjliliil il.» I I idillt Wut ' Tın impuni-. H illuni still ı\isb, but t ШИШ tll| i\ tin tums til lus ill cilttin tııjsıııı VbııııİDiıul bv tbe? «oıl.l, lu stiks m t.ııu ılıt 11)1 ıı ty ot mankind, in \.ıııı lu tiuleatoui» tu In 1нрр\ «uli hiuistlt lut mis lit Ins mm, < ist mu, nul síimmel, li\ tui\ lumini lu mii lu tvists au an ulu nu upon ílu ι irtli' «lult ( oN-
- il ,(l tlllt dl duni lllg lllllll CUI tınındı piiseni, lo Iiiiii tlıı m ..... ol idi.. tion, nul «pins lus muid lo tin magnitud, ot I ıs Ι,ι uk,- nul lims I, Ullllll- Il 11 II li lih ld su ι ι . ι '1 t .1 I nu I 11 III II 1 Illl I t I It lb It'll , t t l' ,1 .su I- t м-' nu '"d St 11 b! I'll l.l-l, Il ! til ..... Ii ui . l'ut ll 1 i un. Ull tu n b'.
II li I r I ) Il i I , ι ι , .1 Slllll 11 Ul ,- III, donu ılı. i-ui , I ,,, ,, idi l.l un 1.1 li¬ ll p. lo „1, ., ll II .1 tl. «Ilk , 1 ,,' I , ,ι,,Ι umili. I
ninnigli liti ni ι,ι ι , ılı ι < t il .1 uns.il, bs simdi ι ι , ll il t, ,11. MUH, lu! Ult bu ,g ι s dl , lus U ll « III n < . lllll mou t mtu . I tl η η ι l SS sti 1)1 UJI ill « 11 I 111 ( It 's ot the mibe sinipliiits ' I du nu i I I', linds tdicitv in tin η st ilisuue b< tiuth inri smi, duts m tlu mils „Hiets if lm lldltl.lll lu I Hows tlllt plidosoplis illudi ruumis dut httli lus II« it ml, ind suks lus lllglllst IlippilllSS m , , „uti lltl d Ullllll lì lutnu ni tunn tlu sı n ts ot men Ol ll« lllultls, ,|„|,|l,s SS 11, 1,S tiltil uns und , il, η,,,Ι,ι,ο! „ıs ,, the siituou. Imu sull, un. ni lu b sonn
Ilii ! d lill Stil, I, st „ΙΓ II l.l Dilli S.l 'l ih. I «dus Ι, ,, ,,,, „li ρ ni ι ι ι t ι u ii.ii ι . /u titl ι. ι ι t nit ι . ι II th tumuli¬ li, w mans nun pluist lu timi t .Its mil κι numi ml -uus ds 1 ν till ıs (s' I'ıı 1 Iv ι,ι n uıtııu ι n
d il ι ι ι il
lu .u I. .1 ι . ι
ot tlllt li to lb hoi kno« uu ι iu Ιι,Ι I.
ι ι . lu. b little ri hllllls 11,1 I Ulllol III 11 p ilili ot ippiui mug tin iluiaitiis lit Oil til. I Olili in, 111 tht ot u tunn. lit iiluthu vu „u InnHon to th. study .« dinul io lillutuin ol m-m .1 ioni,.. Hul
< . tin» ,Ι, .lililí. . Ils , Ι , s , II ll 111. ι ι,Ι ' ι 1 ,i . .1 s 1 dl lui «, ui . lo И v niiis-iiy Ul hl 11 Is. 1 Villi un Ι ılv, ' Ι ,ι ι (. I I, .1 n ιι is it İlli It ι nat«
Illl mind I.s 111. sluds ot letti u thi timst pl, i m,s ι lu ,, ,„ sum lllllls Uld , h 1, u t,, uil IK IIIMOIIS I" li iu In huid un s, mulling lint tuil,uu, ,,/, sou, „„,„ uil, p st, UU s, p,l, ,,,„,1 „ ,s ,|„„„ •Ilts „,Ι ,i| lllll tilt U , s, , | this mosi ununun hli II s. u lul ılı. t mt ıı,, s ıh 1 bu,,, h uu tum tlu somt and d, I uu Ι,ι ι s „t ılıt t, sinon, I,I, sıoılıl İlıı nun, ıhı t „uliu s ol ıh, ıııııul il, (4,1,1,1,1 111 Ult HUIS Ilts til, m к (oiispiuiiius Ilus ippiai and ,s till pll.s,,, s ol .Ιι Ιι ιι. bu s nou sum to In tin iiibng рг~ч n U un sı gun mus s outlı, ubo au a, si'
uninltttiil «illi 1ht s un ¡Jurus ot IİIIS llll.piltOlls 1 Ц'. tlllt 1Ю Ι,ΙΙ,Ρ Ulli so t ısılı suh.lui ili tilt tın, Ol İnim in ıııtııı. ıs m nun ι-,ι,- imu llllOll 111 „I, li ι,Ι.Ι Mlťl.lls „lion, t İnil,il ol ulit 111 ss nul Ilınılın Ih, stıı.l, ol ılı s, uııtıs a tın .....it ι, muunnon tuh muu o« n h, ui, „nI ıhıl lıı^lı nul (Ιι,πιιι·. d spuit t huh t ,«, «itil (listimi tn. s timin tint istil nul mul, inptililo Ι', и. ol »mil ıs upon Ih. , nth Ilıt supunu K ..... I suııplı.m „t h, ut «ill |ii,ini tl ..... nahí ıbit lil, „im; n. ıhı «, s, moitil «ho s, η Ι,,,,,ιι,Ι, t.. Ι ι, ,1, „,,, nul im Imitions „ul M.MS lho„ imunii hım «uh tilt in ol .Inutilii nulul.;, un O t nth ι ho« .dinul joui suiUinin's «ıülıt
conn in pllltlsmg IİIIS llsSOIl lllllll till tllltp sts „t lit. Inn subsulul, and tiliin tbosi misto, tu ,s it bub t insul ptlbitps < uls .illllt lions Inse Minisin, I nul ss lu ıı su, Ub 1,1 s. mi¬ sili sun inului Is I, u 'slu, Ion, nul hh. ns Ilt IUI umi ι ..... ll,.ti Uld Sill u on t ni ul lUlul' non III. misuihln .,,1 un su,|,,| I к ol tl, „nu hipps sili. 1. .ml Ih ι' ut Ut iss iktnttl p, SUI "I Instili tud si, nu „1 litll, s il nul i, I .1 ilt ι un' hinni «huh •ul, Ιι, , uni,- Ι,ι tiu 11 Si¬ ll, , -Is II, II, t', un lill tiltil (Oll (hill ml Ini Id tiu puntul su.], Ol < oll pl 111 oi > blt.il, llolll tllll! II, s,
on llu luoll.uıon . ι tin ορι ıtssıd md ιηριιηΙ ı.lııu ts uhosi hugim st hop s tlus b,,, ,1. si, .„,,Ι I t tlıı m ısk llıııı lı, nls il ι, ,1 plı ısını br lliiii ι ι ι il nosnih, ,1 punts ι. ,ι ,ι tiu suusi „, ,,ν,,Ι oblimi,. It 1 ι ılı ι in il,, llu ιι mu ud lu uls and uiiiiii, tiiil ıı uiuieitu! tının mııpııtş 1 buc ıs an all gmious (mrl, who sull hen' en to the since ot their supplii itmns, ami si boo ds ısı aits tbur upi nr uhi til it Ik m is li gi umus 11 ρ,ι sup.un.l. i, pp „, ,11 II, os, ulin U 11 illl I II I «11 t ι uti lo ıh sitiin, ι, nm, . I lb, ι lil ι Ul Ι lok I, ,k и >n ılım « il Ils llllll Ht KO,, Ι , „Ins ...... Is , 1 suu.u , ııı Ιι, Ι,Ι , ¡, ıh, η πι , ι lllll llllll t ľlloill , ч iling NI uu
happi (motion md «ho ι „, «,,Ι, tiuth (sd ..... ι mu ııı tlı.u Int ino η» ut- " I ıpııt till- I Utilii si ι η, ,η pni, aud h, pp,,,.- io, 1 „η ,,,,,Ι ol tin «(„Id aml it- tumultuous |OS- 'Jllt' Mlltllllrilts of' III) Ullllll und tho fuling« ot my beai t haie guided me in ıvery thing I has с svrıtten throughout these volumes. This me¬ thod ot v ntuig has icitain 1 pioihued liull- «liiih a ss ste matic | lo-ophii si ould not lust tomnnttul Hut I sliill inns.,1, mssill for tinse (r ,„,s ,1 tin, «oik .'hud .nils .ι ghinpsi ot the ids oil ig, - ol siitin upon Ilı· iiiinil-, tin undi ist iiuhnus, ,ι,,Ι «h, .ll.ll. III.. , 11.11 ll.l IM Hi , hi ni ll) ι I ul) · u- 'ion . I ılı« inn, n h|..
and subiu u pliisuris pi otlun ti b\ a li nupu) ind atltifoiiitt itinttmpli tion ol limito ind 1>\ ni t \tpnsitr stıısılulıh loi tun tiniig tint is ir.,,.,1 g. m ou, imitiu 11, ulu tiiiwill' Wluuiltitli sh ill pul ι ptiuitl tn ms «oiltllj ι urs 1 onb isk tilt tonsolitioii ot irpiising nn lit ul upon tiu husom ot ι tunul «lus, ts., «hil, 1„ dos, s nun, will ,ΙιρΙιιι im loss nul «hos, kuul ι ire «ill ι . nti \ nit t > а tonili ill tiu
