Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The castle chapel: a romantic tale
THE CASTLE CHAPEL.
CHAPTER I.
" With awe-struck thought and μι tying tears, l ucu that noble, stately dome, Where Utster's kings of other years, Fam'd heroes! imd their royal home : Alas ] how chaug'd the times to come ! Theii royal ???? ion ? the dust— Their hapless race wild, wand'ring roam— 'J hough rigid law cne·) out—'twas just l' J.N the province of Ulster, on a com¬ manding eminence, stands tbe ancient cas¬ tle of St. Doulaglts : at some distance it appears only a shapeless mass, but on a nearer approach, assumes a more distinct vol. L ?
form, and presents an assemblage highly grand and picturesque. We shall not at¬ tempt a particular description of its nu¬ merous outworks, or fortifications, but con tent ourselves with simply stating, tliat these majestic ruins cover a considerable space of ground, the walls enclosing two spacious courts, to wdiich a Gothic portal forms the entrance, flanked by two mas¬ sive towers, and secured by a portcullis. The great extent of the building, the grandeur and size of the apartments, give strong proof of kingly magnificence and hospitality, such as, according to tradition, in former days it was famed for, when the residence of its just and regal posses¬ sors. The state hall alone would have been sufficient to bear evidence to tliis, from the grandeur of its dimensions, and the vestiges of ancient hospitality it still retained. From the summit of the hill on wliicli the castle of St. Doulagh's stands, falls a noble torrent, because mighty in force, which, dashing in its course over project-
ing rocks, stumps of old oaks, and ash- trees, which grow out of clefts in the side of the hill, causes a thick spray to spread around, to a great height and distance, as the water dashes from precipice to preci¬ pice, down a descent of several hundred feet, when, forming a basin of great ex¬ tent at the foot of the eminence, after re¬ posing therein for some time, it takes its course to the left, through a rich, luxuri¬ ant vale, winding and serpentining through flowery meadows, corn-fields, and clumps of trees, in a deep, smooth channel, or foaming and tossing amongst a bed of broken rocks, as the vale rises or sinks in gentle elevation, until it is lost amongst hills, dotted with rural dwellings, monas¬ tic ruins, and lofty woods, behind vvhich rise, in grand succession, yet more lofty hills and gigantic mountains, which, com¬ bining the varieties of light and shade, vie in contrast and singularity of romantic beautv, in colour and form : whilst to the right the vale is closed in by hills, man. ? 2
tied uith wood, some swelling in elegant modulation, backed by others which rm: more wildlv, until the eve is lost amidst the gloom and irregularities of gigantic mountains that bound the horizon. At the rear of the hill on which stands the castle, ranges of mountains rL->e in succes¬ sion, until lost in the clouds, sprinkled with trees, and traversed by torrents. No general description can give an ade¬ quate idea of such scenery, because so great a similarity must appear; but this is by no means the case u hen viewed in reality, Nature still presenting us with a different aspect, and from rocks, woods, and water, forming endless combinations, In short, from its mountainous situation, the depth and profound gloom of its scat¬ tered uoods the noise of its waterfalls, and the thinness ofthe neighbourhood, no¬ thing could be more romantic or impres¬ sive than the scenery about St. Doulagh's. In this interesting because ancient for¬ tress, the only descendant of the royal house of O'Neil had taken shelter from
14 the storms of wintry time," and awaited the coming of that u unbounded spring- that shall encircle all.** O'Neil, írom whom lieutenant O'Shaughnessy O'Neil was a lineal descendant, in defiance of the whole force óf tlie English, kept his station as king of Ulster, in his ancient cabtle of St Doulagh's, aowii to the sixteenth century, u?. his coins, dated fifteen hundred and thirty-five, make plainly to appear; bui as all human things must have an ei\d. this great Irish monarch lost iiis power about the time that his holiness the pope lost his over Henry the Eighth, at wh;ch period this defender of the iaith ravished ihe castle of St. Doulagh's, and its rich do¬ mains, from tlie rightful possessor, and be¬ stowed them on a creature of his own. Thus stripped unjustly of their birth¬ right, O'Neil's descendants became scat¬ tered about the countrv : one, however, still contrived, amongst his vassals and re¬ tainers, to keep up a rank in society suit able to the royal house from vviiich he sprung: but tins branch was finali}' des-
THE CASTLE CHAPEL. tined to experience again the oppression of England, through the medium of Oli¬ ver Cromwell, who, seizing on what had been retained by them ofthe original pro¬ perty of the family, banished them, with many others, into the comparatively wild and uncivilized province of Connaught, where, in place of their goodly lands, they were assigned waste, sterile spots, on the sides of bleak and rugged mountains ; but this was the policy of Oliver, to break and crush dowrn the spirit of all whom he thought capable of resisting his usurpa¬ tion ; he was jealous of all who seemed likely to oppose him ; and thus driving them into this district, had square castles built about it, for the purpose of hemming in these unfortunate Milesians. There is particularly blended in the human composition a consoling aptitude to hope, capable of supporting us under almost all afflictions: for this none per¬ haps are more remarked than the Irish ; no sooner is one door shut against them, tlian their lively imaginations open an-
other. This was the case in the present instance; these oppressed people fully cal¬ culated on the retrieval of all they had lost, the moment Cromwell left the king¬ dom; but his unremitting vigilance de¬ feated this expectation; and when, on the restoration of monarchy, they applied*for the recoverv of what lie had robbed them of, to their utter confusion and disappoint¬ ment, they were informed that the /azv considered his grants too firmly establish¬ ed to be shaken. Barren and bare as their ?ietv possessions were, still, in course of time, the descend¬ ants of the original Irish managed not only to involve themselves in debt, but to part with most part of their lands to strangers. Of this number was the father of lieutenant O'Shaughnessy O'Neil—so that when the poor boy, on the death of his parents, came to look about him, all he found himself actual heir to, was about twenty acres of bog, on tiie top of one of .the Cunnamara Mountains; and to heigh¬ ten the melancholv circumstance, witliout
his being able to discover, either to the right or the left, any friend to serve him ; not certainly from there not being many who had the inclination to do so, but from all with wbom he was either connected or acquainted being left in no better plight than he was himself. An attentive ob¬ server might indeed fairly have thought that there was a competition amongst the families here, to see which would he the soonest ruined, so wild and inconsiderate in general was their conduct ; but to close the door against any one, was a meanness which none could permit themselves to be guilty of, how inconvenient so ever it might be to keep a caravansary^ as in those days a gentleman's house in this quarter might be considered, a traveller having only to look about him, to consi¬ der where he should like to stop, to im¬ mediately quarter himself according to his fancy. How O'Shaughnessy O'Neil managed to get on we know not, except through the immediate assistance of Hm <f who
tempers the wind to the shorn lamb," and has especially declared himself the friend of the orphan ; that he did so, however, in some way or other, was evident, from his attaining the rank of lieutenant in the navy, on the half-pay of which, soon after the termination of the war, he returned to his native country, after many years of hard service. Two children, a boy and a girl, accompanied him, his offspring by an English lady, who lost her life in bring¬ ing the latter into the world, and who, had she lived, would have proved an in¬ vincible obstacle to his seeing his native land again, from the terror vvith which ¿he iiad been inspired by the exploits of captain Bock's men. He returned to it, with an intention of settling, if possible, near tlie sea* ,f his renowned ancestors ; this being the case, with what delight did he find that he might obtain a residence in the castle it¬ self 1 It had for some time been unte¬ nanted; and the person into whose hands ? S
it had fallen evidently proving he set no value on the venerable pile, from not onljT grudging, though immensely rich, to ex¬ pend a sixpence to keep it in repair, but allowing depredations to be committed on it, to save expence about other places, it was suggested to the lieutenant, that for a comparative trifle he might obtain pos¬ session of it—a suggestion which he ac¬ cordingly lost no time in acting upon ; and, to his unutterable satisfaction, short¬ ly found himself its purchaser, with about ten acres of land, immediately adjoining the building. This business was no sooner accom¬ plished, than his only sister, Miss Agnes Flora Judith, came to take up her abode with him, as had been previously agreed on whenever he should be settled, for the purpose of managing his establishment, and educating his children. For this lat¬ ter office she was infinitely better calcu¬ lated than the former, neither her educa¬ tion, habits, or pursuits, having been ofa (eminine description. She was now up-
wards of forty, and almost from her in¬ fancy to this period, had resided solely with a maternal uncle, a minister of the dissenting church, who, either from con¬ ceiving her possessed of extraordinary abi¬ lities, or else to gratify a whim, had given her an education more suitable to the op¬ posite sex than hers, to the utter neglect of those acquirements absolutely indis¬ pensable to a female, at least of a middling rank in life. Hence poor Miss Agnes Flora Judith (for having been called after three great-aunts, all equally great and distinguished in her estimation, she vvould not, for the worid, have had one of her names omitted) often found herself ex¬ posed to very serious inconveniences ; but for all wdiich she still conceived she was fully compensated by tiie admiration her extraordinary attainments for a female in¬ spired ; but whether this was not quite so great as she persuaded herself, or that she possessed nothing else to be admired for, she found herself advancing in lire, to her
equal vonder ånd disa^poitrtìment, with¬ out û change of name. This disappointment, however, had not that effect upon her wliich it has been sometimes known to produce upon the female temper ; hasty, and even obstinate. she might be termed, but to any thing like peevishness or ill-will, she was an ut¬ ter stranger. Her disposition was if pos¬ sible, stiil more excellent than her tem¬ per ; through her overweening opinion oí herself, however, and ignorance of life. she often did mischief where she wished and intended to render a service ; and not¬ withstanding her amiable qualities, wab the laugh and ridicule of many, from her eccentric habits, and the oddity of her manner. If her brother did not regard lier as a superior being, he certainly did as a won¬ derful creature from her learning, Ins own being coniined to what he had acquired onboard ship: in his way, however, he was equally satisfied with himself; he was aware that no one knew their profession
better than he «lid—that he was a ioyai subject, ami a true friend to tiie establish¬ ed churcli—and conceived, that there was no one who coukl say all this, but what had a right to think well of themselves. In disposition alone this brother and sister resembled each other, being equally generous and compassionate ; but in every other respect they differed, often acting as antipodes to each other—she frequently only going to bed when he was rising, and he often thinking of repose when she was only getting up. She declaimed a- gainst church and state, being a Whig in politics, and a Methodist in religion ; while he would have considered it high treason to speak against either one or the other. He was fond of old systems—she delighted in new ones ; a new plan, or idea, no matter how extravagant it seem¬ ed, had her immediate sanction, from the additional opportunities, as she said, it af¬ forded the human mind of evincing its comprehensiveness, and the encourage¬ ment she conceived due to whatever ex-
ercised the faculties : he was fond of quiet discussions, she of argument—particularly if she met vvith an opponent she thought woithy of contending with. Her chief " pleasure, however, was derived from study, and her highest pride and ambition, novv that personal vanity had a little subsided, of which, notwithstanding her alleged su¬ periority to the generality ofher sex, she had not been without her share, to be con¬ sidered a woman of uncommon attain¬ ments. Rut much as they differed vvith regard to education, habits, and opinions, they were still most sincerely attached to each other. On one point, however, they per¬ fectly agreed—that of their attachment to the children. This, however, as might naturally be supposed, from their different way of thinking, was displayed in rather a different manner by them. To inspire them with a thirst for knowledge, render them virtuous and religious, and cultivate a taste for polite literature, were the proois of affection offl* vd by the aunt ; while the
father's consisted in furnishing then a with opportunities for play, and contriving a- musement for them. The interruption this occasioned to their studies, and the romping habits it gave her niece, frequently gave rise to no slight disputations between the brother and sis¬ ter. She could not deny, however, that he had a right to some interference about Eugene, and accordingly particular hours in the day were at lengtii settled for his being given up to him. In consequence of this arrangement, he had him out at an early hour in the morn¬ ing in the fields, for the purpose of in¬ structing him in all exercises calculated to improve muscular strength, and render the lad bold, active, and enterprising ; and by which Eugene so much profited, that, while yet a mere child, he could clamber, with all the dexterity and fearlessness ofa squirrel, to the top of the tallest tree, and swim, play ball, and hurl, with almost any one in the parish. Thus, while his mind was improved and enlightened by his aunt,
his body was strengthened his nerves braced, and manly habits acq j*« ed, through means of his fatber. The methods pursued for Ibis purpose were not such, however, as by any means to meet the approbation of Miss Agne 1 Plora Judith, from the dangor with whicli she conceived thev were attended to the bov. " Kow, Eugene," the father was in the habit of saying, on getting him to a parti¬ cular spot, " we must commence the busi¬ ness of the day ; still remembering, that what I have taught you, and am still in¬ tent on teaching you, will be of more real service to you, than all the outlandish lin¬ go your aunt is cramming your head with ; not but that, in its way, it may, at some time or other, be serviceable, for in the navy," the profession to which he had des¬ tined him, from conceiving it the first in the world, " there is no knowing the out of the way coast on which we may be tossed; so clap this here pistol in your belt, and mount to the topmost head of
yonder oak, whence, if you can discern Nell Tierney's cabin in the distance, you are immediately to discharge it, in signal of an enemy's vessel being in sight, and tlien hasten down, to prepare for the at¬ tack." On these orders being obeyed, and Eu¬ gene's return to what his rather chose to call tlie deck, he was commanded to load a swivel, and fire away without intermis¬ sion, at the opposite side of the lake, on which these supposed engagements always took plaee, till tlie signal was given ofthe vessel having struck, wdien vvith loud huz¬ zas at thcir imagined victory, he was pa¬ raded back to the castle, to be resigned. for a few 'hours, to the more serious in¬ structions of his aunt. It so happened, however, that, in the order of attack, or hurry to commence it, he more than once fell into the lake, and had a tumble from the tree ; which acci¬ dents so alarmed his aunt, that slie at length began a serious remonstrance with the lipiitennnt. oo tho snhWt nf th*> ??™
ger to which he was exposing him by his conduct, protesting, if be continued to en¬ courage him in such exploits, she had not a doubt he would be the means of his lo¬ sing an eye, or getting a fever, or break¬ ing his neck. But the amusement derived by the lieu¬ tenant from his plan was too great to permit her arguments to be of any avail. —" Pooh, pooh ! it is a sign you are a wo¬ man," he said, " or you would not speak in such a manner ; lose an eye, indeed ! no great danger of that—and if he did, what then ? why there was more than twenty sailors on board the Royal George, that had but one apiece, and they were the very best hands on board: then as to falling from the mast-head, in the field, and break¬ ing his neck, that is morally impossible, except the ship heeled too greatly in a storm, seeing I have taught him to hold both by legs and arms ; and as to being drowned, why, with all your learning, x\gnes, I am sure you should know that all animals learn how, from nature, to
swim ; and this being the case, how the deuce is there any danger of any one's sinking." The kind of education he received early gave something of peculiarity to the cha¬ racter of Eugene : from his father he ac¬ quired a thirst for enterprise, that render¬ ed exploits of danger, of all others, the most pleasing to him ; from his aunt a so¬ vereign contempt for trade, and an enthu¬ siastic love of liberty, that rendered him ready to start forward, as the ch. aipion of the oppressed, at the slightest mention of tyranny or injustice. On giving up Eugene to his studies with his aunt, the lieutenant generally be¬ took himself to loitering abont the neigh¬ bourhood, amongst the old retainers of his kingly house, whose stories and traditions concerning it were a never-failing source of delight to him. A path led to the summit of a moun¬ tain, behind the castle, overlooking a tor¬ rent below, where, crossing a rude bridge, formed of trunks of trees, cast across a deep
glen, you arrived at a neat cabin, or cot¬ tage, embosomed in alder trees, where a sod seat invited the passenger to rest, and vievv the surrounding scenery, hence be- lield to the greatest advantage, and a- bounding in all that could charm the eye or fix the attention. Tips was the lieutenant's favourite walk —here he loved to rest upon the turf seat, for he had a limp in bis gait, from a severe wound, that rendered the ascent of the eminence rather a work of fatigue to him, and listen to the funny anecdotes or wild stories of Nell Tierney, the owner of the cabin. Among these was one that made a particular impression on the mind of the lieutenant, a little inclined, like most of his profession, to credulity and superstition. At the period of the Reformation, Nell related, that commissioners being sent over to Ireland, to take account of, and value the church lands, one amongst them, a man of most abandoned character, was so charmed with the castle of St. Doulagh's, and its rich dependencies, as to form a
plan for the destruction of its owner, iu order to get himself possessed of his valu¬ able property. For this end he artfully represented to the jealous tyrant, that the king of Ulster aimed at sovereign sway, to tlie destruction of course of the Eng¬ lish power in Ireland ; in corroboration of which many circumstances were stated, any one of which was sufficient of itself to have excited the jealousy of such a tyrant as Henry, but all of vvhich were tiie fabri¬ cation of the commissioner's own fertile brain. Having sufficiently worked upon the gloomy mind of Henry, he asserted that he had tiie power of putting the suspected monarch's loyalty to a decisive test, if he had but his majesty's permission so to do, and promise of pardon for whatever might be the result. Botli being obtained, he proceeded to state, tiiat there was a parti¬ cular species of dogs, possessed of the ex¬ traordinary sagacitv of discovering a toi¬ lor, even though amongst thousands of other men, one of which he had then in
his possession, and would make use of in the way he wished, now that he was per¬ mitted. Prior to entering upon this plan, the Englishman shut up a bloodhound in a room by itself, and having kept it for some days without food, brought it out to a gar¬ den, in which was placed a figure, fashion¬ ed so as to represent the king of Ulster, and in the belly of which was deposited the entrails of a sheep ; at this the hound was set, and, infuriated by hunger, quick¬ ly succeeded in tearing it to pieces. This was repeated, till his treacherous owner conceived there could be but little doubt of his performing the part he intended ; accordingly, on an appointed day, the des¬ tined victim was brought forth, and, as foreseen, no sooner recognised by the dog, than he flew at him, and literally tore him to atoms. The place in which this tragedy was acted was a field adjoining the castle; and there was a tradition, that whenever this (from that period named the king's field
of blood) should be planted with English hops, the castle, with all its rich domains, would be restored to his descendants. W henever the poor lieutenant's spirits sunk beneath the pressure of worldly cir¬ cumstances, for he was neither rich, nor passing rieh, his thoughts would revert to this tradition, and rekindle courage to bear up a little longer against what mig t ensue.
CHAPTER II.
" Tis sn.mtfMİ, ;uh1 no plaint ? truth appea* «, ?? ??? mipuUtiiit ari um e.uiicM years 1 iit ho.wr, ??? mk'i'd :«> íl v rulu <: jm'm í , Huds tiy decrees tho ti teli- thu ι oncv \¡nro 4s\nt, Aml att tlu ir dttp ¡????????? nesir away." But if İMiss Agnes Flora Judith was an¬ noyed by the frequent interruptions the studies of her nephew met, through his
own volatility, aud the restless disposition of his father, as she termed it, how much more was she by those her niece received through her propensity to play ! in vain slie tried to check or correct tliis—she might as well have attempted to arrest the filgitl/e butterfly in its flight, or the spor* tive kid in its gambols, as hinder Grace from a bout of romps, when intent on one* The more she descanted against hoydenish manners, the wilder the other seemed to become, apparently delighting in all man¬ ner of mischievous tricks—setting the dogs and cats by the ears, the birds scream¬ ing, and the maids squalling, with the un¬ usual noises she made. At length, just as her aunt, in despair, was on the very point of giving her up as an incorrigible creature, she took a studious turn, and from not knowing what it was before to ba at rest for a moment, could now hardly be got from her book. In delight at this sudden change, or re¬ formation, as slie caiied it, which she impu* ted, with no Uttle degree of exultation, to
her own perseverance, Miss Agnes Flora Judith would not allow herself to disturb her, by calling her attention to the me¬ chanical parts of education.—" No," she said, i4 she is now imbibing such a passion for knowledge, as will reconcile her to all that is tiresome and tedious in the attain¬ ment; I will not, therefore, for a little while longer, resume my part of instruc¬ tress." At length, one day that she was sitting absorbed in the perusal of the Iliad, sud¬ denly observing a tear stealing down her cheek, Miss Agnes Flora Judith demand¬ ed, in the softest accents, what part of it it was that so deeply interested her feel¬ ings— 44 But I dare say the parting scene between Hector and Andromache," she added ; 4t for I knovv nothing in the book so affecting—is it so, my love ?" 44 Oh no, ma'am !" replied the sobbing Grace, " it is the heart-rending cruelty of the inflexible aunt, not to permit a parting interview between the unhappy lovers." vol* L ?
44 Aunt !" exclaimed Miss Agnes ; 4< why hovv is this, my dear ? I don't recollect any relation in the book mentioned by that title." 44 Oh yes, ma'am, there is—there is Mrs. Wilson—she wlio educated poor Emily, and------" 44 Why what nonsense is this you are speaking about, child ?" said Miss Agues Flora Judith, impatiently interrupting her : 4t let me see what it is you are really reading." " The Iliad, ma'am," said Grace, but in a very timid tone, and making rather a retrograde movement as she spoke. te No, that I am convinced it is not, ,f said her aunt, and starting from her chair, she made a sudden snatch at the book, and discovered, snugly concealed within it, the novel of" Precaution."— 44 So, so!" slie exclaimed, as soon as indignation would permit her to speak, " this is the kind of study you have been pursuing all the time I conceived you were storino your mind with classical knowledge*, and
qualifying yourself to become a second prodigy in the family' Fie, fie! aint you ashamed of yourself for being so art- r..\ If» iUi ? " I am sure, ma'am," in a whimpering tone, said Grace, " I thought there was no harm in reading things ofthe kind ; ii you only look over that book, you'll find it as good as it is beautiful." " Oh yes, very likely indeeel ' but we shall soon have proof of that by its effect upon you. By this time, I dare say, your head is running on nothing but love ad¬ ventures. Come, confess—is it not so?— should you not like to have a lover ?" Grace blushed, and hid her face in her handkerchief. " Ay, I see hovv it is ; we shall have you running off some night with a stroll¬ ing Romeo, or attempting it, I mean ; for now that I understand you, Miss, I shall take care, I promise you, to keep you un¬ der proper restraint." " I hope, ma'am," a little spiritedly ie ? 2
plied Grace, ** I sha'n't need any restraint on the score you allude to ; if I did ven¬ ture to make choice of any one without the consent of my family, I trust it would not be any one that would disparage them." 44 Indeed ! and pray, if you were at li¬ berty to make a choice for yourself, what are the qualities that you would deem in¬ dispensable in a lover?" 44 Why, a tall, slight, elegant figure," replied Grace, in the interesting subject recovering all her animation, 44 with very dark, thick, curling hair; eyes still darker, and so eloquent, as to render any other vehicle fbr the glowing sentiments of his soul unnecessary ; and then a heart ! a heart capable of loving even to adoration." 44 Oh, a perfect Lydia Languish ! Well, Miss, and supposing you did meet with such a captivating being, as in the lan¬ guage of romance I suppose you would style such an one as you have described, do you think it is by an ignorant, untu¬ tored mind, you would captivate him ?
No, believe me. I speak from experi¬ ence. To excite more than a transitory passion, the union of internal with exter¬ nal graces is requisite. I believe none could boast of a more numerous set of lovers than 1 had; but do you imagine I acquired them merely by my personal charms? no; though without vanity (a weakness indeed I have always despised), I believe I could boast of some in my day ;" and applying her hand to the ad¬ justment of her flaxen tresses, she cast her eyes upon a glass: " are you attend¬ ing to me, Miss ?" " Yes, ma'am," was the almost smother¬ ed reply of Grace, as, nearly convulsed with laughter, she buried her face in her handkerchief. " This, perhaps," resumed Miss Agnes Flora Judith, " may be doubted—that is, my having bad many admirers, I mean, from the circumstance of my having re¬ mained single—a circumstance that drew upon me, for years, the imputation of be¬ ing cruel and cold hearted; but what
then?—I had early determined on never giving my hand but where I discovered a kindred mind, and, in consequence, re¬ mained as I am; which, let me tell you, Miss, you may have reason to congratu¬ late yourself on; since, had I had a family of my own, it is not probable I should have been able to have taken the pains with you I am anxious to do, as a proof of which, my anxiety on every point to enlighten you. I will now, since we have so prematurely entered npon the subject of love and matrimony, inform you, that in so serious a matter as that of entering the marriage state, the consideration should be—is the object of our attachment that heing Providence would approve of? to depend on our own judgment is entirely out of the question, for on such occasions the passions are generally under a wrong bias, more particularly so when the love of beauty is that which governs. Who that knew what happiness really is, would seek it in that bloom that every breath ean blast, and which time will certainly
efface? Something, Grace, tickles your fancy just now ; but be assured, if you are silly enough to imagine outward ap¬ pearances will fix the heart of a man of worth, you'll find yourself wofully mis- taken. It may catch the eye at first glance ; but without the strong auxiliary of a well-cultivated mind, can never hold fast the affections of the heart. The finest set of features, tlie very blush of the da¬ mask rose itself, will only cause a woman to be regarded as a beautiful picture; ex¬ cept there be sentiment and sensibility within her soul, to give expression to these features, and vary the hue of this complexion ; for instance, my counte¬ nance," Miss Agnes Flora Judith was still before the glass, 44 fixed in the still, or rather dead calm of insensibility, is viewed by the other sex without emotion ; but restored to aii its wonted animation, kindness, and sense, and spirit, thrown into it, as thus—and see the effect it pro¬ duces !" This was too much for poor Grace; the
the grimaces made by her aunt at the mo¬ ment were so truly grotesque, that she absolutely fell on the carpet, convulsed with laughter. Miss Agnes Flora Judith immediately seated herself, with ah air of offended ma¬ jesty, and continued calmly viewing her niece during this attack of mirth. On its a little subsiding, Grace endeavoured to apologize for it, by laying the blame of it entirely on thc cat and dog, that, whilst her aunt was lecturing her, had been quarrelling, in a manner that render¬ ed it impossible for her to control her risi¬ hi! ity. 44 I am sorry to hear you say so," said Miss Agnes Flora Judith, gravely, 44 since a person who cannot command themselves in tliis w T ay, must appear as a fool ; how¬ ever, that is not the question at present ; 1 now demand, who tlie person was that supplied you with these books, to the prejudice of the studies I thought you pursuing ?" Grace hesitated to confess ; but the
question was repeated in a manner that proved evasion would be unavailing ; and Grace accordingly, with reluctance, ac¬ knowledged it was William Delamere. a lad in the neighbourhood. 44 Ay, it was the act of a boy," said Miss Agnes Elora Judith ; ' 4 however, I shall take care that Mr. William gives no further proofs of his mistaken kindness towards you at present. I would be un¬ derstood, however, not to intend by this restricting you from the perusal of sucli works hereafter—I only wish to do so till your mind is sufficiently strengthened and enlightened to permit you to indulge your¬ seif in it without injury, or, in other words, to allow you to discriminate the wheat from the chaff; then you shall have my free permission to range at will through the delightful regions of romance—weep over the sorrows of the exalted Clemen¬ tina—sympathize with the lovely Harriet —and sigh to think that, in these dege¬ nerate days, no such men as the all-elegant ? 3
and accomplished Grandison, he who knew how to pay such proper homage to our sex, and raise woman to the altitude on which Nature intended to place her, are to be found." Miss Agnes Flora Judith was as good as her word—novels were absolutely ta¬ booed at the castle of St. Doulaglts ; and Grace, suddenly deprived of the works that, from the excitement they had given to her curiosity, and the new world of en¬ joyment they had opened to her lively sensibilities, had had a taming effect upon the exuberance of her spirits, relapsed in¬ to her wonted ones, to the utter despair of her aunt, who began to think it vain to hope she should ever be able to break her in, in such a manner as to ι ender her capable of receiving the instructions she wished to impart to her. Just at this period, the sublime system of Gall and Spurzheim, on Phrenology, began to make a noise in the world, or at least to reach the loophole of retreat on which Miss Agnes Flora Judith looked
out upon what was passing amongst man¬ kind. With the eagerness with which whatever was new caught her fancy, she immediately set about endeavouring to make herself mistress of it; but in vain, till by chance some volumes of Black¬ wood's Magazine fell into her hands, fully explaining it to her, to her great satisfac¬ tion and delight. '* It is a well-known fact," says sir Tob) Tickletoby, in the work just mentioned, 44 that the human cranium may be mould¬ ed, in early infancy, into any conceivable shape, from the elastic nature of the bones of which it is formed ; and it is equally well ascertained, that several tribes of sa¬ vages take their distinctive mark from the form of the skull. It is fashionable, for instance, among one tribe, to wear thcir brain in a case shaped like a sugar-loaf, while others prefer to have their termi¬ nating prominence moulded in imitation of a cocoa-nut. And I have little doubt, wdien the interior of the African conti¬ nent is better known, that nations will
be found, with their craniurns compressed into forms still more unaccountable.— Othello says, * Men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders,' and he was a na¬ tive of Africa. The mere mention of these undoubted facts, when coupled with the knowledge of the functions of the brain, derived from the writings of Gall and Spurzheim, must awaken in the minds of philosophical observers, ideas of the perfectibility of the human race, and the concentration and expansion of the powers ofthe human mind, which may make the golden age of the old world, or the millen¬ nium of the present, an event within the reach of ordinary life, and perfectly prac¬ ticable in the next generation. " As all the organs of thought and voli¬ tion are as distinctly laid down," he goes υπ, " in the cranial map of Galland Spurz¬ heim, as the position of thc isle of May, or the Bell-rock, in the charts of the coast of Scotland, and as I have already de¬ monstrated the practicability of compress¬ ing the cranial bones, at an early age, in-
to any conceivable form, nothing more is required to give a new and definite direc¬ tion to the thoughts and feelings of the next generation, than to mould the infant head to a given form, by the simple appli¬ cation of an unyielding metal headdress, formed so as only to permit the develope¬ ment of the required organs." 44 Oh Heavens, what a glorious disco¬ very !" exclaimed Miss Agnes Flora Ju¬ dith, in an absolute transport ; 44 what trouble is it not calculated to save parents, and tutors, and governesses—in short, all concerned in the instruction of youth, in future! had I been sooner acquainted vvith it, what moments of labour and anxiety should 1 have been spared about Eugene and Grace ! but it is not yet too late to profit by it—much yet remains to be done fbr them, and 1 shall immediately there¬ fore proceed to act upon it ; that is," and she turned pale with dismay at the tlioughts of tiie opposition slie might meet with in the effort from them, 4S if their un-
suppressed bump, or organ of obstinacy, will permit me." Suspense on such a subject was not en¬ durable—they were immediately sum¬ moned to her ; and after a good deal of coaxing, in order to wheedle them into a complying humour with her intention of having their heads immediately prepared for the adoption of the metal cap, she thus began :—" By this time, my dear children, I must hope you are so weli assured of my affection for you, that you must be con¬ vinced I can propose nothing that is not for your advantage. That there are but two kingdoms in this world, the kingdom of light and the kingdom of darkness, 1 early endeavoured to impress upon your infant minds ; now to one or other we must belong; but how difficult it is to at¬ tain to thc one we must all naturally pre¬ fer, let the constant struggles we are en¬ during between our good and bad pro¬ pensities tell. To conquer the latter ot course must be our aim, as the only means of enabling us to aspire to ultimate
happiness. But how is this to be done ? in what way are we to accomplish so de¬ sirable, so essential a matter? I pro¬ nounce, with a heart overflowing with gratitude to the Giver of all Good, the Enlightener of the human understanding, by availing ourselves of the glorious sug¬ gestion or discovery of sir Toby Tickle- toby, the greatest, the most renowned of our modern philosophers. Before I read the sublime system of Gall and Spurz- heim," she proceeded—" that which you were poring over the other day, Eugene— like other ignorant creatures, I fancied man born a free agent, endued with pow¬ ers to discriminate between good and evil, but left entirely to his own choice, with a knowledge of the penalty or rewards at¬ tached to it. The contrary I find, how¬ ever, from these great men, Gall and Spurzheim, to be the case; from them 1 find, that man is sent into the world with organs of thought and volition, that pro¬ pel him as they please, either to evil or to good, according to the organs that prepon-
derate, so tbat he can have no will of his own, but must, like an automaton, when wound up, perform certain evolutions, whether he will or no. But how wretch¬ ed must the knowledge of this have made us» by the constant apprehension it would have caused us to live in, of rendering others wretched, in spite ofour best wishes and intentions, but for the discovery I have alluded to—a discovery that proves there is a way by which we can re-organize ourselves, if I may use such an expression, so as to render ourselves what creatures we please, or others wish to have us ! for infancy, or early youth, is the time for new modelling our construction, or sup¬ pressing whatever from it might be likely to lead us astray. Happily you are not past the latter period ; all that therefore remains to be done, ere I give orders for the metal caps I mean you to wear, is to examine your craniurns, in order to ascer¬ tain what bumps most require to be press¬ ed on ; to permit this, the cutting off your hair, or, m other words, close shaving of
your heads, will be necessary ; but, against this, I must flatter myself, my dear chil¬ dren, that the good sense you both pos¬ sess, as well as the wish I must conclude you experience to be good and amiable, will prevent your offering any objection.'* To describe the astonishment ofher au¬ ditors, when they found she was real¬ ly serious in this proposition, would be impossible. They were, however, very differently affected by it ; tbere appeared in it something so extremely ludicrous to Eugene, that he was nearly suffocated with laughter by it, whilst rage absolute· ly sparkled in the eyes of Grace at the thought. She was just on the point of vehement¬ ly protesting that she would die sooner than consent to a thing of the kind, when Caty, one of the helps, according to the American phrase, rushed into the parlour, to say that her master had just been kilt dead by captain Rock's men, and was coming in at the gate—a proof that, in
Ireland, to a certainty, they consider kill¬ ing no murder. All was now confusion and dismay, till the voice of tlie lieutenant was heard, ex¬ claiming— 4t Don't be alarmed ! don't be alarmed ! 'tis a mere trifle—nothing more than a scratch !" wiping, as he advanced into the room, his forehead, from which a little blood was slowly flowing. ' 4 Good Heavens !" exclaimed Miss Agnes Flora Judith, wdiilst Eugene flevv off fbr Mr. Barney O'Rooke, the village sur¬ geon, or barber, or both in one, for such was actually the case, 44 I never could have apprehended a thing of this kind ! ¿lever could have thought that the de¬ scendants of the O'Neils would, here at least, have met with injury ! that in their own neighbourhood, at least, they did not bear a charmed life about them !" 44 Pooh, pooh ! I suppose you mean led a charming life," said tlie lieutenant ; 44 however, that's as it may be—when the tide runs smooth, and the breeze blows fair, why they are well enough off then ;
but when it sets in contrary, and there's a stiff gaie, they are no mo/e over comfort¬ able here than they would be elsewhere." 44 Ah! you don't understand me," said Miss Agnes Flora Judith ; " but that's nothing new, or at present of any conse¬ quence : but, in the name of Heaven, tell me, I conjure you, how it is we have pro¬ voked the enmity of captain Rock, or any of his banditti ?" 44 The pirate ! what the devil has put him in your noddle, Agnes ?" 44 Noddle ! w r hat an extraordinary man¬ ner you have of expressing yourself, bro¬ ther ! but is not tliat wound in your fore¬ head owing to him, or some of his men?*' 44 No, how the deuce should it, when 1 never yet came alongside of them ! though 'tis a sign you were never on board a seventy-four during an engagement, to call this scratch a wound." 44 Well, as the poet says, 4 a rose by any other name would smell as sweet,' so call that hurt in your forehead by what name
you please, 'tis still a wound ; so pray ex¬ plain how you came by it ?" 44 Pooh, what signifies ! but since you must know—by the flashing of a pistol in my face, that I was endeavouring to teach Martin to fire at a mark with, in order that Eugene and I might have him as an assistant in our engagements, when we are hard pressed." The uplifting of Miss Agnes Flora Ju¬ dith's eyes evinced she was on the point of exclaiming—" What folly !" when the entrance of the surgeon, or barber-sur¬ geon, as he should more properly be de¬ nominated, prevented her. His exami¬ nation of the lieutenant's forehead quickly dissipated the alarm the accident he met with had occasioned. Order restored, and Miss Agnes Flora Judith again collected, it suddenly occur¬ red to her, as O'Rooke and her brother sat regaling themselves with some eold meat and a glass of grog, to make a confi¬ dant of the former, in the project she had in view, should she find that, without as-
sistance, she could not carry it into effect, and of which indeed, from the manner in which it had been received by Grace, she had very little hope. From the aid she was aware he could give her, she could not help considering what had just hap¬ pened, since it had ended in the manner it had done, as a lucky circumstance, as, but for seeing O'Rooke at the moment, she might not have thought of him, and there was not a person in the place that could be of such service to her in the affair. Whilst she was thus making up her mind to let nothing prevent her from pursuing the plan of the immortalized sir Toby Tickletoby, Grace, all indignation at tlie barbarous idea it had suggested, had flown off, to make her complaint to Nell Tierney, the repository of most of iier girlish grievances. In giving utterance to her anger, how¬ ever, it evaporated, and seating herself on the turf bank at the door ofthe cabin, she began gaily singing, whilst she amused her¬ self with re-stringing an old necklace of
beads she had coaxed her aunt out of the preceding day, with a prospect before her on which the eye conld never be tired expatiating—of hills, separated by din¬ gles, mantled with thickets of oak, and watered by torrents, which heightened the effect of the most romantic scenery, by their incessant roar and glittering foam, wliile a beautiful valley lay stretched at their feet, through vviiich rapidly flowed another mountain stream, now obscured by tufted trees and hillocks, then again bursting on the view, sparkling in the beams of a meridian sun, mellowing into the softest tints the verdure ofthe distant mountains.
CHAPTJblt III.
" Beneath th' umbr^coub grove, Bv kindly acts lie oàen íound To teivmmend ?? !?\?."
" The breach, though strnili at first, soon op'mng wide, ín rushes folly uith n tull -ιηουιι tide." In this romantic spot (¿race was surprised, or rather joined, by her friend William, for she could not well be said to be sur¬ prised by the appearance of a person who was abvays on the watch to converse with her, William Delamere was an orphan lad. who liad been brought up in the neigh¬ bourhood, at the expence of an uncle in the East Indies, who had always signified his intention of sending for him, as soon as he was qualified by age and education to join him there. He had now nearly
completed his seventeenth year, and was in consequence daily looking to be called away, a circumstance that would have caused him but little regret, but for the pang he felt at the thought of being torn from Grace, for vvhose pretty face he had early conceived a boyish fancy, as he de¬ clared in the rhymes with which he had wounded the barks of the trees in her praise. She was indeed his inspiring muse ; and had had her charms celebrated in all manner of ways by him, in sonnets, odes, and acrosticks, while he was conti¬ nually making her some little present or other, and ready on all occasions to chal¬ lenge any one to mortal combat who seem¬ ed inclined to rival him. All this was very gratifying to the youthful vanity of Grace ; but vanity was the only feeling that William, for some time, succeeded in interesting. At length his unceasing kindness and attention gain¬ ed her right good will, and without being absolutely in love with him, she certainly became very fond of him.
Poor William was not altogether in¬ deed a kind of being to inspire this ro¬ mantic passion in the breast of a young iri rl : his annearance was aerainst him—he was stunted in his growth, through the studious life perhaps he had been compel¬ led to lead, to be ready for the summons of his uncle, and the anxieties inseparable from a dependent state, and was of a bi¬ lious complexion, with certainly, however, the dark hair and eyes that Grace so much admired. The moment he now joined her, she proceeded to inform him of the narrow escape those tresses had had that had so often been the subject ofhis muse. His eyes flashed fire at the recital^— " What, think of such a spoliation !" he exclaimed ; " by Heavens 'tis well she did not commit it ! But," and be placed him¬ self by her on the sod seat, and passed bis arm round her waist, " I am come with heavy tidings, Grace," he said ; " the long-expected mandate is arrived from my VOL. L D
uncle, and to-morrow I leave this for England, to embark for India !" 44 How vexatious," said Grace, 44 when vve were to have such a pleasant dance next month in the village !" 44 It is," said William, with a deep sigh ; " but tlien, the sooner I depart the sooner I shall return." 44 Well, there is some consolation in tliat; but come, that I may have some¬ thing to keep for your sake------" and whipping out her scissars, she cut off a lock of his hair. 44 And am I to have nothing in return, to preserve for yours?" asked William involuntarily, perhaps unconsciously,draw¬ ing her still closer to his heart as he spoke. 44 Oh yes, you shall have one of those happily-preserved tresses;" and with as iittie ceremony as she had used in cutting off the lock from his head, she severed a ringlet from her own ; then, having plait¬ ed and secured it at each end, she desired him to hold out his wrist, that he might have it bound round it.
William dropped on one knee as he obeyed her.— 44 And with life," he ex¬ claimed, 44 shall this precious token of re¬ gard be guarded ! and by the radiant skies above—by the verdant earth below, I swear, that no other than the lovely bc- stower of it shall ever be the lady of my love!—But vvill you not promise to wait for me, Grace?" he demanded in a soft¬ ened accent. 44 How long do you think you will be away ?" asked Grace. 44 Seven years probably ; in less time I think it hardly possible I can have realized any thing sufficient for an independence." 44 That is a long time. But let me see, I am only fourteen and two months now, ?? I sha'n't, even at the end of that, be very old ; so yes, I will promise to wait tor you for that time, let vvhat vvill betide.'* When the ecstacy occasioned by this promise had a little subsided— 44 But vvill you not also promise to write to me?' said William. υ 2
44 Yes ; but I should not know how to send my letters." William gave her the necessary instruc¬ tions; and the plan of a correspondence being thus settled between the youthful iovers, Grace, after a little hesitation, said, that wlien he did write, if he could con¬ trive to send her a bottle of the attar of roses, she should take it quite as an obli¬ gation; for she had heard that it was a guinea a drop, and w f as quite longing for it in consequence. William, but not without a smile at the reason she assigned for wishing for it, assured her, that as she would live in his thoughts, she might rely on his missing no opportunity of sending her over what¬ ever he thought might be agreeable to her; but as these might vary, he desired her to mention what she was most anx¬ ious for. 44 Why I should be quite delighted to get one of the beautiful ivory fans," she said ; 44 and the shawls are so graceful, and —but I suppose you'll think it quite ridi-
culous to mention such a thing—however, some time or other, I suppose, when I get a little older, I shall be allowed to go to an assize ball, and then a gold muslin wculd be so enchanting !" " Then a gold muslin you shall have," said William. " Shall I ?" cried Grace—" then you are a dear, darling creature !" throwing her arm round his neck ; " and I doift care if I promise to wait for you a little, little longer than the seven years." The lovers unconsciously wandered on to a darksome glen, where all w r as wild, romantic, and secluded—where the thick trees, and the shaggy banks, threw a deep shadow on the verdure, and the babbling of a brook was the only sound that met the ear. Here William internaliv ex- claimed, as he held her to his throbbing heart— * t Oh to find her when I return what she now is—all innocence, all love¬ liness, heightening, by ber unconscious¬ ness of it, the feelings she is so formed to inspire í —vvill it not be a compensation for
all of early suffering—the grief of early bereavement—the pangs of dependence ?" 44 How 1 shall miss you in winter !" said Grace. 44 No, not near so much as in summer,"" returned William ; " for this delicious sea¬ son was, you know, Grace, our season of highest enjoyment, when we could ram¬ ble where we pleased, and loiter as long as we liked amidst this enchanting sce¬ nery, watching the last gleams of day gra¬ dually fading from the hill-tops, and lis¬ tening to the closing chant of the birds. Oh ! how fondly will my imagination re¬ vert—how will it delight to linger over the recollection ofour twilight walks—the delicious calm of the hour of sunset here —when heedlessly vve have wandered on to some wild and heathy scene, or found some ruin amidst its dreary dells— £ Whobe u alls more auful nodded By the religious gleams'
of parting day —
* While all the air was hush'd, save where the weak- eyed bat, With bhort shrill shriek flitted by on leathern wing; Or where the beetle wound His small, hut sullen horn, As oft he rose 'midst uur twilight path, Against us borne in heedless hum !" Grace was in excessive sorrow for the departure of William. The raillery of Eugene, however, united to the consola¬ tion she derived from the presents he had promised her, had soon a salutary effect upon her ; while her thoughts were still further diverted from the circumstance she regretted by the renewed attack of her aunt. Determined on pursuing her plan, she rested not till she had, by stratagem, obtained an opportunity of examining, as she called it, the cranium of Grace. Un¬ der the pretext of adjusting her hair for her one day, which a walk had disordered, she succeeded in procuring this; and having committed to paper her remarks on it, she proceeded, after a slight exor¬ dium, explanatory of the deep regret and remorse she felt for the sufferings she had
inflicted on Grace, by punishing her for faults which she now saw it was not in her power to have avoided committing, to ask her so and so.—" Pray, my love, did you ever feel so attached to any one as to think you could break your heart for them ?" " Yes/' was the reply, the thoughts of Grace at the moment reverting to poor William. " Right !" in an ecstacy exclaimed the aunt ; " I'd take their word for a thousand pounds! Here stands adhesiveness large indeed: and by the map of Gall and Spurzheim, I see the functions of this faculty is to give attachment.—And pray, my dear, when you set your childish wits to work to play me a prank, or disturb the repose of the family by personating a ghost, or something of the kind, did you ever intrust any one with your scheme ?" " Very seldom indeed, except for the sake of getting assistance, to afford more fun." " Right again ! secretiveness very small
—And how do you feel towards yourself?" t( Feel towards myself! I don't compre¬ hend you, ma'am." 44 Why, do you think well—do you admire, or think highly of yourself ?" Grace laughed, and blushed, and cast a glance towards the glass, as much as to say it would be odd if she did not. 44 So I see self-esteem very large indeed. —And when commended, do you feel much pleasure ?" 44 Yes, great—especially if I am praised by those I love or like myself." 44 Right again ! here it is— love qf ap¬ probation very great.—And when opposed in any project, can you readily bring your¬ self to relinquish it ?" 44 No, not by any means; when once 1 have made up my mind to any thing, 1 cannot bear to be thwarted or disappointed." 44 Second Daniels, upon my life! Yes, here it is— firmness, large indeed, and sa?i- guineness. —That is, when you hope for a thing, what or how do you feel ?" d S
" As if I had what I wish for already in possession." " Right, right—still right, divine phi¬ losophers ! what—what skill—wbat know¬ ledge—what science have ye not display¬ ed in your chart, or map, of the human skull !" So far all was well, with the exception of firmness, which, according to Gall and Spurzheim, wben too energetic, produces obstinacy, stubbornness, and infatuation ; but, in opposition to the bumps indicative of candour, benevolence, warmhearted¬ ness, and love of approbation, there were others, such as amativeness, and so forth, from the propensities they betrayed, that Miss Agnes Elora Judith determined, as in duty bounden, the application of the metal cap, reminding her of the ample compensation she would have for the tran¬ sient loss of an ornament, that time would restore, by the lectures this would be the means of saving her, and the further strug¬ gles it would put an end to between her
good and bad inclinations.—" Constructed soas to press upon the bumps indicativeof the latter," she continued, <4 you will, with out further struggling, or scolding, or stri¬ ving on your part, by its mere application, become all that is wished. How then, my dear Grace, with the good sense you pos¬ sess, can you hold out against what would be the means of saving so much trouble and anxiety to all parties? Gall and Spurzheim have clearly proved that we cannot help what we do, however contrary it may be to our sense of right, no more than a coach can help going down a pre¬ cipice if dragged thither by horses; but from the horror of the thought vve are re- lieved, by the re-organization which the discovery of sir Toby Tickletoby enables us to obtain for ourselves." But in vain she argued—Grace was as inexorable to her coaxings and reasonings as the winds to the supplication of the alarmed mariner ; and in a rage at lier ob¬ stinacy, the consequence of the bump of firmness not having been suppressed, Miss
Agnes Flora Judith proceeded to declare, that since she would not yield by fair means to what would be so much for her advantage, she should by foul ones. At this threat, Grace, in alarm, as if she already felt the despoiler's hands upon her hair, started up, and retreating a little way from her aunt— 4i What, consent," she exclaimed, 44 to have my hair not merely cut off, but my head shaven, and cased up in an iron cap ! No !" she cried, while her very eyes flashed fire at the hi¬ deous idea : 4S you have told me I possess firmness, and to prove you not incorrect in the statement, I now protest—nay I swear, by the memory of my great ances¬ tor, that nothing but force, outrageous force, shall ever obtain the submission you require !" and with these words she flew out of the room. 44 So, so!" said Miss Agnes Flora Ju¬ dith ; 4t then since I cannot use force, I must have recourse to stratagem ;" and, as she had previously determined in case of being reduced to such a dilemma, she im-
mediately sent off a message to Mr. Bar¬ ney O'Rooke, requiring to see him at a certain hour that evening at the castle.
CHAPTER IV.
" Make the dooi* fast ujhjü îi uuuum'a wi% and it wdl tuu at tbe cîi-ement; fcluit that, aud it v\ill out at the ity hole ; stop that, it uilJ fly with the smoke out ot On clmimey." Bakney O'Rooke was the descendant of one of the retainers of the great O'Neil, and had been born and bred in the village, where, according to his statement, up¬ wards of a hundred generations belonging to his house had flourished and faded, though all living to a good old age. " Why, Barney, ?? boy, how can you make that out?" inquired the lieutenant one day, on hearing him repeating this assertion ; '* if so be as it is as you say, why, by the head of Neptune, your fa-
mily must have come straight out of the ark to settle at St. Doulagh's !" 44 Oh no, no, admiral, your honour!" the title by which the lieutenant was alone known in the village, from being one which it was there perhaps conceived he had a right to, 44 we don't count so high," said Barney ; 44 our family history does not go higher than the Conquest." 44 Family history !" repeated the lieu¬ tenant, with a whistle ; 4t why, what the devil, do you pretend to a history ofyour family ?" 44 Yes, that I do ! and by St. Patrick I'd sooner lose my right hand than be de¬ prived of it, seeing the value that must have been set upon it by my ancestors, to have been preserved through all the changes and chances that took place amongst them, and the storms that passed over this unhappy land! I don't go to deny, to be sure, that some people might only call it a journal, or memorandum- book, of all the chins that were shaved ; but I contend, and insist upon it, it an«
swers all the intints and purposes of a his¬ tory by the dates. Now, as I was stating to your honour, according to these, I know nothing certain of my family before the English invasion, at which time I find one of my great ancestors, A. D. 1172, had the honour of bleeding and blistering the great Strongbow." " The devil he had ! Well, I should fike now to see tbat memorandum; for that is, I suppose, in what you call your black letter, that the learned make such a piece of work about it ?" " Ay, black enough once, I dare say ; but this is not the only honour my family have had to boast of. Another progeni¬ tor, equally fortunate, was the person em¬ ployed to adjust the glibbs of the four Irish kings that were called to a confe¬ rence in Dublin with Richard the Second ; and a third, I discover, was appointed shaver to the commissioner Mordaunt, on his coming over to value the church lands." " He was ! Then I hope the devil took
him, for not shaving his head off, vvhen he had him in his power." 44 The Lord save us !" cried Barney, crossing himself devoutly, for, like all his race, he was a bon Catholic ; * 4 how could you say such a thing, admiral? Its long ago, I trust, his precious sowl was deli¬ vered out of Purgatory, and is now in Pa¬ radise." 44 What ! is it for letting such a villain escape?" demanded the lieutenant, who, in the simplicity of his heart, gave impli¬ cit credit to all the other told him, for the purpose of trying hovv far he might exer¬ cise his inventive powers upon him ; 44 for would not the life of the great O'Neil then have been spared ; and with him, to protect them, would not all his rich lands and dependencies here, come down to his descendants, instead of being parcelled out among strangers, to their utter impoverish¬ ment, not to say ruin ?" O'Rooke could not deny this, and with the greatest dexterity endeavoured to change the subject, ready to bestow a be-
nediction on himself for having started one on which the lieutenant could never think or converse with patience. Mr. Barney was now pretty well stric¬ ken in years, but still hale, strong, and hearty; having always made a point of taking good care of himself", and letting nothing trouble him, if possible. That he was not over scrupulous, may be inferred from what has been already said of him ; he bore a fair reputation, however, in the village, where, from being the chief, if not only practitioner on the chin, as well as the only individual that knew any thing of the art of medicine, he was look¬ ed up to as a person of some importance ; which the knowledge of his being abie to argue with the priest, and having a well- stuffed purse lying by him, did not tend to lessen. Miss Agnes Flora Judith's message threw him into something like a flutter. There was a mystery in the delivery of it that set him about conjecturing— 44 To slip in the back way, and see there was
no one minding me:' why then sure she's not being after taking a fancy to me ; yet what, in the name of St. Patrick, can she be wanting with me in private, if 'tis not to be telling me some secret ? and if she did not ogle me the other day, when I was after dressing the forehead of her bro¬ ther, the devil's in it ! Ah then, Barney, my boy, you are made at last, maybe; and sure wasn't there my ould aunt W he¬ lan, that was a bit of a witch, tould me I'd make my fortune yet by marriage?" and under the flattering idea of being re¬ garded with a favourable eye by Miss Ag¬ nes Flora Judith, he set about adonizing for the approaching interview, though the trouble of dressing was one he by no means liked. Armed at all points for conquest, or, as he conceived, for securing the con¬ quest he was induced to think he had made, his best suit on, his black horse¬ hair wig bushed out, and he little hat that was perched on the top of it pinched into sharper cocks, he set off at the ap¬ pointed hour for the castle: but whatever
was the delusion under wbich he entered it, it was soon dispelled by the manner of Miss Agnes Flora Judith, who never for a moment lost sight of the dignity of the O'Neils, or forgot the homage due to a woman of her superior endowments ; not but that she was, in some degree, conde¬ scending on this occasion to 0*Rooke, in consequence of the purpose for which she had summoned him, motioning him to take a seat in a distant window. Having secured the door, to prevent the danger of interruption, she then pro¬ ceeded to business ; and after a few intro¬ ductory compliments, explanatory of the opinion she entertained of his learning and fidelity—" I presume, doctor," she said, (a title by which she now chose to address him, in order to deceive herself into a be¬ lief that she was not absolutely conver¬ sing with an inferior,) " that, as something ofa professional man, you have read, stu¬ died, and inwardly digested, that sublime treatise, or system, of doctors Gall and Spurzheim on phrenology ?'*
After the high compliments she had paid him on his learning, Barney was a little confused at being obliged to acknow¬ ledge ignorance on any subject; aware, however, that to attempt to deceive here would be unavailing, he forced himself to confess he had never heard of these doc¬ tors before; wliich, to be sure, seemed very strange to him, as he thought his ancestors had made it a point to make mention in their history, or memorandum- book, ofali the great doctors of their day. 44 Their day !" repeated Miss Agnes Flo¬ ra Judith, with a smile of contempt— 44 ah, doctor, these are very different doc¬ tors from those of their day. Little, in the time you allude to, was it dreamt of, that the period would arrive in which man should discover, as they have clearly pro¬ ved to be the case, that he was more a creature of mechanism than of free will ! but I will explain." This she accordingly proceeded to do, with all the delight and enthusiasm in¬ spired by the subject. Having concluded,
^-" Well to be sure !" exclaimed the as¬ tonished O'Rooke, " it may well be said, wonders will never cease. Who would ovpr llrïV* 3 tlmil erb t nf «unii ? thiner í" tí Ay, who indeed !" said the lady ; ít but how unhappy, doctor, should we have been rendered by this discovery of Gall and Spurzheim, but for that of sir Toby Tickletoby, well entitled to be styled the benefactor of mankind ! since by that, you perceive, it is in our own power to rectify whatever is amiss, or likely to lead us astray, in our construction. For instance, when we would have a girl truly virtuous, we must have the hollow in the metal cap intended for tbe bump of amative¬ ness very small indeed ; and the reverse with regard to the organs of benevolence aud righteousness, that they may be al¬ lowed to shoot up to the utmost luxuri¬ ance. By stratagem I have succeeded in obtaining a map of my niece's cranium, and find, that promising as she appears to be, she has still many dangerous organs, f \\iit if not timely suppressed, or corrected,
may eventually lead her to destruction: but so great is the bump of obstinacy, that she will not hearken to any thing I can say about the metal cap, which I have al¬ ready given private orders to the black¬ smith to prepare, though with tears I have implored her to allow the application of it: novv what I want of you, since I find it hopeless to conquer her opposition, is to mix up a sleeping potion for her a- gainst the cap comes home, that, without further trouble or delay% you may be en¬ abled to shave her head for it." O'Rooke wiped his face, and took a long pinch of snuff—afraid to refuse the lady, yet equally so to promise to oblige her.— 44 There's nothing I am not bound, I'm sure, to do for you and yours, my lady," he said ; 44 but what would the admiral, and master Eugene, and Miss Grace her¬ self say, ifl was to do what you require? I'm sure my cheek tingles now at the thought of the box she once gave me on it, tiny as her hand is, for having cut her hair too short ; and didn't her brother and
William Delamere weary the life out of me almost, for some time, for having vexed her ? Wasn't I near being blown up, like the figure of Guy Vaux on a re¬ joicing night, by one pinning a cracker to my wig? and didn't the other almost frighten the sowl out of my body, by cry¬ ing like a banshee one night at my win¬ dow? Besides, in the whole course of my life, never did I hear of an attempt to mould the osseous covering of the centre of nervous energy ; all that is ever done, is carefully to close the cranium, and to attempt more, I humbly and respectfully declare, would be a certain means of de¬ stroying the child. Sorry am I to be obliged to differ from a lady so deeply and profoundly read as your ladyship ; but I do aver and protest, that the safest and most expeditious method of correcting any thing wrong, in either master or miss, is a good birch rod !" ·* You think so ! ' said Miss Agnes Flo¬ ra Judith, vvith a look of ineffable con¬ tempt; "but, Mr. Barney OTtooke, I
did not send for you here to think, but to act ; or, in other w r ords, receive my instruc¬ tions, and promise attention to them ; but through my condescension, in explaining what I have done, I suppose you have been tempted to imagine the contrary. Understand now, that it is a trouble I would not have taken, had I thought you the stupid old fool you have proved your¬ self! You are one of those ignorant, be¬ sotted beings, I see, who are so wedded to old notions, as to consider all improve¬ ments innovations not to be tolerated ; but does not the great suggester of metal caps justly observe, that 4 trees, left to their own mode of growing, always delight to luxuriate in the wild irregularity of un¬ shapely and iHipruned branches ; though it is well known to the skilful gardener, that they can be made to assume the form of a fan or a cone, on walls, or expand horizontally on espaliers, at the pleasure of their early instructors, and still, after all, be trees, and bear fruit better than in their wild, uneducated state?' Now I
will not do my fellow-creatures the injus¬ tice to suppose that they are less sus¬ ceptible of cultivation than plum or cherry trees, or that the bony covering of their thirty-two propensities is harder than holly or boxv >d, or more untractable than the teak, or ' knotted oak.' Eut fur¬ ther illustration is unnecessary—the thing carries conviction with it to the mind, ex¬ cept where the bump of stupidity over¬ whelms the other thirty-one; so let me hear no more contradiction from you, but at once ray you are ready to obey my com mandt." " Certainly, my lady—surely, my lady ; that is, in all reasonable matters; but to go for to commit such an act upon the head of Miss Grace !" " You refuse then !" exclaimed Miss Agnes Flora Judith in a rage; " but 1 see how it is," and snatching up Gall and Spurzheim's map of the human cranium, now her constant study, with one hand, she, with the other, to his equal terror VOL. I. E
and surprise, pulled off poor Barney's wig, and rubbing her hand over his bare skull— 41 ay, it is as I imagined," she said ; 4t here are the bumps of stupidity and arrogance indeed of a size to account for all. But, in spite of them, î will be obeyed, or Mr, Barney O'Rooke must expect, fbr the fu¬ ture, to have his services dispensed with here." Barney, through life, had made it a point to make his own interest his first consideration ; this tlireat therefore was not without its due effect; in short, upou Miss Agnes riora Judith's promising to reward him most liberally, for doing what she re¬ quired, and to take upon herself thc re¬ sponsibility of it, he consented to oblige lier, and the spoliation of poor Grace's head wa* finally settled. On the cap being brought home, the potion prepared by Barney was adminis¬ tered, and advantage taken of the deep sleep into whicii she was thrown by it, to divest her liead of its beautiful tresses, She did not, immediately on rising the
next morning, perceive what had > happen¬ ed. Jier head remaining confused by the ' ·. Aj % effects of the dose she had taken; but when, on pulling off her nightcap before tiie glass, she discovered it, who can de¬ scribe her rage and horror! she shrieked aloud, and, overcome with passion, fell senseless ou the floor. The whole house was alarmed; all has¬ tened to her ehamber, where, at the sight which was exhibited to her view, Miss Agnes Flora Judith began to think she had gone a little too far. She had meant to have been by on Grace's awaking, to prepare her, in some degree, for the shock that awaited her; but being little accus¬ tomed to rise early, was not up time e- nough for the purpose. When tranquillity was a little restored, ami the \oung lady given up to the care of Nell Tierney, her rage returning when- ever her aunt approached her, the asto¬ nished lieutenant desired to know the meaning of all that had happened—what poor Grace had done, to be treated in the E 2
barbarous manner as, it seemed to him, slie had been. 44 Ah ! so you think," replied his sister, 44 judging, like other short-sighted mor¬ tals, from appearances; but when I ex¬ plain, perhaps you'll be of a contrary opi¬ nion;" and she proceeded to gratify his curiosity, first reminding him, however, that though he had reserved to himself a right of control over Eugene, he had en¬ tirely resigned Grace to her management. The lieutenant listened to he, "ith un¬ utterable amazement.— 4t Well," he cried, 4< ofali the whims, or fancies, Agnes, that ever entered your noddle, this exceeds them all ! Bumps ! why didn't I see the poor girl's liead as bare as Salisbury Plain ? and if there was a bump or a lump on it, I'll consent to be shot for a coward ! No wonder her poor little heart should be vexed, to be docked in such a manner. To be sure, if she was of an age, like your¬ self, to mount a false covering—but----- -" 44 Brother, brother," exclaimed Miss Agnes Flora Judith, with a rising flush,
44 I must say you speak in a most extraor¬ dinary manner ! how often have I told you that personal allusions are extremely offensive !" 44 Well, well," with a sly wink, 4f there's no harm done," cried tlie lieutenant; 44 for you know there's nobody by ; so let it pass tiiis time: but, by the Lord, Ag¬ nes, you put me in mind of tlie vane up¬ on tlie mainmast top, that is sure of being twirled about by every blast! here, not long ago, you wanted to make me believe that nothing woukl save the girl from de¬ struction but turning swaddler; and now you say that her salvation depends upon having a brass helmet clapped on her head !" 44 Yes, and contend for it," replied his sister, 4i as you would yourself, could you be made to understand tlie system I have been endeavouring to explain to you ; but in vain, I perceive, some minds being un¬ fortunately so opaque, that nothing can enligiiten them. Oo not attempt, how¬ ever, to abuse the system because you
cannot comprehend it, as most ignorant people in general do what they cannot un¬ derstand. You are yourself to blame for whatever is amiss in your children's cra- niums, and therefore it is an incumbent duty in you to support any thing that has a ciiance of rectifying vvhat is wrong in thcir construction. Yes, you may stare ! hut had von. vvhen yon tiiought of mar- rying. given vourself time to discover what qualities you were deficient in, and whe¬ ther tho lady you were about to wed pos¬ sessed those yon lacked, by marrying ac¬ cordingly there would have been an im¬ provement, nnd what is obstinacy in yon, would, in that ease, have been but proper firmness in vour children. Ay, you may give one of yonr polite whistles, but this is not, as í see you are on the point of exclaiming, one of my own ridiculous suggestions, but the suggestion of some of the first philosophers of the day. Thev argue naturally, if animals, fbr in¬ stance— -if the breed of sheep, and horses, and dogs, is improved by cross breeds, v\hy may not that of man? but in vain
do they devote their time and abilities to researches beneficial to their species, while passion is allowed to predominate, and a man marries to please his eye, without any thought about those that are to descend from him." 44 By the head of Neptune, Agnes, 'tis enough to make one mad to hear you talk so foolishly ! why, vvliat the devil can be- more natural than for a man to marry to please his eye ? and I'd be glad to know hovv any thing that's natural can be bla¬ mable ?" * 4 Ah ! fine doctrine ! a fine way of teach¬ ing your son ! Brother, I am astonished at you ! I shouldn't wonder if, through your means, your son became one of the greatest profligates in the place." " Oh, no danger of that ! But, Agnes, ain't you afraid of Grace's being revenged for wdiat you have done to her? By tiie Lord, I shouldn't be surprised if she ser¬ ved your head just as you served hers." Miss Agnes Flora Judith turned pale at the thought, and involuntarily applying
her hand to her head, as if to feel that all was secure there—" Dear, I should hope— I should trust," she said, " that she would never suffer herself to forget------" but her agitation was too great to permit her to finish the sentence, and in extreme con¬ fusion she left thc room. Grace certainly had, in the first trans¬ ports of her rage, vowed vengeance against her aunt for the trick she had played her; hut the violent agitation into which she was thrown by the circumstance brought on a fit of illness, that confined her for some days to hcr chamber; and the time that was thus allowed for the subsiding of her passion, was not without its effect in meliorating it. Her heart was too good, and she had profited too well by the religious principles that had early been implanted in her mind, to be capable of long harbouring revenge against any one. She determined, how¬ ever, not to forgive, or in other words, be reconciled to her aunt, except she received a positive promise from her, never to serve her again in such a manner, or attempt
annoying her as she had latterly done. This promise was readily given by Miss Agnes Flora Judith, glad to get off so cheaply, having been in no little dread of vvhat mierlii- pncnn on the recovery oí Grace, from the spirit she knew she pos¬ sessed. A shyness however for some time after existed between them, vvhich rendered the addition that was just about this time made to thc establishment at the castle a very agreeable circumstance to both. Miss Agnes Flora Judith, vvith all her attain¬ ments, aware that in those days of refine¬ ment there were many things she was not capable of instructing her niece in, and anxious to have her, not only learned, but truly accomplished, engaged a young girl vvho Iiad been brought up for a governess to assist in the completion of her educa¬ tion, and wliose manners proved so very amiable, as soon to render her a general favourite in the house, and vvith none more than her pupil, vvho, ardent and af* L 3
fectionate in her nature, soon loved her as if she were a sister, finding in her society a substitute for the loss she had sustained through the departure of her friend, or, as lie would have preferred being styled, lover, William.
CHAPTER V.
" Oh, come nor yc, near innocence and tiuth, Ve worms, that eat mto the bud of youth ! infectious as impuic, jour bhghtmg pow'r Taints m ?? rudiments the proimYd riowV." ??? the system of Gall and Spurzheim was not to be abandoned because of op¬ position, or disappointment, in the first instance. Miss Agnes Flora Judith still continued to make it her study and her theme. She at length succeeded in awa¬ kening the curiosity of her nephew, whose mind was naturally inquisitive ; and the result of his investigation of it, was his
becoming a convert to it. He was just of an age and temper to be caught by any thing new ; and in this there was some¬ thing so ingenious and specious, as com¬ pletely to captivate him. How often was the world surprised by sudden aberrations in those whom it be¬ lieved almost incapable of error ! and was not this a convincing proof of the truth of the system ? for if we could help it, would we, so often as vve do, commit acts which we know we must not only be condemned by others, but ourselves for, and which at times we could hardly account for ? The examination of his cranium was no longer opposed ; on the contrary, he had an eager curiosity to know what he was likely tobe; and vvith vvhat delight did his aunt proceed to it, with the map of Gall and Spurzheim before her—a delight only allayed by the reflection, that if she found any bumps requiring suppression, it was now too late for the application of the metal cap. 44 That which I once took such pains to
impress upon your mind, my dear boy," she began, 44 namely, that man possessed tiie power of controlling his passions, through reason, religion, and education, I find to be all nonsense; the new discovery of Gall and Spurzheim clearly and satis¬ factorily proves tiie reverse to be the case; exciting certainly some degree of terror, by tlie consideration of what we may yet be tempted to commit ; but, on tlie other hand, relieving us from a weight of re¬ sponsibility—since if we cannot help, from our construction, what we do, should we be punished for our actions? No, assured¬ ly—it stands to reason that would be both cruel and unjust; but, notwithstanding this, it is so natural for us to wish to be amiable, that we cannot too soon enter upon the study, not ofour minds, but our craniurns, that, according to the bumps, or, in other words, organs of thought and volition, we find upon them, we may en¬ deavour to regulate our conduct so as not to arouse, but keep under those that have ? tendency to lead us into mischief. Foi
instance, the organ of anger is large ; you must, therefore, as much as possible, avoid cause for irritation, since, when this opens, its effects are often productive of the most fatal consequences—a man, at such mo¬ ments, not being able to distinguish rigiit from wrong; but if such will occur, as indeed it is hardly probable to imagine they vvill not occasionally, you must then fly to the organ of benevolence for succour; and thus the mischief to be ap¬ prehended from the other will be pre¬ vented. " Combativeness and destructiveness are also large, and I should rejoice at this, from the proof they afford of your possess¬ ing all that magnanimity that leads to glory, could I be assured they never would be allowed to flow but in the de¬ fence ofyour country, or some other equal¬ ly just cause, vvhen we call them courage, which is that magnanimity by vvhich man is enabled to achieve such actions, as by reason of the obstacles to be surmounted are impracticable to the pusillanimous,
and the performance of which obtain for a man the name of hero; but the great dan¬ ger of these organs is, the strife, fierceness, and revenge, to which they may also lead. " Firmness is of a good size; but ex¬ cept in battle, there are few other things to call it into action ; as I conceive there are but two natural evils in life—the death of those we love, and our own ; these are the only two that require any mental strength to sustain them—a very common share of fortitude, or perhaps that which does not deserve the name of fortitude, will suffice for the rest; but the loss of a dear friend, or relative, who was the object of our tenderest affection, is a stroke of adversity that will be sure to call forth the full contents of the organ of firmness. " Constructiveness too is of a good size, as is also the love of applause ; the first will be of service to you in the profession your father is desirous of placing you in, as enabling you to devise plans and stra¬ tagems, which the spirit flowing from the second will assist you to carry tiirough.
44 Here is an organ, acquisitiveness, also large; this, in business, would be of great service, but can never be of much in the army or navy, where, in general, a wreath of laurel is all that is to be reaped, and that too often at the expence of life and constitution. In other pursuits, where wealth is to be attained, this organ, as I have already observed, would be invalua¬ ble. Not, my dear boy, that I would wish you to have a regard for riches for themselves alone—far from it; because I consider such a failing" base and ignoble : but gold and silver being, by general con¬ sent, the key of commerce, and the in¬ struments by wliich all our wants are sup¬ plied, it would be folly to disregard any fair opportunity that may occur to enable us to become independent. Sorry am I to be compelled to say, it is the mammon that guides too much the actions and con¬ siderations of mankind in the present day ; for I never knew a man or woman who were wealthy, who was old, or ugly, or wanted wisdom and virtue; such is the
effect it has in blinding the eyes, and de¬ ceiving the judgment. I have remarked a strange trait —so it appears to me—in some characters I have met with in the course of my journey through life—tiiat is, to magnify the fortunes of all they are acquainted with, and look up to people known to be wealthy, witii all the obse¬ quiousness of slaves, even though, from their own knowledge, of a description that would not give a doit to .save the life oí a human being, and whose moral charac¬ ter should have made a £ood man ilv from their presence. It is therefore evident riches possess the magic power of throw¬ ing a thick veil over their possessor, so as to render all defects invisible. 44 I have ever admired a bold, manly, open disposition, considering candour one of the finest traits in human nature; it therefore follows, that I must be much pleased by thc small size of your organ oí secretiveness. " Novv, my dear lad, the metal cap, as suggested and advised by sir Toby Tickle«
toby, that great benefactor to mankind, being declined, and which would have rectified your evil affections and expanded your good, all that is left for you to do, is earnestly and carefully to watch over them, and by perseverance, endeavour to correct them yourself, by opposing the one to the other; so that you will be able in time, as I fervently hope and trust may be the case, to bring them to a tone of union and harmony, that vvill enable you to pass through the world free froni the perplexing, jarring conflicts, which are the cause of all the unhappiness in this life. I cannot conclude these remarks, however, without adding, as it vvould be unfair, when no fault of ours, that the idea of self accusation should torment us, that if you find, on close examination, vour evil affections in some instances out- weigh your good ones, you have no right whatsoever to attacli blame to vourself fbr any actions you, from that cause, commit, be tiiose actions vvhat they may; for it vvould not be according to the rules of jus-
tice, ifyou were condemned for that over which you had no control. For instance: suppose your organs of combativeness and dvstructh'cncss overpowered that of bene¬ volence, and you killed, in a passion, a man—vvhat then ? no possible blame ought to attach to you ' but if you had any other organ sufficiently strong to have called to the aid of benevolence, that would have checked the other two, and you did not take advantage thereof, then, and in such case, and no other, you would be made answerable both to God and man ! But I look with a lively hope and confidence to the day, and anticipate its pleasure, though I should not live to see it with my own eyes, when, through the laws of propagation, as laid down by Gall, or in other words, through the merits of cross-breeding, all human de¬ fects will, by degrees, be avoided, and future generations produced perfect. Then shall commence the British millennium, and the revival of the golden age. It is improper unions, indeed, that have caused so many divorces. Nature, pointing out the pro-
per objects, no matter whether married or .iingle, for affection and love, they are in¬ sensibly attracted towards each other, as the needle to the magnet. To condemn sueh creatures for their actions, by attach¬ ing crime to their intercourse, would be to fly in the face of the Most High ; since it was not any intention in them to com¬ mit an error, but tiieir organs of love and affection, tliat propelled them into con¬ duct they may afterwards deplore, but had no power to avoid at the moment." Thus did this infatuated woman pro¬ ceed in endeavouring to destroy, root and brâncii, those pure principles of religion and morality she had before taken the greatest pains to implant in the lad's mind, traversing her own work in a manner tliat was most extraordinary. Eugene became perplexed and disturbed by her arguments ; as a mind of any reflection must ever do wlien an attempt is made, by a person on wliose judgment tliey have a reliance, to make the worse appear the better reason. Iiis own opposed her arguments. There
was something in this new doctrine alto¬ gether inconsistent with the ideas he had formed of the goodness and justice of the Almighty ; but, as his aunt observed, this was the age for discoveries, and what was he, a raw and inexperienced youth, that he should attempt to set himself up in op¬ position to men of deep research and pro¬ found knowledge ? in a word, he became, as already stated, a convert to the system. There was something pleasing to a youth¬ ful mind in taking up a cause that would require all its subtlety to support, and equally so in thinking, that if we did err. we should not have ourselves to blame for it.
CHAPTER VI.
" Plac'd for his trial on this hustling stage, From thoughtless vouth to ruminating age, Free in his will to choose, or to refuse, Man may improve the crisis, or ahuse : Eise, on the tatalistb unrighteous plan, Say, to what ?? amenable were man > With nought in charge, he could betray no trust, And if he fell, would fall because lie must; If love renard htm, or if vengeance strike, Ilia recompence in both unjust alike," Tfi ings were going on in this way at the castle of St. Doulagh's; the aunt and ne¬ phew were completely engrossed by the new system that had so captivated their imaginations; Grace, possessing a strong, comprehensive mind, and anxious for im¬ provement, was steadily pursuing her education with her young friend; and the lieutenant, as usual, was seeking amuse¬ ment for himself in rambling about the neighbourhood, and listening to the tra-
ditions connected with the memories of his great ancestors, vvhen a letter arrived from an old friend, just appointed to a ship ordered on foreign service, with whom be had served many years, offering to take Eugene on board as a midshipman. The joy this offer afforded the poor fa¬ ther was great indeed, his ambition not going beyond seeing his son a British officer. No time was lost in preparing matters, and in the course of a few days after the receipt of this welcome letter, Eugene was on his way to Portsmouth. Ardent, enterprising, full of the most sanguine expectations of glory, longing to know something more of the w r orld than as yet he knew r from books— "Or swains, w hoc IW î ???· 1 ^ anrl'ruig o'er the nightly dew," and an enthusiast about the profession he was entering, from the glowing colours in vvhich it had been depicted by his fa¬ ther, the delight of Eugene at his ap¬ pointment was unutterable. The vessel sailed soon after his joining, and it was
not long ere an opportunity was aiforded him of witnessing a sp cimen of that va¬ lour on which his father had so often dwelt with pride and rapture. The feats he saw performed this day fully equalled any he had heard of, and as he joined in the shout of victory, he again exuited in the thought of beino* the comrade of such heroes.— 44 My aunt," he said to liimself, 44 laid great stress upon the size of the bumps of constructiveness and destructive¬ ness on my skull; but, hang it, ívom the captain to thc powder-monkey, wdiich is including several hundred men, every man seems to possess organs of equal di¬ mensions !*' But when would the time arrive in which he should be able to espe¬ cially distinguish himself—to tuke the lead—to set the example, instead of fol¬ lowing it? It was yet distant, and all he could do, in the interim, was to fit himself for the occasion, by diligent attention to the duties ofhis profession. But these did not prevent iiis occasion¬ ally attending to others, and the system
of Gall and Spurzheim still continued to be his favourite one, or rather every day took deeper hold of his imagination. In¬ fatuated by it, instead of using his reason and discretion in regulating his conduct, he was feeling the bumps on his skull to account for it ; and whenever reprimanded for faults committed, conceived himself most barbarously treated, from the cruel injustice there was in censuring him for actions over which he had no possible con¬ trol— 4i But such must continue to pre¬ vail in the world," he vvould exclaim, 44 till all become equally enlightened ; then, and not till then, shall we relax in our severity towards each other !" At length, after serving about two years, during which opportunities occurred for his visiting many celebrated places, the long wished-for one, as he conceived, ar¬ rived, for permitting him to signalize himseif. Observing a ship lying at an¬ chor under the protection of a battery at the mouth of a harbour, blockaded by his own vessel, his active and enterprising
temper made him immediately call upon his organ of constructiveness, and having formed a plan for cutting the enemy's ves¬ sel out ofthe harbour, it was submitted to his commander, with an earnest entreaty that he might be allowed to achieve the exploit. The imminent hazard attending it rendered it difficult for him to obtain the requisite permission. At length his supplications prevailed ; the captain, unwilling to disappoint or check the ardour of so daring a spirit, gave the desired consent, provided he could get a sufficient number of men to volunteer in the business with him. This was not a hard matter; twelve gallant fellows instant¬ ly stepped forward ; and at the destined hour, that is to say, as soon as the shades of darkness had overspread the hemisphere, the pinnace, was lowered, and the party, armed with pistols and cutlasses, descend¬ ed into it, all determined to conquer or die, Eugene, on their way, observed a sen¬ tinel beneath the fortress ; could this man vol. I. F
be put out ofthe way of giving an alarm, it would be doing wonders ; accordingly, ordering the boat to lay to under the rock on which the battery was erected, he landed by himself, and, after much diffi¬ culty and danger, succeeded in clamber¬ ing up the sides. On reaching the top, he stooped down, and creeping cautiously along, till he came "to the box where the sentinel was sta¬ tioned, obtained possession of his firelock, and had a pistol clapped to his breast ere he knew whom he was attacked by. The astonished wretch implored mercy. Eu¬ gene hesitated a moment ; but the organ of benevolence prevailing, he satisfied him¬ self wdth obliging the soldier to descend into the boat with him. On reaching the object of attack, it was immediately boarded. A desperate con¬ flict ensued, the numbers in the vessel more than doubling the assailers, but not¬ withstanding which Eugene finally suc¬ ceeded in cutting it out. This desperate exploit was hardly achieved ere the fort,
by this time alarmed, commenced a brisk cannonading. Flushed with success, Eugene entirely lost sight of discretion, and would have the prize brought opposite the fort, for the purpose of silencing it. While the men were endeavouring to obey this rash or¬ der, the tide changed. Advantage was immediately taken ofthe circumstance by the enemy; they put off in boats, well armed, and after a sharp conflict, succeed¬ ed in retaking the vessel, and making pri¬ soners of most of the party ; Eugene, and the few that escaped with him, being in¬ debted for the circumstance to their skill in swimming. On regaining his own ship, he was sum¬ moned into the presence of the comman¬ der, where he met with a severe repri¬ mand for the rashness he had been guilty of.— " I should be sorry," continued his gallant adviser, " to dishearten a youthful spirit, but I deem it an incumbent duty to endeavour to impress upon your mind, f 2
tliat valour without discretion can never be regarded in any other light than as a species of madness. Conduct, in every in¬ stance throughout life, is requisite, but more especially when thc safety of others is committed to our care ; but I can too well understand the cause of your error, however, not to be able to prevail on my¬ self to forbear making any further animad¬ versions on it, with this remark, that I should conceive it utterly inconsistent with my duty to pass over the repetition of it in a similar manner." After the expectations he had indul- ited, it would be ridiculous to say that Eu- gene was not stung to the very quick by this rebuke ; with the greatest difliculty, notwithstanding what lie knew of the strict rules of subordination, he kept the bump of anger from operating on him whilst listening to it ; nothing indeed per¬ haps enabled him but the consideration that it was the friend of his fatiier that was addressing him. Some time after t λ ,, a project, simi! ?
to the one wdiich had been attended with so mortifying a result to Eugene, was planned by th.e first lieutenant, and amongst those wlio volunteered on tliis oc¬ casion, our hero was the foremost; but on a nearer approacli to the fort, winch it liad previously been deemed practicable to sur¬ prise, the utter impossibility ofa tiling of the kind, from the not-till-thcn discovere · additional outworks that iiad been thrown up, was so evident, that the lieutenant very wisely relinquished his intention. The reasons he assigned for giving it up were sufficiently conclusive to have sa¬ tisfied any rational being; it must there¬ fore be inferred, tliat Eugene did not me¬ rit the name of one exactly at the mo¬ ment, as he was absolutely outrageous at the disappointment of his hopo of renown ; for he had hoped tiie present would have afforded him an opportunity tor obtaining that distinction he had prev iously been disappointed of attaining, and to be de¬ prived of it, therefore, was more than he could bear with patience.
Forgetting that his duty was passive submission, he proceeded from remon¬ strances to angry expostulations on the subject vvith the lieutenant, opposing, with the utmost violence, the return of the boat to the ship. The lieutenant, a cool collected Scotch¬ man, of long standing and experience in the navy, after hearkening to him for some time, with a supercilious smile, observed he was a poor silly boy, who knew no¬ thing of the subject on which he was speaking. This was more than Eugene could bear; his organ of combativetiess was full at the moment, acted upon by that of self-esteem, which we need not say can bear no slight¬ ing, or lessening remark, and in the fury İt excited he struck his superior officer. His sword was of course directly taken from him ; and on the affair being laid be¬ fore the captain, on their return to the vessel, he confirmed his arrest, and took the necessary measures for having a court- martial held on him, on entering port;
but it was with the greatest regret he found himself compelled to the perform¬ ance of this imperative dutv. more espe- cially as the offence committed was one that rendered the offender liable to the punishment of death, so great was the fan¬ cy he had taken to the lad, and such the friendship he felt for the father. Being brought to a court-martial, on being called upon for his defence, Eugene arose, and, to the surprise of a crowded court, thus began—" I rise, gentlemen, filled with wonder, that a set of educated men, in this enlightened age, should act in such a manner, as to place me in the situation in whieh I now stamk I am ac¬ cused of striking lieutenant Macintosh— 4is an accusation I do not deny—I could not if I would, my organ of sccretiveness being too small to permit me. This act you are pleased to call an ofience— ? deny its being so, because it was merited ; but supposing it were what it is designated, or even a crime of the greatest magnitude, why should I be punished for that whieh
I could not help ? The legislature, you vvill tell me, contemplates it in so heinous a light, as to have apportioned the punish¬ ment of deatii to it ; but, gentlemen, this was at a period when, with all their wis¬ dom, our legislators knew very little of the real organization of man ; it remained for tliis, tiie age of deep discovery, research, and science, to positively prove and ascer¬ tain this, and once proved and ascertained, it must be self-evident, that all acts tend¬ ing to severity should be abrogated, as cruel and unjust in the extreme, or regard¬ ed as thc dead-letter ones of barbarous pe¬ riods. 44 It is an admitted fact, beyond contro¬ versy, that all tilings human are in a pro¬ gressive state, nothing under the sun be¬ ing at a stand. We see by history this remark verified. From the grossest igno¬ rance and darkness, like the world itself, that was proti u ced out of chaos, the de¬ scendants of the original inhabitants of this island gradually emerged, till, in the course of time, they gave place fo a set of
beings, learned, polished, and otherwise enlightened ; until, at this day, we stand the first nation in the civilized world. But this state of perfection was not ac¬ complished all at once—it took several years to be brought about, gradually pro¬ ceeding, step by step, and as we advanced, we looked back with surprise, that those wlio had gone before us could have walk¬ ed in such profound darkness, in respect to the sciences in particular, which at this day stand upon the highest grounds. In¬ vention follows invention, discovery dis¬ covery, till we are almost Jed to believe a miracle wrought. How vvould queen Eli¬ zabeth, that enlightened princess in her day, have stared to have seen her fleets moving majestically along, in spite of wind or tide, to meet her enemies, merely through means ofa boiling kettle of wa¬ ter; or Mr. Sadler mount up into the very heavens themselves, through those of an inflated bag of silk ! Now, .since wdiat then would have been conceived im- F 3
possible has since been accomplished, why should w r e deride, or scoff at, or deny, our belief to the discoveries that are daily ta¬ king place? Amongst these I hold that of Gall and Spurzheim, to wdiich, I make no doubt, you are aware I previously alluded, one of the most beneficial that has yet taken place for mankind, tending as it does to early enable man to obtain a knowledge of his own propensities, a mat¬ ter of all things the most important and desirable to him. What time was here¬ tofore wasted in endeavouring to learn the natural bent or bias, or, in other words, disposition of a child ! whereas, all that is now necessary for a parent or a tutor, is to examine his cranium, and act accordingly. Hut this is not the only benefit likely to lesult from this discovery. Noble as is our constitution, fine as are our laws, yet lias our penal etnie long been stigmatized for severity ; revision after revision has been attempted by some ofour most enlighten¬ ed legislators ; but hitherto tiiose efforts of divine philanthropy have failed of sue-
cess; but ean we suppose this will be much longer the case ? No ; as this su¬ blime system gains ground, which, for the sake of humanity, I am happy to say it is gradually doing, depend upon it the de¬ sired amelioration will take place—for how could our legislators pretend to Chris¬ tian principles, to feeling, to justice, if they continued to keep in force, or enact statutes for the punishment of crimes, which it is now proved we involuntarily avoid, or commit, according to the con¬ struction ofour craniu mì " That I am a disciple of Gall and Spurzheim, it must be superfluous to de¬ clare, after the arguments I have made use of; as such, I protest against the rules by whieh I have been tried, since, in com¬ mon justice, I conceive, ere I was accused, or, in other words, brought to trial, it should first have been ascertained whether I could have avoided what I did. How would a member of the Phrenological So¬ ciety have addressed you on the occasion ? he would have said-—
' Look at that bump, gentlemen, upon his head» Pray feci ib brother on the other t>nle, And say, if in the ι auge of pos^bihties, '1 lus man hete could a\oid the act, Bertring Mich sinking ?nurk\ about him, ------------------------ fetl youi heaits, Ληύ if theie ís a knob upon yonj skulk 1 hat imhiates to justice, ??? caunot One up this much-«roiled man to piumihmen* 44 But, gentlemen, I have done, feeling that I have already trespassed too much on your time. For the patient attention vvith which I have been hearkened to, I beg to return my sincere thanks, and to assure you, tiiat whatever may be your decision respecting me, I shall remain, to the last moment of existence, impressed with the deepest sense of gratitude for the indulgence shewn aie. 44 Should I be destined to become another victim to scepticism and ignorance (par¬ don the expressions, but I know of none others to make use of on the occasion), I trust in the organ of firmness I shall not be found wanting ; though, like Douglas, I may perhaps feel a pang of regret, in
closing my brief life, at the quick termi¬ nation ofthat career of glory, vvhich never mortal was morc fond to run." Here Eugene made a low bow, arid sat down. The court remained for some minutes, after he liad ceased speaking, absolutely overwhelmed vvith astonishment ; pro¬ ceedings were then resumed, and, after a discussion of some length, it was agreed to find the prisoner guilty, on his own confession, but recommend him to mercy, as a person of incompetent judgment, oí¬ as the French would have it, sans dis¬ cernment. This was accordingly done; the recom¬ mendation was attended to, and at the same instant Eugene was restored to liber¬ ty, he received his dismission from the service. Thus ended his short career in the navy, for which he had to thank liis aunt, and lier mad passion for the system of Gall and Spurzheim—a lesson to those intrust¬ ed vvitli the care of youth, how they play
with their feelings, or attempt bewilder¬ ing their judgment. His captain, deeply feeling for the dis¬ appointment ofthe poor father, addressed a letter to him on the occasion, in which he said every thing that was possible to soften this, as he feared to him, terrible blow, assuring him, t í thongh Eugene was not fit for thc navy, he knew of no profession to which he would not do ho¬ nour, from his bravery, his humanity, and kindlv aflections. This letter, which preceded by some days, as the writer intended it should, Eugene's arrival at the castle, was one of tiie greatest puzzles that ever fell in tlie way of the lieutenant. How Eugene .should possess all these qualities, that were so absolutely essential for the profession he had entered and yet not he fit for it, was more than hecould comprehend; and after perplexing his brains for some time to no purpose, he at length applied to his sister for a solution of the riddle. This she was not long in giving him : in a mo-
ment she surmised the cause of wbat had happened. She guessed it was owing either to some hasty impulse on the part of Eugene, or some firmly-maintained opinion, and she gloried to think of the courage which, in cither case, he had given proof of. The lieutenant however listened to her with dismay,-»" What! after all I told him of the strict rules of the service ? By the head of Neptune, if he has mutinied against his captain, he deserves------" '· Pooh, pooh ! don't talk nonsense, bro¬ ther; why should he not assert himself? which ?. as 1 surmise, the whole iront of hi.s oifending. Eugene has courage, in- tegrity, .spirit—all necessary for an oflicer; yet is he not fit for the navy ' The mean¬ ing of this is, that his organs of thought and volition are not iormed by nature for the drudgery of a sea-faring life—some other must consequently be struck out for him; but for my own part, I had always a presentiment, that such would be the end of sending him into any profession in whieh
ìie conld not be his ovvn master; for vvho butthe most stupidly ignorant could sup¬ pose a youth of his uncommon genius, his poetic imagi nation, his lofty anden thusiastic turn, couîd submit, all his life, to be bound to perform the duty of an old blind mill- horse, that is for ever going the same dull round ? As some professions are regulated, I consilier the men belonging to them as no- thing better than machines; and vvith his high intellectual endowments, his powers of discrimination, what a sin—wdiat a shame woukl it have been, had he quietly allowed himself to be converted into one! No--1 rejoice as it is, tliat ere the vigour of his faculties was deadened, lie lias burst the chain that would liave fettered him to ignorance and stupidity. Returning here, he will resume those studies, that only re¬ quire to be a little longer pursued, to en¬ able him to burst out upon tlie admiring world, as another luminary in the regions of literature. Let any one examine his cranium, and however fitted he may be to command, I'll defy them to prove
?? is fitted to obey ; take my advice, therefore, brother, and endeavour to re¬ concile yourself to vvhat has happened." " Why, that 1 suppose I must," said thc lieutenant, ki wliether I vvill or no," with a sigh from tiie very bottom of his heart. " Yet let me tell you, Agnes, af¬ ter looking to see the boy, if not an ad¬ miral, at least a post captain, it is no tri¬ fling disappointment ; but if so be it is, as you say, that he is so given to mutiny, why, it is as well as it is," Tliis argument, iiowever, could not immediately reconcile him to the circum¬ stance. He was restless and unhappy Ibi- some days after the discomfiture of his fa- vourite project; but at length his happy temperament prevailed over disappoint¬ ment, and though now and then a sigh of regret would heave his breast, at the thought of tliere being an end of all fur¬ ther prospect of being the fatiier of an ad¬ miral, he forbore any further complaints.
CHAPTER VIT.
r******
" Beside the dvwy border let mc bit, Ali in tía- frf-hness ot tht Immiti air; Tliere in that holloaed mek, μι olisque and wiltl, An anijjle th.iir, mob^-lin'd, and ovethcad, By flo w tim«; υιη1ι;αμο -h idcd ; where the hue Strays diluent, autl \Mth th' extracted balm Of inturant woodbine loatbher little ihiidi.*'
Eugene was now u ])wards of three years away. Short as is this period in review, yet what a change ? it calculated to pro¬ duce in persons very young! yet was it only maturing and perfecting what Grace early promised to be. The wild romping girl was now changed into the animated, in¬ teresting young woman, full of animal spi¬ rits, but chastened and restrained by the na¬ tural sensibility and softness of her sex. No pains had been spared in her education, and the advantages bestowed on her were
not thrown away ; few of her age could boast of a mind more richly cultivated, and in all the ornamental accomplish¬ ments she excelled ; while a native ease and grace, in all she said or did, impart¬ ing a charm to the merest trifle, would have rendered her a creature of eaptiva¬ tion, even though less alluring to the eye than she was ; but " \\υν t'jrru up-, fitilli 1 !· ihan the inorimi}; rose, Vvht·.) the tl* v\ uor-i ib if aves;" while her eye's dark charm 'twere vain to tell, or the kind of dazzling radiance that high-toned feeling and intellect diffused over her enchanting countenance. Her young friend, Rose Cormack, the young person who had been taken by Miss Agnes Flora Judith to assist in the ornamental parts of her education, had not profited less than she had in the course of these few years. She was the daughter ofa miller, who had lately taken up his residence in the village of St. Dou¬ lagh's; while yet a mere infant, a widow
lady of some consequence took her under her protection, with an intention of edu¬ cating her for a governess. Ere her edu¬ cation was completed, however, her bene¬ volent benefactress died, without the power of doing any thing for hcr. One of thc conditions of her accepting the si¬ tuation at the castle was, her being al¬ lowed to take lessons with her pupil from the masters vvho attended there, to which Miss Agnes Flora Judith superadding her own, Rose grew up, in every sense of the word, a highly-accomplished young wo¬ man. The deference which she paid to her abilities, and her facility in acquiring knowledge, soon made the old lady love her almost as well as her niece; theonly quarrel they ever had being on the sub¬ ject of phrenology, which Rose steadily set her race against ; nor did the sweetness of her temper, and her obliging disposi¬ tion, endear hcr less to the other inmates of the house, while by the warm-hearted
Grace she was absolutely regarded as a bister. But it was not merely in mental attain¬ ments that Rose equalled her friend ; na- ture had not rendered her less attractive to the eye. Like thc Maria of Sterne, she was of the first order of fine forms, her air easy, graceful, and commanding; more that of a superior than a dependent. Her complexion was inclining to paleness, but the slightest emotion tinged it vvith a crimson glow, as fugitive as bright; her countenance was ofthe Grecian outline-— her brows arched, her mouth small, her lips red and pouting, her teeth regularly set and beautifully white, her eyes oi* the darkest hue, and her hair, vvhich İn rich profusion was braided round her finely- formed head, of a corresponding colour. Her temper and disposition, as already intimated, equalled her external appear* ance. She had a natural flow of spirits, though she was not without her anxieties, that kept the castle alive ; but withal a simplicity and purity of heart that knew.
no guile, nor entertained the most distant notion, by such mirth, of levity ; her sen¬ timents were never twisted or turned to an¬ swer any particular purpose—she spoke as she thought, and acted as she felt Her loveliness seemed to set at nought one of Miss Agnes Flora Judith's systems, her father, the miller, being a cross, black- looking, little old man, and her mother, she understood, for she had been dead some years, was not more amiable in her appearance; yet here, in their offspring, was a paragon of beauty ; but extraordi¬ nary cases will sometimes occur, she re¬ flected. But for the society of Rose, heavily, at times, would the days have passed with Grace ; and even as it was, she could not help, at times, from the little company they saw, sighing at the absence of her lover and her brother. The former kept up a constant correspondence with her, nor were the promised presents forgotten ; but his letters were often nearly as calcu¬ lated to afford her pain as pleasure; for
though William would not have willingly caused affliction to the heart of her he loved, yet the gratification inseparably connected with the idea of unbosoming one's self to those of whose sympathy we are sure, made him confide all his vexa¬ tions and grievances to her.; and these were not a few, his uncle being a man of an austere temper, little adapted to conci¬ liate or soften the bitterness of dependence. A severe shock was experienced by Grace on hearing of Eugene's dismission from the navy ; but when she reflected on his disposition, and that she might assure herself from it he never would have turned his face again towards home, had he done any thing to discredit or dishonour his name, she in a degree got the better of it. The precise moment of his return was not known ; he therefore surprised his aunt one day, when all the rest of the family were out. Had she met him by chance, she would hardly have recognised him, so great was the alteration a few years had wrought in his appearance ; from a slight,
delicate-looking boy, he was now changed into a fine, tall, manly youth of nineteen, with a pleasant, ingenuous countenance, dark, sparkling eyes, and short, thick, curl¬ ing hair, that set off his expressive fea¬ tures to the greatest advantage.— 4t W r ell, here I am, my dear aunt and kind in¬ structress !" he cried, clasping the old lady in his manly arms, and giving her a hug of the most affectionate nature, " your poor sailor boy, turned adrift, to seek his fortune where he may, because, forsooth, he vvould not bow and cringe, and relin¬ quish his own opinions ; but, by Jove, that is a meanness I would not have de¬ scended to, though thc worid had been all before me, where to choose my place of rest!" 44 Then it is as I imagined," said Miss Agnes Flora Judith, as soon as she had recovered from the effects of surprise and the hug ; 44 but explain, my dear boy, ex¬ plain, before we are likely to be inter¬ rupted." This w r as succinctly done; and Miss
Agnes Flora Judith was vehement in her exclamations on the injustice he had met with—" But console yourself for it, my love," she cried, " by the reflection of the glory that ever attaches to persecution in a jnst cause; and that, as nature did not form you to be a slave, these men, or petty tyrants, have only been instruments in the hands of fate, to turn vou hack into that path which vvill lead you onward to the accomplishment of your high destiny. Had your father taken my advice, instead of the few last years having been wasted, as they have been, amidst strife, and igno¬ rance, and stupidity, you might even now, young as you are, have been a rising star in the horizon of literature, and suc¬ cessful competitor vvith * the Great Un¬ known ;' but n'importe, no great time has been lost, and ere long, I triumphantl) anticipate seeing your brows bound with bays, instead," with a smile, " being sha¬ dowed with that odious hairy cap, like your late comrades, all tar and roughness.' vol, r. g
44 What, turn poet, my dear aunt!" cried Eugene, as he doffed the offending covering of his head ; 44 ah, that might be ail very fine, if I had nothing to do but to write sonnets 4 upon a lady's eyebrow,' as if this was the golden age of softness and sentiment! but in these, our iron times, something more forcible must be had recourse to. I have been injured, and í feel my injuries : tliey have wrested the sword from my hand—but a pen shall sup¬ ply its place ; and if I do not ring a peal about their ears, disclaim me for a de¬ scendant ofthe great O'Neil ! We boast, that the moment a slave sets foot on British ground, his chains drop off- —so they may ; but while ignorance is the order of the day with tiiose who govern us, tiiey will be used to fetter the enlightened amongst us who dare leave the beaten track of sci¬ ence, as Galileo was imprisoned, by the pope fbr teaching tliat the earth turned round on its axis! But what signifies the freedom of the limbs, if the mind of man be manacled? But perish the dastard,
with ignominy for ever attached to his name, who should submit to an attempt of the kind, though whips, and stings, and all the arrows of outrageous fortune, were levelled at him for his opposition to it ! No, my dear aunt, I will not give up the system vvhich, under you, I have em¬ braced. Justly it has been observed—and thinking this, am I not bound to support them?—that Gall, and Spurzheim, and Combe, have done more, or, in other words, thrown greater light on the nature of man, than all the other philosophers put together since the world began, leaving now little or nothing to discover in the moral and intellectual geography of the head of man. Shame on those whose in¬ dolence, or whose bigotry, keeps them still in ignorance of their system ! but while this ignorance prevails, we, my dear aunt, thcir disciples, must expect to meet with ridicule and opposition ; but which, encountered in a cause so approved of by our reason, we shall laugh at, as the gods laugh at ! petty follies of mankind," a 2
Hardly had Eugene concluded this tu rachy which, delivered with full force and animation, raised him in the estimation of his aunt to the very heaven of heavens, ere Grace and Rose burst into the room, to welcome his return. While yet the foiimcr was clasped to his heart, his eye was turned on the latter, and with asto¬ nishment he beheld the improvement whicb a few short years had made in her appearance. But be was diverted from bis eager contemplation of her by the en¬ trance of his father. The lieutenant meant to have receiveel him with reserve, but nature overpowered tbe resolve; and when Eugene thought, that to the new system he bad adopted was owing tbe tear of min¬ gled affection and disappointment that fell upon his check from his father, as lie press¬ ed him, vvith eager emotion, to his breast. in the pang of the moment, he, perhaps, notwithstanding all he had recently said on the subject to his aunt, bestowed a be¬ nediction upon it that might have astound¬ ed her. Eugene had returned more wounded
by his dismission from the service than he would have chosen to acknowledge ; but vexation, anger, disappointment, all were forgotten in the society of Rose ; she had burst upon his enchanted vision as a being ofa superior order: loveliness was around heras light—her every word was treasured, her every glance was dwelt on ; while lis¬ tening to, while looking at her, it was impossible to feel aught but pleasure; and, in short, ere he was aware of it, he became as very a lover as ever sighed '* upon a midnight pillow." To indulge in the meditations, and give utterance to the poetical effusions she in¬ spired, the most lonely parts of the adja¬ cent scenery became his favourite haunts ; in particular, he fixed on a romantic cave at the opposite side of the mountain, lead¬ ing to Nell Tierney's cottage, for his study. From this sequestered spot the scenery was wilder, and more romantic, than at the other side : at the foot of the hill, bor¬ dering on a high mountain, ran a narrow glen, chiefly occupied by a torrent, sur-
rounded by scenery indescribably wild, all things being abrupt and rugged, as the torrent foamed over its rocky channel in this hollow abyss, half obscured by trees. After crossing the torrent, over felled trees cast across the glen, which passage filled the mind with terror, from the depth at either side, a narrow and rugged path led to the ruins of an ancient monastery, through hanging groves of oaks, ash, and beech, spreading over the precipitous sides of the ascert These ruins derived a pe¬ culiar beauty from the height and boldness of their situation, elevated upon the side of a high mountain, and darkly shaded by oaks and elders, well suited to religious solitude; as behind the building rose in succession mountain after mountain, as if closing it in from the busy world on that side ; while the trees, that formed the bridge across the darksome glen, only re¬ quired to be withdrawn, to equally cut off* access to it in front. From these ruins a bowered walk, suited to the genius of the place, led to an
opening, called the Lover's Leap. The screen the wood formed at times totally precluded the slightest view of the coun¬ try beneath, while at others, through a chance break, the eye caught a view of a deep, gloomy valley, the bed of a wind¬ ing and foaming torrent, that, as it rushed along, was now completely lost, now half revealed to the sight, through obscuring foliage. An angle in the wood suddenly turned, an opening, awful in the extreme, was presented to the view, from the tre¬ mendous depth down which an incau¬ tious approach must have occasioned pre¬ cipitation, from the sides of which pro¬ jected pointed rocks, and tangled shrubs and thickets growing out of their fissures. This was denominated the Lover's Leap, and numerous were the tales on record of the catastrophes that had taken place here. That such scenery was not calculated to dissipate the feelings that had taken pos¬ session of the mind of Eugene may easily be imagined ; the romantic effect of the deef) gloom of the woods, the solitary
ruin, the voice of waterfalls, the roar of torrents, the murmurs of the mournful breeze, sighing through the streaming fo¬ liage of dilapidated ailes, served to render still more powerful the impression that had been made upon him. But in in¬ dulging his passion what was his aim ? what did he hope for? to what look for¬ ward? In vain he tried to evade the question, and, with black despair, acknow¬ ledged to himself, that without fortune, without interest at either side, to form the union he sighed for would be downright madness. But then, to give up the ob¬ ject of his adoration—to see her perhaps in the arms of another—another, who might not estimate her virtues, her tran¬ scendant loveliness, as he did—No—there was distraction in thc thought ! Yet, to drag her into lingering wretchedness, through his ungoverned passion—the idea was still more insupportable ; and sooner than do this, he would heroically resign her. But there was no occasion for such a sacrifice ; they were both still young
enough to wait some years for the com¬ pletion of their happiness, and with such a stimulus as love for exertion, such a re¬ ward in view for them as Rose, what should he not be able to make—what difficulties to overcome—what wonders achieve ? But these ideas were only the feverish dreams of a suddenly-inflated imagina¬ tion, vvhich a little reflection tended to sober or dissipate. Supposing he had abi¬ lities deserving of encouragement, yet, without interest to procure patronage, of vvhat avail would they be to him? for though he had not, as yet, seen much ot life, yet he had read suflSciently to know, that unfriended genius has indeed but a poor chance of making its way in thc world. After the fate of a Chatterton, a White, a Burns—that fate over which his youthft I eye had so often melted in sym¬ pathy, at which his breast bad so often flamed with virtuous indignation—what hope could he indulge to buoy his spirit up to enterprise? No—it would be but ? 3
to deceive, to delude himself, to add ano¬ ther to the list of those heart-broken vic¬ tims, whom cold neglect, and biting scorn, had crushed into untimely graves—and Rose roust be relinquished.—** And this is existence," he would exclaim, seized at these moments with sudden misanthropy, " to see our budding hopes withered and destroyed, and a long, thorny path, deso¬ late of all that can cheer and invigorate, stretched before us, our journey through life impeded by obstacles we do not de¬ serve to meet with, till our temper be¬ comes soured, our spirit broken, and after unsuccessful struggles with fate, we fall exhausted into the ocean of eternity !" The loss of his profession stung him to the soul ; but still he would not allow the justice of his sentence, conceiving, from the unhappy persuasion he had imbibed, that he bad been most cruelly dealt with. At length, after many struggles with himselfi the necessity of giving up Rose became too evident, not to induce him to determine on the conquest of his passion.
In consequence of this determination, he began to absent himself more than ever from the castle, convinced that it was only by abstaining from her society, that he could hope to succeed in his efforts for the purpose. What credit did he not give himselt fbr his resolution on this occasion, quite overlooking the anxious impatience with which he would listen for the first sound of the dinner-bell from the castle, from the pretext it afforded him of returning to her, and the thrill of delight he felt when Grace would insist on his being their companion in some evening ramble ! How delicious were these rambles—after walking till perhaps fatigued, sitting down in some romantic spot, they would digest the studies of the day, or talk over such works of fancy as might have fallen in their way ! Hence too they would com¬ pare the scenery of their favourite poets with nature, and so appreciate its truth and justice. At the close of day, encircled by an
amphitheatre of black and lofty moun¬ tains, which seemed to exclude all inter¬ course with the rest of the habitable world, would these youthful fancies picture and describe to each other the fairy castles the mists of the valley formed at times on their sides, or the extraordinary chimeras portrayed ty the clouds, as they slowly moved along the void, before the sun had declined too low in the west to have its beams obscured by these stupendous mo¬ numents of nature: while it remained above the horizon, it gave to the scene the aspect of a pleasing retirement; but, as this bright luminary of light and life gradually withdrew its cheering rays, the prospect began to assume a gloom that. from the awe and terror it created, often rendered it an exertion of courage on the part of the females to remain where they were. It was then Eugene exercised his invention, or memory, in wild and horrific talcs. Sometimes Nell Tierney, by chance, would join the youthful trio, and her gob-
lin and fairy tales were, at such hours, a high treat to her auditors, enriched as they were by her ovvn remarks, and en¬ larged by her imagination. The ghosts she spoke of she protested she had heard and seen herself, wailing, and gliding amidst the ruins of the monastery, and a thousand and a thousand times the good people, the tallest of them not higher than her little finger, dancing within their own rings in the meadows, attended by the glow-worm. Eugene had made a mystery of his her¬ mitage, but at length it was discovered to the girls by Nell Tierney ; and, under the idea of teasing him, believing him to be engrossed in study there, not a few were the interruptions he began to receive from them. Eor the philosophy with which he bore these we shall give him no credit, believing, as we do, that they did not put his temper to any severe trial. At first he became alarmed by these visits of Rose to this romantic retreat, as striking down the supposed barrier he had
raised to his growing passion; but in a short time, he began to persuade himself, nothing could be more calculated to cure hiin of it. Before, on his return to the castle, his soul was all fire and agitation on beholding ber; but now, almost con¬ stantly in her company, this agitation had begun to cease. Little, however, did he imagine, because his fears of losing her began every moment to lessen, that love was fixing her image still more firmly in his heart ; and that, although hè might have been able to support a separation from her, while his soul trembled with apprehension, such could not be borne when an imaginary security had made her bis alone. But either the subtle passion that possessed him blinded his judgment, or he chose to hoodwink it himself. When we feel that we shall be compelled to make a sacrifice by opening our eyes, how studiously do we try to keep them closed ! Grace was sometimes detained by her aunt on private matters. Not having
her company, however, did not prevent Rose from strolling to the hermitage ; she knew of no harm in doing so—was not Eugene as a brother to her? and why should she deny herself the pleasure of his converse when left to herself? These were the moments that should have convinced him of his danger—these the occasions on whicb Eugene lost his balance ; without intending it, he would express his admi¬ ration of her beauty, her talents, rail at fortune, and express terror at the idea of a separation between them ; to all which Rose would reply, she supposed he was rehearsing a scene with her he proposed representing through bis muse; would even tell Grace of bis fine compliments to her, and affect to laugh him out of his mad pranks, as she caiied them : but a secret pleasure thrilled through her veins whde listening to hira, that might have assured ber she would have telt sorry had she really considered his com¬ pliments in tbe light she pretended to do.
CHAPTER VIII. ***** ** *■■*++++ +**■+* ** Oppos'U to \ove > atab ! how vain arc vows!" Time rolled on unheeded; Eugene be¬ came every day more deeply sunk in the passion that absorbed him ; he no longer struggled against it—he believed, or per¬ suaded himseif, it was useless, and eagerly caught at the idea, as a pretext for indul¬ ging in the delicious pleasure it afforded him. When he could not engross Rose to himself, he bent his steps to the ruined monastery, or the Lover's Leap, that there might be no interruption to his dwelling on her idea. Rose herself still continued to laugh at him whenever he seemed seri- ous, and to try and deceive herself with regard to the real nature of her sentiments for him, endeavouring to persuade herself
that it was owing to the gratification she derived from listening to his poetic effu¬ sions, which he was in the habit of read¬ ing to her there, on the spot where they were composed, that she took such plea¬ sure in going to the hermitage. They were sitting here by themselves one evening (a thing now not very unusual with them, Grace, just at this,juncture, being a good deal engaged in looking over some papers for her aunt), when suddenly throwing aside the poem he had been reading— 44 How cruel is your conduct, Rose !" said Eugene ; 44 if I seem serious on any subject, or solicit your opinion, you laugh in my face, or------" 44 Wei!, what is the subject on vvhich you want my opinion?" interrupted Rose, but with a tremulous motion about her lip, that but too plainly indicated her not being unsuspicious of it, 44 Why, you know, I was asking you, the other day, what you thought of early marriages ?" 44 Oh dear, yes—I recollect—and I told
you I had never yet bestowed a minute*s consideration on the subject." " Well, but I ask you now to do so ?" " Well, if I must then—why, I think them very foolish things—yes, positively and decidedly, a very silly thing for a boy and girl, ere they know their own minds, to slip their necks into a noose from which they cannot withdraw them." " You are not in earnest?" " I am indeed ; I think a man should never marry before he is*—" " Twenty," said Eugene, laughing in her face, and seizing her hand. " No, thL iy-five or forty, and a woman until she is thirty." u What, wait till all the vividness of the imagination—till all the fine sensibili¬ ties of tlie soul are deadened or destroyed, by the flat realities, the harshnesses, the anxieties of Hfe ? No, if we desire happi¬ ness in the marriage state, let the union he formed while yet the dewy freshness of youth is possessed by our hearts, our minds, our faculties—for 'tis then only, free
from the sordid and debasing considera* tions that influence at other periods, we wed from the pure disinterested motives that can alone constitute felicity. It is then alone the enamoured pair can with truth exclaim— « .—, -------.------What is the t\orîd to them,
Its pomp, its pleasure, and its nonsense all, Who in each otiier clasp whatever fair High fancy forms, and lavish hearts can wish?' Besides, the chances are against a man or woman ever living to see their children brought up, who wait until a late period of life to marry. There is a proverb, my charming Rose—* Late children are early orphans—what an afflicting idea to their parents! By an early marriage, a man has not only the happy prospect of seeing his children, but his children's ehildren» comfortably settled in life; and what—— w " What a patriarchal idea !" said Rose, trying, under a laugh, to conceal the emo· tion excited by the subject. " But sup¬ posing a fortune was wanting, as the «ariy
season of life is the period for commencing efforts to acquire one ?" 44 Well, and w r hat would be so likely to render those efforts successful, as a man's having a lovely and adored being depend¬ ing on him for comfort and happiness ? Do you think his own mere wants or ne¬ cessities couid ever prove such a stimu¬ lant to a generous and enthusiastic spirit, as this consideration ? no ; to make a man truly exert himself, let the happiness of a beloved being be early confided to him— let her, with all the lovely helplessness of her sex, be cast upon his bosom for suc¬ cour and support, and to what will he not be roused—to what will he not be equal ! Oh, how cheerfully could I toil through all the day, 4 if, when I returned at eve/ sure of the smiles of my sweet girl !" and the arm which had involuntarily, perhaps unconsciously, encircled her waist, gave all proper emphasis to these words, by draw¬ ing her still closer to his throbbing heart, as he was uttering them. Rose began to feel the danger of her
situation— 4t I can see to work no more," she said, rolling up a bit of muslin, on which she had affected to be busy ; i4 and as this is quite a poetical hour, I will leave you to your musings." It was indeed a poetical one, and Eugene knew too well the effect of such an hour on tlie feelings, to let her escape in this manner —that it was at such moments as these love makes impressions never to be effaced. The day had been uncommonly warm, the sun sinking behind the distant mountains, ren¬ dered the shade delightful in the extreme ; the air was all balm—the woods all me¬ lody ; all, in short—the gorgeousness of sunset—the lengthening shadows of the mountains—the dying sounds of busy day, borne to the ear upon the fluttering breeze —the buzzing of insects in the parting ray—the vesper chant of the wild choris¬ ters of nature—tended to tranquillize the soul to peace and harmony.—" No," said Eugene, catching Rose by the arm, as she attempted to leave him, and drawing her back with gentle force to her seat beside
him, fl I cannot let you go ; half the en¬ joyment of this delicious hour would be lost were you to do so—this hour of en¬ chantment, when the deepening tender¬ ness, when the awakened sensibilities of the heart, make it instinctively seek for the object of its adoration to participate in its feelings : oh, Rose------" But what he would, or might have add¬ ed, was prevented by the sudden appear¬ ance of Grace at the moment.—" So, a pretty pair you are," she exclaimed, " to be sitting quietly here, instead of coming to meet me, as I fully expected you would do, that we might have taken a long walk together, after my being pent up with my aunt the whole day, as I have been ! Up¬ on my life, Eugene, I have a great mind to lay violent hands upon your sonnets, for detaining Rose in such a manner! 1 ' 44 No, you would not be so ill-natured," said Eugene, fondly kissing her ; " be¬ sides, I am not to blame—it was Rose kept me here." ** I kept vou here !" exclaimed Rose.
44 Yes, you know it was," replied Eu¬ gene, with an archness of look that recall¬ ed the fugitive blush that had just left her cheek. 44 Ah, I believe you, to be sure," said Grace, as she skipped out before them, Iittie aware of what was then passing in their hearts. After this scene, Rose could no longer think of visiting the hermitage by her¬ self; an innate sense of modesty, of pro¬ priety, forbade her; though still she tried to believe Eugene had no serious mean¬ ing in what he said; but no longer could she try to persuade herself she was unin¬ terested or unconcerned on tlie subject, " And ail thf r< ??? of lier bout u.ts ??." The anguish occasioned by a passion ihat she was convinced must be hopeless, was aggravated by the impossibility ofher bringing herself to repose confidence, in this instance, in her friend Grace. Agi¬ tated, distressed, unable to converse as usual, she now sought as much as pos-
jsible to be alone·* Like most girls of her age, she was romantic, and the passion that pervaded her soul did not render her less so. The ruined monastery now be¬ came her haunt, whenever unaccompanied by Grace. Here she could freely indulge her feelings; and here, when she thought it would not be likeiy to create alarm, she loved to linger, when the full-orbed moon shed its shadowy light upon the face of things. More than once she was surprised here by the impassioned lover; but it was each time with Grace so close on bis steps, that all he had time to do or say, was to snatch a hasty kiss, press her gently to his breast, and whisper a remonstrance for her cruelty in thus absenting herself. On finding she no more came to the hermitage by herself, and equally avoid¬ ed all opportunities that tended to allow him to speak to her alone, he grew rest- Jess and unhappy, uncertain tq what this conduct was owing, .whether .to indiffer¬ ence, or a, persuasioni of the necessity, of repressing his passion : there was distrac-
tión in the former apprehension, and some way or other he must be put out of sus¬ pense. He had always made it a point to place himself opposite to her at table, for this was the feast of his soul. The oppor¬ tunity which this situation afforded him, of contemplating her countenance, of ob¬ serving every look, was now more eager¬ ly, more anxiously than ever profited by. The manner in which she now strove to avoid his looks^—the blushes they called, up when encountered—the confusion, the emotion occasioned by his suddenly ad¬ dressing her—all tended to inspire him with hope; but this was not sufficient to satisfy a nature ardent, impassioned, as his was— nothing short of an absolute confession of her love would do this ; but how was this to be'obtained, eluding» avoiding him, as she did? At length one evening, as she and Grace were rambling with him, in the romantic vicinity of the castle, the latter was sud« vol. ι. H
denly sent for by her aunt. On her with¬ drawing her arm from her brother's to obey this summons, Hose, alarmed and agitated at the idea of being left alone with him, prepared to attend her, but tin's was opposed by Eugene's firmly keeping hold of her arm, while Grace said, there was not the slightest occasion for her re¬ turning with her, as she did not expect to he detained long by her aunt, and if she were, there was no reason why she should also lose so lovely an evening. Thus prevented doing what prudence dictated, Rose endeavoured to assume an air of carelessness, and the turn uitu ou s throbbing of her heart was in some degrte .stilled by finding Eugene made no at¬ tempt to take advantage of the circum¬ stance that İiad thrown her into his power. But he only commanded himself till he had got her more completely into it : step by step he drew her on towards the Lo¬ ver's Leap, diverting her attention from the path they wvro pursuing, till, sudden¬ ly, the awful gap appeared before them.
Eugene stopped,and looking steadily in her face for a moment, relinquished her arm ; but it was only to throw liimself at her feet—" Cruel Rose," he exclaimed, u to compel me to have recourse to stratagem, to obtain an opportimity for speaking lo you ! —nay, there ís no use in struggling-— I will be heard !" 4Ž For Heaven's sake, what do you meau bv this conduct? what will Grace think of seeing you in this attitude, should she surprise us? Rise, I implore—I beseech you ! you know not how you agitate me by this behaviour !" " Never, though the world were to collect around us, till you tell mc what 1 have to hope—that you are not indifferent to the passion which, you must be sen sible, you have kindled in my soul." " How you distress me ! but supposing 1 felt what you wish, for what purpose would you draw the confession of it from me, aware, as you must be, of the obsta¬ cles that are opposed to our thinking se¬ riously of each other?" H 2
44 I know of none but what your indif- lerencc may create. 14 44 What, not in the disparity of my birth?" tk Speak not of a mere chance circunb stance proving one," exclaimed Eugene, with vehemence. " No, Bose, you should he convinccdj from the love, the reverence ???? you by my familv, they never would consider it as such." 44 Ah, Eugene, you speak as you wish. But do 1 not know your aunt's sentimenti respecting birth ? do I not know what liei pride of ancestry is ?" t * Say but you regard me," cried Eu- pene, with pleading tenderness in his looks and tone-—" acknowledge a respon¬ sive sentiment for me, and I swear there can be no obstacles to our union that will not, that shall not be overcome ! Did I not think so, do von imagine I could urge you in tiiis manner? No, by Heavens I would not have to accuse myself of trifling with the feelings of a heart like yours, to be lord ofthe universe! Speak tlien, my
angel—I rest upon you for happiness; ore w T ord can elevate me to the summit of bliss—one word sink me into the very depth of despair!" Poor Rose ! her resolution faltered ; she felt there was no safety for her but in flight, and fliglit was prevented ; İier frame trembled— lier colour varied ; and Eugene, believing slie was on the point of faint¬ ing, hastily quitted his kneeling attitude, to support her in liis arms. The scene that followed may be guessed : any fur¬ ther attempt at concealment was useless— the secret of her heart was betrayed ; and the agitation and regret that followed tlie conscious discovery, were soothed, and gradually subdued, by Eugene's solemn assurances of truth and sincerity. Wiien composure was a little restored, Eugene ventured to acknowledge he did not desire thtir attachment to be yet known to his iamily, lest the know ledge of it should induce them to tiiink he meant to abandon those exertions that were so essential for him.—" The moment 1 liave
struck out a feasible plan for myself, that moment," he added, " I shall demand the hand of my sweet Rose ; but till then, we'll let the secret of our hearts be locked up within tbem." Rose could make no objection to this suggestion ; on the contrary, she was rather pleased than otherwise at it, from the rail¬ lery and jesting she conceived it would be the means of saving her. Had she known a little more of the world, however, or the general deceitfulness imputed to man, it might have caused some uneasy feel¬ ings. But suspicion was certainly not merited by Eugene, his intentions being truly and strictly honourable, although he had not assuredly been quite ingenu¬ ous with her in this instance. The fact was, he was not quite so certain as he pretended of his family overlooking the disparity of Rose's birth; and from the fear he felt of the effect of their oppo* sition to their union might have upon her, wished to keep them in ignorance of their attachment, till he had succeeded
in binding Rose, in some way or other, irrevocably to bim. Solemnly engaged to each other, as she conceived, and reposing the greatest con¬ fidence in his honour and delicacy, Rose no longer sought to avoid giving Eugene opportunities of conversing with her in secret. Doubts and anxieties would re¬ cur; but the moment she found herself listening to his soft persuasive accents, her soul became restored to tranquillity ; no wonder then that she was not able to re¬ sist his passionate entreaties for these sto¬ len interviews. The old dilapidated cha¬ pel of the castle was in general the scene of these, as the place where there was least danger of surprise, the terror in wdiich it was held by the domestics being such, that not for all the wealth which they as¬ serted being buried beneath it, would any one of them have approached it at the hour when it was visited by the lovers ; while the other inmates of the castle, from its long desertion, hardly ever thought of entering it.
At each succeeding interview Eugene gained a still greater, a still more dange- Tous ascendency over his lovely Rose; but with a heart as full of truth and pu¬ rity as her own. But a curious circum- •stance took place at this time at St. Dou¬ lagh's, that a little diverts us from him.
CHAPTER IX.
«« ------------Foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth whelni'd them from men's eyes/* On giving up the castle, Mr. Mordaunt, the recent proprietor, requested permission to still retain two or three apartments, in a remote part of it, it not being convenient, just at that time, to remove some articles he had deposited in them. This was readily granted ; these rooms being amongst the number of those the
femily. did not mean to use, and entirely out of the line of those prepared for occu¬ pation. Months, years, rolled on, and nothing further was heard on the subject, and the circumstance might almost have been forgotten, from these rooms being in a part of the castle that was utterly aban¬ doned, but for the allusions of the people about St. Doulaglts from time to time to it, accompanied by dark and mysterious hints of there being something in these chambers that should be inquired into; and to which was owing, they asserted their confident belief, the strange noises that were heard in them. At length so much injury was done to this part of the castle by a violent storm, that the lieutenant deemed it advisable to apprize Mr. Mordaunt ofthe circumstance, lest any thing should happen to his proper¬ ty from what had occurred. By return of post he received a polite answer from him, thanking him for his attention in ac- И?
quainting him with what had happened, atid mentioning his intention, in conse¬ quence, of immediately proceeding to Ire¬ land, (for his chief residence was England,) to have the apartments cleared, and re¬ sign the keys of them, with many apolo¬ gies for their long detention. Just about the time this letter was re¬ ceived, Eugene was obliged to go to a dis¬ tant town, to give orders about some matters required at the castle. His re¬ turn that day was uncertain ; but in hopes of meeting him, when the evening was somewhat advanced, tlie girls walked out in the direction he must come : chatting of one thing or another, they proceeded much farther then they had at first intend¬ ed, and might have gone on, but for a sudden shower that surprised them, obli¬ ging them to run down a little, narrow, straggling glade for shelter, in which stood the ruins of one of those innumerable old churches that are scattered over Ireland. They were in hopes that the present storm, like summer ones in general, might
soon blow over ; but every moment it be¬ came more violent, the sky grew heavier and heavier, till at last a pitchy darkness overspread the hemisphere, while in awful peals the thunder was heard rumbling amidst the distant hills. What to do they knew not; they were now afraid to quit their shelter, owing to the road they had to retrace being in ma¬ ny parts extremely dangerous ; and yet to remain much longer where they were, vvould lie to throw the family at home, they feared, into the greatest consterna¬ tion. While in this state of incertitude, they heard the sound of an approaching car ; and the probability of its being one sent from the castle for them instantly occurred. In this agreeable persuasion they were confirmed, on rinding it had turned down the glade, accompanied by a lantern, the faint twinkle of which was, every now and then, espied tiirough the bushes, with which the place was over¬ grown,— 44 Thank God," cried Grace, in tlie joy of her relieved heart, 4t that our
adventure is likely to end in this man¬ ner !" and was about raising her voice, to call out to the supposed driver to hasten, if possible, when Rose, laying her hand upon her arm, bade her in a whisper be siient, as the voices she heard were not those of any one they knew. Grace, trembling from head to foot, lis¬ tened attentively, and soon distinguished the voices of unknown men. The terror of our poor dan. sels now became indescrib¬ able; no good purpose, they were con¬ vinced, coukl have brought any one, at such an hour, to so solitary a place; and crouching down together within the ruins, they hardly allowed themselves to breathe. In the mean time tlie car had stopped, and some brands being lit, their red glare al¬ lowed tlie affrighted í.» irta to see, tiirough the chinks of the wall behind which they were concealed, three men. mufHed up in great-coats, with flapped hats, and some¬ thing large, apparently a chest, upon the cur. lt Come, come, lad·-*,"" cried oneof them.
in a tone of impatience, on perceiving his companions employing themselves with the brands, as the wind threatened to ex¬ tinguish them, ie don't be delaying in this manner : consider what tiie consequence of being surprised here would be." 44 Oh ! as to that, master, you may make yourself pretty easy on that score ; for who the plague, Pd be glad to know, would be likely to come here, at such a time as this ? however, if wc could once make out wdiere the grave, or the pit is, we needn't mind keeping this blaze in,— I thouglit, Murdoch, you said you coniti point it out directly to us ?" '· And so I could," said Murdoch, 4 * on¬ ly a {'ter digging it, 1 was obliged to cover it over with briers, to prevent its being seen ; but—ay, here it is, right under the gable-end of the church ; so bear a hand, rny boy, and we'll soon finish the busi¬ ness.*' The blazing sticks were immediately extinguished, and the two ruffians wlio liad held them proceeded to lift the chest
from the car ; as they put, or rather threw it into the earth, a rattling sound was heard within it, that made the girls shud¬ der. As they were loosely filling up the chasm, and covering it over by the light ofthe lantern— 4( Are you sure," demand¬ ed he whom they styled master, in a tone of the most anxious alarm, ** that there is no danger of any discovery taking place here?" 44 Oh sorrow danger 1" replied Murdoch ; 44 in tlie first place, myself will be here by the first peep of day, to see that all is safe and snug ; and in the next, barring my¬ self, I don't suppose there's a man in the place would set spade in the spot, seeing there's an ould story tould ofa priest that was buried in it. leaving a malediction to any one who should disturb his bones." 44 Weil* I hope it may be as you say," was the reply ; 44 but, should it prove otherwise, remember, lads, what you've sworn." The girls did not permit themselves to
move till the rumbling sound of the ear coukl no longer be distinguished. As soon as she thought she might ven¬ ture to speuk—" Oh Heavens!" exclaim¬ ed Grace, " what have I not suffered! and you, Rose, I suppose are almost dead with fright too." " I have been in a state of extreme hor¬ ror indeed," replied llose, " listening, as I am convinced I was, to ruffians concerned in some atrocious deed, of whose sacrifi¬ cing us to their safety I had not the slight¬ est doubt, if they discovered us." " Good God! vvhat a narrow escape we have had !" said Grace, shuddering. ik Yes, there cannot be a doubt of what they bu¬ ried being the body, or rather skeleton, of some murdered person, for the sound within the chest was evidently that of the rattling of bones : but what is to be done ? I tremble to remain here another minute, and yet I am almost equally afraid to stir, lest of encountering those ruffians.'' " I don't apprehend any great danger from the circumstance," replied Rose, " ex-
cept in the immediate vicinity of this. At all events we must run the risk, lest their cowardly fears should make them return unexpectedly ; and see, the moon is be¬ ginning to struggle .through the watery clouds, sq that we should hardly have any chance of remaining concealed from them if they came back." ** Let us fly then," said the terrified Grace ; and seizing the arm of Rose, they hurried, with all the quickness of alarm, through the wet bushes. On emerging from the glade, they look¬ ed cautiously about-them, to see whether any one was lurking near it. They per¬ ceived no one, however, and hastening on¬ ward, hardly allowed themselves time to breathe, till they came within sight of the castle. Entering by the nearest gate to tliem, in order to avoid a round to the usual entrance, they had to cross the soli¬ tary grass-grown court, in which were the chambers still retained by Mr. Mordaunt, to the one in which the inhabited part of the castle stood.
" Stop/' said Rose, suddenly laying hold of Grace as they were going on ; 44 don't I see the door leading to the rooms lock¬ ed up by Mr. Mordaunt lying open ?" 44 No, to be sure," replied Grace— 44 how could that be, when he is not yet come over, and has the key in his possession ? and yet upon my word it is, and with a key in it ! Some one has been here then—is it possible he could have arrived clandes¬ tinely ? or, rather, have any motive for keeping his visit to these apartments a se¬ cret?" Rose staggered, and caught at Grace for support.— 44 A horrible suspicion crosses my mind," she said, fC that what we wit¬ nessed this night is connected with them ; tales much to the disadvantage of Mr. Mordaunt have been in. circulation, you know ; and assuredly, now I am collected, the ι voice of one ofthe men we saw. in the churchyard was Ithat of a person.of a su¬ perior description;" 4i You:màke me shudder!" cried Grace. ** My very t>lood runs cold at the thought
of any atrocious crime having been per¬ petrated beneath the roof under which we reside : but I'll tell you what we'll do— we'll secure this door, and without men¬ tioning any thing of what occurred this evening, return, at an early hour in the morning, to examine the apartments by ourselves, when, if we find any further grounds for suspicion, we'll consider how we sball act." Rose could make no objection to this plan, and the door being secured, they went on. Instead of finding all within in a state of alarm about them, as they fully expected, from the lateness of the hour, and the storm to wbich they had been ex¬ posed, they found them in a perfect state of composure. But the fact was, their ab¬ sence was not known, Miss Agnes Flora Judith being engaged at study at the time of their going out, and the lieute¬ nant having dined abroad that day, and tlie servant man, the only person wdio saw them leaving home, having taken himself
off, the moment their backs were turned, to a dance in the village. Their nerves were so agitated, that, in. stead of separating for the night, they con¬ tinued together in Grace's chamber, talk¬ ing, more than sleeping, of the extraordi¬ nary manner in which atrocious crimes were still brought to light, and the con¬ vincing proof this afforded of there being an omniscient eye, that never slumbereth or slcepcth, continually watching over us, ?? that he vvho says in his heart " there is no God," indeed completely deceiveth bim¬ self. By the first dawn of day they were up, and stealing out, admitted themselves, with a feeling of mingled impatience and dread, to the chambers they were so anxious to inspect. They consisted of two large drea* ry rooms, forming part ofa range that uni¬ ted two of the old mouldering towers that flanked the building, and were both lying open, containing, with a few articles of antique furniture (comprising a bed, a few chairs, and a table or tvvo), several female
habiliments scattered about, of a descrip¬ tion calculated to induce a belief of their owner having been of superior rank. But who was this owner, or who the last oc¬ cupier of these desolate apartments, where scarce the light of day could find admis¬ sion, from the smallness of the high-raised casements, and the gloomy curtain spread over tbem by the dark tangled ivy ? But conjecture was vain on the subject. The hints, however, they had heard, of an unknown female having been confined in the castle by Mr. Mordaunt, whom nobo¬ dy ever saw, and wlio had been removed from it with the same silence and mys¬ tery that she had been brought to it, did not fail to recur to their recollection at the moment, attended with a eold shudder. from the idea of vvhat they had seen the preceding night. f ' Could these silent chambers speak," cried Grace, " vvhat a tale of suffering might they not perhaps reveal ! Yet is it possible that Mr. Mordaunt coukl be guil¬ ty of what we are certainlv how allowing
ourselves to suspect him ? His character, even here, where he is neither liked nor loved, is not that ofa dissipated man ; on the contrary, he has always, 1 understand, heen reckoned even a doting husband ; and if the person supposed to have been eonfined here was not the victim of seduc¬ tion, whicii, from vvhat wc have heard of him, seems improbable, what else could she have been ? or whatever motive than her heing one could he have had for spirit¬ ing her away ? But, Rose, does not our stolen visit to these chambers reoiind you oí' some ofthe incidents in the Mysteries of Udolpho? in particular of Emily's mid¬ night one with o'tl Dorothée the house¬ keeper, to the apartments of her deceased aunt ? Coukl we but find a lute, a pic¬ ture, resembling one or other of us, and see a ghastly visage gradually rising, not ? hove that pall, to be sure, but that coun¬ terpane, wliich, however, from the dust that has settled on it, does not certainly appear very unlike one, it would be quite similar."
44 Hush !" cried Rose, in an under tone, 44 I think I hear some one on the stairs." 44 Good God!" exclaimed Grace—and the temerity of which they had been guilty, in visiting these remote chambers, at such an hour, by themselves, all at once occur¬ red to them. They listened tremblingly, Rose's ear had not deceived her ; a heavy foot was plainly heard ascending; and Grace, in in¬ describable terror, involuntarily crouched down behind Rose, so as to he completely concealed by her. Not less alarmed, Rose stood absolutely transfixed with fear to the floor, directly fronting the stairs upon vvhich this cham¬ ber opened, her dark hair stiffened up above her brow, and tiie Hfeblood forsa¬ king her cheek, so that she migiit well, at the moment, from tiie imperfect light that still, from the earliness of the hour, pre¬ vailed within the chamber, have been mis¬ taken by a superstitious mind or a guilty conscience for a tenant of the tomb. Presently a man was seen ascending
the stairs ; ere he had well gained the top, however, he suddenly paused, evident¬ ly owing to the ñgure that was facing him in the chamber.·—" Merciful Heaven, do my eyes deceive me !" Rose heard him exclaim, betraying, by the voice in which the exclamation was uttered, his being the person who evidently was the director of what had taken place the preceding night at the ruins. He appeared irresolute whether to ad¬ vance or draw back ; on a slight movement of Rose's, however, he precipitately re¬ treated. A groan was instantly after heard, with a noise resembling that of a fall " Good Heavens ! should he be killed ! ' exclaimed Rose, *' fbr 1 am convinced he has fallen." " Oh no, I hope not !" cried Grace. They cautiously advanced to reconnoi¬ tre ; he was gone, however, leaving the door open behind him, doubtless owing to the agitation he was in. We need hardly say, that our damsels
did notlose any further time in specula¬ ting or surmising ; they darted out, leav¬ ing the key as they had found it the pre¬ ceding night. Some time elapsed ere the flutter of their spirits at all subsided. At length, a little recovering herself—" Well," ex¬ claimed Grace, " thus conscience doth make cow r ards of us all,' for to its influ¬ ence I positively and decidedly believe was owing the precipitate retreat of this man, vVh oever he is." ' ( Why you don't suppose he took mc for a ghost?" said Rose. " I really am inclined to do so ; thc idea may appear ludicrous, but when wc reflect on what wc have heard of the ef¬ fects of conscience on a guilty spirit—the deeds of horror it has been the means of bringing to light—the strong and power¬ ful minds it has been the means of un¬ nerving, making him who laughed at the battle's roar turn pale at a fleeting shadow, and shrink within himself at the whisper of a passing breeze—I do not think it de-
-serves derision : it is, in short, the accu¬ sing spirit armed with t whips and stings,* the mysterious power of giving a threat¬ ening meaning to ail we see or hear, that is raised up against us the moment we wil¬ fully violate the sacred commands of our Creator. Like lady Macbeth, do you not imagine that the shuddering murderer must still fancy he sees his hand stained with that fearful evidence ofhis guilt, that must vet bear such terrible record against him at the bar of the Almighty—or that the cruel despoiler of the fatherless and widow may not, in his most exulting mo¬ ments, be often scared w r ith the imagi narv groans of expiring misery ? Have we not heard of nabobs, unable, from the way in which thc wealth was gained that acqui¬ red them that title, to pass a night in dark¬ ness or solitude? and why, since all 1 have stated is known to be a fact, why, í sny, should my suggestion about you this morning be ridiculed?—Oh my God l' she suddenly added, dropping on her VOL. L ι
knees, and raising her beaming eyes to heaven, " since such are the horrors of guilt, keep me ever from the knowledge of it! strengthen me, that I bé not led in¬ to* temptation—for, let my destiny in Jife be what it may, still, if the consolations of an approving conscience are mine, it can¬ not be utterly a bitter one. My path may be lowly, but if, in the security of con¬ scious innocence, I can inhale the sweets of nature, and enjoy its beauties, will it not still be one of bliss—for could all the splendour of wealth make amends for such fears, such horrors, asi have alluded to?" The quivering lip and trickling tears of Rose, proved her joining in this supplica¬ tion. " So pray'd they innocent, And ίυ their mínds firm peace restorM." They had hardly done breakfast, when a chaise and four drove up to the door, and Mr. Mordaunt was announced. The girls exchanged looks at the curious confirmation which his arrival, just at this
juncture, was of the suspicions that had taken possession of their'minds. This gentleman had now attained the third season, or, in other w T ords, the au- tumn of his days ; but advancing age had only served to render his appearance more imposing: tali of stature, with a dignified, commanding air, he was what might be pronounced a magnificent-looking per¬ sonage; but though his countenance was certainly handsome, there either really was a something sly, dark, dissimulative, in the expression of it, or else the girls fancied so f through the influence of the impression under which they laboured, that forbade those feelings of pleasure and confidence it might otherwise have in¬ spired. The lieutenant and his sister had previously a personal knowledge of him ; but Grace was quite too young at the time the negotiation for the castle was entered into, to have any recollection of him. Compliments having passed between ï2
him, her father, and aunt, she was intro¬ duced to him, and then Rose. It so hap¬ pened, that until the moment of her heina presented to him, he had not observed Rose, through her being obscured by Grace, behind whom she had modestly retired, to give her her due precedence. Thc instant his eyes fell upon her he .started back, and—" Good Gocl !" escaped him ; then recollecting himself— ' t I— í beg pardon," he said ; " but a sudden gid¬ diness seized me : a—another niece, 1 presume, ma'am?" with a kind of forced smile, U> Miss Agnes Flora Judith. " No, sir, no kind of relation, thougli quite as much loved as if she were; her name ? Cormack, as I have alreadv told )OU." ** Oh ! av—Cormack' Cormack'" and he repeated the name several times, with the air of a man perfectly unconscious of what he was uttering at the moment: t lun again recollecting himself in some degree—.*· These sudden giddinesses an. terrible thiugs" he said ; " ma\ 1 eniuat;
throwing himself into a chair, 4i for a glass of water ?" Rose was standing near a table, on vvhich there was a glass jug of thc pure lymph, clear and sparkling as brought from its native fountain; she directly poured out a glass, and presented it to him. He received it with a bend of ac¬ knowledgment; but at the very instant '*e was raising it to his lips, his eyes en¬ countering hers, as she stood regarding hifti with a feeling of compassion—that compassion vvith which a virtuous mind cannot forbear viewing a fallen fellow- creature, such as she believed him to be, his voice, the instant it met their ear, having betrayed, both to her and Grace, his being the person vvho had caused them such alarm that morning—he suddenly rested it on his knee, and— 44 Gracious Heaven! what------" he stopped, gulped down the water, hastily rose, and walked to a window. 44 You appear much indisposed, sir,*" said Miss Agnes Flora Judith, tt and 1
advise you therefore to endeavour to ob¬ tain a little rest. When over-fatigued by study, I am sometimes subject to these kind of vertigoes myself; and on such oc¬ casions, always find a little repose effica¬ cious. Since your intention of coming over was known, a chamber has been in readiness for you here, the accommodation at the village inn being but of a sorry de¬ scription, and if you permit, my brother will now shew you to it." " By no means, my dear madam," was the reply ; " I feel myself quite recovered now, and have too much to do during the short time I can remain here, to permit me to lose a minute. Nor will it be in my power to avail myself of your kind hospitality to its full extent—I can¬ not sleep under this roof. But if I am permitted to pass the very few hours I sball have at my command hem in the present society, I shall consider myself highly favoured." A suitable reply was returned, both by Miss Agnes Flora Judith and her brother.
Neither liked Mr. Mordaunt; not abso¬ lutely from any personal enmity to him, but chiefly his being a descendant of him to whose treachery they imputed the loss of the rich possessions of their famed and royal ancestor ; but notwithstanding which, the politeness of one, nor the natural kind- heartedness and hospitality of the other, would allow them to shew him any slight, npon an occasion that seemed to have tlirown him upon their attention. Mr. Mordaunt resumed his chair, and the party began chatting on the topics of the day, till his servant entered with the keys of the long locked-up chambers, which Mr. Mordaunt had previously men¬ tioned his having given orders to have cleared, and a small package, wdiich, on being opened, was found to contain some costly ornaments for the aunt and niece, and a musical snuff-box for the lieutenant. A glance at Rose, at the instant he was opening it, seemed to imply vexation that he had not known of her at the time of his making these purchases; and his se-
lecting a beautiful brooch from Graces ornaments, and forcing it on her accep¬ tance, proved this glance was not misin¬ terpreted. Miss Agnes Flora Judith did not by any means like to be indebted to him for gifts of such a description, How¬ ever, as she thought their positive rejec¬ tion would savour of ungraciousness, she condescended to accept them for herself and niece. Having given up the keys to the lieu¬ tenant, Mr. Mordaunt prepared to depart, but vvith a promise of returning in the evening. The moment he was gone the girls flew off, all impatience to be at liberty to con¬ verse about what had occurred.™" Well, what do you think now ?" asked Rose, anxiously ; " for that Mr. Mordaunt was not only the person that gave us such a fright this morning, but one of the men vve saw last night at the ruins, his voice must, of course, have betrayed to you." " Yes, the moment he opened his lips I recognised him ; and what I think is,
that he certainly has been engaged in some transaction that shuns the light, but still which may not be exactly of the atro¬ cious magnitude that we allowed ourselves first to imagine." 44 He said he could not sleep under this roof; and, to my ear at least, he said so with emphasis : what a meaning may we not attach to these words !" 44 We may indeed, a dreadful one ; but still it seems so very improbable that a person in his rank of life, with his fair character, should have committed so ter¬ rible a deed as that you hint at——But this is going to confute all my own argu¬ ments this morning, in which I certainly did declare my belief of the emotion lie betrayed at your sight being owing to bis being under the influence of an accusing spirit." 44 But as he could not, it is to be pre¬ sumed, mistake me for a ghost when he saw me in the parlour, what do you infer from the emotion evinced by him on then seeing me?" ι 3
" Why, either that yon reminded him pf some one whom he cannot think of without regret or remorse, or else that hfe was fearful you might have recognised him for the person whom you saw in your »tolen visit." 44 Yes, either one or other must be the case ; but how liave you decided—is it to keep silence on what we witnessed?" 44 Yes, decidedly. I know the disposi¬ tion and temper of Eugene too wdl not to be convinced, if acquainted with it, he would, regardless of all consequences, im¬ mediately set about an investigation of the affair ; and in what trouble and diffi¬ culties might not such an investigation be the means of involving, not merely him, but all of us—causing our names in parti¬ cular to be dragged forward in a way most unpleasant to the feelings, and all about a business which no way concerns us ! We will therefore keep to ourselves the whole affair, with a firm belief, that if any ac¬ tion has been committed deserving of pu¬ nishment, it will yet meet with it ι Pro^
vidençe, in its own good time, never fail¬ ing to raise up efficient instruments to bring to light the secrets of the guilty." To the great disappointment of the girls, who would have liked, but without letting him know why, to hear what he thought of Mr. Mordaunts countenance, Eugene, instead of returning this day, sent word he should not be back till the one after the next, that on which Mr. Mordaunt had fixed for his departure, owing to his not bemg able sooner to exe¬ cute the business on which he went. Mr. Mordaunt, as expected, came to tea ; there being no further surprise, for he now knew who he was to see, there was no further emotion. But nothing could divert his attention from Rose; his looks dwelt upon her, with an intenseness that actually alarmed her, from the motive to which she conceived it owing, namely, his wishing to discover whether she had any suspicion ofhim; since, if he did, she had hardly a doubt, from what she had been led to think of him, that the circum*
stance might be attended with danger to her. In vain she sought to avoid his eyes ; move as she would about the room, they still followed her; and that his thoughts were wandering was evident from the random answers he more than once returned to Miss Agnes Flora Ju¬ dith, who, vvith all ber philosophical re¬ searches, had still a great curiosity to hear about the world of fashion and bustle, whenever she had an opportunity of ask¬ ing questions about it. Rose inquired of Grace, as soon as they were again by themselves, whether sbe had noticed thç manner in which she had been regarded by Mr. Mordaunt? Grace acknowledged she had ; and also, that she attributed it to the same motive that Rose herself did. " How I should like to know," said Rose, *' what is passing in his mind, that renders him so anxious to discover the thoughts of mine ! But that I fear it might be a dangerous experiment, I should like, by taking him to the old church-
yard, to put his conscience to the test, in something the same way that Hamlet did that of his uncle." " It is better as it is," observed Grace; " since our attempting any thing of the kind would probably be productive only of something unpleasant to us." Mr. Mordaunt could not say whether it would be in his power to dine at the castle the next day, but be promised to call in the course of the morning, to let it be known whether it would. Rose happened to be alone in the par¬ lour when he entered.—" How rejoiced I am at this !" he cried, the moment he per¬ ceived she was by herself, hastily closing the door, and approaching towards her; " I have been wishing for an opportunity of speaking to you without witnesses, and have now most happily obtained it.—Nay, don't be alarmed," he said, on seeing her turn pale, and recoil as he advanced, alarmed at what he intimated of his wish to speak to her by herself; " there is no¬ thing in wbat I have to address'to you to
alarm, or, I trust, offend. In short, not to trespass unnecessarily upon your atten¬ tion, I have, for this some time past, been on the look out for an accomplished fe¬ male, to whom I might, with confidence, resign tbe care of a very young person, about whom I am particularly interested. Now, in you, it strikes me I have exactly met with the object of my anxious search ; and as I presume, from the age of Aliss O'Neil, that your services here are no longer required, if you will accept the si¬ tuation 1 wish you to fill, you shall fix your own terms, and may rely upon it, tliat in every instance I shall endeavour to evince the sense of obligation which your acceptance of it will confer upon me." " I thank you, sir," said Rose, coldly withdrawing her hand, which, while speak¬ ing, he had taken, 44 for the favourable opinion with wdiich you honour me ; but I must beg leave to decline your offer. I dwell here amongst mine own people, and nothing could compensate for the pain of quitting tliem."
44 What, your friends here?" 44 Yes ; the kindness with which tbey treated me has made me, long since, cease to regard them in any other light than that of dear connexions ; and so long as they wish to retain me with them, the world could offer me no bribe that could allure me from them." 44 Happy beings," cried Mr. Mordaunt, " to have secured to themselves so charm¬ ing a friend í" 44 Rather say—-happy she, who, wanting friends, obtained such ! A motherless girl—^-." The eyes of Rose filled with tears, and her voice faltered— 44 A mother¬ less girl often needs protection !" Mr. Mordaunt, without making any re¬ ply, turned abruptly away, and walked to a window. Rose, wiping her eyes, was about leav¬ ing the room, to inform the family of his being there, which she concluded, from no one appearing, the servant had omitted to do, when, turning hastily round, he pre* vented her.— t4 Stop," he cried, interposing
between her and the door. * 4 Though no one can more admire the feelings that bind you here than I do, yet let me remind you, that a little abstracted consideration for yourself may not be amiss. The situ¬ ation of a dependent—excuse the expres¬ sion—however loved or respected, is still always a precarious one. There is no knowing the moment in which some change might take place in this family, to render your longer stay here unpleasant or impossible ; and, vvith such a possibility in view, would it not be as well for vou to give my offer a little consideration, ere your mind was decidedly made up about it?" 44 It would be useless, sir; my mind was instantly made up about it." 44 To reject it?—Well, I must say, f think this a little extraordinary. If you will not, however, be prevailed on to ac¬ cept it now, promise, at least, that if any thing should occur to induce or oblige you to leave this, you will give it the prefer¬ ence to any other ?"
44 No, sir; I cannot promise what I would not do." 44 Not do !" repeated Mr. Mordaunt, in an emphatic tone, and with a change of complexion ; 4t pray may I ask the rea¬ son ? is it owing to any prejudice ? to—to Rose, alarmed at the idea of having be¬ trayed too much, hastily interrupted him. — 4t I have already intimated, sir," she said, 44 that I should be most unwilling to leave the place to which I have been ac¬ customed—to this you must attribute what I have said," The searching look of Mr. Mordaunt, Iiowever, plainly intimated his not being satisfied with tliis excuse ; and something more he was on the point of saying, when, to the great relief of the agitated Rose, Miss Agnes Flora Judith, followed by Grace, entered the room, vvith a thousand apologies, for she piqued herself on her politeness and perfect knowledge ofali the etiquettes of good breeding, for nothaving booner waited on Mr, Mordaunt, but oi
whose being there she had not heard till the instant before. Mr. Mordaunt, evidently without know¬ ing one word she was saying, abruptly in¬ formed her it was not in his power to have the pleasure of dining that day at the castle, and then took a hasty leave, with a promise of calling in the evening, previous to his departure the ensuing morning. The moment Rose found herself alone with Grace, she informed her of the re¬ cent scene ; anxiously asking her whether she did not conceive the offer of Mr. Mor¬ daunt meant for a lure, to get her into his power, owing to some suspicion of her re¬ cognition of liim ? Grace was very much inclined to think so, but feared acknowledging this, les¿ of alarming Rose ; she therefore rather eva¬ sively answered—it might or might not be so ; that when people entertained a preju¬ dice against any one, they were apt to put the worst construction upon whatever they said or did ; but, at all events, it was no matter, whether it was the dictate of
treachery or not, since she neither had or intended to accept it. Rose protested she would not, if pos¬ sible to avoid it, remain in the presence of Mr. Mordaunt again, so unpleasant to her w r as the scrutinizing earnestness with which he regarded her. Accordingly, on his being announced in the evening, to take leave, she made a hasty escape from the parlour by one door, as he entered by another; and with real joy, the next morn¬ ing early, heard the distant rolling of his carriage wheels through the village. The arrival of Eugene served to divert her thoughts still further from him. The short separation between the enamoured pair was, in love's calendar, an age ; and, at the usual hour, a meeting was appointed tiiat evening in the old chapel.
CHAPTER X.
lt í bcorn tht (hil! tu w nd and heating rain, ???? het <i ? 1 i \atchinjL , s in 'hf (h ^\ ??? ¡ i, ifa 1 f hf h ????* l fur lovt -?«-* un, VN ith iove**· % rt « ? ion 1 - j vv- >it L\-t bt crown'd " It was not without agitated nerves that Rose kept these appointments ; but not even so much tiirough the apprehension oí an unpleasant surprise, as th^ idea of act¬ ing vvith any thing like disingenuity to¬ wards friends vvho had such claims upon her confidence ; in particular, it was pain¬ ful to a nature open and affectionate as hers, to have any concealments from a friend so dear as (»race. As usual, Eugene received her trem* bling iu his arms, and, as usual, was obli¬ ged to exert all his el oc pi ence, to reassure and compose iier, ere her tremour at all sub¬ sided.
44 Oh, what unhappiness have I not suf¬ fered during these few last days," cried Eugene, when he found she was again able to attend to him, 44 separating me as they did from you ! If so miserable during an absence that I looked forward to have end¬ ed every minute, what will not my wretch¬ edness be in a separation I cannot exactly fix the termination of! except, indeed, you consent to put an end to all further apprehension about our union, by binding yourself in such a manner to me as we shall both deem irrevocable." 4i How do you mean ?" asked Rose anx¬ iously ; 44 I thought you did not wisli our union yet awhile to take place?" " Xor do I publicly, till 1 have struck out some plan of independence fbr myself; but, iu the interim, to put this blessed event beyond doubt, toset at rest all fears, all anxieties, on the subject, let us bind ourselves to one another here, bv ??? tiirough the marriage ceremony," 44 Surely you are not serious ?" said Hose, in a tone of unfeigned astonishment.
if By what right would you attempt to of¬ ficiate on such an occasion ?" " By that of nature. What is the cere¬ mony but a mere form, established by man. Think not I would be understood to speak with irreverence of the institu¬ tions of society—no, I consider them as the sacred safeguards of virtue, the cheeks of vice and immorality, and therefore to he upheld and supported, even at the risk of life. But 1 contend for it, the bind¬ ing part ofthe ceremony, leaving worldlj considerations out of sitdit, is tlie solemn appeal to Heaven, for the truth vvith vvhich we intend to keep our plighted vows. í have a superstitions dread about me, that nothing can conquer but our pledging ours to each other, in its solemn and im¬ pressive language, plighted in this way : and 1 fevi that you will indeed consider your engagement to me irrevocable». Come then, my love, approach with me the altar of our (¡od; and kneeling before Him who SL4N into the inmost recesses of th** heart, and consequently knows how to np-
predate virtue from vice, let us pledge our¬ selves to eacli other." Rose trembled, but could not bring her¬ self to oppose him, as he raised her from the old toinlfetonc on which they iiad been sitting ; how couid she resist his pleadings —how, indeed, resting as she did on him for happiness, bring herself to refuse what he led her to believe he should consider binding them irrevocably to each otiier ! Amongst other vestiges of its original destination tiiat the chapel still contained, was an antique altar. Hefore this the youthful pair knelt, with the moon shining in upon theni in lull hbtre, through the gorgeous v : ndow, beneath which the altar was placed, and which, partly composed of stained glass, btill in perfect preserva- tün, notwithstanding the hundreds ot years that had rolled by since the erection oi tht 4 building, threw a rich tinge of va¬ rious hues upon the old banners, image*», ??? entablatures, that were scatterei! throughout tilt- place. The purpose tor which they knelt be-
fore the altar soon accomplished.—" Now," said the enraptured Eugene, as he raised his trembling companion from the ground, and with a bridegroom's ardour, indeed, clasped ber to his breast, * t now do I eon¬ sider, that in the sight of God, we are as mucb man and wife, as if the ceremony that should make us one, in the eyes of the world, were performed by all the priests in the universer " Qh, Eugene !" cried liose, dissolving into tears, as she reclined upon his breast ; " I bope, I trust, we never shali have rea¬ son to regret our binding ourselves to one another in this manner ! but if your family should yet prove adverse to our union .............. ■" " I could chide you," said Eugene, in¬ terrupting her, tí but that it would not be consistent with my new character to do so, for attempting to poison the bliss of this minute, that tells me you feel that you are mine, by giving way to tormenting fears. I thouglit I had already said suffi¬ cient to render you easy on that head*— but supposing the reverse to prove the
case of what I have stated, sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof; and what shall we not have courage to contend witb, or surmount, feeling, as vve must, that in eon- science we cannot permit ourselves to be separated ?" Scarcely had these words been uttered, ere a congregation of black clouds, that had for some time been gathering in the sky, the precursors of a thunder storm, completely hid the moon, leaving them in almost total darkness ; whilst the wind rose to a hurricane, the thunder in succes¬ sive peals rolled over the ancient pile, and the lightning ever and anon quivered through the gloom. Rose, in a state of mind that rendered her easily agitated, instinctively clung to Eugene, and awful as he thought the storm, yet, as he clasped his fearful mis¬ tress to bis bosom, he hardly knew how to avoid being pleased with what seemed to make her take shelter there. As Rose, after a tremendous clap ofthun* VOL. L ?
der, raised her head from tbe shoulder of Eugene, under the idea that the roof above them was rent asunder, she saw, or fan¬ cied she saw, by the red glare of the light¬ ning, that at that instant darted through the aisle, a tall figure ofa man, attentive¬ ly watching her—* 4 Good God !" she ex¬ claimed. "Whats the matter — what affrights you, my love ?" demanded Eugene, vvith the quickness of alarm. ít Oh ! did you not see it ?" " Xo—what should I see?" * fct A tall apparition of a man—see there ! hy that flash of lightning—how he frowns upon me !" ** My love, this is silly—well leave this place, since its eftect is such upon your imagination." " Oh no, not till I have first tried to ascertain what it is 1 have really seen------ Hut it is gone!" she said, in a relieved tone, as a sudden drifting of the clouds from off the face of the moon, allowed her to see again distinctly within the place;
* e and yet, I do believe it was nothing but the shadow of that old suit of armour 1 saw." " Can you have a doubt on the subject —or, at least, can you imagine it was any thing supernatural you saw? Voluntarily do you suppose the released spirit would ever return to this world of care, of toil, and trouble, or that Heaven would per¬ mit our fears to be the sport of bugbears? but, at all events, since * conscious,' as The¬ odore, in the Castle of Otranto, says, * of having offended no good angel, we should fear no bad one." " Ah, this is all fine arguing in a mo¬ ment of calmness," said llose, with a smile: " but I believe I have been silly ; so let us say no more on the subject, but leave tliis dismal place, as you proposed, without further delay." f * But which w ill ever be dear to me, as the scene of our interchanged vows," said Eugene, as he proceeded to conduct her through the labyrinthian passages that connected it with the building. ? 2
There is a presumption in the season of youth, that gives a false confidence in its strength. The meetings of our lovers were continued, poor Rose forgetting the caution of the poet to her sex, not to trust their soft-believing moments to deceiving man: yet, of a premeditated idea of ever taking any unworthy advantage of the reliance she placed in his honour, Eugene was utterly guiltless ; but, in short, both had soon reason to regret their confidence in themselves, and felt that nothing but the real performance of the ceremony that was to make them one, could restore them to tranquillity. Eugene could no longer linger over the idea of quitting St. Doulagh's ; all the energies of his nature were roused to ex¬ ertion ; and having by this time completed a treatise on the state of Ireland, with an address to his countrymen, some love .nonnets, and two volumes of poems, on the plan of the ancients, he decided on regularly commencing author ; the lengtii
of time that would be required ere he could be established in any other profes¬ sion, now putting it out of his power to think of any other. If there were dis¬ couragements to his plan on one side, as in moments of despondence he had suf¬ fered himself to think, what encourage¬ ments were there not at another, in the honours, the rewards, bestowed on some of the existing geniuses of the day ! and having obtained from O'Rooke a letter of introduction to a relation of his, in the publishing line, as he said, in Dublin <which, with no little ostentation, he pro¬ mised to give him, should he ever make up his mind to the disposal of his poems), he forthwith announced his intention of departing to his family, with a private as¬ surance to his Rose, that the moment he had secured to himself an engagement, or settled a mode for the publication of his works, he would return, to make known their engagement, and claim her hand. His aunt was the only person in tbe fa¬ mily who heard his intention without re-
gret; but in the results she anticipated from it, it was utterly impossible for her to think of it witb any other feeling than pleasure.—" Yes, my dear boy," she cried, in the exultation of her heart, to whieh the samruineness of her imagination gave rise, '* in emerging from your native shades, 'tis only, I feel convinced, to rise another dazzling luminary in the hemi¬ sphere of genius. Should modesty, at first, induce you to conceal your name, to what speculations will not the circum¬ stance give rise! how will ingenuity be taxed to diacover who the other Great Unknown is, that has also started forward to astound, transport, enrapture, an ad¬ miring world ! As in former days the name of O'Neil was immortalized by arms, so will it now be by the pen. Hardly, I feel persuaded, will your foot have touch¬ ed upon the threshold of the temple of fame, or rather, approached the base of the mountain on which, according to Pope, the glittering and alluring struc¬ ture stands, ere you will find yourselt
elevated to its very summit ; for, without flattery, I consider your productions de¬ serving of unqualified approbation; and this is not an age barren of rewards to ge¬ nius—it is not now the fashion to wait till the tomb has closed over the poet, to re¬ compense him as he merits. What force of language, what strength of argument, what justness of reasoning, is tbere not in your address to your degenerate country¬ men, on the evils they have brought on their native soil by their passion for expa* triating themselves i while in your poems 1 trace the wit of Horace, the elegiac soft¬ ness of Tibullus, and the epigrammatic points of Martial ! Go then, my dear lad, where, as some one, I don't know who, says, where glory leads, and when you have accomplished what you wish, that is, opened for yourself a fair field of renown, return hither, to intermingle the bays ot the scholar with the laurel of the soldier, those green wreaths of* victory, that, in memory at least, must every flourish over the tombs ofyour forefathers. Grieved I
am indeed—but what human joy is there without alloy ?—that tlie descendant of the great O'Neil should be compelled to make an exertion for support ; but since it is so, why, 'tis well as it is—that you have powers to make one in a line that will in¬ flict no degradation. What remains of the patrimonial inheritance is not suffi¬ cient for two, and to let Grace be without a portion, would be out of the question. The twenty acres that remain to the fa¬ mily of their estates in Connaught, have always been intended for her." 44 What, the twenty acres of bog on the top of one of the Cunnamara Mountains ?" 44 Well, bog or no bog, 'tis still twenty acres of land," cried Miss Agnes Flora Judith, a little flurried ; 44 and that sounds well." t£ Poor Grace !" with a bitter smile, said Eugene—" if that be all her portion, he who takes her must take her for herself alone ; and if he have a heart capable of appreciating her real loveliness, and taste.
and genius, rich indeed will he consider himself in her possession." 44 Yes, she certainly is a fine creature !'* assented Miss Agnes Flora Judith ; 4t she has all that beauty," and she drew herself up, and cast a pleased sidelong glance at an opposite mirror as she spoke, 4i for which the family were always remarked ; and though she would not permit the ap¬ plication of the metal cap for the suppres¬ sion of her bump of firmness, yet, I must confess, I never have had any great reason to accuse her of obstinacy : but attractive as she is, I trust you will yet give anotlier daughter as fair to the house of O'Neil-— that is, when you have the po'.· cr of pro¬ viding an establishment for a wife, suit¬ able to the house to vvhich you would al¬ ly her: sooner, would be cruelty both to her and yourseif, arguing selfish feelings, or ungoverned passions, wliich sooner or later meet tlieir punishment; for hovv could a man of any sensibility endure tho sight of the woman he loved struggling ? 2
with difficulties, and degraded from her natural station in society, through his means ! I know, in the vernal season of youth, there is nothing that we think vve cannot have strength to bear and courage to overcome; but, believe me, my dear lad, there are difficulties and privations that, even at this buoyant and elastic pe¬ riod, can crush the spirit, and harrow up the heart, rooting up the powers of enjoy¬ ment, till the feelings become numbed and callous, incapable of being revivified by a gleam of sunshine. Throw, there¬ fore, the shield of prudence over your heart. I beseech you, for a time, and add what title you will to your name, do not add that of * Benedict, the married man,' till a certain independence be yours. 4 Who that hearkened to this advice eould have believed Miss Agnes Flora Judith capable of the wild ideas to which she, at times, gave utterance ! but such are the inconsistencies in human na- ???— -wise on some points, foolish on
others, according to our various caprices and inclinations ; even the decidedly in¬ sane at times astonish and deceive tbe judgment by the sageness of their re¬ marks. Eugene, in this instance, did full justice to the soundness of his aunt's arguments; but he sighed from his uttermost heart, that it was now beyond liis power to at¬ tend to them.—' 4 Can it be," thouglit he, 44 that my aunt has renounced the system she so warmly advocated? or has she only lost sight of it for tlie time ?" for they were such sentiments as, iu his cool, dispassionate moments, his ovvn reason had suggested to him. The first idea struck him witli actual horror, recollecting the advantage he had taken of unsuspecting innocence. After a fearful pause, he falteringly asked if phrenology stood as high in her estimation as ever? 44 Most assuredly !" with a state of sur¬ prise. Eugene was able to breathe again, for on this stay alone now İiad he to depend
for consolation. The day, but not the ex¬ act hour, was fixed for his departure, in order to avoid the pain of an absolute leave- taking ; he gave the family to understand he would not set off till after breakfast, but in his own mind decided on commen¬ cing his journey by early dawn.
CHAPTER XI.
«-----------------------—from hi-, tongue Th' unfniisii'd period ibi Is : whdf, borne away Oo swelling thouglit, 1?? uatícd -.pint flies ?? the vain ????? of his distanr fair," To avoid disturbance, Eugene hail order¬ ed his horse to a distance from the castie, preferring this mode of travelling to the restraint and confinement of a stage. As he crossed the ancient portal, the crimson glow of the eastern heavens, partially screened by a long ridge of lofty moun¬ tains, announced the approach ofthe bright
god of day, rejoicing " like a giant to run his course." Involuntarily Eugene lingered as he proceeded, and as his eye ran eagerly over the well-known objects, of hills separated by dingles, gloomy with shade, and water¬ ed by torrents, heightening the effect of this romantic scenery by their sound, ín thundering amongst the stones that im¬ peded their progress, the hours, the days of happiness he had passed within them, recurred to his recollection, and with a deep sigh he demanded, whether it was likely those houns, those days, would short¬ ly be renewed ?—" But yes, they will— they must," he exclaimed ; "did I ima¬ gine the contrary, what would be the agony, the distraction of my soul at this moment ! sorrowful enough, God knows, already, without wanting the aggravation of tormenting fears to render it still more so. Yes, confiding in thc goodness of Heaven, I shall soon return, to press again my Hose to my longing heart, and restore to that angelic bosom the peace which I
have injured. In the mean time, may she be the especial care of that Power, on whom I rely for my restoration to her !" The voice of Martin suddenly roused him from his abstraction : he had followed with the horse, with which O'Rooke had undertaken to provide Eugene for the journey, and wdiich Eugene had not be¬ fore seen. On now casting his eyes upon it, his first idea was, that it was the ghost of doctor Syntax's, that of poor Rozman t e being by this time, lie supposed, com¬ pletely laid.—" Why, in the name of all thats strange, where did you get that re¬ surrection of a horse, Martin?" he de¬ manded. 44 Sure then, from Barney, your ho¬ nour; didn't he promise to lend you his own hunter?" "Hunter! vvhat, a miserable animal, tiiat does not appear to be able to move one leg before thc other ! 1 did not think O'Rooke would have played me such a trick ; lie assured me this was a most ex¬ cellent horse."
44 Ah then, sure it's natural enough to speak well of an old friend ; and its many a long day that he and poor Swiftsure here have been acquainted." 44 Yes, that is pretty evident, if both have been acquainted since their birth; however, this places me in a very awk¬ ward predicament, since, without a con¬ siderable delay, I cannot novv procure another horse." ' 4 And if you could, the sorrow a need woukl there be for you to do so ; only wait till the poor beast is put to his me¬ tal, to see how he'll get on !" * t His metal ! if ever iie iiad any, of which I am very doubtful, it is long since gone indeed. However, if 1 must, 1 must; but it is with tlie greatest reluc¬ tance, and a firm conviction that I shall be obliged to change him." At length he mounted, and setoff, but not in the brisk gallop of impatience, but in the slow pace of evident reluctance; and on gaining the summit of a hilt, whence liis eye ranged over scenes, every
one of whieh had, on some separate ac¬ count, a peculiar charm or interest in them, that he knew, on descending, would exclude St. Doulagh's from his view, he involuntarily checked the horse, in order to take another farewell look at that loved home, the delightful residence of, to him, the dearest objects on earth. Often as he had before contemplated, with mingled awe and admiration, the venerable structure, yet never, perhaps, had its ancient grandeur, or picturesque appearance, so forcibly struck him as at this moment; but owing, perhaps, to the influence ofthe feelings he was then under, that heightened charm, that, in our fond regret at parting from any object, animate or inanimate, we are apt to sec in them at the instant. The rising sun was just beginning to burnish its antique windows, while the long streaming grass, that, in¬ termixed with wild flowers and ivy, be¬ girt its battlements, floated and fluttered in the morning air, like thc gay pennons
of a martial train, and all was indeed pic¬ turesque and beautiful. Eugene, with a fervent, though silently- uttered prayer for the peace of its beloved inmates, at length forced himself to turn away.— 44 Yet is it not hard," he cried, as he slowly descended the other side of the hill, that was to hide it from his view— 44 yet is it not hard, that I should be com¬ pelled to tear myself away from all my heart holds dear—the scenes of my youth, my natural connexions, and her, without whom life to me would be a desert ? vvhy, since endued with these poignant sensibi¬ lities—why, since to separate from those he loves is the pang of death to his heart —why are the necessities of man so often beyond his means? why, endued with elegant desires, with noble aspirings, when so often compelled to be the slave of sor¬ did considerations—why, in short, are his feelings and his hard destiny so often at variance? But this is impious! are we not assured, tliat all that now seems dark and mysterious, liarsh and unjust, to our
finite capacity, will yet be thoroughly ac¬ counted for, to the fully justifying the ways of God to man ? that this is not our resting-place, but a scene of probation, to which, of course, therefore, trials are in¬ cidental ? and even these trials, are they not often productive of felicity to us— such as, without them, we sliould not have tasted? If, for a season, we are torn from onr friends, do not the delights of meeting compensate for the pangs of ab¬ sence ? do not the delicious tears of joy, that wet tiie glowing cheek of tenderness, as it reclines against the bosom from which it was separated, make rich amends Jor the bitter ones of agony that parting oc¬ casioned?—if, for a season, obliged to re¬ linquish our domestic happiuess, do we not, by its transient deprivation, better understand the value of that happiness? and could the mere possession of heredi¬ tary riches confer upon a man half the rapture that, when compelled to labour, he derives, from finding his efforts crown¬ ed with the success due to virtuous exer-
tions? Yes, even by the light let in by my own reason upon my mind, I see, I feel, that all is for tiie best, ordained in infinite wisdom and benevolence. Never more, therefore, may I know what it is to cavil or complain; but firmly convinced of being under the care of a superintend¬ ing Providence, cheerfully perform the part assigned me to the best of my abi¬ lity. What reason indeed have I not for gratitude! and yet I have been murmur¬ ing—been complaining. My prospects are uncertain, and yet what multitudes would envy me the power I enjoy of gazing on the rising luminary of day, of inhaling the sweetness of thc air tliat plays upou my eheek, of listening to tiie music of the bubbling brook, and feeling that I carry with me the prayers and wishes of devoted friends ?' Thus arguing, thus reasoning, or, as it migiit be said, silently conversing with himself^ Eugene proceeded at a pace that certainly did not put his steed to any great trial; so that, whetlier he retained
any of that metal of which Martin boast¬ ed, he yet remained ignorant, now too completely absorbed to attend to any thing, now insensibly drawn out of him¬ self by the scenery. This chiefly consisted ofa pleasing intermixture of wildness and cultivation, sequestered enclosures, skirted by hills, partly green with herbage, and partly darkened by overhanging woods. Having purposely struck out of the public road, he crossed some romantic glens, gloomy from their awful depth, and the tangled shrubs and thickets that pro¬ fusely covered their steep sides, while roaring at their bottoms, through all the impediments of broken rocks, and stumps of trees, was heard the mountain torrent, now playing in wild eddies amongst the branching roots of old trees—now foam¬ ing again over ledges of rock, as if impa¬ tient fo gain the tranquil mazes of a smoother channel. — 44 Who can behold this scenery," thought Eugene, as he look¬ ed around him, 4fc without being convinced it is the work of a divine hand? and if
Heaven takes such pains to clothe, to beautify the earth, should not man be con¬ vinced of being under its especial protec¬ tion ? and should not this conviction ba¬ nish all gloomy misgivings, and inspire the mind with that strength and fortitude that fits it to bear up with composure and resignation against whatever may ensue? How much more rational is this belief than that latterly impressed upon me by the system my aunt has adopted ! by that I am taught to believe myself a mere machine, that, according to my construc¬ tion, must act so and so, whether I will or not, how contrary soever it may he to my wishes, or ideas of virtue. Tiie idea is not reconcileable to reason, or vvliat we have been accustomed to conceive of the goodness and justice of the Deitj. If I cannot help my actions, why should 1 be accountable ibr them ? and yet, that I must be so, both to God and tnan, 1 am well assured, Incongruous as this ap¬ pears with divine justice, yet, if the truth of the system was not satisfactorily proved,
can I imagine that a person so truly reli¬ gious as my aunt, possessed of her clear, comprehensive judgment, and enlightened and superior understanding, would take it up, and embrace it? No—the tiling is utterly improbable, not to say impossible:' she has had full leisure to give it a parti¬ cular investigation—she has read, and most attentively studied and compared the va¬ rious opinions and discussions to which it has given rise—and the result ofali is, her belief in the svstem being confirmed. The t great error of youth is to doubt tlie wis¬ dom of age; instead of being guilty of this error, let me endeavour really to un¬ derstand my construction, so as to be able tc» regulate my conduct accordingly ; and suppose, that what now appears unjust and inconsistent, will, hke other matters that have at times appeared so, h^ equally accounted for hereafter. Yet, I must con¬ fess, it is a melancholv reflection, that we are no longer creatures of the will; and, in this instance, it may indeed be fairly said, that 4 wliere ignorance is bliss, ìis
folly to be wise; 5 for whatever benefit may accrue to mankind from this recent discovery, it certainly will not be produc¬ tive to them of additional happiness. Yet, if on one hand it impresses on them the horrors of fatality, on tlie otiier, it relieves them from those of remorse; for, to grieve ovei what vve could not help coumiitting, would indeed be weakness : as well inight a clock, if endued with sensibility, excuse itself for a sudden ¡stoppage, occasioned by some error in its machinery, as a man, or¬ ganized as it İs now proved he is, for any tiling he did. For instance-—how misera¬ ble sliould I now be, from self-accusation. for my conduct respecting Ko.se, eould I blame myself tor it ! but 1 know, from what my aunt told me, it was out of my [lower to avoid it; and yet, knowing and feeling this, it seems stränge to me, that if 1 discovered any man hatl taken a .simi¬ lar advantage of tlu conliding innocence of Grace, 1 would pur-ne him to destruc¬ tion. In short, 1 am not more comiorta¬ ble fbr being enlightened, and must con«
fess, from the bewildering effect of this new system upon my mind, I rather wish I had been allowed to remain in ignorance of it, and go on, as 1 had been brought up to do, believing that if tempted, there was still a way for me to escape if I pleased, and a forgiving Creator, to whom repentance was acceptable." Day was drawing towards a close, when, after having stopped several times in the course of his joumey, but more on ac¬ count of the poor beast he rode than his own, Eugene found himself approaching a long, lonely hill, rising out of a dreary and far-spread heath. Alighting, as usual on such occasions, he left the horse to follow as he pleased, while he slowly walked on. In vain he longer struggled to keep up his spirits ; his thoughts, no longer amused or occupied by varied ob¬ jects, reverted to home, bringing back, from the images they conjured up there, to his imagination all that heaviness of heart whicli had been experienced by him at the instant of setting out. He was so
completely lost in his own reflections, that he nearly reached the summit of the hill, without noticing a traveller, who had for some time been walking by his side, wdien he was roused from his abstraction by the fall of Barney's horse, with a hollow sound. that made him believe tlie creature was at the last gasp. He was hastily turning to his assistance, when the sight of a person so near him, rivetted him, through sur¬ prise, to the earth, not perhaps unaccom¬ panied by a sensation of alarm ; for tlie stranger not only appeared to have stolen upon him, but was certainly a suspicious- looking personage, siirouded up in a large flapped h at and loose great-coat, that pre¬ vented either his features or exact figure from being clearly defined, with pistols in tiie holsters tliat hung at the saddle-bow of the horse, that he led by the bridle and Eugene was unarmed, witli very little to lose, to be sure, but his life ; but still what money he had could not be parted with without very serious inconvenience to him· VOL. I. i
Both stood surveying each other for a minute in silence.— 4< An awkward acci¬ dent this, sir," the stranger then said; 44 but I hope not a serious one?" 44 I hope not, sir," was the reply of Eugene, as he proceeded to the assistance of his poor steed, whicb, to his great joy, he found, by this time, endeavouring to make an effort to aid liimself. This being seconded both by Eugene and the stran¬ ger, he was soon upon his legs again.— 44 Poor fellow !" cried Eugene, patting his neck, and stroking him, * 4 I would have saved your poor old limbs this day's fa¬ tigue if I could ; but you shall be well fed and rubbed down for the night, and to¬ morrow sent back to your master, with an admonition against subjecting you to any thing of the like again." 44 Why, it seems indeed full time," said the stranger in a satirical tone, 44 for him to be put upon the superannuated list. A bad horse, sir, where a fleet one would be rc;- quired, as is sometimes the case.in a jour¬ ney, particularly in travelling over suck
lonely places as this, when one does not know the moment a dangerous rencounter may take place." Eugene turned his eyes full upon him at this remark ; not without an apprehen¬ sion that it was but the prelude to some¬ thing still more unpleasant. 44 That we may get over this dreary hill without meeting with any thing of the kind, I believe I need not say I sin¬ cerely hope," added the stranger; " yet as this is considered a most dangerous spot, it is as well for us to be both prepared, in case of accidents. Accept this therefore, sir," he said, 4 * as I perceive you have no arms ;" taking, as he spoke, his pistols from the holsters, and presenting one to Eugene. This act, restoring Eugene to confi¬ dence, as it was perhaps intended to do, he had no hesitation in informing him whither he was bound ; nor, on his say¬ ing he was also going to Dublin, consent¬ ing that they should travel the rest of the vvay in company; finally it was agreed L 2
that tiiey should put up for the niglit at a little public-house about two miles off. where the stranger assured Eugene he would be able to get a proper horse for the remainder of his journey. Eugene soon conceived lie liad reason to congratulate himself on the adventure he had met with, his companion very shortly proving, by his style of conversa¬ tion, that he was qualified to be at least a very pleasant travelling one; judicious, livelv, and amtihing in his remarks, with a perfect knowledge of every plaee that was mentioned to him. But notwith¬ standing this his ??????? of tlie coun- trv. then* was something in his accent that persuaded Eugene he uas not a na¬ tive «»ftlii* kingdom. Thev had not advanced fnr. when the mon; was seen rising above the distant chdui of hill· that skirled the heath. The air was still—tlie having of the distant wauh-df^ was the only Hound that met tht* tar, ami all, in short, was calculated lo heighten tlie placid ? ? et gent rally pre»
duced upon the feelings by her mild sha¬ dowy light.—" What a melancholy re¬ flection," said Eugene, after a silence of some minutes, during which his eyes were fixed upon this beautiful planet, <t tliat a man cannot, with that perfect tranquillity it is so adapted to inspire, enjoy sucii a scene as tiiis, through fears of his fellow- man breaking in upon his delicious en¬ joyment of it ! but fbr these, or rather the risk of being accused of romantic folly, for wantonly exposing myself to danger, how should I love to rove this heathy scene at such an hour, watching the queen of night İn. her progress through the heavens, a thousand stars attendant in her train, and listening to the night breeze sighing through the chinks of the rock Γ 44 By which I am plainly to under¬ stand," said the stranger, evidently with a smile, t4 that you are an enthusiast?' 4 * If to feel dehght, amounting to rap¬ ture, in the contemplation of the work* of nature—if to hold in rehgious venera» tion the memory ofthe mighty dead, ami
kindle at the sight ofthe illustrious living —if to derive pleasure fron whatever tends to lonely or abstracting musings, be lo deserve tiie name, I confess the just¬ ness ofthe imputation." " Witii pride it siiould be confessed, for ii is inseparably connected with genius, or rather genius is produced by it—-for with¬ out a certain portion of it, nothing great or glorious was ever achieved in life; it is tlie true Promethean spark, that gives life and warmth to the dull clod of clay. Through its inspiring ardour, wiiat cannot man hv able to accomplish? Animated by this, no dangers can daunt, no diffi¬ culties oppose him. It is to it we are in¬ debted for all that is matchless in song and eonsummate in art ; the heroism that has .iwakened our astonishment, and the ge¬ nerosity that has thrilled through our hearts; in short, you may esteem, you may love the man who does not possess it, but you eannot admire him." * h Aiter this," said Eugene smiling, èi I shall ever consider the accusation of en-
thusiasm one of the highest compliments that can be paid me." " Assuredly it must be considered so," rejoined the stranger; " for, as some wri¬ ter observes, the mere man of business, by which is meant a person who abjures enthusiasm, and makes no claim to any thing bc)ond downright understanding, is no better than a farthing candle to tîie world, while enthusiasts are the Argand lamps that dazzle and enlighten.— But see, we have reached the Red Cow—our auberge for the night.'' This was a long, straggling, thatched cabin, with a sod seat at the door; but not for the accommodation of the spin- >ters or the knitters in the sun, but tlic smokers ; the Irish, like the Spaniard» t from whom they so pertinaciously boast of being descended) delighting in basking in luxurious indolence in it, whenever they have an opportunity. A barefooted hoy and girl ran out to receive the travellers; the furnier look the iior>es and the latter conductei! tlien:
through a smoky clay passage, to what she called the parlour, a small room, with naked whitewashed walls, and a floor of yellow clay, like the passage, and con¬ taining four or five chairs, of different de¬ scriptions, with a table that seemed to have suffered in the wars, and a moulder¬ ing turf fire in the chimney, over which hung some prints of saints and martyrs, that, from tlieir scarlet habiliments, led to the supposition of their having been coloured by the same pencil that drew the Red Cow. Little Norah having deposited her bleared candle on the table, bobbed a courtesy, and desired to know^what their honours would be pleased to have for sup¬ per ? w< Now, my iittie lasb, is not that an idle question ?" cried thc stranger, " when you know we can have no choice here ? Come, tell me the truth now, though I am not your priest, and III give you a ten- penny ; could we have any thing berebut bacon and eggs, vvith a dish of murphies.
which, by the bye, I smelt smoking hot as I was coming along the passage?" Norah blushed and laughed, and bob¬ bing another courtesy, said— 4fi Yes, an"" please their honours, they could have a fowl if they wished." 44 What ! steal upon the slumbers ot unsuspecting innocence? Oh no; after going to roost, I bar all murders of this description. Not for the fattest fowl that ever fed at barn-door, would 1 have poor Chanticleer grieved, by missing one of iiis wives in the morning; sogo, my little lassy, and let us hiwe a supper of what¬ ever you have in the house." Tİie order was soon obeyed, and mine hostess herself attended to lay the cloth, with an apology fbr her husband being out ofthe vvay, owing to his having gone to a iair that day, to make an addition to his domestic animals, or, in other words·. to purchase a pig, to have fattened up, towards paying the rent. The stranger's hat and great-coat were L 'å
now laid asides and his figure and features heing, of course, fully revealed, Eugene was quite struck by his appearance, con¬ ceiving he had never seen any one who couid boast of a more commanding air, or greater inieiligence of countenance; and altogether, ho could not avoid believing, be certainly w ib a person accustomed to nunc in the higher walks of society. That he was a highly-talented being was evident; but what were his propensities .-* —" How 1 should like to know,*' thought Eugene, " by the examination ofhis era- dium, whether he has any against which the keen sitire that lurks underneath that smile, the indignation which those dark brows evince his lieing capable of' ex¬ pressing, migiit not be directed ;e> well against those of others'** 'fhe recurrence ojl hh» thoughts to hb tavom ite system. imperceptiblj led to the discussion of it. The stranger listened with the greatest attention lo his arguments in support oi it, as he did inde d to his observations on every Mibjeet. To a looker-on, indeal, oí
keen remark like himself, it would have been evident that he wished to thorough¬ ly understand the character of Eugene— what his real disposition and sentimenb were ; but whether from the interest ex¬ cited by his youth, or open and ingenuous countenance and manner, was not now to be determined.—" And you really believe m this system?" he demanded of Eugene. in a tone that seemed indicative of incre¬ dulity on the bubject. "' I do," replied Eugene with seiioiiy. ncbs, " truly and firmly. Weighing ?\1 the consequences likely to result from it, mv doing so cannot make me discredit it. There are few human discoveries that may not lead to partial evil. I know you will teil me that this has a tendency to make us fatalists, and leads to the doctrine of materialism, and that human nature \??? quite sufficiently prone before to find ex¬ cuses for its errors, without having rl additional one of believing them unatoid- *ible; but still this eannot make me vit η ν
my belief to the doctrine of Gall and Spurzheim." ""Assuredly all this I should have told you and more ; I should have observed, that discoveries that cannot benefit man¬ kind, 'tis both the part of wisdom and phi¬ lanthropy not to give promulgation to. But to argue with enthusiasm," he added with a smile, 44 on a favourite subject, I know would be unavailing. Some few- years hence, however, wlien its fervour perhaps has a little abated, should we ciiance to meet, and the present one be started, you may probably speak very dif¬ ferently of it to vvhat you do at present. Vou may, by that time perhaps, liave had some experience of the misehief the sys¬ tem is likely to do ; and there is nothing >o apt to disgust a man with any particu¬ lar opinion, as Ids snifering through the adoption of it." At lengtii the traveil* rs thought oí re» tirina to rest, and were according I v con- duetul, bv their little barefooted attend- ant, tt) adjoining chambers, more comiort»
able than, from the sitting-room, they ex¬ pected to have found them. Transiently-banished reflections present¬ ly returned, and driving sleep frora the pillow of Eugene, rendered him for some time restless. At length, through the profound stillness of the place, he was sinking into a doze, when he was roused by the voice of the stranger, speaking in his sleep. At first Eugene could only distinguish broken sentences, muttered in an under tone. At length, accompanied by deep groans, he heard more connected expressions, indicative of some deep inter¬ nal trouble. " Good God !" cried Eugene, after lis¬ tening to exclamations that almost excited horror, " is it possible that goodly shrine can contain a guilty spirit ? but no, it would be cruel to judge of the man by what has escaped him at such a moment a- this, when we knovv the soul is often harassed by frightful imaginings. Be¬ sides, there are other causes ibr mental an* «>tmh than positive guilt. Imprudence
on our own part—deceit on tiiat of others «—loss of fortune—ingratitude of friends- perfidy in a beloved object—all, or any one of vvhich, is quite sufficient to occasion perturbation of mind. There is some¬ thing in this man that has so powerfully interested me, that I should grieve if by~ any ciiance 1 discovered he was the re¬ verse of what I thought him. ' He listened attentively, and finding tiiat all was again quiet in thc next cham¬ ber, again composed himseif to slee]), nor woke till the swallow had at his window bid good morrow. He ibund the stranger in the sitting- room beloi e hun. it had been settled. övcrnmhî. that ihey bhould recommence iheir jotu ne) la loie breakfast ; but this uitention w as obhged to be relinquished, m cumtt|uenee ι í thelior^e wluch Eugene had üblanud, in place of Barney \ being vet to hi caught, and tlu n wanting a shoe. W luie breaklast nas preparing, the gen- liumii w t re invited into the garden, into vvhich ihe parlour opened, by the balmy
odours of the flowers, with which, to the astonishment of Eugene, he saw it abound¬ ed.—" How reviving is this fragrance,*' he said, 4i after a iú(¿ht of disturbed re- pose, such as mine was for some part of the night !—and 1 believe, sir, you fared no better." The stranger started, and turned his quick searching eyes upon Eugene— 4i On —on what grounds do vou imagine so, sir ?" he asked, in agitated, confused ac¬ cents. 44 Merely from the restless state of your mind." " My mind î my mind ! and pray, sir, how do you infer my mínd was restless ?" 44 By your groans and broken exclama¬ tions." " Groans and broken exclamations Good God! and couid you understand/ did you distinguish ?" " Yes : 1 heard vou sav- ——" ** Oh, 1 can well guess wiiat —lor novv 1 recoiled the frightful dream I had. I thought 1 was crossing the lonely hilh
where we met last night, by myself, and that I shot a poor innocent man, vvho over¬ took me, under the belief of his lieing a robber ; and wbat you beard me uttering, were my expressions of horror and remorse at the supposed deed." 44 Exactly so," said Eugene. 4t You seemed, with the greatest compunction, to be accusing yourself of some terrible act/' 44 Just so," said the stranger; " I assure you I was so affected by the deed I fan¬ cied I had committed, that I was quite glad when I woke to find it all a dream/' " No doubt," said Eugene ; ** and hovv many, like you, vvould rejoice to find the horrors that have haunted them bv night but unreal ones !" Tlie stranger turned of a deathlike pale¬ ness. Sometliing he vvould have said, but iiis quivering lip refused to give it utter¬ ance, anil hastily turning away, he stoop¬ ed down, as if to smell to a tuft of laven¬ der. Presently raising his head, with .something of restored colour.— 44 'Tis mreA he said, applying as he spoke his Jiand to
his forehead,, to brush away his hair, "that at the instant appeared to lay damp upo« it, 44 to see such a profusion of flowers m a garden oeionging to suen a piace as this." 44 It is," said Eugene ; 44 I know not when I have seen a spot of the kind bet¬ ter laid out, or in finer culture ; 'tis really a paradise of sweets—truly gratifying to the senses." At this instant the landlord made his appearance from behind a little hedge, with a spade in his hand ; and having ex¬ pressed his hope that their honours rested well, proceeded to apologize fbr not be¬ ing in the way when they arrived, to see that the good woman had every thing right for them. 44 Oh, no occasion for regret on the sub¬ ject," said Eugene, with one of his kind smiles-— 44 there was nothing amiss. But, landlord, we have been admiring your gar¬ den—upon my word, it would do credit to the hand of an experienced gardener!" The man gave a melancholy smile.—*
" I had a pretty long experience in the bu¬ siness, sir," he said. '· You !" cried Eugene—" you surprise me 1 why, is it owing to you it is in the beautiful state it is?" % * It is. sir. I was head gardener at lord G ------ 's." 4t You surprise me still more," cried Eu¬ gene. " Is it possible you could have re¬ linquished the advantageous situation you must have held in his lordship's service, for such a one as your present?" "It might well astonish any one if I liad done such a thing," replied the man— *' given up «iuch a situation as that, for the miserable one oí an Irish innkeeper; but, about three years ago, my lord broke up housekeeping here, for the purpose of re¬ siding for the future iu England, my lady baying, that there was no life to be enjoy¬ ed but there; and 1, with all the other head servants on the Irish establishment, being discharged, 1 had no resource, to keep my taniily from starving, but taking this plaee, a poor one to be sure; but
though I cannot boast of the Red Cow being a very good milcb one, still she gives the children milk with their potatoes." ** WeU, weli, we must hope for better times," said Eugene, touched by thc man¬ ner in which this simple little statement was given. ki His lordship will yet see the folly of abandoning his natural home, and by returning, restore matters to their former condition." " Ah, no, sir, 1 see but little chance of that—all is gone to wreck and ruin since his becoming an absentee; it being the plan now not to beautify, but to make the most of every thing ; so that, of course, my lady would now dislike more than ever to live here. Ah, sir ! if you knew the place well enough to he able to compare what it was formerly vvhen İt wasn't to careless underlings, or hard-hearted stewards, it was given up, with vvhat it is now, it woukl wring your heart, as it has done mine."' Here a summons to breakfast interrupt¬ ed the conversation, but without puttiug
? end to the reflections to which it had given rise: the evils, the miseries,brought upon the country, by the desertion of so many of the landholders, became the sub¬ ject of discourse. Eugene expressed liimself on it with all the warmth of a benevolent mind.— " 1 was in hopes," he cried, " that I should have found -what I lieard of these exagge¬ rated ; but I am sorry to be compelled to confess the exact contrary is tbe case. I was in hopes my own observations would have enabled me to refute the statements ; but, alas ! they have only served to con¬ firm tliem. I saw the rich shrubberies torn to pieces by the children for fuel, to dress their food—the sound of tbe axe proclaiming equal destruction to the or¬ namental timber of the demesne—the high¬ ways, nay, the very fields, desolate, fbr not a carriage or a passenger, save yourself (to his companion), did I meet in the whole of yesterday's journey—^or scarcely a peasant did I see in the latter. I baw no hedger or ditcher—I saw no plough or harrow in
motion—not even a child, to frighten the birds from the standing corn. I appeared, at times, like my parent Adam, wander¬ ing alone in Paradise, on the first creation of thc world. There were flowery meads, ripening fields of corn, and green pastures well stocked. To what tlien, since it was evident it was not to want of support for man and beast, was this loneliness, this appearance of all the busy flush of life be¬ ing fled, owing? To the heartiessness oc¬ casioned by a want of interest in the coun¬ try. Convinced that, if he did any thing for the improvement of the little spot he rents, it would be wrested from him by the cruel middleman, at whose mercy the expatriation of his landlord has left him, the poor frisk peasant, having just se¬ cured the means of keeping lite in his wretched family, by sowing his potatoes, ceases from any further exertion : wander¬ ing about in indolence, witliout any occu¬ pation for his thoughts, he has time to brood over tlie misery of his condition ; Millen indignation is the result—designing
incendiaries take advantage of the circum¬ stance, and a spirit is gradually aroused within him, that leads to the commission of the most frightful excesses." 44 Tis a strange infatuation indeed," said the stranger, " that induces men to give up their entire interests to the .care of others ; but, in the end, the landed propri¬ etors will have bitter cause to rue it The observations I have made in travelling through this ill-fated country, are similar to those that you have mentioned. What beautiful places have I seen destroyed— entrance lodges half unroofed, their aper¬ tures stuffed with potatoe-stalks, to keep out the weather—filthy dunghills filling up the way—and pigs and poultry, for want of the opposing obstacles of gates, long since torn away from their ornamen¬ ted piers, uprooting the velvet sward of the,undulating lawn, and all through the absence of him who should have been the protecting genius of the place !" ν There are three subjects connected with the state of property in this coun-
try," resumed Eugene; "these are mid¬ dlemen, absentees, and agents. The mid¬ dleman is one who takes land on lease (from the owner, who holds from the crown at a quit-rent), but without intending to occupy an acre of it himself; he re-lets it, at a considerable rack-rent, and whatever the occupiers can make of it, must go into the pocket of the middlemen. If not suc¬ cessful, the cattle of the miserable occu¬ piers is driven, the very day the rent is due, into pound, and sold, and those from whom it has been wrested left to starve. These fellow T s are therefore a disgrace to their country, and no slight occasion of its troubles ; for, driven to desperation, man naturally becomes reckless of what he may do, knowing he cannot be vvorse off, and may be better. This is not the only grievance to be laid to the charge of the absentees ; the injury done to a country like this, by the enormous sums (as proved by a committee of the House of Com¬ mons) drawn out of it by them, to be spent amongst those who have no right to be
benefited by tliem, may easily be calcula¬ ted. With regard to agents—knowing their tenure is always uncertain, they make the most of every thing over which they have any control, often realizing for¬ tunes, to the utter destruction of those who confided their affairs to them. In all cases, however, there are exceptions ; and I have heard of middlemen and agents, deserving both of esteem and admiration, for their exertions to serve those de¬ pending on tliem." " As to Irish proprietors, natives of England, who have large estates in both countries, leaving the place of their birth, to take up their abode in this country," said the stranger, u it is totally out of the question ; but it might be expected they would from time to time pay it a visit. Instead of continually travelling abroad, let the noblemen and gentlemen vvho are Irish reside for so many months on their estates while parliament is up—let the Catholics be emancipated'—because being satisfied, order must be restored—or, if not,
treat them with the severity hypocrites deserve, and I tiiink tiiere is a ciiance oí tranquillity being restored, or rather per¬ manently established, in tiiis now-distract¬ ed country." 44 As the poet says,"' cried Eugene, 44 that were a consummation devoutly t< be wished ;' iiowever, we must not de¬ spair; good and generous spirits liave taken up the cause of suifering humanitv in this country, and from their exertions vve may at last hope for the wished for ?- suits." Breakfast was by tiiis time over, and the horses being brought to the door, th«* gentlemen took leave ofthe Red ('ow. They had not proceeded a ¿»rea t wav, when Eugene's attention was attracted by a beautiful cottage, mantled over \% ith homy * suckle and moss rose-trees, at th mad-sidr There was a small garden in front, with ' prattling stream at the bottom ot it, whetv siioals of minnows, or, as tliey are called in Ireland, pinkeens, were seen disporting VOL, L M
amidst the white pebbles, and over whieh a fairy bridge was thrown ; with a high beetling hill, thickly planted with wood, at the rear; the lawny spaces amongst the trees covered vvith sheep ; and at its very summit, to which a stony path, enriched with wild thyme and lichens, led in a zig¬ zag direction, an old stone tower, nearly overrun with ivy, looking down upon the country. Eugene involuntarily checked his horse, to gaze upon this lovely spot, rendered still more delightful to his imagination bv the air of profound tranquillity that pre¬ vailed about it. fc4 You seem pleased with that piace?" .aid liis companion, at length breaking in upon the reflections to vvhich it gave rise. * l i am indeed charmed with it," replied Emelie ; ** 1 was just thinking what a deligbtiul retreat it vvould be for an ena¬ moured pair !" u That thought savours a little of love,'* said the stranger, a little archly ; ** but
don't blush," he added, laughing; **'tis a passion natural to your time of life." 44 If I do blush," cried Eugene, i4 'tis neither from shame, or anger at the suspi¬ cion—I do indeed confess myself as true a lover as ever 4 sighed upon a m id niglit pillow." 44 And, like all youthful lovers, conceive that a cottage, with the object of your adoration, would be all that could ever be wanting for happiness. Ala.«! how short would be the delusion ! from the dream of romance how soon do we awake, to be astonished at ever indulging in such a one !" 4 * I should pity the person," said Eugene, a little warmly, ** who was not capable of indulging in such a one." pi Ah ! this is the great error of youth, to hug their errors. The greatest a young man can commit, is to marry for love— except indeed he has a fortune to sanc¬ tion the folly." 44 And because a man is not blessed with M 2
riches, is he to remain a stranger to the de¬ lights of connubial tenderness ?" " By no means; but it is very possible for a man to enjoy these, without the complete sacrifice of his comfort, which must be the inevitable consequence of his marrying without a competence at one side or the other. It is natural enough for boys and girls to fall in love; but you know the old adage—* ????? poverty comes in at the door.'—If I vvas a young man, beginning life without a fortune, I should seek to turn whatever natural gifts I possessed to advantage, by looking out for a wealthy partner, instead of exposing myself, or dragging ail innocent creature along with me into wretchedness; and what numbers of well-endowed dowagers and affluent maidens, who have suffered their youth to pass away in trifling with lovers, are to be found ready and willing to make the fortune ofa handsome young man, by giving themselves to him. * € .What, marry from interested motives —ally 'myself to a woman, the disparity
of whose age to mine must convict me to the world of having done so?" cried Eu¬ gene. 44 The most prudent thing a young man can possibly do," replied his companion coolly ; 44 for, from what a variety of vexa¬ tious circumstances does he exempt himself by it, as a very judicious writer has obser¬ ved—the caprices of youthful beauty—the distraction of children—the torturing fear of having the paragon he possesses so coveted by others, as eventually to be robbed of her—with many others, too nu¬ merous to mention ; while, if he thinks the circumstance renders his taste liable to imputation, he has only to allow himself a little time for consideration, to be con¬ vinced of the contrary. For who has ever attempted to vilify the taste of Paris—of Henry the Second of France—or Louis the Fourteenth ? and yet we all know the respective objects of their idolatry were all past the^ early period of life. If the classics are to be relied on,' Helen was four- score when Paris stole her away; while
Diana de Poitiers, many years after Hen¬ ry's fatber had withdrawn his attentions from her, made a conquest of him, and to the last moment of his life had in him a faithful, jealous adorer ; and Louis, after having rendered Inmself so remark¬ able by various means, by battles, bytour- naments, and finally, by his triumphs.over some of the finest women in Europe, at last became captivated by an old gouver¬ nante, and sighed away whole years at the feet of his venerable mistress, as she work¬ ed in spectacles ! The admiration which the renowned Ninon L'Enclos excited* is another proof of the truth, the writer:I have just alluded to observes, of what he asserts—that we need not fear ridicule for paying homage at the shrine of matured beauty; as who does not know of the catastrophe occasioned by the passion which her son, ignorant of their connexion, con¬ ceived for her, when of course she must have been far past the bloom of youth— or her conquest, long after, of the polished abbé?
Eugefce could not avoid believing bis companion.laughing all the time he was conversing in this manner; tbis, however, was not exactly the case. About ten o'clock the next morning they arrived at the hotel in Sackville- street, to which Eugene's trunk had been directed. Here, of course, he expected his companion to alight, as he did, and in consequence was a good deal surprised at seeing him, instead of quitting bis horse, preparing to go on.—** I thought you meant to stop here, sir?" said Eugene, anxiously, for he was unacquainted with any one in Dublin, and the intimacy he had formed with the stranger on the road, made him consider him something in the light of a friend. " No, it is not in my power," was the reply ; " we must part here." " So soon—so abruptly ?" cried Eugene: u but if we must, I hope not at least with¬ out a prospect of meeting shortly again ?" 44 Assuredly—of that there is not the slightest doubt—even sooner perhaps than
------but I see some one crossing the street I want to speak to;" and ere Eugene could give utterance to his intended re¬ quest for his address, kissed his hand to him, and touching his horse vvith his spur, galloped off. This seemed strange ; but it inight be as he had said—he might have seen some one he wished to speak with ; and trying to believe this, and that he would return to apologize for his abrupt departure, Eu¬ gene entered the hotel, and lost no time, after breakfasting, and changing his dress, in procuring a boy to shew him the way to* the relation of OTlooke, to whom he had a letter of introduction.
CHAPTER XII.
'* Such is thc fate of simple bard, On lilVs rough ocetm luckless siarr'd ! Unskilful he to note the curd Of prudent lore, "Till billows rage, und gales blow hard, And h helm him o'er." This bookseller, or rather bookbinder, Mr. Phineas Murphy, resided in a blind alley off Skinner-row, a short distance from the Castle. Eugene having intro¬ duced himself, and presented his letter, he forthwith proceeded to read it. This, however, was not as easy a matter as might have been supposed—Barney certainly not excelling in the art by which his senti¬ ments were in this way explained. Having puzzled himself for some time, in a vain attempt to decipher the pothooks MS
and iiangers of his relation, he handed the letter to Eugene, for the purpose of ma¬ king it out for him. The youth cast his eye over it; but finding himself in a si¬ milar predicament with the bookbinder, that is, unable to read it, he proceeded to explain what he supposed to be the con¬ tents, that is, its allusion to his works, and request to Mr. Murphy to point out the most eligible mode of disposing of them, ' r Ls it here?" exclaimed the bookbinder; '* och, botheration, botheration, honey ! iWney is thinking of ould times, totally forgetting that our parliament has been taken from us, and along with it nearly all that could read, or at least patronize literature: so that, gra, no bookseller in Dublin now will run the risk of publish¬ ing anv thing on his own account. But let me lui ve a side glance at your M.S. hee:aise I have a notion, although 1 ean't stive you in Dublin, I may be able to render you a kindness elsewhere, jeieel — that ? in London, where 1 have a iriend
and relation living, one of tbe biggest publishers there, and that's saying a migh¬ ty great thing, where there are such thou¬ sands of other great ones : but, dear, you see ??. C——— (the person I allude to), brings out works that the cowardly hearts of others would never dream of; he's the man who cares as little for law as gospel. and so has got on to be what I've tould you : but come, give me the papers ; and while I am skimming over them, you can amuse yourself with the books there," pointing to some that were laying on the counter. Eugene, with a little agitation, produced his M.S. from his pocket; but this was the first time it had ever been submitted to the inspection of an absolute stranger ; and vulgar as Murphy appeared, yet still he did not doubt, from his long acquaint¬ ance with books, but that he might be shrewd enough to be a judge of the merits of one; and who can be waiting the re¬ view of a production, without some little flutter of spirits ?
Murphy remained silent for some mi¬ nutes; he then broke out into a violent exclamation— 4t Hulla balool he cried, 44 what's all this about ? ah ! then, my jewcL as Barney might have tould you, it was useless for you to be after writing such an address as this to your countrymen, because as how, five-sixths of them never learned to read or write at all at all, and tlie other sixth, vvhich are the Orange boys, seeing, by tlie titiepage, your object is to reconcile all matters, would never give a squint into it. So you see, honey, if a bookseller could he got to purchase it here, he'd have all the fun to himself— that is, no one coming to buy, wdiich would never do: but it has pathos and íbice, ay, and a great deal of both, let mc tell you; and if your poems, which I find you have not brought vvith you, possess equal spirit in the^ir way, I don't despair of hearing your name shortly making a noise in the world : but, jewel, it's not by an Irish press you must hope to be intro¬ duced to the n orld-—no, no, poor Ireland
must now hide her diminished head : she may still give birth to genius, but it is not upon her solitary shores it can hope to raise itself to fame. But, to prove to you that it is not to be saving myself trouble I'd be telling you this—for there's nothing I wouldn't do to serve a friend of my cou¬ sin Barney's, and more particularly a young gentleman of such learning and parts—I'll go round with you to all the booksellers." t( By no means," said Eugene; " I have not the least doubt, I assure you, Mr. Murphy, of the correctness of your statement; and to confess the truth, I had some misgivings myself on this sub¬ ject. I certainly feel more regret at the idea of a longer separation from my family than I at first contemplated by going to London; but as I see I must ei¬ ther acquiesce in the necessity of a jour¬ ney there, or else abandon the object tor which 1 have come so far, I shali grate¬ fully avail myself of your proffered intro¬ duction to your friend there, and set oft'
without delay," Finally, he insisted on Murphy's dining that day at the hotel with him; and having, ere they parted, received the promised letter from him to his friend C«--------» penned in as strong terms as the naturally-energetic mind of Murphy could dictate, and addressed one to St Doulagh's, to apprize its beloved inmates of the necessity there was for ex¬ tending bis excursion, he repaired, by early dawn thc next morning, to Howth, and stepping on board the steam-packet, in a few hours after found himself at the Head. On his arrival in London, he lost no time in calling on ? ------—-, who, on per¬ using his letter of recommendation, ad¬ dressed bini most kindly, assuring him he should have most particular pleasure in attending to the purport of it ; as a proof of which, if he now left his poems with him, he should have an answer respecting them the ensuing day. Not merely the youthful, but the hu¬ man mind in generak has always a ten-
deney to hope ; it is not till after a long reiterated series of disappointments, that this grand prop of suffering nature entirely gives way. Naturally sanguine, a slight matter was sufficient to give elevation to the mind of Eugene, and in tiptop spirits he took his leave of ? ———. As he was walking on, in a state of mind that, humble pedestrian as he was, might have rendered him the envy, at the moment, of not a few, per¬ haps, of the occupiers of the brilliant equi* pages that passed him, he was suddenly accosted by a young naval officer, with whom he had served abroad. After chat¬ ting for some time, tbey separated, their routes lying in different directions, with a promise of dining together the next day. The moment Eugene returned to the liotei, he sat down to acquaint his aunt with the brilliant prospects that were opening to his view, and the hope he con¬ sequently indulged of being soon again vvith the dear circle at St. Doulagh's; for a channel for the disposal of his works
once opened, he bad nothing more to do, he conceived, than prepare others for the press. But how did he regret, as he fold¬ ed up the letter, that he could not accom¬ pany it with one for his Rose! but this was out of the question; they had not dared to make a confidant of any one, and could not, therefore, hold any communi¬ cation in this manner. Never was morning more impatiently longed for than the next one. Eugene was punctual to a minute; exactly as the clock of St. Paul's was striking the hour at which Wr. ? ----------had desired to see him, he was entering his shop.—" Well, sir," cried the man of business, after the usual compliments of meeting were over, " I have been looking over these papers of yours, as 1 promised; but I am son*} to tell you they wont do." *' Won*t do r faintly repeated Eugene, changing colour. 41 No, sir, they are not oí a description that would answer—thev are, in short/ and he laughed—oh, how tje laugh seem-
ed to insult the agonized feelings of Eu¬ gene !— 4f too sententious, too—too moral L· ?? IclStC Ul Lilt" pi COCÍ J ? ««»J , UU l, CCi- tainly, they are still not destitute of me¬ rit. Yes, sir, it is evident you have abi¬ lities, which, if properly directed, might be turned to good account : for instance, if you were to write a treatise in favour of radicalism, or a ridicule on the Holy Scriptures, or a scandalous story of some man or woman of exalted rank, hitherto considered of immaculate reputation, or a libel on the reigning monarch, or a satire on the moral and religious character of a deceased one, and continue to supply me with similar productions, I should not merely willingly, but gladly, become a purchaser; and make no doubt, in a very short time, we should have reason to be pleased at our introduction to each other." 44 No!" exclaimed Eugene, with a burst of indignation, i4 never-— no, never will I prostitute my abilities to such vile pur¬ poses ! never will I be guilty myself of what I have abhorred others for !-—
' CuiVd he the ???&?, hmv v,e\\ soe'cr it How, That tends tu make one honest man my foe!' But is it possible—can the age indeed be so lost to purity and refinement, as to pre¬ fer what is gross and immoral to what is chaste and refined ?*' 44 Ah, sir, it is a sign you know very Uttle about it, or you would not ask the question; but it is truth, upon my ho¬ nour, sir, all that I have asserted, as a very short residence in this great mart of literature, and world in itself, London, will prove to you." 44 1 am sorry fbr it," cried Eugene, 14 from the very bottom of my heart," with a sigh that proved him sincere in what he said—" sorry fbr it, from the terrible de¬ generacy it argues." ** And you persevere in your romantic resolve? excuse the expression, sir; but I really know no other to apply to yours, so diametrically opposite is it to what self* interest would prescribe." " Perhaps so, sir; but," haughtily, " that h> my consideration."
" Assuredly, sir, assuredly, every one to their taste and their principles; if they pay for them, why, as you say, sir, that is their affair. But we need not entirely part in this way ; here is a lighter volume of poems, that I don't care ifl take; so what say you—vvill this," producing a few sove¬ reigns, i4 answer for them ? I am no hag¬ gler, wanting to take advantage of any one; so at a word, will this do?" Eugene hesitated; he had built much upon these poems ; but his purse was very low, and his spirits, in perfect sympathy with it, equally so, and thc glittering gold, just fresh from tlie Mint, looked so tempting, that, in short, tlie wish to grasp it in his hand, as his own, was not to be resisted ; and accordingly, after very little further difficulty, the bargain was closed. 41 Well,"' cried ? ------—, as he locked the pq>ers up iu liis desk, 4i before this time to-morrow you will probably have the pleasure of hearing your verses chant¬ ed in a hundred different keys, in a hun¬ dred streets in Westminster/*
" What, are you going to convert my poems into common ballads ?" exclaimed Eugene, the flush of indignant pride crimsoning his cheek. " Am I ! to be sure I am. What else could you think I meant to do with such trifles ? not bring them out on fools¬ cap, hot-pressed ! Well, d ------me, thats a good one, your being angry about them î what signifies to you, or to me, my good sir, how the mocuscs be produced, so they be jyroduced? You recollect, no doubt -—but there is no occasion, I dare say, to recall to mind your classical recol¬ lections; besides, was not the king of poets of the same opinion? did he not even sing his own verses through the cities of Greece ?—* Go to, go to,' as sir Pertinax Macsycophant says, d ------me if ever you'll be a great man, if you don't cast off at least a hundred weight of the Irish pride you brought over with you !" ** Let me cast off what I will of it," said Eugene, with a scornful look, * fc I shall still always retain sufficient of it to make
me resent insolence and impertinence!" and he was quitting the shop, when ? ----------, wdio w r as accustomed to those hasty ebullitions of temper, from the in¬ tercourse he had with authors, and mind¬ ed them no more than he did the effer¬ vescence of soda-water, stopped him.— 41 Come, come, wc don't part in anger,*' he cried ; * 4 curse me if I meant to offend you ! so come, let me have your address, and perhaps you may hear from me in a few days." Eugene hesitated ; but an unwillingness to do any thing tliat might raise up addi¬ tional obstacles to his projects, at lengtii overpowered his reluctance to give it, and he slowly drew forth his card,—* 4 Yet what can 1 hope from hearing írom this fellow?" In» demanded of himself as he began to retrace his way in the lingering step o! disappointment ; * 4 nothing, but sorne nev* mortification, or additional insult ; and thus end my shortlived expectations— these expectations tiiat were but yester
day so vivid, so sanguine ! but, as Wolsey says— 1 This i^ the· state of man; to-day he pats forth The tender leave·* of hope, to-morrow hlossoms, And bears his blushing honours thick upon lurn; Tlie third day comes a. frost—a killing fros', And when he thinks %<>od ea*>y man, full surelv His greatness is a ripeninir, nips his root, And then he falls »s I do.' But what is to lie done? had I not better make up my mind to return at once to St. Doulaglts while I have the means, and sink int* the sordid obscurity to which I seem destined ? But no, I will not so hastily abandon the oar, to sufler myself to be turned adrift: after the ex¬ pectations my letter must have raised there, how could I bear to return without a further effort to do something? All the booksel¬ lers may not exactly coincide in opinion or sentiments with ? —------: I will try some more of them, nor relinquish my exertions till I see that longer perseve¬ rance in them would be folly. n But how cruel to his feelings the delay which this resolution must necessarily oc-
casion to his return to St. Doulaglts— - there, where love, honour, tenderness, all united to recall him—how bitter—how al¬ most desolating to his heart, the disap¬ pointment that rendered him unable to attend immediately to this call ! He was ill at feigning what he did not feel; accordingly, the dejected state ofhis mind was soon betrayed to his companion that day at dinner. The discovery led to questions which shortly produced a dis¬ closure of the cause of İt. After a hearty laugh — " Well, I could never have thought tiiis," cried the other, 44 that a young fellow like you, with such bumps of destructiveness, amativeness, construc¬ tiveness^ and in sli ort, of ail necessary to make your fortune, should have given way to despair in this manner î There is an old saying-—when one gate is shut up another is opened ; so come, elicer up, my hearty, as we say on board ship, since this d—d dog of a bookseller won't employ you, without your levelling your own principies, we'll go to the play; after
which, I'll introduce you to a house in Pall Mall, where you'll get as good drafts on the Bank as any he coukl give you, and in a much pleasanter and readier way." They went to the play; but when, on leaving it, Eugene understood that the place to which it was intended he should be introduced was one of those gambling- houses not inaptly termed h-lls, declined accompanying his friend thitlier; but not, if the truth is to be confessed, without doing some little violence to his inclina¬ tion ; but he had heard too much of thc mischiefs, the horrors, resulting from an initiation into such scenes, not to see the wisdom of avoiding them, and determined to act accordingly. His companion attempted, for some time, to laugh him out of what he caiied his quizzical notions; but finding the ef¬ fort vain, he suddenly turned on his heel with a contemptuous smile, and, without the slightest intimation of a wish for ano- ther meeting, left him.
CHAPTER XIII. ****** **** ** ***r~r ** " Sn Tob — ('??? tb v' \\^\?, >i'íiiioí i . ??? " '* Fab.— !\.t\, ΠΙ tonif ; it'i lf»-t i a sí r^pİt υ? ι!η·> »poj í, ■ et uo bf boilM to ílf.ith ? /l» nithiucholy." Seveeal successive days were entirely given up by Eugene to visiting the diffe¬ rent booksellers ; but without any intro¬ duction to them, an unfledged author lite¬ rally, " to fortune and to fame unknown," the result was what might have been an¬ ticipated. if tliere be any place that brings to mind the saying, that " gold maketh unto itself wings, and fleeth away/ it certainly is London. When, at the expiration ol this period, Eugene, in utter despair of succeeding in the object that had brought him over, came to examine his purse, with an intention of returning without delay to VOL. L N
St Doulagh's, he found sufficient did not remain within it for the purpose. To des¬ cribe his feelings at the moment would he impossible ; he absolutely staggered under them. As he sat in the coffee-house, con¬ sidering what was to be done, an isolated being, in the midst of busy thousands, away from friends, from kindred, from all who could feel for, or would sympathize in his forlorn situation, his eye was caught by an advertisement to the following ef¬ fect, in a paper that lay before him ; and whicli, the moment he had perused, de¬ cided him on calling again on ? ---------, though with the greatest reluctance, not merely from his previous conduct, but hav¬ ing heard no further from him.—" Wan¬ ted, by a learned society, a-secretary.—For particulars apply to Mr. ? --------- /' &c. &e. On explaining to this gentleman ? the business on which he had now called on him.—" Bless your heart !" he exclaimed, " this is a thing that would not janswer for you ! I am sure I have had more than a hundred applications already for the situa-
tion, and probably may have a hundred more, ere a person be found qualified to fill it ; so few thoroughly understand the science the society profess to study." " Pray may I beg to know what that is ?" 44 Cranioscopy*, Craniologyf, Phreno- logyf!" 4# Then, I flatter myself," said Eugene, 44 1 am at home î each of these I have long made a particular study of, so that if I do not perfectly comprehend them, it must be through stupidity." 44 Indeed !" but with rather a sneer— 44 oh ! well, if that be the case, here's the pre¬ sident's address," taking a card out of his desk* and giving it to hirn ; " but should you not succeed (though I see you expect it), let me know, as I was just on the point of writing a note to you as you came in." Eugene, with new-flushed hopes, imme¬ diately set out according to the direction of the card. He found the president at
N2
home ; and on announcing the business on which he had come, was instantly admit¬ ted to his presence. He was an old gen¬ tleman, full seventy at least, tall, and meagre in the extreme, and altogether such a personage as, in former times, if met at a suspicious hour, on a lonely heath in Scotland, might very well have been taken for a wizard. He received Eugene in his study, where, at the instant, he hap¬ pened to be engaged in the examination of the cranium of an, old lady, who was sitting with her head uncovered, on a stool by his side ; her flaxen wig, one of the ornamental productions of Bishops- gate-street, laying on the table beside her. Eugene, on discovering the extraordi¬ nary situation of the parties, conceiving the servant must have made a mistake, drew back, but was prevented finally re¬ treating, by the old gentleman calling af¬ ter him—" Come in, sir—come in," he cried ; 44 you could not have arrived at a more fortunate moment, since I am now engaged on a subject that vvill give me an
Opportunity of ascertaining whether you are qualified, by knowledge, for the situa¬ tion of secretary to our Phrenological So¬ ciety. You must know, sir, there's a cross organ here," laying his hand upon the naked head ofthe old lady, "insomuch that I know not how to decide on its de¬ nomination. Now be so good as to consi¬ der it, and say whether you can illustrate the matter?" 44 Sir," said Eugene, after due obedience to this command, 44 1 should pronounce this the organ of inhabitiveness ; but to have doubts about it, need not be thought to deteriorate from the judgment of any one, since even the great Gall and Spurz¬ heim themselves, if you recollect, sir, have such on the subject, what they state re¬ specting it being on conjecture. Now I humbly suggest, in such cases as the pre¬ sent, the advisable mode would be to as¬ certain, from the subjects under consider¬ ation, how they felt, as to the nature of the supposed faculty." " As how, young gentleman ?"
" Why, sir, whether this lady has had my passion for moving about—being care¬ less of her place of abode, so it had no¬ velty to recommend it—or contrary, so at¬ tached to one particular spot as not to be able to leave it without pain." * k (rive me your haiul ; a very Daniel 1 pronounce you—just the enlightened secretary the society want. Be here at eight o'clock, and ill invest you in an of¬ fice, if not of great pecuniary emolument, of vast importance to science, and, of course, the world at large." Eugene having promised to be punc¬ tual to the appoiuted time, was retiring, when—'* 1 beg your pardon, sir," said the president, again stopping him, '" but if ymtll seat yourself here, [the lady had, hy this time, risen, and was replacing her wig on the block to vvhich it had been trans¬ ferred from llosas,] ill take a map ofyour cranium, that it may be placed in the so- ciely-rtM>m, for the study of the members." Ere Eugene could take írom his poek- abook one which M hi, Agnes Flora Jn-
dìtli had made of it, as well as slie could, without his having had ids iiead shaved for tlie purpose—* 4 I'll free you from this wig," cried the old gentleman, impatiently, and seizing Eugene by the hair as he spoke, with such violence as to causean exclama¬ tion of pain from him. On discovering his mistake— 44 Bless my heart, young gen¬ tleman," he said, tt this is a great omission ! I sliould have thought, so great a phreno¬ logist as you appear to be, would have had your cranium ready for inspection at a minuteV notice! but tliis is a matter tliat can easily be remedied, so no more on the subject till we meet this evening.*' But tliough Eugene did not vie ? thc recent scene in the light that others might, still adhering as he did to the system that had already led him into such errors, he did not feel, and he knew not how to ac¬ count ibr tlie circumstance, any very ex- quirite delight at the idea ofthe appoint¬ ment he now looked forward to. In u short time, iiowever, he expected its emo¬ luments wouid enable him to return home:
and longing, as he did, to find himself on his -ay there, he could not, accordingly, avoid hoping he might not be disappointed in his present expectations. At the appointed hour, he repaired to the president's house, in whieh the society held their meetings. The mansion, it seems, h id formerly belonged to an emi¬ nent professional man, vvho had erected an extensive surgery at the rear, and it was iii this tiie society assembled. A place better adapted for the purpose of examin¬ ing the craniurns, both of the quick and the dead, could not possibly have been íound. being covered in vvith glass alone, so that a elear, bright, stead) light, ena¬ bled the members, who met now by day — now by niglit, according to the .whim í.l the moment* or the urgeoey ofthe oe- i ,*???. to examine the most minute rises humps, or, as the great doctors term theni, organs tff a/feetio/i. The members* con¬ sisted of eaeh sex. and amounted to lorty- U\ ? , if not of the íírM. rank, at least, judg¬ ing Irom manners and appearance, not
far removed therefrom ; at all events the street was filled with elegant equipages. Round the room was ranged, in gilt frames, maps of thc craniurns of the forty- two members; with the name attached to each of the party from whose head it had been taken ; and In rhe centre was a iong narrow table, strewn over with books, and lighted hy an immense chandelier of cut glass, suspended from the ceiling ; and at each side of wliich the members were seated—the ladies on one side, the gentle¬ men at the other, and the president, as usual, at tîie head, in a chair somewhat elevated. Eugene being introduced into the apart¬ ment—** Ladies and gentlemen," saiu the president* directing every eye to hini, ** thb is the young gentleman 1 iiave just had the honour of mentioning to you, as an applicant for tlie vacant situation oí ^e- eretary to our societv, From some olber- vuuons wliich a particular circumstance t licited from him, thb morning, 1 tm Ν ?
inclined to imagine heïs not without the requisite qualifications for what he aspires to; but as the"examînationthat can alone establish this fact will take up some time, I move that we first proceed to the regu¬ lar business of the meeting, and have the honour, therefore, ladies and gentlemen, to announce to you, that the house has resumed its sitting." This was almost too much for the risi¬ ble faculties of Eugene; but when, in¬ stantly after, he saw the vvhole corjw de phrenologists, with as much alacrity and precision as a well-disciplined' regiment would go through their manœuvres on •parade, clap their right hand to their heads, and strip them of their artificial co¬ verings, be must have electrified the whole assembly, by an absolute roar of laughter, but for the timely application of his hand¬ kerchief to his mouth. ** But how ridiculous is this," he said, with no slight indignation against himselt as soon as lie had á little got the better of this convulsion«** I profess myself a dis-
ciple of this system, and yet I feel as if I were turning into ridicule, those who are devoting themselves to the study of it ! Hovv much, how effectually may not tlieir researches tend to remove whatever has hitherto had the effect of bewilderine: me on the subject! If I had any previous doubts of the correctness of the system, would they not vanish now before the high estimation in whicii I perceive it held—an estimation so great, as to induce even the softer sex to sacrifice their usual delicacy to it? Yes, that must be felt and considered right, for the investigation of which so much is done." A gentleman now rose.—" On the last adjournment of the house," he said, " we left undecided the question, * whether this recent discovery is not capable of being improved upon?' As every individual in this society is well versed in the rules by vvhich we are guided, in discovering the .different organs of t/wught and volition— so rnuch so, that in the idark we can, by carefully passing pjurîhajidspver the era-
Mums òf .our fellow-beings,, décide infal¬ libly the powers of their minds by the biimps on their skulls—I respectfully sug¬ gests that we sliould not stop in following up this great system of Gall and Spurz¬ heim, but, by a deeper search on the skulls of each other, endeavour to make some new discovery, as ï can by no ineans allow, that all the organs of affection which humanity, no doubt, is in posses¬ sion of, being set forth in the thirty-three divisions which Gall and Spurzheim have executed in the map of the osseous, cover¬ ing of the centre of nervous energy —I say, it is my opinion that this map does not go far enough, for I think room might be found for thirty-three divisions more ! (Hear, hear, hear î from the opposite side of the tablé.) For instance, we know that there are dull, and very stupid, and even imané people irV the worlds ýét there is no organ of stupidity or bump ot dul¬ ness (great murmuring), no rise or de¬ pression to' designate the iant from the insane Γ .Here the noise became very
great, insomuch that the speaker was obliged to call the unruly members to or¬ der. On the gentleman attempting to re¬ sume the argument which had been thus interrupted, several female members, rose in a rage, to deliver their, sentiments. Another tumult now took place, as to who had the first right to be heard. An appeal, as usual on such occasions, was made to the chair.— 4< Mrs. Déliré first caught my eye," said the president. This restored order; the other ladies courtesied, and sat down, and Mrs. Dé¬ liré, with a triumphant smile, advancing a little forward, thus began :—" Mr. Speaker, I am sorry the honourable gen¬ tleman who spoke last forces me to enter on a subject that may tend to cause any misunderstanding, in a society that has hitherto proceeded in its affairs with such feelings of unanimity ; butMhis attack is so clearly meant to my-honourable friends who occupy this side of the table, that to vindicate them, as well as myself, from
such insinuations, I feel to be a bounden duty. It is represented, that the great Gall and Co. have not entered deep enough into the study of' their theory, having left out the bumps of insanity and folly in their cranial maps. The honourable member vvho has thought proper to advance tiiis new doctrine, did not, I am sorry I am compelled to say so, do so merely out of a pure wish to suggest inquiry, but to in¬ sult his sister members at this side; ibr what can be clearer, in proof of this inten¬ tion, than iiis adding— 4 We kmw there are dull, and very stupid, and even in¬ sane people?' Who knows? Why, the member and his friends at the opposite side know that we are dulh .stupid —nay many of us insane! Tliese expressions were too »oreibly emphatized by tlit speaker's eyes arul gestures, during their delivery, to allow me to entertain a doubt ol their real meaning; and I de* contend lor it, Mr. Speaker, and I am ready to take the voice of the house on the occa¬ sion, that if personal allusions be allowed.
particularly of this injurious nature, there will be an end of all freedom of debate and concord." The gentleman thus accused, or at¬ tacked, now rose to explain. In the most solemn manner he assured the honourable members at the other side of the table, that he had not the most remote idea of giving any one of them offence ; his only objeet in what he had said being to start inquiry. This a little appeased the ofiended part of the assembly ; still, however, there were murmurs of dissatisfaction, and pri¬ vate discussions, wliich leaving the presi¬ dent's attention unoccupied fora moment, Eugene took advantage of the circum¬ stance, to ask whether they had disco¬ vered any method of turning to practical usethis theory of Gall and Spurzhchu? and being answered in the negative, avail¬ ing himself of the suggestion of sir Toby Tickletoby, received permission to address the society on the subject. Having sta¬ tioned himself at the further end of the table, he thus began.
CHAPTER XIV.
«-----^—, — ...ßüt teli mc true, are you nut mad in¬ deed, or do you but counterfeit ?" *' Believe roe, í am uot ; I telí thee true." ** Xay, ΙΊΙ ne'er believe a maduian till ï ??? lus brain*." í4 Mr. President, and ladies and gentle¬ men, receive my acknowledgments for the high honour conferred on me, by the permission I have obtained to deliver my sentiments before you ; in entreating you to accept them, permit me also to solicit your adding to the kindness already shewn, your bearing in mind, as an ex¬ cuse fof any thing in which I may be found deficient, that I am but a young and an inexperienced speaker, insomuch that it is not without extreme diffidence I think of addressing so erudite a body. But not to trespass unnecessarily upon time so precious, from the purposes to
which it is here devoted—ladies and gen¬ tlemen, I presume it must strike every one, that the theory of Gall and Spurz¬ heim, like all other theories in general, could only be considered valuable to a certain extent, except the means of turn¬ ing it to practicable account were disco- vered —that is, of being enabled by it to do more than ascertain on each othets skulls the indications of genius, or the want of it. Thinking so, and feeling as¬ sured that there must be a coincidence of opinion with me on the subject, it is with pleasure that I announce to this learned assembly, that a discovery of this nature has been made, and of which being duly appreciated, I cannot entertain a doubt; the production of genius being a much more philosophical subjeqt of inquiry than the indications of it. (Hear, hear, hear!) It is a well-known fact, that the human cranium, in early infancy, may be mould¬ ed into any conceivable shape, from the elastic nature of the bones of which it is formed. As all the organs of thought and
volition are as distinctly laid down in the cranial map of Gall and Spurzheim as we could desire, and as I have already ex¬ pressed the practicability of compressing tlie cranial bones, at an eariy age, into any conceivable form, nothing more is re¬ quisite to give a new and definite direc¬ tion to the thoughts and feelings of the next generation, than to mould the in¬ fant's head to a given form, by the simple application of an unyielding metal head¬ dress, formed so as only to permit the de¬ velopement of the required organs. If the elevation of the skull, at a certain point, be accompanied by tlie develope¬ ment of a particular organ seated under it (and this is clearly demonstrated by the great doctors), there can be nothing more easy in nature, or in tiie brass or iron ma¬ nufacturers, than to furnish metal caps, which, by repressing the growth of the injurious, and encouraging the expansion of the good affections, will invariably make all the future generations of Britons to think and act alike for the common
welfare. In short, the thirty-three divi¬ sions into wdiich the skull is arranged, and the thirty-three propensities, correspond¬ ing to these divisions, may be so modified, by adopting metal cases fbr tlie covering ofthe heads of tlie young, as to produce any quantity of talent required." On Eugene signifying he had conclu¬ ded, by drawing back, with a bow, from the table, the members, as if one and all were electrified, sprung from their seats, and gave three cheers, waving their wigs. On resuming their seats, after giving this mark of their approbation, one of them proposed that tiie thanks of the assembly should be voted to their learned secretary, as from that moment lie was henceforth to be considered, for the perspicuous man¬ ner in which lie iiad explained the mean? by vvhich the system of the great Gall and Spurzheim might be turned to account, and the same entered on the journals of tiie house, as too much gratitude could not be evinced to the person, who, by his suggestion, or discovery, had probably
hurried on the British millennium some hundreds of years. Nothing was* heard but the praises, of the young secretary, and congratulations amongst the society, for having met with so brilliant a genius to fill the situation. In taking these plaudits to himself, as a just tribute for the merit of a discovery due solely to. another, we must acknow¬ ledge Eugene was not correct; he certain¬ ly did not exactly assert a falsehood ; but then his not disclaiming what was attri¬ buted to him, was nearly,as bad; but he was young and unthinking, to be sure, when .the organ of vanity flows at a rapid çate —perhaps also knowing his unfortu¬ nate country was considered only capable outproducing thick-headed blunderers, he wished to prove, in that respect, as in others» there was-no general rule without an* exception. The question being put fromííthe chair—^Whether, the thanks of íhiffjhonóurable house be bestowed.upon Eugene OToole O'Shaughnessy. (XNeil, tbeir ^ secretary, for the suggestion of so
beneficial a discovery, as that of turning the theory of doctors Gall and Spurzheim to practical account, by the use of metal headdresses, during the infancy of chil¬ dren, for the suppression of bad affections, and encouragement of the good ?" a mem¬ ber rose, and expressed himself concerned, that, in justice, he could not give his as¬ sent to so great an honour being conferred upon any man, as that proposed to be conferred upon their secretary, unless his services were incontrovertibly proved to be of importance to the community at large, or who had, in some particular, rendered their society some essential be¬ nefit ; and therefore as this, in neither in¬ stance, was the case, he could not, al¬ though he felt for their worthy secretary a respect for the genius anddepthofread¬ ing evinced by so young a man, concur in the vote he had been called upon for.— " If," continued be, ** the soul is indepen¬ dent ofthe body, as we are led to believe^ and which indeed we cannot doubt being actually the case—if, I say, the soul is in-
dependent of the body, and if the bumps and depressions of the human cranium be the work of this invisible agent, it should be full proof tbat it can make room for the display of its peculiar faculties, with¬ out consulting the mass of matter, or the bones where it has its temporary resi¬ dence. What possible benefit could man¬ kind derive, in sucli cases, from metal headdresses? I am firmly of opinion, none. More, that the soul wouid most likely not choose to occupy a habitation moulded by these brass or iron caps to a certain shape ; and further, that if forced to reside in a house she did not like, she might sit sullenly in her cell, and disap¬ point the expectations of those interested in her future display." Severi Jadíes here rose in an evident rage with the last speaker ; but whether through being prepossessed in favour of their youthful secretary, on account of his manly beauty, or to vindicate the disco¬ very they supposed he had made, we can¬ not venture to decide. As before, tlie
president was obliged to decide which had the first claim to attention ; and his voice being in favour of Mrs. Folle, she step¬ ped forward, and thus began :— " The doctrine broached by the honour¬ able member last on his legs, has ñlled me with astonishment! He asserts, the soul is independent of the body ; but do vve not all know, that when the body is worn out by sickness, or years, and ceases longer to act, our natural life is at an end ? Do vve not commit the body to the earth, from whence it sprung? We know, for a certainty, therefore, what is become of the body ; but where is this separated be¬ ing, the soul, to be found ? Do vve know any demonstration ofthe soul, save through the body ? Is it not absurd, therefore, to assert, that the soul is independent, when it is nowhere to be found, save in com¬ munion with its corporal body ? Wine is wine, whether in a cask or a bottle, and soul can only be soul while it animates the bod}'. If however the honourable mem¬ ber can produce me any soul—nay, even
satisfy me> from unquestionable proof, that he has ever conversed with one, indepen¬ dent ofa body, then, but not until then, can he persuade me that soul and body are two distinct beings. The soul comes into thc world as belonging to a particu¬ lar body, and takes its departure with the same ; ergo, a body could not exist with¬ out a soul, nor a soul without a body ! What can be a stronger proof of this than the old atiage, when speaking of a person whose fortune is small—* He has scarcely snfficient to keep soul and body together?' How then can any one pretend that one can be independent of the other, when, to make a whole, both must be united ? As wu are assured, by our great masters, that the seat of the soul is in the cranium, 1 must heartily concur in voting that the thanks of this honourable house be be¬ stowed upon our learned and ingenious secretary, for so valuable and important ? discovery as that ofa metal headdress. 5 ' ** After the very brilliant, clear, and com¬ prehensive speech of my honourable sis-
, ter," cried another lady, hastily rising, 4Í it is hardly necessary for me to intrude upon the attention of the house ; nor should I, but for the impossibility I feel of avoiding following up her observations on the strange assertions of tlie honourable mem¬ ber who has opposed the tribute we con¬ ceive due to our secretary, for his most ingenious and valuable discovery. To shew that the soul is not independent of the body, as has been attempted to be proved, I would ask if ever philosopher was heard of, who eould invent theories, or illustrate facts, witliout the assistance of his stomach, anil the apparatus con¬ tained in its thoracic cavity ? (Hear, hear, hear ! and great applause.) And does not «ι cannon-shot tiirough the breast put a -•top as effectually to the operations of the soul, as if it had been directed to the head ? (great and reiterated applause,) which proves, beyond a doubt, that İn place ot the soul being independent of the t udy, she occupies not only the head, but every individual part of the body, tliough her vol. i. ?
means of thought and volition are fixed in the cranium. What do we phrenologists contend for? Why, merely that parti¬ cular powers of the mind, or soul, have been proved to manifest themselves in particular dcvelopements of the bones of tlie head ; and all that our secretary's glo¬ rious invention (as 1 have no doubt, if not in the present, it will at least in after ages be termed) contends for is, that the growth and developement of these bones may in eariy life, from their yielding quality, be made to accommodate themselves to the display of any required faculty oí 1 mind. In expressing the pleasure 1 feel in giving my hearty concurrence to the vote oi thanks, I cannot help taking this oppor¬ tunity of noticing vvhat lasting and great obligations this nation is under to many of his countrymen, for services that have immortalized their names. * í -bv Othcihr- \^'i£v *n his mmd, Ait Ì U> itis hut.oUa .mû h." i. th -iíií f .ais f)„fi 1 ni) - ,ul .i.íú hJitmitA eoii-tua'i f exclaims the beautiful Desdemona, vio*
lently enamoured of a gallant soldier: can we allow genius to affect our hearts less warmly than courage?" casting a fas¬ cinating glance. > .— ~ -------------- —Oli, wise \numr sfnetai), Ifow hnidi more i-hlct ,nt thovi tlwi » thy loi U This member sat down, amidst tumulto of applause. The standing order being then read, that the whole house go into a committee on the study of skulls, the twenty-one ladies turned round on their stools as regularly as a regiment could to thc right or left, and presented tlieir era* ntums for inspection to the gentlemen at the other side of the table, vvho, having finished the investigation, and taken notes made of whatever alterations appeared iu them since the last examination, iu their turn undenvent the same from the ladies *· Prior to adjourning the house» I deem it expedient," said the president, " to take its sense, whether it is abso¬ lutely necessary ibr our secretary to con« ??? to the general rules uf this honour* ri ?
able society, by having bis head shaved, and made ready against the next inspec¬ tion, by mounting a scratch ?" This was carried nem. con. The house then adjourned to that day week, then to meet for the dispatch of business; but their resolution about his head had settled the business with Eugene. To return to his Rose in a wig ! No—the thing was impossible; and, in consequence, lingering behind, he informed the president, that since the honourable society could not be satisfied with the map he had already taken ofhis cranium, he must beg leave to decline affording them an opportunity for making any other; he made him :* parting bow, and retired. With a heavy heart would he have done -?, after the expectations he had been in¬ dulging, but fbr the hope held out by what I/— -----. had said ofhis being about inform¬ ing him when he called, ofhis having some¬ thing advantageous to propose to him. ??? or vol. i.
