Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Clarentine: a novel
CLARENTINE.
С II A Ρ T E R XV. Clarentine hearing at the door s when ihe returned home 9 that Captain Somerfet was already gone, immediately went into the parlour publicly to announce —wifhing to avoid any private convcrfa« don with Mr, Lenham upon the fubjetl— her new r plan. The furprize with which flie was'heard by every body f but particularly the anxious and ftedfaft look with which, whilft blufhing and fpeaking very quick, ihe wás furveyed the whole time by Mr, Lenham.) embarraßed her extremely. She anfwercd all their queftions with the moft tremulous agitation; feemed even afraid of railing her eyes, and fought with fo much eagcrnefs, but fo little атц to v#l. in. В change
k /ie converfation, that not only lì lerable guardian, but Mì'fs Bar- <■" 'n> fat attentively examining her, w ewife filled with fufpicion and arc .i.ient. ι . mother, however, neither fo ch ·** inteieftcd as the one, or fo dif- t? as the other, fpoke of the fcheme, ri ι er firft unmeaning wonder was over, with her accuftomed facetious un- unconccrn. &ζ Good wits jump, I've heard fay/* cried flic; u it was but this very afternoon Capt?in Somerfet talked of going a jcuirney too : not fo long a one though a.s yours, Mik Clary/' Clarentine, who could not, now, hear the mere name of Somerfet without con¬ fufion« irufted not her voice to make any enquiries, but i u her own defpite felt ex¬ tremely anxious to learn whither, and for what purpofe he was going. Mrs. Barclay went on— " He's obliged, he fays, to fct out for Wind for to-morrow, and doesVt think he can be back in lefs than a week : fo ihat, what with the lofs oí *Mr„ Eltham you
your journey, Mrs. Denbigh's, and his^ we ihall be left here quite folitary/' 64 O, Mifs Dcimington has been in fuch charming fpirits lately/' cried Miks Barclay, ironically, " that we ihall cer¬ tainly be terribly dull without her !" ** I am not confcioua," faid Clarentine» vexed at this fpeech, and unufually eager to defend hei fclf, 6Î that I have been at ail in worfe fpirits of late than common." ť€ No!" exclaimed Mifs Barclay— u Why, Lord, you have looked, as my mother fays, fo like a poot ha pc th of Jyvup for above a mouth, that I could almoft—· Clarenune, dreadfully afraid ihe would to her, as well as to Eltlkim, eooioe blunder out fome rude infinuat.on con¬ cerning her being in Uvl\ now hafulv ι ι tcrruptcd her, and with a fot с ed imde, faid— u Jf I really was lowTpírited. Miks Barclay, nothing would be fo little likely to cui с mc as animad vet ung upon it." " No, ίο he luie/' cried íhe mother, " к only makes bad wotfe. for my pait, vshen íve g'u the ll*e drxh. I lud ач
Itef any body fliould beat røe, as take notice of k." The converfation then, to Clarentine's great relief, took a different turn, and nodiing further was faid concerning her journey that night» Infinitely as her reafon, and ftill more lier pride, taught her ίο rejoice at her ap« proaching departures her heart, as the time drew near, funk at the pro fpe ft of thus voluntarily banifhiog herfelf from êomericL 44 Ah ! little did I imagine/' cried lhe* ** a few weeks ftnee, that a féparation like lids, could ever have been planned and fought by me! My whole foul recoils at the idea even now : and to go thus fud¬ denly, thus coldly too—quit the place whilft he is abfent— »take no leave of him ! Good Heaven, is it I that can do all this ì J s it Swerfet I can thus part from ?«— Cruel, cruel Mrs, Hertford !—Why do you compel me to fuch a taik?— But for you i might ftill have remained here— itili at. times even have converfed with and heard him, as in former days, call mc bis асац .his gentle Clarentine l—iik Ck« remine ?
his Г—- It was on the night preceding her jour¬ ney, that whuff, unfitted for general con¬ verfation, íhe was íhut up in her own apartment, indulging thefe melancholy re~ íleâions, fome one, who by the gemle- nefs of the found ihe concluded to be Mr. Lenham f knocked unexpectedly at her door. She immediately arofe from before the fire oppofite which ihe had been fit¬ ting, and trying to a {fume a look oí fere- nity, if not of chearfulnefs, moved to the door, and opening it, was beginning, 46 My dear Sir, is it"—-but drawing back the next minute, with an air of affri&ht and coníternation, walked haílily again to the chimney, followed by — Somei fet. Bodi, dining a íhort, but to Clarcn¬ tine moft embarraffing interval, ílood ut¬ terly filent. At length. Somerfet. having íhut the door, once more approached her, and with a look of burr)' and anvieiy faid—- " Am I, Mifs Dcimington, to believe lhe ílrange report I have juil heard r— Arc you, indeed, going from Ilampftcad : * В 3 Ciai ею
» Clarentine, fupporting herfelf with one hand againii the table, and trembling as much from furprizc at his unexpected ap¬ pearance, as from confufion at the almoft reproachful feriou lhe fs of his enquiry j anfwered in a low voice— u Yes, Sir." 4 * And did you mean, is it poílible you coukl mean thu-s abruptly to let out with¬ out leaving one line to explain to me die motive,'·? of your departure—or, at leaft, to teii me when í might ilaiter myfelf you would return ? *— Clarentine, dreadfully abafhed 1 , hung lier head, and with difficulty rcpreffed her tears, but attempted not to anfwer him. ** ч «■ fpeak of time* /Че«" refumed So¬ mei ív t, aftei vainly waiting fome mumies к ι ά n pk*, " cha utled a* ihcy arc. would to me he too p-knful ; elk would I aík Jvlifs Delmington, v. herber the dcfign fhe had ho -j meditated, would then have appeared to lier genei ous ar.d friendly :~— We quit not eoo a o^uk aeqiointanee without fome ]ìì\*paiation, iome previous inf.)r.: 4 aLÍon of ene inteuîiou: — yet your brot; er. your h ¡end, your Sonn riet you could qui: 3 and not even deign, con¬ cerned
cerned and amazed as you knew he muit Ье on hearing of your depanuse, to leave him a veibal farewei ľ* . u Oh Heaven !" exclaimed Clarenune« overcome by this fevere but juft reproof, and throwing herfelf in a chair— u lay no more, Mr, Somerict, 1 conjure you!—I am forry— î am aihamed — I meant not— She coukl proceed no further, but burihng into tears, fkuted up, and ran with precipitation into the adjoining room. Her abfence, however, was but of fhort duration : the inftant flie was alone, reproaching herfelf for having flown hnu fo inconsiderately, íhe endow omol ίο command hei feelings, ãnd leturn to hun again wuh an apohoy iome what шок' díítiut-t, and a count*, nanee íoookot moie couipofed. Almoíl 1"р'кк, id hot 'pautitm h* m ítich au o "ik; u о*. ' е,е ,, ι. \/,··), íhoooíi 'л\\ Ι ahli 1 u ii α' t' ' e .e '¡ »n /e had caul d, ihno ¡ tì ίιη α( ¡ Al ¿ L 0 c { thoughìfulm k and d M .ulìiou noo the lire, h/kk «uk.uu .-d ί > eocL hei as íhe ente ie d ...id m a h/ie ied \.>u e, iod — è * Can you for-zoo- ηκ my tie neli ľkík Deİ...;:'gtoîî, ť/l me, eau y ou pardon tlo ^ 4 noljcenccd
uniicenccd freedom with which 1 pe!^- mitted mfeif to addrefs you ?— I arø grieved, you know not how deeply griev¬ ed, to have occafioned you one moment's uneafmefs." Clarentine required not this gentlenefe ni orde f - feel pacified and appeafed-. Fully íes ,, . how defervedly fhe muft have appeared 10 merit his reproaches, they had not awakened in her mind one rc» fentful thought, or excited in her any fetitirnents but of ihame and regret» She therefore very readily accorded the par¬ don that uma folmmbly folicited, and then aimoit as humbly pleaded for her own, 44 Oh !" cried Somerfet, with earncft- nek, α Ipeak not fuch a word, î beíeech vou; Ut. the forgivenefs be as wholly \ours as the ofience was mine/' Then drawing a chair next her, after ihe had again taken her feat, he added— 4 » í have but one apology to offer, Mifs Delmington, for the force of the expref¬ fion s î ίο much lament having " ufed.. The fuddennefs with which the intelli¬ gence of your intended journey %vas an» nounccd to mc threw me oíľjny guard, and beicft me of all reflection : my heart was
was full, 1 fcarce knew what I faid—and might have proceeded yet longer in the fame ftrain, had not the tears I with ib much cruelty drew from you 5 checked and recovered mc to a fenic of the im¬ propriety I was committing. 5 ' « Well, well/' faid Clarentine, faintly fmiling, €l the ftorm is now blown over» and w 7 c will think of it no more." a Ah? believe me/ 1 cried he, u I Ihall not the fooner с cafe to think of it with felf-reproach for this unmerited gentlenefs and mercy !" They were then for fome time both íilent» Clarentine, however, affeÜmg a gaiety ftie did not feci, at length faid— * б Tour anger being paft, Mr. Somerfet? it is now my turn to reprove. Why, if we ought not even to quit a caf ual acquaintance without fome preparation^ did you fet off fo fuddenly to W r indfor, and leave me to hear of it only by accident ?" ** Ah, deareft rVhfs Delmington/' re» plied Somerfet, in a tone of dejeflion,— 16 i had not the vanity to fuppofe my ab¬ fence could be to you му other than a matter of utter iofignificance : the cafe 5 wiih regard to what I fek br your depar- В 5 ture.
ture, is different: ï never did, noreveŕ wiflj te conceal, that in every thing which relates to you, I take the livelicit and moit fervent intereft!" 66 Is it poifible/' thought Clarentine, extremely alfecied by this fpcech, " he could thus ferioufty reproach mc for my indifference if he knew or believed I love him ?" This doubt gave her courage to look up, and with a fweetnefs and fenfi¬ bility to which he had long been di fu fed» Ü\e faid— u Why, Mr. Somerfet, will you talk tome thus? —Why believe me fo unj u ft and ungrateful ? Have í ever given you reafon to fufpeft I really felt fo little ef- teem and regard for you, as not to be fcnfibly hurt by any thing diat on your part bore the appearance of flight or ncg- lcü Г The wonder, doubt, and joy this fpeech occafioned Someťfcf, held him fome minutes fpeechlefs and immoveable. At length, however, recovering his voice, and eagerly fnatching her hand, he preifed it with a look of gratitude and tranfport to his lips, and earneflly exclaimed— â " Ever
« Ever dear, ever lovely and generous Clarentine! what relief to my heart bis not this kindnefs—this unhoped for kind- nefs given '—Oii, tell nie," added he, after a íhort paufe—" tell me—why ihould you undertake this hateful jour¬ ney ?—-Why muft I } the Brìi moment you have reílored yourfeif to me again, and for fo long, lofe you :" Clarentine, furprized, yet involuntarily foftened by this tendernefs, fighed deeply, but made no anfwer, and Somerfet fkll detaining her hand 5 which indeed ihe had not courage to attempt drawing from him. thus went on— {i Could I divine, my beloved Claren¬ tine, what pa'ies in that gentle bofom, and penetrate its fecret forrows, with wl at earned anxiety would 1 endeavour to al¬ leviate them ' \ ou acknowled vV ad¬ ded he, u iome regard, fune elkem fo¬ me, but when, when will thofe femimenr; animate again into confidence «uid-dhc- tion ť i ou cannot have a gnei iu v hul·, myller!, os as you are, í tlo o -tom ι- pate; fay then, fweeteU Coio'uu! h Π me why that bitter figh an I t.ieh involun¬ tar y tear.?" •1' в Ciai vìi-
Clarentine had no time, even if íhe had had words to anfwer him, for juft then- the voice of young Biandford was heard* at the door, calling out— S{ Captam So« mcrfet, Mrs. Hertford is below, and wants to fpeak wkh you/' All Clarentine's late pride of heart re- mraed at thefe words; all that foftnefs into which his own foothings and gemle- nefs had melted her, difappcarcd, and fmtching her hand abruptly from him,- with glowing cheeks, and a look of bafte and trepidation, fhe faid—" Oh, go, go,. Mr« Somerfet! Why did you ftay fo· long ? Why fu ffe r me to detain you i' $ And then, without railing her eyes to luk, or giving him time to flop her, with yet more fpeed than before, ihe rufhed out of the clofet into her own room, and locked the door after her. Ina few minutes ihe heard him, though flowlv, go down Hairs,* after which all was filent, except that, at intervale, fhe fancied fhe could diftinguifh the murmut of voices in the parlour, as ihe maid (for к was now near fupper- time) opened the door and pafled backwards and forwards ι what was faid, however, it was impoflîble to
lo difcover, nor would her agitation have allowed her to liften even had ilie wiihed it, Difturbed and reftlefs, fte travcrfed her room with uncafy fteps, fomctirnes foftening at the гесоИсШоп of Somerfet's late kindnefs; at others, indignantly fhrinking cither from the idea of iharing his divided heart with Mrs, Hertford, or being made folely the dupe of his diiTent- bted affeäion« That he wiihed her to believe he loved her, fiie could have no doubt \ yet when ihe reflected upon his marked attention to another woman the whole time ; upon the íbrt of public iniluence and power that woman feemed authorifed to exe reife over him; how to reconcile fuch a wifh to his accuftomed high fenfe of honour, ihe knew not. u Was it pity only, he defigned to íhew me ?" cried ihe—" or does he mean all thefe warm profe (fions to paf> merely for the cífuíions of brotherly find- n.fs Ì —-Why does his conduct fo itrangely militate againii his language ? and why, when his looks are all tendernefs, are his actions all duplieity ? Is there either rec¬ titude or principle in fceking to conciliate my affection after bis own is gone ? OU Somer«
Somerfet, when íhall í ever tinderii and your inexplicable charaBcr! when know whether with juftice io beftow upon you contempt or eftecm f' Whilft thefe thoughts were daruiig în rapid fucceflîon through her mind, the parlour cioor vous again opened, and ihe heard Mrs. Hertford's voice in the paf¬ fage. Defirous of aiiuring herfelf whether flic was really going, Clarentine went back to her clofet, and the moon being by this time rifen, prefently faw her at¬ tended by Somerfet, who walked by her fide, and her own fervant who followed her at fome diftance, crofs the little court before the houfe, and when ñie reached fhe gate that opened to the road, flop at ic diiring a confidérable interval, in ap* parcntly earned converfation. Clarentine's heait beat quick at this fight, and as if rooted to the fpot, flie ftood mournfully obferving them, till at 1er gth Mrs. îleuford, after fhaking hands with uomcrfct, walked on with the fer¬ vant, leaving him to go 1ыек alone to the houle; this 'nc did immediately, but as he advanced looking up at Clarentine's windows flic haílily retreated, and foon after
after heard him fimt the pafľagc door, and return to the parlour. The maid now came to let her know fupper wa.s ready; ihe declined going down, however, upon pretence fhe had not yet fini filed her packing, an excuie that in fome mcafurc was true, as ilie bad ftill all her drawing materials to codec!; but defircd her to tell Mr. Lenham, that as fhe was to go very early in the morn¬ ing, fiie fhould bc extremely glad to fpeak to him heiorc lie went to bed, either in his ftudy or her own room; Mrs, and Mifs Barclay ihe meant to take leave of after they came up flairs, but Someifct ihe was determined if poffible to avoid feeing attain. Accoidim-Jy, when at his ufual Ivor Somcrfet, defpaiiing of another into view, departed, Mr. Len ha til hailem 'd in lot\ His adieus were affectionate, and e\en in the prefent depu ifed date of her fpiiits, touching ; he c .refully forbore, hou e s er, fpeaking upon any íubjí ci he th. ui fx likely todiihcls her, or alkim; one* (ри ò tion concertino íhe motives of lur jour¬ ney; but havine írmiued to her tluopuo tei ly payment ihat about this tune m.u
near becoming due, tenderly embraced and ble ffed her, and immediately retired» The Barclays foon after both came to her likcwife; their parting compliments ihe found no difficulty in fupporting with perfeÖ compofure; they were fliort and blunt, though on the mother's part¿ at leaft, by no means unfriendly ; and hav¬ ing ftaid with her a decent time, aíked a grcal number of uíelefs queftions, and fcarccîy attended to one anfwer 3 they wiftied her good night, and walked out with the fame unconcerned afpeE they had entered. Early the following morning, Mrs. Denbigh in a hired poiEchaife was at the door, and Clarentine getting imo it, they Immediately proceeded forward, and fleeping one night upon the road, arrived ihe next evening at Bath,
CHAP»
С II А P. XVIIL MRS. Denbigh and her fair companion having flept the firfl night of their arrival at the York Hotels faliied forth the next morning to feeure lodgings as near as they could to the South Parade«* where Mrs. AVeflbury, the friend who Mrs, Denbigh was purpofely come to vi ík, re¬ fi ded. To thefe they immediately re¬ moved, and as foon as their early dinner was over, having prcvioufly fent a note to announce their intention, walked to that lady's houfe. In the parlour which Clarentine was fhewn into, whilft Mrs. Denbigh went up to her friend's room, fat a young man apparently about two-and-twenty years okk lounging back in his chair before the fire with a pamphlet in one hatul and a tooth-pick (of which he feemed to he making furious ufe) in the odier. Ни lace and figure when he rofe up and looked round, appeared to Clarentinc, though both tor a man rather finical and dirnio i»utive 3 extremely regular and handfome, but
hut the ridiculous affeckuion of negli¬ gence that accompanied eveiy motion, and the fixed yet vacant ilare with w hieb, feat eek condefcendina to how a. fhe en- •F О tered, he furveyed her, at fit it amazed, and afterwards enibarraffed her fo much, thatj declining die chair which the fervant Lad placed for her near the fiie, ihe walked gravely to the window, and with¬ out I peak ing, Hood before it with her oaek to him, pretending to be engaged in obferving what was palling in the areeu Tim quiet indifférence appeared to flimulate the young mank cuiiofity, and pique lus vanity; for in a very fhort time, kicking away the d.an* which flood bef ween them in prefeieme to taking the tioubie of walking round ii* he laun- tc ied up to lier w idi 1 n. 'ľ.anď. in his coat pt /i ket,»·-, and leihte»; one íhouldfi aeainít tie window ha.uv ľ and halí yawning as he fpoke, ieud m a languid, drawling vok e-- 4 * Лге\о-| гсаге to make any flay in this pii-ce, Nk»'am "' Ciar-'uninr, infuiitely loiter pleafcd to enter into anv ioiLof convei lation than to
tú be merely с on fide red as an obj e ft to be flared at, very readily anfwercd— u I believe^ Sir, we iliall be here about a month." a You are a relation of Mrs. Den¬ bigh's;, 1 prefumc, Ma'am?" u No, Sir, I have not that happinefs." u Have you a 'very extenfive ac¬ quaintance ut Bathş Ma'am ?" 4C î never was here before, Sir/* 44 Toir come from London I think* Ma'am ? Is it not very thin juft now r fs u No» Sir; it appeared to me extremely crowded/* δί At this time of the year London crowded ?—- Tb.e public places filled ?" ** Oh, as to the public places 1 kno-v nothing about them-, I fpoke merely of the íliTcts.*· áí The llreets?** repeated tbc coxcomb, a little coutempíuouíly, u And did thofe bright eyes vouehfafe to befiow a glance tipon any of the vulgar objects in the It reets?" í¿ My bright eyes/' replied Clarentinc, determined to petrify him at once by the difcovery of her iníigniítcant e 5 *' weie fo neaily upon a level with thofe objeds, as
as ï always was on foot when in London f that foîBetimes as well as my ears, they were extremely inconvenienced by them/* The gentle youth, as fhe expeûed^ looked utterly confounded at this dif* graceful confefllon, and for fame féconds remained profoundly filent ι at length, however, addreffing her again, though with yet lefs ceremony than at firft— âc Mrs, Denbigh, I think, Ma'am/' faid be, " lives in a very confined circle when in town ? Do you rcfide with her? M 4 No, Sir; only for the prefent/ 9 " Your ufual refidence is in the city then, perhaps ?" Clarcntine laughed, but again her only anfwer was a fimple negative: after which, walking very compofediy to the fire, and fitting down, ilie took up the pamphlet he had been reading, and begun turning it over without fceming to tecollccl he was in the ι oom. Mrs, Denbigh now in a íhort time came do\wi, and on kemg the young man, who, wuh a giais lu hi to his eye.. was fiill lolling againii the window, in a friendly and familiar voice, called out— " Well»
fl Well, John, how do you do ?-— Your mother has been telUng me you have left college and are come to live entirely at home : I am glad ία hear it on her account, for confined as Ihe is, it muft be a great pleafure to her to have you in the fame houfe/* John, appearing by no means delighted at the old-fafhioned freedom of this ad« dreft, made a cold bow, but did not fpeak * Mrs. Denbigh continued— ' ** I hope," faid Ше, u fitting down by Clarentine, " you have entertained this ytrnng lady very gallantly during my ab- fencer'* John fmiled a little fupcrciliouily, and ftill remained filent, β< Why, friend," ciicd Mrs. Denbigh, furveying him, at length, with fome fur- prize, *" are you giown too brie to fpeak to an old acquaintance Ì You look im* menfely folemn." Then turning to Clarenune, wdio had thrown afide her book and fat internally enjoy ing poor John s conitcrn *:ion— H What do thofe arch and comic eyes ûî yours mean ľ* cried fhe. α lld\e б you
you and our young ftudcnt been falling out ?'* " О dear-j not at all, madani î" anfwered Clarentine, unable any longer to refrain laughing. 46 No two people were ever more peaceable than we have been ; î don't think we have fpoken one word this lafl half hour!*' ** Thaťs being very peaceable in¬ deed!** faid Mrs. Denbigh, drily. * e But pray John, how comes all this about? fou were w r ont to be extremely affiduous, iiupïès des dames: is not that any longer the faffiion Г " Dear Ma'am," cried he, (imperi n g and looking extremely (illy, u why a ík ;//„' fuch a queftion ? Nobody cares I с fu about faíhions than ï do.** Then put¬ ting up hi. s glafs and moving indolently to wauls the door f " I'll go and fee,** added he, Si whether my mother is com¬ ing down." α No, don't trouble yourfeif,** cried Mrs. Denbigh, " Mifs Dcimington and î arc to drink tea in her d re ffi ng- room, and when fiie is ready flic will fend us word» * «* Mifs
** Mih» Delmington ľ' repeated the young man, with a look of furprife, ** is that Lady's name Dcimington?" " Yes, " replied Mrs. Denbigh, " did you ever hear it before ?*' *' O, very often; I had the pleafure of being extremely well acquainted at Oxfoid with a young Baronet of that name—Sir Edgar Delmington. Pray 9 Ma'am," to Clarentine, " is he any rela¬ tion of youri?" « Yes, Sir.'* ** Your brother ?'* 45 No, Sir~my coufin." Aifuming an air of infinitely more po* litenefs than he had yet worn, (though her London walks ftill chøaked him a little) he now faid— 4i Upon my word, Ma'am, î am ex¬ tremely happy to have had the honour of feeing you. î hope Sir Edgar is very well?—Ls he in town?" " He Ь in Devonfliire, I believe, Sir." u How could you fuppofe,'' cried Mrs« Denbigh, " that an acquaintance of yours f Mr. Weftbury, a Baronets would difgrace himfelf (not being iu parliament) by appearing
appearing ia London before the birth«. day?" juil then, very fortunately, for Mr. Weftbury was extremely ât a loü what to fay, ihe door opened, and they were all fummoned to the dreflmg-room. în ihe mother of this trivial young man 9 Clarentine found a woman/ who, though an habitual valetudinarian, feeble and infirm, was yet plcafing, fenfible, and veil-bred. She had been the tried and approved friend of Mrs. Denbigh for more than thirty years ; was bleffed with an excellent temper and many eftimable virtues. To thefe recommendations, how- ever, flie unfortunately added one pre¬ dominant foible, which in converfation, at leaiij often obfeured thera fo much, that it required fome candour and ytt morc judgment to difcriminate her real mci i t through fo thick a -mi ft. She was, what has often been defcribed but can never be too often held up to derifion, a female pedant, a female politician, a financier in philofophv, a perpetual con« tmvertill !—In her youth flie had been, though not a decided beauty, an exceed¬ ing pietty woman-j which advantage, re« inforced
unforced by the powerful additionof gold, had gained her many admireis, much de« iicatc flattery, and a great deal of obfe» quiousattention. Time advanced, wrin¬ kles appeared, and lovers difappcarcd I —The love, Mrs. Weftbury found it no difficult matter to difpenfe with ; but the adulation, the general» homage, the con¬ ftant deference—how was íhe to difpenfe with thefe? At once to fink into infignk ficance, after having been fo long held up as an object of univerial admiiatiou, was not to be borne ! Mrs, W eil bury, therefore, in the íailure of youth and beauty, had iccourfe to ftudy— Tet up for a female critic, and though on a dif ferent kore, was fiill by many fools ad¬ mired, and by many s\iìe men, loi tiu fake of peace, applauded. With the acutcnefs aud ехо*] lem шь derftat.ding which Mus. Denbigh poi feffed, it ь not to be imagined Jiu w,: s the lafl to difcover all thefe little failing, . Kind-hearted, however, and afh ť lionate, fuch errors in a fuend who, to tountei- balancf them, had fo many good t ualmos ihe eifily pardoned, and c-ndea\ouud a,> much as poílible cither wholly to o\eo ^ ol. ni, С look,
look, or unmoved to fmile at. Upon it' 1 î s lollies utterly unmixed with malignancy, yet too deeply rooted by age to be eradi« rated, ihe thought it as ungenerous to ex~ ercife feverity, as it was hopelefs to at« tempt expenuieutal reform. Learned diftertations or political argu¬ ments apart» Mrs. Weftbury could be equally rational and entertaining; and in that light, during the whole evening, did ihe appear to her youthiul vifitor« Books were fomctimcs talked of, but only fuch as Ihe imagined were within С larentine s reach, in which number ihe j u lily con¬ cluded that poems, motal с flays, and hiftory might bc compi ifed. Upon IuzcLíiüU) G.vamnent^ iá e. ¿fi. fortunately for her fair auditor, Hie wholly forbore touching, well knowing that Mrs. Denbigh (though far more ably qualified to difcourfc upon fuch iubjects than herfelf j had an infu- pt-rable averfion to diem, and wifely fuf- pcBing, thai with the modelt Clarentine it might be the fame. Young Weftbury meanwhile had, as foon as any thing like icgular converta» tion began, difappcarcd—leaving Claren¬ une infinitely more difguftcd by the fpe- £İe-s
cies of fervility he had difplayed fubfe¬ quent to his difcovery of her relationihip to a Baronets dian flie had by any means thought it worth her while to be by all bis previous impertinence.
С H A Ρ. ΧνίΠ. CLARENTINE had been about three days at Bath, when from her friend Sophia, to whom fhe had written before ftie left Hampftead to inform her of her Intended journey, fhe received the foi- Jowi^ig letter, Dei niogton-lloufe, Dec. MI^S DFLMÎNGTOM. t; Why, what an unconfcionable, mer- cilefs little monopolift of human hearts, *you are, Clarentine! A few days fince arrived at Welwyn park, with as lovedorn and almoft as woe-begone a face as ever my poor brother Edgar lud, your /¡:юп! Ci ' „¿.tf
сфер, George Elıharo, Hfq.— The man really macle mc give а и e rv ом s fi ût t (I am very titrvous, you know) the inftant I beheld him; nor for a long while, guefs, try, pir/zle and perplex myfelf as I would, coukl ï poiîibly make out what was the matter with him. " Surely, thought I, that folemn phiz muit portend fome¬ thing diieful and fttange! Whom have I feen that ever looked at all like him? Why, Edgar, And why did Edgar look like him r ľ e caufe he was croffe d in love« Ergo, iris man muft be ero ffed in love ! Now, the next thing is to find out who has done this wicked deed/' Accord¬ ingly, ï fet about this arduous under* taking (fufpecUng you a little, all the tune) ^ and after four failures, four days f huikin g and evakon on his part, and lour da\ s fruitlefs examination and croîs- examination on ш/о, at length drew, or rather dragged from him Ins horrifying fecret« ¿> Vou íhall hear» for your edification and inflruclion in a fundar cafe, how 1 filially fuc ceeded. " I w-uit yeflerday morning (I fliould co tainly not have gone but for the above- mentioned
mentioned purpofe, for the day was piercing cold, to call upon Lady Julia, who is now at her father's. Never hav* ing lived in the great world, you know, î am as regardlefs of all ceremony as the wild inhabitant of an African delert: — О, you may truly call me an unadulterated Child of Nature! Well, in at the little park gate, to which fhe gave us a key laft year, i went (marching up the folemn avenue is my averfion), and from thence making the beit of my way, through the glafs door in the breakfaft-room, entered the houfe* All was profoundly filent İn that quarter of the manfion ; and fo, after taking an inventory of the many fuper- numerary moveables I beheld—inch as a fierce cockeddiat of Mr. hltham's upon one chair; a muff and cloak of Lady Julia's upon another ; an odious fquaHing parrot. Ì prefumc, of her Ladyfhip's like- wife > a itately gold headed cane of my Loid's, See. See. — 1 'moved on, and without any interruption fafcly 1 cached the dreifing-room. ■*■ î ciuci ed— and lo f the fnft objeü ï beheld was Mr. Eltham in perfon, alone and reading. « Times are difmaily C j changed ;''
changed :" thought I—this poor тип rever ufed to fit thus quietly dofing over a book !" u I cmtfied with my accuftomed pro¬ fundity—he bowed with u· accuftomed gravity; after which we both fat down.—- '* A very cold day, Sir," faid î-™ " Yes, extremely fo,** anfwercd he. " Have you been out this morning?" α Л little way with Lady Julia, but ihe found the wind high, and turned back 'm lefs than ten minutes.*' u Upon this ΐ flatted up, and flying to the glafs, kí Ah. tnu.," cii«. d I, et the wind />■ high, and ought to have given me a blight colour: and fo it has, 1 proteíl i Look at me, Mr. Eh ham. 1 really am e-Uienuly like my nouiin Clarentine to¬ day: don't you think fo :''' *■■· ľur. Eltham forcei! a fmile, and faid, * ; \\hy (honk! you not be as well con¬ tented ίο look like iovrf ¿¡fŕ u Bede demut'L!' cried I, «Why be caufe, you k n ow, Clai entine has always been r* ckoncd the beauty of the family; îiay. îi' I am not mi Huken, y f и thought hei L· as well as every body elfe. Prav/* added I э du i i ¿h te d to obfeive he ice rø ed to
tø fit uneafy, 'Å\\dfi J getied upon his chair — u pray* for I forget uhat you laic! about is ? have you Ucn her very lately ?" " No," anfwered he, rifing and fl rollins to the window with an air of aiiecied in¬ difference—" not very lately/' " Umphľ'—- thought I— 46 that's a/7, I have no doubt ľ' &4 i laid nothing more, however, but moving to the piano forte, flood turrung over fome of the mufic that lay fcatteied upon it, and among the reil, fpying the fíale old fong—- ·' Why fo pale and wan, îonâ lover ?" fat down to the inftrument, and with all the expreflion I could give it, began play¬ ing and iinging it, Ì may almoft fay at him, rather than to him, ** Very indecorous, Clarentine, was it not ? 6i The poor man could not iland this •—but approaching me with a look fomc- what angry and tremendous-™ 4 * Mifs Sophia./' cried he—»{he feems to hate the name of Dclmimjton, and never utter> it when he can avoid it), " thefe lignifi¬ cali t looks, your choice of this long, the firange and iepcated quciiions you ha\e С 4 aiked
aíked me— what do they ail mean? What is it you wifh me to underfland by thcnf?" ŕä I thought it heft to be honefl with him at once* and therefore anfwercd very calmly·—" Only that ï am extremely curious, Mr. Eltinm, and have an earnefl defne to know, when the cale becomes ni)' own, how İt will be moil proper and well-bred to difcard an unfuccefsful lover : I am Iure yen can give me this in¬ formation, for your whole afpeél tells that you have been difcarded, and by one t 1 Ju fpe £1, who would do к in the civileft way in the world—Mifs Clarentine Del» mington." u Civil V' repeated he t turning from me and walking about the room in great agitations " Civil!-—No; fhe was im« penousj inhuman !'* " So far, fo good/* again thought ï~ " my conjeftures were right, ï find ! &i Then aifuming an air of mingled furprife and concern, " Clarentine dcierve fuch an imputation?" cried I— u Im¬ poffible ! She is gentlenefs and goodnefs itfelf, and ï am perfuaded, Mr. Elthanv io you could never behave with impro¬ priety." «4s
^ Isthisaftonifhment real or affeûed r*'* cried he, fitting dovvn near the inftrument and looking diftrullfully at me — u Паз fhe not written to you? lias fhe not exulted in her fcorn, her haughtinefs, her inflexibility !" α You amaze me!" cried Í, what fliould lead vou to entertain fuch an opinion ? She has written to me, it is true, and to my mother alfo; but not one word is there in my letter- at leaft, that in the moft di fiant degree relates to you." *** This icemcd to wound his pride more than ail the reft. Again he aiofe, and re¬ newing his quarter-deck realk, faid in а hurried, indignant manner, 4f ï belie\e, indced, ï need have heed under no ap- prehenfion that fhe would take the nonble to record her cruelty ! fhe murders uit- confciouflv—and when fhe has ftabbed tho dccpeft, turns fron) her viBim with the cool unconcern"-— u Ofa butcher ; } '— i n í e r r u p * e d ϊ — * ť w a s not that what you meant ?" u Angry as he was, he feemed half tempted to funic: but repre fling the un» fcemly propenfity, and moving towards the door—" I will leave you, Madam fi С 5 cried
c lied he, u railleiy upon this fubjeű is nun e than I can bear!" and was then actually going; but calling him back, and apologi/ing very (vrlouily for røy un¬ ica fonable flippancy, I ar length foftened him, and he ended (by no means forry, I believe, to have an auditor fo willing to liflen to him) by recounting to mc his whole ddafhous üoıv. «■ " I wiih, dear Clarentinc, you could have fren with what a half-pitying, half- laughing countenance 1 heard him. It was impoffible to attend to his impaffioned, and iometimes almoft frantic exclama¬ tions and complaints, without being ready to expiie : I contrived, however, to con¬ ci al my rifibility, upon the whole, pretty wed; but i fincerely hope I fhail never fit in fuch mifery again. α 1 believe we w t re together almoft halí an hour after he had dííbutdened his o 4 er-fiauglt hearts before Lady {alia came tou*». Kever was relief more welcome! for though his hifiory was concluded, his ravings ftill continued, and the whole ex ρ re Шоп of his countenance often aifumed fuch a fierce and^ avage caft, that icnodlly fpcaking, I was more than once fo
fo heartily frightened, I would have given the world to liave been out of the room ! Ŕí Lady juha, who had been fitting with her father in the library, and did not know î was in the houfe till ilie fa w mc, preifed me extremely to itay dinner, but that, not having had leave given me, I declined. After fitting with her therefore as long as 1 dared, 1 went home efcorted by Mr. Lltham, who fpent the remainder of the day with us. " We parted at night exceeding good friends ; but if he concludes die horrible fright he put me into is to pafs un- revenged, he is wonderfully miÜaken I It was impoffible to do any thing yelterday but appear to pity him ; the next time be comes, however, he will find me a little lefs companionate! Are people to be put in fear of their lives by every impatient» mortihcd lover, who wear* willow inilead of my ule } **- I wanted extremely to make him talk fo me, as we were walking home, of Mr, Someriet, but could noi manale u at all. Why ihib fli y neís . l)oc¿» he apprehend in bim a rival ? (Jlcai up this point to me, dear girls I enti cat, and wmc to me a С 6 detailed
detailed account of every wife man of every fool you fee, every place you gO' to, every creature you vifit, every pleafure or difappointment you meel with ! u Adieu, my own Clarentine· Your poor defertcd little Emma, who is the only one in the houfe, by the way, that knows of my having written· this mad letter, deures her tendereil love to you, and a thoufand grateful thanks for the charming books you fo kindly fenţ her· &i Adieu again, Ci Sophia Delmington.'* The effect this letter had upon Claren¬ iine was much the fame with that Mr* Ekham's own conduct had always had : я made her congratulate herfelf upon the fortunate independence which had given her the power of rejecting him; and led her very naturally to conclude, a paffion k* indignant and ίο refentful was not of »nature to be very 'Jailing in itfelf, or •ycrv tender; to its objeti. ^ Such a man," cried ihe, " Hery and impetuous—always exacting implicit lub¬ mi iiion to his own wiilj or burftmg out even
on account of their age or fex, into tranfports of irrational fury—Oh, fuch a man was not deilined to make me happy ! Far, far different is my idea of the dif¬ pofition of him, I would chufe as a partner through life. To ail the fpirit and gal¬ lantry of youth and courage, 1 would join humanity and gentlcncfs ; to an open intelligent countenance, an expreffion of benevolence and fenfibility ; to it rong natural parts, the molt unprefuming dif¬ fidence; and to a temperat once generous and placable, a chearful gaiety cpidly dilti nel: from turbulence or fádneho Ahî where, i4 added ihe," can inch an object be found ? or where* when found., is the rcafonable hope that Ihould leda me to expect it will ever be шу lut to be fo allied? There ks, thoe can be upon earth but one fuch cha ratler, and he who poifeifes it is, í doubt not, loll to mc for ever!" Thus indulging the fond admiration and plaintive reprit íhe Luì fo often de¬ termined to lupprefs, v iaieuime, uho had hoped fo much from time and change offecne, as the hourt», days and weeks palled
paiľcd away, found that üıe depreffion of* her fpirits rather augmented than de» crcafcd, and the fadnefs of her heart took from her all power of exertion and all capacity of enjoyment. No longer fur*» rounded by obfervers whom ihe feared, thofe quick and irritable feelings which had, of late, upon the flighteft oecafion alarmed her pride and awakened her diflruft, were fucceeded by a quiet de* jection,a fettled, but unmurmuring, gentle forrow, that penetrated Mrs. Denbigh with compaffion* She faw that her young friend, pale, languid and oppreffed, loft her health as well as her animation, and that although too rational to decline par¬ taking in the amufements that were pro» pofed to her, fhe yet found no real amufement or relief in any thing. The difcovery gave her pain in proportion to the waimth and fmcerity of the truly maternal regard fhe had conceived for her; and determining, if poifible, to cou nte raci this dangerous turn of mind, fte iei/.ed the firfl opportunity that pre¬ fented itfelf of attempting by friendly admonitions and remonftrances to reafon her into greater firmnefs* ·« My
Êf My Clarentine," fáid íhe 9 one morn¬ ing as ihcy were titting at breakfaft, « í have a propofai to make to you : this place, contrary to my expectations, feems to difagrce with you fo much, that İ can¬ not bear to be the oecafion of prolonging your ilay at it ; and therefore next week we will go back to town." ié Deai Madam/* cried Clarentinc, alarmed at the very mention of fach a fcheme-—* c why fo ? Happy or gay, î expeft not to be any where; but here, at leaft, I am tranquil; and as for my health, that can derive nothing but beneht from the air and fituation." " But how is it then," rc fumed Mrs, Denbigh, " that acknowledging thus readily the value of tranquillity, you yet fuller yourfelfto droop and pine with fo little fortitude and ίο little fircngth of mind? Clarentinc, fuch weak neis ss un¬ worthy of you ! it rende гь uíelefs every acquirement you pofiefs, and every good quality with which you are gifted; de¬ generates what was once female foftncfc, blended with fpirit and ibund fenfe, into inertion and fupinenefs ; undvtill, I fear« in time degrade you into a mere Ian- В gmfhing
guifhing, enervated, love fick girli îs your cafe^ my young friend, a new one? Oh no!—How many notable and contented old women there now are, attending duly to the dome die occupations of their honfehold, fcolding their maids, whipping their children, fnarling at their hufbands, and fitting in judgment upon their neigh¬ bours, who once, like you, were funk in liftleffncfs and apathy, and thought no pleafure equal to that of elegantly indulg¬ ing their romantic defpondence V* u Ah, my-dear Madam," cried Clarcn¬ tine, who had liftencd to this fpeech with alternate blufhes and fmiles, s * is mine an affection that deferves thus to be feverely cenfured? You well know it has not feecn the mere work of an idle imagina¬ tion, fceking anxioufiy, yet feleöing un¬ worthily, iome objeci of fancied perfec¬ tion on whom to beilow unqualified and enthufiaftic admiration: on the contrary, it is a Icntiment that itole upon me gra« dually and imperceptibly ; which, though never intentionally cherifhed, grew with my growth and ftrengthened with my ftrength. I was y et a mere child, help- kfs and dependant, when William So* roerfet.|
mcrfet, at an age when moft boys fly from a nurfery with difdain and horror, was my watchful friend and only com¬ panion : we parted long e'er I knew the value of fuch an aiiociate, but not before f in remembrance of his invariable kind* nefs, my heart was attached to him with the warmcit gratitude. In my fécond afyluui I found anoi 1er friend, and companions whom I foon learnt to love with nearly equal tendernefs : here, however, the af- feüion 1 met with in return, though cor¬ dial, İ believe, and lineere, had neither the «lability, the gentlenefs, or the indul¬ gence of that I had been ufed to from him. Edgar, who was the one at that time ofteneít with me, was frequently unjuil and petulant: a moment of unintentional neglects a cbildifli or baity reproach would irritate and о fiend him h) deeply. that perhaps during a whole day he would neither fpeak to me, nor hilen to any ex- cufc : hb lifters, engioffed by other ob¬ jecto of comic, had no icifure to btítow Upon me that degree of attention to which, unfortunately, I had been accuf¬ tomed; fo that oitcn m the midii of play- fellows of my own age, in the mid ft of io с iet у
focicty and chcarfulncis·} i felt defolate and u «happy/* u A fata! tendency to encourage catife« lefs repini ngs, feems to have been your banc through life," faid Mrs» Denbigh» here intenupting her— 64 but goon with your little hiítory, and forgive this abrupt comment." 6ti Rather call it my apotúgvf faid Cla¬ rcntine, uniting, ** I have not much more s ho л ever, to adıl ; nor ought the recapi¬ tulation of our own feelings to take up a great deal of time, ís there one amongft: ш, who, minutely defcribing every paft emotion of their mind, could not make up, as I have donc, a tedious differtatìoìì upon nothing?" 46 Well, wel!, go on, î teli you," cried Mrs Denbigh, with a fort of impatient pleafdntry, " go on, and whatever com¬ pliments i can fpare íhall come after¬ ward ч/' Clarentine laughed at this fpeech, and thtb continued-— 6 * Several years now paífed, during which, except by letter, my friendly Wíl» liam and 1 had no întercourfo. At length he came down into Devonihire upon a vifit
vifit ín our neighbourhood, arid flopped., he faid, at his faiheľs^ but İ doubt not at his o'irn inftigation, to vifit and enquire after his former little inmate. An acci« dent, not worth relating now, prevented my feeing him till alter he had quitted the houfc ; he found me faulting and fenielefe upon the road as he was driving through the village, and in that condition earned mc back in his carriage to Delmmguui Houfe, Never, oh, never can 1 folget, child as I yet was, the look of tendcrneis and folicitude with which, when recovei· ing, í beheld him fla nd ing motiotdefs be¬ fore me! ît was a look that penetrated my very foui, and would alune havo taught me to love him. had not his pre» vious behaviour already difpoied, and his fubfequent conduci amţe'. a me to it! Again, however, we parted, but not for the length of time we had been fcparated before; he returned to us more kind, more animated, more gcncrouily inturcil- ed in all that related to me than I had even dared hope to find him, and dining the two days he flaid, treated me wuh a con¬ ciliating fweet n-dy, a inore than fiaternal partiality, that left upon me, at hh de¬ part ut c t
parture, a melancholy and regret 1 fcarce knew how to conquer/* " Weil," cried Mrs. Denbigh, again breaking in upon Clarentine's little nar¬ ratives ** all this, I confefs, was flatter¬ ing? and infinuating; but, my deareft girl, have you not in Sir Edgar Delmington, m a young man whole paifions muit ne- cellarily be fo much more ungovernable than your own, an example of fortitude anti felf-command that ought to flimulate you to emulation ? Ibe too, i have been? told, knew you from your infancy-, waa brought up in the fame houfe with you, and chenOied for years the moit fervent and animated affection for you. Duty, region, and honour, however, enabled him to conquer this early and habitual piepofleffion ; and in a cafe exačily pa* ι allel to your own« made of him, at once, a hero and a phiiofopher ! Aie your feek πις , though lek tumultuous, more in- furmounub.c ? Eet it not be thought! Excit your courage, diliipate your mind, uy every expt ument that the ingenuity of woman can deviie^ to prove that an opimon ίο humiliating is groundlef& and cnuncuas ľ* *« The
«s The council/* faid Clarcntine, figh¬ ing, ťÉ is g^>d, and i will endeavour—I bave endeavoured always to acl as if in purfuance of its diokues : yet, my deareft Madam, fundar as the two cafes may ap¬ pear, there is, however« a wide difference bet wee ìì the part ihat Edgar had to per¬ form, and that which is now affigned to me. Fremì the firft moment he difco¬ vered totne his unauthorifed partiality, ï dealt openly and frankly with him; and readily, gladly as I would have promiicd him my friendihip, denied him all claim to my love. Have ƒ been treated with equal .candour. r> Oh no? Such ungene» rous, unremitting pains, have been taken to lead me into a belief î was beloved, that, till my own obfervation, and yet more convincingly t\\e explicit avowal of Mrs. Hertford, told me I deceived my¬ felf, every aition, every look, feemed calculated lo infuie into me a pofilive certainty of Somcift ik atuuhment ! Ah? wonder not then, that \\ hilft entertaining fo flattering an illuiion, the high opinion I had of his honour and integntv lulkd all vigilance to íleep, and k f t me íuithct power or inclination to κ hit tio fratelui 6 a ii v et 10:1
aifcftion ! felt for him ! I beheld him as a man who from infancy had loved me— who feemed to have no defire fo earnefl as that of promoting my happinefs—as hmi, in fhort, by whom it wás finally deilined to be ai fu* ed P' At that moment their converfation was interrupted by the entrance of Mrs. Den¬ bigh's fervant, who brought Clarentine a letter: it came by the poll, and was di¬ rected in Somerlet's hand. She received ir with a degree of agitation fhe fcarce knew how to conceal ; and, laying it down upon the table by her, as foon as they* were again left by themfelves, faid ы Mrs. Denbigh—* 44 The writing is Somerfet's—1 almoft fear to open it!" u Give it mc then," faid that lady, fmiling—- b№ and if it is very treacherous and vay temler, 1 will burn it without fuf fe ring you to read it/ J Clarcntine hefitated a moment, ^nd then holding it out to her, " Ah! why does he write to me at ail?" cried íhe : 6t · There—take it, o;ar madam, and, if I can help it, I will not even гоф to know its contentò·" 11 Согае э
<« Come, come," cried Mrs» Denbigh, ^ I begin to have fome hopes of you! 'J his is the molt rational thing you have done yet." She then opened the letter, and began reading to herfclf; whilft Cla¬ ientine, with her eyes fixed upon her face, fat earneftly oblerving her, by turns rcpioachiug and applauding herfelf for the facility with which ihe had reiigned a privilege which would once have been fo precious to her. When vjio Denbigh had ecafed read¬ ing, u lie re, my dear, ' faid ihe, " take back your letter; it contains a requcft whieh no one but youi felfean anivter." u Λ requcft!' repeated Clarcntine, ftarting and bluihing; is "'îomc! öf what na tu ie? What requcft f" u Nay¿ nay, my love," refumed Mrs. Denbigh, very calmly, ^ don't put your¬ feif into fuch iiemor^; the favour he a íks is as trifling as Ыь ftyle i& fimple and proper; fee what he fays yourklf, thcie» k>Tvd Clarentine held ont an unfteady hand fur the letter^ 'and read as follows:
MISS
MISS WILMINGTON. CHI οι d íhect, Deccmbei €ê î am unwilling to fuppoíe, my dcaieft Mifs Dclmington, that oui parting, though abiupt, was therefore unfiiendly; and as \ ou prohibited not my wtiting, take the libem to addieis to you a little petition it will цие rae lhe utmoft pleaíuie to hear }ou leant with indulgence. u Since you left iu\oi f have been down ι lew d<\\ \ hi Noithamptonfhne, *md puipofe gom*; thither agam duiin^ Chnftmas vok uiih a paity of fiiends, f\\i> of whon· i\4\w afteiwaids to fpcnd a khoit tnnt. at Bath. 1 daie not pu fume to at company them' but if, when ihcy ioc lift mc, î fhould dire Π my \uuidci- nij ooif_ to DommMon 1 Ionic, \\ould you, m\ ;enîl( fiiend, whilft 1 am then , ia\o'ji n^c wiih a letter oPimroduB-ion to yoai anuabh Madame d'Ariele ^ 1 ha\ e the m oft cai m it delirt ίο Ue and become ai.juamícd \\ л\\ lu»; and undt ι whofe aufpnts tould 1 hope ìor а пи>п mdnl pent icce jition-, than undo il oie oí h ι omo and fo\ í ¡\ bi nelai ot ί 7 > * ь * \ ( π af.pvdicd at y un d. pailnic în- d.j'p' í«, i, d. ignite d, and, í ίι ai, πη- 1οη·>) :
happy : write to ine 1 b efece h you ; lell me you are better; that the air of Bath agrees with you ; and that, although com¬ pelled to í uffer b v your abfence, I have nothing to apprehend for your health ! « Prefent my heft reipctb to Mrs. Denbigh : fhe is my friend, and í hope will a fii ft in determining you to grant my re que it. 44 Adieu, and may all happinefs attend you ! u \V 11.1 1 л m S о м r n ь î. 1 ."* The extreme furprife with whi eli Cla¬ rentine pei ufed thb letter kept her (ih nt fume minute* aber íhe had concluded it; at length., hovuvei, pointin; to tht ie word?, î py p'. ' ¿£''>\ Γ tbi'her (t¿d : d,i* h ι Chr iji ;r;.is 4¿\;' s fli e laid, with a !ο.ί\ (ί incredulity, " Do vou belio, e. \iad.im. bebas really fuch an inlemion г 1 ì)^ он* believe he vuil aioin, und ios р. Ьоо quit Mi>, 1 Li lïoid : u î alvors belico d ю\ tin. * t dot a man oí honour lolu me/ 1 aidv, o^d Mi* Denbigh, "except, indeed, hi- \oVv.soi perpetual lotdtan. у ! What ím h. n pou d joumo İü;o {.ra VAí-jj], howevoi-, 1 a.. ^ о . Hi t 1) he-·, lie^^e
I now led ge it is beyond my power oi comprehenfton to find out/' " Tims," cried Ciai entine, fighing, u has he ever been-—my lierions ш\а un- fathomable. Oh! that dus painful íuí- penfe were over! that, at length, he was aBualiy married, and all doubt of his at¬ tachment for eve ι at an end ľ 1 α Λ dectfive way, it muil bc owned, of wrmirating íufpcnce ľ' cried Mrs. Den¬ bigh: " I did not think, Clarentine, you bad réfolution lo form fo ieuiiblc a w i fli. But let me hear what you delign to άο concerning the letter he rcqueits you to vrite for him. Shall you fena İt?" 44 Undoubtedly ; and the more readily, ■jî ϊ know it will give infinite pleafure to my excellent Madame d'Arz* le to ice him. On his fir íl arrival he was the con¬ fiant theme of all my letteti» to her, and Jhe каь oüen expieüed gu-at concern at the iíka it v -аь ίο unlikely iheJhould ev^r be i" quainted %\iih him/' Mrs, Denîıigh now ajof-·, and allied ). -í whether file would a < o: jpany her on a iji'tiiiini; viiit to Mi .. V «■■•■bury. ^ Xo. my ilear M u! hi:, not to day, if you pkuie ; my m in X ^ unufually occu. pied
pied and perplexed, and juft now í can think of nothing but this ftrange letter/' ** Well then," faid Mrs. Denbigh, u I will leave you, for the prefent, to your own contemplations; but in ihe evening I am determined you fhail go to the afifem- bly— and what is more," added fhe, ťí you ihall dance with your Hule favou t i te, Johnny Weftbury, if he will have you Γ Clarcntine, not believing this fpeech had any real meaning» made no oppo¬ fition to the plan, and foon after Mij*. Denbigh left her·
\_y í 1 «\ 1 * Λ- Ì \. AT dinner, \vhen Mr*. Denbigh rc- turmd—*· Wdl, Ckrenune," ciicd ihe, " I have made a party ior you to ¡.iglu, and Johnnv ha* /· // proiniíed. jo^odol a certain Hon. jVnf» Some hod), hiier to a ceitain кон! omebody, docs ou шаке her appearance iu the ball room hi! aker the Hvo ioli danoo aie over, he will do !> -: himkli
himfelf the honour to go down them with you/' a He is really too obliging!" faid Cla¬ rentine, laughing; éb but, dear Madam, is it true you have made this party?*'·* ^ Vos, ne? Гей -Iv tme. I met Mrs. and )Md, И·- tk. /ι * f;k\ny% and they Lave po * ло J ьо ŕ ¿il ίοι you at the proper hour. Before you go, however, I deli re î may fee you with all your ilumes and decorations: I am a prodi¬ gious judge of modern drefs you know, and therefore, left Johnny ihould criticife yom tafte, come and confult mine pre« %ious to bib fceing'yoti/' u I am afraid/ 1 faid Clarentine, fmiling 9 u a drefs fo fimple as that i iliall wear will neither be worth your attention, Madam, or Mr. WeftburyV* u Well, no matter how limpie к is, if, according to Johnny's opinion, it is but fajhlonable: he would expire at the idea of dancing with you, i i you had one gi ain too little or too much powder in у tor hair, or half a ftraw's breadth too long or too (hort a waift !*' '· 1 will endeavour then/' faid Claren* tine, u to be as correct m all thefe mat¬ ters
tersas I can; but really I know fo little of the b u fine fs of a toilet that 1 am afraid 1 fhail fucceed very ill at laft." ^ ¡n that cafe," cried Mrs. Denbigh, Cl I don't know what people can do better than perfuadé themfelves to like you for your oâiginality. A young woman in thefe days, who is a novice in the Iciciu e of drefs, is fo extraordinary a creature, that ihe ought, Ì think, to be admired as a curiofity/' They then fcparated, and Clarcntine went to prepare for die evening. At the, hour appointed the two ladies, who had been engaged to go with her, and whom fhe had feveral timc¡> icen be¬ fore at Mrs. Weftbury 'ь, called for her in their own carriage, and they all pro» ceeded to the aifembly-room. This was the iirft evening that flat en- tine had ever been in public, except, fince fhe had been at Bath, once or twice with Mrs. Denbigh at the play. 'J he confufion ihe expected, howe\er, to ex¬ perience, the extreme fu 11 neis oí the place effecìually prevented: the lafl ^cek liad brought down an incredible number of people, all of whom appeared to be con- D а с em rate d
ccntrated in that one fpot : confequently* no paiticular party could be more con* í|d( uous than another, but each feemed to have met there for the foie purpofe of being crowd*. d and incommoded. * % Oh, how much preferable," thought * h.· * uh e - -u r s ¡¡ι ţl 4 facial and thouiuIL'dlK at Dehmioioiu t<j this dull* у tt buftling (cene !" C4 Soon after, a tali, fine young man, otoic LouuunaiHC was animated and plcafing, and who had for fome time been ui? y iged in obferving them as they flowly advanced, contrived to approach Mifs Manners who had hold of Clarentine's arm, and faid to bei in a low voice, yet loud enough to be overheard,— 4ς Will von introduce me Louifa?*' £i Yes certainly*/'—then turning to С Lite mine — * ť allow me, my dear Mifs fklmington," added ihe, " to prefent my brothí-i to you/'— <¿ í laicntir.c curtftcd, and Mr. Man¬ ners voy poiuely addreffing her, faid — ^ 1 fear, N'ifs Delmington, that any ^p* uhoiinm to you for the honour of your hand this evening, would now come too Luc : vou arc probably engaged already:" " Indeed,"
u Indeed/' rephed Clarcntine, half- laughing, ς; I fcarcely know whether I am or not/' fiá And who," faid Mr, Manners, with fome furprife, " is the extraordinary perfonage that can leave you in doubt upon fuch a fubjetl k s Ciareatme then related to him the foit of half engagement Mrs. Denbigh had formed for her in the morning; 'upon which, Mr. Manners brightcniiw, up, faid, with a fmile— i; í umy then fafcly, Madam, renew my foiicttation; fince I can aflure you İt is not ten minutes ago, that Ì heard Mr. Weil bury engage one cd" Lady A——'s daughters, who had juft entered with her mother/'-— Clarentine laughed, and by no means forry to be releafed from fuch a partner, very readily gave her hand to Mr. Man¬ ners, and fuffered him to lead her towards the danceis. — Whilft they flood up, it was impof¬ fible to engage in any regular conver¬ fation ; but after a long лпа confuíed dance, Mr. Manners feci n q her look ex* tremely fatigued, exerted himfelf to pro. cure for her a fear-, and conducting her to D 4 it,
kş haítened to bring her fome re f reih - merits and then placed himfelf next her during the remainder of the evening. His converfation was lively " and agreeable, and Clarcntine found herfelf ib well difpofed to like him, that her fpirits were infenfibly revived by his at¬ tention» and her anfwers to all his gay remarks were made with a chearfulnefs nearly equal to his own. Af»r fome general difcourfe of this animated kind, addreffing her foraewhal snore feriou fly—- u May I afk Mifs Del« mington," faid he, " what flay fhe dcfign s making in this place r" "It ia very probable/' anfwered , Clari' nti ne, ** I may yet be here three weeks/*— u And may I tell her/* refumed ho, ¿í what the interefted motive was that led me co venture fuch an enquiry ?' 9 t( If you pleafc—·certainly./' ^ Why then/' faid he, " I wiihed to know whether at my return from a íhort vifit I am upon the point of inal; ing in Northamptonfliire, í might flauer myfelf with ihe hope of fiill finding you here." '*- In Nonhamptonfkirc r" repeated Clarcntine, with a faint blufh—." And who
whom, may í aík, are you acquainted with in Northamptonihire ?'' 66 One of the oldeit friends ï have, Captain Somerfet, has a feat in that county/* anfwered Mr. Manners. An involuntary half-iigh efcaped Clarentine at thefe words, and an air of thoughtfuine fs once more overfpread- ing her but-lately-re-animated counte¬ nance, íhe funk into a total, but uncon* feious filence. Mr. Manners fat fome minutes im- fufpcčtcdly obferving her 5 at length, how¬ ever, addrefling her again, " I believe," faid he, " I have the pleafure, in Mifs Dcimington, to fee a relation and a ward of Captain Somerfet's ?" Clarentine only bowed. 44 You have feen him lately, î pre* fume ? ! ' u No, Sir, not—not very lately.** u But, however, you can a full me in the fol ut ion of a myftery 1 am very anxious to have explained. Tray what has he been doing with himielf all tins winter ? Is he, as has been rcpoiud, upon the point of marriages and to hi.s fair I) ^ miltreis,
mi ft refs, is it, his friends muft attribute his long filence and neglect?" Clarentinehs varying colour during this fpeech almoft betrayed her; and the hcfitating and embarraffed manner in which ilie anfwered him, yet more ftrongly denoted her emotion·— H i believe—I fancy/ 1 faid fhe " he is going—he will be foon married/' *·* And what fort of a woman is the lady he has fclečlcd ? you doubtlefs know herí' '' t4 Yes a little."— u Ь íhe agreeable r" Scai cely fenfible of what fhe was fay* mg, t4 I car/t teli," anfwercd the diftref- kd Claientine. Mr. Manners laughed-*«* Upon my word/' oied he, " fuch a reply is not mudi calculaţi d to give a very high opinion of the lady's merit ! I fhould be fur í y to fuppofe, iiowever/" added he, more gr<ivch, ¿t that Mr. .Someifct had made a choice that was unworthy of him." Cldientine, upon this, recovering greater prefence of mind, compelled her¬ le if to fay, though in a low and almoft inai acuiate voice— 44 I meant no re~ f lection.
fleBion, Sir, upon the lady, believe me ; but, as I told you, knowing very little of her, 1 am ill qualified to decide upon her character. She is generally thought, I believe, remarkably agreeable/* " Well," cried Mr. Manners—" í fhail certainlv endeavour to fee her when next I go to town. There is no man in whofe happinefs 1 take a greater interefl than in Somerfet's; and no man, I am convinced, who deferves happinefs moie." This converfation was here, to Claren¬ tine's infinite relief, interrupted by young Weftbury, who, after leading his partner to a feat with the moil obfequious refpecl, negligently approached Clarcntine, and faid—« *' So, you have not danced at all, Ma'am, this evening ?" * 6 Not, at leaft, with the cruel Mr, Weftbury!" faid Mr. Manners, vith a lau çh-— it " Cruel !" repeated he—" No, upon honour, that was-n't it í The fatt is, I have been engaged—that is condi¬ tionally engaged, to Mifs К ------, thefe three days."—- D 6 « And
u Ami the condition waf, Ι Αφρο&* 9 Mr. Weftbury/' faid Clarentinc^ archly, u that you were to renounce her, if an Earľs or a Duke's daughter claimed you in her ftead !" ** f am i'ony to hear fuch a partial ac¬ count of your gallantry^ Weftbury/* cried Mr. Manners, (baking his head—* a poor miférabie Commoner like me will bc alìaid to fpeak to you foon!" u Fíha ws p flia w, what nonfenfe you talk ľ p cried the young coxcomb, taking out his glafs and beginning vejy-critically to examine а рапу oí' ladies who jull then were paffing. « Pi ay, Mr. Weftbury/* faid Claren* tine, felefling from amongft them one who was remarkably pretty™" what do you think of that young lady r'*— ■>-*· She's very well«—but her hair is not turned up high enough—yon don't fee enough of the contour oï her throat/' u Well, but what do you fay to the one who is walking next her?"— éí Her waift is hideous-—and thofe long fleeves are entirely out/'— %i Å little beyond, however," faid Mr» Manners, ťí is a lady whofe very el¬ bows
bows arc bare·—what's your opinion of ¡ic r ?"-*— " She's better—fomething better; but there's no cafe, no bend in her form : fhe'á ix$ upright as a dart—there's nothing piäurefque about her !"—- Mr. Manners, now caftiug his eyes to¬ wards a,poor girl who w^as extremely de¬ formed, and yet dreffed in the moil ex¬ travagant height of the /on~~~~ li what do you íay to that fair nymph, Weftbuiy ?" cried he-^-^ Jhe has bend enough, I hope ?"™ 64 Why fhe's not amifs, really, confo dering: there's tafte in the arrangement of her drefs, and upon the whole ihe po- fitively looks like a girl of fafhion/' Here Mr. Manners and Clarcntine, unable to prefcrve their gravity any longer, bolli huift at the fatne moment into a laugh, which offended the poor connoifjdır fo much, that completely dif- comfitcd, he turned upon his heel and abruptly walked away. Ê4 Was there ever fo abfurd a puppy !" at length exclaimed Mr. Mannets, fol¬ lowing him with a coniemptuouá look du
he crofted the room— Γ ve no patience with rhe vain idiot ! fî " O s blefs me f cried Clarentine, " do not bellow upon the poor little man fach ferious indignation ! f think he is ex¬ tremely entertaining ; and to rae, his character is quite new. * « in what enviable retreat have you then lived/ 1 faid Mr. Manners, " where ihtte pcfts of fociety gained no admit- .ance ?"—» " I have fpent," anfwered ftie, laugh* ing, íő the greateft part of my life in De- voníhite.'*— 4 * O5 happy Devon (hire ! and thrice- happy all us favoured inhabitants! Muft I defpair of ever obtaining a refuge there ? if you have any pity, Mifs Delmington, take mc in your fuite when mxt you g°* " What, and deprive the world of fo willing ati admonifticr ! î would not be acceffary to fuch an evil on any ac¬ count/' During this fpeech, Clarentine, in taking her handkerchief out of her pocket, let drop without perceiving it a little filver trinket«, which, as it fells ringing iiightly upon
upon the ground, caught Mr. Manners' attention, and made him íloop to take it up. He looked at it very attentively a minute before he either fpoke, or fhe knew what he held ; and then prefenting it to her with a fmile— éc Why," faid he, ťí where Certainty ihould reii de, is I lepe fu b fl itu ted in her place ? Why docs Mifs Delmington carry about with her an emblem fhe fhould re- fign to thofe children of natine who arc lefs partially endowed ?" Clarentine, who at firit had not attend¬ ed to what he offered her. now ca il intr her eyes upon it, coloured violently, and eagerly feizing it, put it back into her pocket; at the fame moment nfing. and haftily faying— u Can you imagine oliere your filter О 3" İS Г u л т о," anfwered he, following bei. u but if you will lend me your anchor to reft my hopes upon dining the toil hum. fearch, I will go in purfuit of her/* u Ì would not wiih," faid (larentine, attempting to laugh, u you ihould reii them upon fo feeble a fuppoit/' 41 'ко
6е To obtain hope from you theris any way but by furprife, îs, 1 perceive, im¬ poffible! Pray, did Captain Somerfet leach you the importance of that invalu¬ able fymbol?—was it his gift?" δί No, no," cried Clarcntine, turning away from his arch enquiring eyes in great confufion, u it was not, in¬ deed!" Mr. Manners, feeing her look resàly difconcerted, had too much good-nature to purine the fubjtči ; but whenever, in the courfe of the evening, her eyes again met his, Ше beheld io them an expreffion of comic fignificancc, that ahafhed her ib much, fhe was obliged immediately to look another way. When they were going, and he wa$ leading her to the carriage— '* Captain Somerfet, I p re fume/' faid he, ^ in Ins province of guardian, has the happinefs of correfponding with you, and theieforc, Mifs Dcimington, if I requefl to he røide the bearer of any letter you may wllh to fend him, I hope I fhail not be thought impertinent." Clarenune, endeavouring to fpeak with ñeadincfs, faid— « When
gí When, Sir, do you Ut out ?" 6δ On Thurfday morning, and, if I have your permiflion, to-morrow I will do myfelf the honour to call for your difpatches." They were now at the coach door, and Clarentine had only time to bow her thanks, before, having handed herein, he wiihed her good night, and returned to the bal к room. Provoked at her own unguarded be¬ haviour, and exuemely mortified at the idea of having given ufe to шу ft range conjectures in Mr. M urners, Clarentine was abfent and filent the whole way home, and fpent a night of unu hul и it¬ le fineis and difturhance. Half dreading, yci hall wiihing to fee him the next day, ihe determined, by the aifumed tianquik lity with whieh flic meant to liften to ail he could lay, even concerning Somerict, io dilpel eveiy fuipicion he might enter¬ tain, and prevent счету remai к he might promulgate. The апикг^ (Lady Julia's former gift) which had unfortunately ex¬ cited fo many embaí idfiing tefkUions, Ibe immediately locked up, aimoit lonpt- êâ (dimuîiijied iu her eyes as at tab time v. a·*«
was its all ulive value) to throw it wholly away. She had hitherto kept к exprefsly in remembrance of Somerfet; but ίο ear« neitly did fiie now wifh to drive him from Lu thoughts, that even this trifling nie- moiial fhe thought it aimoit wrong ίο pi ι lerve. At breakfait fhe next morning, when Mrs, Denbigh afked for an account of her halb ihe faithfully related to her all that had palled, and prepared her for the vifitor they were to expect: after which, înting down to wiite to Somerfet, fhe ihewed her, when ilie had concluded Щ the following cufd and formal epiitle. С APT. SOMERSET« Bath» December. " Dear Siä, *' The letter you wim to deliver to Madame d'Arzele in my name, I íhall be happy to fend whenever, or wherever you pícale. It will give her pleafure, 1 am iuie, to become known to you. " 4 Accept my beit thanks for your obliging enquiries concerning my health» which ι*, I flatter myiclf, confiderably amended,
amended, atui, 1 doubt not, will foon b-i ρ e ι *c θ î y rc f \ o re d . u Mis. Denbigh joins with me in hoping your intended exem fion will prove agreeable, and delires her beft compliments* " î icnrain, dear Sir, " With great regard, 6& Your obliged, u And grateful humble fervant, ib Cl л r l n- r ï ;; í. D 11 y. ι и о г о \ ." а€ This letter is what vou may call Aioit and— noi fweet î" erted Mrs Den¬ bigh, when fhe had icod it, " he will think, í fear, it accordi voy ill with the kindnefs and cordiality of his own." u ï hope and believe/* feid Clarentinc, aiicHiug to fpeak with indifference, i% he wdl think very little about it." 64 There arecafos," faid \lr$. Denbigh, u when young Lidtes nov be peimittod to dd /ό v uh impunity, and this is one; or ehe, iddi mine, you mav (к pend upon it î íhould not fu íle ι ihat luie, Ihn , to paf.s um enhned." ŕí Ah, my dear madam/' i\f\d Ciaren- line, had 1 uihti£ t ( ' tiu te v\ ^uîd be no end ol
of.vniuriiig me upon diat fcorc, for, of late, my whole life has been a ¿teľ* bi Some part or other of every body's life muft be fuch," faid Mrs. Denbigh; u mine was a He, when, at fixtccn an old grandmother I had carried me down into Northumberland, and obliged me to tell her I liked it! My poor huíband*s was a lie, when he firit married me, and thought к needful to fay he loved me !" Here Clarentine, who fat directing Somerfet's letter at the tabic, discontinued her employment, and looking up with an air of innocent furprife, faid,— 4 " And did he noi love you, then?" " No, not at all, the fi r ft fix months." "Good Heaven, how tcnibic! Mow could you marry him r" 4 * In the firit place, he tola his He fa well, I did not know he had this difiiké io mc; and in the next, my father chofe him for me, and left me no negative voice. " Well, but," faid С İaremi ne, eager to hear the refuh of this fright!ul beginning —" did he love you bitter afteiwards, Madam ? uere you hupp) ''' «< V'csj
u Yes, very. I never fu fpe Be d his affection had been di fïc m bled till he told me fo himfelf, and by that time it was become real, though by no means, I muft acknowledge, romantic Γ u And yet,*' faid Clarentine, " without a little romance in youth, what is life good for r" 44 Every rational enjoyment that fobcr common fenfe ought to lender valuable to us," éí But, my deareft Mrs. Denbigh, do you ехрев me to have already acquired a fuffic ic n t portion of this feber common /е-ф to think fo?" 14 Ko, I know you have not; but a little longer refidence with mc, í flatter myfelf, will give it you. liiere are cer¬ tain words with which fentiment ah fi s hy fr of φ n nou u fli their folly, that ϊ have totally effaced from my vocabulary, and never permit even my friends to ufe if I can help it, Otllcacy (fuch falle delicacy a.s they mean) is one ; refinement is another; fenfibility is a third ; fufceptibility (the moil odious of all) is a fourth ; cnthufiafm is a fifth; and laflly comes that ideal bug» beai*; constancy", a term of which no 2 woman
after fhe is either married, or pofuively engaged." Bciore Clarcntine had time to anfwer this fpeech, tb.e door opened, and Mr, Manners was announced. Clarentine introduced him to Mrs. Duihigh, who, though flic well knew the ladies of his family, had never before ken kirn, and then ihcy all took their feats. After fome general converfation, calling his eyes towards the letter which ftill lay upon ihe table,— 44 May I flatter myfelf/* ùïd he, *■*· that Mifs Delmington has been fo good as to remember the tacit promife flic ga\ e me laft night ? Are the creden¬ tial,-* İ am to carry to my friend ready r'* Haremine thanking him for con¬ descending to become her courier, put the letter into his hands. fefe Ah, Madam, ' cried he, u ca*l not that a condei comun which is only a pioof of my feli-inteicftcdnefs. Captain Someifct and 1 have loen fcparated ю long, ihat to fee ure myíelf a*-- cordial a π (option o- in íoi;ne r times 1 was always ah'uooJ of obtaining, 1 thought it neccihoy to
tö apply for the moil precious intro* dučtory prefentation I could procure." *- 4 If that was your view," faid Claren¬ tine, α it would have been more politic to have addı eífcd yourfeif elfewhere ; you had better, î believe, give mc my letter again, for I much dííubt its having the efficacious power you expect." w No, no. Sir," cried Mrs. Denbigh, keep it now you have it ; a long-abfeut fiiend requires not fuch potent recom¬ mendation as one whom we have feen more lately, and the re foie content yonu fclf ¿his time with being the bearer of a mere letter of civility, and referve for your next meeting the letter of tender¬ ne is.*' u I am forry you give me icafon tu fuppofe/* cued he, " both will not come from the fame hand." 6t Xay. that ь ungiatcful !" liil Mn\ Denbigh, u when inflead of cv/e wc aie proving to you that you have r^o íhing.-i lo your \)i)\\\ ought you to expreks inch a regiet r M * ¿ .My regret, Маккии, 1 ' anlucrcd hf, ** may Imii fome apology in tu π; hu- tereítedneís— -it \ъ v. iı-liîy iov mv in nd, *» Aie б
α Are you not afraid, Mr e Manners/* faid Clarentine, fmiling, " that your partial gallantry will incur the fame reproach, Mr, Wclibury's received from you laft night? You know nothing of the lady at whole expencc you have now been pleafec! to complimeiu me, and can by no means be certain your regret is at all juftifíahle/' ίέ ϊ have two infallible guides upon this fubjetì/' cried he; a my ears upon tne oecafion, and my eyes whenever I have the honour of feeing you/ 3 " Your ears?" « Yes; did they not laft night inform me, that Mifs Delmington, whofe coun¬ tenance alone bears teltimony to her na» turai candour, thought the lady in quef¬ tion too infignificant an object to merit any place in her remembrance? Sucha diícovciy may furely well j unify my re- gret!" 44 1 was not aware," laid Clarcntine·* deeply blufhing, u of the fevere inference you would drav/ from fo momentary a fit of abfence !" Kir. Manners was beginning fome very eager reply, when the entrance of his fi 1er, nnd piefently after of Mr. Weft¬ bury, put an end to the fuhjeek Av
As the morning, though cold, vas clear and hne, M ík Manners at the end of a fhort vifit, propofed to Clarentine taking a walk with her fo the Гррег Crekent : îo this ilie very readily confented, and efcorted bv the two gentlemen, they ím* mediately Ui out. Mr, Manners kept by her fide during the whole uay, alternately amufing her by the aptneis ami vivacity of his general remai k.*;, and embarrufhng her bv the archnefs of his diilaut oliufj· >ms to the lub« jctt> íhe had before lo gladly fìown from? the peried good-breedim;, Iiowever, with which he thus ingcniouily tormented lnr, and, yet more, the indulgence \.hick his acknowledged innmacv with Someıîet unt onií.iouík' dtípolto her to ihew ìiììd^ prcventcil the poiliboHv of luu bein 4 le- iiouíly ciiípleaícd, ano kej t Sui invoel humour \v itli hım UÜ the juouìcju tht у park d. In their way hotne, Mik Manners ad- drclhng (. Urcntine in a low voice, w h M Mr. \Y ι ítbiiry s head wo ionu d ¡iha% f'id, -· I muíl cali ι l· 1 л m< ιίιϊ.ί ; aí λ ο , Wellburv' ..... mv motlicr tlchted it; 'o-t do pi av go with ine/* \oi, m. 1 к
α If yo\i wiih it," anfwered Clarentine, in d\e fame tone, *· í will certamly ; buc what mikes you aík it fo caineftly ?" 4fc C) dc-ar, there is nothing ίο formida¬ ble to me a*i a fort-noon vifit there: fhe u ¿hon ·- furioundcd by inai ling politicians^ and iolonn authoi-;, and muliv dictiona¬ ries, a'ui huge folios ; dud up to her voy ehm tn learning and philofophv* ; ?nd İ know nothtug m the w odd of all îhiC & " But do you expeci me fi faid Claren¬ tine, laughing-, ^ to be any wifer?" " C) no, you'ic a gwť)d, unaffícttd ri corni ŕ 1 , I know: but if \ou go with me, 1 íhall, at leaft, have {omebody to talk to, whom 1 fan undciftand and bc undo ilo d b v " *- ifihat İfS \uUi icaíou,* íjid Claren- lint, α 1 â\n \ч hıdiv aí \our command." 'j he\ w с ic nou .omed .it Mis. W < ft· !ej'\ **. (io*-r, ani f-ill attemkd by Mr. До U' iN , , Ο ,Ί_ς \\\ ΐ4'.11\ uode 1 ÍS liOW r u, î ib ís íe* hm;* l v lu к they uoe r >.n , о* e m ι * * luciu ? and veie íl'« un up í*·* ti îï la-i* ·· ! tím д room, (launmu, a- 'u ouovd, b*.b id tíiC fcuiJiC ĺ ,:л ίίΛΗ.ν bi foi c a largť table, Q cove ıcd
covered with books, pamphlets, papers, pens and ink. Stretched out at his caie, în an atm-chair near the fire, fat a portly and learned profeflor of mathematics, who, by the ftart he gave as they walked ¡u^ evidently betrayed either how deeply the fubinnity of his contemplations, or the icnindneh oîhisflo'en r.ap^ had prcvioufly abfoibed eveiy faculty, intently poi ing over iome pıofoutiüly fcıentıİic Gruk тми i.)tjtm which, in honour of lus own leanung, he had brought with him in Ьь pocket, at one end of the table, oppoíiíe мгъ. \\ eílbiiry, iát a little withered, íonkinq man, m a ru ily bkok coat, who, dt the fame time that he aipncd to the imputation of a ooo/, likcwife ai.ned at lint « Ί 4 man oí iddiamı \ * arul wj. tiie lad:· < inofi idiic quious and devoted ilave. I.iÜl», baiane тц hındtlf ¡о he il о 1 n o th.· \, imi»w* w,i> a Ui ьм, iì i. h« c'üoU do >кпц man. w uh en u 000 ílu h c\ e biows. f 'ow :пе; от a in'vfj,*'* r. aiul muit -ui·,.;' v-i 1 ,ίΐοΐί- t -hım. í,\ v, -ud ht tead. - Alei Whbhľ' fuld ( lir <e ţ „ J. (Ье'Л.пц л)''\ M.ÍÍUU о nt л í-»*· * : ·, Mii t rf*, , ι iv ; ¡ чги {., í4 y ã ι ,. ; | β
bi which of thefe three dignifies himielf with the title of phtiofopber 'r* ^ Why, I believe ihey every one pre¬ tend to it in fome degree; but the philo« íopher par excellence is thai gentleman' — looking towards him who frowned at the window. *· í fîıotıkl fooner/* faid Clarentine·, fei have taken him, by his employment, for a /oV/i/ooo'' i¡ > О, he's both: politics and philofo- phy always go together now r" u His countenance, at lea ft, does not denote him to be of the feci of laughing рШиррЬеп" " lìiefb me, no; he never laughs but in fic r H." liete their attention was attracted by the little шап in black, who looking up with a fet fmile, and waving his hand as be fpoke, faid-- ** Madam, I muft beg leave to affure you, that in thi.> íhort dmpjjfìnon there is moie cxcpufite th-queiue, moie wonder¬ ful profundi 1 }*, uore an urate critictfm, than in any peí forman« e of the kind I have met w-ih for шапу усагь/ 1 « Whofc
« Whofe wiitings does it criticife, Mr. Lf-a ?" enquired Kirs. Weftbury. Mr. 1 ea, with e xi reme cmphafis, ut- tened ooo haid («reek name, and was then pío«. í-i-ding iluiN-— ςί It can be no new inhumation to a lady oi vour univerial eiudition.ihai this incomparable author"'— when the ρίι.οί phicrl p'liu'nH abiuptly interrupting him, called out — <É 'VUdv d—-nm— d ncws-wrncis? fk/W they do make my blood boil к Here's a fellow now/ ih iking the back of hb fin¬ gers agai nil the paper, **** who, fir half a- Crown a d. ; , v, ijj kn* and nnJav ike ìa^ac confi nmdcd lie fix times in oik week! — By all that's good. Madam*' tumme to Mrs. Weftbuiy, u it aitoni íhe-, me to think you can take in fu< h a flojjnous compilation tiffa Iiehood and infarnv!" 46 Is r'/> a fpecimen οι the gent lemon's phil· ľ ' Λ/!· ( ť' a ík r d Clarentine, in a low voice· turning to Mifs Manneis. ' s Hufh, huih!— ■ Hear the lady's an¬ fwer."' *'» My dear Sir/' criol Mro Weftbury, u you are párnak you are prepidued; thâl s one oí the beft paper.*» that come, out." K j « Av >
4a Ay? Ay?" Iliid the learned Doótor» ls let me fee it then; I want to change mine, and I don t know what other to order." i; Take my won! fot it, Doctor," faid Kits. AVcftbury, u you can't chufe a bet¬ ter than that, ľ ut now, Mr. Lea, let me hear a little moie about your Greek manufcript : what author did you fay"— " Madam,'* interrupted Mr. Lea, the 'ame invariable fmile il ill adorning his countenance, u with your permiffion, before thefe young ladies," looking par« ticulailv at Clarentine, ttt we vsili have íceomíe to fome more compatible fubject. Loubtleí-i ΐΓ> the mind.s of uninitiated youth thele remote and inapplicable themes muit be too intricate and unper* ipi с uou-> to afford them any portion of mental recreation ; and, Madam, I make it a poi пц a* pertinently as I can, to ad- mituiier to all fuch convetfation as I íuraiife heft accoids with the age, fex> and capacity of my auditors.' , —■ u O, mticy," faid Mifs Manners, in a whifper to CLuentine, a there will be no induiing that man if he once takes it into
into his head to oiddrefs his pedantic jargon to us! Do pray, let's bc off!" Clarentine, as little difpofed to pro¬ long the vifit as her friend, inftantly arofe togo; and Mr. Manners flatting up ai the fame moment, they all three took then leave, and haftened away, When they were in the 1 ftrtct, tť Good Heaven/* exclaimed Clarentinc, ic how different a woman Mis. Weif bury ρϊ -л ays- appeared tome befoie! í never faw her fo fu r rounded till this morning." u 0 } flic bas a few lucid intervals," cried Mil's Manner^, i% and before Mos, Denbigh, pai ticulailv, I've known her very rational : however, we did not ftay half long enough to behold her in her real perfeftion ; ï dare fay flie and the poli¬ tician will have a furious quarrel befoie they put !'* 6t But now/' fhid Clarentinc, '< will vou have the goodnefs to explain to me youi r^afons for dubbing him a pli!c;opher'ľ* H Why, iu the firft place, he publicly proft* fies Atheifm, anei in the next' — " O, that's enough î ' intcirnptcd Cla¬ rentine; " 1 delire to hear no more either »f him or his piiieupleo" E 4 « Well,
u Welk then, let's change îL íulqeft - uho <lo you do with yoiaíelf ıhûs even- ne* r >? ι 4b I fhali İhı y at home to м ι: altei the raking ol Lill ni'íht.'* 4(1 i), thatV a hun id p' in ! Von kad bot¬ it i go to tin play volli us," u Л//.ч£ belter,*' faid i\ir. Manners. 44 NO, indeed/' tried Chrentine, Êf if 1 had no dher objeUion, I could not bear to leave Mn. Denbigh two evenings alone.'* > ε О э Mrs. Denbigh fhail be of the party !" crieri Mils .wanners-—" I'll run ììp and a ík her ch roily. " And then, without giving Clarentine finie to flop her, being juil arrived at the door and finding it open, ihe r u filed into the houfe and up ÍUñsm a moment, Mr, Manners and Lhrcntinc both following her. Before they readied the dining-room, b'rs. Denbigh, unwilling to neglect any opportunity of difljpating her young friends thoughts, had already given the confent that лаь reqinied of her; and loon alter, i ejote ing in thtir iuccefs, the brother
brother and filler went home to d refi for dinner. «, AVhy, my deareft Madam," cried Clarcntine, when they were gone, u what able you гЧ! e determined 1 filali lead! ' u Any tliingj my good child, ratlu r than fu ffe r you, in your pt efeni difpoli- tion of mind, to flay at home and think" *■· Do you, then, imagine it is imponi¬ ble to think in a play-houfe r" ^ Oh, pei velie people will da what they ought mt to do, every where, but 1 am yx. iluaded !ef» effiLhudb- m л play- hoiiie th^-u th.it up iu tKir o\, ι apait inent Oo up -»ud diets thiiehne, .aei let ηκ he c* r no moie r^: v c w. с .-, ' Ciarem ine halí provoked«, yet unable to refi аш lau^huij«. was îon tá to ou*, v, and at nİ^ht w lu n \he tetu-ned, ,dmo!t againii in r ovmi w dl. » ,ι, t ..πρ< ľ »d ίο acknowiedg· Ihe had u.iL'y been tmu- taincd.
E5 CII \P
NEAR a week now paffed on much in the fame diffipated manner ; at the end of which, Clarentine, wholly unufed to fuch a way of life, was laid up with a fevere cold, and obliged, for feveral days, to confine herfclf entirely to her own room. During this penitential retreat, fhe re¬ ceived a fécond letter from Sophia. MISS DELMINGTON. Ddmingfon-Hpufe, January. " I do not know what you may be in \our part of the world, but here we have been exceedingly gay. Lord Welwyn gave a very elegant ball two nights ago, at which we were all prefent, and I had the honour of dancing, if not the whole evening, at leaft the greatcft part of it, with your fiiend Mr. Eltham. Since he has made me (or rather fince I made my¬ felf J his confidant, it is aftonifhing what ρ rogre fs I fee m to have made in his good graces : he never has a forrow or a joy that
that he does not come to impart to me; шпа as both very often arife from caufes equally frivolous, he has now got io u ied to being laughed at, that he not only beai > it with ftoical patience, but iometimes even catches, the infection. The grim afpecì he brought down with him h confiderably improved within this laft fortnight, and i have great reafon to hope, that I ihall now in a fhort time reftorc him to all his former gay and youthful gallantry. " My deareft mother, who knows nothing of his motives for thus diftİnguifh- ing and attending me, and. í dare fay, concludes very often he is iníidioully laying fiegc to her daughter's bean, when, in fact, he is only bewailing the cruelty of her niece, looks extremely grave upon thefe occafions, and yeftciday, without affigning any reafon for it, had the in¬ humanity to foibid my ever going alone to Welwyn Park while he ftays tl^te ? Dear Madam, you need be unde с no alarm :«—he thinks of me only as of a good humoured rattle, whofe conveifation. fcrves a little to beguile the horrors of difappointmentj and lighten the burthen E 6 Ы
of bis heavy woes ! He muft be certain Γ have no deíign, and î believe we may all be equally certain Ίν has «one " My brother Edgar is now ai home» and pays very afüduotis court to his pretty mi it reís, who, by the way, really grows prettier and prettier every hour:-— ay, Chircntiiie, and ίο do 1 too, ifi am to believe honell friend Ehham Î— He vas yeflerday (and yet I had been up dancing half the night before) com¬ plimenti npj me upon this fiibjeft, in a nyìù of counlinefs 'n would, î sın períuaded, lia ν e done vour heart good to hear, when, finding he dwelt longcil upon the luÜre of mv charming eyes, 1 haft ily inter¬ rupted him to aflu whether they were like L«cv Barclay's, of da unt lef s memory î * ť Heaven forbid !" exclaimed he, iauching-— ^ In what do tlie y differ ? > enquired I*— α ln every thing— in form* in expref¬ fion. and even in colour.*' 44 Are they like СЬгеШте ; ;* ? * .-" HcheťHatc'cU-h!t at lait fud—" I have rcaion to think tiiem preferable." 1 * ; ånd why ίο ?" ' ♦ i4 iiecaufi;/*
^ Becaufe," anfwered he, fmiling, u their beams, though arch and fportivc, are likcwife merciful and friendly—and upon me were never played, but with a fort of temporated brc, which animate«;, without appalling/' m There, С larentine— what do you think of my animating pozzei s ! By his account, however, of the appalm:g in¬ fluence of yours, f fear, my good girl, you dealt very haidly with thi poor man. He is horrid foie yet^ and your name, unexpectedly uttered, will often make him lueially ftart! í take pretty g-iod care, though, he ihould never do fo on hearing it írom me ; for when we are together. í am perpetually repeating ¡t 3 on purpofe, as you do with young ll imfh hories, to ule hun to the object he fine ς at. Edgar ufed to be quite as ;oro -j upon this fubjcH ; but I think that ati powenul medicine, ablence, has под/ nearly enrol him. in nervous odo,, brought on by appalling oŕ.f, abílnee, 1 believe, ıs vour only valci ian I u My mother has ¡uil had а charmi r,·/ letter —elegant, refped fuh yet friendív, from Mr. Somerfet, lie i í now> as you knew
know I fuppofe, in Northamptonihire» and purpofes coming here for a few days before he returns to town, 1 am en¬ chanted at the idea of feeing him, and my mother, like wife, is fo much pleafcd, that Hie has written to him by return of poft to exprefs the greateft fatisfaâion fuch a profpeu gives her. u I could not help thinking whilft I was reading his letter, wdiat an incom¬ parable trio we fhould have, if this un¬ happy man (as I cannot but fufpeÖ.) is alio one of your caji- uß s Л— -yet-— Sû mei y et unfuccefiful ! how fhould that be ?— Ehham would not be fo icy about him-if he was really a brother willow ! I cannot make it out ; yet fomething there is to make out, î am certain. I wonder whether it will be poifible to wreathe myfelf into his confidence as î did into Eltham's;—I am akaid not Wifeacres like you and Somerfet are never fo cafy ίο expound, as crazy-brained people like Ehham and I. *··* Your poor Madame d'Arzele is upon the eve of experieiu ing a fevere lofs : her brother, our excellent Chevalier, is going abroad v^xy fhoitly to join fome troops in
ín the Welt- Indies, I believe, or in Germany, or Holland, or fome where 'm fliort, We are alî greatly concerned at his departure, and as for her, poor little foul! ihe looks quite unhappy* Write to her again foon, my beit Clarentine; and fince íhe cannot be revived by your chcaring préfence, footh and comfort her by your diitantkindnefs. There is nobody, î believe, upon earth, ihe loves with more tendernefs than you—therefore one word of confolation from your pen will weigh more than thoufands from our lips. « Galloping up the avenue, here comes Mr. Eltham; fa rewel thercfoie; í am going to hold his Itirrup while he alights ! *■- Yours ever, » S. D/* Clarcntine read this gay letter to Mrs, Denbigh, who was fitting with her at the time fhe received it, and who, when ihe had concluded, faid, with a fmile— α Dejinní î believe indeed, your giddy friend has none; but wahcti dcfign, if ilie don î take care, it appears very probable her little heart will be drawn Д1* э
ín * fiie will flutte ι about lhe flame till fhe finges Ik r wings-— ■ only wiih he may finge lus . /;/^o, and tiun all wd! цо well, and íhey muy make a \4iy happy couple· Is iht pieuy r " « & Yis/ aiifvvcred Clarentine, eť flie 1.^4 a loi t of [ich f с 5 full of dimple» and сон! humour, that is, extremt ly be» wndung; and die daiTÌin^ bnghtnef. of hi í í omplexion fuipafks any thing 1 ever ÏAhtld." « О then/' Lud Mr*». Deidugh—" with finh p с! ai tU U i ánd inni a fot m, íhe udì «rt,, ch hm·* I ia\t n > /loubr ; at preítni h v i "i»i upi n his guild a чип!! htr, he lo d iiuon lier, ι* s fhe ins, merely as a um u » ìaeohmg gol, w uh whom to chat ami »aby s as iah ıs it ıs ph aiant. In a lutk w ď , 1 ow-. \ 1 1, ií íhe ο κ ally thus a π ·* \ ■ , ι »ι·- 1 up as tiny both aie in fo < Otaie' 1 t] it »d ¡he w oild* he will find I i t ΐ о l ' í tud // // ¿ wuhout her, ,1 í i ! e ti Π Hl' ЩО d" M ¡,Κ t , Will, t ifii { , i U ť ihr himfelf, and u, .. [ i- j· » íl . > 1 i í imd\ ." *» í ou pu hf.i ti, m\ dear Madam/* # î C ок r ■* í\i(í ! y нчшкК uu 1 of % I u i \'ľ « i oioe laid of her hun- kil :
İel í ; he wa.s delci ibing l»ei, as you have done, as a gay, anı mated gnL who with¬ out beauty enough to iakmate ( J full fight, ъ ottld b pa м- a n*Ju$ y a* d thy by ťťta /'..ι^: if fuch íhould be the u ί , hnvoii, do you think Ulv ¡>ooi Soph, 1 ν mid ä e pes m.ment ! у Ьярру w у\\ hım ." *-' W 1ï\ not ? We nevi 1 li' ^rd that Mr» I lth*:m, tho' wild and thoughtlcis, was dctid cd y piofligatv', or dthberattly wukfd Hu η , t peu ^ (ui once ¡did, I oíd V»cL had t ld·, (mì v. а 4 c-ínrrabh, no tonira non ol WiiKiì wei e the an- p.-tfho«ud and lovtr-hke lage s he L 11 into on b*. »'' ι ¡o abı uptl) diiíauhd: any п\лп of (ionu i hugs upon itu h an oc caiion might b pai ď. ικ d foi betiaying fonie. de^ue ol Γν it ¡ument ; and ıcaüy, my cenfures upon him have always been Io mixed with pity, that 1 am u] >utd to think L has, at Lit, nut with an 1 om 'I, »«íentimcntal gul who wdl ]чпьа hum to lay his willows at Κ ι kt t '* u You h cm to be of opinion. Matiain," faid vJauntine, ^ he v. .u dl uIcíD'* *■ Not exadly that: but he was t í it nuly bat ply uíedj and at the nme he 1 ecu ved h» i
his conge had really done nothing to de lerve it/* Clarentine, a little íhocked at the in¬ controvertible truth of this obfervation, lemained filent: and Mrs. Denbigh, read¬ ing her thoughts, haftened to change the I'u bj ečk At the end of a few days, Clarentine was fufhcienrlv recovei cd to be able, though flie iiill confined heiíelf in an t \ ening, to w «J к out about an hour every morning. It was on her return from one of thefe early rambles, that, afcending the fteps of Mrs. Denbigh's houie, flie beheld Mr. Manners· who, after a fort« night's abfence, was. haftening, he faid, to pay his refpecis to her- Clarentine, in whom lus préfence aî«» ways awakened an emotion of mingled pleafure and confufion, which was now encreafed by the recollect ion of his hav¬ ing ίο lately partt íl from Somerfet,bluihed deeply the inftant he addreffed her; and, dating fome minutes, had fcarcely pré¬ fence uf mind luffieient to anfwer his ge- пеы! eninine, with any tolerable degree oflteadinek or compofure. This how¬ ever, he aiiecied not to obferve ; but when
when the v reached Mrs, Denbigh's ufual fitting-room, and the fitil compliments between him and that lady were over, taking out Ins pocket-book, and prefent- m-T Clarentine a letter, he faid— 4 * From Captain Somerfet, ÎVÎFidain, who, at the fame mne that I delivered it, áeürcá me to give his beft re (pech/* Clarentine, now blufhing a yet deeper die, received it with down-cait eyes; and, in a voice fearer! y audible, Hammered out fomething like an acknowledgment for his goodnefs in taking charge of it. 6i 1 hope» Sir, 1 ' faid Mrs, Denbigh, 14 you leit your friend perfe cil y well?" 46 Yes, Madam, m healths 1 hope he was; but in [¡ifits he appeared ill in¬ deed." Clarcntine fearfully looked up; and Mrs, Denbigh, in a tone that was fome- what fa reali ic, faid, " Ami what can have affected his fpirits fo prodigioufly ľ y u Hopelcííncfs and abfence,'" anfwercd Mr. Manner*; Iteabnt» a fide-Iona; ekince at the aUotiifhed Clarcntine. u \ r ery e\traoidmary comj)laints f >x a man ti) fu fíe r by, v.* h о Ьач his cure in kıs own power!" cried Mr». Denbigh, with Г :П t
yet cncreafing irony.—" ľ ray, why does he piolong ln> л·/ С/ о if it í aides him fuch e,\qtiiike mik r\ :" *·· Bei aute ίκ* ho» no с neom agrement to ¿horten u.'*' ÏMib. De.ïiugh was klent а moment; and then, fh iking lui u «d, and looking \eiy humble, ihe laid, ·" Yc»u are too problematical for me, Mr. Manners: I muft give up all hope of underftanding you/' ** And do i appear to you, JV if> Del« mington, equally unintelligible *" Ée I' ч -ualíy. Sir,"— aufwer^d fhe, m a low* von о u \ ou have more anxiety, however, to elucidate the mviiery r'' " No, notat all."' ^ Then certainly," i e fumed Mr. Man¬ ners, ^ | "4Vill not pi elume io force an explanation upon you; wc will therefore ftart another iubject. pray who did )"0U dance wnh at tht lafl aconbly r" Ciao, ntmc, though extremely piovoked with him, compelkd hcrldi to anfwer i'iiu* and fcvcial odiei qm ikons of the ioue natuie, wuh an appearance oi per- /jU unconctxn; and \ciy loon alter* laying
faying he hoped he fliould have the ho¬ nour oí meeting her at fhe rooms in the evening he a role d>nd took leave. Mrs. Denbigh and Clarentine fat look¬ ing at each other iome minutes after he was gone in utter filence. At laft, 44 Are we to undcrftand by all this/' cried Cla¬ rentine, '"· that Airs. Hertford is grown cruel ť" *·■■ I imagine fo," anfwered Mrs. Den¬ bigh, laughing-—'-* or that Somerfet him- fJFha> changed has love, and imbibed a paflion ior fome fair tvgiefs." Clarentine ihrugged her fhoulders with a look oí' incíoduiuy, but forbearing to fay any thing fui ther. broke open (he let¬ ter Mi. Manners had brought her. It contain, d not moie than fix lines, and was wiiiteii with a coldnels almoft equal to her own. Jle began by thank- ing her for granting his rcqucll; and then, begging ihe woukl (end the promifed letter to him dt Lady Delmington s as íoon as fhe had Iciluie, com iude 1 wuh a few faint cungiatulations upon the emendation of her health. Chu cutimos heart was too fuii, when fhe had read this chiliin·! kıolL to make j * any
any comments upon it; therefore putting it tilently into Mrs. Denbigh's hand, Üíc retired to her own room to execute the commiffion it contained. С II A F, XXL TlíE laft week of Mrs. Denbigh's ftay at Bath was now nearly elapfed, and fhe and her young fiiend were already making preparations for their departure, when, juft as they had rifen from breakfaft one morning, Mifs Manners unexpectedly made her appeal ance*— *■*■ í am come/' cried fhe, eagerly, α to beg, to entreat, that you will fpend the evening at our houle to morrow: we are 10 have a delightful little private dance; oni ν fifteen or fixtcen couple, and ac I love heard you fay, Mils Delmington, \ ou cannot indure the great aífembkes, I irffi upon your corning to our Lilliputian oo/' ' ίέ You
м You are very peremptory ľ' cried Clarentine, fmiling-, a Why the dance was half made on v.our account.'* 66 On my account?" " Ye$) mama was very unwilling to agree to it, till my brother and I deter¬ mined her, by reprefenting the neeeffity of doing fomething civil by Mrs. Den¬ bigh and you before your departure/* u О then/' faid Mrs. Denbigh, δ4 1 am to take a (bare in thus honour?" " Certainly/' 44 But who do you intend fhali open the ball with me i' Will your brother, do you think, lead mc out?' u I have not a doubt of it," anfwered Mifs Manners laughing. u Very well then; go home and defho him to цс -t his while gloves ready, and tell your mother, that it íhe\w¡l pornu us to make oui cunhes at ciev -u (/сек L, we will do ourfelves do ho-ioui ol \oeu mg upon hci d' ς * /Vt eleven о Y lo*, k ? Dt ar еле. s о f* ι >> » ίο еагЧ" . и Becauíe the r.e\* (¡iv ,u' defi-pi to begin our journey, and u has al\\a\ Л иеец ту
my plan, on the eve of travelling, to en¬ deavour to get a little íleep." 44 kut Mils Delmington need not run away fo foon /' íť if fiie is wife, î think flie will ; all that, however, f leave to her own deter¬ mination/' Mifs Manners then fhaking hands with Clarentine, and thanking Mrs. Denbigh for her ready acquiefcence, hallened away, full of buitle and huhnek, The next day, about an hour before ihe fet out to fulhl lier engagement, the following letter was delk ered to Claren- tme from Madame d'Arzele. MÏ5:*- DbLMINt/rON. KU>nt Repos, JLmmry, ťí In what tenns fli aH I thank my be¬ loved and amiable Clarentine for the in¬ valuable new acquaintance fhe has pro¬ cured me э v oui Mr, Someriet is all that is exiellent in man; diltinguiihed in his addiek; t legaut in his converfation; kind, good, and benevolent in his nature! He has made a complete conqueít of me f and the noble trail í have to relate will, I hope, confirm 1иь conqueít oïjou. « Our
< c our Sophia, I fmd, by the a fte c - tionatc condolences contained in the letter your friend brought mc, has informed \ou of the heavy deprivation I am about to ín ítain ; my poor Chevalier leaver me in a few days, but he leaves mc with a heart, pioud as it is, fo ovei flowing with gratitude, that there feems no longer to be in it any room for foi row, 4 *-** Öne of our late poets, you know, has juftly and beautifully faid, that 41 En tjui pav à tous les bons cœurs funt frères,'' * You will not be fui prifed îb-tefoc to hear, that }our amiable Somo .'. : an 1 on bun Che\ aliei became ííR-oh di * . ' Г< «m the 1 ili hout they n. î. '1 he / ..-.'.' .ее. the manly funphoiv of thcii ( v, w 1 minds, attached them to cath«-*h·- v, uh a coi«liaht\ and '/cai tiuit did tí к о о ( с 1 hoiHJiiì, and aftorded me ti'· io.! J pleaíuie to behold. Ddv ait ι ο , o\ mutual appointment, thev ip ei w!u v houis in waiuLnn^ about the to, \ t\\ io- gctheij talking over the wutihol fitu¬ ation of pooi, unhappy Fiant t -* v./; y, /./ vol. ut. F them*
thcmfelvcs, one minute by feaiful p re¬ dirions, and chcaring each other the next bv brighter conjc сЬпсг.. At length, how- c v e u Mr. Sonu rfefs time was expired, and hs odled to take leave oí u*. : it was thb vn y morning-, and my hi other and I vc ic both talking of himw hen he appeared. tif i\ly exec Ik nt fneniks/'cried he, as lie enuied, 4в f am gueved to fay that f am now* tome to bid you farewei ; the ha} pint Ε ï love ď rived fo m your fo¬ ciéi}' fince I have btcn here, fcarcely kuVis me the courage to quit you; and у o/* addtd ho a gleam of unufual fatb- lo non brighttnmg his expuilîve face, fe * and vet, i have a íäint hoje held out to nn . tkat du motive for v\Inch I go may bv at n ufkd w uh the moft cxqu.fhe feli», ity ion f Aîi-, Madame d'Ar/ile/' conti¬ nui d h \ taking im hand and half fini ling, 4 · ν, ai would 1 not giv e to make you the tornt .mum oí mv jouımy— the afiìftant ì \ mv к kau lies into one of the beft, but h di pi 1. 1 liable Ь.едгь, that ever inha- bi. tl a h mate boioni !" - We both kiughed at Ыь ас know- It !o d ptiplrxiíy upon a fub jed we ionhl not but allow in u ft be fo intcrcft- >2 İng
¡пщ lo him, and fim erei v u i -lied him all the fuccefs he ι oul l (kiito Wiio thn imp'HttľťMdŕ fem ¡lv v /ач, bow«, vei u e ven¬ tured not to enquib, not did he к citi difpoied toinfonnus; foo ¡Ниц at the end ol' л fhoit \ifit. he iu íl pat i Ьь com¬ pliments to me in the moit pou aui fin ndly terms, alluum* me he íhoui í t he the eailieil oppoıtumîy of w aum* up^:i me whenevei he ienc\wd Ьь vilu in my neighbourhood; and thoi luminalo ďe С hevalier, ami putting a İmali pu^kt t uno hk hand, »' My friend,' iaid.be, *· vou vill imci two leîUiS \\iihm that f»· »w ι, v h,*, h I íbuil bt g \ou o dí.li\*.i ι ι oe when \ on ie ich ν our plao <d dt ч '"''»г, îhev aie doetívd; but \ ou ^/' ·\ι goodnefs, beíoie vou i;o* U^ κ * /л ■ - ŕ So íay uo v * he l'ho >k ilands w α.: « .ι 'ik' mod cooliai mamut , w, ıh*, i h u. · 'ι and pıoipcıity ; eu. booti t. ' l «, ; aml Ьо'лиц a uimi i > .ьо ip« ,¡- , о cli ule thai \ as ν ai^r í : . ι dooi, and dıo\ e a\\a\ wuh. о ч , d ι loon catin tl hiin 1k\oììuw,i ίϊ j r <>' \\Vu'ui:i',4İ,HKÎd.ıo !\ „οι l! и:, into the p.oi jnr; end tk о tlo »ht va¬ lici, «lad of am tii ·\ и* d·^ о] w ., d ι he
■packet, and taking up the fealmg-waXj prcpiu'cd to obey bus friend's laft requcft. |ndgc\ however, what were his fen f at ions, when, in addition to the above-mentioned letter,-;» winch were directed to two Bri* tüh officers in ¡he Weft Indies, he beheld, £ddre.{fed ίο the οοο'γ?./ ; ο· de ľalcctrc,, and eneloíed in a written envch.ppe^ a Bank bill fo' ι oo!. u 'ïhe papers dropped front his hands ¡n attcunihment unutterable, and in an¬ fwer to my eager enquiries*, all .he .could do wo to poot d) them without having power to Ipeak, ifc I mok ihem up, You may imagine what were mv exclamónos and feelings mom ieeiio the note; but never can von p;t î :i ro to voui leli lhe íí.rong emotion with v. hieb î reati theie words — u j..ej -:dns de ľnwiiic nfi'afini jamais,* " W. S. 1 ' u ("ïcnrrtuis, fee îiru.;. delicate Somerict? Oh, nv-· Chucntuje, that I dared but give ulto ano: to Üıe wiih t h. it now nies to
my
mv heart! '1 1 t u '■* but t.ue f, ŕí u r o.» h пшп! as his m lu« \- ond t. η i uot íhe \\ho po lo f > i* mav 1н ооч » nîjole υί hb woith. and pru\ ·, í' t iii <i ι w .iti ol all lu ν \ ο tiľ » -- % i í- > С uie они , / / « t it ь the к пой w iiii . í ţf \ n сеч n, « Loo > и \ i о i ^;' Ihn ^ v, . 1 >■% , , . m t! ι ' .о oí tins kn. \ h> Λ , . f if ïo ; ií» . 1 ta»', wiiulb'i 1 O 'Fe'· « i N*. i>a'i\t loot ' nnpu 1ÍK/1« that a f d í ; ικοΐιη, οι an aition о 1 s οι -ι',-, n. ,4,1t, melted 'oy ι - ι rt.t . ι у d , ι i oku¬ tul U i s İh- Luw 1' lio. λΟΟ noihin , ί,! . od ί.ί η t. noi ! ι - e gl\í.n! ·ι ρ. dh uti ■ 'diJ^t od at ι \ * l- ¡РЦ, ¡И li ' ■ ·. , * ι *. ' \ d w í o' t, îl ou<J, id ' ι ι h oh ih 1 ' l' t* filed ì o h n ,1 i ! ¡ f v 11 c l _ '4 Odt— o· ,ι , ,- ι e v ts · ч ,'! ; 1 t ol u ', i; k 'h ., o \ i ImiiiIu un iet t t ■ ii r« \ í ί ι 1 , o^ t t i ì .1 tl m o hoi ιοί t ) 1 », 44 Io \v j '11. Ol ( Mil Ό ' t 'n>>t ίο O Нид S oiv i ·, i ìì d hs , v * I a ì o -- luaded \u!h 'ι· 1 ι í ! * l X A 4 v <ч. «> ţ *· V'
<■ » * \ " t a* a ϋ l',' * »» f ι 'Í ( » τι -. ϊ » я ■ * « ,{}. hí** Κ, , . . ι
1 , - ί. tn ; — ] ( ,11í ,li, Η. ! , !θν· -,ι!* 4 S t í ) ! S í *^· ·*
* ■ î m-, -n ι * ι l ' ΐ ι' * ! Ih · · rv Γη . ' о \. ' ν s ι » f i /t *h ι ! - î 1 o ii h ii ι t · ι I t j v, ы m, «n 1 »n f . î \ t ■ \ å ι· t í i í u «t»! ti» nu p-íur f« ! i[ ui : , i i 1 *\i j *,mt viiUuaí t\^iy tí -n· h » ' Dtí^i'í 1 n* ? v* tluuíote, and inďf- í< u nt .».at m jîıt in futute be the likU a on İ v * o ii -i. -id * í ei ϊ t íolution ! > {oi Ui «.«. 1 h/ * .4L í h e conclud· d that ι m j.,-, ţ v, î\ tvi k r -íe ! ,;,üaíMih tn te¬ ti , ) i\ ¡í V4 st t ob Iht h ul huhtiío I i up iì rs wand * n' % , íhe íhould h î ,'í ! ..u i í l· lì у 1 ι! hi Lue I у fi ϊ. ι '·. ¡, i oí Ί ïo t de » d h _ -м ! î. lu 1 , d i, »î a di» ibt , f I ■ S * Î4 th U t tkt l h« * л 1И)п % . , iuilil ' ! n, i.i ..Ί ,ι * u> h;y , , . - W ' v ' , км î ■·■· ' s"«u ki hım ( }· . ! , » ι . h * ù i d í í ¡ í e! lut î Ч- f ad- ь«-··.. >ι < ι » '- libine ι ι » ь , lu-i -οι «ıı didi.ïb Uu. , h, У ud *> л^ cv.. ; , , td π,, and ihtUÜauiL
,.»./■!< ι îï: b* " 'f'-i.' / * г м ' a* l H» ( Jo , î , 1 i. ». i '' O, .4. e i- ΐικίιΐ, - . i *-· í ! ; !t ii' î* ci * , aii, /1 ť , 1 M u ^ -1 - o í e ι r κ , c hm e .v 1 1 w o '. lis ľ ч i.V. ι . ! uhu t jî π in** ,.». u '..iii a Ι αΐί'Μίΐ i nolei' oaf,, \,ì ¡u!, i ,:ь!.п S *" о it «as tn he î о „:! uro у iiii ne i« t „, iui * bí re the -q [o a t о,о « I I О о. v , Г, L ί Uvil hu Mı >. Μ ·ηη* ï - о ·.*.- pi ι ttd t Vi η í»y î.4 i ϊ * .и tí УУ. l' ' i, \ъ ho ao udunu ti to Ίκ i ^vuig< 1 .o.e. к, a',d ignorant о! 1кг hooo*; ï · ..ed »u. y late letto , tho.i^ht nt i 1. ι *-" ' idence whIí any woîoo, ì»uì ai.*m..*l· verted up -η it wuh at-> u.. ^ but Iur ufual g" »с! mmn^uitd pi H-o»·· . In îi. e ba 1 ! îo eu, o ie of U, ί,ιίί ]чг- huti who appHOthtd С ho -тик. се, r ííoood paid hei ι nnpImoníMo tîu* ladu s oí tl·«· hoìJ ·, w л Мк NW /uo, Не began wru ι >ач îl η \ \ t ,ookJ Γι »el [>.\Ín as an apoio o f i i -. о- ч i:\\., on the tugiu ι Γ the ín. i ι' n ; ^ \ , m 1 then reepn d η » /ne I i\ oui ( ! !.o ea** i lur the two hol Ц -.Jití -, coi j. ι ov'M ; Ί r I v ío.üúj
о>п(еш% rd moft mechanically, he faun« 1 1 red back to lib U<\t« \'eiy foon after, Mr. Manners, who at ih- mon m íhe entered was convcifmg wuh h-mo gentlemen in a diftant part of the ϊ,.ν).·ι, ativanc ч! !one.ríLs 1кг with the ! ¡ue poiron. Af firit, io ünle did flie к mow wint (he dui. ihe was upon the point 'd' ac ν en iii.g him ; but fuddenly iccollect- m , lioifili-, ihe î iftdv laid, ^ О no, ! oò, \\v. Weilhurvha juílalLedme/* » Го >o Wil! bui s ! } Vxclaimcd Mi. m ' unco, î uighmg-~ c · lie has no icaíou t . 'w \ ( »incd'tİK i\adiîKÎ6 with w lucine u thud·; of him ! * Then lowering his voice, and looking at iu ι vovaiüily, u ï wonder/' added lu , * s \.hat you i-re thinking of? Hope, lauii, or f lica ity Г' t latentin« , ceitain he alluded again to the am hor. coloured; but affo: ting to ht.o/. laid— u Oí С hjîifv cciíainiv; oi Ce I oordd never enduire у:ч ίο pa¬ tu iur, ď ·* í i »u ι\ thou" cric d law s * always re¬ tío V If ¡тес ľhP vi rt tie when in my com· |v..\, oitid i ¡u ой, líe alw:y^ to lunu Ih you
vou with occafions to exerctfe it, ЛИ malice apait, however, will you du шс the honour to до down the two ficif.d dances with me :" Again Clarentine bo'wd; and Mr, 3Vl*inners entieatini» her not to Ju get him, went up to ipeak to a frefh party that waá jufl entciing. He had not ¡eh her many minutes, when a new candidate approached he ι in the perion of the femenuotb Mo Lea, who bowing to bei with minete t cie¬ rno n у, begyed leave to propoíe hnníelf to her as a panner dunnt; ih.c commeiü-C- ment of then í'eíiive levels! daremmo, unufed io bu îi a m</de ot pleading, and iutprded ãí tlo idi a </ a man's cLncin;' t at δΙΙ who Leinid \tu; iì ι towards ííxtv-. drew bat к her hancl u--.u a look nf j' t rave aít-uiiflimcnt, and m t tár¬ tain ílu Ibid pCaly uudciilo^u ! cn. Lid. * Sır?' rıh d io ,ι,.ί. : <äO hj:o tue mı do ti youi Λ\ϊη do.; u..; η ■ ut-; (.dm y ou \ * iun· ia fe me the '~-~ u 'u/' iutei tuptoi С laiciiíUiC, α- ueiiKîi bekened wi Iho. -* i aut turoò, l' \ cv: .k\cd 4
engaged, 1 thank you, for the four firft tl moes and afur they are over I fhail y> home immediateiy/ 1 6f? İ hope not/' t nod Mr. Lea, 4C I hope a lady w h ofe phyfiognomy indicates fuch dulcet betìigunv, cannot meditate fo dhecì a deviation from luunanity r" (lat oí/me, not in fpiiits to be amufed by this com eit, u peated her fiift decla¬ ration with encrealed eokinek, and Kîr* ï e«u aí knob, walkvdaway. The daiKing now in a very fhoit time be ian, and (İarem ine, who in the languid Mi. \\ eh/orv kit by no means fony to lu.. · a paitn* r who would fuller to in¬ dulge lu ι defne of being hk ni without uiten uptioiu was called to join in the fet ihat was foi umog. Not long, however, он! lhe ualou to congiatulate herfelf upon hu «good toi tune; for fcarcely had ine lie·, n huume» up five minutes, when ; У Лоо ' o íol a ooi g kuly whom he iod e ig. vt t m, v kc t u íuLl, next couple ï ) wou iíu wj placid, and n i med de« ï u'Oüol to dov, ι, ei into converfation. **· ľun, λ- ik 1 ч hningion," faid he, 1 di lamdın».»;-* ** how oold vou liave the о tu ity to Idi η to the eloquent Mr. Lea with
with fuch rcpulíive gravity ? I watched you the whole time he was fpeak ing to you, and really never fa w any thing io petrifying as your countenance. What did he fay to you, mav í aík ?" u lie talked to ine, I believe," an- fwered Clarentine negligently, ** of the dulcet fani ¿ui ty úf my f hyjïovmny Г Mr, Manners laughicd heartily at this reply, and wa< proceeding to queftion her farther, when a fervant approaching him faid fomething in a low voi< e, and the next moment, apologizing to his partner for quitting her in an mfiant, he hafteuctl out of die room. Clarentine, relieved by îho unerípetled fuminon.s, and in no humour to begin- any converfation with tier unknown nci'jh- hodrs, was now perm i í tea ю ^[o up ti:e dance very quhtly; and ahb.ough ihe v< t fcarcely knew one İlen of the brure, v\as within two couples of the top, when, carting her eves aceid^ntailv tovvanh the door, f ho fa w Mr. M а ок n re emer the fog m, immediately foi lowed by Captain Somerfet ! An involunt-ny, but fcarce audible exclamation of ** (i-.-d God!" efcaped E U ilet 'f
lui , ind changing colouı, it was -.mli dilhcuh). ihe knew how to kc< ρ liti place, or ilimuui out а Гшн txciií· for the Tud- d η tt iu and ij u ul itioa which had given ill-, in ík t iKai-.it nughbour*>, to fo inutli ailonifiu ıtııt Muti \aıılc bonu ι fct, flill follow n*(ţ ln*, fi it nd, ^as iiittcduccd h) hım to j »uniu ı and filiti, the hutr of whom, af t«, t a fliou (.omeri mon, lit ltd towards t t d uitti ч, and (lood up vuth himftlí; wl illi Mr M urnen, appaienti) nmt h Га- tbliid «ι h thi4 anangemetu, ittumed to ii fiinin ¡uaion, ul, but that he wis • n d by Ki Íjéin; now obliged to b ^ı tiu dinct, ítfi.ied veiv m util ιη¬ ι imd to uium h м. \ıf tts h , former niuitiiHiH — qucllioiiiiisj and obieiving l I ıı utun n vt ι ui îdintt uorft fonc down, m t Ii ui η tirt. imiti tbh blundered. \ii W t fl ut\. ts beut tioiu airs and / tl iu n nt w ι Iro n ir 1 agitation, 'h 'l i s ι ilt t j know Oit he was mut ч hti U f it dk meu nti ¡landing c¡ t íl M att ι is ici ! Ύ, yuarckMy i· illin « vt i) b niv unitul who tame πι Ьь v, u, ht maat iuti а hou ¡b! t confuted buü nefs
bufirieíi оГ lt, diat Clauntin , ufinnud oí the obici valion tili,} both t \tit<.d befon, tluy rtithcd tiiF. bonom, en¬ treated him to kt ber ßt down, and ч uh¬ oin waiting ior an anfv-ci ian to the fuit vacant kat lhe înv Pelina kd now that bomeıfet either knew not tiiat iht was in the loom, or foreboie ipeakmg to her thiough pique, Iht thought herkif ken c, in the ι emote co-rie 1 to chitii ilie had ι em ed, of not being noticed, and followed him vit'i lier e) es hrough tlie -л hok dance îsatuOı/ л\е11 bied, md ahv i)ie\treintl) áltenme to women, le conveikd, ihe fiw, oe cafiondly w th Ьь li\e)y paıtııtr, but with f) 1 tie of his ul id animation, ind an ан ίο abietit, ind i\ci>, for hım, negli,, с nt, tl u it v sis îdeiit i i*. thought» were w d ¡y waiidtim b lıom the iulject*, he dıit uíied, and inutli puma cd hım tolpe к up Л1 them with eons m ıjıJ n e of iiiuid V hen the dime w ч cont'udcd it 1 the 1 1 us wtie all í 1 \ ii in to tl ui feats S > ι ι riel 111 ¡ iin^C'au m s io conduit MiC Man ici to οικ ne u u t length, f iv, and knew lui He üc¡ j id a deep
л di cp £>low ι ill only ovcrlpicad his face, lus i>is fpaiklid with dtlijju, and un» eonkioulk qt анид Ins lair loinpanion, h г advaneed e. » ţci ly towauîs. hei, faymg, '· MH, Dehrungton' «nd I not know lhe ei as lie if ' pot pu ecu e her before' ' " 1 hat,' replied Clarentine, foicing a Inule, and attempting to ipeak \uih co>n- poltiit— " is bv no mean*, wtuiderful, as I h tve hv cn luun,· íl ill during the greatcft f ¡π of tht dante " Juil ihcn tht у were joined bv Mi. Muincib, who icemcd purpofely to have foieborn mentioning CLuentini to his fucini lor the mdieious pk aktre of •4'UKÍfiiig the lull elleri*, of lus кирше on b' holding her — s » \ir So «eik t," faid he, very gravt ly', 45 w i'I you h »ve the goodnefs to e include one put of vour bulinei bt foie you take дп\ otbir in bind ' M\ filiti is waiting ft ι vou to Imd her a feat " Soiiuilet lookcel a lmk* dife ont erteti, but tikelin; to liuiţh, ι ,ь utu illy going f) ri ρ ιιι Ι s niniíhoü, esilen be pt -tci v< (t Mi's Vanni ıs vtıv tontpoled 1 , leming h ek in ı ehm talkın; to Ionie ^nikmat* »t the uppe r eivd oí ilit room. " Your
«' Your filler," tried he, mining round açanı, "is airead) placid," then once note adtheiing С lai >.nun , *' have F.oii no Miih," laid he, "to lu.tr how I left уши ítiettds at D< Immotiti, and Mont Repos ¿ ' The meie natne of the lafl mentioned place made her tolom by bid ijnig ίο her mind the Utť*i (he had lo latt'-, t vii ivi d liowi vei, lhe inmiediatilv laid, " I hope they m ere ail u ell '" 'f Yes pcrfOiy ; indeed I think I ncs ei faw an) oi the party look betti i." «· Does Lotd Wilvsv» Hill mteiui сонник ¡о town next l¡jisng ; ' " He kerns determined upon it , *h e is one individual m that pai tol ιΉ м j ! ! , however, vthol Line, ion vi,il Ο , ι ί loonci." " Sır Ldsţii do \ou mían 5 * " NO ; 1пч giv hik r '- And what Ihould burnt ' ч to town alone ? ' " bhe ν,ιΙ! a · rome One." " (»ood lit tv m, tlľ4 , e чО -Firìicil Clan mmi , ' ts (he m irti' il ' '· О mm,' tiRcl Sumei Lt, litii'imj-, ")ou aie a hule too pieuţ иле' No, ine
Ih i nol \ t miu ed, noi, I beliete*, tu u ι 1 the el m 7 ir Hie и in ol loon benig í) but ii( ι u опея ne üıonO ι ţ u ilt Ski íi ι i* te ilb к ne time iliuuil ¿lavı " <■ 11 th st, lu I Mt M unui , who bad liii'ie te> lilleiied ш liknet to this little tli\lij,iu, '· is ι Umpioni ol impending nntnmoitj, bow i-on «e mit, cxptít to ke MiU Dclinin^ton undei lume other íl tim ' Ь ıh n ilk d Some i iet, inxioufly iı in 1 e ι blulJiiti n 1 iet "lo vei) gi iu ·* (,ι ее' lhe ıs even ťiemun, and J) lıbjtM ti f s í/ ι , ini folget*. J 1 íl e\ I tl ll f 1 ce ne In k, ind tbc conlctous (1 i u it 1 1 Нш j Sı nui kt, " you κη . ι u ı < I Mı M пин ii not to π ι к ί e e t to uil hi·, nomeai t \¡ ι Κι O ií I t n 1 i Son e ıhı doubted r ell 1 \ üll'd b i ι hım i few t ut¬ lie ti u dt otu itil, but İr ι I u O Some ıitt I ı » S ti t, ıO mı M< " t ) i и 1 υ ı at ее nt of }ouı s ıO э a ι ν ı ь J it ali inat cut ol 6 bis
his he td' \oulì % t nothing more hom hım. Mils Delnim дюн, ui kis when he lui reumu I his tonkimuon a hult, touthule to tike hun Í01 юш p ırtneı, during tht two ıiF.\t d iuti s, ¡nlkad ol «it ' " Sett n ; jink all pOmal \anit\, cued Soitul t * ť ιιι on ni) word, Mils JJelmin ti 11, 1 thmk - u -a ill pt fit bv the exrhmgt, lint t ι к til, in me, % viu w il bt ftcuic ol 11 >t iindinţ ti until! η " I actej t tiu o'l *■ th ti, fatiH ¡tien tine, (and íhe ne*. tr ip i.ı no с trim 'j wuh gratitude ' Somukt bowed Ьь th?nks, and I eLJ them yet more exprefli tK , wluift \ίι. Manner«!, kaning down, (aid to hit 111 a low \01ct—■'· I Ins, 1 think is the fti time I have егег been fo kiinnite . ч to do any tin 1, \on inn 11 К t, uro·, с d " i h ι- , u О 1 ( l U m tını, с 1 de u 01m n о uh ' it \ 1 1 >t t t t с fllì — ai 1 thi 11 hu · íl 5 W ι Ι Ι ι ιι a ¡van u _, t , -ud li í u id onte mou attom] mu M 111 to ι J n ıs Sointi í t s 1 > >kOı s t, el 11 1 ι i of «tdditllii 0 li ,, t peí u 1 ι i ti η t *■
ν th lhe loue ot tutli ıııtmcnf, f ( Ol n eiilibl, , but ennui}, the I юн Is ind tl jethoii ılı α had t <1 İri lo π Jıllereııt to eveiy tiling , ι t u x j υ ul ol t' e et t ııi ι » el to el hi ti tui il ehcOuhieh e lU no e It) ' ftt now upon lei nodi e! ( ppielk 1 liti beai t, but n Ue tl ln ti e meie pk ilme, altei io К)1Ц in tbienee, oi i¿4in be Holding hinij Ornile 1 innocent |,laeliiels playeel upon bu li¡ , ıı 1 in 1\р01ши of del 0 lt beimi d πι Ικ t eyes. Ileetlkf , t tufore, how lier ınfipıd \> ırtneı < quilted limikll, (lie went down dint e with a lij.htntli and afìivny í! it pj md no lefs to (noc's and cou¬ til h r tl an it iiTuíeuihe obfenant V litre, wlo folk win j; her, when, i i' I ut not «ulpu m d, flit v ent 1 ι ι tO ι il* "·' Ot ı look moie tl ι ı uf u p'ov ' ι '—O really begin i r i i Mil Deb ι ¡ι,ιοι , 1 Ihall not Oeil lîuek ' 'I ei iu to t ч nme m Y ι itili "Οι w t nt do n tO S ut < ικ' ιι ι ί \ , kt ni ι ' lu ' j 'O» j s r , tl » d M . tint I e "i ' . nbe.1 lOc 1 0 n» tie sui
wall foi vu· tudni Ín u tiu ii of h ν inj, bt c i bl >il 1 1 ι tiv οι h Ю ,ιν< ι π Up' -{ ni \d ie ί lic, * bc cilici WS and un'in i' ни 1 i i Iv Son ci- 1 t \ ii 1 ie J el Ι Ulv ι onti ι to ţ > ο ι v\ it mv Π' r ' « Vi Soiurfit,' -aid (1 ι itine, <ι little dui/ "m·- t, ) on with w' ; i li^ j leali*, bn it dl events, Ι Όο-. u, ι η thcelH.' iiţet ι ¡t, Sit, bi tute n ) ou indue as dilloh ι !, and muft beg }ou ν ill < \- etlit Π Tel t vlllf, it '- (, od Cod, tht ıı vıhv did vou du ncc tìnsi dl пик io piovi kınalı v\ 1 11, ι id the in II í ) ltiiţt ui v ili ? 1 re ih ılıt u ht vou 1 di t+t ι d fpoied, and did not v. ıı to ibi ' нч ' *' \n t v uh tl it id tvot un ι пи 1 it ι d n viulu nť I ,11 tí IV in t > i Olifl^ 1 I ι ι r to i 1)11 ! " í), O I hi ll )t tí I * 1 U th Ι O α putl ( ' ( ί! ! D UU 1 f J Г ) ' ι , uni 1 <ι ! ι j tU ι ilivcti u 1 uv ve joi fi íiru fi ť ' 'vei ! «un d d im O i ! tf ! VS J il U. 1 tu V I il ПИИ ll I ) 1 ι ) , would ni ι!· e ικ eüiıı^ leielv ν ' t ш t' ' ' X i
' 't ι Orv, ' ,jf ύ ¡t'" tıted hťj 1 ι. I iii ; " 1 in .ť u Ο ,Ό ud Claientine, ä 1 nt i dl f < и milil \ )ч pıomıİL, or ι tn ι , un te ц J , \ S ', , -i u , tint >ou i ı tını ι ıc u i«} p ıiıuıce too 11 ι ι ll O f π 1 ť < O \I . M mne ¡ч, ) он ι i f. ι η íor tht. lonu nt vil , ' ιΙΟ ni Ιι cintel mii - tili it ρ n it sitih han th ιιι L \ ^c % tl I l 1 Oi о 1 MiJiiud— ; -)йч puipoLl) pio- IjOkf 11 ι "O ii no luum ι i ıh it, finco it an> 'in 1 ι Ι ι th ι Ы í ul to pai take ι í i 1 i ни <¡ α >ο\ οι iii\e than a ίο- ľ" ' ' li l v'il V 11 ν π iu 1 tov, tub I 1 t nil iti ill lil lllil IllilkC 1 ι ι I ' i ι ι _, i h toi i Fİ hnu ıO NıO >> lOUh , 1С i f n ht Ihn 1 ίι nn the ıh t j il 'κ η ι \ ι! ιιι ι ·· \ Otl V, HI t Ι ι ι ι 1 , ι и ι % Ι ι I Ik pi to щ t ' ι l i nI I 1 ι Andih ц li ι », ι (Οι , ί ι η ιγ, I 11)11 ιι ι . t ί ι lud ι-
PllKIIIÍ
Dane rig among ílu livt Ικ íl md the moll aii) -, oui.j, pt opi ni th¡ »oom, ( la- mitini, to 1>< r mu con It t nuti »ι, now bJicId ili' piol >un 1 md I ımliıc ν ι. Ltd, , İı 'tıııj, dl ťit al nm (sand vivi tit), oí ι ' »n'), vithall tilt 1 Ικ ι 1) mp ton s in in ionului nu "ί ι ni iu h uiti¬ in í' upon h s i nd F i n (li m \ t lminç b tn ibit ii> pi кии i putík ι to Ьь taik lu -л *. ι ι,ι it uinuu ι ıhı atlı ami h nın ) 1 ι il í ( inntilt İp Il id, it ) lì, tl π U hi í nu t -itt ¡с Itt Is, md tinnii to О < n ι ι Лай >н, 11 J ·, I 1 İL tu ť ι 1 1 11 ( ' t \ f |\ t till 1 siili 1 IVII, , 11 J U ία tu ,, ! s ¡ 1 L ι ι -. - i u- \ Ult ц 1 Ικ ι u n ti t t i ■ O \ \ '" ^ ^* ' с h Ul ll L l t 1 l 1 1 1 I ·. I 1 S ib s umu t > 1 i ( n, t i \ t tilt i - О и! л İtin ι mi' ι Ο' · ,Η ι ( ί ι Ο ('ι Ι Ι ι j F 1 111 I 1 , U ) 1 1 11 1 1 ld ! j nt it itli i I ι * * > ııtti JC um ικ. í uh - 'Iki It IUI Ι ¡, 11 01 О 1 1 π in 1 lilt,
Ì Οι s Mı Minners, \·1 о t¡ \ \ n bctt< ι inform шоп \!ι JV r tltití te, th l ut t j ι ι \t T t ¡ IO л I > wah ö rt it ' ι ν lm td 1 í i Ms L 11 w ts » g d ! ίί) ¡, ι ul il u ň e í дЦпк, and \ im tl , uhi jt tın., b) ui) f n 1 j i t be ül ııtd b) 1 s jp- l 1 ι /i tid Πιο λ ıh ι look ol t t — 1 (. U, tl it ·> 11 İp fllbk 1 t t> il İh t ıı ıı 1 t ti lan in ıny ili N t < 1 m G ·■ ı 1 ) f ! 1 II 1 , ' U ■ li ti \ ι eCı t tii ι t 1 ι it w j-, ' 1 I i i м u likt ti ». ¡ с It О 1 \ i f I I util g th it I i 'l u и \ I ι ( Uil hi t plin tn , t 1 с pi ) с lill C Ni) VVO í « - ϊ t real!) tme, \ t ** ι i cl ( t nt, '· th MO O t u t 1 1 ь— a n at I hitt < Ιι ,
£ · Ya, upon ni) bono n, have 1 ) ou дну delitti» > in t<>iiíe'<|U nee *' '· S tiniik he uohlil nuke an esteliéin luilbind f ο ΝΊ Wt (Ibt.i y " ■* Í) no. tlu\ au* to un, leh alike " ,ς Dont \'uı approvi t he π oí a limila-. riıy of dıli4)lıtK)n*. diu pmluib between manı d people " " N'ot io too jrt tt an с lient: it either enge-mhi* t (pint of ııvali) and tontcn- tion bei wt e π tb< ч,, oi niakvsthem ioni. pletely / e imi mauluíh, always echoing to cae h olhei ıhı 1 une unmeaning ")·.*·> in\ deal, « ml ·· η >. ı»y dtai." Sotiini i, \ I o, eluntig the itti baci İKenıdhing iii ¡'e ι aid tiwul \· uh Mı*,. Delibi -h, no ,i¡), ¡ei.it heel to dann his read, ρ ti... О Маш, ers aílOeOei religii m ι w и i t moO io!e>u Lilinmu« illgs, bli' ..( Kllglli, itlfblllllF Κι toco, latti he would <guitd hei f. al iluung her «iblenie. 'ннЬ'ц it impoilible to élance again afin .ntkuiglu halauiliie Whilltihe) (It .«I up, before tin y weic too mudi t44 _ΟιηιΊ< uant' to bc able to coin e ríe, (h, η. .ne aml Somería, with appui mlv eijtial pk iluic unewed their diieomk upuu hie labjett oi IKI mington
mahi ion ambi *. n цЬЬошЬоос! Песоп- imnul vint lu li si ıh c uly hinted ol the mutu 1 potnhty ol ! ltlnm ınd Sophia , ml (hu tint lu.ın thı. mi·, gıcıt £ı!is- iıih n u uh \\\ idi 1 oıd λ\ ıb)n leemt ã to < hiu м it, b hid not a doubt of his j4\ii^ tin iiuhill concurrtnee to the su in h *- f uh ПсЬмш^юп, howc\eı,* «itUkclhi, *' hit ui anxious and tendir ïiiotlu ι ¡s t\i(lüi h ni Ionu huk al uut (Mı l lihmı not Si \ пц Mt dei Lırt.d iımı- klf f ι 'κι d ıtırlı ci s ti iii^uilhtv aiidtiaj pui **! < kn и, ч not how to iritilt. hım 1 π ι 1 ι 1 d, \ ďas, I law, ι iati ! (t i l s. 1 ıı i ind« li i t t ' mid he now i ι , ¡ικ \ t\ n ,'ulv thut • ч İH 1 1 1 l 1 J ll; olí Will» \iı ¡ıı na i if u ¡i! 1 ht nt any ti · ί Π ИК, .Π 1 ί·1) , '· tu ¡Ιι ι itv ä m í >ı ind ]ila\ luí ' I Sı ι O >ı м r 1 İti nu il i ť ι < '' ι 0 ll Ο ν ιη\ Ui 1 ι ( ι \ Ι lu , ridS >ηιι i k t, i ¡ 1 fi i, nid his unck ¡ııi « t CUit-ntinc
Clarentine was very anxious to know s how, on their firii metting, I İtham had behaved to SomOet, but before fhe had gained courage to attempt any inditeci enquir), he changed the (abject, and afked her when flit thought of leaving Bath— st We go to morrow," anfwercd flic. " To шоп o w ? repeated Somt ritt. " Do \ou indeed* And how, VliU Del¬ mington, after all the ga tty in which \ou luve he ic been engaged, will you be able to endure the privacy and reniement of Mi. Lenham'i hou'c ? " Shall I дат credit, replied ihe, fmiling, ·· if I tell you that all this dı'lı- pation has wcincd mc, and th°t I ihall rejoice on being rcftoicd t) my ioi mi r Way of lib ' ' " \ci>, cued lit, waiml), *· ncdit oí every deicnption ' ' I hey -,νίΓν. now intcntipud bv b>.m¿ obligtd to joi ι in the d net, dannatili reft of which thiy had \ti) lutk oppe r- tunıty foi continuing the «.oiivei i uk η When Chu nunc moved tow uls hci feat, Mr. Manners, flic found, lad kept lui» w о id, and guuded ¡t loi 1кг moft \ou, ιιι, G OdO
lîiitiîy On feeing htr advance, he m ílantly -.îeldedu, but chufing to ftation hmtlť If hy her fide, nothing further was laid hut upon general lubjeös, and at the end oi lm Oond d inte with Somerfet, Mis Denbigh с died her to go home " At w lut hour in the morning, faid SomOet, as he led her out, " do you fet oft? " \t nme о clock, I believe " " And will you allow me to breakfaft vutli you befoie you go ■"' " Certainly ' * " Go )d night then, deareft Mif*· Del. miniton, ' ciO he, gently prpfling hei hind " (jootl night,' rtptated Clarcntine, and jumping into the coach, it immedi ateh drove off SdJoni, e\ ui in the carhcll and hap pieft p-uod of her life had the heait of Clarentin hit more eafy, more com¬ pii. tcK fatished, than u did on her return from this hill In the abfence of Mrs. lleitf -id, to bave feen, to ha\econverfed and fpent the whole ( vctnng wuh Şomer¬ ii t, Λν ıs to her à gratification ίο unex¬ pired, ίο new, and fo lupenor to all others,
othcri,, that flie íelt as il u haa repaid her for e\ery inquietude flie had lately en¬ dured What could have brought him fo fuddcnl) to Bath lhe neither found it pol- fible to dnme, nor thought it much \ioith her while to conjeflure, it was luffieient for her that he was there—that file fliould agam behold him the foliou ing day—· and that he Hill, notei uliltandmg the cold nefs oí hu lettéi, leérned to think of hei with rigird I heii. were interval*., Oen. recolleüing the motive whieh he had told Madame d'Arzele tarried him from Dci¬ mington, flie 1 uiuly whifpeicd to her own hear that it might peihap*. be to inveiti«· gate hr kiHimeiit·. he was come afraid, howevei, of long inducing luch dn idea» flie endeavoured to drive (rom her mind all anticipation ol the iuturc, and to reil her thou^his., contented and thankful, ■«ipon the feienity of the prel ш Mi·, Dt пЫдЬ, befoie the·, kparaitd for the night, ohieiv mg the unwonted vi¬ vacité that d incul m hei ι \ c¡>, and (he chcaríuliieb, ал well of hei eonveriation» ıs the vety tone of her voi t, rngiatu- lated hei archh upon the ehaııt,c, and Mrv caınıftlv icquelted to know vai u C' z c o u lei
could foßlly bave occafioned ¿t? Cle- rciitmc blulhed and laughed, but ven- шнч1 not to rally m lUuni; and foon aitci vom up to ber own mom.
C H å P. XXÏI. BEFORE СУк-ш-пе had quite tam- plficd he«· packing йж next moining. word «as brought 1кч that Captam So« -tiť.íľí was below. The glad tidttigs no foonci ген hod ht r, than diípatching what «•lfc nmained to be done vith all the quickncl·, her half ticmbhiig hands would alio'», lhe tan down ftairs to receive hıra A blight glow animated her whole «rounten-iicc »ι*· ihe entered, and in a chearful voue flie called out·—« You »ouki teach us to keep early hours, Mr. Somerfet, were you often to breakfan with in '' ·· I ihoulf! he happy," faid he, taking ber nand and gazrøg ddıghtediy at her,
power of making >ou look fo well Clarentine was too conlciou*. ol ihe emotion which had occafioned thefe go xi looks, to receive ıhı*, compliment entne ly without embarradme nt, dunging the iuhjed therefore dirccily, flie withdrew her hand, and as file lea.ed heiieli, faid— ť< I am afıaıd, as Mis Denbigh ь not jet read), it Ol hi rathei late bciore we have done breakf ift wd can (et out " 1 hope, however, if it ihould,' med he 3 " you will think your efeoit ftioi g «nough to banifl» ail alaun," Clarenune looked furpriLd, and So surfet watching he» countenance v hilft. he f'oki, added—" \ou will not, HI at¬ te r myfell, Mifs Delniington, oppole my intuition of attending you m à íepaiate chaife to London r " Scarcely able to tonceal the pleafure this intimation gave her, CLuentine eaft down her eyes, and m a losv voice an¬ fwered—" No, certain))-—if you—if st war your delign to leave Bath fo loon " " 1 had but one ictfon for vifiting Bath at all," cued he, " and that cannot be G 3 anfwercd
anlwtud hy »ην now makin« any 1οη<τι li i\ at it ' Ι ικ ι ii un how (lie oii-.ht to undc ril md th« к voids, md ddirou , at lead, that lu fhoit 11 oi fu] poh flu ijiplud them to Ь ; ft if, ( bruni ie now (aid — " Is Mr M urnei;- allo ¿oing to tow О ı ' ι ье í ve not " '* ff io, vou Ot ím t lv made lam a Víl) ihot t v fit ' ' Odi not mmk. Ικ aj-piopuatcs am patt of it îo btmitlf." Cluintmc nov rofe up, and moving > w mis tit Ьп alvi ill table, faid with a ! tlf !ш U —»' Ou atı (¡mu enigmatical this hk nun,», О Somerfet, I am not it ill ii.ii d to tumput 1нЬ"дуоц," And mui') -цпм hım to π ı n th< bell, flie bu¬ iu d h<t id) ıı j ıı pan j; the liungs ioi li sk Пц It I SoinO t, u ul.ottt itt' tiding to her ic- tjiiL 1, oı iı ni ig t) hi ir it, vas ap- ρ, о и 1 нц lei nd I ijtnning to ¡peak a un, vìi n íie doti < j ι m d, md Mrs. Denin Ji appi ai d. O bu lus lipi, and иш ι t ! i iti Kıtı atine, Honul to hei ftom tla plan v ht ie he fia« li foie flood, but itemed unahk tu uttcì a word. Mrs,
Mu Denin, h İmdin,; them both ihui imite (loi L'iKiitine, bem lhe ind tnt behul idvaiieed, h id le It ι de „ree ol i ft i tatuili tint neies re пеки el hei ii iiitapable oi fpt akmg as binili li;, at knalli lal l with t ldii^h—* How lon;, has ti is re 11 pined íileiice Idled—and bow much 1оице r ıs it te) 1 dl J Somerk t iteeivt illí, bill, Milli 1 fore e d funk, iiihseied —" Viiiibiitc ¡t to и , Madun, Míľs Dehiıııı, ton leeuled mc -Alien I did í pt ík oi doing it iu ti ¡unte ill gibly, ihat I not only bec mie feailtil 01 «tttctiipttiijT it ι ξ un. but e immunitateil to her 1 filare e f ni\ own taeiltnnity ' ' Mj ffeiie uinefs lecim to be a reigning fafloon, (uel Níl s Denbigh, *' ime 11, lhe )e)Uii¿ men e>l the pieleni eh), y iur inend Μι Manne ib ıs 1 ι hilo npiei end bit lómenme , th u he 1 u heie t ilkini, t > us ι quarter ol an hour the other ¡ne rn iiı^ without Us being pi flible lui eimer Claientinc 01 me to unektlLmd one we 111 he faul I hen turning to her — " Hnt ye made tht tea, my dear Ot 11 U be \ e 1 \ late, I fear, G 4 О 1
(Inc»! n«, niitv«. d bv ılm change of ι ('ovulation, «epi iti d lu ! ri quell to So¬ im rfu th Он \л(-и1<1 ung tht bt.ll, aud к II iflXl, l'IL í«, n im b tilgi Hg UJ) tht v itu, thtv vm nt to brcal- fitt \t ílu sppomíí d tmu the íhatľe Mu ľ)t п'п rh hul o-Ocd vi-, м tlit door, ml ιΐκ n \t ııııııııtı ι 1 tond, .»tundid b oul oí 'b vint i fit i uiu «зп hork- bhl, Ί л t u,) hO n« . <■* V, ln, priv,' i tid Mis. Denbigh, as Uh v>d% pOui¿ tht witiduv«, '* vihat arc %i to do wali /wö chaiícb i diid «hufe fer- \ Hit Is til u ' S itiuikt then infoi med her of hi» de- í ti oi ti eo upan) нц them " Oh, vou ; -i ıı th tıs Sır, do you ? 1' i kt m« h« 'v нч poltihoii ша> take ι h I il, ilt iionk «i aie (lopped, the ι bbi ι η ıı j t the н< heft booty firit, ml iliiwaids tone to tis ¡ıı good hu¬ mt ш " Mı, Viilun, ct id Somt·» fet, " they w o J 1 tl ιι Οι > pi / 1 » ι н uoui аь that \ ош 11 ul uni « ont iu s ! ¡upli f —\\ ts .hit coiiip ! iirient ad- i fl í ι > i it naie» ι f »iv /ефН) or the < h U ' ι it S r ih i
«· We will divide tt between us, ' ci.ed Chienii'it, " and eaeh tike our (hot аь •well of what belong*, to tin peilon аь the minti During this time the leñan s Ю beti buhe el ι i eosdtng the trunks behind il challe, and ai r ш >mg e \ e ly thing pit { rator\ to their lettinp out Wien tl s ■was done, Mrs Delibigli» matı ι une to announi e m Ьеиц read\,aııd S ner ι, 'uit ι ig ner anel С laie n ıı e lo ι mı ι ι, bade them ľaiewel till they met at dmnei* and 1 lib ning t ) his o »n loht rv O iel , got ι t t it and dte \ e tí 11 Hm •f ОН, ПН' \ ешпд im nO,' í d Mt* Deısbı h, after Utey кла tile on í ne time l i íikiice, * t. e \ ota beai t ί 1 1 as light jul! now, ι \oiit t iu tíñante ' ι s tomi ' l n! lt ι» a я π ι ι tal ι th , don t ι e t allow, ! f ti n 1 1 u om s t t unt 1 l ik ind pie Η η' 11 ih > bave lt in ont s powei, lied ι i ι dem, to nuke In nils ω Ί , - *· · cdl it up ш ι momi nt " ïes,' ani w e ri d ( 1 ılı ι κ, t ι " very aqiet ebi " Spoken out hke ι ι 1 ι il 1 gol '' ei led Mi Di ι ' ' .
, ıı η , и lì rm f, h и bi ni ,ι t ιι pi ite íl r ι i ľ ι Ί í > *,-pott f i 'f In ¡ · ', Mil m, 'l > n > mo' * du t\ ιι ' 11 ' < \oti í i I n ) ι \ ul loia htm \ ' ι« « m Μι ιι mli 1 i iii' in , it ' 'K- m u ι 1 Sii lu -, t ip >kın ί ι u ιι ol Mrs lu i 1 tf tU ' * N ( on -л οι 1 Sii ti 1 \ il u il) ( b) шоп to m ,, til nij, 1 ni, ıs ι uitKHitlv ι*. Ι ι tn, 4 I w (¡ ,i'h n i uniti?' (Ιιιιι t t ι t i ι ıı inin·, Ih ι aí Ii li ί ι ' ll Ih ut ini ıhı ,.< od ni s > d t ■ о in ji π ι s uhm í am ! ! j r t n ι ι in tiu ,\ uld ' \ \ U ľ c n, I I u! kt ib ut u li ııi un , il 1 un ¡ i ш İt 1 I itil t 111 ııhtıl ııi ! ι ! v* ¡tli ( ι nipo ii ι ι ι ч ii к J - , ılıl 1 tli u I, ( t >. ìli Soi ι ' \ 1 iit iv < Il ( , l'tl η ι tu n d I t IHK ,
time the ftibji В of thtir convu lation •Jui.ii,.' t! t «tí \U íi pan of tiu mottling. Лчинц'И othtr thıtı J *. — " í batı long л own, '- lud Mn Dih h, " um v ou'liful gnauli uil ntn, ind long lu 1 , till tint, ' t ıkı ι ι u I )! tl' ıı ull, ť r ('t) ч not t Sitt 1 II ,11 up ι < ireli tvi ι ι 111 ГС riODİt fplUt, 'U ι kind 1 itt İt t ! \ Ull , I uttu, I Ol I III I ' ,' II II Ilt, fs < 1 1 IS II. 1 1 I , 111 list I I M HOM tl 1Ц . I I Ol u 1 «h.i к с it ut v i π ι ι ι ι 1 ι 1 .»I i IO t .ţrct, »nitmi ľ '} .it 11 t ir luw' lu 'i a OÍ ill 11 II I ,11 ut ι ί, tblt I I It ! к 'I ! ! ! ι ! It l.l j,o in» viti aht. j t ι ν ι н ία il 111 til • O ι, ti-trui Mul m м- · Π ι tint h ! >οιιι ι ο Ι κ it 'I ¡ d и ni I ,1 It ', I l I 111 bt 11 πι 1 III I I 1 » I till 1 (ЮПИ tl) til ll tibt I t 11 M 1 I ' úit kli to inch ι Π it í n tl tl [ U u li ) ion H ( ¡li ι/ ( \ í t 1 O O) hm íh i'i I. ,íi O id I. ! nit lit, to K 1 η ι ll I , t. I tv Jii 1 — t U '* i\ ,
1 Γ ! h, ţ ι ıh' м u dit talking t· о i hu <1 pi it m'm to mt asciai' Be ί ι i mi ¡Mit tin ¡ıtırı , aml utiler ι η ) i\ oi i í < mj, hım ııi intui u Ho ι ' n uu ľ< ıflutı ) om It If \ ou ill 1 ни tij m Som Stis dilt int i) 1 I t 1< n ti to -Пни ηη ίι If ' re- | О ( 1 u nit i İmli uiimn td — 4 d İSİ % n, \1 ııi uu, how -л nik 1 -, ou ι ι ι Ο ť ι ion I m 11 Μι í lihim I ч ι! inglmg il' tüt ι ţi н, tmi n it <kt 1 u in д himl If i i i V Sonni k t iff lu tlit Ijuk rta lo. 4 i't t M O π, im thi ittmtion he ¡nt ». ι b ι ilU 1 ι ι ξ Doi ч u dt aH til'! Mi i Ithttn f \iui ¡s !n not ι и ni л t it ! oni 1 t > j t it in Im d u 1 Ί с )imuh< i <i ,u trdtan indilla ! " If tO ut nt 41 w н not iklhuihve ftu t I î! iht ín ί t u hut, { ' ('o 11 ti bt u t 1 1 u t m vi r p i i t i \ I h ] ( ili!» 1 (or } m to (îi í t o in i in I t «h ill * ο ι >И S, υ I itui it \ b t ki ( un, îl < ' h¡ \ \ th tunet tt t·. .nO Λ }oimg wo m α ii
■ Dirin П. inil cıtİKi be vei) cer! un oi tht nıuı uil aüıftıoıı оГ a m sn (lic lom ot Γ ıliı'o i íl v «ciwuiitc hb OiU), linci abf ¡kí, as 50111 (tand Sipina fus, ь the f ui) tun fo- tU pl u td piitnlity ' '» 1 did not Sind, fiul Clan nunc, (un pttiìui' ι fi -h " that m) t шс bulinul anv „пл piuçrıı*. d iun¿ thi tuo month, •ле (1 'id it Bıth " / i nıoı tiis ' f\ mont! s, i n d ir dni I, in uli li mdi, bt < i ou" 1 ! t endi file )i i/ eomplıiıtıt ' Yon 1м\ t m laleni li, as if you apprtîcndıd the »чл "very would It worie tlnn the dikale. Hew ever, I wi'l iiy no more upo ι the fubje£i juft now, jou have got into a fort ol fool's p iradiíe (pardon the e\pieffion)lrom which it is almoft pi'y to recai you, and fo hi it, foi the pOuit, < ids my kehire." She then began talking of .ndjflcicnt things During the rcmamdii of thit da\ s journey nothing m item! oceuru d Mrs. Dcnbıçu hid no ορροί tunny of making the tnijuines fhe uu dilated, not hid So¬ mcikt any of (peaking to (Olemme apart lluy all appeared chearful and happy when they met, fpent tht evening m
in pt ι fe Π harmony, ¿nel fcparated at mejit in unabated good fpirits. 1 he next moiiiing, about a quaitcr of in hour before they left the mn at win t h •bey flept, Mrs Denbigh calling after bomeritt, as he w ts leaving the room to give fonie о dei·, to lm fei v uit, begged hım to ¡hew lur л letter he had promiftd 1 1 let hci ıtıd hom Mr, Lenham, con- uinnijt lome public пси.·, they had been tilkmgovei (¡иипд bieaklall. Somerfet, lulhly teelmg m his pocket as he ftood with the dooi hall open in his hand, de¬ livered the Utter to Clarentine, -svhojuň then happened to paf> him, a,id faying, " Will )ou ha\t tl e goodnef» to give it to Mrs Denbigh? ian awav, expefting the ehaifes %oald be annotine d every minute. Mrs Denbigh opened it as loon as he was gone, whilll Clarentine, not knowing how to fill up fo tomfortlcis an interval, triverled Ле room Λ,ιιΐι !i!lltf> llepi, Hopping from time to time to obferve what w ií paffing in the mn yaid, and then renewing hci walk. In lefs. than ten minutes Somerfet re turned, and Mr*., Denbigh gravel) fold¬ ing
ing up the letter, piefcnttd u to him v uh great foimahty, and laid, " Thank )cni, Sir, for the perniai of ifas · will }<>n now be fo obliging a*, to favom me with a fight of what Mr. Lenham write , 1 ' Somerfet ftarcd at fail without com¬ prehending her, but the next won ei t, calling his tye*, upon the direi lion, cagei 17 fu¿ed it, and, colouring м rj, hsj-b. (aid in great conhifion, " I ht g vour paid > ι¬ κ was a miftakc— this,' takin ç asıotİK r lettet fi om h¡» pocket, '· 11 w ha ι I in¬ tended, Madam, to ihew you. ' 44 I would advile you 111 future," faid Mrs. Denbigh, rather drily, " to be more careful, thefe mtfiaka may fomentile·, be a little awkward." Clarentine, during this, fhort dialoge, had ftood at the window looking hrll at one, then at the olhei, with the utmoit furprife and purple iity. Sht vtould ha\ e given the world to know with ctrtanny whofe the lettéi »n, íulpcÜmg in So- ırtrfet'i eniba..airnient U could be fiout no other than Mri. Hertford not lu-ving courage, however, to ha/ard tin kalt en¬ quiry, even in laitleiy, ihe tin u>d away on perceiving Somerict was looking at hci «
her, and fs.lt truly rejoited when a few minute·, dfteiwdidb they were furomoneţl to de pai t W hen the cínife ¿iovi on, unable any longn to reptds. bet tunoiity— " W a$ that kttei, M dim, * faid flie to Mis De migli, alkOnig to fptak with Uidiiltitncc, '* fiora a icmale correfpon- dent 44 N o, from t Highly ind nnpertment " ' ík, 1 I did not lufpett Mr Somerfet of having any of tint defcription," si i hen you gave htm morc credit than he deftrvtd ' " May I aík," rtfuraed Clarentinc, he« hmmgly, '· who э « liou had better," interrupted Mrs. Denbigh, « not afk any thing about the matter, my dear, lor it could give yo« id plcafuT to hear an account either of tht iubjeft or the ftyle ' " Dear Midain, did it contain any thing that relattd to mc ? ' " I Ice your ennoßty ıs upon therack,, and the re loi e till u ii mauhed it would be Tasn, I íuppofc, to ечрео any reft ÌVnow
Know then- my lieat child, that the letter »s from Mr. Manners," « Mr Manner*.," repeated Clarenunt, bluibing—-*' Ah' tlitn its contenti, I fe<-r s may be too well guelTed '" " Certam it is, at lean," refumed Mis Denbigh, ' 4 that he appears to have gue ffed _)<*« veiy thoroughly' He writes fioin Bath, fome days after his return П011 Northamptonfhtie, and begins by it preaching his inend for denyir 0 bti at¬ tachment to Mrt Hertford, and yet per ftfting fo ungratefully in avoiding you. He relates to hıra, ra confirmation of what he feems to bave told him befoee of your partiality, the little anecdote of the amber, upon which, and upon >our blufhes and confufion at the moment he found it, he lays great ftrefs t not douot- ıng, I believe, its being Somerlet's gift. Numberlefs other trifling ctrcumÜanccs he bringt, forward m fupport of his opi¬ nion, and concludes, after a long and very animated panegyric of you, by urging his fiiend, very ftrenuoufly, to renounce alî conneûıon with that viper, as he is pleafcd to call her, Mrs Hertford, of whom he affirms to have heard an exceed-
mg
ing equivocal charaücı, and р.ейеь him to hallen iinmitha'tly to Bath, to reflore bloom to the cheeks., and happineis to tht gentle bolom, of the fair and too« tendei Claientiiií· '" '1 hund' »ıİı иск. by this mortifying de¬ tail, íhocked to find ihe had thus cruelly expoítd heridi not only to Mr. Marineis, but, through him, to .Somerfet hkewife, ( laidume, drowned m tears, and mca- p iblc of lntctrupting a relation, every woid of which was а daggci to her heart, now alarmed Mrs. Denbigh fo much by the almoft convuifive fobi which efcaped her, that reproaching herfelf for the faci¬ lity wiih which fhe had yielded to her defire of information, ihe attempted—but lor fome time attempted in vain—to footh and compofe her by every argument flie could devife. When at length, however, the diftreffed girl had fome what recovered, and was able to Ipeak, " Oh ! deareft Mrs. Den- bigh," cried fhe, hiding her face upon her flioulder, " how am I ever to meet Mr. Somerict again ·- Indeed, indeed, î can¬ not bear to think of »t ! He will know you luve reported to me every word of that hate fu i
hateful letter, and from my looks will en¬ dt a\ oui t > diltovcr the truth ol its con. tents Where t m í conctal my coni 1- oufncfs ind my lb une ? Mrs Denbigh t> calm her a lutk, (hen told hti, that upon pretence of la- tigut and indilpoluion iht might, whi 1 they flopped to dint, rttiie to a privite room, and ha\t fome rdreihmtnt fent îıtr, without appearing at thtir irtil at all Chrtntmi moil tagerly tinnraced this pupofil, and tlianl mg Mr IXn- bigh a thoufand times for hti conbderate ktndntf*. in miking it, recurred the next minute, once again, to the fubjetl of the letter. " İt was pit) then, ' cried ihe, " pity for my felf-betrayed weaknefs and folly, that brought Mr Somertet to Bath ! His love for Mrs Hertford may not, my, probably ts not, at all dimimihcd, not- wuhftandmg tht lacnhce hit. fnena s ur¬ gency m my behalf might, perrnps, fiora motiv еь of generofity, impeli hun to make. Oh, deareft Madam ' if you have any comparitoli, any ngard for me, endear oui to undectne—or rather, alas' to mtllead htm vuth rtlpect to mv real fentimtnts' i ell
Idi hım, I cjıijure you, that Mr Man¬ nt rţ was in an error, that to any feelings oí the nature he fufpcüed no part of my tondutl was to be attäibutttl, reílore hım, ш íhort, to the full hbtrty he before eııjoj, d, and never let me undergo the deep humiliation of being fuppofed fo ftrongly infatuau d, that nothing lefs than the txtoitcd -md reluctant vowi of the nitn i loit tan f ne or гейоге me { " 4 My deareft Clarenune, erted Mrs. Denbigh, who now (aw htr fufficiently rtvjved to bear a little ¡Ailltry, " yon tie al »ays either upon iliks or upon crutches' Bea little rational, and give nit n ) commiffion*, of this fublime, but lying kind In the firft place, -Äaihoui knowing the true nature of bomerfet'a Attachment to you, it would be madnefs fupreme to tell the pooi nan you ibbor —you can t endure him—you wtfta him every ev»! under Heaven · Such tnmgs are never faid by modeiate and cıvıl girl*· In the next pkee, to oblige you, were I even to ftrttch a point, and falfify my confcience fo grofsiy, it is a thoufand to one, wncther, after what he has heard, he would take ше for any thing buta fuper- atmuatsd
aimuated doîœrd, telling fibs pour mon bo» fkifir-, and meddling m what does not concern me All I mean to do, there fore, is to hilen quietly to the explanation he will, no doubt, be himfelf lohcitous to enter upon and to itport it to you faith¬ fully and exafíly An old woman who does not wifh to be lìyled a match maker or a matcb-htaker, can, m honom, do no more " When the chailt flopped, and Somerfet, haftily alighting from his own, advanced to hand the two ladies out, unlike the finding readmeis. with whith ihe had ac¬ cepted his feivices the day before, Cla¬ renune ihrunk back when he would have affifttd her, ind without looking at hirn 9 jumping oft the ftep ran into the houfe, and up itdirs m a moment, leaving to Mrs Denbigh the care of apologizing for her, and tending lome one to ihew her to a chamber ' Confounded at her abiupt flight, So¬ merfet filtntly followed Mrs. Denbigh snto a parlour, where, grave and dejeéfcd, he threw hiralelf into a chair near the door, feemmg hardly conîcıous that -any •one wââ m tfee room, MfSi Denbigh ob¬ ferved
íerved hım fome time without interrupt¬ ing his revêtu at length— '- Mils Delmington, íaid ihe, " is fa¬ tigued with hci jouriuy, and not very udi today ilie ha*, retired to lie down. ' u Not Ol?" iepcated Somerfet, with a look oí anxiet), "iam gueved to hear it, and yet, ' added fie, hcfitating, " a!- inoi) ftlhfli enough to feel, ш hearing it s a fpecies of relu f," " ^ ou imputed her filence, perhaps, to A -A tong eaufe ? " " 1 hope 1 did Mrs. Denbigh could never ba\c the einelty to communi eate to her the purpoit ofthat fatal letter-" " I communicated it, faid Mrs Den¬ bigh, " to obviate a iufpieion of iome- thing FAorfc fhe might have thought, )ou know,, u was. a challenge, or а lettet írom а dun—-ox fomething ver) difgrace- lulindeed ! " Somerfet now fiartmg fiom his feat in great agitation, exclaimed— " Good God ' you have really ac¬ quainted her wuh its contents! Ah! then, her coldneu is but too well ек· plained! She muft think roe the moft sain
vam and ciedulotis of men, and will fly my light as an objttl of dttdldtion ' ' " No, not quitt lo bad as that, we'll hope —flic certainly docs not wiih to ite you jull now, but when flic gtts over the ftrft ilwck, bet anıtı t tvill chu Ily Ol where it tb moil duc —with Mt Man ners ' " " Manners has voluntarily and doubly impoled upon I wj ', cried Somerlet, " and endeavoured to impole upon olheis, ¡tt a ti t) ılgıt t s mı the utmed} ρβιιι to think of,— Λ\ tth ι cgard to nt) ¡ell, he has, perle cutcd me with cxhoitattonv and remon- ftrdFites no Uf*, ttnnecelľtiry, than, upon fuch a (ubjctl, they tv ere extraoidinary the enor he itll into with telpen to Mils Delmington, though I dare not trull my¬ felf to expau.ue upon it, it. ofa natine that hab been }U more ptrnttious to me, and may be one ot thole, tvhtch, m its con¬ féquence >, I ihall have caule to rue whilft I extii 1 ' s I do not pcrftftly undciftand you, Sir," laid Mr*,. Denbigh, " tv hat error relating to youtielf, do you allude to? Is it роШЫе that his fufptewns concern, ing Mrs, Hctdoid—'* She
She hefitated. b«it Somerfet- eafily comprehending her meaning, exclaimed«— " Ah, Madam ! have you alfo given them admittance "* Have my true feel« itigi. been fo little known to you that they r-.ni un yet to be txplaincd?" Mrs. Hertford, added lit, " h'is btcn to me no more Ла» a friend from the firft hour I faw Iter I thought her worthy, I be¬ lieved htr amiable and fmcere, fhe wiung Ют» me the real fecret of my heart, and hen difi- mbled pity, her artificial foftnefs, loathed a»d flattered me. Whatever the icnttments were flie fought to peifuade nv* ï had excited in hei breaft, Ihe well knew my power of returning was pafled. Still, however, her gentlcncfs, her ap¬ parent ¡ntereft in my happineis continued fue made herfelf a fort of barrier between rae atta mifery, and the feemmg gene- ìofty with which, at the fame time that βίε was hoaľly infinuating to me her own partiality, fiie extolled and applauded her lovtly pretuflor, deceived me fo egre- gioaiy, that ϊ firmly fuppofed her one of the beft 5 as ihe appeared one of the molt »Hdid of hutra« beings." « And
«' \nd wh n latt icafon Înv <- vou bid,' faid Mis Denbigh, " to than), youi opini m ? ' *' Rt don too intoiitrovtrtil le " ir· phtd he, " to be dtfputid S ib 1 and defining as iht u, and guudid a? in all hi 1 mealim s flit lus ^ nera'ly betu, iht was ıı )t, however, quii e\ tmptcd írom tht vtnity and wiiknc's which oittn к id*, pohtuian*. > с »in¬ ni u lidi tuions iht mid İdini a conlı l »nt and kis írom (¡tn t if litaittlan iron tht dilire oí obtaining admiration nid pic lit loi hır 11 ţiuuitv, revcaltd ill liti ftciet m uhmatun*, to л kmale fiitiid who has bctnvti n r. From tl it iiiuid—a Mrs C títltton — who flu bis tmwuib, but deeply о (Ten led, I reteivid, tht dav before ï lift IXlm ngion, t p u ket of Itt irs in» ('u 1 ı n oni dom hti kif, v lu h ti ıunn. an )íln t υί Mı Iıtıtıoıd s 'tit, a d a number oí otbtis, wiitttn to htr by that veiv lady, w uhm theft Lit tìnte months. 'Ihe fail of theft fufficitn ly told me what wd» tht nature of tht others., 1 и ad dure» lore only one of them, and turned irom the reft with difguit and hoi ror. Good VOL, HI, If („^,¿1
í,o<ľ \' b it л tidin ol aitifice and åe- tepn >n di 1 n rt m d lo mt · I could not, bui tint 1 lit* ,uid kui w th<_ Iwiid to Ьс ihat oi 'lic iiitpuiiLiplcd piojcííor— I could not li tVv li iit.·. t d tlııt iutii de¬ ti unu cti lnpocııh, fuih пик*. ling ίι 1- fifluiLÍs, txiíUd upon latih' ίο hue 1н tn ırndt ılıt dııpt ııı\idf jf ht r in¬ li nt ıiı\, ï am \ un i ншц!) to think, ai n u ι not тц to înv uilp tr igt mtiit, lon\ ihou'd Ì bt t\,u to Imd my- klt ι ι tilth loi lach tunluiimute duplicít) l hert w·!·, palliati, hm,- e\ci, in tht Unti, ihat made m*, blood boil svitli indi nation Iht) diicovtrcd to mt that ¡he had not only dtttivid Mils Dtlmnijton in regaid to πι ν it utrnit nts ţ (л tircumíUnci» whiih, uniiiiportuit a*, it may be to 11. , )it to nit ь <1 tply mor- uhmgj but that ρ tin·, had alio bttn tiken to i.ifuft into htr mind d btlitf, that I Was toxconib inoligli to cn clu the prt tındı d iníiimaiions Mrs. liutfoid had given mc of her attachment In thi (uit placc, inch jníimntions never iTtaj td Iter, and in the nt\t, Mii-. l)ı İmmgtoıı шау be allured, tf tluy bat, I am not of a diipuùuim
a dťpofmon fo bghilv to îmbib coh^tit, or lo e dih t') admit pitiump.ioii ' Mis Diiihijíh, at ılıt. con Juhon oí this fpe ι th. lilting up lui hinds and (}cs with conili 1 nation md atna/i 1111 lit, ι xelaiiiitd, 5 ' h u polhblt,—good lltaitn, is it po(- iibli, that in fo young a mml (tit ¡1 peiiidv and deceit ihould b~ 1 к! л d ' \uur leiount, Mı. Soniti u (, ıı. kesme ttımbU, anıl rtjoıted .n í mı at out gınıı d t ίι apt fiom 10 ssorthkl- a ssonun, I am N it ihotkid to bt oblige d to bell , e a diatatkr likt her s txilh '" lhtn pıufinçd mointnt, flit preftntly adtltd in a low et voite, fpeakmg to hei ftif —·'· My poor CiaruHine ' Ноъ toi ld I bt ti ut 1 enough to blaim \ ин \ 11 tuons indigli Hion, to diitudit jour too jult iuipitioiiì ' ' Soim Ot, 'w bo had caught tiu name of Ciartntmi, and ltnolunt mlv lilltned to ■vihat ¡bllowtd, now im!, '· ľ>· n Mis, Denbigh, -what luipiuons do \ou mt n ■ Why do )ou fpeak 111 а voite oí lutb conti in *■" Mis Denbigh had no time to in (wer htm, for juft then tlie íuvaets intetid with dinnei. lï » Little
1 uti" w ι*, fad whtlft they Meie at table Somi ılı t s Ικ tit, and Mu Denbigh? и ind, ueie too lull to allow them to con- л Oc upon iiidtlkiciit fttbjcUs, and -.hilft the iituidmti weic in tic 100m, it v,a$ iinpollibL to put Sue th t whieh hid Ixfou cin,! fled thetn W hen onte ni ne, ho« t ver» the) were 1 ne —" I will not, htd Mis Denbigh^ » li fu betray niy tmft, Ctpcaiii Somci- iet, i^ ι > mipatt t j \ou the ml e of -»hat j 1 n, but this, ioi your prefent iati*,- lıüıt n, I ht\t no fi rupie in telling you, tl uuiiinc s υ, mion of Mu Hertford has long been iuch, that aftei the firfl moment, fhe never gave credit to thei piclunipiion, il vou art pleafcd to call it lo, which that lady fought to impute to j on bhe ilti ems }ou too fincerely to believe tn) thing to vour prejudice , <md I iin cenam, he, no deine fo earneft as to re mi your good opinion, and prove ic you bei own ί η lift Hifiit upon it, however that you do not, at this time» tuhu tttempt to fjeik vuth he» alone 9 or to convei ie vuth hır upon any but central toptes 1кг mind is not in л flate ϊ) beai i rnnulwuc luulin-, it has lor a considerable
л collidei ible period bt η Γι cruelly hanalìtd, that H m i\ ti ulv be ¡aid to have btcn thoioujţhly unhinged iht ¡mtl- I ι ικ t l ha/i t · цп t hti, how c u r, jou m ) r It aduicd will dl ud h ι pleafur , tn pi ipoHion to the juít л\ с ihon (ht h ıs Ιοί í had for Mis Iltıtford, and the coi dn! regard Iht acknowledge:, for } ou Soncifir, re\ncd and enchan'id by this İnendi) lpct< h, piomi' d implicit iubmiiiioii to tlit itto liijuntt on, it ton- lamtd, and foi beamy to extend his tn quines, eager and impititnt at. ht was to know the -uhok that had been alladed to, iufkred Mrs Denbigh to leave hmi and go up to her >oung inend.
H s CHAP.
C U Α Ρ Will. "UNI, un <I ir С lucutine,' tried Mrs il obi h m t ton- < f OaifulnO i-, (ht «penni tic. (loot — ·' our cxpian.i- ti n i', UV1.1, aid -.oui Sonu ι Γι. t, your 1 cud, ι h rıouıab!, uquittcd' ' DcttMiltii ci id < i an nunc, her ılı ι к*, αϊ d with ι \ivul jjluw—■*' ex¬ pia n \ourli 11, î entreat' — '· î will, biu )ou mult promift mc firft to bt.hd\c rcdiiHiably during the red oí tht day, to imet him with good humour, and to anfwer him, when next he ipeaks to \ ou " " Ah M idam do you think, if ï hear of him и ОошаЫс an account as you teach rec to t\j ι ft, I fluii retjuire fuch an с hort mon '0\ly I dont know, you may ex- p it шоп, perhaps, than I have power to tell, or '— í (trt Clárenme interrupted her, and ti o ¡mp mt nt for longer dthy, befought bei moil tarat ítK to kginher relation. Mrs,
Mrs Denbigh, tho ab i) «¡ compofed and tranquil hei fell, could y a make «tilou niet s for an ímpetu )íiiv fo natural „t fuch t moment, and too Kind t j letzthin liei íuíptiiie, entend ti] m the promikd 'v indicati jiì iniudiucl) Ile piednnintnt knktion v.uh which С ì trentine lille ned to ι confiin atı ш f» un к ni »Ые ol the lelhflmeh and di (li nida¬ tion íhe lud 1 mç lulpeűtd, w s hni >r mixt d wuh tlunklultiei» foi the pto- vnlential dehvei met ot л mm I) i 1 ! formed to cope with luch ai tiheni double dealing loo generous, howevei, to exult o\tr a fallen enemy, to accumulate the meaiuie ol her ciiors by ílhbcrd ammadv criions, or to add mweOive to contempt, fliehend the wl ok account, tho not m dftomíhed, >et in determimd hleuee, and when it concluded, pern utt d not herfelf to utter à finale comment upon ıny pin of It Much, however, remuned for htr dill to learn , Mis Denbigh hid hithtrto con¬ fi! cd herfclf who!!) to ť e fubjetl of £1rs 1 Icrtford, ihe η ην l¡ jke to 1er ol Somerict h mleli— ol hi* »vowed illOi n —his modtil apprel cniams, and tiu ton¬ il 4 ilderne
fidente delicacy w uh winch he had ibftuincd hom enlarging on the Memoirs Mia Cdftluon had Jcnt him, and from pu tu u' ui/nig anv peculi u inftance of tic ici t s % itlatiiig ι» himkli in the iiultibh toiicfpundtncc tliat had been Kmiik d to him " \\ с miv weil fuppofe, however," added f! c, " »hi «tit the, dilìgiti, that toi к íj oiidtnce di fch 'cd, by the dcttr- r ud antipathy а да in 11 Mr*.. Hcrtfoid -.uih whtih , feems to have mfpired him, I doubt not but thit и difcovcied to him, in their hilled extent, the mercenary vit ws th it feem to hive aÛuated her; »юг do 1 doubt at the fame time, but that e verv page was fraught with triumphant antieip mons ot certain fuccefi. It is pl<im (lie never loved him no woman truly attached wntcs of a lover to a ft lend in a ftyle it vould be pre|udicial to 1 < r he fliould fee even where ñrata- gems are employed to win that lover, if tbc v are relorted to merely ñom motives of tendeiiiefò, a man foi gives the tjjeii in the can f¡, and thougii he llights the ffiiiheb, is flattered by the fondntit. Not iuch u Kre the taft . cold blooded, heartlefs
beartlefs policy feems to have been her only guide, and without one oí the excuO tiru might be foutid foi a worn n of aident imagination ind ftiong paiTion«,, fiie has run, I begin to think, into a'l the intrigue that ufually pioceeds from jcaloufy and apprcnenfion 1 ih ill big» however, to fee the corri fpondemt, fine , íhiewdly as I have deft anted upon u*, fuppofed tenour, I muft ackn iwlcdgj myíelf to be b\ no mi tus íulíicu ntly ел fat' in all thefe ıntııcaıuO decep¬ tion to ha\e yet acquired any diilmft idea ef her p'ans or her motives ' Si Deareft Mrs. Denbigh," cried CI trentine, " why ftould }ou wiih to fully your mind by an mfpeehon fo un» intercfting and really fo hornd ? As for me, 1 am perftcily content to know thei e are fuch beings as coquettes in the *a odd, vithout wifhmg to dive lo deep mt j their hearts Mi*. Hertford is dttefted is bctn>ed, ah, then let her fiulu rclt m petec' ' " Mv deir child, this is, all \ery v.e!l for \ou to lav, and you to think—but let me I entreat derive what amufement I can from a detail fo ne\,, and I doubt H 5 noi
not ¡o mftruQive I have no appre- htnfion of being anut d into а tojuitle t and iv 1 m мг itati Machiavel in my vomii, am di u i muitti to lludy im modi rn ardu !> j t ш my old ΐί,ι I d i rt 1 1 y ϊ ih til luid it an xietdiiig enttrtaitiiiig pafs- tunt m »polt chailt, md 1 am ptrhiadtd Mr Sotnuiu wtll moll rcidii) rtinţn the whi к bi dji t, Iji bt knm to havı. as 11 it ι hon »ι if u as j ι tn 'til ' Ilın rising up " Iitit tomti the dn ι, .ultid М»ч Denbigh, " 1 have »otint to lolt theidote in ц plying ior thtľe imit It ttt r* Will jou go down -*ıtlı me, or wait h ie till i (end joii mord wc aie ready to ftt out '" ä í will wait here, if )ou pleaft. Madam ' Mr Denbigh, upon this, immediitely kft htr, ami returning to the pai lour—- *·* Mr Son« ritt, trud iht, " h«.vc )ou got Mrs Hertford s iţitem oí politics H uh you ? ' omtrltt fmiled, and mfwered he had. " And rcav 1 ilk to fte it ? ' " Moll aiiuredlv, And ringing the bell, bi dduutd t> hb itrvant a kev, and din f tid lan where to find the whole paCkt», « Well,"
reiuvcd u— ")<>u miy expect .ίίΐι,ι (tuli a peiuía!, ι> (πκΐ πι mt ionu vtiy сч- traordintľy inipiovtmtiit lhe opacity oí my inu lic Ü*. (as Mr İta would (tv) v/aııted a İmle iubııb/atıon, loi I uivei could invi m nn mg< ¡nous plot m my lilt tin*,, I hope, will tnabk me io fct up foi .uoiuiiur thiough lilt \s (or Cl и cium* , poor finipU loul ' Iht j rou ÍK agallili itad 1ц a linkli line oí u, ílu uld I, nrx-t > hit imin > nie. ĺ t with .un *ery valuable »nit uıüıonc, am patKulai ¡/)oíi rttcipt for nuking a fintili, dutun, ï ihall cıiumly communicate it to ¡кг dire¿ih .' " *i ou tre rt ili) too kind to her'" ciad Somcikt, lushing " I have no apptthtnlio i, howcvti, of hti pioíiUn¿ b) luth icíloii*. ' Mrs Denbigh nov- mov<d towards the door to dtpirt and L 1 m nunc hiHinin^ do\ui upon iht full lumm m*, v is di taust d by Somería ι moult nt ai tiu dooi to en¬ quire aim lui lu. ıh h, and ¡lun handt cl »Uo the elude w hu h ııııtnuLuttl) <ho\c away, II G Mts»
Mis Denbigh, iHttiing morc eager·» nc \ tl an ih u al lv kit, opined the рнк t ь li o» «s flu мач (cited, ant] bt- b ai,)i,itn mmudnuK whillKlaun- t ik hid r ι ош к to ι b >uk İhı had the div bt юн put ι t» ont of ılıt cliaile- po О·. 1! lırft amongft tin İt tunt us mínu í npt-, *, luth Mís l)tnbii,h th it to S ! Л «as Mr« Caßkton ч mwì ktttr. iin ««il v part of it, tont tinn g the b tttit'l sciiti ' Titul itìiHii tinnii her f пен 1 , (ht reád vtry ijuictly, but when iht came to particulars,— íuth ıs the flóry oí young Godfiev s dilappøintntnt, and ılıt íubkqucnt elopement with i itham, fiie could contain hcríclí no longes — • 8 VIerciful powers ' exclaimed Aie, with <å mixture in hti countenance of uiibihty ind dıfmay, !i I İtham might well dtfpife this unhappy woman! migln well caution vou igainil her' whv ihe jilted another -t »n lırll, лпа then ran away with htm to bt oil aid bifore he w и innetter» 1 ' Clart nunc, kb íurpnbd than íhocked, fait!, -<■ It hid been well for Mrs Hcrt- fonl if, ns thi? trt и lu rous md abominable Jrumi) iht bdd ши «a uh 4 mind a*, honour¬ able
able as Mr Eltham s î am perfuad 1 be *auldncverha η v al d ¡hb iure dote " Mrţ Delibigli wint on ) d ¡ц, and Clarentine щт out d hi ι book rhcjoiiiiil ol \Ьь Ih iti >rd simigli adventurt , ıs Ol m S , t/c il nd ı m lulv , fhe had η ι p un ni e t > get tin > i h, nor did it ıpj ( ¡r tluı S »it iet I imlclf had Ur от of ıhı 1 í ih ts h »vu g prciduit ill) bien touch d b\ thi hit к ihn¿ w ix, 1 id idin itd t ^ ihn, u\d icmalli d иио| ıcd Tuining ue t i > Mie Heilt ıi*.cor~ rtfpond nti, < -с of the fi ι ft para^riph« ilie met with %v is t! < f jllowiiy " rltham, > s l bid íea'oii Jo belitle he would, i*, hıullv dilmilled I w is lorry, a« no othtr nv »1 to tht guardia ι ıppe u d, to раи with hım, but he was a confiant bafiltlk to my l .»ht I loathe andjullly diead him more th in »in mm upon ι »th. Mj ftclm 0 4 with uzatıl to Sonici ft t ut thoft of indilli renie, with repaid to hım they onount toabhotrcm u So then, cr ι tl Ми De ubigli, inter- rupting hirklf, '■ ρ »i l· İtham was hen ficed to thb deteflıblı wont u»· She ft ems to have held you by a wae, and to luve guided
í, «idi d } ou all. <u h« υ« η pleafure, like ίο in ms piinpi ts ' ' Hun к laming hu k 0 u rc, flir tims su m o v — '· \ I il ï ( 1 .H Utilii ь и or not, I «un tint ιι ¡1 »o ditilin', butti it iht ıs ^ uu a ť »ul ind unì он nimi tendi d to ju »i l pi η th t pude I hue \ioiktd, <ι d h tv il m ■ İRİ ill tl nik Soiuciíu I itti ι ı н , \tı iii ıny ι πι ιι ^tluu was (!Ol UR ¡χ ι W Οίύ i ilkti, tİKUlJit Mould un uin * f .ην» .muh» tut to ulioıe lui] ptiu К to hu, 1 luvt bulul inch а ihn .n oí indignation iu htr nitnd, that, ahır a \cty tiitudl conveifation, fhe ended by telling mt, Sonu i k ι wis be¬ tömi to htr nn bij il tl limt' l nuly bil«, w it and nul) bt beve «dio, thty art tiou dtvuktl ! or lift ' If lu addrtlks hır lui dier vuth uiuilu.il lohnt'-, íhe w a uuhiiti it to и /if ι Jft n, fliould he Ai iu. iitally luglttt htr, flu «iii impute u to. ¡ею, , Otu ga}, iht «¡11 behest ht ι*, i i'ı ¿lifi, От ieiioti, iht will t ин lude lu ıs / rt / .'>t4 ; ¡tino oir dui dttou of mind tan flu now ever bt! old bun "лип «.Ле or confidence, ' Here
liere Mn. Duibigh, angrily rfpljcing thi* letter in as covti, <\i ! iniud, O tan g{ no (tatlıcı ' I his ts kí-, a io ан than ¿fi >ď \*o doubt, what I luvt now Ыеп re uling i\ the part Mr. hoineikt ľo ımlıg- juntK dtılditd liti loa lah ι ht— x-, the part that ltd nun fo kailullv to appa¬ ll nd you fulptited hun ol v inity and pit- f ι iiption·— Cood (-od ι how hns flic de- fiiuilim fiom t! t fiifì moine nt I k m w Ι. ι ' S> tho ylitit I·* and undt! giling πι app .nallit, lo II líe !lv\ ¡L·.·, ani Ullprill cipini in natuie '- i i*. Urangt — u*, vioii- dıoib ílrange ' С I »re num to «tli thii мач uíteilv íiltnt * to hot attempted any deft nee of Mr«. Jit rtlord would lw\ e btcn pttpofte rota¬ to aggravati· Lei еггон would have been unineicittil fhe the it lore fu a muiral aud tor oi Mrs Dtnbigh s t xtlam.iaonsg and kit rtbtwd, -a he n Гн kt ııtd of tht íi.bjtti, Ihr. ii 1 ημιΐι, voluutdiih vh.!iı b eil ît. ¡ate in the citnm^ .ht tia\tl'ci*. ar- r.vidlaftl} at il.tni| fh ad, aid рм ıtt'td iinimdiattly to the houfe· ol \lr lenii un. i hat gt nik m n \ n ce¡ tton oí thitji was cordwl diul tİKAiıuU Mr*., Bjieia) s ui ìltl
her wí*y, wis friendly ; and ber dangiv* ¿ers, as ufual, blunt and indifferent· Λ fte* the cultomary compliments and ^ongratulatioUN were over, Clarentine, who dreaded lu ((eit to aOi any queftions î скш ve to Mis. Heitford, was by no means foiry, however, to hear Mrs* Denbigh enquire of Mr. Lenham where ihe wao » At her uncle's houfe in towiij n re* plied he. « She is going lo Bath foon/' cried Mif> l'arc lay. « To Bath ?" "Yes; fhe complains of her healths and fays the waters have been prcfcribcd lo hor." ^ Le f hea fî wa'ers> they íhould be," faid Мгч iVubígh-, in a low voice io Claren«» tine. ^ I fufpcčV* returned Clarentine, fmiling, " fhe would be perfectly con¬ tent to tefign thofe to us." The change fince the morning· which Somerlet now obferved in the behaviour «)f (larentine; the returning fweetnefs vith which (he treated him; the tinnd legibility that unconfeioufty betrayed it« fclf
felf in her fine eyes whenever they met bhs and the conciliating gentlenefs of her voice as often as ihe ventured to addiefs him, filled him at once with hopes fo flat¬ ter ing, and gi atitude ίο unbounded, that, all animation and vivacity, he converfed with a gaiety and fpirit wiiich inf u fed cheatfulneks into the whole party, and made the evening appear to Clarentine one of the happicft, though one oí the ihortcfl, fhe had ever known, When Mrs. Denbigh arofe to depart, and had taken leave of the reft of the company, approaching (larentine, whofe thanks ior 1 er hue kindncfc- were аь warm as they weie киоте, ihe took her hand, and p rt flieg ц uííecn mal· ly between her own, laid. ·· Do not talk to me of thanks, deareft gn!. but of coinage to fuppoit your lois; 1 know not how lo pait hoin you, for Го i e you liave proved a com¬ panion fo invaluable and lo attaching, I dread the iiigiuhil ioluudc to winch I am now returning " Clarcntine, equally gratified ami af- fefled by thb Ipoch, pi ami ti with the utmoft alaci uy, huce iho itili u fidi d ίο веаГэ although they were no Auugci um er the
the fame roof, to make her vi fits frequent and long, and to fpend as much of her time with her as fiie wiihed. She then attended her to the door, whither they were accompanied by So¬ merfet, who was to efcort Mrs, Denbigh home, and who, as fhe defcended the ueps<> held out his hand to Clarentine, and faid with a half fmile, c< Will you not, my fweet friend, beftow one word of confolation at parting upon your fé¬ cond fellow-traveller ť' " No," re[)lied fhe, chearfully, " for if he finds· the féparation very irk fome, he need not doubt the pleafure we ihall ail have in feeing him as often as he can come to us." So faying flic gave him her hand, which, with blcffings and thanks he preifed to his lips, and then flew after Mrs Denbigh. The pleafure with which Clarentine now revi fi te d her former apartment, and again beheld f о many objects that re¬ minded her of the happy time when So- merkt and ihe (upon the fame friendly tenus tf) which they appeared to be re* turning) feemed to have no wiih fo earned as that of mutually fcrving and plcafing each
ca ini other, was live'y-^ind unreftrained» Every doubt of his fmcerity removed ; convinced almoft to a certainty of his love, and aífured íhe had nothing more to apprehend from her iniidious rival, flie furveyed all the different tcfliinonies of his faithful affection with the fame grateful exultation ihe had firft accepted them; and, at length, retired to bed in a ftatc of contentment anfing nearly to felicity.
CHAP. XXIV. Clarentine had been fettled once more at her venerable guardian's near a fortnight, when, foon after breakfaft one morning, as fhe was fitting alone in her own room, another letter was brought to her from Sophia. MbS DELMINGTON. Delminuton-Houfe, Ffbruary« u I have firange things ίο tell you, deareft Clarcntine-^ firange, that half doubting
doubting the poíľihiiity of their being reaî myfilfï I am aimoit afraid jø« will doubt it entirely, öne moment, eager to come to die point, the next, frightened and afhamed, I know not how in the worid to begL τ and as iovfinißjing^ really believe I muit leave that to the unmoved and tran. quit Harriet* Dear, ihe does ftroll about the houli with an air fo provokingly са!щ and at her cafe, ï could aimoit beat her ! Why is not every body as diitraBed and ľcftiefs as I am ? My mother's kind and anxious face is the only one in the family I can look at with any patience : dear Edgar is not here, or elfe he would, per* haps, fympathizc in my perturbations; at leaít, í am fure he would not appear fo indifferent. ï cannot bear indifference juil now—if I dared, ï would rather pinch people than fuifer them to retain the flighteft fymptoms of it I i6 Muit ! not now, however, endeavour to begin my (lory ? You will otherwiíè pinch me w hen we meet, I fuppofe. Well then, take the following ílrange (there h no other term for itj relation. " We have lived here, as well fince the departure of Mr. Somerfet as before his arrivalj
arriva!, in extreme good humour with each other* vifiting or vi iked every day, dancing or playing every evening, and— href~m high fpirits and perfcB amity. " On a fudden, however, lo and be¬ hold ! a few days ago, while with Emma, I was lifting thrumming upon our old harpfichord in the parlour, the door opened, and in walked——you (hall guefs who when you hear the reit. « How·dye-does and very wells, and thank-yes^ and fpeeches over on both (ides, I quitted my feat, and taking my work, placed myfelf at the window, and tried to ilart one of the ufual conver¬ fations concerning funfliinc and rain 5 wind and calm; for, to fpeak the truths my companion's looks and countenance perplexed me a little, and taught me, though I fcarce knew why, to apprehend fomething extraordinary was coming : thefe amufing topics, however, had no efìecì: upon him, and eveiy five minutes there enfued a profound and embarraffing paufe. «* Mercy, thought Î, this whimfical wretch is always alarming me! What am I td expect now ? « He
*' He kept me not long in fufpencc—« but in a fliort time, difpatching poor Emma upon fome bootlcfs errand, (Í wonder what right people have to take fuch liberties with m íiíterfj approached me, as I Itili pretended to be, immenfe ly buiy, and feating himfelf at my fide, would have taken my hand: I drew it back; and though I did not fpeak, looked, í believe, ш little di ima y cd, for prefently he cried-« 'Why h my lovely friend thus filent and thus frigid ? She takes from me all courage to begin the fubjetì upon which I came purpof ly to addrefs her; deareít Sophia,* added he, my unfortunate little round face teaches every body to be familiar with mej 4 fpeak to mc—tell me î may open to you my heart, and that you will deign to hear its fecrets with indulgence !* 'What, more fecrets?' cried 1, en¬ deavouring to rally, '1 thought î had pe¬ netrated all yours long ago ľ 4 О no ï' cried he again, and aimoit for¬ cibly ínatching my hand, * you know not yet what a capacious heart it is—how many fecrets it can contain, nor how nearly its preien t feelings relate to yourfeif/ ** Hooked
&i 1 looked up, ! looked down, ï co¬ loured, Ì turned p-de; in fliort, I was fo confcious of having the direct appearance of what at t\w f moment I certainly was—» a fool—that unable to keep my ieat f knowing that the man's piercing eyes were fixed upon my face the whole time, haf¬ tily arofe, and made an attempt to run tmt of the room: ir w a·» but an attempi, how¬ ever, for iiiliaiuly puifuing me, he once more caught my hand as i was opening the door, and never parted with me til! not only his <?-v/¿-~ -but mj poor fecret was revealed alio. " kan you conjeture what this double myilerv -vas, Clareniine ? No. you fay. Why th· n, futcy you fee us both Ieated again at ti.at memorable window; I İMİ looking filly —he fancy, and I am afraid ä little feeure—and attend to the lequel. " One of the iirft things he afked me, and aimoit in as plain terms as I now re¬ peat it, was-—' v an you love me, deareft Sophia ?* 4t * I did not anfwer like poor Kate— c i iaYinot tell-d but my look of mdecifion-, and his own ftraight-forward enquiry, I iancy reminded him of that fcene, for he pre¬ fently
í » Ч odde d T *ub a nude— β /^ /7г * car ft ¿ ? ^ # ч í t л % ƒ„ j ts tfoi—tÅat 1 ч *t\ ^ * — * 4í · ì it \ ¿uit j i\ tbs I \ < , ,:κ τ * 4 ;'//u /гг.— A\ f ϊ' i i: )Ла. η »ч ti а'ч dui nn late dii- ¿ i> o e» n,, 1 ^elü\ r t i )otìd>ie 1 L\vr с ίι , luve агчо Yi t* the с час! ι ·. α ν İt »ц* f to f ί ί connection ^if h ! к -и h)ì îo be iimablcj î have exptruncvd dot \ ju c^n be guıerı us, #i d 'o ah îi It with whom uni aie alhcd I \ tì e ih > oí ηΐ"!κ% I Ice that you ian i „ u o^ť Ih i n» 1 '. Ь jv\e\ π, d~- 4 о. Ч t , 1 г Hi liOt 11 il у и« t α 1 τ J * v ν* tin t i\ír«vagant and ϊ o t josh ¡ u 1 ] n 1 d it ior v nur rak inat- i _ t . ^^o b( f 1 «idnuif* the cxctlknce < í \ uu urdei íhndiiO, I d light m the ^i o í f v om tom ouuín n«, 1 love the > * он! h nei ritv f> f your dilpofuion, i? tul riu «ггисч of y oui animated anden« сЬаыац htt'e countenance have half tu* o d mv hcol ! — I comot be happy с ' ^ '/ vou, and îc/</> you, î may not onh be liappy ?o ■ /, but piove the means of nndciing jŕ// ίο likevsile.— Be mine-, then, dcaieii Sophia! complete y otu
\ o!k- and a·· }<'u Lectin, ίο i f iJ uhi n y ItfiAUv 4ч Κ,ο-Γ^^ίΓί tiun j:> m ti o í* * j c , ι ι·α will д. Ι h - teal ĺ о*.» * . ;.o; ík \ о » . A , t iî)g tO ίι 4 ν \ п!и I я О О v j Л О . ороиоо О îmaïl. i,« о; t i í ' ^ . О и « th_ 11P 1 í!. í f ä, r io! e/u, * »»o·-..*·.
s
whe*hc: i км i * л од u to > ч ■ .», οι м Io L o i ^i »чЦ* c, ..iod íhe |*tr- î e ilk Ul h í * v o o ik . I >..umi- iii iľaijj allievo] í ' чу" 1 ' Î!>i "- Пиер, r- iui h ico cots ικ\,ί <:cu . lo tool ; Ьл\ f i>, ^ďii I writ- ίι ' f !■ .du; /'l .e, no', oli¬ li io anu .. о · -л л » . . ι . . , , î raud i ч .-— -ΐ! ^ ι *.«■ tit u« - ì . « ;. : .s :o uc v, . ,, luUo v,4 t. s ^ .v· «ic ο ι * i tua . : v t' . ι l —— u.l . . t. ,-■ . -—- IL af. -. v \ ч. . . .siv. : i . t. . ov, , 4 \ hoeih! e * O. u.iKtt С !л* ос/л..· vi ο *' ι- and ик oehJOntc a·, wt Lo*ì „o* no' that we eie upon the o! r,e ■ í ť ·* pie о pice, 1 tiouble to think <d t/l tht. o.uur- ditics and n>dios we ma\ both commi; '—- Mv mother tt lis mc he in 1 cut u. isn . co· rymgmc kJ Londontids voy iprme ■, £ wifhed—you know how t _;eih— -t > go with Lath julia; lun dıoıJ nulluni lo > ».F r KW \or , jü, î nu u li
и - e ^^ρ ими. who, q'oaiiyas î Iliall м ι * h >s «"ipofTîbh'. Ьоъ t veti í c m look » ο ,» ť* ti * d ч^епег í İh ou id toa more ι n oi guni,* I ru indulgono* ' '* b ib ь octree of his temper promdes г , I ^οίΐ4 I- г щ -¿.né the Foam of dii» "pìtici wl ι h will b í" offered no ï fiait j , ίι m. tht" t -το» oí abufiug. i h a v ť* not v Ί* Oľieoo eio dear < iarrntme, por Ι ί'ί>^:ι Pãii\f Ην с of tranq^jîiuy. î íha 1 ! bvuj cn odious Irtela fluttering с ^ oc o 'inring mv vnsîru a^d detiene- г ■: u ! ífi i ^ а д dhp <ц uld card» öi\ r—» .îi 4 il! "/ thuc;}». »..»w Ithink of it. ¡οι I ! α< ели*- . t.y, bat perlups \oiii aliununabh Lunden mav teach røe to like thou : aie )ou become a gambler » φ * # ží Give me joy, my own Clarentine, give me joy if you love mc !—It has jufl been detcu lined, that inftcad of going to London to figure away in all the new« fan^h d frippery of an upftait fuie lady, in a hctifi cf her οζνκ, and a coach of ber owr$ and all the ctcetcias that would infallibly have mined my giddy brain, i am this year,
· \ e¿r* ^* * *- - a. 'H. nn f i, i. , * a icLl.k»-.. oi m , %'i ^, Ь r ^ , * ь гл hol ! : í!1 j f f- ^i me j ¡i ¡| j4 o íi > » « ·, -n j: i f ï Ol ť » /W i liti. „ ■ . и í d ,^ηΓ I « I/ о <* í * ' -f '· !\ ti . \dii i ie ! r ŕ h o s i t ï tlie ,У1к î .»í ž » ,η,'Ίί * ä ,. τ , , baui о ы\ \ ii ; .ι^ . а\ч j ν οι ι # muelo ^ Ι lo ' » » a u' α ; » l.^h, ι ^ ť * íohcine I ^la w v 4İ upi . u i: Ia α lOllUtuOÌ !П, 't r ¿Z ΆΜ, IHI, '! 1st ϊ fhouhi , i. л\ . ■ f ν»-ι ' * h , dwbt, 4 oj ι lt. t . i d ./ » diu i f : j » dol bv ι 4 i n r i > ti ■ . ;„ ι éi M; ή *ι· tl mo h , ì ■ŕ viili i υ» 1 Wo .»Ί. ir . i thi* Г.«-] . , ·---. .Lo i ' * » î iort oí a lobo \ . í*. , , , ·. the r y o;n ; οι ι ·., I Л о» ; к* * , t 1 h-dLVe tO h»» 4 M l·. 'Lat l'tjvji ii'tK,!. κι,,* tolerably ι. ;hu aisd keep u> j. u, щ ^ e| order. \\i<*dd mv motÌ4i von.iia-«. imi- pan) iro; οι, at leali, in.it \ e ti>uld 1 av. iucccedcd in delay mg thbionmhahle . ν о- mony 1. 11 I had it in m\ po\us ίο ю^ч.· túlate invícifon кАчщ a lude v nu , both Τ f> lpc
é t ŕ I *- * <♦ M *u n * о I _ ^ νΐ -'iii \* , г- о о I ik*- о* « ι * M » v n t -dť г í a ".v 1 vi , r , c c ft e i , rtlHÍ r ^ OO" n 1 ? ' ■ ï i İ Ob Jou i o ίο ^ ιτ m« n h ly % î * ţ Í Π £ w' i t * - ik eï. ι ι * ufi be 1 , ih w ι; 11 w ι ι be uiv I í * ι,— hut о s α 'houiand î * ι * iuKiine^ break out of I n, ' it İ *í ad 1 ave fuch art о '* j .ι m m\ tompámon, ís \s t'un a nurdcle can with» *o í kdiwVMng и. ο ι i - c ia* с mme, now I feel fafc 9 ! ll * ãjyiiíl. rd Wo oì s time f«>r fetting it is toad 1 -* lı\edş but i have great reafon
í к
те«» u 'Mf » н - - а г ► Ui* *i. fr, ( i-i k s , » · . ' ' У ľlL , in* »u t к, : ,оИ í 4 , ί ,ί J , ι * Ι , . 4 Ο 'ί κ U* i „a J f , - . , ^-¿r ĺ ' · "ι, î .*.. '·■ * uî ' **: * π Ot- I.'Oţ ^ * л - : ' vu * 1 ■ T · L г. u r't о '„ oe ì с н ur, gî t at f l i л о » », ι» ť» , η tu-, '¿ ι * > » к «ом <, M v * e?, lo*, j i m oí loj. w «г în„ui f t w ölő t oto auon. ш die coa le d" Hil Å ι o m» w * >î' H orr j* я, f le ito ' 4 o,, k" ¡s d^\. и , ι ι ' » o. !' fpent ť ' 4ll ' * *■ M p. . ι ^ WritU ii O hO „'í , . * -»1 ι - e „О к Л the о. . 4*.„,.: t» 'unii ,, -.τ L· - Λ I i^c- о! * ι ' ., -.Nil í\ol i ¡uVv а oo o iile \oh roí r*,* much d-jítgí.Uu Vie т, а> ! oh ι ι noi ror ot ct cerom с т'ого% and n»r>u!d foouer admit any body ıhan hım, I b - heve, ш the honour oí booming her re¬ lation» What if to be doue, hou e v* г ? 2 cannot perfuadé him to alk for iu ï con» I 3 fent,
Iľ«í î i* ' » * ^ í ** í % г r fji ť · 0 и * v ï J C] · j » « fdOi » ^ i í ь ι há ik» L Йен Л У.\ ? * i j i , л L * 4Ìi r en '..·
n * ,,
\ .) ι < ! θ/' ι » η jr »d ·*.ΙΚ ? - dejretì i . «'u, lhe nad ι к - - . s ί ι " en or í г í » ι * u .ι л ц pr· i e .л ι- α i d ìu^fc^er, á ί .elu ül o the ľ ! Z. ' ν ι ί-ν | cr-
t f ì^ с: λ r: » ηη * ΐΐ.Η, m αη- ì г ■· ! π.„ 1 u as vit wholly т с . ,« , i-v η. J ν*., in» u пде a Iet- í r у v v ι *. t ,. «'iü¡' ihe u* >íí afLctionate ! ι o- u 4 oí í ' aU and oncloíing in :t \h u·» i 4 uc np o :he tame occaíion to j adv IhVhu χ, ¿¡a o íei.i them btith by re- turi, i r ι oft. Scarcely
^^vL. fui ык ^ιπ, f 4 u vus lua- od 1>чп ibu;* ! * ;. ' fì ni.tii- VsSn. li. noel * 1 her« -A» pid i* bv o u »th i ^¡00 ^ í- 1Гл ì kî i\ f ^Añ€ í ^ ·· «.^.U Hib íu K nr„ «wl nüık.iîu iu » *- »..огфагч.п! „, .: ki . t UioieLi e haut ned d«, άιι without û«*> As ilt «ifproi-vhtì у- païluur loo'-. Do di * ! v; khi d, ta*' д with uil hut «.u· cuito'.)* U ovaory^thv vo^c i \l r evkoi- neiN, αΐ.α лЬси íhe optaed u, Loh, H им Walk. ^ ! П , 1. Ч« îht îoC'ill at I ïïi «oro HIÒ l J 1* -, .;o < Pî r ч rvJj krť e Ό^Ο. ' . t ,iul. h " ϋ f 1 ? t oí |UÌ- iı, ι * 1 *îî t *I v. 1 ď hv eì^ d tO O. í - * J O i , ¡Í¡M. vvb', l ÌL· no í or n d n * . ы e v,k 1 lì tne o ťror li, k . .i d ii:i íií h,, p «w 1 tu vauttp.iu. tor il tn,.-*» vv ι ч . h *r tul «r would t о 'аш. C! ivuiiu. i n"i di*.tely openc í r, and found ns u th iv 'Anno¬ io Mo D* * Ί*\ΜΓ\', u We са ne t > town 1 .(t ηΐ; ξ t. nív ď ir Mik ккЬгооилц an 1 I um Jiïvddv- ι,η- 1 4 patient
я , * ž í s cl i nol horrible cold t t t м n-, ^ (-ом- o prí^'tnts 4 ^ o i'*.* tht ff Л U elHİ volí u ŕ - ni.iii d j> s M v í f ι·* v ï leqiK íl« ' i " t b' ч , t 'ij u ;i d, Hot í* -, * " .1 o tä o if) to*nt and % ! v h í i ) ι î o a d í b ш д u i <·■ -a/:** Ι' ι i ob îoi ou aí duce í Л е l ll г tá Pj * 4 f 4 t o Nhi ne-TOmgton, w ovor aff oìonaielv vo'irs, *■* Lo. * 4 Al in :^R>"» l' 5 ' t «v *p: \fr ι ! L to in^.iation, 1 ' 1 i,j · 1 f rt, ! m p ti e note and uni. " *w M m , "· \ f the ut¬ ót , 'í * ĺ ·\ , ■ ι., κ ittuî U be ready «ıı (he Ш íht , ppfJIilt>." bs j ïï arh nm m hei name/" cried he, ťí and \, .li o.w ^сЛор bí» :& to announce »ln Înv,* ,ts of mv embaliv. Somerlet," oleioi tu, % * do \ou return with mer" sí No; I am going to pay a viiit to Ms. Denbi¿b. M m Mrs,
s * Mr-. D u.h'gh .' a; , trae, o 1 ! ougui to do ihe la nc ; I ha\ c ivu ti 0* to d н , îhou \h · but qne tn v í cíp оь :<» h:r, and teli 1 -r Ι ih di tu! th- cori ofl 00 »;:ц- nity «ď îb 00-, п.* m\ í 'f u '"rr f y.t, and repa i i iì'4 nr pt f* - ^ 'fh /i.. ' Ile ihou m,*de í о Ь .v ι j íjoentinc, and mount 1 ig hi> huite, ba.(K-:ie i back t,* Aìbctnaik Hre ч Though karce a day had paífed fiiife her ι etimi from Bath, dumo the coude of which Clarentinc had not ie n, and tvra fot ho-ir* c^iivcrfed widi "koorírf* thb wmv the nr'l tune fhe had * v- r ¡kuml herfelf a'one \\i.n him. The hints Mrs* Denbigh had do pptd of 1ю *a'i\ioa» de¬ fire to солю to oi explanation had Udì frightened* ^^à ia nie her cautiouily avoid aii priv.ite c.niverfation ; it was nor, ihe re- fore, without extreme cmbanailmei. t ihe now perceived that almoft every e, n-o* ol екарпц it was at an end. Mis, lul lav and her daughter were both in town; Mi. Lenham was engaged with his young pu¬ pils, and Somerfet iorgetting his intendi Л viíit, feemed by the thoughtfuinek of his îooksş to be meditating how he fhould be¬ gin. Clarentine could not bear thus рак I 5 к veiy
lively to avait the refuh of that delibera* lion, and dctcimining to check all expia¬ tion that was preceded by a folcmnity fa awful, threw on her cloak, which hap« pened to be in the room-, and faying it was yet early enough to allow of her de- feeing to drek herfclf another hour, pro¬ pofed accompanying him to Mrs« Den¬ bigh's. Somerfet, fufpecUng her motive, ap¬ peared a ¡hue hurt at this confiant eager« nek to rcprck every attempt he had made to fpeak îo her apart: pitying her evident confufion, hou ever, and knowing her to be incapable of allegation, he was toø delicate to detain her by compulfion, and therefore, with whatever reluBanee, fuifeied her to quit ihe room and (Hently foil о we d her. They walked on fome time, Clarentine compelling herfeîf to talk upon indifferent fubjkok; he, abfent and grave, fcarcely knowing v hat he faid, when, unwilling wholly to loie fo favourable an oppor¬ tunity, beat length interrupted her, and cried, '»it would perhaps be felfifh, per- cei ving how feduloufly you feck to deny mc the indulgence of a private audience, were
were I, with a view of termőn t i n g my own fufpence, to force upon you w liar I have to fay ; but will you, Mm Delming¬ ton, confent to receive a letter from me, and may î venture to hope you wdl anfwer it !" Clarentinc, grateful 10 him for having adopted an expedient that would lave her from fo much painful embarraifment, nudi readily replied in the affirmative, and í/ U half tempted to thank him for his con¬ fiderate forbearance. On their arrival at Mrs. Denbigh**, they found her at home reading a letter ilie had juft received from Mrs. Weft¬ bury. ît contained intelligence of ıMr·,. Hertford's arrival at Bath, and of hci having been introduced to her by the gallant Mr. Lea, who, in quality of cice, beo, attended her wherever íhe went. s * Further/* continued Mrs. Denbigh, u to the honour of my poor friend's heart, though to the difgrace of her judg¬ ment be it known, flic is as completely deceived in this artful woman as we all were. She writes concerning her in the moil favourable terms, and at the fame time that fhe thinks it necefiary to con- I б dole
ťnífjímnÍ by her depirture, congratulates herfelf upon having made fo valuable art acquifiiion to her own iocietv * r To ibi i fpeech neitl;cr Clarentinc nor Someifei made any anfwer: the name of Wits. Hertford was almoíl equally hateful to them both, and their with to changea converfation of which file was the obj ев, led diem inftantly to ftart another fubjett. €£ I have had letters alfo ibis morning/ 9 faid Clarcntine, with а fmile, u ana letters that prove you. Madam, tobe fo infallible л prophctefs, tlot hei.ceforward î ihall be Fiore than ever afraid of your penetra¬ tion/ 1 Mrs, Denbigh begged her to explain herfclf—- u Have you forgot, then/* refumed Clarentine— ς; your predile iiion relatíve to my friend Sophia?'* Mrs, Denbigh, deceived by this fpeech, as Clarentine had upon a former oecafion been by one of Somerfet's, immediately faid, 6i ! s fhe married ?" *» Kot yet; but the formidable ceremony 9 us fhe juftly calls it, is to take place on Tuefday fennight." «* I am
* г I am rejoiced to hear it," cued Mi > Denbigh, íê and rejoiced alio to think v\e are likely fo foon to have her m ihii pan of the wc-ïld; ! long to fee her; i jr a more rational, unalietted creatine 1 or- perfuaded docs not ':xdL Coquetry . * now fo much the fdfhion, that theie dre a thoufand modern Miiľcs, without halí he: real ment, who wutild have thought it extremely pretty to have kopt poor Eltham a year or two in iufpence, by %λυ of revenge for not hating been the n J object of his attachment." u Dear Madam," cried Lb remine, with fome earneftnefs, ^ what anoj it,ion you have of the unfortunate girls of the prefent day !" 46 Nay, do not undertake their defence, my dear: fhJc cauie includes not }ot:n 9 for 1 anı convinced that when once you knew your own mind, you would not keep a deferving m«.n in doubt a moment." Confcious how tli fhe muft, juft thei·, appear tu mei it fuch a compliment, Clarcntine bhiihed, and caft down her eyes j and Somerfet ftroHcd to tke window, at which he remained till the converfation took a different turn, Ы
ln a (hort time íhe arofe to go, and attended by Somerfet, who, however, Cook leave of her at Mr, Lenham's door^ walked home. At the hour mentioned by Mifs Man¬ ners, the carriage came for her, and conveyed her to Albemarle ftreet. The fair invalid received her with much cordiality, and t ho* impatient under ilhïcis, âna extremely oul of fpirit, exerted herfelf to make die day pafs off to her friendly viiitor chcarfuUy and agreeably» Somerfet was the only gnefl there except herfclf; and he was more gay and animated than ihe had icen him fince the night of their return from Bath. A party was formed for the opera the en fu ing Saturday, if Mifs Manners was by that time fufficiently recovered to venture out; atid at ten o'clock Clären- tine took lier leave*
CHAP·
С II А Р. XXV. EARLY next morning, Somei feťs letter arrived. Clarentine, though prepared to receive it, and in very little doubt a*, to its contents, opened it with great agita¬ tion, and read as follows, TO MISS DELMLN'GTON. <ľf, «ord-S t reet, Ft b. 17, u Too long, my amiable friend, love 1 ftudied your guilelefb and gentle nature to be tempted for one inîidiıt to accufe you of ungencrouily wiihing to tri íle with the feelings and happinefs of another. You have evidently fought to avoid giv¬ ing me any oppouunity of unburthenim; to you my heart; you have convinced me, that to pei fevere in attempting it in perfon would diftrefs and embarra к you : but, at the fame time, having permitted ше to addrefs you by letter, you have proved to me that your referve was not lhe effect of infenflbility to my inquietude, % or
or of any dcfign to prolong ¡t, I bleb and thank vou with thewarmeft gratitude loi this foothing conviction, and now ha r !cn to die fubjeci that led mc to folicit \ our attention. * ς It can—I think it can, bc no new iri« formation to my gentle correfpondenfc, that the heart of her devoted Someifct has been wholly hers almoft from the firft hour he law lier on his return from his lait vo\age. Bringing back with him the fweet remembrance of what in child- hood he had known her; impatient once again to behold the lovely, the undif¬ guifcd and youthful friend he had then quitted, he arrived prepared for the im¬ preflion he was to receive, and unarmed to rcfift her power over his heart. Öh, my Clareniine, a.s I again furveyed you, ai with looks of fweetnefs and confidence you addreffed mc, called me your friend, allowed mc the indulgence of hourly and daily feeing you, how did the vitions, which even in abfeuce 1 had cheriftied, itrcngthen and increafc! Often, when harrafed and fatigued by the dangers of my profeliion, often had 1 faid to myfelf, " What a confolatory lccompcnce per¬ haps
haps awaits me on my return ! Clarentine Del mington, tht dear, the ingermous Cki- rentme, when next I fee her, will, from an intercfting and attaching child, be giown Uto a fafcuueiing woman .Retired as was the fkuauou in which I left her, unlefs the fortunate Edgar has íucceeded m conciliating her a f í dion, thoe ıs yet a chance of my finding lier difengngcd. Oh, if fuch fliould be the caie; if after all my toils, my long exile, and the hard¬ ships incident to a Jailor's career, I Ihould in her meet with a reward—a friend—a mi fl refs— what would be my happinefs !" *>* Theie flattering illufions, however, were but of fhort duration. The diilaut, and, to me, inexplicable coldnels thai fuddenly took place of the eoudefeenhon with which, on my firft arrival, you had treated me, checked the prefumption with which I had indulged them, and taught me, though I had not the courage long to fly your fociety, at leafi to conceal my fentimeuts, and never to reveal to л\\) my difappointment. That coldnels·, originating in the artifices of a woman whofe very recoileciion is abhorrent to me.
me Л mean not, however, to complain of; it is at length lufficiently explained; and relieved from the iníupportabic appre- hetifion of having mvlelf eaufed it by fome unde ligncd offence, î now perceive with joy that it has wholly ceafed, and that my friend feems permanently re¬ trieved, u Oh yttz then, my Clarcntine— beloved from infancy, firit and deareft object of my heart!—oh yet-, then, realize thofe delightful vifions !-— deltroy not again the fair proI pect your own fweet» ne i; '. has raifcd.: prove not to me that, in \cntuiing once moie to cheti ill the hope of your becoming mine, í eir too vainly f о be forgiven ! but accept my vows, and vith the nob!-, candour, ihe genero fity that has ever diihmtuiihcd you, tell me, that you think me not uuwouhy of adding yet another, and a more tender title to that of guardian, lover, and fticud! άί W 1 L L î Λ ľ.i Si) M t' K S E Γ ! " Clare/nine wept over this letter vith mingled ienfutionb of gratitude and joy, arui determined by the fpced with which fiie aid were d it to prove to its beloved and
and generous writer the high fenfe fiie had of his difintercfted attachment, and the fmcere and reciprocal affection of her lieaiL TO CAPT. SOMERSET. cc fvfy eyes are yet blinded by the tears your letter has drawn from me : they were tears, however, not of forrow, but of admiration and t hank fui nefs, Somer» fct, my noble-minded, and í will add, dear Somerfet, I am yours. My hand I now give you, and my heart 1 long fince loít all power to withhold from you. " C. D. In lefs than an hour after it had been d i fpatched, this billet brought the warm¬ hearted and enraptured Somerfet to pour forth his fervent acknowledgments at the feet of its fair and ingenuous writer. She received him in her own apartment-—in that clofet to which he had fo long been denied admittance, and with looks of timidity and confeioufnefs, with alternate fmiles and blufhes, liftencd to his ardent proteftations, and frankly confirmed the avowal
avowal v hieb his letter hati inefiíiibly ton* fiom lu r. inicníible to the p rogre fi of time, they had í pent near thue hou is together, and Sonn t h t thought not of ictuining, nor haal С lau ulme the courage to lend him away, till, at length, they woe inter» три d by a iummom? to the diiung- ÏMih.ur. She then entreated him to go bat К to lovtu, feat ing that the privacy of t hur imemtw would occaíion fome dif- »iga с al ie obk i nations L om tlie Barclays, winch iho ut lì knew would in tus piefence diîeoncett 1 er mut h more crucliy than íf duy ней v holly addieíLd to herfelf, IL obevui hei without hüiution, though not wuhout uluctance, and having ob¬ tained peimiliicm to wait upon her again io ¡test morning, took bio leave in the undetdt a.Ml moit grateful manner. IlaUoufig down ilau.s the inilant he \.a. ooe- un eutenng the pat lour fhe found tke v hole L moy already aliemblcd and ieated at table, bhe made a con- fuied apology lor being lo late, and then t?. L mg ho ufual place without daring to iade hu cw-ì, began her dinner in ideat embaituUmeiU;» apprehenfive every moment
moment of being interrogated, and unable to determine wnat excufe íhe íhould make for ne riel f, Mifs liare lay, who from the time (he fi r ft walked in hati never looked at any other object, in a very few minutes fully realized her fears. u Has not Captain Somerfet been with you all the morning» Mifs Dcimington ?" cried fhe—" Pray why didn't he come in to dinner ?" Clareniine, though {¡ie cxpecíoJ fome¬ thing blunt, wa.s yet by no means pre¬ pared for a queftion quite fo di reef ; and knew fo little how to anfwer it, that before ihe could fpeak Mifs Barclay had time to add— i: Tiiere hns been a gentleman here fince break fall* a Mr. Manners, enquiring for you; but thinking it would be pity to interrupt iu fnug a converfation, í bid the maid tell him you was particularly engaged with Captain Somerfet, and could not fee h inu" Clarentinc coloured, and looked, as fhe really felt, extremely provoked, whi lit Mr. I.enham, with fome feverity, faid, u And by what authority, Lucy, do you allow 7 yourfelfto deliver fuch melfages in Mils
Mifs Delmingtoiťs name without her con« г irrence ?" 44 Lord, uncle, ï thought it was but doing as one would be done by!'* Mrs· Barclay laughed, but neither Mr. Len¬ ham nor Clarentinc, though aimoit equally indignant, chofe to make any reply. In the evening their party was rein¬ forced by the addition of Mrs. Denbigh, to whom Clarcntine, open and unreferved, took an opportunity of communicating what had paiTed in the morning. That Lady, warmly interefted in all that con- cerned her, and entertaining of Somerfet an opinion the moft honourable, congra¬ tulated her with the true it affection upon the happy termination of her late anxiety, and uttered the kindefi wiíhes for her fu¬ ture and lafting felicity. Somerfet himfelf, the next day, an¬ nounced the fame intelligence to Mr» Len¬ ham, and was heard with equal, if not yet greater fatisfaclion. Attached to him more as a father than a tutor, the worth and excellence of his nature had been known to him even from his boyííh days ; formed to cultivate and value the blcffings of fe- lect friendihip and dome Шс fociety, Mr. Lcn·
Lenham was thoroughly aífured there was no other fpecies of happinefs his heart was fo well fitted to enjoy, and no woman upon earth, who, from the iimilarity of her tafte and purfuits, was fo pcrfeQly adapted to his character as the rnodeft and retired Clarentine. The connection he had once apprehended he was upon the point of forming with Mrs. Hertford had always given him pain · 3 lefs becaufe he at that time harboured any unfavourable idea of her, than becaufe he had difcovered the apparently hopelefs attachment of his young ward, and grieved to,obferve what ravages that attachment was making upon her peace. He thought himfelf bound in honour, however, not to betray a fecret he had thus clandeftinclv penetrated, and confining alike his regret and his fufpi- cions to his own breait, forbore all at¬ tempts to ferve the one, from his reluc¬ tance to injure the other. But now T that the real character of Mrs. Hertford was known to him, and all competition was therefore at an end, he hefitated not in declaring the cordial preference he had always felt difpoied to give Clarcntine, and the implicit reliance with which he depended
depended upon the goodnefs of her heart, and the firmnefs of her principles. From the moment this attachment be¬ came known in the family, the extraor¬ dinary licence with which Mifs Barclay permiti* d herfeîf to animadvert and make fneenng comments upon every look as well as аШои of Clarentine's^ rendered the houfe fo extremely disagreeable to her, diat had (lie been influenced by no other motive, ihe would have found it difficult io refi ft íhe urgency with which Somerfet implored her to become his without further delay-—** My probation," faid he, half fmiling, " has furely been fuf^ciently long, deareft Clarentine, and my court Chips though indirect^ has alfo, I thinks been of a duration which in con¬ fcience you Cannot wifh to protrae!. Whai more could we difcover in each other's characters, aftei an acquaintance of ib man/ years, were we now with any view of that fort ίο defer our union even for a twelvemonth ? I am no diffembier; the good and the bad, in my difpofition, are equally penetrable, and all your vigilance itid delay will fucceed in deteâing in me nothing raon 1 than an ¡ncrcafe, perhaps, % öf
ricuce/' Clarentinc laughed at this remon« ftrance, but at the fame time alfured him that, far from defiring to raife urmeceffary difficulties^ after having once freely avowed to him the fentimeuts of her heart, flie wiihed or* ''* defer their marriage till fhe had writtt „ to Lady Delmington, and received, what fhe doubted not to obtain, her fančiion and confent, α Ah, rather then, let me write to her!" cried Somerfet, with warmth ; " î dif- truíl the earneftnefs with which you will plead for we ; fuifer me therefore to dif- cufs the fubjetl with her myfelf." Clarentine, by no means forry torefign to him io awkward a tafk, made no oppo¬ fition to this propofai, but retiring with him to Mr. Lenham's ftudy, he there wrote a fliort letter, which, though ihe criticifed extremely, he permitted her not to alter, but the inftant it was concluded, fealed and immediately difpatched. Soon after breakfail the next morning fhe received the following note from Mifs Manners. vol. π i· К TO
TO MfSS i>F!^îîNG10N. u I have at length perfuaded my røo- therthat ï may be permitted to venture to the Opera to-night without any danger; the truth is, fhe docs not know that the villainous apothecary who attends me in¬ fills upon bleeding me again this morning: he talks of my being feverifh, and makes torrid wry faces at me, I Ihall not at» lend to all his profesional cant, Iiowever, but lick or well, dead or alive, am de* termined to fubniit to this irkfomc re¬ il rai nt no longer. '·- We have borrowed a lady's box for this evening, and áre to h -ve it entirely 7 ю our fel ves. The pit и now b come too vulgar to fit in, at leali, fo I am told. Young Wcflbury, who is now in town, and called here yeflerday, protei! s that on Tucfday laft he flood during the whole of the fécond dance next a good old nurfe, or fomcthing of that foit, who finding the wind blew cold from the flage, turned the train of her gown over her fhoulders, and fat with it fo, very compofcdly, till the curtain dropped! u Come
" Come to us early, dear Mifs Del« mington, and make Captain Somerfet fend his carnage for you, as ours is never al¬ lowed (for fear it fhould calci? echi and want bleed'Ht 1 ) to go out in the morning when it has any duty to do at night. 4i Adieu—vour's с -er, ** L. ΛίΑΝ τ Ν£.4£·' 3 f tb. 21. This fľ'id:n: note Clarcntine anfwered with fome tlegree of irony, congratulating its fair wiiter upon the phitoiophical in¬ difference fheexprelfed concerning cither life or death, and applauding her lor thul ciithufiailic py¿\" /у pihJu w h/cn lai Е,г thus to brave all dinger for the fake of hearing a line orcheffra! She concluded, however, by pjomifin^ punctually to iuilil her eng igémen t. Accordiiigh , at the proper tine, at¬ tended by one of somerfet s feivaní^, flu* drove in a hackney coach to Albemaile¬ ft reet, prefening thit conveyance to ac¬ cepting his caniage. Mifs Manners ran out to meet her ¿a the head of the flairs, ready dreilet! and in excellent fpirits, but fo dreadfully К 2 - hoa и e
hoarfe nie could hardly make herfelf in¬ telligible. Clarcntine (hook her head at her with an expreffive fmile, and calling her an incorrigible racket, proceeded forward to pay her compliments to her mother. ín a very fhort time they were joined by the three gentlemen who were to eícort them—Somerfet, Mr. Manners, and young Weftbury; and as foon as tea was over, all repaired to the Haymarket. Their box was upon the fécond tier, and extremely near the ftage, which—the Opera having been began fome time be¬ fore they entered—was already crowded with gentlemen who were ftanding at the kde feenes, and whom in a few minutes Mr. Weftbury, as anxious to difplay the graces of his perfon as themfelves, went lo join. Mr. Manners then ftationed himfelf be¬ hind Clarentinc, and addreffing her in a low voice» u Fray, Mite Delmington/* faid he, u till what time did the important buiinefs you were tranfacting with Somer« fet the other morning engage you ľ' Clarentine, extremely confufed, an- fwcFcd) " I ought to have apologifed to you
you fooner for the rude meíľage you re¬ ceived, but i aíľure you it was not fent out by mc, nor did ΐ know you had called Itili after I went down to dinner." u And who was the kind friend that fi> feafonably ι . dertook the taik of removing all intruders ?" " I was very far," anfwercd Clarentinc, " either from thinking the atl itfelf a kind one, or you an intruder." Mr e Manners bowed, and was begirt - ning again to fpeak, but with an archnefs in his looks which frightened her fo much, that, turning haftily from him. fin faid, Sé î muft not fuifer you to talk te. mc now: we are coi net to have a fon·"," At the end of the firft aťt young \\\ ft ~ bury returned to them, purpofely to îe : Clarentinc he had juil feen a friend o» her's, who, when the Opera was over, he would bring round to her. ŕí I have not been able yu," added hc\ u to fpeak to him, for the Rage k fo full it's impoifible to get at himo, but 1 am fur de men fait* and determined not to let him цо without having feen you," "And who к this fiiend, Sir k' faid Clarentinc with great indiiference. K s « Mr,
" Mr. Lea, perhaps/' ci ied Mr. Man¬ ners -"- О, for Tíeaven fake, Mr. Weftbury/* toto! his ítík r, 'oloni bıiııg h ι herei There is nobody upon cauli Ì hate io much ! ' " Ami yet/ 4 iaitl WeObuiy, u the laft time 1 was at youi houfc wluift you ie* inained at i^ith, 1 nut him there,'' Si 'i hat fays not». ime in his favour; oio's obliged iö invite all fort- vî people foan times : İ repeat it theicfoie, lu \ my avLiiion, and if you bung hiin to us, ill m v o íoigtvt you," i¿ \ , s íikioy /* ( ¡ sed M ť. Mantuns. í( 1 Π го i ! m l 'lu Ьоо , wl'.h \ou, cuid \t»u «j j j j LOO Ì ίκ" 1:1'^ this 1\,ΟΙίΙ of íV'IÍj Dv к iele o·· s, \v o f bui , npHj t l i) to«d. iii-u by the arm, and ihcy qu'un d die box toge- - Λ Α\ bi(>íhcr } í hitnya faid Mihi Manìbo, when tluy woe goue, '· ich by uo means ion y that fuch an excuie w a; oiven him to txhibit l s pietty perfon lik -v-wie. Piay, С aptain Sonici ív t, don't \,n wiíh ίο join them r" « Yes;*
к Yes," an ív/ered he, fmiling, ^ to ferve vou, and h-iík-n the approach oí Mr. Lea." " (), don't talk to me of that man V' sc Then do not talk to mc of leaving you/' V' 44 Dear, I thought I was doing you an immenfe fivout, for 1 coneladed you only Ibiid with us from motives of polite- nefs. ar.d was Ioniin'» the v.iole time to j r*t play the ľ\Aľeí;ois ooo(> th*. ь ά of ibe to.iijh Macar'ì:iie> ι: ■ ìi,! "ее ff >^-\" ĞS Xoj realis j Ì ha\jiiotany fuch am¬ bition/* ■*· You rcfe^' ^ otiife'" c s «ι ικΛ'οΊν then, to be admi»*.-: iu the o.iù,· г<юел ■? ' **· Vos' i enhed i ^ - m,!j . iau l n ·· мщ have .ion; pei fee t ív ^t. Loi и. ' " ί -Oíd ÍVi-w íííaiu !*-, > ou O'íoO . 1 can nuke noiìiim; vii \οα ..nd íe> I leave it to Mi!> Ovlmin^tuu to takt у οα m hand," * ŕ í am ц1а-*, ' Ĺwd C larenîme, ;c you ι dialogue is coiuimled, íur as the оочоц is now diawmg up I Ihau w oli to be per¬ mitted to litten to the ίκ,μοο.'* Very little tutthei д\а*> laid till the end of the lall dance, when Mih> Manners, К 4 impa-
impatient to get to the coffee-room before Mr» Weftbury could nut his menace in execution, hurried them all out of the box, and befought her mother to lead towards it immediately. In their way thither, the lobby being extremely crowded, Clarentine, f eating to be f epa rat ed from her party, moil gladly accepted Somerfet's arm; whilít Mrs. and Mifs Manners, lefs unu fed to fuch a buf¬ ile, proceeded compofediy forward, ap¬ pi a ring quite л< much at their cafe as if they had been in their own houfe. Though í lowly, and with difficulty, they had juil reached the d >or of the coffee-iouin, and were upon the point of entciing, when Clarentine, as ihe was drawing away her hand, and turning to thank Somerfet for his afîiÜancc, beheld immediately behind her, walking arm in arm, Mr. Eltham and Sir Edgar Dci¬ mington î Doubt and ailonifliment, not wholly unmixed with conilernation, feizcd her at this fight, and bereit her of all power to advance. She changed colour, and again almoíl involuntarily catching hold of Somerfet's arm, drew him back, and fcarcely
fcarcely knowing what fhe faid, wink pered, **** Let thefe gentlemen pafs." " What gentlemen?" cried he, but at the fame inftant looking round and per¬ ceiving who they were, he touched hk hat to them, thougii not without himfelf undergoing a eonlklcrablc alteration of countenance, and Hopped to give them time, if they wiihed it, to ipeak. Eltham was the íiríl to make ufe of this opporiumty. He quitted his companion, and, comiiiiţ forward, gravely faid^ u í hope I have* the honour of feeing you well, Mik Dehmneton ?'* Clarcntine only curtfir-d; and Sir Edgar now approaching her likewile, in an un¬ it cady voice, and with a countenance that indicated the ilrongeft emotion, repeated the fame enquiry nearly in iimilar terms, 'And then attempted to exprek the plea hne ίο unexpeck'd a meeting had given him; the woid.·,, however, died on his lips- he hefitated, Hammered, and at length abruptly interrupting himfelf, laid as he retreated, 4i I fear wc detain you from your party, Madam." Clarentinc, in whofe affectionate heart 4he fight of this caily friend had revived К 5 jhe
tlie remembrance of ail th.eir fortner inti - macy, v/a s ftuick with ioi row, on reco¬ vering írom her foil amazement, at the dejection of his looks and voice and con¬ cerned to hear horielf addreiied by him -ŕ loth fuch chiding formality. Innocent a*u· unreferved, ihe forgot the cauie which bad fcparated them, and feeing him only in the light of a long abfent brother—of one whom ihe had always loved, and ftill rc Mined the true ft regard for, ihe held oul to him her hand, and, in a tone of the moil conciliating kinduefs, faid— si No, n\v dear Sir Edgar, you do not detain me: I Hay becaufe 1 am fincerely rc joiced ti> fee you, and have a thoufand ijtudlions to aík concerning y our family. Hove did you leave Lady Dcimington, and my deareft Sophia r"' Sir Edgar furprifed, yet deeply aífečkd by this friendiinefs and coidiality, ac¬ cented lier offered hand with gratitude, and bowing upon it as if to conceal hia agíUtion, after a momentary paufe, an¬ fwered, " They were both well, í thank you, and would both, had they'known the honour f íhould have of feeing you whilft in towuj have made me the bearer
bearer of their mod affectionate remem¬ brances/' * & \\ hai ii iv, Sir." ci ied Somerfet, now addreífin^ Elthin, ;i do you delign to make in ï ona m ί; We abive/í/' au.fwjiedhe, ¿í late this evc.un.;, and jeturn on Tuciday moniin·; Jull ι hen Mi. Maimers arid young \Veitl)ury, as they were forcing them- felves a paifage thiough tlie crowd in then way to the cotice loom, perceived and joined them. iS Ah, Su Ed »ir," cr/cl the hitler, fa¬ milial ly ,оит1!"Ц the e\ idenily-aito- niflicd Baronet. -'' )oa 1 ive andcipated me, i fmJ; I ha/ipiepai^d M:iù Delming- ton to expect a tiieud. and intended to have conducud you to hei m\ í ».di befóte íha kft her box, but you were off lo quick ¿hci tlie em tain div>pped I had no opportunity of fpeakmg to you/' u 1 liave not the honour. Sir" laid Sii Edgar«, gravely, u of knowing to whoni I am indebted for inch unmerited al\e* tion." Somewhat abafhed by this Uueoura-dntc reply, yet determined, alter all the parade K ô with
with which he had boafted of their îong acquaintance, not to fu ffe r himfelf to be fo eafily repu lfed, Weftbury now faid— u I had the pleafure, Sir, though I was not in the fame college, of feeing you often at Oxford : my name is Weftbury.'* Sir Edgar 5 in anfwer to this iutercfting information,, made a flight how ; and theo terning ιό Clarentine, " If you will now proceed, Mifs Dcimington/' faid he, "we wi-i do ourfelves the honour of following you/* Clarentine immediately moved on, and finding Mrs. and Mifs Manners, when ihe entered, ieated near the door, placed her¬ felf' next them; Someríeí and Sir Edgar remaining with her, the thi ее other gen· ik-men itrolhng to the upper end of the room, The mournful filence into which Sir Edgar now funk, the melancholy expref¬ fion of his countenance, and the fixed, yet unconfeiob attention with which he rivetti d hi¿. ev о» upon her face, difcon- ccrtcd aiai at the fame time pained her fo i o h. fo, i o.i cely knew how to look up, or in ά hai manner to fupport any part in tke converfation» Gaiety at fuch a mo* ment—
ment— feeing before her with every fy inp¬ tom of unhappinefs a man ihe had fo long known, and fo long valued—it was impof¬ fible cither to a ffe 61 or feel : faddened, upon fuch an occaíion, or even thought¬ ful, in the prefence of Somerfet—of him to whom fhe had fo lately avowed her at¬ tachment, and was fo foon to be united — flie dreaded to appear; diftreffed, there¬ fore, moft cruelly, and appreheniive of being obferved, ihe fat confuíed and ir» refolute, not knowing how to fpeak with her ufual compofure, and rclu6lant to bctrav her real feelings. Somerict was the firft to perceive and pity her uneafinefs. Too li he ral and noble-minded to entertain any fufpicions to her difadvantage, he imputed it άΐ once to the true caufe, compaflion and friend¬ ihip,; and felt not for a (ingle inilant anv other fenfation towards his lefs fortunate rival than that of humane and generous fympathy. The depreffion ίο vifible in that rival's countenance Somerfet was of all others, when he looked. :.t Cïarcntinc, and remembered what had been his own fufferings at the time he fancied her loft to hinij the moft likely to pardon. Her com-
commifération for him he honoured, and the undifguifcd and a nich» fimplicity with which fhe had fullered her kin d nefs to¬ wards him to appear, much as İt might have irritated a diíiruílfuJ or a felfifh na¬ ture, he veueiated and loved. Anxious therefore to diliipate her em- bar raffinent, and if poílible to engage Sir Edgars attention, he exerted himfelf in order to draw him into converfaiioji, and flartcd by turns every fubjeel which he thought bell calculated to intereft hin.. .Lady Julia he ventured not to name ; but he talked to him of his own family, of biadarne d'Arzele, of Ins Oiler's approach¬ ing marriage, and of the pleafure with which Mil* Pennington looked forward to her arrival in town. Sir Edgar, tho* he was not fenfible of half the merit of this eonfideraie civility, anfwered him with politene fs-, and made an attempt to appear more cheai fui ; his fucceks, how¬ ever, was by no means adequate to the pain which the effort inflicted; ίο little indeed did it anfwer to it, that Eltham, who in a fhoit time again approached them, obferving the fadnefs and defpon- dency with which he itili appeared to be oppi'cficdj
opprcíľed, haílily moved towards him, and taking hold of his arm, faid in a low voices yet with great carneflncfs, ;i Come away, Dcimington, come away !—you'll unman yourfeif if you ft,./ here any longer !" Roufed by thisunexpcOcd admonition, and but too well* convinced of its pro¬ priety.. Sir Edgar merely flopped to make his parting bow, and then with a look that claimed and excited all Claren¬ tine's tendered pity, fuffered himfelf without oppofition to bc drawn avvay. When they were gone— u who is that difmal-looking young man ?" cried Mifs Manncrs> 4i his countenance and figure interefl mc in his behalf, tho' he has really made me alinoli as vaponih a.s him¬ felf." Clarentinc, with a figli, replied he was a relation of hers, and his name was Deìmiioton — ι > **- W cil, î proteíl I thought U^ re¬ fumed Mifs Manners, " there is fo ft rong » a family refemblanccbetwcenyou, that the whole time he Hood here I had got it into my head he was fomchow or other connect cd
connected with yon- But pray do telî me, what is the matter with bini ?" Somerfet, who law the cpnfufion to which this queition gave rife, (pared Clarentine the pain of anfwering it by favini; with a half-fmile, u cannot Mifs Manners, if indeed ilie fufpects our friend of being unhappy, beilow upon· him her good wiíhes and hercorapaffion, without íufrering her curiofity to precede her benev<dencc ? !t " О dear, if his hiftory is a fecret, 1 don't defne to penetrate it ! my pity is homily at his fervice, and ï am only forry he has not fomething more condolatory to depend on/' *· He has, I hope/* thought Clarentine, *· ihe moft certain of all dependencies, rectitude and good principles I м Mrs. Manners' carriage being now announced, her fon haítened forward to offer his aííiítance in conducting Claren¬ tine to it, whilft* his iiíicr put herfclf under the care of Somerfet, and Mr. Weftbury had the condefcention to give Ыь hand to her mother« ľt had been prcvioufly determined that Culi entine was to Uccp that night in Albe«
Albemarle ílreet, and return the follow« ing day to Mr. Lenham's. Somerfet therefore took leave of her at the coach door, after receiving an invitation from Mrs, Manners to breakfa.fi the next morn- Clarentine's mind, after this diflrcffing interview, remained in a Hate of the utmoft inquietude and agitation. Sophia s late Setters, and the favourable accounts fhe had heard from time to time of Sir Edgar's amended fpirits, had taught her to hope f as well for his own as the fake of Lady Julia, that the juvenile partiality he had ich for her had wholly given way to reafon and abfence. The deep and fettled depreffion, however, fhe had with fo much regret obferved in his ap¬ pearance—his manners—his very voice, had deflroyed all thofe expe8ations, and ieň her nothing but the afflicting con» icioufnefs of having, with whatever inno¬ cence, been the means of blafiin<y all his youthful happinefs. Soft and gentle as was her heart, this certainty was angui ih to her; and flic wept with bittcrnefs over the iate of a man, whom, to have reftored to peace and tranquillity.» ihe would have iac ri*
ťacuficcd almoíl every perfonal gratifica¬ tion* Sincerely did íhe lament the un¬ fortunate chance whi«. h had again brought them together, and again revived, per¬ haps at the very time his laudable and vi¬ gorous с ilorts had hiccceded in nearly era¬ dicating her image from her mind, all lus fonner íenthnento No vanity, no little un* generous exultation mixed itfelf with thefe rellecLiuiis ; it was far from being a matter of triumph to her to think ilie had been the caufe cf gk'ing pain to any human being; auttch lefs to а friend who, like Edgo' 5 had ihe been permitted to accept, at the time he propofed himfelf to her, before her heart became fenfible in favour of another, fhe would have given her hand to with gratitude, and have made it the íkie íhidy of her life to have repaid him for hi diuntcreited preference. Her love for him asa child had been animated ami f.nccre, and though as ihe grew up, the frequent changes ílie witnefíed in his tempo , perplexing as they л\еге to her till the ill chofen moment of his declaration, had often piqued and oííerided her, yet the habit flic was in of regarding him with confidence, and treating him with inti¬ macy,
macy, affu red her, that in contributing to his felicity íhe íhould greatly have promoted her own. That time, however, was palled ; and equal to the wrctched- nefs he experienced would now have been hers, had (he , to unite herfclf to him, been compelled to renounce Somerict ! " Alas İ then, dear Edgar/' cried ihc 3 11 what remains for me to do, but, wkh my pit}'; to offer up for vou ray moil fer¬ vent prayers for the reíloratíon, thiough fome other channel ? of that happinefs, which, even if I had unì the power to confer, î could no longer participate ; but which the fweet and amiable creature to whom yon are about to be connected is equally formed to bellow, and difpolld to fharc ! — Heaven, then, blots and teach you how to eilimate her value, and return her innocent aífctUoa!"
Cia a ρ
C H A P. X XVL ÄT breakfaft the next morning, when íhe met Somerfet, her languors and the heavincfs of her eyes alarmed and grieved him : he had no opportunity of fpeaking 10 her alone, earneflly as he wiihed it $ but hearing ilie had been prevailed upon to remain with her friends till the fuc« ceeding day, put into her hands, juft be¬ fore he went home to drefs for dinner, the following billet written with a pencil at the window : — *' In my way hither this morning, ϊ acci* dentally met with Mr, Eltham:—Anxious to hear fome account of his unhappy friend, I took him with mc into a coffee houie, where wc had a long and intercfting con¬ verfation. Be not ib painfully diftreffed, mv beloved Claicntine ;—- poor Delming- ιυη, great as was his agitation on firit feeing you, ili 11 poifeifes a fortitude and manly ftrength of murid- which will enable him
bim, after this trying interview, to meet you upon every fuccceding one with firm nefs and courage. He knew not, till Eltham, informed of it by fome third pcr- fon at the Opera, announced it to him, lhe happinefs I have in view; the intelli¬ gence, at íiríl, üartled and confounded him ; but upon the whole, has been of in¬ finite fervice in determining him more re- folutely than ever to bani fii írom his mind every fentiment for you that par¬ takes of more than fraternal warmth. Re¬ vive then, fweeteft. Clarentine, and fu ifer not the foft companion you feel for hiin, at a moment like the pre lent, to fuperfede all the other aifeclions of \our beau! The deep concern with which your own forrow has idled me, entitles me to neaily as much pity as you have bellowed upon — ï had aimoit called him—the enviable Edgar Г With fuch a motive to overcome her dejection as the fear of making hci μοο- rous Somerfet unhappy, Chirentoie found it no diilicult taik, when he ag-iin appealed, to meet him with all her wonted . hearful- neo and compofure. The caution con¬ tained in his note, delicate as ϋ was, put ï iicr
her upon her guaul, anal proved to her, that however diftant from bis mind all jealous mi liruit now was, he could not anfwer for the continuance of his ferenhy fhould her anxiety and melancholy con- ti nue alfo. 'fhe '-'/V./ p cr [ι к alluded to as Fkhanks informant at tb.e Opera, fhe had not a doubt was Mr, Maimers. His raillery and former archiok had aimoit wholly ceafed, and been replaced by a refpeclful quicttu fs, or a ooieud \ioohy« which, as İı had never, e\cept once the night be¬ fore, fu non oí o«'usu <d hk' abrupt dif- million tiu.· mor;,·:' t he hoi calk d ел liomp.h-uk ;;:v · . ^,·\·η, ..i га! зга) love of tormenting, com oo d ho - he wos per¬ fectly acouinu Ί w it i\ ú e pokút íuua- tion oì' her a if us -^ Kaik' tlie ü. v \f тапок.}, С lauluine woukl ioi ve rt w.vu -d iuuj.e. " 'u «tiis okn- nct*., encoura.'eu io' her hk! 'иссек* Ье- fought her lo íaoueíU) to dcf«rhei do¬ pai ture till evening, îhat at h п<лЬ íle ■ -uk med; and with yet his diííiculty a í|uarter of an 1;(Я!Г aftciward^, agreed îo accompany her, attended by her brother, to the Si^akefpcar Gallery ; Someifct was to
to be engaged the greateft part of the day unon fome profeífional buíinef'» ; and Mrs« Manners, expeciing viiitoi\s, declined bein^ of their party. Soon after bro. k fett therefore they fet out on foot, die weather being favourable, and had neirly reached tlie mi idle of Pall Mali-, when, coming out of a hookfelh*r"s fhop alone, and w uh a countenance, which, though not more animated, vo^ infinitely lefs p Tturbcd than when Cicucnunc had. Ι. Л ť oi lii η, they vore met, and immediati 1 / recog- ni fed by Sır lohgar D<dminj;'on, Changing cob-in' as he a luo ί'ΌΙ the с, }et llru.^hny to appear o' ho caie, ho ft'qipcil a few minutes î > m Ле fome te¬ nerci eu- uh U s, and v; as toen taking ho leave-, but Mii s evl a m. о s, whifperiug Clarentine, laid-—" Why don't \ou а Л him tv) go with us ľ' 64 Shall I tell him you delire it ľ re¬ turned ihe, fmiling. u Yes, if )ou like it ; I have no fort of objeción.' 1 ** Why then, Sir Kdgai," cned Cla¬ rcntine, turning tow aids him with the fame look of chearfulncfs—·" I am com* mi ilio ned
miiïioned to requcft, in the name of this )oung lady, whom 1 beg to introduce to you—Mifs Klanners— that you will fa voui us with your attendance to the Shakefpear Gallery." ·*·* Moil willingly ¿" repïltd he, bright* erung ãí the propofai, u 1 ventured not to enquire whither you were going, but be allured, my defire of accompanying you preceded the honour you have dime me in pei mitting it." I hey then all moved on. Mi fi Man« mers faying to Ciat entine as they ad van« cech--»" I think your iblemn friend im- pioves; that was really a much prettier fpecch ıhan I expelled from him. 5 ' 4 - Probably," returned Clarentine, *'· уош i;oodnefb to him put him into ipi- ПК" Mifs Manners made fome flight anfwer to th.>* vinçti her companion had not liuie to attend to, lor juil then they ar- îb'cd at the doorof tlie Gallery. /.fur the} h*id wancieicd about the юоь.ч fome time, Sir Edgar, approach¬ ing ; -intentine, who, u it h a catalogue in hrr hand, was fitting upon a form oppo¬ ste one oi the gieai pictures, reading the leene
feene fi eun whence its fubjeÛ was taken, placed hiiidelf next her, and laid, α lias JMifs Ddaiington any meffage, any letter to íend into Devonfliire? Wc leave town to monow." α No leiter," replied flic, " for î wrote very lately : but a thoufand kind Bicffagcs, to our dear Sophia in parti¬ cular." Then paufing a moment, and think.ing there would bc a fpecies of a ffe ¿tation m ίο manifeftly avoiding to mention I ady julia, íhe prefently added, u And to Lady Julia Ley burne likcwife, when vou fee her " Sir Edgar fuppreffed a figh, awK after г fliort ídenco, ik'd, u Have vou uıİttoı to Lady jului -Jhi lately ľ ot И\л\1 I he the firft to announce to her thcuoou » fhat are o.oo/au-d com c ning \ou *·' (lai mine bluííicd, but aíK¿lmg to freak with gaiety, remit d, *· 'Í ill lady julia can repiy me by iome lìmi· ti ou). lígencí', ílu* u, i/ht acu u'» me oi (h h niiiu-r ·" > "** Оэ îndiredly \o ie;eu4U h ] ei fnr her ci ut 1:\ , were ï ίο Ipt «k tv)o eu K of mv <оц" - íhe hei'., Ut-d I и a wund Hot wnujd \. i h prop, n-t - Оли- 1л ho , , t м^ц, bro í: «L V.OL, í í J, ! ; , f
ing none that flic liked, blufhcd yet deeper than bifore, and heartily repented having gone fo far. Sir Edgar, fancying he had interpreted that meaning, fupphed the deficiency for her» éí Of your own tendernefs r'* faid he—-**' Was not that what you would have added ? Oh, deareft Mils Dcimington, nuy that tendernefs, defervedly as J hope к is beitowed, be but as fervently, as gratefully returned, as it muft involunta¬ rily be envied' - he Hopped, his eyes gliftened; Clarentine,-too, felt her's fill vith tears, and was compelled to turn away hes lìead : recovering more firmnefs, however, he at length added— u Pardon nie, moil g«. ntle, moft beloved of human being*, !-—This is not language in which 1 ought now— d ought ¿"¿o, diítinci as were our lentiments, to have addreiied voui Ir is the lail time I will permit linkli to hold it; but your own foftneis, a ï и î the angelic compaifion you have İhı wn tne, drew H f«om me! When next we meet, to utter it would bc criminal : ťuíhr me iherofore, as a relief to my buriling lirai t, thus one—this only"— « Xo,
a No, no," interrupted Ciarem ine, though not with anger, yet with feriouf- nefs, 4i You have faid more already than, iituatcd as we mutually are, I ought to have allowed. From this moment, Sir Edgar, we fee each other, we converfe, but as brother and as Π iter, or we fee each other, we converfe no more ! M is I fubmit to your terms," cried he; α they are thofe which, fiom this day forward, ϊ meant İtri ttl y to obferve. Toe* long, dear Clarentine, have 1 been inured to the painful tafk of felf-reftraint, m diftruft the fuccefs with which ï ftiall in ■future practife it. J have known every •degree of wretchednefs, borne every fpe¬ cies of torment, which doubt, the appre- henfìon of detection, and the pangs of dif¬ appointment, could iniiicl — bonie them, though not with unremitting, yet with go. nerai fortitude! if, at fo early a period, I could do this-—fufter, yet di f fem ble— fmile, yet -be in anguifh—ah, need jou fear the courage 1 ihall now excit î— A youth of forrow fhould make an old a^e of philofophy : who knows," added he forcing a melancholy fmde, 4& what)ou r Kdgar may one day become ;" L 2 Éí и
u líe will become/* cried Cînrentinc, turning towards him with earneftnefs, and (no one being by) giving him her hand·*-* « h,e will become, 1 doubt not, as happy as with wor¿h ? honour, and integrity, fuch as he poifefes, he deferves to be ! You have a dilpofition, dear Edgar, formed for dome H ic felicity—cultivate your na¬ tural love for it; attach yourfeif to thofe von live with; and, above all, cherifh oıd be kind tí) the alfeòtionatc and lovely partner whom you are deilined to fpend your life with." - « Deareft Clarentine/' cried he, pene¬ trateci by her kmdnef-F, and prefiní g to his bofom the band he held, u how docs this friendihip, nud the ime reft concerning me von fo generoufly cxprefs, footh and ct>nfoleme! Yes. belt of wimien f I will be all vmr excellent heart can wiih! She who has been chofen for me, I will leek to dcierve and render happy; the duties, w holier public or private, that may in the courfe of my future life be hbMo'od up(>n mc, i will endeavour lo fulíil V'-uh exanifule and fpirit: you flialt be my ftciet iplide, the unknown fpring id all ыу adions; your friendly fmile
ihaìì reward, your approbation íHmulate mv exertions; and whatever may be my fate, or my fuccek, Clarentinc never iliall have caufe to blu ih for the voluntary errors of the friend of her infancy—the imperfect copy, but the faithful reve- renccr of her virtues ?" He then, feeing her too much affected to be able to fpeak killed her hand with an expreffion tb.it equally partook of ten¬ dernefs aud refpeet, and haítened out of the room Though cheared by his fair proraifcs, Clarentine was yet İ'o fcnfibly touched by all that had pa fled, tbot fhe remained, after he had left her, motionlehs and m tears, forgetting where ihe was, tiil roufed by the re-entrance, from an adjoining room, of Mr, and Mifs Manners, "What? is our young Sir Dolorous gone ?" cried the latter, golv approaching her—Clarentine· t i hug and walking to¬ ward.» one of the pictures, in a low voice anfwered in the aiììrmative, without ven¬ turing to look round. Mils Manners, perfectly content, thought of him no more, but the next minute began talking of other fubjeÜs, criűcifing L 3 the
the drefs and appearance of every new· comer, admiring the différent paintings, yet fcarcely looking at any one of them two minutes together, forming fchemes of pleafure for the next day, reproaching Clarentine for not ftaying with them longer, and wondering what her mother would find to fay to all the ftupid quizzes who were that morning to call upon her. This thoughtlefs rattle relieved Cla¬ rentinc, and gave her time to recover her ufual tranquillity. They remained in the Gallery till a late hour, Mifs Man¬ ners protciting ihe would not go home whilít there was any chance of finding the quizzes there, and then walked back to Albemarle- ftreet. Somerfet, releafed from his morning engagement, called in foon after dinner, and when Clarentine took her leave, would not be denied the fatisfaÛion of attending her home. In their way to Hampftead, (he ac¬ knowledged to him, with the ingenuous franknefs that characierifed her difpofi¬ tion, the meeting of the morning, and repeated to him the honourable aifurances Sir Edgar had given her as well with re¬ gard
gard to bis future conduct, as to the fen¬ timents with which hereafter he defigned to meet her, Somerfet, with a heart fo well formed to feel the value of this confidence and candour, expreífed his gratitude in the moil animated и rms ; and joined with her in uttering the fincereft good wiíhes for the returning peace of mind of one whom he knew was fo juftly dear to her. " As for Mr. Eltham," added he, with a fmile, 4i the pride and rcfentment which your reje£tion occafioned, has., \ plainly perceive, cur d him completely. Sir Edgar's feif с aiqueft is folely the refuit of effort and principle— bis is the effect of indignation, lie fpeaks of you with extreme reipect, but at the fame time with a certain air of hau'eur which amu fed use extremely, and which, as it proved to me that his angry heart was but a fecondary fuife re r in the bu fineis, amufed me alio without fcruplc.'* 46 lhave fome defign, ' ciicd Claren¬ tine, with arfe&cd grav ну, " to make an experiment of this kind upon yo ; I fhould be curious to know, upon bung h 4 di feat ded
difcarded which would predominate m your mind, anger or forrow." " Oh, my beloved Clarentine/' cried he, fnatching her hand, " flart not fuch an idea to my affrighted imagination ! I cannot bear it even in raillery !" Clarentine drew away her hand, and with a laugh, faid-- 64 If yon are fo fuf- ccptiblc oï a little irony, Mr. Somerfet, what would you have done had you had fuch a gay creature aí? Sophia to contend VOLh?" £S I fhould have been driven to detrac¬ tion; or rather, as a lover, at Icafl, I never ihouUl have contended with her at all. The nuidncL and fallibility of my Clarenune fuit far better with my temper than would that mif-placed wit, wdiich fpotts with the aifeûions of the heart, and makes a jeil even of the moft ferious feel- illGS. ' < f Éi Ah," cried Clarentinc, carncílly, ^ ií fuch is the levity of nature you afcribe to Sophia, you wrong her cruelly ! In the fiill place, íhe neuber afpircs, nor in fad poÜcíies any claim to the character ofa *ωΐΐ\ and iu the next-> her difpofition İf^ khıdnefs and benevolence itfelf» Hcrs is aU
ail hamilefs and innocent pleafantry, re« faking from real gaiety of heart, and as totally unmixed with acrimony, as it is free from the moft diftant intention of of¬ fending!" ** I allow her every excellence," faid Somerfet, " you attribute to her, and yet/* continued he, fmiling, " if I had been ferioufly attached to her, and ihe had treated me with the carelefs volatility with which, whilft at Delmington, I often faw her treat Uîî*. Eltham, I much doubt whether, like him, 1 could with patience bave indu red it." m Yours is not a character,'* faid Cla¬ rentine, ***- which like his would have called that volatility forth, and thercfoie upon you it would never have been tried; it fuits Mr. Eltham, however, exactly, and hy amufing, will contribute to attach him with far more confiant, ν than a difpofition lefs airy and lefs fpiritcd could have any chance of doing/ 5 She then gave a different turn to the Converfation, and foon after they flopped at Mr. Lenham's. The anfwer which Somerfet expeRcd wkh fo much'impatience from Lady Del¬ l' 5 mington,
mington, arrived at his houfe in tows early on the fifth day after he had written to her. He was at Iíampítead when it was delivered, but having left orders that whatever letters came for him in his ab¬ fence íhould immediately be brought after him, one of his larvante rode thither with it full fpeed, and alighted at Mr» Len- ham's gate juft as he and Clarentine were walking up to it, on their return from a morning vi fit they had been malung to Mrs. Denbign. ¡oy% hope, and rapture, animated the eyes of Somei fet, and brightened his whole countenance as he received and looked af the welcome pott-mark of tub moft ar*· dently deh red letter. С larentine ob* ferved his emotion, and by a quick glance at the direction, obferving like wife whofe vvcis the hand that had written it, filemiy withdiew hes arm from within his, and all tonft ionl nefs and emotion in her turø| wal kul haílily into the houle. In a h-w minutes, Somerfet, with una« baud (/,tafy, followed her. She had taken o fuge in Mr. Lenham's ftudy, which at th л hour of the day, he being engaged with his pupib, was aimoit always empty, and
and was there traverfing the floor with agitated fteps, when he entered and flew to her— Oh, now 7 ," cried he 9 feizing her hand and preffing it wiih feivour to his lips, u Oh, now, beit beloved of my heart, I may indeed call you my own, my cver- deåined Ctarentine! All fufpences at an end, all doubts, all fears eternally re¬ moved, you are mine for life, irrevoca¬ bly and folely mine ! Read, deareít of creatures, read and confirm to me by one kind look the tranfporting contents of this enchanting letter ! You faid that upon thofe contents my fate íhould de¬ pend; ratify that promife, and tell me you are all my own!'' Gently difengaging herfclf from his hold, deeply blufhing, yet attempting to laugh at ids earncñneis and unwonted im» petuofìty, Clarenune took the letter, and moving towards a chair, fat down to read it. Someriet placing himfel f next her, The confent for which Lady Dehninp- ton had been folicited was granted, the found, with the readied alacrity, and the good wifhes and felicit *ns to both par¬ ties which fullo wed о с eoi dial and L о animated,
animated. The letter, however, was fhorl though fatisfactory, and ingcniouily a» Clarentine fought to gain time by pro¬ longing its perniai, ihe was at length com¬ pelled ίο own ihe had concluded it, and obliged to anfwer his eager fuppüca«* tions—- Cb What can I fay to you, Mr. Somer- fet?** cried ihe, hefrtaiing and embar* raffed. *-*■ You do not fufpe£t me of de« f: »uinif to recali the word I fo lately p-i r !ed: ) Why then prefs me to fpeak? What would you have me add?" -* 4 'Ihat \ou will now," anfwered he, wiih warmth» im leeeive my fa k h immc- dï.\ti'l % i : no cae t ih (facie itänds between j· i-ur u hol iv ,ο \our décifion and on yror nvr. *i ttl! η ν hopes ľ' í h·; rentu . ahaííi« d and heíitating, íli^l Ì -o ;t b.ľxk-, and itdl evaded fixing any pohïivr ι i .«it, tel bomerfet, no longer abh* ro с \r.m od \уя impatience, named hr rde? f (о very early a period, that, ra* ther than pomit hun, by her filence, to ronHudc the propofai met with her con¬ clu π nee, fhe was forced herfelf So de¬ cide upon "the laft йлу of the following week. This
This conceffion gained, he then left her, all gratitude and delights and haf¬ tened back to town in order immediately tø fet on foot the neceflary preparations for their marriage.
C Η A Ρ, XXVIL THREE days after this arrangement had been made, Clarentine was much fur« prifed again to receive a letter from So¬ phia— TO MISS DELMINGTON. Delmington-Houfe, Feb, гу, ** When I fent off my laft letter, Ì con« eluded that as we weie to meet fo foon, nothing was likely to occur trut could make me defirous of writing again ; I was miiiaken, however, as upon a thoufand ©ccaiions hai» happened to me btfoie, and 1 feel that I muft either once muie relieve ray mind by a little d t n» > pufi v ;, or bc acceffory myfelf to its going wild» * 4 Oux
«' Our two wanderers, .Edgar and' his friend, returned to us yefterday; Heaven only knows why they ever left us 5 Mr» Eltham faid it was to make fome indifpen¬ fable arrangements previous to a certain events and Edgar allured us it was merely îo bear him company, it is as well to feem credulous when people take pains to deceive you 5 and fo when they are by 9 İ appear all faith and truft; but to fpeak honeftly, my own private opinion is, that they went for no other purpofe than— to go ίο the Opera 1 '—Strange that two rational creatures ihould travel fo many miles upon fuch an errand ! So it 'щ however* and to the Opera they both haftened the very firft night of their arrivai. " There is a mild and gentle being m tlie wo!Id., whom you have occafionaliy beard me mention by the name of f laren- cine Delmington who ; notan hundred years agog was an-object of nearly equabadora* tion to both thele operatical adventurers. With this fair creature, this perfect fem* blance of white-robed innocence— fpeaking foft and finding fweet—they met, on their way to iome room or other adjoining to the theatre, Their feelings upon the oc¬ caíion
oafîon were rather awkward, fmce, in ad¬ dition to the emotion which her fudden appearance excited, they had the pangs of envy to contend with ; for this lovely dam« M $ fo relentlefs and fo inexorable unto them % was leaning with looks οΐ cordial fatisfaâion, upon the arm of another man # which other man they had but too much reafon to fufpect was their favoured fuc- ceffor ! * & Ö, what a treat it would háve been to me to have feen this maichlefs trium¬ virate at the moment their eyes firit met! I except poor Edgar, however 5 it would have given me nothing, but concern ta have witneOed the pain which he, I doubt- not, felt; hutas for Meffrs. Jbltham and Somerfet, their countenances I think muil have been delightfuk To have piiicd either would have been a faree ; one was upon the point of marriage with the choien. miftrefs of his heart—and the other, wc muft all allow, was in a yet more enviable fituation, being engaged to fuch a phœnix as your Sophia. Befides, Eltham, when he mentioned the circumibmee, did it with «iii air io edí'y aud unembarraíľed, that I venture to flatter, myfelf it made but little imp rc Iiion upon his mind ; he met
met me not afterwards with one atom lefs vivacity or good humour, and appears not in the flighteft degree more thoughtful or more depreifcd. All therefore that bis afpe£l teftiflcd, 1 imagine, was furprife, mixed perhaps with a tn fling expreflion øf offended fclf conféquence. The poor gentleman is ftill a little fplenetic, 1 au urc you, when that horrible word rejetiion comes acrofs his mind! Low foon he means cordially to forgive you I know riot; he fecm? more difpofed towards it, however, than ! once thought he ever would be ; and therefore í am not with* Oin hopes, that when we all meet I fhail perfuadc him to take you by the hand and a fit you to be friends with him; pray do not refufe him, if iou ftill mean to con¬ tinue friends with ме, ** As for Edgar (who, by the way, myr Snother has no fufpicion of your having íetn) he never fpeaks oi you without the extremeft veneration and gratii ude. We have had a long conference together con¬ cerning you, and he tells me that your be¬ haviour to him was mil v that of an angelí Ï)£ai'€Ïï girl, how do I love you for your fweetnefs and fympathy to this beft oí brothers I
brothers! It has calmed his agitated mind, and been balm to his wounded heart. You have promifed him, he fays, your future friend/hip, your fißerly friend¬ ihip; you wept over the too faithful pic¬ ture he drew of his long fufferings; you fpoke peace and aßcriion to him—and with the kindeft advice, uttered the moft benevolent good wiihed Excellent and confiderate Clarentine ! never can 1 fuffi¬ ciently thank you for a foftneis fo well timed, a tendernefs that has been fo be« ne ft ciai I u Rejoicing that this firft meeting is over, he now affurcs me, that, although he never can iec you with indifference, he íhall henceforward iec you without any of thofe tumultuous fenfations which at that moment fó nearly overpowered him. I lincerely hope his prediction will beveiified; but, meanwhile, cannot help feeling rather dilpofcd to bear him a little malice for having hitherto io completely deceived mc ; İ icahy t., ought him tho¬ roughly recovered, ior his behaviour to Lady Juha tins whole winter Ьаь uniform¬ ly been fo attentive, her own gestionéis, leads him always to addrcls her with fuch lüUll'OÍS)
íbítnefs, and he feels for her, I am cons- ¥Ínced ? fo much interefl and regards that it feemed to me impoffible he íhould at the fame time harbour fuch an ardent af¬ fection for another object. 1 fuppofe, however, his heart is very capacious as well as Mr, £kham f s; I am certain, at It-art^ it is very difficult to read, tft I fdy nothing to you, my beloved Clarcntine, of the letter my mother lately received írom Mr. Somerfet. The idea of next 1 u-w fd ay puts mc in fuch a fnght for myíelf, I have no courage tö fpeak oí the approaching fright which hkewife awaits you. l.ady Julia is L· generous as to laugh at my difmay ; her own turn, however, will come iio v l Septembers and then I hope to hav-e gained fpiiits to ictaliate the favour in kina* " Mî s. Harrington has at length vouchfafed io ani wer my mother's letter» and to anfwer и, alfo, with far greater civility to our ñicnd ELiham than 1 ex*- pec ted» 1Пь near relationship to Lord Wei* wyn, w hole title (lie refpeBs infinitely more than his character; and his fplendid fortune* which beyond even title itfeìf Aie re* vetea,
yderes, induce her to filence every ob¬ jection flic would other wife, î am per¬ fuaded, make to the man himfelf, and courteouily to congratulate my mother upon Sophia's ρ o i luch u W here fhail you be, deareft: Claren- tine,-the eighth of next month ? On that- day we all expect to be in town. Lord Welwyn having confented, at his daugh¬ ter's earnefl requcft and mine, to fct out at the Ume time Mr. Eltham and ϊ do t impatient as I fhail be to fee you, let me hope you will not, before then, have left the neighbourhood of London to rarøble to any very formidable diftance with your new pilot ; tell him I iliall be extremely angry with him if he fleers his lovely, prize into any remote harbour, and that he may expect a whole fleet to be fent after him to win her back again. 44 Do I talk good feaman's language ? Afli him, dear С larentine, and when he has anfwercd you, caft your eyes once more upon this paper, and give me due credit for the (inceri ty with which I lab* iVribe myfelf, ts Youťs, moft affectionately, é * And truly, " é S* Di, LM I N G ΙΌΝ." Previous
Previous to the leceipt of this letter, it had been agreed between Clarentine and Somerfet, that immediately on their mar¬ riage they fhould go down to his feat in Northamptonihire This plan they fiill adhered to, determining, however, to make their abfence much fhorter than was originally intended, for the pleafure of meeting fooner with the friends whom they expecled, and on w lib f с account they now decided to haften back to town bciore the expiration oi a week. Their deliberation upon this fubjeB was fcarcely concluded, when Mifs Barclay entered-) followed by one of die maids, %vho, with a broad grin upon her face, delivered to Clarcntine a card íaying* * ς Mrs, Manners'footman, Mifs, has juft brought that for you." Clarcntine, wondering at lier rifibility, held out her hand for it ; and read aloud—* Mrs. Manntïu, At Home, Thurfday, March 4th, g о clock, u Åt home r' 1 repeated the unpra£tifed Claientine, '* and what then ?" « Lord/ 1
u Lord," exclaimed Mifs Barclay, con- terøptuoufty, ;ί dont you underitand what then ? Why, flie means to invite you to fome party, on Thurfday." Éí Ay, Mifs, it's true enough," cried the maid, who, accuftomed to be treated by Mifs Barclay with extreme familiarity, made no í crupié, when fhe was prefent, of behaving with equal freedom herfelf, u for I aiked the fervant about it, and he told me Madam was to have a grand rout that day. For my part, I thought, may¬ be íhe had been to have come here, and fo, not being well, had fent you that, to let you know íhe ihould (lay at honed' Then ftiil languì ig heartily at my odd contât ihe left the room. Clarentine now turning to Somerfet, faid — * . am ailumed of betraying uuh ruftic ignorance, but do pray tell шс, ts this really meant a.s лп invitation ?" -*** Yes, reali,," anfwered he, f niüng. u And aie the gu 'Its never told oo/ the/ are invir d lo ' Whether to a balk a card piny, ог -.» conce. t." 44 i)eir, no; cned Mifsj Barclay, " its taken for granted one hears all mat before
before one goes^ among one's acquafeu ■ance·' ' éá But what," refumed Ciarentine e u are thofe to do, who like me have no acquaintance f" u Why ta'ke their chance^ and prepare 4hemfelves accordingly»" 4t Hov/ prepare them fel ves ?" " Lord, why by carrying money In their pockets that they may be ready to play if afked, and by putting on light íhoes_ that they may be equally ready to dance/' u Thank you," cried Clarentine, bow« ing, 4¿ thefe inftručtions may be ex- tremely ufeful tome/' a You mean to go, then ?" faid Somer¬ fet. H îf ï knew any lady I could go with s I ihould certainly.** åi Oh, if it depends only upon that," cried Mifs Barclay, 6& I ihould like to ac¬ company you of all things/' Clarentine looked a little difconccrted 5 and Somerfet haftily fifing, walked to the chimney. Mifs Barclay thus went on—*' 111 tell you what, Mifs Dcimington, you have but to write a bit of a note to Mifs Man¬ ners w fay there's a young lady lives with you
-you who wifties to be of your party, and Captain Somerfet can fend it to her when he goes back to town." žc My dear Mifs Barclay," faid Cla¬ rcntine, mildly, u you would not wifh î am fure, any more than myfelf, to make your appearance at a great aifembly, fuch as I prcfume this will be, without fome married lady ?" ** Perhaps Mr.s. Denbigh may have been invited; I 11 ftep to her houfe and afk her." Then without waiting for that encou¬ ragement flie faw it was hopelefs to ехребЬ, fhe ran up-ftairs for her cloak, and fet out alone for Mrs. Denbigh's. Clarcntine and Somerfet remained, after fhe was gone, looking at each other for fome minuteb in filent, yet half laugh¬ ing amazement, at an ignorance of the world, and a forwardnefs at once fo con¬ ceited and fo vulgar. Somerfet was the firft who at length fpoke— éí Let not this Urange propofai diftrefs you, my ( larentine," laid he, u 1 ihall fee Manners this evening, and will com« million him to ftatc the cafe to his mother and
and fifler, and prepare them to expect your intruding companion." u Wait, however, till flie returns," faid Ctarentine, ** perhaps Mrs. Denbigh may not be going, and then í íhall have an excellent excufe for declining the invita¬ tion myfelf." İn lef* than a quarter of an hour Mifs Barclay came back, calling out trium* phantly as fiie opened the parlour door™ C£ * Well, Mr*. Denbigh ii afked, fure enough, ami means to go; fo now there¬ fore. Mifs Delmington, you have nothing to do but to write the note í told you of, Let me confider," added fhe, fitting down and looking very thoughtful, 44 next Thmfciav, isn't it? Ay, í fhail have time enough to get my new gown made, and Hannah Gib fon protnifed to pin me up a cap whenever wanted one." S£ And who is f f annali Gibfon?" en¬ quired Clarentinc. * 4 Why. íhe was a fchooi fellow of mine, but her fa t hci died about a year ago, and left hír fo poor, íhe has bound heifelf prentice to a undiner in Ciauhourii alley. You can t imagine what tafty osps í have icen oí her maiing} all thoíe that src β hung
hung in the fhop window are moftly what ihe did up, and every body admires them excefftveiy* If y 7 ou like, I'll aík her to contrive one for you. ' u I am much obliged to you,* 7 faid Cla* rentine, fmiling, " but I beg you will not trouble her," $e Dear, file's very good-natured, and would think it no trouble, İ dare fry; however, we have time enough to think about that—do vou write the note now," £t There is no nceeftky to write at all ; Mr» Somerfet has undertaken to carrv a verbal me flage to town t which will do quite as well." Mifs Barclay» perfectly fatisfied with this arrangement, then left thum, and flew to the head of the kitchen ftairs to order one of the maids to iun immediately for the mantua -maker. Somerfet, who could not help being amufed by the whole affair, and particu¬ larly by the obliging oifer that had been made to Clarentine of applying in bet be¬ half to the ingenious Hannah Gibfon, ftaid only to remonftratc* with her u ¡юн having rejected inch aihilanccj and mount- VOL» ΠΙ» M Íjig
ing his borie, which at that moment was brought f о the door, iode back to town. During breakfail the next morning, Clarcnfi'K· received a verv polite note ftom Mrs and Mifs Mannei.s, expreilive oí the pleafure it would give them to fee her friend, and incoftng for her a card íimilar to the one thai had been lent the duv befoie, which they ie<pieíled íhe roulddt liver in their names. Mifs Barclay, wiiofc rage to be intro¬ duced into fafhionable íoeieíy was as un¬ bounded as her qualificai ions to fhine in e were deficient, нч eived this invitation ι idi equal pride and laptuie. In her own f pinion feeure henceforward of moving oik in ihe moll elegant circles, ihe enjoyed i-Jrcjdv in anticipation the envy which ooMoil her lefs fortunate acquaintance íhe íhould excite, and die wonder which íhe dorbud not to infpire; even the tally Nannab dibfon ílu: now began fo think unw<>rthv of the honour of adorning her; end lCLollecting accidentally to have heard ihe fdhion*> of ('rinbourn-Aliey a little dendok refohed to befpeak every prof of her head-drtfs upon this irn- ncuiuut occafîon from the more modifli maga-
magazines that fo abundantly- fupply the J*"*! ŕ i l J neighbourhood of J aviilock-ltieet. W r i î Ь this detei niination, as foon as breakfail vas ovei, íhe walked alone to town, cat ry но, villi her, in afldition to w haï remained of her own allowance, a painfull)' extorted half guineuj the reluc¬ tant pioduce tif her mothers bounty. On her return, about bau an hour be* fore dinner was announced, not finding Clarenune in the parlour, ilie ran up to her room to imptUt to her tlie í uceéis of ho expedition. 4 * Louk hou comfoit /ole y un are fit¬ ting heie,' eked íhe, as íhe fl mg open the door-— ** as ho me, I ua\ Ί /t a he» lo f lan d upon; i dobuico* I hav'n't walked kk th\n t ı/u nods: 1 hd\ e noule iome e.xcelkn: bai^an^^ howevei, and love fought (lii íucotell mekkue and ear- lings \ ou evci he,v ' cìnlv look." auííed ihe, Mixing a likk box out of her pot ket, pud cage t ly dıipkv тц its c< intents, ςί what a beauuiul tohun íh^íe beau*, are ; I got thon next door to w heie I went about my cap ;—do you like them r M *** I ddie kıy , * anfwered (larentine evafively, ; * tb'»y will be very muc ι ad* M z mired;
îiıired ) but what fuccefs had you with re* J gaul lo your cap P 1 * " О dear, î did'n't buy any, for they told rne it would he much better to chufe fumethmg that I could pin on myfelf in ihe „oiy cd a fancy turban; fo 1 fixed upon a fpangled gauze, and to-morrow ï am to have iome very ímart ornaments fent borne to wear with it," Clarcntine was beginning to congratu- k f e her upon having been able fo well to fuit her ta íle, when haltily intenupting ht'bMds Barclay faid^ 4i now î know you muit have bought a great many new things uoťinfl vour wedding; ; do let me fee fome of them:—what do you intend to be married in ?" ** Indeed/' faid Claientinc, colouring ■ami half limling-—* v I have not yet thought about it." и Nf)î>~~well, thaCá the oddelí thing ï ijver hrani off— în your place î fhould already have fettled every individual ar¬ tide 1 meant to wear ; to be iure, how¬ ever, you intend to go to church in v hiter" To this, Clarentine, not very defirous of dwelling upon the lubječt, made fome flight,
flight, carelefs anfwer, and then added— u Did you fee any body in town whom you knew ?" H Yes, 1 faw Mrs» Hertford driving at an immenfe rate along Pall-Mall in a daiho ing new chariot : 1 wonder whofc it was» < t * and why ihe never let mc know ihe was come home." u Ah," thought Clarentine, 4i there is no chance, 1 hope, of her making any advances towards a renewal of her former intimacy In thi* hou f·. , ν* hitíl Somerfet ν i fit s at it ίο often, and I continue to in¬ habit iU 5 They weie now called dovn to dinner, and an end \wo put for that time to Mils Barcia«; ь interi oouioo. The noo diAy, howe\ ei\ С lareiuinc hoi all the foieuc to undergo ef cxamiuing and praihng the tafteiek fmeiy ihe had befpokc, and which (ctuîiıiting of gaudy ribbons, üicwy ilowcrs, and coloured gauzes 'an ived, to the great joy cd" the im¬ patient expectant, eaiiy inthe courfe of the morning. Her difcourfe, throughout the wdiole aíternoon, turned upon nothing but the moft fafhionable method of arranging о о l hefe various decorations ¿ and fo com« M 3 pletely
ph t.. к" did fiie e\ en furfeithcr mot-herupon the iubjeet,iudilferenl a. 1 - íhe generally svas to \vh. s was pallini;, that, at length, exerting an unulud ile^íťí o{ auîhoıity, fhe called l!s maul, aud mfpdeoí all Mifs kucy'siu- do/.iaiU len.o.iihx.uv e\. very peremptorily oi.i.;ti d iu ι to bundle all the tti:-:u/>y trum- r· о imo a Io. к Ьоч tretner, and bt.ifi W uh IL lip hai; s dl K c í ly. kn L pecable to Cl л ren ti ne as were thefe contentions, it was yet a relief to kr Ujko ihe puJ'oH occaíion to be ex¬ empted fiom any fu ι thei confultations; and the more fo. a«, a l\ w mi mues aker the юш \.'.l to·. к pl .cc, S,, u ikt appeared ■·ϊ ! 'η ц Ле, ,o*d Cìii-ocu ihe houie.
CHAP
С Π А P. Χ X VIH. TlíE hom at length, arrived fo ardently defi red by Mifs Barclay, and fo gladly hailed by Clarentine hkewife, (who, bek¬ ened of ihe very name of лп aifembly, was anxioiu \ί ■*:· w it over) when they weie informed the canoge w«o at tbc d -д-г which was to convey them to Albem.nle- itrect ; they ihe, ; o! ior Mrs. Tenhojí in their way, and око pioeeed J immoh- ately to tow »> Ön îhcîr.M ι iva! rt ^Vr$, Mann^is*. S* 1 » røcriei, hea ri iu; their uimo t-tuiounco' haftened out to meet ti un at îî e h ad о* the Hairs; he reproached tla m i\>r being fo late (it was t !hmi conhderab?\ pail ten o'clock \ and directing ihem wl:ei\· io finti Mifs i\,amieis 5 after they had fpoken to her mother at the door, followed them acrofs the room. The reception th tt was given to Mifs Barclay in favour of theperfons ihe came \ T > ! ^ l I Wltu,
with, was extremely polite, and did ho¬ nour to the confiderate good-nature wiih which Somerfet had taken the trouble to prepare them for her introduction: the flaunting ihewinefs of her drefs however, pauicularly when com raited with that of her companion which was all fimplicity, appeared among the young people who fin rounded Mil's Manners to excite a mixture of furprife and ridicule. Some Ih rugged their fhoulders with an air of co'd contempt, whilít others, after ftaring at her from head ίο foot with the moit iledfaít curiofity, turned upon their heel with á hal f-ÍU íl ed laugh, and ttipped away to communicate their farcaftic ob- íeooüon.s ίο a différent party. To all this, fortunately for her, Mifs Parelay, at the height of her ambitions feîf-fatisf.ed hnd elated, was totally in¬ fenfible : carelefs what the women thought of her, flic fcarcely noticed any of them; but at the approach of every frefh gen- ileman who addre fled Somerfet, her heart fluttered, her face afflimeli a com¬ placent fmile, and in the hope of exciting attention ihe iiiihmly began a giggling fort of converfation with Clarenune, which
which lafted, with an affectation of infan¬ tine vivacity, till, one by one, they again fetreãtcdj and fhe was left only with the ladies. Meanwhile Mrs, Denbigh, feeing them provided with feats and peculiarly at¬ tended to by Mifs Manners, who ftationed next to Clarentine fcarcely fpoke to any one elfe, con femed, after fome time, to fit down to cards, and had juft left them for that purpofe, when Mr. Lea, fmiling and bowing with all his wonted cour- teoufnefsj approached them— 46 This ani mal," faid Mifs Manners, in a hafiy whifper to «Clarcntine as he ad¬ vanced, u has taken it into his head to marry fince you íãw him : I long to know which is his wife." Then turning to him—" How do you do, my dear Sir ?" cried flie ; 64 I hope you have brought Mrs. Lea with you ? In what part of the room am I look for her r 1 * Mr. Lea, in anfwer to this, touched a lady's elbow, who, with her back towards them, was converfing with a group of gentlemen at fome diftance, and on her turning half round faid, " My dear, allow mCf this is Mifs Manners/' and taking M д t ber
her İKind 3 he drew her towards them, and in the perion of his wife, difcovered to tho half-petriiicd Clareniine, and the no iefo wondering Mifs Barclays the form and features of Mrs. Hertford! 44 Lord!" exclaimed Lucy, abruptly addre ifim» her, * 4 is it your Well, to be fure sou have got over your difappoint¬ ment pretty quick! I low long have you been married ? and when did you come to town } y Mis. Hertford, or rather Mrs Lea, coloured, but made no anfwer, to thofe blunt enquiries, contenting herfelf, after a formal curticy, to Mils Maimers, who had rifen at bet approach, to beilow upon her late confident a fight inclination of the head; and then moving away again,- flie renewed the eonveriation her huf- band had interrupted. u Doeyou know .the lady?" laid Mifs Munners in л low voice to Lucy— ^ Dear, yes. Madam, 1 have known her ever fo long, md I can't imagine why ihe would not fpeak to me; iťs very im¬ pei í inent, i muíl fay, and î have a inonilrous mind to go and have a little converfation with her aboutit/* é£ No«
« " No, no," cried i oitinc-—" for Heaven fake do not thi, iti" " What is it againfl eh Mifs Oel- mington is ¡Ъ carneílb noníi rating ŕ 11 faid Мг. Manners, v 1 idi Someiiu jull then walked up to Clarentine, {embed- L'i. in the hear» ing of Mr. ! ea who Hill kept his polt near (hem, Mifs ľ-arcluy mould blunder out any untimely ечрЬп.топ, was upon the poiiit of entreating lu r m a low* v«-h e to be careful of what ihe f-ou, wlien Íííč fa w her fuddenly ítai t vyu andas Mrs. Lea w¿s e t oiling tb.e ιό;ί to fit down, follow, and place hcrL.. xt her. Mif* Maimers lauo and leaning 1 * 5 towards Clarcntine faie ι-, your fiiend going to (piarrei with, ι ìor bride? * 4i I hope not; but in- iths very pof¬ fible; k t me enti eat -». л îo go with me into t ík- next room; for I could not bear to wilnefs any feene oí that lort." -** Deai î asi know I 'le of tiíhcr of the parties, fuch a bato Mild entertain me extremely : howeva . 4 σο wheiv- ever you like." So faring ihe a rofe, ом! arm in arm they walked into the adj, -ing; apartment. MG Somei let
Somcrfet and his friend followed them f and the former feizing the firft oppor¬ tunity of fpeaking to Clarentine unheard, faid, with fome anxiety— 4 What drove you hither with fuch precipitation ?" She explained to him as brieflyas ilie could her reafon*·, and then aíked hiin whether he had yet feen or fpoken to Mrs. Lea herfelf?— 66 No/' anfwered he gravely 3 " nor do I wiih iu" Mifs Manners now addreffmg her brother faid, '* Have you been prcfentcd to Mr. Lea's pretty wife ľ* " Yes; the happy bridegroom did me that honour yefterday : î met him whilft J was riding out, and he in fitted upon my going home wiih him folely for that purpofe. « Well— î beheld, admired, bowed gmd retreated."— « Did not you like her then?" «* 1 had more reafon to like her thatî her poor cringing booby of a mate, for at the fame time thai fhe treated him with Ihe îïioft ineffable contempt, fhe behaved to
to me - a th the utmoit fwcctnefs and com¬ placency. 1 ' " With contempt already!" cried Mifs Manners-—" Good God, then, why did ihe marry him ?" " Mr. Lea," anfwered her brother, drily, ** é is worth 1200I. per annum.'* u And was that the beft reafon ilie had for accepting him V s u Draw your own inferences from what you have heard," replied he ; and turning away, he walked up to another party.— To Clarentine's infinite joy, Mifs Bar¬ clay rejoined them no more till Mrs. Denbigh's game broke up, and Somerfet's carnage, in which they were to return, was announced. in their way to the outward room, whilít Mrs. Denbigh flopped a few minutes to take leave of fome ladies of her ac¬ quaintance, Clarcntine again perceived Mrs. Lea featcd near the place where they were Handing : ihe purpofely avoided looking towards her, but hear¬ ing her own name mentioned, could not, with equal forbearance, re lift giving fom€ attention to what was puffing. The
rhe pei fon to whom flic was fpeaking was a young man, л\ ho, ^ith his e\es fixed upon С İaremi ne, feemed to have been cat neu ly tnquuing who fhe was — ίς \NhatL\ii fht ıs now matters very little," anlwtt.d Mis. 1 см, in a half w hi í per» u lime lur iánk and fituation \si\l in a lew d tys be entirely changed." * 6 J .s ilie« th n, going to be mai ried ť** 64 íes; fhe fonns a biilliaiit con¬ nection w uh a man of large foi tune, whom-, alter niin·*; extremely ill for many F У months, fhe at length, in the failure of two otheis, (a young Baionet, and the nephew of an Karl,) condelcends to accept ς - She's a beautiful cieature." ^- \ es, a pretty foir ofa gill, fomewhat liaughty and \ain, however, but you animaK continuile to fpoil all thefe rural btaut.es by \ our unbounded flattery; they are i\(4. u led to fuch fine things, poor fouls win n they fn if cieep out of their caves, and if you had any mercy you ^ould modesate the doles a little, and be content to nun their heads by degrees, lathe ι than fet them a (pinning all at once! A* lor imk Dcimington, her hopes were raifcd
raifcd ft) high when flic firii kk her native wilds, that it's ten to one if the does not actually give herfclf gieat credit for having had the humility to iloop to any thing under a Duchéis*,-, title ! 'Í heie mi ifes all come Hocking up to town with Lad v Coventry's fucceks iti their h cadi, and while their milkmaid bloom lañs, feel fo feeure of triumph, that they negleù or mifmaingc, the íiríl three months, moie fplendid opportunities than they ever obtain jftei wards with the belt hud plans in the world/' 44 Who is it ihe marries?" **-* Do you know Captain Somerfet :" " No." u That*s him {landing yonder with Mr. Manners —-He's what grave and lage people call a worthy, good creature, and what í call a tine young man, very eafy to be duped however, very credulous and vci y unfufpicious." " Is' that 51 laid Mrs. Lea's friend, with a fìgnilìcani fmìle, *·» what the lady partieukuly requires: * u Exaclly," anfwercd fiie— Though Cdareutinc, it will eafdy be fuppofedj loft many feutences of this charitable
charitable dialogue, ihe yet heard enough to tinge her checks with the deepett crini fon, and to irritate her fo ex¬ tremely, that difdaining herfelf for hav¬ ing liftencd to fo much, fhe now moved abruptly towards the door, and waited there alone till Mrs. Denbigh and Mifs Barclay were ready to follow her. During their ride home, Mrs, Den¬ bigh being fatigued, and Clarentine in¬ dignantly meditating upon what the had heaid, Mils Barclay eugroflèd the con¬ verfation aimoit exclufively. *«* Well, î declare/* cried fhe, after they had proceeded fome way, "if an angel from Heaven had come down a few weeks ago and told me Mrs. Hertford could ever have behaved to me as fhe did this evening, could ever have married fuch a fneaking, mean, difagrceable look¬ ing wretch as that natty little Mr. Lea, I fhould not have believed it î She ufed to take fuch pains to perfuadé me of her love for fomebody elfe, ufed to talk fo difmterefledly about it, make fuch fine* parading profeifions of regard for me—« and then* ail at once, to accept fuch an object merely for his money ¿ look at me •US
as if fhe had never fcen me before, and treat me with fuch pride and negligence ! To be fufe iťs a good leifon—and if ever in future I truit quite fo much to people that fpeak mc fo fair, I ihall wonder !" *■* 1 am amazed to hear you talk of her thus/' cried Mrs. Denbigh; u í faw ■ ■ fitting together and apparently convening fo amicably, that 1 concluded you weie upon the beft terms imaginable." u No fuch thing, though I can affure you, ihe was cunning enough to get me to return to her evcrv one of her letters before flie went to Bath ; and fo as flie has now loft all fear of me, and! never had any reafon to fear her, wc fpoke out to one another pretty plainly ! You may believe mc or not as you will, but ibis I am fure of—flics a bad woman, and as artful and fly as a ferpent!" As neither Mrs. Denbigh nor Claren- rentine chofe to undertake her defence, Mifs Barclay, exulting in the perfuafion that flie had carried conviciion to their minds, and been the firit to flagger their goodopinion of Mrs. Lea, went on in the fame ilrain with fuch perfect fclf compia· cency till the carnage ftoppedj that fhort as
as the ride had appeared to her whilft thus employed, fhe could fcaicely believe the coachman had driven to the right houfe»
С II A Ik XXIX. 1 ilk follow inq day, which was now the only one that remained previous to the nini! imputtanì one of Chuentmc's life, Somerfet, who ipent the gieatcll part of it at Mr. kcnhamk, being alone with her towards the evening, faid— <4 My Clarentinc, I have been re« licking with regret upon the difficulties, which, at the dittante that feparates us, will prevent our feeing your beloved Madame d'Arzele as often as i know you would wkh : can we fix upon no plan that might furmount thefe obftacles? would it be impoilible to induce her to chufe fome habitation nearer to our own neighbourhood r" " Attached as Ihe is," anfwercd Claren» tine, έέ to her piefent chearful, yet quiet little manfion, I fliould think it almoft cruel«*
cruel, great as would be the happinefs í fhould derive from her fociety, to draw her from it, unlefs í knew of any other w t c could recommend as an equivalent for the one ľne would quit." u 1 confeís," ic fumed Somerfet, "that at this moment ï know of none fuch ; but a very íhort time nnght enable me, with diligence and adivity, to difcovci one the very counterpart of that ihe now refides in : at all events, we could with cafe piwi.il upon hci to fpend a few months in town every year, by means of making a proportionate addition to the little income my generous ( larentine has hitherto fparol her, and which, after this day, fhe will have i n veiled mc with the right of encreaiing." u Dear and noble Somerfet!" cried Clarcntine, holding out to him her hand, the tears ftarting into her eyes— 4 * Who half fo generous, ίο confiderate as your¬ feif! We will di fc ufs this fubjeci, how¬ ever, juft now, no f rther : î owe fo much already to your difintercfted liberality, that I cannot bear at prefent any ad¬ ditional weight of obligation, When Lord Welwyn comes to town, talk the matter
matter over with him; it is right that before we attempt to remove from him fuch a neighbour he fhould be confultcd : if he approves your plan, we will then devife together the means of obtaining her fantlion to it." Somerfet, fubferibing unhefitatingly to this décifion, now flartcd a different topic, and remained with her till a late hour, talking over a variety of plans relating to their future way of life. In addition to Mrs, Denbigh, whofc attendance Clarcntine herfelf requeued., flie was accompanied to church thc v hext morning, at that young lady's own pref¬ fing fokcitation, by Mifs Barclay. Mr, Manners gave her away, and the ceremony was performed by the worthy Mr. Len¬ ham; after which, the travelling chaife that had waited for them at the door being ordered to draw up, Somerfet handed her into it, and iniiantly following her, they fet out immediately for Vorthamptonfhire* On the enfuing Tucfday, without wait¬ ing for a fumino гкч, they returned totown, and, driving poft, reached Clifford ftreet before the clofe of day. Clarcntine, without lofs of time, difpatched a note to Sophia
Sopbiaat Mrs. Germaine's, apprizing her of their arrival, and entreating to know when fhe could íèe her. The fervant brought her back the foU lowing anfwer; MRS. SOMERSET. u Come to mc, deareft creature, after breakfaft to-morrow. A convenient head» ach will keep me at home, and alones the whole morning, as Mrs. Germaine is going about the town with Lady Julia and Har¬ riet to ihew fights, and Eltham has pro- mi fed to be of their party. They know nothing of your return, for I chufe to have you entirely to myíelf the firit three hours, and the expectation of feeing you might make them ail take it into their heads to flay at home. ■" 1 write this in horrid haile; juil ei- caped from a drawing-room full of aunts and coufins, who have made my cars ring with congratulations till they have almoft ftunned me. Adieu, dear Clarentine, " S. E." Somerfet, to whom Clarentine, when fhe had read it, ihewed this note, fmiled as he gave it back into her hand ? and laid, « It
« ît is fo evident^ my love, уош* pretty friend wiíhes for no third perfon to be prefent on your firft meeting, that I iliall defer my vifit to her till evening, and leave you to make yourovwi at what hour luiis you beft in the morning, lil en- dee vou r. however, when you return-, to draw fiom y ou the fecrets of fo myfterious an interview, you muft not bc furprifed: hufbands, you know, arc piivilcgcd to be curious-, and the privacy of this ap¬ pointment is fuch ль to excite о у cuiiofity very ftrongly." 6; Arc you aware/' faid Clarentinc, with equal gaictv, u that by thus remind¬ ing me of your privileges you put me upon my guild, and teach me the necci' iì t у of being cautious? Whatever ϊ may hear, I ihall nou come home fo well pre¬ páit d to diífemble, ihat ail yourimeiro- gations will bo uíelefs/* At one о clock the next clay the car¬ ri .ge came to the door, and Clarentine gì iti i, g into İt*. wa< di iven ίο the houfe of Mis. Germaine, iti Pouland Place, She was fhewn up (lai ι a on her an i val, and left an inftant alone in a dreffing- rooni, the door of which; however, was the next
next moment thrown open, and Sophia, fparkling with joy and breathlefs with ea* gernefs, Hew into her arms. u Who ihall detain mi,'' cried ihe, u when lue h a friend as this İ-, here r i'hey are áll Ы h>w ftill, m\ (Ί » entine; but healing your caniage Hop, be toi e the íervant could announce you, í udbed hom them, at the hiZ.nd of breaking my net к to İte awl to c nhrace you. Tneie— do voti hear? J iamei ib now íhiickii-it aie г me! Begone, dear gni," л ,i -<l í¿- ', ip*, akı. ig from the buiding piace, " I told vou be¬ fore İ could not go with you; í am en· gaged —I am bufy." Then haíiily íhuíung the door, and faf- tening the bok, ilie returned to Claren- tine, and drew her towards a iofj, upon which íhe fea ted hcrfeif next her. u Since you are dub unwiihug, my dear Sophia, ' laid Clarentine, apprehenfívely, %i that our conference ihould be inter¬ rupted, 1 am very forry I came lb eaily. The cai ri ige that iifought me will infal¬ libly betray us, for í gave no otdersthat it fhould duvc oifj and the party below mua fee it at the door, ' u О uo ;
" О по ι I told one of the fervants, as I ran through the hail, to difmifs it di- redly : befides, EUharø к gone out ak ready, and he would have been the only one amongft them who could have known the livery," áí But why all thefe precautions, So* phia? Why fo much fecrecy ? Have we any thing very important to di feu fs ?" 44 Perhaps not; but I don't chufe to -make you popular tiil 1 have exhauited all my ftore of family anecdotes» I am my own mi itre fs now, Clarentine, or the deuce is in it! and as long as I can, I am determined to fave you the mortification of being prefented to Mrs. Germaine, Oh, ihe is the nioft wearifome, infipid perfon, by whom the world was ever for¬ feited ! A frolicking Mrs. Barclay in higher life, without half her vulgar ori« ginality, however, and confequently with¬ out any of her coarfe entertainment! I am amazed how Lord Welwyn could fix upon fuch a woman to he the guide of Lady Julia» She will racket the poor ¡jr\ into a consumption in lefs than a viovihj if ihe goes on as íhe has begun." i át Have
" Have you, then, had time to go out much already ?" m O yes; we only arrived yeflerday morning, and fiie dragged m, two hours afterwards, toa thoufand different fli ops; made a large party for the evening of her's ¿.:d Eltham's relations; propofed this pretty expedition for to-day; and takes us all out to dinner, and then to tea and cards, to-morrow.** 65 Is this perturbed lady very young ?" Sé No; an emaciated, antique fkeleton, worn out with diifipation and late hours ľ* u Deareft girl, what a comfortlefs houfe for you to refide in I How long íhall you be here ?" e5 O, as fliort a time as poffible, be af- fured. Eitham has no great veneration for his amiable aunt anymore than myfelf, and therefore I hope we fhail get out of town by the latter end of May/* áè Alas « poor Sophia 1 Are you then to remain with her near three months ?'* u Indeed I fear fo; and, what is worfe? in thofe three months fhe will have given rae fuch a thorough diítaíle to London, that 1 fear î never fhail be able te indure t ť «arrt-ji« »ι l'* t· *í-í.|¿«íríji ; vol, ш, К ^ Per-
< β Perhaps/ 5 laid Clarcntine, fmiling, u there may be no harm in that: you had at one time formed fuch high expectations of it, that, had they been all realbed, you might have become an abfolute Lady I own ley щ éé It is by no means improbable," re¬ turned Sophia— 44 and therefore, if you will affi ft me with a few philosophical ar« guments, I will endeavour to reafon my¬ felf into a belief that my being configned to this odious old flutterer is a very for* tunate circ um ft ance," The fu bj с c-t was then changed, and Sophia > with her accuftomed animation and good humour, was beginning to afk a thoufand different qutflions which flic fcarcely gave Clarentine time to anfwer f when, hearing a quick ftep upon the flairs, fhe haílily faid, with a look of vex¬ ation — « What now, í wonder ? Will thofe creatures linger ât home all day ?" As flie fpoke, forne one from without attempting to turn die lock, but finding it fattened, called out in a voice which they infUiuly knew to be that of Ehham— 2 « Sophia
u Sophia— will you not give me admit¬ tance ?" 6S Yes}" anfwered fiie, moving towards the door—" but who have you with you ? Are the ladies gone ?" & * They are; and I am come to know why you did not accompany them : pray don't keep me ftanding here." 4î No, no—»let him in for Heaven fake ľ ä cried Clarentine, earneftly. Sophia laughed, and, in a low voice, faid—* s Will yon be very civil to him if lie comes in ?" éS Yes, certainly ?" €Ê And will you, Eltham/' refumed fhe, fpeaking louder, «* be very civil to my companion if I allow you tojóin us?" ® € Your companion ?— Are you not alone,, then?" u N03 I have an exceeding pretty little French milliner fhut up with me. Shall you like to fee her ?" α Yes, yes : pretty or not pretty, open ihe door before I lofe ail path c ľ* Sophia did fo; and Eltham haftily enr· tered, faying, * e What ridiculous fabrica» tion"— but ftarting at fight of Clarcntine, be Hopped íhort, and bowing to her with Nu'
an air of mingled gravity and furprifcg " I beg your pardon, Madam/' cried he f " f knew f not that you were here/* " Nor did I intend/' faid Sophia, " you ßmdd know it; I had a great many things to talk over w .. her, and meant to have excluded all intruders the whole mornings lìnee you have feen her, however, I infill upon it, Eltham, that you once for ail throw afide thofe petrifying formal looks, and fpeak to her with the freedom ( and chcarfulnefä of an old acquaintance.™ There, go and with her joy on her mar- riage s and beg her to return the compii« ment" Eitham, who could not forbear laugh- ing, complied, however, with the beft grace he was able s and taking Clarentine's hand, which he bowed upon as he fpoke^ paid his compliments to her in terms equally unaffected and well-bred. " This is as it fhould be/* cried So¬ phia, who, with looks of pleafure, had attended to the little ceremony» 6S You have acquitted yourfeif perfectly well, Eltham, and I now give you notice that whilít we are in town, this dear creature* as often as 1 cao prevail upon her to let it be
be fo, iv ť) make one in all our parties, and to live with us as much as it is in her power, ft was highly neceifary, there¬ fore, you will allow, that all your four faces fhouM difappear, and that, cordially and fincerely, you ihould fhake bando and determine to meet as friends. You know the old ballad, Eltham ? «« 'I cm loved M-u ν p.ifllnj: \\ 4„ *' Kut Mj»y th, íuod ìLiìi)/' Pemember, however, that in future you aie to love no oilier Mai y than me ; though you are to be civil to them all. Ay, and to the Harrys, too !" Then bringing to him his hat, which-} on his entrance, he had throw η down upon a table, íhe put it into his hand, and gently pu ihing him towards the door, added— ^ Now make us one of your beit bows, good friend, and don't kt me fee you again till dinner/' **· I will go, I think/' faid Eltham, laughing, " and pour my complaints into the fympathizing ears of Captain Somer¬ fet, from whom, fince I prefumc he Ls no better treated than myfelf, I have not any doubt of obtaining the utmoit commi fera- N & tion.
tion. Shall T," continued he, addreffing Clarentine, hi have any chance of finding him at home this morning? 53 4ί ï left him there, Sir," anfwercd flie, vi whon I came out." Ê4 Don't you mean, then," faid Sophia, ki to keep your appointment with Mrs. Germaine and Lady juliar" H No ; your brother is gone with them, and iherefore 1 referve myfelf for fomc other oecafion." líe then bade them good morning, and left the room· Clarentine, who could not but applaud the part her rattling, but fenfible little friend liad aftcd, and who fincerely re¬ joiced in the certainty fhe now had of be« ing henceforward always treated by Ei¬ tham with friendly unrefervc, ilaid with her till the return of Mrs. Germaine and her voung companions. The delight with which fhe was met by Lady Julia was evident and flattering, and the warm attachment which had fub- lifted between them ihe faw with gratitude remained unaltered and undiminiihed. As for Harriet, iiicapablc of experiencing any ílrong affeñiofb &c made no attempt to
to evince greater pleafure than ilie felt, butaccofledher with unmeaning kindnefs, and congratulated her with tranquil civi¬ lity. From this period to that of their leaving town, the day feldom paífed in the courfe of which thefe long-tried and mutual friends did not meet. Somerfet, as an additional gratification to his lovely bride, fought by every means in his power to draw Madame d'Arzele a few weeks from her folitude to join their hâ ï py circle, but his endeavours were vain ; de¬ voted to her children, and thankfully con¬ tent with her peaceful refidence, no folk citations could fucceed in detaching her from either even for an hour, or in de» termining her to accept any increafc to the annual hundred pounds fhe ftill continued to receive from the hand of her niece. Of the Barclays, during the fpiing, Clarentine faw little. The mother, lefs ambitioni: of mixing with the cultivated and the elegar ^ than of keeping up her intercourfc with the jolly affociatcs of her accuftomed amufements, made no eiforts to force herfelf into their parties % and the daughter receiving from raoft of them a reception
rece t )íton which might almoíl be termed ^pulik-e, af· er tb.e f.rft two or three un- C'iccekfki evjj^iimcnts, renounced the att<u'>pt, and iciigned heiiclf again to her Íol ло r intimaieá. W uh repaid to Mis. Denbigh,however, and Mr. Lenham, the c ak, it will Le be¬ lk ved, \ots wid.îy diíleront. Revered aml beUntvk not only by Claroni me and Somcikt tht mit Ives, but by eveiy friend v/uhm th ' (iole of tioir acquaintance, ttoy veic и * ived \vidi delight whenever Ilır у appealed, and vdited with refpeet by all whom they would admit« In the difappointment of the fole view which had mdueod her to form fo preci- pu cue an engagement, the interefted and aitifh kıl Airs. Li a found the puniihment of her unprincipled condtıÜ* Irritated b\ lu ι neglect, and too well convinced of tb- lordi d motives to which he owed her banco her Irtib.u.d, concealing a will he had node «n bor tavour foon after their niairiage, vhew ir> another, unknown to hei, m whith ke left her a bare fubfift- vnce^ And coníigricd the bulk of hk for* tunc to a diilaut branch of his family* Thb change elLüedj he iupported with her
liera wretched exiftence about three years, and then by his death reducing her to the fame flate of indigence he had drawn her from, ihe was compelled, once again, to feek an afyluin abroad, where neglected, fou red and repining,· fhe fpent the remain¬ der of her days. Lady Dcimington, in the profperity, good conduit and happinefs of her chil¬ dren, found the reward of all her mater¬ nal folicitude. Sir Edgar, reftored to him¬ felf and to his friends, became the orna« ment and honour of his family, fulfilled all the hopes his early acquirements had promiicd ; and in his mild and intercfting partner, found a companion whofe faith¬ ful tendernefs conciliated and fecured all his own, Playful yet affectionate, Sophia, by ihe excellence of her temper, and the fpright- lincfs of her converfation, preferved the influence her gooddmmour and her frank» neís firit gained her over Ekham's heart. Both thoughtlefs, but both generous and welldntcniioned, their attachment was permanent and fmcere, and their happineis feldom ruffled by ал y ftorm this attach¬ ment.
ment, and their mutual gaiety did not dif- fipate the next hour. Of Clarentine and the long-chcfen owner of her heart, ble Uva with domeftic felicity and poflelling minds that taught diem how to prize if, nothing further can be added, than that their lives were as ho¬ nourable as dieir names were reiperkd.
FINIS.
