Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Clermont: a tale
CLERMONT.
CHAP. I.
Thoughts fuceecd thoughts, like retøefs troubled waves, Dalhîng out one another. AFTER pemfmg her letter, Madame D* Alembert leant her head upon her hand and continued filent many minutes as if abforbed in profound meditation; then raifing it, " my love (fhe cried to Madeline, whofe eyes, though flie had retired to a window were faf¬ tened on her), my love, (motioning for her to take a feat by her), I am now going to put your friendihip to the teft." vol, ш» в u l
"ï truft, Madame, (faid Madeline as fhe feated herfelf), you do not doubt its being able to bear any trial you can put it to." " î have no reafon indeed, (replied Ma¬ dame, taking her hand) to doubt your affec¬ tion or fincerity ; but the lequeft I am about making appears to me unreafonable, confe¬ quently I fear its appearing much more fo to you." She paufed a minute, and then, tho' with rather a hefitating voice, proceeded. " Monfieur D'Alembert is comina; to the chateau s the letter î have juft received came by an exprefs to announce his approach,—in the courfe of this day I expect ЬЫ. Reafons of the it oft powerful nature, but reafons which í cannot, muft nor, dare not declare, make me wifh to prevent his feeing you, at kaft while yoii are under my protection." " Deareft Madam (then faid Madeline with quicknefs), let me return immediately to my father; how could you imagine I fhould think your requeiling me to do fo unreafon¬ able i' I have long wifhed to fee him, and my regret at quitting you will now be leffened by knowing
knowing Monfieur D'Alembert will be your companion." "My dear girl (cried Madame) you totally miftake me \ though I do not wiih you to fee Monfieur D'Alembert, I by no means wifh you to return to your father ; on the con¬ trary, fhould you infift on doing fo, you will pain me beyond expreflion." "But how, Madame, (afked Madeline with much furprife) how will İt be poflible to avoid being feen by Monfieur if I do not quit the chateau." " By confenting to feclude yourfelf from ibciety (anfwered Madame) while he is in it ; his ftay he informs me will be but fliort—was it a long one I could not be fo felfifh as to at¬ tempt to keep you ; tell me then, my Made¬ line—terminate my fufpence—-will you gra¬ tify, will you comply with my wiihes?" She paufed ?nd looked earneftly at Madeline for a reply, but it was many minutes ere Made* line could give one» Amazed by what flie had- heard, and learning that Madame D'Alembert had pow- B 2 erful
erful reafons for concealing her from her huf¬ band, her whole foul was engroíľed in trying to develope rhofe reafons ·, but like the other myftcries which had tortured it, flie vainly tried to do fb. "Ah! Madeline (faid Mad?meD'Aiem- beitj in a melancholy voice) I fear this filence bodes me no good." " My deareft Madam, (cried Madeline) í would at once have anfwered you, could í at once have determined how to ačl j but í will acknowledge though my affection for you prompts me to comply with your requeft, my pride makes me revolt from the idea of becoming the unknown gueft of any perfon; befides—befides (with fome little hefitation) there is a kind of appréhenfion mingled with that pride. í recollect the particular, the imprtffive manner, in which my beloved be- nefaCtrefs bade me remember, that when¬ ever Monfiuer D'Alembert came to the chateau, flie did not defire me to continue Ín it¿ and her words, together with thofe you have uttered, n.ake me fear that Monfieur has fome fecret enmity againft me, though for what
what caufe î crnnot poffıbîy conceive, unac¬ quainted as I am with him." "What a wild idea, (exclaimed Madame), to fuppofé a perfon who is really ignorant of your exiftence, can have any enmity to you?" " Good heaven ! Madam, (cried Made¬ line) how you aftonifh mei" "I repeat, (faid her fiiend) that Mon¬ fieur D'Alembert, at this moment, knows not that fuch a being as Madeline Clermont e»\- ifts : when he comes to the chateau hc cer¬ tainly muft hear about you, but your real refidence I fhall take care to have concealed from him : Come, tell me, do you longer hefitate how to aft?" Madeline fighed deeply -, flie was unwil- to flay, and yet unwilling to go : unwilling from motives of aíľečlion, and a fear thac if fhe aid flie íhould be deemed ungrateful ; rightly confidering that thofe who will not fometimes tax their feelings for a friend, are в j them«
themùdvcs unworthy of the appellation of one. if Xo, Madam, (laid flie, after the iilcncc ofa few minutes) 1 ncj longer htutate,—-do with mc аь uri pk iiíè , í Íhould ill requite )vi¡ favor·» if J ddobeytd your wiihes." " A rliouCmd Luaki, my Madeline, for your compliance, (erieri her friend, tenderly embracing hei) it \ыь removed a heavy bur¬ then or une a fine fs fiom mc : and now, my dear girl, to inform you of the plan which ï have concerted for your concealment; a plan which only to thofe immediately con¬ cerned in canying it into txccutkm í ihall bipart, in 01 1er to avoid any danger of a diicovery, and to prevent idle curiofity : I fhall immediately have ic circulated thiough the family that you are going to pay a vi fit to a ι clarion fome leagues off, and order Lubin, (in whom, his old godmother, Agatha, and Floretta, I alone mean to con¬ fide) to prepare horfes for the journey s as foon аь voti are out of fight of the chateau, he
he fìiall conduci: vou to the grotto by the lake, where as foon a:, it is dark, Floretta fhall be íènt tore-conduft you home, and by a private door bring you to the chamber of my mother, which I think better adapted than your own for concealing you, as her death İs too recent to permit the fcrvants to wiih to enter it. " I hope my love (feeing Madeline turn pale) you have no objection to it?** Madeline was ailiamed to acknowledge fne had.—■ " No, Madam, (anfwered flie faulteringly) 1 have not." " Confider, my dear, (faid her friend, who was not perfeftly fatisfied by this affu¬ rancè) your fe clu iion in it will be but fhort ; and while you continue in it, Agatha and Floretta fhall pafs as much time as poffibie with you ; every opportunity too which occurs for vifiting you, without danger of deteftion, I fìiall fcize : retire now, my love to your chamber, and in order to give the appear- в 4 ance
znce wc wifli to my plan, put on a riding habit." Madeline withdrew, but inftead of chang¬ ing her drefs, fhe fat down to reconiider all that had paifed, and the more flie reflected on it, rhe more her heart recoiled from the idea of continuing in the chateau, " If difcovered (faid fhe) î may be in- infbkcd as an intruder, and degraded not only in my own eyes, but thofe of the family ·, but can ï retract the promile I have given to Madame D'Alembert ? No, it is impof¬ fible todo fo-— ΐ cannot appear fickle, Ì can¬ not difappoint her ; fooner than do fo I will run the nfk even of indignity." While thus engrofled in thought, Madame D'Alembert, followed by Agatha and Fio¬ retta, entered : Madeline ftarted and at¬ tempted to apologize for not having put on the habit.
«You
Cí You are an idle girl, (cried her friend) the horfes are waiting, and no time is to be loft." In a few minutes fhe was ready, and with Madame D'Alembert defcended to the hall, where ihe found many of the old fervants, (who loved her for the fake of their dear de¬ parted lady as well as for her own) aflembled to bid her farewell; having received and re¬ turned that farewell, and alfo a parting em¬ brace from her friend, file mounted her horie and fet off at a fmart pace with Lubin : they foon penetrated into the thickeft of the wood, and after proceeding about a mile through it, they turned into a winding path leading to the lake ; here they both alighted, and Madeline, being acquainted with the way, walked on, while Lubin flowly led the horfes after her. This was the very path which de Sevignie had taken the laft evening ihe be¬ held him, and the moment flie entered it, the remembrance of that evening ruihed upon her mind j flie fighed heavily ; ťí Ah 1 how diť- B j ferem
iei ent (flir cried to herfelf) were my feelings th« η ν what they are now 1 —then I imagined vyflf die bt loved of de Sevignie's heart, then believed him endued, not only from í.fièction but woith, to the poifeflion of mine; but now no idea of that kind remains, and to that which 1 once entertained I lookback as to a delightful dream, from which í luve onl} been awakened to mifery and honor. u Yet can de Sevignie (fne continued, as flie puifbed her way), can de Sevignie, (as if only now flie had conceived the doubt) be pufi/ious, be unworthy ? Oh ! impoflible! (cried fhe, }ieUmg to the foggeftions ofa tendt rnc A, winch, though oppofed, had nivr been in the leaft degree conquered), Oh ! impoffibie ! Vice could never wear fuch а femblancc of viitue as he wore ; the alter¬ ati m in luì manner muft have been owing lo fome circumflances which, prick prevented his revealing, and 1 fhould, 1 ought at once to hove believed fo : furely I had done fo, had
h ."d I not obeyed, (let me whifper it to my¬ felf) the dictates of difappointed tendernefs and offended pride." On reaching the erotto flic feated herfelf on the mois- covered itone before it, the very feat on which flie had once been alarmed by de Sevignie ; the very feat on which flie had once, while the pale ilars glimmered o'er her head, fo impatiently waited his approach, tf Oh î what minutes were thofe, (fhe ex¬ claimed) Oh ! whit the palpitation of that moment which brought him to my feet !—" Again fl.e beheld him in idea, again fr w his fine eyes beaming; on her with mingled love, hope л\и\ forrow j agii n felt the foft prefltire of his cold trembling hind ; again heard rhe fighs, with which he declared there was an unconquerable neceflity for their féparation. (i Oh! de Sevignie (flie cried) to know you happier now than when that declaration was made, would relieve my hcait of an al¬ ii 0 moil
moft intolerable weight of anguiih: fhe wifhed lhe could learn whether he had yet left V—; but to enquire without betraying her motives for doing fo was impoflible, and from the idea of difcovering them fhe flirunk with af¬ fright. " What fatisfaction (fhe afked herfelf) could 1 derive by knowing he was flill there ? Ko hope of feeing him could be derived by fuch a knowledge." She continued engrofled by this idea till ihe felt the tears dropping upon her cheeks ; thefe brought her to a fenfe of her weak- nefs. <f h it by indulging fuch "feelings as my prefent ones,—is it by dwelling on the umembrance of Sevignie, (faid ihe) that I adhere to the réfolution I formed not to think about him, that I obey the injunctions of my lamented benefactrefs, or what I know muft be the wiihes of my father : what folly ! in¬ flead of trying to drive him from my heart, to try and eftablifli him more firmly than ever â
ever within it, by flill believing him ami¬ able ! Ah, had he been really fo, never would he have formed plans which he did not mean to realize -, never would he have con¬ demned my opening my heart to fuch a friend as I was bleft with; and 'tis only a fud¬ den impulfe of weak and culpable ten¬ dernefs which could make me again con¬ fider him in the light I once did -, an im¬ pulfe which I will endeavour never more to yield to : Yes, de Sevignie, more refolutely than ever I will try to expeli you from my heart. She wiped away her tears, but fek at the moment how arduous was the tafk which flie had impoíêd upon herfelf.— How difficult it would be, in moments of fecurity and quiet, tobaniíh de Sevignie from her thoughts, when feenes of grief and ter¬ ror, fuch as fhe had lately experienced, had not had power to do fo. " Heaven, however, (cried fhe) ftrength- ens thofe who wiih to do right, I wifh to do fo,
fo, and to do fo I think 1 muft forget dc Sevignie." Lubin, who had hirhei to been engaged in fecuring the horfes within a cavity of the mountain, now approached, and opening a fmall bafket of nice provifions, wnich Aga¬ tha had given him, he thread a napkin on the grafs before Madeline, and laid the contents of the bafket on it. " 'Tis tirne for you to take fomething Mademoifelle (faid lie) i dai с lay 'tis now far beyond your ufual dinner hour; do pray, Mademoifelle, do take fomething, you look faint indeed." Madeline felt weak and tired, and did not refift his entreaty; after her little repaft was over, he removed the things to a [refpeftful diftance, and fit down to lefrefh himfelf. The parents of Lubin had pafled the prin¬ cipal part of their lives in the fervice of the Countefs and her fmi ily, and at their death, which
which happened when he was very young, flie had taken him entirely under her pro¬ tection ; his gratitude and fidelity amply repaid her kindnef», and flie had confidered him as flie did Agatha, infinitely above the left of the fervants. With true French gaiety after he had fi- niflied his repaft, he amufed himfelf with finging the following SONG, /"ЧОМЕ, fu¿et Contenti thou e\er fm'hi g rrnuí, Come, fit with me beneath this o'd tics' ih id > Or гдтЫс %7jth me loind )un g'cen-ciaıi hill, Adown whof-î fitle loft ItVs the íilveiy rill. If thou'tt an inmate of my bumble home, I would not change it h,r .1 «ilJcd dome ; J f blei w jih thee j my übte ihall Le crown'd With íweetb, in riot's banquet never found t CariL-fs w itli thee I'd roinrj at eaily day, And join the vwb'ers on íhe \\¿ 'ing ípray ; Or gculy tei>i my fleecy bLatmg fold, And kindly guard th;m t'^m 'Ле wjntV) cjIJ.
Oh* let me fold thee to this throbbing heart, Which fighs for релсе enoa only cau'ft impari j And 'et me with thee ever humbly benJ, Before each trial hcav 4 n may pleafc to fend. I»':kc fome kind ftar that gives a cheering ¡av., To lead benighted mortals on their way, D') thou appear to check each anxious thought. And give that blcffednefi fo Ung Tve fought. ** Is that your own compofition, Lubin, (aiked Madeline) whofe mind was amufed by liilening to him. " Yes, Mademoifelle, (replied he) I pafs many of the long winter nights in fcribbling ; and then I fet my own words to my own mufic, and they anfwer my purpofe as well as the beft fon» in the world." <c The purpofe of amuíing you, (faid Ma- line." "Yes, Mademoifelle, and keeping care from my mind : life is fo fhort that one íhould, according to the old faying, ζ learn to live all the days of their life/ which they never can do if they yield to fretting or vexation.^ ťt True
" True, (cried Madeline), thofe who think as you do, Lubin, are only truly happy." Lubin now rambled away, and Madeline alfo arofe and walked about. The day was now fir advanced, " Ai>'l i" thf» yi/c<4']i fky the viownwrud iun " Look.41 out effulgent frum amid vhc ut ih " Of bioken clouds, gay shifting to lib beams·** Thofè beautiful clouds, and all his dazzling fplendour were reflected in the clear bofom of ■the lake, along with its verdant banks ; where the laureftine juft beginning to bloffom, and the arbutis already in bloom, reared high theii beauteous heads, while its foft mur¬ murs intermingled in the wild concert of woodland chorifters : a thoufand golden beams played upon the foreft, heightening the richnefs of its autumnal fliades. and as they illumined the diftant mountains, difco¬ vering ibme of their moft romanflic recefles. The mind of Madeline was foothed by the charming fcene, and flie fek that while ihe retained her prefent taite for the works of nature, flie could not be entirely infenfible to
îo pleafure. 1 he wild flowers that grew about now emitted their choiceft fragrance, and the evening gale bore to her ear the bleating of diftant flocks, and the far off* whif¬ tle of the peafant the welcome fignal to his companions in induftry, to retire fi-om their labours» At the appointed tirne Floretta came to her; in about an hour Lubin faid he would follow them to the chateau, " Well to be fure, Mademoifelle, (find Floretta, as they walked towards it) tis with fear and trembling I came for you to night; Lord 1 hope this may be the laft time I fliall ever be fent to the grotto." " Is Monfieur D'Alembert come? (aiked Madeline," " Come, yes, and in a way that was not expected ; he has brought three coaches full of company along with him." " Brought company along with him ? (re¬ peated Madeline, in a voice of aftoniihment. " Yes,
' s Yes, an equal number of ladies and gen¬ tlemen, and all çav fouls I can aflure vou." f( Your lady's feelings muft be extremely hurt, (faid Madeline." tc Aye to be fure ; but if Monfieur never hurts them more feveiely, fhe will be very well off." " '1 his bringing fo much company to the chateau feems as if he intended to make a long ftay at it." "Oh, no, Mademoifelle, (replied Floretta with quicknefs) I took care to inquire par¬ ticularly from Lewis his valet de ch im¬ bre, about his intentions, and he told me his mafter and his friends were taking a tour of pleafure, and the chateau lying in their way, had merely called at it for the purpofe of refting themfelves a few days." i£ Or perhaps to requeft Madame D'Alem- beit's company," (faid Madeline.) " Not they indeed, (cried Floretta) flie is quite too grave for my mafter, or the friends he likes, and tis a pity indeed that ihe fhould be fo : Lord, what is the ufe of fine cloaths, or
or youth, or beauty, or fortune, if om lives moping and retired, as flie does, for ail the world like a hermit.'* u Confider, Floretta, (faid Madeline) the affliction your lady is at prefent in." <f And what does folitude do but increafe that affliction ; when a thing is over what is the good of lamenting it » ? Ah ! Ma'am- felle, í have often thought what a fine figure Ld make if I had my lady's fine cloaths, and jewels, and carriage to roll about in." r£ I aflure you, Mademoifelle, (continued flie with a conceited flmper) I could fcarcely come to you to-night ·, Monfieur Lewis, whom 1 knew very well, when in Paris with my lady, would hardly let me leave him ; he is one of the politeli creatures in the world, and pays fuch pretty compliments -, he fays 1 am vaftly improved by the country air, and that my natural roles would fhame all the artificial ones in Pariá. He and the other fervants which accompanied him, have quite enlivened us again, all but poor Agatha j fhe has moped ¿bout ever fince they came, but
but fhe is old, Mademoifelle, (proceeded Fioretta, with a Mgrificant look) fhe is old, and that is the reafon fhe cannot be animated like us." "Poor Agatha! (exclaimed Madeline) who felt more attached than ever to the faidi- ful creature, from finding fhe had feelings fo congenial to her own." She had now reached the chateau, and her heart palpitated with a fear of being dif¬ covered either by Monfieur D'Alembert, or fome of his fervants ; but of this Floretta af- lured her there was no danger. Through a private door in the rea of the caftle, fhe led her up a flight of narrow flairs, feidom ufed, to the gallery, which was now gaily illumined by the lights that blazed in the hail : fearful of being difcovered, Ma¬ deline haftened to the chamber, in which Fioretta informed her ihe would find Agatha waiting to receive her} but ere flie reached it, a fhout of noify laughter, afcended from an
an apartment contiguous to the hall, and fliocked her, by making her feel as if an in- fult had been offered to the memory of the countefs, " if my feelings are fo poignant upon the occafion, (faid flie to herfelf), ah, what muit the feelings of her daughter be !—Surely, furely M. D'Alembert cannot have that fen¬ fibility which the hufband of Viola fiiould pofiefs, or he would n->t thus have broken in upon the facrednefs of her grief." Floretta knocked foftly at the chamber door and it was immediately opened by /ig- gatha i but the moment Madeline entered ic fhe ftarted back, fliocked and furprifed at beholding it in the fame ftate as when the re¬ mains of the countefs were taken from it. Agatha took her hand, and, drawing herin, locked the door. ť£ Pray be compofed, dear Mademoifelle, (faid fhe) my lady, who feared the fight of the hangings mig'i. affect you, would have had them removed had ic been poifibîe for me and Floretta to have taken them down i but as that was not the cafe, fhe feared
feared de firing the men to do fo^ left ir fhcukl excite fufpicion." ft I own (cried Madeline, in a faint voice, with a face as pale as death) I own í would rather have continued in my own room ; but if you or Moretta will have the goodnefs to pafs the night in tiib with me, 1 fhall not feel quite fo relučlánt to it." <c As to my ib) ing with you, Mademoiil-lle, (exclaimed Fioretta, inilantly goirg to the door) that is utterly impoSbule , 1 hive a thoufand things to do, which Agatha, if ihe pit aies can tell you of." So uying flie hailily unlocked the door, and departed without ceremony. " For my part, (fuel Agatha) as foon as flie had again fecured it) 1 would flay with you with all my heart, but that ï fear if I did I fhould be miffed (as fome of the maids rooms open into mine) and if í was, your being in the caille muft be difcovered, which I know would dillrefs my lady exceedingly/' "And
"And why fliould it diftrefs her?" de¬ manded Madeline with quicknefs, no longer able to fupprefs her curiofity» " Why, (repeated Agatha, looking ear» neflly at her) becaufe-—dear Mademoifelle, (cried flic as if fuddenly recollecting herfelf) I am fure ï can't tell you." " Don't be alarmed, Agatha, (faid Ma¬ deline, with affected compofure), I fliall not inquire into fecrets, which I fee your refpečt for your lady makes you felicitous to conceal; in filence I fliall fubmit to her wifhes, her kindnefs gives her a right to expect this from me." Supper was prepared for Madeline, as was alfo provifions for the enfuing day, as till the next night, fhe was informed fhe could not be vifited by any one. Agatha preffed her to fit down to table ; fne had no inclination to cat, ihe however complied with her en¬ treaty, and made her alfo take a chair, being anxious to detain her as long as poflible.
fť Monfieur
u Monfieur D'Alembert makes no hrv; flay at the chateau, í underftand, (fhd ihe), from Fioretta." " No, thank heaven, he foon quits it," /e- piiecl A g it lia. " It fe-ems he merely flopped to reft him¬ felf, and hio pai ty at it," lefumed Madeline. "So he and his ^ood for nothing fervints fiy, (cried ApcUhi) but Ì have к aion to think he Ivd fome other motive fji coming to it." " Have ^ou r' 1 fid Madeline c\ger»v. "Yes, 1 inngine ìa came tv> it foi the ¡4i»p)fe of htlnj vvîıa·- p it of tue eíLte v, ould be the bot to aiv >k с ." "P'í^ojl· οι? (кр -cated Ма hline, in amiz^mti 0 fineiv Moník ur D'Alt mh it tonki ila tnmk of ihfpjfinj of any puti^f it* KiHÎy li , lituation ck>v- not rtqa. e his e.< nig f'»?" " 'Ί is а fign у ai know lİLtk* of it, or * on \ ) ad not La fj, (eiic.l Ag * r) bi, с χ·., α¬ ν g-no 1 ¡Ub long rendered К ..л m w ai L of mono-,." v.v, lit, c "Uh
<c His extravagance! (again repeated Ma¬ deline) Monfieur D'Alembert extravagant! Gracious heaven how you aflonifli me ! By what means was the countefs de Merville prevailed on to let her daughter marry a man of diflipation?" cf He appeared both to the Countefs and her daughter a very different man before, to what he did after his marriage," anfwered Agatha, £; And to the too late difcovery of his real character the nieLnciv ly of the Countefs was to be imputed," laid Madeline. Agatha looked at her but made no reply. A dreadful idea ftaved in the mind of Madeline : — the word-, of Γ bretta, the fo¬ lemn manner in which flie had been bound by the countefs to conceal rhe black tianf- ačtion in the chapel, feemed to deci ire it was a juft one : flie graJped the arm of Aga¬ tha, ihe faftened hei eyrs upon her as if they would
would pierce into the very recefles of her foul. " The horrible my fiery then (faid flie) is explained ; -— Monfieur D'Alembert — tlie chapel —-" "lidi (cried Agatha, ftarting from her chair and fluking off the hand of Madeline) what do you lay? Beware, beware, Mademoi¬ felle of what you utter; beware (with adark frown) even of what you think. I know what you would have faid, I know what you have imagined, but —" " But 1 am not miilaken," Lid Madeline, in a hollow voice, and finking againft the back of the chair. cc Yon are; (exeldmed Agatha) you have df.v iniufticc to Monfieur D'AIember:." "ľkvjii be pMÌfcd, (cried Madeline, clafping her hands together) heaven b^ pi/ifed; had î continued much logger to be¬ lieve the idea I .O. med of him a luft one, ï think I could not hive prekrvedmy reafon.'
с '2
" D "li'
(ί Dear heart, í am fure I fiiould not have wondered if you had left it directly, (laid Agaihi) it muft have been horrible indeed to fupp ofe that the hufband of the daughter could have murdered the mother." "Oh, hoi rible, moft hoi rible!" exclaimed Madeline. " 1 hough Monfieur D'Alembert is gay and extravagant, and not the kind of man he appeared to be be foie his marriage, hc is not fuch а villainas you fuppofed him," cried Aga-, .a. iC l vas not then miilaken in fuppofirg th t Melarne D 'Alembeit had another caufe for fj'ief N f, Jv the death of her mother?" faid М.чкЬпе. ** Хо, you were not mlfbken as to that, (uph(d vgului) poor thing flie frets a great de Л α. bout Monfieu·*, and ï am fure if he f ľs any pait of thi domain belonging to the cheti au, it will go nigh to bre »k her heart, fui ilv loves every inch uf it, and if any thing с jull rufe my p >or ckai lady out of her ¡jiave, I am ccıta'm his doing io would."
" I hope he will not be fo difiefpeclfi.l to her memory, (Aid Madeline) as to do what lie knows would have been contrary to Ik r inclination, nor fo inhuman to her daughter as to difi egard her wifhes." "Ifear he will, Mademoifcl'e : (ciied Agatha) when once he takes a thing into Ids head, 'tis a difficult matter to m ike him gi„c it up : but I hope when you fee Madame you will not tellher any thing I have b. cu fay¬ ing." "You may be aíľured I fhall not," laid Madeline. " She means (refumed Agnha) to pay you a vifit to-moirow night, if ihe cm pof¬ fıbîy ileal fiom hei company: po ι foui tis very di ferent company to what lhe his been acui.bm.dto: Ah! Ma le.noiitiie, if my dear Ld\ had been living, fuch people would never ¡uve been permitted to enter the ehd- tedu, Alas! its glory and happineis are eie¬ parted, aid 1 fliall never again behold iutii days ai once I faw within it." cj "Farewell
" Farewell Mademoifelle, (continued ihe, rifing) tis time for me to leave you, for I hear the iervants retiring to reft, heaven blefs you and protect you." Madeline locked the door after her with a trembling hand, and involuntarily fhuddered' as flie turned from it at finding; herfelf alone in a chamber fo gloomy, and fo remote from every one as her preient one was. Her fpi¬ rits were too much agitated, İn conféquence of her converfation with Agatha, to permit her to fleep ¿ and, even if inclined todo fo, ihe could not think of repofmg on a bed where ilie had fo lately feen the corpfe of her friend ; whenever fhe glanced at it, ic was with a kind of terror, as if fhe aimoft ex¬ pected to have beheld again upon it the fame ghaftly figure. Within the chamber was a clofet which contained a fmall fele<5lion of books j 'deter¬ mined on fitting up the night, Madeline took one from it, with a hope that it would divert her thoughts and prevent her attention from dwelling on what diftreft her \ but this hope
hope was a vain one, and the ntght \yore heavily away. About the dawn of day ihe leant back in the arm chair on which ihe was fitting, and flept for a litrle time; the en- fuing hours were as tedious and melancholy as thofe fhe had recently paffed ; flie waited moft impatiently for the promifed vifit from fome of her friends, particularly after it grew too dark for her to read. At length in about two hours after flie had been compelled to lay afide her book, fhe heard a fofc tap at the chamber door, flie immediately opened it, and Floretta entered with a light, and a fmall bafket of provifions. Madeline followed her to the table on which fhe laid them, as foon as fhe had re-locked the door, and then to her infinite amazement and terror firft: per¬ ceived that Floretta was weeping violently.
в 4 CHAP.
С ПАР. ÏL
ь**^·^^·^^
«« Ah, L.V.; ah, frantic fear, " f fee } I ice thee near s " I know thy l.unie*i lkp, thy h..gg.nd eye^ " Like ihee I »hit, like thee iliionkr'd fly."
W HAT is the matter, Floretta?" afked Madeline, in a voice of alarm. (( Ah! Mademoifelle, (exclaimed Floretta, dropping into a chair, and wi inging her hands) poor Agatha !" "What of lier? (ci ied Madeline, witu an eagernefs that fliook her frame/' « Ske
(ς She is dead !" replied Floretta. ťí Dead! (repeated Madeline, receding a few paces and wildly flaring) dead!" ihe ex¬ claimed, with mingled doubt and horror, fi Yes, (laid Floretta) and her death is at¬ tended with fu:h appearances!" Madeline trembled univeifilly, her refpi¬ ration grew flint, flie fat down by Fioretta, fne laid her cold hand upon her, but it was many minutes ere fhe could fpeak. "Her death has been attended with fuipi¬ cious circumflances then . ? " faid flie. ff It lias," replied Floretta. Madeline ftarted up, and wildly demandeel whether flie could not fee Madame D* Alembert directly. Without oivinG; herfelf time to reflect how very improbable it was that they could have gained accefs to the cattle to perpetrate the crime flie accufed them of, the moment Μά¬ ο 5 deline
deline heard of Agatha's death being attend¬ ed with fuipicious circumflances, flie con¬ ceived the dreadful idea of her having- fallen a vi-Jlim to the muiderers of the countefs, in cider to pi event their being dıfcoveıed -, and to a iimilar apprehcniion Put could not doubt flic would be iaciificed herfelf, as they had ken her in the clnpel with Agatha. It was this ft a r thcrefoie that made her vvh to fee Madame D'Alembert diicvflly that fhe might entreat her pcrmiiTiou to re¬ turn to her father without any fai ther delay. £t See my lady, Mademoifelle," faid Flo- ittta, alfo Γι fing. cc Yes, fene i Mideline, almoil o-ifping for bieath), this houíe is no longer fife for me to d .vc 11 in, and il·e muil let me quit it d.ie.tly." " í will go and try whether flie can come to )íai Mademoiselle, (íWd h loi etta, who, ahrmtd by her agitation, reared to oppofe Lti), bvt indeed I fear flie cannot, without Monfiem's
Monfieurs knowledge, as fhe is now engaged with him and his company : í know flie in¬ tends to vifit you to-night, as flie and my mafter are to have feparate chambers, though it will be at a late hour; if you cuuld wait till then it would be better." " Well, (cried Madeline, growing a little compofed and re-feating herfelf) if you are fure flie intends to come, I will, however conti ai y to my inclination, w 7 ait her own time, rather than expofe her to the difplea¬ fure of Monfieur D Alembeit : and yet, Flo¬ retta, (continued ihe looking earneftly at her) I cannot conceive why he fliould be dif- pleafed to hear I was in the chateau." " Difpkafed ! (iepeated Floietta), Lord I am lure he would dc rejoiced !" " Rejoiced!" exclaimed Madeline. " Yes I have not a doubt but what he would," faid Floretta. " Then why (aiked Madeline) am I con¬ cealed ?" " Becaufe," cried Fioretta — " "What?" eageily demanded Madeline. с б « Why
fí NV li y to tell you the truth, Mademoifelle (ciicd Moretta) but remember it muit go πα fu ther, ϊ believe my lady thinks you ase too pretty to be feen hy Monfieur." (i Heavens! (exc'umed Madeline) what would you have mc imagine that your lady could fuubour a fufpicion of me?" ťf Loi d, no, to be fure 1 would not, (faid Moretta) tis the veiy iait thing İn the woild I wo'dd have you imagine, becaufe it would be the moil uniuil idea you could form; 'tis not of }oiì, buc Monfieur, flie hai bonis a fuf- pi' ion , flie knows if fie faw vou —- " <( \\- ι uld to God ] h. d not confented to ilv in Lbe houle," inteiiupced Madeline. The motive for Madam« DAkmberťs cowhng her иаь now cxphined ; the mo« íve v luen prompted hei lamented benefic¬ ili is fu re} e\ıt(4İÎ\ to tell гнт not to continue ш the chite a j, if Monfieur D'Alembert едпк to u.
"Ohî
"Oh! my father, (flie fighed to herfelf) would to heaven í was again within your arms/' " I hope Mademoiíčlle, (Lud Fioretta) you will not leave us; Monfieur departs in a few days, and í hope you will not mind a fliort confinement." Madeline made no reply, but defired to hear the particulars of Agatha's death. "About the middle of the night, (faid Floretta) ï and a fellow fervant who fleeps with me were awoke by dreadful groans from the chamber cf Agatha, which opened into ours ; we diiečtly jumped out of bee!, and running into it, allied what was the matter ; but groans were all we could hear : we grew dreadfully frightened, and called up more of the fervants. A light was then procured, and we difcovered Agatha in fits : the noife we made alarmed my matter and miitrefs, o'er whofe apartment we were, and throwing their wrappers over them they came up to 5 inquire
inquire what was the matter. My lady ap¬ peared gteatlv fliocked by the fituation of Agirh 1 , and dire Í! ly oidcred a phyfician to bc knt fn, but Monfieur counteimanded this onici ; he faid lie had a medical fiiend in the houfe, who couki do as much for her as any other ptifrn in the fame line» lie was accoid'r.ply f n: for, and on examining Antiul, he decLud liti fita v\ re owîrv to her having eaten fornt 11 u . л > that tiifa^r ed with her. ScPictlv liad ík !p',ke:i \.hc.i-ll'C came to heifelf, and opening p к r tyco, in a holknv \ oice txclaimed, f F< iva! I am poi- font d ľ c Good heavens! (cried Madame D'Alem¬ bert fun ting) what dues ilie fay ? does fne not fay flie ь poifonedr' ť You are not to mind what flie fays, (re¬ plied Moniieur, in ι a .her dn angry voice) die woman raves, dnd í in fid. on your quit- ling her room directly, you are ah ead y iuífi- cieiitly fliocked by her.' " My lady durft not difobey him, and re¬ tired
tired, though I faw moft unwillingly, with her woman " f Send for fdther Bertrand, (again fpoke Agatha, after the paufe ofa minute) for I am dying.' « Nonfcnfe, (exclaimed Monfleui D'Alem¬ bert) fiiend ihe will be well enough by and by, and i am fuie I fliall not permit my neighbour h nod to be diftuibed to giatify her, faid my m Cer, —[ w Ah! Madtwhdk, I fear he is but α baci скпАк.п'] —I infill, therefore, (continued he) that nit a ftu vnt in this caftle fliali go for father Beiti and, except they chufe immediately to be difmifled my fer¬ vice.' lake my poor lady, none of us dui it difobey him, hc took care indeed that we fliould not, by continuing to watch us: ina little time Agatha rehpfed, and died in a few minutes. She had fcarcely breathed her lail, ere nie turned quite black and fwelled to a great fizcv and, notwithftanding what my mailer and my mailer's fiiend fays, we are all, that is, 1 mean, all the fervants aie of opi¬ nion, that flie was poi foned , tliou»h how, or by whom, we cannot poflibly cor.cvive, as we
we know of no ftranger that lately enteied the caftle, neither of any mortal that flie ever offended." "Tis a horrible affair (faid Madeline) who was now firmly convinced that the mm derers of the countefs had deftroyed her. " My mafter has inflfted, (cried Fioretta) upon our making no comment, at leaft no public comments on it i he declares if we do, lie will have us feverely puniflied. Poor Agatha, poor foul, there is nobody regiets her more than I do, though we had many little tiffs together ; flie was fo good-natured and ufed to make me fuch a number of pretty little préfents in the courfe of the year , if ever I wanted any thing nice, nice f\cet- meats, or nice cordials, í had nothing to do but to afk her for them. Mr. Lubin will be holding up his head now I fuppofe, I fancy flie has left him all her money, and no trifle either í dare fay : we fliall know this, how¬ ever, to-morrow, for father Bertrand, who has her will, intends opening ic then, if flie has left
left me a legacy, ï fhall buy mourning for her/' ťí Poor Agatha! (faid Madeline) fhe little thought flie would have followed her dear lady fo foon." t£ Tuie, Mademoifelle, (cried Floretta) but you look ί int, let me give you a glaß of wine?" " Firft tell me (faid Madeline, on whofe agitated mind the dieadful idea of poifon dwelt) firft tell me, (faid flie, ftarting up) where or from whom did you procure this wine?" " Lord bleib me, Mademoifelle, (cried Fioretta) how you frighten me by your looks ·, why, I itole it fiom the sutler." u Well, fince you got it from him, í will take fome of it, (cried Madeline ) She felt her fpirits fomewhat revived by doing fo, and flie then expreffed her hopes that Floretta would ftay with her till Madame D'Alem- beit came. "Tis quite out of my power to ftay till then, (laid Floretta, inftantiy rifing, as if the very
very idea of doing fo had terrified her) I muft go, in order to watch for an opportunity for my lady to come to you." " Haften her to me I conjure you, (cried Madeline) as flie followed Floretta to the door to lock it after her. " О that I was out of this houfe, (ex¬ claimed Madeline, as ihe turned from the door), danger and death furround me on every fide.° She feared that Madame D'Alembert would oppofe her quitting it, fhe feared flic could noc entreat her permiffion to do fo without betravin^ in fome decree the motive which prompted that entreaty. 1 m pre í led with. terror, flic knelt before a iargc crucifix near the head of the bed, and fervently implored the protection of heaven. As fhe prayed fhe was fuddenly ftartled by the creeking of the clofet door : fhe turned her head with quick- nefs towards ic, and beheld it half open ¿ and the horror ofthat moment can better be con¬ ceived than defcribed ¿ a man whofe face was fliaded
fhaded by a large hat leaning from it, and earneftly regarding her. That the murderers of Agatha had by fome means or other difcovered her conceal¬ ment, and from the garden had entered, through the clofet window, with an intention of deftroying her, was the dreadful idea which inftantiy ftarted to her mind : all power of voice and motion forfook her, and ftraining an eye cf agony and horror on the terrifying ftranger, ihe itili continued kneeling: .in this fituation ílie remained for about two mi¬ nutes, when a fofc tap came to the chamber door, the ftranger haftily retreated, raid fliut the clofet door ; Mad line with a feream of mingled joy and terroi dien ftarted from the ground, and flying to the'door opened it and beheld Madame D'Alembert and Fioretta. Madeline fell upon the neck of the former, but for many minutes could only give vent to her feelings by fobs and broken fentences.
«Ohi
íf Ohî you are come at Lift: (fhe exclaimed as ihe preffed her friend to her palpitating heart) you are come, the bleffed inflrument of providence, to ùve me from ddiri.tflion ; let us quit this chamber, and fecure the door till the family can be alarmed and the ciofet fearched." "Heaven défendus! (cried fioretta, in- flantly retreating towards the gallery) what did you fee within the clofet, Mademoifelle ť' " Nothing to alarm her, I am fure," faid Madame D 'A ie mbe rt, " Nothing to alarm her!" repeated Made¬ line emphatically. "No, (ciicd Madame D'Alembert) every avenue to that ciofet ia fecured ; tis therefore im¬ poffible any one could have entered it without your knowledge i your imagination affected by the gloom of your apaitment has deceived you»" " Good heaven! Madam, (exclaimed Ma¬ deline) would you try to make me diibelkve my feiüès. ?,>
fff To
Cí To prove how certain I am they have been deceived, I will fearch the clofet my¬ felf," faid Madame D'Alembert, advancing as Ilie fpoke into the chamber. <£ Oh! do not be fb raih, (cried Madeline, grafping her arm) do not too late repent your temerity." Madame D'Alembert made no reply* but difengaging herfelf, flie directly went to the ciofer, and flinging open the door, exclaimed, fC Come, fee whether or not 1 have oeen miilaken." Madeline approached her with trembling fteps, and to her infinite amazement beheld there was no creature or trace of any crea¬ ture within the clofet, if I am aftoniíhed indeed, (iaid flie) but myfterious as was the entrance or dilappear- ance of any perfon, that I law fome perion is beyond a doubt," " What
"What kind of perfon, Mademoifelle r " aiked Floretta. Madeline, as clearly as flie could, defciibed him ; but was hurt to find Madame D'Alem¬ bert itili appeared incredulous. " You fee, (faid flie) that the window, the only way by which any perfon could have entered the clofet, is fecured within fide." "I fee it is, (ciied Madeline) I muft theiefore only fuppofe that it was a being of the other world I faw." " No, no, my dear Madeline, (faid Ma¬ dame D'Alembert) í am fure you have too much fenk to be fuperftitious," " Ah \ Madame, (replied Madeline) I fliould not wonder if my icafon was impaiied by the fhocks 1 have litely received.] — Wonder not, (flie continued) if I declaie I can no longer remain in this apartment. Oh ! deai eft Madam, be not furpi ifed if ï entreat vour permiflìon to return to my father; he r wiíhes
„TIRM0NT. wiíhes to fee me; and who can wonder if I figh to ice ium: "Unlmd Madeline, (faid Madame D' Alembert, fhedding teaisj will you then leave n e? Will you difappoint the hopes í tnteitJined ofuip\hg your fociety whilft I continued at the en :eau? Your father, you muft remember, in h ·> laft letter, aíľured you he did not exput, ьлу, he did not defire you to lttum, till í was goîiïg to Pads ; and fioM all difagiecable conihiem n. you \vili be rc leafed in two days, as Monfieur D'Alem¬ bert then depaits." Diftreflèd, confufed, perplexed, Madeline flood fikiiL, irrefolute how to act. i 1er fears, her ie afon urged her to quit the e h atea u di- lečlly, but her dieael of bei'ig thought un- gr«iteilil, unfeeling, by Madame D'Alembert, íf íhe did do fo, aimoft tempted her to ftay. Cf Ah! (cried flie to herfelf) how diftrefs- ing a fituation is mine; the feais which make me tiemble to ñdy in the chateau! am bound by
by a folemn vow to conceal -, and except I can afíígn better reafons for wiiliing to leave it than I have already done, (and to do fo is impoffible) Madame D'Alembert will cer¬ tainly be offended at my quitting it." Hurt by her filence, by her too evident wifh of departing, Madame D'Alembert fud¬ denly wiped away her tears, and while a ciimfon glow mantled her cheek, exclaimed, €< Asainft your inclination I will not detain you: no, Madeline, to inclination, not necef- lity, I muft be indebted for your company. I fee your reluftance to continue with me, and you are at liberty to depart the moment you plcafe ; 1 own —" and her voice faul¬ te red. "I had hoped, ï had imagined, but it is no matter, 'tis not the firft time I have been difappointed,—difappointed by thofe on whom my heart placed its tendereit affec¬ tions, and by thofe it believed vvouidfinccrcly return them," Had
Had a dagger pierced the bofom of Made¬ line it could fcarc Лу have given her more pain than did the words of лег friend : eager to be reinftated in her good opinion, flie forgot thofe appreheiifions which but a mo¬ ment before had agitated her foul, and de¬ termined no longer to perfift in deftring to quit the caftle. " Oh ! Madam, (cried flie, while tean trickled down her cheeks) how you have wounded me by your language : Do you faen deem me unworthy ? Do you think me un¬ grateful, forgetful of your kindnefs ? Do you fuppofe I defire to fly fiom you?" " Your words have intimated fuch a defire, (replied Madame D'Alembert." ''Ah! Madame, (fiid Madeline) when î uttered them my fenfes were aimoft over¬ powered by terror; and if you wifli me to continue in the caftle, — -" " W í fli you, (interrupted her friend) Ah! Madeline, (clafping her vim aioundher) do VOL. III. i> VOU
you doubt my wifh mg you to dofo? Yes, my love, his my wifh, my entreaty, my car- neit rcqucll, that you ftay in the caftk till I quit it. You fhall not coi.tinue in your pié¬ fent chambei, í came on puipofe ίο remove you fiom it, for, to be brief, Monfieur D* Alembeit fufperts youi being in the caftle, and may pei haps π ke it into his head to ílaichit, Τ am thcu fore going to conduci: you to л place who e he will never think of looking for you." " Oh 1 Madame, (cried Madeline, and flie paufed, feaiful of agun evciting the difplea- iuie of lui fiiend, for flie had been on the point of agiin enti eating pei miflion to re¬ turn to her fuller) to uh it p!*ce, Ma¬ dame, (afked flie, fuddenly iccolkfting her- feh ) are you goh ¿ to take me." " Afk me no qndlions at prefent, my love, (laid Madame D'A Iemb.it) our fecu- riry pcrivjv dqxnds upon our í iei.ee , for I } ¡ Ί ονί mt at ι ¡lib veiy moment but we may be \ at he !, foliorV me, theicfoie, I entreat in fílente." She
She now led the way fiom the chamber, and, pieceded by Floi etti carrying a light, they ftole with trembling flops along e gal¬ lery, fiom whence they defcended by the pi'ivate fĽirsi oppofite to them was alo"/ aiched door, which they pail through, and proceeded along a dai k paíľ'ge to another flight of fteep ftone fLirs, which feemed to lead to the fubtcrrancous parts of the caftle. ITcie Madeline paufed, and entieated to know whither they were taking her. "Be not alai med, my love, (faid Ma¬ dame D'Alembert) be allured it U to a place of item ity." The fl ui > v ere terminated by ли iron door faftened by an immenfe padlock Floretta laid down the hojht, ¿nd taking down a lai^e rufty key with difficulty unlocked it, flowly opening with a grating noife, thit abfolutely ftiuck tenor into the foul of Madeline; it diftoveied to 1er view a black and hide» ous vault, dripping w : th damp, and fiom d г waich
which a cold vapour iffued that nearly ex¬ tingui íhed the fight; at its entrance Made¬ line again paufed. "Oh! heavens, (cried flie, fhuddering and leaning againft the wall) whither are we going?" "Ah! Madeline, (faid Madame D'Alem¬ bert in a fupplicating voice) after going fo far will you at lail difappoint mc ? Be not alarmed I again repeat ; if you wifh to con¬ firm my obligations to you do not hefitate now : your life, your lafety, are more precious to mc than my own, follow therefore without fear, without hefitation, wherever I may lead." To do fo, however, was fcarcely in the power of Madeline, and Madame D'Alem¬ bert taking her hand, rather drew than led her chrough a fucceffion of gloomy vaults till they came to a low arched door, faftened by a bolt: Fioretta undrc\ , and Madeline, to her infinite horror and amazement, found herfelf
herfelf in the chapel, befide the grave of her benefactrefs, and near the fpot where íhe had received her fatal wound. " Is this (faid flie, looking round her with terror and difmay) the place of fecurity you faid you were bringing me to? 'Tis all but fecure ; death and deftruction hover o'er it. Oh! Madam! (wildly flinging herfelf at the feet of Madame D'Alembert) I cannot, can¬ not flay within it, fur the murderer here takes his folitary rounds, to plunge his dagger in the heart of innocence and virtue/' " My love, (cried her friend, raifing her from the ground) what do you mean ? you ilrike me with horror by your words, you ihake my very foul." The energy of Madame D'Alembert re¬ called the fcattered fenfes of Madeline, and made her reflect on the imprudence flie had been guilty of í fhe fhuddered as fhe con¬ fidered íhe had nearly broken her folemn vow, and been on the point of planting un- D 3 utterable
utteıabİe and ur;ppeafcabìe *üj lo^ s in the hein of Mada iv D'AlenıLc ' t. — li xlì tingali hei !c r ívűi, tc D Cl r iviadavv, (idil f ) I î n fW n t whit í C' í , r v nu t v ι z i was c »f i dered bv the «'vo.n of :η/ nk.e." " Suiely пи; 1)ч*с, (fáid he ι ívn 1 ) y u could iľ t im vjre İ w jui 1 ι e fi ci vi as to intend to keep you hne : iv~-r> ι'*,Ίι, as foon as ic is duk, ei ¡Si í h< w v i, ac¬ companied by Luoi , will ço'\t to ι е -con¬ duct you to the caftle, wheie you fliall be again put in p^ffeiTion of jour own apart¬ ment : my leafim for bıingıng у«л1 to jiaíš the day hue, was to p. с vent your being feen by Monfieur D'Alembert, who, I will ac¬ knowledge, thieatcntd to ftaich the culle ; l' f except he puts that thtcat in execution to-c\y, I am conhcient he neve. \m\í¡ ач to¬ nici ι ow Ьа wit bufi» p 'yi^g ν ' ts in tire ncigh- bvuhood pieviousto lus depamu e."
This
This aflurancc calmed the rgitation of Midtline, dnd flie grew f till moie compoful when Madame ÏVAkmbut ckclate<i ihe would not leave her till tiie nioimng was far¬ ther advanced. They now afcended ti the dormimi y, which, as I have aheady f 1 1, was in an ha¬ bitable ftate, and foon chfev/ere 1 a ceil vi Madehne to fit in, containing th * u v uv of a wooden bedfi.cad. Hei с к bietta 1 íz a fmall haiket oi pr vfivis and fly* ani her lady contiiiued w hh Madelint till the g.ooiuy fliidows of ii'ght liad neatly fit J, ihcy then bade hei a ieu, and repeated their afluíante of coming for her аз íoon as it grew dark, X vft to hei'elf, the flurry of Madeline's fpirits Iubii ed, m - ihe was able calmlv to revnfihi „ ! ι was ρ dl dnd ton lect on Ικ ι j Kf nr 1ки,чП mv a^ ih*· dil io гле bic— teıly ugurt^l non hulug iniuled on u- turni'ig ïmmediaui/ ,o h ι ih hei , foi h *r longvi îtiiciencc in tne caftie, expoied her, flie
fhe was convinced, to dangers of the moft dreadful nature ; that Agatha had fallen by the hands, of the countcfs's murderers flie could not doubt, neither that they had en¬ tered the ciofet with an intention of deflroy¬ ing her; for their „ ftiange ani myfterious difappearance from it flie accounted by fup- pofing that behind fome one of the large' prefles it contained there was a fecret door. " I cannot fuppofe, (faid flie) that one difappointment will make them by afide their hon ible intentions ; by remaining in the caftle I expofe myfelf'to their continual attempts, attempts which may perhaps at Lift be too fuccefsful, I muft fly it thcrefoie, (continued fhe) however unpleafant, however agonizing to my feelings to excite the difpleafure of Madame D'Alembert; I muft, when next wc meet, entreat, impiore her to let me re¬ turn to rny father." As foon as the day was advanced Made¬ line defcended to the chapel, in order to try and
and divert her mind from the dreadful ideas which depreíľed it, by examining the curious monuments within the building ¡ the terror of Madeline's foul now gave way to awe and melancholy,—flie foit chilled, flie felt op- prefled beyond expreffion, as flie viewed the records of mortality, and trod the filent foli¬ tary aides, which awfully echoed her lighted den. and whofe »loom the beams of the fun that darted through the painted cafements could not diflipate. S h e li a d < > fte n ( to и fe the word s of an au - thor, not lefs affecting than fublime) * " Walked beneath the impending promon¬ tory's cwv cli ď, fometimes trod the va ft fpacer of the lonely defert, and penetrated the inmoft recefles of the dreary cavern, but had never, never before beheld, nature louring withfo tremendous an afpect,—never berore felt fuch impreffions of awe ft riking cold upon her heart, as now beneath tiie black browed arches, amidft the mouldy walls
walls of the Monaflery, where melancholy, deepeil melancholy fprcad her raven wings." Ah' if the chikhen of vanity, of diTpa- tio'i, fo mt u mes viflicd a fci ne like this, fu« iv (thoupht flic) their heairs wouKl be ί,Ί -tuîed, they wouki be convinced of the L tic i c.o of tliis w oi Id, of the folly of placing V'Ir entiit auctions unon i., when they 1 .nei 1 " nobility an ay ed in a winding flic 1 1, m ь ieu; «ι ouhkíi· g in dn um, and tue high (y fs wavnj ion.id die htiot ь toiiib, while his uufty b.nner, tl e banner which lit once unfuihd io fu ike copíleination on his foes, hung idly fiutici ing o'tr it." At the grave ofher bene LCa eis flie paufed. " Here (Lid fie) gi .titude and affection muft ever linger. Oh î mv fiiend, my mo- t' er, îvvı edn thy kin !ntf> be obliterated f tm n y 1 тг, naires my Ik art be cori- i i I ihr thv h 's: ak*.! foni thy deep fleep t, e í :,.. v di , У ia x'híK cannot awke thee! Cold
Cold is that bread which was the repofiroiy of her fonows, filent the tongue which poui ed fympathy upon them." When it grew dark flie afcended to ť.e cell, for, the gloom of the chapel then grew too awful for her to bear. Afcei fitnng a confidérable time there in a fiate of painful impatience, flie went to a large fokhng door, which terminated the gallery, and command¬ ed an cxtenfive view oi th*. valley, to try if fie could difcovt-r any fjgn oí Madame D' Alembwit or Moretti, who hid hud, as í fhould picvdouily hive mentioned, tint they would came to her tino igli tliu ga^kn , but no ilep, no voice, could ihe hear, no glimpfe of any olijvfl could inc diiľvgimh. "They cannot ha\e f л gotten me, (Odd flie) they cmnotlet me p if> tnc J.i^.'it amidit the dt ad, and yet 'tis far beyo.id enc hour 1 expected them."
D Ó
Пег
Iler heart aimoft died away as flie viewed the oppofite mountains, whofe dai к brows feemed lifing above the clouds, anil fiom vhofe blatk cavities the wind lftued with houfe min murs, like the yells of midnight m urde re is. " Ah' (cried flie, fliuddering) within thofê cavities pei haps the murdeieis of the coun¬ tefs—of Agatha—the intended muiderers of Madeline, may be now coicealed, before to-moirow perhaps I may be cold and inani¬ mate, like thofe oVr whofe fculptuied urns 1 fo leccntly btnt." At this inftant fhe thought flie heard the echo of a light ftep outfide the building; hei heait palpitated, fhe bmt foiwitd, and ciught a glimpíè ofa iemale figui e habited in bkvck, gliding into the Monafteiy and fol¬ lowed by a mm wiappcd up m a large dark coat : 'Í hat ir was Madame D'Alembert ?nd Lubin ihe b Jit Id flic could not doubt, and m a n ahinoi L of joy íhe iníLntly íkw to the itan s
flairs to meet them, but at the head oftlie ftairs flie paufed, and trembled, for as the low found of voices reached her from below, flie fancied fhe heard the voices of total ftrangers: flie held in her bicadi that flie mi iT ht be better enabled to akertain whether О or not her fears uere juflly founded, and was foon convinced that it was neither Madame D'Alembeic nor Lubin flie had feen enter. Alive only to one dreadful idea, to one ap¬ préhenfion, ihe now believed her fate ap¬ proaching, and looked round for fome place to kerete herfelf; flie looked in vain how¬ ever; for mouldering cells and narrow paf¬ fages, choaked with rubbiih only, met her view. At length flie recollected, that near the cell where ihe had been fitting there was a long and winding gallery, pretty hee from rubbiih, and which Madame D'Alembert had informed her led to the innermoft receites of the
the building, down this fhe determined to fly. At the head of the ibi. caft which ficea the bo ly of the chapel w и a las ge chfman- tled window, tinougli which the moon, now be«in ii ig to life, find a funr h 0 ht, but flill fuflirietit to lender objects confpicuous. Ma- de've theicfoie ftaitd ihe ihould be ken as ihe tioiľed the fluiitafe, flie knew how¬ ever tltie vs is no akunaüve, and tliat ihe muft eıdıer iun the iiiqueof beingdikovej ed now, 01 к mam w he i t in a few minutes later flic was fine oí buiv, fo. Maddine accoıdîngîy flept forvvai 1, but though hei flep v as too hg .t to be h u 1, her f i gi v was pti reived, and fre inkan 1 * htaid a fliout fiom the ciupii, and aicendin * fteps. Feai lent her wings, die fie w to tu v d rv, but, juft as ilie was daituvr mto it, а huge iton hook tnuincrltd her cloaths: wuh a О íliejigth which e!* í} ciai чп only could have given liei, flit attempted to teai them horn it
it; but 'ere her efforts had fucceeded her arm was rudely feized; flie immediately turned her head and beheld the i-iflamed countenance ofa man glaring upon her; the m.mvnr he faw her face he ftarted. bick vrilh α look which feecmd to inrimate ihe was not the perfon he expected to have feen, but the fint pleafure whica this idea vive was quicklv deLuovcd О 1 » / by hib duiVviiv a fnail d. g' T ,er írvn ¡us Ore alt wifli v. hieb he again approacìieJ »vu erine. Her death flie now believed inevitable, and ftaggering b\ck a tew paces, "Ah ! heaven have mercy upon me!*' ihe faid, and drop* ped li felefs on the floor. As flie recovered her fenfes flie felt fome one charting her hands. lc Ah î (Che cried, in а flint voice) d·· you reftore me to life but to have the pleaiure of depriving me of it."" tf My Madeline, my love, (cxcffmied the foft voice of Madame D'Alcmbuc) u hat Lis thus difordercd your fenfes?" Madeline
Madoline raifed hei hen 1 Пот the ^ round, »j * ílu* lookcíi at Mad ane D'Altmber,— Яю locked fi от her, and beheld Lubui. " Gracious heaven ! (ci ied Πν) do 1 di earn or have J been in a fu¿htíul dieam nom л. bic'i you have ¡ufi awAened mc?" " My deareit giil, (faul Muhmc D' Alembeit) uhat his alai mcd you . ' " Alarmed me ? (repeated Madeline, wildly ftaiing at her) Oh, hciveus! furtly it !·> buc an inttant ago fince 1 Jaw the poijn*.,td oí Ehe muideier raided «io;ainfl mer" " You ren if/ пк," exclaimed her ft lend. " Vtiufy )ou, (re])i\iied Madilint, Hart¬ ing from die giound) Oh, let us fly this dreadful place dne-Aly, for even now per¬ haps oui hves may be in danger." " Doni be frightened, Mademoiklie, (cried Lubm) I am not шкчте h'* fí You ilt ike me with hoiro:, (faid Ma¬ dame D'Akmbctt) ariti take m,m methe powLi of moving: tell me \vh '- vîarg. ι ir \ w с have to appre hen J, forno u лес oí any bUL "
l eino, of an T * thi ig to alarm you, did we dis¬ cover, and the fi oon 'n which we found you ve imputed to i.lnef> inilead of tei ror." Madeline in a few ha!ly words infoi med h*.i of the maniKi in whivdi flie had been teinrie J, and w hilft flie giatefully leturned her thanks ro heaven fir h\ fdety, fne ex· piefild her aitoni hmmt at being uninjuied. "Oh ' my love, (cried her fiend, clafp¬ ing her ?ims round her as flie concluded} never, never can í ¡équité you for what you you have luffe red on my account ; never can I forgive myíüí for having expofed you to fuch alarm·.." " f wiih with all my foul (iaid Lubin, giafping the nifty i w old lu liad brought ftuin the chit an) 1 v.rh \ai\ all my kul 1 had cau^nt the villam, I'll wan ant if f ¡\лЛ I íhouki f««jii h.iVc made him confeb what brought him hither, his companion ï fup* pofe, was only a m:n in diíguife."
4f Who
ζς Who thefe myfterious ftrangers were I cannot pofiibly conceive, (cried Madame D'Alembert) but that they certainly did not mean to harm you, however appearances may make you believe to the contrary, I tlunkj for had fuch been their intention they moft aflliredly could have accomplished that intention 'ere we came." " They only defigned to rob her I fup¬ pofe, (Did Lubin) and frighten her to filence; pray llv.rch your pockets, Mademoifelle, to try if y^u hive loft any thing." " There was nothing of any value in them, (replied Madeline) fo I need not take that trouble." " They muft certainly (refumed Lubin) have retreated, on hearing us, down that galler)'," pointing to the one Madeline had attempted to ametal he¡felfin¿ <f I would give all the money I am worth for fomebody now to afiift me in ftarchingit." " Oh, Madeline í (cried her friend) I can no longer attempt to detain you ; I came to you
you half determined to let you return imme¬ diately to your father, as Monfieur D'Alem¬ bert, contrary to his firft intention, has re¬ folved on pafling a month in the chateau ; but I am now, in conféquence of what I have heard, refolved on doing fo ·*. to-night there¬ fore we part, and heaven knows whether we fhall ever meet airain." u To-night! "repeated Madeline amazed. cc Yes, (replied Madame D'Alembert, whofe tears fcarcely permitted her to fpeak) to-night—was your journey poftponed till to-morrow, Monfieur D'Alembert muft dif¬ cover that you have hitherto been concealed in the chateau, and the conféquences of fuch a difcovery v. ould be extremely difagreeable to me." " Heaven forbid then (faid Madeline) I fiiould delay my journey ; and yet — flie paufed, Ike recollected herfelf—and fince her friend was anxious for her immediate depar¬ ture, refolved noc , to mention the fears ihe felt at the idea of travelling by night.
L l
" í confide you to the care of Lubin, (cried Madame D'Alembert) í know lu is faith¬ ful, 1 know he is brave, and will fulfil the truft I rep de in him." " I humbly thank your Ladyfnip for your good opinion of me, (fud Lubin, taking off his hit and making ч low bow) it fhall be my ilu ly to ck fu ve it: î am fure I íhould be an un та te ful variet if ï would not go thiough fu с and λ, aar for you, or any one beh. veri hy ycu ; and Mvie mo*felie nvy be í filired, while í have an arm to f treu h oue in her defence, I will protect her." "At the extiemity of the wood furround- ing the chateau, is die cottage of my nurfe, (faid Madame D'Alembert, addreíľing Ma¬ deline) thither Lubin muft now conduit you, and there he will procure hoi fes for your join ney y for I am afrai 1 to have any taken fiom the fiables here, Icafta difcovery fhould be the conféquence of doing fo : do not delay longer than is abfolutely ncceffary at the cottage, I have important reafons for wiiliiug }ou to get to a diftance from the chateau,
chateau, as foon as poffible, when you are about half way between it and your father's houfe you can flop to reft." ({ Yes, (replied Lubin) there is a fnug houfe juft thereabouts, where we can put up. You may recollect, Mademoifelie,(turnmgto Madeline) that you and my poor lady dined there laft fpring in your way to the chateau ?" A deep figh itole from the breaft of Ma¬ deline at the recollection of that happy pe¬ riod; and Mídame D'Vlemberc was fora few minutes unable to fpeak, ic in the courfe of а few days, Madeline, (faid flie, as foon as flie had recovered her voice) you may expect a letter, containing a full explanation of every thing that ap¬ peared myitcnous m my conduct towards you. After i u fle ring fo much on my account you furely are entitled to know every fecret of my heait— -Oli ! Madeline that heart can never forget the giatitude it owes you."
"Ah!
" Ah, Madam, (cried Madeline, while tears trickled down her cheeks), do not hurt me by fpeaking in this manner; alíthat I could do, could never never repay the nume¬ rous fivours í have received from you, 'tis I only have a right to fpeak of gratitude." " Perhaps (refumed her friend) we may meet again : Ì will indulge fuch a hope, it will looth, it will confole me in fome degree for your lofs. Oh ! Madeline, v, tis with pain, 'tis with agony 1 confent to our féparation, hut without mui muring J muil fubmit to that as well as to many other forrows." She now took the trembling hand of Ma¬ deline, and they defcended to the valley, thro' which they filently and fwiftly pañed, nor flopped 'till they came within fight of the chateau ; Madame D'Alembert then paufed, to give a Uft farewell to Madeline ; locked in each others arms they continued many minutes unable to fpeak, unable to feparate ¡ at length Madame D'Alembert fummoning all lier réfolution to her aid, difengaged hcr- felf 5
felf from Madeline Cí Farewell, (fáid flie) may heaven for ever biefs, proteil you, and make you as happy as you deferve to be." She turned away as ihe fpoke as if fearful her réfolution v- ould fiil her if flie continued another moment with Madeline, and haftened to the chateau. Silent and iuri nvible Madeline flood gazing after her till ^ddreiTed by Liibin. "Come, Mademoifelle, (faid he) we had belter not delay any longer, 'twill be a late hour even as it is I can allure you, 'ere we reach the houfe where we are to reft, this way, Mademoifelle." Al moil inftuclivcíy Madeline followed him to a door which opened from the garden to the lawn, bir here flie again flopped ; the vaiiety of ť^trefľmg and и rnfying feenes ihe liad lately gone through had almoil be¬ wildered] her fenfes, and ihe now felt as if ihe
flie fcarcely knew where fhe was, or whither fhe was going. " Have I really taken my lait leave of Madame D'Alembert ? Am I really quitting the chateau?" faid flie, earneftly looking at Lubin* "Lord, yes, that you have indeed Made¬ moifelle," anfweied he, fomewhat furpriied and alarmed. " Gracious heaven 1 (cried flie, with folded hands) if any perfon two months ago had told me I fhouki quit the chateau in the manner I am at preient doing, what little credit fiiould 1 have given to their words.— " Oh life 1 (fhe fighed to herfelf) how ra¬ pid are thy revolutions!—But a fliort time ago and that very manfion which I now leave with fecrefy and precipitation, ï entered with every hope of finding a permanent and happy home within it ; but a fliort time ago and il was a ι e fuge for diftrefs, an afylum for innocence
innocence and virtue ·, but now the mendi - cant may wander to it in vain for relief, inno - cence and virtue feek proteftîon without re¬ ceiving it. "With its virtues its honours muft de¬ cline j for he who has not a heart to che¬ ri ili the former, muft furely want a fpirit to fupport tht latter, ff No more then fhall the arm of valour un¬ furl its banners to the call of glory \ no more fhall the records of fame be fwelled by irs achievements ; no more fhall noble emula¬ tion be infpired by them. " With its late owner its greatnefs and hap¬ pinefs eieparted ; they are ftt, but fet not like thac fun whofe iplendours fo lately brightened thibfcene,to rife again with renovated gloiy."
vol. in.
£
С НАГ.
CHAP. III.
*' Forlorn and lofi I ti ead, *' With fainting Иерь and J!ow, ,( Where wilds, immeaiu.ably Γρι cad, et Seem length' sung as I go." J[ HOPE, Mademoifelle, (faid Lubin, on hearing her figh a., ihe turned from the cha¬ teau) you are not frightened at the idea of going through the wood?" " No i'* replied Madeline. u So much the better, fo much the better, (faid Lubin) but indeed I fhould not wonder if vou were/'! « Why,
c< Why, (cried Madeline) is it dangerous?" "Not over fafe indeed, but don't be frightened, Mademoifelle, on feeing her fud¬ denly ftop, I fhall bring you the fliorteft path through it." " And when we get to the road we fhall be Ыс, (cried Madeline) as there are cot¬ tages fcattered all along it?" "Yes, (faid Lubin) but if you were in danger and expected any aflîftance from their inhabitants, you would be fãdly difappointed, for thofe kind of people are fo fatigued after their day's labour, that when once they gee to bed one might as well try to waken the dead, as waken them : but don't be frighten¬ ed, Mademoifelle. M i( Frightened! (repeated Madeline) it is fcarcely poi r : ble to be otherwife from the manner in which you talk ; you have really made me tremblo ib that I can fcarcely move." " If you would endefcend to accept my arm, Mademoifelle, we could make infinitely m л'С haite than wc do at prefent," ε 2 Madeline
Madeline accepted the offer of Liibin, nor did rhey again paufe till chey had reached the cottage they were bound to -, they found ic Ihut up for the night, and Lubin knocked loudly with his flick againifc the door, but without efrcÄ. "You fee, Mademoifelle, (fiid he, after the filence ofa few minutes) í was right in fay¬ ing it was next to impoffible to waken thefe cottagers." " Poor people, (cried Madeline) it is a pity to diflurb them." " Oh, not at all, (faid Liibin) they cm go to bed immediately again, you know, and I warrant they will not reil the woife for having had their /lumbers interrupted." He now repeated the knocks with avio·* lencê that íhook the door : at lait a window was opened, and an old man, putting out his head, afked who came there.
"Why,
" Why, a friend, (replied Lubin) and a devilifh time he has been trying to gain ad¬ mittance: Come, come, Mr. Colin, you may open the door without any grumbling, for by the time Ì have taken to waken you it is pretty evident you have had a good fpelk" "Pray what brings you here at this time of night?" cried a flirill female voice. " I am come by the command of my lady to borrow two horfes, (anfwered Lubin) í muft get them directly, and without being afked whither 1 am going with them ; pray make haite, I have a lady waiting with me for them." " A lady!" the old couple repeated, and both thrult their heads together out of the window, to fee whether lie fpoke truth or not. The door was now opened in a minute, and the nurfe invited Madeline into the cot¬ tage, while her hufband went forth with Lubin to a little flied adjoining it, to prepare die horfes : ihe had feen Madeline before at £ J tlie
the cottnge, and almoil immediately recol¬ lected her ; fhe was all amazement at now beholding her, nor could forbear inquiring die reafon of it. Madeline waved the difi- courfe, and expreffed her regret at her having been difturbed. The horfes were ready in a kw minutes, and the good couple having received a ftrid caution againft mentioning her to any one, ihe was affifted by Lubin to mount, and they fet off at a fmart pace. ťí How very curious old Colin and hia wife were! ((aid Lubin) î dare fay they would have given half they were worth to know the cauíè of our travelling by night, and not getting horfes at the chateau." u I don't wonder at their being fo," cried Madeline. <c No, nor I neither, Mademoifelle ; 'tis a comical thing to be fure our rambling about at night ; it puts me in mind of the Fairy Talcs
Tales I ruve read i heaven be praifed our journey is but a fliort one." They did not fläcken their pace till they reached the gloomy foreft, in which the go* thtc caftle of Montmorency flood j the heart of Madeline funk as fhe approached it, and flie trembled as flie entered amidft its awful fliades, and heard the breeze fweeping over them with a hollow murmur : the courage of Lubin too feemed a little to fail him, " î wifh with all my foul Mademoifelle, (faid he) that the houfe we arc going tow as at this fide of the foreft inftead of the other," iC ï wifh it was, (cried Madeline) or that we could get iheker elfe where." "That is impoflible, Mademoifelle, (replied he) fo we muft only make what hafte we can to Ít¿ Lord how glad I fhall be when I find myfelf there ¿ fo will you, I dare fay, Made¬ moifelle d s
e 4 "Undoubt-
" Und.Aibteah, (replied Madeline) the rea Кк tion о» palt danger w nI heighten pre- kiľ· pltíduu." J. ** í Willi »vil oui dangeis were ovrr, and rui pkalures come, (cued Lubin y but Loid, vUd^moiklk, tn vcrv^oi't or oui w^y ь Üill heron u>, the middle о L b L foreft, which we have iot ytt и ached, ί α üumd π ndt /- voib, the у iv, юг ν gao^ < í b'neiii' , ыч hav long mi« ftcd th' co'intiy , Гиеч tlu y mut s toon us к giOVrS ciai Ι , . »id kt Je dier* phn κ,ι tl ι ι ι 'it ^\ «11, (u ailpl.cťs ы d' HOj '1 i íhoilid 11 ;t l'Jvt A> W »ncb'ü M a ion \ it ^oufd be R. Jî a r * cdl) muttei af- « v o to muide» ont." ( И ι , j í í »o, .J lid M ale fine) do not MİL am ! i и m tin. iiuuv er, foi U yon do )üü lî naivi ι > tu ulule ib í ihall not be able to ι e \ iv γ 'í tt, ťi l afi* ojr ρ i don, Mademoifelle, f am fu к th kd ίι. mg m tne world í meant to do was to tighten you : Го be fuie I wiih 1 liad brought a pocket piftol or two with me from the
the chateau, inftead of this rufty fword, to defend you; though, after all, what would avail my Angle arm againft a whole gang ? Heaven help us if they meet us! poor Colin may then go whiftle for his horfes ; though upon iccollečtion my Lady would certainly recompence him for their lofs." fC Drop this dreadful fubječt í entreat you," faid Madeline, in a tremulous voice. "Come cheer up, Mademoifelle (exclaimed Lubin, who was now thorougly convinced he had alarmed Madeline) we will keep as near as poflible to the extremity oftlie foreft, and if we ride fail we fliali foon reach the houfe." As fail as the intricacies of the path would permit them to go, they went, and at laft reached in fafety their deft ined goal. Here Madeline, who had hitherto wirb difficulty kept her feat, alighted; but how impoflible to defcribe her difappointment, and thedifappoinunent ofher companion,when £ 5 after
after repeatedly knocking at the doôr they were at length convinced that the houfe was uninhabited. They flood for fome minutes looking at each other, in a confternation that deprived them of fpeech, Lubin was the firft who broke filence. " What's to be done, Mademoifelle ?" faid he. a ï am fure I can't tell," anfwered Made¬ line in a faint voice, and leaning againft the wall. ť< Faith, (cried Lubin) I have a good mind to break open the door and obtain fhelter for the night, though, to my forrow, I can't get a good fupper; í meant to have ordered a nice omelet, the moment í arrived." <f hor heaven's fake do not attempt to break open the door, (exclaimed Mad Jine) the conféquences of fuch an action might be dreadful." " What's to be done then í pgain afk ? (laid Lubin) you would not wiih, 1 fuppofe, 3 to
îo fit down here without any ftieker for the remainder of the night j neither would you, I fuppofe, like to mount your horfe and go ten miles farther in fearch of another habit¬ ation, and nearer you need not expect to find one that would receive you." " I am not able to go in fearch of ano«* ther, (replied Madeline) the fhocks I received and the fatigue I have gone through this night have quite overpowered me." "Lord (cried Lubin, ftarting) perhaps the Marquis of Montmorenei may be come to his caftie, only you were afraid Mademoi¬ felle of diat part oftlie foreft, we might have paft it, and been able perhaps to have dif¬ covered." " And even if we had (faid Madeline) what benefit íhould we have derived from that circumftance?" " Why we fhould certainly have obtained a lodging in his caftle." "· I fhould bc afraid to diflurb the family at this late hour," cried Madclint hefitatmgly.
1 6
Lord
€ί Lord ϊ am fure (cried Lubin) it is better lo diflurb them than run the rifque of being murdered here/' " But fuppofe they are not there ?" faid Madeline. " Why then, Mademoifelle, (cried Lubin haftily) we wiil try to find fome niche about the wall where we can iheker ourfelves for the night, fmce you are fo fcrupulous about the door of this houfe." " But, (faid Madeline) though the family may not be come to the caftle, there may be inhabitants in it." " Oh ! I underftand you, Mademoifelle, (interrupted Lubin) you are afraid that fome of the banditti i was telling you of may have taken up their quarters there ; but of that î am fure there's no danger, the caftle was too well iecured for them to gain admittance ; fo that except we find the right inhabitants in it, ï am confident we fhall not find any: come, Mademoifelle, let's lofe no time, will you accept my arm, or would you chufe to mount again?" " No,
cc No, (replied flie) I would rather walk." c< Go before me then, (faid he) and I wiu lead the horfes.'* Madeline obeyed him though with diffi¬ culty, for flie felt fo agitated that flie could fcarcely drag her weary limbs along. As ihe approached the caftle her eyes were anxioufly faftened on it, in hopes of difcovering alight or ibme other fign of inhabitation, but all was dark and dreary around» ie I am afraid, Lubin, (faid íhe, ftopping and mournfully fnaking her head) 1 am afraid the family have not yet returned." " I do not quite defpair about that, Mademoiíêlle,( replied Lubin); at ib very late an hour as this you know we could not expect to have found any of them up." " How ihall we make ourfelves heard by them then?" aiked Madeline. <e Why I fuppofe we ihall find a great bell at the gate, which î ihall ring»" "But
" But if the Marquis's family (cried Ma¬ deline, fliuddering at the very idea) fliould not be in the caftle, may not the ringing of that bell cxpoíè us to deftruction ? Do you forget the banditti you told me infèfted this foreft?" " Lord (faid Lubin) that's true, the bell would certainly alarm them—well Mademoi¬ felle, I'll tell you whit we can do: ï re¬ collect taking notice iait ipring as ï paffed this caftie, of the very bad repair in which the court wall was, ib we will fearch about it for fome gap to clamber through." He accordingly faftened the horfes to the gate, and had not long íêarched about 'ere he found a place which Madeline eafiiy got over. Immediately oppofite this fpot was an arched gateway, which led through a wing of the building to another court ; to this Lu¬ bin conducted Madeline, who trembled fo flie could fcarcely (land, but the moment fhe entered
entered it flie flirunk back, affrighted ,t the défolation flie beheld, and fancied in the hoarfe murmurs of the wind that fighed thro' the fh atte red buildings fur round i r g it, íhe heard portentous founds. On each fide oftlie gateway wt e feveral doors ; Lubin perceived one of ti ri open, and through this he led his trem' "g com¬ panion : they then found themfelves in a fpa¬ cious itone hall, light with one gothic win¬ dow, through which the twilight now caft a dim religious light, and oppofite to which was a folding door^ of heavy workmanfhip : there was a damp fmell in this hall, which proclaimed it long deferted, and ftruck cold to the very heart of Madeline. " Shall I go now, Mademoik , (afked Lubin) and try whether there my one within the caftle?" "Not yet, (repliedMadeline, v.mgdown upon a little bench which ran round the hall) " not yet," faid ihe in a faint voice, and in¬ voluntarily
voluntarily leaning her head againft his arm, for fupport. Lubin was terrified, he aimoft believed her dying. t€ Dear, dear,Mademoifelle, (faid he) cheer up, İ fhall not be long abfent i and whether there is or is not any ane in the caftle, we are fecure for the night." Madeline grew a little berter, and no longer oppofed his going. It was fome time 'ere he could open the folding door j when he did it difclofed to his view a long dark paflage, down which the anxious eyes of Madeline purfued him till flowly ciofing, the door hid him from her view. Scarcely was fhe left to herfelf 'ere fhe re¬ gretted not having accompanied him, for as her eye timidly glanced around, flic fhud- dered at the profound gloom in which fhe was involved ¡ never had fhe felt more for¬ lorn,
lorn, fcarcely ever more difconfolate : the manner in which her fir ft journey had been taken recurred to her ıecoîleclion, and th~ contrail lhe drew between her fituation now and then, heightened л\\ the horrors of the prefent: io ti ue is ir, ıh it Üv¿ гет:ч brance of pail joys aggravates our prefent mifeiies. From lier melancholy retrofpection fhe was roufed by tne opening of the d.,or, tho" expcfling Lubin, her fpirits were fo weak ihe involuntarily ftarted from her icat, " Don't be frightened MademoifeMe,(cned Lubin, in a whifpering voice, as he fofdy clofed the door after him) 'tis only I." " Well, Lubin, (faid Madeline, aimoft gafping for breath through agitation) whac intelligence—-did you fee any one?" Cť 1 can't tell you now,Mademoifelle A (cried he) we muft be gone." " Oh, heavens i (faid Madeline) is there any danger." " This
■ "This is no time to afk queitions, (replied Lubin) no place I can aflfure you to anfwer them'i I again repeat it—we muit be gone !" -To move was fcarcely in the power of Madeline, fo much was ihe overpowered by the terror Lufcin's words had given her, ihe gave him her hand however, and he led her from the hall: but fcarcely had they pro¬ ceeded a few yards down the gateway, 'ere he ftarted, fuddenly flopped, and in a low voice exclaimed* " There are fome of them !" . <f Gracious heaven ! (cried Madeline) what do you mean?" 1 - To repeat her queftion was unneceifaryy for at that inftant íhe beheld two men crofs- ing the court. Lubin now drew, or rather carried her back to the hall, for her tremor had increafed to fuch a degree that ihe could not iland, and he was compelled to fupport her upon the feat on which ihe funk.
CLERMONT. ' 91 In a voice of agony ihe now conjured him to tell her what they had to fear, declaring that no certainty aimoft of danger could be more dreadful than the fufpence fhe at pre¬ fent endured. "Since you muft know, Mademoifelle, (faid he) wc have nothing more to fear than being robbed and murdered !" " Good heaven ! (exclaimed Madeline) do you think the men we juft beheld are murderers ?" "Yes," replied Lubin, ruefully íhakin¿ his head. fc What rcafon have you for fo horrible a fufpicion?" afked Madeline. " Why you muit know, Mademoifelle, I had not proceeded far down the dark pafľage 'ere I heard a noife, which founded to me like the clattering of arms. A fudden panic inftantiy feized me, and í had a great mind to return directly and lead you from die caftle : this, however, was but the thought of a'
a minute, for when ï reflefted there was no probability of getting a lodging elftwherr, and hov/ diihial л thing it would be to pafs the lemainder o r *the night in the open air, J refolved on < f. ig forward and trying to diieover whethvr »hero were friends within. " ! accordingly proceeded till I came to the foor of a nai row flight of ftairs, down which a fiint light glimmcitd : up thefe I foftly a'ceivkd ro a half open door, from which lIk light Kfued, and peeping in I be- heki л large ill finnifiud chmiber, with half a dozen men in it, as ill look.ng dogs as ever 1 beheld, before a huge fire, clean-ng fome fire arms : but that was not all— in one cor¬ ner of the chamber lay the body of a man dreadfully mansled. The dogs laughed as they purfued their work, and talked of the exploits they had achieved and itili hoped to achieve with their arms ; in ihort, it was foon evident to me, that the banditti í had men¬ tioned to you had thought proper to make free with tiie caftle in the Marquis's abfence> fo I made the beft of my way back to you, in
in order to take you directly from it ; an intention which the rogues have difappoint¬ ed." " The horfes will betray us," faid Made¬ line in an agony. " Aye, fo I fear, (cried Lubin) it was devilifh unlucky my fattening them to the gate." "Hark! (exclaimed Madeline) do you not hear a noife r" Both wtie inftandy filent, and then clearly heard a violent ftiouting in the outer court. Tiie dreadful кпь it exvted were foon how¬ ever a little appealed by its growing fainter, as if the pcif»ns it came from had moved to a greater diftance. " I think, (cried X uoiu, after the filence of a few mini'tes, a id gafping for the breatli he had berore fupp re ft) 1 thmk 1 will now have another peep to try whether or not the coaft is clear."
Maddine
Madeline rifing declared fhe would ac¬ company him, tl at if there was an oppor¬ tunity for cfcaping, not a moment might be lull. Again thercfoie they quitted the hall, but had fcarcedy done ib 'ere they once more re¬ treated to it with pıecipİtation, on hearing the fhoutingin the court renewed with double violence. <ť Thc horfes ha\e, ï am fure, lv> you fear¬ ed, betrayed us j (a ¡ed I »ubin) and I make no doubt fearch is now r makim/, for us." " Oh ! Lubin, (faid Madeline) ks there no way of efcaping the impending danger ?" (f None that ï know of, (aniwered he) but dcn't be fo fi lightened Mademoifelle, í promife you (he continued, p/afping his rufty iwoid) thofe that attempt to harm you fiuil pay dearly for doing fo : the villains perhaps may not be fuch villains as you imagine, they may have fome iitde mcicy in their hearts."
As
As he fpoke the gateway refouncied with ťne fli outing, and a light glimmered beneath the door opening from it. Madeline turned her eyes with dreadful ex¬ pectation towards it ; the next minute it was flung open, and feveul men entered; Her firft impulfe was to fall at their feet, and fuppli¬ cate tlurir mercy, but as fhe attempted to rife lier fenfes totally receded, and fhe fell faint¬ ing upon the out ftretched arm of Lubin. ЛУЬеп hei reafon returned ihe found her¬ felf fopported between two women, and fur- rounded by men, amongft whom ï anbin flood talking with eanxftnefb. She looked round her wildly, too much ekforek red to undvr- ftand the words of Lubin, or obferve whe¬ ther tlie appearance of the men was calcu¬ lated to remove or confirm her fedrs. Her clear perception was however foon reftored by Lubin, who aimoft as foon as he law her fenfes reftored, exclaimed <c Come,,
"Come, cheer up, Mademoifelle, after all our fright we are in no danger ; the noble owner o f the caftle has returned to it, and the fine fellows ï faw cleaning the fire-arms, and whom 1 took, humbly begging their par- douSj for robbers, which to be fure was a great wonder, feeing what honeft counte¬ nances they have, were ibme of his Lord- fhip's fcrvants." Madeline raifed her eyes in thankfuínefs to heaven, and Lubin proceeded to inform her tii u tne b >dy he had (ten had been one of the banditti, who the night before had made an u.ifueeefhfuJ attempt upon the caftle, and ť «it the tumult in the coui t originated from the (iomeilicb fufpe¿ting, in conféquence of finding the horfes tafte ned to the gate, that thev were again lurking about it. c < Now that you find yourfelf in no diího- norabk hands, I hope, Madam, you will ípeedily recover your fpints," faid an eldeily man, whofe looks and manner denoted a eon- fcious
fcious fuperiority over the reft of his com¬ panions. Madeline thanked him for the hope hc had expreffed, and w going to explain the caufe of her coming to the caftle, when Lubin hailily interrupted her by faying, he had al¬ ready explained every circ u mila n ce. ťf My Lord (criecl· the man who had be¬ fore add reified her, refpeclfully bowing as he fpoke) has been already apprifed of your fituation, and has commifiioned me, Madam, to prefent his compliments to you, and to entreat you to have the goodnefs to excufe his not doing the honors of his houfe him- felfj which the weak ftate of his health and fpirits prevents : he alio defired me to re- queft you would honor his icrvants by your commands, and not think of quitting the caftle till perfectly recovered from your late fatigue and fright.'*
VOL. III.
F
Madeline
Madeline felt truly grateful for this polite¬ nefs, and rather happy than otherwife at not being introduced to the Marquis de Mont¬ morenei, as her exhaufted ftrength and fpirits left her little inclination or ability to converíè with a ftranger. * The houfekeeper, who was one of the wo¬ men that had fupported her, now conducted her down the paflàge, Lubin had before ex¬ plored, to a large apartment near its termina¬ tion ; where, in a few minutes, a table was covered with refrefhments. Lubin was taken to the fervants hall, and Madeline, fomewhat cheered by the knowledge of her lafety, par¬ took of the things provided for her : flie found her companion extremely loquacious, and fo fhe talked, not much caring whether İt was queftions fhe afked or anfwered. Madeline inquired how long the Marquis had been indiipofed.
" Many,
fc Many, many years, (replied the houfe- keeper, with a melancholy ihake of the head) after the heavy affligions he has fuilained, it would be a ν nder indeed if he had retained either his health or fpirits." Madeline, who perfectly recollected the account lhe had already heard of him, now made no inquiry concerning the nature of thofe afflictions -, but of her own accord the houfekeeper gave her a narrative of them. "The Count St. Julian, his fon, (conti¬ nued Лае) was certainly one of the fineft youths I ever beheld; his death undoubt¬ edly caufed that of my Lady Marchionefs : 'tis generally imagined he fell by the hands of banditti, but fome people have theii doubts about that, and í own I am one of them." " Good heaven í (cried Madeline) who but banditti could be fufpečted of murder- ino; hûıı ?"
F 2
The
The houfekeeper íhook her head— íŕ There were people, Mademoifelle, but" -—as if fuddenly recolleitmg herfelf, " it does not become meto tell family iêc rets." The curiofity of Madeline was highly raifed, bur into fecrets which indeed flie thought propeily withheld, fhe could not think of pry ing. " Would not the fympathizing fociety of friends be of fome fervice to your Lord ?" afked Madeline, after the paufe ofa minute. <c î fcarcely think it would, Madam, (an¬ fwered the houfekeeper) but at any rate he will not try whether it would have any ef¬ fect upon him ; he lives the moft ftrange and folitary life imaginable, rambling about from one feat to another, and never admitting any one to his prefence except his attendants, and now and then a kinfman, who lives fome leagues from this, and will be his heir. This caftle, in the hfe time of my Lady, was one of the fineft and gayeft places perhaps you can
can conceive ; and 'tis a grievous thing to any one who knew İt in it's glory, to fee it now going to rack and ruin for want ofa little repair, its courts full of rubbiih, and irs fine old towers mouldering away; but my Lord lee m s pleafed at beholding its decay." "Does he never go about the domain?" afked Madeline. " No : he generally confines himfelf to a great lonely apartment, where he fcarcely luffers a ray of the bleffed day-light to enter, and frequently pafîès whole nights within the chapel, where he has caufed a magnificent monument to be erected to the memory of his lady and fon." The converfation into which fhe had en¬ tered caft an involuntary gloom over the mind of Madeline, and by again deprefling her fpirits made her foon betray fymptoms of langour and wearinefs. The houfekeeper then offered to conduct her to her chamber, an offer which flie f 3 gladly
gladly accepted, and was accordingly led up a flight of flairs, at the end of the paffage, to a gallery immediately over it j here fhe found a comfortable room prepared for her. Too much fatigued to converfe any longer with pleafure, Madeline would have been pleafed if her companion had now retired, but the good woman was fo fond of talkine; that ihe declared fhe would not leave her till flie had feen her to bed* Madeline had fcarcely begun to undrefs when fhe miffed her father's picture* Struck with confternation and regreg at ita bis, fhe threw herfelf on a chair with a countenance, fo full of concern, that the houfekeeper hazily demanded what was the matter : On being informed, fhe begged Madeline not to be ίο much difire fled, at leaft till convinced ihe could not find ir, declaring there was every probability of its being dropped in the hall at the time they were trying to recover her.
Madeline
Madeline inftandy ftarted up with an in¬ tention of going in queft of it, but was pre¬ vented by the houfekeeper, who allured her, that ihe herfelf would make a diligent fearch after it. This affurancè however was not fuf¬ ficient to prevent Madeline from wifh ing to join in it, till told that if fhe went now to the hall, fhe would run the chance of encounter¬ ing the Marquis, who always paffed through it in his way to the chapel, which he fre¬ quently vifited at this hour. As the houfekeeper fpoke fomebody tap¬ ped at the door ; fhe demanded who it was, and a voice which Madeline immediately recollected to be that of the Marquis's valet, who had fo politely addrefľed her in the hall, replied, "'Tis Lafroy.—My Lord préfents his compliments to the young lady, and begs fhe may have the goodnefs to come to him for a few minutes/'
f 4
il Lord
t( Lord have mercy upon me ' (exclaimed die houfekeeper, with uplifted hands and eyes) what can be the meaning of this ?-— Why, Lafroy, e?gerly opening the door, you have quite aftoniflied me!" The furprife of Madeline, if poflible, fur- pafled her companions : befides, with her's was intermingled fomething like fear. cc Aye, (cried Lafroy, in reply to the houfe¬ keeper) í don't wonder, indeed, Mrs. Bea¬ trice, at your being aftoniíhed, 4is quite a marvel to have my Lord defire to fee a ftranger, when he won't permit his own friends to come to him." " But, pray, Lafroy, did he give no reafon for de firing to fee the young lady?" <- Why as 1 was lighting him to the chapel which, accoicling to his ufual cuftom, when¬ ever he finds himfelf in very bad fpirits, he was going to, he found in the hall a little picture, which he directly concluded muft belong to the young lady i fo inftead of re¬ pairing
pairing to the chapel, he immediately re¬ turned to his apartment, declaring he muft himfelf reftore it to her." "Dear heart, (cried Mrs. Beatrice) well, î proteft hc is very complaifant." 'T was a complaifance, however, which Madeline wouki glaJly have excuied, and which flie wondered a mind fo afflicted as his could ever have thought ofi "Í never faw my Lord more diitutbed than he was juft after finding the pkt urt, (laid Lafroy) í thought when he returned to his apartment he would have fainted." " Since fo difordered tis a greater wonder than ever that he ihould defire to fee a ftran¬ ger," cried the houfekeeper. " Aye, 10 I think too," faid Lafroy, Madeline faw he was impatient to conduct her to his Lord, and, though with a reluct¬ ance flie could fcarcely conceal, fhe did not hefitate to accompany him immediately. î 5 He
Нг kd her through a circuitous gallery to a very magnificent one, as well as fhe could difcern by the faint light whiich glim¬ mered through it; at the extreme end of which was die apartment the Marquis fat in : the moment he introduced her to it he re¬ tired, ciofing the door after hím, The Marquis fat at the head of the room -, he bowed without rifing at her entrance, and motioned for her to take a chair on his right hand. Tremblingly Madeline approached him, and obeyed his motion, it was fome mi¬ nutes ? ere he fpoke, and as his eyes were bent upon the ground the timid ones of Ma¬ deline furveyed a form which infpired her with mingled reverence and pity, and which, though bent by age and forrow, flill retained traces of majefty and captivating beauty. "Young lady, (faid he, at laft, raifing his eyes to hers) Ì hope you had the goodneiš to
to excufe my not doing the honors of my houfe myfelf; affliction, (added he, with a deep figh) has long rendered me unable to perform the lites of hofpitality, to fulfil the cuims of fociety." " The rites of hofpitality were fo amply fulfilled towards me, my Lord, (cried Ma¬ deline), that 1 ftiould deem myfelf highly re¬ mits if i neglected this opportunity of aflu¬ ring your Lordfliip of my heart-felt grati¬ tude." " Does this picture, young lady, (faid he, difplaying her father's, which he had hitherto concealed within his hand, and looking ear- neftly at herj belong to you?" "It does my Lord," replied Madeline. "Will you be fo ooliging (faid he, itili retaining ic) as to inform me how it came into your pofleflion ?" The ftrangenefs of this queftion, and the look which accompanied it, threw Maücdne into an agitation mat-made her tremble, and took from iier all power of replying» * 6 " Ycu
" You aie furpiifed at my queiiion, (pro¬ ceeded he) nor do I wonder at your being fo, but ï truft you will excull it, when í in¬ form you I have important leafons forit: tell me theicfoie, i entieat, 1 conjure you, (he continued, with a vehemence Madeline did not think him capable of) how thk pic¬ ture became youi's?" " My father give it to me, my Lord," aniwricd Made íve, cí \ An fichi ι ! β —— ( h acinus heaven ! —- i ĺe pana d, a ¡í ovu ome by ftiong emo- fions, but ahivJ ím.nuh. tel) uto ve ring his * , ·. τ .f, f ? ·»* vo.'ce, η ι ltd ile 1 <» n r v ь " Lk m.' avu L nd," laid Madeline, wvh inou ifii [> w(jnder, " Ctei Ί^ηι f iiepcated hc, . ith a look fu/vk v t .«eif)»e of difappointment ; then . u · the l' ntc oí fome minutes) do you h nov bv wha- ľieaib he obtained it?" " U is his own, my Lord,' replied Made- hue. "Mis own! (upeatcd the Marquis, with я w ud vind ca ge ι look) his own !—All gra- 2 cious
clous powers !" he arofe and walked with dif¬ ordered fteps about the room, Madeline amazed at all fhe faw and heard, remained trembling on her chair. The Marquis fuddenly flopped before her, and looked at her with an earneftnefs that made her droop her head. " Yes, (cried he) í fee traces in that fice of one—-which no time can wear from my remembrance»" lie refumed his feat.— " in what manner does your father live?" aíked he. " He lives in obfeurity my Lord," replied Mach üne, " fvtiat is his family?" " ît conflits but of mc, my Lord." " You are acquainted I fuppofe with his real name, and the misfortunes which drove him to obfeurity?"
" No, my Lord, í am not -, ï never knew he had a right to any name but that of Clermont ; never knew he had been in a fituation different from his prefent one.'' " Tendernefs to you made him, I fuppofe, conceal his misfortunes, {faid the Marquis.) ï fee, (he continued, gazing upon Madelint whofe pale countenance was expreffive of terror as well as agitation) that I have dif¬ turbed you i a curiofity raifed as your's has been, yet ungratihed, is fufficient indeed to give you uneafinefs ; be fatİsfied, however, by an aíTurance that the prefent my fiery (hall perhaps, when leali expected, be explained." The too evident uneafinefs of Madeline however was not folely owing to the caufe he imputed it to. Ignorant of her father** connexions in life, ihe knew not whether to confider the Marquis as a friend or foe, and her uncertainty threw her into agony. fit No, my Lord, (fhe cried, determined if poffible to terminate her fufjpence;'tis not the
the pain of ungratified curiofity that now dif- treffes my mind ; tis the fear — fhe paufed, trembled, and bent her eyes to the ground,-— 'tis the fear —refumed ihe in a few minutes, and fummoning all her courage to her aid—■ that my father perhaps may have reafon to regret the difcovery of his refidence." "Never! (faid the Marquis warmly) never will he have reafon to regret my dis¬ covering it j no, never will he have reafon to regret your feck ing fhelter beneath the roof of Montmorenei Caille. Accept my hand, (continued he, offering it to her) ac¬ cept İt as a pledge of friendihip to you and to your father." Madeline received the proffered pledge with tranfport, and the Marquis, after gently preffing her hand between his, reftored her father's picture. He now told he would no longer detain her from the reft fhe appeared fo much to require, and cxpreffed his hopes, that 'till perfectly
perfeftly recovered from the effects of her late fright and fatigue, ihe would not quit the caftk. Madeline thanked him for his kind confi-* deration about her, but faid ihe was pretty fure flie fiiould be able to re commence her journey the enfuing day. The Marquis rung for Lafroy to re¬ conduct her to her chamber, and cauti¬ oned her againft mentioning the converfa¬ tion which had pafled between them to any one but her father. Lafroy appeared in a few minutes, and Madeline on returning; to her chamber found the houfekeeper flill there, afl amazement and curiofity. "Well, Mademoifelle, upon my word, (flie exclaimed, the moment Madeline en¬ tered) you have had a long converfation with my Lord/'
ť< Yes," faid Madeline, who fcarcely knew what fhe uttered, fo much was her mind en- groffed by wonder. <f And pray, Mademoifelle, how do you like him?" afked the inquifitive Mrs, Bea¬ trice. <f Very well," replied Madeline, begin¬ ning to undrefs in order to get rid of her trou- blefome companion. " Aye, (faid Mrs. Beatrice) he is even now fometimes to be liked i in his youth there could not be a finer gentleman ¡ he was fo complaifant, and one of the beft dancers I ever beheld." She continued to extol what his Lordfliip had been 'till Madeline was in bed, flie then- bade lier good night, and defired her, when flie chofe to rife, to ring for a fervant. But folitude could not calm the agitation of Madeline's mind ; the more flie reflected on the converfation that had paffed between her and the Marquis, the more her perplex¬ ity
ity increafed ¿ íhe at iaft, however, endea¬ voured to compofe herfelf by reflecting on the promife flie had leceived from him of having the myftery explained, and his aíTu¬ rance of friendihip ш her father. " Should that friendihip (flie cried) be fomething more than bare profeflîon ¿ fliould it have power to mitigate the forrows he too vifihly labours under, for ever bleffed fhall I confider the hourin which I entered Mont- mort: nei Caille.'* Exhaufted by mental as well as bodily fa¬ tigue, flie at lail ftm k to repofe, from which ihe did not awaken tül the morning was fir advanced : fhe was ready to leave her cham¬ ber 'ere fhe rung fora fervant, a rvid im¬ mediately obeyed her fummons, an î inform¬ ed her breakfaft was already prepared for her by the houfekeeper. Through a number of winding paflages Madeline was conducted to the grand ftair¬ cafe
Cafe, which flie defcended to the . _1. Here ihe involuntarily paufed to examine the an¬ cient ornaments furrounding her, which fpoke of the fplendor and and tafte of ocher days; but with the admiration they t î, was intermingled a degree of fadnei; ^e neg¬ lect and even défolation fo even ¿re ар - paient; the fliiclds and other w , Ле tro¬ phies which hung upon the itati vilars of the hall, were covered with du »d cob¬ webs, the fine hiftorical yu », which ftretched from the fide of the ft „ λ to the ceiling, were difcoloured by dam:- and drop¬ ping from the walls -, and a great folding door halfopen, difcovered the inner court itrewed with rubbiih, and encompafled by decaying buildings, before which the high grafs waved in rank luxuriance, unbent by any foot. ' How d real y, how defolate, (faid Madeline to heríêif ) is this fcene } but to this ftate every work ofman fooner or later conies : who then fhould vaunt of poflefiions, which, like the hand
hand dut railed them, are doomed to fwift decay ? 1 'Ac the Poet ihe fud, " Why doft thou build the hall, fon of the winged day*,? Thou looktit fom thy toweis to-day, yet a few years and the blaft of the deleit comes, it howls in thy empty court* and whittles round thy half worn fhield." The voice of Lubin rouied her from her melancholy meditation. He came to inquire whether flie was able to continue her jour¬ ney that day. She immediately alfűred him fhe was, and defired him to have the horfes ready againft ihe had breakfafted. She was then fliewn into a parlour adjoin¬ ing the hall, wheie flie found the houfekeeper waiting at the breakfail- table to icceive her. Mrs. Beatrice apologifed tor her Lord's not appearing, but faid, for many years pail he liad not rifen till the day was far advanced. Directly
Directly after breakfaft Madeline bade an adieu to Montmorenei Caftle ; as fhe did fo, ihe requefted Mis. Beatrice to prefent her fincere acknowledgments to the Marquis for the politenefs and hofpitality ihe had received beneath his roof. Lubin would gladly have chatted as they travelled, but the mind of Madeline was too much agitated to permit her to con verfe, and he was forced to amufe himfelf by whiitling and finging. The nearer Madeline drew to the habit¬ ation of her father, tlie more her agitation increafed; all the feenes flie had gone thro* fince her fepararion from him recurred to her memory, and flie feared his inquiries concerning them would be roo minute ·, flie trembled kit ihe fhould difcover, notwith- ftanding all her precaution, the real ftate of her heart, difcover that its affections were abufcd, its pride mortified, its expeåanons dif-
difappointed ; well fhe knew fuch a difcovery would wound him to the foul. €( Ana, Oh i (flie cried) to add forrow to his forrow, to increafe his mifery already too oppreflive, would be indeed to aggravate my own," At the entrance of the valley, in which the cottage of her father flood, fhe alighted and defired Lubín to lead the horfes after her. Had lier mind been lefs difturbed than it now was, flie would have been enraptured with the lovely profpect fhe beheld : it was the autumnal feafon, and the promife of the fpring was amply fulfilled by the luxu¬ riance of the harveft; the grapes fhe had left in embrio, were now ripened into purple clufters, and the toils of the vintage had al¬ ready commenced j a profufion of gay flowers enameled the bright fwerd of the valley, and the yellow mantle of Ceres covered the little vales that interfered many of the hills, and o'er
o*er the waving woods that hnng upon thofe hills foft and folemn tints were juft beginning to fleak Madeline reached the valley when the fun had attained its meridian, an hour when the cattle lay penfivcly ruminating, and «« THp rook anil magpie, to ihe giey-grown oaks (C That tlie calm village in thcîr verdant aims *< bhelt'ut.g, embrate, direct their laľy flight j ft Whereon the mingling boughs they fit embowci'd ' { All ıhı. bot noon, 'oü cooler hou»s aiife ■ 41 Faint, underneath, the houihold fowls convenej *' And, in a coi nej of the buzľing Iliade, *' The h&ufc-dog, v\ it h the vatAnt gtvy-hound, lie « Out-ftrutch d and ileepy." "The children ofinduftry have had their hopes amply fulfilled, (cried Madeline, as (lie caft her eyes around) mine, flie fighed, mine, when 1 left this place, were, though different, as flattering as their's," lo
To defciibe her feelings when flie came in fight ofher beloved cottage would be im¬ poflible ; they were fuch as aimoft fwelled her heart to buriting ; pain and pleafure were fo intermingled, that it would have been hard to determine which was moft predominant. lier pleafure at the idea of beholding her fa¬ ther was damped by reflecting m how very diifeient a mani er ihe once expected to have returned to him. She flopped at tlie little gate which opened into the grove, and leaned upon it, in order to t.y and gain lume com¬ porrne 'ere flie fhould appear before him * old Bijou, the houfe clog-, who lay number¬ ing befide it, woke at her apptoach, and in¬ ftandy fet up a cry of j y, ν hicli denoted his perfect neolkition ofher, as ihe patted his head, flie cndeavoivci to quiet him, but without t fleet : tlie noife he made chftuibed Jaqueline at her woik, and excited her cu¬ riofity. "What is the matter, you noify rogue ? (faid
(faid íhe, coming from the cottage) what poíľe fíes you, Bijou, to keep fuch a barking?" She approached the gate, flopped, ft ι earn¬ ed, and retreated—-then again advanced—· again retreated: at laft flie exclaimed "If you do n'>t w l ih to deprive me of my fenils, you v/ill at once tell me vhe ther or not you are Mademoifelle Madeline?" " Do you doubt your eyes," ciied Made¬ line, ftretching our her hand. Jaquuine inilantly pulk d open the gate, but inftead of taking the rrodered hand of Ma к fine, ilie elafped her arms about lier, and fu· Laie minutes by her careflès pie- vntvlhv fiom ipc aking. io '.i} iau iei wc u . iu. ia^ a. KeU. ivj ΐ~ d'Ywt, dnengagiug heifelf ñom the cvvp- tun..\ J 'queliti ·. " i' t'», Ma íemo ielle, veiy we'lj bi t lvv ev! vev tia\ci ľ— -iíieb n e, looknij ovti tne \OL. III. G '.д.
gate, and perceiving Lubin with the horfes) furely you did not ride?" "Is my father within?" afked Madeline, not attending to this queftion. " No, he is in the vineyard ; I will run and inform him of your arrival." " Do not be too precipitate, (filici Ma¬ deline) break it to him by degrees for he does not expe£t me." To pračtife any caution, however, was to¬ tally out of the power of Jaqueline ; flie flew to the vineyard ; and ľ. iadeline all the way heard her exclaiming, 4i She is come, flie İs come — O, Mon¬ iteur, Mademoifelle Madeline is come." Madeline entered the parlour, flie fat down, and tried to compofe herfelf againft the approaching interview ; but flie tried in vain, ín a few minutes flie heard the voice of her father ; her heart throbbed as if it would burft her bofom : flie rofe, but had not power to meet him. Pale, difordered he
he rufhed into the room, and Madeline funk aimoft fainting into his extended arms. It was fome time 'ere either of them could fpeak. Clermont aţ laft raifed his eyes, " Do í again behold you, my child, my Madeline, (he exclaimed) welcome, thrice welcome to my arms." He held her to a diftance from him; he gazed upon her i the alteration in her looks feemed to ft rike him to the very heart : the rofe that had bloomed upon her cheek when they parted,—the luftre that had brightened hereye was fied, and fad neis had taken entire pofi· Ie Hion of her. ťr Oh î my child, (faid he, looking mourn¬ fully at her) 1 fear, I fear, you have too bit¬ terly Limented the death of our ineftimable friend." M a idine burit into tears. О 2 "Olir
€i Our lofs (refumed Clermont)is gr-'-at indeed, but our grief is felfifh : death to her was a lemovalto unutterable felicity; item therefore thefê it rong emotions in pity to me, check thern, remember you are my only earthly confolation, the only prop í have to reit on." "Alas! (fighed Madeline) how frail a prop!" She took his hand, fhe pre fled it to her lips. ťf My father (flie faid) be a fluted no effort on my pait fhall be wanting to ful¬ fil your expectations, and heaven I doubt not will ftrengthen the feeble hands and calm the agitated mind of her who prays to it for fortitude and compofure to he enabled to perform its incumbent duties." <f Yes, my child, (cried Clermont em¬ bracing her) heaven always aflifts the vir¬ tuous." He now inquired to what circumftance he owed her unexpected return, as in her Jail letter flie had given no intimation of it. Ma¬ deline, without entering into the particulars of
of lier late fituation at the chateau, briefly informed him, that as foon as Monfieur D' Alembert came to it, Madame DVAhmbcrt wifhed her to leave it, and had promifed in a few days to afllgn her reafon for that wifli. Clermont was all aftoniihment, but as he could not poífibly fathom the myftery, he endeavoured to turn his thoughts from it. Madeline was ftiii too much agitated to be able to inform him of her adventures at Montmorenei caftle, but flie determined to devote the firft minutes of returning com¬ pofure to that purpofe, deeming it highly neceffary for him to be acquainted with them as foon as poflible. Her mind was a little relieved from the uneafinefs that opprefìfed it by finding him filent refpečiing de Sevignie; yet while flie rejoiced flie wonderedat that filence till fhe reflected that the Countefs had promifed never to acquaint mm with the renewed at¬ tentions of de Sevignie, except they were g j termi-
terminated in a manner that flie knew muft be pleafmg to him. Bur though the Countefs had kept her promife, though Clermont was filent reípečl- de Sevignie, his mind was occupied in think¬ ing of him » he could not believe that the deep dejection of his daughter was owing folely to the death of her friend, as his words, from regard to her delicay had intimated : to the difappointment of her hopes relative to de Sevignie he was convinced İt was prin¬ cipally owing, »and with anguiih intolerable he looked upon this drooping bloffom, whole fair promife of maturity feemed now utterly at an end. 41 But a few days ago, (he cried to him- felf ) and, from the recollection of former ca¬ lamities, í thought I could not be more wiachcd than í then was: but, alas! I now find í wv iiiiftaken—now, when I behold the fole folace of afiiiftion, my only earthly hope, iinkirg beneath а grief which fcems bending
bending her gentle head to fwift decay. Oh ! gracious heaven, if my child is deftined to an early grave, tiofe thefe fid eyes 'ere that deftiny be accompli íhed." líe wifhed to have the forrows ofher heart acknowledged to him ; the acknowledgment would give him a right to offer his fympathy and counfel : and the fympathy, the counfel ofa parent, might perhaps, he thought, be efficacious. But though he wiihed fuch a divulge ment, he wouki not defire it, well knowing the delicacy of the female mind, and how unwiilingly ic muft confefs a hopekfs paffion.
с 4 CHAR
CHAP. IV.
jŕ^^^WJIi
«' Ah ! happy g ove, dru k sm! fectire retrett ,( Or í tard likbce, icR's eterini Lut , (< How wel! y ai cool and mır cruentai fimde 41 c uıî . vuťi ι' e tlufttí letiiejnent of n ma d . ' i f >4 ,f k,r d lica\cr had bcs.n fo miah my íbu A i, ťt To m tke n j f ite upon my choice depei.d t " A.l n y a nbitioii I would h p ,e confii e, M Aud onh tl selyfumi íliould bc n.íne," ^LæKRMONT went out to fee that Lubin was taken care of, thank him for the atten¬ tion he had paid to Madeline, and inquire whether he v\ould not ftop a day or two at the cottage to reft himfehj but Lubin faid there w 'л л ncccfliry for his immediate re¬ turn
turn to the chateau, and that after dinner he muft depart: he accordingly fet out at the time he had fixed, and as he quitte' the cot- Lwe received the grateful acknowledgments of Madeline for his care of her, and an en¬ treaty tint he would remind his lady of the promife fiie had given of writing loon. Madeline, now more compofed, no longer d laycd acquainting her fit ther of her vi fit to Montmorenei С iille. The inibii t ihe men- tun f \ it be ilarttd, and beťayed the gre ι te ft e «-oLk»n, but л. hen lv proceeded, when ihe írd kw d hım of her b i ag fi 11 mon rd to the p.cf' nce of the Maquis, of tlie inquiries he Ini nď' cone r fing the pictare, he Ind¬ ek, h cxí' lived v, itli uplifted han 1ь and eyes, tc Oh ' P ovidence, how mvfterious arc t^y \va\s!" ir 1he Maiquis (faid Madeline, obeying tlie niution which hei 'at er mad t .vi hv to proceed) tue Mai q «is piomiicdt .at лп p G ч kift
leaft expected perhaps the myftery fliould be explained.—-" She paufed, for at this moment flie heard the trampling of horfes feet —flie looked to- wauls the window and faw a man alighting at the gate, whom flie immediately recollected to have feen at Montmorenei Caille. " 'Tis a meflenger from the Marquis," cried Madeline, finking back in her chair. 11er father ftarted up, and ruihed from the room ; he met the man at the entrance of the cottage, and Madeline heard them talking; together for a few minutes, they then re¬ paired to the ftudy, the door of which was directly bolted, and Madeline remained two hours by herfelf in a fituation that can be better conceived than deicribed—her father then returned to the parlour pale, trembling, diibrdcied ;—he entered it, he fpoke not to Ma¬ ck line—he feemed to have no power to fpeak — but he putan open letter into her hand. Widi ,uì ;'«;î tation that íhook her whole ii ame
frame fhe caft her eyes over it, and read as follows. « The figh of repentance has at length prevailed—-heaven has given me an oppor¬ tunity of making fome atonement for the in¬ juflice 1 committed in my youth :— " Come then, fon ofa much injured and unhappy love, come to your rightful home, to the arms of your father— " The lamp of life but feebly lights his eyes ; hailen then, while he has power to fee ■—to blefs you he would add—but that he is unworthy of beftowing a bleffing. (< Haften, that he may fink to his grave with fome degree of peace, at beholding his rightful heir acknowledged ; at beholding an heir better calculated than himfelf for iiip- porting che honors of MONTMORENCI."
о ö
The
The variety of emotions that aflailed the heart of Madeline on perufing this letter prevented all utterance, and fhe flood gazing on her father, the very image of aftoniih¬ ment f< Yes, (faid Clermont, at laft, in a folemn voice), I am fhe fon ofa much injured and unhappy woman, the rightful though long unacknowledged heir of Montmorenei ; cal¬ led to a fituation I was always entitled to, when too late for that fituation to afford me any pleafure. So much am I attached to my preient recirement, fo congenial is it to my feelings, that nothing but refpect to the memory of my mother, regard to the inte - reft of my cliikl, could tempt me to forego it." " Heai en can witnefs for me, (cried Ma¬ deline) how little 1 d e fi r*- \ ou to kave it on my account. Oh ! my father, no wealth, however great, no rank however exalted, Can now confer happinefs upon me," " My
11 My child (exclaimed Clermont, clafp¬ ing his arms round her) diO not torture my foul by expreflions ν hicli intímate fuch de- fpondence. Oh, try to alleviate my mhery, a mif ry which no time, no c'rcumitance cm bandii fiom my mind, by kuing mc think that you will be happy,—by kttmg me think that the approaching ch'in ge of fituati -η will at leaft ţv note у >чг к h i;y." t£ I wdl *"-y, my firkcr, (fli M.ukhne) î will try to Iv all vou " uh in\" <c 1 bave no 5 ügeı . .'v' ^^.ibn to tonco Ί my former fituadvi^ 4 laui Ciejmont) to-mor. row therefor 1 in our v iy to l e La'tìe of MontiiiOrciici, I dA¡' ¡ci ae .1 bn:; anu arriv¬ ing ftory tO ) Oil. ' " То -morr j\v ' fcíisľd MjıKÜne, zafiro· J ν ι *. foi breath 4 zì -'го. ow do \ e go lo Alone- more*nei Lai л " Yes, (lepued CI invai, the f nant vdv brought me the kt.er -rem I is 1. id ai.d hão tuft dcpaited, inivMPi 1 in. u, ι л c\. π 1 · w nik! Le líele Cu,*y 11 the ; vi v 1^, :o t n- vey us thitner; ш mvo v . zheAhiA i bli adie n
adieu to this cottage, in which î imagined my laft figh would have been breathed j to thofe ilia fowy woods which fcreened me from an invidious woild i to thofe lonely fliades which heard the voice of my com¬ plaining." Madeline was not lefs afferted than her father dt the idea of quirting their retirement í the g nety, the hopes, that would once have lendered her delighted with the profpeit that now opened to her view, were fled, never, never ihe believed, to be revived. Her rather told her he meant merely to inform Jaqueline that rhey were going on a vifit to a friend, but as foon as they were fettied in Montmorenei Caftle he intended to write to her and put her in pofleflion of the cottage as a reward for her long and faith¬ ful fervices» The preparations for their journey were made before they retired to reft ¿ Madeline, at
at the time flie accompanied the Countefs de Merville had fortunately left fome cloaths behind, and thefe weie now packed up for her. In the folitude of her little chamber flie gave vent to thofe feelings which tendernefs for her fiither made her fupprefs in his pre¬ fence. " Alas! ((lie cried) are my hopes always to be difappointed?—muft I refign the tran¬ quillity of this cottage ?— muft I again launch into a world where í experienced little elfe than diftrefs and danger?— Ohi feenes dear .md congenial to my foul! (fhe exclaimed, as from a window ihe viewed the valley, now illumined by a bright moon), Old feenes dear and congenial to my foul, had í never left you I had never known the reality ot fallhood, rever been truly unhappy. ťí I am now (ihe continued) about enter¬ ing into a fituation, which from difappointed hope 1 am incapable of enjoying, a fituation î which
which will give the world claims upon me, thac from the fadnefs of my mind I iball be if not unable, at leaft totally unwilling to fulfil; far better, far happier than for mc to remaia in an obfeurity, where, without flričtures from others, or cenfures from myfelf, I might act as inclination prompted. " But what do I fay ? (cried fhe, after a paufê) do I repine at a change which reflores my father to the rank he has been fo long; unjuflly deprived of; at a change which will give to me the means of diipenfing happi¬ nefs to others. Oh ! let me chace from my breaft a grief fo felfifh, fet mc not wrap my¬ felf in forrow and defpair, and becaufe the bleffing I defired is not mine reject every . other. Let mc not, like a froward child, dafh the proffered cup of joy from my lips, be¬ caufe there is noe in it every ingredient I could wifli. Yes, (ihe proceeded, as if ani¬ mated by a new fpirit), I will try to difpel a. miti that enervates, that finks me into Ian- gour, that makes me ih rink from the idea of fulfilling the claims of fociety -, and I make no^ doubt
doubt my efforts will be fuccefsful, for hea* ven ftrengthcns thofe who wifh to do right, and I fhall be again, if not happy, at lcaft tranquil ; the felicity I fhall have the means of beftowing on others, will foothe my feel¬ ings i the tears I wipe from the cheek of mifery will diflipate my own, and the figh I fupprefi» in the bofom of affliwtion will pre¬ vent mine from rifing." The entrance of Jaqueline now difturbed her, fhe came to make thofe inqniries which the prefence of Clermont had hitherto pre¬ vented. "Dear Maderaoiíelle, (faid fhe, fitting: down by the little toilette as Madeline began to undrefs) what in the name of wonder oc¬ cafioned your coming home in the fudden manner you did?" " Nothing that can afford you any pleafure to hear, (replied Madeline) I therefore requcft you may afk no more queitions, about it."
« Lord
" Lord, Mademoifelle, 4is very natural to inquire abou* - what has fin pri fed one fo much. Well, if you had taken my advice, you would never have gone with the Countefs— d knew very well how flie would ferve you i I knew theie was no dependance to be placed upon the promues of the great, and you find I was not wrong in thinking or íiyutg fo : you fee after proiiiifing you fo fine a Lrtune, how fhe has popped off without leaving you fo much as a fous." "You hurt me extremely by talking in this way, (faid Madeline) I beg you may never fpeak again in fuch a manner of a pei fon who was my beft friend, and whofe fudden death alone prevented her fulfilling her generous intentions towards me." "Ah I Mademoifelle, you are a good foul, and willing to excufe ■ /ery one* but people will have theii own thoughts let you fay vi hat you will. One looks fo foohfh now, (ihe cout nued) for my chit t conflation during your „bfence was telling the neigh- biuib oí the hne fituation you had got into for hfe, < She has been taken (fays Í) to one
one of the fineft cailles in Dauphine, and from thence flie is to be carried to Paris, where, no doubt, flie will get a grand match as the lady, her ûknd, intends to give her a very large fortune ; and as foon as ihe is iet¬ ti d in a houfe of her own, I am to be fent for, either to be her own woman, or houfe¬ keeper, 'twill be at my own option which." " And pray, Jaqueline, how came you to fay fuch things, when you forefaw, as you yourfelf acknowledge that I fhould be difap¬ pointed by the Countefs?" Jaqueline looked confu fed— iC Why, Mademoifelle, (faid flie, after the hefitation of a minute) 1 was fometimes in¬ clined to think that ihe might be as good as her word." " Well, Jaqueline, kt this be a caution to you never agďm to mention expe-ftations which you are not pretty fure of having ful¬ filled/· (( Aye, Mademoifelle, we all grow wifer every day/'
She
She now expieflcd her regret at the in¬ tended departure of Cleimont and Madeline, and endeavoured to difcover whither they were going ; but Madeline evaded her quef¬ tions, and when nearly undrefl difmifled her, highly mortified at not having had lier curi¬ ofity giatified. Madeline's mind was too much agitated eo permit her to reft, and though flie went to bed, fhe paffed a refileis night i towards the dawn of day fhe funk into a flumber, from which however fhe was foon difturbed by Jaqueline, who came to tell her the car· riage waited. She ftarted up and hailily began to d refs. íf Do pray, dear Mademoifelle, (fald Ja¬ queline) do pray come to the window and look at the carriage, I dare fay you never faw fo fine a one, 'tis fo beautifully orna¬ mented, and drawn by fix hoifes, and there are four out-riders and three poftiilions: dear me, it muft be a charming thing to ride in it!
It ! ï dare lay it belongs to a very great man, I fnould certainly have inquired from the fcrvants, but that my mailer told me he would be very angry if 1 afked them any quef¬ tions." " Tell my father, (faid Madeline) ï fhall be with him very foon»" f< Yes, Mademoifelle, (replied Jaquline) and by the time you come down the coffee will be made." Madeline was foo n drefíed and defcended the llairs ; but inflead ofpoiim direcldv to the parlour, ihe itole into the garden, to .ake a lait leave of " Г ht n uwc bower* oí intiocfi а апЛ t? fe, ťl Ьмюог hei yjüth wiitn cvVy с' чип te. ild μ!, tfr »** Scarcely a fpor within the garden but what recalled fome happy, fome delightful hour to her mind , fuch hours as fne never more ex¬ pected to expérience. O'er the trees bemath whofe iheker Hie had fo often fpor ted in chikiiíh ^aietv, fo 3 often
often enjoyed a delightful retreat from the meridian fun-, o'er the flowers which fhe had planted, and with her pencil fo often amufed herfelf by copying, flie could now with dif¬ ficulty prevent herfelf from weeping, and like the poet fhe exclaimed, t( Farewel, ye flow'rs, whofe buds, with eariy care, te I watch'd, and to the chearful fun did rear ; ' f Who now ibali bind your items, or, when you fall, 41 With fountain ftrearas your fainting fouls lecalL" *' No more, my goats, ihall I bfhold you climb, u The ftet'py cliffs, or crop the flowery thyme j " No m >re extended in the grut below, " Shall fee you browzing on the mountain's brow j " The prickly íhmbs, an*l aft«*r on the bare, il Lean down the deep ab yfs and hang İn air." A deep figh from a little bower near her ftartled Madeline : flie looked towards it, and beheld her father : he came out and taking her hand, led her into the houfe. Breakfaft was ready, they took fome coffee and then rofe to depart -> Jaqueline cried bitterly
bitterly, but Clermont comforted her by an aifurance of writing fion, and informing her where he was ; he alfo defired her to chufe fome neighbour for a companion : with a trembling hand he affifted his daughter into the coach, which fet off the moment he had entered it. The deepeft melancholy ap¬ peared to have taken poifeflion of both, and both for a confidérable time obfer^ed a pro¬ found filence."
CHAP
- ■ ii -*Îij^i^3^^p 1 ţîî®№i»^— ·—-- — ^
CIT Alk V.
* 4 A parents £J't foi row: to mine led the way. 4 '
VyLERMONT at laft addrcíľed Madeline, u I fliall now, my love, (faid he) fulfil my promife, and relate thofe events which ten¬ dernefs made mc hitherto conceal from you. "In the chateau, where you enjoyed the fociety of one of the molt amiable of women, the early and the moft happy part of my life
life was paíľed under the protection of Count de Valdore, father to your lamented Bene- fačtreis i I underftood that 1 was the orphaa fon of a very particular friend of his, who, though of a refpectable family, was unabk to leave me any provifion, and had in hu laft moments recommended me to the protec¬ tion of the Count. Had I been in reality the fon of the Count, he could not have paid me greater attention than he did 3 neither he nor the Countefb made any diftinčtion between me and their only child Elvira, with whom, her age being nearly the fame of mine, I was educated i the moft eminent mafters in every branch of literature, and every elegant ас- compiifhmeiiL, attending us conihmtly at th< 1 chateau. " Naturali) oi a ga> difpofirion, and fur- rounded by ever, taint» which could arid to that gaiety, i baíked in cie lun-ihine, nur thought of any cloud* that might hercailer obfcure its brightneís : indeed i had nothing to appre¬ hend, for the Coun; hud always promifed me vol, ш, ii an
an ample provifion. Alas ! the happinefs ï then enjoyed but rendered the mifery î after¬ wards experienced more acute ; for recollect¬ ed joys always íharpen the arrows of afflic¬ tion. ťí The firft interruption my happinefs re¬ ceived was by the death of the Countefs, which happened when í vvas about eighteen ; the grief 1 felt for her lofs was fuch as an affectionate ion muft have felt for a tender mother, but, though poignant, it was faint to that experienced by the Count ; nobly, however, he tried to check his own feelings, in order to appeafe thofe of his daughter and mine : his efforts in time fucceeded ; but, alas! fcarcely were we beginning to regain fome degree of tranquillity ere he was taken from us to that bkflednefs his whole life proved him deferving of. Smothered grief under¬ mined his conftitution, and in three months after the death of his lady he was re-united to her in thofe regions where they could never moie be fcparatcd. " When
" When he fth his laft moments appioa^h- ing, he difmiffed everyone but me and Elviia fiom his room , we knelt on each fide of the bed, and, in the moil affecting language, he conjured us to fubmit, without repining, to the divine will ; after he had beilo ved a fo¬ lemn and tender benediftion upon his daugh¬ ter, fuch as her filial piety fei ved, he turned to me and took my hand : f My dear Laufane, (faid he, for fo I was called) I fhould have died unhappy if I had not had an opportunity of thanking you for the refpeft, the attention you ever paid to me and mine.' "I would have fpoken, î would have told him how inadequate tint refpeft, that atten¬ tion was to the care, the affeciion ï had ex¬ perienced fiom him and his fimily, but the iullnefs of my heart pi evented utterance. " I Lid heaven lpaied my life (continued h< ) a little longer, I fiiould have riifciofed to you a moil important leciet ; i: was ekcreed however that fiom me you fiiould never hear it, but in а lm?Il İndi ι b > , πι my cabine % η - } ou
}0u will find a packet addrefied to you, and cont ùnlng all the particulars i would have in¬ formed you of: when vou lead them,you will find that without know ing misfoitune you have bun m ift untbi tunate, that w i' hout feeling 1П|»ну, y ou luve been moft mjuitd, butas you hope forprofpciity in this woild, entließ hap¬ pinefs in that ro come, I enti eat you never ïaf ^y to. dint thofe misfortunes, or endeavour to ι evenire thofe injuries. Shuuld the au- thor of both füll withhold that juitue you are erntled to, \ ou will not rind youi felf under any neceflity of accepting hb bounty, which in ih' h a cafe would be dc gliding to you, as in my wdl, which will be opened as foon as M, Valdore, my ckughtei s guai dian ar¬ ii ves a r the chateau, I have maue fuch pro¬ vifion for }ou as will enable you to hol 1 the fame place ы fociety you have hitherto clone/ " i canno: defcribe the feelings excited bv the words υ?" t.'ic to mt : ..itojii.hment overwiiJuicd my feníe^, and I would not long
long h ive dt hyed to feek an explanation of their, bui he not clivd ahr.oft imrncriivuelv * »■ after he had cc.vfed fpt king. i4 The confufion of the fumiy, the grief of hib daughfei,* 4İ10 would only Intento ν folation fi om me, and my own affliction then deadened my cunohty, and hii interment had taken place ere I thought of vifiting the cabinet ; nor perhaps fhould 1 have done fo as foon as I с «id, had í not found myfelf, the very evening a\er his fuñera!, feated with Elvira ш uie room wntre it flood. We were alone ; u r k r gu »i dian, who lived in a re- ir,oie ραι t of the kingdom, \-н not yet ar¬ rived, the m anene 1 beu- .d the cabinet my curioíiiy was revived, and i eagerly wifh¬ ed to take fiom it tiie important papers ; the eyes of Elvira followed m ie, and the woids of her father inftantiy recurred to her recol¬ lection. * My dear Laufane, (faid flie) I am con¬ fident you muft have fufle red much from the fufpenfior of your curiofity ; delay no longer to giatify it—it may be requinte for h 3 you
you to be immediately acquainted with the íecret my father fpoke of; f will retire to give you a proper opportunity of perilling the packet/ li No, Elvira, (I replied, taking her hand as flie rofe to \uthdraw\ you have hitherto honored me with the appellation of brother, and heaven can vumefs for me 1 bear you the affection of one ; a brother íhould have no focrets from an affectionate fifler; fince you thcrefoie permit me to confider you as one, condefcend to hear the myfterious words of your father explained; they have pi f pa¬ red me for a tale of dilti efi», and if anv thing can alleviate fhe forrow it may pei haps ex¬ cite, it can only be the gentle fympathy of fuch a friend г s you are. <f She re fedted herfelf, and tremblingly I appioached and unlocked the cabinet: the fail thing í beheld within it was the India box. I took it out, í drew back the lid, and beheld a huge kdkd packet, directed in the lund -writing of the Count to me. I felt my whole
whole frame agitated, and could fcarcely reseli the fofa on which Elvira fit. " Many minutes elapfed ere î could fum- mon fufficient réfolution to break the ftak I felt as if about to raife a veil which had hi¬ therto concealed terrific images from my view, and fhuddered at the idea of the hor¬ rors they might excite ; at length I ventured to do fo, and found feveral fheets of fmall paper within the envelope, all clofcly writ¬ ten, and in a hand entirely new to me. Elvira leant over my flioulder, and together we began to perule the following ftory." Here Clermont paufed; and, taking ama- nufcript from his pocket, he put it into the hand of his daughter, and defired her to read it to herfelf, "When you have finiflied it, (Lid he) I will go on with my narrative." Madeline bowed, and read as follows :
h 4
"Ere
u Kre thof piges meet t ji --ve, r llL ii mkí îbatwîott them will b- r .nbkri inv duft. Oh! my ¡rm, oíľjirg c fv ui.hip; г md ill-uquitfd love, L^g b'f>ie you p/i uíl- thcin, every ti ace, eve τ Genomi ο' iour mforfunete nioti.u wi.l be obliterated from your mmd, nor will «d your effovs h- able to recall to lecolieukvn dr j с »iod in which her bitter ceau hclewv } ova i/nci.ent cheek, in which with happy pkyfulneb you hid your bead m her diffracted bofom : — but I run into complaints ere I a^gn the fad occafion of them—I will, if pofiibîe, be brief " Lie 1 was ben, love, unhappy love, I mav fav, laid in ionic demce the foundation of my miil-ry. My mother, the daughter of Count St. Paul, whofe family is well known for its antiquity and pride in the Fiovince of Normandy i ımtinftured eithu by the ambi¬ tion or avarice of her parents, feledted for herí? If at an eariy age a paitner whofe only p' iti'/fi wb LkIiî, and thus difappointed the с*ч < "rtri^ns Mr ' ich her birth, beauty, and accompli íh ments
accompUfiiments had raifed in her family ; in conféquence of doing fo flie was utteily dif- carded by every member of it, her youngtil brother excepted, who had then however no¬ rthing to beftow but— affurances of friendihip. " St. Fok, the deicendant ofa noble but reduced fimily, to whom flie had united her¬ felf, was in the aimv, and with him fhe launched into the woikl, whofe florns and diftieites ihe had huheito kiiv)wn onl/ by report ; too foon, alas! flie had а fad cxpcii ence of them. "But "with а noble fortitude fhe fuftamul them, not only fiom tende· nefs to her huf- baiivi, but f'om а coníaoufnefs of having drawn them upon liei fell. St. Foix, how¬ ever, the delirium of paifion over, and the preflure of diftrefs experienced, bitterly re¬ gi etted having yielded to an aitection which bright ned his cues, by involving the wo¬ man he adored m foriovv, and in htrìe moie* ť' гл two leaisafttr his mairugt, and a few months alttı my birth, he fell a victim tohis f" , r [-, i he grief of my mother may be ч 5 imagined,
imagined, but cannot be defcribed, and in all probability fhe would foon have funk be¬ neath it, had not her brother flown to her relief: an union juft then completed with an he i reis of confidérable fortune, gave him the power of ferving her as he wifhed, and he endeavoured to calm her forrows by affurances of beino- a never-failing friend to her, and of lupplying to me, to the utmoft of his power, the place of the parent 1 was fo early deprived of. He immediately took a fmall cottage, in a fequeftered and romantic part of Dauphine, for her, and fettled upon her a yearly ftipend, amply fufficient to pro¬ cure her all that flie could want or defire in retirement. if Time and religion foftened her anguifli, and as î grew up, her heart again began to be fenfibk ofpleafure; a pleafure, however, fiequently embittered by a conviction of the unhappinefs her brother experienced in con¬ féquence of ferving her ; for his wife, felfiih and illiberal in her difpofition, could not with any degree of patience bear the idea of his regarding any one out of his own immediate family,
family, or of his expending on them any part of that fortune fhe fo frequently boaited of having given to him. " Long he withftood her folicitations to withdraw his bounty, long oppofed her in¬ clination i but at length, tired of domeftic ftrife, of continual upbraidings for the inten¬ tion he avowed of providing for his niece in a manner fukable to her birth, he hinted a wifh to my mother for my retiring into a convent. i( This was an unexpected blow, and one which overwhelmed my mother, by deflroy¬ ing thofe hopes that, with the natural va¬ nity and partiality of a parent, aimoft from my birth ihe had indulged, of feeing me ac fome period or other happily fettled, and of enioying beneath my roof that tranquillity wmch forrow and dependance had hitherto prevented her from experiencing. " With tears, with agonies which íhook her frame, flie conjured him not to deprive her of her only earthly comfort, not to entomb her child alive, or in one fliort minute undo all he had hitherto done» h 6 «Ahi
"Ahl my moth^^ w edl hid it been for your Madeline, if your lip a had never ut- teied fuch a fuppl i cation ; well had it been foi her, if in the fiift bloom of life, ere her heart was fjrficientJy expanded to feel that tendernefs which umftitutcs our gieateft happmefs or пи fei y, the wall, of a convent- had immured her Loin «t worid, where her peace, hei umt, wo. d í'uncd tobewreckok "MvuîK 1 vv .i too с ne: oiJM о repeat a w ilk which -..л* liiv.li ixun , in' ι e vi tred ever hav - ing mentioned п. »шс* ilmvc tomakt amends for having ekme ib, by teitnanng the moft f Лети aflui anees of fiil filling the intuitions Ы had befóte avowed towaids me. " Thus was the ftorm w hichthrt atened tl^e peace of my mother, overblown -, but, alas' the calm that fucceeded it was to me of ihoit duration. 1 had fcarcely attained my fixteenth year when 1 was deprived of th's ineftimablc parent. In the Imguage of de¬ fpair I wrote to my uncle, then at Paris, to inform him of this event; and at the fame time enclofed a letter, w litten by my mother in hu laft hours, and, which í afterwards found contained a fupplication nut to permit me
me to enter a convent without I wifhed my¬ felf to do fo, and an entreaty for his pro¬ tection to be continued to me. " íle directly haftened to me, and ufed every method in his power to footh my for¬ rows ; he repeated his affurances of continued kindnefs, and declared from that pei iod I fliould refide wiih him till I had a proper ha,* bi tation of my own to go to. " 1 accordingly accoi л panied him ro Faris; and here, in all piobabihty, the ful neis of my heart might foon have been divei ted by the novelty of e veiy thing I faw, had I met with any ofthat réndemela 1 had always been accuftomed to ; but the moil chilling cold- ncb, or elfe the molt contemptuous diklain, wab the treatment 1 received from my ачпе and her family. My uncle, in order to try and prevent my mind from dwelling on it, infilled on my beingtakento all the places they iiequented ; but this, inftead of alleviating, rather aggravated, my mifery, for my aunt loon took it into her head that 1 was a rival to her daughters. A year I dragged on in a ftate of wretchedneß, which no lanmieve could
could juflly exprefs : at the expiration ofthat period, worn out with ili treatment, and ago¬ nized by beholding my benevolent protector in continual difquietude on my account, 1 determined, with a kind of dcfpeiate réfolu¬ tion, to terminate that difquietude and my indignities, by retiiing to a cloifter: but how : .mpoffible isictoexprefs the pangs with which I formed and announced this réfolution ; yet what, you will fay, could have occafioned thofe pangs ? lurch not the idea of renounc¬ ing a world which contained no tender friend to lupply the place of the one Ì had loft?— "Alas! it then contained a being dearer to me ıhan life itlelf :—St. Julian, the Mar¬ quis of Montmorenci's fon, vifıted at my uncle's, and had not long been known ere he was beloved ! Thofe who knew him could not have wondered at my fudden at¬ tachment í every virtue, every grace which ennobles and adorns humanity he appeared to pofiefs. Oh ! St. Julian, Heaven furely endowed you with every virtue; for candour and
and benevolence fat upon your countenance, and it was only an improper education, or pernicious company that rendered you de¬ ceitful, and led you to betray the unfufpi- cious heart, which repofed upon you for hap¬ pinefs. " Secretly I indulged my paffion, yet with¬ out the fmalleft hope of having it returned ; for though a foft beam from the eye of St. Julian fometimes tempted me to think I was not utterly indifferent to him, ï never had reafon to imagine he thought ferioufly about me j but, notwithftanding my hopeleflhefs refpečiing him, fo great, fo exquifite was the pleafure I dérivée^ from feeing, from lif- tening to him, that the idea of foregoing it was infinitely more painful to me than that of death. " My uncle heard my determination of retiring to a cloiiter with a fatisfaction which he could not difguife, though he attempted it i and my aunt and her children with evident delight: generous to the laft, my uncle
uncie kft ive <iee to chufe a convent— ϊ accordinglv fixed on one, with which I was well acquainted, near the habitation whec alone f had been happy. ťí Immediate pieparations were madefor my removal, and in a few days afcei I had avowed my intention of quitting it, í was hurried пот my uncle's houfe. fC Accompanied by лп old female domeftic, I commenced m v journey ; what İ fuftered on doing fo î fhall not attempt to defcribe. I fek like a wretch going into a gloomy exile, where the flituies, the voice he loved, would never moie charm his eye, or footh his ear. <f At a late hour we flopped for the night. As foon as my companion had retired to her chamber, I locked m> felf up in mine, and gave way to the agonies of my foul. In the niidft of my lamentations I was ftartled by a tap at the chambei-door ; I hflened atten¬ tively, and heard it lepeated, and at the fume time my name pionounced in a low voice. Still more furprifed, 1 haftily unlocked die z door,
door, and beheld — ah! gracious Heaven ! wih4 weie the feelings of that moment, St. Julian!--! involuntirily receded, and funk half fiinung upon ι chair. Τ h^ words, the tenderneii» of St. Juh m loon levived me, and bi ought me te a peifečt fenfe of my happi¬ nefs; he vi.plou d my pardon for the agita¬ tion he lu.d caufed ые "He had loved nv, he declared, aimoft from the b rft moment hc beheld me, and would at enee have divulged his paflion, had he not feared its being then difcovered to my aunt, whofe malice he knew would betray him to his father; he had therefore detti mined, if he beheld no chance of lofmg me, to conceal it till the expectations he en¬ tertained of a fplendid independence at the death of a very old relative weie realized, and he confequently Itemed from fullering any pecuniary diftrefs through the diipleafure of his father, which he could not deny his thinking would follow the diieioiure of our union.. " My
íf My fudden réfolution, (he proceeded to fay) had been concealed from him till 1 had quitted my uncle's ; with difliculty on hear» ing it he could hide his emotions, and aimoft inftaHy purfucd me, trembling left I fhould be »04 ;o him forever. ir [Ie now implored me to confent to a private union, and pui myieif immediately under his protection, folemnly aifuiing me, that the moment he could acknowledge me as his wife, without involving me in diftrefs, with equal pride and pkafuie he would do fo. if You may well believe 1 did not, could not refill his fupplications:—-a carriage and confidential fervants were in wailing, and we directly fet out for Paris, which we reached at the dawn of day, and, (topping at the firft church we carne to, were united, (t St. J uliän then took lodgings for me in a retired part of the town, under a feigned name, pafling himfelf for a fecretary to a man of conféquence, and unable, from his situ¬ ation, to be always with me. " 1
u I had now no drawback on my felicity but that which proceeded from forrow at my mother's not being alive to witnefs it, and uneaflnefs at the difquiet, which 1 learned from St. Julian, who itili continued to vifit at his houfe, my uncle felt on my account, not being aule to form the fligktcft conjec¬ ture of what had become of me : Perfect happinefs, however, í knew was unattainable in this world, and as the beft proof of my gratitude to Heaven for that portion which J enjoyed, î feduloufly endeavoured to repel the figh of regret that fometimes involun¬ tarily heaved my bofom. " Before the expiration ofa year you were born. Uh ! with what rapture did 1 receive you to my arms! with what delight did i prefent you to your father! and, with min¬ gled emotions of tendernefs and pleafure, beheld the tear which itole down his cheek, as I endeavoured in your infant features to difcover a rcfemblance to his.
«Í
.i·"- í" ¡cli» cir\ ; υι 1 ni ; fľn was foon to í t r. miki) лт\ de fp ur. " So'Hì . Рч г veut biitli, the vih:s or your father becuPichf **ирк.гч, he ич! not af¬ fluii ai v r, i' m for uic.r bt4ig fo, noi did I uujuue, for fíijjhion \/is a Aungei to my bepfl , my faith was iinbtM.,.dut, gieat, and firm λ% tny love > ; nd while í wept his ablentes I ever hailed bib ρκ fence with a fmile. ic At kngdi a long fpace enfued 'm which I did not behold him -, my fpints invoiunta- lily diooped, and with them my health de¬ clined ; yet, norwirhfhmding my fuffi lings, the moment 1 agiin law h.ir, î thought my- felf amply icwarded for them» " I he pleaiuH, however, which filled my hi at t on lus entering my chamber, was quickly damped by tht coklnefs of his man- nut : he ivrccly n.turned my careffes, or no lie cd vou.
e Well,
'Weil, Madeline, (iaid he, fcating him- ielf at д diftance from me), í treat you have been weiland happy foce I lait iaw you.' ťC Аь weiland happy (ï replied, looking at him with that tendernefs chicli my heart experienced) as I could be without the fo» cktv which conftitutes my chief felicity." 'Ah! Madeline, (cried he) I truft when you пах more i a the world, you will be able to enjoy feikity without that ibciety/ "Could the world (laid Í) produce any ( hange in my prêtant fentiments, î fliould with for ever to be llcluded from it." "He arofcancl approached mv 'I came, Madelin/, (faid he) with a hope of receiving proofs of year good fenfe inftead of your tendernefs; do not interrupt me, (continued he, iceingme about to il как) liften attenti vel v to \\\u\i I am about lavins; : 4 AU hopes of an independence are termi¬ nated by my uncle, who died ibme days ago, bequeathing the wnole of his property а л religious houle ; I am therefore entirely at tiie
the mercy of my father ; confequently to dif¬ clofe oui mai riage would be to involve me in cei tain ι uin, asi am convinced no fupplications, no entreaties would ever pievail upon him to pardon ib imprudent a flep; tis abfolutely neceíľary therefore that we ihould conceal it for ever.' " For evei ! (repeated Í) gracious Heaven* would it not be better for you dt once to avow it, than to be teafed with continual im¬ portunities (which muft be the cafe) to form another connexion." £ I will not deny, Madeline, (iaid he) that it is not my intention to be deaf to fuch im¬ portunities: as our marriage is a piofound fecret, I mean it never fhall be known ; that fiom henceforth we fliall be ftrangers to each other, and each again enter the world free to make another choice/ "Good heavens! what words were thofe for a wife, for a mother to hear f — Tlie blood run cold through my veins, and for fome time the faculties of fpeech were fufpended. " I Live
"Have 1 lived. (I at length exclaimed) have I hw to r< : nie hufband 1 adore dé¬ chu }"■ - M j . .;> (, j' i.f>v. ning me? Have I ÍL., t·» i e ν jiik.n raow his defıgn of ÌAu->\ t < t ν - ' · 'i 1 '· Λ ΐ '- i 1 .L ny?" 4 ' * » f.' ,f , ' к d w i ľ 1 ι ! * ■ ' he) with the weakndb p. í .ш '- 1 > ; ·... > x, πι»ι into com- plaiiíts at once utijiiit an i unavailing j when you mix moie in the world, and have op¬ portunities of comparing my conduct with that of others, you will then be convinced that it is not quite fo bafe or cruel ns you now imaginei you will then fee numbers of your fex, perhaps as amiable as yourfelf, cruelly for- faken after the firft ardour of paflion is extin¬ guished, inftead of which you will find yourfelf, if your obftinacy does not counteract my in¬ tentions, in pofleflion of an ample provifion, with which you can retire to fome other part of France, where you are not known, and there, pafling yourfelf as a widow, bring up your fon, and, perhaps, make another choice more calculated than your prefent one to render you happy.* 5 u Щ
"My heai t feit bui Hing í but I ib ove to reprefs the grief, the indignation with which it laboured. " No, St. Julian, (faid I, in у folemn voice), never will 1 enter the road of infamy >ou have marked out for me to take, I am youi wife, noi fhall any power but that, whofe mandate we muft all ob у, шаке me give up my claims. W hat î did you fnatch me fiom the altar of my God, from the dwell¬ ing of piety and peace, but to plunge aie into guilt and mifcr) ?" c Madeline, (cried he) be wife, nor mar my good intentions towards you by ufelefs riidtavouis to fupport claims, which I am deta mined to den) , 'tis impoffible, you know, fui jou to prove youi matriage ; there were, you may iecollec% no witneffes to a, and with the name of the piieft who pei formed the ceremony you aie unac¬ quainted.' " Alas! thofe weie truths which could no*. be controverted, and deftitute as í was of anv friend
friend to inteifere in my behalf, my uncle hŕiving paid the bit fad debt of nature fome weeks before, I faw no means of efcaping the fate he doomed me to. I wept, 1 jpbraidcd, I fupplicated, but all without e fle (ft, and I was foon convinced that every fpark of his former affection was extingui iked, and tlut fome dangerous rival had taken entire pof¬ leflion of his heart. " Agonized by this conviction, í migh: perhaps have filently fubmitted to hib v/i.lic », aíľured that his name, w itlvnr \\ъ regarei, could give me no harplv -ь, ¡пл J noc con¬ fidered that with his unhippy mother th^ fon of St. Julian muft alfo (ink; nvternal tendernefs urged me tberef>re to vake forno с flort to counteract his ciuci -ала iinjuf, in¬ tentions. " í accordingly formed the réfolution of flying to Dauphine, to thiow my klf at tlie feet of his father, -and implore his protection for the deferted wife and oflVpring of his fon. Alas! it was a réfolution which defpair and vol. ur. i ignorance
ignorance of the world only could have prompted ; for a heart occupied by avarice and ambition, as was the Marquis's, is ever dead to the nobler fofter claims of juftice and" humanity. "As St. Julian departed, he told me hc would give me a day or two to confider of what he had faid; if at the expiration ofthat time he found me inclined to accede to his wiihes, hc would at once fecure to me the provifion he had promifed ,· but if, on the contrary, he found me itili inclined to dif¬ pute them, he would, without farther hefita¬ tion abandon me to a world which would laugh at all the allegations I could make againft him, " I faw no time was to be loft ; the mo¬ ment therefore he had left me I itole from the houfe, and hired a carriage, which I or¬ dered to meet me at an early hour, the next morning, at the end of the ftreet. Faint, trembling, oppreft with a thoufand horrors, I commenced my journey with you in my arms. "Fearful
f f Fearful of being purfued, I made the driver, as night approached, turn into an obfcure village, fome leagues from the road. Here a violent illneis, brought on by the dreadful agitation I fuflfered, detained me two days, and when I recommenced my journey* I was more dead than alive. a Oh ! how impoflible to defcribe the emotions which íhook my frame as I ap¬ proached the manfion of Montmorenei; as I ftopped before thofe gates which I once hoped I fiiould have entered as the acknow* ledged wife of St. Julian ! for many minute* my feelings prevented my declaring to the aftoniíhed domeftics the purport of my vifit; at length I fummoncd fuíHcient réfolution tb defire to be íhewn into the prefence of their Lord. I drew near his apartment more like an unhappy criminal about deprecating vengeance, than an injured fufferer going to implore juftice : the moment I beheld his countenance, where pride and fternnefs only were vifible, the faint hope of obtaining his 1 2 protection,
piotce c tion, which had hitherto cheered my heair, died away, like t e f »ι owning \ν ι etch, howevei, gufping ?t ^veiy flraw, I deter¬ mined to efïày t vei y thing which had a cha ice ofpiocudng me relief— í therefore rail myfcif.it bis Het, and poured foi th my follows, but fcarctly hid 1 conchideil my iad rale^ f< tictly had í lai'ed my tearful eyes ro liis to ay if I could perceive one giv am of p»ty in them, ere a door buril open, and ol Julian ι i*"uid. Пс entered \ un a count nailce iifiumd by i.age and every dııcfuî paiìlim. Uh 1 had a dagger pin f cd my bi t ail 1 could not hive fufFtred gieater agonies than I « xpt lie need when I beheld thole c\es which bid о ice beamed imuttuable ten Icrncis, now dai ting the kcentil gbnees of ltfuitment on me. * You fee, my l»oid, (faid he, addicfíing hi» father,) that I was not muLken with jegaid to this unhapj y woman. I was well convinced of the lengths her amfice and am¬ bition would cany hci. J c Such aı tince in one fo young is really ailoiuiliing, (icphed the Marquis) and i en¬ de is
ďvs it abfolutely neceflary that we fiiould j>revent her having another opportunity of trying to deceive.' " ì attempted to fpeak, but was inter¬ rupted by St. Julian, who directly called in rvo flivanrs, and o^ck-red them to bear me to a 1 emote apartment. Thither, flirieking with dtfpair, and with you in my arm«, f was carried and locked in. A kind of madnefs feized me — î could not weep—I coui 1 not /peak—by cries, by groans I could ai jne exprefs my mifery. (t Night approached ere any one came near me i a young female then appeared—I meiely caft a glance at her, and then averted my eyes, as a trembling wretch would have ¿one fiom his executioner : for every he. 1 rt in the manfion of Montmorenei 1 fancied flecled againft me. Sne came to me and en¬ treated me t » Le fone 1 e ire fli me n t. " Surpi ifed by the entreaty, and by the gentleneis with which it was delivered, í lookedat her, and beheld a tear fteahng down 1 3 her
her cheek ; it was a facred tear, which pity had engendered, and operated more power¬ fully in calming the violence of my feeling than any arguments could hdve clone. Oh 1 how iweet, how foothing, when we believe ourfelves utteily abandoned, utteily fiiend- lefs, to be furprifed by finding a heait that conipaiTiOnates us!— - Ci My tears immediately ivgan to flow, the fever iri my brain abated, and I ftretched out my hand to prefs her's to my bofom. 'Alas! unhappy lady, (fhe exclaimed) I pity you fiom my foul, and wiih it was in my power to lave you from the fate that awaits you/ " What fate? (cried Ï, gazing en her); have t icy planned my death ? Ah ! no—they //ould not be fo merciful as to terminate the anguifli they have inflicted." 4 About the middle of to-night (fud flie) they mean to puc you into a carriage, and fend you to a houfe of penitents near Paris, v/Ivre you will for ever be confined from the w oik!, r.nd fepaiatcd from your fon/ •— fí Horror
— " Honor foi fonic ti ne ι jok fi oai me the poi\er of ipjech. " Oh ' St. Julian, (I at length exchi ned) is this the fate you hive ektrvd fj\ Made¬ line ?—Is this the dcilmy you h.vc doomed hc ι to, whom buta few fliort mc nrhs ago you woo< j d to your aims with vows of ntvti- changing love ? — Oh, never let my fex again confide in man !—Oh, never more kt them vize with pkaiuie upon the beam of tendernefs, nor lifteu with delight to the language of love ľ— " On my knees I implored my informer to afhft me to efcape. " Not on my own account (cried I) do I pie°dj lliipes, dungtons, or peipctual im¬ pi îfonmenr, could give little pain to her u no- has experienced the fo much greatci pain of being deferted by the man flie loves; but on the account of him, who, if deprived of me, would furtly be deprived of his only eaithly fnend ; for thofe who exercifed fuch unprecedented cruelty upon his mother, would no doubt but ill protect his helplefs J 4 youth %
youth : Ey the God, then, which you wor- II ip ; by thai heaven which you hope to at¬ tain, aihil meto fly wiih my fon to ibme foii- try ^locm, wheie I may rear hk youth with unde inefb ^ or fee him, while unconfeious of calimin, Lad within hb grave. u Sh* raifed rre, and told me, if í wouî 1 bc cairn, and thought I could brave the hor¬ rors oí travelling through lonely woods at f ich an hour ль the prefent, flie would try to afljft me in efcaping. J gave her eveiy aíTurance fhe deli, ed, and lhe loit no time in conducting me down a flight of back flairs terminated by a door that opened into the fo. '\ I gave her, at parting, aimoft all 1 had to beftow, my thanks, and puta little fancy ring upon her finger to bring me fome¬ times to her mind, and make her now and then ofer up a prayer for me and my babe, < c My mind was too much difturb¬ ed to fu ife r me to arrange any plan for my future deftiny : all i could think of was
v. s to fcek fome lonely cottile, w't** re î m j t x к .{-..с (1er myfelf t'il the heat of th it pv iuit, which I luppo Id would be made a 1 tei nn', fhould be ow " Vv itho-.it knowing w'fther I v ent, or how fai 1 had vsandeicd, 1 î κΐη 1 m\kh, as if inilince had guided me thitber, ab > 't the muidle of the night as wed as ϊ could con* lefture, the hour which was to h τ ve botne me to eiidlefs coníinemuit, neai the habit¬ ation where I had ícfided With my mothei, m\d which, fince her death, had been unoc¬ cupied. Gently the moon difpenfed her filvery light, and give a pei reft view of all the dear and lovely feenes of cai lv jouth: Oh ! how agonizing were my i^d ngs is ϊ contiafted my prefent nvery with the hip- pinefs I had enjoyed amongfl them a hap¬ pinefs of which, like л bugat vifion, no trice remained but in my memoiy:—Oh! how excruciating my pangs as 1 gazed upon the cottage where I had experienced the caie, the tendei nefs of a paient, and refiefted that I was now α wietch foilorn, withou: о с íj í lie rui
friend to proteic me, without сл\\' coverincr * -'o for my head but the canoj y of heaven, without any pillow to repote it on but the cold fod ; nothing but religion, which had been early «nd llrongly implanted in my mind, could have prevented my raifing the hand of defpair againft a life, which from being no longer valuable to others, was hateful to my¬ felf. fc But I will not (faid 1)1 will not, by any suft of rafhnefs forfeit that heaven, where only I can be recompeníèd for my forrows. ťí Exhaufted by my fufferings, 1 threw 1 myfelf upon the ground, andas f lulled you upon my bofom, fleep ink nfìbly itole upon jne. íC The horror of my waking thoughts dn&ured my fleeping ones, and ï fuddenly awoke in terror : as í ftarted from the ground ï beheld a lady and gentleman {landing by me, for the morning was fir advanced j î gazed upon them wildly, and in the fea¬ tures of the female ac lergth recogmied thofe of the Countefs de Valdore, who had mar-· ζ jie U
ried a few months previous to my mother's death, and with whom, from having refided both before and after her union near our cottage, í was well acquainted ¿ ihe expreffed the utmoft aftoniihment at the fituation ia which flic had difcovered me, and with a de¬ gree of pity that quite overcame me : for as a profufion of viands will overpower the fa- raiilied wretch, fo will unexpected compaf¬ fion Λ fid heart that has deemed itlelf ut¬ terly abandoned. " A total weaknefb feized me, and î could only anfwer her inquiries with my tears. She feated herfelf on the ground, and fupported my head on her lap, while the Count haftened to the chateau for a carriage to convey me thither. There í hy a week before I had power to dift lofe my unhappy ftory ; when I concluded í had the comfort of finding I had fecured two friends for my child, who would never áeíen him j and this comfort was furely requinte to five me from diflrac- tion, for I now learned that St, Julian had ι б been
been married four months to the rich and beautiful heircfs of Charette. ť To attempt now, therefore, to redrefs your wrongs, would be unavailing, (faid the Count ) ; whilft St. Julian is intoxicated with love and the attainment of his willies, any eflbrt to do fo would in all probability e xpofe you to his vengeance, and perhaps occafion your final féparation from your fon : we muft therefore leave him to the workings of confcience ; though fometimes flow, it is always fure in its operations, and will yet raife irs fcorpion flings within his breaft/ " With hib amiable Countefs the Count united in affurances of fiiendfiiip and protec¬ tion; the Countefs told me of tiie high cftecm and regard flic had always felt for me, and that at the elcath of my mother both flie and tlie Count would gladly have offered me an af\lum in their houfe, had they not naturally fuppofed I pitfcircd my uncle's; from the peiivl »if my quitting Dauphine, flie had r.ever heaid concerning me. 4 ŕ Iídd
£ Had I fooner known your fate, (íhe uki) I íhotiid fooner have tried to alleviate it.' " Certain that St. Julian wouLl make dili¬ gent ièarch afbr me, in order to try лпЛ get me into his power, which if he once cuíco- vered me, it would be İmpolTıblc to pi event his doing, fiom his having reprcfenccd meas an ari ful woman, \\3ю had íêduccd hib youth and endeavoured to ruin his cluiafler; it was deemed expedient that ϊ íhould ia future be fecluded fiom the woild: for fucli а purpofe no place appeared ib eligible аз the dclcited monaftcry in the valicyj tnkher I was accordingly conveyed without thç. knowledge of any of the family but a confi¬ dential fervant of the Countefs. A few months after my retirement, I refig'ied you to the arms of my fnend, br the purpofe of Jiaving you conveyed to her houle, as the orphan of an efteemed acquaintance of her Lords. " Two yeais have elapfed fince that period, duiing which I have heard of St Julian's at¬ taining
tabling his paternal title, of his having a fon, born to his wiihes, and of his Ladino; a hfe of imbounde I gaiety ?.nd pleafure—Ah ! how difteient fnm the one he has doomed me to ! " The attentions of the Cou»?t and Countefs have been unremitted ; could kindiiv fs, could compaflion have healed the wounds of my heart, they would long fince have been cloicd. "In tl eir vifits to me you are often biought : — Ah ! how does w } bieaft heave with mingled pain and p.eafure as ϊ clafp you to it, and hear your Hfping accents. Fair is the piomiic of your uifknc), but never, my fon, udîl your unfortunate mother fee it fulfilled , affliction has undermined my health, 1 daily, hourly grow weaker, í fade like an early flowei, o'ei which the d< ioiating biaft has pail, ere half its beauties are expanded ; and long, long before the blofloms of your youth ait blown, ϊ fliall be hud within my coki gì ave. " htom that grave, as you perule this nar¬ rative, Oh! think the fpnit oi your mother ipcaks,
fpeaks, and charges yon to attend to the ad¬ vice which it contains—charges you never, in refentment for her wrongs, to forget the refpečt due to your father ; fhe willies you to plead for your rights, to vindicate her cha - racler, and prove to the world, that the de¬ fcendant of St. Paul, the daughter of St. Foix, never diigraced the noble families from which flie fprung, but flie wifhes you to plead with calmnefs, and, if unfuccefsful, to be refigned* <c She alfo charges you, if only acknow¬ ledged as the fon of an illicit love, to fiy from any overtures of kindnefs which may be made you. (i The Count and Countefà de Valdore have promifed never to withdraw their pro¬ tection. Generous pair! may Heaven récom¬ penfe their kindnefs to me and mine. C( They have alfo promifed, ere they put this narrative into your hands, to prepare you in fome degree for my unfortunate ftory ; Sad and painful has been my taik in writing it—Oh! agonizing in the extreme to divulge ro my fon the crimes of hb rather, "Oh!
<ŕ Oh ! St. Julian, beloved, though perjured from c verv mortal eye, I would have con¬ cealed thofe crimes, hid not juftice to your child compelled me to difclofe them. i( Fai e well, my boy—my child, farewell ! I kave you all 1 have to bellow, my blef- fing—-may your conduct ever entitle yoi: to tha: oí Heaven, may y ,ur mind be fair as your perfon, may youi iicait ever glow with fervour in the caule of vii tue, and your hand never lie idle by your fide when mifery or innocence call for aflîftance ! u In happy ignorance and childifh gaiety often perhaps will your light flvp*. bound o'er the foci which covers my remains ; but the period ï truft will arrive when tendernels and fenfibility fli all guide you to it, to drop a tear to the memory of her whofe laft prayer will be breathed for your felicity, to bedew with the fàcred drops of filial affection the grave of your mother. u MADELINE ST, JULIAN." The
The tears of Madeline fell as flie perufed the narrative of her unfortunate grandmo- theiy.vhich (too much affected by ir» to fpeak), ihe returned in filence to her father. " You can better conceive than f can defcribe (faid he) rhe feelings I experienced on perufing this ftory. ϊ wept for my mo¬ ther, í bluihed for rny fither, and my heart was divided between aifliction and refent¬ ment. iC With the natural impetuofity of youth, I determined not to kt another dayelapfe with¬ out pleading for thofe rights which I had been fo long and fo unjuflly deprived of; but convinced that my agitation would not permit me to plead for them in perfon, as I could wifli, I refolved on lending a letter by a fpecial meflenger to rhe caftle of Mont¬ morenei, where I knew my father refided, declaring the late difcovery of my birth, and rhe manner in which 1 had been pro * tected from the diílreiľes Ыз defertion had expofed me to. "J
fí î accordingly withdrew from FJvira аз foon r.s I was ftifliciently compofed to pen my letter, which 1 did in the moft refpcctfui yet energetic manne ι, and enclofed within it a fmall miniature of myfelf, drawn by the Countefs de Valdore 's defire a few months previous to her death, along with her daugh¬ ter's, for the purpofe of ornamenting a cabinet, whence I now received it from FJvira : I fint it with a hope that ic might perhaps, by recalling to his memory fome feature of the woman he had injured, and once tenderly loved, foftcn his mind in my favour, and incline him to do me juftice. ťf My fufle rings till the return of my mef- fenger mock defcription. At Ids firft ap¬ pearance 1 flew with breathleii hafte to meet limi. The Marquis of Montmorenei (he faid) was too ill to anfwer my letter, but he defired me without delay to repair to his caftle. <l Oh! gracious Heaven, how rapturous v/ere the feelings of chat moment 1—I could not doubt but that he defiled to fee ше for the
the purpofe of bleíľmg, of acknowledging me as his fon, of vindicating the fame of my injured mother. " Elvira thought as I did ; and while a tear of regret formy inti-nded departure itrayed down her cheek, congratulated me in the rnoft fervent manner on the profpect there appeared of having my wiihe» realized. tf I fet' out unattended for the manfion of my father, which 1 entered, though with hope, with emotions that íhook my frame; the domeftics were prepared to receive me, and immediately conducted me to the apartment where their Lord lay, apparently much in¬ diipofed, and exhibiting but the ruin of thofe graces which had captivated the too fufcep¬ tible heart of my mother. α Trembling I approached and knelt be¬ fore him, fupplicating by my looks his blef¬ fing. ' With pleafure (laid he, extending his hand) I acknowledge you as my ibn¿ to dif- own you never was my mtention/
" ΐ pre fled hi-iiiand to my k'ps, but could notfpak; the reception 1 met with, the idea of being able to vindicate the fune of my moth r, quite overpoweied m ;. Alas! ihoit was the duration of my joy, ζ Rife, (continued my í itivi) 1 hive mirh to fiy, but ere I proceed, let n e (looking as he фоке towaids a >oung man who lat at fome diftance from the cov h, and whom my agitation h'dd hitherto prevented mi fiom noticing) let me prtilnt yiu to the Count St. Julian, who has kindly p/omiild to con¬ fider you as a bi other/ "Surprife, intermingled with indignation pervaded my heart, on hearing the Marquis add refs another perfon by the title to which alone 1 luu a light. 1 i upp rcífe d thofe feel¬ ings however fiom г hope that an explana¬ tion would enfue, which ihould appeafe them, ( Chance (proceeded my father) тале him acquainted with your ftory : Duringa late illncfs, from which 1 am now but barely recovered, i ordered evciy letter or meffage which
which came to me to be delivered to him— c vf quivdy yom s fell mto hi iiinds, í thue i jv deemed it rcquifitc that he fhould be pi e f nt at our interview, deemed itan abfoìutt duty tu hım, his mother, and my felt tint he fiiould, Wiiilft he heard me acknow¬ ledge \ »u v my fon, folemnly difa<~know* кч' о е yvi as the heir of Moncmoienci, no ties but th ле of love ever exifted bet" een your mother and me, and if you have been credul o¿> enough to m ve implicit credit to theaifhil tale (he fabricated, all my fchemes in yon favour muft be defeated :— Be wife, ftudy your own intereft, declare your total renunci ition of у our chime 1 ical claims, and enfure mv kindnefs and pi otečtion.' "Never, my Lord, (cued 1) , if your kindnefs and pioteJion can only be acq» ni ed b\ ftigvuiziiig tne character ot mv mother, and ck già vig myfelf, the fon of Midtline St. ivix will nevei confent to bc culed the child of infamv , my opinion of her veracity is unalteiable, and though i may not be able to
to fupport, I never will renounce rny claim«," c Then you muft for ever be an alien to me, (faid the Marquis). Go, (he continued, with an agitated voice and a countenance inflamed by refentment), go, left you fhould tempt me to curfe the hour in which you were born.* " With difficulty î fuppreffed the feelings which fwelled my heart aimoft to buriting, but í determined not to forget that the au¬ thor of my injuries was alfo the author of my being. " 1 direftly left the caftle, and fet out for the manfion which had faltered my helplefs infancy. Ah ! how d ifle rent was the fitua¬ tion of my mind now from what it had been when I journeyed from it ! — On en¬ tering it a fervant informed me that M. de Valdore was arrived. I was too much dif¬ turbed to think of then p?) ing my compii*- inents to him, but I defired to be fliewn di¬ rectly to Lady Elvira. Her tendernefs, faid I to myfelf, will fofttn the bitterne iî» of difap-
difappointment ; her gentlenefs will footh the perturbations of my foul. ťí I found her alone and in the deepeft dejection. She ftarted with aftoniihment at my unexpected appearance, and her eyes inftantiy brightened with pleafure f a bright- nefs however, which quickly vanilhed on furveying my countenance. f My dear Laufane, (faid ihe, extending her hand) what mean thofe ìooks?' sc Ah! my Elvira, (cried I) do they not render language unne^eíľary ?—do they not tell you that my hopes were too fanguine ?—~ that 1 have returned without finding the father î expected ?" * Good Heaven ! (iaid flie, buriting into tears) you overwhelm me with mifery. —- Oh! Laufane, what will become of you?' <f Do not, my dear Elvira, (cried 1) ag¬ gravate my feelings, by giving way to your's. My fituation к not de fpe rate!—-Reflect that the bounty of your noble parents fecured me from experiencing any pecuniary diftreíš through the defertion of my father. " <Oh!
* Oh! Laufane (exclaimed ihe in an agony) you are miilaken. M. de Vald ore, who reached the chateau foon after you had left it, immediately opened the will of my father, in which your name was no where vifible : this, I am convinced, unintentional omiffion, would give me little concern, could I im¬ mediately do what I know my father meant to have done for you ; but M. de Valdore, without whole confent I cannot ačl, appears too fclfifh and illiberal to let me hope he will permit me to follow my wifhes. Surely, furely my father was deceived with reipeft to the difpofirion of his relative, or he never would have chofen fuch a guardian for his Elvira i already he has told me, that if you returned to the caille, he would not luffer you to continue in itj views refpečiing me and his fon, have, I am confident, infpired this réfolution ; he wifhes an alliance to take place between us, and thinks that if you re¬ mained here, ycu might perhaps defeat thofe wiihes : but I will kneel, I will fupplicate him to drop the determination he has avow¬ ed ;
ed ; fhould he, however, have the cruelty to perfevere in it, I can give you jewels of fuf¬ ficient value to fupport you in the itile of life you have hitherto been accuftomed to, till I am of age, when the doors of Elvira's manfion fhall be again opened with delight to the adopted fon of her parents, the friend of her youth, the brother of her heart.' " Sad, filent, overwhelmed with mifery, I liftened to Elvira ; her words gave the final ftroke to my happinefs ·, all the horrors of dependance itared me in the face, and ere fhe had ceafed to fpeak, I had determined on ending the life upon which they feemed en¬ tailed, " Formed for domeftic comforts, (laid I within myfelf) fuch comforts as my fituation precludes my enjoying, life without them would be a burthen. I will not, therefore, toil to fupport an exiftence valuelefs to me ; 1 will not enter a world where 1 have no re¬ lative to guide, no friend to footh mc ; where I might meet fuch men as the Marquis of Montmorenei and M. de Valdore -, I will go vol. πι. к to
to the manfion from which I am exiled, and gratify its mafter by deflroying, perhaps in his prefence, the being he detefls. u A kind of gloomy compofure took pof¬ feffion of me from the moment f had con¬ ceived my fatal réfolution. í made no com¬ ments to Elvira upon the conduci: of her guardian -, 1 attempted not to diffuade her from pleading to him in my favour, but pre¬ tending fatigue, (Î faid) I would retire for a little while to my chamber. sc As foon as 1 entered it, fearful of my¬ felf, fearful that my réfolution would be fhaken if I allowed myfèlf a moment's thought, I put into my bofom a dagger, the gift of my late departed benefactor, and Healing out, bid, as I then thought, a laft adieu to my hitherfo happy home. I flew rather tharï walked, and about fun fH found myfeîf in the gloomicft part of the foreit of Montmorenei, and within view of the caftle. Exhaufted by fatigue and agitation, í threw my klf upon the ground; it was a fine fum- mer
nier evening, and the beauty and ferenity of nature formed a melancholy contraft to the horror and agony of my mind · } the hour recalled a thouiimd tender images to my memory, a thoufand happy feenes in which î had becK engaged with the beloved pro¬ tectors of my youth. '* Oh ! joys departed ! (I exchimed) how bitter is your recollection !—but, for the lait time, it now wrings my heait, ti rnovnv i 'λ. dll be infenfible of pain or pleafuie.— - Uh! hr, (í c/ied, !\UİPgîTv· evvsLotha icíokndent 'ί'ο, ν. likn 111 majefrie gforv v, s re innig from the w odd) never πνν will thy briga: bf ims give me Joy or vigo ι:; <ie they ajun \iik th- ea« tn, 1 iLjII be cv>kl vid inanimate as the fod 0,1 whieh i n< v »tit» kadier of ncick » ! (1 p-'î^ded) raifing myieif on my knees'! t > ih r If . I am forlorn, I am dn owv v 4te t, ea out în thy bofom cm I t\pe t с > v nt 01* protection? Forgiv« me then, í wve me, for appearing in thy piek.kv unfummoned ; and, Oh ' fiiould the eye ol d f'Uicr betudd ϋ 'z m v
my remains, behold them with compunction, let, ï implore thee, that compunction exte¬ nuate his errors, nor fuller the blood 1 íhed to reft upon hib hf ad. "I attempted to raife the dagger to my heart, but felt at the muant my .arm feized. Aftoniflied, I looked round, and beheld him \\h> was ubjuftly filled St. Julian. " 1 ι ок, and cued but in vain, to difen- Sľrve n \íe ir from hım — гаде took immedi · ate poiiviiU n of my ikul. " Kekaf ые ^cnedl) direäly, kíl paf¬ fion fliould ciuiue me with douule ilungth, dud tempt mi to кик that ludid againft your bicéit whivíi low í only v dh to turn ig«mft IL) OWIl" 4 it vi thuatb ne m vai i, (faid lie), I will not lekte you idi you t ff* к me \ou have dio'ji'tdyour i' lent dita .lul n tt niions— till yon ulun ne thai ναι »dl hive rnticy up n }( uı o\ n ¡ Jv-iì. —On ! kneed And dç- psrutt Lh· \ mc« w j oí heaven, foi having thf '.„m; or « \h/ij ymg Кь moft (atred injunc¬ tions, ίυι nav mg doubted ils ¿i om líes of pi Oteftion,
protection, and defpairingly determined on deflroying what, as it gave, fo only it fhould take.' " The acknowledged heir of Montmo¬ renei, the fon of tendernefs and profpcritj r , (cried I) may preach againft a crime which he beholds no profpect of ever being tempted to commit; but were our fituations re ver fed, was he, like me, an outcaft, an exile from the houfe that fiiould have Hielte red and protected him, he would, like me, perhaps gladly refign a being valuelefs to hknfelf from being fo to others." f To more ftrength of mind, more firm- neis than other men, (faid he) I do not pre¬ tend; but itili I humbly tiuit that in the very depth of mifery the faci ed fentiments of religion í have imbibed would g'.ard me againft an ad which would for ever с lofe the doors of happinefs againft me. You ihall not (he continued) throw me from you ; İ will five, 1 will ferve you—we are brothers, lufter us to be fiiends. My heart conceived к J ap.r*
a patriality for you the firft moment î beheld you, zad ï fiiould then have declared it, had J thought its difclofure would have been plea- Jing to you/ s< Ì will not, my love, (proceeded Cler¬ mont, after a fliort paufe) dwell longer upoe а fee ne which I perceive lias already infpired you w irh horror ; fuffice it to fay I was not able to refift his ktndneffes, which, from being unexpected, had a double effect ; his gen¬ tlenefs allayed the ftormy paflions of my foul, his arguments convinced me of the enormity of the crime I had been about committing, and I dropped the inftrument of intended deftruction to clafp his hand to a breaft which heaved with ftrong emotion, forgetting in that moment that he was the ufurper of my rights. iC Ah! had he been convinced he was the ufurper of them, i am confident he would, vris hout hefitation, have wnndravsn from the pLce I ihould have filled ; but the artful tale of the Marquis of Montmorenei completely deceived him: and while his generous heart acknow*
acknowledged me t^his bi other, he confi- dtred me a¿ the illegitimate ion or'lvs father. "From the hour our friendihip com¬ menced ï determined never more to men¬ tion the painful fubjcčt of my mother's wrongs '\nd mine. But ere 1 would accept his offers of aíLftance, I made him allure me that his own feelings alone prompted him to ferve me, folemnly vowing within my mind never through any hands, or by any means, to re¬ ceive any mark of kindneis from my father, except acknowledged by him in the light I vvilhcd. lf St. Julian (for fo I now called him, though my heart fwelled as I did fo), informed me that in a few days he was going to Italy, and afked me to accompany him thither. This 7 gladly contented to do, and, in the interim he fud he would bring me to the houfe cfa cottager, where 1 mignt be fecretly lodged t s And ere we return to France, ( conti¬ nued he) we may think of ibme plan for your future eflabliiliraent in fife.* к 4 u Ere
" Ert I commenced my journey, î wrote to Elvira, acquainting her of the friend ï had gained, and imploring her forgivenefs for quitting her houfe in the abrupt manner Ì had done, carefully concealing, however, the mo¬ tive which liad prompted me to do fo. " St. Julian informed me, that his prefent excurfion was merely for pleafure, as he had already made the tour of Europe. " I fliall pafs over the admiration, the en- ţhufiaftic delight, which pervaded my mind as I afcended the Alps, and viewed nature in fome of her moft fublime forms. " On the evening of the firft day's journey St. Julian told me he meant to pafs the night at the habitation of a very particular friend of his. ť Some months ago, (faid he) as î was returning from Italy to France, î was feverely hurt near h U houfe by the overturning of my carriage, and from him, to whom 1 was then a total ftranger, received every atten¬ tion which poikenc-fs or humanity could dic¬ tate. I fliould therefore deem myfelf highly ungrateful
ungrateful ifi could think of pafng his door without pi>ing him my refpects. c He is а foreigner, fir advanced in hfe ; a man of diftmclion, 'out unfortunate, Of the tioubkb chicli fonie усагл o vk ^oj^ited Lnghnd, and ib fhter kingdom, i dAt fiy you have hcaid. Lord Dunk re (fo mv hieihl ii filled) was one of the moft f irhfol dni '/calotb fijppji tei'b of James : it Sec vd, α id in corfequence of hib att '.cii nent to t мг un¬ happy Prince, befanie ancv.k uo.n hi->na:we countiy, li eland, dnd Ьл\ a eo if, h rable p'-j- perty in it :—with dll he could pieierve, а finali pittance, he retned to the obr v.\ r v of thefe mountain.-, where, with tv' o ďu.g ilei >, anda few alice lionate tol lov. e i »s, he lives dilti: of peaceful letirement, looking back on tlie world he has kft witnout legvt, and. forwird to the one to come with eveiy m>pc of fe¬ licity/ ( 'lis impoflible to give you any а le- quate idea of the benevolence of his aif >- fition, the uibanity, the thceifulneñ of Ins tempei ; he continually brings to mu.d the к$ Hoiks
ílories we have heard of the patriarci^ ; his fmiplitity, ids hofpitality, exactly accords with the account we have received of them. 'Of his daughters t mull not fpeak, becaufe f could not do them juftice. í muft, however, timely caurion you againft the charms cf the elder, who is enwed to a gentleman, to whom flie k- prevented by p^iricular circum¬ flances from being immediately linked ; but the heart ls well as the hand of the younger are at l' ν rty I nndeiltaiiH, and to wifli them my brother's would be to wifli Lím the greateft biefling man could poffciV " Soon afte r thhs converfation we flopped at Lord D uniere 's. St. julian went in firft to prepare him for my reception, and in a iew minutes returned with his venerable friend, whofe кюка were calculated to excite an im¬ mediate prepoíľeíľion in his favour. " He welcomed me wkh the utmoft kind- nefs, and conducted me to the apartment where his daughters fat. I cannot give you any idea of the furprife, the admiration which ivzed n.e on beholding them:—I iaw in·» -? deed
deed that my brother was right in not at¬ tempting to defcribe charms which no de¬ fcription could have done juftice to. My eyes wandered for fome time from one to the other, fcarcely knowing which to give the preference of beauty to, but at laft fet¬ tled on the lovely face o** Geraldine, the younger. " Inftead of flaying but one night, we re¬ mained a week under the roof of Lord Dün¬ lere —■- a week of fuch happinefs as I had never before experienced — a week in which new feelings, new fentiments took poifeflion of my foul, and taught me that I had hitherto beta а ' r, njv r · the greateft. pleafure, the gre a v ft ρ hi .nu· can feel. í wiihed, Ì determined, now'\*ei, if poffible* to conceal my feelings— ϊ lauded my paf¬ fion as hopetefs, and j ride actuated me to hide ir; but in vain I ftrove to da. fo ; my melancholy, my total abiti action, amidft the new and lovely feenes through which í tra¬ velled, and die converfadorb into whicii I inicniibly entered, betrayed me to St. Julian. ϋ 6 lie
He laughed, yet pitied, but neither defired me to hope nor defpair, * Laufane (faid he, one morning, after we had been two or three weeks in Italy), would к be vaftly difagreeable to you if, inftead of pafling two months here as we at firft pro- poíèd, we returned to Lord Dimlere's, and ipent them there ?* "Ahl St. Julian, (cried Î) you know my heart too well to render it neceíľary for me to anfwer you. " In fhort, without longer delay we re¬ turned to that manfion on which my thoughts continually dwelt. Here, in the prefence of her whom my foul adore ck I forgot my réfo¬ lution of trying to conquer— to conceal my paflion:—ah! how indeed could I do fo, when in the foft glances of lier eyes I fometimes fancied 1 íàw an aifurance of its being leturned, At length the period for quitting her arri ved— for quitting without the fmallcil hope of aga in b holding her: the moil excruciating anguiih filled my iieart the moment it was announced, and wich difficulty I concealed İt. 4 " Unable
(t Unable to converfe the evening pre¬ ceding the day fixed for my departure, I left Lord Dünlere and St. Julian together, and withdrew to an alcove in a lonely and ro¬ mantic part of the garden, where fome of my happieft hours had been paffed with Geraldine, indulging a melancholy kind of pleaiure at the idea of there giving vent to my feelings. <ť You may imagine what my emotions were, when, on entering it, the firft obje¿t I beheld was Geialdine!—She was alone, and dejectedly leaning on a little table. Reafon bid me fly, but paflion overpowered, 2nd at her feet I poured forth my forrows. . Ah í how amply did I think myfelf recompeníèd for thofe forrows when ϊ beheld the tear of pity ftealing down her cheek, when I heard her foft and faltering accents declare I was not indifferent to her :—but the rapture that declaration gave was tranfient ; I reflected on my fituation, and my foul immediately up¬ braided me with cruelty to her, and treachery to Lord Dunlere, in avowing my paflion, and
and pleading for a ( retnrn to it, when no hope exifted of otr ever tx-ing united. ťC J'ity me, Geraldine, (faid ï, wildly dart¬ ing from her ίϊν), but n"> longer love me 5 yield not to fentiments which will, if in¬ dulged, email ang lifh upon your gentle foul** fuch anguiih as now p rvades mine—the an- guiili of a hopelefs раТюп :—we mutt part, part without an idea of again meeting $-— í cannot, dare not afk you to become mine ; cannot allí you to beftow your hand on him who is but a dependent. No, Geraldine, wei e it offered î would reject it, from a con¬ viction that by accepting it ï íhould plunge you in diftreíš !-—Oh ! mild as your virtues may угли* deftiny be,—different, ah ! far dif¬ ferent Π om that of the unhappy Laufine's ! " A fudden ruftling amongft tlu 1 trees be¬ hind me made me turn lound, and I beheld Lord »Dünlere. 1 was а little flartled, but the confeiot íhďb of not having attempted to take any advantage of the tendeinels of his daughter, pr^ vented my feeling that confu¬ fion í Ihouid üíherwife luve experienced at being
being thus furprifed, I bow r ed, and was re¬ tiring ív зт the alcove, when he flopped me— 4 1 auf me (laid he), do not let me frighten you üW, 1 ]': ht me try (added he, with а hvighji.t iiuiL) wlvhei í с imut obtain your pirc'on far iw mtruhon.* £C He fated himfjf by ti^e almoil iiinting Geraldine, and то'г.г^п 1»е 1 1 fit bcfl le him. ť You will not, Ì auf me, (fu 1 he, pfrer a paufe) be luion'e 1 í thin':, when I in¬ form you that î hive overheard your conver¬ fation, nor will }ou, í hope, legret mv having done fo, it was one wli cii reflected the higheft honoui on your heatt. lie who can foar above feliìih con'idei ations, who can leiift the pleadings of piflion for it at of in¬ conveniencing the woman he h»>ve*>, evinces a generofity, a fenfibility, that does cieelt to human natine. c í have long fufpe-fled your attachment; you will believe 1 did not difip; rove it, when I confefs I felt happy to thimv it was íe- turne к * Го men of vii cue, not to mui ofjiL if- neilf I always wkLed to gve hi; eku^ 'u^is, t 'у
they only, of all the numerous connexions which once bleffed me, remain ; confequently my felicity folely depends upon «heir's : I therefore determined never to controul their inclinations, if fuch as reafon could approve/ " Oh ! my Lord, (I exclaimed) I cannot give utterance to my feelings ¡ but, ah ! will you indeed peril* vere in your generous in¬ tentions when you hear my fad ftory, when you hear that î have been not only deprived of fortune, but the name 1 have a right to ?" ť î am already acquainted with your ftory, (he replied); Count St. Julian related it a few days after your introduction to me. Your now mentioning it reminds me of a prelimi¬ nary which muil be fettled ere 1 pofitively confent to give you my daughter, namely, that you folemnly promife never to enter again upon the fubjeel of former grievances,,' " This was a promife which, even without having fuch an inducement as he now held out for making, í would not have hefitated to give, having \on ( ¿ before determined to be
be filent about wrongs which ï could not gain t ed refs for. c if then (refumed he) you think you can be happy in the retirement in which we live, for my fortune will not permit me to give you the power of entering the gay world, receive the hand of my daughter. 1 " On my knees I expreffed my gratitude, on my knees with truth aíľured him, that a defert with her would be a paradiíè. From his arms I received the moft lovely and be¬ le ved of women. Ohi moment of ecftacy, in which I folded my Geraldine to my heart as my cleftined wife—in which í kiíľed away the tear that hung upon her glowing cheek, like the fweet dew of the morning on the filken leaves of the rofe I " St. Julian, who appeared aimoft over¬ powered with delight at my happinefs, put off his journey in order to be preient at my marriage, and gave me the moft folemn af¬ furances of dividing with me his paternal for¬ tune whenever he came into poffeffion of it.
"lie
" He left me the moft bleffed of men. Oh l day«, of de light, rapid in your courfe, and fuc- eecded by yeai . of mifeiy апЛ honor I " í had been monied abo'V thiee months v iien 1 leceived a Lti-.r I'hvh my biotlier, informing me th »t lie \\»ь ill, and i'nxioufiy dc.lroiib of feeing nie. I fighed at the idea of even a tranfieni ftparation fi om my love, but î could not i e fill the call of friendihip, and accordingly let out for a cottage near the caftle of Montmorenei, where St. Julian had once before lodged, and now appointed to fee me " The heavineis of heart with which ï CGnuìUTiCcd my iourney was furely a prefen- liment of the iUs that were approaching. Ohi venerable Dünlere, thy happinefs and mine was then about fet ting ! " The chateau de Valdore lay in my way to the caftle of Montmorenei -, I could not think of paffuig it without inquiring after the friend of my youth, from whom 1 had heard but once fince my departure from her houfe; our correfpondenccjt as flie then informed me
me, having been prohibkeci by her guardian. I went through a private path to the chateau, which conducted me directly to the hall oc¬ cupied by the fervants: here, amidft many ftrangers I foon difcovered fome of the old domeftics, and from them learned that Ml. de Valdore and his fimily refided at the chateau, and that Lady El vii a's fuuatİon was unaltered. I fent to rcqueft an interview, and was aimoft immediately fbinmoned to her: fhe received me with the moft raptu¬ rous delignt, and tears involuntarily fell from me as í recollected the »kindnefs ofher parents, and witneiľed her pleafure at be¬ holding; me. "When we grew a little compofed, í an¬ fwered her eager enquiiics concerning ail that had befallen me lìnee our féparation, and my prefent fituation : but, Oh ! what were my emotions when, as I mentioned that fituation, I faw the blood forikke her cneeks, and difcovered that it was more than friend- Ai ip which flie fek for me { «Married
f Mai lied " flie lepcatvi in a faint voice-— flie paufed—flic feemed nying to recollect heruit and attempted to wiih me joy ; but her tengne could not utter what flie wiihed to idy, and hei head fink upon my flioulder. Oh! Gei u hline, finely 1 did not w reng thy love * y the tears, the tears of unuttei.tble ttndeinefb which î flied upon herpale cheek —by the fighs which heaved my bofom on hearing her's. " She foon however recovered : — her mind was the feat of every viitue, and flirunk from the idea of betraying feelings conti ary to propiiety— 4 Laufane, (iaid flie) be aíľured I rejoice at your prefent happincf», the period í truft will arrive when I fliali have an opportunity of benolding İt ; prepare your lady againft that period to love and efteem me ; tell her vou have friend, a fifter, to introduce to her.* " Already (cried I) flie is acquainted with the virtues of£1 viraj already taught to love and efteem her. cc In
ŕŕ în pity to her feelings, which í law flie could ill fupprefs, í determined to fhorten my vift : when fhe faw me rifing to depart, flie defired me to flop another moment— * I have a prefent (faid flie) to fend your lady : you know I often amufed myíelf by copying pictures?—amongll the reil (conti¬ nued fhe, with a bluih) I copied your's, and now requefl you will take it to your lady.' " She retired without permitting me to fpeak, and returned in a few minutes with it: it was the lame which you now have, and which by being an exacl copy of the one í £nt my father, led to the late dif- covery. '* From that period particular circum¬ flances, not neceíľary to explain, prevented my feeing or hearing any thing of the deiliny of Elvira, till chance conducted her to our cottage. She tnen informed me, that foon after lhe was of age, flie had united herfelf to
io the Count de Melville, whole virtues and tendernefs rendered her, during his life time, one of the happieft of women, and thus re¬ warded her for the réfolution with which flic fet about conciuerinff her firft attachment t о from the moment flie knew it was improper to be indulged. " From the chateau de Valdore I repaired to the cottage where my brother had defired to fee me. He received me with the utmoft affection, and î found he had not deceived me by faying he was ill ; it was an illneis however which feemed occafioned more by agitation than any bodily complaint ; and I afterwards difcovered i was not wrong in this opinion. iC Oh ! had he confided in me ; Oh! liad he then opened his heart, divulged its cares, its anxieties, whac mifery, what horror would he have faved us both from ex¬ periencing 1 iť I had not been above a week with him when I w r as overwhelmed v/ith forrow by a letter
letter from my wife, containing the melan¬ choly intelligence of her lovely filler Elea- nora's death. ťt í could not hefitate a moment about re¬ turning to her diieftly ; yet at the inftant I determined on doing fo, my heart was aimoft divided between her and my brother, who was feized with а violent fever the very day on which í heard from her. " I will not pain your gentle foul, my Madeline, bv defcribinsr the fituation in which I found your mother, or relating the numerous trun of calamities that followed the death of her filter, it is fufficient forme to fay that within a few months after her de- ceafo I loft my brother and my wiie. tc Ah, heavens! even at this diftant period í íhudder at the recollection of the excruci¬ ating anguiih I endured on being deprived of friends ίο beloved. The world feemed a blank, and nothing but religion and tender¬ nefs for you could have prevented my quitting к, nor has time done more than appeafe the violence
violence of that anguifli.·—Oh! never, never can the barb of forrow be extracted from my heait ; and refpect for the memoiy of my mo¬ ther, affection for you, could only have tempted me to quit a retirement, where unre- firamed and unobferved I could have indulg'd my feelings. íe Loj d Dunlere foon followed his chil¬ dren to their grave; the wreck of his for¬ tune was placed in the hands nf a banker at Paris, who failed about the time of his death. Thus, from neceflity as well as choice, î fought the obfeurity in which you were l\ ought up. "Difgufted with the world, ï changed my name, in order to conceal myfelf írom every one who had known me before, and thus pi event my retiremej r M from being inter¬ rupted. ' f I carefully concealed my ftory from you, well knowing fiom your fenfibility the pain you would fetl if acquainted with my in¬ juries» " Alas ï
α Alas ! too late is the hand of my father extended to do me juftice ; neither wealth nor titles can now confer pleafure upon me, and the coronet he is about placing upon my brow, I fiiould reject, was it not to have the power of tranfmitcing it to the child of my ■lamented love/'
vol, m.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI.
«' Thus confcience docs mnke cowards of us all." ERE ceafed Clermont, or, as we fhall hereafter call him, St. Julian ; but he ceafed without gratifying the curiofity of Madeline: much of his ftory, fhe was convinced, re¬ mained untold, and fhe fhuddercd as fhe thought it was concealed merely becaufe it was too dreadful to be known. «'Oh, furely, (fhe faid, within herfelf) forne myfterious circumflances muft have at¬ tended the fate of my mother, or ere this my father would have mentioned her to me— ζ ere
H
cic this would have afforded me the me¬ lancholy pleafure of knowing I was defcended from fo amiable a woman, and taught me to reverence her memory ; but what hc wiihes to hide I will not try to difcover, confident as I am that if a full explanation of paft events could have given me pleafure, I fliould have received it from him." When St. Julian came within fight of his father's refidence, the ftrong emotions which the idea of his approaching interview with that father infpired, took from him ail further power of utterance. The day was declining, and the deep gloom of the foreft: heightened the melan¬ choly which the recital of paft events had infufed into the hearts of the travellers. As foon as the carriage entered the court, the doors of the hall were thrown open, and a number of fervants appeared, wim eager L 2 impatieacc
impatience in their looks, to fee and receive the newly declared heir of Montmorenei. St. Julian now flrove to regain his com- pofure, that he might appear to bear the un¬ expected reverfe in his fituation with that calm dignity befitting a cultivated mind, and one which built not its happinefs on the adventitious gifts of fortune; but vainly did he flnve to do fo. He trembled as he en¬ tered the ancient manfion of his forefathers, from which he had been fo long unjuflly exiled, trembled with violent emotion as he iurveyed their warlike trophies, to which the fpirit in his bofom told him he might have added, had not the hand of injuflice plunged him in obfeurity. The refentment this idea excited was as tranfient however as involuntary, and though involuntary he repented it. He was now called, he confidered, to the prefence of his father to receive from his hand
hands, as far as in his power to make it, atonement for every wrong. "And if fuch atonement fatisfies heaven, (cried he) as ν e are aíľured i: docs, fliould ίε not amply fatisfy weak and erring man ?" Agitation caufed him to paufe in the hall, and the domeftics feemed pleafed with the opportunity he thus afforded ù\:m of gra¬ tifying their curiofity i one of them bowing low at length fpoke — ff The Marquis impatiently expedis your arrival, my Lord, (faid he) -, fliall I have the honour of condUwiing you to him?" St. Julian aíľented by an inclination of his head, and was immediately ufheied up ftairs to die apartment where п\ь father fat. On reaching the door he t -ok the hand of Madeline, who with tremjiing fteps had followed him toit. r-3 The
The Marquis attempted to rife at their entrance, but neither his ftrength nor fpirits feconded the effort, and faint and almoil brcathlefs he funk back upon his chair. St, Julian and Madeline knelt before him. "Let the bleíTing ofa father, (faid St. Julian in a folemn voice) at length rejoice my heart." The Marquis railed his venerable head— " I am too unworthy to dare to give it (hc exclaimed) ; but may heaven"blefs you, may all that can render life defirable be your's, long, long after I am laid within that grave where I now wifh to fbroud my for¬ rows and my flume!" " Oh, my father, (cried St. Julian, pe¬ netrated by his language), fpeak not fo again ; wiih not again to deprive your fon of an in- cxprcfiible
expreffible comfort —the comfort of trying to mitigate your forrows." The Marquis embraced him, but was un¬ able for fomc minutes to fpeak ; then fud¬ denly raifing his head— " Treat me not with tendernefs, (he faid, while a frown overfpread his countenance) reproach, revile, neglect me, and you will fhe w me mercy j for you will then fave my heart from the intolerable pangs which kindneis and attention fo unmerited from you muft give it. Oh ! my fon, my fon, (he conti¬ nued, clafping his hands together, and all the aufterity of his countenance vaniíliing), you are now amply avenged, and I am amply puniihed. Had virtue been the guide of my actions, exclufive of that happinefs which ever attends a quiet confcience, I fhould have had the happinefs of being able to enjoy the fociety of my fon ; but now, what thea would have been my bleffing, aimoft becomes my curfe j for not a word of tendernefs» that paíľes your
your lips, not a beam of love »from your eje, bui will come like daggers to my heart," "Far better had it been then (faid St. Julian) that ï had remained in my obfeurity, if I am only taken fiom it to aggravate the woes ofa father: permit me, my Lord, (cried he, with increafiig emotion), again to ictiie to it, permit rre le withdraw fiom your pre- it lire abJrv io injurious to vour tranomlhtv. ' "No, (e»\c! dmed the ľviarqiiii eagerly) i.rv',, ii'-vcr fhall }оч, except you reali/ wih to do foy wiihdiw youríUf iìom me. I xcil> w bat I i.avt, iaid, make fome allow¬ ances for the agitatori of fuch a meeting as our's ; my co npofuie wijl foon, I truft, return, snei I fliall then, I make no doubt, be able to enjoy уоы iociety. " R lie now, my children, (extending д hand to St. Julian and Madelint) tıs 1 ihould have knelt to you , but fince you knelt for a blelfmg, though unwoithy of giving, re¬ ceive it : may happmcis and honour, butii in their fuìkft extent, ever be your'& j may thy ^uakneb (turning to Madeline, and kukng her
her foft cheek), ever find a tender guardian in thy father -, and may Ids fui it ι i ¡gs and filial piety to me be amply recompenfed by thy afle' c 'iuii and duty !" He feated tlie m on each fide of himfelf* and the violente of \\\ъ feedings having a little abated, began, notwithftanding the avowed wifliCä of St, Julian to tiie contrary, the hif- tory of his π pentance. " The dreadful fate of my fon made me recollecl my pail conduci ; all its enormities flared me in the face, and I wondered that the puniilmient of heaven had been ib long delayed. Oh! wretch, (I cried, in the ex- cruciatine; anoriifli of mv foul) thv crimes have at length ¡uftly provoked the vengeance of Heave n, and drawn down deft r uà ion upon the head of thy fon! ------■ " The idea, that the fins of the fither had been the occafion of the death ot the fon, al¬ mod íhook Reafon from her throne ·, horrors, beyond language to exprefs took poifeflion L S °£
of me: —to try to appeafe them, appeaíê agonies which often urged mc to complete the meafurc of my guilt, by raifing the hand of fuicide againft my life. " I ient for a Monk from a neighbouring Convent, to pour out my foul in confeflion to him j an holy ačl which I had long omit¬ ted, from a confeioufnefs that till now it would have been a mockery of heaven, as till now the realfigh of repentance had never heaved my bread." * My fon, (cried the good man) you judge rightly in thinking that your -conduct has caufed your prefent afflictions; a merciful Being has fcnt them, in-order to awaken you to repentance, and by fuíľering here, fave your precious foul from fuffering here¬ after· Without further murmurs, therefore, fubmit to your deprivations as to a righteous ptmifhmcnt, and flrivc by every atonement ín your power to expiate your crimes ; fo may you hope for a gleam of returning peace, fo hope for fupport in the hour of death, • ' * when
when all the terrors of another world arc opening to your view/ " In conféquence of his words> and the pleadings of my own confcience, I directly ordered the moft diligent fearch to be macle after you, but without effect. I then drew up a paper, acknowledging my marriage with your mother, and, confequently, you as my heir: which I lodged in the convent where mv Conicilor lived, that if bv anv chance either he or any of his holy brothers fhould hereafter hear of you, or гту oŕľspríng cf your's, they might bc able to audienticate your title to the Caftle of Montmorenei. " Gratefully I return thanks to Heaven for permitting me to do that juftice to you which I gave to others the power of performing; the pleafure derived from that idea will, I make no doubt, in a few days alleviate my feelings. But, Oh! my fon, if .your atten¬ tions have not always power to mitigate my fadnefs—if, whilft receiving them, the figh of regret, the tear of tender recollection, L 6 fiiould
fhould obtrude, bc not offended, whilft î re« joice for the fon î have recovered, I cannot help mourning for the one I have loft : he was all that the fondeft father could defire ! The proudeft of the fons of men might have gloried in being called his parent, ignorant as w r ell as innocent of my great oíľmces, his praifes cannot difpleale you ; but if they íhould, let the reflection of his beine; now in his cold and dreary tomb, where he can no longer interpofe between you and your rights, remove your refentment." *Oh! my father, (cried St. Julian, his tearful eye evincing the truth of his words) little do you know my heart if you think it can feel dif pleafure at the praifes of my bro¬ ther/ €C I believe you, my fon, (faid the Mar¬ quis) and the belief gives me pleafure ; for to think you will fometimes permit me to talk of him to you, foothsmy feelings." The appearance ofa domeftic now inter¬ rupted the converfation, and the Marquis kd Madeline
Madeline down flairs. The fupper was laid out in one of the ftate apartments which had been long difufed; and though every thing was magnificent, every thing was gloomy. Fatigued by her journey, or rather by the emotions of her mind, Madeline foon after fupper entreated permiiîion to retire to her chamber ; an attendant was accordingly fum- moned to conduci: her to it, and on leaving the parlour fhe found the houfekeeper wait¬ ing in the hall for that purpofe. " Well, I am hippy, (cried flie, fitnpering and courtefying), that I have an opportunity at laft of wiiliing your La'ihip joy. Dear me, f have been fo furpri fed at what has lately happened! Who could ever have thought that the night I had the honour of feeing your La'ihip here, í fhould have had the fo much grcatci homur of calling you Miilrefs,"
Madeline
Madeline received lier compliment with г faint fmile, for her heart was too heavy to permit ht r to anfwer it as at another rune ilie might have done ; nor was her melan¬ choly dtcreafed on entering her fpacious chamber, whofe faded tapeflry and tarniihed furniture fpoke its long defertion and neglect. i{ í hope your La'ihip does not difiiké this apartment, (ibid the houfekeeper, on per¬ ceiving Madeline paufe at the enti ance, and look round her with a kind of dread) ; it U one of the moit nvpviiiceiit in the caftle í can affı ire you, and was occupied by my late Lady, the Maichioncii, fince whofe death it has neither been uivd or altered." ťí No, (replied Maddine, advancing, and endeavouring to fliakc off the imnreflion which i к «boni liad made upon her mind), 1 do not di Ilike it." ťí That door (cried the houfekeeper) opens ini o 'he drcfímg-room¿ there my lady viel to [Ail many of her hours; it was fitted up
up entirely underhel direction, and ornamented with portraits of fcveral of her moil par, iridar fiiends, amongft the pirun es is one of her¬ felf, and another of Lord Philippe, her ion, drawn about a year before hib < eath ; the room itili remains juil in the Ame liate as when flie died." An hrefiilible impulf* prompted Mvkdine immediately to take a view of Оч'с рчЧи^ь; and fhe dircHlv erected the cheflin^-room itili attended by the houfekeeper. The fir ft flie examined was the Mvhi- onefs : it reprefented a woman in all the b* v -i of youth and of tl·^ moil excpiiflte bc: ,ry , ihe tuii^d from it, after expieffing hçv a.l- miration, to Lord Philippe's. But, Oh! w! :t were her feelings at that moment, when tl.j exacl rcfemblance of de Sevignic met her eyes. With all the wiMnefs of afloniihnncnt fnc gve^ upon it: c< Aie you iure (cried flie, glw.ng fw JiLlbiî at the houfekeeper, and
and fpeaking in aimoft breatlilefs agitation) are you fure this picture was drawn for Lord Philippe ?" f< Sure ! (repeated the houfekeeper) Lord, yes, that I am indeed, Why I faw him, my¬ felf fitting forit.' <c Good heaven! (iaid Madeline to her¬ felf) what a likenefs 1 Ahí how vain, (fhe continued) my refolves to forget de Sevignie while his image will be thus aimoft continually before me." As if rivetted by fome fpell to the ipot, flie itili continued to fland before it: the more flie gazed upon it, tiie more if poflible the likenefs grew upon her. " Do you think it ahandfome picture?' 5 afked the houfekeeper, elevating the light ss Hie fpoke as if to give Madeline a better op¬ portunity of examining it, <c Handfome 1 (repeated Madeline em¬ phatically and with a deep figh) yes, very handfome indeed." "Aye
lt Aye, and fo ύο 1 i (cried the houfe¬ keeper), what a iwcet fmile there is about the mouth I " Yes, (thought Madeline) the fafcinating fmile of dc Sevignie. "And the eyes! (continued the houfe¬ keeper) how piercing, yet how mild!" Madeline, who had turned to the houiè- kcepcr, again nUened hcr's upon them, and again fancied fhe beheld the dark eves cf о » de Seviümic beamin»; with imu tte rabie ten · О - ) derne í» upon her. She fighed more deeply than before ; and fearful that if ihe remained much longer in her prefent fituation, fhe íhould not be able to cof.ceal the feelings which now aimoft fwelled her heart to buriting, fhe inftamly left the dre fling- room. " Your La'fhip looks difturbed, (faid the houfekeeper); 1 am afraid the picture of Lord Pliilippe has affected you, by bringing his melancholy fate to your mind : Poor youth, it
it was a ful ťah 's, indeed; but your l.a'fluo muft confider, that if he had not been taken off, your father would never have been re¬ ftored tohis lights; and heaven knows, he was kept long enough out of them." "I muft for ever r<.g,*-i, (laid Madeline) that his refi orai ion to them was occafioned by the death of i к brother." " Why to be fure, (replied the houfe¬ keeper) it would have been better if they could have been regained by any other means s but that that would ever have been the cafe there was very little probability of; and, between ourfelves, (proceeded flie, low¬ ering her voice) fmce your La'ihip has hinted at the affair to me, I think even if it was openly proved, inftead of being meıeîy fufpečted, as it is at prefent, thac the Count, your father, when his injuries were confidered, would not be condemned ¿ I, for my part, am one of thofe v ho would forgive him for what he did." " For what hc did! (repeated Madeline, ftarting), why what has he done to require forgivtnefs?
í vv venčili 1 What is the affair you fay í h *.ve bviedat? Speak,—you have agitated vy very foul." 'İ he houfekeeper receded a few fu-ps in evident terror. " Why, nothing, í aífure your La'ihip, (exclaimed flie in faltering accents) I only meant that—that—" Here fhe paufed in the utmoft confufion. "Speak ! (cried Madeline, in avoi cethat be¬ trayed the moft dreadful agitation—an agita¬ tion caufed by recollecting at that inftant the converiation which had paffed between herand the houfekeeper relative to the murder of Lord Philippe on the night flic had ibught for flicker in the caftle) ; fpeak, I adjure you, (flie repeated, with a diftračled air) and re¬ lieve me from the horrors you have infpired." " í am very forry, I am fure, (faid Mrs. Beatrice) that! have fodiftreffed your La'ihip i like
like an old woman, í muft al л ays be pi atîne,, I only meant, my Lady, I can^fluie you, 10 fiy, tlut it it was ki,o\*ii tíiai the Count, your father, rejoice vl v> mitead of regretted, Vre dedih of hr» υιοί .er, no one could won der at it, coniiJeiiuj; ihe 2 с afon he had to hac* him as tlie ι fu »per of hia lights." "And vas tins all )uj Rail/ meant " afked Ma if lin *. íC Ол, all, I do t *da- »* y^ui La'ihip, upon the word of a t v Chdkiaa , if } ou do not believe me, í will call all the Saints in Hea¬ ven to witnefs forme/' Madeline could not help fmiling : α As it is a call, pei haps, (faid flie) they might not obey, 1 will take your woid." She now endeavoured to compofe herfelf ; but iiol eafiiy could ihe regain compofure, nor difmifs ìenoife from her mind, foi ha¬ ving yieldcu, enough but for a mibu.e, to the horrid
honid fuggeftions which had lately pervaded it. " Oh ! was my father acquainted with them, (ciied ihe to lier Idf), never, never would he forgive me. Ah ! how can I for¬ give myfelf?—Ah! how fuppoit, without beti ay ing it, the pain I muft ever feel, for having thought unjuftly of him," " You fieni well acquainted with the af¬ fairs of this familv ?" faul ihe, fitting down, and making an eflbrt to appear compofed. " Yes, veiy well acquainted with them in¬ deed, (replied the houfekeeper, figmticantly fluking her head) ; I have lived in it aimoit ever fince í was born ; for my parents dying when i vvas very young, my aunt, who was houfekeeper, tuok me immediately und. r her protection." It now occurred to Madeline, that the domeftic who had liberated her unhappy grandmother might kill be living; and anx¬ ious, if flie was, to pay her the tribute of refpect
icl^vT ike merited, ile inquiied ¿ and h'* u d, with pleaiure, that hei pu fent attend¬ ant vas the pei fon whu h, ri pei formed that genti ou: at. ζζ Yes, my ìddvt k ν. ss I, (ci ied the houíè- ktepcr, bridling upi, who freed the poor rnfoitjnate lady : I ws tlu n a une lively young gill» as your La'fl.ip indeed au у well iuppofe, fiom the number of yeais which have paffed fince tint evenr, ond the moft tende' -nea· ted u enture, Ľ'jľp I Tiy it my¬ felf, that perhaps ever liv'ed. i^idr me, J ihall nevci forget how í í ι itd, wìdn I went u dn fome food to her, and found hrr fitting on the giovici, io pale, yet fo beautiful, with her hair, th'* fineft hui I cvr ic *v, ?bout oie Π reit ci .t i ihm your'., mv lady, hang¬ in" about isa ίο id ki«, aid hei nule baby Ь.у oi hv ì j , υπ \ îvvı her teab \ eie kıllın»· fo (d^ } ui»I l ,w «vid wind \,buutri thiough die bıohe.ı w »dows, foi íbew^s ronhned in ?n upper roon, m one u the uii- «nhabited tov\« r s. С oui 1
"CoMİd î fee that room/' a.l.cd Made¬ line. e{ Why, the flairs chicli lead to it are now- very bad ; but if you wifli very much to goto it, I think you may venture fome day or other. Poor foul!—it has not been opened I be¬ lieve fince flic left it. I never fhall forget the manner in which flie thanked me as I led her from iti or the tears flie fined as flie put this little ring upon my finger." Madeline narteci up and examined the iingv then, after a moment faflening her line eyes fwimming in tears upon the houfe¬ keeper, iC Bleffed, for ever bleffed, (ihe exclaimed) be the hand which aided tlie unhappy!" ** There was fuch a fuis, (refumed Mrs. Beati ice), when it was known th it lhe had efcaped, I w аз very near being eiif.nilfc 1 from die caille -, nothing but my }oUh could have obtained iv.y forgi\ enefs : ю in it I con¬ tinued
tinned, and on the death of my aunt obtained her place." if And what was tlie general opinion about the unhappy Marchionefs?" demanded Ma¬ deline. <c It was the opinion of the domeftics, and fiich fimple folks, (replied the houfekeeper) that flie was an unfortunate lady, who had been cruelly inj' u ed i but all the great people believed, or fud rhey did at kail, that fhe was an artful creature, who had drawn in the Count to have an amour with her." After c^n verfing; a few minutes longer with the houfekeeper, Madeline told her, fhe no longer required her attendance. The night was now indeed waning fail, and moft of the inhabitants of the caftle had re-tired to repofe, ere flie difmified her ; however fo much was her imagination affected by the gloom of her apartment, that flie could not avoid afking, whether there was an inhabited one near it ?
4 'Not
£ί Not very near it, (anfwered the houfe¬ keeper) -, the one adjoining it, (flie faid), had belonged to Lord Philippe, but fince his death had been fhut up, with all the reft of the chambers in that gallery, except a few near the ftaircafe, one of which had been now prepared for the Count St. Julian/' Left to herfelf, inftead of retiring to reft, Madeline refeated herfelf by the toilette, and leaning her head penfively upon her hand, began to ruminate over paft events. The picture of Lord Philippe, by recalling de Sevignie to her mind, had awakened a thoufand tender recollections, which wrung her heart witii agony ; the idea of de Sevig- nie's falfehood had faded to conquer her ten¬ dernefs ; fhe flill loved him, ftiii doubted his duplicity, and felt more convinced than ever that all the fplendour of her prefent fituation could never reftore the cheerfulnefs her dif¬ appointment relative to him had injured; again fhe regretted that fituation, again re- vol. iii. m gretted
gretted her elevation to a height which would render more confpicuous the melancholy flie wifhed to conceal from every eye. " The faclnefs that marks my brow will make me appear ungrateful to heaven, (cried ilie) for the wonderful change it has effefted in my father's favour í and what ill-natured {peculation r , may not be excited by feeing one fo young fo hcpelefs !" Severely, however, did her heart reproach her for regretting that change—a change which removed from the memory of her grandmother the obloquy t4u had been fo ionn; attached to it. From the fufferings of lier grandmother her thoughts naturally reverted to thofe of her father, and the moie fhe leflefted on his narrative, the more firmly convinced Лт* was thut much of hib life remained uvold;— the recollected words of her departed fiiend con¬ firmed this opinion, α ς к-
ff She told me, (cried Madeline) and her lips knew not falfehood, that the calamities of his life were unprecedented ; that its cha- rafteţs were marked by horror, and ftained with blood ;—but in the view he gave me of ir, no fuch calamities, no fuch characters met my eye ; tis therefore too evident, that much of it remained concealed. — Oh! may that concealment now continue, (fhe proceeded); Oh ! may no hand more daring than mine withdraw the veil í have been fo orten cau¬ tioned againft raifing; may no untoward Jv~ cumitance reveal а myiltry, whofe elucida¬ tion I have now a prefentiment would fill me with horror Î" She fuddenly paufed, for at this inftant fne thought flie heard a groan from the adjoining chamber; which, it may be remembered, has already been mentioned as once belonging to Lord Philippe. Her heart beat quick, and flie turned her eyes towards the partition, as if they could m 2 have
have penetrated it, and difcovered the caufe of the found that had alarmed her ; but ali again was profoundly ilill, and flie at laft began to think it was either the wind growl¬ ing through the cafements, fhe had heard, or fome of thofe unaccountable noifes, fo common Ín old houfes ; fuch, fhe recollected, as had often ftartled her at the chateau of the Countefs de Merville. Thus trying to tranquillize her mind, flie was beginning to undrefs, when the powers of motion were fuddenly fufpended by a re¬ petition of the found which had fo recently alarmed her—a found flie could no longer afcribe to the caufes flie had already done. Deep and dreadful groans now pierced her ear—groans which feemed burfling from the bofom of mifery and defpair, and which by degiees rofe to a yell, intermingled with fighs and fobs.
That
7 hat Madeline was not an entire ftranger to foperftition, muft have been already per¬ ceived; that it was now awakened İn her breaft, cannot be denied, nor indeed fcarcely wondered at, when her fıtuatiop İs condderedj in a gloomy chamber, remote from every inhabited one, and affailed by noifes from the long unoccupied apartmrnt of a murdered к lari ve. For fome minutes ihe was unable to move ; at length her eyes timidly glanced round her chamber, dreading yet wiihing to afcertain whether any terrific object was within it. They encountered a bell near the head of the bed, and which the houfekeeper had previ- oufly informed her communicated with the gallery where the fervants flept; to this fhe inftantiy darted, and rung İt with violence ;—« aimoft immediately flie heard a bufile over her head, and then defcending ft e p S , She flew to the iigfu, and taking it up, direaiy opened the door, Several of die M 3 male
maie and female domeftics appioached, ac¬ companied by her father. "What is the mairer, my love? (cried he), I have been called frcm iry bed by the found of pafling fteps." "Liften!" exclaimed Madeline, with a countenance of horror, and atanctns. at the chamber. The yell became, if poffible, more fa vage ¿ and the djmeftics began to crofs themfelves. Madeline looked at her father, with an inten¬ tion of afking his opinion of the noife ; but was prevented by obferving the diforder and death-like nalenefs of his countenance. " How long (demanded he) is it fince this chamber was opened?" " Two months at leaft, my Lord, (replied the houfekeeper), and then it was only opened for a few hours, of a fine funny day, merely to air it." (i Where is the key?" afkçd he. "It
" ît hangs befide the door, my Lord ;" an- fwe vl Mrs. Beatrice. " í will examine it then," cried he. " Examine it ! (repeated the houfekeeper) Jefu Maria f— Why, furely my Lord, you t ould not think of f ich a thing ; furely, iurely you, of all men in the world, could not have courr.ge to enter it?" St. Julian ftarted, and turned quick upon her , and a frown, inch as Madeline had never before feen upon it, darkened his brow-—his eyes, hk piercing eyes, were faftened on her, as ii wiiliing to difcover the innermoft recefles ofher foul, and in an agitated voice he demanded what fhe meant. " Meant, my Lord ? (faid the affrighted Beati ice) meant — why, nothing — nothing that could give your Lordfliip ouence." St. Julian looked doubtfully at her ; then turning, he took down the key, ind unlocked the chamber ; the moment he opened the m 4 door
door, thewoii^n tetn Aed from it, and fhame done, it w a«- vilibk, pi evented the men fiom iuilowing their елатрк :— -atende d by them Aid Madeline he < ntereu u, and the node diu ¿:iy с calè eh Hie í com, like Madeline's, was hung with tip* di у , i his Vvu3 now raifed, and the walls minutely examined, but no opening could be difcovered, nor any means of entrance bui by the door in thegalleiy. » с Were you ever before difturbed by any noife in this chamber ?" afked St. Julian. "No, (the Iervants replied) never before the prefent night." if 'Tis ft range !" cried he, after puufing for a minute. They then quitted the chamber, "sKch lie relocked. <( I fluill keep the key mykli, (fad he, as hc tinned fiu.n it) , it muí" undergo ?no~ ihv
thereximmation; though deitrué^ion, certain defti učtion fliould overwhelm me for doing fo, I will try to develope the myileiy." He now took the hand of Madeline, and led her ro her room , lie tried to tranoud- L/A lier, but the trembling of his frame, and diíbrďu of his looks, mocked the eftorts he made to do fo. íť You look alarmed, my love. ? " cried he» Madeline fighed, and might have faid, * c And truft me, in mine eye, fodo you." tc You have no reafon for terror, (faid he with α deep figh), your condtrl has made no enemies either in this world or the next.*'' (< I truft not , (cried Madeline), but con- fcious innocence is not always able to guard the heart againft the attacks of feat , and I own í am fliocked beyond expreflion by the noife 1 have heard." í£ f fear you are fuperflitiüus," exclaimed her fa t iien " Could
" Could you wonder if I was ? (cried ihe); What we cannot account for, wc can fcarcciy help afcribing to fupernatural caufes.** "Am I to infer, (faid St. Julian, regarding her with earneftnefs) from what you fey, that it is your opinion the groans proceeded from the fpirit of the murdered Philippe?" "With the Supreme nothing is impoffible, (faid Madeline), and I have been told that the fpirits of the injured are fome times per¬ mitted to revifi: this world, for the purpofe of obtaining retribution ; and if'tis true what the houfekeeper once hinted to me, ------" St. Julian ftarted,— «« What did fne hint ?" afked hc with eagernefs. 'Madeline paufed for a minute ; then with a filtering voice, and timidly raifing her eyes to her father's face, " She told me (faid lbe) that Lord Phi¬ iippe fell not by the hands of banditti, but—" "By whom?" demanded St. Julian, in ai¬ moft convulfive agitation, « Some'
. " Some relative," replied Madeline· " And did ihe acquaint you with the name of that relative?" " No, and perhaps, after all, it was only an idle furmiife ofher own." St. Julian left his feat, and travcrfed the apartment. Madeline viewed him with confternation * r her thoughts began to grow wild -, and fears of the moft frightful nature again aiïàiled her heart. « Oh, God ! (ihe cried to herfelf, while every nerve was (trained with agony at the idea) ihould the fufpicions that now rack my breaft be juft !— This torture.of fufpenfe is more than I can bear, (continued íhe) ; I will throw myfelf at the feet of n\y father, I v/ill diícloíè to him my fufpicions : if faife, he will pardon them, when he reflects on the combination of circumftances which exited them ι
tkem ; if true, he will not furely fhrink from repoung confidence in his chilã. f Zht rofe, but aimoft inftandy funk upon her feat, ret ofling from the dreadful idea of а child ó LÍanng to a parent her fufpicion of his having committed one of die moil hvribk vîmes whi^h human nature сап be с .[able of—fne fhuddered, fre wondered at her temerity, m ha vin j e\er thought of άοιην, h , ind, í« s ike »ondtred, the recol¬ lection of iit-i taka r s pren prs, hir gentlenefs, hib yiıîkv pit:y, rctıupibg, ь e agun began to believe, ditt v tniriking h--* had ever de¬ viated írom snteguty, ilv had done him the g: í att ft iüjUllícc. St Jľkan, wh ul· emotions prevented his noticing thoL- of MaJehnc, fo in refused his feat ι his tounttnarce had Infi H wfldnef», and a faint glow again mantled his Jieek. iC I truft, my love, (cried he) >ou will not again liften to the idle fuiaufcs of die %v wilts :
^ants : even on the flightcíl foundation they are apt to raife improbabilities and hor¬ rors, which, in fpite of reafon, make too often a dangerous impreflion on the mind, and overturn its quiet, by engendering fuperfti¬ tion ; — Heaven knows, (he proceeded) the evils of life are fufficiently great without add¬ ing to them rhofe oftlie imagination." Madeline aíľured him flie would never more encourage any converfation from the domeftics, on family affairs» " You look fatigued, (faid he) and I will now (nflng as he fpoke) káve you to re¬ pofe , retire to it, my love, without fear or trembling j bleft with conicious innocence, you can dread no evil, no angry fpirit de- mandipcz retribution:—Oh î never may your bofom lofe that peace which muft ever be¬ long to virtue!—Oh! never may reflection break your flumbers, or an offended con- fcienre prefent terrific images to your view. Farewel, my child, (tenderly embracing her) would
^would to God thy father could fink to for· getfulnefs with a mind like thine V* Heart-ftruck by the laft words of her fa¬ ther, Madeline remained many minutes ri- vetted to the fpot on w r hich he had left her, deeply ruminating on them ; then harting, as if from a deep reverie, " I muft not think, (faid flie) fince thought is fo dreadful." She felt fatigued, butit was more a men¬ tal than a bodily fatigue—that fatigue which repels, inflead of inviting reft ; befides a fecret dread clung to her foul, which rendered her unwilling to go to bed ; fhe therefore threw herfelf before a large crucifix, that was placed near it, and continued to pray for her father, for herfelf, and for repofe to the fpirit of the murdered Philippe, till day began to dawn throup-h the fliutters. With night her terror decrtafed, and undreffing herfelf, ihe then retired to bed ; but the fleep into which flie foon fell was broken by horrid vifions, and flie
íhe arofe in the morning, pale, and unre- freflicd. The fun beamed bright through the cafe¬ ments, and on the ftately trees that waved before them, unnumbered birds poured forth their matin lay, intermingled with the Ample carol of the woodman : but neither the bright beams of the fun, the melodious notes of foaring birds, nor the w ild fong of the pea¬ fant, could now, as heretofore, delight the mind of Madeline. Saddened beyond ex¬ preflion by obtrufive ideas, flie ftrove to banifli that fadnefs by banifliing thought— but, ah! how vain the effort! the "vital ípark of heavenly flame" within.us muft be extingui flied, ere we can t cafe to think.
END OF VOL, lil.
