Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Clermont: a tale
CLERMONT.
CHAP. L Far retired Among the windings of a woody vale, By folitude and deep funounding íhadcs, But more by baihful modefty conceaľd, Together thus they (hunn'd the ci uel fcüin Which viitqe funk to poverty would meet From giddy paffion and low-minded pride. Thomson. IN a retired part of the province of Dau- phiny ftood the cottage of Clermont \ its remote obfeurity was well fuited to the men¬ tal folitude of its tenant, and its neat fimpli¬ city correfponded with liis refined tafte. Fif¬ teen years he had been an inhabitant of it ; and from the elegance of his manners and the dignity of his mein, his ruftic neighbours were of opinion that he had once feen better vol. i. в " days.
days. To this impreffion, however, hc flu- dioufly avoided giving any fančtion ; nay, it ivas evident he wiihed by every means in his power, to diícourage the idea of opulence or greatnefs having ever been his portion. His chief employment confitteti in fu- perintending a little firm, from which his principal fupport appealed to be de¬ rived, and his higheft amufement and plea¬ fure in ftudying the works of nature, and cultivating the mind of his daughter; who, with an elderly female fervant whom he had hired after his arrival at the cottage, were the only human beings that ihared with him the fruits of his retirement. Madeline, but two years old at that pe¬ riod, could confequently recollect nothing previous to it ; but, from the ftriking diffe¬ rence between her father and the furround* ring ruftics, flie could not help adopting their ©pinion of him, and thinking that he had once moved
5
moved in a circle very different from that in which he was then placed. She more than once hinted this opinion, and enquired of her father the caufe of their retire¬ ment, and whether they had no relatives, no friend"» in that great world from which they were fecluded ? but flie never received any fatisfačlory anfwer. The agitation he always betrayed at thofe enquiries, made her at laft refolve to fupprefs a curiofity fo painful to his feelings. It however confirmed her belief of his having experienced fevere mis¬ fortunes ; and from this conviction, fhe re¬ doubled her attention, trufting that, if fhe could not obliterate, flie might at leaft foften their remembrance. But to do fo in reality, was, alas ! beyond her power. 'Tis true, he fometimes forced himfelf to wear the femblance of cheerfulnefs, although his heart was ever a ftranger to it ; opprefled by a forrow which the boafted efn-_ cacy of time, the folicitude of filial attention,
в л or
or the tendernefs of fympathy could not miti¬ gate ;—a forrow, which anticipated the work of time, had already faded his cheek and fur¬ rowed his brow, though yet in what might be termed the prime of man's life, not having attained his fortieth year ; and fometimes fb far overcame him, as to render him unable to bear even the fociety of his daughter, his only earthly comfort. At thofe periods he always wandered to the wildeft and moft fequeftered fpot that he could find in the neighbourhood of his refidence, 'mid .......tlioins and mire \ ....... , aH foilorn, To mufe at kil. amid the ghoftly gloom Of guves, and \\ал\у vnults r and cloillet'd cells, To walk with fyečbes thro* tlu midnight iliade, And to the f-i earning owl's acemfed fong, Attune the daaüful wot kings of Ыь heait. Though .one of his chief fources of plea¬ fure (as I have already laid) was derived from Ine culture of his daughter's mind, he was often
oíten tempted to forego this gratification by reflexting on the inutility of accomplishments to her, who, like the deiert rofe, feemed born to wafte her fweetnefs in obfeurity. The tafk, however, was too delightful to be relin- quifhed ; and he at laft rejoiced that he had perfevered in it ; for, as he carefully guarded her againft all refinements which could ren¬ der her diffatisfied with her humble ftation, he found that the expanfion of her mind, by opening new fources of amufement, en¬ creafed her happinefs : he cultivated to the higheft perfection that tafte which the Som ce divine of ever-flowing love, And his unmeafur'd goodnefs, not content With every food of life to nourifh man, Implants within his heart to make, By kind illufions of the wandVing fenfe, ail beauty to his eye, And mufic to his ear 5 with which well pleafed he fcans The goodly profpeci, and with inward funics, Tieads the gay verdure of the painted plains, iî 3 Beholds
JLhyl'i:» tb^ а?огс caiiOjH vi heJVtii, Λ'. î living lamps that ovci -ateh his. İKii With noie tîı.ii K,;ai ípJtml ur. Ne\cr did a pupil render the toils of an inftructor lefb difficult than did Madeline thofe of her father; and as flie grew up, her pcifect knowledge of the hiftortan's re¬ cord, and juft conception of the poet's beau* ty, rendered her a companion well qualified to diverfify his lonely hours. She poflefled befides an exquifite tafte for drawing and mufic, anca accompanied the foft meludy of her lute with a voice which, though not flrong, was inexpreflibly fwcet ; melodious as that which the rapt poet at the vifionary hour of twilight fometimes thinks he hears f haunting fiom the wood-crown'd h ; !' } TÎ *· i'ecpVtng dale, or tnmoft fyiv an gUdc. ' \t live'inefs of her fancy was equal to *' * ι rcngth of her underitanding, and often u al a vifionary parad ifc aiound her $ foft- nefs
nefs an 1 animation were hqipily blended m her difpofition ; and with equa] de¬ light ihe could enjoy the giicy of in¬ nocent mirth and the lonely hour of foli¬ tude : fee' mg and precept had eariy taught her pity for the woes ot others ; and with cheerfulnefi» flie could tax either convenience or comfort to iupply the claims of poverty. To her perlon Nature had not been lefs liberal than to her mind ; by her prodigality to both, it feemed indeed as if ihe had beca anxious to make amends for the deficiency of fortune. She was tall and delicately made ; nor was the fymmetry of her features inferior to that of her bodily form : but it was not to this fym¬ metry that they owed riicir moft attractive charm,—it was derived from the fafcinating fweetnefs diffuied over them. Her eyes, large and of the darkeil hazel, ever true to the varying emotions of her foul, langui ih ed beneath their long filken laflıes with all the foftnefs of fenfibility, and fparkied with в 4 all
all the fire of animation; her hiir, a neh auburn, added luxuriance to her beauty, and by a natural curl, gave an expref¬ fion of the grcatcft innocence to her face ; the påleit binili of health juft tinted her dimpled, fair, and beautifully rounded cheek ; and her mouth, adorned byimiles, appeared like the half-blown rofe when moiftened with the dews of early morn. •4P Such was Madeline Ch rmont, who, igno- jant of the great world, neither practifed its follies, fighed for its plcafures, or dreaded its vices ; her high eft wifh was gratified when ihe could ileal from the brow of her father its ufual fadnefs, and render him for a mo¬ ment forgetful of his furrows. Their houfe ftood on a little eminence, in a deep, romantic, and verdant valley, which wound to a confiderable extent be¬ tween cultivated hills, where the vine fpread her treafures to the fun, and the hufband- man often gathered a luxuriant harveftj woods
woods of variegated verdure ftretched up many of their fteep afcents, and the fummit of one of the higheft was crowned with the ruins of a once noble caftie, the refidence, according to tradition, of fome of the ancient Counts of Dauphiny, This fliattered pile, the record of departed great nefs and the pow r er of time, was carefully fhunned by the peafant after fun-fct, for the village legends were fweikd with an account of the horrid noifes, and ftill more horrid fights, heard and beheld within its dreary walls : but though feared by fuperftition, it was the favourite haunt of tafte and fenfibility ; and thither, as the lait beams of the fun glim¬ mered o'er the fcene, Clermont and Made¬ line often wandered ; they loved to explore its grafs-grown court and winding avenues, and picture to themfelves the feenes that had once paifed to all appearance within them : they alfo frequently afcended to its broken battlements, covered with wild vegetation, where the birds of night held their unmo- lefled /eign, ftart ling by their melancholy B 5 cries
cries thofe perfons whom chance or neceflity * conducted near the fpot, from thence to feait on the delicious profpeci beneath ; whilft the breeze fighed amongfl; the fui rounding tree«, {w hofe pondei ous trunks and mat tv d bi anches declared them long inhabitants of the foii) as if the genius of the.pile fliil haunted their receflcs and mourned its ď folation. The hills were completely furrounded by a chain of mountains, bleak, bai rcn, and defo¬ late, except in the lummer months, when the ihephcrd Ы thither his little flock to trop the fv\eet herbage that tiien grew amongft their inteiitices. A narrow river run through the valley, whofe calm cuirent was in many places interrupted by projections of rocks, which fervcd as rude bridges for the villagers to pafs from one fide to the other ; nume¬ rous heids enlivened its banks, along which a low bru Πι wood crept, intermingled with a few tall tices, weeping willows, and fweet-fmeliing ihrubs, which formed em¬ bowered
bowered feats for the folitary ang'er. A number of neat cottages were fcattered about the vale ; and it was delightful of a fine evening to behold their young inhabi¬ tants dancing to paftoral mufic on the little grafľy lawns before them ;— Like Kdiy tlves, Whole midnight rev elb by a foieit fide, Oi fountain, fome belaied pealanc 1ееь, Οι dicamb lu· Ices i w .ile over htad the moon Sits, aib u eli and ne ai ti to the eaith Wl ccis he? pile coi'iie, they οι/ their ninth anidante Intent, with jocund mufic, charm Ыь e.u» The cottage of Clermont was embofomed in a fmall grove, through which a bioari graify path, enclofed by a rude paling, led from the valley to the houfe ; o'er the door honeyfuckk and wild rofes, dui ing the fum* mer, formed a kind ot portico, and half ihackd its laticcd windows ; its interior was аь fim¬ ple as its exterior, and it was ornamented, aa Madeline grew up, by her fanciful drawings. Midway up the hill that rofe at the rere of his cottage, Clermont had continued his в 6 garden
garden, as the fpace which lay between it and his dwelling was too narrow to yield fuf^cient vegetables for his family, fmall as it was ; a filvery ftream defcended from this hill that gave fertility to the flowers which Madeline cultivated ; and immediately above the garden İt projected into craggy points of rock, which allured thither, by the fragrant herbs that grew about them, not only the induftrious bee, but the wild and adventu¬ rous goat ; and though the garden, its fences being readily overleaped, fometimes fuftered from having the latter in its* vicinity, Cler¬ mont could not think of driving away a neighbour, whofe appearance on the heights ... added to the romantic and pičlurefeme fcenery of the fpot. On the fouthern fide of the hill by a fmall vineyard belonging to Clermont, which he diligently cultivated. Unchequered by incident, unruffled by difcontent, the days of Madeline glided away till flie had attained her feventeenth year; at which period their calm current was inter¬ rupted. CHAP«
CHAP. II.
Oft le. me hear thy foothing voice Low vvhifp'ring duo' ihe ihade. Barbauld. Τ AT was in a fine autumnal evening that Clermont, feized with one of his ufual fits of melancholy, abruptly withdrew from the cottage, and left Madeline to amufe herielf as fancy might direct. Habit had failed of its ufual effect upon her mind ; for, on every re¬ turn of her father's dejection, ihe felt as much diftreffed as if flie had never before witnefled it. To endeavour to alleviate this diftrefs, flie now walked out and purfued her courfe along the margin of the river till ihe reached the old caftk, o'er which the laft beams of the
the fun now glimmered; its gloom rather invited than deterred her from entering İt ; paffing, therefore, through its dreary courts, ihe afcended a flight of half broken flairs that led directly to a large chamber which opened to a kind of rude balcony that ftretched along one wing of the building. This was a favourite feat of Madeline's. The landfcape feen through the intervening trees which rofe before it never fatiated her eye ; upon every view fome new ? beauty, fome new charm, if poffible more lovely than the laft, was difcovered by her. The folemn fhades furrounding her, o'er which the dufky hue of twilight was now beginning to fteal, and the profound ítillneís of the air, only interrupted by the faint warbling of retiring birds, or the yet fainter fighing of the bieezc among the trees, now and then intermingled with the hum of diftant voices, by degrees calmed the painful emo¬ tions of Madeline's mind, and flic became again, if not cheerful, at leaft compofed. * ς How
ťí How (weet, how foothing (cried fhe) is this tranquil hour to the afflicted heart ! it feems to give a refpite to its cares, as it does to thofe of labour. How delightful to gaze upon the glories by which it is at¬ tended ! to liften to the foft breeze thatfeehis * to die away amongft the waving trees, and the low carol of the peafant haftening to his cottage to enjoy the meal fweetened by con¬ tentment, and earned by induftry." Occupied by ideas fimilar to thofe which íhe liad expreíľed, Madeline was almoft ab- ftračled from the fcene which had infpired them, when her attention was fuddenly awakened by an oboe from the valley ; no¬ thing could be more congenial to her pre¬ fent feelings than its melody, and fhe lifi- , tened with exquifite delight ; her fpirits alternately rifing, alternately finking, as the founds fweikd with grandeur on the air, and tiembliiigly died away, till only their faint echo amongft the mountains could be diili nguiíhed : at hü they ceafed entirely; but,
but, as if unwilling to relinquifli the plea¬ fure they had given her, flie immediately began fingi ng the beautiful air the bad been liftening to, md with which flie was well acquainted. She however foon eeafed, ima¬ gining that flie heard a low voice beneath the balcony repeating her words. Some¬ what ftartled, flie haftily arofe, and looked over it; but no object was vifible, and all again was filetee. Her fancy, fhe was then convinced, had deceived her, and her compofure returned in conféquence of that idea ; but the night being now far advanced, ihe delayed no longer quitting the caftie. The next evening her father again left her to herfelf. Slinging her lute acrofs hei arm, with which íhe was wont to amufe her¬ felf in her moments of folitude, ihe again proceeded to the caftie, and fought her favourite feat ; but fcarcely had íhe gained it, ere the following lines, penciled on a fmooth white itone that had once formed part
part of a fupporting pillar to the door of the chamber through which flie hacì paifed, caught her eye, and filled her breaft with inexpreflible furprife. Τ il E LINES. M.d ft grafs -grow n com ts, the " ivy mantled towei/' Wheie legends fey afflicted fpirits mourn O'er the fad records of departed power,™ I reftlefs v, atch for dewy eve's return г For tiitn the Jiauntref* of ihe woodland vale Awakes the echoes of the dieary pile, With founds that o'er my tortur'd foul prevail, And ail its cares and agonies Seguile. The evening ftar, the pale moon's filver ray, I raptur'd hail, that gi vea her to my gaze t Her form, her fmile, haimonious as her lay,— The mild expreffion of her angel face. Should this weak ι ecord of ill-fated love E'er meet her eye,—ah, may one tender tear Be ihed for him, whom f Jte forbade to prove His ardent paflion or his truth fincere I Ah ! may the pity then, companion i$ his claim, *Tisall he dares to alk— 'tis uJJ he hopes to gain. The
The moment Madeline had read thofe ìim-s, flie recollected the vo.ce which íhe fancied ihe had heard фе preceding evening, and was convinced her car had not then deceived her. A ftra^ger, İh* was fure, liad vifited the ruins for to none of the inhabitants of the valley, all the rough and illiterate children of induftry, could fhe afcribe them ; neither could fhe avoid believing them addrefľed to herfelf; not from any confeious fuper; ity of charms over the reft of the village maids, but from a conviction that they never vifited the caille, on account of the fuperftitious dread they entertained of it. An idea that the perfon who wrote the lines might be loitering about the ruins, now itruck her ; and fhe inilantly determined to quit them. Scarcely had ihe done fo, when flie heard the found of a ftep in the adjoin¬ ing chamber ; flie haftily bent forward, and looking through the little arch which led to the
the balcony, íhe perceived a man gliding from the oppofite door into an obfcure corner of the room ; there was juft fufficient light with¬ in to enable her to perceive he was a ftianger ; her heart beat quick ; íhe trembled, and ihrinking backs regretted the thoughtlcfs temerity which had expo fed her to danger, by tempting her to vifit the lonely pile at fuch an hour. That it was the author of the little fon¬ net ihe beheld, Üıe could not doubt ; but the tender fen t i ments it expreíľed could not infpire her with fufficient courage to bear the idea of throwing herfelf entirely into his power, which, by attempting to leave the caftie, ihe muft do, her only paíľage being thiough its innermoft receflès ; ihe deemed it fafer therefore to continue in her prefent fituation, where there was a chance of not being obferved, and of obtaining afliftance by crying out if flie fliould find it neceflfary, eithe.' till flie was aflured the ilranger had departed, or that fome hope of protection prefented itfelf to her view. Eagerly
Eagerly flic liflened for fome found from tlie valley, that might infpire this hope, but in vain; by the fiknce which reigned over it, interrupted only by the barking of cottage dogs, as if they bayed the moon, ihe was at length convinced that care and induf¬ try had aheady retired to repofe. The late hour to which her father pro¬ longed his nocturnal rambles, and the timi¬ dity of their fervant, gave her little reafon to hope deliverance through their means \ fcarcely fuffering herfelf to breathe, ihe con¬ tinued a long time in a ftate of greater agony than flie had ever before experienced. At laft íhe heard a ftep ; but her almoft fainting fpirits were foon recalled by a con¬ viction that it was not approaching her; and in the next minute flie caught a glimpfe of a figure (the fame flie was fure ihe had feen in tbj chamber) defcending a winding path near the b.dcony. Her ftrength and courage immediately returned, and with a quicknefs that fcarcely permitted her to touch
touch the ground, flie left the caftie, and reached the valley by a different path from that which the ftranger oad taken. She had fcarcely quitted it, when a fudden ruffling among the trees behind her induced her to look back, and flie perceived him flowiy emerging from the midft of them. Thefpeed of Made¬ line was now if poflible increafed, and, faint and breathlefs, lhe gained the enclofure before her father's cottage As flie faftened the little gate, flie paufed and leaned over it, but almoft inftantiy ictreated from it to the houfe, difcovering the ilranger to be within a few jards of it. Her fatherwas not yet returned ; and the maid, bufied in preparing the fupper table, took no notice of her agitation. The idea of fecurity foon reftored Madeline's compo¬ fure ; flie then refolved not to acquaint her father with the incident that had alarmed her, kail it fliould agitate, and render him uneafy, if at any future time chance pre¬ vented her returning home as foon as he expected.
expected. She alfo determined not to vifit the caille again till flie was convinced the ilranger had forfaken it, nor even then at fo late an hour as fhe had hitherto done ; to know who he was, to have a perfect view of him, flie could not help wiihing. The next morning, immediately after breakfaft, when her father withdrew to the vineyard, Jaqueline, the ferVant, entered the room ; fhe was a faithful creature, much attached to Clermont and Madeline from the number of years flic had lived with them, and now appeared with a face full of impor¬ tance. " Lord, Mam'felie, (cried flie) I have been wanting to fpeak to you this long time; í have fomething to tell you that v ill fo furprife you } ] dare fay, if you lived to be an hundred, and wete all t K at time gueffmg, }0U would not find it out."
" Yay
« Very likely (faid Madeline, taking up her work) ; fo do you fave me the ufekfs trouble of trying to do fo." " Why this morning (began Jaqueline) before the fun was rikn, I went down to the river to get a pail of water, and there I faw the moil handfomeft young man I ever be¬ held in m ν davs." Madeline dropped her work, and faf¬ tened her c}es eagerly upon Jaquciine's face. Ci Chuck Dubois and Jofephe к Mure, though counted fo handfome, and to be fure they aie the beft looking young men in the village, (refuiiicd Jaqueline; are not to be compaied to him. So, as ΐ was laying, 1 found him ftanding by the liver koking fo eamtftiy at this cottage, as if there was fomething or iomebody in it he wanted to dikener. God blefs my foul, fays I to myfelf, if he fliould be looking at İt with any bad intenti— for jou know, Mam'felie, there
there are people wicked enough to go about the world tying to do mifchief ; fo 1 laid the pail upon the bank, and, thinks 1, I will try to difcover what he wants, or what he means ; but how to begin to fpeak lo him, î did not know ; for though I did not feel afraid, 1 felt fome how or other an awe of him : he faved me the trouble however of inventing an excufe for fpeaking to him, by aiking me whether I lived in the lioufe he had feen me come out of. So after I had anfwered him, í was juft going to beg in return he would tell me why he flood look¬ ing at it, for all the world as if he wanted to take its length and breadth and all its di¬ mensions, when Margarette Du\al, going to market with fome kids, came up to me for the price of a new hat which I had defired her to buy nie the next time fhe went there, and whilit í was untying my glove to take out my money, away he inarched, notwithftanding he faw I was going to fpeak to him when fhe came up."
" Perhaps
" Perhaps you faid fomething about him to Margarette," faid Madeline. " Nothing that could offend him, ï am fure, (cried Jaqueline) ; I only faid, when fhe afked, as I was taking out my money, whe¬ ther that handfome gentleman near me was a fvveetheart of my young lady ? * heaven knows who he is ; he may be a fweetheart of yours or mine as well as of hers, for ought I know.' I muft confefs, indeed, ihe ftared at him with all the eyes in her head, which perhaps drove him away; for I am fure my words could not : this I took care to tell her, after he was gone, was a piece of very bad manners. Before I came home (pro¬ ceeded Jaqueline), I met fome neighbours, to whom I defcribed him, in order to find out if they knew any thing about him ; but they were quite ignorant of any fuch perfon ; it is evident, therefore, that he does not lodg¿ in this valley, or he would be known to its inhabitants,"
VOL. I
С
'Tis
'Tis ftraiige, thought Madeline, that vifiting ir as he does, he ihould not bc known to any of them. " I was all in a flutter till f told you about him (faid Jaqueline) ; and ihould be glad to know whether you would have my niaf¬ ter alio told, that in cafe of any bad defiga againft the houie, he may be upon his guard." 44 1 think 1 may venture to fay there is no bad defign formed againft it (exchimed Madeline) ; confequently there is чю occa¬ fion to fpeak to him on the fubject." "Very well, Mam'klk (anfwered Jaque¬ line) ; 1 am fure you have more wifciom and difcrétion than 1 have, notwithftanding I am the oldeil; I fhall therefore do as you pkafe." Madeline refumed her work as Jaque¬ line quitted the room ; bui not with her wonted diligence did flie puiiue it ; her eyes continually
continually wandered from it to the valley, where, however, they met no object to which they had not been accuftomed. In the evening her father invited her to walk ; this invitation flic accepted with pleafure ; nor was her fatisfačtion dİminifhed on finding that he proceeded in the direction lo the caftie.
С 2
CHAP.
CHAP. III.
E.ich lonely fcene fliall thee reflore, For thee the tear be duly ihed ; Btlov'd till life can chaim no more, .......... Collins. Å HEY had nearly reached the caftk, when Clermont, recollecting fome bufinefs he had to fettle with a cottager who lived at the oppofite fide of the river, or rather brook, for it fcarcely deferved a better appellation, defired Madeline to ftop where ihe was, and, promifing to return in a few minutes, crofled over to him. A little above the fpot on which her father left her, hid from it by intervening trees,
trees, was a low rock overfliadowed by wil¬ lows, upon which Madeline loved to fit, and watch the gambols of the fummer flies upon the water, and thofe of its fpeckled inhabi¬ tants. Somewhat fatigued by her walk, fhe determined to go thither, and there wait the return of her father. As ihe pafled the caille, ihe turned her eyes towards it, but all around was awful un¬ interrupted folitude. The ilranger ihe con¬ cluded had departed : but how great was her furprife when, on advancing a few fteps further, ihe beheld him, the fame fhe was convinced of whom flie had a tranfient view the preceding evening,—the lame, ihe had no doubt, that Jaqueline had defcribed to her in the morning,—feated on the rock, re¬ touching a landfcape laid againft a book, and which, by the diftant view Madeline had of it, appeared to be one of the furrounding feenes.
с з His
His attention was fomuch engroíľed, that: the light flep of Madeline did not diiluib him ; and ihe paufed—-paufed to contem¬ plate an object who, though unknown, had iliongly mterefted her. Hc appeared of the firft order of fine forms ; and to all the graces of perfon and bloom or youth, united a countenance open, manly, and intelligent, but overcaft by a iliade of melancholy, which fccmui ro de¬ clare him acquainted with mibfoitune, and from nature and felf experience formed to iympathi/.e with e\eiy chi' l of forrow ^ his hat lay befiele him, arel the breeze had waited afide his dai к hair from his fore¬ head, and difcovered his polifhed brow r s, where, according to the words of the poet, *' fate young fimplicity ;" İn his eyes, as he fometimes railed them from the paper, was a fine expreflion, at once indicative of re¬ finement and fenfibility ; and as Madeline gazed on them, flie involuntarily faid to her¬ felf, one glance from thofe benignant e>es laft
küt night, would at once have diffipated every terror. As if rivetted to the fpot by a magic fpeli, flie ftood immoveable, till roukd by the voice of her father calling her at a diftance. She ftarted, and a> ihe turned to obey the fummons, ihe caught thofe eyes the had juft been admiring, the confeioufnefs of which perhaps occafioned the blufh that inftantiy mantled her cheeks, and an agita¬ tion that fcarcely permitted her to walk : yet was her emotion faint to that which (though flie but glanced at him) flie faw the ilranger betray when difturbed b} the voice of her father ; he looked towards her, ftart¬ ing from his ieat ; the paper he held dropped from his hand, and wildly, yet delightedly, he gazed on her. She met her father on the fpot where they had parted, and informed him, though not in a veiy articulate voice, of the motive which had made her quit it ; her agitation e 4 was
was too great to efcape his obici vation. and hc enquired it any thing had frightened her? No, faid flie, nothing. Clermont thcicfoic imputed it to the halle íhc had made to meet him. As they had walked a good wav, he mow propokd that they fliould retuin home, to which flie did not object ; but never had ihe been fo filent, fo abfent before, fince of an age to be his companion as ihe was at this time with her father. Oľ. arriving at the cottage, they iouhd fop· per already prepared, to which they imme¬ diately fat down : they had fcarcely finifhed^ however, when one of the young villagers ruihed into the room, and with a trembling voice and pale face, befought Clermont, for the fake oí heaven and his own foul, to come out and give hb afliftance to a poor gentle¬ man who n he and his brother, returning írom their daily labour to their cottage, had found lying bleed и. g and feniek fs, as they fuppoied, in coniequence ofa fid, at the foot of the lull upon which the caftk ftood. *Tu> fuicly
furely the ftranger, thought Madeline, and inftantiy her colour changed, " Do you know him ?" aiked Clermont, rifing as he fpoke. ťC No," replied the young peafant. Ne· verthclefs he and his brother had carried him to their mother's cottage, who had laid him upon her beft bed, and was then trying to bring him to himfelf. " But fadded he) except his wounds are dreit, fhe can be of little fervice to him." I have already faid, that ftudying the works of nature was а favourite amufement of Clermont, and from that ftudy and read¬ ing, he had learned the healing property of many fimples, which he carefully gathered and admimftered with fuccefs to the exter¬ nal as well as internal complaints ot his poor neighbours : to him the y oun» pea- îant had therefore come without hefitation to foiicit relief and affiftance for the wounded ftranger,
€ 5
u You
" You will go, my father ?" faid Made¬ line." ťí Go, my child!" (faid he); yes, and happy I am to think I can in any degree mitigate the fufferings of a fellow-creature." He haftily collected what things he wanted, and went out. Madeline left her fupper unfiniflied, and in a ftate of agitation, fuch as flic had never before experienced, watched in the little grove before the cottage for his return. The moment flie fav/ him approaching the gate, fhe flew to meet him. " Well, my dear fir, (cried flie) - is there any hope ?" " Hope ! (repeated Clermont), heaven forbid there was not ; the unfortunate young man, though feverely, is not dangcronfly hurt ; and I truft, and make no doubt, but that in a few days, with proper care and attention, he will be able to rife : his fenfes, which the fliock of the fall alone deprived
deprived him of, were completely reftored ere I went to him, and he was perfectly fen¬ fible of every thing í did for him, hough too much exliaufted tu e^preis his t ha ks, w hich his looks evinced h m anxious to do, but which indeed a common act of humanity like mine does not merit." Clermont pro¬ ceeded to fay that he thought the ilranger» though in fuch a fituation, one of the fineft: young men he had ever feen. Madeline blu ih ed ; and, perfectly relic v d from her uneafinefs, felt a confeious pleafure at her father's opinion coinciding with her's. The next morning, before breakfaft, Cler¬ mont went to vifit his patient > when he returned, his countenance announced pleaf¬ ing intclhgencc. '· Well, (faid hc, fearing himfelf at the breakfaft table) I believe I ihall icon grow в' о vain of my İkili, and declare myfelf a pra- fefled phyfician; as í prognoílicated, my patient is already better, and I have had fome converîation with him." с 6 Madeline
Madeline looked earneftly at her father. eť He had learned (refumcd Clermont), from the good dame of the cottage that I was not a furgeon, but merely attendee him from good.will ; in conféquence of which he Would have loaded me with thanks, had I not flopped him by declaring, that if he per- lifted in talking of obligations, I would in¬ ilantly bid him a final adieu. " After I had filenced him on that fub¬ ject, he proceeded to tell me his name was de Sevignie, and that a love of rambling, infpired by a wiih of feeing all in nature and art worthy of obfervation in his native coun¬ try, had led him to a little hamlet about a league from our valley, where enquiring, as was his cuftom whenever he halted, if there was any place in the neighbourhood worth vifiting, he had been directed by his hoit to the old caftie, as one of the fineft monu- jments of art and antiquity in this part of the country. ť í vifited it almoft immediately, (faid he) ; and from that time, which was about
about a foitnight ago, have never failed repairing to it every evening at fun-fet, at¬ tracted thither by an irrefiftible impulfe/ " I am forry (faid I), your vifits were at laft fo unfortunately terminated ; your pre¬ fent accident is, I fuppofe, to be imputed to them.—His reply was 'Yes'; he had wan¬ dered unheeding w hither he went, into a wrong path, extremely rugged, where, his foot flipping, he fell from the top to the bot¬ tom of the hill. His fpirits feemed low, continued Clermont ; fo I rallied my own to endeavour to raife them. " There is I believe (faid I) fome ípell, in that caftie which allures, or rather draws, people thither, whether they will or no ; I have a little girl who is always gadding to it, in defiance of all the ghofts, hobgoblins, and fairies, whkh, according to the account of the villagers, continually haunt it." Madeline felt her cheeks glow; and, withdrawing her eyes from her father, ihe pretended
pretended to be bufy in pouring out the coffee. " My forced gaiety was however loft upon him (fai j Clermont!; he grew agitated, fo 1 toe к my kave, promifing to call upon him again in the courfe of the day ; and, at his defire, lent one of tlie young men of the cottage to the hamlet for his feivant, whom he wiihed, in preference to a ilranger, to attend hita. As fom as you have break- fafted, my lose, I wifh you would take a loaf of white bread, which cannot be piOeiired where he ib, and a bottle of laft yeat's vintage to the cottage for the young ft ranger." No commiffion could bc more pleafing to Madeline than the prefent one. The moment ihe rofe from table, fhe tied on her hat, and patting the bread and wine into a fmail ofier baiket, proceeded to the cottage, at the door of which its miftrefis fat net¬ ting.
«Ah,
" Ah! how kind (faid íhe, rifing and taking the baiket from Madeline), is Mr. Clermont i heaven will requite him for his goodnefs ; won't you come in, Mam'felie ; 'tis a warm day, and I am fure you muit be tired by your walk ι all my foiks, old and young, are gone to "the vineyard (it was now the vintage feafon), and I am a little lonely or fo in their abfence." íť Your gueft is better ?" cried Madeline, entering as flie fpoke, and taking a chair. " Yes, Mam'felie, heaven and your father be praiíed for that ; he is a fine youth, and it would be a pity indeed if any thing ailed him long. I muil, now that 1 have fo good an oppoitunity, ihew you, Mam'felie, a little picture, which 1 think belonged to him, as my Claude found it near the fipot where he fell." So faying, ihe opened a drawer, from whence flie took-the picture, and pre- fentcd it to Madeline, who, tb* moment ihe cait her eyes upon it, recollected it to be the fame íhe had icen in the hands of the {fran¬ ger ; and this convinced her of what indeed flie .
íhe had fcarcely doubted before, that he and de Sevignie were the fame perfon. She now found it to be a highly-finiihed landfcape of the caille and furrounding fccncs, in which a fmall female figure was confpicuoufly drawn. This bore fo great a reiemblance to her own perlon, that (he had no doubt of its being defigned for her. Such an indication of attachment touched her y^ung and fimple heart more perhaps than the moft impafíioned declaration could have accompliflied. " As foon as he departs, I fhall pin this picture up (proceeded his hofteis) ; it will look fo pretty againft the wall ; but till then I fliould be afraid to do fo, left he fhould demand it." S€ I think (faid Madeline, who feared the good woman or iònie of her family might difcover the reiemblance which the figure in the drawing bore to her), you had better re¬ turn it.** *' No ?
ťC No, indeed (replied Janette), I fhall do no fuch thing ; he does not know I have it, fo the'-e can be no harm in keeping it." " Well, do-as )ou pkafe," faid Madeline, rifing to depart, and taking up her empty baiket. All the way back, her thoughts were engrofled by what ihe had feen ; and flie felt agitated at the idea of being intro¬ duced tti Sevignie, which flie fuppofed would now be the cafe as foon as he had recovered. The attentions of her father weie unre¬ mitted; and he returned from every vifit more and more pleafed with his new ac¬ quaintance, who, though too feverely hurt to be able to rife for fome days, was perfectly capable of converfing with him. *' I never (faid Clermont to his daugh¬ ter, on returning one evening), met with a mind more indebted to nature, or more improved by education, than that of de Se¬ vignie ; yet, with all his abilities and ac¬ quirements,
quíremeats, he is unobtrufive, unaíTuming, and unafiečted ; he does not ftucly for fub¬ ječb calculatcdjo difplay his talent^, as too many pofteflcd of fuch woukl orientatioufly do ;* inftead of leading, he is lather led to them ; and iiis modefty, not only from its intrinfic merit, but its novelty, greatly heightens his perfections. Such encomiums on de Sevignie were inexpreflibly pleafing to Madeline ; they feemed to give a íančtion to thr tender intc¬ reft ihe felt ior him ; and they made her, befidc:, lecha fenfation of gratified prick at being an object cf regard to fo -amiable a youth. At the end ofa week, her father told her that his patient was able to rife, and ex¬ preifed a with that flie would take fome little delicacies, which he mentioned, to the cot¬ tage for him.
Madeline
Madeline never obeyed a -wifh of her father's more readily ; tying on her ft raw hat, ihe proceeded almoft directly to the cottage with her ofier bafket upon her arm, well filled, and covered with a napkin. The cottage door lay opon, but Janette (as in general w f as ihe сак) was not there ; neither was fhe nor any other perfon in the Utt4e room it opened 'mto. Madeline, not willing to depart without feeing her, proceeded to an apartment which looked into the garden, and was divided from the one fhe had left by a long paflage, at the door of which flie tapt; it was inftantiy opened by Janette, and Ma¬ deline was entering, when the appearance of de Sevignie, who had not, flie imagined, yet left his room, feated in a wrapping gown at an open window, as if to inhale the balmy and refrefhing fweetnefs of the air, made her fuddenly ftart back. Janette, however, pre¬ vented her retreating entirely : — -' Lord, Mam'felie, don't be frightened (cried flie), 'tis only Monfieur de Sevignie you fee, who has kft his chamber this morning for the firft
firft time ; do pray come in, and wifh him joy of his iccovery ; he will be veiy glad I am fure to fee you." Ci Permit me, Madam (faid de Sevignie, Who on her fiift appearance had rifen, though with evident tremor and difficulty;, permit me, Madam, (advancing to her) at leaft to have an opportunity of thanking you for your humane attention to a ftranger» Oh, to the daughter fuffer me to expiefs what to the father 1 am forbad—my warm, my fervent knfe of the obligations which both have conferred upon гле." " You rate much too highly, fir (faid Madeline, raifing her eyes from the ground), any little attentions we had the power of paying you." ·* See, Monfieur (cried Janette, taking the baiket from Madeline's arm, and unco¬ vering it), how good Mam'felk is to you, what nice things fhe has brought you : do pray come in, Mam'felie, and take fome refreíhmem ; Monfieur, 1 dare fay, will be very glad to have you fit a bit with him." « Glad,"
<s Glad," repeated he with energy, while his eyes were faftened upon Madeline ; " that were a poor expreflion indeed for what I ihould feel if I were fo highly honoured." The words of Janette, and the looks of de Sevignie, heightened the bluflies which had already overfpread the beautiful cheeks of Madeline.—" I cannot flop another minute," faid flie, confufed, and turning to Janette as if folely to addrefs her. " Well, I am forry that you can't (replied Janette) ; but before you go, won't you tell Monfieur how happy you are at his reco¬ very." " I am very— happ" indeed (faid ihe with fome hefitation), that he is fo well.—Adieu, fir (again glancing at Sevignie, whofe eyes eloquently expreíľed his wiihes that ihe would comply with the requeft of Janette, though diffidence and timidity prevented his iecond- ing it) ; adieu, fir, I truft you will foon be perfectly recovered." She then, without waiting for him to fpeak, hurried to the outer
outer room, followed by Janette—" ï affurc you, Mam'felk (faid flic), if you had lat a little while with Monfieur, you would have liked him vaflly, he is fo gentle and good- humoured ; did you obferve what a beautiful fmile be has ?" " Yes-—no," anfwered Madeline moving tO the ¡uor. " Do you know, Mam'felk, (cried Janette, ftill following) I was obliged to reflore the little picture ; he enquired fo particularly about it, and feemed fo uneafy at the idea of lofing it, that I could not find in my heart to keep it from him." As Madeline walked back, flie regretted the confufion flie had betra} ed at the fight of de Sevignie, which flie feared he might impute to a confeioufnefs of his fentiments towards her ; and his wiih of concealing them was fo çbvious, that the idea of being fuf¬ pečt cd of knowing, them, fhocked her be¬ yond о .calure. She therefore refolved, if ever they again met, to have a better guard л ч over
over her feelings to endeavour to remove fuch a fufpicion if it really exitlcd. Her icfolution was however eafier to plan than to carry into eflcčl ; for when, o j the fecund day after her interview with him, of whicli flie informed her father, Clermont uihered him Into the parlour where íhe íat at work ; flie fuddenly rofe from her chair with an emotion that rendered hei foi fome minutes incapable of fpeaking. iC Vou and my daughter have already met (faid Cleimont to him); any introduction is therefore unneceflary. Madeline, my love (addreifing hei*), i am iure you wiil feel happy at Monfieur dc Sevignie's being able to come abroad again, and at his kind intention of devoting tins, his fu ft day of recovered health, lo our gratified-ion. " I ihall indeed, fir," iaid Madeline bow¬ ing. The eloquent eyes of dc Sevignie feemed to thank her for this afliiiance. Clermont made
made him take a feat by her; and her con¬ fufion gradually fubliding, they foon entered into co.iverfation. The lituution, fimpli- citVj and ornaments of the cot t aere were píeaíing íheraes to dc Sevignie ; the latter he paiticukuly admired, perhaps from knowing they were Madeline's performances; and Clermont listened with unfpeakabie delight to the praiies bcitowcd upon the tafte and ingenuity of his daughter, nor could he for¬ bear, with the pride fo natural to a paternal heait, joining in them, u Yet 'tis not io much from the beauty of thefc works that I derive my pleafure (faid Oet mont) as from the confi der ,tion of their being fpecimens of a tafte which will always furniih my child with agreeable employment, and prevent her from feeling that moft difa- greeable of all fenfations, wearincís of herfelf: but excufe me, my love (feeing a bluih (teal over the check of Madeline), for f¡ eaking as I have done; modeft merit 1 know always ihrinks from public praife. Monfieur de Sevignie will
will alfo î hope have the goodnefs to pardon me ; to fpcak of what we love, is a foible wc arc all, particularly a parent, liable to ; and fome years hence, when he is himfclf perhaps a parent, he will be able to make allowances for its being indulged." " You do not know my heart (íaiJ de Sevignie, with warmth), or you would not íuppoíe I could not now make thefe allow« ai.Cv-s :—cold and unfeeling indeed ihouki T coniidcr that foul which v\as not proud, which did not boaft of, fuch a treafure as you poikb." After dinner, when the heat of the fun had declined, they walked out to the gar¬ den ; and from thence afcended by an eafy path to the fummit of the hill which over¬ looked it, to enjoy the lovely profpeci and the frefh breeze that played around Co de¬ lightful after the oppreffive warmth of an autumnal day.
VOL. I.
19
ím me-
Immediately before them, they could only fee the white chimnies of the cott.-g^ rifu g amidit embowering groves ; but, on either fide, they commanded a full \iew of the valley, okr which the fiobcr colouring of clofing day wab already fpread, heightening the gloomy folemnity of its hanging woods, and giving a dee} cr tint of green to the í mouth and fl oping kaiks of the ftream which, now ekar and beautifully fcrer*' 1 , re¬ flected, as in а gkifii, thoie Hoping banks, the neat tottagcb, tlie \\a\ing wood·-, that rofe above them, and the blue firmament, yet marked by the* glories of the fot ting fun; w hilft bifide it hy its rum' nating herds, and all around was filence, as it Latore and her woiks were hulhed to rcpoie by the declin¬ ing hour. <£ How delirious ib this profpect (faid de SLO'k'rie, in a voice of ìapture) ! the eye could never be ti:ed vi it ; yet is its tranquillity even nu ie pleafing to the mind, than its beauties to the e;u." "' Tis
" 'Tis delightful indeed (cried Clermont), to a mind that has been harraffed by care," " Woul i to heaven (exclaimed de Se¬ vignie, with fervour), fate had deftined a fituation of fuch tranquillity for me !" " Not now," cried Clermont. " Yes, at this very period," replied dc Sevignie. " Supprefs fuch a wifh, my frie id (hid Germ int) ; it is unworthy of you ; it would be an ill requital to the goodnefs of Provi · dence, if you fought to bury fuch talents as it has given you (talents calculated to benefit mankind) in obfeurity ; befides, you could nut at piefeut enjoy focha fituation." " Not enjoy it 1" repeated ck Sevignie, with а degree of aftoniihmeiit. *' No (replied Cicrmont) ; at your time of life you cannot have fcen much of the world, or experienced many of its vieilli - tudes ; and without doi ;g fo, we can fel¬ dom, or rather never 1 fliould iay, un¬ derftand the real value of rural ttanquiì- lity. » г " Think
ťí Think you the failor, who always glided upon fmooth feas, would thoroughly enjoy his haven of fecurity ?—no ; 'tis the icniem- brancc of the perils he has experienced upon thofe feas, which lenders it io delightful to him : he vaunts to his friends of the dan¬ gers he has encountered with an exultation, а happinefs which thofe could never feel who alway. enjo) cd a ftate of lafety; and with that exultation and happinefs is inter¬ mingled gratitude cľ the moil fervent nature to that Almighty Being who lent his fup- ροϊ ting arm through thofe dangers; and, fliould any little crolfcs arife, ail murmurs, on their account, arc inftantiy fuj puflcd, by reflecting how infignificant they t oe, com; yred to what he has already fuik· cd. * ť Thus have I attent ted io prove, tl at to render retirement i ruly pk ifiiií_, we íliouid firft intermix i.i aclive lile, and un¬ dei ftand what we gi\e up in withdrawing fom it ; and alfo, that л knowledge of its difiicuirieo w'll iiknce that dncontent which is too apt to rile at every little trial; for he
he who has witncflcd or braved the ftorm, will never ihr ink from the biting blaft." The arguments of Clermont were too juit to bc conti overted ; at leatt de Sevignie had not the temerity to attempt doing fo : they continued to converfe till the lovely prof- pv.òl ť су had been admiring, became all оле fuimming fcene, uncertain if beheld. They then rofe to return to the houfe. De Sevignie offered his hand to Made¬ line : as flie took it, íhe felt it tremble. A rifing moon began to diflipa' e the dark- псГь as they defcended the hill, and foon o'er all lier ГИ ver mantle threw, And in her p.de dominion check'd the night. e< How lovely is this fcene (faid de Se¬ vignie, íbj ( ing at the foot of the hill); how loft, how pleafing the İh dowy lig t of the moon ! how beautifully docs it tip the waving trees with filver ; and what a folemn d 3 glory
gîory âoç$ к caft upon the mouldering battle¬ ments of yonder caftie." They entered the cottage ; fupper was prepared for them, and they fat down to it with no other light than what the moon afforded, arid by an open window, through which a foft breeze wafted delicious odours; no found could now bc heard in the valley, but the melancholy rippling of the w r ater. After fupper, ťf this is an hour (faid Cler¬ mont), which my Madeline often devotes to mufic ; the foul is never more fuited for the enjoyment of harmoney, than at fuch an hour as the prefent, when the bufy cares of day are over, and the more painful ones of recollection are foftened by the univerfal tranquillity of nature and her works : you, de Sevignie, are I am fure a performer, and you will not, 1 hope, refufe to accompany íny Madeline."
Dc
De Sevignie fpoke not, but his fmile de¬ clared his readi nefs to oblige ; Clermont put his oboe into his hands, and they proceeded to a ruftic bench, beneath the fpreading branches of a chefnut tree, near the cottage. Here they pafled a confiderable time in a moil delightful manner ; the execution of de Sevignie was in the moil mafterly ilyle, but his tafte if poflible furpaifed it, and never had his comparions been more gratified than they were by liftening to him : at Lilt they roíè to return to the cottage, and he then bade them farewell. From this day de Sevignie became almoft an inmate of the cottage; and аь Cleimont, then engroíľed by the vintag--, could not devote much time to him, Madeline was almoft his fok, and during the mornings, his only co npanion : thole mornings weie generally fpent either in reading poems to Madeline, to which the harmony of his voice imparted new charms, in watching the progrefs of her pencil, or in liftening to i> 4 the
the melody of her lute. The melancholy which opprefled him made Madeline exert all her powers to try and beguile it, but without effect ; every day feemed to add to it ; and often, affected by its foft contagion, Madeline has fwept the choids of the lute with a difordered hand, and abruptly quitted the room to wipe away the tears it occa» iioncd :—flie afcri'oed, flie wiihed to afcribe, her feelings for him to pity, but they pro^ cecded from even a tenderer impulfe than Ρ*)'· At length her altered looks and manner difcovered to her father the fecret of her heart : bitterly he then regretted the hofpi- tality which had introduced fo dangerous a gueft to her knowledge ; and wondered he had not timely forefeen the probable confe¬ quences of fuch a meafure, and avoided them. His attentions immediately flack- ened to de Sevignie ; and he fcruplcd not to hint in pretty plain terms, that his vifits at the cottage were attended with inconve¬ nience.
nience. Severely however was his generous nature wounded at being compelled to fpeak in this manner ; and as the words pafled his lips, he averted his looks from de Se¬ vignie, whofe faded cheeks were inftantiy flufhed by a pale hectic. Had Clermont feen a probability of his daughter's attach¬ ment ending happily, he would nit have acted as he now did ; but of this he beheld not the lemoteit profpect ; for though de Sc\ ignie appeared by his looks to admire her, and by his delay in the valley (now that he was iufficientlv recovei eel to leave it), to be attached to her company, not a word ex- ρ cifi ve of that adııvratıon or attachment ever efoaped him : even if he had declared a pai¬ fion, there would ftill have been abar to Ma¬ deline's hapı inebfrom her father's ignorance of ck Sevignie's real fitu tion and circum¬ ftances; both which it was obvious he wiihed to conceal, аь Cknuont had more than once introduced a converfation calculated to lead to the mention of them, from whkh, with d 5 vifible
vifible confufion, de Sevignie inilantly with¬ drew» The day after the alteration took place in Clermont*s manner, an alteration Made¬ line wept in fecret, de Sevignie abfentcd himfelf from the cottage till the clofe of evening ; he then entered the room where Clermont and Madeline fat dejectedly toge¬ ther, and informed them he was come merely for the purpofe of taking leave, having fixed on the next morning før his departure : delighted to hear this, Clermont loft all cold- nefs, and would have converfed again as uiual with him, had the ipirits of de Sevignie permitted him todo fo ; but Madeline was unable to fpeak ; penfively ihe fat in a win» dow, wiihing, yet fearing, to quit the room, left her father and de Sevignie fliould fuf¬ pečt the motive which tempted her to do fo. At length dc Sevignie rofe to depart; Maddine alfo involuntarily aroie.—" Fare¬ well ľ'
well ! fir (cried he, addreifing Clermont with a kind of folemnity in his looks) ; I cannot do juftice to the feelings that now iwell my heart ; I ihall not therefore attempt to ex¬ press them.—Once more, fir, farewell! (tak¬ ing his hand, and prefling it to his breaft) may that happinefs you merit be ever yours, —-greater I cannot wifh you : then turning to Madeline—* 4 and you, Mam'felk, who, like a miniftering angel, tried to" foothe the forrows of a ft.anger Í" ——He paufed—a tear at that inftant ftole from beneath t he half* clofed eyelidsof Madeline, and gave him emo¬ tions he could fcarcely conceal ; he tried, how¬ ever, to proceed, but in vain ; and, claiping her hand between his, he bowed upon it the adieu he could not articulate : then fnatch- ing up his hat, ruihed from the houk, fol¬ lowed by Clermont ; not indeed, from any idea of overtaking him, but merely to give Madeline an opportunity of recovering herfelf.
D 6
" He
*' He is gone then (faid fhe, finking upon a chair) ; w r e have parted to meet no more ! «—Oh, dc Sevignie 1 I now almoft regret we ever met!" Abforbed in melancholy, flic forgot the neceffity there was for trying to fupprefs her emotions before her father's return, till his ftep, as flie imagined, in the hall roufed her from her reverie, and made her precipitately ûy to another room which opened imme¬ diately upon the flairs. She had fcarcely gained her chamber, when Jaqueline entered, " Come down, Mam'felk (faid flie), Monfieur de" Sevignie is below, and wiihes to fpeak with you." tc With meî (repeated Madeline, ftarting from the feat on which flie had thrown her¬ felf); good heaven ! (in inexpreflible agita¬ tion, the agitation perhaps of hope) what can he have to fay to me ?" ** I am iure that's more than I can tell (faid Jaqueline) ; but 1 will go and inform 3 him
him you are coming." So faying, ihe def¬ cended the ftaiis, followed by Madeline as foon as ihe had wiped away her tears. De Sevignie was waiting for her at the parlour door—" 1 came back (laid he in a hefitating voice as flie entered) to return the poems which you were io obliging as to lend me, and which I forgot this evening when 1 came to take leave." The colour which had mantled the cheeks of Madeline died away, and flie took the book in filence from him. * : Permit me now (cried he) to return thofe thanks for your attentions, which, when I faw you before this evening, I had not the power of doing. Olu Madeline î (as if with irrepreflible emotion) who can wonder at my being then incapable of fpeak¬ ing."—Madeline turned from him to con¬ ceal the feelings he infpired, and walked to the window ; he followed her—" this even¬ ing (cried he) I have bade a final adieu to
to felicity ; to-morrow, to-morrow at this hour, ο. , Madeline ! and I ihall be far, far diftaut trom this fpot I— í fliall only behold this lo\ely face in idea :—tell me (he conti¬ nued, taking her han J, and looking at her with the moft touching iottnJs), when I am gone, may 1 hope fometimes to be remem¬ bered, as a friend?—to thfrjk ot Jiving in the memory of thofe I love, would be to me a foothing pkaiure, the only pleafure I can enjoy." Madeline promifed not to forget him ; 'twas α promife her heart told hei ihe would truly perform. De Sevignie ftill lingered after receiving it ;—" I muft be gone at laft (cried he) ; every moment I ftay but in- creafes my reluctance to depart. Oh, Ma¬ deline ! no words can exprefs my heavinefs of heart at thus bidding a laft adieu to-——-" He paufed—-but his e}es expreíľed what his tongue left unriniíhed. Madehne fat do \ n ; her tears fell in fpite of hei cflbits to refiram them ; de Sevignie grafped her hands in his; he
he looked at her with a countenance full of anguiih.—" 1 muft fly (faid he), or I ihall no longer have any command over myfelf/ 5 The breeze that blew in at the window had wafted afide the hair of Madeline from her forehead ; de Sevignie preffrd his lips againft it for a moment ; and, dropping on his knees, " blefs, heaven (he cried) olefs with the choiceft cf thy gifts, the lovelieit of thy works l'*—-then rifing precipitately, he once more ruflied out of the houfe. Madeline, more dejected than ever, re¬ turned to her chamber ; nor could any crfoit fhe made for the purpofe fo fir reflore her compofure as to enable her to join her father (whofe walk had been purpofely lengthened on her account) at lupper : flie excufed herfelf by pleading а head-ache. Clermont fighed, as he thought that a heart¬ ache was what fhe fliouid have laid. The departure of de Sevignie Clermont trufted would check the paflion of Madeline ; and that, hke an untoward bloffom of the fpung, 4 it
it would gradually die away-—the cc perfume arid ť e fuppliance of a moment :" how great'y therefore was he difappointed when convinced of the faliity of this idea, by the alte -ation which took place in her after the departure of de Sevignie ; the rofe forfook her cheek ; flie pined in thought, and ne¬ glected all her fo» mer avocations : with an anguiih which no Lingo ge can exprefs, he watched over her ; he dul oot hint at the obfervations he had made ; but gently and bydegiees hc ftrove to lead her back to her former purfuits, well knowing that employ¬ ment was the beft antidote againft melan¬ choly : he alfo frequently hinted, that flie fhould be particularly watchful of her peace, as nis entirely depended on it. Thefe infi- nuations at length recalled her to a fcofe of what was due to him and herfelf ; and the felt guilty of ingratitude in fo long giving way to feelings which, by injuring her tran¬ quillity , had interrupted his ; a conviction of error was followed by a determination of making every poflible atonement for it ; íhc therefore
therefore ftruggled againft defpondency, and applied herlelf more affiduoufly than ever to her wonted occupations : fuccefs crowned her exertions ; her health returned, and with it its almoft conftant attend uit— cheerful- neis ; acheeríulncís, however, which derived it- principal fuppoit from the hope of again beholding de Sevignie, and which iomerinics, lofing that fupport, funk into defpondency. The winter glided away without any event happening in the leatt interefting to her feel¬ ings or her fathei's; and without leffeningthe impreflion which de Sevignie had mack upon her heart : the ¡ccnc\> he had j articularîy admired about the cottage, flie itili wandered to; and the old caftk ftill continued her favourite haunt ; flie copied the lines, though her d ing fo was unneceflary, for they were already deeply imprefled upon her memory ; and often vifited the houfe where he had lodged, and where every tongue was eloquent in his praife.
CHAP,
CHAP. IV.
Ftîendihip, of itfelf a holy tie, Is made moie íacre í by adveifity. DíiyDÉN. vJ'NE night in the latter end of fpring, as Clermont and Madeline were preparing to retire from the pariour for the night, a loud and violent knocking at the hall door fud¬ denly ftartled them ; an apprehenfion of danger however never entered their thoughts; fome neighbour taken ill, they fuppofed, had fent for relief; and, under this idea, Cler¬ mont haftened to open the door ; but how great was his amazement on doing fo to perceive a total ilranger.
" Don't
u Don't be alarmed, fir (faid the man, who was young and appeared agitated, on perceiving him ftep back) ; I am fervant to a lady of diftinction, who is travelling from Paris to her chateau about ten leagues from lh ; s, and has met with an unfortunate acci¬ dent in the valley, her coach being there overturned, and fo much damaged, that flie cannot proceed on her journey till it has been repaired : at a lofs, in the mean time, for a place to ftay in, ihe has fent to fhe owner of this cottage, who I fuppofe, fir, (bowing) you are, to requeft he will have the goodnefs either to permit her to remain a few hours in it, or inform her where ihe can gain admittance." Clermont inilantly defired him to prefent his refpečts to his lady, and iniorm her that he was happy he could have the honour of accommodating her. The fervant bowed again, and hurried away, while Clermont put the light intojaqueline's hands, and returned to the parlour to aflift Madeline in iettiing it.
it. In a few minutes approaching fteps were heard, and a lady, fomewhat advanced m years, but of a dianified and bcmenant afpečt, entered the room. Clermont ap- pioachcd to welcome «md recei\e 1кг, but fuddenly flopt, as did the lady, and, to the inexpreflible ama/emuit oi hvLtdchne, they both gi;ed on eacu cthv* л ita all the wild- nctsot iui prife. iť Good heaven! (exclaimed the ftranger, firft breaking iiknce) do I really bf hold a friend fo valued, fo long anxioufly fought af¬ ter—do 1 really behold my ever efteemed- -." Clermont ftaited ; turned his eye upon his daughter j as quickly glanced it at the lady, and laid his hand uj on his mouth : flie feemed to underftand the fign ; fighed— * pauíed —and looked do n ; then again raifing her eyes—" i bleís the accident (cried flie), which has been the means of difcover¬ ing to me the retreat oi а friend fo va¬ lued«," "I
* ζ I cannot indeed regret it (fæd Clermont, advancing, and taking her 1 and, which he preffed to his lips and to his heart) ; I cannot regret what has again introduced me to the notice of the Countefs de Merville, —what hab co ivinced me that a being itili exifts in t ere ft ed about the unfortunite Clermont." (C Clermont ! (repeated the 1 idy, with а mournful voice) ; oh, my friend ! but there is no name, no title by which you would not be equally eftimable to me." *' Allow me (faid he, baking at his daugh¬ ter), to introduce another reel ufe to your ladyihip." She bowed ; and Clermont advancing to Madehne, who, loft in wonder, had hithcito ftood coni empia. uiJ them, took her trem¬ bling hand a .<! ívd her forward. The Coun- tets cla!] cd lei to her holom; 1 1 en fud¬ denly I e.d lei to а ehĺbnce from it, and exclaimed—" what а íeLmbkmce 1" " A latal 01 e (cried Cleimont) ; it often embitters
embitters the pleafure 'I take in gazing on her; the eyes, the voice, the fmile!" " Come, my good friend (faid the Coun¬ tefs), reflect that there is no earthly pleafure without alloy, and try to fupport the com¬ mon lot with fortitude : I believe I need not bring any proof to confimi the truth of what I l· ive faid, that the cup of joy never comes into mortal hands unmixed with bitter in¬ gredients." " No (replied Clermont), I want no proof of the truth of your words." " I hope and believe (faid fhe), that the deftiny of this dear young creature will be happier than was that of the perfon flie rek m bks." " If not (cried Clermont, raifing his eyes), grant, oh thou fu pi erne Being! that I may never live to fee it fulfilled." His own energy ftruck him ; he recollected himfelf: handed the Counteis to a chair, and briefly informed Madeline, whom he faw ai moft ílupified by fu r pri ie, how flie ihould arrange matters for the accommodation ol their guefts ;
guefts ; entreating her at the fame time, to haften whatever fupper could bc procured. She direclly left the parlour, but wasgieatly fuipnfed to find two females ftanding in the lull, jounger, but not quite fo well dreit as the Coüíucfs. She expreíľed her regret at their having continued fo long in luch a fituation, and her wonder at their not having accompanied the Countefs into the parlour : they fmiled on each other at this, and faid they were only her attendants. Madeline blufhcd a ther miftake, for ihe had fuppofed them companions of the Countefs, and con- dueled them into a fmall room adjoining the parlour, ufed by her fa t her as a ftuoy : here, ha\ ing procured lights, flie left them. She found Jaqueline ftirring up the fire, and aiked her how flie could fuffer the ftrangers to continue fo long in the hail ? " Why, Lord a mercy, Mam'felie (faid Jaqueline), how could I think of every thing? here have I been in Hich a fufs, ranlacking my brain to know what we fliould do about fipper. Lord, what an unlucky thing it was that
that Father Pierre dined here to-day; he has always fuch an appetite ι only for him fome of fhe fowl at leaft would have been left, and then 1 could have made fome rich gravy, and tolled it into a fricaflee ina moment, I am fure I am as forry as the lady herfelf can be about the accident; not that I fliould have rared a pin about it had it happened in fummer or autumn, when one would have had nothing to do but put out their hand to gather lomcthing nice ; but now nothing can he got for love or money." u 1 am furc (faid Madeline, with a look of diftitfs), I don't know what is to be done." "Well, Mam'felie, there's no ufe in fretting any mure about the matter ; I'll d refs a good diih of eggs, and w. at with them and the new cheefe, and fome of your iwectmeats, we'll be able to furniih the table pretty tole¬ rably." " We muft beftir ourfelves, my good Jaquehne, for the rooms are yet to be fettled ; my father is to have a mattrefs brought down
down to the itudy for himfclf; and you muit make up a bed here for yon rí elf, as I fhall be obliged to take your's in confé¬ quence of giving my own to the Countefs." " Holy Virgin! what a hurly burly's here, (exclaimed Jaqueline) ; Lord what ill luck we had that they ihouki fix on our cottage in preference to any other in the valley." íe Huíh, huih, (faid Madeline); coti- fider how ill-natured it is to regret giving fhelter to tbofe who were benighted and diftrefled." « Well, Mam'felle, if you'll lay the cloth, as I am io buly; I'il be alter you in a mo¬ ment with fupper.' * " Very well (replied Madeline as ih e took it up) ; and pray do not forget the íl rangers in the itudy." She then proceeded to the parlour, where flic found her father and the Countefs fitting by the fire, apparently en¬ gaged in an intercfting diicourfe, which her preience interrupted. Clermont rofe о affiít her in laying the cbth ; and the vol. i. e Countcfs
Countefs watched her every movement with looks that fpoke tlie waimcft admiration ; lie ver indeed had M tekline appealed more beautiful; furprife and agitation had height¬ ened the faint glow of her check to a bright crimfon, л hich increafed the luftre of her eyes, and rei.dered it almoft dazzling. * Vith downcaft looks and hefitating accents, flic apologfled to the Counteis for the frugal fare ihe was compelled to fet before her. Jaque¬ line foon made her appeal ance with it ; and eie fhe retired, was agam reminded of the fervants in the itudy, for whom flie received fome of Madeline's nice fweetmeats, and Clermont's beft wine. Either from complaifance to the delicate feelings of her cntcitaiheis, or from real in¬ clination, tlie Countcfs feemed to enjoy her fupper; eveiy thing indeed, though fimple, was excellent in Us kind. Her converfation now turned on general fubječb, and Made¬ line was disappointed beyond expreflion, for fhe luvd flattered hcriclf it would have re¬ curred
ctivred to former days, and ot courfe ex¬ plained to her what flie had fo long fighed to know, namely, the real origin ot her father, and thofe misfortunes which had occafioned his prefent feclufion : and her difappoint¬ ment rendered her unable, as fhe otherwife would have done, to enjoy the converfation of her new and noble emeft : which, like her eye, itili retained all the fire of youth, and indicated а fpirit at once penetrating and benignant. Clermont appeared unufually animated ; and Madeline, amidit her wonder and difap¬ pointment, bleft the chance which had pro¬ duced an incident fo pleafing to him* Soon after fupper, the Counteis complained of fa¬ tigue: Madeline immediately took the hint; and having feen that a chamber was ready for her, offered to conduct her to it ; an ofler which the Countefs inftantiy accepted ; but her attendance was not permitted ; the Countefs's women were fummoned, and е г from
from their lady's room repaired to the one allotted for them. Madeline returned to the parlour, hoping that her father would explain whatever ap¬ peared m y itérions to her, but flie wab difap¬ pointed; for he inftantiy faid tliat he muft with her good night, as he was extremely fatigued. Madeline could not help believ- ţ ing this was a pretext to a\oid entenng into converîation, and with imoluntary dejection lhe received his adieu, and retired to her little chamber. Here fhe fat a long time pondering over all that had pafled, and won¬ dering why fu' li piofound fcciccy ihould be oblerved to her : wearied at Lift with con¬ jectures, flic repaired to bed, but her mind was too much chiluibcd to Ie fc her reft as quietly as uiual. About the middle of the nkht ihe was fia! tied by а noile from below flau s ; ticmbhng flic 1 \t up 111 the bed to liften moio diftinctly; and m the next moment beai d a ioit Up at the door ot the 100m adjjinib¿ heb, m which the Counteis flept ; flie
íhe immediately ftole out of bed, and un¬ latching her door, opened juft as much of it as would permit her to obferve what was going on without being difcovered. She had not ftood here a minute, when the Coun¬ tefs's door was opened with as much caution as her own had been, and flie iaw her com¬ ing from it with a light ; and then, to her inexpreflible amazement, beheld her father Handing in thepaflage, who, taking the hand of the Countefs, led her foftly down flairs. It was fome time before Madeline could move, fo much was íhe aftoniíhed ; a num¬ ber of uneafy fenfations ruthed upon her mind ; but ftie was foo innocent to harbour any ideas prejudicial to her father and his friend : fhe concluded they had chofen this time as the beft for talking over affairs which they wiflied to conceal. What an opportu¬ nity, thought Madeline, is there now for difcovering thofe affairs :—fhe inftantiy flew to the chair on which her things were thrown, and fuatching up a wrapper, threw it over her with breathlefs impatience, and haftcned e 3 to
to the lobby;—but here (lie paufed and reflected, 14 Good heavens ! (cried flie, whilit ili e felt her checks furTufcd with the burning bhiihes of íhame) ; g^od heavens, what am î about doi jg!—-going to ileal meanly trci- fht roufly upon the privacy of my father and bajs triend !—a father, from whofe uniform tendernefs I might well fuppofe that nothing which had a tendency to promote my hap- pin-fs would be concealed ;—a father, who has fo fedulouily cautioned me againil any aition contiary to virtue; that any deviation in me is inexcufable.—Fie, fie 9 Madeline, what a wretch art thou î how unworthy of his goodnefs ! how little bene¬ fitted by his precepts!" She returned to her chamber, faftened the door, and fitting down upon the bed, burft into an agony of tears—" ! ili all be ailiamed to meet my father's eyes in the morning scried ihe), I am fure my looks will betray my guilt : well 1 am refolved I will puniih myfclf for it ; hence-
henceforward ΠΙ never exprefi» the fmalieft curiofity to be acquainted with his affairs ; and never more will I fcold Jaqueline when 1 catch her wirh lier ear to the key-hok liftening to our dife oui fe." Ske continued lamenting her conduct anei imploring heaven to forgive it, till ihe h caul the Countefr, notwithftanding the lizlitnefs of her ftep, returning to ! er clumber. Rou ied by this, ihe then firft perceived that day was dawning, and cold and exliaufted crept into bed, where ihe iay till it w a-» time for her to rife. As ioon as drett, flie went doÅn хо aflift Jaqueline in pi eparing bieAíail, and found her the cnly perfon yet up. " Why, Mam'fe'le ('aid flie, the moment flie faw Madeline), 1 ue'vve you flept but badly Lift nkfttt, forjou look very pale." " Do I," faid Madriine, with α figh. ťť Yes, indeed ; and 1 iaocy I don't look vaflly blooming my 'cif, f τ my reit was not over good I can aflure you - T i thought I e 4 heard
heard ítrange noifos laft night; do you know, Mam'felie, I don't half like thofe lb angers." " We muft give them their breakfaft how¬ ever (laid Madeline) ; fo pray, Jaqueline, let us lofe no more time in talking." 41 Biefs you (cried Jaqueline), you'll find 1 kave luft no time in getting it ready ; the i-rffce is ready for making, the things are laid, and I am juft going to the dairy for the but¬ ter and cream." Madeline turned into the parlour, and walked to the window, but uul now, as heretofore, to gaze upon the profpect with delight : her mind was funk in the heavieft dejection ; for, for the firft time, it was con¬ feious of error; and all that had before charmed, was now difregarded. Oh, Innocence î firft of bleffmgs ! how taflelefs without thee would all the pleafures of life appear to a heart of fenfibility ! as no ftate can be happy without thee, neither can
can any be truly wretched with thee ; thy fmiks can give fortitude to the weak; thy power can blunt the arrows of adver- fity : he who chenihes thee fliall, in the hour of mifery, be rewarded by thy confolations,— and bkfkd, thrice bleiľed are they who<know them. Madeline was not long in the parlour ere her father entered. After the ufual faluta- tions, he began a converfation which feemed contrived for the purpofe of knowing whe¬ ther Madeline felt any curiofity about tlie proceedings of the laft night ; he at length took her hand, and leading her to a chair, feated himfelf by her, " My dear Madeline (faid he), you were no doubt furpriièd at what you iaw laft night ; and your iiknce refpecting that fur- priie, pleaíès me more than I can exprefs, as it at once convinces me of the command you have over yourfelf, and the refpečt you have for me,"
я 5
Praife
Praife fo unckferved was more cutting fo the heart of Madeline than the fevereft reproaches could have been ; flie burft into tears ; declared her unworthinefs, her con¬ trition, and implored her father's forgi venéis. 44 Лп error (exclaimed Clermont, after the paufe of a minute, and taking the hand which he had fuddenly relinquiihed), fo in- genuoufly acknowledged, fo fincerely re¬ pented, I cannot deny my pardon to ; but, my dear Madeline, let the conviction of your weaknefs, render you more fervent than ever in imploring heaven to ftrengthen }our virtuous réfolutions : let it alfo influence you to make allowances for the frailty of others; 'tis inexcufable in any one to triumph over the indiferet ions of another, which perhaps the want of fimilar temptations alone pre¬ vented their falling into; but doubly inex¬ cufable in thofe who are confeious of having committed them."
From
" From the firft pang of remorfe, judge of the horrors which ever attend niifcondučt, and ftrlvc to avoid them by ever refilling inclinations that fide not with your duties ; to oppofe our γ aftions, is finally to conquer them ; like cowards, they are tyrannical with the weak, but timid with the brave : and no victory can be fo glorious as one ob¬ tained over them ; 'tis applauded by our reafon, fanit Lined by our confidence, and applauded by him who records the miallcil effort in the caufe of virtue." " Oh, my father f faid Madeline^, hence¬ forward 1 truft í ihall convince you I have profited by your leilbns." *' Be your error forgotten (refumed Ckr- mont), or only remembered as a caution againft any future one. And now, my child, to return to kit night ; you were no doubt aftoniíhed at the feelings mamfefted by the Countefs de Merville and me at uur unexpected meeting ; but flrong as is our mutual regard, friendíhip is the only tie be¬ tween us : how that friendlhip commenced, E 6 Or
or was interrupted, would not be more pain¬ ful to you to hear, than to me to relate. You were right in fuppofing our ftoien inter¬ view was for the purpofe of talking over affairs which we wiflied to conceal ; a wiih dictated by regard to your tranquillity ; as the Countefs knew my pail, fc was íhe now acquainted with my prefent fituation ; and in conféquence of being fo generoufly noble, humanely offered to take you under her protection." I\ iadeline ftarted, and would have fpoken, had not a motion from Clermont enjoined her to filence. ** You know not (he continued), heaven onl/knows it, the load of anxiety her offer has removed from my heart ; unnumbeicd ha\e been the fleeplcis nights, the wretched days I have pafled on your account ; looking forw ard to the hour which fliould deprive you of my protection (a tear dropped from Madeline on bib hand) ; which ihould leave you for- 4. km
lorn in a world too prone to take advantage of innocence and poverty : the afylum of a cloifter was the only one I had means of procuring you ; but to that you ever mani- fefted a repugnance, and I could not there¬ fore influence you to it ; the free-will offer¬ ing of the heart is alone acceptable to heaven : befides, I do not thoroughly ap¬ prove iuch inftitutions ; I think they are fomewhat contrary to nature ; and I can never believe that beings immured for life, can feel gratitude fo ardent, piety fo exalted to the Almighty, as thofe who, in the wide range of the world, have daily opportunities of exploring his wonders, experiencing his goodnefs, and contemplating the profufion of his gifts. The Countefs de Merville is juft the guide to whofe care 1 can confign my beloved girl with confidence and plea¬ fure ; her virtues are as fafcinating as her manners ; and though her ability to do good is great, her wiíh is ftill greater. '* With her you'll move in a fphere of life very different from your prefent one ; and
and againft the dangers fo often attending fudden exaltation I would caution you, did ï not know that flie ν ill at once cherifh you with the tendunefs ofa p^c-t, and watch you with the feduhty of a friend : ail I fliall thcri'o'c (ay is, tl at I tiuft j .u may ever contn.ue the unaifeucd child ot nature; e\cr icmeniber that modefty is the beft 01 na¬ mem of a faiule, лп \ fimplicity her chief attraction : the Countefs departs after break» fail, and you thc -л accompany tier." Madeline again ftaited; all the pleafure ihe mi^ht freni a lively fai.cy bave derived at the piofpect of fuch a change of fcene, was damped by the idea of leaving him ;— " ch, my fatler! (lhe faid, buifting into tears), how can I leave you !" " Equally affected as herfelf, and bitterly lamenting the cruel neceflity which could alone have caufed a féparation, he clafped her to his bofom,, and mingled tears with hers ; in pity to his feelings, he befoughfe her
her to moderate hers ; to confider the tran¬ quillity hc fliould enjoy from having her under fuch protection. He told her in a few months, ifit pleafed heaven, t.iey would again meet, as the Counteis then intended to return to Paris, and had promifed in her way to it to make tome ftay at his cottage. Madeline, comforted bv thofe words, wiped away her tears, and faid flic would try to compofe herielf. Clermont then took a fmall picture, plainly fet, from his pocket ; ·' I know (faid he*), your tendernefs will be gratified by this prefent; accept therefore, my dear Madeline (putting it into hei hand) the copy of what your father was when his cheek was unfaded by age or care, his íjoirit unbroken by difappointment." Madeline had never befoie feen this pičtuie, ihe received it with tranfport ; though from its being done at a very eariy period, ftie could now fcarcely trace any reiemblance in it to her father. The
The Countefs now entered the parlour with a countenance open as day, and irra¬ diated with the funihine of good-humour :— ct Weil (cried fhe to Clermont), have you told our young friend that I meati to run away with her ?" " Yes (replied he), and flie has no objec¬ tion to the meafure, but what proceeds from her reluctance at leaving me." ec If flie did not feel that reluctance, ťfaid the Countcfs) s flie would be leflened in my efteem ; but while I adni ire, it will be my itudy to remove it." ** I am convinced it will," faid Clermont 44 And I, madam, (faid Madeline), am truly fenfible of your goodnefs ; 1 feel it at my heart ; and it will be the height of my ambition to merit it : oh, what joy ihould 1 derive from it, but for quitting my father !" —A tear, in fpite of her efforts to reitrain it, trickled down her cheeíc ; but fhe haftily wiped it away, and feated herfelf at the table, to which Clermont handed Madame. The emotions of Madeline prevented her eating,
eating and flie lingered over the breakfaft things, long after her attendance was necef- fary, till the Countefs, looking at her watch, begged flie would pack up whatever ihe wanted to take along with her, as flie ex¬ pected the carriage every moment, and was anxious to begin her journey that it might be terminated at an eariy hour, the roads about the chateau being very loan fome. " Madeline immediately rofe and repaired to Jaqueline to obtain her afliftance, and inform her flie wab going.—** Alack a day, it was an unlucky hour w nich brought thofe ftrangers to our cottage ! (cried the good- natuied Jaqueline) ; here they have come to difturb our happinefs and comfort, and kave me and my poor mailer like two folitary hermits : we never more fliall have any piea- flmt mufic ! never more any midnight fe- renades, or dancing on the lawn,—no, no i Claude and Jofephe will never more come about the houfe with their flutes when you have left it ;—poor lads ! often and often have
have ï fcofľed at them for doino, fo, and faid they might as well pipe to the kids on the mountains as to you, who was a lady born, I was fure. And then, Mam'felie, if the Cbevalier de Sevignie fliould ever re-vifit the cottage, how fadly he'll be difappointed at finding you gone ; for I'll n^ver believe but what hc was deeply in iove with }0u; what elfe could have kept him in the valley fo long after he was recovered, or make him come loitering about the cottage as 1 difco- vered him one morning?" Jaqueline had now touched a chord which could not bear vibration. Madeline from being pale, turned red, and then pale again ; and, haftening up flairs, defired Jaqueline to follow her directly. Jaqueline obeyed ; and Madeline, too much agitated to do much for herfelf, gave her the things to pack up which flie wanted to take with her ; then leaning penfively againft a window 7 which commanded a view of the caftie, " I am going then, (faid flie to herfelf ) ; going, I may
may fay, into a new world, without really knowing the family to which I belong,—the mother from whom ï fprung, or one circum¬ flance about her : but why do I indulge this reflkfs curiofity ? oh, kt mc try to repre r s it, as well from the relolut' л oí lift night, as from the conviction, that cou. d the knowledge I defire add to my luppinc'r, İt ,>ou!d not be kept from me :—never, t h. refoıe, mıy my raQineft again attempt to raife the veil which prudence as wet as tendernefs, I muft believe, has caft over paft events. £t Well, Mam'felie (cried Jaqueline^, your things are now packed, but heaven knows moft unwillingly. Is there no way by which you could avoid going ?" " No, (replied Madeline), for my father wifhes me to go, happy to have me under the protection of a lady who is as good as flie is gi eat," " She may bc very good indeed (faid Jaqueline) ; but that's more than her attend¬ ants are, 1 fancy ; I don't like them at aH, they
they did fo titter at me laft night when I went to the ftudy with their fupper, though I am iure í paid my compliments to them very handfomely : Lord they think, be¬ caufe they have been in Paris, that no body but thcmfelves knows any thing of good-breeding." Madeline now defcended to the parlour ; and in a few minutesafter the coach appeared. She trembled and wept, and the fortitude of Clermont almoft forfook him ; he bleífed, he embraced her with unutterable tendernefs ; he put her hand into the Countefs's, and faid he committed to her charge his only earthly happinefs, — the only treafure he had preferved from the wieck of felicity,—- his fok friend, almoft his fole companion, for fifteen years. The Countefs, convinced that to delay would rather increafe than dmiinifh the emotions of both, haftened to the carriage, led
led by Clermont, and followed by Madeline, her attendants, and the weeping Jaque¬ line. " I fliall certainly break my heart (cried the latter as ih- walked by Madeline), and this great lady will have my death to an¬ fwer for: Lord fend fhe mayn't have any more fins upon her conícience ; they fay thofe Paris folks are fometimes very wicked.. Madeline caft her penfive eyes alternately on her father, his cottage, and the lovely profpect furrounding it : " oh, dt-ar precep¬ tor of my youth î oh, foltai y feenes of early infancy ! (íhe cried to herlelf ) how gladly would I refign all the pleafttre which, per¬ haps, awaits my entrance into another fituation, to continue the companion of oncy —the peaceful inmate of the other !" More dejected than woids can exprcíš, flic entered the coach, whofe fvvifmefs foon
foon made her lofe fight of her father; but while one glimpfe of his habitation could be feen, flie did not turn her eyes from it ; and when a winding of the val¬ ley hid it from her view, fnc again fighed, and implored the protection of heaven for its beloved owner.
CHAP.
CHAP. V.
·—■ in thofe woods I deem fome fpirits dwell, Who, fiom tlie chiding ili earn and groaning oak, S:ill hear and anfvver to my moan* douglas·
iL ПЕ foothing attentions of the Counted de Merville at length abated the grief of Madeline; ihe gradually revived and began to converfe and admire the new and beauti¬ ful feenes, through which file pafled. In the courfe of converfation flie learned that her amiable friend was a widow, and had one only child, a daughter, married about three years to a Monfieur D'Alembert, who generally rcfided in Paris; in which place the Counteis had alfo lived for that period, 5 for
for the purpoie of enjoying her daughter's company :—·" but at length, weary of the diffipation that prevails there (faid ihe), and in which ï was fometimes obliged unavoid¬ ably tojóin, I found myfelf under the necef¬ fity of giving up my daughter's fociety for a time, in order to recruit myfelf by country air and retirement." They flopped, in the meridian of the da} f , at a fmall lioufe on the borders of an exten¬ five foreft thrcug' 1 which they were to pafs, to procure iomc refrcfh ment, and reft thehorfe*. The 100111 in winch tne Countefs and Ma¬ deline dined looked iato the foi eft ; and the cool ihade which the tiees caft upon the windows, rendered it delightful after the intenie heat they had been expofed to whilft travelling. At fome diftance, proudly rifing above the trees, appeared the antique towers ofa caftk. * 6 What a gloomy refidence muft that be, maflám," laid Madeline pointing to it." " Gloomy
44 Gloomy indeed," replied the Countefs. " Ah, my ladies, (cried their hoft, who was attending them, an old grey-headed man), I ie mem ber the time (with a melan¬ choly ihakc of his head) when that caftie, notwithftandiirţ its fituation in the forefl, was neit' er iad nor gloomy, but one of the gaycfl m .niions in Fiance." ifc A id what occafioncd an alterative in it r" lai 1 Madeline, after waiting α t", iute to tiy ft the Countcfs would afic the queftion. iC Death, my Lady,—death, that pays no rep v: J to rank or riche. The Count cle Montmorenci, (continued the old ıran, ad- vancinp, a few ftcps nearer to Madeline), the loi d of that cait e, had an only fen, one of the fineft youth» pci haps that ever was icen, — ti cadmi ation of the rich, the comfort of the pooi , the pi ¡de ¿rd daihr¿ 't'hK parents; this ЬеЬло.1 ion w .s murdered a^oiit íevcíi- teen \ears ago upon the Al] s and ever fi [ice that period the Count h..s ¡'eva held up his heul. To complete hib muca, the Coun¬ teis, onwhom he doted, died in t.vo clays \ol. i. f after
after flie heard the fate of her fon ; and poor gentleman, fiom that time to the prcient, he rus led a wretched and imfcttkd life, wandering about írom one feat to another, (for he has many in France) as if he hoped change of fcene couid give him commit ;— alas ! nothing in this w t rid can do fo. He has now been two }Curs ub ent from Mont¬ morenci Caille; we therefore expect him ioon at it. While he is away, 'tis abays locked up; and from his frequent abfence«!, and the neglect lhewn to e\eiy thing when in ir, 'tis become, both within and without, quite an aitered place. The only pleafure he has experienced fince his fon's death, has been in doing what he thought would flievv jefpečt and honour to his memory : he has hada fine monument erected for him in the chapcí oí Montmorenci Caftk; and on tlie left fide of İt, at a good diftance, you may fee, my ktdv, (approaching the win 'ow, and pointing out ihe fpot to Madeline), lifing above a thick clump of trees, the top ofa 3 m onu-
monumental pillar, which he placed there to his memory." c * Yes, (faid Madeline) 1 fee it ; there ap¬ pears to me an urn upon it." *' You are right, my lady, there is an urn ornamented with a wreath of laurel, withered ere half blown. Some people fay that the Count in his youth, refumed the old man, committed actions which deferved the chaf- tifement of heaven. For my part, I fay no¬ thing; when a m in is in forrow, his faults fliouid be forgotten." " Not iflways, m) friend, (iaid the Coun¬ teis, who had hitheito fat filently liftening to the converîation) ; I agree with you, ? man fhould not bc reproached for them when in trouble; but they fliould be remem¬ bered to prove the joftice of Providence in fending that trouble, and that, fooner or later, he w ill pumih the evildoer." " Very true, very true," cried her hoft, bowing to the ground.
f г
The
The Countefs was now informed her car¬ riage was leady, and flic loit no time in re¬ entering it : it pafled within a L w yvrds of Montmoienci Caille ; and thiough the bars of the mail) iron gate which opened mto its fpacious couit, Madeline beheld thai com t ftrewed with fragments of the building, o'er which the high giafs ,\aved in îrnk luxu¬ riance. " lhe pude, the ^lon of the fa¬ mily belonging to that caftk (laid the Coun¬ tefs, bending fonvard to look at \t\ is gone for ever; dazzling was its iokndour, but rapid its decime : g, e it nefs unluppoitcd by goodnefs canne\er be durable." 44 You think then, iiT»da*4, (cried Made¬ line), that the Count really merited his affličiions." " 'Tis an unpleafant fuljcčt, my dear, (fikl the Countcfs) we will charge it ;" 'twas accoi dingl) dropped. About fun-fct they reached the chateau, which the Counted de Melville poíľeíľcd in t^ht oí her father ; it was built at α vei y diftant
diftant period, and its architecture was rude in the extreme ; for the p> ide of its poíľeíľors would not репшг the fmalieft poliíh or im¬ provement, confidering its rudenefs an ho¬ ní nable d ite of their own antiquity. Time, hov\cvei, had been lefs iparing, and marked it in many j iaces with \iiibîe ексау ; forno of the windows weie difmantled from the failure of the ftone woik, and many of its battlements had mouldered away : it ftood upon an elevated lawn, fequeftered in the bofom of an extenfive wo<xl, whofe mighty fhades appeared co-eval with itfelf: on one fiele a narrow ftream crept from a little İhı nbbv hill with 11 uggi fli murmurs thiough the biufhwood, expanding by degrees, till it formed a ipacious lake, whofe rifing banks were co\ с cd w ííh a pi ofufíon of fragrant ancf flo .veiing fhmbs ; the myitk, the laureftine, the ík vue ozici, and the weeping willow here intermingled their beauties, and fan- taftically fringed its mai gin ; while on its bofom lay а few fmall iilands of variegated verdure, the haunts of lonely and aquatic F 3 fowl*
fowl, whofe melancholy cries heightened the natural folemnity of the evening hour. Behind the chateau lay its old faihioned garckns full of fountains, labyrinths, bowers, and mutilated ftatues ; and above them, bounding the horixon, were icen the tower¬ ing Alps, thole gigantic ions of creation, to whom compared, the proudefl monuments of art aie as infignilicant as the ray of theglow- woiin to the iolar blaze. The gardens were laminated by а narrow valley, to which there v\a- a eh iccnt b) ftc{ s eut ia the fod : it lay between flupcî doib mountains, who. e iu;n- ПЫ', at a diftance, appealed tinged with blue \apour, and proudly reaching to the clouds; and in it ftood the remains of a religious houfe, built and endowe ' by an anceftor of the Counteis many years prior to the erection of the carile, and at which this period had been long uninhabited in conle- quei ce of its decay ; it itili however conţi¬ nut d to be the Coun teis's place of worlhip; hither, whenever íhe refided at the chateau, flie waj wont to retire at the clofe of day, and
and pifs an hour in prayer and folemn me¬ ditation ; and here π prieft (belonging to the community th it had once inhabited it, and for whom her fithcr had procured another habitation) offici iteci at ílatcd periods. The cha« Л was frill in ťi-brable prefix vation ; but all befi'V, except a flight of flairs that led to the dormitory a^ove, was in irrepar¬ able decay. Ihe numerous religious de¬ vices and hea\ у gothic w indows of the chapel, weic of thcmlelves almoft fufficient to have infpired a holy awe : reliques of faints and departed warriors covered great part of the walls ; and banners prciented by knrbb croi- iaders on t^eir return from the Holy Land, as g m te ful offerings to heaven foi its protec¬ ting caie, trill hung from fome of the pillars, waving, as ifin füllen dignity, o*ci the fculp- tured marble that covers 1 their remains. For religious retirement, no place could have been better adapted than the valley ; ^ts towering mountains excluded eveiy profpect that c^uld have allured the heart to wifh to ilray beyond it ; and the gloom of the F 4 hanging
hanging woods invited to meditation, which there was no founds to interrupt, except the dafhing of diftant waterfalls, and the cawing of rooks : a thick mantle of grafs covered the valley, and here the thiftle ihook its lonely head, and the mofs that crept over the but t reifes of the monailcry whittled to the wind. This builclinj communicated with the caftk by incalió of a fu b terraneous paffage, now never, ufed on account of its vicinity to the burying vaults. The vail magnitude and decaying gran¬ deur of the chateau, impicílèd Madeline with furprife and melancholy ; which were aimoit heightened to awe and veneration on catering a gloomy-vaulted hall cf immenfe ii'/.e, with fmall arched windows, and fup- poitcd by itone arches,ornamented with rude fculpturc, and hung with rufly coats of ar¬ mour ; while againft the walls the ancient implements of war were placed in curious devices of funs, moons, and ftars. At one end
end of the hall was the picture of the foun¬ der of the caftie, and at the other the-grand ftair-cafe, whofe fides were covered with hiftorical pictures reaching to the ceiling. The old domeftics of the chateau were here aflembled to welcome the return of their ladv ; and their delight at feeing her was a convincing proof, if fuch a O'ie had been wanting, of her goodnefs. She ad- dreffed them all kindly and fieverally, nor betrayed the 'eaft impatience at their tedious enquiries. She then led Madeline into a large parlour, where flic embraced and wel¬ comed her to the chateau, which ihe dented her in future to confider as her home. Conce w r as immediately brought in, and the houfe-kecper foon after followed ; presum¬ ing on her fuperiority over the reit of the fervants, flie had come in to hear and relate all that had happened fince her lady's de¬ parture ; ihe was a little woman, almofb double with age, and neat even to preciíč* neis. The Countefs, w ho efteemed her from f í hex.
e her long refidence in the family, and her fidelity, made her take a cup of coffee, and fit down. " Well, madame (faid the little creature, while her eyes twinkled with pleafure at the kindnefs of her lady), has my young lady yet given an heir to Monfieur D'Alembert ?" " No," replied the Countefs. iu Dear heart ! I am forry for that ; I had hoped by this time to have heard there was a grandfon born to my beloved lady." She then proceeded to mention her pleafure at the Countefs's having procured fuch a com¬ panion as Madeline, one who would prevent her miffing her daughter as much as flie had formerly done. The Countefs fighed at thefe words ; and a ihade of melancholy for a few minutes ob- fcured her countenance. The eyes of Ma¬ deline, meanwhile, were bufily employed examining the apartment ; many things within it excited her furprife and curiofity ; and
and fcarcely could ihe keep herfelf from aiking a number of queftions about what ihe faw. While the Countefs and Agatha were talking over family matters, ihe retired to a window which commanded a beautiful prof¬ pect of the lake, now glittering with the beams of a fet t ing fun : the fcene recalled to her mind the manner in which fhe had been fi mated the preceding evening; and the figh of involuntary regret mingled with the pleafures of recollection. With her father flie had then viewed the retiring glories of the fun from the little lawn before their cottage ;—glories which he had likened to thofe that attend the de¬ parture of the virtuous—calm, awful, and lovely : together they had enjoyed the frefh breeze which played around ; and heard the foft voices of the peafant girls chaunting the evening fervice to the Virpin, in which they joined, elevating their hearts like their eyes to that heaven whofe goodnefs they experienced. Enraptured with the fcene, they f 6 thought
thought not of returning to the houfe ; but continued to watch the moon gradually breaking through the fleecy clouds, mellow¬ ing the extenfive landfcape, and cafting long tracts of radiance aibnt the trembling waves ; while the owl, from lfis ivy-mantled bower, hailed her with notes of fadnefs, and the young cottagers came forth to dance beneath her beams. " Oh, my father f (cried Ma¬ deline to herfelf) if I did not think fuch evenings would return, hu v wi etched would be now the heart of your cnild 1" As flie leaned penfively againft the win¬ dow, flie was fuddenly roufed by lively mufic from the wood ; and immediately after, faw a troop of ruftics emerging from it, dreflbd in their holiday clothes, and adoni' d with large boquets of the gayeft fpring flowers. Thofe were the Countefs's tenants come to cek^ brate her arnval. She directly went forth to meet them, followed by Madeline, who derived unipeakabk pleafuie from iuch a fight. They all eagerly crouded round their beloved
beloved mİftrefs, each anx? "js to be firft noticed ; tome weeping for ov, and others bkffing heaven for permiti ^ r hem again to behold her face. Aii ι by thofe proofs of love and gratitude н -rt of the Countefs fweikd with ùnn and a tear rolled down her cheek : oh, delightful ! how diflerent her fenfation 1 ι thofe ex¬ perienced by the fel filli ben 4 lio neither feel nor intcreft themfelve*» it the wel¬ fare of others ; but, like the ¿hty tyrant, feated —---- ——a nid tbe giudj ho i Ol mute bai banans bendii g Ευ his nod, clofe their e)cs upon the diftrefles of man¬ kind, becaufe elevated above them ; and fay within thcmfelves, let not —————the c'am'i ous voice of v\ oe Inti ude upon mine ear I After convening fome time with the peafants, the Counteis returned to the par¬ lour ; from whence flie and Madline watched them refuming the dance, and partaking of the
refrelhments laid out for them on large tables about the lawn. The gaiety of the fcene fomewhat amufed, but could not entirely remove the ckjection of Madeline's heart ; her father, iad and folitary in Ыъ cottage, was prefent to her view : and íhe fighed almoft unknowing to herielf. The Coun¬ tefs perceived her dejection, and loved her the better for it, as ihe кпел' the amiable fource from which it pr cecded : fhe tried, however, to beguile it by her convei fation ;. and related a number of pleafant anecdotes ; defcribed the different places fhe had ken ; and gave а particular account uf Paris, its cuftoms and diverfions. Subjects fo new to Madeline could not fail to amufe and intcreft her ; and flie expreíľed her pleafure in the iivelieft man¬ ner. " Yet this charming place (faid the Coun¬ tefs, alluding to what Madeline had faid on hearing Pans defcribed), 1 fliould never vifit but
but on my daughters account. At my time of life, its gaieties begin to tire : befides, i love retirement, particularly the retirement of this chateau ; I venerate ib woods ; they were planted by my forefathers ; and if ever departed fpirits are permitted to review this world, their fpirits I think fometimes revitit them Often, at the folemn hour of twi¬ light, have I fancied their voices mingled in the gale which fighed among the trees : fuch fancies, perhaps, you'll fay are weak- neifes ; the generality of mankind would confider them fo ; but they rather ftrengthen than enervate my mind : they are more foothing to it than language can exprefs ; they calm, they refine, they almoft ехлк it •above mortality, and gradually prepare it for that hour which, in the courfe of nature, I may foon expeči . But think not, my love (continued ihe, on feeing a gloom again ftealing over the countenance of Madeline), that you arc come to live with a diimal re- clufe$ no,-—I love innocent and rational fociety,
fociety, and ihall continue to do lb, while ï have health or fpirits to enjoy it." In this manner they continued to con¬ verfe, till fupper was announced in another room. Hitherto a ftranger to any thing like luxury or fplendour, Madeline was aito- milice] on ente! ing it at the elegance and grandeur exhib'ted to her view; for the Countcfs, though of the moft don.eftic turn, fliil kept up that ftate her high rank and for¬ tune entitled her to. She gazed alternately at the table, the attendants, and the maffy plate which covered the fide-boaid ; and began to rear ihe ihould make but an auk- waid figure in a fituation fo veiy different from her foimer one. Fatigued by her journey, the Countefs foon aftci fupper propofed retiring to reft ; a propofal extremely agreeable to Madeline, whofe fpirits ftill felt agitated. The Coun¬ tcfs conducted her to her chamber, which was near her own, and at the end of a long gallery
galkry that overlooked the hall ; here they parted ; but a fervant remained, who offered to aflift Madeline in undreffing ; an offer which fhe, never accuftomed to fuch at¬ tendance, retufed ; and, feeling a reftraint in her preience, diímiífed her : yet fcarcely had ihe done fo, ere flic felt an uneafy fenfation, fomething like fear, ftealing over her mind as flie looked round her fpacious and gloomy apartment ; nor could fhe prevent he. felf from ftarting as the tapcfliy, which repre- fented a number of grotefque and frightful figures, agitated by the wind that whiftkd through the ci e vices, every now and then fvvclkd from the walls. She fat down near the door, wiihing herfelf again in her own little chamber, and attentively liftening for a paifing ftep that fhe might defire the fer¬ vant flie had di unified to be recalled ; but all was profoundly ftill, and continued fo ; and at length íhe recollected herfelf, bluflied for the weaknefs ihe had betrayed ; and, recommending herielf to the protection of heaven, retired to bed, where ihe foon forgot her
her cares and fears. She awoke in the morning with rcn ivated fpirits ; and, impa¬ tient to gr.tiiy lur curiofity by examining the contents of die chamber, inilantly rofe : the fura,ture was rich but old-faihioned ; and as flic looked over the great pr. fles and curious inlaid cabinets, flie thought indeed fhe muft 1 we not only agreat foi tune, but great vanity if fhe could ever fill them. Thus em. bjed, flie fot g it the progrefs of time, tid υ ie of ti e Count·' fs's women ap¬ peared to kno ν if íhc was read) for break¬ faft, as her lach waited. She immediately defcended to the parlour, where flie was received with the utmuft kindnefs. Breakfaft over, fhe wrote a long letter to her lather, and was then -»niufed by looking over the ci aîv au. In tlie courfe of a week fhe received a;i anfwer from her father ; and the pleafure he expreíľed at her fituation, joined to the unremitting attentions of the Countefs, entirely leftored her fpirits Every day raifed her benevolent friend itili higher in
in her eftimatton, and love and eftcem were foon united to gratitude and refpečt. The Countefs determined not to receive any vifitors, nor if poffible let her arrival at the chateau be kne wn, till ihe had reco* ered from the fatigue occafioncd by the diflipa¬ tions of Pa· is. But t.. e total retirement in which flie at prefent lived, neither tired nor depreíľed Madeline; with the Counteis it was, indeed, impofiVolc to experience any dullncfs; ihe had received and pioiital by all the advantages of a liberal education; and her almoft conftant intercourfe with the great work], contributed, as well as her knowledge of books, to render her conver¬ fation entertaining and inítručtive. But not alone by her converîation did ihe try to enliven their iuhtude ; ih e \aried it by excurfions about the domain and to the moil romantic places in its neighbouihood. She alfo divedi tied it, by fe.ing carried into execution a number of benevolent fclicmcs
felii mes for her poor tenants: flie went amongft them herfelf to fee if they lud every thing requifite for comí mì ; aad whether their childien were taught to re vert nce the power that ga\ e them babg ; lhe Io\cd to watch their labouis, a .d ciiv.our.gv induftry by rcwaid. Madwh. e, v,!o.l· a\ ь attended her in her jami Ics, 1 ct^ld w uh the moil ex¬ quifite delight t..e с'.сЛ of ) juth dimpling into Innles dt hei a; ţ i wach, and the eye of ace ahttciinc; \ it' 1 te r : while íhe feemed ci О О ' to t lead in ap, a ¡id 1 с» check, warn »Л by the plow of bf n^vo'ena?, agahı riıf|/!a}c\l а colour that njij,utha.v n\aľcd tl e bi u' te fL bloom of j outil. Ne\t to ili^fc, the n.olt delightful of the hoars lufllvl b\ the Coun- tefs »nd Madeline, weie thoie in whiJi they rambled through the \\..d wood w.« k^ of the forefl ; at that time of day when ill the ah is huih tt, five w'ik <. ¡b \uaVn\ t 1 bit, Wahfnoit ilin 1 ! fiï a'.i, fiit·, bv on k^tli.in wmg ; Oi wlii к tla 4 t e V h tj His fmall but fulfil hoin, Аз
As oft' he ilics 'miti tlie twili-ht path, Againil the pitgiim buine in hted'efo hum. A month glided on in this manner, when the Cuintefs, having recovered from her fatigue chiei m* ned to eme-ge a little from lier iolitude on account of her }Oung fn aid.
CHAP.
CHAP. Vî.
The joys of meeting pny tliu pangs of abilnce. jL bľE neareft neighbours the Countcfs had, w r ere а Madame CI attencuf and her daughter : they reiided in a garrifon town at the foot of the /rips, about tiiree leagues from the chate ш. The} were people of for¬ tune, amiable, elegant, and accompliflied ; and their hoafie u as the co .flant reib r t of all the gay and faihionable people in its vici¬ nity. To them the Countefs determined to intioduce Madeline, not only as a means of
of improving, but preparing her for the yet moni brilliant fociety of Paris. She accordingly one morning fet out with her ior this purpofe ; and, during the ride, endeavoured to re-aifure the timid Madeline, who wiflied, yet dreaded an introduction, left flie ihouki not acquit herlelf properly : the livJy converîation of her friend, and the novelty oi every thing flie faw, pretty well hoAever diffipated her fears ere íhe ι cached \)\e home ; which ft od at the fai ther end of the town, in ahn¿e com t funounded with rows ofihefi.ut trees, and wca fig an ap¬ pearance of cheeifuincfs that juitly indicated the temper of its owncis. IVe Countefs had the fatisi action of finding them at home, and was immédiat Чу ulhcied into а room, where t'.ey fat a'o..e. They both fl nv to her with open arms ; but when th ) 1кач1 how long ihe had been ictuined to the с чп- try, could not reir in k l 10 x ing her aui.dil their embraces for not Jet t 'mg them know of her arrival. She gave the real reafon as an excufe
excufe for not doing fo ; and the firft compli¬ ments being over, took the hand of Mack- line;, who, timidly ftanding behind, had not hitherto been noticed, and prefented her to them. The reception flie met with was truly flattering, and quite revived her fpirits; for foe was convinced that nothing fatirical couid lui к beneath the benevolent fmile of Madame Chatteneuf, or the delightful viva¬ ci tv of her daughter. The charms and fim- phcity of Madehne, exclufive of her being the avowed favourite 01 the Countefs, im¬ mediately inteieftcd them in her favour; and they aflured her with real fincerity, that they fliould be happy to cultivate her friend ihip. " Though I am angry (iaid Madame Chat¬ teneuf, addreflins the Coun telò when thev were feated), at your having io long con¬ cealed your return to the chateau ; yet now I can fcarcriy wonder at it, as I am fure that Mim'lelle Cleimont rendered folitude fo delightful, that in reiinquiihing it, you lather diminiih
diminuii than promote your own happinefs ; (the Countefs fmiled, and Madeline bowed) but now that we have difcovered the trea¬ fure you poífefs, be aflured, my good friend (continued flie), we ihall not fuffer you to monopolize it entirely to yourfeJf " is Do not wrong me (o much (faid the Countefs), as to fuppofe I ever harboured fo felfiih an idea ; no, be aflured I would not do fociety fo much injuftice." " I am particularly pleafed (faid Madame Chatteneuf ), that you have come to-day, as my daughter gives a little ball this evening, which, to her and her whole party, I am fure will be doubly agreeable from having your company and Mam'felie Clermont's." " How unfortunate (exclaimed the Coun¬ tefs), that we had no prefentiment of this» for Llwii wc fliould have put on ail our airs and graces." " Nature has already done that," replied Madame Chatteneuf. " Well, but feriouily (fa ; d the Coimtefs), we ihall not be able to appear in our morning vol. i. c drefílí
dreífes before company fo brilliant as I know yours always to be." " Everyone (cried Madame Chatteneuf), will be dreífed quite in a fimple itile, I can alfure you, for it is to be quite a rural affair ; we are to dance in the garden, and have a collation ¿n the banqueting-houfe; and fliould I now be deprived of the pleafure of your company and Mam'felie Clermont's, after the hope I entertained of enjoying it, I fliould derive little from the amufement." ifi Enough (faid the Countefs), we will not mortify ourfelves by refufing your invita¬ tion." The converfation then turned on general fubjeds, and Madeline became if poifible more pleafed with her new friends. After dinner they proceeded to the garden which, was large and beautiful : on a fpacious and level green, at the remote end of it, fur- rounded with trees, ftood the banqueting- houfe, a light and elegant ftručture, elevated on white marble fteps, and encompaifed by
by a baluftrading of the fame : it opened entirely in front in form ofa pavillion, fup- ported by fluted pillars, which were en¬ twined with frågant fluubs that, creeping over the roof, fell through its lat t i ce- work and formed a canopy of í 4 inwoven iliade :'* orcheftres were erected in the moil fequef¬ tered parts of tiie garden, and the walks w r ere ornamented with arches and feftoons of co¬ loured lamps. Madeline was ftruck with admiration at all ihe faw; and her friends anticipated the yet greater pleafure and fur¬ prife ihe would experience when the com¬ pany aifembled and the garden was lighted : nor were they miftaken ; fhe could then have almoft fancied herfelf fuddenly con¬ veyed to the regions of fairy-land ; the bril¬ liancy of the lights, heightened by the darknefs of the grove through which the walks they ornamented were cut ;—the foft¬ nefs of the mufic that feemed to fteal from ihe very bofom of ret irement ;—the ele¬ gance and animation of the company that were fcattered about in groupes, —altoge- Q z ther
ther formed fach a fcene as Madeline had never before feen, or even conceived -, a fcene, crowned by a profpect of the majeftic Alps, vvhofc awful cliffs appeared in many places to overhang the garden, and tinted as they were with the purple rays of evening, united lichnefs aud folemnity to gaiety and iplendour. The ladies, engaged in receiv¬ ing their guefb, could no longer pay her particular attention; and the Counted, who had a numerous acquaintance, was drawn ííom hef into a chatting j>aity with fome of her old friends, but not till İh e had feen her in a general manner introduced to the com¬ pany, wir h uhoni İh e then íuppoled fbe would intermix and amufe herfelr ; but poor Madeline wfr toodiiiidcnt tojóin any party unfohcited ; and they were all too gay and thoughtlcfs either to fol cit her or deem it ncccíľary to do ίο. Left to herfelf, lhe felt auk w ard at funding alone, and accordingly repai ied to a bench placed round the trunk of an old tree near the fpot deftined for the dancers. Some ladies and gentlemen occu¬ pied
pied the fame feat, though at a little diftance from her, and thus prevented any impro- priety in her fituation. Here flie was fuffi- ciently amu fed by attending to what was going forward ; but when flie faw the com¬ pany preparing for the dance, an universal terror feized her leaft flic fliould be aiked to join them : fearful as íhe was that ihe fhou'd not be able to acquit herfelf like than from never having mixed in any but the fimple dance of the peafant, flie took care to place herfelf as much out of the way as poffible : but while enjoying her obícurity, a party of officers fuddenly emerged from a w'nding path near her feat, and in paffing it, they could not avoid obferving her ; they flopped as if involuntarily, and their eyes were im¬ mediately faftened on her. Confuted by their ardent gaze, fhe was bending heis to the ground, when a gentleman, who lad hitherto flood lather behind them, fuddenly ftarting forward, exclaimed, " Good heaven ! do my eyes really de- G 3 ceive
ceive me, or do I behold Mademoifelle Cler¬ mont ?" The heart of Madeline vibrateci to his voice, and looking up, flie beheld de Se¬ vignie. The pleafuie, the agitation ofthat moment cannot be expreifed ;—a pleafure^ an agitation which, even in a greater degree he feemed to experience, " For once (cried he, taking her hand and prefling it between- his;, for one«* has chance been my friend !—oh, how often have J wiihed for fuch a moment as this !—but hopeleflly ï wiihed—defpairingly I fighed for it." Madeline blufhed and trembled ; íhe was not more confufed by his mannei, than by the looks of the officers, whom flie perceived fmiling fignificantly at each other : her countenance betrayed her feelings, and made de Sevignie recollect himfelf; he refigned her hand, endeavoured to reprefs his agita¬ tion,
tion, and turning to his companions, aiked them if they would join the dancers ? ** That is to fay (cried one of them with a fignifioant glance) that you wiih us to do fo." " Yes (replied de Sevignie, colouring, and half fmİling as he interpreted the glance) ; and to follow your example, if Mademoifelle Cleimont is inclined, and will honour me with her hand------" Not more unwilling from diflidence, than unable from agitation, Madeline in a faint voice, faid ihe could not dance, but begged íhe might not prevent him. * s A wiíh to promote my own felicity will prevent me (faid he in a low voice) ; for oh, how much more delightfully will my mi¬ nutes be fpent if you permit me to devot 6 them to you." The officers now moved on ; but theii yet more expreffive glances as they did fo, g 4 fo
fo fliocked Madeline, that, unable '¿υ bear the idea of being thov^ht anxious for ri tele a-tcte with de Sevignie, flie rofe ab- luptly and walked towards an avenue crowded with company; de Sevignie fol¬ lowed.—" Do yon fly me then (faid he) ? atter fo long a féparation, fo unexpected а meeting, do you lefuie me а íew minutes converfation ? ah, Madeline, you once per¬ mitted me to call myfelf your friend,— a per¬ miífion which, I fear, you have now for¬ gotten. You once promifed to remember me ;—a promife which, like too many in the world, was made 1 fear without thought, and forgotten without remorfe V\ Thofe were reproaches poor Madeline did not merit ; and the foft melancholy and confufion of her looks too plainly told him fo ; he caught her hand, and attempted to lead her back to the feat fhe had juft quitted. " I cannot go (faid Madeline, ftrugglmg to difengage her hand) ; your compa¬ nions
mons will think it fo ítrange if they fee u there." " They are too much engrofild by their amufement eithei to oblen e or think about us: and of t ли» bc allured (cued de Se¬ vignie j, you cannot be more tenacious about every thing which concerns }our cleiiaicy than I am, and evet ihall be. ' Madeline no longer oppokd him ; even if inclined to do fo, her culottons weie aimoit too violent to ha\e peimitted her; and he led her back to the bench, w beh the v found defciteJby the company they bai ktt upon it. De Sevignie now enguned pırticulaıi/ for Clermont, for whom he expreifed the waimcft eftecm and gratitude; and then to what fortunate circumflance he owed his prefent happinefs. Madeline briefly informed him a friend of her father's had taken her under lier protec¬ tion; and in turn enquired whether he re¬ fided at V------? 05 " No,
(í No, (he replied), chance merely brought him to it, and hofpitality and kind nefs de¬ tained him in it. By accident (faid he), I got acquainted with tlie oificcis quartered here foon after my arrival, and they intro¬ duced me to the inhabitants, whofe polite- nefs and attention have from day to day induced me to put off my departure. —And for once (glancing at Madeline), I have rea¬ fon to be happy at following the bent of in¬ clination. Though I never d ned to think (faid he) of again intruding on the hofpita¬ lity of Monfieur Clermo it, }et a thouiand times on the airy wmgs oi iancy i have been tranfj orted to his cottage, to the fide of his Madeline, liftening in imagination to the foft pathos of that voice, which had power to thrill through every fibre of my heart ; oh, ha T { py and delightful days when I was not indebted to ilîufion for t lie lound í .ever has the icmcmbtancc of them been abfent from my though'. s ; rompaied to them, how infipid appear thofe í now pais. Tell me, lie cor.unuev', iw'rt^ on hei lY'îhîhe moft mij dii α t*
impaffioned tendernefs), did your father, or did you ever condefcend to beftow one thought upon me after we parted ?" « 4 Yes, fometimes (faid Madeline hefita¬ tingly and blufhing), my father has talked of the unlucky accident you met with, and expreifed his hopes of your having quite recovered it," ·* A more unlucky accident indeed (faid de Sevignie, laying his hand expreflively upon his heart), than he was aware of" " I am forry for it," cried Madeline, who,. though flie underftood his meaning, wiflied to appear ignorant of it. " His fimples, for once, were unfuccefsful refumed de Sevignie) ; yet, notwithftanding their failure^ through his means only î could expect the wound completely cured." Madeline could no longer difguife her confufion j and averting her eyes to avoid his, to her infinite ftrprife and embarraif- ment, beheld the Countefs de Merville at a latie diftance attentively obferving hen с 6 covered
covered with bluflies, flie inatchcd away her hand from de Sevignie, and ftaiting from her feat, haftcned to the Countefs. " I have been fceking you every where, Madeline (faid her friend in a grave accent), and was difappointed at not finding you amongft the danceis." *' I ihould be paiticuiarly honoured (ex¬ claimed de Scvig'íie, who had followed Ma¬ deline, and conjectured this to be her pro« techéis bowing as he fpoke), if Mademoi¬ felle Clermont would permit mc to lead her to them." Madeline bowed,but refufed; ihe thought to dance with him now would bc to acknow¬ ledge a with of leeching his attentions; and delicacy mad her flirmk from any conduct which could excite fuch an idea. 4i We w ill go intoa moie frequented walk Mu-ii,'* hud the Counteis
Thae
There was fomething in her manner which made Madeline believe fhe was not quite pleafed with her ; and ihe bitterly regretted having ftaid with de Sevignie againft her better judgment. Pie feemed in fome de¬ gree to ihaie her diftrefs and confufion ; and attempted not again to addrefs the Countefs, who had merely noticed him by a flight inclination of her head. " I prcfume (cried flie to Madeline, when they had got fome jards from him), you are well acquainted with that young gen¬ tleman." 4t Yes, madam," replied Madeline. " And pray by what means ?" aiked her friend, Madeline, as well as her confufion would permit, related the accident which had in¬ troduced him to the notice of her and her father. " Is he agreeable ?" enquiied the Countefs. " Yes,
* € Yes —-very—that is, î mean rather fo" anfwered Madeline, blufhing, and bending her eyes to the ground. They now reached a large party, amongft whom was Mademiofelle Chatteneuf. She rallied Madeline tor having fo long hidden herfelf ;«—" you certainly did fo (faid ihe), ίο teaze and mortify thoie who wiihed to engage you to dance ; were you not a total Granger, í ihould fufpečt that you and fome íighing fwain had been courting the rural íhades together." The Countefs fmiled fignificantly at Ma¬ deline, who, opprefled by confcioufnefs, turned away her head. Mademoifelle Chatteneuf now introduced' a gentleman who wiflied to engage her for the enfuing dance. Madeline hefitated how to anfwer, not merely to avoid dancing, but on de Sevignie's account, to whom ihe con- ådered herfelf engaged, though ihe feared faying
faying fo bef jre the Countefs. De Sevignie, however, had followed her down the walk, and now ftood near her : he therefore, on perceiving her fituation, ftept forward, and aiferted his prior right to her hand. ** Is this the cafe, Mam'felie ?" aiked the other. She replied in the affirmative : and expreffing his regret at his late application, he retired. Thedancing foon commenced again ; and Madeline, notwithftanding her diffidence, had too much real tafte not to acquit herfelf with elegance ; the harmonious fymmetry of her form, the charms of her face, height¬ ened by the glow of modefty, and the grace and animation of every movement, excited univeifal admiration; and all who had not before feen, were anxious to learn who ûm was. When the cotillion was over, the Countefs contrived to have her feated by herfelf, and thus precluded all further con¬ verfation of an in tereit ing nature between her and de Sevignie : he itili remained» however, near his lovely partner* and by his 5 q es
eyes expreíľed his feelings : but even the little pleafure derived from a reftrained converfa¬ tion, and thofe glances, he was foon deprived of; for as the Counted rofe to repair to the banqueting- houle, a party of her friends fur- rounded her snd Madeline, and rendered all his efforts to rejoin the latur unfuccefsful. The gentleman who had been prevented by him from dancing with Madeline, now led her in triumph to the fupper-table, and feated her between the Countcfs and himfclf. Had the mind of Madeline been leis occu¬ pied by its ovvn immediate concerns than it now was, Aie would have been delighted with the fcene exhibited to her view ; the beautiful foliage that crept through the roof of the building was intermixed with lights which glittered like fo many ftars amongfl it ; and its drooping boughs were careleffly in¬ termingled with feftoons of coloured lamps that hung between the pillars, through which a grand pefpective of illuminated arches were feen terminated ïn a dark grove, from whence the fofteft mufic itole, and feemec} to
to keep time to ihe murmurs of a fountain which played directly before the banqueting- houfe. Madeline perceived fhe was attentively watched by the Countefs, and endeavoured to appear amufed ; but the fcene had no charms for her. She could not prevent her¬ felf from ftealing a glance at de Sevignie, who fat oppofite to her ; (he caught his eyes at the moment, an«p hers were inftantiy withdrawn, yet not without obferving a pen- five expreflion in his face, which feemed to fay his gaiety, like hers, was only aflumed. She felt pleafed, as if about being re¬ lieved from a difagreeable reftraint, when the company broke up ; as ihe was quit¬ ting the banqueting-houfe with the Coun¬ tefs, de Sevignie contrived to approach and enquire, in a low voice, whether flie returned to the chateau that night. She replied in the negative, having juft been informed by the Countefs it was her inten¬ tion
tion to continue in town till the next morn¬ ing. He then begged to know whether fhe would permit him to wait upon her the en« fuing day at Madame Chatteneuf 's. The emotion thofe words gave Madeline, almoft took from her the power of granting him the permiflion he requefled. The moment he had obtained it, he bade her adieu. The ladies were too much fatigued to con· limie long together after their return to the lioufe. Madeline was delighted when ihe found heríèlf alone ·, in the privacy of кет chamber ihe could uninterrupted indulge the pleafing ideas which had taken pofľefiion of lier mind ; ideas which he>* fecond meeting with de Se^ ignie had given riíè to : never before had his language been fo expreffive of love, confequently her hopes relative to him had never before been fo fanguine ; every word» every look, now declared her afcen- dancy over him, and profpečts of felicity opened to her view s which íhe had fcarcely ever .before permitted her thoughts to dwell on
on ;— profpečts which, if realized, would ele¬ vate her to the fummit of her wiihes ; and that they would, ihe now began not to doubt : the words, the looks of de Sevignie, above all the interview he had requefted, flattered her hopes, and her expectations. " Ah, how little did I think (cried fhe), when I left the chateau of the happinefs that awaited me ! how little think that, ere my return to it, I might be——.'* She paufed, flie blufhed, -—yet felt that if indeed íhe was, ere her return to it, the affianced wife of de Sevignie, íhe would be one of the happieft of her fex.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII.
Ah, then Be greatly cautious of your Aiding heart i Dare not th* infectious dgh, the pleading look, Downcaft and low, in meek íubmiífion dieft j 1 ■ ■ " ■ ■ ..... let not the fei vent tongue, » ι ■■ u ». и · - . «lih adulation fmooth, Gain on your pmpis'd will. Thomson. JL HE next morning at breakfaft, Made¬ moifelk Chatteneuf rallied Madeline about the fudden conqueit flie had made of de Sevignie. Madeline laid fhe had known him before ; and then mentioned the acci¬ dent which had introduced him to her ac¬ quaintance. «Do
" Do you know where he lives in gene¬ ral ?" afked Olivia. " No (replied Madeline) ; I neitheľknow his refidence nor family." " He has been here fome weeks (refumed Olivia), and is univcrfally noticed and liked, though no one (at lean that I can learn) knows any thing of his connections ; there can be no doubt, from his manner and ftile ot living, that they are refpečtable." The Countefs faw that Madeline was con¬ fufed, and changed the difcourfe. After converfing fome time on various fubjects, Olivia faid they might expect an early vifit that morning. " The officers are to give a concert and ball this evening, and I know fome of them intend coming here to requeft the honour of your company, Madame (addreifing the Counteis), and Mademoifelle Clermont's." " I hope they will not take that trouble (cried the Countefs), for I could not accept their invitation," " Not
α Not accept it !" repeated Mademoifelle Chatteneuf. 44 No (replied the Countefs) ; two nights of diffipation would be more than I couid bear." The fparkling eyes of Madeline, which had been turned towards her, were inilantly bent to the ground ; and the gloom of dif¬ appointment overfpread her countenance. " Suppofe then, my good friend (faid Madame Chatte t,euf, who faw, by the looks of Madeline, the wifhes of her heart, and knew her daughter would be mortified at lofing her company), that you and 1 enjoy a tete-a-tete this evening, and entruft our girls to the care of fome matron lefs foberly in¬ clined than ourfelves." ** I thank you for your obliging offer {re¬ plied the Countefs) ; but ϊ can neither let you relinquifli an amufement you have fuf¬ ficient health and fpirits to enjoy, nor give up my deteimination of returning to the chateau
chateau this day : and I am too well con¬ vinced of Madeline's regard, to think íhe will feel any other regret in accompanying me, than that which proceeds from quitting you." " Certainly, madam (faid Madeline, re¬ collecting herfelf at thefe words, and endea¬ vouring to di ffipatc all appearance of chagrin), I fhould be ungrateful if I cfrd." " Do not fuppofe, my love (cried the 5 Countefs), from bringing you home to-day, that it is my intention to make you refufe every invitation which I do not choofe to accept myfelf; no, fuch conduct would be unreafonable in the higheft degree ; on the contrary, I fhall be happy fometimes to let you mix in the diverfions of this town, with your amiable friends here, who have already requefted to lee you now and then pafs a few days with them for that purpofe." Madeline bowed, and thanked her friends for their obliging wiihes to promote her hap« pinefs. It
ît was now fettled, that in three days Madame Chatteneuf and her daughter fliould call for Madeline, They had juft arranged this matter, when a footman entered with a letter, which he prelented to Madeline; faying, " Mam'felie, the Chevalier de Se- vignie's tenant waits for an anfwer." Madeline ftarted up in univerfal trepida¬ tion : flie forgot, in the agitation of the moment, the inference that might be drawn from her marnici : ihe forgot, in íhorr, that there was any being to oblerve her. She believed that flie held a lettéi containing a full explanation of de Sevignie's fentiments; and that belief drove ever} idea ^ot con¬ nected with it from her mind. She turned to a window, and, eagerly breaking the feal, rçad as follows :— li Male Sevignie préfents his molt refpečt- ful compliments to Mad e r noi felle Clermont ; he İs extremely concerned he cannot have the honour of waiting on her this morning : 4 but
but, though prevented by very particular bufinefs from making perfonal enquiries after her health, he fliil flatters himfelf he fliall hear that flic is well, and perfectly recovered from any fatigue that might have attended the amufements of laft night." Such a letter from de Sevignie, fo cold, fo formal, inftead of the one flic expected to receive from him, gave a fliock to Madeline that almoft annihilated every pleafing hope, every pleafing expectation. She fighed,—■ flie leaned penfively againft the window ;— " 1 was miitaken then (laid flie to herfelf), in imagining de Sevignie had any thing im¬ portant to fay to me when he requefted an interview ; he only meant to have paid me what it feems is a cuftomary compli¬ ment." u The fervant waits, my dear," faid the Countefs at length, roufing her from her reverie." vol. ι. к Madeline
Madeline ftarted, and felt ready to fink with confufion, as (lie thought, for the firit time, of the remarks flie had probably excited, " If that letter requires an anfwer (cried the Countefs), you had better give one direaiy." Madeline again glanced at it ; íhe thought, or rather wiihed to think, that the laft lines expreíľed fomething hke anxiety about her; and, judging of de Sevignie by herfelf, fup¬ pofmg, like her, he would be delighted to receive even a fine from a beloved hand, fhe determined to anfwer the letterland went to a table, on which was an open writing defk, for that purpofe. « What are you going to do, Madeline ?" aiked the Countefs. " I am going to write, madam," anfivered Madeline. " Does
íť Does your letter 'require a written an- fwer ? (again aíked the Countefs, in an ac¬ cent of furprife) young ladies ihould be very careful how they w r rite to gentlemen." Madeline dropped the pen fhe had taken up. She began to think that to write to de Sevignie, without confulting the Countefs, or ihcwing her his letter, was not only a breach of refpečt to her, but of duty to her father, who had put her under the care of his friend, with a firm conviction, that flie would never follow r her own judgment without having it firft fančtioned by hers. She took up the letter, and, going to the Countefs, put it into her hand. " Will you have the good¬ nefs, Madame (faid flie) to tell me what an- fwer I ihall fend ?" " It docs not require a moment's confi¬ dération to determine that (cried the Coun¬ tefs); biefs me, chikl, could you ever imagine this letter required more than a verbal ani w er^ , tell Monfieur de SevigmVs man (continued ihe turning to the fervant), that Mammelle u 2 Clermont
Clermont is well, and thanks his mailer for his polite enquiries after her health." Madeline fat down in a flate of the moft painful confufion, from which ftie was foon, io fome degree, relieved by the entrance of the oftl· ers ; they were immediately intro¬ duced to her and the Countefs ; and then requefted *he honour of their company for the evening. The Countefs politely thanked them for their attention, but de¬ clined their invitation ; and their mortifica¬ tion at her doing fo, was evident. The con vei farion, however, foon grew lively, and was fupport eel by all but Madeline with the utmuft fpirit, " Pray (afked Mademoifelk Chatteneuf, during the paufe of a minute, addieífing one of the officers), what is become of de SvUgnie to day? I think he is generally your companion in your morning vifits and rambles." «I
tť í met him (replied the officer), not many iiiinutcb ago, and told him wh^re I was coming ; but 1 could not pie\ail on him 10 give up a folitary wi..k he w*s gom¿ to take to the mountains." " Oh, fhoccvin?,! (cr'4 Olivia) to prefer folitude to our fociety; I rnlly ihall not jeadily forgive hispan*- of gülantry." A pang of wounded prick and mortified tendernefs now touched the heart of Made¬ line. She felt equally furpr.fed and hurt to heir, that he had in reality no bufinefs to prevent his comi g to fee her ; and that he had even refufed an invitation to do fo.—« HovV ill did iuch conduct agree with the delight he had evinced the preceding even¬ ing at their unexpected meeting, with the anxiety he had expreíľed to fee her ogim. The hopes, the expectations which that delight, that anxiety, had given rife to, and which his letter had clamped, not fuppreifed, now entirely vanifhed like the fleeting plea¬ fures of a dream ; and ihe began to fear he h 3 had
had either feigned or forgotten the fenti¬ ment s he cxprefled for her. She faw r flic was obferved by the Countcfs and Olivia with an earneftnefs that fieemed to fay they wiíhcd to dévelope her feelings ; and ihe immediately forced herfelf into con¬ verfation ; but never before was one fo pain¬ ful to her; her thoughts were perpetually wandering from the fubject ; and flie rejoiced when the officers rofe to depart. The Countefs then ordered her coach ¿ and flie and Madeline were juft going to it, when M. Chalons (the gentleman who had wiihed to dance with Madeline the preced¬ ing evening) appeared ; finding the ladies on the point of departing, he regretted the late- nefs of his vifit, and paid his compliments in a manner fo pleafing to the Countefs, that flie invited him to accompany her friends whenever they paid their promifed vifit at the chateau ; an invitation which he ac¬ cepted with îapture, and a glance to Made¬ line,
line, as if he wiihed her to think the ex¬ quifite pleafure he derived from it, was o.ving to the idea of feeing her again. His glance, however, was loft upon Ma¬ deline, fo much was her mind engrofled by its own concerns ; and the moment the car¬ riage drove off, íhe forgot fuch a being exiited. The Countefs's motives for hurrying Ma¬ deline back to the chateau, is perhaps already underftood. She thought, indeed, flie fliould ill fulfill the facrcd truit repofed in her by Clermont, if ihe did not particularly enquire about the co nmencement, and try to difcover the ftrength of the attachment it was fo obvious hL· daughter entertained for dc Sevignie, that flie might be timely guarded againft indulging it, till aflured (if that was not already the cafe) l:hat flie never would have reafon to repent it : and as fhe could not (at leaft without interruption) make thofe enquiries, or give thofe cautions h 4 ihe
íhe wiihed at Madame Chatteneuf 's, íhc brought her away for the purpoie of doing fo. «« Well, Madeline 'laid the Countefs fhft breaking fiknce after they had proceeded a few} arc's), }ou were agì eeably amufed laft night." " Yes, madam," icplied Madeline. 44 And agreeably furpnfed," cried the Countefs. Madeline bluflied, faultered , and at length ani w ered in the affirmative. 4C Will you oblige me (faid the Countefs), by giving me now a more particular account of jour fiift acquaintance with Monfieur de Sevignie than you did this morning ?" Madeline wiflied to gratify her friend ; and flie thought flie coüd do fo without betraying the feelings of her heai t ; but this was a miftaken idea. As flic defcribed her iii ft
firft introduction to de Sevignie, and the feenes fhe had pafled with him, flie involun¬ tarily revealed her fentiments : but while flie difcovered the tendernefs of herhsart, ihe fo fully proved its fimplicity and integrity, that flie was rather i ai fed than leffened in the efteem of the Countefs. When fhe had concluded, ч — 4< Your na-rativc, my dear (faid her friend), con¬ vinces me more than ever of the inno¬ cence and fenfibility of }our difpofition; and woe be to the man who fliould ever feek to beguile one, or pam the other! — That a being exifts who could be capable of hurting cither, perhaps you doubt ; but, alas, 1 am forry to fay, too many are to be found who would little fcrupie doing fo ! 'Tis unpleafant to hold up objects ofa difa- greeable natuie to the view of youth ; yet 'tis neceifaiy todo ίο, in oider to inftruct it whom to ihun. They who have made a perilous voyage, would be inexcufable if they did not caution thoie they iaw about η 5 under-
undertaking the fame, of the dangers which lay in their way, that, by being timely appriicd, they might endeavour to fliun or at leaft acquire ikili to ovei come them. i£ I, my dear Madeline, have made this perilous voyage, and againft its dangers I wiih to warn you : to none is the young, the lovely, the inexperienced female io par¬ ticularly expofed as to thofe which proceed from a fex, ordained by heaven for her pro¬ tectors, but of whom too many feem to forget, or rather disregard their oiiginai deftination. Yes, my love, there are beings who make it their ftudy, fometimes their boaft, to eninire the unfufpicious, and en¬ tail fliame and forrow upon her who would never pei haps have known either, but for a too fatal confidence in their honour. Others there are of a nature fcarcely lefs hateful to virtue or injurious to fociety, who from a mere impulfe of vanity, feek to gain the affections, which are no fooner won than dif regarded; while they triumph aloud ovei the
the credulity and weaknefs that afforded them fuch a conqueit. 44 That you have never met, never may meet, with fuch characters I believe and truft : but liable as we all are to be miitaken, too much caution cannot be obferved in receiving attentions which have a chance of touching the heart. In íhort, my difcouife has only been (as I make no doubt you al¬ ready gueis) to lead to the iubječt of the Che¬ valier de Sevignie ; his ej es declare love and admiration, and his language I dare iay accoids with their glances: but oh, my dear Madeline, fortify yourfelf againft fuch fedučlive eloquence, except convinced his intentions are ferious ; if they are, believe me they will be fpeedily divulged ; if not, if his fituation prevents their being fo, he will quickly ceaie to be particular, except deftitute of honour and fenfibility; for the man who poffeifes theie, though he may, from the impetuofity of paflion, be unhap¬ pily led into expreflîons of admiration, will never perfevere iu a line of conduct that may 11 ó inq ir
infpire tendernefs which cannot properly be returned." " You: precepts, your advice, my dear madam (faid Madeline), I will treafure up as I would the means of felicity: oh, how Gratefully do I feel your kind folicitude about me." By this time they had reached the cha¬ teau, and its gloom and ftillnefs formed a melancholy contrail to the gaiety and fplen¬ dour of the preceding evening, and encreafed the dejection of Madeline'* fpirits ; а dejec¬ tion partly owing to her converfati ίι with the Countefs. She was ihockcd to hear of ihe depravity of mankind ; and ífruddered leaft fhe ihould find de Sevignie one of the worthlefs characters the Countefs had def- cribed to her. *' Yer, no (ihe cried to her¬ felf, trjing to dtipel the hoi ror fuch an idea gave rife to), 'tis impoflible ; vice could never lurk beneath an .appearance of ilieh integrity and candour.
She
She was unable ίο converfe as ufual with the Countcfs ; and her friend was too deli¬ cate to notice her dejection, any otherwife than by an encreafed attention ; an atten¬ tion which at laft had the defiled effect. Madeline no fooner perceived the efforts made to amufe her, than ihe felt aihamed of the weakneis which had rendered fuch efforts neceífary, and nilhed herfpints ; ihe tried to cheer, to tranquillize them, bv reflecting that, in a few days in all probabilitv foe would again behold de Sevignie ; and that, as flic had been taught a criterion whereby to judge of him, her fui penie relative to him muft foon be terminateci. So foothing was this idea, that almoft as foon as con¬ ceived, it diffipated her melancholy ; and fhe was again able to converfe and enjoy the converfation of the Counteis. She wrote to her father an account of her meeting with ck Sevignie ; but fbe could not bring herielf to tell him the agitation that meeting o-cu* iioncd. The Countcfs alfo informed hi w^ 1-, and the obfervations fbe had made ; but charged
charged him not to gi\c way to uneafy fen- iati his in coniequence oi them ; afluring him that the would watch ovei Madeline аь íhe would ha\c do ле o\ er her own daughter it flie ha 1 Ixcn in afunilar fituation : and alfo t »at, from Madeline's cliipolition, ihe was con¬ vinced íhe could cali y be n^ade to give up the obj. et of her affect юп., if once aflured by pi udente and cx| ei ience gieater than her own ^bit iu к moie tried), that he was un- wouhj oí them.
CHAP.
CHAP. VOL
HL cheeks where love with beauty glu\v\l, A ite i uy paie оЧгс iit ; So tb'cs the lıcfiı loie in its pi İme В- Foi e clic noithein bbil. Malle ï . jŕ\T the appointed time, Madame Chat- ieneuf and her daughter came to the cha¬ teau ; nor did M, Chalons forget his invita¬ tion ι but he was a much more welcome viii- tant to the Countcfs than to Madeline, as his préfence reftrained her converfation with Olivia, from whom ih с imagined, if he was not by, flie fhould hear fomething of de Sevignie. They walked about the lawr before
before dinner ; and while he flopped to make fome oblervations on a diftant prof¬ pect oi the Alps to the elder ladies, ihe and Oiivia rambled on. 44 Well, my dear ("aid the latter when thev had got to a fuificient diftance n'et to bc overheard), our ball the other evening was delightful ; there was only one perfon that appealed dejected at it; and who that per¬ ion was, and why dejected, I dai e fay }Ou can gue is." " Imponible (faid Madeline, while a rofiy blufh at the fame moment declared her confeioufnefb of the object." *' Poor de See ignie (refumed Olivia), ex¬ pected to have met you ; and, in conféquence offris difappointment, neither danced, talked, or did any thing like himieif the whole evening." It wab this expectation then perhaps, thought. Madeline, which prevented his coming the other morning. Ihe idea was too
too pleafing to be rejected ; and every fha- dovv of uticafinefb vanilh:d from her min 1, Dinner was fen cd at an earlier lumr than uiual; and foon after they had taken coffee, the Counteis bade them adieu, t,.e road be¬ tween the tovwi and the chateau being ex¬ tremely lonelome. She tcndcily embraced Mukliiic at part¬ ing; and faid, as ihe gave up one of her higheft fources of pleafure in refigning her company, flie could not wonder if ihe foon. recalled her. " Remember (cried Madame Chatteneuf), whenever you defire her return, you muft come for her younelf; for, of our own accord, we cannot relinqutth her fociety." Pleafed with the idea of foon beholding de Sevignie, and ftill more pleated at bring able to account in any kinci of fatisfactory mannei for his conduct, Madeline was un¬ ufually animated, and chatted yyith aimoit as
as much vivacity as the little voluble Olivia, who, on reaching home, propofed a walk up¬ on the ramparts of the town, the fafhiorable promenade of the place. Thither they all accordingly repaired, except Madame Chat¬ teneuf, who felt fomewhat fatigued. The fun was already fet, and all was foft, ferene and lovely : ber^ath the ramparts lay a delicious plain, fcattered over with clumps of thick and fpreading trees, a few neat cot¬ tages, and gtoups of cattle now r repofing İn fweet tranquillity. The river, that flowed in beautiful meanders through the plain, had already aflumed the fable hue of evening, and thus heightened the brilliancy of the ftars itteflected. The majeftic Alp» bounded the profpeci, their feet hid in gloomy flia- dows, and their fummits juft beginning to bc touched by the beams of a rifing moon, which, as it afcended higher in the horizon, partly diffipated thofe fliadows, and revealed in fome degree, the romantic recefles they had concealed,
The
The company w r ere juit beginning to leave the rampai ts ; but the finenefs of the night pi evented Olivia and her companions írom following their example, and they were foon the only party on them. As they proceeded, admiring the fublime and beau¬ tiful profpeci: they beheld, which touched their hearts with a kind of penfive pleafure, they nearly overtook a gentleman who walked before them, with downcait looks and folded arms, as if in deep and melan¬ choly meditation : his air, his figure, had a itrong refemblance to de Sevignie's ; and Madeline was aimoit convinced it was him ; but ihe feared laying fo, left ihe ihouki be¬ tray the agitation the idea had excited. Olivia, however, free from all fuch emotion, inilantly declared it was him ; and, quick¬ ening her pace, found ihe was not miitaken. He itarted at the found of her voice, and betrayed the greateil confufion while at¬ tempting, vainly attempting, to return her raillery ; he caught a glîmpfe of Madeline» who had hitherto itood rather behind her friend i
friend : again he ftarted ; and, leaving unfí- niíhed wh.at he was fiv ing to Olivia, he took the trembling hand of Madeline with one equally tremuloub, exclaiming, " This is indeed an unexpected pleafure." The foft beam which ftole from her eye at that mo¬ ment, convinced M. Chalón.», who watched her with the moft critical attention, that the fate of her heart va"» aheady deckled ; and he rejoiced at having made the difcovery ere his own affections were more entangled, refolving from that period to pay her no other attentions than what common polite- nefs derranded, that the world might have no reafon to rank him in the lift of unfortu¬ nate lovers. De Sevignie appeared no longer dejected ; his eyes fparkied with their #ontea üre; and he was able to anfvver the raillery of Made¬ moifelle Chatteneuf with Jiis accuftomed fpirit. He accepted her invitation to fup¬ per ; and never had minutes been fo de¬ lightful to Madeline as thofe ihe pafled at İt 2
it. In his locks, as well as words, there was a tendernefs, whenever he addrefľed her, which convinced her of his fincerity. " The tongue (faid ihe to herfelf), might be taught the language of deceit, but the eyes could never be inftručted in it ; they have ever been famed for telling truth." The next morning after breakfaft, flie and Olivia walked out for the purpofe of feeing fome of the town, and purchafing fome things which flie wanted to wear at a large party to which fhe was to be taken in the evening, and which the Countefs ha I amply given her the means of procuring. They had not proceeded far ere they met de Sevignie. " Well you are a good creature (faid Oiivia), for Lprefume you are coming to pay your devoirs at our lioufe, as I meet you in the high road to it," He made no reply; and flie continued, "youftiailnot however be difappointed of the pleafure of our com¬ pany
рапу ; we are going to take a ramble, and will permit you to beourefcort," ** Your permiflion honours me tàid he) ; but 1 am unfortunately prevented by very particular bufinefs from availing myfelf of it." " Go, go ; you are a fliocking creature I declare (cried Oliva) ; this bufinefs ib the fame with that which prevented } r our wait¬ ing: on Mademoifelle Clermont the other morning according to your promife." His letter had been fhewn, and the rcaion of it explained to Olivia and her mother. De Sevignie coloured highly, and looked confuted. " You fpeak fometimes from fuppofition I fancy," faid he to Olivia. ** Not now 1 can aflure (replied flie) ; I know very well that what you have juft faid to me, is a mere pretext as well as what you wrote to Mam'felie Clermont the other morning." " Well, allowing that you are right (cried he), what can you infer from my trying to avoid
avoid her company and yours ? but that I am fenfible of the danger I run in being with either ° s and that, unhke your military heroes, I rather fly from it than brave it." " You fhould always have that apprehen- fion of danger about you then f faid Olivia), and not afk a lady's permiflion to wait upon her, and then fend a frivolous excufe." " We are not always collected (cried he), and the reflection of the morning often de- ftroys the réfolution of the night." He then bowed and walked away. The folemn accent in which he had deli¬ vered the laft words fliocked Madeline as much as the alteration in his looks and man¬ ner had already done ; he was pale and lan¬ guid ; and his eyes, inftead of anxioufly fieek- ing, affiduoufly avoided her ; while a cool fa- lutation wâ* the only notice he took of her. " De Sevignie is really one of the moft altered beings within thofe few days I ever knew (faid Olivia, as they purfued their way) ;
way) ; his conduct is really quite incompré¬ henfible : was he an unfortunate lover; one might be able to account for it j but of that (continued flie, looking archly at Madeline), there is little danger." The pale cheeks of Madeline were in~ ftantly crimfoned over ; and the diftrefs and confufion ihe betrayed, precluded all farther raillery from Olivia. In pity to her companion, who flie iaw fcane.y able to iland, íhe hailcnul their re¬ turn home ; and, hoping toiitude would enable her to reciuit hei ij it its, under the pretext of dici Гм^, propo fed retiring to their refpe&he chambers; a propoial which, as flie imagined, was eagerly embraced. The moment Madeline was alone, the tears, which pride hid fuppreflèd in the pie- fence of Olivia, burft forth : but while fhe wept the alteration in the conduct of de Sevignie, her heart fecretly applauded it 5 as
as a convincing proof of hb hjrour and fen¬ fibility. " Either his reafon or his fituation does not faiičtion his attachment to me (faid flie), and he thus delicately, thus feelingly tries to fupprefs mine by remitting his at¬ tentions. " Never does he now addrefs me with ten- dernefs, but when we accidentaly meet, as if thrown off his guard at thofe moments by furprife : for whenever a meeting might be expected, he fhuns it with anxiety ; and if it does take place, treats me with the coldcft indifference. Oh, let me ((lie continued), aid his efforts ; let me endeavour to expel from my heart an attachment which, it is evident, can only end in unhappinels. Nor is itili} own peace alone 1 fhall confider by doing fo; tiorbe peace of my father, dearer to me than life, is alfo concerned. I promifed to my bene¬ volent friend to refift the indulgence of feelings which had a tendency to embitter my tran¬ quillity, and I will not wilfully vblate that promue ;—no, ye dear and revered preceptors of my youth 1 ye who, like benignant fpirits, vol. 1. 1 have
have watched over your Madeline, flie will not make fo ill a return to your care as to yield herfelf unrefiflinglya victim to forrow—■ if flic cannot attain, fhe will at leaft try to be dcfeiving of the felicity )ou wifh her !" She fighed heavily as flic fpoke; certain that that felicity never now couid be hers; and that hei cftb.ts to conquer her attach¬ ment would be vain ; when, at the very mo¬ ment flic wiflied to make them, the object of it was raifed higher than ever in her efti- mation. She thought not of dreflingtill Mademoi felle Chatteneuf tapped at her door to know if flie was ready : ihe opened it with much confufion; and, apologifing for her tardi- nefs, hurried on her с loties, and was foon able to attend her to dinner. The entertainment to which they went in the e\ ening, was pretty much in the ftik of that given by Madame Chatteneuf : all the officers
officers and moft of the faihionable people ¿a town weie aíľembled ; but de Sevignie was not to be feen ; his abfence did not iurprife, but it pained Madeline; ihe was fure ere fiie went, that he would not be prefent, from a fear of meeting her; and ihe fighed to think a fad neceflity exiited for his wiihing to avoid Ler. She would not have danced, but trom a fear of appearing particular if flie refufed. Her paitner was a ilranger ; for though M. Chalons was prefent, he did not, in conformity to his réfolu¬ tion, attempt to engage her; he fought, indeed, to avoid as much as poili- ble the fafcination of her looks, which had already made too Лсср^ and, he feared, too lafting an impreflion on his heart. The next morning ihe went with her friends in their coach to pay vihts, and take a furvey of the town ; and the charms df their converîation, joined to the novelty 12 of
of every thing flie faw, infenfibly beguiled her fadnefs. A íelečt party aflembled at dinner ; de Sevignie was invited, but fent an excufe ; the firft, Olivia faid, they Ivád ever received from him, though they had frequently afked him, as he was not only a favourite of hers, but of her mother.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX.
The fprightly vigour of my youth is fled ; Lonely and fick, on death is ali my thought 1 Oh ! fpare, Peifephone, this guiltlefs head j Love, too much love, is all thy frppliant's fault I JL HE fadnefs which marked the brow of Madeline could not efcape the notice of Madame Chatteneuf and her daughter ; but they were both too delicate to mention it, yet left no effort untried todiflipate it. She had expreifed a wiih of vifiting the Alps : and, in hopes of amufing her, Madame Chatteneuf made her and her daughter take an excurfion thither the evening following the 13 day
day whkh has been already defcribed, to the cottage of Olivia's nurfc. They (qî oui in a chaife drawn by mules, leaving Madame Chatteneuf engaged at cards with a feledt party in the banqueting houfe ; and, after travelling about a league, reached the cottage : its fituation was ro¬ mantically beautiful; it ftood a little above the foot of a lofty mountain, which was unmounted by others equally tremen« dous, and overlooked a deep hollow, feat tered over with a profufion of wild flowers, darkened by majeftic pines, and wafhed by а clear rivulet, which proceeded írom a mountain torrent at fome diftance : on a little grafľy feat before the cottage, ί1ι& nur fe íat working, one of her daughters was milking the goats that browfed around it, and another was feen rambling about the neighbouring heights, gathering the herbs which grew upon them.
\
The
The romantic fituation of the cottage, the fimple appearance of its inhabitants, and their yet more fimple occupations altogether formed a paftoral leene inexpreflibly pleafing to Madeline ; to whofe mind it recalled the feenes ihe had been fo long accuftomed to ; and ihe gazed on it with emotions of tendernefs, fuch as fhe might have felt on feeing features in a ftranger which, by fome ftriking refemblance, luddenly brought to view thofe ofa beloved friend. The nurfe threw afide her work, and her daughters forfook their employments, the moment Olivia defcended from the chaife, round whom they gathered with the molt rapturous delight. She returned their ca¬ reffes with affection: and enquired moft kindly after the nurfe's hulband and fon. " A few days ago (replied the good wo¬ man), they went higher up the A'ps, as ufual, to keep flocks for the rich herd'men during the lummer months. Waiter (ihe conti- 1 4 nued),
iiucd), \.i' ic , niv dtar )Oung lady, is my feafon cr hap^inels, for then I have all my fanvh, atfemLlai al out me, and we enjoy together the earnings of mduiiry." Olivia now led Madeline into the houfe, the ii:U nor ncatnefs of which perfectly corre - fponded with that of its exterior; and from thence into the gaïden, a wild and romantic fpot,wLLh, with a Inull vineyard, itretched midway up a ileep aí cent, broken into ava* riety of grotefque hollows. os^-.-.^e^-we—eMofs-liiťd, land over head» By floweiing umbia^e iliaded, where the be« Strayed diliscenr, and with th* extracted balm Of fragrant woodbine fill'd his little thigh. Oh how noble, how fublime did the prof- pečt appear which Madeline now viewed ! fhefclt itruck with aitoni ihment and vene¬ ration as (hG cait her eyes towards the furn- mits of the congregated mountains piled before her ¿ and her heart was more exalted than
than ever towards the author of fuch glo¬ rious, fuch ftupendous works, ■ " .m ......... .'I he Parent of good, Almighty ........ Her fancy pictured the excjuifite pleafure which would be derived from exploring their fequeftered folitudes ; or, on the wings of the morning, penetrating to their innermoft receflb. With mingled curiofity and en- thufiafm, her mind foothed and delighted, íhe wandered about, till followed by the nurfe, entreating her to fit down and par¬ take with Mam'felie Olivia of the fruit and cream ihe had brought out for them. She complied with the entreaties of the good woman, and feated herfelf by her friend in one of the little hollows already mentioned, which was impregnated with the moil delicious fragrance from the herbs that grew aboĽt it. The dun fhades of twilight were now be¬ ginning to ileal o'er the profpect, and 15 touched
touched it with a fombre colouring, which rendered its beauty more interefting, and its folemnity more awful : the gloom, how¬ ever, was ftill a little cheered by a yellow track of radiance which the fun, as it re¬ vealed its finking orb between two parted cfifb above, caft. along the projection of the hills ; but by degrees this radiance faded away, ai id then the damp and dreary fha- do.vs, foat had been gathering below, began to afeen tl ; and, as 4f warned of their ap¬ pro ich, the diftant tinkling of f h сер bells was immediately heai d from the heights, intermingled with the mftic melody of ihep- he*ds*'pipes. Delighted with thoie paftoral i ou nds, the enthufiafm of Madeline's foul icvivcd ; and л itli the eye of fancy íhe be- heti the grand, the wonderful, the luxuriant fpotb from whence they defcended. She faw the fimple herdfmaa penning his flock for the night ; while hif dt g, the faithful part¬ ner 01 hib toil, as if endued with more than common inftind, watched befide, that none fliould flivggk from tiie fold. She heard 4 with
with the ear of fancy the neighbouring fliep- herds enquiring how each had fared through¬ out the day ; and beheld fome haftening to their romantically fituated cottages ; while others laid them down beneath the ihelter of embowering pines ; the laft beams or the fun glimmering o'er all, as if loth to quit fuch feenes of innocence and beauty. It was now indeed a time particularly adapted for fuch fancies as ihe indulged ; a time when ill The fragrant hours, and Elves Who flept in floweis the day, And many a nymph who wreaths her biows with fedge, And iheds the frefh Vmg dew j and lovelier ftill, The penfive pleafures fweet, Prepare the (liadowy car e f eve. A tender melancholy began to ileal over the mind of Madeline ; nor was Olivia's en¬ tirely free from it : 'twas a melancholy İn unifon with the fcene, and which tafte and fenfibility are fo apt to feel and to indulge ; 16 us
ag the landfcape, that charmed by day, gra» dually fades upon the fight, and, to the mo¬ ralizing mind, préfents an emblem of the tranfitory pleafures of life. Silence had re¬ turned many minutes ere Olivia or Made¬ line thought of ftirring ; they were at length rifing for the purpoie of departing, when they were again rivetted to their feat by the foft breathings of an oboe, which feemed to come from fome cliff above them at no great diftance. The air was fimple, tender, and pathetic ; and played in a itile, which evinced exquifite tafte and feeling in the performer. • s How foft, how fweet, how melodious (c.icd Mademoifelle Chatteneuf, during the paule ofa minute, for till then fhe and Ma¬ deline had bee; 1 wrapt in attention too pro¬ found to permit them either to fpeak or move], what pathos^ what mafterly execu¬ tion : but, hark! the echoes revive the ftrains which we imagined had utterly died aw a) ; they fecm ccleftial ftrains, and almoft tempt
tempt one to believe the tales of the poets, and afcribe them to the genii of thefe moun¬ tains. '* « c Lord a mercy, my dear young lady (faid the nurfe, who only caught the laft fentence), what a conceit ! from a genius indeed ; no, they come from a poor young gentleman, who frequently rambles about the heights, playing iuch mournful ditties as often and often makes me and my girls weep ; and we think, to be fure, he has been crofled in love, and that nothing eife could make him fo melancholy, and fo fond of being alone, and fitting for hours together in the deepeft foli¬ tude by himfelf; and a pity it is he fliould have met with any thing to trouble him, he is fo gentle and fo handfome, and looks fo good." ·' Do you know his name ?" aiked Olivia, whofe curiofity was ftrongly excited. « £ No, Mam'felie ; but 1 know he comes from V ------, for ï aiked him one day if he did not, and he laid yes." "And
^ And pray how came you to have any convei'ation with him ?" enquired Olivia. " Why one day, Mammelle, about a fort¬ night after 1 had firft noticed him, as he was paffing the cottage, he appeared very much fatigued ; fo I aiked him, for I was fitting before the door at work, if he would be pleafed to walk in and take fome whey ; he thanüed me courteoufly, and accepted my invitation, and fat a good bit with me chat- tin?, for all the world with as much aflability as if he did not think himieif a bit better than me; fo, from that time, he feldom comes this way without giving me a call, and frequently takes whey and fruit in the cot¬ tage ; for which, indeed, in fpite of all I can fay, he will always pay more than they are worth." *· Is it poflible to get a glimpfe of him ?" aíked Olivia. ** Dear heart yes, if you ftay a little lon¬ ger; this is about the time he generady re¬ turns to town, and he almoft always deiccnds by the path near this recefs." "I
« I will ftay a few minutes longer to try if I can fee him," faid Olivia " Pray do not (exclaimed Madeline, lay¬ ing her hand, which trembled violently, upon Olivia's aim), the darknefs encrea r es fait, and if we ftay much longer, we (hall be quite benighted." " No, no, there's no danger of that (re¬ plied Olivia) ; but if yon with it I will re¬ turn immediately : difmifs however, I be- feech you, the terrors )ou have conjured up to aku m you ; for if you tremble in this manner, you will fcarcely be able to reach the chaife." It was not any apprehenfion of danger however which agitated the foul of Made¬ line, it was the agony of thinking th t de Sevignie was the fad and folitary mourner to whe fe fweet and melanchoiy ftrains flie had been liftening ; for in the air ftie heard (he pe'f ctly recollected one ihe had taught him durn^ 'ль vifit at her fathei 's houie ; md ftie wiihed to avoid his preience, kaft the ihould
ihould betray the emotions a knowledge of his dejed ion had infpired. Again ihe prefled Olivia to depart ; who, in compliance with her wîfhes, was moving from the fpot, when the nurfe haftily exclaimed, u Stop, Mam'¬ felie, flop, he's coming now, for there's his dog. Ah, 'tis a good-natured foul (cried flie, patting the head ofa large ipaniel which fuddenly fprung into the gaiden, and fawned about her) ; he is a faithful campanion to his poor mailer, and attends him in all his rambles : there he fits for hours at a time, upon a point of rock befide him, looking up in his face while he plays upon the oboe, like any chrİftîan, as if he knew his forrows, and piricd them." 4 * I think î know that dog." iaid Olivia. äť Aye, like enough (cried the nurfe) ; and fee there comes his mailer." Olivia raifed her eyes ; but the light was too imperfect to let her difcern the features of the perfon defcending : but in a few mi¬ nutes, as he drew деагег, ihe ftarted, and exclaimed—
exclaimed— u Gracious heaven, de Se- \knie!" Madeline withdrew her hand о involuntarily from Olivia, and refeated herfelf. " I thought, indeed (faid Olivia), it could be no other than de Sevignie, when I heard of an eccentric being always wandering about thofe iblitudes. Pray (continued fhe, while overpowered by confufion and furprife, he flood transfixed to the ipot where he had firft beheld her), have you yet chofen a celt for your retirement ? for I fuppofe you will foon renounce the world and its vanities for ever. But feriouily, de Sevignie, 'tis rather unfortunate that you and I ihould latelv have only met at periods when (at leaft) one of us wiihed to avoid the other." His confufion, if poíTible increafed; he knew ihe alluded to his conduct the laft time they had met. " If I ever harboured fuch % wiih (faid he), it was becaufe, as as î have already
already told you, I apprehended danger in your company." As he fpoke, his eyes г : чес! round as if in fearch of another object, and at laft relied on the recefs where Madeline fat, whole white robe rendered herconipicuous. <e Mam'felie Clermont (faid he) is it not-—" advancing to her. She rofe at his approach ; and, withholding the hand he attempted to take, pafled him to Olivia, and again entreated her to return home. Her curiofity gratified, Olivia no longer hefitatcd to comply with this entreaty ; and they directly left the garden, without taking an)' farther notice of de Seviguie. Olivia was too much offended, and Madeline too fearful of betraying hei feelings, to bid him farew elk That fear, however, was foon loft in the fupcrior one fhe felt at the idea of his going the fohtary road that løy between the cottage aud tne town by himfelf; and flie flood
flood hefitatingly at the door of the chaife ; wiihing to declare her apprehenfions, yet dreading to do fo, leaft ihe ihould betray lier feelings. De Sevignie, Ín the mean time, heart- ftruck by the manner in which flie had de¬ clined his notice, remained fome minutes fixed on the fpot where flie had left him. " Oh, Madeline ' (he fighed^ is it thus you heighten the pangs, the anguiih >ou have caufed me. Yet, alas (he continued), why do I accufe her ? unwillingly flie caufed that anguiih ; and how, without knowing, can flie pity it : but am I aflured her pity would follow that knowledge ?—no ; her averted looks giverne no reálon to fuppofe it would." Slowly he quitted the garden, and, paifing through the cottage, to Ins infinite furprife, foi nd flie was not yet departed. Hurt, however, bv her coldness, he merely bowed to her and О л via ; and was haftcni.ig away, when the latter, who faw through the mo¬ tives oi Madeline's delay, and dctermi ^ed to gratify
gratify her, though fomewhat offended with de Sevignie, exclaimed, s< fo you are decamp¬ ing, without having the gallantry to offe your protection." " The affurance, you fhould fay (cried de Sevignie, returning), confeious as I am that I have (though heaven knows how uninten¬ tionally), offended you." " Well, I'll forgive you this once ; fo you may hand us into the chaife, and take a feat youiielf." 4i But will your friend, Mam'felie Cler¬ mont, be equally generous," aíked he. " Oh, I dare fay fhe will follow a good example ; what fay you, my dear," cried Olivia, turning to her ? " ï cannot pardon, becaufe I have not been offended," faid Madeline in much confufion, t oo clearly perceiving that Olivia f ufpečtcd the ftate of her heart. " Nor never may you be by me (cried de Sevignie, with fervour, and taking her hand), for then I ihould be wretched indeed. Oh» Maddine ! (he continued m a low voice- though,
though I dread your fmiks, J could not bear your frowns." He handed Olivia firft into the chaiíb ; and thus contrived to have Madeline next to himfelf; fomething he would have faid to her after they were feated in a low voice ; but flie turned her head from him, and en¬ tered into converfation with Olivia. Her hand he took however in fpite of her efforts to withftand it ; nor refigned it till they flopped at Madame Chatteneuf's. After handing them into the houfe, he bade them adieu ; but it was a moft unwilling adieu ; for he hefitated as he fpoke, and lingered on the threfhold inftead of departing. He was at length turning from it, when Olivia fud¬ denly invited him to fupper ; and İt ftruck Madeline that flie had only delayed doing fo for the purpoie of teazingtiim. He accepted the invitation ; and they all repaired to the banqueting-houie, where Madame Chatte¬ neuf and her friends were ftill engaged at cards
cards, and enjoying the fragrance and refrefh- ingcoolnefs of the evening air. Olívia gave an account of their excurfion ; and made de Sevignie союиг highly by hinting at the manne* in which they had met him, and at what flie had heaid from the nulle concerning him. The light gave Madeline an opportunity of obferviiig the flrong expreflion of grief his countenance betrayed : he feemed even more altered than when flie had befoie feen him. Pale and languid, the fire of his eyes was fled, and the cíiícompoíuie of his hair, which the mountain breeze had blow r n care¬ leffly about hib face, heightened its fad ex¬ preflion. He appeared no longer defirous to ibun her ; on the contrary, he bctiayed the ftrongcfl anxiety to be near her : but, notwithftanding her pity, hti affection for him, pride deteimined her to a\oid atten» tions which fhe imputed to the mei e im- pulfe of unguarded tenderntb ; for flie could not
not bear to be one day the object of his parti¬ cular notice, and the next of his pointed ne¬ glect. She accordingly placed herfelf at the card-table, in fuch a manner as to prevent his fitting by her ; and, with a look of un¬ utterable difappointment, he turned away, and entered into converfation with Olivia, if that could be called converfation, which con- fifted, on one fide, of laconic anfwers, and, on the other, of queftions relative to the mo¬ tives which made him fo fond of fohtary rambles. Unable to bear the dejection of his looks, Madehne fixed her eyes upon the card-table, as if intently watching the game, though in reality flie knew not what was played. But flie could not, by this meafure, fave her beai t from one pang ; for, though her eye was averted fiom the melancholy of his countenance, her ear was ftdl open to the foft melancholy of his voice ; and fcarcely could fhe conceal the emotions it gave her. The entrance of a fervant with a letter to her, that inftant come
come from the Countefs de Merville, fome- what relieved her from this painful fituation. She itarted up ; and, retiring to a little dif¬ tance from the table, read as follows ι — To Mademoifelle Clermont. íť Will my dear Madeline return to-mor¬ row to folitude and her friend, She may accufe me of fclfifhnefs for fo foon recalling her ι and perhaps with juftice, confidering the pleafure and benefit attending her return will be fo materially on my fide : but, as İt is a failing fo prevalent among mankind, I truit, from its being fo general, it may be cxcufed. I cannot, as í intended, call for her ; but ihall hope and expect to receive from the hands of Madame Chatteneuf, and her amiable daughter, the precious charge I entrafted to her care. The natural elo¬ quence of my Madeline w r ill, I truft, prevent any difappointment ; who, in believing me her fincere friend, will only do juftice to Elvira de Merville."
Madeline
Madeline güefíed the purport of this let¬ ter ere flie opened it, confequently it gave her no furprife. She placed her friend's anxiety for her return to the account of de Sevignie, whom flie knew flie wiihed her to avoid ; a wiih fhe felt it neceflfary to com¬ ply with, if flic defired the return of tran¬ quillity. She handed the letter to Madame Chat¬ teneuf; who, fearful it contiined fome un- pleaiant tidings, had laid afide her cards the moment it was brought in. Her regret and 01ivia\ at lofing her fo foon,-was expreíľed in the moft flattering terms ; and they pro¬ mifed to attend her'to the chateau the next morning. A heavy figli from de Sevignie at this moment reached her car. She involun- t ľ dy railed her eyes, but again bent them to the ground, on perceiving his faftened on her with the moft melancholy earneft- neíš.
VOL. T.
К
The
The Countefs's fervant ihe was told wailed for an anfwer; and flie now haftcned to the houfe to give one. in the hall flie met him, and had the fati faction of heai ing that his lady was well. Her anfwer fimihed, ihe would have preferred u t iring to her chamber to icturning to the company, f о opprefled was her heart, but ti at flie knew her doing io would excite enquiñes, and per¬ haps unpleafanl remarks. Slowly ihe puifucd her way back to the banqueting houfe, and had reached the centre of the long and darkly fhaded walk which led to it; when a fudden ruffling among the trees on one fide, made her paufe, from я fenfation of fear, andan uncertainly whether by advancing or retreating lhe fliould put herfelf more in the way of danger, if intLcd, any threatened her; the pam oí fufper.fewas however terminated in a minute by the appearance of de Sevignie. She flatted; and lib thus feming to watch for her, gave hei emotions which agitated her whole frame; ihe
flie tried however to check them, and was again proceeding when he flopped her— ** Will you not bid me farewell then (faid he in a reproachful voice), ere wc part ?" *' Part 1 (repeated Madeline) don't you fup with Madame Chatteneuf?" c * No ; I feel myfelf extremely ill, and have juft apologi fed to her. You return then to-morrow (he continued), to the cha - teau ; and you know not perhaps when you may revifit this town ?" ťt No (faid Madeline), I do not." " To me indeed, it Ís of little conféquence to know (cried he), for I propofe to leave it foon myfelf; would to heaven I had done fo fome days ago. Yet how can I tear myfelf from a place where I know there is a chance of beholding you :—oh, Madeline, to do fo requires a reiolution I am fcarcely mailer of." " í dare lay (exclaimed Madeline, endea¬ vouring to rally her fpirits, and difengage the hand which he had taken between his), you'll к 2 not
not find any great difllculty in acquiring fuch a reiolution/' " You doubt my fincerity then (ftill de¬ taining her) ; oh ! would to heaven I could, X dui ft convince you of it : yet, alas, why do f vtter fuch a wiíh, when I know not whether that conviction would be of any con¬ féquence to you ; know not, do I lay ?— your altered maimer too plainly aflures me that it would not. " Pray let me go (cried Madeline, inex¬ preflibly agitated) ; I am impatient to re¬ turn to Madame Chatteneuf, for I know flie will wonder at my long abience." iS Go then, madam (laid de Sevignie, in¬ ilantly dropping her hand) ;— go, madam to the happy beings you regard, and excufe my having detained you fo long from them ; I fee you are difpleafed at my having done io ; î fee my fociety is hateful to you. Theie was a period when——-(he paufed, then again proceeded—(when I imagined Madeline Cler¬ mont would rather have fought to mitigate than fly from the forrows ofa friend ; would have
have enjoyed an exquifite pleafure in fulfil¬ ling the claim, the facrecl claim, which mifery has upon compaflion." " Oh, de Sevignie (thought Madeline)» how little do yuu know my heart when you thus reproach me. Your fociety hateful to me !—alas 'tis infinitely too precious for my peace." *' I am fure (faid flic, fpeaking with almoft: as much agitation as he had done), I am fure —I wifh—1 fhould be happy was it in my power, to remove, to ieíľen any forrovv you may feel." " You wifh—you ihould be happy -(he repeated in a foftened voice, as if touched by her gentlenefs).—Yes, Madeline (again tak¬ ing her hand), I a^i convinced of the fince- rity of that wiih ; and nothing, no, nothing but a degree of madneis couid have tempted me to reproach you as í have juft done ;—* could have tempted me to aik your pity for for feelings winch í wiihed, from principles of honour, gi atitude, generofity, to conceal from you. Oh, Madeline, I cannot aik your к 3 pardoik
pardon, for I cannot myfelf pardon my con¬ duct to you." ** Unaiked would I give it (cried Made¬ line), had I been offended, but that be af¬ lured is not the cafe." At this mftant a dills \c ftep was heard ; both ftarted ; and Madeline inilantly at¬ tempted to difengage herfelf. st Do not leave mc yet (cried de Scvigm'e)Jt may be long eie we meet again ; long do 1 fay ? alas, we may never, nevei meet again ! —Spare a few minutes longer tome ; let us turn into this walk (pointing to the one he had juft emerged from), and we fhall not be obferved; though I faid but an inftant ago, 1 would not foiicit your pity, yet my heart now tells me, that an aflurance of it can only mitigate its wretchednefs," " Receive that aflurance then (faid Made¬ line, making another effort as ihe gave it to withdraw her hand ; for, though ihe wiihed, ihe feared to comply with his requeft. Her reafon
reafon oppo r ed her inclination for doing fo, by reprefenting the folly, the impropriety of any longer liftening to the dictates ofa paf¬ fion which ihe had caufe to believe a hope¬ lefs one). But excure me (ftie continued) from ftay ing any longer with you ; the ftep which alarmed us appi oacheş, and I fhould be forry we were feen together." " Fareweh ! then (he exclaimed), moft lovely and moil beloved ; í regret, but can¬ not mur'rur at your refulai : may the hap¬ pinefs yeu de erre bc your«, and be not only pure as your virtues, but lafting as your life : may eveiy change in that life, be to raife you to ftill higher felicity : and when you make ♦hat great that important change which will fix its dcftiny ;—when you give the precious hand I now hold to fome happy, fome highly- favoured mortal, fome peculiar favourite of heaven,—oh, may you then meet with a heart as tendei ly, as firmly devoted to you as de Sevignie's." Thefe laft words were fpoken almoft in a whifper; and Madeline felt by his hands the tremour of his frame. к 4 Farewell !
"Farewell! (he cried, after the paufe of a minute) ; if I have pained, if í have dif¬ turbed you, let the idea of my never more intruding ! nto your preience banifh all re- fentment for my haung done io." He ι cited his cold cheek for a moment upon her hand ; then fuddenly letting it chop, he inilantly darted amongft the trees and clii* appeared* An İcy chillnefs crept through the frame of Madeline, at the idea of feeing de Sevig¬ nie no more. She Mtned with fixed atten¬ tion to the found offris fteps, till they could no longei be riiítmguiíhčd ; then, ftarting, fhe wrung her hands together, and exclaimed—· " He is gone, and we fhall never, never meet again !" Every hope relative to him now become extinct ; hopes which, notwithftanding the alteration in his manner, had lingered in her heart till this moment ; hopes which had cheered
cheered her in the long period that feparated them, by ma tving lier look forward to a fe¬ cond meeting, in which he fliould difciofe fentiments he had before only revealed by his eyes. That meeting had taken place,— thofe fenti merits had been difclofed ; but, inftead of promoting her happinefs as fhe expected, had, for the prefent at kaft, de- ftroyed it ; and fhe wept that crifis to which but a few days before flie had looked forward with the moil flattering expectations. Yet not for herfelf alone flic wept, her tears fell alfo for the wretchednefs of de Se¬ vignie ; and the regretted having refufed to ftay a little longer with him, falfely imagining their parting, if 1е1ь abrupt, would have been lefs painful. " Pie prayed for my felicity (fhe cried) ; but, oh, de Sevignie, except aífured of yours, how unavailing mult that prayer ever be !" The voice of Mademoifelle Chatteneuf calling on her, now roufed her from her me * к 5 lmcholy
choly muíing. She inilantly conjectured it - was her itep which had driven off de Sevig¬ nie ; ands wiping away her tears, advanced, though but ilowly, to mat her. ss Why you muil have written a volume inftead of a letter, if you have been all this time employed in writing (faid Olivia the moment flie iaw her) - y but the truth ï fup¬ pofe is, that de Sevignie intruded difagree- ably upon you» and delayed you."- fi ' No, he did not I aflure you," faid Ma¬ deline. * c You have feen him however, fince you quitted the banqueting houfe." " Yes ; I met him as I was returning to it » " And you flopped no doubt (cried Oli¬ via), to wiih him good-night. M " Well, fuppofmg I had, would there bave been any thing extraordinary in fuch a common act of civility?" " No to be fure, nor in his detaining you aimoit an hour to thank you for it : though hc
he pretended to us the -moment you were gone, that he was taken fo ill he couid fcarcely fpeak or ftop another moment. Pray, Madeline, did he tell you the nature of his malady ? " 4C I never enquired," anfwered Madeline, bluffi ing. " But he might have told you without aiking ; and I flirewdly fufpečt he did; Pray did he aik you to prefcribe for him ?" " Prescribe for him i (faid Madeline, pre¬ tending not to underftand her meaning) do you fuppoie he took me for an old nurfe ?"'* M No indeed (replied Olivia), I fuppofe no fuch thing ; but I am not fo certain that he would be wrong in taking you for a young nurfe." ťt I have not fpirits to anfwer you (cried Madeline) ; fo be generous, and do not take advantage of my inability." ťí And pray to whofe account may í j. lace your dejection," afked Olivia, ** To whofe you pkafe ; I may as well have the pleafure of giving you a latitude t 6 which,
* which, whether í pleafe or not, you will take." " Well, I won't teaze you ?my more (faid Olivia) ; but let us quicken our pace, for fupper waits." They accordingly haftened to the ban¬ queting-houfe, and the whole party then fat down to fupper. ťt lam forry (cried Madame Chatteneuf), that de Sevignie could not flay with us to¬ night. Poor fellow, he looked extremely ill ; but indeed I think he has done fo for fome days pail." ** Yes, and fo do I (faid Olivia). I truft, however, his malady is not of an incurable nature ;" and íhe glanced archly at Made¬ line. " Heaven forbid it was (cried her mother, who took her in a ferious light); 1 know few people whom, on fo íhort an acquaint¬ ance, I ihould fo much regret as de Sevignie ; there is an elegance, a fweetnefs in his man- 3 îier *
ner, which declare a foul of benevolence and refinement ; he does not by flow degrees conciliate efteem 9 but, on the firft interview, excites a pre-pofľeífion in his favour ; which, upon a greater knowledge, you have the pleafure of finding no reafon to regret ; fo that though an interefting, he is not a dan¬ gerous, acquaintance." " Let us afk Mademoifelle Clermont's opinion as to that (cried Olivia). Why do you bluíh, my dear ; you know you have been acquainted with the Chevalier a much longer period than my mother has, and of courfe can better determine whether he is or is not a dangerous creatme." " No one I am fure (faid Madeline, en¬ deavouring to fuppreiš her confufion), can ever doubt the juftnefs of Madame Chatte¬ neuf's difcernment." i( Ah, Madeline (cried Olivia m a low voiced I fee you can fometimes be guarded." " Would to heaven I had been lb in mat¬ ters more material than the prefent," thought Madeline. When
When flie found herfelf again alone in her chamber, ihe again regretted not having ftaid a little longer with de Sevignie. " It wat a laft requeft (faid ihe), and I might on that account have complied with İt ; he might then have opened his whole foul to me : he might then have revealed the whole circumftances which oppofe his wiflies ;— yet, alas ! of what ufe could it be to know them, fince feparated it could give little con¬ folation to know by what means." But, notwithftanding thofe words, Made¬ line wiihed to know them ; it was a wiih how¬ ever which, ihe was convinced, would never be gratified ; for, though ihe was iure de Sevignie had no reafon to bluih in avow¬ ing them, ihe was equally fure he never would do fo. Madame ChatteneuPs coach was ordered the next morning at an early hour, as /he wiihed to fpend a long day with her friend ; but an unexpected circumflance retarded her
her journey to the chateau till a late hour. Juit as ihe was fet ting out, a letter arrived from Verona, from a fifter of her deceafed mother's, who had married an Italian noble¬ man, and had long been fettled in Italy, in¬ forming her, that her lord was no more ; and that, finding herfelf opprefled in fpirits, and declining in health, flie ardently longed for the fociety of her niece, feeling herfelf rather forlorn, now that flie had loft her hulband, in a place where ihe had no con¬ nections of her own about her. Moreover, that as he had left every thing in her power, and flie intended making a will in favour of her niece, it was abfolutely neceifary flie fliould be with her at the time of her death. AfTèction for her aunt, whom ihe tenderly efteemed, and confidération for her daugh* ter's intereft, to whofe fortune the pofleflions of her aunt would make a very fpkndid ad¬ dition, determined Madame Chatteneuf to accept this invitation without delay ; and íhc
íhe immediately ordered preparations tobe mack for her journey the enfuing day ; and, in overlooking thofe preparations, and ar¬ ranging domeftic concerns, was detained at her houfe till within a íhort time of the Countefs de Merville's ufual dinner hour. Amidft all the bufile that was going for¬ ward, Madeline fat motionlefs, and in the deepeft dejection. She regretted the in¬ tended departure of her friends, not only as a means of depriving her of the exquifite pleafure fhe enjoyed in their company, but as a means of deftroying her hopes of again beholding de Sevignie ; for, notwithftanding what he had iaid, fhe was convinced he would continue a little longer at V ------; and ihe had flattered herfelf that the Countefs would again have permitted her to vifit Ma¬ dame Chatteneuf, and thus have afforded her once moie an opportunity of feeing him; an opportunity fhe could not help íighing for, though now 1 aífured their attachment was hopclefs. Ь
ïn their way to the chateau, Olivia made her promife to con efpond with her; a pro¬ mife which Madeline gave with pleafure, yet w th diffidence from a fear that flic might not prove as ent ei taming a correfpon- dent as her friend expected. On entering the chateau, a prefage of ill itruck her heart at not beholding the Coun¬ tefs, who general 1 / came forwaid to the hail with а fmifrng countenance, like the genius of hofpitality, to welcome her friends. " Where is your lady ?" aiked Madeline, turning to one of the fervants. " Above, Mam*telle, in her dreffmg- room ; ihe has been rather indifpofed to¬ day." Madeline hí'ard no more, Heedlefs, or rather forgetful at that moment of all cere¬ mony, flie inftantiy flew up ftaiis, leaving Madame Chatteneuf bufy in ordering her fen ants to have the coach ready at an early hour)*
hour), and found her friend fitting, or rather reclining, in a great chair, with an appearance of illnefs and dejection, which equaky fur- prifed and alarmed Madeline, *' Oh, madam ! (faid flie inexpreflibly af¬ fected, and taking her hand, which flic preffed to her lips and her bofom), why, why did you not fend for me befoie ?" 44 Becauk I did not v,nh to break in upon your happkef," replied the Countefs re¬ turning the preflure of her hand, whik hsr heavy eyes brightened with a fudden ray of pleaiuie, and a fmik broke through the gloom of her countenance. " Ala-, madam (cried Madeline mourn¬ fully), you could not have broken in upon my happinefs, for * experienced none; at leaft none (faid fhe, fuddenly recollecting herfelf ), which í could have put in compe¬ tition with that of attending you." " 1 am truly fenfible of your afíečt ion, my love (cried the Countefs)? and am grateful for it," "You
You muft have been indifpoíèd ionger than to-day 1 am fure, madam," faid Ma¬ deline ?" The Countefs acknowledged flie was right in thinking fo. *' And why, madam (faid Madeline), did you permit your fervant to deceive me lait night by fa) mg xou weie well ŕ" ** í did not with to gise you pain w hik к was poíllbk to avoid doing ίο," anfwered the Counteis." " Ah, madam (faid Madeline, with an in- voluntai у figh), pain is doubly g-eat when not expected." Madam Chatteneuf and her daughter now entered, and both, by their words and looks, cxprdfed their regret for the illnefs of the Countefs. The former tenderly reproached her for not having immediately acquainted them of it.
" Why
" Why you may know (laid flie) by the íhort ftay which Madeline has mack with \ou, that í have not long concealed it from you. í was only taken ill the evening atter íhe left mc ; and, had 1 grown better, I ihould yet a liuk longer, in compliance with your wiihes, luve debarred myfelf the plea¬ fure of hei company But do not díftreís me (the* continued, raifing herfelf in her c'nur, arc! looking round with her wonted benignancy), by this melancholy ; I am al¬ ready better; your preience, my friends, like a rich and precious cordial, has revived mc." The exertion flie made cheered her friends; and the converfiuion foon took a more cheerful turn. Madame Chatteneuf apolo¬ gi fed for not coming at an earlier hour, by afligning the reafon of her delay ; and the Countcfs fincerely congratulated her on an "event which had given her fuch pleafure.
" From
<c From the proípečts of my friends (cried ihe), I mult now derive my chief fatisfačtion." " If they are as bright as your ow r n (faid Madame Chatteneuf ) they muit he pleating опеь indeed.'* The Countcfs fighed deeply, but fpoke not. Olivia faw deject ion again ftealing round, and rallied her Ipirits to drive it away. No л erv dilììcult taik indeed for her, as ihe was djlbhtıd wth the idea of her journcv to lu'y. She talked of the conqueíls lhe Cx- pedal to make ; declued nothing lefs than a Marquis would fatisfy her : arid laid the moment ihe v\as fettled in htr palace, ine íhould invite the Counteis ai»d Madeline to it.—'* And ue will then try (íhc continued), whether our fair friend will follow ην ex¬ ample, and give her little French heart in exchange for anitalian one." " S.Tiouily (cried Madame Chatteneuf, addieífing the Countefs), if we ftay any long time
time at Verona, I fliall flatter myfeif with а hope of having the p'cafure of your company and Mademoifelle Clermont's." *' Do not indulge fuch а hope (faid the Countefs) ; foi, be atfın ed, my good friend, it would end in (hi ippointment. There is but one j j-umcy winch I can now look forward to." The folemnity of her vo ce and manner, o;a\e them no room to doubt the nature of the journey flic allucicd to, " My dear friend (* red Madame Chat- trncuti vou w i 1 lealìy infect me with your glo^m, an 1 1 ihall begin my long and ία- tiginng journey with quite a heavy heait, At }our time of hfe you ma\ well lo ^k for¬ ward to many years, A.id, as I know oi none whole cootmuance in life is more anxioufly defired, fo oeıiher do I know of any who ihould mote ierventh delire that conrinua-ice thuuklves than you ihouki, poflefled as }ou aie of every blcfling which can
can render it happy—affluence—univerfal ef¬ teem—the conic ioufnefs ofekferving it—and an amiabk daughter who adores you, and is fettled as hap¿ ily as youi fond heart can wiih her to be." " 1 am truly fenfible of the bkftings I poíľ is (ciicci the Countefs), and 1 1 ul ƒ grate- Tul for tliem, impute my melancholy not to diicontent, but to illnefs." D' mer was now ferved in the dreffinq;- ioom ; and, foon after its renoval, Math me Chatteneuf ι ofe to depart, having many im¬ portant matters jet to arrange at home. Sne ailurcd the Countefs, but for the mate¬ ria! icafons flie had for haftening to Verona, íh¿ wou'd have j ut oft lier journey thither till ihe ikv her pcriccüy lecovered. This w .b a me dure the Counteis declared ihe nc\er would nevei liave conicnted to, and one by no теапь neceífary to prove me llrength of her friendlhip.
Mackliae
Madeline attended her friends down flairs» and in the hall received their adieu. She wept as they gave it; for their pleafing man¬ ners and kind attentions had infpired her with the true ft regard. x< Farewell ! Madeline (faid Olivia, ten¬ derly embracing her) ; icmember your pro¬ mife of confi antly л riring; and may heaven grant us all a happy meeting to make amends for thb melancholy parting." %i Amen'" fai d Madi hne in a faint \oic? a, fhe followed her to the coach., where Ma¬ tlamc Chatteneuf was already feated, arul which now drove off withoat any lavt her delay. Perhaps no found fliikcs the heart with gi eater melancholy than the found of the carnage which conveys fiom us the friends we tenderly love, in whofe fociety wc have been happy, and whom we know noi when wc fliall behold again. At leaft Madeline thought fo; and her tears wc; e augmented as
as íhe flood liftening at the hall door to the heavy rumbling of Madame Chatteneuf's coach wheels. " Heaven grant we ma) have a happy meeting (cried flie, repeating the words of Olivia) : and yet, was I to give way to the prefent feelings of my heart, I fliould little expect fuch a meeting ; but I will not (continued flie, turning from the door to rejoin the Countefs), 1 will not deferve evil by anticipating ifc."
VOL. I. i. CHAP.
CHAP. Χ, Some melancholy thought that fhuns the light» Lu» k s underneath that fadnefs in thy vifage. Rows, ¡¡ЭНЕ founH the Countefs leaning againft the fide of the chair, as if quite overcome by the parting with her friends. Madeline hung over her, but was too much affected to ipeak. In a few minutes ihe raifed -her head»— u I feel rather faint (faid ihe), and I will go upon the lawn, for I think the even¬ ing air will revive me."
She
She accordingly rofe, but was fo weak, ihe was obliged to lean upon the arm of Made¬ line in defcending the flairs ; and was then fo exliaufted by this exertion, that flie had only power to reach a feat beneath the fpreading branches of a chefnut ;—a feat to which íhe had often led Madeline, as to one peculiarly dedicated to love and friendihip ; it owed its formation to her lord, whom the noble fize and fituation of the tree had charmed ; and this circumflance, together with a complimentary line, devoting it to her, was carved upon its rind : in a beauti¬ ful opening of the wood it ftood, com¬ manding a fine view of the lake, and all around The violet, Ciotus, and hyacinth, with rich inhy JBioider'd the giound. " I love the ihelter of thofe venerable boughs (laid the Countefs); they recai a thoufand tender recollections : at fuch an hour as this, when day was declining, often L 2 have
have I fat beneath them with my lord, watching the fports of our children,—the lovely boys, whole lofs firft taught me the frailty of human joys, firft convinced me that İt is hereafter we can only expect per¬ manent felicity. 'Tis a conviction of this kind, which loofens the hold the world too often almoft imperceptibly gains upon the heait; let us therefore never dare to mur¬ mur at events that draw us ftill clofer to our God." Madeline fighed ; flie felt indeed that nothing will fo foon detach us from life as disappointment. " 1 fear, my love (cried the Countefs), that ш * 1 have infected you with my gioom.' " No, madam (replied Madeline) you have not." " I fear (refumed the Countefs, regarding her with earneftneis), that ionie feci et for¬ row preys upon youi heait; a foirow which, perhaps
perhaps if I knew, I might be able, if not to remove, at leaft to leflen." ** Oh, no, madam," exclaimed Madeline with involuntary quickneis, terrified at the idea of revealing her hopelefs paflion. " Then heaven forbid (er' ed the Countefs), I fliould feek to probe a wound I couid not heal." * l Forgive me, madam (faid Madeline), I fpoke unthinkingly. I know of none more qualified to heal the forrows of the heart than you are ; but—but my feelings (continued flie, hefitating and blufhing), require more the exertions of my own reafon, than the fympathy ofa friend ; and—and be aífured, madam I, to the utmoft of my power, will uk thole exertions." " I truft fio, my love," faid the Countefs, who gueifed the foiroW of Madehne pro¬ ceeded from the dďappointme it of her hopes relai » ι ч e Sevignie." " ï -u l io, my love ; not only on your own account, but \our f.ther's, who, from your happinefs, hopes to receive fome confolation L í for
for the numerous, the dreadful, the unpre¬ cedented calamities of his youth." " Ah, Heavens (cried Madeline, ftarting, and forgetting, in the horror and agitation of the moment, the réfolution flie had once formed 'of never attempting to difcover the nature of thofe calamities), you fliock my very foul by your words. Oh, why, why is there fuch a filence obferved as to his former life !—a filence which makes me tremble left fome heavy misfortunes, in conféquence of the events of it, ihould ftill be hanging over him." Madeline (faid the Countefs in a folemn voice), in my concern for your father, I fpoke unguardedly; and î already repent having done fo from the fituation I fee you in : but, as fome atonement for doing fo, I will take this opportunity of cautioning you againft all imprudent curiofity ; let no incen¬ tive from it ever tempt you to feek an ex¬ planation of former occurrences ; be aífured your happinefs depends entirely on your ignorance of them : was the dark volume of
of your father's fate ever opened to your view, peace would for ever forfake your breaft; for its characters are marked by horror, and ftained with blood.'* Madeline grafped the Countefs's arm in convulfive agitation ;—" I fwear (faid ihe, raifing her other hand, and looking up to heaven), from this moment, never, by any mean , direct or indirect, to try and dif¬ cover ought that my father wifh.es to con¬ ceal." *' I rejoice to hear this réfolution (cried the Couatefs, killing her cheek) ; I rejoice at it on your own account. And now, my love, let us change this dífcouríe. You have pro¬ mifed (fhe continued) to try and recover your fpirits ; and I ihall attentively watch to fee whether you fulfil ι hat piomife. Oh, Madeline, grief in the early feafon of youth, is like fioft to a tender fl wer, unkind and blighting ; and no t >ngue can def' r 1 be, no heart, except a parental one, conceive the bitter, the excruciating anguiíli which a L 4 parent
parent feels at feeing a beloved child wafting the bloom of youth in wretchednefs,—pin¬ ing, drooping, finking beneath its preflure. —From fuch wretchednefs may heaven pre- fei ve your father ! Oh, never» nevei may the diftrefles of his chikl precipitate him to his grave!" Madeline almoft ftarted, ilie looked ca. - neftly at the Counted j and fancied tkat the energy with whkh her words had been deli¬ vered, declared a felf experience of the for¬ row which flie mentioned. The idea how¬ ever was but trar.fitory; and as flie diimifred, ihe wondered flie had ever conceived it. 5 *No," liic faid to herfelf, íť the Countefs has felt no forrow but what the common ca- fualtks of life have occafioned." Both were filent for fome minutes ; Ma¬ deline at length fpoke :— <f It grows late, my dear madam, and í fear your flaying longer in the night air may hurt you,"
The
The Countefs inftantiy rofe, thanked her for her kind folicitude about her ; and, lean¬ ing on her arm, returned to the houfe ; they fupped together in her dreffmg-room, and parted foon after for the night. Madeline retired to her chamber deeply affected by the incidents of the day,—inci¬ dents which had increafed the dejection flie felt in conféquence of thofe flie had expe¬ rienced at V------to a moft painful degree. Inftead of undreffing, ihe fit down to indulge her melancholy thoughts, but was foon in¬ terrupted by a ιΓφ at the door ; on defi ring it to be opened, Floretta, one of the Coun¬ tefs's women, entered. Whenever attendance was neceífary, it was fhe that waited upon Madeline, who liked her much for her frvelinefs and good-nature; flie had been in the Countefs'? fuite at the time ihe flopped at Clermont's, and was daughter to an old and favourite deccafed L j waiting-
waiting-woman, whofe place fmce her death fhe had filled. " I was longing, Mademoifelle (faid ihe with a fmile and a com tefy), foi an opportunity of welcoming you back to the caftie. I hope you had a pleafant time at V·------; but in¬ deed î dare fay you had, for Madame Chat¬ teneuf fees a power of company they fay ; and flie is in the right of it—company is the life of one ; befides, it gives her daughter a chance of being married foon ; I warrant me has a number of admirers ; and î make no doubt but you. Mam' ièlle, came in for your ihare." " You are miitaken indeed Fioretta," faid Madeline fmiling. " Not entirely, Mam'felie : Lord, didn't Jaques and Philippe tell me the firft evening you went to Madame Chatteneuf's, there was no one there half fo much admired as you were ; and how you danced with the handfomeft gentleman prefent who looked fo tender on you, Monfieur·—lord, I for- % get
get his name, but i dare fay you recollect, Mam'felie." Too well, thought Madeline. She fighed, but made no reply ; and, rifing, began to undrefs in order to conceal the agitation which the mention of de Sevignie had ex¬ cited ia her mind. " You are come back to a dil mal houfe, Mam'felie (faid Floretta, echoing her figli, which flie imputed to regret for paft plea¬ sures), to a difmal houfe indeed, (fluking her head) now that my poor lady is ill.'* i( Its gloom on that account will loon be diffipated 1 truft (cried Madeline), by the perfect reftoration of her health," *· Alas! I fear not (faid Floretta with a greater ferioufnefs than Madeline had ever before remarked in her countenance) her mind is too much difturbed to permit me to think it will." '* Difturbed ! (repeated Madelins in an accent of the greateil furprife, and turning ĺ 6 to
to her), why what has happened to difturb her mind ?" " Lord, don't you know ?" afked Floretta with a kind of eager flare. " No, I can't even conjecture," faid Ma¬ deline. 44 Well, I could never ha\e fuppofed my lady would have been fo fecret with you (cried Fioielta, after the paufe of a minute); though after all it does not furprife me, for I know it ftiocks her to have any one fuf¬ pečt his wickednefs." " Whofe wickednefs (afked Madeline eageily)? you aftoniih me beyond expref¬ fion by your words." " Aye, and I could aftoniih you much more, Mam'felk (làici Fioretta), if I was to tell you all I know ; for, from my mother's being a favourite with the Countefs,and from my being always in her fervice, I know more of her affairs than perhaps any other perfon except Agatha does ; often and often flie has mack me promife to keep them all pro¬ foundly fecret ; and to be fure fo I have, and w ould
would always, except (continued Fioretta, whofe paflion for telling fecrets was equal to her paffion for hearing them), except with a little hefitation, to fuch a friend as you are to her." Highly as the curbfity of Madeline was raifed, fhe inilantly recoiled from the idea of learning the Counter's private affairs through the channel of a fervant. *< No, Floretta (faid flie), except from the Countefs, I can пеяег hetrken to iuch fecrets as you would impait ; had flie wiflied me to know them, fhe would have communicated them herfelf. fiad ï been fur t rifed into liftening to them, I fliould have blufhed to¬ morrow when I beheld her face, from the confeioufnefs of having acted meanly and bafely towards her ; and fo would you I am confident, at the idea of having violated \ our promife, and betrayed what fliould be ever facrcd to you, the confidence of your Protec- trefs and friend." " But
u But í am fure (fhe continued, feeing the cheeks of Floretta covered with bluflies, while ihe trembled fo flie could not ftand), you fpoke without thought, or perhaps from an idea that the difciofure of the ff crets you hinted at would have gratified me ; but be aífured, Floretta, that would not have been the caie, for I early learned, my good girL that pleafure could never be attained by acting contrary to truth and virtue ; and î hope you either do or will in future believe the juftnefs of that faying as firmly as 1 do." iS Yes, that I fhall to be fore, Mam'felk (cried Fioretta, fomewhat recovered from her confufion, and again railing her head). As you have faid, Mam'felk, nothing indeed but an idea that I fliould have gratified you by revealing my lady's fecrets could ever have tempted me to mention them." Madeline did not appear to doubt her, but faid ihe would no longer detain her. Floretta
Floretta therefore curteíied, and retired with great humility. Left to herfelf, Madeline reflected on all ihe had heard, and the more ihe reflected,, the more íhe was aftomihed at İt : to fur- mife how or by whom the Countefs was diftreflfed, was impoflible.—" But to know the fource of her grief could fcarcely, I think, augment my regret for it (cried Madeline) » alas ! what an aggravation of my forrow is it to know that the two beings I love beft in the world, are opprefled by griefs which, by concealing, I muft fuppofe they deem too dreadful for me to be acquainted with it." She continued in melancholy meditation till the whole caille was wrapt in filence. She then retired to bed ; but het reft was broken and difturbed by diftrefling dreams % and ihe longed for the return of morning to chafe away the gloomy horrors of the night. She arofe at an earlier hour than ufual, be¬ fore any of the family, except fome of the inferior
inferior fervants, were ftirring, and walked out upon the lawn to try if the freflinefs of the air and exeirife would revive her fpirits. A folemn ftillnefs reigned around, and the de^y Landfcape was yet but imperfectly re¬ vealed ; but by degiees its grey veil was withdrawn, and the ftillnefs interrupted by the twii tering of birds and the carol of the early peafant. Madeline fighed at the con¬ trail the drew between the cheerfulnefs of the fcene and tne fadnefs of her own mind. " And oh, when (flie cried as ihe faw the gloomy vapours of night fljing before the beams ot a rifing iun), oh, when fliall the clouds that involve my projects be dif- peried 1" After walking about fome time, flie fat down beneath the flicker of the chefnut, where flie and her friend had lefted the pre¬ ceding night ; and as flie looked at the op¬ pofite but diftant mountains, ihe thought of Madame Chatteneuf and Olivia, who had fixed
fixed on this irorning to commence their journey ; and her regret at their departure was augmented by believing that theii pte- fence wouid have been a comfort and relief to the Countefs. Full of the idea that they had already begun to afe end thofe ftupendous piecipices, which together they had ío oíten viewed with mingled ал с and veneration ; flie gazed upon them with а melancholy kind of plea¬ fure, as if by doing fo flie could once more have beheld the traveliers. She remained thus engi ged, till Agatha called to her from a windo *, and infoi med her the Cou ite's was up, Sie directly ic- turned to the houk, t id, going up t » t 1, e Countefs's dreıîing-room, met hí s > ft as íhe was entenng it. With the moft anxi his folicitude ihe en¬ quired кол ihe tounci heiuif. « Somewhat better (the Counteis replied). But whether the
the imagination of Madeline was affected by what Floretta had faid the preceding night, or whether it really was the cafe, ihe thought there was no alteration in her countenance to fupport this aifertion ; the fame look of langour and dejection prevailed ; and ihe involuntarily repeated her enquiry with an earneftnefs that intimated the doubt ihe harboured, and hinted a wiih of having a phyfician fent for. ec I thank you for this kind anxiety about me, my dear girl (laid the Countefs) ; but I can with truth aflure you I am better ; and even if 1 was not, í íhouid never tl ink of fending for a phyfician ; medical fkiil (conti¬ nued fhe in a low voices could be of little avail in my malady." ** Ah ! (thought Madeline) this is indeed a confirmation of all that Fioretta told me ;. ihe gives me to underftand by thofe words, that her malady is upon her mind ¿—would lo heaven I could alleviate it ľ'
They
They fat down to breakfaft ; the table was laid near an open window, from whence they inhaled the fweetnefs of the morning air, and beheld the dewy landfcape gradually bright¬ ening to their view,-—beheld along the foreft glades the wild dear trip, and often turning, gaze at early paflenger : grey fmoke aroie in fpiral columns from cottages fcattered about its extremity, painting the rural fcene witb cheerful figns of inhabitation : and foon the induftrious woodman was beheld commenc¬ ing his toil, and the careful ihepherd driv¬ ing his bleating flock along the graify paths to tafte the verdure of the morn, while on every fide Mufic awoke The native voice of undiflembled joy, And thick around the woodland hymns arofe. " Oh, how lovely is this fcene ! (faid the Countefs) this is Nature's hour for offering up her incenfe to the Supreme ; and cold and tmamiable indeed muft be that heart which is not warmed to devotion by it. What real
real enjoyment do the children of indolence and diifipation forego by lofing, in the bed of fîoth, thofe moments when every bloom¬ ing pleifure waits without : how/ cheering even to tlie f Ail of fadnefs itfelf, is the matin of the bi'ds' how reviving to fick nefs or to languor thi e pure breeze, which, as it fweeps over the t ül tr.es of the foreft, bend- their leafy heads, as if in fi¿n of grateful homage to the gi eat C-ealor." ts It is an hour which I particularly love indeed {cried Madelin. 1 ), one in which fome of my moft delightful rambles have been taken ; with my fat *er I have often bruíhed the dews away, and ou the fide of lorne fteep ai.d romantic mountain, caught the firft beams o L the iun, and witched the va¬ pour o c the va'ley r thing befoie them." t£ Our irienl (cen h ued M .defne, after the paıdc of a ie,\ миро'Ч^) have ere th s, 1 dã\c iay, cfVi m ucci their journey; by this time ť ev have \ r ibabìy got a confi- dei able way, ami at this very monent per¬ haps may be filtir.g down to breakfaft in the cottage
cottage of fome trountaineer, attended by him and his frtmily with afliduous hofpita¬ lity ; or elie beneath the fliadow of fome cliff, o'er which the light chamois bound, and tall pines caft a fokmn ihade. Oh, how delightful muft fuch a fituation be 1— how delightful, how elevating to tlľ* mind to be furrounded by the nobleft works of nature,—by ícenos which bring the heroes of other days to view !—how pleafing to liften to the foft melody of fhepheids' pipes, to the bleating of his numerous flock c inter¬ mingled perhaps with the lulling iound of waterfalls, and the humming of bees, intent on their delicious toil 1" " You fpeik like a poet, Madeline," faid the Counteft, i'miiing. Madeline bluflied at this obfervation, and wondered, when it was made, that fhe could have given fuch latitude to her ima¬ gination.
Fatigued
Fatigued by talking, the Countefs lay down upon a fofa after breakfaft. This debi· lity, in a mind fo nervous and a frame ίο ac¬ tive as hers had hitherto been, gave the moft painful apprehenfions to Madeline; and, under a trifling pretext, íhe left the room in order to communicate them to Agatha, and enquire írom her whether ihe did not deem fome advife requifite for her lady. Agatha ihook her head mournfully on hearing them ; but relative to her enquiry, anfwered in the negative* faying that reft and quiet were all that was neceífary for the Countefs, " if thofe don't do her good (faid ihe), nothing can." " Alas! (cried Madeline» as flie turned from her) 'tis too true ! 'tis forrow that un¬ dermines her health, and medicine could not reach her malady. Oh I what, what is this forrow which fo dreadfully affects her,— which is fo carefully concealed that even her moil intimate friends know it not, for fuch 1 know Madame Chatteneuf and her daugh¬ ter
ter to be/and they, I am confident, are ignorant of it ?" When flie returned to the dreiïing-roons, the Countefs requefted ihe would read to her; and thus employed, exceptat íhort in¬ tervals, when her ladyihip mide her paufo to reft herfelf, flie continued till dinner was fer ved, at which the Countefs was unable to prefide; íhe grew better however in the evening, and again entered into converfation with MadeUne. The difcourfe turned upon the time ihe had pafled at V—<■— ; and the Countefs now requefted to hear a particular account of it. This was a requeft whicli Madeline, if fhe could, would gladly have declined obeying ; for, in almoft every amufement, almoft every fcene flie had partaken of, or mixed in while there, de Sevignie was fo principal an object, that to deíčribe them without mentioning him, ihe feared would be fcarcely poflible ; to mention him without emotion, ihe knew
knew ihe could not ; and to betray fuch emotion would be, ihe was convinced, to confim in the Countefs*s mind the fuípí- cions flie knew ihe already entertained of her attachment! to de Sevignie; and now to have them confirmed, now, when not a hope remained of their being ever more to each other than friends, ihe felt would be humiliating and diftreíľmg in the extreme. She attempted however to comply with the requeft oí the Countefs, but ihe faul- tered in her taik ; and, by trying to omit what ihe wiihed to conceal, rendered what ihe would have told aimoit unintel¬ ligible. The Countefs faw and pitied her diitrefc ; flie pitied, becaufe íhc gueflèd the fource from whence it proceeded. She was now more convinced than ever,from the dejection of Ma¬ deline, her confufion, and a few involuntary expreffions that dropped from her, that ail hope relative to de Sevignie was over, and, 5 fince
fmce terminated, flie meant not to enquire concerning him, certain as ihe was that that termination was owing to no impropriety in the conduct of Madeline, or in his either, elfe fhe would not thus regret it. Time and kind attention, ihe trufted, would heal the wound which diiàppointed affection had given to the bofom of her youthful friend. By degrees flie turned the converfation to one more pleafing to her ; and they both parted after fupper with more cheerfulnefs than perhaps cither had expected. The next morning Madeline had the exquifite pkaiure of meeting her beloved protectrefs at breakfaft, with a greater ap¬ pearance of health and fpirits than flie had witnefled the preceding day. No attentions which couid contribute to render this change a permanent one, were wanting on the part of Madeline ; her affı VOL · u m duities
dui ties were indeed unremitting, and the Counted received them with eveiy indica¬ tion of gratitude. A week iaw her rcftored to her uiual looks and ferenity ; and thus happily did the itorm which had threatened the peace oi her friends and family, appear overblown. Occupied by attention and anxiety about her friend, Madeline, during her indifpo¬ fition, had had no time to ruminate over pail feenes ; but now that her recovery al¬ lowed her more lei iure, they arofc in gloomy iTtroipcftion to her view. She law herfelf deprived of all thofe hopes which had hi¬ thű to cheered her mind, allured, aimoit iolemnly aflured, that her deftiny and de íVngnie's could never be united; and fad and folitary i.i theeUiemc ihe anticipated her lih would be л.ег fua hadihippointmenť, foi de S 4 m¿;jc ih confi.'.ered as lier kindred ipuit, and ouid not hope, or rather deemed it ulu riv impoflible, flic fliould ngain meet
meet with one fo truly congenial to her own. Another week elapfed without any thing material happening, during which the Coun¬ tefs heard from her daughter ; ihe gave the letter to Madefine to read, and the vivacity with which it was written, and the affurance it contained of her own health and happinefs, с kail y proved that Madame D'Alembert was entirely ignorant of her mother's late illnefs and difquietudc. Tlie wonder of Madeline was increafed at finding ihe concealed this difquietudc even from her daughter. Surely, fhe thought, its fource muft indeed be painful when fhe thus hides it from thofe who are moft inte¬ rested about her. Invaiti flic tried to aflign fomc caufe for it in her own mind ; the more ihe thought upon İt, the more impoflible ihe found it to conjecture from what or from whom it pro- M 2 ceeded,
< ceded, and that ihene\er would know ľ , flie was convinced ; and nou that íhe law her 'neiid had (apparentlv at leaft) oveicomcit, ker cuiiolity wa· fon^what abated. in about ten <la\ ъ лпег M dame D'A lem¬ be rt \, lettor, flie reçu \al one herfelf from Olivia fas did the Counteis from Madame Chattcneui ), written m the moil hvely an i aílce^ionatc manner, and eomainu g a putt- kiiku account oftİKİrj лпх^сиг the \1ρ % then îcecption from her aunt, wi π ^^ nut quite in to dechiihjg a ilat e a-> the\ appie- hended, and the amull ments thc\ rat «oik oí at Verona. She concluded b) charging Matkine to write immediately; and laid ihe expected to hear from hei all that bad happened in and out of the chateau lino? her departure, and partu ulaily whtth.i ihe bad lince feen de Se\ignic. " Bul tint you ln\e, ϊ can¬ na doubt ^flie added), άηύ, jetting apart, belie vc n.o, my dear Madeline, 1 hope to к αϊ η
kam from you that every little uneafinefs which lurked in your mind, and his, is re¬ moved by the mutual acknowledgment of a paflion which, to the penetrating eyes of fricndfhip, it was evident you enter¬ tained for each other. Blufh not, my dear; the fecret which friends difcover is guarded by them as fedulouily as their own ; and, fliould concealment be neceífary, be aflured of mine. But I will not harbour an idea that it is ; no, í will not believe that dc Sevignie will be contented with the mere pufleflion of your heart :--ere this, perhaps preparations are making; ere this, perhaps, the happy knot is tied ; it fo, accept my finccrcll congi atulat ions ; every une who re¬ gards you, will congratulate you and them- ich cs on fuch an event; for the \viie of ck Sevignie muft, it not her own fault ('which can never bey our ca e,\bc completely h.ipp\." Madeline ^ whole lout tv -t „stated аь- lho read thoie- lines ; fince hopekV, ihr \\>ib 4 , ιι¬ ι relied that her attachment lb v uld oc kno \u ,
known ; and flie fighed with the heavier! fadnefs at the contrail which flie drew be¬ tween her prefent feelings, and what they woukl have been, had her friend's conjectures relatíve to de Se\jgnie and her been juft. She felt fliocked at t}^ idea of being aiked io ihew this letter (whicn fhe had lead in her own chamber) to the Counted ; but that lady, perhaps from fuimifmg fome of the contents, gave not the in alloit intima¬ tion oi a wiih to read it. But though her fears refpečt ing it were «emovtd by this filence, her detection conti¬ nued. The furrmfes of Olivia huit and trnbairaiľd her, and flie feared, when ihe declared their falbcv, that Che Ihoi-ld be re» garded as a flighted object ; and te pride, youthful pride, perhaps no idea ceald be more mcrtifying. To complete her fadnefs tlie Cou au Ь feemed relapfmg imo melancholy ; and, thci.gi.
though they both converfed, converfation in both appeared but as the faint effort of feeling to try and beguile the fadnefs of each other. The efforts flie made to converíè during the day were painful in the extreme ; and when the Countefs retired in the evening, as was her ufual cuftom, to the ruinée! monaf- tery in the valley, for the purpofe of prayer and meditation, Madeline haftily thiew a fcirf around her, and went out upon the lawn, as if fhe had feared a longer continu¬ ance in the houfe would fubject her to fociety, which, in the prefent agitated flate of her mi ad was iikfome to her.
END OF VOL. 2,
