Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Clermont: a tale
CLERMONT.
CHAP. I.
» ................. ■— ....... Witnefs ye Pow'rs How much I fuffer'd, and how much I (hove, Drydem, A HE evening was far advanced when Aladeline went upon the lawn, it was now the duiky hour of twilight, when the glow worm " 'gan to light his pale and ineffedual fires" amongft the tangled thickets of the· foreft, and the vefpcrs of the birds and the toils of the woodman had ceafed. The beetle had now commenced its droning Vol. П. В flight»
flight, and the owlet her fad fong from the ivy mantled turrets of the caftle, inter¬ mingled, or rather loft at times, in the boarie and melancholy cries of waterfowl returning to the little iilands on the lake, acrofs which came the hollow found of a diftant convent bell. Madeline ftood fome minutes upon the lawn as if to enjoy loubds, which by ι ил ing, foot lied the dejection of her mind ; but the kind of ¡leafing trance into which they lulled her, was of flioit continuance ; a'l the perturbed thoughts which anxiety and at¬ tention about the Countefs had, during the day, in fonie degree diflipated, foon returncel with full power; and as (lie caft lur eyes on the bleak and diftant mountains, iancy, torturing fancy prefented de Sevignie to her view, a fad and iohtary wanderer about ι hem. His head unfhclterid, expofed to the un- wholefome dews of night ; his ideas un- fetilcd, perhaps wandering after her, who like himfelf was a child of borrow, 3 Wrapt
Wrapt in melancholy meditation, Lced- kfs aimoft whither or how far ihe went, flic now wandered down a lonely and ro- mantie path, which led along the margin of a lake to a ftupcnduous mountain that terminated it : in this mountain were nu- meious cavities, fome of which had been formed into agreeable fummer retreats by the Count and Countefs dc Merville ; the fore- moft of thefc was a fpacious grotto, whofe fides and roof were formed of rugged ftone, ornamented by beautiful cryftalinc iub- ftanecs, which fparkled in the rays of the fun, that fometimes pierced through crevices in the roof hkc the fineft brilliants ; its floor confined of fmooth pebbles curioufly inlaid, and its arched entrance was nearly overgrown by a tliLk ioilage of ivy, w hoie dark green was enlivened by the bright tints oí leverai wild Пол ι rs; whi'c thick around the myrtle, the lau fedine, and the arbutus, reared high their beauteous and fragrant heads, ib etching their fant aft ic arms through its crevices: immediately above Β ι them
them rofe a wood of folemn verdure, wh.ch reached halfway up the afeen t ; the reft of the mountain was roe k v <ind bare of vegetation. о The beauty and ftvectnefs of the flirubs ; the lovely profped it commanded of the lake and lkirting woods, and the folemn ihadows caft upon it by the trees above, rendered the grotto a delightful place for retirement. »~—»—* ...... . u» » . ,— « ..... . ч — Γη ííiaťy Bower, More facred or fequcfterd lho' butfeign'd. Paner Sylvanus nevei íkpt, nor Nymph, Nor Fanus haunted. From this cavity, through an irregular but not inelegant arch, formed by a chafm m the rock, was an entrance into another, m the centre of which a deep and fpacious bath had been contrived many years back, which was conftantly fupplied by the cold limpid ftreams of the mountain ; this bath, like the grotto, received its only light from apertures in the roof, from whence wild Shrubs hung in fantaftic wreaths ; and about it were finaller caves that anfwered the pur¬ pofe
pofé of lit tie d reffing-rooms ; but thofe caves, tlic bath, and grotto, had been long negleded : for fince the death of the Count, who had conftantly refor ted to them for health and pleaiure, the Countefs had newer been able to bear the idea of approaching them. Her defertion confirmed the fupeiftirious ftories, which had long been in circulation amongft the fervants and pcafantry, of their being haunted by fomc of the former inhabitants of the chateau ; nor would one of them venture near the mountain after fun-fet, for aimoft any confideration. Hither, as I have already faid, Madeline now r wandered, aimoft without knowing whether flie was going ; but when flie found herfelf at the grotto, feeling a little fatigued, flie fat down upon a mofis covered ftone at its entrance ; the prefent fcene was perfedly adapted to her feelings, and like the poet flie might have faid,
Thofe
Tli 't 4v,od«, thcfc u'.lhjtboíe smlancbitl) gloomi Ivf \\ К пн иУУь ûdnefs and <lıaw foıîh T'ť", . .w cf » mov fro:iì mj b in ihrig lìeart. Tke gr tto belìi nd her u as now involved ıı utter dat knefs, and the lake, which lay Införe her, t incluí cd with the gloom of iiofiijg da\, appeared black and difinal ; ex¬ cept where it reilecied one or the beautifully chequcud clouds of evening, or the icattereci ftars that alternately glittered and difap- pearcd ; as if unwilling to difturb the filence of the hour, it ilçje with gentle undulations 10 π ^ green banks ; and no founds, but thofe of its foft murmurs, the mebneholy rippling of the water within the grotto, and now and then a boat í e feream from a wild-fowl on the lake, could bediftmguifhed. The thoughts of Madeline were therefore not in f enuptcd - 9 and fancy again repre- f en ted dc Sevignie rambling about the gloomy heights, whofe outlines ilie could juft difcover *. She fhuddered at the idea of the
the dangers to which fuch conduct expofed him. " Oh, de Sevignie ! (ihe cried aloud, fpeaking in the agitation of her foul,) would to Нглуп че had never met, fince bv meeting, we have onlv become fources of wretched! vis to each otlier ; painful as is our kyaiv.ron, that p..in to me would be ri.ltig iteci, did 1 know you were in any de¬ gree happy ; but while I imagine you mifer¬ able, peace muft continue a ftranger to my breaft." She pauied, for at this inftant a deep figh, from ttie innermoft reccflès of the grotto, pieived her car, and made her ftart with ter¬ ror from her feat. Though flic had early been taught to contemn the weaknefs which gives rife io fuperftition ; and, though in the hour of compofure fhe derided it, yet there were moments when her fpirits where ex- haufted, fuch a moment as the pre lent, in which it found admifllon to her breaft. В 4 Every
Ever} 7 fearful ftory, which ihe had heard of the grotto and othe- caves of the mountain, now recurred to her memory, and the ai¬ moft feared the fpedres they defcribed would ftart to her view ; for of a human creature being in the grotto at an hour of dark nefs, fuch as the prefent flie had not an idea, from the dread flie knew enter¬ tained of it. She was haftening away as faft as her trembling limbs could carry her, when the found of an approaching ftep took from her all power qf motion, and flie funk to the earth in an agony of fear ; aimoft in¬ ftantly, however, ihe was fnatched from it, while a ν ice to wdiich her heart vibrated, the foft the tremulous voice of de Sevignie, aflured her of her fàfety . " Madeline ! (he exclaimed, while he preft her to his throbbing heart) my Madeline I can you forgive the terror I in¬ voluntary caufed you." " Good heaven ! (faid Madeline, raifing her head from his fhoulder) do I really behold, (as if doubting the evidence of her ears,
ears, and eyes,) do I really behold de Sevignie,—why (fhe continued) why, for what purpofe did you come hither." " Ah, Madeline î (he faid) " cannot your own heart inform you ; have you no idea of the fympathy which drew me hither, to wander round the manfion you inhabit ; to indulge my feelings by treading, or tancying ï trod, in the paths you frequented. Oh, Madeline ! what to happinefs would be trifles, are to forrow and defpair matten of importance. While he fpoke, the tremors of Madeline had fomewhat fubfided ; but emotions dif¬ ferent from thofe of fear, though not lefs painful, ftill agitated her mind; emotions which delicacy, diflatisfted with itfelf, had given rife to ; flie did not defire, nor ever had attempted to conceal her friendfhip foi de Sevignie, but fituated as they were, flie did not wiih him by any means to know, it was of fo fervent a nature as her expref- lions in the grotto muft have implied ; and В 5 overwhelmed
overwhelmed with confufion at the idea of them, ihe endeavoured, as foon as flie could move, to difengage herfelf írom his arms, in order to return home. ťC Agaínfl your inclination I will not de¬ tain you, (faid he) and yet (contradiding his words by ftill holding her to his breaft) to part with you fo foon, at fuch a moment as this, is more aimoft than I can bear ; oh Madeline 1 to afled ignorance of what you faid in the grotto, would be to betray infen¬ fibility ; Ì have heard you (he continued, with a voice of rapture) I have heard you in accents which pity might acknow¬ ledge hcr's, pronounce my name. Think then, Madeline, and excufe my doing fo, whether at a moment which has given me the fwcet aflurance of being fomctimes thought of, fomctimes pitied by you, 1 can without the ut moil reludance let you de¬ part immediately." " You have heard me, de Sevignie t cried Madeline, trying to fpeak in a colieded voice,)
voice,) but on your honour, on your deli¬ cacy í reil, to bury in oblivion what you heard." i4 In my heart eternally, (laid de Se¬ vignie." " You muft promife to forget it, (pro¬ ceeded Madeline) that î may try to be re¬ conciled to mv, felf." " Folget ! (repeated de Sevign'e) no Madeline, never will I give a promife which my heart protefts againft fulfilling ; the memory of w^at 1 have heard I will cheriih ; I will treafure,as all that can give pleafure L my exiftence ; in a4 my wanderings, amidft ali my cares, 1 will recur to it for comfort and fupport ; for never can I feel quite for¬ lorn, never utterly miierable, while I imagine I am regarded, I am thought of by you." Madeline fighed, and averted her eyes from his, in order to conceal the feelings his language excited. Reafon oppofed а longer continuance with him, by convincing her a^ lengthened converiation would only add to B ô her
her fubfequent anguifli ivhen ihey parted : but her heart recoiled from the idea of quitting him fo foon, fo abruptly, when per¬ haps they might never meet again ; flie wiflied too, to ftay a few minutes longer, to caution him againft the dangers which his wild and folitary rambles cxpofed him to. For this purpofe, after a little irrefolution, ihe ceafed to make an effort to leave him, and opened her lips but her voice faultered ; and ilie kit that ihe could not exprefs her apprehenfions for his fafety, without be¬ traying the tender intereft (he took in it. Suddenly, therefore, ihe broke from him and moved on. For a minute he ftood transfixed to the fpot where fhe had left him ; then ftarting, he exclaimed thus, " thus, do I ever find my happinefs tranfient 1 oh, how exquifite was that, which but a few moments ago per¬ vaded my foul at the idea of your pity ;—a pity, which your abrupt departure convinces me
me you either wiih to difavow or fup¬ prefs." ci Alas ! (cried Madeline, involuntarily paufmg, and turning to him) of what avail would be my pity." ťí Oh, it would footh my cares, it would affuage my forrows : Repeat, then, my Madeline, repeat the fweet aflurance of it, and fpare a few minutes longer to wretched- nefs and me." i£ No, (faid Madeline, who afliamed of her pail weaknefs refoived to give no farther proof of it,) it grows late, and í rauft quit this place ; to continue much longer here, would, ï am convinced, occafion a fiearch after me, and confequently might fubjed me to the reproach of carrying on clandeftîne pro¬ ceedings." ic Go, then, Madam ! (exclaimed de Sevignie, in paflionate accents) go, Madam l obey the rigid rules of propriety, and difregard my fufferings ; bufferings, which you yourfelf have caufed. Yes, Madeline, 'tis on your account my youth is wafted,
wafted, my hopes overthrown, my com¬ forts blailed · but go— ni aflurance of pity now wouid iooth me ; for 1 am now con¬ vinced, what you feel for mc is not a fettled feeling, but a mere involuntary im¬ pube, fuch аз any ion of loi row may equally excite." He turned abruptly from her, and with· quick, yet tottering fteps haftened to the grotto, againft whofe fide he fuddenly flung himfeif, as if for fupport. At ar other time to be accuted of infen¬ fibility might well have inipired Madeline wiih ;efentmeru ; but now fhe could only feel compaflion and tendernefs for him, whofe pale and djfordered looks gave fuch melancholy evidence of his fufferings. Not more afteded by his words, than tei rifled by his manner, to depart without feeing him in fome degree compofed, was impoffible, and ihe walked flowly towards him, tiufting, that at her approach he would rife, and that ihe
Hie might then be able to prevail on him to quit the Foreft. He did not move how¬ ever, and after ftanding a few minutes by him ilie ventured foftly to pronounce his name. Still he continued filent and mo- tionlefs, and her alarm increafed ; íhe ftoopcd down, but could not hear him breathe,—his hand lay extended from him, (lie gently raifed it, but aimoft immediately let it drop with horror at finding it cold and lifelefs. He was dying perhaps, and fhe had not power to affift him. " Oh, de Sevignie ! (ihe exclaimed, in the agony of her foul) de Sevignie ! fpeak to me for heaven's fake, or I fhall fink with terror." He ftarted, as if ihe vehemence of her words had roufedhim; turned and furveyed her for a minute with a vacant eye. His recollection then returned, and with it all his gentlenefs. ť£ I have
** I have been ill, (he faid) extremely ill ; î never was fo difordcred before, but 4is the effect of weaknefs ; this is the firft day I have been able to come out fince we lafl: parted." '« Good heavens ! (cried Madeline) " what imprudence to come hither j oh, de Sevignie, what can make you act in a manner fo in¬ jurious to yourfelf, fo diftreffmg to your friends." The energy of her voice, the palenefs, the wildnefs of her countenance, proved to de Sevignie the alarm he had given her.. " Ah* Madeline, (faid he,, taking her foft trembling hand in his,) I feem fated to give you uneafinefs ° 9 but be compofed ï befcech you, and alfo be aflured, I never more w ill intrude into your prefence ;·—to¬ morrow, ï leave V-——— for ever. Too long indeed have 1 perfecuted you -, I blufli at the recollection of my impetuous conduct ; to apoligize for it as I wiíh is impoffible ; but never,
never, never, fliall I ceafe to regret it. Per¬ mit me, (he added) to leave you near the houfe, the way to it is folitary, ï will then depart." " No, (replied Madeline) there is no danger in my going alone ; befides, if I per¬ mitted you to accompany me, ΐ fliould bring you out of your way ; for this path near the grotto is the ihorteft one to the road." " Farewell, then (cried he, prefling her hand to his cold lips,) farewell, (he re¬ peated as he refigned it,) but as this is the laft time we ihall probably ever meet, let me have the comfort of hearing from you, that you do not utterly deteft me for the un¬ eafinefs I have caufed you." Madeline attempted to fpeak, but her voice was loft in the emotions of her foul, and flie hung her head to conceal the tears which trickled down her cheeks. They did not, however, efcape the penetrating e)cs of de Sevignie : he again took her hand, " I cannot leave you, (faid he) * e in this fituation 4
fituation ; you weep, you tremble ; oh, my Madeline, reft upon me." *' No ! (cried flie, refilling the effort he made to fupport her) I am now better; let us therefore part, and pírt forever." De Se\ignic repeated the woid, then yielding, or lather overcome by the anguifli of hib heart, be fell at her feet ; he imploied the choicefl bleflings of heaven for her ; he befought her forg, venéis for the raflmefs, the impetuofity of hisconduft. " The remem¬ brance of fuch forgivcnefs may at fome future period (he continued) a little alleviate the pain of lepara t ion." How unncccflary for Madeline to aflure him by woids, of that forgi veneís which her looks ex preil s with (breaming eyes flie hung over him; }ct not their fepaiation alone caufed her tears. His broken health and fpirits were fubječt s of yet water regret, and fcarcely,—fcarcely с ju d fhe picxent herfelf from kneeling on the earth befide him, and fupplicating that heaven he had *'■> recently
recently addreft on her account to reflore them ; but though the fupplication did not burft from her lips, it was breathcel from the veiy depth of her heart. In a moment of agitation like the prefent, the feelings of that heart coukl no ionici be fuppreft, and de Sevignie now beheld the ftrong hold he had of its affedions. But the confirmation of her affedion could not Ieffen his wretchednefs, on the con¬ trary, it feemed to encreafe it : He arofe from her feci:. " Oh, Madeline ! (he faid) hew incon- fiftcnt is the h umati heart ; but a few minutes ago, and 1 fancied the aflurance of your pity and regard would render me in fome degree happy ; now when you have permitted me to receive it, I feel m y fe'f more miferable than ever, and think, fince the obftacles to our union cannot, be con* quered, I ihould have been lefs fo had I ftill imagined you indifferent." Madeline
Madeîine fliuddered, ť< woukl to heaven f (cried flie, emphatically) we had never met." Scarcely was flie able to forbear afking what thofe obftacles were which he alluded to, but propriety checked the queftion ; ihe re¬ gretted bitterly, regretted the divulgement of her fentiments, and the confcioufnefs of its being an unpremeditated divulgement, could fcarcely mitigate her regret for it ; anxious to avoid the imputation of total weaknefs, either from de Sevignie or herfelf, flie now fummoned all her refolution to her aid, and after the filence of a few minutes, addreft him in a colieded voice. " Let us (faid the) endeavour to re¬ concile ourfelves to an inevitable neceflity, the efforts of fortitude and virtue can never fail of being fuccefsful, and how can they be more nobly excrciied, then in trying to repel ufelefs forrow. Let us from this moment, that no interruption may be given to fuch efforts, determine fcduloufly to avoid each other/ 1 " Yet we fhall meet again ; (exclaimed de Sevignie in a paflionate accent, and grafp- ing
ing her hand) our fouls were originally paired in heaven ; and though now feparated by a wayward deftiny, they will, my Madeline, be re-united in that heaven." A tear, in fpite of her efforts to retirai n it, ftrayed clown her pale cheek, but fhe wiped it haftily away. " 'Ere we part for ever in this world, (flie proceeded with a foftnefs flie could not reprefs) let me entreat you, de Sevignie, to exert that fortitude, which from reaion, from education, from principle, you ought, nay you muft if you pieafe, be mafter of. 'Tis an inj u ft ice to yourfelf, to fociety ; above all, to that divine Being who im¬ planted fuch noble faculties in your mind as 1 know you to poflefs, to let them be de¬ ftroy ed by forrow ; befides, what grief muft not the conduct which impairs your health and weakens your mind, give to all you connečVions." " My connedions ! (repeated de Sevignie, looking fteadily at her) my connedions ;'* and his eye loured on her. * f Yes,
" Yes, (replied Madeline) to jour cen¬ ní dions, if then feelings aie at all like mmc. Oh, de Sevignie! if 3011 real!) 1 egard my tranquility, promife, ere wc part, to try and conquer }our dejedion, and to give up your lolitary r.tn bkt; the idea of the danguis to which }ou cxpofe youilelf by them Unifies me." " J^re we jiart, (fid cle Sevignie, who feemed only to have -Utended to thofe woicb) Oli ! what а death- h k e chill comes over my hed! t at the kka of doing lo. Never—never, Madeline, if honour, ii gratitude pern \tcd, won el we fe 1 , aiate." " If they aie combined againft us (cried M'deline) it weie not only íooliíh but crim- rrd to think of ading otheiw ù than we are now doing." *' The ' are ! (ex* Uimeel de Sevi nie) ior ľ oukl it nut be riidioiiounible, Lb/Fateful in tlic exticmc, to attemi-t leruins» the daughiei oi C»cimoi t— he to w noie com- j^afiiuiate t aie, under heaven, 1 periiaps Ovve the prcfeivati'ii oi m} lik; woukl it not, 1 ίαν ,
fay, bc bafe, to attempt Lad 1,1g her fiom са 4 e, f curit}, the cnjoynent ot all that aill'unce cangivi, i.»to cır.*, dinger, and (lıîcunty. No, M icLlme, 1 am not iel'iih ; lam not а \ i'd iin: 1 would not, for the mi ie g at ¡karion of un о \n paifion, invohc the wo:i'\n i ас' ae in trouble ; nor fluuld 1 yraiitx it by iiuli со luuct : — that íLirm wh.ch 1 cou'.d bra\e aioi.e, ï ihould fink i чЛ ieai fi witíi hei." Tie (ìbftvdes which be hid a'luded to, fee mtd now cxp'ai ч\1 : hom fortune, ^¿.wt af foilune, Mad l na was convinced they ip'-ung. Chavned by the nobie, the g.ner- ou^ condud i i de Seurue ; ignorant of the difficulties and ibrro^,b >t fife, \\henun|of feilld of ι comp ť -1 η* e , an 1 belL\ ing, fi /m ly belicvui', that her art idi. u nt ior him could never be (o 1 t í.d, íhe was il noil tempted tooffti ifim 1 er hand. To aflure hım cafe, iecu..t\, the enj > } ment of dll that aiïluence could »ье, uould gladly be rclin- quilhed by her for the fake ot ihaiiag his с αϊ ci>.
cares, dangers, and oblcurity ; but deli¬ cacy, that eeleflial guardian of her kx, chicked the rath impulfe of romantic ten¬ dei nefs. She fuddenly recolleCi^d herielf, and recoiled, from the idea of the action fhe had been about committing, as if from а precipice. " Gracious heaven ! (flic exclaimed within berilli) how mean how defpicable fliould I have appeared in his eyes, who can fo nobly triumph over his own paflion. Had I fol¬ lowed the impulfe of mine, and offered my hand unfolicited, unfančtified, by the ap¬ pi obat ion of a parent or a friend. Ah, Madeline, you may well biufh lor your weak neb." 1 .eft ihe fliould betray that weakneb, fhe determined not to Hay another minute with him, and bidding hun α haíly adieu, flie walked on. De be\ignie 'm afe* minutes followed her, but he continued many by hei tide, ere he again fpoke to her ¿ at lafl he flout, and taking her haud to detain her— ** Madeline
u Madeline, fiaid he, as if hitherto abibrbed m ]>rofound meditation,) do you think, if 1 could render my fituation more profite¬ rons than it at prefent is, that your friends, if you had the generofity to delire it, would permit our union," " 1 do (cried Madeline, hefitating, yet not alVe to repreíš this acknowledgement of tendernefs,) C4 I think they would not oppofc what would contribute to my happinefs." A fudden tmile, the fmile of rapture, illu* mined the countenance of de Sevignie ; he ciafped her hands in his ; he raifed them to heaven.—" Oh, what tranfport ! (he laid) to be able to contribute to your happinefs ; grant, heavenly powers, luch bleifednefs may yet be mine î May 1 detain you Madeline, a few minutes longer to acquaint you with the plan, which 1 have juft conceived, for conquering the obftacles that at prefent im¬ pede our willies." Aladdiné could not reply in the negative, and de Sevignie began : 44 To another"·—laid he.
VOL. И.
С
Ac
At this inftant an approaching ftep was heard, and in the next, the ihrill voice of Fioretta, calling upon Madeline. Provoked by this interruption, de Sevignie attempted to lead Madeline amongft the trees which bordered the path ; but though as much dilappointed as he coukl be, ihe refifted the effort. u No, (faid flie) " I cannot go, 'tis the Countefs, I am convinced, that has feet after me, and flic would be terrified if I could not be found -,, befídes if her fervant dif¬ covered me trying to avoid her, what might ihe not fay. Some othei time muft do for the explanation wl.Lh you were about giving, and which 1 will con f e fs, you could fcarcely be more anxious to utter than 1 to heai." Ci What timt, (afked de Sevignie) " J fliall be all impatience, all fufpence, till we meet again ; to morrow evening you »lay furely come hither."
" Ferhaps,
" Perhaps," faid Madeline. < c No perhaps, (cried de Sevignie) you muft give me a pofitive anfwer." " Well then, you may be confident, if in my power I will come." *' Adieu, then," cried he ; again prefïïng her hand to his lips, then fuddenly darting into the neareft path, he was out of fight in a moment. Madeline paufed on the fpot where he had left her, to refled on all that he had laid, and congratulate herieit on the profped of felicity which was now opening to her view. Her ρ leafing meditation was foon, how¬ ever, interrupted by the appearance of Floretta. " Well, I am furc, (cried flie,) í am glad I have found you. 1 лж! biefs my foul, MamTelle, how can you venture into fuch lonely places by yourleli'. 1 am turc nothing but compulfion could make me do fo." r ' I hope none has been ufed to nlglu,'* с α faid
filici Madeline, as flie proceeded with hei towards the chateau. " That there has, indeed, nothing but the abfoiute commanck of my Lady could have made mc come hither ; 1 wonder, I am furc, what could make her fix on me to look for you. She might have known it was not proper to fend any girl by herfelf into fuch wild places." " Your Lady knew there was no danger, (fa'd Madeline,) as none but her own pea¬ fants and fervants arc about them." " Why, 1 don't fay MamTelle, there is any danger of nieering thieve?, but there is of meeting much woife. Ab, Mammèlle, you know well enough what I mean ; and you muft be either very incredulous or veiy hardy, to venture near the gi otto, after the lurrid ftories }ou have heard in the chateau about it; befides thofe ftories, i could tell }ou others of it, which if you heard, would frighten you fo much, thai 1 dare fay }ou woukl net L· able to move." « If
"If you think they would have that effed upon mc, pray don't tell them at pre¬ fent, (ail M iridine,) for 1 want to make haile to the chateau." " Indeed í don't intend to do fo y (cried h loi etta,) the very telling them would frighten me, and í am iure 1 am iuincienliy terrified already." " Why did you not get fome one to ac¬ company you, (aíked Madeline.) " A likely thing indeed, that any one would accompany me in the dark to fuch place> ; not but I tried, í can aflure you. The butler was the firft 1 afked ; but no truly, he was getting his knives and fpoons ready for fupper. Then I entreated Mr. Jacques, the coachman, but he was juft going to vifit the horfes ; and as to the footmen, ï know í might as well try to bring the pillars of the hall along with me. I tried the maids aMo, but one was going to fettle the chambers, and another wanted to help the cook to get fup¬ per ready ; and another—but in fliort the) had ail fume frivolous excufe or other." с 3 » Well,
0° " Wel!, (faid Madeline,) " though you did -some alone, you met with nothing t<t frighten you." " That fliall never prevail on mc, how¬ ever, to venture again to inch a place by m) {elf, if î can help it." P>y this time they had readied the chateau, and Madeline being informed by a fervant, whom flie met in the hall, that the Countefs was in the fupper parlour, diredly repaired thither.
CHAP.
CFIAF. li.
Iet my tears thank you, for I cannot ipeak, " ■ ...... ■■> ....... * " ■ ' -»And ¡ŕ I con id, Words were not made to vtnt fuch thoughts as mine. JDrypin* β · Л /OU have taken a long walk to night, my dear, (faid the Counteis, as ihe entered,) I really was beginning to grow a little ureafy." *' I am concerned I caufed you any unea¬ finefs, Madam, (cried Madeline,) " I hope you will forgive my doing fo I fliall take care in future not to ilay out fo late."
с 4
The
The Countefs anfwered her with her ufual gracious fwectnefs, and they both fai down to fupper, wliich was ierved immediately afi er her return. The revived hopes of Madeline had re¬ animated her countenance with all its ufual vivacity. The glow upon her check, the luftre of her eye, the fmile that played about her mouth ; the ready chearfulnefs with which flie entered into converfation, and the t-nufual length of her walk j altogether contributed to convince the penetrating π and of the Countefs, that in this walk, fomething uncommonly interefting had oc¬ curred ; and what fhe bclived that fome¬ thing to be, may eafily be imagined. Con- fidering Madeline as flie did,—a facred dépolir, and exclufive of that confideration, deeply interefted about her from her inno¬ cence and fwectnefs, flie deemed it nbfo- lutely neceffary, to enquire into what had pail in the interview, which flie was con¬ vinced had taken place between her and de Sc viírnie.
Sevignie. Well knowing that the eager eye of youth and paflion, too often overlooks thofe dangers, which ftrike the cooler and more experienced one of age. " Your walk to night, my dear Madeîine, (faid flie with a fmile, after the things were removed and the fervants withdrawn) was as pleafimt, 1 hope, asit wa^long." Her imik, and the cxpreffive glance which accompanied it, aflured the confcious heart of Madel ne, that the Countefs fufpeded it had not been a folitary one ; and her face was immediately crimfonecl over : yet Madeline never had an idea of carrying; on any proceedings againft the knowledge of the Counteis. She had determined within her o.vn mind, the moment ihe was acquainted with the plan ol de Sevignie, to unfold to her every circumftance, evei\ nope, relative to hun. The reaion therefore of her prêtent agitation, was a fear, that a premiatine dif¬ covery might make the Counteis imagine с 5 ihe
ilie had meant to carry on a clandcftine cor¬ respondence, and, confequently ieffen her in her cilcem. " 1 fce, Madam, (faid ihe, after the panic of a minute, baíhfully raifing her eyes from the ground) 1 fee that you fufpect iome¬ thmg, and 1 acknowledge you are right in doing fo ; but oh ! deareft madam, do not think me ungrateful, do not deem me im¬ prudent, do not fuppofe to chance alone 30U ow,e the difcovery of my thoughts or fituation ; I only deferred acquainting you with both ; I only delayed opening my heart to your vLw, till 1 had fomething more fatisfactory than at prefent to inform you of" tť Unbofom it now, (faid the Countefs) " and tiuftmc, my dear Madeline, I would not defne the communication, did I not mean to take as gieat an intcreft in your affaii s as a j arent would, ünbofom your heart to me a^ to a Mother ; and beaffured, if my advice, my aiìiftance, my friendfhip, can 5
can in any degree forward your happinefs, ï ihall derive real fatisfadion myfelf from doinfffo." о Thus kindly urged, Madeline rather re¬ joiced than regretted being furpnied into the relation ; ior íhe iiad long fighed, though withheld by diffidence from defiring it ; for the counfel of а perfon more converfant, more experienced than herfe'f in the in¬ tricacies ot the human heart. To elucidate every circumftance which had happened in her interview with de Sevignie, it wffs re¬ quinte to mention thofe which had paft at V——. She began, but it was with the involun¬ tary heiitation of modefly ; and from the iame impulfe ihe tryed to pafs over, as lightly as poifib'e, the pain ihe had expe¬ rienced on de Sevignie's accou it ; but though her language might be uni-iip affioned, her looks plainly indicated what he" fund¬ ings had been, c ó Her
k Her relation ended, the Countefs fat many minutes without fpeaking, asifabfbibcd in profound meditation. She then bioke the iilence, by thanking Madeline with the moil gracious benignancy for the confidence fhe had repo fed in her. " Your narrative, my dear Madeline, ((he cried) " confirms the opinion 1 enter¬ tained, fince the evening 1 law you together, of the ilrength of your attachment tor de bevignie;—nay, do not be coniu fed, my dear ^ love, excited by merit, we have no reafon to be aiiiamed of. " It will pieafe you, no doubt, to hear,. that 1 think his attachment as tender as \our оди ; but it is one, with which his reafon is evidently at variance. Why it is fo, the latter pai t of his converiation this evening ieems to me ţo expiam. A d»ftrell fituation has hitherto ¡minted out the ne- (ifiky of his tr}irg to conquet his paflion ; but 1 own it appears to me ili ange and ni}fterioub that α man of his elegant appear¬ ance
ance and enlightened education, ihould be in narrow circumftances and obfcurity. If however, he can properly account for this obfcurity and want of fortune ; if the one proceeds neither from ignoble birth nor dif- honourable conduct ; and the other from no idle extravagance, no degrading folly, we will not wait for the realization of his plan, be it what it may, to realize his happinefs. You are perhaps furprifed (the continued) to hear me fpeak in this poli tive manner, as if I had an abfoiute power to difpofe of you ; but know my dear, that in me your father veiled fuch a power. As foon as I underftood your fituation with regard to de Sevignie, I communicated to him all I thought concerning it, and requefted his ad¬ vice ; he anfwered me immediately, and begged in future, I might never apply to him on the fubject, but depend entirely on my own judgment \ he entreated me to do tirs, he faid, from a firm conviction that I would watch ovei you with as much foiicitude and fcarcely leis tendemefs than he would himfelf,
hi ι felf. His confidence was not, I t ruft, mii pl ae ed." Madeline woidd have fpoken in the full- nefs of her hedí t, but the Countefs motioned hei to iilence. 4i To co itribute (flie icfumed) to the happineis"! 1 s c ] M,d, will, is í ha\c nhtadv laid, îrnja.t the tuicft j^tbfičiion to me; -hou Id w therefore, leceivcfiomdc Se\i jßic the iatibfadory explanation we delia, í Ihall immf\hately give lo the acioj ted daughtei oi \ry care, that portion, which from the dril moment I took her under my piotection, I ddigned for her; a jortion, which though not fufficient to pimhafe her all the luxunes, is amply fo to procure her all the comiorts of life ; and, to a foul geiitlc and unaffuming as is my Aîadehne's, t hoie ccnitoits will, I tifine, yield more ieai telicity than all its luxuiics or diliipations could do. Should the little poi tion I can gi\e her, be а means of piocuring for her that
that felicity wdiich ihe deferves and I wiih j ier j—bleffed—thrice bleffed, fliall 1 con¬ fider the wealth confccrafccd to fuch a pur¬ pofe." She ftopt, overcome by her own energy ; Madeline was many minutes before ihe could fpeak ; but flie took the hand of her benefadrefs, ihe preft it to her quivering lip, her heaving heart, and dropt upon it tears of gratitude, aficdion, and efteem. " Oh, Madam ! (íhe at length exclaimed) well might you bid me unbofom my heart to you as to a mother ; fure, had I been bkft with one, 1 could not have experienced more tendernefs ; language is poor, is inade¬ quate to exprefs my feelings." *' Then do not attempt expreffing them, (faid the Countefs, with her ufual benignant fmile) but let us refume our, to you to be fure, very uninterefting) converfation. You fay, ίο -morrow evening you promifed to meet de Sevignie." 44 Yes,
ťí Yes, Mad :m, (replied Madeline) with fomc little hefuation." u Inforni him then, (continued the Counlefo) that you have made me your con¬ fidant, alio what I faid concerning him, and my intentions; if he can give the requhed explanation ; but remember Madeline, you tell him, that it muft be an explanation fo clear,-—fo full, that not a fliadow of doubt fliall remain after it ; that, except every thing myfterioub is fully elucidated, Made¬ line Clermont and he, muft in future be ilrangers to each other." " I fliall obey you in every refpecl Madam, (replied Madeline) and indeed (un¬ able to conceal the high opinion fhe enter¬ tained of de Sevignie's virtues) 1 have not a doubt but we fliall reeene as fatisfactoiy an explanation as we could defired 1 " Heaven grant you may, (cried the Countefb) but till you do—till there к fome certainty of your being united to de Sevignie, I fliall not again mention bim to your father, who now imagines from a late letter of
ot mine, that every hope relative to him is over; and I will not undeceive him, except 1 can do fo with pleafure to him and mj felf." They foon after this feparated for the niiriit ; but not to reft did Madeline retire to her chamber : joy is often as wakeful as forrow ; and joy of the moil rapturous kind flie now experienced ; alternately flie tra- verfed her apartment, alternately feated her¬ felf to repeat all that had pail between her and the Countefs, to ruminate over her feli¬ city ; felicity which now appeared i n lured ; for that de Sevignie could give fuch an ex¬ planation as would raiher raife than Ieffen him in the elltmation of her friend, flie did not haroour the fmallefl doubt of. So fanguine is the youthful heart—fo ready to believe that what it willies will hap¬ pen. Alas, ho, v doubly fliarp does this rea- dinefs render the barb of difappointment.
Oh,
Oh, how great was the raptures of Made« line, to think ihe ihould be enabled to put de Sevignie in pofleiïïon of a competency ; every feeling of generofity of fenfibihty, was gratified by the idea, and ilie implored the choiceft bleffmgs of heaven for the bene¬ volent woman, who had been the means of oecafiomng her fuch happinefs. ** May heaven ^fhe cried, with uplifted hands) re¬ move from her heart all forrow, as ihe removes it from the hearts of others." How light was the ftep—how bright was the eye—-how gay was the fmile of Madeline when íhe defcended the next morning to the breakrkft parlour, where íhe already found the Countefs feated ; the ap¬ pearance of every thing feemed changed, the awful gloom which had fo long pervaded the apartments, was haniihed ; and in the landfcape before the win¬ dows Madeline now difcovered beauties which had before efcaped he** notice. The weather had been remarkably fine for fome weeks, yet Madeline thought the fun had not
not flione fo bright for many days as on the prefent. Such is the magic effed of joy, which, like the touch of an enchanter, can raife а thoufand charms around us. With her fiiend lhe took a delightful ride about fome of the moil delightful parts ot the domain after breakfaft; and the re¬ mainder of the day was paft in fociai con- verfe together. As foon as twilight began to ihroud the earth, the Countefs di Snuffed her to her ap¬ pointment. " Do }0u think, Madeline, (cried flie with a fmile, as flie к as retiring from the room) it would ,be amifs if I ordered Jerome to ¡ay an additional plate on the fupper table to night." " Perhaps not, Madam," replied Made¬ line, bluihing. She thought indeed, it was probable that de Sevignie would immedi¬ ately wiih to exprefs his gratitude to the Countefs. CHAP
CHAP. IH.
Ivîy lab 1 ring: îısart, ihat fwelb with irulignniiorb Heaves to jíHch.u ge its burden, that once clone The lufy thing iliall reft within its cell. KOWE, gXPECTING every moment to behold him, flie took the path to the grotto ; but reached it without having that expecta¬ tion fulfilled. Surprifed and difappointed ilie ñopt before it, irresolute whether to re¬ turn to the chateau directly or wait a few minutes there ; ilie at laft refoived on the latter, and feated herfelf on the mois covered itone at its entrance. The deep gloom of the grotto made her involuntarily fhudder whenever ihe caft a glance within it,
it, but in fpite of terror flie continued on her feat, till the dark fliades of night began to involve every objed, and warned her to return home : аз flie arofe for that pur¬ pofe an idea darted Lito her mind, that illnefs or fome d read iul accident, had alone prevented de Sevignie from keeping an ap¬ pointment fo eagerly defiled, to tenderly foiicited, and regretting the time ihe had wafted in expedation, ihe now rather flew than walked to the chateau, in order to entreat the Countefs to fend a fervant to V------ s to enquire about him ; fhe had not proceeded many yards, however, when her progrefs was impeded by the objed who had caufed her aporehenfions and foiicitude. So little did fhe now exped to fee him, that as he ílowly emerged from amidft the trees, ihe ftarted back, as if he had been the laft crea¬ ture in the world the had thought of feeing. Ere íhe could recover fufficiently from her agitation to fpeak, de Sevignie, rather negli¬ gently bowing, laid, " he hoped he had not been
been the means of keeping her out to fo late an hour." * c The officers (continued he, but with¬ out looking at her) to whofe hoípitaíity and politenefs I have been fo much indebted, fince my refidence at V------, infilled on my dining with them to day, and though î wiflied and tried to leave them at an early hour, they would not fuffer me to do fo, nor to depart at the one I did, had I not promifed to return immediately to them." The coldnefs of his manner, the frivolous excufe he made for his want of pundual- ity, and the intention he avowed of quitting her diredly, without any reference to their converfation of the preceeding night, all ftruck Madeline with a convidion, that his lentitnents were totally changed fince that converfation had taken place : for a change fo fudden, fo unaccountable, tenderne fs fug- gefted an enquiry, but pride repelled it, and fhe would inftantly have quitted him with every indication of the difdain he feemed to me rif,
merit, had her agitation permitted her to move." " Will you allow me, Mademoifelle Clermont (cried de Sevignie, ftill looking rather from her) to attend you to the caftle, 'ere I bid you adieu ; and alio to hope, that at fome other time, I may have the honour of feeing you." " Never—(faid Madeline, recovering her voice, and íummoning all her fpirits to her aid) never—no fir.-—No, de Sevignie, ex¬ cept in the prefence or the houfe of the Countefs de Merville, never more will I per¬ mit you to fee me." In her houfe, (repeated de Sevignie with quicknefs, and turning his eyes upon her.) How could í attempt feeing you in the houfè of the Countefs, unacquainted as I am with her." The Counted ¡replied Madeline) would never be difpleafed at my feeing any one in her houfe whom 1 confldered as my friend, Befides—befides-»-(added ihe, hefitating, doubtful
doubtful whether to flop or to go on) be« fides—(after the paede of a minute) íhe gave permiflion to have you introduced to her." *' When, on what account did ihe give that permiflion > (demanded de Sevignie, with yet greater quicknefs then he had be¬ fore fpoken) did (he difcover, or, did you tell her that we had met." βί í told her. (faid Madeline, with firm- nefs, and looking fteadily at him) The Countefs is my friend ;—ihe is more. She is the guardian to whofe care my father has coniîgncd me, and concealment to her would be criminal. I told her we had met, I toid her every circumftance ofthat meeting ; every circumftance prior to it ; I communi¬ cated every thought, ϊ revealed my whole foul." " I admire your prudence, (exclaimed de Sevignie, in an accent which denoted vexation, whilft the melancholy of his coun- \ enance gave way to a dark frown, and the pale nefs of his cheek to a deep crimfon." u î rejoice at it, (cried Madeline) my friend
friend will ftrengthen my weaknefs, will con¬ firm my refolvcs, will give me a clue to difcover the dark and intricate mazes of the human heart." Her language feemed to penetrate the foul of de Sevignie, he turned from her with emotion, then as abruptly turning to her again, " for what purpofe (afked he) did the Countefs give you permiffion to introduce mc to her," " For the purpofe —" Madeline paufed, ihe had been on the point of faying, for the purpofe of promoting our happinefs, but timely checked herfelf. And ah, thought ihe at the moment, from the altered man¬ ner of de Sevignie, ï cannot believe that his happinefs could be promoted by the in¬ tentions of the Countefs. ťt Tell me, 1 entreat, ï conjure you," faid de Sevignie, with earncftnefs. Madeline hefitated.—Yet 'tis butjuftice (flie thought) to my friend, to de Sevignie himielf, to confeb her intentions ; if the al vol. n. o t oration
terat ion in his manner is occafioned by finding the plan he recently conceived im- piadicuible, the divulgmcnt of her penei- fus intent. »ms will a tain iet all to ι ¡edits; cat« hing at this idea, ?nd flat teiing herfelf H was a juft one, ihe briefly related the con¬ verfation which had paft between her and the Countefs; de Sewrnie hftened with fixed attention, but continued filent many minutes aftei flie h?d ceafed to fpeak, as it in a profound re\enc, then fuddenly raifing his ejes from the giou id he raftered them on her with an cxpieifion of the deepeft melancholy, and thus addreft her : " Great (cried he) is my roeret, greater than language ran expieis, » t being unible to avail nv iclf oi the hi di honour the Countefs defigned me ; but though unable to avail ηηίεΐί of it; though unible Ut profit by her noble her geccous 'ntention , røy inability to do i\\ has not ftrppreil v ) gratitude for them. α \Miv,
u Why, why, that inability exifts, í can¬ not explain ; but let me do myfelf the juftiee of faying, that candour would not err in putting the moil favourable conftrudion on it. In this moment, when declaring the re¬ mi iciation of every hope relative to you, f would apologize for the prefumption, the impctuofity, the inconfiftcncies of my con¬ dud 1 1 you. Could 1 do lb as 1 wiih, but аь thai ь impoffible, 1 muft, without plead¬ ing for it, caft myfelf upon the fwectnefs of your di pofi t ion for forgi venéis. í often, brio;e this periód, deci íred I would never more intrude into >our pıdence; 1 now ioLmnly repeat that declaration, for 1 a:a now thoroughly comincvd of the folly of mv former conduci, and he who is fieniibL of his error, yet perfc veres m it, isguihv of weakneibin the extreme ; fuch vcaknels is not mine. In futuie, I mean ю avoid every puifuit, to fly from every thought which can encrvite my mind. f Ls voice iaultered, and a devo fi^h bur I fiom him. " Farewell, Mab^ivdklL r· ¿ Clorc.iom,
Cleimonr, (laid he, after the paufe of a moment) too long have 1 detained—too long ha\e ï puíecutcd }ou—with my hit adieu récrive my belt wiihes for your hap« pmeís, may they be mote availing then thofe 1 iomied lor my own." Fie caft another lingering look upon her, then turning into a winding path, difappeaicd ina moment. fluiy flat teiing hope, every pleating ex- j cetation oí Madeline's, w ľ as again emfhed, without the im dieft pioíj ed of their being uer moie leűvcd; hkc the uníubílanlial p.v < mts of ι dream they faded, noi left a wu\ k bi hind. Oh, what a vacuum d\d their lois otcal'on in the hent of Madeline: at fi, ft, (he almoil hnciid ihe had dieant the ionvufation oí the pieceeding night, and that it was only now, the îllulions oí that dieam wcie il}mg fiom her. But by de- gices her thoughts giew mue compoied, and the ι c\eiy wild oi ioothing iuggeftion of ÍMivythcd гл\глу avti íhe began to íe- toíiLvLí th conduci oí de SeMgDîc. llisLfl wokL 1 ad not been able to make her íhiuk fuoui.iblv
favourably of it. " No, (flie cried) I am convinced, without fome motive for doing foy which he durft not »vow, he never would have with-licld the confidence he was ίο kindlv invited to repofe in the moft amiable of women. Anel \et—(flie continued, alter paufmg iome minutes; Lo with-held it, per¬ haps, not from having any impi oper motu es tornale him wiíh conceıîment, but becaufe his fentiments were altered lefpccring me,— Though no, (fhe proceeded, after another paufe) that could not be the cafe ; 'tis im¬ poffible in one night fo great an alteration could have taken place. 'Tis evident then, too evident, that a caufe exifts for conceal¬ ment, which he cither fears or is afliamed to acknowleilge ; and alio, that his coldnefs lhr> evening, fpnmg fiom a with of trying his power o\er me, for rhey fay neglect is the teft of affection ;—but de Sevignie, your art : fice cauied you no triumph, and never— never more, fliall you luve an oppoitunity of exercifing it on me; like you, I will in future
íuturc avoid every nurfuit, fly from every thought which can enervate my nand." The linking of the caftle clo'k now reached her ear, and ihe haflily walked to the chateau ; alarmed on finding the uiual fupper hour over, leail ihe ihould by her long ilay, have again given uneafinefs to the bufoni oí her inend. On reaching the chateau, a fervant in¬ formed her, that the Coiintcfs was in her ilrcffing-room : flo\\ly Madeline aicended to it ; ihe felt ready to fink with confufion at the idea of the mortifying explanation ihe muil make to the Counted. Ci She will think (cried íhe) that ΐ have hitheito been the dupe of my own fancy ; and that de Stučnie, but in my own imagination, bus S 'een amiable." She pauied at the door f(;r a minute, fiom a vain hope that by fo doing, fhe ihould regain fome compofure. <r Wci!, (faid her hiend, fmiling as flic entered) 1 find, Madeline, by } our long flay, that
yri vou co u'd n )L withland the plcafures (n л utc-a-tjte ; but w heie ıs the ChvVahcr de Se mv nie, í íhe continued, on feeing Madeline fliut the door^ were you af.aid to brhm lim, leaft 1 ihould rival узи." tl lie i. gone, MaJiim, (.an' \ered Made¬ line, in a faint voice, as ihe i at do.vn on the iiuuc I chair, unable any longer to fupport heneh. * s Gone ! (repeated the Cjuntefe, in a tone of amazement) but bleis me, my dear, ) ou look very pale, are you ill." "No madam," Madeline attempted to fay, but her \oice failed her, and ihe burft into tears. ci Giacious heaven 1 (exclaimed the Countefs, riiiag, and going to her,) you terrify me be) ond expreííion, Madeline, my love, what is the matter." * e Nothing, madam, (replied Madeline) only, only, (iobbing as if her heart would bieak) that 1 think, I brieve—the Chevalier de Sevignie, is not quite fo amiable as 1 once imagined." n 4 " Try
6Í Try to compofe yourfclf and fpeak in¬ telligibly my dear, (faid the Countefs) for 1 cannot fupport, much longer, the feats you excite." The tears fhe ih ed fomewhat re¬ lieved the full heart of Madeline ; and the Countefs taking a feat by her, ihe was able in a few minutes, to relate the conduct of dc Sevignie, and acknowledge the fenti- meiib it had infpiitd her with. " His behaviour is ftrange, is inexplica¬ ble, indeed ßiidi tlie Countefs) and I per¬ fectly a^iecwith you in thinking, that he is an unworthy character ; too undeíèrving to have an effoit made to foi ve the nrjjtery which he has wrapt himfelf in ; had he any fenflbility, had he any noblencis, he never would have wounded your innocent, your ingenuoib heart as he has done. Had he refpecled, had he regarded you properly, he never would have regretted your making mc your confidant ; that regret confirms my belief, notwithftanding his folemn pro- reflations of feeing you no more, that he itili entertains defigns concerning you ; de- 5 %ns,
figns, I am forry to fliock your nature by faying fo, of a d i ili onou rable nature. Should he therefore, again throw himfelf in your way, as I apprehend, ihun him, I entreat, 1 conjure you, my Madeline ; as you value your happinefs, your honour, the peace of your friends, the efteem of the world." " Ah, madam, (cried Madeline) I hope you do not doubt my refolution -, —my tendernefs is wounded, my pride is roufed, ^ and thinking as I do of him, could í now permit an interview with de Sevignie, I ihould be leifened in my own eyes." " I do not doubt your refolution, my love, (replied the Countefs, kifli ng her check) and 1 beg you to excu с the caution, the imncceflary caution of age. (She now cx- preft her pleafure at not having written to Clermont, fince things had taken fo dif¬ ferent а turn from what was expected.) 1 rejoice to think, (continued ihe) that he will not know how unworthy de Sevignie was of the kindnefs he ihewed him." d 5 Madeline
Madeline fighed deeply at thofe words, the violence of offended pride was abated, and in this moment of decreafed refentment, an emotion of foftnefs again ftole o'er her heart, and made her regret having expofed dc Sevignie, by her own animadverfions, to the ftill feverer ones of the Countefs. She regretted, becaufe from this returning foft¬ nefs flie was tempted to doubt his deferving them, and to impute the inconfiftcncies of of his condud, to difficulties too dreadful perhaps to relate ; and flic fliuddered at the idea of having, iu addition to his other mis¬ fortunes, drawn upon him the unmerited imputation of bafenefs ; but from this idea, torturing in the extreme, icfledion foon re¬ lieved her, for when flie re·confldered his condud, ihe could not help thinking he de- fcrved that imputation. " Yet is it poffible, (flie cried to herfelf} that dc Sevignie, he who appeared poifefled of the nicer! delicacy, the moil exalted honour, the ficacheft principles oi redi tude ; is
is it poflible that he cai be unamiable ì Alas, why cannot I doubt it ftill ;—but no, let me rather rejoice than regret not being able to do fo ; rejoice, that paflion no lonaer fpreads a ml ft before my eves : to endeavour to doubt his nnworthinefs now, woukl be to trv and blind my reafon, and weaken my refolvcs." But notwithftanding what flie faid, flie ftill fluctuated between refentment and ten¬ dernek, candour and diítručť, —alternately acquitted, alternately condemned him. A Vidi the ut moil gentlenefs, the Countefs tried to booth and ileal her from her forrow ; flie did not, like a rigid cenfor, chide her for w e ík nefs in indulging it. She knew what it was to have the projects of youthful hope overthrown ; the anguifli wdiich at¬ tends the fliock of a firft difappointment, and that time muft be allowed to conquer it. That lime, aided by reaion, would heal the wound which had been given to the υ 6 liei itle
gentle bofom of her Madeline, flie trufted and believed. On retiring to her chamber, Madeline could not fupprefs her tears at the contrail flie drew between her prefent feelings and thofe of the preceeding night ; and again ihe began to fancy de Sevignie more unfor¬ tunate than unamiable 5 when fuddenly re- colleding her refolution of expelling this idea, flie haftily tried to divert her thoughts from it. ** That we are feparated, I am aflured, (cried ihe) and to afcertain whether I have reafon to efteem or condemn him, (though ioothing perhaps to my feelings to think the former) can now be of little confequence to me."
CHAP.
CHAP. IV.
Ah where is now each image gay The hand of Fairy fancy wove, Thepainu-d fpiing, elizium gay, The babbling nil, the cukur'd grove. ER night was reftiefs and unhappy. " Ah, (fighed flie) how differently» did 1 imagine it would have ended." Pale, trembling, clejeded, the very reverfe of what fhe had been the preceding morning, ihe delccnded to the breakfaft parlour, where her melancholy was, if poffible, encreafed by obferving the Countcfs's, who either from iympathy for her, or from a return of her fecrct uneafinefs, or perhaps from a mixture of both, appeared languid and dejecled. She tried, however, to appear chcarfui but the efforts
Η
efforts flic made for that purpofe were too faint tc fuccee Î, and ul iole either to be¬ guile her own iadncfa, or that of her young companions, the d >.y wore heavily away. As they fat, at its decline, by an open window in one of the parlours, ind beheld the fun finking behind the wcftcin hills, a deep and involuntary figh heaved the bofom of Madeline, at rcfleding, how very difícient her ieelings were now, from what ihey had been on the fame hour the preceding even¬ ing. The Countefs interpreted her figh, and taking her hand, preil it between hcr's. 6C My dear Midcline! (íhe exclaimed) my fvcet g'ul, it giicvcs my heart to fee you thus depreft. Your prefent difappointment, I allow, is great ; but relied, and let the re¬ lied ion compofe your mind : how much greater it would have been, how much more poignantly you muft lune felt it, had you married de Sevignie, and then, when too lite, found him to be the worthlcfs charader you are now appr¿henfive he ib. u Few
<ŕ Few there are, my dear Madeline, whofe fituations, however bad, might not be rendeled w r oife ; we ihould therefore try nor to deferve an augmentation oi calamity, by bearing that inflided upon us with ìc- fignation. " W hy calamity is the prevalent lot of humanity— л hy our \htuous hopes are fo often o\ei thrown—why the race is not al¬ ways to the fwift, nor the battle to the ft tong ; both leaion and lehgion teaches us will be explained heie.dter; in the mean time, ht no difappointment, no vicİfiitudes, ho. vever painful and unnici ted we may con¬ fider them, ever tempt us to doubt, or to arraign the t>oodnefs ãnd wiidom of that Bciiir, from whole hand proejáis alike the cup of good and evil. tfi Think not, (flie contii.ued) as too manv perhaps miglitelo, that 1 en eh what î elo not ρ rad ifc ; or, ihat my lefibcs are thoic of а woman, who ha к 1% maceri by di. ар pointaient, can exhort oihc.s to tiiat fub- niiflion wdiich ihe never kne. ν the dii fu u. t ν of
of acquiring. This, believe mc mv dear Madeline, is not the cafe ; 1 know what it is : when we extend our hand foi the rofe to gather the thorn 1 —when we open our bofom to hope, to admit defpaii—when we baik m the iuníhine, to be furprifed by the ftorm, and have it burft wich fui y o'er our unfheitered heads." " Oh, from evciy ad verfe ftorm may you be flickered !" exclaimed Madeline, with up¬ lifted eyes. As fhe fpoke, Father Bertrand, conicffui to the Countefi, and officiating pneft to her houfhold, ftopt before Ihe window : he be¬ longed to the community which has been ahead y mentioned, and frequently rambled at the cìoie of day from his convent, to the wild fohtudes of the wood fin rounding ť 1 e chateau. He was upwaids of fixty, dud one of thofe inteiefting figures which cannot be viewed by fenfibilny without ¡uty and vene¬ ration ; his noble height ftdl gave an idea of what his forni had been, when unbent by infirmi tv ;
infirmity ; and that form, like a fine ruin, excited the involuntary figh of regiet for the devaftations time had made upon it. His hah s were white, and thinly fcattered over a forehead, more deeply indented by care than age ; and the iad, the folemn expreflion of hib countenance, denoted nis being a fon of ibi row, and proved his thoughts w r ere con¬ tinually bent upon another world, where alone he could receive confolation ior the mifenes of this. " How fares the good ladies of the caftle this evening," cried he, leaning upon his ftaff, as he ftopt before the window. " Why not fo well, father, (replied the Countefs) but that we might be better; here we aie, like two philolophers defcant- ing upon the vanities of life; and when women talk philofophy, the world fays, they muft either be indiipofed or out of temper." Well,
" Well, I flirn't pretend ίο con t rad 'ufe what the woild fays, (cried the good man, fmiling) nor fin ce ίο well employed fliall í longer interrupt you, ladies" The Countefs afked him to come in anel take fome refreshment, but lie refufed, anei after chatting a little longer, rambled away to the wikkft parts of the v\ood. " The ftory of Father Bertrand, (faid the Countefs, as he retired) is a ftriking proof to all that known it, that we fliould never be too eager in the purfuit of our wiflies. As it is fliort, and rather applicable to what we have been talking about, I will relate it."-— " He was fon to a gentleman of good familv, but ftill better fortune, wfyo lived in the vicinity of this chateau : íhe large patri¬ mony he was to inherit, made his parents anxious to give him fuch an education as ihould teach him to enjoy it with modera¬ tion and elegance
After
" After learning cveiy thing he could l^arn in his native country, he was fent abroad to iinpiovc himfelf bv viiiring various courts, and acquiring that knowledge of men and manners, winch is fo requiiite for thofe deftincd to mix in the great woild, and which in a fixed refidence it is aimoft impof¬ fible to obtain. In the com fe of his tiavels he ρ ii d a v: dit to England; and bei e, in a fmall nun in that kingdom, he became ас- quainted with a young lady, who at an caily age w T as left an oiphan and a dependant on an old capricious aunt, whofe only motive for keeping her in the family, was, that on her ihe coukl vent that fpleen and ill-nature which no oneclfe would bear fiom her. The fair orphan and Bertrand frequently met each other at diffeient houfes ; antl the beauty of her perfon, the foft dejedion of hermanner, and the patient fwectnefs with which ihe boie her fituation, foon gained a complete conqueft over his heart ; nordici hers retain its liberty. « The
ťC The declaration of his attachment Bertrand would have accompanied by an offer of his hand, had not duty and refped to his patents prevented his taking fuch a ftep without their knowledge and approba¬ tion : he wrote to them for their confient ; but inftead of receiving it, he received a prefling cnticaty to return home immedi¬ ately ; and alio an acknowledgment from them at the fame time, that they could not bear the İclea of his niairymg a foreigner and a proteilant, as was the lad) he paid his ad- drefles to. Bertrand did not attempt to write again, or difregard their entreaty ; his duty to them, and his confederation for his own happinefs, prompted him to return home without delay, for he knew their hearts, and was convinced, when he once pleaded bis caufe in perion, he would not be refufed : calming the ditquietude of Caro¬ line by this aflurance, and pledging to her vows of unalterable love and fidelity, he embarked for his native country, and as he expected, fuccecded in his iuit. It was then the
the depth of winter, and his parents dread* ing his undertaking a voyage in that incle¬ ment leaion, conjured him to defer, till the enfuing ipring, going to England for Caroline, whofe marriage they infilled on having celebrated in their own houfe, from an idea, that' if their fon was married accord¬ ing to the forms of her church, (which they knew would be the cafe if his nuptials took place in her country) fome heavy calamity would befa' him in confeepience of that cir¬ cumftance. c * But the wiflies of Bertrand were too impetuous to comply with theirs ; he ral¬ lied their fears, oppofed their arguments, and returned, without delay, to England. The friends of Caroline ; for her friends encreafed when fortune began to fmile, now tried to detain her and her lover in England, as his parents had tried to detain him in France, till a more favourable feafon, but they tued in vain ; the youthful pair dreaded no dangers, or rather overlooked tho idea
idea of any, in their impatience to quit a place which retarded the wilhcb of one, and brought continually to the mind of the other, alhoufand cruel flights and mortifica¬ tions. They accordingly embarked, elated with hope and expectation ; the fbip was bound to Noimandv, near whole coaft Berti and had fome friends fettled, who pro¬ mifed, on his landing there, to accompany him to his father's houfe, in order to be prefent at his wedding ; the weather con¬ tinued favourable till they had nearly reached their deftincd port, when it fud¬ denly changed, as if to mock their hopes, and teach the heart of man no certain feli¬ city can be cxpeded in this life. The iaüors endeavoured to make ior the íhoic, but in vain, the florm ragul with violence, and after toiling about a confiderable time the íliip at length bulged upon a rock ; the 4>rg-bojt v\as immediately thrown out, though from the fui у of tlie waves it afforded out little chance of deliverance : ι h io chance, however, was eagerly ieized—Bcrtiand cal¬ ling
ling upon every Saint in heaven to prefervc her, bore the fainting Caroline into it, the iailors crowded in numbers after them, and it aimoft diredly upfet. The ihock of that moment fepeiated Bertrand and Caroline for ever in this w r orld,—the waves caft him upon a rock, from whence, aimoft lifelefš, he was taken up by forne fifherman and conveyed to a hiu ; here his friends, whom the expedation of his arrival had drawn to the coaft, difcovered him. Tiieir care, their aíflduity, Í0011 rciiorcd his fenfes—but with what horrors was that r^ftoiat/on accom¬ panied,—the deepeft moans, the moft pierc¬ ing, the moft íiantic crie^, v.ere all, for a lo->g time, he had the power of uttering : he then infilled on being taken to the water- fi Je, anei heie attention alone prevented jib commuting an ad of eLip^raticn, by pluiuHig himfelf amidi! the waves which had entombed lib love ' one day and one nig' c, he íough t her on the ·* ica beat ih ore ," the iecond morning her body λ,ι d fto\cud on the íl rand ; but how altjied r , by ilie ς deaths
cioaths alone it was known to be that of the Caroline he had loft. Kneeling on the earth, Bertrand folemnly vowed, by the chafte fpirit of her o'er whofe remains he wept, never to know another earthly love, but to devote the remainder of his days to heaven. His friends conveyed him and the body to his parents, who endeavoured to prevail on him to cancel his vow, but in vain, and as foon as the neceffary formalities could be gone through, he took the religious habit. " His parents, difappointed in their hopes relative to him—their hopes of feeing a little fmiling race of his prattling about them, pined away, and were foon laid befide the bones of her, who had been the innocent caufe of their trouble. Bertrand then gave up the houfe of his forefathers, and the greateft part of the fortune appertaining to it, to a near and diftant relarion ; by this time the turbulence of his grief had abated, and he foon after be¬ came,
«ame, by his benevolence and ftrid, but unoftentatious piety, one of the moft re¬ fpecled members of the community he had entered into : his ftory interefted me, and on the death of the old monk, who had been my confcflbr and chap'ain, J appointed him to thole officer. Rut t h ©ugh time and reafon have meliorated his forrows, there are periods when all their violence is revived, " When the rough winds ol winter howl round his habitation, and bend the tad ii^cì oi the mountains by which it is iur- roimded, Чь then the remembrance of pail event., i weih his heart with igonv ; 'tis then he thinks he nervs the plaintive voice of Caroline mingled in the blaft, and fancies he behold i herihiveriug fpirit ftaiking through the Ρ,Ιοοίη, at*! beckoning; him awav. íť The vveddmg garments, which ihr pride and fond nei s of his mother prepared for his intended bride; the pidure, which, on their parting in England, ihe gd\c 1dm, VOL. И, e | iC
he ftill treaftnes, as the hcı mî t would trea- fin c the relics of a famt. I have beheld them—I have wept over them—I have ex¬ claimed within myfelf, as J have gazed on îheic /neme at os of loft happinefs—* Oh, children of the dutl ! what folly to place y ur hopes,} our wiflies on а workl \.1ч4е changes aie fo fudden ; whofe hap] inel·, even while it appears in our \icw, even while wc ft retch out our arms to enfold it, flics never г о return.' <й Oh, Madeline ! as Bertrand has fliewn me ihe ornaments defigned for his Co reline, •and told me their haplefs tak , while the big tear of tender rccolicdion and poignant regret has rolled ck'.n his check, 1 could only quiet the Along emotions oí my heart, by faying, like the holy man himfdf. : e Father of heaven ! thy deci ees muft furely be for the wiiefl purpofes, elte thou wouklft not thus aflhd thy cicaturca ; thy will, therefore, not our's, bc done.' The for- 2 rows
vows of Bertrand (refumed die Countefs ? after paufing a minute) were heightened, by thinking himielf acceffary to them, in con» fequence of not regarding cither the Ampli¬ cations cf his parents or friends for poil- poning his voyage till а more fettled feafon ; fo true is it, that thofe who yield to impetu¬ ous pallions, will fooner or later have reafon to repent doing fo." The mind of Madeline was infenfibly CahiKcl, and drawn from its o.vn cares by ihodbiuurfie of the Countefs ; r<*r the pre- о pt of wifdom, the tale of inftrudion is ever pkvilmg to the children of virtue. ÌJvi with that qukk iranfition of feeling, îj peculiar to the youthful mind, flu lelt, VMth ie turning computine, а kind of dulafte to а woild, which daily experience con- vi.1% cd her teemed with calamity. Soon alter the Countefs had conclu led her little narrative, ihe requefted Madoimo L z t )
to take her iute— a requeft, which Madeline attempted not to refale, in the prefent flite of her mind I id or íolcmn ilrains were done congenial to her feeling«, and ihe felectcd a hymn to the Supreme Being, celebrating Ыь goodnels and the happineb prepared for thofe heieaitei, who patiently fupport the trials of this life. Juft depu fled by a conviction of its iuifeiings Madeline de¬ rived a kind ol duine confotydon from woids, which gave fo confoling an afluiance of their being rewarded. At tuft her voit с \\ i c weak, and her touch faint and trému- lou^ i but by degrees, аь if animated by the fubječi, her voice legaincd us ftiength, and her lignei itb ilcadineis; and high on the fwelliiig notes her foul feemed aicending to that heaven, whofe glones appealed opening to her view, when a deep figl·, or lather iob, iuddenl) flartlcd her. Her hand imolan* taiily refted on the liungs, o'er which it was lightly iwecpmg, dud ihe call an eager glance towaiJs the Counteİs. How great wa^ her iuipiie—hci confteination, to fee lier
her fallen Ьа'к, pale, and weeping in ner chair. The lute inftantl) diopped Ьо 4 л Madeline, and ftarting up, flie mftmcttvdy flung her arms round her benefaareb, ex¬ claiming, {< Good heavens ' Madam, what ь íhe matter." Then, without waiting for α reply, ihe was flying from the room for ai- fiftanee, when the voice of the Counte S made her flop. * s Return, my dear, (faid flie, raifing her¬ felf on her chah) I am how better, it was only my fpiiits were overcome. Youi íolcmn ilrahis awoke in my mind recollcdions of the moft painful nature; the hynn you weie playing was a favourite of iny loid's, The evening preceding the illnefs which ter¬ minateti his life, as pale and languid he fat by me in this very room, he requefted me to play it for him; his word\ his lo As, while he liftcned, as afterwards confldered by nie, have fince convinced mc that he knew his end was appioaching, and that he ti ite d on this h) mn as a kind of requiem lor his de- E 3 parting
parting fpirit. ln that light I hive ever tince regarded it. 5 ' О Madeline íhudderctl ; íV.c thought there was a ghaüİy palcncf» in the countenance ol' *he Countefs. ^ Oh, Madam ! (laid Pie), why clici you not prevent my playing it r" *' Вести il· , ΐΓΛ love, (rcj)lied thcCotintef*) í:;ou[;h îi pai iu, it alio pl cafe s mc. I am now better (the continued), and will retire to the chapel for alitile time." t£ Ah ! Madam, (faid Madeline), permit me to accompany you to night, for perhaps you may be again taken ill." '* No, my bvc, (cried the Counter), there is »υ danger oi ny being fo. 1 thank, you for vou: kind follciludc about me, Lut í cannot let you come with mcj my compofure I know will bc perfectly rciiorcd by ufiting Ike chapel Tell Fioretta, therefore, to bring me my fcarf/'-—Madeline obeyed, but with a repugnance flic could not conquer,-— and í lie Count els wrapping it about her, departed, afluring Maddine lhe would hailen
haften back to fupper, and would then ex- ped to find ha cheerful. Made· ine, left to herfelf, ftrolled out upon the lawn. Tt was now the duiky hour of twili ;hL and foli t tide and filence reigned around. Her thou?„ht% no longer diverted by conversation, again reverted to paft u.b ел , and deeply ruminating on them, fhe con- tin 1 .cd to walk till it grew quite dark : ihe then returned to the caftle, and nit finding the Countefs in the room w he» e they had parted, fhe rung fer a fervant, to enquire whether the w r as yet come baci; ; the man replied flie was not. He p Ling fby, after promifing to return fo foon, filled ttie mind of Aladeline with terror, left her delay ihould be occafione ! by a uturn ot her ill- neis ; and going diiedly ίο Agath? flie communicated her appreheniiens to hex, and cntieated her to accompany her to the monaftery— ал entreaty the ia thrul creature readily complied with.
t? ι их * Л , f"» л 4* { " ri -ti·»· *
s
The \λ"ϊι d'r'rø tucirh wai rn »he ^ Ή^ îo pi, t, Weak was the pul/e, and fu» db' ht' «vM the heart» A S they proceeded f hither, Agatha ex- preíľed her regret at her lady^ pci fevering in viri t ing the chat e!. ** ?he if there, ^faid ihei incompafled by the dead, and remote from 'sumar aid, if fu Ji fliould be required ; ■>ffc : a:.d often bave ï fliudtlcied at the iď 1 л oí the danger^ to which íhe expoied lurieh ny poing thituer <:1<*пе ; and often have ï taken the libcity of entreating her jnot to do fo, but withoui effect : ihe ha^ a jaiticular plcaluic in its foìitude, and in pja\ ing ^here not only the bones of her an-
ceftors, but thofe of her hufband and chil¬ dren reft." " I own (cried Madeline) í am furprifed flic can go, at the lonely hours (he ekes to ίο dieary a place, which appears to me fur- rounded by every thing that can appal the im lunation " " For mv part ¡^xcliimed Agatha) и »tiling in the world eoulri te npŕ mc to ею fo ;—Lord ! í Ihould be feared out of my very fenfes by apprehcnfji, if 1 flopped a few minutes in it pfter it wa*> dark. Hdly Vhj/iii ' ¡cried ihe fuddenly, аь they ad- vinc^d down the Vilky) proiecl us,—· ı.ütbmg but b)\e formy lady could teupt тле to go on, thi-» place is fo frightful." Madeline coukl not wonder at the terror flie Det raud ; the fcene was calculated to in- iph e ii, and íha felt а degree ol· it herielf r — on either fide the mountains role in black rifles to the cloiub, and the wind iflued /lo*- ri « h cauties \rith a hollow found, that ii Л lb.ru thing particularly au fui in it, whilft' 'he · \ь ^ ία e j mcd hoiribly hom the trees г. 5 w lue h
which waved about their feet. Madeline began to regret not having procured the protedion of one of the men, but that re¬ gret, wich the fears which excited it, flie concealed from her companion ; both, how¬ ever, were too much difturbed to continue to con verfe ; and in filence they reached the monaftery, and were juft turning into i( y when the figure of a man, ftanding beneath a broken arch, near the entrance, caught their eyes ; both ftarted, and Agatha, who, from being forcmoft, had a better view of him than Madeline, inftantly exclaimed, but without withdrawing her ej es from him, 4ť The Lord defend my foul ! what brings you hither ?" She received no reply however— the man who had neither noticed ber nor her companion till flie fpoke, ftarted at the firft found of her voice, and, after furveying them for a moment with a look of affright, precipitately fled down the valley. " Oh, my lady ! my deareft lady ! (ex¬ claimed Agatha) fome cvi!, I fear, has be¬ fallen her," « Oh,
* ζ Oh, heavens ! (cried Madeline, trem¬ bling fo flie could fcarcely ftan ) w' a e vii do you apprehend ? who is that ftr η er ? why, if he knew 50u, as I fuppofe he did from your knowing him, did he fly from you ?" " Bccaufe he is a villain," (replied Agatha, as flie ruíhcd into the chapel followed by Madeline, whofe tcror and amazement were beyond language to exprefs.) The mo η hen at its full, aided by the twilight of fummer, gave a full view of r^e interior of the ch.i el 5 and as they entered it, they beheld another man darting out of a fmall door oppoilte to them. Madeline invo'untanly caught the ar.ii ol Agatha, and both pau íing, ftramed an eve of agony and terror after him : i u ry pauied however buc ior а moment; for а deepgtoan reaching their can, made t .cm haftily ruih up the aille trom w henee it pi >- с«, eded, where, with fedi-gs too ďwidtul to rc ate, they beheld their friend, their bene* ía Ireis, hina, iL· tened beiore the monument of uv. r aufband, appmm.y ItícleL, а к! a h o hnali
fmalİ dream of blood ifíuing from her fide. A ibriek of mingled gi icf and horror burft from Madeline, and, unable to ftand, ihe funk befide her, and ciafped her trembling arms around her. Agatha, though equally eflličled, u as not fo much (hocked as Made¬ line j for from the moment ihe beheld the ftranger whom ibe had addreifed outfide the chapei, ihe had from fecrct rcafons of her ov\n been a Imo ft convinced, o** entering if, ilie ihould behold a fight oí horror. From being in fome degree prepared for it, me was in fome degree collected ; a>id kneeling down, foon difcovered that her lady ftill breathed, and trufted, that ír m the fmall quantity of blood which iíľucd from it, her wound was not of a very dangerous natine. She row ca'led upon Madeline to aßift her in it aunchi ne, it, eie Oie went to the caftle for lome of the íèrvants to a fii ft in carrying hct thither. The alme íl fainting fernes of Madeline wc -х re* -died bv 1кг voict, ryd ftarting up, ilie Aİldl) deiví^ďd \: Vsi Couattis lived, " Tli^nk
ťí Thank heaven ! flie does,'* faid Agatfta. Madeline dropped upon her knees in a/ tranfport oí joy. " Gracious heaven ! (die cxclaimeel) receive my thanks. \Then haftily rifing) had I not better fly to the caftle (faid ih'e) for afliftance " ťC Firft help me to bind her wound (cried Agatha,) Madeline was habited in a lawn drefs; fhe now inftantly tore it from her waift, and giving it to Agatha, fupported tho head of the Countefs upon hor boiorn, while a bandage was bound round her. The mo¬ rion of railing her and binding her wound, Ierved to bring the Counteis to It к If; ^.s ihe regained her ienfibihty, w itli α deep gro m, and without opening her eyes, flie extended her hand, and made a feeble effort to pulh away Agatha, exclaiming as ihe did fo— " Murderous ruffian, forbear! 'tis not in mercy to me, but to your unnatural em¬ ployer J aík vou to i parc my life ; for never will peace or joy revint his heart, м л.) b»ood /eíb upon his head." " Oh »
íť Oh ! my friend, my more than mother^ (exclaimed Midcline, prefling her cold check to the } et coldei one of the Countefs) no murde.ou^ ruffian .s now near you." The Countefi fighed heavily, and opening her dim eyes, looked round her fome minutes before ihe ipokc, as if doubting the reality of what ihe faw ; th: n in а iaint voice, but one that evidently denoted pleaiure, flie cried, ťí Great and gl rious Being, 1 thank thee—I fliall not die far from thofe I love, beneath the cruel hand of an arTflin." <c Dearly fliall he, who raifed that hand againft you, rue his crime ! (exclaimed Aga¬ tha) ; 1 know the villain-— í difcovered his ac¬ cented confidant near the chapel, and Twill bring him to puniihment, though my own life fliould be forfeited by doing fo." " Miftaken woman, (faid the Countefs in a hollow voice) how would you avenge me ? is it by cxpofing to infamy and death thofe more precious to me than fife—by giving to n.yheait a deeper wound than my body has fuftutned ? íť This
u This fpot 1 will not quit !—:io aid will I receive—on this cold marble \ Ì die—» except you promife to give up - an intent tion—except you í wear, fi 'y ftvear, within thofe co'ifecrated w\' never to divulge to mortal ear the ai, ui my in* juries." 1 ' íť My deareft lady, (cried Agatha, ter« rifled by her cxpreffions), though ti lee ven¬ geance executed on the wretch who at¬ tempted to take away your h:e, would re¬ joice my very foul, I will do out wlnt you pieafe; f wiľ promile what jou wiih." íť Sv^ear then !" exclaim 1 ! l e Cou.'iíefs, ťí 1 do, (re]died Agatha) ' '1 my 1 oy^s of happinefs here and het , íj lock within my lieart, from ever;- í i \ car, all I know concerning tins black ? lion." iC And you, Madeline .mied the Countefb), muft do the fame " She knows not ((aid Ag-tha, h-t^rru^t- ing lier lady) by whom the anódou.! deed has been committed." «« Thank Heaven! (ciiv· Countef*« Ì eve n
even from her, though î might confide in he: prudence» î u ou ld conceal him—conceal my having a relative, who, from ficlf-intcreft, could be tempted to take away my life. But Madeline, my love, (continued ihe, looking at hbr) will you not quiet my troubled hcait by the afluiance 1 deine, from even being, ï ex¬ cept not even your father ; you muft con¬ ceal my wound be : ng оссг1ч)лсс1 bv preme¬ ditated tieachery ; you muft, like Agatha, to all my houfehoJd, to rJI who ihall enqune concerning it, declare it owing, аь I ivjfclr fliall do, to fome unknown and wuPtkriLg raihan." ťt Hear me fwear, then, f<aid MadcliiK with energy) by every thing pieciou^ to me in-heaven or on earth ne\er to diiclofc what you have defircd me to conceal." " Enough," cried the Countef. hi a weak voices; and the next inftant, an if overcome by the exertions ihe had cded, ihe fainted away. 44 Fly, my dear young lady, (faid Agatha to Madeline) our efforts to reco rei her with out other afliftance will bc vain," « Madciu-
fi Madeline ftarted up, and walked with h.ifty fteps hair way down the aifle ; flic then paufed—paufed from the moft horrible fuggelbons of fear. * £ Should the murder¬ ers return—(cried flie, gafping for breath at the л cry idea)—fliould they return before affift ance can be procured, and complete their dreadful defign ; or fhould they be ftill lurking about the chapel, will they not feize me as í go for that afliftance, and facrìfice me to their own fafety !" ín an agony of fear—an agony which took from her all motion, flie leant againft a pillar ;-—a deep groan from the Countefs in a few minutes routed her from this fituation. tť Oh heavens ! (flie exclaimed, rufhing forward) fhe expires through my means. (She inftantly quitted the chapel)-—If I die, (laid flie, as ihe did lb) 1 die m the caufe of friendfhip." A cold dew hung upon her tem¬ ples, and flie could fcarcely drag her trembling limbs after her; every yard, aimoft, flie involuntarily flopped to liften, and to caft her fearful· eyes around ; ready at the firft: intimation.
intimation of danger, to retreat to the walls of the monafteiy. But flie ïeccived no fuch intimation, and when flie came within fhdit of the gaiden, her courage re¬ vived ; lier ftiength returned with her courage, and, like an affligli ted lapwing, flie then aimoft flew to the houfe, and, icaicdy touching· the grouud, ruined into the fer¬ vants' hall. A fisu e as tenine as the one flie nov, exhibircd, they had never, either in reality or imagination, icen ; her race was pale as death, her hair difhe\ elled, and her cioaths Ь rn and tlaincd wuh blood. She attempted to fpeak, but her \oicc died away inarticu¬ late ; in about a minute fhe made another cifoli, and, in a voice io hollow, that it itemed ifluingfroni the very reccflès of her hcait, exclaimed, "Fly!—your lady—there's mulder i a the chapel ľ' Struck with terror, the fervants eagerly crowded iound her to know what flie meant. Äí Alk no explanation I (ihe cried» in aimoft brcathlcfs agitition) a moment's delay may be fatah" The men no longer hefiuicd to obey
obey her, and unable to endure her fiufpenfe till they returned, flie went back w.th them to the monaftery ; but by the time flic had reached it, flie grcvv lick with apprehcmioii ihat tbc ruffians had returned and finiihed their bloody woik ι and ν hilft ibe krv ants ciKfcri ir j íhe wai compeled I s e dp лег riras iound а pillar at itb door far ijpport. Whilft flic leant here, a cry of horror reached her from the chapel, and her fpirits grew fainter. " She is sone for ever !" flie ex- claimed, finking upon the earth, no longer able to ftaid írom the tremor that feized her. Lia few mi mîtes lhe heard the fervan t ь ap¬ proaching j flie then laifed her head, and beheld two of them bearing ont their lady» " Does flic 4vc?" ailed Madeline. Si Live, (icpeated the weeping Agatha), уез, dexr MamleLe, the ftill lives, and not¬ withftanding this dreadful accident, will live, í truft, for many years to come. '—· Relieved from the horrible feats which had overwhelmed her, Mideline again recovered her
her ie-"c; v; h, and wa> able immediati ty to return w- uh the fervants to the dille, В; the time the) reached it the Coun¬ ted had regained her fvnfts; and as foon as ibe was Lud on her bed, ihe com¬ manded, whoever we;jt fora lurgeon not, 01 any account whatioever, to inform him for wnat purpofe he was fent for tili he came to the caftle ; ami that at the peril of being difmifled from her fen ice if they diiobeved her. Her dornendes fliould ftridlv conceal what had befal ¡en her from every one out of hei iiouie, afligning as a icafon for this command, that if known, fhe fliould be teafed by enqui.ies about it; but to Agatha and Madeline, it was evident it pro¬ ceeded from a fear of having the ruffian dc- tcded ii his atrocious crime was mentioned. The fervants promifed obedience to their lady, and two of the men diiedly fet out for the neareft town to p гоеше a furgeon, whilft another went to the convent for Father Bertrand, who on eveiy emergency was the counlellor and conioler of the family ; hs
he came without delay, and the moment he rnteied the Counter's chamber, who liad. fent for him, flic difmifled every other perfon bom it. Nothing but the folemn promife which Madeline knew Agatha toiiave given, to con¬ ceal the author of the Countcfs's i u fiednos could now have prevented her from aıkıng who be was. The more ihe refl eded on the horrible affair, the more myftenous it ap¬ peared to her, and the more aftoniihed and perplexed the felt. How ii range that а worn in of the Counteis's benevolence, whole temper was gentlenefs ittelf, whofe heart was the icat οι chanty, and whole liberal handeler kept pace with the willies of that heart, ihouid have provoked the enmity of anyone. Yet noi" enmity alone provoked the attempt at her lite , her word* in the chapd Oii firft regaining her ienles, declared its being alfo prompted Dy fome view of ielf-intereft.—This was another myilery to Madch' e, for ihe knew of none but Mon- fieur
lì. u r andı Maeíanic D'Alembert, that could be materially benefited by the death of her bcii e fad refs. Ag Ulu Ie f l her foon afur the у had quined the Countefs's room, to ptcp.ie things for her lady againft the furgeon cihvv But Fioretta continued with her, in hopes uf luvi»£ her curiofiîv, which exceeded both her forrow and fun ufe, piatiiicd 1 lu iriii 1 ; t J e^ . О the paiticuiar^ of t'.v. aUa r к made u\ on tbc Ccunttf· b} the lobber, as Jiii 1 d\\d .ill the rtft of the ícnanb ί ι ¡pooled the dildim to be. u Lord Mam'f 'îe. /ried flic, inten upt- jeq^ the íleep lewiie of Madeline} }ou muft i:-r о ci: 'аЬ'Уу iriglıtcncd when you futi belici' ι th«* vi, lain. İ pu'teft it wa 1 - well it vv iS nut I uut A gat lia who went with you, for i fliould ceitam'y hav dropt down dead at once upon the ipot ; 1 dare 1лу he was а îrigl/i t 1 looivwjfi ci* dure '* k £ Ido
%i I do not know, (faid Madriİn^ f>r I did not fee п'ъ faced' " Laid, 1 am very forry }0u did not, for then if you evei met him agin, vou might have f \ oui to him at once, and have had hım tiken up. Well, to be fuie, I always thought my lady would come to fome hamı by goııg to that okl mia ; I wifli with all my foul it was all tumbled down, í don't k nov/ anv tiling it <s fit for, but to cnolofii the dead or fecret a robber;—man} and many a time have ï quake 1 with fear, left m\ lady ihouid have defired me to attend ber to it. Ceitainb, 'tis a horrid thing to İn e m inch a dilmal ρ'αιε as we do ; 1 dare í ty w-e fliall ail be murdered fome night or other in our beds: we have nothing; in the world to defend ouiielves with, for the old guns aie fo nifty that 1 am fure it would only bc wafting powder to try and do any thing with them. 1 think it would be a wile thing Mam'iellc, if you would try anel pi evali on my lady, to fend her jewels and plate awa), for fi the gang, to wdiich no doubl
doubt the villain who attacked her in the chapel belongs, once heard a rumour of their being gone, and that they affuredly would from always having their fpies about, they would never, I am fure, think it worth their while to break into the caftle. í« Well, many men many minds, and many women Τ fuppofe the fame. For I am certain if I was my lady, I would never jive with the fine fortune ilie has, amongft thefe difmal woods and mountains. No, no, Paris would be the place for my money." b ' Do } ou think Floretta, (afked Made¬ line, who iat as pale as death, and aimoft motľonleh.) that the furgeon will icon arrive/' " Why that depends, Mam'fellc, (re¬ plied Floretta) upon r he hafte Antoine aud Jerome make in going for him, and the hafte he makes in coming back with them, Though upon relied ior. indeed, I fliould not be furpriied if none oí them ever reached the caftle ; ior *tis extremely probable they г - may
fiìay all fall into the hanels of the gang, who no doubt are lurking about the caftle." " I have not a fear of that nature," faid Madeline. " I am fure Τ hope mine maybe an idle one (cried Floretta v , poor fellows! they would die ?. melancholy death if fuch an accident befei í liem. Well, MauVllllc, I muft now leave vou ; there is fortúnatele a Aiding wainfcot in my chamber, and 1 ihall go diredly and hide ail my good clothes within it ; 1 ihall then try ii í can't prevail on the men to fee what слп be iioiic \\ith the old fire arms. Bui aftei all, Мл. n' felle, (relumed ihe, after paufing a minute) if the rogues once broke irto the houfe, what comfort could I receive bcm knowing my clothes were hid, for to bc iure Ì fliould be killed as well as the reft oí the iamily, and what avails fine clothes or money, if one has no life to enjoy them." She now retired, and Madeline remained alone in a flate of the moft dreadful clif- ijuietude, till the arrival ot the furgeon. vol. π v Father
Father Bertrand then came to her, and Made-line eagerly enquired what he thought about her friend. €É With refped to her wound (replied he) ï cannot give an opinion, as 1 left her room the moment the furgeon entered it ; but with refped to her mind I think her an angel." it inftantly ftruck Madeline, that to tins venerable man the Countefs had imparted ι \ cry fecret of her heart, and that his warm, his energetic praife, proceeded from admi- lation at her mercy and forbearance, in not attempting to punifh the moniter who had injured her. " To a much later tlatc (he continued) may heaven preferve the life of a woman, whofe charities and example are fo beneficial to mankind."—" Oh ! long, long may flic be fpared (cried Madeline) with up¬ lifted hands ; who amongft the children of diftrefs would have fuch reafon to mourn lier death as I fliould." Father Bertrand informed her, that as foon as he had íven the furgeon, he fliould
go and write to Madame D'Alembert to come diredly to the chateau. " Poor lady ! (cried Madeline, with a figh) how dreadfully fhocked and affedcd ihe will be, to hear of the injury her mother has re¬ ceived !" " I do not mean to inform her of it," replied he. " But when ihe comes to the chateau, fhe cannot be kept in ignorance of it," cried Madeline " Such precautions (faid the Father) will be ufed, that even then flic will not know it. The fight of her amiable and be- lovcel child will, 1 truft, have а happy effect upon the eftimable mother." The furgeon now made his appearance ; the faltering accents of Madeline were un¬ equal to the enquiry her heart didatcd ; bi.t Father Bertrand, more compofed, foon learned, that the Counter's wound was not dangerous. " My principal fears, (laid the iurgeon) arife from the fever with which ihe к threatened, in confequence of the agita- f 2 tion
tion of her mind." He then mentioned his intention of continuing at the caftle till lie had drefled her wound the next morning Madeline, no longer able to controlli her ftrong anxiety to be with her friend, and certain that Agatha would have every pi oper attention paid to him, now bade him and Father Bertrand good night, and repii ι ed ίο the chamber of the Countefs, wheie ihe re¬ foived to continue till morning. All was cmietnef* within it, for the Countefs, cx- haufted by the pain fhe had fuŕľered during the drefling of her wound, and her long con- verfation preceding it with Father Bertrand, had fallen into a flumber -, and her attend¬ ants, Agatha and Floretta, fearful of diiturb- ing her, would not move ; —the latter, how¬ ever, could not avoid whifpering to Madeline, that ihe had prevailed on the men to colled fome of the fire-arms, and that they had promifed to double-bar all the doors.
3
i)eep
Deep groans frequently efcaped the Count¬ efs, but flic continued toleiably quiet for about two hours ; fhe then, in a weak voice, called for drink ; which the ready hand of Madeline inftantly prefented to her. " Why, my love (laid the Countefs, as Madehne, bending over her, raifed her lan¬ guid head), why do I fee you here ?" " Ah ! Madam (faid Madeline), the only comfort my heart can know is in watching by you." ťí I thank you for yoi r tendernefs (replied the Countefs) ; but I muft now infift on your retiring to bed : nay, do not attempt to re¬ fufc doing fo (feeing Madeline about Í] ,. ik¬ ing) ; I will not go to fleep (and want of reft you ¡v iy be fure will injure me), till you leave mc." Thofe words conquered аП oppofition on the part of Madeline ; and, after killing her benciadrefVs hand, fhe withdrew, though with the greateft relucí ance, to her chamber. f 3 She
She could not bring herfelf to go to bed, left ihe Ihould not in a moment, if called upon, be ready to attend her friend ; fhe took off her torn garments, and putting on a л rapper, lay down; but though fatigued to a degree, her mind was too much agi¬ tated, too full of horror, to permit her to tleep : and, after pafling a few rcíllcís hout% ihe »uch as icon as it was ligio t .
CHAP.
CHAP. \ h
l,«t"staìkof staves, aml w οι m«, aa J q<.i«*j>'i*. Madeline Г оГе w.tb а ь™й of heart which left her fcarcely power to move ; the day was as gloomy as her mind, and added, perhaps, by its melancholy to her's ;— a flow, but penetrating, rain was falling, and the cattle that grazed upon the lawn were dripping with w r et, and retiring to the moil fheltered parts of the wood :—the waters ol the lake looked black and troubled, nor did any brightnefs in the íky give a promue of a finer day. To complete the dtjedion of Madeline, on going to the drefimg-room f 4 adjoin-
adjoining the Countcfs's chamber, ilie vvaa inrormed by Agatha, whom,with FatherBer- nand, íhe iound there, that foon after ihe had kft the Countefs, ihe had had a lit of the moil alarming nature. ťí I diredly called the furgeon (proceeded Agatha), and he fat xvith her the remainder of the night, during which flie lud many returns of it ; he has already drefled ner wound, being unckr a neceflity of departing at an early hour, and he fays it bears -л much more dangerous ap¬ pearance than it did at firft. Her fever too is augmented ¿ but he dreads nothing fo much as a return of the fits, which, in her prefent e^haufted flate, arc, he fays, enough to kill her." * ť Oh i why, why (cried Madeline, whofe agonies, at hearing this melancholy account, were inexpreflible), why was ï not called w hen fo dreadful a change took place ?" u At firft we were really too much con- fu fed to think about you (faid Agatha); and when my Lady recovered, and we would have
have gone for you, flie commanded us not to difturb you," Madeline burft into tears at this proof of her friend's confidcratioti for her amidft her own fuffc rings. €ς Be compofed, my dear young Lady (Ыа Father Bertrand), Providence may perhaps produce ai other change more favourable to our wiihes." Madelin j now afked if flic might not íe¿ the Countefs. Agatha anfwered in the affir¬ mative. She rxcordinply entered the cham¬ ber. The foot-curtains of the bed, and thole of one of the windows, were op^n, andı Madeline had thus fufficient light to pe·- ceive the linking, alteration which had taken piacéin the countenance of her friend; her iips were livid, her eyes were funk, and л ghaftly palenefs overfpread her face. The tears of Madeline increafed ; and when f ς tl e
the Countefb, whofe heavy eyes opened on hearing her light ftep, called her to her bed- fide, and, extending her hand, afked her how fhe was? deep convulfive fobs pre¬ vented all reply, &c Pray moderate this concern (faid the Counteis) j *tis true it excites my gratitude, but It alfo gives me unutterable pain ;— the foothing attention of a friend is the beft cor- dial I can receive, but that cordial you will not be able to adminifter if you yield to thofe emotions." iC Ohi Madam (cried Madeline, finking on her knees, and prefling the cold hand of the Countefs between tier's), Oh ! Madam, I will try to reprefs them y I will try to do €vtry thing which can give me the fmalleft power of fervi ng you." '* I am convinced you will, my love (re¬ plied the Countefs), and the conviction is foothing to my iick heart. Oh ! Madeline, 'tis not my frame, fo much as my mind, that is difordcred.'* Weal- nefs
Weaknefs precluded farther c mverfation for the prefent, and Madeline feated herftlf befide the bed, nor ftirrcd till abfoiutcly commanded by the Countefs to go into the next room to breakfaft. She took but little, and quickly refumed her place by her friend, About the middle of the div, the Count efs had another fit. Apprized of its dan.; t, the diftrefs and terror of Aladeline aimoft in¬ duced hei to the fame cxlrcmitw and fome or the fervants were compelled to carry her fiom the room till their Lady had recovered. On regaining her fenfes the Countefs ordered Father Berttand to bc fent for; and, on his arrival, flic difmifled every one clic from the room, While he was flint up with her Lady- thip, dinner was feived m the dioíTmg-room for Madeline, but ierved in vain; the grief and anxiety of he* mind would neither per¬ mit her to eat nor drink, though preifed to do fo by the faithful Agatha and the voluble Moretta, both of w horn, but particularly the Conner, had а ve: у funere regard for her. i 6 She
She was inioiniíd \v ťuc latter on Agatha'. quitting the roum, as a gieat iecict, that tl e iuigcon hid been iequ(iicdb\ the Count- » У í ) nuug v iiotaiy with him the iiext p ıı ^g luaî u ^ town w liere he h\ed, in * xdeî tonilku hcı will. " \\i all gueb, Mal.ht", nui 1 ■( ι .tt ι , that 'tıs υη j OUÏ ,uuai i ¡lu ı oy ,Mv tiMiiikccKU " " Пса\«. ' l^i* v i d jMatichuc \ thîv..» \ouı , tbv ĺ ibun hcı own hand .u jne 1 mav • л KUiVi an) nıuiı oi hei ι ь id." ik \\ In t ) 1 í ¡ t c, M unhei] 1 ud l ío- ritti), thai might be as ρ 1 taru a \» ty г^ the other, but 'ti a^omfoit ,u anv ι ite to bt ccitamoiit. One way οι othu, 1 am a j^eat advocate ior people making Uicr wid^, ior \ou muft know, Mam'iclie, 1 loi! a gieat deal b} an old uncle of mmc in Bin 'undt d) mg without one. He aiu \\s pi onn fed to ka\e me c\cn thing he had, but he was aksa) s of а fluii) -İhally diípolitiou : io de aia uhippui hım oíľwithout Lis puttıngh's pio- nule into execution, and his piopeit) wa·· then divided emongi U vii кькЫопь. Ihd lu
he kept his promife, little as folks think of mc now, 1 can aflure you, Mam'fellc, X Ihould have been an heireis, for he owned t'vo vciy íme vineyards and an excellent houfe, and fcveral large flocks of (heep ; and with all thofe ï think 1 might have held up my head pretty high." iC I think }ou hold it up high enough airead}," iáid Agatha, wdio had entered be- toie the conclufion of the ipecch. ib Xot higher (replied hloietta peitly), than I havca riızht todo." "That point might be dıfputed," ciieJ Agatha. * ς Oh, not at pieient," faid Madeline, to whom every Iound was nkiomc, that did not onvey f me ί dings of tue Countels. Father Berti audi continued а confider¬ able time with the Countefs; and when he le.t her, he palled haftily through the di\f- ling-room. Madeline then ictur.ied to the chamber, follow ! by Agitha, and m iihvrd h τ lianou. The Countefs did not appeai
appear worfej and defircd they might be left together. ťí You have heard, my love, î fuppofe (fakl ihe, turning her languid eyes upon Ma-» deline as Agatha clofed the door after herì, that Madame D'Alembert is fent for." * ť í have, Madam," replied Madeline, * € 1 hope (returned the Countefs) ilie may not arrive too late." " Heaven forbid 1 (cried Madeline fliud- dering); I t ruft when die arrives, fhe will find your Ladyíhip pretty well recovered." * 4 Believe me, my clear (faid the Countefs)., 't is on her account I principally deiire to re¬ cover ; flie ftill chains me to a world, to which lam in a great degree grown indiffer¬ ent, from the lofs of fcveral of my deareft connections, as well as many other heavy calamities;—but for her, I fliould look for¬ ward to the idea of quitting it with pleafure, as I ihould to a releaic from pain and trou« ble— fliould confidar it with delight, as a means
means of re-uniting me to thofe whom, while on earth, ï muft for ever mourn. " For фе fake of my beloved child I wiih lobe fpared a little longer ; with increaiing years, flie may perhaps acquire that for* titude which I fear ilie would at prefect want to fupport my lofs. But ihould my w i fli be difappointed—ihould ihe arrive too late to receive my laft blefling, my admo*· nition againft a forrow, not only ufelefs, but inimical to every duty—to you, Madeline, 1 entruft that blefling, that admonition for her; certain that, as one will be delivered by foiemnity, fo the other will be enforced with fympathy, Should it be my deftiny never more to open my eyes upon her in this world, to you, Madeline, f leave the taik of confoling her ;— a taik. not unaccept¬ able, I am conunced, to your grateful na¬ ture, and one well fuited to its gentlenels. She is already prepared to love and to efteem you ; and, from a prediledion in your favour, will liften patiently to all you íãy. Repreicnt, therefore, to her if (indeed it happens),
happens), that the event flic regrets, could not, according to the laws of human nature, have been much longer delayed. And, Oh! Madeline, I adjure you, never let her know how it was accelerated." {i May Heaven only profper me (cried Madeline) as I keep inviolably from her knowledge the injury you received. " Excufe my betraying a doubt of your doing fo (rcfumed the Countefi), after the fo¬ lemn promife 1 have already received from you to that purpofe ; my fears for her urge me even to unneceffary caution. Oh 1 Ma¬ deline, great as was the pleafure 1 ever de¬ rived from your fociety, ''tis now heightened by confielering you in the light of my child's comforter ;—you will confole, you will ftrengthen her, you will reconcile her to my lofs." 4C Impoffible 1 impoffible!" exclaimed Madeline, in the fulnefs of her heart, and burfting into tears. "Ah! Madeline (faid the Countefs af- ferì ed by her emorion), do not embitter moments
moments Uke thefe bya foi row w nieli will deftroy all the hopes I entertained of \our being a confolcr to my child." 44 May every event (cried Madeline, fink¬ ing on her knees), may every event (with up¬ lifted hands) which could place her in want of confolation, be far, far chilant from her. But ihould fuch an event now happen, Oh ! may Hcasen grant mc power equal to my inclination to give it to her !" " After my death," proceeded the Coun- tefs. <e Oh ! Madam (interrupted Madeline), do not talk of it—you flab me to the very foul by doing fo." " Rather rej oice than grieve to hear me do fo (faid the Counters) ; how much more dread¬ ful, at the very moment when I ftand, per¬ haps, upon the brink of the grave, to find me trembling, flirinking at the idea of diflblu- tion! I luve always tried to aci foas to be prepared for it ; I have always prayed, that I might be compofed when it approached— might be able, in the laft extremity of na~ ture
ture, to hold out my hands to m.) Creator, deprecate his wrath, and implore his mercy, Oh ! my love, but for the precious ties I have ftill remaining, ï ihouid welcome it as a reléale from a world that teem;» with trou«- bles. But î will not, by perpetually reverting to thofe troubles, caft a cloud over the youthful profpeds of my Madeline." " Alas ! (thought Madeline) they are al¬ ready clouded." íť Life (refumed the Countefs) is a chec· quered fcene, and, by a proper performance of our duties, we may enjoy many comforts in it ; 'tis the ufe we make of thofe comforts, and the manner in which we fupport their lois» that fixée the peace or mifery of our lafl moments. Oh ! happy are th / (continued the Countefs, while a faint fpark of animation was rekindled in her eye), Oh I happy are they, who can review their paft condud without regret ! who can think, to ufe the language of a poet of a fifler country, that when their bones have run their race, they may
may reft in bleflings, and have a tomb of orphan's tears wept over the n. " But to refume the ii * ι you inter¬ rupted.—After my death. ulame D'A¬ lembert, í am fure, will retirement; and the retirement of ri bateau I am confident flie will preiei that of any other place, fliould Motifiu. llembert per¬ mit her to remain in it. more happily fettled, 1 hope, and beikv ur father will allow you to be her c.mpa-nion when¬ ever flie vifits, and while ihe continues in it alone ; for your fociety, î am con¬ vinced, will ever prove a iource of comfort to her. But remember, I never defire you to be her companion, except ihe is without the company of Monfieur D'Alembert : and believe mc, my Madeline, I am not fo felfifli as not to hope that you may foon have ten¬ derer claims to fulfil than any fhe can have upon you. Let not the difappointment of your firft expedations make you fupprefs all others ; oppofe reafon to defpondence, and the latter will foon be conquered. 'Tis а duty
diny ',ou owe ι our father as well as yourfclf,* to in .md do c\civ tlimg which can pionvne } í »ur happinefs ; endeavour, thei eroic, to eraie horn vour beai t thoic imi ieffion«;, which сап onî^ < t 4\L } ou pam, and to piepaie U to efteem and be pivpinous to iome wor- tin man. " ^houkl ci miv a;:i.n throw cle Sewigic'e ui }our u ay, ib ironi him inftantly, I conjure you, except he offe s a full e vplanation of his condud. Excufe me, my love (on hearing agenţie finb ftcal fom Madeline) for men¬ tioning a fübjed that is painful to you ; but 5 ou are fo innocent, fo totally unacquainted with art, that too much caution cannot be ufcd m guarding у эй againft it. And even then (continued fhe, returning to the fubjed of de Sevignie) if he ihould offrr to account for his condud, f3 o not hilej. to him ; refer him to ycu r athei to give ti c exphnation ; f 01 an ummp ffoned ear he cannot deceive If by any chance you ihuu ¡ ever difcover hira to be the amiab'e chai a 1er you once fmcied, you will find by my will, which I purpofe
purpofe making to-morrow, that want of roitune will be no hindrance to your union." Madeline could not fpeak, but tears, more eloquently than words could have done, cxprefied her feeling". Cŕ But I am wrong (relamed the Count¬ ed), ia havili.; fuggeftcd the klei of fuch an union to }ou-—an idea which may counter- ad all 1 have before been fa\ irg." u Ko, Madam t faid Madeline m a low voice), it will not/' s * Pieafe me, my Madeline (cried the Ceiuntefs after α paufe), by Ln ing that усы will icmcmber what I have {aul to }ou." "Rememből· (repcMtul Madeline>; Oh 1 Madam, could vou think 1 could ewr iorget aught voh hud ? —Remember'— í will do more—I will try to fulfil eveiv. mjundion you have 2:1 ven лк\ ii lucked ц .ii α η arcei v аг- ticuUte \üu * .t ihouid be nccetfary to do fo."
Л Ч thank
** I thank you for faying fo (replied the Countefs) j 1 thank you not only for this, but ior the many proofs of affection and at¬ tention I have received from you. Your fo¬ ciety has been a greater happinefs, a greater comfort to me than I can exprefs ; it has frequently beguilcel the cares which opprefled me-—cares which the generality of people confidered me a ftranger to. I wiflied to bc thought happy, and í endeavoured to appear fo ¿ but no tongue could defcribe the anguifli which has long preyed upon my heart. Never, however, let this involuntary effufion of confidence cicape you; let it be buried in your breaft with all you know 7 con¬ cerning he black tranfartion in the chapel— a traniaeftion wdiich I fervently hope may never be known to more than the few already unhappily acquainted with it ;—from every eye I woukl conceal its author ;-— my forgive- nefis is his, and my earned; prayers are of¬ fered up to Heaven for its forgivcnefs alfo for him." The
The evening w r as now far advanced, and the Countefs appeared exhaufted by fpeak¬ ing. Madeline befought her to take a re¬ viving cordial ; ihe complied with the en¬ treaty, and then faid flie would fettle herfelf to reft. She charged Madeline to retire at an early hour to bed. <£ You look pale and agitated, my love (faid flie) ; but cheer up—» the mention of death does not make mc nearer dying. Farewell! may good angels for ever watch around you!" Madeline preffed her lips to her cheek ; and then rif¬ ing from her knees, clofed the curtains of the bed, and withdrew. She fent Agatha and Floretta to the chamber ; then retired to her own, where fhe offered up a fervent prayer to Heaven for the rcftoration of her valuabieand beloved fi iend ; after which, find¬ ing herielf ftill very languid, and the rain being over, flie defcended to the garden, hoping the evening air might revive her.
CHAP.
СПЛР. VIL
■&· jr*· jr jr ****?·
Win. 11 с П. ,л . kt,, íl. »ťo\ o íi t íl ел d it i ooi But fmalu ι ίρι <i' iiiv-tt 1ощ л il tt ι Ь'с , — So w lun v\ e tbn к F *c h э\ с , s o\r cm h л' , Oui ippiilieid.ons Πι oot b jc.ul ail Ikuus, Ouïs» ι лспч, ciic-ki^,, teem iliL wtch oî J ι' , \ r ati ic 1 ^ voilt \írm n í ju h ι Go<l ltk" i ¡Us , ĽchoC", t 1 e Iti y H1\ tll^a C'1\" a. Gioì' l ù>M 4 > ík d 1 ;, anı' ci ι -, to ou ^i:urs , Γ »cb î u . I ' о < 'α "■ 1> .0 " m^ ι ij ι , Wi ι x j '.m ♦ ut î ¡ br .ρ {. ,T i , Alt ì í U Cdl VI »tl .M ! t Ol 'à VU J t. 1 t ŕ
ül ADELINE went upon a hiph and g-avelled ten ice to a\Otd the wctnefs ot the lovv and giaíťy | aths beneHh it. But though the uin was ove!, the tui-ws, \\:ь cx t Rinei)
extremely unplcafant, a cold and piercing wind howled through the trees, of whofe increaiing violence the boarie icrcanis of water-fowl gave furc and melancholy inti¬ mation, the clouds ièemed daggering with giddy poife, and the moon vainly endeavour¬ ing to emerge from them, if for a moment flic was difcovered, Riding to her higheft noon, Like one tint had been led ailray, Through the Heavens' wide pathlďs <лху* Her watery luftre rather increafed than di* minifhed the folernn gloom. Madeline, however, purfued her way, and as flie caft her eyes upon the long perfpedive of black and diftant mountains, flie thought of the friends that had fo recently tiavelled over them, and her regret for their abfence was heightened bv believing their company would have been a iource of pleafuie and comfort to the Countefs. From them her thoughts reverted to another object, one ihe VOL. XI. о din *
dared not think her friend, yet could not с ill her enemy ; the idea of his being now expofed upon the checrlefs heights ike viewed, to the inclement blaft, wrung her heart with agony ; flie tried, howc\ er, to ic- pell it, by reflecting that it would, by ener¬ vating, render her unable to pay die atten¬ tions fhe wifhed to her bencfačtrefs ; and alfo, that to think voluntarily of him, was acri, g cjiitiar} to the folemn refolution flic hid toi med, to tiv and forget him. She con¬ tinued out till the wind grew fo \blent that it quite chilled and fatigued herj as flic returned to the chateau fhe faw on every lide a blackening tram of clamorous looks fecking their aceuftomed íheker among the tall trees furrounding it, while, aflkluous m his bower, the owl [died his lad fong, and the water-fowl, wheeling from their nefts upon the lake, feream ed along the land. Made' ine flowly afcended the flairs·, and repairing to the drefling-room, found Agatha and Fioretta there j fhe eagerly en¬ quired
quired about the Countefs, and they in¬ foi med her, that íhe ftill flept, and had done fo aimoft from the time ihe had quitted her. They alio faid, that her Lad} (hip had de¬ fired them to fit up in the dreffmg-room, as a light in her chamber was diiagreeable to her. Λ iadeli iie inftantly declared ihe would keep them company, and felt rejoiced to hear of the repoíe of her friend, flattering herfelf it was а fign of her being better. Every thing, which could give comfort to the night, was already provided. A cheerful file blazed in the grate, the brightnefs and warmth of which were tiuly icviving to the depreffed fpnits and chilled fíame of Made¬ line , and before it lay a table, eoveied with bre id, meat, and rich w ines. Madeline took a bu of br^ad and iome wine, and feated her« ie'i befide the nie. It was now the hour at winch the tenants generally went to reft, .aid with light li eps they w eie foon heard re¬ ining to their lefpechvc chambers; а pro- Lund ftillnefs then reigned tluouţţhout the с z CÆq
Caftle—a ftillnefs, however, which was foon interrupted by the wind, that had now en¬ creafed to a tremendous degree. Sometimes it hovs led di fmall y through the long gal¬ leries ; fomctitnes came in luch fudden iqualls againft the doors, that it aimoft burft them open, whilft the foreft was heard groan¬ ing beneath its fury ¿ and ever and anon loofe ftones came tumbling from the battle¬ ments of the Caftle. The dejection of Madeiine*s heart re¬ turned—a dejedion, which the account flie received of her friend had a little diflipated, and with it a terror flie could not fupprefs ; ihe laid down the cup or wine, and catling her eyes upon her companions, perceived, by their countenances, they were equally af- feded. " How mournfully the wind howls (faid Agatha, in a low voice) ; " the Lord have mercy (devoutly croflmg herfelf) upon all who are at fea 1 many a ftout heart will go to
to the bottom, I fear, to-night. 'Tis very odd, yet very true, that the night before my Lord the Count de Merville (Heaven reft his foul 1 again crofling herfelf) died, there was juft fuch a ftorm as there is now ; the noife it made throughout the houfe was juft as if people had been fighing and fliri eking about it. I thought at the time, the founds were prefageful ones i particularly as the birds kept fuch a fcreaming and fluttering about the windows, for their fcreams are al¬ ways fure foretellers of death. Indeed they have not been very quiet to night." " No (cried Madeline, wifliing to check the involuntary horror with which the words of Agatha had infpired her), " becaufe they are now, as they were then, difturbed by the ftorm j 'tis well known, that their fcreams not only forete!, but laft during one. I have heard my father fay, that people who live near the fea always take warning by them, and never (ifpoflible to avoid doing fo) venture upon it, while they continue." 03 "I ihall
4í I ihall never be made, however, to be¬ lieve that they do not foiebode fomething more than a ftorm (cried Agatha) , no, Mam'fellc, bc aflured they are certain prog¬ nostics of death ; but fuch warnings as thefe are not confined to one family, like others that 1 know of: For bilance, in the Caftle of the Marquis de Vcrmandois, about tw T o leagues from this, a great bell always tolls before the death of any one belonging to it ; and there never was any change about tak¬ ing place in this chateau that there was not a dreadful ftorm before-hand, accompanied by the fall of an old fuit of armour, which hangson the left fide of the hall, nearly op¬ pofite the dining parlour, and which be¬ longed to the founder of the manfion." " I know the fuit you mean (laid Made¬ line) - s I have often examined it as a cu¬ rious piece of antk]uity ; but the reafon it falls, when there is a ftorm, is, becaufe thi wind then <aets through the crevices of the walls, and blows it down." "You
" You are very incredulous, Mam'iclie (cried Agatha); but you'll never be able to make me believe othciVifc than I do now. Lord! 1 ftill tremble at the recoiled ioa of what 1 buffered, when I heard the armour fall with fuch a crafli a few minutes before my Lord's death. I was alone with him, and that, to be fure, augmented my terror ; for my lady, overcome by grief, had fainted, and was carried from the room by the other at¬ tendants." " I have heard fay, indeed (cried Floretta, who had hitherto liftcned to the words of Agatha with the moll profound attention) that thofe warnings of death are very com¬ mon." " God, of his infinite mercy (faid Made¬ line) may perhaps give fuch warnings to the wicked, in order to awaken them to repent¬ ance ; but to the good, to thofe whofe lives prepare them at any hour for his fummons?, Ì never can believe he does." " 1 ihall enter into no argument about the matter (cried Agatha; ; for nothing could perfuaue me out of my own opinion." g 4 "У,,:
" Yet what Mam'fellc fays feems juft enough (faid Floretta; ¿ for why fliould the good, who need no preparation for death, be w r arned of it as well as thofe whofe bad actions render it neceffary they fliould, in order to have them brought to repentance." " Well (replied Agathaj, 1 have not a doubt but what they come to both ?" <ť What a dreadful thing it muft be, to have a troubled confeience, when one is near dying," refumed Floretia. " Ay, or at any other time either (ex¬ claimed Agatha) ; many a foul deed has it forced people to reveal.'* 66 There is a memorable ftory told about that (faid Fioretta), in the part of Burgundy J come from." ie Well, tell it (cried Agatha) j it will help to pafs away the time." ** There ftood, about fifty years ago (be« gan Floretta, drawing h ir chair clofer to her companion's)» near the village wheie I was born, an old manfion, which had for many years been uninhabited ; for its owner, being given
given to travel in foreign parts, never gave himfelf any trouble at all about repairing it ; fothat, owing to his negled, it went by de* grees fo much to rack and ruin, that two fervants, who had been left in it, thought it unfafe to continue in it, and accordingly quitted it. " Well, in procefs of time, the unthrifty mafter of this old chateau died ; and never having been married, it fell to a diftant rela¬ tion, who was delighted (as you may well think) to have the fine eftate furrounding it become his : he was neither given to fquan- dcring nor gadding ; and knowing what the comforts of a good home were, he diredly ordered the ruin to be pulled down, that he might have another houfe built in its place. This you may be ftire was a joyful order for the tenants ; for 'tis the life of the poor fouls to have a rich landlord live amongft them, particularly one that is generous and good, as was the gentleman I am fpeaking of. They fet merrily to work, and foon demoliihed moil of the building ? for 4is a true fay mg, с 5 that
that willing minds, like many hands, make light work, íŕ As they were deftroying the wall of a vault, which had once been ufcd for family .(lores, they found, within a niche of it, againft which a parcel of loofe ftones were piled, the fkeleton of a full grown perfon.-— You may well conceive their confbernation at fuch a fight -, for it immediately ftruck them that this was the fkeleton of a murdered per¬ ion, elfe what fliould bring it there. " The difcovery was foon fpread through¬ out the village, and all the folks came flock¬ ing to the place. They were all of one opi¬ nion, that fome one had been murdered in the houfe, and that the crime had been committed after it became deferted. They ftrovc to recollect whether any perfon, with¬ in their memories, had been fuddenly milled from their neighbourhood, but could not remember a circumftance of the kind. u While they were bufy talking over the matter, there came riding by an elderly gen¬ tleman, well drefled, and of a grave and cornel·/
comely appearance ; fo feeing the crowd, he flopped his horfc, as was natural enough, and alighting from it, entered the court-yard, and enquired what was the matter. 4 A fad affair, mafter (replied one of the oldeft of the villagers) ; we have juft dif¬ covered that a murder was committed with¬ in the walls we have been deftroying.' * A murder ! (repeated ihe gentleman, changing colour) ; a murder !—Pray, my good friend, how did you difcover it ?* * Why> by finding a fkeleton hid within a vault : you may be fure, if the perfon to whom it belonged had died fairly, İt would never have been fluffed into fuch a place. They, to be fure, who committed the cruel ad, thought they w r ere fecure enough of its never been found out by hiding it there, but you iee they were miftaken. The watchful eye oí God is overall ; he felelőm luffers murder to efcapc the puniihment it merits : and indeed í can tcaicely doubt that tne difcovery ot tiie ikeleton is but ttie fore¬ runner of the diicovery of the murderer.' go u The
u The old man and the ftranger were iland* ing by a wall, againft which the fkeleton was placed ; but the latter had hithert > been kept from feeing İt, by fome women who ftood between it and him j they now drew back, fuppofing that* like themfelves, he would be curious enough to wiih to examine it,—- Scarcely had they done fo, when, juft as the old man had finiihed his lafl: fentence, a vio¬ lent guft of wind arofe, which blew down ihe fkeleton, and it fell pinmp at the itranger's feet. He ftarted bark, as any one indeed might haye done at fuch an accident, and attempted diredly to leave the place ; but fome how or other, his foot was entangled by the ikeleton, fo that he could not move. Well* when he perceived this, he gave a deep groan, and funk upon the ground. The people haftened to his afliftancej he was lifted up—but it was many minutes ere he Ihewed any figns of life ; and when he did» it was at firft only by difmal iighs. At laftr opening his eyes, he took the old man's hmå s who helped to fupport him«— a iOhl
« Ohi my good friend (cried he) your words were but too true ¿ the difcovery of Èhat frightful fpedacle but foreruns the difcovery of the murderer ; in me you be¬ hold that guilty wretch. , —At this there was a general cry, and ail praifed the wonderful Providence of Fleaven. « You iliall have (he continued) a full con- feflion of my guilt \ I no longer wiih teven if it was poflible to do fo) to evade the pu« niíhment due to itľ " As he fpoke, he fell into fuch agonies, that they thought he would have died, and were forced to get him fome wine to take. " Being a little revived by it, he was feated on the grafs, and thus began :— * To the old, as well as the young, my ftory may be inftrudive ; it will prove to the former, that their authority over youth fliould never be too much relaxed ; and to the latter, that thofe who are difobedient to their parents or guardians, and wafte the morning of their life in idlenefs or vice, may afluredly expect to end its evening in mifery. ïwas
Τ was born of reputable parents in a fmall town in this province. The comforts they eryo} ai, which were luflicient ίο falisfy hum¬ ble diijpofirions, were procured by their own induftry, and, with tht inheritance of the little property they had acquiied, they trufted I woukl poflefs α fpirit temperately to enjoy, and honeftly to increafe it ; but their over¬ indulgence marred their wiflies. ï foon dif¬ covered their eafinefs of temper, and, in con- íecmence of that eafinefs, grew importunate in my demands-—demands which they foon loft the power of refuting; and I became, from their compliance, giddy and diflipated in the extreme. Too late my parents per¬ ceived their error, in allowing mc fuch lati¬ tude as they had done, and in not checking, at the beginning, the propenfities I early ihewed to idlenefb and difiipation. Their reniorfc, together with the difappointment of their hopes relative to me, terminated their hves ι while 1 was yet in the prime of my youth) and they died within a fhort penod of each other. 1 lull fume little compunction and re¬ giet -,
cţret ; but the fi rft call of pîeafure drove them írom my heart, and I returned my former courfes. A continuance in themfoondiffipated the little property 1 poflefïêd. J then refoived <o abandon my native country, and leeklub· ììdence in another part of the world. This refolution I imparted to a particular friend, a youth about my own age, and, like mc 5 an orphan. Our attachment had com¬ menced at the iirit dawning of reaion, and a kind of infatuation feemed to bind him to me ; he was ever ready to join me in my fchemes, and often, latterly, affifted my de¬ clining purfe. Through my means, his for¬ tune had been confiderably injured j but though his fortune was not wrecked like mine, he now declared he would accompany meto any part oí the world I ih ou Id like to go to; a declaration I rejoiced to hear, as he had the means of keeping me from hard- fii i p·» í otherwife, from the low fíate of my finances, expected to undergo. He accord¬ ingly gathered the remains of his wealth to« get her, and we kt out on foot (the beiter to conceal
conceal the diftrelľed fituation in which wc left the place of our nativity) for Rochelle, from whence wc purpofed embarking ior the Weft indies, thinking that the beft place for adventurers. * About ftm-fct, the firft day, we came within fight of this ruined manfion, and feel¬ ing extremely tired, we turned into it, and refrefhed ouriclves with the provifions wc carried about us. Wc thought wc could not find a better fituation for fpending the night in, and we had fcarcely determined on doing fo, when my companion, more fatigued than I was, fell afleep. * Evil luggeftions, which I had not grace to fubduc, then rofe in my mind. If the remnant of his wealth was mine (1 cried), how much fooner could I realize the fchemes I have formed for making my fortune. The idea was too tempting to be refifted, and, with the knife, with which bui a few mo¬ ments before he had helped me to bread, ï pierced him to the heart ; he never opened his eyes $ one deep, one deadly groan, was all
«ill that efcaped hinn it &И foundb in my ears, and aicended to Heaven to call do л n vengeance on my head. ť After I had committed the execrable deed, I feaiched for aplace to hide the body m i and having difcovered a vault, í dragged it thither, and covered the tiaces of the blood with rubbiih. Oh that the mouldering wails had ciuíhcd me to atoms, while thus impiotili y employed! Yet wretch as 1 ami Oh, why do I fay fo? Rather let meblefs the Pow r er, which mercifully granted me leifure to repent—which pei haps ipared me then in order to warn others, by my narration and puniíhmcnt, from ciimes fimilar to mine. " To be biief, my dear auditors, í pur- fued my original intention, and embarked for the Weft Indies, where every thing fuc- ccecled even beyond my expedations. It feemed аь if Heaven allowed me to profper but to pro\e how miftaken I was, in llippo- fing wealth alone could give me happinefs. Alas ! dreadful miftake, to think any could be enjoyed from a fortune, whofe foundation was
was laid in blood :—with riches wretched- лек, if poffible, mercaied, 'tis now fifteen years fmce I muidv red my friend j ond from that period to this peace lvv been a fi ranger to my brcaik Remende pervaded my Ioul i horror pu ι fued my fteps, and the blood í had ihed continua! 1 v f wam bcfoie me. * İ hu ing at length fècured au ample in¬ dependence, and being dtfgufted with the place where I lived, or rather, as is often the cafe with the wretched, imaamini chance of fcene might alleviate my milei), I leíoivcd on returning to my native country ý but the abode of my yjurii 1 was deftined never more to behold j my confeience would not fuffer rne to remain u i .oncerned on beholding the ikeleton, and thus did Providence, 1 may fay, make me call for juftiee on myfelf/ " In confluence of hk conleflion (conti¬ nued Fioretta), bewas committed to prifon, and foon after trial, condemned, and exe¬ cuted on ι ne (pot where he had committed the murder. A little time before his death, he depofited а fum of money in the hands of a prieft^
л prie ík ikr the purpofe of having mak fald for the ioul of his murdered friend, and a monument u eft eri to his memory in our v diarie church, where his bones were burked. о " O'ten and often have 1 feen that monu¬ ment, upon w bieli, according to his defire, the prkft had inienbed the j arrieulars of his ftrange ftory, exadly oppofite the church¬ yard ; aid at the fide of the high-way he was interred himfelf:—his grave could plain!} be diftinguifhed when I was laft in that part of the country, though all overgrown with grafs and weeds, as was the ftone pi iced at its head, to fignify the reafon he was denied Chriftian burial. Many and many a time, particularly after it grew daik, I have taken a long circuit to avoid pafling it ; for 'tis confidently faid, and believed by our vil¬ iágéi s, that lbs fpirit, and that of the un¬ happy gentleman he murdered, take their nightly round-s about the place, moaning, lamenting, and uttering the moil piteous cries. My poor eikl giandmother, from whom 1 have repeatedly heard the ftory, told me
me flie was once aimoft frightened to death, from fancying ihe had a glimpfe of them near the church-yard ; and the fervants in the houfe that was rebuilt, have often been aimoft feared out of their fenfes, by the noifes- tlicy have heard within it. ss Thus (continued Floretta) my ftory proves the truth of what we were faying, namely, that an evil confeience has often oc¬ cafioned the difcovery of foul crimes. It was owing to it that the ftranger imagined the falling of the ikeleton not an accidental circumftance, but one immediately ordered by Heaven, and from that idea did he be¬ tray himfelf." <€ True (cried Agatha, who had liftened with deep attention, and great delight), 'tis an old faying, and a juft one, that a guilty confeience needs no accufer. " Lord ! if people were to allow themfelves a little time to confider, half the bad adions that are committed would be left un¬ done; for they would then reflcd, that neither riches nor titles can make amends for
forthat peace of mind which a wicked deed deftroys. No perfon's lot can be truly mi- ferable, who, on retiring to their beds, can lay their hands upon their hearts, and fay within themfelves, I may go to reft in peace, aflured of the protection of Heaven, from never having wilfully injured man, woman, or child. Such a thought as this will fup- port one through many diftrefles. May it lupport us at the hour of death !"—" and in the day of judgment ľ' (cried Madeline, with involuntary fervour, and raifing her hands and eyes to Heaven)'*«— " Amen," rejoined Agatha. " As one ftory begets another (continued ihe), if you have no objection, Manťfeíle, I can tell one foti.ething to the fame purpofe of that we have been liftening to." " Objection (repeated Floretta) ! Lord ! no, to be fure fhe can't (anfwering for Made¬ line) j there is nothing, I think, can delight people more than hearing ftories, many and many a winter's night I have palled in hearkening to rr.y grandmother's, who had fuch
fuch a budget of them, there was not a great houfe for many leagues around us, that ihe coniti not tell fomething wonderful about, and ihe has frequently (ent mc to bed fhak- ino; with icar." " Well, Manťfeíle (afked Agatha, turn¬ ing to Madeline), are you of Fiorettai mind ?" " Yes," replied Madeline, who faw that Agatha would be dreadfully difappointed, if not permitted to tell one of the wonderful tales in which flic abounded. Bteaihing aftomfhment, of witching rhymes, And evil fpirits ; of the death-bed call Of him who robb'd the widow, and devoui'il The Orpb m's poi tien ; of unquiet fouls Rib'nfrom the grave to caie the heavy guilt Of dtcds in life conceal'd ; of Oiapts that walk At dead oi night, and clank their chains, and wave Tke torch of hell around the minderer' s hed. u In the reip n of Lewis the Ninth, com- monly known by the title of St. Lewis, from the holy war in which he engaged, there flood
flood (faid Agatha), about a league from the boundaries uf this chateau, a noble caille, ibe ruins of which are 11.11 vifible upon a fine eminence, icaitcred o\cr with wood ; and 1 darj fay, Manťfeíle, in your way to Madame Chattcneufs, you have taken notice of them."—" I have," replied Madeline. " This Caftle, at the period 1 have men¬ tioned (refumed Agatha) belonged to a noble¬ man of an ancient family, and very large for¬ tune ; but notwithftanding his rank, which fliould have made him generous, his fortune, which enabled him to do fo, and his having only one child to provide for, he was of a mean and miferly difpohtion, grudging to himfelf, ond all about him, the neccffaries of life ; and treated his fon, afine noble youth, brave, generous, and accomplished — in fhort, his revcrfc in every refyed, in fuch a levere manner, that he determined to leave him, ifan opportunity offered for permitting him to do fo, without having his real mo¬ tives known ; for though he could not cileem his
his father himfelf, he yet wiflied, ifpoflible, to keep him from the cenfures of the world. ťs The opportunity he defired occurred upon the King's determining upon a crufade; for it was natural, you know, that a youth of hisprowefs fliould wifli to embark m fo glo¬ rious a caufe. He accordingly repaired, with¬ out delay, to the royal ftandard, and bade an adieu to his native country. ťí His only regret, at doing fo, was occa¬ fioned by his reparation from a young lady, whom he had privately made his wife, and by whorn he had a fon, then fome months old. She w r as an orphan, and the defend¬ ant of a good, but reduced family. He faw her at the houfe of the relation's, to whofe care fhe had been configned, and who, not caring to be burdened with her, determined to fettle her in a cloifter. They did not know each other long, ere a mutual attach- menf grew between them ; and well know¬ ing it would be vain to folkit his father's confient, or her relations, for fear ofdifoblig- ing him, he ftole her away, and, after their nuptials.
nuptials, placed her in a fmall houfe near his own refidence, which he had taken for that purpofe. " The only perfon entrufted with the affair was his father's butler, an old man, who had lived long in the family ; had often dandled him in his infancy, and was, he knew, faithfully attached to him. To the care of this good creature, who refpecled the lady, and doated on the child, he left his treafures. " He had but juft reached the Holy Land, when his father died. Poor Peter, who, without authority, could not do any thing, apprized him, as foon as poffible, of this event, and requefted either his imme¬ diate prefence, or orders how to acb 1 So great was the anxiety of the noble youth, to fce his wife and child, and have them publicly acknowledged as fuch, that without lofs of time, he knelt before the King, and entreated his permiffion to return to his native country, in order to fettle his affairs. This the King moft graciouiîy voi./ п. h granted :
granted : but alack í he only returned to find a grave within it. " Within a league of his caftle, he w r as way-laid and murdered by two ruffians mailed ; and the fad intelligence wa* con¬ veyed to his expecling fannly by his faithful fquirc, then his only attendant, who, in at¬ tempting to fave his life, received fuch def- perate wounds, that he die J in two days after. <c Peter was greatly grieved ; but, alas ! what was his grief to that of the poor lady's ; íhe loft ail rclifli for this life, and in lefs than a week after her huiband*s death, was laid befide him in the grave. In her laft mo¬ ments, as well as in thofe preceding them, ihe befought Peter to be a fteady friend to her child, and fee him, if poflible, put into pofleflion of his rights. Peter promifed to do all he could, but that all, he feared, would be but little. The certificate of her mar¬ riage had been deftroyed in a box, with many other valuables, by an accidental fire fome months prior to her death 9 and Peter knew
knew too much of the world to think the gentleman, who was heir to the eftate, irt cafe his mafter left no lawful iffue, would take his Angle teftimony for the legitimacy of her child, and thus give up a fortune he much wanted ; being an extravagant fipend- thrift, addidcd to every vice and folly, and who would for many years have been in the greateft diftrefs, but for the bounty of his poor murdered relation. Well things turned out as Peter thought ; the gentleman came from a diftant part of France, where he lived, to take pofleflion, anel declared he did not give the lmallcft credit to there being any other heir than himielf; he did not doubt, he faid, the child being his coufin's, but hi* legitimate one, he was convinced it was not; and all poor Peter could prevail on him to do, was to allow a fmall ftipend for its fup¬ port. Peter, with the reft of the fervants, was retained, and none of them had reaion to complain of their mafter. For fome time, he rendered the caftle a fcene of confiant gaiety,; but fuddenly his fpirits drooped ; u 2 Le
be íhut out compan}', and appeared to have taken a diflike to all the plcafures he before delighted in ; but though he avoided com¬ pany, foìitude feemed equally irkfome to him, and he aimoft continually had one or other of the domeftics in the apartment with him. The fudden alteration in his manner, the involuntary horrors he fome¬ times betrayed, appeared ftrange circum« cumftances in the eyes of Peter, and from them he drew an inference that fhocked him. Determined to know whether it was, or was not a juft one, he deviied a fcheme, which, when you hear it, you will fay was a bold one. ei He was the domeftic his mafter gene¬ rally feleded to be near him, and, at the clofe of day, they frequently walked toge¬ ther up and down a great Gothic hall. — One evening, as they were thus engaged, Peter, whom his mafter allowed to converfč familiarly with him, from his long refidence in the family, and well-known attachment to it, faid to him, with a fokmn voice and ceun- ς tenance,
tenance, ť Sir, there is fomething of confe¬ quence which I wifli to impart to you : laft night ï had a dream ; indeed I do not know whether I can properly call it one, in which methought my poor young mafter, disfigured by wounds, and ftained with blood, came to me, and told me I ihould, when I leaft expected it, have the pleafure of diicovering his murderer, and bringing him to condign puniihment.* — Peter paufed, and looked fteadily at his mafter, who betrayed the greateft agitation. " Was any thing elfe faid to you ?" de¬ manded he, in a faltering voice. * Yes (replied Peter), ï afked him by what means I ihould difcover his murderer, and he told me he would betray himfelf. ' You will (faid he) mention my murder before him, and his guilty confeience will make him, if not by words at leaft by agita¬ tion, declare his crime. Befides, my troubled fpirit will be near you at the time, and acce¬ lerate the difcovery.*
и 3 Peter's
" Peter's mafter now declared he was taken very ill, and muft go diredly to his chamber. Scarce!} had bc fpoken, u hen the dreadful creaking of an iron door was heard, and a Lint light fhíhed upen him, from the fpiial ftair-cife of an old tolver, tbat had fır cen¬ turies b^en uninhabited, from an idea of its being haunted. * Lord, defend me ! (cried Peter) ; î have the key of the iron door at the top of the tower in my poffeflion, and no human hand could have opened it ; the light, too, from the ftair-cafe is quite a blue flame.* ťt Hark (cried Floretta at this moment» with an affrighted countenance), what noife is that ?" " Noife ! (repeated Agatha, with an emo¬ tion of fear). "Oh! 'tis only the wind (continued ihe, fiftening a minute) ; it often comes in this way againft the doors, as if it wouid burft them open ; but blefs me, MamTelle (look- ino-
ingat Madeline!, how deadly pale you are ; 1 tear fitting up does not agree with you." The fpirits of Madeline, weakened by grief, were indeed affederi, in fpite of her reaion, with a kind of fupcrftitious awe, by the ftories of her companions. a I -et us mull fome wine (cried Agatha) ; it will do us all good." " Ay, do (faid Floretta), and I will make íòme toaft." Madeline now faid fhe would ftep into the Counteis's chamber, and try whe¬ ther flie ftill flept. She accordingly ftole into it, and bending over her pillow, had the fatisfadion of finding fhe continued in a tranquil fleep. This fomewhat cheered her; and after taking a glafs of the mulled wine, fhe felt the gloom of her fpirits pretty well depreffed, Agatha then refumed her ftory· " Scarcely (faid ihe) had Peter uttered the laft word, when his mafterdropped fenfelefs at h 4 his
his feet. Peter raifed, and with difficulty recovered him. The moment he opened his eyes, he dropped upon his knees, implored the mercy of Heaven, and confefled he was the murderer of his coufin. " Plunged into difficulties, he faid, by his extravagance, which he was afliamed to avow, as foon as ever lie heard of his coufin's ex- pccìed return from the Holy Land, he laid the plan for deftroying him, which fuccecdeo! but too well, and in which he was affifted by a fervant, whom he afterwards murdered 5 for fear of his betraying him. ft Peter told him, if he would immediately refign the eftate to the lawful heir, he would not give him up to the puniihment he merited. This he readily confented to do % and every thing necefľary being done, he re¬ tired to a monaftery, where he foon after died of a broken heart. After his death, this ftory was divulged by the fervant, whofe afliftance Peter liad obtained for carrying into execution the fcheme he had contrived for
for knowing whether or not his mafter had murdered his coufin.*' The tale concluded, on which Floretta made many comments, a general iilence enfued ; it was now about the middle of the night, or rather the beginning of the morn¬ ing, and the ftorm ftill raged with unabated violence. Madeline went to a window, and opened a fliutter, to fee whether the icene without was as dreary as fancy within had reprefented it to be, and found it, if poffible» more fo. The faint dawn o*er the wefterm hills was overcaft by heavy clouds, and the trees of the wood tumul tuoufly agitated by the blaft; which feemed threatening to tear them from the earth. *' How dreadful, how appalling is this hurricane (cried Madeline, as flie leant againft; the window). ïf it ftrikes fuch terror into a heart confcious of no crime, what fears* what horrors muft it excite in one burthened with guilt* To inch an one the v^ar of the η 5 derrìent&
elements muft indeed be dreadful, as feeming to declare the anger of an offended God.— Like the Poet, Madeline thought that fuch a heart would think <*™-и«мв*ТЬе tempeft blew his wi ath, The thnntto was hib voice, and the red flaih His fpeedy fword '- f juft ice. Chilled by the melancholy profpecl, flie clofed the fhutter,iand returned to the fire ? before which her companions were nov/ flum« bering. In deep and penfive meditation, íhe fat a confiderable time with her eyes fixed upon the crackling blaze, when the heavy crafli of fomething falling in the lower part of the Caftle, ftartled not only her, but her companions. et Holy virgin ! (exclaimed Agatha, turn¬ ing pale), defend us—'tis the янпоиг that has fallen." " You had better try (faid Madeline, in a faint voice). " Try (repeated Agatha) - 3 Lord, not for the world.*' z f* Nor
ťi Nor I, I am fure (faid Floretta) if you could, or would give me ä principality for doing fo." " 1 will then (cried Madeline, afliamed to propofe what nie would fhrink from herfelf), I will go and endeavour to difcover the oc- cafionofthe noife," She went foftly into the Countcfs's zhamber, to try if lhe was difturbed by it, and finding her ftill afleep, fhe took up a light, and de¬ fcended (though with trembling limbs, and a palpitating heart) to the great hall, from, whence the noife had founded. The light flie held but partially difperfed its awful gioom,and her tremor and palpitation increafed, as fhe proceeded to the extreme end, at which hung the ominous armour. She found this in its ufual fituation, and flie was haftily moving from it, too much depreffed and agitated to think of fearching elfewhere for the caufe of the noife r when a door oppofite toher (which led to a fuit of rooms that had been appropriated iolely to the ufe of the Count, and fince his death, h 6 íhut
íhut up), ílowly opened, and a tall figure, clad in black, came forth, Madeline ftarted behind a pillar ; the con¬ version of her companions had raifed the very fpirit of fhperftition in her breaft, and, with eyes aimoft burfting from their fockets, íhe now ftood immovable, gazing upon the terrifying objed that prefented itfelf to her view ; but when flie faw it approaching her, which it did, with a flow, but fteady ftep» her faculties returned, and dropping the light, flie fled to the flair-cafe ; but ere flie had afcended many fteps, flie fell, through her extreme hafte ; and the furrounding d ark nefs, and the exquifite pain flie fufTered, in confequence of bending her foot under her at the inftant, prevented her from mak¬ ing an immediate effort for rifing. She lay for about two minutes in this fituation, when a faint light gleaming behind her, made her turn her head with quicknefs, and ihe beheld the objed of her terror within a ftep of her. A cold dew inftantly burft from her pores, her heart aimoft died within her, and flie covered her face with her hands. CHAP
CHAP. VIIL
And art thou—of thai facred band > Alas t for vis too foon, tho' rais't! above Tlie reach of human pain, above the fligbt Of human joy. J[ HE welk known accents of Father Ber¬ trand recalled the fainting fpirits of Made¬ line 5 never were founds before fo delightful to her ear. She uncovered her face, ftarted up, and exclaimed, " Gracious Heaven ! is it poflible ï do I really behold Father Ber¬ trand !"
"Mf
€ί My dear young lady (faid the good old man, with his ufual mildneis), what is the matter;—-is our beloved benefadrcf worfe?" ei No, í truft and believe not (replied Madeline) ; her fleep has been long and tranquil." " If ihe is not worfe then—if you did not come to call me to her, what could have brought you to the hall ?" Madeline, as briefly as poffible, informed him ; and in doing 10, notwithftanding ihe wifhed to conceal it, in order to avoid the imputai ion of folly, betrayed the fright he had given her. The good father was too well acquainted with human nature not to know, that the prefent hour was an improper one for rea- foning with her againft the weaknefs which expofed her to it. He determined, how¬ ever, from a wifli of promoting the happinefs of a young creature, which he knew nothing would
would fo materially injure as fuperftition, to take another opportunity of admoniíhing her againft it. He informed her, that his continuing the night in the Caftle was owing to the exprefs defire of the Countefs ; " but inftead of going to bed (proceeded he), I procured the key of the library, well knowing, from the violence of the ftorm, that I could not fleep." He fighed as he fpoke, and his eyes were involuntarily raifed to Heaven. Madeline looked at him with pity and reverence. «* Poor Caroline (faid flie to herfelf) is now prefent to his thoughts ; Oh I what muft have been his excruciating anguiih at the time of her death, when even now, though fo many years have pafled fince that event, his regret is fo poignant/* " Never
et Never (cried flie, addreftmg him), never* again may 1 hear a flot m io tremendous ! I fear we ihall have melancholy accounts to¬ morrow of the miichief it has done." i4 î hope not (replied the Father) ; he, whofe mighiy fpirit walks upon the careering winds, will, 1 humbly truft, prevent then- fury from being deftrudive." Madeline now enquired whethei he heard the noife which had fo much alarmed her and her companions. He lepiied in Uiq affirmative, but faid it had come from the galleiy inftead of the hall, and that he would now go up, and try to difcover the caufe of it, accompanied by Madeline. He accord¬ ingly afcended, and they foon difcovered that it had been occafioned by the fall of the Countefs's pidure. 4t Doyou now, my child (faid the Father), retire, and try to take fome repofe ; for your fpirits have been much agitated. 1 rejoice to hear that the reft of our noble friend has been
been fo good ; 4is a favourable fymptom ; may the morning light witnefs the realization of the hopes it has infpired I" íť Hí aven grant it may !" fervently re¬ joined Madeline. She then bade the good man furewel, and begged he would, on de¬ fending to the hali, try whether the light ihe had dropped was extinguifhed. The moment flie re-entered the drefling- room, Agatha and Fioretta eagerly enquired if they were right in their conjedures* She aflured them they were not, and then in¬ formed them of the caufe of their alarm.—* This excited little lefs confternation than if flie had told them the armour was falen 5— fo prone is fuperftition to drefs up every cir¬ cumftance in the gai b of terror. The dawn was now peeping through the fliutters ; the lights were therefore put out, and Agatha and Floretta then again began to flumber before the fire. They were foon» however, difturbed by a fudden guft of wind, which
which came with fuch violence againft the doors, as aimoft to burft them open. " Heaven defend us! (faid Agatha), the ftorm grows worfe, inftead of better." *' Hark (cried Madeline, with a wild ex¬ preflion in her countenance, and laying her hand upon the arm of Agatha)—Hark !*-— there furely was a groan mingled in that blaft. 1 · "No, MamTelle (faid Agatha), 'tis only the howling of the wind," " Again ! (exclaimed Madeline) ;— Oh Heavens ! (ftarting from her chair) 'tis the voice of the Countefs !" She ruflied into the chamber, followed by her companions. The curtains of the bed were haftily drawn back, and the Countefs was .difcovered in a fit : a feream of mingled terror and anguifli burft from Madeline, and finking on her knees, flie etat ped the nerveteís hands of her friend between her's.
Agatha
Agatha and Fioretta ufed every effort to recover their lady, and at length fucceericri. On opening her eyes, flic turned them round with a wild ilare, as if forgetting where flie was, or by whom furrounded. Fier recol- icdion, however, appeared foon to return ; her eyes fuddenly loft their wildnefs, and were raifed foi fome minutes to Heaven.— She then looked at Madeline, and fpoke, but what flie faid was unintelligible : flie feemed fenfible of this herfelf, by mournfully fliak- ing her head. Gently difengaging one hand from Madeline, flie pointed it towards the door, looking earneftiy in her face as fhe did fo, as if to fay, ihe wiihed her to bring foibe perfon to her. " Father Bertrand 1" cried Madeline, ftart¬ ing up. A faint fmile frum the Countefs was an affirmative; and ihe w r as flying from the chamber, when ihe was fuddenly flopped ' / a deep groan. " Has
íť Has flie relapfed ?" cried ihe with a trembling voice, and a defpairing look, again advancing to the bed. ** Never to recover, I fear," laid Agatha, burfting into tears. si 'Tis too true ! (cried Fioretta), flie is gone for ever." Madeline grew fick ; flic could not weep; flie could not fpeak ; fhe could fcaicely breathe; her fight grew dim; her head grew giddy ; and the objeds that fhe could diiccm feemed fwimming before her. The grief and confternation of her companions prevented them fren, r tricing her, till they faw her catching at a ЬИ -poft for fupport.— They then di e*'v haftened to her aflift¬ ance, and fupp >rtmg her to a chair, opened а window. Tiic к xiinels of the morning air, together with the w\aer they fprinkled on her face, fomewhat revived her, and afliower of tears came to her relief.
Agatha^
Agatha, whom her death-like coldneis, and ghaftly palenefs greatly alarmed, would have led her from the room, but flie re¬ fifted the effort, and tottering to the bed, threw herfelf upon it, and bedewed the pale face oí her dear, her invaluable benefadrefs with tears of unutterable, of heart-felt an¬ guifli. Agatha now defired Floretta to ring a large bell, which hung Ín the gallery. This in a few minutes colieded all the fervants, and they came crowding into the room, pre¬ ceded by Father Bertrand, and apprized by the fudden alarm of the melancholy event which had happened. Few feenes could have been more diftref- fing than that now exhibited by the old do¬ meftics, as they wept round the bed of their beloved lady, under whofe protedion they had pafled the prime, and trufted to have clofed the evening, of their days. "Oh my friends and feliow-fervants! (cried Agatha, whom grief made eloquent), our „ happineís
happinefs in this world is gone for ever ;-— but 'tis a comfoit to think, that, from the common courfe of nature, none of us can e-xped much longer to continue in it.** <ť My friends' (faid Father Bertrand, col- leding all his fpirits to his aid, and wiping away the tear which had bedewed his pale check), my friends (looking round him with the moil benign companion), moderate thofe tranfports of grief, by patiently acquiefcing in the will of the Almighty ; endeavour to defcrvc a continuance of iome of his blef¬ fmgs. " Peace (continued he, advancing to the foot of the bed, and kneeling before it, while his arms folded upon hib breaft, and his head gently reclined, feemed to denote that fubmiffion to the divine will which he preached to others), peace to the foul of the depaited ; and may we all, like her, be prepared for our latter end !" " Let all (cried Agatha, as he rofe from Ids knees) whofe fervices are not required, now retire from the room. ,, 1 Father
Father Bertrand approached Madeline, who ildi 1а т ', with her face covered, upon the bed i he lojk he: hand, and entreated her to riic, but ilie bad neither power to refufc nor ίο obey. Percen ing her fituation, he ordered her to be taken up, and carried into the next 100m ; he wasihocked beyond ľxprcffion at the alteration which grief had effected in her appearance; her cheek and lips had loft all tinge of colour, and her eyes appeared too dim for her to diftinguifh any object. Reftoratwes were adminiftered to her, and by degrees the tears, w r hich extreme agony had iufpended, again began flowing, and fomewhat relieved her. Father Bertrand fat by her in file nee ; he knew the tribute of affection and forrow muft be paid, nor did he attempt to check it, tili the firft traniports of the latter, by in¬ dulgence, were a little abated. He then ad¬ dı efíed her in the mildeft accents ofconfoia« tion,- — " Oh,
" Oh! my daughter (he faid), let the af- foranee of the felicity to which the fpirit of your friend has departed, comfort you for her lofs ; life at beft is but a ftate of pil¬ grimage. God, no doubt, to prevent our too great attachmen 1 * to a ftate which we muft refign, has chequered it with good and evil, fo that few, after any long continu¬ ance in it, can, if poflefled of reafon and religion, regret a fummons from it. To the Countefs it was a happy releafe ; her virtues had prepared her to meet it with fortitude, and her forrows with plea¬ fure j ihe knew flie was about appearing be¬ fore a merciful Being, who would reward the patience with which ihe bore thofe forrows— forrows that corroded the fprings of life : fo far am ï permitted to fay, in order to try and reconcile you to her lofs, but the fource of them I am bound to conceal. Endeavour (he proceeded) to compofe yourfelf; Ma¬ dame D* Alembert may foon be expected, and it will be fome little comfort t& the poor mourner to receive your foothing at¬ tentions.
tentions. I am now compelled to retire to the convent, but at the clofe of day 1 fliall return with fome of my brother monks to fay mafs for the foul of the departed. Farewell (rifing as he fpoke) may theblef- fing of heaven reft upon you, and peace foon revifit your heart ! He had fcarcely left the room ere Agatha entered it. " Had you not better lay down Mam'fellc (faid ihe, in a voice bioken by fobs) ; for my part I can hold up no longer ; as foon as 1 have siven orders about what is о to be done 1 ihall go to bed, and I little care ifl never rife from it." The melan¬ choly accent in which thefe words were pro¬ nounced, redoubled the tears of Madeline. " We have loft indeed (cried fhe) the kindeft, the beft of friends ; never can we ex¬ ped again 10 meet with one like her." The door now foftly opened, anei Fio¬ retta made her appearance; ihe came with a meffage of condolence from the phyfician, who had juft arrived, to Madeline, and a requeft to know whether he could in any manner be ferviceable to her. vol. ii. í £t Ко*
íe No, (replied Madeline, mournfully) he cannot." The Notary has accompanied him, (re¬ fumed florcita) and he defircd me to tell \ou that had he imagined the Countefs fo neat her end, he would, notwithftanding the weather, have come hither yefterday." " Alack—-(cried Agatha) í grieve he did not j my Ladyk kind intentions towaids you will never now be fulfilled." The idea of their being fruftratcd could not, in the prefent ftate of Madeline's mind, exiitcoiic figh. Pale, faint, exhaufted, flic at Lift coin] lied with the requeft of Agatha, anei retiring to her chamber, threw herielf upon the bed ; but not even for an inftant did fleep ihed oblivion over her forrows ; flie found the words of the Poet true, that lie, like ihe world, h"e reicly vifit jays WÌkK' foi tune fmilcs, the wiUehui he foifakts, Ь vifr u\\ Ь.ь. liowny pinions Ü cs fiom woe, And bghts cn lids uHluUyM by a tear.
PaUhcr
ï^aiher fatigued than refrefhed by laying down, flic arofe in about an hour, and open¬ ing a window, feated herfelf by it ; for there was а faintnefs over her which flie thought the air might remove. The heavinefs of the iky was now difperfed ; the fun looked out with refulgent glory, and the winds, whofe fury had fcattered the lawn with fhattcreel boughs of trees and fragments from the chateau, were hufhed into a calm ; the trees, ftill furchaiged with rain, difplayed a brighter green, lt and glittering as they trem¬ bled, cheered the day ;" while the birds that fprungfrom amidft them, poured forth the iofteft notes of melody ; but not that melody, not the bleffed beams of the fun which it feemed to hail, coulei touch the fad heart of Madeline with pleafure. " Ah 1 (the cried) after fuch a night as the laft, how foon on the morning would my dear beneŕadieis, if flic had been fpared to us, have gone forth to enquire what mil- chief was done, and give orders for repairing ι г it '
¡t i Oli \ ye children of poverty and diftrefs— ye, like the unhappy Madeline, have loft a mother." Madeline knew not the ftrength or ten¬ dei nefs of her attachment to the Countefs till ilie was deprived of her j in lofing her, flie loft all hope of comfort ; for to none, as to hci, could fhe impai t the feais, the wiflies, the expectations, wdiich had fo long, and frill at timet, agitated her heart ; and which, by being concealed, fhe knew would fatally coTiods itä peace. Yet net for the tender¬ nefs which had poured balm upon its for- lows, not for the counlel which had regu¬ lated its nupulle?, not for the wiidom which had guarded ibinexpcncnce, did flie lament alene ι cxcj uíive oí aii confideration for her¬ felf íhe bitieny wept the death of her bene- facucb, and imagined, was flie but alive ag'im, her own iiancpiillity woukl infoine degree be rciiorcd, though the next momen Π к mou be t an poi ted to an immeaiur- able diftuiice from her. The
The circumftances which occafioned her death, heightened the grief of Madeline for it, and the flattering hopes ihe had conceived of her amendment, from her uninterrupted reft, alfo aggravated her feelings. She continued alone a confiderable time; at length Agatha entered with fome coffee. " I fee MamTelle, ¡cried fhe) that like me you could not reft ; I might indeed as well have ftaid up as gone to bed." " ÌNo, (faid Madeline, looking mourn - fully in her face) 1 could not reft." " Pray Mam'fellc, (cried Agatha, as ihe laid the coffee on a little table befo. e her) piay Mam'iclie, do not t¿*.c on fo badly; though you have loft а good friend, you have fti 11 -1 kind father to love and to pro ted you ; not uke mc, who in foling my lady, ha\e loft my only friend. Ah, Mam* felie î (chopping into a chair oppofite Madeline) 4is a grievous thing for a poor old foul like me, to be negleded and forlorn."
1 J " You
** You will tuver be deferted or ioıîoııt, I truft, and believe (cried Maılelİnc) ; the noble daughter of your clear departed lady will nevet, I am convinced, ekiert a iy one that flic loved." " She is а iiub'c 1 id}, indeed ¡laid Agat h.i; bul— —" " But what ?" eager!) inte j rugateci Made- fine, on hei fuddenly paufing. " Nothing, Mam'ielk,*Teplied Agatha, fighing; (iheii аь it to change the difcouik) do piay, MamTelle (lhe continued) try and eat fome breakfaft; indeed, if you cb) not take more care of youi felf, than you at pre¬ fent feem inclined to 'do, you will probably biing on a fit o' ficknefi ; and what a gnev ous thing would it be for my poor young lady on arriving, to find, not only her mother dead, but you unable to give her any comfort." " Alas I (faid Madeline) whether well or ill, I fear I ihall be equally unable to give her comfoit.—Agatha again preffed her to tak с
rake fome Weakfaft, buí grief hai deft. - < 1 ί 1 inclination fiir tloing io, aid tlit h ).d.c- keepcr bon left her to hei mehnciiuly пи- ditations. —At the ufual dinner hour ih„y were ao Jn inten u ted by the re-entrañe»- A О ¡.J A<» ulia. who came to entreat her t > ch* ce id to the chimér parlour. «« Do, pray do, dear Mam'fellc (ihe find; ; if you eat nothing, it will even do you good to ftir а little." Madeline had felt fo forlorn whilft by herielf, that flie did not refufc this entreaty, and accordingly went down flairs ; but wdien flie entered the parlour— L *iat parlour where flie had firft been welcomed to the bateau— where flie had been embraced as the adopted child of the Countefs—where flie had p.iflld with her ίο many happy hours, the compolure flie tried to allume vaniflied ; flie involuntarily ftarted back, and burlbng int ) tears, would h ал с returned to her chamber, had not Agatha prevented her ; the pathetic entreaties of the faithful creature at length ι 4 prevailed
prevailed on Madeline to fit down to the table, where Hie alfo infilled on Agatha's (eating herfelf; but ihe could not cat—flic could on!} weep. The forrowful looks of the fervants the— folemn ftilhicf* which reigned throughout the chateau, fo different from its foimer cheerfulnefs augmented her tears. Agatha judged of Madeline by herfelf, and thinking thoie tears womci be a relief to her over¬ charged heart, flie did not attempt to Hop them. They fat together till the clofe of day, when Agatha entreated her to retire to her chamber, and try and take that reft which flie had been fo long deprived of, and fo materially wanted. Madeline was convinced flie coukl not fleep ; but ihe did not hefitate to return to her chamber, at the door of which Agatha left her. Scarcely had lhe entered it, ere flie refoived on going to her benefadrefi's, and indulging her ibrrow by weeping over her
her remains. She accordingly proceeded thi¬ ther ; but when (he reached the door, ilie paufed, and íhuddcred at the folemn feene before her. The chamber was hung with black, and a black velvet pall was thro,vn acrofs the bed, which formed a melancholy contrail to the rich crimfon curtains. Before the bed leve* ral rows of large wax tapers burned, anel caft a gleam upon the face of the Countefs that increafed its ghaftlincis. Awe-ftruck, Ma¬ deline wanted refolution to enter ; and it might perhaps have been many minutes ere íhe could have fummoned fufficient for Luit purpofe, had fhe not beheld Agatha and Floretta fitting in a remote corner of the room. She then, with light and trembling fteps, approached the bed. The moment ihe caft her eyes upon the inanimate features of her friend, the compofure, which fudden awe had infpired, gave way to her affliction. " is ilie gone ? (íhe cried, looking round her with an eye of wildnefs, as if forgetting 1 S the
lhe fcene of the morning —as if doubling rlu* reality of what the faw) ; Oh ! too fu rely- too lurch íhe İh ' the continued, wringing her hards together); and who, in this wide woild, tan fu ] ply her lofs to Madeline ? Oh, moft excellent of women 1 (kneelingbefide the bed, while tears ftreamed in torrents down her cheeks); Thou—friend to the friendlcfs—-'tis now I feel the full extremity of grief ; the ibrrow, which I fo lately deemed excruciating, fcems light, feems trivial, in comparifon of that which I now feel. Had you died (flie went on, after a momentary paufe, and as if the dull cold ear of death could have heard her pathetic lamentations), had you died according to the common courfe of nature, though my lofs would have been equally great, my grief, I think, would not have been fo poignant. To die by fuch horrible means (flie added, with a kind of feream in her voice, and ftarting up as if ihe faw that very moment the poignard of the aflaffm pointed at her own breaft) ; to die by fuch hori bic means, is what overpowers me.
me. Oh why—why did Ì not follow you the fatal night you went to the chapel ?" « Dear Manťfeíle (faid Agatha, rifing and approaching her), try to compofe yourfelf; no grief, пэ lamentations can recai my blef¬ fed ìady." - e Oh ! Agatha (cried Madeline), 'tis not a common friend í 'tis a mother I lament ;*—» ilie was the only perfon from whom I ever ex¬ perienced the tendernefs of one. Do you not wonder (the continued, grafping the arm of Agatha) how any one could be lo wicked as to injure fuch a woman—a woman who ne ţT er, í nm confident, in the whole courfe oí her hfc, injured a mortal ; whoíè hand was as liberal as her heart, and whole pity re¬ lieved, even when her reaion condemned the fuflerer? AVould you not have thought, Aga¬ tha (again beading efer the bed, from which flie had а little retreated) that the innocence of that countenance migb.t have difanued the rage of а favage ? What a fmile is there íl ill upon it; it leems to declare the happi- í ó ' nefs
nefs which is enjoyed by the fpirit that once animated it !" βί My dear young lady (faid Agatha, in a low voice), recoiled yourfelf;·—remember the promife you gave my lady in the chapel, never to mention or allude, by any means whatfoever, to the tranfadion that happened there." ** I thank you, Agatha (cried Madeline;, for awakening me to recoiled ion ; never fliould I have forgiven myfelf, had I broken my promife. I will in future endeavour to have more command over my feelings." She ftill, however, remained by the bed, holding the arm of Agatha. " And to this cold, this ghaftly, this ina¬ nimate flate, muft we all, one day come !" flie cried. ** Yes (replied a hollow voice behind her^ the voice of Father Bertrand, who, unper- ceived, had entered fome minutes before, ac¬ companied by fome of his brother monks, for the purpofe of faying mafs for the foul of ihe departed) ; the crime of difobedience has л dojmed
doomed us to that ftate, and the paths of fame and fortune lead but to the coffin and the grave." He now proceeded to inform Madeline of the purpofe for which he had entered. (i If (cried he) you think you can, with¬ out interrupting, attend to our folemn rites» and join in our orifons, remain ; if not, retire to your chamber." " I do think I can (replied Madeline) ; I alfo think, that, by flaying, my mind will be compofed." Some of the moft ancient of the domeftics now entered, and the facred fervice was be¬ gun, and ere concluded, the turbulence of Madeline's grief was abated : when over, Father Bertrand, who was tenderly interefted about her, infifted on her retiring to her chamber, and gave her his benedidion as flie withdrew.
Overcome
Overcome by fatigue, both of body and mind, flie repaired to bed ; but the fleep into winch ihe tunk was broken and dif¬ turbed by frightful vifions, and ihe aroiepale and unrefrefhed, at the firft dawn of day, to feck forne ot her fellow-partners in afrhdion. To delcribe her feelings this day would be but to recapitulate thofe of the preceding one. They were now, as they were then, alternately perturbed, afternately calm ; and Father Bertrand, whofe fympathy and coun¬ fel alone caufed that calm, was convinced ■ time only could reflore them to their wonted ftate. She this day performed the painful tafk of acquai - ting her fathe* with the me» lancholy iols they had fuflained, which ihe did as follows :■— To M. Clermont. " WHEKL fhall 1 find words to foften the melancholy tidings 1 have to communi¬ cate. Oh 1 my father, vainly would 1 try for exprcflions to do fio ; no language, no prepa¬ ration
ration ï could ule would mitigate them to you ; but what 1 find it impoffible to do, your own reafon and religion will, I truft, perform. " Heaven has been pleafcd to recai our eftimable friend, my dear and lamented be¬ nefadrefs, to itfelf. The dawn of yefterday faw the feal of death imprefled upon thofe eyes which fcarcely ever opened but to cheer her family, or witneis fome good deeds or her own performing, bo fhort was her ill— nefs, fo unexpeded her diflolution, that I feel myfelf at times quite bewildered by the fliock, and tempted to think, that what has lately happened is but the dream of my own d i fo rd e red i magi nat ion. " İs ihe dead ? I repeatedly aík myfelf;— the Counters de Merville dead? ihe whom but a few days ago I beheld fo apparently well and happy ? Alas ! the gloom of every Abounding objed gives а fatal affirmative to thofe felf-queftions. " I wander to her favourite apartments, as if to leek for lier, who never more will re-enter
re-enter them ; and ftart back, chilled and affrighted by their negled and defertion, as if it was unexpeded. Oh, my father, what a change has a few days produced ! The found of fociai mirth no longer enlivens the Caftle ; a death-like ftillnefs reigns through¬ out it, fcarcely ever interrupted but by the \vind fighing through its long galleries, as if in unifon with the grief of its inhabitants. íť Things without appear aimoft as dreary as they do within. The fury of a late ftorm has fcattered the lawn with broken boughs ;,nd fragments from the chateau, and thus given the place an appearance of defolation faddening in the extreme. The poor pea¬ fants, too, who are employed within the wood, appear (to me at leaft) quite altered. They feem to purfue their labours with re¬ ludance, and, often fufpending them, look towards the Caftle with a melancholy air, as if to fay the comforts that cheered their tous, and fupported their ftrengih, died with its honoured and lamented owner.
Their
Their lofs, indeed, is unfpeakable ;—not content with relieving the objeds chance threw in her way, ihe herfelf explored the receffes of poverty, and, like a miniftcring angel from heaven, difpenfed charity and com- paffion wherever flie went. She delighted too in contriving little partîmes which fliould give relaxation to labour, and fmiled to fee the rough brow of induftry fmoothed by pleaiure, and the peafants fporting on the fod which they had cultivated. This morning, as I ftood at an upper window, which overlooked the old trees that -waved before it, and faw the diftant fields already beginning to wear the yellow tinge of Autumn ; I recolleded the manner in which flic had planned to celebrate the con¬ clufion of the enfuing harveft: fhe was to have given a feaft and a dance upon the lawn to all her tenants, and I was to have mixed in the latter with the peaíânt girls. Alas ! little did I think, when ihe fpoke to me about it, that, ere the period deftincd for
for it, ñ\¿ would bc laid within the narrow houfe of clay. " To quit this place diredly, to return to you, my cLar father, and mingle thofe ^caia with jour's, which flioukl emoalm ner memory, would be my wiih, lud lhe not jequefted, aimoft in her laft moments, that I might continue here to receive Madame D'Alembert, who İs fhortiy exj eded, and alfo to give her my company whiL flie ftaid, or whenever flie came to the chateau' alone- —a requeft which the gratitude of your heart will not, I am convinced, permit me to difobey;—)et, alas! hule benefit can flie derive from my focicty. How can I comfort·—how try to reconcile her to a lofs which I feel myielf nothing earthly can fup- ply to me ? But, perhaps, ihe may derive a melancholy pleafure from the company of a perfon who is a real mourner ; I feel myielf, that thofe of the Counteis's family who are the moft afliided, are t hoie to whom I am the moft attached, 45 It
u li will, ï arn fure, impart to you the fame fatisfadion it has done to me, to know that, to the laft, my beloved, my eftimable benefadrefs, bellowed upon me thole proofs of aftldion and efteem, which long fince excited a gratitude in my heart, death or the lofs of reafon only can remove. The very morning on which flic died fo unex- pededly, her generous intentions towards me were to have been put into execution ; that they were unfulfilled will, I am confi¬ dent, be to you, as to me, a fmall fource of regret, compared to that which we feel for her death. ï am not now worfe with refped to fortune than when ihe took me under her protedion : fhe luxunes I enjoyed with her have not vitiated my tafte, or rendered me unable to fupport v : th contentment the humble fituation I am deftlned to. No, my dear father, her leiFons and my affed ion for you guarded me agiinft fuch perverfion of difpofition ; and as I will ftill ftrive to deferve the proteďon of heaven, fo I truft í ihall obtain it, and never feel the preflure of worldly
woildiy want. Do not fuffer any apprehen- fioiib about my health to difturb your mind ; my b'4i) has not fympathizcd as much as }ou might have fuppofed with my mind ; í am not ill, indeed, though a little fatigued ; but thcie is nothing now (idas 1 1 figh as í fay fo) to prevent my taking repofe. " 1 now legret more than ever the depar¬ ture of my good friends, Madame Chatteneuf and her daughter; had they continued at V——, I am fure, on the ih fi intimation of the melancholy event which has happened, they would have flown to the caftle ; and their fociety, I thin :, would a little have alleviated my feelings. When I fat down, ï did not imagine I could have written above a few lines ; but now I find that in writing to, as well as in converfing with, a beloved friend, one is infenfibly eh awn on, and com foiled by being fo. " 1 have now, however, written aimoft to the extent oí my paper ; and as 1 have no« thing
thing of fufficient confequence to fay to make mc begin a new fheet, I fliall bid you, my deai eft father, ft rewel. A Vri te as foon as poflible, î entreat you ; if you fay (which ï know you will not, except it is the cafe) that you are well, and fomewhat compofed after our great lofs, you will give eafe to my heart. " I fliall receive pleafure from hearing that our faithful Jaqueline, and all our good neighbours, are well : to all who may be fo kind as to inquire after me, prefent my beft wiflies. Once moie farewel í and believe me ie Your truly dutiful and affectionate child, " Madeline Cle r mon г."
CHAP.
CHAP. IX.
ît lis the wretch's comfoit ftill to have Some imali ıefetve of mar and inward woe—» Some iniluipecii-d hoaid of daihng giief, Wlpcli they, unieen, may wail, ..ná weep, and mourn. Com. reve» li M her h tter to her father, Madeline care¬ fully guai ded againft dropj ing any hint of the event winch had accelerated the Coun¬ ter's death, well snowing that, if ihe gave ilie moftdiílant intimation of it, íhe ihould prompt inquirid from him, which it would be diificiilt ior hei to evade. The news of the Counte is's deceait foon fpiead through¬ out the neiüh boia hood, and ieveral of her acquaintance ?
acquaintance fent to the calile to learn the particulars of it ; how Mademoifelle Cler¬ mont wa% and whether Madame D'Alem¬ bert was cxpeded ? The refped of the fervants to the com- -mandsof their lady did not expire with her; and, in conformity to the Lift flie had iifued, they anfwered the ine]uiries concerning the caufe of her death, by faying that it was owing to a levere cold, A dead calm now re'çmed throughout the caille ; the domeflics had nothing to do bu* - to lamcnjj and Midcline ρ died her time in wandering about the caftle, like а ghoft round the leene ot its former happinels, or in watching by the pale remains of her friend, alternately with ing, alternately fear¬ ing the arrival of Madame D'AÎembeiı. Ere fhe came, Father Bertrand dotei mined to have the body of the Countefs fecured with¬ in its coffin» truft ing by this meafure to conceal for ever the injury it had fufllicd; COnvinCCd :
convinced, from the ft ro;. t 'cdion Madame D Alembert bore her si riser, that to let bei know the real caufe oi her death, woulel be upon the ťt qua r ry of that murdeicd deer," to add the death of lien Fidili da} s eupleri without any tidings of Maiamé D'Alembert; and before their e\\ n .tion, the umains ut the Counteis wire confined to the coffin, and hid for ci, ii'Mii ечел m : t ai eve. Ar the end oí has ρ ι kv ι ι .elienger cime poil one .•lulliin^ to inc tarile to announce the near 4 i¡;.wi.h oí Madame D'Alembeit, who e ii ч', he ívd, neieìy attended by a few ioiiufiii c . İViadcühc was aftoniihed to Κα· flic wjs unacco'^pinial by Monfieur 1 У Memberi ; but Agai na, to whom flic cx- j/u 111 d that alloniihmenf, re pi ed, that Мои- кугл was of a gıy eh'poiìtion, and did not, flic íuppoíed, thule to vome to ihe caille tül »ise 'lief oí his 1 1 1\ had а little abated.
" Bui
« But who (cried Madeline) fo able to fupport lier under the preffure of that grief as an affectionate hufhand." Agatha fhook her h^ad, but did not anfwer; and Madeline defcended to the hall (from the dreffmg-room of her departed friend, where ilie had been fitting) to receive Madame D'Alembert, whofe caniage at that mftant was heard. in the hill Madeline found Father Bertrand and moft of the fer¬ vali ts afïembled, whom the good prieft ear- neftly befought to command their feelings, in ordei, ifpoflible, to prevent letting Madame D'Alembertknow the melancholy event which had happened, until a little prepared for it. ïn a few minutes Madame D'Alembert entered, leaning on her woman—a female figure lb inteiefting Madeline had never before icen. To that dignity which excites involuntary refpect, ihe united that light elegance, that harmony of form, which ml]«ires the beholder with mingled pleafure vol, ıı. j» and
and admiration ; flie feemed not yet to have attained the prime of her days, and though the rofe upon her cheek was pale, anel the luftre of her fine blue eyes was fled, her countenance frill retained an cxpreuion fo animated, that language was fcarcely necef¬ fary to devclopc her feelings. She advanced to the middle of the hall ; then pauied, as if mvoluniaiily, and calling a look around at the okl domci t,es who л ere ranged on each fide, c\<iaiined, m a 1 1 emu¬ lous voice, ' £ Am í com.' too .ate r i bue J arrived m time to r ceive the lait bleiiiugof my mother ?"—"1 he icrvanls, ubicad oí ап- íwering,huiíg their h; лиъ in mournful filence. Madeline, who h..d bii he sto flood at a oif- tance, pale and trembling, now ikppcel ior- ward, followed by Ibuher Hcrtianel j bat the moment ihe badreaehcel Madame D'Alem¬ bert, tiu* (Oi t n ude die liad ftrugg.cd ro aíiume for look herj and dropping on İili knees, fhe tlafpeel he\ лппь about her, and burft into team * k 1 fee
" 1 iee (faid Madame D'Alembert, în the hollow voice of defpair, and raifing her hands towards heaven) I fee that all ь over—flie is gone, and it is а ilroke too heavy for me to benr." She tottered, and would have fillen, lud not fome of the attendants tim Чу caught her; they convened her into an adjoining apartment, but it was man) minutes ere ihe ihewed any figns of returning icj.vi When recovei cd, inftead of heeding lather Ber- t r and, who hung over hei, like the deleg ite of huven, to ddmi.iiiicrco npafiio i, mikad of regarding M-.debne, wh) kíkíi bodde her, and whole teus cvinceu Ικι iympithy m her ditl.cis, o« tlie. diiie.ira who lur¬ roundcd nei with Kiok, ut lo. с and pıt) : íhe wtldly ílaueri up, a al vL uı .cLd whetlur t luv, hid yet inter v d h ι -not'ter. Wim a'iíw.Rd m the ic^H'.v, the mfi^ ■· » on ging to lv t с ,α-ηι,ο. : any opp^Jinon fatler ßemaid wi, сопл iced, woukl ív г be
be not only fiuitlefs, but an aggravation of her grief. He knew the violence of forrowmuft, like that of the mountain torrent, have way, ere it can fubfide. Followed by him and Made¬ line, fhe afcended to the chamber, but when flic reached the door, fhe flopped, or rather ili runk back, from a lenfation of horror at only beholding the coffin, before which rows of tapers burned, evei) ray of day-light being excluded. In fpeechlefs agonies flie leaned а minute upon the fhouklers of Madeline, then raifing her head, fhe looked at Father Berti and ; u had you the cruelty (fhe cried) to intend I never more fhould behold my mother ?-—never ! never, will 1 acquiefce in fuch an intention. î command ' (advancing into the room) I infift I nay, 1 entreat ! (flie continued, and tears, the firft flie had fhed y began to ileal down her cheeks) that the coffin may be opened ; cold and inanimate as is the foim it сопинъ, it will footh my fad heart once more to behold it. Oh, fuffer the
the eyes of a child again to gaze upon an idolized parent ! Oh let her tears of unutter¬ able forrow be ihed over the dear, the la¬ mented canfe of them !" * 4 Impoffible î impoffìble ! (faid Father Bertrand); the remains of my honoured friend muft not be difturbed." Madame D'Alembert, with a diffracted * air, now flung back the pall which was thrown over the coffin, as if (h^ hoped her¬ felf to effect what ihe wifhed ; but when the ghaftly head of death, curioufly en¬ graved upon the lid, with the name and age of her parent, met her eye, íhe ihivercd, groaned, and unking upon it, fainted away. 1 hey feizcd this opportunity to convey her to her chamber, where ihe was undreíľed and put to bed, which the female attendants de¬ clared was the propereft place for her, as ihe had never flopped to reft from the com¬ mencement of her journey.
к 3 Father
Father Bertrand now determined that the funeral of the Countefs fliould take place that night, well knowing that, while her re¬ mains continued in the houfe, the feelings of her daughter would not fubfide, and ac¬ cordingly iflued the neceffary orders for that purpofe. Madeline ftaid by the bed- fide of Madame D'Alemhirt till the hour fixed on for the removal of the body, though, like с» ery other p< ribn, ibe was totally un¬ noticed by her : the weaknefs flic had been Li zed with, rendering heras ui-able, as from afílidion fhe was unwilling to converte with any one. An exprefs was fent for the iurgcon who had attended the Countefs, and he quieted the apprehen fions of the family about her, by fa} ing, that he trufted atten¬ tion and time would reflore her to her uiuai ftate of health. Madeline continued by her, as î have already laid, till the hour for the funeral drew nigh ; ihe then refigned her ieatto Madame D'Alcmbeiťs woman, and delccnded to the hall, which was again lit up with all its uiual fplcndour ; bue alas !
aias f how melancholy а fcene did that light now difplay î in the centre lay the coffin, lurroundcd by a numerous body of monks fiom the neighbouring monaftery, and the weeping domeftics. Madeline leant, weeping, againft a diftant pillar, nor had power to move till the pro- ceflion began ; fhe then took a long mourn¬ ing veil from Agatha, which flie, knowing her intention oi following the remains of her lady to the grave» had brought for her as foon as ihe entered the hall, and wrapping it round her, followed with the houfe- keeper. The folemn requiem chaunted by the monks, as theypieccdcd the body, the glim¬ mering light of the torches, carried by the fervants, which as it fell in partial diredions upon the old trees that canopied the garden walk through which they paft to the valley, produced a thoufand quiver.ng and gro teique ihadows; the melancholy notes o£ к 4 the
the bilds, who, deceived by the light ? ftarted from their nefts, and the low mur¬ murs of the wind amongft the branches, al¬ together produced an effed upon Madeline that wrought her feelings up to agony. Yet w r as that agony, if poflible, encreafed when (lie entered the valley ;—horror then feized hex foul ; and flie fliuddered as íhe thought ihe might, at that very moment perhaps, be treading in the fteps of the Countefs's murderers. The chapel was lighted up, but the light which gleamed from its windows, by rendering the decay and dcfolation of the building more confpi- cuous, ierved rather to increate ihan dimi- nifii its horrors ; from its fliattered towers the owls now hooted, and the ravens croaked amidft the furiOucdbg tree3, as if finging their nightly fong of death, o'er the mould¬ ering bodies which lay beneath them. Father Bertrand met the proceflion as it entered the chapel ; caimnefs and refignation in his look, but a more than ufual palenefs upon
upon his cheek, on which Madeline alia thought fhe could difcover the traces of a tear. After meeting, he turned, and preceded the bodv to the grave, which was directly before the altar, and near thofe of the Count and his two fons. Madeline's heart felt burfting, and it was with difficulty ihe could prevent herfelf from breaking into lamentations 3 but when the folemn fervice begun—when ilie law the coffin railed— when flie faw it, by degrees, lowering into its lafl receptacle, fhe could no longer com¬ mand herfelf, and a deep groan burft from her.·—Father Bertrand pau fed in the fentence he w r as uttering over the body, and looked fteaddy at her ; ihe inftantly recollected her¬ felf, drew her veil entirely over her face, and buried her fobs in her bofom. He v\ould then have proceeded, but as he attempted to fpeak, his voice faltered, the mufc'cs of his face began to work, and a tear dropped from him into the grave of his benefaCtrefs j the weaknefs, however, which had over¬ come him was but momentary, and he re- к 5 fumed
fumed and fl ni fli cd the fei vice with his ufual ftcadmcfb ; a loiemn nia^s was then again faid foi the foul of the departed, after which Fatlier Bemand pronounced a fliort and pathetic eulogium on hei.—·" The loL, my ft lends (fa'd he, as he concluded itj which you have inflamed by the death of this tiuly good woman, is indeed great , but man is bom to iuifcr, and continually liable to fuch deprivations as you have experienced ; mur¬ mur not therefore at the common lot, but* by patient rcfignation to the will of the Almighti, ftrive to deferve a continuance of your remaining bleflings : inftead ot quitting this place with a vam forrow, quit it with a noble lefoluüon to pei form your Jlotted parts, and to puifue, as far as lies m }our power, the example of your lamented benefadiefs. So may you hope, at the hü day, to afcend w«th her to life immortal." The lights in the chapel, 2nd the torches were now extinguiihed, and the monks re¬ paired i
paired immediately from it to their convent, and Madeline and the icrvants returned to the caitie. Agatha cried bitterly ail the way back; " 'twas a grievous thing (flie faid to Made¬ line) to fee the death of onek beft, one's only friend ; little did 1 imagine (flie laid) that ï ihould ever have beheld the funeral of my lady—1 who, when flie was a nice prattling little girl, have often and often carried her about in my arms." The mo nent Madeline re-entered the caftle, flie retired to her chamber, to give vent to that grief, which by being fo long fuppreffed, had aimoft fwciled her heart to burfting. When fomewhat relieved by the tears flie flie-d, die knelt down and implored heaven to ftrengthen her fortitude, that ihe might be enabled, not only to fubmit with patience to its divine will, but to pay proper attentions to the daughter of her lamentée! friend. " Regard noi í (íhe cried with fervom) Oh, regard not ! thou, from whom mik ry aed к 6 happineís
happinefs alike proceed, with any degree of difpleafure, the forrow of a weak creature, imprefled with the fad idea of the world's being unable to make her any recompencc for what the has loft." Ina fhort time íhe was fuflicicntly com¬ pofed to be able to repair to the chamber of Madame D'Alembert, where flie deter» mined to pafs the night. During that night, Madame D'Alembert continued aimoft in a ilat e of infenfibility, but on the morrow flue appeared better, and again fpoke. She afked, whether the interment of her mother had taken place ? Father Bertrand defired,if fuch a queftion was afked, that he fliould be fent for f o anfwer it, and for that purpofe remained in the houfe ; he was now called, and without heiitation informed her of the truth. The violence of her grief feemed renewed at this, and flie reproached him with cruelty in not deferring the funeral till flie was able to have attended it. He bore her reproaches with patience^ with compofure, and feized t л с
tlie firft interval of filence to reafon with ker. " For what purpofe (cried he) would the interment have been delayed, merely to feed your grief, and continue your fami!} in an u n fet t led ftate. Prove your affeclion to your departed parent, by ftriving to adhere to the precepts flie always gave, to the ex¬ ample fhe always fet you ; with a fenfibihty as exquifite as your's, recall to mind the fortitude with which ihe bore the death of an idolized hufband and two lovely fons, the darlings of her heart, the expected fup- portersofher noble houfe: inftead of fink¬ ing into the fupinenefs of forrow, inftead of withdrawing her cares from life, becaufe that life had loft its brighter! charms, fhe exerted herfelf to fulfil its incumbent duties ; let the remembrance of thofe exertions infpire you to make fimilar ones ¿ let it raife you from the bed of languor, let it roufe you from the torpor of affliction, let it animate you to perform your proper part, by tracing her
her fteps ; by doing as flue has done, you will more truly prove your love, your reverence for her, than by pafling years in fruitleis lament¬ ations over her tomb. Like her then, I again repeat, exert yourfclf j let the fmüe of your countenance again gladden the hearts of your fi iends, and your ear be again open to the voice of cheerfulnefs." " She fet me a glorious example indeed, (faid Madame D'Alembert, on whom the language of the venerable man appeared to have made a deep hr.preffion); and in future l vs ill drive to follow it." " Do, (cried Father Bertrand) if you w i fli to retain your prefent bleffmgs." " My bleffmgs !" repeated ihe mourn¬ fully. 4t Yes, (rcfumed he) the many bleflings you ftill poflefs."-—Madame D'Alembert lighed deeply at thofe words, and fhook her head with an air that feemed to imply a doubt of what he after t ed. ίέ Amongít the leaft of thefe bleflings (continued
(continued he, glancing at Madeline who flic befide the bed) I fliall not rank the friend who now iighs to be prefented to you." " You would be wrong, I am fine, if you did," faid Madame D'Alembert, railing herfelf a little upon her pillow, and extend¬ ing; her white hand, as if to receive Made- line's. Father Bertrand took it, and in¬ ftantly put it into her's.—" You have both (laid he, in a foftcned voice) loi! a mother; be ye therefore as fillers to each Gther, a mutual comfort and fupport." " I have long (cried Madame D'Alem¬ bert, turning her foft blue eyes on Madeline, and prefling her hand between her's) been prepared to love and to admire you ; and flie who prepared me to do fo, 1 hoped would have introduced us to each other ; but that hope, like many others, was indu'ged but to be difappointed." Madeline knelt down, and preffed her hand to her lips ; Madame D'Alembert gently difengaged it, and throw¬ ing
ing her arm round her neck, ciafped her t& a heart, whofe ftrong emotions, for a few moments, overpowered her utterance. " Be¬ lieve me [ihe cried, as ioon as fhe had reco¬ vered her voice) when 1 declare, that the chief pleafure I look forward to, is that which 1 ihall receive from your fociety ; flie who was beloved by my mother, and who loved her, muft on thefe accounts, even if not poifefled of halí your powers of pleafing, be dear and precious to me; with the trueft gratitude í now thank you for all your kind attentions to her." ts Ah Madam ! (faid Madeline, melting into tears) you furely muft be ignorant of my great obligations to her, or you never could fpeak to me in this manner; did you know them, you would certainly think as ï do, that I never did, never could do any thing adequate to the gratitude they excited ; flie was the only perfon from whom I ever re¬ ceived the tendernefs of а mother, and as daughters muft, 1 imagine, love their mo¬ thers, I loved hör." By
By degrees Madame D'Alembert grew compofed, and the converiation then turned upon her deep regret at not arriving in time to behold her mother;—from Madeline, who, flie underftood, had attended her in her laft: moments, flie entreated to hear the particu¬ lars of the diforder which had terminated fo fatally. Father Bertrand, who had feated himielf at the foot of the bed, now inter- pofed his authority ; he knew it would fcarcely be poflible for Madeline, if fhe complied with this entreaty, to avoid giving a too faithful narrative, and he therefore de¬ clared, that except ilie and Madame D'Alembert promifed to converfe no longer on the melancholy fubjed, they ihould be feparated. " Why (faid he, to the latter) do you feed your own grief, and augment her's, by dwelling on it ?" " I promife what you defire, (cried Madame D'Alembert) but Oh ! let me be indulged by hearing, whether in her lafl moments my mother remembered her un- Jiappy Viola î í' Remem*
íť Remembered ! (repeated Madedine emphifically) Oh, Madam' after lea\ea you were her firft coniideration." She then, as far as it concerned Madani D'Alembert, related the con\crlatio.i which had pafl'ed between the Countefb and her the evening prei ed ing her death. Ét Υοα will be my fiiend, my confolcr then 1 (extlaimcd Madame D'Alembert, fiom whom the relation drew floods of tears, extending her hand to Madeline as flie fpoke) ; í open my heart ro receive }Our con* folation^ ; my mother wiihecl me to do fo, and as I j erform what fhe wilhed, fo do I hope that the blefling ihe left me, may draw another down."—-Madeline fighed, and laid her face upon the hand flie held, to conceal the feelings, which, for a few minutes flopped her utteiance; fervently, though filently, flie praved for the fortitude which flie now wanted, to perrorm th^ taik enjoined her by her lamented friend. Yet, ahs ! flie faid to herfelf, as ihe had done in her letter to her father*
ùthcr, how can I give toother^ that combla- tion which 1 want myfelf? Her e\ident inability to do fo, rendered her, perhips, а more foothing companion to Madame D'A¬ lembert, than if the caie had been reverfed ; it proved her deep and poignant forrow more than any wouL eou'd have done; and nothing регЬарь atUehcs the heart of a mourner fo foon, (o trulv, es a keen partici¬ pation in its gi íeis. Ahidame D'Alembert eagerly enquiied, whether ilie would not continue with her while the herfelf remained at the chateau ? and whether flie would not always accompany her to it, whenever flie viiited it alone ? Madeline faid, ihe believed flie might promile to do fo, as flie was pretty certain her father would never refufe a re¬ queft nude by his honowd and lamented friend, or her daughter. " How long Mad.mi, (afked Father Bertrand), do you propofe {laying at the chateau?" Ä * About two months, ¡replied Machine D'Alembert) ; I ihall then be obliged to re¬ turn
turn to Paris, where Monfieur D'Alembert propofes fpending the winter." " And how foon do you exped him here ?' ? ftill interrogated Berti and* " í do not exped him at all, (anfwered Madame D'Alembert); he told me,juft be¬ fore we parted, that he was convinced fome particular bufinefs, which prevented his ac¬ companying me at the preien t melancholy jundure, would not be finiihed in time to permit him to follow me." In two months then, thought Madeline, ï ihall be reflorecí to the arms of my father ; ah ! how many diftreffmg feenes have 1 gone through fince I left them ! Father Bertrand now withdrew, but Madeline continued the remainder of the day with her friend, who, though unable at times to converfe with her, feemed to de¬ rive pleafure from even looking at her. The following day* the exertions which Father Bertrand
Bertrand had animated her to make, enabled her to rife ; and in two day^ more, the gen¬ tleman who attended her took his leave, de¬ claring that time was the only phyfician whofe aid ilie now required ; but though health returned, cheerfulnefs ftill continued abfent, nor had it more completely forfaken her breaft than it had that of Madeline's. The death of her benefaclrefs, together with the difappointment ihe had experienced prior to it, left an impreflion of fadnefs upon her mind which ihe could not conquer ;-— had her efforts for doing fo been aided by any external circumftance, they might per¬ haps, in fome degree, have been fticcefsful ; but her prefent companion and abode were gloomy in the extreme, and of themfelves fufficient to have lowered even animated fpirits. Madame D'Alembert declined feeing any company ; ihe received no vifits but from a Father
Father Beri rand ; and in anfwer to the com¬ pliments of condolence which íhe tecei ved fiom the neighbouring families, and which they anxioufly wiflied to pay in perfon, fhe declared her utter inability of íeeing them at prefent. No more the feaft of mirth and hoípita¬ íity was fpread within the hall of fhe chateau—no more its lofi y roof re-echoed ibiuds of melody—no more the peafants danced upon the lawn, while Benevolence fat by in the form of the Cour.teft, and fmiled upon their fports. Q olitude encoin- paíled, and iilence reigned within it ; and the old domeftics, wihTe grief for their lady knew no diminution^ ficiupkri neit to lay, that the glory, the happineís of her houle had, with her, forfaken it forever. So conneniil wis its idoo.i* to tie pic- fent ieeiings of Madame J/Ai^nlvt, that flic never talked of quii ring it without the t leep e íl
deepeft regret ; exclufìvc of the above con¬ fideration, fhe was alio attached to it from its having been the favourite refidence of her parents, the place where the biofloms of her youth had blown. Liere fhe wiihed to pafs the remainder of her days—here, where fhe could be free from that reftraint—that ftate—thofe tirefome ceremonies, which in а public fituation the etiquette of the work! obliged her to obfèrvc. Like the poet, flie nright have faid, t( This fhaJo ving .'eût', unfieqnenííd wools, ib U< r hi ook ппн tUuníhmg реор'Л tjv.ns. Iin 'j I cır, hr alune, uı Icen υΐ any, And tu the nit' mngrdV, (.onij.lainniiX notes Tun" my «..liiicflls, and îccoıdıîiy wotrs." From -a oak w Inch fometimes dropped from Mada .e J/Akmhest, Madeline was more than -Mice led to imagine, that befides the death oí her motlur, flu h.id another caute for Ibrro'.v ; but when.\cr íhe reikcled on her fituation, that idea vaniiLcd, a.-J the wondered
wondered how íhe could for a moment have harboured İt ; knowing, as flie did, that Madame D'Alembert pofíeíľed thofe bleíľ- ings, which in general are fuppofed to ren¬ der life eftimable'—the affedions of the man * of her choice (for fuch Madeline always un- derftcod M. D'Alembert to be), friends who adored her, and even a fuperabundance of riches. Thofe attentions, which pity for the af« Aided Viola, and reverence for the com¬ mands of her benefadrefs, firft prompted her to pay, Madeline now continued from affe d ion. Madame D'Alembert was a woman, whole temper ana dilpofition, upon an in¬ timacy, captivated the heart, as much as her beauty and elegance, at fii ft fight, charmed the eye : befides, ihe treated Ma¬ deline exadly as a tender fifler would have done, ordered t he fame mourning for her as for herielf,
herfelf, nor luffered the fervants to make any diftindion between them. In the courfe of the converfation Made- line ditcovered that Madame D'Alembert knew nothing of her or her father prior to her mtrodudion at the chateau ; and ihe felt from thk circumftance more firmly con¬ vinced than ever that the private h i ftory of her father muft bc dreadful, when the Countefs would, not impart it even to her daughter. A month clapied without Madame D'Alemberrib iohiude being in the leali in¬ terrupted, during which the anel Madelme paid many vifib to ihe grave of the Count¬ efs, which the bater could never approach without Ihudrieiini·. At the expiration of that period, as the} ikt at breaktail one morning, a letter w .s brought to Madame D'Akmbert by kr
woman -, who, as íhe put it into her hands, laid, '· From my mafter, Madam." Her Lady turned pale at thofe words, and defiring her to letiiCj broke the leal with a trcmblinR hand.
END OF VOL. И.
