H\-'< 



IPJ 




^y,r?tj/'//A ^^^r/^/Zi 



'f ! 




a I E) RAR.Y 

OF THE 
U N IVLRSITY 
Of ILLINOIS 



8^3 

^583d 
v.l 



THE DISCARDED SON 



A TALE» 



Lane, Darling, and Co. Leadenhall-S'reel. 



THE 

BISCAMBED SON| 

OR, 

HAUNT OF THE BANDITTI, 

IN FIVE VOLUMES. 

— — =3««»®e®««== — 

BY 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

4VTH0R OF THE CHILDREN OF THE ABBEY ^ ^*C. 



Thou hast been 
As one in suffering all, that suffers nothing; 
A man who Fortune's buffets and rewards 
Has ta'en with equal thanks : and blest are they 
Whose blood and judgment n-.ingled are so well, 
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger, 
To sound what stop she please. 

SHAKESPEARB. 



londo:n: 
printed at the 

for lane, newman, and co, 

LEADENHALL-STREIT. 

1807. 



8P «:. 

V 1 

THE BISCAEBEB SON> 



>»^<^g» tir. ii 



CHAP. L 



"In struggling with misfortunes 
Lies the proof of virtue : on smooth seas 
How many bawble boats dare set their sails. 
And make an equal way with tirmer vessels ! 
But let the tempest once enrage the sea. 
And then behold rhe strong-ribb'd Jrgosie 
Bounding between the ocean and the air. 
Like Perseus mounted on his Pegasits : 
Then where are those weak rivals of the main ! 
Or to avoid the tempest fled to port. 
Or made a prey to Neptune. Even thus 
Do empty show and true priz'd worth divide 
In storms of fortune." Shakespeare. 

TT 

A HAT the race is not always to the swift, 
nor the battle to the strong ; neither bread 
to the wise, nor yet riches to the men of 
understanding, nor favour to men of 

skill- 



2 THE DISCARDED SON. 

skill — all ages, all countries have furnished 
us with instances. Of these, Captain Munro 
perhaps was not the least striking ; gifted 
ty nature with all that was requisite to ren- 
der him amiable — possessed of every ad- 
vantage that education and fortune could 
bestow — born under the happiest auspices, 
and surrounded, on his outset in life, by 
friends affectionate and anxious in the ex- 
treme for his advancement in it, he had 
not advanced far in his career ere he found 
himself rapidly descending into the vale of 
adversity, and others as rapidly ascending 
to the summit of prosperity, who, from 
the early disadvantages under which they 
had laboured, he could not have supposed 
would have been able to have made a suc- 
cessful effort to approach it. 

Of these, the chances and changes of 
this mortal state, the little fortitude man 
would have to support himself beneath 
them, but for the strength and consolation 
derived from religion. Captain Munro 
deeply pondered^ as he journeyed from 

Glengary 



THE CISCARDED SON. 3 

Glengary Castle, the residence of his father, 
towards his own. 

The day was far advanced when he re- 
mounted his horse at the ancient gateway 
of the castle, for the last time, he was in- 
clined to believe, as no consideration ^vhat- 
ever should induce him ai^^ain, he deter— 
mined, to seek a reconciliation with his 
father, so cruelly, so insultingly had his 
overtures for one been now rejected. 

Rain also fell in torrents, and the wind 
swept in hollow gusts over the heath, driv- 
ing before it the withered burrs, and mak- 
ing the old trees, that scantily dotted the 
soil, groan beneath its fury. 

But notwithstanding the resentment 
which glowed in his breast — notwithstand- 
ing the violence of the tempest to which 
he was exposed. Captain Munro, on reach- 
ing the top of a hill that afforded a view 
of his native home, could not prevent 
himself from checking his horse, in order 
to indulge himself with another view of 
it — yes, indulge ; for though it no longer 
B 2 afforded 



4 THE DISCARDED SON. 

afforded him a shelter, he could not forget 
the happy days in which it had done so ; 
and the remembrance of these made him 
feel something of that kind of pleasure in 
gazing on it, he would have done in con- 
templating the features of an old friend. 
The idea of his departed mother, the ten- 
derest of parents, the most amiable of 
'women, was associated with every view, 
with every recollection of it. He sighed 
as her memory now revived in his mind, 
and involuntarily thought what she must 
suffer, if departed spirits were allowed to 
review the transactions of this world, at the 
shameless scenes now passing in the man- 
sion to which she had given consequence 
and estimation. 

'' But heaven,'" exclaimed he, suddenly 
and aloud, with an outstretched arm and 
uplifted eyes, '' heaven would not be hea- 
ven, were the cares, the inquietudes of 
this life to gain admission to it. No — all 
there is peace and joy ; no tear is in the 
eye, no sorrow in the heart, to engender 

one. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 5 

©ne. Happy state of rest ; happy he^ be 
his troubles what they may^ whose con- 
science insures him such, — Oh God !" he 
continued^ with increasing fervour, '' let 
me never be deprived of this last conso- 
lation ; though happiness may be denied 
me herej let me never despair of it here- 
after. — Nor will I despair of it here/' he 
added, after a pause; "for to despair, is 
to doubt the goodness of that Being v/ho 
has promised to befriend those that put 
their trust in him. As the sun vriH agjaiii 
look forth, in all his beauty, upon these 
now streaming fields; as the clouds v.liich 
veil the heavens will be disper ed, so will 
I hope for the restoration of pro perity, 
and the dispersion of the clouds that now 
obscure my horizon.'* 

He cast another lingering look at old 
Glengary (as he styled the castle), and 
rode on. While he pursues his journey, 
we shall take a retrospective view of his 
life. 

Captain Robert Munro was the only 
9 Z child 



THE DISCARDED SON. 

child of a Scotch gentleman of considera- 
ble property^, and who bestowed on him 
an education suitable to his prospects. Dis- 
liking a life of idleness for him^ in conse- 
quence of the dissipation he had known 
such to occasion^ he intended him for one 
of the learned professions: this intention 
proved by no means agreeable to the 
young gentleman; he possessed an ardent 
temper^ an enthusiastic imagination, had 
heard, like Douglas, of battles, and longed 
to follow to the field some warlike lord — 
in shorty he was too much fired, by what he 
had heard of the deeds of heroes, not to 
resolve on seeking, like them, to immor- 
talize himself in the fields of the valiant. 
His father warmly opposed this resolution; 
but, although his mother dreaded the dan- 
gers attached to a military life, the constant 
and animated pleadings of this her adored 
son, by degrees obtained her acquiescence 
to his wishes; she became his advocate, and 
soon prevailed on his father to purchase a 
commission for him in a marching regi- 

menty 



THE DISCARDED SON. 7 

merit J which, shortly after he had entered, 
was ordered on foreign service. During 
the period of hrs continuance abroad, 
young Munro visited various climates, and 
had ample experience of the dangers and 
hardships incidental to his profession, but 
which neither damped hk spirit, nor for an 
instant caused him to regret the one he 
had chosen. This, however, was by no 
means the case with his parents; they never 
ceased lamenting it, more especially when 
intelligence reached them of his having 
been dreadfully wounded in an engagement 
in one of the West India islands; intelli- 
gence which was speedily followed by his 
return to his native kingdom, owing to the 
advice of his physicians, who, without such 
a measure, protested his recovery was every- 
thing but impossible. 

His mother made use of the opportu- 
nity his r-eturn afforded, to endeavour to 
prevail on him to quit the army, but, 
though naturally of a yielding disposition, 
without avail, since he was now not only 
B 4 more 



b THE DISCARDED SON. 

iT^ore 3f t:\ched than ever to his profession^ 
but conceived his leaving it at this crisis 
wcnki be to comprcmise his honour^ as he 
doubted not his doing so would be im- 
puted to the danger he had been in. 
Finding him inexorable^ she prevailed on 
his father to purchase him a troop in a 
regiment of dragoons, in consequence of 
being informed, by some military friends^ 
the cavalry was not so liable to be ordered 
abroad as the infantry. Of what she had 
done he received no intimation, until his 
promotion appeared in the gazette. The 
young captain would infinitely have pre- 
ferred continuing in his old regiment, 
as in it he fancied he should have 
had a quicker opportunity of reaping 
the laurels he was so ambitious of ob- 
taining — that he would have done so, how- 
ever^ neit'/icr his filial duty or grateful 
nature, would permit his acknowledging 
to his idolizing mother. 

The monotonous life to which he found 
himself doomed on joininghis^new regiment, 

quartered 



THE DISCARDED SON. 9 

<5uarterecl in a conritrv town in England, 
by no means accorded with his active spirit. 
He derived, however, one advantage from it 
— that of being able to renew the studies 
which the pressure of his professional 
duties, vvhile abroad, had obliged him to 
suspend; but he was not allowed to pur- 
sue them without interruption — there were 
in this corps, as there are in many others^, 
several idle dissipated characters, disin- 
clined to do good themselves, and equally 
so to let others. These beset Munro, and, 
by degrees, drew him into the pernicious 
practice of gaming, in which he was too 
great a novice not to let them reap all the 
advantages they wished for. In conse- 
quence his drafts upon his fatl^er became 
so frequent, and so considerable, that a 
serious investigation into the cause of 
them at length took place. 

Munro shrunk not from it; he candidly 

answered the enquiries addressed to hir^,. 

was admonished by his mother of the 

enormity of the vice he had been led inroj 

B 5 solemnly. 



10 THE DISCARDED SON. 

solemnly "abjured it, and was forgiven, at 
least by her. The mind, however, which 
has been for any period dissipated, cannot 
im-^^ed lately revert to rational pursuits — - 
like the sea after a storm, it requires some 
time to subside into calmness: Munro 
more eagerly, therefore, than ever, though 
always from a lively and social temper so 
inclined, entered into company. Amongst 
the families in the neiohbourhood in which 
he was quartered, who paid particular atten- 
tion to him and his brother officers, was that 
of a respectable merchant,who, after making 
a handsome fortune in Cadiz, had returned 
to spend the fruits of his industry in his 
native country. As he was quitting Spain 
there was committed to his care a young 
Spanish lady, for the purpose of having 
her educated in England. Her education 
was completed just as. Munro became ac- 
quainted with her, and she only delayed 
returning to her native country till she had 
acquired that perfect kno'.vledge of the 
manners and customs of the people she 



THE DISCARDED SON. ll 

had been brought up amongst, whichj 
Vv^hile at school, it was impossible for her 
to do. Nothing could be more attractive, 
more engaging than she was; but in place 
of giving a description o*' her, we will give 
the animated one the Chevalier de Bour- 
goanne has given of her countrv-women 
in general, as one she perfectly accorded 
with. 

" Nothing/' says he, '' is more engaging 
than a voung female Spaniard at nneen 
years of a$^e — a face perfectly oval; hair 
of a fine clear auburn, equally divided on 
the forehead, and only bound by a silk net; 
large black eves; a mouth full of graces; 
an attitude always modest; a simple habit 
of neat black ser«^e, exactlv littinor the 
body, and gently pressing the wrist; a 
little hand, perfectly proportioned : in 
fine, every thing charms in these youthful 
virgins: they recal to our recollection the 
softness, beautv, dress, and simpl'city of 
the young Grecian females, of whom anti- 
' quity has left such elegant models — the 
B G angels 



19 THE DISCARDED SON. 

angels in Spanish coinedy are always re- 
presented by young girls/* 

The heart of our young soldier was sus- 
ceptible, in the extreme, of the power of 
beauty, particularly when combined, as 
was the case in the present instance, with 
elegance, modesty, and intel]ig;ence ; in 
short, he soon became the captive of the 
fair foreigner, nor did she seem insensible 
to his merits; but, enamoured as he was, 
he did not seek to inspire her with a reci- 
procal passion. There were obstacles, he 
feared, in the w^ay of their union, which 
would prove insurmountable; honour, 
therefore, forbade his endeavouring to 
create too lively an interest for himself in 
her heart — these obstacles were the nation- 
ality and bigotry of his father: he deter- 
in in cd/nowever, not to despair altogether of 
overcoming tliem, till he had applied to his 
mother on the subject. Just as he had 
made up his mind to do this, an express 
arrived to inform him she was given over: 
he instantly set off for Scotland, but, not- 
withstanding 



THE DISCARDED SON". 13 

withstanding his travelling without inter- 
mission, he only reached home time enough 
to assist in paying the last sad duties to her 
remains. Her de^th overwhelmed him 
with the most poignant grief; in losing 
her he lost not only the tenderest of pa- 
rents, but the most faithful of friends, one 
to whom upon all occasions he could safely 
open his heart, with confidence of receiv- 
ing both advice and consolation, did he 
stand in need of either. But it was not 
simply grief it excited, it also occasioned 
repentance, for he now began to think, 
that the anxiety she sufiered, in conse- 
quence of his remaining in the anir/, had 
shortened her days; and, from the horror 
he felt at the idea, he would have given 
worlds, had they been in his power, to 
have recalled the period in which he had 
the power of ceding his wishes to her's. 
But, alas! time will not return, neither will 
the grave give up its dead; how scrupu- 
lous, therefore, should we be in our con- 
duct to our relatives and friends, since, 

terrible 



14 THE DrSCARDED SON. 

terrible to the heart of feeling is the re- 
mcrse it experiences for errors not to be 
repaired. 

" The woods, the wilds, the melancholy 
glooms" by which his paternal home was 
surrounded, too well suited his feelings at 
this juncture, not to make him wish to 
continue there some time; but, even if this 
had not been the case, he would still have 
felt this wish on account of his father, to 
whom, at this period, he conceived his so- 
ciety absolutely indispensible ; he soon, 
however, found that he vv^as mistaken in 
thinking so — that his father had felt but a 
transient regret, if any, for his mother's 
loss, and that, for the estimation in which 
he had been so long held in the neigh- 
bourhood, he was solely indebted to her. 
Mr. Munro was indeed the very reverse of 
"what his amiable lady had made him ap- 
pear. The defects in his disposition were 
not known to her till they w^ere married; 
but though her uniting her fate with his 
was in obedience to the wishes of her fa- 
ther. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 15 

tlier, not ber own, she as scrupulously 
concealed them as if he had been her own 
immediate choice, and she had conse- 
quently dreaded their discovery occasion- 
ing her judgment to be called in question. 
She did more than conceal, she tried to 
remove them, but to no purpose — as he 
clearly demonstrated, by marrying, a very 
few weeks after her death, a woman for- 
merly in her service, but whom he had 
seduced from it, and from that period till 
the one he made her his wife, kept in an 
obscure house in the vicinity of the castle. 
This event, of which he had neither 
warning nor suspicion, till it took place, 
excited feelings in the pure and noble 
mind of Munro, easier to be conceived 
than described. It was not, howevxr^ so 
much on account of the ruin in which it 
threatened to involve his prospects ( for he 
was entirely dependant on his father), and 
that he could easily be warped from pay- 
ing attention to the claims of nature, he 
had given too striking a proof to permit a 
3 doubt 



IS THE DISCARDED SON. 

doubt to be entertained on the subject^, a3 
on account of the disrespect it evinced 'to 
the memory of his mother^ that he mourned 
and resented it. That, ere the tomb was 
well closed upon her^ her place should be 
filled up, by such a woman too — so vile I 
so abject!, so despicable! so every way 
unworthy of being her successor, filled him 
with indignation too great for suppression; 
in the fust paroxysm of which, though his 
leave of absence was not expired, he fled 
precipitately from the house, with almost 
a determination never to enter it again. 

Dejected and unhappy, he rejoined his 
regiment; but in place of seeking, as he 
had heretofore done, he now sedulously 
shunned society^ particularly that of the 
family in which the lovely Spaniard re- 
sided; for since all hope of being united 
to her was at an end, now that he had lost 
the friend, through whose interference 
alone he had ever believed it possible his 
father's consent to their being so could be 
obtained, he thought the sooner they ceased 

to 



THE DISCARDED SON. 17 

fo have any communication with one ano- 
ther the better. 

In his resolution of avoiding her he per- 
severed for some time^ when one afternoon^ 
as he was returning, heated, fatigued, and 
covered with dust, from a solitary excur- 
sion he had taken to some mountains in 
the neighbourhood, for the purpose of 
amusing himself Vr'ith his gun, he came 
suddenly upon a large party of ladies and 
gentlemen on horseback, amongst whom 
he soon discovered his fair Spaniard and 
the friends she resided with. The delight 
which these latter testified at seeing him, 
the kind reproaches they made him for so 
long absenting himself from their society, 
and the earnest manner in which they 
pressed him to come again amongst them, 
overcame his honourable, his prudential 
resolutions. The consequence of his again 
becoming a visitor at their cheerful, hos- 
pitable mansion was, the renewal of his 
love for the beautiful Spaniard, which ab- 
sence from her had begun a little to weaken. 

How 



18 THE DISCARDED SON. 

How he told his soft tale, or she replied to 
it, is not necessary to mention; suffice, one 
fine moonlight night, but whether tempted 
by jCinthia, by Cupid, or by both together, 
cannot, here at least, be determined, she 
suffered him to hand her into a chaise-and- 
four, which stood most conveniently, at the 
moment, near the garden of her guardian, 
step in himself after her, and bid the pos- 
tillions face to the North. Ere their matri- 
monial fetters were well rivetted, intelli- 
gence of this step was received by Mr. 
Munro, owing to the vigilant eye which 
his new helpmate kept upon his son, under 
the hope of being able to detect him in 
some act, which should give her an oppor- 
tunity of completely ruining him with his 
father, and thus of gratifying the malice 
his refusing to notice her had engendered in 
her heart against him; as also of quieting 
her fears of his yet regaining his wonted 
ascendancy at home, than which nothing 
she knew could be more inimical to the 
designs she entertained upon the fortune 

he 



THE DISCARDED SON. 19 

he had so lon<r been considered undoubted 
heir to. Had she been as well acquainted 
with the disposition of her husband as her 
predecessor was^ she would have spared 
herself half the pains she took to aggra- 
vate his resentment against his son^ as she 
would then have known he wanted no 
stimulus to render him cruel and severe 
to those who in the least offended him. 
But though this imprudent marriage of his 
son's galled him, by disappointing the am- 
bitious projects he had formed for him, he 
still could scarcely regret it, since it fur- 
nished him with a plausible pretext for 
exiling him from his society, and thus 
freeing himself from a person whose pre- 
sence, from being a reproach, was hateful 
to him. 

The young Captain, accordingly, in re- 
ply to the letter he wrote to acquaint him 
with his marriage, and deprecate the re« 
sentment he knew it calculated to excite, 
received one couched in the most violent 
and virulent terms, informing him his noti- 

licatioii 



THE DISCARDED SOF. 



fication on the subject was totally unneccs- 
sary^thatno entreaty, no supplication should 
ever obtain from him the forgiveness he re- 
quired, nor any share again of his favour 
or fortune. Munro expected him to be 
violent in the first instance, and was not, 
therefore, much disappcfintment by this 
letter; notwithstanding it and his preced- 
ing conduct, however, he could not, when 
he took a retrospective view of things, di- 
vest himself of a hope that time might yet 
bring about a reconciliation between them. 
In the mean while, his wife made a similar 
application to her father, but to as little 
purpose — he was not only as national and 
bigotted as old Munro, but ten times more 
proud and ambitious, looking forward to 
nothing less than matching his daughter 
■with some great hidalgo. If therefore the 
Squire was irritated here, the Don was irri- 
tated there, and, in terms scarcely more 
civil than Munro had expressed himself in 
to his son, declared his total and solemn 
renunciation of her. Ske endeavoured to 

obtain. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 2i 

obtain the merchant's interference with 
him, but he was so exasperated at what he 
styled the slippery trick she had played 
him^ the bad example he conceived she 
had set his daughters, and the suspicious 
light in which she had made his character 
appear to her father, whom he had many 
reasons for wishing to stand well with, that 
he positively refused either to aid her in 
this instance, or to have any further com- 
munication with her. 

Time, at length, that great dispeller of 
illusions, began to convince Captain Mun- 
ro, that the hopes with which he had hitherto 
buoyed himself up, of yet obtaining his 
father's forgiveness, were completely fal- 
lacious. He was no sooner convinced 
of this, than he made up his mind to 
leave the army, for some situation that 
might give him a chance of being able 
to provide for the family there was a pro- 
bability of his having. After some little 
consultation with himself and his fair part- 
ner, a country life was decided on, as both 

were 



•82 THE DISCARDED SON. 

were partial to Nature in her rural walks, 
and he besides had^ he conceived, a suffi- 
cient knowledge of agriculture to under- 
take the management of a farm. 

These p!ans for the future, once formed, 
no time was lost in carrying them into 
effect. Munro retired from the service on 
half- pay, taking a difference, with which, 
and his bond for three hundred pounds, 
payable in the course of some years, he 
purchased a small farm, about twenty miles 
from the place of his nativity, for which he 
had still something of that kind of at- 
tachment some believe the disembodied 
spirit to have for its deserted mansion of 
clay. 

For some years, during which he became 
the father of two fine children, a boy and 
a girl, he went on, perfectly satisfied at 
iiaving, like Cincinnatus, turned his sword 
into a ploughshare, when a bad harvest, and 
the failure of some expensive speculative 
experiments in agriculture, which he had 
been induced to make by the example of 

others 



THE DISCARDED SON. 23 

Others in the neighbourhood^ so embar- 
rassed him, as to make him resolve on ano- 
ther effort for a reconciliation with his father. 
To resolve and to execute were almost the 
same thing with him; he accordingly^ after 
very little deliberation on the subject, set 
off early one morning for the ancient man- 
sion of his forefathers. 

Various and affecting were the feelings 
and reflections which arose in his mind, as 
he drew near it. He could not, without 
the liveliest emotion, review the haunts of 
his youth, or think of those halcyon days, 
in which no cloud rested on his prospect^ 
no care dwelt on his heart, that they 
brought to his remembrance; nevertheless, 
he alighted at the castle with tolerable 
composure, but which the sight, or rather 
the emotion they evinced at seeing him, of 
some of the old domestics who had lived 
there during the lifetime of his mother, 
and whom her successor, partly for the sake 
of appearances, partly for the sake of gra- 
tifying her pride, by being served by those 

with 



^4 THE DISCARDED SON. 

with whom she had served, had been in- 
duced to retain, nearly overcame him. 

He imagined he should have found it a 
difficult matter to gain access to his father, 
but in this he was mistaken; since he had 
found the way to the castle again, the old 
gentleman doubted not his persisting in vi- 
siting it until he had seen him ; he, therefore, 
conceived it better at once to give him an 
interview, in which opinion his lady and 
oracle, as with reason she might be styled, 
since he appealed to her judgment in every 
instance, perfectly coincided, a concidence 
for which he was indebted to her having 
no longer any apprehension of his son's 
regaining any influence over him, as also 
to a wish of beholding him (the younger 
Munro) mortified and disappointed — he 
was accordingly admitted. To detail the 
particulars of the interview were super- 
fluous; suffice, after much argument on 
one side, much altercation and invective 
on the other, -Mr. Munro agreed to take 
his son again into favour, provided he en- 
deavoured 



THE DISCARDED SON", 55 

dearourcd fo repudiate his wife, or,, at all 
events, consented to send her and her chil- 
dren to Spain. This inhuman, as well as 
infamous proposal, was received with the 
indignation it merited by the person to 
whom it was addressed — an indignation 
which nothing but its having come from 
the lips of a parent could possibly have 
restrained. 

'' I am answered^ Sir/* said he, with forced 
calmness, but an ashy ^nd quivering lip; 
'• and that I may not forget v/har, from the 
connexion which subsists between us, I 
still wish to feel for you^ I will endeavour 
to forget what you have said.'^ 

He hurried to the hall — the old servants; 
still lingered there, conjecturing and con- 
versing—the pleasing expectations in v.diich 
they had been rather indulging, from judg- 
ing a little of the heart of his father by their 
own, vanished the moment he appeared^as 
his countenance was a faithful index t^o-^' 
volume within. He pressed f-^^'tinie 
the door^, but there wa" '' ^ ^^^'^ 

YOL. I. 



20 THE DiSCArvDED SON. 

and a mist in his eyes, at the moment, 
'which prevented his immediately seeing 
his horse was not there. The poor animal^ 
indeed^ had met with a much better re- 
ception than he had^ having been taken 
into the stable and well fed. MunrOj the 
instant he missed him^ requested he might 
be broug:ht to him. He was obeved: but 
as the old groom (Munro's first instructor 
in the exercise of riding) held the stirrup 
for him to mounts he could not forbear 
saying, he was sure there was a more peri- 
lous storm coming on than just then pre- 
vailed. 

^'Aye, and so am I too^ Andrew^" cried 
the housekeeper^, eagerly coming forward^ 
though at the riok of having the fine crim- 
son-coloured ribbon with which her cap 
was bedecked, and on which she set no 
small store^ in consequence of thinking it 
vastly becoming, completely spoiled by 
OK the rain — '''so am I too; it would be mad- 
on the therefore, for any one who could get 
his son again int(T9/'' 

Munro^ 



THE DISCARDED SON. ST 

MiinrO;, as he settled himself in his saddle^ 
looked earnestly in her face, and ^'but, my 
friend, I can get no shelter here," nearly 
escaped him; but though he could prevent 
his tongue from speaking, he could not his 
looks. 

'' I have got a snug fire in my room/* 
resumed the housekeeper, who read his 
countenance quite as well as Lavater him- 
self could have done, "and — and " 

'' God bless you all, my good friends!" 
cried Munro, in a broken and not very ar- 
ticulate voice, his swimming eyes glanc- 
ing hastily round; '' God bless you alii'' 
he repeated more collectedly, and more 
emphatically, as, ki.ssing and waving his 
hand, he rode off, leaving them, in defiance 
of the rain that {ell, the wind that howled, 
rivettcd to the spot on which he had parted 
from them, till he was out of sfght. 

'' Ah, weel, weel ! "cried old Andrew, shak- 
ing his grey locks, when he could no longer 
sec him, '*^ all in God's own good time — 
c 2 I dare 



28 THE DISCARDED SON. 

I dare to say you'll be comforted for all 
this." 

"Oh, the savage! the barbarian!" ex- 
claimed the housekeeper^, "with a kind of 
wild stare, as if just avraking from a 
trance, " to send his own flesh and blood 
from the door in such an hour. Andrew," 
lowering her voice a little, '' what do you 
think such a body may expect in the next 
world?" 

Andrew, from perhaps thinking this ra- 
ther too delicate a subject to enter upon, 
declined answering the question ; but 
days, weeks, months, nay years elapsed, 
ere this the last visit of their young master, 
as they all persisted in calling him, to his 
native home, and the cruel treatment he 
had experienced at it, ceased to be talked 
of by them. 

It was late when Munro reached Heath- 
wood Farm, the name of his little purchase; 
so late, that he found all his family, but 
his wife, in bed. She had determined on 

not 



THE DISCARDED SON. §9' 

not retiring to repose till all hope of his 
returning that night should be at an end. 
His doing so destroyed the hopes she was 
beginning to indulge^ as he had said^ if the 
issue of his journey was prosperous, he 
possibly, nay was almost positive he should 
remain for the night at Glengary. She 
endeavoured^ however, to conceal the 
pangs which disappointment gave her, in 
order to prevent her husband from being 
more distressed than, with pain, with heart- 
felt grief, she already saw he was. In place 
of questioning him directly as to what had 
passed, as perhaps some of the fair daugh- 
ters of Eve might have done, she hastened 
to assist him in changing his thoroughly 
soaked garments for dry ones, threw fresh 
wood upon the almost expiring fire, 
■which soon began to sparkle, and send 
forth an animating blaze, and spread 
the remains of her frugal dinner upon the 
board. Munro was aflected, even to tears, 
by her tender attentions — for, as the glo- 
rious orb of day never appears so bright, 
e 3 &• 



30 TEE DISCARDED SON. 

fo cheering, as immediately after a storm, 
so kindness never makes such an impres- 
si-on upon the hejirt, as in the moment 
that it is smarting beneath a sense of the 
xeverse. 

He clasped her to his bosom, he thanked 
her for the comfort which, by her tender- 
ness, she administered to his afflictions. 

*' Should I not be very cruel, very un- 
kind, not to comfort you for what I have 
brought upon you?'' she fondly asked him, 
as, sifting on his knee, her arm rested on 
his shoulder. 

''You! youl** cried Munro, with a de- 
gree of wildness, ''you bring afflictions on 
me! — No, no,'' he passionately exclaimed, 
''it is my own imprudence, my own folly." 

'* I shall be angry, very angry indeed," 
cried Mrs. Munro, feigning a gaiety foreign 
to her heart at the moment, and laying her 
beautiful little hand upon his mouth, " if 
you say that again — what, accuse yourself 
of folly for marrying me!" 
'"Of something worse," said he, with a 

kind 



THE DISCARDED SON. 31 

land of reproachfal bitterness against him- 
self; '' for have I not marred all thy flat- 
tering prospects by doing so ?" 

^' And have you not equally injured your 
ovv'n?*' 

*■' Vv'ell, if you do not reproach me/* 
resumed Munro, after a fe^v^ minutes of 
thoughtfulness — '' if you do not repent 
our union " 

" I ! — Oh, if I never ha^ e cause to repent 
any thing' more, I shall consider myself a 
most fortunate woman.'* 

" Then we may yet be happy, spite of 
fortune/* cried her husband, straining her 
to his heart. 

" Nay, can we truly say we are now 
altogether the reverse, possessed, as we are^ 
of health, innocence, and liberty?** 

"' True, true, these are blessings, indeed, 
too great to permit those who possess them 
to reckon themselves wretched ; inesti- 
mable blessings, which, with gratitude, I 
acknowledge ours ; and which, with the 
assistance of Heaven, and by the exertions 
c4 of 



32 TUB DISCARDED SON. 

of industry^ I trust — my, morCj I doubt 
not V7e shall be able to retain/' 

'^ And if we should/* eagerly cried his 
wife, clasping his hands in her% and look- 
ing full in his face, ^' oh ! my dear friend, 
though the roof %vhich sheltered our heads 
was ten times more humble than it is, should 
we not be content ?" 

Muiiro bowed his head assentingly — to 
speak at the moment was impossible. 

Munro arose, the morning after his un- 
successful journey toGlengary, with a heavy 
heart — and, like Shakespeare's splenetic 
Jacques, well disposed to rail at the world. 
But as he knew melancholy and misan- 
thropy would only render bad worse, he 
checked his present inclination to each, 
and resolved on losing no time in applying 
his shoulder to the wheel — that by endea- 
VfOuring to aid himself by virtuous exer- 
tion, he might render himself deserving 
of that of heaven. — The bond for three 
hundred pounds was about this crisis nearly 
due; on applying to know- whether a re- 
newal 



THM 0lSCAFtIXED SpN^ 33 

riewal of it would be accepted instead of 
payment^ he learned that it had been passed 
into the hands of a person who either hadjj 
or pretended to have, immediate occasion 
for the money. To prevent unpleasant 
consequences, therefore) it was requisite i^ 
should imm?ediately be discharged ; he there- 
fore took the necessary steps for that pur- 
pose; and with the sum he with difficulty ob- 
tained, discharged his obligation, and: freed 
himself also from some smaller debts, whfcch 
he had iraiaivoidably contracted;, in conse* 
q^nce of. the expence anddi^appoiatment 
that hod attended hig experiments in agrii- 
€#Mure. 

For sQ-nae^ tsrae after this> thi^ngs wenton 
pKetfey vv^elt at Heath^wood ; the children 
-throve apace, and were at aiace the pride 
atiid pri»4'ii|p^d. pleasure of their parents, 
wh© mu-tuaUy assisted in tfhie task of in- 
styucling them. A thousand, times, as the 
foi^d fiat«heK g'az.ed upon-, trtem, he won- 
dered haw his, owa caidd have prxDved so" 
libd.ua;a>te to aim. — '"*■ What, what," he has 
V^if]A e:iclaimtd to himself, as his eyes 
c 5 wandered 



54 THE DISCARDED SON. 

wandered alternately from one to the other, 
'' could induce me to abandon these crea- 
tures ? though stained with ten thousand 
crimes — though loaded with obloquy — 
though loathed and shunned by all the rest 
of their species, yet, if sorrowful and con- 
trite they approached my door, could I 
keep it closed against them ? — oh, no! — 
oh, no ! — worlds upon w^orlds could not 
tempt, could not pre^pil on me to do so ; 
their griefs^ their shame should be shel- 
tered where their innocence once was, and 
with their prayers mine should mingle, 
and be offered up to Heaven for forgive^ 
ness for them — that Heaven which disdains 
not, as its creature man but too frequently 
does, to accept repentance as an atone- 
ment for error." 

But the pleasure which the idolizing pa- 
rents took in their children was often 
damped and interrupted by anxiety for their 
future welfare ; unable to make any cer- 
tain provision for them, and aware of the 
precariousness of life, they frequently 

trendbled 



THE DISCARDED SON. 35 

trembled to think what their destiny might 
be. 

These fears, however, were never en- 
couraged, and often lost, for a considerable 
period, in their confidence in heaven. — As 
the mind of Osmond (the name of their 
son) began to expand, Munro felt per- 
suaded, from the genius and understanding 
he evinced, that if both were properly cul- 
tivated, he would in all probability make 
a distinguished figure in life, and obtain 
the means, if not of greatly advancing, at 
least of rendering his family comfortable. 
This idea no sooner took possession of his 
mind, than he determined on straining 
every point to give him a liberal educa- 
tion ; accordingly, as soon as he was qua- 
lified to be sent thither, he accepted the 
sacrifice of some rich trinkets of his wife's, 
memorials of happier and more prosperous 
days, for the purpose of raising a sufficient 
sum to place and keep him at an English 
university, which he preferred, on account 
of the obstacles he doubted no; would be 
c 6 thrown 



$9 THE BISCARDED SON. 

thrown in the way of his advancement^ b?* 
the malice of his grandfather's new con- 
nexionSj if he attempted to settle in any 
of the learned professions in Scatland. 

For some time after this favourite plan 
had been carried into execution, Munro 
felt happier than he had been for a long 
time before ; but ere the period allotted 
for the academic pursuits of Osmond was 
well more than half expired^ the expences 
attending his being at the university, 
though none but what were absolutely un- 
avoidable were incurred, so greatly ex- 
ceeded what he had conceived they would 
be, that he dreaded he must be under th* 
necessity of recalling him ere his education 
was completed, and thus of resigning all 
the flattering visions in which he had so 
long indulged. More, he dreaded if this 
should prove the case, seeing him the prey 
of discontentand langour — unwilling, from 
the notions he had probably given him, to 
enter into any other than the line of life 
which his unfinished education would then 
4 incapacitate 



THE DISCARDED SON. S7 

incapacitate him for. Cut the above ap- 
prehension was not the only source of anx* 
iety and uneasiness Munro now had ; he 
now began to feel unhappy at seeing his 
daughter, to whom, with the assistance of 
her mother, he had, without senciing her 
from the paternal roof, given an education 
suitable to her birth, and what there was 
€very reason to suppose her expectations 
would have been, if he had not beej* 
discarded by his- family, literally wasting 
her sweetness on the desert air^ excluded 
from the amusements suitable to her time 
of life, and destined, to all appearance^ 
either to marry som.e person inferior to 
her, or find herself^ on advancing in life, 
a solitary, unconnected being. 

" Oh God !'* he has frequently exh 
claimed at these moments, when his heart 
was weighed down with anxiety about his 
children, *' how maturely should a man 
weigh every circumstance, ere he enters 
into a state in which he is liable to incur 
duties which cannot remain unfulfilled 

without 



38 THE DISCARDED SON. 

without making him feel torture 1 How 
awful is the responsibility that the child 
attaches to the parent, and yet how often 
is it thoughtlessly incurred ! Oh ! in how 
many instances does passion, headlong pas- 
sion, make man, notwithstanding all his 
boasted advantages, his reason, his powers 
of reflection, appear inferior to the crea- 
tures who have only instinct for their 
.guide ! — he only seems to take no thought 
for the future, he only who cannot untwist 
the ties which nature winds around the 
heart/' 

Whatever W'Cre the feelings of the young 
Elizabeth relative to her situation, she 
carefully confined them to her own bosom ; 
she clearly saw her parents stood too much 
in need of consolation, not to endeavour 
to administer it to them by a constant ap- 
pearance of chearfulness. She had nearly 
completed her seventeenth year, at the 
period her father began to fear his pro- 
jects^relative to her brother must be re- 
linquished. 



TriE DISCARDED SON. 59 

linquishedj and bore a strong resemblance 
to her mother^ with this difference, that 
her complexion was fairer, her stature 
taller,, her black eyes still more bril- 
liant and expressive. Her smile evinced 
the sweetness of her temper, her voice 
proclaimed the sensibility of her soul, her 
actions and deportment the goodness of 
her heart and excellence of her under- 
standing, both of which had been most 
assiduously cultivated. 

She had early been taught the luxury of 
doing good ; and that a well-improved 
mind, like a contented heart, was a con- 
tinual feast — like the woman celebrated in 
the Proverbs, who cloathed her household 
in scarlet and purple, she stretched out 
her hand to the needy, though small thq 
offering her narrow circumstances permit- 
ted it to contain; but she remembered the 
widow's mite, and small as it was, believed 
it acceptable in the eyes of heaven. Her 
mother, who had all that inherent gran- 
deur of soul for which the Spaniards are 

in 



40 THE DISCARDED SON. 

in general distinguished, had rendered her 
somewhat romantic, not only by their 
conversation, out the studies in which she 
had indulged her. 

Munro, however, was not displeased at 
this, since he considered romance the par- 
rent of enthusiasm ; without a certain por- 
tion of which, he believed it scarcely pos- 
sible any thing great, any thing gloriou* 
could be achieved. 

Elizabeth had heard of balls, and plays, 
and courts, and 'rasquerades, and she was 
certain they must be all delightful ; yet 
lively as her imagination was, she could 
not conceive a higher pleasure to be de- 
rived from them than she experienced whea 
seated with an entertaining book, the oiTr 
spring oF some vivid and liixuriattt fancy, 
beneath a fresh tree's shade, inhaling th^ 
\ight breeze that whispered through the 
folia;;e, literally w-afting both health and 
harmony. 

This pleasure was heightened by its 
lacing one she could »ot always indulge 

in — 



THE DISCARDED SON. 41 

in — for Elizabeth had much to do at home; 
she had been brought up to be useful to 
herself and others^ and the principal ma- 
nagement of the household concerns de- 
volved on her;, as soon as she was of an age 
to take it upon herself, her mother having a 
large share of that indolence which in ge- 
neral characterizes the natives of v/arm 
climates^ particularly those of the one she 
came from — and wishing, besides, to give 
her a perfect knowledge of such affairs^ 
in case she came to have a family of her 
own. 

Equal to her love of lifeerature, and 
taste for it^ was Elizabeth's fondness and 
taste for rural scenery ; she was a perfect 
devotee of Nature's — a bold and beautiful 
landscape never failed of inspiring her 
with a thrilling sensation of delight; nor 
was there any amusement which afforded 
her gi eater gratification than did such con- 
templations. To range over the slow ris- 
ing hills — to lest on a rock whence the 
streamlet distilled — to watch the rising of 

the 



i2 



THE DISCARDED SON. 



the golden-haired son of the sky — to be- 
hold the clouds of night come rolling down 
upon the dark brown steeps — the stars of 
the north rising over the waves of the 
ocean^ and shewing their heads of fire 
through the flying, mists of heaven, were 
ail sources of inexpressible delight to her, 
such as inspired her mind with the most 
rapturous enthusiasm, and made her heart 
beat with the most delicious emotions. 

The prospects to which she had been 
accustomed from infancy, early furnished 
her with ideas of the sublime, and, though 
in a lesser degree, the beautiful. The 
blue-fading mountains of the western High- 
lands — a vast expanse of ocean and im- 
mense forests of iir, composed the horizon 
sSe was daily in the habit of contemplat- 
ing ; while nearer, the natural wildness of 
the scenery was here and there varied and 
restrained by the hand of cultivation. 

The house of Munro was an antique 
rambling mansion, rough on the outside, 
and plain within ; nothing fine, nothing 

gaudy 



THK DISCARDED SON. 43 

gaudy was to be seen in any part of it, 
but in one room fitted up as a chapel for 
Mrs. Munro^ who scrupulously adhered to 
the faith of her ancestors, and at which 
a priest, from a neighbouring town, at 
stated periods officiated. 

Mrs. Munro could not forbear express— 
ing a wish to be allowed to bring up her 
daughter at least in her own persuasion ; 
but a wish which she relinquished without 
a murmur, since, though devout, she was 
not bigotted, on her husband's candidly 
informing her that the indulgence of it 
would in all probability render his father 
more averse than ever to a reconciliation 
with him, his bigotry being excessive, and 
of consequence, his dislike to all who 
either differed, or shewed any indulgence 
to those who did, in the article of religion 
from him. 

In allowin<j his daughter to have been 
educated in the religious tenets of her 
mother, Munro would have done no vio-' 
lence to his own feelings ; since, thougli 

decidedly 



44 THB DISCARDED SON. 

decidedly of opinion that, from the wa- 
vering nature cf man, a settled form of 
religion was necessary for all, he was 
equally so, that if the heart was sincere 
in its devotions, it mattered not to God 
what that form was. In short, various 
were the roads, he conceived, to heaven ; 
and that the untutored Indian, who fancies 
he sees God in the clouds, and hears hira 
in the winds, so he performs his allotted 
part to the best of his abilities, will have 
an equal chance of happiness with the 
most enlightened bishop. — But to revert 
to the house. A few forest trees, of an- 
cient date, cast a shade upon the Vv'indows; 
and it was still further shrowded by a lux- 
uriant shrubbery. Here intermingled the 
various beauties of 



•** L'dbarnam, rich 



Its streaming gold ; syringa iv'ry pure ; 
The scented and the scentless rose ; this red 
And of an humbler growth, the other tall. 
And tiirowing up into the darkest gloom 
Of iA'ighb'ring cypress, or more sable yew, 

Hei 



tHE DISCARDED SON. 45 

Her silver globes, light as the foamy surf 

That the wind severs from the broken wave j 

The lilac, various in array, now white. 

Now sanguine, and her beauteous head now set 

With purple spikes pyramidal, as if 

Studious of ornament, yet unresolv'd 

Which hue she most approv'd, she chose them all. 

Copious of flow'rs the woodbine, pale and wan, 

But v;ell compensating her sickly looks 

With never-cloying odours, early and late. 

Hypericum all blown, so thick a swarm 

Of flow'rs, like flies cloathing her slender rods. 

That scarce a leaf appears ; mezerion too. 

Though leafless, well attir'd, and thick beset 

With blushing wreaths, investing cv'ry spray, 

Alth^a with the purple eye j the broom, 

Vellow and bright, as bullion unalloy'd. 

Her blossoms ; and luxuriant above all 

The jasmine, throwing wide her elegant sweets. 

The deep dark green of whose unvarnish'd leaf 

Makes more conspicuous, and illumines more 

The bright profusion of her scatter'd stars." 

This luxuriant shrubbery was laid out 
in winding walks, the whole enclosed by 
a neat paling, in which were different 
openings leading to sequestered seats, si- 
tuated 



45 THE DISCARDED SON. 

tuated so as to command the most pleasing 
views of the distant country. • 

The house stood upon an extensive 
heath, to the wildness of which the fields 
and copses, together \v*ith the sheltered 
cots, and here and there cultivated farms^ 
which were discovered at its verge, formed 
an agreeable contrast. The central track 
through the heath became lost at some 
distance from the house, in the tangled 
mazes of what had formerly been a noble 
forest, but of which, except a quantity of 
underwood, no vestiges, save a few vene- 
rable trees, now remained ; beneath the 
shadow of whose melancholy boughs, the 
ruins of a once celebrated abbey were 
espied, now literally 

** A place of tcmbs. 
Waste, desolate, where ruin dreary dwelt, 
^ Brooding o*er sightless skalls and crumbling bones j 
Ghustful he sat, and e3'ed with stedfast glare 
(Sad trophies of his power, where ivy t\Nmes 
Its fatal green around) the falling roof. 
The time-struck arch, the column grey with moss, 
The leaning wall, the sculptur'd stone dcfac'd, 

Whost 



TftE DISCARDED SON. 47 

Whose mofiuraental flatt'ry, mix'd with dust. 
Now hid the name it vainly meant to raise. 
All was dread silence here and un:'".3turb'd. 
Save what the wind sigh'd, and tae walling owl 
Scrcam'd solitary to the mournful moon/* 

The far-extended walls of this edifice, 
magnificent in decay, and whether tinted 
with the warm glow of the setting sun, or 
silvered by the beams of the pale moon, 
presenting an interesting object to the 
eye of taste and feeling, gave an adequate 
idcT of the grandeur of its original dimen- 
sions, r>nd was stiH capable of affording a 
temporary shelter. Amid.t the brambles 
and brn hv;ood that overs^rew the oroiind 
about.it, " grey stones, with their heads of 
mobs/' here and there betrayed the nar- 
row houses of death — the graves of those 
who had lonsj since ceased to converse 
with mortal men. 

This decaying pile vvns a favourite haunt 
of Elizabeth's ; the w^hispering echoes 
which her stealing steps through its long- 
drawn aisles and fretted vaults awakened, 

where 



43 THE DISGAl^DED SON. 

where once the pealing anthem swelled the 
note of praise^ gave rise to sensations plea- 
singly awful. The solemn meditations it led 
to, suited the tender pensiveness of her spi- 
rit — a tenderness, a pensiveness encreased 
by the scenes she delighted to frequent; for 
as an elegant writer has observed — '' The 
lonely mountain and the silent grove sel- 
dom fail of encreasing the susceptibility 
of the female bosom." . 

Wrapped in these meditations, she not 
unfrequently wandered about, unmindful 
of how the minutes waned, till roused to 
recollection by some harsh note, somd 
discordant cry, the hooting of the owl, 
or the chattering of the daws, that held 
their unmolested reign v;iihin the ruin. 
These, however, v/ere not the only inha- 
bitants it had, if the reports of the country 
people in its vicinity were to be believed. 
Tradition had given it other tenants, of 
which superstition did not attempt to dis- 
possess it — indeed it would have beon ra- 
ther unkind and unmannerly to have done 

so. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 49 

so^ as for a considerable time they gave 
no cause of complaint whatever to their 
neighbours. But every thing in this life, 
sooner or later, must have an end, and 
so had their peaceable behaviour; for just 
about the period that Munro began to ex- 
perience such uneasiness about his son, the 
whole neighbourhood was thrpwn into a 
state of confusion and dismay, in conse- 
quence of the malicious tricks and vagaries 
these idle and airy gentry began to play. 
Willingly would the affrighted rustics have 
entered into a subscription to defray the 
expence of sending them to join Pharoah 
and his host in the Red Sea — but, alas ! that 
they knew not how to set about the matter. 

Munro at first imputed their terror to 
the power of imagination, but a very short 
time served to convince him, from the tes- 
timony of his own senses, that there was 
some real foundation for it, as once or 
twice, in passing the now dreaded ruin at 
rather a late hour, and pausing near it, in 
consequence of the prevailing report, he 

VOL. I. D clearly 



50 TFIE DISCARDED SON. 

clearly heard noises from within, well cal- 
culated to alarm the unenlightened mind. — 
This circumstance induced him, more than 
once, to go over the building in the day- 
time, and take his station near it at night ; 
but nothing resulted from this measure, 
as he had rather hoped and expected would 
be the case, to enable him to prove, to his 
rustic neighbours, that their credulity was 
grossly imposed upon, doubtless for some- 
thing more than the mere purpose of fright- 
ening them. 

The consternation gradually became 
greater, and idleness, gossipping, and in- 
ebriety, ensued from it. The alehouses 
alone had reason to rejoice at the general 
disturbance and dismay, as, owing to these, 
they were regularly filled every evening 
after sunset, and continued so till sunrise. 
This conduct of the lower rustics was too 
grievous and alarming to the higher ones, 
particularly as the harvest was just on the 
point of commencing, not to give rise to 
much consultation among them ; but from 

which. 



tHte DISCARDED SON. 5 1 

vrhich, owing to want of r^soliition in 
some^ and obstinacy in others^ no good 
whatever resulted. 

Munro^ who purposely joined in all 
their deliberations on the subject^ proposed 
a nightly watch being kept for some time 
in the abbey ; but this proposition was 
almost unanimously rejected. At lengtli, 
one evenings a farmer/ of the name of 
Stubbs^ whose land joined his^ came into 
a field where he was^ and after some little 
conversation, " Captain/' said he^ ^' I have 
been thinking of what you said about pass- 
sing a night or two in that crazy old build* 
ing yonder, which, God forgive me for say- 
ing such wicked words, I wish the devil 
had dropt some of his burning brimstone 
into long ago, for then we should not have 
been in such a mess as we are now in about 
it; and if so be as how }ou still think it 
would be a good thing to do, why I am 
agreeable to doing so along with you ; for 
one may as well — nay, had better run the 
risk of facing old Nick himself (the Lord 
D 2 sav« 



UNIVERSITY OF 



B2 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

save and defend us from ever seeing his 
cloven feet or long tail), as let matters go 
on in this way. There was last night, after 
being comfortably settled in bed and 
asleep, I was forced to get np to go and 
pen the sheep myself, because the boy 
that looks a'ter them could neither be 
made to do so by fair or by foul means ; 
flat and plain, he told his mistress the devil 
might pen them for him — he wouldn't run 
the risk of his life or his senses by going 
a'ter them to the ruin, about which they 
were feeding— not he, for the best wither 
in the flock.'' 

Munro assured the farmer he ivas as w^ell 
inclined as ever to do what he had pro- 
posed, as a probable means of detecting 
the nocturnal disturbers of the abbey. He 
advised him, however, to keep their inten- 
tion a profound secret, which the other 
readily promised ; and it was agreed that 
they should go thither that very night, as 
soon as darkness had spread its raven wings 
pver the hemisphere. This agreement 

Munro 



* THE DISCARDED SON, 55' 

Miinro could not think of concealing from 
his family^ well knowing the uneasiness his 
absence from home for a night would oc- 
casion, if thev could not account for it. — 
At the appointed hour Stubbs called upon 
him^ and both immediately proceeded on 
their secret expedition » Munro armed 
with a swordj and his companion with a 
pitch-forkj as the weapon he was best ac- 
customed iOj but which for the present 
was laid across a basket of provisions, 
that, together with a dark lanthorn, he 
carried. 

Munro had scarcely entered the deso- 
lated pile, ere its cold and dampness struck 
a chill to his heart, as did its darkness to 
that of the farmer. What the latter did 
not like, he never patiently endured, ex- 
cept compelled to do so ; he therefore 
never ceased groping about till he had 
collected a sufficient quantity of sticks and 
rotten wood, to form a large pile in the 
stone hall in which they were, and to 
which (notwithstanding all the remon- 
D 3 stranees 



54 THE DISCARDED SON. 

strances of Munro^ who represented to 
hiin the little probability there was of their 
being able to make any discovery^ if they 
exposed themselves to detection^ as they 
must inevitably do^ by surrounding them- 
selves with light) he set fire. 

" Why dang it — dang it. Captain/' cried 
the farmer, rubbing his head as soon as 
be had satisfied himself, '' 'tis bad enough 
in any way to be here ; but to be so in 
the coldanddark, would be more than any 
one could put up with. I am sure you 
may be glad I have lit a fire, for you look 
as cold and as blue, as the saying is, as a 
calf of a frosty morning. Besides, Cap- 
tain, if there was any thing to be seen, 
how the duce could we see it without 
light ?^* 

'' True, true, my friend,'* replied Munro 
wiili affected gravity; " I see you are at 
no loss for sound argument to support the 
propriety of what you do." 

'' Why yes," cried the farmer, with a 
look of the most perfect self-compla- 

cencVjj 



THE DISCARDED SON. 55 

cenc}^ " why yes/' his broad features dis- 
tended by a smile of mingled satisfaction 
and importance^ and giving what he cal- 
led a knowing look, " I think I know 
what I am about, but I shouldn't be vain — 
noa ! noa \" shaking his head, '' 1 should 
not indeed; for it is my poor father, 
God rest his soul, I may thank for being 
what I am, for he gave me good learning as 
soon as I could take it. I was for two years 
and three months at a school, at the rate 
of a crown a-quarter, kept by ■" 

*' Oh well^'' said Munro, perhaps not 
consciously interrupting him, '' the ex- 
pence was not thrown away/' 

'' No, no, that's what father said. — 
' Boy,' he has often and often said, ' I 
don't grudge w^hat I have laid out upon 
your learning, because I see as- how you 
takes to it.' — Just as you and I, Captain, 
said last autumn, about our two corn-fields 
that cost us so much to manure. — ' We 
don't grudge,' says we, ' the expence these 
here fields have cost- us in manuring, be- 
D 4 cause 



h6 THE DISCARDED SON. 

cause they have yielded us such a plentiful 
crop this season." 

On each side of the yawning chasm in 
which Stubbs had kindled the fire, a kind 
of rude and partly-demolished bench pro- 
jected a little way into the hall^ on which 
he and bis companion seated themselves 
opposite one another; the basket of pro- 
visions^ containing a jar of strong ale, 
ham, cheese, and bread, was unpacked and 
placed between them, and they soon fell to 
upon its contents. But though the farmer 
had recourse to every method in his power 
to keep up his spirits, and continued to 
talk boldly, it was evident to Munro that 
he gradually began to grow faint-hearted : 
this, however, he did not pretend to see, 
trusting, that by giving him credit for 
courage, he should inspirit him suffici- 
ently to enable him to retain, at least, 
the semblance of it — That a scene more 
calculated than the present to affect a mind 
inclined to superstition, could not well be 
found, be could not help acknowledging 

to 



THE DISCARDED SON. 57 

to himself, and of course, in some de- 
gree, excusing the gradual evaporation 
of poor Stubbs's valour. The building 
^vas not only known to be remote from 
every inhabited one, but the wind made 
a hollow and a moaning noise throughout 
it, that might well at times have been 
mistaken for the sighings and lamen- 
tations of distrerss : a shattered staircase 
descended to the hall, above which all 
appeared involved in ruin, mystery, and 
darkness; while, on the green and slimy 
w^alls, the quivering and uncertain light 
threw shadows more fantastic than any but 
the most disordered imagination could 
possibly have given birth to, 

'' It is a cheerless spot indeed,'' said 
he, after a short iiiterval of silence, during 
which his eye had been busily employed 
in looking about him ;. '' many years, I 
doubt, have elapsed since any thing like 
social comfort has before been seen in it." 

'' Yes, and many more, s!:ouId it last 

30 long, will pass away, ere any thing of 

a 5> thQ- 



58 THE DfSCARDED SON. 

the like will be seen again in it/' replied 
the farmer; '' for I am beginning to think. 
Captain, that ghost-watching is not the 
most agreeable employment in the world ; 
and as to my neighbours, I needn't say 
"what their opinion on the subject is.'* 

'^ The speedy detection of those who 
occasioned them so much uneasiness, will, 
I trust, render any further watching unne- 
cessary,*' answered Munro. 



CHAP, 



THE DISCARDED SON. 59 



CHAP. II. 



** Heav'n has to all allotted, soon or late, 
Some lucky revolutions of their fate. 
Whose motions, if we watch and guide with skilly 
(For human good depends on human will). 
Our fortune rolls as from a smooth descent. 
And from the first impression takes the bent; 
But, if unseiz'd, she glides away Hke wind. 
And leaves repenting Folly far behind.** 

DRVDEK, 



OW that we are upon the subject of 
ghosts and hobgoblins, and suchlike trum- 
pery^ pray may I ask you. Captain, (for I 
know you are a good scholar, and have 
seen a good deal of the world, and can, 
therefore, give an opinion on these 
matters one may depend on), do you 
think," cried the farmer, making an effort, 
B 6 but 



60 THE DISCARDED SON. 

but a vain one, the bench being fastened 
to the ground, to pull his seat nearer to 
Munro, ''^that a man, having all the Chris- 
tian duties paid to his remains, such as 
having a good coffin given to him, and 
being laid in a snug grave, either has a 
right to, or can come back to disturb his 
neighbours, which, God knows, perhaps, 
he did sufficiently while living?" 

'' With God nothing is impossible," re- 
plied Munro, in a solemn tone; "but i 
seems most improbable, to a mind of sensi 
and reflection at least, that a Being ot 
mercy and benevolence, such as he is re- 
presented, such as all his works testify him 
to be, such as daily experience and obser- 
vation convince us he is, for who is there 
that has not h]i his manifold mercies anc' 
loving -kindness, should permit his crea- 
tures to be needlessly tormented; it is, 
therefore, my firm^ my immutable opinion, 
that the spirit once returned unto God, 
who gave it, it revisits this nether scene no 

iQore, " to make night hideous, and us " 

'^Aye^ 



THE DISCARDED SO^T^ 61 

'•"Aye^ ^y^/* eagerly interrupted the far- 
mer, '' you may well say that, indeed — to 
make niglit hideous — well, well, this is 
comfortable — this is comfortable," wiping 
his forehead (which was rather a little damp 
at the moment, but whether from the heat 
of the fire, or whether from the oozing out 
of his valour, cannot be determined \ with 
the corner of his coloured neckcloth; '' 1 
shall tell my folks at home what you have 
said, in hopes it may have some effect 
upon them; for, if a mouse does but scratch 
now in the cupboard, or a bat flit across 
the room. Lord, there is such a kick-up in a 
moment, that one would be tempted ta 
think Bedlam was broke loose/^ 

They continued to converse with very 
little intermission, but much against the 
inclination of Munro, as too much silence 
could not, he conceived, be observed, for 
the enabling them to accomplish the pur- 
pose which had brought them to the build- 
ing. The farmer, however, derived a kind 
of false courage, from hearing the sound 

of 



62 THE BISCARDED SON. 

of his own voice and his companioh'is^ 
which rendered him regardless of the re- 
monstrances Munro made on the subject. 
At lengthy after a long sitting, and when 
the contents of the basket, and the fire, 
and light in the lanthorn^ were nearly ex- 
hausted, the farmer, whose patience was 
also by the same time equally so, proposed 
their breaking up watch for that night: to 
•which proposal Munro, who, frqm the con- 
duct the farmer had pursued, had no idea 
of their being able to efiect any discovery^ 
"Was on the point of acquiescing, when a 
tremendous noise^ immediately over their 
heads, resembling that which thunder makes 
when rumbling over a building, arrested 
his words. He started, grasped his sword 
with firmness, and looked around him; 
while the eyes of the farmer began to stare, 
his teeth to chatter, and his complexion 
to assume a livid hue. The rumbling noise 
over head continued for some minutes, and 
was then succeeded by shrieks, or rather 
yells, of a most terrific nature^, such as 

torture 



THE DISCARDED SON, S3t 

torture alone could be supposed to occa- 
sion. 

" Oh, CaptaiUj, Captain!" cried the far- 
mer, on hearing these appalling sounds, 
and starting from the bench to which ter- 
ror had at first rivetted him — '' Oh, Captain, 
Captain V extending his arms towards 
him. 

Munro raised his finger significantly to 
motion him to silence; the next instan^t he 
heard the stairs creaking, he glanced his 
quick eye upwards, and at the head per- 
ceived a tall skeleton-like figure, enve- 
loped in what appeared to be a winding- 
sheet, and surrounded by a pale luminous 
light. He instantly snatched up the Ian- 
thorn, and darted to the staircase, forgetful 
of its shattered state; scarcely, however, 
had he set his foot on it, ere he was re- 
minded of this by the failure of one of the 
steps, and but that he caught, as it gave 
way, at a banister, he must have fallen 
through the chasm he had thus made. He 
now recollected what sudden emotion had 
5 before 



64 THE DISCARDED SON. 

before rendered him forfjetfiil of, that, at 
the side of the staircase, there was a door 
leading to a narrow shelving passage, end- 
ing at a flight of winding steps, which he 
doubted not having a communication with 
the apartments above; he therefore hasten- 
ed onward, and had just reached them, when 
the frightful apparition he was in quest of 
rushed down them, and passing him with the 
quickness of'lightning, vanished through a 
small space at the side of the passage which a 
door had once occupied. Munro pursued, 
and found himself in a small square stone 
room, half sunk underground, and which 
he perfectly recollected having examined 
before, but without beino* able to dis- 
cover more than one inlet into it. Again 
he went round it, feeVmf^j as he did so, 
all along the walls, but without meeting 
with any thing to impede the progress 
of his hand. ^u\fter a little deliberation, he 
determined on pursuing this adventure no 
further for the present, since he could not 
avoid thinking his doing so incompatible 

"with 



THE DISCARDED SON. ()5 

with his safety^ alone and unaided as he 
was; besides^ he doubted not the farmer 
being in want of his assistance. He ac- 
cordingly hastened back to the hall^ where 
he found him exactly in the same spot 
in which he had left him^ his pitchfork 
presented^ his eyes staring wildly^ his hair 
upright, every feature, in short, betoken- 
ing horror and dismay. Munro shook 
him several times by the shoulder, and 
then made him swallow some ale which 
fortunately remained; this brought him a 
little to himself, and after heaving a deep 
sigh, or rather groan, and wiping his 
damp forehead — " Well, Captain, well,'* 
cried he, *^ did you catch it?" Munro in- 
formed him of the issue of the adventure, 
" The Lord have mercy upon us!" cried 
he, after hearing it — '' Captain, Captain, 
let us be going; but don't ye think, don't 
ye, that I'm afraid — no, no, if I had been 
so, instead of keeping my ground here, as 
you yourself saw I did, I should have kept 
at your heels." 

'- Oh, 



€J3 the DISCARDTiD SON. 

" Ohj no doubt," cried Miinro encou- 
ragingly ; " but come, as you say, my good 
friend, let us be off, for we shall make no 
further discovery here to-night, I am sure. 
Take my advice, and keep what we have 
seen a secret, or else things will be worse 
than ever; and also take my word for it, 
that the spirit we saw this night is one 
enveloped in wicked flesh and blood, to 
which, I most sincerely hope, you may yet 
have an opportunity of giving a good 
ducking in your horse-pond, since I can 
scarcely think any punishment too severe 
for the, person ^yho wantonly sports wirh 
the feelings of his fellow-creatures/* 

The fanrrcr readily promised the secresy 
he desired, but by his silence relative to 
what he had said of the apparition, evi- 
dently proved he could not be persuaded 
to be of his opinion respecting it. They 
quitted the building, and Munro saw his 
companion safely housed ere he parted 
from him. 

The next day he re-examined the abbey 

more 



THi: DISCARDED SON. 67 

more narrowly than he had ever done 
before^ but without being able to discover 
the traces of any human beings, but the 
farmer and himself, having been lately in 
it. He again proposed having a watch kept 
there for a few nights, but the proposal 
was now so universally negatived, and his 
wife and daughter expressed such uneasi* 
ness at the idea of his going thither again 
at such a time, that he gave up all inten- 
tion of doing so. 

His anxiety about his son now daily en- 
creased, as every day tended still further 
to convince him of the impracticability of 
keeping him much longer at the Univer- 
sity, except some unexpected change took 
place in his circumstances, of which he had 
not the remotest expectation ; no, his 
prospects were now, on every side, cheer- 
less and barren; and, by degrees, his in-» 
cessant contemplation of them made him 
acquire an abstracted manner, and a look 
of »moody care, which drew upon him the 
observations of his neighbours, and excited 

variousi 



68 THE DISCARDED SON. 

rarious conjectures among them as to the 
cause of it; some thought one thing, some 
another; all agreed^ however, that it must 
be something very grievous which thus 
Weighed upon him. 

Farmer Stubbs, who, whatever may be 
thought to the contrary, was (ghosts and 
fiuch like trumpery, as he styled them, out 
of the question) not only one of the 
bravest but honestest of men, saw and 
thought as much as his neighbours, but,. 
unlike them, remained silent with respect 
both to his remarks and surmises, it beinof 
a maxim with him, that a man has no right 
to busy himself, unasked, about the affairs 
of another. He had somehow^ (doubtless 
from that secret sympathy which, be their 
education ever so different, exists between 
worthy hearts), contracted avast liking for 
the Captain, he said, such as at any time 
would have made him fi^ht for him through 
thick and thin; and it now vexed him to 
the soul, though he said nothing about the 
matter, to see him drooping his head, like 

a blighted 



THE DISCAHDED SON, 69 

a blighted ear of corn^ and going about as 
if crazed with care. 

One evening;, as this honest farmer was 
digging in a fields, he was joined by a 
neighbour of the name of Watkins^ a sly, 
cunning, canting man, of Methodistical 
manners and appearance, who, though he 
professed to love good works above all 
things, was supposed to love good cheer 
better; and who, having by some means 
or other (not altogether to his credit, 
if the report of the goddess who blew 
the brazen trump in the little village of 
Heathwood v/as to be believed) scraped to- 
gether sufficient to permit him to indulge 
his propensity for idleness, the offspring of 
a creeping, grovelling disposition, passed 
much of his time in running about to col- 
lect new^s of his neighbours, which he de- 
tailed Vs^ith.the utmost avidity, especially 
if it was of an unfavourable nature, as he 
was quite as malicious and envious as he 
was greedy and hypocritical. 

Against Munro he had what is vulgarly 

called 



70 THE DISCAP.DED SOX. 

called a particular gruclge, owing to Ms 
having espoused, and finally enabled her to 
triumph over him, the cause of a poor 
widow, who, by some unexpected casualty^ 
had fallen into his power; as also on ac- 
count of his having repulsed the eflfbrtS he 
made to be on familiar terms with him and 
his family. 

Stubbs, who had but little notion of 
ceremony, and who, moreover, did every 
thing but hate Watkins, for to do that he 
knew would be unchristian-like, took no 
notice whatever of his approach, but con- 
tinued digging away as if he had seen no 
one. Watkins, who knew him well, and 
stood much in dread of him, so much, in- 
deed, that he did every thing he could think 
of as likely to conciliate his regard, at- 
tempted not to interrupt him by speaking, 
till he paused to take breath; he then, 
after ^^ A fine evening, neighbour, a fine 
evening,*' added, with what he intended 
for an approving smile — '' I see thou dost 
not eat the bread of idleness." 

'^No," 



THE DISCARDED SON. 71 

'"•'No/* replied Stubbs, as^ after rubbing 
his hand against his waistcoat^ he dug- his 
spade, with the assistance of his foot, again 
into the ground, '' no, 'tis bad bread for 
any one/' 

" Truly thou sayest right in saying so; 
those who hanker after it will surely meet 
with punishment/' 

" Doubtless, doubtless," returned the 
farmer, again applying his foot to the 
spade. 

" I say, neighbour," resumed Watkins, 
after a short pause — '' I say," twitching him 
by the sleeve, and pointing with his thumb 
over his left shoulder towards the house of 
Munro, conspicuous from the spot on 
which they were, " some folks yonder will 
soon repent, if they already don't, having 
indulged themselves in it/' 

"Well, what's that to you?" replied the 
other, but without seeming to understand 
who he alluded to; "'you won't be obliged 
also to repent for their having done so/' 

'^'Me! no, God forbid that any of us 

should 



f^ THE DISCARDED SON. 

should be obliged to answer for' the siiis 
or indiscretions of others !'* 

^' Why, I believe/' and Stubbs leered a 
little slily at the demure and sanctified- 
looking Watkins, '' it would be a bad job 
for some folks if they were, seeing as how 
they are loaded with so heavy a burthen of 
their own." 

'' But I say, neighbour/' cried Watkins, 
eagerly returning to the subject, for the 
purpose of discussing which with him, he 
had alone sought out Stubbs — " I say, you 
must lately have seen something wrong in 
the house of the Captain, as he is called, 
though why he should, since not receiving 
the king's pay, I can't tell?" 

'' No, not I," replied Stubbs, without 
seeming to notice this last observation — 
"not I," digging aw^ay ; " what should I see 
wrong in it? have the rats eat through the 
walls?" 

" The rats ! — ha ! ha ! — No — yet, never- 
theless, the prop, the main beam, the 
grand support of the building, is, I think, 

going 



THE DISCARDED SON. 75 

going fast; but thou dost not, perhaps/' 
observing the other suddenly suspend his 
labour, and regard him with a kind of 
vacant stare, " understand metaphorical 
language; I will, therefore, explain — Thou 
must know, then, that the Captain (I know 
I should not please thee if I styled him 
otherwise) has brought himself into such 
trouble, by trying to bring up his son 
as a gentleman, that I should not won- 
der if he soon went the way of all flesh," 
and he pointed with his finger to the 
ground, " he frets, and takes on so — for 
which, verily, I should pity him, but that 
I think his pride merits chastisement: for 
what biit pride, his wishing to have his' 
brats hold their heads, like himself, above 
the honest folks about them, could have 
made him think of sending his son to the 
University forsooth, knowing, as to be 
sure he must, he hadn't a shilling, nor a 
chance of getting a shilling, to give him?'* . 

*' Has he asked you," demanded Stubbs, 
*^ to help him to pay for his being there?'* 

VOL. I. E '"Me! 



74 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' Me! no truly, it would be strange if 
he had, being, as I am, of no kindred to 
him." 

*' Then, since he has not, I see no right 
you have to trouble yourself about the 
matter, for I suppose you'H'allow every 
one has a right to do what they please with 
their own ?" 

'' Yea, truly, I grant it; but, notwith- 
standing a man may give an opinion about 
another/* 

'' To be sure — to 1. ' sure he may/' 
cried Stubbs; '' bi;:, by goles, he had 
sometimes better not/' 

^^ Nay, veiily this is the land of liberty," 
said the other, waxing a little, very little 
warm, for he was a peaceable man when in 
company, as was the case at present, with 
any one he was afraid of, " and a man 
may, therefore, say what he pleases/' 

'^ No, there you are out/' cried Stubbs; 
^' he mayn't talk trea.oii, \ei him like to do 
so never so much; and, I believe," looking 
significantly at WatkinSj who was shrewdly 

suspected 



TKE DISCARDED SON. 75 

suspected of Jacobinical principles, '' I 
know some folks who would well enough.*' 

'' PhOj every fool knows tliat ! But, as I 
was saying, it goes so heavily now with 
the Captain, that truly I should not wonder 
if he soon broke his heart, or/' and he 

drew his hand across his throat '^ you 

understand me — the unrighteous have ever 
a bad end/' 

"The unrighteous! — And who told you 
Captain Munro was an unrighteous man?" 

" Why, hath he not been cast off by the 
father who begot him?" 

'' Yes, but there are unnatural fathers." 

" But, I tell thee, old Squire Munro had 
reason to throw off his son, for he wasted 
his substance in riotous living, and brought 
the grey hairs of his mother with sorrow to 
the grave." 

"■ You tell me ! but who told you ? 
Amongst the things," continued Stubbs, 
suddenly sticking his spade into the earth, 
putting his arms akimbo, and advancing 
nearer to the other, '' you have heard of 
E % men's 



76 THE DISCARDED SON. 

men's eating, have you ever heard, neigh- 
bour Watkins^ of their eating their own 
words?" 

'' Why, verily no/' cried the other^ 
stepping a little backward, '' I can't say, 
neighbour Stubbs, that I have/* 

^' Then I have/' resumed Stubbs; ^^and, 
what is more, I have often made a man do 
so; and, what is more again, Ihavn'tlost 
the knack yet by wbich I did so," and he 
nodded his head with meaning to him, and 
returned to his spade. 

'' I protest thou art a facetious man," 
cried Watkins, returning in a few minutes 
to the spot from which he had just made a 
retrogade motion. 

'' Not always — I am not facetious now," 
said the other in rather a surly tone. 

'^And why art thou not? I have not an- 
gered thy spirit, I hope — verily, if I have, 
it was without intending, for I only meant 
to have a little harmless gossip with thee/* 

^'l don't like gossip," in the same surly 
tone he had just spoken in; '^ 'tis only fit for 

women 



THE DISCARDED SON. 77 

women and maudlin men ; if you Avant any 
more^ therefore, you had better go off to 
your wife, and I take it you'll have enough; 
and, hearkee, by the hye, tell her she had bet- 
ter not let that old turkey-cock of her's be 
ranging about at large, as he has done for 
some time past, scaring all the women and 
children — there's not a girl in the parish 
can wear a bit of pink ribbon for him; and^ 
as to my dame, she's mad as the duece, be- 
cause she can't wear the red petticoat her 
daughter sent her a present of, for fear of 
him. Dang me, if the old bully comes in 
my way, if I don't hit him a stounder shall 
make him look about him." 

'' That would not be right nor seemly — 
thy neighbour's land-mark," added Wat- 
kins in a nasal tone, '' or thy neighbour's 
cattle, thou should'st not touch." 

'' Why, as to touching his land-mark, by 
which I take it you mean his hedges and 
stakes, I should do no such thing, because 
I think to do so would be roguish, and, 
moreover, might bring me into trouble; 
E 3 but. 



7S THE DISCARDED SON. 

but, as to giving any of his cattle a douse 
in the chops, if they affront id me, I should 
make no more bones of doing so, than I 
would to my neighbour himself, if he did 
the same." 

" Yet it is a bad thing to smite a man; 
the Lord delighteth to behold brethren 
dwelling together in unity, in that good 
peace and fellowship, which, I trusty neigh- 
bour Stubbs, will ever exist between us^ for 
I like thee much; thou art a man of a plea- 
sant countenance;, and thy discourse also is 
pleasant: why wilt not thou and thy spouse 
let me and my wife have more of thy com- 
pany? we do desire it much.'' 

" I have something else to do than to 
company keep; and, as to my dame, why, 
havn't I told vou already of that old black- 
guard sentinel of a turkey-cock you keep 
strutting before your door; you don't sup- 
pose she wants to be gobbled up as Tom 
Thumb was?" 

''Ha! ha! you maketh me of a cheerful 
spirit — truly I did not know^ till now, the 

bird 



THE DISCARDED SON, 79 

tird was so troublesome to the maidens; if 
he doth not deport himself better for the 
future^ I shall rebuke him." 

"Rebuke him !— O Lord! O Lord!" 
cried Stubbs^, seized with an immoderate 
fit of laughter^ and supporting himself 
with the spade; " and so you didn't know 
that^ like yourself, he was running after 
the maidens?'* 

'' Fye, neighbour, fye ! I run aitei them ! 
no: — I can't deny but J like the damsels^ 
but then it is " 

'^ Come, come, don't burthen your poor 
soul with any more lies this dav — if you 
never did worse than like a prettv girl^ 
why no one could say bad of you except 
they lied." " 

" I know not that any one speaketh 
ill of me." 

" No ! why then in time, perhaps, you'll 
be wiser." 

'' Neighbour," cried Watkins, '' I like 

r.ot dark sayings; let me know who speaketh 

E 4 evil 



^0 THE DISCAP-DED SON. 

evil of me, that I may bring an action 
against them, and obtain damages/* 

"No, I'll never put it in any one's 
power, if I can help it, to make a man pay 
for telling the truth/' replied Stubbs, with 
the utmost coolness. 

'*■ Truth!'' vexedly repeated Watkins. 

*^ Yes; and now that we are upon the 
subject of truth, pray may I make just so 
bold as to ask you, who told you that Cap- 
tain Munro was in trouble for having sent 
his son to the University?" 

Watkins hesitated to reply. 

'' Oh, if you don't give me an author 
for what you have said, I shan't believe a 
word of it." 

Watkins still hesitated; but, at length, 
rather than have his veracity doubted, and 
himself perhaps brought into trouble for 
the supposed fabrication of a falsehood, 
proceeded to say it was his niece, who lived 
as servant at the Captain's. 

*' And pray how came she by her know- 
ledge 



THE DISCARDED SON. 81 

ledge of his uneasiness ?" asked Stubbs. *^ I 
take It, neither the Captain^ nor any of his 
family^ made her their confidant." 

'' No, to be sure not/' Watkins replied, 
'' but she had ears.'' 

'' Which she applied to the key-hole/* 
resumed Stubbs^ with quickness. ^^ I wish 
to the Lord that Old Nick, who tempted 
her to do so, had nailed them to it ! this is 
the way in which so much mischief is done 
in the world, peaceable people set by the 
ears, and innocent characters destroyed; 
for what an eaves -dropper cannot hear 
they will make out, out of their own 
wicked heads, that they may have a story 
to tell. Shame, shame unto those who 
hearken to them ! thev are, like the receiver 
of stolen goods, worse than the thief him- 
self You who pretend to be so good, and 
so pious, and so discreet, to encourage 
a young thing, like your niece, in such 
shameless doings ! why you may just as well 
encourage her to give away his property, 
his meat^ and his drink, and his coals, and 
E 5 his 



82 THE DISCARDED SON. 

his candles, as to pry into his secrets and 
betray them. By the Lord, if a wench be- 
longing to me was to bring me such tattle, 
I'd give her chops a boxing that should 
make them tingle for hours! I am John 
Bull — I was born on the other side of the 
Tweed — and I like to speak my mind/' 

*'But how dost thou know I encouraged 
my niece to speak of her master?'' 

*' How do I know 1 why, if you didn't, 
wouldn't you have stopped her mouth the 
moment she attempted to open it about 
his affairs? But I know^ the reason you are 
so anxious to pry into his concerns; I know 
'tis in hopes of discovering some ill, some 
evil of him, for you hate him — yes, I know 
your heart is full of spite and malice against 
him, and I know also for why. But you'll 
spit them forth in vain against him," and 
with violence Stubbs again drove his spade 
into the ground — " yes, in vain, I say, for 
the Lord will uphold the good against the 
machinations of the wicked; and Captain 
Munro is good; yes, he is a just man — he 

gives 



THE DISCARDED SON. 83 

gives to every one their due; he speaks ill 
of no one; out of his little he giveth to the 
poor; he has brought up his children to 
fear God, to honour the king, and to love 
their neighbours — that is, 1 suppose^*' said 
the Farmer, a little hesitatingly, ''such as 
he thinks deserving of their love; and what 
can any man do more? He, therefore^ that 
wishes ill to such a man is a scoundrel ; he 
who speaks ill of him is a liar, and a back- 
biter, and a slanderer. Go, go,** he added, 
after a pause, occasioned by the fulness 
of his heart, indignantly waving his hand 
as he spoke — '' go, go, I am quite ashamed 
of you, quite ashamed to find one, who, 
from his knowledge of holy writ, knows 
his duty to his neighbour so well, performs 
it so badly; 'tis such hypocritical fellows 
as you who bring religion and the holy 
wor-d of God into disrepute ; for the wicked 
would never scoff at piety, but that they too 
often see those who pretend to it following 
the vvays of unrighteousness. Go, go, take 
yourself to task; and, instead of saying 
E G godly 



84 THE DISCARDED SON. 

gocMy things^ strive to do godly things, for 
words are but wind, but by our actions we 
must stand or fall — the angel of the Lord 
marks them all down upon a table, at which 
he will look at the last day/' 

Watkins attempted to say something; 
but the indignation with which Stubbs 
turned from him, soon made him close his 
lips, and take himself quickly and quietly 
off. 

As soon as he was out of sight Stubbs 
ceased his digging, which he had recom- 
menced with violence, and remained for 
some minutes in a thoughtful attitude 
leaning on his spade — the exclamation of 
— '' Oh, 'tis a scurvy, scurvy world!'* then 
burst from him, as, drawing it out of the 
earth, he threw it over his shoulder and 
proceeded home. 

The confirmation he had received of 
Munro*s unhappiness, as also the cause of 
that unhappiness, deeply affected him; for 
he was a father, a tender father himself, and 
judged of the anguish he must experience, 

at 



THE DISCARDED SON. 85 

at the idea of not being able to give his 
children the advantages he desired for them^ 
by that which his own feelings as a parent 
convinced him he should have i^elt, if unable 
to have sent his family into the world pro- 
perly qualified for their stations in ii — 
''But the worst of all/' muttered he to 
himself between his closed teeth, as, but 
not as cheerily as usual, he pursued his 
way homewards, '' is the thought of such 
a mean fellow as that Watkins, yet perhaps 
being able to hold his head above such a 
real gentleman, such a kind and worthy- 
hearted man as Captain Munro is. Dang 
me!'' and he suddenly clenched his hand, 
''if any evil happens to the poor gentle- 
man, and that scoundrel attempts to crow 

over him But evil will not happen unto 

him; the Lord hath promised he will not 
forsake those that put their trust in him^ 
and I am sure Captain Munro does. He 
may seem to forsake them for a season, in 
order to try them ; for trials are, 'tis said, 
for the hearty like what the furnace is for 

gold. 



86 THE DISCArvDED SON. 

gold, necessary to purify it; but he will 
turn bis face again towards them, if they 
still continue to call upon hirn " 

About this time there arrived in the 
neighbourhood a nobleman of the title of 
O'Sinister, who had an old, but magnificent 
seat in it, to which he came but seldom — so 
seldom, that this was his first visit to it since 
Munro had settled at Heathwood. 

A few evenings after the conversation 
just recounted. Farmer Stubbs called on 
Munro, just as he was sitting down to tea 
with the ladies; he was invited to take a 
cup, or some other refreshment, but de- 
clined either, saying he had only made 
bold to call on the Captain for a few bro- 
coli plants, which he had promised to give 
,him the day before. IVfunro recollected 
the promise, and took him into the garden 
the moment tea v;as over. They had not 
got many paces from the house when the 
farmer, suddenly stopping, seized Munro 
by a button of his coat, and, after looking 
earnestly in his face for an instant — ''Cap- 
tain/' 



THE DISCAllDED SON. 87 

tain," said he, '•' the brocoli plants were 
but a fetch to oet voii from the ladies — I 
have something for your private ear." 

*' Well^ my friend/' returned Munro^, 
" recovering from the surprise his so 
suddenly stopping and taking hold of him 
had caused, " I am all attention.'' 

*■' You must know then/' resumed the 

farmer, ''that od's rabbit it!" cried he, 

rubbing his hands, and looking with a dis- 
contented air, after pausing a few minutes; 
*"' od's rabbit it ! I find, after all, I must tell 
you a story I hate to think of." 

^^ Then the sooner you gQ:\ over it the 
better, my friend/' said Munro — '^ so pro- 
ceed/' 

The farmer testified, by a nod, being of 
his opinion, and then proceeded to give 
the purport of his recent conversation with 
Watkins; which Munro did not hear v/ith- 
out much emotion, though without making 
any comments on it. — " For the life of 
me," proceeded Stubbs, '^\ could not drive 
from my mind the pain I felt at the thoughts 
4 of 



88 THE DISCARDED SON. 

of your being obliged, for I knew how 
unhappy it must make you, to take that 
fine youth, Mr Osmond, from the Univer- 
sity before his education was finished. I 
won't say what I wished and wished; be- 
cause, in my mind, when a man can 
only wish, speaking of his goodnature is 
but like a vain boast. This morning, as 
I w.^s still brooding over what Farmer 
Watkins told me, I got a summons to at- 
tend my Lord O'Sinister, who, you know, 
is lately arrived in these parts — It was 
all along cf his Lordship that father and 
I settled on this side the Tweed; but his 
Lordship being desirous of having his land 
cultivated here after our English fashion, 
never rested till he got father and I 
(seeing as how we were reckoned as good 
agriculturists as any in the kingdom) to 
give up a farm we rented from him in 
Derbyshire for one here — But, as I was 
saying, I was summoned to him; and, after 
he had asked me a power of questions 
about this part and that part of his land, 

and 



THE DISCARDED SON. SO 

and so on, and made much of me, for 
though a lord, and a marvellous proud man, 
he can be very courteous; and the prouder 
a rich man is to his equals, why the more 
pleased a poor man is with his affability to 
himself '' 

" No doubt, no doubt,'* cried Munro, 
finding the farmer paused, and looked as if 
he expected him to say something. 

'^ Well, after my Lord, as I said, had 
made much of me,'' resumed the farmer, 
^' he began to question me about this here 
farm of yours, which you must know, per- 
haps you do already, once belonged to 
him, but was sold to a friend who wanted 
to be qualified for a company in the county 
militia, from whose hands, he being a sad 
spendthrift, it soon passed into others, and 
so on, t'll at length, all tattered and torn, 
as one may say, it came into vour^s. ' Far- 
m'^r/ says he, ' who owns H?athwood Farm? 
h:3> it got into any thing of better ha Is 
than it was in when I was last here?* 

'' Has it! repeated I; so then I tells him 

how 



60' THE DlSCAl^DED SON. 

how that it had and all about what yon 
did for it. ' And yho is this Captain or 
Mr. Munro, that yen tell me is so clever 
in the management of land?' said he; so 
I also told him that, and, from thence,, he 
began to ask me question after question 
concerning you. At first I was a little 
shyish or so of answering him, for I don't 
much like, nor never did, talking of other 
people's aiTairs; till/at length, pop it came 
into my head, all of a sudden, that, per- 
haps, as I had told him what a worthy 
gentleman, and what a good subject, and 
a good m.an altogether you were, he might, 
if I also told him how you were straigh- 
tened a little bit or so in your circum- 
stances, lend a hand to help you; and so, 
the thought had no sooner entered my 
brain, than out came every thing I knew^ 
aye, and moreover, every thing I thought 
of you.*' 

"^ Every thing!" involuntarily echoed 
Munro, scarcely knowing whether to be 
pleased or displeased. 

^^^\ye. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 91 

*' Aye, by goles!" cried the farmer; 
•' w hen once I began to tell him how your 
father had used you, and what a different 
one you were yourself, I couldn't have 
stopped myself for the life of me. But^, 
Captain/' suddenly changing his tone of 
exultation into one of submission, '' I 
hope you don't take amiss what I did; it 
was not for the sake of tattling; I have 
already said I spoke of your affairs^ but 
merely in hopes of getting you a friend, 
because I had not the power of being such 
a one to you myself as I knew you wanted 
and deserved/' 

These words determined the feelings of 
Munro; he eagerly grasped the hand of 
the farmer — '' My friend, my friend/* he 
said, perhaps not as articulately as he had 
just before spoken, ^' I believe you; and 
you are, therefore, entitled to my grati- 
tude, be the result of your communication 
respecting me what it may. But I trust 
Lord O'Sinister could not imagine you 
were set on to speak of me — I confess it 

would 



92 THE DISCARDED SON. 

would hurt me if I thought he did;, as at 
any time I would rather make a direot 
than an indirect application for a kind- 
ness." 

'^ Bless yoUj he think a thing of the 
kind] not he indeed; it must have been 
clear enough to him^ even if he had less 
sense than he has^ that what I told him of 
you was all of a sudden thought." 

" Vv'ell^ did he make any observation 
upon it?" 

^' You shall hear — ' Farmer/ says he, lay- 
ing down a cup of coffee he was raising to his 
mouthy ^you have affected me inuch^ by w^hat 
you have told me of your worthy friend. 
Captain Munro; and I promise you/ says 
he, *■ it shan't be my fault if he and I are 
not better acquainted; for/ says he^ (and 
he laid his hand, w^hich I do verily think to 
be as white as Mrs. Munro's, or Miss Eliza- 
beth's, but which, to be sure is no marvel, 
seeing as how% in the course of his whole 
life, I don't suppose he ever did as much 

as 



THE DISCARDED SON. 93 

a& brush a hat for himself); 'for/ says he, 
' my heart warms to a character of his 
kind — but how should it not^ seeing as 
how it is so like my own ; yes^ there is too 
great an analogy/ yes^ that was the word, 
' between his and mine, not to make me 
feel an interest for him' — a sympathy too 
I think he said^ but indeed I won't be po- 
sitive^ for I did not entirely comprehend 
the meaning of all his words; for though, 
as I have already said, I got a good educa- 
tioUj I didn't go as far as the words that are 
of Roman and Grecian extraction, I think 
they call it, as they say all the hard ones 
are. So," continued the farmer, ^* after 
thinking a little on the subject, I thought 
it would only be right and proper to come 
and let you know what passed between 
my Lord and me concerning you, lest, if 
I did not, you might be taken at a nonplus 
by him." 

'^Certainly, my friend, it was right I 
should be acquainted with it; and I thank 
you for the consideration that induced you 

to 



94 THE DISCABDED SON. 

to make the disclosure^ as also for the kind 
interest you take in my concerns." 

'' And you are not in the least angry 
with me?" asked Stubbs^ with an anxious 
look and in a corresponding tone. 

" Angry ! how could you suppose it 
possible I could be angry with a person I 
look upon as a sincere friend? No, the 
motive with me is every thing — he of 
whose wishing to serve me I was assured, 
would be entitled to my gratitude, even 
though he mistook the way." 

^*^Ah, yours is an honest, honest heart. 
Captain!" cried the farmer; '' and I trust 
it will soon be a joyful one; however, I 
say nothing positive about my Lord; he 
may think, and he mayn't think more about 
what he said — he— in short what I Wf^uld 
say is, that it is a bad thing to reckon one's 
chickens before they are hatched." 

'^^ I understand you, my friend; but don't 
fear that I shall draw disappointment upon 
myself, by being too sanguine in my hopes 
-—the season for castle-building is past." 

'' No, 



TliE DISCARDED SON. 9 J 

^'' No, I don't fear your doing any thing 
that is foolish/' replied the farmer, "which 
to be sure it is to place too great a depen- 
dance on the promise of any man, that is> 
of any great man I mean, seeing as how 
they are all bits of courtiers in their hearts, 
I believe: but good ni^ht. Captain; if no- 
thing comes of what has passed, why you 
are only still as you were, and, if there 
does, why then we'll sing. Oh, be joyful, 
and drive old Care away/' 

The reflections to which his conference 
with the farmer gave rise, prevented Muuro 
from returning to the parlour on his 
lea^ing him. Wrapt in thought, musing 
on the consequences which might result 
from the farmer communication respect- 
ing him to Lord O'Sinister, he continued, 
till roused from it by his Wife and daugh- 
ter joining hin. A fear of awaking 
hopes there was no certainty of having 
real'/ed, forbade his touching on ihc 
subject on vvhich he and the- farmer had 
been conversing. The garden in which 

they 



96 THE DISCARDED SOK. 

they had joined him was the favourite 
scene of all at the close of day — here they 
delighted, amidst the fragrance of exhaling 
plants and flowers^ to watch the sun gra- 
dually fading from the summits of the 
mountains, the evening yielding the world 
to night; and to listen to the soft and ex- 
piring sounds, so well according with the 
fading scenery, and ever, in the country, 
the certain precursor of the weary labourer's 
hour of repose. Hither Elizabeth fre- 
quently brought her guitar or harp, from 
both of which she had been taught by her 
mother to draw the most exquisite tones, 
such as sensibility could not hear without 
emotion. 

The kind of sylvan wildness which pre- 
vailed in the garden, was what rendered it 
so particularly pleasing to its owners; it was 
5urge, and encompassed with steep banks, 
completely overspread with shrubwood, 
and topped in many places with old thorns, 
hollies, and blackberry bushes; contiguous 
to the house it was laid out for flowers; 

the 



"?1IE DISCARDED SON. ^7 

(he centre was devoted to vegetables; and 
at the extremity was an orchard, inter- 
spersed with hazel copses: a little rill 
here wildly meandered through the soil, 
till it came to a deep hollow beneath a 
jutting rock, into which it fell, forming 
a spacious pool of limpid water, planted 
round with oziers, in the soft but incessant 
rustlino- of which there is somethino^ of the 
melancholy sound of the JEoYmn harp; nor 
can this be wondered at, since the same 
invisible musician plays on both. 

The next morning, while at breakfast, 
the following]: note was delivered to Munro : 



To Eohert Munro, Esq, 
'' Sir, 

'' It was but yesterday T had 
the pleasure of hearing I had a neighbour 
of your description ; the moment I was 
apprized of the agreeable circumstance, I 
should have hastened to pay my compliments 

VOL. I. F t0 



98 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

to you, but for a sudden attack of the gout^ 
which prevents me, at present^ quitting the 
house; my confinement to it, however, I 
shall less regret than would otherwise be 
the case, if you will now and then favour 
me with your society. The pleasure of 
your company to dinner to-day, at five 
o*clock, will confer a particular obliga- 
tion on, 

" Sir, 
'^ Your most obedient servant, 

'' O'Simster/* 
Firgrote, 
Friday Morning* 



It may readily be imagined Munro had 
no hesitation in accepting this polite in- 
vitation; still, however, he confined to his 
own bosom the hopes it tended to confirm, 
lest, after all, they should be disappointed. 

At the appointed hour he repaired to 
Firgrove, and was ushered into a sump- 
tuous 



THE DISCARDFO SO>T. 99 

tuous drawing-room^ where he was pre- 
sently joined by the Peer^ in his morning 
gown and flannel shoes, for which undress 
illness was his apology. H"3 Lordship 
appeared about fifty, and was, both in 
manners and appearance, the finished gen- 
tleman — to all the politeness of the old 
school uniting all the ease of the new 
one. His features, though somewhat in- 
jured by time, were still handsome; and 
there was an animation and keenness in 
his countenance, which proved him still in 
possession of all the mental vigour of 
youth, and endowed with no small share of 
penetration; he had literally indeed, as 
Shakespeare says, a hawking eye, such as 
seemed calculated to dive into the very 
recesses of the heart. 

His reception of Munro was truly flat- 
tering — they dined icie-d-tete; and, during 
dinner^ and for a short time after the at- 
tendants were withdrawn, the politics of 
the day, the liberal methods lately devised 
for the encouragement of agriculture^ and 
F 2 other 



10.0 THE DISCARDED SOM, 

other useful arts^ were the topics thcj 
principally discussed. The conversation 
then, in consequence of a question or 
two from the Peer to Munro, relative to 
his connections in Scotland, became more 
particular and interesting; till at length 
the former, but in the most delicate man- 
ner, hinted to his guest his perfect know- 
ledge of the cruelty and injustice he had 
met with from his family, aif3 his ardent 
wish to render him a service. 

Notwithstanding Munro's expectation of 
something of this nature, his emotion was 
quite as great at the moment as if he had 
not entertained one of the kind. 

^^ Good Heaven!" he involuntarily and 
mentally exclaimed, '' in how many unex- 
pected wavs does Providence interfere for 
man ! how little, when listening to the 
rough elTusions of Farmer Stubbs's honest 
heart, did I imagine I should ever be in- 
debted to him for a powerful friend!" 

With all the warmth of gratitude he 
thanked the Peer for his proffered kind- 
ness; 



THE DISCARDED SON. 101 

Ress; and now^, the ice being broke, his 
situation was freely and candidly discussed. 
The result of this discussion was^ Lord 
O'Sinister's insisting that Mr. Osmond 
should in future be considered his care^, 
continued at the University for the usual 
time, and immediately instructed to com- 
mence the study of divinity, for the pur- 
pose of qualifying himself for a living of 
considerable value in the gift of his Lord- 
ship, and the incumbent of which Vvas at 
this time so far advanced in life, that it 
might reasonably be expected it would 
soon become vacant. 

" And now, mv worthy vSir," cried Lord 
O'Sinister, w^hen this matter was settled, 
lookino^ at Munro, with a countenance 
beaming with the satisfaction of a well- 
pleased mind, ^^ how c?.n I serve you?'* 

*■' Oh, my Lord, in serving my s^n you 
serve me," replied the greatly agitated 
?vIunro. 

'' Vs^ell, w^ell, that ma} be,'* returned the 

Peer, smilingly, ''but I never approved of 

F 5 parents 



102 THE DISCARDED SON. 

parents being dependent on their children^ 
new connections but too frequently causing 
old one's to be neglected; not J confess, with 
impunity, but the hour of remorse* often ar- 
rives too late; so tell me what kind of 
situation you would like, for I cannot think 
your present laborious one of a farmer^ so 
ill according wnth your former habits^ can 
be pleasing to you.'' 

" It certainly neither is or ever was, my 
Lord, but necessity is. an arbitrary power^ 
at whose shrine inclination is often obliged 
to be immolated."' 

'' What say you to i^turning to your 
former profession?'' 

Munro started, and remained silent for a 
few minutes — '' My Lord/' he then said, 
'' I will be very candid with you ; I should be 
very unwilling to enter into a situation 
that would be liable to separate me from 
my family, as a military one certainly would, 
or else oblige mc to expose them to diffi- 
culties and dangers they are not accus- 
tomed to/* 

'^You 



THE DISCARDED SON. 103 

'* You entirely mistook my meaning/' 
cried Lord O'Sinister with quickness, " if 
you thought I had an idea of offering any 
thing to your acceptance that would re- 
duce you to the alternative of either leav- 
ing your family, or else introducing them 
into scenes of danger — ^^what I meant was, 
merely to know whether, if a military 
appointment that v/ould not render you 
liable to be ordered abroad could be 
procured for you, you would hav^ any 
objection to accept it — for instance, an 
adjutancy of militia?" 

"The thing, of all others, I should like,'' 
replied Munro eagerly, and with a flush of 
joy upon his cheek. 

'' I am truly happy to hear you say so," 
returned his Lordship, '' since I have one 
at my disposal, which, from this moment, I 
consider yours." 

"My Lord, I cannot, cannot," said Munro 
falteringly, and with his hand spread upon 
his labouring breast, " speak the sense I 
have of your kindness." 

f4 ^^Well, 



104 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' Well, vveil/' returned the Peer, with a 
still more expressive smile than he had 
before siven him, '' that it mav not be 
oppressive, I'll point out a v,ay by which 
you may make me some requital for it — 
you see, Mr. Munro, I am what is called a 
plain spoken man, but I love to come to 
the point at once, since I think there can- 
not be a greater proof of folly than ta 
waste minutes, " the fleeting minutes of 
too short a life,'* as the poet jiisily and 
emphatically styles them, which might be 
usefully employed^ in unnecessary punc- 
tilios. If a man can render me a ser- 
vice, I like at once to ask him — will he? if 
I can do him one, I should think myself 
undeserving of any gratitude for it, if I did 
not directly tell him so. The service you 
can render me is by repairing immediately 
to Ireland, in the northern part of wiiicK 
kingdom I have a very considerable pro- 
perty, and endeavouring to conciliate the 
confidence of my dependants and tenants, 
and induce them to acquiesce quietly in the 

measures 



THE DISCARDED SON. 105 

irteasures now pursuing by g(n^ernment for 
raising a railiti:! there, and to which, either 
through ignorance, obstinacy, or the ma- 
chinations of evil-minded persons, perhaps 
all together, they, like the majority of 
the common people, are averse, and 
trying to resist; should they continiic to 
do sOj some blame will probably attach to 
me, as, from the influence my property 
gives me in the county, and my being 
appointed to the command of the regi- 
ment there raising, and in whicli I no^v 
beg you to understand your adjutancy is, 
it will, perhaps, be supposed that if I ex- 
erted myself properly, the reverse would be 
the case. To let government imagine I was 
not anxious to forward their views, v*-ould 
be to do myself a serious, in all probability 
au irreparable injury; yet, notwithstanding 
my thorough conviction of this, I am, at 
this period, so situated, that, without put- 
ting mys'eif to the greatest inconvenience^ 
I cannot go to Ireland; in consequence, I 
have, for some time past^ been looking out 
F 5 for 



lot} THE DISCARDED SDK. 

for some friend, to whom I might safely 
entrust my ii^terests in that quarter; but, 
till nr>w (don't imagine I flatter), did not 
meet with one to whom I thoiio-ht I could: 
my wi^h is, that you should repair directly 
to Ireland, take possession of the mansion- 
house at Temora, and use every means 
in your power to gain, as I have already 
said, the good will of my people there, 
which obtained, all the rest will follow 
of course ; for once obtain the regard 
and confidence of an Irishman, and yon 
may almost persuade him to what you 
please. Will it be inconvenient to you to 
se t o if to- m orro w ? " 

Munro hesitated to reply; there w^as, 'tis 
true, but one obstacle to his immediate 
departure, but that was insurmountable, 
being nothing less than a want of cash, 
that grand mover, now-a-days, both of 
animate and inanimate bodies — a want sa 
painful to the feelings of a man of delicacy 
to disclose, that poor Munro knew not how 
to confess it. From being compelled to 

do 



THE. DISCARDED SON. 107 

I 

do so he was saved by the quick-sighted 
Peer, who, with one half glance of his 
hawking eye, perceived his embarrassment, 
and instantly conjecturing the cause — 
'' Come, come, my dear Mr. Munro," said 
he, laying his hand, as he spoke, upon 
the arm of his again greatly agitated com- 
panion, and regarding him with the most 
smiling and complacent countenance pos- 
sible, '' we must no longer consider our- 
selves as strangers to each other — I have 
already mentioned my being a blunt man; 
the truth therefore is, you at present re- 
quire a little pecuniary assistance." 

''I cannot contradict your Lordship, but 
a few days will, I trust, suffice for the pur- 
pose of enabling me to raise a sufficient 
sum on my farm, to '* 

" Tut, tut!" interposed his Lordship im- 
patiently, '' I beg your pardon Mr. Munra 
for interrupting you, but, before you could 
mortgage an acre in such an out-of-the- 
way place as this, why the Irish militia 
might not only, I am persuaded, be em- 
f6 bodied^ 



JOS THE DISCARDED T^ON". 

bodied, but disembodied and embodied 
again; no, no, dispatch is the soul of busi- 
ness; you must, therefore, permit me to be 
your banker on this occasion — will fi\c 
hundred pounds answer your present exi- 
gencies? speak candidly 1 entreat/' 

"O more; more than answer, my Lord/' 
replied Munro eagerly. 

'' Nay, excuse me for thinlJng differ- 
ent! v; in the first place, you must imny- 
diatelyr provide for your son's prok.iiged 
stay at college; in the next, all that is re- 
quisite to prevent thase you leave at home 
suffering any inconvenience during your 
absence; for, doubtless," contAUied his 
Lordiihip, with encreasing earnestness, 
'' you have no idea of removing your 
family, till comfortably settled with the 
regiment; to do so before^ indeed, would 
be highly improper; and, thirdly, though 
your journey to Ireland will not, or rather, I 
mean, need not, be a very expensive one,yoir 
will find a residence there just at this time ra- 
ther so, as, to facilitate the accomplishment 

of 



THE DISCARDED SON, SO 9 

of the business you are going on, it will be 
necessary for you to entertain a good deal/' 

'^'^ But such a loan, without any security^ 
without specifying any time for the repay- 
ment of it/' said Munro anxiously. 

'' Vv'ellj \vell_, since so scrupulous, so 
over-delicate/' replied Lord O'Sinister, still 
smiling, '' you shall do both — yes, as Shy- 
lock says, you shall sign me n bond^ in a 
merry mood,, but not for a pourd of ilesh." 

'^•^ But when, when, my Lord?" eagerly 
demanded Munro. 

''Why now, or to-morrow, or when you 
return from Ireland, or — whenever you 
please: my steward here has alv;ays bonds 
and stamps of every description lying by 
him," answered the Peer, with seeming 
carelessness. 

'^ Nov/, now then, my Lord, if you 
please,'' cried IVIunro, who felt that he 
should breathe more freely that the obli- 
gations his Lordship had conferred on him 
would sit lighter on his heart when he had 
given an acknowledgment for the sum in 

cjuestion; 



no THE DISCARDED SOX. 

question; ''pray let hini be instructed to 
prepare a bond for my signature/' 

'' Well, since you are so very urgent — 
but really, Mr. Munro, this between 
friends/' pulling a bell, however, as he 
spoke, " is quite unnecessary/' 

On his summons being obeyed^ he oj- 
dered the steward to be sent in: accord- 
ingly in a fev/ minutes he made his appear- 
ance, and, having received the necessary 
instructions respecting the bond, returned 
%vith it by the time coffee was over, and, 
together with an inkstand;, laid it before 
Munro for his signature. 

Munro was stretching out his hand for a 
pen, when the steward suddenly exclaimed 
— '' But, my Lord, you know two persons 
are required to \vitness the execution of a 
bond/' 

'' What a preeise blockhead !" returned 
his Lordship, but without taking his eyes 
off of a fine spaniel with which he was play- 
ing; "have I not told you that that bond 
is a mere matter of form?" 

" By 



THE DISCARDED SON. HI 

''^ By no means, iiy Lord; I neither can 
inyseir, nor wish any other person to look 
upon i\ ns such/' cried Munro. ^' I t'lere- 
fore request another witness may be called/' 

'' Well^ \v^ll, you shall be gratified/' said 
his Lordship^ again applying his hand to 
the bell. 

'''You write, John, I suppose?'' to the 
servant who answered it. 

'' No, my Lord^ no,'' replied John, with 
evident reluctance, and an air of confusion. 

'' But, I presume, some of the other ser- 
vants do," said his Lordship. 

" I don't know, indeed, my Lord, but I'll 
ask as soon as they come in." 

*' In ! why where are they ?" 

'' Gone to a wedding in the neighbour- 
hood, my Lord." 

"A wedding! oh then,, I must excuse 
them." 

'' Especially, my Lord," observed rhe 

steward, " as this business need not be 

delayed on their account, as there is a 

young man now with m.Cj who will 

5 answer 



112 THE DISCARDED SON. 

answer for a witness^ if your Lordship has 
no objection to admit him." 

'' Oh, none in the world, since Mr. Munro 
will have all the legal forms gone through.''/ ^^^ 

The steward accordingly withdrew for 
his visitor, with whom presently returning, 
the bond was legally executed, and de- 
livered to Lord O'Sinister. 

''''Upon my honour (with a laugh) this 
is a good thing," cried he, as he folded up 
the paper; '^ here I have got y.cur bond, 
for a sum you have not received;" he rose 
as he spoke, and, going to an escritoire ia 
a corner of the room, drev/ out a drawer. 
'"'Idon't think, Mr. Munro," pausing here, 
his back rather turned towards him — ''"that 
you looked over this bond?" putting it 
up, however, at the same moment. 

'' No, my Lord, I did not think it neces- 
sary to do so." 

*'No, certainly not, Jenkins is exces- 
sively exact in all matters of this nature; I 
have glanced over it, and find he has strictly 
adhered to his instructions^ rendering it 

payable 



THE DISCARDED SON. ] iS 

pnyable in the course of five years, by in- 
sfahnents of a hundred a-year, of which 
said instalments (in a goodnatured tone) 
you and I will speak hereafter. In the 
mean while I must tell you, that I shall 
expect you'll keep a regular account of 
your disbursements at Temora, that I may 
.settle with you concerning them, as what- 
ever you expend there I shall consider laid 
out on my account." Then locking tip 
the escritoire, and returning to the table^ 
" I believe/' laying some bank-notes before 
him, '' you'll find these right." 

'^Perfectly, perfectly, my Lord," in an 
agitated tone replied Munro, as he crushed 
them in his hand, and put them into his 
waistcoat pocket. 



CHAP. 



114 THE DISCARDED SON. 



CHAP. III. 



** Mow abandoricd is that heart which bulges the tear of inno- 
cence, and is the cause, the fatal cause, of overwhelming the 
spotless soul, and pJunging the yet untainted mind into a sea of 
sorrow and repentance. Though born to protect the fair, docs 
not man act the part of a demon — first alluring by his tempta- 
tions, and then triumphing in his victory : when villainy gets 
the ascendancy, it seldom leaves the wretch till it has thoroughly 
polluted him." 

Sterne's Letters. 

JLiORD O'Sinister resumed his seat and 
the conversation, which the entrance of the 
steward had interrupted: this principally 
treated of the neighbourhood and beauties 
of Temora, which his Lordship represented 
as a very fine seat, and contiguous to the 
sea; so that Munro, on landing at Donagha^ 

dee> 



THE DISCARDED SON. 115 

dee, would have but a short journey to it. 
After a short interval of silence, he sud- 
denly enquired whether Munro had many 
children ? On receiving his reply — " Aye^ 
true, true," said he, ''I now recollect Far- 
mer Stubbs told me you had but a son and 
daughter — Is the young lady younger than 
her brother?'* 

Munro bowled. 

''And a fine girl, I make no doubt; 
well, I hope, Mr. Munro, you won't dislike 
the idea of having an Irishman for a son- 
in-law; for I think it very, probable you 
will, as the Irish are, I assure you, quite as 
capable of forming disinterested, as fer- 
vent attachments." 

"I know they are, my Lord; and, as 
none can admire the warmth of soul and 
generosity that' characterises them more 
than I do, so, of course, I should be happy 
at a connexion with them: the worth of 
the man who may wish to blend his fate 
witK n]y daughter's, and not his country, is 
what I shall look to/* 

The 



lie " THE DI?CAT^Dt:D 501*, 

The Peer testified the warmest approba- 
tion of his sentiments, and then proceeded 
to express the regret he felt at the little 
probability there was of his being able^, at 
this period, owing to illness, and the affairs 
which had brought him into Scotland, 
to pay his compliments to Mrs. Mnnro and 
her fair daughter — '' Should I not, how* 
ever,*' he continued, '' 'tis some consola- 
tion to think, that next summer I may hope 
for the honour of an introduction to them, 
as I then purpose bringing Lady O'Sinister, 
and Miss Athelstone, my daughter, here, 
and so on to Ireland ; in the meanwhile 
you'll oblige me much by presenting my 
compliments to them, and informing them 
it is my earnest request that they ^vould 
make the same use of the oardens here as if 
they weic their own." 

Munro made a suitable reply to this 
obliging speech; and soon after, conclud- 
ing his Lordship must, from the present 
state of his health, wish io retire early to 
repose, arose to take leave, but was com- 
pelled 



fnS DISCARDED SON. 117" 

pelled to resume his seat^ nor suffered to 
depart till he had partaken of a collation 
with the Peer. He then quitted him, with 
a heart overflowing with gratitude — a 
gratitude too great for words, but which 
caused him, as they parted, silently to pray 
that the dews of heaven might fall thick in 
blessings on him. 

He had scarcely passed the outer gate, 
when he felt his arm suddenly seized be- 
hind. He turned round with quickness, 
and though the light was but faint, dis- 
cerned the honest countenance of Farmer 
Stubbs. 

'' Captain, I beg pardon for stopping 
you,"' he cried, '' but — but — " and his 
heart seemed so full he could scarcely 
speak — '' I find," pointing with his thumb 
over his shoulder towards Firgrove, '' you 
have been up at the great house with the 
great man." 

^'With the good man," said Munro em- 
phatically, and laying his hand upon his 
shoulder. '"Farmer," added he, his heart 

dilated 



iiS THE DISCARDED SON. 

dilated with unexpected happiness, and 
warmed by the generous juice of the grape, 
^' give me thy hand."' 

'■'Dang it, that I will, with a heart and a 
half/* answered honest Stubbs, directly 
striking his hand into the extended one of 
Munro. 

Munro pressed it between his — '^ Far- 
mer/' said he, '' may'st thou never stand 
so much in need of a friend as I did; but 
should'st thou — " he paused for an instant, 
and elevated his fine eyes towards heaven, 
'' may'st thou obtain just such a one as 
thou hast been the means of procuring 
.me." 

''Amen, amen!" ejaculated Stubbs sob- 

bingly ; '' and so my Lord O'Sinister 

well, well, he shall, from this time forth, 

be my white-headed boy but. Captain, 

don't — don't ye, I pray, go for to say as 
how you are so much obligated to me; it 
was myself I was obliging when trying to 
oblige you, for I did feel so lumpish when 
I thought of your being forced to bring 

home 



THE DISCARDED SON". 119 

"home that fine youth, Mr. Osmond, be- 
fore but, but we won't look back to 

old grievances ads dads. Captain, if joy- 
made one as light here/' pointing to his 
forehead, ^' as it does here,'' pointing to 
his heart, ''some folks just now might well 
be mistaken for crazy." 

He then, o>wing, Munro could not avoid 
thinkings to an intuitive delicacy not al- 
"ways to be found in persons of a higher 
description, ran off^ without asking a ques- 
tion as to what Lord O'Sinister had done. 

Munro found his wife and daughter sit- 
ting up for him. The joyful tidings he 
had to reveal w^ere soon made known, and 
their joy was unspeakable. 

" Oh what a worthy, what a charming 
man must Lord O'Sinister be!" cried the 
gentle, yet warm-hearted Elizabeth; ''what 
a noble use docs he make of his riches, and 
the power Providence has invested him 
with of doing good! — if all great men were 
like him, there would not be so much 
misery in the world as there is.'* 

" Certainly 



126 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' Certainly not/' returned her father. 

*' Yet/' said Mrs. Miinro, in visible emo- 
tion, and smiling tenderly on her husband^ 
*"' the happiness he has conferred, in the 
present instance, is like human happiness 
in general, not without alloy/' 

*^' iVlloy, my love!" repeated Munro 
eagerly, grasping her hand, and looking 
earnestly in her still beautiful, still interest- 
ing countenance; for, like the rose, in 
losing her bloom, Mrs. Munro did not lose 
all her attractions. 

'' Yes; iov does not what he has done 
for you obiir>e you to leave us?" 

'' But, my love, for so short a time only.'* 

'' Aye, but then you have the sea also 
to cross." 

^^ The seal" repeated Munro Avith a 
laugh, "71 brook, my love, vou mean; 
why the passage between Port Patrick and 
Donaghadee is so short, that if the breeze 
be at all favourable, you may, with ease, in 
the course of one day, breakfast at one, 

din€ 



THE DISCARDED SON. 121 

dine at the other^ and be back time enough 
to sup at the first." 

" Well^ I'm glad to hear this/' said Mrs. 
Munro, hastily wiping away a tear which 
had gathered in her eye — ''my fears 
have made me betray what a bad geogra- 
phist I am.'* 

Thou£fh Munro had never been more 
inclined to social chat^ to domestic con- 
verse, than at this moment, he had too 
little time to make the necessary prepara- 
tions for his departure, which was fixed 
for the ensuing morning, to remain long 
inactive. 

He wrote a circumstantial account of all 
that had lately occurred to his son, con- 
gratulated him on the smiling prospects 
that were now opening to his view, and 
enclosed him a handsome remittance. 

At an early hour the next day he com- 
menced his journey. He drove from his own 
house, followed, till he was completely out 
of sight, by the fond and tearful looks of 
his wife and daughter, to Firgrove, for the 

vcL, I. G purpose 



122 ' THE DISCARDED SON. 

purpose of receiving from the Peer some 
introductory letters to a few of the prin- 
cipal families in the neighbourhood of 
Temora, 

Unsuspicious of deceit^ unforeboding of 
evilj he began and continued his journey — 
a journey which^ though alone, his agree- 
able reflections, and the beautiful and ro- 
mantic scenery it gave him an opportunity 
of beholding, in which the richness of 
summer was just at this period beginning 
to be blended with the verdure of spring, 
prevented his thinking tedious. Many of 
the scenes he beheld in the course of it 
were familiar to his view^ but they were 
such as required not novelty to render 
them charming; and, from the interesting 
remembrances they awakened in his mind, 
were probably contemplated with greater 
pleasure by him than others he had pre- 
viously been unacquainted with. 

Within a few miles of Port Patrick the 

heavens suddenly lowered, and a dreadful 

storm of thunder^ lightning, and rain en- 
sued. 



THE DISCARDED SOX. ] 25 

sued. Munro had soon selfish motives for 
regretting this change in the weather, 
being compelled to expose hiinself to its 
fury, in consequence of the failure of one 
of the wheels of the chaise. By the time 
he reached Port Patrick, he was completely 
wet through. He eagerly entered the first 
inn he came to, but had scarcely done so, 
when^ to his great chagrin, he was in- 
formed, thatj owing to a number of pas- 
sengers having just landed from one of the 
packets, the house was so full, a temporary 
shelter was all he could obtain in it, and 
not even that, except in a room already 
crow^ded. 

Accordingly he enquired for another 
inn, and was directed to one of a very 
humble description, close to the sea. On 
ent^ering this, he found himself in a room, 
which, from the manner it was fitted up, 
answered, he saw, the various purposes of 
hall, parlour, and kitchen: contiguous to 
the fire some rough-looking men, habited 
as sailors, sat drinking; and, at a little dis- 
ci 2 tancc 



124 TIIE DISCARDED SO?C. 

tance from them^ an elderly woman, whose 
immediate approach to him evinced her 
being mistress of the mansion, was busied 
in unpacking a basket of fish on a table. 

Munro, after informing htr of the accident 
he had met with, begged to know wliether 
she could accommodate him for the night? 
On being answered in the affirmative, he 
desired to have a room to himself; and 
was- accordingly conducted up a few stairs 
to one, which instantly brought to his re- 
collection the parlour splendors of that 
belonoinoj to the inn described in the De- 
serted Village — like that, its wall was white- 
washed, its floor nicely sanded, its hearth 
with aspen boughs, and flowers, and fennel 
gay, its chimney-piece ornamented with 
broken tea-cups wisely kept for shew, and 
its furniture consisting of a 

" Varnish'd clock that tick'd behind the door, 
A chest, contriv'd a double debt to pay, 
A bed by night, a chest of drawers by day." 

Munro stood too much in need of a fire 
to have any hesitation in requesting that the 

ornaments 



THE DISCAKDED SON. 1S6 

©rnaments of the hearth might be displaced 
for one. He was immediately obeyed: soon 
after which^ not having dined^, he sat down 
to a dish of the lish he had seen his hostess 
unpacking, and one of potatoes^ with which 
frugal fare, at least so an alderman would 
probably have called it, he was qr.ite as 
Tvell satisfied as if a feast that might have 
vied with a city one had been spread 
before him. 

Dinner over^ and left entirely to his 
own reflections, his spirits, for the first 
time since his departure from home, bei^an 
to flag ; the melancholy howling of the 
wind round the house, the still more me- 
lancholy and monotonous noise of the 
waves breaking on the rochy shore beneath, 
the heavy and threatening clouds that 
scudded before the gale, and rapidly suc- 
ceeding each other, kept the horizon still 
dark and gloom.y, gradually affected him. 

At length, as a means of dispelling the 

melancholy that had thus crept upon him, 

he was induced to tinkle the little bell that 

g3 hung 



J 26 THE DISCAEDED SON. 

hung over his head^ in order to enquire whe- 
ther the landlord;, of whom;, while attending 
at dinner, the landlady had spoken, was yet 
come home, that, if so^, he might have his 
company over a bowl of punch. 

The landlady answered his summons, 
and, replying to his interrogatory relative 
to her husband in the affirmative, was 
desired to send him up; accordingly, in a 
fewniinutes a tall thin elderly man, in (he 
dr^ss of an invalid, with a wooden leg, and 
a small cocked hat on, made his appear- 
ance;, and, literally marching up to the 
table at which Munro was seated, suddenly 
stopped before him, and, Iiaving saluted 
him by putting his hand to his hat, desired 
orders. 

*^ That you should sit down," returned 
Munro, laughing at the appearance of ori- 
ginality he betrayed, '' and partake of this 
bowl of punch, %vhich I assure you does 
credit to }our wife.'* 

** Sir, you are my commanding officer at 
present," the other replied, with a flourish 

of 



THE DISCARDED SON. 127 

of his hand^ " and shall therefore be obey- 
ed." Then takin;^ off his hat he huncr it oi> 
a peg, and look a chair at the table. " Yes^ 
yes/' he continued, alluding to what Miinro 
had just said of his wife, '' like the rest of 
her sex, she knows lioxv to mingle contra- 
dictions; for punch. Sir, one may say, is 
made of contradictions, seeing as how the 
ingredients of which it is composed are all 
of a contrary nature/' 

"True/' cried Muni'o, ''and it therefore 
proves, that, by skilful management, things 
opposite and contradictory in theniselves 
may yet be so blended as to be rendered 
agreeable " 

There are certain signs by which soldiers 
and freemasons discover one another, be 
their habiliments what they miay; the host, 
therefore, had not been many minutes in 
company with Munro ere he was persuaded 
he was conversing with a military man; to 
put the matter, however, out of doubt, he 
enquired, and seemed highly pleased to 
find he was not mistaken, never feeling so 
G 4 happy. 



128 THE mSCARDKU SON. 

happy^ he said, as when in the society of a. 
person, who, like himself, had been of the 
honourable profession of arms — the result 
of this discovery was a long account of the 
service he had seen, »nd which, if he was 
to be believed, had been of the most 
perilous nature, for still his stories ran 

** Of most disastrous chances, 
Of moving accidents by flood arid field, 
Of hair breadth 'scapes i'the imminent deadly breach. 
Of being taken by the insolent foe,'* 

To all of which Munro lent quite as patient, 
though not, perhaps, quite as delighted an 
ear, as Desdemona did to Othello's rela- 
tion of the same: that this was not the 
case, however, he gave no indication ; he 
knew human nature, and, consequently, 
that nothing more galled a man than inat- 
tention to a narrative of which he has 
made himself the hero: but, though he 
neither interrupted, nor discouraged his 
host from proceeding, he scrupled not to 
avail himself of a pause in his conversation 

to 



THE DISCARDED SON. 129 

to try and give a turn to it, by enquiring 
how he liked his neighbours on the op- 
posite side of the water? 

"'Like them ''* repeated the other; "by 
St. Patrick, their own dear saint, I like 
them much, for they spend their money 
like princes, and, as the old song says, on 
friend or on foe never turn their backs " 

" Are they beginning to be better re- 
conciled than they were to the new mili- 
tary establishment forming amongst them ?" 

"T cannot say; but if not already, in 
time I dare say they will, that is, if pro- 
perly managed, by which I mean, if mild 
measures are pursued with them ; for, like 
the man in the fable, about whom there was 
a vvs'^'cr between -the sun and the w^nd, 
blustering measures will never do with 
them; convince their reason, give in a 
little to their humour, and you may, I am 
certain, do almost any thing with them." 

"Knowing this, and how ungenerous in 
any one to attemj^t having recourse to* 
har^h ones.'' 

G 5 *' Yes, 



130 THE DISCARDED SOV. 

" Yes^ and as impolitic as ungenerous; 
since, like the willow, they will reaclilv 
bend if they conceive themselves \vell 
treated, but^ like the sturdy oak, sooner suf- 
fer themselves to be torn by the violence of 
the storm from their native soib than yield 
to it if they imagine otherwise." 

*' You speak well, landlord/' observed 
Munro; '^ from your language I conjec- 
ture the study of arms has not been your 
only one." 

'^^ Why no, master^ no; I had good pa- 
rents, who gave me good learning, and 
once I was quite a bookworm ; but just as 
they were on the point of binding me to 
a good trade, I took it into my head to be 
a soldier, in spite of all they could say or 
do to prevent me, for I was their only 
childj and they thought much — a great 
deal perhaps too much of me — my poor 
mother in particular; but I paid for mv, 
J can't help calling it, disobedience to her 
wishes^ for had 1 staid at home quietly, as 

she 



THJi DISCARDED SON. 131 

she wanted me, I probably/' glancing at 
his wooden leg, '' should have had no oc- 
casion for this; however, if I had no other 
cause of sorrow for not having- done so, 
why I should think nothing of the matter; 
but, at times, when I think that perhaps 
my going to the wars shortened her days, 
why then,'' laying his hand on his breast, 

'^ I have such twitches here, that " but 

suddenly brightening up — " there is no 
use, Caprain, in ripping up old sores — if we 
do wrong, why all we can do is to repent as 
fast as we can, and so the matter is 
settled/' 

He paused, but a deep sigh was ail that 
Munro at the moment had the power of 
uttering, owing to his just then feeling- 
something similar to the twitches he com- 
plained of. 

'' And so. Captain," after a short inter- 
val of silence^ resumed the landlord, ''von 
are now going, for the first time, amongst 
my opposite neighbours?" 

Munro nodded. 

G 6 *' Welt 



1'32 THE DISCARDED SON. 

" Well, if ever we should chance to 
stumble upon one another again, I dare 
say I shall have the pleasure of hearing 
you say you like them much." 

^'l make no doubt you will — but do you 
ever pay them a \i^it?'' 

" O yes, maGter, often; sometimes oii 
one account^ sometimes on another — I am 
glad enough, whenever I have occasion to 
do so^ they are such jolly souls, than 
which there is nothing I like more^ although 
I am not quite as young as I was twenty 
years ago; and, moreover,'' laughing hear- 
tily as he spoke, and laying hold of his 
wooden It-g, "have, Vviih truth it may be 
said, one leg already in the grave/' 

Munro assured him if he came into the 
neighbourhood of Temora, he should be 
happy to see him ; and, after eating a crust 
of bread, and drinking again to the health 
of one another in a tankard of ale^, they 
separated for the night. 

The heavens the ensuing morning wore a 
\ery diflerent aspect to what they had done 

the 



THE DISCARDED SON. 153- 

the preceding night; the sun shcne forth, 
"with all his summer brightness^ the glitter- 
ins: waves seemed thron;>iiJ,Q: and rollino; 
from afar to behold his awful beauty, the 
clearness of the atmosphere permiited the 
wavy outline of the green hills of Erin to 
be distinctly seen^ and the shore resounded 
with the noise of passengers and mariners, 
whilst the packet in which Munro was to 
embark appeared to be dancing on the 
trembling waters^ as if impatient to pur- 
sue its destined course — emblem of youth! 
Etill eai>er, still anxious to rush forward 
into lifC;, reckless of storms, unapprehen- 
sive of danger ! 

" Ohj life!" cried Munro to himself, Tis 
he stood upon the deck of the receding 
vessel, his eyes still turned towards the 
shore, where fancy at the moment had 
conjured up the images of his wife and 
daughter, pursuing, with looks of love and 
wishes for his quick return, his trackless 
course through the waters of the deep — ■ 

'' Oh, 



134 TflE DISCARDED SOX. 

"^^ Oh, life," as he compared his present 
prospects with his late ones, as he reflected 
on the sndden manner in which they had 
been changed^ '' how chequered is thy 
path, how rapid thy vicissitudes ! to-day 
we sink beneath the storm, to-morrow we 
bask in the sunshine — this hour beholds 
us chilled with apprehension, the next 
warmed and enlivened by hope and con- 
fidence — what an argument against des- 
pair! what an equally powerful one against 
presumption! — for, as the drooping flower 
may in an instant be revived, so may the 
proudest edifice be levelled to the dust." 

Having now^ done all that is im. mediately 
requisite for Munro, by giving him a 
smooth sea, a propitious breeze, snd agree- 
able company in the packet, we shall bid 
him adieu for the present, and return to 
Heathwood. 

This separation, the first that promised to 
be of any length which had taken place be- 
tween Munro and his wife since their mar- 
riage. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 135 

rlage, was most acutely felt by the latter; the 
regretj and consequent dejection^ hov;ever, 
it occasioned her, would probably soon ha^ e 
worn away, but that she relished not the 
situation into which he was entering, since 
one, from what she had heard of it, likely, 
she conceived, to engross those hours hi- 
therto devoted to domestic happiness. On 
the subject of her dislike to it, however, she 
touched not to him ; tenderness for his 
feelings, as well as a conviction of the use- 
lessness of the measure, since he had no 
other alternative, withheld her from giving 
utterance to it; but in the hour of emotion 
and melancholy which succeeded his de- 
parture, she involuntarily mentioned it to 
her daughter. 

Elizabeth immediately exerted herself to 
inspire her with more pleasing hopes of 
the future, and had, at length, the satisfac- 
tion of perceiving, that if she had not abso- 
lutely succeeded in doijig this, she had at 
least in rendering her more cheerful. 

The evening after the departure of Munra, 

as 



136 THE DISCARDED SON. 

as they were seated at tea near an open 
windoWj commanding an extensive view of 
the distant country, then glowing with the 
bhish of evening, and round which a beau- 
tiful honeysuckle flaunted, diffusing fra- 
grance through the room, they were some- 
what surprised at beholding a gentleman^ 
rather advanced in life, but of a strikingly 
dignified and fashionable air, approaching 
them through one of the winding walks in 
the shrubbery^ and who, on reaching the 
window at which they sat, took off his hat, 
and, respectfully bowing, entreated, in a 
voice pleasingly modulated, their pardon 
for the liberty he had taken in entering 

their garden to enquire his way to E , 

a small romantically situated village a few 
miles from Heath v/ood. 

Mrs. Munro politely assured him an 
apology on the subject was unnecessary; 
and Elizabeth, who knew all the beaten 
tracks about the neighbourhood much 
better than she did, immediately gave him 
the required direction. He received it 

with 



THE DISCARDED SON. 137 

with gratitude, but also with a look so 
expressive of weariness, that Mrs. Munro, 
who was goodnature itself, invited him to 
enter and take a chair. With evident plea- 
sure^, and many thanks, he accepted this 
invitation. Elizabeth presented him with 
a cup of tea, and a general conversation 
soon took place, in the course of which, 
the stranger displayed much knowledge of 
the world and a highly cultivated mind, 
and spoke of himself as being lately re- 
turned from the continent, totally unac- 
quainted in the neighbourhood, and now 
on a pleasurable tour through the king- 
dom — " Whenever, therefore," said he, '' I 
come to any very agreeable place, such, 

for instance, as E , I make it a point 

to stop there for a few days; and, in order 
to let nothing escape my observation, since, 
if I cannot lay claim (and he smiled) to 
the title of a sentimental, I can at least to 
that of an inquisitive traveller, make my 
excursions about on foot,thoi]gh frequently 
involved in awkward predicaments from, 

doing 



138 THE DISCARDED SON. 

doing so, such as often oblige me fo put 
goodnature and politeness to the test, as 
you^ ladies/' again bowing and smiling;^ 
" have had a recent proof/' 

Elizabeth^ anxious for information, was 
minute in her enquiries relative to his 
travels on the continent. With the most 
obliging readiness he answered these^ again^ 
evidently to afford her gratification, going 
over the principal part of the classic ground 
of Italy, lingering amidst the enchanting 
beauties of Tivoli, prying into the craters 
of Mount Vesuvia.re-examinino- the mao-ni- 
ficent mementoes of Rome's former great- 
ness, and touching on the emotions awa- 
kened in his mind on his first entering that 
celebrated city, once so justly termed the 
mistress of the world — that theatre, where, 
as an elegant wTiter observes, human nature 
has been all that it ever can be, has per- 
formed every thing that it ever can perform, 
has displayed all the virtues, exhibited all 
the vices, brought forth the sublimest 
heroes and the most execrable monsters, has 

been 



THE DISCARDED SON. 139 

been elevated to a Brutus, degraded to a 
Nero, and re-ascended to a Marcus Aurelius.^ 
On the wonders of Etna he also dwelt, its 
vast extent, its boundless prospects, its ice 
impervious to fire, its fire unextinguishable 
w by ice, its eruptive mountains shaded v/ith 
stately forests, the mountains caused by 
these eruptions, the fields of lava, taking 
ages to coolj the traces of the dreadful de- 
predations committed by it, when raging, 
boiling with terrific fury, it has poured 
into the very bosom of the sea, driving 
far back the proud waves, as if to usu-rp 
their place, — '' Scenes of this nature," he 
continued, '' from the mingled horror and 
magnificence which they present to the 
view, the astonishment, the sublime and 
affecting emotions they excite, are infi- 
nitely more successful in impressing the 
mind w^'th reverence for, and devotion to, 
the Creator, than any the most elaborate 
treatises that were ever published for the 
purpose/' 
''Assuredly/' assented Mrs.Munro, ''since 

'tis 



340 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'tis through the medium of the senses the 
feelings are a flee ted." 

In short, the stranger so amused his fair 
auditors, that, on his rising to take leave, 
which was not till twilight grey had in its 
sober livery all things clad, neither were sor- 
ry to hear him ask permission to wait upon 
them again, for the purpose, he said, of 
repeating the acknowledgments their good- 
ness to him had entitled them to. 

Scarcely had he retired, ere a lettier was 
delivered to Mrs. Munro from Lord O 'Si- 
nister, acquainting her of his Lordship's 
being on the point of setting off for Lon- 
don, owing to an unexpected, as also, since 
it prevented his having yet awhile the plea- 
sure of introducing himself to her and her 
amiable daughter, '^in welcome summons 
thither, on business of such importance, as 
compelled him to leave unfinished that 
which had brought him into Scotland; and 
entreating her, as he had previously done 
through the medlu'.n of her husband, to 
make the same use of the library and gar- 
dens 



THE DISCARDED SOK. 141 

dens of Firgrove as if they were her 
own. 

This polite letter failed not to heighten 
the gratitude and esteem w^ith w^hich his 
Lordship had already impressed the sus- 
ceptible minds of the mother and daughter^, 
and both united in regretting not having 
an earlier opportunity than they now 
looked for of expressing the same in per- 
son to him. 

The ensuing evening brought their new 
acquaintance, Mr. Eaton, for so he styled 
himself aoain to Heathwood, and a^ain he 
gave life and variety to the passing hours 
bv his animated conversation. He now 
hinted a probability of his remaining some 
time longer in their neighbourhood, and 
entreated, should this be the case, permis- 
sion from time to time to pay his respects 
to them; this Mrs. Munro had no hesita- 
tion in granting, his manners and appear- 
ance being altogether such as to preclude 
an idea to his prejudice; he seemed to be 
amiable, and Mrs. Munro was too great a 
5 novice 



142 THE DISCARDED SON* 

novice in the ways of the world, too pure, 
too innocent herself, to doubt his being 
other than he appeared. 

Accordingly, from this period, not a 
day passed in which he did not make his 
appearance at Heathwood; and each visit 
rendered the succeeding one still more 
welcome, so pleasing were his manners, so 
lively, so intelligent his conversation. At 
the expiration of a fortnight, as he was 
sitting alone one morning with Mrs. Mun- 
ro, Elizabeth beino; enoaoed in writing: to 

■^ .000 o 

her father, she, for the first time, noticed 
an appearance of thoughtfulneas in his 
looks and manner — she smiled — '' Our re- 
tired neighbourhood is beginning to lose 
its charms in your eyes, I fancy, Mr. 
Eaton," said she. 

'^ On the contrary,'* replied he, with 
quickness, '' every day renders me still 
more attached to it; but it would be strange 
indeed if this were not the case, since never 
have any of my hours passed so delight- 
fully as those spent here — ah, my dear 

Madam, 



THE DISCARDED SOX. 145 

Madam, not to weariness^ but anxiety, is 
owing the depression you have just re- 
marked ! I dread the disappointment of the 
wishes which the contemplation of loveli- 
ness and virtue has inspired me with. Oh, 
Madam V quitting his seat with an agitated 
air, and drawing nearer to Mrs. Munro^ 
*'Mieed I explain the nature of these wishes? 
need I say they point to your lovely 
daughter?" 

" My daughter!" repeated Mrs. Munro 
involuntarily, and with an expression of 
the greatest surprise on her countenance, 
as an idea of his having conceived, or 
being likely to conceive, a passion for her, 
had never, owing to the disparity of their 
ages, entered her head. 

'' Yes^ your angelic, your fascinating 
daughter! she has given birth to a passion 
to which language cannot do justice — a 
passion which, should she reject my suit, 
must entail misery on me, since to conquer 
it is not, I am thoroughly persuaded, in my 
power.'* 

'' Are 



114 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' Are you aware. Sir/' asked Mrs. Munro, 
" that my daughter has no fortune, nei- 
ther any prospect of one?'* 

'' I never bestowed a thought on the 
subject, my dear Madam, for fortune is no 
object to me, my own being more than 
adequate to all my wants; should I be so 
blest as to obtain your daughter, I shall, 
in obtaining her, acquire all I sigh for, the 
possession of consummate loveliness, a 
companion rich in all those intellectual 
endowments calculated to render her a de- 
lightful one, such as could not fail of 
giving her charms in the eyes of taste and 
refinement, even though her personal 
ones were infinitely inferior to what they 
are." 

'''You honour her. Sir, by your favour- 
able sentiments/' 

." O Madam, I honour myself by enter- 
taining such, since the homage we pay to 
w^orth and beauty reflects lustre on our- 
selves, by the evidence it affords of our 
taste and judgment; but (in accents 

apparently 



THE DISCARDED SON. 14'5 

apparently tremulous through emotion) 
do you. Madam, permit me to hope?" 

"It rests not with me to do so, Sir/' an- 
swered Mrs. Munro; " I shall certainly ac- 
quaint my daughter with your proposal, 
but more I cannot promise." 

'' What, not your influence with her in 
my behalf?" 

" No, Sir, since, should that influence be 
requisite, she must be averse to the match; 
and no parent, in my opinion, has a right 
to urge a child to a union contrary io 
their inclination, though certainly one to 
prevent their forming a connection they 
conceive imprudent.'* 

" But young ladies, that is, such very 
young ladies as your daughter,' rejoined 
Mr. Eaton, with rather a disappointed 
look, '' are sometimes so apt to be roman- 
tic, that the interference of friends is often 
essential to their well-doing." 

" Perhaps so; but (smiling) I flatter 
myself my daughter has profited too much 
by the precepts of the best of fathers, not 

VOL. I. H at 



145 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

at all times to let her reason have empire 
over her." 

"Well, Madam, I will not importune 
you to any measure you are averse to, 
neither at present longer intrude on you, 
aware as I am of my agitation being too 
great to allow of my being any thing like 
an agreeable companion. This evening, 
with your permission, I will return hither 
to learn Miss Munro's decision respecting 
me — return literally to learn whether 
my future days are to be happy or i^i- 
serable.'* 

Elizabeth's surprise at the proposal of 
Mr. Eaton fully equalled that which it had 
occasioned her mother, since, like her, she 
had no idea, from the disparity of their 
ages, of any thing of the kind. On reco- 
vering in some degree from this surprise, 
she requested a day to deliberate on it, a 
request which her mother readily granted. 
The result of this deliberation was favour- 
able to the enamoured swain — filial love 
did for him what he wished; she saw her 
3 mother 



THE DISCARDED SON. 147 

mother pining over the idea of quitting 
Heathwood^ from her dislike to the bustle 
and unsettledness of a military life^ as ini- 
mical in her opinion to the enjoyment of 
that domestic tranquillity she delighted in; 
her father too^ she made no doubt^ from 
her knowledge of his disposition, would 
have been better pleased to have obtained 
a situation less likely than his present one 
to interfere with the habits he had con- 
tracted from retirement. For the purpose, 
therefore, of procuring him this, and thus 
removing from the mind of her mother the 
uneasiness that preyed on it, she decided 
on accepting the addresses of Mr. Eaton; 
the fortune she was led to suppose him 
master of, and the liberality of sentiment 
and benevolence he appeared possessed 
of, inducing her to believe that he not only 
could, but would do all she wished for her 
family, provided she became his wife. 

But that she would ever have consented 

to this but for the above consideration, 

admitted not a doubt; not that she disliked 

II 2 Mr, 



148 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Mr. Eaton — on the contrary, she thought 
him extremely amiable, and, of course, 
admired him much — but that she conceived, 
from the difference of their ages, there 
could not exist that congeniality of feeling 
and sentiment between them which she 
had been taught to believe essential to 
domestic felicity; at least that refined and 
exquisite felicity which the heart of sensi- 
bility pants for, and which can only be 
derived from a similarity of taste and feel- 
ing. Still, however, though her lot as the 
wife of Mr. Eaton might not be the hap- 
piest, the high opinion she entertained of 
him permitted her not to fear its being 
absolutely the reverse; and, even if it were, 
she was almost inclined to believe she 
could support it with cheerfulness, if tlie 
consequences she looked to from her 
liiiion with him resulted from it. 

Generosity and delicacy of feeling pre- 
vented her revealing to her mother her 
real motives for acceding to his wishes; 
Mrs. Munro, therefore, felt rather surprised 

at 



THE DISCARDED SON. 149 

af learning her determination on the sub- 
ject, the inequality of their ages having 
inclined her to believe^ that^ as a suitor, 
he could not have proved agreeable. This 
surprise, however, vanished, when she came 
to reflect on the elegance of his manners 
and the cultivation of his mind, and that^ 
though beyond the prime of life, he still, 
to all appearance at least, remained a 
stranger to any of the infirmities of age; 
her prepossession in his favour inducing 
her to believe Elizabeth would have as fair 
a chance of happiness with him as with any 
other person, she rejoiced at her decision 
respecting him being such as she wished, 
more especially when she considered, that 
her union with him would exempt her 
from all future experience of the ills at- 
tendant on narrow circumstances, . those 
ills of which she herself had had, alas! such 
bitter knowledoe. 

The raptures of Mr. Eaton at the ac- 
ceptance of his addresses were too great 
for description, and as the heart of the 
II 3 timid 



150 THJS DISCARDED SON. 

timid and shrinking Elizabeth did not by 
any means participate in them, she would 
have been better pleased^ had they been 
less violent: they were quickly damped, 
however, by her mother's positively refus- 
ing to let their marriage take place until 
her father's consent to it had been obtained. 

'' For, lest you should not be already 
aware of the circumstance," she added, ad- 
dressing Mr. Eaton, " I now deem it ne- 
cessary. Sir, to inform you that my daugh- 
ter's promise to become your's is but a 
conditional one — except ratified by her 
father, it must be considered void." 

'- Well, my dear Madam,'' cried Mr. 
Eaton, with all his wonted animation^ and 
gently seizing her hand as he spoke, "^ if 
you are resolved on putting my patience 
to the test, have the goodness, at least, to 
let the trial be as short as possible, by 
writing immediately to Mr. Munro." 

Such was her intention, Mrs. Munro as- 
sured him. The hopes in which Mr. Eaton 
was allowed to indulge did not, it may be 

concluded. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 151 

concluded, render him a less constant visi- 
tor than usual at Heathwood — he now in- 
deed almost lived ihere. To Mi-s. Munro, 
in whose good opinion he daily gained 
ground, his company was always welcome; 
but Elizabeth would gladly have dispensed 
with so much of it, as, since she had pro- 
mised to become his, her mind became 
frequently oppressed by feelings that made 
her consider the solitude that afforded her 
an opportunity of endeavouring to argue 
herself out of them an indulgence; the 
involuntary repugnance w^hich she at mo- 
ments felt to fulfil the promise she had 
plighted to him, she still tried to conquer, 
by reflecting on the happy change its 
realization would, in all probability, cause 
in the situation of her pare .t ; an' that, 
with a partner at once so enlightened and 
accomplished as he was, her days could 
scarcely pass otherwise than agreeably; 
she did more, she accused herself of caprice 
for harbouring such a repugnance, since 
certainly she could not avoid acknowledg- 
H 4 ing 



152 THE DISCARDED SON. 

lug Mr. Eaton had done nothing to lessee 
the exalted opinion of his merits which had 
induced her to listen to his proposals. 

From her mother she carefully concealed 
whatever had a tendency to give her unea- 
siness;, and, by the uniform complacency 
of her manner to Mr. Eaton^ evinced an 
almost equal regard for his tranquillity. 

At the expected time a letter was re- 
ceived from her father^ in reply to the one 
acquainting him with the overture of Mr. 
Eaton; but, instead of sanctioning her ac- 
ceptance of thiS;, as expected, he positively 
forbade her (to the utter disappointment 
of her lover, as both his looks and words 
testified, as well as to the surprise of Mrs. 
Munro, her ignorance of the deceptions 
common amongst mankind occasioning her 
to wonder at others not placing the same 
faith and confidence in appearances that 
?he did) from thinking more of Mr. Eaton, 
except he brought forward the most un- 
questionable proofs of his being really 
what he had represented himself — " For, 

though 



THE DISCARDED SON. 153 

though incapable of practising art myself," 
observed Munro, " I have not lived so long 
in the world without knowing that there 
are others not equally so; and though 
revolting to my feelings to do any thing 
calculated to wound those of another, stilly 
where the happiness of a child is at stake, 
suth a child too as my Elizabeth, I cannot 
think of acting otherwise than with the 
greatest caution. Mr. Eaton must, there- 
fore, relinquish all hope of obtaining her 
hand, except he proves himself, beyond a 
doubt, worthy of it/' 

'' I must confess,'' said Mr. Eaton, who 
was present at the receipt of this letter, 
and to whom Mrs. Munro, after glancing 
over it, candidlv communicated the con- 
tents, '' I must confess," after a moody 
silence of some minutes, '' I did not look 
for a letter of this kind from Mr. Munro, 
the mind of candour being seldom the seat 
of distrust ; but, perhaps," and suddenly 
ceasing to pace the room, which for some 
minutes he had done, evidently through agi- 
n 5 tat ion. 



iJ4 THE DISCARDED SON. 

tion, " perhaps/' turning a look full of 
scrutiny upon Mrs. MunrO;, " he may have 
grounds for suspicion; some invidious per- 
son in the neighbourhood may have mis- 
represented me to him.'' 

'' Noj I am convinced not/' replied Mrs. 
Munro; "I am certain you have never been 
mentioned to him by any one but myself; 
and the terms in which I wrote of you were 
not calculated/' with a smile of sweetness 
she added, *^'to excite suspicion." 

'' Then, since he is so unjust as to har- 
bour it without cause, I trust you will not 
permit it to have any weight with you: 
complete your goodness to me, convince 
me, beyond a doubt, that you really enter- 
tain the favourable sentiments for me you 
wish to make me believe, and thus entitle 
yourself to my lasting gratitude, by letting 
me no longer sigh for the treasure I am so 
anxious to obtain." 

"No, Sir," replied Mrs. Munro, in a 
decided tone, and with a cold and repelling 
air; *' did I think I had a right, which, 

however. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 155 

however, I by no means do, to act in op- 
position to the wishes of Mr. Munro with 
regard to his daughter, still would I be 
withheld from exercising that rights by the 
conviction I entertain of the superiority 
of his judgment to mine — what he does I 
have ever found to be wisest, virtuousest, 
discreetest, best ; consequentiy, worlds 
should not tempt me to act contrary to his 
wishes/' 

'' What a happy man to have them so 
respected!'' cried Mr. Eaton, but with 
rather a sarcastic smile ; then, after another 
pause of some minutes, during which he 
again paced the room with agitated steps^ 
and a countenance strongly expressive of 
anger, vexation, and resentment — '' well. 
Madam, since Mr. Munro must have un- 
questionable proofs of my being worthy of 
entering his family, ere he admits me to 
that honour, may I hope that the testimo- 
ny of your friend. Lord O'Sinister, in my 
favour will satisfy him?" 

" Assuredly/' returned Mrs. Munro. 

H 6 " Then 



156 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' Then T shall write immediately to a 
relation in London^ who is not only inti- 
mately acquainted, but connected with his 
Lordship, and disclose my present situa- 
tion." 

" And I trust/' rejoined Mrs. Munro, 
whose gentle nature made her feel hurt a* 
his appearing to be so, " that a little reflec- 
tion will prevent your remaining offended 
at Mr. Munro's conduct on this occasion — 
be assured none can do greater justice to 
your merits than he will.'* 

" When once convinced of them,*' added 
he with quickness, and again a sarcastic 
smile. "Well, my dear Madam, ere many 
days elapse, I trust he will be satisfied, that^ 
if I have not qualities to entitle me to his 
admiration, I have at least to his esteem." 

Though Elizabeth was concerned that 
any thing had occurred to wound the 
feelings of Mr. Eaton, still she could not 
bring herself to feel concerned that some- 
thing had occurred to delay their nuptials; 
neither that, from the day h^r father's 

letter 



THE DISCARDED SON. 151 

letter had arrived^ his visits became not 
only shorter, but less frequent than usual^ 
owing, both she and her mother naturally 
concluded;, to some degree of pique. 

As she and her mother were sitting to- 
gether one day at work;, about the time an 
answer was expected to the letter he had 
written to his friend in London — "^ I won- 
der, mother/' said she, suddenly withdraw- 
ing her eyes from the window, whence for 
some minutes she appeared to have been 
earnestly regarding some object, " who 
that gentleman is/* 

- " What gentleman, my dear?" a&ked her 
mother, raising her eyes from her work— 
"do you mean the young man we have 
seen these few days loitering about the 
heath!/' 

Elizabeth bowed; 

'"^ Oh, probably some one induced hj 
the romantic beauties of the neighbour- 
hood to stop a few days in it." 

'' It's strange then that he should confine 
}iis rambles entirely to the heath." 

"Weir, 



158 THE DISCARDED SON. 

*■' Wellj perhaps he may be on a visit at 
one of the cottages.'* 

''No, no, (with vivacity) I cannot be- 
lieve that; his manners are quite too ele- 
gant to permit me to do so/' 

''His manners, my dear!" repeated her 
mother — " why how can you possibly 
know whether they are elegant or not?'* 

" By having had a — a few minutes con- 
versation wath him/' replied Elizabeth, 
stam.mering, blushing, and letting her eyes^ 
drop on her work. 

"A few minutes conversation Vv'ith him !" 
in accents indicative of the greatest sur- 
prise — "and pray when had you an op- 
portunity for this?'* 

"This morning, at the old abbey, tO' 
%vhich I walked before breakfast: as I was 
thoughtfully leaning against one of its 
broken arches, an approaching step made 
me suddenly turn round, and I beheld him 
making his way through one of the aisles; 
somewhat startled, I instantly hurried from 
the spot; he perceived my emotion, and, 

hastening 



THE 'discarded SON. 159 

iiastening after me, entreated me, in ac- 
cents well calculated to dispel it, to excuse 
the alarm he had given me." 

'MVell, and then I suppose ]ei't you?'* 
said Mrs. Munro, rather anxiously. 

'^ No/' returned Elizabeth, but hesi- 
tatingly, and blushing a still deeper dye^, 
*' he — he — continued to walk on with me, 
conversing about the different places in 
the neighbourhood. On coming w^ithin 
sight of home, however, feeling that I 
should appear awkward if I suffered him to 
attend me to the door without asking him 
in, and convinced my doing so would not 
be pleasing to you, I stopped, and told 
him I must then bid him good bye, upon 
which he immediately took leave of me in 
the most respectful manner.'"* 

'' You were right," said her mother, '''in 
not suffering him to accompany you home, 
for, as your father says, young w^omen can- 
not be too circumspect in their conduct.'* 

''Certainly," assented Elizabeth; "he 
is one of those characters, however, I 

think. 



160 THE DISCARDED SON. 

tYiinkj that would not encroach upon any 
civility.'* 

"As far as I can judge, from the distant 
\iew I have had of him, he appeal's to be 
rather handsome," rejoined her mother. 

'' Rather!'' repeated Elizabeth, but evi- 
dently involuntarily — '' he is excessively 
handsome; I never saw a more expressive 
countenance, or finer features: — his eyes in 
particular '' 

^^ Cannot surpass Mr. Eaton's, I am cer- 
tain,'' interrupted Mrs. Munro with a laugh^ 
but rather a forced one. 

'' I beg your pardon, they do indeed; 
Mr. Eaton's are only indicative of pene- 
tratioUj whereas the stranger's possess not 
only an equal degree of keenness, but all 
the brilliancy, the fire of youth, tempered 
by the most pleasing softness, the " 

" Upon my word, my dear," said her 
mother a little archly, and looking sted- 
fastly at her, " 'tis w^ell he is not here, or 
he might be rendered vain by what you 
are saying." 

Elizabeth 



THK DISCARDED SON. IGl 

Elizabeth laughed^ or rather affected to 
laughs for these wordsj by making her re- 
collect herself, occasioned her a degree of 
confusion which nearly overwhelmed her; 
and was rendered still more painful, by a 
fear of its exciting unpleasant suspicions 
in the mind of her m.other. To her great 
relief; the appearance of dinner gave a 
turn to the conversation. 

Mr. Eaton had brought some new pub- 
lications in the morning, and, soon after 
the removal of the cloth, the mother and 
daughter, each taking up a book, seated 
themselves in different parts of the room. 
Mrs. Munro soon became completely ab- 
sorbed by the one she had selected, but the 
thoughts of Elizabeth wandered, of course 
she could not fix her attention to the subject 
she W' as perusing; she accordingly laid aside 
the book in a few minutes, and, softly quit- 
ting the room, repaired to the garden ; here, 
however, she had not long been, when the 
probability there was of her being shortly 
joined by Mr. Eaton, who had said he 

would 



162 THE DISCARDED SON. 

would come at an early hour to tea, and 
with whom she was at present by no means 
inclined to converse, made her hastily 
clamber up a steep ascent at the extremity 
of the garden, and cross over to Firgrove, 
amidst the embowering shades of which she 
delighted to ramble. 

A double chain of verdant and gently 
swelling hills extended through the do- 
main, thickly wooded and watered by a 
number of silvery rills, which, collecting 
towards the extremity of the chain into one 
mighty stream, fell headlong over a rocky 
steep, and, gradually expanding, formed a 
spacious lake at some distance from the 
fall, round which the willow of the lover, and 
the myrtle of the poet clustered, and, with 
several other ornamental trees and shrubs, 
united in giving richness to its banks. 
On the opposite shore luxuriant pastures 
ascended, bespread with flocks and herds; 
and beyond these the frees again thicken- 
ing, formed a seemingly boundless deep 
immensity of shade, here and there admit- 
ting 



THE DISCARDED SON. 163 

ting partial views of the Gothic but mag- 
nificent mansion, and, farther on, of the 
ivy-mantled spires of the ruined abbey, 
whence the boding owl, in strains of me- 
lancholy, still hailed the rising moon. On 
the summit of the cliff, down which the 
waters precipitated themselves, was situated 
a rustic temple, consisting of two apart- 
ments ; the first commanding a view of 
the lake, and the richly diversified scenery 
that stretched beyond it; the other open- 
ing to the wild heights, that rose beetling 
in the rear, purple with heath, and in their 
deep indentures overgrown with hazels, 
hollies, and a variety of wild shrubs and 
plants. This rustic building, and the em- 
bowered walk over the hills, were favourite 
haunts of Elizabeth; their romantic beau- 
ties were congenial to her taste; and still 
more pleasing, if possible, to her was their 
solitude and silence, since allowing her to 
indulge, without interruption, those wak- 
ing dreams of future happiness, so delicious 

to 



164 THE DISCARDED SON. 

to the youthful heart, because unacquainted 
with the fallaciousness of hope. 

To this building she now bent her steps, 
but more through the force of habit than 
any settled intention of entering it; but 
she did not now, as heretofore, lifiger in 
her way, to catch the distant prospects, or 
inhale the scents of the flowers that per^, 
futncd the gale, and tufted the roots of the 
old trees that shadowed the path. 
- To the feelings, however, w^hich occa- 
sioned this indifference to what was wont 
to charm her, she did not submit with im- 
punity; she accused herself of weakness, 
of caprice, of ingratitude, for ever having 
experienced or yielded to such, for ever 
having given way to the discontent, the 
regrets which, for the few last hoiirs, had 
pervaded her mind — ''Yes,** she said to 
herself, " I deserve to be punished for 
indulging (as she could no longer disguise 
to herself having done) reflections inju- 
rious to the generous man to whom I have 

promised 



THE DISCARDED SON. 1G5 

promised to give my hand, for having suf- 
fered myself to draw invidious compari- 
sons between him and a stranger, who may 
have nothing but personal accomplishments 
to recommicnd him: had any force, any 
influence been exerted to induce me to 
plight the promise I have given, my pre- 
sent feelings might perhaps in some de- 
gree be excusable, but, having voluntarily 
pledged it, nothing short of the conviction 
of the worth which led me to do so being 
but imaginary, could at all justify them. 
Oh, why is human nature so wayward! 
why, in the midst of the most smiling pros- 
pects, does the sighing heart still remind us 
of the imperfection of human happiness! 
but I will stifle the sighs of mine," she con- 
tinued, " I will fly from the thoughts that 
gave them birth/' 

Still, however, she continued to linger 
in her favourite haunt, though but too 
conscious its solitude, its silence, rather 
tended to promote than dispel the feelings 

she 



1.66 THE DISCARDED SON. 

she wished to overcome. The crimson 
glow of evening began to fade, its sha- 
dows deepened, and fainter, and less fre- 
quent grew the carol of the birds, but still 
she attempted not to retire^ when suddenly 
she was roused from her pensive reverie by 
the sound of feet in the inner apartment^ 
and, starting from the rustic couch on 
which she had thrown herself, she bent for- 
ward, and beheld the stranger advancing- 
from the door opening to the heights. 

The surprise, the confusion she betrayed 
at the moment, were sufficient to induce a 
belief of his having alarmed her^ a belief 
which his looks and address implied his 
feeling — "^^ I seem destined/' cried he, ea- 
gerly approaching her, and with a smile of 
mingled sweetness and animation, " to 
alarm you — but for the idea of having 
been now so unfortunate as to do so, how 
should I rejoice at this moment.'* 

These words did not tend to lessen 
the emotion of Elizabeth; she trembled, 

blushed 



THE DISCARDED SON. 167 

blushed still more deeply, said something 
that was not perfectly intelligible^ and 
moved involuntarilv towards the door. 

The stranger folio vved — '' Nay/* said he, 
"I shall indeed begin to imagine myself 
an object calculated to inspire terror, if 
my appearance still causes you to hy." 

'' I — I — really. Sir," replied Elizabeth, 
making a vain effort to speak with com- 
posure, '' was about quitting this at the 
instant you appeared." 

'' Well, Madam," but smiling a little 
reproachfully, as if doubtful of the truth 
of this assertion, and presenting his hand to 
assist her down the steps of the temple, '' I 
will not have the temerity to oppose your 
departure, however I may regret its being 
so precipitate." 

" Pray do not let me be the means of 
taking you hence," said Elizabeth, pausing 
on perceiving him appear as if he meant 
to accompany her. 

" I had no settled intention of remaining 
here any time, I assure you, and shall, there- 
fore. 



168 THE DISCARDED SON. 

fore, conceive myself not only honoured 
but obliged, by being permitted to attend 

vou hence." 

■J 

Elizabeth, but with a fluttering heart, 
signified, by a bow, her compliance with 
this request, since to have refused it would 
have been, she conceived, to incur the im- 
putation of distrust or prudery, neither of 
which she liked the thousfhts of beins ac- 
cused of. 



CHAP. 



[THE DISCArvDED SON* 16^ 



CHAP. iV 



** Why he can smile, and murder while he smiles, 
And cry content to that which grieves his heart. 
And wet his checic with artificial tears, 
And frame his face to all occasions." 

Shakespeare. 



JL HE animated remarks of her compa- 
nion convinced Elizabeth he was a stranger 
to the agitation and embarrassment she felt 
at the moment. As they slowly proceeded, 
the tall trees beneath which they walked 
gently rustling in the breeze^ and from the 
adjacent shades the droning beetle flitting 
across their path, he expatiated with rap- 
ture on the scenes by which they were 
surrounded, and the ciibct, particularly at 
VOL. I. I such 



170 THE DISCARDED SON. 

such an hour as the present, they w^re 
calculated to produce upon the mind, of 
the tranquillity they communicated to the 
feelings, and the consequent disposition 
they excite in the mind to receive tender 
impressions — '' Convinced of this/' added 
he, '' I would, had I an inexorable mistress 
(and he smiled a little archly, and looked 
more earnestly than he had before done at 
Elizabeth), endeavour to allure her into 
such, more especially, as a writer, to whose 
opinions I subscribe, has declared, ' the 
lonely mountain, and the silent grove, en- 
crease the susceptibility of the female bo- 
som, inspire the mind with rapturous en- 
thusiasm, and, sooner or later, draw aside 
and subjugate the heart/' 

He paused ; but the reply Elizabeth 
perceived he expected, she hesitated to 
make ; for, though in her heart she allowed 
the justness of the observation, she did not 
like to acknowledge so to him ; on his 
pressing, therefore, for her opinion on the 
subject, she rather evasively said, that to 

be 



TKE DISCARDED SON. 1^71 

be able to form a just one on it, she con- 
ceived it requisite to have iViixed in others. 

^' Pardon rne for dillering from you/* 
returned he; ''but surely one may easily 
conceive that the noise, the agitating pur- 
suits, and dissipation of a metropolis, are 
inimical to those feelings that soften and 
dispose the heart to love." 

'' Perhaps so,** Elizabeth was about re- 
plying, when, to her inexpressible dismay. 
she heard the voice of Mr. Eaton. It in- 
stantly struck her, that, surprised at her 
absence, after having announced his inten- 
tion of paying her an early visit, he had 
come in quest of her; and ihat to find her 
with such a companion could scarcely fail 
of exciting the most injurious suspicions 
in his breast concerning her. 

Terrified at the idea, she directly hastened 
from the ])ath she was pursuing, nor paused 
till she had got to a considerable distance 
from it; when, in much agitation, she mo- 
tioned to the stranger, who, with astonish- 
1 2 ment 



172 THE DISCARDED SON. 

ment in his looks, had followed her flying 
steps, to leave her. 

''Good Heavens'/' he exclaimed, turn- 
ing pale, '' have I then been so unfortunate 
as to offend you ? — so unfortunate as to in- 
spire disgust and abhorrence where I wished 
to excite such very different sentiments?'* 

^' No, Sir, no," said Elizabeth, endea- 
vouring, from her anxiety to dispel the 
strange ideas she conceived he might form 
of her conduct, to speak in a collected 
tone, '' but I am now near home, and, there- 
fore 'r 

" I understand you. Madam," slightly 
bowing, and in rather a reproachful tone, 
he cried, on finding she paused; '' you deem 
me presumptuous, I see — could you look 
into my heart, you would acquit me of 
being so." 

'' You err in thinking such a thing,'* 
said Elizabeth involuntarily. 

*' Indeed!" exclaimed he with rapture, 
and a cheek suffused with its rich glow, 

'' then 



THE DISCAr.DED SON. 173 

'' then why this impatience to banish me 
your presence?'* 

Elizabeth, with encrcased confusion, bent 
her eves to the ground, and^ unable to 
reply to this question, mechanically moved 
forw^ard. 

The stranger opposed her progress — 
'*" Nay, be not displeased," cried he, ob- 
serving her about speaking with an air of 
anger, '' I mean not to act contrary to your 
wishes; but, at the same time, cannot pre- 
vail on myself to neglect making use of so 
favourable an opportunity as the present 
for revealing: mv own — for avowins: the 
admiration, the passion with which you 
have inspired me. Yes, enchanting girl/' 
suddenly seizing her hand^ and pressing it 
to his throbbing heart, while with eyes 
beam.ing with love he sought her downcast 
ones, ''you are the magnet that has de- 
tained me amongst these shades— I saw you 
by chance, but, sudden and transient as 
was the view, your charms made an im- 
pression on m.y heart, which is, I am con- 
1 3 vinced. 



174 THE DISCARDED SON. 

vinced^ indelible; nor did I endeavour to 
subdue it when, on enquiry^ I found you 
were single, at liberty to (here it may be 
requisite to mention that neither Mr. 
Eaton's visits nor overtures to Elizabeth 
were known in the neighbourhood) receive 
the addresses of a lover/' — Elizabeth started 
at these words, and, turning deadly pale, 
with difficulty prevented herself from re- 
peating this last expression. '' Elad I 
obeyed the dictates of passion," he conti- 
nued, in too much ernotion at the moment 
to notice hers, *' I should immediately 
have tried to make my Vy^ay to your feet, 
but, unknown as I was to any one who 
could properly introduce me to you, I 
feared, by precipitancy, to incur tlie im- 
putation of temerity, and therefore resisted 
those dictates. At the moment we met 
this evening, I wms revolving the manner in 
which I could best introduce myself to you, 
whether by letter, or by watching fcr an op- 
portunity of speaking to vou — my wishes 
are, to be allowed to wait on you to-mor- 

ro w. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 175 

row, and to your friends reveal what my 
pretensions are to your favour — have I 
your permission/"' and he looked anxiously 
in her face, '' to do so?" 

Elizabeth could not immediately reply — 
never had she been so cruelly agitated, 
never as at this moment, when she saw that 
all that happiness which she ha<l pictured 
to herself must be the result of the uniori 
of- enamoured hearts and congenial minds 
might have been hers — "And ah, v;hy, why 
was I so precipitate in engaging myself!" 
she inwardly and involuntarily exclaimed; 
" why not allow myself greater time to in- 
vestigate the nature of my feelings, and 
thus ascertain the effect likely to be pro- 
duced on them, by beholding a being ac- 
cording in every respect with th(i ideas I 
had formed of perfection? — But how vain, 
how improper these regrets! the die is 
cast, my faith is plighted, and both virtue 
and reason require that I should make 
every effort to reconcile myself to the fate 
that awaits me/* 

1 4 '' Your 



176 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' Your favciirable sentiments^ Sir/' she 
at length, but in faltering accents, said^ 
" are flattering, but ill should I deserve 
such, if I did not candidly inform you. 
that -" 

'' Oh, do not doom me to despair!" he 
passionately interrupted, and again seizing 
the hand which she had withdrawn^ '^'^ if so 
unfortunate as to have failed of exciting 
any thing like a similar prepossabsion in 
my favour, grant me at least opportuni- 
ties for trying to recommend myself to 
you." 

'' Impossible, impossible," she was on 
the point of saying, when again the 
voice of Mr. Eaton, evidently descending 
the hill, reached her ear, and closed her 
lips: wresting her hand from the stranger, 
she darted forward, but had not got many 
yards, when, overtaking her, he caught her 
by the robe and stopped her. 

" Will vou then, by flving me in this 
niar.ner, have the cruelty to let me imagine 

myself 



THE DISCARDED SON. 177 

myself an object of abhorrence to you?" 
he cried. 

'' If — if you ^vish I should ever speak to 
you again/* said Elizabeth, confused and 
struggling to free herself^ '' do not detain, 
me now; should we meet again, I shall ex- 
plain why I am so anxious now^ to go." 

'^Should we ever meet again!" he re- 
peated; '' I shall know no peace till we do^ 
for you have conjiu'cd up fear^ that tor- 
ture me." Then relinquishing his hold — 
'^ I no longer oppose your departure. 
Madam," he added ; '' but remember, of all 
states susDense is the most painful; and be 
not therefore surprised if I seek for an 
opportunity of having mine quickly ter- 
minated." 

Elizabeth, without replying, hurried 
forward, nor again paused till she found 
herself at hom.e. Meeting the servant in the 
hall, she asked concerning Mr. Eaton; and^ 
finding he was not yet come, neither that 
her mother had made any enquiry about 
her, she repaired to her chamber, for the 
1 5 purpose; 



178 THE DISCARDED SON. 

purpose of trying to regain composure^ ere 
she made her appearance in the parlour. 

Some time elapsed ere she succeeded in 
her efforts for this; nor did she quit her 
chamber till summoned to tea. She found 
Mr. Eaton in the parlour, and conversing 
in his usual manner with her mother; and 
from every circumstance felt convinced that 
he had not been to Firgrove on her ac- 
count. Though never less inclined to con- 
versation^ or to receive the attentions of 
Mr. Eaton, she forced herself to join in 
one, and receive the other^ with her usual 
complacency; so painful, however, were 
the efforts she was compelled to make for 
the purpose, that she could not help re- 
joicing when she saw him take up his hat 
to retire. 

As soon as he was gone, she candidly^, 
although not unhesitatingly, acquainted 
her mother with her second interview with 
the stranger, and all that had occurred in 
the course of it. 

The communication occasioned ?vlrs. 

Munro 



THE DISCARDED SON. 179 

Mimro not a little surprise^ and would have 
caused her an equal degree of pain^ had 
she at all suspected the feelings with which 
it was made; this, however, Elizabeth took 
such care to prevent, that she had not the 
sliohtest idea of the stranger i;?ivin«: made 
any impression on her heart. Siie highly 
approved her conduct towards him, and 
expressed a hope of her having shortly an 
opportunity of informing him of her en- 
gagement, should they find, which, how- 
ever, from the discoura.oino- manner in' 
which his declaration had been received 
by her, she was rather inclined to think 
they should not, that he still lingered in 
the neighbourhood. 

Elizabeth's self-reproaches were renewed 
on retiring to her chamber — '' But I vvili 
atone for my error," she cried, vv^hile tears 
fell from her, '' by henceforth flying 
from all that has a tendency to make me 
repeat it — yes, from this instant I will se- 
dulously struggle against every feeling cal- 
culated to render me unworthy in my own 
I 6 eyes^ 



180 THE DISCARDED SON. 

eyes, or the eyes of those whose esteem I 
value/' 

Spite, howeveit, of this resolution, the 
thoughts of poor Elizabeth would stray 
beyond the limits she prescribed them, and 
fancy persisted in suggesting to her the 
happiness which, but for her hasty engage- 
ment to Mr. Eaton, might have been hers. 
The pangs which this suggestion occa- 
sioned were not lessened by any reflection 
on the possibility there was of the young 
stranger being other than his appearance 
proclaimed him; had such a one, however,, 
occurred, it v/ould not, in all probability, 
have been attended to, so prepossessmgwere 
his looks and manners — the former all ani- 
mation and intelligence, the latter lively 
and insinuating. 

To a figure of commanding height and 
fine proportion, characterised by an air of 
dignity and fashion, he united a counte- 
nance full of sweetness, sensibility, and 
candour; his smile proclaimed a heart of 
benevolence; his dark eyes a proud and 
I noble 



THE DISCARDED SON. 18 I 

noble spirit, calculated alike to avvx and 
conciliate; in short, his was 

" A combination, and a form indeed, 
Where every god did seem to set his seal. 
To give the world assurance of a man." 

Uninclined to rest, Elizabeth seated her- 
self at an open window. In another frame 
of mind, and the Sv-rene w^ithout would have 
communicated the most delicious feelin^^s 
to her bosom; as it Vv^as, she could not gaze 
upon the starry heavens,, or the full- orbed 
moon rising majestically over the broom- 
clad heights, and extending its silver 
beams athwart the landscape, inhale the 
dewy freshness of the exhaling shrubs and 
flov/ers, or listen to the soft sighing of the 
night-breeze amidst the foliage, without a 
sensation of pleasure — but pleasure, 'tis 
true, of a melancholy nature; and rendered 
still more so by the solemn silence of the 
hour, the monotonous noise of distant 
waters, and, at intervals, the liollow bark of 

the 



IBS' TliE DIvSCAKD-ED SOX. 

the watchful house-dog, the centincl- of 
the farmer. 

From lier contemplative attitude Eliza- 
beth was suddenly roused by a thick cloud 
of smoke rolling pa.:t her window^ and a 
strong smell of fire: not a little alarmed^ 
she flew from her chamber towards her mo- 
ther'Sj w^henee the smoke appeared to issue. 
In vain, however, she strove to enter it, a 
hot and suffocating sm.oke filling the ad- 
joining gallery, which, spite of her efforts 
to advance, forced her to retreat : siie 
shrieked aloud, and was running to the 
servants apartments, when a violent knock- 
ing at the hajl door induced i^er to fiy thi- 
ther — with trembling hands she drew back 
the bolts, and admitted, not, as she ex- 
pected, some of ihc neighbouring rustics, 
but the youn<r stranjjer. She involuntarilv 
Started at beholding him, but, almost in- 
stantly recovering from i\\Q, emotion his 
unexpected appearance occasioned, ac- 
quainted him with i'^i^ danger of her mo- 
ther^ 



THE DISCARDED SON. 1S3 

ther, and conjured him to try and save her. 
He needed no reiterated entreaty to induce 
him to do this; guided by her voice, he 
hastily ascended the stairs^ and^ rushing 
through the smoke, quickly reappeared 
with Mrs. Munro in his arms, enveloped in 
her nio'ht-gown, and in a state of insensi- 
bilitv. CommittinG: her to tiie care of her 
daughter, he hurried oiT to assist the ser- 
vants (whO;, roused by the outcries of Eli- 
zabeth, were by this time risen) in extin- 
guishing the fire, the red glare of which 
was now visible through the smoke. In a 
short time, but principally owiiig to his 
exertions, it was got under^ without doing 
any farther irjury than consuming a few 
boards communicating with the flooring of 
Mrs. Munro s chamber; but from which 
circumstance it was evident^ that if not 
taken at the moment it v/as, it would have 
spread beyond the possibility of being sub- 
dued. Hovv it could have originated where 
it did, was a matter of no less astonishment 
and conjecture than consternation to the 

fiamily. 



184 THE DlSCARDExO SOX». 

family, it being perfectly well recollected 
by all, that not a person bad been through 
the orallery that nii-ht with a lio^ht but Mrs. 
Miinr); and beside, that had it been oc- 
casioned bv a soark from her candle, it 
must have burst out long before it did, as 
there was nothins: in the g-allerv in which 
h could have lain smothered for any time. 
The mystery^ however, was at length solved^ 
by a recently extinguished brand being 
discovered by the stranger close to a win- 
dow near her chamber door, ^vhich, owing 
to the heat of the weather, had for some 
nights past been left open, and through 
which it was evident it had been flung. 

The conviction imparted by this disco- 
very, of having some secret enemy, ago- 
nized ^Irs. Munro, v/ho speedily reco- 
vered her senses, which the siifTocating at- 
mosphere of her cham.ber had deprived her 
of, at the moment she was endeavouring, 
in consequence of being roused by the 
shrieks of her daughter, to gain the door, 
beyond description. 

*^ Against 



THE DISCARDED SON. 185 

"Against an open foe/' she cried, ''one 
may be guarded, but against an ambushed 
one 'tis next to impossible. — Gracious Hea- 
ven ! I sicken with apprehension at the idea 
of what may yet be attempted by a person 
capable of devising so diabolical a scheme ! 
How dreadful, the absence of Mr. Munro at 
such a juncture!" 

" Pardon me, my dear Madam/' said the 
stranger, with much vivacity, '' for saying, 
that, after the striking proof you have just 
received of being tiie immediate care of 
Providence, these fears oug'it not to l:e 
indulged; allow me also to add, that you 
vill center an obligation on me^ by em- 
powering me to make those enquiries re- 
lative to this aflair, which Mr. Munro would 
doubtless deem necessary if here." 

This, however, was a request;, which, 
after his avowal to her daughter, propriety 
forbade her to comply with; but the gra- 
titude she owed him, as the preserver of 
her life, would not allow her to refuse 
seeing him the next morning, especially 

as 



1S6 THE DISCARDED SON. 

as it was her determination then to give 
her daughter an opportunity of informing 
him how she w^as situated, should he con- 
tinue at all particular in his conduct to 
her. 

. He received this permission with spark- 
ling eyes, and a gljtnce at Elizabeth, which 
convinced her he augured favourably from 
the circumstance ; she sighed at the idea^well 
knowing, that in proportion to the san- 
guineness of hope is the bitterness of dis- 
r<ppointmcnt. 

As soon as the agitation of Mrs. Munro 
had somewhat subsided, she enquired to 
v/hat was owing his having so fortunately 
discovered their danger ? and, in reply, 
learnt, entirely to his being tempted to 
stay out beyond the usual hour by the 
fineness of the niglit. 

At length he departed, but not without 
repeating his intention of waiting on them 
the next day. 

Neither mother nor daughter could think 
of rest any more that night — the danger 

they 



THE DISCARDED SON. 187 

the}' had so narrowly escaped^ the horror 
with which their minds were impressed, by 
the idea of having a secret enemy, totally 
precluded sleep; in vain they endeavoured 
to conjecture who this enemy could be — 
they could not recollect a being from 
whom they deserved aught but kindness 
and goodwill — " L^t the consciousness of 
this, therefore, mv dear mother, tranquil- 
lize your ypirits," said Elizabeth, at length 
making an effort to conquer her own agi- 
tation, for the purpose of endeavouring to 
calm her mother's; " those who have no- 
thing to reproach themselves with, may 
surely rely v;ith confidence on the protec- 
tion of Heaven." 

'' No doubt,'* returned her mother; *'it 
would, however, I confess, be a satisfaction 
to me, to know exactly the quarter in 
which we have cause for apprehension." 

*' If yon accepted the services of the 
stranger, I think it probable you shortly 
would," said Elizabeth, ^' for he appears to 
be one of those characters whom neither 

trouble 



188 THE DISCARDED SON'. 

trouble nor difficulty can deter n'om perse- 
veririg in any cause they undertake/' 

*' He does; I ^hal, however, iQ%t sat'sfied 
with those of Mr. Laton on this occasion, 
(Mrs. Munro always seemed to make it a 
point to mention this gentleman whenever 
the young stranp:er was spoken of)— ^Foor 
man^ how greatly will he be affected when 
he hears the danf^rr we wr^re in !" 

*' Yes/' replied Elizabeth ; '' but so must 
every one possessed of humanity/' 

The next mornin?, just as they were 
dressing for breakfast, a letter, directed in 
an unknown hand, was brought from i^r\e 
post-office to Mrs. Munro. She desired 
Elizabeth to open it. Accordingly break- 
ing the seal, she read aloud as follows: 



''Madam, 

*^'The lines that now meet 
your eye are the dictates of a heart fervent 
in its devotion to virtue, zealous in the 

cause 



THE BISCAHDED SON. 189 

cause of innocence; let this assurance, 
therefore;, induce you to pay attention to 
the warning they convey. One of the most 
artful, the most unprincipled of men, has 
found means of introducing himself to 
your notice — introducing himself for the 
diabolical purpose of ensnaring the inno- 
cence of your daughter: as you value the 
preservation of that innocence, as you 
v/ish to retain the applauding testimony 
of your own conscience, let not vour door 
again be opened to the traitor — let not his 
pestilential breath again approach the 
flower, whose sw^eetness he would rifle; 
his licentious eve again gaze upon the 
cheek, whose virgin blush he would anni- 
hilate; his treacherous tongue again pour 
poison into the ear of- purity. That his 
nefarious schemes may in every other in- 
stance, as in this, be disappointed, the do- 
mestic happiness he now aims to des- 
troy, continue unimpaired, is the sincere 
wish of one, who, in avowing himself the 
friend of innocence and vntiie, avows him- 
self 



150 THE DISCARDED SON. 

self the friend of Mrs. Munro and her lovely 
.daughter." 



'^'^Good Heavens ! " exclaimed Mrs. MunrOj 
eagerly grasping the letter, ''who could 
have imagined such a thing! Who could 
have thought him such a villain \" 

'' Who, mother?" tremblingly^ and pale 
as death, asked Elizabeth. 

'' The stranger — Vvho else could vou 
suppose?" 

''Why, I think one cannot be certain 
that it alludes to him," replied Elizabeth, 
but in tremulous accents and with down- 
cast eyes — " one may just as well imagine 
that it alludes to — to — --" 

" Mr. Eaton, I suppose you would say — 
oh, my dear girl (in a reproachful tone), 
how could you admit such an idea?" 

" I should be sorry to do injustice to 
any one," returned Elizabeth; "but, in 
realitv, Mr. Eaton is almost as great a 



stranger to us as him we style so. 



^'But 



THE DISCARDED SON. 191 

'' But his age, his manners, his conver- 
sation, above all, the testimonial he has 
promised to produce from Lord O'Sinister, 
of being what he has represented himself, 
convince me he is not the person alluded 
to in this letter — no, no, 'tis the stranger I 
am certain; and we need give ourselves 
no further trouble about the affair of last 
night, since I have not a doubt of his being 
the incendiary." 

''And to what motive can you ascribe 
such wickedness?" asked Elizabeth. 

'' Entirelv to his wishins: to obtain an 
opportunity of doing something which 
should lead us to believe we owed him an 
obligation, in consequence of his despair- 
ing, from your manner, of otherwise re- 
ceivinc: Dermission to visit here: but he 

O 1 

shall find, from this being denied him, that 
he has no cause to triumph in his villainy — 
that if not absolutely detected, 'tis at least 
suspected." 

Elizabeth sighed — she could not deny 
that circumstances made against him: still, 

however^ 



192 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

however, the reflection that he might be 
innocent, and, if so, of the ingratitude he 
must accuse them of, on finding their door 
closed against him, without any reason 
for its being so assigned — the indignation 
^vith which, in that case, such conduct must 
inspire him, made her wish that her mother 
would not give way entirely to the suppo- 
sition of his beina: ouilty. 

At length, by dint of supplication, she 
prevailed on her to let her not seeing him 
be excused by the plea of indisposition. 
Scarcely had she gained this point, w^hen 
she saw him approaching the house; in a 
few minutes after, the servant entered the 
chamber with a card, on which were writ- 
ten the following lines with a pencil: 



'' The disappointment of Cap- 
tain Delacour, at not obtaining a personal 
opportunity of paying his respects to Mrs. 
and Miss Munro, is not a little ao^ravatcd 
by the cause of it; but, though denied the 

pleasure 
5 



THE DISCARDED SON. 1 §3 

pleasure of an immediate interviev; with 
them, he trusts he shall not be denied the 
pleasure of immediately employing himself 
in their service." 



To this address .Mrs. Munro^ after a little 
hesitation^, returned the following answer: 



''Mrs. and Miss Munro unite 
in requesting Capt. Delacour to accept 
their thanks for his politeness, which, how- 
ever, they must positively decline putting 
to any further test." 



^' Well, if any circumstance occurs to 
prove him the v^retch he is now suspected 
of being, never," said Elizabeth with so- 
lemn earnestness, as she beheld him wnth 
an air of disappointment quitting the house, 
*' never, never^" her fancy still dwelling 
VOL. I. K on 



194 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

on the noble expression of his counte- 
nance, the candour, sweetness, and sen- 
sibility of which it was indicative, '* will 
I again place faith in appearances/* 

Her mother acknowledged, that, to have 
judged of him from his looks, she should 
have considered him one of the most 
amiable of human beings; but, notwith- 
standing their testimony in his favour, 
avowed her belief of his being one of the 
most worthless. 

The conversation relative to him was 
interrupted by the unexpected arrival of 
Mr. Eaton, who seldom called of a morn- 
ing. The occurrence of the preceding 
night Mrs. Munro conceived she could not 
keep from his knowledge; but with regard 
to the anonymous letter she resolved to be 
silent, lest the disclosure of it should be 
the means of involving him in danger. 
He hearkened to the particulars she com- 
municated with an agitated air, and a vary- 
ing countenance; and scarcely suffered her 
to conclude, ere he made an effort to 

depart. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 195 

depart, for the purpose, he said, of enquir- 
ing into the affair. This intention Mrs. 
Munro strongly opposed, but without 
saying why ; and, at length, prevailed on 
him to relinquish it. By degrees he be- 
came tranquillized; and, as he recovered 
his tranquillity, grew extremely inquisitive 
about the young man (so Mrs. Munro 
styled Captain Delacour) who had been so 
instrumental to her preservation. His en- 
quiries, however, relative to him remained 
unanswered; and, but whether ov,ing to this 
circumstance, or to any other secret cause 
of uneasiness, he suddenly became gloomy 
and abstracted, and abruptly departed; 
not, however, without first signifying his 
intention of returning in the evening, and 
expressing a hope of then having the 
letter, he was now in daily expectation of 
receiving from his friend in London, to 
produce. 

The mention of this letter, or rather the 

idea of the event she expected it to lead 

to, sickened the heart of Elizabeth. Pale^ 

K 2 melancholy. 



196 -THE DISCARDED SON. 

melancholy, desponding, she continued 
leaning against a window after the depar- 
ture of Mr. Eaton, lost to external objects, 
till the trampling of horses roused her from 
her reverie; when, raising her eyes, she 
beheld Captain Delacour riding across the 
heath, attended by a groom. It instantly 
occurred to her that he was quitting the 
neighbourhood, an idea which occasioned 
her a pang, that excited self-reproaches 
sufficiently severe to draw a flood of 
tears from her. To conceal these from 
observation, aware that if noticed they 
would lead to enquiries she could not 
answer, she fled to the garden; but had not 
been long there, when the sound of a car- 
riage stopping at the house made her 
hasten back through curiosity; and, to her 
unutterable astonishment, the first object 
that met her eyes, on entering the hall, 
was her father. 

We shall enter into no particulars, being 
totally irrelative to this story, of the man- 
ner in which Munro was occupied or 

situated 



THE DISCARDED SON. 197 

situated in Ireland; suffice it to say, that 
one evening, as he was indulging in a soli- 
tary ramble, for the purpose of meditating 
on the dear connexions at home, and anti- 
cipating the happiness they should all ex- 
perience when again re-united, a gun was 
discharged at him through a hedge, near 
which he was walking, and he instantly fell. 
He felt he was wounded^ but where, the 
universal shj^ck his frame had received pre- 
vented him for a moment from ascertaining. 
He then perceived it was in his leg, and, sit- 
ting up, took out his handkerchief to bind 
round it. While thus employed, a hasty 
step made him raise his eyes, and he beheld 
a man, in appearance a ruf^an, running 
towards him with a gun. On perceiving 
him, he no longer attributed the 'njury he 
had met with to accident, as at first he had 
been inclined to do; and, under the per- 
suasion of his life being threatened, made 
an effort, but an unsuccessful one, to rise. 
Within a few paces of him the ruffian 
suddenly turned the gun, and with the but 
K 3 end 



198 THH DISCARDED SON. 

end of it aimed a blow at his head — " O vil- 
lain!" exclaimed Miinro, with a wild and 
Hashing eye, throwing up his hands as he 
spoke to ward off the impending blow. 
It must, however, have fallen, his position 
being too awkward a one to permit his 
parrying it effectually, but that, at the very 
moment it was descending, the gun was 
knocked out of the murderous hands that 
held it by the blow of a cudgel, and the 
villain instantly fied. 

For a minute Munro lost the power of 
perception; on regaining it, he beheld an 
elderly man bending over him, in v^'hose 
features, at a second glance, he recognised 
those of his mutilated host of Port-Patrick. 

"Good God," he exclaimed, ''what does 
all this mean?" 

" It means," replied the other, " that 
you are the care, as indeed we are led to 
believe the good ever are, of Providence — 
your life was attempted by a villain, and I 
arrived just in time to save it. Your ho- 
nour may remember, that^ as you were 

stepping 



THE DISCARDED SON, 199' 

Stepping into the boat^ I told von, the first 
time I came to this side^, I would make bold 
to call upon you; I was in my way to do 

thisj when I stumbled upon you here ^but 

come. Captain, let us hasten to the house 
for assistance; with the aid of my arm, and 
this stout cudgel, don't you think you can 
make a shift to walk thither?" 

" To hobble, my friend," replied Munro 
w^ith a faint smile, as with his assistance he 
rose from the ground. 

With difticulty they reached it. They 
found the hall door open, and Munro^ 
turning into the first room he came to^ 
rang for a servant. 

His summons vras answered by a man 
who lived at Temora in capacity of steward, 
a fellow of surly manners, and most unpre- 
possessing countenance ; insomuch, that 
Munro had conceived a strong prejudice 
against him, now not a little strengthened 
by the suspicions, which the terror and 
confusion he betrayed at seeing him ex- 
cited^ of his having had some hand in 
K 4 the 



200 THE DISCARDED SON. 

the recent affair; the disclosure of these 
suspicions prudence^ however, now for- 
bade; and^ accordingly, till completely out 
of his power, Munro determined not to 
give a hint of them. 

In puimiance of this resolution, there- 
fore, he contented himself with merely 
desiring him to fetch a bottle of wine, and 
then go off in quest of a surgeon. Der- 
mody obeyed, but not without having first 
made some awkward efforts, such as tended 
to strengthen Munro's suspicion of his guilt, 
to appear concerned for what had hap- 
pened. 

The monlent he was out ofsight — ''Well,** 
said the honest veteran, or as we shall in 
future style him, Macleod, *' if ever I saw 
a^'illain, the fellow who has just left us is 
one. Captain, for Heaven's sake don't 
remain another night in this house or 
neighbourhood, for my mind misgives me 
your life is not safe in either — the wherry 
in which I came over will be on its way 
back in the course of an hour; so, in the 

name 



THE DISCARDED SON. 201 

. name of God, return with me^ and rely on 
it, my dame and I will do every thing that 
is necessary for voii/' 

Munro needed no importunity to in- 
duce him to comply with this entreaty^ 
perfectly coinciding with Macleod, in 
thinking that where he then was he w^as 
not safe. He had no sooner decided 
on departing with him, than, as no time 
was to be lost in making preparations, 
he directed him where to find his chamber, 
in order that he might collect his clothes, 
and pack them up for him. 

Macleod was not long in dispatching this 
business; he returned with the portman- 
teau, and was then desired by Munro to 
unlock an escritoire in an adjoining closet, 
and bring him out the cash, amounting to 
two hundred pounds, which he had de* 
posited there: to apply a key to this, 
however, Macleod found unnecessary, as 
it lay open, and completely cleared of 
its contents, 

k5 ^^WelL'* 



202 THE DISCARDED SON. 

*^Well/' said Munro, on learning the 
robbery, endeavoiirini^ to force a smile as he 
spoke, though distressed beyond expression 
by the loss of a sum so essential to the com- 
fort of his family, '' it can't be helped, my 
friend; there is, therefore, no use in com- 
plaining about it; those who took it 
doubtless concluded, that, by this time, I 
should have had no further occasion for 
cash/^ 

^"^Ah the villains!*' cried Macleod, ''only 
for the delay it would occasion, I'd search 
that ill-looking rascal, Dermody, when 
he comes back, for I'll be sworn he's con- 
cerned in this business but. Captain, 

have you no fire-arms?" 

''Luckily remembered," returned Munro; 
"in the hall, my friend, you'll find a brace 
of pistols belonging to me, and loaded, 
that is, if no trick has been played with 
them." 

Macleod hastened for them, and, being 
examined, it was found that, unlike the 

es-critoire. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 203 

escritoire, they still retained their contents. 
Dermody presently returned, but unaccom- 
panied by the surgeon^ saying he could not 
find him at home. 

'' Well^ it matters not/' said Munro, as^ 
with the assistance of Macleod's stick, he 
quitted his seat; '^ I am going where I 
hope it will not be so difficult to find 
one.^" 

^'^ What^ going away from this?'' ex- 
claimed Dermody, in an accent of surprise^ 
aud with a look at once scrutinizing, appre- 
hensive, and ferocious. 

^' Yes;, it is timie for me to leave a place 
where my property has been taken, and my 
life attempted." 

" What^ — how — your property !— Lord> 
what has made you think so?" 

With involuntary severity, and turning,, 
as he spoke, his eyes full upon him — eyeS: 
which, like those of his friend Lord O'Sinis- 
ter, seemed formed to dive into the re^ 
cesses of the soul — " You w:ill probably- 
soon know/' said Munro, 

kG Dermody 



204 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Dermody tried^ but was unable^ to sup- 
port his gaze. 

*^' Come, come/' cried ?vIacleod impa- 
tiently, '^^ instead of standing like a fool 
there, twirling your hat upon your thumb, 
be so good. Master Dermody, as to throw 
this here portmanteau over your shoulder, 
and trot dov,^n with it to the beach.'* 

Dermody turned a look full of rage and 
scorn upon the old soldier; the refusal, 
however, -which evidently hovered on his 
lips, was prevented by Munro, in a calm but 
resolute tone, reiterating the command. 

After a little hesitation, he sullenly 
obeyed, and still more sullenly submitted 
to going before, after having made several 
unsuccessful efforts to fall into the rear, 
awed, in all probability, by the stern looks 
of Munro. and the threatening^ manner in 
which Macleod held the pistols. 

In pain, both of body and mind, Munro 
embarked — he was agonized to think, that, 
through the machinations of some secret 
foe, he might perhaps be compelled to 

relinquish 



THE piSCATiDED SON. Wdr 

relinquish the advantageous situation he 
had so recently obtained. By degrees^ 
however, he strove to tranquillize his 
mind, by endeavouring to hope the best; 
andj after a little deliberation, fi)iaily re- 
solved, notvv^ithstandino' Macleod'^s arsfu- 
ments to the contrary, on remaining silent 
\\ith re2:ard to the affair that had driven 
him from Ireland, until he had consulted 
his noble friend. Lord O'Sinister, respect- 
ing it. 

The grief, the consternation, and resent- 
ment, which this truly good man would 
feel on being acquainted with it, he pic- 
tured to himself in the liveliest colours — 
*' Yes/' said he mentally, " he v;ill i'eel as 
though the injury had been done to him- 
self, and never rest, I am convinced, till 
he has made every exertion in his power 
to discover the perpetrators of it — how 
then,'' he continued, after a transient pause, 
*' can I let my spirits flag, knowing, as I 
4o, that I enjoy the patronage of so worthy 
and so great a man — one who, of his own 
5 accord. 



^06 THE DISCARDHD SON. 

accord, sought me out for the purpose of 

befriending me Away tormenting fears 

and forebodings, whilst Lord O'Sinister 
continues my friend, and continue so I am 
certain he will, except my own fault, I 
have no reason to give way to you !" 

As soon as he landed a surgeon was sum- 
moned, and the ball, which had lodged in 
bis leg, extracted, but not without diffi- 
culty and danger, and the unpleasant in- 
formation, of the wound in ail probability 
requiring a length of time to heal, owing 
to so long a period having elapsed ere it 
was attended to, and the painful exertions 
made after receiving it. 

Finding he was likely to remain an in- 
valid for some time, Munro resolved on 
returning home immediately, notwith- 
standing Macleod's earnest solicitations for 
him to remain where he was, and his con- 
viction of experiencing from him every 
attention he required; but his heart fondly 
turned towards home, and, even though 
inclination had not impelled his return, 

prudence 



THE DISCARDED SOK. 507 

prudence would^ the again contracted state 
of his finances requiring that he should 
incur no extraordinary expence. 

Accordingly, the day after his arrival at 
Port-Patrick, he was assisted into a chaise 
by his worthy host, and, accompanied by 
his best wishes for his speedy recovery, set 
out for Heath wood. 

Gladly would he have concealed fron? 
his wife and daughter the circumstance to 
■which his quick return was owing, being 
perfectly aw^are o^ the horror it v/as calcu- 
lated to impress them with; but, as to fol- 
low his wishes in this instance was impos- 
sible, he endeavoured to prevent the con- 
sequences he apprehended from its disclo- 
sure, by cautiously breaking it to them; 
but, notwithstanding this, ere his narrative 
was closed, his wife became senseless in hisp 
arms, and Elizabeth, clinging round his 
neck, proved, by her fast-falling tears, that 
k was to these only she was indebted for 
not being reduced to a similar situation. 

The 



SOS THE DISCARDF.D SON. 

The attentions of her husband and daugh- 
ter soon restored 'Mrs. Munro to animation. 
On reviving she fondly pressed the former 
to her hearty and — *' Never^ never will we 
part again on this side the grave!" burst 
from her. 

" While we were so safe, so happy/' cried 
Elizabeth — " oh my father ■" and, dropping 
on her knees, she wrapped her arms around 
him and her mother, and kissed and bathed 
with her tears their united hands. 

The pain ofhis wound, which the motion 
of the carriage had not a little aggravated^ 
soon obliged Munro to repair to his cham- 
ber. In his way to it, the mischief done 
by the fire caught his attention, and led to 
enquiries, which brought about, not only 
an immediate, but candid disclosure of all 
that had recently happened. 

Distrustful of her own judgment^ and^ 
besides, so accustomed to repose unlimited 
confidence in him, that, even if she had 
thought, which however she by no means 

did. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 209 

did, that the circumstances she now revealed 
could have been concealed from his know- 
ledge, she would still have felt uneasy at 
their being so, Mrs. Munro suffered no in- 
terrogatory from him to remain unan- 
swered. 

Munro was greatly agitated by what he 
heard, but by no means concurred in opi- 
nion with her respecting Captain Delacour; 
he was convinced he %vas the young hero 
of whose exploits he had lately heard so 
much, and could not believe it possible 
that a character like his would plot the 
destruction of an innocent family — '' His 
revealing his name is, to me, a proof of 
his innocence,'* he added; ''since, if guilty, 
'tis but natural lo suppose he would care- 
fully have avoided every circumstance 
likely to lead to his detection/' 

''Then if you acquit him, on whom does 
your suspicion light?" asked Mrs. Munro. 

"Not particularly on any one; our lives 
have been so inofTensive,, the little power 
we possessed of doing good to others has 

ever 



210 THE DISCARDED SON, 

ever been so eagerly made use of, that I 
am quite at a loss to conjecture how or 
where we have provoked enmity: when a 
little recovered, I shall certainly endeavour 
to discover; in the interim, all that can be. 
done, is to be as much upon our guard as 
possible; and still to remember, that He, 
without whose permission a sparrow can- 
not fall to the ground, will continue to 
watch over the safety of the creatures that 
look up to him for protection.*' 

" You are of opinion then that the ano- 
nymous letter does not allude to Captain 
Delacour?'* 

''I am; but (half smiling), pray where 
is this Mr. Eaton, of whom I have heard so 
much? when may I expect the honour of 
being introduced to him?'* 

"Why, in the course of an hour or two, 
my love, I make no doubt, as he is a regu- 
lar attendant at our tea-table; if he knew 
of your arrival, I dare say his eagerness to 
pay his respects to you would bring him 
here sooner than usual.'* She then entered 

hit a 



THE DISCARDED SON". 211 

into a discussion of his merits^ and con- 
cluded by a declaration of the happiness 
she experienced, at the idea of Elizabeth's 
marriage with a man so every way calcu- 
lated to render her happy. 

A deep and involuntary sigh from the 
bosom of Elizabeth, at these words, caused 
her father to turn his eyes with quickness 
on her; and awakened suspicions in his 
mind, which determined him to be minute 
in his enquiries, ere he permitted her mar- 
riage to take place with Mr. Eaton, even 
though that gentleman should prove him- 
self worthy of her hand. 

Contrary to the expectations of Mrs. 
Munro, the tea equipage made its appear- 
ance without being preceded by Mr. Eaton ; 
and, to her encreasing surprise, minute 
after minute, and hour after hour, rolled 
away without bringing him. Something 
very particular, she persuaded herself, must 
have occurred to keep him away, and, in 
consequence,resolved on sending,at an early 

hour 



gl^ THE DISCARDED SO^. 

hour the next morning, to enquire after him. 
Elizabeth made no comments on the faihire 
©f his usual visit, neither did her father, 
though he was not without his thoughts on 
the subject, being determined to give no 
Utterance to the suspicions it awakened, 
except convinced beyond a doubt they 
Vfere well founded. 

The messenger dispatched the next 
morning by Mrs. Munro to the village 
where Mr. Eaton lodged, returned with 
information of his having set out for Lon- 
don the preceding evening, in consequence 
of an express acquainting him of the death 
of a near relation, to whose property he 
was heir, and to take possession of which 
his presence there was immediately requi- 
site. 

This story, though plausible, gained no 
credit with Munro; he was convinced it 
w^as a fabrication, and, consequently, that 
an atrocious scheme had been carrying on 
against his daughter. Yes, he had no 

longer 



THE DISCARDED SON. 213 

longer the smallest doubt upon his mind 
that a villain, availing himself of his ab- 
t,ence, had laid a regular plan to betray 
her: this idea made him almost bless the 
hand that had reduced him to the necessity 
of returning home at this crisis, since in- 
strumental, in all probability, to saving 
him from a wound nothing could have 
healed. For though of the purity of the 
" angels that circle the throne of God 
rejoicing," he had not a more exalted 
opinion than he had of that of his wife 
and daughter, he well knew they were too 
ignorant of the arts of the flagitious, 
to be any match for those of a hardened 
libertine. He could no longer think of 
concealing from his wife the opinion he 
had formed of Mr. Eaton ; she heard it 
with astonishment, and, notwithstanding 
the deference she paid to his judgment, 
with something like incredulity : had 
Eaton been a young man, she might, nay 
probably would, have subscribed without 
hesitation to the justness of it; but his age 

was 



214 THE DISCARDED SON. 

was such an assurance to her of his feelings 
being divested of that impetuosity, which, 
in the early season of life^ but too fre- 
quently occasions a lapse from virtue, that 
she could not immediately bring herself 
to believe him guilty. 

'' Trust me, my love/' said Munro, in 
reply to her observations on the subject, 
" unbridled passions are not confined en- 
tirely to the bosom cf youth — if in the 
morning of life we allow them to triumph, 
in the evening they will domineer — ^tna 
is not the only object in the creation that 
has snow u])on its head, and a devastating 
fire within its veins: but, even though I 
should be convinced my conjectures res- 
pecting Mr. Eaton were erroneous, still, 1 
confess, I should give our Elizabeth with 
reluctance to him, persuaded as I am, that 
without parity of age there cannot be that 
unity of sentiment so essential to the hap- 
piness of the married state, at least the 
happiness of a heart of sensibility like her's; 
besides, I am certain she already repents 

her 



THE DISCARDED SON. SI 5 

"her engagement, and equally so^ that she 
^vould never have thought of forming such 
a one but on our account '* 

This assertion occasioned reflections in 
the mind of Mrs. Munro which gradually 
revived a train of circumstances in her 
recollection, that tended to convince her it 
was a just one, and consequently made her 
rejoice at the marriage of her daughter 
with Mr. Eaton being prevented. 

From the wretchedness which the fond 
parents were now equally certain the idea 
of this marriage caused her, they de- 
layed not relieving their Elizabeth. To 
paint her transports at the moment, her 
joy, her gratitude, at being released from 
her promise to Mr. Eaton, at finding 
that the sacrifice of her happiness to 
theirs was what they neither expected, 
nor would consciously permit, would be 
impossible. An insupportable weight was 
immediately removed from her heart, by 
the removal of the chains which she had 
imposed upon herself; the melancholy 

which 



216 THE DISCARDED SON. 

which had began to pervade her mindj and 
make her view every object through a 
gloomy medium, instantly vanished; again 
all around wore a smiling aspect, for again 

*< Hope, with eyes so fair, 
Whisper'd promised pleasure. 
And bade the lovely scenes at distance hail.** 



CHAP. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 217 



CHAP. V. 

" What then remains, but, after past annoy, 
To take the good vicissitude of joy, 
To thank the gracious gods for what they give. 
Possess our souls, and, while we Hve, to live?" 

DRYDEN. 

JL HE whispers of Hope v/ere, however, 
sometimes interrupted by the suggestions 
of fear: when Elizabeth reflected on the 
apparently abrupt manner in which Cap- 
tain Delacour had quitted Heathwood, she 
was not without apprehensions of its being- 
owing to pique^ and, consequently, that he 
would make no effort for the renewal of 
their acquaintance. 

Among those who came to enquire into 
the particulars of the affair which occa- 

voL. I. L sioned 



213 THE DISCARDED SON. 

sioned Munro's unexpected return home, 
was Jenkins, the steward at Firgrove, and 
to him was entrusted the letter which 
Munro wrote to Lord O'Sinister relative 
to it. To this, in due time, an answer was 
rereived, expressive of the greatest horror 
and indignation at what had happened, 
and a determination to take immediate 
steps for the investigation of it — "And as 
I have no doubt/' his Lordship continued, 
^' of these steps proving successful, I shall 
hope, and expect to hear, that, as soon as 
able to travel, you are again on your way 
to Temora, where, with real gratitude, I 
have learned your unceasing exertions to 
forward my wishes." He then, atter dwell- 
ing on the uneasiness he felt at the thoughts 
of what the family of Munro must have 
suffered from the attempt upon his life, 
mentioned his having entered into a cor- 
respondence with Osmond, and being 
greatly pleased with his style and turn 
of thinking: and concluded, by saying 
he should feel himself highly obliged, 

by 



TKE DISCARDED SON. ^19 

by the ladies paying some little attention 
to a particufar friend of his, a widow lady 
of the name of Elford, who, in her way to 
the Highlands, for which she was on the 
point of quitting London, purposed rest- 
ing a day or two at Firgrove. 

From such a friend as Lord O'Sinisrer, it 
must have been a very disagreeable request 
indeed, which Munro or his family would 
have had any hesitation in complying with: 
accordingly, as soon as apprized of the 
arrival of Mrs. El ford, they hastened to 
pay their respects to her, and devoted the 
two days she passed in the neighbourhood 
almost entirely to her. Thev found her 
a pleasing, sensible woman, somewhat ad- 
vanced in life, but still so lively and insi- 
nuating in her manners, that to converse 
with her without feeling prepossessed in 
her favour, was scarcely possible : in a 
word, she so ingratiated herself into their 
good graces, that, on her expressing a wish 
for the company of Elizabeth during her 
stay in the Highlands, no objection was 
L ^ made 



2S0 THE DISCARDED SON. 

made to the proposal, but by Elizabeth 
herself, and that only on account of the 
unwillingness she felt to leave her father at 
this juncture, who still continued lame: 
both he and her nnother, however^ were too 
anxious to promote her amusement to per- 
mit her to decline the invitation, especially 
when assured her absence at the farthest 
v;ould not exceed a fortnight. 

At an early hour in the morning she 
quitted Heathwood with her new friend, 
and, towards the decline of day, reached 
the end of their journey, not a little grati- 
fied by the romantic scenery it gave her 
an opportunity of viewing. 

In a narrow glen, open at one end to the 
sea, and winding away at the other like a 
meandering river, amidst rocks, woods, 
mountains, and falling streams, the pictu- 
resque interspersion of which brought 
to mind the rude but richly luxuriant 
wildness of Claude Lorrain's landscapes, 
stood the habitation of Mrs. Elford, for the 
purpose of disposing of which she averred 

this 



THE DISCARDED SON. 221 

this journey had been undertaken, a lono^, 
loWj spacious, but somewhat ancient and 
dilapidated building, on such a spot as 
Ossian desired to repose in. " O lay me, 
ye that see the light/' he said, ''near some 
rock of my hills: let the thick hazels be 
around, let the rustling oak be near, green 
be the place of my rest, and \ti the sound 
of the distant torrent be heard/' Every- 
thing vv'ithin proclaimed long desertion 
and decay; a fevv o!d servants composed the 
household, and melancholy itself could not 
have desired any thing m.ore solitary or 
still. 

In another frame of mind, and Elizabeth 
perhaps m^ight not have liked an abode of 
this description; but now, owing to the 
impression which recent occurrences had 
made upon her, it suited her better than 
a livelier one would have done. 

The domestics being apprized of the 

coming of their lady, dinner was provided 

against her arrival: scarcely was it over 

when she was summoned to a person on 

L 3 business 



2SS THE DISCARDFD SON. 

business in another room; she accordingly 
repaired thither, leaving Elizabeth to 
amuse herself as she pleased during her 
absence. 

The evening was fine, and Elizabeth no 
sooner found herself alone, than her impa- 
tience to take a nearer survey of the roman- 
tic scenery which so delighted her eve, 
induced her to quit the house, and hei:d her 
steps towards the sea, from whii h it was 
distant but a short way. Here the magni- 
ficent spectacle of the setting sun sinking 
to appearance amidst the glitterir.g waves, 
rmd the glowing tints of the beetling cliffs 
that caught his parting rays, the haunts of 
innumerable wild- fowl, and richly tufted 
vfVh marine weeds and plants, and dotted 
with self-implanted groves of elder, so 
that not un frequently, by those who 
skirted the feet of these stupendous preci- 
pices, the sweet notes of the throstle and 
the rock lark were hecird mingling with, 
and at ines predominating over, the 
harsh and discordant cries of the grey gulls 

and 



THE DISCARDED SON. 223 

and kittivvakSj alternately fixed her atten- 
tion, and excited the most rapturous en- 
thusiasm in her breast, such as the sublime 
of nature never fails of awaking in minds 
of sensibility: but, by degrees, this gave 
place to the feelings inspired by the reflec- 
tion of being now in the immediate vici- 
nity of her father's ancient neighbourhood 
— that residence v^hich he had been so un- 
justly, and, she feared, for ever banished 
from ; wondering, if by any chance she came 
in her grandfather's way, whether he would 
notice her, and recalling to recollection 
the manner in which, should such a circum- 
stance occur, her father had desired her to 
act — namely, in such a way as should prove 
her having been brought up to respect the 
ties which connected them. vShe wandered 
on, almost unconsciously, till her progress 
was impeded by a projecting rock, against 
which the waves broke in white foam, as if 
enraged at the barrier it opposed to their 
innovations. 

*' And thus/* said Elizabeth^ as, pausing 
L 4 and 



224 THE DISCARDED SON. 

and leaning against a jutting point of it, 
she saw wave succeeding wave and idly dis- 
persing on the shore, '' does hope succeed 
hope in the human mind ! scarce has one 
faded and become extinct, ere another rises, 
calming the perturbations of disappoint- 
ment, and keeping aloof despair — friend of 
the unhappy, soother of the afflicted, but for 
thee, how dark and dreary were often the 
path of life! supported by thee what dif- 
ficulties cannot man endure, what sorrows 
not sustain 1 Oh, never may my bosom 
cease to lodge thee I for, as the poet ele- 
gantly says, 

** Hope, like the glimmering taper's light. 

Adorns and cheers the way. 
And still, as darker g;rows the night, 

Emits a brighter ray." 

From her meditative attitude she was 
roused by a strain of wild, but exquisite 
melody ; she started, and looked toward 
thesumir.it of the clip'', whence it seemed 
to proceed, but without perceiving any 

one — 



THE DKCARDED SON. 225 

one — '' Was it then an ideal sound I heard/' 
cried she to herself, after pausing some 
minutes in expectation of its beins re- 
peated^ '' or one peculiar to these solitary- 
regions, such as incline the unenlightened 
mind to superstition, and led our rude fore- 
fathers to believe^ that spirits rode on the 
Clouds, and sung on the winds of the rock ?*' 

She ceased^ for again soft music floated 
on the air, and again, like the strain that 
had preceded it, gradually died away amidst 
the cavities of the cliif, like the larit faint 
sighs of expiring nature. 

Elizabeth^ now looking about her more 
narrowly than she had before done, disco- 
vered one of these cavities^ and im me- 
diately opposite to it a corresponding one, 
divided from it by a narrow path; prompted 
by curiosity, she ventured within in> andy 
passing the intervening space^ advanced 
through the other; but scarcely had she 
issued from the farther outlet, when, she 
started back, in confusion and dismay, at 
beholding a large party of gentlemen at 
L 5 dinner 



2!2G TMK DISCARDED SOS. 

dinner beneath the shelter of a cliff, a ves- 
sel at anchor near them^ and, on a crag 
above themj the musicians whose wild 
melody had drawn her to the spot. Her 
confusion, at starting thus abruptly upojn 
them, was not a little encreased by their 
exclamations at seeing her, and still further 
augmented, by hearing herself pursued 
through the cavern — her being alone and 
unknown to any of. the party, making her 
dread meeting with some impertinence. 
But, notwithstanding her speed, she was 
overtaken, and her flying steps arrested by 
the seizure of her gown; panting and 
trembling, she turned to resent this inso- 
lence, but lost the power of utterance on 
beholding, instead of a presumptuous stran- 
ger, Captain Delacour. Her emotions at 
this unexpected meeting were such, as 
nearly to overpower her, and render his 
support necessary. For a minute she un- 
consciously rested against his shoulder, 
then, recovering to a sense of her situa- 
tion, broke with blushes from him, and 

moved 



THE DISCARDED SON. 227 

moved forward. Delacour did not attempt- 
to oppose her progress^ on the contrary, 
he took her hand^ and eagerly hurried her 
from the beach^ up a winding path amidst 
the rocks, in consequence of knowing he 
was not the only person of the party who 
had followed her; but on reaching a re- 
tired spot, at some distance from the place 
where his companions had lost sight of 
him, he gently resisted her efforts to pro- 
ceed — '' For a minute let me detain you/* 
cried he, " to express the happiness this 
unexpected meetin<^ has pjiven me, and 
enquire to what fortunate circumstance is 
owino i\\Q oleasure of findino- you in this 
neighbourhood?'' 

Elizabeth, in a voice trembling through 
agitation, a cheek tiushed by emotion, in- 
formed him. 

''How delightful!" said he, in reply; 
'■how amply does this moment compen- 
sate for the pain I endured at being com- 
pelled to leave Heathwood in the abrupt 
manner 1 didV 

l6 "Compelled!" 



228 THE DISCARDED SON. 

*' Compelled ! " Elizabeth repeated the 
expression to herself; it was not then 
from pique or choice, but owing to ne- 
cessity he had quitted it without seeking 

another interview with her delightful 

idea ! her bosom swelled with rapture 
at it. 

'' The relation to whom I am on a visk 
here/' continued Delacour/ '• apprized of 
/ny being on my way, and impatient and 
uneasy at my stopping at Ileathwood, sent 
me a summons vv^hich I could not avoid 
obeying ; m.y ill humour at the circum- 
stance, however, was in some degree sub- 
dued, by the attention and pleasure with 
which she listei ed to my conversation 
about you and your mother, owing to her 
having formerly been intimately acquainted 
with your father. She is prepared to ad- 
mire, to esteem, to love you," he addedj 
with encreasing animation, '' and will, I 
am convinced, eagerly embrace the oppor- 
tunity now afforded of soliciting your ac- 
quaintance — to-morrow^ with your per- 
mission. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 221? 

mission, I will have the honour of introduc- 
ing her to you/' 

Elizabeth bowed — she should consider 
herself highly flattered by a visit from her^ 
she said. 

" Then, this matter being arranged, 1 
will no longer deiav your return home," 
fried Delacour, passiortately kissing her 
band. 

'' Nay,*' said Elizabeth, half pausing, and 
perhaps a little coquettish] v, on finding he 
still continued by her side, "I shall think ycu 
sacrifice quite too much to complaisance, 
if you let me be the means of taking you 
from your party.'' 

*'And do you really,'' cried Delacour, 
a little reproachfully> and pursuing her 
half-averted eyes with his, " attribute to 
complaisance alone my wish to attend you 
home? No, no," smiling, and in an altered, 
an exulting tone, he added, rightly inter- 
preting the soft confusion of her looks, 
*' I perceive you do not do me such in- 
justice," 



230 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' Well, well/' said Elizabeth, endeavour- 
ing, under an air of unconcern, to hide the 
pleasure with which her bosom throbbed 
at the delightful idea of being regarded with 
more than indifference by him for whom 
the secret sigh of her soul was breathed, 
*' let us speak no more on the subject 
' — do you find this neighbourhood plea- 
sant?" 

'^ Lately but tolerable^ but now (bowing 
with a gallant air)^ I shall find it de- 
lightful." 

" Fewer compliments," snid Elizabeth 
gaily, '' or I shall be tempted to suspect 
your sincerity." 

''Then, rather than excite a doubt of it 
in your mind^ be my tongue mute, and my 
eyes the only herald of my heart." 

On reaching Mrs. Elford's habitation — 
"Must I then," said Delacour a:, he knocked 
at the door, ''bid you farewell so soon?" 

Elizabeth hesitated for a minute, then 
replied, she made no doubt Mrs. Elford 
^vould be happy to see him. 

** I have 



THE DISCAP.DED SON". 23! 

'' I have your permission then/' returned 
he eagerly, '' to attend you in?" 

Elizabeth bowed, the door opened, and 
Delacour followed her into a parlour, where 
they found the tea-equipage prepared, but 
no Mrs. El ford — a circumstance, perhaps, 
neither much regretted. 

" Oh, how often," said Delacour, in ac- 
cents of mingled tenderness and animation, 
as he seated himself beside her, *^* have I 
wished me thus— wished to be thus situated— 
"wished for such an opportunity of unclasp- 
ing my heart to you — of giving u-terance 
to its wishes, its hopes, its fears; for where 
there is love, I now find, from experience, 
there will be apprehension." 

''Especially," returned Elizabeth, a little 
archly, ''where there is diffidence." 

"True," cried Delacour laughing; "and 
as I have, notwithstanding what you may 
think to the contrary, more than a mode- 
rate share of that, except I receive some 
hope, some flattering assurance that I 

may *' 

The 



252 THE I>ISCAF.rvED SON. 

The door opened and prevented his 
finishing the sentence r both he and Eliza- 
beth looked anxiously towards it, but, 
instead of seeing Mrs. Elford, as they ex- 
pected, a servant entered, to say she found 
herself so indisposed after her journey, that 
she was unable to come down, and there- 
fore requested Elizabeth's company to tea 
in her dressing-room. 

'^ Ah, I now find/* said Delacour in a low 
yoice, and with an air of chagrin, as he 
arose to depart, in consequence of this 
message, *' 'tis a true obseryation, happi- 
ness is of a fugitive nature; but for present 
disappointment I shall endeavour to con- 
sole myself by anticipation of to-morrow." 
Then raising her hand to his lips for a 
moment, he made his parting bow and 
withdrew. 

Elizabeth lingered at a window, whence 
she could trace his steps, till he had entirely 
receded from her view; she then, with a heart 
throbbing with the most delightful sensa- 
tions, hastened to the chamber of Mra. 

Elford, 



THE DISCARDED SON. 233 

Elford, but paused^ through surprise, at the 
entrance, occasioned by finding her with- 
out the smallest appearance of indispo- 
sition. 

'^ Why, ^vhat's the matter, my dear?" 
asked Mrs Elford laughing; *' you look 
astonished/' 

" A little so, I confess. Madam/* replied 
Elizabeth, as &he advanced into the room, 
*' but, at the same time, agreeably so, I 
assure you, since, contrary to what I was 
led to expect, I perceive no symptoms of 
illness about you/* 

'' Oh, it's not my way, my dear, to yield to 
complaints: but come, take a seat, and let 
me know where you met with that hand- 
some young fellow that attended you 
home." 

The terms in which this enquiry was 
made excited a degree of surprise, it might 
be said of disgust, in the mind of Elizabeth^ 
that took from her the power of imme- 
diately answering it. 

Mrs. Elford again laughed^ and enquired 

whether 



234 THE DISCARDED SON. 

whether the surprise she manifested was 
owin<r to her havinn^ had the randour to 
confess she thought the gentleman hand- 
some, or the bad taste to reckon him so? — 
" If to the former," added she, " when you 
know me better, you 11 cease to wonder at 
hearing me say what I think, as it his 
always been my wny io do so " ^^he then 
repeated her question, and received a 
reply to it. This, however, did not satisfy 
her; Elizabeth having accidentally men- 
tioned her meeting with Delacour before, 
she rested not till she had learned when, 
where, and how, in short, every particular 
relative to their acquaintance. 

"And so,*' cried she, on obtaining the 
full gratification of her curiosity, " you 
have given him permission to v^ait on you 
to-morrow?'* 

'' Yes, Madam/* answered Elizabeth, but 
in rather a hesitating manner, owing to 
the air of dissatisfaction, at least so she 
fancied, with which these words were 
uttered; '' but if you have the least objec- 
tion 



THE DISCABDED SON. 23.5 

tion to Ills being introduced to yoii^ or to 
my seeing him *' 

''Me? — Lord, child, not the least/' 
interrupted Mrs. Eiford; ''or, if I had, it 
would only be in consequence of the 
dubious light in which I think he appears: 
but a short time will, I hope, put it beyond 
a doubt, whether or not the anonymous 
letter alluded to him.*' 

" That has already bean done. Madam/* 
said Elizabeth with involuntary warmth. 

"Indeed! well, my dear, I trust he will 
prove deserving of your good opinion — 
if, indeed, he has a relation in the neigh- 
bourhood, and introduces her to you, 
then, indeed, I shall think him entitled 

to your notice; but " 

'.''Till you are convinced he is,'* inter- 
rupted Elizabeth, with a quickness which 
proved, beyond a doubt, her being piqued 
by the suggestion of any thing to the pre- 
judice of Delacour, " we will. Madam, if 
vou please, cease to converse about him.'* 

Mrs. Eiford nodded — "As you please, 

my 



256 THE DISCARDED SON. 

my dear/' said she^ and immediately changed 
the conversation. 

Ill humour was a guest that could not 
long retain a place in such a bosom as 
Elizabeth's; she quickly^ therefore, ceased 
to fee] angry with Mrs. Elford, bv reflect- 
ing, that what she had said concerning 
Delacour could alone be owing to anxiety 
for her welfare; but, notwithstanding this, 
could not help wishing to be alone, that 
she might have an uninterrupted opportu- 
nity of revolving all that had passed in 
her recent interview with him. 

His looks, his words, his manner, all 
tended to confirm her in the delightful 
idea of being beloved by him, and his im- 
iTiediately meaning to make an overture for 
her hand. That her parents would have 
any hesitation in permitting her unioa 
with him, she could not imagine, and, of 
coui-se, saw nothing at this moment but 
happiness before her. 

At breakfast Mrs. Elford gave .orders for 
the admission of Captain Delacour; and, 

on 



THE DISCARDED SON. 937 

on quitting the parlour to receive a 
person in treaty for her house, desired 
wlien he came she might be informed. 

Elizabeth, on being left to herself, took 
up a book, but her ideas wandered too 
much to permit her to be amused with 
i*€ading; and she at length laid it aside, to 
steal into the hall, for the purpose of look- 
ing at the clock. She found it on the 
stroke of twelve — " Well, Delacour will 
soon be here now," thought she, as she 
softly re-entered the parlour. 

She was mistaken, however — liour after 
hour passed away without seeing him; 
and, at length, the announcement of din- 
ner made her give up all hopes of seeing 
him that day. With a feeling of mortified 
pride Elizabeth joined Mrs. Elford, longing, 
yet almost fearing to hear what she would 
say relative to his not coming, for that she 
would comment upon the circumstance 
she made no doubt. 

During dinner, however, not a word was 
said on the subject, but this Elizabeth im- 
puted 



238 THE DISCARDED SON. 

puted to the presence of the servants; Mrs. 
Eiforcl, however, was equally silent after 
they withdrew ; and Elizabeth^ impatient and 
vexcdj was more than once on the point 
of introducing it herself, but for a fear of 
incurring the imputation of over-anxiety 
for his visit. At length, after a silence of 
a few minutes — '' So, after all, no visitors 
here to-day/' said Mrs. Elford, in a laugh- 
ing manner. 

"No," replied Elizabeth, with an eager- 
ness which evinced her anxiety for Mi's. 
Elfoi-d's opinion on the subject; ''don't 
you (hesitating a little) think 'tis rather 
strange. Madam ?" 

'' We have a long evening before us," 
returned Mrs. Elford; -'Captain Delacour, 
therefore, may still be here." '■^'■- ■ 

"True," cried Elizabeth, joyfuliv catch- 
ing at these words; ''I wonder it did not 
occur to me that he mioht." 

Mrs. Elford made no reply, and, a new 
subject being introduced, they continued 
to chat till after tea, when again she made 

business 



THE DISCARDED SON. 239 

business the pretext for leaving Elizabeth 
to herself. 

Vexed, mortified, disappointed, for that 
Captain Delacour's expected visit would 
not be paid this day, she was by this time 
pretty well convinced, and for the failure 
of which she knew not how to account in 
any satisfactory manner, Elizabeth no 
sooner found herself alone, than she 
strolled from the parlour into a wild kind 
of garden into which it opened, in order 
to be out of the way of observation, till she 
had in some degree subdued her present 
feelings: the reflections, however, which 
occupied her mind were not, by any means, 
calculated to enable her to conquer them. 
Lost in thought, she wandered on, till 
startled by a tap on the shoulder, when, 
turning, she beheld Mrs. Elford. 

" Upon mv word," laughing, and pass- 
ing her arm under her's, '' the reverie of a 
philosopher could not have been more 
profound — may I enquire the subject of 
your meditations, or at least guess?" 

5 Elizabeth 



240 THE DISCARDED SON'. 

Elizabeth blushed and drooped her head, 
but too conscious that Mrs. Elford more 
than suspected the state of her heart. 

'' Come, come/' added Mrs. Elford, ''he 
is not worth another thought." 

'"He!" repeated Elizabeth with em- 
phasis. 

" Why, I hope/* smiling a little archly 
in her face, " you will not pretend to 
deny that you were thinking of Captain 
Delacour.^'* 

"Well, Madam/' scarcely conscious of 
what she uttered, said Elizabeth. 

" Well, Madam," Cried Mrs. Elford, mi- 
micking her agitated tone; '' why nothing 
more, ray dear, than that I think it very 
natural for the thoughts of a young girl, like 
you, to be occupied by a handsome young 
man like him^ but certainly no longer than 
while he treats her with proper respect and 
attention, in both of which he l^as been 
totally deficient to you." 

'' You think so?" turning pale^ and in a 



hesitating voice. 



I do 



THE DISCARDED SON, 241 

^' I do indeed, and hope you do the same, 
or you will be liable to meet again with 
rudeness from him: as he led you to ex- 
pect a visit, he certainly, to have acted 
consistently with politeness, and the res- 
pect due to you, should hare given you 
early intimation of his being unable to pay 
it, that on his account you might not re- 
main at home — but I suppose, from the 
ease with which he obtained permission 
to come here, he thinks he can soon make 
his peace with you." 

'' Do you then think. Madam,*' said Eli- 
zabeth, in the greatest agitation, at once 
alarmed and shocked by this speech, ^' that 
I should have refused him that permis- 
sion?" 

'' Why, to be sure, when I consider the 
obligations you think yourself under to 
him, I cannot wonder at the readiness with 
which you granted it — however, since you 
have asked the question, I candidly con- 
fess, I think it would have been better if 
you had not done so, for men seldom value 

VOL. I. M what 



g42 THE DISCARDED SON. 

what they easily obtain. Ah^, they are sad 
creatures indeed; ardent only when they 
see difficulties^ but careless whfen they per- 
ceive none: but let me not rail against 
them, for a perverseness which seems in- 
herent in human nature^ which, in all and 
every stage of life, is, in a greater or less 
degree, perceptible — the child quickly 
throws aside the toy it has easily obtained 
— the prize that may readily be won is 
reckoned scarce worth contending for — 
and seldoni does the bloodless victory gain 
the wreath of fame for the conqueror — 'tis 
not the glittering of the diamond, nor the 
delicacy of the pearl, that renders them so 
valuable, 'tis the difficulty and danger 
with which they are procured — the female 
who would be prized must not unsought be 
v/on — she who knows not how to make 
herself scarce, will never be followed with 
that ardour so pleasing to the vanity, so 
flattering to the sensibility of her sex. 
There is an innocent coquetry, in which 
every woman should be an adept, that of 

knowing 



THE DISCARDED SON. 243 

knowing how to recede^ so as to create 
anxiety, and appear so as to rouse atten- 
tion; in shorty the woman who is politic 
will often disappoint her own wishes, for 
the purpose of stimulating those of others, 
since what we continually see we fre- 
quently cease to regard — But come (smil- 
ing, and tapping the varying cheek of Eli- 
zabeth), I see you are vexed, so let us 
change the subject; should Captain Dela- 
cour come, and make a proper apology for 
his conduct, let him be forgiven ; but, ex- 
cept he does " 

'"'^ We'll speak no more of him,*' inter- 
rupted Elizabeth with w^armth; ^' for to 
converse about a person merely to censure 
them, cannot, in my opinion, afford any 
gratification." 

Mrs. Elford assented to the justness of 
this remark by a smile, and immediately 
after proposed their quitting the garden 
for the sea^side: to this proposal Elizabeth 
making no objection, they were proceed- 
ing thither, when a servant appeared, to 
M 2 say 



244 THE DISCARDED SON. 

say a person had called-, ^vho wanted to see 
his mifetress for a few minutes. 

''Well, this need not, however, prevent 
your pursuing your walk/' cried she, ad- 
dressing her companion, as she withdrew 
her arm from her; "for I shall hasten after 
you, and it would be a pity, after confining 
yourself the whole of the morning, if you 
did not avail yourself of so fine an even- 
ing to take one/* 

In a frame of mind that rendered con- 
versation at the moment painful to her, 
Elizabeth gladly consented to do as Mrs. 
Elford wished. On being left to hei*self, 
she sauntered on, vainly trying to find an 
excuse in her own mind for the conduct of 
Captain Delacour; for, though something 
might have occurred to prevent his paying 
his expected visit, she could not conceive 
that any thing could have occurred to 
prevent his sending to apologize for the 
failure of it. That his not coming, how- 
ever, was owing to any slighting opinion 
h^ had conceived of her, she could not 

bring 



THE DISCARDED SOX. 245 

bring herself to imagine, since, solicited 
as she had been to receive his visits, she saw 
not how she could have refused him: but 
the pleasure of self-acquittal could not 
immediately overcome the pangs of of- 
fended pride and wounded sensibility — the 
feelings excited by his behaviour were 
aggravated by the mortifying conjectures 
to which she saw it had given rise in the 
mind of Mrs. Elford. 

Absorbed in thought, she heeded not the 
length of time which had elapsed since 
her quitting home, nor the gloom that was 
beginning to involve surrounding ob- 
jects, till startled by appioaching steps, 
when, raising her head, she beheld two 
men of mean appearance following her 
steps beneath the shadow of the clifTs; 
concluding, however, that they were na- 
tives of the place, proceeding homeward 
after the labours of the day, the circum- 
stance excited no alarm, till, on her turn- 
ing to retrace her way to Mrs. Elford s, she 
saw them also turn; fear instantly lent her 
M 3 wings. 



246 THE DISCARDED SON. 

"wings^ biit^ notwithstanding her speed, she 
was quickly overtaken by themj and^ spite 
of her shrieks and struggles, borne with 
rapidity from the beach. Her senses for- 
sook her at the moment, and, on regain- 
ing them, she found herself seated on 
horseback before one of the ruffians; for 
a few minutes she felt wild and confused, 
as if awaking from a frightful dream ; 
then, coming entirely to herself, she 
looked around to see where she was, and 
found herself in a narrow dingle, hemmed 
in by rocks of immense height, and, as well 
as the ghastly light diffused around by the 
'' wan pale moon already risen in the 
east" would permit her to discern, savage 
aspect. 

'' Whither are you taking me ?" at length 
burst from her. " O tell me what is the 
meaning of this outrage?" 

'' All in good time you'll know," was the 
reply. 

'' Now, now% I implore you," cried Eli- 
zabeth — '-' but perhaps," with a sudden 

change 



THE DISGA.i'.DED SON. §47 

change of voice^ '^you've mistaken me for 
some other person. Yes^ yes^ it must be 
so/* she added, with a kind of joyful 
quickness. 

^' Are you sure it is?'* said the rufRan. 

" Tell me my name then/* returned Eli- 
zabeth, '' and that will put the matter out 
ofdoubt.'^ 

'^ 1 fancy I shan't be far from the mark, 
if I say *tis Munro.** 

The shock Elizabeth felt at finding she was 
wrong in her conjecture, for a few minutes 
deprived her of the power of utterance; 
on regaining it, she exerted all her elo- 
quence, to try and prevail on the ruffian 
to release her. 

Her supplications, however, might as well 
have been addressed to an ear of marble, 
brutal laughter being all they excited. 

Still, however, Elizabeth continued to 
weep, and to implore, at all events, if he 
would not release her, to let her know by 
whom he had been employed to carry her 
off? 

M 4 '' Did 



248 THE DISCARPED SON, 

'' Did you ever he^r of a person of the ^ 
name of Delacour?" at last asked he. 

'' Delacour !'' faintly repeated Elizabeth. 
*^' Captain Delacour^, do you mean? Gra- 
cious Heaven, is it possible ! — can he be 
concerned in such a business as this?" 

^^ Both true and possible/' replied the 
luffian; *^'so, now that I have satisfied youi* 
curiosity, I hope you'll be quiet/' 

The anguish of Elizabeth, at finding De- 
lacour a villain, was unspeakable; all the 
bright, the flattering hopes which she had 
for some time been indulging in, instantly 
vanished, leaving her mind a prey to 
the pangs of disappointment and regret. 
As soon as she had a little recovered the 
shock occasioned by the discovery of his 
baseness, she again assailed the ruffian with 
tears and entreaties, but to as little pur- 
pose as she had before done; and, at last, 
in absolute despair of succeeding with him, 
ceased her importunities. 

After proceeding some way in silence, 
she fancied she heard horses advancing up 

the 



THE DISCARDED SON. 249 

the dingle; she listened attentively, and 
soon found her ear had not deceived her; 
but the shriek which hovered on her lips 
she suppressed;, lest, after all, the persons 
approaching might not be inclined to afford 
her the assistance she required : ^vhen, 
however, a few minutes after, she beheld a 
gentleman and his servant within a few 
yards of her, she could no longer com- 
mand herself; a scuffle immediately ensued, 
which ended in the complete discomfiture 
and flight of the villain. In a fev/ minutes 
the faculties w^hich hope, as well as appre- 
hension, had contributed to suspend, being 
restored, Elizabeth was about thanking her 
deliverer, when his voice struck her as one 
she was well acquainted with. . Instantly 
starting from the jutting point of rock on 
which she had been seated, she causht his 
arm, and, scarcely conscious of what she 
was about, dragged him from beneath the 
shadow of the impending cliff, to an open 
spot, sufficiently light to allow her to di^- 
m3 tin^L.ioh 



5.50 THE DISCARDED SOK. 

tingiiish his features, and beheld^ as she 
expected. Air. Eaton. 

"Oh, now, now,*' she exclaimed, almost 
•vv'ith a shriek of transport, and joyfully 
clasping her hands together, '' now, now, 
I am sure I am safe !'* 

"Safe!'^ he repeated in the most exult- 
ing accents, and eagerly seizing her hand; 
^' yes, my life, my soul, my Elizabeth! I 
saw,'' added he, " that you did not imme- 
diately recollect me, and I feared disco- 
vering myself abruptly, lest joy at finding 
a fiiend at such a crisis should overcome 
you; but you still tremble and appear 
terrified. ' 

'' Terrified r' repeated Elizabeth — then, 
suddenly checking herself, unwilling on 
many accounts to betray her knowledge of 
X\\e person who had carried her off, and 
anxious, besides, not to encrease the dis- 
tress which, by this time, she was convinced 
Mrs. Elford must be in on her account, 
by delaying her return home, she entreated 
Mr. Eaton to add to the obligations he had 

already 



THE DISCARDED SON. 251 

already conferred on her^ by immediately 
seeing her there; and was proceeding to 
point out the way^ when he interrupted 
her, to say he was not only well acquainted 
with her present abode^ but the lady she 
was with. 

Leaning on his arm, and followed by his 
servant leading the horses, they proceeded, 
without further delay, to the habitation of 
Mrs. Elford. At the entrance they were 
met by Mrs. Elford herself, and her ser- 
vants, all apparently in a state of the 
greatest consternation — but a consternation 
which seemed to give place to joy on be- 
holding Elizabeth. The instant she appeared, 
they eagerly pressed round her, Mrs. Elford 
enquiring vvhere she had been so long, and 
adding, that her terror^ at not finding her 
®n the beach, whither she had followed her, 
surpassed description. 

In faltering accents Elizabeth assured 

her she was not to blame for the alarm she 

had experienced on her account. And 

thcn3 in hopes of preventing further en- 

M 6 quirics. 



252 THE DISCARDED SON. 

quirieSj at least for the present^ on the 
subject, directed her attention to Mr. 
Eaton^ who, standing rather in the shade, 
and at some distance from Elizabeth, ap- 
peared not to have been noticed by her — 
no sooner, however, ^s'as he, than he was 
addressed as an old and favourite friend, 
and invited in the warmest manner into 
the house — an invitation he accepted with 
evident pleasure. 

But, on entering the parlour, she again 
began to question Elizabeth, relative to the 
cause of her long absence, and the terror 
vshe appeared under. 

Elizabeth was compelled, by agitation, 
to refer her to Eaton for the gratification 
of her curiosity. He told her as much as 
he seemed to kn6w of the affair, not 
without expressing a wish to be further 
enlightened on the subject; and in the 
course of his relation, mentioning his pre- 
vious knowledge of Elizabeth and her 
mother, and hinting his present journev to 
the Highlands owing to the foi mer. 

On 



THE DISCARDED SON. 253 

On his ceasing to speak — '' Can you 
conjecture^ my dear girl/' cried Mrs. Elford, 
addressing Elizabeth^ '' who the perpe- 
trator of this outraG^e is?'' 

Elizabeth, determined, if possible, for 
reasons she deemed sufficiently cogent, not 
to reveal the baseness of Delacour, averted^ 
her looks from Mrs. Elford at this question; 
and, on its being repeated — " My dear 
Madam,'' she evasively replied, '' let us 
sny no more on the subject, I implore 
you." 

Mrs. Elford regarded her for a few mf- 
ivutes in silence, then in a low voice — '' I 
will oblige you, my dear," she said; '' fur- 
ther questions, indeed, I deem unneces- 
sary, so thoroughly am I convinced, by 
your manner, that I am not mistaken in 
the suspicions I have formed; but much as 
1 think Captain Delacour deserving ot pu- 
nishment, I shall not, in conformity to 
your wishes, expose him to it." 

Elizabeth, by a look, testified her grati- 
tude for this complaisance, not, however, 

without 



254 THE DISCARDED SOTT. 

without a dread of the silence she wished' 
observed on the subject being imputed ta 
sentiments for Delacour, which he had 
proved himself utterly undeserving of; 
but;, should this be the case, she -tried to 
hope^ and thus in some degree lessened 
the pain the apprehension gave her^, that her 
subsequent conduct would convince Mrs. 
Elfordj that^ in still supposing she felt 
such sentiments for him^ she wronged her. 

Refreshments were brousrht in^, of which 
Mr. Eaton partook^ but Elizabeth was 
too agitated to follow his example; and^ 
sthortly after, under the plea of indis- 
position, entreated permission to retire, 
apprehensive, if she continued much longer 
in his company, of his introducing a sub- 
ject she could no longer bear to think of 
listening to. 

" If Mr. Eaton can consent to vour leav- 
ing us so soon, my dear," cried Mrs. El ford, 
with a look v;hich convinced Elizabeth she 
had surmised the nature of his sentiments 
for her, raid deemed them deserving of 

encouragement. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 555 

encouragement, ^' I can have no objec- 
tion/' 

" I hope 'tis unnecessary to say/' re- 
joined he, '' that I cannot think of losing- 
Miss Munro's company without the greatest 
reluctance, but neither can I think of gra* 
tifying myself at her expence ; for my 
ready acquiescence, however, to her wishes^ 
(rising from his chair and gently taking her 
hand, and pressing it between his), I trust 
I shall be rewarded, by being allowed io pay 
my devoirs to her at an early hour to- 
morrow/' 

"Assuredly," returned Mrs. Elford, an- 
swering for her; " I shall hope to see you 
at breakfast, by w^hich time I hope Miss. 
Munro will be sufficiently recovered ta 
give you the reception you merit/* 

"Ah, rather say. Madam, inclined to 
give me the one I wish for!"" 

Still more confused and agitated by these 
words, Elizabeth forced away her hand, 
and, slightly bowing, retreated to hef 
chamber: its solitude^ however, restored her 

to 



258 THE DISCARDED SON; 

to nothing like tranquillity; she could not 
reflect on the conduct of Delacour^vithout 
agony, nor on the evident determination 
of Eaton to renew his addresses %vithout 
dismay, since unable^ at present, to ascer- 
tain whether or not" this determination 
was sanctioned by her parents — if not, 
she trusted the reserve she resolved on 
assuming towards him would present! v in- 
duce him to relinquish it. Tired Nature's 
F/vveet restorer, balmy Sleep, remained a 
stranger to her eyelids during-the night; but> 
though the perturbation of her mind made 
her quit her bed at an early hour, she did 
not leave her chamber till summoned to 
breakfast, so unwilling was she to hold 
any. further converse with Mr. Eaton. 

She found him in the parlour as ex- 
pected; he met her at the entrance with 
an air of transport, and, taking her evi- 
dently reluctant hand, led her to a seat. 

For a few^ minutes, however, no verv 
particular conversation took place; at 
length, after a short pause, he suddenly 

turned 



THE DISCARDED SON. Qo7 

turned towards her, and, with a look of 
tender reproach, said^ he could not help 
acknowledging he w^as hurt, yes, to the 
very soul, at the indifference manifested 
by her, in not having once enquired where 
or how he had been since his leaving 
Heathwood. 

Elizabeth blushed^ and began stirring 
her tea, in order to have a pretext for 
avoiding his eyes, since, though she did 
not by any means chuse him to suppose 
she ever meant to favour his addresses, 
neither did she like him to imagine her 
rude or ungrateful. At last, but hesitat- 
ingly — '' I don't like to be inquisitive/* 
said she. 

" Inquisitive ! Ah, Elizabeth,*' in accentsi 
of mingled reproach and tenderness, *'in 
some situations, not to be inquisitive is to 
Avound and offend, from the indifference it 
betrays. But I will not torture myselT by 
imputing to indifference the carelessness 
you manifest about me — no, to pique will 
I ascribe it, a pique which, all things con- 
sidered. 



258 THE DISCARDED S07C. 

sidere4 I cannot wonder at. I did nof, 
however^ leave Heathwood^ as you were 
led to suppose^ without assigning a suffi- 
cient reason for not calling on you pre- 
vious to my departure^ as I am satisfied 
you would have allowed^ had the explana- 
tory letter I wrote you on the subject 
reached your hands; but, instead of th;it 
being the case^ the stupid blockhead to 
whose care it was committed, mislaid it^ 
and thus caused me to incur what none 
ever less merited (as I have proved to your 
parents), resentment and suspicion." 

Elizabeth started at these words, and 
lifted her hitherto downcast eyes to his. 

^' Yes," pursued he, ^' I have been to 
Heathwood again, and have not only seea 
your father and mother, but so thoroughly 
justified myself in their opinion, as to ob- 
tain their permission to follow you hither. 
When we met last night (so fortunately 
I flatter myself for both), I was hastening 
to throw myself at your feet, but forbore 
hinting my intentions, in consequence of 
3 the 



THE DISCARDED SON. 259 

the agitation you were then in. wSee/*^ 
drawing out a pocket-book, and taking a 
letter from it^ '' my authority for coming 
here — did you ever/' holding up the letter 
to her with a gay or rather playful air, 
'*' see any hand this reminds you of?" 

Elizabeth, with encreasing agitation, 
cast her eyes on the superscription — 
'' Yes/' she replied, '^ 'tis like my fa- 
ther's.*' 

'' You are not mistaken; 'tis written by 
him and addressed to you/' kissing and 
presenting it to her as he spoke. 

Elizabeth, trembling from her anticipa- 
tion of its contents, broke the seal, and 
read as follows: 



To Miss Muiiro. 

'^ I DESIRED you, my dearest 
girl, to consider youi-self released from 
your engagement to Mr. Eaton, but I did. 
so merely because I thought he did not 

merit 



^60 THE DISCARDED SOK. 

merit your keeping it; the circumstance^" 
which led me to think so have been ex- 
plained so entirely to my satisfaction, that 
my opinion of him is totally changed^ and, 
of course, my wishes for your union with 
him renewed: in honour you are bound' 
to him, and equally so, I hope, by in- 
clination; for I know no man to whom! 
more sincerely desire to see you married'; 
not, however, let me assure you, because ! 
know his fortune to be large, and his con- 
nexions illustrious, but chiefly because I 
know his heart to be good and his disposi- 
tion amiable — of the nobleness of it, his 
proposing for you gives undeniable proof, 
this not being the age in which disiu^ 
terested love holds sway. 

'^ I cannot, my dear child, do justice to 
your mother's feelings, and' mine, at the 
contemplation of your smiling prospects; 
and equally so, I am convinced, should I 
find myself unable to paint our anguish, 
were these prospects not realized, per- 
suaded, as we are, that there is but little- 
probability. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 961 

probability of so advantageous an oppor- 
tunity of settling in life again ocairring as 
Mr. Eaton now affords you, and besides, of 
the derogatory light in which refusing him 
v/ould make you appear, since, assuredly, 
either to some unworthy attachment or 
unjustifiable caprice your doing so would 
be imputed: my wishes are, and hitherto 
they have been considered as commands 
by my dear girl, that you should not only 
immediately permit the renewal, of his ad- 
dresses, but give him your hand without 
deky, urgent business, he informs me, re- 
quiring his speedy presence in London. 

'■'As I think the knowledge of your 
being the wife of so respectable a man 
might occasion a pleasing revolution at 
Glengary, I could wish your nuptials 
celebrated where you now are, although 
their being so would prevent your mother 
and me from having the pleasure of wit- 
nessing them, since we could not think 
of visiting a house so immediately in the 
vicinity of one we have, at present, so 

many 



262 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

many powerful reasons for disliking to be 
near. Emboldened by the goodness and con- 
descending manners of Mrs. Elford, I have 
written to her on the subject^ and, should 
she have no objection, to the ceremony 
taking place at her house, I trust you will 
make none, especially as, the day after, Mr. 
Eaton has promised to return with you to 
Heathv/ood, when it will be decided whe- 
ther you shall nov; accompany him to Lon- 
don, or defer your visit to that region of 
luxury and pleasure till the winter — I know 
you'll be happy to hear, that, whenever 
you go, your mother and I are to bear you 
company. 

'' Mr. Eaton is impatient to be gone — I 
have therefore only time to add, that your 
mother unites with me in fervent wishes for 
your happiness in the new state you are, we 
trust, about entering into — but that you 
will fail of experiencing this with such a 
man as Mr. Eaton, cannot be doubted 
either by her or your 

^'^ Affectionate father, 

*' Robert Munro." 

Hcathwood* 



THE DISCARDED SON. 263 



Elizabeth kept her eyes fixed on this 
letter long after she had perused it^ con- 
vinced, the moment she raised them, she 
should be called upon to ratify hopes re- 
volting to her feelings — hopes, however, 
which, notwithstanding this, a little deli- 
beration made her resolve on not disap- 
pointing; for she saw plainly that the heart 
of her father was set upon her union with 
Mr. Eaton; and, as he had hitherto guided, 
so still she resolved he should guide her^, 
since his judgment she believed unerring, 
and his advice she knew dictated by solici- 
tude for her welfare. 

She strove to argue herself into a belief 
that her compliance with his wishes in the 
present instance would soon cease to oc- 
casion her pain, that the un worthiness of 
the object who had first caused an altera- 
tion in her sentiments for Mr. Eaton would 
« 

soon permit her to think of him again as 

she 



264' THE DISCARDED SON. 

she had originally done; in a word, that she 
could not see him studying to contribute 
to her ^happiness, and that of her family, 
without experiencing for him feelings cal- 
culated to reconcile her to the destiny that 
made her his. 

Spite of these arguments, however, she 
felt most reluctant to unite her fate with his, 
insomuch, that, but for the dread she en- 
tertained of her refusing him being im- 
puted to an attachment she now blushed to 
think of, she would in all probability have 
done so. 

Impatient at her silence, as well as evi- 
dently alarmed by it, Eaton, at length, 
in agitated tones enquired, whether or not 
her father had proved a successful pleader 
for him ? 

Elizabeth, as she folded up the letter^ 
attempted to say yes; but this, her first 
effort to speak contrary to her feelings, 
proved abortive — what she tried to say 
was inarticulate. 

'' Elizabeth,'' exclaimed her impassioned 

loveo 



TEE DISCARDED SON. 265 

iover^ with a flushing cheek and kindling 
eye, '^'' you alarm me by your manner! 
Have I in vain endeavoured to obtain for 
myself an interest in your heart? does 
your father advocate my cause in vain?" 

'■''No, no/' faintly replied the agitated 
Elizabeth, half shunning half meeting the 
glance of his keenly-enquiring eye. 

"Then you are mine! you are mine!" 
in the most exulting accents. '^'^You con- 
sent to bless me with this treasure !'* snatch- 
ing her cold trembling hand, and alter- 
nately pressing it to his lips and heart. 

Elizabeth bov/ed. 

*' Oh, transport!'* he continued, and, 
throwing his arms round her, he strained her 
to his breast, and with his lips would have 
touched her cheek, but that Elizabeth, trem- 
bling and disgusted, shrunk from his grasp. 

"Cruel!" cried he, as she disengaged 
herself from his arms, with a countenance 
expressive of her feelings at the moment. 
She was, indeed, highly offended by the 
violence of his transports; since, in the 

VOL. I. N first 



266 . THE DISCARDED SON". 

first place, she conceived them unbecom- 
irif^ his years, and, in the next, indecorous 
before a third person. In a few minutes, 
however, she recollected herself sufficiently 
to be able to reflect on the necessity there 
was for wearing a complacent air towards 
him in future, lest^ otherwise, she should 
lead him to imagine, in consenting to be- 
come his, she acted contrary to her inclina- 
tion, and thus, perhaps, lay the foundation 
of much future misery to herself and con- 
nexions; she tried, therefore, to force a 
smile, and prevent herself from shrinking 
at his touch; but painful was the effort it 
cost her to do this — her ^vhose counte- 
nance, till the present moment, had never 
been illumined by a smile that did not im- 
mediately emanate from her heart. 

''Well, my sweet girl," said Mrs. Elford, 
in the kindest accent imaginable, ^*^ permit 
me now to congratulate you on your 
happy prospects, and to entreat that you 
will acquiesce in your father's wishes, for 
having your nuptials solemnized here — 

he 



TKE DISCARDED SON. 26? 

he has, I presume, mentioned to you his 
letter to me on this subject?" 

Again Elizabeth bowed — she could not 
reply in any other way at the moment. 

" He has also, I make no doubt," said 
Eaton, in an impatient tone, '''explained 
the necessity there is for our marriage im- 
mediately taking place?'* 

''Yes," faltered out Elizabeth. • 

'' Then this evening, my love, my angel," 
looking with mingled earnestness and 
anxiety at her. 

She started. 

'' Well, well, to-morrow then let it be," 
he added, in consequence of perceiving the 
horror the proposition gave her. '' You 
see, my adorable girl," again taking her 
nearly inanimate hand, and pressing his 
lips to it, '' you have not . a very bad 
chance of happiness with a man who can 
so readily yield his wishes to yours." 

Elizabeth hesitated for a few minutes; 

she thought of trying to prevail on him to 

postpone their marriage till his return 

N 2 from 



268 THE DISCARDED SON. 

from tondon ; but the suspicion of her in- 
difference, which it suddenly occurred t©^ 
her such a measure might, nay probably 
would, be the means of exciting in his 
mind, induced her to relinquish the idea^ 
and, though most reluctantly, consent to 
be his on the morrow. 



CHAP, 



THE DISCABDED SON. 269 



CHAP. VI. 



'♦Some say, no evil thing that walks by night. 
In fog, or fire, by lake, or moorish fen. 
Blue meagre hag, or stubborn unlaid ghost. 
That breaks his magic chains at curfew time. 
No goblin, or swart fairy of the mine, 
Hath hurtful power o'er true virginity. 
Do you believe me yet ? or shall I call 
Antiquity, from the old schools of Greece, 
To testify the arms of chastity ?" 

Milton. 



lUT, but," added Elizabeth, in the same 
faltering voice in which she had expressed 
her acquiescence to his wishes, ''I — I should 

like to have '* 

''What, my angel?" finding she paused, 

eagerly demanded the enamoured Eaton, 

as he hung over her. " Speak your wishes 

N 3 freely ; 



f70 THE DISCARDED SON. 

freely; for if wealth can enable you to 
gratify them^ they shall be gratified." 

'' To have an effort made to overrule 
my father and mother's objections to being 
present at the ceremony/' languidly re- 
turned Elizabeth. 

'' Then I will go myself directly to 
Heathwood^ and see what I can do to pre- 
vail on them to come hither." 

Elizabeth bowed her thanks; and^ pas- 
sionately kissing her fair hand;, Eaton with- 
dreW;, to set out^ as he said, on his journey 
to Heathwood. 

Disturbed^ distressed, dispirited;, Eliza- 
beth would have retired to her chamber 
the moment he was gone, but that she ap- 
prehended she should offend Mrs. Elford 
by doing so. Of the absence of Eaton this 
lady took advantage, to expatiate on his 
pleasing manners, the many amiable qua- 
lities he appeared possessed of, and the 
consequeiit happiness Elizabeth must ex- 
perience with a man so every way worthy of 
her, and possessed besides of a fortune ade- 
quate 



THE DISCARDED SON. S7l 

quate to obtaining every enjoyment, every 
luxury this life could afford; in short, she 
said every thing likely to dispel the cloud 
which, it did not require her penetration 
to perceive, hung upon the beauteous 
brow of Elizabeth, and plainly evinced her 
heart taking no pleasure in the prospect 
before her^ all dazzling and glittering as 
it was. 

Never, indeed, had she known what real 
wretchedness was till the present moment, 
when she found herself on the point of 
being united to a man for whom she no 
longer felt a sentiment of regard. So 
a^^onizinor was the idea of this union to 
her, that, more than once, she was tempted 
to decide on retracting her consent to it, 
but was still prevented, by the considera- 
tion of the disappointment such a measure 
would be productive of to her father, and 
the derogatory light in which it must make 
her character appear: but her thoughts 
were not entirely occupied by herself— what 
Delacour felt at the failure of his scheme 
N 4 relative 



S72 THE DISCARDED SON. 

relative to her, engrossed them not a 
little. 

About sunset Mr. Eaton returned, but 
unaccompanied by her parents. They could 
not bear^ he said, to come into the neigh- 
bourhood of Glengary — '' I trust, how- 
ever," he said, '' you will not suffer your- 
self to be much vexed by their refusal, 
particularly when you reflect, that in a day 
or two you'll join them again at Heath- 
wood." 

Elizabeth, however, could not help feel- 
ing extremely disappointed at their not 
coming, as she fancied she should have 
derived both support and consolation from 
their presence. 

Like the mail, it being our intention to 
proceed as expeditiously as possible, well 
knowing that tedious books, like tedious 
journeys, are fatiguing in the extreme, 
we shall never follow any of our characters 
into the closet, for the purpose of detailing 
their soliloquies, apostrophes, or private 
cogitations^ except when we see an abso- 
lute 



THE DISCARDED SON. 273 

lute necessity for doing so^ in order to 
elucidate soip.e particular circumstance; 
we shall now, therefore, in pursuance of 
the above intention, content ourselves with 
merely saying, that Elizabeth, on the morn- 
ing destined to give her to Mr. Eaton, ap- 
peared with a countenance melancholy but 
calm, an eye downcast, but unmoistened 
by a tear. 

Mrs. Elford had made it a point that the 
ceremony should be performed in a conse- 
crated place; accordingly, an old ruined 
chapel, a few furlongs from the house, and 
sunk in a deep hollow, amidst rude rocky 
mountains, vvas the one fixed on for the 
purpose. 

The moment breakfast was over, the im- 
patient lover arose, for the purpose of con- 
ductino' his bride thither. She involun- 
tarily recoiled as he approached to take 
her hand, but, almost instantly rerollect- 
ing herself, suiTcred him to do so, without 
anv further manifestation of reluctance. 
Thev were attended bv Mrs. Elford, the 
K b clergyman, 



g74 THE DISCARDED SON, 

clergyman, and another gentleman to act 
thepart of nuptial father. 

The wild and mournful solitude of the 
chapel, the desolation every where con- 
spicuous in it, aggravated the feelings, and 
rendered still more chilling the sensations 
with which Elizabeth entered it: the roof 
in many places had fallen in, and the con- 
sequent damps had nourished all around 
that kind of vegetation which announces 
ruin and desertion — the wild vine gadded 
over the tombs^ grass grew thick in the 
intei'stices of the flags^ and here and there 
the ivy, creeping through the broken beams^ 
twined itself about the mouldering pillars; 
the v/indows, half demolished, half filled up 
with stones and rubbish, permitted but a 
partial light to gain admittance, a sickly 
^le^m of sunshine, which, like the smile of 
despair, served rather to chill than cheer. 

The eyes of Elizabeth involuntarily wan- 
dered about, and almost as involuntarily 
she paused, for the purpose o^ contem- 
plating more attentively some of the 
3 melancholy 



THE DISCARDED SON. 275 

melancholy objects upon which they 
fell. 

The impatient Eaton did not allow her 
long to continue thus employed—'^ My 
love/' cried he^ a little impetuously^ as well 
as a little reproachfully^ ''you seem to have 
forgotten the purpose for which we come 
hither/' attempting^ as he spoke, to draw 
her on to the altar, or rather place on 
which the altar had stood, for there was 
now no remains of one; but where there 
had been, there was an elevation of a few 
steps. 

The feelings of Elizabeth at this mo- 
ment became incontrollable — she felt as if 
she was about signing a bond which would 
tear her from all she held dear on earth — 
in the agony of her soul, she unconsciously 
wrested her hand from Eaton, and sunk, 
trembling and aghast, against the shoulder 
of Mrs. Elford. 

'' She's fainting!'* cried he, in accents of 
alarm — '' have you nothing to give her to 
smell to?" 

N 6 Mrs. 



^76 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Mrs. Elford produced a bottle of eau-dc- 
luce. Eaton attempted to apply it himself 
to Elizabeth^ but she took it into her own 
hand ; and^ after bending her pale face 
over it a few minutes — '' I am l>etter/' 
said she, but sighing, as if there was an 
intolerable weight upon her heart. 

'' Yes, yes, so you are, my angel, and 
you'll be still better by-and-bye — the 
damp and desolation of this place has 
affected your spirits, so we'll get through 
our business in it as fast as possible, and 
be off/' 

Again he took her hand ; and motioning 
to the clergyman, the ceremony was about 
commencing, when the grating of a small 
door, leading, by means of a long passage, 
to the cemetery belonging to the chapel, 
drew the attention of all towards it; no one, 
however, appeared; and, concluding it was 
the wind that had moved it, the clergyman 
was on the point of proceeding, when again 
the door grated with more violence than it 
had before done on its rusty hinges, and the 

next 



THE DISCARDED SOl^. 277 

next instant a man, enveloped in a dark 
grey coat, with a large hat flapped over his 
face, so as to prevent any part of it from 
being seen, made his appearance; and with 
a slow pace, but an air of firmness, stalked 
forw^ard till he came exactly opposite Mr. 
Eaton, when he made a full stop. 

"" Very strange all this!'' cried the latter 
In visible emotion; and, after regarding 
ihe unexpected intruder for a minute in 
silence, and with deep attention, 'the na- 
tural ruby of his cheek too somevv'hat 
faded' — '^Say, Sir," in a tone of fierceness, 
'*" what is the meaning of this conduct? — 
Speak ! — Who are you ?" 

•' Behold I" replied the other, in a voice 
of thunder, and taking off his hat — 
''Behold!" and, drawing nearer to him, 
he fastened on him eyes gleaming with 
scorn, indignation, and fury, 

"Ha! — you here!" exclaimed Eatcn^ 
recoiling at the same time as if he had 
seen a serpent — '' Perdition ! what brought 
you hither?" 

"' Away, 



278 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

^' Awa}% vile wretch !" returned the other, 
indignantly waving his hand — '' Away ! — 
the spear of Ithuriel is advancing against 
thee — thy native deformity can no longer 
remain concealed. Away ! thy lingering 
here avails thee not; thy intended victim is 
completely rescued from thee.*' 

Eaton^ though evidently overwhelmed 
with confusion, attempted to say some- 
thing; instead, however, of listening to 
him, the stranger turned towards the door 
by which he had himself entered, as if for 
the purpose of calling for assistance. 
Upon this, Eaton, with a horrible impre- 
cation, precipitately quitted the chapel, 
followed by Mrs. Elford and his two other 
friends. 

The astonishment of Elizabeth, during 
this scene, may easier be conceived than 
described — it was such as rendered her 
motionless. 

" Sweet girl,'' cried the stranger, his 
angry voice and countenance changing 
into mildness the moment he found they 

were 



THE DISCARDED SON. 279 

vere alone; " sweet girl/* drawing near 
her^ and, with an air at once tender and 
respectful, taking her hand, '' you look 
not only surprised, but dismayed — but be 
not alarmed, you are no longer in danger. 
Yes/' observing the wild look she gave 
him at these words, "I repeat, in danger; 
for, but a minute ago, you stood on the 
very brink of a precipice. But I will not 
torture your feelings by affecting mystery; 
to be explicit then, know, that the man, or 
rather fiend, for that title best becomes 
him, since there is nothing he has not done 
to degrade the character and native dig- 
nity of man, he, I say, to V)?hom,you were 
on the point of giving your hand, is 
already the husband of another — of one 
too of the most amiable as well as injured 
of Vvomen — a father also, and of a daugh- 
ter as lovely and innocent as yourself.'' 

Elizabeth clasped her hands, and looked 
up — "Accept, oh gracious Heaven,'' she 
exclaimed, " accept my thanks, my adora- 
tioH; for thy interposition in my favour!" 

'' Yet 



28^ THE DISCARDED SDK. 

''Yet this monster's name is coupled 
with praise/* resunnecl the stranger, '' rrav, 
by your parents — they regard him as the 
best of men — they put their fate into his 
hands. But you will cease to wonder at 
this, when I tell yoii that he is '' 

*' Who?'* demanded Elizabeth, panting^ 
and unconsciously grasping his arm. 

'' Lord O'Sinister/* 

In manifest horror Elizabeth recoiled a 
few paces from him, faintly repeating the 
name he had uttered. 

Had the earth gaped beneath her feet — 
had the foundations of the world been 
shaken — had the clouds darted forth fire — 
had, in shcrt, all that this great globe con*- 
tains seemed ready. to perish and dissolve 
at the moment, she could scarcely have 
appeared more shocked than she did, at 
hearing that i^aQ intend-ed betrayer of her 
honour was the patron of her fainilv. 
The tears, which her chilled heart would 
not before \Gt her shed, now gushed in 
torrents from her. 

'^\h 



THE mSCARDED SON. 281 

'' x\h then, they are ruined ! my family 
are ruined!*' she exclaimed, wringing her 
hands^ her father's pecuniary obligations 
to the wretch recurring to her recollection. 

^' Noj no/' interrupted the stranger; "I 
am perfectly aware of your reason for 
thinking sO;, but I not only hope^ but am 
inclined to believe, that Lord O'Sinister 
will let m.atters remain as they are." 

'' And by what name/' asked Elizabeth, 
^'am I to mention you in my orisons — 
you who certainly have been Heaven's in- 
strument to save me from destruction.^" 

'' My name is Beerscroft: I am the bro- 
ther of Lady O'Sinister. Her knowledge 
of her Lord's disposition — a knowledge 
which, long ago, would have occasioned 
her to separate herself from him, but on 
account of her daughter, whom she knew 
she must then give up, induces her to 
keep a vigilant eye upon him; not, how- 
ever, out of any mean jealousy, but prin- 
cipally for the purpose of obtaining op- 
portunities of frustrating his villainous 

schemes. 



289 THE DISCARDED SON. 

schemes. By means too tedious to re- 
late now, and besides unnecessary for you 
to hear, she received intimation of his de- 
signs on you. The moment she did, she 
fiew to me, as indeed in every emergency 
she has been wont to do, to entreat me to 
lose no time in hastening to interpose 
between you and destruction: I needed 
not the repetition of this entreaty to in- 
duce my doing so, exclusive of the interest 
which every man of feeling must take in 
the fate of youth and innocence. I was 
rendered anxious about yours, by the esti- 
mation in which I hold the character of 
your father, with the chief events of whose 
life I am acquainted, and, of consequence, 
the injustice with which he has been treated. 
I directly repaired from London to Heath- 
wood, where, closely disguised, I hovered 
about my unworthy relative, and marked 
the steps he took respecting you. Instead, 
however, of openly apprizing you of these, 
I had recourse to an anonymous letter for 
the puq^se, wishing as much as possible, 

on 



THE DISCARDED SON. 283 

on account of my sister and niece, to 
screen him from public disgrace, but^, at 
the same time, determined^, if I found this 
had not the desired effect, to enter into a 
full explanation respecting him. Ere I 
had time, however, to ascertain whether it 
would or notj the unexpected return of 
your father drove him away; but still, 
aware of the schemes he was capable of 
forming, I continued to keep a watchful 
eye upon him, and, at length, but not till 
after she had got you into her power, suc- 
ceeded in discovering that he had employed 
a woman of the vilest description, to in- 
veigle you from the protection of your 
parents. I would instantly have wrested 
you from her, but that I thought his shame 
and disappointment would be heightened 
by not doing so till the last moment. After 
the open exposure of his baseness to you, 
I cannot think he will have the effrontery to 
annoy you again in any direct manner; 
and, as to any secret machinations, you 
will, doubtless, be upon your guard." 

" Words 



S8f THE DISCARDED SON. 

'■^ Words are inadequate to express the' 
obligations I owe yoU;, for the interest you- 
have taken in my fate/* returned Elizabeth. 

" Had I taken a less animated one, I 
should have had little pretensions either to 
honour or humanity/^ 

'*^ What will you say to me/' rejoined 
Elizabeth, " if I ask you to add to these, 
by conveying me to my parents?*' 

'' That I should conceive myself com- 
plimented by your request, but that, 
at present, you must not think of re- 
turning to them; as you could not do so 
immediately, and in company with me, 
without exciting enquiries that could not 
be evaded, and which would, in all pro- 
bability, lead to the most unpleasant, it 
might be fata], consequences, as your 
father is not a man to be injured or in- 
sulted with impunity/' 

'' What is to be done then?" demanded 
Elizabeth, not a little agitated. 

"Don't be uneasy; I have procured you 
a safe and pleasant asylum with a lady in 

the 



THE DISCARDED SON, 9S5 

the neighbourhood^ who was formerly well 
xicqiiainted with your father^ and has never 
ceased to esteem him; and is besides on the 
most intimate terms with Lady O'Sinister. 
I confided to her the whole of Lord O'Si- 
nister's conduct respecting you, and pre- 
pared her to receive you. A carriage is 
now waiting at an inn, a little way off, to 
x:onduct you to her; and a servant has 
been already sent to Mrs. Elford, to demand 
your things. You must inform your pa- 
rents that she met you by accident, and, 
discovering your near relationship to her 
old friend, your father, rested not until she 
had prevailed on that lady to let you spend 
some time with her." 

'' How kind, how considerate have you 
been throughout this whole affair," said 
Elizabeth. 

'' Thank Heaven it has terminated as it 
has," he replied. 

He now led her from the chapel; a few 
minutes brought them to a small and soli- 
tary 



!286 THE DlSCAPvDF.D SvOX. 

tary inn, at which a chaise and pair^ with 
tw^o servants^ stood waiting to receive 
them. They immediately entered it, and^ 
as it drove on, Mr. Beerscroft informed his 
fair companion, that Mrs. Dunbar, the lady 
to whom she was going, was a widow, pos- 
sessed of a large estate in the neighbour- 
hood of Glengary, without children, but 
surrounded by connexions; and added, he 
made no doubt, from her amiable manners,, 
and the hospitable and cheerful style in 
■which she lived, Elizabeth v;ould find her- 
self extremely happy with her. 

Elizabeth, somewhat calmed by his as- 
suring her he had no apprehension of Lord 
O'Sinister's proceeding to any extremity 
against her father, and her heart lightened 
of an intolerable load, by the idea she no 
]on2:er hesitated to vield t6, of Delacour's 
having been falsely accused to her — for that 
her being carried off was by the contrivance 
of Lord O'Sinistcr, in order to furnish him 
with an opportunity of doing something 

which 



THE DISCARDED SON. 9S7 

which should make her think him deserv- 
ing of her regard^ his subsequent conduct 
permitted hen not to doubt — was able to 
listen with attention, and something like 
pleasure^ to his conversation. 

After a ride of two hours, she found herself 
farther advanced than she had ever before 
been amidst the wild scenery of the High- 
lands — a scenery vdiich gradually .gave a 
turn to her thoughts, and inspired her 
with the liveliest sensations of awe, pleasure, 
and astonishment, by more than ansv^^eriiig 
the ideas she had formed of the sublimity 
of nature. The carriage, after proceeding 
some way through a rugged road, hollowed 
between tremendous precipices, and open 
to the sen, began to ascend one of the 
highest of these, presenting in many 
places frightful chasms, and headlong tor- 
rents, to the view : at length, after a tedious 
and, at least so Elizabeth thought, danger- 
ous ascent, it reached in safety the plain 
on which the habitation of lAv^. Dunbar 
stoud^ a vast and once impregnable for- 
tress. 



^88 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

tress, but, at this period, exhibiting the 
moss of years upon its towers, over which 
the blast of ocean howled with no idle 
threat of injury. A lofty rampart, but 
overrun with weeds, and in many places 
broken and gapped, still encircled it; and, 
at its rear, arose a still steeper height than 
that it crowned, covered with a deep mass 
of shade, principally consisting of oaks, 
throusb the intertwisted branches of which 
a torrent was seen flashing and foaming 
with impetuous fury down a naked rock, 
which reared high its head amongst those 
gigantic sons of the creation. From the 
plain the eye sought in vain for 

** The shelter'd cot, or cultivated farm ;" 

long mountainous tracts covered with 
heath, gloomy forests of pine and fir, and 
deep sterile vallies, shrouded by gloomy 
precipices, and watered by green-tinctured 
streamSj alone met the view, forming alto- 
gether, however, a grand and varied pros- 
pect, such as could not be contemplated 
by a mind of any taste without emotion. 

As 



THE DISCARDED SON. 28 D 

As the carr]a<2:e drove throii2:h a lonir 
succession of gloomy gateways to aa ip.ner 
coiirtj Elizabeth was almost tempted to 
imai>ine she was about enteiins: one of 
those buildings she had read of in romances, 
where several unfortunate ladies and knights 
are made prisoners irrevocably, till rekasei 
from captivity by the Knight ol the Burn- 
ing Pestle^ or some other of equal hardi- 
hood. Nor was she less disposed to do 
so, when, on alighting, she found, herself ia 
a spacious hall, hung with armour, and 
restino- its vaulted and richlv fretted roof 
on arches of stone, through which a double 
row of narrow painted windows were seen, 
principally composed of stained glass, and 
divided by a gallery. 

From the hall Elizabeth and her compa- 
nion were conducted up stairs, and through 
several galleries hung with tapestry and 
pictures, to the dressing-room of Mrs. 
Dunbar, where she awaited their arrival. 

Kothino: could be more «;racious tlurn 
was her reception of Elizabeth; she wel- 

voL. I. o corned 



5^90 THE DISCARDED SON. 

comecl her to her mansion^ as the daughter 
of a person for whom she had the sincerest 
regard, and assured her nothing but her 
long absence from her native land (Mr. 
Dunbar, owing to ill health, having passed 
the principal part of his time abroad), had 
prevented her making minute enquiries 
after her father, the acquaintance and friend 
of her juvenile days. 

Although beyond the prime of life, her 
person was still attractive, and the expres- 
sion of her countenance, and affability and 
courteousness of her manners, such as im- 
mediately confirmed the prepossession 
which Elizabeth, from the report of Mr. 
Beerscroft, had conceived in her favour. 

She spoke of Lord O'Sinister's conduct 
in terms of the highest indignation, and bit- 
terly lamented so amiable a woman as his 
lady being united to a man capable of such 
atrocity: notwithstanding the indignation, 
however, that it inspired her with, she con* 
curred with Mr. Beerscroft in opinion, that 
it could not be too carefully concealed. 

After 



THE DISCARDED SOK. 291 

After a general conversation of about 
an hour, Mr. Beerscroft rose to take his 
leave, having many particular reasons for 
wishing it not to be publicly known that 
he was at present in Scotland : after paying 
his parting compliuients to Mrs. Dunbar, 
he turned to Elizabeth, and, taking her 
hand — '' I shall returrf," said he, '' to Lon- 
don, winged with pleasure at the thoughts 
of having had the happiness of serving so 
much innocence and sweetness — above all, 
the daughter of a worthy man. May the 
next intelligence I receive of you be, that 
you are the happy bride of some deserving 
character, and thus still more securer- 
guarded against the machinations of vil- 
lainy.'* Then respectfully kissing her hand^ 
he relinquished it, and departed, followed 
by her thanks and benedictions. 

As soon as he was gone, Mrs. Dunbar 
enquired minutely into the whole of his 
unworthy brother-in-law's conduct to Eli- 
zabeth and her family. Tier astonishment, 
on hearing it detailed, fully equalled her 
o 2 indignation — 



292 THE DISCARDED SON. 

indignation — '' What a propensity to vice 
must he have/' cried she, " who can in- 
volve himself in so much trouble on its 
account! — did he take half the pains to be 
virtuous that he does to be the reverse, 
"What a noble character would he be!'' 

She then, in her turn, gratified the cu- 
riosity of Elizabeth \vith some particulars 
respecting Lady O'Sinister and her brother. 
They were the only offspring, she informed 
her, of a very opulent merchant in the city 
of London, who, contrary to the usual 
custom, divided his ample property between 
them, a circumstance which induced Lord 
O'Sinister, who had alw^ays an eye to his 
own interest, to pay his addresses to the 
young lady. Mr. Beerscroft was brought 
up to his father's business, which he found 
in too flourishing a state, at the old gen- 
tleman's decease, to think of withdrawing 
from: averse, however, to trouble, and in- 
clined, besides, to pleasure, he soon re- 
solved on relieving himself from all the 
fatiguing part of it, by taking an active 

partner. 



THE DISCAEDED SON. 293 

partner. Naturally of an iinsiispj'cioiis 
temper^ and of an age, besides, Vvlien he 
formed this resolution^ in which the mind 
is apt to be precipitate in its decisions, he 
was not long in making choice of one, a 
man of manners so plausible, that he soon 
obtained a complete ascendancy over him; 
and, by degrees, succeeded in leading him 
into deep and, so at least to a cool and 
sober judgment they would have appeared,, 
extravagant speculations, for the carrying 
on of which, he pretended large sums were 
requisite, a pretence that obtained for him 
the V7ealth he coveted, and of which he 
had no sooner made himself master, than 
he decamped, leaving the too credulous 
Beerscroft stripped of fortune, and ruined 
in credit, in consequence of the incorrect 
manner the business had been carried on, 
from the time he ceased to take an active 
part in it himself. He fled for consolation 
to his brother-in-law — but consolation 
was almost the last thing he had a chance 
of receiving from him — his sister was sent 
o3 out 



S94 THE DISCARDED SON. 

out of the way, in order to prevent her 
lending him any assistance; and the noble 
Peer did nothing but upbraid and execrate 
the folly, which permitted the embezzle- 
ment of a fortune he had secretly hoped 
some unexpected casualty might yet have 
put him in possession of. 

In the hour of calamity, rebuke, however 
it may be merited, should be avoided, since 
^tis an hour in which the heart cannot 
endure it with calmness, particularly if it 
comes from those whom we fondly imagined 
would have sympathized in our sufferings. 

Beerseroft quitted the mansion of his. 
titled relative Avith greater precipitation 
than he had hurried to it, despair in his 
heart, distraction in his eye, when his good 
genius threw him in the way of an old 
friend, who, like the good Samaritan, car- 
ried him to his home, bound up the wounds 
of his almost broken heart, nor suffered 
him to leave his hospitable roof till he had 
obtained him a lucrative situation under 
government. 

The 



THE DISCARDED SON. 295 

The deep impression made on him by 
Lord O'Sinister's conduct to him in the 
height of his distress, would have induced 
him to forego all further communication 
with his Lordship, but on account of his 
sister, whom he most tenderly loved, as 
she did him. His society soon became 
her chief pleasure, every succeeding day 
tending still more fully to convince her, 
that happiness was not to be enjoyed v/ith 
such a man as 

'• Fate had made her lord." 

His total want of those virtues he had so 
well assumed the semblance of when pay- 
ing his addresses to her — the indignity and 
cruel malevolence with which he was con- 
stantly in the habit of treating her — his 
abominable hypocrisy — his vile licentious- 
ness, of which scarce a day passed in which 
some new account did not reach her ears 
to wound her heart — his ignoble conduct 
to her beloved brother — all, by degrees, 
so completely alienated her affection for 
o i him. 



296 THE DISCARDED SON. 

him^ that, bat for her daughter, whom, in 
the event of a separation between them, 
she knev^ she should not be allowed to 
retain with her, she would have proposed 
one. 

Aware of the atrocities her lord was 
capable of committing, she thought herself 
not only justified, but performing an in- 
dispensible duty, in keeping a watch upon 
him^ for the purpose of being enabled in 
some degree to counteract his schemes. 
In the measures she had recourse to for 
defeating them, her brother was not only 
her confident but chief agent; and to their 
exertions many a father was indebted for 
not bewailing the hour he had become 
one, many a lovely innocent for not pe- 
rishing like a loathsome weed in the streets 
of the metropolis. 

In addition to these particulars, Mrs. 
Dunbar further in-formed her attentive au- 
ditor, that generosity was known but by 
name to his Lordship; tliat he did nothing 
without a secret view to his own interest 

02- 



THE DISCARDED SON. 297 

or gratification ; yet that, unacquainted as" 
he was in reality with virtue, none could 
better assume the appearance of it, when- 
ever he found it requisite to do so for the 
furtherance of his schemes; in short, that he 
was*^a complete man of the world, as the 
term is generally understood — a violator of 
every moral obligation, an insidious friend, 
an implacable enemy, a hardened liber- 
tine, holding in absolute detestation his 
amiable lady, her patient merit, and unde- 
viating rectitude, notwithstanding her tho- 
rough knowledge of his baseness, being a 
kind of reproach to him he could not bear, 
nor more regarding his lovely daughter, 
but on account of the still more illustrious 
and extensive connexions she might be the 
means of enabling him to form. But what 
had brought him to Firgrove, a seat she 
knew he disliked, from its remoteness from 
the capital, where he could indulge his 
vicious propensities without fear of abso- 
Jiite exposure, for, in order to be better 
enabled to deceive, he wished to conceal 
c b his 



998 THE DISCARDED SON. 

his real character from the worlds Mrs. 
Dunbar could not pretend to say. 

We, however, being better informed on 
the subject, are able to state, that his visit 
to it was on account of a married ladv of 
distinction in the neighbourhood, with 
whom he had formed an acquaintance the 
preceding winter in London, and whose 
husband, a gallant officer, was then risking 
his life abroad in the service of his king 
and country. The place in which their 
assignations were generally kept, was the 
ruined Abbey; and^ in order to prevent 
the least danger of intrusion, his Lordship 
employed Mr. Jenkins, his valet, confidante 
and prime agent in every villainy, to m.ake 
use of some contrivance for keeping the 
rustics av>'ay from it. To the ingenuity, 
therefore, of this gentleman, was owing the 
noises and appearances that so alarmed 
and astonished the simple inhabitants of 
Heath v/ood. 

An easy conquest was never a valued 
one by Lord O'Sinister; his passion^ there- 
fore. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 299 

fore, for this lady quickly subsided, and, 
about the same period, he accidentally, but 
without being seen himself, beheld the fair 
Elizabeth — 

** Her form fresher than the morning rose 

When the dew wets its leaves ; unstain'd and pure 

As is the lily, or the mountain snow." 

That very instant love, but not, like Pale- 
mon's, chaste desire, sprung in his heart; 
and he resolved not to rest, until he had 
discovered who she was, and made an effort 
to introduce himself to her. As usual, he 
had recourse to Jenkins, to obtain him 
the information he desired; and, by his 
means, soon learnt her name and situation 
in life. This, however, did not satisfy him; 
ere he commenced his plans against her, 
he conceived it requisite to know the 
principles of her parents, and how they 
were circumstanced. Accordingly, a pre- 
text was formed for bringing Stubbs to- 
him, whom the indefatigable Jenkins soon, 
succeeded in learning was able to give 
6 him 



300 THE DISCARDED SON. 

him all the particulars he required. Con- 
vinced, from the account the honest rustic 
gave of Munro, that to hope to overcome 
his principles, or elude the vigilance with 
which he watched over his daughter, would 
be ridiculous, he conceived the project of 
getting him out of the way, by oflering 
him the adjutancy of his regiment; and 
also (under the supposition of his resem- 
bling his father in point of disposition) of 
keeping the son from Heathwood, by pro- 
mising to become his patron in future. 

On succeeding in tiiis, he lost no time 
>n introducing himself to the innocent 
Elizabeth and her mother, under the ficti- 
tious name of Eaton — fearing to do so by 
his own, lest premature suspicion should 
be excited. Accustomed to deceive and 
triumph, he flattered himself he should find 
her an easy victim: to his extreme disap- 
pointment and mortification, however, he 
soon perceived that there was not the 
smallest chance of succeeding with her by 
the common arts of seduction — by any 

otheiv 



THE DISCARDED SON. 301 

other^ iivOt withstanding her youths, inno- 
cence, inexperience, and consequent un- 
suspicion of the deceitfiilness of mankind, 
but by apparently honourable means, or 
actual violence — to which last measure he 
was unwilling to have recourse^ lest it 
should deprive him of all chance of ob- 
taining her heart, for the possession of 
which he now began to be almost as 
anxious as he was for the possession of her 
person. At length he decided on making 
her a m.atrimonial overture, and, if she 
rejected it, on carrying her oft^ — than which 
nothing could be easier, as he had several 
emissaries constantly in pay, capable of 
executing any villainy he set them on. 

The rapture he derived, from. Elizabeth's 
acceptance of his addresses, was not a little 
damped bv her father's positively inter- 
dicting their nuptials, till he had received 
unquestionable proofs of his respectability. 
The chagrin, however, this interdiction 
caused him, the scheme he formed for de- 
ceiving him on the subject, quickly enabled 

him 



SOS THE DISCARDED SON. 

him to get ovcr^ but for carrying which 
into effect he was prevented by a hint 
from Mrs. Munro, that she would on no 
account consent to the marriage of her 
daughter, till her father could be present 
at it; and, in its place, formed the horrible 
project of incapacitating Munro, by per- 
sonal injury, from retaining the situation 
he had given hiin, (a project which had 
nearly been attended with fatal conse- 
quences, the ruffian whom he employed' 
on this occasion being of a still more 
atrocious disposition than himself), and 
reducing him to such a state of poverty, 
by the destruction of his habitation, as 
would prevent him, he trusted, from throw- 
ing new obstacles in the way of his Welshes. 
The yjartial failure of it threw him into a 
^age that exceeded description ; in the first 
paroxysm of which, he again thought of 
carrying off Elizabeth, but again relin- 
quished the idea, from the dread he enter- 
tained, of converting the favourable sen- 
timents he had reason to believe she then- 

entertained 



THE DISCARDED SON. 3QS- 

entertained for him into horror and dis- 
gust, by such a step: the one he had at 
length recourse to, for getting her intOf 
his power, succeeded according to his 
wishes. The dread he experienced of his 
conduct towards her being resented by 
her father or brother, gave way to the 
conviction of their being both in his 
power — the former in consequence of the 
bond he had given him^ and which, by a 
legerdemain trick of Mr, Jenkins, was 
made payable on demand, and the other, 
from knowing he had no chance of pre- 
ferment but through his means. 

Mrs. El ford, his \ile confederate, in 
order to prevent any thing like suspicion 
entering the mind of Elizabeth, took ad- 
vantage of what she told her respecting 
Delacour, to instruct the ruffians, who car- 
ried her off, to say that he v/as the person 
who employed them. 

In short, from the whole of Lord O'Si- 
nister's conduct, it was evident, that, as a 
much admired writer has observed, '' when 

villain V 



304 THE DISCARDFD SON. 

villainy gets the ascendancy, it seldom 
leaves the wretch, till it has thoroughly 
polluted him." 

Elizabeth, having heard all the particu- 
, lars she desired to know respecting the 
family of Lord O'Sinister^ next enquired 
after that of Glengary. Mrs. Dunbar, in 
reply, informed her, she 9.0 seldom visited 
there, she could give her but little inform- 
ation concerning them, but that she would 
introduce a person to her, the Irish house- 
keeper belonging to it, who frequently 
visited her's, for the purpose of having her 
curiosity fully gratified. After a little further 
conversation, she conducted her to the 
chamber prepared for her, a spacious 
and pleasant apartment, with a dressing- 
room adjoining, in which Elizabeth found 
the things she had brought with her from 
Heathwood already deposited. Mrs. Dun- 
bar soon after left her to prepare for 
dinner; not, however, without first offer- 
ing to send her woman to assist her in 
dressing — an offer which Elizabeth, ac- 
customed 



THE DISCARDED SON. 305 

customed on all occasions to be her own 
handmaid, and wishing, besides, to be leit 
for a little time to herself, in order to 
collect her scattered thoughts, and endea- 
vour to regain the composure the events 
of the few last hours had disturbed, 
declined. 

When she reflected on these events, she 
could scarcely believe herself awake, so 
strange did they appear; gradually, how- 
ever, the horror with vvhich they inspired 
her gave way to the delightful considera- 
tion, of being again at liberty to indulge 
the predominant feelings of her heart: 
she dwelt, with a degree of pleasure that 
recalled to her cheek the colour which 
terror and anxiety had banished from it, 
on the probability there was of her shortly 
meeting Delacour again — she no longer, 
in consequence of his being restored to 
her good opinion, by her detection of the 
artifices of Mrs. Elford, thought with re- 
sentment of the failure of his promised visit 
— no longer entertained a doubt of his 

bein<^ 



306 THE DISCARDED SON. 

being able to account for in a satisfactory 
manner^ whenever she should see him — in 
a word, she again felt happy — again gave 
way to hope and expectation: the idea, 
also, of being at length introduced into 
the kind of society she had so long wished 
to mix in, (Mrs. Dunbar having given her 
to understand that she had now not only 
a number of friends on a visit to her, but 
large parties every day to dinner), added 
not a little to her spirits. As soon as she 
was dressed, she repaired to her chamber; 
but, instead of finding her there, learned 
from her woman that she was already gone 
to the drawing-room to receive her com- 
pany. 

Elizabeth felt a little panic-struck at the 
thoughts of entering the room by herself; 
as she found her doing so, however, was 
not to be avoided, she endeavoured to 
calm her i^erturbation, in order to prevent 
any thing like embarrassment being seen 
in her manner. 

The moment she made her appearance, 

Mrs. 



THE DISCARDED SOK. 307 

Mrs. Dunbar stepped forward to receive 
her; and, taking her by the hand, intro- 
duced her, in a general way^, to the party, 
which consisted of a Mrs. Ruthven, her 
niece, a young and lately married lady; her 
husband, a gay and fashionable young man; 
Miss Rae, her particular friend; Lady Loch- 
ness, a lively woman of the world ; Mr. 
Hume, a pert conceited coxcomb; Mr, 
Grant, a rather blunt and satirical character^ 
and several other ladies and gentlemen. 

The ceremony of introduction over, Eli- 
zabeth would quickly have recovered her 
usual ease, but for the whispering conver- 
sation, and rude staring of Mi's. Ruthven 
and her confident. Miss Rae, by whom Mrs. 
Dunbar had, from motives of goodnature^ 
placed her. To neither, indeed, v/as the 
sight of such loveliness as she possessed by 
any means agreeable, as both had an insa- 
tiable rage for admiration, and certain views 
besides, at this juncture, which they much 
feared her superior attractions would be 
the means of disappointing. 

Mrs. 



308 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Mrs. Ruthven was by no means hand- 
some, nor even pleasing in her appearance: 
her satiricaljand often peevish countenance, 
was a true index of her mind. Granddaugh- 
ter and heiress to a Scotch baronet of large 
fortune^ her temper, never very amiable, 
was so completely injured by the excessive 
indulgence she met from him, and the high 
sense she was early taught to entertain of 
her own consequence, that, as she grew up, 
she became proud, impatient of the slight- 
est controul, capricious, and vindictive. 
Her grandfather, and the father of her hus- 
band, a man also of large fortune, were 
long and intimately acquainted, and, at an 
early period, a union between her and 
young Ruthven was proposed by them ; 
to which, the young gentleman being gay, 
gallant, and handsome, she made no objec- 
tion. Her grandfather lived biU to see this 
completed ; he died under the pleasing 
idea of her happiness being secured by 
it. The very reverse, however, of this 
v/as the case — Riithven's sole induce- 
ment 



THE DISCARDED SON. 309 

ment for accepting her hand, being to 
obtain a settlement from his father: nor 
did he long endeavour to conceal his in- 
difference from her. The discovery of this, 
by the mortification it inflicted on her va- 
nity, irritated her almost to madness, and, 
by degrees, so completely alienated her 
affections from him, as to make her bitterly 
repent having united herself to him — a re- 
pentance which was latterly still further 
heightened, bv a predilection she conceived 
for another object, with whom, her opinion 
of her charms being of a very exalted 
nature, she entertained no doubt she could 
have readily formed an alliance had she 
been at libertv. 

Miss Rae, her bosom friend, vras the 
daughter of a needy parasite of her grand- 
father's, who, anxious to get her off his 
hands, had found means of introducing her 
into the family, where, by dint of flattery 
and artifice^ she contrived to maintain her 
ground, and acquire a complete Ascendancy 
over Mrs. Ruthven. Her person was shewy, 

and 



310 THE DISCARDED SON. 

and so far attracted Mr. Ruthven, as to in- 
duce him to pay her attentions that caused 
her to believe she had made a conquest of 
him — an idea by no means disagreeable to 
her, notwithstanding his being the husband 
of the woman she professed to regard, and 
to whose kindness she was indebted for al- 
most every advantage she possessed, and 
every gratification she enjoyed; in short, 
Mr. Ruthven would have found no diffi- 
culty in succeeding with her in the way he 
wished, but that, just as she was on the 
point of entering into a capitulation with 
him, she discovered the criminal passion 
of his wife; and, under the hope of its 
leading her into some step that might 
yet liberate him, resolved on an immediate 
change in her conduct — imagining, hov/- 
ever, that an alteration in it might occa- 
sion an alteration in his intentions relative 
to her. She was utterly mistaken, no miser 
being ever more covetous of wealth than 
he was. Flattering herself, however, that 
he would lead her to the hymeneal altar, if 

released 



THE DISCARDED SON. 311 

released from his present matrimonial fet- 
ters, she did every thing in her power to 
instigate his wife to give him an opportu- 
nity of breaking them, by secretly reviling 
him to her, and magnifying the perfections 
of the man she loved. 

Of either the real principles, or present 
views of her niece, or her confidant, Mrs. 
Dunbar was alike ignorant and unsuspi- 
cious. It must, indeed, have been some very 
glaring proof of baseness, which could have 
made her doubt the virtue of the former, so 
partial was she to her, from the consideration 
of her being the child of an only and beloved 
sister. Mrs. Ruthven was not capable of 
returning her affecti(>n: she affected to do 
so, however, from selfish motives, the prin- 
cipal part of Mrs. Dunbar's fortune being 
at her own disposal; but, notwithstanding 
this, would probably not, to pay her a visit, 
have quitted London (whither she went 
immediately after her marriage), but that 
she knew the bein^ whom, of all others, 
she wished to see was at this time her guest. 

Relative 



3 ! 2 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Relative to Elizabeth, Mrs. Dunbar said 
nothins: more to her visitors than that she 
\vas the oranddauo-hter of Mr. Miinro of 
Glengary — that, by chance, she had disco- 
vered her being in the neighbourhood — 
out of regard to her father, had invited her 
to spend some time with her — and that 
both her person and manners were attrac- 
tive. This latter part of her information 
was by no means agreeable to Mrs. Ruthven 
or Miss Rae, as both, notwithstanding their 
vanity, wxre apprehensive of the eflect 
which a newer face than theirs might have 
upon the respective objects of their regard. 
But the uneasiness which they felt before- 
hand was trifling, compared to what they 
experienced on seeing Elizabeth, so infi- 
nitely did she surpass the expectations 
which Mrs. Dunbar had raised conccrnins: 
her. That she did this, however, they: 
w^ould have died almost, ere they would 
have acknowledged even to one another; 
on the contrary, their envy and malice 
prompted them to say every thing that was 
5 depreciating 



THE DISCAKDED SON. 3l3 

depreciating of her^ as well as to treat her 
in a manner calculated to make her think 
little of herself. 

'' Pretty ! " said Mrs. Ruthven, after rudely 
staring at her some minutes, in a half whis- 
per to Miss Rae, and with a scornful look; 
'' *tis astonishing to me how my aunt can 
reckon her so/* 

" Oh, she is so goodnatured/' returned 
Miss Rae, with an insidious smile, and care- 
lessly playing with her fan; "but you 
know, my dear, women are not allowed to 
be good judges of the beauty of one ano- 
ther; we should ask the gentlemen their 
opinion — what say you, Hume?" address- 
ing herself to him, as he stood leaning 
over the back of the sofa she and her friend 
occupied. 

"Say, w^hy, that when a man's thoughts 
are entirely occupied by the charms of one 
lady, 'tis utterly impossible for him to de- 
cide upon those of another/' and, with a 
half suppressed sigh, he cast a languishing 
glance at Mrs. Ruthven, whose rage for 

VOL. I. p admiration 



314 THE DISCARDED SON. 

admiration he had sufficient penetration to 
perceive^, and to whom^ it being a maxim 
with him to pay court wherever fortune 
smiled, he paid the most extravagant 
homage. 

"Or by himself^ you might have added/' 
cried Mr. Grants, who, as he was passing 
near where he stood, overheard him. 

" Nay, as to that matter, I flatter myself 
no one can pretend to say I entertain too 
exalted an opinion of myself.'' 

''^Yet, if any one else entertained half 
as good a one of you, I should then allow 
you really had reason for vanity. '* 

*' And pray," somewhat nettled, ^' how 
do you know that that may not be the 
case?" 

" Oh, perhaps so, for some people have 
strange tastes, and little judgment.'* 

''What a savage 1" exclaimed the irritated 
Hume to the two ladies, as Grant walked 
away. *' I wonder Mrs. Dunbar can en- 
courage his visits." 

*' Perhaps,'* said Miss Rae sneering'ly, 
4 the 



THE DISCARDED SOK. 315 

the slighting xnanner in which Hume had 
treated her^ in consequence of looking 
upon her rather in the light of an humble 
companion to Mrs. Ruthven. having pro- 
voked her malice against him^ '' the truths 
he tells her are not quite so disagreeable 
as those he tells yoif/' 



EKD OF VOL. I. 



Uiie, Bailing, and Co. Lcadenhall-stf^ct. 



WORKS 

IPrintctJ at tlje ^inertias lPrc00» 

JVith the Reviewers^ Opinion,, 



VIVONIO ; 

OR, 
THE HOUR OF RETRIBUTION. 
BY A YOUNG LADY. 
4 vols. 16s. sewed, 
«' Vlvcnio is a novel of fome :rierit in Its kind. The ftyle is 
mnch belier than what is ufuaily met with, and the occur- 
rences more interetling. Here, at leaft we can say, that na- 
ture is not outraged, and that the book mny be perultd with 
pl.eafure." Literary Journal, Majj i8o6* 

THE IMPENETRABLE SECRET, 

A NOVEL, 

BY FRANCIS LATHOM. 
2 vols» 9s. sewed. 

" The story is constructed on so artful a plan, that none 
of the agents are left for an inst-ant unemploye.l; the events 
are ps ocetdlng in every quarter at once ; and the interest 
is divided indeed, but never weakened.— From the opening 
of the story to the discovery of the secret, our curiosity in- 
creases ; though we cannot attribute to curiosity alone a sen- 
sation which seems as closely allied to sympathy, as to asto- 
nishment. The explanatory statements that follow the chief 
developement are all satisfactory and probable." 

Critical Re'vieiUy Dec. 1805. 

** We seldom remember to have met with a tale possessing 
so mi;ch to catch the fet lings, and improve the he:irt. The 
adventitious aids of declamatory dialogue and second-hand 
sentiments, he carefully avoids." British Critic, Dec. 1805, 

«' Among the very few of cur modern novels that possess 
any thing to make amends for the labour of perusal, we aie 
hsppy to class the production before us. A powerful interest 
is excited from the beginning. Curiosity is kept alive to the 
conclusion of the book. The events are lomantic, but 
natural/' Monthly Mirror y Dec. 1805. 


