Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The maid of the Hamlet: a tale
MAID OF THE HAMLET.
CHAP. I.
«« Thou haft he«sn #i As one in ñiíFering alî, that fuffers nothing t * f A man who Fortune's buffets apd reward* *< Has ta*en with equal thanks ; and bleft are they *« Whofe blood and judgment mingled are fo wed, " That they are nota pipe for Fortune's finger, <* To ioand what flop ihe pleafes." SHAKSPEARE. x\GE, the end of all wifhes and purfuits, is the period leaft fitted to encounter affliaion. Sweetly, benignly, ihould the gale of profperity breathe along the vale vol. i. в of
of years, when the fruit, meliorated by time, on the leaft rude blaft is ready to drop and periih from the tree of life. Yet i f that Power (whofe ways, however dark and intricate they may appear, are itili directed by wifdom and by goodnefs) ihould allow calamity to purfue us even to the very brink of the grave, there are re* fources which can confole and mitigate, and render our fituation not utterly cheerlefs. Thefe refources are furnifhed by the memorv, which can look back without difmay, and by the mind which, placing a firm reliance upon Providence, fubmits with patience and fortitude to its decrees. Mr. Belmore, the defcendant of a re- fpedable family, and poffeffor of a fine citate in the inland part of Kent, was verging towards his fiftieth year, when he beheld
bjfcheld a profpečt of lofing that fortune which he had long enjoyed (to the benefit of the poor and fricndlefs) fay a diftant connexion laying claim to it, in confe¬ quence of the unexpected difcoveryof fome long-hidden papers. Mr. Belmore was inclined to think the pretenfions of this new claimant inadequate to his own : he endeavoured, however, to be prepared for the worft. The management of the law-fuit thefe pretenfions occafioned, he entrufted to an agent in London ; the infirmities of his conftkution, and a retired temper, ren¬ dering him averfe to going thither, to abide the iffue. Whatever this iffue was, he trufted he ihould bear it with compofure.— Cf If the Almighty ftiould be pleafed to continue to me," he cried, " what I now confider my в 2 rightful
rightful patrimony—may he alfo continue to me a difpofition to do good with it to others! If not — ifit ihould be his divine will to deprive me of it, may he in return give to me fortitude that cannot be fhaken, content that cannot be deftroyed ! thefe are permanent treafures far exceeding any I can lofe; Thefe will give * What nothing earthly gives or candeílroy, * Thefojuľs^alm fun-íhine and eternal joy."· But, notwithftanding his refolution, he fenfibly felt for a lovely bloffom, which bloome'd and expanded beneath the folter¬ ing fhade of tendernefs he had afforded it. This was a female orphan, configncd to his care by two of his deareft friends. He had never married; yet his heart was no ftranger to the fervour and delicacy of an hopelefs affection, and the native ten¬ dernefs
dernefs of hb difpofition, imbibed into his bofom feelings congenial to paternal ones. The young Matilda amply recom- pcnfed his care. Scarcely had her eyes opened to the light, ere ihe was deprived of both her parents, and thrown upon him entirely for protedion, which he extended in fuch а manner as to excite her warmeft gratitude, and create for him an affection,. bordering on enthufiafm. His flighteft wifh had to her the nature of a command ; and to pleafe him, was her higheft felicity: with juftice he has often called her his little Cherub, kindly given to diminuii his , earthly cares. Matilda, though educated in retirement, was brought up with elegance. She was early inftructed in every accomplifhment befitting her fex and future expectations, and to thofe accomplifiiments united » 3 a
a graceful demeanour and infinuating addrefs. «« Her Öiapf was all that thought can ít^ot " Of elegance and grace, ** And heav'n the beauties of her mind ** Reflccìediiì her face " V\ ΛΤΚΙ83. That face, though it could not boaft of exact fymmetry of features, poffeffed a fenfibility and animation which rendered it interefting and attractive in the extreme ; her large blue eyes rendered language fcarcely neceffary to explain her feelings, and her fine auburn hair gave additional charms to the fnowy forehead and glowing cheek o'er which it carelefsly wantoned. Though inexperienced, flic was not ig¬ norant of the world; a well-chofen collec¬ tion of books, read with attention, had expanded her mental powers, and matured her
her underftanding : they acquainted her with the uncertainty of every thing earthly, with the fhame and horror attendant on vice, and the involuntary reverence paid to virtue. Alive to companion, unaffeded in manners, pure in her principles* and pof¬ feffed of all the livelinefs of youth, with fufficient difcretion to temper and confine it within the bounds of propriety, was Matilda. 'Tw r as for this adopted child of his af- fedions Belmore keenly felt. Old and infirm as he was himfelf, he ftill retained that daunt lefs refolution which could have enabled him to bear the ftorm of adverfity without flirinking ; but when he refleded fhe muft be torn from the fhade where flie had fo long flouriihed, and be expofed perhaps hereafter to all the blcaknefs of в 4 cold
cold and cheerlefs, poverty (for, if d epri ved of his eftate, he could not do more than 'fupport her during his life), he found him¬ felf overpowered, and yielded to—what fhall it be termed—to pity, to fenfibility, to the grateful weaknefs of humanity,— : " Was a man only to fuffer himfelf (he has often faid), I fee not the mighty matter of his becoming a phiiofopher; it is his feeling for others gives iharpnefs to the arrows of calamity, and wrings his heart with anguiih." Ail forebodings öf evil, however, he dif, couraged, yet without encouraging hopes too fanguine. To raife our expectations when fo liable to difappointment, he knew to be ridiculous; yet to anticipate evil, betrayed à gloominefs of temper and dif- truft of Providence, equally repugnant to his feelings. Matilda
Matilda neither wholly excluded fear, nor too freely indulged hope; nor was ihe without fome little anxiety to learn the decifion of the fuit. Before we proceed farther in the narra¬ tive, we think it neceffary to make a flight digreffion, to relate fome particulars of Matilda's parents, which will be found re¬ quinte hereafter.
CHAP. II. *« Thus pouring comfort on his foul, " Even with her lateft breath, ** She gave one parting fond em brace, *« And closM her eyes in death ľ* HERMIT OF WARKWORTH. BEAUTY and innocence was the only portion of Lucinda Harley; youth and courage, the only patrimony of Stanley. He was the fon of a veteran, and from in- fancy trained to arms. He faw Lucinda accidentally, and the admiration with which
which he beheld her, ripened into a tender affedion, upon a mere intimate acquaint¬ ance. She was poor, like himfelf; and, like himfelf, an orphan: for he early loft his parents. He compared their refpedive fituations, and thought they could do no better than unite, and mutually try to alleviate the cares of each other. He Wooed her, not like a modern beau, with infipidity and languor, but with fincerity and ardour. Her blamelefs heart foon became his: fhe was too artlefs, either to wiih, or be able to diffemble the influence he acquired over it; and they pledged their irrevocable vows-, and were, though not rich, perhaps as happy a pair as ever entered , the temple of Hymen. Stanley was n » turally impetuous; the gentlenefs of Lu*. cinda reftrained his violence, which only fprung from an excels pf ' intrepidity, в 6 while
while her weaknefs was fupported by his bravery. Belmore, his bofom friend, kindly aififted him in procuring a commiflion in the regiment in which he himfelf ferved; but while the animated glowings of benevo¬ lence were his, he was a prey to concealed pangs that deadened every fource of com¬ fort. Never before aceuftomcd to a long communication with the fair-fex, he found himfelf furprifed into admiration by the gentlenefs and beauty of Lucinda; and de¬ ceived by imagining he was only paying the deference due to her virtues, he found too late the incurable anguiih of hopelefs affection muft be his. Soon after Stanley had entered the re¬ giment, it was ordered to America, then at war with France, where the two friends fignalized themfelves frequently, and were honoured
honoured with flattering teftimonies of ap¬ probation. During this period, Lucinda became the enraptured mother of two beau¬ tiful babes, a boy and a girl. Thofe little cherubs added to their felicity, and, if pof¬ fible, increafed the affedion ihe and her huiband entertained for each other, which had ever indeed fomething enthufiaftic in it. But, alas! how evanefcent is human blifs ! The French, in conjundion with the Indians, watched an opportunity one day (while a number of the Britiih officers and foldiers not expeding an attack, in con¬ fequence of a fineffe of the enemy were ab¬ fent from it, in purfuit of the game with which the neighbouring woods abounded) to attack the camp. The confternation into which this meafure threw thofe who remained within it may be eafier conceived Шап
than defcribed; but foon recollecting themfelves, and animated by their native fpirit, they rallied, and refolved^ if they fell, to fell their lives dearly. Thealarm foon reached the abfent party, amcngft whom were Stanley and Belmore. All haftened to the fcene of action ; and, with the timely fuccour they afforded, the enerny was repulfed and purfued to a con*- fidcrable diftance. Stanley, eager to behold and calm the apprehenfions of his Lucinda, haftened to her the moment he returned to the camp; his cheeks glowing with the exultation of triumph, his heart fraught with gratitude to heaven for her prefervatìon from the horrors which but a few minutes before had threatened her; die big tear of trank port gliftening in his eye. Belmore met and joined him ; they entered his tent to¬ gether,
gether, and found Lucinda, with her in* fant upon the ground, in a ftate of infen- fibility. Stanley knelt befide her; he raifed her; he called upon her to revive; he whifpered in the tendereit accents, danger was no moré. The found of his voice re¬ called her to life. "Ah! Stanley," ihe cried, "do I live once more to fee you?" Belmore affiffed him in fupporting her to a feat; " Revive, my love/* faid Stanley ; * * all caufe for apprehenfion is over." " Alas !" exclaimed fhe, " danger is over, but com» fort can never, never more return." " Say not fo, my Lucinda,*· cried he* «* conquer! and fecurity are our ours again." «* But my bay," exclaimed ftie, « is loft for everf" Stanley ftarted with horror. " He is murdered," faid fhe, " and I cannot fbr- vive him !" * Do you not dream, ?" cried he, gazing at her, with terror^ *« Oh! would
would to heaven I did !" cried fhe, raifing her eyes with agony; " but he is gone, my Stanley, and ihortly muft I follow."——- Stanley, ftill believing her fenfes bewildered by terror, demanded an explanation of her words, which ihe accordingly gave him, ina manner that left him no room to doubt the truth of what fhe atteftedi -*nd Ihe fell to the ground, overpowered by terror. "Merciful Cod!" cried he, " anyftroke but this I think I could have borne. My child, firft pledge of my love, my little fmiling infant, who fo fondly prattled to me this morning—loft, murdered-his limbs barbaroufly torn! it is------" The violence of his grief prevented far¬ ther utterance, and he wept aloud. Bel- more flew to him ; " Leave me," cried he : then finding the trembling hand of Belmore on his, " Alas !" cried he, " my Belmore,
Belmore, the feelings of nature, my beau¬ teous boy—" The maid who attended the child, had been lambung about with fome of the fol¬ diers' wives; and as fhe could not be found, it was conjedured (but too juftly) that flie and the child had fallen into the hands of the Indians, who think mercy to pri- foners degrading.—" My Stanley, my huiband,"cried Lucinda, " Oh! do not 5 by fuch anguiih, render the approaches of death more dreadful." Stanley ftarted up at thefe words, with phrenzy in his looks and manner, and enquired what ihe meant, She briefly informed him. " The ihock I received robs me of life," cried fhe : ceafe to diftrefs me by your forrow. Con¬ fole, fortify me to bear refignedly a repara¬ tion from you, fo loved, fo valued/'—
Stanley
Stanley wildly threw himfelf at her feet; Belmore jjnelt alfo; each grafped a br * · the tears of Lucinda fell; joining tueir .hands ihe preffed them between hers, 99 Comfort, my Stanley, kind companionate Belmore; bid hrm live to protect the le¬ gacy Lucinda leaves him. Early my infant lofes a parent; but amply, moft amply, I truft and believe her lofs will be fupplied«. Your tender care will not, I am certain, be wanting," addrefling herfelf to Belmore: f * as you regarded me, you will now regard my babe, and transfer to her, if fhe grows up to merit it, that friendfhip which her mother was proud to think you felt for her."—" Yes, moft amiable of women,'* laid Belmore, fervently clafping his hands together, **I here moft folemnly promife to cherifh her during life; and may heaven profper me only as I ferve her !" Lucinda
Lucinda grew weaker: to pleafe her huiband, flie permitted the furgeon of the regiment to attend her; but fhe had no hooes of recoveri псу from the ihock fhe had received, nor would fhe flatter them with any. A few days after the lófs of her fon, fupported by Stanley and Beimore, and after pouring forth a fervent petition to heaven for their felicity and the welfare of her infant, fhe preffed their united hands to her blamelefs bofom; and laying her cold cheek to Stanley's, fighed out her exiftence. Thus expired the gent left of her fex; a woman, whofe hem ever pan:ed to do good, whofe tongue never uttered a word that could wound or diftrefs. Young and innocent, fhe funk, followed w T ith uncea- fing regret to the grave. Stanley's
Stanley's grief was not violent; his was the fettled forrow of defpair He fpoke not, he wept not; fpeechlefs was his grief, for language had not power to do it juftice. The faithful partner of his heart, the fweet folaceof all his forrows, was gone, and with her his earthly happinefs had expired. The grief of Belmore was fcarcely lefs exquif.te; his felicity had received a mor¬ tal wound. He not only fuffered for him- fclf¡ but for the anguiih of his friend. Speedily muft he have funk under the poignancy of his feelings, had not the dying requeft of Lucinda forcibly recurred to his recollection, with the folemn promife he had given her; he therefore refolved to combat defpair, to rife from the lethargy of affliction, and be the guardian of her infant daughter, who he had too much reafon
reafon to think would foon lofe her only natural protector. Some of the ibldiers' wives performed the laft rites of decency to Lucinda; and Stanley and Belmore watched with ago¬ nizing ftiilnefs befide her loved remains. Belmore had no power to oppofe the re- folution of the wretched Stanley; his in¬ coherent expreffions, his faltering tongue, were ill qualified to perfuade. The time at length arrived for confign- ing her to the grave; a few foldiers caaie to bear the body to the deftined fpot. It was on a cold damp evening in Novem¬ ber; the wind whittled with a melancholy hoarfenefs, every thing feemed expreffive of fympathetic horror. At the found of their feet Stanley ftarted, and, clafping his hands together, flew from the place. Belmore
Belmore turned fick; he tottered, he averted his face; in fpite of his efforts tears burft from him. Stanley heard his emotions; he walked fofdy to him: " Oh! Belmore/ my Bel- more," he faid in broken accents, " this concern------She was an angel indeed—fo kind, fo gentle ! Dear loft Lucinda !" The foldiers were now quitting the tent with the facred remains. Stanley fprang forward : " Oh, flop," cried he, gafping for breath, " ftop but for one moment; do not fo foon tear her from me, darling of my foul! wife of my heart ! and is it thus we part for ever !—" Pale, feeble, overpowered, he fell on the bofom of Belmore. Hours they continued together, equally incapable of utterance or motion, Stanley,
Stanley, at length ftarting, propoíêd vi- fitiftg the new-made grave. Belmore complied. They tottered to it—the night was far advanced, and the morning dawned ere they quitted the cheerlefs, folitary fpot. The fenfesof Stanley appeared ftupified. Belmore led him to the tent. Here his fenfibility foon returned ; and he thus addreffed Belmore : u Alas! my Belmore, I would, were it poffible, avoid giving you additional pain; but I find myfelf incapable of fupporting this laft dreadful blow, which has totally deftroyed all my earthly happinefs, and cannot conceal from you the conviction I feel of'being foon taken from this world : yes, a fecret Power whifpers to my heart, I filali focn follow my beloved." ' « Ohi
H Oh! Belmore, your integrity, the fin¬ cerity of your friendfhip, I ever, next to the poffeifion of my Lucinda, efteemed the moft precious bleffing I poffeffed.—Con¬ fiding |n its ftill unabated ardour, I configli to your protection the fole remains of Stanley and Lucinda; a parting legacy, which I am convinced will be moft ten¬ derly cheriihed." " My little cherub in you will recover all £he now lofes. My bleffing is all I have to leave her. May that, with the Almighty's, light upon her innocent head ! Portionlefs ihe is committed to you.—To a fordid mind I might apologize ; but to you—yes, Belmore, I perceive your gene¬ rous warmth, and know that to fuccour indigence is your higheft gratification. You will tell her of her mother's virtues, and teach her to refemble that departed angel
angel.—Adieu, moft excellent of men Ι¬ Ι feel weaker, and even converfe grows painful. By the fide of Lucinda let me repofe; and now farewell, my friend, my brother, brother of my affedionsi" In a ihort time he expired. The whole, the valuable, the precious charge of his or¬ phan now devolved to Belmore; who, fti- mulated by the truft, exerted all his forti¬ tude, and with a melancholy compofure attended him to the grave.— Yet, alas ! every fhot that w T as fired over it, went through his heart. He could not fiipport the fcene, and, haftily retreating, returned to the tent, where the young Matilda lay in undifturbed repofe. He kneeled befide her; he liftened to her gen¬ tle refpirations. lie folded his hands with an enthufiafm of tendcrnefs together; and, looking up to Heaven, " Yes," exclaimed vol, p, с he,
he, <c I will ever love and cheriih thee! Life itfelf will be lefs eftimable than thee ! Thou ihalt be the darling of my heart, the adopted child of my affections. I will look forward to receiving from thy hands, . balm for every human woe. And, fup¬ ported and comforted by thee, I may yet perhaps fink in a happy old-age to the flumbers of the grave." His regiment fhortly returned to Eu-, rope. Matilda, then about one year old, was attended thither by the woman who had nurfed her fince her mother's death. On his arrival in England, Belmore quitted the army. He had an affluent for¬ tune, as has already been mentioned, and retired to his feat with a determination of ivhig in retirement till Matilda grew up, and thus devote himfelf to the delightful office of fuperintending her education; and
and with a rapture undefcribeable, he wit¬ neffed the beauties of her mind and form gradually expanding. Their domeftic happmeis was now, how¬ ever, interrupted by the before mentioned fuit. If it went againft him, he muft re¬ linquiih all the luxuries of life ; and above all, that fweeteft luxury, contributing to the profperity of his fellow-creatures, as his power would be then fo diminiihed, that good wiihes would be almoft all he ihould have to beftow. His grief for Matilda exceeded any he felt for himfelf; nor could he fupprefs fome painful emotions at the idea of be¬ holding her reduced from a ftate of inde¬ pendence, to one bordering on penury.
С 2
CHAP..
CHAP. Ш.
" And therefore wert thou bred to virtuous knowledge, ·* And wifdom early planted in thy foul, « That thou mightft know to rule thy fiery parlions, " To bind their rage, and ftay their headlong courfe ; *' To bear with accidents, and every change " Of various life—to ftruggle with adverfity." row e's vlyssis.
As the fuit drew towards a conclufion, Mr, Belmore and Matilda felr involuntarily agitated, and ardently wiihed to be re¬ lieved from a ftate of fufpenfe, perhaps of jail others the moil unplcafant. While
.While at breakfaft, one morning, a letter was brought to Mr. Belmore which ter¬ minated the anxiety infeparable from this ftate. It contained the following lines ;
" Sir, « Affured of the reliance, and thankful for the confidence, you placed on my integrity ; and which, if inclined to inveftigate, you wiH find not mifplaced ; it is with the deepeft regret I acquaint you, the fuit was yefterday determined in favour of the Plaintiff, who clearly proved his right to the litigated eftate, by his connexion with an elder branch of the family. " Though convinced of the j uftice, I own I cannot avoid lamenting the iflue of this decifion. ff To condole with you, or preach pa¬ tience, I know would be impertinent. The c j fteadincfs
fteadinefs of your mind, and certainty that every event happens for the beft, will bet¬ ter reconcile you to the lofs you have fuf- tained than the moft elaborate difcourfe. " I tranfmit the bill of cofts,and a clear account of the expenccs incurred by this fuit ; at the fame time requeft you will not hurry yourfelf to fatisfy thofe demands, as the time which is moft convenient to you, will be moft agreeable to me. And now, Sir, with unfeigned good wiihes for your welfare, allow me to fubfcribe myfelf u Your very obedient, " Humble fervant, March 27, « William Manson."
Belmore was for fome moments filent: the fliock his hopes and expedations had received,
received, for a while overpowered his fa¬ culties, and the trembling Matilda had not refolution to fpeak. Starting, however, from the fituation into which the firft tumults of furprife and dif- appointment had flung him, his reafon and fortitude in their full vigour foon returned : he felt concerned for the weaknefs he had betrayed ; and, rifing from his chair, fer- » vêntly exclaimed, railing his eyes to Hea¬ ven, a Father, thy will be done !" then put the letter into Matilda's hand ; and, walk¬ ing about the room, foon regained the fe- renity and firmnefs which ever adheres to virtue. Matilda caft her fearful eyes upon the letter; and though prepared for the worft, as ihe perufed it, her colour fled : it dropped from her trembling hand, and ihe burft into an agony of tears. L c 4, Mr.
Mr. Belmore flew, and kindly preffed her to his bofom. " Oh ! my Matildo/' he cried, " be comforted, becompofed." He did not chide her tears, he did not endea¬ vour to fupprefs them ; they would, he knew, relieve her fwelling heart. He made allowances for the feelings of a youthful mind, unaccuPomed to adverfity ; he knew how fevere the firft ihock of dif- appointment was. " Be ferene, my child", he faid, tenderly rare fling her. * f Young and innocent, you may yet fee many, many profperous days." * c Ah ! my friend, my parent, my bene¬ factor," replied flic, raiiing her head from his bofom, " miitake menot; imagine not thefe tears are ftied upon my account. No, no i it is not any fclfifli confidcration occafions this regret. No, it is for you 1 mourn ;
mourn ; for you, kindeft, deareft, moft re¬ verend of men." " Difmifs your regrets then upon my account (he eagerly exclaimed). I have not lived to this advanced period, nor ob- ferved the various changes and chances which daily happen in life, without being able to bear this viciffitude with calmnefs ; without being able to bear what the Al¬ mighty, for the wifeft purpofes (to prevent too great an attachment to a being which fooner or later we muft refign), has decreed that all who inhabit this great globe ftiould be liable to, difappointment. Inftead of murmuring at fharing the common lot of humanity, I blefs that goodnefs which has not deprived me of all ; and wiih to prove my gratitude for the comforts I ftill retain, by exerting myfelf to enjoy the bleflings ftill within my reach, and thofe pleafures с ι; befitting
befitting my alrered circumftances. But. retire to your room, my love (continued he, feeing her fo agitated ihe could fcarcely iland), and try to compofe yourfelf ; you ihall then return to me, and we will mu¬ tually ai range a, plan for our future con¬ duct." " Oh ! you are kind, kind," faid flie, ""ill fobbing; "and I would even beg to preferve you from want !" " I ha\e not a doubt of your tender affection, indeed my Matilda/* he replied, " nor that it would lead you to make the moil painful exertions on my account ; but I truft I ihall never be obliged to put it to too fevere a teft : true, the narrow income to which I am now reduced, will compel us to relinquifh luxuries; but,by proper eco¬ nomy, it will furnifh us »vith all that is needful for nature and convenience/* He
He then infifted on her going to her chamber, as he perceived fhe was too much oppreffed, at prefent, to receive comfort from his converfation. But, acquainted as he was with her foft, yielding temper, he knew that when the firft emotions of dif¬ appointment had fubfided, flie would. eagerly return to him, liften to his argu¬ ments, and imbibe from them the confo¬ lation they were meant to convey. He then fat down ferioufly to confider how he was toad; and the refult of his de¬ liberations was, a determination of making immediate preparations for his departure from Woodford, and difcharging the de¬ mands incurred by the law-fuit ; for, though the lawyer's requeft might be efteemed a friendly one, Mr. Belmore was the laft man in the world who confidered permiffion to remain in debt an obligation. e h His
His debt to him was the only one he owed ; fo that the little he yet retained was lia. rally his own. The whole indeed was trifling—juft fufficient to enable him to live with fome degree of comfort in an humble fituation. From the commence¬ ment of the fuit he had been looking out and enquiring for a cheap habitation» that, in cafe things turned out as they had now done, he might be able to procure without any difficulty a dwelling that would anfwer for him. Such a dwelling he had lately heard of; one that from ihe defcription he had re¬ ceived of it, was exactly what he wiihed for; being finali, yet commodious, and re¬ tired, though in the neighbourhood of many honcfi families. It was fituated in Here- fordihire; and as he had already confulted Matilda relative to it, and found her incli¬ nation
nation correfponded with his, he refolved on writing this day to fecure and have it prepared for their reception. He entertained no apprehenftons of not being able to reconcile Matilda to the humble fphere flie muft hereafter move in. He knew ihe was not vain ; and, though high-minded, not ambitious of thofe ciif- tinctions on the attainment of which fo many place their happinefs.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. «' _*_ Superior to ambition, we í¿ Would learn the pi ivate virtues, how to glide " Thro' ihacics and phins, along thefmootheft «< ------------Stream ———- « Of rural life." THOMSON. JVİATILDA repaired to her chamber under the utmoft perturbation and diftrefs of mind; an unreftrained effufion of tears, however, lightened the oppreflion of her heart, and a foft melancholy by degrees fuc¬ ceeded to the emotions that had fo pain¬ fully agitated her. As
As-flie regained her compofure, fhe be¬ gan to regret the little fortitude ftie had difplayed; and that, inftead of endeavour- incr to mitigate the troubles of her bene- fador, fhe had, in all probability, increafed them by the forrow fhe gave way to. This idea was fufficient to animate her to exertion, and her fpirits and refolution accordingly returned. " Yes/'fhe cried, "I will endeavour to banifh all ufelefs regrets ; all feelings that could prevent me from veiling in fuch a manner, as may perhaps lighten his cares and render this reverfe of fortune more fupportable to him. О God!" ftie con¬ tinued, with uplifted hands, " ftrenghten my cifortsand render me capable Gf giving comfort to him. Permit me—permit me, I entreat thee, to requite, in fome de¬ gree, the numerous obligations he has con¬ ferred
ferred upon me, by giving to me the power of adding to his happinefs !—Oh ! enable the creature whohas lived upon his bounty, who has been faihioncd by his precepts, to prove that neither tendernefs nor in- ftručtions have been thrown away ! , *~-— Still trying to fortify her mind, ihe con¬ tinued in her chamber till fummoned to dinner, where, with an enlivened coun¬ tenance, ihe returned the carefles of Mr. Belmore. When the fervants retired—" Now, my Matilda," faid he, cc I thank you, thank you for thofe exertions which have reftored you to yourfelf, and given to me a con¬ vincing proof of your affection." Then, in words of the fweeteft tendernefs, he com* municated the intentions he had formed during her abfence. He flattered her, by aiking her approbation ; he defired her to point
point out whatever lhe approved, or dif- liked ; faid ihe ihould be his little pilot, and fteer him again to happinefs and peace. The delighted girl, kiflmg his hand, with tranfport exclaimed, cf Ah 1 deareft Sir, you are too good to me, in afking my opinion : but, fince you have con¬ descended to do fo, let me for once aflure you I can have,no difiiké —no choice but yours." When by his perfuafive eloquence he had eftablifhed the tranquillity of Matilda, he propofed a ramble, as the evening was ex¬ tremely fine; that, while enjoying the fere- nity of the weather, he might more forcibly expatiate on the bleffings yet within their reach ; and pointing out the various beau¬ ties which furrounded them, paint the plea- fures of thofe deftined by Providence to a middling
middling fphere, and to an intimate and uninterrupted acquaintance with the works of nature. As they purfued their walk, he illuftrated his difcourfe with a number of anecdotes, which knowledge and acquaintance with mankind had given him an opportunity of acquiring; feduloufly endeavouring to prove that the fC cool fequeftered vale of ìife," was the fituation in which men had the beft chance of enjoying happinefs. ** Was this more generally believed," faid he, c< what murmurs, what difcontent, what mifery would be avoided ! But mankind* too apt to be milled by appearances, permit their reafon to be blinded, and wafte that time which, if properly applied, might pro¬ cure them real happinefs in a purfuit after rank and riches, which, if they gave them¬ felves
fel ves lei fure to examine into the cond ition of thofe who poffeffed them, or had the power of reading their hearts, they w ould often find fo far from conferring felicity, were produdive of forrows and vices more cal¬ culated to excite companion and contempt than admiration and envy.' 9 * c The vain and ambitious, however, will not be perfuaded that happinefs can be enjoyed in an humble life. That it can, how forcibly does that young girl (glancing at a milk-maid who paffed, gayly ringing, with her pail under her arm, as he fpoke) demontirate! how bright is the rofe upon her cheek! how fmooth is her brow! nei¬ ther care nor forrow can be traced in her countenance. How different from thefe which are daily to be met with in the cir¬ cles of faihion—the regions of diffipa¬ tion! « So
" So convinced am I of the truth of what I have afferted, that I think * „ , ι of men, * The happieft he, who far from public rage, « * with a choice few retire, » Drinks the pure pleafures of the rural life·" Matilda foothed, comforted, and de¬ lighted with his converfation, hung upon his arm, catching every word. " Beft of beings," fhe foftly whifpered, " ever loved, ever revered !" They were now in the midft of fome neat cottage^, which they flopped to examine. **' We may perhaps from thefe/' faid Mr. Belmore, "filed hints for rendering our own more comfortable: the country in which it is fituated is delightful, and no¬ thing within my pow er fhal! be left undone that can render it a pleafant habitation for. my
my Matilda ; a habitation in which, like her own bofom, I truft fhe may ever find happinefs and content." Matilda's heart was too full to permit her to thank him in any other manner than by her looks, for his tendernefs to her. They returned home, and chatted at fup¬ per with their ufual cheerfuinefs and tran¬ quillity. The uneafinefs that (notwith¬ ftanding Matilda's efforts to baniih it) had lurked in her bofom, was removed by the foothing eloquence of Mr. Belmore, and the refolution with which he fupported the reverfe in his fertune; and he was inex- preffibly delighted by the exertions he faw ihe made, exertions which would enable her to enjoy the bleffings yet within her reach.
vtiAr .
CHAP. V.
« A fudden damp has feized my fpirits, " And, like a heavy night, u Hangs on their aclive fprings."
DRYDEN'S DUKE OF GUISE.
1 HE next morning, juft as Mr, Belmor« and Matilda had entered the breakfaft-par- lour, they faw two men galloping up the avenue, who alight on reaching the houfe ; and, inquiring for Mr. Belmore, were con¬ duded to him. They
They introduced themfelves to him as the fteward and attorney of Sir James Mel- bourn, his fuccefsful kinfman, come to take poffeffion in his name, and obtain a knowledge of the tenants, &c. The fteward delivered a letter to Mr. Belmore from his mailer ; the contents of which were as follow :
" to john belmore, esq^ " Sir, " I fuppofe Mr. Manfon ha» already acquainted you of the decifion, which was carried hollow in my favour. I ihould now condole with you on your misfortune ; but as that would be fomething like repining at my own fuccefs, which would be a very ungrateful affair, I hold it better to fay nothing. " Though
" Though faith 1 hear you arc a very honeft fellow, and I fliould be very forry for your lofing your fortune, if any one but myfelf had got it : I am a plain-fpeaking man, Mr. Belmore, fo you need nor be offended at what I fay; for, putting yourfelf in my cafe, and hearing fuch a thing be¬ longed to you, I take it you would be as eager as your neighbours to claim it. " I ihall not go dow f n to the country for five weeks, at leaft; fo I beg you may flay in the houfe, and not hurry yourfelf on my account; as, by your flaying in it till then, it will be better aired againft I go down. The gentlemen I have fent will have an eye to every thing, and adjuft all matters with you. " I hear there is plenty of game on the land ; as I will not come up to town next winter, I ihall bring down brave ftore of powder
powder and fhot. My nephew fays, one would think I was going to blow up the rock of Gibraltar. No poachers, I hope, ОП UlCglVUIIU—Wilt IlUf, ¿UllWt HåWiil ----iwv.* as afox,.fcout them all; firing them up like fcarecrows, or fend them to Bridewell to look like flarved weafels. c< I am in great hafte ¿ fo, defiring you may give the rent-roll to Mr. Jones, I am, with much efteem, " Yours, Brook ftreet, March 28. " James Melbourn."
This letter extorted a fmile from Mr. Belmore. It was indeed truly charaderiftic of the perfon who wrote it. The Baronet, an only child, was brought up with fuch falfe indulgence, that inftead of poffefling the advantages his fortune, ample even before the late addition to it, gave him the vol, 1. d means
means of acquiring, he was illiberal in his notions, unpohfhcd in his manners, fordid in his principles, fond of his own gratifications ; and the only perfection he had was that of fincerity : if indeed that could be called a perfection which prompted him to divulge, without the fmalleft hefi- tation or confiderà tion about the feelings of others s his fentiments and opinion upon every occafion. After breakfaft Mr. Belmore fettled cvcij' thing that was neceffary with the attorney and ite ward, and gave to them all the papers that itili remained in his hands relative to the cítate. By the orders of the Baronet they were to be lodged and remain in the houfe till he came to it. Mr. Belmore could not avoid thinking this conduct indelicate : he forbore, however, making any comment upon it, but refolved to depart with all poflible
poflible expedition to another habitation, as he did not much reli ih Sir James's re- qucft of continuing in his houfe longer than was neceffary; that, in confequence of hU doing fo, the houfe might be better aired for his reception. Matilda was no lefs impatient then he was to be gone, as ihe longed to leave a place which now filled her with forrow and regret. No more her heart dilated with plea- Çixvc at wandering through the beautiful fee ne ry furrounding Woodford; thofe ve¬ nerable fliadcs which had fo often fheltered her from a meridian fun ; thofe verdant meadows, where in earl;· childhood ili с had fo often rambled with* her little play¬ fellows : _,._~~. a f^oi'Bve train, 1 υ gather king-tupi----------- And prink their hnr with dailies* r> 2 The
The idea of their being loft to him who had fo long conftitutcd her happinefs, rendered them now incapable of infpiring her with any other feelings than thofe of grief and melancholy. As foon as could be expeded, a letter arrived from the perfon to whom Mr. Belmore had written about the houfe in Herefordfhire, informing him, agreeable to his diredions he had taken it for him, and would have it prepared immediately for his reception. Though Mr. Belmore and Matilda had already made preparations for their de¬ parture, they found they could not with convenience leave Woodford before the expiration of a fortnight. As Matilda, in the courfe of her packing, reviewed the numerous expenfive ornaments fhe had received from Mr. Belmore, fhe could
could not fupprefs a figh at the idea õf the pain a difpofition .like his muft fometimes involuntarily feel at not being able to gra¬ tify its generous and benevolent feelings,-— " Alas !" ihe cried, " how many children of forrow will have reafon to lament this change in his circumftances!" The night preceding her departure flie retired early from the fopper-parlour to an apartment hitherto confidered as her dreíľ- ing room. Here with a heavy heart ihe lingered at a window which commanded an extenfive and beautiful profpect, and overlooked a ihrubbery that owed its prin¬ cipal elegance and beauty to her fuperin¬ tending care. She herfelf attended the plants, fet many of them with her own hand, and felt an incxprcffible happinefs atobferving their bloom and vivid buds, expanding to the gentle breath of fpring. In this fin ub- i> 3 bery
bery various improvements had been de- figned by Mr. Belmore. He promifed Matilda, that when the plants had attained a more mature ftate, a temple ftiould be ereded to the powers of harmony and friendfhip, where at ftated periods ihe fliould aflemble thofe flie moil liked and efteemed. In retrofpeding the hour in which this promife had been made, and the occurrences which had fince happened to prevent it from being fulfilled, and in contemplating the beloved fpot flie was going in all pro¬ bability to quit forever, flie found her fpi¬ rits forfaking her. In this fituation Mr, Belmore furprifed and watched her for fome moments, with¬ out being perceived. He eafily penetrated into her feelings, and preffed her to his bofom ere ftie was aware of his approach. Her
Her trickling tears, her tremulous voice, denoted how inadequate efforts of confoh- tion would be at prefent. He accordingly led her in filence to her chamber, where, kifling her cheek, he dcfired fiie would retire to reft, as their journey muft be commenced at an early hour, and then re¬ paired to his own.
d 4 СНЛР.
CHAP. VI. " Good he-av'n t what forrows gloonťd that parting day, ·* That calľd them from their native walke »way," GOLDSMITH'! DESERTAD VILLAGE* 1 HE flumbers of Mr. Belmore were not as tranquil this night as ufual: notwith¬ ftanding all his fortitude and refignation/ he could not avoid feeling a tender regret, amounting almoft t.i anguifli, at the idea of leaving ■'hat marifion in which the wounds of an almoft broken heart had firft been
been clofed, by meditating on the important duties he had to perform in fulfilling his promife to his departed friends; that manfion where he had foftered a hope of breathing his laft, and of giving perma¬ nency to the felicity of Matilda by uniting her to fome worthy -man, who fhould join with her in foothing the clofing hours of his exiftence. Sweet confeious virtue however prevented his finking beneath the difappointment. " As fome tall cliff that lifts its awful form, " Swells from the vale, and mid-way leaves the ßorm, " Tho* round it$ breaft the rolling clouds are ípread, " Eternal í un-Ihine fettles on his head." GOLDSMITH'S DESERTFD VILLAGE. The chaife was early at the door; Matilda was prepared, and ftept intőit, in filence; Mr. Belmore followed her: both, oppreffed d 5 with
with fimilar feelings, were equally filent during the courfe of many miles, when, looking from the window, he found the intervening hills had totally excluded Woodford from their view. Its poor inhabitants mourned, with the utmoft bitternefs, the lofs they were about fuftaining by being deprived of Mr. Bel- more, whofe beneficent heart, whofe ready hand, had never fent away unaided the poor diftreffed. Floods of tears were drawn from Ma¬ tilda by their artlefs* complaints : the effu- fions of fimple nature are particularly * affecting. Nor was Mr. Belmore lefs affected by them. He tried, however, to cheer both them and himfelf, by encouraging a hope of rheir not having as much reafon hereafter to regret
regret his departure from Woodford, as they now apprehended they ihould. By degrees, the painful feelings he and Matilda experienced in confequence of the diftrefs of thefe poor ruff ics, and the idea of having quitted, in áll probability forever* a place fo much endeared to both from long intimacy and many interefting cir¬ cumftances, foftened into a gentle melan¬ choly, which neither prevented their ob- ferving nor admiring the various and often richly-diverfified profpeds that were pre¬ fented to their view. This was the firft long journey Matilda had taken fince fhe was an infant; and Mr. Belmore, who knew how highly he ftiould delight her by doing fo, made frequent pau fes in it, in order to give her an opportunity of gratifying her curiofity by vifiting fome places, near d 6 which
which it led them, that fhe had read of in hiftory. The pleafure ihe derived from thofe vifts was too exquifite for description. The records of departed greatnefs gave to her imagination more pleafant exercife than the moft magnificent modern ftruc- ture ' could poffibly have done. They awakened thè remembrance of former in¬ terefting events ; they fent her foul back to the days of old, and by a kind of magic brought to her view the exploits, the em¬ ployments and the paftimes of thefe days. A figh, however, was fometimes caufed by a reflection upon the ihortnefs and va¬ nity of life/to which a review of the nu¬ merous generations that had fo rapidly fucceeded each other in the places ihe vifited, involuntarily gave rife. " Like thefe,*' ihe cried to herfelf, lf the children of
of future years ihall pafs away» and another race arife," as the poet has faid : " we are like the waves of the ocean, like leaves tfiat pafs away in the ruftling blaft, andare quickly fucceeded by others.—Oh! how forcibly fliould this refledion convince us of the folly of devoting our whole time to purfuits that muft fo foon be terminated, to the utter negled of thofe effential to our w*ell-being hereafter !" After a journey of feveral days, rendered delightful to Matilda by the little hou fes and digreffions in it, we have al ready men¬ tioned, they reached their new habitation about the decline of evening, and were highly pleafed wirh irs interior; and cer¬ tain, from what ihey had heard, the) ftiould be equally fo with its exterior. Two domeftics, а man and a maii, all Mr. Belmore meant to keep, had preceded them
them to it, and prepared every thing ne¬ ceffary for them. Gupper was ferved in a few r minutés after their arrival ; and they retired early to their refpedive chambers, where fatigue foon clofed their eyes.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII.
·' No palace with a lofty gite he wants, ** T'admit Fhe tides of early vi Π tints, *' With eager eyes devouring as they рэга ί( The breathing figures of Corinthian brafs j " No ftatues threaten from high pedeftals; it fjo Petjtan Arr.is hides his homely walls. u But eafy quiet, a fecure retreat, " A harmlefs life, that knows not how to cheat, " With home-bred plenty the ι ich owner hlefs, ( * And rural pleafures crown his happinefs." DRYDEN'S VlRCIt.
OlMPLICITY and neatnefs were con- fpicuous in Mr. Belmore's new abode, which was literally a cottage. It
It contained juft a fufficient number of rooms for the accommodation of his little family: but though fmall, it was, as he - had been given to underftand, perfedly commodious; and even had it been lefs comfortable, ftill its charming fituation— in the heart of a beautiful and luxuriant country would have rendered it a defi rable refidence. It w r as built in a meadow, hedged with hawthorn, and dotted near the border with old trees. A fine clear ftream ran at the bottom, and was croffed by a ruftic bridge that led to the road. Along the banks of the ftream,the trees, cluttering more thickly than elfewhere*, formed little groves, in which the fong of the nightingale prevailed throughout the fummer months. During thefe months, the white walls of the cottage were almoft hidden by the honeyfuckle that crept over them, and diffufed
diffufed the moft balmy fragrance through the apartments. On one fide of the houfe lay a complete farm-yard, with fuitable offices; on the other, a fmall dairy; and behind it, a garden and orchard; both well flocked, and in ex¬ cellent condition. In the former, Matilda was much pleafed by finding a fequeftered feat, where, when the weather was ñne t flie could either work or read,—It confifted of a bank of mofs, elevated on a little mount, fcattered over with flowers and fliaded by an old thorn. Here, while a di.lant view of towering mountains and extenfivc wuods delighted the eye, the nearer profpect of a number of neat cottages, forming a fmall hamlet, cheered the heart, by exhibiting feenes of peace, induftry, and contentment. After breakfaft, Mr. Belmore, accom¬ panied by Matilda, walked over his little farm
farm, and both were charmed with the i n fpedion. This day, every thing relative to their domeftic economy was finally arranged. Mr. Belmore, who by a long refidence in the country had acquired a knowledge of farming, refolved to take his land into his own immediate care; and this he knew, by proper attention, would yield every ne¬ ceffary his houfe required. Every thing within doors was entrufted to the management of Matilda; and in a fhort time fhe hoped to become an excel¬ lent houfewife. In the interim flie flattered herfelf, the maid, who was extremely fkil- ful, and promifed to produce the beft butter and cheefe, with the fatteft poultry in the neighbourhood, would fupply all her deficiencies, and enable her always to have a comfortable home for Mr. Belmore. Their
Their man was to act as gardener, attendant, » &c. and take care of the only horfe Mr. Belmore now kept, which had been a pre¬ fent from him to Matilda. The principal part of Mr. Beîmore's library, together wirh Matilda's piano, a large collection of muffe, and materials for drawing, were brought to their retreat. Thus provided with confiant means of amufement, they entertained no apprehen- fion of ever finding time hang heavy on their hands. Matilda was highly pleafed with the manner'they propofed living in, not from any charms novelty gave to it, but from the flcadinefs and penetration of her mind, which difcerned the falutary benefits that could fcarcely fail of accruing from a life fpent in fo ferene, fo temperate a manner. The melancholy ihe felt at her firft arrival at the cottage, gradually wore away. Her fpirits
fpirits returned, her eyes regained their luftre, her cheeks their bloom; and fhe felt what indeed fhe had fcarcely before doubted, that content can amply make up for the deficiencies of fortune. Mr. Belmore experienced equal happi¬ nefs—a happinefs w T hich fprang from his own fortitude and the virtues of her he regarded as his child* " Yes," he has often whifpered to him¬ felf, while fondly gazing upon her, " fhe is all that her mother was; equally lovely, equally amiable. О Stanley ! O Lucinda! -—dear departed friends ! if permitted to review this world, how muft you re¬ joice at the virtues of your orphan ! how glory at having given birth to a creature whofe condud will entitle her, like your- felves, to hold a feat amidft the fpirits of the bleffed I · CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. <* Would I had falľn upon tboíé happy days «« That poets celebrate ; thofe golden time* *« And thofe Arcadian feenes that Maro fing 5, «* And Sidney, warbler of poetic profc I '« Nymphs were Diana's then, and fwains had heart* ·* That felt their virtues : innocence, it feems, *< From courts difmifsM, found ih elter in the groves." COWPER. İVİR. Belmore contrived to conceal his 4 having ever moved in a more exalted iphere than his prefent one. In confequence of this concealment, none but a few of his ruftic neighbours came to pay their com¬ pliment»
pliments to him. Their evident wifh to pleafe, amply compenfated for their want of politenefs, and their warm invitations proved the delight they fliould feel from having them accepted. Amongft thefe vifitors was a Mr. Hill¬ grove (one of the moft refpedable farmers' in the neighbourhood), and his daughter. He was a healthy-looking man, about fifty, with a countenance expreffive of the utmoft good-humour, and as hofpitable in his dif¬ pofition as unceremonious in his manner. He ihook Mr. Belmore heartily by the hand, faid he liked his looks, was glad to have him in his vicinity, hoped they would be on good terms, affured him always of a ilice of cut-and-come, and a draught of good ale ; called Matilda a pretty chick, and begged flie might often favour his daughter with a call, who he thought would be likely to improve by her company. Mifs
Mifs Patty Hillgrove's principal charms were derived from youth and a blooming complexion. In her manner'there was a kind of fly fimplicity, tinctured with re¬ ferve, which, however, the affability of Matilda foon encouraged her to drop, and ihe began to chat with familiarity on many trifling fubjeds, fuch as Matilda quickly perceived were beft fuited to her capacity and education. Mr. Hillgrove and his daughter preffed Mr. Belmore and Matilda much to fpend the evening at their houfe: the former, upon finding them hefitate about accepting his invitation, declared they muft either come to him, or he to them. In confe¬ quence of this declaration, he and his daughter were invited to return in the evening, and readily confented to do fo :—. they then feparated for fome hours. Mr.
Mr. Belmore eafily conjedured Ma¬ tilda's opinion concerning.their vifitors. " We muft not, however, my dear," faid he, " be faftidious : rudenefs and vice are indeed ever to be avoided ; but the foeiety of thofe whofe manners and difpofitionsare free from either, may, even with a degree of pleafure, be fupported: the refledion how few opportunities thofe honeft people have had of cultivating or adorning their minds, muft ever prevent us from ridiculing them. But it is unnecefiary to fpeak thus to you, my love; you, whofe good and tender heart would never permit you to indulge wit at the expence of feeling. The Hillgroves returned very early. Matilda foon found that taciturnity would never diftinguifti her fair neighbour, whofe aukward diffidence being fubdued, fhe gave her tongue free fcope; told Matilda of a thot'fand
thoufand anecdotes of her own intimates ; how many were on the tapis for matrimony ; the reafon why one was difappointedin her lover; what another wore at a ball given by the landlord; when fuch a girl was fecn fauntering through a dark walk with a young widower; and the agonies of her intimate friend in not finding the predic¬ tions of a fortune-teller fulfilled: in ihort, Matilda, from the whole tenor of her con¬ verfation, perceived that fcandal and envy could not only exift out of the air of the metropolis, but even flouriih amongft woods and wilds. Mr. Hillgrove gave a fummary accouat - of his neighbours, and ended with the par- fon, who, he faid, was a queer kind of a fel¬ low, whofe fermons had the falutary effect of always putting him to ileep. vol, ι. e They
, They ftaid to fupper. Mr. Hillgrove was unbounded in his expreffions of regard; declared repeatedly Mr. Belmore was the honefteft fellow he ever knew; and at length, with vifible reluctance, departed. Every domeftic arrangement being made, time glided on moil pleafantly with Mr. Belmore and Matilda; fpring, which had commenced with unufual mildnefs, was now far advanced, and every fpot prefented fomething charming to their view—green fields and ihady groves and hedges covered with Ά profufion of bloffoms: they rofe early, for the purpofe of purfuing their various avocations, and enjoying the ethe¬ real mildnefs of the morning; nor was the filent hour of evening difregarded : they then cither walked out, or repaired to the recefs in the garden, where they delighted to liften to the reiponfive thrillings of the retiring birds,
birds, the bleatings of the flocks, and inhale the fragrance wafted from the fur- rounding flowers. They at length, according to their pro« mife, went to fpend an evening at Mr. Hillgrove's. The walk was but ihort to his houfe: they found him at his gate, im¬ patiently watching for them. The moment they appeared, he haftened forward to meet them, and having given them a cordial welcome, he led Mr. Belmore into a par¬ lour, where a few of the neighbouring farmers were àffembled to meet him : after which, he conduded Matilda to a fummer- houfe in the garden, where his daughter and half a dozen girls waited tea for her. He then returned to Mr. Belmore, and while his beft ale brifkly circulated, "news much older than that ale went round. " e 2 Matilda's
Matilda's manner, as well as drefs, en¬ gaged the critical attention of Mifs Patty and her companions,, and with difficulty they could ihakeoff the reftraint, or conceal the envy the fuperior elegance of both excited. Tea-table topics were not forgotten; * fome of the village belies were pulled to pieces; the difcovery of two or three pri¬ vate interviews laughed at; and foi of the rural beaux cenfured for want of tafte, becaufe they themfelves were not the ob¬ jects of their admiration. Matilda could not help fmiling at the emulation which each betrayed of excelling in volubility of fpeech ; but while fhe fmiled, flie fecretly lamented that the contagion of fcandal and vanity had extended beyond the metropolis, and baniíhed í -mplisity and innocence from feenes particularly confecrated to them : — <' But,
----------- *' But, alas ! '< Scenes rarely grae'd with rural manners, now.**
.« i£ The'rural lafs, <* Whom once her virgin modefty and grace, *' Her artlefs manners, and her neat attire, " So dignified, that flie was hardly lefs «* Than the fair íhepherdefs of old romance— ** 'Is feen no more j the character is loft. * f Her head adorned with lappets pinnM aloft, ' e . And ribbands ftreaming g-iy, fuperbly 'r;*· s"*d, ** And magnified beyond all human fize ; « Indebted to fome fmart wig.weavers hand «« For more than half the trèfles İt fuftains ; .■««■ Her elbow* гиЯЫ, 'and her totťring form ** Ul prop'd upon French heels, flie might be deem'd *« (But that the baiket dangling on her arm, ** Interprets her more truly) of a rank « Too proud for dairy-work, or file of eggs.'* » After tea, a walk was propofed, a pro¬ pofal to which Matilda gladly acceded, and they fallied forth: after rambling about a e 3 con-
confiderable time, they fat down on the fummit of a rifing ground, from whence Matilda beheld feveral beautiful and exten- five profpects; amongft the reft a noble manfion, furrounded by very fine improve¬ ments, attraded her attention; and fhe inquired to whom it belonged. "That," faid one of the girls, " belongs to Mr, Bromley, who owns moil of the ad¬ joining land, and is to be fure one of the handforneft and eleganteft men I ever faw! —he has the fpirit of a Prince in ipending money ! and to be fure whoever gets him, will have reafon to blefs her ilars !" " I can't conceive," cried one of her companions, " what can take* him fo often to Wilcox's—I can fcarcely think it is Mifs Befiy attrads him thither; for flie neither poffefies beauty nor wit, in my opinion. Matilda, tired of this converfation, pro¬ pofed continuing their walk; as they pro-
proceeded, Patty Hillgrove, who attached herfelf to her with an air of vanity, took an opportunity of informing her in a whifper, of the attention flie received from Mr. Bromley, and Matilda perceived he was an obj ed of general admiration. As they paffed his houfe, their eyes Avere direded towards the windows, in hopes of feeing him there, and by their fmiles they evinced the fatisfadion that would refult from his join¬ ing them. Soon after they had pafied his houfe, they entered a lane, thickly (haded with old trees, and terminated by the remains of a ftupendous building—a melancholy me¬ mento of the inevitable decay attendant on all human produdions. This building immediately attraded the attention of Ma¬ tilda, and ihe expreffed a with of taking a nearer furvey of it. Inftead of complying e 4 with
with this wiih, however, her companions manifefted a degree of horror and aftoniih- ment on hearing it, which not only furprifed but alarmed her; and all eagerly clambered over a itile into a neighbouring meadow, and made the beit of their way towards the Hamlet: " Lord blefs mc!" faid Patty, as flic again took her arm, " I would not ven¬ ture to that place for the uni verfe ! why, it is there the madman lives, and I dare fay he would murder us all.". " Madman!" repeated Matilda. "Aye," cried Patty," and jthey fay he would kill any one that went near him,for it feems hehatesall mankind, prowls about by himfelf, paffes his nights amongft the graves, and has frequently been overheard talking in an unintelligible manner to himfelf." This account excited the curiofity of Matilda. " Did you ever fee him?" aiked ihe. " Yes," replied Patty, « I
" I met him one day in a meadow. Lord ! I was fo frightened ! 1 thought every mo¬ ment he would come up and bite me; fo the moment I paffed him, I took to my heels, nor never ceafed running till I got home." " And pray," aiked Matilda, " has no one ventured near him, to try whether it was poffible his malady could be cured?" " Oh! yes," faid Patty, " the Parfon went to him one day, but he was affronted, and foon left him; I wanted to know whether he could be put into Bedlam? but the Parfon faid, No; foras he had done no mifchief, there could be no pretext for confining him." Matilda's anxiety to learn further par¬ ticulars of diis reputed madman, remained ungratified. Patty and her companions faid they knew nothing more concerning him, than they had already told her. They did not forget, however, to caution her againft venturing too near his abode. e с The
The party feparated on quitting the mea¬ dow, and only fhe and Patty returned to Mr. Hillgrove's, where Mr. Belmore was waiting to atfend her home. . He laughed at the defcription flie gave of her companions, and ftiil more at their converfation and defigns upon Mr. Brom¬ ley, which ihe repeated; " for which, (faid he) he may thank his,fortune: was he di¬ verted of that, believe me, he would be dif¬ regarded: it is his eftate, not himfelf, is the object: they figh for." She mentioned the perfon who had been reprefented as the terror of the neighbour¬ hood. Cf Mr. Hillgrove alfo fpoke of him," faid Mr. Belmore, " and by vyhat I can gather he is not mad, but cynical; untutored imaginations, howeyer, quickly conjure up a thoufand bugbears to affright and torment; but I really think the un¬ happy
happy man we have been fpeaking of ihould create no other fenfation in our breafts than compaffion." iVj.cii.iIua d uliíita uuauit wv.^upiv,v» uty uit idea of this ftranger, for whom fhe felt fen¬ timents of the livelieft pity; convinced in her own mind, that mifery or madnefs could alone have tempted him to renounce foeiety, and refide in fo cheerlefs, fo gloomy a fpot as that he 4 inhabited.
e 6
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. " He makes his heart a prey to black defpair ; " He eats not, drinks not, fleeps not, has no ufe " Of any thing but thought ; or, if he talks, ** 'Tis to himfelf, and then 'tis perfeel raving : u Then he defies the world, and bids it pafs j " Sometimes he gnaws his lips, then draws his mouth " Into a fcornful fmile." DRYDEN. MATILDA rofe before Mr. Belmore the next morning, and quitted the houfe, with an inclination of walking till the breakfaft-hour, and thus enjoy the early hour of day— « For
« For fweet is the breath of morn ; her rifmg fweet, «' With charm of earlieft birds." She croffed the little bridge at the end of the meadow, and .then purfued her way as chance direded ; delighted with the melody of the woodland chorifters, and the reviving freihnefs of the air. Solely engroffed by the beautiful fcenery about her, flie wan¬ dered on, till finding herfelf in a road with which ihe was unacquainted, flie paufed to look round for the one ihe fliould take, and in doing fo, to her extreme confternation, perceived fhe was clofe to the melancholy fpot where the ftrange folitary being, who excited both her pity and curiofity, re¬ fided. A fudden panic feized her, and ihe trembled fo ihe could fcarcely move.— î' Good Heavens!" cried ihe to herfelf, " what
" what ihall I do, if his reafon be really difordered, and he fees me here alone ? he may be malicious enough to hurt me." She tottered on with as much hafte as ihe could make: ere fhe had proceeded many yards, fhe heard the found of feet behind her, and, involuntarily paufing, ihe looked back, and to her infinite terror, faw a man, muffled up fo oddly, that ihe immediately conjedured he could be no other than the perfon fhe dreaded to encounter. This idea almoft overpowered her* and when flie attempted to proceed, her limbs ihook to fuch a degree, ihe had not power to move, and flood ready to fink to the earth. Her apprehenfions, however, were foon relieved. The moment the ftranger raifed his eyes from the ground, on which they appeared for fome minutes bent in gloomy meditation, he ftarted back and haftily retreated
retreated amidft the windings of the Pile. Her ftrength inftantly returned i ihe fprung forward, and foon regaining the path flie had taken from the Cottage, never flopped till ihe arrived at it. " Blefs me, child !" cried Mr. Belmore, (who by this time was up and watching for her return), on feeing her breathlefs and agitated, " What is the matter?" " Oh! dear Sir!" exclaimed ihe, " I have feen him !" " Seen who?"—" I do not know," replied ihe; " but the perfon they fay is mad; and I have been almoft frightened out of my life." " Out of your wits, you mean," faid Mr. Beimore. " Why, what a little fimpleton are you, to lofe your reafon becaufe a parcel of filly girls havegiven you an exaggerated account of him." " I have been very fooliih," faid fhe, as ihe untied her hat, and feated herfelf at the breakfaft
breakfaft-table; <c but I faw him fo fud- denly, that"——» " You could not refift the influence of terror," cried Mr. Bel. more. Curiofity, as well as a hope of beingable to convince her there was no caufe for this terror, induced Mr. Belmore in the evening to propofe their taking the fame ramble flie had done in the morning. Matilda ftarted—" What!" cried he, " afraid to venture with me?" " О no," faid flic, fmiling, " certainly, there can be no danger." They accordingly went out, and had nearly approached the ruinous dwelling of the reclufe, when Matilda perceived him in a field contiguous to it. She immediately directed Mr. Belmore's eyes to him, and both flopped in order to obferve him more attentively. He was itili muffled up; but his
his hat which had entirely concealed his face, in the morning, was now 7 raifed, and difplayed a countenance neither glaring with phrenzy, nor fou red with morofonefš, but enlivened by youth, and the warm glow of delighted and refined benevolence, which had juft been exercifed. The object to whom it had been extended wiis an emaciated female with twochildren; the babes were clinging round his knees, and the tranfported mother with clafped hands, and all the energy of gratitude, was pouring forth her thanks for his bounty. The eyes of Matilda gliftened with tears; Mr. BJmore was not lefs affeded by the fcene before them than fhe was. " We have been both miftaken," faid he; " nei¬ ther madnefs nor mifanthropy predominate here," While he fpoke, the woman, fol¬ lowed by her children, from whom the ftranger
ftranger had gently difengaged himfelf, approached the fpot where they flood.— €x Do you live in this country?" aiked Mr.' Belmore, Hopping her. " No, Sir," re¬ turned flie, ei I was travelling with my children to C-—*- ; but ficknefs feizing me upon the road, here I might have periihed, but for the affiftance of an angel from Heaven." u You mean the gentleman yonder?" iáid Mr. Belmore. " Yes, Sir; and may the widow's bleffing, and the bleffing of innocence, light upon his head !" Matilda put her hand into her pocket; Mr. Belmore gave an affenting fmile ; and ihe flipped fomething into the woman's hand, whofe tears expreffed her thanks. The unknown, after continuing fome moments in a thoughtful attitude, fuddenly pulled his hat over his face ; and, leaving the
, the field, walked haftily along a path that bordered it. " I will try/' faid Mr. Bel- more, " whether he is as unfociable as they reprefent him to be," Unavoidably compelled to pafs each other, Mr. Belmore turning to him, with much politenefs, faid,—" Excufe, Sir, this abrupt addrefs; but I cannot negled the prefent opportunity of expreffing the plea¬ fure I ihould derive from being permitted to cultivate an intimacy with fo near and fo amiable a neighbour." He ftarted at thefe words; a haughty air inftantaneoufly overfpread his coun¬ tenance; and, without uttering a word, or even bowing, he retired with precipitancy. through an ivy-covered gate, which led to the part of the building that was fitted up for his refidence. Mr·
Mr. Belmore was difpleafed, and Matilda was fhocked by this repulfive difdair. " I find," faid he, " my declaration of being miftaken was rather premature. Some calamities, I fuppofe, have difgufted him with the world; and, though open to pity, he is a ftranger to benevolence, and affumes the rigidnefs of a Mifanthrope." " But what," cried Matilda, " can be alledged to counterbalance the humanity of the action we have witneffed ?" fí I wiih not, my dear, to leflen his merit," faid Mr. Belmore; w but, in my opinion^ half the charms of virtue, confift in the manner in which ihe performs her duties. I allow him to be generous; but you muft allow he never can be pleafing while he affumes the manners of a cynic ; if, while fuccouringone individual, herails againft and feduloufly fhuns the reft of the fpecies :
fpecies : fuch charity will by many be im¬ puted to caprice, not feeling; 'tis only the man who ftruggles againft defpair, and to pity unites benevolence, that can be de- ferving of our efteem and admiration." Matilda's mind was now more than ever occupied by reflexions on the fingularity of his behaviour; ihe wiihed, and yet ihe did not know why, to learn the fource from whence it originated. The next day Patty Hillgrove came run¬ ning into the houfe; " Lord -blefs me!" faid ihe, " I hear you met the madman ¿ did he attempt to bite you?" "No really," replied Matilda, " nor even to fpeak to me; and I believe he might be met with as much fafety, or rather more than your fa¬ vourite Mr. Bromley." « Indeed," cried Patty, " I do not be¬ lieve he is fo bad as people have reprefented him
him to be; but Mr. Bromley himfelf told me, he wanted nothing but an opportunity to injure one; and affured me, if I ventured near him, he would undoubtedly drag me into fome of the old vaults belonging to that monaftery he lives in, and bury me alive." u Then I affure you," faid Matilda, " it iş not more ridiculous to propogate fuch abfurd reports, than fooliih to believe them." " I do not give half fo much credit to them now, indeed," cried Patty, as I ufed to 'ào; " for I have lately been told he is very good-natured: I heard a ftory of him this morning, which 1 will tell you." " There is a poor old widow, who lives about two miles from our houfe, to whom my father, from having known her and her huiband many years, defired me to give fome
fome little relief or other, whenever* fhe came in my way. For thefe laft five weeks I neither faw nor heard any thing of her, which furprifed me a good deal, as ihe ufed to come very often to us; fo this morning I refolved to try whether fhe was dead or alive. Accordingly I went to her cottage, and who ftiould I fee but herfelf knitting at the door: So, Jenny, faid I, how are you? Purely, Madam, fays ihe, thanks be to Hea¬ ven. But, O Mifs ! there is no knowing the ups and downs of this world; and, as the Parfon fays, one maybe in grief this day, and in joy the next: I have been in a peck of troubles fince I laft faw you, Mifs Patty. My poor Jemmy was employed by 'SquireBromley^bout anornamental build¬ ing, I think they call it, in the íhrubbery, which the 'Squire wanted to have repaired, againft fome company he expected from London,
London, came down. Well, he hurried all the workmen, and amongft the reft, my poor boy, who, you know, is not very ftrong, fo much, that at laft he fell fick from fa¬ tigue and the heat of the weather, and took to his bed : this was bringing a heap of troubles upon me, as I had not the means of purchafing for him what he required, and did not like to be always troubling my neighbours with my diftreffes. Well, one night as I fat outfide the cottage-door, crying fadly about him, who ihould pafs by but the gentleman who lives at the Abbey, and who, they fay, is out of his mind ; though I don't believe no fuch thing now, I affure you. Well, he had fcarcely paffed me before he turned back, and aiked me in the fofteft, fweeteft voice I ever heard, what was the matter with me?— Though I then thought him mad, I could not
not for the heart of me refofe telling him, he fpoke in fiich a manner : and to be fure, it was a lucky hour in which I told him ; for, before I had well finifhed what I was faying, he took ten guineas from his purfe, and, putting them into my hand, " There," faid he, " I fhall call again; at prefent get every neceffary advice and affift¬ ance for your fon." His bounty feemed to me like that of an angel. Jemmy grew better ever fince, and every thing now wears a fmiling face." This narrative, aided by the humanity of the incident fhe had witneffed* prepoffeffed moft ftrongly the fufceptible heart of Ma¬ tilda in his favour. " And did Mr. Bromley," afked fhe, " do nothing to re¬ lieve the diftreffes of the poor woman?" " Oh, no/' Patty ^replied, <f Mr. Bromley had other things to take up his attention, befides the forrows of a poor ruftic and her vol. i. ç fon.
fon; his houfe was full of company; the other gentleman, however, had nothing elfe to attend to." " Noť* faid Matilda, « nothing that Could have afforded him half fo much de¬ light as** adminiftering to the wants of a fuffering fellow-creature !" They foon after feparated. " What a pity it is," faid Matilda, when left to her¬ felf, " th£ f Ъ benevolent a mind ihould entertain fuch a difiiké to foeiety. The converfe of a few congenial beings, could fcarcely fail of diverting his melancholy* and though their fympathy could not re¬ move, it might perhaps alleveiate his forrows." She then took her work, and went to the little fheltered bank in the garden, ftill oc¬ cupied in thinking of the unfociable, ca¬ pricious, yet humane being, ihe had heard fo much of. CHAP.
wJriAi. л.
ft Of years fcant twenty-five was he, ** And comely was his face ; €f His yellow locks, in ringlets free, *' Hung č ^vn his neck with grace. u Blue werehis eyes, and ftreams of fire, " When angry, from them came ; " Not fo when urg'd by foft defire, " He woo'd the yielding dame."
OLD ENGLISH BALLADS.
lylR. Belmore, who had been fuper- intending his labourers, fhortly joined her in her little fequeftered retreat. He had not been long feated, when Matilda began to fpeak of the Mifanthrope, for fo Mr· * a Belmore
Belmore chofe to call the Reclufe at the Abbey. He made but a flight reply to what ihe faid concerning him, and changed the difcourfe by fpeaking of the pleafures of the countrv, and the felicities of its in- habitants, of which I had never fo perfed ^ knowledge, faid he, as fince I came to this country. " Oh! my dear Matilda/' continued he, in the fullnefs of his heart, " as I contemplate the diverfified works of creation, my heart expands with ineffable gratitude to the fupreme author of them ; and I am aftonifted that man can ever be fo forgetful of the bleffings furrounding him, as to admit difcontent within his heart." ff Certainly," faid Matilda, « it is not more calculated to excite wonder than re¬ gret, that he can thus poifon his enjoy¬ ments; but í will not allow you, dear Sir, to
to drop the fubjed I commenced, nor flig¬ matife the poor Mifanthrope." " Do not again begin hoftilities," faid he, " but be fatisfied that I have not before refuted all your arguments in his behalf." " Ëxcufe me, my dear Sir," replied fiie, fmiling, cc as a true woman, I muft contend till I am fubdued." " Since you compel me then to fpeak, I will candidly give my opinion," faid Mr. Belmore " What does the title of Mifan¬ thrope imply (a title which the perfon you have fpoken of appears to me to merit), but fpleen, malice and difcontent? feelings utterly fubverfive of thofe we ihould endeavour to cultivate, not only for our own happinefs, but the happinefs of foeiety: coniequently, the man who enter¬ tains them is unworthy of our efteem." " Surely, my dear Sir," cried Matilda, " he cannot be undcferving of efteem who f 3 aids
aids the afflided—who dries the tears of the widow, and befriends the fatherlefs : and thus does he do, of whom we are fpeaking. We, ourfelves, beheld an inftance of his humanity, which called forth our plaudits; and to day I have heard of ano¬ ther, ftill more worthy of praife." She then related the little tale told her by Patty Hillgrove; and Mr. Belmore was beginning to make fome comments upon it* when the fervant appeared to inform them dinner was waiting. They then left their embowered retreat, and returned to the cottage to enjoy a frugal repaft, rendered delicious by the probity and contentment of their minds. The alteration in their cirumftances wa£ unattended with regret for any of the luxu¬ ries they were neceffitated to relinquifh in confequence of it. They cheerfully fub- mitted
mitted to their fate; and, by fo doing, were enabled to enjoy the bleffings ftiil within their reach, " Mr. Belmore was, in the moft literal ac¬ ceptation of the word, an Optimift. No viciffitude in life, however painful, could ihake his fortitude, convinced as he was, that it was directed by infinite goodnefs and wifdom. Thus refigned, therefore, to the will of Heavem and relying on Providence for the protection of Matilda, it was not long after his removal from Woodford, ere his tranquillity and happinefs returned like two amiable relatives together.' A few words will fuffice to give fome account of the Mifanthrope, for whom Matilda was fo wairn an advocate. There was a fufceptibility, as well as a fympathy in Matilda's difpofition, which not only made her feel for,, but attached f 4 her,
her, in fome degree, to all who were unfor¬ tunate: the idea, therefore, of his being fo, excited her companion, and created a kind of romantic prepoffeífion in his favour. To thofe who are not diverted of the de¬ licate (enfibilitics of nature, whounderftand the thoufand undefcribeable feelings that daily agitate a breaft of refinement, this will not appear ftrange. The Unknown had refided for fome months/n the country; and by thefingu- larity of his manners, his total feclufion, his diflafte to all foeiety, had excited the wonder of the neighbouring ruftics, who mutually agreed his reafon was difordered. But there was too great a confiftency 'm his acts of benevolence to permit thofe whofe minds were better cultivated to har¬ bour fuch an idea; to thefe it was evident
his temper alone had fuflfered from the poignancy of affliction. His perfon was tall, manly, and elegantly proportioned; there was a dignity in his air, which could not fail of commanding refpečt; and an eafe and grace in all his motions, which proved him well educated, and accu(tomed to elegant foeiety. Five-and- twenty years was the utmoft he appeared to have attained. A gloom, ap¬ parently proceeding from fecret forrow, generally clouded his countenance; but after relieving virtue—after drying the tears of poverty, nothing could exceed the benign complacency and opennefs which enlivened it ; like the brightening rays of the fun, chafing away the gloomy horrors of the winter's reign. Ail his features were ftrong, and expref- five of the varying emotions of his proud f S fp.rit :
fpirit: his eyes, notwithftanding the gloom that fometimes lowered about them, were the molt beautiful that, as Milton fays, *' Ever ihone in the human face divine." To have met him at the clofe of evening in thofe fequeftered ftiades, amongft which he was particularly fond of rambling, one would almoft have been tempted to ima¬ gine he was the blooming, yet defponding genius of them. His retreat the only tenantable fpot of a large and ancient monaftery, lay at the foo of a hill ; which thickly covered with wood, the growth of many ages, hung like a kind offcreenover it, as if to exclude the in- fpedion of the curious. A ftream of watçr trickling from the fummit, and dafliing in its defcent againft fcattered ftones, formed a rude melody by no means unpleafing ; wildnefs,
wild nefs, foli tude, and filence, encornpaffed r he ruin; cluttering ivy obfcured the light of the day; and the croaking of unnumbered birds, unmolefted poffeffors of the moul? dering w r alls, gave additional melancholy to the night. Mournful trees, the yew, the cyprefs, and the holly, which ihaded the burying- piace belonging to the monaftery, totally excluded any view of the country. A num¬ ber of ancient monuments were fcattercd amongft them ; and various little hillocks on the earth denoted the fpots where many bones ftill refted. A thoufand fuperftitious ftories prevailed throughout the Hamlet relative to this pbce. The ruftics avoided it with caution; and, at night, not one would venture near it for the univerfe. F 6 To*
To a weak imagination, fuch an abode indeed was dreadful ; but on å mind, in¬ nocent and properly tutored, it could have no erreit.^ An old man and woman belonging to the Hamlet attended and prepared for him whatever he required; but, from the referve with which he treated them, they were un¬ able to gratify their own curiofity, or that of their neighbours. Had Matilda had an opportunity of accurately furveying the Mifanthrope, I doubt not many would exclaim : u No wonder truly flie endeavoured to juftify the conduct of fuch a man." I wiih not to render bzt charader an un¬ natural one ; nor ihall I pretend to aflèrt her prepoflèffion in his favour would not have been heightened by the elegance of his form and the intelligence of his coun¬ tenance ,
tenance: this, however, I ihall affirm, that they would have been incapable of infpiring her with more than tranfient admiration, if not equalled by elegance of manner, and intelligence of mind.
CHAP.
.
CHAP. XI. ** This pomp of horror *« is fit to feed the frenzy in my foul ; «« Here's room for meditation ev*n to madnefs, «« Till the mind burfts with thinking." ROYVE'S FAIR PENITENT· 1 HE relation which Matilda gave of the Mifanthrope's humanity, infenfibly in¬ terefted Mr. Belmore in his favour, and infpired him with a fervent wiíh to become acquainted with him, and learn his mis¬ fortunes, from a hope of being able to mi¬ tigate the forrow they had caufed, and recon-
reconcile him by degrees to the world :— this wiih he communicated to Matilda. " Surely," faid he, " a mind fo fufceptible as his cannot long remain inflexible to ten¬ dernefs and perfuafion; and by a proper reprefentation of the life he leads, fo re¬ pugnant to the laws of foeiety, I truft, he may be reftored to a world he feems formed to ornament. That very evening therefore, Mr. Bel- more fet off on his charitable vifit; defiring Matilda to conceal it, as it would be both ' troublefome and difagreeable toanfwer the inquiries which would be made, was it known whither he v^nt. He paffed through the gate, through which the Mifanthrope fo precipitately re¬ treated the evening he had been addreffed 'by him. With flow and filent fteps he proceeded through a dark paffage that led to
to the dwelling and burying-ground, in the latter of which he perceived the Un¬ known ftanding by a grave covered with a white itone that appeared to have been lately depofited there. He foftly advanced to him; but his ap¬ proach was unnoticed. The unhappy young man feemed abforbed in melancholy recol¬ lections: fuddenly clafping his hands with all the energy of defpair, he exclaimed— " Where now is the boafted leniency of time? Where is the balm it was faid to adminfter to affliction? Alas! common affliction it may heal, but that occafioned by perfidy and ingratitude it has no power over! no, it has been unable to foften my anguiih, or leffen my regret for thee ! my loved—my buried friend !" He paufed, as if overcome by his emotions—the forrow impreffed
impreffed on his features, forcibly affected the feelings of Mr. Belmore. At the name of friend, he remembered his own griefs. He retraced the agonies of the hour in which he wept over the American grave of thofe dearer and more precious to' him than life. A figh, occa¬ fioned by regret and fympathy, heaved his bofom. The Unknown ftarted at this echo of affliction, and turning, he beheld Belmore. Difpleafurc and haughtinefs inftantly overfpread his countenance, while aftonifti- ment riveted him to the fpot. Mr. Belmore firft recovered himfelf.— " I fear, Sir," cried he, u you think this an impertinent intrufion; but I flatter myfelf you will no longer confider it fo, when I affure you it was not curiofity which brought me hither, but folely a wifti of en¬ deavouring
deavouring to commence an acquaintance, which, I am confident would be produdivc of the higheft pleafure to me. " Sir/' replied he, indignantly, " to flat¬ tery I have been long a ftranger, and ever tnuft abhor it." " Our distaile to it/' faid Mr. Belmore, *' is reciprocal. Believe me, none abhor it more than I do; nor ihould I be more un¬ willing to offer, than to liflen to it." But fure, to bellow on merit its portion of de¬ fended pralle, cannot be cen fu rable/' *' Good Heaven!" exclaimed, he with the utmofl impatience, " am I to be deprived of even the pleafures of folitude—is the retreat to which I have fled from the vices of the world, to be broken in upon by its curiofity and idlenefs?" " 1 am concerned," cried Mr. Belmore, « that I have, thus intruded upon you, fince
fince I find my having done fo, is fo difagreeable to you. I flattered myfelf that the motive which led me hither, when known, would have rendered my vifit not unpleafing; but I now fear I was miftaken in thinking fo. I came ftimulated by efteem for your virtues, which the humanity of your adions have demonftrated, and pity for the misfortunes to which alone I could attribute your love of folitude. I came to try whether you would permit me to fym- pathife in your forrows—whether you were open to convidion; and would attend to the counfel of an oId 4 man, who has been deeply experienced in the rugged fcfiool of adverfity, and from his own knowledge de¬ clares that exertions againft defpair are never unavailing; and that no forrow—no misfortune can excufe a rational creature in the fight of Heaven, from not endeavouring to
to fulfil the incumbent duties of life. But my vifit is unwelcome, and I bid adieu!" " Hold, Sir," faid he, with an eagernefs which.evidently proved he wasihockedat the idea of offending; " your intentions were very kind, and my rudenefs is inex- cufable; I folicit your pardon for it." " Your pardon was granted ere folkited," replied Mr. Belmore, returning: cc but let menot mifconftrue your words; is it not ypur wiih I ihould depart?" He continued filent. <f I receive a tacit acknowledgment that it is," faid Mr. Bel- more, " yet I cannot bring myfelf to depart- A fecret impulfe withholds me from doing fo. I wiih to converfe with and try to reconcile you to the foeiety you appear fo fedulous to ihun." " I have forfworn the world," cried^ he : " I am unfit to hold converfe with it. Op- preffed
prefíed with incurable forrows, wherever I appeared I fhould fpread melancholy around me—my gloom would be infectious, and I fhould, at once be regarded as the peft of foeiety, and railed againft as a cynic.*' "O, no!" faid Mr. Belmore, « far dif¬ ferent are the emotions you would excite. At your approach fenfibility would kindle. Congenial fpirits who have known, who have felt the facrednefs of grief, would re- fpeâ and admire you, while attention and delight hung upon your words, as the ebul¬ litions of a feeling heart," €( Ah! how fallacious are your repre¬ sentations ! But even were they true, not the tongues of fyrens ihould allure me from this folitude, where I may revolve my lofs, and avoid the vices that occafioned it." *' I truft your refolution is not unalter¬ able," cried Mr. Belmore, " and that both reafon
reafon and religion will convince you, that murmurings againft Heaven are not only unavailing, but almoft impious·" €i Impious!" repeated he, refentfully. " Do you talk of feeling, and call forrow impious? No: it is ucred—it is hallowed -—it is acceptable to Heaven! " w How infinitely more acceptable," faid Mr. Belmore/* the noble exertions of virtue and of fortitude! They raife, they elevate, they dignify the human character: and angels may look down with pleafure on the magnanimous man repreffmg defpair, con¬ quering the laflitude of affliction, and en¬ deavouring to fulfil the incumbent duties of life." " Arc you not," replied he, H fome hard¬ hearted moralift who, unacquainted with calamity, defires greater exertions than human nature is capable of? « Ño:
" No : you fee before you a man, who has borne the burnt of the cruelleft adver¬ fity. In a foreign land were torn from my bleeding heart two perfons, dearer— ohî far dearer to it than exiftence; in a ground, often deluged by the blood of their coun¬ trymen, were they interred. Inexorable duty forced me from the fpot, and left their loved aíhes to be trampled upon by bar¬ barous, hoftilc wretches." " And you out-lived them?" continued hé. ci Yes," interrupted Mr. Belmore, u my exertions were fuccefsful, as thofe in a right caufe ever will be; and a power almoft fupernaturai fupported and cheered me on my way." " Then I am weak indeed," faid he, ftriking his breaft, " for itili I figh with unalleviated anguiih. Behold that grave," pointing to that Mr« Belmore had found him
him at—" that ftone coversţhe mouldering remains of youth, elegance, and valour. Beneath.it," continued he, with a broken voice, ? lies the poor duft, over which I lament. You know what it is to lofe the friend of your foul, fuch a friend as mine was: fo interwoven with every hope of felicity, that"—— His utterance was now quite ftifled: each feature, from an attempted fuppreffion of his emotions, was fweiled. " Will you," laid Mr. Belmore, " allow me to return here to-morrow evening? He ihook his head. " I witnefs and I revere your grief," faid Mr. Belmore ; " and far be it from me to intrude on its facred privileges. Fare¬ well; I fhall fee you again." He then left him; yet he had not gone many fteps ere he ftopped^—he looked back. The unfortunate young man ftill continued
Continued immovable: his eyes were ri¬ vetted on the grave ; his hands were folded in each other. « Merciful Powers!" cried the companionate old man, rt look down with pity on this youth ; breathe peace and refignation into his troubled mind, and fave him from the hand of incurable defpair !" As he approached the cottage, Matilda flew to meet him, all anxiety to hear the particulars of his interview with the Mi¬ fanthrope. " Alas!" faid fhe, after liften¬ ing attentively to his account of it, Cf af¬ fliction is then, as weimagined„the caufe of his retirement." cc His refolution is not, I believe," con¬ tinued Mr. Belmore, " very obftinate; and I am in hopes gentle arguments may at length, prevail upon him to forfake th$ gloomy folitude in which he is now bu¬ ried." vol i. a Early
Early the next evening, Mr. Belmore and Matilda left the cottage, but on dif¬ ferent routes : the former again went to the Reclufe, and the latter to drink tea with Patty Hillgrove. After tea they rambled out. They were íâuntering through a meadow, when Patty exclaimed, " Lord ! yonder is Mr. Brom¬ ley!" and Matilda, direding her eyes to where fhe pointed, faw a gentleman indo¬ lently reclined under a tree, with a book in his hand. " Oh! let us go to him," faid Patty; you will be enchanted with him;" and, without waiting for an anfwer, flie ran for¬ ward. " How do you, Mr. Bromley?" cried fhe. " Ah! my dear little Patty," faid he, half rifing, " how have I exifted thefe twenty ages without feeing you?"— " What are you reading?" faid flic, ftoop-
ing to the book.—" Oh ! Arcadia mo¬ dernized; of Corydon and Phillis; Daphne and Thyrfis. Come hither," continued he, pulling her to him, u you fhall be my Sylvia." At that moment he glanced to¬ wards Matilda—he looked from her to Patty—he quitted his hold ; and, after fur- veying her with the moft fcrutinizing in- fpection, in a whifper, but loud enough however to be heard, aiked Patty who that angel was ihe had with her? Matilda, indeed, looked particularly beau¬ tiful: exercife had given additional bloom and animation to her countenance. •' c Upon my honour," faid he, rifing and approaching her, " I think you extremely handfome; and muft entreat permiifion to introduce myfelf to you." So faying, he attempted to falutc her; but Matilda, offended by the freedom of his words and actions, ftarted back, о 2 «No,
« No, Sir," exclaimed flie, t( not in this minner." Patty whifpered fomething to him, and with a mortified air, he remained filent fome minutes; then recovering from his embarraffment, he addreffed her with morerefped.—" You muft excufe me, upon my honour, my dear Madam (faid he), you muft excufe the adions of a man, whofe fenfes were quite bewildered with the fight of unexpeded beauty; befides, in the country we have no idea of rigid ceremony —we are all fhepherds and ihepherdeffes, rural brothers and fifters, and take it for granted we may lay afide the etiquette of formal introdudion." Matilda, who equally difliked the affec¬ tation of difdain or prudery, gave a fmile to his apology; and he infifted on permif- fion to attend them in their ramble: a permiffion which Patty eagerly, and Ma¬ tilda tacitly, granted. «« Good
" Good Heaven!" faid he, addreffing himfelf to Matilda, " what cruel deftiny prevented me from fooner learning you were in my neighbourhood; but how do you exift in this place?—how breathe?" " Extremely well, indeed," replied Ma¬ tilda ; * £ the place is vety pleafant, and the country always delightful tome." " Oh! certainly faid he, " purling rills, ihady groves, inexhauftlefs fources of de¬ light; Heavens! there is no exifting from them!" " Lord blefs me!" cried Patty, "Mr. Bromley, fure it is not long ago fince you faid you hated the country."—"Oh! my dear," he replied, " my tafte was then de¬ praved; I had caught the infedion of the metropolis; but now—yes now,my faculties are enlightened ; in fuch foeiety as the pre¬ fent a defart w ould appear a paradife. Me- G 3 thinks
thinks I corífider myfelf now as Corydon, you Sylvia, this Daphne j we wander, en* chanted with each other, from hill to dale; echo refponiive to our accents j the birds carol over our heads; flowers almoft fpon* taneous greet us in vernal beauty i and every tree records our names." Matilda laughed at thisfpeech; it was pronounced with a countenance, indeed, which did not denote much ferioufneis. "«« You laugh," faid he, Hill looking at Matilda, " as if you believed me jeffing; but really I am ferious, when ϊ fay I adore a country life; and could Iget a dear charmer to take me, and tame me, I would become a mere domeftic animal, and ihe might treat me like a pet fparrow.' 1 They now arrived at Mr. Hillgrove's. Patty, with a voice of chagrin faid, ihe durit not ftay out any longer. Mr. Bromley allured
affured her he was inconfolablc at being fo foon deprived of her company; yet de¬ clared he would fooner fuffer uneafinefs himfelf, than permit her to feel any; looked at his watch, faid it was late; told her he imagined he heard her father's voice in¬ quiring for her, and infifted on attending Matilda home. She affured him there was no neceflity for his attendance; « for you know," faid ihe, *'as we are all rural brothers and fifters, there can be пл pnfflbk u***igci." jh^ would not, however, be prevented from accompanying her to the cottage. *' I, my dear angelí" exclaimed he, « have been dying thefe ten hours to get rid of that girl. She is quite intolerable. Upon my foul I wiih her father would fend - her to fale with his poultry next market- day." g 4 Had
Had Mr. Bromley been acquainted with the difpofition of Matilda—had he known how perfedly diveftcd of envy ihe was-— how incapable of feeling pleafure from hearing another perfon depreciated, he would have been more cautious in uttering his opinion of Patty, which Matilda heard with a look of difapprobation. His fpeech, if I may ufe the expreffion, was indeed in¬ tended as a kind of bait to draw forth her fentiments, and of courfe give him fom«? infight into ner chtu«¿w. He endeavoured to palliate what he had faid concerning Patty, in confequence of finding it difpleafing to her. Patty (he faid) was undoubtedly a good fort of girl ; and what he had faid of her was abfolutely extorted from him by an unavoidable comparifon between her and her compa¬ nion- He
He ftarted a thoufand topics; he argued to fupport his opinions; but his arguments were weakly fupported ; and to a perfon more experienced than Matilda, it muft have been obvious they were only ftarted from a wiih of having them confuted, that thus by appearing to yield to her fuperior judgment, he might pay an indirect com- pliment to her underftanding, and, he hoped, infinuate himfelf into her favour. They at length flopped at the cottage. Matilda wiihed him a good evening; yet he did not attempt to depart ; he loitered about. " What a charming retreat !" cried he, u fit for a fyl van deity !" " Do not you find yourfelf fatigued," continued he; " I am monftroufly tired, only with the walk I mean." Matilda would not appear to underftand thofe hints; and, again curtfeying, was going into the g 5 houfe,
houfe. " Well, now, upon my honour," faid he, cc I did not think you would be ίο cruel: you are downright barbarous not to afk rne to reft myfelf, after what I have faid." Matilda ftill pretended not to underftand him, and again wifhing him a good even¬ ing, ihe flightly bowed, and, entering the cottage, clofed the door. * f What a little prude !" exclaimed Mr» Bromley to himfelf (as he fprung over the hedge, not with the appearance of a man finking beneath fatigue); "one would think her mother was a Methodift, and that with her milk fhe had imbibed her fanctified fcruples." The coldnefs of Matilda, though it mor¬ tified the vanity, could not deprefs the hopes of Bromley. He entertained too high an opinion of himfelf to doubt his being
being able, in a very ihort time, to over¬ come her referve, and make a conqueft of her heart—a conqueft which he meditated almoft the moment he beheld her: for never had he before feen a form and face fo truly captivating—never had he before feen fuch elegant fimplicity—fuch bewitch¬ ing beauty united ; and he refolved to leave nothing undone which could enable him to crop this fair rofe, and " rifle all its fweet¬ nefs." From her fituation, with which Patty acquainted him, he could not flatter himfelf that this would be a very eafy mat¬ ter, as ihe dwelt much upon the vigilance of Mr. Belmore. Difficulties, however, though numerous as the hydra's heads, were difregarded by him, when he had any fcheme in view which could gratify his inclinations. g 6 Brought
Brought up in the faihionable world, both his education and purfuits had been inimical to virtue; and the large fortune which he poffeffed, had from the time he became mafter of it, which was at a very early period, been rendered fubfervient to the purpofes of vice. His perfon was not inelegant, nor was his countenance difagreeable, though too bold to captivate delicacy; his manners were eafy; his addrefs infinuating; and by the neighbouring girls he was confidered as fuperior to the common race of beings. At his approach refpečt and admiration fat on every face; the adulation with whiah they treated him was highly flattering to his Vanity : the flighteft notice from him was efteemed an honour; and even the liberties he thought himfelf authorifed to take, were regarded
regarded as diftindions too deledable to be avoided. Some intricate affairs in the country, obliged him reludantly to quit the metro¬ polis for fome months, in order to have them regulated * He invited a few of his fafhionable affociates.to follow to his feat; but they difappointed him; and how to kill time was his whole ftudy : for this pur¬ pofe he romped* with the girls, ridiculed their male relatives, whom he confidered as only fit for the wilds of America, and pur¬ fued with avidity, all the amufements the country afforded. Books he had never reliihed; and if dreadful neceffity fome¬ times obliged him tohaverecourfe to them, thofe he perufed were either too trifling or immoral for improvement. Full of the idea of Matilda, and the de¬ figns he meditated on her, he returned home, after parting from her. His
His vaiet-dc-chambre was waiting in his apartment for him; and, perceiving unu- fual emotions pictured in his countenance, faid, íť Vat be de matter now?" " Le Rogne ! oh, Le Rogne !" cried he, fC I have feen an angel." ct Ma foil you do find de angel every day !" « ť But not fuch a one as this, Le Rogne —Oh I could I win her affections, I ihould be happier than the Grand Sultan," "Mc hope you may," replied Le Rogne, with a ffirug. This valet acted in the double capacity offervant and confidant to his mafter, who now related his interview with Matilda, and they mutually concerted a thoufand fchemes about her. Le Rogne then retired to pay his devoirs to the fiîle-de-chambre oï a neighbouring woman of quality ; and his mafter fauntercd about
about the room, not really knowing what to do with himfelf, whittling indeed, like Cymon, for want of thought; and often wiihing for the dear charmer, who, like Iphygene, could at once have roufed him from the ftupidity of indolence. He at laft, fortunately, found a treatife on the nature of rarefied air, and though not ab¬ folutely determined on making a balloon, he thought this better than nothing. He was a ftriking evidence of the lan¬ guor and heavinefs to which thofe are liable who negled cultivating their minds. Amufement will pall—diffipation will tire; but the pleafures which an improved un¬ derftanding yields are ever new—ever de¬ lightful—fuch as have power to mitigate calamity, harmonife the foul, and make time glide away with the ferenity of com¬ placence and felf-approbation. CHAP;
CHAP. XII. «< Henceforth not name a woman ¿ « *Tis treafon to my ear. They are *< The bane of empire», and the rot of power ; ** The caufe of all our mifchiefs, murders, maflacres." LEE. XT is now time to defcribe the fecond meeting between Mr, Belmore and the Mifanthrope. The worthy, the benevolent Belmore haftened to his gloomy retreat. On paffing through the arch he perceived him at a diftance,
diftance, melancholy as ever; yet with his eyes directed towards the gate, as if ex¬ pecting his approach« He made a flight motion of his head as Belmore approached, and for fome moments they remained filent. Mr. Belmore, firft fpeaking, faid, " I know not whether my vifits are acceptable; but believe me when I fay I feel fo interefted about you, that without the utmoft pain I could not keep myfelf away." A flight bow was the only anfwer he re* cei ved. The Mifanthrope appeared halfgrarified by the attention of Mr. Belmore; yet, from an habitual fullennefs, unwilling to difclofe the pleafure it gave him. A moffy turf was befide them ; he pointed to it; and, feating himfelf, Mr. Belmore followed his example. " Satisfy
" Satisfy me fo far at leaft," continued Mr. Belmore, " as to inform me whether you really do or do not imagine me an in¬ truder?" * c I know not what," replied he, if to think* Credulity and fufpicion I am equally averfe toj and yet infuch a world, how much reafon is there to repent of the one—to rejoice at the other*" çc Conusant credulity is certainly indi¬ cative of weaknefş," replied Mr. Belmore; u yet a weakncfs more excufable than the injuftice, the cruelty, that is manifefted by, ' the other j of me, I hope you have nothing to fufpečh I cannot fay, indeed, my regard is quite difinterefted; for, if my arguments are fufficiently powerful to overcome your prefent gloom, I truft not only to reftore to the community an individual, whofe exam¬ ple will excite emulation, whofe virtues will
will ennoble and rejoice it, but to gain for myfelf an amiable friend." " But have I not already told you, I had forfworn the world," cried he, « in con¬ fequence of fevere misfortunes^?" u Yes," faid Belmore, " you informed me you had forfworn it; but it was in a ñt of defperation !—Defparation is madnefs; and the vows of madmen, you know, are ever difregarded," "Oh! it was the madnefs," exclaimed he, u of grief—of anguiih—of defpair!—it was a phrenzy in which I almoft curfed the whole fpecies—in which I implored the termination of exiftence—in which I hung trembling with anguiih over the remains of all I adored." " Alas!" cried Belmore, "I told you, I experienced fimilar diftrefs; but life, though
though robbed of its bleffings, yet retained its claims upon me. The knowledge of- having exerted myfelf to the utmoft of my ability, has at length diffufed a tran¬ quillity through my bofom, which infpires me with the fecret hope of having found favour in the fight ofthat Being, without whofe permiifion no care could ever inter¬ rupt the pleafures of life." <* But/' faid the young man \* ith eamefiV neft, t€ foeiety has no claim upon met 1 am uncönııe&ed-^I am slone. My exertion» could little benefit the world—ftiy retire¬ ment never hurt it." w Believe me," replied Mr. Belmore, *< however unconnected, however unknown, foeiety has ftill a claim upon you. Wás every one, who labours under forrow, to aft as you have done, we ihould foon find the incumbent duties of life left unfulfilled, to the
the utter deftmdion of its harmony and happinefs." f ' Yet, allowing foeiety has no claim upon you, as a fingle, unconnected individual, could you bear to drawl out a tedious exift¬ ence, in this ufelefs, this inactive ftate? Young as you are, how many, many years» have you yet, in all probability to live. If thofe years are devoted to folitude, there is no doubt, that from the indolence of your life, you will either fink into a lethargic ftate, ,or grow fo difcontented for want of that variety which is natural for us all to love, and fcarcely poffible for us to do without, that life, by degrees will become a burthen to you, and your afperity con- fequently increafe, till it renders you lefs than human, and creates a kind of abhor¬ rence; for a being thus perverting every faculty, and leading a life more worthíeíš than
than the reptile that crawls beneath his feet," " Abhorrence," faid he, paffion kindling in his eyes, and rifing from his feat, " is this your tendernefs? thefe your arguments to reftore me to my fel f —to the world ? No, to make me hate it, and its fpecies, more than ever! Is fenfibility to be abhorred? Are the wounds of misfortune to be probed by infult?" Here Mr. Belmore alfo rifing interrupted him. " Tell me, ere you pro¬ ceed," faid he, " to what you objed?" He looked at him with the utmoft difdain, and continued filent. " I urge you," repeated Belmore, " to fpeak; if not, I affért my words are juft: do you be alfo juft, and candidly confefs they are only unpleafing, becaufe con* vincing." The
The Mifanthrope walked about: he re¬ fleded. Every word recurred with pointed force, and engraved convidion on his heart. He flopped—his -fury was no more; and the flufh of indignation forfook his cheeks. " But gentler language," faid he,— "Hold," cried Mr. Belmore; "ifi beheld a man unknowing to himfelf about taking a draught of poifon, fhould I only gently attempt-to draw it from him; fliould I not atoncedaih it from his hand?" Then with greater foftnefs approaching him, and taking his hand, " I know not by what name to addrefs you," faid he, " but there is one by which I wiih to call you. Will you permit me to addrefs you by the appellation of friend? Will you accept my proffers
proffers of efteem and regard; nor term mc an intruder or infulter?" The fufceptible young man betrayed emotions he wiihed to conceal : the mufcles of his face were working; his hand trembled in that of Bel more's. " A veteran in life, in affliction have I been indeed," faid Mr. Belmore; "you are young in one, in the other you fay you are old." w Say !" cried he, ftarting :' <f О Heavens ! it was the friend of my foul I loft. He was young and lovely, when a broken heart fent him to his grave. 'Tis the idea of that, of the forrows which oppreffed him, that has rendered my anguiih on his account, fo acute. * <f Had you known him, the ardour of our fríendíhíp, the gentle probity of his fpirit, the benevolence of his difpofition, the
the readinefs with which he extended relief to the children of affiidion, you would not wonder at that anguiih; nor my refolution to feclude myfelf from a world, 'm * hich his peace and happinefs were wrecked." " No," cried Belmore, " I fhould not wonder at it, if you thought by fuch a' meafure you could regain your loft tran¬ quillity?" " Regain it !" faid he, ftarting ; " Oh, no!—'tis gone for ever!"—He turned pale, and threw himfelf trembling and agitated upon a feat. Beimore fat down befide him, and by the fympathy he manifefted, at length, in fome degree, conquered the ob¬ ftinacy of this unfortunate, and induced him to enter into converfation. They continued to converfe, too much interefted by the fubjed to mark the gra¬ dual approaches of night; the gloomy fha- vol. 1. 11 dow?
dows of which, rendered more awful the furrounding fcene, where fcattered ruins and mouldering tomb-ftones were on every fide exhibited, ftriking mementos of the quick progrefs and devastation of time. But though they had not heeded the in- creafingdarknefs, they could not behold the rifing moon difperfing that darknefs and checquering the profpect with the filver of her beams, without expreffing the moften- thufiaftic admiration. All, indeed, was cal¬ culated to delight and calm the foul! nota breeze was heard to blow; and the di f- cordant birds, the folitary tenants of the ruin, were hufhed to filence. Mr. Belmore, ere long, refumed the fub¬ ject on which they had been converting. In the courfe of his converfation he fpoke of the ihortnefs of exiftence, as a further reafon
reafon for preventing us from wafting any of our time in inactivity. " Soon," cried he, u are we called from this world, to the tribunal of our Creator, a Sovereign Judge; where moft äffuredly we filali be puni ftied or rewarded, according to the ufe we have made of the talents com¬ mitted to our charge. Soothed by his tendernefs, the (he fhould npt now be called Mifanthrope, but at prefent his name is unrevealed) appeared attentive to his arguments; and, by not attempting to refute them, tacitly acknow¬ ledged their juftnefs. A kind of promife was extorted from him, that he would emerge from his retreat, vifit Mr. Belmore, and foon think of fome profeffion, which by engroffing his attention, and employing his mind, would prevent him from again finking into enervating fadnefs, « г Th«
The army was thought of;—" A profef- fbn to which Iconfeíš myfelf partial," faid Mr· Belmore, "as I think it calculated to ftrengthen-ail the energies of the mind, and give a general knowledge of the world." The young man replied, he was accut tomed to a military life, and had not long retired from the army. « Then I dare fay," faid Mr. Belmore, € * you will have no objection to return to it ; particularly if the rumour which at prefent prevails, of the kingdom being on the eve of a war, ftiould be confirmed; a rumour which perhaps you have heard of." " I have,", returned he, « c and heard it with regret. « Good Heaven!" continued he, with emphatic warmth, « muft diffentions, heaped on dififentions, for ever rend this globe?—muft ambitian ftill continue to tor¬ ture
tureand deftroy mankind ? Can m triumphs compensate for the wretchednefs it occa¬ fions—can they dry the tears of thofe whom it has rendered fatherlefs, or affuage the anguiih of the widow and the parent, defpoiled by its means of their beit hope?" " 'Tis not always ambition which leads to hoftilities," cried Mr. Belmore. " Ag· greífion much oftener provokes them; and though it is grievous to reflect upon the miferies caufed by war, yet if the fufferings of a few can promote the general good, furely our reafon muft prevent us from murmuring at them. But, if you pleafe, we will purfue this fubject no further. *· There was a little tincture of glooml- nefs," continued he, fmiling, "in whatyou faid ; but I truft it will foon be entirely eradicated from your temper, by a recon- » J dilation
•ciliation to the World, the foeiety of intel · ligent men, and amiable women." " Women!" cried he, ftarting with a look of rage arid horror: " O! name them not; they carry defirudion along with them; they are plagues—they are pefts—they are the bane of fife P f Mr. Belmore's tongue was tied by aftoniihmenr, and he flill went oh with vehemence. w You have undone all you have been doing, by mentioning them. My beloved Edward—my loft friend was the vidim of female artifice and perfidy !" " And for the perfidy of one woman," faid Mr. Belmore, " are you to fligmatife the whole fex?" u Yes/* anfwered he, " the fame deceit, the fame artifice, the fame guile, however concealed, ftill lurks in every female bo¬ fom*
fom. Oh ! you know not what I have loft by the faithlefsnefs of one¿ yon know not the mifery it has entailed upon me : 'tis not alone my friend I have loft, my—— But I will not dwell upon my irreparable injuries ¡ I will oniy fay I have fworn ever- lafting hatred to the falfe perfidious fyrens* " Your arguments have now loft their efficacy; difcontent returns to my bofom; the gloomy horrors of mifanthropy alone fuit me; and never will I ceafe tö rail againft the curfcof the creation—woman/* Belmore, the friend of Lucinda, the pro- tedor of Matilda, could not tamely hear their fex defamed. " Young man," faid he^ with fome in¬ dignation, " this language ill becomes you. Refled, that in arraigning the fex, you alfo arraign the Being who gave you birth; and 11 4 if
if not loft to every feeling of filial rcfpečt »nd tenderncfe, fupprefs your calumny." Mr. Belmore tittered thefe words in a toneof iolemn feverity, which feemed to aifect him. He rofe abruptly, appeared mich agitated, and walked backward and fojw£fd fome minutes in filence; then fi-fdderdy flopping before Mr. Belmore— « JExeufe me," faid he, *« 1 will in future leaiathe h^pocri^ of mankind, and con¬ ceal my real fentiments." ** Soon, ï truft," replied Mr. Belmore, f «-£©* htar yqu talking diflerently—to find eandoiif fucjceedingacrimony-^and content chafing away fpleen and melancholy; while common juftice muft compel you toacknow- ledge the female fcx the fwcetcners of cxiftence." c# Neveri" he pronounced with energy. But Mr, Belmore would not oppofe him tu Q
too far at prefent; he dreaded, by further arguments at this period, to exafperate him to obftinacy, and render the idea of a Tit r , f"r*J 11 !* * .%#*» ·««#»ƒ»■» Κα»ιι.ΔύΠ ^Ib^kinrm ¿λ£Λψ £*(Vaf\ 1-årf» JUrtUCl lIlLi lliaV V UK.*. \y\~<.U l.U4~llï UV.lt. tt vu. *«.·*-■ hoped by moderation and lympathy to win his efteem, gain his confidence, and hear a circumftantial detail of thofe occurrences which had deprived him of his friend, and corroded his редее. It was not from idle curiofity he defired to hear his misfortunes, buta hope that, by knowing them, he might be better qualified to offer fuch confolatiort as would erafe defpair and mifanthropy.. With frefh proteftations of efleem, an efteem which Mr. Belmore realtv felt for him, they feparated ; Mr. Belmore having firft learned that the name of his new friend was Charles Howard. h 5 Mr*
Mr. Belmore was highly pleafed with the progrefs he appeared already to have made with him, and rejoiced to think he had not fcfferedanydifficultiestodifcouragc him in the benevolent caufe he had undertaken^ He faw he had yet a little perverfenefs to. Combat againft; but, permitted to vifit, ш converfe with him, as he now was, he trufted, gradually to overcome it, and be the happy inftrument of refloring to the world a man who, as far as he could judge from fo flight an acquaintance, feemed formed to adorn it.
CHAP.
CHAP. ХШ. *' As fofteír metals are not flow to rnefr, 44 So piiy fooneftiuns in gentle minds.**" JVİR. Belmore found Matilda anxioufly watching for his return upon the lawn; fhe was beginning, indeed,ro feel extremely uneafy at his long flay; and had hebeen much longer abfent, would have fent a , meflènger after hrm. The cloth was already laid for fupper, to which they immediately « 6 fat
fat down, and Mr. Belmore began to an¬ fwer the various inquiries of Matilda, having firft gratefully thanked her for the folicitude fhe manifefted about him. The countenance of Matilda, even more than her language, expreffed her fenfibility for the forrows of this unhappy favourite : -a fenfibility, however, more pleafing than painful, fince it was intermixed with a hope of feeing him in a ihort time receiving the benefit that was intended by the vifits of Mr. Belmore. But the pleafure derived from this hope waa damped by: a fecret regret, when, as Mr. Belmore proceeded in his relation of the converfation that had paffed between them, he mentioned the prejudiced opinion he entertained of her fex. A thoufand benevolent projeds inftantly dropped to the ground, and fhe felt difappointed beyond
beyond expreffion, at being compelled to relinquiih the idea of aiding the benevolent efforts of Mr, Belmore, and contributing not only to foften the anguiih of this Un¬ fortunate, but reconcile him to the world. She knew not that the difappointment ihe felt was impreffed upon her features, till Mr. Belmore, with a fmile, faid, "Come, come, my dear Matilda, do not defpair^ if bent on conquering this gloomy being, I will yet give you hopes." Matilda blufhed ; and the foft confufion which overfpread her countenance was nor diminiihed by Mr. Belmore's proceeding to fay—* Ì fhall, indeed, pronounce him a ftranger to candour and fenfibility, if he can know you without lofing his prejudice againft your fex. < c But too much cannot beaecornpHfhed at once. I have already brought bim, in fome
fome degree, to reafon. I have half pre¬ vailed upon him to forfake а retirement fo unbefitting his youth, and think of a pro-. feffionufuiting his time of life and difpo¬ fition, Soon I hope to eradicate all remains ч of fpleen and difcontent from his mind; then will I introduce him to my Matilda, who, as I have already faid, will, I have no doubt, difpel all his unjuft prejudices, and compel him to again acknowledge the exiftence of female excellence." " You behold your Matilda with partial eyes, my dear Sir," replied flie. " It would be prefumption in her to entertain a hope of being able to conquer prejudices which your arguments failed of overcoming." " Well, well," cried Mr. Belmore, fmi¬ ling, " we will not argue the point at prefent i —tell me how you paffed the evening?" Matilda
Matilda informed him. She mentioned her accidental meeting with, and introduc¬ tion to Mr. Bromley, and alfo the opinion his light and frivolous behaviour had given rife to. " But it would be uncandid," continued flie, u to fay it was a juft opinion; he may appear to greater advantage, when better known: if his, however, are the manners adopted by the faihionable world, may I never become an inhabitant of it !" , " May you never!" cried Mr. Belmore, taking her hand, and affedionately preffing it between his— iC may you never lofe that innocence and fimpl'city of heart which will preferve you from the contagion of folly and vice, by makings you fhrink from an intercourfe with either, and permit you only to reliih fuch pleafures as leave no iling behind !—May you ever, in mind as
as in perfon, refemble your mother!—more perfed, more lovely, í could not wiih you." He paufed, and his varying cheek proclaimed the emotions of his foul. " Such as I have ever beheld you," he continued, again railing his eyes to Matilda, Mho was not lefs affeded than he was— " fuch may I continue to behold you ! and oh! ere I am called from this world, to be tranflated, I humbly hope, to lafting hap¬ pinefs, may I have the felicity of feeing you united to a being who, from juftly appreciating your merit, will give me the fweet affurance of being a tender guardian of your peace!" Matilda could nor fpeak; love, grati¬ tude, and fenfibility, fweiled her heart* almoft m burft ing; and as fhe kiffed the hand of Belmore, her warm tears fell upon it, and fpoke thofe feelings to which fhe could
could not give utteranee. They foon re¬ covered from their emotions, and, after con* verfing a little longer together, retired to that tranquil repofe which is generally the attendant on virtue and content. Theyarofe foon after " the herald of the morning" had, ringing up to Cf Heaven's high gate," proclaimed its approach, to enjoy the fweets of early day. The furnmer was now far advanced ; and foon after breal faft Mr. Belmore quitted Matilda, for the purpofe of feeing hdw his hay-makers went on. Matilda, after making the neceflaiy do¬ meftic arrangements, took up her work, and repaired ţo the moiîy bank in the garden, where, fheltered by the thick foliage of the trees that grew over it, fhe could enjoy the refrefhing breeze that fluttered round, without fuffering any inconvenience from the
the fun. Ás flie worked, ihe involuntarily joined in the woodland concert, a concert neither interrupted nor injured by the hum¬ ming of the bees, the lowing of the catrie, nor the gurgling of water. She was finging a little pathetic air, when a fudden inter¬ ruption was given to her harmony, by the nnexpeded appearance of Bromley. That gentleman's whole mind was occu¬ pied by her idea; even in his fleep her image was before him, and in the morning his converfation entirely turned upon her. To become intimate at her dwelling, he felt abfolutely effential to his happinefs; but previous to his attempting this, he wifhed to learn fomething of her charader and fituation; and alfo thofe of Mr. Bel- more, of whofe refidence in his neigh¬ bourhood he was ignorant till the pre¬ ceding evening. To try and obtain for him
him the information he required, Le Rogne, his confidant upon every occafion, was difpatched while he was at breakfaft. He returned in the courfe of an hour with all the information he had been able to colled from the landtord of the village inn- information highly favourable to Matilda and her protedor, and which convinced Bromley he 'muft be circumfped in his adions, and veil the defigns he meditated againft her, till he had created fome intereft for himfelf in her heart, which he flattered himfelf would be no very difficult matter, as he now knew how to regulate his motions. The moment breakfaft was over, he pre¬ pared to vifit Matilda, In his way to the cottage he met Belmore and Hillgrove walking to a diftant field. An idea that the former was the protedor of Matilda, induced him to ftop and accoft Hillgrove^
Hillgrove, of whom, in a whifper, he in¬ quired the name of his companion. On learning it, he directly introduced himfelf to Mr. Belmore with all that eafe 4vhich his natural affurance and intercourfe with fafhionable life had given him; ex- preffed his happinefs at having fuch a neighbour, and faid 4 he was going tõ pay his compliments to him at the moment they met, Mr. Belmore would hâve returned with him to the cottage; but he peremptorily declined fuch a proof of his politenefs, and bidding him u hafty adieu, without letting him know whither he was going, he haftened forward, delighted at the idea of a 0e~a~ tête with Matilda. As foon as they parted, Mr. Belmore inquired from Hillgrove, concerning him. Luckily for Bromley, Hdlgrove, who had no notion of evertcilinga wifehood, either to ferve
ferve himfelf or any one elfe, knew nothing bad of him; and though, from the account. he gave of him, Mr. Belmore was not led to think him a very eftimable character. he by no means thought him one that need be íhunned. - Almoft breathlefs with the hafte he had made, Bromley reached the cottage; and being told by the maid where he would find Matilda, he itole to the recefs through a winding walk, inclofed between high hedges of hazle, and furprifed its fair inmate, as we have already mentioned. « Where am I? 1 ' he cried, with affected rapture, and gazing round him with looks which well accorded with his words: *· Surely Paradife is round me, " And ev'çy fenfe U full of thy pe+fečBcij. ** To bear thee fpeak migli t calm a madman*« phreiuy ¡ u But, to beholţl the beauties of thofe eyesj might—"
Here
Here Matilda, who by this time had re¬ covered from the confufion into which his unexpected appearance had thrown her, in¬ terrupted his rhapfody, by rifing. She col¬ lected her working materials, and feemed on the point of returning to the houfe; which he perceiving, apologized with much humility, for having intruded on her, and intreated her fo earneftly to refume her feat, that, unwilling to appear affected or difdainful, flie at laft confènted to do fo. « Why," cried he, fitting down by her, ** you are quite a Lady Notable, I think. Do you know ? ," added he, " I am a very good judge of work?" pretending to exa¬ mine hers, which was a muffin handkerchief, worked in coloured filks—" efpecially," fixing his eyes on her face, " of the works of nature. I can fee where the tints are pure, where the colours are blended with „ judicious
judicious elegance; as for inftance, now, I will ftiow you"—taking from his pocket a little round cafe, which opening, he pre¬ fented to her. Matilda, expecting to fee a beautiful picture, raifed her eyes; but as inftantly averted them, on finding it agíais in which her own innocent countenance was reflected, " Well," faid he, « I am fure you muft allow me judgment, when I de¬ clare this picture which I have fhewn you to be one of the moft perfect works orna¬ ture." " Certainly," cried Matilda, fmiling, " I fhould wrong my own judgment, if I did not coincide with you in thinking fo." « c But ferioufly," faid he, u how few, gifted as you are, would think of paffing their hours beneath the u fhade of melan¬ choly boughs ! thus concealing charms from the world, which, but to be feen, would infure you general admiration."~ « Well,» 1
* Well," replied Matilda, « allowing I had pretenfions to fuch admiration, if con¬ vinced it would not add to my happinefs, Ihould J not be fooliih in feeking it?" "Undoubtedly," faid he : " indeed I have ever thought, to a woman of fenfibility, the homage of one fiacere heart, infinitely pre¬ ferable to the adulation of the multitude." Thefe words were accompanied with a look which Matilda thought rather too expref¬ five of fentrnienrs ihe did not wiíh to encourage; and rifing, ftie returned to the houfe, where, after a little entreaty^ fhe fat down to the piano, and played and fung for him. Every moment he grew more fafcinated with her, and his dark, deceitful heart was entirely occupied by plans to get har into his power. He lingered in the cottage» till Belmore's return, to whom, in order rø prevent any fuf.
fufpicion arifing in his mind, he declared his vifit had been an unpremeditated one. Belmore credited this affertion, and invited him to fpend the. evening at the cottage^ an invitation he accepted with pleafure. Matilda began to entertain a more fa¬ vourable opinion of him than ihe had done at firft; and Mr. Belmore joined with her in thinking he was a good-natured, inoffen- five character, whofe chief error was in yielding to too great a flow of fpirits.
voi. 1. 1 CHAP.
ľľSE!
CHAP. XIV.
" Sevei*e decrees may keep our tongues in awe ; *' But, to our thoughts, what edici çan give law ? ** Ev'n you yourfelf to your own breaft ihal We И ** Your crimes, and you» own confcience be your hell.** DRYDEN'S AURFN'GZEEE.
JVİATÎLDA fent to requeft the company of Mifs Patty Hillgrove to tea, who joy¬ fully accepted her invitation. She and Bromley arrived about the fame time at the cottage. Thib fimple girl con- íidercd him a paragon of elegance, and was
was weak enough to imagine he had ad¬ mired her; an admiration which flie indeed repaid threefold. Deluded by this idea, flie actually difobliged her father, by difcarding an humble fuitor, in hopes of obtaining this affluent, yet far more undcferving one. The delight fhe experienced at fo unex¬ pectedly meeting Mr. Bromley, fparkled in her eyes and glowed upon her cheeks ; a delight, however, in which he by no means participated. But this he took care ihould not be difcovered, and appeared fo eafy, fo unaffected, and fo good-humoured, that Mr. Belmore began to like him, and Matilda to think ftill better of him. Patty was unufually talkative; her little nothings were delivered with the utmoft volubility, « Ha, Mr. Bromley," faid ihe, " do you know, wc are going to have a wedding? ï 2 Old
Old Mifs Wilfon, who you faid put you in mind of an Egyptian mummy, is going to be married to Mr. Gagely, who you always declared looked like a fiiaking Mandarine. I am to be bride-maid, and fo is Befly Wilcox; and we cxped very great di verfion, I affure you. 'Tis the moil ridiculous thing on earth for a perfon at her time of life to think of marrying." " Well, really, Mifs Patty," replied Bromley, with pretended gravity, " I can't agree with you in thinking fo. From her age, ihe will no doubt reñea ferioufly upon the important duties flie is about en¬ tering on, and confequently make a very eftimable wife. When there is no difparity in years, I cannot fee any thing ridiculous in people marrying at any period of life ; but I lofe all patience when I behold an Hebe
Hebe united to a Lord Chalkftone, or an Adonis to a Hecate." " Certainly (laid Mr. Belmore, to whom the latter part of his fpeech was addreíTcd) with reafon, fince fuch unions are generally productive of mifery, intereft being ahnoft ever the inducement to them.*' " But," faid Matilda", " is it not poifi- ble a fenfible woman, though advanced in years, may captivate a fenfible man; and that an old man, with the fame attractions, may win the ajFFeAions of a young woman? Hiftory prefents us with feveral inftances of the kind. The celebrated Maintenon, when paft the meridian of her charms, con¬ quered and retained during life the heart of Louis the Fourteenth; and the young and beautiful Portia wedded herfclf to the aged and infirm Seneca. " ι 3 « Well,
*' Weil, really," exclaimed Patty, inter¬ rupting her, c< I wonder at that ; for I am fure, of all things, I could never bring my¬ felf to marry an old man." " Yet notvvithilanding thofe inftances," find Bromley* " I fear the charms of ma- turity will never be fo much admired as thofe of blooming youth; except indeed we have a race of Ninons, who, like that cxtroardinary woman, fhall kill at four- fcore, and be ftvled the grandmother of the graces " After tea, a walk was propofed, and they fct out iuft as the fun was beginning to decline; and, " Evei y mtph-rd told his (ale, ** Under the hawth >rn tn ihe dale/* After rambling a good way, they cane toa fmall neat houfe, which, together with Ur
the grounds that furrounded it, attraded their attention and admiration. It flood in a beautiful garden, and was backed by a hanging wood, which admitted a view of the village church, fome fcattered cottages, and an extenfivc trad of richly-cultivated land. This, Patty informed them, was the Par- fonage ; and in the garden, which was only divided from the road by a low hedge of hawthorn, they faw its reverend owner walking. He was an elderly man, with a fweetnefs and fenfibillry in his countenance, which could not fail of interefting all who poffeffed fenfibility themfelves, in his fa¬ vour. This was the firi! time Belmore and Matild ι hail feen him ; an indifpofition, from which he v.as but iuft recovering. having prevented him frem officiating at 1 4 church
church fince they had come to this part of the country, They had long wiihed for an opportunity of becoming acquainted with him; and Mr, Belmore determined, if pof- iiblc* to avail himfelf of the prefent. With this inteniion he lingered near the garden, as if for the purpofe of admiring t h e fu rro u n d i n g p r ofpečt . Wh i 1 e h e 1 ea n cd a mainit the hed^e that inclofed it, а little fpaniel fuddenjy crept cut, and began leap¬ ing about Bromley and licking his hands, with fuch marks of vehement affection, as attracted his notice from Matilda, to whom he was fpeak ing. Had a monitor of the moft hideous kind been prefented to his view, he could not have manifefted greater horror than he did at this moment ; he ftarted—he coloured- he actually trembled with agitation; and the dog ftill continuing its carefles, he kicked
kicked it from him with a violence that made it yelp violently. His companions looked with aftonifli- ment at his behaviour; Matilda patted the dog; Patty flared ; and Mr. Belmore in¬ quired whether he was unwell? This was an excellent hint, and imme¬ diately feized by him. He faid he was taken with agiddinefs, which he fuppofcd proceeded from fatigue, as he had walked a greatdeal in the heat of the day: then fome¬ what .recovering his compofure, he patted the dog, and faid, laughing, lf He muft return the notice of a creature, who flie wed fo great a predilection for him." The animal, fevercly hurr, füll continued its whining; which reaching the ears of Mr. Aflimore, the parfon, who had hitherto been too deeply abforbed in what appeared a melancholy meditation, to notice the 1 5 party,
party, he haftily approached the fpot» and taking the dog in his arms, careíľed it with ^hc utmoft tendcrnefs. Patty accofted him familiarly. After a little converfation with her, his eyes were directed from her to her companions ; and μ general introduction taking place, he in¬ vited them to walk m and reft themfelves, an invitation which all unhefitatingly ac¬ cepted but Bromley ι he retired preci¬ pitately, under the pretence of indifpofition> to the great mortification of Mifs Patty. Aihmore conducted his guefts toa flower- woven ârbour in his garden, where cyder and cakes were brought to them ; and they fat agreeably xonverfing, till the evening was far advanced. On parting» he promifed foon to call upon them, and, in return, received a promife from them, that they would
would often favour him with their corm- pany. Though Matilda did not doubt Bromley's . affertion of iiinefs, fnc could not forgive his conduct to the dog, nor by any means join in the warm encomiums Patty bellowed upon him. Had flie or Mr, Belmore been prone to fufpicion, they would certainly have given way to it, in confequence of the fudden difcompofure of his looks: as thr was not the cafe, however, they believed it owing to the caufe he affigned for it.
1 б
CHAP.
CHAP. XV. *< Btfore the curing of a ftrong difa^Ce, " Even in the inftant of repair and health, «* The fit is itrongeft : Evils that take leave, *' On their departure moft ofall ft»ew evil." SHAKESPEARE'S KING JOHN. jMR. Afhmore did not long defer his promifed vifit. A further converfation with him augmented Mr. Belmore's pre- diledion for him; a predilection he felt pleafed to think was mutual. He was de¬ lighted at the profped he now beheld of having
having an agreeable foeiety, as he had often feared the winter, different as it muft be from the winters ihe had paffed at Wood¬ ford, where they were furrounded hy feve¬ ral elegant and agreeable families, would prove rather tedious to Matilda. This fear, however, was in a great meafure removed by the acquaintance he had formed with Aihmore, whofe converfation was fenfible and highly entertaining, and alfo with Bromley, who had fufficient talents to ren¬ der himfelf an amufing companion, and who had mentioned his intention of con¬ tinuing in the country the whole year. But no new acquaintance, or expectation of pleafing, could render him forgetful of the afflicted Howard ; his idea was never baniíhed; and to reftore him to the world, ftill one of the moft fanguine wiihcsof Mr. Belmore's heart. He vifited him repeatedly, and
and appeared gradually to gain his eftçem, and divert him of his prejudices. His ten- dernefs—his fympathy indeed, were too con¬ dolatory to be difregarded : they were like balm of the moft precious kind to his lace- rated bofom. But though Mr. Belmore gained upon his eftecm„ he did not win his confidence ; the nature of that perfidy and thofe vices, which had occafioned the misfortunes he deplored, was moft carefully concealed; but referved as~he was,. Mr. Belmore had fome reafon to fufpect his forrow s were not caufed entirely by the untimely death of his friend. Anxious, however, as he was to develope the myftery in which he was wrapt, he dropt no hint of that anxiety ; his feelings revolting from the idea of a folicitcd confidence. Belmore
Belmore at length propofed his coming to vifit him. At this propofal he ftarted, and betrayed the utmoft repugnance, inter¬ mingled with fbmething like difpleafure at Mr. Betmore's fuppofing him of founfleady adifpofition as to give up the refolution he had formed of not again mixing in fbciety. His agitated feelings were again fbothed, however, by Mr. Beknore, and he forced himfelf to confefs the obligations he thought he lay under to him for his unremitted at¬ tentions. « Your friendfhip," cried he, " merits my warmeft acknowledgments; it has given you claims upon iny gratitude which I fhall never deny; nor am I lefs fenfible of your kindnefs than the juftnefs of your argu¬ ments. 1 allow that the retirement I live ih is not fitting the feafbn of youth ; 1 allow that religion» nature, foeiety, all require me to
to make exertions to repel the languor of melancholy and defpair. But while I allow all this, I feel unwilling to make thefe exertions; a thoufand bitter and corroding remembrances oppofe my emerging from folitude—my again returning to a world, where I ihould feek in vain to have that vacuum filled up, the death of my friend has occafioned. . Belmore heard him with emotion; the lofs of a friend he knew from experience to be irreparable, arid a tear fweiled to his eyes as he fpoke. « Oh, Howard!" he exclaimed, in a voice which denoted his feelings, " I companionate you—I fympa- tjiife with you; your fufferings revive the recoiledion of my own—of the agonies I endured when I loft thofe who were dearer to me than life, But I exerted myfelf to fubdue thefe agonies ¿ and the placid hap- 4 pinefs
| pinefs I now enjoy, I conceive a reward from Heaven fordoing fo. Never indeed do the efforts of rciifon and fortifude go unrewarded ; let me, therefore, intreat you> my dear younğ frlenâi to make thofe efforts; , flatter me by making me believe you deem my example worthy of imitation; and fuffer me to have the felicity of again leading you into foeiety." From the idea of again mingling in it, however, Howard ftill fhrunk ; and it re¬ quired all the eloquence of Mr. Belmore to prevail on him to promife, in the courfe of a few evenings, to vifit him: but ere he would give this reluctant promife, he ftipu- lated that there ihould be no company at the cottage, As Mr. Belmore approached his home, he was met by Matilda. He had been much affected by his late converfation with Hçward,
lB6* MAID OF THE HAMLET. Howard, and the emotions it excited were too ftrongly delineated on his countenance not to call forth the affectionate inquiries of Matilda, He briefly anfwered them, and flie joined in the commiferation ; he felt and expreffed for his unhappy favourite. Belmore kiffed her cheek, as it was bedewed with tears of pity. r " When he witneíľes," faid he, " the per&dions of my Matilda—when he hears of the virtues of her mother» he muft forego, his unjuft prejudices againft their fex/* Matilda at once wiihed and feared to be introduced to him. Not confeious, and confequently not vain of her attradions, flie could not think, like Mr. Belmore, that flie fliould be able to overcome the prejudices he alluded to; prejudices flie could not wonder at, when flie refleded on tbe injuries which Howard hinted his be¬ loved
loved friend had fuffered from female per¬ fidy : u Aud I ftiould be forry," faid ihe to herfelf, iC to perceive I was difliked by a perfon fo amiable as he is reprefented to be." Artlefs Matilda, how little were you aware of the power of your charms, the irrefiftible power oí beauty, fweetnefs, and innocence, combined f Her heart fluttered when Mr. Belmore informed her that Howard had, at laft, yielded to his urgent intreaties, and pro¬ mifed to fpend an evening with them; and fo great was the dread that feized her, that ihe would gladly have heard ihe was not to have been of their party. It Ъ now neceffary to give fome kind of explanation relative to the agitation Brom¬ ley betrayed on feeing the dog. That dog had once belonged to him, and was a pre¬ fent
font from him to a young female, over whofe aitedions and honour he had triumphed by the vileft artifices. From the moment liis perfidy became known to her, flie withdrew herfelf from him; and from that period, which at the time he became acquainted with Matilda was about a year back, he had heard nothing of her. Of Aflimore he was almoft entirely ignorant, as he had been in poffeffion of the living in his neighbour¬ hood but a ihort time; and as he had never heard ot лпу connexion fubfifting between him and the unfortunate girl, he knew not how to account for his having the dog, except ihe was an inmate in his family : if this* was the cafe, he trembled to think his bafenefs would, in all probability, be difclofed to Matilda, and his defigns upon her fruftrated, by a premature difcover) of his real charadcr. • All
All anxiety to afcertain whether his ap¬ prehenfions were juft, apprehenfions which caufed him to be agitated in the manner we have already mentioned, he difpatched Le Rogne that very evening, to make the neceffary inquiries; and felt fomewhat re¬ lieved on his return, to hear that the land¬ lord of the village inn had told him there was nobody refided at the Parfonage, but the parfon himfelf, an old female fervant, and a young girl of thirteen, as an affiftant to her. Chance, therefore, he trufted, had thrown the dog into the power of Aihmore; but left he fhould be miftaken, he refolved to neglect no opportunity of endeavouring to infinuate himfelf into the faveur of Matilda, flattering himfelf, if he had once a hold of her heart, he ftiould be able to draw her into any fnare he might fpread for her.
ι
CHAP,
CHAP. XVI. " Is Ше not " As harmlefs as a turtle of the wood?, ** Fair as the fummer beauty of the fields, u As opening flowers, untainted yet with winds, ** The pride of Nature, and the joy of fenfeV* OTWAJr*S CAIUS MARCUS. X HE evening at length arrived on which Howard had promifed to vifit the cottage. Timid, trembling and apprehenfive Ma¬ tilda almoft ihrunk from the idea of the approaching interviews She felt convinced he would not like her; and a kind of weight hung
hung upon her fpirits, at the idea of being feen only to be difliked by a perfon whom flie efteemed, and to whom fhe wâíhed to adminifter all the gentle confolation in her power. Belmore defired her not to appear till fummoned by him. With tardy and reluctant fteps Howard approached the cottage. Difcontent vi- fibly clouded his countenance; a difcontent expreffive of difpleafure againft himfelf for being prevailed on to break his refo¬ lution. Belmore haftened to receive him, and gave him a moft cordial wdcome to his humble abode. The features of Howard gradually foft- ening, evinced his emotions at this affec¬ tionate reception: he endeavoured, how¬ ever,
Ι92 MAID OF THE HAMLET. ever, to conceal them; for he ftill felt dif- fatisfied with himfelf. (r You are very good," faid he, accept¬ ing Belmore's hand, " I feel daily more indebted to you ; but ftill-——" fC Come/' cried Mr. Belmore fC you muft banifh this gloom ; cheerfulnéfs and gaiety are alone known within my cottage." <c Ahl" cried Charles, " no wonder the hearts of its inhabitants are at eafe ; not ruffled by care, nor corroded by agonizing remembrances." ** Have I not," faid Belmore, " already told you I was deeply tried by adverfity ? No remembrances would be more bitter, more corroding than mine, did I encourage them; but inftead of brooding over ills that cannot be remedied, I ftrive to fly from the idea of them." Thefe
Thefe words conveyed fomething like a reproach, which flung the haughty and fuf- ceptiblefpiritof Howard: he frowned—he coloured, and looked too proud to fpeak. <c I fee," faid Mr. Belmore, " you are oflended ; be not fo hafty in refenting : far be it from me to break the laws of hof- pitality by difpleafing you : if I have be¬ trayed an unwarrantable warmth in expref¬ fing the fentiments your conduct has given rife to, it is folicitude for your welfare has led me todo fo." " Enough, enough," replied Howard eagerly, hurt at the idea of being thought of a capricious or vindictive temper : u 1 am neither inflexible nor obftinate; and your wifhes to ferve me demand my fincereft gratitude." " Well," faid Belmore, fmiling, as he conducted him into the parlour, there îs vol, ι. к another
another perfon in this cottage I wiih to introduce you to." Howard ftarted 1— " You promifed," faid he, rf I ihould meet no company." "Don't be alarmed," refumed Belmore; « the perfon—*-but I will fay nothing." He opened the door of an infide apartment and, entering, took the trembling hand of Matilda: fhe, involuntarily, hung back:— €i No, no, indeed," faid ihe, " I cannot go out; there is no occafion; and, befides, 1 am fure he would much rather be without feeing me." * f Why, my dear child," cried Belmore, <( what can poffibly be the matter with you? Has Patty been here to terrify your imagi¬ nation, and ferioufly affért, if you ventured too near the madman, he would bite?" He led her into the parlour : an agitation fhe could not conquer had fomewhat deadened
deadened the rofeate hue of her cheeks; but the palenefs that fucceeded to it, rendered the expreffion of her countenance, if poffi¬ ble, more interefting. Her dark blue eyes were replete with the moil bewitching ioft- nefs, «and the fimplicity of her drefs was calculated to heighten the graces of her form : her robe of white mullin was totally unornamented ; and from beneath a white chip hat, carelefsly tied on, and adorned with a wreath of flowers, her fine hair fell in negligent curls upon a forehead and neck of unrivalled fairnefs. " This," faid Belmore, as he prefented her to Howard, who noticed her but by a flight bow, * c this is my fole companion, the being for whofe fake I wifh to over¬ come affliction; and oh! how amply has flie rewarded me for the exertions 1 made on her account I Were I to give way to the к г fullnefs
fullnefs of my heart, (continued he, ftill detaining her hand, his eyes now glancing with rapture at her—now directed towards Howard,) in what language—what impaf- fioned language ihould I fpeak of her ! but I will not yield to feelings, the utterance of which might pain her: all I ihall fay is, that fhe is the comfort—the treafure-—the fupport of my declining years." Matilda preflèd the hand which held hers, but ihe could not fpéak; a tear, how¬ ever, the precious offering of fenfibility and gratitude, fell from her, and proclaimed the feelings fhe could not exprefs; there was a magic in that tear, as it hung, fweet emblem of affection on her eheek. Howard beheld it with emotion ; nay, he was on the point of expreffing what he felt, when fome fudden recollections checked him. He reflected on the eafinefs with
with which women could affume the ap¬ pearance of fenfibility and virtue; he re¬ flected on the forrows he had experienced in confequence of the perfidy of one; and he felt exafperated with himfelf for hib promptitude, as he conceived it to be im- pofed upon by female hypočrify; for, to hypocrify he now imputed all that feemed fair or excellent in the fex. With a füllen air, he continued leaning againft the wainf* cot, as he had been when Matilda entered the room, till Mr. Belmore drew a chair for him, and motioned him to be feated. Matilda placed herfelf at the tea-table ; ihe trembled—fhe was confufed : the looks of Howard, which were directed to her, were item and difdainful ; and flie fincerely wiihed herlelfout of the room, confident he would be much better pleafed with her abfence than her prefencc. КЗ In
í fi thinking fo, however, flie was perhaps miftaken; Howard's heart was formed to enjoy the pleafures of foeiety, though his aîtlidions had deceived him into a contrary opinion; and, notwithftanding his preju¬ dices, i -с was more than half inclined to ihake off the gloomy temper of his foul, and enter into converfation. Still a fear of again being liable to deception—of being thought of а verfatile difpofition, if he relaxed from the feverity and referve he had affumed, withheld him:—"at kaft, thought he, as he looked with earneftnefs ^from under his bent brows at Matilda, ere I make an effort to unbend, I will firft try to difcover whether this Paragon of Para¬ gons, as flie is reprefented to be, is not like the reft of her fex—vain, volatile, deceit¬ ful." Matilda raifed her eyes ; they caught the lowering glances of Howard, and ihequickly averted
averted them, while a blufh tinged her cheeks.—« Ah 17 cried fhe to herfelf, " he continues the infpection—he examines my countenance, to try, if poffible, to difcover my fentiments. W r hy," thought ihe €i ftiould I be abaihed at his doing fo? confeious as ï am, that they are fentiments I need not be aihamed of having known." Animated by the reflexion of confeious innocence, fhe again looked up : Howard's eyes were ftill faftened on her; and bluihing yet more deeply, flic again turned from him. He was at that inftant fo abforbed in thought, as to be infcnfibleof the apparent rudenefs he was committing, in fo long contemplating her : his heart was agitated by the moft oppofite ftruggkb. He now encouraged the idea of returning cheerful¬ néfs— now determined to indulge his fple- K 4 netic
netic humour, and totally reprefs the idea even of tranfitory pleafure, in the company of a female. Belmore, who watched him attentively, beheld the earneftnefs with which he re¬ garded Matilda. * c Yes," faid he to him¬ felf, " let him examine the ingenuous countenance of my child; in vain will he try to difcover in it any traits of levity or deceit." Howard was fo much abforbed in re¬ flexion, that Belmore twice prefented him with a cup of tea without his perceiving it; at length, tapping him on the ihoulder, he aiked whether he was meditating/' a trip to the moon, ora voyage to Lilliput? The cafe was different, when I was a young man," continued he gaily; u I never medi¬ tated then in a lady's company, except * upon her charms!" Howard
Howard fmiled at his own abfence : that fmile enlivened his countenance; and Ma¬ tilda could not avoid remarking to herfelf Ьш ·ν·.·Λν» *«- Ж-.ГЛ η ımriKAiıpfi Γ**·** » rf-vlt tr\re lt"Ű W ГПиСП ii. vVaa iiii^iv/vC« Lry iv*ui¿ *«^»» gloom. " Come, Matilda," faid Mr. Belmore^ " I apply to you for fubjeds for the tea- table; 'tis the province of the ladies to furnifh converfation for it."—She fmiled. " Have you no news? continued he. "None, indeed/' " What! refide in a country village, and want topics.for a tea-table! Fye, fye! Matilda; I fhall for the firft time be under the neceffity of accufing you of ftupidity: no reputations—no charaders— no perfidious lovers—no defertcd nymphs,' to vent a little witty fcandal on." " No, my dear Sir," replied Matilda, " I have neither fubjeds nor talents for fcandal; and even if I had, I truft your in- * 5 ftrudions
ftrudions are too deeply impreffed upon my mind to permit me to indulge wit at the expence of humanity." Howard, whofe eyes had for a few mi¬ nutes been withdrawn from her, again di¬ reded them to her, at thefe words; and- Belmore thought he perceived fomething like mingled furprife and pleafure in his countenance: he looked from him to Ma¬ tilda—he looked from her to him, and at length faid, " You are very unfafliionable indeed, my dear; I believe! muft fend you to be poliihed by a winter's refidence in the metropolis." €t Oh, no!" exclaimed Howard, with involuntary warmth, * ff fuffer her not to quit the ftiades of retirement, where alone flie has any chance of retaining fimplicity and real feeling/'. Thofe
Thofe words were unexpeded—they were uttered with energy. Matilda coloured; and Belmore began to entertain yet greater hopes than he had hitherto done, that the prejudices of this young man would at- laft be wholly era¬ dicated. He felt difappointed,however, on finding that the efforts he had made to draw him into converfation did not fucceed. After tea Belmore aiked Matilda to play. His leaft wiih had to her the nature of a command. She inftantly, therefore, rofe and feated herfelf at the inftrument, though flie knew ihe muft perform todifad vantage, from the reftraint and agitation ihe felt in Howard's prefence, every glance of whofe eye fhe imagined direded towards her for the purpofe of criticifing and finding fault with her. к 6 Howard,
Howard, who was fond of muftc, even to enthufiafm, approached the piano, as foon as ihe was featedat it. At firft fhe touched the keys in a weak and tremulous manner, but by degrees ihe grew more compofed, and exerted all the powers ihe was miftrefs of. She played a celebrated march in the moil inimitable manner; the notes, harmo¬ nious and animating, íèemed to infpire Howard with rapture I his cheeks glowed— his eyes kindled to the brighteft radiancy, and he looked as if he could that moment have fought reputation, even in <f the can¬ non's mouth." She changed: ihe touched the keys in the fofteft fiyle; the found, at once plain¬ tive and folemn, juft itole upon the ear: ihe fung~" Peace to the fou!s of the He¬ roes, their deeds were great in arms. 1 * The
The fudden tranfition affeded Howard, beyond expreffion; the animation of his countenance vanifhed, his cheek grew pale; and a deep figh burft from tiim. " It is too much !" he at length exclaimed, haftily moving from the inftrument, " it is infup- portable!" cried he, clafping his hands together, and flying out of the room. Belmore haftily followed him. He was ftanding at the door, his countenance in¬ dicative of his feelings. Matilda, frightened at his fudden emo¬ tion, arofe from her feat, and watched him in filence, with a fympathy which perhaps ihe would have been forry to have had per¬ ceived. Belmore took him by the arm : Howard, who appeared eager to quit the houfe, quickly difengaged it: " You muft permit me to leave you," cried he, in a hurried accent,
accent, addrefling Mr. Belmore; " I am not in a frame of mind to continue any longer with you." " I will not—I cannot let you go," faid Mr. Belmore. He again feized his arm : Howard attempted not again to withdraw it ; but in füllen filence returned with him to the parlour. "Ah!" faid Matilda, as ihe faw him re-enter it, ir he now thinks of his loft Edw r ard." After the filence of a few mi¬ nutes, Belmore propofed a ramble in tìie garden; a propofal to which Howard ac¬ ceded in filence. Matilda accompanied them to it, but walked rather at a diftance from them, often flopping to furvey a knot of flowers planted by her own hand, or a little fpot which owed its peculiar beauty to her fuperintending care. Belmore, who attentively watched Howard, f^.w his eyes often
often wander in the direction fhe took, and almoft involuntarily began to fpeak of her. He expatiated on her virtues, with all the warmth of affection ; he called her thefwect confoler of his griefs—the moft amiable 3 the moft excellent of human beings. Howard (not unnaturally perhaps) in¬ quired into the connexion between them. On learning the ties which bound Belmore to her—on learning ihe was the orphan daughter of the friends he had fo tenderly loved and bitterly lamented, a fudden in¬ tereft feemed excited in his boiom for her, of which his looks were expreffive. Matilda, unconfcious of being thefubječt of converfation, at length joined them, and they feated themfelves upon the fod feat at the top of the garden. The laft beams of the fun were now fading in the weft; the evening was calm and
arid delightful, and the founds that fluduated on the quiet air, were only expreffive of peace and harmony. A lovely and exten- five profped was ftretched around; and from the adjacent meadows, the labourers were feen, repairing to their happy homes, to enjoy the fweets of their induftry. " What bleffings," faid Mr. Belmore, " are enjoyed by our Engliih peafants ! and not lefs wife than humane is the Govern¬ ment which permits them to enjoy thefe bleffings; for, by being free, each has an intereft in'the profperity of his country; whereas, in fome northern kingdoms, where the common privileges of mankind are denied the poor—where they are kept in a ftate of flavifh fubjedion—where they are compelled to bend the knee offervile obe¬ dience to their proud tafk-rnafters, and debarred the rewards due to their induftry > cui-
cultivation is negleded, to the great pre¬ judice of the community." " True," cried Howard; " with indigna¬ tion and horror, I have often thought on the cruelties with wbich, in many parts of the world, the indigent fons ,of the creation are treated. Happily for them, their minds are generally fuffered to remain in a ftate of favage barbarifm, as an improvement of mental powers would, by quickening fenfibility, double the wretchednefs of their fituations. Belmore, defirous of changing a fubjed which had a tendency to revive the gloom and afperity of Howard, laid, gaily, they were now in the place where Matilda held her court : " The flowers," cried he, " form a gaudy afïembly for her, and the mûfic of nature is her concert; fhe feels, indeed, a true reliih for the pleafures of rural life"— «JVnd
t€ And thus gives a proof of the elegance and refinement of her mind," faid Howard, (whofe countenance had again brightened) addrefling himfelf to her. This was the firft time, except by tiis eyes, that he had in any manner taken the flighteft notice of her; and thefe words were fo unexpected, that Matilda, confufed and furprifed, looked at him without fpeaking. Offended at not receiving an anfwer, which he evidently expected, a frown in-« ftantly contracted his brow; and juft as fhe was opening her lips, he arofe precipitately, and left the recefs. Belmore and Matilda rofe and followed him. She felt ftill more confufed, and was almoft tempted to blame fuch unaccount¬ able caprice ; but the recollection of his misfortunes intervened to check the refent¬ ment it excited. Howard
Howard reached the parlour firft, and had juft taken up his fiat, with an intention of departing, when Belmore entered it. The cloth was already laid for fupper, to which Belmore, with fome difficulty, pre¬ vailed on him to flay; perhaps all his en¬ treaties would have been unavailing, but that Howard was confeious he had not made fuch a return for the kind attentions and benevolent efforts of Mr. BeUnore, as lie had a right to cxped. From this confcioufncfs, or fome other fecret motive, as he fat at fupper, he gradually unbent from his re¬ ferve, and entered into a converfation in which Matilda bore a fliare. He at length departed: as he quitted the cottage, heprefled the hand which Belmore extended to him; " Vcj, from my foul," exclaimed he, « I thank you for your friendfhip and attention." " Convince
" Convince me of your regard, by let¬ ting me fee you often," faid Belmore :— " 'tis from adions, not words, I judge of fincerity." Howard ihook his head—drop¬ ped his hand, and retired without fpeaking. Mr. Beimore aiked Matilda what fhe thought of him? flie bluihedand hefitated a little. " I think," faid ihe, her looks rather averted from Mr. Belmore, " that he is unhappy." " Oh ! you thought that," faid Mr. Belmore, " before you faw him : I aík you whether you think him unpleafing?" f * No, I think—I believe not ; 'tis really impoffible to know what he is, in fo fhort a time." Mr. Belmore fmiled; but as it was a fmile caufed by a fudden idea he chofe to keep fecret, we do not think our¬ felves at liberty to account for it.
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. " Virtue alone is true nobility ι u Let your own acts immortalize your name; «< 'Tis poor relying on another's fame ; " For take the pillars but away, and ail * f The fuperftruclute mult in ruins fall ; « As a wnc droops, when by divor e remov'd ťť From the embraces of the elm ihe loy'd." STEVENS*S JVVENAL. WHILE at breakfaft the next morning,, Mr. Aflimore called upon them,* andas foon as it was over, he and Mr. Belmore went out together. As foon as they were gone, Matilda fat dow'n to her piano, and played over
over the pieces which had fo power/ully affeded Howard the preceding evening. As lhe played, ihe experienced emotions fimilar to thofe he had then manifefted ; emotions excited more by the recoiledion of his, than the ftrains which had occafioned them; as the martial mufic fweiled upon her ear, fhe thought of the glow it had called into his countenance,—the life—the fire it had kindled in his eyes. When ihe changed—when ihe again fung of the heroes who had fallen in battle, his fudden gloom—his agitation was pidured to her imagination,and an involuntary figh heaved her bofom. At this mement, a lowjioife near her, made her raife her eyes from the inftrument; and fhe beheld, to her extreme aftonifhmentand confufion, Bromley ftand¬ ing by it, his eyes expreffive of rapture and admiration. She ftarted—ihe coloured, and
and was too much difcompofed for İöme time, to aik him how long he had been in the room. He had been much longer in it, indeed, than ihe fufpected, rather pleafed than otherwife, at her being too much engroffed to perceive him ; as her being fo, gave him an opportunity of gazing on her without interruption. He had watched with the moft rapturous admiration the changes of her countenance, her varying complexion, the humid luftre of her eyes; never had ihe appeared half fo interefting—halffo lovely; and he felt more' than ever determined to let neither difficulties nor dangers deter him from per- fevering in his defigns upon her. Scarcely could he controul the feelings fhe had in* fpired ; he could not refrain from fnatching her hand, and railing it to his lips, while his
his eyes fpoke a language to her which heightened her blufties, and made heravert her looks from his. Not all his entreaties could prevail on her to refume her feat at the piano; and taking up her work, ihe endeavoured, by feeming engaged about it, to avoid his glances. At firft her manner was cool and referved to him, as ihe felt difpleafed at what fhe conceived his intrufion, and was by no means in a humour for converfing with him. Bromley, however, not of a temper to be eafily repulfed, pretended not to notice her coldnefs, and by degrees drew her into a converfation on fome interefting fubjeds. Among thefe, the fine arts and the per¬ flation they had attained was mentioned : - and he at length enquired whether ihe was an admirer of paintings ? She
She anfwered in the affirmative. * " Weil then," faid he, with an air of fatisfadion, "if you and Mr. Belmore will favour me with your company this evening, I think I can fhew you fome at my houfe which will meet your approbation; they have been reckoned extremely good by connoif- feurs. The walk will bea pleafant one; and I will call upon .you after dinner/' Matilda had no objedion to the pro¬ pofal; butiCould not, or rather would not- give any pofi t i ve anfwer to it, without con^ ful ting Mr. Belmore. Bromley accordingly waited for hk return, and having received a propitious anfwer from him, haftened home, to have preparations made for tJL· reception of his expeded viiitors, whom he determined, if poffible, to furprife into ad¬ miration. He was delighted at the idea of difplay ing to them the grandeur of his vol, ι. ι. improve-
improvements, and the interior of his ele¬ gant houfe, flattering himfelf that fuch a difplay would increaic his confequenee in their eyes, and perhaps accelerate the completion of his defigns on Matilda; ás, like the generality of the world, he con¬ ceived fhow to have great influence upon the female mind. ' He counted the hours till his return to the cottage, where he found Belmore and Matilda ready to attend him. In their way to his Houfe, they paffed Hillgrove's, where Patty, who had been aiked tojóin the party, impatiently watched their approach. The moment they appeared, ihe flew forward to meet them, and, in a hafty manner, com¬ menced a defcription of Mifs Wilfon's wedding, which ihe had been at, a day or two before. Bromley affected to rally her a little, on being too fevere in this defcrip¬ tion,
tion, and Matilda was not forry when their arrival at his houfe put a ftop to her further eloquence on the fubjed. Bromley conduded his guefts into a fpacious faloon, fuperbly furnifhed, where tea, coffee, anda variety of rich cakes, were provided for them. From hence he led them to the picture gallery,* which con¬ tained a numerous as well as a choice col¬ lodion of paintings ; among thefe a number of family portraits were confpicuous, but thefe, as totally uninterefting to thofe who were neither acquainted nor conneded with the originals, were looked over in iilence by the. guefts of Bromley, to his great mortification, not on account of any veneration he felt for them, but merely becaufe it deprived him of an opportunity of expatiating on the antiquity and con¬ fequence of his family; of the virtues or L 2 renown
renown that perhaps diftinguiihed fome members of it, he never thought; it was of titles and defcent, not of merit and glory, he was proud. The admiration and attention, however, with which fome fine hiftoricàt pieces were viewed, compenfated in fomc degree for the mortification he felt at the negled of his anceftors. Patty's observations and inquiries excited much amufement. A portrait of Cleo¬ patra, in the ad of difiolving the pearl, caught her attention, and ihe eagerly aiked what ihe w as about ; on being informed, fhe ihook her head, and declared it was a very filly action. She inquired the reafon of the melancholy vifible in the coun¬ tenance of jane Shore ; and, on Mr, Bel¬ more's giving her the poetical hiftory of the lovely culprit, expreffed much pity, and bid, " had ftie lived now-a«days, ihe would nor
not have found people fo barbarous on account of fuch a trifle." After his guçfts had completely fatisfied their curiofity, Bromley led them through a magnificent fuite of rooms, which ter¬ minated in folding doors that opened upon a fine terrace, ihaded with high trees, and commanding an extenfive view of the im¬ provements. From this terrace they de¬ scended to a flowery vale, in the centre of which was a noble lake, encornpaffed by a variety of fhrubs and trees; here they faw a richly-ornamented barge, with two young rowers init, at anchor. Bromley inquired whether any of his party had an objedion to the water; and being anfwered in the negative, he took the hand of Matilda, and led her into the barge, Belmore and Patty followed ; and as foon as they were feated, ^ 3 the
the boys dipped their oars into the water, and puihed from the fliore. The fcene was truly pidureique; the hanks of the lake were clothed with the fineft verdure; the * waving trees which dotted them, together with the glories of the fetting fun, were refleded in the water; amid thefe trees, groups of cattle were fcat¬ tered, fome repofing in foft tranquillity* and others ruminating o'er the ftream, while around was ftretched a profped diverfified by all the charms of cultivation> and only terminated by the clouds. A foft breeze, which fpread a gentle curl o'er the bofom of the lake, was impregnated with the moil delicious perfumes from fome adjacent ihrubberies, and to the harmony of French horns,ftationed in a neighbouring wood, the paddling oars feemed to keep time. Matilda was delighted/and Bromley, in
in raptures at the pleafure fhe evinced, imbibed additional fpirits, and exerted him¬ felf more than ever to appear agreeable, After rowing through moft of the meanders of the lake, the boat flopped before a Gothic building, to which there was an afcent from the water by a flight of fteps. It looked like the ruins of an old tem¬ ple: the windows, which were funk within the walls, were enriched with painted glafs ; a few ancient trees grew about it, and mofs and ivy crept over its furface. Here the party landed, and were agree * ably furprifed, on pafling through an arched entrance, to find themfelves in a very plea¬ fant apartment, elegantly furnifhed, and containing fome cafes cf books, and feveral mufical inftruments. Two maid-fervants, neatly dreffed, were ftationcd here to ferve L 4 the
the refreihments, with which a large table in an aclove was covered, confifting of ices» lemonade, orgeat, and the moft deli¬ cious fruits and fweetmeats. " This," faid Bromley, " I ftyle my her¬ mitage; here, whenever I am in a contem¬ plative mood, I fequefter myfelf, to enjoy the pleafures of folitude and ^reflexion." " It is well adapted, indeed," faid Mr. Belmore, " for fuch a purpofe, when the mind, languid or fatigued, feeks to revive its powers by meditation and retirement." Matilda, after examining the apartment, wandered to a window, from whence ihe had a diftant view of Howard's folitary re¬ treat; o'er its mofs-grown towers additional glooms were now fpread, and, as Matilda gazed upon it, her fpirits gradually funk at the idea of the forrows which could have induced
induced a being, in all the prime of life, to abandon foeiety, and take up his abode in fo melancholy a dwelling.—" Ah!" faid fhe to herfelf, " how ihall I rejoice if Mr. Bel more's arguments prevail on him to quit it 1—how ihall I rejoice ir I hear the wounds of his heart are ever likely to b e healed !" ·' La !" faid Patty, who ap¬ proached her at this moment, curious to fee what it was which engroffed her atten¬ tion fo particularly, for her eyes were rivetted to one fpot, " La ! I declare" faid ihe, looking over her ihoulder, *' you can fee the place where the madman lives from this window; well to be fure, I never was fo much afraid of any one in my life. I wiih he was either removed from this part of the country, or confined in one of the vaults belonging to the building." ^ 5 "Are
" Are you not a little barbarian, 4 to wiih fuch a thing?" cried Bromley. She laughed and repeated her fears. " This fame Re¬ clufe, muft certainly be a very extraordinary being/' refumed J romley; " I ihould like to know whether his oddities proceed from a difordered brain, or an irritated temper. I once or twice met him accidentally, and endeavoured to afceitain the point, by making an attempt to converfe with him ; but he repulfed the effort with high dif¬ dain, and quitted me abruptly." Both Beimore and Matilda continued filent relari ve to Howard; prudence and delicacy forbade their making him the fub¬ jed of difcourfe, left they might, by reveal¬ ing any particulars of him, excite curiofity and impertinence, and fubjed him to in- trufions which they were convinced would counterad
counteract all they had yet done, or wiihed to do for him. They continued till a late hour in the hermitage ; Matilda, at the particular re¬ queft of Bromley, played feveral favourite airs upon the, guitar, and .accompanied them with her voice. They then returned through a wildernefs of fweets to the houfe, where an elegant fupper was prepared for them. The sloom which had ftolen upon the fpirits of Matilda, gradually yielded to the cheerfuinefs that reigned around her; and the party did not break up till it was far beyond the hour at which flie and Mr. Belmore had latterly accuftomed themfelves to retire to repofe. They found Bromley's coach waiting for them, in which he infifted on accompanying them home. In their way thither, Patty was dropped at her father's, highly delighted L 6 with
with the evening's entertainment. Brom¬ ley took an opportunity, while Bèlrríore was rapping at the hall door, which the maid, in order to prevent any difagreeable furprife, had wifely bolted, to kifs Matilda's hand with the moft paffion$te fervour, and whifper to her his adoration. The confufion, however, this liberty occafioned, as well as the pleafure flie had experienced throughout the evening was forgotten, when, on entering the cottage, flie learned Howard had been at it. " How unfortunate," faid Belmore, ** that w f e w ere out!" " Ah!" cried Matilda, with an energy fhe was not aware of, fi I regret it beyond expreffion; had I entertained an expectation of fuch a vifit, I ihould have requefted Mr. Bromley's invitation might have been declined, for upon our time and our
our attention the unfortunate have par¬ ticular claims." « True," replied Belmore, " nor can any amufement—any pleafure, to a mind of fenfibility, yield fuch delight as is derived from adminiftering confolation to the un¬ happy, and ftealing them from the remem¬ brance of their forrows. I rejoice (added he) to hear of this vifit ; it feems as if our Reclufe was again inclined to reliih the fweets of foeiety; I will call on him to¬ morrow, and endeavour, if neceffary, to ftrengthen his inclination to return to it." As Mr. Belmore had imagined, Howard was again inclined indeed to mingle in foeiety. The arguments of Mr. Belmore, fo convincing to his reafon—the calm plea¬ fure he had experienced at his houfe the preceding evening, fo foothing to his feel¬ ings, began to give him a diftaftc to his prefent
prefent manner of living he had never be¬ fore experienced. As he penfively fat in Ыв gloomy abode the following evening, he revolved the whole of Belmore's condud; the humanity which had induced him to vifit his retreat, the mildnefs, the moderation with which he bore his caprices and perverfenefs: his heart fweiled with gratitude as he reviewed his kindnefs, and he bitterly reproached himfelf for having made no fuitable return for it. "I will no longer," cried he, fud¬ denly ftarting from his feat—" I will no longer appear ungrateful or obftinate in his eyes—I will no longer withhold from him that pleafure which a mind like his muft feel at finding its benevolent exertions have not been unavailing. I will go to him diredly, and convince him his efforts have been crowned with fuccefs." Scarcely,
Scarcely, however, had he reached the gate >vhich opened into the ruin, ere fome fudden recollections croffed his mind, which made him paufe, and, in a few minutes^ return, with tf penfive fteps and flow," to the feat he had fo eagerly quitted. After fitting fome time in zl gloomy re¬ verie, he raifed his heavy eyes and furveyed the melancholy fcene furrounding him. No images but thofe of hotror and defolation met his view: the brown hue of the neg¬ lected and tangled flirubs was mournfully contrafted by the long verd.mt grafs which grew amidft the broken tomb-ftones, and the mouldering walls of the Abbey feemed ready to fall before the firft rude gale. Never did the fcene appear fo dreary, fo defolate as at the prefent moment; he in¬ voluntarily fliuddered as he furveyed it, and rifing,
rifing, afcended the hill at the back of the building. From hence was an extenfive profped, well calculated to baniih all "fad- - nefs but defpair/' but no feature in the landfcape had now power to attract his attention but the cottage of Belmore :— viewed at this diftance, with the evening fun glittering upon the windows, and the fheep quietly feeding upon the lawn before it, it feemed a little Paradife. His mind gradually loft its depreffion, as he gazed upon it, and thought of the ferene felicity enjoyed by its inmates. " Ah! how happy are they now !" cried he ; " theirs are thofe domeftic joys, which, but for the bafefl perfidy, I might have experienced ; joys which, alas ! I muft now never hope to attain!" He fighed, and for a moment bent his cye$ to the ground ; again he raifed and direded them towards the cottage,beau¬ tifully
ti fully confpicuous amidft the dark woods furrounding it. He pictured to himfelf Matilda, feated at the inftrument, from whence the preceding evening ihe had drawn forth fuch exquifite melody, aaâ Bel- more hanging enraptured over her. He recalled the magic of her voice—he felt it again thrilling through his heart, and calm¬ ing its painful emotions. His refolurion to revifit the cottage returned; and defcend- ing the hill, he inftantly took the road leading to it. " As for the girl/' faid he, as he proceeded, Cf notv, ithflanding the amufement fhe is capable of giving from her mufical abilities, I ftiould be better pleafed to find her abfent ; Mr. Bclmore's converfation is all I defire." He found the fervane maid fitting at the hall door, at work. On inquiring for her mafter, flie told him, though rather hefi- tatingly,
tatingly, (in confequence of the panic his fudden appearance had thrown her into, for, like many of her neighbours, fhe enter¬ tained a ftrange opinion of him) that 'Squire Bromley had fetched him and Mifs Matilda to look at his houfe, and ihe did not fup¬ pofe they would be back for a long while. Howard turned abruptly from her to conceal the chagrin her information gave him*—a chagrin he was exafperated with himfelf for feeling, and which he would have been mortified beyond expreffion to think any one ihould have perceived, or even fufpeded.
v<jrl/i.I. *
\ υ
CHAP. XVIII. " My ugly guilt flies in my confciou· face.'* LE£. J3ELMORE, agreeably to his intention the preceding night, went early in the morning to Howard, to try and prevail on him to dine that day ас the cottage. Matilda felt an inquietude flic could not account for, and vainly endeavoured to divert by her ufual avocations; neither working,
working, reading, nor playing, would an¬ fwer the purpofe for which flie reforted to them; and at length putting on her hat, ihe ftrolled out, the way Mr. Belmore had taken, impatient, even to a degree of anxiety, to hear whether his invitation was accepted. She had not proceeded far, when fhe met Bromley, porting to the cottage; ihe never felt lefs inclined to converfe, and would have avoided him, if poffible. He accofted her familiarly, hoped ihe had received no cold from her aquatic excurfion the pre¬ ceding evening; then, without waiting for an anfwer, faid the queftion was unnecef- fary, as ihe looked quite as blooming and beautiful as ever; inquired whither flie was going, and begged to know whether he might have the happinefs of attending her. Matilda, who earneftly wiihed to get rid of him, anfwered him carelefsly. She was
was quite undetermined, fhe faid, about the way flie ihould go, or how long ihe ihould flay out, and entreated him not to give up a pleafant walk on her account. He affured her no walk, no place, no fituation could be pleafant to him without her foeiety: thefe words he accompanied with a look and an attempt to take her hand, which increafed Matilda's coldnefs to him. This coldnefs, however, could not drive him away; and Matilda, at length reflecting on the pains he had taken to amufe her and his other guefts the preceding evening, began to accufe herfelf of fomething like ingratitude and rudenefá, to make amends for which, flie unbent her brow, and entered into con¬ verfation with him. On coming to a little hillock on the road fide, which Belmore muft pafs in his way from the Abbey to the cottage, Matilda fat
fat down under the pretence of fatigue, and Bromley followed her example. They had not been feated many minutes, w hen Howard and Belmore made their ap¬ pearance. . Matilda inftantly ftarted up, with a flutter at her heart-which caufed her cheeks to glow : it was not long ere they perceived her; and as they drew near, Mr. Belmore called upon her to unite with him in trying to prevail on Howard to fpend the day with them. Ci He has hitherto withftood my intreaties," faid he, €C but I flitter myfelf he will not be fo ungallant as to re fufe complying with yours," Matilda with a ftill deeper bluffi, as her eyes en¬ countered thofe of Hov.ard, from whence all gloom was removed, was beginning to fpeak, when Bromley, who had hitherto beai unobferved, in confequence of his lolling at the back of the hillock, where he had
ч had been colleding fome wild flowers to tw-ine intoa garland, as he faid, for Matilda, fuddenly ftarted' up, and, after aiking Bel- more how he was, and cafting a malicious and difdainful glance at Howard, held up his flowery fpoiis, and avowed the purpofe for which they had'been gathered. Belmore was mortified at his prefencc, as he feared it would drive Howard away: in thinking fo, he was not miftaken ; the brightnefs of his countenance d i redly va- niftied, and flightly touching his hat, he precipitately departed, notwithftanding the intreaties of Belmore for his ftay, and the eloquent felicitations of Matilda's eyes. Belmore, exceedingly vexed at his de¬ parture, drew Matilda's arm under his, without fpeaking, and proceeded towards home. " Lord!" cried Bromley, following them, u I really fear í have frightened the gen-
gentleman away—I really am vaflly con¬ cerned at the idea; not indeed that I think you have any great reafon to regret my doing fo, as I can't imagine his company would prove very delectable. For Hea¬ ven's fake, my dear Sir (addreffing himfelf to Belmore,) by what magic did you allure him from his cell !" Mr. Belmore coolly , replied, " no magic was neceffary to co¬ operate with the dictates of reafon." Bromley was too difcerning not to per¬ ceive his company could readily be aif~ penfed with at prefent ; he therefore deter¬ mined on taking himfelf of£ not a little enraged at the idea of his entertainment the preceding evening being given to no purpofe, as appeared by the manner in which both Matilda and Belmore had treated him. He was a little pacific/, however, at going away* by receiving an invitation
invitation from Mr. Belmore to tea in the evening; an invitation indeed which was given as fome kind of atonement for the coldnefs with which he had behaved to him, and for which (as in a fimilar inftance Matilda had done) he could not avoid re¬ proaching himfelf when he reflected on the polite and hofpitable manner in which he had been treated by him. " I had almoft prevailed on Howard," faid he, as foon as Bromley turned his fteps from them, " to pafs the day with ш э and am almoft fure, but for the unexpected appearance of Bromley, he would have done fo„" So thought Matilda, likcwife, and the idea made her regret more than perhaps flic would have chofe to acknowledge, her having met with the latter. vol. i. и All
с
All figns of regret were banifhed from her looks, however, lqng before he came in the evening. Delighted at being again received both by Matilda and Mr. Belmore with good humour and cordiality, he was chatting away with more than wonted animation, when the parlour door flowly opened, and Mr. Aihmore entered. The inftant Bromley faw him, his lips clofed— his colour changed, and every trace of vivacity forfook him*; he felt involuntarily awed and abafhcd in the prefenc* of a per- fon to whom he fufpeded his bafenefs was known, and who, if this was the cafe, he knew, from the virtues he himfelf pof- fefled, muft defpife him. He feared to look—he feared to fpeak before him, left his looks fhould excite fufpicions, or his fentiments, often fo little correfponding wirh
with his paft adions, provoke an unqua¬ lified accufation of hypocrify, Aflimore, probably from expeding 'to find him there, betrayed neither furprife nor enibarraffment at feeing him at the cottage; a placid fmile, as ufual, fat upon his features, and he entered into converfa¬ tion with Belmore and Matilda. In this converfation Bromley vainly endeavoured tojóin/ and finding it impoffible to ihake off his reftraint, he withdrew immediately after tea, affigning a fudden indifpofition as a reafon for doing fo, as well as for the alteration which had taken place in' his manner, and which, he was well convinced, i ε was neceffary to account for. As foon as he was* gone, Aflimore inquired how long Belmore had known him : on being informed, he aiked a few other quef- tions concerning him, not by any means, m 2 however,
however, calculated to.awaken fufpicion; and the converfation relative to him was then entirely dropped. The evening was iho vvery, and the gentlemen being prevented walking, fat down to backgammon; and Matilda repaired to her chamber, where ihe amufed herfelf with a book, from which however her thoughts often wandered to Howard, and more than once her eyes were turned from it to the road, in hopes of feeing him j but thefe hopes were dis¬ appointed, though perhaps, had Howard followed the bent of his inclination, this might not have been the cafe. He had beheld Belmore approaching his dreary habitation in the morning, with a pleafure which but a ihort time before he thought he fhould never more have ex¬ perienced; and though he did not abfo- lutely promife to pafs the day with him, he did
did notrefufe accompanying him in a ram¬ ble. The promife, however, which Mr. Belmore defired, he would, in all probabi¬ lity, have given him, but for the unexpeded appearance of Bromley, whom, he had rea¬ fon to think a frivolous and malicious cha¬ rader; and who, he concluded, would be of the party at the cottage ; he could not, therefore, endure the idea of going to it. " No," faid he to himfelf, " fecretly exafperated with Matilda, whom he had been inclined to think, notwithftanding his prejudices, fuperior to the reft of her fex ; " no, the company of a malignant coxcomb, and a coquettifh girl, would be infupport- able." Scarcely, however, had he left them, ere he began to think he had been too hafty, and to condemn himfelf for not endeavour¬ ing to controul his feelings. " If I per- M 3 fevere
fevere in fuch conduct," thought he, " I muft at length lofe tlie eítcem of Mr. Beb more; that efieem which has been fur h a fource of confolation ionie: thericheit inn J ot good-nature and patience may at length be exhauftcd by caprice and cbflhiacv," He paufed, and felt inclined to turn back and to acknowledge he had been to blame; bui w hen he confidcred fuch conduct would more than ever expofe him to the imputa¬ tion of caprice, he checked this impulfe, and proceeded to the Abbey, refolved to poflponc the acknowledgement he medi· tared, to another day. Beyond the next day he could not defer it, and was accordingly on his way to the cottage, when he was met by Belmore, who accofte-d him with his ufual cordiality, and propofed his accompanying him to a mea¬ dow which was mowing. * c If you promife, how evert
however, to fpend the day with me, I give you your choice," faid he, " either to come with mc, or repair to the cottage, where you will find Mifs Stanley." ff Then, like a wife man," replied How¬ ard, half fmiling, " I will be guided by prudence inftead of inclination, and attend you ;" well aware that the danger of a iiu- à-tête with Mifs Stanley would not be in¬ ferior to the pleafure. They accordingly repaired to the mea¬ dow, which exhihitcd а fcene of joyous induftry, highly gratifying tu the benevo¬ lence of their minds. They mufl, indeed, be deflitute of the focial charities of life who do not rejoice at beholding the earth teeming w¡th increafe, and the huibandman rejoicing amidft pro- fpech of plenty. The
The pleafure which rcnilted to Howard from the fcene was depicted on his coun¬ tenance, and Mr. Belmore rejoiced to he- hold his fcclingt refoming their natural bks, ** How bounteous is Providence to man¬ kind!" cried he, actuated by fimilar feel¬ ings j ** how numeroni are the bleffings with which it his interfperfed the care» and forrows, neceflTariry annexed to huma¬ nity, to check the arrogance and levity wc are all fo liable io, and make us remember our transitory ftatel" Howard acknowledged the truth of his obfervation; and they continued to ramble about till the fun becoming vertical, com¬ pelled them to take refuge under an old thorn, which enwrcathing its boughs on high, formed a thick and delightful fhade. A rapid flream that murmured near it, gave
gave an air of cool nefs to the fpot, and the ground immediately around it was thickly inlaid with wild ftowers: here they inhaled the fragrance of the new-mown hay, and enjoyed the ruftic mirth that was going on among the pea fants. u If Matilda was here, we might dine pleafantly beneath thefe fpreading boughs," faid Mr. Belmore; " the fweetnefs of the air, and the beauty of the profpect, would render a repaft here truly delightful :*'■— Howard wzs of the fame opinion. Mr. Belmore, therefore, difpatched a Bceffage to Matilda by apeafant boy, defiring horto join him without delay, and have provi.. fions, with every thing requinte for their accommodation at ^dinner, brought along with her. Matilda obeyed his fu m mons w ¡th ala¬ crity, and tripped on with a frmli bafket of m 5 frefh
frefh fruit, nicely covered over with vine leaves, upon her arm, and followed by the maid, bearing a larger one, in which were all the' requintes for a comfortable dinner. " DeaT Sir/* cried fhe, quickening her pace, as fhe approached Mr. Belmore, " this was a delighful thought, fo------" She paufed—fhe almoft ftarted; format this inftant fhe beheld Howard, and furprife "painted her cheeks with blufhes, «« Like colours o % er the morning ík -ш, " As bright, as tranfient too." Howard alfo coloured; but not from plea¬ fure, he endeavoured to perfuade himfelf. He tried to think the company of Matilda no acquifition, and fecretly refolved to re¬ fume his referve the moment fhe appeared* This refolution, however, he found impoffi¬ ble to put into pradice, fo harmonized were his feelings by the prefent fcene. The
The cloth was laid upon the grafs ; and the provifions being produced, Matilda feated herfelf by Mr. Belmore, who was delighted at the pleafure ftie feemed ro ex¬ perience. " Oh!" exclaimed this amiable man in the fullnefs of his heart, " how much to be preferred is the ferenity of a country life, its innocent and tranquil pleafures, to the noife, the bufile, the diffi¬ pation of a town one; to thofe amufe¬ ments, which inftead of unbending the mind, bewilder the fenfes and fatigue the fpirits ! What enemies to their own happi¬ nefs are thofe who forfake the fweet and fimple feenes of nature, for the haunts of vice, of folly, and intemperance! How much to be regretted is the infatuation that leads them to do fo! how much to be pitied are they for yielding to it !" μ 6 "And
t
" And why," aiked Howard, " fince thus attached to the ferenity of a country life, do you urge me to quit it, and return to the great world ?" " 'Tis hot a country life ; 'tis gloom— 'tis folitude—'tis indolence I urge you to give up," replied Belmore : " had you any purfuit to follow—had you any tie to bind you to it, I think a continuance in the country would rather promote than injure your happinefs; but as that is not the cafe, as you have no avocation here tó employ your time—as you are unçonneded and firtglc ,f, —* Howard ftarted at thefe words, fighed deeply, and averted his eyes from Mr. Belmore. " As you are ftngle," re¬ peated Mr. Beimore, after a paufe caufed by the ¿motion Howard had betrayed, " and a fine young fellow, the bufy world. ís your proper fphere." Howard
Howard again fighed. " I will return to it," faid he, " though without a hope of recovering my loll happinefs." Mr. Belmore perceiving him relapfing into melancholy, exerted himfelf to try and diffipateit." His efforts were foon feconded by Mr. Aihmore, who, in crofting a neighbouring field, efpied the little party, and haftened to them. He was received with the utmoft pleafure by Mr. Belmore and Matilda, and fat down to partake.of their humble repaft. Howard and Aihmore were not unknown to each other; the latter having vifited him, prompted by feelings fimilar to thofe which had induced Belmore to do fo. The re¬ ception, however, he met wirh, difpleafed him fo much, that he never attempted to repeat his vifit. * Howard
Howard at firft felt forry that he had joined their party; but, by degrees, the mildnefs and benevolence of his manner reconciled him to his company. " We ftiould appear a curious group," faid Matilda, fmiling, " to fpedators at a diftance; they would take us, in all proba¬ bility, for a fet of ftrolling gypfies." " Or fuppofe," cried Mr. Belmore, " a forcerefs and magicians; your looks would certainly bear teftimony againft us." Whilft converfing, an itinerant family of muficians, confifling of a huiband, a wife, and two children, approached them ; the huiband played on the violin, the wife on the hurdy-gurdy, and the children alter¬ nately on the tamborine. The lively ftrains of the former, and the antiek meafures of the latter, foon caufed a fu fpenfion of labour. Mr. Belmore, who delighted İn promoting
promoting innocent mirth and contributing to the happinefs of his fellow-creatures, ordered the fragments of his feaft to be diftributed amongft them, and rewarded them ftill more liberally afterwards, for the hilarity they had given rife to. This hilarity, initead of exhilarating the fpirits of Howard, feemed rather to dep refs them ; it feemed to awaken painful remem¬ brances in his mind, and a deeper gloom than ufual fat upon his features.. Mr. Belmore, in hopes of diffipating it by foçial converfe, detained him in the field till the hour of toil was over, and the labourers were departing from it. He then endeavoured to prevail on him to fpend the remainder of the evening at the cot¬ tage; but his efforts to do fo were ineffec¬ tual. Howard, however, rcfufed him in a manner which proved that it was not from caprice,
caprice, but from real melancholy, which needed the indulgence of retirement, that he declined his invitation. They parted from him at his dreary abode, over which the fetting fun diffufed a folemn glory, that rendered its decay ftill more awful and confpicuous.—The heart of Matilda funk as flie beheld him retreating amidft its defblated walls ; and the pleating impreffion the amufements of the day had made upon her mind, gave place to regret for him. ' *' I rejoice to find," faid Aihmore, ad¬ drefling Mr. Belmore, as they purfued their way to the cottage, 4ζ that your exertions, relative to Mr. Howard are likely tó be¬ come more fuccefsful than mine." ** I truft they may be fuccefsful," faid Mr. Belmore; " it will indeed give me incxpreffiblc pleafure, if í can ever confider myfelf
myfelf the happy inftrument of refloring to foeiety a perfon fo eminently formed to adorn it as this young man.
CI IAP.
CHAP. XV. 4i I'm pleasMand pain"d йпсе firft her eyes I faw." DRYØfc.S'S CONQJTEST OF GRANADA. Notwithstanding Bromley's na¬ turai levity, his feelings at this period were extremely painful ; fearful as he was, that his bafenefs was known to Aihmore, and that his knowledge of it would lead to the expofure of it; an expofure which could not fail of depriving him of the good opi¬ nion of the world (which he by no means dif-
difregarded), and counteracting, in all pro¬ bability, his defigns upon Matilda. Had he imagined he poffeffed any influence over her heart, he would not have felt halffo uneafy at the idea of his condud been dif¬ covered to her, well knowing that love is prone to pardon, and overlook offence»; but notwithftanding his vanity,-he could not flatter himfelf with an idea of having made that progrefs in her affedions he de¬ fired, and confequently dreaded, if his vil¬ lainy was difclofed to her at'prefent, fne would for ever after ihun him. After much deliberation, therefore, he determined, in order to prevent the confe¬ quences that might refuli from a premature difcovery of it, to propofe to her a clandef¬ tine marriage, under fuch pretences as he hoped would impofe upon her credulity and inexperience; flattering himfelf, that from
from interefted motives, fhe might permit him to obtain that triumph which from more tender ones fhe would not allow him. It is fcarcely neceffary to fay, that this marriage he meant ihould be a { fiditious one. He had already, as has been men¬ tioned, fucceeded in a fcheme òf a fimilar nature. If lucky enough to do fo, now it was his determination to take fuch meafures as ihould prevent Matilda from being ever troublefome to him after he grew weary (which he had no doubt would be the cafe) of her* FKs plans once arranged, he watched with the utmoft anxiety for an opportunity of malcing his meditated propofal, ading with fuch circumfpedion, that neither Bel- more nor Matilda could poffibly objed to his vifits, Ere
Ere he obtained, however, the opportu¬ nity he defired, an incident occurred which had nearly'betrayed him to Matilda.—-As fhe and Patty were walking one evening, about fun-fet, in a lonely road, they were met by him on horfeback, returning from a gentleman's houfe, where he had fpent the day, and where his libations to Bacchus had been quite too potent for his head. The moment he faw Matilda, he leaped from his horfe, and giving it in charge to his groom, whom he ordered to proceed home, feized her hand, with a vehemence which alarmed her, fwearing at the fame time ihe was the moft lovely girl in the world; and ihe—and fhe only could make him bleffed. • Matilda, with much difpleafure, tried to difengage herfelf from him, as the fituation flie perceived he was in could not excufe to her the freedom of his manner; but her efforts
efforts to do fo were vain ; he held her by a firm grafp, infifted on her accompanying him to the hermitage, and defired Patty to leave them* Patty, offended by his neglecting her, with an air of high difdain was walking off, when Matilda, who by this time he had drawn towards a ihady path, leading into a retired part of his own grounds, forcibly broke from him, and running after her companion, caught her by the arm, and hurried on. Bromley purfued rhem; and again feizing Matilda's hand, fworcfhe ihould not leave him. Patty, ftill more enraged, now tried . to difengage herfelf from Matilda; but Matilda holding her by the gown, turned to Bromley, and with a look exprcffive of the refentment ihe feir, commanded him to reléale her.
In
Her look and manner reftored him to inftant recoiledion ; and fecretly curling himfelf for his boldnefs and termerity, he dropped her hand, and attempted to apo- logife.for his condud. To this apology, however, Matilda paid no attention: flie quitted him indignantly, and, on reaching farmer Hillgrove's, procured a man to attend her home, left flie ftiould again be molefted. She found Mr. Belmore in the parlour. The flutter of her fpirits had not, by any means, fubfided; and her agitation called forth his tender inquiries. Thefe inquiries Matilda endeavoured to evade, from an apprehenfion of the confequences that might refult from his knowing the behaviour of Bromley; but he was too much interefted about her to permit any evafion, and by degrees drew from her the particulars he defired
defired to learn. He felt greatly exafpe¬ rated at the conduct of Bromley, which even the fituation he was defcribed to be in, could not palliate ín his opinion. In a few minutes, however, his difplea¬ fure was more than counterbalanced by the fatisfaction he experienced at having fo fair an opportunity as the prefent, for in¬ quiring into the ftate of Matilda's heart; an inquiry he had long been defirous of making, in confequence of fome fecret ob- fervations he had made, as well as a fufpicion of the attachment of Bromley, notwithftand- ing all the pains he had taken to avoid feem- ing too particular to Matilda. As foon therefore as ihe had recovered her compo¬ fure, he led, in the moft delicate manner, to the queftion he wiihed to afk; and intreated to know whether, if Bromley made propofals for her, fhe would accept them. Matilda, un- *
unhefitatingly affured him fhe would not. —" I. am then to underftand," faid Mr. Belmore, looking attentively at her, " that your heart is difengaged?" Matilda ftarted, blufhed, and withdrew her eyes from him, fC Yes," faid fhe, with an emotion which almoft deprived her of breath, * e you are." " And may it remain fo," cried Mr. Belmore with fervency, " till you meet with a being who can eftimate its virtues, and requite its tendernefs! Oh! never- never may fo rich, fo invaluable a treafure be beftowed on a being infenfible of its worth!" A gentle figh ftole from the bofom of Matilda, as ihe tremblingly raifed the hand of Mr. Belmore to her lips. " Oh! Sir/* flie faid, her eyes fwimmmgin tears, "how fweet, how kind are your wiihes for my n felicity!
felicity! how inadequate is language to exprefs the feelings they give rife to!" When Matilda retired for the night to her chamber, her thoughts involuntarily recurred to the converfation that had paffed between her and Mr. Belmore. " Was I candid, did I deal ingenuoufly with him?" ihe aiked herfelf, as ihe leaned penfively on her little dreffing-table; " I was finCere when I affured him worlds would not tempt me to an union with Bromley \ but, was I equally fo when I faid my heart was difengaged? oh! yes—I was s it muft be fo—*tis companion—'tis pity alone I feel* Bromley, contrary to his ufual cuftom, did not vifit her the next morning; he re¬ folved to abftain from calling on her again, till he had an opportunity of converfing with her in private; and making not only an
an apology for his late conduct, but the propofal he meditated. Howard» in the mean, time, became al¬ moft an inmate in the cottage; his diipo- fition was not fuited to the cheerlefs plan which, in the height of affliction and de- fpair, he had adopted. By degrees, his referve towards Matilda wore away; he read—he walked—he freely converfed with her; and felt again inclined to think, that innocence, truth, and feeling, were to be found within a female breaft. Every day he became, ¿f pofiîble, more inter efting to Matilda; and thecontraft&e unavoidably drew between him and Brom· ley, leffened one as much it exalted the other in her opinion.
ν г CHAP.
мВЗиП
CHAP, XX.
** Píftiaitifully íhe look*d \ then tuınhîg round, " She fix'd lur «yes unmovM upon the ground ; *' And what he fays and fwrars regards no more, <? Than the deaf rocks, when the loud billows roar." DRYDEN'S VIRGIL*
AT length Bromley obtained the oppor¬ tunity he hadfo long defired of converfing with Matilda. An emiffary he had ftationed near her abode, flew to 'him one evening to inform him Beimore, accompanied by Howard, was gone out upon a long ramble, and
and he diredly haftened thither, agitated by alternate hopes and fears. He found Matilda in the parlour; his unexpeded and equally undefired appearance roufed her from a penfive, though perhaps not unpleafing meditation. The manner in which he had treated her in their lait in¬ terview, the converfation that had paflM between Mr. Belmore and her relative to him, and his prefent intrufion, all combined to make her receive him with the moft frigid coldnefs, which, though it fomewhat damped his fpirits, could not induce him to abandon the intentions with which he had come to her. " I fee, Mifs Stanley," faid he, with un- ufuaľgravity, " I fee, with extreme regret, that I have difpleafed you; I flattered my¬ felf, that the fituation I was in, at the time I gave you caufe for difpleafure, a fituation n 3 I
I was unhappily and unwarily led Into, might have palliated the offence I was guilty of. Surely, you cannot imagine that the man who adores you, who looks upon you as the firft of human beings, would willingly offend you î No, he would fooner expire th&n do fo! Tell me then, deareft «and moft lovely of girls—*-teU me that you forgive me,—that you permit me to hope." *< Hppe, Sir!" repeated Matilda» fomewhat angrily-V* Yes, that you will comply with * the wifhes of my fond heart, and unite your fate to mine." «* Oh, Mifs Stanley !" he continued with vehemence, in order to prevent her from interrupting him, which he faw ihe was about doing, with looks that promifed but r lU i e —« Oh, Mift Stanley! more than exiftence, happincfc, depends, upon your confcnting to be mine ! Ah! how much do I
1 regret not being in a fituation to permit me to try and prevail upon your friends to intercede for me : I am not independent as the world imagine me, and am therefore under the neceffity of concealing my at¬ tachment to you, left, if known, it ihould deprive me of the favour of a rich though avaricious relation, upon whom I prin¬ cipally depend for a future eflabliihment. This muft account and apologife to you for my folkiting you to blefs me in private, even without the concurrence of Mr. Belmore, whofe pride, I know, would ren¬ der him averfe to a clandeftine marriage; though, when once over, I am certain he would not be difpleafed at it. Confent then to become mine in the manner I wifh—- confent to put yourfelf under my protec w tion, and be affured, the whole ftudy of my life Ihall be to prove my gratitude for your con«
confidence in me, and compliance with my wifhes. u My uncle, from his advanced period of life, cannot live much longer. The mo¬ ment he dies, with tranfport«—with rapture I will proclaim the honour, the happinefs you have conferred upon me; I will bind myfelf in any manner you pleafe, to make a proper fettlement upon you at his death ; and till that event takes place, you ihall, if you pleafe, after you have rendered me the moft bleffed of men, return to Mr. Belmore, and refide with him. Speak—fay you are not averfe to my fuit." u Your own impetuofity has alone pre¬ vented me from fpeaking to you before, Sir," replied Matilda, * f and afluring you, that were your propofals all that the vaineft and moft ambitious of my fex could defire, I would reject them ; I therefore——" "Hold!"
w Hold!" interrupted Bromley, " you will drive me to defpair and diftračtion, if you reject me! Oh, Mifs Stanley, (he con¬ tinued, kneeling before her, and vehemently grafping her hand,) fuffer the moft tender, the moft ardent paffion that ever warmed the heart of man to plead for me—to—'* At this moment, Belmore*s voice upon the lawn reached his ear, * c Fury and ^madnefs!" cried he, ftarting up, u 1 have fruftrated my own intentions; tell me, (he cried, in an enraged voice) thou witch— thou forcerefs!" regarding Matilda as he fpoke, with a countenance expreffive of the raoft malignant paflions," will you—will you, or will you not, be mine?" Matilda, frightened by his violence, fhrunk back, and endeavoured to pufli him from her. He flood for a moment as if irrefolute how he ihould ad; then dropping her hand, he fnatched
fnatched up his hat, and flew out of the houfe, without paufing to notice Belmore or Howard, who were at that inftant enter¬ ing it. Their prefence %vas truly welcorhe to Matilda, for never had her fpirits been more agitated. Her palenefs and tremor called forth their inquiries; to which, how¬ ever, a fhower of tears prevented her imme¬ diately replying. All referve— all coldnefs at this moment forfook Howard; he flew for a glafs of water—he raifed it himfelf to her lips—he united with Mr. Belmore in trying to calm her perturbation. Their attentions, the attentions of Howard, fo foothing^—fo tender^—fo unexpeded, foon reftored her to compofure; and fhe then pleaded an head-ache as the caufe of the fituation they had found her in. That this plea was not credited by either, may eafily be
be believed; delicacy, however, forbade Howard from being too minute in his in¬ quiries, as did prudence Mr. Belmore, be¬ fore a third perfon. Howard fat a little time with them, and in the courfe of converfation informed Ma¬ tilda Mr. Belmore had at length obtained a pofirive promife from him to forfake folitude, and embrace diffipation. " Not fo neither/* faid Mr. Belmore: " it is in everyone's power to avoid diffipation; an enlightened mind can never be deftitute of employment, for the many leifure houri which gentlemen in the army have when unengaged in war." <f Army !" repeated Matilda, with emo¬ tion ; " what 1 is it intothe army Mr. Howard is going? 4 ' Yes," replied Belmore, " our lonely hermit will foon be metamorphofed into a fmart military hero." A
A pang, unfclt before, fmotethe heart of Matilda at thefe words ; wiih difficulty fhe fuppreflcd a figh; but not all her efforts could prevent tears from again Dealing down her cheeks—tears which would hive covered her with blufhes, had not the dark¬ nefs ©fthe hour prevented them from being feen, and which fell from feelings very dif¬ ferent from thofe that had caufed them to flow but a few minutes before. The perils, the dangers to which thofe who embraced a military profeffion, at de¬ fcribed by Mr. Belmore when relating her parent's pathetic ftory, recurred to her ima¬ gination, and ftie fliuddered at the idea of Howard*« being expofed to them. «« Oh, Heavens !** fheexebimed tojier- f If, " why does Mr. Belmore perfuade him to exchange fecurity and peace fordanger and fatigue? So
So much abforbed was ihe in melan¬ choly reflexions, that when Ho%vard retired ihe was almoft unequal to the tafk of in¬ forming Mr. Belmore of Bromley's con¬ duct. His urgent inquiries, at length, drew from her a candid difcíofure of it. u Gnxciom Heaven !" exclaimed Mr. Bcl- jnore, as foon as the furprife excited by this difclofure would permit him to fpeak— " is ir poffible hypocrify can 1 be carried fuch lengths? In trying to prevail on you to confent to a clandestine marriage, he tried to draw you into mifery and ruin. Oh, my child ! may Providence and thy own prudence ever counteract the machinations of the bafe —------! Of this be affured, the man who defires you to commit an action, which even for a tranfitory period can fully the purity of your character, feeh not the delicacy of real love, nor the fer¬ vency of rea»! efteem." \ot. i. о The
