Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Nocturnal visit: a tale
TUE
NOCTURNAL VISIT.
\ CHAP. L " Mournful is the tale *' Whlcli ye so fain would know." HßRMiT of Warkwortîï. A HE Countess, apprehensiA^e of un¬ pleasant consequences to herself from Jacintha's being acquainted with the secret of her birth, appointed an interview svith Lord G svy therin, for the purpose of endeavouring to pre¬ vail upon him to resign her. entirely vol. iv. ? . hito
VISIT. into her (the Countess's) hands, and thus gis-e her an opportunity of pre¬ venting Avhat she apprehended. As a means of prevailing upon him to accede to this measure, she solemn¬ ly assured him, if he consented to it, she svould enable him to free himself from the difficulties svliich, from pri- vatejnformation, slie knesv had alone made him think of an union Avith her—- an union to svhich she candidly con¬ fessed her abhorrence. Lord Gsvytberin, finding her reso¬ lutely bent on rejecting his hand, at last came into her terms; pieviously stipulating, howeser, that he should be acquainted svith the fate to Avhich she had destined Jacintha. This she accord¬ ingly revealed, and, callous as he As^as to the feelings of humanity, he could not hear it svithout emotion ; or rather such a pang of remorse at the idea of being accessary to it—at the idea of betraying
betraying the confidence which was re¬ posed in iiini, as scarcely a contempla¬ tion of the advantages that would attend his compliance with the Countess's Avishes, could dissipate. The Countess, on the contrary, still more hardened than he Avas (for sensi* bility ancl principle had long given up the very little ascendency they had ever possessed over her heart, to ambition and avarice), felt not the slightest com¬ punction at the idea of the lingering misery to Avhich she condemned Jacin¬ tha, The self-abasement she felt, in consequence of her birth, made her de¬ test her ere she saAv the light ; and she 1 ? would much more Avillingly Imve con¬ signed her to the grave (as indeed she would Avillingly ha\-e consigned all who Avere acquainted with her disgrace) than *. to the protection of Greville. This detestation, rather strengthened than ? 2 diminished
diminished by time, made her derive a maleA T olent pleasure from the idea of in¬ flicting pain upon her, and revenging upon the daughter the injuries she had sustained from the father. But, exclusive of her aversion to Jacintha, she Avould have been unwilling to haA r e acknowledged her, lest such an acknowledgment should have led to the discovery of a secret, upon the preser¬ vation of Avhich depended a reputation 'that gaA T e to her the power of triumph¬ ing over those who were less fortunate than herself in concealing their indis¬ cretions ; and, independent of her strong resentment against Lord Gsvytberin, she Avould have declined his hand, in consequence of some private and important reasons she had for svish ing to unite herself to the Marquis de Montalde ; reasons Avhich, if com-* niunicated to Lord Gsvytberin previous to
to his quitting England, Avould have deterred him from visiting France. In this visit he had desired the com¬ pany of Jacintha, not for the pur¬ pose of promoting her happiness, as he had pretended, but merely from selfish considerations. Her interesting loveliness, he thought, coukl not fail of aAvakening all the tender feelings of a mother in the heart of Lady Dunsane (of which he judged more favourably than it deserved), and rendering her a successful advocate in his favour. This idea, and this only, was his in¬ ducement for taking her to thè Conti¬ nent ; for about her felicity or welfare, farther than either could have promoted his osvn, he felt almost totally uninte¬ rested, and had entirely banished her from his thoughts, from the moment he' learned she Avas not (as he had supposed, and to Avhich supposition Avas owing the ? 3 discos r eiy
discovery of her birth) the destined heiress of Mr. Decourcy, until tbe mo¬ ment be thought she could be service¬ able to him. His solicitude for an union svith Lady Dunsane, svas not prompted by any re¬ visai of his once ardent passion for her, but merely because he knesv, from the information of his friend Mr. Villers, that she had amply the posver of extri¬ cating him from the embarrassments in wbich, through the failure of his matri¬ monial projects in England, he sasv himself involved—a failure which arose from the unfortunate discovery of his real circumstances ; as those avIio could have brought themselves to overlook the relaxation of h is principles, could by no means bring themselves to disregard the deranged state of his affairs. It required all Jacintha's confidence in Heaven* and strength of mind to support
NOCTURNAL VISIT. support her under her estrangement from her friends, her incertitude and anxiety about them, and the dreadful ideas which sometimes started, of a prolonged captivity—ideas, from Avhich she tried to fiy, as ones leading to hor¬ ror and madness. In vain she impor¬ tuned her keepers to transmit a letter from her to the Countess ; ¿rusting, if she could get one conveyed to her, con¬ taining a solemn assurance of secrecy, and representing the consequences that could scarcely fail of resulting from her detention, she might perhaps be able to obtain her enlargement. They were inexorable to all her entreaties ; either pretending, or really believing they should drasv upon themselves the dis¬ pleasure of Lady Dunsane, if they com¬ plied with them. Jacintha endeavoured, by making use of all the little resources of amusement within her posver, to banish despondence, ? 4 and
and preA'ent unavailing complaints.— She had brought some books with her from England, Avhich, Avith the rest of her things, came Avith her to the chateau; and Avith these, aud her con¬ versations Avith Josephine, Avho every day grew more pleasing to her, she Avas enabled not only to diversify her time, but often to dissipate the gloom of re¬ flection. Under happier circumstances than the present, the magnificent and varied scenery by Avhich she Avas surrounded, Avould have been a source of the highest delight and pleasure to her ; but it re¬ quires a mind at ease to enjoy the charms of Nature : yet perturbed as her's was, there svere moments svhen the avi Id and beautiful prospects about her habita¬ tion had pOAver to detach her from the contemplation of' her unhappiness, and, by inspiring her Avith still sublimer sen¬ timents of devotion for the Author of stich
such glorious works, raise in her "an undergoing stomach to bear up againsb what should ensue. " She frequently wished to wander be¬ yond the precincts of the castle ; but this was a wish which, like that relative to the conveyance of a letter to the Countess, would not be granted. t$hß did not, however, as more stubborn spi¬ rits would have done, disdain a unfitted indulgence : some part of every day she passed in walking about the court ; and in the evening, in particular, she liked to saunter about it, and watch from its walls the shepherds in the vale below,, collecting their flocks for the night, and listen to their simple music; for here tlie Arcadian life was still preserved in all its former purity. " The stock was regularly penned every evening, to preserve them, from tuie ravages of the wolf; and the shep- n 5 heixi
herd returned homeAvards at sunset,. with his sheep follosving him, and seem¬ ingly pleased svith the sound of the pipe, which Avas blosvn svith a reed, and re¬ sembled the chanter of a bagpipe*." Here Jacintha sasv the dreams of fancy, the descriptions of the Poet jealized, svith an admiration, a delight which often not only soothed but ab¬ sorbed her cares, and diffused such a tranquillity over her mind; as permitted her to enjoy the pleasures of imagina¬ tion—pleasures Avhich,, by a kind of magic, can re-animate the drooping soul, render even the captive forgetful of his chains, and irradiate his dungeon ; pleasures, of Avhich it is doubtful svhe* ther they do not exceed the reality of those imparted by the possession of svhat we desire ; pleasures Avhich can create a Paradise around ns, which can give
u$
us the perfume of flowers, the melody of birds, the mystic murmur of the woods, the tenderness of love, the sym¬ pathy of friendship, yea, all that car* render life desirable. But though Jacintha sustained the early period of her confinement Avith patience and fortitude, Avhen she sasv week after week stealing aAvay, Avithout effecting her deliverance, her spirits be¬ gan to sink into a dejection, which not ail her efforts at times could overcome. As she Avas traversing her apartment one morning, in one of these melancholy moods, her eye accidentally fell upon a part of the tapestry svhich Avas torn to the bottom, and through the Avamscoting, from which it avrs rent, a stream of light now issued, Avhich evidently proved an aperture in it. She directly approaehed to try whether, as she imagined, the pannel was loose ; and, to her extreme- ? 6 surprise»
surprise, on pressing her hand against it, it slid back, and discovered a large closet, lit by an arched windosv at the end. Attracted by curiosity, Jacintha en¬ tered it, and Avas greatly struck by the singularity of «the furniture : an ebony table, of heavy, yet curious Avorkman- ship, stood at one side, close to the Avail ; above it Avas a crucifix of the same, and upon it a book, richly bound, which, upon examining, Jacintha found to be a Missal ; Avhile, on either side, Avere neatly pencilled several texts from holy Avrit, and altogether proved it had been fitted up for prayer and meditation. Jacintha continued attentively ex¬ amining all svithin it, till interrupted by * Josephine, svho, unexpectedly entering the chamber, ran to her, exclaiming—
"So
( t So, Mademoiselle, you have disco· vered the closet." * I " Is there any reason for Avisbing it concealed ?" asked Jacintha, coming from it. Josephine hesitated. <ζ Why I don't knoAv, Mademoiselle í but you had better say nothing about it to my mother, " pulling back the pan- nel as she spoke. " Who furnished it ?" ^sked Jacintha. " A lady," ansAvercd Josepliine. " What lady—the Countess of Dun¬ sane ?" " Lord, no," replied Josephine, " I never sasv the Countess ;—she never was here sjfcce I svas born·" "But
" But the lady who furnished the closet svas ------" Josephine shook her head* " Pray ask me no questions," Saia she. " Indeed but I must," cried Jacintha, ***and you must answer them." "I do not Avish to disoblige you y Mademoiselle,"said Josephine ; ' t but if it Avas known that I told you------ " " It neA r er shall," interrupted Jacin¬ tha; " I pledge my honour not to di¬ vulge Avhat you disclose." " Well, Mademoiselle, I svill depend npon you ;—but indeed I can give you yery little information respecting the poor lady you are enquiring about. She
She was an inhabitant of this castfe before I was born." <( What was her name," eagerly de¬ manded Jacintha, " or her motive for residing here ?" u I assure you I never heard her name ; and my parents either could not, or would not let me know the Gause of her confinement." - <t Confinement!" repeated Jacintha, * € what, was she then confined ?" Josephine shook her head. , " Good Godi" exclaimed Jacintha, " tliis is not the first time then, this building has served the purposes of ty¬ ranny and oppression." " Toorlady ! I believe she was hardly used indeed," said Josephine; "but, 3 however
NOCTURNAL VISIT4 r however great her sorrows might have been, she never gave utterance to them. But they were seen in her face, and I learned to pity her when I was but young. Indeed I should have been ungrateful if I had not done so, and also loved her sincerely ; for she was kind and gentle to me, and I am indebted to her besides for almost all I know ; and so is my youngest brother, whom she lovedeven better than his own mother did." " Your youngest brother," repeated Jacintha, astonished that so ungracious a being should have attracted such re¬ gard. " Oh, not Claude," replied Jose¬ phine, as if she had developed the thoughts of Jacintha, 4i he is not my youngest brother. You never saw him, for he left this castle before you came toit"
u And
'* And he was such a favourite r" " Yes; she taught him many things which I had no time to learn, from being obliged to assist my mother in do¬ mestic concerns ; and to this hour he will weep and lament for her." t£ She died then?" said Jacintha· " No/* " She was released then ?" " No, slie escaped," said Josephine« · ic How, in what manner?'* eagerly interrogated Jacintha; in hopes of having some idea suggested to her, which might, perhaps, forward her own escape, % ' From a window in this chamber.'* " Impossible l*
" Impossible !" said Jacintha, going to a AvindoAV, and looking from it ; <t the height is too great from the ground to admit the possibility of an escape this way." " And yet this is the Avay she got QÍF," cried Josephine. " Who Avere suspected of having aid¬ ed her escape?" demanded Jacintha. " Some of the peasants in the valley, to whom they concluded she had found means of reA r ealing her situation, were suspected by my father and mother," replied Josephine. " And Avas there no search, no en¬ quiry after her ?" cc Oh yes, " Josephine ansAvercd, ' ' but to no effect."
"And
11 And how," cried Jacintha, "did those who had confined lier, bear the knowledge of her flight ?" " I never heard," replied Josephine. i( But, poor lady! had she borne her confinement with patience a little longer, she would have been released without any trouble or danger.—She >>as only gone two days, when a very fine gen¬ tleman, who called himself her friend, and was attended by a number of ser¬ vants, came here, he said, to deliver her ; and when he heard she was fled* he raved and stormed, and insisted on searching the whole chateau for her." " This was strange," said Jacintha, musing, " 'Twas unlucky," cried^Josephine. « Poor lady !" added she, with a sigh, <t I much fear some dreadful mischance happened to .her," " What
" W^hat reason have you for this r fear ?" asked Jacintha. " You'll think me foolish if I tell you ; but I ani convinced she met a* ith an untimely * death, from the mournful sounds,* exactly like tliose of her voice, which I heard one evening." " Wherç?" asked Jacintha, starting. " From the tosver, at the end of the east terrace. As 1 svas walking there one evening, about sunset, I thought -1 heard a losv moaning sound, from a small grated windosv, Avhich just opens above ground. I stopped to listen, and soon distinguished a voice like her's.— This was sufficient to make me fly back* I told my father and mother Avhat I bad heard» and they agreed with me in thinking it As r as an intimation of her death ;—from that hour I has'e never gone near the placef * . t ! ;. ... "Neved*.
'*·' Never!" repeated Jacintha, in an accent expressive of horror. " Never,"'replied Josephine» The dreadful surmise, which had but a moment before started in the mind of Jacintha, Avas now confirmed. It svas evident to her that those who impri¬ soned the unhappy captive, Avere ap* prized of her friends having discovered her prison, and had gİA r eri timely orders for her removal fram the apartments she occupied, to a solitary dungeon, where there was no probability of her being sought for. The more she reflected, the more confirmed she became in this conjecture, and that of the innocent and credulous Josephine's being imposed upon by a fabricated story. The dreadful idea of being in thè power of those wlio .had. committed such an atrocious act of cruelty, of those who might
* might again be tempted to perpetrate actions equally inhuman—the dreadful idea of the .enquiries and solicitude of her friends, involving her perhaps in still greater Avretchedness than she already experienced, chilled her heart, and ab most overpowered her faculties. Josephine, observing her change co* lour, suddenly exclaimed— " Bless me, Mademoiselle, are you ill r" " 111," repeated Jacintha, after a pause, "no; but I am affected. Me* thinks this poor lady's fate has brought mine before my eyes," " Dear me, Mademoiselle, don't en¬ courage such gloomy ideas. " " Hoav can I avoid doing so," replied Jacintha, " Avhen every thing conspires to excite them ?—Ah! Josephine, think how you Avould feel if you were in my situation :
situation: debarred of liberty, remote from your native country, and separated from all you love on earth 1" "To be sure 'tis s r ery distressing," said Josephine, s\ ith tears in her eyes. " And why, my dear Josephine, do your parents join in oppressing the weak and the innocent ?" " They are not free agents, Mademoi¬ selle/* cried Josephine, Avith a heighten* ed colour, " their all depends on their obedience and fidelity to the Countess ; and if they commit an error, 'tis she, who leads them into that error, must be answerable for it.- —But don't de¬ spair; your friends, perhaps, may dis- cover your situation, and—-'* " If they did/' interrupted Jacintha, " should I be nearer happiness ?—Might not the hand which destroyed------" Here
Here she recollected herself, and paused as she svas on the point of re¬ vealing her suspicions concerning the unhappy captive ; about ssliom, as soon as sbe recovered from the confusion into svhich the imprudence she had been so near committing thresv her, she asked many questions ; as much to try and dissert Josephine from dsvelling on the agitation she had manifested, as ♦ from curiosity. Josephine readily ansAvered all those questions : she extolled the beauty, the goodness, the piety of the unfortunate lady, Avhose deportment, she said, be¬ spoke her of superior rank. <£ The closet you discovered this morning, Mademoiselle, " she continued, ς( she fitted up for herself, as a little chapel ; thither she used to retire to her de\ r otions—thither she often brought my brother and me, to make us join in prayer,
prayer with her, and give us such in¬ structions as, I am sure, will never be obliterated from our minds. Tis now four years since she left this castle, and every thing since that period has ap¬ peared to me changed within it ;—the idea of her being so much happier in heaven than she could have been here, is my only consolation for her loss." u Tiie thoughts of their superior hap* piness can indeed be our only consola¬ tion for the loss of our friends," replied Jacintha; " poor lady ! I trust she now enjoys a reward for all her suffer¬ ings.—But tell mc, Josephine, did you never in auy manner discover the source from whence the}' originated ?" " Never, I assure you, Mademoiselle." * f Do you imagine Mademoiselle Dupont knew any thing respecting her ?" vol. iv. ? asked
asked Jacintha ; the emotion which Mademoiselle had betrayed the night she attended her to her chamber, noAV re¬ curring to her recollection. "I do beiieA r e she did," ansAvercd Josephine. " I understand, from niy mother, she was always high in the con¬ fidence of the Earl and Countess of Dunsane ; an honour Avhich, between ourselves, Mademoiselle, I do not en Ay her." " Certainly not," said Jacintha ; " no honour can compensate for*the loss of peace and self-esteem';—happier, even in the midst of misery, are those Avhose hearts cannot reproach them with eA*er having intentionally injured a ic How- creature, than the oppi essor of tbe in¬ nocent, though surrounded by all the luxuries of life." + Josephine
Josephine assented to the truth of this assertion, and then withdrew about her domestic business. The particulars which she had heard, impressed Jacintha*s mind with the deepest gloom and horror. The mys¬ terious svords of Mr. Villers, respecting* the Countess's having some prístate rea¬ son for svishing to keep fair Avith the Marquis de Montalde, seemed nosv ex¬ plained ; it appeared almost evident to Jacintha, that he Avas acquainted svith the secret relatis-e to the unhappy cap¬ tive, and that "the hand and foitune of the Countess svere to be his recompence for preserving it. <f And is this inhuman, this unprin¬ cipled Avoman," said Jacintha, *' at whose barbarity my soul recoils, is she my mother?—A being whom, by the lasvs of nature, I should have loved and revered !—Oh ! may penitence precede c í2 her
her death, and lead lier to make some expiation for her offences 1—Gracious Heaven, how dreadful the idea of those offences !—Unhappy victim of her cruelty ! sympathy, as svell as compas¬ sion, makes me mourn thy fate ; for, alas ! between it and my own, I behold too great a similitude.— Should my captiv ity end like thine—but no, I Avili not dwell upon so horrible a thought.—Oh God î though I should not live a moment after, let nie be restored to my friends !■—let my last sigh be breathed upon the bo¬ som ofhim I love !—let mc fed upon rny pale cheek that Kind domestic tear, which gives to tlie expiring heart the SAveet assurance of being remembered by those Avhom it regards !" Absorbed in melancholy reflections, she sat pensively leaning her head upon her hand, till roused by an ascending strain of sAveet and solemn music. She started from her seat, ancl hastening to a stone
stone balcony, which stretched before the windows of her chamber, looked to¬ wards the place from whence the sounds proceeded, and Leheld the musician in the habit of a shepherd, seated on a low browed rock in the valley, at a little distance from the walls of the chateau, and which formed the base of more stupendous cliffs, from whence a Wild and purple foliage hung streaming over his head, shadowing: him from the rays of a meridian sun ; his staif lay beside him, his dog slumbered at his feet, his flock ranged over the flowery pasture uncontrouled, and altogether formed a scene romantic and pic¬ turesque. How a person in his station of life could have acquired such exquisite taste and scientific skill, as he displayed upon the flute, surprised Jacintha; who, leaning from the balcony, listened to him with the most fixed attention.-~ ? 3 The,
The gloom of her mind yielding to the powerful enchantment of his strains, and her despondence and terrors gradually* giving way to a thrilling sensation of delight, from what she felt, she thought, like the poet, that ^ *' Music, sweet artificer of pleasure, <f Should not bs exercis'd alone, ** In festivals, on Hymeneal days, <f And in the full assemblies of the happy j ** But rather should İtb skill be courted - " u la soi iow's gloomy season, to diffuse « Its smooth allurements through the languid eat «* Of seIf-de\oui\î affliction, and ddude " Tlie wiietched from their sadness/* When the shepherd's melodious ma¬ drigal was over, he raised his eyes from the ground, on which they had hitheito been bent, and, casting a careless glance after his scattered flock, he sutU denly turned them towards the chateau, and rested them upon Jacintha. The "distance was too great to permit Jacintha 1 to
to distinguish his features, nor had she any curiosity to do so ; she ss r as only: interested about his music, and svhhiug him to prolong an amusement which had afforded her so much pleasure, she lean¬ ed still more forward, her long tresses* flying svikl and disordered in the breeze that tl uttered round her, and endea¬ voured, by her gestures, to make him understand those Avishes. He continued to gaze at her for some minutes Avithout moving ; then rising, he took up his staff, and appeared about making some motion to her, when sud¬ denly starting, he looked behind him, and the next instant darted down the valley. Astonished by his precipitate retreat, Jacintha endeavoured, but in vain, to discover the cause oí* it y no nesv object appeared in the valley to have inspired the alarm, which he sc* evidently betrayed.
? 4 f A hoper
A hope of his return induced Jacintha to continue a considei able time at the windoAv, but she saw him no more ; and, by degrees, the pleasing impression his music had made upon her mind, yielded to the paiiiful and still stronger impression made upon it by the cir¬ cumstances Josephine had restated ;— the horror they had inspired slie could not shake ok'; the fate of the unhappy ladv haunted her imagination, and seem- ed to warn her ofher osvn ; and she shud¬ dered Avheneser her eyes As T ere involun¬ tarily directed tosvards the decaying tosver, where she believed the Avretched captive had perished. Oppressed Avith terror and melancho¬ ly, Jacintha could not behold the de¬ cline of day Avithout feeling an increase of both ; she marked Avith sorrosv and dismay the lengthening shadosvs which proclaimed the approach of that dark¬ ness, that svas nosv dreadful to her imagination*
imagination, from an idea of the atro¬ cious deeds she believed it had shrouded within the Avails of the chateau ; and saw the gleams of sunshine fading from the summits of the cliffs, and the pur- pie glow of evening yielding to the du«t shades of night, with the most mourn¬ ful sensations. She now expressed a wish for Jose¬ phine's company at night ; but, though Josephine herself seconded the w İsli, her mother positively refused complyingwith it ; and to her refusal Jacintha affixed a fearful meaning. Unable to sleep, yet still more unable to bear her present thoughts, Jacintha had recourse to a book to try and divert them, but in vain ; and she sat revolv¬ ing wliat she had heard, and what she apprehended, till roused from her medi¬ tations by hearing the loud, resounding clock striking the hour of one. Per- ? 5 . ceh ing Sk
ceisdng her fire and lamp almost out, she immediately rose to undress, casting, as she did, a timid glance around the room, which, by the Avavering and shadoAvy light that noAV gleamed within it, appeared to her more gloomy than it had ever done before, and Avell suited for the perpetration of fearful deeds— such deeds as she had reason to believe had been committed within it. A kind of superstitious terror, till noAV almost a stranger to her breast, began to pervade it : unnumbered stories of sheeted spec¬ tres, of accusing spirits, rising from the confines of the dead, to rcs T eal enormities practised against them Ci iu their days of nature"—stories which, in the hour of cheerfulness and supposed security, she had denied all credence to, nosv occurred to her recollection, forcing upon her mind a belief of their probability. 1 She shuddered inwardly, and svith difficulty could bring herself to move & front
from her chair, by the fire, tOAvards the dressing-table, Avhich fronted the bed, the mournful drapery of Avhich Avas re¬ flected in^a large mirror that stood upon it. As she approached it, her eye accidentally glanced upon the sliding pannel, Avhich, to her extreme surprise» she noAV discovered partly pushed back. A dim light shone Avithin the closet, calculated to heighten the unpleasant sensations of Jacintha, and she instine- - ti vely hastened to close it; her efforts« to do so, hosves r er, were unavailing, and as she was repeating thenb with stilL greater energy, a cold hand encountered. her's, and suddenly caught it in its< grasp !—Jacinthashrieked, and instantly* fainted.
? 6 CHAP.-
??
CHAP. II. " Shepherd, I take thy word, « e And trust thy offer'd service." Milton» AT Avould be difficult to determine Avhether the terror which had òverpOAver- ed the * senses of Jacintha, was lessened or increased when, on recovering them, she found herself supported iu the arma of a young man. " Oh Heavens !" she exclaimed, after a transient glance at him, "for Avhat destiny am I reserved ?" "Bo
<< Be not alarmed, Lady," cried he, in a gentle accent, and placing her upon a chair, he knelt before her ; " I am not come to injure, but to serveyou." tt Serve me !" íepeated Jacintha, and looking earnestly at him ;—she nosv, by bis dress, recognized him to be the shepherd, whose delightful music had so entranced her in the morning.— " Good God ! Avho are you—how did you get hither ?" she exclaimed. He informed her he Aras son to the people As r ho took care of the castle, and gained access to her chamber by a way unknoAvn to the rest of the family. íÉ The purpose of my visit is to-offer you my services," said he, "and assist you in making your escape, ifyou Avish to quit this place. " " If I Avish to quit it l* said Jacintha, % " gracious Heaven ! my peace, my happiness,
happiness, nay my life itself, I believe, " she added, in a kind of inward voice,, " depend upon my quitting it.—But Ís it possible," she cried, surveying him with still greater earnestness, "is it possible that thou, so generous and hu¬ mane, canst indeed be the son of people so lost to feeling, so ready* to become the instruments of treachery and op~ pression ?" " Oh Lady!" said he, with downcast eyes and a mournful air, yet with a heightened colour, * ' Oh Lady ! I trust their poverty, and not their Avili, con¬ sents." " Excuse me," cried Jacintha, recol¬ lecting herself; " to censure the pa¬ rents, is but an ungrateful return to the son for the obligations he would confer upon me. But tell me by Avhat means you can accomplish my escape-^tell
t me by Avhat means you have been in¬ spired svith compassion for me." " On returning, yesterday, to the chateau,, from whence I had been some time absent," replied he, rising as he spoke, in compliance with Jacintha's motion, ct Josephine, under a promise of secrecy, acquainted me Avith your confinement in it. " " A promise of secrecy !" said Jacin¬ tha. " Yes ; in a fesv days, my father and mother meant to send me from the castle- entirely ; and it Avas settled amongst the family that I should knoAV nothing of your residence Avithin it. " "Ah! cried Jacintha, involuntarily, " that is a com r incing proof to me that your disposition does not resemble their's." c ' The
" The particulars "Josephine comniu/- nicated," resumed tlie young stranger* "excited my pity;—but when I saw ' you—" " How did vou contrive to see mc?" asked Jacintha. " I stole to a window which over¬ looked the court where you were walk¬ ing. When I beheld you, I------" (he paused), " I resolved, Mademoiselle, to adventure every thing to restore you to liberty—to a world you were formed to ornament. As soon as I conceived this resolution, I wished to get an op¬ portunity of apprizing you of it, that I might not alarm you by appearing un¬ expectedly before you ;—for the purpose of trying to obtain this opportunity, I took charge of a flock, this morning, belonging to my father.—I succeeded in drawing you to the window ; but at the moment I was about making you a signal,
signai, svhich should give you some idea of my intentions, one of my brothers appeared at a distance, and I A\as obliged to fly, lest a suspicion should be excited of these inf entions, that might cause them to be defeated. " " But hoAV can I make my escape?" asked Jacintha ; É ' or hosv avoid again falling into the huiicbi of those a* ho may, nay svill, I am sure, pursue me?" " The means of your escape are easy, " said he, " and in my pOAver ; and at a Convent, about seven miles from this, you can obtain refuge, till the pursuit that will be made after you is over." " Are you certain," demanded Jacin¬ tha, " that I shall be received into the Consent ?" " Yes ; 'tis bound by the rules of its Order to give succour and shelter to ail
all who need them, else many might perish from, necessity and unexpected mischances in these dreary and but thinly inhabited regions." Jacintha bent her eves to the ground Avithout speaking ; a vague suspicion crossed her mind, and she hesitated hosv to act ; but tliis hesitation Avas over, and the suspicion, which caused it, va¬ nished, when again looking at the young stranger, again ilxstening her eyes upon him Avith the most scrutinizing earnestness, she beheld candour and be- ????????? in every line of his counte¬ nance, eyes that sparkled Avith sensibi¬ lity and sweetness, and a brow upon which, as Juliet says of Romeo's, ** Shame wjould have been ashamM to sit.** " No," she said to herself, " 'tis im¬ possible this countenance can veil tbe dark purposes of an unworthy heart." Hope
Hope and confidence again sprung up Avithin hers; "her soul became re¬ solved, the tear Avas dried from her wildly looking eye, and a troubled joy rose on her mind, like the red path of the lightning on a stormy cloud." " I accept your services," cried she, starting from her chair, "svith grati¬ tude ;— aud may Heas'cn requite you for your kindness to me Ì" "Ah, Lady 1 the knosvledge of having sei*A T ed you, Avili be a sufficient requital to me.—But hasten, Lady; the grey dawn already begins to streak the east—» my father and brothers rise early, and------" Jacintha, starting at the idea he sug¬ gested, hastened to her trunk, and having made up a small bundle of ne¬ cessaries, she wrapped her pcllisse about her, and gave him her hand. He led her.
her into tbe closet, near the Aviudosv of svhich Jacintha perceived a panne!, similar to that in the chamber, slid back, and beyond it a narrosv flight of stone steps,, that wound between the thick Avails of the castle, and terminated in a door, which opened into the court. Erom this door they crossed to a smaller one at the side of the court, almost hidden by the sveeds svhich gresv about it, and svhich Henri, not svithout diffi¬ culty, opened ss ith a key he took fiom his pocket, and Jacintha found herself upon the edge of a steep descent, os r er- looking the romantic valley she had so often admired from her svindows, nosv dimly seen through the shadosvs of night. Henri supported and guided her dosvn the intricate path, svhich end¬ ed in it, and near the foot of which she sasv tsvo mules, ready bridled and sad¬ dled, and tied to a tree. Surprise
Surprise at finding the plan of her escape so svell arranged, made her raise her eves to Henri's face, and asram an unpleasant doubt obtruded on her mind, which again s'anished, liosves er, before the confidence his unembarrassed looks inspired. " Nosv, Mademoiselle," cried he, faking hold of the bridle of the mule upon Avhich lie had lifted jher, and - mounting himself, " nosv, ^lackmoi- scllc," as they commenced their jour¬ ney, "like you, I hope, I fãin bidding a last faresvel to ; l on dreary pile." Jacintha in astonishment repeated these s* ords ; and Henri/ informed her that his parents having /'hosen a situa¬ tion in lire for him nojt by any means consonant to his inclination,' be Avas quitting them for the purpose of avoid¬ ing it. '
The
The interest he had excited in the bosom of Jacintha, by his conduct to¬ wards her, led her to enquire into his intentions respecting his future destiny. He- explicitly ansAvered her enquiries, apparently pleased with her having made them. It ss l as his intention, he said, to en* deavour to procure a settlement in the East Indies, svhere he trusted, by his laudable exertions, to obtain that hap¬ piness, Avhich he had A r ainly sought in his native country, amongst his osvn connections. Encouraged by the profound atten¬ tion Jacintha paid to Avhat he said, an attention so expressive of the interest jibe felt in his concerns, he proceeded to gİA'e a little history of himself; and Jacintha found he had never been a favourite of his parents, and owed what·* ever felicity he had enjoyed in life to the
the unfortunate lady who had been con* fined in the chateau. Jacintha, Avithout violating the pro* mise she had gis r en Josephine, of never divulging Avhat she had communicated relative to the unhappy caprive, had now an opportunity of making such en¬ quiries as her strong anxiety about her fate dictated, Henri, hoAveA-er, and Jacintha could not doubt his assertions, profeticei him¬ self utte. ly ignorant of the origin ofher misfortunes,, the means by which slie had effected her escape, and her destiny since it had taken place. " At the time she quitted tbe cha¬ teau," said he, "I Avas absent from it ; my father haAing sent me upon a visit to his brother in Gasconv, a fe\v weeks previous to her disappearance." "Ah t* .
* * Ah ! *'' though t J acin íha, ς t y ou Avere purposely sent out of the As^ay." fi On my return/' continued he, " I w r as diligent ia my search and enquiries after her, but both Asiere imas T ailing.— I cannot, hosswer, divest myself of the idea of her death.—Peace to her spirit," said he, after a momentary pause, ¿ * u he- ther an inhabitant of this svorld or the next !—Whilst Memorv holds her seat within my breast, the gratitude as ith which she has inspired me, can never be obliterated.—To her, as I have al¬ ready told you, Mademoiselle, I am in¬ debted not only for happiness, Avhatever 1 ex-peiienced at home ; but such in¬ formation, such knosvledge as, I trust, will enable me to steer through life with honour. But for her, my mind svould have been rude and uncultivated as my native mountains.—Ah, Mademoiselle ! hosv often does ss hat sve consider a mis¬ fortune, turn put a blessing ! Surely this
this reflection should render us patient under our various trials. The neglect and harshness of my parents, Avhich I eonceis^ed to be so unfortunate a cir¬ cumstance, Avas in reality a fortunate one for me, since it procured me her pity, which, by degrees, ripened into an affection that led her to instruct my jguoiance." Ci And Avere your parents pleased at your acquiring such superior advan¬ tages *to tiie rest of their chiklren ?" ίζ By no means ; they wished to haA*e prevented it. But disobedience here I thought no crime ; and having acci¬ dentally discovered the secret passage to her closet, I used it for the purpose of receiving her lessons. *' *" Tis strange/ 4 said Jacintha, "that, in the course of your com*ersations, she never dropped a hint concerning the vol. iv. η cause
cause of her misfortunes. The oppress* ed heart finds relief in venting its com¬ plaints." " To her God she alone addressed them," replied Henri. » The more Jacintha conversed with this young man, the more strongly in¬ terested she became about him. She saw in him one of Nature's own chil¬ dren ; a mind active, candid, enthusi¬ astic, prompt to obey the call of huma¬ nity, and regardless of any dangers in¬ curred to benefit others. His appear¬ ance bespoke his sentiments ; his mien was lofty, graceful, commanding ; and, though the down of youth still shaded his cheek, the expression of his counte¬ nance was bold, intrepid, and animated. But, ardent as was the gratitude of Jacintha, the interest frhich it excited in her bosom for him was faint, com¬ pared
pared to that which Ioac and admiration created in his breast for her. The mo-. "men t he beheld her, his heart paid her homage, as one of the most lovely of her sex; he utterly discredited the tale told to her disadvantage, he saw * f The beauties ofher mind « Reflected in her face,'* and became confirmed in the resolution he had previously conceived, of liberat¬ ing her from her cruel and unjust cap- tivitv. How the adventure might end, he did not permit himself to think. As they journicd on, he coukl not avoid dropping a hint, expressive of curiositv to learn the real cause of her confinement. *This, Jacintha explicitly declared, she was not at liberty to reveal, begging him to believe that the con¬ fidence which his conduct towards her n ? gave
gave him a right to expect, she would not withhold, had she not been under a solemn obligation to do so. He informed Jacintha it was his in¬ tention to secrete himself near the Con¬ vent, till there was a probability of the pursuit after them being over; and de&trcd to know whither she meant to proceed on quitting it, declaring not only his readiness, but determinai ion to attend her, till he had left her in a place of safety. Jacintha gratefully thanked him for this determination, which relieved her mind from many apprehensions that began to invade it ; and sbe rejoiced to think, thiough the generosity of Mr. and Mrs. Dccourcv. she had the means of preventing him from suffering any pecuniary inconvenience by attending her.
•4
And
And now the dusky shades of night began to be AvithdraAvn, and gradually « Tlie (hipping rock, the mountain*» misty top " Swell on the sight, and brighicn with the dawn/* The travellers soon after entered from a plain into the deep recesses of a forest, through Avhich they had not proceeded far, A\hen the receding trees gaA^e to their view a beautiful glade, covered •with a smooth and vivid verdure, and ending in a gentle acclivity, crowned with the ancient Convent to which they Avere repairing; discoloured * py time, and surmounted b\ T a wild and romantic scenery of ¡neen hills, and intermingled cliffs tinted with purple hues, and dis¬ closing the course of many a svandeiûig stream. Nature seemed to have designed this ~ place for religious meditation : here ? 3 Silence
Silence and Solitude held their "unmo¬ lested reign ;" the gurgling of the water which flowed through the glade, the lowing of the cattle that fed upon its margm, the rustling of the trees, and the responsive songs of the birds, were the only sounds which met the ear ; and from the eye all prospect was excluded by the thick woods which extended on either side, save that of the romantic mountains veiling their aspiring sum¬ mits in the clouds. The tranquillity of the scene was sooth¬ ing tO the agitated spirits of Jacintha, and gradually communicated itself to lier bosom. At the entrance of the forest, she and Henri, as had previously been agreed on, alighted, and proceeded on foot to the Convent ; Henri meaning to claim ad¬ mittance for her there, under thfe 'pre¬ text
text of the carriage they Avere travelling in having broken doAvn, and consequently disabling them from pursuing their journey, till he could get it repaired at some one of the neighbouring ham¬ lets. He prepared lier to answer any ques* tions that might be put to her, and as¬ sured her, the moment he imagined she might 1??\ ? ? her retreat Avith safety, he would come for her, and reconduct her towards her native country ; to which (Avith a sigh he added) he saw she was so impatient to return. Jacintha repeated her fervent thanks, attempting, as she spoke, to put her pocket-book into his hands, with an en¬ treaty for him to consider its contents as a mutual stock. This he absolutely refused doing, and in a manner too which evidently proved his feelings to d 4 be
be hurt by the request, and someAvhat embarrassed Jacintha ; she resolved, hosvever, on persisting in her inten¬ tions, and regretted that time, at pre¬ sent, ,would not admit of her urging the matter as she wished*
CHAP.
NOCTURNAL VISIT*'
CHAP. IIL ** Oh ! take this virgin to thy care, " Good angels be your guard ! ** And may the saints, İn heaven above, <* That pious care reward!" iL HE matin bell rung out as they ap¬ proached the Convent, and, Avit,hm·· a fcv/ paces of it, they heard, . front the interior of the build in a\ the sweet and solemn chanting of female Aoices, accompanijd by the deep-tuned organ. Jacintha involuntarily paused lo liäten. Kever lud she heard, from anv "moi-tal mixture of earth's mould," such divine, enchanting ravishment as the present ;— x> 5 never
never before did music soposs r erfully affect and delight her ;—the ardour of devotion kindled svithin her heart, her bosom glosv- ed, and, wMr the choral symphonies of the . assembled virgins, her thoughts ascended to heaven, in praise ofhim to whom all nature, at this early hour, seemed paying homage. On knocking at the gate, a portress appeared, and demanded their business. Henri informed her, and she directly left them, without opening it, to call a lay-sister, with whom she returned.— They were noAV admitted into the court, which was surrounded by a high Assail, covered Avith aromatic shrubs, glittering Vith dew, and perfuming the air. The Nun conducted them into a small par¬ lour, svhere she left them ; but returned in a finv minutes with the Lady Abbess's* permission for Jacintha's being lodged in the Convent.
Henri
Henri now rose to take his leave, and as soon as he had departed, the Nun led Jacintha under an old 4t ivy-mantled arch, " into an inner court, round which the cloisters were built, surmounted by the heavy walls of the edifice, into which various small doors from the cloisters opened. The morning service was by this time over, and Jacintha, as she followed the steps of her guide, met several of the Nuns passing from the Church (the * t moss-clad spi re" of which was eminently conspicuous above the rest of the build¬ ing) to the refectory. They examined her with a scrutinizing earnestness, which convinced Jacintha that curiosity was not amongst the worldly passions they had conquered ; every eye, in¬ deed, seemed attracted by her appear¬ ance; for, perhaps,
p ? *' Never
*' Never their holy fane ·* Did fairer maiden grace. V Through a small door-Avay, in a re¬ mote corner of the court, Jacintha Avas conducted up a narrosv flight' of stone stairs, to a long and dismal gallery, near the entrance of Avhich she Avas shesvn into a little bedchamber. Here the Nun offered to bring her some refresh¬ ments ;—the refreshment of sleep, hosv* ever, was most needful to Jacintha at present, and she declined taking any thing till she had tried to recruit her wearied frame, and still more exhausted spirits by repose. The N un accordingly retired, having first shesvn her a bell svliich she desired her to ring when she needed her attendance« The ssveet consciousness of security, for svhich her heart swelled Avith irrati- ? tude to Heaven, soon enabled Jacintha to enjoy the repose she required ; and she
she awoke from a sleep of some hours, with very different feelings from those she had latterly experienced. But these feelings were soon damped by reflecting on the many unpleasant circumstances which peihaps awaited her return to England—by reflecting that, except Egbert had returned to it, she had neither friend, nor home to receive her in her native country. She did not long, however, indidge the melancholy these reflections inspired, without struggling against it ; she thought it like a doubt of the goodness of Providence, the protection of that Being, of which she had received so re¬ cent an instance ; and she resolved se¬ dulously to try and banish all anticipa¬ tions of evil, and, by still placing her implicit confidence in Heaven, endea¬ vour to render herself deserving of its care, With.
With astonishment she reviewed alf she had lately gone through. So strange, so romantic appeared the late es T ents of her life, that> but for the con¬ vincing proofs she had of their reality, she Avould have been inclined to be¬ lieve they owed their sole existence to a disordered imagination. She svas too deeply engaged in thought to think of ringin«: for some time after ? ? she had risen ; Avhen she did, the lay- sister obeyed her summons, and led her into an adjoining apartment, Avhere she brought her refreshments. This room, like the one she had quitted, asms fur¬ nished Avith the greatest simplicity, and, like it, commanded a viesv of the ex¬ tensive gardens, laid out in emboss r ercd walks and dark recesses, fit haunts for meditation ; and enclosed on CA r ery side by high and beetling cliffs^ apparently insurmountable, Jacintha
Jacintha ate her frugal meal alonen By the time she supposed she had finished it, the Nun returned, and pro¬ posed introducing her into the presence of the Lady Abbess ; a customary cere¬ mony, Jacintha understood, for the purpose of returning her Ladyship thanks for the shelter she afforded. Jacintha Avas rather pleased than otherwise at the idea of going through this ceremony, as she had a curiosity to see cs r cry thing, and every one belong¬ ing to a Convent. She accordingly followed the Nun, through several windings and turnings, to a spacious parlour, furnished in a style Jacintha little expected to bave seen in such a building. Here the Lidy Abbess sat, and, if the costly decorations of her apartment surprised Jacintha, tlie but ill-disguised arrogance and osten¬ tation of her manner still more asto¬ nished her; so unlike the' meekness 5 and
and humility which should has r e cha¬ racterized a cloistered votaress, whose vosv extends not only to a renunciation of the pleasures, but the pomps and vanities of life. Though evidently past her meridian, she still retained a large portion of beauty ; her smooth brow proved her to have been a stranger tp care, and her unladed cheek an equal stranger to rigid abstinence ; her dress svas so contrived as to set off her charms to tlie best ad¬ vantage, her veil devolved in graceful folds upon the ground, and lier robe Avas bound tight round her Asaist, to shew its symmetry. She mn ely returned the losv obeisance of Jacintha svith a blight inclhrition uî her head ; but, as soon as she had re- ccis-cd fiom lier lhe acknowledgments she expected, she assumed an air of gracioubiichs, more calculated, hos\ever, to
to humble than exalt, and motioning for her to advance further into the room, began, still however keeping her stand¬ ing, to put many interrogatories to her; which Jacintha, but for Henri's precau¬ tion in preparing her for them, would have found it difficult to reply to. Her being a foreigner, neither she nor Henri had ever thought of concealing ; and the Abbess, in consequence of hear¬ ing she had never before seen the in¬ terior of a Convent, desired her (in a manner evidently intended to prepossess Jacintha with favourable sentiments, and persuade her to believe that the' state she assumed was on account of her situation, not from her real dis¬ position) to be shewn every thing worthy of observation in this Con¬ vent. In pursuance of this command, Jacin¬ tha was conducted by a Nun, whom slie
she found at her entrance in the par¬ lour, to various parts of the build¬ ing, and to the Church, AVhich was rich in sculpture and paintings ; but though her curiosity svas gratified, her mind ss'as unavoidably saddened by the mournful solemnity Avhich presided OA'er all she sasv, and by beholding so many fellow-creatures excluded from thesocial ssveetsof life, destined to wither in cheerless retirement—" to pass asvay in secret, like the flosver of the rock, that lifts its fair head unseen, and stresvs its withered leaves on the blast."—Hosv the heart of man could ever have en¬ gendered a superstition so dreadful, as tö believe the God of mercy and com¬ passion could find pleasure iu these hu¬ man sacrifices, filled her Avith astonish¬ ment and horror, and she insvardly shuddered as she surveyed its victims. From the Church she svas led into the gardens, where she Avas told she might range
range at pleasure ; this information Avas extremely agreeable, as she feared being restricted entirely to tbe narrosv limits of the chambers appropriated to her use. As she was retracing a long embosver-' ed walk, which fronted the building, Avith the Nun, who had been her con¬ ductress to such parts of it as she visit¬ ed, her attention was attracted by a' tosver, Asiiich terminated one end, and appeared infinitely more ancient than the rest of the-edifice; so rugged and discoloured indeed Avere its Avails by time, that it seemed more like a huge rock, heAvn into something lite an human structure by ther hand of Art, than a structure reared by the* hand of Art itself. That kind of A-e- getation, Avhich announces the decay it hides, gresv thick about its bat¬ tlements ; and round the deep inden¬ tures made for its grated windosvs, the long
ÍS NOCTURNAL VISÍT, long grass whistled mournfully to the wind. With a shuddering sensation, which she could only account for by the idea of cruelty and oppression svhich it ex¬ cited in her mind, and for the purposes of svhich it appeared so peculiarly adapt¬ ed, Jacintha gazed upou this building { and, after a pause of some minutes, asked whether it was ever inhabited. ft Sometimes," replied the ííun, iö, an emphatic voice ; and Jacintha thought the pale rose, which bloomed upon her cheek, grew paler. " What a dismal habitation !" said Jacintha. ζζ Dismal indeed," repeated the 0 Nun.
.* And
" And is it necessity or choice which causes it, at times, to be inhabited ?" enquired Jacintha. "Neither," Replied the Nun, Avith quickness ; and then, evidently from a fear of being led into some imprudent communication, she formed a pretext for leaving Jacintha, and withdrew to the Convent. Her words-or rather manner^ con¬ jured up in the mind of Jacintha au idea of this building being still used for, the purposes for which it seemed ori¬ ginally intended. " Yet this cannot be the case," thought she, after reflecting some mi¬ nutes; "for punishment is seldom inflict¬ ed without some cause, real or imaginary ; and Avhat cause can be given for its inflic¬ tion here, Avhere there is no temptation to ssverve from the most rbid virtue?" Again
Again she reflected, and suddenly it occurred to her, that perhaps some of the holy Sisters might has -? been unsvil- ling victims, and doomed to suffer for their murmurs, by a solitary confine¬ ment Avithin the decaying tosver. This thought had scarcely occurred, ere she became confirmed in thinking she svas right in her conjecture ; and she invo¬ luntarily turned, Avith mingled indigna¬ tion and horror, from the spot, congra¬ tulating herself on being the inhabitant of a country, alike equitable and mild in its religion and its lasvs. Anxious to as'oid the sight of a build¬ ing, Avhere, as she imagined, misery moaned,, and poor misfortune felt the lash of tyranny, she Avandered away to a "remote part of the garden, Avhere, find¬ ing a stone bench near the entrance of an arbour, she seated herself, and en¬ deavoured to divert. the unpleasant thoughts that had arisen in her mind, by
?? perusing a little book of poetry Avhich she found in her bundle, and Asdiich, as the gift of Egbert, had been her con¬ stant companion in her confinement. ThcfolloAving poem, hoAvever, at svhich she opened, Avas not calculated to pro - ???? the effect she desired :—
'The nocks, extended on the mountains, lay 5 The feather'd songsters ceas'd their cheeiful flrains} The htrJs no longer round the meadows stray» And solemn silence reigns throughout the plains. The ι ¡sing moon diffused a silvVy gleam, And glittring stars their friendly ¿loi ies joined ; A time reflection aids Religion's theme, And penbive caies increase upon the mmd» *Twas then young Edward took his pensive way, The still church-yard, with trembling step and slow j Where his iov T d Phillis moulderM into clay, lie sought, distracted with excess of woe»
The turf, new raîs'd^ seemM willing to declare Where, deep in earth, the beauteous maid reclinM $ He saw, quick started forth the sudden tear, And thus his words betray'd his torter'd mind ;— ι ' f See where, regardless of this siîent tear, ** The lovely Plullis sleeps in soft repose \ f * Ah! what avail my anguish, my despair, u She sleeps, unconscious or my dreadful woes I "Ahl why did Heav'n so fair a form bestow ? " Why was she bless'd with more than mot V\\ charms Ì ·* To serve, alas! but to augment my v\oe, " And add new horrors to iny wsdow'd ai ms ! , 4t Her face was lovely as the op'nİiig day ; - '* Sweet was her breath as autumn's rich perfume j " Her voice, melodious as the linnet's lay j ** Pier cheeks outvied therose*s brightest bloom. ·* So the young bud bedecks the virgin thorn, '· Whilst deep within a venom'd canker lies, ** Witb fragiance sweet, salutes the using morn, " Ere ni^ht, alas ! untimely blasted lies 1
" Some
' ? Some Goddess» envying her superior charms, " Some God, repining at my happier fate» " WUH jealous fury snatchM her from my arms, " And frantic ucg'd th* unwilling hand of Pate. " Slow on her frame a HngYmg sickness seiz*d» 11 0>r Iyer weak Hmbs a deadly paleness spread» *« Her eyes no more their sprightly ??? display*d, " And from her cheek, the gay ver .nil ion fled. " Sudden»-alas İ would flattei ing hopes arise» *« And long lost health seem bloontng o*er her face ; " But» ah ! too soon-the fond delusion U es» '* And to despair reluctant yields her place. " Faint, weary» pale» she bowM her languid head» '* Unequal Nature yielding to tlie stufe; «« Calm, by degrees, she sunk amongst the dead, " And, sweetly smiling, languished into life I «« Adieu, ye lawns · adieu, ye flowVy meads 1 ' c Ye groves, ye partners of our love, adieu ! «< Phillis no more your painted carpet treads» w No more her eyes your varied prospects view. VOL. IV. E « Welcome
** Welcome the silene? of the midnight hour, «' This solemn scene, this gHmm'ringray of light | « My sou!, deprtst by Fate's relentless powV, «* Enjojs this hour with a sad delight, « Oh ! would kind IJçav'n indulge my ardent pray V t " Life, hated life, with transport I'd resign j ** Glad, in the grave, ld lose my torturing care, ** Whom death has parted, death alone can join I*'
" Ah !" cried Jacintha, " hosv ago¬ nizing to Aveep over the grave of those Ave lose;—yet hosv much more ago¬ nizing," and her thoughts reverted to the tower " to knosv the object of our tenderest afíection survives, but to ex-» perience the horrors of confinement and despair!" Wrapped in pensive meditations, she remained in tbe garden long after the bell for vespers had tolled, regardless of the
the dusky hue which gradually stole upon the blue' expanse, and veiled the beauties of the surrounding scenery. At length a Nun approached, to in¬ form her the gates of the Convent Avere about being closed for the night.— Jacintha immediately quitted her se¬ questered seat, and followed her to the cloisters, where the Nun, who had here¬ tofore been her attendant, níet and con¬ ducted her to her chamber ; in av hich she continued Avith her tiil she had supped. On being left alone, Jacintha soon sought to obtain, in sleep, a refuge from the gloomy ideas which oppiessed her ; sleep, hoAVCA'cr, could not dissipate them, and the Aviid and terrihe dreams to Avhich they gave rise, harassed her spirits, and made her forsake her couch at the first dawn of day. Breakfast, like her other meals, Avas served in the adjoining apartment, and ? ? she
she found that all society, or even con¬ verse Avith the Nuná, except it A\ r as ac¬ cidental, Avas prohibited. She did not revisit the garden till she sasv they had quitted it to attend their mid-day de¬ votions; she then lepairedtoit. Again her eyes ins'oluntarily rested on the black tower, and she paused to re-examine its massy structure, A y ainly wishing for poAver to penetrate Avithin its dark recesses, and relieve the Avretch¬ edness which perhaps pined within it. Whilst thus she stood, in a melancholy and contemplative attitude, before it, to her inexpressible astonishment she sud¬ denly beheld a svhite handkerchief sus¬ pended through the iron-bars of a small windosv, a fesv yauls above the ground. Though prepossessed with the idea of its being at tliis time inhabited, Jacintha startet! at this moment as if she had seen something supernatural, and
and remained immoseable till she beheld the handkerchief Avaving, as if to insite her approach. Ahnost instinctively she then stepped forward, but again stopped ¿>n obsemng the handkerchief with¬ drawn; in the next instant, however, she percei ved a hand pushing a folded paper through the bars, Avhich fell upon the ground. That this was designed for her, Jacin¬ tha could not doubt ; and having glanced about, to see whether she Avas observed, she darted to the spot, and catching up the paper, directly concealed it in her bosom ; then hastening to another part of the garden, though Avith trembling limbs, and a heart that fluttered as if it would burst from her bosom, she took a few turns, and returned to her chanv ber, without meeting any of the Nuns, The moment she regained it, she drese forth the paper, svhich appeared to be a leaf torn from a pocket-book, and ? 3 read
read the following lines pencilled í* English :—
t t If your countenance be the index of your mind, you will compassionate the miser v of an unfortunate fellow* cieature and country-woman, treache¬ rously separated from all she loves on earth, and cruelly doomed to linger out the residue of her days in this solitary Convent. ít Oh stranger! this 'doom may, through your means, be reversed, if you will give me an opportunity of ac¬ quainting you with such particulars of sny sad story, as may enable you to in¬ form my friends in Britain of my situa¬ tion ; but this opportunity can only be granted by your visiting the place of my confinement. To do this you may perhaps be unwilling, from an apprehen¬ sion of danger ; but no danger can be incurred
incurred by such a measure, since there is no probability of its being discoA r ered. The gallery in which you lodge, h re¬ mote from the one occupied by the Nuns, beingenthely appropriated to the „ ??? of any Avandering strangers Avho may require the shelter of this Convent \ it terminates in a small door, which opens upon a narrow flight of stairs that descend into the Church, and exactly opposite the foot of these stairs is an¬ other door, which leads into the tosver where I am confined, but so artfully con¬ trived as not to appear to casual observa¬ tion Avhat it really is ; you will knosv it, however, by a frame of woodsvork which surrounds it, and into which, on the right side, the bolt that secures it pro* jects. At the hour of one, when a}l the Convent is likely to be Avrapped in repose, you may safely visit me.—Oh do not determine against coming, I conjure you 1—Oh do not refuse real¬ izing the hope your appearance excited ! £ 4 So
So may Heaven bless and prosper ??? and peace and happiness go with you r hand in hand, through life !" The feelings of Jacintha's mind, on perusing these lines, can better be con¬ ceived than described : surprise, pity» and apprehension all took their tum to 2 eign, and for some time she was irre¬ solute hoAV to act. Humanity at length ended this in esolution, by determining her to visit the wretched captive ; yet, at the very moment she formed this de» tei mination, her heart sunk Avithin her, at the idea of (she believed) the perilous undertaking. She endeavoured, how¬ ever, to revive its courage, by reflecting N on the very little probability there Avas of any of the inhabitants of the Con¬ vent being up at the hour appointed for tlie visit, and consequently the little riak she should run of encountering danger by it. i( And
" And surely any pain attendant on the apprehension of danger, must be trifling, " she cried, ' * compared to that which I should feel, if I permitted selfish considerations to render me regardless of the supplications of misery, and thought a fellow-creature groaned in captivity whom İ might, by an exertion of courage, have been instrumental to delivering from it ;—such a thought would for ever destroy my happiness.— Oh God 1 Avhat an ungrateful return should I make for the restoration of my liberty, if I refused trying to restore to another a similar blessing !—Yes, un¬ happy woman I I will, on thy account, endeavour to overcome all apprehen¬ sions, and act to thee as, a few short days ago, I should have wished, have prayed some friendly mortal to has*e acted towards myself." " Good Heavens !" excfc»^ ? s ^ e> after the pause of » ^J^mutes, * s should ~5
4i should this be the unfortunate lady who was so long confined Avithin the castle !—Ah ! if it should be her indeed, hoAv will the glowing heart of her pupil rejoice Avhen he hears his kind in¬ structress lives—lives în expectation of being restored to freedom !" The pleasing images Avhich this kle& gave to the mind of Jacintha, tranquil¬ lized it, and she almost felt impatient for the hour which Avas to introduce her to the captive. She remamed in the apartments as¬ signed to-her the remainder of the day, without seeing any person except the attending Nun, who, as usual, brought her solitary meals, and a lamp at night,
CHAP.
e
CHAP. IV. ** Ail hope of succour but fiora thee, h past P'' Dryden. W ITH darkness the fears of Jacintha again returned; and, as she shut herself up in her little cell, she involuntarily began to ruminate on the dreadful situation in which she would, in all probability, be involved, should the en- terprize she meditated be discovered. Before the reviesv of this situation her resolution began to waver; yet when she reflected on the very little likelihood there Avas of the discovery she dreaded ? 6 taking
taking place, and, above all, on the Avretchedness she should experience, if she could reproach herself with having- refused trying to serve a suffering fel¬ low-creature, she once more determined on persevering in her charitable inten¬ tions.. With a fluttering heart she heard the* bell for midnight prayers ; Avith a still more agitated heart she heard* the deep- toned clock striking the hour of one. When its solemn reverberation Hvas over, bhe rose, and going to the door, softly opened it, and stepped into the gallery to listen. She scarcely breathed, from her strong anxiety to try and ascertain Avhether there Avas- any one up in the Convent; she soon, however, had reason* to believe all its inhabitants Avere wrap¬ ped in repose, for *< Nor eye, nor listning ear an object fourni/*"
Silence-
Silence and Darkness, solemn sisters twain, seemed now to reign within the building. Jacintha returned into the chamber for her lamp, and again stepped forth- She had not proceeded many yards, however, when she ** Back recoíld, " Even at the sound herself bad made." Shuddering, she stood immoveable For some minutes ; re-assured then by find¬ ing her fancy had deceived her, ami that it was the echo alone of her own steps which " had pierced the fearful hollow of her ear;" she again moved onwards, nor paused till she came to the door that terminated the gallery ; here she lingered a short tíme, scarcely able to prevail upon herself to descend the stairs, which seemed to terminate in impenetrable gloom. At
At last she ventured forward, cling¬ ing to the banisters, and trembling lest the wind, Avhich came in sudden gusts from the aisles, should extinguish her lamp. „ A pale tAvilight gleamed through the windoAVS of the Church, much more calculated to affect thé imagination, than the profound darkness of the gallery. Oppressed with terrors she had never before experienced, Jacintha advanced from the foot of the stairs, starting, and often pausing to look back, as the lonely aisles echoed her steps, and almost made her imagine she Avas followed. "With difficulty her trembling hands enabled her to unbolt the door leading into the tosver, and Avhich disclosed to her view a small hall terminated by a narrow flight of stairs ; these stairs she began to ascend in the utmost trepi¬ dation;
*.
dation, chilled to the very heart, not more by apprehension than the cold and dampness of the place. Scarcely had she gained the top, ere a Avild scream burst upon her ear, and a female figure rushed from an opposite apartment, and fell trembling at her feet. The variety of emotions Avhich assailed the heart of Jacintha, rendered her for some minutes unable to speak or move ; then recollecting her perilous situation, she tried to exert herself, and setting the lamp upon the ground, endeavoured to raise the prostrate stranger. Her efforts soon succeeded; the unhappy captive, by her assistance, slowly rose, and discovered to her view a counte¬ nance which, notwithstanding the too visible ravages of time, sorrosv, and sickness, still retained the most inte¬ resting expression, and a faint vestige of primeval beauty.
«
She
She gazed a few minutes in silenes upon Jacintha ; then withdrawing from her support, she took up the lamp > and led the way into the apartment from whence she had come. Jacintha shud¬ dered οίί entering it, at the idea of a human creature being the inmate of such a place;, the rugged walls were covered with green and slimy damps, and its only furniture was a wretched pallet stretched upon a wooden bedstead ; to this the captive feebly moved, and seating herself upon it, she burst into tears ; Jacintha followed, and endea¬ voured to sooth her. ·* Kind stranger," said she, laying her emaciated hand upon Jacintha's arm as she spoke, " be not distressed at beholding these tears ; they are tears of joy—such as I have not, for a long, long period shed, at the prospect that now dawns upon me of my deliverance. Say,
Say, blessed creature, say, will you in¬ deed exert yourself in my behalf?" "Would to Heaven I could .flatter myself that my pOAver to serve you was equal to my inclination, " replied Jacin¬ tha. " My feelings Avere prophetic on be¬ holding you," said the stranger; " something seemed to Avhisper my heart that you Avere thrown in my way by Providence ;—joy thrilled through my frame when I saw you, and heard you were my country-woman." " Heard !" repeated Jacintha, in ex* treme surprise. " Yes ; I met you in the cloisters as I Avas returning from the matin service. Attracted 7 by your appearance, I en¬ quired of a Nun concerning you.— «Put the pleasure her information gave, was
was soon damped by the Abbess's arbi¬ trary command to have me confined iu this tower till you had left the Convent, lest I should be tempted to disclose to you my unhappy story, and, through your means, obtain an opportunity of acquainting my friends with my situa¬ tion. That I have been able to obtain this opportunity, I bend in gratitude to Heaven." More affrighted than ever by hearing of the precaution which was used for keeping the captive and her story from her knowledge, as it tended to prove the dangerous consequences that would result from its being known that she had discovered either, Jacintha earnestly importuned her to be brief in explaining how she could serve her ;- informing her, at the same time, that she was about returning to England·
5' The
<t The service I require," she replied, u is to acquaint my friends with my situation." " But where," demanded Jacintha, somesvhat impatiently, " are those friends to be found ?" " Where," repeated she, Avith a kind of shuddering horror, as if a fearful thought had that moment started in her mind, "alas!" cried she, Avhilst tears again burst from her eyes, "perhaps those dear friends, the hope of Avhose existence rendered liberty so desirable, are noAV no more." " Dear lady," said Jacintha, "hope the best." She sighed, looked up to heaven, and* after a momentary pause, thus pro¬ ceeded.
" Tlie
" The family from whom I am de*. scended, is a Scotch one, of the name of Nairn ;—a letter can scarcely faii of finding some one belonging to it, in its ancient neighbourhood, Inverness ; and if the letter falls into the hands of even the most distant of my relatives, I am convinced I shall be redressed." " And by Avhat name am I to men¬ tion you ?" asked Jacintha. " The Earl of Endermay is my hus¬ band. The most perfidious arts were practised to make him imagine me false to the vow I had plighted to him, and impose upon my friends a belief of my death. Within the solitary walls of this Convent, I have passed years of lingering misery, secluded from all that could render life desirable, and kept in ignorance of the fate of those I loA r ed—> an ignorance productive of greater tor¬ ture than any other circumstance.— Oh
Oh God ! how agonizing is incerti¬ tude about those Ave regard— liosv ago¬ nizing to the fond heart of a mother to be denied the knosvledge of her off¬ spring's fate! A thousand times have I implored the barbarians Avho confined me, to let me knoAv Avhether my infant, whom they so cruelly snatched from my arms, ere her sweet eyes had Avell open¬ ed upon the light, was in existence, but in vain." ' ' Then surety, " said Jacintha, f ' you may conclude she still lives ; for it is not natural to suppose that those who so cruelly confined you, would keep from your knosvledge any eA r ent that could cause you additional pain." " Except convinced," replied the un¬ happy Countess, " that the tortures of suspense exceed those which any cer¬ tainty could inflict." /
" Your
" Your suspense, your sufferings Avili soon, I trust, be happily terminated,** said Jacintha. " Depend upon my zeal;—amongst the hours of my life Avhich I shall Avish to remember, are those that gave me an opportunity of serving you. " Lady Endermay caught her hand, and pressed it to her lips. " Say," cried she, gazing upon her, <c svho you are—Avhence you come? —As you are, my dreams have repre¬ sented my daughter to be;—such the benignant expression of her eyes—such that look of ssveetness Avhich sinks upon the heart." " Under happier auspices than the présents I trust, dear Lady," replied Jacintha, " I shall have an opportunity of telling you Asdio I am. Of this, hosveATr, let me assure you ; that the self-
self-experience of sorroAv has taught me to feel acutely for the woes of others." " May sorrosv henceforth.be a stranger to your heart !" said Lady Endermay ; " may your future .destiny be mild as your looks !—may the comfort you have given to her, who Avas ready to perish, never be needed by you i —may glad¬ ness encompass your steps, and those whom you love requite your tender¬ ness i—Oh God!" she continued, with uplifted hands, " hear my Avishes !" The tenderness and fervour of her expressions affected Jacintha beyond description ; she could not restrain her tears—her heart melted within her, as if at this moment she had been receiving the blessing of a long-lost mother, and she could not forbear reflecting on the different reception she should have met with from Lady Endermay, had she been
j*
been her parent, to that which she had experienced from Lady Dunsane. In^ a feAV minutes her emotions sub¬ sided, and permitted her to enquire of Laijy Endermay, Avhether she had ever been confined in any other place than the Convent. Lady Endermay replied in the negative, and thus proA T ed to Jacintha, Avhat indeed she had before suspected, that she Avas mistaken in hnagining her to be the lady who Avas imprisoned in the chateau. IlaAñng received a more particular di¬ rection to her Ladyship's friends than she had before, and repeated her pro¬ mise of losing no time in writing to them, she bade her farewel· At this moment Lady Endermay started up, and grasped Jacintha's hands. *' Remember
" Remember your promise," she ex¬ claimed ; " remember you haA'e created a hope in my heart which, if disappoint¬ ed, will break it 1—I know the time at Avhich, if you keep your Avoid, I may expect my deliverance ; if that time passes asvay, Avithout effecting \t z I can no longer support the burthen of exist¬ ence ;—and you," she proceeded, AvhiUt her eyes assumed a Avildness of expres¬ sion Avhich terrified Jacintha, ** yes, you will be accessary to sinking me to my grave—and you, like my inhuman persecutors, my accusing spirit avÜI haunt, to reproach you for your deceit !" " Dear lady, be composed," said Jacintha, " and rely upon my assu¬ rances;—let my braving the conse¬ quences Avhich could scarcely fail of re¬ sulting from my visit to you being dis¬ covered, prove to you whether or not t am sincere in my svishes to serve } ou." vol. ia% f "Ahl
tC Ah ! how could I doubt your sin¬ cerity after such a proof!" cried Lady Endermay, ás if suddenly recollecting herself; tí excuse my doing so—the unhappy aie ever fearful." " Adieu, dear lady !" said Jacin- tha, kissing lier hand ; Ci all that in¬ defatigable zeal can, do to hasten your deliverance, shall be done." Then taking up the lamp, slie hastened from the room, followed hy Lady En¬ dermay to the top of the stairs ; on gaming the bottom, Jacintha looked up, waved her hand, aud iuid it for a moment in expressive silence upon her heait; then advancing to the door which open¬ ed into the Church, she gently pushed it open, and as gently closed it. As she was moving from it, she ac¬ cidentally glanced upon the railing of a small adjoining chapel, between which, with
Aviti) a horror that instantly rivetted her to the spot, she beheld a ghastly coun¬ tenance earnestly regarding her. , From this terrific apparition Jacintha had not posver to withdraw her eyes ; in a few minutes, hosvever, it gradually disap¬ peared, and Jacintha recovered suffi¬ ciently from the shock it bad given her, to be able to move towards the opposite stairs. But ere she had proceeded many paces, tbe rustling of drapers''made her instincti vel ν look back, and she beheld a tall figure, whose habiliments seemed much better suited for an inhabitant of the grave, than for an inhabitant of this Avorld, foliosving her. Her faculties again became suspended, the lamp dropped* from her hand, and sinking on her knees, she extended her arms in a supplicatory attitude ;-r-the figure approached, and at length, in a voice which %irst like thunder upon the ears of Jacintha, svho immediately recol- f â lected
lected it to be the A T oice of the Nun who had shewn her the Convent, ex¬ claimed— " Stranger, you will dearly pay for this temerity*. Be assured there Avili be a severe scrutiny into this mysterious business. " The chilling fear which, but a montent ? before, had awed the heart of Jacintha, and scarcely permitted her to breathe, noAV gave way to apprehensions that caused it to throb Avith the utmost vio¬ lence. The consequences which she had dreaded from engaging in her late en- terprize, seemed now ready to over¬ whelm her; and, unable to speak 01; move, she remained upon her knees some minutes, looking up in the face of the Nun, as if she expected to have heard from her lips her doom pro- #ounced.
The
ι The Nun at length, in an austere voice, desired her to rise. Jacintha, instead of obeying this command, sud¬ denly clasped her arms about her, and implored her to forgive an action prompt¬ ed alone by humanity. ** Tis not to me," said the Nun, in a haughty and repulsive tone, " to whom you are to address your suppli¬ cations.—I am not the person who is to decide upon your conduct.'* " But you are the only person ac¬ quainted with it," cried Jacmtha; *' and, except you please, it need not trans¬ pire." " And do you suppose I do not mean it shall ?" replied she ; "do you imagine you can prevail upon me to become the accomplice of deceit ? svliich I should consider myself, ifj concealed the late transaction. No; if you have had f 3 the*
the presumption to think so, you haA'e been as much mistaken in that idea, as in believing your rash undertaking would either escape detection or punish¬ ment.". So saying, she burst from the grasp of Jacintha, and again commanded her, Avith increased haughtiness, to rise. This indignant treatment roused tlie spirit of Jacintha, and starting on lier feet, she hastily ascended the stairs, followed by the Nun ; s\ ho, in her eager anxiety t" acquaint the Abbess svirh what she had seen, utteiiy forgot the penance she svas doing at the time she beheld Jacintha. * Ere Jacintha had reached her cham¬ ber, the courage which resentful pride inspired, sunk beneath the dreadful ap¬ prehensions which oppressed her. She doubted not having provoked a most rigorous
rigorous punishment—a punishment against which she coukl make no re- sistance.—She paused—she looked back on the Nun ; but the unrelenting seve¬ rity which marked her countenance, checked the supplication that was ready to burst from the lips of Jacintha ; and tottering into the chamber, she threw herself upon the bed, ahnost suffocated by her emotions. 4 The Nun remained some time in silence at the door; then advancing into the room, she approached the bed, and laying her hand upon Jacintha s arm, told her in a softened voice, she might pei haps be induced to keep the secret she wished her to conceal, if she candidly confess¬ ed every thing relative to her visit to the tower;—a confession, she assured her, she did not require for the gratifi¬ cation of her curiosity (as that u as al- ìeady satisfied by having overheat d the whole conversation between her and it 4 tlie
the captive, in consequence of being in the Church at the time she entered it, and foliosving her into the tosver) ; but merely to prove Avhether she Avas - sufficiently sincere and honourable to be worthy of consideration and for¬ bearance. Jacintha could not doubt the truth of this latter assertion, Avhich was utter¬ ed with the utr^ost solemn itv : and start- ^ ing from the bed, she candidly revealed . all that had passed betsveen her and Lady Endermay; fully removing the suspicion she found, by the further in¬ terrogatories of the Nun, svas entertain¬ ed of her having been introduced into the Convent, for the purpose of trying to obtain an opportunity of conversing with the Countess. The moment she had concluded her narrative, the Nun abruptly quitted the room, and locking the door after her, left Jacintha
Jacintha to experience all the violent emotions that alternate hope and fear could inspire» Two hours elapsed before she return· ed ; she then entered the room as ab¬ ruptly as she had quitted it, and in¬ formed the almost fainting Jacintha that her friend was come to take her from the Convent. Terror and weakness vanished before the joy these tidings imparted ; and, with an cxclamation'expressive of her rapture, Jacintha immediately began to prepare for her departure, not without wondering at her escape from the ex¬ amination, but still more the punish¬ ment she had dreaded. In her self- congratulations, however, upon this supposed escape, she soon found she was; too premature:
f S " Though
" Though your friend is come, you cannot go to him," said the Nun, fastening the door, and ads l ancing to¬ wards her. " Not go to him!" repeated Jacintha, looking wildly, and dropping her pelisse, which she had just snatched from a chair, " not go to him !" ** No; nes r er must you hope to re¬ join him—never must you hope to pass these Avails, except you promise inviola¬ ble secrecy relative to the discovery you made svi thin them." Jacintha shuddered on hearing a de¬ termination which, if persevered in, doomed the unfortunate Lady Ender¬ may to continued misery; she tried, however, to conceal the shock it gave her, and, with an assumed calmness, said— "TU
" Tis not your osvn ignorance, I am am convinced, of the consequences which could not fail of resulting from the unlasvful detention of a British sub¬ ject, but your supposition of mine, that has induced you to hold out such a threat to me, svhich, I must nosv in* form you, I svell knoAv you could not put into execution." * " Could not !" repeated the Nun, Avith a disdainful glance; " be not too certain.—Who is to knoAv of your un¬ just detention?—iiosy easily could a. story be invented to impose upon your friends l' Jacintha again shuddered!. She saw she was completely entangled in a snare, from svhich she feared she could never extricate herself, but by submitting to the conditions prescribed. Nothing short of absolute necessity, however, ï ó* she
she determined should make her give up the cause of Lady Endermay. " Listen to me," resumed the Nun, motioning for her to take a chñir, and seating herself by her; " the compas¬ sion excited by your youth and inex¬ perience, has led me to conceal from the Abbess the indiscretion you have been guilty of; thoroughly convinced that was she to know it, she would punish it in the most rigorous manner, in all probability by the utter deprivation of liberty ; but, though inclined to screen you from her resentment, I cannot think of exposing myself to it on 30111* account, which must be tîie case, if 1 suffered you to quit the Convent with¬ out pledging me the vow I require." " Why must it be the case?" asked Jacintha.
" Because
" Because the disclosure you Avould then think yourself at liberty to reveal, Avould soon reach the ears of the Abbess, and discover to her mv has r ing conceal- ed your visit to the tosver ; svhich, it must be knosvn, you could not hase made without my knosvledge, having passed the two nights you svere in the Convent svithin the Church, at penance. Such a circumstance Avould inevitably drasv upon me a A'cngeance that nothing, perhaps, but the most dreadful suffer¬ ings on my part could appease—suffer¬ ings Avhich, be assured, I shall run no risk of encomi tering. Ifyou, therefore, persist in Avithhoiding the promise I de¬ sire, I svili no longer hesitate acquaint¬ ing the Abbess svith your conduct.—If I do, mark my svords—you svill repent having compelled me to the measure. As a further inducement to your acting in the manner I svish—Heaven knosvs, for your osvn sake—-knosv that you have been imposed upon by a fabricated story.
story. The person svith whom you con¬ versed in the tosver, is not the person she wishes you to believe ; if she svas, these hoîv walls svould never ha\ r e been her prison. - It is her osvn artifices, and not the artifices of others, a\ hich have caused her to be confined within them ; an eaily deviation from propriety compelled her friends to deprive her of a liberty as hich she made so improper an use of." Jacintha utterly discredited this as¬ sertion, and endeasOured, by all the address slue svas mistress of, to avoid binding herself to secrecy relative to Lady Enderniay. * i 1 will no longer argue with you, '* said the Nun, rising from her chair as she spoke; " abide the consequences which you seem to brave." These consequences svere too appalling to the imagination of Jacintha, not to make
make her earnestly solicitous to avoid encountering them. She hastily follow¬ ed the Nun, and caught her arm. " What is your decision ?" demanded the Nun, pausing and looking earnestly at her, Jacintha made no reply, and by her manner betrayed the highest irresolu¬ tion. " Again I solemnly assure you," said the Nun, " you never can pass these Avails except you take the voav I require. I Avish to saA'C you from suffering ; but 1 cannot sacrifice my own safety to that wish." " There is then no al tematiske," cried Jacintha, Avho had not a doubt that loss of liberty would follow the Abbess's knowledge of her conduct ; " there is then no alternative," she inwardly ex¬ eiaitned,
claimed, " between involving myself in irremediable evils, or consigning a fel¬ low-creature to lingering misery.—Oh God!" she continued, with uplifted eyes, J' thou who seest my reluctance to give up the cause I undertook—thou who seest me compelled to a breach of humanity—do thou, merciful and gra¬ cious Being, alleviate that wretchedness to which all human consolation—ail hu¬ man succour is denied !" Pale and trembling, she then took a sacred oath never to disclose any parti¬ cular relative to Lady Endermay ; but scarcely had it passed her lips, ere her countenance assumed a deathlike hue, and she fell, almost fainting, upon the bosom of the Nun, overpowered by the idea of the misery to which disappoint¬ ed hope would condemn the unhappy woman. The Nun supported her to a window, the cool air soon revived her, and a flood of tears in some degree lightened the
NOCTURNAL VISÍT. . the oppression of her heart. As soon as her emotions had a little subsided, she prepared for her departure, assisted by the Nun. At the head of the stairs she Avas met by a lay-sister, who conducted her to the parlour where Henri impatiently waited for her. His eyes sparkled, his - cheeks glowed at her approach ; but his pleasure soon A r anished before the dejec¬ tion so visible in her looks; into the cause of which it svas evident a fear of offending alone prevented him from enquiring. Jacintha svas too much occupied by the idea of Lady Endermay, to be able to enter into conversation with Henri, cs'en after she had left tbe Consent, After addressing a fesv broken ancl dis¬ jointed sentences to him, she sunk into a gloomy reverie, and began to question her heart svhether a voav, taken under such
such circumstances $s her's—a a*oav, which doomed innocence and virtue still to suffer beneath artifice and op¬ pression, ought not to i>e broken.— But when she reflected upon its solem¬ nity—when she reflected that, if its violation restored one innocent person to happiness, it svould condemn another to misery (tor so the Nun had assured her), she shrunk írom the idea, and, wjth a flood of tears, resigned the un¬ fortunate Lady Endermay to her fate. Hen rfs loo!* «declared ib surprise at her emotion ; and Jacintha recollecting her¬ self, and naturally concluding he might suppose she had some new cause for melan¬ choly, and feel ofended if she did not reveal it, endeas'oured to rally her spirits. The in ules Avere stationed at the en¬ trance of the forest, and they imme¬ diately recommenced their journey, Travelling through tlie less frequented ways,
ways, lest they should encounter those whom they wished to avoid, about sun¬ set they reached a small village at the foot of the Pyrenees, where they stopped for the night. By an early hour the next morning, Henri, according to the request of Jacintha, had a chaise at the inn-door for her, in which, accompanied by him, she commenced her journey to Calais. And now, as she began to retrace the road she had travelled with Lord Gwytherin, the severe sufferings she had experienced in consequence of. his treachery, and the cruelty of her mother, rushed upon her mind, expelling from it every other idea than that of the inhumanity of her parents—an idea so agonizing, so dreadful, that she tried to prevent her¬ self from dwelling on it. In Henris conversation she sought to find a refuge from her oppressive thoughts ;"
thoughts; mild, modest, and respect¬ ful, he every moment gained upon her esteem and admiration, and she could scarcely persuade herself tliat he Avas the son of the rude and illiterate pea¬ sants, to Avhose care she had been con¬ signed. They travelled Avith the utmost cau¬ tion and privacy, and, after a journey of some days, reached Calais; a sudden joy pervaded the bosom of Jacintlia as she cast her eyes upon the Avaves as hich Avere to transport her back to that king¬ dom, where she expected to finti that truth, that tenderness svhich a sain ex¬ pectation of meeting elsewhere had in¬ duced her to quit. It was nosv upsvaids of a year since Egbert had left England, and, by this - time, she flattered herself he svas re¬ turned. She pictured to herself the raptures which would attend their meet-
ing ; Avhen, perhaps, after his suffering all the tortures of ignorance and sus- pense about her, she appeared unexpect¬ edly before him. " Oh !" she exclaimed to herself, as her heart glosved at these anticipations of her fancy, " that moment, that bless- ed moment ?? ill compensate for all my sufferings !" The feelings of Henri, on arriving at Calais, sveie very different from her s ; and his dejection, which had gradually increased as they approached the termi¬ nation of their journey, confirmed a sus¬ picion, Avhich the language of his eyes. had for some time before infused into her bosom—a suspicion Avhich made her , anxious for a separation as soon as pos¬ sible. They reached Calais early in the day, and Jacintlia had scarcely alighted from the
NOCTURNAL VISIT. tlie chaise, ere she enquired about a packet ; and, to her extreme satisfac¬ tion, heard one was to sail m the after¬ noon, in which she immediately en¬ gaged a passage. Her ardent gratitude made her deeply regret not ha\ing the power of making any adequate return for tiie services of Henri ; w ithout which, she had every leason to believe, at tliis moment sbe should have been a solitary exile ft oui all she loved on earth. In the course of the dav, after a me- lancho! v silence of some minutes, he entreated to be favoured with her ad¬ dress; that, if ever he visited happy England (so he styled it) lie might be able to enquire into her destiny. After a little consideration, Jacintha gave him an address to Mr. Decourcy's agent ; assuring hiin, at the same time, it
it Avould ever affoid her sincere happi¬ ness to hear of his welfare. When the moment for parting ar¬ rived, the emotions of iler. ri became too violent to be concealed ; Jacintha, how¬ ever, thou»h se_retiv affected, did not secui to notice them. " F*ircAvel !" cried she, extending her hand, Avhich he tremblingly clasped be¬ tween hi?, as she rose to obey a sum¬ mons to the pier ; <fc svith this faresvel, receive m ν most fers'cnt wishes for your happiness. } lay lbe hopes, the expecta¬ tions with u hich vou are commencing 1 your cai eer in life, never be disappoint¬ ed !—May you meet from others, gene¬ rosity equal to that svhich you mani¬ fested in your couduct towards a forlorn and unhappy stranger!" Henri, unable to speak, bowed his thanks, lie attended Jacintha to the pier,
pier, nor left it till the packet was under weigh ; he then, with swimming eyes and a heavy heart, retired from it, re¬ peating to himself her last words. " Unavailing wishes !" he exclaimed ; <¿ iny hopes and expectations of happiness are already disappointed.—Yet, though unavailing, sweet is the idea of them ; — yes, soothing to my soul is the idea of liv¬ ing in her remembran ce. — Ah ! why did I not strive to resist this passion at its com¬ mencement ?—Had I done so—had I at¬ tended to the suggestions of reason, which warned me of the misery it was likely to be productive of, I should not perhaps have experienced such pangs as I now feel.—Vain, however, is the re¬ gret ; it only adds sharpness to—shall I dare to say the sting of disappointment ? Oh no ; I never encouraged a presump¬ tuous thought." s CHAP·
CHAP. V. ** Jic'mln hoe ïn soltiuíc tliîv f ·ν. ìc?, " Ktr downcast eyes fi Kt on the büciit grou n J ; " lit. dîLSs neglected, a.id unbound l.ci hair, " Sbe scenici the moumf.t! iirajc of DcsjH*r.'* G..RTH. ÖÍX months had nosr elapsed sin re Jacintha quitted England ; but so tedious appears rime passed in misery, that it seemed to her si\ ATars since she had left it. There Avere but fesv passengers on board the packet, and these all strangers VOL. I\ l . g to
to Jácintba. As soon as it Avas under Avcigh, a sailor put into her bands a \small scaled parcel, svhich, to lier ex¬ treme regret, she found to be her pocket- book, undiimnbl;cd in its contents, and svhich, previous to the commence¬ ment of her journey to Calais, she bad insisted on ??? i's accepting. She felt shocked and distressed beyond expres¬ sion, at the idea of hU little stock of wealth (svhich she understood he had re¬ ceived from his instructress, as the means of freeing himself from the tvranin' of his parents) being in all probability ex¬ pended on her account, and of the consequent difficulties in which be might be invoked; and, bad she bad the posver of doing ??, sbe svould imme¬ diately have sent back svhat she con¬ ceived he had so imprudently returned. Early the next morning the packet reached Dover. Jacintha hailed svith delight those Avhite cliffs, to Avhich, but a fesv
a few months before, she had bidden so melancholy a farewel; gloom and de¬ spondence vanished as she approached them, the sweet consciousness of secu¬ rity diffused a pleasing serenity over her mind, and eheerfuhiess again took up its abode iu her bosom.. On reaching the inn, to which tbev all repaired; she parted from her fellow- passciiiOTs, and was bv her desire shewn. into a private room. She lost not a moment in enquiring about a convey¬ ance to the metropolis ; hearing there was a vacant seat in the mail-coach, which set off in the evening, she direct- ly secured it, as the most eligible mode of travelling for her, in her present un¬ protected situation. The intervening hours wore heavily awav, and nothing but a dread of en- countering some person she knew, pre¬ ti ( 2 vented
a ented her from getting scine one to shew her the antiquities of Dover. The passengers in the coach consisted of two elderly men and aAvoman ; Avho, after a little desultory conversation at the beginning of the journey, sunk to repose. Jacintha vainLv Avished to follo sv their example, as her mind became invo¬ luntarily agitated at the idea of as hat her feelings in a few short hours Avould be, svhen she .should either has -? her expect¬ ations confirmed or disappointed. Slie felt that suspense itself does not cause greater agitation than the anticipation ofthat moment in Avhich Ave imagine it avi II be terminated. At an early hour the next morning, she and the other passengers Avere set doAvn at --------- Inn ; Avhere, hosvever, the latter stopped but a fesv minutes, and Jacintha could not refrain a sigh at
at the idea of being compelled to stay behind them, from having uo friend, no home to receive her. She sasv, hosvever, the more destitute she svas, the more requisite her osvn ex¬ ertions svere; checking therefore the unpleasant reflections her situation in¬ spired, which she flattered herself a fesv hours svould reverse, she desired to be shesvn into a more private room than that into svhich she had been ushered on quitting the coach, and ordered breakfast. It svas some time, hosvesrer, before breakfast made its appearance, for as yet but few of the inhabitants of the inn svere up ; and the surrounding streets, svhich in a fesv hours resounded svith the rattling chariot and din of business, svere nosv almost perfectly still and deserted. The first object svith Jacintha svas to procure a proper habitation for herself, ? 3 av hielt
which she did not consider a common inn to be ; but svhere to look for such a habitation slie svas utterly at a loss. After a little consideration, it occurred to her that the people of tbe house, per¬ haps, might be able to assist her search ; accordingly, Avhen the Avaiter entered with breakfast, she desired him to in¬ form his mistress she svibhed to speak to her. In consequence of this message, a little fat, vulgar-looking Avoman soon after entered the room, and begged, with a curtsey, to knosv Jacintha's commands. Jacintha motioned for her to take a chair, and then (though not Avithout embarrassment, conscious that she must appear in a suspicious light) informed her of the purpose for Which she had sent for her. The landlady made her no reply for scA'cral minutes, nor svould she promise to
to comply with the request of Jacintha, till she had repeatedly questioned and requestioned her ; at length she said she knew a widow woman,, who lived in Oxford Street, who had very nice snug lodgings, which, if unlet, she thought she might be able to procure her ; but assured her, if she found her good¬ nature or credulity were Imposed upon, she should resent it highly. Jacintha thanked her fervently for her obliging readiness to serve her,. and expressed an earnest wish to have an immediate enquiry made about these lodgings. The landlady accordingly left the room, and returned in about an hour with the plea&ing information of their being ready for her reception· Jacintha, rejoiced at this intelligence, delajed not a moment in proceeding to ? 4 them ;
them ; eager to commence those en¬ quiries her heart dictated, 'and pies ious to svhich she considered procuring a proper habitation for herself ait indis¬ pensible step. She was set dosvn at a neat pirate house, at the upper end of Oxford Street. The door svas opened by an elderly svo¬ man of no very prepossessing appear¬ ance, who, on Jacintha's entering the hall, gave her to understand she svas the mistress of the mansion ; 'she led the Avay up stairs to a small front drasving- room, commanding a pleasant viesv of Hyde "Pai ?, calling, as she did so, to a servant gnl, to go and receive the young lady's luggage from the coachman. The girl followed in a fesv minutes as itii this luggage, wliich merely con¬ sisted of the fesv necessaries Jacintha had brought svith her from the chateau, tied up in a handkerchief, " The
" The coachman says there is nothing more of your's in the coach, Mem," cried the girl, dangling the bundle upon her finger. rf Nothing more !" repeated her mis¬ tress, in a soice expressive of surprise and displeasure, and casting a scruti- nizins: ?1?? ce at Jacintha, Avhich called a blush into her race by tbe suspicion it betrayed ; then, as if recollecting her¬ self, she took the bundle from the girl, and desired her to go and discharge the coach. Jacintha informed her she did not mean to have it discharged, as she Avas going out again in afeAV minutes. Mrs. Benson enquired when she might ex^· pect her back ; to which enquiry Jacin¬ tha replied she could not possibly tell ; ^ and Mrs. Benson, having asked her a fêAv other trifling questions, retired svittv the maid* e 5 Jacintha.
Jacintha immediately set about re¬ adjusting her dress, and then descended to the coach, in which she directly pro¬ ceeded to the house of Egbert's friend and correspondent in the city. Her emotions on approaching it, at the idea of Egbert perhaps being at this very period in it, became so violent that she could scarcely breathe. Instead of alighting, on reaching if, she sent a porter Avho stood at the door, into the olfice, to request Mr. Arden would step to her for a fesv minutes. Instead of the old gentleman she ex- pected to see, a young one, in deep mourning, came to her ; svho almost petrified her by his intelligence of the death of the merchant, his uncle, and his declaring himself utterly ignorant of his private correspondents, amongst whom he included Egbert. As
As soon as Jacintha Avas sufficiently recovered from the shock he had given her, she ordered the coachman to drive further into the city, Avhere Mr. De¬ courcy's agent resitted ; but here disap¬ pointment also asvaited her : he svas gone out of tovvir svith his familv, and the woman entrusted Avith the care of his house, could gi\'c no information Avhat- soever concerning them. Tortured bv lier incertitude about those she loved, Jacintha resolsxd on proceeding immediately to Mortlake, svhere she trusted it svould be termi¬ nated ; better able to bear the contempt of Airs. Dersvent, and the coldness of Miss Woodville, than the pain it in¬ flicted. Thither she svas accordingly driven ; but the moment the coach stopped at Mrs. Der sven ts house, she svas con¬ vinced she should not here receive the g ? satisfaction
satisfaction she required, as its closed windows evidently proved the family Avere from home. She alighted, how¬ ever, and after knocking several times, the door was at length opened by an elderly woman, who soon confirmed her conjecture, ?? informing her that Mrs. Der wen t and Miss Woodville had left home upwards of a month. "To what place are they gone r'* asked Jacintha. " Why, I understand they are gone upon a tour to some of the distant * "counties, Miss," replied the woman. <ς Pray can you tell me whether Mr. Woodville was of their party ?" i( Oh Lord! yes, Miss; became up fiom Wyefield on purpose to go with them*" *
6
" Good
" Good Iíeas'cns ! hosv unfortunate !" cried Jacintha; " then I suppose you can give me no direction to them ?" "No, that I can't indeed; but if you chuse to leave any letter or message Avith me for them, I will be sure to de- ÜA'er either faithfully, Avhen they re¬ turn ; which, I dare say, they will do in about six svecks or tsvo months." "Tsvo ages!" exclaimed Jacintha, in an agony of impatience and dibap- pointment. " Dear me, Miss, I am sorry to see you so fretted," cried the svoman. " Pray Avalk into the hall, and rest yourself a bit. I am sorry there is not a better place to shesv you into." Jacintha, almost exhausted by her feelings, accepted 4 the good svomaus invitation*
invitation. After considering a little, it occurred to her that perhaps this avo- raan might be able, in some degree, to relieAe the anxiety she suffered about her- friends. This idea no sooner oc¬ curred than her spirits felt revised, and raising her head from her hand, she en¬ quired Avhether she belonged to Mrs. Der sven ts family. " Yes," the Avomanjepîicd, she svas Avife to tie gardener, and first house¬ maid. " Then you can probably tell me," said Jacintha, "svhether Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy, avIio you knosv to be sure are relations of your Lady's, have been here lately, or whether they are still abroad ?" " Oh yes, Miss, I knosv they are still abroad ; for one of the servants called here the other day from the country." " And
íc And did he say svhen they Avere expected back ?" (i No, Miss ; but he said he supposed not for some months." Jacintha paused a moment; she then dcsciibed the person of Egbert, and asked Avhether she had ever seen -a gen¬ tleman ansAvering that description iu the house. " Whv no, î can't sav as I e\'cr did, Miss, "replied the svoman. * t But, Lord ! such a person might base come forty times, and I not have seen him ; for I am not in the svay of seeing my Lady's visiters." <t Good HeaA'ens!" exclaimed Jacin¬ ths to herself, finding all her enquiries fruitless, " a\ hat shall I do ?—To endure any longer the torture inflicted by my ignorance
ignorance of those I love, is impos¬ sible." She sat some minutes in deep medita¬ tion; the result of Avhieh was a deter¬ mination to go to Mrs. Grcviile the ensuing day. She rewarded the. woman for her civility ; and, Avith ahea\y heart, re-entered the coach, and returned to her lodgings, faint from fatigue of body and mind. She had scarcely entered the drawing- room ere she was folio weil by Mrs. Benson, who desired to know Avhether v she had dined. Jacintha replied in the negative, but said she had no appetite. u Lord ! vou had better comedown, and take a cup of tea with me, Ma'am," said Mrs. Benson ; " you really look quite Aveak and pale."
Jacintha*
Jacintha accepted the invitation, glad of any expedient svhich had a chance of diverting the unhappiness of her thoughts. Slie soon found Mrs. Ben- son's motive for desiring her company, was curiosity, not good-nature. She found it difficult to avoid answering the direct questions she put to her; and on declining to do so, Mrs. Benson proceeded to mention the danger svhich attended any attempt at imposing upon creditable housekeepers, and mentioned the exemplary punishment she had had inflicted upon tAvo or three persons, who had attempted to practise imposition upon her, and Avhom, as strangers, she had most unwillingly admitted into her house. Jacintlia heard her svidiout emotion, conscious of possessing the power of re¬ moving the suspicions she sasv she en¬ tertained concerning her, and at Avhich she ssas not in the least surprised. llei\
Her conversation reminded her of the scantiness of her Avardrobe : and being * miAuliing to go to any place svhere bhe was ηοΓ knosvn, ?? herself, she asked Mrs. Benson to accompany her the next morning, as early as coiwenient, to make the purchases she required. Mrs. Benson's countenance brighten- ed at this invitation, and she read il ν promised to attend her. At her request Jacintha breakfasted with her the ensuing morning, and im¬ mediately after breakfast, proceeded with her, on foot, to a house a little losver in thestreet, which she had particu¬ larly recommended, Avhere she bespoke a variety of things, Avhieh tlie people pro- * mised to send home to her the next evening ; and from hence she proceed¬ ed in a coach to the lodgings svliich the knew Mrs. Grcviile had occupied in Essex Street, -at the time she left the ■ kingdom ;
kingdom ; where she flattered herself she should not again be disappointed ; that this, however, would be the case she had no great fear, as she knew the term for which Mrs. Greville had taken them was not yet expired. Nothing but a hope of having her painful anxiety about her friends relieved by this visit, could have induced her to make it ; so unwilling was she to encounter the rudeness and ill- nature of Mis. Greville and Miss Ger¬ trude. The hall-door was opened by a little girl, who instantly destroyed the hope which had brought Jacintha to the house, by informing her Mrs. Greville liad left it. Jacintha paused for a moment in an agony ot disappointment, and then de¬ sired to know whether she was gone to the country. Ere the girl coukl reply to
to this question, a Avoman, who had stood listening at a parlour-door to Ja¬ cintha's enquiries, came out, and inform¬ ed her Mrs. Greville was gone to live with her daughter in Finsbury Square. " In Finsbury Square!" repeated Ja- * cintha; and svas ahout asking amore particular direction, svheu the woman prevented her by sa} ing— t< Yes, Miss, it is there Mr. Polworth, who lLarried her daughter, lives." " How long has she been married ?" aîked Jacintha. " Why upwards of t svo months, Mi>s," bíúd t '.ie Asoman, drawing closer to lhe coach, and las ing her hand upon the door; " and very greatly, I assure you. Mr. Polworth is a merchant of the /irst coiisc<jtieiice ; and though to he
be sure a little oldish for so young a ladv, his wealth mav avcII make amends for everv thincr. 'Twas a lucky hour for her, when first her mother tliought ot bringing her to town." tí I hope it may prove so," cried Ja¬ cin ilia fervently, yet in voluntarii v in a voice that proved her doubts of its being* so. (i I am sure you would think so, Miss, ifyou saw the st^le in Avhich she lives. Why she has a house and a coach fit for a Princess ; and as to dress, I don't suppose there's a woman of her rank in the kingdom exceeds her in that respect.—Many people blamed her for inavrs ins: il man so much older than herself; but, for my part, I think she shewed her wisdom in doing so." " I hope she did," again inAOİunta- rily said Jacintha; then begging her address,
address, she put a stop to any further conversation by ordering the coachman to drive on. He stopped agreeable to ber direction before a very handsome house ; whilst he was knocking at it, Jacintha looked from the window, and caught at the moment a glimpse of Airs. Greville peeping over a Venetian blind in the parlour. That Mrs. Greville saw and recognized her, Jacintha was convinced, from her immediately retreating; and she greatly feared her being denied to her. Sbe found herself, however, agreeably mistaken ; the servant wbo opened the door, immediately said Mrs. Greville, for whom Jacintha alone enquired, was at home ; and Jacintha accordingly alighting, was ushered through a verv handsome hall, up a flight of stairs richly carpeted, into a superb drawing- room,
room, where all bespoke tlie wealth of the master, and taste of the mistress. Here she sat a full hour before any one made their appearance, during which her thoughts frequently reverted from herself, to the too proba: le conse¬ quences likely to result from an union between beings so totallv dissimilar in ages, dispositions, and pursuits, as she had reason to suppose Gertrude and her husband to be—an union to wliich she concluded, from what she had heard, that vanity on one side, and a foolish and inconsiderate passion on the other, had been the sole inducement. At iength the drawing-room door was thrown open, and Mrs. G revide entered, completely out of mourning, and dress¬ ed in a style not more ridiculous than improper, considering the early hour of • the day. At the first glance, Jacintha saw she had altered her dress, and she now
nosv perceived to Avhat cause it Avas osving she had not before made her ap¬ pearance. Notsvitbranding the ill treatment Jacintha had c\ r er received from her, her affectionate heart involuntarily glosved svith pleasure at tlie sight of a person svhom she had so long knosvn—. so long li)oked up to as her nearest re- latis'e; and svho, by an association of ideas, revived the recollection of many tender and interesting soenes, at once pleasant and mournful to her soul. She started from her chair the moment Mrs. Greville entered, and, ss ith out¬ stretched hands, and a smile of ineffable ^ ssveetness, svas approaching her, Avhen the coldness of Mrs. Greville's look, and her formal curtsev, made her as hastilv retreat as she had advanced, vexed - with herself for having yielded to her reelings. " This
** This is an unexpected pleasure, Miss Jacintha," said Mrs. Grcviile, seat¬ ing herself as she spoke upon a sofa, and motioning to Jacintha to resume her chair; "pray when did you cometo town ?" Jacintha informed her. t( And how did vou hear of my ad- chess ?" Jacintha satisfied her also on this head. " And so you did not hear until this morning of Miss Greville s marriage ?" c c No, Madam, I did not, " replied Jacintha. » " You were vastly surprised, I sup¬ pose, at it ?" ' v vol. iv. h ' " Not
" Not in the least," replied Jacintha; " Ave can only be surprised at svhat is extraordinary, and there certainly was nothing extraordinary in such a mar¬ riage. " " Why no to be sure/* said Mrs. Greville, with rather a mortified look ; " only that I thought, perhaps, as you - knesv Gertrude had not a great fortune, you might have wondered at her being so advantageously settled ;—many peo¬ ple did so, I assure you." <£ I think they should rather haA'e wondered if she had not been advan¬ tageously settled," said Jacintha, with a good-natured smile. *' Certainly Gertrude has attrac¬ tions," cried Mrs. Greville; t% but then fortune is so generally the first consi¬ deration in these days, that people are 6 unavoidably
unavoidably surprised Avhen theyİie&r of disinterested matches. Perhaps yoa don't knosv," she added, fearing that Jacintha, from not expressing any asto¬ nishment at the sudden elevation of Gertrude, svas not fully impressed with an idea of it, tí that Mr. Polworth is one of the first merchants ín the city, and possessed of a princely indepen¬ dence." She then proceeded to gratify her vanity, by giving an account of the settlement, tlie courtship, the marriage, and even the entertainments which were given in consequence of it. From her narrative, notwithstand¬ ing the care she took not to say any thing which could lessen her daughter, Jacintha svas able to collect sufficient to prosee that she svas not mistaken in the motives she had ascribed Gertrude's ? â marriage
marriage to ; and also to make her con¬ jecture it had been greatly opposed by the friends of Mr. Polworth, on ac¬ count of his age, and a daughter he had by a first marriage. As soon as Mrs. Greville had ???- tifiecl her vanity, by fully expatiat¬ ing upon the wealth and- conse¬ quence ofher daughter, she endeavour¬ ed to gratify her curiosity, by enquiring into ?? -ery thing Avhich had befallen Jacintha since they separated ; but par¬ ticularly how she became acquainted Avith the lady in Lancaster— " To whose house," continued she, " I learned from Mrs. Derwent, one dav Mrs. Polworth drove mc to Mort- lakein her phaeton, you Avere gone." Jacintha, who expected this enquiry, betrayed no embarrassment at it, and merely
merely replied to it, by saying time would not permit her to enter into the particulars Mrs. Greville desired to knosv, She then changed the discourse, by asking after the health and Avelfare of all her family, and their old friends at Wyefield, and concluded by requesting to knosv (ina manner which she hoped would give Mrs. Greville no suspicion of having svaited upon her solely for the purpose of making the enquiry) whether she had heard any thing lately of Mr. aud Mrs. Decouicy? « Not ?, indeed," said Mrs. Greville; u the last time I heard any thing about them, svas Avhen 1 called upon Mr. Decourcy*s agent for my annuity, which is at least three months ago. They never desired to keep up any cor¬ respondence s. ith me ; and indeed I am ? 3 now
now glad they did not, for I should have found it vastly inconvenient, I am so constantly engaged amongst the nu- merous friends and connections of Miv and Mrs. Pol worth.— J-propos, I hope they do not mean to break their pro¬ mises to you ; Mrs. Polworth and I have often talked over the dreadful situation you would be in, if they shoukl do so; in that case, we have thought the best thing you could do,, would be to try and procure the situa¬ tion of governess ; which, in a respect¬ able family, is not uncomfortable, I assure you.—You can't conceive what a pleasant life Miss Polworth's governess leads. Should you require any thing of the kind, I think I may venture to pro¬ mise you the recommendation of Mrs, Polworth." (t You and Mrs. Polworth, Madam/' replied Jacintha, with a calmness which defeated
defeatedthe malicious purpose of this speech, by proving her neither ruffled uor mortified by it, * ' are extremely kind in being interested about me. 1 have no doubt of your being still as much inclined as you ever Avere to serve me." " There's often a double meaning in your speeches, Miss· Jacintha," cried Mrs. Greville, Avith a heightened colour, and after a short pause, u which I de-- test—1 like plain speaking." " So do I, my dear Madam," £#id Jacintha, " and plain dealing too. JBufc will you permit me to ask Avhether ryou. intend to return to Wyefield soon £" 4t Soon ;—Avhy 1 don't mean to re¬ turn there at ail—I hate the very name of it. There is no society there fit for any one svho has seen any thing of life —'tis the mo>t stupid------" h 4 Here
Heregi sudden noise outside the door, * something like smothered laughter, in¬ terrupted her ; and the next instant the door was flung open, and a great, tall, - hoidening looking girl entered, or ra¬ ther bounced into the room ; and after rudely staring a minute at Jacintha, without taking any other notice of her, told Mrs. ? reville that breakfast was ready, and the old boy (meaning her father) M'as gone to the 'Change, and Captain Bellamy was just come, in the channingest spirits in the world. „ Mrs. G reville immediately rose, as did Jacintha. The enquiry most interest¬ ing to hei%heart she had delayed till this moment; she now approached Mrs. G re ville, and, in a low voice, begged to know whether she had received any 'intelligence of her friend Mr. Oswald. tt My
. <í ]\íy friend !" repeated Mrs. Gre¬ ville, in an indignant tone, " I request, Miss Jacintha, you may never style him so again* I assure you I shall never, forget or forgive the disdainful manner in which he treated me when about f quitting Wyefield, I remember the time when you would not have honoured me. so far as to call him my friend. But times are altered," added she, glancing round the drawing-room» The insinuation which these words were meant to convey, raised a blush of indignation in the cheeks of Jacintha. ct I shall no longer intrude upon your time, Madam," said she. " Be so good as to present my compliments and con¬ gratulations to Mrs. Poiworth." " Stop, Miss Jacintha,*" cried Mrs* Greville, as Jacintha turned towards the door, " I don't want you to suppose Ά 5 I have
I have any enmity to you ; on the con¬ trary, I am inclined to pay you at¬ tention, and so is Mrs." Polworth, I dare say ; only she is particularly en¬ gaged, I should introduce you to her now ;-~but if you svill leave me your address, Ave will endeavour to find an opportomity of calling on you." Not t^ do this, however, Jacintha had determined previous to seeing her, as she Avell knew, by giving her her address, she should give her an oppor¬ tunity of learning whence she carne^ and many other particulars necessary to conceal ; she therefore, in reply to this speech, said it was uot in her poAver at present to receive any visiters ; and again curtseying, she hurried from the room, not sufficiently quick, how¬ ever, to prevent her hearing Miss Pol¬ worth ask Airs. Greville whether she was «ot the young girl Avhom she had brought up so long out of charity. Aa
a. servant, suddenly coming from a ? par¬ lour, gave her an opportunity, of seeing: Mrs. Polworth.in, a,Aery elegant-morn¬ ing-dress, at breakfast,, with Captain* Bellamy by lier side¿ whose looks evi¬ dently pros'ed· the subject? on whicbhe* was conversing with her.. Thougb*botht of thein glanced^ toward* Jacintha,, neither appeared to perceive her.. With a heavy heart Jacintha re¬ entered the coach, and at a little distance from the house gave the man a direction»· to her lodgings. She saw there Avoulcb be no use in renewing her enquiries foe- some time about Egbert aiul the De- courcys y and tried to heai % r svithi pa¬ tience the idea of being, kept stilb longer in ignorance concerning, them. ? ¡ f ; As the coach, was driving through Cheapside,, it got soï entäsiglecV amidst «ther carriages*, thatr one of the bind* it βί wheel«
wheels was dragged ofR Jacintha re¬ ceived no other injury from the acci¬ dent than that which fright occasioned ; ami by the exertions of the people who collected round it, but more particu¬ larly by the exertions of a gentleman, whose carriage had principally caused the accident, and who immediately' alighted to offer his services, J aci π tha was soon extricated from it, and con-, ducted to a jeweller's shop, on the opposite side of'the street. Here drops ami'Water were administered to'het, and -áhe- *soon „recovered from her fright ' * î t f 1 J * * "'"The gentleman who had been s 1 o assP- dtiou^tø rendering her his' assistance,~ at^ whose manners, 1 -as Weil aà j appear- anc^thuwgh· past > the -prime' of life, were highly prepossessing, still con- tlîtuieiiMtolpayher the utmost attention, İtiâ' ut ! length entreated *to have the pføa&urø'of ^eetting her downjn. whatever part
part of the tosvn she Ava¿ going to. This entreaty Jacintha politely, but po¬ siti vely declined com pis ing with; and, notssithstauding all hiš solie itations; was- quitting the shop, in ordei to pursue her Avay homesvards on foot, svhen the coach¬ man entered to demand his fare, which Jacintha, in the agitation she'was throsvn into, had utterly forgotten. She directly proceeded to satisfy hh demand ; but on putting her hamb into bei* pocket, she found both her putlse and pocket-book Avere gone.—' Her consternation at their loss was so great, that she stood rømte and motion¬ less, till restored to something like re- collection by tlie stranger, Avho still pressed his suit, and seemed bent on trying to ptfes'áil on her to take a seat in his carriage, enquiring Avhether she was ilh * Not
" No, Sir," she replied, with a deejy sigh, and scarcely knowing what she said ; then reflecting that complaint» would be unavailing, and that by be¬ traying her distress, she might perhaps» expose herself to unpleasant treatment,. she calmly took from her pocket a few loose shillings, which she found in it, and paid the coachman his demand* She then left the shop with a 'deter¬ mination of returning immediately to» Mrs. Polworth s house* for the purpose: of acquainting Mrs. Greville wkh what; had happened, and endeavouring to ob¬ tain a supply ftom her for her present emergencies-; which she was almost* confident she would not, on Mr, and Mrs. Decourcy's account, like to re^ fuse her; as Jacintha well knew, though she pretended to make light of their notice,, she would be extremely concerned to displease them t which permitting her to remain in any distress she:
she could free her from, could not fail of doing. Though Jacintha had still a few shil¬ lings remaining, after paying the coach¬ man, she meant to proceed on foot to, Finsbury Square, a» the late accident rendered her fearful of going again through any of the crowded streets in. a carriage. This intention, however, she was obliged to give up> in consequence of being folloAved by the gentleman avIio^ had been so importunate with her to accept a seat in his ; and who noAV be¬ came so troublesome in his assiduities, that, in- order to free herself from them, she suddenly beckoned to a coach, which immediately drawing up to* the pavement, she stepped into it r ere * he Avas svell aware of her intention* On stopping at Mrs. Polworth's, she alighted and knocked at the door her- selil The servant who opened it svas tlie
the same slib had before Seen. In reply to her enquiry, he informed her Mrs. Greville As r as out. Distressed and agitated by this intel¬ ligence, Jacintha Avas considering Avhat she should do, Avhen her eyes accident¬ ally glanced upon one of the parlour- windows, and she perceived Airs. Gre¬ ville again peeping os T er the Venetian blind, svho instantly, hosvescr, shrunk from her observation. ie I have very particular business, Sir," said she, immediately turning to the sers r ant, " svith Airs. Greville; and, if I cannot see her, you Avould oblige me A^ery much by shewing me into a room where I could svrite a fesv lines to her." The man Jiesitated a few minutes ; he then admitted Jacintha into the hall, and conducted her into a small back parlour
parlour, fitted up something like an office. Here he waited till Jacintha had written and - delivered to him a short note for Mrs. Greville, explanatory of the distressing situation she was in at present, and the consequent necessity she was under of borrowing a few pounds from her, till she could receive a remittance from Mr. and Mrs. De¬ courcy. Near an hour elapsed ere he returned ; when he did, he presented a sealed paper to Jacintha, 4 which she eagerly tore open ;—but how great was her mortification on finding it was her own note he had given her Ì f' What is the meaning of this, Sir?" asked she, looking at the servant. " Notlung, Madam, " answered he, "only that what I told you is true:—· Mrs»,
Mrs. Greville is out, and so is my Lady, and all the family." " Where are they gone?" demanded Jacintha ; svho, from the positive man¬ ner in which he spoke,, nosv almost began to doubt the evidence of herosvn eyes. %t I really don't knosv—somewhere to the cou atr,, I believe." u Hosv soon do you expect them back?" tf I really can't tell Avhen they wilt be back, " answered he, somesvhat im- * patiently. " They can only be gone upo» art excursion," said Jacintha ; ** if" I leasee this note, and cajl for an answer in the evening, don't you think it is probable i might get one ?;* " No,
" No, I think no such thing," re¬ plied he, in rather a surly accent. "I am certain there s no use in your either calling or sending here again." From these words Jacintha could no longer doubt Mrs* Greville s being at home, her having read the note, and persisting in being denied, in order to avoid complying with the request it contained ;' neither could she doubt both she and Mrs. Polworth triumph- 4 ed at the idea of the distress her refusing to grant it would occasion. Her heart ssvelled with indignation at their meanness and inhumanity, and tearing the note, she hurried to the hall, forgetting in her resentment the horrors of her situation. Ere she reached the hall-door, however, all these horrors rushed upon her imagination; sheshud^ dered at the idea of being friendless, penniless, iu such a place as London ; and
and pale and trembling, she stopped before the door of the parlour in svhich she had seen Mrs. (ires ille, and still s apposed her to be, irresolute svhether or not she should open it, and, by ex¬ plicitly declaring her sentiments, en¬ deavour to obtain the assistance she required. The servant, hosvever, ef¬ fectually prevented such a measure by getting between her and the door, and telling her there Avas no use in her waiting any longer. Jacintha, Avithout replying, instantly mos-ed onwards, and left the house, almost with a solemn determination never more to have any intercouse Avith Mrs. Greville or her daughter. ft Oh my father, my friend !" she in¬ wardly exclaimed, involuntarily think¬ ing at this moment of the departed Greville, " Iioav differently Avouidst thou have acted !— Dut hadst thou lived, I should
should not have been situated as I now -am-1 should not then has^e needed succour or assistance ; for 1 should not then have been disclaimed, disacknosv- ledged, a solitary svanderer, against Avhom every door seems barred—every heart seems hardened !" Her eyes svere ready to oserflosv from the anguish ofher thoughts ; she tried, however, to struggle against her feel¬ ings, in order to prevent those svho she knesv rejoiced at her distress, ard she doubted not at this very moment Avere Avatching her, being gratified by beholding it. Though she svas İli abletoAvalk in the present agitated state of her mind, she was obliged to discharge the coach, in consequence of having no more change remaining than what exactly settled the coachman's demand for bringing her to Finsbury Square. Exclusive of this circum-
circumstance, however, she would not haA r e re-entered it, as she wished for time to deliberate on the conduct she should pursue, ere she returned home* Vain, however, Avere her deliberations upon this subject ; she could arrange no plan, she could devise no scheme for extricating herself from her present dif¬ ficulties, or even lessening them. The more she reflected upon them, the more frightful and multiplied they became, and her thoughts consequently grew wilder and more disturbed. She knew, both by the manner and con\*ersation of the Avoman Avith Avhom slie lodged, that she* entertained suspi¬ cions of her by no means favourable, which, as has already been mentioned, she did not wonder at, aware that ap¬ pearances AA r ere rather against her ; and much she feared that when those suspi¬ cions were confirmed, Avhich she could scarcelv
scarcely doubt their being, on her pre¬ sent situation being revealed, that tbe most unpleasafnt consequences would ensue. * She could not doubt indeed Mrs. Benson's discrediting all her asser¬ tions ; and from the seslere steps Avhich she boasted of having taken against some former lodgers, svhoin she suspected of an intention of deceiving her, Jacintha could scarcely hope to escape her ven¬ geance. In consequence of this appre¬ hension, she became e\ r erv moment more unsvilling and afraid to face her ; and on reaching Civanim* Cross, Avhich she did not do svithout difliculty and delay, being obliged to stop frequently to en¬ quire her svay thither, she proceeded to St. James's Park, instead of turning to¬ wards Oxford Street, and took possession of t he u rst a acan . seat she sass r . 11ère slie again asked herself svhat she Avas to do, or rather tried to summon sufficient courage to do Avhat svas unavoidable—· *· namely,
namely, to return to her lodgings, from whence Avith agony, almost bordering on distraction, ohe reflected, that eA-en if she escaped the ills she dreaded from Mrs, Benson's resentment, she svould in all probability be turned. Absorbed in misery, she heeded not the attention she attracted ; scarcely a person approached the seat she occu¬ pied, Avithout stopping to gaze upon her, struck by her beauty, the disor¬ der of her dress, but still more the disorder of her looks ; and many con¬ tinued to hosier about her, only pre¬ vented from accosting her by the deep distress which marked her countenance, heightened almost to an expression of Avildness, by the quantity of hair Avhich had fallen from beneath her bonnet, and hung carelessly about it. At length the deep-toned clock of Westminster Abbey striking four, roused her
her from her reverie ; her heart fcunk as the sound vibrated on her ear ; for it seemed a signal to her to return to her dreaded home, and she accordingly rose for the purpose of doing so, certain the longer she continued out, the stronger appearances would be against hor. At this' instant, just as she was quitting her seat, she heard a female voice, at a little distance, cililing to her. She started, and turning eagerly round, perceived a lady and two gentle¬ men hastening towards her. At the first iriance she did not recollect the lady ; but upon her drawing: nearer. Jacintha immediately recognized in her uii early companion and friend, who, in consequence of the severity of her friends, had, three years before, eloped from Wyefield to London ; a step which, from the advantages it was reported to Vol. iv. ι have
have been attended Avith to her, might perhaps, as has been hinted in the be¬ ginning of this book, have set a dan¬ gerous example to Jacintha, whose situation then so nearly resembled that ■she fled from, but for the superior -strength and delicacy of her mind. The striking alteration in the dress of her friend, Avbich was fashionable in the extreme, and Avhom Jacintha had never before seen in any thing better than -a russet gown and uound cap, svas the cause of her not directly recollecting her ; but when «he did, Avhen she found herself affectionately saluted by a person who she had reason to believe regard¬ ed her, and svho she doubted not Avould do all in her power to guard her from the dangers noAV impending over her, the sudden transition from despair to hope, from anguish to joy, Avas almost •too much for her weakened spirits ; and had
liad not tears cometo her rélid, šhe would in all probability have sunk be¬ neath her feelings. Trembling and sobbing, she threAv Jierself upon the seat from Avhence she had just risen, unable for many minutes to do more than fer¬ vently press the hand of her friend, Mrs. Savilie, to her bosom. Mrs. Saville returned her pressure Avith the utmost tenderness, and enquired the cause of her emotions. As soon as Jacintha^could speak, she rose, and still holding the hand of her friend, drew her to a little distance from the seat, and briefly informed her of ¿he distressing situation she Avas then in. " Good Heavens! I don't Avonder, indeed," cried Mrs. Saville, after .atten¬ tively listening to her, " at your being almost mad. You can't conceive hosv I rejoice at having met you at so cri¬ tical a juncture. The pleasure of this ι £ unex-
unexpected meeting is doubly heighten* ( d by its having taken place at such a fime. Be composed, my dear girl ;— thank Heaven, my ability to serve you is not inferior to rny inclination. My house, my purse are both at your com¬ mand, ancl shall continue to be so Avhile you need them/' Another shoss^er of fears fell from the eves of Jacintha at these Avords, and * more forcibly perhaps than any language could haA r e done* expressed the grate¬ ful feelings to which the fulness of her heart AS'ould not permit her f ? gise utterance. " Come, come," cried Airs. Saville, tapping her cheek, " I will have nothing but sunshine noAV. We will directly steer our course homeAvards, where we can talk more freely oyer our adventures at- d misadventures than Ave can possibly do here ; and svhere you shall gİA-e më the
the address of the woman with whom you lodged, and the trades-people from whom you bespoke your things, that I may immediately settle svith them." So saying, she beckoned to the tsvo gentlemen, her companions, svho liad hitherto stood aloof; they diiectly hastened to her, aud Jacintha svas presented to them as her most particular friend. Jacintha umvillinglv raised her tear- ful eyes from the ground to en- counter their's ; and instantly recog¬ nized in one of them the gentleman svho had been so assiduous, or rather so troublesome in the morning; and svhom Mrs. Saville introduced to her as a Mr. Loveit, a relation and intimate friend of her deceased husband's, Mr. Sa¬ vilie. r 3 " From*
" From the occurrences of this dayv I shall certainly be tempted to-Avorship chance," cried Mr. LoAeit. '" Why, what has chance clone to merit your adoration ?" asked Mrs. Saville. " GİA'en me an opportunity of seeing and knowing one of the most lovely objects in the creation." Mrs^ Saville desired an explanation of these Avords, which he accordingly gave, accompanied by looks too ex¬ pressive of admiration not to embarrass Jacintha ; lier confusion was too great not to be perceived, and Mr Loveit; not less well-bred than gallant, checked him¬ self, in order to avoid increasing it. Mrs. Saville lived in Sloane Street On entering her house, Avhich Avas spa¬ cious, and handsomely furnished, she quitted
quitted the gentlemen, and conducted Jacintha.to her dressing-room, Avhere she receİA ed a more particular account of her present situation, and the inci¬ dents that had led to it, than she had received in the Park. She Avas minute indeed in her enquiries ; but as Jacintha imputed them to friendship and solici¬ tude about her, she ansAvered them as unreservedly and explicitly as prudence. Avould permit. Mrs. Saville, in her turn, related what had befallen her since her departure from Wyefield, of Avhich Jacintha had before heard but an imperfect, and con¬ sequently unsatisfactory account. On her arri\ r ai in London, she said,. she fortunately obtained an introduc¬ tion to an old lady, who engaged her as a companion. In her house she met an elderly gentleman of fortune, svho soon became her captive, and made her 1 4 proposals,
proposals, which she did not think it prudent to reject. A year after their marriage he died, leaving her a very handsome independence. She professed herself extremely hap¬ py, and ready to render every service in her posver to her relations in Wye¬ field ; though, from their former con¬ duct to her, they little merited any at¬ tention from her. She also as r osved her determination of not again parting svith her liberty Avithout due consideration^ as she had not enjoyed any great por¬ tion of felicity in the married state. As soon as the curiosity of each was satisfied, Mrs. Saville proposed to Jacintha her accompanying her to Covent Garden Theatre in the even¬ ing, Avhich, with the other winter Theatre, had been opened a few days, and in Avhich, she said, she had places engaged Jacintha
S" i. Jacintha had no other objection tp this proposal (as she thought, like her friend, an amusement of the nature proposed, Avould agreeably unbend her mind, and detach it from painful retrospections) than her dress. This · Avas an objection, however, immediately obviated, by Airs. SaA r ilte's offering to accommodate her from her Avardrobe. Accordingly a Avaiting-maid" Avas sum¬ moned, and Avith her assistance and Mrs. Saville's, Jacintha AA^as elegantly. dressed in a few minutes ; and, Avith her friend, descended to the dining- parlour, Avhere the two gentlemen im¬ patiently expected them. Dinner Avas served in a feAV minutes after their re¬ turn to it, and a lively and pleasant coiwersation took place. That Mr. LoA T eit A\ T as a man of high fashion and great information, both his manner and discourse denoted ; and Captain Merton, ι 5 tlie
the name of the other gentleman, a. young and very handsome man, was searcely less elegant or entertaining. In the society of people she liked, and a friend she regarded, Jacintha once more began to feel herself happy. But though she admired Mn Lovei í*, she svoukbhas^e been much better pleased. had his attentions been less particular,. and his looks less empassioned.' Γη the * « course of the evening, hosvescr, his de¬ claring his almost continual gaze svas owing to the striking likeness she bore a lady whom he had formerly knosvn, in some degree overcame the embarrass¬ ment it excited.. Mrs. Saville eagerly enquired Avho the lady was; " She was, "replied Mr. LoA y eit, "one of the loveliest of———but need I ex¬ patiate
patiate upon her charms, ivhen I tell you Miss GreA'ille is her counterpart ?— Never in my life did I behold so strong, so perfect a resemblance—it extends even to the voice." (C What Avas her name?" asked Mrs· Savilie. Ci Excuse me," said Mr. LoA r eit, "I have very particular reasons for not mentioning it ;—nor is it of any conse¬ quence to know it, as she has long been numbered with the dead." " She made a deep impression upon your memorv, I faiicv,'" said Mrs. Saville. (C A deep one indeed," cried Mr. Loveit, with a sigh; and suddenly rising, he Avalked about the room for several minutes in manifest agitation ; i. 6 then
then resuming his seat, he began to con¬ verse on another subject. Coffee As^as soon after served, and Mrs, Saville ordered her coach, in Avhich the party proceeded to Covent Garden.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI.
«* Hold oif, anu let me run into his arms !** Lee's Alexander.
" Pleasure never comes sincere to man, " But lent by Heav'n upon hard usury ι " And while Jove holds us out the bowl of Joy, " Ere it can reach our lips, 'tis dashM with gall " By some left-handed God." Dryden's Oedipus. Jo Y the time they reached the Theatre, the first act of the play Avas nearly over; the interval between that and the second Avas employed by Jacintha in looking about the house, which she
she had /ïcver befoie been in ; but the moment the curtain again dreAv up, her whole attention Avas directed to the stage. Mr. Loveit procured a seat,by her, and his conversation betsveen the acts heightened the entertainment of the evening. She sasv that Captain Merton was very assiduous to her friend ; but as he had also, like Mr. Los;eit, been introduced to her as a relation and intimate friend of the late Mr. Saville's, she knesv not yet whether* to impute his assiduities to friendship or to love. Towards the conclusion of the play, a little bustle in the next box made her instinctively direct her eyes tosvards it, and she beheld tsvo gentlemen quit¬ ting it, in one of whom, svith emotions which may better be conceived than de¬ scribed, she recognized Egbert. She instantly started from her seat in order to fly after him; this action, together
NOCTURNAL together with the Avildness of look Avhich accompanied it, alarmed Mrs. Saville, who, catching her hand, eagerly enquired what Avas the matter ? " I liaA'e seen him— Γ have seen him l* whispered Jacintha, in almost breathless agitation-, 4i I ha\ y e seen Mr. Ossvaldl He quitted the next box this instant.— Oh do not detain me, for Heaven's sake t or he Avili be gone—we shall miss each other!" Mrs. Saville was proceeding to make some further enquiry, Avhich Jacintha interrupted by forcing her hand from her, and making her Avay, regardless, or rather unconscious of any obstacles, to the box-door. She looked in- vain, however, on gaining the lobby, for Egbert; and, in the agony of dis¬ appointment, she wrung her hands to¬ gether, ancl burst into tears..
!*For
" For tleaven's sake ! my dear girl/* said Mrs. Sasille, who, Avith the gentle¬ men, had hastily folloAved her, "try to compose yourself." "Oh! why did you detain mc?" cried Jacintha; " hejs gone, and per¬ haps I may not be able to find him." " I dare say he has not left the house," said Mrs. Saville; "describe him as Avell as you can, and these gentlemen will go in search of him, I am sure." Jacintha, joyfully catchingat the hope these Avords inspired, did as her friend desired, and the gentlemen depart¬ ed different Avays. Mrs. Saville then draAving Jacintha to a seat, entreated her to endeavour to calm her emotions, which she made her observe had already drasvn the eyes of se\ r eral people upon her; this observation increased Jacin¬ tha's
tha's impatience for the >retu,rø of the gentlemen. Nearly half an hour elapsed ere they came back ; the moment Jacintha per¬ ceived Mr. Loveit, avIio first returned* she started involuntarily from her seat, and hastened to meet him. His words confirmed Avhat his looks had previously announced, namely, that he had been tinsuccessful ? his search ; and Captain Merton, almost at the same instant, de-r 'clared he had been equally unfortunate. Jacintha noAV relapsed into tears aud agonies ; nor could all the eloquence of her friend, or the united efforts of the gentlemen, in any degree tranquillize her, till they suggested to her the pro¬ bability there Avas of her being able to obtain some satisfactory intelligence about Egbert the next day, by having an enquiry niade after him in the most frequented coifee-houses and hotels, which
which enquiry both Mr. Loveit and Captain Merton readily undertook making. Again cheered by revised hope, Jà- eintha soon recovered sufficientlv to be able to enter the carriage. She excused herself, howesrër, from sitting up to supper; for the various occurrences of this eventful day had completely fa¬ tigued her spirits. Mrs. Saville ad¬ mitted her excuse, and attended her te her chamber, where she repeated to her every assurance that had a tendency to calm her mind. In congratulating herself upon the safe return of Egbert, and the prospect there Avas- of their soon meeting, Jacin¬ tha tried to overcome or lessen the re¬ gret occasioned by her disappointment relative to him in the playhouse. It occurred to her that it Avould be an advisable measure to leave her address for
for him at the house of his late friend, the merchant in the city, where she bad no doubt of his calling ; this idea she communicated to Mrs. Saville, the next morning, who approved of it; but said, instead of waiting upon Mt. Arden, she thought it would be better fco write to him. Accordingly, after breakfast, Jacin¬ tha wrote a feAV lines, which she sent by a servant of Mrs. Saville's, requesting Mr. Arden to have the goodness to in¬ form Mr. Oswald, or desire him to be informed, should he chance to call at his house, that a very particular friend wished to see him at such a place (giving Mrs« Saville's direction). Neither Mr. Loveit nor Captain Mer¬ ton made their appearance till tOAvards dinner-time ; neither brought any satis¬ factory intelligence for Jacintha-; and, in proportion as her spirits had been elevated
elevated by hope, they now snnk fron* disappointment. Mrs. Sav y ille perceiv¬ ing her, after dinner, so Aveak and lan¬ guid that she could scarcely sit up, or speak;, proposed^ in hopes the air and exercise might be of service to her, taking her to pass the night at a villa she had, about six miles from tOAvn, upon the banks of the Thames. Jacintha immediately acceded to this proposal, as she saw her friend wished her to do so;, and, besides, thought that change of scene might be of ser¬ vice tq her.. Accordingly the coach Avas t Ordered, and the gentlemen followed . the ladies into it, though bojh had pre¬ viously mentioned their being engaged ; engagements, however, which they de— clared they gave up Avith the utmost pleasure, for to have .the superior plea¬ sure of attending the ladies in their ex¬ cursion,
Mrs.
Mrs. Saville's house Avas built in the cottage style, elegantly fitted up, and delightfully situated ; the grounds Avere extensive, and though it Avas noAV about the middle of October, they still re¬ tained a gteat deal of autumnal beautj^. Jacintha »felt herself benefited by the air and the ride, but still more by the assurances both gentlemen gave her of being still more diligent and general in their enquiries the ensuing day, than tljey had been on this. The ensuing one, however, passed away like the preceding, without bring¬ ing either Egbert, or any information of Egbert to her* The night they came to the villa, Mrs. Saville proposed their remain¬ ing a few days at it, as the Avcather was still delightfully fine, to which proposal Jacintha made no objec¬ tion ;
tion ; but when she found there was no tidings of Egbert, she sincerely re¬ gretted having done so, as she felt she should have been much happier, or ra¬ ther less restless and disturbed in town, where, in wandering about the streets, she would have had a chance of meet¬ ing him, than where she was at pre¬ sent. She hinted this to Mrs. Saville, who either did not, or pretended not to un¬ derstand the hint. Jacintha then spoke more explicitly, upon which Mrs. Saville Teplied, it was totally out of her .power to return to town immediately ; as, upon leaving it, she had given orders to have some alterations made in the principal rooms of her house, which could not be finished in less than a Sew days. " I thought, " said Jacintha, much .surprised, " you left town with an intention
intention of staying but one, night in the country." " Oh yes,"said Mrs. Saville, colour¬ ing highly; and after pausing some minutes, as if to consider for an anssver, " I left it with an intention of staying several nights in the country, and I thought I told you so in the coach.— But, Lord! my dear," continued she, in rather a peevish accent, and without giving Jacintha an opportunity of speak¬ ing, " you really make a monstrous fuss about this young man—much more than he is deserving of, í dare say." " Good HeaAens !" exclaimed Jacin¬¬ tha, * * after svhat I told you concern¬ ing him, can you svender at my strong anxiety about him ?" " Indeed I can, except you are as¬ sured he is equally anxious about you.'* "Then
"Then I am assured he is/* cried Jacintha. " Don't be too certain," said Mrs. Saville ; " men are naturally fickle ; as the old song says—" To one thing constant never»" " I must haA r e convincing proofs of the inconstancy of the man 1 love, ere I can gÍA r e credit to it, " said Jacintha. " Well, supposing he is constant/' cried Mrs. Saville, " svould you really be so imprudent, so foolish as to marry him, except he hid recovered something like an independence ? ' * "I Avould indeed," said Jácintba; " because I should hope by doing so, to ligliten his caros, and to lessen his difficulties. " 4 "I ant
ζζ I am sony to find ? ? ??? notions so romantic," said ]\Irs. Saville; " take my Avoid for it, love Avould never com¬ pensate to you for the pleasures and comforts you must forego, by marrying a man a\ ithout a fortune^—Come, be well advised ; d Umiss the foolish ideas you at present harbour, and make a proper use of your attractions. " " I don't understand you," cried Jacintha. " Accept the advantages they Avould procure you," answered Mrs. Saville. '* At this moment there is if man of * logance, of a f Uuencc, of conséquence, ì n ids to 1 iy hi n self, and ail he possesses, jt a our feet. I am sure vou know who i/ V I mem/' " I simuld he concerned to think you w oi e serious" said Jacintha, "con- ^°?· »v. ? cerned
cerned to think I had inspired a passion Avhich I could not return." <f And A^liy not?" demanded Mrs* Saville. *' Why not!" repeated Jacintha; f< surely it is scarcely necessary to an¬ swer such a question ; but since you have asked it, I must inform 3011 that, was my attachment to Mr. Oswald less fervent than it is, 1 should still be bound to him from honour, since, from the mutual vovvs that passed between us, I consider myself almost as much his Avifc as if the Ceremony that Avould make me so, had already taken place.*' "Vows!" said Mrs. Saville, av ith a deriding laugh, tt you really arc noAV quite the country girl. After plighted voAVs, you will next begin to speak, I suppose, of love tokens.—Ah, my dear Jacintha !
Jacintha ! I see you has -? not forgotten your village education." i( I Avish," cried Jacintha, in a soice half gay, half serious, tt I could say the same of you," « Well," said Mrs. Saville, " let us . nosv adjourn-to the gentlemen;"—this conversation had taken place in her dressing-room, after dinner;— tt I dare say, by this time, they have finished their svine, and tea is ready." They accordingly descended to the parlour, svhere they found they had been expected some time. The hint svhich Mrs. Saville had dropped, or rather gisen of Mr. Loveits attachment, determined Jacintha to be more cool and distant in her conduct to him than she had hitheito been. This coolness and distance, hosvever, did not ? 2 anssver
answer the purpose for svhich they wem intended, namely, of checking his at¬ tentions by shewing her dislike to them ; oil the contrary, the more reserved she grew, the more assiduous aiid empassion¬ ed die became ; and Jacintha thought Avith the utmost uneasiness of con¬ tinuing much longer in a situation Vhich svould subject her to his com¬ pany. But exclusive of any. considera¬ tion about him, or anxiety about Egbert, she began tö feel uneasy at the idea of being for any longer period the guest of Mrs. Saville ; in svhose manner there Avas a certain something, this evening, so like levity, that Jacintha felt both shocked and surprised, and rather in¬ clined to think tliat a total change in lier principles, as sveli as circumstances, had taken place since she left Wyefield. Absorbed in unpleasant reflections, Jacintha sat at a window remote fiom the tea-table, pensively leaning her head upon
upon her hand, and utterly regardless of the lively conversation wliich Avas going forward, and Avhich at first seem¬ ed to render the rest of the party for¬ getful of her. "She had not sat long here, hosvever, before she svas startled by Mr. Loveit, avIio, approaching her, unperceived, said, as he leant over her chair, in the words of Romeo, and in a A T oice svhich well accorded with these words— <f Oh that I wore a glove upon ;:???:???^, *« That I might touch that check.I" Jacintha instantly ι ose, but svas pre¬ vented moving from the windosv by Mr. Loveits catching her hand ; Avho, as he did, declared he envied the per¬ son svho had engrossed her thoughts. " Then I assure you," said Jacintha, -gravely, and trying to disengage her ? 3 hand
hand as she spoke, "the person who engrossed my thoughts is not an object to excite envy, for they were employed about myself. " 4 í They were employed then," said he, w by the same charming object that engrosses mine. " Jacintha, without seeming to notice these Avoids, repeated her efforts to free herself. Ere she had succeeded, Mrs. Saville suddenly started from a sofa, upon %hich she had been coquetting with Captain Merton, aud ran out of the room, calling him after her, under the pretext of deciding a dispute 4 about a picture Ín the adjoining room. Jacintha now insisted on Mr. Loveit's releasing her hand. 1 " Your commands are absolute, " cried he, relinquishing it, yet at the same
-t same time placing himself betsveen her and the door, evidently to oppose her leaving him; " the sentiments svith Avhich you has'e inspired me, are mot less respectful than tender. But must 1 es-er expect to see a'frown upon your t brosv when I address you?—Is í ust the man who feels for you the most ardent passion—svho Avould Avillingly resign his fate, his fortunes into your hands, must he, I say, never hope for any thing like condescension from you—for any re¬ laxation of severity ?"* " I must entreat you, Sir," said Jacintha, " to desist from speaking to me in this manner;—many circum¬ stances render your doing so particu¬ larly disagreeable." She attempted to pass him as shp spoke ; but, seizing her hands, he forced her to hear a still further declaration of his passibn, essaying every art he Avas ? 4 master
master of, to try and render'her pro¬ pitious to it; till at length Jacintha, indignant and provoked, informed him both her heart an¿ hand were engaged, and protested, if he did not immediately suffer her to quit the room, slie would call aloud to some one to compel him to do so. At this threat he released her, and suffered her to leave him. She directly repaired'.to her chamber, highly in¬ censed at his presumption, as she was convinced he knew perfectly well of her engagement to Egbert, prior to her speaking on the subject ; . but still more incensed at the conduct of Mrs. Saville, which had exposed her to it : for it was evident to her she had quitted the room, in order to give him an opportunity of «peaking ia the manner he had done. She resolved on remonstrating with her on the impropriety of such eonduct, and explicitly telling her, if she subjected her
fier to disagreeable treatment m her house, she entirely did away the obli- , gations she had conferred upon her by receiving her into it. She also resolved on not going down to supper; or, if possible to avoid doing so, meeting Mr. Loveit again till she had spoken to her friend in the manner she intended. This latter resolution, however, she relinquished, in Consequence of a mes¬ sage from Mrs. Saville, declaring that if she persisted in refusing to come to «upper (though she pleaded a head-ache as a pretext for this refusal), she would send one of the gentlemen to bring her down ; a threat which, from the hu¬ mour she was in this evening, it was not altogether clear to Jacintha she would not put into execution ; it accord¬ ingly extorted the desired coinjtfiance from her. She remained silent and re¬ served, however, ail the time she was obliged to continue at the table ; nor ? 5 was
Avas her manner less cool ancl distant the next morning at brcakfabt. A considerable time elapsed after breakfast, ere she could obtain an op¬ portunity of speaking in pris r ate to Mrs. Sa Afille ; at length finding she Avas alone in her dressing-room, she repan ed to her from her chamber, Avhere she had been switching for this moment, and found her seated at her toilet, looking oser some ornaments, Avhich she began to collect and put up the instant Jacin¬ tha entered the room, as if umvilling she should see them. She Avas not quick enough in her motions, hosvever, to present Jacintha from accidentally seeing a small picture Avhich lay amongst them, so extremely like Mr. Falkland, that Jacintha's eyes became rivetted to it, and she involuntarily enquired how it had come into her possession. <t What?" demanded Mrs. Saville. " Thb
* c This picture," replied Jacintha, taking it from the table. She turned it as she spoke, and Mr. Falklands initials, in diamonds, at the back, convinced her she svas not mis¬ taken in supposing it had been draAvn for him. " Oh ! this picture," exclaimed Mrs. Saville, eagerly snatching it from Ja¬ cintha, and throAving it into a box, " Avhy it Avas given mc by------by my husband." li Your husband!" repeated Jacintha, in extreme surprise, and fastening her eyes upon Mrs. Saville. ζ( Yes, by my husband," saki Mrs. Saville, colouring violently, and betray¬ ing the greatest confusion ; " the gen¬ tleman, for whom it svas drasvn, Avas a ? ? relation.
relation of his.—Do you knosv any thing of him ?" Jacintha informed her she did ; and added, Avith a still more scrutinizing look— " No doubt you do also.—You visit to be sure at his house, where, I dare say, your old friend, his svife, is happy to pay you every attention. " " No," replied Mrs. Savilîe, " I do not. There ivas a coolness betsveen him and Mr. Saville, as hich presented any intimacy betsveen our families." "A coolness,'* said Jacintha; "it svas odd then Mr. Saville should obtain hb picture."' " Oh! he got it by chance/' anssver- ed Mrs. Saville. " But pray," added she, evidently wishing to change the 4 subject
subject upon which they were conversing, li had you not better prepare yourself to take a ride with me this fine day ?" tt No," said J'icintîm, " I have not spirits to go out. I feel extremely un¬ happy, and you must excuse me for telling you you have added to my un¬ happiness." Mrs. Saville desired her to explain herself. Jacintha accordingly did, and entreated her friend not to subject her again to the disagreeable declarations of Mr. Loveit. *' You really are an enemy to your own happiness—to your own interest," said Mrs. Saville, xi in not permit¬ ting these declarations to have proper weight with you. You are rejecting a man who adores you—a man who would place you in a most desirable situation, for one who does not, 1 am sure, think of
of you in the manner you imagine; and Avho, es'en if he did, could not, hi all probability, from his circumstances, lead you into any thing but distress ; and as the Poet says— *' AVhy should you b« ?? cruel to yourself, *' And to those dainty limbs, which Nature lent ** For gentle usage and soft delicacy, « As to encounter difficulties you may avoid ?'* ft What reason haA'e you for being certain," asked Jacintha, Avho alone at¬ tended to this part of her speech, t * that Mr. Oswald does not think of me in the manner I imagine ?" " A convincing one," replied Mrs. Saville, " I will nosv tell you, since J find you so obstinately bent on sacri¬ ficing for his sake your osvn interest, what I did not before care to tell you, that he left the playhouse ia order to avoid you. ,; "Hosv ?
" Hosv!" cried Jacintha, starting. <c We Avere scarcely seated/' con¬ tinued* Mrs. Savilie, " ere he entered" the adjoining box ; he sasv yon as plainly as I nosv see you. It svas the earnest attention, indeed, Avith which he re¬ garded you, that attracted my notice, and made me Arateli his motions ; and I clearly perceived by liis actions, as -well as the circumstance of his cjiiitting the box when the pky svas drasving to- wardîi a conclusion, that he at once Wbhcd to gratify his curiosity concern¬ ing you, and elude your observation. What I have told you, I solemnly as» sure yon is true." " I don't suppose," replied Jacintha, xecoveringfrom the transient shock sbe had given her, tí that you Avould make any assertion you did not think you had some foundation for. But I am also sure," added she, with a smile, which ípoke
spoke her confidence in Egbert, and the happiness she derived from that con¬ fidence, " that you are mistaken—you fancied he saw me ; but that he did in reality I cannot believe. His acknow r - Iedging it himself, could alone make me believe so—Egbert alone could per¬ suade me of the inconstancy of Egbert. ;i t( A very short time, I fancy/ will prove whether I am mistaken or not," said Mrs. Saville. u I sincerely hope so," cried Jacin¬ tha, with fervour. " Again I assure you," said Mrs. Saville, Ät I am not mistaken. I had ocular demonstration of the truth of what I have asserted ; and I advise you in time to withdraw a confi¬ dence which has been misplaced, and prepare yourself for the disappoint¬ ment which awaits you; for, depend upon
upon it, you will find Me. Oswald is not Avhat you now imagine* There is an old saying, and a true one, " that an opportunity once lost is seldom rè- cos T ered."— Be Avell advised therefore, and neglect not the opportunity at pre¬ sent svithin your ,poAver of securing to } ourself ease, affluence, and independ¬ ence—of guarding yourself from the iuconseniences to which the caprice of your friends might again subject you ; for to their caprice, ihough you will not acknowledge so to me, I can clearly perceive your late distressing situation Avas oAving. By accepting the protec¬ tion of Mr. Loveit, you will secure to yourself all the ad spåntages, the plea¬ sures svhich Fortaue can bestow ; and these too Avithout losing Avhat every Avoman should be anxious to retain—- her liberty." " Her liberty l' repeated Jacintha; u Avhat, at the expence of her honour l 1 . " Honour
" Honour is a term much used, but little understood," said Mrs. Saville. " I cannot think that any one forfeits their honour avIio does not act contrary to their ideas of Avhat is right.". " I must hope that you has r e spoken contrary to your ideas of svhat is right," cried Jucintha ; "did I think other¬ wise—did I think it possible tliat you countenanced dishonourable designs against a person whom you voluntarily promised to serve and protect, I must candidly declare that no fear, no con¬ sideration should deter me from quitting your house immediately. ? " I was only jesting," said Mrs, Saville, with an affected laugh; "the hint'which appears to have shocked you so much, Avas purposely dropped to hear what your scrupulous virtue svould say to it"
"I
* t I cannot consider the virtue scru¬ pulous, " cried Jacintha, somesvhat in¬ dignantly, "svhich Avould shrink Avith abhorrence from the meaning it seemed intended to coiiA r ey.—Jesting on moral and serious subjects, appears so like levity, that every Avoman of delicacy should carefully avoid it ; for it is na¬ tural to suppose Avhen Ave speak lightly, Ave think lightly." *' For my part,*' replied Mrs. Saville, with an air of high disdain, " I am not so prudish as to think there is the least harm in a little jesting.— You are really quite too rigid in your notions, and I must acknowledge I think «' Unseemly shew* m bloon, ig youth <* Such grey severity," " Not rigid, but steady, I flatter xnysehV* said Jacintha, rather warmly ; " but
" but I see," rising as she spoke, u t prevent you from dressing." "Stop," cried Mrs. Saville, "Imay as avcII give you nosv the bill svhich I paid -for you to the trades-people in Oxford Street. It is avcII I settled it immediately, or I could not haA'e done so at all; for I was yesterday called upon to fulfil an engagement, Avhich I entered into, to a very considerable amount, for a friend. I put off the man, however, for a fortnight, by which time I hope to be able to make up the sum." " I am extremely sorry," said Jacin¬ tha, " that you should has T e been put to any inconvenience on my account." u Óh! don't mind it," replied Mrs. Savjlle ; "in the course of a fow days, perhaps, you'U be able to reimburse me. I exactly Avanted svhat I paid for you, to
to make up-the sum which Ava^ de¬ manded from me." Jacintha took the offered bill, and withdrew to her chamber,, distressed and disturbed beyond expression, at the idea of lying under obligations to a per¬ son svho seemed so solicitous to make her feci the full Aveight of them ; but still more distressed and disturbed by the suspicions which began to pervade her mind*, She began to fear she had but escaped one dirìiculty to be involved in another ; and that her present resi¬ dence Avas by no means an eligible or proper one for her. The more she re- * fleeted on the recent coiwersation which had passed between-her and Mrs. Saville, the confusion she had betrayed at the discovery of Falkland's picture, and the vogue and unsatisfactory answers· her friends iii Wyefield always gave to any enquiries that were made after her, not¬ withstanding their assertion of her being
s* being advantageously settled, the more confirmed she became in this idea, and consequently convinced she should lose no time in extricating herself from her power. But Iioav to do so, perplexed and de¬ tracted her. As she sat revolving the conduct she should pursue, a servant, who had been particulaily ordered to attend her, entered the room, and de¬ sired to knosv Avhether she required her assistance to dress for dinner ; adding, if she did, she must either accept it nosv, or be av ithout it, as she Avas going away almost immediately. Jacintha, scarcely knoAving Avhat she said, from the perplexity ofher thoughts, asked her whither she svas going ?—The girl pertly replied, she was going to leave her place, as her mistress had used her extremely ill. ·
" People
i( People in her situation," said she, with a toss of her head, "should be very careful hoAV they behave to their servants ;*for it is not ????? one would like to live Avith them ;—for my part, nothing but being a little embarrassed or so at the time, could ?\ ? ?? have made me think of such a thing ; however, I hope I shan't be thought worse of for living Avith her a feAV months." Jacintha's attention became aAvaken- ed at these words, and she determined not to lose the present opportunity of trying to obtain the information and assistance she required. She accord¬ ingly* rose, and having bolted the door, she turned to the niaid, and entreated her ta explain the meaning of her words ; assuring her of her secrecy, and that it AA'as not from curiosity, but the most important reasons, she desired this explanation·
The
The girl readily complied with her entreaty, rejoiced to have an opportu* nity of gratifying her malice by ex¬ posing "her mistress. She informed Jacintha that she had never been mar¬ ried ; tha« her elopement from Wyefield Avas occasioned not by the severity of her friends^ but. the artificer of an Officer, Avhom she had got acquainted Avith at Chester, and vvho met her in London, Avhere he soon after abandoned her; that shortly after his desertion, she was Introduced, by means not ne¬ cessary to' relate, to the notice of an elderly gentleman, Avhose protection she accepted without hesitation, and into whose favour she so successfully ingra¬ tiated herselfy that he not only permit¬ ted her to tak€ his name, but settled a very handsome independence upon her : îiotsvithstanding svhich, she would often have been involved iri very great difii- : culties, through her A r anity and httfiw rious style of living, but for the large additions
NOCTURNAL VWnv' additions other gentlemen/ but in par* ticuiar Mr. Falkland and Mr. Loveit had made tò her income; both of whom had for some time discarded her,, and were succeeded by Captain Merton. • t " I thought indeed, Misa," continued the girl, " the moment I saw you, that you were ignorant of the circumstances I have related, or you would never have taken up your abode in the nouse of such a person." " I háve indeed been greatly de¬ ceived," isaid Jacintha« " Aye, so ï thought," cried the girl ; " I had more than one reason for think¬ ing so." Jacintha earnestly conjured her not to conceal from her anything in which she was interested ; and, after alîttïe hesita¬ tion, she confessed having overheard a vol. iv. L conversation
conversation between Mrs. Saville and Mr. Loveit, by which slie understood that the former laboured at present, under some pecuniary embarrassments, from which the latter had promised to relieve her, provided she prevailed on Jacintha to accede to his wishes. This information rendered Jacintha more anxious, if possible, than she was before to quit her present abode ; no¬ thing indeed but absolute compulsion, she determined, should detain her in a place where she was so completely in the power of two unprincipled beings. She briefly explained ' her situation to the maid, and promised to recompense her hereafter if she would assist her in leaving Mrs. Saville's house, and pro¬ curing a residence in some other, no matter how private or obscure, so it was reputable, until she could regain the protection of 1?? friends.
5 The
Tlie girl readily promised what she desired ; and it was settled that, as soon as Mrs. Saville went out, which she was preparing to do with the gentlemen, Jacintha should leave the house. Every thing relative to her intended departure being arranged, the maid proposed packing up some clothes for her ; Jacin¬ tha consented to her doing so, and she accordingly made up a large bundle of things, from amongst those which Jacintha had bespoke in Oxford Street, and Mrs. Saville paid for; with this bundle she then left the room, and Jacintha immediately sat down to write a letter, which she designed leaving upon the dressing-table for Mrs, Saville. As a reason for quitting the house, she assigned the conduct of Mr. Loveit, and the encouragement she feared it was likely to receive from her.— She warmly thanked her for her kind¬ ness, and assured her she would take ? U the
the earliest opportunity that oifcred for discharging the pecuniary obligations she had conferred upon her. With a beating heart she saAV her treacherous friend and the two gentle¬ men drive from the house, and Avith a still more agitated heart she obeyed the summons of the maid. The road lay at the rear of the house, and they reached it Avithout meeting anv one. Jacintha Avas sorrv to find her companion had encumbered herself with the bundle she had made up of her clothes,, as she thought it likely to re¬ tai d their speed ; and till she found her¬ self in town, she felt she could not OA'cr- come the apprehensions she entertained, of again falling into the power of Mrs. Saville and Mr. Loveit. In vain the maid endeavoured to obtain a seat in some one of the numerous stages that Avere
were passing, for her; they Avere all full, and she reached Piccadilly com¬ pletely tired. Here, as she understood she had still a considerable distance to go, she avo uld immediately have taken . a coach, but that she had not a shilling to pay for one, and felt unwilling to encroach farther than Avas absolutely necessary upon the kindness of the maid. Slowly and pensively she pursued her Avay, ruminating upon the strange occurrences which had placed her in her present unpleasant situation. At length she accidentally raised her eyes, Avhich had hitherto been bent upon the ground in deep meditation, and to her extreme surprise, on doing so, missed her companion. She eagerly looked on every side for her, but to no purpose ; she then ? walked back part of the way they had come, L Ò looked
looked up all the streets she crossed, and ?? ? ?? ventured to peep into the shops she thought there Avas a likelihood of her having entered, but Avithout seeing Jier ; and, after an hour spent in this manner, she Avas obliged to admit the conviction of her having deserted and deceived her, for the purpose of making herself mistress of the things she car¬ ried. This dreadful conviction nearly over- posvered the faculties of Jacintha, and she leaned for a fesv minutes against the pallisading of a house, unable to mos-e, or even to think hosv she should act in the present emergency. The necessity of immediate exertion then became too obvious not to stimulate her to make it; and (though, after the in¬ humanity she had already experienced in it, her feelings revolted from such a measure) she resoled on proceeding to the
the residence of Mrs. Greville, where she flattered herself, by a representation of the consequences Avhich could scarcely fail of attending ä refusal, she might obtain the succour she required ; and also indulged a faint hope she might receive some intelligence of Egbert, about Avhom, she Avas now convinced no enquiry had ever been made by either of Mrs. Saville's friends. Her exhausted spirits Avere somewhat reA r ived on teaching Finsbury Square by finding Mrs. Greville at home. She sent up her name by a servant, who returned in a fesv minutes, and told her Mrs. Greville Avas so particularly engaged, she could not see her ; nor did she know svhen she svould be at leisure to receive her. Jacintha, in an agony at this mes¬ sage, conjured the servant to inform L 4 Mrs.
Mrs. Greville she had the most urgent business with her—business which couid - not be postponed. The servant, after a little hesitation, complied with her request, and soon returning, ushered her up stairs into a superb dress¬ ing-room, where Mrs. Greville received her. " So, Miss Jacintha," said she, with a cool and disdainful air, as Jacintha entered the room, " pray what is this particular business you have with me r" Jacintha sunk," almost fainting, upon a chair, and begged for a glass of water. Mrs. Greville, without shewing tlie smallest degiee of feeling, though the pallid and agitated looks of Jacintha weie well calculated to excite pity and tenderness, carelessly rung the^bell, and ordered
ordered the servant to bring one. — Jacintha felt a little revived on taking it, and then briefly informed Mrs. Greville ofher present distressing situa¬ tion. " Upon my word, Miss Jacintha," said Mrs. Greville, as soon as she had ceased speaking, " you must excuse me for saying that I think there is something very strange and mysterious in your conduct. I have thoimht so ever since I last saAV you.—It seems to me extremely odd that you should conceal the motives which made you quit Mr. Falk¬ lands ; the manner in which yoa got introduced to the lady, to Avhose house, in Lancashire, you have given me to understand you Avent ; but still, stranger that you should conceal your residence in tOAvn, which you must re¬ collect you refused to tell me. But L 5 don't
?5?, ' NOCTURNAL VÍSIT. don't imagine I wish to discover your, secrets. 1 only hope you may be able to give a satisfactory account of your actions, to those who may be desirous of knowing them. As to interfering in any thing which concerns you, it is to¬ tally out of my posver: in the first place I have no acquaintance amongst people who keep lodging-houses ; and, in the second, if I had, I could not possibly recommend any one to them, svith Avhose pursuits and connections I have latterly been entirely unacquainted*— With money I certainly should not have refused accommodating you, but J really have none by me at present ; and cannot think of encroaching upon the generosity of Mr. Polworth, to which I am already highly indebted, by applying to him for any ; but I cannot believe you are destitute of friends able, as well as ssâlling to serve you. I liasse too great an opinion of your merit to think so.—Excuse me for not devoting more
more óf my time to you át présent; — l I wás about preparing for a party at the moment you camé ; and 1 , indeed, we are now preventing Mrs. Polworth from dressing, as she obligingly left this room, in order to permit me to receive you in it." Had Jacintha been almost certain that death aAvaited her the moment she quitted the inhospitable house she Avas» now in, that certainty Avould scarcely have prevented her from obeying the* dictates of her proud heart by imme¬ diately leaving it. She rose in silence,. and instantly descended to the hall, in a state of mind "bordering on distrac¬ tion, and with an intention of going· directly to Mr. Arden's, whereshe trusted she should hear something of Egbert. Should she be disappointed—but she would not permit her thoughts to dwell upon the possibility of a disappointment L 6 lest
lest an anticipation of the horrors that could scarcely fail of resulting from it, shoukl overpower her little re¬ maining strength. As she was slowly pursuing her way thither, her face nearly shaded by her bonnet, she suddenly started on hear¬ ing some one speaking behind her, whose voice slie thought she knew. She in¬ stantly turned round, and found her ear had not deceived her—it was Wood¬ ville, indeed, whom she beheld, in com¬ pany with another gentleman. In a transport of joy sbe clasped hei- hands together ;—but how impossible to paint her feelings.when, instead of finding the pleasure of this unexpected meeting mutual, she saw Woodville turn from her with a look of contempt, and attempt to pass on without taking any other cotice of her.
"Woodville !"
" Woodville V T exclaimed Jacin¬ tha, Avith wildness in her countenance, ' " Wood Afille," exclaimed she r almost breathless from surprise and con¬ sternation, and laying her trembling hand upon his arm as she spoke, " do you mean to abandon me ?—Gracious Heaven ! do you not know me ?— Am I altered ?" t * I fear so," said Woodville, empha¬ tically. » " Explain yourself," cried Jacintha, u ifyou do not wish to see me drop at your feet." <( This is no place for explanation," replied Woodville, beckoning his com¬ panion to leave him ; " but, if you per¬ mit me to attend you to your residence, I Avili with pleasure give you any ex¬ planation you may desire."
"I
" I know not whether I shall shock you or not," said Jacintha, " by tell¬ ing you I have no residence. At this moment I know not a house to Avhich 1 could repair* Avith any certainty of being admitted into it. " The countenance of Woodville con¬ vinced her she had shocked him by what she had said. He remained silent some minutes, and then asked Jacintha whe¬ ther she svould promise, if he procured her a proper habitation, to reveal the circumstances Avhich had placed her in her present situation, and submit her¬ self to his guidance. "Gracious Heaven! Avhat a doubt does this question imply !" said Jacintlia. " Can you suppose I svould have con¬ cealments?—Can you suppose I has r e any reason for concealments from my friends r"
Woodville
Woodville made no reply ; but bec¬ koning to a coach, one immediately drew up, into which he handed Jacin¬ tha, and following himself, directed it to Southampton Street. Jacintha was scarcely seated ere she eagerly enquired after Egbert, inform¬ ing Woodville of her having seen him.— Woodville evaded answering the en¬ quiry ; and, upon her repeating it, he entreated her to suspend any further interrogatories tiil they had got to the place to which they were going. The coach stopped before a private house belonging to people well known to Woodville, from their having for¬ merly been tenants of his father's. Here he occasionally lodged, and here he was certain Jacintha would receive the attention she required. He stepped into it first, in order to prepare thein for her reception, and then returning, handed
handed her out, and conducted her up stairs to a drasving-room. The mistress of the house followed with refreshments ; and having desired Jacintha to com-~ mand her services if she required them, withdrew. - Jacintha, with a vehemence Avhich spoke her strong anxiety to have them anssvered, now renesved her enquiries about Egbert. " I cannot ansAver your enquiries," said Woodsdile, " till you have related to me the circumstances I am so de¬ sirous of learning.—I haA r e particular reasons for not doing so before. " Hurt and confused by this speech, Jacintha continued silent many minutes. There As^as a something in the manner of Woodville, Avhich both alarmed and surprised her ; for, as she concluded her letter had done aAvay his suspicions, she could
could not account for his present cool¬ ness—a coolness which, in a great de- ■ gree, destroyed the pleasure she would othersvise have derived from being under his protection. " My letter," said she, at length be- - «inning the recital he Avas so anxious to hear, " informed you of my motive for quitting the kingdom." " What letter?" cried Woodville, looking earnestly at her, and in an ac¬ cent expressive of surprise. " The one I Avrote to you from Mortlake," replied Jacintha, " and which Miss Woodville Avas so obliging as to enclose." "At what time did you Avrite it?" demanded he.
Jacintha
Jacintha informed him. >Vood ville repeated her Avords, then resting his head upon his hand, he seemed lost in thought some minutes ; after Avhich he entreated Jacintha to commence her narrative, as if she had not Avritten the letter she alluded to. Jacintha complied with this entreaty, and gave him a circumstantial account of the discovery of her birth, and the various incidents it had led to. Wood¬ ville listened to her Avith the most profound attention, and betrayed ex¬ treme ao'itation durine: her recital.— Scarcely had she concluded it, ere he wildly started from his chair, and strik¬ ing his hand upon his forehead, ut¬ tered some broken and indistinct sen¬ tences, Avhieh increased the alarm his preceding conduct had already given to Jacintha. She
She now conjured him, with the ut¬ most energy of voice and manner, to relieve her anxiety about Egbert· " Jacintha," said he, suddenly turn¬ ing to her, and clasping her hands be¬ tween his, " I must leave you—leave you without entering into any particu¬ lars about Egbert.—You must at pre¬ sent be satisfied with knowing that hé has returned in safety.-^—Do not, I conjure you, attempt to detain me ; a longer continuance with you, may be productive of the most fa------the most unpleasant consequences," cried he, as if suddenly recollecting himself. e ' Oh Wood vi lie ! do not leave me in this state of torturing suspense !" ex¬ claimed Jacintha. " Your words have conjured up the most dreadful appre¬ hensions ;—something, I am sure, has happened to Egbert !"
" Notlung
NOCTUENAL VISIT. tt Nothing, I solemnly assure you, ihas happened to him, " said Woodville ; t; nothing," added he, in rather an in¬ ward voice, "has yet happened, I trust, that—'-But I cannot bç more explicit at present.—In a fesv days—^perhaps a fesv hours, you may see me again.—It is for your osvn sake I noAV hasten from you.—Of this be .assured, I Avili not re¬ turn to you Avithout Egbert.—FareAvel ! —The people of the house will do every thing in their posver to sen r e and oblige you." So saying, he disengaged himself from - her, and darted out of the room. Já¬ cintba attempted to follosv him, svrought almost to distraction by the fears his mysterious Avords excited ; but, in the attempt, her agitated spirits utterly fail¬ ed her, and she sunk fainting upon the floor, where she was found, a fesv mi¬ nutes after his departure, by the svoman of the house; avIio, terrified by her situation*
situation, immediatelv summoned a neighbouring apothecary to her assist¬ ance. By his orders she Avas conveyed to bed the moment she regained her senses, and an opiate Avas administered to her. She asvoke in the morning from the stupefaction, rather than sleep into as hich it had throsvn her, fes'erish and uuiefreshed. But, though so ill she could scarcely move, her strong anxiety to be ready to receive Wood¬ ville the moment he came (and that he Avould come in the course of the day, she hoped and believed), made her rise. The day, hosvever, wore asvay Avithout bringing him, and her disappointment thresv her into agonies almost too great for her to support.
CHAR
CHAP. VII. u Wild hurrying thoughts €C Start evYy way from my distracted soul, v ** To find out Hope, nnd only meet Despair.** Sovth's Fatal Marriage. CONTRARY to the advice of the people about her, after passing a mi¬ serable night, Jacintha rose the next morning, and was supported to a sofa in an adjoining apartment, With un¬ speakable anguish she saw this day, like the preceding one, wearing away with¬ out bringing any tidings of Woodville.
Towards
Towards evening, as the mistress of the house sat by her, vainly endeavour¬ ing to reason her into composure, a ser¬ vant entered the room, aud informed her there was a woman below wanted to speak to her. "Who is she?" eagerly demanded Jacintha, raising her languid head from the arm of the sofa. " She desired me to tell you, Miss," replied the maid, " that she comes from your friend, Mrs. Decourcy. " " From Mrs. Decourcy !" repeated Jacintha, in a joyful accent, " good Heavens ! is it possible ?—Let her come up directly." The maid withdrew, and in a few minutes returned, followed by an elderly woman, a total stranger to Jacintha,
" You
(t You comei from Mrs. Decourcv, you say?" cried Jacintha, rising Λ rom her reclining posture, and looking ear¬ nestly at her. The woman curtsied, and said she did. She had been hired by Mrs. De¬ courcy, she said, to attend her to Por¬ tugal; from Avhich kingdom ^he and Mr. ???????? had returned a fesv days back, and Avere nosv at their seat in Hertfordshire, whither they impatiently expected Jacintha to follosv them. " Expect me to follosv them !" re¬ peated Jacintha, greatly surprised. " Yes, they do indeed, Miss," re^- plied the woman. " I Avas sentón pur¬ pose to bring you down." " Hoav did they discover Avhere I Avas?" asked Jacintha, still more sur¬ prised. "It
iC It would require more time to tell you, Miss," replied the woman, "than I can spare at present ; for I received orders to leave town this evening ; and a chaise is now waiting at the door for me, in which I trust vou will not refuse to accompany me." Jaaintha made no reply : anxious as sbe was to behold her friend, andnleased as she was to hear she was afgani per^ mitted to enjoy her society, she felt an insurmountable reluctance to leaving town in her present state Of suspense and incertitude about Egbert, especially as she every moment expected Wood¬ ville. Her silence, as well as looks, pro¬ claimed this reluctance ; and Mrs. De¬ courcy s supposed attendant began to importune her to accompany her to the country. vol. iv. n "Indeed^
v r ft > Indeed,-Miss/' said she, "I much fear my Lady will deem it unkind if you refuse coming to her." . , ; -r, Jacintha sighed» deeply. " I hope hot—nay, I am sure she avmI not," cried she, " Avhen she hears hosv I am situated.—I ?? ? ??? instant expect a gentleman, svith intelligence of the utmost consequence to me. " " Ifit is Mr. Woodville you expect, Miss," said the woman of the house, avIio, from the increasing illness of Jacintha, asms extremely desirous of getting rid of her, " you'll be disap¬ pointed." " What reason haA-e you for sup¬ posing so ?" asked Jacintha, in a quick voice, and Avith « scrutinizing look. "A
•P
<r A very sufficient one," answered the woman ; " I svill nosv tell ycu svhat I did not care before to mention, lest vou should be still more vexed aud ini- tated than you already svere—that an event has taken plaf e in the fainily of Mr. Wooch'ille, Avhich, I am sure, svill engross him too much for some time, to permit him to think of any thing ?!??. *' Jacintha eagerly enquired what ss-as the event she alluded to. " The marriage of his sister," she replied. " I hope she has not married against his approbation ?" asked Jácintba. " Why I don't rightly know Avhether she has, or not," said the woman· " There certainly is something strange and sudden in the affair, as avcII as. I coukl learn from a servant of Mrs. m 2 Denvents,
t)erwefits, who called here this morn¬ ing, and gave me an account of it." Jacintha, whose own cares never ren¬ dered her regardless of the happiness of her friends, as in selfish tempers is too frequently the case, now proceeded to make some further and more particular enquiries relative to Miss Woodvilles marriage, to which, however, she re¬ ceived no satisfactory answer ; and being at length convinced, from what she heard, that there was no probability of seeing Woodville for many days, and that if her present wretchedness could receive any alleviation, it \v r ould be from the tenderness of Mrs. Decourcy, she no longer hesitated about going to her. In a few minutes she was ready to de¬ part ; and descending to the hall) found a chaise and four waiting at the door, into which she immediately stepped. She left a message for Woodville with the woman of the house, conjuiing him not
not to delay giving her the information -she required. As soon as the chaise drove frøm the door, site again enquired by Avhat means she had been traced to her late residence, and had her curiosity fully satisfied. After receiving the particulars she Avas desirous of learning, ^ she spoke but little to her companion. Her indis¬ position of body and mind every hour increased ; the more she reflected upon. the words of Woodville, the more firmly convinced she was that Egbert Avas in some unpleasant situation, and she almost repented having left town. t By the time they reached Barnet, the evening Avas so far advanced, and she appeared so exhausted, that her com¬ panion proposed their continuing there that night—a proposal to which Jacintha jnado no objection. She wtm not, hosv- u 3 ever,
\
ever, at all better when she rose in the morning to pursue her journey. Absorbed in melancholy reflections, she leaned against the side of the chaise; utterly regardless of external objects ; till', beginning to think they were a very unusual time in going from Barnet to Beech Grove, she looked up, and per¬ ceived they were upon a road utterly unknpwn to her ;—she observed this to her companion, who, after a little he¬ sitation, said the postillion had certain¬ ly "missed his way. This he acknow¬ ledged, on her calling to him, but said he should soon regain the right road. * Jacintha looked in vain, however, for objects familiar to her, and, in the course óf an hour, to her great surprise, percéived they were entering a smalt town. Ere she could well express this surprise, the chaise stopped before an inn, and the postillion alighting, came to
NtfCTütèNAL visit*' io the door, and entreated the ladiei "to pardon his error, confessing he had Gome* much farther out of his way than he had at first imagined, and could hot proceed without changing horses. * * Jacintha's companion chid him for his carelessness, and bade him be as expeditious as possible. In a few mi¬ nutes they again set oif, a^d^acintliau now fiattepea'heráelfín-uverý^hOííttim© s k he should be in the arms of her friend* They travelled mile afíe^r nlílephô^rèvèr» without entering íupon the roatt she bolted fpr;¡ land when-she^aw the day declining, without having reached, or even appearing to be near the end of her journey, she became seriously alarmed, and entreated her companion to make the postillion stop at the first inn they came to, that they might change him for one acquainted with the way they wanted to go.
u 4l·
"He
" He has not gone Avrong," replied the woman. " Not gone Avrong I" repeated Jacin¬ tha; " Avhy he appears going further and further from Beech Grove every minute.' 4 " Certainly," said the woman, "and* in so doing he only obeys his directions^ You are not going «to J5ee<:bGrove." " Nq$ '.going to Beech Grove I" cried Jacintha, svith the /utmost wildness ia her looks, " svhtther then am i going ?^ " To liappmess, if it is not your OAvn, faule.'' Jacintha yielding lo her .feelings, Avithout considering hosv very impro¬ bable it svas that a person, Asdio appear¬ ed so evidently in the plot against her, would give her the assistance she required,
* required, now attempted to let down the front-glass, in order ,to caj) 4 tp the postillion to stop. This §be ???? pre¬ vented doing, however, by Jier com¬ panion, who, rudelv seizing her hands, declared, in a stern voice, if she was not quiet and passive, she would.inevi¬ tably draw upon herself treatment she couifl not at all like. <c Opposition," added she, ct can only be productive of violence ; I ad¬ vise you, therefore, to be resigned to your present situation, particularly as I assure you no efforts you can make will liberate you from it. " Jacintha endeavoured to support her almost fainting spirits, and reason with her companion upon the enormity of her present conduct. She represented to her, in the most forcible language she could use, the consequences that coukl not fail of resulting from a perse¬ li 5 veranee
A-eran cè in ît ; and conjured her to let her retutó from the place from which she harf 'inveigled her, solemnly assuring her if sh<é did, she Avould never mention any thing tSa't could injure her. , í t Her remonstrances, threats, and en- treaties svere alike unavailing ; and in her agony and distraction at finding them so, she at length shrieked aloud, and after a fruitless effort to disengage her hands, sunk senseless agamst the back of the chaise. When she recovered, she found her¬ self in a chamber, supported by the as ornan Avho had travelled witli her, Avhilst another, about the same age, ad¬ ministered restoratives to her. Jacintha concluding she Avas in an inn, and that this person, Avho Avas so busy in trying to recoA'er her, Avas the mistress of it, began to supplicate her interference and assistance. Her supplications svere soon put
Uut a-stop to, however, by the wo¬ man 's coolly telling her she was the particular friend of the person whom she had travelled with, and that the house she was then in, was a private one belonging to her. Jacintha, on hearing this, wildly de·? manded whether they had then reached their destination?—She was answered in the negative, and also informed that they had a long, long journey before them. She felt somewhat revived by this information, as she indulged a hop£ of being. ??? to procure upon the road the succour she required. The women forced her to lay down upon a bed, and take some refreshment. After resting* two hours, they told her she must rise* and recommence her' journey. With augmented terror, she found the woman of the house Mas to accompany them the remainder of the way; she still, however, endeavoured to support her ? 6 spirits^
i
NorjT^&Ai^vmtf* spirits, 'with a hope ôf being afoiètofaákf some successful exertion. \ - Thb hope, howes r ër, the vigilance and precaution of her 'companions de¬ feated ; as hen ever a carriage approached, they drew up the blinds, seldom stop¬ ped, andnever except at poor aiid lonely houses, where ¿the tale they told pre¬ vented any attention from being paid to the supplications which Jacintha sometimes, -in #pite of their threats, ad¬ dressed to the people. She was repre¬ sented as a young person labouring under insanity, .whom her .friends in Scotland were solicitous of having &gain under their osvn immediate care, on r finding t nothing could be done for her in London. Despair at length succeeded to hope, » Onlfinding all her efforts to free herself »from the machinations of Mr. Loveit, whom she .accused of being the contriver of
qf-tî>e-present scheme against Iter, un¬ successful The agitation of her mind increased her fever, and she was often so exhausted, that she could neither speak nor move ; but, notwith¬ standing her alarming situation, her companions persisted in pursuing their journey without intermission ; paying to her illness, hoAvever, in every other respect, every possible attention. , They positively refused letting her,knosv avhither they Avere going, but neither denied nor acknowledged: being employ¬ ed by Mr. Loveit. After being many days and nights upon the road, the chajse stopped one evening before a lonely house, ' sur¬ rounded by a Avild and mountainous country, and Jacintha Avas informed . she had reached the end of her journey· Jacintha sighted deeply, but could not speak ; she felt as if she was dying, and * * nt
in this hour of languor and depression^ she scarcely regretted this feeling.~ Abandoned by her parents ; apprehen¬ sive about the Avelfare of the man she loved, and Avhose destiny, if Avretched, she had rio' means of alleviating; beset on es*ery side with difficulties and dan¬ gers, she thought it svould be a for-, tunate circumstance for her to be taken from a world, in Avhich she had vainly sought' for happiness ;—a world in which, like poor Orlando, she had no¬ thing; and in which, like him, she thought she only filled up a place which might be better supplied when she had made it empty. An elderly man came from the house as soon as the chaise had stopped, and she Avas carried into it more dead than alive. Drops Avere immediately admi¬ nistered to her, and in a fesv minutes she began to revive ; but scarcely had she opened her eyes, ere she closed them again
again with a shuddering sensation of horror and disgust, on seeing Mr. Loveit enter the parlour. He dismissed every person from it, but the woman who had been the im¬ mediate instrument of his treacherv, and then, with the utmost humility, endeavoured to deprecate the just re¬ sentment with which his conduct had inspired Jacintha ; he pleaded the vio¬ lence of his passion as an extenuation of it, aiid'assured her he should consider his fortune as a poor equivalent for her favour. Jacintha at first resolved against speaking to him ; but, upon considera¬ tion, s-he thought it would not be ad¬ visable to lose an opportunity, like the present, of trying to make an appeal to his reason ;'—-curbing, therefore, the in¬ dignation his language excited, she re¬ presented to him how much he had ro fear
íear from her friends, and .how little he had,to hope from Jier ; she therefore ad¬ vised him, as much for .his own sake as her's, no longer to detain her, as her detention,could only be productive of trouble and uneasiness to him ; her heart and hand being both ,so firmly engaged to another, that, even if his addresses were as honourable ,as they .were'the re¬ verse, she )vould reject them. Time often effected f wonders, Mr. Xoveit said» and to time he „trusted his cause. Jacintha, overpowered by the exertion she had made, or rather her disappointment at finding that exertion unavailing, relapsed into β, state of in¬ sensibility, and in ¡this situation was conveyed to a chamber. ??)?? ????? compelled to summon medical aid to her assistance, and serious apprehensions were entertained for her safety.—How Mr. Loveit contrived to get her into his - power, now requires, explanation. Though
Though the accident which befel her in the city, was occasioned by the care¬ lessness of his coactiman, it was not tljtis circumstance, neither humanity, but solely admiration, which induced- him to offer her his assistance. He endeavour¬ ed, though vainly, as has already been mentioned, to commence an a&quaint-* ance with her, and felt not only disap? painted, but mortified a$ the repulsive çolduess with vhich she tre#ted ???> * About two hours after l&ey had parti ed, as he was sanntexi^ through St. t James's Park, ruminating on her idea, and fervently wishing àie might again be tlirown in liis way, he accidentally met Mm. Saville, who, though once a great favourite, wm now entirely^ dis¬ carded by him, as .he was not more un¬ principled than inconstant iri ins dispo¬ sition ; but, though indifferent to him, he was too gatlanf-tp decline conversing with hfcr. to
•In the coursé of 'their conversation,. he mentioned the lovely stranger who now engrossed his thoughts. Whilst describing Iter beauty in the most em¬ passioned language, he was interrupted by a sudden exclamation from Mrs. Saville, occasioned by her surprise at unexpectedly beholding Jacintha. Mr. Loveits eyes followed the diroc- tion^of her s ; and it would be difficult to determine whether joy or astonish¬ ment was . most predominant in his mind at finding his charming unknown was.a 4 particular friend of IMrs. Saville^ for, such ihat Jady declared' lier to be. This, declaration, together with the dis- tress'too evident in the looks of Jacin¬ tha, inspired hinvwith the most sanguine hopes of succeeding in any designs he might' form against her. Mrs. Saville, in consequence of her unbounded extravagance, was at this thne
time involved in A r ery great difficulties· As she Avas hastening to Jacintha, Mr. Loveit caught her by the arm, and draAving her aside, told her he svould biud himself in any maimer she pleased, to free her from these difficulties, pro¬ vided she promised to exert herself in his behalf with her loA r ely friend, and bring her to accede to his wishes. Mrs. Saville readily promised all he desired· Hoav she drew the unsuspecting Jaciri^ tha into his posver, has alreaay been related. it I* Soon convinced that neither her ar¬ guments, iior the eloquence ' of Mn* Loveit, would bé able t¿ make ' áhý fa¬ vourable impression 'upoflT'thVhtind of Jacintha, it was 'ágreed tliát other hléä- sures, such as the law ga\ r e her an op¬ portunity of using, in consequence of the large sum she had paid for Jacintha, should be pursued, in order to try anil force her to act in the manner that svai wished ;
wished ; measures which, in all proba¬ bility, would have driven the unhappy Jacintha to distraction, and which were only prevented by her fortunate escape from the house of Mrs. Saville. Her being able, to effect this escape, was.at once attributed to the as*btance , of the discharge^ maid, after whom an immediate search was accordingly set on fpot n One of the servants, well ac- quainted witlji her haunts, % soon disco* vered, and drew from her every ???????? necessary to he known relative to Jacin¬ tha. Unluckily the house in whjich she sought ftn asylum, after tlie cruel de* ceptioji and treachery she &ad practised, was exactly opposite the ,<>ue to which WoodviUe jhad conveyed Jaxintjja. Informed of her residence, and ofher being at present amongst strangers, which the maid had found means of learning, JVlrs. Saville ajid Mr. Loveit soon con¬ trived
tri ved a scheme for getting her again into their power. On regaining her, a lonely house of Mr. Loveits, in the Highlands of Scotland, which had often before answered the purposes of vice, was appointed for her reception ; —there Mr. Loveit hoped to triumph over that innocence which, had he been endued with the smallest particle of honour or humanity, it ivould have been his pride, iiis glory to have protected.
CHAP.
e
CHAP. VIII. ** Words would but wrong the gratitude I owe }ou ** Should I begin to s pen k j my souls so fu 11, " That I should talk of nothing else all day." Otway's Orphan» JACINTHA continued a week dan¬ gerously ill, and often insensible to sur¬ rounding objects ; at the expiration of this period her disorder took a favour¬ able turn, she regained her perception, and began slowly to recover. With returning health her strength of mind increased ; instead of yielding any longer to despair, which in her, she now began to
lo reflect, would be particularly inex¬ cusable, after the many instances she had received of the goodness and pro¬ tection of Providence, she endeavour¬ ed to support her spirits, in order to be enabled to make such exertions as, in her present situai ion, were neces- sarv. From this situation she saw no other method of freeing herself but by inte¬ resting some person about her in her behalf; she despaired of succeeding with any of the attendants ; after some deliberation, therefore, she resolved on making an application to the physician who attended her, an elderly man, of gentle manners and prepossessing ap¬ pearance ; and whose looks, she thought, seemed expressive of regiet for the errors which, it was natural to suppose, from her being the guest of Mr, Loveit, she had been led into. The
The day after she šat up, she con¬ trived to find an opportunity of writing . a few lines with a pencil, upon the back of a letter wliich she found in her pocket, explanatory of her situation, and conjuring him, as a man of honour and feeling, to rescue her from it. She slipped it into his hand, Avithout being obseiTed, as he sat by her; and re¬ ceived aiook in return, Avhich seemed to say its contents AS4>uld be attended to· She became all impatience and anxiety for the next day ; it came, hosves'ef^ Avithout bringing to Jacintha the com¬ fort she expected. The hour in Asiiich she usually receis^ed a visit from the Doctor, arrived without his making his appearance; and Avheu she at length ventured to express her surprise at not having seen him, she learned he had sent a message early in the morning, to inform her he could not call upon her 5 that
that day ; nor, perhaps, for one or two more, in consequence of his being obliged to go to some distance, upon a case of very great emergency. Jacintha felt rather alarmed by this message; she endeavoured, however, to hope the best, and tried to compose herself by reflecting that a very short time, in all probability, would terminate her suspense. She felt so ill, in conse¬ quence of the agitation she experienced this day, that towards evening she was obliged to lay down. She was just be¬ ginning to obtain the repose she so much needed, when she was startled by some one touching her ' hand. - She started from her pillow, and beheld a young woman standing beside the bed, whom she had never before seen. Jacintha looked wildly at her, and then round the chamber, and found her usual attendants had taken the oppor- voL. iv. n tunity
tunity of her being" asleep to leave ifc. She again turned her enquiring eyes upon the stranger, who, without speak¬ ing, drew a letter from her bosom, and put it into Jacintha's hand ; then with a look which seemed to enjoin her to silence, she hastily quitted the chamber, and gently closed the door after her. Jacintha's heart throbbed with hope and expectation as she eagerly opened the letter, which contained the follow¬ ing lines:—
" I am happy to find I was mistaken with regard to you, and that I have been able to render you the service you require. An honourable lady in the neighbourhood, to whom I applied in your behalf, has promised to protect you, till you ??? restored to the friends from whom you have been so hasely in¬ veigled.—To-night the bearer of this letter
letter (as soon as yon can find a con¬ venient opportunity for quitting your chamber) Avili give you any assistance you may require in getting to your sincere friend and <t AVELL-AVISUER. " Remember the utmost caution is necessary, as I haA r e particular reasons for not svisili ng to appear in the affair."
Jacintha's transports on perusing this thrice Avelcome letter, were too great for description ;" an approaching step, hosvever, made her endeaAOur to mode¬ rate them, lest they should be discover¬ ed, and give rise to suspicions that might defeat the schemes formed for her deliverance. She had but just con¬ cealed the letter Avhen the Avoman, who generally attended her, entered. This woman, nosv that Jacintha ivas begin¬ ning to recover, instead of sitting up n % with
with her, slept in a closet adjoining the chamber. Jacintha, in hopes she svould follosv her example, and thus gis r e her an early opportunity of effecting her escape, pretended to be uncommonly drosvsy this evening, and retired to* rest earlier than usual. According to her expectations, the other did the same. As soon as Jacintha, had reason to think she svas asleep, she left her bed, and dressing herself svith as much expedition as she could use, stole to the chamber-door, to listen Avhether all Avas quiet within the house. After standing several minutes here, Avithout hearing the smallest noise, she ventured to open the door, and advance to the head of the stairs ; but here she stopped, trembling and irresolute Avhe¬ ther she should proceed or retreat. As she leaned, in almost breathless agitation, against the banisters, a light suddenly
suddenly glimmering below, made her look over them, and she sasv the young Avoman avIio Avas to assist her escape, in the hall. Jacinthas courage returned on beholding her, and she immediately descended the stairs. On hearing her approach, the young woman held up her hand to motion her to silence ; and stepping softly to the hall-door, opened it for her. To her* extreme joy, Jacintha found the good Doctor Avithin a fesv paces of it. He threw a plaid os r er her» to protect her from the night air, and hurried her to a chaise in Avaiting at a little distance. As soon as Jacintha's agitation had subsided sufficiently to permit her to speak, she returned her grateful acknosv- ledgments for the services he had ren¬ dered her. In reply, he declared him¬ self truly happy in being instrumental in rescuing her from the dangerous n 3 situation
situation she was in, and placing her ín one where she wonld experience not only protection, but tenderness. He informed her the young woman who had aided her escape, was an under» servant of Mr. Loveits, whom he had prevailed upon to second his intentions by means that are generally successful ; and then proceeded to ask a few ques¬ tions about Jacintha's connections, which she answered in as brief and ex¬ planatory a manner as possible. They travelled expeditiously, and in the course of an hour reached the gate of what, as well as'Jacintha could dis¬ cern by the imperfect light which now prevailed, appeared to be an ancient and extensive edifice. On the stopping of the chaise, the gate was instantly opened, and the Doctor alighting, handed out Jacintha, and led her into a spacious court ; here, beside tho
the old porter who had given them ad¬ mission, . she saAv an elderly woman standing, into whose hand the Doctor put her's, and bade her faresvel. She was then conducted to a remote door in the building ; and after ascending a private staircase, and passing through many passages, she found herself in a magnificent chamber, Avhere an elderly lady, of a gracious and benignant aspect, received and Avelcomed her. She inter¬ rupted Jacintha's fervent acknosvlcdg- ments for her generous kindness, by saying she had but merely performed her duty, iu serving a suffering and innocent fellow-creature. She insisted on her taking some re¬ freshment, and retiring immediately to rest, as she saw she was ready to sink from languor and fatigue. According¬ ly, in a few minutes Jacintha wsô shewn into an interior chamber, where she was assisted to undress hy the N 4 attendant
attendant svho had been her conduc¬ tress to the lady, and where she soon sunk into the repose she needed. When she aAvoke in the morning, she found her standing beside the bed, earnestly regarding her. All that had passed seemed like a dream to Jacintha, and she started Avith wildness from her pillow at beholding a stranger ; a fesv words, hosves'cr, served to recompose her, and rising, she dressed herself, and As>as conducted through the outer cham¬ ber to a dressing-room, where her pro¬ tectress sat, by srhom she svas jreclived with the utmost kindness. The manner in which she had been drasvn into her late perilous situation was nosv particularly enquired into, but not more particularly enquired into than related, Jacintha gave a clear, though uccinct account of the manner in which she became acquainted with Mr. Loveit, and
and the arts he had used to deceive and betray her. The lady appeared violently agitated as she listened to her, and frequently shed tean. Jacintha was greatly surprised at the emotions she betrayed, which seemed to her to be caused by something more than common feeling for the wrongs of a stranger. As soon as her little nar¬ rative was finished, the lady rose, and, in a voice scarcely articulate, told Jacintha she had important reasons for not wish¬ ing to have it known she had taken her under her protection, consequently she could not pay her all that attention, or treat her altogether in the manner slier was certain she merited. Jacintha said every thing that was proper upon the occasion ; and the lady quitted the room, in order to breakfast with her family, leaving Jacintha to the care of her woman.
S Ana
And nosv the cause of her agitation Avas explained. As Jacintha cast her eyes around the room, Avhilbt breakfast Avas preparing for her, they accidentally glanced upon a large portrait, Avhich immediately fixed her attention, from the striking resemblance it bore to Mr. Loveit. Upon observing this to the attendant, she regarded her for some minutes Avith an earnest look, and then said^— " You are not mistaken, young lady, in thinking it like him. it svas diasvii for Mr. Los T eit, as vou call him," ζί As I call him!" cried Jacintha; " Avhat, is not Loveit then his real name ?" The woman shook her head, but made no reply. Jacintha's curiosity uoav be¬ came so otrongly excited, that she could not rest Avithout having it gratified; *^ she
she therefore pressed her question npon the woman, who, after a little hesita¬ tion, said— <c I see no harm in telling you what, by some means or other, you would sooner or later, in all probability, dis¬ cover. Loveit is not the name of the person who has acted so vile a part to¬ wards you ; his real name is Sinclair, and he is husband to the lady who has afforded you her protection." " Good Heavens l' exclaimed Jacin¬ tha, inexpressibly shocked by this in¬ formation ; <; had I known this, I sjiouid not have inveighed so bitterly against him." (i His actions speak so forcibly against him," said the woman, Éí that it mat¬ ters not in w hat terms they are men¬ tioned, lie is a bad character in every n G respect,
respect, and has behaA^ed cruelly to a. most excellent wîfe. Ty <ζ I am concerned to think she feels his conduct so sensibly." " She does indeed," replied the Ash¬ man, " but Avithout resenting it ;—it is her constant study to conceal his enor¬ mities from his friends." " I am surprised the Doctor shòukl think of applying to her in my behalf," said Jacintha, " as he could not be ignorant of the ses r ere svound a husband's baseness gives to a feeling heart. " " True," replied the Avoman ; t( but. the Doctor, though a good man, studies his OAvn interest ; and he avcII knesv that nothing could oblige my Lady more than giving her an opportunity of defeating any villany of her husband's. Should he ever discover she has been instrumental
instrumental in defeating his designs against you, I tremble to think of Avhat he may make her suffer ; for he is vio¬ lent and revengeful in the extreme. It is in order to *avoid incurring his re¬ sentment, as Avell as to prevent his base¬ ness from being knoAvn to his brother, Lord Endermay (his opposite in every respect), that she Avishes to conceal your bcin s: under her care." t{ Lord Endermay !" repeated Jacin¬ tha, Avildly starting from her chair, ci his brother !—Am I then beneath the roof of Lord Endermay ?" <t Yes," said the Avoman, looking aghast, and retreating a fesv paces ; " do you knosv anv thin«* of his Lord- ship ?—or haA r e you any reason to be alarmed at finding yourself beneath his roof?"
" No,
" No," replied Jacintha, recollecting herself, and sinking into her chair almost breathless, from the emotion caused by what she had heard; " no, I knoAv nothing of his Lordship.—I have no reason to be uneasy at finding myself in his house." " You really frightened mc," cried her companion, again approaching the table; " I thought you had heard something." Jacintha, fearful of conA^ersing upon the subject, lest it should lead her to , betray what she Avas so solemnly bound to conceal, checked the enquiries Avhich her heart dictated, and began to ask some questions totally foreign to it. She Avas inattentive, howe\er, to the answers she received ; the sufferings of the unfortunate Lduy Endermay (svhich her OAvn had in some degree banUhed from her mind), thus unexpectedly revived
revived svithin it, engrossed her thoughts almost entirely. She represented to herself the vain expectations which the unhappy woman indulged of regaining her liberty—the anguish she svould suiter Avhen she found they Avere deceit¬ ful. She pictured her in the last agonies- of expiring nature, Avithout a friend to- sooth her—Avithout a sympathetic bo¬ som to repose upon ; groaning beneath misery and disappointment, and ac¬ cusing her (Jacintha) of hashing in¬ creased her sorroAvs, and helped to aug¬ ment a burthen before too grievous. With difficulty Jacmtha forbore Avecp- ing aloud at these mournful suggestions- of her fancy. She sasv, hosvever, she vvas narrowly watched, and she endea¬ voured on that account to controul her emotions. Mrs. Sinclair returned soon after breakfast, composed, but with a dejec¬ tion,
tion, both in her looks and manner, which spoke the soitoavs of her hearts She began to question Jacintha about her connections, with a minuteness' Avbich somewhat surprised her. Her looks Avere expressive of this surprise ; and Mrs. Sinclair, appearing suddenly to recollect herself, apologized for the curiosity she had betrayed, which she declared Avas owing to the striking re¬ semblance Jacintha bore to a lady she had formerly known and tenderly loved. " I should like to knoAv Avho the lady was," said Jacintha, involuntarily, " for this observ ation has been made before. '* wt Ah !" cried Mrs. Sinclair, with quickness, " I know Avho made it ;—it was Mr. Loveit.—Yes, the likeness in» deed must forcibly have struck him ; be yourself a judge of iL"
So
So saying, she took from her bosom a small miniature, and presented it to Jacintha. Jacintha examined it atten¬ tively, Avith a confused idea of having somesvhere seen, independent of her¬ self, a person svhom it resembled.— While she was endeavouring to recai thia person to her recollection, she accident¬ ally turned the picture, and perceis r ed upon the back of it, " E. E." That it Avas drasvn for Lady Endermay, uoav instantly occurred to her ; and a feeling not to be described, and Avhich she could not account for, agitated her soul at finding she so strikingly resem¬ bled this unhappy Avoman. Some strange ideas started in her mind, Avhich she quickly, hosveA^er, endeavoured to banish as the Avild suggestions of a dis¬ tempered imagination. She returned the picture in silence to Mrs. Sinclair, and exerted herself to try and hide the emotions it had caused. It
It was evident to her that Mrs. Sinclair was the friend of Lady Endermay, and consequently ignorant of her destiny ; certain, therefore, from these circum¬ stances, that was it revealed to her, she would take immediate measures to redress the poor sufferer, the se* cret relative to her trembled upon the lips of Jacintha, and was with dif¬ ficulty prevented bursting from them. She was compelled to dwell upon the solemn vow she had taken to preserve it inviolate—upon the miseries she was told she should doom an innocent fel¬ low-creature to by disclosing it, in order to prevent herself from yielding to the impulse of humanity ; and, with a flood of tears, she again resigned the unhappy Lady Endermay to her fate. Those tears, which Mrs. Sinclair im¬ puted to her own sorrows, called forth all her tenderness, and she repeated her
her assurances of protection to Jacintha till she was again safe under that ofher own friends. As soon as Jacintha was composed, she svrote an explanatory letter to Wood¬ viUe, conjuring him, in the most earnest terms, not to delay taking her from her present situation, and relieving her anxiety about Egbert. This letter she enclosed in one to the Avoman from Avhose house she had been inveigled, Avith an entreaty not to let any time be lost in having it delivered to Mr. Woodville. Mrs. Sinclair again spoke of the im¬ portant reasons she had (though Avithout explaining why) for Avishing to conceal Jacintha's being under her care, in con¬ sequence of Avhich she Avas under a ne¬ cessity ef removing her to a remote part of the castle ; as Ît Avould be utterly impossible to conceal her being a resi¬ dent
dent in it, was she to remain in the apartments she then occupied ; on the same account, she added, it would be utterly out of her power to visit her.— She expressed the deepest regret at being . compelled to act in this manner ; and said, at some future time, she hoped she should have an opportunity of endea¬ vouring to remove the prejudice which she feared it might excite in Jacintha's breast against her. Jacintha, acquainted with her motives for this conduct, assured her to the contrary, and that nothing could cancel the obligations she had confei red upon her. Towards the decline of evening, Jacintha was conducted in silence by Agnes, Mrs. Sinclair's woman, to the part of the castle she was to oc¬ cupy. After traversing several spacious, though forlorn galleries, they entered a narrow dark passage, terminating in a heavy door, which Agnes cautiously unlocked
unlocked with a key she brought with her; and beyond which was another passage, similar to the one they had passed through ; this also ended in a door, which opened into a Gothic apart¬ ment, in which w r as a dark closet that served as a bedchamber. A good fire burned in this room, and Jacintha found refreshments provided for her, besides books, paper, ink and pens to amuse her solitude. Though these apartments had not been inhabited for a long while, Agnes assured her she need not fear their being damp, as her mistress and she had con¬ trived to air them well, and had also brought hither a well-aired bed and bed¬ clothes. She mentioned the hours at which she thought she should be able to visit Jacintha in the daytime, and desired her freely to ask for any thing she required. Jacintha
Jacintha requested to knosv svhat she should do if any one Avandered this way. Agnes told her she would take care to guard her from intrusion, by keeping the key of the outer door her¬ self. Thougli Avas it to remain within it, she added, there would be but little danger of her being disturbed,· as fesv of the inhabitants of the castle ever visited this part of it. A small door in a corner of the room attracted Jacintha's attention, and she desired to know whither it led. Agnes informed her to a very ancient tosver, long since consigned to decay. She remained svith her a few minutes, and then bade her good night. Jacin¬ tha listened attentis^ely to her receding steps, and heard her securing the outer door s\ ith'rather an unpleasant sensation at finding herself thus locked up, and 5 remote
remote from the inhabited part of the mansion. This sensation naturally led to reflections upon the strange occur¬ rences Avhich had placed her in her pre¬ sent situation. From her own misfor¬ tunes, by degrees her thoughts re\ r erted to those of Lady Endermay ; and again such mournful images rose in her mind, as made her hastily retire to bed, in hopes of losing them in sleep. Her sleeping thoughts, hoAvever, Avere not happier than her waking ones ; fright¬ ful dreams tormented and harassed her, and she rejoiced when the return of daylight permitted her to rise. Agnes came sooner than she expect* ed, to prepare her breakfast. Her ex¬ treme languor and dejection did not escape her notice, and she eagerly en¬ quired hoAv she had rested. Jacintha replied, "Very badly,"
" Nothing
J' Nothing happened to disturb your rest, I .hope," said Agnes, Avith invo¬ luntary quickness. " Happened," repeated Jacintha, * 6 Avhat could happen?—No, nothing disturbed my rest but my own unhappy thoughts." While at breakfast, she ventured to make some enquiries concerning Lord Endermay and his family, Avhich Agnes answered in a most unsatisfactory antl reluctant manner, and Jacintha accord¬ ingly determined not to repeat them. Agnes staid but a short time with her ; she visited her again in the course of the day Avith her dinner, and then left her to a solitude which Avas more irk¬ some than solitude had ever before been to her, from the anxiety and dejection under which she laboured·
CHAP.
*Ä—-=--S=E-=*=====SÄ-!Ä'
????. IX. " 'Tis night î the season when the happy take " Repose, and only wretches are awake : *' Now-discontented ghosts begin their rounds, «* Haunt ruin'd buildings, ind unwholesome grounds ; * ( Or at the curtains of the restless wait, " To frighten iheih with some sad tale of fate." 'Otwav's Don Carlos Fatigued both in bodv and mind, Jacintha retired early to rest, and soon fell asleep. From this sleep she Avas sud¬ denly startled by a strong light flashing upon her eyesc it vanished, howeA^er, with such quickness, that she was led vot. iv. ? to
to believe it was an illusion of her ima¬ gination ; and after listening for some j minutes, without »hearing any other noise than that of the wind howl¬ ing without the windows, she again yielded to the uncommon drowsiness which oppressed her. The next day passed as the preceding one had done. Agnes merely visited her for the purpose of bringing her meals to her ; and, tortured as she was by incertitude about those she loved, it required the exertion of all the philoso¬ phy she was mistress of, to support with any degree of fortitude her present situation. She endeavoured to divert her thoughts by reading, but too often found it impossible to do so. The third nicht of her confinement she was again startled from an uneasy dumber by a light glaring upon her ¿eyes, which had scarcely awoke her, however,
bowes r er, ere it disappeared ; but, not- Avithstanding the quickness Avith svhich it vanished, Jacintha could not nosv, as she had done befoie, believe herself de- -ceis T ed by her imagination, and she be¬ came alarmed and agitated. Her mind, weakened by illness and sorrosv, could make but little resistance against the influence of terror, and a number of un¬ pleasant ideas started in ît. She mentioned the incident which ínul alarmed her, to Agnes the next morning. Agnes listened to her Avith profound attention, and appeared, for several minutes after she had ceased speaking, lost in thought ; then, as if suddenly recollecting herself, she affect¬ ed to laugh at Avhat she had heard, and told Jacintha she had been dreaming. Jacintha was positive she had not been dreaming at the time she started from her sleep ; but as she knesv an illness like that she was recovering from, often ? 2 rendered
rendered people weak and fanciful, she did not persist in attesting the reality of what she had seen. -But, though again inclined to believe her imagination had deceived her, she became greatly agitated as night ap¬ proached, and could not sleep for a cons'derable time after she went to bed. The night, however, passed away with¬ out any thing happening to disturb her slumbers, and she awoke in the morn¬ ing rather better than she had been the preceding day. She still, however, con ti n ued extrem ely weak and low ; tormented by anxiety about Egbert, and scarcely less tortured by the idea of Lidy Endermay and her sorrows. Her thoughts were more than ever occupied about her this day, and even at night, after she reti: cd to rest, they still continued to dwell upon her. She dreamed several wild and terrific dreams
dreams concerning her, and at length* started from her sleep, under the terri¬ fying idea of having seen her approach the bed, while in a deep and mourn¬ ful A'oice she heard her declare she a\us no longer an inhabitant of this Avorltl, and that her death Avas occasioned by ker (Jacintha's) 'cruel breach of pro¬ mise. It Avas some time before Jácintba couid İn any degree overcome the hor¬ ror thisstlream inspired. As she was en¬ deavouring to reason herself into com¬ posure, and struggle against the super¬ stitious terrors which were ???????* to invade her mind, she thought she heard ? noise in the outer room, as if some person was walking in it. The night was far advanced ; and as Agnes had de¬ clared it was out of her power to vhit her, except in ; the daytime, she could not suppose it was her she heard Her heart began to beat svith unusual ? 3 violence;
violence ; and gently raising herself in the bed, she parted the side curtains with a trembling hand. Ihe noise ceased for a moment ; t it then returned, accompanied by a deep groan. * The closet door stood open, and by the shadowy light which a full moon dif¬ fused through the outer apartment, Jacintha, as she instinctively bent for¬ ward, perceived a tall female figure, ar¬ rayed in white, slowly moving about it, with folded hands and gestures expres¬ sive of deep distress. Upon this figure Jacintha continued to gaze, with feel¬ ings which may easier be conceived than described, till she beheld it sud¬ denly advancing to the closet, and at the same moment heard the name of Lady Endermay pronounced. Her senses instantlv forsook her, and she sunk fainting upon her pillow.— When
í When she recovered, she. svas astonished to behold the glare of daylight in the outer apartment, and Agnes leaning over her, from whom a joyful exclama¬ tion burst, tlie moment she opened her eves. " I really svas nesler so much fright¬ ened before," cried she; " I thought you never would recover. What could possibly haA'e throsvn you into such a situation ?" Jacintha, in a few minutes, became sufficiently composed to tell her. Agnes listened to her now, as she had done before upon a similar occasion, Avith the most profound attention, and again at¬ tempted to persuade her she had seen nothing but what her imagination, still aftectcd by her late illness, had created.
? 4 " No/*
* c No," cried Jacintha, in reply to what she said, " I can no longer doubt the reality of what I saw. *' ? Agnes persisted in ascribing her terror to a fanciful cause; she assured her no living being but herself had access to this part of the castle. li And as to the inhabitants of the other world," added bhe, looking ear¬ nestly at Jacintha, ",1 am sure you have too much good sense to suppose they ever visit this." Jacintha sighed deeply, but made no reply ; she knew not what to think oi¬ to believe; she felt, however, so ter¬ rified at the idea of passing another night in her present chamber, at least by herself« that she conjured Agnes either to have her removed from it, or contrive to stay with her at night. Agnes
Agnes assured her it Avas impossible to do either, as both she and her mis¬ tress were narroAvly Avatched by spies of Mr. Sinclair's, in consequence of his having a suspicion of the manner in which she (Jacintha) had effected her escape, and of her present residence* " A suspicion," added she, " svhich, if confirmed, and it could scarcely fail of being so, if your request in either way b was complied svith, Avould be produc- th*e of the greatest Avretchedness to my. Lady." Jacintha, on hearing this, ceased to urge the request. Agnes assisted her to dress, and continued svith her till *he had breakfasted ; expatiating all the time upon the fancies which melancholy and ????» are »o apt to create, Jacin* tha feit her confinement nosv more irk¬ some than ever ; she endeavoured, however, to support it Avith patience, ο 5 particularly *
particularly as she flattered herself a very short time would terminate it ; for she could not doubt that Wood ville, upon the receipt of her letter, would take immediate stq« to release her from it. Though, by the arguments of Agnes, bhe was again almost persuaded to be¬ lieve her late terror owing to an imagi¬ nary cause, she could not behold the approach of night without dismay and apprehension, nor prevail upon herself to retire to bed till the return of day¬ light. The next night did not find her hy any means more tranquil than she had been oa the preceding one, though that had passed away in quiet ; on the con¬ trary, she was rather more agitate*!, in consequence of having remarked that it was f every second night she was dis¬ turbed. She sat in fearful expectation 3 till
till she heard a distant clock striking twelve; overpowered by fatigue and watching, she was then beginning to t think of retiring to rest, when sud¬ denly she heard a Ioav noise in the gal¬ lery ;—she instantly started from her seat, and, obeying the impulse of terror, * extinguished the light, and shrunk into the closet. In a few minutes she heard the door of the outer apartment opened, and, by the faint light which a glim¬ mering fire afforded, perceived the same tall figure that had before alarmed her, advancing. into it« She sasv it start,. look round the chamT r svith gestures expressive of surprise, and then approach' the closet* Jacintha could no longer controul her feelings; she shrieked aloud, and rushed from her concealment. The figmt surveyed her for an instant in silence ; then uttering a fearful cry, it turned precipitately, and tied from the ? 6* chamber·
chamber. Jacintha, wrought almost to desperation by the ideas it had giA'en birth to, eagerly pursued it into the gallery, supplicating it-to stop, and ex¬ plain the cause of ¡ts mysterious ap¬ pearance. To her supplications, however, she receÏA*ed no answer ; but she still con¬ tinued to go on, though in her pursuit she Avas guided alone by her ear, for the gallery was involved in utter darkness ; when suddenly she heard a deep groan, and something fall like a dead Aveight upon the floor. She instantly stopped, and stood for a moment confounded and dismayed ; recovering then in some degree her presence of mind, she groped lier way hack to her chamber, and re¬ lighting her candle, returned to the gallery, where she behckl the figure ohe had pursued, lying prostrate upon the floor. She stooped doAvn, and drawing back a kind of hood which hung oa t cp the
the head, discovered the features of an elderly woman, who appeared in tho agonies of death. Unable to aid her herself, and fearful she would expire if she did not receive immediate assistance, Jacintha resolved on endeavouring to procure it for her ; she accordingly hastened to the door at the end of the gallery, in which, to her extreme joy, sho found a key that per¬ mitted her to open it ; and, with trem¬ bling steps and a fluttering heart, she pursued her way, as she thought, to¬ wards the chamber of Mrs. Sinclair. After passing through numerous pas¬ sages, she at length reached a door near the entrance of a spacious corridor, which, from this circumstance, she,was so certain of being the one she sought, that she ventured to knock at it.—Upon doing so, she thought she heard a faint voice within desiring her to enter ; not being
being quite certain, however, that this was the case, she repeated her knock, and immediately heard some one ap-' preaching the door. In the next minute it Avas opened ; 'But hosv .jreat Avas her confusion Avhen, instead of beholding Mrs. Sinclair or Agnes, slie beheld a venerable looking man ; who, from the description she had received of him from Agnes, she could not doubt being Lord Endermay. She instantly started back, and retreat¬ ed to the galleiy into which the corridor opened;—here she paused from igno¬ rance of the Avay she should turn, and thU pause enabled Lord Endermay (si ho was indeed the person she saw, and in whom the glimpse he had had of her features excited such emotions, as for a minute suspended his faculties) to os r er- take her. "For
" For Heaven's sake tell me svho you are !" cried he, as he tremblingly grasp¬ ed her arm, svhile his eyes svere fastened upon her svith the most scrutinizing earnestness. Jacintha hesitated to reply, con¬ fused and distressed beyond expression at the idea of any discovery taking place unpleasant to the feelings-of her protec¬ tress, Mrs. Sinclair. Her CA-ident embar¬ rassment, as she deliberated about an an¬ ssver, heightened the curiosity of Lord Endermay, and he repeated his ques¬ tion with still greater earnestness. "I am an unhappy stranger, Sir," replied Jacintha, in a timid accent, on finding it impossible to as-old answering him, " whom Mrs. Sinclair, from mo¬ tives of humanity, has taken under her protection, till 1 can be restored to my friends in England, fiom svhom some distressing
distressing circumstances have separated mc." "'And have you any business Avith? Mrs. Sinclair at thib late hour?" en-*- quired Loi d Endermay. Jacintha replied in the affirmative, and entreated him to have the goodness- to direct her to her chamber, for svhich, she added, she had mistaken his. " There is no use in directing you to itnow," said Lord Endermay; "for Mrs. Sinclair was-indisposed, and Avent early to bed to-night." " Good Heavens!" exclaimed Jacin¬ tha, startin o\ " what sl mil I do, if I cannot see her or Agnes?" " You look alarmed," cried Lord Endermay ; "doydu require the assist¬ ance of cither ?" " Not
" Not for myself;" replied Jacintha ; ? butl ------» " For whom?" eagerly demanded his· Lordship. " I knosv not for Avhom," said Ja¬ cintha. " Gracious Heaven ! svhat mystery is this?" cried Losd Endermay; "explain yourself, I conjure you." Jacintha did so as briefly as possible ; and Lord Endermav, in an agitated voice, called to an attendant, in an ad¬ joining apartment, into whose hand he put the light svhich Jacintha had hitherto held, and desired him to precede them to the part of the castle she had men¬ tioned. Jacintha's distress and confusion, every moment iucrcascd. It svas evident to
to her, from the manner and interroga¬ tories of Lord Endermay, that he Avas* determined to discover the circumstances- which.had placed her under the proteo"" tion of Mrs. Sinclair, and she trembled* to think of the consequences which might result from that determination. On entering the gallery leading to* the apartments she occupied, Lord Endermay dropped her hand, which he* had till then retained, and hastily ap¬ proached her mysterious visiter, who-. still lay in a state of insensibility.— The moment he beheld her face, he ut¬ tered an exclamation expressive of the* greatest surprise,, and from Avhich Jacin¬ tha discovered that the unhappy woman, was a domestic belonging to the castle. The servant, not less astonished than his Lord, resigned the light he carried, into his hand, and raising her in his arms, conveyed, her to the chamber of Jacintha,.
Jacintha, to which she involuntarily led the way. " This then is the room you occupy ?"- said Lord Endermay, glancing round the chamber as he entered it. " Gra¬ cious Heaven I I am all amazement.— What could Mrs. Sinclair's motives be/* added he, looking earnestly at Jacintha, " for lodging you in this remote part of the castle ?" Jacintha affected to be too busy about the senseless object before her, who wa% gently laid upon a couch in the outer apartment, to hear this question. In a> few minutes the unhappy creature began; to shew symptoms of returning life, in consequence of the aid that was admi¬ nistered to her; but scarcely had she opened her eyes, ere she closed them again, with & piercing scream at be¬ holding Jacintha beside her, and relapsed into insensibility.
* * It is you svho alarm her, " said Lord Endermay, addressing himself to Jacin¬ tha. " There is something dark and. -mysterious in this affair, svhich I am de¬ termined to develop." As soon as she be^an to revive aimin.·. Lord Endermay motioned to Jacintha to retire to the closet ; svliich she ac- cordingly did, trembling beneath the emotions svhich were excited by an idea* that had started in her mind, of some great, some interesting discos-ery being about to take place relative to Lady. Endermay. For many minutes after the unhappy woman, whose emotions at beholding her gave rise to this idea r had revived, her reason seemed disordered, and she' uttered the most incoherent expressions ; all, howes-er, tending to criminate her¬ self, and proA r e that she had assisted in Bomo dreadful plot against Lady Endei> may.
Tx\ãy b whose name she conti - ually re¬ peated, declaring she had seen her apparition. Lord "Endermay, whose tremulous voice denoted his emotions, did all. i A ■his power to sooth her, ahd by degrees «he came to herself; but when her per¬ ception returned sufficiently to permit her to notice the situation she was in, -the confusion and terror excited by it, -nearly overwhelmed her reason again, and starting from her seat, she attempt¬ ed to leave the room. " You cannot, you shall not escape •me!" cried Lord Endermay, seizing her arm ; " you have gone too farto recede —you have given me a clue by which your guilt may be discovered.—Enor¬ mous, however, as I am certain it is, from what you have said, I promise you my forgiveness if j ou make a can¬ did confession of it. if not, if you oblige
1 oblige me to take any steps to ascertain. it, be assured the punishment it merits, shall be inflicted on you." - She hesitated for a few minutes, as if irresolute what to do; then dropping011 ber knees, she burst into tears, and pro¬ tested, if she could be ceitain he would not punisti her in the manner she me¬ rited, «he would reveal to him all he desired to know ; glad of an opportu¬ nity of easing her mind of a heavy bur¬ then, which had long oppressed it. Lord Endermay repeated the promise she required; then raising her from the ground, he reseated her, and endeavour¬ ed to calm her perturbations, which would not for some time permit her to enter upon her narrative, or rather con¬ fession—a confession by which Lord Enderniay discovered he had been the dupe of complicated baseness, and that his
his domestic peace had been -destroyed by the machinations of those in svhom 3ie most confided. Ere Av r e touch upon what she reA'cakd, •it is necessary to 4 say something of those whose agent she \iád been.
CHAP.
CHAP. X. "*« Thoughts cannot form themselves in words so horricb *< As can express his guilt/* Bryden's All for Lovt, Å HE Earl of Endermay was scarcely of ace when he succeeded to the titles and estates of his father. He com¬ menced his career in life with eveiy advantage which nature, foitune, and education could bestow, and gave an early promise of being an honour to the race from which he was descended. His father's death was not by any means expected at the time it took place ; and, in
ïn consequence/of its happeningko sud¬ denly, tsvo children, a son and a daugh¬ ter, by a second marriage, Avere left totally unprovided for. All uneasiness, hosvever, on this account Avas removed from their minds, by the promises of the young Earl—promises Avhich he most faithfully kept. * At a* proper age he settled upon his brother (Avhom he, had educated in a manner befitting his birth and expectations) a handsome in¬ dependence ; and introduced him, un¬ der the" most favourable auspices, to the great svorld. To his sister, Lady Jane Sinclair, pru¬ dence made him act less generously, thougli not less kindly, convinced from her appearance, which was* disagreeable in the extreme (being highly deformed in her person, and forbidding in her countenance), that no man but a ne¬ cessitous one could ever think pf mar¬ rying her ; he resolved to, prevent the vol. iv. ρ unhap-
-unhappiness so likely to result from her changing her state, by never giving her a fortune sufficient to tempt any man to ask lier to do so, or enable her to quit Endermay Castle, Avhich he deem¬ ed the most eligible residence for her. This conduct, which disappointed the matrimonial hopes of Lady Jane (hopes which were extremely sanguine, as she was vain enough to imagine herself ca¬ pable of inspiring both love and admi¬ ration), made her conceive an implaca¬ ble hatred against him, which she had sufficient cunning and policy, however, to conceal ; and the Earl gave her cre¬ dit for Avhat in reality she had ????? possessed—sisterly affection and good¬ nature, But much as she detested the Earl, Sinclair detested him still more ;— though his expectations had been more than answered by him, he liad early been
???? taught to envy and hate him by a selfish and designing mother, Avho detested the Earl lierself, because he stood in the Avay of her son, and pre¬ vented his attaining 'the honours she Avas ambitious of seeing him 'in posses¬ sion of. Like his sister, however, Sin¬ clair A'ciled his real sentiments, and acted in such a manner, as to make the Earl believe he sincerely regarded him. The Earl married soon after the de¬ cease of his father ; Avhose example he imitated in making Endermay Castle (the ancient seat of his ancestors, and the place of his nativity) his principal ■residence. In the course of time his brother also married a very amiable lady, of small fortune, but great expectations ^—these expectations, hosvever, Avere disappoint¬ ed, and Mr. Sinclair Avas too much irri¬ tated by their failure, to affect any i* íž " longer,
longer, except in public, a regard for his Lady, to whom they had been his sole inducement for uniting himself. He carefully, however, endeavoured to conceal the neglect and cruelty Avith which he treated her, from all/ but in particular from his brother; Avho, he knew, abhorred any thing like inhuma¬ nity or immorality, and Avhose favour, from selfish motives, he s\ r as anxious to retain. . Mrs. Sinclair Aras scarcely less de¬ sirous to conceal his detects than he was himself; she loved him too tenderly to think of exposing him to the censure of the world, and thought besides, if any thing could touch his heart, it would be gentleness and forbearance on her part. He was too unprincipled, however, to permit her mildness, or un¬ complaining submission to his will, to have any effect upon him, and con* tinued
tinued to persevere in conduct not more degrading to himself, than injurious to her.- At the particular request of his bro¬ ther, he continued after bis marriage to consider Endermay Castle, as he had done before it, his home, svheneA'er he as as in Scotland. In Scotland, hosv¬ ever, he contrived to pass but little time ; his having a seat in the House of Commons gaA^eJiim a plausible pre* text for being almost constantly m England ; and the delicate state of Mr»* Sinclair's health gave him a pretext equally plausible for leaving her behind him. But though Lord Endermay was his opposite in es r ery respect, though a self- approving conscience and the real esteem of the world -was his, he Avas still dis¬ contented and unhappy, in consequence of his ardent Avishes for a family being ρ .3 disap-
t disappointed—a disappointment which opened the most flattering prospects to his brother, but so materially affected the health and temper of his Lady, that the latter part of her life Avas a burthen to her. At the time she died, Lord Endcr^ may Avas upwards of fifty ; but, from the regular and temperate life he had always led, he appeared much younger. The alteration in her temper had lat¬ terly rendered him very unhappy ; his regret for her loss svas consequently not very ^joignant. Ere long he completely overcame it, and. recalled that gaiety and cheerfulness to the Castle, in Avhich he delighted, but Avhich her spleen and ill-humour had banished from it. Amongst his constant visiters ivas a gentleman of the name of Naïni, svho, a fesv months preceding tht death of lady Endermay, had taken up his residence
i residence in the neighbourhood of Endermay Castle. He had an only daughter, at this period about nineteen, remarkably handsome, lively, and ac¬ complished. The Earl soon began to experience tenderer feelings for her than admiration alone could haA*e inspired ; he cudeavoured, hosvever, to conquer a passion svhich, from the disparity of their ages, he could not flatter himself Avould ever meet svith encouragement. Her father, hosvever, avIio perceived it, notAvithstanding all his efforts to con¬ ceal it, took such pains to convince him to the contrary, that he at length- made proposals for the lovely Eglantine, whicfi were unhesitatingly accepted, and their marriage Avas soon after cele¬ brated svith much pomp and splendour. This marriage, Avhich threatened to. annihilate all his iht tering expectations was a dreadful blosv to Sinclair. The apprehensions it gave rise to svere soon v 4 con-
confirmed-—Eglantine .became in that u situation in which ladies wish to be who love their Lords, " and with difficulty coukl he conceal the anguish occasion« ed by disappointed avarice and am¬ bition. His ouly satisfaction was now derived fiom the visible inquietude un¬ der which his brother laboured ; who, ' thougli he beheld a prospect of having one of his most ardent wishes gratified, and was united to a woman he adoicd, still felt himself unhappy, in conse¬ quence of an idea, too strong to be overcome, which he entertained, of Eglantine's having married him more from interested motives than from af¬ fection. Ibis idea, which the wily Sinclair dis¬ covered, he did all in his power to strengthen, though without appearing to do so ; and his efforts were seconded by his áster, whom he had attached to his interest (knowing her cunning might at
at times be serviceable to him) by so¬ lemn promises of providing amply for her, if he ever succeeded to his brothers possessions. As he svas returning, one summers evening about twilight, through Ender¬ may Park, from a secret visit he had been paying, he thought he heard Lady Endermay's A'pice in an arbour at a little distance from him. Surprised at this circumstance, as he understood just before he left the Castle, that she Avas taken ill, and obliged to v& tire to her chamber, he stepped lightly to the side of the arbour, and, Avithout being discovered himself, beheld her parting from a very elegant young man, Avhose hand she held between her's, and whom she faithfully promised to meet at the same hour the next evening. That this was a favoured lover, Sin¬ clair could not doubt; from associatinr ν 5 with
with the Avorst of the female sex, he- had conceived a bad opinion of the whole* and, Uke Lord Endermay him¬ self, had always been inclined, to'believe the heart of Eglantine had not accom¬ panied her hand. His transports at the discovery he had made Avere too great fox description^ as he trusted by it to be en¬ abled toeffectalastingseparation betsveen the EaiTand the Countess ; svell-knosv- ing, from the disposition of the former, ** That, should he piove her haggard, ** Tho* tbat her Jesse's were his dear heart-st» İr.gs, *' He'd wbîstïe her off, and let her down the wiaJ ·« To prey at Fortune,** And, could this be done, could he part them, there Avas still a chance of his at¬ taining the dignities lie had so long coveted, and expected to possess. He Avas not long in settung tlie measures he should pursue ; and, hastening to the Castle, he wrote an anonymous letter to Lord Endermay, in which he fully expatiated
expatiated on the perfidy of bis Lady, and Avhich he contrived to leave in a place Avhere he could not avoid seeing it. Tliis letter produced the desired effect. Fired svith indignation and jealousy (for the admission of svhich his mind, as has already been mentioned, svas previously prepared), Lord Endermay could with difficulty practise the caution and for¬ bearance to svhich he was strictly en¬ joined, lest any premature accusation should put his faithless Avife upon her guard, and prevent his obtaining such- proofs of her guilt as Avould be necessary in order to do himself justice. At the hour appointed for her detec¬ tion, he repaired alone and armed to the arbour, Avhich Avas in a remote part of the park ; there, with feelings which no language could express, he beheld Lady Enderniay, her Avhom his soul adored^ even în this moment svhen he ρ 6 deemed
deemed her so unsvorthy of his tender* ness, leaning on the bosom of her sup* posed lover. This sight caused such emotions as* maddened his brain; contrary to his first intentions of demanding satisfac¬ tion in an honourable manner, he rush¬ ed into the arbour, and svhile with one hand he tore Lady Endermay from the grasp of his fancied rival, with the other he aimed a poniard at his heart. His trembling hand, however, missed its dreadful aim, and but slightly Avounded the young stranger in the arm ; who in¬ stantly starting from the ground, on which he had been kneeling at the feet of Lady Endermay, and on which she hatl dropped to all appearance lifeless, turned upon his defence, and endea¬ voured to disarm Lord Endermay ; con¬ juring him at the same time to grant him a fesv minutes' attention, and he would
would do away* the suspicions he saw be entertained. His supplications, hosv¬ ever, Avere unavailing, „nor Avere his efforts to Avrest the poniard from Lord Endermay, Avho again aimed it at him, more successful. In struggling with him, Lord Ender- may's foot chanced to slip, and he fell to the ground ; in his fail the danger¬ ous weapon he held pierced his bosom, and caused such an effusion of blood as made the stranger fear he was ma¬ terially injured. Kegardless of any pain he suffered himself, he directly hasten¬ ed towards the Castle, to procure for him the assistance he required; but the alarm had already been given there by an emissary of Mr· Sinclair's, who, in pursuance of his orders, had watched the motions of Lord Endermay ; and, ere the stranger had got half way to it, he was met by Sinclair and a number of
øf the domestics, two of whom, by the command of Sinclair, directly seized And conveyed him as a prisoner to the Castle, whither Lord and Lady Ender¬ may were both taken, in a state of in¬ sensibility. Sinclair's heart throbbed with hope and exultation at the situation of his brother ; he wore, however, such a sem¬ blance of grief, and paid him such ten¬ der attention, that he completely de¬ ceived all but his own immediate con¬ fidants, into a belief of his sincerely feeling for him, But, notwithstanding all lib hypocrisy, he could scarcely dis¬ guise the mortification he felt when, contrary to his expectations, the sur¬ geon, summoned to the assistance of Lord Endermay, declared lib wound not mortal. He tried, however, to endure his disappointment with some degree of patience, by flattering himself that the wound
wound Lady Endermay "s conduct had' given to his heart, would prove so. From the chamber of his brother, lie proceeded to the room in Avhich the stranger Avas confined, to Avhose wound, from motives wliich may easily be con¬ jectured, he had inhumanly ordered no attention to be paid. But how was lie shocked, hosv was he surprised Avhen, instead of a full confession of his guilt, Avhich he hoped to have extorted from him, he heard he was the, natural son of Mr. Nairn, avIio, in consequence of various indiscretions he had been led into by the natural thoughtlessness of youth, and a temper too impetuous» bad abandoned him entirely for some time past. Reduced to extreme distress by this conduct, he at length resolved on applying to his sister, Lady Ender¬ may, to intercede with his father for him*
lot
For the purpose of making this ap¬ plication, he came in private to the neighbourhood of Endermay Castle, where, not without difficulty, he found means of soliciting his sister to see him ; a solicitation which she granted Avith¬ out any reluctance, but what originated from a fear of their interviesv being dis¬ covered by her Lord, svho Avas so strongly prejudiced against him in consequence of the representations of his father, that she knesv he would be displeased if he found she held any intercourse svith him. As they could not in one interviesv entirely arrange the measures they deem¬ ed ^necessary to be taken to obtain hb father's forgiveness for him, it was set¬ tled that they should meet again ;—they accordingly did so, as has been already mentioned, and were unfortunately surprised by Lord Endermay.
The
The second dosvnfal of Iris revived hopes and expectations was mote than Sinclair could bear ; and after some de¬ liberation, he.contrired, in concert sviih his sister, a scheme not more «laring than atrocious, to prevent the innocence of Lady Endermay from being clear» ed— a scheme which the dangerous ill¬ ness of Lord Endermay, who was utterly insensible to surrounding objects, and the absence of Mrs. Sinclair from the Castle, , whom he had purposely sent from it on a visit to a relation, gave him but too favourable an opportunity of accomplishing* In pursuance of it, the unfortunate brother of Lady Endermay was forcibly conveyed, the second night of his con¬ finement, to an uninhabited part of the Castle, from whence there was no possi¬ bility of his making his escape ; here Si ? ? lai ? determined he should pass the remainder of his life, convinced he eouhi
could not be in a place more secure, of less liable to inspection. The next night, the two men who had dragged him to his solitary abode (Mr. Sinclair's valet, and the husband of Lady Jane's woman), entered the cham¬ ber of his sister, to Avhich no one but Lady Jane and her attendant had access, and muffling her up so as to stifle her cries, and prevent any resistance, bore her to a carriage at some distance from the Castle, which conveyed her to a distant part of the coast, where a ship, hired expressly for the occasion, lay ready to take her to France, where Sinclair had a relation (the Abbess of the Convent in which Jacintha sought shelter) to whose care he knew he might with safety entrust her. A letter was left upon her dressing- table, addressed to Lord Endermay, in which she informed him that, unable 4 any
any longer to support the fetters which an arbitrary rather had imposed upon her, she had lied for ever f ofi him with the man whom her heart adored, and to whom her child owed its bein«\ This letter was the work of Lady Jaue's head and hand, and so nice aa imitation of the writing of Lady Ender¬ may, that the quickest eye could scarcely have discerned the deception* Lord Endermay slowly recovered from the effects of his wound, but never from the shock occasioned by the sup¬ posed peifidy of Lady Endermay. At first he bitterly regretted her elopement* as it disappointed the revenge he medi¬ tated taking; by degrees, however, his resentment softened, and instead of re¬ gretting, he then rejoiced at her not having given him an opportunity oS gratifying that revenge.
Her
Her father, like him, the dupe of complicated artifice, died of a broken heart on her account, solemnly protest¬ ing to his last moment, that she svrong- ed him in accusing him of ever bavin«: exercised unjust authority over her; as, had he not believed her affections Avere entirely disengaged from any other ob¬ ject at the time Lord Endermay pro¬ posed for her, instead of persuading, he Avould not have permitted her to ac¬ cept his hand. " The task of attending the unhappy brother of your Lady," said Barbara, (Lady Jane's woman, pursuing her nar¬ rative, which excited in the bosom of Lord Endermay blended emotions of grief, horror, rage, and indignation, ( gi devolved upon me—and a most un¬ pleasant dne it was ; as, exclusive of the constant apprehensions I was under of having my nocturnal visite discovered (for, exceptat night, I never dared
dared to venture to him) I could not avoid feeling a thousand superstitious terrors, as í tras'ersed the lonely pas¬ sages leading: to the tosver in which he was confined." "What tower?" eagerly demanded Lord Endermay. " The east tosver, my Lord, to Avhich that door, " pointing to the one which had attracted the attention of Jacintha, and excited her enquiries^the first night she entered the chamber, " leads.— Through a svicket in the door of his chamber, L conveyed to him hîs^provİ- bions, and whatever other necessaries he required. His reproaches, his com¬ plaints were so ^dreadful to me, as were the apprehensions I have already men¬ tioned, that nothing but the great re¬ wards I received for my services, and the still greater I Avas promised, if Mr. Sinclair ever succeeded to your titles and
and estates, could have induced mc to perscA T ere in my attendance upon him. Latterly my mind has been more than es-er disturbed by tl?e declining state of his health, which made me tremble AvheneA-er I Avent to him, lest I should find him a corpse. Bitterly I nosv be¬ gan to regret the part I had acted, and felt such horrors as only those who have a guilty conscience can conceive. These horrors svere not a little augment¬ ed by strange and mysterious noises, which, for some nights past, I thought I heard avi thin this chamber.—Oh ! my Lord, do not imagine I rave svhen I tell you that this night—this very night I sasv the apparition of your Lady !" " Conscience makes cosvards of us all," said Lord Endermay, in a solemn voice, " and raises phantoms to affright us.—But tell me," added he, grasping her arm, and svith wildness in his lo^k, " tell meof my child ¡" " All
" All that I know concerning her I ■will tell you indeed, my Lord," cried Barbara, frightened by the wildness^of his looks. "The wife of Mr. Sinclair's valet, a woman whose art and little feel¬ ing rendered her well qualified for the trust reposed in her, was the person ap¬ pointed to deliver Lady Endermay into the hands of the Abbess. On board the ship your poor Lady was taken ill, in consequence of the terror she suifered, and delivered of a daughter, ^ ho, not¬ withstanding her premature birth, was a lovely infant." " And this infant—this precious child," cried Lord Ehidcrmay, starting from his chair, and traversing the room with disordered steps, " I shall never behold !—Oh wretches !—Oh barba¬ rians !" " Hope the best, my Lord," said Barbara, tremblingly; " Providence, which,
which, by such wonderful means, has brought about the vindication of your Lady's innocence, may have presented your child, to be the comfort of your latter days, and recompense you for all your troubles." " Proceed!" cried Lord Endermav, reseating himself. " There was à sailor s wife on board the ship, Avith an infant at her breast, and it occurred to Mrs. M 'Neil that she could not find a better person than this Avoman to give the child to (svith whom slie was vested with full power to do what she pleased), nor a better opportunity of disposing of it than the present. She accordingly sounded the woman, and finding her ready to accede to the proposal she was about making her, she informed her the child was the offspring of guilt and indiscretion, whose connections, in consequence of its 4 illegitimate
illegitimate biitb, being determined never to acknoAvledge it, had lodged five bundled guineas in her hands, to be given to any person who would .take charge of it, and bring it up as their own. This the Avoman did not hesitate promising, and to her it was consigned." " And has she never been heard of since ?" demanded Lord Endemias', again starting from his chair, and almost bieathless svith agitation. " Never, my Lord ; there has been no enquiiy made after her." " Oh cruelty unexampled !" cried Lord Endermay, clasping his hands in agony together, " Do not despair, my Lord," said Barbara ; " you may yet be able to dis¬ cover her. " vol. iv. q " How
" Hoav is it possible to do so?" said Lord Endermay, " svithout having any clue by which she may be traced ?" " Though Mrs. M 'Neil Avoùld not acknoAvledge so to me, I am convinced she knows the name of the svornan to whom she gas r e her," replied Barbara, f( and many other particulars necessary tO be knosvn, and Avhich, I dare say youll be able to extort from her ;—but es'en should you not, you should not despair, as she acquainted me Avith a t circumstance svhich, I think, may bring about the discovery you desire." " What circumstance?" eagerly de¬ manded Lord Enderniay. "She told me that the child was marked, in a very remarkable manner, a little above her left elbosv with a cherry. This mark may------" Here
Here she was interrupted by Jacintha, who rushing from her concealment, fell panting upon the bosom of Lord Ender¬ may. Barbara uttered a piercing shriek the moment she beheld her, and again. fainted away. <c Gracious Heaven!" exclaimed Lord Endermay, trembling beneath his lovely burthen, " what is the cause of this emotion ?" Jacintlia started from him, and baring her left arm, laid her hand expressively upon it. " Oh*Heavens!" cried Lord Ender¬ may, " what do I behold ?—Do I see aright ?—Do I behold the mark said to be impressed upon the arm of roy child ? *—This mark—the likeness too so great *—Oh yes, you are her I—you are the daughter of my Eglantine—my long* lost child l' q ä "Oh!
"Oh! could I hope so," said Jacin¬ tha, with uplifted hands, as he strained her to his breast ; " but I fear-™ I fear to indulge such a hope—convinced, as I am, that icould less bear the disappoint¬ ment of it than of any other." " You are then ignorant of your parents ?" exclaimed Lord Endermay ; " Oh this circumstance," continued he, not permitting her to interrupt him, " confirms the assurance which the others have already given mc, of your being mine." "My Lord," replied Jacintha, "I will, ifyou please, reveal to you my history, uhHi, though short, has been a strang* eventful one» You Avili then be betiiT able to judge, than at present, whether the idea which now agitates us both, is weil or ill-founded/' Lord
Lord Endermay, leaA'ing his valet with the still insensible Barbara, con¬ ducted Jacintha toa dressing-room ad¬ joining his chamber ; where, as briefly, as possible, she gave him the particulars she had promised. Thougli his heart sunk svhen he heard of her being born in Ireland; yet still her striking like¬ ness to Lady Endermay, and the mark upon her arm, kept hope from utterly expiring svithin it. The moment she had finished her nar¬ rative, unable to endure a much longer continuance of his present torturing anxiety and suspense, Lord Endermay hastened from her, though daylight was but just beginning to dawn, to call a servant, by whom he sent a message to his Chaplain, desiring to see him immediately. The Chaplain, not a little surprised at this message, instantly ro*e to attend him; and, on entering hîs dressing-room, was still more sui prised Q 3 by
by beholding Jacintha in it, than he had been by his message. Lord Endermay explicitly acquainted him with the discovery he had made* instructed him to visit the unfortunate Nairn, administer to him all the com¬ fort in his posver to bestoAv, and, at a proper hour, have Mrs. M 'Neil brought to the Castle, to be interrogated relative to the woman to whom she had gis*en his child. As soon as hç could 4o. so Avithout 'i t exciting any alarm, Lord Endermay sent to request Mrs. Sinclair would favour liim svith a few minutes* conversation in her dressing-room, Mrs. Sinclair, who py this timt was up and dressed, return¬ ed for answer sht should be happy to see bim Avbenever he pleased. He ac¬ cordingly repaired to her ; and, in a§ brief a manner as possible, related thç events of the preceding night* Mrs*
Mrs. Sinclair Avaa OA T erwheirøcd with confusion and regret by Avhat she heard ; for not all the enormities of her husband had been able to subdue her affection for him, or preA r ent her from regretting the shame and infamy to which she nosv saw him exposed. Lord Endermay en¬ deavoured to calm her emotion*; hç assured her, on her account, he would not punish his brother in the man ner he merited, or hold him up to public scorn ; but, at the same time, declared, duringhis lifetime, he never should enter Ender^ may Castle again ; in which, he added» she AvoukJ alsyays be a weieome resident- Mrs. Sinclair thanked him, as well as the perturbation of her spirit* %vould permit her to do, for his kind¬ ness, and endeavoured to derive con¬ solation from the assurances he had given her relative to her husband, Slie felt more shocked than surprised by what he told her, as she leug suspected Q 4 Mr.
Mr. Sinclair of having contrived some scheme to injure Lady Endermay ; and this suspicion had infused such a super¬ stitious dread into the mind of Agnès, who Avas the confidant of her Lady, that she could scarcely prevail upon her¬ self to stir svithout some person svith her after it svas dark, and readily belieA'ed Jacintha had seen something super¬ natural in her chamber, though she used all her eloquence to persuade her to the contrai v. In this belief she svas confirmed, bv ¡masrining no one but herself had a key to the part of the Castle Jacintha svas lodged in. Lord Endermay mentioned to Mrs. Sinclair the ideas he entertained respect¬ ing Jacintha, and svas delighted to hear sbe liad also been struck by her resem¬ blance to Lady Endermay.
CHAP·
I '«' l ■',!
CHAP. XI. *' Vou Gods, look down, * f And,'from your facred víais, pour your graces ** Upon my daughter*» head.* 1 Shakespeare. A GNLS was sent to conduct Jacintha to Mrs. Sinclair's dressing-room, where Mrs. Sinclair, prepossessed with the idea of her being Lord Endermay's daughter, received her with mingled confusion and tenderness,
Q S Lord
Lord Endermay continued with them* till Mrs. M'Neíls arrival at the Castle. She came totally unsuspicious of the purpose for which she Avas sent ; like Barbara, she soon perceived that a can¬ did confession of her guilt could alone save her from the punishment she de¬ served ; she accordingly made a merit of necessity, and throwing herself upon the mercy of Lord Endermay, ïwealed to him all the particulars he was de* sirous of know ing. in consequence of her information, messengers Avere immediately dispatch* ed to a small village upon the coast, about fifteen miles from Endermay Castle, where she said the woman had informed her she resided, at the time she committed the child to her care. In the course, of. tbe day, the, Chap» kin, accompanied by proper attendants, S kft
left" the Castle, to embark from the nearest port for France, for the purpose of liberating the much-injured Countess, the present state of Lord Endermay'a mind rendering him totally unfit foe such an undertakings Towards the close of day, the domes¬ tics, who had been sent to enquire aften íhe ninse of his child, returned bring¬ ing her» to his unspeakable joy,, along with them, and anothei: woman» whom; she called, ber sister ; they both appear¬ ed greatly confused and embarrassed oní being brought before Lord Endermay^ and it was some time ere ? could pre* vail upon them to speak ;,— aiî length re- assuredi» in some degree, % the gentle¬ ness he forced himself to assume* anit the rewards lie promised if nothing wm concealed; from him» *h® nurse ean~, didly contessed «he had parted wiih hb child.
€ ô M Sbø»
" Soon after our return from France»' r ¿aid she, " I accompanied my husband in a voyage to the southern part of Ireland, taking your child along with me. My sister was then the wife of a soldier, whose regiment lay at no threat distance from tlie place u here the ship had anchored ; I accordingly took this opportunity of going to see her, aud naturally let her into the seciet con- cerning the child I was nursing; she, in return, told me a storv not less curious, about an infant she had at her breast. This poor infant was seized with convulsions, and died suddenly whilst I was with her. My sister greatly lamented her death, as, had she lived, she said, she was certain she would have been the making of her fortune. Upon this, wishing to serve my sbter, and not over desirous of more trouble than what my own children gave me, I told her she should, if she pleased, have the child I was
was nursing, about whom I was certain no enquiries would ever be made, to supply the place of the one she had lost. She eagerly embraced the proposal, as there was no danger of the deception being discovered, the children being about the ???? age, and like each other. Accordingly the place of little Jacintha was supplied by your daughter, Eglan¬ tine to whom I gave that name, in con¬ sequence of hearing it mentioned by the poor lady, her mother.—My sister will now inform your Lordship of——" Here Lord Endermay feebly extended his hand to motion her to silence, any further information being unnecessary ; and, overpowered by the excess of his joy at finding his hopes relative to Jacintha realized, he fainted away. As soon as he was brought to himself, he returned his fervent, his grateful ac¬ knowledgments to Heaven for the pre¬ servation, the restoration ofhi» daughter, and
and çksired to be supported to the apart* nient Adhere she sat, Avith Mrs. Sinclair, in a state of the most painful agitation.. Lord Endermay, unable to speak on enter big the room, paused near the en* trance 'r and, while the big tears coursed one another doAvn hia pale and fuiTosv* ed cheeks, he extended his arms t<* Jacintha. Jacintha started from her chair, ancl surveyed b Un with Avjjdnessin her look- She panted,, she trembled, and Avas ready to sink beneath the mingled emo¬ tions of hope, and fear, to Avhiçîi tbe expression of his countenance gave rise. u My child, my Eglantine!" atr length exclaimed Lord Endermay, *f wilt thou not approackto receive tím blessing qf a father,?—Thou art mine—* tlipn ait roy child—tium ait ?? long- 1?% daughter l" 1?
The apartrnent resounded with the shriek which burst from the lips of Jacintha;—sheflesr, rather than sprung into the arms of her father, and nearly fainted on his bosom ; then sinking at his feet, she passionately embraced his knees, and called upon him again to ac¬ knoAvledge her.—Lord Endermay sunk upon his knees beside her* " AcknoAvledgethee," he said, "yev with pride—Avith rapture—witli, un u t ter* able joy I acknowledge thee, my child ï —Oh God !" he continued, as he strain¬ ed her to his bosom, " pour down thy choicest blessings on her head !—As thou. hast conducted her with honourand safe* ty through the thorny path» of adversity,. so still continue to guide ??! protect her through theflosvery * bi|t more da^ngcrrous, paths of prosperity I—Render her worthy of happiness herself, by continuing to her a disposition which will lead her tq dis¬ pense it φ other»; and stíH majte her remember
remember that those who place their trust in thee, are never disappointed V r On this scene it is not necessary to dwell any longer; suffice it to say, that such proofs of Jacintha's birth were pro¬ cured, as put it out of any person's power to doubt or dispute it ; and that she was publicly introduced to the nume¬ rous relatives and dependants of the House of Endermay, as Lady Eglantine Sinclair, the daughter and heiress of the Earl of Endermay. The congratulations which she and her father received, were not more nu¬ merous than sincere ; for as Sinclair was ahnost general!) disliked, so the disap¬ pointment of hu expectations was con¬ sequently rejoiced at. Nothing hut the absence of Lady Endermay, and the apprehensions that were entertained about her, prevented public rejoicings from taking plaee in the castle and its environs,
environs, at the unexpected restoration of the Earl and his daughter to each other. Overwhelmed svith shame ancl regret, Sinclair withdrew in secret from the neighbourhooil, bitterly regretting the hour Avhich had introduced him to his niece, by svhose means the clbcovery of his baseness, he knesv, had been brought about; and soon after closed his iniqui¬ tous life upon the Continent. Not ail the entreaties of Lord Ender¬ may and Jacintha (or Eglantine, as Ave must nosv call her) coukl prevail upon Mrs. Sinclair to remain in the castle; her heart revolted from the idea of con¬ tinuing ina place svhere the baseness of a husband, fehe could not eea.e regard¬ ing, was the theme of every tongue. She accordingly repaired, a few days after the discovery of Eglantine s birth, to the house of a relation, at mtm ciblante,
distance from it, where she spent the resi¬ due ofher life ; often visited, and guard¬ ed from every pecuniary distress by the generosity of the Earl and his daughter«. £ady Jane Sinclair also left the castle, not from inclination, however, but ne¬ cessity. Her brother settled her in ? decent retreat in another part of the country, but never suffered lier again to approach his residence. All the under agents in the plot against his domestic happiness he too provided for ; but, like Jjady Jane, banished them jiis presence; for ever· The unfortunate NtirOf ? conse* quence of the tender attentions whicl* were paid him, soon regained tliat health, which long confinement and neglect had deprived him ot Lord Enderniay fnskfced on bi* residing entirely with hiin* and made him every apenck id
his posver, for the suflfcringt he ba$ drawj^ upon him. At the expected time, which, as it approached, increased tbe perturbjation* of Lord Endermay and Eglantine, the Chaplain returned, and completed the happiness of h& patrpn by putting iptQ his arms his much-injured Lady ; alter¬ ed, inveja, fron) ???? sjie wss at the period they Avere separate^» fiut infinite¬ ly more interesting, more precipua tø bis Iteart now than she had ever been ? all the prjide øf youth find ¡»looming beauty. Over the scene whieji ensued I shalt pass, as conscious of its far exceeding my powers of description,—Who, in* deed, could attempt, with any hope of floing them justice, to describe (and where we cannot do justice, it is surely far better to let the irøagbatbi* of our reader paint for us) the feelings of as ?????
amiable svoman restored to the tender¬ ness she valued, the reputation she prized, the friends she regarded ; or those of an adoring husband clasping to bis bosom a long estranged svife, whose loss he had never ceased regret¬ ting, even Avhen he thought bhe svas undeserving of that regret ? As soon as their first transports had a little subsided, Lady Endermay turn¬ ed her enquiring eyes round the apart¬ ment, from which, it Avas previously settled, Eglantine should be kept till her mother svas a little prepared to be¬ hold her; and her countenance evidently changed at not finding svithin it an ob¬ ject at all resembling the one she looked for. 11 I see—I see," cried she, in a me¬ lancholy voice, * f my tears svere just;— but ¡rt mc not murmur at the decrees of Providence.** " Mur-
ζ( Murmur!" repeated Lord Ender¬ may, €< no," continued he, clawing her hand in his, as he looked up to heaven, i( svith me extol ¡ts goodness— that goodness svhich has enabled me to gİA'c joy to your heart, by preserving to us a treasure more precious than the wealth of Avorlds.—Yes, my love—yes, my Eglantine, I have a daughter to present you !—the fair resemblance of yourself, and every way worthy of you t affection." " Give her—give my child to my arms !" exclaimed the utmost fainting Lady Endermay. Lord Endermay, unable to move, almost to speak, motioned to one of his surrounding friends tu go for Eglantine, who accordingly withdrew, and in a fesv minutes returned leading her in. Lady
Lady Endermay sprung forward to meet her; but, instead of embracing her, the moment she cast her eyes upon her, she started back. <c Can I believe my eyes ?" she cried, with a look of svikl surprise; " is this my daughter?" Eglantine advanced to her, and kneel¬ ing at her feet, tremblingly clasped her hands betsveen her's, and bathed them Avith her tears. ** Oh transport 1" exclaimed Lady Endermay, " she is my child !—Enable me, gracious Heaven 1" she continued, falling upon her bosom, tt to support, with some degree of calmness, the great *—the unexpected happiness of finding á daughter in her whom my heart felt in¬ terested about, ere it knesv she had any claim from nature upon its tenderness." As
As Eglantine had never mentioned her interview with her mother (not froni conceiving herself any longer bound tó secrecy concerning her, but merely from a fear of affecting her father too severely by a description of her sufferings, which she could not have avoided giving, had she acknowledged seeing her), these words of Lady Endermay's required an explanation, which was demanded, and given as soon as she had regained some degree of composure. Blessed with what she had so Ions: sighed for—parental tenderness, deliver¬ ed from dependance, and secured from again experiencing pecuniary distresses, the heart of Eglantine would now have expanded to felicity, but for the dread¬ ful anxiety she suffered about Egbert ; concerning whose fate she was still kept in total ignorance by the obstinate silence of Woodville, though, upon thè discovery of her birth, she had again written
written to him, acquainted him tfith that discovery, and conjured him, in the most earnest manner, to relieve her un¬ easiness about his friend. The heavy cloud upon her brow, and the deep dejection into which she often sunk, coukl not escape the watchful eyes of those vvho depended upon her for happiness. She had hitherto for¬ borne to say much of Egbert, trusting, from day to day, that lie would arrive to speak for himself. But now, in re¬ ply to the anxious enquiries of her puren ts, she freely revealed the cause of her uneasiness, deckucd her long en¬ gagement to Egbert, and described him in such colours as excited the warmest interest in his favour, and made them readily promise to do "every thing in their power to promote his felicity and her's. In pursuance of this promise, a day not far distant \uis fixed for the commencement of a journey to London. On,
On the eve ot their intended depar¬ ture from the Castle, a letter, with the London post-mark upon it, was put into the hand of Lady Eglantine ; *she tore it open in a tremor, which was rather increased than diminished hy finding it from Mrs. Decourcy, instead of Woodville, as she expected. It be^an with the most fervent con- ? gratulations upon the happy revolution in her affairs—a revolution not more unexpected or pleasing, Sirs. Decourcy said, than that which had taken place in her own situation, in consequence of a letter from Lady Dunsane to her bro¬ ther, containing a candid confession of all the errors of her youth—a con¬ fession which entirely removed the sus¬ picions he had so long entertained to the prejudice of his domestic happiness.
VOL. IV. R "Ιχχ
ίζ In this letter," proceeded Mrs. Decourcy, " Lady Dunsane not only reA T ealed her early indiscretions, and the still greater errors she svas led into-by avarice and ambition, but the cruel and treacherous manner she behaved to you when decoyed into her power by the artifices of Lord G svytherin. She also related the particulars of your interviesv wâth her, and the means by svhich she understood you had effected your escape from the chateau, where she confined you. " It As ? ill, no doubt, fill you Avith astonishment," continued Mrs. De¬ courcy, " when I inform you that Henri, your generous deliverer from a cruel captivity, is heir not only to the title of Dunsane, but to immense pos¬ sessions, which the basest schemes have for some years kept from him.—His story is briefly as foliosvs ;
"Tlie
ζί The father of his mother and of ' the late Earl of Dunsane Avere brothers ; her father Avas the eldest, and she' (his only child), by succeeding to his estates, left the title, Avhich devolved to her cousin, scarcely Avorth his acceptance· She Avas under acre at the time her father died ; and the Marquis de Montalde, a near relation of her mother's, was ap¬ pointed her guardian. In pursuance of a solemn injunction she received from her rather, nevei to have anv intercourse with her cousin, avIio was considered a most dissolute character, and never per¬ mitted to visit at his house, she refused to see him, though he repeatedly soli¬ cited her to do so. He at length con* trived, notwithstanding the vigilance of the Marquis (avIio, apprized of his mo* tives for desiring to become acquainted with his ward, took care to make her observe the prohibitions of her father) to introduce himself to her, and so completely ingratiated himself into her it % favour^
favour, that she consented to give him her hand in private, and thus put him into possession of what had alone made him solicitous for an alliance Avith her— her large fortune. ? c< His indifference for her Avas in¬ creased soon after their marriage by the violent passion he conceived for Miss Decourcy, Avith whom, about this pe¬ riod, he became acquainted. Fertile in resources, it did not require much de¬ liberation to arrange a plan for enabling him to gratify his inclinations : be pro¬ posed a tour of pleasure to his unsus¬ picious Lady, then in a state which, if he had possessed the least degree of feeling, ivould have interested him about her ; and taking with them a fesv chosen domestics,' he repaiied svith her to a solitary chateau, in the Pyrenees, (thfe only possession he inherited from his father), where he cruelly consign¬ ed her to lasting confinement. He had
had then a report of her illness propa¬ gated in the neighbourhood they had left—a report which was soon followed by an account of her death ; and shortly after he returned home, ' Avith well- dissembled sorroAv in his face> but real joy in his heart, at the success of his schemes ; and, as soon as decency would permit, the appearance of Avhich he Avas studious to retafn, he offered his hand to Miss Decourcy, and Avas ac¬ cepted, contrary to the advice of her brother, Avho had heard his character, and consequently detested the idea of her being allied to him* " The anguish his unfortunate Lady experienced at finding herself so cruelly deceived and abandoned, for some time disordered her reason ;—in this unhappy situation, while labouring under a tem¬ porary derangement, she- became the mother of a lovely boy, and, in con¬ sequence of her malady, was easily hå R a to
to believe, the moment after he was bora> he had expired.—Instead of breaking into murmurs or complaints on regaining her senses, she submitted Avith patience to a fate, Avhich she deemed a just punish¬ ment for her disobedience to her father. Nature, however, not to be deceived by any artifice, early attached her to her child, though represented · to her, in pursuance of the orders of her in¬ human husband, as the son òf the people Avho took care of her. Her only plea¬ sure Avas derÍA T ed from cultivating and improving his mind ; and the education she gave him, joined to his natural abilities, rendered him Avell qualified for the situation he Avas destined to fill. " By the perfidy of one of the con¬ fidants of Lord Dunsane, the Marquis, after a lapse of many years, obtained a knosvledge of her Avretched situations Burn ing. with indignation, he set out for the place of her confinement ; but, unfortunately,
unfortunately, all his intentions in her favour A^ere defeated by the tnachinar tions of Lord Dunsane, avIio, having received an intimation of the discovery he had made, timely apprized the people at the chateau of the visit he was about making to it. In consequence of which, Lady Dunsane was removed to a dun-» geon, in a remote tower belonging to the building, where no apprehensions were entertained of her being sought for, * and where she soon closed her calamitous life. " The Marquis returned from bi$ unsuccessful search, fully determined to investigate the mysterious fate of'his unfortunate relative, and bring to 4h6 punishment they merited all who had been accessary to injuring her ;—but* alas ! this determination was over-ruled by self interest ; he was a man of plea¬ sure, and had so deeply involved hi* R 4 fortune*
fortune, that at this time he was in φ most embarrassed situation. •\ " From this situation, Lord Dun- sane (who possessed neither delicacy nor honour, and judged of others by himself) explicitly informed him he should be extricated, if he promised to remain silent concerning his late ward. The offer was too tempting to be re¬ fused ; and, in order to silence any un¬ pleasant rumours, he suifered himself to be still further prevailed upon by Lord Dunsane, to appear to the world as hia particular friend. "His motives for desiring an union with Lady Dunsane, upon the decease of her Lord, have been already men¬ tioned, as also her's for consenting to it. On no other conditions, he assured her, would he any longer keep that secret, on which she knew so much depended ;
for it had for some time been entrusted to her. u As Henri was pursuing his way from Calais, to the place where he hoped to obtain a passage to the East Indies, it was his good fortune to render a sin¬ gular service to the Marquis de Mon» talde, who, but for his exertions, would have been precipitated down a tre¬ mendous precipice, - in his carriage, in consequence of his horses being frightened by a noise on the road. Penetrated with gratitude, the Marquis invited him to his chateau, which was at no great distance from the place where the dreadful accident was so near happening. Henri accepted his invitation ; and the elegance of his man¬ ners so little corresponding with the coarseness of his dress, and still more, the striking resemblance he bore his un¬ fortunate mother» awakened the cu¬ riosity of the Marquis, and led to ? o enquiries
enquiries which ended in the discovery of his birth. The Marquis hesitated for some time, Avhether or not he should res v eal it to him ; pity and remorse at length triumphed over avarice and am¬ bition, and he at once delivered his con¬ science of a lieavy burthen, Avhich had long oppressed it, and obeyed what it was evident to him Avas tbe Avili of Pro¬ vidence, by the manner in Avhich Henri bad been thrown in his Avay. " Lady Dunsane, oversvhelmed Avith shame at the discovery Avhich took place, immediately formed a resolution of re¬ tiring for the resiti ue of her life to a Convent. Henri acted most'nobly; he secured to her and to her daughters an ample provision, and relieved the Mar¬ quis from all his embarrassments. ct Upon the receipt of the Coimtess s letter, Ave hastened our return to Eng- . knd, " proceeded Mrs. Decourcy. * t On our
our arrival in London, we lost no tim§ in sending for you to Mrs. Falkland's, where we naturally concluded you were. Our consternation at finding you had left her house, and Avere gone no, one knew whither, may be easier conceived than described. Our agonizing fears about you Avere at length relieved by Woodville's enclosing the letter he re¬ ceived from you to us. " Ere I bid aou adieu, I must inform you Ave had not been many days in London, Avhen sve were most agreeably surprised by a visit from Lord Dunsane, who obtained our address from Mn Decourcy's agent, to whom you may remember you gave him our direction. It is unnecessary, I am sure, to say we recéis ed him svith every demonstration of pleasure; hail his osvn merits been less, we shoukl still have bem delighted to see, and shesv every attention to him, for the essential servio» he ren¬ ii ? dered
dered to a person so dear to us as you are. He mentioned his intention of residing in future in England, to Avhich he professed himself extremely partial—· a partiality originating, I fancy, from the still greater he has conceived for one of its fair natives ; Avho that is, I leave you to guess,"
Mrs. Decourcy concluded her letter with an earnest request to Eglantine to Avrite to her immediately, and inform her Avhether she had anv idea of visiting London soon, as, if not, she and Mr. Decourcy Avould directly prepare for a journey to Scotland. This letter threw Eglantine into such agonies, from the apprehensions it ex¬ cited by its total silence concerning Egbert, and the manner in which it mentioned Woodville to haA-e acted, as made her hastily retire to her dressing- room,
room, to prevc.it hcv parents from being pained by beholding distress Avhieh they could not relieve. She had not been here above half an hour, Avhen she heard a hasty step approaching, and in fhe next moment the door was throsvn open by her mother. Eglantine started» and averted her head to conceal her tears. " I am come, my dear child," said her mother, " to inform you your father has changed his mind, and wilt not go to London." " Not go l* repeated Eglantine» in a faint voice, and turning to her mother· "No," said buly Endermay» "he thinks a journey thither quite turnece»· sary·" " Unnecessary } f » again íepeated Eg* Iantine»
·' Yes,
í( Yes, and so will you, I am sure,"" replied her mother, * t Avhen you hear his reason for thinking so." The smile which accompanied these words, caused such emotions in the heart of Eglantine, as nearly overpoAvered her. " My love, my Eglantine," cried her mother, clasping her arms around her, " hosv do I rejoice at being able to give you joy—at being able to inform you that he, for whom you suffered so much anxiety, is safe—is Avell—is ------" Eglantine heard no more ; her spirits sunk beneath the sudden revolution iu her feelings, and she fainted upon the bosom ofher mother,—How impossible to speak her transport when, on recovering, she found herself in the arms of Egbert !— Neither, for many minutes, Avere able to giA'e utterance to their feidings ; and both in this blissful moment found themselves
themselves " amply recompensed for alî their sufferings» " May the happiness I now whnes$ be as permanent as it is pure !" cried the venerable Lord Endermay (as soon as the attendants, who assisted in. recovering Eglantine, had withdrawn). *' Bless, Oh God !" he continued, looking up to heaven, and folding their "united hands in his, " bless these my children 1-^ May they never forget the gratitude thev owe thee for thy protection through the difficulties and dangers they expe· rienced ! may that confidence in each other, which was so great a comfort to them throughout all these perils and distresses, ??? ? ?? be diminished ! and may they live long, a blessing to one another, and to all connected with them !" As soon as Egbert was a little com* posed, he gratified the curiosity of Eglantine,
'Eglantine, by relating to her the cir«- cumstances which had caused her to be so long tormented with anxiety and ap¬ prehension about him. (( I was beginning to despair of ever recovering any part of my lost property," said he, "and in consequence of that despair, to think of leaving the West Indies, when I received a letter from the Marquis of Methwold, written in conse¬ quence of the death of Lord Augustus Oswald, to entreat me not to delay returning to England, that he might have the pleasure, ere lie died, of pub* liciy acknowledging me as his heir, and personally imploring my forgiveness for his neglect and unkindness to my pa¬ rents and me, which had, in a great measure, been occasioned by the arti¬ fices of his sou and grandson ; the latter of whom declared, in his last moments, that they had both contrived to keep hack all the letters that were written to soften
soften the Marquis, or try to* interest him in my behalf. You may be sure I did not hesitate to comply Avith tht* entreaty ; but, notwithstanding the promptitude Avith Avhich I obeyed it, I arris'ed but in time at Methwold Castle s Avhither he returned from Por¬ tugal, Avith the remains of his grand¬ son, to receis T e his last sigh.—Here I ivas joined by my friend Woodville; and the pleasure his unexpected visit gave me, Avas heightened by its enabling me to make enquiries after you. As soon as the Marquis svas interred, we set off for the house of Mr. Falkland, in Essex, where we supposed you were,—«* Mrs. Falkland received us alone, and notwithstanding our having formerly known her, with the utmost coolness« She told us, in a manner that excited a sudden alarm in my heart» which my firm reliance on your truth and con¬ stancy, however, made me almost in- etanUy dismiss, %?% yo» had ìeft.hfr ionie
??? weeks before, in a strange and sudden manner ; that she had not heard any thing about you since that period ; and that the day after your departure, a gentleman, who would not reveal his iiame, and took great pains to conceal his ??????, had been to enquire after you. From her house we proceeded to that of Mr. Decourcy's, in Hertford¬ shire ; but here, instead of obtaining the satisfaction I sought, I found additional cause for uneasiness. 1 could not doubt, from what the housekeq>er said, that the gentleman Avho followed you tö Beech Grove, Avas the same that had been to Mr. Falkland's, to make en¬ quiries lOncerning you ; neither that it was through his means you had given up your intention of going toa residence she had been about procuring for you.— Tortured by perplexity, to svhich the looks of Woodville added, I accompa¬ nied him to Mrs. Deiwents house, at Mortlake ; liefe my inquiétude as as re¬ lieved
lieved bv Miss Woodville's informing nis she heard you were gone to reside vviA a Lady in Lancashire, Avhose address sh? said she liad accidentally tesmed, and now gave me. /Thither Woodville and I posted ; but Oh í how impossible to paint the agonies I felt* when I found you had never been there ; and learned from the old lady, to whom with dif¬ ficulty I obtained admission, that she knesv no such person, and had merely permitted your letters to be directed to her house, to oblige Lord Gsvytheriii» her relation. Strong, however, as ap¬ pearances were against you f I did høfc readily (so great ? the confidence of real love) yield to the suspicions they inspired ; till Woodville, in order, as he hoped* to terminare ali further anxiely about you, expîklriy informed me, from the conduct he haú\ witnessed at Beech Grove t he was iui in the leatt surprised at svhat he heard» and fully convinced me you were unworthy of røy esteem—·
a conviction I svas compelled to admit* from the particulars he related to me." " Surely," said Eglantine, here in¬ terrupting him, Avith astonishment irt her looks, ít vou never could have re- ceived the letter I entrusted to Miss Woodville for you?" " Never," replied Egbert; " she basely kept back not only the letter you left Avith her for me, but the one you addressed to her brother ; and to their detention was ossing the misery I so long endured—a misery which only those like me, who ha\'e knosvn Avhat it is to dote, yet doubt—suspect, yet strongly lo ., xn form an adequate idea of." IC Good Heavens !" exclaimed Eglan¬ tine, " what could have tempted her to act so basely l*
<f Envy I s
mt Envy Γ' replied Egbert ; " the su¬ periority of your charms ; but still more the friendship Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy entertained for you, svliich she thought militated against her interest, made her detest you, ancl svish to behold you les¬ sened in the estimation of the svorld. She perccised, on her brothers return from Beech Grove, that he Avas dis¬ pleased svith you; but on svhat account she coukl not discover, though she practised all her arts to try and do so ; Woodville generously determining never to divulge auy thing svhich coukl injure you, svhile there svas a hope of your being able to vindicate yourself, and such a hope he Avas inclined to entertain, in consequence of a letter you svrote to him from Beech Grove, but svhich he was too angry svith you, for your sup¬ posed levity, to anssver. The letters you consigned to Miss Woodville's care, slie doubted not, Avould reveal to her the secret she panted to know; in defiances therefore,
. therefore, of every principle of honour, she opened and perused them. The consequences which could scarcely fail of resulting from their suppression, Ίη- * stantly occurred to her, and stimulated her to destroy them, relying upon her own ingenuity to extricate herself from any diiBculty, her having done so might hereafter draw upon her. But to this measure she was prompted not more by envy than ambition. About the time you visited her at Mortlakc, a rumour prevailed of the death of Lord Augustus, and the Marquis's intention of recalling me to England ; and could I be brought to think ill of you, she flattered herself, from the intimacy subsisting between her brother antl me, she might by de¬ grees insinuate herself so fer into my regañí, as to lead me to offer her my hand, and thus elevate herself to the rank she was always ambitious of at¬ taining.* 5
« How
** How severely the conduct of hia sister must have Avounded the heart of WoodAÜle!" said Eglantine* " ScA r erely indeed," replied Egbert. *' She is a proof of the mischiefs which result from placing young people under the care of those Avho are not perfectly amiable. Had she been brought up by Mrs. Decourcy instead of Mrs. Der¬ went, she might have been an orna¬ ment to her sex; for virtues, as Addison justly observes, areas catching as vices; and as barren land may, by proper culti¬ vation, at length bring forth good fruit— so, by proper correction and advke, a wayward disposition may at length- be rendered capable of generous actions, —•But to proceed in my narratiA'e. ? We returned from Lancashire to Mortlakc ; and mm Miss Woodville explicitly in¬ formed me that it was rumoured, and generally beheved, that you had eloped to some oböcure retreat with hora 5 Gwytherin.
Gsvytberin.—I shall not tire you by •dsvelling upon the pains I took to dis¬ cover this retreat. I panted for revenge, and my not being able to obtain it, heiglrtened my Avretchedness ;—this Avretchedness Avas so great, that life was often a burthen to mc. My friend Woodville watched oser me Avith tl&e greatest anxiety and tenderne»s; and imagining the gaiety of the metropolis might in some degree dissipate my . thoughts, he forced me to it, from a distant country residence of Mrs. Der- wents, to which with him, upon her going thither, I had received an invi¬ tation. In this visit to the metropolis, I sasv you at the Play.— Oli Heavens ! even now I tremble to think of the feelings I experienced on beholding you in company svith a woman of infamous description ; for such the gentleman who accompanied me to the Theatre informed me your companion svas."
"Ali
r ic Ah í then," said Eglantine, " Mrs. Savilte did not deceive me when she said you saw and shunned me»" ' € She did not indeed, " replied Egbert ** After some minutes of irresolution I left the Theatre, fearful lest, if I longer continued in it, I might be led into some action which would draw upon me general observation.—I found Wood¬ ville, whom a particular engagement had prevented from accompanying me thither, at home; in vain he attempted to sooth my agonies. I wasin astate of mad¬ ness, and instantly left town, to avoid the chance of again meeting you.—1 return¬ ed to the house of Mrs. Derwent, though why I know not, for inclination, I am sure, did not lead me thither; and Wood¬ ville, whom important business detained in town, promised to follow in a few days, Itwas at this period he met yon, and received an explanation, which re· moved every suspicion, he had ever tol. iv. ? enter*
entertained against you, from his mind, rendered you inore estimable than ever in bis opinion, and comdnced him that some treachery had been practised. . This, your mentioning the letters you had entrusted to his sister gave him a clue to trace ; and he trembled to think of my being exposed to her blandishments, while my mind svas in a ferment, and my anguish so great, that I scarcely cared svhat action I committed ; to the apprehensions svhich started in his mind ivas osving his abrupt departure from you, ancl the mysterious language he used. The moment he quitted you, he set out for Älrs. Dersvents, regardless of his osvn concerns, in his anxiety to save me from further, or still greater misery than I then experienced. Ere he reached the house of Mrs. Dersvent, hosvever, I had left it. I accidentally learned from a gentleman, svhom I met at it, that Lord Gsvytberin svas in France ; and I, with " Wings
*< Wings as swift < f As meditation, or the thoughts of love, hastened to take revenge ; but ere I arrived at the town Avhere I Avas inform¬ ed his Lordship resided, ample ven¬ geance had been taken on his crimes : he fell in a duel with a young Orhrer, ^hose sister he attempted to seduce." "Unhappy man l' said Eglantine, inexpressibly shocked to hear of his fate, " how dreadful the idea of his being cut off, with all his crimes upon his head l' r ' Dreadful indeed, " replied Egbert ; " but, remember, it Avas those crimes· which provoked that fìtte. —In the town where I expected to meet him, extreme fatigue and agitation threw me into a fever. Here Wood\ille ovei rook me, and brought ?? itli him such tidings as restored me to health, to life, to hap- s £ piness.
[íi ness. —He extorted from his sister, ?\1? found it in vain to deny it, a full confession of her baseness, and left her overwhelmed with shame and confusion. iiis eagerness to follow me to France, pi evented him from pajing his respects to Mr. ¡md Mrs, Decourcy, uho about this time returned to England : but he teituinated their anxiety about you. by encioMiiir to them vour last v. elcoinc v' t/ k'tter from Scotland;—with them, I h'>j>e, he *.v ill soon partake of our.joy. Of ?? destiny Mrs. Decourcy was ig¬ norant at the time she wrote; but ere this she is acquainted with it, as Woodville staid behind for the express purpose of waiting upon her and Mr. Decourcy. " In the course of this happy day, which terminated all the anxiety of Eglantine, she wrote to her beloved fiicad, Mrs. Dccourcy 7 requesting her, Mn
Mr. Decourcy, and Woodville to hasten immediately to Endermay Castle. The invitation was accepted,, and two days after their arrival, Egbert and Eglantine were united. The rejoicings which took place upon this occasion were not such as mere ostentation dictated, but such as sprung from love and tenderness ¿ every one seemed interested in, every one seemed to rejoice at the happiness of, the youthful pair. t( Oh my children !" said Lord En¬ dermay, in the course of this day, wliich gave to him a son rich in every virtue, t< hov/ forcibly does your story incul¬ cate the usefulness of patience, resigna¬ tion, and fortitude ! It is by the ex¬ ertion of those estimable qualities, you have ultimately attained your present felicity. Had you yielded to despair- had you, by so doing, withdrawn your confidence from Heaven, you would, s 3 no«
no doubt, have sunk beneath the bur¬ thens which oppressed you; but by struggling against ads'ersity, you'have conquered it, and proved that those .who exert their own strength, are still supported ; and also that they who rely for succour upon the Almighty, are never disappointed." Little more nosv remains for us to sa\ r , than to give some account of the other characters introduced into this work.—Of Lord G svy therin and Lady Dunsane we have already spoken ; the former fell a victim to his vices, and the latter, in the solitude of a Consent, too late permitted herself to be convinced that the winding paths of dissimulation ever end in shame and sorrow. The giddy and unfeeling Gertrude, who had been led by vanity alone to unite herself to Mr. Polworth, at length s u fíe i ed
suffered herself to be seduced into guilt by the insinuating tenderness of Captain Bellamy. The eyes of her husband, Avhich her artifices had completely blinded, were soon opened by thefriçnds of his daughter, and he immediately sought legal redress for his injuries ; ere this, however, could be obtained, Ger¬ trude died of grief for the desertion of her seducer, and the infamy Avith which she found herself overwhelmed. The affliction of her almost distracted mother, who, notwithstanding her con¬ duct, avo n Id not separate herself from her, was increased bv the .idea of having merited it, not more from the improper education she had given to her, than from her oavîi disobedience to the last commands ofher husband, and her inhu¬ manity to the innocent and distressed Eglantine. She Avas indeed, by this dreadful stroke, humbled to the dust, <t and 3
" and OAvned, Avith tear,v the punish^ ment ss r as just»" Eglantine (svho never mentioned the cruelty she had experienced from her to- the Decourcvs,, avcII knoAving the irreparable injury it svould be to her to have it knosvn, and svho had long since •forgiven it) never rested, on hearing of the death of Gertrude, till she discover¬ ed the obscure retreat to svhich her unfortunate mother had retired to hide her miseries. ' At first the unhappy Avoman shrunk from beholding her ; but by degrees her gentle pity was so soothing to her lace¬ rated heart, that she hailed her presence as she Avould have done that of a mi¬ nistering angel, and, next to lieaven, looked up to her for support and con*- solation*
Thus
Thus dkl Eglantine, by the comfort sbe afforded her, and the services she united with the Decourcys in rendering to her family, gratify the benevolent feelings of her heart, ancl evince the gratitude she felt for the kindnesses experienced from Mr. Greville, the father, the friend, and protector of her early youth. Lord Dunsane, avIio came over to England for the express purpose of pro¬ posing for Eglantine, returned to France on hearing of her engagement, where, by calling reason to his aid, he soon triumphed over his hopeless passion, and, in the course of time, married a very amiable lady, with whom he en¬ joyed all the felicity he merited. Miss Woodville profited by the shame she felt at the detection of her baseness ι and by a strict adherence in future to truth
truth and integrity, regained her for¬ mer place in the esteem of her brother, aiul a\ as at length happy in an alliance witli a man of Avoith. Woodville, attached to domestic hap* piness, soon followed the example of Egbert, and was as happy in his choice of a wife as he had been in that of a friend: Egbert and Eglantine, as amiable in prosperity as in adversity, were, as Lord Endermay had Avished them to be, a blessing to one another and to all connected Avith them. Their time Avas principally divided between E)ndermay and Metlnvold Castles ; in the former of which Lord and Lady Endermay continued to re¬ side, blessed by beholding the happiness- of those most dear to them.
"On&
" One bright gleam f « Of setting life shone on their evening hours s " Not less enraptured than the happy pair j *' Who flourished lang in tender bliss, and reai'd ** A numerous offspring» lovely like themselves, «* And good, the grace of all the country round.** Thomson,
WIN IS.
XANt, ΜΙ)θΕλΤΑ·ΡλΙ9|, t«AD*NHAI.b.»T*IIT,
