Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Nocturnal visit: a tale
?И? NOCTURNAL VISIT.
CHAP. I. ·*-■ In struggling with misfortunes l'es the proof of «* virtue." Shakespear. J\ BOUT a AAcek after the masquerade, as Jacintha Avas walking, at the close of day, with Egbert, through a shady lane contiguous to the village, she suddenly beheld, in^an opening leading to the high road, a post-chaise and four.— Egbert eagerly dreAv her towards it j the door lay open, and, to her great sur¬ prise, she beheld Woodville seated in it; but before she could make any vol. ii, ? enquiry,
enquiry, Egbert snatching her up in his arms, placed her in it, then leaping in himself, the door Avas instantly closed, and the postillions set off Avith the ut¬ most expedition. "Good Heavens! Egbert," said Ja¬ cintha, as soon as she recovered the poAver of utterance, which the sudden¬ ness of this action for a few minutes deprived her of, " what do you mean ?" Egbert caught her to his bosom, and, after some passionate expressions of ten¬ derness, briefly gaA r e her the* explana¬ tion she demanded. Jacintha highly resented his suspi¬ cions respecting her father, to ?? hich lie declared the project he had so hap¬ pily carried into eifect Avas owing ; they were suspicions, she said, not more groundless than injurious ; and she ab¬ solutely insisted on his dropping his present
present design—a design Avhich, if per¬ severed in, could not fail of exposing them to ridicule, Avell-knoAvn as Avas their situation with regard to each other. Egbert Avas deaf to her entreaties, and tried to siience her remonstrances by endeavouring to convince her he had reason for his fears ; of this, however, she could not be persuaded, and continued to expostulate, though with¬ out effect, as the chaise still proceeded in its first direction ; but a sudden stop Avas put to its velocity : in turning the sharp angle of a road, one of the hind- Avheels íIcav off, and laid it not very gently upon the ground- As soon as Jacintha was disengaged from the broken vehicle, which Avas not done Avithout some difficulty, she re¬ newed her entreaties to Egbert to relin¬ quish, what she termed, his rash design. ? % " This
" This accident, " said she, "seems a warning to you to do so. " Egbert, though vexed and provoked, could not forbear laughing at Avhat he called her, superstition ; and, Avithout regarding her remonstrances, hurried her on to a small public-house, at a little distance fiom the spot where the mis¬ ad ven t u re happened . 11ère he proci! red a messenger to go to a neighbouring toAvn for another carriage, nothing of the kind being to be procured at this place; then following Jacintha into the room, Avhi ther Woodville had conducted her, he exerted all his eloquence to try and calm her agitation and reconcile her to his scheme. He painted, in the most forcible colours, the misery occa¬ sioned by his fears respecting Lord < Gwytherin—fears which he had no other method of terminating than by the present step ; and conchuled by conjuring her not to cloud the happi¬ ness
ness of the present hour by retaining her displeasure. " I could have wished you to act otherwise," replied Jacintha, whose countenance evinced the perturbation of her mind; "I still wish it, be¬ cause I am convinced your fears are groundless;—did I think otherwise— Oh Egbert ! you knoAv my heart." " I do," cried Egbert, passionately, and straining her to his bosom as he spoke, " and therefore depend on being forgiven. " The sudden opening of the door made him hsstily turn round, and he beheld, to his unutterable astonishment and equal dismay, Mr. Greville entering. No real or imaginary spectre ever excited greaier consternation than Avas now raised by the appearance of this ? 3 Λνοι -thy
worthy man. Woodville looked con¬ founded. Egbert stood Avildly staring at him, and Jacintha turned pale, and trembled, fearful that he woukl scarcely be brought to believe she was ignorant of Egbert's intentions, and confident that to think she had openly defied his authority, would provoke his serious displeasure, " I see," said Mr. Greville, advanc¬ ing from the door, Avhere he had paused for a minute to survey the astonished group, " I see I was not mistaken, and ihat my presence is not more unexpect¬ ed than undesired." Egbert, who perceived he could no longer hope to persevere in his journey, now determined to learn, if possible, why bb marriage had hitherto, or might still be delayed, as he could not be more his oavii master, Avhen of age, than he Avas at present ;—he also resoh'ed, if Mr.
Mr. Greville's ansAvers Avere not perfect* ly satisfactory, to be very explicit in acquainting him Avith the motives which had led to the step his presence inter¬ rupted ; better able to brook the idea of incurring his resentment, than that of continuing any longer in incertitude and consequent misery concerning Jacintha. ¡ " I can no longer delay," cried Mr. •Greville, as soon as Egbert,had con¬ cluded the vehement enquiries whicli passion and anxiety dictated, " I can no longer," continued he, in a solemn tone, ' t delay acquainting you with the motives which have hitherto, and m^ist still, I fear, even beyond the period L mentioned, make me defer your union with Jacintha; I haA'e long Avished to inform you of them, but I still Avanted resolution to do so ;—the* disclosure noAv, hoAvever, becomes unavoidable, ? 4 and
and with the deepest regret·——" He paused. " Speak on 1" said Egbert, the pale¬ ness of'death overspreading his cheek, " doubt not my firmness—I have been the pupil of adversity." * " And doubt not," cried Mr. Gre¬ ville, " that the merciful Being, Avho extricated you out of your former trou¬ bles, will extricate you from your suc¬ ceeding ones, if you still rely upon him—still continue, as formerly, to do your part." " Relieve my suspense," said Egbert ; " I would rather feel.the savoicI, than behold it suspended. " " In one Avord then," said Mr. Gre¬ ville, " your fortune is gone !—The agent, entrusted with the final arrange¬ ment of the late Colonel Moreland's affairs,
affairs, has decamped with the sums re¬ ceived from the ^ale of his estates ; and it Avas my utter inability to gtA'e Jacin¬ tha such a portion as the altered state of your circumstances required, that prevented, and still prevents my con¬ senting to your immediate union." Egbert appeared thunderstruck for a moment ; then striking his forehead Avith . a distracted air, he exclaimed— " The evil destiny of my father pur¬ sues me, and my short experience of happiness but renders more dreadful the succeeding misery." " Is this your vaunted firmness?" cried Mr. Greville. " Can you wonder—can you reproach me," said Egbert, " for feeling acutely —for being even agonized by such a biow as this—a blow which strikes at ? ? my
my dearest hopes—my long cherished expectations of felicity? Yet think not," continued he, Avith increasing vehemence, after the pause of a minute, " think not that I now regret your in¬ tervention.—Alas ! how little do Ave knoAv Avhat can render us happy ! Had I accomplished my late wishes and in¬ tentions, every pang I iioav feel Avould have been doubled, at the idea of in- volving the woman I adore in calamity. Sooner than doso, I swear, before Heaven I sAvear, I would resign her for ever.— Yes, my Jacintha, to lose thee Avon Id not make me half so Avretched, as to think I had rendered thee miserable." " Miserable !" imvardly repeated Ja¬ cintha, who, Avith rapture, Avould have shared his destiny, though assured «-* That the barerai th ** Wbuld be their resting-place, its roots their iboJ.. " Some deh theu habitation." " Miserable I
" Miserable !— Oh ! how impossible for thee to make me so, except it is by leaA'ing me !" " The dreadful scenes of domestic misery f have beheld," pursued Egbert, shuddering, as if Avith secret horror, at the retrospection, £ ' have made too deep an impression upon my heart, to permit me to indulge its tenderness at the ex- pence ofher I loA*-e.—We must part then, Jacintha—Ave must part," he cried Avith uncontroulable emotion, as he felt her Avarm tears fall upon thè trembling hand Avhich clasped her's to his heart, " till a happier destiny pre\ T ails." " Patience and fortitude," cried Mr. Greviile, " not only alleviate, but over¬ come misfortunes ; and I doubt not their united efforts enabling you to sur¬ mount those Avhich have befallen you."
? 6
lie
He then begged he Avould endeavour to compose himself, and listen calmly to some further particulars it was necessary for him to hear, relative to the late un¬ fortunate event Egbert obeyed him to the utmost of his power ; and Mr. G reville proceeded to inform him that, very soon after the demise of Lady Oswald, he had receiA r ed a letter from his (Egbert's) corre¬ spondent in London, acquainting him with the perfidious conduct ofthe agent, and entreating him to break it in the best manner he could possibly do. " IJiesitated, hoAvever, to disclose it at that period, " continued Mr. Greville, " not only from my unwillingness to add affliction to affliction, lest the bur¬ then should become too heavy to be borne; but from an idea Avhich sud¬ denly occurred, and which, 'upon cont- municating
municating to your friend, met his approbation : namely, to Avrite to the Marquis of Methwold an explicit ac¬ count of the unexpected reverse in your situation, * and appeal to his humanity and justice to make you amends for the deficiencies, or rather cruelties of for¬ tune." ' t His humanity, his justice !" re¬ peated Egbert indignantly, his faded colour reviving at the mention of his name ; " good Heavens ! these are vir¬ tues which he does not possess. Had he possessed the smallest particle of them, Avould he have suffered -----but— I cannot dwell upon the dreadful sub¬ ject," cried he, again turning pale, and faltering. <t I hoped," said Mr. Greville, -'«that his own sorroAvs had taught him to feel for the sorrows of another person ; for 5 the
the callous heart is frequently softened to compassion by such means." " His sorroAvs !" repeated Egbert. " Yes, I learned that he Avas under the heaviest affliction, in consequence of the languishing state into Avhich his /darling grandson, Lord Augustus* Os- Avald, the heir apparent, as you knoAV, of his titles and estates, had suddenly fallen ; and flattered myself I could not have made the appeal I have ihentioned at a more favourable juncture. "But, unfortunately, ere I dispatch¬ ed my letter, he had sailed with the in\ T alid for Lisbon, Avhose premature death, if it should take place, makes you undisputed heir to the honours and .fortunes of the Marquis; who I also hoped, from this consideration, exclu¬ sive of any other, Avould be induced to , serve you. My letter Avas forwarded to Lisbon j
Lisbon ; but, as yet, I have received no ansAver to it. " 4 * A convincing proof you never Avill, " exclaimed Egbert, hastily. iC I oavii I am rather doubtful," said yir. Greville ; " such a length of time has elapsed since I wrote ; especially as I have found means of learning that he has Avritten several times to England since his departure ; and, through the same means, I have also heard that Lord Augustus is better. li As soon as I began to doubt re¬ ceiving an answer from the Marquis, I began to consider in what manner I should break the unpleasant intelligence Avith Avhich I was charged to you. Day after day passed aAvay Avithout coming to any determination, to speak the truth ; I still invented, or found some excuse for deferring my intended communica- * tion
tion, from the unconquerable unwil¬ lingness I felt to interrupt your hap¬ piness. " Egbert at this instant felt the keenest remorse at the suspicions he had suf¬ fered to pervade his mind respecting Air. Greville; nothing, perhaps, Avound¬ ing a generous, a noble heart more seA-erely than the idea of having done injustice, even in thought, to any per¬ son ; and that he had done injustice to Mr. Grev-iile, the circumstances he re¬ vealed, as Avell as the language he used, evidently proved. " But a letter I yesterday received from your friend in town, proceeded Mr. Greville, " at length made me re¬ solve not to postpone what 1 had to communicate beyond to-morrow, as I noAV saw cleat ly I should injure you by any longer delay ; the purport of the letter being to inform me, that the # agent
agent had been traced from Jamaica to St. Domingo, and that it was the opinion of the person Avho gave this intelligence, if immediate steps Avere taken, by which he meant, if some active person went over directly, part, at least, of the em¬ bezzled property might be recovered. Your friend iaid this opinion before thè different legatees, but not one of them Avould undertake the cause in any man¬ ner whateA-er. He trusted, hoAvever, that you, about whom he professed himself greatly interested, would not feel a similar reluctance." " Reluctance !" repeated Egbert, " good Heavens ! I shall be all impa¬ tience till I embark.—I feel new life, neAv spirits, at the thoughts of recover¬ ing something from the wreck, and still being happy." " Many, many bright years of felicity are.before you, I trust," said Mr. Gre-
ville,
ville; "there is one consolation, one happiness, at all events, which must be your's—that which ever results from the consciousness of properly perform* ing our part
CHAP.
??????????
CHAP. II. » Now Heaven, I truet, hath joys in store u To crown thy constant breast»** JOY this time the chaise, destined at first for a very different journey, had arrived ; and, as the night was growing late, Mr. Greville, feaiful of his Avife's being uneasy at his long absence, hur¬ ried Egbert and Jacintha to it, folloAV·* ing them himself; Woodville particu¬ larly requesting to take his horse. On their Avay to Wyefield, Mr. Gre¬ ville accounted for his unexpected ap* pearance at the inn, which was owing to
to accident, and not to premeditated design, as they had at first imagined. He had gone, early in the morning, to spend the day with a friend, who lived on the Holywell road ; on arriving at his house, he found him just pre- paring to set out, about some particular business, to a place near Chester. He asked Mr, Greville to accompany him , thither, towhichhemadenoobjection,the day being delightfully fine, and the ride exceedingly pleasant. On their return, they stopped at an inn to refresh their horses ; and scarcely had Mr. Greville been seated in a little front parlour, ere, to his unutterable astonishment, he be¬ held Jacintha and her companions en¬ tering. For a moment he sat lost in thought, vainly trying to conjecture what could have brought them to such aplace, at such an hour ; a sudden recol¬ lection then of the impetuous temper of Egbert, and the high displeasure he expressed
expressed at the delay of his nuptials, made him conceive the real cause; and he blessed the chance which hád given him an opportunity of frustrating so rash a project—a project Avhich, if accomplished, could only, in the present crisis of affairs, have been productİA'e of sorroAV and repentance. Mrs. Greville and Gertrude, Avho, in the early part of the evening, had been at a party in the village, were all amaze¬ ment (an amazement not intermingled Avith much concern for any one of them) at the long absence of Mr. Greville, Jacintha, and Egbert ; and vainly en¬ quired from the maid and the boys if they kneAV where the latter were gone. Their surprise Avas infinitely increased on beholding the three return together, in a chaise and four. Mrs. Greville scarcely suffered them to enter the par¬ lour, before she eagerly demanded the cause
cause of this strange, this mysterious circumstance. Mr, Greviile, hoAvever, declined gratifying her curiosity till they Avere alone. Thè agitation and distress so Avisible in Egbert's looks, whose spirits had again sunk at the idea of the long se¬ paration Avhich would, in all probability, take place betAveen him and Jacintha ; and the still deeper melancholy that Avas impressed upon her countenance, im¬ mediately attracted the obser vat ion of Mrs. Greville, and gave rise to va¬ rious surmises, which heightened her impatience to learn the particulars Mr. Greville had promised to commimicate. When they Avere revealed, no language could fully express the joy they gave her., To hear that Egbert, Avhom she de¬ tested ever since she had given up all hopes of gaining him for Gertrude— to hear that he Avas sunk, distressed, and
and might eventually be deprived of every stay—to hear that all the pleasing prospects of Jacintha were destroyed, and find that she Avas again throivn en¬ tirely into her power, inspired her Avith a pleasure almost too exquisite to be con¬ cealed. Luckily, hoAvever, for her, she had to do Avith a person not more un¬ suspicious of deceit in her boson», than unconscious of it in his own ; and Avho therefore belicA r ed to be sincere the ex¬ pressions of regret which she forced her¬ self to utter. " I see, my dear," said Greville, completely imposed upon, " to have had the poiver of placing this amiable, this noble young man even in humble independence, ivould have afforded to you as much delight as it ivould have done to me ; had such been the case, I should certainly have opposed his em¬ barking in his present enterprise."
" Yon
" You do me justice indeed, my dear," said Mrs. Greville; "I should have been very happy to have had the 'power." " We must, we will hope," cried Mr. Greville, " still to see him and our poor Jacintiia happy." " To be sure, my dear," replied Mrs. Greville, " as happy as I wish them to be," The anguMâ Avhich Jacintha restrain¬ ed in the presence of her father and her IoA r er, before Avhom the paleness of her cheek, and the trickling tears which be¬ dewed it, alone evinced her feelings, she gave Avay to in the solitude of her chamber ; she there Avept, even to agony, at the idea, not merely of (in all pro¬ bability) her long separation from Egbert, but at the idea of the hazards, the numerous dangers he might encounter.
encounter These apprehensions, how¬ ever, she did nöt encourage—she endea-» Aourcd to exert her reason to conquer them ; anticipations of e\'ilshekneAvihust inevitably increase hei* wretchedness, if indulged ; besides, they could not avert Avhatshe dreaded—and she also consider* ed that the ills she feared might never come to pass. Why, therefore, unnecessarily torment herself—Avhy sharpen the sting of real sorroAV, by yielding to the terrors of imagination ? Thè same Almighty Pro¬ vidence, slie reflected, presided alike in every place, and to its divine protection ■she devoutly recommended her Egbert. She at once "trietl to struggle with her fears,-and with her grief; but alb her efforts to subdue, in any degree, the latter, Avere ineffectual. She still wept and trembled at tiie idea of the ap¬ proaching separation, concealing, how- •ever,. to the utmost of her power, the - «nguish she endurai ; but it could not Vol, u% ? be
be'hidden from the watchful eyes of -Egbert: he discerned the'conflicts of her mind—he saw what she sufiered to saA*e him frofh an additional pang ; and, 'while his heart -was flattered b ν this' *v proof :of her tenderness, it was also Avrung by the knowledge of her af- iliction. In the bustle of preparation, he strove to lose the agony of thought.—' ·' lu a short time," cried he to himself, t< Ín a short time, andAve shall again be—re-united ; —but in the interval, the little interval which inten l enes, Avhat may not happen? Ah ! that is the reflection Avhich mad¬ dens, Avhich torments me Î— I leave my Jacmtha again exposed to the tyrann), the artifices of an inhuman mother ;— should that tyranny be hoav too much for her gentle heart to bear—which avíU not easily, I know, forego the sorroAV . •that pervades it on my account ; and should
should I, at my return, find, instead of my love, her—■-" He started, he groaned at the dread*· fui idea Avhich obtruded itself upon his imagination, and looking up tö héaA r en, he fenently prayed that he might-never lne to hear Jacintha was lost to him. tt Mrs. Greville could not conceal from him, nor from Jacintha, ■ the ma¬ lignant joy she felt at their unhappiness ; neither coultl she forbear attempting tó* Avound the proud heart of Egbert, by mnittihff those attentions avi t h Avhich sîie had before distinguished him | but here her malice Aras impoterit— -Egbert* felt it Hot, except Arhen directed agamst- Jacintha. In the cou'isö of t avo flaws every thing was prepared for his departure** accompanied by Woodville 4 , wh<y 4 detei> mined not to leave him until he had em- ? ? barked ;
barked; a determination which gave great pleasure to Jacintha. He Avas to proceed from Wyefield to London, to receive final instructions for his future conduct, and from thence to Falmouth, to take his passage in a West India packet. The evening prev« ou·*· f ? his departure, Mr. Greville invited him to a solitaiy walk ; he had many things to say to him, Avhich he believed Avould be much better received and delÍA*eted if thev were alone. He Avished to knoAv what course he had determined upon, ot avIu> ther he bad formed any plan for his future settlement in life, if his exertions to recover his fortune should prove un¬ successful. Egbert, who had not suffered his thoughts, for a moment, to dwell tip on the possibility of a disappointment, now
???? started, and turned pale at the idea of one being suggested. *■ -, "No," cried he, Avith a degree of Aviidness, 4 ' 1 1\??*? thought of no course — I huve formed no plan ; to Avhat pur¬ pose should I do either, Λν&1ιοινΙ friends, without interest to assist me ?" Mr. Greville, deeply affected by these- woids, did all in his power to check the progress of despair ; and as a proof that we should never give way to despond* ence, the blackest prospfcet often bright¬ ening Avnen least expected, he lightly touched upon his ???? story in the fol¬ lowing words, as they pursued their walk through some lonely meadows at? a little distance from the village..
CHAP.
Ml, 1 , 1 , ,-L. ., ' ί' I ..... , , ■"■■"""Ι ""tf
CHAP. III. n He various changes of tiie world had known», u And strange vicissitudes of human fatej «- Good after il], and after pain, delight, "rAlttfnate, like the, scenes, of. day and night., ,« Since every ???- who lives, is born to die,, ..«» And none can boast sincere felicity; * ««With equal miud,> wbat happens Jet us bear f «* f ^Jor joy, nor grieve too much for, things beyond our ease 3 « Like pilgrims to thç appointed place we tend i *,* * *~ * , „, " / " - , , * .«' Xhe^oi'id's an mxtj and^t.ntltsthejournc^iead'l* '* tt *. f Dryden, "My father," said Mr. Greville, ic Avas the youngest son of a respectable family ; he Avas brought up in the mer¬ cantile line, and, before my boyish days were
were over, had realized ι a handsome fortune ; but the tenure of .earthly en¬ joyments is uncertain—by the sudden failure of a foreign house,, he was de-r prived ofthe fruits of his long industry. The unexpected misfortunes which fell upon him, were not half so severely regretted upon his oavii account, as upon the account of his family, consisting, of ma and one daughter. ζζ At this distressing period, an old friend, the companion of his early days, and a mau of considerable fortune an<$ consequence, stepped" forward' to hi^ assistance» Through his means,- ?? father was enabled ta arrange. his:añairs, and re-establish himself ?? business ; but in a very narrow and circumscribed line, particularly, when, compared with, that which, he had formerly been in. " In order to lighten his expences,: his friend proposed taking me entirely ? 4t under«
under his own*xore, and educating me for the Church ; having it in his pWèr to makea vety ample provision for me m that iiue. "* it My ?? received this additional p^)ûf of his regard with the deepest gra¬ titude ι and,- at the age of fourteen, I ex^šbímged -his protection for that of Sir Hugh Netley % and accompanied him to his resklence in Kent. t t " r Hil Laáý and one son, about my ágb¡ * comprised ìÉà family. This son was the idd- of -higr parents ; ^OOt so ffåeeh, ftíhafá¿ frtön^Mng the only survivor óf ,a uttmfcréös offspring, as -from being the «last hope of their ancient House—the person, by whose means thcii 1 names ?? honours were to be transmitted to .posterity, a considera¬ tion of deep importance to minds swayed by yride and vanity. " Their
ζ% Theirexcessivemdulgencestreìigtìi- ened the violence of passions naturally impetuous; but their blind partiality rendered them incapable of perceiving the ill effects produced by this con¬ duct. ic I shared all the advantages which* they gave this darling heir, in point of education, and was placed at the same University with him in Oxford ; from whence, during the vacations, we ge¬ nerally returned to Kent. In the course of one of those visits, I had an oppor¬ tunity öf witnessing the unjust lengths to which the extravagant partiality of Nfetley*s parents could lead them,, when either his reputation or tranquil¬ lity were in any manner affected. " In a little cofctagey, near the perk- gate, there resided a widow who, re¬ duced, by the unexpected death of he* husbands from a state of comfort to . ? 5 «ne
one bordering on penury, had, witli an only daughter, taken refuge in this hum¬ ble retreat, from 4t Tlie eruebscorn " Which virtue, sunk to poverty, would meet " From giddy passion, and low-minded pnde." " Here they endeavoured to support themselves by their industry ; and their laudable efforts were greatly encouraged and aided by the kindness and huma¬ nity of some neighbouring families^ of distinction, Avho had known them in more prosperous days. The girl was extremely pretty, and, as Netley grcAv up, she attracted liis attention, and he determined to leave no means untried to gain her; persuading himself that the affluence in Avhich he could place her, -Avould be quite a sufficient restitu¬ tion to her and her mother, for the loss of her innocence.
"He
" He soon found, however, that-they were not of the same opinion ; and with difficulty could find an oppor¬ tunity of speaking to her. But hen mother could not always be at her side, » and he surprised her one day in a Avood ; * he forced her to> hear the most insulting offers, from Avhich he proceeded to the most unbecoming actions ; all his elo¬ quence being unavailing to win her to his Avishes. " I Avas luckily passing near the spot at the time, .and hearing the screams of * a female, hastily darted to İt. " Enraged at the scene I beheld, I not only tore her from his grasp, but re¬ proached him, in the bitterest terms, for his base, unmanly conduct» " He replied to my reproaches Avith » insolence ; he meanly spoke of the obli¬ gations I lay. under to h\s family,, and co plainly.-
plainly declared, on that account, he expected, he had a right to expect, the most implicit deference and submission from me. - ~" I endeavoured fo curb the indig¬ nation and resentment which he ex¬ cited ; but Avhen he raised his hand against me, I lost all forbearance, and falling upon him, I gave him that chas¬ tisement he merited : some accidental passengers separated us witii diíficulty, and Ave returned by different Avays to the house. On reaching it, I hastened to my chamber, too much irritated to think of the unpleasant consequences which might result to me from my be¬ haviour to young Netlcy. " Not so the poor widoAV ; she trem¬ bled at fhe idea of the evils I had, per¬ haps, draAvn upon myself by my ser¬ vices to her daughter ; and her grateful heart instantly prompted her to wait 3 upon
upon Sir Hugh and Lady Netley, in order to try and avert Avhat she dreaded* by giving a plain statement of Avhat had happened. 1 c To her extreme mortification, her narratİA'e Avas received with the utmost coldness, and she v/as dismissed Avith¬ out having her suspense or anxiety in any degree lessened. " Her fears about me, hoAvever,- proA r ed fruitless. Sir Hugh and his Lady, from a suspicion of their son, in this one instance, not having acted cor¬ rectly, did not chuse to manifest any displeasure against me for my conduct to him, lest, by doing so, they should render the affair more public ; they con¬ tented themseh r es Avith Avreaking their revenge upon the unfortunate Avidow, to the imprudence of Avhose «laughter they ascribed and reported the indiscre¬ tion of tlieir -son was OAving. Tliey withdrew
withdrew their protection ^entirely from " her ; and, as they bore a pretty general sway in the neighbourhood, their ex·«- ample was almost universally folloAved» and she soon found herseif compelled to seek another habitation., . " With floods of tears and bitter an¬ guish she submitted to this necessity. A long residence.in it,had attached her to her little dAvelling. I pitied her dis¬ tress, and wliile I did all in my poAver to mitigate it, I vainly Avished I could liave sheltered» her from the despotic tyranny of offended pride. " Netlcy, conscious of having atsed me ill, did not resist the efforts which were made to reconcile us· ' \ ¡ ? ? ι » " I could not but pereeive tbcerrors of Netley met Avith the same pernicious iiv dulgençe /roni.the private tutor,- Avhört- tended usto Oxford, andAv.h{> wasreçojn- « ·, x mended
meiulcd to Sir Hugh by *% noble farnily, whom he served in that capacity, that tiiey did from his parents ; but I Avas jtop young, too inexperienced, to disco¬ ver the motives from Avhence this in¬ dulgence originated ; or, that to it Avas OAving the complete ascendency AA r hich Bai clay, by degrees, acquired over the mind of his pupil. " Tliough I did not perfectly esteem,· I warmly admired him. Highly fa¬ voured by Nature, he had improved lut gifts by the most studious attention, and a cqnstant - int-erGOu-rse? with »ele¬ gant society, and Avas altogether one of the most accomplished and. r pleasing men 1 ever knew. ; ? ì * 4 He sometimes made us shorten our visits in Kent, in order to accompany him to a little patemalseat he possessed in Nor l folk ;—a perfect Paradise in miniaturqt high woods sheltered the house at thp rear;
rear ; liefore it flowed a spacious rivers on eitlier side was ä «wilderness of sweets ; and vines* myrtles, and honeysuckles completely coAered it. This delightful^ mansion, the interior of which corre¬ sponded w r khits exterior, was graced by an inhabitant worthy of such ad welling— the niece of Barclay, the most lovely Avo¬ man, without exception, I ??-?? beheld : her manners, like those of her uncle, ivere fascinating ; nor Avere her accom¬ plishments less brilliant, less deduct İA-e than his. 4 * You may wéñ believe such a crea¬ ture could not fail of inspiring theli\'eliest admiration ;—I felt at once thepoAver of her charms, but carefully concealed the impression they made upon me> from a conviction of her being attached to *Netley. To my utter astonishment, however, he did not take the least pains to cuitİA T ate her regard; on the con¬ trary, he betrayed an utter indifference . · to
to her attractions, to the regret and dis¬ appointment, I thought, of her uncle ; Avho, I could not help thinking, had some ambitious projects in his head w hen he introduced her to the notice of his pupil. " On being ordained, Sir Hugh ap¬ pointed me his domestic chaplain, until the living he had promised me should become vacant, by the death of its old incumbent. » " Soon after this event, Netley and I again accompanied Barclay to Nor¬ folk. The alteration in the appearance of his niece struck we the moment I beheld her : all her florid bloom Avas gone, and a deep melancholy marked her countenance,'Avhieh evidently proved her gaiety was counterfeit. " My heart dictated an enquiry (whicli prudence and propriety repelled), into
into the cause of this, extraordinary change. " Two days after my arrival 4 in Noi 4 * folk, Netley entered my chamber one morning, Avhere I Avas reading, and congratulated me on my good fortune. * In Avhat Τ said I, laying aside my book. ' In making a conquest of so lovely a girl as Edith Barclay,' replied he. * You jest,' cried I ; 'if there be any conquest in the case, you certainly have the glory of making it.' * You are mistaken, I assure you,* replied he, very gravely ; ' 'tis for you the secret sigh of her soul lias been breathed. Her uncle made the disco¬ very this morning, and revealed it to me in confidence. All her languor, all
her melancholy ha ax beeu OAving to Avhat she believed a\ as a hopeless passion for you, in consequence of the uniform coldness ofyour manner toAvards her.' " I could no longer doubt his since¬ rity, and eagerly accounted for my coldness, by declaring the opinion I had conceived of her being attached to him, 4 It was jealousy made you think so,' said he ; * like loA r e, it often blinds the judgment. ' ' t He then iniormed me my addresses would meet with the approbation ofher uncle; and promised, on our-return to Kent, to have every thing arranged, in the most agreeable manner, for my im¬ mediate union. " I thanked him, in the most grate¬ ful terms, for the interest he took in my
. my happiness ; not, hoAveA^er, without feeling someAvhat surprised at receiving so unexpected a proof of his regard. " He led me to the feet of my blush¬ ing mistress, who heard my warm pro¬ testations of affection Avith a coldness and confusion \vhich would have chilled all my hopes, but for the prior assurance I had received of her attachment ; by degrees, however, she became less re¬ served, and I thought myself one of the happiest of men. Short and delusive ?vas my felicity : on the very night of this, as I imagined, auspicious day, I found, on retiring to my chamber, -Ensealed billet upon the table, direct¬ ed to me. Surprised at so strange a circumstance, I hastily tore it 4 open, and with increasing atonishment, not de¬ void of horror, read thefoüowing words, in a hand utterly unknown to me :— a*
" Treachery
tc Treachery is on foot ;—on perusal *>f this, repair vvith caution to the read- ' ing-closet adjoining Miss Barclay s dress¬ ing-room, and you will be thoroughly convinced that the av riter of these lines- has not deviated from truth."
" î shall pass over the feelings and sus¬ picions Avhich pervaded my soul, on the perusal of this note ; suffice it to say, ï obeyed the anonymous advice it contain¬ ed, ivithout loss of time, and stationed myself in the closet, which was elegantly fitted up as a library, and opened into Miss Barclay's dressing-room. I found the door of communication sufhciently open to let me see into the room, with¬ out being seen mystlf. It was now fit np, amt in a few minutes Miss Barclay entered, followed^ to my h> txpressible astonishment, by Netley.
"She
" She threw herself upon a sofa, and reproached him witii having made her the most miserable of women ; he re¬ plied to het reproaches av ith gentleness, declaring his conduct should not excite such bitter resentment* since it ivas owing not to his own inclination, but to his father's, " In 'short, I soon found he had triumphed alike over her affections and her honour ; ■ and that rit Avas merely írom a wibh to save her reputation, as she Avas in a situation· to betray her in* discretion, that she consented to accept? my hand. "í Solely dcA'Qted to his own gratifi¬ cations, Netley could not. be restrained by any regard for the unele, írom taking advantage of the, innocence « of tlie niece. He thought too* it was fair? to entrap those Avho had attempted to enttap him; for it was evident that Barclay
Barclay had introduced him to his niece, for the express purpose of draAving him into a ma-rriàge Avith her; a measure, from Avhich his proud and ambitious soul revolted, disdaining the idea of an union Avith any woman, Avho was not of illustrious birth, " The imprudence of Barclay gave him all the opportunities he could de¬ sire of effecting his designs—designs v/hich he \'eiled under an appearance of indifference. "Thus did he tuf n against Barclay that art he had infused, in a great de¬ gree, into his mind, and foil bim at his ' own Aveaports. " But unwilling to have a quarrel Avith him, aVhe found him necessary to¬ bis pleasure, tie no sooner learned that there Avas a probability of* his baseness being discovered by its consequences, thau
than he contrived the scheme vou are already acquainted with, to prevent any thing disagreeable fiom happening to himself; pretty certain of its being sue* cessful, from the admiration I in\ 7 olunta- rily betrayed for Miss Barclay ; he ac* cordingly prevailed on her to confess a partiality for me to her uncle, Avho, I have reason to believe, at that very moment, knew the contrary, and was well acquainted with the real state of tlie case* but thought it better to feign ignorance öf what could not be remedied5 nor even resented, Avithout losing, in all probability, the patronage of a family, who, he yet hoped, would tlevate him to the eminence he was am¬ bitious of attaining. " I burst upon the guilty pair with an indignation which darted in light¬ ning from nry eyes. Miss Barclay shrieked and fainted, , ftud Nctley> wildly
wildly starting from his knees, hastily exclaimed— ' Greviile, you cannot pardon me l * Pardon thee l I cried, with inef¬ fable contempt ; t Avretch ! canst thou pardon thyself?' " I Avas quitting the room, when Miss Barclay, slowly reviving, implored me to pause for a moment. I hesitated and still drew nearer to tiis door, Avhen suddenly rising, she tottered towards me, and falling at my feet, implored me to have pity on her, and not publish her disgrace. ' I do not descn-e A r our merc\ r —I do not deserve your compassion, ' she cried ; ' your generosity Avill therefore bc greater in extending any to me. Should my uncle know Avhat has happened, I shall be driven from his house with vol. ir. d ' infamy
infamy and scorn, Avithout having a friend, a home in the Avide Avorld to re¬ ceive me !—What the consequences of such desertion must be, you may easily picture to yourself.—Oh ! doom mc not, therefore, to more dreadful horrors than I already experience !—Be softened in my favour, by my solemn assurance of rejoicing, instead of regretting your escape from the snare spread for you l " I told her she had nothing to ap¬ prehend from me, and abruptly retired ; fearing to continue any longer in the room Avith my perfidious friend, lest my indignation against him should burst into Ariolence, that, on his father's ac¬ count, I Avished to avoid. " I determined to take an eternal, 1??? ? ? of Barclay's house the next morn¬ ing. Miss Barclay heard of my prepa¬ rations for departing, and had a letter conveyed to me, the purport of which Avas
' was to remind me of my promise, and conjure rite not to think of returning to Kent before Netley, lest my doing so should excite enquiries that might lead to the discoA ery she dreaded. 4 c In a short ansAver I satisfied her on this head, informing her that I was going upon a little tour I had long me¬ ditateti, and that she might depend on the faith I had pledged to her. " I departed, without beholding either her or Netlev, and took a cold leave of Barclay, t» tt I prolonged my tour to a fort¬ night, though my mind was too much disturbed to permit me to derive any great pleasure from it ; I then turned homcAvards. Within a few miles of Sir Hugh's, I stopped to give some refresh¬ ment to my horse ; I had scarcely en¬ tered the inn, when I was accosted by one of the Baronets tenants, who coming d2 ' up
up to me, begged IcaA'c to shake mc by the hand, and offer his congratula¬ tions on my at length obtaining the long promised living; an account of the old incumbent's death havina: reach* cd Netlcy House the preceding even¬ ing. "The idea of immediate independ¬ ence re-animated my spirits ;« I rejoiced to think I should no longer be obliged to live under the roof Avith a man I abhorred ; and speedily remounting my horse, I soon found myself at Sir Hugh's. tc The family were just sitting down to dinner ; I entered the parlour Avith¬ out hesitation, and Avas eageriy ap¬ proaching Sir Hugh, when I felt myself suddenly chilled and transfixed by the coldness and seventy of his looks ; in a peremptory tone he commanded the butler, avIio was about placing a chair at
at the table for me, where I should have told,you both Netley and Barclay were seated, to desist, 4 You have no longer, Sir,' said he, directing his eyes sternly towards me, 'a seat at my table ; —and the only obliga¬ tion you can confer upon me, or I can; acknowledge from you, is that which will result from your withdrawing your* self from my house immediately.' " I leave you to judge Avhat my feel¬ ings Avere at these Avords. Pride, re- sen tmeut, indignation raised a Avhirl- Avind in my soul, Avhich shook my frame. I Avould have demanded—I Avould have insisted on knowing the cause directly ofthe indignity Avidi which I Avas treat¬ ed, as a common act of j tis tice to my¬ self, had not the swelling passions of my heart opposed my utterance, and compelled me to retire precipitately, lest I should afïbrd a greater triumph υ 3 ta'
to Barclay and Netley than I had yet done. " I traversed my chamber in a state bordering on distraction ; nothing, per¬ haps, being more agonizing than' to know we are traduced, Avithout having the power of vindicating ourselves from the aspersions cast upon us : and such was my case. I saw I was vilified in the opinion of Sir Hugh ; but, as I Avas confident the falsehood Avhich had ruin¬ ed me, Avas fabricated hy his son, I kneAV ail appeals to his justice would be unavailing. " Netley, in short, detested mc ever since I had discovered the perfid)" he meditated against me, and Avas conse¬ quently determined to effect my de¬ struction. So true is this remark—> ti Forgiveness to the injur 1 *«! does belong j * { But they ne'er pai don who have done the wiong.*" "Ere
" Ere I had regained any degree of composure, the butler, avIio had been an inhabitant of the house long before I entered it, came to me. 1 Ah ! Sir, ' said he, c I was grieved to witness the undeserved reception you met to-day; but don't despair— inno-. cence is, sooner or later, rewarded Jn this world as Avell as the next, and guilt punished.—Your enemies triumph iioav ; but, depend upon it, you avíU yet have the advantage of them.' *_/ " He then proceeded to tell me what indeed I Avas prepared to hear, from the behaviour of Sir Hugh ; namely, that, in despite of his solemn promise to me, he had bestow r ed the living upon Bar¬ clay. V t Artifice and falsehood,' said he, * have led my poor master astray ; for D 4 he
ir he has an honest heart, and Avould wil¬ lingly do no man injustice.' " He confirmed all my suspicions of Netley's being the person avIio had in¬ jured me Avith Sir Hugh ; though Avhat his allegations against me were, he could not tell. " I receiA-ed two letters from him, Avritten by my father, and their con¬ tents completed my misfortunes:—the first informed me of his having failed again ; the second, of his being in a most'languishing state of health, Avith¬ out any hope but Avhat Avas derived from the prospect of my independence, and being able to support my sister, a\ ho, he had reason to think, Avoukl soon be deprived of his protection ; and con¬ cluded bv mentioning the severe shock he had received from tlie cold manner in which Sir Hugh had replied to a let¬ ter acquainting him Avith his misfor¬ tunes.
tunes. —* He seemed to think,' said my father, f that I had expectations, of again experiencing his generosity;— Heaven knows, in encouraging such, an idea, he did me the highest injustice, as I ivould rather perish than attempt to encroach upon my friend. ' " I resolved to lose no time in going; to my father ; though I grieved to think the littie comfort, or rather the increased sorrow I should occasion him.- I tried to cheer myself, however, by hoping I might find % means of rendering myself serviceable to him. " Ere I departed I wrote to Su* Hugh,. proudly declaring my innocence, and total unconsciousness of ever having done any thing to forfeit his friendship. I accuseds him of the highest injustice· in having condemned me unheard ; and concluded by protesting, if I e\*er found the slanders ivhich deprived mç of his d 5 good
good opinion, pursued me into the world, I should take such measures as the laws of my country Avould enable me to use, to clear my injured charac¬ ter, and punish my accusers by ex¬ posing tbem to the open contempt they meritcd. " On my arrival in London, Avhithcr I journied, as you may believe, Avith a heavy heart, I found my poor father in obscure lodsrinffs, and almost in the last extremity. To have undeceived him at such a period as this, relative to my prospects, Avoukl have been the height of cruelty ; ami ï had the satis- faction of thinking he died in peace, at the idea he entertained of my happy situation and ability to ser\'c my sister, whom he recommended in the most af¬ fecting and energetic manner to my care.
"The
" The poor girl almost sunk beneath the shock she received on hearing of my χ real circumstances, Avith which, after the demise of her father, I could not delay informing her. Unable to pro¬ vide her a proper asylum myself, I ex¬ erted myself to procure her one in the house of a respectable and opulent family, Avith Avhom ??? Avere connected, and luckily succeeded. I iioav turned my thoughts to my own destination, but here indeed I Avas at a loss. Tis· true, from my long residence in the house of Sir Hugh, I had fbrmed many intimacies with people of high respect¬ ability and ample poAver to serve me ; but to their befriending me, I Avas pretty confident the desertion of Sir Hugh Avould be an insurmountable obstacle, ancl therefore determined not to pain myself by making applications Avhich I could scarcely hope would be ?? /ailing ; 'and here I involuntarily thought like Fielding— Iioav cautious should the great i> 6, be 4
be in discarding their dependants, since, in doing so, they often deprive them of the favour and countenance of the world ; it being natural to suppose they must huve merited this renunciation, or they Avould not have experienced it. " Unable to arrange any plan, being not more unwilling to apply to the con¬ nections of my father, than to those of Sir Hugh, most of them having sus¬ tained very considerable looses by his misfortunes, I Avandered about in a most forlorn and melancholy manner. In the course of those Avanderings, I chanced one day to behold my iriend, the AvidoAV, in a little shop in the en¬ virons, of Avhich she Avas the mistress ; her eyes encountered mine almost at tiie moment I beheld her, and she in¬ stantly beckoned me in. She expressed the utmost *joy at seeing mc ; but after ber first transports ????? abated, she gazed
gazed at me in silence for a few minutes, and then exclaimed, in a mournful tone— 4 Alas ! Sir, Avhat a pity that he, avIio has been so good a friend to others, should proA'e so bad a one to himself !' * t I entreated an explanation of these words, and she did not hesitate to in¬ form me, that she understood I had lost «V the protection of Sir Hugh through my own imprudence. " In short, from the information I collected from this honest creature, Avhich she received from the housekeeper at Netley House, who was a kmd of confidant of Lady Netley's, I Avas iioav enabled to develop the scheme which had been formed to ruin me. Netley, by a solemn promise of providing libe¬ rally for Miss Barclay and her infant, and screening her from public disgrace, prevailed
preA-ailcd upon her to lay the guilt of her seduction at my door ; her uncle affected to credit this assertion, because it was his interest to do so, as Netlcy assured him he should take care to make his father Avithdraw his favour entirely from me, and endeavour to make him some reparation for the injury I had done him, by doing for him Avhat he had formerly intended to do for me.— This Avas* the point liarclay had long been labouring to accomplish ; and so it Avas accomplished, he cared littie by what means. " Sir Hugh could not doubt the ve¬ racity of his son, and hcaid of mv sup¬ posed enorm itv Avith horror ; m ν false accusers artfully advised him to forbear from any reproaches on tfiesubj^|^Ä| 1 Z'* * * r J * til* 1 - ti ^^ ??^^ % also trom giving me any ¿atiSi&cUou its to the cause of my dismission* frpm his house, and the alteration in his con¬ duct. " Thev
" They also, in order to prevent any after repentance of Miss Barclay's en¬ dangering their schemes, sent her to France, Avhere, I learned, she died soon after the birth of her infant. " Acquainted with the nature ofthe crime aliedged aga i ust me, I Avas now enabled to stand forward in my own defence ; but ere my vindicatory letter reached Sir Hugh, he had paid the last debt to Nature. All hopes from this quarter being at an end, and my pro¬ spects more forlorn than ever, the good widoAV, Avho Avas the confidant of my distresses, and who uoav found I had been basely injured, interested herself so warmly in my behalf av ith a literary character of her acquaintance, of re¬ spectability İn his line, that I Avas put into a Avay of deriving some little ad¬ vantage from my abilities ; thus did she requite the little services I had formerly rendered her.—I became her lodger; and,
and, İn her innocent society, often lost those melancholy thougiits Avhich me¬ ditations on the future, and retrospec¬ tions on the past, occasioned. " I had not been above two months in her house, Avhen she w as seized with a lingering disorder ivhich terminated fatally. Her principal anxiety at this awful and melancholy period was about her daughter, avIio still continued Avith her, and ? -vhose youth, inexperience, and beauty made her mother tremble at the idea of the dangers to ivhich she might, to Avhich she would, in all pro¬ bability, be exposed, Avhen deprived of her protection. " A residence under the same roof with this young creature, her engaging attentions, and apparent amiableness, had created an interest, a tenderness for her in mý heart, whicli nothing but the unpleasantness of my situation with¬ held
held me from divulging. One day, however, as the mother was dwelling upon the usual theme, I was unwarily led iuto a confession of my sentiments for her daughter, and the motives which had hitherto rendered me umvilling to ie\ r eal them. " She heard me Avith surprise and delight, and explicitly declared that, Avere my situation still more unpleasant than it Avas, she should die happy if she left lier child under my protection. " You may believe I did not raise any obstacles to her Avishes, nor did her daughter; and a feAv day3 before her death Ave were united. " From the knowledge our readers have already acquired of Mrs. Greville, it is scarcely necessary to say that Mr. Gre¬ ville was utterly ignorant of her real disposition.—Vain, arrogant, and am¬ bitious,
bitious, she Avas continually forming schemes to raise herself to the summit she sighed to attain. Her mother, be¬ fore whom she did not practise that de¬ ception she did before others, did all in her power to correct the propensities she regretted, and Avhich Avere concealed Avith the most consummate art from the eye of casual observation ; but her en¬ deavours to do so Avere ineffectual, and she shuddered to think of the ills to which they might ultimately lead ;—to the imprudence they more than once occasioned, were already to.be attributed many sorrows. She weli kneAV that, to the manner in which her daughter had acted to¬ Avards him, in hopes of making an ho¬ nourable conquest, might in a great de¬ gree be imputed the libertine attempts of Netley, and the consequent resent¬ ment of his family ; and she gladly em¬ braced the idea of uniting her to Greville, iu
in order to free herself from the appre¬ hensions she entertained on her ac¬ count. To this union the young lady Avould scarcely have consented, in the present situation of his affairs, had she not flat¬ tered herself he Avould recover some of his former friends, and, by their means, be extricated from all his ditnculties. * t The death of the worthy widow, " continued Mr. G revillé, t í Avas speedily folloAved by other misfortunes Avhich, from being less expected, were more calculated to overwhelm us. 1 avHI not exhaust your patience by recapitulating what they were ; suffice it to say, I found myself nearly deprived of the means of subsistence, and so unaAOİdably involv¬ ed, that. I dreaded every moment the ' *! loss of libertv. V
" Perhaps
" Perhaps you cannot well picture a situation much more distressing or de¬ plorable than Avas mine at this juncture : » I not only found myself almost at the loAvest ebb of fortune, but saw the wo¬ man,- whom I tenderly loved, destitute of the comforts essentially necessary for her. Yet still I did riot suffer myself to sink into despair ;—and my hope and confidence in ???? ? ?? were rewarded. " By means, not more unexpected than sudden, I Avas relieved from my embarrassments—a conviueiug proof that often «* Wnen Fortune means most good to men, i{ She looks upon them with a threatening eye." " From that period I have led a tran¬ quil and a happy life, unen vying, as vmenvied by the great ; and Avith truth may say, Avithout e\er breathing a sigh at the narrowness of my fortunes, till I felt
felt prevented by it from obeying the dictates of friendship. " But I not only hope, but believe, that the delay of your Avishes Avill add to yonr happiness Avhen they are com¬ pleted ; for, trust me, felicity never is so thoroughly enjoyed, as Avhen it has succeeded pain and disappointment.— But, my dear young friend, be not rash -—be not too impetuous in the pursuit of those measures Avhich you think may accomplish it. " Precipitancy more frequently re¬ tards, than ronvards our designs.-—I know you will excuse Avhat 1 say, par¬ ticularly AvJien I assure vou anv advice I V *. */ offer, is not dictated by an idea of su¬ perior understanding, but superior ex¬ perience. " Young, undesigning, and ardent, you arc now, for the first time, about launching
launching into the Avorld, your OAvn un- controuled master—into a Avorld, Avhere snares of the most destructive nature are continually spread for people of your temper, Avhieh İt requires the ut¬ most circumspection to aAoid. On the counsels ofyour heart keep a continual Avatch ; iu your disclosures be reserved ; confide not in professions, till you have some proof of the sincerity of those who utter them ; and, aboA-eall, let not bril¬ liant talents allure you into society you knoAv to be unworthy of your esteem ; for in admiring, avc too often cease to con¬ demn—and Avhat we cease to condemn, it is not unnatural to suppose avc may be led to copy. " Egbert felt truly grateful fbr the soli¬ citude Mr. Greville manifested for his welfare ; he acknowiedged his advice was Avell applied to him, as he had an impetuosity in his temper, too apt to hurry him away, and prevent the proper exercise
exercise of his judgment ; but, hence¬ forth, he protested his determination of trying to restrain it, from a full con- viction ofthe errors and unhappiness it might otherwise lead him into.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. fl Theu*s such sweet pain in parting, ** Th.it I couid hang for ever on th} arms, <* Ar.d look aw ay rny life ¡nto thy eyes !" Otway. JL HE shadoAvs of evening ????? iioav descending fast. Greville and Egbert returned to the village : in their Avay tliither, GrcA'ille gratified the curiosity of Egbert, by informing him that Bar¬ clay did not long enjoy the living he had obtained so basely ; and that Net- ley, neither improved by age nor by ex¬ perience, still lived unhonoured, and would, in all probability, die unlamented. He
He also told him that the person whqse anonymous warning had saved him from the artifices of his false fiiend, was a servant who attended them both to College. On a little verdant mount, at the ex¬ tremity of Greville s garden, between two high and spreading trees, a rustic bench Avas placed, " o'er-canopied hy luscious A\ r oodbine^" it commanded a view of the village, and an exten¬ sive and variegated prospect, too ro¬ mantic for the ??? of ta&te ever to be weary of viewing. In this retreat, which he had long dedicated to love and friendship, Mr. Greville particularly delighted ; here he loved to listen to the « hummings of his bees, whose hives were ranged on either side ; and here he cul¬ tivated the choicest flowers ;—so that * it like * vol ικ s "Pon.o:ia's
" Pomona's arbour smild, " With flowVets deckM, and fragrant smeJls.'* It Avas here that Egbert found Jacin¬ tha Avaiting his return. The lingering sunbeams Avere iioav dying away upon the summits of the distant mountains, and ?11 Avas be¬ coming a dreary scene, uncertain if beheld ;* when the moon rising from behind a thickly ?vooded hill, " un¬ veiled her peerless light," and touched the surrounding prospects with a meek¬ ness of colouring, which softened and increased their beauties ;—the various sounds which had fluctuated on the air by day, were noAv over ; the flocks had ceased their bleatings ; the village murmur was become faint and indis¬ tinct, and the song of the nightingale alone prevailed throughout the ???ods, whilst
• The
«* The beetle, with hts drowsy hum, «* Rung the first watch of night j and *< m. — . . , - ?? ι-1- oft, with careless wing, «« Brush'd the dew from many a weeping flow'r. *· The softness and stillness of the scene Avere not, by any means, calculated to dispel the melancholy which had taken possession of the mind of Egbert and Jacintha ; on the contrary, they revived a thousand tender remembrances in their minds, Avhich at once tortured and afflicted. " Oh Egbert !" exclaimed Jacintha, in reply to the arguments he used, at once to conceal his own dejection and try to lessen her's; " Oh Egbert ! you avíU enjoy comparatİA'e happiness com¬ pared to me ;—neAv pursuits, neAv so* ciety cannot fail of subduing, or at/ least diverting your sadness ; but here, amidst scenes, among objects so fami- E fí liar
liar to us both, Iioav can I hope to con¬ quer mine ?" " By the efforts of reason," said Egbert ; "which must convince you of the little probability there is of a long separation betAveen us." «> "Oh! could I hope it Avould be a short one," cried Jacintha, "how light¬ ened should I feel ! But I dread your per¬ severing in the enterprise you have un¬ dertaken, regardless of difHeulties or dangers. I fear that, even if you re¬ covered part of your property, you would still delay your return, in hopes of regaining the whole, hoAvever distant or uncertain the prospect of doing so appeared." Egbert assured her this apprehension was groundless; and that it was his fixed determination, if he beheld little likelihood of his exertions being croAvned Avith
with success, to return to Europe imme¬ diately, in order to try and devote them to some better purpose. A long and interesting conversation noAv took place, in the course of Avhich, Egbert mentioned some ideas which had been suggested by her father and himself relative to his future destination, in case he found it impossible to recover what was lost. Several matters too, which neither he nor Jacintha had be¬ fore spoken of, from an umvilbngness to touch upon the moment of departure, were now finally arranged. Egbert made Jacintha solemnly promise to in¬ form him of every thing which happen¬ ed to her during his absence ; and she, in her turn, insisted upon his being equally unreserved iu his communica¬ tions. Most reluctantly they rose to obey a summons to supper. Ere they returned e 3 to>
to the house, Jacintha made Egbert pause to obseive a group of villagers, Avho had just assembled, as Avas fre¬ quently their custom, upon a little . "moonlight glade" adjacent to the inn, to dance to the simple music of the harp : the loud shouts of laughter, Avhich resounded on every side, proved that the feelings of their hearts were in per¬ fect unison with the lively strains to which they kept time. " Here, Egbert, " said Jacintha, who still feared that, notwithstanding all his protestations to the contrary, he might be induced, by the ardent desire she knew he felt, of placing her in a situa¬ tion more elevated than she had hitherto been in, to prolong his stay in theW T e¡st Indies, if there Avas the least chance; however remote, of recovering his for¬ tune; "here, Egbert," said she, press¬ ing her hand upon his arm, "is a con¬ vincing proof that wealth is not abso¬ lutely
lutely essential to felicity. Can imagi¬ nation picture to itself y in any station, greater happiness than ? experienced by these rustics ? and yet they are not more ignorant of luxuries, than destitute of the means of obtaining them. " Ofthe shortness of life you your* self have spoken ; Avaste not, therefore, its fleeting moments in toiling after riches, which we see may be done Avith¬ out; and which, perhaps, instead of adding to its enjoyments, might mar them : for too often, I believe, our wishes increase in proportion to our sup«· posed poAver of gratifying them, till at length they become uncontroulable, and consequently tormenting." "Oh my Jacintha !" cried Egberts who perfectly comprehended the mean¬ ing of this speech, gazing upon her pale face, now " combating 'tAveen smiles and tears," and clasping her to his e 4 bosom
VISIT.' bosom as he spoke, £ ' canst thou, not less. fovely than belov T ed, imagine I Avould waste moments, which might bc devoted to thee, in idle pursuits ; or delay, an instant longer than is necessary, a re¬ turn which, I trust, Avill put me in pos¬ session of my most ardent wishes ?" A second summons now obliged them to hasten to the house. They found Woodville and his sister in the parlour : ,a heavy cloud hung upon ????? broAv except upon Mrs. Greville's and Ger¬ trude's, Avhich ?? efforts could dissipate; and, at an early hour, the little party broke up. Egbert had been advised, both by Mr. GrcviMe and Woodville, to avoid taking any particular 1??? ? ? of Jacintha, ivhich, they assured him, could only be productİA'e of pain ; he accordingly pro¬ mised, though with infinite reluctance, to
NOCTURNAL «Sli' to set off in the morning, Avithout seeing; her. But when they Avere about separating for the night, his· emotions nearly be¬ trayed this intention. He seized her. hands as she Avas quitting the room, and pressing them Avith the most pas¬ sionate fondness to his lips and bosom, imperfectly articulated something like a farewel. A significant glance from Mr,- Greville suddenly restored him to recol¬ lection, and he immediately permitted her to retire ; still persuaded that he did not mean to depart till after breakfast the next morning. ?* By the first glimpse of day Egbert stole from his chamber, Avhere he had passed a sleepless night, and quitted the house Avithout meeting any ofthe family, having previously taken a most affec¬ tionate leave of Mr. Greville.« e 5 Punctuali
, Punctual to the hour, he saw Wood¬ ville approaching at the instant he left the house, and they proceeded together to the bridge, where, as had been settled, they found the groom with their horses. Here Egbert involuntarily paused, and looked back ; he seemed to want reso¬ lution to tear himself from a place, which contained all that was dear to him in life. Something like a gloomy presen¬ timent of ill pervaded his mind, which he condemned himself for weakness in indulging, yet had not power to shake off; once more he wished to have folded Jacintha to his heart—once more he wished to have heard her repeat assu- , ranees of eternal constancy and truth, almost persuading himself he should not have felt so unhappy if he had taken that leave his heart dictated· The
The melancholy appearance of every thing at this early hour, contributed not a little to increase his dejection: the shadoAvs of night Avere as yet but inv perfectly withdrawn ; no spiral smoke, ascending from amidst the tufted trees, which embosomed the cottages on the green, proclaimed the rising of the children of industry and labour ; a few straggling sheep, nibbling the Avet grass, Avere the only animate objects to be seen. " This dreary prospect resembles mine* at present, " tliought Egbert ; " but the resemblance will not long continue ;—· a bright and glorious sun will soon dis-? pel the gloominess of this ; but days, nay months must elapse ere I can hope, for any change in mine !" " Come, Oswald," cried Woodville who began to suspect he meant to delay his departure till he had seen Jacinth», e 6 anet
and who wished to prevent an intervieAV which could not fail, he was sure, of causing additional pain to both ; " the morning air is cold and damp ; Ave shall be quite chilled if we stand here any longer." Egbert laid his hand upon his horse, as if going to mount; then again pausing, he once more directed his eyes towards Jacintha's window^ " Farewel, my love !" he inwardly exclaimed, " may peace, may health, may happiness be thine !—and may avc meet, even sooner than Ave expect, to part no more !" Then vaulting into the saddle, he in¬ stantly rode off, and soon lost sight of Wyefield and its environs.
CHAP.
chap. v. « When thy iovM aîght shall bless my eyes again *' Thea will I own, I ought not to complain, ** Since that sweet hour is worth whole years of pain·** JACINTHA was deeply affected when she found Egbert had departed without seeing her ; but, as soon as she had somewhat recovered from the shock the intelligence gave her, the arguments of her father in some degree reconciled her to his having acted in tliis manner, by convincing her that contrary conduct would only have been productive of ad¬ ditional pain to both..
Slie
NOCTURNAL VIST*. She now exerted herself to bear with patience a separation that could not be avoided, and encouraged, as much a» possible, hopes of its being a short one, Egbert, according to his promise, was punctual in writing to her during his continuance in England ; his last fetter, written the A^ery hour he was about em¬ barking, was brought to her by Wood¬ ville, after an absence of a fortnight, and contained the most fervent decla¬ rations of affection, and solemn assu¬ rances of expediting as much as possible his return. About a week after he had sailed, Mr. Greville was agreeably surprised by receiving a letter from his sister, Mrs. Decourcy, who had been absent many years in the East Indies, informing him- that she and Mr. Decourcy were arrived in England, and proposed paying him an almost immediate visit. These
Mr. Greville; their long separation not having diminished the tender affectiou he felt for his sister, Avhom he had de¬ spaired of ever seeing again. They also diffused a general joy throughout his family. Jacintha was truly pleased at the idea of being intro¬ duced to a relation, of whom she had heard so amiable, so interesting a cha¬ racter; and Mrs. Greville and Gertrude were delighted to think of the conse¬ quence they should derİA*e from the ap¬ proaching visit ; not doubting that it would gİA'e their neighbours an oppor¬ tunity of judging, in some degree, of the immense wealth of Mr. Decourcy ; nor were they less charmed at the thoughts of the handsome presents, wliich, from former acts of generosity, they had every reason to believe they should receive on the present occa¬ sion. fr These
These agreeable hopes and expecta¬ tions almost obliterated the grief which Gertrude felt for the departure of Cap* tain Bellamy ; Avho, Avith Lord GAvy- therin, and all his Lordship's visiters,, had-quitted the Park in the middle of tlie week, and Avho, during hi« con¬ tinuance there, had contrived to make a deep impression upon her heart ; from which, hoAvever, he was preA r ented de¬ riving any advantage, not more by the circumspection of her father than the vigilance of her mother, Avhom pride rendered prudent, and who perceiving his designs, took care to guard against them ; but though all hopes of obtaining the victory he had meditated were over, he did not depart without taking a very tender leave of Gertrude, protesting he meant to have married her privately* and ·« That if JoTehad set htm in the place of Atlas, " And laid tbe weight of Heav'n and Gods upon hiro," he
he could not have been more oppressed than he was at the idea of parting from her. A feAv days after he had the plea- - sure of hearing from her, Mr. Gre¬ ville had the superior pleasure of em¬ bracing his sister. Though the bloom of youth Avas over, the elegance of her person, the regularity of her features, the SAAeetness and animation ofher coun¬ tenance still rendered Mrs. Decourcy a most attractive object ; nor were her manners less calculated to please and captivate, than her appearance ; frank, cheerful, and obliging, they evinced her disposition to be candid, generous, and humane. The figure and deportment of Miv Decourcy were commanding; his un¬ dei standing Avas strong, and highly cul¬ tivated, and he was neither destitute of sensibility nor benevolencç ; but there was
was a haughtiness, a resent, a kind of sternness in his temper, which, in a great measure, overshadoAved the more amiable qualities of his mind. Incapa¬ ble himself of deviating from the strictest integrity, or intentionally injuring any person, he could find little excuse in his own mind for the misconduct of others. His rigid notions of honour coukl at all times overcome his humanity ; and, al¬ together, he was a man much more calculated to engage esteem, than con¬ ciliate affection. He formed but few attachments, and never dissolved any without being able to assign a sufficient cause for doing so. That for his wife Avas infinitely more ^fervent than perhaps might be supposed, from the description we have given of him ; he loved her indeed with a tender¬ ness that might almost have been called romantic, and she was deserving of the passion she had inspired. Yet, not¬ withstandmg
withstanding their mutual affection, their affluent fortune, their extensÍA T e power of conferring benefits, they Avere not truly happy : they served to prove, what daily experience must confirm, that felicity is neA T er perfect in this life ; and that it is only in a better and a future world Ave can hof>e to enjoy it AvMiout interruption or diminution. By the-fcAv, and they Avere but a few, who kneAV of their disquietudes or regrets (for they were as little ostentatious in their griefs as in their charities) the death of their children was the supposed source from whence they originated;- but there was a secret cause not more carefully concealed than unsuspected. The pride and vanity of Mrs. Greville were highly gratified by the elegant style in which they travelled to Wye- field ; but here was another convincing proof that unalloyed 'happiness is not to be
be attained in this state : that which she experienced on the present occa¬ sion, was considerably lessened by the 'departure ofthe fashionable folks from the Castle, without even knoAving of her connection to people of such for¬ tune and consequence as her present visiters. There was also another, and a still more poignant cause for regret and mortification : Mrs. Decourcy shewed a decided preference for Jacmtha, which not all the artful insinuations of this, her supposed mother, could prevent* Mrs. Decourcy knew her sister-in-law too well to be biassed by her; though she was too amiable, and too sincerely attached to her brother to attempt com¬ municating, or even hinting to him the opinion she entertained of his wife.— Ignorance, in some respects, she be¬ lieved essential to happiness.
The
The heart of Jacintha ghwed Avith gratitude for her attentions ; they gave her the most exquisite pleasure, not from any idea of the triumph they af¬ forded her over her mother and sister, but from the pride, the delight she felt at being thought Avorthy of the regard, the particular notice of a person she herself so highly esteemed and ad¬ mired Mrs. Gîeville exerted all her talents to entertain her guests, Avho, by. their manner, gave her reason to belicA-e she had not exerted herself in vain. It Avas evident, however, that their principal gratification, in regard to amusement, was derived from excursions about the neighbourhood, and particularly into Wales. In these excursions they Avere accompanied by Woodville and his sister, who, I have already sakl, Avere related to Mr· Decourcy, and very graciously
graciously received by him, on his ar¬ rival at Wyefield. At the expiration of a month they talked of departing. Jacintha heard themr with regret ; she Avas uoav too much attached to Mrs. Decourcy to think of a separation Avithout sorroAV ; besides, she felt that in losing her so¬ ciety, she should lose a charm Avhich had diverted the sadness that oppressed her heart ever since Egbert quitted Wyefield, notwithstanding all her efforts to conquer it. She wats also perfectly aAvare that the presence of Mrs. Decourcy Avas her only -shield against the persecutions of her mother and sister, who, she clearly per- ceivedj were irritated to the highest pitch of malignancy against her, in consequence of the partiality Mrs. De¬ courcy had manifested for her. These
These painful reflections and appre¬ hensions compieteiy vanquished the cheerfulness she had forced herself to assume; spiritless and sad, her countenance denoted the dejection of her mind. How agreeably, how de¬ lightfully Avas this dejection dispelled by an invitation from Mrs. Decourcy to accompany ber to town, and reside . av ith her till her union Avith Egbert (of Avhom Mr. Greville had fully spoken to his sister) should take place. Mr. De¬ courcy seconded it with as much Avarmth as he generally displayed ; and Mr. Greville, who appeareel infinitely more pleased than surprised, instantly grant¬ ed Jacintha permission to accept it. · To give an adequate idea of Mrs. Greville's feelings upon this occasion is utterly impossible ; the rage she felt at Jacintha's being the object of attraction* both to Egbert and Lord Gwy therm, was faint compared to that she now experienced
experienced at her being taken under the protection of Mrs. Decourcy. The agitation of her mind Avas dis¬ cernible in her countenance; but, though she trembled Avith passion and resentment, she was prevented by selfish motives from giving either utterance. 'But the restraint she imposed upon her¬ self before Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy, she made herself ample amends for Avhen alone Avith her husband ; the dissimula·- tion she had so long practised then gave way, and her envy and jealousy relative to Jacintha were openly manifested. ,"She has entered my family," she exclaimed, scarcely articulate from pas¬ sion, " to be the bane of all my hopes and expectations. Only for her arti¬ fices, I am sure Gertrude would have been preferred to her by Mrs. Decourcy. —But she shall not enjoy her protec¬ tion—no, Mr. Gì e ville, she aliali not triumph
triumph over my daughter,— ï will in¬ form your sister she is no connection of our's ;—common justice must then in¬ duce 4 her to change her intentions in favour of Gertrude." 4 iC You err in thinking so," said Mr. G rcA'ille ; "J ustice, if she attends to it, must influence her to perseA-ere in any- kind intentions she may have formed for Jacintha." (C My suspicions then," criçd Mrs. Cí reville, Avith eagerness, " are well founded." " No," replied Mr. Greville, in a calm and rather solemn voice, " they are not.—I knoAv the nature of your suspicions—I know, from former hints, you doubt my innocence respecting Miss Barclay, and believe Jacintha to be her child and mine. A perfect ¿knowledge of my disposition had long vol. ii. f since,
VISIT* since, J hoped, tôumphed oa^ these un¬ just suspicions,—T cannot express the grief I feel at finding myself disap¬ pointed.—Many men, in a similar¿situa- tion, might yield to resentment ; but I can only regret not being sufficiently happy to obtain the esteem of my wife, after aa union of so many years." " You Avrong me," said Mrs. Gre¬ ville, Avho began to fear she had seriously offended him ; and as she knew, his displeasure was not easily proA r oked, so neither Avas it easily allayed. "No," cried Mr. Greville, « I do not wrong you ;—for how is it possible you can esteem the man whose veracity you doubt?—Nay more, how is it pos¬ sible you can bring up your children to respect a father, A\hose integrity you yourself suspect ?"
" Dear
" Dear me,** said Mrs. G^wiHe, bursting into tears, " Iioav cruel tò speak in such a manner ! I am sure it was "in consequence of Avhat you your¬ self said, that I dropped the unfortunate hint, which seems to have offended you «d so much. It Avas natural to suppose there must be some connection «between you and Jacintha, else Avhy should she have a claim upon the kindness of Mrs. Decourcy, Avhich your Avoids certainly implied she had ?" * "Ptest satisfied," said Mr. Greville, " Avith hearing me again most solemnly protest, Jacintha is in no Avay related to me or mine, " «, * " Why then speak in such a nai- ner?" asked Mrs. Greville; her apple- hensions of his displeasure yielding to her curiosity.
v %
<-i
" J cannot ansAver the enquiry," re·* plied Mr. Greville; "I therefore re¬ quest you may not repeat it. " "Yery well, Sir," ansAvered Mrs. G reville ; " but I am sure, if y ou corn- plain of. not obtaining my esteem, I haA*-e an equal right to complain of not obtaining your confidence ; by this time, I think I might have been thought worthy ? of learning the secret relativne to Jacintha's biith." * " Nothmg could excuse my divulg¬ ing it," said Mr. GreAille, " after the solemn promise 1 made to keep it ; and except the restrictions laİd4ipon me to presele it, should be Avithdrawn, of .which there is A^ery little probability, it must descend with me to the grave. " But come, my dear," continued he, taking her hnul, and evidently wishing to change the subject, " com¬ pose
pose yourself;—let not envy and jea¬ lousy disturb the tranquillity of your bosom—they are malignant guests, not more destructive to the virtue and gene¬ rosity,, than to the peace of those Avho ? harbour them,—Jacintha is an amiable 4 girl, deserving of the kindness of my * sister ; which; I am convinced, she has acquired merely from the innocent at¬ tractions ofher manner." Much more he said to convince her, t that as Mrs. Decourcy regarded Jacintha for her own merit, she would not be induced to forego any intentions she had formed in her favour, by learning she Avas not their offspring. Mrs. Greville, though no philosopher, after a little consideration, thought it expedient to submit with calmness to what was inevitable ; the storm conse¬ quently blew over Avithout doing any mischief. ? 3 Tavo»
Two days after the above conversa¬ tion, Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy, accom¬ panied «by Jacintha, departed for Lon¬ don ; as also did Miss Woodville and her brother, so that a very pleasant travelling party was formed. As the hour of separation approached, the tenderness of Jacintha's heart com¬ pletely overcame the involuntary resent- menther mother and sister's injurious conduct towards her had excited, and she would have taken a most affectionate leave of them, had not the repulsive coldness of their manner prevented her. Greville, as if to make amends for¬ that coldness, pressed her4o his bosom with the warmest tenderness, and be- stoAved a fervent blessing on her. Not¬ withstanding the joy she felt at being delivered from the capricious tyranny of her mother, she could not quit a place Avhere she had. lived so long—a place
place endeared to her by the remem¬ brance of the happy hours spent in it with her beloved Egbert, without an emotion of regret, Avhich filled her eyes Avith tears. The kind attentions and pleasant conversation ofher companions, hoAvever, soon subdued her painful emotions. ·"» The third morning from the com¬ mencement of their journey, the travel¬ lers Avere set down at Mr. Decourcy's^ lodgings in Piccadilly, the house he had taken in St. James's Square not being yet ready for his reception. From hence Mr. WoodA'ille and his sister proceeded to Mortlake, where their aunt, Mrs. Derwent, resided, at Avhose house Woodville had promised to pass the ensuing Avinter.
f'4 chap.
?????????????????
CHAP. VI. " Now cold despair '* To livid paleness turns the glowing red." MRS. DERWENT, the half-sister of Mr. Decourcy, was by no means pleased to hear that a relation df Mrs. De- courcy's was in future to reside under his roof; it was a circumstance that made her apprehensive he felt a prefer¬ ence for her family, which might prove highly detrimental to the interests of his OAvn,; a consideration that gave her extreme uneasiness, as her niece, Miss Woodville, the only being on earth whom she really regarded, required an additiou
l addition to her fortune, Avhich she had not the poAver of making to it, though her jointure Avas considerable, as an un¬ governable passion for shew and expence induced her to live up to the full amount of it. She Avas too great an adept, however, in the arts of dissimulation, to discover the jealous eye with which she looked upon Jacintha ; nor in any instance did she betray a deficiency of esteem and affection for Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy. Miss Woodville appeared equally fer¬ vent in her regard ;. Avhether it Avas mure sincere, is a point hereafter to be ascertained. Woodville, Avho never spoke but as he thought, Avho .never professed what he did not feel, unlike his aunt and sister, could not avoid making a dis¬ tinction in the attentions he paid to f o Mr.
Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy; thç former he coldly esteemed, the latter he Avarmly admired. % This distinction either was not no¬ ticed by Mr. Decourcy, or purposely overlooked by him, in consequence of his ardent affection for his Avife, Avhose merit he allowed to infinitely exceed his OAvn, and Avhom he therefore deemed entitled tp superior homage. Though this Avas neither a gay nor a fashionable time of the year to be in London, tliere Avas sufficient in the no¬ velty of every thing about her to afford amusement to Jacmtha, Avho could scarcely be persuaded that they did not mean to impose upon her simplicity, when they told iter (perhaps at the A^eiy moment she was preparing for a round of entertainments, or almost felt her head giddy, from the crowds Avhich had been passing and repassing, during the day,
day, before theAvindows) that the'toAvn was quite dull and deserted at present. After a residence of three weeks in the metropolis, during Avhich she saw every thing worthy of notice, or that could entertain her, she, accompanied Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy into Hertford¬ shire, Avhither thev Avent to visit a seat ' *l Avhich was advertised for sale. .4 ■v They took up their quarters in Hert¬ ford, the 'seat being situated near that tOAvn ; they found it perfectly agreeing Avith the description giv r en of it—a de¬ scription Avhich had pleased them highly. Mr. Decourcy therefore did not long deliberate about becoming the purchaser ; and, as the house Avas ready for the im¬ mediate reception of his family, he soon took possession of it. Highly as Jaciutha had been amused in London, she Avas not sorry to find ? 6 herself
herself again in the country ;—habit and disposition had attached her to it, for in rural scenes there is a sooth¬ ing tranquillity, which cannot fail of pleasing a mind of sensibility. Mr, Decourcy's ne\v mansion Avas a noble structure, superbly furnished, and surrounded by extensive pleasure- grounds, beautifully laid out, and wa¬ tered by a branch of the river Lea.— The landscapes Jacintha had been ac¬ customed to contemplate, had more of awful grandeur in them than those she now beheld ; but pastoral beauty here amply made up for the want of subli¬ mity. The rich and melloAV tints of autumn were now diffused over the Avoods, the •fields stood thick Avith corn, the harvest horn sounded in eA'ery direction, and the whole country presented scenes of joyous
joyous industry truly delightful to the benevolent heart. The Decourcys Avere visited by all the respectable families in their neighbour¬ hood, and a very pleasant society Avas soon established ; their time therefore glided away most agreeably in visiting, making exclusions about the countrv, and projecting improvements in their ???? domain. e But no amusement, no avocation, could render them, particularly Mrs. Decourcy, forgetful of the claims of poA'erty* or the obligations laid upon her by the bounty of Providence to benefit others ; her charities, hoAvever, were Avithout parade or ostentation ; like the fostering dews of heaven, they Avere dis¬ tributed in silence and secrecy to those they nourished.
Jacintha's
Jacintha's esteem and affection ibr her daily increased ; for scarcely a day passed in Avhich she had not some new cause for admiration and gratitude. But the regard she felt for Mr. De- ? courpy, bore no proportion to that she felt for Airs. Decourcy ; neither time nor intimacy subdued tîie reserve of his manner—a reserve ivhich chilled all the warm, the glowing feeiings, the real kindness of his actions were calculated to inspire. The latter end of autumn, the Wood- villes, accompanied by Mis. Denvent, paid a visit to Beech Grove, the seat of Mr. Decourcv. Three months had now *> elapsed since the departure of Egbert, and Jacintha Avas becoming not only anxious, but impatient to hear some tidings of him ; the imeashie^ occasion¬ ed by this anxiety and impatience was happily relieved, ere Woodville left the country, by a packet from her father, enclosing
enclosing letters from Egbert to her and Woodville/ the purpoit of Avhich were to inform them of his safe arri\ r al in Jamaica; his having there recei\ T cd such particulars as he required to know relative to the agent, and the pleasing prospect he beheld of being able to re¬ cover at least part of his property, and return tf) England sooner than he at first imagined he could have done. He desired these letters'might be an- SAvercd immediately, though at the same time he hinted the probability there was of his not receiving them directly on their reaching the place of destination ; as the business he \vas engaged in, woukl most likely oblige him to change con¬ tinually. Jacintha obeyed his request with transport ; she gave him a faithful nar¬ rative, according to her promise, of all that had happened to her since his de¬ parture, and fully expatiated on the happiness
happiness of her present situation^ from a conviction of the pleasure she should impart to him by doing so. But the delightful tranquillity dif¬ fused OA r er her mind by his letter, a\ as soon interrupted by the illness of Mrs. Decourcy. Two days after her visiters had left her, she Avas confined to her bed. Jacintha hoav became her constant attendant, and, by her ten¬ derness and assiduity, amply repaid the kindness she had experienced from her. Mr. Decourcy, not more alarmed than distressed by the illness of his wife, Avas truly sensible of any attentions that had a chance of mitigating it, and ex¬ pressed high obligations to Jacintha for her conduct; avIio shrunk from re¬ ceiving acknowledgments, which her gratitude couid not permit her to think herself entitled to. Airs»
Mrs. Decourcy continued a week in extreme danger; at the expiration of that period the disorder came to a crisis, and a visible change then took place for the better. V She had just fallen asleep one morn¬ ing, and Jacintha was reading by the bed-side, when a servant softly opened the door, and beckoned her from the room. " My master wishes to speak to you directly, in the parlour, Miss," said the maid. Jacintha immediately descended to it, and was seized with a sudden panic the moment she entered it, in conse¬ quence of the discomposure of Mr. De- courcy's countenance, which she could not possibly account for; having left him but a few minutes before, rejoicing at the favourable report which the phy-* sician
sician had made that morning of Mrs, Decourcy. * " I hope you ???*? not heard any ' unpleasant tidings,Sir," said she, trem¬ blingly approaching him. He motioned for her to take a seat, and looking* from her to the table on which he leaned, appeared ata losshow to answer. The idea of Egbert was ever upper¬ most in the mind of Jacintha ; and per¬ ceiving a newspaper upon the table, it instantly occurred to her that it con¬ tained some dreadful tidings from the West Indies, in which he Avas mention¬ ed as a sufferer. No sooner had this thought suggested itself, than Avithout giving herself time to reflect how very improbable it Avas that, had such been tli£ case, Mr. Decourcy, in the present situation of his family, would ???? per¬ mitted
mitted her to obtain a knoAvledge of it, she started wildly from her chair, and caught up the paper. "What is the matter?" exclaimed Mr. Decourcy, rising, and evidently alarmed by her manner. "Oh! tell rne," cried she," almost breathless with terror, " has any thing happened to him ?" " To Avhom ?" asked Mri Decourcy. "To Egbert—to Mr. Oswald," re¬ plied she. " Nothing that I know of.—But, my dear Jacmtha," continued Mr. De¬ courcy, Avith something like reproach in his voice and countenance, "is Mr. Oswald your only friend ?—You have relations-—you have parents—a tender, an indulgent father." "Ah l*
" Ah ! w cried Jacintha, starting, and clasping her hands together, " Avhat of my dear father ?" Mr. Decourcy put a letter into her hand, Avhich he said he had received but a few mmutes before; and Jacintha read as follows : "TO GEORGE DECOURCY, ESQ. " Wyefield, Nov. —- " SIR, "It is with extreme concern I break in upon your domestic happi¬ ness, with the distressing intelligence of your worthy brother-iii-laws illness ; but the alarming state which he is now in, very little hopes being entertained of his recovery, renders it necessary to apprize his friends of his danger.—You can better imagine than I describe the - anguish of his Avife and children, at the near prospect they behold of losing the most tender of husbands and of fathers. " Their
" Tlieir neighbours sincerefy* sympa¬ thize in their grief* for his virtues have rendered him universally bekn^ed ;—but, alas ! common sympathy can do little toAvards alleviating affliction like their's. If you, Sir, and your amiable lady, could make it coiwenient to come down to Wyefield, your presence, I am con¬ fident, Avould do more than any thing else could do, to support and console the unhappy family.—With respectful compliments to the ladies, " I remain, Sir, " Your obedient and very " Humble servant, " J, JONES."
" This is no time for ihe indulgence of grief," said Mr. Decourcy, on seeing Jacintha Aveeping in an agony over the letter; "exertion is requisite.—At all times, the best proof we can give of our
our regÉtó for those we love, is by making efforts to serve them. You mitst set out directly for Wyefield ; and be assured nothing but the situation of your aunt, should prevent me from ac- " companying you thither." i. He said he Avould himself break the melancholy tidings of her father's illness to Mrs. Decourcy, whom he declared he could not permit her to see before her departure, lest her emotions should agitate her. He desired her to be ex¬ peditious in preparing for her journey, in which he said his housekeeper should accompany her. Jacintha hastened to her chamber, and soon exchanged her present dress for a travelling one. Mr. Decourcy presented her with a pocket-book, con- * taining Bank notes to a pretty consider¬ able amount; and charged either her pr the housekeeper to write immediately $ upon
upon their arrival at Wyefield; pro¬ mising, in his turn, not to delay ac¬ quainting' Jacintha with every thing she could desire to knoAv respecting her aunt. They proceeded to St. Albans in Mr. Decourcy's chaise, and pursued the re¬ mainder of their journey in hired car¬ riages. * It Avas now the gloomy month of November, and every thing seemed changed since Jacintha had, a few short months before, traA r elled the same road ; but the alteration in the appearance of Nature Avas not greater than Avas the difference between her feelings noAV and at that period ; and never, perhaps, had she been so thoroughly convinced of the mutability of earthly happmess, as at the pteseiit moment.
Tliey
Tliey travelled Avith such expedition that, on the second night of their jour¬ ney/ they reached Wyefield. The heart of Jacintha beat with redoubled violence when, from the summit of a hill, she beheld the faint glimmering of the vil¬ lage lights, and reflected that, in a few minutes, her dreadful apprehensions ivould cither be confirmed or removed. Trembling and agitated, she leaned for a minute against the garden-gate, on alighting from the chaise, in order to try and recover a little composure ere she entered the house, to ivhich her eyes were eageriy directed. Darkness and silence seemed to reign within it, nor did the external scene appear less dismal and dreary. The night was dull and dark ; the heai r y clouds rested on the distant hills ; no trembling star, no moon looked from the sky ; the wind was up in the wood,, and whistled through its leafless branches ; the
NOCTURNAL VISIT. ?\ the stream ofthe A'alley murmured as if impeded in its course; and from the tree at the graA-e of the dead, the long- howling oavI Avas heard.—Shivering and sad, Jacintha approached the door, and knocking softly at it, Avas almost im¬ mediately admitted by Gillian.
vol. η. β CHAP.
CHAP. VII. *' Death ends our woes, «· And tht kind grave shuts up the mournful scene." DlLtDZS. JL HE looks of Gillian were not ex- pressİA-e of any surprise at beholding Jacintha ; instead, however, of answer¬ ing her eager though faltering enquiries, she continued at the door. ** For Avhom are you looking?" said Jacintha, perceiving she did not close it. * e Why, lauk a mercy, for Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy, sure !"
ft They liavé not come to Wyefield, ,, said Jacintha, * ? Dear a me, how sorry I be to hear soh— it will be grievous tidings formy poor Missus/* cop tinued Gillian, gently shutting the door, and leading the way into the parlour, which was dreary and deserted, though a decaying fire stiU glimmer-ed within it " Tell me of my father J" exclaimed Jacintha; u Gillian laid down the candle, and raised her apron to her eyes. "Telime, tell me/V cried Jacintha, ' Ci if what I fear has come to pass?'* Gillian shook her head, and turned ??'??.
« S
The
, * The melancholy truth iioav burst upon Jacintha; her heart sunk beneath the shock it ga\e her, and she would liaAC fallen to the ground, had not the house- ^ keeper caught her in her arms ; by the aid of restoratives, which the affrighted Gillian - hastily procured, her senses were gradually restored. The house¬ keeper then exerted all the eloquence she was misti e-^s of, to try and reconcile her to the event which had taken place ; but the common-place aiguments * she made use of, had no effect upon Jacintha. She wept in agony, and her affliction for her father was, if possible, increased by her having arrived too late to receive his last blessing. " Lauk a mercy, Miss," said Gillian, on hearing her express this regret, " I am sure you should be glad, instead of sorry, that you Avere not here ;—it w r as the mostmelancholiest thins; in the world to s& the poor dear soul a dying. To be sure,
, sure, if eA'er there \vas a saint upon earth, he was one :—he was so quiet, so good- natured'through all his sickness, though he kwew he could never recover." " Oh, my dearest father!" cried Jacintha, as she cast her eyes around the room, which revived in her remem¬ brance a thousand tender recollections of his goodness and indulgence to her, "Avhy was I not Avith you?—Had I entertained the smallest apprehension of what has noAv happened, nothmg should haA**e tempted me hence. —Oh ! little did I imagine, when in this room, this very spot, you bade me farewel, and blessed me, that it Avas a last farewel—a last blessing I was receiving !" She asked when he died, and Avas informed on the preceding day.—» She enquired in the tenderest manner about her mother and Gertrude, who, judging from her own feelings, she g 3 concluded »
> , concluded to be under the heaviest af¬ fliction, and for Avhom she felt a sym¬ pathy that reA^ived all the affection she had once borne them, and only ceased to experience in consequence of their Unkindness. Gillian informed her they Avere in¬ deed in A r ery great sorrow ; and that, Avorn out by fatigue, as AA-ere also all the rest of the family, they had retired to their chamber at a very early hour. The housekeeper hoav urged Jacintha not to delay any longer endeavouring to obtain some rest, and offered to pass the night Avith her; an offer which Jacintha accepted, and they were con¬ ducted to a chamber, Avhich, as it had been prepared for Mr. and Mrs. De¬ courcy, was extremely comfortable. Jacintha's mind was too much dis¬ turbed and distressed io permit her to sleep ;
KOCTURKAJÊ, VISÍT. ì%7 sleep ; sbe spent the night in tears ; and rising at the first glimpse of day, stole from the chamber, without being ob¬ served by her companion, to visit the remains of her father. With a trembling hand she opened the door of" tbe room in Hvhich they were deposited—with srill greater emo- ' tion she approached the bed upon Avhich thev were laid;—she shuddered, and *l r involuntarily shrunk back, as her eyes first fell upon them ; then again drawing nearthe bed, she gazed upon the pale countenance of liim she had supposed her father :—neither sickness nor death had deprived it of its benignancy ; but for the hollow eyes, the colourless lips, it might have been supposed he was in *% profound sleep. Jacintha, as if deluding her imaginat tion with this idea, scarcely breathed or moved for some minutes ; then kissing ? 4 the
the iey lips, her tears burst forth ?????; and kneeling down, she implored his departed spirit, ifit still hovered over this çartbly scene, to pardon all he had ever deemed amiss in her conduct—the little inadA r ertencies and errors into Avhich youth and inexperience might have led her ; for of ever having intentionally offended him, her heart acquitted her. Oh ! Avhat comfort did she derive from that acquittal !—Couid she noAV have reproached herself Avith ever having avîI- fully caused him pain—now that it Avas beyond her poAver to* make the smallest atonement for doing so, how dreadfully agonizing would have been her feelings í Utterly absorbed in grief, she remain¬ ed kneeling by the bed-side, till roused by the housekeeper, who, on- missing her, had instantly risen, and Avas direct¬ ed by Gillian to the chamber,* Avhithcr she naturally concluded she was gone.
She
Shb informed Jacintha tliat her mo- , ther and sister were in the parlour, im¬ patient to see her. Jacintha longed to have the first interview Avith them over, and Avith another lingering look at the pale countenance which had so t often beamed with kindness and benevolence upon her, she quitted the room, and de¬ scended to the parlour. On entering, the tears she had tried to suppress, gushed in torrents from her, and with expanded arms she flew to throw herself upon the bosom of har mother, who, Avith Miss Gertrude, Avas seated at the head ofthe breakfast-table ; but this Mrs. Greville prevented her from doing, by extending one hand to keep her at a distance, whiie Avith, the other she pulled out her handkerchief to« cover her face, as did Gertrude at the same instant. q 5 Shocked
Shocked by this conduct, which was not more cruel than unexpected, for affliction, Jacintha imagined, could not fail of softening the heart of her mo¬ ther; she threw herself, sobbing and trembling, upon a chair. "Ah, Miss!" cried Mrs. Greville, after tlie silence of a feAv minutes, "you may well lament, indeed," sloAvly Avith- drawing the handkerchief from her face as slie spoke ; " for you haA^e lost a real friend !" Jacintha clasped her hands together. ** But what is your grief compared to toor Gertrude's and mine ?" cried she '(here Gertrude, who had also uncover¬ ed her face, sighed, and attempted to look sorrowful); "for, according to the laws of Nature, you cannot feel as she and I do on tbe present occasion." Jacintha*
Jacintha, ignorant as she Avas of what this speech alluded to, could only sup¬ pose it was meant to insinuate that she did not possess so great a portion of" sensibility as her * mother and sister— an insinuation which only hurt her, as it tended to prove she was stiil as little regarded as ever by them ; and one of the most ardent wishes of her heart was to live upon terms of amity and affection* with such near relations. " So Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy wouid not condescend to come down r 4 cried Airs. Greville, after pausing a moment, to try Avhether Jacintha would make any reply to Avhat she had just said ; their refusing to do so, does not agree with the professions of regard they made for their poor brother." " Good Heavens! Madam,** ex¬ claimed Jacmtha» who» now felt a^e~ gree of resentment, Avhich the fbtrntr ? & wordsi
words of Mrs. Greville had failed of inspiring; "you wrong them if you doubt the sincerity of their profes¬ sions. " She then proceeded to explain the situation of Mrs. Decourcy at the time Mr. Jones's letter arrived. " Well, I am glad to hear fheir not coming does not proceed from a want of regard," said Mrs. Greville; "for iiothing hurts one so much, particularly in the hour of affliction, m unkindness and neglect from those with whom wc lire connected." , " Nothing, indeed," said Jacintha, emphatically, and looking expressively ? ? her mother as she spoke. Mrs. Gre¬ ville either did not, or Avould not, pre¬ tend to understand the meaning of these glances ; and, after asking a few trilling questions of Jacintha, relative to
to her journey, the housekeeper, Avho had hitherto modestly forborne to make her appearance, v/as summoned to breakfast. As soon as it was over, she sat doAvn, by Jacintha's desire, Avho Avas herself unequal to the task, to acquaint Mr. Decourcy Aviih the melancholy event which had taken place. In the course of the day, Jacintha put into her mother's hands the pocket- book which she had received from Mr· Decourcy, and which she could not "avoid seeing, imparted to her much pleasure and consolation ; indeed, in every instance, it was evident that her grief Avas of a yielding nature; and that, notwithstanding the virtues, the tenderness, the uniform indulgence of lier departed husband, he wouid soon cease to be remembered with regiet by her» Jacmtha
* Jacintha Avas astonished at this want of feeling ; she tried, hoAvever, as much as possible, to prevent her thoughts from dwelling upon it, lest it should utterly efface the sentiments she wished to entertain for her mother.
CHAP.
% ?
CHAP. VIII. " Envy, like the fun, doet btat « With scorching rays on a)a-thats.high and great.'* Waller. ? IME passed mournfully with Jacin- « tha ; she everv where missed her father ; his little study, his neglected garden, his forsaken bower, continually brought to her view the loss she had sustained, and impressed her mind with the deepest sad¬ ness. All her apprehensions, her dis* quietudes about Egbert now returned, and she could not help wishing to quit a place which, at present, strengthened the most corroding regrets* 6 At
NOCTURNAL VISIT. At the expected time, a letter arrİA-cd fr ?? Mr. Dec ourcy, atldressed to Mrs. Greville. It contained the most tender condolence on lier late loss, and solemn assurance of befriending to the utmost of his power, botli her and her family ; lie confirmed to her the set¬ tlement he had made upon Mr. Gre¬ ville of two hundred a year, and said he had also instructed his agent to hcttle every thing relative to the fune¬ ral, and provide mourning for the fa¬ mily, lie mentioned Mrs. Decourcy"s slow amendment, the deep regret she felt at her brother s death, and her strong anxiety for Jacintha's return. This letter, far from inspiring Mrs. Greville Avith pleasure and gratitude, as might have been supposed from the contents, displeased and disappointed her. She had flattered herself that Mr. Decourcy Avould have invited her and Gertrude to spend at least the Avinter at his
his house ; and his not doing so, toge¬ ther wilh the ardent Avishes he expressed for Jacintha s return, mortified ana ir¬ ritated her too highly, to permit her to feel his generosity. Indeed, on this head, she did not deem him entitled to many thanks, as she tried to persuade herself that, in acting as he had done, he but merely fulfilled his duty. She could not entirely conceal her dis¬ satisfaction from Ja ein tha, neither the cause from Avhich it sprung ; she also hinted something like an intention of going to town, notwithstanding the cruel neglect of Mr. Decourcy, and her determination of keeping Jacintha with her till that period. Final arrangements ????? made for tlu? funeral upon the receipt of Mr. De¬ courcv's letter, and two days after it took place. ?И the family, Mrs. Gre¬ ville excepted, prepared to attend, as did
did most of the villagers ; for Greville was universally beloved. But Avhen Jacintha sav/ the coffin removing, when ahe reflected that in this world she should nexermore behold him, to whom she Avas so strongly at¬ tached by the ties ot affection and gra¬ titude, the fortitude w ith w hich -she had hitheito endeavouied to submit to the dispensations of Providence utterly fail¬ ed—she fainted, and Avas recon ? -eyed to her chamber. Orr reviving, she was left to indulge the anguish of her heart alone; for those who had ambled in recovering her, Avere impatient to join the funeral procession, whit h had* al¬ ready set out. Jacintha wept aloud,— The day was nov/ declining, and it*» fall¬ ing glooms, together wilh the solemn stillness Avhich reigned around, only in¬ terrupted by the dull reverberations of the bell, that sounded her father's sum¬ mons to his last dreary home, height¬ ened
ened, if possible, her melancholy.-—At length the bell ceased to toll ; Jacintha started from the bed on ivhich she had been placed, and hastened to a window commanding a view of the church-yard. She saAV the mournful procession enter¬ ing the church, preceded by the Clergy¬ man. She dropped upon her knees— she moved not—she scarcely breathed— she seemed as if she feared to disturb the solemn service. The church ivas lit up on this me¬ lancholy occasion, and, by the waver¬ ing lights from its windoAvs, she could discern the spot where her father Avas to be interred ; she saw, Avith something like a sensation of pleasure, that he ivas to be laid beside tlie tomb which Egbert had erected over tiie remains of his mo¬ ther and grandfather—a neighbour in death, as in life, to tliose whom he re¬ garded ! But the gleam of pleasure," if tlie sensation she felt at this moment could
could be styled so, faded away, on be- holding the villagers thronging round the grave, as if to take a last farewel. Her tears again burst forth.—"Fare¬ wel!" she cried, "my father, farewel for ever in this world !—in the next, I trust, Ave shall meet again !—Without such a hope, Iioav conld Ave support the anguish which attends a separation from those Ave lo\*e—how overcome the shivering horror Avhich seizes us, at be¬ holding their beloved remains con¬ signed to darkness and decay ?" After the funeral Avas over, the vil¬ lagers retired to tlieir respective homes, all but a few who accompanied the mourning family to their habitation. Jacintha Avas invited to the parlour, but she declined the invitation. Real grief, like real charity, is unostentatious, and she did not wish to leave retire* meut
ment till she could regain some degree of composure. She now endeavoured to do so ; she reflected upon the submission Avhich Avas due to the will of Heaven ; she reflect¬ ed upon the happiness to which the spi¬ rits of the just were transported, on their exit from this life ; and, by de¬ grees, the acuteness of her anguish gave way to these reflections. Her fortitude returned ; a soft and pleasing melancholy took possession of her mind, too soothing to her feelings to wish to have it interrupted. AVhen she thought of her father being now a blessed inhabitant of heaven, rejoicing Avith kindred angels in the glories of his Creator, she almost, in the itlea of his supreme felicity, lost the re¬ collection ofthe irreparable loss she had sustained by his death. Nature, how¬ ever,
ever, prevailed at intervals, and gush¬ ing tears proclaimed the keen perception ofthat loss being deeply impressed upon her mind. Mrs. Greville and Gertrude lost much of their melancholy after the funeral had taken place—a convincing proof that it had originated more from ásense of propriety, than from real soitoav. Their evident insensibility, as Avell as many unpleasant circumstances, made Jacintha ardently wish to quit them ; but, to her extreme mortification, on expressing a desire to return with the housekeeper to Hertfordshire, which she made Mrs. Decourcy's illness an excuse for doing, Mrs. Greville positÍA r ely de¬ clared she would not let her leave Wye¬ field, till she left it herself, which could not bc at least for a month. " You are really then going to Lon¬ don, Madam, " said Jacintha. " Yes,
" Yes, Ma'am," replied Mrs. Gre¬ ville ; " I suppose there is nothing Avon¬ derful in my doing so. Perhaps you think I haA'C no friends there ; but if you do,- you are very much mistaken ,¬ Ι ???'? many of my own relations there, of Avhom I have no reason to be ashamed, though*, to be sure, I can't boast of having a Nabob amongst them." " Ifyou could," said Jacintha, "it would be a very insignificant boast. It is of the virtues, not the opulence, of our friends, avc should be proud. " * t Oh dear ! you ahvays affected to be sentimental," cried Mrs. Grevrille, with a sarcastic smile, "no doubt for the purpose of obtaining admiration ; but if every one thought as I do, you would iw disappointed in your aim, for I detest affectation."
"So
<c So I perceive, Madam," said Jacin¬ tha; ''for I am firmly convinced you both act and speak from your real feelings. " <c I don't know, Ma'am," cried Mrs. Greville, her colour rising as she spoke, *' whether ,you mean, by this fpeech, to compliment me, nor do í care; though I am rather inclined to think the contrary, for I see you are horridly vexed at my not letting you leave this place immediately ; but I think you may reconcile yourself to a longer stay i u Wycfield, when you reflect on not having had any share in the late fatigue and trouble which all the rest of the family under¬ went " I 1 " Fatigue and trouble," «repeated Jacintha, involuntarily and wit-h indig-< nation, " good Heavens ! what an ex¬ pression.—Do you call it a fatigue and trouble
trouble to attend the dying bed of a husband and a father ?" " I beg, Miss, you may not mis¬ construe my expressions," said Mrs. -Greville, her colour still increasing, "I hope I knoAv my duty, and have eA r er performed it as Avell as other people. " Would to God I had been here," said Jacintha, Avithout attending to these last words, " to have shared your fatigue and trouble ! Would to God I had ??? here to ????? heard my father repeat the blessing, Avhich he so fer¬ vently, so sweetly bestoAved upon me in our parting moments—a blessing which it will be my boast, my pride to think I merited. " " Indeed he Avell deserved all the at¬ tention you could have paid him," cried Mrs. Greville; " of the extent of your obligations to him, you are not yet vol. ιί. ? aware,
aware, nor consequently ofthe gratitude you owe him," * " If you think I have not a perfect sense of these obligations," replied Ja¬ cintha, tc I shall be grateful to you, Madam, if you ivill enlighten me on the subject. " " Depend upon it I mean to do so," said M;s. Greville, with a malicious smile. To such smiles, however, Jacin¬ tha was too much accustomed to attach any particular meaning to this ; but,to our readers it may possibly give an idea of Mrs. Greville's real intention. She had, in short, finally determined to conceal no longer the secret relative to Jacintha. In A'ain the mild form of her husband seemed rising to her view, to reproach her for a determination so contrary to his wishes—his express de¬ sire ; she persisted in her resolution of making
making a discovery which, she trusted, ivould lessen Jacintha in the general estimation of the world ; and, above all, diminish, if not utterly depriv-c her of the regaul of Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy. That they Avould persevere in preferring her to Gertrude, after such a discovery, she could not suppose ; but if they did, she Avas pretty confident she should, hr some degree, be revenged upon them for doing so, by the censure wh ich such flagrant injustice must draw upon them from the world. To her extreme regret, her husband, as he had often told her would in all probability be the case, had gone to his grave, Avithout imparting to her any of the particulars she was so anxious to know respecting Jacintha ; ivhen con¬ vinced he could not recover, sbe artfully mentioned the name of Jaci n tha several times to him, in hopes it might lead to some inadvertent expression, that would ? 2 betray
betray the long concealed secret ; but Greville, clear and collected fo the last moment, never dropped a hint tliat could in the least degree gratify her curiosity ; on the contrary, he earnestly conjured her ????-? to undeceive Jacin¬ tha or the world, with regard to her not being allied to them ; he also spoke in the Avarmcst manner of the virtues of l·,is adopted daughter, and implored Mr*. Greville, if ever she needed it, to extend to her a mother's care, and make lier house her awhuu. As soon as she had recovered from tiie transient shock his death occasion¬ ed her, bhe imparted to Gertrude the »secret so long painfully pent u\> in her bosom concerning Jacintha, omitting however to mention the real motİA'cs which had induced her to bestoAv the name of daughter npon her ; to this measure, she asserted, slie was alone in¬ fluenced by humanity, wliich the con¬ duct
duct of Jacintha had long since made her repent. Not satisfied Avith this falsehood, or rather wishing to conceal (from the de¬ sire Ave all have to appear amiable) the. malevolence and selfishness Avhich prompted the present discovery, Mrs. Greville proceeded to tell the astonished (iert rude, that, touched by a similar repentance, her father had, almost in his last moments, desired tliat Jacintha miglit no longer bc ackr.uv. lct!gcd one of his family. " And, but for theagonies with which he was seized about this time," cried she, " i am confident he v/ould have disclosed to me everv thinsr concerning: her birth ; however, to know she does not btbuig to us, will be quite suf¬ ficient to pre*, ent our friends from anv longer lavishing that kimlii&s and attea- ? 3 tioa
tion upon her, Avhich they have so long done to our detriment." " Yes, I think she has too long in¬ deed usurped our rights," exciaimcd Gertrude, Avhen amazement Avòuld per¬ mit her to utter a connected sentence. " 1 Avonder, mama, you could suffer her to take my place iu Mrs. Decourcy's house ; no doubt, had she knoAvn who she really Avas, she never avo uld have invited her in preference to me, and one or other of us, I'm sure, she meant to take." "Well, Avell, my dear," said Airs. Greville, " you must only reconcile yourself to Avhat is past, by reflecting on Avhat is to come. I'm sure you'll soon have an opportunity of triumphing over her completely. " The hope and prospect of doing so, tended much more to appease the anger and
and resentment Gertrude felt, at what she conceived the usurpation of Jacin¬ tha, than all the eloquence of her mo¬ ther. Impatient to gratify her malice by humbling the lofty spirit of Jacintha, which had hitherto soared above it, and which she doubted not the present discovery effectually doing, she could scarcely be prevented from hastening to communicate it to her ; nor would any thing have prevailed on her not to do so, but her mothers represent¬ ing to her, that if Jacintha was ap¬ prized of it before Mr. and Mrs. De¬ courcy, she would, in all probability, take such underhand measures to in¬ gratiate herself into their favour, or secure that portion of it which she al¬ ready enjoyed, as might render any at¬ tempts hereafter to deprive her of it, ineffectual.
h 4 Anxious
Anxious to develop the mystery which veiled/ the birth of Jacintha, they carefully examined the papers of Greville, from which they hoped to - have received some information re¬ specting it ; but their bopes ????? dis¬ appointed. The day after the funeral, Mr. De¬ courcy's housekeeper departed from' Wyefield ; and it was soon evident to Jacintha, that it was not from any wish for her company that her mother pre¬ vented her from leaving it at the same time, as she even studiously avoided conversing ivith her—an example ivhich was followed by Gertrude. The almost total solitude to ivhich she was conse¬ quently consigned, together with the marked unkindness with which she Avas treated upon every occasion, ivas not by any means calculated to diminish the melaneholv vrith which the death of her supposed father had impressed Jacintha's
Jacintha's mind ; every day increased! it, for every day gave her new cause to> deplore his loss : and, but for the sweet hope she entertained of Egbert's return, and the prospect she beheld of being soon restored to Mrs. Decourcy, her spirits avo uld have utterly failed her.— Her only pleasure was derived from, Avandering through the scenes whicli. had been the favourite haunts of Gre-- vilie ; amidst these scenes, Avith a "sadly [»leased remembrance," she dAvelt upon tlie many proofs she had received of his tenderness—his affection. İlere, in the gloom of evening, she could often almost have fancied she heard his mild voice mingling in the mournful breeze, and saAv his pale form gliding amidst the distant solitudes, in mournful contemplation. The time at length arrived for her removal from a place, v»here it ???? ? 5 impôs-
loé NOCTURNAL VISIT. sible' for her to enjoy any thing like happiness, till time bad blunted the poignancy of her feelings. Previous to quitting Wyefield, Mrs, Greville placed her sons at a school near it ; and from this, and other arrangements, Jacintha Avas pretty cer¬ tain it Avas not her design to make a short stay in London. Of her inten¬ tion of going thither r Mr. Decourcy was apprized ; slie assured him it Avas a measure dictated more by necessity than inciination, change of. scene being ab¬ solutely requisite for the restoration of her health and spirits. Without making any observations upon Avhat she had said, Mr. Decourcy, in reply to her letter, merely invited her to rest, herself at his house in her Avay to London, and promised tosend his car¬ riage to meet her at St. Albans.
Though
Though Jacintha so ardently wished to leave Wyefield, she could not bid it what, in spite ofher reason, she couldYiot help believing avouUI be a long farewel (from a gloomy sadness, a kind of pro¬ phetic feeling wliich had taken posses¬ sion ofher mind) Avithout a sigh of re¬ gret ; so strong Avas her attachment for Avhat^she considered the place of her nativity—an attachment which can never be obliterated from hearts of sen¬ sibility. *% With feelines totali ν dissimilar from those of Mrs. Greville and Ger¬ trude, she commenced her journey ; there Avas indeed nothing of melancholy or mourning about them but their habits. The second day they reached St. Albans, and found Mr. Decourcy's car¬ riage waiting their arrival. As soon as η 6 Mrs.
Mrs. Greviile and Gertrude had adjust¬ ed their dress (at all times a matter of importance to them) they stepped into it, and proceeded to his house. He re¬ ceived them in the hall with kindness and sensibility, and conducted them to Mrs. { Decourcy, « who, though able to leaAT her chamber, Avas still in a very languid state ; her recovery having been greatly retarded by the shock she re¬ ceived from her brother's death. She was deeply affected at beholding Mrs. Greville and the girls;—grief, however, did not prevent her from Avelcoming them to her house ; but though she dis¬ played much tenderness in her manner - to Mrs. Greville arid Gertrude, it re¬ quired no great discernment to perceive that her heart A\ ? as not so much interest¬ ed about them as Jacintha. As .soon as the painful emotions, oc¬ casioned by this iiieeting, had subsided, Jacintha
Jacintha felt a sensation of happiness she Lad for some time been a stranger to, at finding herself again ina house where she was certain of meeting kindness, sym¬ pathy, and affection ; but tîie tranquil¬ lity this idea avrs calculated to diffuse over her mind, was soon interrupted.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX.
"■ Not the last sounding co dd surprise me more, " That summons diowsy mortals to their doom." Pryden. vtERTRUDE having been previously instructed by her mother, contrÌA*ed a pretext for draAving Jacintha from the parlour soon after dinner. The mo- mentthey retired, Mrs. Greville hastened to make the discover, which she trusted would sink Jacintha in the estima¬ tion of Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy. She began by repeating her acknowledg¬ ments to them for their kindness and at¬ tention on the late melancholy occasion, and
and proceeded to say, she had been im¬ patient for the present intervieAV, in order to disclose to them a secret which Mr. Greville, upon his death-bed, com¬ manded her to reveal. At these Avords Mrs. Decourcy, Avho had hitherto sat with her head resting pensively upon her arm,» started, and fastened her eyes with the most anxious expression upon Mrs. Greville.— Abashed by lier looks, which Mrs. Gre¬ ville thought expressive of something like a doubt of her veracity, she invo¬ luntarily paused ; her confusion, how¬ ever, Avas but transitory, and she briefly and unhesitatingly informed them of all she desired them to know, or indeed had to disclose, concerning Jacintha. Surprise seemed to seal the lips of Mr. Decourcy for some minutes ; as to Mrs. Decourcy, she appeared infinitely more shocked than surprised, nor did she
she attempt to break the silence which prevailed when Mrs. Greville ceased speaking. " 'Tis a strange affair," at length cried' Mr. Decourcy, interrupting it, and raising his eyes from the table on which they had hitherto been bent, * as *l ' 4 if in profound meditation; "did Mr. Greville never disclose to you whose child she was ?" " Never," replied Mrs. Greville, " though I frequently importuned him to do so," " And what motive could actuate vou to reccÌA r e a child, of Avhose con- nections yon wae ignorant," cried Mr. Decourcy, " and pass her for your own ?" " Good-nature, and a wish to oblige Mr. u revidt," replL'dshe.. "Oh
ν " Oh Heavens !" exclaimed Mrs. De¬ courcy, at these words. The suddenness of this exclamation startled Mrs. Greville, and,- for a few minutes, silenced Mr. Decourcy. " Did you never," he then interro¬ gated Avith renewed earnestness, " even conjecture who her parents were ?" "Never," sakl Mrs. Greville, "it was utterly impossible for me to do so. I OAvn I should have beeu tempted to imagine she was, in some way or other* connected to. Mr v Greviile, from the extreme fondness he alwavs manifottd for her, but that he assured mc to tht. contraiT." " Has Jacintha boen told th.. t sl· c h not your child:"
aS o^
" No, I thought it better first to in¬ form you and Mrs.-Decourcy." "Why should she be told?" asked Mrs. Decourcy. Mrs. Greville hesitated for a moment, at a loss to form any excuse for making a communication,, which it Avas natural to suppose must be so painful ; then su dvidy recollecting herself— " Your brother commanded mc to tell her ; and I cannot bring myself to disobey any of his commands." " Undoubtedly not," said Mr. De¬ courcy. He then, Avith the utmost earnestness of voice and manner, enquired particu¬ lariy the age of Jacintha wheu received by Mrs* Greville; and how, where, and at
at Avhat period, she had been brought to her. Mrs. Greville fully answereel all those enquiries, and he again expressed his ) surprise at Mr. G reville s never having entrusted her with the secret of Jacin¬ tha's birth ; then resting his head upon his hand, he continued for some mi¬ nutes in deep and gloomy meditation. At length raising his eyes, and looking earnestly at Mrs. Decourcy— " Did your brother," said he, "never give you'a hint on the subject?—You haA r e frequently told me he Avas very unreserved in his communications to you." " Is it natural to suppose," replied Mrs. Decourcv, " that the coniidence he denied to his > wife he woukl repose in me ?" * "And
" Dear Madam," said Jacintha, "something, I fear, has happened to disturb you." *! " That invidious Avoman !" exclaim¬ ed ???. 'Decourcy, and paused. 4 Inexpressibly shocked by these Avoids, which she could not doubt alluded to her mother, Jacintha was unable to re¬ peat her enquiry concerning the cause of Mrs. Decourcy's agitation ; she Avas also equally unable to repress her tears, at the idea of her mother having «riven uneasiness to their kind, their mutual benefactress. (i Tliat invidious Avoman !" again re¬ peated Airs. Decourcy; "sheyou call¬ ed your mother—she has disclaimed you—disowned you—renounced you for ever!"
" Good
"Good God!" exclaimed Jacintha, Λν ith uplifted hands and eyes, tc Avhat have I done to merit such conduct ?— Avhat has she aliedged against me to justify it?** tí Nothing ;—nor has she uttered an untruth in baying you Avere not her child!" tí Not her child !" repeated Jacintha, starting and gazing upon Airs. De- ? courcy, as if she imagined her senses were forsaking her. <t Be composed, my dear girl," said Mrs. Decourcy, who appeared strug¬ gling Avith her own feelings, in order to- try and calm the emotions of Jacintha. She then briefly acquainted her with all that Mrs. Greville had communicated— ít Which, I am convinced," continued she, "from many circumstances, she never was desired to disclose by my brother.
brother. The ν motives which have actuated her to divulge what has been so long, so carefully concealed, are evident to me ; —but her hopes, her in- - tentions bhall be frustrated to the utmost of my pouer,*' Though Jacintha had no reason to be attached to Mrs. Cri eville, nor those of her family who now existed, she .could not hear that .slie was east oíl, unacknowledged, unowned, unclaimed by any relative, Avithout feeling the severest anguish. Her pride, her sen¬ sibility, were alike wounded; and, over¬ come by the violent and various emo¬ tions of her soul, she dropped in trem¬ bling; agitation at the feet of her bene- tactress. Mrs. Decourcy raised and embraced her ; she said every thing she thought could compose her feelings ; she assured her ihat the late discovery, instead of lessening,
lessening, rather increased her affection for her. " It Avas not because I thought you my relation, " cried she, ' c that I esteem¬ ed and loved you—it Avas because I thought you amiable and engaging ;— Avhile, therefore, you retain the qualities Avhich first engaged my esteem, * iny re¬ gard must remain undiminished." " Oh! Madam," said Jacintha, bathing her hand Avith tears, " I am fully sensible of your goodness ; but I cannot immediately get the better of the shock Avhich your information has given me. You, I am sure, can picture to yourself Avhat my feelings must be, at the idea of not knowing a being in this vast universe, Avhose protection or assistance I have a right to claim." vol. 11. 1 « Your
<c Your own merit must ???? give you a claim to the friendship ofthe Avorthy," said Mrs. Decourcy. * " Ah'! Madam," replied Jacintha, " that is a claim, I fear, wliich Aery few Avould allow ; and even was it ad¬ mitted, to incur continual obligations can never he pleasing to a heart of real sensibilii a'." tí My dear Jacintha," cried Mrs, Decourcy, tt life is chequered ; our pleasures are seldom Avithout alloy, or our pains without mitigation ;—in find¬ ing your happiness imperfect, you but share the ?????? lot of humanity *, let that reflection, thei ef ore, reconcile vou to your situation, and prevent you from foregoing the power of enjoying the present good, because it does not come to you exactly in the manner you could wish." *' It
NOCTURNAL VISÍT. " It shall be my study to profit by your advice," replied Jacintha; "but a ou yourself, my dear Mailam," she continued, as if anxious to find an excuse for the paiiiful feelings she could not conquer, " seemed shocked and dis¬ tressed by the discovery Mrs. Greviile has made." " I Avished to have prevented it," said Mrs. Decourcy. " Were you then aware that she in- tended to make it?" asked Jacintha, with eager quickness ; "did you then really know that I Avas not the child of your brother?" " I have not said that I did," cried Airs. Decourcy, with uncommon o*ra- */ f ? \\t\\ *> "No; but you implied it, I thought, Madam." ι SI "I
" I did not mean to do so, then, 4 * said Mrs. Decourcy. " Is there no clue, no means by which I could trace my parents?" asked Jacintha. " None," said Mrs. Decourcy; "all enquiries rçlath T e tothem, must fbr ever be unavailing !" " For ever!" repeated Jacintha, mournfully, "for ever must I remain in ignorance of the authors of my exist¬ ence?—Perhaps at this very moment they live—they think of their deserted daughter !" " If they do, believe me, it is not , with any wish to acknoivledge her," replied Mrs. Decourcy; "that their long iclinquishment of her niust con¬ vince you." Jacintha
Jacintha clasped her hands together, and, by her looks, expressed the deepest sorrow. " Once more," said Mrs. Decourcy, " I advise you not tolet unavailing re¬ grets poison your present enjoyments. " " I avíU endeavour to conquer them, mv dear Madam." Mrs. Decourcy's Avoman uoav ap¬ peared, to inform her Lady that Mr. De-' com ey wished to speak to her; she im-. mediately arose to attend him, in her diessing-ioom, Avheie she undeistood he Avab ; affectionately pi essing Jacintha's hand at the same moment, and bidding her remember what she had said to her. Jaciutha retireel to her OAvn chamber, to try to collect and compose her spirits ere she rejoined Mrs. Greville ; whom she ι 3 A\as
was desirous of seeing, for the purpose of interrogating her more minutely than she hud interrogated Mrs. Decourcy, con¬ cerning the late discovery ; indulging a faint hope that, by enquiring particu¬ larly into the affair, she should be able to obtain some information respecting her parents. As soon as her agitation had a little subside*:!, she descended to the parlour, where she found Airs. Greville and Ger¬ trude, seated by themselves, engaged in an apparently interesting conversa¬ tion, which her presence interrupted. *" I suppose," said Mrs. Greville, turning round as Jacintha approached, and looking earnestly in her face, where tlie traces of · tears Avere still visibie, " Mrs. Decourcy has saved me the pain¬ ful necessity of informing ypu there is no connection between us ; though, indeed, I don't know r Avhy I should call it
it painful, since I am sure the discovery will occasion you no regret/' / Jacintha attempted to reply, but her voice Avas unequal to the effort, and «>he hastily aA'erted her head, to conceal the tears Avhich gushed from her eyes ; slie soon, hoAA-ever, conquered this emotion,- and then, with as much calmness as she could assume, informed Mrs. Gre\ ille she had been told of the particulars she had revealed to Mrs. Decourcy, and which she entreated her now to repeat, frankly acknowledging the motives which made her wish to hear them re¬ capitulated. *.** I cannot be more circumstantial toyou, than I have already been to your fiiends," replied Mrs. Greville; " I know nothing of your parents ;—and/' added she, with a malicious look, ** there is every reason to belio e it could ι 4 not
not add to your happiness to knoAv any¬ thing of thein." <c I understand your meaning, Ma- dam," said Jacintha, colouring; " but I cannot, I avíU not believe that my parents Avere unamiable. Mr. Greville's being their friend, is a convincing proof to me that they were not." " Pray how do you knoAv Mr. Gre¬ ville was their friend ?" demanded Mrs. Greville., " By accepting the guardianship of their unfortunate child," replied Jacin¬ tha; " what but friendship coukl Im^e induced him to take her to his bosom, and.educate her as his oavii?" tt Why, indeed, 'tis very natural to suppose nothing else could have induced him to do so," said Mrs. Greville; "but his liaving had a regard for your parents,
parents, is no proof of their Avorth; for, poor dear man ! he Avas so good, so innocent himself, that it Avas an easy matter for any one to impose upon him by false appearances." " That I firmly believe," said Jacin¬ tha ; " and I also believe that much of his felicity proceeded from his not de¬ tecting the imposition practised on him. Simplicity and credulity are in some cabes essential to happiness." Jacintha involuntarily fastened her eyes upon Mrs* Greville, as she uttered these last words, whose rising colour clearly proved she understood their meaning. At this instant a servant entered with an apology for Mr. and Mrs. Decourcv's not appearing again thiit night, as the former had letters on business to avi ite, and the latter, was extremely indisposed. ι ã Jacintha
Jacintha fkrw to Mrs. Decourcy 's chamber on receiving this intelli¬ gence, but Avas stopped at the entrance by her Avoman, who said her Lady had - retired to rest, and Avished not to be disturbed. She had the satisfaction, hoAvever, of learning that her indispo¬ sition Avas not of a nature to cause any alarm. She could not bear, in the present disturbed state of her mind, to return to the parlour ; she accordingly repair¬ ed to her chamber, Avhere, Avith in¬ creasing Avonder, she reAolved all that had passed throughout the day. She tried to reconcile herself to the unex¬ pected discovery that had taken place, bv reflecting* that it had neither de- prived hér of the friendship, nor would lessen her in the estimation, of those she regarded ; but, though she endea¬ voured to banish the regrets it occa¬ sioned, she could* not divest herself of a strong 6
strong anxiety to- learn something con¬ cerning her parents ; a conviction, hoAV- ever, that this Avas an anxiety whicli could ne\"cr be gratified, determined her at length to try and subdue it. Cut though she did not imagine IVlrs. De¬ courcy could haA'c satisfied her curiosity on this head, she could not avoid. thinking, from some inadvertent ex¬ pressions which had dropped from her, that she knew, previous to Mrs. Gre¬ ville's disclosure, that she Avas not the child of her brother. Why Mr. Greville should desire this long concealed secret to be reA T ealed, when no purpose could be ansAvered by its disclosure, v/as a circumstance which astonished Jacintha, and made her at length suspect that he had never ex¬ pressed such a desire. This suspicion, Mrs. Decourcv's recollected words cou- firmed ; and Mrs. Greville's motives for divulging it Avere perfectly compre- χ 6 hended*.
hended. The indignation with which this new instance of her cruelty and falsehood inspiicd Jacintha, made her almost rejoice that Airs. Greville had no further claims upon her duty and affection. On entering the breakfast-parlour, the next morning, Jacintha found only Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy there ; the latter still looked pale and languid, and by the countenance of the former, ic Avas evident his mind Avas «Teat 1 v dis- turbed. After the usual compliments were OAxr, a silence of some minutes ensued ; Mr. Decourcy then, though Avith visible reluctance, took the hand of Jacintha, and desired her not to let the late discovery affect her spiiits, as it could make no alteration in the sen¬ timents her friends entertained for her. His Avords ?*, ere kind, but his man¬ ner was the reverse; and Jacintha could
could not help thinking, a thought Avhieh Avounded her to the very heart, that, on the present occasion, his lan¬ guage and feelings were totally dis¬ similar. She endeavoured, hoAveA 7 er,- to dissi¬ pate the involuntary gloom Avhich this idea threw over her, by trying to per¬ suade herself it Avas erroneous ; that it av as not from any diminution of his re¬ gard, but something whieh bad hap¬ pened to discompose his mind, that his air Avas so cold Avhen he addressed her. On the entrance of Mrs. Greville and Gertrude, a general, though evi¬ dently forced conversation took place, CA r ery one present appearing much inore ' inclined to indulge their own thoughts, than enter into discourse. Jaciutha could not a\ r okl noticing the cold and ceremonious manner in Avhich
? which Mrs. Decourcv behaved to Mrs. Greville and Gertrude, whose looks proved they had not been less quick in perceiving it. Mrs. Greville indeed, to her extreme regret and mortification, perceived that it was not Jacintha, but herself she had lessened by the late discovery;—a con¬ vincing proof that doubts Avere enter¬ tained of her being desired to make it by Mr. Greviile ; so humbled did she- feel at the idea of having her veracity doubted, that, but for the pain it avrs. evident the disclosure had gi\'en Jacin¬ tha, she Avould have regretted it. Unable to bear the supercilious con* duct of Mrs. Decourcy, Avhich her heart told her she but too Avell merited, she resolved on departing for London the· next day. This intention, Avhich met with no opposition either ??? Mr.. or Mrs. Decourcy, she announced at dinner ;
dinner; and accordingly, the ensuing morning, departed for the metropolis, to the great joy of Gertrude, Avho Avas impatient for its pleasures, and who, besides, detested a residence under the roof with Mr. and IVlrs. Decourcy, from ' the involuntary restraint she felt in their presence. Mrs. Greville affected to take a ten¬ der leave of Jacintha, and said, though she had no longer the honour of being considered as her mother, she should still retain fbr her the same regard she had alwavs felt. " I am convinced you Avill, Madam," «* * replied Jacmtha, with a sarcastic smile she could not suppress, " nor Avill my gratitude for it be diminished, though I should receive fewer proofs than you ha\ r e hitherto given me of it." v It.vi ·
????. χ. '« I fancy *' ?? now turnM wild, a commoner of nature, *« Of ail forfaken." Dryden. WHILST Mrs. Greville and Ger¬ trude Avere enjoying the pleasures for which they had so long panted, the happiness of Jacintha Avas gradually de¬ clining, like the tender blossoms of a too early spring before a nipping Avind ; and her short-lived, felicity but rendered more acute her present sorroAV, as tran¬ sient gleams of sunshine, on a wintry day, but render more oppressive the glooms
glooms by Avhich they are succeeded.— The diminution of a happiness, which she had so sensibly felt, and gratefully acknowledged, Avas occasioned by the striking alteration Avhich took place in the conduct of Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy towards her, soon after the departure of Mrs. Greville. From the most conciliating tender¬ ness, the kindest attentions, and ex¬ pressions of regard, they suddenly be¬ came cool and neglectful. Mr. De- courcy no longer sought opportunities of conversing with her, as he had for¬ merly done, on subjects which Avere calculated to expand her ideas, and im¬ prove her judgment; but observed, upon every occisión, to her an almost total silence. Nor did Mrs. Decourcy appear - to feel more pleasure in her society than he did.
This
This cruel, this unexpected change Jacintha imputed to the late discovery ; she knew no other cause to Avhich she could ascribe it ; for her memory could furnish her with no instance of ever haring acted in any marnier that could excite their displeasure. Slie concluded she Avas indebted to her supposed rela¬ tionship to therii, for their past kind¬ ness ; and that, since they could no longer consider her as a connection, tliey sincerely regretted having taken her undeu their protection ; t though they could not think of withdi awing it, after their solemn promises of continuing it to her—promises which, she now had reason to suppose, were made from the impulse of the moment, Avithout con¬ sideration or-refiection.—Oh ! Iioav did she lament not having the power of re¬ le asing them from these, as she imagined-, repented promises ; but she knew no roof, except their's which would afford hpr a shelter. She
She noAv began to experience a mi¬ sery, which can only be exceeded by tliat attendant on a guilty conscience— the misery of dependance; and wept Avith bitterness over the disastrous fate m Avhich obliged her to receive favours from those, whose regard for her seem¬ ed so totally extinguished—favours wliich, except bestoAved by the hand of Affection, must ever be oppressive to a noble and a feeling heart. Humbled and afflicted, wounded to the very soul to think it was only ima¬ ginary ties which had interested Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy about her, her nights were often passed in tears, her days in restless inquietude ; she could no longer attend to her usual avoca¬ tions, but strove to beguile the Avretch- edness' of her thoughts in rambling about, AvhencA'er the weather would per- »rit her to leave the house.
There
There Avas a mournful sympathy be¬ tween her and Nature in the present' season, which Avas soothing to her feel¬ ings. " But the sympathy avíU not long continue," she has exclaimed; "ah! will my hopes, like the verdure of these groves, revive?—Avill my heart, like them, again become the resort of har¬ mony and joy V " She!oA 7 ed to walk beneath tîie trees, amidst the leafless boughs of w hich, ** Barren as lances, ths wind 11 Makes wintry rniwc, sighing as it goes i" where no other noise Avas heard, save the faint Avarble of the red-breast, content ** With slender notes, an J more than half supptess'd» ** Picard wiih his solitudes, and íiitting light, ** From spray to spi^y, shaking where'er he rests, * «* Fiom many a twig the pendant drops of ice, « Tint
*' That linkle în the wither'd leaves below. " Stillness, accompany'd by sou ids so soft," charmed Jacintha CA r en more »than total silence couhl have done, and often lulled her anguish. But though the calm scenes of Na¬ ture could sooth, it Avas only the idea or Egbert's love —the hope, the expec¬ tation of his quick return, Avhich could console her. That the alteration in her situation, avo uld occasion any alteration in his sentiments, she never for a mo¬ ment fancied; on the contrary, she Avas convinced that sorrow Avould doubly endear her to him, and that, Avith eager transport, he Avoukl snatch her from misery and dependance.· — These thoughts sometimes almost re¬ stored her to perfect tranquillity ; but too often the pressure of present ill, repelled the pleasure Avhich prospects of future happiness Avere calculated to inspire. Severely
ScA r erely as her pride Avas wounded by the altered conduct of her protec¬ tors, her sensibility was stul more se¬ verely in]tired. She esteemed, shelovL'A theni, particularly Mrs. Decourcy, Avith the utmost fervency ; andj in the most exalted», the rnost independent situation that Fortune could have placed her, the diminution of that lady's regard would have cast a cloud over her happiness. But her painful feelings Avere not en¬ tirely excited on ,hcr oavii account : the change which took place in the conduct of Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy to her, Avas not more striking than that Avhich took place in their behaviour to each other. Their mutual tenderness, their domestic harmony were gone ; pensive and un¬ social, tliey sat in each other's company, ami Jacintha felt scarcely more grief at their aliercd manners to her, than to one another. The cause of this change it was utterly impossible tor her e\'ea to conjecture,
conjecture, and the surprise was not in¬ ferior to the regret it excited. Three Aveeks passed away, unmarked bv any occurrence, and Avithout de- creasing the coldness and reserve of Mr. and M ?. Decourcy ; a gloomy melancholy seemed to have taken pos¬ session of their mi mis ; they admitted no company, and forbore entirely to speak of returning to London, though apprized of tlieir house bemg ready for their reception. The dejection of Jacintha daily in- creased; the natural cheerfulness ofher mimi, which had so often given her strength to bear up against sorrow and oppression, was completely subdued by the idea of her forlorn situation ; her warm, her gîouhig, her affectionate heart was chilled, Avas agonized at tîie idea of her being so tot ally disregarded as she now believed herself to lie. The C4btetu'e,
existence, which appeared so ' little esteemed in the eyes of others, would soon have lost all value in her owr ? but for the assurance she retained of Egbert's love—the hope she entertained of his soon returning, of his again connecting her to society. At present she seemed to herself a blank, a cipher in the great account—a solitary being, who, like the lonely flower of tlie rock, might fade away, unmissed and unlamented.
????.
4 ????. XI. *" Dissembled quiet, sit upon my face, " My sorrow to my eyes no passage find, " But sink within/* * AT Avas noAV about the season that, on the two preceding years, Jacintha had been so near in idea to, but so remote in reality from, happiness; and she often reflected, Avith mingled surprise and regret, on the many strange inci¬ dents and vicissitudes she had expe¬ rienced in her short journey through life. Deeply meditating on them one day, she heeded not how far she had wan- voL. ir. ? dered,
dered, nor thought of returning home, till the glooms of 'evening began to gather round her, and reminded her that, in all probability, she fchouM keep Mr. and Mrs. Decourcv av aitino· dinner. */ ? This'idea had no sooner occurred, than she hastened forwards. The path she took, wound between a thick shrubbery, Avhere clumps of c\ er¬ gicene almost excluded the faint light tliat still lingered in the sky, and spread such an additional gloom around, that had not this been the shortest Avay to the house, Jacintha Avould ha\ r c avoided it. She was still far from home, a\ hen bhe suddenlv heard some one hastily folloAvinic her. She felt somewhat startled, and her alarm was not dimi¬ nished when, casting a timid glance be¬ hind, ïhe perceived the person avIio evidently pursued her, Avas a man, so muffled up that, even had the light been stronger
stronger than it now avrs, his features couid not have been distinguished. She moved on Avith redoubled quick¬ ness ; but, notwithstanding the swift¬ ness Avith which she Avalked, or rather ran, she ivas soon overtaken. " I almost gave up all hopes of seeing you," exclaimed the stranger, catching her hand as he spoke. His A-oice Avas not unfamiliar to Ja¬ cintha, though she could not recollect ivhere she had heard it. " Me Γ cried she, ìn a tremulous accent, and endeavouring at the same moment to disengage her hand, " me did you expect to see ?" " You," he replied.
? 2 Jacintha
Jacintha noAv recognized the voice, of Lord Gwytherin. " Oh Heavens ! Miss ?????И?, this is indeed an unexpected happiness," said he, eagerly pressing her hand to his lips. This action excited the indignation of Jacintha, and restored the faculties which surprise had suspended. She forced aAvay her hand, and attempted to pass him. " Stop," cried Lord G Avy therin, still impeding her progress, "stop, I con¬ jure you—if but for a minute." ' " I insist, my Lord," said Jacintha, trying to Speak composedly, though her heart fluttered with terror, " I insist, my Lord, upon your not detaining me !" "I
" I cannot, I will not let you pass," replied he, " till you ???? heard Avhat I Avish to say—till you have heard that—" He paused, for at this instant ap¬ proaching steps Avere heard, and in the next, the voice of Mr. Decourcy, dis¬ coursing Avith his gamekeeper, ivith whom he ivas returning homeAvards after a day's sport. Jacintha had no further occasion now to repeat her commands to his Lordship to let her pass ; he turned from her with precipitation, and hastily disappeared ; but he was not quick enough to elude the obsen-ation of Mr, Decourcy, av ho advancing to Jacintha, desired to knoAv Avho the per¬ son ivas that had fled Avith such quick¬ ness from her. Jacintha was tco much agitated and confused to attempt concealing the trftth, had she even been inclined to do ? 3 so ;
so; she accordingly replied, it Avas Lord Gwytherin. " Lord GAvytherin," repeated Mr. Decourcy, in an accent expressive of surprise ancl displeasure; "you' know him then ?" ¡ " Yes, he Avas at his seat at Wye¬ field, last summer." " And did vou never knoAv him till that period r'* " Never, Sir," replied Jacintha. " NeA r er felt interested about him till then ?" resumed Air. Decourcy. " Till then !" repeated Jacintha, in¬ dignantly ; " good Heavens ! Sir, you err extremely if you suppose I ever Avas interested about Lord GAvytherin." "Why
t ** Whv should 3 r ou m-cet hito then ?" t T t *ψ tt Thé meeting was aceidental j— not more unexpected than undesired, I asaure you/' , £ ζ But do you not imagine he came hither to.see you ?" asked Mr. Decourcy, in an anxious voice. ci I cannot tell, Sir, whether he did or not,*' answered Jacintha; who now began to suspect that he was acquainted not only with the character of Lord Gwytheiiu, but his conduct toher; and meant, in consequence, of this know¬ ledge, to resent his having again ob¬ truded into her presence ;, not,, she nattered herself, from« any regard for her, for that she believed had Ions: since ceased ; but from thetpride of his' na¬ ture, which could not brook the idea of* having any person, under hiß protection, injured or insulted; injurious treat«·- ? 4 ment-
ment to them being, she supposed, con¬ sidered by him a kind of indirect indig¬ nity to himself. But to whatever motives she ascribed the resentment she imagined - he now felt, the apprehensions it excited in her bosom Avere stiil the same. She trembled to think of the consequences which might result from his giving ivay to it, well acquainted as she was with the haughtiness of his spirit, and the vin¬ dictive violence of Lord Gwytherin's disposition. She endeavoured to speak of some¬ thing else than the incident ivhich she imagined had caused it, but in vain ; Mr. Decourcy persisted in dwelling on her interview with Lord Gwytherin, and questioning her concerning it.— - These questions teazed and perplexed Jacintha«, and she rejoiced to enter the house, as she hoped she should there be able to avoid them ; of this, however, she became very doubtful, on his desiring
desiring her to folloAV him into the par¬ lour;—but, contrary to her expectations, he did not appear inclined to renew his interrogations; and his discontinuing them, dissipated in a great measure the apprehensions of Jacintha. He ordered a sen-ant to acquaint Mrs. Decourcy of his return ; the man came back in a feAv minutes, and said his mistress was not at home. " Not at home!" repeated Mr. De¬ courcy, starting in manifest agitation from a chair upon which he had thrown himself " how—Avhithcr is'she gone?" " Ipannot tell, Sir," replied the man, " nor do any of the servants knoAv ;— but she has not been long out, for 'tis not half an hour since her maid Avas with her, in her dressing-room." ? 5 Sir.
Mr. Decouroy bit his lips, knit his brows, and' traversed the room in an agitation Avhich Jacintha could no longer place to her oavii account ; and - Avhich she Avas astonished so trivial a circumstance as that of finding Mrs. Decourcy out, Avhen he expected to have found her at home, could in¬ spire, and to this circumstance it Avas evidently owing. That he should be surprised at hear¬ ing she Avas out at such an hour, un¬ attended, Jacintha could not indeed wonder at ; nor could she possibly ac¬ count for her being so, except by sup¬ posing that, like her fellow-mortals, she Avas now and then a little whimsical. A quarter of an hour passed in pro¬ found silence ; Jacintha wishing, but fearing to quit the room, lest she should displease Mr. Decourcy. At the expi¬ ration of this period, Mrs. Decourcy entered,,
entered, but without appearing to have^ been jout. " You have just returned from your Avalk, I presume," said Mr. Decourcy, Avith coolness» She ansAvered (Jacintha thought) ra¬ ther confusedly, and said something pf' having been tempted down the avenue by the clearness of the eA r ening ; then ringing the bell, as if to prevent any further enquiries, she asked whether* dinner Avas ready, and being answered«. in the affirmative, directly led the way to the diuing-pariour.. Soon after the cloth Avas removed, and the attendants Avithdrawn, a few Avoids inadvertently dropped from Mì*.. Decourcy expressive of a wish to'speak to *Mrs. Decourcy alone. In conse¬ quence of these words, though, with¬ out seeming to have noticed tliem,, ? ? Jacmtha.
Jacintha immediately formed an excuse for quitting the parlour ; from whence she hastened to'her chamber, Aviiere she endeaA ? Qured to amuse herself by read- . ing v but. the disturbance of her mind prevented her from deriving any enter¬ tainment from books. The unhappiness of Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy occupied her thoughts ; and, if she ceased to think ofthat unhappi¬ ness for a moment, it Avas but to think of Lord GAvytherm, who she coukl not avoid believing, after the late adventure, stiU persisted in his designs against her. Neither could she avoid think¬ ing, from ihe place in which she had met him, and Avhich Avas her most favourite haunt, that he knew some person in the house, who acquainted hinvwith her movements. This idea alarmed her, as she kneAV it Avas difficult to guard against the designs of a secret enemy ; and none but an enemy could» m
in any manner, attempt to beiray her into the *power of Lord Gwytherin. But the Being on Avhom she depended for protection, was equal, shekneAv (and the idea calmed herm ind) to defeat all the machinations that could be formed against her, and conduct her with safety and honour through the mazy path of life. From herself her thoughts again re¬ verted to Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy—. imhappy and dejected in the midst of blessings. "Ah!" cried she, "Iioav little can the workl judge.from appearances'!—If it could look into their hearts, I fear it Avould find there Avas more cause to pity than to eiwy them.—Wliat can this untold sorroAV be, Avhich has power to poison ail their enjoyments ?—^But for me to attempt to conjecture it, would only be to bewilder aud distract myself. The thorn which rankles m their breasts İS'
is carefully hidden ; and Avhy should I wish to discover, except I thought I could extract it. " That I could, in any degree, oc¬ casion ' their present unhappiness, is surely impossible," 'said she, endeavour¬ ing to dispel an idea, which at this in¬ stant obtruded itself upon her mind, of having, in some way or other, been the cause of it —an idea calculated to anni¬ hilate her little remaining peace, and inflict the deepest distiess upon lier. " If I really thought so," ciied .she, wildly starting from her chair, and tra¬ versing the room with a disordered step, " no consideration should detain me longei in their house.— But no, 'tis im¬ possible this cau be the case. " ? She resumed her scat, and again tried, by reading, to divert her thoughts ; but her efforts to do so were ?- am: there was
was a weight, a sadness on her heart Avhich could only be relieved by tears. The loneliness of her chamber, Avhich Avas remote from the inhabited part of the house, and the mournful how r ling of the blast Avithout, added not a little to her melancholy, hy making her feel aá if she was utterly deserted. She invo¬ luntarily contrasted the solitary eA'en- ings she nov/ passed, Avith the social, the pleasant ones she had been accus¬ tomed to spend at Wyefield. "Oh blissful evenings !" exclaimed Jacintha, " more prized in the remem¬ brance, than CA'en in the enjoyment ; for, alas ! Ave seldom know the full ex¬ tent of our felici ry till it has departed. Wiil such domestic pleasures ever again he mine?—shall I again enjoy the social happiness, for Avhich rny heart is form¬ ed ?—Oh ! my friend, my father (for so I will ever call tha ), how prophetic were my feelings upon thy death !— Iioav truly 6 *
truly did they inform me, that in losing thee, I had sustained a loss which would bring upon me various sorrows ! Wert thou living, I should not be as I now am, a stranger upon the earth—a being about whom nobody seems interested ! ?> This idea brought Avith it an ardent wish to know Avhether her parents Avere in existence ; a wish, hoAvever, Avhich she endeavoured to dismiss, from the very little probability there appeared of ever having it gratified. " If they are dead," said she, " and the dead are CA*er permitted to revicAV this Avorld, perhaps at this very mo¬ ment they may behold my soitoavs Avith regret—perhaps at this moment------" Here a Ioav noise startled her;—she rose Avith trembling eagerness, but it had ceased ; and concluding it was the moaning of the Avind she had heard, she was
NOCTURNAL VISIT.
was resuming her seat, Avhen again the noise returned. Ere she could reach , the door, however, to Avhich she noAv hastened, it was throvrø open by a house¬ maid, ivho entered to make up the fire for the night. A momentary blush suffused the cheek of Jacintha, at the idea of her Aveakness, in suffering herself to be so easily alarmed ; and she deter¬ mined no longer to indulge the dejec¬ tion to Avhich she imputed it, convinced that, if she did, her mind Avould at length become totally enervated. " Lord a mcury, Miss, Avhy didn't you ring for something for the firer" said the maid. Jacintha uoav cast her eyes upon it, and, for the first time, perceİA'ed it was almost out ; for she had been too much engrossed by her reflections to attend to any thing else. She
t
She learned with astonishment that it wps ρ, st ten, .ml that Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy had already îetired to tlieir chambers. Tt l dare say, Miss," said the maid, " you were surprised at not being called down to tea;—but, Lord, th.re has been neither tea nor s-ipper in tlie par¬ lour to-night.—Alas' ? ? and mistress," continued she, lowering her voice, and looking back ίο see whether the door was closed, " have had a little misun¬ derstanding, I bf lieve ; and so tlicy have gone to their rooms Avithout taking any thing." Startled by this intelligence, J? cin tha was eagerly opening her lips to enquire av hat reason she had for supposing so, an hen a sudden reflection on the impro¬ priety she should be guilty of, in con¬ versing with a domesticou so delicate a subject, prevented her, and made lier change
change the enquiry she had been about making, into one of a wry difìerent na¬ ture ; then taking up a book, she af¬ fected to be entirely engrossed by its contents, in order to prevent any fiu> ther conversation. The girl perceiving this, ceased to speak, and soon wit li¬ di e w ; but not Avithout offering to bring Jacintha some refreshment, Avhich she declined. Left again to uninterrupted medita¬ tion, she felt more distressed than she had done before, in consequence of what she had just heard ; and, not Avithstand¬ ing her recent determination to resist the influence of melancholy, she retired to rest with an oppressed heart. She was relieved from many painful apprehensions concerning Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy, by iiad ing them together, in the breakfast-parlour, the next morn¬ ing; but the pleasure this circumstance inspired,
inspired, Avas soon dispelled by perceiv¬ ing a deeper shade of melancholy than ever upon their countenances ; she found them also more reserved than usual. The unsocial silence Avhich prevailed, Avas interrupted, however, ere breakfast was over, by the unexpected arrival of Woodville, who brought with him his usual cheerfulness and vivacitv. liis appearance reAHwcd tiîe languid spirits of Jacintha ; in him she beheld a person with Avhom she could not only cciwerse on the subject most interesting to her heart, but a person who, she imagined, had some regard for her—an idea truly consolatory at this period. Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy lost some¬ what of their gloom on seeing him ; but it was evident to Jacintha, that the sudden cheerfulness Avhich brightened their looks, Avas derived not from any satisfaction
Satisfaction they felt at his visit, but from a wish of concealing from him their unhappiness, lest he should at¬ tempt to discover the source from Avhence it originated. Relative to their unhappiness, or her OAvn, Jacintha resolved not to drop a hint ; honour and pride alike prevented her from communicating either. She deemed herself bound to conceal Avhat- ever she thought her protectors wished to conceal ; and she shrunk from the humiliating idea of having it knoAvn to any being, that she Avas indebted to hu¬ manity, not to affection, for an asylum. She found an opportunity, soon after breakfast, of enquiring from Woodville whetlier he Avas yet acquainted Avith the late discovery respecting her. He re¬ plied in the affirmatİAT. Ile had met Mrs. Greville accidentally in London, he said, and she had informed him of it. " But,"
" But," added he, " I could scarcely credit Avhat she told me." " 'Tis but too true, hoAvever," re- ^plied Jacintha, Avith a deep sigh, and starting tears ; "I belong to nobody !" " You avíU not long be able to say so," cried Woodviiie, affectionately; "you ??? soon, I hope and belie\ r e, belong to one of the noblest, the avoi- thicst of human behms." The train of sweet ideas which these words introduced into the mind of Jacintha, diffused such a serenity over it, as enabled her, Avithout any great difiiculty, to conceal its sorrows, and converse, if not cheerfully, at least composedly, with Woodville. About the decline of day, a secret impulse carried Mr. Decourcy to the spot ai here, on the preceding evening, he
he had met Lord G Avy therin and Jacin¬ tiia. Woodviiie perceived him, from the parlour-AvindoAv, crossing the laAvn to the-shrubbcry ; and not conceiving that he wiahed tobe alone, hefollowedhim thi¬ ther. Mr. Decourcy could readilv have dispensed w ith his company ; bellid not permit him, however, to percei a'C that he At as disconcerted by it, and forced himself to enter into coua citation ahout some impunément* he purposed makingin the giounds, the ensuing spring. They had not proceeded far through the shrubbery, A\heu they perceived a man slowly Avalking before them, Avho, on hearing their steps, 'turned round with quickucss, and after glancing a moment at thein, darted into an ob¬ scure path, and disappeared ; but, not- Avithstandinghis disguise, antl theprecipi- tatiou Avith v hich he ficcÇ Mr. Decouiev recognized him to be Lord Gwytherin, 1 and
jr and starting back, he uttered his name with something like an execration. " Lord GAvytherin !" repeated Wood¬ ville, with scarcely less emotion, " Avhat, does he reside İn this neighbourhood ?" " He has some secret residence in it," cried Mr.· Decourcy, in an accent ex¬ pressive of displeasure. " You have seen him hereabouts then before?" "Yes, yesterday, at this hour, and in this Avalk, with Miss Greville." " Good God, is it possible !" exclaim¬ ed Woodville; " surely the meeting must have been accidental." " So she said, 1 " replied Mr. Decourcy, moving toAvards the house as he spoke ; " but they appeared in a deqi and interesting
Hiteresting conversation, Avhich my ap¬ proach „interrupted ; and, from Avhich circumstance, 1 am rather doubtful of the truth ofher assertion." Woodville felt agitated and alarmed by this intelligence; he began to fear that the insinuating maimers of Lord G aw therin had not altogether failed of making an impression on the mind of Jacintha ; t-hc surely, he thought, she coukl never for a moment Ikíax· been prevailed on to hold any intercourse a\ ith a man, Avhose conduct to her had been so atrocious— aman whom delicacv and propriety should have made her shun ai ith contempt and abhorrence. He felt deeply interested ín her con¬ duct, not only from the regaul Avhich his knowledge ofher, from her earliest a ears, had inspired; but because with it Avas connected the happiness, the ho¬ nour of the friend he most loved and valued. After a little deliberation, he vol. 11. & resolved
resoÎA-ed on speaking to her concerning it, inform her of Avhat he had heard, and admonish her of the dangers, difficulties, and disgrace which the slightest devia¬ tion from propriety could not fail of drawing upon her—the eternal stigma; which would be affixed to her name, if, situated as she Avas respecting Egbert, she attempted to encourage the atten¬ tions of any other man, particularly of such a man as Lord Gwytherin, whose designs relative to her she knew to be ofthe most injurious nature. He wished to have enquired into her actions from Mr. Decourcv; but the reserve of his manner, or rather the un¬ willingness he betrayed to speak upon the subject, prevented Woodville from doing so, and inclined him to believe the apprehensions he entertained of Jacintha's being prepossessed hi favour of Lord Gwytherin, were not erroneous ; and also that that prepossession had led her into
into some indiscretion, which had in¬ curred the displeasure of her protectors· * » AVhen once a suspicion is excited, the most trivial circumstance can strengthen or confirm it, like glowing embers, which the weakest breath can fan intoa flame. The coldness of Mr. and Mrs. De¬ courcv's manner, their too visible ?? « easiness, ivhich not all their efforts could conquer or conceal, counteracted as these efforts were by internal wretch¬ edness, were proofs to Woodville that Jacintha had displeased them ; and he felt impatient for an opportunity of Avarning her of the unpleasant conse¬ quences which might, and would, in all probability, result from forfeiting their esteem and affection. But, eagerly as he sought for this op¬ portunity, it did not occur till the L £ ensuing
ensuing morning, when perceiving Jacintha alone iu the garden, Avithin the limits of Avhich she had determined in future to confine her rambles, he joined her, and after a little hesitation, and many assurances of being urged to speak, in the manner he Avas about doing, by his sincere regard and strong anxiety for her happiness, he briefly explained himself. Jacintha listened to him Awth pro¬ found attention, but by degrees the blush of indignation suffused her cheek, at the idea of his unjust suspicions.— AVhen she reflected, hoAvever, that ap- pcarancf's Avere against her, and that nothing but real friendship could luu e prompted him to speak, to counsel her, as he had done, resentment gave way to gratitude ; she warmly acknowledged her obligations to him for his anxiety about her, and hastened to exculpate herself in his cats. To do this Avas not a difficult
difficult matter. Woodville could not doubt her solemn assurances of having met Lord G Avy therin but by accident, and being detained by him against her inclination ; and, perhaps, had Egbert doubted her truth and constancy, he could not have felt a purer joy at finding her able to vindicate both, than Wojd- ville experienced,
.13 CHAP.
■??????????
?И??. ??. *' 'torgíve mc, if I cannot better answer " Than weeping." Ro wl, WOODVILLE and Jacintha sepa¬ rated soon after the explanation ivhich had taken place betAveen them ; and the former went out to amuse himself, by rambling about the grounds. As he was returning through the shrubbery, Avhich curiosity to know whether Lord Gwvtherin would again ?/ i-v? be there, induced him to do, he thought he heard a low murmur of voices from a path
path at a little distance, and Avhich was thickly shaded by tall evergreens. With trembling eagerness he paused a mo¬ ment to listen; then lightly stepping forward, he beheld two persons slowly advancing down the path, one of Avhom he kneAV, at the first glance, to be the disguised Lord Gwytherin, and the; other greatly resembled Jacintha in figure ; but, a thick veil which shaded her face, together with the dusky light » that novv prevailed, for he had pro¬ longed his walk to a late hour, prevent¬ ed him from distinguishing her features. Determined not tQ lose such an op¬ portunity of ascertaining Avhether the suspicions, Avhich again began to per¬ vade his mind, were avcII or ill founded, Woodviiie sprang forward Avithout hesi¬ tation ; but the moment he did so, Lord Gwytherin and his companion, whohad not till then observed him, separated, L 4 and
ι and taking opposite directions, were almost immediately out of sight. Woodville could not hesitate a mo¬ ment Avhich to folloAV : his anxiety to know who tîie lady Avas, made him eagerly pursue her steps ; but not all the expedition he used enabled him to overtake her, and he reached the house breathless and disappointed. The first object he cast his eyes upon, on entering the hall, Avas Jacintha, muffled up exactly as the person Avas whom he had seen Avith Lord GAvy¬ therin;—that she Avas that person, he ???? could scarcely cioubt ; and it would have been difficult to determine whe¬ ther regret or indignation were most predominant in his mind at her supposed duplicity. Jacintha, avIio avrs ascend¬ ing the stairs at his entrance, paused to speak to him ; but, instead of replyiug to what she said, he cast a disdainful glance
glance upon her, and passed into the parlour. Confounded by this conduct, Jacin¬ tha stood for a feAv minutes transfixed to the spot ; she could only account for it by supposing that either his suspicions had not been entirely removed in the morning, or had since revived—an idea Avhich Avounded her as severely as their disclosure had done ; and nothing but the horror she felt at lying under them, could bave induced her to folloAV him into the parlour, in order to receive an explanation of it ; or, at least, to en¬ quire his motives for treating her in a manner so little expected* Their long intimacv, the connection which ? existed betAveen him and the family to w hom she had imagined she belonged, and the friendship he had ahvays professed for her, authorized her making this enquiry ; yet, Avhenopening l ã her
her lips for the purpose, pride and re¬ sentment opposed her utterance, and she burst into tears* Woodville appeared extremely affect-: ed" by her emotion. " If I ??? distressed you------" said he. "If," repeated Jacmtha; "Oh! Mr. Woodville, can you indeed doubt having done so ?—Can you indeed be¬ lieve I am so insensible as not to feel, acutely feel contemptuous treatment from those, whose esteem I flattered myself I had possessed. Be assured, nothing could alleviate the anguish it gives me, but the consciousness of not having deserved it." "Imust, I do belicA T e you," cried Woodville, " notwithstanding all I have heard and see-ti-;—- and I must, I will believe
believb that when you hear what I have to say, you avíU forgive the pain I haA r e caused you." He then proceeded to relate the cir¬ cumstances Avhich had impelled him to act Ä as he had done—circumstances Avhich Jacintha was almost brought to acknoAvledge Avere sufficiently strong to lead him into error. She assured him solemnly, that beyond the precincts of the garden she had not been that day, nor meant to go, except she could be assured that Lord Gwytherin had quit¬ ted the neighbourhood. That she was not the person who had attracted him to it, she sjncerely rejoiced ; Avho it Avas that had done so, she could not possibly conjecture; but that it was no one belonging to Mr. Decourcy's family, she was almost certain.
i6 The
The pardon Avhich Woodviiie solicit¬ ed Avith humility and contrition, she granted, and promised, if possible, to think no more of the uneasiness ho had caused her.
CHAP,
? CHAP. XIII. *« She thrice essayM to speak j her accents hung, *« And faltVmg dy'd, unfinish'd, on her tongue, *' Or vanished into sighs \ with long delay *« Her voice return'd, and found the wonted way." Drydekv JL HE next morning, at breakfast, Mrs. Decourcy proposed to Woodville to . drİA'e her out in the phaeton, as the day was remarkably fine, and asked Jacintha whether she chose to accompany them. Jacintha said she would with plea¬ sure, had she not received a letter that very day from Mrs. Falkland (Mr. Frank land's eldest daughter lately mai¬ ned),
ried), Avhich she Avished to answer im¬ mediately, as it contained some very severe reproaches for her long silence- reproaches which, she Avas anxious to convince her friend, she'did not merits Her excuse Avas admitted ; and, as soon as they drove of£ she repaiied to her chamber for the purpose of Avriting a long and explanatory letter. When finished, as Mrs. Decourcy and Wood¬ ville were not returned from their ride, and the day still continued fine, though the bright sunshine had gone off, she quitted the house Avith an intention of walking in the gardens. They lay at a little distance from it, and the interme¬ diate space Avas thickly planted Avitli trees and clumps of evergreens. From behind one of these clumps, ere Jacintha had advanced many paces, to her great surprise (for she had no idea of meeting him so near the house) Lord Gwytherin rushed forward, and, ere she could make
make an effort to avoid him, seized her hand. ' " Suffer me to detain you," cried he, " I conjure, I entreat you—if but for a minute.'' " I will, my Lord," said Jacintha, with a kind of calm disdain in her A r oice and countenance, r ' I Avill suffer you to detain me, that I may have an oppor¬ tunity of telikig you, if you continue to persecute me in this manner, I must be under the unpleasant necessity of requesting the interference of my friends. " 4 ' Your friends have used mc cruelly, " exclaimed, he, in a passionate accent, " or you would not speak to me in this manner.—Good God í why ha\ r e tbey left it to me to make a. discovery so painfully interesting ?—rWhy left it to me—to tell you that-—" 5 He
Ile paused, .apparently overcome by the violence of his emotions. Jacintha became agitated ; resent¬ ment gave place to curiosity. " What," asked she, in a tremulous accent, and turning as pale as death, * ' Avhat is it my friends have left you to tell me?" " What I wish I could flatter myself would give you pleasure. " " Be explicit, my Lord;—you tor- lure me by this suspense," cried she, Λν?ίΙι increasing agitation. " They have left İt to me to tell you," said he, in a solemn voice, and looking earnestly at her as he spoke, " that I------" He again paused, for Jaciutha seemed ready to drop at his feet.
"Go
" Go on, my Lord," cried Jacintha, in a faint voice; "you can scarcely pain me more by kny discovery you have to make, than by the conjectures vou have excited." *! I e " They have left it to me then, to inform you," resumed he, " that I am your father !" ' These words acted like an electric shock upon Jacintha ; her senses, which appeared gradually receding, Avere in¬ stantly revived ;—she shrieked. " You my father !" exclaimed she wildly, "you my father !—Oh God !— it is impossible !" " You doubt, because you Avish to disbelie\ T e, " cried Lord Gwytherin, re¬ sentfully; "but Mrs. Decourcy will confirm the truth of my assertion ;—· she Avill ----- ·" He
- He ceased, for Jacintha at this mo- ■* ì ment sunk almost fainting against his shoulder, OA'erpoAvered by the sudden¬ ness of this discoA-ery, or rather by the horror she felt at finding herself the daughter of a man who had meditated ber destruction. Terrified by herlsituation, Lord Gwy¬ therin laid her gently upon the grass, and tried, by chafing her hands, to re¬ vive her. ln a short time she came a little to herself; but the moment her half-Opened eyes glanced upon him, they ??^?? again closed, with a shivering sen¬ sation of disgust and abhorrence, and she involuntarily withdrew her hand, " I see, I see," cried he, in a aoìcc expressÍA -? of resentment and anguish, and starting from the ground on Avhich he had knelt beside her, " I see, I see you detest me.—Would to God, I had withstood the pleadings of my heart—« you
you Avould not then have been distressed by the present discovery ; nor shoidd I have been agonised by knoAving I Avas an,object of hatred to my child." " If I have said or done any thing to displease you, my Lord," said Ja¬ cintha, who noAV felt it a duty to endeavour to conceal the sentiments with which he had inspired her, " im* pute my having done so, not to design, but to the confusion into which surprise has throAvn me." " May I then flatter myself," cried Lord Gwytherin, as he raised her from theground, "that you really do not hate me; or rather," added he, hesi¬ tatingly, " may I hope that you Avill endeavour not to do so?—that, when time has proved the sincerity of my af¬ fection for you, as Avell as repentance for the conduct which gaA r e you pain, you avíU give me a place in your regard Ì Had
Had I sooner knoAvn my relationship to you, I should sooner ??? ? ? endeavoured to render myself worthy of that regard, and should also have avoided many errors and indiscretions, Avhich I ciln never cease to regret." " Mention them no more, my Lord, I conjure you," cried Jacintha, inex¬ pressibly shocked, as she Avell knew to what he alluded ;—" for mercy's sake," she exclaimed, with a wildness of look which alarmed him, "nev T er again re¬ cur to what is past ! But tell me, tell me," she added, " to Avhat strange cause is it owing, that you Avere kept so long in ignorance of my connection to you ?" » " To do so," said Lord Gwy therin, " to relate the \ r ariety of circumstances which conspired to keep me in igno¬ rance, not only of your affinity to me, but of your very existence, would require
ι Tequile more time than either of us ca« command at present."' '" Good God !—my very existence 1" repeated Jacmtha ; tc I am all amaze¬ ment at what I hear, and shall knoAv no peace till I am acquainted \\ ith the mvstcrious circumstances \ou have al- Iudeii to.— Äly mother too—she ------" " Who she is," said Lord Gwvthcrin, " you shall------" He was interrupted by Jacintha. " Who she is," repeated she, and grasped his arm, u she lives then—I have a mother !" " Who she is," resumed Lord G aw- therin, with a calmness Avliich, had Jacintha been sufficiently composed to haA'c observed it, would have surprised her, "you shall hear, as well as every particular
particular of our unfortunate story, Avhenever you can give me au oppor¬ tunity of conversing with you in pri¬ vate." t ' In private, " said Jacintha, t t must H be uoav in private ?" " It must," replied Lord G Avy therin ; " 'tis dangerous for us to be seen to¬ gether." Jacintha started, and cast an appre- hensİA-e glance around. " I think," cried she, "you spoke as if Mrs. Decourcy kneAV of our relation¬ ship." "I did,'* replied he; "she İs ac¬ quainted Avith it." " And she only ?" asked Jacintha. u Yes;
" Yes ; add Avith her the knoAvledge of it must rest. Fame, honour, hap¬ piness—nay, life itself depend on its being kept a profound secret." Jacintha lifted her hands in astonish¬ ment. . "Oh that you could noA\-,** she cried, " gratify my ardent curiosity !" "Tis impossible," said he; "but surely you could soon contrive to give me an opportunity of speaking to you." " I know not Iioav I can do so," re* plied Jacintha, " fbr í am Avatched.— I am------" she paused, fbr she could not bring herself to say she Avas sus¬ pected; " could you not, therefore, Avrite ?" she added. "Impossible;—a letter could net'er fully explain the circumstances you wish to
to learn. Besides, even if it could, I should be too much agitated in retracing those circumstances, to be able to write.'* - 'Jacintha considered for a moment. " This evening, perhaps, 4 " said she, «c j______ ■> " Hush!" cried Lord Gwytherin, in a low voice ; tí did you not hear a rust¬ ling amongst the trees?" Jacintha, Avithout attempting to listen, motioned for him to leave her ; terrifietl almost to death, at the idea of his being seen Avith her by Woodville. He instantly obeyed her motion, and had scarcely disappeared Avhen »he be¬ held Woodville approaching.
She
She endeavoured to <&ltn her per¬ turbation, and AA'alked towards him as fast as her trembling limbs could carry her. " Have you been long.out?" asked - Woodville, as he met her. " Not very long," she replied, and tried to shun his eyes as she spoke, from «a conviction that her countenance Avas α faithful index of her mind. Woodville Avas too quick, however, in his observations not to perceive at once the disorder of her looks, and, in an accent of surprise, exclaimed— " Good Heavens! what is thematter? You look pale and frightened ! Has any thing happened to alarm you ?" c( No, nothmg," said Jacintha, .still «nore agitated, from finding he had - vol. n # # noticed
noticed fier agitation. She then endea* voured to change the discourse, by ask¬ ing whether lie had had a pleasant ride. Woodville mused for some minutes" before he ansAvered her, and then, in a cold and careless manner, said— , " Yes, a very pleasant one." Jacintha asked a few other trifling questions, Avhich he continued to an- sAver with the same air of indifference, and on entering the house, they sepa¬ rated; Jacintha Avounded to the soul bv his behaviour, which evidently implied a revÍA r alof his unjust suspicions concerning her. That time, hoAveAer, would*prove their unjustncss, and fuliy eradicate them, she could nof doubt ; and from thb idea, felt the pain they at present gave her much diminished. CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. « f With how secure a brow and specious form ·* He gilds the secretvüiain î Sure that face *' Was meanrfor honesty} but Heav'a mismatch'd it # 4t And furntsttd Treason out #ith Nature's pompt «·- To wake îte work more easy. «' See how he sets his countenance'for deceit* ·* And promues a Ke before h« «peaks ?* Sai» ?» Dolabella mir Anthony. xi. FEAR of agitating Mrs. Decourcy, by too suddenly revealing her know* ledge of a secret, Avhich it was evident she neA er wisheil her to learn, checked the impulse which would otherwise have carried Jaciutha immediately to her» for m £ the
the purpose of doing so ; and she re¬ tired to her chamber, in order to try and compose her spirits ere she appeared at dinner : but to succeed in this attempt was at present impossible. What she hied so recently heard, as Avell as what she still expected to hear, kept her mind in a state of agitation, which rendered all hereffoits to regain composure unavail¬ ing ; nor could she dİAest herself of the* horror which had seized her the moment she learned she Avas the daughter of Lord Gwy therin ; and so far from in¬ creasing her happiness, she Avas con vinced the late discovery Avoukl consider¬ ably lessen it, since it could not fail of being a lasting source of anguish to her, to know a parent, to whom her heart conld pay no homage, A\hom she could neither love nor esteem. In vain she endeavoured to aAvakea tender sentiments in hb &vour, by repre¬ senting to herself his affection for her; to * ? which
which alone she could suppose his dis¬ closing their relationship Avas OAving; the remembrance of his former conduct could riot be obliterated, and her soul recoiled from the idea of even calling him her father. She rejoiced to think that they \vould seldom, if ever, be together, in conse¬ quence of the necessity there ivas for keeping their connection a profound secret—a necessity which too clearly proved the unhappy circumstances under which she was born* With a flood of tears she resigned the pleasing idea she had heretofore cherish¬ ed, of her parents being virtuous ; yet she still hoped she should hear some¬ thing that might palliate their conduct. She regretted not having been more urgent with Lord Gwytherin to inform her who her mother was. A thousand ? 3 strange
strange conjectures began to float upon her brain ; and, in consequence of them, slie felt pleased she had not been abrupt in her communication to Mrs. De* courcy, and finally determined not to acquaint her with ivhat she had heard, till she had again seen Lord Gwytherin, and conversed Avith him. Absorbed in thought, she forgot the lateness of the hour, till restored to re¬ collection by the entrance of a maid¬ servant, who informed her dinner was nearly ready. Jacintha started up at this intelligence, and hastening to the toilet, began to adjust her dress. " I have brought you a letter, Miss,'* said the maid, presenting her one as she spoke, " which Nanny Wilson s little boy gave me, a few minutes ago, for you. He says it is from his mother, about some work she ivas to do for you." " For
ei For me," repeated Jacintha, break¬ ing open the letter iri astonishment, which Avasnot diminished by perceiving the signature of Lord Gwytherin. The contents were as folloAV :-—
"I am obliged to go to town to¬ morrow ; and, as I do not know Avhen I may have another opportunity of con¬ versing with you, 1 earnestly entreat you to let me see you this evening.—- Just before we parted, I think you said something of being able to do so, Let røe know whether I wm mistaken* Be under no apprehension of this letter leading to any discovery ;—the person entrusted Avith the conveyance of it does not know who it comes from.—Adieu! Believe me Avith the truest affection, ** Yours, ** GWYTHERIN."
m è Jacinth»
Jacintha hesitated a moment, their sitting down to her writing-table, she wrote as follows :~
" MY LORD, " Between the hours of eight and nine, this evening, come to the glass- door, on the south side of the house, ivhich opens from the lavyn into the breakfast-parlour.. I avíU receive you there, if it be possible for me to do so ; if not, χ íiaüér myseu you wia con¬ trive some method of acquainting me with the particulars I am so anxious ta learn. With respect, &c. " I remain, my Lord, " Your obedient, J. V.
The moment she had sealed her note, which she did not direct, she dispatched
dispatched the maid .with it, and crush¬ ing Lord G Avy therm's, was proceeding to throAv it into the fire, when the sud¬ den ringing of the dinner-bell made her hastily put it into her pocket, and de¬ scend, Avithout altering her dress, tothe drawing-room, Avhere, besides the usual family party, she found three gentle¬ men and two ladies, Avho resided in the neighbourhood, whom Mrs. Decourcy had met in her excursion, and invited to dinner. Jacintha considered their coming a very fortunate eireumstance for her, as she naturally thought Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy's being engaged Avith com¬ pany, would enable her to sec Lord Gwytherin Avith greater ease and less danger of detect ion, than she could other- Avise have done; yvt f notwithstanding this idea, she still looked forward to her meeting him with trembling apprehen¬ sion, and so great at times avcic her ? 5 terrors
terrors of the consequences Avhich might ensue from doing so, that nothing but her strong anxiety to be informed of her mother, could have kept her faith¬ ful to her appointment. The compensation during dinner Avas pretty general and tolerably lively, and it was past eight ere the latlies retired from the parlour. Confused and irresolute. Jacinthahesi- tated upon the stairs w hether she should follow tliem into the drawing-room or not. During this hesitation, they had entered it, Avhich she no sooner per¬ ceived, than she turned into a passage ivhich led to a flight of back-staiis, by which she descended to the breakfast- parlour, libere a dull fire still burned; she fastened the door by wliich she en¬ tered, and then lightly stepping to the one tl at opened upon the lawn, un¬ bolted it, and beheld Lord Gwvtherin at
at a little distance slowly walking before it. The moment he saAv her, he hastened to her, and taking her hand, pressed it in expressive silence to his lips. - Jacintha trembled violently as she admitted him into the parlour, and for some minutes could scarcely articulate a Avoid. Lord G aw therin endeavoured to re- assure her ;—as soon as she, Avas a little composed, he informed herthatafter they had parted, he had received a letter re- quiimg his immediate return to town. " I should have been miserable," continued he, " had I departed Avith¬ out satbtving the curiosity I kneAV I had excited in your mind, and again entreating a ou to try and ???????? the unhappy piejudices ? hich, I know, ??? have conceived against me." ? 6 "I
"'I am all impatience, my Lord,"' said Jacintha, Avithout appearing to no¬ tice these last Avoids, " for the parti¬ culars you have promised to communi¬ cate. Besides, I am fearful of bein g too long absent." " I cannot," said Lord Gwytherin,. in a low voice, and seating Jacintha and himself as he spoke, t ' reveal the circum¬ stances Avhich you are so desirous of learning, AHthout previously declaring; that the errors (if you will permit me to call them by so miid a term), which, in the course of my narrative, I must ac¬ knowledge having committed, Avere OAving more to education than to dis¬ position, lest, if wholly unexcuscd, they should lead you to imagine me totally umvorthy of your esteem and regard ; which to obtain would, I assure you, confer upon me the highest happi¬ ness."
Here
Here he paused, and looked earnestly at Jacintha, expecting, perhaps, some complimentary answer from her ; if he did so, hoAvever, he A\*-as disappointed, for Jacintha Avas too sincere to speak a language foreign to the feelings of her heart, and, after a short silence, he re¬ sumed his narrative, " Instructed rather in the art, of gratifying than restraining my passions, which, from being naturally ardent, particularly needed controul ; brought up amidst scenes of dissipation, and launched, at an early period of life, into a world abounding Avith temptations for the rich, the great, and inexpe¬ rienced—temptations, which some¬ times not all the boasted stoicism of the philosopher can enable him to resist ; can it excite avoihíci* that I, who nei¬ ther possessed coolness nor caution, and was a stranger alike to moral precept and example, should yield to their' seductions^
,254 NOCTURNAL VISIT. seductions, and be led into actions in¬ consistent Avith virtue?" II?re he again paused, in hopes, per¬ haps, of hearing something fiom Jacin¬ tha, Avhich might enable him to ascer- tain Avhether she admitted the apology he offered for his conduct ; but she was silent, and lie soon proceeded. " Thç sensibility of my heart, and the ?1 ? ???1? of my disposition, rendered me particularly susceptible of the attrac¬ tions of your sex ; but, not W'itbstand¬ ing the homage I paid to them—the tenderness, the admiration they in¬ spired, I Avas resolutely determined against marrying ; not so much from a conscio ub ness of any inconstancy in my temper, as from the many instances I had ???? of conjugal infidelity and in- - felicity.—If I ever felt inclined to change this resomi ion, it certainly was in favour of ???* mother, Avho avos undoubtedly
r undoubtedly the most lovely and be¬ witching creature I ever beheld.", " Tell me," cried Jacintha, no longer able to controul her strong impatience,. "tell me," said she, scarcely able-to speak, and involuntarily resting her hand upon his arm, " who was my mother ?" " A sister of Mr. Decourcy's." L t Good Heavens ! a sister of Mr. Decourcy's !" exclaimed Jacintha, with uplifted hands and eyes. " Yes ;—she was educated in Ireland, and sent, Avhen about seventeen, to an aunt in London, for ihe purpose, I believe, of being advantageously settled. She re- ceiA'ed the very particular attentions. I paid her, almost from the moment Ave be¬ came acquainted, w ith evident pleasure ; but, notwitlibtunding my vanity, that vanity
vanity so natural to the youthful mind, I could not avoid perceiving 1 Avas more indebted for her smiles to my rank and fortune, than to my person and accom¬ plishments. I Avas piqued on making this- discovery. , We all like to be re¬ garded merely for our OAvn merits, and not for any accidental advantages Ave may possess ; and, in consequence of it, I thought myself justifiable in form¬ ing designs against her. In these de¬ signs 1 was soon too successful : Avhile she imagined she Avas drawing me into her net, I completely entangled her in mine.—You shudder; my conduct cer¬ tainly Avas very culpable, and I review it myself, I assure you, with very great remorse : but, after all, it is your total ignorance of mankind which makes it appear so very atrocious to you.—Vices and virtues are lessened and increased by comparison ; and I have no doubt, when you acquire a greater knowledge of the Avorld, of the deceits Avhich are practised,
practised, the dreadful crimes that are daily perpetrated in it, that you will look , Avith more lenity than you do at present upon my actions." " HeaA r en forbid," said Jacintha, " that I should only be'taught mercy for the frailties of one felloAv-creature, by hearing of the superior enormities of another!" 11 And yet nothing is more common, nothing is more natural," cried Lord Gwytherin; "we think of the plun¬ derer Avith indignation till Ave hear ofthe assassin ; and rail Avith severity against the flattery of the sycophant, till avo hear ofthe ingratitude ofthe friend." '"I alloAv the justness of what you say, my Lord, " replied Jacintha ; " but pray proceed in your narrative—I am all impatience to learn the fate of my un· fortimate mother." " SorroAY
" SorroAV and repentance folloAved her deviation from virtue," continued he, " both of which, I assure you, I afterwards felt in their fullest extent for my conduct towards her. " " Tired by her incessant reproaches and importunate demands to make atonement for her Avrongs, I at length detached myself entirely from her, and fleAV to amusement, as a resource against the regret and compunction Avhich would iioav and then, even at that period, Avhen I Avas volatile and un¬ thinking, misled by company, and hardened by example, obtrude upon my mind on her account." " Ah !" said Jacintha, in\-oluntarily, " you might have found a much easier and more effectual Avay of banishing those feelings, than by flying to dissi¬ pation." Lord
Lord Gwytherin sighed deeply, or at least affected to do so ; and, after the pause of a minute, proceeded. " I almost dread to go on," said he, " lest I should injure myself irrevocably in your opinion.-" " Oh my Lord!" exclaimed Jacin¬ tha, t t surely you would not have the barbarity to leave me in this state of suspense ?" " Well," said he, " I Avill proceed, begging you to remember tbat if my enormities havx been great, my peni- ^ tence is sincere. —In a short time after I had bidden your mother a last adieu, I became acquainted with Mrs, De¬ courcy ;—she Avas then unmarried ; from the beauty which she still possesses, you may judge what she must have been in the early part of her life. To the un¬ rivalled loveliness she then possessed,* were
Avere united a simplicity, an innocetice irresistibly attractÌA«e. I beheld her with instantaneous admiration, and as instantly resolved to attempt the con¬ quest of her heart. Success crowned the attempt ; but the designs I hoped to accomplish, in consequence of that success—·" ' ζ Were defeated, " exclaimed Jacintha. " They Avere ;—through your mo¬ ther's means she was rescued from my snares. " " Oh blessed and happy interference !" cried Jacintha. " Be assured," said Lord G Avy therin, " though provoked and disappointed at the time I lost her, I have since sincerely rejoiced at her preservation, after Avhat bad passed ; for she eloped from her home Avith me, under an idea that my intentions
intentions Avere honourable. She could not think of returning to her friends ; she Avas therefore compelled to accept the proteciion of your mother ; and for¬ tunate Avas it for her that she did so, as it Avas the means of introducing her to the amiable man she afterwards married. From-the period I lost her till the pre¬ sent, I never saAV her ; nor, Avithout the utmost difficulty could I now procure am interview Avith her,.though 1 came hither merely for that purpose." " But she Avas the person Avhom you met İn the demesne, " said Jacintha. " She Avas, " replied he. t i On coming hither, I took up iny abode in an ob¬ scure inn at Hatfield, from Avhence a confidential sen-ant had a letter con¬ vey eel to her by a country-boy, con¬ taining an earnest request from me, to be permitted to converse Avith her a few mmutes in private relative to you. 'She
She at first refused this request ; but, on its being repeated, at lengtli consent¬ ed to meet me ; but not all my solicita¬ tions could prevail on her to make you acquainted Avith the secret of your birth, for the purpose of doing Avhich I alone sought an interview with her ?" " And Avhat reason," asked Jacintha, rather hesitatingly, t£ did she assign for wishing me not to knoAV it?" " Oh ! many reasons, too tedious here to upeat, none of Avhich I could allow to be just ; in short, my heart «Avas bent upon making the discoATiy, for I could not endure the idea of still continuing to be an object of terror and aA-ersion to you. Besides the 1oa t c I felt for your mother—a love A\hich, little as my conduct agrees with the assertion, never knew any great diminution, urged me to assure her child of my affection, and endeaA our
endeavour to inspire her Avith some åe- gree of reciprocal tenderness. " As I could neither intrude into Mrs. Decourcy"s house, nor force her to reA r eal the secret I Avas so desirous you should hear, I resolved, from time to time, to hover about your habitation till I could obtain an opportunity for disclos¬ ing it myself. I have at lengtli succeeded in doing so ; and should it occasion any alteration in your sentiments—should it create in your bosom any interest in my faA'our, I shall feel greater happiness than I ever before experienced. Tell me theu, my dear and charming girl, tell me that you will, in future, tiy to look upon me as a father, anil forget and forgive my past offences ?" " May Heaven - forgive them!" said Jacintha.
His
His Lordship piously ejaculated, " Amen !" Then taking her hand, he was pressing it Avith fervour to his lips, when Jacintha, shuddering, iiiAOİunta- rily dreAv it from him. Immediately, however, recollecting herself* she said, though Avithout re¬ turning it— " I hope, my Lord, I shall ne ??? he forgetful ofthe duties of a daughter." * ' Those duties, " thought she, É t which v ere so early taught me by the best of men.-—Ah ! if he who noAV acknow¬ ledges himself my father, resembled him whom I so long believed to be so, Avhat very different feelings should I at this instant experience !" " 1 am sure you liever will," replied he, " and I derive pleasure from the assurance; but it is a pleasure, damped by
îl hy lhe idea of not being able to ac¬ knowledge you publiciy, and proudly boast to the world of such a daughter ; but the fame of yonr mother, as well as many otiier considerations, totally pre¬ vent such a measure. " u You have not yet, my Lord," said she, (i gratified my anxious curiosity respecting my mother ; nor informed me hy what, or rat Ικτ by wliose means 1 was placed under the care of Mr, ? ¿re ville." <t Your mother," resumed hi> Lord¬ ship, *' made Mrs. Decourcy her con¬ fidant ; and she was the person who consigned you to the protection of Mr. Greville, to be brought up as his child, and with a strict injunction to seurecy, which I am certain he would liave ad- lui ed to; but------" vol. n. x Here
t lieve Lord G Avy therin faltered, and appeared emban issed ; and Jacintha again became violently agitated. " Tlie moment I learned our relation¬ ship," continued Lord Gwytherin, rc- i *v covering from his contusion, "I would have acquainted you with it, had not Mr. Cireville dissuaded me from doing so, hy a variety of arguments not ne¬ cessary here to mention ; but so restless and unhappy did I feel in consequence of yielding to them, that I Avas on the point of returning to Wycfield, A\h*-n I received an account of his death, and your departure from it." * · "Eut my mother," interrupted Ja¬ cintha, " tell me, my Lord, ofher." " She lives," said he, " in th.e pos¬ session of every blessing this life can bestow." Jacintha
Jacintha started, and uttered aa ex¬ clamation of surprise. - " In the possession of happiness and honour," resumed he, "she lives; a faithful wife, an estimable mother ; beloved by her intimates, and admired by all who know her." "Then I find," said Jacintha, " í liaA'e been utterly mistaken ;—I ima¬ gined my mother to be th.e eldest sister of Mr. Decourcv, avIio, manv years ago, I ???'? heard ??. Decourcy say, conceived a dislike to the worid, and ■retired to a Convent in France, though Avithout takim»· the voavs," ? " No," replied Lord Gwytherin, " your mother is his Aouiutvst surer. the Countess of Dun»auc. Soon alter your birth (ofwhich it was her inten- " ;ion I should never hear), she accom¬ panied some friends to the Continent, N 2 AVlklV
where she met the Earl, the descendant of a noble Irish family ; avIio, in con¬ sequence of their attachment to the cause of James the Second, lost the A principal part of their property in Ire¬ land ; but, by splendid alliances in France, regained nearly an eqiuA'alent for it. The Earl became her .captive almost4he moment he beheld her, and soon made proposals, which she accepted ?? ithout hesitation " r "Without hesitation!" repeated Ja¬ cintha. " Yes ;—by him she has obtained dignities she Avas abvaA r s ambitious of possessing, and has two lovely daugh¬ ters, OA'er Avhom she watches Avith all the solicitude of a tender parent." " Is she then so much engrossed by these happy daughters," said Jacintha, ? ith starting tears, " as to be utterly regardless
regardless of* me ?—Alas ! have the un¬ fortunate circumstances under a« hich I was born, draAvn so great a curse upon me, as to deprive me of my another's love ?" " Regard for her reputation prevent¬ ed her from noticing you," cried Lord Gwytherin; " but 1 cannot suppose you are cither forgotten or disregai ded." " Oh î could I hope so," said Jacin¬ tha, " Oh 1 could I hope,, éyer to be known to her— ever to-experience f*v*m her the kindness, the attention of a mo¬ ther, what happiness should I derive from the idea !" " Well, do not despair," replied Loid Gwy therm ; " some lucky chance may jet introduce you to her; and f ani certain she could not know you,*Avithout admiring and esteeming you." ? S "I
" I wish I could think so," said Ja* cintha, ivith fervour. She then pro¬ ceeded to ask so many questions con¬ cerning this mother (for whom, not- iiitbstanding the high disapprobation ivith which her conduct had inspired her, she felt all her tenderness awakened), tliat Lord Gwytherin at length became weary of answering her, and shifted the discourse, to question her, in his turn, concerning Mr. and Airs. Decourcy's conduct toAvards her. On this she ex¬ patiated with all the Avarmth of grati* tude, carefully avoiding any expression which could convey an idea of her eyer having thought their affection on the decline. Lord Gwytherin professed himself highly pleased with what she told him ; but begged to know ivhether she yet knew what their intentions were re* specting her.
"I *
' c I never bestowed a thought upon such a subject, my Lord/' replied Jacintha. ? "Well, well, I dare say the}'U act nobly by ???," said Mü Lordship. " They have already done so, my Lord,' 4 ciied Jacintha, warmly ; 4i but for them, disclaimed and unacknow¬ ledged as I wai, without a home, with¬ out a refuge, in how unpleasant a situa¬ tion might I have been at present Γ 11 True/' said he, with an indifference in his manner which hurt Jacintha, and seemed strange after his professions of aflection for her; "true, their taking you under tlieir protection was a very fortunate circumstance indeed ; aud I assure you I should be much more mi¬ serable than I am at present, from not being able to take you under mine, but ? 4 for
for the happy manner in which you arc situated." Jacintha sighed deeply, but did not speak ; and he proceeded to ask her a feAv other questions relative to Egbert, which she ansAvered very briefly, as they evidently appeared to her to be dic¬ tated more by curiosity than any soli¬ citude about his welfare. He then rose to depart ; but ere he bade her adieu, lie put iuto her hand a miniature resemblance of himself, which had been presented by hhn to her mo¬ ther, and returned by her, when all hopes of an honourable union between them were dissolved. Jacintha received it with trembling emotion—what ber fancy immediately representeÖ to her, had been bedewed with the repentant tears of a mother, aud placed it in her bosom.
He repeated his assurances of regard, and expressed his earnest hopes that she Avould endeavour to cultivate other sen¬ timents for him, than those he feared she at present entertained î and made her promise she Avoukl, as often as pos¬ sible, give liim an opportunity of con¬ versing with her, which, he said, he doubted not she wotdd often have the power off loing, through Mrs. Decourcy s means, to whom he supposed she meant to communicate a* hat lie had told her. Jacintha replied tn the affirmative.— For her intended communication to Mrs. Decourcy uhehadiiideedadoubb motive; first, to Ahtain a more circumstantial ac¬ count ofthe particulars she wished to kara¬ than she had received front bis Lordship, wliose broken, disjointed, and cursory narrative had not fay any mean* gratified herctirkbity ;—and, secondly, to consult with' lier how she should regulate her actions with respect to hmi ; for §i»ce n S tinir
their relationship Avas to be kept an in¬ violable secret, she dreaded, from the peculiar delicacy of her situation, the irreparable injury she might do herself hy having any correspondence Avith him. And yet, notwit hstanding this dread, . she almost felt a reluctance to decline it entirely, from the impiession Avhich his repeated assurances of affection had made upon her. Could she have looked into his heart, however, this reluctance ♦ would instantly ???-? vanished ; for she would tlien ???^? perceived that he Avas not more a stranger to any thing like tenderness for her, than to any thing Jike repentance for his past enormities ; that the most selfish considerations had alone induced him to disclose the secret of her birth ; and that, had she been * unnoticed by her present protectors, she ???^?? would have been noticed by htm.
When
When his atrocious designs against her impelled Mr. GreA'ille to divulge the connection betAveen them, he per¬ fectly agreed Avith that good man, in thinking it right to keep her still, as^ Avell as ?? ? ??? other person, in ignorance of it. The remorse and honor with Avhich his conduct towards her had involun¬ tarily inspired him, Avere of short dura¬ tion, and on quitting the country, he ceased entirely to think about her; nor Avas she ever recalled to his remembrance till he heard of her being taken under the protection of Mr. and Mrs>, De¬ courcy, and that she Avas considered as the person who would possess the largest portion of their wealth. The advantage** which might, nay would result, he doubted not (from her general character, and his own know* ktlgeofher disposition), to Kim here· ♦ ? 6 after,
after, from his relationship to her being known, immediately occurred to him, and determined him to conceal it no longer from her. The measures he took to put this de¬ termination into execution, have been already explained. lie possessed too much discernment not to discoAer the feeiings which Jacintha at present en¬ tertained for him ; but he flattered him¬ self his affected tenderness and insi¬ nuating manners, would by degrees completely overcome them, and give him such an ascendency over her mind as, for his oavii sake, he Avished to ac¬ quire. Though he doubted not her re¬ ceiving a more particular account of past occurrences from Mrs. Decourcy than she had received from him, he felt no great apprehensions at this idea ; as he wm almost persuaded that Mrs. De¬ courcy Avas far too amiable to dwell upon any circumstances, ivhich had a tendency
tendency to create or strengthen a pre¬ judice in the bosom of a child against a parent. " My ardent anxiety to discover my pa. jnts, is then at length satisfied," said Jacintha to herself, as Lord Gwytherin departed from her; " but has its being so occasioned me any pleasure?—Ah! no. Whilst thev Avere unknown to me, I believed them virtuous» and rejoiced in the belief; but now------" She checked the reflections that Avere rising in her mind, and crossing the room with cautious steps, unbolted the door.
CHAP.
?И??. XV. ** Methought, ev*n now, I maik\j ihe sfaits of guilt ** Tînt shook her soul." Rowe. ς Under how hard a fate are women born ! *« PrJz'ii to thtnr ruin, or expob'd to scorn I" AValler. JL ? give a just idea of the consterna¬ tion into Avhich Jacintha Avas throAvn, Avhen, on opening the door, she beheld Woodville speaking to a servant Avithin a feAv paces of it, is utterly impossible* She started back, and for a minute re¬ mained immoveable ; then recollecting that
that her confusion of itself Avas sufficient to confirm any suspicions he might en¬ tertain against her, she again came forward, and passed him in silence to the staircase. Had she indeed been in¬ clined to speak to him, his conduct would have effectually prevented her from doing so; for, as she approached, he turned from her Avith an angry and contemptuous glance, which clearly proved the ideas that then predominated iu his mind. Confused and agitated, Jacintha would have preferred going to her cham¬ ber to the drawing-room, had she not feared exciting unpleasant enquiries or surmises, by longer absenting herself from the latter ; thither therefore she repaired, and found all the dinner party assembled. No questions were asked concernine: her lon&· absence from the company, and she would have felt happy, could she have flattered herself no observations
observations had been made upon it * but thatvthis Avas not the case, the be¬ haviour of Woodviiie convinced her; and she resolved on acquainting Mrs." Decourcy the next morning w ith what she had heard this day, and advising w ith ~ her on Avhat measures she should take for endeavouriug to remove his injurious ideas respecting her. Soon after she hail entered the draw r ing-room, he re¬ turned to it, but continued cool and reserved throughout the evening. The uneasiness of Jacintha Avas con¬ siderably increased by finding, on re¬ tiring to her chamber, that she had dropped Lord G Avy therm's letter from her pocket. She would immediately have gone in search of it, could sbe have flattered herself the search would prove successful ; but that this would be tbe case she could not think, from the length of time which had elapsed since she lost it She dreaded its having fallen -
fallen into Woodvilkts hands, from the necessity such a circumstance would lay her under of revealing (in order to remove the unpleasant suspicions it must naturally confirm in Lis mind) the truth concerning Lord Gwytherin, which she could have wished, from pride as Avell as other feelings, only to hav e disclosed to Egbert. The agitation of her mind precluded sleep ; and, at an early hour the next morning, she was iu the breakfast par¬ lour, where-« she endeavoured to anra:e herself by reading, till Mrs. Decourcy made her appearance. " I have got a letter for you» Jacin¬ tha," said Mrs, Decourcy, as she enter¬ ed the parlour. "Forme, Madam," eriçd Jacintha, in a joyful accent ; for it instantly oc¬ curred
curred to her that she had found ther letter about which she was so uneasy. "Yes;—Woodville set off for toAvrT this morning before it Avas light ; and, in a letter Avhich he left for me to apologize for his abrupt departure, owing, he said, to the sudden recol¬ lection of some business he had to trans¬ act in town to-day, he enclosed one for you ; about the contents of which, he added, if I felt curious, he Avas certain you would inform me.'* " Undoubtedly, Madam,"said Jacm¬ tha, as she received the letter, which contained the following lines :—
" I should ill deserve a title which has hitherto given me pleasure—the title of your friend, if, perceiving the dan¬ gers you are incurring, I did not warn you
you of them. The most fatal conse¬ quences can scaicely fail cf resulting from your continuing to have piİA^ate rnteniews with Lo¡d Gwvtherin. If your heart feels a preference for him, fpr lleaA T en"s sake, avow it to those who have a right to enquiie into his inten¬ tions re-pecting 30u (Avhich Mr. and Airs. Decourcy undoubtedly have, from your being under their immediate pro¬ tection), and no longer trifle with your reputation and happiness—blessings which, be,assured, if one» lost, can never be regained.—Tbe most ardent solicitude about your welfare has die«* tated this letter, and to hear you have attended to it, will confer real pleasure upon " II, WOODVILLE.'*
" How unfortunate," thought Jacia* tha, " that he should have left the country
country with such unfavourable im¬ pressions against me !" tí Whats the matter, my dear girl ?'*■ asked Mrs. Decourcy, with a gi eater air of cheerfulness than she had for a long time before spoken to Jacintha, observing her change colour; " I really am beginning to feel· some curiosity about the contents of that letter, since I perceive it has affected you." " Your curiosity shall be gratified after breakfast, Madam/* replied Jacin¬ tha, " ifyou will permit me to attend you to 'your dressing-room. I have much besides the eontents of this letter to impart to you.". - · *'* To me," said Mrs. Decourcy, with a look expressive of surprise ; and she was about making some enquiry, when the
the entrance of Mr. Decourcy prevented her. Jacintha could no longer entertain the smallest doubt of Wood ville's hav-ing found her lost letter, and discovered her interview the preceding evening with Lord ÖAvvtherin. She Avas not mis- */ taken in thinking so ; he had indeed done both. On rising to accompany the other gentlemen to the draAving- room, he found the letter, Avhieh she had drawn from her pocket with her handkerchief, near his chair, and which an irresistible curiosity immediately prompted him to read. Fired with in¬ dignation by its perusal, he hastily ascended to the draAving-room, to see a\ hether she Avas there ; on missing her, and learning from Mrs. Decourcy, to whom he made a trembling enquiry re¬ specting her, that she had been long absent, he abruptly quitted it, for the purpose
purpose of searching for lier Avithout the house ; and Avas taking his hat from a servant, when he heard her unbolting the parlour-door, and saw her coming from it. A sudden impulse of resentment and disdain made him turn from her, and he did not re-enter the drawing-room till the agitation, Avhich her supposed dupli¬ city had thrown him into, had İn some degree subsided. To remonstrate with her upon the impropriety of her conduct, after all he had alreadv said to her upm that sub¬ ject, would, he feared, br unavailing; and the only expedient he lo.dd devise for saving her from the destruction he belicA'ed impending over her, Avas to ac¬ quaint the friends, Avith whom she re¬ sided, of the danger she Avas incurring. From an open and abrupt disclosure, however,^
hoAveA'cr, his feelings revolted; all he could bring himseif to do, Avas ■ td lead to an enquiry Avhich should discoixr it. For the purpose of exciting* this en¬ quiry, he contrived a pretext for ?» ?? mg to Mrs. Decourcy, dropping such hints in his letter to her, about the one he enclosed in it for Jaciutha, as could not fail, hctluaght. of makin g her solicitous to learn its cor -?. nf^ and oblige Jacintha to disclose them. The moment ! wkfast Avas over, Mrs. Decourcy r'pairu' r o her dicssing-room followed .iy Jacintha, Avhose promised communication she wjis impatient to hear. The emotions she betraved, while listening to it. v/ere not inferior to those Jaci n tha mani felted. " I ov/n," said Mrs. Decourcy, after she had concluded, "I was very un¬ willing you should be acquainted with the
the secret ofyour birth, from a convic¬ tion that the knoAvledge of it could im¬ part no happiness to you.— Tis infinitely more distressing, I think, to know"Ave "have relations, avìio either cannot, or will not acknowledge us, than to know we are unconnected. But, since Lord tí Avy therin has disclosed Avhat I was so desirous of concealing, I can häA*e no objection to gratifying the curiosity he has excited. The account he has giA r en of past circumstances is brief indeed, and slightly has he touched upon his own conduct ; this, however, is but na¬ tural : Ave generally draAV our own por¬ traits in flattering colours. Do not imagine, however, from Avhat I have said, that I think him now by any means the character he formerly Avas ; no, I really am inclined to believe him ψ sincerely penitent for his past errors." 4 "I
'í NOCTURNAL VISIT. £8# " 1 hope so," said Jacintha r with fervour. " Indeed I cannot doubt his being so," continued Mrs. Decourcy ; " and, but for the idea I have already men- v tioned, and some apprehensions I shall hereafter explain, J should, without hesitation, haA'e introduced him to you by his proper appellation. That he dis¬ regarded all I said, to dissuade him against the discovery he has made, I do not wonder at ; for who that had such a child, Avould not Avish to claim her, if but for the purpose of trying to inspire her Avith favourable sentiments for them ?" " Could I hope my mother would ever receive mc—-" said Jacintha. " Publicly she never can," replied Mrs. Decourcy ; " nor, situated as she . VOL. II. ? ÍS
is at present, could she in any manner do so."
Jacintha sighed, and remained silent for some minutes ; she then entreated Mrs. Decourcy to favour her Avith the particular» »hewas sodesirousof learning.
BND OF VOL. Ib
