Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Nocturnal visit: a tale
ftiíi uimii (?????????+???&?????&??????????????? THE NOCTURNAL VISIT»
CHAP. I. " His tongue ** t Dropped manna^zvíA could make tlie worse appear *' The better reason, to perplex and dash u Mattirest counsels : for his thoughts were low, u To vice industrious, but to nobler deeds ** Tim'rous and slothful j yet he pleas'd the ear.** mi LTo m A HE relation I am about giving you," said Mrs. Decourcy, after re¬ maining some minutes in a thoughtful attitude, äs if to recai past events to her recollection, t * I must preface with vol. hi, ? some
A V l '- V.H ». ^ t * * - ^ ? » ^ some account of myself; else many «circumstances would still remain unex¬ plained to you. But in touching upon my own story, I shall endeavour to be brief, in order to avoid exercising your patience too severely. 44 The knoivledge which you have acquired of my family, by your resid¬ ing with my brother, renders it unne¬ cessary for me to speak of it, or to relate the misfortunes in consequence of which, at the age of seventeen, the period I lost my father, I was totally deprived of provision. My brother's situation was as destitute as mine ; the disappointments which rendered it so, you are acquainted with ; and all he could do for me, was to endeavour to ??????? me an asylum in the house of a family connected with our's, who had received many" favours from ?? .de¬ parted parent, which my brother flat¬ tered himself they would be happy to have
have an opportunity of requiting, by extending their protection to his orphan daughter* " But in thinking so, in judging of them by his oivn feelings, ivhich he elid, he was utterly mistaken. Mr. and Mrs. Cresfieltl had neither hearts to feel, ??? tò return kindness ; 'tis true they granted his request, but it was ostentation, not gratitueíe or sensibility, which prompted them todo so, "-Ignorant, however, at that period, of their real dispositions, he entrusted me to their care, in full confidence of my receiving from them every attention Avhich coulel soften the remembrance of past sorrows, and ' give mc spirits to support my present situation ; my own hopes were equally sanguine, for 1 was then as unacquainted as he was with the principles which governed them. I had not been long, however, under their pro- B S tection,
tection, ere they Avere completely uit* folded to my view ; and I perceived that it was not a wish to serve me, but a wish to obtain a character for benevo* lence, which had induced them to be*' friend me. *' Their family consisted of three daughters, Avhö, in my prosperous days, had professeda. tender affection for me— an affection which I had now every reason to believe they never felt. Their cold and altered manners hurt me still more than the cold and altered manners of their parents * and I wept to find their friendship " But a name* ·' A »hade that followM wealth or fame, «* But left the wretch to weep.** 44 When the first shock of disatf* pointment was over, I determined to try and support my situation ivith pa-* tience, and fortitude* Complaints I knew*
knew could not remedy it; and by comparing it with the situation of others, I endeavoured to reconcile my¬ self to it. " Mr, and Mrs. Cresfield resided in Staffordshire, Avhere they owned a noble estate, Avhich had not long, how¬ ever, been in their possession ; and prior to its being so, they had expe¬ rienced many ditficulties, which the friendship of my father had not oiity alleviated, but in a great ineasure enabled them to overcome. That friend¬ ship, however, as well as the afflictions which it had softened, was utterly for¬ gotten ; and they lived in a continual round of luxury and pleasure, ivithout eAer bestowing even a thought upon the distresses of their fellow-creatures—* distresses, the self-experience of which should at least have taught them to commiserate.
n 3 " ?
44 In their house I first beheld Lord Gwytherin; about the time I became an inmate of it, he had just returned from his travels, and mado frequent excursions from Wyefield, where he had taken up his residence, for some months, to visit them. 44 You can better conceive what he was, at the early period I am speaking of, from what he is now, than from any descriptiqn 1 could give you ;— *í Hi* faultless «hape appearM with ev'ry grace, « While beauty sat triumphant ia his face/* Yet, notwithstanding the mental and personal attractions which he possessed, I should not, perhaps, have experienced a w r armer feeling for him than admira¬ tion, had .he not distinguished me by the most delicate and insinuating atten¬ tions—attentions which seemed so much to result from a consciousness of my unpleasant situation, and a wish to alleviate
v alleviate it, that they gradually, sunk upon my heart, and inspired it ivitb tlie liveliest tenderness for him- " Against the progressif a passion, .hoAvever, AvhicKT believed to be hope¬ less, for to pity, not to love, I ascribed the conduct of Lord Gwytheiin y . I made the most strenuous efforts ' r but vain were my attempts to oppose or . overcome it, whilst the object who had inspired it, was almost continually be¬ fore me. Dejected, restless, and ap¬ prehensive that, every eye ivould pene¬ trate into, the. recesses of my heart, % • no longer disliked the solitude to ivhich the cold and repulsive manners of Mrs. Cresfield and her daughters had so often before driven me, since it gave me an opportunity of indulging, without f restraint, my feelings. " As Iwas sitting one evening, ab¬ sorbed in melancholy meditations, in ι l ? 4 a little
? little sequestered bower in the gar·* den, whither I had retired from the drawing-room, which was crowded with company, a sudden rustling amidst the ifiurrounding trees alarmed me; and •looking up, I beheld Lord Gwytherin. Confused by his unexpected appear- ^ance, for in my countenance I feared ? could read ívhat was passing iu my heart, ï started from my seat, and at¬ tempted to pass him; but he prevented -ine. í. " No," cried he, eatchingmy hand^ * " *you must not leave me, you must vnot deny me this opportunity—an op- .portunity which I have long anxiously .sought for, of disclosing my sentiments to you," " He gently forced me ."back as he spoke ; and kneeling before me, avowed *a passion not more fervent than nonour- able^-a, passion which : he protesled Jat had
had felt almost from the moment he had known me. I leave you to judge of the feelings this avowal excited ; language* would be weak to describe them, or the transports he seemed to experience, on drawing from me a confession of my attachment. " How perfect would the happiness of this moment be," he exclaimed, " coukl I immediately unite my fate to your's ; but to do so at present, is out of my poiver." " He then proceeded to inforni me that he ivas not yet of age, and that until he was, our union couid not take place, as he well knew his guardians. ivould never consent to it; aiid en¬ treated me, in order to prevent any dis¬ agreeable remonstrances froni his friends, not to mention his intentions* nntil they could be carried into execu¬ tion. Shocked at the idea of hishicmv ? â sing
ring their displeasure on my account,. I was for some minutes unable to speak ; nor would I give him the promise he * desired, until assured the friends, whose resentment I feared his exciting, had no right to controul his actions. He expressed the greatest satisfaction at receiving it—a satisfaction Avhich I lit- elle imagined at the time, I should ever have discovered to proceed from the hopes it gave him of being able to en¬ tangle me completely in his snares. " He departed for Wyefield soon after the explanation which had taken place between us, leaving me in a state òf greater happiness than, a short pe¬ riod before^ I thought I should ever again have experienced. * " About a week after his departure, as I was wandering one day through some of my favourite haunts, indulg¬ ing the most agreeable ideas, a country boy
boy came up to me, and putting a sealed paper into my hand, ran ofF directly. . The manner in which it was delivered, threw me into an agitation that scarcely permitted me to stand— an agitation Avhich was not lessened^ w r hen, on opening it, I perceived the signature of Lord G ivy ther in. He informed me that he Avas then concealed in the neighbourhood, whither he had come for the purpose of speaking to me on a most important subject ; and entreated me to meet him, about eight in the evening, in a grove of elms which stood at the extremity of the/ Park.. 44 This mysterious billet conjured up a thousand phantoms to distract and affright mc ;—I fancied he was come ta tell me Ave must part ;. that his friends had greater authority ?? ? ?? him than he at first imagined, and had insisted on* our separation. From what I have said*» ? ? yoiu
you may well believe that the^hourt which intervened, till the one appointed for our meeting, were -passed by me m the most restless anxiety. 44 On reaching the grove, I found him already there;-pale, faint, over¬ powered by the violence of my emo-» tions, I sunk into his expanded arms r unable to speak, almost to breathe. His transports, his caresses, his impas¬ sioned language by degrees re-animated me ; and when I looked in his fece, where pleasure alone'was visible, all the apprehensions which oppressed me, vanished like mists before the sun. * l· am come, my most lovely and beloved girl,' he said, i to put your affection for me to the test;-»—some very particular and unexpected , cir¬ cumstances, too tedious here to explain, compel me to go in a very short time to the Continent; how long,I may continue 3
that incertitude I cannot support, with, any degree of tranquillity, the idea of quitting the kingdom u ithout calling you mine. Consent, therefore, to accompany me immediately to Scot* land * r and be assured/' added he, ob¬ serving me extremely agitated by this- unexpected proposal, " I never should have thought, much less asked you to* accede to such a measure, could I fiat¬ ter myself with any hopes of being in the kingdom, or able to return to it o» becoming my own master.' 44 My heart seconded his fishes y but a recollection of my father's dying injunction—an injunction which I so¬ lemnly vowed to observe, never, whilst I remained unmarried, to take any ma¬ terial step without consulting my bro¬ ther, opposed my compliance with them. #
* Suffi*
sitatingly, ' suffer me to consult my brother. ' * î would,' replied he, 'with plea¬ sure, were I not so situated that it is impossible for me to admit of any delay. And why, my Isabella/ he continued, with all that softness which he knew so well how to assume, * why desire an event delayed, which, if you love like me, must surely contribute to your hap* pkiess as well as mine. The moment our union takes place; your brother shall be acquainted with it; I mean to place you under his protection until *I can publicly acknowledge you, and thereby prevent any censure that might otherwise fall úpon you, for withdraw¬ ing yourself from the protection of your friends: come theii, my love, no longer hesitate.'-—As he spoke he attempted to draw me forward, but I resisted the effort» ' v ' - " * I cannot
f 4 I cannot, my Lord/ said I, ^in¬ deed I cannot violate the promise which I gave my father, of consulting my brother upon every important occasion/ 4 I see, I see how it is/ he ex.- clainied, in a passionate accent, and rennquishing my hand, * you do not love ; I am sorry, Madam, you did not before undeceive me; had you sooner done so, I should not have found it so difficult to erase the impression yon have made upon me, as I fear I now shall; but my reason, I hope, in time, will enable me to overcome it*' " He ivalked from me as he spoke, and I imagined he was quitting me for ever ; I attempted to speak, but passion choked my utterance. Lord Givytherin paused, and looked back ; he observed my emotions, and after standing a minute, as if irresolute, he returned. • If
indifférence^' he said, * as these tear* almost make me flatter myself 1 have, you must-blame yourself alone for my hav* ing done so. Oh Isabella! why inflict unnecessary pain upon yourself and me ? why hesitate to comply with wishes which spring from the tenderest affection ?* " He saw by my looks that that he¬ sitation was over; and catching me in his arms, he conveyed me to a chaise which waited at a little distance from the grove, and which drove off the moment we were seated in it. 44 He now exerted all his eloquence to calm my perturbation, and reconcile me to myself; assuring me that the sudden exigency of the case fully ac¬ quitted me of any breach of duty té my departed father.
" We
" We travelled severaî hours without interruption; at length the carriage stopped, and glancing from the window, I perceived ive Avere bçfore a spacious mansion, surrounded, as well as I coufd discern by the imperfect light ^which. the night afforded, by extensive plan* tations, T ' Surely, my Lord/ said I, some¬ what surprised, * this cannot be an inn ?' ' No/ replied he, 'itis a mansioni over which your power wilhhe sovereign as over my heart/ " The shock I received on hearing I was brought to his house, cannot be described γ the glaring impropriety of such u* measure in my present situation, overwhelmed me with confusion and dismay. -.*..,.* ! i ι- *' But* tre, I cotil&Æsprøs toe feel* inga
ings it excited, the carriage door 'was opened, and I was lifted from it, and conducted by Lord Gwytherin intoa magnificent parlour, lit up.in such, a manner as convinced me he Avas ex¬ pected. 4 Oh my Lord !' I cried, c ívhat have you done—Avhy have you brought me hither ?' 44 He could not avoid doing so, he said, as he had some affairs to settle ere he pursued his journey to Scotland; but begged me to compose my spirits, as it would be resumed early the next morning. Γ , " í . r XT 44 Regardless of what he said, I in¬ sisted upon. ??? conducted to some inn in thç røglih-QMrliood ; but he pe¬ remptorily refused to let me leave 1?? house¿ and reproached me for harbour- * ing doubts of hi^honouiy which alone, ; , he
lie was convinced, could have made me désire to quit it, * No, my Lord, ' I replied, ' T do not doubt your honour ; if I did so now, I should be the most wretched of women : but neither your honour nor my innocence can, in despite of appearances, prei-ent your domestics from forming unpleasant surmises re¬ specting me*' 4 Oh, if your objection/ he said, * to remaining here, merely proceed» from the cause you have mentioned, I can easily obviate it ; the manner in which we are situated ivith respect to each other, is knoAvn to my family s and also the reason of our coining hither.' " H» tried to calm my agitation, and reconcile me to my situation ; but he could not succeed in doing either I felt
I felt restless and dissatisfied ; and en¬ treated him to permit his housekeeper^ or some respectable female belonging to his family, to be brought in, to give, by hecpresence, some kind of sanction to it : but with this entreaty he would not comply, and appeared so offended by it, tliat I feared to repeat it. An elegant supper wa* served up, and he became all life and gaiety ; the moment the things were removed, I expressed a wish, but to no purpose, to retire. 4 4 He dreifr a chair close to mine, and from the most ardent professions of affection—professions to ivhich 1 list¬ ened ivith β, pleasure that was too evi¬ dent, he gradually began to converse in a style which both alanned and sur¬ prised me. Almost in the words of liloisa, he declared that love could »ever exist for any time, but in a state «of perfect freedom; and that the grati¬ tude wijth which a ivoman who reposed unlimited
tiniîmited confidente in his honour, must inspire a generous man, would bind him more firmly to her than any human ties whatsoever* * Could I believe you wcte noi? speaking your real sentiments, my Lord/ said I, at length interrupting him, * I should be wretched indeed/ " My looks corroborated the truth of this assertion ; and Lord Gwytherin, perceiving the agitation into which hö had thrown mej and feaiful of having awakened suspicions whicii might put me on my guard against his further artifices, immediately changed the con«» versation, ivhich he protested was merely introduced for the purpose of trying Avhat effect it would have upon me. " He now tafèed with rapture of thé. joys of wedded love and entirely dia|^ pelled
pelled the uneasiness which his rail* ing against it but a minute before had created. But though the subject on Avhieh he was conversing was delightful to me, I could not forget that propriety demanaed my leaving him;—dl my efforts for doing so, hoivever, were ineffectual ; and at length, clasping me to his bosom, he asket! why I should wish to quit him, since he already con¬ sidered me as his wife ? I gazed on him a minute in silence, without compre* hending his meaning; but when hc ventured to explain it—when he ven¬ tured to unfold his wishes and designs, I burst from his arms with mingled hor¬ ror and indignation» , * Oh my Lord l I cried, in an agony which scarcely allowed me to be articulate, t is this the delicacy, is this the honour I had a right to expect from you? Have you then imposed upon my credulity ? Tell mc, tell me/ I continued,
î xrontinued, opposing his efforts tO speak, ' what are your real intentions respecting me ? and do not attempt any longer to deceive either yourself of me with false hopes ; for before that Heaven, which I trust will ever pro¬ tect me from any snares that may be laid for me, I swear never willingly to commit an error» ' * My intentions respecting you are what they always were, * he replied. ** This evasive answer did not satisfy me : * Be more explicit, my Lord/ I cried, with increasing agitation. * They are honourable then/ said hè, antl again attcmptecl tu' fold me to his bosom ; but I shrunk from him, * If you do not wish to make me doubt the'truth of this assertion, my Lord/ I said, t you will not persevere in
in treating me in this manner, not atiý longer detain nie/ ' Only till I have obtained your for* giveness/ he replied, 'for the uninten·* tional offence I have given you—an offence which, if you loved like me, you would easily pardon/ " He knelt at my feet, and conjured me not to leave him in displeasure ; solemnly assuring me, by an early hour in the morning every thing should be ready for resuming our journey, as he was impatient to prove that his in¬ tentions were nei r er otherwise than ho* iiourable towards me. " Again persuaded of his sincerity, Ì granted the pardon he solicited, and a servant was then summoned to conduct me to my chamber; 1 dismissed her upon entering it, ahd having secured the\ tlootj I flu% myself upon a chair* toe
^oo much agitated to think of retiring torest. As I «at, revolving the con* duct of Lord Givytherin, which alter¬ nately excited hope and fear, I was suddenly startled by a low noise, appa¬ rently Avithin the chamber ; trembling, I looked towards the spot from whence it proceeded, and perceived a door, which I had not before observed, half open. I instantly flew to the one Avhich communicated ivith the gallery ; but ere I could unlock it, the other ivas thrown open, and -an elderly Avoman entered the room* I shrieked involun¬ tarily on seeing her.— 4 Do not be alarmed/ cried she; c I am come not to injure, but to serve you/ "t She approached me, and taking my hand, reconducted me to a sent. ' Explain/ said I, in faltering ac¬ cents, ' the meaning of your words ; they Iiave conjured up the most hor- voL, ni. ? rible
rible ideas in my mind. Tell me, tell me, are my apprehensions just ? Is Lord Gwytherin a----- *' 4 Yillain!' exclaimed the stranger; 4 yes, too surely; and if you wish to preserve that innocence which I imagine you possess, }ou will fly his house, to which you have been allured for the vilest purposes l " You, I am slires my dearest Jacintha, can better conceive than I can describe, what my feelings were at this moment; tlie human heart, indeed, I believe, cannot experience a greater pang, than what is inflicted b)' finding its confidence and affection misplaced. " The good woman proceeded to inform me that bhe acted ? the capa¬ city of İKuisckecpci in the Castle; and that she had discovered Lord Gwy¬ thcrin's designs against me, by means of
t>f a confidential servant, unworthy indeed of the appellation, whom she overheard disclosing them to another 'domestik 44 His Lordship discovering) through his conversations with mc at Mr. Crcs¬ fiekls, that he could never hope to sue* ceed in his intentions if hc at once iivowed them, used all the art he was master of to make me believe them ho¬ nourable, and draw me into his power. On bringing me to his mansion, it was liis intention first to try and overcome my principles by arguments and flat¬ tery ; and if these railed) to represent the irreparable injury I had done my character, by flying with him from the protection under which I had been placed, and by convincing me that the world would give no credit to my asseverations of innocClicCi tempt mc to lose it in reality»
tâ * Such,
4 Such, Madam/ continued the worthy Avoman, t Avas the project of my Lord ; happy do I feel at having discovered and defeated it/ 1 I am punished, I am properly punished/ cried I, throwing myself upon the ground, in an agony, ' for breaking my promise to my dying fa¬ ther. Oh God !' I continued, 4 suf¬ fer my remorse to palliate my fault ; forgive me, and extend thy protection to me l " Mrs. Seymour, ivho had acted the part of a guardian angel to me, raised, and endeavoured to comfort me ;* but I interrupted her efforts. 4 You know not/ I wildly exclaimed, 4 the horrors of my situation ; I have no home, no friend to receive me ; and my reputation is gone, I fear, for ever !' 4 No/
' No, % replied Mrs. Seymour, 'fu¬ ture propriety wiil do much towards retrieving it; and be assured I shall ever be ready to vindicate it, and I flat¬ ter myself my evidence ivould not be disregarded.' 4 But Avhere am I to look for a shel¬ ter r' I exclaimed. 4 If you have no objection, ' she said, 4 to quitting the kingdom, I think I can procure you an asylum, perhaps not less pleasant than the one from which Lord G ivy ther in withdrew you/ " All places, I replied, Avere alike to the unhappy, " She then informed me that a young lady, well known to her, and who she knew would grant any request she made, had, on her way from Lon¬ don to her family in Ireland, stopped ? 3 the
the preceding day at an inn near Wye* field, ivhere a slight indisposition still detained her ; to her she said she would send me, ivith such a letter as, she was convinced* would procure me her friendship and protection. " I blessed her for her kindness; but though the distraction of my mind ivas somewhat relieved by it, nothing could lessen the anguish I felt at the perfidy of Lord G ivy therin ; and not- Avithstanding my resentment and indig¬ nation at the injuries he had medi¬ tated against me, I ivept involuntarily at the idea of our eternal separation. " 4 ' I can well, indeed, " said Jacintha, " conceive what you must have felt." Mrs. Decourcy paused for several minutes, and then resumed her narra¬ tive, as folloAvs,
CHAP.
chap. ?. *· What have I done, ye pow*« I what have I done, " To see my youth, my beauty, and my love * * No sooner gain'd, but slighted and betrayed ; «« And, like a rose, just garba "d from the stalk, " But only smelt, and cheaply thrown aside, *' To wither on the ground r'* DRYDEN. ''MRS. SEYMOUR continued with me the short remainder of the night, part of which she employed in writing the introductory letter she had pro¬ mised ; and early in the morning, ere any of the rest of tbe family had * ? 4 risen«.
risen, she consigned me to the care of a servant in whom she could confide, to be conveyed by him to the inn where Miss Decourcy lodged. 4 4 She was up hy the tíme we reached it ; the letter was taken to her by the woman of the house, and I remained below till I received a summons to at¬ tend her. Language is inadequate to give you any just idea of the admira¬ tion I felt on beholding her. To all the charms of early youth, and youth, as an Author * has observed, itself is beautv, she united the most attractive charms of face and person, and was altogether one of the most lovely crea¬ tures I had ever seen. She assured me she should be happy to render me every service in her power; and promised me, the protection of her grandmother, with whom she resided. Perceiving me
pale,
pale, trembling, and agitated, she in¬ sisted on my retiring to a chamber im¬ mediately after breakfast. To sleep I found impossible ; but though I could not do so, I gladly continued in thd room several hours, in order to try and compose my spirits, and reconcile my¬ self to the situation into which I was so unexpectedly thrown. " On returning to Miss Decourcy y I was both shocked and surprised to find her in tears :—-she started on seeing me, and hastily wiped them away ; but * no effort could dispel the melancholy which clouded her countenance. She told me it was her intention to pursue her journey in the evening. Previous to my setting out, I wrote to my brother an account of all that had befallen me, implored his forgiveness for the rash» step I had taken, entreated him to pass over the conduct of Lord Gwytherin in silence, and endeavour to vindicate ? 5 me
me in the opinion" of Mr. CresfiekPs family. 44 In the course of the dav, Mrs. Seyniour found means of acquainting me that I need be under no apprehen¬ sions of Lord Gwythcrin's pursuing me, as he had not manifested any in¬ tention of doing so, though exaspe¬ rated at my escape, and outrageous with the domestics, whom he suspected of having favoured it. ? I cannot well describe the emo¬ tions this intelligence gave me ; it de¬ stroyed the hope that till this instant had lingereel in my heart, of his being touched with compunction for his con¬ duct, and seeking me for the purpose of making atonement for it ; and I commenced my journey in a state of greater wretchedness than I had ever before experienced.
14 Miss
44 Miss Decourcy appeared scarcely less unhappy ; and it was evident thfr pressuré of her ow T n sorrows rendered her unable to attempt administering any consolation to mine. As she drew near her home, however, instead of any longer indulging her dejection, she seemed solicitous to subdue it ; and suc¬ ceeded tolerably well in the efforts sh& made for doing so. 44 Her grandmother resided in an ancient mansion in the southern part of Ireland—a mansion not more vene¬ rable from its antiquity, than the vir¬ tues of those to whom it had, and still belonged. Hospitality and benevo¬ lence dwelt within it ; and the poor and wayfaring hailed with tears of ec- «tacy the mossy towers of Carrie Owen, assured, on reaching them, of receiv¬ ing the comfort and assistance they required.
? 6 " The
x tt The old lady confirmed the pro¬ mise her grand-daughter had made me of her protection. AVith the particu¬ lars of my unhappy story, she was not acquainted ; she was merely informed that I was a deserted orphan, whom Mrs. Seymour had recommended as a person well qualified to be her compa¬ nion ; and with such a person she had long been solicitous of meeting, as her grand-daughter went out a great deal, and she then required some one to amuse her lonely hours. " In her peaceful habitation my mind gradually recovered its lost tran¬ quillity. The remembrance of past scenes could not, 'tis true, be oblite¬ rated from it; but it was a lemem- brance which ceased, by degrees, to afflict. " AVith regret and surprise I per¬ ceived that Miss Decourcy had not long *
lons: returned to her native home, ere she became again as dejected as before. She no longer sought society nor amuse¬ ment, as I was informed she had hcre- tofoie done; on the contrary, she se¬ dulously avoided both, and passed hours in the solitude oi her chamber. Though her grandmother hud attained a period of life, which pre\ented her from be¬ ing very quick in her discernment, a change so great in a bcn.g she adored, could not escape her notice, nor fail of distressing her ; and she frequently asked me with tears, whether I could tell her, or even suspected the cause of her beloved Alice's melancholy. 44 That I suspectcel it, Avas most cer¬ tain, though 1 did not acknow ledge so to her; it was, indeed, almost evident to mc, that the thorn u hich rankled in the bosom of Miss Decourcy, was implanted there by disappointed love, and
and that time and reason could aloné extract it. "Four months passed away unmarked by any occurrence; at the expir it ion of tliis pcnod, the venerable Mrs. Decourcv was taken from this world to a better one. Her death was sudden; and never, 1 think, could these beau¬ tiful lines of Lee Iiave been more ap* plica ble than to her :— *' Of no distemper, of noblast shed;*d j ** But fell, like autumn huk thai mi How'd long, ** Kv'n wondered at, because she dropt no sooner» ·* Fate seem'd to wind her up for ???????? years, *< Yet freshly ran she on Un winters moie j 4t Till, like a clock, worn out with eat.ng time, ·' The wheels of weary life at last stood still." This event gave Miss Decourcy a pretext for indulging, without restraint, or any fears of exciting unpleasant re¬ marks, the anguish of her heart. AU the efforts that ivere made to draw her from
/
from Carrie Oiven were ineffectual; nor did she detain any of the numerous friends and relatives of her departed parent, who attended the funeral obse¬ quies, beyond the hour they were over. " But though she shunned an inter¬ course with society, she no longer avoided my company ; on the contrary, she appeared to derive a melancholy kind of pleasure from ivandering with me about the romantic scenes surround¬ ing her habitation—scenes, the wild- v ness and solemnity of which suited her feelings, and, by being congenial to, were well calculated to sooth them. " The mansion ivas situated upon the coast ; high and beetling cliffs, as hieb extended in a wild series of rocks to a considerable distance, defended it from the fury of the ivaves; and imme¬ diately at its rear rose a hiil, or rather 3 mountain
mountain, wooded to the top, and which equally sheltered it from tbe fury of the winds ; amidst its hanging shades, a variety of wildly devious walks were cut, which commanded the iriost enchanting and extensive pro¬ spects. But no description I could give, could convey any just idea of the beauties oí" this place, though the im¬ pression they made upon my mind is not bv anv means effaced : 1 still, with enthusiastic delight, retrace in imagi¬ nation my fa\ omite haunts about it— still wander upon the sea-beat shore, where the rocks, rising in the form of ?? amphitheatie, exhibit a romantic scenery, with which the eye can never be tired, and explore their deep re¬ cesses, bestrewed with shells, and hung with^ weeds and plants of the most vivid colours. 44 I often imagined, in our lonely rambles, Miss Decourcy seemed inclined to
to unburthen the sorroAvs of her heart ; a fear, however, of being mis¬ taken, as Avell as a fear of offending, prevented me from appearing to think so : there was, indeed, a reserve, or, more properly speaking, a haughtiness in her disposition and manner, which checked the adi r ances of friendship, anel still kept at an humble distance those whom Fortune had placed at all beneath her. " But at length the smothered an¬ guish of her heart burst forth. Deeply engaged in conversation one evening about past events, we heedlessly stray¬ ed towcirdi» the ????? e>f a cliff which impended over the sea, and round our¬ selves upon its eelge ere we iveli knew where Ave weie ;—the moment I perceiv¬ ed our danger, I recoiled with horror, dragging my companion after me. ( Why so alarmed j Isabella?' said Miss
Miss Decourcy, after pausing for some minutes, as we rested against a frag¬ ment of the cliff; ' \ou have stood upon the edge of a much more tremen¬ dous precipice than this.' 4 Yes/ I replied, perfectly compre¬ hending her meaning, * and blessed be the guardian hand wliich snatched me from it l * 4 Blessed indeed l she exclaimed, in a kind of inward voice ; ' thou wert the peculiar care of Heaven, but I------* She paused, and looking at me with a wildness which appalled me, clasped her hands togethei, and buret into tears.— t Oh Isabella!' she continued, as I vainly attempted to sooth her, * I am too wretched to receive consola¬ tion ; I am lost, I am------what thou mightst have been/ she cried, with increasing wildness, 4 but for the inter¬ vention of thy guardian angel l < You
* You terrify me 1' said I, invo¬ luntarily, 4 Isabella, ' she proceeded, 4 I have almost gone too far to recede, nor do I desire to do so : the fatal secret, lodged within my bosom, must be disclosed to some one, and to no one would I so soon divulge it as to you ; but ere I do so, you must swear to preserve it invio¬ lable.' " I gave her the solemn assurances of secrecy she desired ; and seating ourselves upon the cliff, she gave me the following narrative, as soon as her agitation had somewhat subsided. c Ere I touch upon the cause of my sorrows, ' she began, 4 1 must relate a few particulars concerning my family. My father, the heir of Carrie Owen, was twice married ; he weclded his first lady more in obedience to the will of hh
*#4 NOCTURNAL VISIT. his father, than from inclination. She? Avas an English woman, of a proud and imperious spirit, and but ill quali¬ fied to promote domestic happiness— the happiness he ivas most attached to ; consequently his regret upon her de¬ cease, which took place soon after the death of his father, ivas not very poignant. 4 His second lady ivas the choice of his oavii heart ; and his expectations of enjoying felicity ivith her were never disappointed. The friends of his de¬ parted lady Avere highly exasperated at this second marriage ; and either ivere, or pretended to be so apprehensive that tlie children she left might be neglected in consequence of it, that they en¬ treated to have them committed to their care—an entreaty ivhich my father com¬ plied ivith ; they ivere accordingly sent to England, where, in the course of time,
fime, they were advantageously mar¬ ried. 4 By his second union my father had two daughters, the youngest of whom I am, and a son. AVhilst we were in¬ fants, he and my mother died ; and the whole care of us devolved upon his surviving parent, who, though then far advanced in years, proved herself well qualified for the trust reposed in her. ' She was not, however, rewauledfor her attentions by beholding us all in the possession of that happiness she ivished us to enjoy : an unfortunate attachment clouded the early prospects of my sister, and a still more unfortu¬ nate one overwhelmed me with despair. My sister, in consequence of the cir¬ cumstance I have just mentioned, in¬ sisted on being permitted to retire to a Convent, and about *the period she quit· ted
ted Carrie Owen, my brother was sent abroad to complete his education ; so that 1 alone remained with my grand» mother, the sole object for the exercise - of that excessive tenderness she hael always manifestée} for the offspring of her son 5 her partiality for me, in par¬ ticular, she carried almost to a fault, since it rendered her unwilling to cor^· reet, anel too reaely to bestow praise. 4 Soon after the departure of my bro* ther and sister, 1 was invited by a rela* tion to London ; an invitation my grandmother gladly allowed me to accept, from an idea of the advantages which might accrue to mc from going thither. She thought, in short, I coulel not fad of making a splendid- con quest there; my expectations (I will confess my vanity) were not less sanguine than her's, and I delighted in indulging them» for my disposition is ambitious» 4 The
.* The house of my relation was the resort of the gay and fashionable ; and Lord Gwytherin was a constant visiter. He soon distinguished me bv the parti- cularity of his attentions, which, from what I have said, you may believe af* forded me the greatest pleasure ; and erelong, he insinuated himself so com¬ pletely into my affections, that, not¬ withstanding my ambition, the splen¬ did situation to which he could exalt me, by making me his wife, was but a secondary consideration with me for wishing him to do so : neither I nor* mv friends entertained a doubt of his intentions being strictly honourable, consequently he had every opportunity he coukl desire of being with me. · * These opportunities he turned tö the basest purpose : he led ine to believe where there was real lovcj thcte should be unlimited confidence; and'hinted from time to time, it was his fixetf determination
determination never to marry any AVoman, Avho did not place the greatest security in his honour. In short------' 44 Here," proceeded Mrs. Decourcy, 4< her rising agonies for a considerable time impeded her utterance; at length) raising her head from my shoulder, against which she had leaned it, she exclaimed, r Oh Isabella ! let tears and burning blushes speak the rest. * Scarcely had he triumphed over what ivas dearer to me than life—my honour, scarcely had he degraded me in my own eyes, and rendered exist¬ ence a burthen, ere he ceased entirely to see me. I ivrote to him the most importunate letters, remonstrating on tlie barbarity of his conduct, but to no effect; he preserved an inflexible silence. Maddened) at length, almost to desperation, I resolved on obtaining an interview with linn, and compelling liim
him to terminate at least the horrors of incertitude ; for still a lingering hope remained within my heart, that he yet meant to act honourably by me, 4 At the time I formed the resolu¬ tion of seeing hini, I discovered he Avas at his seat at Wyefield, where I doubted not I could easily procure an interview Avith him, through means, of Mrs* Seymour, whom I had knoAvn almost from the period I knew any being, and who, in consequence of the distressed situation she had been left in by her husband, a Clergyman, Avas recom¬ mended to the situation she now filled in Lord GAvytherin's family, by the lady Avith whom I resided in London, 4 On reaching tlie inn in which yon found me, I feigned indisposition, in order to have a pretext for continuing, if expedient, some clays at it ; and, send¬ ing for Mrs. Seymour, I gave her a dis- voL. ih. o guised
guised account of the conduct of Lord Gwytherin, pretending that I merely wished to sec him, for the purpose of obtaining from him some letters which he had received from me, under a sup¬ position, of his being serious in his ad¬ dresses. 4 She promised to favour my wishes to the utmost of her power ; but de¬ stroyed all the pleasure this - promise gave, by informing mc that Lord Gwytherin was, at this very time, en¬ gaged in pursuit of a new object. The despair and distraction caused by this intelligence, can better be conceived than described : but though the emo- tions I betrayed, convinced her of my attachment for him, I am happy to think, from her manner, they created no suspicions of the real cause of them. 4 The very night of the day on which I saw
saw her, you were brought to the Castle ; .and Airs. Seymour, fancying, from what I said, that you were the only obstacle to my happiness, determined, if pos¬ sible, to remove you from Lord Gwy¬ therin. But do not imagine, in wish¬ ing to do so, she was actuated b ν no other motive than regard for me ; ex¬ clusive of any considerations about me, ¡she felt trulv solicitous, and would Iiave done all in her power to have saved you from the destruction she saiv im- 1 pending over you. 4 The morning on which you came to me, I met Mis. Seymour at a little distance from the inn ; and was con¬ ducted by her, through private paths, to the Castle, where I obtained the so long desired interview with Lord Gwy¬ therin. I found hiin,—but let me not dwell on what but to think of, almost maddens my brain ; suffice it to say, I found his heart ivas a total stranger to d 2 any
any thing like humanity or virtue. He reproached mc—-yes, he had the inso¬ lence to reproach me for being instru¬ mental to your escape. I gloried in acknowledging I was ; and assured him that 'all attempts to allure you again into his poiver, would be inef¬ fectual, as you were now thoroughly acquainted ivith his artifices and de- signs; the truth of this assertion I suppose he did not doubt, by never having made an effort to regain you. I left him with a contempt and indigna¬ tion, ivhich time has rather increased than diminished, and which have com¬ pletely destroyed every tender senti¬ ment I felt for him ; and, but for one circumstance, were he now to offer me his hand, I should reject it Avith ab¬ horrence.' " She wept, she blushed," continued Mrs. Decourcy; " and rendered by 5 her
her agitation any explanation of her words unnecessary. * Thus/ said she, 4 have I disclosed to you the source of that anguish which has so long oppressed me—an anguish beneath which nothing could have supported me, but the idea of the cause of it^ being utterly unknown. Were it to transpire, I never could sur¬ vive the discovery ; never would I live to experience scorn and neglect—never would I live to find myself sunk to a level with the most degraded of my sex —never would I live to surfer the vain, the arrogant, and malicious _to tri¬ umph over me ! * Amongst my own family are some who would enjoy such a triumph ; the too great partiality of my grandmother created me many enemies, and my two eldest sisters particularly would rejoice at my fall. But I trust they never ? 3 will
will have an opportunity ; I have used' such caution, and made such arrange¬ ments, that it is almost impossible iny unhappy situation should be discovered : and that Lord Gwvtherin will ever ex- pose me to the contempt of the world, I have no apprehension ; for he is more anxious to conceal than to glory in his vices, well convinced that to avow them would put those upon their guard whom he might wish to deceive.' 44 She then proceeded to inform me it was her intention never to let Lord Gwytherin know any thing respecting her child ; and acquainted me with the retreat tq whieh she meant to retire, when it should be necessary to with¬ draw from public observation. This was an ancient castle, near the cele¬ brated Lakes of Killarney, which had long been in possession of her family ; but, notwithstanding the beauty of its situation, had for many years been deserted
deserted by its possessors, in conse¬ quence of some dark and dreadful trans¬ actions ivhich had taken place within it ; but though a superstitious preju¬ dice prevented any of the family from inhabiting it,, they were too proud of this record of their greatness, to permit it to fall into utter decay. They ac¬ cordingly kept a few domestics in it, the principal of whom was Miss De- courey's nurse, in whom, as in me, she meant to repose unlimited confi¬ dence. " I was to attend her to this neg¬ lected dwelling, from whence, after continuing in it some days, she was to depart unaccompanied by me, under the pretext of visiting some friends, who resided at a considerable distance from it; and at night return toa decay¬ ing tower, where she meant to seclude herself -until all necessity for confine¬ ment should be over. Her whole plan d 4 succeeded
succeeded according to her ivishcs r at a certain distance from the Castle, the chaise in which she travelled Avas dis¬ missed ; and being met by her nurse, she Avas conducted to her destined retreat, in Avhich ive had contrived to render an apartment tolerably commo¬ dious for her, and where she could be under no apprehensions of a discovery ; for this tower being the scene ivhere all those atrocities had been committed, Avhich inspired such a horror against the building, ivas most carefully shunned ; as its «« Mournful chambers held, " So ntght*struck fancy dreamt, the yelHng ghost,** " Though Loughlean Castle had suffered considerably by the neglect of its owners, its want of comfort and cheerfulness Avas amply compensated by its situation ; and I often Avon dered that taste as iveli as reason had not been able to triumph over superstition an<J prejudice*
prejudice, since no where, perhaps, could a-greater assemblage of beauties have been beheld. 44 It stood upon the borders of one of the most romantic of the lakes, and commanded a view of a magnificent cascade, which, apparently bursting through a dark arch of wood, pictu¬ resque in the extreme, fell, with a noise truly appalling, into the lake below. " This lake was adorned with islands of matchless beauty; its enchanting shores were formed into a variety of bays and promontories, crowned with clustering groves, where the myrtle, the arbutus, and the holly, that, amidst all the rigours of whiter, retain all the verdure of spring, were con¬ spicuous. " Mountains towering to sublimity, the haunts of the eagle and the cor- ρ 5 moräns
moxant, Avho here hekl their unmo¬ lested reign,, surrounded this lovely scenery, and at once exhibited all the bleakness of desolation, and all the- richness of cultivation ; the faintest sound within tbeir deep indented ca¬ verns awoke a thousand echoes, and almost led one to believe the fabled accounts oí invisible beings true. 44 Deprived of the society of Miss Decourcy, for except at night I could not attempt to visit her, my principal amusement Avas derived from Avancier* ing about this delightful countrv. In one of my rambles 1 accidentally met a large party near the Lake, going to embark upon it, amongst whom I was not very agreeably surprised at behold¬ ing Mr. Crcsfiekls eldest daughter, Avho was then married to an Officer, quartered (as I afterwards learned) in the neighbourhood. She surveyed mc for a minute with earnestness, and then passed
passed me in silence ; and with a look of contempt, which wounded me to the heart, and determined me to avoid a second meeting, by confining my¬ self in future* within the precincts of the Castle. 44 I must here inform you that alt my brother's efforts to vindicate - mý innocence in the opinion of Mr. Cres¬ field and his iam ily were ineffectual ; they persisteel in believing, or pretend¬ ing to believe me guilty, and said every thing which malice could suggest to blacken my character. Their enmity against me was imputed by my brother (who himself gave immeeliate credit to my assertions, and granted the for¬ giveness I implored for my indiscre¬ tion) tc their disappointment relative to Lord Gwytherin, with whom they had hoped to form an alliance ; which hope they imagined was defeated through my means, alone, and consequently ? 6 they
they could not bring themselves to» pardon me» " About a week after the seclusion of your mother, you were born, and immediately conveyed by her faithful attendant to a nurse she had provided fior ???" 44 Immediately f" repeated Jacintha,. urith a melancholy look. " The unhappy circumstances under which you were born," replied Mrs. Decourcy, "prevented her from giving way ta that tenderness which no doubt she felt for you ; but to proceed. " I now spent the best part of every night with your mother, in order to relieve ??? nurse, who found means of visiting the tower in the day-time, though I could not, without danger of detection..
detection. In traversing the lonely - passages leading to it, I often felt a kind of shuddering aive which cannot be described, frequently imagining I heard strange and mysterious noises in the deserted chambers adjoining them- 44 Returning one night from your mother, I ivas startled by the sound of steps within one of these chambers. I paused, irresolute whether I should proceed ; but recollecting how often my fancy had before deceived me, and concluding I was*again under its in¬ fluence, I summoned my courage to my aid, and ivas again advancing, ivhen ♦suddenly the half-closed door of the chamber opened, and by the shadowy light whicii the moon cast through the arched windows of the gallery, I per¬ ceived the figure of a man cornino- from it, ivho, at the first glance, I saiv was not an inhabitant of the Castle. I shrieked aloud, and should have falle»
fallen to the ground, had not the stranger sprung forward, and caught me in his arms, recalling my fleeting senses at the same moment by men¬ tioning his name. Language can con¬ vey but a faint idea of the surprise I felt, on hearing he was the brother of Miss Decourcy, who, on receiving the intelligence of his grandmother's death, which had reached hini at Naples, immediately set out for his native country, contrary to the expect¬ ations of his sister, as she imagined he would not think of returning to it, un¬ til he had completed the tour of Europe. From Carrie Owen, where he was greatly disappointed at not finding her, he had travelled to Loughlean Castle, at which place he arrived just as the gates were ahout being closed for the night, and soon after I had withdrawn from my chamber to that of Miss Decourcy's. 4i ills unexpected arrival threw the few
few domestics ivho ivere in the Castle into such confusion, that on descend¬ ing ivith him to the parlour, in order to satisfy his anxious enquiries about his sister, I found them all up; and one of them threw me into the utmost consternation, by expressing herasto- nishment at not being able to find me, ivhen, upon the arrival of her master, she had sought me for the purpose of bringing me to him. This, consterna¬ tion ivas not a little increased by Mr* Decourcy 's informing me it was his in¬ tention to set out the next morning for the rcsideuce of his sister, Avhom he was impatient to behold. tt Unable to devise any scheme my¬ self for preventing this dreaded mea¬ sure, I resolved on returning lo her in the course of the night, and acquaint¬ ing her with all whicb had happened since 1 quitted her. 44 Accordingly, in pursuance of thb resolution,.
resolution, I watched in my chamber,. until I had reason to suppose the fomily Avere at rest ; then stealing from it, I proceeded ivith cautious steps towards the tower, trembling as 1 passed the chamber of Mr. Decourcy, lest hc should again start from it, and, struck with the strangeness of finding me again in such a place, insist upon ascertain¬ ing the motives ivhich brought me to it;—happily, however, I reached the tower Avithout interruption. 44 Miss Decourcy immediately per¬ ceived nothing could prevent her bro¬ ther fiom persisting in his intention,. but her making her appearance in the Castle ; she accordingly determined on doing so the next morning. Luckily, she ivas at this time nearly recovered ; so that no great apprehensions could be entertained about her putting this un¬ avoidable determination into practice. In pursuance of it, the next clay, at an
an early hour, she quitted her confine¬ ment, and by a short and solitary path, in which there was little danger of being seen, again reached the Castle, and accounted to the astonished domestics for coming to it in such a manner, by informing them that the chaise in ivhich she had been travelling, had broken down Avithin a few miles of it, and that, unable to procure another car¬ riage, or even an attendant, she had been compelled to pursue the remain¬ der of her journey alone, and on foot. ' t This fabricated story imposed upon her brother as well as the servants; and not only accounted to him for her present agitation, but furnished her with a pretext for confining herself a few days to her chamber. From this period she rapidly recovered her health and spirits ; the apprehensions ivhich had so long injured both were removed, and
and she seemed again to look forward to happiness. 44 Mr. Decourcy was so delighted with the ancient seat of his ancestors, which he had not before seen, that he resolved on passing some'time at it; proper servants, and every thing which could render it an agreeable residence, were accordingly provided. All the families of respectability in the neigh¬ bourhood paid their compliments to him and to his sister ; and again the voice of mirth resounded through it, and the feast of hospitality was spread within its halls. 44 In the course of my visits with Miss Decourcy and her brother, I was frequently distressed by meeting Mrs. Ottley, the daughter of Mr. Cresfield, whom I have already mentioned. She behaved to me, upon every occasion, with a supercilious haughtiness, which agitated
agitated and embarrassed me, and in¬ spired feelings, prophetic of the unhap¬ piness she Avas about causing me by her artifices and malice. 44 I had not long been known to Mr. Decourcy ere he distinguished me by the most particul ir attentions ; ivhich, as time and reason had completely tri¬ umphed over my ill-placed passion for Lord GAvytherin, I received with plea¬ sure—a pleasure that would have been unalloyed, could I have flattered my¬ self his sister approved of his groAving attachment ; but that she did not, I had reason to apprehend, more from looks than words hoAvever, for she always ex¬ pressed the sincerest regard for me. 44 His attentions were soon noticed, and spoken of throughout the neigh¬ bourhood; and the malevolent passions they excited in Mrs. Ottley's bosom, who could not bear even the remote prospect
prospect of my being elevated to inde¬ pendence, at length burst forth into open invectives against me, and pro¬ voked her to disclose thè imprudence " into which the insidious arts of Lord Givvtherin had drawn me, but which ehe ascribed not to his machinations, but my oivn levity ; and hesitated not to declare that, in consequence of my indiscretion, I had been compelled to seek a temporary retirement, which the humanity of Miss Decourcy had af¬ forded me in Loughlean Castle, and that the evidence of my shame was now in the care of a soldier's wife, belong¬ ing to the regiment of her husband, " Unfortunately, Miss Decourcy's nurse placed you with this woman (of whom she had obtained a\i accidental knowledge, and Avhose child died a »hort time before you were born), ün¬ ler an idea that jthere could be less langer of a stranger's discovering the secret
secret of your birth, than an inhabi¬ tant of the neighbourhood. 44 She found means of introducing herself to her ; and having ascertained her readiness to accept the proposaUhe was about making her, she proceeded to settle all the necessary preliminaries for your reception ; informing her that you ivere the offspring of a prÍA T ate mar¬ riage, which, for many important rea¬ sons, it was still necessaty to conceal ; that your birth, therefore, must be kept a profound secret ; and that, if faithful to the confidence reposed in her, she should receÌA r e a reward ade¬ quate to her fidelity. 44 She vowed to observe the most in¬ violable silence respecting you ; but whether from a suspicion of not having heard the truth, or from what other motive, I cannot possibly ascertain, she did not long hesitate to disclose the secret
secret entrusted to her to Mrs. Ottley, who was her patroness, and had made several enquiries respecting the infant she saw with her. 44 This disclosure, together with the strange circumstance of my being left at the Castle by Miss Decourcy, ? hich Mrs. Ottley had been at pains to dis¬ cover, confirmed every injurious sus¬ picion she entertained relative to me ; and, however conscious she might ha\ e been of violating humanity by the ìc- ports she propagated, she did not by any means think she had violated truth. " Ere long they reached the car for which they were principally intended ; shocked and confounded by what he heard,- Mr. Decourcy, who about this time had made serious proposals to me, resolved, after a little deliberation, to acquaint
acquaint me with the particulars he had heard. 44 You may easily conceive my feel¬ ings on hearing them : I acknowledged the imprudence which artifice on one side, and credulity on the other, had led me into ; but I proudly denied the other charges against me, and indig¬ nantly enquired whether the conduct of his sister was not a sufficient refu¬ tation of them, who it was not natural to suppose would have permitted him to think seriously of me, had I acted in the manner that was represented. But, alas ! her conduct was no corro¬ boration of my innocence : she had ma¬ nifested a dislike to our union, which her brother had observed, and Avhich was now imputed by him to a very dif¬ ferent motii e from the real one, parti¬ cularly as she was prevented, on the present occasion, from being a stre¬ nuous
nuous aelvocate in my favour, by the delicacy of her situation. " In short, I perceived that nothing could remove the suspicions of Mr. Decourcy, but my candid avowal of your name and lineage, with ivhich he had but too much reason to think I was acquainted ; and as it was out of my power to elo this, we parteet, anei Mrs. Otti ey fully enjoyed the success of her malicious scheme. 44 In the meantime, Miss Decourcy, terrifieel lest her nurse should not be able to evade the interrogatories ivhich she was confident her brother meant to put to her, prevailed upon her to take you from the woman with whom she had placed you,^ and go to a distant part of the country. The idea of re¬ maining any longer in a place ivhere I ivas certain Γ should meet Avith universal scorn and neglect, was insupportable ;
imd Miss Decourcy accordingly left Loughlean Castle ivith me, immediately after her brothers departure, and returned to Carrie Owen, sincerely regretting the unhappiness which, thiough her means, I experienced. 44 Her spirits again declined, and the vivid bloom of vouth a^ain faded from her check. " After a residence of some months 1 at Carrie Owen, a neighbouring fa¬ mily, the only one almost ivith whicii she now kept up any intercourse, pro¬ posed her accompanying them to France, ivhithcr they were going. She received the proposal with pleasure, and invited me to accompany her in this excursion ; which I declined, from the probability there was of her meet¬ ing her brother, who, on quitting vol! in; ' % Loughlean
Loughlean Castle, had proceeded to that kingdom. , " Her nurse, at this period, ivas in a state of health which threatened a speedy dissolution, and your future destiny now occupied her thoughts : after much deliberation on the subject, it occurred to her that my brother, who was now married, and in the most embarrassed circumstances, of which she obtained a "knowledge by the ago¬ nizing distress they excited in my bo¬ som, might be induced to take you un¬ der his care, and bring you up as his child, by the advantages ivith which it was her intention such a measure should be attended. I resisted, however, all her importunate entreaties to make this pro¬ posal to him, until she had given me permission to disclose the secret of your birth; without doing which, I justly dreaded creating injurious sus¬ picions
pïcions in his mind, thnt might lessen ine in his esteem and affection. 4 - We acceded to the proposal; and gave such solemn assurances of pre¬ serving inviolate the secret entrusted to him, as perfectly quieted the appre¬ hensions of Miss Decourcv. ν " The nurse, according to her in¬ structions, sent you with an attendant to the place from whence I was to em¬ bark for England. " 41 And did my mother sec me tben ?" asked Jacintha. n 44 No, she feared to do so ; she ap* peared affected at parting with me, and seemed by her manner then, to feel a presentiment that we should meet no more. Her last words to mc were— 4 Remember, Isabella, that more than life is in your keeping ; that the e $ hour
hour which injures me in the opinion of tlie world, is the last of my exist¬ ence. ' 44 On reaching London, where my brother then resided, and had provided obscure lodgings for me, I sent for him, and consigned you to his care; I then dismissed vour attendant, and remained in retirement until he had ob¬ tained the Curacy of Wyefield, to which place I soon followed him. Mrs. Greville was led to believe I had hist arrived from Ireland ; and this belief completely prevented her from enter¬ taining suspicions of my knowing any thing respecting you. " Fre long 1 found a residence in Wyefield extremely unpleasant ; the disposinoti of my sister-in-law was by no jue.ins congenial to mine, and the sun >utiding scenes revived a thousand painful recollections, whieh opposed the return
return of tranquillity. I therefore gladly availed myself of an offer, made by my kind friend, Mrs. Sey¬ mour, ivho, to my infinite regret, died soon after my departure from Wyefield, to procure mc an asylum in the house of the lady with whom Miss Decourcy had resided winbt in England, " But here again my expectations of happiness were disappointed ; alas ! hoiv seldom in this life are they fulfilled I—> Lady Markham ivas capricious and arro¬ gant, boastful of the benefits she con¬ ferred, and incensed if they did not render those ivho received them subser¬ vient to her in every respect : but un¬ pleasant as Avas a rcbidence beneath her roof, I preferred it to a continuance with my brother, in consequence of the selfish und jealous temper of his wife. " I had not been many months in e 3 Lady
x Lady Markham s house, ere I received a letter from Miss Decourcy, inform¬ ing me of her nuptials with the Earl of Dunsane, whom she described as pos¬ sessed of every virtue and accomplish¬ ment In consequence of this union, she said her future residence ivas fixed in France, ivhere, she trusted, she should find herself amply recompensed for all her past sorrows ; she desired me to write to her from time to time, but solemnly enjoined me never to touch upon past events. " She did not speak of her brother throughout this letter ; and her silence respecting him afflicted me, for I still nourished his idea, and sometimes in¬ dulged a hope that he would yet disco¬ ver the injustice he had done me. " Some time after the receipt of this letter, as I ivas sitting one evening with Lady Markham, listening to a disserta¬ tion
tion upon gratitude from her Ladyship, the drawing-room door was suddenly opened, and Mr. Decourcy entered. 1 ' To describe the agitation and con¬ fusion into which his unexpected ap¬ pearance threw me, is utterly impossible, nor did he appear le:is affected at behold¬ ing me; he soon, however, recovered his composure, and assumed a sudden cold¬ ness and reserve in his ,. manner, which prepossessed me ivith an idea of his indifference, and strengthened my , determination to conceal the real senti- ments of my heart : whenever, there¬ fore, we were compelled to converse, it was as total strangers, utterly uninte¬ rested about each other. ' ' About the time he arrived at Lady Markham's, ivhere he proposed making some stay, a gentleman of considerable fortune, who visited there, and had for some time distinguished me by very par- E 4 tic ular
ticular attentions, tendered me h h hand, ivhich I unhesitatingly refused, tothe astonishment of Lady Markham, who deemed mc little less than mad for doing so. I thouglit Mr. Decourcy appeared someivhat agitated at this- juncture; but the involuntary hopes this idea excited, vanished before his continued coldness. " Lady Markham took it into her head one day, before him, to enquire into my particular reasons for rejecting proposals* so far beyond my expecta¬ tions. " Because the person ivho made them, had created no interest in my heart," I replied. 4 ' She laughed aloud at these words. t Why, 'child, ' said she, 4 people of for¬ tune seldom think of consulting their inclinations in marrying ; how ridicu*
lous, then, for a person in your situ¬ ation to think of doing so l 44 I made some reply to this speech, ivhich ivas not agreeable to her Lady¬ ship ; she began to talk of obligations anul ingratitude, and I withdrew from the room in tears, and hastily turned into an adjoining one. £t Here, as I wept over the remem¬ brance of ívhat my faithless fortune promised once, an approaching step made me look towards the door, and I beheld Mr. Decourcy ; a sudden im¬ pulse of resentment and disdain made me directly turn from him ; for at that moment 1 imagined hc had conspired with the rest of the world to oppress and afflict me. 4 Isabella/ said Ire, e you will drive me mad if you continue to treat me 'm this cold and repulsive manner. In E 5 vain
vain have I attempted to conquer my passion for you; you still maintain your empire over m) heart; and without you I find it impossible to enjoy any happiness. ' b T- 44 The feelings this declaration ex¬ cited, you may easily conceive. I be¬ lieved he was now convinced of the injustice he had done me, and I con¬ sented to give him my hand, in full confidence of every injurious suspicion respecting me being obliterated from his mind. 44 But, alas ! the story which had ex¬ cited these suspicions,, was never con¬ tradicted ; and in marrying me, he obeyed the violence of passion, and not the dictates of reason. 44 His friends disapproved of oui- union ; and soon after it, Lady Dun- sane dropped all correspondence with me,
me, nor has she ever attempted to reneiv it : not so much, perhaps, from ceasing to regard me, as in conse¬ quence of a coolness ivhich took place between her and her brother from the time of her marriage, which he had strongly opposed ; the Earl, he assured me, not being by any means the cha¬ racter she had represented him to be, and this opposition to their mutual wishes was never forgiven by either party. " The hospitality of Mr. Decourcy's ancestors had considerably injured his fortune; he therefore received with pleasure a proposal, made him soon after our marriage, of residing in the East Indies ivith a rieh relation, who promised, if he accepted his invitation, to make him his sole heir. " I will not tire your patience, nor wound your feelings, by dwelling upon ? ? the
the sorrows I experienced in India, m consequence of'the loss of several lovely children. 'But 4 their death was not my only source of afiiiction ; deep fits of melancholy frequently seized Mr. Decourcy, Avhich generally ended in wild and passionate enquiries con¬ cerning the mysterious transactions in Ireland ; and too late I Avas convinced 4 that suspicion, like a subtle venom, is- never to be extracted, and that, like remorse, it has power to poison every enjoyment. 44 You may wonder, perhaps, at my suffering hini to retain ideas so inju¬ rious to my felicity, when it ivas so completely in my power to remove them. But, in the first place, I A\as bound by a solemn oath never to dis¬ close the secret of your birth to him ; and in the second, I was well aware I should endanger his existence if I did"; Convinced, from his proud and ^ *-* vindictive
vindictive spirits he never Avould rest, if once acquainted with them, until he had revenged, or at least attempted to revenge, the injuries of his sister, or, more properly speaking, the wound that had been given to the pride, the dignity, the honour of his ancient House. 44 To eiAJoy even a moderate share of hanpiness in the married state, without «nutual confidence, is utterly impossi¬ ble ; and though I am certain the most perfect affection subsists betiveen Mr. Decourcy and me, we are, notwith¬ standing, wretched and dissatisfied, in consequence of the unhappy doubts engendered in his mind. 44 These doubts were almost fatally confirmed by the discovery Mrs. Gre- ville made, respecting you; and the conduct of Mr. Decourcy upon that occasion affected me so deeply, that, j terrified
terrified by the situation to which he had reduced me, he solemnly vowed never again to touch upon the subject which had distressed me, provided I consented to give you up :—regard for you, and the pride of injured inno¬ cence, then strong within me, made me peremptorily refuse doing this." " Oh ! for Heaven's sake, my dear¬ est Madam," said Jacintha, " no longer refuse to do so, no longer let ?? be a bar to your happiness 1" " We will speak of this hereafter," replied Mrs. Decourcy. " My motives for refusing Lord G wy therin's request, to inform you of the connection existing between you and him, originated in my fears of its being further discovered by such a disclosure; your prudence, however, and
and his consideration will, I trust, render these fears ill-founded. 44 His Lordship's mysterious wan¬ derings about the house were not'by any means calculated to tranquillize the mind of Mr. Decourcy ; and con¬ sequently, by further disturbing it, they added to my unhappiness—an un¬ happiness to which you may impute the reserve and gloom which have lately marked my manner. Again Mr. De¬ courcy proposed- " ■ " 44 Parting with me, " said Jacintha^ observing she paused, and appeared greatly embarrassed ; C4 1 entreat you, my dear Madam, no longer to refuse complying with his wishes ; I can well account for the feelings which give rise to them. But is there no wav of re- moving his suspicions ? Must you still continue to be punished for the faults of others ?" ih None,
44 None, but by a breach of faith, Avhich is not to be thought of," replied Airs. Decourcy ; 4t but I think I should in ? great measure prevent their causing me uneasiness, by acceding to his wishes." 44 Can you then hesitate a mo¬ ment about acceding to them, my dearest Madam ?" asked Jacintha. 44 I have only hesitated on your ac¬ count," replied Mrs. Decourcy. 4i I knew not what reason to assign to you for sending you from me ; the explanation, however, which Lord Gwvthcrin has led to, »has given me an opportunity of assigning the real one, and, conse¬ quently removed my rehfctancc to comply with Avhat Mr. Decourcy de¬ sires ; since, should a separation take place between us,-you will now be con¬ vinced it is not occasioned by any dimi¬ nution of affection on my part, as you might
might otherwise have supposed, if ig¬ norant of the cause of it. <f Humanity, as well as regard, urges me to do every thing in my poiver to assuage the wretchedness experienced by Mr. Decourcy—a wretchedness, which can only be conceived by those who, like him, at once ? * " Dote, yet doubt \ » u »peer, yet »trongly Jove.* 44 The confirmation ofhis suspicions could scarcely, perhaps, occasion him greater'misery than he now feels. How, harbouring such suspicions against me, he could have thought of uniting his fate to mine, may, perhaps, excite your wonder : but ere they were awak¬ ened in his mind, his affection for me was too firmly established to be eradi¬ cated by any thing but the most con¬ vincing proofs of my guilt ; and be¬ lieving he could not enjoy happiness without
without me, and finding it impossible to win me upon any other than honour¬ able terms, he at length yielded to the violence .of his passion, and made me his. " Thus have I tried to account for what might otherwise appear inconsist¬ ent and unnatural, though only, my dear Jacintha, to such as, like you, were not well experienced in life, which daily furnishes instances of still greater inconsistency than what appears in the conduct of Mr. Decourcy. " He has solemnly assured me, my parting with you shall not render him unmindful of your interest ; he has also, in order to furnish a plausi¬ ble pretext for doing so, proposed my accompanying him immediately to Por¬ tugal, a place he has long beerì desirous of visiting, and whither your situation relativo to Mr. Oswald, which it must naturally
naturally be supposed inclines you to remain where you can receive the ear¬ liest intelligence of him, will be quite a sufficient reason for your not accom> panying us." " Undoubtedly/' replied Jacintha. " But where can I find such a resi* dence as I would wish to place you in ?" said Mrs. Decourcy, " I can easily remove all anxiety upon that head, my dear Madam/' cried Jacintha ; " my friend, Miss Frankland, of whose marriage ï have long sirice informed you, has repeat¬ edly expressed her earnest wishes to see me at her seat in Essex : I will there¬ fore, with your permission, write to her to-day, and acquaint her with my intention of paying her'a visit" " This idea composes my mind/* said
said Mrs. Decourcy, " and divests il of all uneasiness at the idea of parting from you, but that which must be felt at a separation from those we love." iJ ' But how, my .dear Madam," asked Jacintha, recurring to Wood- yiile's letter, which she had put into Mrs, ????????'? hands, previous to the commencement of her narrative ; 4 4 how am I to act relative to Mr. Woodville?" 44 You must acquaint hjm withthe truth,".said Mrs. Decourcy; " I see no other method by which you can ae* quit yourself in his opinion! However unwilling I may be to expose your mother to the slightest degree of cen¬ sure, yet I cannot think of sacrificing to that unwillingness, the reputation and peace of her daughter. The secret you will entrust to Mr. Woodville will, I am confident, be as secure in his bo¬ som as your own. Until you meet, you must
must not divulge it, lest any accident should happen to the letter :—Mrs. Der- Avent is wary and suspicious ; she has always detested her * sister, and would rejoice, î ani certain, at having' the power of injuring her in the estimation of the world. All you can, therefore, do at present, is to write to Wood¬ ville, and entreat him to suspend his judgment till you see tíimi 44 Blameless in reality and in appear¬ ance may you pass through life, bless¬ ed in the consciousness of deserving and possessing a spotless reputation ! and, in the tender affection of an amiable man, may you find an ample recompence for the unavoidable de sertion of those ivho were bound by the ties of nature to protect you ! 44 To hear of your happiness, or in any manner to be accessary to it, will ever confer unspeakable pleasure upon me.
me. I felt interested about you ere I saw you, and I loved you as soon as I knew you, and should have been re¬ joiced could ï have retained you with me, until I had consigned you to the still " tenderer care of your beloved Egbert; but though disappointed in this wish, I still encourage a hope of witnessing, at some future period, your felicity with him." Too much affected to speak, Jacintha gently raised her hand, and pressed it to her lips. 44 Upon the caution ivhich is neces¬ sary to be observed in holding any cor¬ respondence with Lord Gwytherin, I need not dwell," resumed JMrs, De¬ courcy ; * * the secret, wliich it has cost me so much to keep, I am confident you will be careful to guard. I will now seek Mr. Decourcy, and inform - him
him I mean to comply with his: wishes. " She and Jacintha then parted ; the latter retired to her chamber, where she immediately sat down to write to her friend, Mrs. Falkland; she also wrote to Woodville such a letter as Mrs. De¬ courcy had dictated. Her mind was in a great measure restored to tranquillity by the expla¬ nation which had taken place between her and Mrs. Decourcy ; the restless¬ ness attendant on unsatisfied curiosity no longer tormented it, nor was it any longer distressed by apprehensions of having lost the affection of a person she regarded ; she also hoped and be¬ lieved that the unhappy surmises which at present caused a separation between her and her inestimable friend, would at length be overcome by the powtr of united virtue and tenderness. On
On meeting Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy at dinner, the altered countenance of the former demonstrated the pleasure his Lady's communication had given him. As soon as alone with Jacintha, Mrs. Decourcy informed her .that im¬ mediate preparations were to be made for their vov age. J acin tha ad vised with her, Avhether she should acquaint Lord Gwytherin with her removal from their habitation. Mrs. Decourcy replied in the affirm¬ ative; desiring her at the same time to point out to his Lordship the neces¬ sity there was for being circumspect an all his actions relative to her. A letter soon arrived from Mrs. Palkland, expressive of very great pleasure at Jacintha's promised visit, Avhose company would now be doubly tvelcome to her, from having lost that of her sister but a few days before. Three
Three days after the receipt of this letter, Jacintha bade her beloved friend adieu, who again assured her of her unaltered regard, and the sincere plea¬ sure she and Mr. Decourcy would de¬ rive from accelerating her union with Egbert, by removing any obstacles that might perhaps still continue to oppose it on his return to Europe. * As the time fixed for her departure approached, the reserve of Mr. De¬ courcy somewhat lessened; and the pleasure he felt at the idea of her re¬ moval was but too e vielen t. Jacintha travelled in his chaise, ac¬ companied by the housekeeper, to the residence of Mrs. Falkland, which ivas about thirty miles from his house, and ivhich she reached about the decline of day. Here she was received with every demonstration of joy by her friend, vol, iii, f who,
who, after mutual interrogations had passed, conducted her from the par¬ lour, where she received her alone, to the drawing-room, in which a large party were assembled preparatory to dinner.
CHAP.
CHAP. III.
<* Through th* heart *' Should jealousy its venom once diffuse, " Ye fairy prospects, thený " Ye beds of roses, and ye bowers of joy, " Farewel 9 ye gleamings of departed peace» " Shine out your last ; the ye! low tinging plague " Internal vision taints, and in a night 4t Of livid gloom imagination wraps/* THOMSON· vJN entering the draiving-room, Jacintha was introduced to Mr. Falk¬ land, a young man of elegant man¬ ners, and a prepossessing appearance, f 2 Amongst
Amongst the company assembled in it, . Jacintha was not by any means de¬ lighted at recognizing Sir George Ash- ton, the gentleman whose troublesome attentions, it may be remembered, had <Jriven her from the/ ball, given by Woodville upon Lord Gwytheiin's ??? ? rival at Wyefield, the preceding sum¬ mer. He instantly recollected her ; -and scarcely permitted her to be seated, ere he approached to pay his compliments, aiijd express the exticme pleasure he felt at meeting her so unexpectedly. iC I assure you," said he, "I almost began to despair of ever seeing you again ; and I have been quite incon¬ solable at the idea, for I have thought of nothing but yoa ever since I first met you. " i£ I am sorry your thoughts have not been better«eniployed, Sir," replied Jacintha, " How
"»Hew could they be better em¬ ployed?" said Mr. JFalkland, who stood near her, in a low and "insinuating: AOİce. 44 In many Avays, I think," cried Jacintha. 44 Well, I deserve at least some re ward for f my constancy," said the Ba ronet; "' so pray give me some little reason to suppose the Nplea^ure of thi& uiiexj>cGted meeting ψ not .entirely oa íny side. " 44 I never attempt to deceive," re* plied Jacintha. 44 So then," cried he, "you deny feeling any satisfaction at this inter* view r 44 'Tis unnecessary to deny what ha^ .never heen asserted," said Jacintha. v 3 " Stilb
44 Still as cold as ever; well, though obdurate in one respect, I hope you ivill not be equally so in another, nor refuse gratifying the ardent curiosity I ^ feel to learn the strange circumstances which took place, at Lord GAvytherin's masquerade, and which I have been in¬ formed you can well explain ?" *' I must refer you, Sir," said Ja¬ cintha, extremely provoked at these words, i4 to those who gave you the information, for the explanation you desiTe. "* <c I see, " # exclaimed he, * c you are determined to drive me tö despair." " Then turning carelessly upon his heel, lie walked away, humming a new air. " 'Tis well, indeed, for the Baro¬ net, " said Mr. Falkland, taking a chair "by Jacintha, 4t that he does not possess any great degree of sensibility, else he would,
Avould, in reality,! be driven to despair by the reception he has met. " '" He had no right to expect any other, " replied Jacintha, smiling. " But to know you, and not have wished for another, would have been utterly impossible;" said he. These words were accompanied by a look so full of softness and admiration, that Jacintha felt herself greatly confused by it, which Mr. Falkland perceiving, he immediately ceased from noticing her in any particular manner ; and Jacintha/ naturally Imputing his words and looks to that common-place gal- lantiyv with wh ich ï fashionable * mm think it necessary td%eat the4emale sex in general, thought no^more of either. The company assembled to dinner Avere lively and elegant, and the evening f 4 passei
passed aivay agreeably in music and * dancing ; yet not half so pleasantly to Jacintha,, as if it had been devoted to an unrestrained conversation with hci\ friend about former events. She heard, with concern, that Sir George Ashton Avas at present upon a visit to Mr. Falk¬ land, and earnestly enquired fiom Mrs. Jlalkland Avhen she supposed he would depart ; on this head, hoivever, her iriencl could give her no satisfaction. The ensuing day passed as the pre¬ ceding one had done, and Jacintha soon found she was the inhabitant of a -mansion consecrated to gaiety and plea¬ sure; but in ivhich, Avith regret, she perceÍA T cd its yoyiig and lovely mistress but little participated. Her surprise at - this circumstance was scarcely less than her regret, as she knew Mrs. Falkland had married the man Avhom she pre¬ ferred to all others, and ivas, besides, surrounded ivith Avhat are considered the
the most estimable blessings of life.. Her melancholy, however, did not long remain a mystery to Jacintha ; obser¬ vation, and her candid confession,, fully explained ther cause of it. Romantic, inexperienced, passion¬ ately attached to Mr. Falkland, and fondly flattering herself he was equally so to her, she had looked forward to> the enjoyment of the most perfect feli¬ city in her union with him. A short time, however, served to convince her, her expectations ivere too highly elevated;—wild, inconstant, and dis¬ sipated, Mr. Falkland, Avho had mar¬ ried her more for the purpose of obtain· inga settlement from his father, than from inclination, soon began to remit those attentions on which she founded* her principal hopes of happiness, and relapsed into all his former follies and extravagances, wliich, by degrees epming to her knowledge, infused the/- j 5, most
most corroding auspicious into her mind, and completely poisoned the fountain of " domestic bliss/' But though she ceased in some degree to esteem, she could not cease in any de- gréé to iove ; she suffered, therefore, continual pain, lest he should at length be totally estranged from her. The most trivial circumstance awakened all her tcprs, excited her jealousy, and threw her into agonies; and though the gentleness of her temper prevented her from breaking into open reproaches, the dejection of her countenance, her sudden emotions, and the minate en¬ quiries she made into his aci ions, suf¬ ficiently explained to hini, and to the ivorld, what ivas passing in her heart. Convinced, as she was, of the levity of his disposition, her having invited such a guest, so eminently gifted by nature with every attractive charm, as was Jacintha, to her house, may excite some
some surprise ; but she still retained too high an opinion of him, to imagine he would ei r er attempt to violate the pro¬ priety which he was bound by every principle of honour to adhere to, be¬ neath the roof where his wife resided, even though hc received encourage¬ ment to do so, of which, from Jacin¬ tha, whom she looked upon as her sis¬ ter, and into whose sympathizing bo¬ som she felt a melancholy kind of plea¬ sure at the idea of pouring her sorrows, she could entertain no apprehension. Jacintha essayed every art she Avas mistress of to try anel console her, be¬ neath griefs which she coulel not avoid acknowledging were difficult to bear ;, but she soon discovered it was utterly out of her power to administer conso¬ lation to a mind diseased üke her's. AIL she could elo was to divert her thoughts sometimes from the troubles ivhich op¬ pressed them, by talking of fonner t 6' eicuœ
events, and dwelling upon tbe rational hopes Avhich might be entertained of a change ????«; at length effected in tlie conduct of Mr. Falkland by the unde¬ viating rectitude of her's. The hopes with which Jacintha en¬ deavoured to inspire her, J acin tha herself in reality felt. She saw Mr. Falkland was not destitute of sensibility ; and, from the observations she hael been able to make upon his disposition, she was led to believe the errors he committed ori¬ ginated more from a too volatile tem¬ per, and early introduction into fa¬ shionable life, than from any inherent depravity, and were, therefore, such as might be conquered. About a week after her arrival at his» house, she received a letter from Mrs. Decourcy, containing the tend crest assurances of unabated regard,. and in¬ forming her that she and Mr. Decourcy were ?
were on the point of setting out for Falmouth, to embark for Portugal. This letter was soon followed by one irom Lord G wytherm, in which he ex¬ pressed extreme surprise at the depar¬ ture of Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy from England; and solicitude (dictated, he said, by strong anxiety about her wel¬ fare) to know whether there was any truth in the report now İh circulation, of their intention of making her their heiress. Jacintha, in reply to this letter, assured him there was not ; that all they had ever given lier reasou to expect from them, was a moderate independence, beyond the possession of which, she eleclared her wishes had never soared. Her time would have passed plea¬ santly at Mr. Falkland's, but for the uneasiness she experienced on account' of her friend, whose dejection, or rather cause for dejection, became every day more
more visible, and the troublesome assi- dailies of Sir George Ashton, which ai ere doubly insufferable, from his o-iv- ing her plainly to understand that he considered any notice from him a very paiticuiar honour to her, Mrs. Falkland appeared extremely agitated one evening at the idea of Air. Falkland's going to a house in the neighbourhood, where she Avas certain he ivould meet a lady paiticulaily ob¬ noxious to her, from the encourage¬ ment she had given to his gallantries, and on whose account she had declined the invitation which, with him, she had lecci ved to it. Jacintha, perceiving her every mo¬ ment giowing more uneasy, at length proposed going down to Mr. Falkland, and trying to prevail upon him to give up his intention of leaiing home that evening ; tins proposed ivas joyfully accepted
accepted by Mrs. Falkland, whose pride rendered her unwilling to use any soli¬ citations to him herself upon the sub¬ ject. , Jacintha accordingly descended from the drawing-room, and sent a servant to inform Air. Falkland she wished to speak to him for a minute. He instantly came to her ; a kind of eager joy dif¬ fused over his countenance, ami lead¬ ing her from the hall, where she stood waiting the return of her messenger, into an adjoining parlour, desired to know her commands. ' f I am come to tell you, " said she, 4( that your company cannot be dis¬ pensed with this evening at home : Mis. Falkland has received some new music from London, and proposes having a little concert, in which a verv distin- guished part is allotted you." "
41 And
VÏSÎT. 44 And do you really wish me to con¬ tinue at home ?" cried he, gently press¬ ing her hand, and looking with the most insidious softness in her face. " Yes* I do indeed," replied Jacintha, rather hesitatingly. " Then I will this instant send an excuse, but too happy in having an opportunity of proving the ascendency you have over me. Oh MissGrcvillc'l" he continued, seizing both her hands as she was turning from him, " how* lon¿ have I ivished for a moment like the present ! hoAv long have I wished for an opportunity of disclosing the sentiments with which you have in¬ spired me 1 From the first minute 1 be¬ held you, you have been enthroned within my heart—my soul has paid yon secret homage; nay, do not frown, do not look so indignant ;—tenderness like
like mine surely merits some other re¬ turn than contempt." 44 Eray release me, Mr. Falkland," exclaimed Jacin tha ; t 4 1 am impatient, " added she, affecting not to believe him serious in what he said, " to return to Mrs. Falkland, and acquaint her ivith the success of my embassy." "Not till you reward me for my ready qbedience to your Avishes." 44 A generous minti ever finds a re¬ ward in its own feelings for conferring a favour, " replied Jacintha, still- strug¬ gling to disengage herself, " Then thus I take what you re¬ fuse," exclaimed he, wildly catching her in his arms, and passionately em¬ bracing her. At this instant, while liis lips a\ ere pressed to hets, and he held her, in a grasp too firm for her to
to break from it, to his throbbing heart, the door opened, and Sir George Ashton entered. Falkland started, and, instantly releasing Jacintha, turned- abruptly to a window to conceal the extreme confusion he was thrown into, whilst Jacintha, overpowered by re¬ sentment and indignation, stood trans¬ fixed, ivildly staring at the Baronet. " Bless me!" exclaimed Sir George, after alternately surveying her and Falk¬ land, " how unfortunate ! I really ask fen thousand pardons for my intru- sion. Then, with a malicious look at Jacintha, he precipitately retired, clos¬ ing the door after him. · The moment he quitted the parlour, Falkland again approached her; this action directly restored her suspended faculties, "and she flew to the door; but
but ere she couid open it, he caught her by the gown.—" Hear me, Miss Greville," cried he, 44 hear me, I con¬ jure you !" 44 Mn Falkland," said Jacintha, in a solemn accent, " if you do not wish me to expose you to the contempt you merit, the contempt of your own fa¬ mily, you will not detain me another minute." Awed by her manner, or rather per¬ ceiving she was too much irritated at present to admit any apology for his conduct, he no longer prevented lier from leaving him ; and she hastened to her chamber, where she threw herself upon a chair, almost breathless from contending passions. Offended pride and delicacy^would have led her Immediately to quit a house where she had received such insulting
insulting treatment, had not the uii- happy consequence» Avhich might result fiom such a measure, opposed her yield¬ ing t» the dictates of resentment;— io depart abruptly, Avithout assigning some cause íbr doing so, ivas almost impos¬ sible; and what cause but the real one could she usai^n, ivhich, if known to her friend, avo u Id, she ivas iveli con¬ vinced, give a mortal stab to her peace ? In pity, therefore, to her, she resolved, after many struggles ivith her irritated feelings, to pass over the conduct of her husband ; endeavouring to recon¬ cile herself to this resolution, by so¬ lemni v detenni ning, if he evei* at- tempted to repeat such conduct, to guffer no consideration to prevent her from lvithdrawing from his ??£ She tried to hope that it proceeded more from the effects of wine, ivith which it was evident he was heated at the monicut he came to her, than to depravity
depravity of principle ; and that shame and remorse ivould attend the recollec¬ tion of it; and, perhaps, make such an impression upon his mind, as might guard him from similar offences. But, in thi uking so, she ivas utterly mis¬ taken : hc Avas a libertine in even' re- speet, callous to shame antl to remorse, and firmly bent upon essaying every art he was master of, to try and inspire he;· with such a passion as .->îic had in¬ spired him, and ivhich, as he boldly declared, hc had long been seeking Tor a favourable opportunity of disclosing, fiattering himself, from the high opi¬ nion hc entertained of his oavu attrac¬ tions, that the disclosure ivould not be extremely unpleasing. The agitation and distress into Avhich his conduct had thrown Jacintha, ivere greatly increased by Sir George Ash ton having Avitnessed it ; not so much from a fear of his mentioning it, for she fan¬ cied
cied he would not like to provoke the vengeance of Falkland, who was fiery and vindictive in the extreme; but , from an apprehension of his being em-. boldened by it, to treat her with greater freedom than he had hitherto p!one. Her reluctance to meet Mr. Falkland prevented her from returning to the drawing-room, untii she was sum¬ moned thither to tea ;—on entering it, she found him, and all the gentlemen who had composed his party at dinner, assembled there, and beheld a smile upon the countenance of Mrs. Falk¬ land, which denoted the pleasure she felt at his having relinquished his en¬ gagement. He started from a sofa, upon which he was carelessly lolling, the moment she entered, and approach¬ ing her, attempted to take her hand, and lead her to it ; but Jacintha shrank involuntarily from his touch, and, with averted looks, passed him, and took a seat
\
seat near Mrs. Falkland at the tea- table. " I really thought you had run away, my dear girl, " said Mrs. Falk¬ land, " from your long absence." " Miss Greville is fond of solitude," cried Sir George, with a smile border¬ ing upon a sneer; " but no wonder,— she can ahvays employ her thoughts agreeably. " " Not always," replied Jacintha, " for' fools and coxcombs will some¬ times obtrude upon them." " But that has not been the case this evening, I flatter myself," said he, looking earnestly at her. " 'Tis not unusual ivith you to flat ter yourself, Sir George, I believe, cried Jacintha. " Why
44 Why so severe ? Why," asked he, in a low voice, ít not let me share a little of that mercy you bestow upon others? I assure yon, you would not fiucl me undeserving of it." 44 Come, come, Ashton," exclaimed Falkland, who appeared uneasy at his whispering to Jacintha, t£ I cannot per¬ mit you to monopolize Miss Greville's conversation." 44 You may not permit, but you can¬ not be surprised at my wishing to do so," answered the Baronet; 4i for 'tis natural, you must allow, to try and engross what wc admire." 44 True," said Falkland; (í but this excuse will not avail." And rising as he spoke, he approach¬ ed the scat of Jacintha, and placed himself bv it. She immediatelv turned from
from him, nor could the repeated cRbrts he made for the purpose, obtain the least degree of notice from her. She acted, however, in such a manner as to prevent Airs. Falkland from øføerv- ing her altered conduct towards tjhbp· He at length became offended and ill- tempered, andAvouid, in* ali probability, have left the house, had. not hazard been proposed, contrary to the incli¬ nation of Mrs. Falkland, avIio A 7 ainly tried to introduce a more innocent amusement. She and Jacintha Avere left to arøusc themselves the remainder of the CA*en- ing as they pleased ; for the gentlemen did not quit the gaming-table till die night, or rather morning, ivas far ad¬ vanced. The next day was remarkably fine ; and at breakfast the ladies were invited to accompany the gentlemen in an vox., in· ? excursion.
excursion, which had been planned the preceding evening ; they accepted the invitation, and curricles, as well as saclcíle-horses, were accordingly 01 der¬ ed, ßut when Jacintha found, by tlie-artful management of Falkland, that she was to be his companion during the ride, she positively declined being of the party, to the extreme sur¬ prise of all, and manifest displeasure of her friend, who plainly imputed her "sudden refusal to the effects of caprice ;—nothing, however, could shake the resolution of Jacintha, fiimly persuaded as she was, by cat ai a looks of Falklands, that by accompanying him, she should expose herself to lan¬ guage highly di&agi ecable (even in idea) to her. As soon as the party set off, she with¬ drew to the garden, hurt to think she should have given her fi iend any reason to suspect her of an unsteady temper ; but
but still moré hurt to think of FahV* land's persevering in his designs against her, which she had but too much rea¬ son to imagine he did, and in conse¬ quence of which she feared she »should at length be compelled to seek refuge amongst strangers. All the melancholy ideas her deserted situation had ever inspired, (without a settled home, without a friend to whom she coukl look up for advice and protection) were again awakened, and her tears could not be restrained. " The free indulgence of these tears, how¬ ever, lightened by degrees the oppres¬ sion of her heait; and a soft and pleas¬ ing melancholy gradually diffused itself over her mind, which the gentleness of the day, and the smiling appearance cf eveiy thing around her, coniribated to' render still more soothing to her feel- İno'S. ? It was now the middle of Apri!, g Q ¿nd
ind the season being remarkably mild, vegeiation was already far advanced; again the hills and vales were clothed in liveries of green, again the woods „ were prodigat of harmony, arain the dew-bright borders of the garden were bedecked with floAvers, from Avhich the zephyrs that expanded' their beauties, wafted the most delicious fragrance. " Ah !" thought Jacintha, " Avith what different sensations did I hail the re¬ turn ofthis genial season last year ! With what pleasing expectations did I then behold the foliage gradually expanding —thatfoliage," added she, with-a shud¬ dering horror, " which bestrewed with its falling honours the grai r e of my best friend—of him whom ;ny heart can alone acknowledge as my parent l" — She paused, and looked up to Heaven.— " But this regret," continued she, " is selfish, convinced as I am that death
death must to him havebeen a passport to joys not less glorious than immor¬ tal" The tear of tender remembrance; however, could not be suppressed ; and seating herself in an arbour, which terminated the walk she ivas in, she involuntarily yielded to the returning sadness of her soul. 44 Shall I ever," she inwardly ex¬ claimed, 4 * shall I ever again be pressed to a heart interested as was his about me ? Shall I ever again experience' the pleasures of domestic life ? ever more become the inmate of those peaceful shades which afforded me so long their shelter—those dear and delightful scenes of early youth, to which my heart, un- travelled, fondly turns, forgetful of the sorrows, and only recollecting the happiness which it felt amidst them— a happiness which if possible appears* g 3 brighter;
brighter and more perfect in the retro¬ spection, than it did in the enjoyment ? But such, I believe, iß ever the case; our blessings brighten as they leai r e us, „ and are too often never properly appre¬ ciated till gone for ever ; and *t . ■■,.,, not to undersland a treasure's worth ** Till time has stoln away the slighted good, ** Is cause of half the poverty we feel, " And makes ths woi Id the wilderness it is." From her pensive meditations Jacin¬ tha Avas suddenly roused by an ap¬ proaching step ; and raiding her head from her hand, she beheld, to her inex¬ pressible surprise and displeasure, Falk¬ land within a few paces of the arbour. She instantly started up, in order to leave it ere he could enter/ but he was too quick in his motions to permit her to do this; and seizing her hands, vowed she should not leave him until she had granted him her forgiveness. " This
- 4( This rude detention is not the me¬ thod to obtain it, I assure you, Sir," replied Jacintha, with indignation in her VOİce and countenance, 'and strug¬ gling as she spoke, though ineffec¬ tually, to disengage herself. " Why all this coldness and con¬ tempt ?" cried he; " what have I- done to incur either ?" " Ask your own heart, Sir," re¬ plied Jacintha; " and if it be not ut¬ terly destitute of honour and sensibi¬ lity, it will better reply to the interro* gatory than I can possibly do." * · " My heart can never reproach me for yielding to a passion inspired by the most loveiy and amiable of her sex," said he. " Mr. Falkland," cried Jacintha, with affected calmness, " I must sup¬ ei 4 pose
.pose your presuming to repeat the in¬ sult you offeree} me yesterday, is occa¬ sioned by my then forbearing to resent it in the manner it deserved. Let me now inform you, Sir, that that for¬ bearance was caused, not from Manting cither spirit or inclination to resent it, but from what I now find was an erro¬ neous idea, of your head more than your heart being in error, ançl a wish to avoid any action which could give pain to the too vulnerable heart of my friend ; but, were I now to forbear ex¬ pressing the resentment it has excited, I §bn«ld consider myself deserving of it. I shall prove that resentment not by reproaches, but by quitting your house—a house in which those ties that even the most common of mankind in general regard as sacred, the ties of honour and hospitality, have been vio¬ lated. " 44 On my knees I conjure you to drop
drop such an intention," exclaimed Falkland ; 4i you will drive me to de¬ spair, to desperation, if you persevere in it—I cannot exist out of your pre¬ sence. " " If you knew my thoughts con¬ cerning you," replied Jacintha, with a smile of contempt, 4( you would ??* ther avoid than wish for it; let your pride therefore, since you have not virtue to do so, interpose to prevent your any longer thinking of a woman, who looks upon you as the most abject of your sex !" " Then, by Heavens!'* exclaimed he, wildly stai ting up, and clasping her in his arms, i4 I'll be revenged for her contempt !" Jacintha shrieked.— ltt Mr. Falkland, " cried she, 44 you ΛνίΙΙ compel me to* expose you to the scorn of the world." e $ 44 Curse
" Curse upon the Avorld !" said he, " I care not for its opinion; riches and consequence Avill ahvays, I knoAV, command its pleasures; and its plea¬ sures more than counterbalance any paiñ its censures may inflict. " · " But the censures of the heart !" cried Jacintha, almost breathless from. her efforts to f r ?? herself from him. " what can silence these?" " The enjoyment of its wishes."— And airain he tried to force her further ? into the arbour. Jacintha again shrieked.—At this instant a rustling was heard amongst the shrubs ivhich clustered near the arbour ; and the next moment Sir George Ashton stood before it. The presence of a beloved friend never inspired Jacintha with greater pleasure
pleasure than did his unexpected appearance, raised as were her appre¬ hensions to the highest pitch of terror, by the wild and savage conduct o£ Falkland. 44 Ha ! Ashton, " exclaimed Falkland, ! ivith a contracted brow, and without releasing Jacintha, tí ívhat the devil brings you here? I thouglit you had proceeded with the rest of the party." " No," replied Sir George, ivith an air of the greatest carelessness, " I changed my mind ; 1 thought, like you, a ramble in the garden might be productive of greater pleasure, than could be experienced by accompanying them." 44 Well, Avhy don't you pursue your rambler" demanded Falkland, impa¬ tiently.
ρ ? C( Hold,,
44 Hold, Sir George!" said Jacintha, perceiving he was turning from the ar¬ bour ; "I entreat you not to go, until Mr. Falkland has released me ; he de^ tains me here against my inclination ; - and though he appears to have forgot¬ ten the character of á man, by insult·* ingf a defenceless woman, I trust you will not follow his example, by deny¬ ing her your protection," " My dear Madam," replied Sir George, with a bow, 4f to be your champion upon every emergency, could not fail of giving me the most super¬ lative pleasure ; but excuse me for thinking my services are not requisite at present ; I cannot believe Mr. Falk¬ land to be v so discourteous a Knight, as to f detain any lady perforce. " 44 Tis rather improbable indeed," said Falkland, with a laugh ; 4t and ta prove I am wronged in the assertion, sjnce
since I now understand what the wishes of the lady are, I shall set her free." 44 And is it only now you under¬ stand them ? is it only now they have been explained to you?" demanded Jacintha; 4i Oh shame, shame, Mr. Falkland ! I am grieved—grieved be¬ yond expression, on my friend's ac¬ count, to find you so lost to every prin¬ ciple of honour." She then quitted the arbour, and hastened to her chamber, where it was long ere she could regain any degree of composure, or consequently set about making the necessary preparations for her departure, whieh she resolved should take place the next day. She proposed returning to Beech Grove, and remaining there until she could obtain such a residence elsewhere as she wished for ; which she doubted not being soon able to procure, as she was enabled,.
enabled, by the generosity of Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy, to offer the most libe¬ ral terms for accommodation, in a pri- A'ate and well-regulated family. The hope of being able to procure a safe and pleasant asylum, though sooth¬ ing to her feelings, could not perfectly tranquillize them; afear of offending her friend, by her abrupt departure from her house, i\ iihout assigning any reason for it, agitated her mind ; nor was it less disturbed by the malicious insinuation which Falkland had thrown out against her to the Baronet, wliich she endeavoured to flatter herself how¬ ever, proceeded more from the impulse of disappointed passion, than any pre¬ meditated design to injure her ; ami would consequently, if productive, or likely to be productive of any thing unpleasant, be contradicted. , -
CHAP.
3
CHAP. IV. " In her ears the sound " Yet rung of his persuasive words, impiegn'd ** With ïeason to her seeming, and with truth." MJLTOM. Mrs. FALKLAND and her party (from whom Falkland and the Baronet had separately, and unknown to each other, made ? ?????? excuse for withdrawino) returned earlier than was expected from their excursion ; but Jacintlia did not join them until they were descending to the dinner pai lour* She studiously avoided the looks of Falkland
Falkland and Sir George, though both, by every art they could practise, endeavoured to engage her attention, and appeared so dejected and disturbed, that the affectionate heart of Mrs. Falkland became alarmed ; the displea¬ sure she felt at Jacintha's refusing to accompany her in the morning, vanished, and she eagerly longed for an opportunity of enquiring inta the cause of her too evident unea¬ siness. 44 Something, I am sure, has hap¬ pened to disturb you, my dear Jacin¬ tha," said she^ the moment they re¬ entered the draiving-room, "for yon look unhappy." " I am indeed unhappy," replied Jacintha, with a deep s»gh, " at the idea of leaving vou." " Leaying me!" repeated Mrs. Falk¬ land,
land, with a look, and in an accent expressive of the greatest surprise ; "I hope you have no such idea." 44 Indeed I have," said Jacintha; " to-morrow I must bid you farewel," " Good Heavens! you astonish me ; what can have caused this sudden de¬ termination ? What can have happened to make you change your intention of remaining with me till the return of Mr. Oswald?" " My dear Emma/' cried Jacintha; " be assured I am notso great an enemy to my own happiness, as to quit your society was it in my power to continue with you ; but, in short, you will oblige me extremely, you ivill add to the nume- rous obligations I already consider my¬ self under to you, if you let me depart, ? ithout further interrogatories as to my motives for doing so." " Certainly,"
" Certainly," ansivercd Mrs. Falk¬ land, in a cool anel resentful tone ; "I should be sorry to intrude enquiries upon you, or attempt to extort your confidence," " I see you are offended," said Jacintha: " Oh Emma!" added she, with streaming tears, " if you could look into my heart, you would find me an object more deserving of pity than of anger." ' t Any anger I feci on the present oc¬ casion," replied Mrs. Falkland, affection¬ ately embracing her as she spoke, ' t pro¬ ceeds from the doubts ivhich your deny¬ ing ire your confidence has inspired of your regard ; answer me this one ques¬ tion sincerely—has any thing occurred in my house to drive you from it ?" " I am sure you don't suppose there has/*
has," said Jacintha, trying to evade the question. " There is a mystery in all this which I cannot fathom," cried Mrs. Falkland, after a pause of some mi¬ nutes. 44 Well," said Jacintha, with affect¬ ed cheerfulness, 4i a mystery some¬ times gives pleasant employment to the iniaçmation. " 44 But not in the present case, I assure you," replied Mrs. Falkland, gravely. i 44 I am certain," said Jacintha, "it would afford you no satisfaction to hear I was leaving your house, for the pur¬ pose of trying whether change of scene could divert the unhappiness of my mind."
44 And
" And is this your real motive for quitting it?" demanded Mrs, Falkland, eagerly. " I really think," ansivercd Jacin- >tha> evasively, " change of scene is accessary for me." " And why not acknoivledge this before ?" asked Mrs. Falkland. ι " Because I did not like to let you knowhow disturbed my mind was." Every vestige of pique and resent¬ ment now vanished from Mrs. Falk¬ land, in consequence of her curiosity being satisfied ; and Jacintha rejoiced to find that, without any violation of truth, she had been able to gratify it. She made nò secret of the place to whicii she was going, and obtained from lier, though not without diffi¬ culty,
culty, a promise to be silent relative to her departure, until it had taken place ; for ívliich requested silence, she as- . signed as the cause her dislike tcrthe ceremony of taking leave. s A servant Avas now dispatched to a* neighbouring inn, to engage a car¬ riage, which Jacintha ordered to be at the door by six o'clock the next morn¬ ing. Her mind felt relieved of a heavy burthen, by having the disclosure she dreaded over, and every thing settled for her journey ; and its tranquillity was increased by being allowed to enjoy the company of her friend throughout the evening, without restraint or ob-' servat ion, as none of the gentlemen made their appearance till supper, be¬ ing engaged till then at hazard. Mrs. Falkland took leave of hex iu her
her chamber, with many entreaties for another , visit, which Jacintha, however, would not deceive her by promising ; in order to avoid any thing like particularity, she letta com¬ plimentary message for Mr. Falkland, expressive of her gratitude for the hos¬ pitable attcntkms she had experienced from him. At the appointed hour, tÌK% chaise arrived the next morning, and Jacin¬ tha, who was already prepared for her journey, and impatient to be gone, instantly stepped into it; she travelled with such expedition, feaiful of a pur¬ suit from' Falkland or Sir George Ash- ton, that early in the afternoon she came within sight of Beech (hove, j lier heart bounded nith transpoit when, through its en ch cling ti ees, she first caught a glimpse of it ; but this transport soon gave way to regret and melancholy,
melancholy, when she reflected its beloved mistress was far distant, and that she herself had no longer a right to consider it as her home. Yet still she felt such a confidence of protection and security «ith in its walh, that the nearer she approached it, the more tranquil she became ; the beautiful serenity of the evening, the calmness, the verdure, tlie cheerfulness of the surrounding scenery also conti ibuted to impart a soothing charm to her mind. Spring appealed liteially to have descended upon the delicio ?? plains she viewed, in a shower of shadowing roses, and round ' t the tepid airs," and *' foster¬ ing bieezes blew." AU nature seemed to feel its renovating iniluence; the joyous husbandman, cheered by the blended \oice of social labour, love, and happy glee, again pursued his task ; the flocks pla vf ull v hounded over their flowery pastures, and 44 The
" The thrush «' And woodbrk ran through the sweetest length «« Of note*V Avhilst *' The blackbird whistled fiom the thorny brake, u The meliow bullfinch anstver'd from the grove ¡ * f Nr>r were the linnets, o*cr theflow'ring fura« *' Pour*d out profusely, bilcnt. Join'd to these» *' In^umeious songsters, in tht. iresh'ning shade */ Of new-sprung leaves, their modulations roix'4 u Mellifluous: thejny, the j ook t the dav/, *· And each harsh pipe, discordant heard alone, " Aided the concert \ while the stockdove breath'd fi A melancholy muunur thio* the whole," Jacintha reached the house without beholding any one belonging to it ex¬ cept the porter, ivho had opened the gates - to admit the chaise into the avenue ; all the windoivs in the front ivere shut up, and, though the postil¬ lion knocked loudly and repeatedly, 6 the
the hall-door remained unopened. Jacintha, on finding this, desired him to drive round to a back court ; but eie he coukl obey her, direc¬ tions, a country .boy came gaping from it. Instead, lioivever, of com¬ ing to Jacintha, as she beckoned him to do, he disappeared the moment hc had satisfied his curiosity; and, before the chaise had again proceeded many yards,' she beheld the housekeeper ar^d several servants approaching. 44 Why, good gracious 1 ." she heard the former exclaiming, as the driver stopped, <4 you don't v tell me truth, Dick ; Miss Gre ville come back ! Why, ívhat in the name of fortín could bring her here? Aye, so it is she herself indeed. " 44 I hope, Airs. Colville," said Ja¬ cintha, with a good-natured smile, vol. in. ? " though
44 though an unexpected, I am not an unwelcome visiter/' 44 Lauk, no, to be sure, Miss," replied Mrs. Colville, resting her hand upon the chaise door; 4t but you are not come to make any stay ?" *' Only for a few days/' said Jacin¬ tha; tfi some particular circumstances obliged me to leave Mr. Falkland's, and I wish to remain here until I can procure a proper residence elsewhere." 44 Dear me, that is very ilkonve- > nient, for all the best bed-chambers are unsettled, and the furniture covered up, and none of the things are in their proper places at present. Don't you know any place, Miss, where you could be more comfortably accommodated ?" Jacintha attempted to reply ; but the humiliating idea of being compelled to solicit
solicit admission from a reluctant do¬ mestic, into a house which, but a short time before, she ? had been taught to consider as her home, excited such emotions as impeded her utterance, and filled her eyes with tears. Though she hastily averted het head to conceal those tears, they were not unperceived by Mrs. Colville, who, fearing she had given her offence, which, for many reasons, she was unwilling to do, be¬ gan to apologize for what she had said, assuring her she would do every thing in her power to render her comfortable. Her reluctance, indeed, to receiving Jacintha into the house, proceeded not from ill-nature, or any dislike to her, but an apprehension that her being in it, might be an interruption to the pleasure and amusement she had proposed to herself from the company of some friends, whom she had invited h 3 from
from London, and expected in the course of a day or two. The chaise, by her order, now drove into the court, and Jacintha was con¬ ducted from it into the breakfast par¬ lour, where, it may be remembered, she had first learned the name of her mother ; the recollections which this room revived, at once painful and pleas¬ ing, were too much for her already agitated spirits. The tears she had hi¬ therto with difficulty suppressed, now burst forth, and she sunk, trembling and exhausted, upon a chair. Mrs. Colville, who still believed these tears flowed more from wounded pride than any other feelings now became otli- ciously kind, in order to make atone¬ ment for the offence she feared she had given ; a table was immediately spread with refreshments, and every thing done M'hich she thought could contri¬ bute to Jacintha's ease, or the restora¬ tion
tion of her tranquillity. As soon as Jacintha was sufficiently composed to enter into conversation, she informed Mrs. Colville of her anxious solicitude for a residence beneath some respect¬ able roof, and begged to know whether she could put her in a way of accom¬ plishing her wishes. Mrs. Colville, after some consider¬ ation, said she did know a Clergyman's family near London, in ivhich she was sure she could be accommodated, and equally certain she would be happy. She then entered into particulars, which tended so much to confirm this latter assertion, that Jacintha requested she would write the next day, to pro¬ pose her admission into it, impatient to quit a mansion where she could not avoid thinking herself an intruder. She would gladly have dispensed with Mrs. Colville's company the remainder n 3 of
of the cvenmg, her loquacity and in¬ quisitive disposition being extremely fatiguing to l\er, particularly in the present state of her mind. Mrs. Col¬ ville, however, who detested solitude herself, naturally concluded every one else hatl av equal aversion to it, and therefore persisted in sitting with her, from an idea of obliging her by doing so. f The chamber which Jacintha had formerly occupied, was again prepared for her ; and with a sigh, caused by the contrast she drew between her feel¬ ings now, and when, she had first be¬ come its inhabitant, she again took possession of it· ????, for the purpose of enjoying that uninterrupted quiet which suited her present feelings, she sat almost en¬ tirely the ensuing clay ;—as she wa» reading in the evening, a maid abruptly entered»
entered, and informed her there was a gentleman below, who wished to speak to her. The idea of Falkland imme¬ diately occurred, and Jacintha en¬ quired whether he had not mentioned his name;—the maid replied in the ne¬ gative. 44 What kind of person is he?" asked Jacintha. 44 Why, very handsome indeed, Miss," said the girl. Jacintha was now convinced it was Falkland. Her bosom swelled with re¬ sentment, . her cheeks glowed with in¬ dignation ; and she desired the gentle¬ man to be informed she was so particu¬ larly engaged at present, it was not in her power to receive any visiter. With this message the maid withdrew; but returned in a few minutes with a note, which Jacintha refused taking. ? 4 4i I caitt
44 I can't indeed, u|iss," said the girl, laying it upon a table, " take it back to the gentleman ; he seemed quite vexed and angry when I told him ^ you would not see him, and said he wafrsure, on reading this, you would not any longer refuse coming to him." At these words, Jacintha cast her eyes upon the note, and, to her extreme surprise, beheld it directed in the writ¬ ing of Lord Gwytherin; she directly snatched it up, and found it contained the following lines*;—
f * I flatter myself it was your igno¬ rance of your visiter's name, which made you decline receiving him ; hasten to me, dear Jacintha, on perusing this, for I have much to impart."
Jacintha
Jacintha immediately descended (though not without some little degree of agitation) to the breakfast parlour, where she understood he waited for her, and was received by him in a ? ? ??? affectionate manner. - He led her to a chair, and having seated himself beside her, proceeded to speak of the disappointment he had experienced on not finding her at Mr. Falkland's. 44 What," said Jacintha, i4 were you at Mr. Falkland's to see me ?" 44 Yes, or I should not have knoivn you were here ;- for you gave me no intimation of leaving his house in your letter to mc." 44 I had no idea of quitting it Avhen I wrote that letter," replied Jacintha.
» 5 « Well,"
^ Wdl," said Lørd Gwytherin, ^without trqitbling himself to enquire what were her reasons for doipg so, 4 4 1 Äih come to ask you whether you, chase. to pay ? visit to your mother ?" 44 Oh Heavens!" exclaimed Jacin¬ tha, starting fram her chftir, and ivith tt look of wild surprise* * c is my mother Cf#n$ to England ?" 44 Be composed, my dear girl," said Lord Gwytherin, again seating her r 44 your mott^sr is not come to England ; but her still continuing in France does not render it impossible for you to see her. The Earl of Dunsane is dead, . and ?? danger çarç now attend your introduction to herl" ? 44 But how, my Lord," eagerly de¬ manded Jacintha* laying her trembling fe^nd upon his arm, ** could I pos¬ sibly go to France, without exciting 5 suspicions
suspicions either injurious to myself or to my mother, perhaps leading to the discovery of those circumstances, which I cannot doubt her ever wishing to conceal." " Certainly," replied Lord Gwy¬ therin, '* as her daughter, she never can publicly acknowiedge you; but privately, I am certain, she will take you to her heart with aH the fond affec¬ tion of a mother." " But what motive can I assign for going to France ?" impatiently dev manded Jacintha. " You must not letit be known that you are going thither." " How will it be possible to avoid doing so?" cried Jácintba. u δ " Are
" Are you not your own mistress ait present?" asked his Lordship. 44 I am," replied Jacintha, with a. sigh. " And therefore at liberty to go where you please ?" " Undoubtedly; but it will appear strange if I make a mystery of my re¬ sidence." " There is no necessity for your doing so ; you can say you a?e going to some remote part of England/' * " But should an enquiry pursue me thither ?" said Jacintha. 14 ^ Follow my directions," resumed his Lordship, " and depend upon it there will be no danger of any disco¬ very taking place that you ivish to avoid.
avoid. I know an old and respectable lady in Lancashire, who, I am certain, at my request, will permit your letters to be directed to her house, from whence they can easily be forwarded to you; and ivith her you can ^inform your friends you are going to reside, until the return of Mr. and Mrs. De¬ courcy, or Mr. Oswald." 44 But the voyage—the journey?" said Jacintha. ** I shall take care that both are conducted in such a manner, as to pre¬ vent your leaving the kingdom being even suspected ; in short, if your wishes are really sincere for seeing your mother, there is nothing to deter you from gratifying them/' " Sincere Î" repeated Jacintha, i*Oh my lMd\ one of the most ardent wishes
wishes of my heart is to know and be . acknowledged by her !" 44 You consent, then, tq accom-. pany me to France ?" 44 Yes, since you have convinced me there is little danger of my doing sa .being discovered." Lord Gwytherin kissed ber hand with transport.—"Propitious bé the voyage for both !" said he; '* may it give ta you ? mother whom you can love ! to me _¿_" He paused, as jf overcome by his^ emotions. " Jacintha started, and looked ear¬ nestly at him.—" Do I understand you aright?" cried she. " My most ardent wishes arc, indeed for an union with your mother," lie replied, " and thus to be permitted to have
have an opportunity of endeavouring to make atonement for my former con¬ duct. Neither time nor levity ever triumphed completely over the passion she inspired in my heart; and but for the continuance of that passion, which prevented my thinking of» any other object, 1 should long since have ex¬ changed the dissipated, unsettled, and desultory life I led, for that domestic state, in Avhich real happiness can alone be found ; but in the way of my wishes, I am well aAvare there are many obsta¬ cles; through your means, however, I trust they may be overcome." " My means.!" repeated Jacintha, with surprise. K " Yes, the interest I cannot doube your exciting in her heart, together Avith the eloquence I flatter myself you Alili exert for me, will, I think, by degrees,
degrees, subdue her hitherto undimi¬ nished resentment, and incline her to accept my A r ows." " Most happy shall I consider my¬ self, "said Jacintha, "ifit be in my power to bring about any event which can conduce to the happiness of such near connections. But tell me, my Lord, hoAv, when did you hear of the Eails death?" He had received intelligence of it the preceding week, Lord Gwytherin replied, from a very particular friend, an English gentleman, who resided in the neighbourhood of the Earl's cha¬ teau, in Ro, and knew of his attach¬ ment for the Countess. ". Knew of it! 1 ' repeated Jacintha, " surely------" " I guess the question you are about asking/'
asking,' f interrupted Lord Givytherin; 44 no, my dear Jacintha, he knew but of my attachment for your mother; her fame I have ever guarded more carefully than my life, and ever will endeavour to maintain, even at the ha¬ zard of it." The Avhole plan of tiieir journey and voyage was now arranged. It Avas set¬ tled that Jacintha should depart for London the next day, and beset doAvn at lodgings Lord Gwytherin promised to provide ; from whence, in the course of a few days, she ivas to set out for Dover with him. Previous to her quitting London^ she proposed making an excursion to Mortlake, for the purpose of enquiring whether any recent intelligence 'had been received of Egbert, and depositing a letter in WoodviUe's hands for him, containing a brief account of the late unexpected
unexpected discovery, and the events which, in consequence of it, had taken place—particulars which she feared to transmit by a common conveyance, lest any accident should befal the letter. For her intended communication to Egbert, she had the free permission of Lord Gwytherin and Mrs. Decourcy ; the former granted his, from an idea of the advantages which might here¬ after result to himself from his relation¬ ship to her being known ; and the lat¬ ter, because she thought, or rather knew from experience, that happiness can never be enjoyed in the married state, Avithout reciprocal Confidence and esteem. Jacintha deemed it absolutely neces¬ sary to inform Egbert of her departure from the kingdom, lest he should return to it before she did-^a circumstance she
she did not altogether think improba¬ ble ; for if received by her mother in the manner she wished, she felt she should be unwilling to forego her pro¬ tection for any other than his. That this would be the case she could scarcely doubt ; for to the peculiar delicacy of her situation, and not to any want of natural affection, she imputed the appa¬ rent neglect and inattention of the Countess. The sweetest' sensations took posses¬ sion of her mind, at the idea of being received by her with tenderness.. Her glowing fancy anticipated the raptures whicb-would attepd the moment she should first find herself within her arms—first hear the soft, the soothing voice of a mother, sinking Jike balm .upon her heart, after being so long exiled from the sweets of sympathy and mutual confidence. How delight¬ ful to think she should soon acquire a friend,
friend, of Avhose sympathy she was certain, and in whose gentle bosom she coulel confide every sorrow—every thought ! To obtain such a friend, she scarcely thought any difficulty or dan¬ ger too great to undergo; for to a heart like her's, formed to feel the so¬ cial charities of life in their fullest ex¬ tent, there coulel be no happiness in this life, without a consciousness of loiing, anel being beloved. For this unknown parent her filial re¬ verence and affection were alone ex- citeel ; no effort could overcome the impression of horror ivhich Lord Gwy¬ therin had made upon her mind. An union with her mother, she thought, might, in some degree, have a ten¬ dency to conquer it ; but that such an union would ever take place ¡bhe could not help doubting, since not only the deen resentment ivhich, by his own con¬ fession, the Countess felt against him, but
but the strong attachment Jacintha understood she entertained for her de¬ parted Lord, ivere likely, she thought, to place insuperable bars in the ivay of his Avishes. Her doubts, hoAvever, she kept to herself; and every thing being finally adjusted on both sides, Lord Gwytherin took his leave, and set out for London.
CHAP.
NOCTURNAL VISIT.
????. v. ** Dissimulation «« Screen'd htr dai ? thoughts, and set to public wew <* A specious face of innocence and beauty." ROWS. jtaS soon as his Lordship had with¬ drawn, Jacintha sent for Mrs. Colville, and apologized for the unnecessary trouble she had given her, in causing her to write to her friend, as it was now out of her power, she said, to go to his house. " Dear me, Miss," cried Mrs. Col¬ ville, ivith an offended air, " I wish you
you had known your oavu mind before you desired me to Avrite ; people don't like to be trifled with." Jacintha repeated her apology, as¬ suring her she was serious in her inten¬ tions of going to. his house at the time she desired her to write, or she never would have commissioned her to do so. 44 I suppose, then, you have heard of some other residence, Miss," said Mrs. Colville. Jacintha replied in the affirmative. 44 From the gentleman, I suppose, who ivas ivith you this evening, " re¬ sumed Airs. Colville. Jacintha boived. 44 He is a relation, I presume, Miss, " said Mrs, Colville, Avith a scrutinizing look.
look, Avhich called a blush into the face of Jacintha.—" Pray may I ask lvhither you are going ?" continued she, after pausing some minutes, evi¬ dently for a reply from Jacintha, wliich she seemed much disappointed at not receiving. " Here is my address," cried Jacin¬ tha, taking a card from her pocket- book, and writing upon it the direc¬ tion Lord.Gwytherin had given her. " To Lancashire!" said Mrs. Col¬ ville, in an accent expressive of sur¬ prise, " ivhy, you have a long jour¬ ney to take. Pray how soon do you set out, Miss ?" " To-morrow," replied Jacintha, 44 I depart for London," " London!" repeated Mrs. Colville; L " why, bless my heart, Miss, that is getting
getting further instead of nearer to the place to which I understood you were going." 44 Oh !" cried Jacintha, recollect¬ ing herself, though extremely con¬ fused, " I want to get some things in London before I commence my jour¬ ney." She then requested Mrs. Colville would be so obliging as to order one of " the men-servants to engage a chaise for her against an early hour the next morning ; a request which Mrs. Col¬ ville very readily promised to comply with, losing in her joy (at getting rid of Jacintha before her own friends ar¬ rived) the displeasure she had but a mi¬ nute before felt against her. Jacintha now repaired to her cham¬ ber, where she passed the principal part of the night in writing to Egbert She vol. ι ir. ι endca-
endeavoured, as much as possible, tó extenuate the errors of her parents, particularly those of her mother ; and to this she was prompted by justice as - iveli as tenderness, since she knew them to have been occasioned not by , levity of disposition, but the most insí- -dious'artifices. She fully represented the necessity there ivas for inviolable secrecy respecting her communications, and entreated him to endeavour to en¬ courage favourable sentiments for those i\ho were so nearly connected to her. At an early hour the next morning she quitted Beech Giove, and readied London about two o'clock in the after¬ noon ; she ivas set down, by Lord GAvytherin's direction, at a hotel near Piccadilly, where his valet waited to conduct her to lodgings in Dover Street. Here she remained by herself the re¬ mainder of the day ; as it had been previously settled that Lord Gwytherin should
should not make his appearance, lest liis doing so should excite any sus¬ picion, or lead to any unpleasant dis¬ covery, The hours ivere prevented from ap¬ pearing tedious by books, nhich the servant of the house procured her Irom a circulating library. Immediately after breakfast the ensuing morning, she sent for a can iage, and proceeded to Mortlake ; she found both Mrs. Dérivent and Miss Woodville at home, and alone. They received her with surprise, but ivithout the smallest ap¬ pearance of plcasuic; on the contrary, their manner was ao cold, so formal, so ??????!, that Jacintha, confounded by a reception so little expected (for they had formerly professed, and ap¬ pealed to feci a friendship for hei), was unable, for man) minutes, to look u\>, or answer the kind of supercilious en- quirics which Λ 1rs. Derwent made, ι 2 respecting
respecting her present situation ; at length she informed her she had left the house of Mr. Falkland " Really ! Why I thought," said Mrs. Derwent, " since your very ten¬ der anxiety about Mr. Oswald would not permit you to accompany Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy abroad, that you were to have continueel there until his re¬ turn, which they imagined would take place before their's, " 44 I thought so too, Madam," re¬ plied Jacintha; " but some very parti¬ cular reasons have obliged me to leave it* " Oh, no doubt 1 you have always very particular reasons for your ac¬ tions." " Such reasons, Madam,"said Jacin¬ tha, indignantly, her pride awakened by
by the sarcastic tone in which these Avoids were uttered, * 4 as ivill ever, I trust, justify those actions to my ow n heart, and to the world." " I hope you may not find yourself mistaken in the latter instance, " cried Airs. Derwent. Jacintha, without seeming to hear her, turned to Miss M^oodville, and begged to knoiv whether she could see Mr. Woodville. " My brother returned to Wye¬ field some weeks ago," replied Miss Woodville, raising her eyes from the frame at ivhich she ivas seated. " How unfortunate !" sighed Jacin¬ tha to herself, disappointed beyond ex¬ pression at not having been yet able to obtain an opportunity of removing from Woodville s mind the unpleasant ι 3 suspicions
suspicions he had formed respecting her conduct — ít But perhaps," thought she, t t hc may have seen Mrs. Decourcy prior to his departure,- and received from her that explanation I wisli to gi\e him/' On enquiring of Miss Woodville, however, she found, to her extreme mortification, that no interview had taken place between him and Mr. and Mrs. Decourcy since his last visit to their.house, a short time before she had quitted it. Unable to endure the idea oi' any longer laying under his censure, she resolved on writing an explanatory letter to him, erejdie quitted the king¬ dom. Impatient to put this resolution into practice, and conclude a visit she found so extremely disagreeable as the present, she no longer delayed asking Miss Woodville whether her brother had received
received any intelligence of his friend ere he returned to Wyefield. Miss Woodville assured her he had not; and Jacintha noiv entreated per¬ mission to leave in her hands .the k t ter she had ivritten to ? -ghcit, assigning as a reason for this ìeque^t, the very great probability there auis of tiieir not meeting for some time after his return to the kingdom, as she ivas removing to a considerable distance from the ca¬ pital, which she knew he must visit as soon as he came back, and perhaps be detained a long period'in. Miss Woodville readily took charge of her letter ; and losing a great deal of her coldness, desired to know ivlii- ther she was going. Jacintha, with¬ out speaking, though not without con¬ fusion, presented her with a card, simi¬ lar to the one she had given Mrs. Col¬ ville. I 4 <4 You
NOCTURNAL VISÍT. " You will not be remote from yew old neighbourhood, " said Miss Wood¬ ville, as she examined it. , Jacintha blushed, and fearful of en¬ quiries, rose abruptly to depart. " You seem uneasy, Mis* Grevillc," said Miss Woodville^ interrupting her as she was bidding her farewel, "at not seeing my brother. Would you wish to leave a message or letter for him ? If you do, I promise to transmil: either faithfully." Jacintha thanked her, and said she meant to write. " Then you can do so here," resunv ed Miss Woodville, " and I will enclose the letter in one 1 am about writing. " Jacintha accepted the proposal, and was conducted into an adjoining room, ivhere
where she soon wrote a slioi t and expia· natory letter, containing a solemn in¬ junction of secrecy relative to its con¬ tents. She then took a cool leave of Mrs, Derwent, and a not much warmer one of Miss Woodville, and departed. AU the way home she ruminated on their conduct, for which she was at a loss to account ; once indeed it oc¬ curred to her, that Woodville might have infused his own doubts respecting ? the propriety of her actions, into their minds. But she soon dismissed this idea, as one highly injurious to his can¬ dour and generosity, which, upon re¬ flection, she was convinced would not permit him to injure her in the opinion of others,, particularly whilst her own vindication remained unheard· In the evening she paid a visit to Miv Decourcy's agent in the City, for tho purpose of enquiring whether any intel- j S ligence
ligence had been received of him and Mrs. Decourcy since their depar¬ ture—an enquiry she coukl not bring herself to make at Mrs. Denvent's, as slie did not like to acknowledge that no correspondence had been established between her and her friend (ivhich, for obvious reasons, the latter had not pro¬ posed). The agent gaie her the pleasing in¬ formation of their safe arrival in Lis¬ bon, ivhere he understood they pur¬ posed making a long stay. 44 Sooner than they expect may they return !" fervently, though secretly, prayed Jacintha, who knew it was not their intention to do so till her union with Egbert had taken place, in order to prevent unpleasant conjectures be¬ ing formed respecting their not again receiving lier into their house, which such
such an event would render unneces¬ sary. The ensuing evening a note arrived from Lord Gwytherin, to inform her hc had fixed upon the next morning for the commencement of their jour¬ ney, and that at an early hour a car¬ riage would hc with her. Jacintha was accordingly pre pired to enter it the mo¬ ment it came to tlie door ? Lord Gwy- ?? therin, apprehensive of being seen, did not call upon her, and v, as taken up at his own house in Piccadilly. They travelled with privacy and ex- pedithu ; and about the decline of day ι cached Dover. Instead of stopping at an inn, they immediately went on board a small vessel, engaged by Lord Gwy¬ thcrin's valet, who had preceded them, and which Lord Gwytherin preferred to the packet, on account of the se¬ crecy necessary to be observed relative ιδ to
to his fair companion ; the wind was tolerably fair, antl about an hour after they had entered it, the ship was under - weigh. At this moment the spirits of Jacin¬ tha sunk. The consequences which might ensue fiom the step she had taken, rushed like a torrent upon her mind, bearing down all her hopes and expectations. She wished she had given herself a little more time to consider what she was about, but it was now too late to recede or repent ; and humbly recommending herself to the protection of Providence, she sat upon the deck, Avith her eyes fixed in melancholy medi¬ tation upon the white cliffs from which she was gradually receding, till sick¬ ness overpowered her, and compelled her to retire to the cabin. At an early hour the next morning» they reached Calais,—Jacintha had by this
this time reasoned herself into some de¬ gree of composure ; and she felt still more calm and cheerful when she had landed. ' In consequence of the extreme .sick¬ ness she had experienced, they rested that day and the following night at Calais ; about the decline of evening; Jacintha prevailed upon his Lordship to take her upon a ramble, to see what¬ ever was worthy of observation, or, from ancient story, interesting in and about the town. The next morning by sunrise, they commenced their journey to Roussil- lon.—It was Lord G wy therin's inten¬ tion to take up his abode (an intention he had previously announced to him) at the house of his friend Mr, Villers, who resided at a little distance from Perpignan, and near the chateau, as he had already mentioned, .of Lady Dunsane.
Dunsane. To this gentleman he told Jacintha he meant to introduce ha- as his niece,* travelling under his care for Improvement Jacintha did not approve of"any thing like deception, but in the present case it was not to be avoided. Her ardent curiosity, so natural to a young and enthusiastic mind like hcr*s, made her often wish for pauses in her journey, .Lord Gwytherin made his anxious impatience to behold the Countess, a pretext for not gratifying this wish ; he ~ had in reality so often gone over the-same ground before, that he was completely tired ofit ; and it was a rule withhim never to sacrifice his own inclination to that of any other person's, except certain that some particular advantage would result from doing so. He contrived, however, to conceal this selfishness (few indeed were ever' more skilled in concealing their de- , fects),
fects), and to render himself a very entertaining companion ; he relatecla number of pleasant anecdotes,, and de¬ scribed several agreeable scenes, in which he said lie had himself been an actor, and which he rendered more amusing and interesting by pointing out, or pretending to point out, the identical spots where they had hap¬ pened : thus, like the poet, giving to *' Airy nothings '< A local habiiatioiii and a name.** After a journey of some days, the travellers arrived at Mr. Villers s, wbo received his expected visiters with the utmost politeness and hospitality. He seemed about Lord Gwythcrin's age, and was equally elegant in his manner and scarcely less prepossessing in his appearance. Jacintha was not mistaken in imagining he had been a votary of pleasure, if dissipation can be styled so; but ill health hud for some vears 4 obliged
obliged him to change his mode of life, and induced him to reside in France. His retreat, for such it might be ealied, having withdrawn to it from the follies anjtl extravagances of life, lay * € Between tbe groaning forest and the shore* <* A rural, sheltered» solitary scene." Tlie house spacious, though built in the cottage style, Avas fitted up Avith the most exquisite neatness and ele¬ gance ; and the grounds immediately belonging to it Avere laid out with a simplicity, Avhich formed a beautiful and striking contrast to the grandeur and sublimity of the surrounding scenery. It stood upon a verdant lawn, fenced from the road by thick¬ ets, «< overgrown, grotesque, and wjIüj " And over head up-grew, *' Insuperable height, of loftiest shade, ** Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm.** ??
On either side umbrageous groves ex¬ tended ; ^one opening to a distant view of the Mediterranean, and its roman¬ tic shores, the other to the wild mag- , nificence of the far-stretching Pyrenees, those stupendous, those glorious monu¬ ments of the power of the great Creator, exhibiting at once such a variety of syl- ^ van beauties, and such dreary desolation, now veiling their aspiring heads amidst the clouds, now bursting in almost ter¬ rifie majesty from the thin vapour, inspir¬ ing awe, astonishment, and admiration. The lawn, in fi-ont of the house, de¬ scended almost imperceptibly to a broad stream, adorned along its fringed banks with weeping willows, myrtles, and other odorous shrubs, and crossed by a marble bridge of singular beauty and workmanship, which led into the deep retirement of hanging woods/, that rose boldly precipitous above the water, and were surmounted by the slender spires.
spires of an ancient Convent, which gave a romantic solemnity to the scene, highly impressive aud interesting ; and further on appeared an embattled tower, rendered venerable by the decay¬ ing hand of Time. The travellers reached Mr. Villers's early in the afternoon, just ?? the even¬ ing sun was beginning to dif! use a yel¬ low radiance over the ivoods, which ivere scarcely heard to rustle. The scene, indeed, seemed as tranquil as it Avas beautiful: the cattle that found pasture upon the green slopes ivhich shelved to the ivoods, lay ruminating beneath its crowded willows, and a faint warble was alone heard through the groves. To describe the admiration ivith which Jacintha viewed this enchanting prospect, would be utterly impossible ; she stood for many minutes absolutely lost
lobt in wonder anel delight; but the embattled tower soon became the most i ni erest ing feature in the landscape, from being pointed out to her by Lord Gwytherin, as forming part of her ? mother's residence. The next day ivas destined for her visit to this mother, whom her heart at once trembled and sighed to behold ; she was to take an introductory letter from Lord Gwytherin, and merely an¬ nounce herself as an English lady, en¬ trusted with a commission from Eng¬ land to the Countess. She wished this first interview over, almost as much from apprehension as tenderness; and the nearer the time for its taking place approached, the more agitated she became.
CHAP*
????. VI. *' My motber^ ** Let me not live I but at thy very name " My eager heart ipiingi tip, and leapt with juy/* A HE taste* conspicuous in the inte¬ rior of Mr. Villers's house, charmed Jacintha almost as much as that dis¬ played in the disposition of his grounds. She was particularly pleased with the apartment in which they dined ; it was built in the form of a pavilion, hung ivith a light drapery of green silk, and opened entirely iu front into the gar¬ den, which might literally indeed be styled
«týled a wilderness of sweets, from which the eye wandered over a richly -diversified prospect, while the ear was delighted with the humming of the bees, and the gurgling sound of a waterfall at its extremity, and the smell ivas regaled with the delicious fragrance of orange trees, roses, and laA r ender. " Ah Egbert!" thought Jacintha, " With even a bare competence, in such a retreat as this, in our native country, how happy should we consi¬ der ourselves ! Ah, if Heaven is so much our friend as ever to grant us any thing like it, surely Ave should never complain of our destiny!" The heart of Jacintha prompted many enquiries to Mr. Villers, Avho, she understood, sometimes* visited at the chateau, relative to her mother, which prudence, however, prevented ; and
and the same motive, she supposedj restrained Lord G wy therin's. Questions, hoivever, Avere unneces·^ sary ; for Mi\ Villers, of his own ac¬ cord, began to speak of Lady Dunsane after dinner. " You have not yet asked me any thing about my fair neighbour, my Lord," said he, smiling at Lord Gwy¬ therin ; " I hope the smothered flame is not extinguished, at the very mo¬ ment it might blaze forth without danger." " By no means," replied his Lord¬ ship; " but you hai 7 e hitherto rallied me so much Avhenever I spoke of her, that I have now forborne to do so on that account/' " But times are chaaiged," cried Mr. Villers, " True/'
44 Truc," said his Lordship; "do you think there is any probability of her making use of her restored liberty in the manner I ivish?" \ 44 I cannot possibly determine," an¬ swered Mr. Villers; 4( I saw her but once since tlie death of the Earl, and she then appeared in deep affliction, Tis a point, however, ivhich^I think you cannot yourself endeavour to as¬ certain too soon ; for, I assure you, you will have mtny rivals. Lord Dun- sane, ?? I men tion ed to you in my let¬ ter,- bus le^t a considerable part of his fortune '? her power; and her wealth, exclusii e of lier personal attractions, remiers her a prize well ivorth contend¬ ing for.— í ivould not wish to alarm you; but------" ".What?" eagerly demanded his Lordship.
" Tm
" Tis said that the Count de Mon* talde, appointed by the Earl joint guai ^ dian with her to the young ladies, is already a candidate for her hand, which he is instigated to seek as much from interest as love, hoping, if he can accomplish an union with her, to bring about a marriage between his t avo sons and her daughters ; and thus se¬ cure the ivhole of the late Earl's exten¬ sive possessions in his family." " You did not mention this report, ^ cried Lord Gwytherin > with an agitated and displeased countenance, " when you Avrote." " No, because it did not then pre¬ vail/' " And do you giAC any credit ίο it r'* asked his Lordsiiip» " I really do not know the lady's inclination, "
inclination// replied Mr. Villers, with rather a sarcastic look; 4i but I know she has reasons for wishing to keep fair ivith the Marquis." Jacintha started at these words, and involuntarily repeated them. 44 What are thcv r" demanded his Lordship, in an impetuous voice. (( They were told in confidence, and therefore cannot be tiivulged. But do not dcbpair ; suppose you make your first esviy to-morrow, and ivait upon her Ladiship." " No," replied Lord Gwytherin, " I have not courage to do so, until I know m hat reception mv niecc will meet with." 44 What! docs Miss Gm ylheria," (lur bv this name Jacintha had been intro- vol. in. ? ducei
duced to him) "propose visiting the Countess?"^ " Yes, to-morroiv." ""She is known to her then?" said Mr. Villers. " No; but she has procured an in¬ troductory letter to her." Mr. Villers politely offered to altend Jacintha in her intended i iblt, ai hich offer, as may be supposed, i\as ele- clin eel. It was evident to Jacintha that Lord Gwytherin ivished for a prii ate conver¬ sation with his friend ; she therefore strolled away, soon after dinner, into the garden, from whence she went upon the lawn, and crossing the bridge, pursueel her walk along the margin of the stream. The
The last gleams of sunshine ivere now fading from the rocks and mountain tops, and soon the distant prospect be-, came tt one swimming scene, uncer¬ tain if beheld;" the gloom of evening Avas rendered more solemn by the still¬ ness which accompanied it ; no other sounds ivere heard but the hollow whis¬ pering breeze that shook the a\ oods, the droning hum of the beetle that *i\ut- tered through them, and the thrilling song of the nightingale. The tranquillity of the scene gra¬ dually diffused a corresponding tran¬ quillity through the mind of Jacintha,; and as lier agitation decreased, her hopes revivei ; and again she indulged the pleasures of imagination, and antici¬ pated the expected happiness of the next day, lier thoughts were now too agreeably employed to ivish to have them inter* ? <2 rupt cd ;
riiptcd ; and she wandered on until stopped by a small grotesque building, whieh hung immediately over the stream, that here, impeded in its course by some mosveo\ered rocks, foamed over them with impetuous iiuy, as if impatient to regain the tianquil mazes of the quiet vale. Curiosity induced Jacintha to wish to examine the interior of thb build¬ ing; she accordingly tried the door, which readilv vielded' to her hand, and she found herself within a hand¬ some joctagou room, fitted up, as well as the imperfect light would pennit her to discern, in a neat and simple sty lc, and furnished with a variety of musical instruments, which ewdcntly proved its being designed for the reception of company. Amongst those instruments Jacintha perceived a harp, which, in her native village, under the instruc¬ tions of Egbert, she had been taug) 1 1 to
to touch with delicacy and taste ; her hand now instinctively swept the trem¬ bling chords, and to the plaintive sounds they emitted, her heart vibrated with a mournful kind of pit asure; for they revived ivithin it a train of tender ideas, and brought to her remembrance the last evening she had passed ivith Egbeit; all the hardships and difficul¬ ties he might have encountered since that period, and still pei haps have to encounter ere they again met, rushed upon her mind, and dreiv a flood of teais from lier. . By degrees, hoivever, her confidence in Heaven re-animated her spirits ; and in anticipating the joys of meeting, she tried to soften the pain occasioned by separation. " Yes," she exclaimed, " I feel that the blL&ful moment i\ hich restores Egbert to mc, ivill amply recompense ? 3 ??
me for all my cares, my anxieties oä his account !" Lulled again into tranquillity, she quitted the building, and slowly pro¬ ceeded towards the house, often paus¬ ing to üsten, ivith a thrilling sensa¬ tion of delight, to the noise of the waterfall, softened by .distance, and lhe low murmur of the woodr; still wondering as she went, that there jcould be beings so tasteless, so vitiated, as lo prefer the crowded confines of a drawing-room, to the pleasures which attend the twilight walk, when all is calculated to sooth ihe .soul, refine the thoughts, and elevate them to heaven. The moon began to unveil her peer¬ less light ere Jacintha- reached the house, ivhere she found the gentlemen seated in the vestibule, enjoying the cool breeze that then prevailed, impreg¬ nated
nated with the rich perfume of those flowers and plants which own ·' The stionger impnlse of the evening air." Here they supped without any other light than that afforded by the beautiful luminary of night. The scene reminded Jacintha of a Roman meal in the daya pf its simplicity ;— * c Such as the mistress of the world once found -** Delicious» when her patriots of high note, v «' Pei haps by moonlight, at their luimble doors, " And under an old oak's domestic shade, *· 'P ????"?? spare feast, a ìadish or an egg.'* She retired early to her chamber,, which ivas elegantly though simply furnished ; but it was long ere she could withdraw from the window, ivhich pre«· «en-ted to her view all the enchant¬ ments of light and shade. Her mind was too much occupied to* ? 4 permit
permit her to enjoy uninterrupted repose ; and at an early hour, just as the matin bell from the neighbouring convent began to ring, she forsook her . pillow ; and having, with more than usual * pains, dressed'herself, descended to the laivn, to inhale the dewy fragrance of the morning. With increasing awe and admiration she viewed the magni¬ ficent and beautiful scenery which every where met her eye; and from Nature's works, her thoughts gradually ascended to Nature's God. Delighted not only with the pro¬ spects, but the rural sounds that noiv prevailed, she continued to wan¬ der about till joined by Lord Gwy¬ therin, who, after giving her some general instructions relative to the approaching interview, and the letter she was to present to the Countess, led her in to breakfast.
Immediately
Immediately after it v/as over, Mr, Villers's chaise drove to the door for her; at this moment her spirits again began to fail her, and bhe wished for the company of some supporting friend. Lord Gwytherin perceived her agita¬ tion, and hurried her to the carriage, fearful, if hc allowed her time for deli¬ beration, her resolution would utterly forsake her. Jacintha now endeavoured to reason Ler^elf into composure ; but her efforts to do so ?\?!? \ain, and she arrived at the chateau iu an agitation which scarcely permitted her to speak or move. Though, fiom its elevated situation, it appeared so immediately ia the vicinity of Mr. Villers's mansion, it ?\?$ at least two miles from it : and \(s srioomv ürandciir vas not calculated to re-ani- kV* mate the spirits of Jacintha. ' Dy the marriage of one of the Earls ? ¿ ancestors
ancestors with a French heiress, it had come,into his possession; and though care was taken to preserve it from in¬ jury, the power of all-conquering Time „ was in many parts discernible, parti¬ cularly in its battlements &nd rugged towers, upon which the moss of years grew green, and from whence the wild fox-glove and wall-flower hung in fan¬ tastic" wreaths, intermingled with the mantling ivy, and, like ill·suited or¬ naments upon age, rendered but more conspicuous its decay. Woods of an¬ cient growth surrounded the lofty emi¬ nence upon which it stood, and ex- * eluded every prospect but that of their own luxuriance, and the ro manti ? mountains of the Pyrenees. After driving through two spacious courts, the chaise stopped before the Castle, and Jacintha, being informed tftW\ the Countess was at home, $ÊÊ?$&*9 anc l having delivered a message ?
message for her, though in low and fal¬ tering accents, to a servant, was con¬ ducted by another through a magnifi¬ cent antichamber, at* the extremity of the hall, into an inner apartment like the preceding one—> u In ptcturM pomp array'd." Here Jacintha had not sat many mi¬ nutes when she heard voices in the outer room, and approaching steps. This seemed the most awful moment of her life ; her heart throbbed as if i$ would burat from her bosom ; and when a servant threw open the door, and an¬ nounced the Countess, she could with. difficulty rise from her chair. It would be impossible to determine whether re¬ spect, tenderness, or admiration ivere at this instant most predominant in the mind of Jacintlia ; the charms of the Countess, unfaded by time, were such χ6' as
as she had never seen excelled ; nor was the elegance of her form less strik¬ ing than the beauty of her face, which her mourning habit rendered more in¬ teresting, as it did ihe graces of her form more impressive. Kut even at the first glance, Jacintha could not avoid secretly acknowledging that, though more dazzling to the cye> Mrs. De¬ courcy was more pleasing to the heait ; sweetness, softness, and sensibility formed the character of her counte¬ nance,—pride, spirit, and haughtiiu^, that of the Countess's; she looked i.l «hört, as if born to command the h·/- ma*rc of mankind, and determined to exact it The servant retired the moment she entered the room ; and motioning ior Jacintha to resume htr eluir, sIr took one by her. Jacintha no>v aik' nptcd to apeais butin\ain; and ih¿ in vo¬ lini tarily
ki n tarily bent her eyes upon the ground, to avoid the scrutinizing looks of the Countess. Lady Dunsane, at length, after a silent though ciitical examination, en¬ treated to know to uhat circumstance she was indebted for the honour of this A İbİt. At these words, Jacintha, stiil una¬ ble to feperJk, drew from her bosom Lord GAvytherin's letter, ivhich she pre¬ sented to her with a trembling hand, and *i\hich contained the following lines : —
44 Though I sigh foran opportunity of pouring forth my repentant sorrows at your feet, and trying to deprecate vour just resentment, I dare not at¬ tempt to enter your presence without your
your permission. Oh Lady Dunsane ! let the .sincerity of my repentance for my offences against you, the fervour of my unabated passion, plead in my behalf, and influence you to grant me this earnestly desired permission ; but should these be insufficient to obtain it, Oh suffer the solicitations of a child, pleading the cause of an unhappy pa¬ rent, to prove successful ! Yes, Lady Dunsane, this letter will be presented to you by your ou η daughter ! she to whom we have hitherto been compelled to deny tliat notice which her virtues merit, and her tenderness claims. Ί ake her to your bosom; she is woi thy of being folded to it, and permît her to intercede for her repentant father. " GWYTII£UIN,"
Scarcely had the Countess cast her eyes upon this letter, a\ hich she tore open
©pen Avith the most impatient eagerness, ere her colour changed, lier brows con¬ tracted, and her whole frame seemed violently agitated; ere she had well finished it, she crushed it in her hand, and wildly starting from her chair, seized the arm of Jacintha, and ex¬ claimed, while her eves lightened with fury—" Am I then exposed, betrayed, insulted r" Jacintha, shrinking from her grasp, instinctively dropped upon her knees, and ivrapping her arms about her, ex- ' claimed— .' 4 Oh my mother ! Avill you not then acknowledge mc ?" * ' Tell mc, " said the Countess, disen¬ gaging herself from hei, " tell mc," she continued, " if you do not wish to see mo start into instant madness, whether
whether your relationship to me is uni¬ versally known ?" Jacintha, in faltering accents, as- ^ sured her it was not ; and the Countess, panting and trembling, from the vio¬ lence of her emotions, dropped upon a chair. , «" Alas! then," said Jacintha, who still remained upon her knees, " you refuse to own ihe ?" 44 Rise," cried the Countess, " 1 scarcely knoiv what I anfabout. Tell mc," added she, after a momentary pause, and raising her head from the back of the chair, as Jacintha rose from her kneeling posture, "by Avhat means you discovered your birth · for a solemn voAv ' ivas plighted to me that you should never knoiv your parents/' Jacintha could not refrain from tears rt
at these words ; and for many minutes she was unable to reply to the Countess. She then briefly informed her that it was Lord Gwytherin himself wheHïad disclosed it to her, " And how did he learn you ivere in existence?" asked the Countess. "He knew not the persons in whom I re¬ posed confidence, and consequently could have made no enquiry of them concerning you." " Mr. Greville informed him/' Jacintha replied. " Mr. Greville !" repeated the Countess, indignantly; "and what motive instigated him to violate his promise of secrecy ?'* Embarrassed by this question, Jacin¬ tha hung her head, utterly at a loss how to reply to it. She then timidly answered,
. answered, she supposed Mr. Grevillc had acquainted Lord Gwytherin with her relationship to him, from an ide$ of its being an advantage to her to hayc^ it known. The Countess looked incredulous, and rihing, seemed about quitting the room. 44 Ro you then refuse to acknowl¬ edge me?" cried Jacintha, clasping her hands together; " do you then cast me oñ for ever ? I aspire to no title which you do not wish ?? to take ; 1 desire but that place in your atlec- $ion which Nature ,ha¡s given ??? aright to ¿ilairø. Ohi disappoint aot the hopes of my heart," she continued, again sinking on her knees before the Countess; cc let me not still continue to tli ink my self a solitary and forlorn creature, exiled from "all the social sheets of ?? —unconnected with tha world í
■ Avorld ! Ah, if you knew the dreadful sensations such a situation -inspires—if yon knew what it is to imagine no being interested about you, you would from pity, if from no other motive, regard my wishes." 44 I mean to return to you," said the Countess, * 4 as soon as I reco¬ ver a little composure. Wait here," added she, taking the trembling hand of Jacintha, and raising her as she spoke, 4i until I return; but remem¬ ber," said she, in a low and inward kind of voice, 4t if you breathe a syl¬ lable of AvluuTyóü have uttered to me> you sink your mother to perdition !" The look which accompanied these - words, as well as the purport of them, made Jacintha shudder; and, inastate cít agitation, which may better be ima¬ gined than descri lied, she threw herself upon a seat, where she remained till the
the rc-cn trance of the Countess, who» continued about an hour absent. The stormy passions of her mind- seemed now allayed ; and though her cheek still retained the glow of agita¬ tion, her eyes had lost their fierceness, and her brows their contraction, , " Impute not," said she, advancing to Jacintha, ivho rose at her approach, and taking her hand, " impute not the reception you met from me to unkind¬ ness, but to the real cause, surprise and apprehension. I should do myself injustice if I did not assure you that you have never been banished from my thoughts, and that it was my intention to go to England in a very short time, for the purpose of enquiring into your situation, about ivhich the lapse iu Mrs. Decourcy's correspondence and mine, fora considerable period, prevented ?? from receiving any intelligence. Though the
tlie unhappy circumstances you are so well acquainted with, preclude a pub¬ lic acknowledgment, my heart ivith readiness'admits your claim-to my ten¬ derness, protection, and support ; and to fulfil to vou the duties of a mother, niîl be amongst the first pleasures of my life. Jacintha threAv liei self ivith grateful transport upon the bo-»om of her mo¬ ther, aí hich she bedewed with her tears. Tiu: Countess embraced, and endea¬ voured to compose her. As soon as she had succeeded in some degree iu tranquillizing her, she desired to know her pt csent residence. Jacintha imme¬ diately informed her, as also the cha¬ racter under which she had been intro¬ duced to Mr. Villers, aud the ι casou assigned to him for her visit to the chateau. The
The Countess s enquiries being tho¬ roughly satisfied, she said she Avould no longer detain Jacintha, hut assured ber she would take an early opportunity of seeing her again, and in the interim arrange some plan for their being together. Jacintha kissed, her hand, and rose to depart; at this instant she recol¬ lected Lord Gwytherin, recollected the promise he had obtained from her, of pleading for him ; and ashamed and umvilling to break this promise, to ap¬ pear as if her own interests rendered her forgetful or regardless of the interests of others, she asked, though in a hesi¬ tating accent, whether there was not some message for------ Here she again paused ; that appellation whicii her heart had hitherto refused to give Lord GWytlicrln, she could not now bring herself
herself to bestow, and with an embar¬ rassed air, she added— 4i for Lord Gwytherin." 44 Give him this note," replied the Countess, putting one into Jacintha's hand. 4i Adieu, my Jove!" she added;, 44 may you be as happy and.fortunate, as you are amiable ami lovely Í" The interview she had dreaded beins: over, acknowledged by her mother, aftid assured of her affection, the heart of Jacintha gradually began to experience something like that happiness' and tran¬ quillity w iiich so many untoward events had contributed to banish from it. Lord Gwytherin watched impatiently for her return; the moment the'car¬ riage stopped he flew to it, and hand¬ ing her from it led her to a distance from
from the house, ivhere he poured upon her a torrent of enquiries. Jacintha as briefly as possible an¬ swered them ; she suppressed all that was disagreeable in the late interview, and which she really imputed to the cause assigned bv the Countess, and only dwelt upon what was agreeable ; concluding her little narrative, by giv¬ ing to his Lordship the Countess's note. 44 An interview !" exclaimed he, as he eagerly perused it. (i Did she say nothing to you," turning to Jacintha, <t of having desired to see mc this evening at the chateau?" 44 No," replied Jacintha, much sur¬ prised at her silence upon this subject, 44 bhe did not." His Lordship mused for some minutes ;
minutes ; and then putting the letter into his pocket, reconducted her to thé house, enjoining her, as they pro¬ ceeded, not to drop a hint to Mr. Villers respecting his intended visit to the Countess. Jacintha assured him his injunctions ivere unnecessary, as her own prudence would have kept her silent respecting it ; but she could not possibly imagine, she said, Iioav. he could go to the chateau, without Mr. Villers's know¬ ledge. 44 I must endeavour to do so," said his Lordship ; " luckily tAvo gentlemen spend the day with him, so that I can easily disengage myself from hitn/' The d«ay was far advanced, and din* ner was served almost the moment he and Jacintha re-entered the house. Jacintha withdrew, soon after it ivas vol. πι. L over,
over, to a dressing-room adjoining her chamber, which contained a good col¬ lection of booksr; and with one of these she seated herself in a window, from whence she saw Lord Gwytherin, in a fe? minutes, quitting the house, "and burning towards the road. After remaining some time alone, Mr. Villers sent to request" her com¬ pany to coffee; she accordingly de¬ scended to the parlour. As Mr. Villers banded her to a chair, he informed her that a sudden indisposition had caused Lord Gwytherin to leave the room, in order to tiy whether · the air would be of any service to him.— 4i If hc pro¬ longs his stay, yon- must not· be alarmed," continued Mr, Villers ; "for he told me if the air was of benefit to him, he would in all probability ramble about for some time." In the course of tbe evening Jacintha walked
Avalked Out Avith Mr. Villers and hb guests (who were both Officers in the French service, lively and intelligent) to some distant grounds, not less beau¬ tiful nor romantic than those . imme* diately adjoining the house. As they were returning to it, Lord Gwytherin joined them ; after answer¬ ing Mr. Villers's enquiries, he con¬ trived to detach Jacintha from the rest of the party, ivho, perceiving he wished to converse v/ith her in private, ivalked on, 4 r » Your mother, " said he, when they had got to a sufficient dis¬ tance not to be overheard, 4i is quite charmed ivith you ; and so anxious to rojo}' your company ivithout restraint or interruption* that she proposes your going to a chateau, at some distance from the one where she at present L % resides,
resides, and to ivhich she will follow you in a day or two/' - ·" Can I not travei with her?" asked Jacintha. ' " No, .she is fearful, if you did, that unpleasant enquiries or suspicions might be excited. In the abode to which she has invited you, you can freely and unreservedly converse, and arrange every necessary plan relative to a future correspondence and intercourse, as itis * merely occupied by a few old domestics, to whom you are to be introduced as a young English friend of the Countess's, compelled by misfortunes to seek an asylum out of your native king¬ dom. She designs passing a month there ; and as I have acquainted her with your situation in every respect, she does not think it expedient for you to be absent longer than a month from England ;
England; at the" expiration of this period, therefore, I am to rejoin you, and reconduct you back." 44 Rejötn !" repeated Jacintha; 4í what, are you not to be of our party ?" 44 No," replied Lord Givytherin, smil¬ ing ; " though the resentment of the Countess is softened, it is not subdued. Time, however, will, I trust, bring about the accomplishment of my wishes; one of the most fervent of them is, I assure you, already fulfilled, in having you, my dear Jacintha, taken to the bosom of your mother." 44 And when, my Lord, is this pro¬ jected journey to take place?" asked Jacintha. Tlie ensuing day, Lord GAvytherin L 3 replied ;
replied ; at the distance of a few miles from Mr, Villers's house, a confidential st π ant of the Countess's, he said, was lo meet her in a chaise, to which he meant to convey her himself in his own carriage. 44 But A\hat reason can be assigned to Mr. Villers for my sudden departure 1 freni-Mrlroiise ?" demanded Jacintha. 44 Merely that hearing (at the Countess'*) a young French lady, with Avhom you had farmed an intimate ac¬ quaintance in England, Avas a resident in a neighbouring Convent, you have requested me to. lodge you there for some time, on her account. " ** Should Mr. Villers be too minute in his enquiries ?" said Jacintha. 44 I shall be able to answer them in such
such a manner as will not lead to any V discovery," resumed Lord Gwytherin. He now conducted her to the house, * whore they found Mr. Vi llera, alone. Lord Ciuythcrin immediately spoke of Jacintha":» departure. Mr. Villers 1 looked surprised, but (without asking any of those questions which Jaciuth.i dreaded) cxpiessed his regret at being so soon deprived of her company. Lord Gwythcrin's carriage ivas or¬ dered to be ready at an early hour the next morning; and as soon as break¬ fast was over, Jacintha bade Mr. Vil¬ lers adieu, and commented her jour¬ ney, ciated at the idea of being her mother's guest, whose solicitude for her company ivas a flattering proof to her of her regard. She soon perceived they ivere travei¬ le 4 ling
lîng toAvards the Pyrenees ; and now, for the first time, enquiring the situ¬ ation of the chateau to Avhich she Avas going, learned that it lay amongst these-romantic mountains,
CHAP.
CHAP. VIL t « Those towers, alas ! now »tand forlorn, *« With noisome weede o'erepread, « Where feasted Lords and courtly dames,, ! " And where tbe poor were fed.!* ' ' í LORD GWYTHERINS carriage stopped, in about an hour, near the en¬ trance of a woodi and he and Jacintha alighting, walked onwards to a turn in. the road, which the branching trees concealed till they were immediately at it. Here they found the expected chaise and attendant ; the po&tijljon stood near the door, as if watching for L 5 their,
their approach, and the moment they appeared, he hastened to open it. At this-instant the -looks of Lord Givytherin became gloomy and disor¬ dered ; he paused, sighed, and grasp¬ ing the hands of Jacintha within his, seemed uncommonly agitated. " Jacintha," said he, in a voice , wliich well accorded with the expres¬ sion of his countenance, " jacintha, endeavour to think faiOurably of mc ; I am not so culpable as you may be led to imagine ; it is not inclination but ability, which has prevented me from being your friend. " 44 Be assured, my Lord," replied Jacintha, affected by his emotion, and with a peculiar softness in her voice, * t I will endeavour to cultivate the senfi- ments you wish me to entertain." X-ord
Lord Givytherin pressed her hand affectionately to his bosom, and then led her to the chaise, into which she immediately stepped; and the postillion instantly mounting, drove off at full speed. Jacintha soon began to converse with her companion, an elderly woman, of no very prepossessing appearance, but not of an ungracious manner. ? They travelled with expedition, and ere long began to ascend the Pyrenees ; the wonder and admiration with which Jacintha had viewed their stupendous scenery at a distance, were now in¬ creased by a nearer survey of it. Their bold outline had given her no adequate idea of their interior beaqties and sub¬ limity ; the rude magnificence of their rocks, the. grandeur of their forests, the verdure of their winding vallies, rendered still more romantic than h 6 Nature
Nature had already made them, by the humble but picturesque cabins of the herdsmen, and the clambering* goats that scaled their steep acclivities ; a kindôf awful pleasure, too great, too exquisite to be expressed, took posses¬ sion of her mind, and her heart paid. involuntary homage to that Being, whose glorious Avorks she contemplatoci on every side. About the middle of the day, the chaise stopped ih a deep valley, and the travellers alighted, and seated them¬ selves beneath the projection of a , shrubby rock, from ivhence pines and wild ashes hung, 4i resounding o'er the steep. " Here Jacintha and her com¬ panion dined upon the cold provisions which .they brought with them* and remained till the mules, which had been unharnessed on their quitting the chaise, were rested.
Jacintha
Jacintha was delighted, whilst she sat here, with the humming of the mountain bees, and the lulling sound of distant waterfalls. Nor was her eye less charmed than her ear; the valley was adorned with the most beau¬ tiful verdure ; the aspiring mountains, between which it was hollowed, were clothed at their base, and in many places more than midway uptheir-steep ascents, with variegated woods, ocr- topped by broken rocks, tinted with a rich and solemn colouring; and from whence small silvery rills descended to the valley, where, uniting,, they flowed through a deep and pebbly channel, which their continual drop¬ ping had worn in it; forming a stream sufficiently broad- and clear to reflect the romantic scenery on either side. About the decline of ?1??, as the chaise was slowly ascending a moun¬ tain, infinitely more dreary and rugged 5 than?
than any Jacintha had yet beheld, and united to another by a wooden bridge of tude workmanship, her companion informed her they were near the end of * theh'journey, pointing, as she spoke, to an ancient edifice which crowned the brow of the opposite clift^ and was backed by an extensive and hanging wood of gloomy pines. Jacintha, on finding she must cross this terrific bridge, insisted on doing so on foot ; she accordingly quitted the chaise, and, followed by her companion, slowly proceeded to it, shuddering at going over it even in this manner, from the frightful dangers, which its tremen¬ dous height above the rocky chasm that yawned below (through which a moun¬ tain torrent foamed with impetuous fury), presented to her view. But if her < imagination M ; as here impressed with terror, her mind was not less affected with melancholy, on beholding the mournful desolation of the building she
t she Avas about entering ; for over the ruins of Avhat was once great and noble, ' the heart of sensibility involuntarily laments. This* building appeared to have suffered scarcely less from desertion than from time ; from its massy walls it might be seen, that had attention been paid to it, it ayo uld have retained much more of its primeval strength and grandeur than it did at present— a strength and grandeur noiv too much injured ever to be restored. The sivelling towers that flanked it, and the embattled ones that termi¬ nated the terrace, Avhich on either side extended along the edge of the cliff, Avere mouldering aivay, their battle¬ ments broken, and fringed ivith weeds ; the terrace itself, once fortified, was now covered Avith rank luxuriance; - here the purple thistle reared its prickly Head,
head, and tbe long grass whistled in the wind. The rich stone-work that ornamented the front of the edifice, was scarcely discernible through the moss of years, and many of the nar* roAv casements were half obscured by creeping ivy. < On reaching the gate which opened from the bridge into the court, Jacin¬ tha's companion: rang the bell which hung within it. Whilst they stood waiting for admission, Jacintha atten¬ tively examined the pile, the decay of which was now rendered more con¬ spicuous and awfully impressive, by the kind of luminous gloom, if I may be allowed the expression, which the streaming purple of the setting sun cast over it ;—as she gazed, the following lines, truly descriptive of it, recurred, to her recollection :—
" Methinks
« Methinks suspicion and distrust dwell here, <* Staring, with meagre forms, thro'grated windows j " Death lurks within, and unrelenting punishment " Without i grim danger» fear, and fiercest power* « Sit on the rude old tow'rs and Gothic battlements } « While horror overlooks the dreadful wall, <* And frowns on »U around." * In a few minutes an approaching step- was heard, and soon after a man ap¬ peared, peeping over the terrace wall. The instant Jacintha's companion, Mademoiselle Dupont, perceíved him, she addressed him in familiar terms, and bade him hasten* to let them in. He answered her with a loud exclamation, expressive of surprise ; and quickly de¬ scending, unbarred the gate, and re¬ vealed to the eyes of Jacintha the inte¬ rior of a court, not less dismal than the walls which environed' it. This man was old, meanly habited,
and
and seemed well acquainted with Made¬ moiselle Dupont ; a circumstance which did not surprise Jacintha, as she under¬ stood this was not her first visit to the chateau.. He examined Jacintha with the most scrutinizing earnestness, and eagerly enquired from her companion the cause of this unexpected visit ; to which enquiry he received no direct answer. Tliey entered from the court into a spacious hall, supported by a double row of black marble pillars, through which the small arched casements ad- mitted too feeble a light to dissipate the gloom that reigned throughout it ; at its extremity were folding doors of heavy workmanship, which opened into the interior of the building, and above them a stately gallery, with 44 tasteless sculpture decked," from whence, in formei .days, the Lordsand Ladies of the Castle viewed, upon particular
'particular occasions, the pastimes of their vassals. Of those days nothing now remained but the most melancholy memorials- no object here but seemed mortality to mourn;—" And like those," involun¬ tarily cried Jacintha to herself, 4t in whose steps I now tread with reveren¬ tial awe; I shall one day pass away, and be forgotten. Surely, if such a reflection was oftener indulged, the pride and vanity of man would be checked, 4 4 when he thought that the va¬ liant must one day fall, ^nd be no more known on his hills ;" he would endea¬ vour to render himself renowned whilst hecould, not by ostentation, but by virtue; he would endeavour to per¬ petuate his memory, not by monu* ments doomed, like himself, sooner or later, to inevitable decay ; but by such actions as should benefit others, and give
give him a claim to the gratitude of posterity." On passing through the folding doors Avhich fronted a grand staircase, they stopped, and the shrill voice of Jacques re-echoed through the roof, and soon brought his family; consisting of a Avife, a daughter, and two sons, both grown up, about him ; they manifested not less astonishment than he had done, at beholding Mademoiselle, and, like him, gazed earnestly at Jacintha. Mademoiselle, having answered a few trifling questions, led the way to a parlour, which it was evident, from tlie dusty appearance of the faded furni¬ ture, and the damp smell within it, had long been unoccupied. Here she left Jacintha, telling her she would soon return, and withdrew with Jacques and his family, who had followed hejr
tothe door, Avhich she carefully closed after her. The dejection ivith Avhich the melan¬ choly appearance of every thing about her had infected the mind of Jacintha, ivas increased by solitude, and her tears began to flow. A sadness not to be described weighed heavy on her heart, at the idea of being amongst total strangers, far, far remote from all ivho loved—from all Arho ivere interested about her, noAV obtruded itself upon it. In vain she tried to cheer her spirits,. by reflecting that she should soon enjoy the company of the Countess; they ivere too deeply affected to be easily re-ani¬ mated; aiid the deepening gloom of evening, which noiv not only involved the cloud-capped mountains she viewed from the apartment, but the apartment itself, in mournful obscurity, threw such an
an additional gloom upon them, tint' she was about seeking Mademoiselle Dupont, who continued much longer absent than she expected, when she made her appearance, preceded by Josephine, the daughter of Jacques, bearing a light. 4 e In tears, Mademoiselle I" exclaimeel she; " I am afraid this dismal habita¬ tion has made you melancholy." 46 It has indeed," replied Jacintha. " Then we must try to enliven you/' said Mademoiselle ; and taking the colel hand of Jacintha, she led her from this parlour to another, at some distance from it, not less spacious, but rendered infinitely more cheerful by a blazing wood fire. Here Jacqiies and his wife were both busily employed laying the cloth for supper, at which not only they, but their daughter
daughter attended, and during which they frequently joined in the conver¬ sation ; a liberty ivhich their age, and the long period she understood they had - served in the Earl of Dunsane's family, excused to Jacintha, ivho felt almost insensibly amused by the little anec¬ dotes they related respecting it. ? » Mademoiselle Dupont seemed pleased to observe her dejection lessened, and exerted herself to banish it completely ; bhe assured her there was no doubt of the Countess's being at the, chateau in a day or two, and threw out indirect hints of the admiration an<J tenderness ivhich she ivas convinced she felt for her—hints ivhich contributed more for¬ cibly than any thing else, to impart a soothing charm to the mind of Jacintha, Soon aftei* supper she proposed retir¬ ing to rest—a proposal extremely agree* able to Jacintha, avIio Avas fatigued . both
4
both in body and mind. Josephine accordingly tripped up the great stair¬ case before them, bearing lights ; and from whence she conducted them down a Jong gallery, ornamented with old portraits large as life, and ivhich ap¬ peared frowning from their ponderous frames, at the neglect to which they Avere consigned* At the extremity of this gallery ivas the chamber destined for Jacintha, Josephine threw open the door, and Mademoiselle having glanced within it, hastily ivished her good night. At this instant Jacintha thought Made¬ moiselle's countenance assumed a ghastly paleness, and instead of re¬ peating her wish, she eagerly enquired whether she was unwell. " Unwell !" said Mademoiselle ; 44 no, what makes you imagine I am ?" Jacintha
1 Jacintha informed her. 44 No," said she. "I am métely tired. " 44 Tlien I will no longer detain you/' cried Jacintha; and taking a light from Josephine, whose attendance she declined, she entered the chamber, and closed the door. Had the heart of Jacintha been at all inclined to superstition, the sepulchral gloom of this chambeÝ was well calculated to awaken it ; but agamst this weakness the well-remembered lessons of Greville, and her own strength of mind guarded her. She could not, however, without a shuddering sensation, survey it, and perhaps would not have felt sorry to have had the company of Mademoiselle Dupont ; it was not only larger, but move dreary than the apartments she had seen below; its tapestry, torn in vol. in. ?- many
many places, discovered a dark wains¬ coting of oak ; and the long purple curtains, ivhich descended from the lofty tester of the bed, appeared, by the faint light ivhich iioav gleamed upon them, to be black. Mournful images of death rose to the imagination of Jacintha, and she stood some minutes lost in pensive me¬ ditation ; then feeling that melancholy, ivhich had so recently been banished from her mind, fast gaining upon it, she recommended herself to the pro¬ tection of Heaven, and sought iu sleep to lose her cares. Sleep, however, Avas far from delivering her fiom them; frightful visions disturbed and terrified her, and she rose in the morning op¬ pressed and un refreshed. The bright beams of the sun ivhich darted into the chamber, somewhat cheered her mind, and it was still more euliiened by the beautiful prospect it commanded. The iv indows
Avi n do ws looked over the walls of the court into a smiling valley, watered by clear rivulets, covered Avith rich ver* dure, and scattered over with flocks and clambering herds ; the ascents on the opposite side clothed to their very summits with luxuriant pines, amidst which, in the remete landscape, a shepherd's cabin here and there peeped forth, whilst sui mounting all, appeared congregated rocks and mountains, their ethereal summits now ( very mo¬ ment brightening to the view. Jacintha stood long admiring this pleasing scene, and then quitted the" chamber to descend the stairs ; at the foot of the staircase she was met hy Josephine and her mother Nannette, from Avhom she enquired Avhether Mademoiselle Dupont was yet up. 44 Yes, she has been up some time," replied Nannette, as she led the m S way
way into the parlour, where Jacintha had supped the preceding night, and in which the breakfast things were now laid. 44 Then she will be here soon, I sup¬ pose/' said Jacintha. 44 Not very soon, 1 believe, Made¬ moiselle, " replied Nannette, smiling ; 44 this letter,* (and drawing one from her bosom, she presented it to Jacintha) 44 may, perhaps, account for her ab¬ sence. " 44 Her absence!" repeated Jacintha; " good Heavens ! what do you mean r" and snatching the letter, she eagerly tore it open, and read the following lines :—
44 Thesword hangs suspended over your head; breathe but a syllable of what
what you have divulged to me, and it falls ;— yes, a still heavier punishment than that ivhich yout presumption has draAvn upon you, avíH then be your's, if you dare to disclose, even in the solitary confinement to ivhich you are doomed for life, that secret I Avish to be concealed. From ívhat I have done, judge of Avhat I am capable of doing ; so provoke no further the vengeance of 44 A. DUNSANE."
Overpowered by the dreadful shock this letter gaA'e her, Jacintha sunk fainting upon the floor. When she re¬ covered, she found herself supported between Nannette and Josephine, and all the rest of the family assembled about her. She looked wildly round her for a minute ; then recollecting her situation, she disengaged herself, and obeying the impulse of her feelings, ? 3 threw
NOCTURNAL VISIT. threw herself upon her knees, and im¬ plored thera to have pity upon her, and restore her to that liberty, of which she had been so cruelly, so unjustly, so treacherously deprived. She used all her eloquence to awaken their humanity ; she offered to put mani valuable presents ivhich she had ι ccciv ed from Egbert (and ivhich, ivith the remainder of her things, she packed up, and brought with her to liancc), into their possession, if they ivould set her free. But supplications and offers were alike unavailing ; and Jacques, in rather a disdainful tone, at length ex¬ claimed—" Ladv, we eat the biead of the Countess, and nothing can bri lie ns to betray the trust she has reposed in, us." " Fidelity is here not a vhme t buta crime," said Jacintha; "no tie, no obligation
j* obligation can .bind you to be accom¬ plices in cruelty and injustice." " I shall enter into no argument with you, young lady," replied Jacques; 44 all I shall say to you i% that I am not to be warped from what I consider my duty, and that therefore you had better try to reconcile yourself to your situation ; come, let me prevail on you to do so, " attempting to raise her as he spoke., Jacintha resisted the effort, and clung to ?? avi fe, " Will you not compassionate ine?" she cried ; " i\ ill you not intercede for me? Oh ! act tome as you would wish other* to act to vour daughter, were she in r\y situation ; so may you and } oui s never iv ant a friend 1" " Dear lady," said Nannette, " we ? 4 cannot
cannot disobey the commands of those wc serve ; but depend upon it, every¬ thing that can render you happy here, we will do. Follow the advice, there¬ fore, of my husband, and try to com¬ pose yourself. " " Good Heavens!" cried Jácintba, in an agony, " is it then impossible to move you to justice or compassion?, Under what pretext am I detained here ?" " 'Tis not our business to enquire into the Countess's motives for sending you hither," answered Jacques, eva* sively ; -" all we have to do is to obey her." M The time may come, " cried Jacin¬ tha, starting from her knees, while her eyes lightened with indignation, "when you may have cause to repent that obedience. I am not the unfriended creature
creature you may have been led to ima¬ gine ; no, I have friends who will fol¬ lows who will seek me at the remotest verge of the earth." 44 Well, when they seek you here, I have no doubt you will be restored to them," said Jacques, with a derid¬ ing laugh ; 4i till then, lady, you must be patient." The glow which sadden indignation had diffused over the cheek of Jacin¬ tha, faded from it ; her heart again sunk in terror and despondence ; and throwing herself upon a chair, she co¬ vered her face with her hands, and burst into tears. Nannette attempted to administer consolation, but was interrupted by Jacques, who, on Jacintha's turning disdainfully from her, exclaimed, in an indignant tone, 4i Come, come, Nan¬ nette, 1 desire you may not intrude m 5 your
your kindness upon the young lady£ wait till she is sensible of the value of it" He then insisted on his family's re¬ tiring Avith him, and leaving Jacintha to her own reflections. ' " Am I really awake?" cried Jacin¬ tha, uncovering her face, as they with¬ drew from the room, and looking wildly round it, " or am I in a fright¬ ful dream r Alas, no !" she exclaimed, clasping her hands Together, cc I am too surely inveigled from my friends, remote from all ivho love—who arc in¬ terested about mc. And is it tiie ain thors of my being ivho have doonud mc to wretchedness? Is it my mother, fi'omAvhom lhad aright to expect ten¬ derness—is it my father, from v hom I should have experienced protection,, that have consigned mc to ????? —to misery for merely indulging a sweet, a natural 3 hope
hope of ending friends in them ? —Be- teitf -? hope í would to Heaven I had never indulged it î —But 1 will not despair;—no/* she continueel, again throwing herself upon her knees, i£ I will not despair of deliverance from this unjust captivity. My earthly parents may forsake me, but thou, my heavenly Father, wilt never abandon mc, whilst in thee I place my confi¬ dence, m v trust !" Soothed by tliis idea, her mind re¬ gained a sufficient degree of compo¬ sure to permit her to reflect ; and she now begun to rejoice at what but a short time before she had regretted oa iier mother s account, namely, having been compelled to acquaint Woodville with the indiscretion of that mother, in order to acquit herself, in \? opi¬ nion, of that which lie suspected iier of having committed ; since this clbcior sure, together with the knowledge of ? 6 hex
her having quitted the kingdom with Lord G ivy t herin, ivould, she now con¬ sidered, afford her: friends a clue by which Ihey might trace her ; and she well knew (from her knowledge of the JaAvs of her country) that Lord Gwy¬ therin, though her father, must ansiver for her safety, ivhich she thought líe could scarcely do to the satisfaction of those who enquired after it, without bringing her fonvard. What motive couldhave instigated him to consign her to the tyrannic power of the Countess, she could not conjecture, since he knew, ívhat perhaps the Countess might have doubted, that her solicitude to conceal the secret of her birth, ivas not greater than their own. Every sentiment of tenderness and respect which she had ever been inclined to feel for either, ivas iioav changed into abhorrence .and disgust. Her soul re- coiled at the idea of their barbarity and deceit ; and she fervently, though involuntarily,
NOCTURNAL VISIT* involuntarily, prayed she might never behold them again.* She continued alone upwards of an hour ; at the expira*! m of that period, Nannette and Josephine returned, and both, by their looks even more than their ivords, evinced their surprise and^ pleasure at seeing her so much moie tranquil than when they had left her. "Ali, Mademoiselle," saiel Nannette, " this is shewing your wisdom indeed ; nothing can be more foolish than to fret about what cannot be remedied. You'll find that you will be happier here than you expect ; here's a fine noble mansion for you to range about in, and a pleasant walk for you with¬ out it, and folks about yoitall ready to oblige y ou and serve you; Josephine in particular,* who has taken a great fancy to you, shall be your attendant, and
and I assure you she is a nice ic handy little gii# " Λ\Ίιφ walk is that yoîi have men¬ tioned without J'C chateau ?" asked Jacintha. ? - 4t The court beneath the windows of vour chamber. 1 ' *- V 44 What ! am I to be confined within its narrow bounds?" saiel Jacintha, who encouraged a hope that, if permitted to wander beyond them, she might find an opportunity of prevailing on some pea¬ sant, by a bribe, to take a letter for her, acquainting AVood ville with her situation, to a post-town. 14 Such are our orders/' replied Nan¬ nette. 4i And pray," asked Jacintha, after a. momentary
a*momentary pause, occasioned· by the st niggling emotions of her soul, " what reason has ihe ???И??? as¬ signed for confining me heie¿" Nannette lievitateti for sonic min ures. and then said she ivas not at liberty to, tell. 44 But you can tell Avhether you think it is a sufficient one for depriving me of my libertv/' ? t Nannette again lievitateci, and then replied she could not give an opinion upon such a subject.— 4t Come, Made¬ moiselle/' she added,, ".let me make your breakfast, and don't trouble vour- self ivith making enquiries which can¬ not be answered. " You can have no objection to
to inform me when Mademolselle Dupont departed, I suppose," said Jacmtha. ,4 44 No, she went away at an early hour this morning·" 44 And only from her you received your intelligence respecting me ?" 44 ??1? from herj" said Nannette. " Treacherous creature !" involun¬ tarily exclaimed'Jacmtha. 44 Yet let menot," she reflected; *' condemn her unheard; she may, perhaps, havebeen imposed upon by a fabricated tale." Whilst making breakfast, Jacintha made another effort to interest Nan¬ nette in her favour, but, like her for¬ mer efforts, it was unsuccessful ; and she
she at length determined to desist from supplications which she beheld no pro¬ bability of becoming availing, and en-v. deavour to support with paticnce^and fortitude, what she trusted avquIcI prove her temporary confinement. Her mind, hoAvever, during the day underwent many re\ r olutions; alternately it expe¬ rienced the elation of hope, and the depression of despair ; sometimes fear- in«* that Lord Givvtherin and the Countess might be able to deiise such a scheme, as would either prevent, or put a stop tothe enquiries of her friends ; then again flattering herself that no¬ thing short of the most unequivocal proofs of her fate, Avould silence their anxious solicitude about her. From the attention of Jacques and his family, she concluded the Countess had ordered her to be treated with re¬ spect. To interested motives, how* ever,
ever, more tîian to any order of the Countess's, she was indebted for this attention ; they flattered themselves by it Jthcy slrould obtain some part of those valuable things which bhe herself, by offering them as a recompence for the restoration of her liberty, had acknowledged being in her posses¬ sion. The parlour in whicii she had sup¬ ped with Mademoiselle Dupont, was appropriated solely to her. use, ancf Josephine was appointed to attend her. There was an innocence, a simpli¬ city in the manner of this young girl, an expression of tender pity in her countenance, which rendered her pleas¬ ing to Jacintha, who tried, by con¬ vening with her, to divert hcrscif from the
the contemplation of «her oivn unhap- piness. The rest of the family she regarded witli distrust and apprcliension ; the traces of cruelty and cunning 11 ere dis¬ cernible in their countenances, and she coukl not avoid considering them as the ready instruments of treachery and oppression. In thinking so she was not mistaken ; and in confiding her to their care, the Counters well knew she had nothing to fear from their humanity. Jacintha ivas represented to them as a distant relation, of the Countess's, entrusted to her protection for the express purpose of having her confined for life ; in consequence of some indiscretions she had committed in England, and which her friends had every reason to apprehend her repeating if sbe retained her liberty.
It is ^íow necessary to explain the. motives which' induced Lord Gwy¬ therin to act so cruel and perfidious a patf/towards Jacintha.
END OJ VOL. irR.
LJHitf ?»?*?*-*?*?$, MAUZ* ???*91????
