Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Frankenstein: or, The modern Prometheus
FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS.
LETTER I. To Mrs, Saville, England. St. Petersburg!!, Dec. 11th, 17— You will rejoice to hear that no dis¬ aster has accompanied the commence¬ ment of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil forebodings. I arrived here yesterday ; and my first task is to assure my dear sister of my welfare, and increasing confidence in the success of my undertaking. I am already far north of London; and as I walk in the slreets of Peters« vol. i. в
burgh, I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which braces my nerves, and fills me with delight. Do j ou understand this feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my day dreams become more fervent and vi\id. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and de¬ solation ; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the region of beauty aud delight. There, Margaret, the sun is for ever visible ; its broad disk just skirting the horizon, and diffusing a perpetual splendour. There—for with your leave, m\ sister, I will put some trust in preceding navigators— there snow and frost are banished; and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders
and in beauty every region hitherto dis¬ covered on the habitable globe. Its productions and features may be with¬ out example, as the phænomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes. What may not be expected in a country of eternal light? I may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle ; and may regulate a thousand celestial observations, that require only this voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever. I shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world never before visited, and mav tread a land never before imprinted hy the foot of man,. These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death, and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage with the jo % \ a child feels when he embarks в 2
in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But, supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot con¬ test the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all mankind to the last gene¬ ration, by discovering a passage near the pole to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are requisite ; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine. These reflections have dispelled the agitation w ith which I began my letter, and I feel my heart glow with an en¬ thusiasm which elevates me to heaven ; for nothing contributes so much to tranquillize the mind as a steady pur¬ pose,—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye, This expedition has been the favourite dream of my
early years. I have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have been made in the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean through the seas which surround the pole. You may remember, that a history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our good uncle Thomas's li¬ brary. My education was neglected, yet I was passionately fond of read¬ ing. These volumes were my study day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which I had felt, as a child, on learning that my father's dying injunction had for¬ bidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a sea-faring life. These visions faded when I perused, for the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced ray soul, and lifted it to heaven. I also became a poet, в 3
and for one \ear lived in a Paradise o/ my own creation ; I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the temple where the names of Homer and Shake¬ speare are consecrated. You are \>ell acquainted with my failure, and how heavily 1 bore the disappointment 15 u t just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent. Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. I сал, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. 1 commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale- fishers on several expeditions to the ISonh Sea; 1 voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day, and devoted my
nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest practical advantage. Twice I actually hired myself as an under- mate in a Greenland whaler, and ac¬ quitted myself to admiration. I must own I felt a little proud, when ly cap¬ tain offered me the second dignity in the vessel, and entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness ; so valu¬ able did he consider my services. And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some great pur¬ pose. My life might have been passed in ease and luxury ; but I preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my path. Oh, that some en¬ couraging voice would answer in the affirmative İ My courage and my re¬ solution is firm ; but my hopes fluctuate, и 4
mia ray spirits are often depressed, f am about to proceed on a long and dif¬ ficult voyage ; the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude : I am re¬ quired not only to raise the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing. Tins is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia. Tluy fly quickly over the snow in their sledges·; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opi¬ nion, far more agreeable than that of an English stage-coach. The cold is not excessive, if you are wrapt in furs, a dress which I have already adopted ; for there is a great difference between talking the deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise prevents the blood from actually freez¬ ing in your veins. I have no ambition to lose my life on the post-road between St. Petersburg!! and Archangel.
I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks ; and my in¬ tention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying the insu¬ rance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think necessary among those who are accustomed to the w hale- fishing. I do not intend to sail until the month of June : and when shall I return ? Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this question ? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I may meet. If I fail, }ou will see me again soon, or never. Farewell, my dear, excellent, Mar¬ garet. Heaven shower down blessings on }ou, and save me, that 1 may again and again testify my gratitude for all \our love and kindness. Your affectionate brother, R. Walton·. в 5
LETTER IL To Mrs, Saville, England, An bungel, 2mh Mardi, Î7 -. How slowly the time passes here, en¬ compassed as 1 am by frost and snow ; yet a-second step is taken towards my enterprise. 1 have hired a vessel, and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom I have already engaged ap¬ pear to be men on w hom I can depend, and are certainly possessed of dauntless courage. Hut I have one want which I have never yet been able to satisfy ; aud the absence of the object of which I
now feel a« a most severe evil. I have no friend, Margaret : when I am glow¬ ing with the enthusiasm of success, there will be none to participate my joy ; if I am assailed by disappoint¬ ment, no one will endeavour to sustain nie in dejection, I shali commit my thoughts to paper, it is true ; but that is a poor medium for the communica¬ tion of feeling. 1 desire the company of a man who could sympathize with nie; w hose e} es would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but í bitterly feel the want of a friend. I have no one near me, gentle }et courageous, possessed of a culti¬ vated as well as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to ap¬ prove or amend my plans. How would such a friend repair the faults of }our poor brothei! I am too ardent in ex¬ ecution, and too impatient of difficul-
tics. But it is a still greater evil to me that I am self-educated: for the first fourteen }ears of my life I ran wild on a common, and read nothing but our uncle Thomas's books of voyages. At that age I became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own country ; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its most important benefits from such a conviction, that I perceived the necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages thaft^ that of my native country. Now I am twenty-eight, and am in reality more illiterate than many school- boj s of fif¬ teen. It is true that I have thought more, and that my day dreams are more extended and magnificent; but they want (as the painters call it) keeping; and I greatly need a friend who would have^ sense enough not ta despise me as romantic, and affection,
enough for me to endeavour to regim¬ iate my mind. Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find no friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen. Yet some feelings, u Rallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these rug¬ ged bosoms. My lieutenant, for in¬ stance, is a man of wonderful courage and enterprise ; he is madly desirous of glory. He is an Englishman, and hi the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of humanity. I first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel: find¬ ing that he was unemployed in this city, I easily engaged him to assist in my enterprise. The master is a person of an excel¬ lent disposition, and is remarkable in
the ship for his gentleness, and the mildness of his discipline. He is, in¬ deed, of so amiable a nature, that he will not hunt (a favourite, and almost the only amusement here), because he cannot endure to spill blood. He is, moreover, heroically generous. Some \ears ago he loved a young Russian lady, of moderate fortune ; and having amassed a considerable sura in prize- money, the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony ; but she was bathed in tears, and, throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor, and that her father would never consent to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover instantly abandoned his pursuit. He had
already bought a farm with his money, on which he had designed to pass the re¬ mainder of his life ; but he bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his prize-money to pur¬ chase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman's father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man decidedly refused, think¬ ing himself bound in honour to my friend ; who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations. " What a noble fellow !" you will exclaim. He is so ; but then he has passed all his life on board a vessel, and has scarcely an idea beyond the rope and the shroud. But do not suppose that, because I complain a little, or because I can con¬ ceive a consolation for my toils which I
may never know, that I am wavering m my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate ; and my voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. The winter has been dreadfully severe ; but the spring pro* mises well, and it is considered as a re¬ markably early season; so that, pen- haps, 1 may sail sooner than I ex« pected. I shall do nothing rashly ; you know me sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness when* ever the safety of others is committed to my care. I cannot describe to you my sensa*- tions on the near prospect of my under¬ taking. It is impossible to communi¬ cate to you a conception of the trem¬ bling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which I am preparing to depart. I am going to unexplored regions, to " the land of mist and
snow;" but I shall kill no albatross, therefore do not be alarmed for my safety. Shall I meet you again, after having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern cape of Africa or America ? I dare not expect such suc¬ cess, yet I cannot bear to look on the reverse of the picture. Continue to write to me by every opportunity: I may receive your letters (though the chance is very doubtful) on some occa¬ sions when I need them most to support my spirits. I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again« Your affectionate brother,
Robert WalTon.
LETTER Ub To Mì s. Sa vims, England. July 7tli, 17—. MY DEAR SISTER, I write a few lines in haste, to say that I am safe, and well advanced on my voyage. This letter will reach England by a merchant-man now on its homeward voyage from Archangel ; more fortunate than I, who may not see my native land, perhaps, for many \ears. I am, however, in good spirits : my men are bold, and apparently firm of purpose ; nor do the floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indi-
eating the dangers of the region to¬ wards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We have already reached a very high latitude ; but it is the height of summer, and although not so warm as in England, the south¬ ern gales, which blow us speedily to¬ wards those shores w hich 1 so ardently desire to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which I had not expected. No incidents have hitherto befallen us, that would make a figure in a letter. One or two stiff gales, and the break¬ ing of a mast, are accidents which ex¬ perienced navigators scarcely remem¬ ber to record ; and I shall be well con¬ tent, if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage. Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be as¬ sured, that for my own sake, as well as your's, 1 will not rashly encounter dan-
ger. I will be cool, persevering, and prudent. Remember me to all my English friends. Most affectionately yours, R. W.
LETTER IV. To Mrs, Saville, England. August 5th, 17—. So strange an accident has happened to us, that I cannot forbear recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before these papers can come into your possession. Last Monday (July 31st), we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed in the ship on all sides, scarcely leav¬ ing her the sea room in which she floated. Our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we were com¬ passed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some
change would take place in the at¬ mosphere and weather. About two o*clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out in everv direction, vast and irreo-ular plains of ice, which seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted our attention, and diverted our solicitude from our own situation. We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half a mile: a being which had the shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic sta¬ ture, sat in the sledge, and guided the dogs. We watched the rapid pro¬ gress of the traveller with our tele¬ scopes, until he was lost among the distant inequalities of the ice.
This appearance excited our unqua¬ lified wonder. We were, as we be¬ lieved, many hundred miles from any land ; but this apparition seemed to denote that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. Shut in, however, by ice, it was impos¬ sible to follow his track, which we had observed with the greatest at¬ tention. About two hours after this occur¬ rence, we heard the ground sea ; and before night the ice broke, and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few hours. In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went upon deck, and found all the sailors busy on one side
of the vessel, apparently talking to some one in the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night, on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was a human being within it, whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but an European. When I appeared on deck, the master said, " Here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish on the open sea/' On perceiving me, the stranger ad¬ dressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. " Before I come on board your vessel," said he, " will you have the kindness to inform me whi¬ ther you are bound ?" You may conceive my astonishment
on hearing such a question addressed to me from a man on the brink of de¬ struction, and to whom 1 should have supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. 1 replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole. ('pon hearing this he appeared sa¬ tisfied, and consented tocóme on board. Good God ! Margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. His limbs were nearly fro¬ zen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering. 1 never saw a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him into the cabin ; but as soon as he had quitted the fresh air, he fainted. We accordingly \ol. i. с
brought him back to the deck, and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy, and forcing him to swallow 7 a small quantity. As soon as he shewed signs of life, we wrapped him up in blankets, and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen-stove. By slow degrees he recovered, and ate a little soup, which restored him won¬ derfully. Two days passed in this manner be¬ fore he was able to speak ; and 1 often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he had in some measure recovered, I removed him to mv own cabin, and attended on him as much as my duty would permit. I never saw a more interesting crea¬ ture : his eyes have generally an ex¬ pression of wildness, and even mad¬ ness ; but there are moments when, if any one performs an act of kindness
towards him, or does him any the most trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that 1 never saw equalled, But he is gene¬ rally melancholy and despairing; and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him. When my guest was a little reco¬ vered, I had great trouble to keep oft" the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but I would not allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of body and mind whose restoration evidently de¬ pended upon entire repose. Once, however, the lieutenant asked, Why he had come so far upon the ice in so strange a vehicle ? His countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom ; and he с 2
replied, " To seek one who fled from me." <ť And did the man whom you pur¬ sued travel in the same fashion?" " Yes." " Then I fancy we have seen him ; for, the day before we picked }ou up, we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice." This aroused the stranger's atten¬ tion ; and he asked a multitude of ques¬ tions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had pursued. Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, " I have, douhtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good people ; hut you are too considerate to make inquiries." " Certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in me to trouble )ou with any inquisiti veness of mine."
" And )et yon rescued me from a strange and perilous situation ; you have benevolently restored me to life." Soon after this he inquired, if I thought that the breaking up of the ice had destroyed the other sledge ? I re¬ plied, that I could not answer u ith any ilegree of ceriai nt \ ; for tlie ive had not broken until near midnight, una the traveller might have arrived at a place of safety before that time ; but of this I could not judge. From this time the stranger seemed very eager to be upon deck, to watch for the sledge which had before appear¬ ed ; but I have persuaded him to remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere. But 1 have promised that some one should watch for him, and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight. с 3
Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the present day. The stranger has gradu* ally improved in health, hut is very silent, and appears uneasy when any one except mvself enters his cabin. Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle, that the sailors are all in¬ terested in him, although they have had very little communication with him. For my own part, I begin to love him as a brother; and his con¬ stant and deep grief fills me with sym¬ pathy and compassion. He must have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so atr tractive and amiable. 1 said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should find no friend on the wide ocean ; yet I have found a man who, before his spirit had been broken by misery, I should have been
happy to have possessed as the brother of my heart. I shall continue my journal concern¬ ing the stranger at intervals, should I have any fresh incidents to record. August .ılı, 17—. My affection for my guest increases every day. He excites at once my ad¬ miration and my pity to an astonishing degree. How can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant grief? He is so gentle, yet so wise ; his mind is so cultivated; and when he speaks, al though his words are culled with the choicest art, yet they flow with rapidity and un¬ paralleled eloquence. He is now much recovered from his illness, and is continually on the deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. Yet, although uu- c 4
happy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery, but that he interests himself deeply in the employments of others. He has asked me many ques¬ tions concerning my design ; and I have related my little history frankly to him. He appeared pleased with the confidence, and suggested several al¬ terations in my plan, which 1 shall find exceedingly useful. There is no pedantry in his manner ; but all he does appears to spring solely from the interest he instinctively takes in the welfare of those who surround him. He is often overcome by gloom, and then he si is by himself, and tries to overcome all that is sullen or unsocial in his hu¬ mour. These paroxysms pass from him like a cloud from before the «fun, though his dejection never leaves him, J have endeavoured to win his confi¬ dence ; and 1 trust that I have sue-
ceeded. One day I mentioned to him the desire I had always felt of finding a friend who might sympathize with me, and direct me by his counsel. I said, I did not belong to that class of men who are offended by advice. " I am self-educated, and perhaps I hardly rely sufficiently upon my own powers. I wish therefore that my companion should be w Uer and more experienced than myself, to confirm and support me ; nor have 1 believed it impossible to find a true friend.'* " I agree \\ ith ) ou," replied the stran¬ ger, " in believing that friendship is not only a desirable, but a possible ac¬ quisition. I once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship. You have hope, and the world before you, and have no causo for despair. But I------1 have ix^t с 5
every thing, and cannot begin life anew." As he said this, his countenance be¬ came expressive of a calm settled grief, that touched me to the heart. But he was silent, and presently retired to his cabin. Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can'feel more deeply than he does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea, and every sight afforded by these wonderful regions, seems still to have the power of elevating his soul from earth. Such a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery, and be overwhelmed by disappointments; yet when he has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit, that has a halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures. Will 30U laugh at the enthusiasm I express concerning this divine wau-
derer? If you do, you must have cer¬ tainly lost that simplicity which was once your characteristic charm. Yet, if you will, smile at the warmth of my expressions, while I find every day new causes for repeating them. August шЬ, 17-!—- Yesterday the stranger said to me, " You may easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. I had deter¬ mined, once, that the memory of these evils should die with me; but you have won me to alter my determi¬ nation. You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did ; and I ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not know that the relation of my misfortunes will be useful to you, yet, if you are inclined;
listen to my tale. I believe that the strange incidents connected with it will afford a view of nature, u hich may enlarge your faculties and understand¬ ing. Vou и ill hear of powers and occurrences, such as you have been accustomed to believe impossible: but I do not doubt that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.'* You may easily conceive that 1 was much gratified b\ the o nered commu¬ nication; )tt \ could not endure that he should renew his grief by a recital of his misfortunes. I felt the greatest eagerness to hear the promised narra¬ tive, partly from curiosity, and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate, if it were in my power. I expressed these feelings in my au- £ţ\er. α I thank you," he replied, " for
your sympathy, but it is useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait but for one event, and then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling/' continued he, perceiving that I wished to interrupt him ; " but you are mis¬ taken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to name }Oii ; nothing can alter ray destinv : listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is de¬ termined. He then told me, that he would com¬ mence his narrative the next day when I should be at leisure. This promise drew from me the warmest thanks. I have resolved every night, when I am not engaged, to record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has related during the day. If I should be engaged, I will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure : but to me,
who know him, and who hear it from his on n lips, with what interest and sympathy shall I read it in some future day!
FRANKENSTEIN; од, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS.
CHAPTER I. I am by birth a Genevese; and ray family is one of the most distinguished of that republic. My ancestors had been for many years counsellors and syndics; and my father bad filled seve¬ ral public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public busi¬ ness. He passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the affairs of
his country; and it was not until the decline of life that he thought of mar¬ rying, and bestowing on the state sons who might carry his virtues and his name down to posterity. As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I cannot refrain from relating them. One of his most intimate friends was a merchant, who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous mischances, into poverty. This man, whose name was Beaufort, was of a proud and unbending disposi¬ tion, and could not bear to live in po¬ verty and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been distin¬ guished for his rank and magnificence. Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town of Lu¬ cerne, w here he lived unknown and in wretchedness. My father loved Beau-
fort with the truest friendship, and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. He grieved also for the loss of his society, and resolved to seek him out and endeavour to persuade him to begin the world again through his credit and assist¬ ance. Beaufort had taken effectual mea¬ sures to conceal himself; and it was ten months before mv father discovered his ahode. Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean street, near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. Beau¬ fort had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes ; but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the mean time he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a mer-
chant's house. The interval was con¬ sequently spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling, when he had leisure for reflection; and at length it took so fast hold of his mind, that at the end pf three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion. His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness; but she saw with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing, and that there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an un¬ common mould;, and her courage rose to support, her in, her adversity. She ^procuredplain .work ; she plaited straw ; and by various,means contrived to earn a .pittance scarcely sufficient to sup¬ port life. Several months passed in this man¬ ner. Her father grew worse; her time
was more entirely occupied in attend¬ ing him ; her means of subsistence de¬ creased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow overcame her ; and she knelt by Beau¬ fort's coffin, weeping bitterly, when my father entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who committed herself tò his care, and after the interment of his friend he conducted her to Geneva, and placed her under the protection of a relation. Two years after this event Caroline became his wife. When my father became a husband and a parent, he found his time so occu¬ pied by the duties of his new situation, that he relinquished many of his public employments, and devoted himself ta the education of his children. Of these I was the eldest, and the destined sue-
cessor to all his labours and utility. No creature could have more tender parents than mine. My improvement and health were their constant care, especially as 1 remained for several years their only child. But before 1 continue my narrative, I must record an incident which took place when I was four ¿ears of age. My father had a sister, whom he tenderly loved, and who had married early in life an Italian gentleman. Soon after her marriage, she had accom¬ panied her husband into her native country, and for some years my father had very little communication with her. About the time I mentioned she died ; and a few months afterwards he re¬ ceived a letter from her husband, ac¬ quainting him with his intention of marrying an Italian lady, and request¬ ing my father to take charge of the in-
fant Elizabeth, the only child of his deceased sister. " It is my wish/* he said, " that you should consider her as your own daughter, and educate her thus. Her mother's fortune is secured to her, the documents of which I will commit to your keeping. Reflect upon this proposition ; and decide whether you uould prefer educating your niece yourself to her being brought up by a stepmother/' My father did not hestitate, and im- mediately vent to Italy, that he might accompany the little Elizabeth to her future home. I have often heard m ν mother sav, that she was at that time the most beautiful child she had ever seen, and shewed signs even then of a gentle and affectionate disposition. These indications, and a desire to bind as closely as possible the ties of domestic love, determined my mother to consider
Elizabeth as my future wife; a design which she never found reason to repent. From this time Elizabeth Lavenza became my playfellow, and, as we grew older, my friend. She was docile and good tempered, yet gay and playful as a summer insect. Although she was lively and animated, her feelings were strong and deep, and her disposition uncommonly affectionate. No one could better enjoy liberty, yet no one could submit with more grace than she did to constraint and caprice. Her imagination was luxuriant, yet her ca¬ pability of application was great. Her person w ? as the image of her mind ; her hazel eyes, although as lively as a bird's, possessed an attractive softness. Her figure was light and airy ; and, though capable of enduring great fa¬ tigue, she appeared the most fragile creature in the world. While I ad-
mired her understanding and fancy, I loved to tend on her, as I should on a favourite animal; and I never saw so much grace both of person and mind united to so little pretension. Every one adored Elizabeth. If the servants had any request to make, it was always through her intercession. We were strangers to any species of disu¬ nion and dispute; for although there was a great dissimilitude in our cha¬ racters, there was an harmony in that very dissimilitude. I was more calm and philosophical than my companion ; yet my temper was not so yielding. My application was of longer endu¬ rance; butit was not so severe whilst it endured. I delighted in investigating the facts relative to the actual world; she busied herself in following the aerial creations of the poets. The world was to me a secret, which I desired to
discover; to her it was a vacancy, which she sought to people with imagi¬ nations of her own. My brothers were considerably young¬ er than myself; but I had a friend in one of my schoolfellows, who compen¬ sated for this deficiency. Henry Cler¬ val was the son of a merchant of Ge¬ neva, an intimate friend of my father. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. I remember, when he was nine years old, he wrote a fairy tale, which was the delight and amazement of all his companions, lus favourite study consisted in books of chivalry and ro¬ mance ; and when very young, 1 can remember, that we used to act plays composed by him out of these favourite books, the principal characters of which were Orlando, Robin Hood, Amadis, and St. George. No youth could have passed more
happily than mine. My parents were indulgent, aud my companions amiable. Our studies were never forced ; aud by some means we always had an end placed in view, which excited us to ar¬ dour in the prosecution of them. It was by this method, and not by emula¬ tion, that we were urged to application. Elizabeth was not incited to apply her¬ self to drawing, that her companions might not outstrip her; but through the desire of pleasing her aunt, by the representation of some favourite scene done by her own hand. We learned Latin and English, that we might read the writings in those languages; and so far from study being made odious to us through punishment, we loved appli¬ cation, and our amusements would have been the labours of other chil¬ dren. Perhaps we did not read so many books, or learn languages so VOL. i. D
quickly, as those who are disciplined according to the ordinary methods; but what we learned was impressed the more deeply on our memories. In this description of our domestic circle I include Henry Clerval ; for he was constantly with us. He went to school with me, and generally passed the afternoon at our house : for being an only child, and destitute of compa¬ nions at home, his father was well pleased that he should find associates at our house ; and we were never complete¬ ly happy when Clerval was absent, I feel pleasure in dwelling on the re¬ collections of childhood, before misfor¬ tune had tainted my mind, and changed its bright visions of extensive useful¬ ness into gloomy and narrow reflections npon self. ¿Sut, in tira ing the picture of my early da>s, I must not omit to record those events which led, by in-
sensible steps to my after tale of misery: for when I would account to myself for the birth of that passion, г* hich after¬ wards ruled my destiny, I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources ; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys. Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my predilection for that science. V\ hen I was thirteen л ears of age, we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon : the incle¬ mency of the weather obliged us to re¬ main a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate, and the d 2
wonderful facts which he relates, soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to daw n upon my mind; and, bounding with joy, I com¬ municated my discovery to my father. I cannot help remarking here the many opportunities instructors possess of di¬ recting the attention of their pupils to useful knowledge, which they utterly neglect. My father looked carelessly at the title-page of my book, and said, ** Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash." If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me, that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded, and that a modern system of science had been introduced, which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while
those of the former were real and prac¬ tical ; imder such circumstances, I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside, and, w ith my imagination warmed as it was, should probably have applied myself to the more rational theory of chemistry which has resulted from modern discoveries. It is even possi¬ ble, that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance my father had taken of my vo¬ lume by no means assured me that he w as acquainted with its contents ; and I continued to read with the greatest avidity. When I returned home, my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me trea- D 3
sures known to few beside myself; and although I often wished to com¬ municate these secret stores of know- ì'^ì'xe to my father, yet his indefinite censure of my favourite Agrippa always withheld me. I disclosed my disco¬ veries to Elizabeth, therefore, under a promise of strict secrecy ; but she did not interest herself in the subject, and I was left by her to pursue my studies alone. It may appear very strange, that a disciple of Albertus Magnus should arise in the eighteenth century ; but our family was not scientifica!, and 1 had not attended any of the lectures given at the schools of Geneva. My dreams were therefore undisturbed by reality; and I entered with the greatest diligence into the search of the philo* sopher's stone and the elixir of life. But the latter obtained my most undi-
vided attention : wealth was an inferior object ; but what glory would attend the discovery, if I could banish disease from the human frame, and render man invulnerable to any but a violent death ! Nor were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts or devils was a pro¬ mise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which I most eagerly sought ; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own inexpe¬ rience and mistake, than to a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. The natural phænomena that take place every day before our eyes did not escape my examinations. Distillation, and the wonderful effects of steam, pro¬ cesses of which my favourite authors were utterly ignorant, excited my asto¬ nishment; but my utmost wonder was d 4
engaged by some experiments on an air- pump, which I saw employed by a gen¬ tleman whom we were in the habit of visiting. . The ignorance of the early philoso¬ phers on these and several other points served to decrease their credit with me : but I could not entirely throw them aside, before some other system should occupy their place in my mind. When I was about fifteen vears old, we had retired to our house near Bel- rive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunder-storm. It advanced from behind the mountains of Jura; and the thunder burst at once with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. I remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with cu¬ riosity and delight. As I stood at the door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of fire issue from an old and beautiful oak,
which stood about twenty yards from our house ; and so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared; and nothing remained but a hlasted stump. When we visited it the next mornings we found the tree shattered in a singular manner. It was not splin¬ tered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbands of wood. I never be¬ held any thing so utterly destroyed. The catastrophe of this tree excited my extreme astonishment; and I ea¬ gerly inquired of my father the nature and origin of thunder and lightning. He replied, " Electricity ;" describing at the same time the various effects of that power. He constructed a small electrical machine, and exhibited a few experiments ; he made also a kite, with a wire and string, which drew down that fluid from the clouds. This last stroke completed the over* d 5
throw of Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, who had so long reigned the lords of my imagina¬ tion But by some fatality 1 did not føel inclined to commence the study of any modern system ; and this disincli¬ nation was influenced by the following circumstance. My father expressed a wish that I should attend a course of lectures upon natural philosophy, to which I cheer¬ fully consented. Some accident pre¬ vented my attending these lectures until the course was nearly finished. The lecture, being therefore one of the last, was entirely incomprehensible to me. The professor discoursed with the greatest fluency of potassium and boron, of sulphates and oxyds, terms to which I could affix no ide$ ; and I became disgusted with the science of natural philosophy, although I still read
Pliny and Buffon with delight, authors, in my estimation, of nearly equal in¬ terest and utility. My occupations at this age were principalis the mathematics, and most of the branches of study appertaining to that science. 1 was busily employed in learning languages; Latin was al¬ ready familiar to me, and I began to read some of the easiest Greek authors without the help of a lexicon. 1 also perfectly understood English and Ger¬ man. TTiis is the list of rny accom¬ plishments at the age of seventeen ; and you may conceive that my hours were fully employed in acquiring and maintaining a knowledge of this various literature. Another task also devolved upon me, when 1 became the instructor oí' my brothers. Ernest was six years younger than myself, and was my principal pu-
pil. He had been afflicted with ill health from his infancy, through which Elizabeth and I had been his constant nurses: his disposition was gentle, but he was incapable of any severe appli¬ cation. William, the youngest of our family, was yet an infant, and the most beautiful little fellow in the world ; his lively blue eyes, dimpled cheeks, and endearing manners, inspired the ten- derest affection. Such was our domestic circle, from which care and pain seemed for ever banished. My father directed our stu¬ dies, and my mother partook of our en¬ joyments. Neither of us possessed the slightest pre-eminence over the other ; the voice of command was never heard amongst us ; but mutual affection en¬ gaged us all to comply with and obey the slightest desire of each other.
CHAPTER II.
When I had attained the age of sevens teen, my parents resolved that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto attended the schools of Geneva ; but my father thought it necessary, for the comple¬ tion of my education, that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. My departure was therefore fixed at an early date ; but, before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.
Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever ; but her illness *vas not severe, and she quickly recovered. During her confinement, many arguments had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. She had, at first, yielded to our entreaties ; but when she heard that her favourite was recovering, she could no longer debar herself from her society, and en¬ tered her chamber long before the dan¬ ger of infection was past. The con¬ sequences of this imprudence were fa¬ tal. On the third day my mother sick¬ ened ; her fever was very malignant, and the looks of her attendants pro¬ gnosticated tbe worst event. On her death-bed the fortitude and benignity of this admirable woman did not de¬ sert her. She joined the hands of Elizabeth and myself: " My children," she said, " røy firmest hopes of future
THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. happiness were placed on the prospect of your union. This expectation will now be the consolation of your father. Eli¬ zabeth, my love, you must supply my place to jour younger cousins. Alasi I regret that I am taken from you ; and* happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all ? But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign m\self cheerfully to death, and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world." She died calmly ; and her counte¬ nance expressed affection even in death. I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the coun¬ tenance. It is so long before the mind can persuade itself that she» whom we saw every day, and whose very existence
appeared a part of our own, can have departed for ever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extin¬ guished, and the sound of a voice so familiar, and dear to the ear, can be hushed, never more to be heard. These are the reflections of the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual bit¬ terness of grief commences. Yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away some dear connexion ; and why should I deaerine a sorrow which all have fett, and must feel ? The time at length arrives, when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and the smile that plays upon the lips, al¬ though İt may be deemed a sacrilege, is not banished. My mother was dead, but we had still duties which we ought to perform ; we must continue our course with the rest, and learn to think 1
ourselves fortunate, whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My journey to Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. This period was spent sadly ; my mo¬ ther's death, and my speedy departure, depressed our spirits; but JLlizabeth endeavoured to renew the spirit of cheerfulness in our little society. Since the death of her aunt, her mind had acquired new firmness and vigour. She determined to fulfil her duties with the greatest exactness; and she felt that that moet imperious duty, of rendering her uncle and cousins happy, had de¬ volved upon her« She consoled me, amused her uncle, instructed my bro¬ thers ; and I never beheld her so en¬ chanting as at this time, when she was continually endeavouring to coa-
tribute to the happiness of others, en¬ tirely forgetful of herself. The day of my departure at length arrived. 1 had taken leave of all my friends, excepting Clerval, who spent the last evening with us. He bitterly lamented that he was unable to accom¬ pany me : but his father could, not be persuaded to part with him, intending that he should become a partner with him in business, in compliance with his favourite theory, that learning was superfluous in the commerce of ordinary life. Henry had a refined mind ; he had no desire to lie idle, and was well pleased to become his father's partner, but he believed that a man might be a very good trader, and yet possess a cultivated understanding. We sat late, listening to his com¬ plaints, and making many little ar¬ rangements for the future. The next
morning early I departed. Tears guished from the eyes of Elizabeth ; they proceeded partly from sorrow at rny departure, and partly because she reflected that the same journey was to have taken place three months before* when a mother's blessing would have accompanied me. I threw myself into tbe chaise that »vas to convey me away, and indulged in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever been surrounded by ami¬ able companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual plea* sure, I was now alone. In the univer- sity* whither I was going, I must form my own friends, and be my own pro* tector. My life had hitherto been re¬ markably secluded and domestic ; and this had given me invincible repug¬ nance to new cou\¡*enances, I lovtd my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clervaî ;.
these were " old familiar faces ;" but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of strangers. Such were my reflections as 1 commenced my journey ; but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisi¬ tion of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my }outh cooped up in one place, and had >nged to enter the world, and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my jour¬ ney to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the high white steeple of the tou n met my eyes. I alighted, and was conducted to my so* Htary apartment, to spend the evening as I pleased.
The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction, and paid a visit to some of the principal professors, and among others to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He received me with politeness, and asked me se¬ veral questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I mentioned, it is true, with fear and trembling, the only authors I had ever read upon those subjects. The pro¬ fessor stared: " Have you," he said, " really spent your time in studying such nonsense ?" I replied in the affirmative. " Every minute," continued M. Krempe with warmth, " even instant that vou have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. l ou have burdened your memory with exploded systems, and useless names. Good God! in what
desert land have you lived, where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies, which you have so greedily imbibed, are a thousand years old, and as musty as they are ancient? I little expected in this enlightened and scientific age to find a disciple of Al¬ bertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear Sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew." So saying, he stept aside, and wrote down a list of several books treating of natural philosophy, which he desired me to procure, and dismissed me, after mentioning that in the beginning of the following week he intended to com¬ mence a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Wald man, a fellow-professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alter¬ nate days that he missed. 1 returned home, not disappointed,
for I had long considered those authors useless whom the professor had so strongly reprobated ; but I did not feel much inclined to study the books which I procured at his recommendation. M. Krempe was a little squat man, with a gruff voice and repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of his doctrine. Besides, I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very diffe¬ rent, when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand: but now the scene was changed. The am¬ bition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which m} interest in science was chiefly founded. 1 was required to exchange chimeras of boundless gran¬ deur for realities of little worth. Such were my reflections during tbe
first two or three days spent almost in solitude. But as the ensuing week com¬ menced, I thought of the information which M. Krempe had given me con¬ cerning the lectures. And although I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had never seeu, as he had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity, and partly from idleness, I went into the lecturiug room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest bene¬ volence ; a few gray hairs covered his temples, hut those at the back of his bead were nearly black. His person was short, but remarkably erect; and his
voice the sweetest I had erer heard. He began hi» lecture by a recapitu¬ lation of the history of chemistry and the various improvements made by dif¬ ferent men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the most dis¬ tinguished discoverers. He then took a cursory view of the present state of the science, and explained many of its ele¬ mentary terms. After having made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern che¬ mistry, the terms of which I shall never forget :— " The ancient teachers of this sci¬ ence," said he, u promised impossi¬ bilities, and performed nothing. The modern masters promise very little; they know that metals cannot be traits- muted, and that the elixir of life is a chimera. But these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble vol. ι. E
in dirt, and their eyes to pour over the microscope or crucible, have in¬ deed performed miracles. They pe¬ netrate into the recesses of nature, and shew how she works in her hiding places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers ; they can command the thunders of heaven, mi¬ mic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible w ? orld with its own sha¬ dows." I departed highly pleased with the professor and his lecture, and paid him a visit the same evening. His man¬ ners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public ; for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture, which in his own house was replaced by the greatest
affability and kindness. He heard with attention my little narration concerning my studies, and smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa* and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that M. Krempe had exhibited. He said, that t£ these were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebt¬ ed for most of the foundations of their knowledge. They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names, and arrange in connected classifications, the facts which they in a great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. The labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.*' I listened to his statement, which was delivered w ithout any presumption or affectation ; and then added, that his lecture had removed my prejudices against modern f о
chemists ; and I, at the same time, re¬ quested his advice concerning the books 1 onght to procure. " I am happy/' said M. Waldman, ** to have gained a disciple; and if your application equals yonr ability, I have no doubt of your success. Che¬ mistry is that branch of natural philo¬ sophy in which the greatest improve- trients have been and may be made ; it is on that account that I have made it my peculiar study ; but at the same time I have not neglected the other branches of science. A man would make but a very sorry chemist, if he - attended to that department of human knowledge alone. If your wish is to berome really a man of science, and not mereh a pett\ experimentalist, ï should advise лой to appi) to every branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics."
He then took me into his laboratory, and explained to me the uses of his va¬ rious machines; instructing me as to what I ought to procure, and promising me the use of his own, when I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the list of books which i had requested ; and I took my leave. Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.
E 3
CHAPTER HL From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most com¬ prehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I at¬ tended the lectures, and cultivated the acquaintance, of the men of science of the university; and I found even in M. Krempe a great deal of sound sense and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. In M. Waldman I found
a true friend. His gentleness was ne¬ ver tinged by dogmatism ; and his in¬ structions were given with an air of frankness and good nature, that ba¬ nished every idea of pedantry. It was, perhaps, the amiable character of this man that inclined me more to that branch of natural philosophy which he professed, than an intrinsic love for the science itself. But this state of mind had place only in the first steps towards knowledge : the more fully I entered into the science, the more exclusively 1 pursued it for its own sake. That application, which at first had been a matter of duty and resolution, полу be¬ came so ardent and eager, that the stars often disappeared in the light of morn¬ ing whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory. m . As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that I improved ra- E 4
pidly. My ardour was indeed the asto¬ nishment of the students; and my pro¬ ficiency, that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked roe, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on ? whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two 3 ears passed in this manner, du¬ ring which I paid no visit to Geneva, but ivas engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries, which I hoped to make. None but those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science. In other stu¬ dies you go as far as others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in a scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder. A mind of moderate ca¬ pacity, w hich closely pursues one study, must infallibly arrive at great profi¬ ciency in that study; and I, who con-
tinually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit, and was solely wrapt up in this, improved so rapidly, that, at the end of two years, I made some dis¬ coveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments, which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. When I had arrived at this point, and had become as well ac¬ quainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought of returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident happened that protracted my stay. One of the phænonema which had peculiarly attracted my attention was the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with life. W T bence, I often asked myself, did the e 5
principle of life proceed ? It was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a mystery ; yet with how many things are we upon the brink' of becoming acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries. I revolved these circum¬ stances in my mind, and determined thenceforth to apply myself more par¬ ticularly to those branches of natu¬ ral philosophy which relate to physi¬ ology. Unless I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome, and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the science of ana¬ tomy: but this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body. In my education my father had taken the
greatest precautions that my mind should be impressed with no superna¬ tural horrors. I do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale of supersti¬ tion, or to have feared the apparition of a spirit. Darkness had no effect npon my fancy ; and a church -λ ard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become food for the worm. Now I was led to examine the cause and progress of this decay, and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and charnel houses; My attention was fixed upon every ob¬ ject the most insupportable to the deli¬ cacy of the human feelings. I saw how the fine form of man was degraded and wasted ; I beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I
paused, examining and analysing all the minutiæ of causation, as exempli¬ fied in the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was sur¬ prised that among so many men of ge¬ nius, who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so asto¬ nishing a secret. Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens, than that which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery were dis¬ tinct and probable. After days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue,
I succeeded in discovering the cause of generation and life ; nay, more, I be¬ came myself capable of bestowing ani¬ mation upon lifeless matter. The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this discovery soon gave place to delight and rapture. After so much time spent in painful labour, to ar¬ rive at once at the summit of my desires, wiis the most gratifyingconsummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming, that all the steps by which 1 had been progressively led to it Avere obliterated, and I beheld only the result. What had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of the world, was now within my grasp. Not that, like a magic scene, it all opened upon meat once: the information I had obtained was of a nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as I should point them towards
the object of my search, than to exhibit that object already accomplished. I was like the Arabian who had been buried* with the dead, and found a passage to life aided only by one glimmering, and seemingly ineffectual 1 , light. I see by your eagerness, and the wonder and hope which your eyes ex¬ press, my friend, that }ou expect to be informed of the secret with which lam acquainted; that cannot be: lis¿ ten patiently until the end of my story, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was, to your destruction and infallible misery. Learn from me, if not by my precepts, at least by my ex¬ ample, how dangerous is the acquire¬ ment of knowledge, and how much happier that man is who believes his
native town to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than, his nature will allow. When 1 found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I hesitated ft long time concerning the manner in which I should employ it. Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intrica¬ cies of fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable dif¬ ficulty and labour. I doubted at first whether I should attempt the creation of a being like myself or one of sim¬ pler organization ; but ray imagination was too much exalted by my first suc¬ cess to permit me to dou ht of my abi¬ lity to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful as man. The materials at present within my command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an
undertaking; but 1 doubted not that I should ultimately succeed. I pre* pared myself for a multitude of re¬ verses ; my operations might be inces¬ santly baffled, and iat last my work be imperfect : yet, when I considered the improvement which every day takes place in science and mechanics, 1 was encouraged to hope my present at¬ tempts would at least lay the founda¬ tions of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its im¬ practicability. It was with these feel¬ ings that I began tbe creation of a hu¬ man being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the being of a gi¬ gantic stature; that is to say, abpujt eight feet in height, and proportionably large. After having formed tbi$ de-
termination» and having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my materials, 1 began. No one can conceive the vaijetyof feelings which bore me onwards, like a hurricane, in the first entbusias*» of success. Life and death appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new spe¬ cies would bless me as its creator and source ; many happy and excellent na¬ tures would owe their being to me. No. father could claim the gratitude of hifr child so completely as I should, deserve their's. Pursuing these reflections, I thought, that if 1 could bestow anima¬ tion upori lifeless matter, I might in process o'/ time (althoogh 1 now found it impossible) renew life where death bad apparently devoted the body to corruption.
These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my. person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very brink of cer¬ tainty, I failed ; yet still I clung to the hope which the next day or the next hour might realize. One secret which I alone possessed was the hope to which I bad dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with υ n relaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret loil, asi dabbled among the unhal¬ lowed damps of the grave, or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay l· My limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance ; but then a resistless, and almost frantic im¬ pulse, urged me forward ; I seemed to .
have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was indeed but a pass¬ ing trance, that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, tbe un¬ natural stimulus ceasing to operate, I had returned to my old habits. I collected bones from charnel honses; and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human frame. In a solitary chamber, or rather cell* at the top of the house, and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, 1 kept my work¬ shop of filthy creation ; my eyeballs were starting from their sockets in at¬ tending to the details of my employment. The dis&ecting room and the slaugh¬ ter-house furnished many of my mate¬ rials; and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupa¬ tion, whilst, still urged on by ari ea¬ gerness which perpetually increased^
I hrought my work near ţo a conclu- sion. The summer months passed whiW I was thus engaged, heart and soni, in one pursuit. It was a- most beautiful season; nevar did, the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest* or the vines ^ield a more luxuriant ymţage: but my eyes were insensible ι о the charms of nature. And the same feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom 1 had not seen for so long a tíme., I knew my silence disquieted them ; and I well remembered the words of my father: " 1 know that while yon are pleased with yourself, you will think of us with affection, and we shall hear regularly from you. You must pardon me, if I regard any interrup¬ tion in your correspondence as a proof
that your other duties are equally neg¬ lected/' I knew well therefore what would be my father's feelings; but I could not tear my thoughts from my employment* loathsome in itself, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagi¬ nation. I wished, as it were, to pro¬ crastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be completed. I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect to vice, or faultiness on my part ; but I am now convinced that he was justi¬ fied in conceiving that 1 should not be altogether free from blame. A hu¬ man being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind, and never to allow passion or a tran»*· tory desire to disturb his tranquillity.
I do not think that the pursuit of know¬ ledge is an exception to this rule. If the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affec¬ tions, and to destroy your taste for áiose simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is cer¬ tainly unlawful, that is to say, not be¬ fitting the human mind. If this rule were always observed ; if no man allow¬ ed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic affections, Greece had not been en¬ slaved; Caesar would have spared his country ; America would have been discovered more gradually ; and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been destroyed. But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting part of my tale; and your looks remind me to proceed. My father made no reproach in his
letters; and only took notice of my silence by inquiring into my occupa¬ tions more particularly than before. Winter, spring, and summer, na^id away during my labours ; but I did not watch the blossom or the expanding leaves — sights which before always yielded me supreme delight, so deeply was 1 engrossed in my occupation. The leaves of that j ear had withered before my work drew near to a close ; and now every day shewed me more plainly how well I had succeeded. But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared raih e r like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome trade, than an artist occupied hy his favourite employment. Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a most painful degree ; a disease that I regret¬ ted the more because I had hitherto en-
joyed most excellent health, and had always boasted of the firmness of my nerves. But I believed that exercise and amusement would soon drive away such symptoms ; and I promised myself both of these, 1 when my creation should be complete»
CHAPTER IV,
It was on a dreary night of Novem> ber, that I beheld the accomplishment of my toils. With an anxiety that aï«. most amounted to agony, I collected the instruments of life around <ъе, that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. It was already one in the morning ; the rain pattered dismally against the panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the half-extin¬ guished light, I saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open ; it breathed VOL. I. F
hard, and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs. How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to form ? His limbs were in proportion, and I had selected his features as beautiful. Beautiful !—Great God ! His yellow skin scarcely covered the work of muscles and arteries beneath ; his hair was of a lustrous black,and flawing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these luxu* nances only formed a more horrid con¬ trast wi*h his watery eyes, that seemed almost of the same colour as the dun white sockets in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion, and straight black lips. The different accidents of life are not So changeable as the feelings of h iman nature. I had worked hard for
nearly two years, for the sole purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body* For this I had deprived myself of rest and health. 1 had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that I had finished, the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. Unable to endure the aspect of the being I had created, I rushed out of the room, and continued a long time traversing my bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. At length lassitude succeeded to the tumult I had before endured ; and I threw myself on the bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments of forgetful ness. But it was in vain : I slept indeed, but I was disturbed by the wildest dreams. I thought I saw Elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in the streets of In¬ golstadt. Delighted and surprised, I em- F 2
braced her; but as I imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of death ; her features appeared to change, and I thought that 1 held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms ; a shroud enveloped her form, and I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel. I started from my sleep u ith horror; a cold dew co¬ vered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed ; when. In the dirn and yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window-shutters, 1 beheld the wretch —the miserable monster whom I had created. He held up the curtain of the bed ; and his c}e&, if eyes they may be called, were ñxeá on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarti¬ culate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks. He might have spoken, but I did not hear; one hand was
stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I escaped, and rushed down stairs, I took refuge in the court-yard belong¬ ing to the house which I inhabited ; where I remained during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as if it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which I had so miserably given life. Oh ! no mortal could support the horror of that countenance. A mummy again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. I had gazed on him while unfinished ; he was ugly then ; but when those mus¬ cles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could not have conceived. I passed the night wretchedly. Some¬ times my pulse beat so quickly and ν 3
hardly, that I felt the palpitation of every artery ; at others, 1 nearly sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with this horror, I felt the bitternessof disappointment : dreams that had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space, were now become a hell to шс ; and the change was so ra«* pid, the overthrow so complete ! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned, and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingol¬ stadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the wretch whom I feared every turn¬ ing of the street would present to my view. I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt
impelled to hurry on, although wetted by the rain, which poured from a black and comfortless sky. I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring, by bodily exercise, to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I traversed the streets* without any clear conception of where I was, or what I was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear; and i hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me : Like one who, on a lonely road» Doth walk in fear and dread, And, having once turn'd round,, walks on, And turns no more his head ; Because he knows a fj ightful fiend Doth close behind him tread*. Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the various diligences and carriages usually stopped.
r 4
Here I paused, I knew not why ; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming to¬ wards me from the other end of the street. As it drew nearer, 1 observed that it was the Swiss diligence : it stop¬ ped just where I was standing; and, on the door being opened, I perceived Henry Cierva!, who, on seeing me, in¬ stantly sprung out. " My dear Fran¬ kenstein/' exclaimed he, " how glad I am to see you ! how fortunate that you should be here at the verv moment of * my alighting ! Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval ; his presence brought back to my thoughts my father, Eliza¬ beth, and all those scenes of home so dear to my recollection. 1 grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot my hor¬ ror and misfortune ; I felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months.
calm and serene joy. I welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial manner, and we walked towards my college. Clerval continued talking for some time about our mutual friends, and his own good fortune in being permitted to come to Ingolstadt. " You may easily believe," said he, " how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that it was not absolutely necessary for a merchant not to under¬ stand any thing except book-keeping ; and, indeed, I believe I left him incre¬ dulous to the last, for his constant an¬ swer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the Dutch school¬ master in the Vicar of Wakefield: ' I have ten thousand florins a 3ear with¬ out Greek, I eat heartily without Greek/ But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to undertake ρ 5
a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge." ** It gives me the greatest delight by see you ; but tell me how you left my father, brothers, and Elizabeth." " Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from you so seldom. By the bye, I mean to lec¬ ture you a little upon their account my¬ se!. —But, my dear Frankenstein," con¬ tinued he, stopping short, and gazing full in my face, " I did not before re¬ mark how very ill you appear ; so thin and pale ; you look as if \ou had been watching for several nights/' u You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one occupation, that I have not allowed my¬ self sufficient rest, as you see : but Γ hope, I sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an end, and that I am at length free."
I trembled excessively ; 1 could not endure to think of, and far less to allude to the occurrences of the preceding night. I walked with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my apartment might still be there, alive, and walking about» I dreaded to behold this monster; but I feared still more that Henry should see him. Entreating him there¬ fore to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up to¬ wards my own room. My hand was already on the lock of the door before I recollected myself. I then paused; and a cold shivering came over me. I threw the door forcibly open, as chil¬ dren are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them on the other side ; but nothing
appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty; and .my bed¬ room was also freed from its hideouă guest. I could hardly believe that so great a good-fortune could have be¬ fallen me ; but when I became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, I clap¬ ped my hands for joy, and ran down to Clerval. We ascended into ray room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but I was unable to contain myself. It was not joy only that possessed me; I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sen¬ sitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly. I was unable to remain for a single in¬ stant in the same place; I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud. Clerval at first attri¬ buted my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival ; but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in
my eyes for which he could not account ; and my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter, frightened and astonished him. " My dear Victor," cried he, " what, for God's sake, is the matter ? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of all this? " Do not ask me," cried I, putting my hands before my e}es, for 1 thought I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room ; " he can tell. — Oh, save me ! save me!" I imagined that the mon¬ ster seized me ; I struggled furiously, and fell down in a fit. Poor Clerval ! what must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he an¬ ticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was not the witness of his grief; for I was life* less, and did not recover my senses for a long, long time.
This was the commencement of a nervous fever, which confined me for several months. During all that time Henry was my only nurse. I after¬ wards learned that, knowing my father's advanced age, and unfitness for so long a journey, and how wretched my sick¬ ness would make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the ex¬ tent of my disorder. He knew that I could not have a more kind and at¬ tentive nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that lie could towards them. But I was in reality very ill ; and surely nothing but the unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend oouid have restored me to life. The form of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence was for ever before
my eyes, and I raved incessantly con¬ cerning him. Doubtless my words sur¬ prised Henry : he at first believed them to be the wanderings of my disturbed imagination ; but the pertinacity with which I continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event. By very slow degrees, and with fre¬ quent relapses, that alarmed and grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the first time I became capable of ob¬ serving outward objects with any kind of pleasure, I perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared, and that the young buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. It was a divine spring; and the season contributed greatly to my convales¬ cence. I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom ; my
gloom disappeared, and in a short time I became as cheerful as before I was attacked by the fatal passion. " Dearest Clerval," exclaimed I, " how kind, how very good you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever repay you ? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of u hich I have been the occasion ; but } ou will for¬ give me." " You will repay me entirely, if you do not discompose yourself, but get well as fast as you can ; and since you appear in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not ?" I trembled. Onesuhject! what could it be? Could he allude to an object on whom I dared not even think?
" Compose yourself/' said Clerval, who observed my change of colour, " I will not mention it, if it agitates you ; but your father and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your own hand-writing. They hardly know how ill you have been, and are uneasy at your Jong silence." " Is that all? my dear Henry. How could you suppose that my first thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom I love, and who are so deserving of my love." " If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to see a Jetter that has been lying here some days for you : it is from your cousin, I believe."
CHAPTER V. Clerval then put the following letter into my hands. " Tő V. Frankenstein. "my dear cousin* " I cannot describe to you the un¬ easiness we have all felt concerning уоцг health. We¡ cannot help imagining that your friend Clerval conceals the ex¬ tent of your disorder : for it is now ser¬ verai months since we have seen your hand-u riting; and all this time vai have been obliged to dictate your letters to Henry, Surely, Victor, you must have
been exceedingly ill ; and this makes us all very wretched, as much so nearly as after the death of your dear mother. My uncle was almost persuaded that you were indeed dangerously ill, and could hardly be restrained from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt. Clerval always writes that you are getting better; I eagerly hope that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own hand-wri¬ ting; for indeed, indeed, Victor, we are all very miserable on this account. Re¬ lieve us from this fear, and we shall be the happiest creatures in the world. Your father's health is now so vigorous, that he appears ten years younger since last winter. Ernest also is so much improved, that you would hardly know him : he is now nearly sixteen, and hae lost that sickly appearance which he had some years ago ; he is grown quite robust and active.
" My uncle and Ï conversed a long time last night about what profession Ernest should follow. His constant ill¬ ness when young has deprived him of the habits of application ; and now that he enjoys good health, heis continually in the open air, climbing the hills, ov rowing on the lake. I therefore pro¬ posed that he should be a farmer ; which you know, Cousin, is a favourite scheme of mine. A farmer's is a very healthy happy life ; and the least hurt¬ ful, or rather the most benefícia! pro¬ fession of any. My uncle had an idea of his being educated as an advocate, that through his interest he might be¬ come a judge. But, besides that he is not at all fitted for such an occupation, it is certainly more creditable to culti¬ vate the earth for the sustenance of man» than to be the confidant, and sometimes the accomplice, of hia vices ; which is
the profession of a lawyer. I said, that the employments of a prosperous far¬ mer, if they were not a more honour¬ able, they were at least a happier spe¬ cies of occupation than that of a judge, whose misfortune it was always to med¬ dle with the dark side of human na¬ ture. My uncle smiled, and said, that I ought to be an advocate myself, which put an end to the conversation on that subject. " And now I must tell you a little story that will please, and perhaps amuse you. Do you not remember Justine Moritz ? Probably you do not ; I will relate her history, therefore, in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mo¬ ther, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the third. This girl had always been the favourite of her father ; but, through a strange per¬ versity, her mother could not endure
her, and, afterthe death of M. Moritz, treated her very iîh My aunt observed this; and, when Justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow her to live at her house. The republican institutions of our country have produceţi simpler and happier manners than those which prevail in the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are utorø refined and moral 4 A ser- va»t in Geneva does not mean the same thing as a servant, in France and Eng¬ land. Jîustine, thus received in onr fa¬ mily, learned the duttes of a servant ; a condition which, in our fortunate coun¬ try, does not include the idea of igno¬ rance, and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human, being.
" After what I have said, I dare say you well remember the heroine of» my little tale : for Justine was a great fa¬ vourite of your's; and I Hecollect yon once remarked, that if yon were in an ill humour, one glance from Jnstine could dissipate it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerni ng the beauty of Angelica—shelooked so frank-hearted ^nd happy. My aunt conceived a great attachment for her, by w T hich she was induced to give her an efdneation su¬ perior to that which she had at first intended. This benefit was fnlly re¬ paid; Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: Ido not mean that she made any professions, I never heard one pass her lips ; but yen could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay, and in many re¬ spects inconsiderate, yet she paicl· the
greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence, and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now r she often reminds me of her. , " When my dearest aunt died, every one was too much occupied in their own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill ; but other trials were reserved for her. " One by one, her brothers and sister died ; and her mother, with the excep¬ tion of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The conscience of the wo¬ man was troubled ; she began to think that the deaths of her favourites was a judgment from heaven to chastise her partiality. She was a Roman Catholic ; and I believe her confessor confirmed
the idea which she had conceived. Ac¬ cordingly, a few months after your departure for Ingoldstadt, Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! she wept when she quitted our house : she was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before been re¬ markable for vivacity. Nor was her residence at her mother's house of a nature to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her re¬ pentance. She sometimes begged Jus¬ tine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her brothers and sister. Perpetual fretting at length threw Madame Morite into a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the fint approach of cold we% vol. ь. о
ther, at the beginning of this last wrø- ter. Justine has returned to us; and I assure you I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty ; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expressions continually remind me of my dear aunt. " I must say also a few r words to yon, my dear cousin, of little darling, Wil¬ liam. I wish you could see him ; he is Very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eye-lashes, and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dim¬ ples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two little wives, but Louisa Biron is his favourite, a pretty little girl of 4lve years of age. *' Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be indulged in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already
received the congratulatory visits on her approacliing marriage with a )oun£ Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq, Her ugly sister, Manon, married M* Duvillard, the /ich banker, last au¬ tumn. Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several mis¬ fortunes since the departure of Clerval from Geneva. But he has already re¬ covered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a very •lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is very much admired, and & favourite with every body. " I have written myself into good spirits, dear cousin ; yet I cannot con¬ clude without again anxious!;, inqui¬ ring concerning your health. Dear Victor, if you are not very ill, write .yourself, and make your father and all g 2
of us happy; or ——I cannot bear to think of the other side of the question ; my tears already flow. Adieu, my dearest cousin. " Elizabeth Latenza. * 5 Geneva, March 18th, 17—." " Dear, dear Elizabeth !" I exclaim¬ ed when 1 had read her letter, " 1 will write instantly, and relieve them from the anxiety they must feel." I wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me ; but my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly. In another fortnight I was able to leave my cham¬ ber. Öne of my first duties on my reco¬ very was to introduce Clerval to the several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a kin J of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had sustained. Ever since the
fatal night, the end of my labours, and the beginning of my misfortunes, I had conceived a violent antipathy even tó the name of natural philosophy. When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my ner¬ vous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view. He had also changed my apartment ; for he perceived that I had acquired a dislike for the room which had previously been my laboratory. But these cares of Clerval were made of no avail when I visited the profes¬ sors. M. Waldman inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress 1 had made in the sciences. He soon per¬ ceived that I disliked the subject; but¿ not guessing the real cause, he attri¬ buted my feelings to modesty, and G 3
changed the subject from my improve-, meni to the science itself, with a de~ sire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. W hat could I do ? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt as if he had placed carefully, one by one» in my view those instruments which were to be afterwards used in putting me to a slow and cruel death. I writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit, the pain I felt. Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick iq dis- eerning the sensations of others, de¬ clined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his total ignorance ; and the conver¬ sation took a more general turn. I thanked my friend from my heart, but I did not speak. I saw plainly that he * as surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and al¬ though I loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence; that knew no
bounds, yet 1 could never persuade myself to confide to him that event which was so often present to røy recol¬ lection, but which I feared the detail to another would only impress morc deeply. M. Krempe was not equally docile ; and in my condition at that time, of almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me even more pain than the benevolent appro¬ bation of M. Waldman. ,ê D— n the fellow !" cried he ; " why, M. Clerval, I assure you he has outstript us all. Aye, stare if you please ; but it is ne¬ vertheless true. A youngster who, but a few years ago, believed Cornelius Agrippa as firmly as the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the uni¬ versity ; and if hé is not soon pulled down, tf e shall all he out of counte* nance e ~~Aye, aye," continued he. ob- G 4
serving my face expressive of suffering, " M, Frankenstein is modest ; an excel¬ lent quality in a young man. Young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, M.Clerval; I was myself when young: but that wears out in a very short time." M. Krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me. Cierva! was no natural philosopher. His imagination was too vivid for the minutiæ of science. Languages were his principal study ; and he sought, by ac¬ quiring their elements, to open a field for self-instruction on his return to Geneva. Persian, Arabic, and Hebrew, gained his attention, after he had made himself perfectly master of Greek and Latin. For my own part, idleness had ever been irksome to me; and now that 1 wished
to fly from reflection, and hated my for¬ mer studies, I felt great reliefin being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not only instruction but consola¬ tion in the works of the orientalists. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating to a degree I never expe¬ rienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your os\n heart. How different from the manly and he- roical poetry of Greece and Rome. Summer passed away in these oc¬ cupations, and my return to Geneva was fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable, and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. g 5
I félt this delay very bitterly ; for t longed to see my native town, and my, beloved friends. My return had only. been delayed so long from an unwil¬ lingness io leave Clerval in a strange* place, before he had become acquainted with any of its inhabitants. The win¬ ter, however, was spent cheerfully; and' although the stiring was uncommonly lute, when it came, its-beauty compen* sated for its dilatoriness. The month of May bad already com¬ menced, and I expected the letter daily which was to fix the date of my depar¬ ture, when Henry proposed a pedestrian. tøur in the ea virons, of Ingoldstadt that l· might bid a persooal farewell to the eountry I had so long inhabited; T a<v ceded with pleasure to tbispropositioö : I was fond of exerefee, and Clerval ha# always been my favourite companion in* the rambles of this nature that 1ЬФ
taken among the scenes of my native eountry. We passed a fortnight in these per¬ ambulations: my health and spirits had long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the salubrious air I breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and the conversation of my friend. Study had before secluded me from the intercourse of my fellow- creatures, and rendered me unsocial ; but Clerval called forth the better feel¬ ings of my heart ; he again taught me to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children. Excellent friend ! how sincerely did you love me, and endeavour to elevate ray mind, until it was on a level with your awn. A selfish pursuit had cramped and nar¬ rowed me, until your gentleness and affection warmed and opened my senses; L became the same happy creature who,
a few years ago, loving and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delight¬ ful sensations. A serene sky and ver¬ dant fields filled me with ecstacv. The present season was indeed divine ; the flowers of spring bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud : I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding jear had pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an invincible burden. Henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathized in my feelings : he exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that filled his soul. The resources of his mind on this occasion were truly astonish¬ ing: his conversation was full of ima¬ gination ; and very often, in imitation
of the Persian and Arabic writers, he invented tales of wonderful fancy and passion. At other times he repeated my favourite poems, or drew me out into arguments, which he supported with great ingenuity. We returned to our college on a Sunday afternoon: the peasants were dancing, and every one we met ap¬ peared gay and happy. My own spi¬ rits were high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.
CHAPTER VI.
Ön my return, I found the following letter from my father :— " To V. Frankenstein. ** MY DEAR VICTOR^ " You have probably waited impa¬ tiently for a letter to fix the date of your return to us; and I was at first tempted to write only a few lines, mere¬ ly mentioning the day on which 1 should expect you. But that would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it. What would be your surprise, my son, when
you expected a happy and gay welcome^ to behold, on the contrary, tears and* wretchedness l· And how, Victor, can I .relate our misfortune,^ Absence can* not have rendered yon caîleus t to our joys and griefs ; and how shall I inflict pain on an absent child h I wish to pre^ pare you for the woeful news, but i know it is impossible ; even now your eye skims over the page, to seek the words which are to convey to you the horrible tidings. *' William ispead !-—that sweet child,. whose smiles delighted andv warmed my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay ! Victor, he is murdered ! " I will not attempt to console yotn but will simply relate the circum¬ stances of the transaction. " Last Thursday (May 7th) I» my niece, and your two brothers, went to walk in Plainpalais, The evening was
warm and serene, and we prolonged our walk farther than usual. It was already dusk before we thought of re¬ turning ; and then we discovered that William and Ernest, who had gone on before, were not to be found. We ac¬ cordingly rested on a seat until they should return. Presently Ernest came, and inquired if we had seen his bro¬ ther : he said, that they had been play¬ ing together, that William had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards waited for him a long time, but that he did not return. <e This account rather alarmed us y and we continued to search for him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjec¬ tured that he might have returned to the house. He was not there. We re¬ turned again, with torches ; for I could not rest, when I thought that my sweet
boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night: Elizabethaiso suffered extreme anguish. About five in the morning I discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before I had seen blooming and active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless : the print of the murderer's finger was on his neck. u He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my counte¬ nance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth. She was very earnest to see the corpse. At first I attempted to prevent her; but she persisted, and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, * О God ! I have mur¬ dered my darling infant !* " She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she again lived, it was only to weep and sigh.
She told me, that that same evening Willia mhad teazed her to let him wear a very valuable miniature that she pos¬ sessed of your mother. This picture is gone, and was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. We have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him are unremitted ; but they will not re¬ store my beloved William. " Come, dearest Victor ; you alone can console Elizabeth. She weeps con¬ tinually, and acenses herself unjustly as the cause of his death ; her words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy; but will not that be an additional motive for yon, my son, to return and be our comforter ? Your dear mother ! Alas, Victor ! 1 now say, Thank God she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling ! * 4 Come»Victor ; notbroodingthoughts
of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of festering the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of mourning, my friend, hut with kind¬ ness and affection for those who love you, and not with hatred for your ene¬ mies. *' Your affectionate and afflicted father, Alphonse Frankenstein. " Geneva, May 12th, 17—.* Clerval, who had watched my coun¬ tenance as I read this letter, was sur¬ prised to observe the despair that suc¬ ceeded to the joy 1 at first expressed on receiving news from my friends. I threw the letter on the table, and co¬ vered my face with my hands. " My dear Frankenstein," exclaimed Henry, when he perceived me weep with bitterness, " are you alwajs to be
unhappy ? My dear friend* what has happened ?" I motioned to him to take up the letter, while I walked up and down the room in the extremest agitation. Tears also gushed from the eyes of Clerval, as he read the account of my misfor¬ tune. " I can offer you no consolation, my friend," said he ; " your disaster is ir¬ reparable. What do you intend to do?" " To go instantly to Geneva : come with me, Henry, to order the horses." During our walk, Clerval endea¬ voured to raise my spirits. He did not do this by common topics of consola¬ tion, but by exhibiting the truest sym¬ pathy. " Poor William !" said he, ** that dear child ; he now sleeps with his an¬ gel mother. His friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest: he does not
now feel the murderer's grasp ; a sod covers his gentle form, and he knows no pain. He can no longer be к fit subject for pity ; the survivors are the greatest sufferers, and for them time is the only consolation. Those maxims of the Stoics, that death was no evil, and that the mind of man ought to be superior to despair on the eternal ab¬ sence of a beloved object, ought riot to be urged. Even Cato wept nver the dead body of his brother." Clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words im¬ pressed themselves on my mind, and I remembered them afterwards in soli¬ tude. But now, as soon as the horses arrived, I hurried i rito a cabriole, and bade farewell to my friend. My journey was very melancholy. At first I wished to hurry oh, for I longed to console and sympathize with
my loved and sorrowing friends; but ^hen I drew near my native town, I slackened myţtfrogress. I could hardly sustain the innltitude of feelings that crowded into my mind* I passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which I had not seen for nearly six years. How altered every thing might be during that time ? One sudden and desolating change had taken place ; but a thousand little circumstances might have by degrees worked other altera« tions, which, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive· Fear overcame me; I dared mot advance, dreading a thousand name- lea» ¿vifs that made me tremble, al¬ though 1 was unable to define them. I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. I contem¬ plated the lake : the waters were placid; M around was calm, «»a die snowy
mountains, * ς the palaces of nature," were not changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I continued my journey towards Geneva. The road ran by Üıe side of the lake, which became narrower as I approach¬ ed my native town. I discovered more distinctly the black sides -of Jura» and the bright summit of Mont Blanc; I wept like a child : " Dear mountains ! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your wanderer? Your sum¬ mits are clear ; the sky and lake are blue and placid. Is this to prognosti¬ cate peace, or to mock at my unhap- piness ?" I fear, my friend» that I shall rendet myself tedious by dwelling on these «preliminary circumstances .;, but they were days of comparative happiness, and 1 think of them with pleasure. My
country, my beloved country ! who but a native can tell the delight I took in again beholding thy streams, thy moun¬ tains, and, more than all, thy lovely lake. Yet, as 1 drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. Night also closed around ; and when I could hardly see the dark mountains, I felt still more gloomily. The picture ap¬ peared a vast and dim scene of evil, and I foresaw obscurely that I was des¬ tined to become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the misery I imagined and dreaded, I did not con¬ ceive the hundredth part of the anguish I was destined to endure. It was completely dark when I ar¬ rived in tbe environ к of Geneva; the gates of the town were already shut ; and I was obliged to pass the night at
Secheron, a village half a league to the east of the city. The sky was serene; and, as I was unable to rest, I resolved to visit the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not pass through the town, I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at Plainpalais. During this short voyage I saw the lightnings playing on the summit of Mont Blanc in the most beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly ; and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might ob¬ serve its progress. It advanced; the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the rain coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased. I quitted my seat, and walked on, althongh the darkness and storm in¬ creased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash over my bead. It was echoed from Salêve, the VOL, ï. H
Juras, and the Alps of Savoy ; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it ap¬ pear like a vast sheet of fire ; then for an instant every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the case in Switzer¬ land, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. The most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over that part of the lake which lies betweeen the promontory of Bel rive and the village of Copêt. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the east of the lake. -îWhile I watched the storm, so beau¬ tiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky elevated my spirits ; (clasped my hands,
and exclaimed aloud, " William, dear angel ! this is thy funeral, this thy dirge!" As I said these words, I per¬ ceived in the gloom, a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; I stood fixed, gazing intently: I could not be mistaken. A flash of lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect, more hideous than be¬ longs to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the filthy dæmon to whom I had given life. M hat did he there ? Could he be (ţ shuddered at tbe conception) the mur¬ derer of my brother ? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than 1 became convinced of its truth; ray teeth chattered, and I was forced to lean against a tree for support. The figure passed me quickly, and I lost и 2
it in the gloom. Nothing in human shape could have destroyed that fair child. He was the murderer! I could not doubt it. The mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact. I thought of pursuing the devil ; but it would have been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me hanging among the rocks of the nearly perpendicular ascent of Mont Salêve, a hill that bounds Plainpalais on the south. He soon reached the summit, and disappeared. I remained motionless. The thunder ceased ; but the rain still continued, and the scene was enveloped in an im¬ penetrable darkness. 1 revolved in my mind the events which 1 had until now sought to forget: the whole train of my progress towards the creation ; the appearance of the work of my own hands alive at my bed side ; its depar-
ture. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life; and was this his first crime? Alas! I had turned loose into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother ? No one can conceive tbe anguish I suffered during the remainder of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. But I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather ; my ima¬ gination was busy iu scenes of evil and despair. I considered the being whom I had cast among mankind, and en¬ dowed with the will and povier to effect purposes of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light of my own vampire, my o\wi spi¬ rit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me. Day dawned ; and I directed my steps и a
f owards the town . The gates were open ; and I hastened to røy father's house. My first thought was to discover what I knew of the murderer, and cause in¬ stant pursuit to be made. But I paused when I reflected on the story that I had to tell. A being whom I myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. I remem¬ bered also the nervous fever with which I had heen seized just at the time that I dated my creation, and which would give an air of delirium to a tale other¬ wise so utterly improbable. I well knew that if any other had communi¬ cated such a relation to me, I should have looked upon it as the ravings of insanity. Besides, the strange nature of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were so far credited as to per¬ suade mv relatives to commence it.
Besides, of what use would be pur¬ suit? Who could arrest a creature capahle of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Salêve ? These reflec* tions determined me, and I resolved to remain silent. It was about five in the morning when 1 entered my fathers house, í told the servants not to disturb the fa* mily, and went into the library to at> tend their usual hour of rising. Six years had elapsed, passed as a dream but for one indelible trace, and I stood in the same place where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. Beloved and respectable parent ! lie still remained to me. I gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the mantle- piece. It was an historical subject, painted at my father's desire, and re¬ presented Caroline Beaufort in an ago* h 4
ny of despair, kneeling hy the coffin of her dead father. Her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale ; but there was a» air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity. Be¬ low this picture was a miniature of W illiam ; and my tears flowed when 1 looked upon it. While 1 u as thus en¬ gaged, Ernest entered : he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me. He expressed a sorro« ful delight to see me: " Welcome, my dearest Victor," said he." Ah f I wish you had come three months ago, and then \ou would have found us all jo\ous and delighted. But we are now unhappy; and, I am afraid, tears instead of smiles will be л our welcome. Our father looks so sorrowful : this dreadful event seems to have revived in his mind his grief on the death of Mamma, Poor Eliza¬ beth also is quite inconsolable." Er*
nest began to weep as he said these words. " Do not," said I, " welcome me thus ; try to be more calm, that I may not be absolutelv miserable the moment I enter my father's house after so long an absence. But, tell me, how does my father support his misfortunes ? and how is my poor Elizabeth ?" " She indeed requires consolation ; she accused herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her very wretched. But since the murderer has been discovered------" u The murderer discovered ! Good God ! how can that be ? who could at¬ tempt to pursue him ? It is impossible ; one might as well try to overtake the winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw." " I do not know what you mean ; but we were all very unhappy when π 5
she was discovered. No one would believe it at first; and even now Eli¬ zabeth will not be convinced, notwith¬ standing all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family, could all at once become so extremely wicked ?" " Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused ? But it is wrong¬ fully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?" " No one did at first; but several cir¬ cumstances came out, that have almost forced conviction upon us г and her own behaviour has been so confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be tried to-day, and you will then hear all." He related that, the morning on which the murder of poor William had
been discovered, Justine had been taken ilí, and confined to her bed ; and, after several days, one of the servants, hajb pening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the murder, bad discovered in her pocket the. picture of my mother, which had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer, The servant instantly shewed it to one of the others, who, without saying a word to any of the family, went to a magistrate ; and, upon their deposition, Justine was apprehended. On being charged with the fact, the poor girl con¬ firmed the suspicion in a great mea¬ sure by her extreme confusion of manner. This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith ; and I replied ear¬ nestly, " You are ®i\ mistaken ; I know the murderer. Justine, poor, good Jus¬ tine» is innocent/'
At that instant my father entered. I saw nil happiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endea¬ voured to welcome me cheerfully ; and, after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced some other topic than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed, " Cood God, Papa ! Victor says that he knows who was the murderer of poor Wil¬ liam." " We do also, unfortunately," re¬ plied my father; " for indeed 1 had ra¬ ther have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ingratitude in one I valued so highly/* " My dear father, 30u are mistaken ; Justine is innocent/* " If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty. She is to be tried to-day, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted/'
This speech calmed me. I was firmly convinced in my own mind that Justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. I had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be brought forward strong enough to convict her ; and, in this assurance, ï calmed myself, expect¬ ing the trial with eagerness, but with¬ out prognosticating an evil result. We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had made great alterations in her form since I had last beheld her. Six years before she had been a pretty, good-humoured girl, whom every one loved and caressed. She was now a woman in stature and expression of countenance, which was uncommonly lovely. An open and capacious fore- bead gave indications of a good under¬ standing, joined to great frankness of disposition. Her eyes were hazel, and
expressive of mildness, now through recent affliction allied to sadness. Нет hair was of a rich dark auburn, her complexion fair, and her figure slight and graceful. She welcomed me with the greatest affection. "Your arrival, my dear cousin," said she, " fills me with hope. You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guilt¬ less Justine. Alas ! who is safe, if she be convicted of crime ? I rely on her innocence as certainly as I do upon my own. Our misfortune is doubly hard to us ; we have not only lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom I sincerely love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will not, I am sure she will not ; and then I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little William." 4î She is innocent, my Elizabeth,"
said I, " and that shall be proved ; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal." " How kind yon are ! every one else believes in her guilt, and that made me wretched ; for I knew that it was im¬ possible : and to see every one else pre¬ judiced in so deadly a manner, rendered me hopeless and despairing." She wept. " Sweet niece," said my father, « dry your tears. If she is, as you be¬ lieve, innocent, rely on the justice of our judges, and the activity with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality."
CHAPTER VII.
We passed a few sad hours, until eleven o'clock, when the trial was to commence. My father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend as witnesses, I accompanied them to the court. During the whole of this wretched mockery of justice, I suffered living torture. It was to be decided, whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of two of irjy fellow-beings: one a smiling babe, full of innocence and joy; the other far more dreadfully mur¬ dered, with every aggravation of in-
faray that could make the murder me¬ morable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit, and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy: now all was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave ; and I the cause ! A thousand times rather would I have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to Justine ; but I was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have been consi¬ dered as the ravings of a madman, and would not have exculpated her who suffered through me. The appearance of Justine was calm. She was dressed in mourning; and her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her feel¬ ings, exquisitely beautiful. Vet she appeared confident in innocence, and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by thousands; for all the
kindness which her beauty might other¬ wise have excited, was obliterated. in the minds of the spectators by the ima¬ gination of the enormity she was sup¬ posed to have committed. She was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evi¬ dently constrained ; and as her confu¬ sion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to an appearance of courage. When she entered the court, she threw her eyes round it, and quickly disco¬ vered where we were seated. A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us ; but she quickly recovered herself* and a look of sorrowful affection seem¬ ed to attest her utter guiltlessness. The trial began ; and after the advo¬ cate against her had stated the charge, several witnesses were called. Several strange facts combined against her, which might have staggered any one
who had not such proof of her inno¬ cence as I had. She had been out the whole of the night, ön which the mur¬ der had been committed, and towards morning had been perceived by a mar¬ ket-Woman not far from the spot where the body of the murdered child had been afterwards found. The woman asked her what she did there ; but she looked very strangely, and only return¬ ed a confused and unintelligible an¬ swer. She returned to the house about eight o'clock ; and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she re- pliedç that she had been looking for the child, and demanded earnestly, if any thing had been heard concerning him. When shewn the body, she fell into violent hysterics, and kept her bed for several days. The picture was then produced, which the servant had found in her pocket ; and when Elizabeth» in
a faltering voice, proved that it was the same which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and in¬ dignation filled the court. Justine was called on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded, her coun¬ tenance had altered. Surprise, horror, and misery, were strongly expressed. Sometimes she struggled with her tears; but when she was desired to plead, she collected her powers, and spoke in an audible although variable voice :— " God knows," she said, " how en¬ tirely I am innocent. But I do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me: I rest my innocence on a plain and simple explanation of the facts w li ich have been adduced against me ; and 1 hope the character 1 have always borne will incline my judges to a favourable interpretation, where
any circumstance appears doubtful or -suspicious/' She then related that, by the permis¬ sion of Elizabeth, she had passed the evening of the night on which the mur¬ der had been committed, at the house of an aunt at Chêne, a village situated at ahout a league from Geneva. On her return, at about nine o'clock, she met a man, who asked her if she had seen any thing of the child who was lost. She was alarmed by this account, and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain se¬ veral hours of tbe night in a barn be¬ longing to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. Unable to rest or sleep, she quitted her asylum early, that áshe might again endeavour to find my brother, If she had gone near the spot
where his body lay, it was without her knowledge. That she had been bewil¬ dered when questioned by the market- woman, was not surprising, since she had passed a sleepless night, and the fate of poor William was yet uncertain. Concerning the picture she could give no account. " I know/' continued the unhappy victim, " how heavily and fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but I have no power of explaining it ; and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been placed in my pocket. But here also I am checked. 1 believe that I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me wantonly. Did the murderer place it there? I know of no opportunity afforded him
for so doing; or if I bad, why should he have stolen the jewel, to part with it again so soon ? '* I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for hope. I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my character ; and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must be condemned, although I would pledge my salvation on my inno¬ cence." Several witnesses were called, who had known her for many years, and they spoke well of her; but fear, and hatred of the crime of which they sup* posed her guilty, rendered them timo¬ rous, and unwilling to come forward. Elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent dispositions and irre¬ proachable conduct, about to fail the accused, when, although violently agi-
táted, she desired permission to address the court. " I am," said she, " the cousin of the unhappy child who was murdered, or rather his sister, for I was educated hy and have lived with his parents ever since and even long before his birth. It may therefore be judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion ; but when I see a fellow-creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to be allowed to speak, that I may say what I know of her character. I am well acquainted with the accused. I have lived in the same house with her, at one time for ñve^ and at another for nearly two years. During all that period she appeared to me the most amiable and benevolent of human creatures. She nursed Madame Frankenstein, my aunt, in her last illness with the greatest affection and care ; and
afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew her. After which she again lived in my uncle's house, where she was beloved by all the family. She was warmly attached to the child who is now dead, and acted towards him like a most affectionate mother. For my own part, I do not hesitate to say, that, not¬ withstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temp¬ tation for such an action : as to the bau¬ ble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it, I should have willingly given it to her; so much do I esteem and value her." Excellent Elizabeth! A murmur of approbation was heard ; but it was ex¬ cited by her generous interference, and not in favour of poor Justine, on whom vol. ι. I
the public indignation was turned with renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude. She herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. Jhy own agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. I believed in her innocence; I knew it. Could the dæmon, who had (I did not for a minute doubt) mur¬ dered my brother, also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy. I could not sus¬ tain the horror of my situation ; and when I perceived that the popular voice, and the countenances of the judges, had already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the court in asronv. The tortures of the accused did not equal mine; she was sustained by inno¬ cence, but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom, and would not forego their hold, I passed anight of unmingled wretch-
edness. In the morning I went to the court ; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not ask the fatál question ; but I was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my visit. The ballots had been thrown ; they were all black, and Justine was condemned, I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before experienced sensations of horror ; and I have endea¬ voured to bestow upon them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I addressed myself added, that Justine had already confessed her guilt. " That evidence/' he observed, " was hardly required in so glaring a case, but I am glad of it ; and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a cri¬ minal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive/' ι 2
When I returned home, Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result. ' e My cousin," replied I, " it is de¬ cided as you may have expected ; all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer, than that one guilty should escape. But she has confessed." This was a dire blow to poor Eliza¬ beth, who had relied with firmness upon Justine's innocence. " Alas!" said she, "how shall I ever again believe in human benevolence? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on those smiles of inno¬ cence only to betray ; her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or ill- humour, and yet she has committed a murder." Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a wish to see my cousin. My father wished her not to go ; but said, that he left it to her own
judgment and feelings to decide. " Yes," said Elizabeth, « I will go, although she is guilty ; and you, Victor, shall accompany me: I cannot go alone/* The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet I could not refuse. We entered the gloomy prison-cham¬ ber, and beheld Justine sitting on some straw at the further end ; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on her knees. She rose on seeing us en¬ ter ; and when we were left alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My cou¬ sin wept also. " Oh, Justine !" said she, " why did you rob me of my last consolation. I relied on your innocence ; and al¬ though I was then very wretched, I was not so miserable as I am now." " And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked? Do you also ι a
join with my enemies to crush me?**" Her voice was suffocated with sobs. . u Rise, my poor girl," said Eliza¬ beth, " why do you kneel, if you are innocent ? I am not one of your ene¬ mies ; I believed you guiltless, notwith¬ standing every evidence, until I heard that you had yourself declared your guilt. That report, you say, is false ; and be assured, dear Justine, that no¬ thing can shake my confidence in you for a moment, but your own confes¬ sion/' " I did confess; but I confessed a lie. I confessed, that I might obtain absolution ; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins. The God of heaven forgive me ! Ever since I was condemned, my con¬ fessor has besieged me ; he threatened and menaced, until I almost began to think that I was the monster that he
said I was. He threatened excommu¬ nication and hell fire in my last mo¬ ments, if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on roe as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. What could Ido? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly mise¬ rable/' She paused, weeping, and then con¬ tinued—" I thought with horror, my sweet lady, that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. Dear Wil¬ liam ! dearest blessed child i I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that con¬ soles me, going as I am to suffer igno¬ miny and death/'
" Oh, Justine ! forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you. Why did you confess ? But do not mourn, my dear girl ; I will every where pro¬ claim your innocence, and force belief. Yet you must die ; you, ray playfellow, my companion, my more than sister. I never crn survive so horrible a mis¬ fortune/* ** Dear, sweet Elizabeth, do not weep. You ought to raise me with thoughts of a better life, and elevate me from the petty cares of this world of injustice and strife. Do not you, excellent friend, drive me to despair.** " I will try to comfort you ; but this, 1 fear, is an evil too deep end poignant to admit of consolation, for there is no hope. Yet heaven bless thee, my dear¬ est Justine, with resignation, and a con¬ fidence elevated beyond this world. Oh ï how I hate its shews and mock-
cries ! when one creature is murdered, another is immediately deprived of life in a slow torturing manner,; then the executioners, their hands yet reeking with the blood of innocence, believe that they have done a great deed. They call this retribution. Hateful name! When that word is pronounced, I know greater and more horrid punishments are going to be inflicted than the gloom¬ iest tyrant has ever invented to satiate his utmost revenge. Yet this is not consolation for you, my Justine, unlerø indeed that you may glory in escaping from so miserable a den. Alas! I would I were in peace with my aunt and my lovely William, escaped from a world w hich is hateful to me, and the visages of men which I abhor/' Justine smiled languidly. ** This, dear lady, is despair, and not resigna¬ tion. 1 must not learn the lesson that
you would teach me. Talk of some¬ thing else, something that will bring peace, and not increase of misery." During this conversation I had retired to a corner of the prison-room, where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. Despair ! Who dared talk of that? The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the dreary boundary between life and death, felt not as I did, such deep and bitter agony. I gnashed my teeth, and ground them together, uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul. Jus¬ tine started. W T hen she saw who it was, she approached me, and said, " Dear Sir, you are very kind to visit me; you, í hope, do not believe that I am guilty/' I could not answer. " No, Justine/' said Elizabeth ; " he is more convinced of your innocence than I was; for
even when he heard that you had con¬ fessed, he did not credit it." " I truly thank him. In these last moments I feel the sincerest gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I am ! It removes more than half my misfor¬ tune; and I feel as if I could die in peace, now that my innocence is ac¬ knowledged by youy dear lady, and your cousin." Thus the poor sufferer tried to com¬ fort others and herself. She indeed gained the resignation she desired. But I, the true murderer, felt the never- dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or consolation. Elizabeth also w*ept, and was unhappy; but her's also was the misery of inno¬ cence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair moon, for a while bides,
but cannot tarnish its brightness. An¬ guish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me, which nothing could extin¬ guish. We staid several hours with Justine; and it was with great diffi¬ culty that Elizabeth could tear herself away. 4t I wish," cried she, " that 1 were to die with you ; I cannot live in this world of misery." Justine assumed an air of cheerful¬ ness, while she with difficulty repressed her bitter tears. She embraced Eliza¬ beth, and said, in a voice of half-sup¬ pressed emotion, " Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only frìend ; may heaven iñ its bounty bless and preserve you ; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer. Live, and be happy, and make others so. As we returned, Elizabeth said, " You
know not, my dear Victor, how much I am relieved, now that I trust in the in¬ nocence of this unfortunate girl. ï never could again have known peace, if I had been deceived in my reliance on her. For the moment that I did believe her guilty, I felt an anguish that I could not have long sustained. Now my heart is lightened. The inno¬ cent suffers; but she whom I thought amiable and good has not betrayed the trust I reposed in her, and I am con¬ soled. Amiable cousin ! such were your thoughts, mild and gentle as your own dear eyes and voice. But I—I was a wretch, and none ever conceived of the misery that I then endured. END OF VOL. I.
VOL. I.
&
