Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The last man
THE LAST MAN.
CHAPTER I. I am the native of a sea-surrounded nook, a cloud-enshadowed land, which, when the surface ofthe globe, with its shoreless ocean and trackless continents, presents itself to my mind, appears only as an inconsiderable speck in the immense whole; and yet, when balanced in the scale of mental power, far outweighed countries of larger extent and more numerous population. So true it is, that man's mind alone was the creator of all that was good or great to man, and that vol. i. в
Nature herself Avas only his first minister. Eng¬ land, seated far north in the turbid sea, now visits mj dream·** m the -semblant e of ΰ Vaţ>t und well-manned ship, which mastered the winds and rode proudly over the waves. In my bov ish days she was the universe to me, AVhen I stood on my native hills, and savv plain and mountain stretch out lo the utmost limits tif my Abiov speckled hy the dwellings ofmy country¬ men, and subdued to fertility by their labour*, the earth 4 .·» very centre was fixed for me in thai spot, and the rest of heľ orb vvas as a fable, to have forgotten Avhich would have cost neither m\ imagination nor understanding au effort. My fortunes have been, from the beginning* an exemplification of the power that mutability may possess олег the varied tenor of man's, life. AVith regard to myself, this came ahmtet by inheritance. Ыу father was one of those men on a*, horn nature had bestowed to prodigality the envied gift·* of wit and imaginai ion, and then left his bark of life to be impelled by these
winds, widiout adding reason as die rudder, or judgment as the pilot for the voyage. His ex¬ traction was obscure ; but circumstances brought him early into public noiice, and hk small Internal property was soon dissipated in the splendid scene of fashion ami luxury in which he was an actor. During the short years of thoughtless youth, he was adored hy the high-bred triflcrs of thr day, nor least by the youthful sovereign, vvho escaped from the in¬ trigues of party, and the arduous duties of kingly business, to fìnti never-failing amusement and exhilaration of spirit in his society. My father s impulses, never under his own controul, per¬ petually led him into difficulties from which his ingenuity alone could extricate him ; and the accumulating pile of debts of honour and of trade, which wou hi have bent ïo arth any other, was supported by him with a light spirit and tameless hilarity; while his company was so necessary at the tables and assemblies of the rich, that his derelictions were considered ve¬ il 2
nial, and he himself received wiih intoxicating flatterv. This kind of popularity, like every other, is evanescent : and the difficulties of every kind with which he had to contend, increased in a frightful ratio compared with his small means of extricating himself. At such times the king, in his enthusiasm for him, wtnild come to bis relief, and then kindly take bis friend to task ; mv father gave the best promises for amend¬ ment, but his social disposition, his craving for tbe usual diet of admiration, and more tlian all, the fiend of gambling, which fully possessed bim, matle bis good résolutions transient, his promises vain. AVith the quirk sensibility peruliar to his temperament, he perceived his power in tbe brilliant circle to be on the wane. The king married; and the haughty princess of Austria, who became, as queen of Englanti. the head of fasbion, looked wilh harsh eyes on liis defects, and wilh conte nipt on the affection her royal iiusband rulrrtaiikd for hini. My
father felt that his fall was near; but so far from profiting by this last calm before the storm to save himself, hc sougiit to forget anti- cipatcd evil by making still greater sacrifices to the deity of pleasure, deceitful and cruel arbiter of his destiny, Tiie king, who was a man of excellent dis¬ tinguions, but easily led, had now become ;i wilting disciple of his imperious consort. He was induced tt) look vvith extreme disapproba* tion. mid at last with distaste, on my fatlier's imprudence and follies. It is true thaf his pre¬ sence dissipated these clouds ; his warm-hearted frankness, brilliant sallies, and confiding de¬ meanour were irresistible: it was only when at a distance, while still renewed tales of his errors were poured into liis royal friend's ear, that he lost his influence. The queen's dextrous manage¬ ment vvas employed to prokmg these absences, and gather together accusations. At length thr king was brought to see in him a source of per¬ petual disquiet, knowing that he should pay for
the short-lived pleasure of his society by tedious homilies, and more painful narrations of excesses the truth of which he could not disprove. The result was, that he would make one more attempt to reclaim him, and İn case of ill success, cast him off for ever. Such a scene must have been one of deepest interest and high-wrought passion. A powerful icing, conspicuous for a gootlness which had heretofore made him meek, and now lofty İn his admonitions, vvith alternate entreaty and reproof, besought his friend to attend to his real interests, resolutely to avoid those fascinations which in fact were fast deserting him, and tt» sjiend his great jxiwers on a worthy field, in which he, his sovereign, would be his prop, his stay, and his pioneer. My father felt thiskind- aess ; for a moment ambitious dreams floated liefore him ; and he thought that it would be well to exchange his present pursuits for nobler duties. With sincerity and fervour he gave the required promise : as a pledge of continued fa-
vour, he received from his royal master a sum of money to defray pressing debts, and enable him to enter under good auspices his new ca¬ reer. That very night, wldle yet fuU of grati¬ tude and good resolves, this whole sum, and its amount doubled, was loet at the gaming-table. In Ms desire to rejaair his first losses, my father risked double stakes, and thus incurred a debt of honour he was wholly unable to pay. Ashamed to apply again to the king, he turned his back upon London, its false delights and clinging miseries; antl, with poverty for his sole com¬ panion, buried himself in solitude among the hills and lakes of Cumberland. His wit, his bon mots the record of his pe rsonal attractions, fascinating manners, and social talents, were long remembered and repeated from mouth to mouth. Ask Avhere now was this favourite of fashion, this companion of the noble, this ex¬ celling beam, which gilt with alien splendour the assemblies of the courtly and the gay—you Iieard that he was under a cloud, a lost man ;
not one tliought it belonged to him to repay pleasure by real services, or that his long reign of I ilh'ant Avit deserved a pension on retiring. The king lamented his absence; he loved tt) repeat his sayings, relate the adventures they had had together, and exalt his talents—but here ended his reminiscence. Meamvhile my father, forgotten, could not forget. He repined for the loss of vvhat was more necessary to him than air or food—the excitements of pleasure, the admiration of the noble, the luxurious and polished living of the great. A nervous fever was the consequence; (hiring which be was nursed by the 1 daughter of a poor cottager, under whose roof be lodged. She was lovely, gentle, antl, above all, kind to him ; nor can it afford astonishment, that the late idol of high-bred beauty should, even in а fallen state, appear a being of an elevated and won¬ drous nature to the lovvly cottage-girl. The attachment between them led to the ill-fated marriage, of vvhich I was the offspring.
Notwithstanding the tenderness and sweetiU"**» of my mother, her husband still deplored his degraded state, Unaccustomed to industry, he knew not in what way to contribute to the siqi- jiort of his increasing family. Sometime« Hr llmugbt of rpplying to the king; pride and shame for a while withheld him; and, beforr his neces-Htiics became so imperious as to compel liim It) some kind of exert; he died. For tme brief interval before tbis catastrophe, he looked forward to tlie future, ami contemplateti with anguish the desolate situation in which bis wife and children vvouhl he left. His last effort vse* a letter to the king, full of touching elo¬ quence, antl of occasional flashr- of that brilliant sjiirit w hirh was an integral jiart of bins. He bequeathed bis widow ami orphans to the frieiul- sbij) of his rovai master, em! felt satisfied that. by this means, their prosperity was better assured in bis death than in İıis life. This letter was en- closet 1 tt) the tare of ¿ι nobleman, who, he tlitl not
doubt, would perfonn the last and inexpensive office of placing it in the king's own haml. He dietl in tlebt, and his little property was seized immediately by his creditors. Ыу mo¬ ther, penny less and burthened vvith two children, waitetl week after week, anil month after month. in sickening expectation of a reply, vvhich never came. Sbe hati no experience beyond her fa¬ ther's cottage ; and the mansion of the lortl of the manor was the chiefest type of grandeur sbe coniti conceive. During my father's life, slie had been made familiar vvitli the name of royalty and the courtly circle; but such things, ill ac¬ cording vvitli her personal experience, appeared, after the loss of him vvho gave substance and reality to theni, vague and fantastical. If, under any circumstances, sbe could have ac¬ quired suflicient courage to address the noble persons mentioned by her husband, the iil suc¬ cess of his own application caused her to banish the idea. She savv therefore no escape frtnn
dire penury: perpetual care, joined to sorrovv for the loss of the wondrous being, whom she continued to contemplate with anient admira¬ tion, hard labour, and naturally delicate health, at length released her from the sad continuity bf want and misery. * The condition of her orphan children was peculiarly desolate. Her ovvn father had been an emigrant from another part of the country, and had dietl long since : they had uo one rela¬ tion to take them by the hand; they were out- easts, paupers, unfriended beings, to whom the most scanty pittance was a matter of favour, ami who vvere treated merely as children of peasants, yet poorer than the poorest, who, dying, had left tliem, a thankless bequest, to the close- handed charity of the land. 1, the eitler of the two, was five vears okl vvhen my mother died. A remembrance of the discourses of my parents, and the communica¬ tions which my moiher endeavoured tt) impress upon me concerning my father's friends, in slight
hope that I might one day derive benefit from the knowledge, floated like an indistinct dream through my brain. I conceived that I was dif¬ ferent and superior to my protectors and com¬ panions but I knew not hovv or wherefore. The sense of injury, associated with the name of king and noble, clung to me ; but I could draw no conclusions from such feelings, to serve as a guide to action. My first real knowledge of myself was as an unprotected orphan among the valleys and fells of Cumberland. I was in the service of a farmer; and with crook in hand, my dog at my side, I shepherded a numerous flock on the near uplands. I cannot say much in praise of such a life ; and its pains far ex¬ ceeded its pleasures. There was freedom in it, a companionship with nature, and a reckless loneliness; but these, romantic as they were, did not accord with the love of action and desire of human sympathy, characteristic of youth. Neither the care of my flock, nor the change of seasons, were sufficient to tame my eager spirit ;
my out-door life and unemployed time were the temptations that led me early into lawless habits. I associated with others friendless like myself; I formed them into a band, I was their chief and captain. All shepherd-boys alike, whil? our flocks Avere spread over the pastures, we schemed and executed many a mischievous prank, which drew on us the anger andie- \ T enge of the rustics. I was the leader and pro¬ tector of my comrades, and as I became dis¬ tinguished among them, their misdeeds were usually visited upon me. But while I endured punishment and pain in their defence with the spirit of an hero, I claimed as my reward their praise and obedience. In such a school my disposition became rug¬ ged, but firm. The appetite for admiration and small capacity for self-controul which I in¬ herited from my father, nursed by adversity, made me daring and reckless. I was rough as the elements, and unlearned as the animals I tended. I often compared myself to them, and
finding that my chief superiority consisted in power, I soon persuaded myself that it Avas in povu-r only that î was inferior to the chiefest potentates of the earth. Thus untaught in re¬ fined philosophy, and pursued by a restless feeling of degradation from my true --bition in society, I wandered among the hills of civilized Englanti as uncouth a savage as the wolf-bred founder of old Hume. I owned but one law, it was that of the strongest, and my greatest dvcd of virtue was never to submit. Vet let me a little retract from this sentence I bave passed tm myself. My mother, when dving, had, 'm addition to her other half-for¬ gotten and misapplird lessons, committed, with solemn exhortation, lier other child to my fra¬ ternal guardianship: and this one duty I per¬ formed tt» the best of my ability, with all the zeal and aflection of which my nature was ca¬ pable. My sister was throe years younger than mvself; I had nursed her as an infant, and when the diflerence of our sexes, by giving us
various occupations, in a great measure divided us, yet she continued to lie the object t)f un¬ careful love. Oqihans, İn the fullest sense of the term, vve were poorest among thr poor, and despised among the unhoiioured. If my daring and courage obtained for me a kintl of respect¬ ful aversion, her youth and sex, since they did not excite tenderness, by proving hrr to !κ· wrak, vt ere the causes of mnulieriess mortifica¬ tion·* to hrr ; and her w» disposition was not se> coifetituted as to diminish the evil efiects of her lowly stallon. She was a singular bring, and, like me, in- hcritcd much of the peculiar disposition of onr father. Her countenance was all expression; hrr eye·« w err not dark, hut impenetrably deep; you seemeti to discover spare after space in their intellectual glance, and to feel that the soul which was their soul, comprehended an universe of thought in ils ken. Sin* was pale and fair, and brr golden hair clustered on her temples, contrasting ib rich hue with the living
marble heueaih Her coarse peasant dress, litlle consonant apparently with the refinement oi fcťimg AAiiith her fate expressed, vet in a strange manner accortisi with it. She was like one of Guido's saints, with heaven in lier heart and iu her look, so tbat when you .saw lier )ou oiriy thought of that witiiin, and costume and even feature were secondar) to the mind that beamed in her countenance. Vet though lovely iuid full of noble feeling, my ptKir Penlita (for this was the fanciful name mv siste; bad received from her dying pai nil), was not altogether saintly in her disposition. Her manners were told and repulsive, if she had been nurtured bv those who had reearded her vvith affection, she might have bern tuf¬ fe rent ; but unloved and neglected, Jie rrpuitl want of kintlnes-s wiih distrust and silener. She vwb submissive to tliose wbo held authoi it) over her, but a ptrpetual c'oud dwelt on her brow ; she looketl as if she expeeted nuni t y firm every oue vv ho approached her, and her actions wen*
instigated by the same feeling. All the time site could command she sjient in solitude*. Sbt* would nimble to the most unfrcquentd places, ami scale daiigenms heights, that in those un- visited spots she might vvraji herself in loneli¬ ness. Often she passed Avhole hours walking uji and tlown the paths of the woods ; slie wove garlands of flowers and ivy, or watched the flickering of the shadows and glancing of the leaves ; sometimes she sat beside a stream, and as lier thoughts paused, threw flowers or peb¬ bles into the vv ¿iters watching hovv those swam and these sank ; or sîıe wouid set afloat lioats ftirmet! of hark of trees or leaves, with a feather for a sail, antl intensely vvateh the navigation of hrr craft mining the rapids and shallows of the brook. Meanwhile hrr arrive fancy wove a thousand combinations; she dreamt ** of moving accidents by flood and field"—she lost herself delightedly in these self-created wanderings, and returned w ith umvilling spirit to the dull detail of common life.
Poverty was the cloud that veiled her excel¬ lencies, and all that was good in her seemed about to perish from want of the genial dew of aflection. She had not even the same advan¬ tage as I in the recoUection of her jiarents ; she clung to me, lier brother, as her only friend, but her alliance with me completed the distaste that her protectors felt for her ; and every error was magnified by them into crimes. If she had been bred in that sphere of life to which by in¬ heritance the delicate framework of her mind antl jierson was adapted, she would have lieen the object almost of adoration, for her virtues vvere as eminent as her defects. All the genius that ennobled the blood of her father illustrated hers ; a generous tide flowed in her veins ; ar» tifice, envy, or meanness, were at the antipodes of her nature ; her countenance, when enlight¬ ened by amiable feeling, might have belonged to a queen of nations; her eyes were bright; her кюк fearless. Although by our situation and dispositions
we were almost equally cut off from the usual forms of social intercourse, we formed a strong contrast to each other. I always required the stimulants of companionship and applause. Per¬ dita was all-sufficient to herself. Notwithstand¬ ing my lawless habits, my disposition was socia¬ ble, hers recluse. My life was spent among tangible realities, hers was a dream. í might be said even to loA*e my enemies, sime by ex¬ citing me they in a sort bestowed happiness ujKni me ; Perdita almost disliked her friends, for they interfered with her visionary moods. All my feeHngs, even of exultation and triumph, were changed to bitterness, if unţtarticipated; Perdita, even in joy, fleti to loneliness, and could go on from day to day, neither expressing her emotions, nor seeking a fellow-feeling in another mind. Nay, she could love and dwell with tenderness on the look and voice of her friend, while her demeanour expressed the coldest reserve. A sensation with her became a sentiment, and she never spoke until she had
mingled her perceptions of outward objects with others which were the native groAvth of her own mind. She was like a fruitful soil that imbibed the airs and dews of heaven, and gave them fortli again to light in lovehest forms of fruits and flowers ; but then she was often dark and rugged as that soil, raked up, and new sown with unseen seed. She dwelt in a cottage whose ,trim grass-plat sloped down to the waters of the lake of Uls- water ; a beech wood stretched up the hill be¬ hind, and a purling brook gently falling from the acclivity ran through poplar-shaded banks into the lake. . I hved with a farmer whose house was built higher up among the hills : a dark crag rose behind it, and, exposed to the north, the snow lay in its crevices the summer through. Before dawn I led. my flock to the sheep-walks, and guarded them through the day. It was a life of toil; for rain and cold were more frequent than sunshine ; but it was my pride to contemn the elements. My trusty
dog watched the sheep as I slipped away to the rendezvous of my comrades, and thence to the accomplishment of our schemes. At noon we met again, and avc threAv away in contempt our peasant fare, as avc built our fire-place and kindled the cheering blaze destined to cook the game stolen from the neighbouring preserves. Then came the tale of hair-breadth escapes, combats with dogs, ambush and flight, as gipsey-like avc encompassed our pot. The search after a stray lamb, or the devices hy which Ave elude or endeavoured to elude punish¬ ment, filled up the hours of afternoon ; in the evening my flock Avent to its fold, and I to my sister. It was seldom indeed that we escaped, to use an old-fashioned phrase, scot free. Our dainty fare was often exchanged for blows and impri¬ sonment. Once, when thirteen years of age, I was sent for a month to the county jail. I came out, my morals unimproved, my hatred to my oppressors encreased tenfold. Bread and
water did not tame my blood, nor solitary confinement inspire me with gentle thoughts. I was angry, impatient, miserable; my only happy hours were those during Avhich I devised schemes of revenge ; these were perfected in my forced solitude, so that during the Avhole of the folloAnring season, and I was freed early in Sep¬ tember, I never failed to provide excellent and plenteous fare for myself and my comrades. This was a glorious winter. The sharp frost and heavy snows tamed the animals, and kept the country gentlemen by their firesides; we got more game tlian Ave could eat, and my faith¬ ful dog grew sleek upon our refuse. Thus years passed on ; and years only added fresh love of freedom, and contempt for all that was not as wild and rude as myself. At the age of sixteen I had shot up in appearance to man's estate ; I was tall and athletic ; I was practised to feats of strength, and inured to the inclemency of the elements. *My skin Avas em¬ browned by the sun ; my step was firm Avith
conscious power. I feared no man, and loved none. In after life I looked back with wonder to what I then Avas; how utterly worthless I should have become if I had pursued my 1алу- less career. My life was hke that of an animal, and my mind was in danger of degenerating into that which inform^ brute nature. Un¬ til now, my savage habits had done me no radical mischief; my physical powers had grown up and flourished under their influence, and my mind, undergoing the same discipline, was im¬ bued with all the hardy virtues. But now my boasted independence was daily instigating me to acts of tyranny, and freedom was be¬ coming licentiousness. I stood on the brink of manliood; passions, strong as the trees of a fo¬ rest, had already taken root within me, and were about to shadow with their noxious over¬ growth, my path of Hfe. I panted fcr enterprises beyond my childish exploits, and formed distempered dreams of fu¬ ture action. I avoided my ancient comrades,
and I soou lost them. They arrived at the age . when they were sent to fulfil their destined situations in life ; while I, an outcast, with none to lead or drive me forward, paused. The old began to point at me as an example, the young to wonder at me as a being distinct from themselves ; I hated them, and began, last and worst degradation, to hate myself. I clung to my ferocious habits, yet half despised them ; I continued my war against civilization, and yet entertained a wish to belong to it. I revolved again and again all that I remem¬ bered my mother to have told me of my fatlier's former life; I contemplated the few relics I possessed belonging to him, which spoke of greater refinement than could be found among the mountain cottages ; but nothing in all this served as à guide to lead me to another and pleasanter way of life. My father had been connected with nobles, but all I knew of such connection was subsequent neglect. The name of the king,—he to whom my dying father had
addressed his latest prayers, and who had bar¬ barously slighted them, was associated only with the ideas of unkindness, injustice, and consequent resentment. I was born for some¬ thing greater than I was—and greater I would become; but greatness, at least to my distorted j>erceptions, was no necessary associate of good¬ ness, and my wild thoughts were unchecked by moral considerations when they rioted in dreams of distinction. Thus I stood upon a pinnacle, a sea of evil rolled at my feet ; I was about to precipitate myself into it, and nish like a tor¬ rent over all obstructions to the object of my wishes—when a stranger influence came over tbe current of my fortunes, and changed their boisterous course to what was in comparison like the gentle mcandcrings of a meadow-en¬ circling streamlet.
VOL. I.
с
CHAPTER II.
I LiA r ED far from the busy haunts of men, and the rumour of wars or political changes came worn to a mere sound, to our mountain abodes. England had been the scene of momentous struggles, during my early boyhood. In the year 2073, the last of its kings, the ancient friend of my father, had abdicated in com¬ pliance with the gentle force of the remon¬ strances of his subjects, and a republic was in¬ stituted. Large estates were secured to the dethroned monarch and his family ; he received the title of Earl of AA r indsor, and AA r indsor Castle, an ancient royalty, vvith its wide de¬ mesnes were a part of his allotted wealth. He
died soon after, leaving two children, a son and a daughter. The ex-queen, a princess of the house of Austria, had long impelled her husband to withstand the necessity of the times. She was haughty and fearless; she cherished a love of pow r cr, and a bitter contempt for him who had despoiled himself of a kingdom. For her chil¬ dren's sake alone she consented to remain, shorn of regality, a member of tlic English republic. AVhen she became a widow, she turned all her thoughts to the educating her son Adrian, second Earl of AVindsor, so as to accom¬ plish her ambitious ends ; and witJi his mother's milk he imbibed, and ivas intendetl to grow up in the steady purpose of re-acquiring hi> lost crown. Adrian was now fifteen years of age. He was addicted to study, and imbued beyond his years with learning and talent : report said that he had already begun to thwart his mother's views, and to entertain republican principles. However this might be, tlie haughty Countess c M
entrusted none with the secrets of her family- tuition. Adrian Avas bred up in solitude, and kept apart from the natural companions of his age and rank. Some unknoAvn circumstance novv induced his mother to send him from under her immediate tutelage ; and we heard that he was about to visit Cumberland. A thousand tales were rife, explanatory of the Countess of Windsor's conduct; none true probably; but each day it became more certain that Ave should have the noble scion of the late regal house of England among us. There was a large estate Avith a mansion at¬ tached to it, belonging to this family, at Uls- water. A large park Avas one of its appendages, laid out with great taste, and plentifully stocked with game. I had often made depredations on these preserves ; and the neglected state of the property facilitated my incursions. AVhen it Was decided that the young Earl of Windsor should visit Cumberland, Avorkmen arrived to put the house and grounds in order for his re-
ception. The apartments were restored to their jiristine splendour, and the park, all disrepairs restored, was guarded with unusual care. I was beyond measure disturbed by this in¬ telligence. It roused all my dormant recollec¬ tions, my suspended sentiments of injury, and gave rise to the new one of revenge. I could no longer attend to my occupations; all my jilans and devices were forgotten; I seemed about to begin life anew, and that under no good auspices. The tug of war, I tliought, was now to begin. He would come triumph¬ antly to the district to which my parent had fled broken-hearted; he WOuld find the ill- fated offspring, bequeathed with such vain con¬ fidence to his royal father, miserable paupers. That he should know of our existence, and treat us, near at hand, vvith the same contumely wiiich his father had practised in distance and absence, appeared to me the certain consequence of all that had gone before. Thus then I should meet this titled stripling—the son of
my father's friend. He would be hedged in by servants; nobles, and tlie sons of noble«, wen* hh companions; ali England rang with bis name ; and his coming, like a thunderstorm. was beard from far: while I, unlettered and unfashioued, should, if I came in contati with him, in the judgment of bis courtly folk)wcrs. bear evidence in my very person tt) the propriety ofthat ingratitude whieh had made me the tlc¬ graded being I appeareth With mv mind fully occupied by these idea*·. í might be said as if fascinated, lo haunt tht destinoti abotle of the young Earl. I watrhtti the progress ofthe improvements, and sttuul by the unlading waggons, as various articles nt luxury, brought from London, were taken forth and conveyed into the mansion. It was part of the Ex-Qiiren's plan, to surround her son with princely magnificence. I beheld rich carpet«* and silken hangings ornaments of gold, richly embossed metals emblazoned furniture. and all the appendages of high rank arranged.
*ίΐι that nothing but what was regal in splen¬ dour should reach the eye of one oí royal de-cent. I looked on t Нел· ; I turned my gazt to mv own mean drv«. —Whence sprung this difference '* Whence but from ingratitude. from falseluMrtl, from a dereliction on the part of tlie prince's father, of all noble sympathy and v-uerous ferlini»;. Doubtless*** he also, whose bliKid received n mingling tide from his pronti moi hrr — hr, lhe acknowledged focus of the kingdom*-** wealth and nobility, iiad lieen taught to repeat my father's name vvith disdain« and to **titfi" at my just claim*-* to protection. I strove to think that all tliis grandeur wa·* but more glaring infamy, and that, by planting his gold¬ en woven Hag beside my larnishotl and tattered banner, he proclaimed not his superiority, but his debasement. Ye» 1 envied him. Iiis* stud of beautiful horses, his arms of costly Avorkman- >b'tp, the praise thai attendi d him, the adoration, reatly servitor, high place and high esteem,—1 i tmsitlered ihem as forcibly wrenched from me,
and envied tbem aH with novel and tormenting bitterness Tt) eroAvn my vexation of spirit. Perdita, lhe \isionary Perdita, seernet! to awake tt» real life with transport, wlien she told me that the Earl of AA'indsor Avas about to arrive, " And this jileases you?" I observed. moodily. " Indeed it does, Lionel, 4 ' -iie replied ; ** i quite long to ser him ; he is the tlescemtant of our kings, the first noble of the laud: every one ad n iire.s aud luves him, and they say that his rank is his least merit ; he is genermi>. brave, ami affable." " You have learnt a pretty leseni, Perdita," saitl I, ** and repeat it so litvally, that you forget tlie while the proofs we he ve of the Earľs Aİrtues; his generosity to is is manifest in our plenty, his bravery in the protection he affords- is, his affability in the notice he takes of us. His rank his least merit, tlo you say ? Why, all his virtues are tlerived from his station only ;
because he is rich, he is called generous ; Ы». eau-M» lu* is powerful, brave; because hr is welt served, he is affable. Let tlicm call him ч\ let all England lielieve him to be thu«—we know bim—die is our enemy—our penurious, dastardly, arrogant enemy; if he were gifted witli onr partiele of the virtues you rail his, hc would <h) justly by us, if it wen only to shew, that if he must strike, it should uot be a fallen for. His father injured my father—h'.s father, unassailable on Ыч throne, dared de¬ spise him who only stooped beneath himself, when he deigned to associate vvith the royal ingrate, Wc, descendants from the one am! the other, must be enemies ако. He shall find that I can feel my injuries; be shall ivum ν dread my revenge!" A fvw days after he arrived. Every inha¬ bitant of the most miserable cottage, vvent to swell the stream of population tliat pound forth to meet him : even Penlita, in spite ofmy late philippic, crept near the highway, to behold
this idol of all hearts. I, driven half mad, as I met party after party of the country people, iu tlieir holiday best, descending the hills, escaped to their cloud-veiled summits, and looking on the sterile rocks about me, exclaimed—" They do not cry, long live the Earl!" Nor, when night came, accompanied by drizzling rain and cold, would I return home ; for I knew that each cottage rang with the praises of Adrian ; as I felt my limbs grow numb and chill, my pain served as food for my insane aversion ; nay, I almost triumphed in it, since it seemed to afford me reason and excuse for my hatred of my unheeding adversary. All was attributed to him, for I confounded so entirely the idea of father and son, that I forgot that the latter might be wholly unconscious of his parent's ne¬ glect of us ; and as I struck my aching head with my hand, I cried : *' He sliall hear of tins í I will be revengedi I will not suffer like a spaniel I He shall know, beggar and friendless as» Tarn, that I will not tamely submit to injury Í"
Each day, each hour added to these exagge¬ rated wrongs. His praises were so many adder's stings infixed in my vulnerable breast. If I saw him at a distance, riding a beautiful horse, my blood boiled with rage; the air seemed poisoned by his presence, and my very native English was changed to a vile jargon, since every phrase I heard was coupled with his name and honour. I panted to relieve this painful heart¬ burning by some misdeed that should rouse him to a sense of my antipathy. It was the heigh ι of his offending, that he should occasion in me such intolerable sensations, nnd not deign him¬ self to afford any demonstration that he Avas aware that I even lived to feel them. It soon became known that Adrian took great delight in his park and preserves. He never sported, but sjient hours in watching the tribes of lovely and almost tame animals witli which it was stocked, and ordered that greater care should be taken of them than ever. Here was an opening for my plans of offence, and I made
use of it with all the brute impetuosity I derived from my active mode of life. I projiosed the enterprize of poaching on his demesne to my few remaining comrades, vvho were the most de¬ termined and lawless of the crew ; but they all «hrunk from the peril ; so I was left to achieve my revenge myself. At first my exjiloits were unperceived; I increased in daring; footsteps on the dewy grass, torn boughs, and marks of slaughter, at length betrayed me to the game¬ keepers. They kept better watch ; I was taken, and sent to prison. I entered its gloomy walls in a fit of triumphant extasy : " He feels me now/' I cried, " and shall, again and again !" —I passed but one day in confinement ; in the evening I was liberated, as I was told, by the or¬ der of the Earl liimseif. Tliis news precipitated me from my self-raised pinnacle of honour. He desjiises me, I thought ; but he shall learn that I despise hini, and hold in equal contempt his punishments and his clemency. On the second night after my release, I was again taken by
the gamekeepers—again imprisoned, and again released; and again, such was my pertinacity; did the fourth night find me in the forbidden park. The gamekeepers Avere more enraged than tlieir lord by my obstinacy. They had re¬ ceived orders tbat if 1 Avere again taken, I shoukl be brought to the Earl ; and his lenity made them expect a conclusion which they considered ill befitting my crime. One of them, avIio had been from the first the leader among tliose who had seized me, resolved to satisfy his own resentment, before he made me over to the higher powers. The late setting of the moon, and the extreme caution I Avas obliged to use in this my third expedition, consumed so much time, that some¬ thing like a qualm of fear came over me when I perceived dark night yield to twilight. I crept along by the fern, on my hands and knees, seeking the shadowy coverts of the un¬ derwood, while the birds awoke with unwelcome •ong above, and the fresh morning Avind, play-
ing among the boughs, made me suspect a foot¬ fall at eacli turn. My lieart beat quick as 4 approached the palings ; my hand was on one of them, a leap vvould take me to the other side, when two keejiers sprang from an ambush upon me: one knocked me down, and proceeded to inflict a severe horse-whipping. I started uja — a knife was in my grasp ; I made a plunge at his raised right anu, and inflicted a deep¿ wide wound in his hand. The rage and yells of the wounded man, tlie howling execrations of his comrade, wliich I answered with equal bitter¬ ness and fury, echoed tlirough the dell ; morn¬ ing broke more and more, ill accordant in its celestial beauty witli our brute and noisy contest. I and my enemy were still struggling, when the wounded man exclaimed, ** The Earl Γ I sprang out of the herculean hold of the keeper, panting from my exertions ; I cast furious glances on my persecutors, and placing myself vvith my back to a tree, resolved to defend myself to the last. My garments were torn, and they, as well as
my hands, Avere stained with the blood of the man I had wounded; one hand grasped the dead birds—my hard-earned prey, the other held the knife ; my hair was matted ; my face besmeared with the same guilty signs tbat bore Avitness against me on the dripping instrument I clenched; my whole appearance was haggard and squalid. Tall and muscular as I Avas in form, I must have looked like, wbat indeed I was, the merest ruffian that ever trod the earth. The name of the Earl startled me, and causetl all the indignant blood that warmed my heart to rush into my cheeks ; I had never seen him be¬ fore; I figured to myself a haughty, assum¬ ing youth, who would take me to task, if he deigned to speak to me, with ail the arrogance of superiority. My reply was ready ; a reproach I deemed calculated to sting his very heart. He came up the while; and his appearance blew aside, with gentle western breath, my cloudy wrath ; a tall, slim, fair boy, with a physiognomy
expressive of the excess of sensibility and refine¬ ment stood before me; the morning sunbeams tinged with gold his silken hair, and spread light and glory over his beaming countenance. " How is this ? v he cried. The men eagerly began their defence ; he put them aside, saying, " Two of you at on-ce on a mere lad—for shame Г He came up to me : " Verney,* he cried, '* Lionel Verney, do we meet thus for the first time? AVe Avere born to be friends to each other ; and though ill fortune has divided us, will you not acknoAv¬ ledge the hereditary bond of friendship which I trust will hereafter unite us ?" As he spoke, his earnest eyes, fixed on me, seemed to read my very soul: my heart, my savage revengeful heart, felt the influence of sweet benignity sink upon it ; AA'hile his thrilling voice, like sweetest melody, awoke a mute echo within me, stirring to its depths the life-blood in my frame. I desired to reply, to acknowledge his goodness, accept his proffered friendship; but words, fitting words, were not afforded to
the rough mountaineer ; I would have held out my hand, but its guilty stain restrained me. Adrian took pity on my faltering mien : " Come vvith me,*" he said, " I haA'e much to say to you ; come home with me—you know who I am ?" " Yes," I exclaimed, " I do believe that I now know you, and that you Avill pardon my mistakes—my crime. 1 ' Adrian smiled gently; and after giving his orders to the gamekeepers, he came up to me ; putting his arm in mine, Ave Avalked together to the mansion. It was not his rank—after all that I have said, surely it wiH not be suspected that it Avas Adrian's rank, that, from the first, subdued my heart of hearts, and laid my entire spirit pro- strate before him. Nor was it I alone Avho felt thus intimately his perfections. his sensibility and courtesy fascinated every one. His vivacity, intelligence, and active spirit of benevolence, completed the conquest. EA r en at this early age, he was deep read and imbued with the spirit of
high philosophy. This spirit gave a tone of irresistible persuasion to his intercourse with others, so that he seemed like an inspired mu¬ sician, who struck, with unerring skill, the " lyre of mind/* and produced thence divine Varmouy. In person, he hardly appeared of this vvorld; Ids slight frame was overinfonned by the soul that dwelt within ; he was all mind ; " Man but a rush against" his breast, and it would have conquered his strength ; but the might of his sinile would have tamed an hungry lion, or caused a legion of armed men to lay their wea¬ pons at his feet I spent the day with him. At first he did not recur to the past, or indeed to any personal oc¬ currences. He wished probably to inspire me with confidence, and give me time to gather to¬ gether my scattered thoughts. He talked of general subjects, and gave me ideas I had never before conceived. AVe sat in his library, and he spoke of the old Greek sages, and of the power which they had acquired over the minds of men,
through the force of love and wisdom only. The room was decorated with the busts of many of them, and he described their characters to me. As he sípoké, I felt subject to him ; and all my boasted pride and strength vvere subdued by the honeyed accents of this blue-eyed boy. The trim and paled demesne of civilization, whicli I had before regarded from my wild jungle as inaccessible, had its wicket oj>ened by him ; I stepped within, and felt, as I entered, that I trod my native soil. As evening came on, he reverted to the past. " I have a tale to relate," he said, " and much explanation to give concerning the past ; perhaps you can assist me to curtail it. Do you remem¬ ber your father ? I had never die liappiness of seeing him, but his narae is one of my earliest recollections : he stands written in my mind's ta¬ blets as the type of all that was gallant, amiable, and fascinating in man. His wit was not more conspicuous than the overflowing goodness of his heart, which he poured in such full measure
on his friends, as to leave, alas ! small remnant for binself." Encouraged by this t-ncoiimuii, I proceeded. iu answer to liis inquiries, to relate what I re¬ membered of my parent ; and he gav r an acrount of those circumstances vvbicli had brought about a neglect of mv fathers testamentary letter. When, iu after times, Adrian's father, thru king of Englanti, frit bis situation become nunc peril¬ ous, liis hue of conduct more embarrassed, again antl again lie wishetl for Ids early friniti, who might stand a mound against the impetuous anger of bis tjueen, a mediator between hmi antl the parliament. From the time that he bail quitted London, on the fatal night of his defeat ot the gaming-table, tlie ΚΊημ- had receivetl no titlings concerning him ; antl when, after the lapse of ν ears, he exerted himself to discover him, rv erv trarr was lost. With fonder regret than ever, lie clung to his memory ; antl gave it in charge lo his son, if ever he should meet this valued frientl, in his name to bestow every succour, and
to assure him that, to the kist, Ьн attaehtnnit survived M-paration and siìciier, A short time b* forr Adrian's vi>it to Com¬ béi kind, the heir of the nobleman to whom ni\ father had confided his hbt appeal ■♦,> Jd* ro\al uuistrs put tlii- lettes is seal unbroken, into tht voung Karl's hands. It bad turn found tist asitle with a niasx of papers of uhi tints and accident alone brought it to light. Adrian reati ií with dorp interest; and found there that Haui-j* spirit of genius ami wit he had м» often bratti rommrmoratrd. НемГье«лич*<1 the панк of »he spot whither mv father had retreated, and where he died; he learnt tin* ехЫгпге ot' UU orphan children ; and during the short interval bet ween his airivai at llswater and our nieelin*·* îıı ılır park, he had bern oi-eiqmd in makin«** inquirir', concerning us, and arranging a vari-Sv «uf plans for our benefit, preliminai \ to Ins intro¬ ducing himself to our novo. Thr mode in whieh lir stinke of mv fallu r aa us gratifying to my vanity; the veil which
he delicately cast over his benevolence, in alledg¬ ing a duteous fulfilment of the king's latest will, was soothing to iny pride. Other feelings, less ambiguous, were calletl into play by his conciliat¬ ing manner and the generous warmth of his ex¬ pressions, respect rarely before experienced, admi¬ ration, and love—he had touched my rocky heart with his magic poAver, and the stream of affection guslied forth, imperishable and pure. In the evening we parted ; he pressed my hand : " AA r e shail meet again ; come to me to-morroAv/' I clasped that kind hand ; I tried to answer ; a fervent " God bless you !" was all my ignorance could frame of speech, and I darted away, ofi- pressed by my new emotions. I could not rest. I sought the hills; a west wind swept them, and the stars glittered above. I ran on, careless of outward objects, but trying to master the struggling spirit within me by means of bodily fatigue. " This/' I thought, " is power .' Not to be strong of limb, hard of heart, ferocious, and daring ; but kind,
compassionate and soft/ 1 —Stopping short, I clasped my hands, and Avith the fervour of a new proselyte, cried, « Doubt me not, Adrian, I also will become wise and good!" and then quite overcome, 1 wept aloud. As this gust of passion passed from me, I felt more composed. I lay on the ground, and giving the reins to my thoughts, repassed in my mind my formerj life ; and began, fold by fold, to unvvind the many errors of my heart, and to discover how brutish, savage, and worthless I had hitherto been. I could not however at that time feel remorse, for methought I was born anew ; my soul threw off the burthen of past sin, to commence a new career in innocence and love. Nothing harsh or rough remained tt) jar with the soft feelings Avhich the transactions of the day had inspired ; I was as a child lisp¬ ing its devotions after its mother, and my plastic soul was remoulded by a master hand, which I neither desired nor was able to resist. This was the first commencement of my
friendship vvith Adrian, and I must comme¬ morate this day as the most fortunate of my life. I now began to be human. I was ad¬ mitted within that sacred boundary which divides the intellectual and moral nature of man from that Avhich characterizes animals. My best feelings Avere called into play to give fitting re¬ sponses to the generosity, wisdom, and amenity of my new friend. He, with a noble goodness all his own, took infinite delight in bestowing to prodigality the treasures of his mind and fortune on the long-neglected son of his father's friend, the offspring of that gifted being whose excellencies and talents he had heard comme¬ morated from infancy. After his abdication the late king had re¬ treated from the sphere of politics, yet his do¬ mestic circle afforded him small content. The ex- queen had none of the virtues of domestic life, and those of courage and daring vvhich she pos¬ sessed were rendered null by the secession of her husband ; she despised him, and did not
care to conceal her sentiments. The king had, in compliance with her exactions, cast off his old friends, but he had acquired no new ones under lier guidance. In this dearth of sympathy, lie had recourse to liis almost infant son ; and the early development of talent and sensibility rendered Adrian no unfitting depository of his fathers confidence. He was never weary of listening to tlie latter's often repeated accounts of old times, in wliich my father had played a distinguished part ; his keen remarks were re¬ peated to the boy, and remembered by him ; his wit, his fascinations, his very faults were hallowed by the regret of affection ; his loss was sincerely deplored. Even the queen's dis¬ like of the favourite was ineffectual to deprive him of his son's admiration : it was hitter, sar¬ castic, contemptuous—but as she bestowed her heavy censure alike on his virtues as his errors, on his devoted friendship and his ill-bestowed loves, on his disinterestedness and his prodi¬ gality, on his pre-possessing grace of manner, vol. i. D
and the facility with wiiich he yielded to temp¬ tation, her double shot proved too heavy, antl fell short of the mark. Nor tlid her angry dislike prevent Adrian from imaging my fa¬ ther, as be had said, the type of all that was gallant, amiable, and fascinating in man. It was not strange therefore, that when be braid t>f the existence of the offspring of tliis cele¬ brateti person, hc shoultl have formed the plan of bestowing on thrm all thr advantages his rank matle him rich to afford. AVhen he fountl me a vagabond shepherd of the lulls, α poacher, an unlettered savage, still his kindness did not fail. In addititm to the opin'sn he entertained that bis father was tt) a degree culpable of ne¬ glect towartls ns, and thai hr was hound к*» every possible reparation, he was jileased to say lhat un-iler all my ruggedness tliere glimmered forth an elevation of spirit, which couhl be distin- mushetl from mere animal courage, antl that I inherited а similarity of countenance to mv father, which gave proof ihat all his virtues and talents
had not died with him. AAhatrvir those might be vv hich descended to me, my noble young friend resolved should not be lost for want of culture. Acting uţiou this plan tn our subsequent in¬ tercourse, he leti me to wish to jiarticipate in that cultivation vvhirh graced his own intellect. My aclive mind, when oner it sei/rd щюп thi* new idea, fastened on it with extreme avidity Al first it wa-, Jie great object of my ambition to rival the merits of my falber, aml rentier myself worthy of the frientlship of Adrian. But curio-iiy s<4m awoke, ami an earnest love of knowledge, w hirh rausetl mr to ])as> davs and nights in reading ant! study. I was already well acquainteti with what 1 may term the pa¬ norama of nature, ihr change of seasons antl the various арргагапсе* of heaven ami earth. But I was at oner start leu and enchanted by my suddeu extension of vision, when the cur¬ tain, which hiid been drawn before the intel¬ lectual world, was withdrawn, antl 1 saw the universe 1 , not only as it presented itself to my i> 2
outward senses, but as it had appeared to the wisest among men. Poetry and its creations, philosophy and its researches and classifications, alike avvoke the sleeping ideas in my mind, and gave me new ones. I felt as the sailor, who from tlie topmast first discovered the shore of America ; and hke hira I hastened to tell my companions of my discoveries in unknown regions. But I was unable to excite in any breast the same craving appetite for knowledge that existed in mine. Even Perdita was unable to understand me. I had lived in what is generally called the world of reality, and it was awakening to a new country to find that tliere was a deeper meaning in all I saw, besides that which my eyes con¬ veyed to me. The visionary Perdita beheld in all this only a new gloss upon an old reading, and her own was sufficiently inexhaustible to content her. She listened to me as she had done to the narration of my adventures, and sometimes took an interest in this species of
information ; but she did not, as I did, look on it as an integral part of her being, which having obtained, I could no more put off' than the uni¬ versal sense of touch. AVe both agreed in loving Adrian : although she not having yet escaped from childhood could not appreciate as I did the extent of his merits, or feel the same sympathy in his pur¬ suits and opinions. I was for ever Avith him. There was a sensibility and sweetness in his disposition, that gave a tender and unearthly tone to our converse. Then he was gay as a lark carolling from its skiey tOAver, soaring in thought as an eagle, innocent as the mild-eyed dove. He could dispel the seriousness of Per¬ dita, and take the sting from the torturing ac¬ tivity of my nature. I looked back to my restless desires and painful struggles with my fellow beings as to a troubled dream, and felt myself as much changed as if I had transmi¬ grated into another form, whose fresh senso¬ rium and mechansim of nerves had altered the re-
flection of the apj^arent universe in the mirror of mind. But it was not so ; I was the «ame iıı strength, in earnest craving for sympathy, in my yearning for active exertion. Шу manly virtues did not desert me, for the witch Urania spared the locks of Sampson, Avbile he reposed at her feet ; but all was softened and humanized. Nor did Adrian instruct me only in the cold truths of history and philosophy. At the same time that he taught me by their means to subdue my own reckless and uncultured spirit, he opened to my view the living page rf his own heart, and gave me to feel and understand its wondrous character. The ex-queen of England had, even during infancy, endeavoured to implant daring and am¬ bitious designs in the mind of her son. She saw that he was endowed with genius and sur¬ passing talent ; these she cultivated for the sake of afterwards using them for the furtherance of Jier own views. She encouraged his craving for knowledge and his impetuous courage ; she even
tolerated his tameless love of freedom, under the hope that this would, as is too often the case, lead to a passion for command. She en¬ deavoured tti bring him up in a sense of resent¬ ment toAvards, and a desire to revenge himself upon, those who had been instrumental in bring¬ ing about his father's abdication. In this she did not succeed. The accounts furnished him, however distorted, of a great and wise nation asserting its right to govern itself, excited his admiration : in early days he became a republi¬ can from principle. Still his mother did not despair. To the love of rule and haughty pride of birth she added determined ambition, patience, and self-control. She devoted herself to the study of her son's disposition. By the applica¬ tion of praise, censure, and exhortation, sîıe tried to seek and strike the fitting chords ; and though the melody that followed her touch seemeti dis¬ cord to her, she built her hopes on his talents, and felt sure that she Avould at last win him.
The kind of banishment be now exjitrienced arose from other rauses Tbe ex-quccn had akt) a daughter, now twelve years of age; bis fairy sister, Adrian was wont to call ber; a lovely, animated, little thing, all sensibility and truth. AVith these, her children, l ie noble widow constant!) resided at AVindsor; vid admitted no visitors, except her own jiarti- s-ans travellers from her native Germain, ami a few of tbe foreign ministers Among these, and biglilv distinguished h\ Iur, w ¿is Prince Zaimi, ambassador lo England from the free States of Greece; anel bis tlaughter, the voting Princess Ev atîne, passed mueh of her time at AVindsor Castle. In eompanv with this sprightly and clever (neek girl, the Countess would relax from her usual slate. Her views with regard to hrr own children, placed all her words antl actions relative to tium under restraint: but Evadne was a ţilavihing she tould iu no way fear; nor were her talents and vivarity slight m К
alleviations to the monotony of the Countess** life. Evadne «as eighteen years of ase. Although they spent much time together at AA'intbor, the extreme \outh of Adrian prevented any suspi¬ cion as to the nature of their intercourse. But he w a* ardent and tender of heart beyond the com- nam nature of num, ant' iiad ahead) learnt to lene, while the beauteous G reek smiled benignanti)* on the boy. It was strange to me, wht), though older than Adrian, had nev er lov ed, to witness the w hole heart's Merìfiee ofmv friend. Tliere was neither jealousy, inquietude, or mistrust in his sentiment; it w as devotion and faith. His life vv as swallowed up in the existence of his beloved ; and his heart beat only iu unison with the pulsations that vivi¬ fied hers. This was the secret law of his hfe— be loved and w a* beioved. Tbe universe was to bun a dwelling, to inhabit with his chosen one; and not either a scheme of society or an en¬ chainment of events, that could impart to him either happiness or misery. AA'hat, though DÍJ
life and the system of social intercourse were a wilderness a tiger-haunted jungle ! Through the midst of its errors, in the depths of its savage recesses, tliere was a disentangled antl flow trv pathway, tbrough vvhich tbey might journey in safety and delight. Their track would be like the passage of thv Ret! Sea, wiiich tbey might traverse with un wet feet, tliougli a Avail of destruction were impending on eitlier sale. Alas ! why must I record the hajiless delusion of this matchless specimen tif humanity ? What is there in our nature that is for ever uiging us on towartls piiin and misery ? AA f e are not formetl for enjoyment; and, however vve may be attuned to the reception of pleasureable emotion, disap¬ pointment is the never-failing pilot tif our life's bark, and ruthlessly carries us on to the shoals, ΑΑΊιο vvas better framed than tliis highly-gifted youtb to love ami be beloved, and to reap un¬ alienable joy frtmi an unblamed passion ? If liis heart bad slept but a few years longer, he might
ŕ
have lieen savet!; but it aw«ike in its infancy; it batl power, but no knowledge; and ìt was rumed, ven us a too early-blow ing bud is nipt by thr killing frost. I did not accise Evadne of hypocrisy or a Avitli to deceive her lover ; but the first letter that 1 saw of hers convinced me that she did not love him; it was written with, elegance, and, foreigner as she Avas, with great command of language 1 . The hand-writing itseif was exqui¬ sitely beautiful ; ihere was something in her very paperand ¡fe folds, which even 1, w bo did not lov r, and was withal unskilled in such matters, could discern as being tasteful. There Avas much kindness gratitude, and sAVcetncsb in her expres¬ sion, but no love. E v atine was two years older than Adrian; antl who, at eighteen, ever loved onr so mueh their junior ? I compared her placid epistles vvith the burning ones of Adrian. His soul seemed to distil itself into the words he wrote; and thry breathed on the paper, bearing with tbem а portion of the life of love, which was his life.
Tbe very writing used to exhaust him ; and br wouki weej) over them, merely from the excess of emotion thry awakened m his heart. Adrian's soul was painted m hk countenance, and etili ceal m en t or deceit were ¿it tbe antijiotks tt) the dreadlcss frankness of bis nature. Evadne mude it her earnest retjuest that the tale of their kiAes should not bo revealed to iiis moiher; and after for a wliile contesting the jioint, he yielded it to her. A vain concesión; his demeanour quickly betrayed bis secret to the quick rv es of the ex-queen. AA'itb the same wary jirutkncr tbat characterized her whole conduct, she con¬ cealed her discovery, but hastened to remove her son from *he sjihere ofthe attractive Greek. He was sent to Cumberland; but tbe jilan of corrrsjwiidencc between the 1 lovers, arranged by Evadne, was effectually hidden from her. Thus the absence of Adrian, concerted for lhe jiurpose of separating, uniteti tbem in firmer bonds than rv er. To me he discoursed ceaselessly of his beloved Ionian. Her country, its ancient an-
nak, its late memorable struggle?, vvere aii niadc lo partake in her glory and excellence. He mi1>- in'itted to be away from her, because she ct)m* mantled this submission ; but for lier influence, hr won Iti have declared his attachment before all England, and resisted, vvith unshaken con¬ stancy, bis mother's opposition. Evadne's femi¬ nine prudence jierceived how useless any asser¬ tion of his resolves would be, till added years gave weight to bis |>ower. Perhaps, there was besides a lurking dislike to bintl herself in tlie face of the world to one whom she did not love — not love, at least, with that pasionate enthu¬ siasm wiiich her heart told her sbe might one day feel towards another, lie obeyed her in¬ junctions, and parsed a year in exile in Cum¬ berland.
CHAPTER III
Happy, thrice happy, were the months, and weeks, and bours of that year. Frientlship, band in band witb admiration, tenderness and respect, built a liower of delight in my heaçt, late rough as an untrod wild in America, as the homeless wind or iierbless sea. insatiate thirst for knowiedge, and boundless aflection for Adrian, combined to keeji both my heart antl understanding occujiied, and I was conse¬ quently hajijiy. AVbat hajijiiness is so true and unclouded, as the overflowing and talkative de¬ light of young people. In our boat, UJH1I1 my native lake, beside the streams and the pale bordering poplars—in valley and over bill, my
crook thrown aside, a nobler flock to tend than silly sheep, even a flock of new-born ideas, I rei' d or ľs tel iet I to Adrian; and his discourse, whether it concerned his Joa e or hi.s theories for the improvement of man, alike entranced me. Sometnnes my lawless mood vvould return, my love of peril, my resistance to authority ; but this wa-s in his absence ; under the mild sway of bis dear rye«, I va as obedient and good a> a bov of live years old, who does bis mothers bit kling. After a residence of about a year at Uls- watrs Adrian visited London, and eame back full uf plans for our benefit. Vou must begin life, he said : a ou are seventeen, and longer de¬ lay vvoultl render the necessary apprenticeship more antl more irksonie\ He foresaw that his own life vvoultl be one of struggle, and I must partake his labours with him. The better fo fit me for this task, we must now separate. He fountl my name a good passport to pre¬ ferment, and bc bad procured for me the situa-
toin of private secretary to the Ambassador at Vienna, where I should enter on my career under the best auspices. In svo years, I should return to my country, with a name well known and a reputation already founded. And Penlita ?— Perdita was to become the pupil, friend antl younger sister of Evadne. AVith bis usual thoughtfulness, be batl jirovided for her independence in tbis situation How refuse the offers of tbis generous friei d ŕ — I did not wish to refuse them; but iu my heart of hearts, I made a vow to devote life, knoAv- ledge, ; nd power, all of which, in as much as they were of any value, be bad bestowed on me —all, all my capacities and hopes, to him alone I vvoultl devote. Thus I promised nnsclf, as I journied to¬ wards my destination with roused and ardent expectation : expectation of die fulfilment of all that in bo) booti vve promise ourselves tif power and enjtiy ment in maturity. Methought tbe time was now arrived, when, childish occu-
pations laid aside, I sliould enter into life. Even in the Klybian Holds, Virgil desi-rilk-s the souls of the happy a- eager to drink of the Avave Avhich avus ίο restore them to thb mortal coil. The young are seldom tn Ely¬ sium, for their desires, outstripping pos.sibiHtv. leave ihem as реюг as a monev less debtor. AVe are told by tho wisest philosophers of the dangers of the Avorld, the dec« »its of nun, and the treason of our own hearts : but not liie les» fearlessly does each put oft' his frail bark from the port, spreal the sail, and strain hi» oar, to attain the multitudinous streams of the sea of life. How feAv in > out 1rs prime, moor their vessels on the " golden sands," and collect the painted shells that strew them. But all at close of day, with riven planks and rent canvas make for shore, and are either Avrecked ere they reach it, or find some wave-beaten haven, some dosart strand, whereon to ca¡>t themselves and die unmourned. A truce to philosophy ï —Life is before me,
and I rush into possession. Hope, glory, love, and blameless ambition are my guides, and my soul knows no dread. What has been, though sweet, is gone ; the present is good only be= cause it is about to change, and the to come is all my own. Do I fear, that my heart palpi¬ tates? high aspirations cause the flow of my blood ; my eyes seem to penetrate the cloudy midnight of time, and to discern within the depths of its darkness, the fruition of all my soul desires. Now pause !—During my journey I might dream, and with buoyant wings reach the sum¬ mit of life's high edifice. Now that l am ar¬ rived at its base, my pinions are furled, tbe mighty stairs are before me, and step by step I must ascend the wondrous fanv —- S'ieiik !—What door is opened ? Behold me in a new rapacity. A diploma¬ tist : one among be pleasure-seekmg society ofa gay city; a youth of promise; favourite
of the Ambassador. All vvas strange antl ad¬ mirable tt» the .shepherd of Cumberland. AA'itb breathless amaze I entend on thr gav scene, whose actors were ------- . f hr Idirs цкгь-ш as Solomon, Wh«) te'il ne-t, neither do they spin. Soon, too soon, I entered tlie giddy whirl ; forgetting my .studious hours, antl the compa*» nioiiship of Adrian. Pascoliate desire of sym¬ pathy, antl ardent pursuit for a wished-for oil- jeet still characterized me. The sight of beauty entranced me, and attractive manners in man or woman won my entire confidence. I called it rapture, when a smile matle my heart beat; and I felt the life's blood tingle in my frame, wiien I apprtiached the idol which for awhile I worshipped. The merr flow of animal spirits was Paradise, and at night's close I only desired a renewal of the intoxicating cleiusiein. Tlv dazzling light of ornamented rooms; Jowly forns arrayed in splendid tinsses ; the motions
of a dance, tbe voluptuous tones of exquisite music, cradled my senses in one delightful dream. And is not tbis in its kintl happiness ? I ap¬ peal to moralists and sages. 1 ask if in the calm of iheir measured reveries if in t Lt^ deep meditations which /ill their hours, they feel the extasy of a youthful tvro in the school of plea¬ sure? Can the calm beams of their heaven- seeking eyes eejual the Hashes of mingling pas¬ sion vvbicli blind bis, or tloes tbe influent r of cold philosophy steep their soul in a joy equal to his, engaged In tins dear work of youthful icvt'lry. But in truth, neither the lonely meditations of the hermit, nor the tumu'tuous raptures of the reveller, are eapable of satisfying man's heart. From the one we gather unquiet specu¬ lation, from the other satiety. The miud flags beneath the weight tif thought, antl droops in lhe heartless intercourse of those vvhose
sole aim is amusement. There is no fruition in their vacant kindness, antl sharp rocks lurk İK'tıcalh the smiting ripple-« of these shallow waters. Thus I fell, when disappointment, weariness, and solitude chove me back upon my heart, to iraibrr ι bence ılır jov of wbieb il batl liecome lianen, Mv ihiivim» spirits asked for sometiiing to speak to tho allei'tions; and not finding it, I drooped. Thus, notwithstanding the thought¬ less delight that waitetl on its commencement, tiie impression I iiave of my life at Aienna is melanciio'y. Goethe has said, that in youth we cannot be happy unless we love. I did not love; but I vva> devoured bv а restless wish to l»e something le» others. Ì became the victim e*f ingraţii miranti roki coquetry—then I desponded, and imavuecl that mv discontent save me a rillit to hate the workl. I receded to solitude; I hati recourse to my hooks, and my tlesire again to en¬ joy tliesoeieiv of Adrian became α burning thirst. Emulation, that in its excess almost assumed
the venomous properties of envy, gave a sting to tlicse feelings. At this period the name and exploits of one of my countrymen filled the world with admiration. Relations of what he had done, conjectures concerning his future actions, Avere the never-failing topics of the hour. I was not angry on my own account, but I felt as if the praises which this idol received A\ r ere leaves torn from laurels destined for Adrian, But I must enter into some account of this darling of fame —this favourite of the Avonder-lo\*ing world. Lord Raymond was the sole remnant of a noble but impoverished family. From early youth he had considered his pedigree Avith complacency, and bitterly lamented his Avant of wealth. His first wish was aggrandisement; and the means that led towards this end Avere se¬ condary considerations. Haughty, yet trembling to every demonstration of respect ; ambitious, but too proud to shew his ambition ; willing to achieve honour, yet a votary of pleasure,—he entered upon life. He was met on the threshold
by some insult, real or imaginary; some repulse, where he least exjiected it; some disappoint¬ ment, hard for his pride to bear. He writhed beneath an injury he was unable to гел -enge; and he quitted England Avith a voav not to re¬ turn, till the good time should arrive, Avhen she might feel the poAver of him she novv despised. He became an adventurer in the Greek wars. His reckless courage and comprehensive genius brought him into notice. He became the dar¬ ling hero of this rising people. His foreign birth, and he refused to throw off his allegiance to his native country, alone prevented him from filling the first offices in the state. But, though others might rank higher in title and ceremony, Lord Raymond held a station above and beyond all this. He led the Greek armies to victory ; their triumphs were all his ovvn. AVhen he appeared, whole towns jxmred forth their population to meet liim ; new songs were adapted to their na¬ tional airs, whose themes were his glory, valour, and munificence.
A truce Avas concluded betAveen the Greeks and Turks. At the same time, Lord Raymond, by some unlooked-for chance, became the pos¬ sessor of an immense fortune in England, whi¬ ther he returned, crowned with glory, to receive the meed of honour and distinction before de¬ nied to his pretensions. His proud heart rebelled against this change. In Avhat was the despised Ray¬ mond not the same ? If the acquisition of power in the shape of wealth caused this alteration, that poAver should they feel as an iron yoke. Power therefore Avas the aim of all his endea¬ vours; aggrandizement the mark at which he for ever shot. In open ambition or close in¬ trigue, his end was the same—to attain the first station in his own country. This account filled me with curiosity. The events that in succession followed his return to England, gave me keener feelings. Among his other advantages, Lord Raymond was supremely handsome ; every one admired him ; of women he was the idol. He Avas courteous, honey-tongued—
an adept in fascinating arts. What could not this man achieve in the busy English Avorld ? Change succeeded to change ; the entire history did not reach me ; for Adrian had ceased to Avrite, and Perdita Avas a laconic corresjxmdent. The rumour Avent that Adrian had become------ Iioav write the fatal Avord—mad : that Lord Raymond Avas the favourite of the ex-queen, her daughter's destined husband. Nay, more, that this aspiring noble revived tlie claim of the house of AVindsor to the crown, and that, on the event of Adrian's incurable disorder and his marriage vvith the sister, the hrow of the ambi¬ tious Raymond might be encircled vvith the magic ring of regality. Such a tale filled the trumjiet of many voiced fame ; such a talc rendered my longer stay at Vienna, away from the friend of my youth, intolerable. Now I must fulfil my vow ; now range myself at his side, and be his ally and support till death. Farewell to courtly plea¬ sures; to politic intrigue; to the maze * of VOL. I. E
passion and folly ! All hail, England ! Native England, receive tliy child ! thou art the scene of all my hojees, the mighty theatre on vvhich is acted the only drama that can, heart and soul, bear me along vvith it in its development. A voice most irresistible, a power omnipotent, drew me thither. After an absence of two years I landed on its shores, not daring to make any inquiries, fearful of every remark. My first visit would be to my sister, who inhabited a little cottage, a part of Adrian's gift, on the Iiorders of AVindsor Forest. From her I should learn the truth concerning our protector ; I should hear why she had AvithdraAvn from the protection of the Princess EA'adne, and be in¬ structed as to the influence vvhich this over¬ topping and towering Raymond exercised over the fortunes of my friend. I had never before been in the neighbour¬ hood of Windsor ; the fertility and beauty of the country around now struck me with admi¬ ration, which encreased as I approached the
antique аачкх!. The ruins of majestic oaks wliich had grown, flourished, and decayed during the progress of centuries, marked where the limits of the forest once reached, while tlie shattered palings and neglected underwood shewed that this jiart was deserted for the younger plantations, vvhich owed their birth to the beginning of the nineteenth century, and novv stood in the jiride of maturity. Perdita's humble dwelling was situated on the skirts of the most ancient por¬ tion ; before it was stretched Bisliojigate Heath, which towards the east apjieared interminable, and was bounded to the vvest by Chapei AA r t>od and the grove of A T irginia AA r ater. Behind, the cottage was shadowed by tlie*venerable fathers of tbe forest, under which the deer came to graze, and wliich for the most part hollow and decayed, formed fantastic groups that contrasted vvith the regular beauty of the younger trees. These, the offspring of a later jieriod, stood erect and seemed ready to advance fearlessly into coming time; while those out worn strag¬ li 2
gier s blasted and broke, clung to each other, their weak houghs sighing as the wind buflctted Г 4 i* í™ 1 thrm— α weather-beaten crew. A light rai I im*: surroundrd tho iranien of thr fS ¿"t 4 cottage», vvhich, ю" -roofed, seemeti to submit tothe majesty of nature, ami rower amidst the venerable remains of forgotten time. Полит**·. the children of the spring, adorned her ganlen and casement* : in the mitist of lowliness then was tm air of elegance which spoke the grateful taste of the inmate. With a beating heart l rntercd die enclosure; as I stood at the en¬ trance, I bearti her voiee, melodious as ii hat! ever bceu, which before I saw ber assunti im of ber welfare. A moment vore and Penlita appeared, she stood before me in thr fresh bloom of vouthful womanhood, different from antl vet thr same as thè mountain giri I liad left. Her eyes could not be deeper than tliey were in childhood, nor her countenance more expressive; but the e*x- pression was changed ami improved; iuţelii-
gence sat on her brow ; when she smiled her face was embellished by the softest sensibility, »nd her low, modulated voire seemeti tunet! by love. Her jierson was formed in the most femi¬ nine proportions ; she was not tall, but her mountain life h¿itl given freedom to her motions, so that her light step scarce made her foot-fall heart! as she tript across tbe ball ţo meet mv. AA'hen we liad jiartetl, I had clasped her to my bosom with unrestrained warmth ; vve met again» and new feelings were awakened ; vvhen each beheld the other, childhood passed, as full grown actors on this changeful scene. The jiausc was but for a moment ; the flood of association and natural feeling wbirb hail been cheeked, again rushed in full title ujion our hearts, and vvith trntlerrst emotion vve vvere swiftly locked in tarli other's embrace. This burst of passionate feeling over, with calmed thoughts we sat together, talking of the past antl jiresent. I alludetl to the coldness of hvr letters ; but the few minutes avc had spent
together sufficiently explained the origin of thi*. New feelings batl arisen within her, Avhich she was unable to express in writing to one whom she had only known in childhood; but we saw eacb other again, and our intimacy wa*-* renewed a**- if nothing had intervened to check it. I de¬ tailed the incitlents of my sojourn abroad, and then questioned her as to the changes that had taken place at home, the causes of Adrian's absence, and her secluded life. The tears that* suffused »ny sister's evrs w ben I mentioned our frientl, and her heightened colour seemed It) л ouch for tlie truth of tbe reports that had reacbed me. But their import was too terrible for me to give instant credit to my suspicion. AVas there indeed anarchy in the sublime universe of Adrian's thoughts, did madness scatter the well-appointed legions, and was be no longer the lortl of liis own soul ť Be¬ loved friend, tliis iil work! was no clinic for your gentle spirit ; you delivered up its go¬ vernance to false humanity, which stript it of
its leaves ere winter-lime, and laid bare its qui¬ vering life to the evil ministration of roughest winds. Have tliose gentle eyes, those "chan¬ nels of the sour lost their meaning, or tto they only in their glare disclose the horrible tale of its aberro* vus ? Does that voice no longer ** discourse excellent music ?" Horrible, most horrible ! I veil my eyes in terror of the change, and gushing tear.s bear witness to my sympathy Ibr tliis unimaginable ruin. In obedience to my request Pc rdita detailed the melancholy circumstances that led to this event. The frank and unsuspicious mind of Adrian, gift etl as ii was by every natural grace, endowed wiih transcendant po weis of intellect, unblem¬ ished by the shadow of defect (unless bis dread· less independence of tliought was to be construed intti onr), was devoted, even ¿is a victim to sa¬ crifice, to bis love for Evadne. He entrusted to brr keeping the treasures of his soul, his asjiira- tions after excellence, and his plans for the im-
provemrnt of mankintl. As manhood dawned upon him, his schemes and theories, far from bring changed hy personal antl prudential mo¬ tives, acquired nvw strength from the power- he felt arise within bini ; and liis love for Evadne bréame derp-rooted, as hr each day be¬ came more certain that the path he pursued vvas full of difficulty, antl that lie must seek his re¬ ward, not in tho applause or gratitude of liis fellow errat ures, hardiv in tite success of bis plans, but in the approbation of bis own lieart, antl in her love antl sympathy, wbieb was to lighten every toil and recoin pence every s;i, eri fier. In .solitude, and through many wanderings afar from the haunts of men, hr matured hk views for the reform ofthe English government, O fs and the improvement οΐ the people. It vvoultl have lieen well if lit- had ronrralrtl his senti¬ ments, until hr had eome into possession of the power which vvoultl secure their practical de- siopmmt. But be was impatient of the
years that mibt intervene, lie was frank of Iicart and fearless. Hr gave not only a brief denial to ids mother'* schemes, but published his intention of using his influence to diminish the power of the aristocracy, to eflect a greater equalization of wealth and privilege, and to introducea perfect system of republican govern¬ ment into Englanti- At first his mother treated bis theories as the wilt! ravings of inexperience. But then' were so -wsteinutically arranged, and hk arguments so weil siqqmrtrd, that though siiil ¡n appearance incredulous, she began to fear him. She tried to iwison vvith him, and tinding hira inflexible, learned to bate him. Strange tt) sav, this feeling vvas infectious. His enthusiasm for good whieh dit! not exist ; his contempt for the sacredness of authority ; his ardour and imprudence vvere all at the an- tipodrs of the usual routine of life ; the worldly feared bim ; the young antl mexprriencrt! did not understand the lofty sivrrityof liis moral views, and disliked him as a being difierent к 3
from themselves. Evadne entered but eokllv into his systems. She thought be did wed to assert bis own wiii, but she wished that will tt) liavv hern more intelligible to the multitude Sbe had none of the spirt* of a murtvt, and tlitl not meline to sbare the shame ami tkfeat nf a fallen patriot. Чн» was aware of the purity cf his mori ves, the generosity of hi.s tiisposition, his true and ardent attaihimnt to her; and she entertained a greal alleeiion for him. lie rr- c*· paid thi- spirit of kindness with the fondest gra¬ titude, antl matle her the treasure-house of all his hopes. At this time Lortl Raymond n turned fiom Greece. No two persons tould be more oppo- site than Adrian and he. With all the ineon- gruities of bis character. Raymond was щ\~ phatieally a man of the workl. His passions were vioh nt, as these often obtained the mas¬ teryover him, he eoukl not always square his conduct to the obvious line of sc|f-inU4Vst, but self-gratification at least vvas the paramount ob-
ject with him. He looked on the structure of society as but a jurt of the machinery whit h supported the web on which his life was traced. Thr earth was spread out as an highway for him ; the heavens built up as a ranojry for bim, Athian felt that lie made a part of а great w hoir. He owned affinity not only vvith man¬ kind, but all nature was akin to liim; tht mountains ¿md sky were liis friends; the winds of heaven and the offspring of earth his play¬ mates: while he the focus only of tliis mightv mirror, felt bis life mingle with the universe of existence. His soul was symjiafhv, and tirili. cated to tlu* worship of beauty and excellence. Adrian and Raymond now came into contait. ami α spirit of aversion ro-*r between thrm. Adrian despised the narrow views (if the |*»h- nertv aml Rav mond beid in supreme contempi the benevolent visions of the phtkmthrojikt AVith the coming of Ravnmnd was formed the storni that laid waste at one fell blow the gardens of delight and -sheltered paths which
Adrian fancied that be had secured to himself, as a refuge from defeat and contumely Ray¬ mond, the deliverer of Greece, the graceful soldier, veho bore in ΙιΉ mien a tinge of all that, peculiar to her native clime, Evadne cherished a* most tlear—Ravmond was loved bv Ev atîne. Ourjwwcred by her new sensations, slie tlitl not pause to examine tbem, or to regulate her contluct by any sentiments except the iv ranimai one whieii suddenly usurped the rmjiirr of her heart. She yielded to its influence, antl the leni natnnd consequence in a minti unaituiied to soft emotions was, that the attentions of Adrian Iwranie distasteful to her. She grew cajuicious ; her gentle contluct towards him was exchanged for asperity antl rejiukive coldness. AA'hen she perceived the wild tu* pathetic ajiţieal of his ex¬ pressive countenance, stir would relent, antl for a while resume her ancient kindness. Ibr these Huet nations shook to its depths the soul of tin* sensitive vouth; he uo longer deemed the workl subject to bun, beeause he jK>sessed Evadne***■
iove ; he felt in every nerve that the dire storms of the mental univ erse were al wilt to attack his fragile being, wiiich quivered at the expecta¬ tion of its advent. Perdita, vvho tin n resided with Evadile», saw the tortun- that Adı 'an endured. She loved him as a kintl elder brother ; a relation to guide« protect, and instruct her, without the too fre¬ quent tyranny of parental authority. She adonti hi*- virtue-·», and with mixed contempt and indignation sbe savv Evadne pile drear sor¬ row on his beati, for the sake ofour vvho hartlly marked her. In his solitary despair Adrian vvouhl often seek mv sister, and in rovend terms ex¬ press his misery, while fortitude and agony ılÎAİded the throne of his mind. Soon, alas! was one to conquer. Anger made no part of his emotion. Witb whom should lie be angry? Not with Raymond, vvho was unconscious of liie misery he occasioned ; not with Evadne, for her his soul wept tears of blood — poor, mis¬ taken girl, slave not tyrant was she, and amidst
his OAvn anguish he grieved for her future des. tiny. Once a writing tif bis fell into Perdita's bands; it was blotted witb tears—well might any blot it with the like— u Life"— it began tbus— 4t is not tbe thiiiíf romance writers describe it ; going through tlu* measures of a dance, anil after various evolu¬ tions arriving at a conclusion, vvhen the dancers may sit down antl rejxiso. AA'hile tliere is lift* there is action and change. AVe go on, each thought linked to the one wbieb was its parent. each act toa jìrevious act. Vt) joy or sorrovv tlics barren of progeny, which for ever generated and generating, weaves the chain that make our life : Γη dia llama à oiro dia y ass i llama, y eni'udona llanto ň llanto, y prua à pina. Truly tlisajiţiointinent is tlie guardian deity of human life ; sbe sits at the threshold of unborn time, and marshal* the events as they come forili. Olire my heart sat lightly in my bosom :
all the beauty of the vvorld was doubly beautiful, irradiated by the sun-light shed from mv own soul. О wherefore are love and ruin for ever joined in tliis our mortal 1 1 ream ? So that when we make our hearts a lair tor that gently seem¬ ing beast, its companion enters vvith it, and pitilessly lavs waste what might have been an home and a shelter/' By degrees his health was shaken by his misery, and then his intellect yielded to the same tyranny. His manners grew wild ; be¬ was sometimes ferocious, sometimes absorbed in speechless mclanciioly. Suddenly Evadne quitted London for Paris ; he foilovved, and overtook her wiien the vessel was about to sail ; none knew whai passed between them, but Perdita batl never seen him since ; he lived in seclusion, no our knew where, attended by such jıeıvms as bis mother selected for that purpose.
CHAPTER IV.
The next day Lortl Raymontl called at Per¬ dita's cottage, on his way to Windsor Castle. M) stSţ-r s heightened colour and sjiarkling eyes half í saled her secret to me. He w¿is ţierfeetly sti f- jiossessed ; he accosted us both vvith cour¬ tesy, seemed immediatelv to enter into our feelings, and to make one witb us. I scanned his physiognomy, vvbicb varied as be ьрокс, yrt was beautiful in every change. Tlic usual ex¬ jiressioii of his eyes was soft, thougli at times he ctiultl make tbem елен glare vvith fenici t y : bis comjilexitm vvas colourless; and every trait sjiokr predominate self-will ; bis smile was pleasing, tliough disdain too often curled hk
lips—lips At hich to female eyes Avere the Aery throne of beauty and love. Ills voice, usually gentle, often -startled vou by a sharp discordant note, whieh .shewed that his usual low tone was rather tlie work of study than nature. This full of contradictions, unbending yet haughty, gentle yet fierce, tender and again neglectful, he by some strange art found easy entrance to the admiration and affection of women; now ca¬ ressing and now tyrannizing over tbem accord¬ ing to bis mood, but in every change a despot. At the present time Raymond evidently wished to appear aniiabk. Wit, hilarity, nnd deep observation were mingled m liis talk, ren¬ dering every .sentence that be ulteretl as a flash of light. lie soon conquered my latent distaste; I endeavoured to watch him and Perdita, and to krep in mind every thing I bad heard to his disadvantage. But all appeared st) ingenuous, and all was so fascinating, that I forgot every¬ thing except the pleasure his society afforded mc. Under the idea of initiating me in the
scene of English politics and society, of which I was soon to become a jiart, lie narrateti a num¬ ber of anecdotes, and sketched many characters ; his discourse, rich and varied, flowed on, tier* vading Ί my senses with pleasure. But for one thing he vvoultl have been completely tri¬ umphant. He alluded to Atlrian, and sjioke of him with that disparagement that the worldly wise always attach to enthusiasm. He perceived tbe cloud gathering, and tried to dissipate it ; but the strength of my feelings vvoultl not per¬ mit me to pass tbus lightly over this sacred subject ; so I said emjihatieally, " Permit me to remark, that I am devotedly attached to the Earl of AVindsor ; be is my best friend and be¬ nefactor. I reverence bis goodness, I accord vvith bis opinions, and bitterly lament his pre¬ sent, and I trust temporary, illness, That ill¬ ness, from its peculiarity, makes it jiainful tti me beyond words to hear bim mentioned, unless in terms of respect and affection." Raymond replied ; but there was nothing
conciliatory in his reply. I saw that in his heart hc despised those dedicated to any but worldly idols. u Everyman/* Ito sait!, 4Í dreams about something, love, honour, and pleasure ; you dream of fricndsliip, and devote your¬ self to a maniac ; well, if that be your voca¬ tion, doubtless von are in the right to follow it."— Some reflection seemed to sting him, and the spasm of pain that for a moment convulsed liis countenance, checked my indignation. ťí Hap¬ py are dreamers," he continued, " so that they be not awakened ! AVould I coukl dream ! but * broad antl garish day* is the clement in which I live ; the dazzling glare of reality inverts the scene for me. Even the ghost of friendship has dejiarted, and love"------He brok e off; nor coukl I guess wbether the disdain that envied bis lit) was directed against the passion, or against bim¬ self for being its slave. This account may be taken as a sample of
my intercourse with Lord Raymond. I became intimate with him, and each dav affoided me occasion tt) admire more and more bis jiowerful and versatile talents, tbat together with his elotjuence, wbich was graceful and witty, and his wealth now immense, caused him to be feared, loved, and hated beyond any other man in England, My descent, which claimed interest, if not resjiect, my former connection with Adrian, the favour of the ambassador, whose secretary I bad been, and now my intimacy with Lord Raymond, gave me easy access to tbe fashion¬ able and jiolitical circles of England. To my incxjierience vve at first apjieared on the eve of a civil war; eacb 4 »arty was violent, acrimoni¬ ous, and unyielding. Parliament was divided by tbree factions, aristocrats, democrats, and royalists. After Adrian's declared^ predeliction to tbe republican form of government, the latter party had nearly died away, cbiefless, guide-
less; but, when Lord Raymond came forward as its leader, it revived Avitb redoubled forer. Some vvere royalists from prejudice and ancient affection, antl there were many moderately in¬ timiti w ho feared alike tbe capricious«, tyranny of ţlie populai party, and the unbending tlc-s. potisin ofthe aristocrats. Мою than a third of the members ranged themselves uuder Hay- rvntl. and tlieir number was perpetual!) rn- rreas'mg. The aristocrats built their hopt- on their prépondérant wealth and influence; the n formers on the force of the nation itself ; the tie-bates w re violent, more violent the discourir·**· held by each knot of politicians as they assem¬ bled to arrange their measures. Opprobrious epithets were bandied about, resistance even to tbe death threatened ; meetings of tiie populace disturbed the quiet order of tbe countrv- iv- eept in war, how eould all this end? Even .is the destructive flames were ready tt) break forth, I saw them shrink back ; allayed by the ab¬ sence of the military, by the aversion entertained
by every one to any violence, save that of speech, and by the cordial politeness and even friendship of the hostile leaders wlien they met in priA'ate society, I AA-as from a thousand mo¬ tives induced to attend minutely to the course of events, and watch each turn with intense anxiety. I could not but perceive that Perdita loved Raymond; methought also that he regarded the fair daughter of A'erney with admiration and tenderness. Yet I knew that he was urg¬ ing forward his marriage with the presumptive heiress of the Earldom of Windsor, with keen expectation of the advantages that would thence accrue to him. All the ex-queen's friends were his friends; no week passed that he did not hold consultations with her at AA T indsor. I had never seen the sister of Adrian. I had heard that she was lovely, amiable, and fasci¬ nating. AA r herefore should I see her ? There are times when avc have an indefinable senti¬ ment of impending change for better or for
worse, to arise from an event ; and, be it for better or for Avorse, avc fear the change, and shun the event. For this reason I avoided this high¬ born damsel. To me she was everything and nothing; her very name mentioned by another made me start and tremble ; the endless discus¬ sion concerning her union with Lord Raymond Avas real agony to me. Methought that, Adrian withdrawn from active life, and this beauteous Itlris, a victim probably to her mother's ambiti¬ ous schemes, I ought to come forward to protect her from undue influence, guard her from un¬ happiness, and secure to her freedom of choice, the right of every human being. Vet how- was I to do this ? She herself would dis¬ dain my interference. Since then I must be an object of indifference or contempt to her, better, far better avoid her, nor expose myself before her and the scornful world to the chance of playing the mad game of a fond, fool¬ ish Icarus.
One day, several months after my return to England, I quitted London to visit my sister. Her society was my chief solace and delight ; and my spirits always rose at the expectation of Piecing her. Her conversation was full of pointed remark and discernment ; in her pleasant al¬ cove, redolent with sweetest flowers, adorned by magnificent casts, antique vases, and copies of the finest jiictures of Raphael, Correggio, and Claude, painted by herself, I fancied myself in a fairy retreat untainted by and inaccessible to the noisy contentions of politicians and the frivolous pursuits of fashion. On this occa¬ sion, my sister was not alone ; nor could I fail to recognise her companion : it was Idris, the till novv unseen object of my mad idolatry. In what fitting terms of wonder and delight, in wliat choice expression and soft flow of lan¬ guage, can I usher in the loveliest, wisest, best ? How in jxior assemblage of words convey the
halo of glory that surrounded her, the thousand graces that vv r aited unwearied on her. The first thing that struck you on beholding that charm¬ ing countenance was its perfect goodness and frankness; candour sat upon her brow, sim¬ plicity in her eyes, heavenly benignity in her smile. Her tall slim figure bent gracefully as a poplar to the breezy Avest, and her gait, god¬ dess-like, was as that of a winged angel new alit from heaven's high floor ; the pearly fairness of her complexion Avas sUined by a pure suffusion ; her voice resembled the low, subdued tenor ofa flute. It is easiest perhaps to describe by con¬ trast. I have detailed the perfections of my sister; and yet she was utterly unlike Idris. Perdita, even where she loved, Avas reserved and timid ; Idris was frank aud confiding. The one recoiled to solitude, that she might there en¬ trench herself from disappointment and injury; the other Avalked forth in open day, believing that none would harm her. AVordsworth has compared a beloved female to two fair objects vol. i. F
in nature ; but bis lines always appeared to me rather a contrast than a similitude: A vioh t Ьу л mo-îiy stono Kalf hidden írom the ess 1\ш as u siar vhen oni) one U bhiumg m ihe *-k\. Such а violet was sweet Penlita, trembling ti» entrust herself to the very air, cowering from observation, yet betrayed by her excellences; antl repaying wiih a thousantl graces tiie ialwur of those who sougiit her in her lonely bye-path. Idris was as the star, set in single splendour in the dim auadem of balmy evening; ready to enlighten and delight the subject world, shielded herself from every taint by her unimagined dis¬ tance from all that was not like herself akin to Iieaven, I found this vision of beauty in Perdita's al¬ cove, in earnest conversation with its inmate. AVhen my sister saw me, she rose, and taking my hand, .-.aiti, " lie is here, even at our wish ; this is Lionel, my brother."
Idris arose ако, and bent on me her eyes of reies/ml blue, and vvith grace peculiar said— *· You hardiv ueed an introduction ; we bave a picture, highly valued by my fiither, which de¬ clares at once your name. A'erncy, you will acknowledge this lie. antl as my brothers friend, I feel that I may trust you." Then, with litis humid witli a tear and trem- biiiiíľ voice, she conunued— 4% Dear friends, dt) not think it strange that now, visiting you fot- the first time, I ask your assistance, and confide my wishes and fear** tt) you. To you alone ilo I dare speak ; I hav e beard you commended by impartial spectators ·, you are my brother's frientls, therefore you must be mine. AA'hat can I say ? if you refuse to aid me, I am b t unire. 1 !" She cast up her eyes, while wonder held her auditors mute; then, as if carried away by her feelings, she cried— ki My brodier! beloved, ill-fated Adrian ! bow sjieak of your misfortunes ? Doubtless yon have both beard the current tale; perhaps believe the slander; f 2
hut he is not mad ! Were an angei from the foot of Gods throne tti assert it, never, never would I believe it. He is wronged, betrayed, imprisoned-------- .ave him ! A"erne),yoii must do this; seek him out in w baten er part of ıhe bland he U immured ; find hım, rescue him from his perseen tors, restore him to himself, to mr—on tlţe wide rartb I have nonetti love but only him ! * Her earnest ajij)oal,so svvcetl) and passionately ex}>5essed, filed me with wonder aud symjia- thv; antl, when she added, with thrilling voice atul look, " Do you consent to undertake tliis enterpri/c ?" I vowed, witli energy antl truth, to devote mvself in life and death to the n-sto- lation and welfare of Adrian. AA'e then con¬ versed on tbe jilan I shoultl pursue, and dis¬ cusseti tlie probable means of discoveiing liis residence. AA'hile we were in eai nest diseour.se. Lord Raymontl entered unannounced : I saw Perdita tremble anti grow deadly jiale, and the cheeks of Itlris glow with purest blushes. lie must have been astonished at our conclave, elk-
turlied h»· it I -bould have thought ; but nothing of this ajqiean d ; he salutrtl niy conqianiov, ami addressed me vrith а coidiul grrrfmg, Ithis apjiraivtl susjiended for ¿ι moinent, and thru uith »xtrrmr suertuess, she said, *· Lord Ravmond, I collibie m vour goodness and honour." Smiling haughtily, he bent hi« head, and re¬ jilied, with e m j il utsi*,, *-* Do you indeed confide, Lady I d rúr " She endeavoured to read his thought, and ihen answered with dignity, * % As vou jilease. Jt Is er г tainty best not to compromise oneself by any concealment/' • s Panion me/' be replied, *- % if I have of¬ fended. AVhether you trust me or not, rely on my doing my utmost to further your wishes, whatever they may be." Idris smiled her thanks, and rose to take leave. Lortl Raymontl requested jiermission to accompany her to AVindsor Castle, to wiiich sbe consented, and tbey quitted the cottage together. My sister and I were left—truly like two fools,
who fancied tbat tbey had obtained a golden treasure, till daylight shewed it to be lead—two silly, luckless flies, wbo batl played in sunbeams and were caught in a spider's web. I leaned against tbe casement, and watched those two glorious creatures, till thoy disappeared in the forest-glades ; and then I turned. Pertlila had not moved ; her eyes fixed on the ground, her checks pale, her very lips vvhile, motionless and rigid, every feature stamped by woe, she sat. Half frightened, I would have taken her hard ; but sbe shudderingly withdrew it, and strove to collect herself. I entreated her to speak to me: " Not now/' she rejilied, " nor do you speak to me, my dear Lionel; you rail say nothing, for you know nothing. I will see you to-morrow ; in the meantime, adieu !'' She rose, and walked from the room ; but pausing at the door, antl leaning against it, as if her over-busy thoughts had taken from her the power tii supporting her.self, she said, "Lord Raymond vvili proba¬ bly retum. AVill you tell him that he must
excuse me to-day, for I am not well. I will see him to-morrow if he w blies it, antl you also. Vou batl better return to Loudon Avith him ; ytni can there make the enquiries agreed щюп, concerning the Earl of WuhL**oi and AÌ>it me fs again to-morrow, before you proceed on your journey—till then, farewell Í" She spoke falteringiv, and concluded vvith a heav y &igh. I gave my assent tt) her request ; and sbe left me. I felt as if, from the order of the systematic world, I had plunged into chaos, obscure, contrarv, unintelligible. That Ray¬ mond shoukl marrv Idris vvas more than ever intolerable ; yet my passion, thougli a giant from it**? birth, vvas too strange, wild, and impracticable, for me to feel at once the misery I jierceived in Perdita. Iiow shoultl I act? Slie had not confided in me ; I could not de¬ mand an explanation from Raymond without tlie hazard of betraying what was perhaps her пны treasured secret. I vvoultl obtaiu the truth from iier the following day—in the mean time—
But, while I wa« occupied by multiplying re¬ flections, Lord Raymond returned. lie asked for mv sister; and I delivered her message. ÍS After musing on it for a moment, hr asked inv if I were about tt) return to Loudon, ami if I would accompany hhn : í consented. He was full of thought, and remaiuetl silent timing a considerable part of our ride ; at length he said, ** I must apologize to you for my abstraction ; the truth is, Rykind' motion comes on to¬ night, antl I am considering my reply." Ryland was the leader of the popular party* a hard-headed man, and in bis way eloquent; he had obtained leave to bring in а bill making it treason to endeavour to change the jiresent state of the English government antl the stand¬ ing laws of the republic. 'Phis attack was di¬ rected against Raymond antl his machinations for the restoration of thr monarchy. Raymond asked me if I vvould aerompany him to the House that rv ening. 1 remembered my pursuit for inteliig, uce concerning Adrian ;
anc!, knowing that mv time would be full ν oc- cupied, I excused myself. '* Nay/* said my companion, ** I can free you from your jiresent impedi.nent. Vou are going to make enquiries concerning the Earl of AA'indsor. I can answer tbem at once, be is at the Duke of Athoľs seat at Dunkeld. On the first ajiproach of his dis- nrder, hr travelled about from one place to another ; until, arriv ing at that romantic seclu¬ sion he refused to quit it, and vve made ar¬ rangements w ith the Duke for his continuing there/' I was hurt by the careless tone with vvhich he conveyed tliis information, and rejilied coldly; ·* I am obiiged to vou for your inteUigence, and Avill avail myself ofit." ť% Vou shall, A'erney/' saitl he, ik antl ifyoti continue of the same mind, I will facilitate your views. But first Avitness, I beseech you, tbe result of this night's contest, antl the triumph I am about tt) achieve, if I may so callit, while I fear that v ictory is to me defeat. A\ r hat can F 3
I do? My dearest hopes appear to be near their fulfilment. Tbe ex-tpietn gives me Itlris; Adrian is totally unfitted to succeed to the earl¬ dom, and tliat eviduiu in my hands Incomes a kingdom. By the reigning Gtxl it is true; the paltry earldom of A\ T indsor shall no longer con¬ tent him, Avbo will inherit tbe rights which must for ever appertain tothe person wiio possesses it. The Countess ean never forget that she has been a queen, and she disdains to leave a di¬ minished inheritance to her ehildren ; her power and my wit avîII rebuild tbe throne, and this brow will be clasped by a kiuglv diadem.—I can do this—I can marry Idris/*------ He stoppet! abruptly, his countenance dark¬ ened, and its expression changed again and again under tbe influence of internal passion. 1 asked, " Does Lady Idris love your" " Wbat a question," replied he laughing, 44 She will of course, as I shall her, when we are married/' " You begin late," said I, ironically, " mar-
iage is usually considered the grave, and not the crati le of love. So you are about to love her, but do not already ?'* i% Do not catechise me, Lionel ; I will do my duty by her, be assured. Love ! I must steel my heart against that ; ex|KÍ it from its tower of strength, barricade it out : the fountain of love must cease to play, its waters tie dried щ\ antl all passionate ihoughts ats dant on it die- that is to say, the love vv hieb would rule me, not that which I rule. Idris is a gentle, pretty, sweet little girl ; İt is impossible not to have an affec¬ tion for her, and I bave a very sincere one ; only do not speak oflove—love, the tyrant and tlie tyrant-queller ; love, until now my con¬ queror, now my slave ; the hungry fire, the untamcable beast, the fanged snake------ nrj— no—I will have nothing to do with that love. Tell me, Lionel, do vou consent that I sliould marry this young lady ?'* He bent his keen eves upon me, and mv un¬ controllable lieart SAvelled in mv bosom. I re-
plied in a calm voiee but how far from calm was the thought imaged by my still words— '· Never ! 1 can never consent that Lady Idris shoultl be imiled to one who tioes not love her." u Beeause you love her yourself/' ·-·- Your Lordship might have spared that taunt ; I tlo mV tiare not love her." 4 " At least,' 1 * he continued haughtily, *' ьЬе does not love y«m. I would not marry а reigning sovereign, were I not sure that her heart was free. Bui, (), Lionel ! a kingdom is a word of might, antl gently sou tul ing are the terms that compose the style of royalty. Were not the mightiest men of the olden times kings.- Alexander was a king; Solomon, the wisest of men, was a king ; Napokon was a king ; Cæsar died in his attempt to become one, and Cromwell, the puritan and king-killer, aspired to regality. The father of Adrian yielded up the already broken sceptre of England ; but I will rear the fallen plant, join its dismembered frame, antl exalt it above all the flowers of the field.
%ί You need not wonder that I freely disco¬ ver Adrian's abode. Do not suppose that I am wicked or foolish enough to finitul m v purjxjscd sovereign lv on α fraud, and one so easily dis- covered as the truth or ťalseliootl of the Earl's insanity. I am just rome from him. Before I decided on my marriage with Itlris, I resolved to sorbim mysel f again, antl to judge ofthe proba« bility of lis recovery.—He is irrecoverably mad." I gasped for breath — ■** I will not detail to you,' continued Ray¬ mond, *'the melancholy particulars. You shall see him, and judge for yourseif; although I fear this visit, useless to him, will be insufferably painful V vou. It lias weighed on my spirits ever siner. ExerUent antl gentle as he is елен in the tlown fall of his reason, I do not Avor- ship him as vou do, but I Avould give all my hopes ofa crown and m v right hand to boot, to see bini restored to himself." Hi* Aoice expressed the deepest compassion: %i Thou most unaccountable being," I cried,
" whither will thy actions tend, in all this maze of purpose in which thou seernest lost ?" " AA'hither indeed ? To a crown, a golden be¬ gemmed crown, I hope ; and yet I dare not tribe and though I dream of a crown and wake for one, ever and anon a busy devil whispers to me, tbat it is but a fool's cap that I seek, and that were I wise, I should trample cm it, and take in its stead, tbat wiiicb is worth all the crowns of the east and presidentships of the webt/' 44 And wbat is that ?" " lf I do make it my cimice, then you shall know ; at present I dare not speak, eveu thmk of it." Again be was silent, antl after a pause turned to me laughingly. AVhen scorn tlitl not inspire his mirth, wben it was gtuuine gaiety that painted his features with a joyous expression, bis beauty became super-eminent, divine- " Verney," said he, " my first act w lien I be¬ come King of England, will be to unite with the Greeks, take Constantinople, and subdue
all Asia. I intend to be a warrior, a conqueror : X.ipoleou's name shall vail to mine; and en¬ thusiasts, instead of visiting his roekv grave, and exalting tlie merits of the fallen, shall adore my majesty, and magnify my illustrious achievements." I listened tt) Raymond with intense interest Ciniki I br oilier than all vúi\ to one who seemed to govern the whole earth in lus grasping ima¬ gination, antl vvho only quailed when he at¬ tempted to rule himself. Then on his word and will depended ni) own happine»—the fate of all tlear to me. I endeavouretl to divine tlu» concealed meaning of his words. Perdita"* name was not mentioned; yet 1 could not doubt that love for her caused the vacillation of pur¬ pose that he exhibited. And wbo was ш worthy of love as my noble-minded sister '" Wbo deserved the band of tbis self-exalted king more than slie whose glance belonged to a queen of nations ? who loved him, as he did her ;
notwithstanding thiit disapjiointment quellet! her passion, aud ambition btkl strong combat with his. AVe went together to the House in die tnen- ing Ray molili, while he knew that bis plans antl prosjmb wen to be discussed antl decidéit dunng the expected debate, was ga> and care¬ less. An bum, like that of ten thousantl hives of swaniiiiig bees, stunned us as we ente reti the toffee-room Knots of jioluiciatis vuie assem¬ bled with anxious brows antl loud or dteji v tuces. The αϊ nvcratieal j),ut),ihe tii hrst anti most influential nun tn Euglmd, appeal id kss agitated tii m ıhı otlu ι-, for the question was to be discusseti without thcu iute ife unt e Neai the in t was Rvland and his supjnirteis R\land w is a man of obscure both and of im¬ mense wealth, ınhented from hs father, wbo had been a manufacturer, lie batl wituessttk when a young man, the abdication of the king, and tbe amalgamation of the two houses of
Lords and Common-**·; he hati >ympathiľeel uith thc-c j oj)ular eneroatinnent-, and it had been the business of bis life to consolidate and em-Tease them. Sinte then, the influence ofthe landed proprietors hail augmented : and at first Ry laud was not sorry to observe the machina¬ tions of Lord Raymond, which tlrew off' manv of bis opponens- -p-nii/aii**. Buttile thing vvas now going u**» far. The poorer nobility hailed the* return of sovereignty, as an event which would restore thrm to their power and rights, now lost. Thr half extinct spiril of rov ally roused it>ci ť in the minds of men; and thry, willing slave-, sjf.constitutcd subjects, wc ri¬ vn lv to bruti their neeks to the yoke. Some «LTivl and manly spirits still remained, pillars of state ; but the word republic had grown stale to thr vidgar tar; and many- the event would prove whether ii was a majority —pinetl for the tinsel antl show of rovaltv. R \land was roused to resístante; he asserted that hs sufferance-
alone had permitted the encrease of this party ; but the time for indulgence was passed, and vvitli one motion of his arm he would sweep away the cobwebs that blinded his countrymen. AAlien Raymond entered the coffee*room, his presence was hailed by his friends almost with a shout, Tbey gathered round hini, counted their numbers, and detailed the reasons why they vvere novv to receive an addition of such and such members, who bad not vet declared themselves. Stime trifling business of the House having been gone through, the leaders took their seats in tbe chamber; the ciamour of voices continued, till Rylaud arose to speak, and then tbe slightest whispered observation was audible. All eyes vvere fixed ujkhi him as he stood—ponderous of frame, sonorous of voice, and with a manner which, though not graceful, was impressive, I turned from his marked, irou countenance to Raymond, whose face, veiled by a smile, would not betray his care ; yct his lips
quivered somewhat, and his bant! elasjied the lieneh on which be sat, with a convulsive strength tbat made tlm muscles start again. Ryland began by praising the jiresent state of the British empire. lie recalled past years to their memory ; tlie miserable contentions which in the time of our fathers arose almost to civil war, the abdication of the late king, and the foundation of the republic. He described this republic ; shewed bow it gave privilege H> each individual in tiie state, to rise to conse¬ quence, and even to temporary sovereignty. Hc compared the royal and republican sjiirit; shewed how the one tended to enslave the minds of men; while all the institutions of the other ¡•crved to raise even the meanest among us to -something great antl good. He shewed how England had become jiowerful, and its mliabi- tants valiant antl wise, by means of tbe freedom tbey enjoyed. As he sjioke, every heart swelled with pride, and every cheek glo wet! with delight to remember, that each one there was English,
and that each supported and contributed to the happv state of things now commemorated. Rylantľs fervour increased—iiis eyes lighted up—his voice assumed the tone of passion. There vv;is ouo man, he continued, vvho wished to alter all this, and bring us back to our days of impotence and contention:—one man, who would dare arrogate the honour u hich was due to all who claimed England as their birthplace, and set his name and style above the name and style of his coimtry. I saw at this juncture that Raymond changed colour ; his eyes Avere withdrawn front the orator, and cast on the ground; the listeners tinned from one to the other ; but in the meantime the speakers voice filled their cars—the thunder of his denuncia¬ tions influenced tbeir senses. Tiie very bold¬ ness of his language gave him weight; each knew that he spoke truth—a truth known, but not acknoAvledgod. lie tore from reality the ma.sk with va hich she had been clothed; and the purjloses of Raymond, which before had
crept around, ensnaring by stealth, novv stood а bünteti stag—even at bay— as all perceived who watched the irrépressible changes of his countenance. R viand ended by moving, that any attempt to re-erect the kingly power should be declared treason, and he a traitor who shoultl endeavour to change the i»re>ent form of govern- inent, ('heel's and loud acclamations followed lhe dose of his jsptHch. After his motion had been мч -omlriî. Lord Raymond rose,—bis countenance bland, hi** voice --oftlv melódiou*», his manner soothing, his grace antl sweetness eame like the miltl breath¬ ing ofa flute, after the loud, organ-like voice of his adversary. He rose, he sai*,!, to speak in favour of the honourable members motion, with one slight amendment subj»»med. He was readv to go back to olii times, and commemorate the contest-* of our falllers, and the monarrhV ab¬ dication. Nobly antl greatly, lie said, batl the illustrious and last sovereign of England sacri¬ ficed himself lo the apparent good of his coun-
try, and divested himself ofa power which could only be maintained by the blood of his subjects —these subjects named so no more, these, liis friends and equals, iiad in gratitude confermi ca'tain favours and distinctions on him and his family for ever. An amjile estate was allotted to tbem, and thev took the first rank among the jieers of Great Britain. Wt it might be con¬ jectured that they bad not forgotten their an¬ cient heritage' and it av as hard that bis heii shoultl suffer ¿dike with any other pretender, if be attempted tti regain what by ancient right and inheritance belonged to bim. He did not say tbat he shoultl favour such an attempt ; but he did say that sucb an attempt would be venial; and, if the asjirant did not go so far as to de¬ clare war, and erect a standard in tbe kingdom, his fault ought tti be regarded with an indulgent eye. In bis amendment be jirojiosetl, that an exception should be matle in the bill in favour of anv jierson vv lui claimed the sovereign power in right of the earls of AA T intkor.
Nor did Raymond make an end without drawing in vivid and giovi ing colours, lhe splen¬ dour of ι kingdom, in opposition to the com¬ mercial spirit of republicanism. He asserted, that each individual under the English mo¬ narchy, was thru as now, capable of attaining high rank and power— w ith one only exception, tbat ofthe function of chief magistrate; higher and nobler rank, than a bartering, timorous commonwealth coniti afford. And for this one exception, tt) wbat did it amount ? Tbe nature of riches antl influente forcibly confined the list of candidates to a few of the wealthiest ; and it was much to be fraretl, that the ill-humour antl contention generateti by this triennial struggle, wmdd eounteibalance its advantages in impartial eyes. lean ill record the flow of language and graceful turns of expression, tive wit and easy raillery that gave vigour antl hr- fluence to bis speech. His manner, timid at first, became firm—his changeful face was lit
up to superhuman brilliancv; bis voice, valions as music, was like that enchanting. It were useless to record the debate that followed this harangue. Party speeches vv en- delivered, which clothed the cpiestion in rant, and veiled its sjmple meaning in a woven vvintl of words. The motion was lost; Rylautl with¬ drew in rage and despair; and Raymond, gay and exulting, retiretl to dream of bis fu tun- kingdom.
CHAPTER IV.
Is thtre such a feeling as love at first sight - And if there be, iu vvhat tloes its nature differ from love founded in long observation antl slow growth? Peihaps its effects are not so perma¬ nent, but they are, while thev last, as violent ami intense. AVe vvalk the pathless mazes tf society, vacant ofjoy, till we hoki this chit, leading us through that labyrinth to paradise. Our nature dim, like to лп unhghted toich, sleeps m formless blank till the file attain ir; this life of life, this light to moon, and gloiy to tbe sun. Wbat cities it mattes whetbri the voi . i. <.
fire be struck from flint and steel, nourished with care into a flame, slowly communicated Un¬ tile dark wick, or whether swiftly the radiant power of light and warmth passes from а kin¬ dred power, and shines at once the beacon and the hope. In the deepest fountain of my heart the pulses were stirred ; around, above, be¬ neath, die clinging Memory as a cloak enw rapt me. In no one moment of coming time did I feel as I had done ín time gone by. Tlie spiiit of Idris hovered in the air I breathed ; her eyes were ever and for ever bent on mine ; her remem¬ bered smile blinded my faint gaze, antl caused me to walk as one, not in eclipv, not in dark¬ ness and vacancy—but in a new and bruKav light, too novel, too dazzling for my human senses. On every leaf, on every small division of the universe, (аь on the hyacinth ας is en¬ graved) was imprinted the talisman of my ex¬ isteuee— She livens ! She is í —I had not time yet to analyze my feeling, to take myself to task 4
«md leash in the tameless passion ; all was one idea, one feeling, one knowledge—it Avas my life ! But the die Avas cast—Raymond would marry Idris. The merry marriage bells rung in my ears ; I heard the nation's gratulation which fob lowed the union; the ambitious nobie ujirose .with swift eagle-flight, frtim the lowly ground to regal sujiremacy—and to tbe love of Idris. Yet, not so í Sbe ¿lid not love him ; she hat! called me her friend: she had smiled on me ; to me she bad entrusted her heart's dearest hope, the wel¬ fare of Adrian. This reflection thawed my congealing blood, and again the tide of life and love flowed impetuously onward, again to ebb as my busy thoughts clianged. The debate bat! ended at three in the morning. My soul was in tumults ; I traversed the streets vv ith eager rapidity. Truly, 1 was mad that night —love—which I have named a giant from its birth, wrestled with despair ! My heart, tbe field of combat, was , ounded by tbe iron beel of .he G 2
one, watered bv the gushing tear -ч of the other. ϊ)λ\, hateful to me, dawned ; I ri treated to mv lodgings—I threw mvself on α com h— -I slept— was it sleep?—for thought was still alive—lev e and despair struggled still, ami I v\ rithetl with unendurable pain. I awoke half stupefied; 1 felt a heavy op¬ pression on me, but knew not wherefore; I en¬ tered, a.s it were, the council-chamber of mv brain, and questioned the various ministers of thought therein assembled ; too sotm I renum¬ bered all ; too soon my limbs quivered beneath the tormenting power; soon, too sotm, 1 kneu niv self a slav e í Suddenly, unannounced, Lord Raymond en¬ tered my apartment. lie came in gaily, singing the Tviolese song of liberty ; noticed me with a gracious noti, and threw himself on a sopha opposite tlu copv of α bust ofthe Apollo Bel- vidore. After one or two trivial remarks, to which 1 sullenly replied, he ¡suddenly cried, looking at tlie bust, ·- I am called like that
victor! Not a bad ielea: the head will sirve for mv new coinage, and be an timen to ¿ill dutiful subjects of my future succé-»«/' He s-iid this in his nsc)sţ gay, yet benevolent manner, antl smiled, not disdainfully, hut m playful mockery tif himself. Tben bis coun¬ tenance suddenly darkened, antl in that shrill tour peculiar to himself, he tried, " I fought a good battle last night ; higher conquest the* jjlaiiis of Greece never saw me achieve. Now I am the lirst man in the state, burthen of every ballati, and object of oltl women's mumbled dr- votioiis. What aie your meditations; Vou, who fancy that you ran read the human soul, as vour native lake read* each crevice and fold¬ ing of its sunounding hilk -чау what you think of mr; kiug-exjiectiint, angei or devil, which?"' This ironical tone w a- discord to m v burst¬ ing, over-b,«ihng-heart ; I was nettled bv his insolence, antl replietl vvith bitterness; *- There is a spirit, neither angei or devil, damned to kmbo merelv. " I saw his cheeks become pule,
and his lips whiten and quiver ; his ungnr served but to enkindle mine, and I answered vv ith a determined look his eyes which glared on me; suddenly they were withdrawn, casi down, a tear, I thought, wetted the dark lashes; I was softened, and with involuntary emotion added, il Not that you arc such, my dear lord/' I paused, even awed by the agitation he evinced ; " Yes," he said at length, rising and biting his lip, as lie strove to curb bis passitin : u Such am I ! You do not know me, Verney ; neither you, nor our audience of last night, nor does universal England know anght of me. I stand here, it would seem, an elected king ; this hand is about to grasp a sceptre ; these brows feel in each nerve the coming diadem. I ap~ pear to have strength, power, victory ; standing as a dome-supporting column stands; and I am —a reed í I have ambition, and that attains its aim ; my nightly dreams are realized, my waking hopes fulfilled ; a kingdom awaits my
acceptance, my enemies are overthrown. But here," and he struck his heart Avith violence, α here is tbe rebel, here the stumbling-block ; this over-ruling heart, vvhich I nmy drain of ils living blood ; but, vvhile one fluttering pulsa¬ tion remains, I am its biave." He spoke with a broken voice, then bowed his head, antl, hiding his face in bis hands, wept. I was still smarting from my own dis¬ appointment ; yet this scene oppressed me even to terror, nor could I interrupt his access of passion. It subsided at length ; and, throwing himself on the couch, he remained silent antl motionless, except that his changeful features shewed a strong internal conflict. At last he rost 1 , antl saitl in his usual tone of voice, ** Thr time grows on us, Verney, I must away. Let me not forget my chiefest errand here. AVill you accompany me to AVindsor to-morrow ? You will not be dishonoured by my society, and as tliis is probably the last service, or dis-
чтА -íce you can do me, Avill you grant my request ?'* He held out his hand with almost a bashful air. Swiftly I thought—Yes, I will witness the last scene of the drama, Beside which. his mien conquered me, and an affectionate sen¬ timent towards him, again filled my heart—I bade him command me. " Aye, that 1 will," said he gaily, *-** thaťs my cue novv ; bc with me to-morrow morning by seven ; bo secret antl faith¬ ful ; and you shaLl be groom of the stole ere long." So saying ' he hastened away» vaulted on his horse, and with a gesture as if he gave me his hand to kiss, bade me another laughing adieu. Left to myself, I strovo with painful intensity to divine the motive of his request, and foresee the events of the coming day. The hours passed on unperceived ; my head ached vvith thought, tho nerves seemed teeming v\ith the over full fraught—I clasped my burning brow, as if my fevered hand could medicine its pain.
I was punctual to the appointed hour on the following day, and found Lord Raymond wait¬ ing for me. AA r e got into his carriaire· and proceeded towards AA'indsor. I had tutored myself, and was resolved by no outward sign to disclose my internal agitation. *' AA'hat a mistake Ryland made," said Ray¬ mond, " vvhen he thought to overpower mr the other night. He spike well, very well ; such an harangue vvould have succeeded better addressed to me singly, thau to the fools and knaves assem¬ bled yonder. Had I been alone, I should have lis¬ tened to him with a wish to hear reason, but when lie endeavoured to vanquish me in mv own territory, vvith my ovvn weapons, he put me on my mettle, and the event vvas such as all might have exjiected." I smiled incredulously, and replied : c ' I am of Ryland's way of thinking, and will, if you please, repeat all his arguments ; we shall see hovv far you will be induced by them, to change tbe royal for tbe patriotic style " с 3
" The repetition would be useless," said Ray¬ mond, " since I well remember them, and have many others, self-suggested, which speak with unanswerable persuasion.' 1 He did not explain himself, nor did I make any remark on his reply. Our silence endured for some miles, till the country with open fields* or shady woods and parks, presented pleasant objects to our view. After some observations on the scenery and seats, Raymond said : " Phi¬ losophers have called man a microcosm of nature, and find a reflection in the internal mind for all this machinery visibly at work around us. This theory has often been a source of amusement to¬ me ; and mauy an idle hour have I spent, exercis¬ ing my ingenuity in finding resemblances. Does not Lord Bacon say that, * the falling frtnn u discord to a concord, which maketh great sweet¬ ness in music, hath an agreement with the affec¬ tions, which are re-integrated to the betler after some dislikes?' What asea is the tide of pas. sion, whose fountains are in our own nature!
Our virtues are the quick-sands, which shew themselves at calm and low water ; but let the waves arise and the winds buffet them, and the poor devil whose hope was in their durability, finds them sink from under him. The fashions of the workl, its exigencies, educations and pur¬ suits, are winds to drive our Avilis, like clouds all one way ; but let a thunderstorm arise in the shape of love, hate, or ambition, and the rack }ξκίθϋ backward, stemming the opposing air in triumph/' *· Vet/' replietl I, u nature always presents to our eyes tbe appearawe tif a patient : while there is an active principle in man which is capable of ruling fortune, and at least of tack¬ ing against the gale, till it in some mode con¬ quers it." '* There is more of wbat is specious than true in your distinction/" said my compa¬ nion. * 4 Diti vve form ourselves, chcxising our dispositions, and our powers? I find myself, for one, as a stringed instrument vvith chords
and stops—but I have no power to turn the pegs, or pitch my thoughts to a higher or lower key." fi Other men/' I observed, " may bc better musicians. ' " I talk not of others, but myself," replied Raymond, u and 1 am as fair an example to go by as another. I cannot set niy heart to a particu¬ lar tune, or run voluntary changes on my will. We are born ; vve choose neither our parents, nor our stations ; we are educated by others, or by the world's circumstance, antl this cultiva¬ tion, mingling with our innate disposition, is tbe soil in wbich our desires, passions, antl motives grow." " There is much truth in what you say,' 1 said I, *' and yet no man ever arts upou this theory. ΑΑΊιο, when he makes a choice, says, Tbus I choose, beeause I am necessitateti ? Does he not on tlie contrary feel a freedom of will within him, which, though you may call it fal¬ lacious, still actuates him as he decides V м
*' Exactly so/' replied Raymond, " another link of the breakless chain. AVere I now to commit an act vvhich wouki annihilate mv hopes, ¿uid jiluek the regal garment from my morial limbs, to clothe them in ordinary weeds, would tiiis, think you, be an act of free-will on my jiart ?" As vve talked thus, I percei veti that we vvere uot going the ordinary road to AA'indsor, but tlirough Engleficld Green, towards Bishopgate Heath. I began to divine that Idris was not the object of our journey, but that I was brought to witness the scene that was to decide the fate of Raymond—and of Penlita. Ray¬ mond had evidently vacillated during his jour- r » J i*s »/ ney, and irresolution was marked in every ges¬ ture as vve entered Perdita's cottage, I watched hini curiously, determmed that, if this hesitation should continue, I would assist Penlita tti over¬ eóme herself, and teach her to disdain the waver¬ ing love of bim, who balanced between the possession of a crown, and of her, whose excel-
lence and affection transcended the worth of a kingdom.. We found her in her flower-adorned alcove ; she was reading the newspaper report of the debate in parliament, that apparently doomed her to hopelessness. That heart-sinking feel¬ ing was painted in her sunk eyes and spiritless attitude ; a cloud was on ber beauty, and fre¬ quent sighs were tokens of her distress. Thk sight had an instantaneous effect on Raymond ; his eyes beamed with tenderness, and remorse clothed his manners vvith earnestness and truth. He sat beside her ; and, taking the paper from her hand, said, " Not a word more shall my sweet Perdita read of this contention of mad¬ men and fools. I must not permit you to be acquainted with the extent of my delusion, lest you despise me ; although, believe me, a wish to appear before you, not vanquished, but as a conqueror, inspired me during my wordy Avar/* Perdita looked at him like one amazed ; her
expressive countenance shone for a moment witli tenderness ; to see him only was happiness. But a bitter thought swiftly shadowed her joy ; she bent her eyes on the ground, en¬ deavouring to master the passion of tears that threatened to overwhelm her. Raymond con¬ tinued, " I will not act a part with you, dear girl, or appear other thau what I am, weak and unworthy, more fit to excite your disdain than your love. Yet you do love me ; I feel and know that you do, and thence I draw my most cherished hopes. If tiride guided you, or even reason, you might well reject me. Do so; if your high heart,. incajiable of my infirmity of jiurjiose, refuses to bend to the lowness of mine. Turn fromme, if you va ill,— if you can. If your whole soul does not urge you to forgive me— if your entire heart does not ojien wide its door to admit me to its very centre, forsake mc, never speak to mc again. I, tliough sinning against you almost beyond remission, I aisti
am proud ; there must be no reserve in y ou ľ pardon—no drawback to the gift of your aflec¬ tion." Perdita looked down, confused, yct pleased. My prcaence embarrassed her ; so that she dared not turn tt) meet her lover's eye, or trust her voice to assure him of her affection; while a blush mantled her cheek, and her disconsolate air was exchanged for one expressiv e of deep- felt joy. Raymond encircled her waist with his arm, and continued, " I do not deny that 1 have balanctd between you and the highest hope that mortal man can entertain ; but I do so no longer Take me —mould me to your will, possess my heart and s nú to all eternity. If you refuse to contribute to my happiness, I quit England to¬ night, and will never set foot in it again. " Lionel, you hear : witness for me: persuade your sister to forgive the injury 1 have done her; persuade her to be mine." '* There needs no persuasion," 5 aid the blush-
ing Pei tlita, ■*--■ except your own dear promisei·, antl uiy ready heart, whieh Avhispers to me that they are true." That same ev ening we all three walked to¬ gether in the forest, and, vvith the garrulity which happiness ittenire-*-**-, thev detailed to me tlie historv of their loves, it was pleasant to see the haughty Raymond and reserved Penlita clianged through happy love into prattling, play¬ ful children, both losing their characteristic dignity iu the fulness of mutual contentment. A night or tvvo ago Lord Raymond, with a brow of care, and a heart oppressed with thought, bent all hisenergios to silenceor persuade the legislators of England that a м -rptrr was not too weighty for his hand, while visions of dominion, war, and triumph floated before bim ; now, frolicsome as а lively boy sporting under his mother's щи proving ryr, the hopes of bis ambition were complete, when he pressed the small fair band of Perdita to hs lips; while she, radiant with tk¬ iigbt, looketl on the still pool, not truly atlmiriiv
herself,but drinking in Avith rapture the reflection there made of the form of herself antl her lover, shewn for the first time in dear conjunction. I rambled away from them. If the rapture of assured sympathy was theirs, I enjoyed that of restored hope. I looked on the regal towers of AVindsor. High is the Avail and strong the barrier that separate me from my Siar of Beauty. But not impassable. She will not bc his. A few more years dwell in thy native gar¬ den, sweet flower, till I hy toil and time acquire a right to gather thee. Despair not, nor hitl me despair í AVhat must I do now ? First I must seek Adrian, and restore him to her. Patience, gentleness, and untired affection, shall recai him, if it be true, as Raymond says, that he is mad ; energy and courage shall rescue hini, if be be unjustly imprisoned. After the lovers again joined me, vve supped together in the alcov e, Truly it was a fairy's supper; for tliough the air was perfumed by the 4'cnt of fruits and wine, wc none of us
either ate or drank—even the beauty tif the night was unobserved ; their extasy could not be increased by outward objects, and I was wrapt in reverie. At alxmt midnight Raymond and I took leave of my sister, to return tt) town. He was ¡dì gaiety ; scraps of songs fell from his lips ; every thought of his mind—every object about us, gleamed under the sunshine of his mirth. lie accused me of melancholy, of ill- humour and envy. '** Not so/' said I, " though I confess that my thouglits are not occupietl as pleasantly as vours are, Vou promised to facilitate my visit U) Adrian; I conjure you to perfoim your pro¬ mise. I cannot linger here ; I long to soothe— perhaps to cure tne malady of my first and Ы -st friend. I shall immediately depart for Dunkeld." *·■ Thou bird of night/' replied Raymond, " what an eclipse do you throw across my bright thoughts, forcing me to call to minti that melan¬ choly ruin, vvhich stands in mental desolation, more irreparable than a fragment of a carved
column in a w red-grown field. You dream that you ran restore bim ŕ Dædakis never wound so inextricable an error round Minotaur, as mathuis hus «oven about bis inqirisoned rea¬ stm. Nor you, nor any oilier Theseus can thread the labyrinth, to whieh jierhaps some unkind Ariadne has tlie ciur." " You allude to Evadne Zaimi: but she o not in England." 4 ' .Vnd were she," said Raymond, " I vvoultl not advise her seeing him. Better to derav in absolute delirium, than to be ihe victim of the methodical unreason of ill-bestowed love. The long tluration of iiis malady has jirobably erasetl from his mind all vestige of lier; and it were w til that it should never again be imprinted. You will find bim at Dunkeld; gentle and ıra clable he wantlcrs up the hills, antl through lhe wood, or sits listening beside the waterfall. You may see bim—his hair stuck vvitli wild flowers—his eyes full of untraceable meaning— bis voice broken—his jierson wasted to a sha*.
do«. He plucks flowers and weeds, and weaves chaplets of tbem, or sails yellow leaves and bits of bark on the stream, rejoicing in their safety. or weeping at their wreck. The verv memory half unmans inc. By Heaven ! the first tears I have shed siner boyhood rushed scalding into mv eves when 1 saw bini." It needed not this last account to spur mo on to a isit him. I only doubted whether or not I shoultl tntkavour to see Itlris again, before I tle- jiartt tl. This doubt was derided on the follow. iiig tin*. Early in the morning Raymond eame to mr ; intelligence had arrivetl that Athian vva> thmgtrouslv ill, and it appeared impossible that bis failing strength shoultl surmount the fs О disorder. *" To-morrow/* said Raymond, ** his mother ami sister set out for Scotland tt) see him onee again."' *' And I go to-day," I cried; " this very iiour I will engage a sailing balloon ; 1 shall be there in fortv-eight bours at furthest, perhaps m less, if the wind is fair. Farewell, Ha\~
mond; be happy in having chosen the better part in life. This turn of fortune revives me I feared madness, not sickness—1 have a pre¬ sentiment that Adrian will not die; perhaps this illness is a crisis, and hc may recover." Everything favoured my journey. The bal¬ loon rose about half a mile from the earth, antl with a favourable wind it hurried through the air, its feathered vans cleaving the unopposİng atmosphere. Notwithstanding the melancholy object of my journey, my spirits Avere exhilarated by reviving hope, by the swift motion of the airy pinnace, and the balmy visitation of the sunny air. The pilot hardly moved the plumetl steerage, and the slender mechanism of the wings, Avide unfurled, gave forth а murmuring noise, soothing to the sense. Plain and hill, stream and corn-field, Avere discernible below, Avhile wc unimpeded sped on swift and secure, as a Aviltl swan in his spring-tide flight. The machine obeyed the slightest motion ofthe helm; and, tbe wind bloAving steadily, there was no let
or obstacle to our course. Such Avas the power of man over the elements ; a power long sought, and lately w on ; yet foretold in by-gone time by the prince of poets, whose verses I quoted much H> the astonishment of my pilot, when I told hini how many hundred years ago they had beeti written ;— Oh ! human wit, thou can'st invent muen iil. Ihou searched strange arts; who would thiuk by ikili, An heavy man like a hght bird -bhould stray, Antl through the empty heavens find а *лау > I alighted at Perth ; and, though mueh fa- tigued by a constant exposure to the air for many hours, I would not rest, but merely al¬ tering niy mode of conveyance, I went by land instead of air, to Dunkeld. The sun was rising as I entered the opening of the hills. After the revolution of ages Birnam hill was again co¬ vered vvith a young forest, while more aged pines, planted at the very commencement of the nineteenth century by the then Duke of Athol, gave solemnity and beauty to the scene. The
rising sun first tinged the pine tops ; and my miud, rendered through my mountain educa¬ tion deeply susceptible of the graces of nature, and now on the eve of again beholding my be¬ loved and perhaps dying friend, was strangely influenced by tbe sigbt of those distant beams : surely tbey were ominous, and as such I re¬ garded tbem, good omens for Atlrian, on vvhose life my happiness depended. Poor fellow ! he kıy stretched on a bed of sickness, bis cheeks glowing with the hues of fever, bis eyes half closet!, his breath irre¬ gular and tliffieult. Yet it vvas less jiainful to see him thus, than to find him fulfilling the animal functions uninterruptedly, his mind sirk the while. 1 established myself at his bedside ; I never quitted it day or night. Bitter task was it, to bti ml d his sjiirit Avaver between death and life: lo see bis warm cheek, and know tbat tbe very fire vvhich burned too ficicciy tliere, was consuming the vital fuel ; to bear his moaning voice, which might never again articulate word*·
of love and wisdom ; to witness the ineffectual motions of his limbs, soon to bc wrapt in their mortal shroud. Such for three days and nights appeared tbe consummation which fate had decreed for my labours, and I became haggard and spectre-like, through anxiety and watching. At length his eyes unclosed faintly, yet with a look of returning life: br became pale and weak ; but the rigidity of h:s features was softened by approaching convalescence. He knew me. AA'hat a brimful cup of joyful agony it was, vvhen his face first gleamed vvith the glance of recognition-when he pressed my hand, novv more fevered than his own, and vvhen he pro¬ nounced my name ! No trace of his past in¬ sanity remained, to dash my joy vvith sorrovv. This same evening his mother and sister arrived. The Countess of AVindsor was by nature full of en-rgeiic feeling; but she had very seldom in her life permitted the concen¬ trated emotions of her heart to sbew themselves on her features. Tlie studied immovability of vol. i. u
lier countenance ; her slow, equable manner, and soft but umiielodioua voice, were a imisk, bid¬ ing her fiery passions, ami the impatience of her disoositioii, She did not in the lea 4 t resemble either of her children ; her black antl sparkling eye, lit uji by pride, was totally unlike the blue lustre, and frank, benignant expression of either Adrian or Idris. There was sometiiing grand and majestic in her motions, but nothing persuasive, nothing amiable. Tall, thin, and strait, her face still handsome, her гален hair hardly tinged with prey, her forehead arched antl beautiful, had not the eye-brows been somewhat scattered—itwas impossible not to be struck bv her, almost to fear her. Idris ajijieared w be the only being who could resist her mother, notwithstanding the extreme mildness of her character. But there was a fearlessness and frankness about her, which said that she vvoultl not encroach on another's liberty, but held her own sacred and unassailable. The Countess cast no look of kindness on my
worn-out frame, though afterwards she thanked me coldly for my attentions. Not so Idris ; her first glance was ibr her brother; she took bis band, sbe kissed Ills eyr-iids, and hung over bim with looks of eomjiassion and love. Her eyes glis¬ tened with tears when she thanked me, and th.* grace of her exjircssioiis was rnhanrrd, not diminished, by the fervour, wbich caused hvr almost to falter as she spoke. Her mother, all eyes and ears, soon interrupted \is ; and Ì saw, that slie wished to dismiss me quietly, as one whose services, now that bis relatives had arrived, were of no use to her son, I was harassed and ill, resolved not to give iqi my jiost, yet doubting in vvhat vvay I sliould assert it; when Adrian called me, and clasping my hantl, bade me not leave bun. His mother, apparently inattentive, at once understood what was meant, and seeing the hold vve had upon her, yielded the point to us. The days that followed were full of pain to me ; so that I sometimes regretted that í had h 2
not yielded at once to the haughty lady, who watched all my motions, and turnet! шу beloved task of nursing my friend to a work of pain «no irritation, х-чсуег ош any woman apjpear so entirely made of mind, as the Countess of AA'indsor. Her passions had subdued her ajipe- tites, even her natural wants; she slept little, and hardly ate at all ; her body was evidently considered by her as a men machine, whose health was necessary for the accomplishment of her schemes, but whose senses formed no part of her enjoyment. There is something fearful in one who can thus conquer tbe animal jiart of our nature, if the victory be not the effect of consummate virtue ; nor was it without a mixture of tbis feeling, that I beheld tbe figure of the Countess awake when others slept, fasting when I, abstemiou naturally, antl rendered so by the fever that preyed on me, was forced to recruit myself vvith food. She resolv¬ ed to prevent or diminisli my opportunities of acquiring influence over her children, and cir-
cumvented my plans by a hard, quiet, stubborn resolution, that seemed not to belong to flesh and blood. AVar Avas at last tacitly acknoAv- ledged between us, AA r e had many pitched battles, during which no word was spoken, hardly a look was interchanged, but in which each resolved not to submit to the other. The Countess had the advantage of position ; so I was vanquished, though I would not yield, I became sick at heart. My countenance Avas painted with tbe hues of ill health and vexa¬ tion. Adrian and Idris saw this; tbey attri¬ buted it to my long watching and anxiety ; thry urged me to rest, and take care of myself, while I most truly assured them, that my best medicine Avas their good wishes; those, and the assured con¬ valescence ofmy friend, now daily more apparent. Tbe faint rose again blushed on his cheek ; his brow and lips lost the ashy jialeness of threat¬ ened dissolution ; such was the clear reward of my unremitting attention—and bounteous hea-
ven added overflowing reconqiencc, when it gave me also the thanks and smiles of IthK After the lapse of a few weeks, we left Dun¬ keld. Itlris and her mother returned imme¬ diately to AVindsor, whde A d rían and I followed by slow journies and frequent stopjmges, occa¬ sioned by bis continued weakness. As we tra¬ versed the various counties of fertile England, alt wore an exhilii ating appearance to my corn- painon, who bad been so long secluded by dis¬ ease from tbe enjoyments <-f weather antl scenery. A\"e passed through busy towns and cultivated jilains. The husbandmen w ere getting in their plenteous harvests, and the women and ehildren, occujiied by light rustic toils, formet! groupes of happy, healthful persons, the very sight of whom carried cheerfulness to the iicart, One evening, quitting our inn, vve strolled down a ahady lane, then uj) a grassy slope, till we came to atı eminence, that commanded an ex¬ tensive view of hill and dale, meandering mers
dark woods, and shining A'illages. The fain nas setting ; and the clouds, straying, like nevv^ shorn sheep, through the vast fields of sky, re¬ ceive·«*! the golden colour of his parting beams ; the d'tbt an t uplands shone out, and the busy í nun of evening came, harmonized |y distance, on our car. Adrian, avIio felt all the fremii î-pırit infused by returning health, clasped hin ) tands iu delight, and exclaimed vvith transport : " O happy earth, and happy inhabitants of earth ! A stately palace has God built for you, О man ! and worthy are you of your dwelling ! Behold the verdant carpet spread at our feet, and the azure canopy above; the fields of earth which generate and nurture all things, and the track of heaven, which contains and clasps all things. Now, at this evening hour, at the pe¬ riod of repose and refection, methinks all heart.·* breathe one hymn of love and thanksgiving, and we, like priests of old on the mountain-tops, give a voice to their sentiment. " Assurtnlly α most benignant power built
up the majestic fabric we inhabit, and framed the laws by whicb it endures. If mere existence, and not happiness, had been the final end of our being, what need of the profuse luxuries which vve enjoy ? Why should our dwelh-gg-* place be so lovely, and why should the instincts of nature minister pleasurable sen¬ sations ? The very sustaining of our animal machine is made delightful ; and our suste¬ nance, the fruits of tbe field, is painted with transcendant hues, endued w ith grateful odours, and palatable to our taste. Why should this be ; if he were not good ? AA r e need houses to protect us from the seasons, and behold tbe materials with which Ave are provided ; the growth of trees with their adornment of leaves ; while rocks of stone piled above the plains variegate the prospect with their pleasant irregularity. " Nor are outward objects alone the re¬ ceptacles of the Spirit of Good. Look into the mind of man," where wisdom reigns enthroned ;
where imagination, the painter, sits, vvith his pencil dipt in hues lovelier than those of sun¬ set, adorning familiar life with glowing tints, AA T hat a noble boon, worthy the giver, is the imagination ! it takes from reality its leaden hue : it envelopes all thought and ¡»sation in a radiant veil, and with an hand of beauty beckons us from the sterile seas of life, to her gardens, and bowers, and glades of bliss. And is not love a gift of the divinity ? Love, and her child, Hoţie, which can bestow Avealth on poverty, strength on the weak, and liappiness on the sorrowing. 44 My lot has not been fortunate. I have consorted long vvith grief, entered tbe gloomy labyrinth of madness, and emerged, but half alive. Y r et I thank God that I have lived ! I thank God, that I have beheld his throne, the heavens, and earth, his footstool. I am glad tbat I have seen the changes of his day ; to behold the sun, fountain of light, and the gentle pilgrim moon ; to have seen the fire π 3
bearing fiowers of the sky, and the flowery Vrs of earth ; to have witnessed the Fowir -ц and the harvest. I am glad that 1 have loved, and liave experienced sympathetic jt)y and sorrow wilh my fellow-creatures. I am glad now to feel the eurn-abof thought flow through my mind, as the blood through the articulations of my frame ; mere existence is pleasure ; and I thnnk God that 1 live ! <; And all vr happy nurslings of mother- earth, do ye not relio my words? Ye who are linked by the affectionate ties of nature ; com¬ panions, frientls, lovri's í fathers, avIio toil with joy for their offspring ; women, w ho while vi/iim* on the living forms of their children, forget the pains of maternity; cliiltlren, who neither toil nor spin, but love and are loved î ·*** Oh, that death and sickness were banished from our earthly home ! that hatred, tyranny, anil fear could no longer make their lair in the human heart ! that each man might find a brother in his fellow, and a nest of repose
amid the wide plains of his inheritance! that the source of tears Avere dry, and that lip** might no longer form expressions of sorrow. Sleeping thus under the beneficent oyc oi' heaven, can evil visit thee, О Earth, or grief cradle to their graves thy luckless children ·* Whisper it not, lest the dæmons hear and re¬ joice ! The choice is vvith us ; let us will it, and our habitation becomes a paradise. For the will of man is omnipotent, blunting the arrows of death, soothing the bed of disens 1 , and wiping away the tears of agony. And what is each human being worth, if he do not put forth 1rs strength to aid his fellow-crea¬ tures ? My soul is а fading spark, my nature frail as a spent wave ; but I dedicate all of in¬ tellect and strength that remains to me, to that one work, and take upon me the task, as far as I am able, of bestowing blessings on my fellow- mon Г His voice trembled, his eyes avc re cast up,
his hands clasped, and his fragile person was bent, as it were, with excess of emotion. Tlie spirit of life seemed to linger in his form, as σ dying flame on an altar flickers on the embers of an accepted sacrifice.
CHAPTER V. AA'hen we arrived at AA r indsor, I found that Raymond and Perdita had departed for the continent. I took possession of my sister's cottage, and blessed myself that I lived Avithin view of AA ľ indsor Castle. It Avas a curious fact, that at tbis period, when by the marriage of Perdita I was allied to one of the richest indi¬ viduals in England, and was bound by the most intimate friendship to its chiefest noble, I expe¬ rienced the greatest excess of poverty that I had ever known. Äly knowledge of the worldly principles of Lord Raymond, would have ever prevented me from applying to him, however deep my distress might have been, It was in
vain that I repeated to myself with regard tt) Athian, that his purse was open to me ; that one in sou!, as we vvere, oui foi tunes ought also to Ik- common. I couid never, while with him, think of h : bounty as a remedy tt» my jioverty ; antl I even jiut aside hastily his offers of siq>- piics, assuring him of a falsehood, tliat I needed them not. Hovv could I say to this generous being, <c Maintain me in idleness. You wiu» hnve dedicated your powers of mind and for¬ tune to the benefit of your species, shall you so misdirect your exertions, as to sujijiort ш uselessness the strong, healthy, and cajiable ?'* And yet I dared not request him to use bis influence tbat I might obtain an honourable provision for myself—for then I shoultl have been obliged to leave AA T indsor. I hovered for t ver around the walls of its Castle, beneath its eiisbadowing thickets ; my sole conqvuiions wert my books and my loving thoughts. I studied the wisdom of the ancients, and gazctl on the happy walls that sheltered the beloved ofmy soul.
My mind was nevertheless idle. I pored over the poetry of old times; I studied the metaphysics of Plato and Berkley, I read the histories oť Greece and Rome, and of England's former |*> riotls, ami I watched the movements of the lady of my heart. At night I coukl see her shadow on the walls of her apartment ; by day I viewetl her in her flower-garden, or riding in the park with her usual companions. Methought t he- charm would be broken if I were seen, but 1 heard the music of her voice and was happy. I gave to each heroine of whom I read, her beauty antl mateillesi» excellences—such was Antigone, wiien she guitled the blind Œtlipus to tlie grovt of the Eumenides, and discharged the funeral riles of Polynices; such was Miranda in the un- v bited cave of Prospero; sucb Haidee, on the sands of the Ionian island. I w as mad vvith excess of passionate devotion ; but pride, tameless as fire, invested my nature, and prevented me from betraying myself by word or look. In the mean time, vvhile I thus pampered my-
self with rich mental repasts, a peasant Avould have disdained my scanty fare, Avhich I sometimes robbed from the squirrels ofthe forest. I was, I own, often tempted to recur to the lawless feats of my boy-hood, and knock down the almost tame pheasants that perched upon the trees, and bent iheir bright eyes on me. But they were the property of Adrian, the nurslings of Idris ; and so, although my imagination rendered sen¬ sual by privation, made me think that they would better become the spit in my kitchen, than the green leaves of the forest, Nathelesse, I checked my haughty will, and did not eat; but supped upon sentiment, and dreamt vainly of " such morsels sweet," as I might not Avaking attain. But, at this period, the whole scheme of my existence was about to change. The orphan and neglected son of Verney, Avas on the eve of being linked to the mechanism of society by a
golden chain, and to enter into all the duties and affections of life. Miracles vvere to be wrought in my favour, the machine of social life pushed vvith vast effort backward. At¬ tend, О readerì while 1 narrate this tale of wonders ! One day as Adrian and Idris were riding through the forest, with their mother and ac¬ customed companions, Idris, draAving her bro¬ ther aside from the rest of the cavalcade, sud¬ denly asked him, " AVhat had become of his friend, Lionel Verney ?" cc Even from this spot/' replied Adrian, pointing to my sister's cottage, "you can see his dwelling." (i Indeed !" said Idris, " and why, if hc be so near, does he not come to see us, and make one of our society ?" " I often visit him," replied Adrian ; " but you may easily guess the motives, vvhich prevent him from coming where his presence may annoy any one among us/ 1
" I do guess tbem," saitl Itlris, "and such as tbev are, I would not venture to combat tbem. Tell me, however, in vvhat vvay he passes bis time ; what be is doing and thinking in his cot¬ tage retreat ?" ' ς Nay, my sweet sister/ 1 rejilied Adrian. wv you ask me more than 1 can well answer; but if you feel interest in him, why not visit him? He will feel highly honoured, and thus you may rvpvoy a jiart of tbe obligation 1 owe him, and compensate for the injuries fortune has done him." c " I will most icadily accompany you to hk abode/' said the lady, " not that I wish that either of us shoukl unburthen ourselves of our debt, vvbicb, being no less than your life, must remain unpayable ever. But let us go ; to¬ morrow vve will arrange to ride out. together, and proceeding towards tbat part of the forest, call ujion him." The next evening therefore, though the autumnal change bad brought on cold and rain,
Adrian and Idris entered mv cottnm·. Thev found me Curius-like, feasting on sorry fruib for supper; but they brought gifts richer thnn the golden bribes of the Sabines, nor could I refuse îbe invaluable store of friendship ami delight which they bestowed. Surelv the glo¬ rious twins of Latona vvere not more welcome, w hen, in the infancy of the world, ihey were* brought forth to beautify and enlighten this *· .sterile promontory," thau were thU angelic pair to my lowly dwelling and grateful heart We sat like one family round nr» hearth. Our talk vvas on fubjects, unconnected vvith the emotions that evidently occupied each ; but vve each divined the other's thought* and as our voices spoke of indifferent matters, our eyes, iu mute language, told а thousand things no tongue could have uttered. They left me in an hour's time. They left me happy—how unspeakably happy. It did not require tho measured sounds of hum in language to syllable the story of my extasy. Idris had *- isited me ; Idris I should again and
again sec—my imagination did not wander beyond the completeness of tbis knowiedge, I trod air ; no doubt, no fear, no hope even, disturbed me ; I clasped vvith my soul the ful¬ ness of contentment, satisfied, undesiring, bea¬ tified. For many days Adrian and Idris continued to visit me thus. In this dear intercourse, love, in the guise of enthusiastic friendship, infused more and more of his omnipotent spirit. Idris felt it. Yes, diviiiitv of the workl, I road vour characters in her looks and gesture; I bearti your melodious voice echoed bv hov —you pre¬ pared for us a soft and flowery path, all gentle thouglits adorned it—your name, О Love, was not spoken, but you stood tbe Genius of tbe Hour, veiled, and time, but no mortal hand, migbt raise the curtain. Organs of articu¬ late sound did not proclaim the union of tnir hearts; for untoward circumstance allowed no opportunity for the expression that hovered on our lips.
Oh my pen! hasle thou to write what was, before tbe thought of what k, arrests the hand that guitles tbee. If I lift uj> my eyes and see the depart earth* and feel that those dear eyes have spent thtir mortal lustre, and tbat those beauteous lijis are silent, their ** crimson leaves" faded, for ever I am mute í But you live, niy Idris, even now you mov t before me ! Tliere w ¿is a glade, О reader! a grassy opening in the wood; the retiring treet left its velvet expanse as a temple for love; tbe silver Thames bounded it on one side, and ¿t willow bending down dipt in the water its Naiad hair, dishevelled by tlie wind's view less hand. The oaks around were the home of a tribe tif nightingales—there am I now; Idris in youth's dear [irime 1 , is by my side—remember, I ¿imjust twenty-two, and seventeen summers have sc¿irtv- ly jiassed over the beloved of my heart. ТЫ river swollen by autumnal rains, deluged the low lands, and Adrian in Jiis favourite boat is employed in the dangerous pastime of jiîuekki«·
the topmost bough from α submerged oak. Are you weary of life, О Adrian, that yoi; thus play with tlanger?— lie has obtained his prize, and he pilots hi*? boat through the flood ; onr eyes were fixed on him fearfully, but the stream carried him away from us; he was forced tt) land far lower tlown, and to makea considerable circuit before he con Id join us. ''lie is safe !"" said Idris, as he leapt oil shore, antl waved the bough over his heatl in token of success ; ·** Ave vrill wail for him here '* AVe vvere alone ttigether ; the sun had set , the song of the nightingales began ; the evening star shone distinct in the flood of light, vvhich was yet unfaded in the vvest. The blue eyes of 1113* angelic girl were fixed on this sweet emblem of herself : " How the light palpitates," sbe said, '* which is that star's life. Its vacillating efful¬ gence seems to say thai its stale, even like our* upon earth, is wavering and inconstant ; it fear*-, methinks, and it loves/' u Gaze not on the star, clear, generous friend/"
! criei, ' c read not love in iis trembling rays« look not upon distant worlds; speak not of the mere imagination of а sentiment. I bave long İven silent ; long even tt) sickness have I desired to speak to you, antl submit my soul, m v life, nív entire bring to you. Look not on the star, dear love, or do and let that eternal spark plead ibr me ; let it be my witness and mv advocate, silent as it shines—love is to me ms light to tlie star; even so long as that is un- eclipsed by annihilation, so long shall I love you." Veiled for ever to the world's callous eye must bc the transport of that moment. Still dti I feel her graceful form press against my full-fraught heart—still tloes sigbt, and pulsee eaid breath sicken and fail, at the romembrance of that first kiss. Slowly and silently we went to mert Adrian, whom vve heard approaching. I entreated Adrian to return to me after hi¬ hat! conducted bis sister home. Aud that same evening, walking among the moon-lit forest paths I poured forth my whole heart, its tran-
sport and its hope, to m) friend. For a moment he looked disturbed—" I might luse foreseen this," he said, "Avhat strife will now ensue! Pardon me, Lionel, nor av onder tìiat the expec¬ tation of contest witli my mother should jar me, when else I should delightedly confess that iny best hopes aie fulfilled, in confiding my sister to 30UI· protection, lf you do not already know it, you will soon learn tho deep hate my muther bears lo the name of Vernej. I will converse with Idris; then all that a frientl can do, I w ill do ; to her it must belong to play the lover's part, if she be capable of it."* AVhile the brother and sbter were still hesi¬ tating in what manner they could best attempt to bring their mother over to their party, she, bvpecting our meetings, taxed her children with theni, taxed her fair daughter with deceit, and an unbecoming attachment for one wiiose only merit was being the son of the profligate favourite of her imprudent father ; and who avus doubtless as worthless as he from whom he
boasted his descent. Tbe eyes of Idris flashed at this accusation ; she replied, *' I do not deny that I love Venus ; prove to me that he İs Avorthiess, and I will пел er see him more/' " Dear IMadam," said Adrian, t4 let me cn- veat vou to see hini, to cultivate Ins friendship. Vou will Avon d er then, as I do, at the extent of bis accomplishments, and tbe brilliancy of his talents." (Pardon me, gentle reader, this ь not futile Aanitv ,—not futile, « since to know that Atinan felt tbus, brings joy even now to m\ lone heart). " Mad and foolish boy /' exclaimed the angry ladv, " vou have chosen with dream** and theo¬ ries to overthrow iny schemes for your own aggrandizement ; but you shall not do tbe same bv those I have formed for your sister. I but too well understand the fasemation you both labour uuder; since I had tbe same struggle w uh ) our father, to make him cast off the parent of this youth, who hid liis evil propensities» vvith the smoothntsb and subtlety of a viper. In vol ι. ι
those days how often did I hear of his attrac¬ tions, his wide spread conquests, his wit, his refined manners. It is well when flies only are caught by sue« .-qnders' webs; but is it for the high-born and powerful to bow their necks to the flimsy yoke of these unmeaning pre¬ tensions ? AAvre your sister indeed the insig¬ nificant jierson she deserves to he, I woult! willingly leave her to the fate, the wretched fate, of tbe wife of a man, whose very person, resembling as it does bis wretched father, ought to remind you of the folly and vice it typifies— but remember, Lady Idris, it is not alone the once royal blood of England that colours your veins, you are a Princess of Austria, artd every life-drop is akin to emjierors and kings. Are you then a fit mate for an uneducated shepherd- boy, whose only inheritance is his father's tar¬ nished name?" ťÉ I can make but one defence," rejilied Idris, " the same offered by my brother; see Lionel, converse with my shepherd-boy"—
The Countess interrupted her indignantly— iC Yours !"—she cried : and then, smoothing ber impassioned features to a disdainful smile, she continued—" AA r e will talk of this another time. All I now ask, all your mother, Idris, requests is, that you will not see this upstart during the interval of one month." " I dare not comply/' said Idris, α it would pain him too much. I have no right to play with his feelings, to accept his proffered love, and then sting him vvith neglect." 4i Tbis is going too far/' her mother an¬ swered, vvith quivering lips, and eyes again instinct by auger. " Nay, Madam/' said Adrian, " unless my sister consent never to see him again, it is surely an useless torment to separate them for a month/* ** Certainly," replied the ex-quccn, with bit¬ ter scorn, " his love, and her love, and both their childish flutterings, arc to be put in fit comparison with my years of hope and anxiety, | о 1 л*
with the duties of the offspring of kings, with the high and dignified conduct which one of her descent ought to pursue. But it is un¬ worthy of me to argue and complain. Perhaps you will have the goodness to promise me not to marry during that interval ?" This was asked only half ironically ; and Idris wondered why her mother should extort frtmi her a solemn vow not to dt), vvhat she had never dreamed of doing—but the promise was required and given. All went on cheerfully novv ; vve met as usual, and talked without dread of our future plans. The Countess was so gentle, and even beyond her wont, amiable with her children, that they began to entertain hopes of her ultimate con¬ sent. She was too unlike them, too utterly alien to their tastes, for tbem to find delight in her so¬ ciety, or in die prospect of its continuance, but it gave them pleasure to see her conciliating and kind. Once even, Adrian ventured to propose
her receiving me. She refused vvith a smile, reminding him that for the present his sister had promised to be patient. One day, afte*r the lapse of nearly a montli, Adrian received a letter from a friend in Lon¬ don, requesting his immediate presence for the furtherance of some important object. Guileless himself, Adrian feared no deceit. 1 rode with him as far as Staines : he was in high spirits ; and, since I could not see Idris during his ab¬ sence, he promised a speedy rettun. Hi« gaiety, vvhich was extreme, had the strange eflect of awakening in me contrary feelings ; a presentiment of evil hung over me ; I loitered on my return ; I counted the hours that must elapse before I saw Idris again. AVherefore should this be ? What evil might not happen in the mean time ? Might not her mother take advantage of Adrian's absence to urge her be¬ tr*« α yond her sufferance, perhaps to entrap her ŕ I resolved, let vvhat would befall, to see and con¬ verse with her the following day. This deter-
mination soothed me. To-morroAv, loveliest and best, hope andjoy ofmy life, to-morrow I will see thee—Fool, to dream of a moment's delay í I went to rest. At past midnight I was awaked by a violent knocking. It was novv deep winter; it bad snowed, and was still snowing; the wind whistled in the leafless trees, despoiling them of the Avhite flakes as they fell ; its drear moaning, and the continued knocking, mingled wildly xv ith my dreams—at length I vvas wide awake ; hastily dressing my¬ self, I hurried tt) discover the cause of this disturbance, and to open my door to the un¬ expected visitor. Pale as the snow that showered about her, vvith clasped hands, Idris stood before me. i( Save me Ï" sbe exclaimed, and would have sunk to the ground had I not supported her. In a moment hovvever she revived, and, with energy, almost w ith vio¬ lence, entreated me to saddle horses, to take her away, away to London—to her brother— at least to save her. I had no horses—she
wrurg her hands. * 4 AA'hat can I do r" she cried, " I am lost—we are both for ever lost î But come—come with me, Lionel ; here I must not stay,— avo can get a chaise at the nearest post house ; yet perhaps Ave Ьал т е time! — come, O come Avith me to save and protect me !" AA r hen I heard her piteous demands, while with disordered dress, dishevelled hair, and aghast looks, she wrung her hands—the idea shot across me—is she also mad?—"Sweet one," and I folded her to my heart, ts better repose than Avancier further ; —rest—my beloved, I will make a fire—you are chill/' " Rest !" she cried, " repose ! you rave, Lionel ! If you delay we are lost ; come, I pray you, unless you would cast me off for ever." That Idris, theprincely bom, nursling of Avealth and luxury, should Ьал т е come through the tempestuous winter-night from her regal abode, and standing at my lowly door, conjure me te'flv
with her through darkness and storm— was surelv a dream—again her {plaintive tones, the sight of her loveliness assured me that it was no vision. Looking timidly around, as if she feared tobe overheard, she vvhisj^ered: "I have discovered —to-morrow—tbat is, to-day—already the to¬ morrow is come—before dawn, foreigners, Aus- trians, my mother s hirelings, are to carry me off to Germany, to prison, to marriage—to anything, except you and my brother—take me away, or soon tbey will be here !' I was frightened by her vehemence, and ima¬ gined some mistake in her incoherent tale ; but I no longer hesitated to obey her. She had come by herself from the Castle, three long miles, at midnight, through the heavy snow; we must reach Englefitid Green, a mile and a half further, before we coukl obtain a chaise. She told me, that she had kejit up her strength and courage till fifer arrival at my cottage, and then both failed. Now she could hardly walk. Sup- j^orting her as I did, still she lagged : and at the
distance of half a mile, after ma^y stojijiages, shivering fits, and half faintings, she slipt from iny supporting arm tm the snow, and with a torrent of tears averred tliat sbe must be taken, for diat she could not proceed. I lifted her up in my arms ; her light form rested on my breast. —I felt no burthen, except the internal one of contrary and contending emotions. Brimming tkiigbt now invested me. Again her chill limbs touched me ¿is a torjiedo ; and 1 shuddered in symjiathy with her pain and frigid. Her head kıy on my shoulder, her breath waved my hair, her heart beat near mine, transport made me tremble, blinded me, annihilated me—till a suppressed groan, bursting from her iips, the chattering of her teetb, w hieb she strove vainly to subdue, and all tbe signs of suffering she evinced, recalled me to the necessity of speed and succour. At last I said to her, " There is Engleficld Green ; there tbe inn. But, if ytiu are seen tbus strangely circumstanced, dear Idris, even novv your enemies may learn your flight i3
ию soon : were it not better that I hired the chaise alone? I will put you in safety mean¬ while, and return to you immediately/' She answered that I was right, and might do with her as 1 pleased. I observed tbe door of a small out-house а -jar, I pushed it open ; and, with some hay strewed about, I formed a couch for her, placing her exhausted frame on it, and covering her with my cloak. I feared to leave her, she looked so wan and faint—but in a moment she re-acquired animation, and, with that, fear ; and again she implored me not to delay. To call up the people of the inn, and obtain a convey¬ ance and horses, even though I harnessed them myself, was the work of many minutes ; minutes, each freighted with the weight of ages. I caused the chaise to advance a litde, waited till the people of the inn had retired, and then made the post-boy draw up the carriage to the spv where Idris, impatient, and now somewhat reco¬ vered, stood waiting for ше. I h fled her into the chaise ; 1 assured her that with our four horses vve
should arrive in London before five o'clock, the hour when she would be sought and missed. I besought her to calm herself; a kindlv shower of tears relieved her, and by degrees sbe related her tale of fear and peril. That same night after Adrian's departure, her mother had warmly expostulated with her on the subject of her attachment to me. Every motive, every threat, every angry taunt was urged in vain. She seemed to consider that through me she had lost Raymond ; I was the evil influence of her life; I was even accused of enereasing and confirming the mad and base apostacy of Adrian from all views of advance¬ ment and grandeur ; and now tbis miserable mountaineer was to steal her daughter. Never, Idris related, did the angry lady deign to recur to gentleness and persuasion ; if sbe had, the task of resistance would have been exquisitely pain¬ ful. As it was, the sweet girľs generous nature was roused to defend, ai*d ally herself witb, my despised cause. Her mother ended with a look
of contempt and covert triumph, whicli for a moment awakened the suspicions of Idris. AA r hen they partetl for the night, the Countess said, " To-morrow I trust your tone will be clianged : be composed ; I have agitated you ; go to rest ; antl I will send you a medicine I always take when unduly restless—it will give you a quiet night." By the time that she bad with uneasy thoughts laid her fair cheek upon her pillow, her mother's servant brought a draught ; a suspicion again crossed her at tbis novel proceeding, sufficiently alarming to determine her not to take tbe potion ; but dislike of contention, and a wish to discover whether there was any just foundation for her conjectures, made her, she said, almost instinc¬ tively, and in contradiction to her usual frank¬ ness, pretend to swallow the medicine. Then, agitated as she bad been by her m others vio¬ lence, and now by unaccustomed fears, she lay unable to sleep, starting at every sound. Seon her door opened softly, and on her springing
up, she heard a whisper, 4i Not asleep yet/' and tbe door again closed. With a beating heart she exjiected another visit, and when after an inter ла1 her chamber vvas again invaded, having first assured herself that the intruders were her mother and an attendant, she comjiosed herself to feigned sleep. A step approached her bed, she dared not move, she strove to calm iier pal¬ pitations, whicb became more violent, when she beard her mother say mutteringly, ** Pretty himpletou, little do you think that your game is already at an end for ever." For a moment tbe poor girl fancied that her mother believed that she bad drank poison she was on tbe jioint of springing up : when the Countess, already at a distance from the bed, sjioke in a ow voice to her companion, and agaiu Idris listened : " Hasten/' s¿iid slir, ^ there is no time to lose—it is long past eleven ; they will be here at live ; take merely the clothes necessary for her journey, and her jewel-casket/' The servant obeyed ; few words
were spoken on either side; but those were caught at vrith avidity by the intended victim. She heard the name of her own maid men¬ tioned ;—- No, no, v replied her mtither, " she does not go with us; Lady Idris must forget England, and all belonging to it." And again ъЬе heard, " She will not wake till late to¬ morrow, unci we shall then be at sea.'* ------ u All is ready," at length the woman announced. The Countess again came toher daughter'sbed- side : " Iu Austria at least," she said, " you will obey. In Austria, where obedience can be enforced, and no choice left but between an honourable prison and a fitting marriage." Both then withdrew ; though, as she went, the Countess said, " Softly ; all sleep ; though all have not been prepared for sleep, like her. I would not have any one suspect, or she might be roused to resistance, and perhaps escape. Come with me to my room ; we will remain there till the hour agreed upon. 0 They went. Idris, panic-struck, but animated and strengtis
ened even by her excessive fear, dressed her¬ self hurriedly, and going down a flight of back-stairs, avoiding the vicinity of her mother's apartment, sbe contrived to escape from the castle by a low window, and came through snow, wind, and obscurity to my cottage ; nor lost her courage, until she arrived, and,depositing her fate in my hands, gave herself up to the desperation and weariness that overwhelmed her. I cemi forted her as well as I might. Joy and exultation, Avere mine, to possess, and to save her. Vet not to excite fresh agitation in her, " per non turbar quel bel viso sereno? I curbed my delight. I strove to quiet the eager dancing of my heart; I turned from her my eyes, beaming with too much tenderness, and proudly, to dark night, and the inclement at¬ mosphere, murmured the expressions of my transport. AA r e reached London, methought, all too soon ; and yct I could not regret our speedy arrival, when I witnessed the extasy with
which my beloved girl found berself in her brother's arms, safe from every evil, under his unblamed protection. Adrian wrote a brief note to his mother, in¬ forming her that Idris was under his care antl guardianship. Several days elapsed, and at hst an ansvvtr came, dated from Cologne. " it was useless," the haughty and disappointed lady wrote, " for the Earl of AA-^idnor and liis sister to address again the injured parent, whose only expectation of tranquillity must be derived from oblivion of their existence. lier desires had bceu blasted, her schemes over¬ thrown. She did not complain ; in her brother's court she would find, not compensation for their disobedience (filial unkindness admitted of none), but such α state of things and mode of life, a* might best reconcile her to her fate. Under such circumstances, she positively declined any communication vvith them/' Such were the strange and incredible events, that finally brought about my union with the
sister of my best friend, with my adored Idris. AA'ith simplicity and courage she set aside the prejudices and opposition which were obstacles to my happiness, nor scrupled to give her hand, where she batl given her heart. To be worthy of her, to raise myself to her height through the exertion of talents and virtue, to repay her love Avith devoted, unwearied temlerness, vrere the only thanks I could offer for tbe matchless gift.
CHAPTER VL
And now let the reader, passing over some short period of time, be introduced to our happy circle. Adrian, Idris and I, wt?re established in AVindsor Castle ; Lord Raymond and my sister, inhabited a house vvhich tbe former had built on the borders of the Gnat Park, near Perdita's cottage, as was still named the low- roofed abode, wii ere we two, poor even in hope, had each received the assurance of our felicity. AVe had our separate occupations and our common amusements. Sometimes we passed whole days under the leafy covert of the forest with our books and music. This occurred dur¬ ing those rare days in this country, vvhen the sun
mounts his etherial throne in unclouded majesty, and the windless atmosphere is as a bath of pel¬ lucid and grateful water, wrapping the senses in tranquillity. A\ ľ hen the clouds veiled the sky, and the wind scattered them there and here, rending their woof, and strewing its fragments through the aerial plains—then vve rode out, and sought new spots of beauty and repose. AA T hen the frequent rains shut us within doors, evening recreation followed morning study, ushered in hy music and song, Idris had a natural musical talent ; and her voice, which had been carefully cultivated, was full and sweet. Raymond and I made a part of the concert, and Adrian and Perdita Avere devout listeners. Then Ave were as gay as summer insects, playful as children; we ever met one another with smiles, and read content and joy in each other's countenances. Our prime festivals were held in Perdita's cot¬ tage ; nor were we ever weary of talking of the past or dreaming of the future. Jealousy and disquiet Avere unknown among us; nor did a
fear or hojie of change ever disturb our tran¬ quillity. Others said, AA r c might be hajijiy—vve said—AVe are. AVhen any sejiaration took place between us, it generally so happened, that Idris and Perdita would ramble away together, and we remained to discuss the affairs of nations, and the philo¬ sophy of life. The very difference of our dispo¬ sitions gave zest to these conversations. Athian had die superiority in learning and eloquence ; but Raymond possessed a quick fienctration, and a practical knowledge of life, which usually displayed itself in ojiposition to Adrian, and thus kept up the ball of discussion. At other times vve made excursions of many days' dura¬ tion, and crossed tl e* country lo visit any spot noted for beauty or listorical association. Some¬ times we vvent uji to London, and entered into the amusements of the IJusy throng ; sometimes our retreat was invaded by visitors from among them. Tliis change made us only tbe more bensible to the dcl&hts of the intimate inter-
course of our OAvn circle, the tranquillity of our divine forest, and our happy eAenings in the balls of our beloved Castle. The disposition of Idris was peculiarly frank, soft, and affectionate. Her temper was unalter¬ ably sweet ; and although firm and resolute on any point that touciied her heart, she was yielding to those she loved. The nature of Perdita Avas less perfect ; but tenderness and hajipiness improved her temper, and softened her natural reserve. Her understanding Avas clear and comprehensive, her imagination vivid ; she was sincere, generous, and reasonable. Adrian, the matchless brother of my soul, the sensitive and excellent Adrian, loving all, and beloved by all, yet seemeti destined not to find the half of bimself, vvhich was to complete his liappiness. He often left us, and wandered by himself in the woods, or sailed in his little skiff, his books bis only companions. He was often the gayest of our party, at the same time that he was the only one visited by fits of des-
pendency ; his slender frame seemed over¬ charged with the weight of life, and his soul appeared rather to inhabit his body than unite with it. I was hardly more devoted to my Idris than to her brother, and she loved him as her teacher, her friend, the benefactor vvho had secured to her the fulfilment of her dearest wishes. Raymond, the ambitious, restless Raymond, reposed midway on the great high¬ road of life, and was content to give up all his schemes of sovereignty and fame, to make one of us, the flowers of the field. His kingdom was the heart of Perdita, his subjects her thoughts ; by her hc was loved, respected as a superior lieing, obeyed, waited on. No office, no devo¬ tion, no watching was irksome to her, as it re¬ garded him. She vvould sit apart from ns and watch him ; she would weep for joy to think that he was hers. She erected a temple for him in the depth of her being, and each fa¬ culty w r as a priestess vowed to his service. Sometimes she might be wayward and capricious;
but her repentance wae. bitter, her return en* ire, and eveu this inequality of temjier suited him vvho was not formed by nature to float idly down the stream of life. During the first year of their marriage, Percuta jiresented Ravmond with a lovely girl. It was curious to trace in tbis miniature model the very tniits of its father. Tbe same half- disdainful lijis and smile of triumjib, th*. same intelligent eye\s, the same brow and chesnut hair ; her very bands and tajier fingers resembled his. How verv dear slie was to Perdita ! In progress of time, I ако became а father, and our little darlings, our playthings and delights, calletl forth a thousand new and delicious feelings. Years passed tbus,—even years. Eaeh month brought forth its successor, eacb year one likr to that gone bv ; truly, our lives were a living comment on that beautiful sentiment of Plu- t , that ** our souls lurve a natural inclina- t о love, being born as much to love, as to
feel, to reason, to understand and remember/' AA f e talked of change and active pursuits, but still remained at AA'indsor, incapable of violating tbe cbarm that attached us to our secluded life. Pareamo aver nui tutto il ben raccolto Che fia mortali in più parte bi rimembra. Now also that our children gave us occupation, Ave found excuses for our idleness, 'm tlie itlea of bringing them up to с more splenetici career. At length our tranquillity Avas disturbed, and tiie course of events, which for five years had flowed on in hushing tranquillity, was broken by- breakers and obstacles, that woke us from our pleasant dream. A new Lorcl Protector of England was to be chosen; and, at Raymond's request, we removed to London, to witness, and even take а part in tbe election. If Raymond had been united to Idris, tbis post bad been his stepping-stone to higher dignity ; and his desire for power and fame Iiad been crowned vvith fullest measure.
He bad exchanged а scejitre for а İV t-, а king¬ dom for Penlita. Did be think of this ¿is we journev ed up to town? I watched hint, but could make but little of him. He was jiarticularly gav, jilaying with his child, antl turning it) sjmit vwry word that was uttered. Ptrhajis be tlitl this because lie savv a cloud ujion Perdita's brow. She tried to rouse lierself, but iier eyes evriv now and tben filled with tears, and she looketl vvislfulh on Raymond and her girl, as if fearful that «v Cm stime evil would betide tbem. And so she felt A presentiment of iil hung over her. She Waned from the window looking on the forest. and the lurrets of the Castle, atul as these became hit! hy intervening objects, she passionately exclaimed—" Scenes of happiness ! scenes sa¬ ered to devoted love, when shall I see you again! and when I see ye, shall I be still the beloved and joyous Perdita, or shall I, heart-broken and lost, wander among your groves, the ghost of wbat I am !" vol. i, к
" AVhy, silly one," cried Raymond, " it hat is your litlle head pondering upon, that of a. sudden you have become so sublimely dismal *·* Cheer up, or I shall make you over to Itlris, and call Adrian into the carriage, who, I see h\ his gesture, sympathizes with my good spirits."^ Adrian was on horseback ; he rode up to the tarringé, and his gaiety, in addition to that of Raymond, dispelled my sister's melancholy AVc entered London in the evening, antl went to our several abodes near Hyde Park. The following morning Lortl Raymond vi¬ sitetl me early. " I come to vou," he said. u only half assured that you will assist me in mv project, but resolved to go through with it, wheiher you concur with me or not. Promise nie secrecy however; for if you Avill not contri¬ bute to my success, at least you must not baffle me." " AVell, I promise. And now------" " And now, my dear fellow, for what are avc come to London ? To be present at the election
of a Protector, and to give our yea or nay for liis shuffling Grace of--------------? or for that noisy Ryland ? Do you believe. Verney, tiiat i brought you to town for thai ? No, vve will have a Protector of our ovvn. A\ r e will set up a can¬ didate, and ensure bis success. AA'e w ill nomi¬ nate Adrian, and do our best to bestow tm bim the power to which he is entitled by bs birth, and vvhich lie merits through his virtues. *· Do uot answer; I know all your objections, and will reply to tbem in order. First, Whe¬ ther he will or will not consent to become a great man ? Leave the task of persuasion on that jioint to me ; I do not ask you to assist me then. Secondi v, AAliethcr he ought to ex- change bis employment of pint-king blackberries, aud nursing wounded partridges in the forest, for the command of a nation ? My dear Lionel, we are married men, and find employment sufficiënt in amusing our wives, and dancing our children. But Adrian is alone, wifeless, child¬ less, unoccupied. I have long observed hitv к 2
He pines for want of some interest m life. His heart, exhausted by his early sufferings, reposes like a new-healed limb, and shrinks from all excitement. But his understanding, his cha¬ rity, his virtues, want a field for exercise and display; and vve will procure it for him. Be¬ sides, isit not a shame, tliat the genius of Adrian should fade from the earth like a flower in an untrod mountain-path, fruitless ? Do you think Nature composed his surpassing machine for no purpose ? Believe me, he was destined to be the author of infinite good to his native England. Has she not bestowed on him every gift in pro¬ digality ?—birth, wealth, talent, goodness ? Does not every one love and admire him ? and does he not delight singly in such efforts as manifest his love to all ? Come, I see that you are al¬ ready persuaded, and will second me Avhen I propose hiin to-night in parliament." '« You have got up all your arguments in excellent order," I replied ; " and, if Adrian consent, they are unanswerable. One only con-
dition I would make,—that you do nothing vvithout his concurrence." " I believe you are in the right/' said Ray¬ mond; " although I had thought at first to arrange the affair differently. Be it so. I will go instantly to Adrian ; and, if he inclines to con¬ sent, you will not destroy my labour by per¬ suading him to return, and turn squirrel again in AVindsor Forest. Idris, you will not act the traitor towards me ?" " Trust me," replied she, " I will preserve a strict neutrality." " For my part," said I, ** I am too well con¬ vinced of the worth of our friend, and the rich harvest of benefits that all England would reap from his Protectorship, to deprive my coun¬ trymen of such a blessing, if he consent to bestow it on them." In the evening Adrian visited us.—" Do you cabal also against me," said he, laughing ; " and will you make common cause vvith Raymond, in dragging a poor visionary from the clouds to sur-
round him Avith the fire-works and blasts of earthly grandeur, instead of heavenly rays antl airs ? 1 thought you knew me better." * £ I do know you better/' I replied " than to think tbat you would be happy in such a situa¬ tion ; but the good you wtnild do to others may be an inducement, since the time is probably arrived when you can put your theories into practice, and you may bring about such refor¬ mation and change, as will conduce lo that perfect system of government which you delight to portray." ίς You speak of an almost-forgotten dream," said Adrian, bis countenance slightly clouding as be spoke ; " the visions of my boyhood have long since faded in the light of reality ; I know now that I am not a man fitted to govern nations ; sufficient for me, if I keep in whole¬ some rule the little kingdom of my own mor¬ tality. " But do not you see, Lionel, the drift of our noble friend ; a drift, perhaps, unknown to bins
self, but apjiarent to me. Lord Raymond was never born to be a drone in the hive, and to find content in our pastoral life. He thinks, that be ought to be satisfied ; he imagines, that liis present situation precludes the possibility of aggrandisement ; he does not therefore, even m his ovvn heart, plan change for himself. But do you not see, that, under the idea of exalting me, he is chalking out a new path ftir himseif; a path of acrion from which be has long wan¬ dered ? "* Let us assist bim. He, the noble, the war¬ like, the great in every quality that can adorn the mind and jierson of man ; be is fitted to br the Protector of England. If /—that is, if reo projwsc him, be will assuredly be elected, and will find, in the functions of that high office, seojie for the towering powers of bis mind. Even Perdita vvili rejoice. Perdita, in whom ambition was a coveret! fire until sbe married Raymontl, vvhich event was for a time tbe ful¬ filment of her bojíos; Penlita will rejoice in the
glory and advancement of her lord—and, coyly and prettily, not be discontented with her share- In the mean time, vve, tbe wise of the land, will return to our Castle, and, Cincinnatus-like, take to our usual labours, until our friend shall require our presence and assistance here." Tbe more Adrian reasoned upon this scheme, tlic more feasible it appeared. His own deter¬ mination never to enter into public life was insurmountable, and the delicacy of his health was а sufficient argument against it. Tbe next «»tep was to induce Raymond to confess his secret wishes for dignity and fame. He entered while we were speaking. The way m whieii Adrian batl received his project for setting him up as a candidate for the Protectorship, and bis replies, had alreatly awakened in his mind, the view of the subject whieh we were now discussing. His countenance and maimer betray etl irresolution and anxiety ; but the anxiety arose from a fear that we should not prosecute, or not succeed in our jţdea ; avl his irrt solution, ftom а doubt v lu Uso
vve should risk a defeat. A few words from ι ? decided hirn, and hojie and joy sparkled in his eyes ; the idea of embarking in a career, so con¬ genial to his* early habits and cherished wishes. made him as before energetic and bold. AA'e discussed bis chances, tbe merits of tbe other candidates, and the dispasi t ions of the voters. After all we miscalculated. Raymond bad lost much of his popularity, and was desertetl by liis jieculiar partizans. Absence from the busy stage had rausetl him to be forgotten by the peojile ; his former jiarliamentary supporter·* were principally composed of royalists who hati been willing to make an idol of hint when he apjioared as the heir of the Earldom of AA'ind¬ sor ; but who were indifferent to him, when he rame forward with no other attributes and dis¬ tinctions than they conceived to be common to many among themselves. Stiil he hail many friends, admirers of bis transcendent talents; bis jiresence in the bouse, his eloquence, addres« and imposing beauty, vvere calculated to produce к 3
an electric effect. Adrian also, notwithstanding liis recluse habits and theories, so adverse to the spirit of party, had many friends, and they were easily induced to vote for a candidate of his selection. Tbe Duke of----------, and Mr. Ryland, Lord Raymond's old antagonist, were tbe other candi¬ dates. The Duke Avas supported by all tiie aristocrats of the rejiublic, Avbo considered him their jirojier represeııtatİAV Ryland was tbe po- jiular candidate; when Lord Raymond was first added to tbe list, bis chance of success appeareel small. AVe retired from the debate which had followed on his nomination : vve, his nominators, mortified ; be dispirited tt) excess. Perdila re¬ proached us bitterly. Her expectations bad been strongly excited ; sbe had urged nothing against our jiroject, on the contrary, sbe was evidently pleased by it ; but its evident ill success changed the current of her ideas. She felt, tbat, once awakened, Raymond would never return unrejiining to AVindsor, His habits were
unhinged ; his restless mind roused from its sleep, ambition must now be his companion through life ; and if he did not succeed iu his present attempt, she foresaw that unhappiness and cure¬ less discontent would follow. Perhaps her own disappointment added a sting to her thoughts and words; she did not spare us, and our own reflections added to our disquietude. It was necessary to follow up our nomination. and to persuade Raymond to present bimself to the electors on the following evening. For ц loug time be was obstinate. He would embark in о balloon ; lie would sail for a distant quarter of the vvorld, where his name and humiliation were unknown. But this was useless; bis at¬ tempt was registered ; his purpose published to the workl ; his shame could never be erased from the memories of men. It was as well to fait at last after a struggle, a& to fly now at the be¬ ginning of bis enterprise. From the moment tbat he adopted this idea, be was changed. His depression imd anxietv
fled ; be became all life and activity. Τίκ* sinile of triumph shone on his countenance; de¬ termined to pursue his object to the uttermost, his manner and expression seem ominous of the accomplishment of his wishes. Not so Perdita. She was frightened by his gaietv, for sfii dreaded a greater revulsion at the end. If his appearance even inspired us with hope, it onlv rendered the state of her mind more painful. She feareti to lose sight ofhim ; vet slie driaded to remark any change in the temper of bis mind. She listened eagerlv to him, vet tantalized her- self by giving to liis Avon! s а meaning loiv'vn tf) iheir true interpretation, and adverse tt) her hopes. She dared not be present at the conterai - yet she remained at bonica prey to double soli¬ citude. She wept over her little girl ; sbe looked, she spok* 1 , as if she dreaded tbe occur- reiue of some frightful eaiamity. Sbe was half mad fivn the efiects of uncontrollable agitation Lortl Raymond presented liimseif to the house with fearless confidence and insinuating address
After the Duke of ---------- and Mr. lly land had finished their speeches, he commenced. Assuredly he had not conned his lesson ; and at first he hesitated, pausing in his ideas, and in the choice of his expressions. By degrees lie warmed; his Avords flowed with ease, his lan¬ guage was full of vigour, and his voice of persua- sion. lie reverted to his past life, iiis sum-sR**, in Gieece, bis favour at home. Win shoultl he lose this, now that added years, prudence, antl the pledge which his marriage gave to his country, ought to encrease, rather than di¬ minish bib claims to confidence ·*** lie spoke of the state of England , the necessarv measures to be taken to ensure its ы euri tv, anti eonfinn its prosperity. Ue drew a glowing pieture oi its present -situation. As he spoke, every sound was hushed, every thought suspended bv in¬ tense attention. Иь graceful elocution en¬ chained the senses of his hearers. In some de¬ gree also he was fitted f о reconcile all parties.
His birth pleased tbe aristocracy ; his being the candidate recommended by Adrian, a man inti¬ mately allied to the popular party, caused a number, who had no great rebanee either on the Duke or Mr. Ryland, to range on his side. Tbe contest Avas keen and doubtful. Neither Adrian nor myself would have been so anxious, if our own success had depended on our exertions ; but we bad egged our friend on to the enter¬ prise, and it became us to ensure his triumph. Idris, who entertained the highest opinion of his abilities, was warmly interested in the event : and my poor sister, who clared not hoj)e, and to whom fear was misery, vA'as plunged into a fever of disquietude. Day after day passed while avc discussed our projects ftir the evening, and eacb night was oc¬ cujiied by debates which offered no conclusion. At last the crisis came : the night when jiarlla¬ ment, which bad so long delayed its choice, must decide : as tbe hour of twelve jiassed, and the new
day began, it Avas by virtue of tbe constitution dissoh r ed, its power extinct. AVe assembled at Raymond's house, we and tiu r ţiartizans. At half jiast five o'clock vve prtiteeded to the House. Idris entleavoured to calm Perdita; but the poor girl's agitation deprived her of all power of self-command. She Avalked up and down the room,—gazed wildly when any one enteied, faneving that tbey might be tbe announcers of ber doom. I must do justice to my sweet sister: it was not for herself that she was thus agonized. She alone knew the weight va hieb Raymond attached to his success. Even to us he assumed gaiety and hope, and assumed them so well, tiiat we tlitl not divine the seciet av ork mgs tii' bis mind. Sometimes a nervous trembling, α sharj) dissonance of voice, and momentary fits of ¿ilişence revealed to Perdita the violence he did himself; but we, intent on our plans, tibserved only bis reatly laugh, his joke intruded on all occasions, the flow e>f his spirits which
seemed incapable of ebb. Besitìes, Perdita vvas with him in his retirement; she saw the moodi¬ ness that succeeded to this forced hilarity ; sho maiked his disturbed sleep, liis painful irritability—once slie bad seen his tears—her* had scarce ceased to flow, since she had beheld the big drops which disappointed pride had caused to gather m his eve, but which pride was unable to dispel AVhat wonder tlien, that her feelings av ere wrought to this pitch! I tints accounted to myself for her agitation ; but this was not all, and the sequel revealed auothct excuse. One moment we seized before our departure, to take bave ofour beioved girls. 1 had small hope of success, antl entreated Idris to watch over mv sister. As I approached the latter, she seized my hantl, antl drew me into anotlier apartment; she threw herself into my arms, antl wept and sobbed bitteily and lots I tried to soothe her; 1 bade her hope; I asked what tre¬ mendous consequences would ensue even on our
failure. ''My brother," she cried, "protector of my childhood, tlear, most tlear Lionel, un¬ fair bangs by a thread. I iiave you all about me now—you, »he companion of my infancy : Athian, as dear to me as if bound by the ties of blootl ; Itlris, liie sister of my lieart, and her lovely offspring. This, О tliis may be the last time tiiat you will surround me tins !" Abruptly she stopped, antl then cried: *· Whet have I said?—foolish false girl that I am !" She looked wildly on nus and tben suddenly calming* herself, apologized for what die called her unmeaning words, savi n ¿г that she must intleed be insane, for, while Raymond lived, she mibt be happv ; antl then, though «hr still w opt, she suffend me tranquillv to tlepait. Rav mond only took hei hand when he went, and looketl on her expressively ; she answered bv a look of mtcihgenre arat assent. poor girl ! what she then suffered ' f rouhi never entirely forgive Rav mond for the trials he invoked on ber, oeea-ooned as ihev were bv
a selfish feeling on bis part. IL bad schemed, if lie failed in liis present attempt, without taking leave of any of us, to embark for Greece, and never again to revisit England. Perdita acceded to bis wishes ; for his contentment was the chief object of her life, tiie crown of her enjoyment ; but to leave us all, her companions the beloved jiartners of her happiest years, and in the interim to conceal this frightful d eternii- nation, was a task tbat almost conquered her strength of mind. She hiid been employed in arranging for their departure; she Iuid prv mised Raymond during this decisive evening, it) take advantage of our absence, to go one stage of the journey, ¿md he, after bis defeat was ascertained, would slip away from us, and join her. Although, w ben I was informed of this scheme, I was bitterly offended by the small attention which Ravmond paid to my sister's feelings, I vue-* led bv refleclion to consider, thathe acted under the force of such strong excitement, as to t¿*ke
frtim him the consciousness, and, consequently, the guilt of a fault, If he hiid jiermitted us to witness bis agitation, be vvould have been more under the guidance of reason ; but his struggles for tbe shew of composure, acted with such violence on his nerves, ¿is to destroy his power of self-command. I am comincetl that, at the worst, he would have returned from the sea¬ shore tti take leave of us, antl to make us the jiarmcrs tif bis council. But the task imposed on Perdita was not tbe less jiainful. lie had extorted from her a vow of secrecy ; and her jiart of the drama, since it was to he jierformed ¿done, was the most agonizing that eould be devised. But to return to my narrativ e. The debates batl hitherto been long and loud ; they bad often been protracted merely Jor the sake of delay. But now eaeh seemed fearful lest the fatili intiment shoukl jiass, vvhile the choice was yet undecided. Unwonted si¬ lener reigned in the house, the members sjioke m whispers, antl the ordinary business was
transacted with celerity and quietness. During the first stage of tbe election, the Duke of ---------- had been thrown out; the question therefore lay between Lord Raymond and Mr. Ryland. The huvr had felt secure of victory, until tbe appearance of Raymond; and, since bis name had been inserted as a candi¬ date, he had canvassed witb eagerness. He had appeared each evening, impatience antl anger marked in bis looks, scowling on us from the opposite side of St. Stephen's, a, if his mere frown would east eclipse tm om hopes. Ever} thing in the English constitution lutti been regulated for the better preservation of peace. On the last day, two candidates only v.ere allowed to remain; and to obviate, if possible, the last stiugglc between these, a bribe was offered toliini who shoultl voluntarilv resign hispietensioiis; a place of great emolument anil honour w as given lum, antl his success facilitated at a future ekction. Strange to sav howevei,
no instance bad yet occurred, vvhcre either candidate had batl recourse to this expediem ; in consequence the law had become obsolete, nor had Leea referred to bv any of us in our discussions. To our extreme su prise, vriieti it was moved tliat we sh uld resolve ourseivos into a commiìtee for the election of the Lord Protector, thr member avIio bad nominated Ryland, rose and iufonned us tliat this- candi¬ date batl resìgiu d his pretensions. His infor¬ mation was at Ги**! receivetl vvith silence: a confuseli murmur succeeded; and. vvhen the chairman declared Lord Raymond tlulv chosen, ii amounted to a shout of applause and vieton . It seemeti as if, far from any dread of defeat even if Mr. Ryland had not resignei!, every voiee would havebeen united in tavour ofour candidate. In faes novv that the idea of eon- test was dismissed, all hearts returned to their fonner respect antl admiration of our accom¬ plished friend. Each felt, that England bad never seen a Protccto»* *o capable of fulfilling
the arduous duties of tbat high office. One voice made of many voices, resounded through the chamber; it syllabled tbe name of Ray¬ mond. He entered. I was on one of the highest seats, and saw him walk up the passage to the table of the speaker. The native modesty of his disposition conquered the joy of bis triumph. He looked round timidly ; a mist seemed before his eyes. Adrian, who was beside me, has¬ tened to him, antl jumping down tbe benches, was at bis side in a moment. His appearance re-aniiuated our friend; and, wben he came to sjieak and act, bis hesitation vanished, and he -hone out supreme in majesty and victory. The former Protector tendered him the oaths, anil pre¬ sented him with the insignia of office, performing thr ceremonies of installation. The house tben dissolved. Thr chief members of the slate crow tied round the new magistrate, and con¬ ducted him tolbe palace of government. Adrian suddenly vanished ; and, by the time that Ray-
mond's supportors were reduced to our intimate friends merely, returned leading Idris to con¬ gratulate her friend on his success. But where was Perdita? In securing soli¬ citously an unobserved retreat in case of failure, Raymond had forgotten to arrange the mode by vvhich she was to hear of his success ; antl she bad been tot) much agitateti to revert to this cir¬ cumstance. AVhen Idris entered, so far had Ray¬ mond forgotten himself, that he asked for mv sister ; one word, vvbicb told of her mysterious disappearance, recalled him, Adrian it i& true had already gone to seek the fugitive, imaginins . cľ) ~ * ?S fs that her tameless anxiety had led her to the pur¬ lieus of the House, and that some sinister event detained her. But Raymond, without explain¬ ing bimself, suddenly quitted us, and in another moment we heard him gallop down the street, in spite of the wind and rain that scattered tem¬ pest tner the earth. AA r e did not know how far be batl to go, and soon separated, supposing that in a short time tie would return to the pa-
lace with Perdita, and tluit tbey would not be sorry to find themselves algne. Penlita had arrived with her child at Dar- ford, weeping and inconsolable. She directed every thing to be jirepared for the continuance of their journey, and placing her lovely sleep¬ ing charge on a bed, passed several hours in acute suffering. Sometimes she observed the war of elements, thinking that they alsti declaretl against her, antl listened to the patter¬ ing of the rain in gloomy desjiair. Sometimes sbe hung over her child, tracing her resem¬ blance tti the father, antl fearful lest in after life sbe should display the same ji¿issions anıl uucontrollable impulses, tbat rendered him un¬ happy. Again, with a gush of tiride and delight, she marked in tbe features of ber little girl, the same smile tif beauty that often irradiated Raymond's countenance. Tbe sight of it sooth¬ ed her. She thougiit of the treasure she pos¬ sessed in tbe affections of her lortl ; of his accomplishments, surpassing those of his eon-
temporarieSj his genius, his devotion to her.— Soon she thought, that all she possessed in the vvorld, except him, might well be spared, nay, given with delight, a propitiatory offering, to secure tbe supreme good she retained in him. Soon she imagined, that fate demanded this sacrifice from her, as a mark she was de¬ voted to Raymond, and that it must be made with cheerfulness. She figured to herself their life in the Greek isle he bad selected for their retreat; her task of soothing bim; her cares for the beauteous Clara, her rides in his eompany, her dedication of herself to his conso¬ lation, The picture then presented itself to bel¬ in such glowing colours, that she feared the re¬ verse, and a life of magnificence and power in London ; where Raymond vvould no longer be hers only, nor she the sole source of happiness to bini. So far as she merely was concerned, she began to hope for defeat ; and it was only on bis account that her feelings vacillated, as she heard him gallop into the court-yard of the inn, vol. i. L
That he should come to her alone, wetted by the storm, careless of every thing except speed, what else could it mean, than that, vanquished and solitary, tliey vvere то iake their way front native England, the scene of shame, and hide themselves 'm the mvrtle -groves of the Grecian isles ? In a moment sbe was in his arms. The know¬ ledge of bis success had Ьеч-оте so mueh a pari of himself, that he forgot that it was necessarv to impart it to his companion. Shi 1 only ftil in his embrace α dear assurance that while he pos. sessed her, he vvoultl not despair. vi I his is kind," she cried ; "this is noble, my own beloved ! О fear not disgrace or lowl) fortune, while you have your Penlita; fear not sorrow, while our child lives and smiles. Let us go even where vou will; the love that accompanies is will pre¬ vent our regrets."' Locked in bis embrace, she sjioke thus, and east back her bead, seeking an assent tt) her words in his eves—they were sparkling with
ineffable delight. «« ΑΑΊιν, my little Lady Pro¬ tectress/' said he, playfully, c what is this you чау ? And what pretty scheme have you woven of exile and obscurity, Avhile a brighter web, a gold-cnwoven tissue, is that which, in truth, you ought It) contemplate У lie kissed her brow —but the wayward gii L half sorry at hi*-, triumph, agitateti by >uiit change of thought, hid her face m his 1кьош antl wept. Ife com fort eel her : he instilled inu* her his own hope*··» and desires; and soon her countenance beamed w Uh -ş mpathy. Hovv verv happy were thev that night! How full eveu v bursting was their sense of jov '
L 2
CHAPTER VIL Having seen our friend jiroperly installed m his new office, we turned our eyes towards* Windsor. The nearness of this place to Lon¬ don Avas such, as to take алуду the idea of pain¬ ful sejiaration, when Ave cjuitted Raymond and Perdita. AA r e took Jeave of them in the Pro¬ tectoral Palace. It Avas jirett-· enough to see my sister enter as it were into the sjiirit of the drama, and endeavour to fill her station Avith becoming dignity. Her internal pride and hu¬ mility of manner Avere now more than ever ¿it Avar. Her timidity was not artificial, liut arose from that fear of not being properly appreciated, that slight estimation of the neglect of the world.
which also characterized Raymond. But then Penlita thought more constantly of others than he ; and part of her bashfulness arose from a wish to take from those around her a sense of infe¬ riority ; a feeling vvhich «ever crossed her mind. From the circumstances of her birth and educa- tvv Idris would have beeu better fitted for the formula? of ceremony ; but the ν ery ease wbich accompanied such actions vvith her, arising from habit, rendered them tedious ; while, vvith every drawback, Perdita evidently enjoyed her situa¬ tion. She was too full of new ideas to feei mueh pain vvhen we departed ; she took an aflectionate leave of us, and promisetl to visit us soon ; but she did not regret tbe circumstances tiiat caused our separation. The spirits of Raymond vvere unbounded ; he did not know what to do vvith bis new got power ; bis bead was full of plans ; he had as yet decided on none—but he pro¬ mised himself, his frientls, and the world, that the æra of his Protectorship should be signa-» I ized by some act of surpassing glory.
Thus, we talked of tbem, and moralized, a- witb diminished numbers we returneel to AVind¬ sor Castle. AA r e felt extreme tkiigbt at our eacajje fiom political tui moil, and sought oui solitude with redoubled zest. We did not want for occujiation ; but my eager disjiosition was now turned to tbe field of inteUeetual exertion only ; and bard study I found to be an excellent medicine to allay a fever of sjiirit * itb which m indolence, I sliould doubtless have been assailed Perdita had permitted us to take Clara back with us to Windsor ; antl she and my t wc lovely infants were perpetual sources of interest and amusement. The only circumstance that disturbed our peace, was the health of Adrian It evidently declined, without any symjitom which eould lead us to susjiect his disease 1 , unless indeed his brightened eyes, animated look, and flustering cheeks, made us dread consumption; but lie was without pain or fear. He betook himself to books with ardour, and reposed from study in
tlie society he best loved, that of his sister and myself. Sometimes hc went up to London to visit Raymond, and vv ateh the progress of events Clara often accompanied him in these excursions: partly that sbe might see her parents, partly because Adrian ckiigiiteil iu the prattle, and intelligent looks of this lovely child. Meanwhile all went on well in London. The new elections were finished ; parliament met, anti Raymond was occupied in a thousantl beneficial schemes. Canals, aqueducts, bridges, stately buildings, and various edifices for public utility, vvere enterrei upon ; he was continually sur¬ rounded by projectors and projects, wbich were to render Englanti one seene of fertility and magni¬ fiée nee ; the state of poverty was to be abolished, men were to be transported from place to place almost w itb the same facility as the Princes I Ious- sa'm, Ali, aud Ahmed, in the Arabian Nights. The physical stale of man would soon not yiekl to the beatitude of angels; disease was to be ba- lushed; labour lightened of its heaviest burden.
Nor did tbis seem extravagant. Tbe arts of life, and the discoveries of science had aug¬ mented in а ratio which left all calculation be¬ hind ; food sprung up, do to say, sjïontancOUsly —machines existed to .sujiply w ith facility every want of the jiopulation. An evil direction still survived ; and men were not happv, not because tbey could not, but because tbey would not rouse themselves to vanquish self-raised obsta¬ cles. Raymond was to inspire tbem with bis beneficial will, and the mechanism of society, once systématisée! according to faultless rules, would never again swerve into disorder. For these hopes he abantloned bis long.cherished ambition of being enregistcred in the annals of nations ¿is a successful warrior ; laying aside hk sword, jieace and its enduring glories became ids aim—tbe title be «coveted was that of tlie benefactor of his country. Among other works of art in which he was engaged, he bad projected the erection of a national gallery for statues and pictures. He
jiossessed many himself, which he designed to present to the Republic; and, as tbe edifice was to be the great ornament of his Protcctorshiji, he was a ery fastidious in his choice of the plan on which it would be built. Hundreds vvere brought to bini and rejected. He sent even to Italy and Greece for drawings; but, as the design was to be characterized by originality as well as by perfect beaut), hs endeavours were for a time without avail. At length a thawing came, with an address where commu¬ nications migbt be sent, and no artist's name affixed. The design was new and elegant, but faulty; so fault), that although drawn with tbe hand and eve of taste, it was evidently the work of one vvho was uot an architect. Ray¬ mond contemplated it with delight; the more be gazed, the more jileased he was ; and yet the errors multiplied under inspection. He wtov to the address g'nen, desiring to see the draughtsman, that such alterations might be L 3
made, as should be suggested hi a consultation between him and the original conceives A Greek came. A middle-aged man, with some intelligence of manner, but with so com¬ mon-place a physiognomy, that Raymond coniti scarcely believe that he was the designer. He acknowledged tbat be was not an architect ; but the idea of the building had struck him, though be had sent it vvithout the smallest hope- of its being accepted. He was a man of few words. Raymond questioned him ; but his re¬ served answers soon matle him turn from the man to the drawing. He pointed out the errors, and the allerations that he wished to be made; he offered the Greek a pencil tbat he might correct the sketch on the spot ; this was refused hy his victor, who saitl that he perfectly un¬ derstood, and would work at it at home. At length Raymond buffered him tt) depart. The next day he returned. The design had been re-drawn ; but many defects still remaiuetl.
and several of the instructions g'nen had been misunderstood. * 4 Come/' said Raymond, is í yielded to you yesterday, novv comply Avith my request—take the }>encil/' The Greek took it, but he handled it m no artist-like way ; at length he said : " I must confess to you, my Lord, that I did not make this thawing. It is impossible for vou toset 1 the real designer ; your instructions must pass through me. Condescend therefore to have patience vvith mv ignorance 1 , antl to explain your wishes tt) me ; in time I am certain that vou will be satisfied ^ Raymond questioned vainly; the mysterious Greek would say no move. AA r onld an archi¬ tect he jiermitted to see the artist ? Thib also was refused. Raymond repented his instruc¬ tions, and the visitor retiretl. Our friend re- bolved however not to be foiled in bis wish. He suspected, that unaccustomed poverty Avas the cause of the mystery, and that tbe artist was unwilling to oe seen m tne garo ano aoocìr
\* of want. Ray mond Avas only the more excited by this consideiation to discovei him; impelled by tbe interest lie took in obscure talent, he there¬ fore 01 dered a pei son skillet! in such matters, tt) follow the Greek the next time he came, and observe the house in wbieb hc shoultl enter. His emissary obeyed, and brought the desired intelligence He had tiaeetl tbe man to one of the most penurious streets in the metropolis. Raymond did not wonder, that, thus situated, the artist had sluunk fiom notice, but he did not for this alter his rezolv e. On the same evening, be went alone to the house named to hmi. Poverty, dirt, and squalid misery characterized Us appearance. Alas ' thought Raymond, I have much to tlo before England becomes» a Paradise. He knocked; the door was opened by a string from above— tiie broken, w ι etched staircase ay as immediately before hmi, but no person appeared ; hc knocked again, vainly—and then, impatient of further delay, hc ascended tlie dark, creaking
stairs. His main wish, more particularly now that he witnessed the abject dwelling of the artist, was to relieve one, possessed of talent, but depressed by want. He pictured to himself a youth, whose eyes sparkled with genius, whose person was attenuated by famine. He half feared to displease bim ; but be trusted that his generous kindness would be administered so delicately, as uot to excite repulse. Wbat hu¬ man heart is shut to kindness? and thougli poverty, in its excess, might render the sufferer unapt tt) submit to the supposed degradation of а benefit, the zeal of tbe benefactor must at last relax him into thankfulness. These thoughts encouraged Raymond, as be stood at tlie tloor of the highest room of the bouse. After trying vainly to enter tbe other apartments, he per¬ ceived just within the threshold of this onr, a pair of small Turkish slippers ; the door was ajar, but all was silent within. It was probable that the inmate was absent, but secure that he had found the right person, our adventurous
Protector was tempted to enter, to leave a purse on the table, and silently dejiart. In pursuance of tbis idea, he pushed ojien the door gently— but the room was inhabited. Ravmond had never visited the dwellings of want, and the seene that now jiresented itself struck him to the heart. The floor was sunk in many places ; the walls ragged and bare—the ceiling weather-stained—a tattered bed stood in tbe corner; there were but two chairs in the room, and a rough broken table, on whicb was a light in a tin candlestick ;—yet in the midst of such drear and heart sickening poverty, there was an air of ortler and cleanliness that surpriset! hini. The tliought was fleeting ; for his atten¬ tion was instantly drawn towards the inhabitant of this wretched abode. It was a female. She sat at the tabic ; tme small band shaded her eyes from the cantile; the other held a pencil ; her looks vvere fixed on α drawing beibre her, vvhich Raymond recognized as the design presented to him. Her whole appearance awakened bis
deepest interest. Her dark hair Avas braided and twined in thick knots like tbe head-dress of a Grecian statue ; her garb was mean, but her attitude might have been selected as a model of grace. Raymond had a confuseti remem¬ brance that he had ocen such a form beibre ; he walked across the room ; she did not raise bel¬ evés, merely asking in Romair, who is there ■*■ " A friend," replied Raymond in tlie same dia¬ cci. She looketl up wondering, and he saw- that it was Evadne Zaimi. Evadne, once the idol of Adrians affections ; and vv ho, for the sake of her present visitor, had disdained tlie noble youth, and then, neglected by him she loved, vvith crushed hopes anda stinging sense of miserv. bad returned to her native ti revete W hit revo¬ lution of fortuno rould have brought her to England, ami housed her thus р Raymond recognized her; ami his manner changed from polite beneficence to the warmest protestations of kindness and »-vmpathv. The sight of her, in her present situation, passed like
an arrow into his soul. He sat by her, he took her hand, and said a thousand things Avhich breathed the deepest spirit of compassion and affection. Evadne did not answer ; ber large dark eyes were ca^t down, at length α tear glim¬ mered on the lashv. " Thus," she cried, " kindness can do, what no Avant, no misery ever effected ; I weep." ¿-lie shed indeed many tears ; her head sunk unconsciously on the shoulder of Raymond ; he held her hand : he kissed her sunken tear-stained cheek. He told her, that her sufferings Avere now over : no one possessed the art of consoling like Raymond ; he did not reason or declaim, but his look shone with sympathy ; he brought pleasant images before the sufferer ; his caresses excited no distrust, for they arose purely from tbe feeling which leads a mother to kiss her wounded child ; a desire to demonstrate in every possible Avay the truth of bis feelings, and the keenness of his Avish to pour balm into the lacerated mind of the unfor¬ tunate.
As Evadne regained her composure, his manner became even gay ; he sported Avith the idea of her рол -erty. Something told him that it Avas not its real evils that lay heavily at her heart, but the debasement and disgrace attendant on it ; as be talked, he divested it of ihese ; sometimes speaking of her forlitude with ener¬ getic praise ; then, alluding to her past state, he called her his Princess in disguise. He made her warm offers of service ; sbe was too mueh occupied by more engrossing thoughts, either to accept or reject tbem; atiength he loft hei, makinga promise to repeat bis visit the next day. Ile returned home, full of mingled feelings, of pain excited by Evadne's wretchedness, and jileasure at the prospect of relieving it. Some motive for which be did not account, even to himself, pre¬ vented him from relating bis adventure to Per¬ dita. Tbc next day be threw such disguise over his person as a cloak afforded, and revisited Evadile. As be went, be bought a basket of
costly fruits, suchas vvere natives of herown country, and throwing over these л -arious beau¬ tiful flowers, bore it himself to the miserable garret of his friend. " Behold," crieel he, as he entered, " Avhat bird's food í Ьал-е brought fot* my sparrow on the house-top.""* Evadne novv relatodthe tale of her misfortunes. Her father, though of high rank, had in the end dissipated his fortune, and even destroyed his reputation and influence tht ough а cour*e of dissolute indulgence. I lis health was impaired beyond hope of cure ; and it became his earnest Avish, before he dietl, to preserve his daughter from the poverty whieh would be the portion of her orphan state. He therefore accepted for her, and persuaded her to accede to, a proposal of marriage, from a wealthy Greek merchant settled at Constantinople. She quitted her native Greece ; her father died ; by degrees sbe was cut off from all the companions and ties of her youth. The Avar, which about a year before the pre«
sent time bad broken out between Greece and Turkey, brought about many reverses of fortune. Her husband became bankrupt, and tben in a tu¬ mult and threatened massacre on the part of tbe Turks, tbey were obliged to fly at midnight, antl reached in an open boat an English vessel under sail, vvbicb brought them immediately to this island. Tlie few jewels thev hati saved, sujijiorted them awhile. The whole strength of Evadne's mind was exerted to sujijiort thr failing sjiirits of her husband. Loss of jiro¬ perty, hopelessness as to bis future prospects, the inoccupation to which jioverty condemned hini, combined tt) reduce him to a state border¬ ing on insanity· Five months after their ar- rival in England, lie committed suicide. " Ybu will ask me, " continued Evadne. rC wbat I have done since ; wby I have not applied for succour to tbe rich Greeks resident here ; why ï have not returned to my native country ? Äly auswer to these questions must needs appear to you unsatisfactory, yet they
have sufficed to lead me on, day after day, en¬ during every wretchedness, ratlier than by such means to seek relief. Shall the daughter of the noble, though prodigal Zaimi, appear a beggar before her compeers or inferiors—supe¬ riors she bad none. Shall I bow my head before them, and witb servile gesture sell my nobility for life ? Had I a child, or any tie to bind me to existence, I might descend to this— but, as it is—the Avorld has been to me a harsh step-mother ; fain would I leave the abode she seems to grudge, and in tbe grave forget my pride, my struggles, my despair. The time AviU soon come ; grief and famine bave already sapped tbe foundations of my being; а veiy short time, and I shall have passed away ; un- -stained by the crime of self-destruction, unst un g by the memory of degradation, my spirit will throw aside this miserable coil, and find such recompense as fortitude and resignation may deserve. This may seem madness to you, yet you also have pride and resolution ; do not then
wonder tbat my pride is tameless, my resolution unalterable/' Having thus finished her tale, and given such an account as she deemed fit, of tbe motives of lier abstaining from all endeavour to obtain aid from her countrymen, Evadne paused ; yet. she seemed to have more to say, to which sbe was unable to give words. In the mean time Ray¬ mond was eloquent. His desire of restoring his lovely friend to her rank in society,and toher lost prosperity, animated him, and he poured forth with energy, all bis wishes and intentions on that subject. But he was checked; Evadne ex¬ acted a promise, that be should conceal from all her friends her existence in Eugland. " The relatives of the Earl of AA T indsor," said she haughtily, "-doubtless think tbat I injured him; perhaps the Earl himself would be the first to acquit me, but probably I do not deserve ac¬ quittal. I acted then, as I ever must, from impulse. This abotle of penury may at least prove the disinterestedness of my conduct. No
matter : I do not wish to plead my cause before any of them, not even before your Lordship, had you not first discovered me. The tenor of my actions will prove that I had rather die, than be a mark for scorn—behold tlie proud Evadne in her tatters ! look on tlie beggar-princess ! There is aspic venom in the thought—pro¬ mise me that my secret shall not be violated by you/' Raymond promised ; but then a new discus¬ sion ensued. Evadne required another engage¬ ment on his part, that he would not without her concurrence enter into any project for her benefit, nor himself offer relief. " Do not de¬ grade me in my own eyes," she said ; ťC poverty has long been my nurse ; hard*visaged she is, but honest. . If dishonour, or vvhat I conceive to be dishonour, come near me, I am lost/* Raymond adduced many arguments and fervent persuasions to overcome her feeling, but she remained unconvinced ; and, agitated by the dis¬ cussion, she w'ddly and passionately made a so^
lemn vow, to fly and hide herself where he never could discover her, where famine vvould soon bring death to conclude her woes, if he per¬ sisted in his to her disgracing offers. She could support herself, she said. And then she shewed him hovv, by executing various designs and paintings, she earned a pittance for her support. Raymond yielded for the present. He felt as¬ sured, after he had for awhile humoured her self-will, tbat in the end friendship and reastm would gain the day. But the feelings that actuated Evadne Avere rooted in the depths of her being, and vvere such in iheir growth as he had no means of understanding. Evadne loved Raymond. He was the hero of her imagination, the image carved by love in the unchanged texture of her heart. Seven years ago, in her youthful prime, she had become attached to him ; he had served her country against the Turks ; he had in her own land acquired that military glory peculiarly dear to the Greeks, since they were still obliged
inch by inch to fight for tbeir security. Yet when he returned thence, and first apjieared in public life in England, her love elid not pur¬ chase his, whieh tben vacillated between Perdita and a crown. AA'hile he was yet undecided, sbe bad quitted England ; tlie news of bis mar¬ riage reached her, and lier liojies, jXKirly nur¬ tured blossoms, withered and fell. The glory of life was gone for her; the roseate halo of love, Avhich had imbued every object with it? own colour, faded ;—she was content to take life as it was, and to make the best of leaden- coloured reality. Sbe married ; and, carrying her restless energy of character with her into new scenes, she turned her thoughts to ambi¬ tion, antl aimed at the title and jiower of Prin¬ ce** of AA T allachia ; while her jiatriotic feelings vvere soothed by the idea of the good sbe might do her country, wben her husband should be chief of this principality. Sbe lived to finti ambition, as unreal a delusion as love. Her in¬ trigues with Russia for the furtherance of her
object, excited the jealousy of the Porte, and the animosity of the Greek government. Sbe was considered a traitor bv both, the ruin of her husband followed; they avoided death by a time!) flight, and she fell from the height of her desires to penury in England. Much ol this tale she ctincealed from Raymond; nor did she confess that rejnike and denial, as to a cri¬ minal convicted ofthe worst of erime s tbat oí bringing ıhe sev the of foreign ilesjiot-sm to еш awav tbe new springing bbeit'it-s, of lier countrv, would have followed her ujiplicathm to aiu among the f »neks. She knew tliat sis* was the cause of her bus. band's utter ruin , antl sh. strung lur-eif to beai the consequence's. The rejMoatlus v* im h agon v extorted; οι uorst , curek'ss, uniomj»lainmg dc- jıres-ioıı, w lu n hîs mmd wa*stuık .11 a torpos ш>< the kss jKiintut because it wjs sflent and mov<— less She ívj »roat htfd bersıtf with tiıe rruıit ol Ьь death, gudt ãini its jnmıshmeiıf s apjieared v > 01 1 м
surround her ; in vain she endeavoured to allay remorse by the memory of her real integrity ; the rest of the world, and she among them, judged of her actions, by their consequences. She prayed for her husband's soul; she con¬ jured the Supreme to place on her head the crime of his self-destruction—she vowed to live to expiate his fault. ln the midst of such wretchedness as must soon have destroyed her, one thought only was matter of consolation. She lived in the same country, breathed the same air as Raymond. His name as Protector was the burthen of every tongue ; his achievements, projects, and magni¬ ficence, the argument of every story. Nothing is so precious to a woman's heart as the glory and excellence of him she loves ; thus in every horror Evadne revelled in his fame and pros¬ perity. While her husband lived, this feeling was regarded by her as a crime, repressed, re¬ pented of. W r hen he died, the tide of love
resumed its ancient flow, it deluged her soul Avith its tumultuous waA'es, and she gave herself up a prey to its uncontrollable power. But never, O, never, should he see her in her degraded state. Never should he behold her fallen, as sl*e deemed, from her pride of beauty, the poverty-stricken inhabitant ofa garret, with a name which had become a reproach, and a weight of guilt on her soul. But though impenetrably veiled from him, his public oflice permitted her to become acquainted Avith all his actions, his daily course of life, even his conversation. She allowed herself one luxury, she saAV tlie news¬ papers every day, and feasted on the praise and actions of the Protector. Not that this indul¬ gence Avas devoid of accompanying grief. Per¬ dita's name Avas for е\ т ег joined witli his ; their conjugal felicity was celebrated even by the au¬ thentic testimony of facts. They Avere con¬ tinually together, nor could the unfortunate EA r adne read the monosyllable that designated his name, without, at the same time, being pre- at â
sented with the image of her avIio was tbe faith¬ ful companion of all his labours and pleasures. They, their Excellencies, met her eyes in each line, mingling an evil potion that poisoned her very blood. It was in the newspaper that sbe saw the ad¬ vertisement for the design for a national gallery. Combining with taste her remembrance of tbe edifices whicb she had seen in the east, and bv * ml an effort of genius enduing tbem with unity of design, she executed the plan wbieb had been sent to tbe Protector. She triumphed in tilt¬ id ca of bestowing, unknown and forgotten as she was, a benefit upon him she loved : and with enthusiastic pride looked forward to the accom¬ plishment ofa work of hers, vvbicb, immortalized in stone, would go tlown to posterity stampet! with the name of Raymond, She awaited vvith eagerness the return of hen' messenger from the palace ; she listened insatiate to bis account of eatii word, each look of the Protector ; she felt bliss in this communication with her beloved,
although he knew not to whom be addressed bis instructions. The drawing itself became in¬ effably dear to her. He had seen it, and praised it ; it was again retouched by her, each stroke of her pencil was as a chord of thrilling music, and bore to her tbe idea of a temple raised to celebrate the deepest and most unutterable emo¬ tions of her soul. These contemplations en¬ gaged her, vvhen the voice of Raymond first struck her ear, a voice, onee heard, never to be forgotten ; she mastered her gush of feelings. and welcomed him vvith quiet gentleness. Pride and tenderness novv struggled, antl at length made a compromise together. She vvould see Raymond, since destiny had led him to her, and her constancy and devotion must merit his friendship. But her rights with re¬ gard to him, and her cherished independence, shoukl not be injured by the idea of interest, or the intervention of the complicated feelings at¬ tendant on pecuniary obligation, and the rela¬ tive situations of the benefactor, and benefited.
Her mind was uncommon strength; sbe could subdue her sensible wants to her mental wishes, antl suffer cold, hunger and misery, rather than concede to fortune a contested point. Alas í that in human nature such a pitch of mental discipline, and disdainful negligence of nature itself, should not have been allied to the extreme of moral excellence ! But the resolution that permitted her to resist the pains of privation, sprung from the too great energy of her pas¬ sions; and the concentrated self-will of which this was a sign, vvas tlestined to destroy even the very idol, to preserve whose respect she sub¬ mitted to ibis detail of Avretchedness. Their intercourse continued. By degrees Evadne related to her friend the whole of her story, lhe stain her name had received in Greece, the weight of sin which had accrued to her from the death of her husband. AVhen Raymond offered to clear her reputation, and demonstrate to the world her real patriotism, sbe declared that it was only through her present sufferings
that she hoped for any relief to the stings of conscience ; that, in her state of mind, diseased as hc might think it, the necessity of occupation Avas salutary medicine ; sbe ended by extorting a jiromise that for the space of one montli he would refrain frtmi the discussion of her in¬ terests, engaging after that time to yield in part to his Avishes. She could not disguise to herself that any change would separate her from him ; now she saw him eaeh day. His connec¬ tion with Adriau and Perdita was never men¬ tioned ; he was to her a mete ir, a comjianionless star, vvhich at its appointed hour rose in her hemisphere, w hose appearance brought felicity. and vvbicb, although it set, was never eclipsed. He came each day to her abode of penury, and bis jiresence transformed it to a temple redolent vvith sweets, radiant witb heaven's own light; he partook of her delirium. *" Tbey built a wall between tbem and tlie world"------ With¬ out, a thousantl barjiies raved, remorse and misery, expecting the destined moment for
their invasion. "Within, Avas the peace as of in¬ nocence, reckless Mindless, deluding joy, hope, whose still anchor rested on placid but uncon- stant water. Thus, while Raymond had been wrapt in visions of power and fame, Avbile he looked forward to entire dominion over tbe elements and the mind of man, tbe territory of his own heart escaped his notice ; and from that un¬ thought of source arose the mighty torrent that overwhelmed his will, and carried to the obli¬ vious sea, fame, hope, and happiness.
CHAPTER VIII. In the mean time wbat did Penlita ? During the first montlis of bis Protectorate, Raymond and she bad been inseparable ; each jiroject was discussed with her, each jilan ap¬ proved by her. I never beheld any tine so per¬ fectly happy as my sweet sister. Her expres¬ sive eyes vvere two stars whose beams were love ; hope and ligbt-heartedness sat on her cloudless brow. She fed even to tears ofjoy on the jiraise and glory of her Lord ; her whole existence was one sacrifice to bim, and if in the humility of herheart she felt self-complacency, it arose from the reflection that sbe had won the distinguished beroof the age, and bad for years preserved him, Mil
even after time bad taken from love its usual nourishment. Her own feeling was as entire as at its birth. Five years bad failed to destroy tbe dazzling unreality of passion. Most men ruthlessly destroy the sacred veil, vvith wiiich the female heart is wont to adorn tbe idol of its affections. Not so Raymond ; he was an en¬ chanter, vvhose reign was for ever undiminished ; а king Avhose jioAver never Avas suspended : fol¬ low him through the details of common life, still tbe same charm of grace and majesty adorned him ; nor couid he be desjxiiled of the innate deification vvith which nature had in¬ vested him. Penlita grew in beauty and excel¬ lence under bis eye ; I no longer recognised my reserved abstracted sister in the fascinating and open-hearted wife of Raymond. The genius tbat enlightened her countenance, was now united to an expression of benevolence, which gave divine perfection to her beauty. Happiness is in its highest degree the sister of goodness. Suffering and amiability may exist
together, and writers have loved to depict their conjunction ; there is a human and touching harmony in the picture, But perfect happiness is an attribute of angels ; and those who possess it, appear angelic. Fear lias been said to be the parent of religion : even of that religion is it the generator, which leads its votaries to sacrifice human victims at its altars ; but tbe religion which springs from liappiness is a lovelier growth ; the religion which makes tbe heart breathe forth fervent thanksgiving, and causes us to pour out the overflowings of the soul be¬ fore tbe author of our being ; that wbich is the parent of the imagination and the nurse of poetry; tnat wbieb bestows benevolent intelli¬ gence on the visible mechanism of tiie world, and makes earth a temple witb heaven for its copo. Such happiness, goodness, and religion inhabited the mind oi' Perdita. During tlie five years we bad spent together, а knot of happy human beings at AVindsor Castle, her blissful lot had been the frequent
theme of my sister's conversation. From early habit, and natural affection, she selected me in preference to Adrian or Idris, to be the partner in her overflowings of tkiigbt ; perhaps, tliough apparently much unlike, some secret point of resemblance, the offspring of consanguinity, in¬ duced this preference. Often at sunset, I have walked with her, in the sober, enshadowed forest paths, and listened with joyful sympathy. Security gave dignity to her passion ; the cer¬ tainty of a full return, left her vvith no wish un¬ fulfilled. The birth of her daughtci, embryo copy of her Raymond, filled up the measure of her content, and produced a sacred and indisso¬ luble tie between them. Sometimes she felt proud that he had preferred her to the hopes of a crown. Sometimes she remembered that she had suffered keen anguish, when be hesitated in his choice But this memory of past discontent only served to enhance her present joy. What had been liardlv won, was now, entirely pos- bessed, doubly dear. She would look at him at
a distance vvith the same rapture, (O, for more exuberant rapture!) that one might feel, who after the perils of a tempest, should find him¬ self in the desired port ; she would hasten to¬ wards bim, to feel more certain in bis arms, tbe reality of her bliss. Tbis warmth of affection, added to the depth of her understanding, and the brilliancy of her imagination, matle her beyontl won's tlear to Rav mond. if a feeling of dissatisfaction ever crossed her, it arose from the idea that he was not per¬ fectly happ). Desire of renown, and presump¬ tuous ambition, bad characterized his vouth. The one be bad acquired in Greece ; the oilier hc had sacrificed to love. His intellect found sufficient field for exercise m his domestic cinic, whose members, all adorned by refinement and literature, weie many of them, like bimself, distinguished b) genius. Ά et active life was the genuine soil for bis vii tues; and he some¬ times suffered tedium from the monotonous suc¬ cession of events in our retirement. Pride
made him recoil from complaint ; and gratitude ami affection to Perdita, generally acted as an opiate to all desire, save that of meriting her love. AVe all observed the visitation of these feelings, and none regretted them so much as Perdita. Her life consecrated to him, was a slight sacrifice to reward his choice, but was not that sufficient—Did he need any gratification that sbe was unable to bestow ? This was the only cloud in the azure of her happi¬ ness. His passage to power had been full of pain to both. He however attained bis wish ; he filled the situation for vvhich nature seemed to have moulded bim. His activity was fed in Avholesome measure, Avithout either exhaustion or satiety ; bis taste and genius found Avortby ex¬ pression in each of the modes human beings have invented to encage and manifest tbe spirit of beauty ; the goodness of bis heart made him never weary of conducing to the well-being of his fellow-creatures : his magnificent sjiirit, and
aspirations for the respect and love of mankind, now received fruition ; true, his exaltation Avas temporary ; perhaps it w T ere better that it should be so. Habit would not dull his sense of the enjoyment of power ; nor struggles, disappoint¬ ment and defeat await tbe end of that which would expire at its maturity. He determined to extract and condense all of glory, power, and achiev ement, which might have resulted from a long reign, into tbe three years of bis Protec¬ torate. Raymond was eminently social. All that he now enjoyed vvould have been devoid of plea¬ sure to him, had it been u n part ici pated. But in Penlita he possessed all tbat bis heart could desire. Her love gave birth to sympathy ; her intelligence made her understand him at a word; her powers of intellect enabled her to assistane! guide him. He felt her worth. During the early years of tbeir union, the inequality of her temper, and yet unsubdued self-will wbieb tar¬ nished her character, bad been a slight draw.
back to the fulness of his sentiment, Noav that unchanged serenity, and gentle comjiliance were added tti her other qualifications, bis re¬ sjiect equalled his love. Y'ears added to tbe strictness of their union. They did not novv guess at, and totter on tbe pathway, divining the mode to please, hoping, yet fearing the con¬ tinuance of bliss. Five years gave a sober cer¬ tainty to their emotions, though it did not rob them tif tbeir etherial nature. It had given them a child ; but it bad not detracted from the personal attractions of my sister. Timidity, which in her had almost amounted to awkward¬ ness, was exchanged for a graceful decision of manner ; frankness, instead of reserve, charac¬ terized her physiognomy ; and her voice was attuned to thrilling softness. She was now tbree iind t wenty, in the jnide of womanhood, fulfilling tbe jirecious duties of wife and mother, possessed of all her heart had ever coveted. Raymond was ten years older; tohis previous beauty, noble mien, ¿md commanding aspect,
he now added gentlest lienevolence, winning tenderness, graceful and unwearied attention to the wishes of а not Ium*. The first secret that had existed between them was the visits of Raymond to Evadne. He had been struck by the fortitude and beauty of the ill-fated Greek; and, vvhen her constant tender¬ ness towards him unfolded itself, he asked with astonishment, by what act of his he had merited this passionate anti unrequited love. She was fora vvhile the sole object of bis reveries; and Perdita became aware that his thoughts and time were 4 bohtoAved on а subject unparticipatrd by her. My sister was by nature destitute of the common feelings of anxious, petulant jea¬ lousy. The treasure which &hc posses-od in the affection** of Raymond, was more necessary to her being, than the life-blood that animated her veins—more truly than Othello she miffht ·.' ***> sav, To be once m doubt, Is—once to be resolved.
On the jiresent occasion she did not susjiect any alienation of affection ; but she conjectured that some circumstance connectetl with his high place, bad occasioned this mystery, Sbe was startled and pained. Sbe began to count the long days, and months, and years vvbicb must elapse, befoie be wouki be restored to a prİAate station, and unreservedly to her. She w¿r not content tliat, even for a time, he should practice concealment with her. She often repined ; but her trust in tbe singleness of his affection was undisturbed; and, when tht y vvere together, unchecked by fear, she opened her heart to the fullest delight. Tmie went on. Raymond, stopping m id-way in his wild rareer, paused suddenly to thmk of consequences. Two results jiresented them¬ selveb in the view he took of the future. That bis intercourse with Evadne should continue а secret to, or that finally it should be discovered by Perdita. The destitute condition, and highly wrought feelings of his friend prevented him
frtmi adverting to the possibility of exiling him. self from her. In the fii stevent he had bidden an eternal farewell to open-hearted converse, and entire symjiathy with the companion of his life. Tbe veil must be thicker than that invented by Turkish jealousy ; tbe wall higher than the un- scaleable tower of Vathek, which sliould conceal from her the workings of his heart, and hide from her view tbe secret of his actions. This itlea was intolerably painful to him. Frankness and social feelings vvere the essence of Raymond's nature; vvithout them bis qualities became com- nion-place; without these to spread glory over his intercourse with Penlita, his vaunted ex¬ change of a throne for her love, was as weak and emjity as the rainbow hues vvhich vanish when the sun is down. But there was no re¬ medy. Genius, devotion, and courage; the adornments of bis mind, aud tbe energies of bis soul, all exerted to their uttermost stretch, could not roll back one hair's breadth the wheel of time's chariot ; tbat which bad been was vvritten with
the adamantine pen of reality, on tbe everlasting volume of the jiast ; nor couid agony and tears suffice to wash out one iota from the act ful¬ filled. But tbis was the best sitie of the question. AVhat, if circumstance should lead Perdita to susjiect, and suspecting to be resolved ? The fibres of bis frame became relaxed, and cold dew stood on his forehead, at this idea. Many men may scoff' at his dread ; but be read tbe future ; and the jieace of Perdita vvas too dear to him, her sjieecbless agony too certain, and too fearful, not to unman him. His course was speedily decided upon. If the worst befell; if she learnt the truth, he would neither stand her reproaches, or the anguish of her altered looks. He would forsake her, England, his friends, the scenes of his youth, the hopes of coming time, he vvoultl seek another country, and in other scenes begin life again. Having resolved on this, he became calmer. He endeavoured to guide with prudence the steeds of destiny tbrough
the devious road whieii he had chosen, and bent all his efforts the better to conceal what he could not alter. Tbe perfect confidence that subsisted between Penlita and bim, rendered every communication common between tbem. Tbey opened eacb other's letters, even as, until now, the inmost fold of the heart of eacb was disclosed to the other. A letter came unawares, Perdita read it. Had it contained confirmation, she must have been annihilated. As it was, trembling, cold, and pale, she sought Raymond. He was alone, examining some petitions lately presented. She entered silently, sat on a sofa opposite to him, ¿md gazed on bim with a look of such despair, that wildest shrieks and dire moans would have been tame exhibitions of misery, compared to the living incarnation of the thing itself exhibited by her. At first be did not take bis eyes from the jiapers; vvhen lie raised them, he was stiuck by
the wretchedness manifest on her altered cheek ; for a moment he forgot his own acts and fears, and asked vvith consternation—"■ Dearest girl, what is the matter ; Avhat has happened ?" " Nothing," she replied at first ; " and yet not so," she continued, hurrying on in her speech ; " you have secrets, Raymond ; where have you been lately, whom have you seen, what do you conceal from me ?—why am I banished from your confidence ? Yet this is not it — I do not intend to entrap you with questions—one will suffice—am I completely a Avretch ?" With trembling hantl she gave hini the paper, and sat vvhile and motionless looking at him while he read it. lie recognised the hand-writ¬ ing of Evadne, and the colour mounted in liis cheeks. AVith lightning-speed he conceived the contents of the letter ; all was now cast on one die; falsehood and artifice were trifles in com¬ parison with the impending ruin. He would
either entirely dispel Perdita's suspicions, or quit her for ever. " My dear girl," he said, u I have been to blame ; but you must pardon me. I was in tbe wrong to commence a system of concealment ; but I did it for tbe sake of sparing you pain ; and each day has rendered it more difficult for me tt) alter my plan. Besides, I was instigated by delicacy towards the un¬ happy writer of these few lines/' Perdita gasped : i; Well/' she cried, t% well, go on !" ť< That is all—tbis paper tells all. I am placed in the most difficult circumstances. I bave done my best, though perhaps I have done wrong. My love for you is inviolate." Penlita shook her head doubtingly : u It can¬ not be," she cried, " I know that it is not. You vvoultl deceive me, but I will not be de¬ eeived. I have lost you, myself, my life !" " Do you not believe me ?" said Raymond haughtily. " To beHeve you/* she exclaimed, " I would
give up all, and expire vvith joy, so that iu death I could feel tliat you vvere "true—but tbat cannot be !" " Penlita," continued Raymond, 4 ' you do not see the precijiice on whieh you stand. You may believe tbat I did not enter on my jiresent line of conduct without reluctance and pain. I knew tbat it was possible that your suspicions might be excited ; but I trusted that my simple word would cause tbem to disajipear. I built my hope on your confidence. Do vou think that 1 will be questioned, and my replies dis¬ dainfully set aside? Do you think that I will be susjieeted, periiaps watched, cross-ques¬ tioned, and disbelieved ? I am not yet fallen so low; my honour is not yet so tarnished. You have loved me; I adored you. But all human sentiments rome to an end. Let our affection exjiire—but let it not be exchanged for distrust antl recrimination. Heretofore we have been friends—lovers—let us not become ene¬ mies, mutual spies. I cannot live tbe object
of suspicion—you cannot believe me—let us part Γ " Exactly so," cried Perdita, ςί I knew that it vvould come to tbis! Are we not already parted ? Does not a stream, boundless as ocean, deep as vacuum, yawn between us ?" Raymond rose, bis voice was brtiken, bis features convulsed_, his manner calm as tbe earth¬ quake-cradling atmosphere, he replietl : " I am rejoiced that you take my decision so philoso¬ phically. Doubtless you will play tho part of the injured wife to admiration. Sometimes νου may be stung with the feeling tbat you have wronged rie, butthe condolence of your rela¬ tives, the pity of the world, the complacency wbieb the eonseiousness of your ovvn immaculate innocence will bestow, will be excellent balm ; — me you will never see more '"' Raymond moved towards the tloor. lie for¬ got that each word he spoke was false. Ile per¬ sonated bis assumption of innocence even to self-deception. Have not actors wept , as tbev VOL. I. N
jiourtrayed imagined passion ? A more intense feeling of the reality of fiction possessed Ray¬ mond. He spoke w ith pride ; be felt inj uret I Perdita looked uji ; she saw his angry glance ; bis hand was on tbe lock of the door. She started up, sbe threw herself on his neck, sbe gasped and sobbed; be took her band, antl leading her to tbe sofa, sat down near her. Her h eiid ftil on his shoulder, she trembled, alter¬ nate change*» of fire and ice ran through lier limbs: observing her emotion be sjioke vvith softened accents: " Tbe blow is given. 1 will not part from you iıı anger ;—I owe you too much. 1 owe vou six years of unalloyed hajijiiness. But they are jiassed. I will not live the mark of suspicion, the object of jealousy. I love you too well. In an eternal sejiaration only can either of us hope for dignity and propriety of ariiun. AA'e shall not tben be degraded from our true characters. Faitb and devotion have hitherto been the essence of our intercourse ; —
*hese lost, let us not cling to the seedless husk of life, the unkernelled shell. You have your chikl, your brother, Itlris, Adrian"------- "■ And you/' cried Perdita, bí the writer of that letter." Uncontrollable indignation flashed from the eyesof Raymond. He knew that this accusa¬ tion at least was false. " Entertain tliis belief," he cried, *■ hug it to vour heart—make it a pil¬ low to your heatl, an opiate for your eyes—I am content. But. by the God that made me, bell is not more fake than the wort I you have .spoken ■" Perdita was struck by the impa-ssioned seri¬ ousness of his asseverations. Site replied witli earnestness, * e I do not refuse to believe you, Rav monti; on the co vary I promise to put implicit faith m your simple word. Only assure me that your love and faith towards me have never been violated; and suspicion, and doubt, and jealousy will at once be dispersed. We N l ^
shall continue as vve have ever done, one heart, one hope, one life." " I have already assured you of my fidelity/' said Raymond Avith disdainful coldness, " triple assertions will avail nothing where one is de¬ spised. I will say no more; for I can add nothing to vvhat I have already said, to what you before contemptuously set aside. This contention is unworthv of both of us; and I confess that I am weary of replying to charges at once unfounded and unkind." Fcrdita tried to read his countenance, Avhich hc angrily averted. There vv T as so much of truth and nature in his resentment, that her doubts were dispelled. Her countenance, which for years had not expressed a feeling unallied to affection, became again radiant and satisfied. She found it however no easy task to soften and reconcile Raymond. At first he refused to stay to hear her. But she WOuld not be put off; secure of his unaltered love, she Avas willing to
undertake any labour, use any entreaty, to dispel his anger. She obtained an hearing, he sat in haughty silence, but he listened. She first assured him of her boundless confidence ; of this he must be conscious, since but for that she Avould not seek to detain him. She enu¬ merated their years of happiness ; she brought before him past scenes of intimacy and happi¬ ness ; she pictured their future life, she men¬ tioned their child—tears unbidden now filled her eyes. She tried to disperse them, but they refused to be checked—her utterance was choaked. She had not wept before. Raymond could not resist these signs of distress : he felt perhaps somewhat ashamed of the part he acted of the injureďman, he who was in truth the injurer. And then he devoutly loved Perdita; the bend of her head, her glossy ringlets, the turn of her form were to him subjects of deep tenderness and admiration; as she spoke, her melodious tones entered his soul ; he soon sof¬ tened towards her, comforting and caressing
her, and endeavouring to cheat himself into the belief that he had never wronged her. Raymond staggered forth from this scene, as a man might do, who had been just put to tbe torture, and looked forward to when it would be again inflicted. Hc had sinned against his oavh honour, by affirming, swearing to, a direct false¬ hood ; true tlds he had palmed on a woman, and it might therefore be deemed less base^—by others —not by him;—for whom had he deceived? — his own trusting, devoted, affectionate Perdita, whose generous belief galled him doubly, when he remembered the parade of innocence with which it had been exacted. The mind of Ray¬ mond was not so rough cast, nor had been so rudely handled, in the circumstance of life, as to make him proof to these considerations—on the contrary, he was all nerve ; his spirit was as a pure fire, which fades and shrinks from every contagion of foul atmosphere : hut now tlie contagion had become incorjxirated with its es¬ sence, and the change was the more painful.
Truth and falsehood, love and hate lost their eternal boundaries heaven rushed in to mingle witb hell; while his sensitive mind, turned toa field for such battle, was stung to madness. He heartily despised himself, he was angry with Perdita, and the idea of Evadne was attended by all that was hideous and cruel. His passions always his masters, acquired fresh strength, from the long sleep in which love had cradled them, the clinging weight of destiny bent him down ; 'he was goaded, tortured, fiercely imjxitient of that worst of miseries, the sense of remorse. This troubled state yielded by degrees, to sul¬ len animosity, and depression of spirits. His dependants even his equals, if in his present post he had any, were startled to find anger, derision, and bitterness in one, before distin¬ guished for suavity and benevolence of manner. He transacted public busmess with distaste, and hastened from it to the solitude which was at once his bane and relief. He mounted a fiery horse, that which had borne him forward to vie-
tory in Greece; be fatigued himself vrith dead¬ ening exercise, losing the pang» of a troubled mind in animal sensation. He slowiy recovered himself; yet, at last, as one might from the effects of poison, be lifted bis head from above lhe vapours of fever antl pas¬ sion into the still atmosphere of calm reflection. He meditated on wbat was best tt) be clone. lie was first struck by tbe space of time that had elapsed, since madness, rather than any reasonable impulse, had regulated bis actions. A montli bad gone by, and during that time he had not seen Evadne. Her power, which was linked to few of the enduring emotions of his heart, bad greatly decayed. He was no longer her slave— no longer her lover: he would never see her more, and by the completeness of his return, deserve tbe confidence of Perdita. Yet, as he tbus determined, fancy conjured up the miserable abode of the Greek girl. An abode, which from noble and lofty principle, she bad refused to exchange for one of greater
luxury. Hc thought of the sjilendour of her situation and appearance when he first knew her; he thought of her life at Constantinople, attended by every circumstance of oriental magnificence ; of her present jiemiry, her daily lask of industry, her lorn state, her faded, famine-struck cheek. Compassion swelled his breast; be would see her once again ; he vvould devise some plan for restoring her to society, and the enjoyment of her rank ; tlieir sejiaration would then follow, as a matter of course. Again be thought, bow during this long month, be bad avoided Perdita, flying from her as from tlie stings of his own conscience. But he was awake novv; all this should be remedied; and future devotion erase the memory of ibis only blot on the serenity of their life. He be- V mf rave cheerful, as he thought of this and soberly and resolutely marked out tbe line of conduct he would adopt. He remembered that he iiad promised Perdita to be present this very even¬ ing (the 19th of Ottober, anniversary of bis N 3
election as Protector) at a festival given in his honour. Good augury should this festival be of the hajijiiness of future yeiirs. First, he vvould look in on Evadne; he vvould not stay ; but he owed her some account, some compensation for his long and unannounced absence ; and tben to Perdita, to the forgotten world, to the duties of society, the sjilendour of rank, the enjoyment of power. After tbe scene sketched iu tbe preceding pages, Perdita bad contemplated an entire change in the manners and conduct of Raymond. Sbe expected freedom of communication, and a return to those habits of affectionate intercourse wliich bad formed the delight of her life. But Raymond did not join ber in any of her avoca¬ tions. He transacted the busines c of the day apart from her; he went out, sbe knew not whi¬ ther. The jiain inflicted by this disapjiointment Avas tormenting and keen. She looked on it as a deceitful dream, and tried to throw off* the consciousness of it ; but like tbe shirt of Nessus,
it clung to her very flesh, and ate with sharţi agony into her vital principle. She possessed that (though such an assertion may appear a jmradox) which belongs to few, a capacity of bapjnness. Her delicate organization and creative imagination rendered her peculiarly susceptible of pleasurable emotion. The over¬ flowing warmth of her heart, by making love a plant of deep root and stately grovvth, had at¬ tuned her whole soul to the reception of hapjn- ness, when she found in Raymond all that could adorn love and satisfy her imagination. But if the sentiment on which tbe fabric of her ex¬ istence was founded, became common place through participation, the endless succession of attentions and graceful action snapt by transfer, his universe of love wrested from her, happiness must dejiart, and then be exchanged for its oj)jx>- sitc. The same peculiarities of character ren¬ dered her sorrows agonies ; her fancy magnified tbem, her sensibility made her for ever open to their renewed impression ; love envenomed the
heart-piercing sting. There Avas neither sub¬ mission, patience, nor self-abandonment in her grief; she fought with it, struggled beneath it, and rendered every pang more sharp by resist¬ ance. Agnin and again the idea recurred, that he loved another. She did him justice; she believed that he felt a tender affection for her ; but give a paltry prize to him who in some life- pending lottery has calculated on the possession of tens of thousands, and it will disappoint him more than a blank. The affection antl amity of a Raymond might be inestimable ; but, be¬ yond that affection, embosomed deeper than friendship, Avas the indİAİsiblc treasure of love. Take the sum in its completeness, and no arith¬ metic can calculate its price ; take from it the smallest portion, give it but the name of parts, separate it into degrees and sections,and like the magician's coin, the valueless gold of the mine, is turned to vilest substance. There is a meaning* in the eye of love ; a cadence in its voiee, an irradiation in its smile, the talisman of vvhose en-
chantments one only can possess; its spirit is elemental, its essence single, its divinity an unit. The very heart and soul of Raymond and Perdita had mingled, even as tvvo mountain brooks tbat join in their descent, and murmur¬ ing and sparkling flow over shining pebbles, beside starry flowers; but let one desert its primal course, or be dammed up by choaking obstruction, and the other shrinks in its altered banks. Perdita vvas sensible of the failing of the tide that fed her life. Unable to support the slow withering of her hopes, she suddenly formed a plan, resolving to terminate at once the period of misery, and to bring to an happy conclusion the late disastrous events. Tbe anniversary was at hand of tbe exalta¬ tion of Raymond to the office of Protector ; and it was customary to celebrate this day by a splendid festival. A variety of feelings urged Perdita to shed double magnificence over the scene ; yct, as she arrayed herself for tbe even¬ ing gala, she wondered herself at tbe pains she
took, to render sumptuous the celebration of an event wbich ajijieared to ber tbe beginning of her sufferings. AVoe befall the day, she thought, woe, tears, and mourning betide the hour, that gave Raymond another hope than love, anotlier wish than my devotion ; and thrice joyful the moment when he shali be restored tti me ! God knows, I put my trust in his vows, and believe his asserted faith—but for that, I would not seek what I am now resolved to attain. Shall tvvo years more be thus passed, each clay adding to our alienation, each act being another stone piled on the barrier whicb separates us ? No, my Raymond, my only beloved, sole possession of Perdita ! Tbis night, tbis splendid assem¬ bly, these sumptuous apartments, and this adornment of your tearful girl, are all united to celebrate your abdication. Once for me, you relinquished the prospect of a erown. Tbat was in days of early love, wben I could only bold out tbe hojie, not the assurance of happi¬ ness. Novv you have the experience of all that
I can give, the heart's devotion, taintless love. and unhesitating subjection to you. You must choose between these and your protectorate. This, proud noble, is your last night ! Perdita bas bestowed on it all of magnificent and dazzling that your heart best loves—but, from these gor¬ geous rooms, from this princely attendance, from power and elevation, you must return Avith to¬ morrow's sun to our rural abotle ; for I vvoultl not buy an immortality of joy, by the endu¬ rance of one more week sister to the last. Brooding over this plan, resolved when the hour should come, to propose, antl insist upon its accomplishment, secure of his consent, the heart of Perdita was lightened, or rather ex¬ alted. Her cheek was flushetl by the expecta¬ tion of struggle ; her eyes sparkled with tbe hope of triumph. Having cast her fate upon a die, and feeling secure of winning, she, Avhom I have named as bearing tbe stamp of queen of nations* on her noble brow, now rose superior to huma¬ nity, and seemed iu calm power, to arrest with
her finger, the wheel of destiny. She had never before looked so supremely lovely. AVe, the Arcadian shepherds of the tale, had intendetl to be present at this festivity, but Per¬ dita ay rote to entreat us not to come, or to ab¬ sent ourselves from AVintbor ; for she (though she diti not reveal her scheme to us) resolved the next morning to return with Raymond tti our dear eircle, there to renew a course of life in whieh she bad found entire felicity. Late in the evening she entered the apartments appro¬ priated to the festival. Ray monti had quitted the palace the night before ; he had promisetl to grace the assembly, but he batl not yet re¬ turned. Still she felt sure that he would eome at hibt ; and the w itler the breach might appear at this crisis, tbe more secure she was of closing it for ever. It was as I sani, the nineteenth of October; the autumn was far adv ancetl antl dreary. The wind howled; the half bare trees were despoiled «if the remainder of their summer ornament ; the
state of the air vvhich induced the decay of vegetation, Avas hostile to cheerfuluess or hope. Raymond had been exalted by the determina¬ tion be had matle ; hut with the declining day bis spirits declined. First be was to visit Evadne, and then to hasten to the palace of the Protec¬ torate, As he walked througb the wretched streets in tbe neighbourhood of the luckless Greek's abode, bis heart smote him for the л-, bole course of his conduct towartls her. First, Ins having entered into any engagement that should permit her to remain i u such a state of de¬ gradation ; and then, after a short wild dream, hav ing left her to drear solitude, anxious con¬ jecture, and bitter, still—disappointed expec¬ tation. AVhat had she done tht while, how supported his absence and neglect ? Light grew dim in these close streets, and when tbe well known tloor was opened, the staircase was shrouded in perfect night. He groped his way up, be entered the garret, he found Evadne stretched speechless, almost life-
less on her wretched bed. He called for the people of the bouse, but could learn nt ith ing from tbem, coccejit tbat they knew nothing. Her story was plain to bini, plain and distinct as tlie remorse and horror tbat darted tbeir fangs into bim. AVhen she found herself forsaken by hini, sbe lost the heart to jiur- sue her usimi avocations ; pritle forbade every application to him; famine was welcomed as tbe kind* porter to the gates of death, within Avhose ojiening folds sbe sliould now, without sin, quickly rejiose. No creature came near her, as her strength failed. If she died, where coukl there be found on record a murderer, whose cruel act might com¬ pare with his? AVhat fiend more wanton in bis mischief, what damned soul more worthy of perdition ! But he Avas not reserved for this agony of self-reproach. He sent for medical assistance ; tbe hours jiassed, spun by suspense into ages ; tbe darkness of the long autumnal night yielded to day, before her Hfe was secure.
He bad her then removed to a more commodi¬ ous dwelling, and hovered about her, again and again to assure bimself that she was safe. In the midst of his greatest suspense and fear as to the event, he remembered tbe festival given in his honour, hy Penlita ; in his honour then, when misery and death were affixing in¬ delible disgrace to his name, honour tti bim whose crimes deserved a scaffold ; tbis was the worst mockery. Still Perdita would expect him ; he wrote a few incoherent wortls on a scrap of paper, testifying tbat be Avas well, and bade tbe woman of the bouse take it to tbe palace, and deliver it into the hands of the wife of the Lorcl Protector. The woman, wlio did not know him, contemptuously asked, bow he thought she should gain admittance, jiarticularly on a festal night, to that lady's jiresence ? Raymond gave her his ring to ensure the resj>eet of the menials. Thus, vvhile Perdita was entertaining her guests, and anxiously awaiting tbe arrival of her lord, bis ring was brought her ; and she
was told that a poor woman had a note to de¬ liver to her from its wearer. The vanity of the old gossip was raised by her commission, which, after all, she did not un¬ derstand, since she had no suspicion, even novv* that E valine's visitor was Lord Raymond. Perdita dreaded а fall from his horse, or strnie similar accident—till the woman's answers woke other fears. From a feeling of cunning blindly exorcised, the officious, if not malignant messen¬ ger, did not speak of E vadne's illness; but she garrulously gave an account of Raymond's fre¬ quent visits, adding to her narration such cir¬ cumstances, as, while they convinced Perdita of its truth, exaggerated the unkindness and pcrfitly of Raymond. Worst of all, his absence now from the festival, his message wholly unaccounted ftir, except by the disgraceful hints of the woman, appeared tbe deadliest insult. Again she looked at the ring, it was a small ruby, almost heart-shaped, which she had herself given him. She looked at the hand-writing, wiiich bhv
could not mistake, and repeated to herself the words—" Do not, I charge you, I entreat you, permit your guests to Avonder at my absence :" the while the old crone going on vvith her talk, fillet! her ear with a strange medley of truth and falsehood. At length Perdita dismissed her. The poor girl returned to the assembly, where her presence had not been missed. She glided into a recess somewhat obscured, and leaning against an ornamental column there placed, tried to recover herself. Her faculties vvere palsied. She gazed on some flowers that stood near in a carved vase: that morning she bad arranged them, tbey were rare and lovely plants ; even now all aghast as she was, she observed thtir brilliant colours and starry shapes.—" Divini* iiifoliatious of the spirit of beauty," sbe ex¬ claimed. " Ye droop not, neither dt) ye mourn ; the despair that clasps my lieart, has not spread contagion over you !—AVhy am I not a partner of your insensibilii)', a sharer in your calm !" She paused . u To my task," she continued
mentally, Ci my guests must not perceive the reality, cither as it regards him or me. I obey : they shall not, though I die the moment they are gone. They shall behold the antipodes of vvhat is real—for I will appear to live—while I am—dead." It required all her self-command, to suppress the gush of tears self-pity caused at this idea. After many struggles, she succeeded, and turned to join the eompany. All her efforts vvere now directed to the dis¬ sembling her internal conflict. She had to play the part of a courteous hostess ; to attend to all ; to shine the focus of enjoyment and grace. She bad to do this, while in deep Avoe she sighed for le olìness, and would gladly have exchanged her crowded rooms for dark forest depths, or a drear, nigh t-enshado wed heath. But she became gay. Sbe could not keep in the medium, nor be, as was usual vvith her, placidly conteni. Every¬ one remarked her exhilaration of spirits; as all actions appear graceful in the eye of rank, her guests surrounded her applaudingly, although
there was a sharpness in her laugh, and an ab¬ ruptness in her sallies, vvhich migbt have betray¬ ed her secret to an attentive observer, Sbe went on, feeling tbat, if sbe bad paused for a moment, tbe checked waters of misery would have de¬ luged her soul, that her wrecked hopes would raise their wailing voices, and tbat tliose w ho now echoed her mirth, and provoked her repartees, would have shrunk in fear from her convulsive tlespais Her only consolation during the vio¬ lence wbieb sbe die! berself, was to watch tbe motions of an illuminated clock, and internally count the moments which must elapse before she could be alone. At length the rooms began to thin. Mocking her ovvn desires, sbe rallied her guests on tlieir early departure. One by one tbey left her—at length she pressed tbe band of her last visitor. ** How cold and damp your band is/' said her frientl ; " you are over fatigued, pray hasten to rest.'' Penlita smiled faintly—her guest left her ; the carriage rolling down the street assured
the final departure. Then, as if pursued by an enemy, as if wings had been at her feet, she flew to her ovvn apartment, she dismissed her attendants, she locked the doors, she threw herself wildly on the floor, she bit her lips even to blood to suppress her shrieks, and lay long a prey to the vulture of despair, striving not to think, while multitudinous ideas made a home of her heart ; and ideas, borriti as furies, cruel as vipers, and poured in vvitli such swift succession, that tbey seemed to jostle and wound each otlier, vvhile they worked her up to madness. At length she rose, more composed, not less miserable. She stootl before a large mirror— she gazed on her reflected image ; her light and graceful dress, the jewels that studded her hair, and encircled her beauteous arms and neck, her small feet shod in satin, her profuse and glossy tresses, all were to her clouded brow antl vveie- begone countenance like a gorgeous frame to a dark tempest-pourtraying picture. α Vase am I," she thought, " vase brimful of despair'*
direst essence. Farewell, Perdita î farewell, poor girl ! never again w ill you see yourself thus ; luxury and wealth are no longer yours ; in the excess of your poverty you may envy the home¬ less beggar ; most truly am I without a home î I live on a barren tlesart, which, wide and in¬ terminable-, brings fortini either fruit or flower; in the mid it is a solitary rock, to whieii tliou, Perdita, art chained, and thou scest the dreary level stretch far aw ay. " She threw open her window, vvbicb looked on the palace-garden. Light and dai kness were struggling together, and thy orient was streaked by roseate and golden rays. One star emly trembled in the depth of the kindling atmo¬ sphere. The morning air blowing freshly over the dewy plañís, ribbed into the heated room. -- All things go on," thought Perdita, 4Í all things proceed, decay, and perish! A\ r hen noontide has passeei, antl the weary tlay has driven her team to their western stalk, the fires of heaven rise from the East, moving in their vol, ι, о
accustomed path, they ascend and descend the skiey hill. AVhen tbeir course is fulfilled, the dial begins to cast westward an uncertain shadow; the eye-lids of day are opened, and birds and flowers, the startied vegetation, and fresh breeze awaken ; the sun at length ap¬ pears, and iu majestic procession climbs the capitol of heaven. AH proceeds, cbanges and dies, except the sense of misery in my bursting heart. " Ay, all proceeds and changes: vvhat wonder then, that love has journied on to its setting, and that tlie lord of my life has changed ? AVe call the supernal lights fixed, yet they wandei about yonder plain, and if I look again where I looked an hour ago, the face of the eternal heavens is altered. The silly moon and incon¬ stant planets vary nightly their erratic dance; ihe sun itself, sovereign of the sky, ever and anon deserts his throne, and leaves his domi¬ nion to night and winter. Nature grows old, and shakes in her decaying limbs,—creation has
become bankrupt ! AA r hat wonder then, that eclipse and death have led to destruction the ЩЫ of thy life, О Perdita í"
о 2
¿V,/ rt»
CHAPTER IX,
Thus sad and disarranged were the thoughts of my poor sister, when she became assured of the infidelity of Raymond. All her virtues and all her defects tended to make the bloAV in¬ curable. Her aflection for me, her brother, for Adrian and Idris, Avas subject as it were to the reigning passion of her heart ; even her maternal tenderness borrowed half its force from the delight she had in tracing Raymond's features and expression in the infanťs coun¬ tenance. She had been reserved and even stern in childhood ; but love had softened the asperi¬ ties of her character, and her union with Ray-
mond had caused her talents and affections to unfold themselves; the one betrayed, and the other lost, she in some degree returned to her ancient disposition. The concentrated pride of her nature, forgotten during her blissful dream, awoke, and with its adder's sting pierced her heart; her humility of spirit augmented the power of the venom ; she had been exalted in her own estimation, while distinguished by his love : of what worth Avas she, now that he thrust her from this preferment ? She had been proud of having Avon and preserved him—but another had won him from her, and her exultation Avas as cold as a water quenched ember. AVe, in our retirement, remained long in ignorance of her misfortune. Soon after the festival she had sent for her child, and then she seemed to have forgotten us. Adrian observed a change during a visit that he aftenvard paid them ; but he could not tell its extent, or divine the cause. They still appeared in public to¬ gether, and lived under the same roof. Ray-
monti was as usual courteous, though there was, on occasions, an unbidden haughtiness, or pain¬ ful abruptness in his manners, which startled his gentle friend ; his brow was not clouded but disdain sat on his lips, and bis voice was harsh. Perdita vvas ail kindness and attention to her lord ; but sbe was silent, and beyond words sad. Slie had grown thin and pale ; and her eyes often filled with tears. Sometimes she looked at Raymond, as if to say—That it should be so ! At others her countenance expressed— I will still do all I can to make you happy. But Adrian read vvith uncertain aim the charactery of her face, and migbt mistake.— Clara was always vvith her, and she seemeti most at ease, vvlien, in an obscure corner, she could sit holding her child's hantl, silent antl 1 iiicly. Still Adrian was unable to guess tbe truth ; he entreated them to visit us at AVind¬ sor, and tbey promised to come during the fol¬ lowing month. It was May before they arrived ; the season
had decked the forest trees Avith leaves, and its paths Avitb a thousand flowers. AA r e had notice of their intention the day before; and, early in the morning, Perdita arrived vvith her daughter, Raymond would follow soon, she said ; be had been detained by business. According to Adrian's account, I bad expected to find her '-sad; but, on tbe contrary, sbe appeared in the highest spirits : true, she had grown thin, her eyes were somewhat hollow, and her cheeks sunk, though tinged by a bright glow. She was delighted to see us ; caressed our children, praised their growth and improvement; Clara also was jileased to meet again her young friend Alfred ; all kinds of childish games were entered into, in which Perdita joined. She ronimunicatcd her gaiety to us, antl as vve amused ourselves on the Castle Terrace, it aji¬ jieared tbat a happier, less care-worn jiarty could not have been assembled. ťí Tbis is better, ¡Mamma/' said Clara, " tbat being in that dis¬ mal London, where you often cry, and never
laugh as you do now"—« Silence, Utile foolish thing,"" replied her mother, " and remember any one that mentions London is sent to Co¬ ventry for an hour."" Soon after, Raymond ani ved. líe did not join as usual in lhe playful spirit of the rest ; but, entering tuto conA'crsation with Adrian and myself, by degrees we seceded from our com- ' panions, and Idris and Perdita only remained with the children. Raymond talked of his new buildings ; of his plan for an establishment for the better education of the poor ; as usual Adrian and he entered into argument, and the time slipped away unperceived. We assembled again towards evening, and Perdita insisted on our having recourse to music. Sbe wanted, slie said, to give us a specimen of her new accomplishment ; for since she hati been in London, sbe had applied herself to music, and sang, vvithout much power, but with а great deal of sweetness. We were not permitted by her to select any but light-hearted melodies; and all
the Operas of Mozart were called i n tti service, that vve might choose the most exhilarating of his airs. Among the other transcendant altri- í*5 butes of Mozart's иные, it possesses more than any other that of appearing to come from the heart ; you enter into the passions exjiressed by him, and are transported with grief, joy, anger,or confusion, as he, our soul's master, chooses to inspire. For some time, the spirit of hilarity was kept up ; but, at length, Perdita receded from the piano, for Raymond had joined in tbe trio of" Taci ingiusto core," in Don Gio¬ vanni, whose arch entreaty was softened by him into tenderness, and thrilled her heart vvith me¬ mories of the changed past ; it was the same voice, the same tone, the self-same sounds and words, w bieb often before she had received, as the homage of love to her—no longer was it that; and this concord of sound with its dissonance of expression penetrated her with regret and despair. Soon after Idris, who was at the harp, turned to lhat passionate and sorrowful air in о 3
Figaro, "Porgi,amor,qualche ristoro" in which the deserted Countess laments the chance of thr faithless Almaviva. The soul of tender sorrow is breathed forth in this strain ; and the sweet voice of idr"b, sustained by tbe mournful chords of her instrument, added to the expression of the words. During the pathetic appeal with which it concludes, a stifled sob attracted our attentitm to Perdita, the cessation of the music recalled her to herself, she hastened out of the hall—I followed her. At first, she seemed to wish to shun me ; and then, yielding to my earnest questioning, she threw lierself on my neck, and wept aloud :—" Once more," she cried, " once more on your friendly breast, my beloveu brother, can the lost Perdita, pour forth her sorrows. I had imposed a law of silence on my¬ self; and for months I have kept it. I do wrong in weeping novv, and greater wrong in giving words to my grief. I will not speak ! Be enough for you to know that I am miserable be it enough for you to know, that the painted
veil of life İs rent, that I sit for ever shrouded in darkness anti gloom, tbat grief is my sister, everlasting lamentation my mate !" I endeavoured to console her ; I did not question her ! but I caressed her, assured her of my deepest affection and my intense in¬ terest in the changes of her fortune;— st Dear words," she cried, "expressions of love come upili my ear, like the remembered sounds of forgotten music, that had betu dear to me. They are vain, I know ; how very vain in their attempt to soothe or comfort me. Dearest Lionel, you cannot guess what I have suffered during these long months. I have read of mourners in ancient days, who clothed them¬ selves in sackcloth, scattered dust upon dieir beads, ate their bread mingled with ashes, and took up their abotle on the bleak mountain tops, reproaching heaven and earth aloud with their misfortunes. AVhy this is the very luxury of sorrow í tbus one might go on from day to day contriving new extravagances, revelling in the
paraphernalia of woe, wedded to all the appur¬ tenances of despair. Alas I I must for ever conceal tbe Avretchedness that consumes me. I must weave a veil of dazzling falsehood to hide my grief from vulgar eyes, smooihe my brow, and paint my lips in deceitful smiles— even in solitude I dare not think hovv lost I ans lest I become insane and rave." The tears and agitation of my poor sister had rendered her unfit to return to tbe circle Ave had left —so I persuaded her to let me drive her tbrough the park ; and, during the ride, I induced her to confide the tale of her unhappi¬ ness to me, fancying that talking of it would lighten the burthen, and certain that, if there Avere a remedy, it should be found and secured to her. » Several weeks hati elapsed since the festival of the anniyersary, and sbe bad been unable to calm her mind, or to subdue her thoughts to any regular train. Sometimes she reproached herself for taking too bitterly to heart, that vv hieb
many would esteem an imaginary evil ; but this was no subject for reason ; and, ignorant as sbe was of the motives and true conduct of Ray¬ montl, things assumed for her even a worse ap¬ pearance, than tbe reality warranted. He was seldom at tbe jialace ; never, but when be was assured that his pubbc duties would prevent hi.s remaining alone vvith Perdita. Tbey seldom addressed eacb other, shunning exjilanation, each fearing any communication tbe other might make. Suddenly, however, the manners of Raymond changed ; be ajipeared to desire to find opportunities of bringing about a return to kindness and intimacy vvith mv sister. The tide of love towards her ajipeared to flow again ; he could never forget, hovv once he bad been devoted to her, making her the shrine antl storehouse wherein to place every thought and every sentiment. Shame seemed to bold bim back ; yet he evidently wished to establish a renewal of confidence and affection. From
the moment Perdita had sufficiently recovered herself to form any plan of action, she had laid one down, which now she prepared to folloAv. She received these tokens of returning love vvith gentleness ; she did not shun his company ; but she endeavoured to place a barrier in the way of familiar intercourse or painful discussion, which mingled pride and shame prevented Raymond from surmounting. He began at last to shew signs of angry impatience, and Perdita became aware that the system sbe had adopted could not continue ; she must explain herself to him ; she could not summon courage to speak—she wrote thus :—■ ·* Read this letter with patience, I entreat you. It Άνίΐΐ contain no reproaches. Reproach is indeed an idle word : for vvhat should 1 reproach you? *' Allow me in some degree to explain my feeling ; Avithout that, avc shall both grope in the dark, mistaking one another; erring from
the path which may conduct, one of us at least, to a more eligible mode of life than tbat led by either during the last few weeks, " I loved you—I love yoa—neither anger nor pride dictates these lines ; but a feeling beyond, deeper, and more unalterable than either. My affections are wounded ; it is impossible to heal tbem:—cease then the vain endeavour, if in¬ deed that way your endeavours tend. Forgive¬ ness ! Return ï Idle words are these ! I forgive the pain I endure ; but the trodden path can¬ not be retraced. " Common affection migbt have been satis¬ fied with common usages. I believed tbat you read my heart, and knew its devotion, its un¬ alienable fidelity towards you. I never loved any but you. Y T ou came the embodied image of my fondest dreams. The praise of men, power and high aspirations attended your career. Love for you invested the world for me in en¬ chanted light ; it was no longer the earth I trod— the earth common mother, yielding only
trite and stale repetition of objects and circum¬ stances old and worn out. I lived in a temple glorified by intensest sense of devotion and rapture ; I walked, a consecrated being, con¬ templating only your power, your excellence ;
For O, you stood beside me, like my youth, TiarVoriwd for me tbe* real toa dream, Clo it hing* the palpable and familiar With golden exhalations oí the dawn.
* The bloom has AanUhed from my life'—there is no morning to this all investing night ; no rising to the set-sun of love. In tliose clays the rest of the world was nothing* to me : all other men— 1 never considered nor felt what they were; nor did I look on you as one of them. Separated from them ; exalted in my heart ; sole possessor of my affections ; single object of my hopes, the best half of myself. "Ah, Raymond, were we not happy? Did the sun shine on any, vvho coukl enjoy its light with purer and more intense bliss? It was not—
it is not a common infidelity at which I repine. It is tbe disunion of an whole which may not have parts ; it is the carelessness vvith vvhich you have shaken oft* the mantle of election with whicb to me you vvere invested, and have become one among the many. Dream not to alter this. Is not love a divinity, because it is immortal ŕ Did not I appear sanctified, even to myself, because this love bad for its temple my heart? I have gazed on you as vou slept, melted even to tears, as the idea filled my mind, that all I possessetl lay cradled in those ido¬ lized, but mortal lineaments before me, \ T et, even then, 1 have checked thick-coming fears vvith one thought ; I would not fear death, for the emotions that linked us must be immortal. ** And nov, I do not fear death. I should be well pleased to close my eves, never more to open them again. And yet I fear it ; even as I fear all things ; for in any state of being linked by the chain of memory with ibis, haji¬ piness would not return — even in Paradiso,
I must feel that your bve Avas less enduring than the mortal beatings of my fragile heart, every pulse of which knells audibly, The funeral note Of love, deep buried, without resurrection. No—no—me miserable ; for love extinct there is no resurrection í " Yet I love you. Y r et, and for ever, would I contribute all I possess to your welfare. On account of a tattling world ; for the sake of my —-of our child, I would remain by you, Ray¬ mond, share your forluner·., partake your coun¬ sel. Shall it be thus ? AVe arc no longer lovers ; nor can I call myself a friend to any ; since, lost as I am, I have no thought to spare from my own wretched, engrossing self. But it will please me to see you each clay ! to listen to the public voice praising you ; to keep up your paternal love for our girl ; to bear your voice ; to know that I am near you, though you are no longer mine.
" If you Avish to break the chains that bind us, say the word, and it shall be done—1 will take all the blame on myself, of harshness or unkindness, in the world's eye. " Yet, as I have said, I should be best pleased, at least for tbe present, to live under the same roof Avith you. AVhen tiie fever of my young life is spent ; when placid age shali tame the vulture that devours me, friendship may come, love and hoţie being dead. May this be true ? Can my soul, inextricably linked to this perishable frame, become lethargic and cold, even as this sensitive mechanism shall loose its youthful elasticity ? Then, with lack¬ lustre eyes, grey hairs, and wrinkled brow, though now the words sound hollow and meaningless, then, tottering on the grave's extreme edge, I may be—your affectionate antl true friend, " Peu dita/' Rav mond's answer vvas brief. AVhat indeed
coukl be rejily to her complaints, to her griefs vvbicb she jealously jialecl round, keeping out all thought of remedy. *' Notwithstanding your bitter letter," he wrote, " for bitter I must call it, you are the chief jierson in my estimation, and it is your hajipiness that I vvoultl principally consult. Do thiit whieh seems best to you : and if you can receive gratiiieation from one mode of life in preference to another, do not let me be any obstacle. 1 foresee that the jilan which vou mark out in your letter will not endure long ; but you are mistress of yourself, and it is my sincere vv ish to contribute as far as you will jiermit me to your happiness." " Raymond has projihtsicd well, ' said Per¬ dita, " ¿das, tbat it should be so ! our jiresent mode of life cannot continue long, yet I will not be the first to jirojiosc alte ration. lie beholds in me tute whom he 1ms injured tvt n unto death ; and I derive no hojie from his kindness ; uo change ran possibly be brought about even by bis best intentions. As well might Cleopatra
have worn as an ornament the vinegar va hieb contained 1нт dissolved jiearl, as I be content with tbe love that ¡Un moud can novv offer me " I own that I did not sec her misfortune with the same eves as Penlita. At all events ine- t hough t that the wound could bc healed; and. if fs they remained ttigether, it would be so I en¬ deavoured therefore to sooth and soften her mind : and it was not until after manv endea¬ vours that I ţ^aw uji the task as impracticable. Perdita listened to me impatiently, and answered with some n-qientv :—" Do vou think that any of your arguments are new to me? or that m\ own bui ning u ishes antl intense anguish have not Miiniestecl them all a thousand times, with far more eagerness and subtletv lhan voo. can jiut into them 3 Lionel, vou cannot understand what woman's lov e is In davs of hvqqiincsN I have often rejieated to mvself, witii a grate¬ ful heait and exulting spirit, all that Ray¬ mond sacrificed for me. I was a poor, un¬ educated, iinbefiiendecl, mountain girl, raised
from nothingness by him. All that I possessed of the luxuries of life came from him. He gave me an illustrious name and noble station ; the world's respect reflected from his own glory : ¿ill bis joined to his own undying love, inspired me with sensations towards him, akin to tliose with which we regartl the Giver of life. I gave him love only. I devoted myself to him : imperfect creature that I was, I took myself to task, that I might become worthy of him. I watched over my hasty temper, subdued ni} r burning im¬ patience of character, schooled my self-engross¬ ing thoughts, educating myself to tbe best per¬ fection I might attain, that the fruit of my ex¬ ertions might be his happiness. I took no merit to myself for this. He deserved it all—all la¬ bour, all tit votion, all sacrifice, I would have toiled up a scakiess Alp, to pluck a flower that would please him. I was ready to quit you all, my beloved and gifted companions, and to live only witb him, for him. I could not do other¬ wise, even if I had wished ; for if we are said to
have tvvo souls, he was mv r better soul, to which the other was a perpetual slave. One only ren¬ turn did he ovve me, even fidelity. I earneil that ; I deserved it. Because I was mountain bred, unallied to tbe noble and wealth)', shall he think to repay me by an empty name and station ? Let him take them back ; Avithout his love they are nothmg to mc. Their only merit in my eyes was that they were his. Thus passionately Perdita ran on. AA r hen I adverted to tbe question of their entire separa¬ tion, she replied: a Be it so! One day the period will arrive; I know it, and feel it. But in this I am a coward. This imperfect com¬ panionship, and om* masquerade of union, are strangely dear to me. It is painful, I allow, destructive, impracticable. It keeps up a per¬ petual fever in my veins ; it frets my immedica¬ ble wound ; it is instinct with poison. Vet I must cling to it ; perhaps it Avill kill me soon, and thus perform a thankful office." In the mean time, Raymond had remained
with Adrian and Itlris. He was naturally frank ; the -continued absence of Perdita and myself became remarkable ; and Raymond soon fountl relief from the constraint of months, by an unreservetl confidence with his two friends. He related to them the situation in which he had fountl Evadne. At first, from delicacy to Adrian he concealed her name- but it was divulged in the course of his narrative, and her former lover heard Avith the most acute agitation the history of her sufferings, Itlris had shared Perdita's ill opinion of the Greek ; but Raymond's account softened and interesteil her. Evadne's constancy, fortitude, even her ill-fated and ill-regulated love, vvere matter of admiration and pity; especially vvhen, from the detail of the events of the nineteenth of Oc¬ tober, it was apparent that she preferred suffer¬ ing antl death to any in her eyes degrading application for the pity and assistance of her lover. lier subsequent conduct did not diminish this interest. At first, relieved from famine antl
the grave, watched over by Raymond with tbe tenderest assiduity, witb that feeling of repose peculiar to convalescence, Evadne gave herself up to rapturous gratitude and love* But reflec¬ tion returned with health. She questioned him vvith regard to tbe motives which had occa- sioned his critical absence. She framed her en¬ quiries vvith Greek subtlety ; she formed he 1 * conclusions vvith the decision and firmness pe¬ culiar to her disposition. She could not divine, that the breach which she bad occasioned be¬ tween Raymond and Perdita vvas already* irre¬ parable : but she knew, that under the present system it would be widened eaeh day, and that its result must be to destroy her lover's happi¬ ness, and to implant the fangs of remorse in his heart. Frtmi the moment that she perceived the right line of conduct, siie resolved to adopt it, and to part from Raymond for ever. Con¬ flicting jiassions, long-cherished love, and self- inflicted disappointment, made her regard death акте as sufficient refuge for her woe. But the VOL. í. ť
same feelings and opinions which had before re¬ strained her, acted with redoubled force ; for she knew tbat the reflection that he had occasioned her deatli, would pursue Raymond through life, poisoning every enjoyment, clouding every jirospect. Besides, though the violence of her anguish made life hateful, it had not yet pro¬ duced that monotonous, lethargic sense of changeless misery wbich for the most j^art pro¬ duces suicide. Her energy of character induced her still to combat with the ills of life ; even those attendant on hopeless love presented them¬ selves, rather in the sbaj^e of an adversary to be overcome, than of a victor to whom sbe must submit. Besides, she had memories of past tenderness to cherish, smiles, words, and even tears, to con over, which, though remembered in desertion and sorrow, were to bc pieferrcd to the forgetfulness of tbe grave. It was impos¬ sible to guess at tbe wiiole of her jiian. Her letter to Raymond gave no tiue for dis¬ covery ; it, assured him, that sbe was in no
danger of wanting the means of life ; she pro¬ mised in it to preserve herself, and some future day perhaps to jiresent herself to bim in a sta¬ tion not unworthy of her. She then bade bun, with tbe eloquence of despair and of unaltenible love, a last farewell. All these circumstances were now related to Adrian and Idris, Raymond then lamented the cureless evil of his situation with Perdita He declared, notwithstanding her harshness, be even called it coldness, that he loved her. lie had been reatly once witb the humility of a penitent, and the duty ofa vassal, to surrender himseif to her; giving up his verv sou S to her tutelage, to become her pupil, her slave, her bondsman. She had rejected these advances ; and the time for such exuberant siibmisskm, which must be founded on love and nourished bv it, w ¿is now passed. Still all his wishes and endeavours were directed towards her peace, and his chief discomfort arose from the percep¬ tion that be exerted himself in vain. If sbe were v 2
to continue inflexible in the line of conduct she now pursued, they must part. Tbe combina¬ tions and occurrences of this senseless mode of intercourse w f ere maddening to him. Yet he would not tiroteóse tbe separation. He was haunted by tbe fear of causing the death of one or other of tbe beings implicated in these events ; and he could not persuade bimself to undertake to direct tbe course of events, lest, ignorant of tbe land be traversed, be should lead those attached to tbe car into irremediable ruin. After a discussion on tbis subject, which lasted for several bours, he took leave of his friends, and returned to town, unwilling to meet Perdita before us, conscious, as we all must be, of tbe thoughts uppermost in tbe minds of both. Perdila prepared to follow him with her child. Idris endeavoured to persuade her to remain. My jwor sister looked at the counsellor witb affright. She knew that Ray¬ mond had conversed with her ; had be instigat¬ ed this request ?—was this to be the prelude to
their eternal separation ?—I have said, that the defects of her character awoke and acquired vigour from her unnatural position. She regard¬ ed with suspicion the invitation of Idris ; she embraced me, as if she were about to be de¬ prived of my affection also : calling me her more than brother, her only friend, her last hope, slie pathetically conjured me not to cease to love her ; and with encreased anxiety she departed for London, the scene and canse of all her misery. The scenes that followed, convinced her that she had not yet fathomed the obscure gulph into vvhich she had plunged. Her unhappiness as¬ sumed every day a new shape ; every day some unexpected event seemed to close, vvhile in fact it led onward, the train of wdamities which now befell her. The selected passion of the soul of Raymond was ambition. Readiness of talent, a capacity of entering into, and leading the dis-positions of men ; earnest desire of distinction were the
awakeners and nurses of his ambition. But- other ingredients mingled Avith these, and pre¬ vented him from becoming the calculating, de¬ termined character, which alone forms a suc¬ cessful hero. He was obstinate, but not firm; benevolent in his firr -Л movements ; harsh and reckless when provoked. Above all, he was remorseless and uny ielding in the pursuit of any object of desire, however lawless. Love of pleasure, and the -softer sensibilities of our nature, made a prominent part of his character, conquering the conqueror; holding him in at the moment of acquisition ; sweeping away ambition's web; making him forget the toil of weeks, for the sake of one moment's indulgence of the new and actual object of his wishes*. Obeying these impulses, he had become tbe hus¬ band of Perdita egged on by them, he found himself the lover of Evadne. He had novv Itst both. lie had neither tlie ennobling self-gra¬ tulation, whicli constancy inspires, to con¬ sole him, nor the voluptuous sense of abandon-
ment to a forbidden, but intoxicating passion. His heart was exhausted by the recent events ; his enjoyment of life was destroyed by the re¬ sentment of Perdita, and the flight of Evadne ; and the inflexibility of the former, set the last seal upon the annihilation of his hopes. As long as their disunion remained a secret, he cherished an expectation of re-awakening past tenderness in her bosom ; novv that we were all made acquainteti with these occurrences, and tbat Perdita, by declaring her resolves to others, in a manner pledged herself to tbeir accomplish¬ ment, he gave up the idea of re-union as futile, and sought only, since he was unable to influence her to change, to reconcile himself to the pre¬ sent state of things. He made a vow agamst love and its train of struggles, disappointment and remorse, and sought in mere sensual enjoy¬ ment, a remedy for the injurious inroads of passion. Debasement of character is the certain follower of such pursuits. Yet this consequence would
not have been immediately remarkable, if Ray¬ mond had continued to apply himself to the execution of his plans for the public beneiit, and the fulfilling his duties as Protector. But, extreme in all things, given up to immediate impressions, he entered with ardour into this new pursuit of pleasure, and followed up the incon¬ gruous intimacies occasioned by it without reflec¬ tion or foresight. The council-chamber Avas deserted ; the crowds vvhich attended on him as agents to his various projects were neglected. Festivity, and even libertinism, became the order of the day. Perdita beheld with affright the enereasing disorder. For a moment she thought that she could stem the torrent, and that Raymond could be induced to hear reason from her,—Vain hope ? The moment of her influence was passed. He listened with haughtiness, replied disdainfully ; and, ifin truth, she succeeded in awakening his conscience., the sole effect was that he sought an opiate for the pang in oblivious riot. With the
energy natural to her, Perdita then endeavoured to supply his place. Their still apparent union permitted her to do much ; but no woman could, in the end, present a remedy to the enereasing negligence of tbe Protector ; who, as if seized with a paroxysm of insanity, trampled on all ceremony, all order, all duty, and gave himself up to license. Reports of these strange proceedings reached us, and wc were undecided what method to adopt to restore our friend to himself and his country, vvhen Perdita suddenly appeared among us. Sbe detailed, the progress of the mournful change, and entreated Adrian and myself to go up to London, and endeavour to remedy tbe enereasing evil :—■" TeU him/' she cried, " tell Lord Raymond, that my presence shall no longer annoy him. That he need not plunge into tbis destructive dissipation for tbe sake of disgusting me, and causing me to fly. This purpose is novv accomplished ; be will never see me more. But let me, it İs my last entreaty, let me in tbe ρ 3
praises of bis countrymen and the prosperity of England, find the choice of my youth justified." During our ride up to town, Adrian and I discussed and argued upon Raymond's conduct, and his falling off' from the hopes of permanent excellence on his part, which he had before gÍA r en us cause to entertain. My friend and 1 had both been educateti in one school, or rather I was lus pupil in the opinion, that steady adherence to principle was the only road to honour ; a ceaseless observance of the laws of general utility, the only couscientiouo aim of human ambition But though we both entertained these ideas, we dif¬ fered in tbeir application. Resentment added also a sting ю my censure ; and I reprobated Raymond's conduct in severe terms. Adrian was more benign, more considerate. He ad¬ mitted that the pnnciples that I hnd down were the best; buthe denied tbat they were lhe only ones. Quoting the text, there are many man- bioiis in myjïtfhei's house, he insisted that the modes of becoming good or great, varied a?
much as the dispositions of men, of whom it might be said, as of the leaves of the forest, there Avere no two alike. We arrÌA r ed in London at about eleven at night. AA r c conjectured, notwithstanding Avhat we had heard, that луе should find Raymond in St. Stephen's: thither vve speri. The chamber was full—but there was no Protector ; and there was an austere discontent manifest on the coun¬ tenances of the lcadeis, and a whispering and busy tattle among tbe underlings, not less omi¬ nous. We hastened to the palace of tbe Pro¬ tectorate. AVe found Raymond in his dining room Avith six others: tbe bottle was being pushed about merrily, and bad made consider¬ able inroads on the understanding of one or two. He who sat near Raymond vvas teiľmg a story, which convulsed the rest vvitli laughter. Raymond sat among them, though while he entered into the spirit of the hour, bis natural dignity never forsook bim. He was gay, play¬ ful, fascinating—but never did be overstep the
modesty of nature, or the respect due to himself* in his wildest sallies. Yet I ovvn, that consi¬ dering the task which Raymond had taken on himseif as Protector of England, and tbe cares to which it became him to attend, l was ex¬ ceedingly provoked to observe tbe worthless fellows on whom bis time was wasted, and the jovial if not drunken spirit wbich seemed on tbe point of robbing him of his better self. I stood watching tbe scene, while Adrian flitted like a shadow in among tbem, and, by a word and look of sobriety, endeavoured to restore order in the assembly. Raymond expressed bimself de¬ lighted to see him, declaring that he should make tme in tbe festivity of tbe night. Tbis action of Adrian provoked me, I was indignant that be should sit at the same table with tbe companions of Raymond—men of abandoned characters, or rather without any, the refuse of high-bred luxury, tbe disgrace of their country. " Let me entreat Adrian/' I cried, " not to comply : rather join vvith me
in endeavouring to withdraw Lord Raymond from this scene, and restore him to other so¬ ciety." " My good fellow/' said Raymond, " this is neither the time nor place for the delivery of a moral lecture : take my word for it that my amusements and society are not so *S«d as you imagine. We are neither hypocrites or foojs— for the rest, * Dost thou think because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more cakes antl ale ?' " I turned angrily away : " Verney," saitl Adrian, " you are very cynical : sit down ; or if you will not, perhaps, as you are not a frequent visitor, Lord Raymond will humour you, and accompany us, as vve had previously agreed upon, to parliament/' Raymond looked keenly at him ; be coukl read benignity only in his gentle lineaments ; he turned to me, observing with scorn my moody and stern demeanour. ť£ Come/' said Adrian, "■ I have promised for you, enable me to keep
my engagement. Come Avith us/'------Ray¬ mond made an uneasy movement, and laconi¬ cally replied—" Τ won't Γ The party in the mean time had broken up. They looked at the pictures, strolled into the other apartments, talked of billiards, and one by one vanished. Raymond strode angrily up and down the room. I stood ready to receive and reply to his reproaches. Adrian leaned against the Avail. " This is infinitely ridicu¬ lous, n he cried. " if you were school-boys, you coukl not conduct yourselves more unreasonably.'" " Y"ou do not understand,''' said Raymond. "This is only part ofa system:—a scheme of tyranny to whicb I will never submit. Because I am Protector of England, am I to be the only slave in its empire? My privacy invaded, my actions censured, my friends insulted ? But I will get rid of the whole together.-*-Bc you witnesses," and he took the star, insignia of office, from his breast, and threw it on the table.
** I renounce my office, I abdicate my power— assume it who will Γ ------ "Let him assume it," exclaimed Adrian, *' who can pronounce himself, or whom tbe vvorld will pronounce to be your superior. There does not exist the man in Englaud with adequate presumption. Know yourself, Raymontì, and your indignation will cease; your complacency return. A few months ago, Avhenever Ave prayed for the prosperity of our country, or our own, Ave at the same time prayed for the life and wel¬ fare of tbe Protector, as indissolubly linked to it. Your bours were devoted to our benefit, your ambition Avas to obtaiu our commendation. You decorated our towns with edifices, you bestowed on us useful establishments, you gifted tbe soil with abundant fertility. Tbe powerful and imjust cowered at the steps of your judgment-seat, aud the poor and oppresseti arose like morn-awakened flowers under the sunshine of your j)rotection.
'* Can you Avonder that we are all aghast and mourn, when this appears changed ? But, come, this splenetic fit is already passed ; re¬ sume your functions ; your partizans will bail you ; your enemies be silenced ; our love, honour, and duty will again be manifested to¬ Avards you. Master yourself, Raymond, and the Avorld is subject to you/' " All this would be very good sense, if ad¬ dressed to another," replied Raymond, moodily, " con the lesson yourself, and you, the first peer of tbe land, may become its sovereign. You tbe good, the wise, the just, may rule all bearts. But I perceive, too soon for my own happiness, too late for England's good, that I un¬ dertook a task to which I am unequal. I can¬ not rule myself. My passions are my masters ; my smallest impulse my tyrant. Do you think tliat í renounced the Protectorate (and I have renounced it) in a fit of spleen ? By tbe God that lives, I sw r ear never to take up that bauble
again ; never again to burthen myself vvith the weight of care and misery, of which tbat is the visible sign. u Once I desired to be a king. It was in the hey-day of youth, in the pride of boyish folly. I knew myself vvhen I renounced it. I re¬ nounced it to gain— no matter what—for that also I have lost. For many months I have sub¬ mitted to this mock majesty—this solemn jest. I am its dupe no longer. I will be free. *' I have lost that which adorned and digni¬ fied my life ; tbat which linked me to other men. Again I am a solitary man ; and I Avill become again, as in my early years, a w T an derer, a soldier of fortune. My friends, for A'erney, I feel that you are my friend, do not endeavour to shake my resolve. Perdita, wedded to an imagination, careless of vvhat is behind the veil, whose charactery is in truth faulty and vile, Perdita has renounced me. With her it was pretty enough to play a sovereign's part ; and, as in tbe recesses of your beloved forest we
acted masques, and imagined ourselves Arca¬ dian shepherds, to please the fancy of the mo¬ ment—so was I content, more for Perdita's sake than my own, to take on me the character of one of the great ones of the earth ; to lead her behind the scenes of grandeur, to vary her life with a short act of magnificence and power. This Avas to be tbe colour ; love and confidence the substance of our existence. But Ave must live, and not act our lives ; pursuing the shadoAv. I lost the reality—now I renounce both. ts Adrian, I am about to return to Greece, to become again a soldier, perhaps a conqueror. AVill you accompany me ? Ybu will behold new scenes ; see a new people ; witness the mighty struggle there going forward between civiliza¬ tion and barbarism ; behold, and perhaps direct the efforts of a young and vigorous population, for liberty and order. Come with me. I have expected you. I waited for this moment ; all is prepared ; —will you accompany me ?" " I Avill," replied Adrian.
« Immediately ?" 44 To-morrow if you will." ^ Reflect Γ I cried. " AVherefore?" asked Raymond—"My chir feliow, I have done nothing else than refloat (ΛΙ this step the live-long summer ; and be a$$ft*fëet that Adrian has condensed an age of refí^cÄn into this little moment. Do not talk of refkcirøft ; from this moment I abjure it ; this is tny **n>ty happy moment during a long interval of tíftw, I must go, Lionel—the Gods will it: aud I must. Do not endeavour to deprive me vsi liny* companion, the out-cast's friend. i( One word more concerning unkind, unj citófc Perdita. For a time, I thought that, by vv^l^-s ing a complying moinent, fostering tb# $Ij1I warm ashes, I might relume in her the nume· *Г love. It is more cold within her, than a firô kïft hy gypsies in winter-time, the spent cittbff« crowned by a pyramid of snow'. Then, in en¬ deavouring to do violence to my ovvn dispogliato, I made all worse than before. StiU I thinly
that time, and even absence, may restore her to me. Remember, that I love her still, that my dearest hope is that she will again be mine. I know, though she does not, how false the veil is which she has spread over the reality—do not endeavour to rend this deceptive covering, but by degrees withdraw it. Present her vrith a mirror, in whicb she may know herself; and, when she is an adept in that necessary but diffi¬ cult science, sbe will Avonder at her present mis¬ take, and hasten to restore to me, wbat is by right mine, her forgiveness, her kind thoughts, her love."
CHAPTER N. After these events, it was long before we were able to attain any degree of composure. A moral tempest bad wrecked our richly freighted vessel, and vve, remnants of the dimi¬ nished crew, were aghast at the losses and changes which vve bad undergone. Itlris passionately loved her brother, and could ill brook an absence whose duration was uncer¬ tain ; bis society was dear and necessary to me—1 bad follow etl uji mv chosen lite- lary occujiations with delight under his tu¬ torship antl assistance; bis mild philosophv, unerring reason, and enthusiastic friendship
were tbe best ingredient, the exalted spirit of our circle ; even the children bitterly regretted the loss of their kind playfellow. Deeper grief oppresseti Perdita. In spite of resentment, by day and night she figured to herself tbe toils and dangers of the wanderers. Raymond ab¬ sent, struggling with difficulties, lost to tbe power and rank of tbe Protectorate, exposed to the perils of war, became an object of anxious interest ; not that she felt any inclination to recall him, if recall must imply a return to their former union. Such return she felt to be im¬ possible ; and while she believed it to be thus, and with anguish regretted tiiat sí) it should be, she continued angry and impatient with him, who occasioned her misery. These perplexities and regrets caused her to bathe her pillow with nightly tears, and to reduce bet* in person and in mind to the shadow of what she had been. She sought solitude, and avoided us when in gaiety and unrestrained affection we met in a family circle. Lonely musings, interminable
wanderings, and solemn music were her only [lastimes. She neglected even her child ; shut¬ ting her heart against all tenderness she grew reserved towards me, her first and fast frieud. I coukl not see her thus lost, without exert¬ ing myself to remedy the evil—remediless I knew, ifl could not in the etui bring iier to re¬ concile herself to Raymond. Before be went I V* used every argument, every persuasion tt) induce her to stop his journey. She answeretl tbe one with a gush of tears—telling mo that to be per¬ suaded—life and the goods of life were a cheap exchange. It was not will that she wantetl, but tbe capacity ; again and again she declared, it were a.**- easy to enchain the sea, to put reins on tbe winti's viewless courses, as for bor tt) take truth for falsehood, deceit for honesty, heartless communion for sincere, confiding love. She answered niy reasonings more briefly, declaring with disdain, that the reason was hers : and, un¬ til I eould persuade her that the pt**t could bo unacted, that maturity coukl go buck to the
cradle, and that all that was eoukl become as tliough it had never been, it vvas useless to as¬ sure her that no real change bad taken jilace in lier fate. And thus with stern jiride sbe suffered him to go, though her very heart-strings cracked at the fulfilling ofthe act, which rent from her all tbat made life valuable. To change the scene for her, and even for ourselves, all unhinged by the cioud tbat bad come over us, I jxrsuadecl my tvvo remaining com¬ panions tbat it were better tbat we sliould absent ourselves for a time from AA'indsor, AA r e visited the north of England, my native Uls w ater, and lin "-ered in scenes dear from a thousand associa- tions. AA'e lengthened our tour into Scotland, that vve migbt see Loch Katrine and Loch Lo¬ mond ; thence vve crossed to Ireland, and jiassed several weeks in the neighbourhood of Killarney. Tbe change of scene ojierated to a great degree as 1 exjiected ; after a year's absence, Per¬ dita returneel iu gentler and more docile mood to AVindsor. The first sight of this jilacv for a
time unhinged her. Here every spot was dis¬ tinct Avith associations now groAvn bitter. Tbe forest glades, the ferny dells, and lawny up¬ lands, the cultivated and cheerful country spreiid around the silver pathway of ancient Thames, all earth, air, and wave, took uj> one choral voiee, inspired by memory, instinct with plain¬ tive regret. But my essay towards bringing her to a saner view of her ovvn situation, did not end here. Perdita was still to a great degree uneducated. When first she left her peasant life, and resided with the elegant and cultivated Evadne, ihe only accomjillshment she brought to any perfec¬ tion was that of jminvig, for wliich she had a tiiste almost amounting to genius. This had occujiied her in her lonely cottage, wben sbe quitted her Greek friend's protection. Her jiallet and easel Avere now thrown aside ; did she try to paint, thronging recollections made her hand trembie, her eyes fill with tears. AVith vol. i. Q
this occupation she gave up almost everv othei , and her mmd preyed upon itself almost to madness. For my ovvn part, since Adrian had first withdraw n mc from my selv atic wilderness to his own paradise of order and beauty, I had been av eddeel to literature. I kit com inted that however it might have been in forme) limes, m the present stage of the vvorld, no man's faculties eould be developed, no man's moral principle be enlarged and liberal, without an extensive acquaintance with books. To me they stood in the place of an active career, of ambition, and those palpable excitements neces¬ sary to tbe multitude The collation of philo¬ sophical opinions, the study of histoticd facts, the acquirement of languages, vvere at onee mv recreation, and the serious aim of vy life. 1 turned author myself. My productions how¬ ever were sufficiently unpretending; they were confined to the biography of favourite histórii a'
characters, especially those whom I believed to have been traduced, or about whom clung ob¬ scurity and doubt. As my authorship increased, I acquired new sympathies and pleasures. I found another and a valuable link to enchain me to my fellow-crea¬ tures ; my point of sight was extended, and the inclinations and capacities of all human beings became deeply interesting to me. Kings have been called the fathers of their people. Sud¬ denly I became as it were the father of all mankind. Posterity became my beirs. My thoughts vvere gems to enrich the treasure bouse of man's intellectual possessions; each sentiment was a precious gift I bestowed on them. Let not these aspirations be attributed to vanity. They were not expressed in words, nor even reduced to form in my ovvn mmd; but they filled my soul, exalting my thoughts, raising а glow of enthusiasm, and led me out of the obscure path in whieh I before walked, into the bright noon-enlightened highway of mankind, α 2
making me, citizen of the Avorld, a candidate for immortal nonors, an eager aspirant to the praise and sympathy of my fellow men. No one certainly ever enjoyed tbe pleasures of composition more intensely tlian I. If I left the Avoods, the solemn music of tbe waving branches, and the majestic temple of nature, I sought the vast halls of the Castle, and looked over wide, fertile England, spread beneath our regal mount, and listened the while to inspiring strains of music. At such times solemn har¬ monies or spirit-stirring airs gave Avings to my lagging thoughts, permitting them, methought, to penetrate the last veil of nature and her God, and tt) display the highest beauty in visible expression to the understandings of men. As tbe music went on, my ideas seemed to quit tlieir mortal dwelling house ; they shook their pinions and began а flight, sailing on the placid current of thought, filling the creation with new glory, and rousing sublime imagery tbat else had slept voiceless. Then I would hasten to
my desk, weave the neAv-found web of mind in firm texture and brilliant colours, leaving the fashioning of the material to a calmer moment. But this account, Avhieh might as properly belong to a former period of my life as to the present moment, leads me far afield. It Avas the }>leasure I took in literature, the discipline of mind I found arise from it, that made me eager to lead Perdita to the same pursuits. I began with light hand and gentle allurement ; first exciting her curiosity, and then satisfying it in such a Avay as migbt occasion her, at the same time that, sbe half forgot her sorroAvs in occupa¬ tion, to find in the hours that succeeded a re¬ action of benevolence and toleration. Intellectual activity, though not directed to¬ wards books, had always been my sister's cha¬ racteristic. It had been displayed early in life, leading her out to solitary musing among her native mountains, causing her to form innumer¬ ous combinations from common objects, giving «trength to her perceptions, and swiftness to
their arrangemeh . Love had come, as the rod of the master-propi et, to swallow up every minor propensity. Love had doubled all her excellencies, and placed a diadem on her genius. AA r as she to cease to love ? Take the colours and odour from the rose, change the sweet nutriment of mother's milk to gall and poison ; as easily migbt you wean Perdita from love. She grieved for the loss of Raymond with an anguish, that exiled all smile from her lips, and trenched sad lines on her brow o·' ' eauty. But each day seemed to change the nature of her suffering, antl every succeeding hour forcetl her to alter (if so I may style it) the fashion of her soul's mourning garb. For a time music was able to satisfy the cravings of her mental hunger, and her melancholy thoughts renewed themselves in eacb change of key, and varied with every alteration in the strain. My school¬ ing first impelled lier towards books ; and, if music had been the food of sorrow, the produc¬ tions of the wise became its medicine.
The acquisition of unknown languages was too tedious an occupation, for one who referred every expression to the universe within, and retid not, as many do, for tbe mere sake of filling up time; but who was still questioning herself and her author, moulding every idea in a thousand ways, ardently desirous for the dis¬ covery of truth in every sentence. She sought to improve her understanding ; mechanically her heart and dispositions became soft and gentle under tbis benign discipline. After awhile sbe discov eretl, tbat amidst ¿ill her newly acquired knowledge, her ovvn character, vvbicli formerly slie fancied tbat sbe thoroughly understood, be¬ came the first in rank among the terne % icog- ttiUe, the pathless wilds of a country tbat had no chart. Erringly and strangely she began the task of self-examination vvith self-condemnation. And then again slie became aware of her own ex¬ cellencies, and began to balance witl »juster scales ■rhe shades of good and evil. 1, who longed beyond words, to restore her to the liappiness
it was still in her poAver to enjoy, watched vv ith anxiety the result of these internal proceedings. But man is a strange animal. AVe cannot calculate on his forces Hke that of an engine ; and, though an impulse draw with a forty-hor.se power at what appears willing to yield to one, yct in contempt of calculation the movement is not effected. Neither grief, philosophy, nor love could make Perdita think with mildness of the dereliction of Raymond. She now took plea¬ sure in my society ; towards Idris she felt and displayed a full and affectionate sense of her Avorth—she restored to her child in abundant measure her tenderness and care. But I could discover, amidst all her repinings, deep resent¬ ment towards Raymond, and an unfading sense ofinjury, that plucked from me my hope, when I appeared nearest to its fulfilment. Among other painful restrictions, she has occasioned iu to become a law among us, never to mention Raymond's name before her. She refused to read any communications from Greece, desiring
me only to mention when any arrived, anti whether the wanderers were w T ell. It Avas cu¬ rious th*it even little Clara observed this law towards her mother. This lovely child was nearly eight years of age. Formerly she had been a light-hearted infant, fanciful, but gay and childish. After the departure of her father, thought became impressed on her young brow. Children, unadepts in language,, seldom find words to express their thoughts, nor coukl vve tell in wbat manner tbe late events had impressed themselves on her mind. But certainly sbe had made deep observations vvhile she noted in si¬ lence the changes tbat ¡Missed around her. She never mentioned her father to Penlita, she ap¬ peared half afraid when she spoke of him to me, and though I tried to draw her out on the subject, and to dispel the gloom that bung about her ideas concerning him, I could not succeed. Yet each foreign post-day she watched for the arrival of letters—knew the post mark, and watched me as I read. I found her often о 3
poring over the article of Greek intelligence iu the newspaper. Tliere is no more painful bight thau that of untimely care iu children, and it was particu¬ larly observable in one whose disposition had heretofore been mirthful. Yct there was so much sweetness and docility about Clara, that your admiration was excited ; and if the moods of mind are calculated to paint the cheek with beauty, and endow motions with grace, surely her contemplations must have been celestial ; since every lineament was moulded into loveliness, and her motions Avere more harmonious than the elegant boundings of the fawns of her native forest, I sometimes expostulated with Perdita on tbe subject of her reserve; but Jie rejected my counsels, Avbile her daughter's sensibility excited in her a tenderness still more passionate. After the lapse of more than а year, Adrian returned from Greece. AVhen our exiles had first arri veti, а truce was inexistence between the Turks and Greeks ;
a truce tbat was as sleep to the mortal frame, signal of renewed activity on waking. AVith the numerous soldiers of Asia, with all of warlike stores, ships, and military engines, that wealth and power could command, the Turks at once resolved to crush an enemy, vvhich creeping on by degrees, had from their strong¬ hold in the Morea, acquired Thrace and Mace¬ donia, antl bad led their armies even to the gates of Constantinople, vvhile their extensive commercial relations gave every European na¬ tion an interest in their success. Greece pre¬ pared for a vigorous resi* lance ; it rose to a man ; and the women, sacrificing their eostly ornaments, accoutred their sons for the war, and bade them conquer or die with the sjiirit of tbe Spartan mother. The talents and courage of Raymond were highly esteemed among the Greeks. Born at Athens, lhat city claimed him for her own, and by giving him the com¬ mand of her peculiar division in the army, the commander-in-chief only possessed superior
jiower. He vvas numbered among her citizens, his name was added to the list of Grecian heroes. Liis judgment, activity, and consummate bra¬ very, justified their choice. The Earl of AA r ind- sor became a volunteer under his friend. " It is Avell," said Adrian, " to prate of war in these pleasant shades, and with much ill-spent oil дпаке a show of joy, because many thousand of our fel low- creat ures leave with pain this sweet air and natal earth. I shall not be sus¬ pected of being averse to the Greek cause ; I knew and feel its necessity ; it is beyond every other a good cause. I have defended it with my sword, and was willing that my spirit should be breathed out in its defence ; freedom is of more worth than life, and the Greeks do Avell to defend their privilege unto deatb. But let us not deceive ourselves. The Turks are men ; each fibre, each limb is as feeling as our own, and every spasm, be it mental or dily, is as truly felt in a Turk's heart or and brain, as in a Greek's, The last action at
which I was present was the taking of---------. Tbe Turks resisted to the last, the garrison perished on the ramparts, and we entered by assault. Every breathing creature within the walls was massacred. Think you, amidst the shrieks of violated innocence and helpless in fancy, I did not feel in eyery nerve the cry of a fellow being ? They were men and women, the suf¬ ferers, before they were Mahometans, and wben they rise turbanless from the grave, in what except their good or evil actions will they be the better or worse than we ? Two sokliers con¬ tended for a girl, whose rich dress and extrenie beauty excited the brutal appetites of these wretches, who, perhaps good men among their families, were changed by the fury of the mo¬ ment into incarnated evils. An old man, with a silver beard, decrepid and bald, he might be her grandfather, interposed to save her; the battle axe of one of tbem clove his skull, I rushed to her defence, but rage made them blind and deaf; they did not distinguish my Christian
garb or heed my words—words Avere blunt weapons then, for Avhile war cried "havoc/** and murder gaA-e fit echo, how could I—- Turn back the tide of ills, relieving- wrong With mild accost of soothing eloquence ? One of the fellows, enraged at my interference, struck me with his bayonet in the side, and I fell senseless. " This Avouud will probably shorten my life, having shattered a frame, vveak of itseif. But I am content to die. I have learnt in Greece that one man, more tır less, is of small import, while human bodies remain to fill up the thinned ranks of the soldiery ; and that the identity of an individual may be overlooked, so that the muster roll contain its full numbers. All this bas a different effect upon Raymovl. He is able to contemplate the ideal of war, while I am sensible only to its realities. He is a soldier,« general. He can influence the blood¬ thirsty war-dogs, while I resist their propensi¬ ties vainly. The cause is simple. Burke has
said that, s in all bodies those who would lead, must also, in a considerable degree, follow/—I cannot follow ; for I do not sympathize in their dreams of massacre and glory—to follow and to lead in such a career, is the natural bent of Raymond's mind. He is always successful. and bids fair, at tbe same time that be acquires high name and station for himself, to secure liberty, probably extended empire, to the Greeks." Perdita's mind was not softened by this ac¬ count. He, she thought, can be great and happy without me. Would that I also had a career ! AVoukl that I could freight some un¬ tried bark wilh all my hopes, energies, and de¬ sires, and launch it forth into the ocean of life —bound for some attainable point, with ambi¬ tion or pleasure at the helm ! But adverse winds detain me on shore ; Hke Ulysses, I sit at tbe water's edge and weep. But my nerveless hands can neither fell the trees, nor smooth the planks. Under the influence of these melan-
choly thoughts, she became more than ever in love with sorrow. Yet Adrian's presence did some good ; he at once broke through the law of silence observed concerning Raymond. At first she started from the unaccustomed sound ; sooii she got used to it and to love it, and she listened with avidity to tlie account of his achie vemen ts* Clara got rid also of her restraint ; Adrian and she had been old playfellows ; and novv, as they walked or rode together, he yielded to herearncst entreaty, and repeated, for the hundredth time, some tale of her father s bravery, munificence, or justice» Each vessel in the mean time brought exhi¬ larating tidings from Greece. The presence of a fiiend in its armies and councils made us enter into the details vvith enthusiasm ; and a short letter novv and then from Raymond told us how he was engrossed by the interests of his adopted country. The Greeks were strongly attached to their commercial pursuits, and would have been satisfied with their present ac-
quisitions, had not the Turks roused them by invasion. The patriots were victorious; a spirit of conquest was instilled; and already they looked on Constantinople as their own. Raymond rose perpetually in their estimation ; but one man held a superior command to him in their armies. He was conspicuous for his conduct and choice of position in a battle fought in tlie plains of Thrace, on the banks of the Hebrus, Avhich was to decide the fate of Islam. The Mahometans were defeated, and driven entirely from the country Avest of this γϊαέγ. The battle was sanguinary, the loss of the Turks apparently irreparable; the Greeks, in losing one man, forgot the nameless crowd strewed upon the bloody field, and they ceased to value themselves on a victory, which cost them—Raymond. At the battle of Makri he had led the charge of cavalry, and pursued the fugitives even to the banks of the Hebrus. His favourite horse was found grazing by the margin ofthe tranquil
river. It became a question wliether he had fallen among the unrecognized ; but no broken ornament or stained trajiping betrayed bis fate. It was suspected tbat tbe Turks, finding them¬ selves jKissessed of so illustrious a cajitive, re¬ solved to satisfy tbeir cruelty rather than their avarice, and fearful of the interference tif Eng¬ land, had come to the determination of concealing for ever tbe cold-blooded murder of the soldier tbey most hated and feared in the squadrons of their enemy. Raymond was not forgotten in England. His abdication of the Protectorate had caused an unexampled sensation ; and, when his mag¬ nificent and manly system was contrasted with the narrow views of succeeding politicians, tbe period of his elevation was referred to with sorrow. Tbe perpetual recurrence of bis name, joined to most honourable testimonials, in the Greek gazettes, kept up tbe interest be bad excited. He seemed the favourite child of for¬ tune, and his untimely loss eclipsed the workl,
and shewed forth the remnant of mankind with diminished lustre. They clung with eagernes* to the hope held out that hc might yet be alive. Their minister at Constantinople Avas urged to make tlie necessary perquisitions, and should his existence be ascertained, to demand his release. It Avas to be hoped that their efforts Avould suc¬ ceed, and that though novv a prisoner, the sport of cruelty and the mark of hate, he would be rescued from danger and restored to the hap¬ piness power, and lionour which he deserved. The effect of this intelligence upon my sister was striking She never for a moment creditei! the story of his deatli ; she resoh^ed instantly to go to Greece. Reasoning and persuasion Avere thrown away upon her; she would endure no hindrance, no delay. It may be advanced for a truth, that, if argument or entreaty can turn any one from a desperate purpose, Avhose motive and end depends on the strength of the affections only, then it is right so to turn tlvm.
since their docility shews, that neither the mo¬ tive nor the end were of sufficient force to bear them through the obstacles attendant on their undertaking. If, on the contrary, they are proof against expostulation, this very steadiness is an omen of success ; and it becomes the duty of those who love them, to assist in smoothing tlie obstructions in their path. Such sentiments ac¬ tuated our little circle. Finding Perdita im¬ moveable, we consulted as to the best means of furthering her purpose. She could not go alone to a country AA'here she had no friends, where she might arrive only to hear the dreadful news, which must overwhelm her with grief and re¬ morse. Adrian, whose health had always been weak, now suffered considerable aggravation of suffering frois the effects of his wound. Idris could not endv-ff to ieave him in this state; nor was it right either to quit or take with us a young family for a journey of this description. I resolved a', kngth to accompany Perdita.
The separation from my Idris was painful—but necessity reconciled us to it in some degree: necessity and the hojie of saving Raymond, and restoring him again to happiness and Perdita. No delay was to ensue. Two days after we came to our determination, we set out for Ports¬ mouth, and embarked. The season was May, the weather stormless; we were promised a jirosperous voyage. Cherishing the most fer¬ vent hopes, embarked on the waste ocean, we savv with delight the receding shore of Britain, and on the wings of desire outspeeded our well filled sails towards tbe South. The light curl¬ ing waves bore us onward, and old ocean smiled at the freight of love and hope committed to bis charge ; it stroked gently its tempestuous plains, and the path was smoothed for us. Day and night tbe wind right aft, gave steady im¬ pulse to our keel—nor did rough gale, or treacherous sand, or destructive rock interpose an obstacle between my sister and the land
which was to restore her to her first be* loved, Her dear heait's confessor— -э heart withm that heait.
END OF VOL. I.
tliUtvb, L, A ft RU W3M ΙΗ* λ. ItOÜCI.ij ÎOMNÏOW ï'fOLllT, К U\i ΚΤ-ΙΤη Ь К Г .
