Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The last man
THE LAST MAN.
CHAPTER L Durino this voyage, when on calm evening» wc conversed on deck, watching the glancing of the waves and the changeful appearances of the sky, I discovered the total revolution that the disasters of Raymond had wrought in the mind of my sister. AVere they the same waters of love, which, lately cold and cutting as ice, repelling as that, now loosened from their frozen chains, flowed through the regions of her soul in gushing and grateful exuberant ? She did VOL. II. в
not believe tbat he was dead, but she knew that he was in danger, and the hope of assisting in his liberation, and the idea of soothing by tender¬ ness the ills that hc might have undergone, elevated and harmonized the late jarring ele¬ ment of her being. 1 was not so sanguine as she as to the result of our voyage. She was not sanguine, but secure ; and the expectation of see¬ ing the lover she hod banished, the husband, friend, heart's companion from whom she had long been alienated, wrapt her senses in delight, lier mind iu placidity. It was beginning life a^nin ; il wás leaving barren sands for atı abode of fertile beauty ; it was a harbour after a tempest, an opiate after sleepless nights, a happy waking from a terrible dream. Little Clara accompanied us; the* poor chiid did not well undei stand vvhat was gonio; f 01 \. ward. She heard that we were bound for Greece, that she vvould see her father, and now, for the first time, she prattled of him to her mother. On landing at Athens we found difficulties»
cncrease upon us: nor could the storied earth or balmy atmosphere inspire us with enthusiasm or pleasure, while the fate of Raymond was in jeo¬ pardy. No man had ever excited so strong an interestin the public mind; this was apparent even among the phlegmatic English, from whom he had long been absent. The xVthenians had expected their hero to return in triumph; the women had taught their children to lisp his name joined to thanksgiving; his manly beauty, his courage, his devotion to their cause, made him appear in them* eves almost as one of the ancient deities of the soil descended fremi their native Olympus to defend them. AVhen they r spoke ofhis probable death and certain captivity, tears streamed from their eyes ; evem as the women of Svria sorrowed for Adonis, did the wives and mothers of Greece lament our English Raymond —Athens was a city of mourning. All these shews of despair struck Perdita with affright. With that sanguine but confused ex- « 3
pectation, which desire engendered while she w r as at a distance from reality, she had formed an image in her mind of instantaneous change, when she should set her foot on Grecian shores. She fancied that Raymond would already be free, and that her tender attentions would come to en¬ tirely obliterate even the memory of his mis¬ chance. But liis fate was still uncertain: she began to fear the worst, and to feel that her souľs hope was cast on a chance that might prove a blank. The wife and lovely child of Lord Raymond became objects of intense interest in .Athens. The gates of their abode were be¬ sieged, audible prayers were breathed for his restoration ; all these circumstances added to the dismay and fears of Perdita. My exertions were unremitted : after a time I left Athens, and joined the army stationed at Kishan in Thrace. Bribery, threats, and in¬ trigue, soon discovered the secret that Roymond was alive, a prisoner, suflering the most rigorous
confinement and wanton cruelties. We put ire movement every impulse of policy and money to redeem him from their hands. The impatience of my sister's disposition novv returned on her, awakened by repentance, sharpened by remorse. The very beauty of the Grecian climate, during the season of spring, added torture to her sensations. The unex¬ ampled loveliness of the flower-clad earth—the genial sunshine and grateful shade^—the melody of the birds—the majesty of the woods—the splendour of the marble ruins—the clear ef¬ fulgence of the stars by night—the combi¬ nation of all that was exciting and voluptuous in this transcending land, by inspiring a quicker spirit of life and an added sensitiveness to every articulation of her frame, only gave edge to the poignancy of her grief. Each long hour was counted, and " He suffers"* was the burthen of all her thoughts. She abstained from food; she lay on the bare earth, and, by such mimickry of his enforced torments, endeavoured to hold com-
munion with his distant pain. I remembered in one of her harshest moments a quotation of mine had roused her to anger and disdain. " Perdita," I had said, " some day you will discover that you have done wrong in again casting Raymond on the thorns of life. When disappointraent has sullied his beauty, when a soldier's hardships have bent his manly form, and loneliness made even triumph bitter to him, then you will repent ; and regret for the irreparable change " will move Tn heaits all rocky now, the late remorse of love."* The stinging " remorse oflove*" now pierced her lieart. She accused herself of his journey to Greece—his dangers—his imprisonment. She pictured to herself the anguish of his solitude; she remembered vvith what eager delight he had in former days made her the partner ofhis joyful hopes^— w ith what grateful affection h e received her
sympathy in his cares. She called to mind how often he had declared that solitude was to him the greatest of all evils, and hovv death itself was to him more full of fear and pain when he pictured to himself a lonely grave, * c My best girl," he had said, "relieves me from these phantasies. United to her, cherished in her dear heart, never again shall I know the misery of finding myself alone. Even if I die before you, my Perdita, treasure up my ashes till yours may mingle with mine. It is a foolish sentiment for one who is not a materialist, yet, methinks, even in that dark cell, 1 may feel that my inanimate dust mingles with yours, and thus have a companion in decay." In her resentful mood, tliese ex¬ pressions had been remembered with acrimony and disdain ; they visited her in her softened hour, taking sleep from her eyes, all hope of rest from her uneasy mind. Two months passed thus, when at last we ob¬ tained a promise of Raymond's release. Con- i5 nemen t and hardship had undermined his health;
the Turks feared an accomplishment of the threats of the English government, if he died under their hands; they looked upon his re¬ covery as impossible ; they delivered him up as a dying man, willingly making over to us the rites of burial. He came by sea from Constantinople to Athens. The wind, favourable to him, blew so strongly in shore, that we were unable, as we had at first intended, to meet him on his watery road. The watch to wer of Athens was besieged by in¬ quirers, each sail eagerly looked out for ; till on the first of May the gallant frigate bore in sight, freighted with treasure more invaluable than the wealth vvhich, piloted from Mexico, the vexed Pacific swallowed, or that was conveyed over its tranquil bosom to enrich the crown of Spain. At eariy dawn the vessel was discovered bearing in shore; it was conjectured that it would cast an¬ chor about five miles from land. The news spread through Athens, and the whole city pour¬ ed out at the gate of the Piraeus, down the roads,
through the vineyards, the olive woods and plan¬ tations of fig-trees, towards the harbour. The noisy joy of the populace, the gaudy colours of their dress, the tumult of carriages and horses, the march of soldiers intermixed, the waving of banners and sound of martial music added to the high excitement of the scene; while round us reposed in solemn majesty the relics of antient time. To our right the Acropolis rose high, spectatress of a thousand changes, of ancient glory, Turkish slavery, and tlie restoration oť dear-bought liberty ; tombs and cenotaphs were strewed thick around, adorned by ever renewing vegetation ; the mighty dead hovered over their monuments, and beheld in our enthusiasm and congregated numbers a renewal of the scenes in which they had been the actors. Perdita and Clara rode in a close carriage ; I attended them on horseback. At length we arrived at the har¬ bour; it was agitated by the outward swell of tlte sea; the beach, as far could be discerned, was covered by a moving multitude, which, urged by u 3
those behind toward the sea, again rushed back as the heavy waves with sullen roar burst clo.^e ίο them. 1 applied my glass, and could discern that the frigate had already cast anchor, fearful of the danger of approaching nearer to a lee shore: a boat was lowered; with a pang I saw that Raymond was unable f о descend the vessel's side; he was let (fown in a chair, and lay wrapt in cloaks at the bottom of the boat. I dismounted, and called to some sailors who wore rowing about the harbour to pull up, and take me into their skiff; Perdita at the same moment alighted from her carriage—she seized my arm—" Take me with you, 11 she cried; she was trembling and pale; Clara clung to her—" You must not," I said, " the sea is rouoh—he will soon be here—do you not see his boat ?" The little bark to which I had beckoned had now pulled up; before I could stop her, Perdita, assisted by the sailors was in it—Clara followed her mother—a loud shout echoed from the crowd as we pulled out of the inner harbour ;
whiîe my sister at the prow, had caught hold of one of the men vvho was using a glass, asking a thousand questions, careì. ss of the spray that broke over her, deaf, sightless to all, except the little speck that, just visible on the top of tiie waves, evidently neared. AVe approached with all the speed six rowers could give: the orderly and picturesque dress of the soldiers on the beach, the sounds of exulting music, the stirring breeze and waving flags, the unchecked exclamations of the eager crowd, whose dark looks and foreign garb were purely eastern ; the sight of tern pie-crow n eel rock, the vvhite marble of the buildings glittering in the sun, and stand¬ ing in bright relief against thedark ridge of lofty mountains beyond; the near roar of the sea, the splash of oars, and dash of spray, all steeped my soul in a delirium, unfelt, unimagined in the common course of common life. Trembling, 1 was unable to continue to look through the glass with vvhich I had watched the motion ot' the crew, when the frigate's boat had first been
launched. AVe rapidly drew near, so that at length the number and forms of those within could be discerned ; its dark sides grew big, and the splash of its oars became audible : I couhl distinguish the languid form of my friend, as he half raised himself at our approach. Perdita's questions had ceased ; she leaned on my arm, panting witb emotions too acute for tears —our men pulled alongside the other boat. As a last effort, my sister mustered her strength, her firmness ; she stepped from one boat to the other, and then vv ith a shriek she sprang towards Raymond, knelt at his side, ancl glueing her lips to the hand she seized, her face shrouded by her long hair, gave herself up to tears. Raymond had somewhat raised himself at our approach, but it was with difficulty that he ex¬ erted himself even thus much. AVith sunken cheek and hollow eyes, pale and gaunt, liow could X recognize the beloved of Perdita ? I continued awe-struck and mute—he looked smilingly on the poor girl ; the smile was his. A day of sun-
shine falling on a dark valley, displays its before hidden characteristics ; and now this smile, the same with which he first spoke love to Perdita, with which he had welcomed the protectorate, playing on his altered countenance, made me in my heart's core feel that this was Ray¬ mond , He stretched out to me his other hand ; I dis¬ cerned the trace of manacles on his bared wris*. I heard my sister's sobs, and thought, happy are women who can weep, and in a passionate caress disburthen the oppression of their feel¬ ings ; shame and habitual restraint hold back a man. I would have given worlds to have acted as in days of boyhood, have strained him to my breast, pressed his hand to my lips, and wept over him ; my swelling heart choked me ; the natural current would not be checked ; the big rebellious tears gathered in my eyes ; I turned aside, and they dropped in the sea—they came fast and faster ;—yet I could hardlv be ashamed, for I saw that the rough sailors were not un-
moved, and Raymond's eyes alone were dry from among our crew. He lay in that blessed calm which convalescence always induces, enjoy¬ ing in secure tranquillity his liberty and re-union vvith her vvhom he adored. Perdita at length subdued lier burst of passion, and rose,—she looked round for Clara ; the child frightened, not recognizing her faiher, and neglected by us, had crept to the other end of the boat ; she came at her mother's call Perdita presented her to Raymond ; her first words were ι " Beloved, em¬ brace our child :" " Come hither, sweet one," said her father, ίέ do you not know me ?" she knew his voice, and cast herself in his arms with half bashful but uncontrollable emotion- Perceiving the weakness of Raymond, I was afraid of ill consequences from the pressure of the crowd on his landing. But they were awed as I had been, at the change of his appearance. The music died away, the shouts abruptly ended ; the soldiers had cleared a space in which a carriage was drawn up. He was placed in it ;
Perdita and Clara entered with him, and his es- cort closed round it; a hollow murmur, akin ţo the roaring of tlie near waves, went through the multitude ; they fell back as the carriage ad¬ vanced, and fearful of injuring him tiiey had come to welcome, by loud testimonies of joy, they satisfied themselves with bending in a low salaam as the carriage passed ; it went slowly along the road of the Pirseus ; passed by antique temple and heroic tomb, beneath the craggy rock of the citadel. The sound of the waves was left behind ; that of the multitude continued at iutervals, su pressed and hoarse; and though, in the city, the houses, churches, and public build¬ ings were decorated with tapestry and banners— though the soldiery lined the streets, and the in¬ habitants in thousands were assembled to give him hail, the same solemn silence * availed, the soldiery presented arms, the banners vailed, many a white hand waved a streamer, and vainly sought to discern the hero in the vehicle, which,
closed and encompassed by the city guards, drew him to the palace allotted for his abode. Raymond was weak and exhausted, yet the interest he perceived to be excited on his account, filled him vvith proud pleasure. He was nearly killed with kindness. It is true, the populace retained themselves; but there arose a perpetual hum and bustle from the throng round the palace, which added to the noise of fireworks, the frequent explosion of arms, the tramp to and fro of horse¬ men and carriages, to which effervescence he was the focus, retarded his recovery. So we retired awhile to Eleusis, and here rest and tender care added each clav to the strength of our invalid. The zealous attention of Perdita claimed the first rank in the causes whieh induced his rapid recovery ; but the second was surely the delight he felt iu the affection and good vvill of the Greeks. We are said to love much those vvhom we greatly benefit. Raymond had fought and conquered for the Athenians ; he had suffered,
on their account, peril, imprisonment, and hard-, ship ; their gratitude affected him deeply, and he inly vowed to unite his fate for ever to that of a people so enthusiastically devoted to him. Social feeling and sympathy constituted a marked feature in my disposition. In early youth, the living drama acted around me, drew me heart and soul into its vortex. I was now conscious ofa change. I loved, I hoped, I en¬ joyed ; but there was something besides this. I was inquisitive as to the internal principles of action of those around me : anxious to read their thoughts justly, and for ever occupied in divining their inmost mind. All events, at the same time that they deeply interested me, arranged themselves in pictures before me. I gave the right place to every personage in the groupe, the just balance to every sentiment. This under¬ current of thought, often soothed me amidst distress, and even agony. It gave ideality to that, from which, taken in naked truth, the soul would have revolted : it bestowed pictorial co-
lours on misery and disease, and not unfrequently relieved me from despair in deplorable changes. This faculty, or instinct, w r as now rouzed. I watched the re-awakened devotion of my sister ; Clara's timid, but concentrated admiration of her father, and Raymond's appetite for renown, and sensitiveness to the demonstrations of affec¬ tion of the Athenians. Attentively perusing this animated volume, I was the less surprised at the tale I read on the new-turned page. The Turkish army were at. this time besieging Rodostó ; and the Greeks, hastening their pre¬ parations, and sending each day reinforcements, were on the eve of forcing the enemy to battle. Each people looked on the coming struggle as that vvhich would be to a great degree decisive ; as, in case of victory, the next step would be the siege of Constantinople by the Greeks. Ray¬ mond, being somewhat recovered, prepared to re-assume his command in the army. Perdita did not oppose herself to this deter. oiination. She only stipulated to be permitted
to accompany him. She had set down no rule of conduct for herself ; but for her life she could not have opposed his slightest wish, or do other than acquiesce cheerfully in all his projects. One word, in truth, had alarmed her more than battles or sieges, during vvhich she trusted Ray¬ mond's high command would exempt him from danger. That word, as yet it was no more to her, was Plague. This enemy to the human race had begun early in June to raise its ser¬ pent-head on the shores of the Nile ; parts of Asia, not usually subject to this evil, were infected. It was in Constantinople ; but as each year that city experienced a like visitation, small attention was paid to thoie accounts which de¬ clared more people to have died there already, than usually made up the accustomed prey of the whole of the hotter months. However it might be, neither plague nor war could prevent Perdita from following her lord, or induce her to utter one objection to the plans which he pro¬ posed. To be near him, to be loved by him, to
feel him again her own, was the limit of her de¬ sires. The object of her life was to do him pleasure : it had been so before, but vvith a dif¬ ference. In past times, without thought or foresight she had made him happy, being so herself, and in any question of choice, consulted her own wishes, as being one with his. Now she sedulously put herself out of the question, sacrificing even her anxiety for his health and welfare to her resolve not to oppose any of his desires. Love of the Greek people, appetite for glory, and hatred of the barbarian government under which he had suffered even to the approach of death, stimulated him. He wished to repay the kindness of the Athenians, to keep alive the splendid associations connected vvith his name, and to eradicate from Europe a power vvhich, while every other nation advanced in civi¬ lization, stood still, a monument of antique bar¬ barism . Having effected the reunion of R aymond and Perdita, I was eager to return to England ; but his earnest request, added to awakening
curiosity, and an indefinable anxiety to behold the catastrophe, now apparently at hand, in the long drawn history of Grecian and Turkish warfare, induced me to consent to prolong until the autumn, the period of my residence in Greece. As soon as the health of Raymond was suffi¬ ciently re-established, he prepared to join the Grecian camp, near Kishan, ct town of some importance, situated to the east of the Hebrus ; in vvhich Perdita and Clara vvere to remain until the event of the expected battle. We quitted Athens on the 2nd of June. Raymond had re¬ covered from the gaunt and pallid looks of fever» If I no longer saw the fresh glow of youth on his matured countenance, if care had besieged his brow, 44 And dug deep trenches in his beauty's field," * if his hair, slightly mingled with grey, and his look, considerate even in its eagerness, gave signs
of added years and past sufferings, yet there was something irresistibly affecting in the sight of one, lately snatched from the grave, renewing his career, untamed by sickness or disaster. The Athenians saw in liim, not as heretofore, the heroic boy or desperate man, wlio was ready to die for tliem; but the prudent commander, who for tlieir sakes was careful of hi.*» life, and could make his ovvn warrior-propensities second to the scheme of conduct policy might point out. All Athens accompanied us for several miles. When he had landed a month ago, the noisy populace had been hushed by sorrow and fear ; but this was a festival day to all. The air re¬ sounded with their shouts; their picturesque costume, and the gay colours of which it was composed, flaunted in the sunshine; their qu^qv gestures and rapid utterance accorded vvith their wild appearanee. Raymond vuts the theme of every tongue, the hope of each wife, mother or betrothed bride, who£e husband, child, or lover,
making a part of the Greek army, vvere to be conducted to victory by him. Notwithstanding the hazardous object of our journey, it was full of romantic interest, as we passed through the vallies, and over the hills, of this divine country. Raymond was inspirited by the intense sensations of recovered health; he felt that in being oenernl οΐ the Athenians, he filled a post worthv of his ambition ; and, m his hope of the conquest of Constant'uople, he counted on an event which would be as a land¬ mark in the waste of ages, an exploit unequalled m the annals of man ; when a city of grand his- tone association, the beauty of whose site was the wonder of the world, vvhich for many hun¬ dred years had been the strong hold of the Moslems, shouldbe rescued fiom slavery and barbarism, and restored to a people illustrions for genius, civilization, and a spirit of liheitv Perdita ι esteti on his restored soui tv, un his love, his hopes and fame, even as a Sv- barite on a luxurious couch; everv thought
was transport, each emotion bathed as it were in a congenial and balmy element. We arrived at Kishan on the 7th of July. The weather during our journey hrd been serene. Each day, before dawn, we left our night's encampment, and watched the shadows as they retreated from hill and valley, and the golden splendour of the sun's approach. The accompanying soldiers received, vvith national vivacity, enthusiastic pleasure from the sight of beautiful nature. The uprising of the star of day was hailed by triumphant strains, while the birds, heard by snatches, filled up the intervals of the music. At noon, we pitched our tents in some shady valley, or embowering wood among the mountains, while a stream prattling over pebbles induced grateful sleep. Our evening march, more calm, was yet more delightful than the morning restlessness of spirit. If the band played, involuntarily they chose airs of mode¬ rated passion ; the farewell of love, or lament at absence, was followed and closed by some solemn
hymn, whieh harmonized with the tranquil love¬ liness of evenini»", and elevated the soul to grand and religious thought. Often all sounds were sibpcnded, that we might listen to the nightin¬ gale, while the fire-flies danced iu bright mea¬ sure, nnd the *4>ft cooing of the azmlo spoke of fair weather to the trav eileis. Did we pass a valley ŕ Soft shades encompassed us 5 and rocks tinged with beauteous hues. If we traversed a mountain, Greece^ a living map, was spread be¬ neath.her renew ned pinnacles cleav ing the ether ; her rivers threading in silve 1 !* Hne the fertile land Afraid almost to breathe, wc Knglish tra. veilers surveyed with extasy this splendid land- -.cape« so different from the sober hues and melancholv graces of our native scenery. When we quitted Macedonia, the fertile but low plaint« of Thrace afforded fewer beauties; yet our journev continued tobe interesting. An advanced guard gave information of our approach, and the country people were quickly in motion to do honour to Lord Raymond. The villages were vol π e
decorated by triumphal arches of greenery by day, and lamps 1"' night ; tapestry waved from the windows, tho ground was strewed with flowers, and the name of H aymond, joined to that of Greece, was echoed in the Evive of the peasant crowd. AVhen we arrived at Kishan, we learnt, that on hearing of the advance of Lord Raymond ancl his detachment, the Turkish army had re¬ treated from Rodostó; but meeting vvith a rein¬ forcement, they had re-trod their steps. In the meantime, Argyropylo, the Greek commander- in-chief, had ad vaneed, so as to be between the Turks and Rodostó; a battle, it was said, was inevitable. Perdita and her child vvere to remain at Kishan, Raymond asked me, if I vvould not continue with them, u Novv by the fells of Cumberland," I cried, " by all of the vagabond and poacher that appertains to me, I will stand at your side, draw my sword in the Greek "Uise, and be hailed as a victor along vvith you !" All the plain, from Kishan to Rodostó, a dis-
THE LAST MAN. 27 y tance of sixteen leagues, was alive vvith" troops, or with the camp-followers, all in motion at the approach of a battle. The small garrisons were drawn from the various towns and fortresses, and went to swell the main army. AVe met baggage w aggons, and many females of high and low rank returning to Fairy or Kishan, there to wait the issue of the expected day. AA r hen we arrived at Rodostó, we found that the field had been taken, and the scheme of the battle arranged. The sound of firing·, earlv on the follovviiiir morning, informed us that advanced posts of the armies were engaged. Regiment after regiment advanced, their colours flying and bands plaving. They planted the cannon on the tumuli, sole elevations in thh level countrv, aud formod themselves into column and hollow square; while the pioneers threw up small mounds for their protection. These then were the preparations for a battle, nay, the battle itself; far diflerent from any í* о е л.
thing the imagination had pictured. Wc read of centre and wing in Greek and Roman historv ; we fancy a spot, plain as a table, and soldier> small as chessmen ; and drawn forth, so that the most ignorant of the game can discover science and order in the disposition of the forces. AA'hen I came to the reality, and saw regiments file off* to the left fa·' outof siffht, fields intervening; be- tween the battalions, but a few troops sufficiently near me to observe tlieir motions, I gave up all idea of understanding, even of seeing a battle, but attaching myself to В aymond atttmded with intem-e interest to his actions. He shewed him¬ self collected, gallant and imperial ; his commands were prompt, his intuition of the events of the day to me miraculous» ín the mean time the cannon ι oared; the music liften up its enliven- in« voiee at intervals : and wo on the highest of the mounds í mentioned, too far off l о observe the fallen sheaves vvhich death gathered into Ins storehouse, beheld the regiment--, now lost m
smoke, novv banners and staves peering above the cloud, while shout and clamour drowned every чинк!. Early in the day, Argyrop)lo was wounded dangerously, and Raymond assumed the com¬ mand of the w hole armv. He made few remarks, till, on observing through his glass the sequel of ли order he had given, his face, clouded for awhile with doubt, beeame radiant. " The day i> оть" he cried, "the Turks fly from the bavonet. And then swiftly he dispatched his aides-de-camp to command the horse to fall on the routed enemy. The defeat became total ; the cannon ceased to roar ; the infantry rallied, aiid horse pursued the fl) ing Turks along the tlreary plain ; the staff of Raymond was dis¬ persed in various directions, to nr ike observations, and bear commands. Even I was dispatched to a distant part of the field. Tho ground on which the battle was fought, was a level plain —.so lc*vel, that from the tumuli \ou saw the waving line of mountains on the
wide-stretched horizon; yet the intervening space- was unvaried by the. least irregularity, save such undulations as resembled the waves of the sea. The whole of this part of Thrace had been so long a scene of contest, that it had re¬ mained uncultivated, and presented a dreary, barren appearance. The order I had received, was to make an observation of the direction which a detachment of the enemy might have 1 taken, from a northern tumulus; the whole Turkish army,followed by the Greek, had poured eastward ; none but the dead remained in the direction of my side. From the top of the mound, I looked far round—all was silentand deserted. The last beams of the nearly sunken sun shot up from behind the far summit οΐ Mount Athos ; the sea of Marmora still glittered be¬ neath its rays, while the Asiatic coast beyond was half hid in a haze of low cloud. Many a casque, and bayonet, and sword, fallen from un¬ nerved arms,reflected the departing ray; they lay
scattered far and near. From the east, a band of ravens, old inhabitantsof the Turkish cemeteries, came sailing along towards their harvest ; the sun disappeared. This hour, melancholy yet sweet, has always seemed to me the time when we are most naturally led to commune vvith higher powers ; our mortal sternness departs, and gentle complacency invests the soul. But now, in the midst of the dying and the dead, how could a thought of heaven or a sensarion of tranquillity possess one of the murderers ? During the busy day, my mind had yielded itself a willing slave to the state of things presented to it by its fellow- beings ; historical association, hatred of the foe, and military enthusiasm had held dominion over me. Novv, I looked on the evening star, as softly ancl calmly it hung pendulous in the orange hues of sunset. I turned to the corse- strew n earth ; aud felt ashamed of my species. So perhaps vvere the placid skies; for they quickly veiled themselves in mist, and in this change assisted the swift disappearance of twilight
usual in the south ; heavy masses of cloud floated up from the south east, and red and turbid lightning shot from their dark edges ; the rush¬ ing wind disturbed the garmcntsof the dead, and was chilled as it passed over their icy forms. Darkness gathered round ; the objects about me became indistinct, I descended from my station, and with difficulty guided my horse, so as to avoid the slain. Suddenly I heard a piercing shriek ; a form seemed to rise from the earth ; it flew swiftly towards me, sinking to the ground again as it drew near. All this passed so suddenly^ that I vvith difficulty reined in my horse-, so that it should not trample on the prostrate being. The dress of this person was that ofa soldier, but the bared neck and arms, and the continued shrieks discovered a female thus disguised. I dismount¬ ed to her aid, while she, with heavy groans, and her hand placed on her side, resisted my attempt to lead her on. In the hurry of the moment ï forgot that I was in Greece, and in my native
accents endeavouied to soothe the sufferer. AVith wild and terrific exclamations did the lost, dying E vadne (for it was she) recognize the language of her lover ; pain and fever from her wound had deranged her intellects, while her piteous erics and feeble efforts to escape, penetrated me with compassion. In vvild delirium she called upon the name of Raymond; she exclaimed that I was keeping him from her, while the Turks vvith fearful instruments of torture were about to take his life. Then again she sadly lamented her hard fate ; that a woman, with a woman's heart and sensibility, should be driven b v hope¬ less love and vacant hopes to take up the trade of arms, and sufler beyond the endurance of man privation, labour, and pain—the while her dry, hot hand pressed mine, and her brow and lips burned w ith consuming fire. As her strength grew less, I lifted her from the ground ; her emaciated form hung over my arm, her sunken check rested on my breas. ; in a sepulchral voice she murmured;—'* This is e 3
the end of love !—Yet not the end !"—and frenzy lent her strength as she cast her arm up to heaven : " there is the end ! there we meet again. Many living deaths have I borne for thee, О Raymond, and novv I expire, tby vic¬ tim !—By my death I purchase thee—lo! the instruments of war, fire, the plague are my servitors. I dared, I conquered them all, till now ! I have sold myself to death, with the sole condition that thou shouldst follow me—Fire, and war, and plague,unite for thy destruction— О my Raymond, there is no safety for thee !" With an heavy heart I listened to the changes of lier delirium ; í made her a bed of cloaks ; her violence decreased ana а clammy clew stood on her brow as the paleness of death succeed¬ ed to the crimson of fever, I placed her on the cloaks. She continueel to rave of her speedy meeting with her beloved in the grave, of his death nigh at hand ; sometimes she solemnly declared that he was summoned ; sometimes she bewailed his hard destiny. Her voice grew
feebler, her speech interrupted ; a few convul¬ sive movements, and her muscles relaxed, the limbs fell, no more to be sustained, one deep sigh, and life was gone. I bore her from the near neighbourhood of the dead ; wrapt in cloaks, I placed her beneath a tree. Once more I looked on her altered face; the last time I saw her she was eighteen ; beautiful as poet's vision, splendid as a Sultana of the East—Twelve years had past; twelve ycars of change, sorrow and hardship ; hei- bril liant complexion had become worn and dark, her limbs had lost the roundness of youth and womanhood ; her eyes had sunk deep, Crushed ан -J o'erworn. The houis had drainai her blood, and filled her brow With lines and wriukles. AVith shuddering horror I veiled this monu¬ ment of human passion and human misery ; 1 heaped over her all of flags and heavy accoutre¬ ments I could find, to guard her from birds and beasts of prey, until I could bestow on her a
fitting grave. Sadly and slowly I stemned my course from among the heaps of slain, and, guided by the twinkling lights of the town, at length reached Rodostó.
CHAPTER II. On my arrival, I found that an order had already gone forth for the army to proceed im¬ mediately towards Constantinople; and the troops which had suffered bast in the battle vvere already on their wa). The town was full of tumult. The wound, and consequent inability of Ar- gyropylo, caused Raymond tobe the first in com¬ mand. He rode through the town, visiting the wounded, and giving such orders as were η e- ecssary for the siege he meditated. Early in the morning the whole army was in motion. ín the hurry I could hardly find an opportunity to bestow the last оШееь on Evadne. Attended only by my servant, I dug а deep giove for her at the foot of the tree, and without disturbing her warrior shroud, 1 placed her in it, heaping
stones upon the grave. The dazzling sun and glare of daylight, deprived the scene of solem¬ nity ; from Evadne's low tomb, I joined Ray¬ mond and his staff, now on their way to the Golden City. Constantinople was invested, trenches dug, and advances made. The whole Greek fleet blockaded it hy^ sea ; on land from the river Kyat К banali, near the Sweet AVaters, to the Tower of Marmora, on the shores of the Pro- pontis, along the whole line of the ancient walls, the trenches of the siege were drawn. AVe already possessed Pera ; the Golden Horn itself, die city, bastioned by the sea, and the ivy- mantled walls of the Greek emperors was all of Europe that tlie Mahometans could call theirs. Our army looked on her as certain prey. They counted the garrison ; it was impossible that it should be relieved ; each sally was a vic¬ tory ; for, even when the Turks vvcre trium¬ phant, the loss of men they sustained was an irreparable injury.
I rode one morning with Raymond to the lofty mound, not far from the Top Kapou, (Cannon-gate), on vvhich Mahmoud planted his standard, and first saw the city. Still the same lofty domes and minarets towered aliove the ver¬ durous walls, where Constantine had died, and the Turk had entered the city. The plain around was interspersed vvith cemeteries, Turk, Greek, and Armenian, with their growth of cypress trees ; and other woods of more cheerful aspect, diver¬ sified the scene. Among thera the Greek army was encamped, and their squadrons moved to and fro—now in regular march, now in swift career. Ravmonďs eyes were fixed on the citv, ge I have counted the hours of her life,"*' said he; %i one month, and she falls. Remain vvith me till then ; wait till you see the cross on St. Sophia; and then return to your peaceful glades.'" ** Vou then, 11 I asked, " still remain in Greece ?"
ις Assuredly," replied Raymond. Si Vet Lio¬ nel, when 1 say this, believe me I look back with regret to our tranquil life at Windsor. I am but half a soldier; I love the renown, but not the trade of war. Before the battle of Rodostó I was full of hope and spirit ; to conquer there, and afterwards to take Constantinople, was the hope, the bourne, the fulfilment of my ambition. This enthusiasm is now spent, I know not why; I seem to myself to be entering a darksome gulph; the ardent spirit of the army is irksome to me, the rapture of triumph null.'' Hc paused, and was İQ.st in thought. His serious mien recalled, by some association, the half-forgotten Evadne to my mind, and I seized this opportunity to make enquiries from him concerning her strange lot. T asked him, if he had ever seen among the troops any one resem¬ bling her; if since he had returned to Greece lie had bearci of her ? He started at her name,— he looked uneasily
on me. "Even so,' 1 he cried, iC I knew) ou vv ould speak of her, Long> long I bad forgotten her. Since our encampment here, she daily, hourly visits my thoughts. When I am addressed, her name is the sound I expect: in every com¬ munication, I imagine that she vvill foim a part. At length vou have bloken the spell; tell me what you know of her. 1 ' I related my meeting vv ith her ; the story of her death was told and re-toLI, With painful earnestness he questioned me concerning her pro¬ phecies vvith regard to him. I treated them as the ravings of a maniac. íť No, no," he said, * r do not deceive yourself,— ine you cannot She has said nothing but what I knevv before — thougli this is confirmation. Fiie, the sword, and plague ! They may all be found in vonder eity , on my head alone may they fall Γ From this day Raymond'·*» melancholy in¬ creased. He secluded himself as much as the duties of his station permitted. AVhen m com¬ pany, sadness vvould in spite of every effort steal
over his features, and he sat absent and mute among the busy crowd that thronged about him. Perdita rejoined him, and before her he forced himself to appear cheerful, for she, even as a mirror, changed as he changed, and if he were silent and anxious, she solicitously inquired concerning, and endeavoured to remove the cause of his seriousness. She resided at the palace of Sweet AVaters, a summer seraglio of the Sultan ; the beauty of the surrounding scenery, undefiled by war, and the freshness of the river, made this spot doubly delightful. Raymond felt no relief, received no pleasure from any show of heaven or earth. He often left Perdita, to wander in the grounds alone ; or in a light shallop he floated idly on the pure waters, musing deeply. Some¬ times I joined him ; at such times his counte¬ nance was invariably solemn, his air dejected. He seemed relieved on seeing me, and would talk vvith some degree of interest on the affairs of the day. There was evidently something behind all this ; yet, when he appeared about to speak
of that which was nearest his heart, he would abruptly turn away, and with a sigh endeavour to deliver the painful idea to the winds. It had often occurred, that, when, as I said, Raymond quitted Perdita's drawing-room, Clara came up to me, and gently drawing me aside, said, ťt Papa is gone; shall we go tohim? I dare say he will be glad to see you. v And, as accident permitted, I complied with or refused lier request. One evening a numerous assembly of Greek chieftains were gathered together in the palace. The intriguing Palli, the accom¬ plished Karazza, the warlike Ypsilanti, were among the principal. They talked of the events of the day ; the skirmish at noon ; the dimi¬ nished numbers of the Infidels ; their defeat and flight : they contemplated, after a short interval of time, the capture of the Golden City. They endeavoured to picture forth vvliat wouid then happen, and spoke in lofty terms of the pros¬ perity of Greece, when Constantinople should become its capital. The conversation then re"
verted to Asiatic intelligence, and the ravages the plague made in its chief cities; conjectures were hazarded as to the progress that disease- might have made iu the besieged city. Raymond bad joined in the former part of the discussion. In lively terms he demonstrated the extremities to vvhich Constantinople was reduced ; the wasted and haggard, though ferocious ap¬ pearance of the troops; famine and pestilence was at work for them, he observeel, and the in¬ fidels would soon be obliged to take refuge in their only hope—submission. Suddenly in the midst of his harangue he broke off, as if stung by some painful thought ; he ros>° uneasily, and I perceived him at length quit the hall, and through the long corridor seek the open air. He did not return ; and soon Clara crept round to me, making the accustomed invitation. 1 consented to her request, and taking her little hand, followed Raymond. AVe found him just about to embark in his boat, and he readily agreed to receive us as companions. After the
heats of the clay, the cooling land-breeze ruffled the river, and filled our little sail. The citv looked dark to the south, while numerous lights along the near shores, and the beautiful aspect of the banks reposing in placid night, the waters keemly rcmVcting the**hcavcnly lights, gave to this beauteous river a dower of loveliness that mioht have characterized a retreat in Paradise. Our single boatman attended to the sail ; Raymond steered; Clara sat at his ieet, clasping his knees vvith her arms, and laying her head on them. Rav- mond began the conversation somewhat abrupţi ν . " This, my friend, is probably the last time we shall have an opportunity of conversiiig freely ; my plans are now in full operation, and my time will become more and more occupied. Be.side.*·, í wi-di at onee to tell you my wishes and expectations, and then never again to revert to so painful a subjevt. First, I must thank vou. Lionel, for having remained here at mv request. A'anity first prompted me to ask you : vanitv. I call it ; yet even in this í see the hand of fate—
year presence will soon be necessary; you will become the las\ resource of Perdita, her protec¬ tor and consoler. You will take her back to Windsor."— " Not without you," I said. " You do not mean to separate again ?"' * ť Do not deceive yourself," replied Raymond, ίς the separation at hand is one over whieh I have no control ; most near at hand is it ; the days are already counted. May I trust you 't FOr many days I have longed to disclose the mysterious presentiments that weigh on me, although I fear that you will ridicule them. Vet do not, my gentle friend ; for, all childish and unwise as they are, they have become a part of me, and i dare not expect to shake them oft'. " Yet how can I expect you to sympathize with me'i' Vou are of this world; I am not. You hold forth your hand ; it is even as a part of vourself ; and you do not yet divide the feel¬ ing of identity from the mortal form that shapes
forth Lionel. How then can you understand me. ? Eaith is to me a tomb, the firmament a vault, shrouding mere corruption. Time is no more, for I have stepped within the threshold of eternity ; each man I meet appears a corse, vvhich will soon be deserted of its animating spark, on the eve of decay and corruption. Cada piocln un piramide levanta, } cada flor costruye un monumento. с ida edihao es un st pulcro altivo, cida soldado un t-squeieto vivo "-{· Пь accent was mournful,—he sighed deeply. *' A few month*, ago," he continued, " I was thought to be dving, but life was strong within ше Λίν, affections were human ; hope and love were the daj -stars of m ν life. Now—they dreun that the blows of the conqueror of the infidel faith are about to be encircled by tri¬ umphant laurel ; tlu ν talk of honourable re¬ ward, of title, power, and wealth—all I ask of Gieece is л grave. Let them га'ье a mound
above my lifeless body, vvhich may stand even when the dome of St. Sophia has fallen. " Wherefore do I feel thus? At Rodostó I was full of hope ; but when first I saw Con¬ stantinople, that feeling, vvith every other joy¬ ful one, departed. The last words of Evadne were the seal upon the warrant of my death. Yet I do not pretend to account for my mood by any particular event. Ail I can say is, that it is so. The plague 1 am told is in Constantinople, perhaps I have imbibed its effluvia—perhaps disease is the real cause of my prognostications. It matters little why or wherefore I am affected. no power can avert the stroke, ancl the shadow of Fate's uplifted hand already darkens me. %i To you, Lionel, I entrust your sister and her child. Never mention to her the fatal name of Evadne. She vvould doubly .sorrow over the strange link that enchains me to her, making my spirit obey her dying voice, following her, as it is about to do, to the unknown country." I listened to him vvith wonder ; but that hi»
sad demeanour and solemn utterance assured me of the truth and intensity of his feelings, I should with light derision have attempted to dissi] ae his fears. AVhatever I was about to reply, was interrupted by the powerful emotions of Clara. Raymond had spoken, thoughtless of her pre¬ sence, and she, jioor ehild, heard with terror and faith the prophecy of his death, lier father was moved by her violent grief; he took her in his arms and soothed her, but his verv soothings were solemn and fearful. " AA'eep not, sweet child," said he, "■ the coming death of one vou have hardly known. I may die, but in eleath I can never forget or desert mv own Clara. In after sorrow or joy, believe that your father's spirit is near, to save nr sympathize with you. Be proud i»f me, and cherub your infant remembrance of me. Thus, sweetest, I shall not aţipea r to die. One thing you musí promise,—not to speak to ;шу one but your uncle, of the conversation vou have just overheard. When I am gone, you will console your muher, and tell her that eleath was VOL. 11. H
only bitter because it divided me from her; tliat my Ia**t thoughts will be spent on her, Rut while 1 live 1 , promise not to betray me; promise, m) ehilde' With faltering accents Clara promibCel, while she still clung to her father in a transport of sorrow. Soon vve returneel to shore, and I en¬ deavoured to obviate the impression made on the child's mind, by treating Raymonds fears lightly We heard no more of them ; for, as he had said, the siege, novv dravving to a conclusion, became paramount in interest, engaging all his time and attention. The empire of the Mahometans in Europe was at its close. The Greek fleet blockading everv port of Stamboul, prevented the arrival of succour from Asia; all egress on the side towards land had become impracticable, except to such desperate sallies, as reduced the numbers of the enemy without making any impression on oui lines. The garrison vsas now so much diminished, that it was evident that the city coukl easily have
been carried by storm ; but both humanity and policy dictated a slower mode of proceeding. AA r e could hardly doubt that, if pursued to the utmost, its palaces, its temples and store of wealth would be destroyed in the fury of con¬ tending triumph and defeat. Already the de¬ fenceless citizens had suffered through the bar¬ barity of the Jaiiisaries ; and, in time of storm, tumult and massacre, beauty, infancy and decre¬ pitude, woukl have alike been sacrificed to the brutal ferocity of the soldiers. Famine and blockade were certain means of conquest ; and on these vve founded our hopes of victory. Each day the soldiers of the garrison assaulted our advanced posts, and impeded the accomplish¬ ment of our vvorks. Fire-boats were launched from tlie various ports, while our troops -some¬ times recoiled from the devoted courage of men vvho did not seek to live, but to sell their lives dearly. These contests were aggravated by the season: they took place during summer, when the southern Asiatic wind came laden with into- ϋ %
îerable heal, when the streams vvere dried up in tbetr sii al low beds, am' the vast basin of tlie sea appealed to glow under the unmitigated lays of the solsticial sun. Nor did night refresh the eaith. Dew was denied; herbage and flowers thei'i w Lie none, the very trees drooped; and i-uimuer assumed the blighted appearance of winter, as it went forth in silence and flame to abridge the mean- of -sustenance to man. In vain dui the eve strive to find the vnock of some northern cloue 1 m the .stainless em pv team which might bring hope of change and moisture to the •opp* e-si ve an J windless atmosphere. All wat ьеге^е, burning, annihilating. We the bcsic-gei s wen 4 iu the comparison littie aifected by these nil·. The woods arountl afforded us «-hade,— tlu uver secured to us a constant supply of watei , пел, detachments were emploved in fur- nislr.i.g the army vvith ice, whieh had been laid up ou II «en ais, anci A the s, and the mountains oi Macedonia, while cooling fruits and whole - лоте food r 1:0 > ed the strength of the labourer *,
¿md made us bear vvith less impatience the vv eight of the unrefresbmo; air. But in the citv things wore a different face. The sun's rays were re¬ fracted from the pavement and buildings—tiie voppage of the public fountains—the bad quality of the food, ancl scarcity even of thai, produced a slate of suffering, which was aggravated by the scourge of disease ; while tlie garrison arrogated v\Qi-y superfluity to themseives, adding by vaste and riot to the necessary evils of the time. Siili ihey would not capitulate. Suddenly the system of warfare was changed. We experienced no more assaults: and by umliL aud clay we continueel our labours unimpeded. Stranger »till, when the troops advanced near the eity, the walls were vacant, and no cannon was pointed against the intruders. AVhen these ej reu instances were reported to Raymond, he caihscd minute observations to be made as to what was doing within the walls, and when his scouts returned, reporting only the continued silence and desolation of the city, he commanded
the army to be drawn out liefore the gates. No one appeared on the walls; the very portals, though locked and barred, seemed unguarded ; above, the many domesand glittering crescents pierced heaven; while the old walls, survivoisof ages, with ivy-crowned tower and weed-tangled buttress, stood as rocks in an uninhabited waste. From within the city neither shout nor cry, nor aught except the casual howling ofa dog, broke the noon-day stillness. Even our soldiers vvere awed to silence; the music paused; the clang of arms was hushed. Each man asked his fellow in whispers, the meaning of this sudden peace; while Raymond from an height endeavoured, by means of glasses, to discover ancl observe the stra¬ tagem of the enemy. No form could be dis¬ cerned on the terraces of the houses ; in the higher parts of the town no moving shadow be¬ spoke the presence οΐ any living being : the very trees waved rot, and mocked the stability *of architecture vvith like immovability. The tramp of horses, distinctly heard in the
bilence, was at length discerned. It was a troop sent by Karazza, the Admiral ; they bore dis¬ patches to the Loid General. The contents of these papers were impoitant. The night before, the watch, on board one of the smaller vessels anchored near the seraglio wall, was loused by ι •blight splashing is of muffled oars; the alarm was ¿riven: twelve snudi boats, each containing thiee Jani/aiies, weie descued endeavouring to make their w ay through the fleet to the opposiU bhore of Scutari. AVhen they found themselves discovered they discharged their musket-*, ami some came to the front to cover the others, whos« j crews, exciting all their strength, endeavouied to escape vvith their light barks from among the dai к hulls that environed them. Tbey weie m the end all sunk, and, with the exception of two or three prisoners, the crews drowned. Littlt could be got from the survivors; but their cau¬ tious answers caused it to be surmised that sene¬ ral expeditions had preceded this last, and that sev ci al Turks of rank and importance had been
. conveyed to Asia. The men disdainfully repelled the idea of having deserted the deft nee of their city; and one, the youngest among them, in an¬ swer to the taunt of a sailor, exclaimed, "Take it, Christian dogs ! take the palaces, the gardens, the mosques, the abode of our fathers—take plague with them ; pestilence is the enemv we fly ; if she be your friend, bug her to your bo-Oins. The curse of Allah is on Stamboul, share ye her fate."* Sueh was the account sent by Karazza to Raymond: but a tale full of monstrous cxa«'- gerations, though founded on this, was spread by the accompanying troop among our soldiers, ¿Y murmur arose, the eity was the prey of pes¬ tile nee ; already had a mighty power subju¬ gated the inhabitants; Death had become lord of Constantinople. ï have heard a picture described, wherein all the inhabitants of earth were drawn out in fear to stand the encounter of Death. The feeble and decrepid fled ; the warriors retreated, though they threatened even in flight. Wolves
THE LAST MAN. 5/ and lions, and various monsters of the desert roared against hitn ; while the grim Unreality hovered shaking his spectral dart, a solitary but invincible assailant. Even so was it vvith the army of Greece. I am convinced, that had the myriad troops of Asia come from over the Pro¬ ponila, and stood defenders of the Golden City, each and every Greek would have marched against the overwhelming numbers, and have devoted himself vvith patriotic fury for his country. But here no hedge of bayonets opposed itself, no death-dealing artillery, no formidable array of brave soldiers—the unguarded wails afforded easy entrance—the vacant palaces luxurious dwellings ; but above the dome of St. Sophia the superstitious Greek saw Pestilence, and shrunk in trepidation from her influence- Raymond was actuated by far other feelings. He descended the hill with a face beaming witli triumph, and pointing with his sword to tiie gates, commanded his troops to —down with those barricades—the only obstacles novv to com- D 3
pletest victory. The soldiers answered his cheerful words with aghast and awe-struck looks; instinctively they drew back, and Ray¬ mond rode in the front of the lines : —" By my sword I swear," he cried, " that no ambush or stratagem endangers you. The enemy is already vanquished ; the pleasant places, the noble dwellings and spoil of the city are already yours ; force the gate ; enter and possess the seats of your ancestors, your ovvn inheritance i'' An universal shudder and fearful whispering passed through the lines; not a soldier moved. " Cowards Í" exclaimed their general, exaspe¬ rated, " give me an hatchet í I alone will enter Ì I will pïant your standard ; and when you see it wave from yon highest minaret, you may gain courage, and rally round it !" One of the officers now came forward ; " Ge¬ neral," he said, " wc neither fear the courage, nor arms, the open attack, nor secret ambush of the Moslems. ЛЛ т е are ready to expose our breasts, exposed ten thousand times before, to
the bails and scvmetars of the infidels, and to fall gloriously for Greece. But we vvill not die in heaps, like dogs poisoned in summer-time, by the pestilential air of that city—we dare not go against the Plague Γ A multitude of men are feeble and inert. without a voice, a leader ; give them that, and they regain tbe strength belonging to their num¬ bers. Shouts from a thousand voices novv rent the air—the cry of applause became uni¬ versal. Raymond saw the danger ; he was will¬ ing to save his troops from the crime of dis¬ obedience; for he knew, that contention once begun between the commander and his army, each act and word added to the weakness of the former, and bestowed power on the latter. He gave orders for the retreat to be sounded, and the regiments repaired in good order to the camp. I hastened to carry the intelligence of the.4 strange proceedings to Perdita ; and we were
soon joined by Raymond, lie looked gloomv and ]ierturbed. Äly sister was struek by my narrative : " Iiow beyond the imagination of man/' she exclaimed, " are the decrees c-f lieaven, wondrous and inexplicable!" " Foolish girl," cried Raymond angrily, "are you hke my valiant soldiers, panic-struck ? AVhat is there inexplicable, prav, tell me, in so -»cry natural an occurrence? Does not the pingue rage each vear in Stamboul ? AVhat wonder, that this year, when as vve are told, its virulence is unexampled in Asia, that it should have occasioned doable havoc in that citv ? AA T hat wonder then, in time ef siege, want, ex¬ treme heat, and drought, that it should make un¬ accustomed ravage*»? Less wonder far is it, that the garrison, dcsp*"ringof being able to hold out longer, slu ilel take advantage of the neg¬ ligence of our fleet to escape at once from siege and capturt. It is not pestilence—by the God that lives ' it is not either plague or impending;
danger that makes us, like birds in harvest-time, te miied by a scarecrow, abstain from the ready prev—it is base superstition—And thus the aim of the valiant it, made the shuttlecock of fools; the worthy ambition of the high-souled, the pla) thing of these tamed hares ' But yet Stam¬ boul shali be ours ! By my past labours, by torture and imprisonment suffered for them, by mv victories, by my sword, I swear—by my hopes of fame, by my former deserts novv await¬ ing their reward, 1 deeply vow, vvith these hands to plant the cross on v onder mosque !" í% Dearest H av mond Г' interrupted Perdita, m a supplicating accent. Ile had been walking to and fro in the marble hall of the seraglio; his very lips vvere pale with rage, while, quivering, they shaped his angry words—his eyes shot fire—his gestures seemed resti arned by their very vehemence. " Perdita," he continued, impatiently, " I know what you vvould say ; I know that you love me, that ^ ,u are good and gentle ; but this is no woman's
work—nor can a female heart guess at the bur* ricane vvhich tears me !" He seemed half afraid of his own violence, and suddenly quitted the hall : a look from Per¬ dita shewed me her distress, and I followed him. He was pacing the garden : his passions were in a state of inconceivable turbulence, " Am I for ever," he cried, " to be the sport of fortune ! Must man, the heaven-climber, be for ever the victim of the crawling reptiles of his species ! AVere I as you, Lionel, looking forward to many years of life, to a succession of love-enlightened days, to refined enjoyments and fresh-springing hopes, I might yield, and breaking my General's staff, seek repose in the glades of AVindsor. But I am about to die !—nay, interrupt me not— soon I shall die. From the many-peopled earth, from the sympathies of man, from the loved re¬ sorts of my youth, fro;*, the kindness of my friends, from the affecùon of my only beloved Perdita, I am about to be removed. Such is the will of fate ! Such the decree of the High Ruler
from whom there is no appeal : to whom I sub¬ mit. But to lose all—to lose vvith life and love, glory also ! It shall not be í " I, and in a few brief years, all you,—this panic-struck army, and all the population of fair Greece, will no longer be. But other generations vvill arise*, and ever and for ever will continue, to be made happier by our present acts, to be glorified by our valour. The prayer of my youth vvas to be one among those who render the pages of earth's history splendid ; who exalt the race of man, and make this little globe a dwell¬ ing of the mighty. Alas, for Raymond! the prayer of his youth is wasted—the hopes of his manhood are null í " From my dungeon in yonder city I cried, soon I will be thy lord ! AVhen Evadne pro¬ nounced my death, I thought that the title of Victor of Constantinople vvould be written on my tomb, and I subdued all mortal fear. I stand before its vanquished walls, and dare not call myself a conqueror. So shall it not be ! Did
not Alexander leap from the walls of the city of the Oxyclracie, to shew his coward troops the way to victory, encountering alone the swords of its defenders ? Even so will I brave the plague —and though no man follow, I will plant the Grecian sťmdard on the height of St. Sophia," Reasou came unavailing· to such hi-gh-vvrousHht О о о feelings. In vain I shewed him, that when winter came, the cold would dissipate the pesti. lcntial air, and restore courage to the Greeks. * c Talk not of other season than this !" he cried. α I have lived my last winter, and the date of this year, 2092, vvill be carved upon my tomb. Already do I sec," hc continued, looking up mournfully, " the bourne ancl precipitate edge of my existence, over vvhich I plunge into the gloomy mystery of the life to come. I am prepared, so that I leave behind a trail of light so radiant, that my worst enemies cannot cloud it. I owe this to Greece, to you, to my surviving Perdita, and to myself, the victim of ambition." A\ r e were interrupted by an attendant, who
announced, that the staff of Raymond was as¬ sembled in the council-chamber. lie requested me in the meantime to ride through the camp. and to observe and report to him the disposi¬ tions of the soldiers ; he then left me. I had been excited to the utmost by the proceedings of the day, and now more than ever bv the pas¬ sionate language of Raymond. Alas! for human reason ! He accused the Greeks of superstition: what name did begive to the faith he lent to the predictions of Evadne ? I ра**.чч! fiom the palace of Sweet AA r aters to the plain on whieh the encampment lay, and found its in¬ habitants in commotion. The arrival of several with fresh stories of marvels, from the fleet; the exonerations bestowed on what was alreadv Known; tales of old prophecies, of fearful his¬ tories of whole regions which had been laid waste during the present year by pestilence, alarmed i\\\d occupied the troops. Discipline was lost ; the army disbanded itself. Each individual, before a part of a great whole moving only 'm
unison with others, now became resolved into the unit nature had made him, and thought of himself only. Thev stole ofl' at fir.st by one? and twos, then in larger companies, until, un¬ impeded by the oflicers, whole battalions sought the road that led to Macedonia. About midnight I returned to the palace and sought Raymond ; he was aleme, and apparently composed; such composure, at least, was his as is inspired by a resolve to adhere to a certain line of conduct. He heaid my account of the self-dissolution of the army vvith calmness, and then said, fi You know, Verney, my fixed de¬ termination not to quite this place, until in the light of day Stamboul is confessedly ours. If the men I have about me shrink from following me, others, more courageous, are to be found. Go you before break of clay, bear these dis¬ patches to Karazza, add to them your own en¬ treaties that he send me his marines and naval force ; if I can get but one regiment to second me. the rest would follow of соигье. Let him
send me this regiment. I shall expect your le- turn bv to-monow noon." Methought this was but a poor expedient. but I assured him of my obedience and zeal. I quitted hnn to take a few hours rest. AA'ith the breaking of morning I was accoutred for my ride. I lingered awhile, desirous of taking leave of Perdita, and from my window observed the appioaeh of the sun. The golden splendour апъе, and weary nature awoke to suffer vet another day of heat and thirstv decay. \'o flow eis lifted up their dew-laden cups to meet the dawn; the dry grass had withered on the plain-., the burning fields of air vvere vacant ot buds ; the cicale alone, children of the sun, be- jnran their shrill and deafening sona amono* tîıc cvptLsses and oliws. I saw Raymond's coal- black charter brought tf) the palace gate ; a small company of officers arrived soon after; eare and fear was painted on each cheek, and in each eye. unrefreshed by sleep. I found Ray¬ mond and Perdita together. He was watching
the rising sun, while vvith one arm hc encircled his beloved's waist ; she looked on him, the sun of her life, with earnest gaze of mingled anxiety and tenderness. Raymond started angrily when he eaw me. " Here still ?" he cried. " Is this your promised zeal У " Pardon nie," I said, " but even as you speak, I am gone.'" " Nay, pardon me," he replied ; " I have no right to command or reproach; but my life hangs on your departure and speedy return. Farewell Г His VOİce had recovered its bland tone, but a dark cloud still hung on his features. I vvould have delayed ; I wished to recommend watch¬ fulness to. Perdita, but his presence restrained me. I had no pretence for my hesitation ; and on his repeating his farewell, I clasped his out¬ stretched hand; İt was cold and clammy. " Take care of yourself, my dear Lord, 1 ' I said. . " Nay," said Perdita, *« that task shall be mine. Return speedily, Lionel/'
IVith an air of absence he vras playing vvith her auburn locks, while she leaned on him ; twice I turned back, only to look again on this matchless pair. At last, with slow and heavy steps, I bad paced out of the hall, and sprung upon my horse. At that moment Clara flew towards me ; clasping my knee she cried, " Make haste back, uncle ! Dear uncle, I have such fearful dreams ; I dare not tell my mother. Do not be long away Í" I assured her of my impatience to return, and then, with a small escort rode along the plain towards the tower of Marmora. I fulfilled my commission; I saw Karazza. He was somewhat surprised ; he would see, he- said, vvhat could be done ; but it required time ; and Raymond had ordered me to return by noon. It was impossible to effect any thing in so short a time. I must stay till the next day ; or come back, after having reported the present state of things to the general. My choice was easily made. A restlessness, a fear of what was
about to betide, a doubt as to Raymond's pur¬ poses, urged me to return without delay to his quarters. Quitting the Seven Towers, I rode eastward towards the Sweet Waters. I took a circuitous path, principally for the sake of going to tlie top of the mount before mentioned, which commanded a view of the city. I had my glass with me. The city basked under the noon-day sun, and the venerable walls formed its pic¬ turesque boundary. Immediately before me was the Top Kapou, the gate near which Mahomet had made the breach by which he entered thecity. Trees gigantic and aged grew near ; before the gatei discerned a crowd of moving human figures —with intense curiosity I lifted my glass to my eye. I saw Lord Raymond on his charger ; a small company of officers had gathered about him ; and behind was a promiscuous concourse of soldiers and subalterns, their discipline lost, tiieir arms thrown aside ; no music sounded, no ban ners streamed. The only flag among them was one vvhich Raymond carried; he pointed with
it to the gate of the city. The circle round him fell back. With angry gestures he leapt from his horse, and seizing a hatchet that hung from his saddle-bow, went vvith the apparent intention of battering down the o t posing gate. A few men came to aid him ; their numbers increased ; under their united blows the obstacle was van¬ quished, gate, portcullis, and fence vvere demo¬ lished ; and the wide sun-lit vvay, leading to the heart of the city, novv lay open before them. The men shrank back ; they seemed afraid of what they had already done, and stood as if they expected some Mighty Phantom to stalk in oflended majesty from the opening. Raymond sprung lightly on his horse, grasped the stand¬ ard, and vvith words which I could not hear (but his gestures, being their fit accompaniment, were marked by passionate energy.) he seemed to ad¬ jure their assistance and companionship ; even as he spoke, the crowd receded from him. Indig¬ nation now transported him ; his words I guessed were fraught with disdain*—then turning from
his coward followers, he addressed himself to enter the city alone. His very horse seemed to back from the fatal entrance; his dog, his faithful dog, lay moaning and supplicating in his path—in a moment more, he had plunged the rowels into the sides of the stung animal, who ÌHHindcd forward, anci he, the gateway passed, was galloping up the broad and depart «treet. l'util this moment my soul had been in my eves only. I had gazed with wonder, mixed wuli f var and enthusiasm. The latter f ceh rg n o iv predominated. I forgot the distance be¬ tween us: " I vvill go vvith thee, Raymond'*' 1 cried ; but, my eye removed from the glass, I couhl scarce discern the pigmy forms of the crowd, which about a mile from me surrounded the iya í с ; the form of Iťivmond was lost. Stung with impatience, I uiged my horse with fore t of -pur and loosened ι eins down the acclivitv, that, before danger could arrive, I might be at the sjde of my noble, godlike friend. A num¬ ber of buildings and trees intervened, when I
had reached the plain, hiding the city from my view, But at that moment a crash was heard. Thunderlike it reverberated through the sky, while the air was darkened. A moment more and the old walls again met my sight, while ever them hovered a murky cloud ; fragments of buildings whirled above, half seen in smoke, while flames burst out beneath, and continued explosions filled the air with terrific, thunders. Tiving from the mass of falling ruin which leapt over the high walls, and shook the ivy towers, a crowd of soldiers made for the road by vvhich I came; I was surrounded, hemmed in by them, unable to get forward. My impa¬ tience rose to its utmost ; I stretched out my liands to the men ; I conjured them to turn back and save their General, the conqueror of Stam¬ boul, the liberator of Greece ; tears, aye tears, in warm flow gushed from my eyes—I would not believe in his destruction ; yet every mass that darkened the air seemed to bear with it a portion of the martyred Raymond. Horrible vol. л. к
sights were shaped to me in the turbid cloud that hovered over the city; and my only relief was derived from the struggles I made to ap¬ proach the gate. Yet when I enected my pur¬ pose, all I could discern within the precincts of the massive walls was a city of fire : the open way through which Raymond had ridden was enveloped in smoke &nd flame. After an in¬ terval the explosions ceased, but the flames still shot up from various quarters ; the dome of St. Sophia had disappeared. Strange to say (the result perhaps of the concussion of air occa¬ sioned by the blowing up of the city) huge, white thunder clouds lifted themselves up from the southern horizon, and gathered over-head ; they were the first blots on the blue expanse that I had seen for months, and amidst this havoc and despair they inspired pleasure. The vault above became obscured, lightning flashed from the heavy masses, followed instantaneously by crashing thunder; then the big rain fell. The flames of the city bent beneath it; and the
smoke and dust arising from the ruins was dissipated. I no sooner perceived an abatement of the flames than, hurried on by an irresistible impulse, I en¬ deavoured to penetrate the town. I could only do this on foot, as the mass of ruin was imprac¬ ticable for a horse. I had never entered the city before, and its ways were unknown to me. The streets were blocked up, the ruins smoking ; I climbed up one heap, only to view others in suc¬ cession ; and notliing told me where the centre of the town might be, or towards what point Raymond might have directed his course. The rain ceased; the clouds sunk behind the horizon ; it was now evening, and the sun de¬ scended swiftly the western sky. I scrambled on, until I came to a street, whose wooden houses, half-burnt, had been cooled by the rain, and vvere fortunately uninjured by the gunpow¬ der. Up this I hurried—until now I had not seen a vestige of man. Yet none of the defaced human forms which I distinguished, could be е %
THE LAST MAN. Raymond ; so I turned my eyes away, while my heart sickened within me. I came to an open space—a mountain of ruin in the midst, an¬ nounced that some large mosque had occupied the space—and here, scattered about, I saw vas rious articles of luxury and wealth, singed, destroyed—but shewing what they had been in their ruin—jewels, strings of pearls, embroidered robes, rich furs, glittering tapestries, and oriental ornaments, seemed to have been collected here in a pile destined for destruction ; but the rain had stopped the havoc midway. Hours passed, while in this scene of ruin I sought for Raymond. Insurmountable heaps sometimes opposed themselves ; the still burning fires scorched me. The sun set; the atmo¬ sphere grew dim—and the evening star no longer shone companionless. The glare of flames attested the progress of destruction, while, during mingled light and obscurity, the piles around me took gigantic proportions and wierd shapes. For a moment I could yield to the creative power of
the imagination, and for a moment was soothed hy the sublime actions it presented to me. The beatings of my human heart drew me back to blank reality. Where, in this wilderness of death, art thou, О Raymond—ornament of England, deliverer of Greece, " hero of unwritten story,'* where in this burning chaos are thy dear relies strewed ? I called aloud for him—through the darkness of night, over the scorching ruins of fallen Constantinople, his name was heard ; no voice replied—echo even was mute. I was overcome by weariness ; the solitude depressed my spirits. The sultry air impreg¬ nated vvith dust, the heat and smoke of burning palaces, palsied my limbs. Hunger suddenly came acutely upon me. The excitement vvhich had hitherto sustained me was lost ; as a building, whose props are loosened, and whose foundations rock, totters and falls, so when enthusiasm and hope deserted me, did my strength fail. I sat on the sole remaining step of an edifice, which even in its downfall, was huge md magnificent ;
a few broken walls, not dislodged by gunpowder, stood in fantastic groupes, and a flame glim¬ mered at intervals on the summit of the pile. For a time hunger and sleep contended, till the constellations reeled before my eyes and then were lost. I strove to rise, but my heavy lids closed, my limbs over-wearied, claimed repose— I rested my head on the stone, I yielded to the grateful sensation of utter forgetfulness ; and in that scene of desolation, on that night of despair —I slept.
CHAPTER III. The stars still shone brightly when I awoke, and Taurus high in the southern heaven shewed that it Was midnight, I awoke from disturbed dreams. Methought I had been invited to Timon's last feast ; I came with keen appetite, the covers were removed, the hot water sent up its unsatisfying steams, while I fled before tîv anger of the host, who assumed the form of Ray¬ mond; while to my diseased fancy, the vessels hurled by him after me, vvere surcharged vvitii fetid vapour, and my friend's shape, altered by a thousand distortions, expanded into a gigantic phantom, bearing on its brow the sign of pe%ti-
lenco. The growing shadow rose and rose, filling, and then scemine: to endeavour to burst beyond, the adamantine vault that bent over, sustaining and enclosing the world. The night-mare be¬ came torture ; with a strong effort I threw off sleep, and recalled reason to her wonted functions. My first thought was Perdita ; to her I must return ; her I must support, drawing such food from despair as might best sustain her wounded heart ; recalling her from the wild excesses of grief, by the austere laws of duty, and the soft tenderness of regret. The position of the stars was my only guide, I turned from the awful ruin of the Golden City, and, after great exertion, succeeded in extricating myself from its enclosure. I met a company of soldiers outside the walls ; I borrowed a horse from one of them, and hastened to my sister. The appearance of the plain was changed during this short interval ; the encampment was broken up; the relies of the disbanded army met in small companies here and there ; each face was
clouded ; every gesture spoke astonishment and dismay. AVith an heavy heart I entered the palace, and stood fearful to advance, to speak, to look, In the midst of the hall was Perdita; she sat on the marble pavement, her head fallen on her bosom, her hair dishevelled, her fingers twined busily one within the otlier; she was pale as marble, and every feature was contracted by agony. She perceived me, and looked up en¬ quiringly ; her half glance of hope was misery ; the words died before I could articulate them ; I felt a ghastly smile wrinkle my lips. She under¬ stood my gesture; again her head fell ; again her fingers worked restlessly. At last I recovered speech, but my voice terrified her; the hapless girl had understood my look, and for worlds she wonld not that the tale of her heavy misery should have been shaped out and confirmed by hard* irrevocable words. Nay, she eeemed to wish to distract my thoughts from the subject : she rose from the floor: íť Hush!" she said, vvhisperingly ; E 3
ťí after much weeping, Clara sleeps ; we m use not disturb her." She seated herself then on the same ottoman where I had left her in the morning resting on the beating heart of her Raymond ; I dared not approach her, but sat at a distant corner, watching her starring and nervous ges¬ tures. At length, in an abrupt manner she asked, " Where is he ?" " O, fear not," she continued, " fear not that I should entertain hope í Yet tell me, have you found him? To have him once more in my arms, to see him. however changed, is all I desire. Though Constantinople be heaped above him as a tomb, yet I must find him—then cover us with the city's weight, vvith a mountain piled above—I care not, so that one grave hold Ray¬ mond and his Perdita." Then weeping, she clung to me : <c Take me to him," she cried, 44 unkind Lionel, why do you keep me here 'f Of myself I cannot find him—but you know where he lies—lead me thither»" At first these agonizing plaints filled me with
intolerable compassion. But soon I endeavoured to extract patience for her from the ideas she suggested. I related my adventures of the night, my endeavours to find our lost one, and my disappointment. Turning her thoughts this way, I gave them an object which rescued them from insanity. With apparent calmness she diecussed with me the probable spot where he might be found, and planned the raeans we should use for that purpose. Then hearing of my fatigue and abstinence, she herself brought ma food. I seized the favourable moment, and endeavoured to awaken in her something beyond the killing torpor of grief. As I spoke, my subject carried me away; deep admiration ; grief, the offspring of truest afTection, the overflowing of a heart bursting with sympathy for all that had been great and sublime in the career of my friend, inspired me às I poured forth the praises of Raymond. " Alas, for us, v I cried, " who have lost this latest honour of the world ! Beloved Raymond !
He is gone to the nations of the dead ; he has become one of those, vvho render the dark abode of the obscure grave illustrious by dwelling there, He has journied on the road that leads to it, and joined the mighty of soul who went before him. When the world w r as in its infancy death must have been terrible, and man left his friends and kindred to dwell, a solitarv stranger, in an unknown country. But now, he who dies finds many companii <r ľ gone before to pre¬ pare for his reception. The great of past ages people it, the exalted hero of our own days is counted among its inhabitants, while life becomes doubly ť the desart ar.d the solitude/ ςί What a noble creature was Raymond, the first among the men of our time. By the gran¬ deur of his conceptions, the graceful daring of his actions, by his wit and beauty, he won and ruled the minds of all. Of one only fault he might have been accused ; but his death has cancelled that. I have heard him called incon¬ stant of purpose—when he deserted, for the sake
pf love, the hope of sovereignty, and when he abdicated the protectorship of England, men blamed his infirmity of purpose. Now his death has crowned his life, and to the end of time it will be remembered, that he devoted himself, a willing victim, to the glory of Greece. Such was his choice : he expected to die. He foresaw that he should leave this cheerful earth, the lightsome sky, and thy love, Perdita ; yet he neither lievitateci or turned back, going right onward to his mark of fame. AVhile the earth lasts, his actions will be recorded with praise. Grecian maidens vvill in devotion strew fiowers on his tomb, and make the air arounei it resonant with patriotic hymns, in u hich hi % name will find high record." I saw the features of Perdita soften ; the sternness of grief yielded to tenderness—I con¬ tinued :—" Thus to honour him, is the sacreei duty of his survivors. To make his name even as an holy spot of ground, enclosing it from all hostile attacks by our praise, shedding on it the
blossoms of love and regret, guarding it from decay, and bequeathing it untainted to posterity. Such is the duty of his friends. A dearer one belongs to you, Perdita, mother of his child. Do you remembçr in her infancy, with what transport you beheld Clara, recognizing in her the united being of yourself and Raymond ; joy¬ ing to view in this living temple a manifestation of your eternal loves. Even such is she stilb You say that you have lost Raymond. O, no ! —yet he lives vvith you and in you there. From him she sprung, flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone—and not, as heretofore, are you content to trace in her downy cheek and delicate limbs, an affinity to Raymond, but in her enthusiastic affections, in the sweet qualities of her mind, you may still find him living, the good, the great, the beloved. Be it your care to foster this similarity—be it your care to render her worthy of him, so that, when she glory în her origin, she take not shame for vvhat she is." I could perceive that, when I recalled my
sister's thoughts to her duties in life, she did not listen vvith the same patience as before. She appeared to suspect a plan of consolation on my part, from which she, cherishing her new-born grief, revolted. " You talk of the future," she said, " while the present is all to me. Let me find the earthly dwelling of my beloved ; Jet us rescue that from common dust, so that in ti-tncf; to come men may point to the sacred tomb, and name it his—then to other thoughts, and a new course of life, or vvhat else fate, in her cruel tyranny, may have marked out for me." After a short repose I prepared to leave her, that I might endeavour to accomplish her wish. In the mean time vve were joined by Clara, whose pallid cheek and scared look shewed die deep impression grief had made on her young mind. She seemed to be full of something to whicli she could not give words ; but, seizing an opportu¬ nity afforded by Perdita's absence, she preferred to me an earnest prayer, that I would take her within view of the gate at which her father had
entered Constantinople. She promised to com¬ mit no extravagance, to be docile, and imme¬ diately to return. I could not refuse ; for Clara was not an ordinary child ; her sensibility and intelligence seemeel already to have endowed her with the rights of womanhood. With her there¬ fore, before me on my horse, attended only by the servant who was to re-conduct her, wc rode to the Top Kaiwm. AA r e found a party of sol¬ diers gathered round it. They were listening. " They are human cries," said one : " More like the howling of a dog," replied another ; and again they bent to catch the sound of regular distant moans, vvhich issued from the precincts of the ruined city. " That, Clara," I said, " is the gate, that the street which yestermorn your father rode up." AAliatever Clara's intention had been in asking to be brought hither, it was balked by the presence of the soldiers. AVith earnest gaze she looked on the labyrinth of smoking piles which hael been a city, and then expressed her readiness to return home. At this
moment a melancholy howl struck on our ears ; it was repeated; "Hark!" cried Clara, " he is there ; that is Florio, my father's dog.' 1 It seemed to me impossible that she could recognise the sound, but she persisted in her assertion till she gained credit with the crovvd about. At least it vvould be a benevolent action to rescue the sufferer, whether human or brute, from the desolation of the town ; so, sending Clara back to her home, I again entered Constantinople. En¬ couraged by the impunity attendant on my former visit, several soldiers who hael made a part of Raymond's body guard, vvho had loved him, and sincerely mourned his loss, accompanied me. It Ís impossible to conjecture the strange en¬ chainment of events vvhich restored the lifeless form of my friend to our hands. In that part of the town vvhere the fire had most raged the night before, and vvhich now lay quenched, black and cold, the dying dog of Raymond crouched beside the mutilated form of its lord. At such a time sorrow has no voice ; affliction, tamed by
its veiy vehemence, is mute. The poor animal recognised me, licked my hand, crept close to its lord, and died. He had been evidently thrown from his horse hy some falling ruin, wiiich had crushed his head, and defaced his whole person. I bent over the body, and took in my hand the edge of his cloak, less altered in appearance than the human frame it clothed. I pressed it to my lips, while the rough soldiers gathered around, mourning over this worthiest prey of death, as if regret and endless lamenta¬ tion could re-illuinine the extinguished spark, or call to its shattered prison-house of flesh the liberated spirit. Yesterday those limbs were worth an universe ; they then enshrined a tran- soendant power, whose intents, words, aiid actions were worthy to be recorded in letters of gold ; now the superstition of affection alone could give value to the shattered mechanism, wiiich, in¬ capable and clod-like, no more resembled Ray¬ mond, than the fallen rain is like the former mansion of cloud in which it climbed the highest
skies, and gilded by the sun, attracted all eyes, and satiated the sense by its excess of beauty. Such as he had now become, such as was his terrene vesture, defaced and spoiled, vve wrapt it in our cloaks, and lifting the burthen in our arms, bore it from this city of the dead. The question arose as to where we should deposit him. In our road to the palace, we passed through the Greek cemetery ; here on a tablet of black marble I caused him to be laid ; the cypresses waved high above, their death-hke gloom accorded with his state of nothingness. AA r e cut branches of the funereal trees and placed them over him, and on these again his sword. I left a guard to protect this treasure of dust ; and ordered perpetual torches to be burned around. A\ r hen I returned to Perdita, I found that she had already been informed of the success of my undertaking. He, her beloved, the sole and eternal object of her passionate tenderness, was restored her. Such was the maniac language
of her enthusiasm. AA r hat though those limbs moved not, and those lips could no more frame modulated accents of wisdom and love ! AVhat though like a weed flung from the fruitless sea, he lay the prey of corruption—still that was the form she had caressed, those the lips that meeting hers, had drank the spirit of love from the commingling breath ; that was the earthly me¬ chanism of dissoluble clay she had called her own. True, she looked forward to another life ; true, the burning spirit of love seemed to her uncxtinguishable throughout eternity. Yet at this time, with human fondness, she clung to all that her human senses permitted her to see and feel to be a part of Raymond. Pale as marble, clear and beaming as that, she heard my tale, and enquired concerning the spot where hc had been deposited. Her features had lost the distortion of grief; her eyes were brightened, her very person seemed dilated ; while the excessive whiteness and even trans¬ parency of her skin, and something hollow in
her voice, bore witness that not tranquillity, but excess of excitement, occasioned the treacherous calm that settled en her countenance. I asked her where he should be buried. She replied, "At Athens; even at the Athens which he loved. Without the town, on the acclivity of Hymettus, there is a rocky recess which he pointed out to me as the spot where he would wish to repose. 1 ' Ыу ovvn desire certainly was that he should not be removed from the spot vvhere he now lay. But her wish was of course to be complied vvith ; and I entreated her to prepare without de¬ lay for our departure. Behold now the melancholy train cross the flats of Thrace, and wind through the defiles, and over the mountains of Macedonia, coast the clear waves of the Peneus, cross ihe Larissean plain, pass the straits of Thermopylae, and ascend¬ ing in succession CErta and Parnassus, descend to the fertile plain of Athens. Women bear with resignation these long drawn ills, but to a man's
impatient spirit, the slow motion of our caval¬ cade, the melancholy repose we took at noon, the perpetual presence of the pall, gorgeous thougli it was, that wrapt the rifled casket vvhich had contained Ravmond, the monotonous ie- currence of day and night, unvaried by hope or change, all the circumstances of our march were intolerable. Perdita shut up in herself, spoke little. Her carriage was closed ; and, when we rested, she sat leaning her pale cheek on her vvhite cold hand, w uh eyes fixed on the ground, indulging thoughts vvhich refused communication or sympatii) . AVe descended from Parnassus, emerging from its many folds and passed through Liva¬ dia on our road to Attica. Perdita would not enter Athens ; but reposing at Marathon on the night of our arrival, conducted me on the following day, to the spot selected by her as the treasure house of Raymond's dear remains. It was in a recess near the head of the ravine to the south of Hymettus. The chasm, deep,
black, and hoary, swept from the summit to the bise ; in the fissures of the rock myrtle under¬ wood grew and vvild thyme, the food of many nations of bees ; enormous crags protruded into the cleft, some beetling over, others rising per¬ pendicularly from it. At the fcot of this sub¬ lime chasm, a fertile laughing valley reached from sea to sea, and beyond was spread the blue Ægcan, sprinkled with islands, the light waves glancing beneath the sun. Close to the sjiot on which we stood, was a solitary rock, high and conical, which, divided on every side from the mountain, seemed a nature-hewn pyramid ; with little labour this block was reeluced to a perfect shape ; the narrow cell was scooped out beneath in which Raymond was placed, and a short in¬ scription, carved in die living stone, recorded the name of its tenant, the cause and æra of his death. К very thing was accomplished with speed under my directions. I agreed to leave the finishing and guardianship of the tomb to the
head of the religious establishment at Athens, and by the end of October prepared for my re¬ turn to England. I mentioned this to Perdita. It was painful to ap]>ear to drag her from the last «cene that -spoke of her lost one ; but to linger here was vain, and my very soul was sick with its ν earning to rejoin my Idi is and her babes. In reply, my sister requested me to ac¬ company her the following evening to the tomb of Rav mond Some dav s had passed since I had visited the spot. The path to it had been enlarged, and steps hewn in the roek led us less cirtuitously than before, to the spot itself, the platform on vvhich the pyramid stood was en¬ larged, ancl looking towards the south, in a recess overshadowed by the straggung branches of a wild fig-tree, I saw foundations dug, and props and rafters fixed, evidently the commence¬ ment of a cottage ; standing on its unfinished threshold, the tomb was at our right-hand, the whole ravine, and plam, and a?ure sea imme¬ diately before us; the dai к rocks received a
glow from the descending sim, which glanced along the cultivated valley, and (heel in purple and orange the placid waves; we sat on a rocky elevation, and I ga/ed with rapture on the beau¬ teous panorama of living and changeful colours. which varied and enhanced the graces of earth ■ md ocean. " Did I not do right," said Perdita, 4 · in having my loved one conveyed hither ? Here¬ after this will be the cynosure of Greece. In such a spot death loses half its terrors, and even the inanimate dust appears to partake of the spirit of beauty which hallows this region. Lionel, he «deeps there ; that is the grave of Raymond, he whom in my youth I first loved; whom my heart accompanied in days of separa¬ tion and anger; to whom I am now joined for ever. Never*—mark me—never vvill I leave this «pot. Methinks his spirit remains here as well as that dust, which, uncommunicable though it be, is more precious in its nothingness than aught else widowed earth clasps to her sorrowing vol. и, г
bosom. The myrtle bushes, the thyme, the little cyclamen, vvhich peep from the fissures of the rock, all the produce of the place, bear affinity to him ; the light that invests the hills participates in his essence, and sky and moun¬ tains, sea and valley, are imbued by the presence of his spirit. I will live and die here I ct Go you to England, Lionel ; return to sweet Idris and dearest Adrian ; return, and let my orphan girl be as a child of your own in your house. Look on me as dead ; and truly if death be a mere change of state, I am dead. This is another world, from that which late I inhabited, from that which is now your home. Here I hold communion only with the has been, and to come. Go you to England, and leave me where alone I can consent to dras out the miserable days which I must still live." A shower of tears terminated her sad harangue. I had expected some extravagant proposition, and remained silent awhile, collect¬ ing my thoughts that I might the better combat
her fanciful scheme. " You cherish dreary thoughts, my dear Perdita," I said, " nor do I wonder that for a time your better reason should be influenced by passionate grief and a dis¬ turbed imagination. Even I am in love with this last home of Raymond's ; nevertheless we must quit it. 1 ' " I expected this," cried Perdita ; " I sup¬ posed that you would treat me as a mad, foolish girl. But do not deceive yourself; this cottage is built by my order ; and here I shall remain, until the hour arrives when I may share his hap¬ pier dwelling." " My dearest girl !" cc And vvhat is there so strange in my design ? I might have deceived you ; I might have talked of remaining here only a few months ; in your anxiety to reach A\ r indsor you would have left me, and without reproach or contention, I might have pursued my plan. But I disdained the artifice; or rather in my wretchedness it was my emly consolation to pour out my heart to you, e 2
my brother, my only friend. Vou vvill not dispute vvith me? You know how wilful your poor, misery-stricken sister is. Take my girl with you ; wean her from sights and thoughts of sorrow ; let infantine hilarity revisit her heart, and animate her eyes ; so could it never be, were she near me ; it is far better for all of )ou that you should never see me again. For myself, I will not voluntarily seek death, that is, I vvill not, while í can command myself ; and I can here. But drag me from this country ; and my power of self control vanishes, nor can I answer for the violence my agony of grief may lead me to com¬ mit.' ' ' c You clothe your meaning, Perdita," I replied, ŕ f in powerful words, yet that meaning is selfish ancl unworthy of you. You have often agreed vvitii me that there is but one solution to the in¬ tricate riddle of life ; to improve ourselves, and contribute to the happiness of others : and novv, in the very prime of life, you desert your prin¬ ciples, and shut yourself up in useless solitude.
Will you think of Raymond less at Wind-cr, the scene of your early happiness ? Will you commune less with his departed spirit, while you watch over and cultivate the rare excellence of his child ? You have been sadly visited ; nor do I wonder that a feeling akin to insanity should drive you to bitter and unreasonable imagin¬ ings. But a home of love awaits you in your native England. My tenderness and affection must soothe you ; the society of Raymonds friends vvill be of more solace than these dreary speculations. We vvill all make it om first care, our dearest task, to contribute to your happiness." Perdita ehook her head ; " If it could be so, 1 ' she replied, " I were much in the wrong to disdain your offers. But it is not a matter of choice ; I can live here only. I am a part of this scene ; each and all its properties are a part of me. This is no sudden fancy ; I live by it. The knowledge that I am here, rises with me in the morning, and enables me to endure the
light ; it is mingled vith my food, which else vvere poison ; it walks, it sleeps vvith me, for ever it accompanies me. Here I may even cease to repine, and may add my tardy consent to the decree vvhich has taken him from me. He would rather have died such a death, which will be recorded in history to endless time, than have iived to old age unknown, unhonoured. Nor can I desire better, than, having been the chosen and beloved of his heart, here, in youth's prime, before added years can tarnish the best feelings of my nature, to watch his tomb, and speedily rejoin him in his blessed repose. " So much, my dearest Lionel, I have said» wishing to persuade you that I do right. If you are unconvinced, I can add nothing further by way of argument, and I can only declare my fixed resolve. I stay here; force only can re¬ move me. Be it so ; drag me away—I return ; confine me, imprison me, still I escape, and come here. Or vvould my brother rather devote th heart-broken Perdita to the straw and chains of
a maniac, than suffer her to rest in peace beneath the shadow of His society, in this my own selected and beloved recess ?"— All this appeared to me, I own, methodized madness. I imagined, that it was my imperative duty to take her from scenes that thus forcibly reminded her of her loss. Nor did I doubt, that in the tranquillity of our family circle at Windsor, she would recover some degree of composure, and in the end, of happiness. My affection for Clara also led me to oppose these fond dreams of cherished grief; her sensibility had already been tew much excited ; her infant heedlessness too soon exchangecl for deep and anxious thought. The strange and romantic scheme of her mother, might confirm and perpetuate the painful view of life, vvhich had intruded itself thus early on her contemplation. On returning home, the captain of the steam packet vvith whom I had agreed to sail, came to tell me, that accidental circumstances hastened his departure, and that, if I went vvith him, I
must come on board at five on the following morning. I hastily gave my consent to this arrangement, and as hastily formed a plan through which Perdita should be forced to be¬ come my companion. I believe that most people in my situation would have acted in the sarae manner. Yet this consideration does not, or rather did not in after time, diminish the re¬ proaches of my conscience. At the moment, I felt convinced that I was acting for the best, and that all I did was right and even necessary. I sat with Fertlita and soothed her, by my seeming assent to her vvild scheme. She received my concurre. vvith pleasure, and a thousand times over thanked her deceiving, deceitful brother. As night came on, her spirits, en¬ livened by my unexpected concession, regained an almost forgotten vivacity. I pretended to be alarmed by the feverish glow in her cheek ; I entreated her to take a composing draught ; I poured out the medicine, which she took docilely from me, I vvatched her as she drank
it. Falsehood and artifice are in themselves -o hateful, that, though I still thought I did right, a feeling of shame and guilt came painfully upon me. I left her, and soon heard that she slept soundly under the influence of the opiate I had administered. She vv as carried thus unconscious on board; the anchor weighed, and the wind being favourable, vve stood far out to sea; with all the canvas spread, and the power of the en¬ gine to assist, vve scudded swiftly and steadily through the chafed element. It was late in the day before Perdita awoke, and a longer time elapsed before re¬ covering from the torpor occasioned by the laudanum, she perceived her change of situa¬ tion. She started wildly from her couch, and flew to the cabin window. The blue and troubled sea sjied past the vessel, and was spread shoreless arounei : the sky was covered by ι lack, vvhich in its swift motion shewed how speedily she was borne away. The creaking of' the masts, the clang of the wheels, the turnip ť 3
above, all persuaded her that she was already far from the shores of Greece,—" Where are we ?" she cried, " where are we going?"— The attendant whom I had stationed to watch her, replied, tť to England. 1 '— u And my brother i v — t( Is on deck, Madam." *' Unkind ! unkind Г' exclaimed die poor vic¬ tim, as with a deep sigh she looked on the waste of waters. Then without further remark, she threw herself on her couch, and closing lier eyes remained motionless ; so that but for the deep sighs that burst from her, it would have seemed that she slept. As soon as I heard that she had spoken, I sent Claia to her, that the sight of the lovely innocent mighl inspire gentle and affectionate thoughts. But neither the presence of her chikl, nor a subsequent visit from me, could rouse my sister. She looked on Clara with a counte¬ nance of woful meaning, but she did not speak. When I appeared, she turned away, ancl in re-
ply to my enquiries, only said, u You know not what you have done !"—I trusted that thi* sullenness betokened merely the struggle between disappointment and natural affection, and that in a few days she would be reconciled to her fate. When night came on, she begged that Clara might sleep in a separate cabin. Her servant, however, remained with her. About midnight she spoke to the latter, saying that she had had a bad dream, and bade her go to her daughter, and bring word whether she rested quietly. The woman obeyed. The breeze, that had flagged since sunset, now rose again. I was on deck, enjoving our swift progress. The quiet was disturbed only by the rush of waters as they divided before the steady keel, the murmur of the moveless and full sails, the wind whistling in the shrouds, and the regular motion of the engine. The sea was gently agitated, now shewing a vvhite crest, and novv resuming an uniform hue ; the clouds
iiad disappeared; and dark ether dipt the broad ocean, in vvhich the constellations vainly sought their accustomed mirror. Our rate could not have been less than eight knots. Suddenly I heard a splash in the sea. The sailors on watch rushed to the side of the vessel, vvith the cry—some one gone overboard. "It is not from deck," said the man at the helm, tk something has been thrown from the aft cabin/ 3 A call for the boat to be lowered was echoed from the deck. I rushed into my sister's cabin; it was empty. AA'ith sails abaft, the engine stopt, die vessel remained unwillingly stationary, until, after an hour's search, my poor Perdita was brought on board. But no care could re-animate her, no medicine cause her dear eyes to open, and the blood to flow again from her pulseless heart. One clenched hand contained a slip of paper, on which was written, '· To Athens." To ensure her lemoval thither, and prevent the irrecover¬ able loos of her body in the wide sea, she had
had the precaution to fasten a long shawl round her waist, and again to the starni chions of the cabin window, She had drifted somewhat under the keel of the vessel, and her being out of sight occasioned the delay in finding her. And thus the ill-starred girl died a victim to ray senseless rashness. Thus, in early day, she left us for the company of the dead, and preferred to share the rocky grave of Raymond, before the animated scene this cheerful earth afforded, and the society of loving friends. Thus in her twenty-ninth year she died ; having enjoyed some few years of the happiness of paradise, and sustaining a reverse to which her impatient spirit and affectionate disposition were unable to submit. As I marked the placid expression that had settled on her countenance in death, I fe4t, in spite of the pangs of remorse, in spite of heart¬ rending regret, that it was better to die so, than to^drag on long, miserable years of repining and inconsolable grief.
Stress of weather drove us up the Adriatic Gulph ; and, our vessel being hardly fitted to weather a storm, we took refuge in the port of Ancona. Here I met Georgio Palli, the vice- admiral of the Greek fleet, a former friend and warm partizan of Raymond. I committed the remains of my lost Perdita to his care, for the pur¬ pose of having them transported to Hymettus, and placed in the cell her Raymond already occupied beneath the pyramid. This was all accomplished even as I wished. She reposed beside her beloved, and the tomb above vvas in¬ scribed vvith the united names of Raymond and Perdita. I then came to a resolution of pursuing our journey to England overland. My own heart was racked by regrets and remorse. The appre¬ hension, that Raymond had departed for ever, that Ins name, blended eternally vvith the past, must be erased from every anticipation of the future, had come slowly upon me. I liad al-
ways admired his talents ; his noble aspirations ; his grand conceptions of the glory and majesty of his ambition: liis utter want of mean pas¬ sions ; his fortitude and daring. In Greece I had learnt to love him ; his very waywardness, and self-abandonment to the impulses of super¬ stition, attached me to him doubly ; it might he weakness, but it was the antipodes of all that was grovelling and selfish. To these pangs vvere added the loss of Perdita, lost through my ovvn accursed self-will and conceit. Τ).:ε aear one, my sole relation ; whose progress I had marked from tender childhood through the varied path of life, and seen her throughout conspicuous for integrity, devotion, and true affection ; for all that constitutes the peculiar graces of the female character, and beheld her at last the victim of too much loving, too constant an attachment to the perishable andlöst, she, in her pride of beauty and life, had thrown aside the pleasant percep¬ tion of the apparent world for the unreality of the grave, and had left poor Clara quite an
orphan. I concealed from this beloved child that lier mother's death was voluntary, and tried every means to awaken cheerfulness in her sorrow-stricken spirit. One of my first acts for the recovery even of my own composure, was to bid farewell to the sea. Its hateful splash renewed again and again to my sen >е the death of my sister ; its roar was a dirge ; in every dark hull that was tossed on ifs inconstant bosom, I imaged a bier, that would convey to death all who trusted to its treacherous smiles. Farewell to the sea ! Come, my Clara, sit beside me in this aerial bark ; quickly and gently it cleaves the azure serene, and with soft undulation glides upon the cur¬ rent of the air; or, if storm shake its fragile mechanism, the green earth is below ; we can descend, and take shelter on the stable continent. Here aloft, the companions of the swift-winged birds, we skim through the unresisting element, fleetly and fearlessly. The light boat heaves not, nor is opposed by death-bearing waves ;
the ether opens before the prow, and the shadow of the globe that upholds it, shelters us from the noon-day sun. Beneath are the }>lains of Italy, or the vast undulations of the wave-like Apennines : fertility reposes in their many folds, and woods crown the summits. The free and happy peasant, unshackled by the Austrian, bears the double harvest to the garner ; and the refined citizens rear without dread the long blighted tree of knowledge in this garden of the world. AA'e were lifted above the Alpine peaks, and from their deep and brawling ravines entered the plain of fair France, and after an airy journey of six days, we landed at Dieppe, furled the feathered wings, and closed the silken globe of our little pinnace. A heavy rain made this mode of travelling novv incommodious ; so vve embarked in a steam-packet, and after a short passage landed at Portsmouth. A strange steiry was rife here. A few days before, a tempest-struck vessel hael appeared off the town ; the hull was parched-looking and
cracked, the sails rent, and bent in a careless*, unseamanlike manner, the shrouds tangled and broken. She drifted towards the harbour, and was stranded on the sands at the entrance. In the morøing the custom-house officers, together vvith a crowd of idlers, visited her. One only of the crew appeared to have arrived with her. He had got to shore, and had walked a few paces towards the town, and then, vanquished by malady and approaching death, had fallen on the inhospitable beach. He was found stiff, his hands clenched, and pressed against his breast. His skin, nearly black, ids matted hair and bristly beard, vvere signs of a long protracted misery. It was whispered tnat he had died of the plague. No one ventured on board the ves¬ sel, and strange sights vvere averred to be seen at night, walking the deck, and hanging on the masts and shrouds, She soon went to pieces ; I was shewn where she had been, and saw her elisjoined timbers tossed on the waves. The bodv of the man who had landed, had been
buried deep in the sands ; and none could tell more, than that the vessel was American built^ and that several months before the Fortunatus had sailed from Philadelphia, of which no tidings vvere afterwards received.
CHAPTER IV. I re тип neu to my family estate in the autumn of the year 2092. My heart had long been vvith them ; and I felt sickwith the hope and delight of seeing* them аяа'т. The district which con- tained them appeared the abode of every kindly spirit. Happiness, love and peace, walked the forest paths, and tempered the atmosphere. After all the agitation and sorrow I had endured in Greece, I sought Windsor, as the storm-driven bird does the nest in which it may fold its wings in tranquillity. Hovv unwise had the wanderers been, who had deserted its shelter, entangled themselves in the web of society, and entered on vvhat men of
the world call "life,*'—that labyrinth of evil, that scheme of mutual torture. To live, accord¬ ing to this sense of the word, we must not only observe and learn, we must also feel ; we must not be mere spectators of action, vve must act ; we must not describe, but be subjects of descrip¬ tion. Deep sorrow must have been the inmate of our bosoms ; fraud must have lain in wait for us; the artful must have deceived us; sickening doubt ancl false hope must have chequered our days; hilarity and joy, that lap the soul in ecstasy, must at times have possessed us, AA r ho that knows what " life" is, would pine for this feverish species of existence ? I have lived. I have spent days and nights of festivity ; I have joined in ambitious hopes, and exulted in victory: now,—shut the door on the world, and build high the wall that is to separate me from the troubled scene enacted within its precincts. Let us live for each other and for happiness ; let us seek peace in our dear home, near the inland murmur of streams, and the gracious waving of
trees, the beauteous vesture of earth, and sub¬ lime pageantry of the skies. Let us leave " hfe," that we may live. Idris was well content vvith this resolve of mine. Her native sprighthness needed no undue excitement, and her placid heart reposed con¬ tented on my love, the well-being of her children, and the beauty of surrounding nature. Her pride and blameless ambition was to create smiles in all around her, and to shed repose on the fra¬ gile existence of her brother. In spite of her tender nursing, the health of Adrian perceptibly declined. Walking, riding, the common occu¬ pations of Hfe, overcame him : he felt no pain, but seemed to tremble for ever on the verge of annihilation. Yet, as he had lived on for months nearly in the same state, he did not inspire us with any immediate fear; and, tliough he talked of death as an event most familiar to his thoughts, he did not cease to exert himself to render others happy, or to cultivate his ovvn astonishing powers of mind.
AVinter passed away ; and spring, led by the months, awakened life in all nature. The forest was dressed in green ; the young calves frisked on the new-sprung grass ; the v\ ind-winged sha¬ dows of light clouds sped over the green corn¬ fields ; the hermit cuckoo repeated his mono¬ tonous all-hail to the season; the nightingale, bird of love and minion of the evening star, filled tho woods with sonff: while A'enus lingered in Ö is the warm sunset, and the young green of the trees lay in gentle relief along the clear horizon. Delight awoke in every heart, delight and exultation ; for there was peace through all the world ; the temple of Universal Janus was shut, and man died not that year by the hand of man. £i Let this last but twelve months," said Adrian; s *and earth will become a Paradise. The energies of man vvere before directed to the destruction of his species : they now aim at ifs liberation and preservation. Alan cannot repose, and his restless aspirations will now bring forth good instead of evil. The favoured countries
of the south will throw off the iron yoke of ser¬ vitude ; poverty vvill quit us, and with that, sickness. Wliat may not the forces, never before united, of liberty and peace achieve in this dwelling of man ? й< Dreaming, for ever dreaming, AVindsor Γ said Ryland, the old adversary of Raymond, ancl candidate for the Protectorate at the ensuing election. " Be assured that earth is not, nor ever can be heaven, while the seeds of hell are natives of her soil When the seasons have become equal, when the air breeds no disorders, when its surface is no longer liable to blights and droughts, then sickness w ill cease; when mens passions arc dead, poverty will depart. Wlien iove is no longer akin to hate, then brotherhood will exist: wc are very far from that state at present. 1 ' " Not so far as you may suppose," observed a little old astronomer, by name Merrival, " the poles precede slowly, but ecurely ; in an hundred thousand years—**
{i Wc shall all be underground," said Ryland. " The pole οΐ the earth will coincide w itli the pole of the ecliptic," continued tbe astronomer, fci an universal spring will be produced, ancl earth beeome a paradise," u And we shall of course enjoy the benefit of the change," said Ryland, contemptuously. " AVe have strange news here," I observed I had the newspaper in my hand, ami, as usual, had turned to the intelligence from Greece. ** It seems that the total destruction of Constantinople, and the supposition that winter had purified the air of the fallen city, gave the Greeks coinage to visit its site, and begin to rebuild it. But they tell us that the curse of God ison the place, for every one vvho has ventured within the wails has been tainted by the plague; that this disease has spread in Thrace and Macedonia ; and nou, fearing the virulence of infection during the coming heats, a cordon has been drawn on the frontiers of Thessaly, and a strict quarantine exacted." vol. u. G
This intelligence brought us back from the prospect of paradise, held out after the lapse of an hundred thousand years, to the pain and misery at present existent upon eartli. ЛУе talked of the ravages made last year by pestilence in every quarter of the world ; and of the dreadful consequences of a second visitation. We dis¬ cussed the best means of preventing infection, and of preserving health and activity in a large city thus afflicted—London, for instance. Mer¬ rival did not join in this conversation ; drawing near Idris, he proceeded to assure her that the joyful prospect of an earthly paradise after an hundred thousand years, was clouded to him by the knowledge that in a certain period of time after, an earthly hell or purgatory, would occur, when the ecliptic and equator woukl be at right angles.* Our party at length broke up ; " We are all dreaming this morning," said
Ryland, <c it is as wise to discuss the probability of a visitation of the plague in our well-governed metropolis, as to calculate the centuries which must escape before we can grow pine-apples here in the open air." But, though it seemed absurd to calculate upon the arrival of the plague in London, I could not reflect without extreme pain on the desolation this evil would cause in Greece. The English for the most part talked of Thrace and Mace¬ donia, as they would of a lunar territory, which, unknown to them, presented no distinct idea or interest to the minds. I had trod the soil. The faces of many of the inhabitants were familiar to me; in the towns, plains, lulls, and defile*- of these countries, I had enjoyed unspeakable delight, as I journied through them the vear before. Some romantic village, some cottage, or elegant abode there situated, inhabited by the lovely and the good, rose before my mental sight, and the question haunted mc, is the plague there also ?—That same invincible ь 2
monster, vvhich hovered over and devoured Con¬ stantinople — that fiend more cruel than tempest, less tame than fire, is, alas, unchained in that beautiful country—these reflections would m t allow me to rest. The ïjolitical state of England became agitated as the time drew near w hen the new Protectoi was to be elected. This event excited the more mierest, since it was the current repoit, that if the popular candidate (Rvlauit) should be chosen, the question of the abolition of hereditary rank, and other feudal relies would come under the coifoideration of parliament. Not a word had been spoken during the present session on any of these topics. Every thing would d< pend upon the choice ofa Protector, ami the elections of the ensuing year. Vet this ver) si'ente was awful, shewing the deep weight attubuted to the question ; the fear of either paity to ha/aid an ill-timed attack, and the expectation of a furious contention when it should begm. But although St. Stephen's did not echo with
the voice vvhich filled each heart, the newspapers teemed with nothing else; and in private com- jjanies the conversation however remotely begun, soon verged towards this central point, while ν oiees vvere low ered and chairs drawn closer. The nobles did not hesitate to cvpress their fear ; the other party endeavoured to treat the matter lightly. u Shame on the country,* said Ry¬ land, " to lay so much stress upon words and frippery ; it is a question of nothing ; of thv new painting of carriage-pannels and the embroidery of footmen's coats." Yet could England indeed doff her bully trappings, and he content with the democratic style of America? Were the pritle of ancestry, the patrician spirit, the gentJe courtesies and re¬ fined pursuits, splendid attributes of rank, to be erased among us ? We vvere told that this would not be the case; that wc viere by nature a poeti¬ cal jieople, a nation easily duped by words, ready to array clouds in splendour, and bestow honour on the dust. This spirit we could never
lose; and it was to diffuse this concentrated spirit of birth, that the new law was to be brought forward. We were assured that, when the name and title of Englishman was the sole patent of nobility, vve should all be noble ; that when no man born under English sway, felt another his superior in rank, courtesy and re¬ finement would become the birth-right of all our countrymen. Let not England be so far dis¬ graced, as to have it imagined that it can be without nobles, nature's true nobility, vvho bear theirpatentintheir mien, whoarefromtheir cradle elevated above the rest of their species, because they are better than the rest. Among a race of independent, and generous, and well educated men, in a country vvhere the imagination is empress of men's minds, there needs be no fear that we should want a perpetual succession of the high-born and lordly. That party, however, could hardly yet be considered a minority İn the kingdom, who extolled the ornament of the column, " the Corinthian capital of polished
society ;" they appealed to prejudices without number, to old attachments and young hopes ; to the expectation of thousands who might ont day become peers ; they set up as a scarecrow. the spectre of all that was sordid, mechanic and base in the commercial republics. The plague had come to Athens. Hundreds of English residents returned to their own country. Raymond's beloved Athenians, the free, the noble people of the divinest town in Greece, fell like ripe corn before the merciless sickle of the adversary. Its pleasant places were deserted ; its temples and palaces were converted into tombs ; its energies, bent before towards the highest objects of human ambition, were now forced to converge to one point, the guarding against the innumerous arrows of the plague. At any other time this disaster would have excited extreme compassion among us ; but it was novv passed over, whde each mind was en¬ gaged by the coming controversy. It was not so with me; and the question of rank and right
dwindled to insignificance in my eyes, when í pictured the scene of suffering Athens. I heard of the death of only sons ; of wives and hus¬ bands most devoted ; of the rending of ties twisted with the heart's fibres, of friend losing friend, and young mothers mourning for their first born; and these moving incidents were grouped and painted in my mind by the know¬ ledge of the persons, by my esteem and affection for the sufferers. Tt was the admirers, friends, fellow soldiers of Raymond, families that had welcomed Perdita to Greece, and lamented with her the loss of her lord, that were swept away, and went to dwell vvith them in the un- distinguishing tomb. The plague at Athens had been precedeel and caused by the contagion from the East ; and the scene of havoc and death continued to be acted there, on a scale of fearful magnitude. A hope tliat the visitation of the present year would prove the last, kept up the spirits of the merchants connected with these countries ; but
the inhabitants vvere driven to despair, or to a resignation vvhich, arising from fanaticism, as¬ sumed the same dark hue. America had also received the taint ; and, were it yellow fever or plague, the epidemic was gifted with a virulence before unfelt. The devastation was not confined to the towns, but spread throughout the coun¬ try ; the hunter died in the woods, the peasant in the corn-fields, and the fisher on his native waters. A strange story was brought to us from the East, to which little credit would have been given, had not the fact been attested by a mul¬ titude of witnesses, in various parts of the world. On the twenty-first of June, it was said that an hour before noon, a black sun arose : an orb, the size of that luminary, but dark, defined, whose beams were shadows, ascended from the west ; in about an hour it had reached the meridian, and eclipsed the bright parent of day. Night fell upon every country, night.
«■ α
sudden, rayless, entire. The stars came out, shedding their ineffectual glimmerings on the light-widowed earth. But soon the dim orb passed from over the sun, and lingered down the eastern heaven. As it descended, its dusky rays crossed the brilliant ones of the sun, and deadened or distorted them. The shadows of things assumed strange and ghastly shapes. The vvild animals in the woods took fright at the unknown shapes figured on the ground. They fied they knew not whither; and the citizens vvere filled with greater dread, at the convulsion which Si shook lions into civil streets ;"—birds> strong-winged eagles^ suddenly blinded, fell in the market-places, while owls and bats shewed themselves welcoming the early night. Gra¬ dually the object of fear sank beneath the horizon, and to the last shot up shadowy beams into the otherwise radiant air. SuJi was the tale sent us from Asia, from the eastern extre¬ mity of Europe, and from Africa as far west as the Golden Coast.
Whether this story were true or not, the effects vvere certain. Through Asia, from the banks of the Nile to the shores of the Caspian, from the Hellespont even to the sea of Omar, a sudden panic was driven. The men filled the mosques ; the women, veiled, hastened to the tombs, and carried offerings to the dead, thus to preserve the living. The plague was forgot¬ ten, in this new fear which the black sun had spread; and, though the dead multiplied, and the streets of Ispahan, of Pekin, and of Delhi were strewed with pestilence^-struck corpses, men passed on, gazing on the ominous sky, regardless of the death beneath their feet. The christians sought their churches,—christian maidens, even at the feast of roses, clad in vvhite, vvith shining veils, sought, in long pro¬ cession, the places consecrated to their religion. filling the air with their hymns ; while, ever and anon, from the lips of some poor mourner in the crowd-, a voice of wailing burst, and the rest looked up, fancying they could discern the sweep
ing wings of angels, who passed over the earth, lamenting the disasters about to fall on man. In the sunny clime of Persia, in the crowded cities of China, amidst the aromatic groves of Cashmere, and along the southern shores of the Mediterranean, such scenes had place. Even in Greece the tale of the sun of darkness encreased the fears and despair of the dying multitude. We, in our cloudy isle, were far removed from clanger, and the only circumstance that brought these disasters at all home to us, was the daily arrival of vessels from the east, crowded vvith emigrants, mostly English; for the Moslems though the fear of death was spread keenly among them, still clung together ; that, if they were to die (ard if they were, death would as readily meet them on the homeless sea, or in far England, as in Persia,)~if they were to die, their bones might rest in earth made sacred by the rehcs of true believers. Mecca had never be¬ fore been so crowded with pilgrims; yet the Arabs neglected to pillage the caravans, but,
humble and weaponless, they joined the pro¬ cession, praying Mahomet to avert plague from their tents and deserts. I cannot describe the rapturous delight with vvhich I turned from political brawls at home, and the physical evils of distant countries, to my own dear home, to the selected abode of goodness and love ; to peace, and the interchange of every sacred sympathy. Had I never quitted AA r indsor, these emotions would not have been so intense ; but I had in Greece been the prey of fear and deplorable change ; in Greece, after a period of anxiety and sorrow, I had seen depart two, whose very names were the symbol of greatness and virtue. But such miseries could never intrude upon the domestic circle left to me, while, secluded in our beloved forest, vve passed our lives in tranquillity. Some small change indeed the progress of years brought here ; and time, as it is wont, stamped the traces of mortality on our pleasures and expectations.
Id lis, the most affectionate wife, sister and friend, was a tender and loving mother. The feeling was not with her as with many, a pastime ; it was a passion. We had had three children ; one, the second in age, died while I vvas in trreeee. This had dashed the triumphant and rapturous emotions of maternity with grief and fear. Before this event, the little beings, sprung from herself, the young heirs of her transient life, seemed to have a sure lease of existence ; now she dreaded that the pitiless destroyer might snatch her remaining darlings, us it had snatched their brother. The least illness caused throes of terror ; she was miserable if she were at all ab¬ sent from them ; her treasure of happiness she had garnered in their fragile being, and kept for¬ ever on the watch r lest the insidious thief should as before steal these valued gems. She had for¬ tunately small cause for fear. Alfred, now nine years old, was an upright, manly little fellow, with radiant brow, soft eyes, and gentle, though independent disposition. Our youngest was yet
in infancy ; but his downy cheek was sprinkled with the roses of health, and his unwearied viva* city filled our halls with innocent laughter. Clara had passed the age which, from its mute ignorance, was the source of the fears of Idris. Clara was dear to her, to all. There was so much intelligence combined vvith innocence, sen¬ sibility with forbearance, and seriousness vvith perfect good-humour, a beauty so transcendant-, united to such endearing simplicity, that she hung like a pearl in the shrine of our posses¬ sions, a treasure of wonder and excellence At the beginning of winter our Alfred, now nine years of age, first went to school at Eton. This appeared to him the primary step towards manhood, and he was proportionably pleased. Community of study and amusement developed the best parts of his character, his steady per¬ severance, generosity, and well-governed firm¬ ness. AVhat deep aud sacred emotions are ex¬ citer 1 ií¿ a father's bosom, when hc first becomes convinced that his love for his child is not a
mere instinct, but worthily bestowed, and that others, Jess akin, participate his approbation ! It was supreme happiness to Idris and my¬ self, to find that the frankness which Alfred's open brow indicated, the intelligence of his eyes, the tempered sensibility of his tones, were not delusions, but indications of talents and virtues, which would " grow with his growth, and strengthen with his strength," At this period, the termination of an animal's love for its off¬ spring,—the true affection of the human parent commences. We no longer look on this dearest part of ourselves, as a tender plant which we must cherish, or a plaything for an idle hour. We build now on his intellectual faculties, vve establish our hopes on his moral propensities. His weakness still imparts anxiety to this feeling, his ignorance prevents entire intimacy ; but we begin to respect the future man, and to endea¬ vour to secure his esteem, even as if he vvere our equal. What can a parent have more at heart than the good opinion of his child ? In all our
transactions vvith him our honour must be in¬ violate, the integrity of our relations untainted : fate and circumstance may, when he arrives at maturity, separate us for ever—but, as his ægis in danger, his consolation in hardship, let the ardent youth for ever bear with him tlirough the rough path of life, love and honour for his parents. AVe had lived so long in the vicinity of Eton, that its population of young folks was well known to us. Many of them had been Alfred's playmates,before they became his school-fellows. AVe novv watched this youthful congregation with redoubled interest. AA^c marked the differ¬ ence of character among the boys, and endea¬ voured to read the future man in the stripling. There is nothing more loveiy, to which the heart more yearns than a free-spirited boy, gentle, brave, and generous. Several of the Etonians hael these characteristics ; all were distinguished by a sense of honour, and spirit of enterprize ; in some, as they verged towards manhood, this dc-
generated into presumption; but the younger ones, lads a little older than our own, were con¬ spicuous for their gallant and sweet dispositions. Here were the future governors of England ; the men, who, when our ardour was cold* and our projects completed or destroyed for ever, when, our drama acted, wc döfted the garb of the hour, and assumed the uniform of age, or of more equalizing death; here were the beings who were to carry on the vast machine of society ; here were tlie lovers, husbands, fathers ; here the landlord, the politician, the soldier ; some fancied that they were even now ready to appear on the stage, eager to make one among the dramatis personæ of active life. It was not long since I was like one of these beardless aspirants ; when my boy shall have obtained the place I now hold, I shall have tottered into a grey-headed, wrinkled old man. Strange system ! riddle of the Sphynx, most awe-striking ! that thus man remains, while we Гч> individuals pass away. Such is, to borrow the words of an eloquent
and philosophic writer, íť the mode of existence decreed to a permanent body composed of tran¬ sitory parts; wherein, by the disposition of a stupendous wisdom, moulding together the great mysterious incorporation of the human race, the whole, at one time, is never old, or middle-aged, or young, but, in a condition of unchangeable constancy, moves on through the varied tenour of perpetual decay, fall, renovation, and pro¬ gression."*' Willingly do I give place to thee, dear Alfred ! advance, offspring of tender love, child of our hopes ; advance a soldier on the road to vvhich I have been the pioneer í I will make way for thee. I have already put off the carelessness of childhood, the unlined brow, and springy gait of early years, that they may adorn thee. Advance ; and I will despoil myself still further for thy advantage. Time shall rob me of the graces of maturity, shall take the fire from my
eves, and agility from my limbs, shall steal the better jiart of life, eager expectation and passion¬ ate love, ancl shower them in double portion on thy dear head. Advance ! avail thyself of the gift, thou and thy comrades ; and in the drama you are about to act, do not disgrace those vvho taught you to enter on the stage, and to pro¬ nounce becomingly the parts assigned to you ! May your progress be uninterrupted and se¬ cure ; born during the spring-tide of the hopes of man, may you lead up the summer to which no winter may succeed î
i CHAPTER V. Somt: disorder had surely crept into the couv>e of the elements, destroying their benignant in¬ fluence. The wind, prince of air, raged through hb kingdom, lashing the sea into fury, and sub¬ duing the rebel earth into some sort of obedience. The God sends down his angry pbgues from Irgh, Famine and pestilence m heaps they die. Ag-un in vengeance of ins wrath he falls On their great hosts, and breaks their tottering walla, Arrests their navies on the ocean's plain, And whelms their strength with mountains of the main/
Their deadly power shook the flourishing coun¬ tries of the south, and during winter, even, we, in our northern retreat, began to quake under their ill effects. That fable is unjust, vvhich gives the superiority to the sun over the wind. AVho has not seen the lightsome earth, the balmy atmosphere, and basking nature become dark, cold and ungenial, when the sleeping wind has awoke in the east ? Or, when the dun clouds thickly veil the sky, while exhaustless stores of rain are poured down, until, the dank earth refusing to imbibe the su¬ perabundant moisture, it lies in pools on the surface ; when the torch of day seems like a meteor, to be quenched ; vvho has not seen the cloud-stirring north arise, the streaked blue appear, and soon an opening made in the va¬ pours in the eye of the wind, through which the bright azure shines ? The clouds become thin ; an arch is formed for ever rising upwards, till, the universal cope being unveiled, the sun
pours forth its rays, re-animated and fed by the breeze. Then mighty art thou, О wind, to be throned above all other vicegerents of nature's power ; whether thou comest destroying from the east, or pregnant with elementary life from the west ; thee the clouds obey; the sun is subservient to thee ; the shoreless ocean is thy slave ! Thou sweepest over the earth, and oaks, the growth of centuries, submit to thy viewless axe ; the snow-drift is scattered on the pinnacles of the Alps, the avalanche thunders down their vallies. Thou holdest the keys of the frost, and canst first chain and then set free the streams; under thy gentle governance the buds and leaves are 1югп, they flourish nursed by thee. AVhy dost thou howl thus, О wind ? By day and by night for four long months thy roarings have not ceased—the shores of the sea are strewn vvith wrecks,its keel-welcomingsurfacchas become impassable, the earth has shed her beauty in obedience to thy command ; the frail balloon
dares no longer sail on the agitated air ; thy ministers, the eloudr,, deluge the land with rain ; rivers forsake their banks; the wild torrent tears up the mountain path ; plain and wood, and verdant dell are despoiled of their loveliness ; our very cities are wasted by thee. Alas, what will become of us ? It seems as if the giant wa\cs of ocean, and vast arms of the sea, were about to wrench the deep-rooted island from its centre ; and cast it, a ruin and a wreck, щюп the fields of the Atlantic. What arc we, the inhabitants of this globe, lea»t among the many that people infinite space? Our minds embrace infinity; the visible mechanism of our being is subject to merest accident. Day bv day we arc forced to believe this. He whom a scratch has disorganized, he who disappears from apparent life under the influence of the hostile agency at work around us, had the same powers as I—I also am subject to the same laws. In the face of all this vve cad ourselves lords of the creation, vidders of the elements,
masters of life and death, and we allege in excuse of this arrogance, that though the indi¬ vidual is destroyed, man continues for ever. Thus, losing our identity, that of vvhich we are chiefly conscious, wc glory in the continuity of our species, and learn to regard death without terror. But wlien any whole nation becomes the victim of the destructive poweis of exterior ag-ents, then indeed man shrinks into insigniti-- О ■* £7 canee, he feels his tenure of hfe insecure, his inheritance on earth cut off. I remember, after having witnessed the de¬ structive effects of a fire, I could not even behold a small one in a stove, without a sensation of fear. The mounting flames had curled round the building, as it fell, and was destroyed. They insinuated themselves into the substances about them, and the impediments to their progress vielded af their touch. Could we take integial parts of this power, and not be subject to its operation Ρ ( ould vve domesticate a cub of vol. п. и
this wild beast, and not fear its growth and maturity ? Thus we began to feel, vvith regard to many- visaged death let loose on the chosen districts of our fair habitation, and above all, with regard to the plague. We feared the coming summer. Nations, bordering on the already infected countries, began to enter upon serious plans for the better keeping out of the enemy. We, a commercial people, were obliged to bring such schemes under consideration ; and the question of contagion beeame matter of earnest disquisi¬ tion. That the plague was not vvhat is commonly called contagious, like the scarlet fever, or ex¬ tinct small-pox, was proved. It w r as called an epidemic But the grand question was still un¬ settled of how this epidemic was generated and increased. If infection depended upon the air, the air was subject to infection. ,As for instance, a typhus fever has been brought by shipá to one sea-port town ; yet the
very people who brought it there, were incapable of communicating it in a town more fortunately situated. But how are we to judge of airs, and pronounce—in such a city plague vvill die un¬ productive; in such another, nature has provided for it a plentiful harvest ? In the same way, individuals may escape ninety-nine times, and receive the death-blow at the hundredth ; because bodies are sometimes in a state to reject the infection of malady, and at others, thirsty to imbibe it. These reflections made our legisla¬ tors pause, before they could decide on the laws to be put in force. The evil was so wide-spread¬ ing, so violent and immedicable, that no care, no prevention could be judged superfluous, which oven added a chance to our escape. These were questions of prudence ; there was no immediate necessity for an earnest caution. England was still secure. France, Germany, Italy and Spain, were interposed, walls yet with¬ out a breach, between us and the plague. Our vessels truiy were the sport of winds and waves, n 2
even as Gulliver was the toy of the Brobdigna- gians ; but we on our stable abode could not be hurt in life or limb by these eruptions of nature. We could not fear—vve did not. Vet a feeling of awe, a breathless sentiment of wonder, a painful sense of the degradation of humaniiy, was in¬ troduced into every heart. Nature, our mother, and our iriend, h.ad turned on us a brow of menace. She shewed us plainly, that, though she permitted us to assign her laws and subdue her apparent powers-, yet, if she put forth but a finger, we must quake. Slie could take our globe, fringed vvith mounrains, girded by the at¬ mosphere, containing the condition of our being, and all tbat man's mind could invent or his force achieve; she could take the ball in hei hand, and east it iuto space, where life would be drunk up, and man and all his cflbrts for ever annihilatexl. These .speculations vvere rife among us ; vet not the less we proceeded in our daily occupa¬ tions, and our plans, whose accomplishment
demanded the lapse of many years. No voice was heard telling us to hold í AVhen foreign distresses came to be felt by us through the channels of commerce, vve set ourselves to apply remedies. Subscriptions were made for the emigrants, and merchants bankrupt by the failure of trade. The English spirit awoke to its full activity, and, as it had ever done, set it¬ self to resist the ev il, and to stand in the breach which diseased nature had suffered chaos and death to make in the bounds and banks which had hitherto kept them out. At the commencement of summer, we began to feel, that the mischief which had taken place ш distant countries was greater than we had at first suspected, Quito was destroyed by an earthquake. Mexico laid waste by the united effects of storm, pestilence and famine. Crowds of emigrants inundated the west cf Europe; and oui» ibland had become the refuge of thousands. In the mean time Ryland had been chosen Protector. He had sought this office with ea^er- ness, under the idea of turning his vv hole forces
to the suppression of the privileged orders of our community. His measures were thwarted, and his schemes interrupted by this new state of things. Many of the foreigners were utterly destitute ; and their increasing numbers at length forbade a recourse to the usual modes of relief. Trade was stopped by the failure of the inter¬ change of cargoes usual between us, and America, India, Egypt and Greece. A sudden break was made in the routine of our lives In vain our Protector and his partizans sought to conceal this truth ; in vain, day after day, he appointed a period for the discussion of the new laws concerning hereditary rank and privilege ; in vain he endeavoured to represent the evil as partial and temporary. These disasters came home to so many bosoms, and, through the various channels of commerce, were carried so entirely mto every class and division of the community, that of necessity they became the first question in the state, the chief subjects to which vve must turn our attention. Can it be true, each asked the other with
wonder and dismay, that whole countries are laid waste, whole nations annihilated, by these disorders in nature? The vast cities of America, the fertile plains of Hindostán, the crowded abodes of the Chinese, are menaced with utter ruin. Where late the busy multitudes assembled for pleasure or profit, now only the sound of wailing and misery is lieard. The air is empoi¬ soned, and each human being inhales death, even while in youth and health, their hopes arc- in the flower. AA r e called to mind the plague of 1348, when it was calculated that a third of mankind had been destroyed. As yet western Europe was uninfected ; would it always be so ŕ О, yes, it would—Countrymen, fear not ί In the stili vincultivated wilds of America, what wonder that among its other giant destroyers. Plague should be numbered ! It is of old a native of the East, sister of the tornado, the earthquake, and the simoom. Child of the sum and nursling iif the tropics, it would expire in these climes. It drinks the dark blood of the
inhabitant of the south, but it never feasts on the pale-faced Celt. If perchance some stricken A&iatic come among us plague dies, with him T unconun u nicated and innoxious. I>e t us weep for out brethren, tliough we can never experience their reverse. Let us lament over and assist the children of the garden of the earth. Late w e env ied their abodes, their spicy groves, fertile plains, and abundant loveliness. But in this- mortal life extremes are always matched ; the* thorn grows with the rose, the роьоп tree and the cinnamon mingle their boughs. Persia, with its cloth of gold, marble halls, and infinite vv eaith, is now a tomb. The tent of the Arab is fallen in the sands, and his horse spurns the ground unbridled and unsaddled. The voice of lamen¬ tation fills the valley of Cashmere; its dells and woods, its cool fountains, and gardens of roses, are polluted by the dead; in Circassia and Georgia the spirit of beauty weeps over the ruin of its favourite temple—the form of woman. Our own disiresse***, though they were occa-
sìonecl by the fictitious reciprocity of commerce, enchased in due proportion. Rankers, mer¬ chants, and manufacturers, whose trade depended on exports and interchange of wealth, became bankrupt. Such things, w r hen they happen singly, affect only the immediate parties ; but the prosperity of the nation was novv shaken by frequent and extensive losses. Families, bred in opulence and luxury, were reduced to beggary, The very state of peace in which vve gloried was injurious; there were no means of employing the idle, or of sending any overplus of population out of the country. Even the source of colonies was dried up, forin New Holland, Van Diemens Land, and the Cape of Good Hope, plague raged. O, fov ьоше medicinal vial to purge un¬ wholesome nature, and bring back the earth lo its accustomed health ! Ryland was a man of strong intellects and quirk and sound decision in the usual course of things, but he stood aghast at the multitude of evils that gathered round us, Must he tax the и в
landed interest to assist our commercial popula·* tion ? To do this, he must gain the favour of the chief land-holders, the nobility of the country ; and these were his vowed enemies—he must conciliate them by abandoning his favourite scheme of equalization ; he must confirm them in their manorial rights ; he must sell his che¬ rished plans for the permanent good of hiá country, for temporary relief. He must aim no more at the dear object of his ambition ; throw¬ ing his arms aside, he must for present ends give up the ultimate object of his endeavours. He came to AA r indsor to consult with us. Every day added to his difficulties ; the arrival of fresh ves¬ sels vvith emigrants, the total cessation of com¬ merce, the starving multitude that thronged around the palace of the Protectorate, vvere cir¬ cumstances not to be tampered vvith. The blow was struck ; the aristocracy obtained all they wished, and they subscribed to a twelvemonths' bill, which levied twenty per cent, on all the rent-rolls of the country.
Calm was now restored to the metropolis, and to the populous cities, before driven to despera¬ tion ; and we returned to the consideration of distant calamities, wondering if the future would bring any alleviation to their excess. It was August ; so there could be small hope of relief during the heats. On the contrary, the disease gained virulence, while starvation did its accus¬ tomed work. Thousands died unlamented ; for beside the yet warm corpse the mourner wa* stretched, made mute by death. On the eighteenth of this month news arrived in London that the plague vvas in France and Italy. These tidings were at first whispered about town ; but no one dared express aloud the soul-quailing intelligence. AVhen any one met a friend in the street, he only cried as he hurried on, '« Vou know!"—while the other, with an ejaculation of fear and horror, woukl answer,— 4 * ΑΑΊκιΐ vvill become of us?'' At length it was mentioned in the newspapers. The paragraph was inserted in an obscure part: " We regret
to state that there can be no longer a doubt of the plague having been introduced at Leghorn, Genoa, and Marseilles.'" No word of comment followed; each reader made his ovvn fearful one, AA r e were as a man who hears that his house is burning, and yet hurries through the streets, borne along by a lurking hope of a mistake, till he turns the corner, and sees his sheltering roof enveloped in a flame. Before it had been a ru¬ mour ; but now in words uneraseable, in definite and undeniable print, the knowledge went forth. Its obscurity of situation rendered it the more conspicuous: the diminutive letters grew gigan¬ tic to the bewildered eye of fear: they seemed graven with a pen of iron, impressed by fire, woven in the clouds, stamped on the very front of the universe. The English, whether travellers or residents, came pouring in one great revulsive stream, back on their own country ; and with them crowds of Italians and Spaniards. Our little island was filled even to bursting. At first an unu&ual
quantity of specie made its appearance vvith the emigrants; but these people had no means of receiving back into their hands what they spent among us. With the advance of summer, and the increase of the distemper, rents were un¬ paid, and their remittances failed them. It was impossible to see these crowds of wretched, perishing creatures, late nurslings of luxury, and not stretch out a hand to save them. As at the conclusion of the eighteenth century, the English unlocked their hospitable store, for the relief of those driven from their homes by poli¬ tical revolution; ьо novv thev were not backward in affording aid to tiie victims of a more wide- spreading calamity. We had many foreign friends vvhom vve eagerly sought out, and relieved from dreadful penury. Our Castle became au asylum for the unhappy. A little population occupied its halls. The revenue of its possessor, which had always found a mode of expenditure congenial to his generous nature, was now at¬ tended to more parsimoniously, that it might
embrace a wider portion of utility. It was not however money, except partially, but the neces¬ saries of life, that became scarce. It was difficult to find an immediate remedy. The usual one of imports was entirety cut off. In this emergency, to feed the very people to whom we had given refuge, we were obliged to yield to the plough and the mattock our pleasure-grounds and parks. Live stock diminished sensibly in the country, from the effects of the great demand in the market. Even the poor deer, our antlered pro¬ teges, were obliged to fall for the sake of wor¬ thier pensioners. The labour necessary to bring the lands to this sort of culture, employed and fed the offcasts of the diminished manufactories. Adrian did not rest only with the exertions he could make with regard to his own possessions. He addressed himseif to the wealthy of the land ; he made proposals in parliament hille adapted to please the rieh ; but his earnest pleadings and benevolent eloquence were irresistible. To give tip their pleasure-grounds to the agriculturist,
to diminish sensibly the number of horses kept for the purposes of luxury throughout the coun¬ try, were means obvious, but unpleasing. Yet, to the honour of the English be it recorded, that, although natural disinclination made them delay awhile, yet when the misery of their fellow-crea¬ tures became glaring, an enthusiastic generosity inspired their decrees. The most luxurious were often the first to part vvith their indulgencies. As is common in communities, a fashion was set. The high-born ladies of the country would have deemed themselves disgraced if they had now enjoyed, what they before called a necessary, tru¬ éase of a carriage. Chairs, as in olden time, antl Indian palanquins vvere introduced for the infirm; but else it was nothing singular to see females of rank going on foot to places of fashionable resort. It was more common, for all who possessed landed property to secede to their estates, attended by whole troops of the indigent, to eut down their woods to erect temporary dwellings, and to por¬ tion out their parks,parterres and flower-gardens,
to necessitous families. Many of these, of high rank in their owrn countries, novv, with hoe in hand, turned up the soil. It was found necessary at last to check the spirit of sacrifice, and to re¬ mind those whose generosity proceeded to lavish waste, that, until the present state of things be¬ came permanent, of which there was no likeli¬ hood, it was wron*? to carrv chanc? so far as to make a reaction difficult. Experience demon¬ strated that in a year or two pestilence would cease ; it were well that in the mean time we should not have destroyed our fine breeds of horses, or have utterly changed the face of the ornamented portion of the country. It may be imagined that things were in a bad state indeed, before this spirit of benevolence could have struck such deep roots. The infec¬ tion had now spread in the southern provinces of France. But that country had so many re¬ sources in the way of agriculture, that the rush of population from one part of it to another, and its increase through foreign emigration, was less
felt than with us. The panic struck appeared of more injury, than disease and its natural con¬ comitants. Winter was hailed* a general and never-failing physician. The embrowning woods, and swollen rivers, the evening mists, and morning frosts, were welcomed with gratitude. The effects of purifying cold were immediately felt; and the lists of mortality abroad vvere curtailed each week. Many of our visitors left us: those whose homes vvere far in the south, fled delightedly from our northern w inter,and sought their native land, secure of plenty even after their fearful visitation. We breathed again. What the coming summer woukl bring, we knew not; but the present months were our ovvn, and our hopes of a cessa¬ tion of pestilence were high.
CHAPTER VL I have lingered thus long on the extreme bank, the wasting shoal that stretched into the stream of life, dallying with the shadow of death. Thus long, 1 have cradled my heart in retro¬ spection of past happiness, when hope was. Why not for ever thus ? I am not immortal ; and the thread of my history might be spun out to the limits of my existence. But the same sentiment that first led me to pourtray scenes replete with tender recollections, now bids me hurry on. The same yearning of this warm, panting heart, that has made me in written words record my vagabond youth, my serene manhood, and the paissions of my soul, makes
me now recoil from further delay. I must complete my work. Here then I stand, as I said, beside the fleet waters of the flowing years, and now away ! Spread the sail, and strain with oar, hurrying by dark impending crags, adown steep rapids, even to the sea of desolation I have reached. Yet one moment, one brief interval before I put from shore—once, once again let me fancy myself as I was in 2094 in my abode at A\ r ind- sor, let me close my eyes, and imagine that the immeasurable boughs of its oaks still shadow me 1 , its castle walls anear. Let fancy pourtray the joyous scene of the twentieth of June, such as even now my aching heart recalls it. Circumstances had called me to London; here 1 heard talk that symptoms of the plague had occurred in hospitals of that city. I re¬ turned to Windsor; my brow was clouded, my heart heavy ; I entered the Little Park, as was my custom, at the Frogmore gate, on my vvay to the Castle. A great part of these grounds had
been given to cultivation, and strips of poiatoe- lancl and corn vvere scattered here and there. Th.e rooks cawed loudly in the trees above ; mixed with their hoarse cries I heard a lively strain of music, it vvas Alfred's birthday. The young people, the Etonians, and children of the neighbouring gentry, held a mock fair, to which all the country people vvere invited, Tlie park was speckled by tents, whose flaunting colours and gaudy flags, waving m the sunshine, added to the gaiety of the scene. On a platform erected beneath the terrace, a number of the younger part of the assembly were dancing. I leaned against a tree to observe them. The band played the wild eastern airof Weber introduced in Abon Hassan; its volatile notes gave wings to ths feet of the dancers, while the lookers-on unconsciously beat time. At first the tripping measure lifted my spirit vvith it, and for a mo¬ ment my eyes gladly followed the mazes of the dance. The revulsion of thought passed like keen steel to my heart. Ye are all going to die,
I thought ; already your tomb is built up around you. Awhile, because you are gifted with agility and strength, you fancy that you live : but frail is the " bower of flesh " r that encaskets life ; dissoluble the silver cord that binds you to it. The joyous soul, charioted from pleasure to pleasure by the graceful mechanism of well* formed limbs, vvill suddenly feel the axle-tree give way, and spring and wheel dissolve in dust. Not one of you, О ! fated crowd, can escape—not one! not my own one;*! not my idris and her babes' Horror and misery í Already the gay dance vanished, the green sward was strewn with corpses, the blue air above beeame fetid vvith deathly exhalations. Shriek, ye clarions! ye loud trumpets, howl! Pile dirge on dirge; rouse the funereal chords; let the air ring vvith dire wailing ; let wild discord rush on the wings of the wind ! Already I hear it, wiiile guardian angels, attendant on humanitv, their task achieved, hasten away, and their departure is announced by melancholy .strains; faces all un-
seemly with weeping, forced open my lids ; faster and faster many groups of these woe-begone countenances thronged around, exhibiting every variety of wretchedness—well known faces min¬ gled with the distorted creations of fancy. Ashy pale, Raymond and Perdita sat apart, looking on with sad smiles. Adrian's countenance flitted across, tainted by death— Idris, vvith eyes lan¬ guidly closed and livid lips, was about to slide into the wide grave. The confusion grew«—their looks of sorrow changed to mockery ; they nodded their heads in time to the music, whose clang became maddening. I felt that this was insanity-—I sprang for¬ ward to throw it off; I rushed into the midst of the crowd. Idris saw me: with light step she advanced ; as I folded her in my arms, feeling, as I did, that I thus enclosed what was to me a world, yet frail as the waterdrop which the noon-day sun will drink from the water lily\ cup; tears filled my eyes, un wont to be thus moistened. The joyful welcome of rny boys,
the soft gratulation of Clara, the pressure of Adrian's hand, contributed to unman me. I felt that they were near, that they were safe, yet methought this was all deceit ;—the earth reeled, the firm-enrooted trees moved—dizziness came over me—I sank to the ground. My beloved friends were alarmed—nay, thev expressed their alarm so anxiously, that I dared not pronounce the word pi t gue, that hovered on my lips, lest they should con-true my perturbed кюк s into a symptom, and see infection in my languor. I had scarcely recovered, and vvith feigned hilarity had brought back smiles into my little circle, when we saw Ryland approach. Ryland had something the appearance of a farmer ; of a man whose muscles and full grown stature had been developed under the influence of vigorous exercise and exposure to the elements. This was to a great degree the case : for, though a large landed proprietor, yet, being a pro¬ jector, and of an ardent and industrious dis¬ position, he had on his own estate given himself
up to agi icuitural labours. When hc went as ambassador to the Northern States of America, he, for some time, planned his entire migi ation ; and went so far as to make several journies far westward on that immense continent, for the pur¬ pose of ι boosing the site of his new abode. Ambition turned his thoughts from these de- rignsr—ambition, w hieb labou ri ngt h roi ig h various lets and hindrances, had novv led him to the summit of his hopes, in makmg him Lord Pro¬ tector of Imglaud His com.tenance was rough but intelligent— his ample brow and quick grey eves seemed to look out, over h's ovvn pirns, and the oppo¬ sition of his ent nees. His voice was sten¬ torian. Ьь hand si ι etched out in debate, seemed by its gii> antic and museu Lu foim, to w at η his bearci s that woids vvere not his onlv vv cations Few people h*«d discovered some cow ar dice and much îurnnulv cfpuiposc under this imposing exunor. No nuiji could tiush a " but'ei flv on the w ht el 1 with better (fleet, no man better
cover a speedy retreat from a powerful adversary. This had been the secret of his secession at the time of Lord Raymond' s election. In the un¬ steady glance of his eye, in his extreme desire to learn the opinions of all, in the feebleness of his hand-writing, these qualities might be obscurely traced, but they were not generally known. He was now our Lord Protector, He had canvassed eagerly for this post. His protec¬ torate was to be distinguished by every kind of innovation on the aristocracy. This his se¬ lected task was exchanged for the far different one of encountering the ruin caused by the con¬ vulsions of physical nature. He w r as incapable of meeting these evils by any compreheiveive system ; he had reserted to expedient after ex¬ pedient, and could never be induced to put a remedy in force, till it came too late to be of use. Certainly the Ryland that advanced towards us now, bore small resemblance to the powerful, ironical, seiemingly fearless canvasser for the first rank among Englishmen. Our native oak, VOL. il ι
as his partisans called him, was visited truly by ί nipping winter. Ue scarcely appeared half his usual height; his joints were unknit, his limbs vvould not support him ; his face was con¬ tracted, his eye wandering ; debility of purpose and dastard fear were expressed in every ges¬ ture. In answer to our eager questions, one word alone fell, as it were involuntarily, from his con¬ vulsed lips : The PZag?ic.—-"Where ?"—"Every where—vve must fly—all fly—but whither? No man can tell—there is no refuge on earth, it comes on us like a thousand packs of wolves— we must all fly—vvhere shall you go ? Where can any of ш go ?" These words vvere syllabled trembling by the iron man. Adrian replied, " Whither indeed would you fly? We must all reniain ; and do our best to help our suffering fellow-creatures." " Help !" said Ryland, " there is no help ! —great God, who talks of help ! All the world has the plague !''
st Then to avoid it, vve must quit the world," observed Adrian, vvith a gentle smile. Ryland groaned ; cold drops stood on his brow. It was useless to oppose his paroxysm oť terror : but vve soothed and encouraged him, so that after an interval he was better able to ex¬ plain to us the ground of his alarm. It had eome sufficiently home to him. One ofhis ser¬ vants, while waiting on him, had suddenly fallen down dead. The physician declared that he died of the plague. ЛУе endeavoured to calm him—but our own hearts were not calm. I saw the eye of Idris wander from me to her children, with an anxious appeal to my judg¬ ment. Adrian was absorbed in meditation. For myself, I ovvn that Ryland's words rang in my ears ; all the world was infected ;—in vvhat uncontaminated seclusion coulel I save my be¬ loved treasures, until the shadow of death had passed from over the earth ? AA r e sunk into silence : a silence that drank in the doleful ac¬ counts and prognostications of our guest. I 2
We had receded from the crowd ; and ascend¬ ing the steps of the terrace, sought the Castle. Our change of cheer struck those nearest to us ; and, by means of Ryland's servants, the report soon spread that he had fled from the plague in London. The sprightly parties broke up— they assembled in whispering groups. The spirit of gaiety was eclipsed ; the music ceased ; the young people left their occupations and gathered together. The lightness of heart which had dressed them in masquerade habits, had decorated their tents, and assembled them in fantastic groups, appeared a sin against, and a provocative to, the aw ful destiny that had laid its palsying hand upon hope and life. The mer¬ riment of the hour was an unholy mockery of the sorrow» of man. The foreigners whom we liad among us, who had fled from the plague in their own country, now saw their last asylum invaded ; and, fear making them garrulous, they described to eager listeners the miseries they had beheld in cities visited by the calamity, and
gave fearful accounts of the insidious and irremediable nature of the disease. We had entered the Castle. Idris stood at a window that over-looked the park ; her maternal eyes sought her own children among the young crovvd. An Italian lad had got an audience about him, and with animated gestures was de¬ scribing some scene of horror. Alfred stood im¬ moveable before him, his whole attention ab¬ sorbed. Little Evelyn had endeavoured to draw Clara away to play with him; but the Italian's tale arrested her, she crept near, her lustrous eyes fixed on the speaker. Either watching the crowd in the park, or occupied by painful reflection, we vvere all silent ; Ryland stood by himself in an embrasure of the window ; Adrian paced the hall, revolving some new and overpowering idea—suddenly hc stopped and said : " I have long expected this ; could we in reason expect that this island should be exempt from the universal visitation ? The evil is come home to us, and we must not shrink from our fati.
What are your plans, my Lord Protector, for the benefit of our country ?" " For heaven's lov e ! Windsor,'' cried Ry¬ land, " do not mock me with that title. Death and disease level all men. I neither pretend to protect nor govern an hospital—such will England quickly become/'' " Do you then intend, now in time of peril, to recede from your duties ?" " Duties í speak rationally, my Lord ! —when I am a plague-spotted corpse, vvhere vvill my duties be ? Every man for hinbcif.' the devil take the protectorship, say I, if it expose me to danger Г 7 " Faint-hearted man !" cried Adrian indig¬ nantly-— u Your countn men put their trust in you, ancl you betray them i'' " I betray them Г said Ryland, " ihc plague beirays mc. Faint-hearted í It is well, shut up in your castle, out of danger, to boast yourself out of fear. Take the Protectorship who will ; before God I renounce it Г
Ki And before God," replied his opponent, fervently, " do I receive it ! No one vvill can¬ vass for this honour novv—none envy my danger or labours. Deposit your powers in my hands. Long have I fought with death, and much" (he stretched out his thin hand) " much have I suf¬ fered in the struggle. It. is not by flying, but by facing the enemy, that wc can contpier. If my last combat is now ahout to be fought, and I am to be worsted—so let it be Γ " But come, Ryland, recollect yourself ! Men have hitherto thought vou magnanimous and wise, will you cast aside these titles ? Con¬ sider the panic your departure will occasion. Return to London. I will go with you. En¬ courage the people by your presence, I will in¬ cur all the danger. Shame! shame ! if the first magistrate of England be foremost to renounce his duties," Alean while among our guests in the park, alî thoughts of festivity hael faded. As summer- flies are scattered by rain, so did this congrega-
tion, late noisy and happy, in sadness and me¬ lancholy murmurs break up, dwindling away apace. With the set sun and the deepening twi¬ light the park became nearly empty. Adrian and Ryland vvere still in earnest discussion. We had prepared a banquet for our guests in the lower hall of the castle ; and thither Idris and I repaired to receive and entertain the few that remained. There is nothing more melancholy than a merry-meeting thus turned to sorrow : the gala dresses—the decorations, gay as they might otherwise be, receive a solemn and funereal ap¬ pearance. If such change be painful from lighter causes, it weighed with intolerable heaviness from the knowledge that the earth's desolator had at last, even as an arch-fiend, lightly over¬ leaped the boundaries our precautions raised, and at once enthroned himself in the full ancl beat¬ ing heart of our country. Idris sat at the top of the half-empty hall. Pale and tearful, she almost forgot her duties as hostess; her eyes were fixed on her children. Alfred's serious air
shewed that he still revolved the tiagic story re¬ lated by the Italian boy. Evelyn was the only mirthful creature present: he sat on Clara's lap; and, making matter of glee from his own fancies, laughed aloud. The vaulted roof echoed again his infant tone. The poor mother who had brooded long over, and suppressed the expression ofher anguish, novv burst into tears, a^d folding her babe in her arms, hurried from the hall. Clara and Alfred followed. AA r bile the rest of the company, in confused murmur, which grew louder and louder, gave voiee to their many fears. The younger part gathered round me to ask my advice ; and those w ho had friend-sin London Vi ere anxious beyond the rest, to asecitain the piesent extent of disease in the iiictiopoUt-. 1 encouraged them vvith such thoughts of eheei as presented themselves. I told them exceed¬ ingly few deaths had yet heen occasioned by pestilence, and gave them hopes, as we were the last visited, so the calamity might have lost ib i3
most venomous power before it had reached us. The cleanliness, habits of order, and the manner in which our cities vv ere built, were all in our favour. As it was an epidemic, its chief force was derived from pernicious qualities in the air, and it would probably do little harm where this was naturally salubrious. At first, I had spoken only to those nearest me; but the whole assembly gathered about me, and I found that I was lis¬ tened to by all. £C My friends, ' I said, " our risk is common; our precautions and exertions shall be common also. If manly courage and resist¬ ance can save ie-, we will be saved. We w il 1 fight the enemy to the last. Plague shall not find us a ready prey ; we will dispute every inch of ground ; and, by methodical and inflexible lavis, pile invincible barriers to the progress of our foe. Perhaps in no part of the world has she met with so systematic and determined an opposition. Perhaps no country is naturally so well protected agaiibt our invader ; nor has nature anywhere been so well assisted by the hand of
man. Wc will not despair. We are neithe« cowards nor fatalists; but, believing that God has' placed the means for our preservation in our own hands, vve vvill use those meaus to our utmost. Remember that cleanliness, sobriety, and even good-humour and benevolence, are our best medicines," There was little 1 could add to this general exhortation ; for the plague, though in London, wa-. not among us. I dismissed the guests therefore; and thev went thoughtful, more than sad, to await the events in store for them. I novv soughi Adı ian, anxious to hear the re* suit of his discussion u uh Rv land. Ile had in part prevailed ; the Lord Protector consented to return to London ibra few weeks; durin**' c*> whieh time things should be so ¿u ranged, asto occasion less consternation at his departure. Adrian and Idris were together. The sadness with which the former had first luard that the plague was in London had vanished; the energy of bis purpose informed his body with strength»
the solemn joy of enthusiasm and self-devotion illuminated his countenance; and the weakness of his physical nature seemed to pass from him, as the cloud of humanity did, in the ancient fable, from the divine lover of Semeie, líe was endeavouring to encourage his sister, and to bring her to look on his intent in a less tragic light than she was prepared to do ; and vvith passionate eloquence he unfolded his designs to her. " Let me, at the first word," he said, " relieve your mind from all fear on my account. I will not task myself beyond my powers, nor will 1 needlessly seek danger. I feel that I know what ought to be done, and as my presence is neces¬ sary for the accomplishment of my pians, I will take especial care to preserve my life. " I am now going to undertake an office fi:ted for me. I cannot intrigue, or work a tortuous path through the labyrinth of men's vices and passions; but 1 can bring patience,and sympathy, and such aid as art aflords, to the bed of disease;
I can raise from earth the miserable orphan, and awaken to new hopes the shut heart of the mourner. I can enchain the plague in limits, and set a term to the misery it would occasion; courage, forbearance, and watchfulness, are the forces I bring towards this great work. " O, I shall be something now ! From my birth 1 have aspired like the eagle—but, unlike the eagle, my wings have failed, and my vision has been blinded. Disappointment and sickness have hitherto held dominion over me ; twin born with me, my would, was for ever enchained by the shall not, of these my tyrants, A shep¬ herd-boy that tends a silly flock on the moun¬ tains, was more in the scale of society than I. Cong! ,i túlate me then that I have found fitting scope for my powers. I have often thought of offering my services to the pestilence-stricken towns of France and Italy ; but fear of paining you, and expectation of this catastrophe, with¬ held mc. To England and to Englishmen I dedicate myself. If I can save one of her
mighty spirits from the deadly shaft ; if I can ward disease from one of her smiling cottages, I shall not have lived in vain." Strange ambition this í Yet such was Adnan. He appeared given up to contemplation, averse to excitement, a lowly student, a man of vi&ions —but afford him worthy theme, and— Like to the lat к at break of day arising, From sullen earth, sings hjmns at heaven's ¿ate.* so did he spring up from listlessiie, s and un- productive thought, to the highest pitch of vir¬ tuous action. With him went enthusiasm, the high-wrought resolve, the e\e that without blenching could look at death. With us remained sorrow, anxiety, and unendurable expectation of evil. The man, buys Lord Bacon, who hath wife and children, has given hostages to fortune. Vain was all philosophical reasoning—vain all forti-
tude — vain, vain, a reliance on probable good. I might heap high the scale with logic,courage, and resignation —but let one fear for Ich is and our children enter the opposite one, and, over- weighed, it kicked the beam. The plague was in London ! Fools that we were not long ago to have foreseen this. AA'c wept over the ruin of the boundless continents of the east, and the desolation of the western world; while vve fancied that the little channel between our island and the rest of the eaith was topreserve usalive among the dead. It were no mighty leap methinks from Calais to Dover. The eye easily discerns the sister land ; they were united once ; and the little path that runs between looks in a map but as a trodden foot¬ way through high grass. A'et this small inter¬ val was to save us : the sea was to rise a wail of adamant—without, disease and miserv— within a shelter from evil, a nook of the garden of paradise— a partiele of celestial soil, which no
evil could invade—truly we were wise in our generation, to imagine all these things ! But we are awake now. The plague is in London ; the air of England is tainted, and her sons and daughters strew the unwholesome earth. And novv, the sea, late our defence, seems our prison bound; hemmed in by its gulphs, we shall die like the famished inhabit¬ ants of a besieged, town. Other nations have a fellowship in death ; but we, shut out from all neighbourhood, must bury our own dead, and little England become a wide, wide tomb. This feeling of universal misery assumed con¬ centration and shape, when I looked on my wife and children ; and the thought of danger to them possessed my whole being with feai*. How could I save them ? 1 revolved a thousand and a thousand plans. They should not die—first I would be gathered to nothingness, ere infection should come anear these idols of my soul. I would walk barefoot through the world, to find an unin-
fected spot; I would build my home on some wave-tossed plank, drifted about on the barren, shoreless ocean. I would betake me vvith them to some vvild beast's den, where a tygers cubs, wdiich I would slay, had been reared in health. I would seek the mountain eagle's eirie, and live years suspended in some inaccessible recess of a sea-bounding cliff— no labour too great, no scheme too wild, if it promised life to them. О ! ye heart-strings of mine, could ye be torn asunder, and my soul not spend itself in tears of blood for sorrow ! Idris, after the first shocks regained a portion of fortitude. She studiously shut out all pros¬ pect of the future, and cradled her heart in pre¬ sent blessings. She never for a moment lost sight of her children. But while they in hcahh sported ahout her, she could cherish content¬ ment ancl hope. A strange and wild restlessness came over me—the more intolerable, because I was forced to conceal it. My fears for Adrian were ceaseless; August had come; and the
symptoms of plague encreased rapidly in Lon¬ don. It was deserted by all who possessed the power of removing ; and he, tlie brother of my soul, was exposed to the perils from which all but slaves enchained by circumstance fled. He remained to combat the fiend—his side unguard¬ ed, his toils unshared—infection might even reach him, and he die unattended and alone. By Jay and night these thoughts pursued me. I resolved to visit London, to see him ; to quiet these agonizing throes by the sweet medicine of hope, or the opiate of despair. It was not until I arrived at Brentford, that I perceived much change in the face of the coun¬ try. The better sort of houses were shut up ; the busy trade of the town palsied ; there was an air of anxiety among the few passengers I met, and they looked wonderingly at my carriage— the first they had seen pass towards London, since pestilence sat on its high places, and pos¬ sessed its busy streets- I met several funerals ; they were slenderly attended by mourners, and
were regarded by r the spectators as omens of direst import. Some gazed on these proces¬ sions with wild eagerness—others fled timidly —some wept aloud. Adrian's chief endeavour, after the immediate succour of the sick, had been to disguise the sy T mptoms and progress of the plague from the inhabitants of London. He knevv that fear and melancholy forebodings were powerful assistants to disease ; that desponding and brooding care rendered the physical nature of man peculiarly susceptible of infection. No unseemly sights were therefore discernible: the shops vvere in general open, the concourse of passengers in some degree kept up. But although the ajipear¬ ance of an infected town was avoided, to me, who had not beheld it since the commencement of the visitation, Loudon appeared sufficiently changed. There were no carriages, and grass had sprung high in the streets; the houses had a desolate look ; most of the shutters were ι losed ; and there was a ghast and frightened stare in
the persons I met, very different from the usual business-like demeanour of the Londoners. My solitary carriage attracted notice, as it rattled along towards the Protectoral Palace—and the fashionable streets leading to it wore a still more dreary ancl deserted appearance. I found Adrian's anti-chamber crowded—it was his hour forgiving audience. I was unwilling to disturb his labours, and waited, watching the ingress and egress of the petitioners. They consisted of people of the middling and lower classes of society, whose means of subsistence failed with the cessation of trade, and of the busy spirit of money-making in all its branches, peculiar to our country. There was an air of anxiety, sometimes of terror in the new-comers, strongly contrasted with the resigned and even satisfied mien of tiiose who had had audience. I could read the influence of my friend in their quicken¬ ed motions and cheerful faces. Two o'clock struck, after which none were admitted ; those vvho had been disappointed went sullenly or sor-
rowfully away, while I entered the audience- chamber. I was struck by the improvement that appeared in the health of Adrian. He was no longer bent to the ground, like an over-nursed flower of spring, that, shooting up beyond its strength, is weighed clown even by its own coronal of blos¬ soms. His eves were bright, his countenance composed, an air of concentrated energy vvas dif¬ fused over his whole person, much unlike its former languor. He sat at a table vvilh several secretaries, who vvere arranging petitions, or registering the notes made during that day's audience. Two or three petitioners were still in attendance. I admired his justice and patience. Those who possessed a power of living out of London, he advised immediately to quit it, affording them the means of so doing. Others, whose trade was beneficial to the city, or who possessed no other refuge, he provided with advice for better avoiding the epidemic; re¬ lieving overloaded families, supplying the gaps
made in others by death. Order, comfort, and even health, rose under his influence, as from the touch of a magician's wand. " I am glad you are come," he said to me, when wc vvcre at last alone ; 4 ' I can only spare a few minutes, and must tell you much in that lime. The plague is now in progress—it is useless closing one's eyes to the fact—the deaths cuerease each week, Wliat vvill come I cannot guess. As yet, thank God, I am equal to the governmcntof the town ; and I look only to the present. Ryland, whom I have so long detain¬ ed, has stipulated that 1 shall suffer him to depart before the end of this month. The deputy ap¬ pointed by parliament is elevaci ; another there¬ fore must be named; I have advanced my claim, and I believe that I shall have no com¬ petitor. To-night the question is to be decided, as there is a call of the house for the purpose. Vou must nominate me, Lionel ; Ryland, for shame, cannot shew himself; but you, my friend, vvill do me this service?''
How lovely is devotion í Here was a youth, royally sprung, bred in luxurv*, by nature averse to the usual struggles of a public life, and now, in time of danger, at a period when to live was the utmost scope of the ambitious, he, the be¬ loved and heroic Adrian, made, in sweet sim¬ plicity, an offer to sacrifice himself for the pub¬ lic good. The very idea was generous and noble,—but, beyond this, his unpretending manner, his entire want of the assumption of a virtue, rendered his act ten times more touching. I would have withstood his request ; but I had seen the good he diflused; I felt that his resolves were not to be shaken, so, with an heavy heart, I consented to do as he asked. He grasped my liand affectionately:—"Thank you," he said, " you have relieved me from a painful dilemma, and are, as you ever were, the best of my friends. Farewell—I must now leave you for afew hours. Go you and convene with Ryland. Although he deserts his post in London, he may be of the greatest serv ice in the north of England, by re·*
ceiving and assisting travellers, and contri¬ buting to supply the metropolis with food. Awaken him, I entreat you, to some sense of duty/' Adrian left me, as I afterwards learnt, upon his daily task of visiting the hospitals, and in¬ specting the crowded parts of London. I found Ryland much altered, even from what he had been when he visited AVindsor. Perpetual fear had jaundiced his complexion, and shrivelled his whole person. I told him of the business of the evening, and a smile relaxed the contracted muscles. He desired to go ; each day he ex¬ pected to be infected by pestilence, each day he was unable to resist the gentle violence of Adrian's detention. The moment Adrian should be legally elected his deputy, he would es¬ cape to safety. Under this impression he listen¬ ed to all I said ; and, elevated almost to joy by the near prospect of his departure, he entered into a discussion concerning the plans he should adopt in his own county, forgetting, for
the moment, his cherished resolution of shutting himself up from all communication in the man¬ sion and grounds of his estate. In the evening, Adrian and I proceeded to AVest min ster. As we went hc reminded me of what I was to say and do, yet, strange to say. I entered the chamber without having once re¬ flected on my purpose. Adrian remained in the coffee-room, while I, in compliance with his desire, took my seat in St. Stephen's, There reigned unusual silence in the chamber. I hael not visited it since Raymond's protectorate ; a period conspicuous for a numerous attendance of members, for the eloquence of the speakers, and the warmth of the debate 1 . The benches were very empty, those by custom occupied by the hereditary members were vacant ; the city members vvere there—the members for the com¬ mercial towns, few landed proprietors, and npt many of those vvho entered parliament for tin- sake of a career. The first subject that occu¬ pied the attention of the house was an addrc&s VOL. II. Jv
from the Lorel Protector, praying them to appoint a deputy during a necessary absence on his part. A silence prevailed, till one of the members coming to me, whispered that the Earl of Windsor had sent him word that I was to move his election, in the absence of the person vvho had been first chosen for this oŕfiV., Novv for the first time I saw thé full extent of my task, and í vvas overwhelmed by what I had brought on myself. Ryland had deserted bis post through fear of the plague : from the same fear Adrian had no competitor. And I, the nearest kinsman of the Earl of Windsor, was to propose his electiou. I was to thrust this selected and matchless friend into the post of clanger—im¬ possible í the die was cast—I vvould oiler my¬ self as candidate. The few members vvho vvere present, had come more for the sake of terminating the busi¬ ness by securing a legal attendance, than under the idea of a debate. I had risen mechanically —my knees trembled; irresolution hung on my
voice, as I uttered a few words on the neces¬ sity of choosing a person adequate to the dan¬ gerous task in hand. Rut, when the idea of presenting myself in the room of my friend in¬ truded, the load of doubt and pain was taken from off mc. My words flowed spontaneously —my utterance was firm and quick. I adverted to what Adrian had already clone—I promised the same vigilance in furthering all his views. I drew a touching picture of his vacillating health ; I boasted of my own strength. I prayed them to save even from himself this scion of the noblest family in England. My alliance vvith him was the pledge of my sin¬ cerity, my union with his sister, my children, his presumptive heirs, vvcre the hostages of my truth. This unexpected turn in the debate was quickly communicated to Adrian. He hurried 'in, and witnessed the termination of my impas¬ sioned harangue. I did not see him : my soul was in my words,—my eyes could not perceive that vvhich was ; while a vision of Adrian's form, к ¡2
tainted by pestilence, and sinking in death, floated before them. He seized my hand, as I concluded—"Unkind!" he cried, "you have betrayed me !" then, springing forwards, vvith the air of one who had a right to command, he claimed the place of deputy as his ovvn. He had bought it, he said, with danger, and paid for it with toil. His ambition rested there ; and, after an interval devoted to the interests of his country, wa*> I to step in, and reap the profit ? Let them remember what London had been w hen he arrived: the panic that prevailed brought famine, while every moral and legal tie was loosened. He had restored older—this had been a work which required perseverance, patience, and energy ; and he had neither slept nor waked but for the good of his country.— AVouid they dare wrong him thus? AVouid the) wrest Ins hard-earned reward from him, to be¬ stow it on one, who, never having mingled in public life, would come a tyro to the craft, in which he wa> an adept. lie demanded the
place of deputy as his right. Ryland had shewn that he preferred hini. Never before had he, vvho was born even to the inheritance of the throne of England, never had he asked favour or honour from those now his equals, but who might have been his subject«. AA T ould they refuse him ? Could they thrust back from the path of distinction and laudable ambition, the heir of their ancient kings, and heap another disappointment on a fallen house. No one had ever before heard Adrian allude to the rights of his ancestors. None had ever before suspected, that power, or the suffrage of the many, could in any maimer become dear to him. He had begun his speech with vehemence; he ended with unassuming gentleness, making his appeal with the same humility, as if he had asked to be the first in wealth, honour, and power among Englishmen, and not, as was the truth, to be the foremost in the ranks of loath¬ some toils and inevitable death. A murmur of approbation rose after his speech. 4i Oh, do not
listen to him," I cried, " he speaks false—false to himself,"—I was interrupted: and, silence being restored, we were ordered, as was the cus¬ tom, to retire during the decision of the house. I fancied that they hesitated, and that there was some hope for me—-I was mistaken-—hardly had vve quitted the chamber, before Adrian was recalled, and installed in his office of Lord De¬ puty to the Protector. We returned together to the palace, " Why, Lionel," said Adrian, ie vvhat did you intend ŕ you could not hope to conquer, and yet you gave me the pain of a triumph over my dearest friend." Ci This is mockery, 1 ' I replied, " you devote yourself,—you, the adored brother of Idris, the being, of all the world contains, dearest to our hearts—you devote yourself to an early death. I would have prevented this ; my death vvould be a small evil—or rather I should not die; while you cannot hope to escape.*'
ť4 Аь to the likelihood of escaping," said Adrian, " ten years hence the cold stars may shine on the graves ofall of us; but as to my peculiar liability to infection, I could easily prove, both logically and physically, that in the midst of contagion I have a better chance of life than you. ςί This is my pust: I was born for this—to rule England in anarchy, to save her in danger— to devote myself for her. The blood of my forefathers cries aloud in my veins, and bids me be first among my countrymen. Or, if this mode of speech offend you, let me say, that my mother, the proud queen, instilled early into me a love of distinction, and all that, if the weakness of iny physical nature and my peculiar opinions had not prevented such a design, might have made me long since struggle for the lost inheritance of my race. But now my mother, or, if you vvill, my mother's lessons, awaken within me. I can¬ not lead on to battle ; I cannot, through intrigue
and faithlessness rear again the throne upon the wreck of English public spirit. But I can be the first to support and guard my country, novv that terrific disasters and ruin have laid strong hands upon her. " That country and my beloved sister are all I have. I vvill protect the first—the latter I commit to your charge. If I survive, and she be lost, I vvere far better dead. Preserve her— for her own sake I know that you vvill—if you require any other spur, think that, in preserving her, you preserverne. Her faultless nature, one sum of perfections, is wrapt up in her affections —if tiiey were hurt, she would droop like an un- watered floweret, and the slightest injury they re- ceive is a nipping frost toher. Already she fears for us. She fears for the cliildren she adores, and for you, the father of these, her lover, husband, protector; and you must be near her to sup¬ port and encourage her. Return to AA ; indsor then, my brotlier ; for such you are by every
üe«=*ííU the double place my absence imposes on you, and let me, in all my sufferings here, tum my eyes towards that dear seclusion, and say— There is peace."
к 3
ς-
CHAPTER VII. I run proceed to Windsor, but not with the intention of remaining there. I went but to ob¬ tain the consent of Idris, and then to return and take my station beside my unequalled friend ; to share his labours, and save him, if so it must be, at the expence of my life. Yet I dreaded to witness the anguish vvhich my resolve might excite in Idris. I had vowed to my own heart never to shadow her countenance even with transient grief, and should I prove recreant at the hour of greatest need ? I had begun my journey with anxious haste; now I desired to draw it out through the course of days and months, I longed to avoid the necessity of
action ; 1 strove to escape from thought—vainly —futurity, like a dark image in a phantasma¬ goria, came nearer and more near, till it clasped the whole earth in its shadow. A slight circumstance induced me to alter my usual route, and to return home by Egham and Bishopgate. I alighted at Perdita's ancient abode, her cottage ; and, sending forward the carriage, determined to walk across the park to the castle. This spot, dedicated to sweetest re¬ collections, the deserted house and neglected garden were well adapted to nurse my melan¬ choly. In our happiest days, Perdita had adorned her cottage with every aid art might bring, to that which nature luid selected f о favour. In the same spirit of exaggeration sím had, on the event of her sepai ation from Ray¬ mond, caused it to be entirely neglected. It was now in ruin : the deer had climbed the broken palings, and reposed among the flowers ; grass grew on the threshold, ancl the swinging lattice creaking to the wind, gave signal of utter
desertion. The sky was blue above, and the air impregnated with fragrance by the rare flowers that grew among the weeds. The trees moved overhead, awakening nature's favourite melody-- but the melancholy appearance of the choaked paths, and weed-grown flower-beds, dimmed even this gay summer scene. The time when in proud and happy security vve assembled at this cottage, was gone—soon the present hours would join those past, and shadows of future ones irose dark and menaci ng from the womb of time, their cradle and their bier. For the first time in my life I envied the sleep of the dead, and thought with pleasure of one's bed under the sod, where grief and fear have no power. I passed through the gap of the broken paling— 1 felt, while I disdained, the choaking tears—I rushed into the deaths of the forest. О death and change, rulers of our life, where are ye, that I may grapple with you í AA^hat was there in our tranquillity, that excited your envy—in our happiness, that ye should destroy it ? AA r e were
happy, loving, and beloved ; the horn of Amalthca contained no blessing unshosvered upon us, but, alas' la fortuna deidad bai bara importuna » oy cadaver y ayer fior, no peimanecejamasí*" As I wandered on thus ruminating, a number of country people passed me. They seemed full of careful thonght, and a few words of their eon T ersation that reached mc, induced me to approach and make further enquiries. xV party of people flying from London, as was frequent in those days, had come up tlie Thames in a boat. No one at AVindsor w r ould afford them shelter; so,going a little further up,they remain¬ ed all night in a deserted hue near Bolters lock. They pursued their way the following morning, leaving one of tlieir company behind them, sick
of the plague. This circumstance once spread abroad, none dared approach within half a mile of the infected neighbourhood, and the deserted wretch was left to fight with disease and death in solitude, as he best might. I was urged by compassion to hasten to the hut, for the purpose of ascertaining his situation, and administering to his wants. As I advanced I met knots of country-people talking earnestly of this cveut; distant as they were from the apprehended contagion, fear was impressed on every countenance. I passed by a group of these terrorists, in a lane in the direct road to the hut. One of them stopped me, and, conjecturing that I was ignorant of the circum¬ stance, told me not to go on, for that an infected person lay but at a short distance. " I know it," I replied, " and I am going to see in what condition the poor fellow is." A murmur of surprise and horror ran through the assembly. I continued :—" This poor wretch is deserted, dying, succouricss ; in these unhappy
times, God knows how soon any or all of us may be in like want. I am going to do, as I would be done by." " But you will never be able to return to the Castle—Lady Idris—his children— 11 in confused speech were the words that struck my ear. " Do you not know, my friends," I said, " that the Earl himself, novv Lord Protector, visits daily, not only those probably infected by this disease, but the hospitals and pest houses, going- near, and even touching the sick ? yet he was never in better health. You labour under an entire mistake as to tlie nature of the plague ; but do not fear, I do not ask any of you to ac¬ company me, nor to believe me, until J return safe and sound from my patient." So I left them, and hurried on. I soon arrived at the hut : the door was ajar. I en¬ tered, and one glance assured me that its former inhabitant was no more—he lav on a heap of straw, cold and stiff ; while a pernicious effluvia
filled the room, and various stains and marks served to shew the virulence of the disorder. I had never before beheld one killed by pes¬ tilence. While every mind was full of dismay at its effects, a craving for excitement had leel us to peruse De Foe's account, and the masterly delineations of the author of Arthur Mervyn. The pictures drawn in these books л ere so viv id, that we seemed to have experienced the results depicted by them. But cold were the sensations excited by words, burning though they vvere, anel describing the death and misery of thou¬ sands, compared to what I felt in looking on the corpse of tliis unhappy stranger. This indeed was the plague, I raised his rigid limbs, I marked the distortion of his face, and the stony eyes lost to perception. As I was thus occu¬ pied, chill horror congealed my blood, making my flesh quiver and my hair to stand on end. Half insanely I spoke to the dead. So the plague killed you, I muttered. How came
this ? AA T as the coming painful ? You look as if the enemy had tortured, before he murdered you. And novv I leapt up precipitately, ancl escaped from the hut, before nature could re¬ voke her laws, and inorganic words be breathed in answer from the lips of the departed. On returning through the lane, I saw at a distance the same assemblage of persons whieh I had left. They hurried away, as soon as they saw me ; my agitated mein added to their fear of coming near one vvho had entered within the \ ergo of contagion. At a distance from facts one draws conclusions which appear infallible, whieh yet when put to the test of realii), vanish like unreal dreams. I had ridiculed the fears of my countrymen, w hen they related to others ; novv that they came home to myself, I paused. The Rubicon, I felt, was passed ; and it behoved me well to re¬ flect what I should do on this hithei side of disease and danger. According to the vulgar superstition, my dress, my person, the air I
breathed, bore in it mortal clanger to myself and others. Should I return to the Castle, to my wife ancl children, vvith this taint upon me ? Not surely if I were infected ; but I felt cer¬ tain that I was not—a few hours would de¬ termine the question—I would spend these in the forest, in reflection on what w r as to come, and what my future actions vvere to be. In the feel¬ ing communicated to me by the sight of one struck by the plague, I forgot the events that had excited me so strongly in London ; new and more painful prospects, by degrees vvere cleared of the mist whicii had hitherto veiled them. The question was no longer whether I should share Adrian's toils and danger ; but in what maimer I could, in AVindsor and the neighbour¬ hood, imitate the prudence and zeal which, under his government, produced order and plenty in London, and hovv, now pestilence had spread more widely, I could secure the health of my own family. I spread the whole earth out as a map before
me. On no one spot of its surface could I put my finger and say, here is safety. In the south, the disease, virulent ancl immedicable, had nearly annihilated the race of man ; storm and inundation, poisonous winds and blights, filled up the measure of suffering. In the north it was worse—the lesser population gradually de¬ clined, and famine and plague kept watch on the survivors, who, helpless ane 1 feeble, were ready to fall an easy prey into their hands. I contracted my view to England. The over¬ grown metropolis, tlic great heart of mighty Britain, was pulseless. Commerce had ceased. All resort for ambition or pleasure was cut off —the streets were erass-growii—the houses empty—the fevv, that from necessity remained, seemeel already branded vvith the taint of in¬ evitable pestilence. In the larger manufactur¬ ing towns the same tragedy was acted on a smaller, yet more disastrous scale. There was no Adrian to superintend and direct, while whole flocks of the poor were struck and killed.
Yet we were not all to die. No truly, though thinned, the race of man would continue, and the great plague would, in after years, become matter of history and wonder. Doubtless this visitation was for extent unexampled—more need that we should work hard to dispute its pro¬ gress ; ere this men have gone out in sport, and slain tiieir thousands and tens of thousands; but now man had become a creature of price ; the hfe of one of them was of more worth than the so called tieasures of kings. Look at his thought- endued countenance, his graceful limb*^, his ma¬ jestic brow, his wondrous mechanism—the t)pe and model of this best work of God is not to be cast aside as a broken vessel—he shall be pre¬ served, and his children and his children's children carry down the name ancl form of man to latest time. Above all I must guard those entrusted by nature and fate to my especial care. And surely, if among all my fellow-creatures I were to sc4ect those who might stand forth examples of the
greatness and goodness of man, I could choose no other than those allied to me hv the most sacred ties Some from among the family of man must survive, and these should be among the survivors ; that should be my task—to accom¬ plish it my own life were a small sacrifice. There then in that castle—in Windsor Castle, birth-place of Idris and my babes, should be the haven and retreat for the wrecked bark of human society. Its forest should be our world—its garden afford us food ; within its walls I would establish the shaken throne of health. I was an outcast and a vagabond, when Adrian gently threw over me the silver net of love and civilization, and linked me inextri¬ cably to human charities and human ex¬ cellence. I was one, who, though an aspirant after good, and an ardent lover of wisdom, was yet unenrollcd in any list of worth, when Idris, the princely born, who was herself the personification of all that was divine in woman, she who walked the earth like a poet's
dream, as a carved goddess endued with sense, or pictured saint stepping from the can vas— she, the most worthy, chose me, ancl gave me herself —a priceless gift. During several hours I continued thus to meditate, till hunger and fatigue brought me back to the passing hour, then marked by long shadows cast from the descending sun. I had wandered towards Bracknel, far to the west of Windsor. The feeling of perfect health vvhich I enjoyed, assured me that I was free from conta¬ gion. I remembered that leiris had been kept in ignorance of my proceedings. She might have heard of my return from London, and my visit to Bolter's Lock, which, connected with my con¬ tinued absence, might tend greatly to alarm her, I returned to Windsor by the Long A Valk, and passing through the town towards the Castle, I found it in a state of agitation and disturbance. "It is too late to be ambitious," says Sir Thomas Browne. "AVe cannot hope to live so long in our names ¿is some have done in their
persons; one face of J anus holds no proportion to the other." Upon this text many fanatics arose, who prophesied that the end of time was come. The spirit of superstition had birth, from the wreck of our hopes, and antics wild ard danger¬ ous vvcre played on the great theatre, while the remaining particle of futurity dwindled into a point in thc v eyes of the prognostica tors. Weak- spirited women died of fear as they listened to their denunciations; men of robust form and seeming strength fell into idiotcy and madness, racked by the dread of coming eternity. A man of this kind was now pouring forth his elo¬ quent despair among the inhabitants of AA T ind- sor. The scene of the morning, and my visit to the dead, vvhich had been spread abroad, had alarmed the country-people, so they had be¬ come fit instruments to be played upon by a maniac. The poor wretch had lost his young wife and lovely infant by the plague. He was a mecha¬ nic; and, rendered unable to attend to the occu-
pation which supplied his necessities, famine was added to his other miseries. He left the chamber vvhich contained his vvife and child — wife and child no more, but vi dead earth upon the eartli""—wild with hunger, watching and grief, his diseased fancy made him believe him¬ self sent by heaven to preach the end of time to the world. He entered the churches, and fore¬ told to the congregations their speedy removal to the vaults below. He appeared like the for¬ gotten spirit of the time in the theatres, and bade the spectators go home and die. He had been seized and confined ; he had escaped and wan¬ dered from London among the neighbouring towns, and, with frantic gestures and thrilling words, he unveiled to each their hidden fears, and gave voice to the soundless thouglit they dared not syllable. He stood under the arcade of the town-hall of Windsor, and from this elevation harangued a trembling crovvd. " Hear, O ye inhabitants of the earth," he cried, " hear thor, all seeing, but most pitiless
Heaven I hear thou too, О tempest-tossed heart, vvhicli breathes out these words, yet faints beneath their meaning ! Death is among us ' The earth is beautif id and flower-bedecked, but she is oih grave ! The clouds of heaven weep for us—the pageantry of the stars is but our funeral toïch- Iight. Grey headed men, ye hoped for yet a few years in your long-known abode—bnt t lie lease is up, \ ou must remove—children, ve will never reach maturít), even now the small grave is dug Îor ye—mothers, clasp them in voiu arms, one death embraces you !" shuddering, he stretched out his hands, his eyes east up, seemed bursting from thur sockets, while he appeared to follow shapes, to us invisible, m ihe v ielding air—" There they are, " he cried, " the dead ! They rise m their shrouds, and pass in silent procession towards the f-ur land of their doom- their bloodless lips move not—theu shadowy limbs are void of motion, while still they glide onwards. ** We come, ' he exclaimed, springing forwards, ** for what bhould we wait? voi II ι
Haste, my friends, apparel yourselves in the court-dress of death. Pestilence will usher you to his presence. Why thus long? they, the good, the wise, and the beloved, are gone before. Mothers, kiss your last—husbands, protectors no more, lead on the partners of your death ! Come, О come î while the dear ones are yet in sight, for soon they will pass away, and we never never shall join them more." From such ravings as these, he would sud¬ denly become collected, and with unexaggerated but terrific words, paint the horrors of the time ; describe with minute detail, the effects of the plague on the human frame, and tell heart¬ breaking tales of the snapping of dear affinities — the gasping horror of despair over the death¬ bed of the last beloved—so that groans and even shrieks burst from the crowd. One man in particular stood in front, his eyes fixt on the prophet, his mouth open, his limbs rigid, while his face changed to various colours, yellow, blue, and green, through intense fear. The maniac
caught his glance, and turned his eye on him— one has heard of the gaze of the rattle-snake, which allures the trembling victim till he falls within his jaws. The maniac became composed ; his person rose higher ; authority beamed from his countenance. He looked on the peasant, vvho began to tremble, while he still gazed ; his knees knocked together; his teeth chattered. He at last fell down in convulsions. " That man has the plague," said the maniac calmly. A shriek burst from the lips of the poor wretch ; and then sudden motionlessness came over him ; it was manifest to all that he was dead. Cries of horror filled the place—every one en¬ deavoured to eflect his escape—in a ïcw minutes the market place vvas cleared—the corpse lay on tiie ground ; and the maniac, subdued and ex¬ hausted, sat beside it, leaning his gaunt cheek vipon his thin hand. Soon some people, deputed by the magistrates, came to remove the body ; the unfortunate being saw a jailor in each—he fled L 2
precipitately, wdiile I passed onwards to the Castle. Death, cruel and relentless, had entered these beloved wails. An old servant, who had nursed Idris in infancy, and who Hved with us more on the footing of a revered relative than a domestic, had gone a few days before to visit a daughter, married, and settled in the neighbourhood of London. On the night of her return she sickened of the plague. From the haughty and unbend¬ ing nature of the Countess of AA r indsor, Idris liad few tender filial associations with her. This good woman had stood in the place of a mother, and her very deficiencies of education and know¬ ledge, by rendering her blindile and defenceless, , endeared her to us—she was the especial favourite of the children. I found my poor girl, there is no exaggeration in the expression, wild with grief and dread. She hung over the patient in agony, which wasnot mitigated when her thoughts wandered towards her babes, for whom she feared
|>(V
infection. My arrival was hke the newly dis¬ covered lamp of a lighthouse to sailors, who are weathering some dangerous point. She deposited her appalling doubts in my hands; she relied on my judgment, and was comforted hy my partici¬ pation in her sorrow. Soon our poor nurse ex¬ pired ; and the anguish of suspense was changed to deep regret, which tliough at first more pain¬ ful, yet yielded with greater readiness to my consolations. Sleep, the sovereign balm, at length steeped her tearful eyes in forgetfulness. She slept ; and quiet prevailed in the Castle, whose inhabitants were hushed to repose. I was awake, and during the long hours of dead night, my busy thoughts worked in my brain, like ten thousand mill-wheels, rapid, acute, untameable. All slept—-all England slept; and from my win¬ dow, commanding a wide prospect of the star-il¬ lumined country, I saw the land stretched mt in placid rest. I was awake, alive, while the brother of death possessed my race. What, if the more potent of these fraternal deities should obtain
dominion over it ? The silence of midnight, to speak truly, though apparently a paradox, rung in my ears. The solitude became intolerable— I placed my hand on the beating heart of Idris, î bent my head to catch the sound of her breath, to assure myself that she still existed—for a mo¬ ment I doubted whether I should not awake her ; so effeminate an horror ran through my frame. —Great God ! vvould it one day be thus ? One day all extinct, save myself, should I walk the earth alone ? Were these warning voices, whose inarticulate and oracular sense forced belief upon me ? Yet I would not call them Voices of warning, that announce to us Only the inevitable. As the sun, Ere it is risen, sometimes paints its image In the atmosphere—so often do the spiiits Ot' great events stride on before the events, And in to-day already walks to-morrow.*
CHAPTER VIIL After a long interval, I am again impelled by the restless spirit within me to continue my narration ; but I must alter the mode vvhich I have hitherto adopted. The details contained in the foregoing pages, apparently trivial, yet each slightest one weighing like lead in the depressed scale of human afflictions; this tedious dwelling on the sorrows of others, while my own vvere only in apprehension ; this slowly laying bare of my soul's wounds : this journal of death ; this long drawn and tortuous path, leading to the ocean of countless tears, awakens me again to keen grief. I had used this history as an opiate ; while it described my beloved friends, freâh with
life and glowing with hope, active assistants on the scene, I was soothed ; there will be a more melancholy pleasure in painting the end of all. But the intermediate steps, the climbing the wall, raised up between vvhat was and is, while I still looked back nor saw the concealed desert beyond, is a labour рач my strength. Time and experience have placed me on an height from which I can comprehend the past as a whole ; and in this way I must describe it, bringing forward the leading incidents, and disposing light and shade so as to form a picture in whose very darkness there vvill be harmony. It would be needless to narrate tiiose disastrous occurrences, for vvhich a parallel might be found in any slighter visitation of our gigantic calamity Does the reader wish to hear of the pest-houses, where death is tlie comforter-—of the moumfui passage of the death-cart—of the insensibility of the worthless, and the anguish of the loving heart—of harrowing shrieks and silence dire—of the variety of disease, desertion, famine, despair^
and death ? There are many books vvhich can feed the appetite craving for these things ; let them turn to the accounts of Boccaccio, l)e Foe. and Browne. The vast annihilation that has swallowed all things—the voiceless solitude of the once busy earth—the lonely state of single¬ ness which hems me in, has deprived even such details of their stinging reality, and mellowing the lurid tints of past anguish with poetic hues, I am able to escape from the mosaic of circumstance, by perceiving and rcflecťng back the grouping and combined colouring of the past. I had returned fremi London posse?seti by the idea, with the intimate feeling that it was my first duty to secure, as well as I was able, the well-being of my family, and then to return and take my post beside Adrian. The events that immediately followed on my arrival at Windsor changed this view of things. The plague was not in London alone, it was every where —it came on us, as Ryland hail said, like a thousand packs of wolves, howling through L Ò
the winter night, gaunt and fierce. When once disease was introduced into the rural districts, its effects appeared more horrible, more exigent, and more difficult to cure, than in towns. There was a companionship in suffering there, and, the neighbours keeping constant watch on each other, and inspired by the active benevolence of Adrian, succour was afforded, and the path of destruction smoothed. But in the country, among the scattered farm-houses, in lone cot¬ tages, in fields, and barns, tragedies were acted harrowing to the soul, unseen, unheard, un¬ noticed. Medical aid was less easily procured, food was more difficult io obtain, and human beings, unwithheld hy shame, for they were tin- beheld of their fellows, ventured on deeds of greater wickedness, or gave way more readily to their abject fears. Deeds of heroism also occurred, whose very mention swells the heart and brings tears into the eyes. Such is human nature, that beauty and deformity are often closely linked. In read-
ing history we are chiefly struck by the genero¬ sity and self-devotion that follow close on the heels of crime, veiling vvith supernal flowers the stain of blood. Such acts were not wanting to adorn the grim train that waited on the progress of the plague. The inhabitants of Berkshire and Bucks had been long aware that the plague was in London. in Liverpool, Bristol, Manchester, York, in short, in all the more populous towns of England, They vvere not however the less astonished and dismayed when it appeared among themselves. They were impatient and angry in the midst of terror. They would do something to throw off* the clinging evil, and, while in action, they fancied that a remedy was applied. The inhabitants of the smaller towns left their houses, pitched tents in the fields, w andering separate from each other careless of hunger or the sky's inclemency, while they imagined that they avoided the death-deal¬ ing disease. The farmers and cottagers, on the contrary, struck vvith the fear of solitude, and
madly desiious of medical assistance, flocked into the towns. But winter was coming, and with winter, hope. In August, the plague had appeared in the country of England, and during September it made its ravages. Towards the end οΐ October it dwindled away, and was in some degree re¬ placed by a typhus, of hardly less virulence. The autumn was warm and rainy : the infirm and sickly died off— happier they : many young people flushed with health and prosperity, made pale by wasting malady, became the inhabitants οΐ the grave. The crop had failed, the bad corn, and want of foreign wines, adeled vigour to disease. Before Christmas half England was under water. The storms of the last winter were renewed ; but the diminished shipping of this year caused us to feel less the tempesis of the sea. The flood and storms did more harm to continental Europe than to us—giving, as it were, the last blow to the calamities vvhicli de¬ stroyed it. In Italy the rivers were uuvvatched
by the diminished peasantry ; and, like vvild beasts from their lair when the hunters and dogs are afar, did Tiber, Arno, ancl Fo^ rush upon and destroy the fertility of the plains. Whole vil¬ lages were carried away. Rome, and Florence, and Pisa were overflowed, and their marble palaces, late mirrored in tranquil streams, had their foundations shaken by their winter-gifted power. In Germany and Russia the injury was still more momentous. But frost vvould come at last, and vvith it a re¬ newal of our lease of earth. Frost would blunt the arrows of pestilence, and enchain the furious elements ; and the land would in spring throvv off her garment of snow, released from her menace of destruction. It was not until February that the desired signs of winter appeared. For three days tbe snow fell, ice stopped the current of the rivers, and the birds flew out from crackling branches of the frost-whitened trees. On the fourth morning all vanished. A ^outh-west wind brought up rain—the sun came out, and
mocking the usual laws of nature, seemed even at this early season to burn with solsticial force* It was no consolation, that vvith the first winds of March the lanes were filled with violets, the fruit trees covered vvith blossoms, that the corn sprung up, and the leaves came out, forced by the un¬ seasonable heat. We feared the balmy air—we feared the cloudless sky, the flower-covered earth, and delightful woods, for we lookedon the fabric of the universe no longer as our dwelling, but our tomb, and the fragrant land smelled to the apprehension of fear like a wide church-yard. Pisando la tierra dura de continuo el hombre està y cada passo que dà es sobre su sepultura.* Yet notwithstanding these disadvantages win¬ ter was breathing time; and we exerted ourselves to make the best of it. Plague might not revive
^with the summer ; but if it did, it should find us prepared. It is a part of man's nature to adapt itself through habit even to pain and sorrow. Pestilence had become a part oí our future, our existence ; it was to be guarded against, like the flooding of rivers, the encroachments of ocean, or the inclemency of the sky. After long suffer¬ ing and bitter experience, some panacea might be discovered ; as it was, all that received infec¬ tion died—all however vvere not infected ; and it became our part to fix deep the foundations, and raise high the barrier between contagion and the sane ; to introduce such order as would con¬ duce to the well-being of the survivors, and as would preserve hope and some portion of happi¬ ness to those vvho were spectators of the stiU re¬ newed tragedy. Adrian had introduced syste¬ matic modes of proceeding in the metropolis, which, while thty were unable to stop the pro¬ gress of cj,4*th, yet prevented other evils, vice and folly, ίν,Αΐΐ rendering the awful fate of the
hour still more tremendous. I wished to imitate his example, but men are used to -— move all together, if they move at ail ? * and I could find no means of leading the inha¬ bitants of scattered towns and villages, who for¬ got my words as soon as they heard them not, and veered with every baffling wind, that might arise from an apparent change of circumstance. I adopted another plrn. Those writers vvho have imagined a reign of peace and happiness on earth, have generally J ^scribed a rural coun¬ try, where each small township was directed by the eiders and wise men. This was the key of my design. Each village, however binali, usuili ly contains a leader, one among themselves vvhom they venerate, whose advice they seek in diiliculty, and whose good opinion they chief! ν value. I was immediately drawn to make this
observation by occurrences that presented them¬ selves to my personal experience. In the village of Little Marlow an old woman ruled the community. She had lived for some years in an alms-house, and on fine Sundays her threshold was constantly beset by a crowd, seeking her advice and listening to her admoni¬ tions. She had been a soldier's wife, and bad seen the world; infirmity, induced by fevers caught in unwholesome quarters, had come on her before its time, and she seldom moved from her little cot. The plague entereel the village ; and, while fright and grief deprived the inhabi¬ tants of the little wisdom they possessed, old Martha stepped forward and said ~" Before now I have been in a town where there was the plague. 1 "—" And you escaped r'" —" Xo, but ï recovered."·—After this Martha was seated more firmly than ever on the regal seat, elevated by reverence and love. She entered the cottages of the sick ; she relieved their w ants with her own ha»d ; she betrayed no fear, and inspired all
who saw her with some portion of her own na¬ tive courage. She attended the markets—she insisted upon being supplied with food for those who were too poor to purchase it. She shewed them hovv the well-being of each included the prosperity of all. She would not permit the gardens to be neglected, nor the very flowers in the cottage lattices to droop from want of care. Hope, she said, was better than a doctor's pre¬ scription, and every thing that could sustain and enliven the spirits, of more worth than drugs and mixtures. It was the sight of Little Marlow, and my conversations with Martha, that led me to the plan I formed. I had before visited the manor houses and gentlemen's scats, and often found the inhabitants actuated by the purest benevo¬ lence, ready to lend their utmost aid for the wel¬ fare of their tenants. But this was not enough. The intimate sympathy generated by similar hopes and fears, similar experience and pursuits, was wanting here. The poor perceived that the
rich possessed other means of preservation than those which could be partaken of by themselves, seclusion, and, as far as circumstances permitted, freedom from care. They could not place re¬ liance on them, but turned with tenfold depend¬ ence to the succour and advice of their equals. I resolved therefore to go from village to village, seeking out the rustic archon of the place, and by systematizing their exertions, and enlightening their views, cuerease both their power and their use among their fellow-cottagers. Many ciianges also now occurred in these spontaneous regal elections : depositions and abdications were fre¬ quent, while, in the place of the old and pru¬ dent, the ardent youth would step forward, eager for action, regardless of danger. Often too, the voice to which ah listened was suddenly silenced, the helping hand cold, the sympathe¬ tic eye closed, and the villagers feared still more the death that had selected a choice victim, shivering in dust the heart that had beat for them, reducing to incommunicable annihilation
the mind for ever occupied vvith projects fbr their welfare. Whoever labours for man must often find in¬ gratitude, watered by vice and folly, spring from the grain which he has sown. Death, which had in our younger days walked the earth Jike "a thief that comes in the night," now, rising from his subterranean vault, girt vvith power, with dark banner floating, came a con¬ queror. Many saw, seateel above his vice-regal throne, a supreme Providence, who directed his shafts, and guided his progress, and they bowed their heads in resignation, or at least in obedience. Others perceived only a passing casualty ; they endeavoured to exchange terror for heedlessness, and plunged into lieemtious- ness, to avoid the agonizing throes of worst ap¬ prehension. Thus, while the wise, the good, and the prudent vvere occupied by the labours of benevolence, the truce of winter produced other effects among the young, the thoughtless, and thi- vicious. During the colder mouths there
w a- a general rush to London in search of amuse- ment —the ties of public opinion vvere loosened , many were rich, heretofore poor—many had lost father and mother, the guardians of their шоьчЦ their mentors and restraints. It would have beeu useless to have opposed thc-rc im¬ pulses by barriers, vvhich would only have driven tho.se actuated by them to more perni¬ cious indulgencies. The the-atrcs were open and thronged : dance and midnight festival werv frequented—in many of these decorum was vio¬ lated, and the evils, which hitherto adhered to an advancenl state of civilization, were doubled. The student left his books, the artist his -study . the occupations of life vvere gone, but the arm«·*■**- ment.-·, remained; enjoyment might be protracted to the verge of the grave. All factitious colour¬ ing disappeared—death rose like night, and, pio- t ceted by its murky shadows the blush of mo¬ desty, the reserve of pride, the decorum of pru¬ dery were frequently thrown aside as useless veil».
This was not universal. Among better na¬ tures, anguish and dread, the fear of eternal separation, and the awful wonder produced by unprecedented calamity, drew closer the ties of kindred and friendship. Philosophers opposed their principles, as barriers to the inundation of profligacy or despair, and the only ramparts to protect the invaded territory of human life ; the religious, hoping now for their reward, clung fast to their creeds, as the rafts and planks which over the tempest-vexed sea of suffering, would bear them in safety to the harbour of the Un¬ known Continent, The loving heart, obliged to contract its view, bestowed its overflow of affec¬ tion in triple portion on the iew that remained. Y T et, even among these, the present, as an un¬ alienable possession, became all of time to vvhich they dared commit the precious freight of their hopes. The experience of immemorial time had taught us formerly to count our enjoyments by years, and extend our prospect of life through
a lengthened period of progression and decay ; the long road threaded a vast labyrinth, and the Valley of the Shadow of Death, in which it ter¬ minated, was hid by intervening objects. But an earthquake had changed the scene—under our very feet tiie earth yawned —deep and precipitous the gulph below opened to receive us, while the hours charioted us towards the chasm. But it was winter now, and months must elapse hefore we are hurled from our security. AVe became ephemera, to whom the interval between the rising and setting sun was as a long drawn year cif common time. We should never see our children ripen into maturity, uor behold their downy cheeks roughen, their blithe hearts sub¬ dued by passion or care ; but we had them now —they lived, and we lived— w hat more could we desire ? With such schooling did my poor Idris try to hush thronging fears, and in some mea- bure succeeded. It was not as in summer-time, when each hour might bring the dreaded fate— until summer, wc felt sure ; and this certainty,
short lived as it must be, yet for awhile satisfied her maternal tenderness, I know not hovv to express or communicate the sense of concen¬ trated, intense, though evanescent transport, that imparadized us in the present hour. Our joys vvere dearer because vve saw their end; they were keener because we felt, to its fullest ex¬ tent, their value; they vvere purer because their essence was sympathy—as a meteor is brighter than a star, did the felicity of this winter contain in itself the extracted delights of along, long life. How lovely is spring ! As we looked from Windsor Terrace on the sixteen fertile counties spread beneath, speckled by happy cottages and wealthier towns, all looked as in former years, heart-cheering and fair. The land was ploughed, the slender blades of wheat broke through the dark soil, the fruit trees were covered with buds, the husbandman was abroad in the fields, the milk-maid tripped home with well-filled paita the swallows and martins struck the sunny poofs with theii <r, pointed wings, the new dropped
lambs reposed on the young grass, the tender growth of leaves— Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds A silent space with ever sprouting green,* Man himseif seemed to regenerate, and feel tlie frost of winter yield to an elastic and warm re¬ newal of life—reason told us that care antl sorrm- would grow with f Jie opening year—but hew to believe the ominous voice breathed up with pestiferous vapours from fear's dim cavern, w hile nature, laughing and scattering from lu ι green lap flowers, and fruits, and .-vparkhiig waters, invited us to join the gay masque ol young life she led upon the ^cene? Where was the plague? "Here—evu v where!" one voice of horror and dismay ex¬ claimed, when in the pleasant days of a sunny May the Destroyer of man brooded again ov it the earth, forcing lhe spirit to leave its organic
VOL. II.
u
chrysalis, and to enter upon an untried life. AVith one mighty sweep of its potent weapon, all caution, all care, all prudence were levelled low : death sat at the tables of the great, stretched itself on the cottager's pallet, seized the dastard who fled, quelled the brave man who resisted : despondency entered every heart, sorrow dimmed every eye. Sights of woe now became familiar to me, and were I to tell all of anguish and pain that I witnessed, of the despairing moans of age, and the more terrible smiles of infancy in the bosom of horror, my reader, his limbs quivering and his hair on end, would wonder how I did not, seized with sudden frenzy, dash myself from some precipice, and so close my eyes for ever on the sad end of the world. But the powers of lovcy poetry, and creative faucy will dwell even beside the sick of the plague, vvith the squalid, and with the dying. A feeling of devotion, of duty, of a high and steady purpose, elevated me ; a strange joy filled my heart. In the
midst of saddest grief I seemed to tread air, while the spirit of good shed round me an am¬ brosial atmosphere, which blunted the sting of sympathy, and purified the air of sighs. If my wearied soul flagged in its career, 1 thought of my loved home, of the casket that contained my treasures, of the kiss of love and the filial caress, while my eyes w r ere moistened by purest dew, and my heiart was at once softened and re» freshed by thrilling tenderness. Maternal affection had not rendered Idris selfish ; at the beginning of our calamity she had, with thoughtless c-nthusiasm, devoted her¬ self to the care o£ the sick and helpless. I clucked her; and she submitted to my rule. I told her hovv the fear of her danger palsied my exertions, how ťne knowledge of her safety strung my nerves to endurance. I shewed her the dangers which her children incurred during lier absence ; and öhe at length agreed not to go beyond the inclosure of the forest. Indeed, w ithin the walls of the Castle we had a colony
of the unhappy, deserted by their relatives, and in themselves helpless, sufficient to occupy her time and attention, while ceaseless anxiety for my welfare and the health of her children, however she strove to curb or conceal it, absorbed ail her thoughts, and undermined the vital principle. After watching over and providing for their safety, her second care vvas to hide from me her anguish and tears Each night I returned to the Castle, and found there repose and love awaiting me. Often I waited beside the bed of death till midnight, *^md through the obscurity of rainy, cloudy nights rode many miles, sustained by one cir¬ cumstance only, the safety and sheltered report of those I loved. If some scene of tremendoic* agony shook my frame and fevered m) brow, 1 would lay my head on the lap of Idris, and the tumultuous pulses subsided mto a temperate flow—her smile could raise me from hopeless¬ ness, her embrace bathe my sorrowing heart m calm peace.
Summer advanced, and, crowned vvith the sun's potent rays, plague shot her unerring shafts oyer the earth. The nations beneath their in¬ fluence bowed their heads, and died. The corn that sprung up in plenty, lay in autumn rotting on the ground, while the melancholy wretch vvho had gone out to gather bread for his children, lay stifF and plague-struck in the furrow. The green woods waved their boughs majestically, while the dying were spread beneath their shade, answering the solemn melody with inharmonious cries. The pamted birds flitted through the shades ; the careless deer reposed unhurt upon the fern™the oxen and the horses strayed from their unguarded stables, ancl grazed among the wheat, for death fell on man alone. AVith summer and mortality grew our fears My poor love and I looked at each other, and our babes.—" We vvill save them, Idris/' I said, " I will save them. Years hence we shall recount to them our fears, then passed away vvith their occasion. Though they only should
remain on the earth, still they shall live, nor shall their checks become pale nor their sweet voices languish." Our eldest in some degrede under¬ stood the scenes passing around, and at times, he with serious looks questioned me concerning the reason of so vast a desolation. But he was only ten years old ; and the hilarity of youth soon chased unreasonable care from his brow. Evelyn, a laughiug cherub, a gamesome infant, without idea of pain or sorrow, would, shaking back his light curls from his eyes, make the halls re-echo vvith his merriment, and in a thou¬ sand artless ways attract our attention to his play\ Clara, our lovely gentle Clara, was our stay, our solace, our delight. She made it her task to attend the sick, comfort the sorrowing, assist the aged, and partake the sports and awaken the gaiety of the young. She flitted througli the rooms, like a good spirit, dispatched from the celestial kingdom, to illumine our dai к hour with alien splendour. Gratitude and praise marked vvhere her footsteps had been. Yet,
when she stood in unassuming simplicity before us, playing vvith our children, or with girlish assi¬ duity performing little kind offices for Idris, one wondered in what fair lineament of her pure loveliness, in what soft tone of her thrilling voice, so much of heroism, sagacity and active good¬ ness resided. The summer passed tediously, for vve trusted that winter would at least check the disease. That iL would vani&h altogether was an hope too dear—too heartfelt, to be expressed. AVhe*n such a thought was heedlessly uttered, the hearers, with a gush of tears and passionate sobs, bore witness how deep their fears were, how small their hopes. For my own part, my exertions for the public good permitted me to observe more closely than most others, the virulence and extensive ravages of our sightless enemy. A sh ort month has destroyed a village, and vvhere in May the first person sickened, in June tlie paths were deformed by unburied corpses—the houses temantless, no s^oke arising from the
chimneys; and the housewife's clock marked only the hour when death had heen triumphant From such scenes I have sometimes næ сч! a deserted infant—sometimes led a young and grieving mother from the lifeless image of her first born, or drawn the sturdy labourer from childish weeping over his extinct family. July is gone. August must pass, and by the middle of September we may hope. Each day vv as eagerly counted ; and the inhabitants of towns, desirous to leap this dangerous interval, plunged into dissipation, and strove, by riot, and what they wished to imagine to be pleasure, to banish thought and opiate despair. None but Adrian could hav e tamed the motley population of London, which, like a troop of unbitted steeds ribbing to their pa~aires, had thrown aside all mi¬ női fears, through the operation of the fear para¬ mount. Even Adrian was obliged in part to yield, that he might be able, if not to guide, at least to set bounds to the license of the times. The theatres wei с kept open; every place of
public resort was frequented ; though he endea¬ voured so to modify them, as might best quiet the agitation of the spectators, and at the same time prevent a reaction of misery when the excitement was over. Tragedies deep and dire vvere the chief favourites. Comedy brought with it too great a contrast to the inner despair : when such were attempted, it was not unfrequent for a comedian, in the midst of the laughter oc¬ casioned by his disproportioneel buffoonery, to find a word or thought inhis part that jarred vvith his ovvn sense of wretchedness, and burst from mimic merriment into sobs and tears, while the spec¬ tators, seized with irresistible sympathy, wept, and the pantomimic revelry was changed to a real exhibition of tragic passion. It was not in my nature to derive consolation from such scenes ; from theatres, whose buffoon laughter and discordant mirth awakened dis¬ tempel е Л sympathy, or where fictitious teai> and wailings mocked the heart-felt grief within. from festival or crowded meeting, where hila¬ li 3
rity sprung from the worst feelings of our na¬ ture, or such enthralment of the better ones, as impressed it with garish and false varnish ; from assemblies of mourners in the guise of revellers. Once however I witnessed a scene of singular interest at one of the theatres, vvhere nature overpowered art, as an overflowing cataract w Ш tear away the puny manufacture of a mock cascade, which had before been fed by a small portion of its waters. I had come to London to see Adrian. He was not at the palace ; and, though the attend¬ ants elid not know whither he had gone, they did not expect him till late at night, It was between six arid seven o'clock, a fine summer afternoon, and I spent my leisure hours in a ramble through the empty streets of London ; now turning to avoid an approaching funeral, now urged by curiosity to observe the state of a particular spot ; my wanderings were instinct vvith pain, for silence and desertion characte¬ rized every place I visited, and the few beings I
met were so pale and woe-begone, so marked vvith care and depressed by fear, that weary of encountering only signs of misery, I began to retread my steps towards home. I was now in Holborn, and passed by a pub¬ lic house filled with uproarious companions, whose songs, laughter, and shouts were more sorrowful than the pale looks and silence of the mourner. Such an one vvas near, hovering round this house. The sorry plight of her dress displayed her poverty, she was ghastly pale, and continued approaching, first the win¬ dow and then the door of the house, as if fearful, yet longing to enter, A sudden burst of song and merriment seemeel to sting her to the heart ; she murmured, " Can he have the heart ?" and then mustering her courage, she stepped witliin the threshold. The landlady met her in the passage ; the poor creature asked, i£ Is my husband here? Can I see G eorge ŕ" 1 "Scellini," cried the vvoman, " yes, if you
go to him ; last night he was taken with the plague, and vve sent him to the hospital." The unfortunate inquirer staggered against и wall, a faint cry escaped her— u О ! were voir cruel enough," she exclaimed, " to send him there ŕ" The landlady meanwhile hurried away ; but a more compassionate bar-maid gave lier a de¬ tailed account, the sum of vvhich was, that her husband had been taken ill, after a night of riot, and sent bv his boon companions with all expe¬ dition to St. Bartholomew's Hospital. I had watched this scene, for there was a gentleness about the poor woman that interested me; she now tottered away from the door, walking a<* well as she could down Holborn Hiil ; but her strength soon failed her ; she leaned against a wall, and her head sunk on her bosom, while her pallid cheek became still more white. I went up to her and offered my services. She hardly looked up—" You can do me no good/' she
replied; " I must go to the hospital ; if I do not die before I get there.^ There vvere still a few hackney-coaches ac¬ customed to stand about the streets, more truly from habit than for use. I put her in one of these, and entered with her that I might secure her entrance into the hospital. Our way was short, and she -said little; except interrupted ejaculations of reproach that he had left her, ex¬ clamations on the unkindness of some of his friends, and hope that she would find hun alive There was a simple, natural earnestness aliout her that interested me in her fate, especially w lien she assured mc that her husband u as thebe»! of men, — liad been so, till want of business dunng thc^ unhappy times had thrown him into batí com¬ pany. " He could not bear to come home," bile said, <( only to **ч*е our children che. Л man cannot have the patience a motlier has, with her ow n flesh and blood." We were set down at St. Bartholomew's, and filtered the vv retched predicts of the hemse oi
disease. The poor -creature clung closer to me, as she savı with whit heartless haste then'bore the tlead from the wards, and took them into a room, who-,e half-4>jK?»ed door displayed a num¬ ber <4 согр-еъ, hoíTib!,· to behold by one unac¬ customed tu sueh scenes. We v*.erc directed Ш the ward where her lur-band had bevn first Liken, ana Mill was, the nurse* said, if alive. Ыу companion h»oketì eagerly from one bed to the other, till ăl the end of the ward hhe espied, on a w retcb-ed bed, a 4|ualid, hairgard creature, writhing under the torturi· of disease- She rushed low aids hmi, she* embraced him, bh v**-mg G<hI for his preservation. The enthiis.-isin diat iibpired lier vuth this étrange jov, blinded her to the fwtrro; s аЫшг ht ι ; but they v, t re intolerably ag'-ni/mg to me. The ward was filletl with an iffiuvt thaï vnu^d my heart to heave vuth painful qualms The dead were carried out, ami tlie sick brought in, with like indifference; sonu* v, eie vieamm« with pain, others laughing fremi the íufíueuee of
more terrible delirium ; some were attended by weeping, despairing relations, others called aloud with thrilling tenderness or reproach on the frie i nds who had deserted them, while the nurses went from bed to bed, incarnate images of de¬ spair, neglect, and death. I gave gold to my luckless companion; I recommended her to the care of the attendants ; I then hastened away ; while the tormentor, the imagination, busied itself in picturing my ovvn loved one>s, stretched on sueh l>ed*s, attended thus. The country afforded no such mass of horrors ; solitary va retches died in the open fields; and L have found a survivor in a vacant village, contending at onee with famine and dis-ease ; but the assem¬ bly of pestilence, the banqueting hall of death, was spread only in London. í rambled on, oppressed, distracted by pain¬ ful emotions—suddenly I found myself before Drury Lane Theatre. The play was Macbeth — the first aetor of the age was there to exert Jus }>owers Lo drug with irreflection the auditors ;
such a medicine 1 yearned for, so I entered. The theatre was tolerably well filled. Shakspeare, whose popularity was established by the ap¬ proval of four centuries, had not lost his in¬ fluence even at this dread period ; but was still " Ut magus," the wizard to rule our hearts and govern our imaginations. I came in dur¬ ing the interval between the third and fourth act. I looked round on the audience ; the fe¬ males vvere mostly of the lower classes, but the men vvere of all ranks, come hither to forget awhile the protracted scenes of wretchedness, which awaited them at their miserable homes. The curtain drew up, and the stage presented the scene of the witches' cave. The wildness and supernatural machinery of Macbeth, was a pledge that it could contain little directly con¬ nected with our present circumstances. Great pains had been taken in the scenery to give the semblance of reality to the impossible. The extreme darkness of the stage, whose only light was received from the fire under the cauldron,
joined to a kind of mist that floated about it, rendered the unearthy shapes of the witches ob¬ scure and shadowy. It was not there decrepid old hags that bent over their pot throwing in the grim ingredients of the magic charm, but forms frightful, unreal, ancl fanciful. The entrance of Hecate, and the wild music that followed, took us out of this world. The cavern shape the stage assumed, the beetling rocks, the glare of the fire, the misty shades that crossed the scene at times, the music in harmony with all witch-like fancies, permitted the imagination to re¬ vel, without fear of contradiction, or reproof from reason or the heart. The entrance of Macbeth did not destroy the illusion, for he was actuated by the same feelings that inspired us, and while the work of magic proceeded we sympathized in his wonder and his daring, and gave ourselves up with our whole souls to the influence of scenic delusion. I felt the beneficial result of such excitement, in a renewal of those pleasing flights of faucy to which I had long been a
stranger. The effect of this scene of incanta¬ tion communicated a portion of its pow r er to that which followed. AVe forgot that Malcolm and Macduff vvere mere human beings, acted upon by such simple passions as warmed our own breasts. By slow degrees however we were drawn to the real interest of the scene. A shud¬ der like the swift passing of an electric shock ran through the house, when Rosse exclaimed, in answer to " Stands Scotland where it did ?" Alas poor country ; Almost afraid to know itself ! It cannot Be called our mother, but our grave: vvhere nothing-, But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; AVhere sighs, and groans, and shrieks that rent the air, Are made, not marked; vvhere violent sorrow seems A modern extasy: the dead man's knell Js there soaree asked, for who ; and good men's lives Expire before the flowers ia their caps, Using, or ere they sicken. Each word struck the sense, as our Hfe's passing bell ; we feared to look at each other, but bent our gaze on the stage, as if our eyes could fall innocuous on that alone. The person who
played the part of Rosse, suddenly became aware of the dangerous ground he trod. He was an inferior actor, but truth now made him excellent ; as he went on to announce to Mac¬ duff the slaughter of his family, he was afraid to speak, trembling from apprehension of a burst of grief from the audience, not from his feJlow-mime. Each word was drawn out with difficulty ; real anguish painted his features ; his eyes were now lifted in sudden horror, now fixed in dread upon the ground. This shew of terror encreased ours, we gasped vvith him, each neck was stretched out, each face clwmged with the actor's changes^—at length while Mac¬ duff, who, attend ing to his part, was unob¬ servant of the high wrought sympathy of the house, cried vvith well acted passion : AH my pretty ones ? Did you say all ?— О hell kite ! All ? AVhat ! all my pretty chickens, and their dam, At one fell swoop ! A pang of tame-dess grief wrenched every heart, a burst of despair was echoed from every lip.—
I had entered into the universal feeling—I ha* I been absorbed by the terrors of Rosse* —I re¬ echoed the cry of Macduff, and then rushed out as from an hell of torture, to find calm in the free air and silent street. Free the air was not, or the street siient. Oh, how 1 longed then for the dear soothings of maternal Nature, as my wounded heart was still further stung by the roar of heartless mer¬ riment from the public-house, by the sight of the drunkard reeling home, having lost the me¬ mory of vvhat he vvould find there in oblivious debauch, and by the more appalling salutations of those melancholy beings to whom the name of home was a mockery. I ran on at my utmost speed until I found myself I knew not hovv, close to Westminster Abbey, and was attracted by the deep and swelling tone of the organ. I entered with soothing awe the lighted chancel, and listened to the solemn religious chaunt, vvhich spoke peace and hope to the unhappy. The notes, freighted with man's dearest prayers,
re-echoed through the dim aisles, and the bleed¬ ing of the souľs wounds was staunched by hea¬ venly balm. In spite of the miseiy I depre¬ cated, and could not understand ; in spite of the í old hearths of wide London, and the corpse- strewn fields of my native land ; in spite of all the variety of agonizing emotions I iiad that evening experienced, I thought that in reply to «nir melodious adjurations, the Creator looked down in compassion and promise of relief; the au ful peal of the heaven-winged music seemed /iUino* voice wherewith to commune with the Mipreme ; calm was produced by its sound, and bv the -sight of many otlier human creatures offering up prayers and submission with me. A sentiment approaching happiness followed the total resignation of one's being to the guardian. sinji of the world's ruler. Alas ! with the fail- in» of this solemn strain, the elevated spirit sank agam to earth. Suddenly one of the choristers «bed —he was lifted from hi* desk, the vaults below were hastily opened—he was consigned
with a few muttered prayers to the darksome cavern, abode of thousands vvho had gone be¬ fore—-now wide yawning to receive even all who fulfilled the funeral rites. In vain I would then have turned from this scene, to darkened aisle or lofty dome, echoing with melodious praise. In the open air alone I'found relief ; among nature's beauteous vvorks, her God re¬ assumed his attribute of benevolence, and again I could trust that he who built up the moun¬ tains, planted the forests, and poured out the rivers, vvould erect another state for lost hu¬ manity, where we might awaken again to our affections, our happiness, and our faith. Fortunately for me those circumstances were¬ of rare occurrence that obliged mc to visit Lon¬ don, and my duties vvere confined lo the rural district which our lofty castle overlooked ; and here labour stood in the place of pastime, to oc¬ cupy such of the country-people as weie suffi¬ ciently exempt from sorrow or disease. Μ ν endeavours were directed towards urging* them
to their usual attention to their crops, and to the acting as if pestilence did not exist. The mower's scythe was at times heard; yet the joy¬ less haymakers' after they had listlessly turned the grass, forgot to cart it ; the shepherd, when he had sheared his sheep, would let the wool lie to be scattered by the winds, deeming it useless to provide clothing for another winter. At times however the spirit of life was awakened by these employments ; the sun, the refreshing breeze, the sweet smell of the hay, the rustling leaves ancl prattling rivulets brought repese to the agitated bosom, and bestowed a feeling akin to happiness on the apprehensive. Nor, strange to say, was the time without its pleasures. Young couples, who had loved long and hope¬ lessly, suddenly found every impediment re¬ moved, and wealth pour in from the death of relatives. The very danger drew them closer. The immediate peril urged them to seize the immediate opportunity ; wildly and passionately ,
they sought to know what delights existence afforded, before they yielded to death, and S nate lung their pleasures vvith rough strife Thorough the iron gates oflife,* they defied the conquering pestilence to destroy vvhat had been, or to erase even from their death¬ bed thoughts the sentiment of happiness which had been theirs. One instance of this kind came immediately under our notice, where a high-born girl had in early youth given her heart to one of meaner extraction. He was a schoolfellow and frientl of her brother's, and usually spent a part of the holidays at the mansion of the duke her father. They had played together as children, been the confidants of each other's little secrets, mutual aids and consolers in difficulty antl sorrow. Luve had crept in, noiseless, terrorless at first- till each felt their life bound up in tlie other.
and at the same time knew that they must part. Their extreme youth, and the purity of their attachment, made them yield with less resistance to the tyranny of circumstances. The father of the fair Juliet separated them; but not until the young lover had promised to remain absent only till he had rendered himself worthy οΐ her, ancl she had vowed to preserve her virgin heart, his treasure, till he returned to claim and pos¬ sess it. Plague came, threatening to destroy at once tlie aim of the ambitious and the hopes of love. Long tlie Duke οΐ L— —■ derided the idea that there could be danger while he pursued his plans of cautious seclusion ; and he so far succeeded, that it was not till this se¬ cond summer, that the destroyer, at one fell stroke, overthrew his precautions, his security, and his life. Poor Juliet saw one by one, father, mother, brothers, and sisters, ¡>icken and die. Most of the servants fled on tiie first appearance of disease, those who remained were infected mortally ; no neighbour or rustic ventured VOL. II. n _______
within the verge of contagion. By a strange fatality Juliet alone escaped, and she to the last waited on her relatives, and smoothed the pillow of death. The moment at length came, when the last blow was given to the last of the house : the youthful survivor of her race sat alone among the dead. There was no living being near to soothe her, or withdraw her from this hideous company. With the declining heat of a September night, a whirlwind of storm, thun¬ der, and hail, rattled round the house, and vvith ghastly harmony sung the dirge of her family. She sat upon the ground absorbed in wordless despair, when through the gusty wind and bicker¬ ing rain she thought she heard her name called. Whose could that familiar voice be ? Not one of her relations, for they lay glaring on her with stony eyes. Again her name was syllabled, and she shuddered as she asked herself, am I becoming mad, or am I dying, that I hear the voices of the departed ? A second thought passed, swift as an arrow, into her brain; she rushed to the window ; and a flash of lightning
shewed to her the expected vision, her lover in the shrubbery beneath ; joy lent her strength to descend the stairs, to open the door, and then she fainted in his supporting arms. A thousand times she reproached herself, as with a crime, that she should revive to happi¬ ness with him. The natural clinging of the human mind to life and joy was in its full energy in her young heart; she gave herself impetuously up to the enchantment : they were married; and in their radiant features I saw incarnate, for the last time, the spirit (if love, of rapturous sympathy, which once had been the life of the world, I envied them, but felt how impossible it was to imbibe the same feeling, now that years had multiplied my ties in the world. Above all, the anxious mother, my own beloved and drooping Idris, claimed my earnest care ; I could not re¬ proach the anxiety that never for a moment slept in her heart, but I exerted myself to dis¬ tract her attention from too keen an observation Я rt
of the truth of things, of the near and nearer approaches of disease, misery, and death, of the wild look of our attendants as intelligence of another and yet another death reached us ; for to the last something new occurred that seemed to transcend in horror all that had gone before. AVretched beings crawled to die under our suc¬ couring roof ; the inhabitants of the Castle de¬ creased daily, while the survivors huddled to¬ gether in fear, and, as in a famine-struck boat, the sport of the wild, interminable waves, each looked in the other's face, to guess on vvhom the death-lot would next fall. All this I endea¬ voured to veil, so that it might least impress my Idris ; yet, as I have said, my courage survived even despair: I might be vanquished, but I would not yield. One day, it was the ninth of September, seemed devoted to every disaster, to every harrowing incident. Eariy in the day, I heard of the arrival of tfie aged grand¬ mother of one of our servants at the Castle.
This old woman had reached her hundredth year ; her skin was shrivelled, her form was bent and lost in extreme decrepitude; but as still from year to year she continued in existence^ out-living many younger and stronger, she began to feel as if she were to live for ever, The plague came, and the inhabitants of her village died. Clinging, with the dastard feeling of the age J, to the remnant of her spent life, she had, on hearing that the pestilence had come into her neighbourhood, barred her door, and closed her casement, refusing to communicate with any. She would wander out at night to get food, and re¬ turned home, pleased thatshe had met no one, that she was in no danger from the plague. As the earth became more desolate, her difficulty in acquiring sustenance increased ; at first, lier son, who lived near, had humoured her by placing articles of food in her way: at last he died. But, even though threatened by famine, her fear of the plague was paramount ; and her greatest care tras to avoid her fellow creatures. She grew
weaker each day, and each day she had further to go. The night before, she had reached Hat¬ chet; and, prowling about, had found a baker's shop open and deserted. Laden with spoil, she hastened to return, and lost her way. The night was windless, hot, and cloudy ; her load became too heavy for her; and one by one she threw away her loaves, still endeavouring to get along, though her hobbling fell into lameness, and her weakness at last into inability to move. She lay down among the tall corn, and fell asleep. Deep in midnight, she was awaked by a rustling near her ; she would have started up, but her stiff joints refused to obey her will. A low moan close to her ear followed, and the rustling increased ; she heard a smothered voice breathe out, Water, Water ' several times ; and then again a sigh heaved from the heart of the sufferer. The old woman shuddered, she con¬ trived at length to sit upright ; but her teeth chattered, and her knees knocked together— close, very close, lay a half-naked figure, just
discernible in the gloom, and the cry for w r ater and the stifled moan vvere again uttered. Her motions at length attracted the attention of her unknown companion ; her hand was seized with a convulsive violence that made the grasp feel like iron, the fingers like the keen teeth of a trap. —-" At last you are come !" were the words given forth—but this exertion was the last effort of the dying—the joints relaxed, the figure fell prostrate, one low moan, the last, marked the moment of death. Morning broke; and the old woman saw the corpse, marked vvith the fatal disease, close to her ; her wrist was livid with the hold loosened by death. She felt struck by the plague ; her aged frame was unable to bear her away vvith sufficient speed ; and now, believing herself infected, she no longer dreaded the asso , ciation of others; but, as swiftly as she might, came to her grand-daughter, at Windsor Castle, there to lament and die. The sight was horri¬ ble; still she clung to life, and lamented her mis¬ chance vvith cries and hideous groans; while tha
swift advance of the disease shewed, what proved to be the fact, that she could not survive many hours. While I was directing that the necessary care should be taken of her, Clara came in ; she wa» trembling and pale; and, when I anxiously asked her the cause of her agitation, she threw herself into my arms weeping and exclaiming—" Uncle, dearest uncle, do not hate me for ever ! I must tell you, for you must know, that Evelyn, poor little Evelyn 4 —her voice was choked by sobs. The fear of so mighty a calamity as the loss of our adored infant made the current of my blood pause with chilly horror ; but the remembrance of the mother restored my presence of mind. I sought the little bed of my darling ; he was oppressed by fever ; but I trusted, I fondly "and fearfully trusted, that there were no symptoms of the plague. He was not three years old, and his illness appeared only one of those attacks incident to infancy. I watched him long—his heavy half-closed lids, his burning cheeks and
restless twiningof his small fingers—the fever was violent, the torpor complete—enough, without the greater fear of pestilence, to awaken alarm. Idris must not see him in this state. Ciara, though only twelve years old, was rendered, through extreme sensibility, so prudent and careful, that I felt secure in entrusting the charge of him to her, and it was my task to pre¬ vent Idris from observing their absence. I ad¬ ministered the fitting remedies, and left my sweet niece to watch beside him, and bring me notice of any change she should observe. I then went to Idris, contriving in my way, plausible excuses íbr remaining all day in the Castle, and endeavouring to disperse the traces of care from my brow. Fortunately she was not alone. I found Merrival, the astronomer, with her. He was far too long sighted in his view of humanity to heed the casualties of the day, and lived in the midst of contagion unconscious of its existence. This poor man, learned as La Place, guileless and unforeseeing as a child, had n 3
often been on the point of starvation, he, his pale wife and numerous offspring, while he neither felt hunger, nor observed distress. His astrono¬ mical theories absorbed him ; calculations were scrawled with coal on the bare walls of his gar¬ ret: a hard-earned guinea, or an article of dress» was exchanged for a book without remorse ; he neither heard his children cry, nor observed his companion's emaciated form, and the excess of calamity was merely to him as the occurrence of a cloudy night, when he would have given his right hand to observe a celestial phenomenon. His wife was one of those wondrous beings, to be found only among women, with affec¬ tions not to be diminished by misfortune. Her mind was divided between boundless admiration for her husband, and tender anxiety for her children—she waited on him, worked for them, and never complained, tliough care rendered her life one long-drawn, melancholy dream. He had introduced himself to Adrian, by a
request he made to observe some planetary mo» tions from his glass. His poverty was easily detected and relieved. He often thanked us for the books we lent him, and for the use of our instruments, but never spoke of his altered abode or change of circumstances. His wife assured us, that he had not observed any difference, except in the absence of the children from his study, and to her infinite surprise hc complained of this unaccustomed quiet. He came now to announce to us the comple¬ tion of his Essay on the Pericyelical Motions of the Earth's Axis, and the precession of the equinoctial points. If an old Roman of tlie period of the Republic had returned to life, and talked of the impending election of some laurel-crowned consul, or of the last battle with Mithridates, his ideas vvould not have been more alien to the times, than the conversation of Merrival, Man, no longer with an appetite for sympathy, clothed his thoughts in visible signs ; nor were there any readers left: while each one, having thrown away
his sword with opposing shield alone, awTÚted the plague, Merrival talked of the state of mankind six thousand years hence. He might with equal interest to us, have added a commentary, to de¬ scribe the unknown and unimaginable lineaments of the creatures, whe would then occupy the vacated dwelling of mankind, AVe had not the heart to undeceive the poor old man ; and at the moment I came in, he was reading parts of his book to Idris, asking what answer could be given to tbis or that position. Idris could not refrain from a smile, as she listened ; she had already gathered from him that his family was alive and in health ; though not apt to forget the precipice of time on which she stood, yet I could perceive that she was amused for a moment, by the contrast between the contracted view we had so long taken of human life, and the seven league strides with which Merrival paced a coming eternity. I was glad to see her smile, because it assured me of her total ignorance of her infant's danger : but
I shuddered to think of the revulsion that would be occasioned by a discovery of the truth. While Merrival was talking, Clara softly open¬ ed a door behind Idris, and beckoned me to come with a gesture and look of grief. A mir¬ ror betrayed the sign to Idris—she started up. To suspect evil, to perceive that, Alfred being vvitii us, the danger must regard her youngest darling, to fly across the long chambers into his apartment, was the work but of a moment. There she beheld her Evelyn lying fever-stricken and motionless. I followed her, and strove to hispiré more hope than I could myself entertain; but she shook her head mournfully. Anguish deprived her of presence of mind ; she gave up to me and Clara the physician's and nurse's parts; she sat by the bed, holding one little burning hand, and, with glazed eyes fixed on her babe, passed the long day in one unvaried agony, It was not the plague that visited our little boy so roughly ; but she could not listen to my assurances ; apprehension deprived her of judg-
ment and reflection ; ever} slight convulsion of her child's features shook her frame—if he moved, she dreaded the instant crisis ; if he re¬ mained still, she saw death in his torpor, and the cloud on her brow r darkened. The poor little thing s fever encreased towards night. The sensation is most dreary, to use no stronger term, with vvhich one looks forward to passing the long hours of night beside a sick bed, especially if the patient be an infant, who cannot explain its pain, and whose flicker- insr life resembles the wasting; flame of the watch- light, Whose narrow fire Ь shaken by the wind, and on whose edge Devouring darkness ho\ ers.* With eagerness one turns toward the east, with angry impatience one markb the unchequered darkness ; the crowing of a cock, that sound of glee durino -day time, comes wailing and un- tuneable—'the creaking of rafters, and slight
stir of invisible insect is heard and felt as the signal and type of desolation. Clara, overcome by weariness, had seated herself at the foot of her cousin's bed, and in spite of her efforts slumber weighed down her lids; twice or thrice she shook it off ; but at length she was conquered and slept. Idris sat at the bedside, holding Evelyn's hand ; we were afraid to speak to each other; I watched the stars—I hung over my child—I felt his little pulse—I drew near the mother—again I receded. At the turn of morn¬ ing a gentle sigh from the patient attracted me, the burning spot on his cheek faded—his pulse lieat softly and regularly—torpor yielded to sleep. For a long time í dared not hope ; hut when his unobstructed breathing and the moisture that suf¬ fused his forehead, vvere tokens no longer to hc mistaken of the departure of mortal malady, I ventured to whibper the news of the change to Idris, and at length succeeded in persuading her that I spoke truth. But neither this assurance, nor the speedy con-
valescence of our child could restore her, even to the portion of peace she before enjoyed. Her fear had been too deep, too absorbing, too en¬ tire, to be changed to security. She felt as if during her past calm she had dreamed, but was now awake ; she was As one In some lone watch-to wer on the deep, awakened From soothing visions of the home he loves, Trembling to hear the wrathful billows roar-,* as one who has been cradled by a storm, and awakes to find the vessel sinking, liefore, she had been visited by pangs of fear—now, she never enjoyed an iuterval of hope. No smile of the heart ever irradiated her fair countenance ; sometimes she forced one, and then gushing tears would flow, and the sea of grief close above these wrecks of past happiness. Still while I was near her, she could not be in utter despair —she fully confided herself to me—she did not seem to fear my death, or revert to its possibility ;
to my guardianship she consigned the full freight of her anxieties, reposing on uiy love, «^ a wind-nipped fawn by the side οΐ a doe, as a wounded nestling under its mother's wbg, as a tiny, shattered boat, quivering stí 11,beneath some protecting willow-tree. While I, not proudly as in days of joy, yet tenderlv, and wuh glad consciousness of the comfort I afforded, drew my trembling girl close to my heart, and tried to ward every painful thought or rough cir¬ cumstance from her sensitive nature. One other incident occurred at the end of this summer. The Countess of Windsor, Ex-Queen of England, returned from Germany. She had at the beginning of the season quitted the vacant eity of Vienna; and, unable to tame her haughty mind to anything like submission, she had delayed at Hamburgh, and, when at last she came to London, many weeks elapsed before she gave Adrian notice of lier arrival. In spite of her coldness and long absence, he welcomed her with sensibility, displaying such affection as
sought to heal the wound» of pride and sorrow, and wab repulsed only by her total apparent want of sympathy- Idris "heard c*f her mother"* return with pleasure. Her own maternal feel¬ ings were so ardent, that she imagined her parent must now, in this waste world, have lost {»ride and harshness, and would receive with delight her filial attentions. The first check to her duieou» demonstrations was a formal inti¬ mation from the fallen majesty of England, that I w a? in no manner to be intruded upon her. She consented, bhe said, to forgive her daughter, and iifktjowledgc her grandchildren ; larger con¬ cessions must not be expected. To me this proceeding appeared (if so light a term may be pt-rmitted) extremely whimsical. Now that the race of man iiad lost in fact all distinction of rank, this pride was doubly f&tuitems ; now that we felt a kindred, fraternal nature with all who bore the stamp of humanity, thib angry rt-miiiiscence of times for ever gone, was wor*e than foolish, idris was too much
laken up by her own dreadful fears, to be angry, hardly grieved ; for she judged that insensibility must be the source of this contiuued rancour. This was not altogether the fact: but pre¬ dominant self-will assumed the arms and masque of callous feeling; and the haughty lady dis¬ dained to exhibit any token of the struggle she endured ; while the slave of pride, she fancied that she sacrificed her happiness to immutable principle. False was all this—false all but the affections of our nature, and the links of sympathy with pleaMircor pain. There was but one good and one елИ in the world*—Hfe and death. The jKjmp of rank, the assumption of powcr v the jiosscNsiouí. of wealth vanished like morning mist. One living lieggar had become of more worth than a national peerage of dead lords—alas the day !— dian of dead heroes, patriots, or men of genius. There was much of degradation in tliis; for even vice and virtue had lost their
attributes—life—life—the continuation of our animal mechanism—was the Alpha and Omega of the desires, the prayers, the prostrate ambition of human race.
CHAPTER IX. Half England was desolate, when October came, and the ecjuinoctial winds swept over the earth, chilling the ardours of the unhealthy season. The summer, which was uncom¬ monly hot, had been protracted into the begin¬ ning of this month, when on the eighteenth a sudden change was brought about from summer temperature to winter frost. Pes¬ tilence then made a pause in her death- dealing career. Gasping, not daring to name our hopes, yet full even to the brim with intense expectation, we stood, as a ship-wrecked sailor stands on a barren rock islanded by the ocean, watching a distant vessel, fancying that now it nea&s, and then again that it is bearing from
sight. This promise of a renewed lease of life turned rugged natures to melting tenderness, and by contrast filled the soft with harsh and un¬ natural sentiments. When it seemed destined that all were to die, we were reckless of the how and when—now that the virulence of the dis¬ ease was mitigated, and it appeared willing to spare some, each was eager to be among the elect, and clung to life with dastard tenacitv. Instances of desertion became more frequent ; and even murders which made the hearer sick with horror, where the fear of contagion had armed those nearest in blood against each other. But these smaller and separate tragedies were about to yield to a mightier interest—and, while we were promised calm from infectious influences, a tempest arose wilder than the winds, a tempest bred by the passions of man, nourished by his most violent impulses, unexampled and dire. A number of people from North America, the relics of that populous continent, had set sail for the East with mad desire of change,
leaving their native plains for lands not less afflicted than their own. Several hundreds landed in Ireland, about the first of November, and took possession of stmh vacant habitations as they could find ; seizing upon the superabun¬ dant food, and the stray cattle. As they exhausted the produce of one spot, they went on to ano¬ ther. At length they began to interfere with the inhabitants, and strong in their concentrated numbers, ejected the natives from their dwellings, and robbed them of their winter store. A few events of this kind roused the fiery nature of the Irish ; and they attacked the invaders. Some vvere destroyed ; the major part escaped by ejuick and well ordered movements ; and danger made them careful. Their numbers ably ar¬ ranged ; the very deaths among them concealed; moving on in good order, and apparently given up to enjoyment, they excited the envy of the Irish. The Americans permitted a few to join their band, and presently the recruits outnumbered the strangers—nor did they join witli them, nor
imitate the admirable order vvhich, preserved by the Trans-Atlantic chiefs, rendered them at once secure and formidable. The Irish fol¬ lowed their track in disorganized multitudes ; each day encreasing ; each day becoming more lawless. The Americans were eager to escape from the spirit they had roused, and, reaching the eastern shores of the island, embarked for England. Their incursion vvould hardly have been felt had they come alone ; but the Irish, collected in unnatural numbers, began to feel the inroads of famine, and they followed in the wake of the Americans for England also. The crossing of the sea could not arrest their pro¬ gress. The harbours of the desolate sea-ports of the west of Ireland were filled vvith vessels of all sizes, from the man of war to the small fishers' boat, which lay sailorless, and rotting on the lazy deep. The emigrants embarked by hun¬ dreds, and unfurling their sails w ith rude hands, made strange havoc of buoy and cordages Those who modestly betook themselves to the
smailer craft, for the most part achieved their watery journey in safety. Some, in the true spirit of reckless enterprise, went on board a ship of an hundred and twenty guns ; the vast hull drifted with the tide out of the bay, and after many hours its crew of landsmen contrived to spread a great part of her enormous canvass —the wind took it, and while a thousand mis¬ takes of the helmsman made her present her head now to one point, and now to another, the vast fields of canvass that formed Ьет sails flapped with a sound like that of a huge cata- ìact; or such as a sea-like forest may give forth when buffeted by an equinoctial north- wind. The port-holes were open, and with exery sea, which as she lurched, washed her decks, they received whole tons of water The difficulties vvere increased by a fresh breeze wdiich began to blow, whistling among the shrowds, dashing the sails this way and that, and rending them with horrid split, and such whir as may have visited the dreams of Milton, VOh. II, о
when he imagined the winnowing of the arch¬ fiend's van-like wings, wbich encreased the uproar of wild chaos. These sounds were mingled with the roaring of the sea, the splash of the chafed billows round the vessel's sides, and the gurgling up of the water in the hold. The crew, many of whom had never seen the sea before, felt indeed as if heaven and earth came ruining together, as the vessel dipped her bows in the waves, or rose high upon them. Their yells were drowned in the clamour of elements, and the thunder rivings of their un¬ wieldy habitation—they discovered at last that the water gained on them, and they betook them¬ selves to their pumps ; they might as well have laboured to empty the ocean by bucketfuls. As the sun went down, the gale encreased ; the ship seemed to feel her danger, she was now completely water-logged, and presented other indications of settling before she went down. The bay was crowded with vessels, whose crews, for the most part, were observing the
uncouth sportings of this huge unwieldy ma¬ chine—they saw her gradually sink ; the wa- tcrs now rising above her lower decks—they could hardly wink before she had utterly disappeared, nor could the place where the sea had closed over her be at all discerned. Some few of her crew were saved, but the greater part clinging to her cordage and masts went down w ith her, to rise only when death loosened their hold. This event caused many of those vvho vvere about to sail, to put foot again on firm land, ready to encounter any evil rather than to rush into the yawning jaws of the pitiless ocean. But theso were few, in comparison to the numbers who actually crossed- Many went up as high as Belfast to ensure a shorter passage, and then journeying south through Scotland, they were joined by the poorer natives of that coun¬ try, and all poured with one consent into England. Such incursions struck the English with о 2
affright, in all those towns where there was still sufficient population to feel the change. There was room enough indeed in our hapless country for twice the number of invaders; but their lawless spirit instigated them to violence ; they took a delight in thrusting the possessors from their houses; in seizing on some mansion of luxury, vvhere the noble dwellers secluded them¬ selves in fear of the plague ; in forcing these of either sex to become their servants and purvey¬ ors ; till, the ruin complete in one place, they removed their locust visitation to another. AA r hen unopposed they spread their ravages wide ; in cases of danger they clustered, and by dint of numbers overthrew their weak and despairing foes. They came from the east and the north, and directed their course without ap¬ parent motive, but unanimously towards our un¬ happy metropolis. Communication had been to a great degree cut off through the paralyzing effects of pesti¬ lence, so that the van of our invaders had pro-
ceeded as far as Manchester and Derby, before we received notice of their arrival. They swept the country like a conquering army, burning- laying waste—murdering. The lower and vaga¬ bond English joined with them. Some few of the Lords Lieutenant vvho remained, endeavour¬ ed to collect the militia—but the ranks vvere vacant, panic seized on all, and the opposition that was made only served to increase the auda¬ city and cruelty of the enemy. They talked of taking London, conquering England—calling to mmd the long detail of injuries which had for many years been forgotten. Such vaunts dis¬ played their weakness, rather than their strength —yet still they might do extreme mischief, which, ending in their destruction, would ren¬ der them at last objects of compassion and remorse. AVe were now taught hovv, in the beginning of the world, mankind clothed their enemies in im¬ possible attributes—and how details proceeding from mouth to mouth, might, like Virgil's ever-
growing Rumour, reach the heavens with her brow, and clasp Hesperus and Lucifer vvith her outstretched hands. Gorgon and Centaur, dra* gon and iron-hoofed lion, vast sea-monster and gigantic hydra, were but types of the strange and appalling accounts brought to London con¬ cerning our invaders. Their landing was long unknown, but having now advanced within an hundred miles of London, the country people flying before them arrived in successive troops, each exaggerating the numbers, fury,and cruelty of the assailants. Tumult filled the before quiet streets — women and children deserted their homes, escaping they knew not whither—fa¬ thers, husbands, and sons, stood trembling, not for themselves, but for their loved and defence¬ less relations. As the country people poured into London, the citizens fled southwards—they climbed the higher edifices of the town, fancying that they could discern the smoke and flames the enemy spread around them. As Windsor lay, toa great degree, in the line of march from
the west, I removed my family to London, as¬ signing the Tower for their sojourn, and joining Adrian, acted as his Lieutenant in the coming struggle. Л\ г е employed only two days in our prepara¬ tions, and made good use of them. Artillery ancl arms were collected ; the remnants of such regiments, as could be brought through many losses into any show of muster, were put under arms, with that appearance of military discipline which might encourage our own party, and seem most formidable to the disorganized multitude of our enemies. Even music was not wanting ; banners floated in the air, and the shrill fife and loud trumpet breathed forth sounds of encouragement and victory. A prac¬ tised ear might trace an undue faltering in the step of the soldiers ; but this was not occa¬ sioned so much by fear of the adversary, as by disease, by sorrow, and by fatal prognostica¬ tions, whicii often weighed most potently on the
brave, and quelled the manly heart to abject subjection. Adrian led the troops. He was full of care. It was small relief to him that our discipline should gain us success in such a conflict ; while plague still hovered to equalize the сопсрдсгог and the conquered, it was not victory that he desired, but bloodless peace. As wc advanced, we were met by bands of peasantry, whose al¬ most naked condition, whose despair and horror, told at once the fierce nature of the coming enemy. The senseless spirit of conquest and thirst of spoil blinded them, while with insane fury they deluged the country in ruin. The sight of the military restored hope to those who fled, and revenge took place of fear. They in¬ spired the soldiers with the same sentiment. Languor was changed to ardour, the slow step converted to a speedy pace, while the hollow murmur of the multitude, inspired by one feel¬ ing, and that deadly, filled the air, drowning
the clang of arms and sound of music. Adrian perceived the change, and feared that it vvould be difficult to prevent them from wreaking their utmost fury on the Irish. He rode through the lines, charging the officers to restrain the troops, exhorting the soldiers, restoring order, and quieting in some degree the violent agitation that swelled every bosom. AA r e first came upon a few stragglers of the Irish at St. Albans. They retreated, and, join¬ ing others of their companions, still fell back, till they reached the main body. Tidings of an armed and regular opposition recalled them to a sort of order. They made Buckingham their head-quarters, and scouts were sent out to ascer¬ tain our situation. AVe remained for the night о at Luton. In the morning a simultaneous move¬ ment caused us each to advance. It was earlv dawn, and the air, impregnated with freshest odour, seemed in idle mockery to play with our banners, and bore onwards towards the enemy the music of the bands, the neighings of the о 0
horses, and regular step of tlie infantry. The first sound of martial instruments that came upon our undisciplined foe, inspired surprise, not unmingled with dread. It spoke of other days, of days of concord and order ; it was associated with times when plague was not, and man lived beyond the shadow of imminent fate. The pause was momentary. Soon we heard their disorderly clamour, the barbarian shouts, the untimed step of thousands coming on in disarray. Their troops now came pouring on us from the open country or narrow lanes ; a large extent of un« enclosed fields lay between us ; we advanced to the middle of this, and then made a halt: being somewhat on superior ground, we could discern the space they covered. When their leaders perceived us drawn out in opposition, they also gave the word to halt, and endeavoured to form their men into some imitation of military discipline. The first ranks had muskets ; some were mounted, but their arms vvere such as they had seized during their advance, their horses
those they had taken from the peasantry ; there was no uniformity, and little obedience, but their shouts and wild gestures showed the un¬ tamed spirit that in-spired them. Our soldiers received the word, and advanced to quickest time, but in perfect order : their uniform dresses, the gleam of their polished arms, their silence, and looks of sullen hate, were more appalling than tbe savage clamour of our innumerous foe. Thus coming nearer aid nearer each other, the howls and shouts of the Irish increased ; the English proceeded in obedience to their officers, until they came near enough to distinguish the faces of their enemies ; the sight inspired them with fury: with one cry, that rent heaven and was re-echoed by the furthest lines, they rushed on ; they disdained the use of the bullet, but with fixed bayonet dashed among the opposing foe, while the ranks opening at intervals, the match- men lighted the cannon, whose deafening roar and blinding smoke filled up the horror of the scene.
I was beside Adrian ; a moment before he had again given the word to halt, and had remained a few yards distant from us in deep meditation : he was forming swiftly his plan of action, to pre¬ vent the effusion of blood; the noise of cannon, the sudden rush of the troops, and yell of the foe, startled him : with flashing eyes he exclaimed, " Not one of these must perish !" and plunging the rowels into his horse's sides, he dashed be¬ tween the conflicting bands, AVe, his staff, fol¬ lowed him to surround and protect him ; obeying his signal, however, we fell back somewhat. The soldiery perceiving him, paused in their onset ; he did not swerve from the bullets that passed near him, but rode immediately between the opposing lines. Silence succeeded to clamour ; about fifty men lay on the ground dying or dead. Adrian raised liis sword in act to speak : " By whose command," he cried, addressing his own troops, " do you advance ? AVho ordered your attack ? Fall back ; these misguided men shall not be slaughtered, while I am your general
Sheath your weapons ; these are your brothers, commit not fratricide ; soon the plague will not leave one for you to glut your revenge upon: will you be more pitiless tban pestilence ? As you honour me—as you worship God, in whose image those also are created—as your children and friends are dear to you,—shed not a drop of precious human blood." He spoke vvith outstretched hand and winning voice, and then turning to our invaders, with a severe brow, he commanded them to lay down their arms : " Do you think," he said, " that because we are wasted by plague, you can over¬ come us; the plague is also among you, and when ye are vanquished by famine and disease, the ghosts of those you have murdered will arise to bid you not hope in death. Lay down your arms, barbarous and cruel men—men whose hands are stained vvith the blood of the innocent, whose souls are weighed down by the orphan's cry ! AVe shall conquer, for the right is on our side ; already your cheeks are pale—the
weapons fall from your nerveless grasp. Lay down your arms, fellow men ! brethren ! Par¬ don, succour, and brotherly love await your repentance. You are dear to us, because you wear the frail shape of humanity ; each one among you will find a friend and host among these forces. Shall man be the enemy of man, while plague, the foe to all, even now is above us, triumphing in our butchery, more cruel than her own ?" Each army paused. On our side the soldiers grasped their arms firmly, and looked with stern glances on the foe. These had not thrown down their weapons, more from fear than the spirit of contest ; they looked at each other, each wishing tíí follow eome example given him,—but they had no leader. Adrian threw himself from his horse, and approaching one of those just slain : " He was a man," he cried, i( and he is dead. О quickly bind up the wounds of the fallen- let not one die; let not one more soul escape through your merciless gashes, to relate before
the throne of God the tale of fratricide; bind up their wounds—restore them to their friends. Cast away the hearts of tigers that burn in youi breasts; throw down those tools of cruelty and hate ; in this pause of exterminating destiny, let each man be brother, guardian, and stay to the other. Away with those blood-stained arms, and hasten some of you to bind up these wounds." As he spoke, he knelt on the ground, and raised in his arms a man from whose side the warm tide of life gushed—the poor wretch gasped—so still had cither host become, tliat his moans were distinctly heard, and every heart, late fiercely bent on universal massacre, now beat anxiously in hope and fear for the fate of this one man. Adrian tore off his military scarf and bound it round the sufferer—it wa» too late—the man heaved a deep sigh, his head fell back, his limbs lost their sustaining power. —" He is dead !" said Adrian, as the corpse fell from his arms on the ground, and he bowed his head in sorrow and awe. The fate of the
world seemed bound up in the death of this single man. On either side the bands threw down their arms, even the veterans wept,and our party held out their hands to their foes, while a gush of love and deepest amity filled every heart. The two forces minghng, unarmed and hand in hand, talking only how each might assist the other, the adversaries conjoined ; each repenting, the one side their former cruelties, the other their late violence, they obeyed the or¬ ders of the General to proceed towards London. Adrian was obliged to exert his utmost pru¬ dence, first to allay the discoid, and then to provide for the multitude of the invaders. They were marched to various parts of the southern counties, quartered in deserted villages, •—a part were sent back to their own island, while the season of winter so far revived our energy, that the passes of the country were de¬ fended, and any increase of numbers prohibited. On this occasion Adrian and Idris met after a separation of nearly a year. Adrian had been
occupied in fulfilling a laborious and painful task. He had been familiar vvith every species of human misery, and had for ever found his powers inadequate, his aid of small avail. Yet the purpose of his soul, his energy and ardent resolution, prevented any re-action of sorrow. He seemeel born anew, ancl virtue, more potent than Meclean alchemy, endued him with health and strength. Idris hardly recognized the fra¬ gile being, whose form had seemed tobend even to the summer breeze, in the energetic man, whose very excess of sensibility rendered him more capable of fulfilling his station of pilot in storm-tossed England. it was not thus vvith Idris. She was un¬ complaining; but the very soul of fear had taken its seat in her heart. She had grown thin and pale, her eyes filled with involuntary tears, fier voice was broken and low. She tried to throw a veil over the change vvhich she knevv her bro¬ ther must observe in her, but the efibrt v/as ineffectual ; and wheu alone with him, vvith a
burst of irrepressible grief she gave vent to her apprehensions and sorrow. She described in vivid terms the ceaseless care that with still re¬ newing hunger ate into her soul ; she compared this gnawing of sleepless expectation of evil, to the vulture that fed on the heart of Prometheus ; uuder the influence of this eternal excitement, and of the interminable struggles she endured to com¬ bat and conceal it, she felt, she said, as ifall the wheels and springs of the animal machine worked at double rate, and were fast consuming themselves. Sleep was not sleep, for her waking thoughts, bridled by some remains of reason, and by the sight of her children happy and in health, were then transformed to wild dreams, all her terrors were realized, all her fears received their dread fulfilment. To this state there vvas no hope, no alleviation, unless the grave sliould quickly receive its destined prey, and she be per¬ mitted to die, before she experienced a thousand living deaths in the loss of those she loved. Fearing to give me pain, she hid as best ¡die could
the excess of her wretchedness, but meeting thus her brother after a long absence, she could not restrain the expression of her woe, but with all the vividness of imagination with which misery is always replete, she poured out the emotions of her heart to her beloved and sympathizing Adrian. Her present visit to London tended to augment her state of inquietude, by shewing in its utmost extent the ravages occasioned by pestilence. It hardly preserved the appearance of an inhabited city ; grass sprung up thick in the streets ; the squares were weed-grown, the houses were shut up, while silence and loneliness characterized the busiest parts of the town. Yet in the midst of desolation Adrian had preserved order ; and each one continued to live according to law and custom—human institutions thus surviving as it were divine ones, and while the decree of population was abrogated, property continued sacred. It was a melancholy reflection ; and in spite of the diminution of evil produced, it
struck on the heart as a wretched mockery. AU idea of resort for pleasure, of theatres and festivals had passed away. " Next summer, 11 said Adrian as we parted on our return to Windsor, " will decide the fate of the human race. I shall not pause in my exertions until that time ; but, if plague revives with the coming year, all contest with her must cease, and our oidy occupation be the choice οΐ a grave. 1 ' I must not forget one incident that occurred during this visit to London. The visits of Merrival to Windsor, before frequent, had sud¬ denly ceased. At this time vvhere but a hair's line separated the living from the dead, I feared that our friend had become a victim to the all- embracing evil. On this occasion I w r ent, dread¬ ing the worst, to his dwelling, to see if I could be of any service to those of his family who might have survived. The house was deserted, and had been one of those assigned to the in¬ vading strangers quartered in London. I saw his astronomical instruments put to strange uses,
his globes defaced, his papers covered with ab¬ struse calculations destroyed. The neighbours could tell me little, till I lighted on a poor vvo¬ man who acted as nurse in these perilous times. She told me that all the family were dead, except Merrival himself, who had gone mad—mad, she called it, yet on questioning her further, it appeared that he was possessed only bv the delirium of excessive grief. This old man, tottering on the eû^c of the grave, and prolonging his prospect through millions of calculated ν ear-,--thts visionary who had not seen stai ν ation m the wasted forms οΐ his vvife and childien, or plague in the hoi- i ible sights and sounds that surrounded him —this astronome!, appaienti) dead on earth, and living only iu the motion of the sphcics -—loved his family with uuappatent but in¬ tense affection. Thiough long habit thev had beeome a part of himself; his want of woi Idly knowledge, his absence of mind and infant gudclessncss, made hnn utterly dependent ou
them. It was not till one of ihem died that he perceived their danger; one by one they were carried off by pestilence ; and his wife, his help¬ mate and supporter, more necessary to him than his ovvn limbs and frame, vvhich had hardly been taught the lesson of self-preservation, the kind companion whose voice always spoke peace to him, closed her eyes in death. The okl man felt the svstem of universal nature chicli he had so long studied and adored, slide from under him, and he stood among the dead, and lifted his voice in curses.—No wonder that the at¬ tendant should interpret as phrensy the harrow¬ ing maledictions of the grief-struck old man. I had commenced my search late in the day, a November day, that closed in early with patter- ingrain and melancholy wind. As I turned frpm the di»or, I saw Merrival, eir rather the shadow οΐ Merrival, attenuated and wild, pass mc» and sit on the steps of his home. The breeze scat¬ tered the grey locks on his temples, the rain dreneheii his uncovered head, he sat hiding his
face in his withered hands. I pressed his shoulder to awaken his attention, but he did not alter his position. " Merri vul, rt 1 said, " it is long since we have seen you—you must return to Windsor v, !th me—Lady Idris desires to see you, you will not refuse her request— come home with me." He replied in a hollow voice, " Why deceive a helpless old man, why talk hypocritically to one half crazed ? Windsor is not my home ; my true home I have found ; the home that the Creator has prepared for me." His accent of bitter scorn thrilled me— u Do not tempt me to ^peak," he continued, "my words would scare you—in an universe of cow¬ ards I dare think—among the church-yard tombs —among the victims of His merciless tyranny I dare reproach the Supreme Evil. How can he punish me ? Let him bare his arm and transfix me with lightning—this is also one of his at¬ tributes 11 —and the old man laughed. He rose, and I followed him through the rain
to a neighbouring church-yard—he threw him¬ self on the wet earth. "Here they are," he cried, Si beautiful creatures—breathing, speak¬ ing, loving creatures. She who by day and night cherished the age-worn lover of her youth —they, parts of my flesh, my children—here they are: call them, scream their names through the night ; they will not answer !" He clung to the little heaps that marked the graves. " I ask but one thing ; I do not fear His hell, for I have it here ; I do not desire His heaven, let me but die and be laid beside them ; let me but, when I lie dead, feci my flesh as it moulders, mingle with theirs. Promise, 11 and he raised himself painfully, and seized my arm, " promise to bury me with them." u So God help me and mine as I promise," I replied, " on one condition : return w ith me to Windsor." 4C To Windsor !" he cried with a shriek, "Never !—from this place I never go—my bones, my flesh, I nîy self, are already buried here, and
what you see of me is corrupted clay hke them. I will lie here, and cling here, till rain, and hail, and lightning and storm, ruining on me, make me one in substance with them below. 1 * In a few words I must conclude this tragedy. I was obliged to leave London, and Adrian un¬ dertook to watch over him ; the task was soon fulfilled ; age, grief, and inclement weather, all united to hush his sorrows, and bring repose to liis heart, whose beats were agony. He died embracing the sod, vvhich was piled above his breast, when he was placed beside the beings whom he regretted with such wild despair, I returned to AVindsor at the wish of Idris, who seemed to think that there was greater safety for her children at that spot ; and because, once having taken on me the guardianship of ihe district, I would not de?ert it while an in¬ habitant survived. I went also to act in con¬ formity with Adrian's plans, which was to con¬ gregate i u masses what remained of the popula¬ tion ; for he possessed the conviction that it vol. u, p
was oniy through the benevolent and social virtues that any safety was to be hoped for the remnant of mankind It was a melancholy thing to return to this spot so dear to us, as the scene of a happiness rarely before enjoyed, here to mark the extinction of our species, and trace the deep uneraseable footsteps of disease over the fertile and che¬ rished soil. The aspect of the country had so far changed, that it had been impossible to enter on the task of sowing seed, and other autumnal labours. That season was now gone ; and winter had set in with sudden and un¬ usual severity. Alternate frosts and thawb succeeding to floods, rendered the country im¬ passable. Heavy falls of snow gave an arctic appearance to the scenery ; the roofs of the houses peeped from the white mass ; the lowly cot and stately mansion, alike deserted, were blocked up, their thresholds uncleared ; the win¬ dows were broken by the hail, while the preva¬ lence of a north-east wind rendered out-door
exertions extremely painful. The altered state of society made these accidents of nature, sources of real misery. The luxury of command and the attentions of servitude w r ere lost. It is true that the necessaries of life were assembled in such quantities, as to supply to superfluity the wants of the diminished population ; but still much labour was required to arrange these, as it were, raw materials ; and depressed by sickness, and fearful of the future, we had not energy to enter boldly and decidedly on any system. I can speak for myself—want of energy was not шу failing. The intense life that quickened my pulses, and animated my frame, had the effect, not of drawing me into the mazes of active life, but of exalting my lowliness, and of bestowing majestic proportions on insignificant objects—I could have lived the life of a peasant m the same way—my trifling occupations were swelled into important pursuits; my affections were impetuous and engrossing passions, and p2
nature with all her changes was invested in divine attributes. The very spirit of the Greek mythology inhabited my heart ; I deified the uplands, glades, and streams, I Had sight of Proteus coming from the sea ; And heard old Triton blow his wreathed horn,* Strange, that while the earth preserved her monotonous course, I dwelt with ever-renew¬ ing wonder on her antique laws, and now that with excentric wheel she rushed into an untried path, I sliould feel this spirit fade; I struggled with despondency and weariness, but like a fog, they choked me. Pei haps, after the labours and stupendous excitement of the past summer, the calm of winter and the almost menial toils it brought with it, were by natural rc-action doubly irksome. It was not the grasp¬ ing passion of the preceding year, which gave life and individuality to each moment—it was
not the aching pangs induced by the distresses of the times. The utter inutility that had at¬ tended all my exertions took from them their usual effects of exhilaration, and despair rendered abortive the balm of self applause—I longed to return to my old occupations, but of vvhat use were they ? To read were futile—-to write, vanity indeed. The earth, late wide circus for the display of dignified exploits, vast theatre for a magnificent drama, now presented a vacant space, an empty stage ■*— for actor or spectator there was no longer aught to say or hear. Our little town of Windsor, in which the sur- v'vors from the neighbouring counties were chiefly assembled, wore a melancholy aspect. Its streets were blocked up with snow—the few passengers seemed palsied, and frozen by the ungenial visitation of winter. To escape these evils was the aim and scope of all our exer¬ tions. Families late devoted to exalting and refined pursuits, rich, blooming, and young, vvith diminished numbers and care-fraught
hearts, huddled over a fire, grown selfish and grovelling through suffering. Without the aid of servants, it was necessary to discharge all household duties; hands unused to such labour must knead the bread, or in the absence of flour, the statesmen or perfumed courtier must undertake the butcher s office. Poor and rich were now equal, or rather the poor vvere the superior, since they entered on such tasks with alacrity and experience ; while ignorance, inaptitude, and habits of repose, rendered them fatiguing to the luxurious, galling to the proud, disgustful to ail whose minds, bent on intellectual improvement, held it their dearest privilege to be exempt from attending to mere animal wants. But in every change goodness and affection can find field for exertion and display. Among some these changes produced a devotion and sacrifice of self at once graceful and heroic. It was a sight for the lovers of the human race to enjoy ; to behold, as in aucient times, the patri-
archal modes in which the variety of kindred and friendship fulfilled their duteous and kindly offices. Youths, nobles of the land, performed for the sake of mother or sister, the serv ices of menials with amiable cheerfulness. They went to the river to break the ice, and draw water : they assembled on foraging expeditions, or axe in hand felled the trees for fuel. The females received them on their return with the simple and affectionate welcome known before only to the lowly cottage—a clean hearth and bright fire ; the supper reaely cooked by beloved hands ; gratitude for the provision for to-morrow's meal : strange enjoyments for the high-born English, yet they were novv iheir sole, harıl earned. and clearly prized luxuries. None was more conspicuous for this grace f ni submission to circumstances, noble humility, and ingenious fancy to adorn such acts with romanùc colouring, than our own (Mara. Mie saw m ν desponueiicy, and the aching cares of Idris. Her perpetual study was to relieve иь from
labour and to spread ease and even elegance over our altered mode of life. We still had some at¬ tendants spared by disease, and warmly attached to us. But Clara was jealous of their services ; she would be sole handmaid of Idris, sole minis¬ ter to the wants of her little cousins ; nothing gave her so much pleasure as our employing her in this way; she went beyond our desires, earnest, diligent, and unwearied,— Abra was ready ere we called her name, And though we called another, Abra came.* It was my task each day to visit the various families assembled in our town, and when the weather permitted, I was glad to prolong my ride, and to muse in solitude over every changeful appearance of our destiny, endeavour¬ ing to gather lessons for the future from the experience of the past. The impatience vvitii vvhich, while in society, the ills that afflicted my species inspired me, were softened by loneliness,
when individual suffering was merged in the general calamity, strange to say, less afflicting to contemplate. Thus often, pushing my way with difliculty tlirough the narrow snow-blocked town, I crossed the bridge and passed through Eton. No youthful congregation of gallant- hearted boys thronged the portal of the college ; sad silence pervaded the busy school-room and noisy playground. I extended my ride towards Salt Hill, on every side impeded by the snow. AA r ere those the fertil fields I loveel—was that the interchange of gentle upland and cultivated dale, once covered with waving corn, diversified by stately trees, watered by the meandering Thames? One sheet of white covered it, while bitter recol¬ lection told me that cold as the winter-clothed earth, were the hearts of the inhabitants. Imet troops of horses, herds of cattle, flocks of sheep, wandering at vvill ; here throwmg down a hay¬ rick, and nestling from cold in its heart, which afforded them shelter and food—there having taken possession of a vacant cottage.
Once on a frosty day, pushed on by restless unsatisfying reflections, 1 sought a favourite haunt, a little wood not far distant from Salt Hill. A bubbling spring prattles over stones on one side, and a plantation of a ïqw elms and beeches, hardly deserve, and yet continue the name of wood. This spot had for me peculiar charms. It had been a favourite resort of Adrian; it was secluded ; and he often said that in boyhood, his happiest hours w r ere spent here; having escaped the stately bond¬ age of his mother, he sat on the rough hewn steps that led to the spring, nowreadinga favourite book, now musing, with speculation beyond liis years, on the still unravelled skein of morals or meta¬ physics. A melancholy foreboding assured me that 1 should never see this place more ; so with careful thought, I noted each tree, every vvinding of the streamlet and irregularity of the soil, tliat I might better call up its idea in absence. A robin red-breast dropt from the frosty branches of the trees, upon the congealed rivulet ; its pant¬ ing breast and half-closed eyes shewed that it was
dying: a hawk appeared in the air; suddei fear seized the little creature ; it exerted its las strength, throwing itself on its back, raising iti talons in impotent defence against its powerfu enemy. I took it up and placed it in my breast I fed it with a few crumbs from a biscuit ; b) degrees it revived ; its warm fluttering heart beai against me ; 1 cannot tell why I detail this trifling incident—but the scene is still before me \ the snow-clad fields seen through the silvered trunks of the beeches,—the brook, in clays oí happiness alive vvith sparkling waters, now choked by ice—the leafless trees fantastical!) dressed in hoar frost—the shapes of summel leaves imaged by winters frozen hand on tht hard ground—the dusky sky, drear cold and unbroken silence—while ciose in mj bosom, my feathered nursling lay warm, anc safe, speaking its content with a light chirp— painful reflections thronged, stirring my brait vvith wild commotion—cold and death-like as th« snowy fields was all earth—misery-stricken thi
life-tide of the inhabitants—why should I oppose the cataract of destruction that swept ш away ?—why string my nerves and renew my wearied efforts—ah, why ? But that my firm courage and cheerful exertions might shelter the dear mate, whom I chose in the spring of my life ; though the throbbings of my heart be re¬ plete with pain, though my hopes for the future are chill, still while your dear head, my gentlest love, can repose in peace on that heart, and wiiile you de-rive from its fostering care, comfort, and hope, my struggles shall not cease, —I will not call myself altogether vanquished. One fine February day, when the sun had re¬ assumed some of its genial power, I walked in the forest with my family. It was one of those lovely winter-days which assert the capacity of nature to bestow beauty on barrenness. The leafless trees spread their fibrous branches against the pure sky; their intricate and pervious tracery resembled delicate sea-weed; the deer vvere turning up the snow in search of the hidden
grass , the white was made intensei) dazzhng bv the sun, and trunks of the trees, rendered mou· conspicuous by the loss of preponderating fo¬ liage, gathered around like the labyrinthine co¬ lumns of a vast temple; it was impossible not to receive pleasure from the sight of these things Our children, freed from the bondage of winter. bounded before us ; pursuing the deer, or rous¬ ing the pheasants and partridges from tht и coverts Idris leant on my arm , her ^adne^s yielded to the present sense of ptcasim. Wc met other families on the Long Walk, enjovmg like оигчКсь the leturn oťthe genial uC.ison. Лт once, I seemed to awake; I ca^t off the clinging -.lodi of the past months, eaith assumed anew appearance, and my view of tht futuri u,v- sudden!) made clear 1 exclaimed, *' i lum now found out the secret r " What secret ^ In answer to this question, ì de sei ihed oui gloom) uinkr-hfe, our sordid <ares, ош шина! lahoni·*. —" This northern count t v/" I w tud, * »-*- voi π и
no place for our diminished race. When man¬ kind were few, it was not here that they battled with the powerful agents of nature, and were enabled to cover the globe with offspring. AA r e must seek some natural Paradise, some garden of the earth, where our simple wants may be easily supplied, and the enjoyment of a delicious chinate compensate for the social pleasures we have lost. If we survive this coming summer, I will not spend the ensuing winter in England ; neither 1 nor any of us." I spoke without much heed, and the very conclusion of what I said brought vvith it other thoughts. Should w r e, any of us, survive the coming summer? I saw the brow οΐ Idris clouded ; I again felt, that wc were enchained to the car of fate, over whose coursers we had no control. AVe could no longer say, This we will do, and this vve vvill leave undone. A mightier power than the human was at hand to destroy our plans or to achieve the work we avoided, lt were mad¬ ness to calculate upon another v/intcr This wa*
our last. The coming summer was the extreme end of our vista; and, when vve arrived there, instead of a continuation of the long road, a gulph yawned, into vvhich we mukt of force be precipitated. The last blessing of humanity was wrested from us ; we might no longer hope. Can the madman, as he clanks his chains, hope^ Can the wretch, led to the scaffold, who when he lays his head on the block, marks the double shadow of himself and the executioner, whose uplifted arm bears the axe, hope ? Can the ■diijMvrecked mariner, who spent with swimming, hears close behind the splashing waters divided bv a shark vvhich pursues him through the At¬ lantic, hope? Sech hope as theirs, vve also mav entertain ! < )ltl fable tells us, that this gentle spirit sprung from the box of Pandora, else crammed vvith evil-* ; but these vvere unseen and null, while ail admired the inspiriting loveliness of young Hope, each man's lieart became her home; slie was enthroned sovereign of our lives, here and here-
after ; she w as deified and worshipped, declared incorruptible and everlasting, But like all other gifts of the Creator to Man, she is mortal ; her life lias attained its last hour. We have watched over her ; nursed her flickering existence ; now she has fallen at once from youth to decrepitude, from health to immedicinable disease ; even as vve spent! ourselves in struggles for her recovery? she die.**; to all nations the voice goc -ь forth, Hope is dead ! AVe are but mourner*-» in the funeral train, and what immortal essence or perishable creation vvill refuse to make one in the sad procession that attends to its grave the dead comforter of humanity- Does not the sun call in his light t and day Like u t bin exhalation melt away— Both wrapping' up their beams in clouds, to lit Themselves close mourners at thii oUeqnio.*
KND OK VOL- II. ŕhíniu-ľt, Airijw-.ľuitli, uml Ц -nifW's, J ttíťl-htK-ťt, Lttit· 1 .'*-*.
