Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Mary-Jane: a novel
MARY-JANE.
CHAP I Ilat ulic С aß MARY JANE, fiom lhe ıha (he I il formed wlcn the itioiikleiiii 0 itnittt it fn l prtfmtcd itfelf, c\pe'tid to find Ilı" inttrioi of it equally uitit md gluoni), was mucii furpnfed when с mduftcd to an a¡ annum by M ibel, to find it neiri) exuding m modern elegance and magn licence the one fiom which die hid been fo tetentlv and iuddenlj ici o td. vol, и, к " Tur,"
" Пи / futi M ' I, ıs ť v enlen 1 U, "benn one of ıhı b h ι , i m tU С iille, md which, with )o ι >v t)t , ι >ч t ııv Ite m) ııı iller 1 ıs İp r d ι ie L ei ct t ) in ее hai dl mt, toil UU il'e ι ie it ь to b ) Dl s. 1 e < ι I o un , the d Ol efwllch wel ve H p fl 1, , to ht le, tuai I m i) be i s n i t ) ι t u i on .Uld i ive vou Ul ete ) nn D " M 1 l'i il Wl v, ol ι 0 the jouine > ll ι i gl t 1 r 1 1 , 11, id tint Iht weu I ilt Mul ι η ioni 0 up tomului] Ί ь о d loi tutu tq | u Магу laie I tv no ıı ^ıt ol l'i ville t'nt even ng, md ' ι u ς u c ei) t ıuı 0 viel led obediucc to Mibcl, tl t lui;, v 1 ι le 1 cl with h ι do ii) md luin u n, bo t len o'clock retn 1 ι ) h ι ill it tl ipumieiit, and Mai) I e luun,. le m 1 hei , vtii- tured lo ui dul", а tl teuit i pol h evie bhe lud leen in bc 1 about two lour, wl en
when lhe was thilurbed b) a frange burn¬ ii ing noil , which İte urd to i lund fum under the betl She lu enea, il t noi e wis agam le cited, aid much louder than before, ihe imagined fome i u fin wis under t't btd, nd ι vi μ tvtrj tin n to dead fom tht dirk dli,]., of Buvillt, (he hittil) aioit, elicile i he elf, (ti e h-lit fo-- tuiately file had not itti Handled), and bc 0 an to nive Hi., Uc ihe e'ianib ι Notlin , I ov с u, eould ' ť e η ι to con lx 1 ile iler fe l s , ι iti b иц it 1 1 t comi iced that the no I I a Ι ι r i ce led only lioin hu own dllıc'ı tl ııı ı mı, lhe, th lugli wit, o it i ¡ic r ııg, ь m i e ied htrľeli upo i ti - b d Not 1 ni- lal lhe lun, wh n ti lanı nofe, α to q ıı I uh the 111 ail utili gol ti el en i ue, alcı i lic i ducei hu lo nie Γοι lome ti ie every с fott wb r ri t't . ι 2 to
to diftoici wint it и ıs il it lud ίο duid- full) al umed lui, w lu n tiu noile was .again ıı] с Hui w uli tie Int cfliíl а' be¬ fon. M ri-'uic no tuit'i lt 1 .hat lome I etion nas behind tlu bec', nul matit def¬ iliate 1) feli uni înxiet), ¡ icce! lier kilce .ıgainll the li Hie td, uıııouıl it hom its lituani n, uu! foon found tbc ι uile of htr p. Huit шоп and α'ι m A hi «e doni, leaned on ť ľ' next to lui with twu unnici l n m b il. , w I ich the b d In' bJoie с ι iu ileti, (h > ııı., nole illy as the nfing tund pilhcd loi cibi) α,αιηΐΐ it ontle ι pi olite fidi, cominciti Maiy Jane 1 id jiittltiitd tht humming noil, md agi- t itu! th Ud tinnitili, nd pioniptid by cuiioiìt) to diluvii wheu the doorled ίο, flie i ΐ7ι ! tlıt h Ju, and w ıtlulıuı ılıt bolts, illudi Ilıt had Imd!) tfiicìi I tiun the door built oj ui uith Höhnet, ud (buck the candle ii m mi li nul Mli) Jue hoitcvei, rchcicd fun her ^ feai s
fears that Bai ville had α private entrance into her room', and being certain that the door had opened fo fuddenly but from the force of the wind, which (till blew ftrong in her face, flood for iome time endeavour¬ ing to penetrile with her eyes thiough the intenfe darknels bejond it, when a hollow groan, at no gre t dilt нес from her, occi- íioned 'ier to vv iti driv/, -nd, tıembhng \t\lh ipprehenfion, igaui to Ihut and fecuie the dooi The moon, at tin ti ne, dııtın^ luí rivs into tlıe ip ütmen , enabled her, though wilh lome labour and dithciilt), to uplače tlıe bed in us fori ier pofition, which hav¬ lı g done, flic agun thrc v heifelf upon it, and tried to сопцое her fpirits. Mai j- lane, though (lie again heard the fi mei noi e, vv ıs no ionger dıituıbed by it, but the deep and ιοί v L 'ioın ftill dwelt on lui mind, and Ihc determined in the morning to lohut M ibel to get her re- noved into mother apartment,
*3
As
As di lijit ajp rul, Inmur, Maiy- Jini's courigc ι tun,. I with it, and an idei iujgcllcd Kle t that llioul 1 not Ií.itihe libriti htr ıs lie İnil promifed, tl door, v. uch hul at luit lo ali-incil lui, mı Jit by lerne nie ms in oth г be leuciti 1 .luene ti lu Pipe, uni (lie um udi) icio vul on the next rijit to ixaniim tne put it led to She would naie put ι 1 don , it in ılıt ıh) time, bot tl ui iln w s 'ubi- lo betl I ileti Ь) Mabel, Ilı iii'd ı ı hu pm, the benefit fli jiittupuul « u 1 I ìrieriuibl) lofi Hauii 0 lims .m 'bu intention of loliciting Mi' il foi ι um il, lhe cincciicd it more piiiluit 11 bi ι i- tiiuy f luit on tlie fiibjičt. Mıhı!, at m culi hour, ionu 1 hu m the morum *, and u meed, bj lici ¡ι ι í/ud .ıpp-aruıcc, tint Ihı had palliti ııı, ι m ı- ıııtıly mou to lier lUbficiion tlıuı tlu lift "Will, Lad)," fud Ilıt, looking iltul till)
at Marv Jit, ' Ih, )οιι lave fl 11 fîuntll " As wtll,' re t lie î Магу J me, " as ι wretch m my deplor tb e (uuau n could expert " Did ) I r ν [ utieiihr uoife m the u 0 ht, ei t Mil el, " to diituib jou ' ' v/lv lho 1 ) ( fpet I til re j ι 'fli |n lit t ) ι I tn or iul v t hir f ) ' l I IIM bel s 11 с . ι vu ııv n M I qu ' α j o ; le c riai v 1 ave
bir il ı ı I Mı у Jıne α \ ifit in the t 1 f h ι iv but fini her с (uallj d ch ' Uf re ι α 1 i en to lus propo- lil il rem 1, eu lie l t liei, t at t bpul 1 lune lhe e\[ etted со bc ce iv e) ctl to 1 I id \ it ι leve io loci t lhe fune etenini*, с 4 when
when M ibel had withdrawn for tlie night, Maiy Jant rtmovıd the bed, opened the dour, and prepared to put her defign, of t plormg the parts bejond it, into execu¬ tion , and, left the wind fliould again ex¬ tinguid! tlic light, llie licld one hand cauti- oufl) before tlic blaze, and btgan to rccou- noiti» the phc. She fiift entered a large o\ il room, but entiitly ш furniihid, nlncli tlıe ılın ught ihe held kuccly full cui to undu· ι u bit, the wills in many plaits win ıkı ivul а id humid with tht noxious dtw tint mil 1 d dotvn them, fevtnl lapi cha ms, through which th. wind lound ai eai) ι luulhu i, gave it fo difilli an qq ι trance, tint Mir) Jane flnuldcnd with lıuı or as ! τ ejes glanced oier it, it, howeiti, con¬ vinced hu that tint pait ot the bull ling was uninhabited, md liifpuul lur nuh n w h q cs of efitcìing lui tit q~, ihould Gan ille not fullil lus piomiit.
At
At tlıe oppoiitt txtrcnuty α door hilt open indented itfeii, Mar)-Jane paffed tli ι Ji it, tnd found herfcl. in α mirow pulp, Alınlı llie m mtluicloly filence purlut I, until Ihe ainvc 1 it ihc hnd of а flonc flu t il , which Ihı bepıı to deleend, but ut llıe Ind 1 1 idied tlıt boltom, ¡ hi¬ ng lur fon upni loinethinj idildi flid with tin induit, ílu h tl mail) í lien lhe tapei, m lu tndtiioui to ine luridi", dıoppul hom im lund, aul iiiilintlj ι lotil bufili, is at j erf ins litirrj ing eliT iont wajs, rtl mm 1 ihiouji delu tul looms M i) Jane, tremblii g with fuipnle -nd teño], now ìnwau'ly icpoai'ud iuiitlfior liei tnitnt) — Somitlun., w Imi cd by hır, flit tlie ctl an uivolunt ır\ lıuam, which lelıoıııg tbfi jllj fio ι tuiyp rt, com ud ι n m id h ι ti to lui 1 1 it lor lone İm e ille remanie 1 u uisí.xid mei immove¬ able, agonized tulli the molt (eiilei ap, u- henliiis, when eicr) thing again becoming filent nd undiltuibcd, hci courage once ι 5 moie
more returned for thin 'n envelop d in midnight thrkiels, md tiieonq ille.l with furnun' lioirois, iifle'lim j rtlv lub- duitl i't laiinileiiKtiiibti t 1 id u luft fu¿tdi u, u i 1 1 tl 1 t ai ι minti, con¬ fimi oí h u 0 coi u ului no cuie, md end ivi in, io leiid.i unitive the idi eolilrivuutsofgult, tould enli ıc lu tint ]> ot Imi t d li] p> t lum the allit inti ош n] ûetııt Buna;, ıs would lafdy uth' ti liti iioni iinptiidiiig dang ь Mır) -I ш .treílie renace 11 u w av mc', vvi ml ι tl li) in i İtmeme u ¡mir, io Лоор i 11 end vour to reeovu ti e ι intlle- ibek Л t Ind (hoppul, whtcn lid tun; Iht hul olt ned, t lift, tl οι ¿h not without fielt hun ııı l dulculty, to hei iiicv.- ptelľibk j>), found liultll at tie entinte ol ber i n itnt, nd was tbout to clolt thťtciť-ťoir, hi in J en too m leii tern¬ ii d, tveiiroill hi l ave ïchgh etl lier nper, tint η ;ht lo v ílu ton munt any finti« r, when a¡ in v dt-p .ui l hollow ? ro\n, limi' u
tti wint (U lul lic irci on the ¡reading ι veiling, reuil ι г tied fiom the cini tv lp ice ai'jo'ii ng Mır) (u , ι un overcome ıvıt ı tcrıoı antl tui, nie, I ťlilv pitee I ii ч diilit к u on tlu toil t. Uld fillenet! lhe d .ur with tlu p intiero s bolts, lepi leed lhe lud as I dort, uni Ime n ihc lit irti ionie rufu m her room, uiflíiicíively tin evv h r it up n tlie be J, md hid berteli indu the cou nupun Not luu lul flic lam tr midin with Mp ile, тс he leus were confuti cd 'lu diiiuctly he ird Го Ul ps tiuiioiiíly ppioieíiui b tjwaids lier, ihe h ul jt il 't с ¿h (umacın to mL nei head, and endt' iui, ii po ubit, thiou liti iscreme ti u kncls, Iı t m шиш iu tU th , when a cold huid elled on hu flec, ι i uitin gu n, mou Inul md tun le ıhın utur (he h d beioie hem!, iliuck hil 1 1 on 1er cu. With tlttlden (lut, icce пц aiucd b) , 6 а fe u-
a fearful fli lek, ihe ıh e v 1 trfe f from lhe ojipofite fide of the b d upon tl e floor, when а fennie voice exclaimed — " fhe I oul forgiv e me n y fins '— Wl at will become of me' ' Marv-Jıııc, alulle relieved, as the voice feemed fmuhar to her, tiuiiiiloufly cjacu- la'ed— " Si), who ire you, antl whit is ¡om bi fincis with mc ?' " Merc upon me ' 1 am glad to fi id it is you, von luve almoft leued mc on' of mj lentes, ' tud а vo ce v h ch M uv J me knew to bc Mtbeľs " How ι ined you admutai cc into this room lai icly uttered Mary J ine " Wh , infveiedMilcl, " h unghie 11 lit been foulv frrihe )) the opening and (hutting of doors, when I knew ill the fully to be at refl, 1 thought I would .(к )ОШ pe nuflion to let mc be wuh you, Ihou' 1 I be difbnbtd in hl e η inner ı 0 un, and beine; but t fliort time fince gu tiy tightened with a rejetıtıon of the line Гоеше 1 ,
founds, t 1 um 1 oui oi I 1, ani didn; you hul not I ctr el vou dooi, vv'ieli ( thou 't vv ıs luny спои, Ί, I tiept lottly 1 iti t! r о 1, t I Kli 1 111 -r vou to bt (hep, I tl igt l v uld vait viu, and Hi''11 111 loll fi l ll lb 1 ieJt l Olit lile bulbi 1111 t , b- e ud iot il vou, at lad 1 bat 1 nie tl 5011, when )oii fpring out 1 1 υ Ι ι luth ι loifoutiilid Imn , il t l e η t eı tu' viu loi the glıjıl, ud „ionul I r, 1 I have done ( 1 t vo i 'ts I , 1 v m b I. I e e e I lit t 1 1 lil t le mui¬ de I, il vis mott Pf) i) pi Ve s, vvlıel elli Ivet Vele, lulu i ie ι en ' [llévenle I 1 le Mil) jane then Icalcd 1 crfclf upon the bed, "nd Ш tl to t in[ ol ihc violent ici- tmbitiou of hu ipuiis Mabel lclurncJ to her own ipirtm nt, 1 ich. a h B ht, ai d wis fom with liei again Mar) J ine, op [eUc.ving the dooi of her
liei chambtr open, wis convinced that whit M ibel had I ml was true, and though Ihe blamed licifclf foi her neglect, felt much relieved tliat the groans flie hatl heaid were thus iccounled foi, and the nolle which had excitetl them was noiv palpable that file hail been he occalion ot " Л\Ь )у Lath," exclaimed Milcl, on perttiving the i i'ttti fl i Чп; Tint, " jojfeimti luie bun m ,. e rul tl an mylill 1 Eu' in t I ut jtu dope u h jour candii' — ur, 1 un ılı it', tu il lun till moulin^." Min line pouted to t 1 1 t 1 , ι ι ν Inch Μ ibel μ ud tu ont f h il ι lu nul, tiun ludden!) exclu i e 1- «Ilt- Lord topu i t, «hat hate tebu ' in I, uttering ι feaiful lena n, Ih 'u n i lutk agun into lier oui clnnbir. Mu) Jı e, vfbi ι ! it 'er conduci:, fiice! her cies upn tlie lo'et, ud with in.ifciibabie
indefciibtbli hoiioi beleld vv ut flic had brou Jit with hci in the duk hom tl e ruin¬ ous j ut of the f buc, and wl ich lhe uin¬ ui cd, in the 11 nui' her 111 ι d, to hue ltci tne tai I , to be th jiv Ье^с udi u fclhr -nd off 1 Π' t I
113 j
1 ' on lt, tlu 1, l lupi
putnd
I hli , Ih
ν Int, V г ,' ľ í il lu
in thi
t i>
Ilış t cr Ite 1 upo 1 the (pe t le on the tonet —kiv tied ti t e I, ot he i t iod а h к s h Uh 1 it, ìrticulit 01 vv ь iul putle hb comte te ciiiii 0 ed to 1 deadly İlle.
palt, lus lips quivered, eveiy feature vvas convulled with fear and dread, he trembled iinivcrlalh , and Miry- fane, milling paft lum, f on ga ned Mabel s a¡ irtment, anel í illtiied the iloor Here, with Mabel, flie fearfully paiTtd 'he ni 3 ht, who believed, is Miry [uie ven¬ tured not to un le tivt htr, whit Hit 1 id fetn to have be η ι ufed l> fu[ nitu il power
CHAI'.
CHAP II. Ile Ring MARY JANI ,loon utırllıthadıeftBir- vılle, and hurtled ι to M be s apaitmcnt, lini I limi fice \ t itd) tlefce d the ítairs, but furu nils luiirn, and io ne i eilon with lum, nd a 0 11 ciuci tie room, wiu e he hid bek e b en fl computei) fhockcd and ter ilivd ,— lus toce lhe could diftinjiilh, but w lio η he w s fpeakmg to fl e kn ч not, nor, as th y i oke m а low ton , eould Ihe iea.ui tlu lub и ot t i n d couili As foon as ih)h Q ht api с irte!, M ibel tor a fliort tunt lift ha, ind Mir} J ne began to
to rur mate m не iltq ly upon the terrific u adcnts of the night She lliuddtred as htr tl oughts r verted to wíl t, in lier agita¬ tion, the hid íemoved fiom the uninhabited put of llie tdifiic. flic lenoi and alarm li rvillc betiajetl on beholding it, al noil j roved to 1 er he u 11 a mut I rtr Ti e idea « i< dici iful, but ihe beli ved it jmt:. The door, wl ich lad cieľed fo m ch ttl or am' conluiitn, lhe enti ivoiiied to ] eiluule berteli all t\tej t heilt 1 1 eie igno 1 mt of, throi 3I1 vvluth Hit Itili det 111 ied, it no better vv ly ol ied, to atttmpt ai el-ape, b it th ho v could ili a if ver the liitcuogitoii ь, vvluth ihe nituiilly con- ctivtd would be made, without b ti jiiig it' i lie molt Hit pond rtd, the mole perplexed Die btcmie, when, drop] 111^ on her kiietb, flic lnvo.ed the ¿flifUncc of Hcv en 1 del) to dehvti liti from tht alio 't of fm ind dtath. Huville, to liei grtat lchcf, did not vift htr
hei the whole of tint diy. Mabel infornitd lier tint he w ıs fuddtnly t u tn ill. " And no wonder," fid flie, " for I undciftuu] bv Riwhnd, ttlio looks pliguy pile and grim about fomething or other lnmlelf, tint hc fav the ghoft 11 tlıe fime hoirie! fliapt it appealed to us lift night, winch, fir in) part, 1 -m by no means lori) ftıı as moll likcl/ wc Iln 1 Ihoitl-, in tonlt ^tnii, be winded bitk agun to I ondon Marv Jant was f naiv gritiátd that th sfii llıe İni cit apul tlıt fuıpcoı Ilıt 111 il dici' d Mıh 1 coi tru i with hu the whole of this dij, ь flit t'd li titile t di) Iute ι lup en pt tilit 11 tlu crauııgs ot 11 n e ι b ρ I uu to 1 1 abfent to pn- j aie ılıtır ri t ils ar ' с с 1 the 1 not wiih¬ out D ıc t ıpı iiii hl i u iliould yin encou Hu lom tuubit p li. On the thud morning of her confining· huftlf
herfelf in Mabel s room, the ílipuhted period of one week expired, and Mary-Jane became as aiiMous to fee BartilJe as lhe had before dreaded his prefence "However, tv о days more elapftd, and fhe faw him not Mabel mbrmtd her t at he ftill continued indilpoftd, and confili d to his chambei. " If he fhould de th ught Mar¬ jane, " with all his fins upon lis head 1 " Much as flie feired lum, much as Ihe abhoned him, much as Hi wilhed to rulli into the- aru s of Ridatili and Ht rj, to be liberateti by ms diffolution, eie b) re¬ pentance he had fougl t to exp it his crimes, chilled her with honor Late m tlie evening of the i ime da) all apprehenfion» of his de"th wert ¡u Idenly dtfpeiled, and r cars of mother natuie took full poiltffion of lur , for Barv ille himfelf ftalktd
ítalkctl into hci apartment, but not vvith his uluil j olitene s, or even deiyiing to make aiy apolo 0 y foi iitiudiiie, u[ ο ι her privacy atlo itte an hour, but inftantly Ruing 1 1 ulelf, coi minded her to do tie lime She trembled, but daud not to dil- obe) Inm With α icrutinizing look I <· fui fune tunc ijcdlu m lullen fi ence , his foul I ıı ti bı D with fome hoi ribic dc figli, ul lleta palhon lat ieovvli g on lus ι loony bi )iv, al lall, m accents terrible, he utlei tl — « W с 1, Iiaiight) Madam, do you conf nl to wh ıc befirt Ι ν mlv have lohcitcd? ' lhe wretched Mary Jant, agliaít with gnet and terıoı, ia v ords lcaıcl) audible, ıı ule aiiiwci —" The Iole mn promile mide to me------ ' YcJifelf liave iblolvcd mtfiom. The bub i) ν 11 whith jou Utempted to coi rupt my feiv nt, has long lince mule thit void, dnd know that, lentitud defpeute bj jour childifli
chid (li olílui-t), .1 ¡ui j tinit in ι luling ny pioficicd tem ь, loue ihill o ui vvhıt you hiv hitheito denied, fe u Ih 1' ь га- til) inqeuius t'élus, midt u ou lince anti nuit it b) j uu ütu ilion " Marj Jıne, ll uılt'erıııg as tlıt theadfjl words ıflucd ironi his lıps, itutetl hom lier feat, vncuous ı dıgnatıon inljiire ! her with cou'age, ard flic wich cıergy ltjiltd — " Inhuman moniter, dead to everv feule of honoui, fct ling, orhunaintv, ei it belio lite, turu thte from the dcftiuflivc | ills of fin aid guilt, aid know that M r¡- ]апс, vhom tl t u ГсексП. to reduce to а level with ihvfclf, piotečted fiom above, ili ill tnumph isci tic* deattl) m clunations of an al ifin ' " Ah, ι ι ir n' fyfl liou f ' j 1 -n tini lu put tl v L iUleouu_ to tlu dt' ' Ilen ι ulmi g tow ai d 1 r, l e ru le y fu/ed liei in i i aims, ind jiiotecde 1 to luťtcert i tedüuıs. Mai) -Jai с,
Til U) jin", fintini ■ hule f thus м ikatly aH mite I, v inj uu' ло ud to f uin lhe I o 'iuti ία: 11 11 hen h , lhe Ilinek" 1, ent cu d d ht I til nc l ; еч ι II dividi lhe Hill t, j le 111 ll lllif.her.elll » f 11 1 ct in , h vas but t« ecoai] il li 1 ıs li la ι (e, ν nei aun tu , vh th 1 u , iul, edit 11 1er i cek, m t his ii hl A ic 1 c h 1 1 Ic „t l hım, lus c)cs 1 1 d ν uh till ¿Γ ι he, ь if he lul ouil t ί t η tlie nie. t _ ítlv ρ untom 111 ι¬ ι. unt и ev 1 ι 1 1 1 - lı t Uri I ıdtlcıly fıoı 1 1111, 1 lluü 'ı di peC 'litis α 0 οι / m ' I i[ if , ν 1 U J ine, o ice moe lee le 1, 1 r Spill s ijUlekl) retti ned, ai d on hu ui es fl с petitiont J fjr n cic). " Лили mc tiu/," h ас lilt pro noi ice 1, evt у (ilture со viliid with ex¬ cels of di ad n 1 aftoniílnient, " ínívver me Hu'), s thoj ivi t - count foi ıc here¬ after— whofv u ( e ib mee do I iu . bc- hod'"
Mary-Jane,
Mary Jane, obfimnp lus eps intently fixed upon tht minutine, tremutjufly iji- culatcd —" Alas, my lathers' and tins," Iliewmg lum the opi ofite fidt, " ni) Iainttd mother's." Had perditions j awning gulf, and all its attendant horrors, oj ened at his feet, he could nof hai с <remul more appalled, he gnaflicd h s teeth magon) , evci) featu e was contr aid, Ins bofom heaved wuh violent emotions, his lips quivering and livid, and wiithing with unutteiable in guiih, he ftiggeicd from the apaitmcnt Mar) -Tanc, freed from her bctiayci at а moment io unevpecled, with idias wild and incoherent, lool ed fiarfull) aiound A confulid noile iiom below α ou ed htr to a ftnfe of the tlanpr fhe lud fi pon¬ deriti illy efcaped, hu heart bat qu tk with apprchenfion, lell Bnvillc (1 ould it turn W ith fi intic teleni) lhe darted, and fecund the door. « Oli б
" Oh RadmilP Oh Henry'" Ihe ex¬ clami d, as ali igaui wis hu filed m fil псе, " how would pur iyiptlimng hea ts bc torn did you but know ti e agonies tine rmtl tlic ¡fflntid bofom of join luTiring Marj- ïaie' Loft in a cluos of diftrafling thou Jits, for 1 me lime 11 e continue I pacing the apartment, uh η the poffibilil) oi eicaping throuji tlieitii ts ρ uls oll tei ι caput prefen ed it if, ail pull) iub lu 1 the lagmgtutui t oí hu mud \οί ι moment was to be 1 ft, but thin, oiee wit ι ut the bulliin g tvliitliu cnild flit tt i fo i ¡ge? —Nomalter — lhe co d but di , α u d at ι to one fo it[ iilatiiel) t r ttl el, ι o„d L™ α kind ult ait fiom toituic Ii n mitant flie mined ihc adjoi ung inom, itiiottd tin btd tulli v tlie lu t) b li and 1 α ing Iccuied the h , Io nici d tl e f le flauem, (ne h J и ] ait b f re di tei li I, а do ir wl uh te min ıted it, \ uh the ílightcíl difficulty opened, an! M y fi с found hiilelf in wh t о ,cc had been α voe il с ip moas
fpatioiis lull, lin win 1 li'irai щ flroiif; in lui fait, ilnou di t u ι nains ol tht dm) td uil s imi ttl li lui lit tt s m , the ι vínnu of tli lil it,— ıhı indi - votimi io cilioui ι o| ti in; li gt t ıoıı 0 lı lo a it lur l' io i, «Un tht lam ili ir nt i t 111 lili n la'uied witJi lui t tv in s b [ ι , кГц 1 1 tu iiji- o\ ι ť ι t'ı m 1 On ι u t \ t >ii't o \ nh tei <i, i 1 ι l 1 ι tt s f uli', nomi, u' , t 1 i i n 'I i' t t I t o mo 'i I 1 1 1 11 l 41 c u tu u ,ι 1 ι i r ι ι h iti при bl ť II I t to l ι t ι tt- fion t и и t hu 0 n lo nitih tqp'il it Li Itnt ι , Ιι ι e ti, ι iota li ι etcìy cuoi t to , 1 t ι ' он» dai ıs Ut ıı I t I lut' nu il tuh , lui ť _.ι tl li t ι li ι ι ι, ti Ια t u m tin. f i , ι , up li 1 ι t ι ι ι ıh
peet moi ol ceo ι lillu 0 h r deh 0 i Several lot) rooms, fimi! ir Io thole lhe luti dicati) ut ' red, diluii dof even orm- ni nt tlıt hul io merl) tl c irate 1 then, cnıı biing un 'er the 1 uai) hnd of Timt, danij , gloo ny elicili, aid anın ıı tl, convey ı^ınl] ıkıb'clouı toti mnd, in melai h lv 1 ι ι ι I e ι I d ılır udi, wlen li m, ι hi Iı su ι ι e η dil ι], υ ι t ι ι ι ies ιι ne le Ле ι ei ti e 1 li up i itu i i ıh t n, ulucii nitet ' Iri "l' " il" ıı it tnt 1 di hiti, ml oltan u m 1 no li, , i , tl , s of mil iv nu I eil ι ι il i hu tve , lu Uut ι , iul uh ιν ' η . s ıhın u w t t U r i pi n i t с infinti cl ι' Ί ι ι vv ι 1 re th ι itlet ι ., h ι Ι c t i f d dw ι il r- 1 siliei'ioi oi, r ι d J q ir ι
lircľoletc and unii iun ι ied wl tre next to guide her wt i) l\ an' hid linku g buit uh tin wu lit ei ' t i" tcı s
hci ejt g -lit difi mit ι
bur a l! oit n g tutli u i ıı)s ol the tl h ι, an lult
и О that \ i di n 1
Ilı tl le
erci
math li, 1 1 Λ 1 ijl videi е. hue 1 i u tl lu lit i le ι ; h ι mijit tl e 1 0 ly ol a nai ι ι the elt , Il Пне of pıt t e n, pit i l' t 1 itti titr im 1 ť u w il 14 le Cred i I 1 11 Ι ι tipo d tio 1 1 <e d, 1 t r , Ιι I tet J 1 ι 1 tl i ot Ό ' ìl <- CJ i 1, η hl vi, i tl 1
fwelled to α piodi 0 inis lut, and Iiu'ling Irni then ficht!, will a indly (tire leciteti li el oi ln ι S illemig \u re could cnduic no m 11c, ι ι eleim; (hne iii ied fiom I 1 h s, at' 1 hlihe th ovcr- fp ml I ti pi id bi 1 ν , I 1 fi uliies weie fufp n t 1, hu j ι ts bei nibe I nul Oul, the 1ц it di 1 ipe 1 ni li li r huil, (lie '-fiel P " iel ill 1 11 edible amula ıh , - lihi hu η I 'j ν li 1 > id coït u d ¡r aite, fl ,iiveil t kul ul 11 11, ,he 1 1 v Ut t, lili 1 letllll! , 1 С 0 le Uti l 1 »Ilt recolle * ) , li 1 ι 1 neid ι ıs tint ha 1 iteli il, Il 1 i 11 , ι 11 1 Μ d cilve eh li, (I ,1 , ıııd ul dul vind ud VV ι t с nııjll İnece hel S 101 1 ι helij notu , Ы ip neh¬ li r ι , íl n t inuiiiciiud mhjit i 1 t 1 í 1 , t le 1 ¡ICI Clenching tu- el, ' , vi ' . ι, ihllorted, lib eV » ο 1 n, t lil l'y 1 11 ll, 1 | lOll ULt Jiu On 1 eu , hu, he íl, ud,
.jO ıs il uncen un uhcthci he beheld the object heioi,rnt Muidu Ico lcd on h s bi ow, ml evinced his hel idi pui | ol. A fiintic h i i hızın,, Mır) Itn , Iht чаи! 1 luve f d, lut ılıt ile non, catcluii» hu l y the II ot Iťu, piivuitcd e , md w eh iii lifted w ı ııı in eı bolu, when illin , till- ı 1 nti nt i to 1 ııı utu Ί 1 hs , ui - 1 I , nd a loud atice jull Mu d hui [ t lined—" Ilot', l и dill ed mil- tie Ul -lit 1 honil, lluego thv ııh ın- ı ni, ird lu n me leccive i pimiihiiicnt ui'* i' с thine tilfelles I" Γιοι ibll кг, be ι екаГс i hei fio и his gul] , uti M uj Jue ig uu duit 1 though the tlıeı 1, li lue te îpiitincuis lile moon, ctili ij - ieeo'e ni, dll ivciedio her an I titule m tlie will,— lhe li vv t wauls it, it 1 el to tl с e\teiior oi ihe bud mg— how lit„h fiora the level of the cauli (he knew noi 1) I] ,u r hatl taken full poilcdion oi her, Il t l| lung through it, autl dunned with the fall, laj infenfible at the bife of the illudine. СНАГ.
1 Iı el и m λ e tl \У 1 ν th с οι cunei t i Pienet, ititi utu u i hue III III W ned I tl , 1 ll le 1 e 111 ici llltlthe haulle l tri e t tlie . th ug M rv lane, Ilı ful ei i in be I, a ílraiige t o inn, tu n in ılı ıh itt ııtioıı, was w itt ung mu¬ tui) Ip с ideoi it M l) [ane endea- loji J te ni , b t fi il 1 le I t ω wca!, t _, i .. »li ni 1 ľ ри ш nu lit id, uil h . h ib lill) Imi ei ud tote, to a on hl]i u m e H ΊΙιι uoman, j ircuung her cndcaiour, с 4 tenderly
tti dei ) cnqu ied Ι ο ν ih α-, an I bcigetl thl (lit in ιιΊΙ keep heiielf s ti intimi uni 1,4 el ıs poiľl ле. " Л hue un lì' exclu util Mai) İme, " ι ι' who ait ν iu ıhıl letni to p ilefs fo mum | v 1 eni u i е Ню ι (οι ι wretch f ν ι ι t Ί ι ι delimit suvľ ί- 1 , ' f ι i h tl, " Ь of el,' ell t i i m ill , lit ι iul t ι pıt vo U 11 it ¡i int y u ι 1 0 ill IO hileli lo vv İt 1 11 Ve lo i u to vo An hei ti ι , wh n ош he 1 l ıs liioin ci 1 1 ı с 1, ou ih ill now how 1 h Ve le int 1 me iew p u t cul -. tint I > r .. lij alinat 1 jou, in t t nite im cíl
fit shed v u i tl t
I hut mı
tutl
iillcltil
liLÍ ιι ι lü 1 ι η, λ au mi) lu e ton-
Ihti ν ai -ıı ındtftııbıblt luna ug¬ ni tit minner ot the pt lion who tlııı-, iddi elled
at'illtf liti, th Íl lııuıl'ı U lilprco , liti umetti ti Mli) lint ılı ı llu t is ι о loisii Uni ti thi со tio il il Bu illi , an u чре ιιΊΙ fini шоп of ρ ilitudt mil iluij t thi II d ıı lui lıofı ı, whith, ıh ηι»Ιι no l u tl , ι I Ir u hu lins, 'icm ι- nanct in iiiiiiitly iiititiwd, И tn ^ 1 muran i i t u d cqn 1) 1 1 Hill I tintici worth hid ι io I uni lo igni ılık in tfuc. Г' < tf tins liiduin llıpııoıı m iti U I i iti ΙίΟ i illty llOÍ I t Uiip t ι- Ιιι u ιιι i ti ,üt ttt pumi to inli¬ nin ttl ι lun u lul 1 hu, lll to h u cium Ιι! bun' ι, win it niy I с nmtmb ini inibii li, 1 a lO titt li lulliin t- Jlltl tO 1 1 ι С ıfllı 111 till il utol t. f i Ull 1 tl tl dll, fi II ¡lii, e i i n u pi Ι Ι) ι ulii' t) ι м b iul 1 0 mı t 1 ni, to j ,¬ ι n ι ti „, Ιο bih ill ) ! Il (l- c ιι„ιι, tnt 't un il ol η 0 hc li . i u с 5 hou, s
hou ibfcuiidthe ι ml <ib < f tn, when f minitel) he ïtlumd ци! it tht m munt IVIııı luì. ipııııg ilnou h m ц uture in II dili| id itti i ill, and ull inanı η ite at ils шс d bilt Ve, as lhe f 1, ι blu ite! a 11 ρ fe of hu, md innu mg lia to b ılıt t hoit with wliicli r poi t liad li iunie I t v t ıhtı, ilo d witi h li ena, and tus l ılu'l, live tipo iti t ol Ject tinelli ) n olion'eb but a Ilı it bilance liem I ıı, inci ilute IVİl t tl tO itli Ulte, Ol le v tl e eliti Ulte of tie t. iille hy molliti na' w it i kn in сити w iris tint lid thoipul inni f ι 1 icl| cui r l ci mal a s e tlyis u¡ on tlt lad) lei I bi ug! t with hım, ret ııı u il to I ıs n с ı t , i -id t iv ι 1 t ť it wint hv 1 tlmi ht btihe fu lid) itteni lia i nudli from t] wi kıt' untili t s ■ i ι il jit ι il ι 1, ıııd ı i|iıed Ir ι n t t tt ir 0 e υ ιλ nine U í n
Willi cum w md ticiib'iiig Л ,ь lic hm I totini . ι, α i um ol Ί„ιιι, 'Ut ti e Ulite I (ГОШ Ι tillille 1 ille li ΙΙΟ¬ Ι , 111) dll u ıı Κι f с ml'it iiii- i ut lj ¡emb ιι Μ ι ι I tht fime ııh ' ι ıct b Pi 1 , uh eh ills n 1 nl it , ıs Die ' 1 n m the in ι, 1 1 as e u Uie elti) the e itle ι > I Hui iv tıı ııı, hul over iv ui ι, he ι l lu hon ıı İt luuıl Κι m ti n ι md ın- ' it l t t ıı ' I d lier to bf ι , h ti ι ι cd htm of tu' , liait pil- i Κ t t eı ıı I el fiotïl , il l 11 111 bUlljt! ι , ι in ι ııı 1 ıs ι m , K tn- e dnu Kas lhe was, rl ιι ι tv o uil о и lefidencc 1 ι , 1 'ni |Ц the Ι ι 1 ien ei Kr İle 1 i 1 e 11 Γ i Veľ tO
Du ill m
Dimitan hid fomt d ijs lu'i ettal tint ill
was ι et it lit m po r, i e w ıs hi vvhıt lu I ι heti to bc ι o Ι ι often v lihe line Of Biml he been с i plev tl ι ν and tholt It he Mul' ııı ii ( 1 I- llu t ıı İv e
ι ιι li , foi ıh u h , lllb lev „ u U M bel uliu, Ins milei ι he flıoul I be, h d ou ol ht» lenice η w hui hl 1 , 1 i i g π l u Iwi mils, tl I nil el with
Ile tl luut I
hy, liv d d ι
YVI,"
" Well," llioiijit Dundan, as he pro¬ ceeded with his lovely burthen towards Mrs. Mel.iortli's, " tlic w.irfl tj.aii can lu; p-.at to nn, liuiull I bv h .m ft Ro timd be detected in the per.:'.·..!: nee of this chari¬ table nflice, К In.: ! ι !.,;;■ my place; aui (o lofe Ihat vv ¡l'eli trou:.", s me to k.-ep, is not as lean well delir·.·."
On h's rrrival a', V.u.ckir.g loii.ilv at
flic luv liti opn lur t)t , vv iti (le few Wťlltls b t le 11 m 101 Cti Weie UlCcletl 1 οι ftv ι r Ul vs wa M rj Jıne painfully coi li td t> hu U , ıhını _, vvııeh tune V λ 1 uth, with the m ie uucmıt- tıı n- Unlun , s ι nol incili ıtlv with hei, и ν on vhi) (ue r ite! in what ıı mı I t n I U.. ıı til ι η htr f lends b) Ii 1 ul , in t l ι ι e ı tl 1 ice 11 ι ce Ι Ι ι 1 ι enti etl not 11) 1 ! I 1 t Ve С ) j I boti) 11 e 1 ι ι ι il t 11 S to e e q ίο ι ι oe I О ıs U 11 I t I to tit
λ
1 I 1 II tl I tli Ιι Ι ι t ι with t с V le v
il I et 1 lui tn 1 ι t let i i r ll , 1 ι 1 ' ! υ i 1
11 d luu fon th t tenti ııı ol ι deed lo dieidlul, lhe tenli iv m means iccount foi " f.ieit al eie I 1 Cod'" Ihe e\- c ι .ι Ι, ι Μ ι ! ι tin' d, " ν lowill n t lut r in he t . nn v reiv upon tute Γ οι pıtı etion, ln i i'v m thy VI) , to De tnlinJul ιι t it u к ol the v ukul, but v u mie lhe et 1 t . ventile tl leeoil i ι ih le'v s, e i w . fitlinle, l İt' llitll e VI 1, [ e iti) 10 lllbilllt 1 1' | 111 Vie t e , I trOJle Ot" th ·, t, ν Iıı Ί tili l, m tu vi lon, Ucenicii ] e\ ıh u II I ιι ι,ι nt ra the til l li 1 i 1 to in, Ulti tille ч h ρ ιι eitt al '
.ve, u ,') nie.1 ttll, M.i) (ine lil ι ni) re med h l i iu a l i, u el Wilted . Il ι ι ιι i lo ι lu r vv luth Iti Kei tu i'iiiuul to ılı pollo ice foi ki ln 11, ni met eı lor İleni), v hui, on ti pıcuuııg
ι uful!, lliv-lliub idlrdK-d hu —
M) ti u M,, M Kinti,, ,,,) good umbi I ti, Ins am I Iden с nife lui d i in cheeks ι th 1 ir w' Or u ac 1 \1 it Jut le lo iiijiih- 1 ' 1 s to litoi llii (oliti m? ι , i о 1 th tlıt , ib ui thy
), ,t η ι ι Ι ,ι , tiu.
le il
u r i et I in li
of th b (Ι ι . ! ι I ν ι ι 1 ι il itli ı fi th b ι ι s <l Ι re ire 1 tu \ 1 , υ I, t m o j t c c j „ ill 1 _, th i n rt lit it ι l, nt oui tunc, no и о , tnt о Г t f , hil WI Kİ ι, v 1 il ш fılıım I İl l Dll lilt 1 I κ 1 ι 1 l ftVeilt til jtir 'lis iv 1 ι , e tl IH s 1 l e, «e, tellllt 11 tl I 1 1 1 of t t Jul pai ι 1 ι и! (ιι «ι u til tlie lit v turc a of В 11 1, Lul шу tl 11 vit«, ir lus OÍ 1 İt ! ПС 1 1 ll al io l u i ) vv i red,— tv , ι 5 fül It 111 , 111 t. .ιι lie ti ι , Ii ch h Ι ιι ils.
io
l.elV)
tenp ll , I deft I
tov id tU t Ih
t ni - on tl (liei 11 etc lcd fem it, α tl j itti) ι ıı ed u to v ilk into it. Л\е u nuli t implied w li Ins ohi ging г 11 α 1 il tu tonti i ed ι nul the uo- lu e of un flour ılı tul, bei lups the tui f tti nt i b nu tul i d uni h) .rora tit t nt u 1 tl louée 1 iiblel, π¬ ι 1 ι on con el ľ, U5 ill ll j c in T ' to ÍLU ι πι Ilus ottei tu İne ile b attııılly ice e, tee, i d loon atite -, un reached oui itildi ice " 1 t n hí ι mod the pet on who hid fo tl tiy fluite etl Ub uu the iude in¬ ele че) of ılıt u m nts, w 1 lit ι l' nauti nte leb lo ι loma )ou w.s Buullc, wis our ť ij ι filei, ail, lgnrrmt of the iL| ıaı tj u luut, /eoi ι finid t n beea n (o i ci I tenli Ini-, ll u и leluin Wilton d nqt i. tlu .t Buine Culli. « My \lıı it ıhıs piu .1 was be- f t.ietl to uı пин joi lı , of the name of I4u D ut, with ilan om ml .ney lhe 1 ni been iCjUii led, in ι uho ıtııu'd Ire· quenti) fiora London, lus η un e reliden с, lpend
|[ end ι few ttttlvs u .h t u oui it uc- ment " One evening Mitiltla, ni) Iti! being inthlpo ed, purlutd h i uji ííO '' viitn- tut me, .vht.i l' " h in s t it ι it , * d hır not l tu ι , e e v t u eall ťs ) li fime uus i i. h tl b lc i I. r 1 illlpltť tl ι ' l\ ut ili qu 't . f n 1, b it no Mu ' 'Ih lid, n İh irt, the ni h p i d 'ııl at iv, ' one" m ire alluniti, nl (Ul n / atılla, .he U Cv of ni) hte, t l' e t. " M) dilire о is ι ο. e till) coicnv 1 tinn tl iciibiil — il ο ι ell .Ub to t' ca. cr lier the t h le of tlut d ι eid d in dılap- pointiuent, when It с e i \t etenin^, ha İm dıiı t 1 e 1, de'ııır ani t ılı! thın İni 1 ı k l' t cııreı 1 ılı a¡ u ni >, where Ι alo u s litim-. all m uhi l.olv tl ipindenc) oi f 1 l'i t 1 r I henchí liei, tti en, «U ι 1 J lv t i s buck, Ih. chop¬ ped hiele s at η ) Icei " I milled t ma-Is her, gert'y rufed lui up, ui! 1 iuii_, lun -т the bell for affiltance,
-JAXE. afi Ί ıı«, lt. 1 t ÜÍ ι ι ι ni ιι ι- PU e' lu, 1 ι ! 1 t 1 Ce Ille l'Iti ι I il ly means to 1 f) . , 1 ms ι, 1 ll u, ι llu Ιιι 1 fit l' ıvts 111 ι tl ι Ult . 11 1, lied l , 1 e ex u ici lo me Il .mg ' tr i ul—'Su, ht is the 'Mı 1 do η ι ι (ι lu et ι ι,' , lud -' ι' n í Ιι m I, mho i\>'— e n ) iul , -'iii ι η 1
ι' e. i'c' ii ute hu el 'Hol " i', ι il,' iele I nu, o. Nu„ nt lie Г, lib dû le '- I 'e's g 11 , loft, fl ι '- No, lee, he leu e. nuni —ϋι , ıe Imi'—Su how tiu en ilon pie inekies i e , limi— lilluu in, bu¬ li noe hi ufi 1 us iodi ligure n t Cui lud nud lo ι neu —ilut uil ftıtıs. I ıs pureh led tli dinin mon ι — O ι uhm a ill ıııd vil чп' -lier le îfes nui I îlotu Jiu, md ine ilt] fed into înleiilibihu " loi t о dajbind I w iteli l) liei Лег flic agun ieco\eictl irom hti lwoon, 1 i t flie
ilte 1 new mt nit, iicr telinini licieifeti, α fi tır fu d hei α u ι ed irmi , and lhe itpiiccl m in arms ' ' His Mcltoith was fu fo ue ii ic 1 о much ι il ed to j loe ed At ' J ι il e cui nel -
ln 1 1 u ι 14 e t U tO 1 1 t Л 1 lete 1 nol ll ι li tt 1 l'e ľ Ί ι I С 1 tu e Ul'd dii¬ li) pooi M ıı ι ι il 1 ι 1 II, a d t Ull! the Cl ню IP Uil! to ι ι 1 )Oi lo my ti telili |, I \ Ol 1 ι t h lellin, but, no t! n lif f Ie i t 1 il due t mı ull lui, all io 1 1 oí t i L U t. ml u 1 íle 1 il tuender·.
'Wit ui h ill inn eine, continued Μ Λ1 Iwtiih, ' t о mn after my ehil 1 ι ι ι t ıı , I lee ı d ι lena nom bpciit i tha, iet,i I g n e to lune, ani nui m hım it lis kn wis with me, as lie Iı d many wcuvS befoie left London, with
wuh an inteni ι in to )ourncy a fu as vVi'cs, iince whith Ime li had neither Ittn noi heml fiom Inm He las win ten funai tums fnte, ind Ills di) I lavt leteivtd ant'liei, f n u li has nit jet r t unet', and tint lus nui 1 ue ι ί il κ tn асе unt of it ľ lul lome thea Hul icei lent malt have ui lel luu" Μι ) fane ι Tel cveiţ ait ti ftill tie tam t in tie m nil of liei Denti dli , vvlut h tl e rel U o t ot tl t fortgo nj; eue 1 ntes lalın full) evened, which 'ia oı ce ton hlhed, lhe wis e\tı tidy tıu- t ou n t t i rt t t tlie t pic 1 lie ter l ' idei tl t al' ie I Irr as Mis. Me «oui. tont li ltd hen an uive, ftt ι leiert ll Alt lil her oui bil n, s 11 it inviel tie t oi thtn wo hut int it I ıh t th o r (ilt ıs о li ous te ovtlt nt S vu I u ¡niitti awiv, an! b 1 )- Jlit ГСП d 10 Ul Г 10 t t letter wh t ι lil been de tv ci td at il c i II t foce foi
foi Radmill, when die d er nmed, notivith- flantliiip Mis Melworth tuul everv ciT it to J llmde hci to fet t ft fu Li tl in, mt doubting but Radmill lud cie t'nt le¬ tuined io lus lelleltnte 11 toivu
Mu) Ji cl ilpvh nih"loun-\piei dl le'! 'hi Ito , tie "tui ani iL Hull ; in ι ι , lu, t hi h ts ye fe I illal ι iieili ιι u m h, ti re tolt l' I 1 ' il ι ) ι ol li uellt
4
ι t И
juu ,l f J/ 11 d, b m ni ) η¬ ν need I l ill it .ι ι r pi ileli oı m die lill I c\, cud ее I le i и Radi ll α iei i i ι )
1 t muni g of lu dtprture at ı'l an ved, ne hi mg b. natii 1 ed ııı pıjuıf- lligt e n et ,ι u omam b) Mı ih¬ lu Ι , it blıluilig her ail "i' dilli te adu u, fit на», wuh i t t с. ι t n¿ u, dihiucuulo ι с dent ο ι ti e ioni, iti m abitili e
ablence of moie t ia hie months, fife')' let down it Curing Ciols Hue flu obt 1 id a h cl icy coach, an till η" t! ct acb u in n h it lo irti to, iiialhoit nmt ľ c h 0 liti 1 U tne dooi of htl ι liléit le eflelor
CHAP IV Thi V tıı rani. MaRì [ANI, whofe heait beat high with the expedit ion of once more cmbi c- uig thole on earth moil dear to liei, otd led the 11 in 10 I Jioih t ijjc door, 1 ι , too 1111- Ì ·. tit nt tow ut itbbeingopinetl,ilii t'cfii tided from tin cc ach, 1 tl li ucliing for li 1 j aule to piy tie 10 chinan hb fui., to her liu- 1 nit eliconi ttl (lit 1 id loll it At Chinng- Clofb
C-oľs die had paid from it the remainder of what was due for hei paffage from Wales, and rightly conjectured that in her hurry and ag tation to procure a hackney-coach, fome peifon had picked her pocket At an) other time fuch a dilafter would Icriouily hive vexetl her, at this time (lie heeded it but little, and dclired the nun to wait until the dooi w ıs opened, and her fiitnds knew of her armai, antl hc fliould receive his money λίαΐ)- Jane then afcciidtd the dtps which led to the dtor, to ν inch no pcilon had it tentitti, tht whole t J rite Jounded as die tic lecoid ti aie more foictbly applied foi atlnuttincc, but to as little puipofe, ι 01 did a ıhı d ıııd t muli eflort meet with uettei fucccis V rich old fpnfter, who refided in the rext houle, and who by this ludden ind re| cited ki ockin_, at Ruhin i s dooi, had been aioufed fiom ι comfortable nap flie vol ıı d was
was enjoying by tlie fire-fide, thruft hci head out of her parlour window, and not in the mildefl accents ccclaimcd—" You had much better pick tiie lock, and 10b the houfe that way, as by fplitting the door you will alarm the neighbourhood, who may not cheie to be quiet fpečiators when fuch depiedations aie committed, for no doubt you are acquainted tint the owner of the houfe has, with his family, been abfent almoft fix months " " What does that good humiuied old tabby fay?" vociferated tlie coachman. " Rob the houie 1 —D^nm mc but I hive a great inclination to pull your's down about your eais for your infolence." The old lad), rather alarmed at ins words, Infill) withdrew, and doled the íaíh. Mary-Jane, who had not the moil ditlant idea of meeting with fuch a dif ppointmcnt, now inw trill) re,ieaelied 1 crlelf for leav¬ ing Mrs. Melworth ere fhe liad íeeeiittl an anfwer
anfwer to lier letters What to do ihe knew not, the coachman became urgent for ins money, antl flie had none to give him, her declaration of having loft her purfe he now by no mems credited, but believed it to have been utteied folely with an intent to cheat him of his 1 ire, and lie prefently evinced as much, by exclaiming·— " Come, come, Madam, I am not lo eafily to be choufed —tip me the tivo flulimgs and ilx- pencc, 01 I ll charge the vv itch with you ' ' Almoft finking to tie eai th with tenor, ihe ıephed— " l Vhat can I do> I idecd 1 have told you it tiuth —Oh God, once mo e deliver me hom tic ] cnl and dangers tli it fu round me ' " 1 lhall prete itiy delivel jou into the cultody of thofe, retoited the driver, * who will tot piove the beft conpauions in the w uld to a peifon 11 your fituation, if jou doi 't inltantly con pi) with my jult demand If )t u have been lobbed, is you lay jou Inve, of )0ui puife only, depofit d 2 fomething
fomething with me until you get α frdli fupply. My со ich ıs No ------, and whe ι you bung or lend me my due, )ou can have it again,—for inftance now, that bauble on you finger " It was the ring ihe had found when ex¬ ploring the de r crted apartments in BamlJe Caftle In an mftant flic 1 1 ík it from lier finger, gave it to lum, and he departed Mary Jane, no v left by heifelf, without a fix pence in hei pocket and unknowing where to proceed for refuge, the 'adding tears of an 0 uifh and dilapi oi imet t trickled from her c)es as flie iiowl) movie! Irem the door, when fuddei ly r со lifting t widow lad), by the name ot Mr bourb), who had fomeimcs vifited Rad ι ill aid whofe refi¬ dence was but α fhort diilmcc (rom Ins, ihe detei mined to proceed thither, acquaint that lady w ıh her diftr s, a d implore her ptte i in until her íriuids gam re¬ turned tu L η lon It
It was now about feven o'clock, in one of the dark, bleak evenings of December, the ftrcets were wet antl ilippery, and the atm ifphere fo thick and mifty, that thehghts in the lamps were fcarcely vifible. Marv Jane, however, after fome labour and difficulty, reached Mrs Sourbj's door, and foon ader defired the footman, who opened it, to acquai it his miftrels that Mil« Radmill would be glad to fpeak a few words with her The footman bowed, and haflened with the meflage to his mtltiefc, but foon re¬ turned, md addrefle i her as oliowo —■ " Mrs Souiby, Madam, defired me to inform you tlut h never was ас minted but with one Mils Radmill, ι ti at lady hav in = deferte 1 hei friends, id forfeited their prote tion, die can no longer receive her 1 e ıs svont fo d >, therefore, if jou ate the pei on hu .„.ds allude to, D з m-
Hie defircs vou will quit hci hotif ι umi¬ diate!) " " Giacious powers'" exclaimed Mar)- Jane, " dcltrtct! ni) fricntls, and forfeited then proteuion 1 —Shew me to Mis Sourby immediately '—lou ht litat" —1 toa uipou to con jil) with mj ic ,ι ll, tl at I m i) hue an opportune) to rifcuc ni) clnrictei iiom obloqnj.and ¡liicmjitlt 111! noijij her efteem ι ' " 1 dui not," he \ cretnp ι ) rejihed, " I iruil ix cute tin ordus I h it rnuved, or the It Г if ni) pi iet wou d be lhe e ııılc- quence ' — ι le then pulhed her irom th door, and elofeel it rudel) iller he . Poor Mir)-line, thus flint out, a, it were, fiom tin pottuun of ill the woild, without ι place whe e Ihc coniti left her aching head, or (heller her lliivcrii g limbs from the cold, continued for fome time fixed and immoveable with delpau, gating upon the houfe fhe had io nneijiectedly bun driven f'~>i> at lall, clafpmg her hands
hands in agony, (lie uttered—" Cruel, un¬ feeling woman'— Alas' where can I turn for refuge ?" " Into m) arms' ' exclaimed a voicejuft behind her The perfon fion. whom theft words pro- reuied, advanced, and feized her hand She flunked, the voice iounded hke Bai villt's. " ijixlGoď' he again rejoined, " do l bel ld Mils Ridmid ? ' Slit waittd to hear no more, but inftantly tlirtul Irom limi He puiiuidher, but the daikiuls itv uud liei e cipe blu had ai¬ ri idy piTttl thro 0 h leienl ftreets antl COtii ís, ruiling t'i ou o ll eVtr) till lil lig ťl it [neluind itlilt, urti her iliuigtli b"ing quite exhai flid, İhı could pioitt i nj lul- tliu Bau in iht im gl cd lhe luar 1 itili bilim hei, ipin ione perlon took her hand, (lu g ι pul with terroi, hci mes neie fail receding, when a female exclaimed D 4 —" Amaze-
—" Ama?ement' Mifs Radmill alone, and in the (treets on fuch a night as this'—Dear me, how you tremble ' W h it has bef then you'—Can I be ol an) leivice to )ou ? ' Mai) [me, a htlle itcoveicd on fuidiip Barvil'c had not overt il en hci, as hei fears it firft luggcfted, nov turned to the perfon who had tliusaddieffed hei, and lienuloudy ejaculattd—" Oh' n m icv, whoever )OU aie, tint Piovi lente no doubt, Ins lent to my relnf, five mc—lave me from the evil I moil dread ľ *' Save .ou' Ap, tint 1 will Cime, let mc conduct; you to m) dwelling— α dwelling, but for the kind affiftance of the beft of men, jour honoured fathei, í had never been blcffed with—But conte —dear me, how cold you aie '—You fvCir ill— r it unon my aim for fuj ¡ ort , — tl ere, come, be oí good heart, and, God willing, all lhall foon be well agam'" Mar¡ -Jane, though (he never temcmbcic 1 to
to baie feen, or heard before, the perfon who feemed thus tlilpo r ed to (erve her, hefitated not to accept of her profiered kindnefs, and as liei refidence was jufl by, they (oon entered it together, where the care ard attention of her humane conduftrefs quickly reftored her to а digree of eale and tranquillity. " How finii I thank ) ou," utteied the weeping Mar) Jne, " lor the fervice you in t lendeied mt f' " B) t iking another glafs of this cordial. — С ime, i un lure it will do jou good, and 'ln i b) tt ling me if in an) other refpeñ 1 с 11 ei f the leaft ftrvıce to you " " To whom, replied Mary-Jane, " am 1 ind bled for fo mucli fiiendfhip and civility " "lo one whom your bountiful father railed fi m indigente, flieJíeied fromoppref- fion, ıııd gaie eveiy comfort 1 now enjoy.'* Hei natne, fite informed her, was Slnp- 1 i, uni lelated the mannet in which llie D 5 had
had become acquainted with Radmill, for fhe was the vu) pu ion who n lit liad nlcucd from the inhumanity of the Beatili, as dt- fenbed m the fecond chapter of tlie firft volume, and fince ih it had protidei! her with the tenement flie at pielint occupied, allowed her α weekly ilipind f) hei lupport, until, by her lnduftiy and it mom), llie had contrived to op η α gi ten (hop, which enabled her a few jcirs after to purcbilc the houfe (lie lived in, and, but foı tlu pofitive refufil of lier benciaitoi, to havı repaid what his chuitible heait hid lo fcalonably beftownl Mary Jane, though tins was tlie hi ft timi flie cvtr remembered to hive feen Mrs Shipley, had frequenti) hcud Radmill and Hemy mention the incidents llie had juft. relatid, and praifc her for tlic honeft) and rectitude ot her tundučl and pruitiplis, therefoie ihe now confidila! liei in tlıt light of an old acquuntaicc, on whole fiiendfhip flie mielit rel), aid by whole e affilai ce
affiftance flic hoped foon again to be reftored to tliem Marpl no foon after related to Mrs. Shipley tlic filande manner in which lhe lud been loicel hom Brighton, md what fublt ¡titntly liad befallen hei, conceding onl) hu liornd ldienture amidit the rums oí B u ville C dt e Her efcape from it, her anivil in Lotului, and, as flit btheved, her agam lo unc\| céì d!) tncountciing Bändle, il e minutt!} d ult on. Mrs Sluplc) hftcned with the profoundeft atte iti in, antl as Ihe concluded, exclaimed —" T I ink God, aitei all the penis and duigirs iou hue tfcipcd, )ou aie inw in a place of fafety ' Piovidence, no doubt, gu lcd )cur foetftcps tefm) lillut mon, that 1 might ]iıteâ )ou fr m tuitlier iniult, an 1 to give me an opportunity of proving, to t e beft ot nen, I am not ungritelul li r ti e fiiours 1 have retened at lus hand, hy Ihtlttni b , piouding, and пШишц to ώ ú Inni
htm his dear, long-loft, ind lamented child How wretched mufl he line been in )our ablence 1 —But there, forrow, when un¬ mounted by virtuous efloils, carries its own ген nd, for, like luuli lut aftei rim, »t be¬ come moie cxluhrated, ind pour forth our pious thanks to the Omuiiolent Ruler, tint he has fafely condufted us thiou 0 h the thicatening gloom, ai d once more blelltd, animated, and enliven d his woik« ' " How, my g( il Mi Shiplt), futi Marj Jant, " fliall I bt enabled to trınf mit α fe« lines to Ml R idú iilor Htm), to acquaint them of my piefent fituation " Oh, no doubl, ' llie replied, " er< long tht) will return to 1 ondon, thtrefui I Itt no occafion for writing unni to- monovv if) u «ill I ive the cot ılı leen fum, )ou cm ltfdt with ι e till jou icce e n inKvcr, nothing, on n y put, Hull be wanting to ıı al t yi u cheenul and ton- ttnttd I hait ι bui-ioom and ¡ allom ίο uiiaicl) it this time n tiet, tl cit jeu v ll
will be fafe, retired, and, 1 tiuit, not un¬ ii ippy" Mar) -Τ me rc uhly acceptul tins kinci oder. " Nevei," flic exclam d, " will I fu¬ get the ibhgation— ncvti will 1 folget that I am indebted to ¡ m for moie ıhın life, а , but lor yom timci) interference, c e th ь 1 might a^Hii h ive been dngged 1 1 the ıufın ous refidence о the tv rete ι I have but fouce Ul) с feaped fl ι ll '— M night) 1 Ul er' m tice 1 imleci, ani wis lil I) delivered Troua the penis that lu îoun Int 1 ' Mrs Shipley, on peuuu g hel qu ie tunquil'i/cd, md teconciled ti h r fi u - tien, adviletl lu to lettre to r (l, tvin ι "duce Mar) J int vv ıs ab lut to fol ο , when tne ílieet d in vv is íorccd open vv th fome device ot vnl nec, and iev u 1 i ıc i n ih d into the i] ι t i nt in w ich t } vue fitti f>Iuj line ie etnice, ani few
ilew to Mrs. S 1 p v or pıotcclıon, w lio was hardly lefs а r ctl than lierleif " Arc yon cci tain tiu-. ıs the houfe'" fud one of lliem. " Quite pofit 11 ' rejhed another, " and tlıat ) ιιιηζ cıeatıue, ıtlıo lools all innocence, I lete it eel it from ' Mis Sluplc) ι ow enqtiued t! en I ulinefs, •ι uch wonde пц uli it tould luve in need tliem io abtujtl) to cutci liti habit tion. " ΙΊ Ι π fs enough I ' txclaimt ι the ill jitifon ll it I tl İpken, " tli t louiy da ulti, ' ])ИШ1Ц it M r) J inc, ' mull ^o with u ' " Wim )(ii'' lcpiitcd Mis -.hiplc), iv'ilciMuy [ine ι lied clofe to li r, dmoll tyn with in t, " neveri— K ep oil ι —/ t joui |tiil pie ume to oii ι ui) ι ιο¬ ί С İlle " Λι 111 ι cuib., it then 1 " lou Ilı voeıfe ι Ucci molliti " "ioti
" You had bettei defift 1 " again ex- thimttl Mis Shiplt), " orvou may rcpc it youi rilhnels when it is too lite ' " Arc )ou lure )ou ale right ? " " lam ietti) to ma! e oath of it, 1 wis anfweietl to the perl >n who intti rogateti. " Then,' he rej lined, " 00 I vvomn, wc, in the King's nunc, fei/e tint joiing creatuie as oui puloncr —Rcliftancc vvoul 1 be folly, therefoie pu iuulc her peicea I) to .,0 With us · " ^^ 1 at has Ihe done " treni il ill en¬ quired Mis bluple), " aad wl it milio¬ ni) Invejou thus iude') to entei m) d Vel¬ lin« ' " In the firfl: ph e, ' lc ıephed, " for Ю111 IllllflttlOIl bt lt kil Ull, Wt lit I'u 1 e Offictıs, antl m the fteon I, we hive 1 w 11 unt to ai pichend ılıt ¡ erloı tin 111 in ( 1 U ρ mt out to u ," 1 1) in 3 hib li lu, 011 ť e Ihoule ci oi the ι Ijed nc\t to lun, " о fulpicion ol l mig cotiiiuiut 1 1 rolo iv, U ПО ι u Ul ei " Mald 1 1 ľnlxiv '' e l ll ei λ iv !
I\Iiry-Jme, ftarting involuntarily from Mrs. Shiplev, and hxin^ her eyes upon the group before her, not doubting but thty would difcov r their null ike on obtaining ι moie difluift view of hei pciftn The duaciful icculition iiifpncd her with courigc, is flie had at fiift coiijtcluicd the utrufion to have t rigl n iteti in lome new contili шее of lîırvılle's " íven Го," uiíwercd one of th m " This ung ¡ou will not deny, I puluinc, liav ing given to this mm but ι fhort time fii ce, vv! en unible to pay the lire t bar wis 'ue to luu Ur vour comejanec fiom Chum" Ciols to------Street, m ι liicknej- loach ' Mar)-ime, as he held the ring towards h r, ticmbletl violem 'y, the horn 1 lpeñacle lile Ind beheld, s [be ilooj cd to pick it up in Binile С (tie, recurred to lei memerj Iler evident confufion ti ey n Г contimeli in o cc itam (у mp' mis of guilt, ulti nitwit idam in j al' th t Mrs S'il ey ccıU
could urge, either by threats or entreaties, more tleatl than alive, they forced the hap- ltfs Mar)-Jane from her dwelling.
CHAP V. A Rctiofpeit. IT is now neceffary we fliould take a le- tiolpeft, and learn liovv Ra Imill iupported lnmlelf under Ins misfortunes, and what pieventetl lus anftvenng tlıe letter Maıy- Jane luti written to lum while with Mrs. Melworth. Plagiary, ere the arrival of the phyfieian, with plealurc, as he cad lus ejes over the following
following note, ninth the fervant delitercd to him, faw his fiiend overcome tin Iuit ι motioi s tint hatl lu/cel lum when intonimi of Henry s dcpaiturt.
" HONOURED SIR, " No doubt you will be extiemil) fui- pr r cd whin )ou leirn b) theie. lints th t I am on tht load to 1 ondoi , ant! it i tme win n the igonl/ug fu ] uli i u lit ι ıoı tli lois ı( our piu Mu) |mi, liquiitel tun i upli endi u m ol ¡oui ion to amiiniin u ni I itiun, uti nuli,iti tint aiipu n illudi too udi 1 к iow will not cali!) Uo eie me in luti) ţoi tuli In- givinii »luni a ,u utt u ι ui hueie- ceivetl inie ip t oı t\ uj I ni, π ti il\ to extricate bu l oi i tl t .u p s ι u kn mul hei If 1 mi) nh ι pi Hu π m non I hau nunul, I n il I ο ι ι ι plore her to you lo I tv hım ul nd in¬ foimed ¡ou of wint 1 had iuard, I tull admit,
uimit, cie I com liencctl my journey, would hive betn no Hurt t! in the dut) 1 Olvt to fo kind α pitelit, but aiiothti cucimi ' ince, which )ou will knotv htrtaftci, tliouji tiifling in Us nuure, tblc d n e to dtp u t in tilt abiupt muniti 1 h ï. donc—M) gratitudt, and undutiful conduct towuds ) ou, ui) beil, my 1 nou td, ind citte ned i lend W hen wc mc t agun, which 11 lhe cou fv if a lev di)s wc cenami) Iliail, 1 trult it tuli be to banih jou lear, nd m) lilt to e\| enenee the 111 ilt exqulilte pie luie l'ioiitiucc cm gì mi) me wilh, il it of lecui a you ufi ne 1 ind ha] pj " HENRI RIPMILL "
That Henry had heard fomctli ng of Miryjine, putly lecoiultd Ri inull to tins lafl le¡)u mon, im! Ins pi > n'c if re¬ turning 111 α tew dais with h 1 hid io Vlhble m effect upem his f| lilt··, tint v hen the ph) liuau entered the room, hc w s t о much
much recovered to mid his advice oi affift¬ ance, therefore he foon after ıetıred, pro¬ bably not bell plcafed with the clilappoint- inent Plagiary conti nicd with hm until α late hour in the evtl nig and the next morn ing waited upon him again, when Ridnull apprised lum of hivng lent a ftrv-uit poft- hafte to town, with a let er t> lîaıvılle, as he was anxious 1 1 be litis ie I if that honeft gentle nan merited the o] prob ι ms lan¬ gu gr ir this inftance, that had b en tıttcıeel b} Northcote Plagi ir), though he fiw the impropriety of tl ıs iroee luie, f ı oıc fo m mı m it, left it 1 о Id nnt it , α d elidei m moie unii pn , for ii BuvıUc ıcıl) \ s gult), an lound I u I If thus iui] & d I e would become loubly cautious to lecuit hi nlclt from being dcteŕtcd Sır Watkn Ľeveriy and Ľhza foon after joined
joined tliem, antl though much giicvtl thcmftltd at the rutit tvents, beilovvtd tver) comfort in their powtr to clu'e the iiiilinchnly fymptous of defpondency fiom the blealt. ofpior Radmill. lliey had icarcclj left lum when Noith¬ cote c leied, antl, vvhıt wis ver) unu uai wuh thi glinenim, le lnmlelf began a cumulinoli, ml ıhtın irds Ind the pati¬ ence D lillen to R ul mil s iel mon of Henr) 's Uiangc lullen, anıl unexpected d i a tuie, ind to penile the iote he had rctiived ílom hu i, vhen Radmili obíerved —" lici rv, I un und, ь too f inguine m lu счрес' m ms of r eovenn¿ Mary-J ine ' " 1 hope not, he ıephed —' YeC why do 1 ho| e lo' It ¡VI u; lane has volun¬ tarii) gole oli with tl ai reptile buvillc, it weie better you ι evtl iiw lier a 0 ain ' " Impoffible' Do not toiture me with luch horrid luinufes 1 —1 tell you Miry J uie is all punt) ¡all innocente, evei) tiling 1 would Willi
Willi her lo be, no do I believe hci it tl ıs mommi to beef wrttched tl m mjl If" " I kin ν 's conduri ι, ptustqiiall) Urangt an ' u tîutıful " ' I ier) ıhın:; with )ou is llimge, every thing undutitui, )ou put the word con- fruaiun upon ever) thing, mel urte evn) thing jou ипа 0 1Пе will pun me to he ir Noilhcote liumcdiitel) with lien, but tow ud the clolt oi the nttt th) vifite 1 hun a am Tht lerv ml, wl m Ridnull had dt patched wilh a lutei to Birvil t, at that moment returned, and delivered ins αηίν tr to lus maller " Hank God'' he exclaimed, is his ejt glinted otei it, " our ŕtais m oue retjeik are it an end—I icre, take it, fuel Ridnull, hol 'mg u tow ids Northcote, " read, antl bt convinced Noithcote having ] tru<ed it, as he returned
r turned it lo Ra Inull, cxclumcd—" 1 hive read it, but 111 b) no meiu, convinced " ' Hue) ou any reálon (lill to imagine youi i ifptuon iuft ? " A ihoultnd ' « Name ihem." " Ihc Uioc .ics he his foimerl) com- mittttl " " W e he α thoiifin 1 tunes more deepl 111111 r^tt 1 m hi il 11 )ou conceive huu to b , dill ot whit )OU impute to In u he i y bi innocent ' " Λ ul \ re he cvei better than I fuf- peft, he might bc g nhv " Suietv it ь u ul to accufe lum be¬ fore we 1 iv good j loof that he is delervmg of it" " llnve " How' " 1 1 ive laid ' ' WMcn?' ' Not a minute fiuce " " Repeat it ' " His [ia t cnonnties ' " You
t( You maybe miítakcn." " So may you." " You may injure his chararln.'* " Impofiiblc." " Not it he be innocent ? " » No." <( How fo ? " " i le has none a good man would wiih to acknowledge, or that his uorfì: enemy can deienbe blicker ıhan it is." " lie wifiiLb me to acquaint lum with the name of the pcilon who has prefumed to utter fentiments agamfl bim io ui juit and infidi jus." » Do fo." " Would )ou forgive mcr" " Certami}." » What Hull I unte?" " \\ hat )0u pleafe." The fervant now entered with a letter, the iuptiicnplio ι wis Henry's. Radmill with trtp dation opened it, and read aloud as follows:— " HONOURED
' HONOURED SIR, ' 1 he unpleafant all ıı which fo unni - tl ι el) ittachtd to myfell, un' which о ihgetl uie to quit Bu Jiron (o lutld nl , I -ai hippy to inform you is it η til,—would I tould ii) ıs much lu tnt thn 0 en which cncompils Mir) Juit' I 1 ave iniLbmble proof that flic is with Batvtit. I am juft lttuincd f om lus houie, wl ere I learned that he had but α few houb lince et о 1 , with put ol his fimily, into tbecjunti), but to tv lut phce could gun no inform i- tion I hoi t, however, oon tutli eoiei,when, I truft, I ill ill nullum to j ou moie pleafing intelligence tioin join dunful ind afledion- itt Ion, " He NRV RADVIIEL. '
" I was ifraid," defp indenti) uttered Northcote, " niy fears wue but too jull voe. ιι E " What
" What can be done' ' fig! ed Radimi' " Mifci ılık, iinliap,)) man tint I mil [ will let ofl foi Loni on immcdi Ucl) ' " To wl at purpoľt ' " Alas, I know not, except it be to tht, and forget my follows n tlie ^itic." " You cannot do worfe wheie you arc " " What would you ulule" " Patı lice " " My poor gin, 1 Ilıı'l never behold her agam' ' " If flic be guilty, it vu. as wtll you nevei oo " " Guilt and Maiy-Jait 1 —Oh, it is mipofliie'" " She is not the fu ft. tint has been be¬ tra) cd m I lumed by the rtifices oi α \ ill un " " Antl wire flic lo, how gudly fhould tins lu tl be external till lehel ' How gla II) wot d 1 agun pie's hei to i y I e rt, and, with ť с tud ι α in ι iiitious ot ι fnend, uc 1 1 i ening I otile, s to tinle paths of uituc, ıeftılude, mel pc ce ihe lo
fo fata!l ; li id dev nted doni ' Not n accent of rt pro ich diould efea ıc my lips' Nota ten tint ftirttd from hci t)t, but I would ι ipe tway' I would bltfs the hand that lelloitd hei to tnc, and once more lit me down ,rateful and rtiign»dl" Northcote, the (lern, the inflexible North¬ cote, wis ftnfibly afíeelu! , a teai, fpite of his cndcivouis to ie[ reis it, ticmbletl m
his c)c is he cjieulatc I----- A d v ouldd thou B ni 11 citer th |io ι οι 1 1 n thy bentviltiit lent ruled f i u 11 , and eijulietl ν nu e, i) nti .tu J d hivt Cl IUI 1 lel CVe lililí 1 pu el , 1 а Ílu not i ¡lenet! (11 tii 1 t Ili tuli ns ot vice 1 ith u U e 1 t t ul . 1 ι ill obli Ulu 1 tO 11\ Í1U 11 th Hm ι
ι (mit ι Min
" Would the reltntlels, the unforgiving parents but profit by )out indiuflion, when the poor, dtluded vifli i s of lcduftion, len- lible of then indtluciions, ! nccl pci itcnt at tlieir feet, and fupphcate to be forgiven, what horrors migi t not be avoided, wliat pangs would tht) rot themitlv s elcape' 1 or when extended on tint bed, from which they never again dial! rife, reflection muft tell them that fliould th n Almijit) Father be as ugid towuds them as they luve bten to their own offping, they nevet can efetpe perdition ' " Supi ofe a d tug tei of thine, covcied with flume, and penitent at th) feet, in- llexibe as thm art, couldfl th iu foi b ive he ' Woultltt th u r ue liei un, vvqe the teau of an 0 iulh fiom lier p I id cheek, tcich her to nomi, and again make hci happy in thy mile ? ' Northcote became much agitated, he once hail а dau 0 tei , ι numerous trun of fad tde is niemor) conjured up to tortine hım
hım He vvas too much overcome to reply, but luflied precipitately and dilconfolately fiom tn- lioule Sc er 1 div« cl ip ed, when Ridimi rc- ccı t ! au iu leťci iiom Hemy, vvlucl , hi c İt ıh l univi cpiíUcs he lud tınK e Ι, ι e ıoı 1 Ins ìeleaiches iftci Birvht ai 1 Mu)-Ja e to luve betn without fbccef , nl ht tkteininiation not to return to m unul he hid thltover tl them, whith hc is )et did not defpau of effecting Radmill's fpnls cotii 1 ill brook fuch repcatc 1 thl ц point tuts Grief lud il- rcdy made conhder ι ie encroaelimcnts on his (.ondulili m Su W itkin Beveri) , Lh¿.., and Plagiar), who weie lmolt mceflintly with hım, vuil) en leıvouıed to ınfpıre lum with ho, e, lui nude, and r.fignation. Aim it b oken hcaitcel, lie appeared fift icrjng t »art! lint bourn ' there the vvitktd et-ift ном tumbling, a id thv weary aie at rtlt ' E 3 ÎMoiel eo»»
Northcote was now ofitn to be feen with him, he perfuaded him to itlinquilli his intention of retuining to town until things wore a mort favourable afpičt Several d i) s more paffed chcerleffly awaj Refpeftmg the f ite of M i)-Jant tht) were ftill in the moft painful uncu taint) North¬ cote was upon the point of tourne} ing to tow ι to -affift ITciirj m his endcavouis lo diftover Buvi le when tie event in the ne t tliapter uievpcftidl procraftnuted Ins <lefgn,andad «1 frefli tortuit to the allies lie alieady was ftruggung to overcom .
CH \1>.
CHAP. VI.
ihe Penitent. ' Q* 8 1 Ρ αη pnľ ,ct e cit n locens v/NC evening, as Northco'c v as tal ing lus courte tojvaid R cimili «, a poor vv и m, the m ager obj -t of ditlref·- and limine, app с cheti hım, and petitioné 1 hım to beilo t α tr ft to r li ve a vvrttch aiuoli djıııgto the wait of ftud He fluted at the lound of lei elee, then iı\ın ö his c)cs on tut e-vv in ob] et, he bt eld, with f| eeel leis furp il , 1 <· lei) pt ion vv th whom Ins c i d v ıs ei tre it I wh i су lo myftcneufi) ehlippeacd fiom Roo dale e 4 Abbe) .
Abbey. Near fort) jcars had el ipltd fince he hal hil fetn her, jet were liti features not fo gotten T he poor creature, it ti с fame moment, feemed to lecoilcčt hci old m iller She lecoilcd with horioi, the glow of <_uilt ov ei fp cad her pale checks, ihe Iert ured, nd tndcivouietl to Пу fion 1 mi Noithcote prungaftei hei, teiroi oveicame her, and Ihe diopp d, gif ι ig for life, al lus feet. Severii ,to ι , vlo 1 ' b 1 at ¡lied bet eel tieni no ι Cl t fu ul, ard tnt uut 1 wh it I ul 1 1 u tl ι Κ ι mı d ti m both N ill tc vv ъ i ne t ue cie lic coe'tl aiticulatc a woi I, vvltn, is th ) ι lfe te nu ei It w 11 ι ι her f ι, lc t\cl in cd— ( n' nui ei ь> . ť f 11) il 1 ' u Cod ' lhe ei ig l ď) ¡Ho¬ nour cc , « huw j ill ait thou in il thy vvivb' M) oflci ce vv ι ι ю h intui title ipe th) v uh Mech 1 ave 1 alltad) t Л tel — pity and relieve the toimtnts 1 eiiduu ' Л fli it
fiıoıt tunc Ιοηςει to have efcaped tins drcidcd in ert ew, and I lud hid me from his ungíante in iht giavt' ' " Murtenfs'" agun vociferat d North¬ cote, " my clii'tl ' my child ' Hovv dif¬ pofed )tu of my child 5 " I am no mai 'uels' ' flic feebly re- ] hid. " С nidi 1 me to 'ome place wheie, ıı ıchiHııbcd, Inn) recount to )Ou whit you nod wiiii to know, and loon )ou Hull be utibfied " Noithcote (oon prevailed upon thofe who had ι tiled hci fi mı the giound, to beai hct to к cm lb, vvhtn, hiving libel ill) re- vvaidtd them foi then tumble, tl e) left her wit 1 1 imfelf n 1 Riehui I, uho oi a noment Ί ι it his lee 11 с lim ty to liften to what ih" had to ι li'e, when flic ioon alter be¬ gin is follows —· " "Ί in ι α) ι iicniliT, Sn, tint on jour having occil ο ι to en uca pilon tor tie es[ reis ι iiijoL of ι tn'iig jout child, tnd L ţ liivin^,
'.avug, d ui_\ \ ut e l ci ι fole c rt ι f t e i il , I I ι ti von bv Mi 1 ι nl ţ, j >u í u ι n n, tl h u 11 t i u í e (ts ih ull )ju ι ni lie 1 tint к lut d n u i 1 , le Ulli! % b) ) lei e 1 t . U Ι ι ν Noithcote 1 111 1 ileVel e t \e , 1 и ι UJ on 11 ι, b) et 111 1 t l lel 111 ¡ ountk αϊ I u pi n u l t ΐ) ι it oi tht d ihti ι fi t t h t t vt) ■„) clu e 1 , lel " Ilt ıı ih t t me iti I ι ι 1 Ι iui hoi tl ol Ko 1 tlak, it i Of lllb 111 e V Uh Mill ΙΌ ι , le liiiifelfas iucli t ric et) lile г PI io tei ìn^ thilo'u n n oi ) niella' ь thofe nőit tæthed to l ei ! ovvtv to bt blief— \M,tn the t\[ eel eve t ecurred I totk dv ntage ef the „ener ι fließ ıııd coııfulon ll at j rev tied wi I ti e houle, л id, 1 belice, un bierved bv iti ек, tithe! Mı. ι hulee t, t 1 alın , ν it
t ι ι hun moll glad!) rc-
İrili t I ılolılv coıı- I 11 1 io 1 1 tl ι h Ilı Λ ι ι tt 1111 lul ilt t 1 brıbtd
li lui t I Olli 1 t t
ıhı t pıı\) 1 1 ) ou bj
s tl t ill İt ti lı U 1, ih t 11 lu t»
1 W t L/ koo i t n ht, 11]1 1
Il il lunatih (ι l tl tn tl ш i, шии lil id, ku ι 1
V i l i oi in İh ι 11 S 1- iıt t 1 il b 1 'ıı I loi iıc 1 I It' 11 t 1 lit 1111 U, ttll 1 I u too!
took lodgings in another pa t of the to vn, ftarftil that ι refidtntt too long m out (litt (hould cieate α fufpic on of wlo and whal 1 was, that might in the end le id to ι difcover) of ι ly perfidy In tin wíj 1 finirti) pili d upvv mis of let t itttn je h, duung vvhieh time Mi 11 it v 1 ti к ч- larly rentted to m Ι vei t) h /e j o u I ouaitcii , wilh vvlı h fum I w ıs e mint t) live m a 1 ! ι l İt il n uı ot e lit and ueoit, ni ι ,el 1 ! n ι \, un d n u ) munir) 1 it ti ι 1 1 1 с ι it , ihou tl luve bttn et tii' i e tente 1, vvlieleas 1 tv ıs h > i y 1 1 tu e l w th tic idea of bung tl keled, ani ie the puniíhmtnt I dekrved " It was Mr Limit) intention, wh n we removed from Rook-dale to Lo don, to hive the child lift it the gate of t n Foundling Holpilal, but to thio mea uie I fticnuoufly objefted 1 fell an affetti in (or htr that induced me not f ι rt ul ly to rc- fignler, md befidc 5 , bj ktq ing h ι in mj own power 1 emu itti the punduil 5 1 a) mc it
pi) nient of my qiiarterl) allow ice, as, m de mit ot ivlutli, I с toiy Aired, no doubt, aid rightly, I Ihould return with hei to Root thit, when it w s probable tlıe py )üu would c\p nei Ce u ι ani belio du g jour diughter, m .dit lut oïlyeiiluie my forgivencl , but ι pioiifion toiul to w nt 11 tl ι ecu td as tic ι i, 11 tu ıcneiy and un, ml a tufi ılıtıl un ol hls c\pcc- t nue " Vr i 'ni v, liiHiiii S tint I peili' d in el i_ In lu t 1 l'i ed Ile cl ' I, pifľlbilUwnb ofi ι il«) r, ud tl ii t linj „nuen ιιΊ th ti Siccus I ' , t ι о co j uv , loi ti i vi us v as h u 'lv evci to lu ( en m tU l tets, my wh le tmplov ment vv ıs co ıccı ti ile 1 m the ctl i- ea'ion of my chu 1, loi s luch fiom lho time 1 quitted Rook-tlıl I coııhtleıtd liti. Stub millers to tcuh ι tl mlliuet hei, as ni) i iconic wo ll 1 illi w, 1 pioetlled i r hei, nul well dul M л i, ι un n I hul yven 'u, [i t u. dei Ilıtır tu in. Slie
Ч e "lew I t pul i i i ^ of i t mn! ι, ti Ι iel ) Il le 11 e t 1 tl I ll ' le 1 1 ll ie ι ,1 ui 1 t lit w, I el
li ' I i i ft ıs il il le i 1 I 1 i İH ιι Sv lm» 1 1 i i ι nl)
I il i I t ι, ,1) ' ι ,"! m ''e! 1 1 Villi ι Ι ι ν Ι v M tl Ul le V , 1 ! 1 1 nth ι it , t İti I) it po tl t 1 1 n il .o 1 uei Ul ıh lv cıiv the w Γ , :l ι v t IV 1 t 1 1
Ilık lhe ml! be left in, Ih id d th tiki me h 1111 hi , vv a α i и lu ι ( pii¬ pitti il ui lille! Di, и lu lui"· I eı 1 o ι ellt t ι itti ti e nut iu I ite vv Ί Vi Bu ill — " imli who u tul nel Nutin ile
" V uh H tuli, ι lilt I Ι 1 1 01 bit ľ.
il
WOl i lo 'i i 11 1 ly thty v e, nane', , atter (hip ul etl ι 1 titilli lg 1 ΠΙ IO С lb he li tl turne. A .e il 1 1.1 bi itK. -ulive levile lettu, о
. ', 'tın ν .' h, ,) n n I
t 1 1 Ш11 1 ι f v h l e v .ılıttım . t. m' tl t , 1 1 1
lents, and informul li ıı that lue fulul iva, lo mich cu u-t d iv uh t e flip he lud t il en, tilt he lul determinei never to ii 'e to lim, oi, ii [olille, tlıuı с of hım am moie Ί lus vv i í iti nei s ior poot bu ville, lus bitither bili t! vtij kind to hım ul tutl to luli, Ut I i chigim, t ' lınlı с v ihiible j ul n s, and when Iı it í I ond n, ctivt 1 tl ttei ir nu iali¬ ni e tO de ivei 1 1 11 it r, lit 10111 led 1 Ule his Ulli ib tli 1 о 1 out ι ι i t I ui η, u til t 1 ti 1 ad ι¬ ι lit 1 1 1 i ot t ) return о n t it lui ■' Sj n itta hs de] un e, ir Emile ıc e ι oı eı to j n l u nent, tnd he an ' Mi guct I t mt. I li ' niitten a tl η und Mi i Im' j tí с eil] ote ni т.е. \\ illi Muguets nanne Ί c\| îeiled hitnitl v eil lit s r i d, id t ι tl me to J r felle ini ιοί i ť Ictr t ot hci birth, id ην quai tu y i 1 ai t, lo ton¿ as 1 n ttl, Intuid be ι une 1 1 ill v ulen lcd to. M t p re , with lei lull) nd, Iı d left I ııtİJiı ajout lı\ moiťi , wh η 1 icce vet! il t-
ι letter iiom hım, vvhieh indi ned me tıııt lus itaunuit vvas oı lue I to ılıt U çil¬ indin., ıııd tint the) c\pıilcd to ml in the conile ul ifcw d )s, thete 01 te ludlcd me, as Mugliti and hun tlf wilhed muth to leemt ert tht) lelt I u luid, to joui tliem at "oiilmouth as loon " ] olii It it abluitt io retiini to London He lkewife acqu unit 1 ι e that hn f ι ti Itili coni tied tuutii u ceniti тчи (t hım, anıl, not nih¬ il n III, ht h 1 Ireq entlv w litten to lun, coni I vu e bt un in mivel to one ef his 1 t r tt th ti ıc Ilı απ ι vul, the lift epi ile I cvu ι etivttl ι tii uth ι of thtm, 1 liad b en ιοί inin 1 vs confined ti ui) be! by fiel n I , nd tl doctor uho attentie 1 m", μι 1 in ılı t 1 ν ıs not ııı a litu unn to peni t ιι u e u me not until thiee weeks utcrwatel , wnen tht ievtr uııdeı wl idi I luficic 1 vv is qui t lubdutd, and he h d ıj- nounce 1 me in ι convalelteiit Hatt. vi tık is I then wis I wo Id havt ftt oft for Portimo th
Porfiiiotithtlic monn nt I hulltad il, had not ılıt iJotìoi, uh m I li/orn ul oi m\ mt r л. foi Ilt ю imu, t ι i i mf| ·.] ir I t in the labiele hul jull beloit Ituitxmii n , ml tom intui π с tint tne lliq , \ ılı tht ı & ı- ıııtııt in wlul, I lud tut, I m Mı. Bar- ville was, nui filed ten daj» otti.. " I was muth hurt aid th α]\ omted at this inlornniion, but it ι is i u nedtal le, and 1 ins obli ed t> lul .nit. At lins jiu niti mı quai tu ) ul t ι e ι η Mr. I I li) had I en duc vu 1 e к , I nitul woidcrtd at tıı, nt I t it tue lu I d t istruì itli , 11 by tin ρ ll itti tie utmt.il pu i t) b t, alas' ι olim ta I , ıı/ 1 ι me ott ι- ilon oi it- Mı I m \ l il li 1 umu ry tıltıı ıh, nd, «uhoni ι lu ai , |ji.i- ίιοη fiu died. His 1 itu d li ti¬ li) ile ρ] ıs, nul io 1 a tır, bt u iun ıh une, tl ι ıhı fii ρ in . nn n Μι Β ι ile and Ma uet h d en ai d, had i u leued at ita, .nui all on boird had ¡i rifiuti ľ' Noru cote
Xoitiit tt crouitd loud, R nil en¬ de u ourei! to t 1 loit 1 11 1, ul 1 c t ie poor tremile, wh İni „vein lilt emo¬ tion, dio, ¡el on hei ..ice , ul ι honed lum nti to etui ' 1 1 It 11 e l h t es upon hei emaci let! n 1 ir mu e I, 111 luutly exch meel— " Oh to B t e, t ι ne me ere I die' Pio\ 1 1 e In dully huiled I is fiiit an i 1111 ,ι η veiigti et on nn hai' Mirriti el ι h < 11 ı'l ti J) li nt' M) fue it it 1 I 1 0 to pu ' r thl , lb ill I 1 ci tit t s thus I I till el — ι ρ 11 I el mc 11 l' I Ce' lledebls I a 1 e 11 neted 1 t I r t к fı m mt evtl iı\ pe te Ι ι' ile e 11 e> ll nu cl il t 1 s olu ed to pan li to , x ir u ıh- uitellee, when I t I il I it eled ııı il oblainini lilluit t n in ι í/ leían uni but, ıh ι there 1 conn ι but ι (hort time eie I ,un Ind to leek otiti Noti mg e er went well vut me i i ¡t- tum loni) par h, and crate (Till ne the e, 1 lmigined wa ioon to hue mj nil
to с с ılıttır no pcilon won iııbfiılıd ını r 1) ui with 1 1) mifiubltaţ ] Kdo td ııı mı - 1 e I e ι ι It
t le I ll live jei ! y me, inel I have n v I u thulc, iliuck anı t litvehimuncly u ot 1 I iv I ti ι-
О
the Mrddiip, toil and thllieb 1 hive en¬ di κ Ι, -η η tiled at tl te ι 'etc ' d ubi) ııı- fuppoitalle ly tl tcinb'e ıpjı ıtlıngs of an iıcufırg confutine, t tpiate mv ctnu, peci ıc ne )i ui ρ 'on, tint l mu tiup into tht giav t ııı ptice ' ' Qu tc extruded with fpea' mg fo long, (lie fell Pinoli hi Ids it his le t R el- mill conceived hei и le tivù g, he in¬ flam y ran a tlıt bth for lo nt oí Ins hoiiu- hold to hillui 11 htr ici et, when tl e) ton- it) id lir nuo a otl ti moni, 1 o ι α 0 ιιη ι flonel her to lite mel ruo lection, ι el v uteel fol oidcu hovv fum ei t j j loccctl
СПЛР.
CII VP. VII
Л /шипа, li S mi) I,nn ι Noii 11 СОП ,ηοιν ul.ludi g the in- guifh li e ti lei Wille ll lei ng tO tilt iole- gnu шпике, indtil 1..L uinuit he tiie'l Hittil ľyieeliol tlie Ulti OIS ot lus luHcim»,, could n t lo k e] on the pooi, niiiuable, åpent mt e b eet belo t hun Lut wuh an t)t ι i companion Limit), tnt ti caci erous Limit), whom he hid elLinicd is 1 is beil, ins vvoul ,eit fileni!, li iluw tw late con- aimed ol llie in ti ly, V is be) ud hie ic ich, he 1 id bee ι luininoiied, at ι moment uncxpefleil, uniepuuint of Ins cumes, to nppeir before th it ^rcat, omini utent, un' mi] aılıa
impartial Jtitlg , fiom whom no action 1 1 Olir liVtS CUI b COI etiled, tlltlt IO lttelVt Ihat len enee which muft eilhei etem illi fe it hım in ıh ι a ns of bhls, or conf gu hım to torment tve lifting I le fhuıldeıtd s his thoughts averle 1 to his 1 ui dilla lu ion, α d, ι nabli to it v, b h d the fer a tv bear (he emaci u d wi i m tioui i ıs prefentt, ι dtplorìbic conv iť -ιο i of lhe mitenes we engender, ii not piooí alunit tlie temptations ot th- vvıekı 1, when they offer lhe g den bait ίο decoy us m ι the с luimiihon ol fin, nd mip'ant the 0 ı lízing imeni Ol lemoı t in oui heul , eve ill ill) lo link us nto in untimely gr ve, u Intuirti inel deipil d Λ moui ufi 1 Mince <Όι Ι ι n pie- vul tl, wliu Hilft i' Umili t i diclltd 1 ι — 'M d il, h not < U lel] nul, it ıs i ι ι lu It (nn th t ti e m ( u V/ uta envelul e I l' I te oí ) uur d ug I ,
ıs iloti Ult 1,— İh ıs happ , then to the vil of Pu vi ! lite let ts Ulive lo be le¬ iig e ' Colili vv Лип Un 1 our M i) İme, flic lb u tl li j p'y the pl ice of tile u night« ¡ou luve 1 , (hevt mi) hv.. to bleb us both, ml Ι α ι well con w-il Ihe pu¬ ii es m le tu ι Ui ) j equ il ti «hit lhe li ev ι e eıılııed to . t th ui) lell ' h. ip s lifien 1 lint Ri lıııll I' .ül e tk it ur 11 I ı tl ıs ow ı lufìer- tı , ud pc k U llflll t 1 'inn, wis in 4 uinet и In n l'iii Lut ι iti lobi met wuh He lelt inccd to v uels luin , an in¬ il I u blei iilitioi ıh ıh il u, on lus heut, I moid ,1 Ins ev t itli t tear, as he milat d—' iul Uı. И tılıtıı — ' Wim then'—Com , ci с, ι π M Ilt Hige lee W Г UCell il 111 H y HIV thl, licou, t il . , iu Ui-., Iı e I e ou s
л luv mt i ered ul inin ııı I thtm ol lhe
ti e iccoieiy oí the poor wictch u tlıe n \t loom Ri 'mill dcfiľal um to icni м lur mio thi knellen, bclloit titi) titi tion liti ililliiífid fituation îıtjunu!, illine lui tint flit liad nolliin, to i] pnlind tin t ni, and liait when lhe bienne trin p /t , I would ijejk tilth ilel ipin The fi riant u ι Jit! tu, ani к dn il! agun addrtílcii liimfil. to hoıtluok " You arc acquainted with Su 1 i il¬ min Huville,—! id he a ion b liles t perion who ίο julli) maus our al hom ι ai d ct n! nipt · " Ilı hid, and will do I rein n 11 tie cucumu incc of the iciiei 1 пц Lll in which i с failed i >ı the Will Indus " W as lu laiher, lor manı пц с nti uy to his w tilit , It ι ιΙΙιλ b ) ılıtır ı 11 пич to bihol 1 hun gin ' "ln that pulluliti 1 tai i ot anfwirjoii, tl s
hi 1 now, 4i Beiija nm las, with the ll ¡ i 0 tilt concern, bin ι te 1 that his ν .) d 1 in ih > ult! hive foi ö ottcn Jus paient, 1 tl W It 1 he id , ul qu tied 1 g u ', nevel, alis' ιι t i bu j, hım alili 1 his he t Sin 'lei UlleKl ılıt tins' — o (ulj ^ ' l . I 1 I 1 111 Cli 1' -Нх и 11 ι ι Π 111 vt luve bi il II α¬ ill 1 ) IS 1 1 J ϊ mı 1Ге İt vou! ol mı 1 ' 1 Ι ιν ι ıı ıj t non qıı t t }ıp Hut l 1' с ι i 3 İt 1 ıs b ,,ρ . j ι, ι α, . un il αι S 1 ι "ТТч ' ι Ι ι η , m i tihi '"' , '' t " un d Ί .4.1 1 il but wuh t ,ι 1 , 1 ι ι td I vi 'a lll'dllt Uj' ) Ι ľ e'
" ìli ιαη ioli ııı us numidi le'i into S iiufcilhue" Ratinili ι ıs foi limt ut he e ile teil to tins piopo'al ol Non leote s, le li w- tur, at hit piciului up η hm, Ι ι kıtır ıtıs ımnııdııtılı fun to n j office foı I leni), ulu*, ¡reuil il il I ondon tlıeı hli lonu tune rei ie uu lor tie nil ribe ιι ιι ι 1 1 pi ι ni fiume, ţintind licitul ılıt i ti tli i ť- den remoli!, the) lııul ııı ¡pırını!, lening one ftrvant to tal t circ 1 1 1 er unni the) ind iihlcil Sır F -μηαιη, ot Inch the) win to ritene j r | ci notile, ıııd ihen l nmcdutily let o t foi Ridnull s refil nee in town lhe follow mg di), 1 i in t il en 1 eil Sır Watkn Bei erli indi' gii), id ittik othtr inciti ıj mittel , th i, mts qi ite the reicrfe of thofe nuh ι Inch he lud en- Icrtd Br! D hton, Radmill bipn ! is jjuine) j it ili
with Niithcott, ¡он irds Somerf ¡íl u , wheie, 11 tiue tunc, tlıe) arrive !, uiti ion 1 Sı t ıııuıu mucii buter in inalili ihan tell lece İt 1 I le s might hive been
Sı ' n -n i w nııclı g u Ii tl u be i ui tu lonu ¡m, ind, tutli R dnu 1 pve hun ι moľ e i hal ι e] non, ιχρ ι 11„ ι tulli nultí uit timt to fpnı i luv Ute li l'i I 111, 1 Ilt 1 IS lllliell 1 1 w mt of I el ι liien 11) locictt \ oi tin ote h i\ i p d 'ir el h s mı utun tlijs, cri'a wae 0 ıaı tl t к null' ι tants ι ι ht 'ν ρ ι ι tl d to, tt ι hiving I d t tu i e , ^ onl e te thib - leh lied Iı I ıı 1 ι ιι ι — ' Ulte ) i i ι ou 1 i hl t, b ι li ι mı ι U ni, le pi ' )t fncv
lus manlige, now bettei than thirlcen )cir<- ago, though 1 iltquentlj heai icci uiits ot lum that give me mint pun tl in j к i- luie in liflenme; to His wife inil tl ildrtn, fil ce lus cruel i'eleititii of them, l ut tlutfly refilled with mt, tht) aie the t iv t mil 11 lelt me ' " I \cuft me, Sır K nja ni ι, Ilid mill, " for totithiiig upon lo nit land о) а fub]tft, but 1 hive ] utcu'ai lealen - was jour eldell Ion, Litutcn nt buvile, who was loft in his pad 0 e to the Well- Indies, man ice!-" " 1 believe ι ot, il he v cic he concealed that с teu (lai ct from me, lb he did с ely othei iccurieiice (o tit lift tntlv ι oiith of h life WI at induced lum to tit t me with lo much l diflticncc ml l Ject, 1 know not, lever lad h mj j id ciule irom me to adopt li ch b liivi ui, η , but in the ι refent i ul i с , ga e 1 lu ι liti η oj portunit) tí i onúui enig luu tilei ui B iiicnil or dilobedient. 1 eannut eten now rtílcčl upon hia ili ange con luci b t with
villi the moft painful regret, that his devi ι- tion irom the pith of rectitude, which tiltil then he lui io nobly till, fliould luve uidut cd hım to have Lit lus native eouuiiy without one Willi, one enjuii), or CVlll nurum» hlb puent ne 1 ill ι heu it puni 1 ι i u ul , Uth ¡en il, lul l eil deil [ lu Ine je lib, io tl It i 1 d ι ıhı ι ι ti ) m in mv ч lul , vilume ,1 lui. lm to the ь .e " Yulll oilier ion, obeıv elisoli *otc, t( was with you at tl ıs tun ' " He was, but he r„thei contribuí d to ıncreafe than Lffeii mv tufterings, he hid been with lus brothei lome months beioie m London, and the account he ö ıve me ot lum was terrible Ile informel me that lus time was fpent in a regulu futccilioii of debaucherj, and that lie hid tl cured to him tint unieb I would oftcier r mır hım fupplıes of culi, to enibe lun to ] er fifl in his unj lovidcnt caua, le never wilhed to beho'd me agun 1 was hoiror- ilruch, as jou nny imagine, at this intelh- r 0 gence,
j;ciicc, anel doubted if 1 hutl bearti aright, Francis repeated tlie w'ortls again. 1 was at this time confined to my room with the gout, or 1 would on the inllant have let off for town ; as it was, 1 could only write to Ыш. I urgently atlvííèd him to £e-t leave of abfence, and hallen to mt; which, diould he· find any difficulty in nctomplifliing, to part with his conimilfion, .-··. 1 had íòiiwtliing of great importance to rnmn.unicatf to bim, which aihriittei! not o- a u'.r.ment's eieiay. Tiiib letter 1 i. ; 4ve lü l-'ıaı.c'ıa, to eie liver at the pod-office lui' hi:·' ; bert I nevfr received an aiiliver to it. Again I wrote; and after that a third and a fourth time, but all to the fame effect. 1 bearti that his regiment was drafted for the Weie- í nei ics. —' Surely,' I exclaimed, ' he «ill l-.oi leave Kngland without bidding ши adieu!'—Hut Ì was midaken ; 1 neither f..\v nor '¡.tard of him any mote em;il I learned iht· fatl cataftropite which configlieli hiin to a watery grave !"
" Did
" Did his In other," fud Noithcote, ' cvu lcccivt an) Itcttis fiom Inni 5 " " Nevei " " Kot Olle ' " No, not t n " " Ibvv vvtit v ni vilumi of tiis'' " 1!) hi iltli Jìjt wh) .aie )OU thu·. minute in jıne iqiiirir '" " β С 11 'e I lllipeel ) ш ion I ruicis ins lltteivt 1 ) u ' « ih t he hasd ruled me often I wni gunt, but m tins p iti alai ι li it ptirpoi could it ann er ? " " Tnat b bell known to himfelf How¬ ever, attend to what 1 am about to relate to jou, the tiuth of which I will vouch pr, and my tuend Radmill h evvile can tellily tht fatt, and then decide foi jouilclf." Noithcote then lepeited to lum wlut he luti lo leccntly leained, ulpeŕtnig li daughter, u lîrıghton, th njieiue mannerin which he had loll hei, li h el le- counttd to hım many years before. I Iu F it mam ¿e
mai ruige with his Ion, and his brothel vifiting lum in London, tallied exaftl) with tlie time he acknowledged to hive feen huu. Sir Benjamin became extremely agitued, and as Northcote concluded, ex¬ claimed—" bureiy, furtiy Trinci* ¡к\ег can hut been fo vile, fo trnchfious' When, inti from whom, gamed jou tii s inloniu- i n ? ' " Afi dar Im«, ml fiom out who, tottering on et. may's drtid bmk, eould hud!) h ve btei wrought upon to declare α fil eliood." '1 heir converfation vns luldenly inter¬ rupted by the arrival ot Mrs. Bai ville and her two youngeft children, the one a fine blooming „nl, about ten years old—the other a well-looking boy, ¿twelvemonth joungir; her two eldtft, both boys, were it the Um- \e-iity of Oxford. ¡Mrs Btrville was about five-ard thirty, of an interefting appear¬ ance, which tht a ela ichoh remembrance of tilt ill ticatri.ent fhe had expci.uiccd from hct
Jicr hufband, and the fad accounts flie lud heard of him fmce lie had abandoned lier, fuüvfuig ι languor ovet lier features, which uere beautiful and cxprcffiie, rather incicafed than dimmiflied She continued with them i ime time Noithcote and Radmill wue dthghttd with her, hei obliging cirri ige towards Su Ben¬ jamin, the tender repiel file betiuedlor lur childien, and hei eaiy and refined be- hauoui toitaids tliemielvis, gue tbem lo lugli an opinion of her unduftandmg, th f Omilie, who li t! treated iui ίο ınîıuıuın /, i r poffible, luni lower 111 their eíliiiiatioii. " Pou thing ' exclaimed Su Benjamin, when, with lur childien, lhe uitlullen, " lhe ıs deferving of α better fite '—1 knotv not what I diould do witliout lier, flie is all the world to me.·—Vlav iht [nove moie fortunati in hır chil iren than I h ıvt betu ' May ihe never regrtt th it Providence lias 1 5 mice.
r ıfed her 1 1 innb , but in th liapjinel Γ finds uitli them, folget die bintil on lue e of their fuller ' ' Then fornici conseifation nas f ion tficr renewed, and fo much was bir Ienjimn ailonilhcd and affcrlid with wlut Northcote and Radmill revealed to him, and w ıs lo anxious to Ime the matter thoroughl) in teftigatcd, that he refolved, as loon as Ins health became more eflabhlhed, to let our. for London, furpnfe his fon by lib pic fence, and oblige him to icknonledge wlut motive had induced him to b lute lo treachcroufh to his brother This was piecifel) wliat Northcote wifhed, winch he foon gave him to undertand , antl promifed to remain with ium until he was in a fituation, with f .fety, to m ikt fuch α journey, when his friend Radmill antl him¬ ielf would accompany lum Northcote liad defigned not too iuddenly to
to appn¿ Sır Benjamin of the villany lis fon had fo fucccfslully pıaöıfed on Ma-y- Jmc, but Radmill, who could not for а moment banilh her fion his mind, mvolun- 1 1 ily uttered 1 few incautious words on the fubjeft, and an explanation became "bfoUitely necefliry c ir Buiiamin liiienul 111 filence unni lhe) had fimlhu!, though ins coufitenance lufnacntl) evinced the tortine he endured, when he c\tlam eel— " Oh Goei' how hue I incntctl thus la be afflitltď— I nnituial boj, was it f 1 this I watched tii) inf nt "v с 11s, ind, with the c\ultiiion ot a ioni t Utllt, it V tllet lip n Ult Hl lil 11 Klei 1 \v İS 11 fu tlu I lllOVt to inculc Ite into thy VJUlhíui mind the puic pieeepts or piety . nd vu ti t ? \ ıs it ior t! ¡s t jou endt ı- a-oured to min thy orotliu m mv eltet ıı, that I might mort atuttly ieel thy bile¬ nd ? — Inhuman, dcgeneiale bo), it had been better iti t iet i adit ihou nevei betn 1 n' ι 6 Northcote
Noithcote ind Radmill, tl οι φ ίο Л OjUaliíicd fiom the potgninc\ if ti u ου, u fi-Lİıngs, cndcavouıcd to Гре -il с ı u L lo hım, ind Mrs, Birvillr юоп if t u ] n ıın^ thtm, ka flic fliould fufpect tint Iiii im Inpjmiefb oıiû,ınıted in lnMng iccci\ed moie unfivounblc intelligence oí her lui¬ huid, he ifkČLcd ι chu.riuliu.is but too IoiLi¿n to lus liLart bu Benjımm had been ίο much fhocked with whit he hid hcird on the preceding t\cnmg, thit bib heaith, which hid betn lorg m a\ery prccdiious flate, on tie fol- bsvm 0 morning was mucb woiíè, and bis journey to London ipp icd likely to be ])io^i iftinilcd to a greitcr length of time than he hod it firft fufpcAed Kidmilľs fpmts v\cic in no uite im¬ pioved, md Northcote, who from the recent occuucnces, h id diverged fiom his ulual ticitumity ind acubity, wis fi trom b»mg hippiéi in the lUcntion
Mı B u ville, much al umed at tins Л.е1- (ltn ciunge in Su Bcnjimn, teas almoft meciì uiilj with him, md he, in laft, wis İJ much Une'ed to her and her children, that lie could liudly bcir to be left a mmute without than Noithcote and Ridmill continued with Sir Be janin upwai Is ol thiee wc ks ere Ins heilth would punit hm Eo fix the day ior his journej to t ui, md tl ich cien then wis piciuited by α lettu lioin Henri, winch innouneed to them t it ne I id obtained intelligente ılı t Baıulle, tilth Milj J t ıe, had ıetıred ıntı Wiles, whi¬ ther h was about ti foll ην them Iı confequence of which, N01 beote [ret ulcel ìpon Sir Benjamin and Radmill, in lieu of London, to accompany lum to Ro k-tl ι с Abbey, wliicli was in Wiles h! cuile, and only ten miles diftant from b u ville Calile, thou B h Sır Benja 1 ni w ıs lo totally ig 10- raııt of the alteration his ion hatl made in the latter Itrutture, tint'he ruinous ftate he
' e conceived it to be u , would 1 ave u duced li ι to icirch e ci y part of W ii s о iDtain an uteivitw wilh h m, ere lu vu uld Inve uiciivcd it ıc pulut to vi it I Hi; t
f H IP \ш
IHTI! iv i/ı Л ai Uno lo Mis Mi huy " A 1 LW un , i y umilile ι aufm, aid I diali bc with vou Radmill and Sır Benj mini Buvılle, both of whom, b) formu lettets, jou are m а manner acquainted wilh
vi f 'i, i" leeoni, απν mt, — he lutei having re enti) re oVei il Ιιοι ι J. levere lildii- 1 olinoli, will lequne much tl 50111 atten¬ tion, ι , indeed, wc Ilıdı ill tl lb. Μ.η- f ine tu 1 ut 1 rt betn ble lo rtcoiu though we httt iiceived с nun piool tint flit 11 feiiiided with lì uv ille, and it ıs be- 1 vtd tint they j e it t ib tunc in W iles, lut u what put iecrcq envelopes, vvhieh ι ıc ρ ıncıpal dc(î 0 ı of oui jo ir.ie) at prê¬ tent ıs, if polble, to unfold. liti en piofpci our end uo ib' or, w mid it be moi piu lent to [ tition tne Almi J ly tint ihcj cvei mt) elu lc our violin ? tor to find tbem mi; be to conlnm our it tr·., .and loiflibhlh vvnitl cannot avoid luiptet- m 0 , th t Mar) line is цш1п '- 1 1 01 Rui¬ ni 1' I fuch ι continuation vvoul 1 inde d luin ι hım to dt ip ur His ht ıhh is rjj dly declining—it times iıc ts mconlolıble, nor ıs Sır Benj ıının lıaıdly leh, lo when lus tlıou 0 lıts revtıt to the iniquitous CO It Uet tit ins ion I 01 myteit—Oh f 'i' Movvbuy ' I have
1 ive vıaletotcllvvl ıchv lliıcc?eth) bloodttv Itır — Oui kini nı ,1 1 1 v, whom we inve oft lamented, was t e moil ti aelicioijs, the moft vil ! — lìut 1 s n nitre' Hi mili¬ tieled ii) peace, but J fo give Inm I—God, l loje, his It r i en Jim alio—\\ hen we meet, wl ch wi Iuoitl) lhall I will ac¬ quimi } u wiiii ever) p u tienili , until tint tunc 1 once moie ailectioiutely bid vou ad cu ι '
CHAP
CHAI' Ρ
Ilı I in ( и 1 AI is njv icqu f thu ılıt u-dti ıhojul bc informed of lune cucu nil ınecs uluite to Heni) Radnuil, which will account fir his fudtlen rcmovil from Bnjliton, to the utter aftonilluncnt of lus i itlui, whci his prefence woultl have contnbuicd to coniolc lum 111 the abfence of Mir) - la ie Ht 111 j, г ('cititi eil m the fird с ııpter ι l t IS woik, t NJ ielle i Ills relu lite tO aet( 11 mv lis lunu 1 to the сей itry lo tui) ıs die od jŢeiitlc nn pıopoid, Uti nmly tn 1 v 1 d πι j rend upon hun to defel
tefti lu intention foi ι lew weeks, tht uji h n oliv for vvidiup his filhei to proeril- ut Ins | umit) ht muli 1 to nuke kuo n, wl th ι in it ttt d in, tint he obli ttl 1 ' , α 0 αιηΙΙ his will, to itt oil with lu η tor 1 ι ghton on tlie f 'lovu ig iiiuriin B , ь ip, i pu I lent loi h s oodiini) ard unti u ul e ι l rai Ιν va, oi 1 eil) »diline' ι ι Ι ιν i lil) lom, u 1 ivim li 1 en le P îeveal, к n w e t't ly lo e , in. liis Sourbv, whom we hue mentioned s bung on hundí) tuins with Radmill, on e de ith of hei hufband fi ding heiielf in j ι ilt Шоп of bout three hundred pounds t-r, which lit had гепгсс! in purluing ι ie ottu iti in ol α lillimon 0 u, conceived ι α iuthei ev, ıs IK Kıl ıhıldtcıı, lor her lunne luppo I, ui 1 ι ud h j i ш- l , lut Ιο n Undue, ht of nido elice bi o u tal ь lui Ы to htr dilit (¡tion and belllg
being ofun invited to pafs an tuning with fume fiw with \ iiom Hit hid loiitiivul to get acqu untul, vliofi foitune weu ι .· hi ι e!) iiipcnoi to hci ov n, it not Ol . 1111- pl inteti in hci boloiu л uiicanqtii tb!. tie ill e loi 111 incef'uit İOUİH С of tile UHU e - muns Ľi \ jiuiluul to kill umt, but ıı un leus with toi-Miiil them ine peie. anel pu de ιι lui о .m houle, whin tinle vil ι. wiu milliini) to bi u uu ul I ι, tlitli i urpufi tht e lib'iliiiiiint ι/ lu h nelit el, uimit e ılı! d or oı lhe. limale 1 lunts, dutl ι bi) übt , ie- j enei cul а louíidu ibu augmentatu ι , tuo íootmen, a butler, &.c žíc were pul .i.ly e gaged,. nd the pleafing prolpeft of In ing aftu the rate of hlteen hundi-d punds pu annum, puíuitcd íifelí, «lien Ih kreiv that lhe had little hettu thin t it litth pait о Hit lum to tuppuit it. "l 1 S 1 1 1 Uİ It l e 1 (lie p likt , 1 - fon ¡ni , 1 mu, it tin e\ uu m ot UU)
cverj twelvemonth, during that tunc, b tn neceffitated to put with lome hun ueds of I u ci[ ltd, ulucii w ıs iolely inveiteti in the I ıvt pel Cents, tint it tins epoch the и - teicii oi wlut uniuucd leucelj amounted tOtW !1!V nve ¡10Ш lis tjlllltelJy It il u lis Ou b m li i vi ν/ 1 ι t . I U) u i i i l,i leviu u lu h liou;' il Is t u i e n a icv)c s moie n ull deprive hu f e v et/ Γιχ -pencc lhe lud in the world W h t cou'd be donc to reti icvc her c rcumítances, or, at kaft, avert the ι «pen ling clangei '—The lotit fhe lived in was hei own, this, how¬ ever, was (ome confutation, and which ihe prudenti) determined (if poihble to retain in hci poiieilioii) never to pait with, yet, in the deranged (late of her affaira, flie knew not what herefter necefni) might not oblige hci to do And hoiv was it to be ivtudcd' lo udutc her cilibhlhment to ι pirille! wilh hei means appeared the moil Willy method lo fave her fiom ruin, but
lul lindei te lul no lo iei luge elled tiu» I ) hei lei rilied un i Jimio ¡, th ılı [ nth. u- ,ιι td n, ud .u 'ч miniceli ttl) ρ dentiti itfelf tint tlu in tibie migu it i ve liei Ih titi 1 l пич lt leemel 1 er oiilv 1 fllllti , Ull (h det 11111 ed Unille eVelt l'iuig, in'nii liput b) i At moll of tl pl t wl i im di¬ mie I, tut Ollill It Uh Ue 1 1 ltl'e- i t, u il, nom i er t > Ι 1 ι ι anui ι ее it I 111, Ihe 1 itve 1 lit. el id i U tn II
ld I li e to t, lill ld i Г 1 Ve ι ι i ch upon ι', ein but ι ι 1 t n n to lui mı t her leu , u I, t L unui faiouied 1 r, lo 1 coni i . á L i e lier 11 tiltil t, lile evei 1 , luet ι Ilı i' til ill V 11 ell lilt h.' Dl ! 'l UelOlUIOli Uie curie 1 11 и lie\tcecui. S e ICI le: cv erv t\t th t vv ıs о, uti, -ul ut in colludei ible w lecu hel en t t le D eli ι intn, who ,vtu nuc i i'« nil tl ι t
futltti i ic αιιοη ni li i e induri, indul¬ at irdly | ι . I ıı i' I İlinti lier foi her tenie ut) Il i t ti, it the ι nclufioi of the tic !Ц, Mi So lb ; , lo 1er llle\piefflb lui li tun, loui ' her '1 It «muci ol tit. iiiiimitd mil Ue ii\ ( iiiiui 11 t ι tn- coni tamilit be)on 1 hei in 11 In ι m t - ] tintions, theltloit 111 ılv 1 nillııl tl¡ lil lue lins tllli u cl0lls li elice, i 1 1 terel) upıoıchctl htilell ft ι ι ot bt^ni un 0 fornt tens íoonti, i t floubii c; but li tt ill 1 Uv be ıı cıjuılly İneci ,ιι' αϊ Ι at ıhı u ıjıl hive been en ibi ti to kttp her t ι л ett, md nol obliged to plutind tht ifiilluiee ot m hacknc)-e! ch upon e\ i) otealion hor feieral weeks 1 νΠιη coiinued to fi ile upon her, tnd be íevuif, from lue'i unexpected and rt pellet' 1 icCv.s, tint Ih fliould netei счрепспсс in) rei eric, tt is attuili; on the etc ot aj pointing a perlon to pínchale а h mtllome pui of hoifes for lier at 1 attcifiii s, md to bclpeak her ι chin fiutai It
funil Ji ti h ι nuk ıııd 'pleniluni in lift whtn o t unlut к) ivilip ol 11, ed hei to lulpuil tinle u built Iı nem ol unit! ш li dil ι , innu t ,111 leu h r to uh ι ,ιι In pin, bi и, u ι ir ıkıl hır tltiıiv, tıııllıı Uu l'i »ild l'io t m t wuh m oppoitu i') ι i oteli h ibll , ıı I it lilt İhı w nol ti t tl pu 1 ol ei i\ thın lin lul p u u ih u un 1 in tl s dm,nou pi Huit, lut (nul Ieri It on tl oul n I ротик 1 l' it 1 ι ' ι '- ,ιιιι ılı , uho t .y obl jı I no t ti' fileni t hır oule lor pai ln feien a dilinimi iv ut ι ι to be elme R pu I u ι cim too iatt hui ι tlel t ol honour, and muft be p ul ıs 'n m ν demanded Out of lı\ tlioul η I ρ nud-, İhı loi mci ly po'lıfl d, ti o tlioul tnd onlt remained, md int Stocks it Ilus tune ba g extraiu!) loti, lhe mii.t nat tu I) İtli out at ι greit lofs, but what wou'tl ren un, tien with the moft ugni поношу, would not be α fuihciincy foi her lu, [io t. W ι» ι h ly
ЫЬ aid J crini ht d pice (lie t ли nut u ionic tın t, m ill the mon) oi ıemorle, to trav île U apiitmcnt, when Huir) Rid¬ null, ıs v fıcoueı il) lus cuíloiii, made her ι uit li uv, ιι,ι .v, hu Iı uličníci) filili I, as η ı It l t\|ı U I, , nquntil tini it wis th ι ι id (telili 1 tt. di n u hu, ι il sod ol liais w^s ill ıh ınhver flu could nuke ! ııı İleni) wis mich alecled, anil til ι ι hi km ') b) the Inn I, с ltrcatcd hci 1 1 be conq olee " Oh Mr R tlmili 'le i íl e ι canned, " in me ¡ou Ululei oe of ι ι moll unfortuuite of Ur r t '— ΟΊ (. d' what will become of г 3 Л е , ι el Ι ι inend who would ulvic 1 Ulitt u c, i) ťiitjculties ι = htcifil)l lui nouute 1 " Good Hel us' Ι ι Souiov, ia 1 Heniy, "vvlat eu h ve ren hied 5011 U uni appv 3 Is it 11 mv ρ i vei to bc tl il 3 ' L
leaft lu vice to ) ou r 11 it ι-, )ûu may corn¬ ili nid nie." 1 lus was prccifely the oflu Mrs Sourby waited foi, as fhe Inel determined in her own mint], as loon as Heniy wb an¬ nounced, to make Inm .acqulintel with as much of hei cmbuiaf'ed fituation as might induce lum to pity hu, and to nuk an oder of affiftuig her to tlic utmo I of his ability, theictoic, hiving informed huu ť at he' u"rjifi is on -.matı d İranı pceiı- nuıy mattela, concluded b) ícqjellnig of hım the lom ol t thouíuid pounds iar a nio itli. Alis. Soutb), cíe die foheited this luni of Henr), was well awue, ihould ht relu e her, theie was no other penon die could q ply lo, antl ei nieqjently the denied due of her afluis mutt fion be pubhuy к iow ι, —on the con. arj, dioukl hc vomply .vith her requeft, the impei ding bio v tor the piefent wouki be averted, ind another vol. ii. с triai
tmi at the caid idile nn it pote nm e [irtipitioii 1 1 kl «illic , and t uhle hei to upi) hım al lhe lli[ dite] [ noel Henr) vv ıs too adornllili ι umidi tev torcjl) 1 le vvilheil tolerve her, but vvit i- out aj ι lyiuj; to lus fiili r, hovv tv is he to uile fuch ι fum' and Inch in ιρι he lion ňie lul altiul) pralni ite 1, ι , ι te (lie ac - qininied hım with 1 er chiliei!., (he cui u ι tl 1 m tu I eco ul tt die w is ¿Lout ta utlei a jreíound f 'aet, obieivíi о ihc v oul ! u util r iti ci traiisfr lici pin] it) 11 tic lu ', thoL-di al fueli an unn η с Ы , tl in ι ih ul pcifoi ilio ild be ιρριι/ d ol h cin¬ li ııı ı lıııcn t SiıeliKevvıfe givo Umy to undei (l nd, (ju l n i ig tl it In ìdonidi lent ι rocecticd iron ι ι 1 ña ice io ir* ν itli lo m tji mone)), thu ihc 1 tl le it twelve huntlied pounds but а fe v t i) L f ie ti ι fucini, nt t ι snuing flu 1 Hit uld have fo inmediato an occalion foi it li' ricu, . ' 1 i h die fliould
Pioukl lecui., again en th noil' cxp rd, ui ui ien flie u le 1 the itim in queftion. 1 le π, who bc ici cd cluj ι oul (ht hul uttiicd, loon iflerlilthe , lining in ft Ге- j iteti ins jn ornile u i lo dilti ' tuutille hatl in co filici eı incil d to hm, uil lil nule, if poflib t, Ό piotine t ie ι ι ρ foı hu on die fol mıng d ) lier ν wis f) α со ι Γ h ıı e m αι ι i f , 111 his I rJci t u 1 I» e , t J i lì i I ljpli, wlitn α "t i 1 tei li 1, i > 1- ícllowof lis, wl i u vi' , l , ud lud lefi hım u fi , ι ııı I to lus ıııeıııi) , Ju i pt ι 1 up ι Jl! 11, nasi a moki e i Hille! leCelvtl], and on lus lui 11 ig to ι 11 tint n ι 1 1 a jı ílu-, ott iun I n t ι u oí on t ÜU- di aft upn h s bui i u ti e Ια η, t 1 i r, Hent) s nott it oı 111 h j I s \¡ laulklınd ι ould ι ι hp li t I with, ι dn 11 bu ı ıtıs ied t th h s t ui 1 О 2 tO
to repay lu ıı when convenient, but I (till), judging Mrs Sourby would be punftual with lum, on no other conditions v ould lie leccive the diaft Henry immediately letuined to Mis Sourby, who with extieme pleafure took fhe draft fiom hun, ror was Htnrj lefs elated that he had been lo fuccefsful 11 his eftbits to ieivc hei lie foon after a 0 ain withdicvv, having onl) a verbal pionille from her that (he would leturn the favoni ere the month expued, and as (lie pio- pofed no fecunt), Hcniy demarded none, forjtdgi g of herb) lnmlelf, he conceived a p omilt io be equally, binding, as iad all the attoi nits 11 Chriftcndom b en con- lultcd and cmplo)cd on the occalion. Λ few di)s after the abave affur, Hun), with R tuuli and Μι ) Jane, were invited t (ι end tht even ng it Mis Squami r s, Ilır· two Utter dteln d goın but llelll), at the defne of Radmill, attendeu — 'oı, ' oblu Ved
obferved lus Either, " as Mrs. Squander has been fo confiderate as to name us all, though wc are but little acquainted, let it not appear that wc abfcnted ourfelvcs thiotigii a defire of not becoming more in¬ timate with lier and her friends." Heni) accoidmjly attended, Mrs.Sourby u is theie li'ic.vife, as weie many others that he uas on fiicndlv turns with. He pailetl the majoi part of the evening at ivlult, a £ame he was very partial to, ioi the mode¬ rate fum of half-ciovtn points, and as it fo luppcned that the \ ulj at his table feemed equiily Ctttsfied null himleit with the funi they were playing for, he had no concep¬ tion of the money that ins won and ioli at the other end of the r >om, until а lady, who ftemed to havejufl left off play, drew а char ciofe to Ins partner's, and Ijioke, jufl loud enoiyh for thofe immediately about her Ό hear—" I protei! poor Mrs. Sourby, if the fune ill-luch which file has с 3 lee tiy
re ''en h met ν uh continues much Ιοηςα^ ν ıh bt ınevıl ibi ι unt I ' "1 ııı il on Ine I,' tv limed the 1 ly ti le le 1, " ll lb lilt III С pilldcilCt ' >\l( M ' 111 tn 1 If" '■ 14 Jill ııı i t; v te „!,cd, 1 u idi α il ru ι 1 ,) t tl и Mı Siji m ti s il İl u ι 1 ol ι I 'и li tl Jt 1 ' ' "l' " 11 tl iu ι ι ¡ou t mk Γ h , ι ι ι vet "U π ι h S u m t b e to fay, lut 1 Ih i'd ι ne tint lhe hal, fr I î io J ι s bqu id ι too We 1 to conceive ihe vaniti nik a ietoi d accuut eit İti α Iveri i) h d dilclr gtd tht lift" " How gleit luna s Mis Squamiti tne wiine of to nijit " " When I juft iov 1 ft the t iole win h ι ut M toin , 1 ht ud let excluiu, ıs it was ılıt coutil 1 on t ι rubber—' Tin, Mis ^ouro), πι es it jul touı hund etl рош tis.' " Л feVV
" Λ fetv moie luch loffe , and it will be ill over with liei, ior I iiave been luiormed, ami 1 b lieve bom toleiable luthont), th it oul ol leven 01 cl_, it t îouia it' poll id , vvlic'i Ihefoinicrl lul nthe Г u els, fcaialy toi 1 ι , ul il ihc li li lu 1/ puu t ıc del t oi h„]oı due to Mis Squander, tint mull be dwin lied to ion cthing leb than one— De 1 mc, M,. Radmill, 1 leg jour ρ ι m' —cluba vv ь le 1, I b 1 1 — ulo m[cď— But theie, ılı не n olile í it, ίο it does not matt r — 'ι wn t 1 I of bunts tld )ou 'cave Mr Siu 1. ƒ tea Λ1 ulani ? " Oi to'eiabl , 111 11 uch 1 ttei , 1 1 е., cucut llaiiecs со ilidem!, t 1111 t i- togtlhti bc c\i Ud She tvill noe ieel her lolies ι n lit ,.m 'eget hei he ld upon lier pH , r't οι lucii tınıca 0 cnci illy Vil ts l 1 1] c , 11 mtkeS US l U у 1 tie its U e lille COlll illeteti t IO сое icol th el ) ' 1 he) continued d r coui fing on the fucccis с 4 of
of Mr Squander, and the tlioughtlcls im¬ prudence of Mrs. bourbj for a confider¬ able time longer, and evinced to Henr), who hftcned attentively to their converfa¬ tion, tint Mrs S nub) had deceived him He pitied her fiom the verj bottom of his heart, though °t the fame time he с mid not dived li mftlf of the fear that fhe wou'd not be fo pimetual m return¬ ing wl at flie had bouowetl of him, as he at fiift liad been given to c\)cft, which, fhould it be the cale, wlrt was to become of his notc p —Tl ough 1 tull hnd, he was confiions would not part wu ι it, or even pieient it to hım, m cife he wilted not upon 1 im at the ipecified pc.iod, yet fuch apparent neglect muit lover him greatly m his opinion, to avoid which he determined, fhould M c . Sourby diiappomt him, to acqu tnt Taulkland with every paiticulai, concealing only the lady's name, and he was certain he woultl excufe him, return him his note, and wait for pa) nient until it quite iuited his convenience. 'U
At a late hour Henry returned home. He obtained a ghmpfe of Mrs Sourby ei e he left the room, and read in her counte¬ nance tjiat lhe itili continued unfuccefsíul. She was too anxious at the game to notice hun, as indeed was the greater part of the company, they feemed eager to increate what they had alieady obtained, or by a fortunate (troke of chanci, to recover their loffes, very few feemed inclined to follow his example of retiring, though they had encroached then nearly two hours on the Sunday morning. It was fomething better than a week after thio that Radmill exprefled а wiih to vifit Margate, to which Henry objected, not being willing to leave London for realons befoie mentioned,—howevei, his objection, and Jus reiufuig to acquunt his fathei with the motive that had produced it, made no other (Iteration m the old gentleman's determination than vifiting Bnghton inftead of the place his fancy had at luft fuggeftcd. G 5 Henry,
Henr), Ιιι duig hım io 1 iremptoij, con¬ ceived it moft pruduıt to toniti) with lus ι lihe II , lioicie , n muh Útly w Uni upon I aul la 1, a ul at jU unte i lu 11 tf llıe ıııceffity lie was unt! r of iccoiiipmjing lus fithtr into the countn, and hirlcd ti luna tint lie was dubious wli tlıeı lie fliould return tie his nate became du' 4 lit iiofuiicly indited upon lluuj's takn g İnek the note, and, by way of reconciling Hcniv to luch a procedure, defired lıını to give ium a note end muu! 111 luu of p ud conchidid with ob erving, tint when- eicr hi ftlt 1 mlilf ncccffititcd for the mone) , lic fhould not f il of a[ pi) 1 ig tu ium Henr), who fiw tlu ö ood intention of his frunţi, at lift tomphtd, rnd they ioon afte paitcd, well filisi id ι ith с ich odur. ïlenrt, -j foon as he ltft laulklınd, waited upon Mrs bomoj, and infoimed hu of the jourat y le ms abcııl to 11 ak^, ml
ind that prohab 1 ) he Ihould iot have the , Ie itirc of 1 cing her agam for t vo or three ι ont's c hc ieeii eel evidently plcafed ť ou 0 n Гицп1 d it this u lcxneettd meti¬ li ence, but never one i и itioned tlu n oiiey Ihc had bono ed ol huu, or in t' it min ci Ihe t as to uturn it, a 1 1 li¬ uon afi ι left hci, bj no means luisi.eel with her con luet Had Π my, on the onfet, made tins aflur kno in to ins fuller, theie nu no doubt but 'c would have idv meed tne ι oney foi lini, but then he hatt pronnled \irs Souby to I tep it α profound fecict, ι el he kiuw Ins lither too well to imagine U would j -αϊ t vv ih ι guinei bejond hi Uud How шее, vv i h v ıs one nunt 1r ed D untlbqunt il),vvn nutbeingfnftapprized of the ui he intendi 1 t ) n ike oí it md left! s, Uttal) he had been ìitli-r e ι ι¬ ν gun, aidini obe ned α ie ν hun' ., of hım to dılclıarge lome de its that he had imp udeiitly conti itteel, and vns nov g 6 become
become extremely cautious not agam to merit his reproaches, by encroaching upon his bounty be) ond wh t he himfelf con¬ ceived lequifite to bellow. Henry had hardly been in Brighton a week, when he received α letter from α Mı. Sackworth, a perfon totally unknown to him, which informed lum that Mr. Faulk- land, a few days befoie, had been killed by а fall from his horfe, and that his note for one thoufand pounds, on demand, had been found among the effects of the de- ceafed, and which he requefted he would immediately honour with payment Henry's agitation, as may be rememb red, in perufing this letter, excited Radmill s cunofity and alarm, and, notwithitanding all he could urge, Henry refufed to inform bini of its contents. He the fame day tranfmttted a letter to Mrs. Sourby, ex¬ plaining the mEthod he had adopted to procure the money Ihe had received fiom lum.5
hım , and, as the time was now expired for which flie had foheited it, hoped flic would not ful to wait upon Mr Sackworth, at the hou r e of his deceafed fiiend, and take up the note for lum. Several days elapfed, and Henry con» ceived, as he had not heard irom Mis. Sourby or Mi Sackworth again, that Mrs. Sourby had lound the means to comply with his requeft, and though he was much grieved at the accident which had deprived his friend Faulliland of life, he became quite i ıtısFc I tin' he fliould hear nothing more nlpecting his note.
СНЛР,
CI UP. λ.
The tlifi¿> leahii Sm ¡nifi. OO confident was Iltnrj tl at Mrs Soıııby lud waited upon Mi bitkwoiti, is iie hiel requefted, tint his tl oughts never onte re¬ itit d to the fub eft, until the thy ftic- ceeihng the evening on v/h ch Mir) J ine lati lo ftnngtly thfqipt ucd Tht letter which h.. lecuvetl, in 1 which ins fuller, who ν ι with hi n U tne time, and buojeel lumlell will the h i,ie that it muft be iioni Maiy Juc, was α fécond lettu fron Mr Sickwoitli, in which he eipi (led ι iu h lurpnie tl at Hen y had not eon- cleicudcl to Honour his lull tpil le with
an anfwer, and hkewife allured lini that ii he hcud not from hım by the return o r the poft, he lhoul 1 adopt ludi mealures to enforce payment of his note is the luv in itch cifes allowed 1 he reader is ahtady acquainted how g eatl) Henry was hurt ind concerned on the icctipt of tin , moie partici! 1 ul) ft) when he difcovered by the date of it that it ought to have been dehveied to him at leale tour da) s befoie. Ihe diftieh, in which Нин, bc'icld lus 1 t ici when he infoimed h 11 tl at the lettu 1 meg t no intelligence of Maiv line, and hb lpcicilmg ■'gomes wliui lit left I 1 to icqumit lum fion ıııoaı it t ме, lud neaıly oveicome Ileni)'s leloiutie iof keep¬ ing lum lgnorint cf its со tenis, uitu the pioni le ht had madt to Mis Sauib), w'utii as )tt í e could not imiğine himftlf ib- iolved fiom, rctuiit 1 to his mtmor),antl for th s timt picuntcd lum from diiukung 5 the
I36" Г -IARY JANE. the affair to his fatlier Ilad he been cer¬ tam that Mrs Sourby had real!) decciitd Inm, he would not have hefitated to make the affair known to him, and crave lus advice and affiftance, but whether ihc liad, or had not deceiv"d lum, at prefent it was impoffible he fliould know Tiie letter he had written to her nu_Jit have miftaired, ot a number oí unforcfeen events might have prevented her receiving it, fliould either of winch be the cafe, he fliould concene him¬ felf moft effentially to blame, and defe v- mg of hei loudeft cenfure in betraying what he had piomifed not to divulge. Northcote made them a vifit foon aftei with Plagiary, Sir Wukin Btverly, and Ľhza, when Northcote hinting lus fufpicion that Maiy-Jane hid gone off with Bat ville, induced Henry and Plagiary to enqune at his lodgings if he had left Brighton on the preceding evening, as was leported, and found their fears in tint ptrticular lentied, and that two of his fervants, who were much
much furpnfed it then maftcr's fueldcn de¬ parture, as feveral th)s yet remained ert the time for which tht houfe had been taken would expire, received orders latt the night before, to pack up eveiy thing that belonged to Inm, and to take plu.es fot thcmftKcs m tht euch, fır Totdon, on the following morning, which oideis th y ln 1 obej td Plagiary and Htnry were now half con¬ vinced tint what Northcote hid utte ed was but too true, though, like h ia, th y fulpetled not that flie had gout volunta ily with hım, but tint he hid by form, mtans or othtr tiepanned her away H w to proceed they kntw not, to difcovtr what road the) hid taktn was their 111 tt objefl., yet, upon fécond confìdtration, this could be but of little avail, for if they had kt off for London, there they muft have arri ed fome hours before,—at all events, ajourney toBaivillts town houle feemed to Henry the moll likely means he could purfue to afcer-
afccrlain whether or not Bu ville menteti their fufpicions. I lus lie minti it! to I'l ici ii), «ho gaie lib opinion 111 the allumativi lliey loon alter 1 | ι it I, ind Henry wis hadtnui^ to n loi n h (ul u oí ul iti I id It une I, ult itti e lus рсшиЛюп lo luve Bujnou 11 le ut ι ot them immcdiattl), when а [ nt vim ι, addreffing hım by hu namı, bt_, 1 to ip . α few words to hım Henıv I | pr I, ι 1 the othei icquiii ted lum tl ι К 'n vuit a 0 aınft lun, at the fuit of ' Sttcwoith, txccutoi to the late Mı i jKhntl, foi one tjioul u d ¡lotin s Π my, overcome with furprilt, could not nrlicuh t iwoitl, — theo ω, p letiviighis tm 11 ΙΊ it t, t elírod ht wou 1 walk vvıtı 1 u 1 to tl t С" itle I ivern, «ht t they could dıltouıft u, on the iubjeel uu u riupted 1 Lnr) f ilo ved hım m fıleııcc , — the) io 11 rciclìtd ihe inn, whin Peur) begin to ıc (leu upon vh t meais he could t'cviie to {Atur te
n trícale himfelf 1глн lu pie ent di'i.eiilti. No othtr method oficie 1 1 lelf but to ac- quiint his lit urinih tin ιΙΓι ι , but tins his piomifi to Mr Sotub/ptohibttel, nel he Ik Id a pio ι v too fuie 1 to bv broktn thro h 1111 1 1 ι 1 ι ι tl ι 1 lit ttt un tu hi ul İt m kt ping it. I! it lus ftther —if the m tter win not fpudily finin!, hov \ю Ji lu íupport ins abfence' Almolt dill lčltd with the conte idmg emo¬ tions, hano u ind dut), hc knew not how to decide He made the badili acquainted \ 1 h as much of the tranlaftion tint had occilioned his prefent diftnfs as he could with piopuct), without betraying Mrs. Souib), and requiftid his advice. 1 lie bailiff, who polTcfli.il none of thofţ шее iciupJcs of honoui which influenced ihc conduct of ileni), aduied htm by il mcins t) make tlu matter known ti Ina i ulier —" Ntccflity," laid lit, "his no luv, thciibre, not«lthitandiiig youi pio- mife, it being а piocccding of ablo tile rcccfit ,
neceffity, jou will bc juítiiied in the ejes of the world." Henry, however, fell himfelf but little incliniti to follow this iage advice, which the other peiccivmg, enquired if he had any incuti m Brighton lint he imagined would advance the mone) for Inm, as, unltls Uiitislied his dem md, oi pr cm d bul, the) muft fet o'l ior Lonuon lo D Ci'icr as expcdittoufly as poffible. His mentioning London, and likewife foon aftei obferving hehad 1 ft it late on the preceding c aj , a id th it he did not reach Bn b iuon in conlequcnce u nil pit mid¬ night, oicaiioncd He ry's thoughts agun toieiert to Maiy Jane He interrogated the bahn as to whom 1 с liad met on the ro d, apj Π71Ι g hım tint a )oun_, lal) oí lus acquaintance had ihe Mt iu fa ht eloped fiom her friends, and it was fulptätd hid taken the road to London.
He
He replied hc lud leen no traiellcrs on the load, of whom lie had the rcinoteft idea to be the perfon in queftion " Unlefs," he continued, " they were withm the car¬ riage which flopped it Cuckficld to change holies juft 1« I irnved theie, about eleven o'clock in the eienmg —who were withm it I know not, foi, without alijiting, as foon as the borles were procuicd, they recom¬ menced then jouinc).' Heni) hid not α doubt but the dr¬ inge contained Binile md Mary-J m , thciefoie determined to purfue them, an 1 tmltnig he Ihould ioon bc embletl to iettle his buhnefs with Stcl worth on his annal in London, he loit! tlıe bailiff iıc was rea ly to accompli!) hun, who immediately re¬ tired to ^ivc ord ıs for α pott cínife, while Iïenrj wrote tnt noit the rcadei ia alreuly acquainted with, to lis fathei. Ht gave particular oideis to the waiter, to whom he delivered it, to convey it to Mr Ridmill, on the Manne Parade, as foon as he wis gone, ulucii
itmeli the waiter jiromil d faithfully to do 1 luiry now felt Ins mind much tali ι , In, as hi hid lnfiimul ins f tlıeı tint his an¬ lı u was cheli) oıttfıoiicd bj listnui- \ours to uile ι Mii) [me to inm, lie flat- tcictl lumiilf it uoukl in л guat i u ilurt iceoucilt him to the lip r lion I lit ci ufi was now annoimeli!, and the) wue jic- fcntl) out of light of Bnghton FLgniy, who obtained a limpie m Heniy cu he had quite leached the extu- mity of the tonn, concludili that, Willi the confuit of 1 is father, lie w ıs m j urijıt of Mil) Jane and Baıulle, noi, until 1 1 fiw Radmill ι tl с tun ig, was he intornili! to the conti i). Tlie it aitir, to \ 1 om 1 Tenrj gai e the nott r i ι ins fit' u, tl lljltlt.l') ptt it ι ito his pOeKtt, -чп! i ot jitil mail} hours tfttt- ward , iu en 1 1 b) chanci jıut lus 1 and upon it, did it agun utur to lus ι mot) whci, iinfiLlt of hi ntglel, he I aliened with it to
ti ne billie Punit, ΙιπΊιια; the dtliy w oul I ] ot e ol lo little ĺ > i e ,u nte, that 'us ι ι II inon would unun undiliúvirtd. At the di leunt fliges Ilenn mide cn- qunies ui lhe tb us ciel uppti moll lil Ins m io', lut co 1 ι 1 un nothing decifri c iintil he e ltcitd tlie inn it Ci mley. 11ère the neat little b ι- ι ι 1, ι itliout much ¡iei uifion, ichtcil to luu fit ad.intuits of tit pun hip in Jit, and it Ileiry's requ fttltluibtdtht nuloi i-d dulsof tlu ) mn, 1 I) и и h tl bun llopi d и lu, ill"' t to (neti. tj e il ly tic t 1 ti ul pillut diu 1 lilit , í or Κ ch Ille fli 1 lup- jol tl β nule u b ', t ' o, a ter w i t lu lud lud to lur, ta ell u tulli tac han 1- lonn [itltnt lu 1 tl m de lui, lini io g unt el 1 tr ι leu th i tlıeı! ι he ııugnt lit t dcıuıetl 4u oı ıtıs leLıtıg the part of ı icon ıclrel, η Ve oie enteied her ııın- gii. ilion Henrj was now се..аш, fiom the difcrip- tton
tion (lie gate of hei, that it was Mai} fane and that Hie had beul foiced away through tht deep laid aitihcis ot villany, n now cvidi ' likewilt. Henry, eager for an oppoitumty of pimifiu ig Ban ille for lus treachery, and leleafing M iij-fane fron his lawiefs power, became impatient to recommence his jour- iiu, whith was inftantly acceded to b) the bailiff, and they foon after were fet dou π, at Hem j 's requtft, at Ofborne s Hotel, in the Adtlihi A waitei was immediately difpatched to JVJr Sackworth s, to dtfirc that geut'einan would wait u| on thtm as loon as convenient Tht waiter loon aftti rttumed with the dilagieeable intelligence, that he hid left town but a few hours beiore, and that he was n )t expeftt I home ui til 1 tc on ılıt follow ing day Ti 5 was ι leieic di/ãppomtmcnt to Hnr}, h \t\ci, as lus laft retouice to cbt in his libers tlrt uenmg, he ltnt a note
nole to Μη Soji b), 11 ι luth J ι ι Unie 1 hci how diiij-cc -Ί lv he wis flutt 1 in ii r lecount, ill 1 be f jed to Ice hu l ll nedi U ) и tlie h Iti, i lu v ıs not alıoıvcd tl e j i, il ge of ![ u ng lu nut tioubie by vv ulun, upon hu t hu o vii houle Ilen j foon αι r iccuveel tie íolbwiiu liote —
' Vi Souri v ıs t (u ııtij gi ied tn it it ıs пл in lei pew u to comi 'y Willi Vi II ıhın ľs ruji cl , ¡h" ıs tiu y loi ) ιοί the inconvt ueiıcc lu Ins, aid ь hk lv to lifle on İKİ leCOUIlt, but lile tll'tb ll wíl ıı t imp t tie tı'tıcof her, ornile to n tin i 0 L it I cr bei g difi po itt 1 m а ίι nü ir w ), vvhieh Uu could nether í ire ее nol avoid '
Γιοηι the dictioi cf this piille it ь VOL. II. II 10V
I obi o ti i un ıhıl ilt it 1 ΙΙΙ¬ Ι ι 1 lo f\ ιν ν I t lhe Inel olitili d il ıı ! in , π 1 Ι ι lei m ρ « ι fl ,η of loth ι ti 11 vt ' I iv lu 1 hei It th ι lu ι, 1 n ι eh ılıt 11 nd fhe du I ıı i 1 i, w th le i i, bel ι M i t | V et dui ι it tulli evn 1 nei t I n n ,, tie note. Ut lili t lin lie i , ¡ied ίο laie Itti tl 1 Iv ell 1 US i I tO nienti II 11 ) t ii| n » toniti j fim ly It t ι ι ι ιοί 11 ι ι tl 111 1 1 η u of tnt t el t V\ uh. t t il l lo tl ι l tl I ll î lo the e I jett who 1 1 , ill tl I , le Г 1 ι ι Ut lt into lis ι ι tt i u ti-t « s io hb Ч Η K t 1 , ι 1 '' I uhli pue l l g ! ill Iet UU 1 ΙΟ ell f 11Г tO ¡If CU t Ιι ı e i it ) d αϊ i ı el to ı tec ttl i f li ι le in η il le had leen ŕ r S c t ι
I \¡ 1 lv 1 ι
I ι
, di К l' t ct Πι uv R u i'l m π 1 ' tn ¡I tic i l i! )tu 1 n I ih ι r K n , n , ι t Π 01 d ι ι f ilh 1 t , ι ι n—h ι 1 1 il pu Ι ' , II η
c <>ι ч ¡ΙΊ. ,«1 Ι) lill iCiptpl 1 lill III 111 il li" Γ l t' ni i up ud-" Aii ka i mH, 11 ι to j >] 0 i ι in iht cur vt lim- luns ! liati idi| I ', 1 ut in txti f ot и nt 1 1 avı d ι e, 1 t ι 1 ι l'y m ¡on th it umil 1 tl iu In I t ıs un it )ua nini t th tiu il α¬ ϊ utu of Μι К ini, oı the illecm he viis ht d in hy ii) tit ιι ι I in η Ι. Ίο th put tni ι, Γ\Ί (jjjtl ιι, Ϊ am in- t btn! ί ι tliat hi oul t ^ , and, as lome to ρ ι itn foi t с tiüullt 1 hut otcı- fıo id \ u, I hue to ai'uic )oti tint ) iu an αϊ Hut), u tl that ihc η iti, which atı« tli ι it m ılı c u t of t e ılığı id mon )ou hivt t pıutiıııd, notwitlillmdi ι, Mı G ood л ill
G iod vin ln flerel to 1 1 ι e ıh money forjou, 1 Ilı 11 ului nuil it quite funs vi u Su, to d ниш re ι ie и - oj ¡ per- J «' Henrj was n uch afton (lied at this gene¬ rous puof of frici dlh p in Cuodwin Je thin ed tu-nu tue vv irn cil tenus fır his proti ıcd ki ι in ( , vv ich hc told In n he Pi ul 1 hav f с ' ι il If mcl n 1 to icctpt b t fo te liben ty of Mr Sicktorth, vith u' >m U was n it If pitied or bit kw u d m lus ackn ь lyne its lor lus p i e b Ί tuoi i u I t i mttultcd coi luft, t d ie li ig lumie f n w quite abluí ve I İrim t e prouıı ol 1 cıec ıı al ıı ide io \h ς ui), tg let el it w iole i oı t of us pelemem ıı ili ent, cut u cl cl e to n ', e co ice ι et h η li ι о ìlj lei nunc. 1 ' >u 1 1 evv h ι ) u ι ti i, dii t (noi í el wl 1 t I i ч lui, v i n «li ) Uiinm.lt - 1 t up n i v ις h s den it.
It α t y e ut t il 1 ν α ι to ] a с 1 ! 1 ngl 1
!
hım bit И it ι ι ι tifi l t, ι! ι V 1 u le ι I 1 t t ui me ! by i İt h feil e, I I ll I
Ul V e 1 t Г ici l t O Ut M et' t Л 1! Hell ,,
lv t e 1 m o ι
" Nor luve )0u an idea vvhtn le will return ' " Cut nil) not, he Π lom infoi ms hib luv i b ot wlrt ıs ıaı ely known cveti by h ι elf" " Had he any lady wilh him when he left to η ha night'" " ìou ai- moie inquifiiive than it be- 1 oves mt to anlwcr 1 would adviit vou, ' u to rel ivi th It queflions fır n v maíLi , 1 vill len \ to the ıı тле Cuil Ily tl m 1 U 1 cu iblei! to elo Heiiij tool I piufe fiom 1 s ] ecket, mu t tmu!, s he hell t loi u , ¡ι ıı - 1 В с 1 1¡ it, nel anUvcı nie mi) lucii qucího! s аэ í m ly put to you, and t Ua fhall bt jour ι wild 1 ' He nan counte aie I etii'ed lus ni¬ elu ilion нега;!) wuh hib icepick, whe ι ι fetonti ici ut, t ìblv wo ılüiy it tilt lon, i (fthe h II n ; na le lu , car- mee. IU otl ti, οι pucciving hm, v' U 1 itd
ıc' ile iţ lo be ι 1 11 ι ι l! f ľov- 1 1 Ι с I ν t ίι doe' , vv u
d l
1 1 Vvii le ООГ 1 ll 1 ili
on ι ι 'ut e tiiill ι wliehUe iy evv v is Ult i I i 'e') lo deie Ve Ílu e mv e v ul ι, α 1 и rl etu us to n wh 1 il temed Iun o ι the
I. f \ j ι ι u 1 11 ι
!, о . 1 U Tie ι η.
t leo ! . ti ee\, ι .
t d ι ι ι,ι »Ί hım 1 с ь Jv t) j lıııı lo the uti oft о lis ııı f, eui Jun tu, if hevve.ee u hy ' iu p 1С vu i wlut he Ind pc e e 1 Ol
ht
'У
é
n
] ι 1 "I liitto t ılı ll, ich
lii li d 1 le I ! ι к ι ei th ni ι ι Ι¬ ι ι Ι hij m , ι t ι ί ii t ι
ti li
ì i
ini íl upon 1кг uturninj; hım ť e fun [ι. iıad bono \ttl, when the convei non he had he u d at Mis jqu inders ìl^uì >d to Jiib menorj, md ima" ш 13 t it her ni- pndenee, md bui iuta, ь it th" o i im 0 - íiblí, mjn Inte iili.audJ 5 d nul her of tl с means of being jufl· to hmi, excited that device of [ it; fur her unhapp; fitui- ticn, fliould fueh Rally be tie cad, as π \\ d hun \t that tine to ichnuih a 1 deis of revulse. 1 J nry,U mLİıour eie morn bc_,nhı jour- n 5 о 1 horí b ick towards Birul c C ιί L At a li , ill mn, uh ch was only tun mı cs fiom t'ı if ot h fou 0 ht, he dcteı uedtolca\e ] ı, Icıl , and ı' с ıt\t ch,, the d íl шее Ы. nj; ίο ti ϋΐΓς, le co ceıud it me il r ru lent to j. locccd on foot to ια,ο mo tie Il e Colile " Should I be fo turale enough,' thouM t ПиирЧо the black tunets jI tU C íUl 11 <- i ıs finht, " to chfcoui Λ/ Ιιΐ) Jun. i u
in 50η giro ij α' hee, I am util wie it vii» requie tu π c r tin ι if, t Лш ι toe , ft ! ι r ι 1 e , f 1 tl e ıı um who, to gr tify ln ul !, t il 1 ftıuples not to h lil t kli irt I İM , Itti 1 π ti ' divím, con¬ dì ib tilt и» ¡uner, i i j ui V phce, by fu cv el muc, и uli 1ιι_,!ι at mj men ft ] i ! 1 1 e [ 1 у cci It hun ot l> ο ι il il ι ten to ini iel tint с ll t 1 tl di 1 1! oii'uel h illiy timt 1 u t 1 f r 1 ed b my te neri , id i oy ' elek к 1 n ııı ois, vii m lus l diasi uti ulei' Utu of 1 ıs guilt, he ¡ 0 it ¡teure m , ani notent tlie gocxl 1 m ài ue m tht cm itip tion of my pooi Mai) fm- I\. n, thertf ire, fit hous to avoid being ¿ 'tov 1« , it I n, rl i rt J tl tl t r iinous pit, md entere I, chrouji a lu r t < ip 11 the ι a I, into tht deftrted part о it, \v 1 r li contri d tur fone timt uc Iw c til 1 t hım elf tie othei t 're u t w 11 i ib t I 1 n'-,
a j r m I
ι ι wo ι ! ĺ, to elu-
Γ
.1 ! t - 11 f of- 1 li, 1 ι ι ι ι ι 1 dut 1 I Ι itti ι V u e tr tiu
ι ti l' с tre t y i e 1 ıs iu el 'l' tirl
of t
"tl л íle 1 1 id he lult d ti e 1 ' tl e, ijl 1 ι e rJi tu Ίιη'ι I 1 d 1 pet t 1 I 1 'letti o ÍIIJIS - il ui Ли )- ' 1 ie h 1 1 du Hood ιι 0 t ), i ru 'e 1 i ; 1 ij ıııd I ci ıı r in' >, l i
ft pantion, he fou I, diould (V net again be ledoretl lo lin, he dıou tl be m lei il ' His bhotl bo ltd wi'li honcil mthgnattn a^ К followed the mllcieints with ins eves, until a pr jcčltng [ait or tie fabric ill them fiom lis light, when ie de cd ni- c lutious by the mcreafing cbulnlion of pal¬ hon, and α tlcdic to obťu ι f] ccdj and complete leveuge, le trev lis fil' İs fiom lis рос vel, ni ν от tl jont of ruihıng hun h s ïttr ie t> i cu! ce Loth to h ji с icfeitii nt, v ' n t t mea tlut he nullit be inul tn, ш' Mır fint not the pulou agiinfl v hom tlıe vv of hoin I ι upon hid been uti ıc ', povit ntıılly inten med, and detentei hun ho n dis r (h dtligii. Rendcied more coil and collected by reflection, he contini eel on the fpot unii he fav β u ville and Roi'ncl uturn to th„ С idle 11 then be 0 in to ctaii e t diear) api ti icnts, with a intention, if ] oln- bii, to (ine! io ut [ jfs t it η i^lit conduct lum
him into the habitable pírt of the build- iii 0 , i utfriiitLls w ıı, the itttni| t — ali tom¬ mun e lua Ittuicd enlucí/ cut oit, — Ie, ho tv , i,avt not о ti lus l irth until the nigit «as fır adva iced, when he re¬ turned to the inn to obtain fome íefitlh- ment, which tie cuvings of natuie, tjo pottnt to be icfilttd, hiving fifi d the whole day, jenltied ib bt reseñar}. fe, hov-ıeı, η f it letiiirg to t tr, tl ou 0 i l uch fit i- , h iv n^ fin"! I s fu« ι iq (t, rett ι ' η mı 1 to w t h . ι li tv ot 1 aim ıj «ııı , ι ι »ι gloomj wall« Γοι ftvcıa! this ani ııı lib «ıs Htnrv thus octUj ıc 1, without bur., ı e to tohe lus doubts., w hell ti Vi v J t wa , or wis nol the toi une 1, «ι ι oi Jit, ren¬ déit Idli ut bi li i > 1 i rt >, i с de¬ ttai in d t > 1 l iv ' , ι 1 d e arc the puiptit ol hi vu ι i vin 0 f mied tiis relolut tn,
rclòlutnn, ho was al-mit lo put it intn in¬ flan t inecini.-,!, v-.l.-i! itieVeiily the Π; und of (uotiicps eclıottl through the interdices ofll.ctti.íkc, a.iti :-.-.5rdeJi,isd.,;gn. lie lillened nti.r.iiiV.v ; lhe founds b. came nr-re i'ifliiiíl ; he e: dtav..-.ir.-d ta difcover (Vom vvheuce i' t y ¡rott. 'tirt'., but the at- lur.pt was fn.ii.cli. !š п.; one fcrenmctl vi-.;eiitiy¡ r. S :.i'ii h: huriei he I new not white, ivi.e,!, b: ti.e г.: y s cf' ihe moon
the
but
that had
ih: 1. u-lly
leti
Ш
lu eu
Г
CO
x
fl
I hi
14
t
у а
h
О
t
the apirtmeut to which it led, and beheld into the bufoni of tiie ire inbuilt; iVUry-Jr.ne ! His timely iiuerpefiiiti.i prciervtd her life. Bani'!.', overcome by fear ane! luulit·, re- lcalť.l her frum his rratn, when M.-.ry-Jane fpr.m.v fi'om him, unioidtioui to whom flie ivas thus indebted fur her 1 rd'ervation.
ti paliti
t t
I
Пу
Lid
he b
1 fpirits, aud
У '
be
lum
D
У
ppalled; I
lv he e x.t
i
yat
t
ıc m
f
í
СНЛГ XII.
7/it lieti eat, and the lucí y Ra eounlcr. IİLNRY, finih irr л ι, рсГП e to otcr- take uiti fecure Barn le, no ι ι etl i la ut¬ moft eff rts to dil otei to tint place Mirj- I ne Ί И fled, but in ti ıs he\)io\c 1 equally u im cef ful, — in t un did he echo het inme through etcì) atenue of tht lo emn ítiuc- tutt, no ani ti was utu ne ', not а r - 1] lift, lite \ . 1 m tie. ce, ι ct lu Reimtet . Γοι ft m ho ь 1 ' 1 c nued - fruitltk feudi, t i ı 0 aıı t e lo ind ol footfleps η foeindet fi ıı tini li ij pai , V. lell
м к İl " gl mmcrmg lig' t, that «as ľude' cu y en Hied t itim it, tenler 1 v fil e, ht al/anccl lo ι mis it, nul diltoveied ı3 1- iil't ind I oftlaid, both \\t 1 ι 111 el, е\- imimnr ciutiouflj cui) ] ut il u tli y [ itLcl, ац -iitntly Mth th cUl D n t ) thiet, er -md liciilitt hun to t tu iui). ľ uleie iov teV ltd litui) to m ' e a pi ц ue reti it, but tl tu «Incitai to bicorne ol "VLj-luť Ίο 1ηο\ her to bt fiiiiouiidul by dangei, t d to ibantlon lici to İti fitt, »к turiblc, )Ч he kntw ot »litre Ше h tel letitted herfelf, ind fhould he overeo ie tht lemons whole lidLgaiel and delein med looks evinced to him that they vvcu bent 11] on hi d ¡bue¬ no 1, it wuuld n it ehleovcr to lum the plu.e of h^r tonen me it Ilovtvu, К deter¬ mined not to le u e hei 1 fe agun leized a piftol, aid was a uling their approa h, when an idea picltmed it elf that b, h Hen¬ ing back to the 1 in, lit could pel fu ide fome cf the domcíUcs to ruuin to the culL with
u 1 il o f ? u i nuli ni lis at¬ çım hi , but t ui u iti 1 ι ıoı ts η ull loon ililioiu ıh it tit ol lus 1 1 ir Iau Ths n 'u l l mı O mk Ins ťi , ι, wh ϋι 11 it, il ilt lı t txp ΠΙ 111 1 ) 11 ts of ,10 1 tl , , ι Π, fun ι of il 1 1 ι ι' anıl t t i tıı 1 cui tions, sı til it ι uitu d 1 ine ol t ι ι ι 1 ı t 1 t ) ıııol ı- paıi) hım, ııınp ııı i ш tl ıı ıs n ıh of the u ııı) t r L t \ ia 'u 11 cut l r qui iti i i u li ι ol , ai 1 ρπ i i id hi ι j to itui II i fu t ıc ι tuil Ilıt у lom α ite! Un С ' .., wlcn limi) ι net ito tl 11 ıtri ι İr im which, on his fiift ν fit, lit 1 d ittn 1'in ilk and Rowhnd pocud 1 1 e ılıoı wis ftciuul, lu loudly ıpıliıd the kiocku, detciniin d il
г( 7 li ПО Oi e Ull le e to the lui imo ÍS, io ' - muli il di r, -louvei, ht I id it w utul li "tic oll Mu hi ıppeııed t h η 1' m Ι ι td, t h tui nt m i ııı ι, liiat lia ti 1 , ι ιι ι the lui ι y, heile t α J ltr lu Un ni e\ee t d, lui 1 tt iht C e al out luh ti 1 . ι le ie II ι , 1 v r, ıs Ί Un m- t bc end u u 11_, o i n 1 ii| > i lu n ıhı t iile ied tl, 1 1 lilt lilit tliem uto ciei) ι, mı t in the Cili. , t h lu i 4 o t, he w ι lu ι 1 tl it lì с I el ι I i ed i ııı t t v nuth In im he utu ill il t ь M ry- ! u , il t e tl ее ι ' ι к to 2it 1 ι n ι ei ι ι it ι ι ! d ι η el t ( ι ) ι ι uu it le il 1 1 'e. Il tic 1 n lei ili I ' itici I but on the city ot h ι Ι ι ι e ılı 1 t) htr loom, n I li iti et t eie ul t,oiiea«i), li y I u tuv , to 0 eiiei.
Hemy, from <he artlefs manier in wl ich this account was dehvutd, was «in¬ aliceli tint (lie hid no u cutio ι to dece \e Inm, he doubted not but Barville had agun fei/ed upon his jioor, unloitunatv Mu)- Jant, ani was cuniepig her to iome other íemote p ice, mo t prob ib y antiei- pting lhe conlequtiiccs, iliould lie iernam wlicre he was, as he Ind ι ot betn abL to preiert the eft apt of him b) whom he had been f) ditidiui!) ıhmıed, ıııd iated fiom the Clin e 1 1 meditateti Heni), with lus folio vers, now iciuincd to the inn, where lining iew utled tlıe ıı for their tıouble, lie oideitd h s borle w th a ι mention ti eidooier what ι oat' Banıl İni tiken, and to j urlile hım, bet t' e l tipe lie had eapcnenccd foı fcveial пц s, Inv¬ ing not bc n in bul, but pafful il em fola) m the damp, cheerlcis, and deci d aput- tncnts o r Bımlle Calile, t velli ι with the violence of his fetlii gs, wlnen ι unteti htm •limoli to dcpur when he found all his ellons
ulita tumin lied n thi poi ìtiucnt, 1 Il¬ diiül Inni lo nu and Ii gud tint he hid not ftutlgdl to e.eelite Inselligli. Mie mift rol tht inn, p li.ivng luv e IlUllti) liitti dl Ocelli!, ¡ iluilel luu t > tl Ιιι h s ι it iitnii, ι id ti ta' Η ν 1 tu' le', ttll li he eli bel nor inu I 11 Ueli te, el'l lill, Ull l lelli ) , till J lOlllltl I mue i 1 i im t iul te tl ll ll appre- Ί 'uf l 'ıs ¡ien t ihte lie Huilei lu Ul ll e t ) i t 1 p , it I t g ее 1 1 1 а t 1 ıs adr ce. Ile lud b- ι in bed but a fhort t me, ι be ι 1 e mi lei/ d t uh α toM Ihitering. I e ci ι ι,ι f eu ubili' t lue r Ikih, d uu ι uno i t ι lumi , wuit, thu nut ol bic t , d eni α α out Κ η u , ) in mı, ι n r í tU 1 ICC t t, dll i, ее lie I) b Ull. eel tJ 1 - III lU 1 1 Г 'l til l' en tl tf lis ι ml tuni t ι щ' lui ho milt ), ind llie ui^ л j л u ι' ι ot υ ι hi ι
lum to U in t li ef com ile een ι Soie w KS n ι eh I eie Ii Udih v li li t me ill' It) ι I le 1 1 ι to
ive , he it ht л il le', (hou Ί ν ei 1 1 lil tU e e tl ll he 1 ld ıs On Us ιι vil u Odi in , Hole!, U f und fevei 1 lelte s fiem 1 f tl ci, as le 1 ul uven u eı eu I e le t I m 'm, ni t tx| tlmg 1 e ihould b blei t i) lon 0 , ť it ι cv 11 oud lu 1 c[ t un il 1 ıs ietti n OllC Ol tleli he lelOelVCe, bj tilt pofi¬ in It le lul oui) u ivei tint morning, tillo he t Uh tupi U m (ult oj ened, wl ich с m ι meei lus leus ılı tins ( ilci was illi ı ıoı u ot ll e lite ol Maıy J ne, and it un Ι ο ν wiccejied lic it telelleni ¿ him oie .ııjunced mio
hk
,ιι e ''qu int 1 ul n ude I un ι leltei filice tl it......... ..... hu lell on the point oi tl ι eil I) λ\ Jes
Ι leni),
Henri dunng lu couinement, lud ικ- qi ill , ι 1 ι lus t'iti) th would pamit, ι niten tt) Ii s lil er, u d conti ined togne I i n 1 1 ps thit he llioul i tet rea ι ei tlie <■ b rv J , but η ta шее nenn n d h л ι n lil cl , t cl ki о g h v r at I v Iholle mci ite lu ι ι t) ud lut cl , Се ί Ι ) n a ( π u the ι ie 1 e it s mieli ll l llhed, ly the I t elle e iti le I 1 l penite , t ) U U 1 il it t 1 ile Itttcls he In ! ι tei teate Ι ΙΌ ν e , οι ivadip .hol t lue ι I 1 1 , v d d ι , th mt \ ι , 1 i un u, ť, I i ui íl tn ι e lene ν ι о. ih t h Ihıl ıe tte ι I oı Β ι Juon, ti winch ,1 ее 1 ld tiiettcd h , letters, Ilı ıı Jı h ııeu it ibi ıs fiı'l u ntıoııor ntjınıp to to ı ııı O tbe, l ut t inch u teııtıo i he the 0 1 c n ut hue b e ι lndii-td to loreg i, 1 1 c île j ι ce of th abfeile oí hi j t i ıh ie ι ι hul not t t iv ι Util ıdıt t t le woud ι iove u n 1 ne) İn ι oı ι lai ! ıı ι ıı- 1 ) '.il mı
li liti
Alititi Miti ιρι ι I lui uf ľ u h il le il ll i'e 1 N ι il 11 IH S I Че 1 11 I. ' 111 S Ihı ,1 Ί İt intit -ıı' ul ι 1 il ι ι ι 1С ν Ί Si R ι μη ι, η I v ι 1 1 v, t w' ıh ,1 te 1 v Oil vv I U tlel tl d, tl i' ,1 let ill 1 o loi i, '' íl i I 1 ι ι 1 lille.' li < ι ' ιι Uil n, V 1 11 il l 1 t dl etil 1 i.Oll lll'cl- t u n tlie jotu ľ ivi le С illi, it h ι ile i 'u I lui, lie id vi i ť, but i uní it ť le.ted, еч- cc|t b aio 1 v mu, ν Ι , ν m lu hu - l d, ν in. ι he i ι ι t, v ul t t) uke (o nu eh il il ti Ille ,' ıc ο Ιι ea Su Ι! ι m ud 1 s lu, w lu ilut luie о Inj I с tobe ol u с'.
IIliuj \\аь Cillait) 0 iiL\.d lo ii id tint
thit ht h d 1 en loi Ги h α leim-th of tuno coi (ined Ull Ile«, ei и nun lv- ties, and lits hcher wul 11 α 1', mı es of lhe l f t witluut his knowing it he in n t'liuly wmte α itti r to luu, и vvhic ι 1 ι fount I hım of cier) thing tint hail luppuied fince they laft parted, alfnred h m that he w s then quite recovered fron lis illnefs, and th t Iı flîoud coıcınuc in I о ition bue to ци the hv in ( ic i 0 unft .invile, to oil t. luu о с iitef hov/ h 1 td ι ılı olul of I j Ui , when lie V Jtllei JOU lut at Кол iac Abb y Ilen/, 1 i i i" f tis letter, an ! tiken f ıc uh Ih ne it, Ile tl e 'utd t) l' I ııv il h и , ti lun il li ι ι li ! been in tow ι li c U law ni ι 1 ι ι I 1 e mt t 1 1 u t \, w h \ ti ι t ¡ ι ' io 1 e ι ĺ li, at o t n ι t ι у iti ι ι ir ť if h 1 1 1 с Ί I tl re he ι 1 nn to ill 1 I I I it i I r It, ч ' li 1 Vis t 13 n ed
ríloiníhcdat ttliaí lit hcaid mmcdialtl) toie- ji't, tl in l'li 0 nrv uluiţi to hım 1 is hiving bt leld hu u sı S Hiibj's dooi, (for he it ι ıs t! t l < ι .. ι 1 h ι turui,,, lin had n lineili lunu 1'. rui.), -il U u in ft he I u v i. r nti, Lut be ui d lu to bt one ef thou cot j nnt ft. iltb whom ivety 1 crfon might ¡i cfune to add cfs without the tluigei tf ei min», iiom lee ng het alo.e mel u p olute 1 in lie 1' eets at inch ai nour líc ti η ι. e mon el ltr ahım ui hilft quint ill-lit , ι d ıuttuıh- ľuidinghe hid pif. d bei, tint flu lud tcıpd lum, nor coud he tu, w nieli ι λΙ 11 -hi Ι tıktı Helin, α liit'c receler t' fjom lus ii Γ¬ Ι.) u-, t oul I kırçıl) ci lu what he hcud out li oılııı te, etli ig ιι! at he lud iu 1, -anel pulu np πι li pol iti ι ııanıur, Hut in coiltl not i ue b ι tunc ken, he no Ό ip ebubted lun, «lun, lull will nth ,0), ud (ел 1 ft llu Ino t 1 l t uu then let ,,ιι L | tuiLd t. ti) ill ť tinuu wl eh
vvhieh Plag ii¡ tl oiijit there was а piom¬ bi it) of her having pioceedc 1, and at hit, fippirted b) the Pcicc ofiieers, more delti thtn a ıvt, but a few piecs from M^s Ship- lcj s t i tj "och lel h r Marj- 1 tne at t e fime tun , a the lights the oltucrs held made funounding objects vifible, beiieltl Henry,—he ruflied towuds lier, lhe íhiickcd, and f И híclcf, into lus aims. 1 ie nen t mit wre appichenlive o'* a « IS tlel nee, lllllll OU ot ille 11, W İU İvil V Hen , ani [tice vi l D ile ululilo l to vv ich Mu, laic wis uluci ρ ν 1 u tn the otltrs tO ГеСО leiuift ll 1 t J Mi Ь nplc) s To Mi« S i¡ lej s ıı is Ihc agam con¬ ienti, „ ек u „, f iun i (1 IC J t f t it gi id wo ι i w u h d il rceci 1) p l I, an 1 l j the oi e is that te wn ait lil been ι m I to ap uheld 1er D) ι M 1\ „u t, ne nl t ne ce of lus fou 1 u ι g ι 4 been
been muTng fome months, and Ilut the тц the lad} had given to the coichmin, when unible lo paj Ins dem md, he woultl mdc oill lus loi had upon his ftngei when 1 1 he f ι v lu n. " Mı } iane flipet? ed of Înving eom- n nted t multici ι" esci umed Hem) , "| ıc- poPcrous ' Mv ι oor gi Ι, ν hen wi 1 hei ppi- Ico'itionstc ι m titl —ΙΌ v lortunite it v -s I ict hu '—I ' unn i mui, eould not il e trp í¡_ tot lici aagclle COJIlte lu ice, ivncic, bv tic hand ι i l'iovidence, 11 io ence ıs lo leub'j depicted, co ivince ) ııı of yom cri ir, convince jou hov e.ıoııeous wue )tuı ¡uli icioiis'" t " I low en ic the u ig m h t роП.Гю- >" Слс 1 mud one of the oihcus " Λ í ei nie that, and 1 Hull be Ι ιι.ΛιιιΙ die is Ρ lideis " " No doubl,' fud lit iij, « but lhe v i v e'l lecount ioi it." i i i.o« redoubled lus ititiition tow u 1 hel,
htr ttl ıı'ı, n tOllj t Ull Willi "í S llll- 1 ) „, t mt'I iiv.it 1 lupt un - m 1 ι Distillai iq ıı l'uni, aul ,ιιιι fiP .. L ι ito 1 ο ir 1 S lil tl u I, oit unuttu Ι ι PılUl, СП ll 1 Iti Ili ET ini 1 titntly (timp ılıt!, tth h lus pulenti ţ_ r Uly ute¬ lu itti!, uluitul to ıhı nn , tuen lhe rt Ut 1 to t'unì η ι utili the mannti in tl i'i il ι h id oU uncii n Ί .i-v 11 u , ' ıc 1 as tl ıj hf ud to the Ι ι ' lit, α tl ι I rn cl tht ι but wis t nn 1 1 r d of tht tilth it tl t lie 1 il ttt ι I '\ n n Ih li 1 fu, ud, oli¬ ti ılıt ι, itli ι hin iılf to Muin, tolti lini, th ι olt ıı'ıfl liding tl су tuli lo t ι 1 ι ι li d ot 1 ti bui ", innocent, th / null «il n lu ıs th u piioin, lut ti id t t n itt p, heiluin Ilı iuti Li n ult Ι ι N t- n', Ij b) 1ns mt uu h ι lUitj и ij ĺ Li luupouuid. lo tl ь nuil, t lini) to 1 1 ititi, z ι j li u 'uuy-
ln kiic)-coath was liifliitly с 11 d, n wl uh he, ulli Mu) lue ai tl 11 ι of tl e olmas, t\tr Ihoni) Utu to iicpd lo li. Nutans l'I gnr) (vt ιι td iccni] mj - ug than, judging he eou d be о on., ι i lvieeillt, aid tl t M i) Juie with Heniy, w ts iumcıcntiy [ ι iteetcel To infoin the leid ı 1 1 th cuifc oi Ml!) J lie's l[ pre leilhun, as bel rc tl - leni d, we h \e o ıh lo obl te that th. cu и inn, s (t n ıs Ilıt hil ute ı h n • 1» i nf, tool it lo α ι ııı bul ci, d tei- roi t ι tt ftt onl) I ь Iı t, tio (lııllı ,» rd íiej le, upon it, ait! ıı cife tht pt I m ii n whom hc 1 at' it Ihotltl dan nil it oí lum " αι ι, to gi t her tic duplic te, ıs th n teleli ot tl e ι kein 1 e coneaied fiit 1 id jn ш doj.blt.il light to d lt ur b c Thnptnbio ι to wl on he took it, 1 id f ld tin n g to îi Np nt, ibout tt о ye lb Le'o e, loi thutj int gun t ι , lie ki t lt w uta im uh Uti), md judging I
b) tie tr lı İt wo ild have tiken on lt, tl it lit cut nit hınıllH 1" u, had lu n t it unititi ι od), ι tl it icio Μι Nugiiit, who con ir ι td 1 ıs lulp u n , ıslım pi q cr ne biniti in io inini tlıe pl'un irom w hım hi 1 ulitami! U Tın ct adım in, nuli the oi'iicis и ho tuie ftlt in quill tt Min Ime, gii ıc l f u t of lier as Iht ballund iioni Mis. S ι ib) ' s doi», ml followtd lur to Mu S' q к) s, tiny t u'cd tl cre fm ( me time, e\pc tin il 1 ti> ci me out agi n, but hi ılın-, flit ılı ! 11 jt, they mit al, аз bcfoit rt Utd.
CITAIV
CIAF MH.
'lie kfíjipi/ Mutin« On tl cu arriv I at Mı Nugr-nt's, they im prel rtly coi iiictcd int) the piiloin, w hci t, with two o hci gtıılleiıı η, Mı. Nugent w s ft Ucd, who uofe as th ) cn¬ tcied, nd Mr Nunci t t'ı covcied utat lur- |ii'e when ont ot the oluceis infoi m tl hui tint Mı ) Jmcvvı the pcrfoı ı_,ıı ift ıvho ı the v in mt İn 1 d tu ıllıı d. I Itıuy ltd iui to а than, when, at hb ltqutlt, Ihc uc j itulated v 1 lt Ind otcuncd to htr at Buvil't С (lit, b, v Inch the nur hid runt into lier poiieilioii. Mr.
Mr Nut-ent 'ılleııcd ittenliVei) until (he h iti concluded ilei n ìraliui, Wien letv- pitiled lus reute "t tht VeVitioa thu, by lis încins ľie had bten luljeet to, and thoiuh ¡ueail) ignited, le t je nul — " liniile, tic ininim и ltunk, 1 .111 .ıfraıei, Iıı niirlcicti my ¡001 bo) , ami ľiovidciiCe, iu doubt, uit' led you the influi ııtnt t) bung lins duk ifin to li^lit, tint the си!) nt mi) be biought to ju^ci' — i ıhımla , linguuiaiv moniter' —· Uh ra j ¡ooi bo) <" One of the cnt'emcn who was with Mr. N11 >ent when Mu) fine and Henrv ir- nved, now enqi ned il the perlon -Minded to wis the Ion of Sir tic pmui Buvil't, Of Sellici stillile' Пешу ani cu 1 hi ч u t e afin nunc. He feemed mo с g îetctl thm lurpiil I ^t thiuiileriiiation, tl en \cluued —"1 kiéi lus biolhei well, licuici ut Binili-, mil hive et en 111 ue cnepjuic , but e iul nt. cr
never Jearn the fate of tint good jjjig man, he w ıs ni) moll intimite í ien ! ' " I believe I can intorni )ou, ' fud Henr) , " he was lod in Ins [ aiiage to the Wed Indies, about twent) jeais ago " " Ь ι man) imagirt, ' hc reph-et, " b it I know to the contrar) It was h s in- tendon to emb rk witli his ic a imcnt in the Wed Indies, who, about t e tim" jo ι mentioned, weit all loft n tl cu pda^-, but his wife, the daughter of a Mis. Smith, whom he ma ned but a fe v months befoie, was İLüdcnly taken ı'l, and bei g it the fame Ume fır advanced n I er pre_,mtii), it induced Inn to put witn his co nnníľion, as Ihe vv is b) no n e ms in a fituation, but at tl e с типе basirti of her life, to make fuch a vo ag I lis fuller wis lo imaged, in con'tqueue C jf lus m rrjin^ α woman ι iti no f л tunc, that he never could bc pici tiled upoi lo fee hm illeiwarc's Pooi I' m' , feiilul that 1ιι·> continuance in f ijtnl night ι - tcii r e him llul IM t, and lot ill ; prete t а гееоп-
aracii cil ti a, to eo ice il it fiom his knoii- Ic 1 t alitin titl iim of Romi \ ¡Su- ι er lus biotllel, who 11 he coni elered as lus be'li ien !,iior ι ) о' his iel tite , ever knew lut tint h. Huit J m the lune unliippy lite t» tie rey nmt to winch le f ııııııı y lıtion D etl İniler lat lu 1 if ei tins, tho.. 0 'i 1 recintai a lutti, m which lit u. muntoti 111c w tli il ι ρ ime u us t f uhu I hnt now rti itt I j ill ıs I \ as on tl с noint ot nakmg α ι ^ to tiie Γ ll Indies, and which I ¡ 1 tic but ι fen ho 1 s ere 1 quittée! L gl ni! ' H nr) t rte с! to h eiiui tuh won 1 r tid m ¿en tnt ï ly [ me tv u ionuciottrc met' lu lor tht tn e y al fiance oí '11 î\p , wlo ниц tie bel, 11 1 01 leti th leiv nt tei t iie liei а ¡ths o u tei, lie w iu 1 ' hne i n ite I. Henr), Oil ¡ ree vi t ' ti 1 Itle levite', a t înceţi ti ti e genti 1 ian li u li 1 t ее ι ί ned liieľ ι ııı ttl m .ι ι, αϊ teliin 1 - " ι oir
—" Υ iur mm , l pıeleme, S r, ľs St ım 1 - forel ' " Stanipfottl," lie rtphetl, " ıs my name ' " Meien il Piovi lenco'" tremuloufly cj-cııl iteti Muy-fiiic, " then tuil tit li ildene d wieteh, the aullıoı el our 1 liv¬ ings, be my uncli'" The oilier gentleman, v 'о fottìi it I was the nngidrite ' at Ind ¡Hue 1 the w u- lant to ippichend Mu) |ni, fmdl ig the tonvcilation giovv Cvlremel. m erellm , d hred the Peace officers to wul lav, tell ng them he was perfe t y fatt ded with ivi at ť ev h d done, and ihn it [lift t he lud no fuithti occifion foi '.icni Ui ) mimed ately ictncd , wl cr l f ¡u> adviled Maj Tine foi a di it tun to vuthchiw into the ne\t loom, 't n 3 v e he vv t tl mt to m ike km w n to Mı ui - f 1 mı ht too much afl et liei Mı. iM 0 nt ^ in i lin j tlie b 11, and e' Iıı d Г Ho.
.Mis Pot/el, ¡i s liouiiUc, cr, mt¿!it bt i it to hun, by ιν n am Ma ) Jıne vv s led i to the idjoininj pi c neat, i I le iry ^ive ΛΙι S unpfoid i full du I ot tvei/ tl u j ItiJtl t to ivin, Jıne, ι l I eet 1 t vvhıt he h d lcirn tl by his ι ι u s 1 tteio, u- ipcâıng his ulu, vvıtı Noithcote, to bir li njamın Bııvıle, aid of tlıeı Itbcquent journey mio \ , vnele, wi h bu b-ij - min, tU) i 1 i ıı ned. Smol wis affected tv n to tens as he h ι ' ol 1 n.e uc ie j cil o f his bit il autl his nu b'e c u í ut Геог N.. "it vv t o i t li t' iliellctl, as lis tl л .>' ts revelled to l ıs t π, to t ι) much а tentimi to then dleourfe, vide Mr. J ur'e , tne muf» fc aie, w s ti m ii\_J co his le t ιν uh Ί ir oı id (urării ,— h s toun- tt linee ίι ilhttl w th turell indign tion а n le tie d ¡br el' ıvıt о, l' ш οι of the ıı uni ij, i vil i v to el i i t tllioiuh e civ ie η , 1 cl ie t tl M iht de l'i ef
of Nugent ivas not the on'y niuidtr he had to anfvvei for. Siampford's voyage to the Tilt I dies hid been occafioned bj a neu rehti n of his luvirg died thcıe, ind leqtmthcl to lum tiie thief pait of what he hul potutici!, which tuis fomctliingconfideiable, and tvhich cncumltanccs rendcied it neccil ir) he fliould be iheu m peifon to itccive, wlice luvinct amuei, le foon lett'ed niitcsigreibl) to his wiflies, md fintling he could mere ile lus fortune muth belter wheie he was, than he cculd hope 01 expect to do in bnglaid, continued there foi be. ei than fifteen ¡cais, when, with tic neh earnings of his indulti j', le returned to his native land, and almoft the fiift perfon ' - waned upon was the biother of his tltctued Iren 4 , Licutenmt Bai ville, to ıı ikt tujui es lefpeclughim, whe n lint hon 11 j-iıl'c nau, vith the utmoft ¡ι « fimi, "cqi miel lui of his having penille l m lus ¡ ill ige to tlıe Weit indies. He dt 1 not u idceciv c h u , aid
and learning aľo that his father, who vv as in the fime en οι, had never been recon¬ ciled ti him, lit ve it r d 1 t to undective hım cititi Of li | ıtuul a h» nov m- forııtd H ııv, md nut n itvvitliílmdmg lic Ind tu 1 ever) tf j t lj get inttiligen e of his ii lend, he could lever Itain inj thing of him, and until the picfeit moment, was tota ly ig íorint о «hat had 1 chilen hım. Нешу loon a f tei etpreifed " Willi to b gin h o j imn 5 to Roi L dal Abliev, if .Mui 'an shtuthand fpnits would admit of it, eai ) on tht following maimig, when Stamptoid, «ho now fet e4tiemtlj anui is to mike every thing he kicv lefpoeting L iiutenmf Barville known to his fatliu, íe- queflcd pcimiilion to accîiıjany them, vv'ıı h v ai unii [Icafuie gri iteit by Heniy, until wh th tint Mi Nuocili be ,'cd th у woult connu v 11 lun illisini ıl»ı hkewilc 1 lei ij gi Ue ully ictcj ie 1 Si 111 p- f ud, h vevel, p > iLiy deel ie I u, in lu ait ι dep 1 t 1, lu t t lm , lien ile ι! lee
fct Inni cai ly oa tlic iu xl div, an 1 li r ııV lo it tind him into W ! s t 1 e vır it w ıs (.ornement foi hırı to begin llu jiuinej Μη Jne now made hei appcara се, when Mr Lumley took his leave, promil- lng to iduin again on tl e following da,, ivlirn he would take eiery necefiar) flip for the ij piehenlion of Buttile Inumitele Hen )'sene' not s toeoı- folc Mr tXugclU, mel t t eb I s nouţ; ts fron tlıe hori tel c tťílrop! с oı v.1 ich t u fiem d fxid Mai) Juu, tl ouji iii ty was befit ehi, fiuideílL fnug 1 d to οι h her retint cal i lites fiom h r mini, ti learn lint В iville, a muniti с , ua-, h ι uncle, Ilı eked hu too mucii, ail e uı e 1 finii uiq li .(nt ien nions ni I u Lolo n ıs nere not cud) to be oiercome Minti mc iti ined tobe lu ι ι li ι, i'* flu w ie well enon h, to f t t Ί e ι' 1 ciulii],, da) fu \\ ılı , to ¡ ι li ь ' t r
loth·. Mm T netle ıhıl') af ile!, ail
b , ., .p ι / tl ι f Μι Ν igt nt s , quill, t! nl t ill t en liny teu I стигне wi hin , Ih 1 η l I 1 lhe tui lo h r inom b) M sloe Ι be,,,) t d Mr. Nm t ioli lill .muí Ι , nI tn the litiu ι- pul ι 1 I) lit Ι ι h id mli fi d 1[ ints m Il i 0 i til il; Lil ι ' Ι mul il с m d ι it ι > 1 'ul 1 i le lo
? I ri Ι η ι '1 iiaiixiiib onte moie to ci b ehi ch'i il ICIlefl 1 that ıs Ih¬ tı t t' lhe') tu nui nu I ľn ing Ulli 11 , I 1 li 1 L ll ti u ir l II un η Iıh , Ilı 1 1 lue 11) ilei ι ι uth until tib) I ni »idi, tut tht ι j ui- 1 ι j lill pl t lite etl 11 t Pe I Ι 1Π I 11 Iteti a η Olile ten ll Ollit. If 1 ι ι 1 1 jtd it tlic iltvi lioi he beheld n' 1, til 1 1 01 Kugelt, w' ole j ilhl tni 1 ι t nit 1 inu ti luw p. ile d
1 ilid tlıe π İt in "iı ıııllı nd unav uling и ι t, u n inil ttd lui on de impune nie 1 oi liu 1 calili Mı Sili ı fil lion artet | unit! them, il ι li in ι ul hım t f h int nam oi . ι f ι tl h ıs lom as ρ nb ι i] i 1 i il It i ıs ι ılı , t I) to n j i i ι , 1 1 ι и j oliti, t\ uh w ıs il ) ic ', t .с I ι·· ein agi, with | li- her j I i tl c ii l Ilı e, η ı t ht eoııııy tl - , i u n ι ι ι lodious ml [ici Iı t liai ι ,J r ι , wl eh Heitj ιι ι aitili ılı n N e .t u ııı tl öteler bli ι t > еле ! ı hım ?ı İt « t ı tl tl, и ılıout in 1 ııı t .ıı time to he ťo ı, tito iti,,, ,it ' 1 π, ι d ι tilit η s i , iei« ilt. tier r ts ef Inri —t 1 et t e b ah i ıı 1 ι ιι dil- toi U ue hol ,ıı v I ı . I no ılıt) lın uı i; Itu puh r. d, ıııd ıpn tlıuı jounuy.
They
The reicleelNevvbui) th fud tliv, w! ere (lie) ι ι it I ť t iiiHit, mil 01 the lucceed- ii r evinin r ci tiled I. t 'il, cntınued tlıeı e utul ile ι \t noni u, vvleı ťl y ıı ileti ι ie ť ew '' id g nil ibout m 1 thy umul -ι the ι ι Heni) h 1 1 ft b it ι tw di s b loe, dilui tei miles fiom Birville (1 , an I ut n o t t i n h u i hom Ко 1 e'l e Mibe V Heie Hen vw te a Uw 1 n s to his filhei, to pc, aie Ι ι η fi ılın ru ı tion, tl u i luv n H t n ι iu pri ι h m too much b) l' n u e\[ cel u j cai i lee i Ins one ol lhe I ivi t lei f rv ι 1 wuh, vhle the) 1 e tlee lot) İte lil At length the c·. i -rt da, ped -t the <\l bev R dni'l a ti Notti cote wctc it the d ioi to lee ive them Ratinili, over¬ come with pv 1 l emiti ıs ıs Mir) |ane ditandu' Ion the cinngc, caught htr in his aim —" O i n ) cl ild ' ni) child ' ' he сллЛшпс 1, " nive 1 a 0 un found you, and at
it α timt fount , ul ľ 1 Πι ill not de ill 1 Ite, H t L ι ll 1 will not dd Ulli t ) ill ,1 I I I itll ill.. HOW )Oll 111 o le IHO t iu olul t J i! e' ' Mut Jue, i o f te us coud io lui ι bc ebi i u 1 Utul η 1-" Oıni) Il 1 il fU el 1 Ml 1' UMCtele 1 Ile- li ll ι' ! w Πι 11 I q t \ ui o di Ib 1 liiViil ι blu, pi . II uu ti ub tb .İle ili ilet 11 tl e bil b ť Ib jutets 1,11 t-
Non'tete noi e! imul h-i ite t, ι, ι dilli,' ιι Nt th ot , tl ι - u iu) 1 ι , ι tb lu , 11 η j ici n, ι t fii ud idillt n il el ι ııh lilit Не, e 1- Joı j a 1 ut I 0 u f tıı , α leu li¬ temu rd e e she u h ι 1 luí ι tum, uh Ιι ιι ι Ιιι,ΐ) e icnii ti t n Ini flu 'in 1 Ί ι gii dl thu, b cune loo apatel lo ujil). be lock lur hud, б
huid, and lul i er in R tiiii'l u tl ıı terim vv ıs eng 0 ed wuh 1 leint. " M) deir 1)0)," e edanı cd the de tio ute old nun, " wlut n i tj 1 ive i nit cndıiictl on )Our account' but l .n hip, у not," he icjollitel, is he leélni 1 Ins Kıl tv r ıı, lliotildei, ι 1 vv ι, , «ť ΐ" Λ О ) 1 I am ht] pv, lm mv cl i't' en ι e ι 0 ι leľoied lo nit ' " Miy jou bn >, vei long con u 11 o'' lepJltd Неин, " nuv ПО t u l III} CilJ- eV ι agii ι coi ! p ie to пае j iu ot 1 e.- Vlile 1 ' I'eniv now u t otu eel M St nıpılıd, vlio, uni lil 'I t Pe iei ι 11), lud b n ılın Ί Ulli Otitei! R Tl Ulli íl lieti İS ne İle I f the iun , but loi bille И (hit t. İle t) ulv 'li) quelli ins, η I th..' 1 t d Hi). Jllell' \ iril CO.. 1 tl tl Ole
ι OL II
lieaícnbointiuiqiulhtphautceliťeirmmig th m, Mai) Ime related ciei) tini g ılı it lud hipptned to nu h cc hei emel lepi ntion Honor, derdi ition, (uıpıılı, ud n iltern Kıl) pofiiľfid hu auditois, but ι tn St impi r I cleared tlıe nn ftct), which poıtd Muí filíelo bc the child of [hat tin hta Noithcote lud fo long lime iteti, woiih He mule ¡uite to tl lei tl e his emo¬ li u s hc tivi bl tl, gib с I for brulli ìe- i[ union« sinpcdcd, Mar) fiicehtjpcd on hu kn es, md lei/ed Ins 1 anıl, ulucii Ihc bulled with 1 a tens ' It nuit bc If beatili funti) arti- tnluulaslc raifed hu up, ' the aliti¬ noli 1 have cvu kit foi tiue kids me not to dojbt it' I Ime th t withu which tells mc I im th) uandfulicr' Muft thou meet α h ippici lot thm thy moehc. s' for though good nul tu ılık, )ct could lhe not cicaj с the non fang ol miler)." Iïenrj, on Northcote and M iry J inc becoming
becoming morc cjmpoied, cnquiie 1 tor Sn Jïcr ja t ш Bar\ílk, whom hc had not y^c icLn, and wti ítiíormtd by his father that he \\\ь ίο extremely ill, thit hc had not quittul his ted tor nun) ch)s, tint hc had betn infenfible One tuie, aid fur tin. hit tudvc houli, thu lad c\¡ cded tint tury m ment \\o\i\d bt his ltft— cc Hiadiu^'i ter, he continued, ' and Mis Mo\bia\, with the, ph)iium, ul nov wit ıhım, ai ï i ihort umt tie \ou arrived, 1 cnqu re . ¡how lie «лчь, atid was an in ci ed that they beht\td l с was d) ing Heaven, in com I iflion, will not p rmıt him to hear of th •UioCities ot Im fon, but will imtch hun to the ıcahıs of bhls, to y\e him that reward hib cxcmnlary life hab jııcrıtecî
У 1
(HIP
( 1 1Л1'. \I\ . ΙΊι lin, nil, um' Ihı Sın r ÎVUlO I \^ ' , who hill iievei Iteli Sl Jieiljinilll I'll ville, bitted hu .elt Willi ıh. lio¡ t tint lie wa not lo mu 1 ь md ι tl e [hvfieim ìmiginid, — lhe lilt txtitmtlv anuous fot Ins litovti), inti b) hun tu bt .ckiioivlidged ıs lus gi melebihi tlit.tloitit i doiblul ihc Inoculile íceuvul, when, ıs (lie deicendcd the II ins on the following moi mug, (lie vv is iiifoiiued b) Mis Mow- b i) thu Sn Bui) mun hid bitithel \\\ъ lall. Mis. Blinde wis with Inn when he expued,
pirtti, aid thou·'1 foi fornt tne hi-. tih hi 1 b tn an event hutlv n be e\- ted, yet, when 1 took pi ice, α I Pi. '1 1 beilandalnoftheronlv fin d like 1 1 her, Pit bet me mail) dill ickc! 'to Mowbrav in I the phjlitian, who were ľ'Lnt, hinned htr irom tnt nu'incholy irtnicnt into her own. wh n- for α confi- ib'e time (ht rtmui td 111 enfibl to everv τ thu wi* >\Tm- 1 ou id 1er, v lill ! 1 Ultiel rui tl 11 I "i "II Г 1 till fli I ! > U el HU 1 li I I llie 1 Л 1 1 tli moie ρ ι- v r um tv "с I ıı 1 ' er to b„ , qt e , I 1 1 i t' 'dr ıs (ike 11)1 thus nťin .1 ci hei th by )ielthn;to the nui „d on' itv f woe. Her wo U uitucei 111 'ir ei 1, the m ntion of liti ul ι n i t,İleti Ι ι Pitt ig finits, milhe и e tobe ο ι lefi η d.
İt vv s Ra İn h intentivi! oi the picce '
ud Ilcnr), to feek the refidence of Mrs. Mclttorih, and leluin iicr his thanks for her foniei kindnefs towaids Maiy-Jane, but this was now entirely fet afide penfive melancholy took pofieffion of each peifon in the "abbey, and they agreed to pafs the time by themfelves until the laft rites hid been adminiftered to their deceafed fnend. On the feienth chi from Sir Benianun's dcatn, the ncccflary απ ingcments hivin¿ 1 een made foi his lemo il into Somerfct- ilnt, where le it is to be interred, Mrs Birville, 11. ¡j [ -ν, В dn ill, and Henr), 11 one coach, Noithc tt, Stampford, a d Mrs Мол brij, in the oth r, fol 1 wed tne Jiearie, until πι lut inne *licj irnved at tht lite lifideiceol tie diiealeil, and on t e iucceetliug diy his .eniams were confignid to the (1 nt g ам, resetted md lamented b) all who hid known him The next day the will was read The ι .0 t ol wl it Sn Btijan.in hid to bequeath tlid
οι j not exceed fue thoufmd pounds, oıc* thoufand oí which he left equ illy to İl divi kd among tl ok t uthfuì domeílics who had giown grey m his fetvice, and the re¬ maining four equally among Mrs. Barville's children, which Mrs Ban ilk, however, wai to enjoy until they became of age The title, with an eftate of .about three thoufand pounds a-)car, defcended to his fon, m wh T ch his rtTiilu cc in bomerfetfhirt. wab includ til A few days after the interment of Str BenjTnin, Henry receded a letter from Mr Nugent) to whom he had pievioufly written, to inform him of Sir Benjamin'* deatn, and of his removal from Rook dale Abbey in confequuice This letter from Mr Nugent acqiainted him that, though they h id nc t betn ible аь yet to detect В ir ulk, muy Str 1 raí сь, thi. y h d apprthu ded lui ferv u t and tccomphte, Rouland, who, O fut his o tia lik, hal turned evidence к 4 agiiníl
n- -ni Λ 'ıs nn'iei.a d tlu ul etl ledi dne a'iocitics, b) hin comıııiLİcd, as human i ture mı fl Pıutıder to litar ıtpcattd. It со с utled nuh n tuneli delne to fee Heni) m town, wl en hc flioti'd know moie of the iflii, by which time he Hulled the fiend who lud as jet eluded their vigilance, would be in the hi ids ot ji ilice. II ni) the ie ti n in; let о it foi Lon¬ don, in mt I it Mi Imi = c u stile .mie e eni t , it lie rc ll 'tun t! lhe I lowing r - tuĽ s, t he. Ilt cone i of ľ ui nl tn Ned "u b i, n ι .ıı iv lo nwi ' î'tı 1 u ' h b „ıı "w oi i li u t t 'el e Ι ι 1 ι, unii . πι , u. I Ol dit lein t e e tien 1 el Ч = ote .1 ille ρκ, -nitivs oı lis ) t 0 i i'lt , It, It ae.ii h n .n In ι e ¡u ut , i ť lel ll .el' О lie, 1 . I 1 1 1 , ll I '. tl el, í. II, li he Ut 1 . ο ι , u I l.b e tn 11 le η ut ι ι 1 ь « .ι. ι
tor'ip e f iťfil to 'n in (hint, lie it 1 e' e le io vili tal l 1 thit R wind woultl n v r ' tti iv li n, ť at he í I n pri-t '-1 m n 1 1 ne itu unťut kmt v tho u h vi ii .toti u lus aelviee a I ; u. ,f ,, 1 ire " '. run 1 ι itt n ie η ilel to lus ι -nit ι pun lul Ί hil i I iot 1 e ol' ι ! 11 1 Iď", uli l Wil) nivoit V OllM, ι 1 а i 'u· duete, cipi lus title ι ld t ν ιι ιι ¡ nt 11 hiv ρ« eı v, bu i li ι, , ( 11 I ' h It, ill il e 111 iu 0 t e 1 ι I, el ι etl I it ibu h) Si I 1 nil 111 'l it II Vile extend P I la 1 1 ι ll ' 'i ι "ii ν ice > w- J tu tt 1 1 1 till hım ıh t lie tl i nt h I 1 to nI ıı nuv, vhieli w , Ι ι ι ι ' , t ) 11 1 ' 1 11 Ι 1 hla ( 11 [. cf tem, ılı t ¡ιι η e 1 wh Ii iu ibe li t n r\ , , ее ц 1 Ι „ ,, Innled
I i
pil ılıt , I ill e, V eh Iitti ' - Ле, lv U 1 1 I 1 ll Ulv lit t 1 1 le 11 lut Κνιι teut , nI el u ι
it was not in tlic power of their eflorts to depute lum " This unprincipled ads ice pleifeil inni too well, but the uni npcicha' Ic conduct of his brother foi (one tuie ien lucei ctcry contrivance to ni)u e huu ibom e unni his unfo lun ite m u inge, whe ι lis IucccIj m tieten nig both his tuha and bother, 50u, Mr Radmill, ate ihc uh -ρ,ιη /cd tf therefore 1 ib ill only obici te that it . a¿ with infinite j It lure Bannie heml lat the Hup, 111 which ins biothu filled foi the \\cll Indies was loft at ft 1, ine! tint till on I oard had pcrilhcti. It was 1 ov. that he deemed himfclt íceme fro 11 ever having his tieacheiy n this rtlpcct dif- toveied, and of inheriting bereifter lus lathci s title and property, ior neither lnm¬ lelf nor Rowland, to this da), know aught to the contiar) but that the eitler Birvill·*, as was rei oiled, found . ι watery grave ' Mr Nnoent next enumcr ted а nui ibér of their atrocities,—the villany he b d eiileľtour ed a
MARV JANE. 2O3 cndnvoured to pncìdc on thediughtcr ot Mr Knghtlcy, lus muri ige, uidfub.cqueit btlnnour to Mrs Birville, the ilduriun of Mrs Stltvoilh, together with α long litt of tf ceteras wl itli were co nmttcul ere Mis Meivvoith md her daughter weie invited to (helter tliemlelves, from the fill oi α heavy lhovver of uni, in Birville Calle, which we fli ill now pafs over, and mention the par- t ct lats of mat afl u, is aeknovvled 0 ed by Roviniti " Buvillt, ftitick ivilh the beaut) an I eltűnt aecomj lillimenls," emtinued Mi. Nugeit, " ol Mı ildi Mclwoitl, t , vvhon mj ion was betrothed, deter nincd, if podi- ble, to induce her to fl) the protection t f her mother, and to live with him, but foon found, in the Ihort time they леге acquainted, his vile arts wuh this love у girl would never lucctcd Hc li tl be n ftudvin^ (or many di)S what tiiacleiy le could idopt to get her into hi potie , iv hen he met Matilda in hei tveiii i„ w ıh , к 6 ui tuoni-
uincompi ned b liei mollur,— ť cete inj beni I ) , li pui It I li] l liti lotti liti ber walk s fu ıs ine Cil k, oble vu j,, tint s ha nul ci w s ut t h lu, lie л ultltle nia ι 11 h t i t l'on Mitil lili f etil ι t tht t a seh b ılıtıl n iti ıı ıı, ull ι,Ι tl o. w 1 ug corn¬ ili 1 Hey totn It i e ter 1 ť e Calile, t Iti ih ) 1 id bei b t ι Ih it un t n h ıı İlci la e i t uh Ι ι ulous ι Hf и, w' tli, tu nitidis ie it) 1 ıı t 1 e ! ее 1 ι . 1 il t lon ι ι η¬ ν π ι r Ι e h u , t n ι 1 ι pii ι Mi¬ ti , ,ι ni , t illi I I, lut h pı¬ tı 1 iti . il i elli I ее el tl t- fi 11 ι 'у lo ι, t Ι ο w ıs ι η Ι ι )ιι mey tl to λ\ tl 1 er l Villi, It tl ıs 11 t 11 IS 1 tl 11 1 ll t le il t tf ll Cifti III I 't uııd M ι itli wuh Bu¬ ik, le hil d to ılı m Un tu le r ı'l İt > i İlen I ι tie Citer l с С ite io t 1 ' ι hen lv h d ι ', ι' c d r . u ρ n, le dihi ily I ii 1er ľ iel ide ei ι - 1 1 11 an ι il ni
nid int f rung fiom h s hoi ft, rudi d into the li uie, and it I I it it itti tue a[ art¬ ın nt in win h tl v ere, bull opi the ť r tu' t it I tv I e, Il 1 u'ıcd at
th
nil
le 1 Ml
pi rt vent 1
1 v t 11 te u
tnd th ι, lo the 1 . touı 1 no w. lumi-, v I шс ι nt Kne , et 10 ei 11 to lecuiţi
not ıtlıeı motiıeı's until the followina even¬ ing, which accounted likewife ioi their nt t being able to dıltovtı htr, is had flie taktn lhe dirtft road home, they muft inevitably Inve ovtı taken her " Difippointed, and ftruck with hoiror at the deed they had c mmitted, thty at length reti med, fuirmoned fortitude to remove the body they had fo u humanly mutilated and deprived ef 1 fe, into the unuihab tibie part of the Caille, they then, having, with the utmoft celerity, airan, ed eveiy th ng for their depaiture, on tie wings of guiit and fear ag in fet ой ior London " All this was the woik oi α few hours, antl being executed wuh iucli fecrecy and difpatch, not a loul befidcs theoiielvts th t were then within the Cdtle, vv is pnv ; to it " For many weeks after then ai rival in London, the) remained in hourly expecta¬ tion of being apprehended, tunc, however, iubdued.
fubdi cd their ft ir, nrd Nhrj-Jine hnd neiilyfitkn inothtr vičttn to increife their citili Tue of cumcs. " Of whit r mains, Mr Ridmill, of Rowhnd s conftffion, you 11c ilrt-idy ic- quaintcd with, c\cipt thit whit Birville beheld m Mtryjuus ipirtment, when cilkd theie bj the fc rea 11 s of M ibel, in liimlle Caftle, immediately oecuned to him muft Ime been chopped m the icmo\il oí the body fome months bifore, though how it emit- there hi could by no mems iccount 1er Much ilimuìldt the mui¬ de r of mj b ) (hould bt. bi u¿ht to li to ht in coi il q ĺ erte, hi. 1 ni^ht Rowland, who urged tint 1 icci nd m inici was become ¿blolutel} ncccihr), if th<-j hoped to con¬ ceal tin. iirit "lo thľ·, howcxer, Eirvdlc ftrongly object ul, and having, with Rowhnd, re¬ move 1 what hid ρ,πιη ufe to th a dubohcil advic , they paflul the night wi fruukffly «levili ig whit cHl- might be adopted tu praent adikovery ot then villany. " The
" \t du, ılıt th) on Ί ıh il ty piffi , t /itn joi win crii ilei' be¬ hind ι na ni nt if the ııı ι liai n; cone to ίο ι .,ι Inhon, tins t\ ıs ftill t n (u jtet of then dilt trie, ulien ili tu, i u ct ded in convinti ., R v! id ti il ч u |ii с Coud lel IU ed tO i olu t lj teľ 1 l- ince tulli limi, liie.li .ее et \ o„ tl _e 1 e, ami that it t\o liti lem t t ij to ct tie her to thb aflu .el id lit I , utt ι ι il) ilia fleti, l'lifl Ü) t e I II tl tl Ц it of letlll tion, Ul VI. ei lc ill ι,ι pi tt \ but t mei ill kilt t lei il lie ll И ЦП t ill relole tile) loOll ifltl .e| , et 1 , li İt ll„ d t ııııııı tl ılı t b t α h ι ti ι , ι η I tlıpfı tre he l OU d pi Ce 1 t ) lel 1 t e « Ihe thud и Jit l. in . ne as pio- cecihn f to leeoni, ith i j [üi^t, ulien Ihe niiniuuc, t heh 1инц b : а nb n liOll lile 1 ede OÍ ili 1Y (l e, ., 1 C J II - vult 1 umit uh u, an in u eel h , ι ι¬ ι oii Uu ι il b η Ι , leí ,i liei. Ι 1 n- idftolusbiu ι , lton dui hel e- t- tjuimtid »ith hisiuanup, fei the bt tei to
to deceive lum into α belief that hc was uring his utmoft endeavours to reconcile Ins father to Inm, he loa led huu with prefents, and amoiigothtis I aving tn 3 ¡red an aitift to tike then 1 ь.с I' =, 1 id prt feat tl them to 1 is brother Tins piilui , tnc etor , which he difcovered futpended fron th- neck of M ry I mc, filled hi 11 with name- lef honor, antl the reniiez o' Mui İme to h s quelli j seni eed hu 1 lint II vas lus 11 ее lomttliiig Ike cniiimli™ ilinek L 01 hi, he irt bhe ι ııı d hom th. apait ıc it ho vev 1 ti vvas but of h rt din mon, foinetlu ig v lul, ered hım Ьь 'то- tlıcr ıııı 0 lıt be l'ili hv r 0 , and would lon г d ) 01 oilier edl hım to 1 Uvere account ior lus 11 hu nan ctmdıut to his chil 1 I le had ned bace ajun to lier aput uit to 1 tei in 0 tc liei iu ther on t К tic t, vv 1 n le die teied tic do 1 tino 1J1 v l h Iİ13 I id pil ed vvi h ııı 111 it to clei ţ no 1 lhe С ili! Con idi n noiv ii iille İpi lis 1111 d ıhıl lhe lul bil ie t q bul tlı„ ıırb to vvlik.li it Ll, ıııd 1 1 o held w u К
he hoped would have for tver remained conceal d fiom every eye,—vviought to a pitch of delpciation, he ruftied after her, at laft difcovered her, and would have facnficed her but for ) our tin ely interfer¬ ence. " Barville knew you at firft fight, and on Ins eicaping you, foon informed Rowland of wliat had happened Your d atlı was then determined on, evtry part of the ruin they fruitltffl) exami ied to di cover yon, at length, being quite wearied in their fearch, and at the fame tirre convinced thit you had not onl) effected your own efcape, but Mar) Jane's alfo, and judging you would foon return, properly at'ended, to fecure them, their only lafety was m a fpeedy flight, therefore they left the Caftle, as old Martha infoimed jou, and contuvtd, about the mtddl' o* the iecond ι ı c l e r om tlieir departuie, to reach Barville s relidencc in Pill-Mall, which yeftxrd y underwent a minute fearch, when Ron hnd on j was de¬ tected, who afiirmed that lus malter vvas ftill with ι
tuttun the houfe, though cıery endıaıour w.ti vain!) uful to difcovtr bun " We have omitted mcntioring the agita¬ tion of Mr. Nugent, or the bred s in con- fequence that otcurred in the courle of this narratile, which he had hardly finifhed when his ftrvant entered, and acquainted him that a peiion requefted permiffion to Ipeak a few words with lum He was defired to conduct the perfon to linn, who proved lo be oı t of tlıe ofhcers tint ind been m queft of Barville, when as he enteied the room, Mr Nugent cncmued if as yet he had bttn luci tfsfııl. " Not altogether fo," he replied, " we have found him, but in a moil temb'e fituation, foi, no doubt, being neh ton- vinctd tlut fnrhb nu ι ìouscn ι tshi Ihould itliler an .„nominimi at it , he hj" ι in tilt onl) prtc unon lu w s iti hım ro pa¬ ient it, and blown out his brains turn a pıitol." Nugent
Nugent and Henry were fo fiiockcd at this n tclligence, that it t L· lo ne time ere they coultl ìnlciiogatc hım further on the ltib]ec>, at lcnilh, howcttr, they tiwfiied to be inlormed oi tlıt particuiais ot this (hocking caiaitroplit. TI e officei proceeded as follows — " Haling evert reafon to bcheie, Ge ι¬ ι men, I om Ro \1 nd s co if fiioi, th u n s mater w.s fl 1 coi ceiled i> t theie m lus tun It we a ni halt nui th t iu with αη ι tien of t nn enting а lecontl ftaitlı Whtn ie arrived tl e , wc vter inhumée b) one of lus f it uus ot the hoin I ciicuniíliiice I hue ji β me ше к 1, autl ihir, as Rot imd in oni d us, 1 v h i b n íteleted in α íemote ρα t ol the Ιιοι winch m oi r cvuiniľUion ln! cíe ıj I us, to winch place wc th n alet elt ι lum, while w b held rh det bi ib e ob e t extended on the flooi, in 1 lıııı 0 | it t mu/zle of the piftol, will win h U lil t , с 1
dilpitcliul 1 im ftlf, into his monili, it ln I bh wn oll tbc buk piit of Ыь 1кж1, and ÍĽ\ltLied (lib Liiins in vuioub puts of the 100m, rendu ınç him ilpecì:\cleto) Pioc n g to dclciibe \\ l then kit tht, hou l, wh η I contened it nrcLÍhij to с ill nn 1 icqmint )Ou, Su, of whit Ind In] ρ nal ' ük oľicci foon -iflcr withd tw. í h in y L mínu d »ith Mr Nu^nt tuo ot tliut- dijs, when he к ten ul ι note hom his father, informi n¿ hım of his ıı ı iv il in ro μι , he thtn took kive of Mı. Nugent hiving übt inul г promık thit he woud foon mike h mı a λ ılıt, md 1ιι π ¡ıc 1 lo pm his falhei
ίιΙΜ'.
CHAP. XV Α Γι tp lo Poi Ifmouth IR. \DMILL and Nortlicote had heaid of the dtplorible end cf Baıulle eie Henry arrived, to hım, howeier, tlıe) were in¬ debted for the pırtıculars To Lady Bar¬ ville, whom tliey liad left in Somerietfture, they immediately wrote to apprize her of her huiband s deatJı , but as Ibe was en- tirel) ignorant of thole recent circumflances •which had ]iifll) lendtrtd Inm an oo eft of public nu igna ton, they dul not acquaint her that, to avoid in ignominious death, lie had become his own executioner, and, unltfs the Coroner s Jur; gai e their Verdiä f eh defe, which
which would dcprucMis Barville aad her children of what remained of the wreck of his fortune, ind which mufl eventually open lier eyes to every thing that had happened, the) trulted that it would eier be withheld trom her knowledge 1 lie next da), therefoie, it was with great jo) the) licud a ve ehet; lia 1 been given— non co npos nenin Tne da) aftei the) r ceived an mlwei tonen letter fion Lid) Bamlle, 111 winch fhe enticated them, beirg the only friends 111 hci preient cmergenc) to whom ihe could apply, to iettle ior her the affını of her late hufband With this icqucft Northcote and Rad- nuli ciiccrfu ly complied. They found that out ot one hund ed and fii y thoufand pounds tint Biri ille had recen ed with ins wife, foit) tiioulud only remained, winch, as he died mtcliit , defcended to Mrs. Birville and her children. Her prefent rtfiduice, with the fmll cp e attached to
to lt, to-ethu ι uh tlu litle, ins nott htr clt'iil ton's \ io iJuj lioj ed ttotild live to uijov it, and, unhl c lus filur, become ι noni ) lucniber ol l ulet) Η nirg fettled cuti thın-, t itwasniciílu) to bi do u, they dilj iiciiid moti u 1 n r tj 1 ul) Birulli, t ) π i m h i of tlıuı j r ceding , ai d c in¬ cluded with ι j romiie ipeethl) to ufit hu ni Som ifiilluu. It wis with extreme ¡ le aftne uıdmıü and Noithcote beheld Henrj s ttiilimtnt to Mai) Juu, ι Jucii tiis now b cone too apparent to efcape tiun notice Hiriicuit iipuation fon hım fumul to I ue anted tu. t paffon и 1 ıs brıaft which No tııcotı, beloit lit kiew Mai) [ mt was lo nuly rehtid lo lum, had ngittttd is not hi d\ to tike phi. To Henry, Mai) [iielud lince been ι deblcd for 1 tr lift, and that ! ι mijit 1 emit the glaub η of tint lift 1 lud piifuiul, wis tit ılı neft v ìfli of hi luut.
Tlu)
They had been fome wetks in London, when Siampford, who fince their return hid clnefl) refided with diem, though he polľcňcd a handfome houfe m Berkley bquaic, exprefled a determination of mak¬ ing а journey to Portlniouth , for as he knew the name of the perfon with whom Lieu¬ tenant Barville refided when it was ge leraily believed he embarked with his regiment for the Weft Indies, b) apply.ng theie he thought it probable he fliould be ab'e to learn fome further account of what had befallen his regretted and deccaied friend, ere Ra ¡mill relcued htm from the honor* of α tempeftuous night in tin public flreet, but to expire beneath his hofpitable roof. He 1 ad fome years befoie written to the peifon on the iubject, but the anfwer he rtceivcdwasby no meinsfatisfaftoij, there¬ foie he was now icfolvcd to recommence his enquuies Northcote and Radmill would willingly vol. n. e have
luve jcconipanittl hım but as they wiflitd to ketp Mar) J ne eı tirei) ıgnoı mt of whatever intelligence the) mi^ht obtain, the) at lad conceived t would be mort thgıblt for Mr Sum, loid to ptiforn the journty alone The dav after I is dipartii с tl ty vv re a 0 rteably lurpiie! by Sir W at in Be eily and his daughter f li /а making then ι lilt, the lat tr eoi Ul not icfrain fi >m tc rs m the h ippinifs fl с еч} mented n once more btho'ding Mır) laie, wlio wis no* lefs dthghttd in h ic'ing Г liza had no foi- gttlen tho с tcci¡ toc tl vins of fie ilip tl at lud been fe n cri) inuiclm d be¬ tween tic i Her ff er Liei о 1 ì/i i- ľornitd 1er, \- \ three wc ' s befoie given her ha d to Mı ВашсошК —" Ihcrc- foľ," (lie со tınucl, " ıs Sır v\ ıtkuı aid ııyfelf, now Ilt r nd Mr Bun¬ ei ibt uive ltft u , Ih 1 1 be ni ti 11 ν ι it of linie lind, e ifid ule frie iels t) alb- cute with, 1 moll infill that jou 1| end
ıs much of your time with u% in Picca- chllv is jou can poffibly make convení¬ an, and tlie good people of ¡our family will pcimit ' With this fnend') requeft Mir) Jane rtuilv piomilcd to compi), andas Rad- mil ail Northcote weie anxious n cul¬ tiv Uc the acquali l mee of Su W ul 11, v hofc open, unrefeíved chancer th y ad¬ mired, they promile 1 to often aceom any her Plignr) frequenti) looked m unon tl ci ι Northcote, w ο w-s oteóme i cubic ti' eheeiful, was by no m ans d iplcafe 1 w Ih linn o lus qiotiiiois, bit would 1 iu J bearti y at tie dılpı tc¿ ulucii w u ııv with ruiovTcil ι u iur ıc r u ned ilei celi hun and R uni, ti 0 igh 1 lagni), vvli-n iti foinl uso ponei t waxing лиц r ion iciteiatetl cenil J Л101, elei, I } Ionie wcJJ- int о hiecd lues írom lus iavouiice ai thor, 19 it
gave tlıe converfation a ludicrous tuin, and reftored htm to good-humour again. Mrs. Sourby, Radmill learned foon after his return to London, had fold her houfe, and withdrawn from the metropolis into thecountty, therefore lie could not thank liei, as he intended, foi her inhumanity in refufing to admit Mary- ľane into her houfe. The thoufand pounds fhe had borrowed of Henry he intended not to trouble her lor, his benevolent heart fo far fupcrfeded his refentment, that on Heniy giving it as his decided opinion that neceffity Jiad obliged her to deceive him, he freel) forgave her the debt, though the unfeeling conduit flie had adopted towards Maiy-Jane he could by no means thmk of with lo much indifference. The money which was due on Heniy's note, he tranfmitted to Mr Sackwoith almoft аь foon as he arrived in town.
We
Wc will now leave thtm haptnly together, and fillovv Mi Stamptoid to Ponfmoulli, where, on his arnval, lit repaired to the houle of ι Mrs Cl uke, the perlon with vvht л h s th celiti] li end had reli Iti, and ou enquuy found it to bt octtipittl by the fame woman ftill,—he foon diltloltd to her tht рш poi t ol his vilit, when lhe rti tied to 1 1 n tht tollon mg account. " Lieutenant Romié) ," laid lhe, " a..J his wife were my lodgeis for better than a twelvemonth, during which time Mrs. Rom- ley was fafely delivered of a fine girl, boon after this Mr. Romley was taken extremei) ill, owing to his having caught a violei t cold, m tonfequence of his lulhing into tus water one evening to refcue fome poor fouls with whom the boat in which t' ey weie, hid upiet, and but for his timely luiftancc, and a iew others urged by his txample, tbey had all betn drowned. The Lieutenant, however, was never well after vards The doctors that attended him uud the compi unt J. 3 hut
hatl iettled upon his lungs, and atter they hid trud evtry lemedy in vain to rtmovt it, for more than five months, the) pro¬ nounced inm to be m a deep decime, and advifed, as tney could do no more (or linn, change of air Brido!, 1 think they told him, was the moil likely pi ice to be oi ijvice to him, but whether he wc t tilere, or not, or what became of lu u alter he left my houfe, which he did in about three weeks fiom the time the doceorj had aduied a removal, finding himftlf get¬ ting daily worfe, I am ignorant. " I thought lus poor wife would have gone diltraäed. Night after night would Hit watch by his bed-fide, ard though die endeavoured to appear cheerful when iutii lum, when away, and he couid not hear her, ihe would cry as though her heart wou'd break.—Poor heart' it ufed to grieve me to fee her —Wei!, your Honour, die at laft prevailed upon hi n to re nove to London, flattered with the hope that it would
would prove beneíiutl to hım, as to Bııllol hc hid ibioluttly declared lit would nol ¿о " Mr. Temple, who lite in the next "•■■thcet, lining Ionic bulincU m town, fit off in the ftigi-coach with tliuu and lit his nol forg t it )il, I'll tturiii Inn, for a lout fin mi ι υη tli fi k oi I oı I n thi cti ich wb lopped b) í uu Ipli v ιρι ι, who ıobbıd ıhını tl eıuy tin i¿ that wis worth takın , lid t'ı 1ft thtm wuh cup) pui t ti purlut tin ι intimiti ot thtn j iui my " Staınpford, fia 'mg Mrs. Clu e could gue lupi no furchet noi nit 11, inni ι d hei fur the tro ibie lit hui givui lu , and aquilini Iht t ould direct ln n to tie houle of Mr. Temili, w iu ι iu ι , düne, he luckily lound thai giitkmin at lone, who ρ ihtely, on lib m intoning Ins buimef,, corroborated part oi vuat Mrs Claike had rented to lum. Ые ackno t L 4. ' Icdpd
kd D cd pOt g to Lontion about nmefeca tears bifore, in the flage coach, with α lad , her hulivili, and α ft ink child, that the gen eman а [ caicd in the lift ft ige of а corľumptiai, inel that wit in live miles ol L ondo ι the) hid I ctn ml 1 1 1 b> ln H h- waymen, is Mis Clatke had n formed Inm He then continued—" V\ hen wc arrived at tlie nn m 1 oi don, tiie (ici gentle n in ip[ ired I j exccffivtly ovciome wul tl futnuc he hul endured, that I ,. Ivile 1 him to retne to bed as icon as [offible le verned inclined to follow my advice, antl f ioon after left him Having ione bufii eis to tranfaft in that part of the town tlie ι ext da), I took the opportunity of calling at tl e ι n, and enquiring aftei the ι cor invalli, when I was n formed that he con¬ tinued there bat a fev hours after I lelt hım, foi on feeling himfelf a little revved, one of the houfehold lit u d h in tell lus wife, who fat weeping by his fide, that he wis determined to adjourn to the houfe of a fr end, which was in Covent Garden, where
where he doubted not but they fliould mtct with α moil friendly reteption —' For,' he continued, ' as our late misfortunes have taken from me my kit fix pence, I will incur no uniieceifary expence by continuing at an inn, wlvn I can bc quite as well accommodated elfetthere without contract¬ ing debts that require almofl; immediate pa) ment ' " The landlord, on being informed of this, made him an oflti of apartments in 1 is houfe u itil he could write to his fnends, or my thug bcfides the) mtg'it Jiavc occafion for, but tins die othtr rt- fultd to accept, and not tttlıftındıng the night was d ırk, nd portended an approach¬ ing temped:, he fct off about ten 0 clock in the evening towards his fnend s ıefı- tlcncc " The landlord had, on finding him de¬ termined to go, offered to procure him а hackney-coach, but this he refufed like iule, obferving that the diftance lit had to J.0 was io trifling, that file minutes' w ilk 1 5 would.
would conduct hım to his ¡friend's hottíõ. lhe landloid then funeree! hım, with hb wire and child, to depart, but fcarmg he wis not fo well as hcendcivourul to xppeir, defired one of his unrcrs ίο lo'low them it a diftmce, and if, eie he irrned 't the houfe he fought, he appeued m wint ot affiftance, to run back and inform him, when he uoukl Innen to his rchef, and reconduct hun to his houfe. " The man did as he was ordered , he followed him into Covent-Garden, when 1 e öbfervul Inm ίο much overcome by his walk, that lus wife, unable to fupport him, was neceffitated to feat him upon the nep* that led to the door of one of the houles t hej were paffing. A heavy fliowei of liad and ram deicendcd from the overcharged clouds as the man hurried back to icquatnt his mailer of whit he hid beheld, who fet oui, iiJtwithíhndmg the inclemency of the weather, immediately to refcue him. The object he fought, ho vever, was gone ere he arrived, but he barncd from a watchman,
watchman, whom he interrogated on the fubjeci, tliat a perfon, who liad been found Ijuigon tlie pavement, with his wife and child, lud bten taken up by α gentleman m a liackney-coacli, wlio itemed difpofed to nndci them eieiy poffible aíhílance, but uho he was, 01 to w hat piace he had taken thtm, he could give him no information. " The next dav, but a ihort time ere I ca'letl at the inn to make enqumes about thtm, the landloid was infoimed by a Mr. Andrews, a furgcon, that they had Leen taken to the houii of a Mi Radmill, in ------ Stieet, and th it tlie poor invaliti and his wife, notuithilinding eiery means had bem taken foi thur ptfirvition, had ex- piitd during the night, but that tlieir in- fint was living, au I uould be well provided for by tht 1 uin inc pcrfon under whofe cara flit then was. " On my return to Portfmouth I en- deavouicd to learn fon e further account of Mr. Romley from Mis. Claike, but cculd procuie np latiafjčtory 111(01 nation L (1 wheebv
whertby í could gam any knowledge of his family, as I conceived it my duty to appriľe them of the melancholy eient I left Mis. Clarke Without acquainting her of my mo¬ tive for making the enquiry refpeciing them, .and until this da) have never fince heard their nan.es mentioned b) any one, except¬ ing when I learned, about feven )ears ago, on m) addrefimg а letter to Mr Andrens for tlie purjiofe, that tlieir offspring was filli living, and witli Mr Radmill, who was as mucli in tlie dark rcTpefting her parents as myitif------ Mi Stimpfoid now took Ins leave of Mr Temple, and the next day arrived m 1 onden, and embraced the firfl opportunity of ι dating to Noithcofe and Radmill the fucctfs of Jus jourre) Mr Andrews tliey now fent for, who ac¬ knowledged that lie had informed tlie land¬ lord of tlie inn what Mr Temple had men¬ tioned to Mr Stampford, and hkewift anlwenng
anfivering the letter he had received from hım about ftven years ago lt was now evidently proved beyond a doubt, though they had long fince been convinced of it ш their own minds, that Maty Jane was the daughter of Lieutenant Barville, and tl e gland-daughter of the late Sir Bvnjamm Barville and Mr Northcote Mi Andrews left them eie Mary-Jane returned, who, with Mrs Mowbray, паз gone out in the carriage, the litter having t'efignedly taken her away, that Mr Stamp- lord might haie an opportuni!) of declar ng tie iclult of lus jour ley to Portlniouth She now joined them, whin they ftrove to overcome thofe emotions Mr St impford s narratile had excited, and nut her as uiua!, with a İmde of pleafure, which I er pre¬ fence never failed to nlpue.
ITO
IUI CONCLUSION
Α- ΓΙ vV vv e' ^ more had fcarcci) p fed ìojouily tv αν, vhen Henrj and Mar) J ine wcie uniicd m the ìndiffoluble bonds of matiimoiiy N irthiote, on tîıc day oi tiieir marrnge, prcicntcd Marj- lane with t venty thouland pounds and the hke íum was be¬ ilowed by Radmill upon Henry Su AVatkin Beveri), 1 li/a, Stampford, and Plagiary were pie ent at the nuptials. îsoithcote danced forjo), and Ritmili wis equ illy elated, the troub cs the) lud pafled give an additional ¿eft to that 1 liar ty which pie\ailed among tl cm About
A uut three months from tins, Htnry and lis bude, Niithcott and Mis Mow- bra), with Radmill md Scampford, made their piomifed viiit to lad) Birville, and coniinued wuh lier for fomt uteks, when Stamj torti Ьссапе lo enamoured w th hei, that a twelvemonth after this introduction he led 1 er to the altar ol Hyme 1, and the nun) b Us Iran lit ¡eirs Lidy Birville en- jijil with htr iecon 1 choice, mule lur uni l amends for the fufferings ihe had endu'ed with 1 er hill btimpford poíľtíľtti a firtune of one hun !red thoufand pounds, and as Prow- tuct did not bltfs Inm 1 uh anv chi litri ot lus own he made his will in favour of lus ch dren m law They giew up undei h s paternal protection α 1 1 regard, to be а confult to his old age, antl objects of lin¬ eere eulogıum to all who knew them Eiiza happening to meet Mr Goodwin at htr anuab e in nd s, t led to α m re 3 intimate
intimate acquaintance, in fine, they faw, and loved each other Henry, who, fmce Goodwin s liberal con¬ duct towards lum when under an arrelt at the iuit of Mr Sackworth, had ranked lum among the fireinoft ol his inende., was ex¬ tremely plcafed at his choice, and as Mr. Goodwins chaiiâei, fortune, and family were unexceptionable, Sir Watkin with real fatisf iftion gave him ins daughter but on this condition, that his daughter fliould ftill continue under tlie fame roof tritìi him¬ felf, as vithout her he fliould be milcrablt. To this Goodwin cheufully aňented, an I few could boaft of more leaf happineis than Sir Watkin for tht reman tier of ins da)s, nor tould hc be othcrwiie, w hen each new day evinced to htm that his children became more attached to each other The only incidents that ever occurred to diftrcfs him, were the continual difputes between
