Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The son of the storm: a tale
TIIL SON
THE STORM.
-- -ίΪ«ΜΙ**~
СНЛРГЕ11 I
Itinrvrn m some mt isiire hom her lnxieticsbvtht kmd tlloitsot hti liben) youn a kinsman oui voting 1 idv etuui- cd towards home with her spuits some- wb it lecuutcd VOL и s !t'J
Lord John accosted her in the hall, with " Have )ou seen or heard any riling of Aithur'—is he better'" ' Much better uncle, I have just been paying hnn a visit, and have had a sight of his little adopted." " \h, Susan ! under the semblance of levity, does this )outh conceal all the honourable feelings which give dignity to human nature ' would to God I w ere as sure of heaven as Arthur Conyeis 1 " With these words, Lord John clasped his hands together and hurried foivvards to the Duke's study. Habit had taught his niece not to be offended at any abruptness, 01 eccentricity •f
of this nobleman bis many noble quali ties made lnm adoied 1 y eveiy bunch ol thefinnlv ind instead tf fcebn,' resent mentát bis nifi mitu s tbc oni« bre Ulied the si,b ot bum mity atlı districati nis of a Plul mtln ipic mm I ' lhcv w r convinced that 0 uilt to ild exi t m Ins -own imaginat ou done üt t ire Susui hid reiche! the lop et th staucise 1 trd Jehn jome 1 hu and e mesti) imploied bei not to tell anv hv mg soul, that he bad hi ken («ul s com mandmeiif ind muiden d h s Tull ti ' She s Ulied ind ende v nul lo ai triu lus w indeling thou, hts to piiseni b|cets but he bro! с fr m her nul hui tving dum thi steps cl rt 1 tut at tin· strtetdoor which bı d s d with fui ıoı » в " u ılı n
■violi cr t II the «bil h dl i ung ıs «ult ·> ] cal ot ibunda Ter fy tl af t it morc tlmi ι 1 ι ην ve bemenet of h s m uinu 1 ad Su m ι m into the drawing ıoom uıd ıııtı ateıl I eı fıtlıeı to folk vv bun His Grace complied with ílu ı e piesi desiring hei to s nd Ben ılı ı li ııı ıs s ıs possible The ladies waited then lettini with the most alarming anMctv eveiy num ut draggalon İlke an İnin nul yet tb v came nót terioi stispi ucc nul m\iotj were stronglj poiirtravid n th linca ments of tvtry corniţei mee as th it heart must have been callous indeed which could not feel for hi ι »ho hid ftlt foi Mil
M
ρ,·'- -.-.-,.. ibe bei;.-. Ч.С ,:..:»:! i.; D<.-t--i-'.;i)Ui¡t— :'.-.■ ıh w ; :■ ■ ou'ii.',!. Ľ .-..-ver, tosei .| v ci: ■,ύ st.ııiııs-..·,· in suuri. Ol' lll.il fii.-iid; Sir Auli«" b- ing tin ".-I ll.' Iľ.i-lilioll.-d И vvas inore
'IV Our, -au! continued s- : .»|yci,p- .u, on. iiil li-· clock slrn.-k Hvelv.:, 'inn Ih,: Dui.' ι,ΊΐΗ -n.-d, p ile-, langui d, nul exhausted with the I.iuhiuh excr-
tien of a long, but meti 11 ml search, «Inch hid been londucd tiuly alarming, from the descnption hc hid reci iveil ot li brothers extl ioniin uy bib moni ata ncijiboiiiing I пеш Hi» Grace bad «ith much difficulty ti ıc d bun to H)de Pall, where finding the fitigue ι f Ins iiseiich beginning to iiovv ten poweiful t ι bun, he was foiced 1 1 tike s me si ,lit ι h slimeiit but not till he b il iinpltv d vyl int, mil trusty dcleoatts tok p on an iinicmitted lock out loi the tl | clot his uiqiiny When h t un bom b was ııı such ι nuvoli stili ll t flu li us vvut quite alumni ıntl bı sought liuu tt 0 ι ti btd directiv, ı> tilt) «ut tonv metti that wint ot lus naturii ıc t «oul 1 bave tbc mo il
ni kt disti cssf ul cflt ets ιιραι bis con¬ sti! ilion Ilciesistetl these intieatits for some tmu, mih the „leitest ıbstııııcv ht al list, hon ι να suffei d lumselt to be over persuaded when tlu v pled, cti tb n woids to h m tint thev would have bun roused is 1 1) is six o'tl nk the ensui ig nioriiui D llus proiin-c tiny punctually pertorm- I llu Duke in se— the second was pisse I like tl ι tonna thy vvith as much 1 ιιι,ιιι, but with is little prosici t ot sueltas Latly Susin, uu ing whos eiiouis ι nifi li dispisitiiu tould not be tunnit i ıled lell bu pinito vixatioiis sunk in the ult t ot tin gi nml til unity she could think it notimi, but liti uncia¬ li t slit
«he· coniti pttend to no ot' ci coiuvrr Vu thtrclore sent ofl a note to мг \itlmr, iv ılı htr apologies for not ¿'lending to htr iiinagement with bin. \!xnit six o'rlotk, when the Duke and Doctor Giv line tnltre.i the house, fati,ued an«l harrassed vi ith the rambiings of the day, a rap »as li ani at tbe strut door, and Mr Hanbuiv «as announced. He addressed hnnvlf with great ι re« i- 4ion and formality, lo even pi rsoii pri¬ sent, when H cam« to Mrs ь 1шк«ш<нчЛ turn—bowing most obsequiously, and hoping that she h^d «pjitc ,ot nd of b , íheumutitl ¿. îvoıv tins f,ord ,'Ci)tlt«onnn bated anv one to i. ılıt« hu iiihimitiis slu uusi titled ılıt in. ııtı m t Γ ılıtın ıs inip. lite uı hu u/««A, anıl she tht ıı,lıt ıı ılı » ııı ı, ht impudente in kel intuíeis, ti dut tosio tU. m
f Iıı ııı 1 η tosi) tht tinti tlu io vv ι no out thing nn cauli s ι ι! οι ι lohn, ıs Uly atqil tilitiini ОГ U UVI lUtloll, Willi ptisoiiigis »lio did not mou in tlit Jin sj hut odile with iicisilt Vi hui idiliissul in On, imp ii'i-in mumu, by Mr. Π inliuiv, thai I ж slu thevv liei elt up in ıhı ııı ist st ılı İv, ı ul ilpufiul muniu, cr MK tli uikin nd asking I nn it be cune i oui Mis, I uri (empi sf, to ci nvinit Iııtı iiy tins di w '1 mpiu; nit π ptoiv, tint . u In «mn account, tins usititnu »1, ь lit, Ľ ı\ peeled asıl «ъ ıtcıptıblı It is v ni,ni sul tint« ail i> ι о I ι „iodio и Ы „II ι-ι ıh s iv uı.s ot tin vultu au s, , |, n muml d m the piHitijlısoftıııılı thıtiıluııınuıl «nuli İS il coup Uliul «Ull ,0t tl sms,, vv ill κ ι tliiv idiuittluu tente, ııı ln it ht angiv it thai applicatici· u j Now
Now «ι re vve to ι niploy tvvtntv. ρ iges m the delineation ol tlio tbatietei ol Haul mv «ventilili qu stion it «ι «ould give my trut m il, «luth cauld depict bun moie stiongly tinn the lbovt vulpi saying foi tt t il!) insensibil to «bit Mis Scud mır« una,in d a kun bint and a well dm ctetl pohshi t] spi ruutu ot tint figure ofspcı ch denn innat tl ııoııy he 1 1 pt an un Ittiul u untenant uni ι ^ ıc uit к к ıs h iipeatcd I un ι ι am Missla i ť ------ Nunniani — nt 1 . uin t siv Ibu 1 t m dne« Uy hoin tint fm lid) s ht iv miv siv li it 1 come on i Utlein i pnv u hu in s i , InsGrice ' Oli' voi !, «hlív sinimin пни ν,ι, _\ t s mulini ıhıl ıhı up -h t on t ı bj ly mav iv 1 it uııvvıll uı.
mg to deiiv ni) self the pleısuıe of seeing you, good mıdaın, antl my yoıınır; tuend, Luly Susin then, I refused the liutler's otlu of calling my "ootl fntiid flit Ouki out ot the room " ' Mjself and nu tc, arc ln,lily It ι to in I m Ьепц niunbired imong ¡jotti tntiiiis Sn ' an ljoxouii indue! 1 vvas totillv uu- tonstious ot deserving " Hit Dule to pititul Mı İlminin boni uni ukin,, tlit pointed ι Ull lless Oı flus list ut uit il ïcplv now sli ppttl toi- « ud, m I with t ι nuh sı insu η, uu witlily unióiul hom t tuuli tu j tooi« limi Iıv tht huid, nil dun ,ιιι! d «ha inumisi ıııtı bul pu ruled luin tlie tuoi if ıeıl! it th it li ян Ν ι liun it ι! ıı ν ί «id Duke, I !e n vou vvı „t ılı 41 s v llllsllt шс n th И -I li elo it st ill _1| ,t, een m ine
monv — шцЬЬшш I ire—tb it ill— ou ıs to the diurnist mees ------' Vh Mi Hui! hv— vilut «lo tli conca n M hy my J ad Duke thev iont ι vom brilhei iny luv ,οοιΐ In ml tlie loid lohiiOtii! 1 1 1« spa t luu ninth thou, b l un soi iv to si)------" ' Mint sn'-« 1 t has butt ι lnm
Evl imul tin Dul ι îl Di I ι f 1) une, sintin up ud 1 I 111, v .itli suchí igt m, , tb ll tin ι t ι ished 1! limy pinipul inek se/ ı il 1 us, inil losiu, Ins 11 t ι ist h iv Ilen, bad he not и uhu! I n tu bv mlv plu ,| ^ bis buk l Hilst Mis iui lunn „ еч- tt nded hind , ι- κ ι s' л Ilın, v ııllı lililí,!! UIHU ill 1 1 11 Ili! ι hin ι ν lhe 'ne suli
ťom.ica clin contusoli of lin st tue. 1 nly Susui Ind Inn ι I iwa) th. no- inuit she İn id tie n um ot hu inik «nupi d »ıtıısoııov Mrs Suu' unni uol.ntly sunnini, ml ı pui m- Hui¬ luni, »ho st., .1 siiainblin, with tugiu lu foie lici, positivei) du I uıd, tli it, il sht vas net asistid inimcdutel) slie ..и//с/ inul likewise Luly Susan leviving, and oidei benig somewhat lestolul, Dot ίοι GMine m ι tone of vtxitiou, isk. ! Mi Hanbui), vvh) in God's uante he eliti not go en. Hiidly knov nig whethei he stood on Ins heul oi Ins Intls, and hijiluicd out of Ins wits at the ttuisle, ntion lie had oceisioned, he stared, tumbled, nd t tul- tcrett out— ' lîless iri) soul, ,u tl nun ' Ι ,ονν you hive inule ine qmtt ncivous 1 —set lio'V
how )0U hivt fu, litem d mj good fnend Mrs Scudnnoit too—bliss mv soul' bless my soul !—l dut say tht pool dtar old lidj »on t gel the btttu ot it tinsi- two d t) s " Aunt Anne could not sptak for indig- uition Lad) Stisuicoll eting htiselt as v ell as sht was iblc « cut up to Uus tt- dious messengei with i bok of mtffible sweetness, and bcg a ctl ι mı not to make ui) moie apt ki-iits but lebevc them fiom thai appn hensions eonet innig hu uncle Ibigv.ur paid η \ı un — İmcin mylady sud the pl hv Μι limbu), ' 1 «as pist about totill viu lhe vv bole matta, when yom lidvsli| nul tinse twe , altlanın ill ,πιι, mtt sieh / utu ι ııtııs occasioned n y lightening nıy po ι d. ir tuend Mis Anneni suei ι ıııannı 1 vow 1 in quit shot! ul 111 bites to 'luny uıv bttlv— t ι isl ptJiii) dt u Mis
Mis Ilinbiuy—iny sweet llacliail' siys I, when )tm aie in any of your------" ' Will )ou, or will )Oii not, tell us whit you Inow of Loul O'Cinol' cued Doctoi Glynne, " vou see his biothci is too much igititcd eun to speak to you, and it is icaliy bubaious to keep a whole funil) in stu h dttadtul suspense " " Bless mv soul, Doctor Glynne' I was just o 0ing to inloini ni) deir tuend Lady Susan, bow Lord lahti О С uroi саше lo my house I ist in, it " " Io jour house ' ıs he then no« ' ' " Uııdıubtull) Dictoi—I kft bun theie—but it jo» nil! liuun „u w uli youi attention mil not ltok s u tri li t— lully U mı I will till v ju the whole puticuljis " Mi
Mr. H mimi v then lotil ι ıhan, P,ut di living it t lose lo that of the peti ılı tl Mis. Scud nuore, »as almut to auaiige bis veij best plu istolo,v, to gi it ι hi- history, but tiu Duke iun,ruptul Ium betoie be li.ul «-poken tlii.e «cutis, by hastily C4c3anii4ig— " You must have the goodnesp Sn, to disptnsc with niy attentions tn yon at piesent, as 1 must tins instant set oui toi jour bouse t — Gljiine' you «ili bui mo company '" '· Most cm tainly, my loid " Λ hatkney coicli «as that moment passing, the Doctoi st ipp. 1 il tiom the window, whuh Intl li in litt open to watch the ictbiii ol sutul messili 'us. The tin. e genti, nitu iiiimcthaí. Ij entil¬ ed it, muth io tin monific ilion ol poor Hanbuiy, »bo wished loi „u oppoit.iiiiry
ef iii„ .«пи it up with aunt Липе bil ırı ht w« ut down suu«, however, h« nidď 1 lura formal b «, and ti ld 1ι<τ, ' sl r» if she and l^i !v Susan would come an J tule tec with Ins Raphael at Ha¡3 s !siei«b in a famiiv «av he «a- sure t'ut bis « ι e* would tin > it « e le fnendiv, and mako uo st r angcis ol li tm." The Dike <-m the angr) 1 „litaiing Oashin^ nan the e)ts of bis indiLnaut sister and hurned iway th tlllvvilti lg otiuiilir, in Нь luiy coulu burst forth 'W ben the ecidi uuvtd it Haraptı ad !1< ith, tht ubidente ι f the Jlanbuiv ta- milv, the tinte guiţi meu found Lina lunptst in tin μ atest distuss foi Itid loin Οί ml uudei picttuu of simitti uil, m Uu girdin Iı id ııllullv iludid ill thtn vpil tuet, nul ton'nvul f o ш ikt his ese ipe
ills
Mrs. Ilanbury as soon as she learned that the Duke hid honouied her house with Ins priselite, rtsoUetl to rendu hci¬ self amiable and interesting m bis eyes, to accomplish « İneli gı nul point, she thought proper to throw heiself mto vio¬ lent and convulsive bystenes Irom long practice she « as become a first r ite actress in scenes of this description, intl might hate melted the beirts of ordinaiy spec tatois, but unluekilv foi hci, she had in tie peison ol Doctoi Giyime, a veiv slire« d critic to deal »ith, and bad not most serious contemp! itions absorbed that gentleman's ulms at the moment, be »ould bate given hera specimen ot Ьь discrimination which would hive nude bti lathei cautious beline «hom she ex¬ hibiţii! hu pu toi manees kn tue tutine , as it « ıs, lie appealed blind lo hır folly, and contented lumselt with an eiuotidii of contempt loi bei ine unless, and bei duplicity. Lanu
I iun, «ho would hive givi n vvoilds to have ace impaniai them I ick to town, m st uch ot bei belőve«! bei rovereti pro li cto ' w ι comp Ile 1 by e eiy duty ot bum univ ti шини with Mis Ilinbiuy, iltning this ııı ill etui indisposition llie Du' e ml I) ten Glynne vvao obliged to ıetuın ti I ind n with soiiow- tul comital nuc» indile u j hearts. Glynne filt much loi the amiable Miss Iemptst uid Ι 1 1 he lhou 0 ht bei remo- v it ¡пора «ould soon h tve îcstoicil Mrs llanbuiy t ι s u id uıd pustnic lu ilth ,ιηι, but dinin th pu ent tıoııblcs ot his Grıccs tııuılv, he tliou 0 lit it much battı foi il! pııtıe tinti iirisboultlb kt pt tut 1 1 t ıı w ıj Vs tbey «tit rt turning 1 nu , tli ν iesolvcd to с ill on Su Altlını it \t istillili tu knowing the af¬ fı ttıoıı tlııt ) uth bore towaids Loid John it temed in ict ot kindness, to
console
cruso'.- lun n ι kr t 1 »- huw (i-«8urc of til« general cai5¿nniv The с a"ti вПчрН at tue d «ir of Mr« Hs3İ4Tıss whtre tn pm iu for voting lem r», he rui otit ti th л and with- dnwiiig them into ai oditi apartment, told .hem tl at I ord John was pist come mto lug room— naie —drenchid with a vie lent «how crol iam, aud without any hal ou his head K ir Artun- hkivisi informed ihcm, that be b d n t senken a single word since b j nitritici — had sı, bed inquini¬ li and had ground as if h licait vvis al out ti buist ui shut th tun lau« holy as hi hi! t rmuly ip] utd In n iw <- timd labfurni untiti su lit dtipu dt- j ttion ılı m evi ι I have sent,' sani Arthur " 1 1 Gıos- vuıoı Squue, fn Lieu Vt il n, who »ill peisua I
persimi hım ti clu , his ι r lulls, aud tikt some r. fr. sh n nt fır be Ink» veiy weak and taint uidiul. ' The Dule was so much agit ned Iry the nul uitbel) n untivi, tint ht «¡ulKrul himself to lit plevu' d unon finniini where be was until he coul 1 tun tune foi the u oieiy ot Ins spnits picvious toan intervii w with his brother 'W ¡ion D tini Glume urged bis fiiéiul to ti e s nie iiuisluiiint Iı toınphtd incili mu ıllv but t и к not tht sb, littst notice ot any thing thit wis pissing Hound hnn, until little Dn k r in into the aputment to «ıslı Sn Vilhui good ni,ht LoidJiiin it tint mtnnint sudili nly ıp- peaied violently ptitul tnd besou,ht them to put tint / It I p' cut of lhe rovni, siyiii", tint he hid been tlie cause of ill his prt scut n isuv —tlieu ¡shuddering « tlidicvv lus toit finn the Childs
child's band, who being accustomed to ende irmetits, now sought in infantine playfulness to attract his notice, leaiful of nutating Ium Su Arthui caincd the boy away with hnn, and re¬ turned bunging in lien, whose rough rhetouc w.s moie ptisuasive with his mista, thin all the oiatory m the «orld could have proved lie soon contrived to coax hnn to a «arm bed, which had been previously prepaned by the kind and attentive Mis Williams He continued ν ay low for seveial day«;, at the end of «Inch, it was strongl) re¬ commended that he should pioceed to the .ea side, the ur, and bathing, being the only things avliich had ever beai successful to lnm m attacks of this natine. Doctoi Glynne with his usual philan¬ thropy,
thropy, gave up all consideiation of liu personal concerns, to accompany lnm to Margate, vvliithei it was agreed that the Duke antl his funily should follow lnm with all bncf convenu ucy \ssoon as hi It ft London, Lad) Susan, «ho bad been too deeply agitated on ac¬ count oflus midship to think ol heiself, sent a noti to Sir Aitimi, lequesting hull to appo nt Mi Stivens to give hei the meeting the next daj at Mrs Wilbanis's > Sir Aithui came to Giosvenor Squaie in the afternoon, and took a pnvate op¬ portunity oi infoi uiing hu, that on the ensuing moruni,, at tuo o'clock piecise¬ ly, the oltlgiiitlein.nl would wait upon her. He told the Duke, that he had been that moining to set the old woman, his pensionei, at Twickenham, and hadfound that
thai Loul John had been there, on flit ι«Ί\ diy lie »as su/cd with a return of his malady. 1 I qui,tioned ber," added Convers, " ami she conltssul that be had come thither to make enquiñes coni eining little Dick's friends—that be had also given hci money, but upon ber telling hun paitol liersloiy he had sworn at her in a temblé manner, and ran violently oul of the cottage." " But what did you say to lnm, Mis. Davies' said I." " Ob, Sır' Ι гал determined never to ttll nobody iny stoiy agam, his strange ¡oi.lship fiiglitened mc so, and I am so at' ud of being brought into a peck of tio iblcs—Loid knows 1 have had a plenty of tbem aheady, although I never did wiong in <.II my boin days." " Finding
" Finding till my entreaties vain, I »as toic.'d to leave her." 'Ihe Duke aftei list, mng attentivtlv to what the voung Rnonot had pist related, paused foi л sttonil 01 two, and then matle answei. " It is piobable, mv dear Althin, that tins Mis. Dav ics's stoiy was not in the most remote de,iee the cause of in) pool biotbei's tienzv tor I am ually peisuad- <d ilut it must have originated m the vioitut ti vei with »inch he was attacked soon nttu our fathu's deatli. lie can bave no ¡letsmitil afflictions, lie would so long ioni, al fiom f ι iends who love, ad¬ mire, and tstceni lnm so aidcntly and íűectionatclv as nc all do " Mis Scuciamole „«не it ns her opinion, that it «as abominably insolent, anil voe. u. e prcgiously
cgregiouslv impeitinent ni an old woman, to utusi givmg ansiveis to Чп Arthu-s points of interrogation, adding— " Τ hope nephew von will not demean yoiirsi If bv condese ι uding to take any firther notice ol the iieatme, as sue does not si em st nsible ol the implicit respect, due fiom people of hti situation, to supe¬ rior ıank." A blush of "Piietous indignation ae- conipinied the man!) answer of the noble minded ν outh. " I'xcuse me Mulam' but tbcie isno rank 01 situ it ο ι in lift, bowt ver splendid oi ixalted, wluth can pes bly eave one human bung any authonty to tvi.mise ovu moth« r' thank God evtr body's Ihm, Ih me fue' mil I shoul! lit a dispiciblo fellow, it, taking .ulv inn e of undent«!
к euh util cucimistanecs (the merit of p ople Ί n belure I »as I bought ol) I . \cr« ι id any powi ι over ι ht lpless pooi ild »oui in 1 " , Ilii' ' tint) ' mn ıs demotraev with ι » ι m «ь ' aud umt Липе. " - tirnici slılııtıoıı tl principles as ι ч ¡lu 1 in mv litt," icjomed the [>i ' e ι in tu ík in llie pricticc of thtse noble fet п. ,s nil thty »ill bi then own lev· ud, ш j bo ' ι u lun ι* »as Iij no means «hat Sn udu i s u ht he took bis aunt by tlie h uu! t'tnfiit and in ι soothing sn mi t. Id In ι she h id sutler d her kind n s f. hım t ι mi in liei judgement, s lung tint Ί bul a 1 1 vvuful iesti unt, vin h »oıılıl iva unlit ito ı,aııı t lus destituii« Ms Daut pvhiilivvas hei
not possessing one single qualification which could inteiest any other person in her behalf. Tins atttmptto soften mine aunt Anne, was of very little avail Sir \rthur, how¬ evei like a s-killtul engineer at length took the toituss b) sap, fot when he thiew in an artful compiimi nt, stating, that all Ills foim fellows had t ikon her and Susan for •usta s, the last time thty came to visit bun in the ch mot, at Westminster, the wimklis on her f(«rehead were giadually tfiated, the smile of returning good hu¬ moui mantled round bei lips, and when the paity sipaiated, haimony and good humour weie thoroughly restored. Lady Susan took care to attend her ap¬ pointment at the time prescribed, on the next morning Л oung Con) ers not bemg leturned fiom school, she enteied into conversation
conversation with Mrs \V illnms, who wis never vveuiy ot talkın,' ot liei dear voung gcutlemm, ot whom she told stub stories, as exalted him to the heishl of his cousins opinion "id suffused hit lovely eye» 11 tears ot admintion,— " Tears, sueh as \ipelsslieel 1 She had scaicely tune to wipe them from her cheek, betoie the Hlio of Mrs W illi ıms's histories entered, accomp mi¬ ed by Mi Stevens V ien Sir Aithur had niliotliictd bun ani "lis Willums li id left the loom Mı t 11 ns seist d tlie L uly bv llu baud with in an ol the greatest tainiliiiity intl givni_, it ι hentv shake uidsquesi assui¬ ed hci he shoultl tlmil himself p utieti t , hih
1 nly ияр » ııı b. ing able to obi ¿o such a pitti) looking )0ini o lidy. ^ot at all gi Uil ed bv the frei dom tt bis addı. ss vetbuınaııclv attııbtıtıııgıt to the propu e ısı— i w mt of knowing belter—1 adı Susan cnticitul bun to take л ι li in un/ , и с, « ıth a « Kfull look on hti u usni m hopes of Ins entiling on tht busintss f n winch they lad issemblel, butSir Aithui vvas so much diveltai Iıv hi r stare of surprise adtled to Mi Ste¬ vens's forced, and aukward ittempts it eise, that be bad retirai to the wind vv, in J crammed Ins pocket binilkeieinef in bis mouth to avoid m explosion ot tb tl mirth with which be felt h mselt so nie subbi) tickled Mı 'ti vens declari d that though he was at that moment wanted in tbrre dit feu lit
furorii ρ'ι es, 11· b J not it ill vvisi to hmi) hu Itilphip, but id 1 I - ( Mv voung acquaintance Sir Aitiiur Cm crs, int inn d iue)otir lnl)slup wisli ed to si t m —no v 1 il t i)s m ikt busi¬ ntss give \vdy to the ladies— lui as Oi)4 1 ablts says— " WP ι ι La 1rs in th ctsc, " 4 u ι know dil otlıu tluu,, „ivcpht-e" " So you see inadım, tli ,t, although I do nut live at the p ılıtt end ol tht town, ] lute md somaliin, and know .j/iut't u Itu t " Ilı stood simpering with approbation ni hopis of t rt ply fiom hu lad)ship, but Sn Aithur pttetiviu.'hti shanit md ι ι tusi in beginning to ö ıow too painful, tUtcuumtd to dash into the business at ι f once,
once, therefore going up to Mr Stevens, and giving bun a hearty slap on the bick, he esxlainicd— " Why my hearty old buck ' I've been telling my cousin vou are a wann snug ftllow, worth a jtiiuiii at least, and so being in «ant of a trifle to pay for jevvclsi court dresses, and tnnkcts, she wishes to do you the honour ot boirowing about— how much Susan 1 will a cool thousand do'—yon km« Mr Stevens )0u always tell mc, you are nevei so happy as «hen )OU can oblige )our fnends " " Λ cry tuie, Sır Arthur' andi hope that m) lady and ι shill be etto c mu i u id I anı sure niv 1 u!) Mis Stevens niv Vutci ind my son Mı Simuli Stevens will be pırtıculııly li ıppy to see you to с it Mutton with us, ui) div U Ilimp stead, exdpt Sunti ιν , toi tlııt I like to.
bivi с inip uıv tiun mv sı l' Incinse ii d и sai l in tei la« with busun ss va ь S пишу ılvvays txiiti ts t ! ivelisSin dus to bimself, lit noul ι ι s lhe pl sine ot )our company « hu h I should ! e sony foi — foi ihol 1 siv it tint s! ml' not siy it hi 0 h oi 1 ι« I dont kın ν Sammys filio ' Sun's i tıp top om — ι lıesuıe tint's ncitht r ben noi thu —· nul 1 un v iv «iihip to lend vo i lu' snip the sum Su Ai th ni Convois mui- tio is si un, is I r « 1 « an hau u v g ud st inity ior my mom v — not ts 1 em ılı nit mom v (is l sav s to Mis Su „ ) v hv /W/l' 1 hive ι limigli u I v ιι know my '¿dv, αιοιι 3 1ι ıs ıs g od ıs / ist" 1 ulv Susin ı\ ıs ıvelv llis,lbl d I his mii mrs iiiil convers uı uı, bp uı I univ t it pun il I iv n, piu liniştii n lu ubi tıstı in «hu su mu! so
i ulv I iv u! lui ι dl ,1 vu, tppntii ini) 1 m ıkı ι li ι η ι Ί ot Un ftvoiii In bail ilon lu n d to ti li r with ι ľ « I in no ııtı u puso ι I lv" diluito use iovi nils h-r it « ıs tu tb t ( o n о ľouvim nd takılırdı ıııı ı,ı ol 1 ılı bl 1 1 in ' ivein ι ! ss resp ι Hul in unti Unn v as a,„cable but si 11, hi wns ι guiil man, and ills' «batevci hr undu link of ai л '/, Mr Stcvtn, «as veiy I ' - mov ι lu in an) pu tc ι mis to tint tun Still ho ever lobe ub v d fi m 1 ıı- voi i's ıniHutııisiıce, by p vii hım, md Uierc! y putting an ind Io Woodvilk s ledono sui mises, w ıs i "-tion , t"i ıptıtıı π, in idtbtioii to .vbieli, slit could not but 'l il „ι ι ilul lortbe icadnic.s with «h Ii Mi vtcvens complied «nil lui ìeq ι st foi his vuljuity she felt lontuiq t, but hi lcsPittmcnt—his zealous conqi'inu with lur wishes, was a high milk ol ι ıı tilai ι ш ι toti! stran, α «huh tn e-
ι ti lus heut of I uly Susan (uncinsa is lhu rank uid foitune bun, Ui aim 11 ns) ttlt i|i its tullest extent I h niku L lnm thuefoi , m tue in ist | lite mil ith ble ni inner, she tnquutd vvh u it woull be convuntnt t hım t > let bir h ve the nitiiitv, uıd at vvh it tunt ht «isi 1 1 tint tht interest sii miti bt ltmittt I to lu n O to moirow— 1 1 monow Midiin v m diali linger the cish, evei) body knows that Sa n Stevens has only ti «lus¬ tie and command any nu ney ho chuses, and as foi the inteiest my lad), we won't sti itch each others f itts ibout th it—pay it when you like—only fivt per tent— mmd that— mlv five per tent — no usury—no Jew Ir ils with me—ill 1 m and above boaid—and is 1 hope )ou «ill tal e beif aul plumb pudding with 11 evci) piy div I hut cart how long you m mv debt 'j e ( 1I, 0 ,ly
НцЬК pie sed »uh limiseli t n li s ge- neiesity npi\ nig her sueh ititt mtleisy intuition ht thought it impossible toi her to lcMst it and hugged hitustlt up in tin thought of she» in 0 all bis icqu mit¬ inee whit fine eompniy his wile and diughtei kept Io estiicate liebclf fioin this unple ι sa t dilemini cost tlie fan Susan some thoııjıl ind ptipltxity ι lueky idea ud lenly t ι eied her ladyships muid, uni ч its vm 0 toMi Stev ι ns, w Uh everv iti uk pohteness and condescension, ι ïnlnpU ïtjoined I am I i.,hly flittered by voııı kind imitation Mı Stevens, but as it ıs nt- < ssııy foi this han tole lipt ipiolound sirici Ι ι innot at ul nits 11 ol youi mi¬ lities without the 1 ш »ledge of nıy I ni- ly, ud tlie cumien e of mv visiting al
at Iliinpsteiil, would lead to the chsco- vuv of a en. umstance, which, as you nuist pciceive, 1 am most particularly anvious to conic il —míj I, thcielore, depend on )oui silence' ' Ceitunlv, mv latly' certuni)' — í am veiy soi ι y jou e m't lit me have tilt | It isiire of sin win,' jou mv Л ill ι at llinipsttid bin vou uıd 1 tan meet her. to tiansict oui busintss whentvci «ι hkt—and is foi tht steiet, jou may dipcnd on mt—I shall Ive snug as а Ъиц inning my lulj—depend on Sam Sti¬ vens — «с sh ill bc good fi iends, I can see tint with halfan eje, foi nothing brings filks u qu lulled so well as a seciet, jou know, my luij ' He then «ıth ι significant «ink aiost, atiilsijin, he luti ι thous mil ıppoınt- nieiits lbuut uiontj matteis, wished the cousins
cousins a good moining, fust h.ivin n «hat be calk d л fling at Sn Aıtlıur, loi s/aun· ming Alımlının As soon as be hati takt u his de pattuii the Haronet ìtcoiidiitted bis louly finişin to Cirosvenoi Mpiare, where thcy found Lord Dalton, who bad called to request Lady Susan's «oinpaiiy in his curricle "Will you go and take а ¡utul ride with ine my fair sister'" said be, " tor I kıııı« your saje aim* has an objection to mv «lashing you thiough the Jushionable IjllllgU." "Willi all my heart Tarnest' llieic do you wish togo' —my dearest Arthui— perhaps ¡put will give us your compati)'" Sır Aıtlıur, with whom to discover the wishes of anothei, and to fiutbei them was one antl the same thing, in а m «incut dived
divel ι ita Ins Lei ships n tentions, anıl dul red ho should 111 ι the plan of all thin,s if thev « ι uld „о and call upon Lam ι leiiq ι ι liuııpstıad Ile then -ent for lus horses and ser- v nits, md tbey sit out on their expedi¬ tion lad Luton told his fair «impa¬ ni η he 'ni s m out of the ofliceis of (Jia les's legi nent, who had given him α vut ui) ïomisiiig account ofins biother's pilts Ihe tucsome fellow" added he quite Itj/e/me, foi you know Susan 1 vv 1 hut dismals lit savs, that fiom b ι g tin 11 isiniest fell)« in the whole Ir op bei I ti mea perfect Penruddocl 1 t! 1 1 it 1 tin » t »аз a most rrmantit I us in my «o tli) fıtlıeı thought pio p t 1 1 ins it ııı vem conti ict foi bidding the miiiiige till ni\t Gluistinass, no« my
mv m «unis —whtn ι man his mule up his nunti to thnt sınıl bılteı pill, t illeti imiti пиши/, e'en let hnn swallow it at οηιι,οι it's tht long odds but lit runs- nstivt, and tıkın, ılıt bit bit», in his teeth, st unptrs oll aud leives the discon¬ solate damsel in the «lumps " They were bercinta uptcd bv Ml liou- verie, w ho met tlitin on hoistb itk to tlie great lchtf of 1 idv Sus in lit woultl Inn |iissul with ish lit good moniin,, but Loid Ddt n .linking Ins hoisis, talliti out to ! un 1 1 lit g tint lu w. ild tike lus g nid foi hım the next moiiiiug il St James's, adunig— " I am cngigcd to meet ι contounili 1 horse jock« > it twelve, ııı llvıle l'ıık, tin retine, il voull assume mj pi ııı m militane I vull tike vou to time u ılı s joung ladies titiléis to moiro«, uıd ıhın
you may by your gallant speeches hinder Mulam Sentiamole liom giving \t me most soundly—and if you don't—the Lord have mercy upon me!" Luly Susan sat upon thorns during thu most imprendi nt invitatimi, when Lord Dalton staring at her, immediately sub¬ joined. " Why don't you second uu Susm' I am sure Ins 0 taie will be very -,'ad to se_ llllll." " My father, Tamest, «ill always be happy to see any ol ijum li iends " 111 garelli ss of liti Inly ship's evtsive answer, liouvtni iiislantlv .tttipttd Loul Dillon's piofiutd civilitv, tutl rode oil, toucluu s lus h it lo Su Vitbui as lit ¿ il-
lop d
1 ipu! by ln n When he vv is gone L id/ Sus in cxeluined—■ ' Hi« vciy thou,litlt ss it «as of you I mist, to invite this yfiuu, mm' you kno «hit ididiki bolli Loul Ddor nut and your biothci have to bun " "Wtll, well' bmhe is nol inkclious, is hi ' I suppu c lu e in't pois m w itli his ey s hkt t llis.l к 1 hive h aid tlit «onn u ill than Aided oui s — luth the fibow is InudbOini enough 1 I shoul 1 not n uth nlish hiving huu foi а rival «litre I wish ι 1 foi uttt ss, and reily n vv I think oi it 1 bavı biought myself into a btff ι sci ipt, f л lie lull uitiiiily sup plant mc with Miss Siudunoie " Ladv Susan no« be,an to reioncilc ll"- ell to an evil fioinwluch there w ıs nc
ese"pi.i, is to dine fio u home, as she had at fi s ıhouglıl ι f, nn, ht to Потене seem hk / η, md lii ι ι . ι slu vuil kne» ν tul 1 ι 'ildir hım still nıoıt confi¬ dent ano assumiu , u »udd likewise tud to jm mott « ищи its, fi um ha fit ur ат! uspii ions ıı ba aunt, thtse ε',ι Wil» -lu , m'.! nI s itisfy, and tbeıe- f u iltterinniul logetovti the ılıv isvïill as she »ıs hh, l.v makin; Sn Aithur ki p clise to hei, sic а' о hoped tli it sonu lut i¡ v eli nut might ot t ııı 1 1 tane. Il¬ ing that debt with Codino, »hieb hung so beai) on nei n nid. Having airangi d sometlinip like a re¬ gulu plan m lu vunni 1 she endeavoured to ionnal liim bu volatile companion tin uncisiii.ss »Inch Ins nicoiisnleiati invitation h ul given hei. A shoit tunc brought tbem to Mi llanbiiiv s,
Iliinbiiry's — Sır Aıtlıur assisted Ьн cousm to alight, ami followed by I oııl Dtdton, tbey nil entered, tho Uoust
(ЛПРТПП II
J_J ι,υΙιΛ «as statte! ni a back room fmploj cd m «h uvnig flowers Mrs H m- buiy perceiving ι curricle advancln, to the door, had flown iqi stairs to tluovv her chess into a romantic elegant disor¬ der Luna received hi ι iint\peetul visitors with an artless uiibsguised i\- pressfon of sitisfaction 1 diced
1 oiced bť concurring circumstances cl lui exirioiduiiry fite, to live much anion.st pel si us «idily dit!tun¿ f m hi istif in the moie a nuble and graceful ıttrıtlı ns »hieb adorn the human mind and limit polished socittv »as to bu ι got 1 1 «hieb she capily desned mil as sitlut uslv cultiv iteti She enquire 1 carnestlj ifter Loul (ohn of Si \rtlur, cxel umin/ it the sanu moment 1 Ab' lit» anxiously do I look fti- vtaid to that tunc win η I adj Delorune shall call upon u с lo fulfill the imitation she so liiuily „avı me tt leeompiny hei fiinilv to Mani iti' I thtn m ιν pei! api bave it ııı im ) uter, ııı soire licerci , to lieu mţ ι ılıtıldı tuli buıetoltnıbeıng win ч il η il evu lhe n lu ıj , f tito vtictclicd tıplıaııs 1 — Ull' in iy Ileum „ivo
givo some power to my brother and mj¬ self of assuaging the tortures of his mind ' of healing the wounds of his lacer ited heart'" Afiected bj these illusions to her de¬ pendi lit situation 111 hfi—Lady Susan could not say 1 word— I ord Ü ilton strov ι to suppu ss 1 sort of soft sigh, mil Sir Aithur turning over the leaves of bei driwing btol uidtav oured to divert lhe conversation into a different channel. V, ith this kind bearti 1 intention he « n- teied into conveisation on the subject of ha ucent iniplnjmuit this drew Ins, 1 ordship to the tibie, vim declai n. It lud ut voi se 11 шу thing so cb nmingly t \i cutid iddcd— " D ι von know Miss Tempest that ill mv muli ulatius m eath to «lo s ime- tliing towaids furnishing mv house' fin 1
1 лт going to be steady, now I am gran - ing near 30 —upon my soul 1 intend, now 1 am no longei a child, to put away f//iW«V' things'- I'll be a rude schoolboy no longer, as Mrs. Haicourt, Susan's fnend, calls me—Louisa is to woik me ,i rug foi my diawmg loom, and Hai not is to furnish 1 indscapes for the paunch,, Harry Tempest is to paraphrase some Greek epigrams for my screens too. 1 nsketl Mrs Scudamore what she would do towaids these voluntiry contributions, and sht lias promised to woik m. ι pau of Ottomans in case I should get tht ¡rout by good living, и lien 1 become я family man, forvou know vve single fellows in London live so spare, vve nevtr gettile gout—but all in good Inn, " " Now I von (said Latly Susan) tins modest young gtntleman is spelling for you and I to do something foi bim I'll
',o as fır as kmitni, hım i night cap to weil in his studi W h it »ill ι/πι, ilo I uni'" I pun uıv. soul, 1 adv 'susin vou tie uıv , iod, in miking ι utpust to Miss li nipist /dut not ιπ,ι, but, v\ Inch it she »ill g-nul, would conti ι honour on me uni ί,ι uilnalion 1 1 ill thi »ho <■ e bu pi inani uı«t Vi ill vou n id un ,ι iu .iblv assuu" ' t ι rt mıh, mv lord I un but t н> ninth flıttııcd bj voui compliment Uıs tin stııtlv, as it ıs lhe pııtlt ot uıv hli, to obiig! all those gen. ous bunds »hi li ut so nobly stepped foi n ml to piuau înv fűim, lhe vv ml ot ill tin undu tus tit tehtıonshıp, anıl l hopt 1 nuv im! 'su \itliur, who « ıs tumbling ovu In ι poitfoho, hue y tul itid— voi ,ι ΐ) λ '
" Aye' aye' vou shall call cacbotliei brother and sister, then )ou'II ацгее as well as be does with his sister I omsa " " Arthur, I vv ıslı you would not inter¬ fere with your nonsense' I shall think myself highly complimented on bearing tin proud title of Miss Tempest's sincere fnend." Laura then promised him a pietuie for bis dummy piece, and Lady Susan quit- ıngSır Aithui, whispered iu Dalton's car. " Has your lordship any objection to having three in thejUirncle, in case of my p.ev.ubng on Mis« 1 empest to go batk with us'" "Notm the least, upon my honoui, theie is no one thing in the world which would give mc more real satisfaci ion '
Inly
Lady Susan then turning· to Laura, suiti she had also a very great favor to ask. adilin-' smilingly— " Now if you (h'iıy mol shall positive¬ ly lu; «m'iti; jiMilous ol' ľ.rnest— do coun; lure anıl lıılp me topersuailc hur!" '■ What is this mighty favour Latly
'· Nay! nny! if you mi/ l/iifi/ me, 1 shall give it up, and Iıı; (|uilu suru thai me.v^/.amllmayhaveliop.-s!" ·' Well llifn, my dear Susan I promise to tin any tliinţ, anıl every liiiny you woultl have nie." " lîravf»!" évied Sir Arthur "the bini is eiuiitlit!"
Λ ou two pickles bave succeeded to a nura. le ' added his lordship I idv Susin smiled and proceeded Well thai my sweet I аша' the git it sunt is —that )Ou havt now pio¬ niised to go with us ti 1 ondon to dav, nul uniani theie unti 1 1 can pievail on finest to duve you bick again " ' Hut my dtar Susan, what will Mrs Huibuiy think of my having hei iu such m unccicinonious i malinu ' ' Sır Arthur tool up the matter here w ıtiı a— " Poh' stuif and nonsense' let me alone—I'll bunboo/le Dame llinbui) I'll get a soft pillion uid jouit bei up to London behind me, like a fumci's wife going to sell buttei at a m ukot, and « hen wc
we get home, I narr nil jou aunt \nne «ill link so ι ши it ln ι tint 1 slnll be obliged to ciirj hei tu my own quina, as i ren ird loi inj tioii'ilt " ' Hold voııı tt Igu '" tutti lus «ои- ып " mil do jou Luna go ι id | ııı up some ol vom dussin, thn „s to sec if jou tin out tl> mv unit, »ho is now giowii nunc g i) intl I llm, than evu —lin.st' O o and onici th ium! li tumble to lie u t.lv ioi 1 un ι s раек i 0 c ' Uıs loidship ilmost tl w tut it tbe io ııı ııı .ulu ti exeiiit lins a, ι ι ible eo linussion, uni Su Villini [is nuis 1 to emulam Mis I Imbui ι w 'min tli V ılış¬ tın, uished bj tin chik eltuv t, hu ii tl, 11 bt descendu!., tn tuis t ldj ilisin Itu ι ıvııı 0 hu ι tuv t ч ti « ι, mt c impimu u ııı tlie g. odness of her looks, tin ¿ed 1 uni ıııtı liti ıooııı, n whu«
wheie in s|iile of vanous lepiesentations of the .uikvviiidiiess of going to Grosvenor Square without а previous mutation houi the Duke ol Montcastle, or Mis. 4cuda- moie, she foiced ha to equip hciself, and assisted in throw ing hır things into sm ill trunk, tilling bei, il she h ιμροηοι! not to lake enough filici), aunt Aunt would blip ba out, who had lud m a huge stoik the day thei unne to London, as shebehevcek with a villam uıs, anıl nuh cious design tqion tin heait ot |iooi Doi tor (jl)iuie, but that his good ¡jenius had removed hım fiom the manic spells ot his C.il)pso, and broke all bu talis¬ mans, for thev would most jiiob.ihlv In come |i(iftctlv antique, and uul.ishiou- able betoie then pioposed metling vt Maigate. While the ladies wae thus inqilo)ul above stans, Ioni Dalton had been vay busy in ranoving tht cuslnonsandgii.it
coït-, to unke is much loom in the cai - rugi ıs possible Sır vitiini «as deeply engaged by Mis II liibuiy, «ho « is ie¬ pe tting some vases to him under ι sti let piomis of scciccv vv lucii prouiist she tarnestlv hoped he would hive more , toil bieedin 3 thm to olisi ivc Ibis iiucsshc b id heistlf composed, in the subject of Loul Johns iiloption ot lieniv uid Luni sn Vrthui did not it tust mudi lehsh hu pitchin, on su Iı t theme tır the ılis- pli) of hu poctu d lilents, but ь she piot tt eled uı hei icuuti ι both tin stvl mil tone hie tin so iiiiionquei ibly llllll liions tlllt til t sellOUs ι kt vvas put to h hl md notimi, but tlie ttiiin ot ıhı h li s tudd In e invaiteli hun hom I iilatin his , ai ι il id ınaııneıs, mil ,ııın„ v nt ti lu muţii Ι) ι loud •ind viti ut him «fluidità Mis ι ι Huibuiy
Ilanbury with a look of uiysti rv, intended to cxi ite cnquii), put the precious manu script into btr pocket I inn «as too much accustomed to hei lli,bts to til t any uotttt 11 this mi- retiieious puce ot m.disly, but ι a ly Susan »bo li nl some untucsloi wishing to co i\ md «bcidle bu a little slily enti. ıled tobe indul, ul with ι split «it some if the illusions of liu tl. , tut must Mis llaiibmysuiiltd md told her Ui it tin ie was no iisistiu, such a pli idei \s bei I id) ship wis ι bu! si ntl tl tnd annoyed it so unwelcome ι c η pli- anet with i mue ci niphnieiit i) lequtst sh. thanked hu m the «armest uiuinei, but die ulm, the vve il niss ol hu mn clcs, ııı i sisim, lhe ıısıble idei» «hull wt uld ıııev itahly leeempinv ι h mugit the threatened pean she idi ıllv iv t iti , I
ed thi tlin.ei »İneli meniu 1 tin m, bv sijiug in i pjlıte tout oi t oiet ' M inj th ink- di u Mulini bv tbc w ιν Mis lluibip I In e with saw «lidit nity prevnlid ou mv il n 1 uni t) iceompuij us bick t ι ι n lon pitulul v utull lute th ,ίι to spii Ί ι fu ι 1 ι dn 1 и II hoe tli linoni il , ι lu tup ι m k t ι t.l s t notne İse it t îtlı mu s m l titt ί,ι и «lu 11 ťllt pui ll 1 nus I tl bl tlııt \ Ul «ill lute tin _, ıhı -, t ill iw in pie 1 I tl tit ththl t | llslt | 1 us ol «Ulell I inesp iks iu suih ι II ont ll ι ıc une tmu m .,ιιι li vi u ¡ ι ıj) ι ишь it pu¬ sun I ini s ι cuıellj bunu d in nv, time, tlııt I un sino 1 shoultl lose manv ot tlie 0 iiu.» »Uh wliii h l umiditami vour corneo iti ins и l nit tt— b ııı le^ »İneli like those ot Milt и in lth dnine liuke¬ nit и iiqtiiH ııı ι tb ι ι tlie siipuheiil ¡,1u oı t eu soi p ĺ t Util — »o ne l'oets
are to be tompiehendu! in .1 moniuil, but I undei stand that the w utings ol Mrs. JLiiibiny aie not to In lni.isiiiul by the geneial stantlaul ot oitluiaij t a paci ties." Giatified to the .xuss bj llus inflated complunait, Mis. Hanhiuv. blushed, (oi seemed to blush) while Lady Susan fi\- ing one ojt on Launi, and keeping the other rivettd on the objtct ot hei uito- nnunis, continued hei ihapsoilv. Ila|ipv' happv Miss lunpest 1 »Ito e.m In dailv t hai m« d »ub suth poun al ability— »hotan listin to su, h estiai i- diinnv veisilicatlon — , nd the favoliti tompámon othei »ho might qui te trom the ľaiadise Lost - ' li lliilliiviiiufll. utili I lim |«ı uinui, " Ли 1 mli!) gutst, nul ι! nist 1 ıııpvıt tl ti' Mun
Milij were the cur sics «hieb suc- tcedid tins most undaunted compliment, but Mrs Hanbui) Ιιι,ΐι pio if i, unst quiz/ing, vv ıs em ıptıırul tt suoli eneo ımuıııs fıoııı ı persan ot high ımk, mil uı Ы gıaeıoııslv givi lit ı misent to Miss lunpisťsdi pütüre, askın, it she those liei mud to fol'oiv in the sti, e .oicli Luly atısın titolili« «J this pi itľer, by stum,, tilitt n so shoit i pino ! hu оки vy oui m would be vuv will ible to ittcnd than bitli Loul Dilim then címem to huny Ihını, in I ıhtı Mis llmbiiiy hul bein issailul «uh i loud volley ol ml, ,111 ns hom tvu bod) p esciit, slie cinismi them to the don, tutl seeing lu ni s toll vent ducali toba «ııtııı, tlesk uıd b pn tlie Inst ι ι ito ol tu Lpie l'ut n. Ilio spi, ts ot ι il Dih m v ne anı¬ nı t İH li h „li | ι bv the pie
scuce of Ins lovel) Laina he «led ucti to Lad) Susan, that since shi bid ki pt bun out so long, hc «as idi ud hi should miss his duini r at lhe mı s and «oıılıl Unu fou, lug loi a kııılt and folk at Un Dııkt's table, piovided Mis Sauhuuni «oıılıl ι \cusc boots and letaltets "I am sure Linist" was ber insvvti " bolh \iiut Липе and my fathei will b vtry hqipv to bivi vom comp mv foi vou know vou не a tu at favoliti , but I hope tin» visit ,,, passant, «il! not hinder von ban coinin, to-mouo«, is vou luu iskal λ ι lîoııvcııc to ma t you'' " О no, Susin' I'll conn' 1 im not so eeiaiioinoiis as tint natii« ι— both ( osmo mil ι usi U w ill u it univ ln tlıc t ıs l kim«, vou httlc Gipst ι, juu «oul 1 be distppoitit tl ii «e tulul ' \flei ι most ht Uth) imi ilclUiťiil «Invi
dine Dilton sit tlo» η tue lulles in bios v cuoi Sqiiiie İhı Duke leccived I mn lempi st wiili ill tint mb iinty nul pohti ılı s »Inch m elıırıeteııstıı il ot the reil ııobleı ı in intl the tuie pntlomui He .roodhu- mouidly scolded lord D litui loi hum, ι 4ceed the tinnier hom ti Ihug hun, he «lind not hive servul Inul Uıloııuie such a tuck Mrs Scud un ne «ho ι miti uevci tlisptnei »itli in) ot th ce¬ it inonious pulícidos ol ι tirpit Ut bileti rıtlıcı sliti tt 1 m ι Ι ι с unui, »ılutnu a ugni ir invitinoli, bui ι 1 и e unpli nuits on lui heul this-, I un loid D Utoň,« U tu li th lm ul m t e uclcv, e isy in inuti (uı ıı il q tul lo pt ,ιι ı- sitii th ıı ıh m t luthul md el ılıt rite lı«4iı,ı ) i li I ll sınıl s ml dim¬ ples t , hu 11,
\s S u ıs ll ι 1 t s 'l 1U11 Su \ huir
Aithur quilted the compiny in oidtrto pit pili, Ыь exercises for che next ih\, which he wis igun lcqucstetl lodine ш (iioavciior SqiHic, uid ih the dinner hour « is consultnbi} iftcr tint of even ш_, school he ь mi he u is ш hopes oi ne complihhing the point In llie слишц the DuketriNc] κ v Susin ι Itttci lo icul which lie Ind just lLCLUcd iıom lib biother John She н tın d to tlıc di ıuın 0 ıoom with lui unit mil Mi>s Itinptst wheu shi pti usul tlu I Ilo« ııı 0 t pistils -
11 Ils Οι ас tut Diu of MoiiUastle Grosvenor Squaie Mv Di ar GioRCL ' Glynne tells me tint vou ire verv mxious to bear iıom nie licei ι ithu betta at tins place Ulani hive been foi som time pist «pute «elli ' le ir I nev el sb ill bc but 1 feel gu it sa tisi u ti η «heu 1 ι ııı gun sııthcıuıt ι immun! tver mv 1 vvildued minil ıs t ρ iv nt n ν İt n, ι t io bt ινν bui tiltil li ι on tlie Utenti ns nul if- feetitiiite 111 ln s, f I the best blothir ( vu mau «as ! I s eel wuh—did vou Inou w li it I met uns nul ie ------ but I «ill not pun vom sv nip ilinsin., ' heut with ι desci q tion 11 uhıtlsııl- i ι — I cuıv ı ıııdulı ibout mı which death doue с uı eııie Ihıp 1 un not tıılpıble
' tıılpıble m pi iv in, foi i dissolution ol ' Ibis ρ untul, fieble finnt ot unne I ' hopt, md ti ust, th it my inoiuntiil dis¬ order is disiglieli by ι pitvin, God, i, ' m txpi non foi my guilt in liivin eiliset! my poor deu t ithei such il 1 dictions — l bioko his ln ut Gunge— ι vuy time I anı lift donc ııı tin still ' ııı ss ot the night he comes sı huig ti ' mv bed sidt, and tells mt so—th ľ, that tirnblc idei haunts me—it stunt umts makts me dıspaıı —but then tin inn, e t f my mother comes sunini, lit Ιοί ι mv ι tut uns nul tells me tint ťn meny ot tin lb ıvcııly tttlısı ь 0 rcat, ' ıs ıs hısjiıstıu t) t.ıorgı' (,ιιι ι ' von r mı mb whu puns tint in tl in thu I ouis I к to m 111 nil ι ι in minds m ι ilv Ι ι tl dul' I tin I I ni να 1 si sı i t ι t ll I pil u pis v t ll tli v n time 1 in« st itvcuul tlum I I u- ' th ι | ι Ute— 1 dalt u it trust ' nıy ılı ııı i I ıh ι " I
" 1 sat ilon n lo «ııtı you ι gì otl ai - ' toinit ot mv st H, and tlıt ıı t nas ι nn- " tiaihtted tin mli ııtı uı vvlı it uı ııı ' consult ι ite ıtııuı d ıs ılı j ionii bang ' ıı uued man' — loi, ivt ne — ıvııı tj " me — love nu — l love ı/u« ln mt mil "soul 1 — mav Ihe glitt (tiiinriiii ol " mi ιι v p uu down Ьь lilt s n, s upon " you, mil upon yom ı'ıılılı, ťs пиаци' " toi von Ιι ιν c not tini', 11 ss« d " (.они lo Minute to mt as som " ıs volitili' my minti is now m ι s ıtt " to ılımı tömlőit tmıu vour s un ty ' I..... i th -oiiilv ol dl ıh -ι b, lovtd t,ı ııı j who hi tin u iťu n η foi me, " loi,Ot Uie pun Ι Ι,η ,w I tilt η tost " them 1 1 wish umih toi lltıırv it n- pist, bnth is I,,,, , «|,„ h, is—Uie ' HI, lllllllsol youlhltil , Inni | H ¡ι« — «hy' ıh, »hp s¡, , 1,11 „li ul thai ' II «tui dm и n'- , „nul n , | ou Del,llllll llllll, s Udi t 011,11, ss Ы thai
' their kindness to that excellent ' oung " min 1 slnll not isk Hi ııry lunpest " to eome here befoie you ill tlo tlo " not cvi n lunt it to hım, I ch ııgı jou ' " lie isoogrıtelııl for m action ot coni- ' mou chintv, tint he would instuitly ' mike my slight Jis/t his o n slutt ' duta " Kanı nıbıı me most ill. etion itely ' ti L iun, Sibiu, and \itliiii Louvers " 1 enclose ι lettel 1 hive leiuved liom ' in V voun 0 tllllld liniptst, in oída l' ' i ust Inni (il possilili) stili beliti in tin ' opinions of ill who aie dt ir to mt " 1 iriwell' 111 sltkliess, 111 llu boni ι f ılı ıth voııı 0 ı ıtılul— vuur ath( Hon¬ il« biothu " İOI14 Ol LVNts O'Cu noi '
lin
Πιο tnclobtd İtti« ι fi ohi Henry mu as lol lo« s.
1 1 ном tbc dus of carii« st infilici ni) iva honouied, my «να beloved presen li bis stnetly forbidden ni) hpstipiu ulti ranci to the Icihnp ot ni) lu ait — foi tht vu ilth ol vvoilds I woultl not Oliënd hım, but li nd, most bird has this injunction been'—to rt ceive kindness, .nul tets of solicitous ' iffection as nutter» of tonisi , must be to posstss sucli fellings is 1 hopt ill) ■' butst «an nevei búbom Λ «holt hfe devoted to voui enviée mi tie и ' I oid, would be in itltqu iti loi tilt it- " Пип ol thost bountits, which join ovuilovung puotiin ss bas lon., bun ni ' tlu Iubit ot pi tu иц down upon ιιιγ ' sistir and ni) sı 11—whin 1 losi thi " saisi
" sinse of tin uic ilcul ıblt dtbt, in ij this " unworthy hi ut b ι it to ubi ite' Oh, " my и vaui pi. tutoi ' tuist un U w ıs ' not willi tin intuition ol bu ıkın, the u n limt tu n ol tint silence jou h tu un ' posi d upon im by m , „мои tint I " thus uldrtssvon' iu me l besuch ' jou joui t nidoin uıd itt« útion, «lul. 1 I «\plnii my monies foi this iiiiiisiiil ' ιρρ,.Ι'" " Duini-, my mt nev, md ι vi η in th. " mue advmuii puniti of m) vontb ' mctssilv .ompi Hul nn to tonlunu ι ' pinsi. η. ι .η vom Ι ι Ills! ıps ,ιηιιο " 4tv but ıı ıs η ην tmie, wlun Ιΐιιοιι 0 1ι ' you I hive ' un «duciiul fu md 'pstibislud tt tlu sicied | к . s ı, n " »hu ι bun mv ıhı к. vou [ imiti d in to anbriti tint umin, ι 1 u li un mv » Uly Ilıttın, an impi« u muu, ι m n s Ins t m Ut Ulti 111 ι vv ist oin tiu Dulu I Monte istir, i nusl ' Illuni
libi ral pccuniaiy « iiinphinuit ıs lus Giace's domestic Ghaplam púdon nn my Loid, if I now diehnt bı ııı, шу fmtliei biiithen upon that bun voli η. ι «llicll С HI 111 VH VV Ull fit olq. Its (ol lis subbilli ısı ilions" Ood foı- bııl mv loved pint«cloi, tint b) this a.t, »Inch conseil no ti lis tut is a si- cud dut), ) ou should t oiisidu nn is attuatili b) ι tlilistabli pndt' «u tint I slnll ful mv stlf m tin most minuti I utiailu abstliid In ,11 my atltttn 11 itt obi du 111 1 lo tlu milil ciininaiids «filini whom 1 luvt tın loud and uvend utxt to He iun ilont Li ist vom loidship bv 1 gisti u и know- Ιαΐ,ι, simuld bi hui ıfı, 1 lul t , „us¬ pi ot nu cf dissimili m n I now cou f. ss it as ni) slini, win ti mil unce ni) istu to ι upt tlu pi tui ılı 11 ot my pıcsıut mutili mu m md to tu tieat you (bumbii) tu ılıştım b, m , muiiifiunii »buh minnis« uu , s ıı 11- ' «lu
" der now no Ιοη,η r niussary to utlu r ' l thoııdıt misi U m m ι! ing I uu ι ıhı " oliti, but slu du Imul it with t supi " rifinì) off« I1115 и huh tliough I «mn " Inow liuu half llikivusi umkss " 1 dul not at fust know bow to ippiu 1 " alt It must thin u m 1111 Unis, ml " it tin suitmu Is ol _,a ,nidi mil " honoi «an «vu so f u di-iit mi is ι , ' inula 1111 tninnn liul of inv own pi " sonai obligations, my Invidi lm« I " Lauia must 1 1 tht piti!, t f riv uu qualifitil avow U otilie bistst ail thu " « vei inin committed I soli muly uni- " 11111 you mv loid, to btlitu lhat 1 " vvas nevu more youi elepintluit in ivtry bonoiirablc sense ot tin woul, ' thm at tin vut moment 1 un entú it ' \щ you to set к molha sul jut loi " vou bounties — no 1 nıy bononu I ' pristini' —1 pm not Uut vam vu tk " eu itine, to think for .1 monn nt tl at ί evir сип Iı, ındep, urlali foi on votli 1 11 nlmuul
loiitiiiuiil good «ipiiiuiii (intl pennit rat thi honin of adding 50111 ifľi . tion) 1 dépend toi all tht futun h ipj nuss of my lit. Miv I hop. f. ι ι t tv οι ible aus» u to this lui hi 1 1 1 slnll also pi tv foi abettu it.. un!, fumi li. ilth and spuits lu lu v« m niv lu noi ul lind tu in vour d« u ful ıflıttıoıııtı , dutiful, and most gi ttt tul ' İli M \ Tl lll'tsl. '
Ilıt Duke intenti tlu io. m pistas bis ilaughiti lud matit ııı uıd ol it ailing tinning to« nds linn, lui t vt , tillid with tens at the affidili;, gıalıtııılt , ıntl disiiittiistid
dısıutuıstul noblı ness ol Huil), slit t χ« 1 umt tl " Ho« suplinii, my tatlıcı, ıs om bt loved funni, my deal Huny, to »lut «ι «vu tlioujit bun' I »ould fun kno» Laura's nasun toi H|utin 0 Ins bh« ι al piofiir of sinnlig- 1ns huh unin il nu om. with hu I anı suu the ıııotıus tint attintili lnr mestbe both gì. itami, ioti foi be appeals to speik of tin in is uu- t oinmon " " I «ill isk lnm," rephul his Gnu if my brothei »ill pennit me but in¬ deed, 1 am very un« isy about join un« li , »ho seems lo me, «h iti ν ci li. in y ass.it to lin eontiiiv to lilimu uiiilir in in acısı ofins m d ulv it ıs i f ılıt misi affli« tu gkiud, aslı. ıppu ntlv 1 ıh« ins un¬ der a «olisi iinisness ot some 1a ılı 1 dm answci toi lus luvin nivir uiminilteil Glynne issuus me it ís ι .опцион thouji
though a mcluiiholv thing foi peisons 1 ibourin initia nient il du ingeim nt, Ιο ima,iut tint tht v Inve committed tlu most cht iilľul aum s — ıvııı ımııdeı - mil to i uk y tint tin y ire In u L I bv th tonni 11 in, and iv t η,ιιρ hinds d ,inh Suth in ısı militai ıs the cist с t uıv iiiit immite lu ilha 1 mı d t imin« d ι dt vvn to hm this «uk vu «diali quii town tinim inin ılı i ılıt IJnthd ıı I vv ul. ,o s, onu bul I i Iv D li mm uıd your aunt m ıkı ι li ug ρ mt oi vour Iı ıı, piesuit I it ( ι ni ι Unt (' ιν is you will ıı t hiv in t , i o¡ p uni itv picvious to ν· in шиш, 1 dl), t tlitn i tenni t ,ι Ίι (,ί κι « ılı s, ıııı q ısı, ,, ,1, ,ιιι bı, b is s— tl» Dule (pum 1 lus d ııı liti wh unid st m ι lv ton e il liti anttı ıs t thi nuntien oi ll evi nt win t Ihı ι ι «f vuv it lia sun t 11 c w 1 iu η ι , voııı ι ut
many diffei ent persons) would finally de¬ stroy. The much dieaded ceremony of going to Court—fresh expenccs must thereby be incuired—cxpences which she saw no mode of tlefriying —ytt to start an objection to iny thing which originated with Mis Seutlamoit', would be to expose herself toa thous uıd enqui¬ ries, and a long list ot the most sciutinis- mg questions. To parry the thrusts of this skilful an¬ tagonist exceedetl hu ability, l'atc bad caught hu m the toils, and, like Iht poor uptili, tempted b) the allın mg sw ut, she bad entangled heisi If in a fl itluing rum, ami eveiy tflort to tsaipt, on 1 ) sutul to plunge her many fathoms tit t ρ« ι in dt s- pair. The gaining tabli, as it otlatıl the evil, again seemed to suggt st the η nu d) , her mind shuddi red at the d ingű oí Un tepeiimcnt —hu thoughts «ut ig un in¬ volved
volved m gloorov darkness ind obscurity, and the diy stir ol hope, bioke not with glimmering idnncc thiough tin shroud She was loused from her unpleasant 11 vene bv foul Dilton suddenly iskin» lur how long it w issi ice she bad «litten tod ules Ilei uiibaiiasuient it tins so mal quo pt s «pitstioii, « is consuli 1 iblv aii.nient- ed 1 v hu aunt 1 din,— lun — t d now vt u menti uliul —- pi iv I itiv Mis u, vv hat ıs tin tease 11 of bis not Inv 11 , iniltin to /on Mint is ill this ibout'' sud tin Duke, i liojit von mil Chillis |,,v, nut qu indlul' il ht I ıs b I md ,|| и.
my darling he shall suffer foi it, I can tell hnn." Though deeply tonfoiindcd at these searching queues, bei mind was too ge¬ neious to allow hci father to suppose that AV oodv ille had been the aggressor. She replied—" th it, although thcy had certainly disagreed, she considered her¬ self as having been the person in fault and «ould write to him." She, therefore, requested hei paient not to intetjcie the smiling duke pro¬ mised compliance Mrs Scudamoie looked inquisitive, but said not a word. Lord Dalton commg behind hei chair, whispered, that as he was afraid he had done
dono mischief he would be off—and then told the Duke that he had taken the hbeity of inviting a fuend to eat ioni/ beef with lnm at Giosvrnoi Squue the next day His Giaco veiy cordially piounsed a hearty welcome to both, but warned him to be suie to come m time, as he was go¬ ing to the Theatre, «heie а Ьоч wasat the sci vice ol any body who liked the amusement, Ins Loidship declaring that he should like to be ot the paity abou all things, bowed and took his departme.
Ь 3 ClIAPÍUl.
СНЛРТЕП III.
¡Hi LmìFORE Sii Aithur left Grosvenor ^i. ι к' on the precceding day, Lady Susan had given hull a note to Mr Stevens, re¬ questing that gentleman to let her cousin have the money, and enclosed α receipt foi one thousand pounds. She was foiced to have recourse to this
tins method as I iura being her guest, she could not consistently with politeness go out alon« , and to inak hu btr com¬ panion might li ul to the divelopimeul of hci whole scen t lheie was 11 the character of Lam ι Iempcst adı, intl though d the mildest and most femnii e picles which mide it impossible to confide te her iny thing in the most rem ite deglec dishonour iblc or repiehensil lc A secrtt of nv 1 md woul 1 have been painful to this с inditi ere itine whose thoughts and actionsweit all open ıs the blue vaulto II ıvtıı md tht sttıet of lierunfoit ľ ι tl «as most delicate¬ ly el iboi il olvtd Dc u lyas she loved ' ι ısın could not help feeling a t ι с oıiaiıtss it inipripiietv, i i « Inch
w luth gave her own mind a pang of painful humiliation Such was the sweetness of Miss Теш pest's chaiaeter, that, though she squ n ed bei own conduct b) the mist ngul iules of propnety and decoium, no hu¬ man cieature wis evci mere softly alive to the pitym n claims ol tlunt) am! com- misei ition Latly Susan hid, indeed, been too much hint by the gentle disuasivos of the young L nonet, to iun the usk ol encountenng the moie em lgetie elo¬ quence ot Luna liniptst, this consule iation withheld lui tının «ι confidence, which might Invi beni the ine nis ol saving many pun 0 eut p in„ in tutine The appointed houi of dinner bioujit all the expected v ısıt nils to Giosvcnoi Squni
Squaie The Duke lecuvcd Mi. liou- verie, who was not al ogethu a stranger to him, in the most ail hit, ind politest manner Sn Aithur drawin, his cousin isitle, put mto her hinds ι sealed packet, con¬ taining notes to the amount ol o £l000 j tollin 0 bei at the s uni lime, bow rauch Ml Stevens bad been clnuined tt not hiving eiijovctl (In gi ttiliealion ol a pu- soiiil niteivievv, addın,— tint be had bimsclt given the leceipt to the lender, and desned hmi to set! up the bills, so th tt she h id notlıiiij, to tlo but to ρ ly Cosmo the mine), an opportunity foi » Inch business shoultl m the couise о tlıeiMiıııy be ,ιν ıı i 11 As soon as the d.s. it ν,ι, plicul on tht tibie, the Dukt oiduiii, lnstuiia,e > desimi the lidies to pi pue loi tin ι J ìli. u
llieatif, at the same time gıvın. Mi Romom an invitation to attoiupaii) them Sir Villiin sutl be must It ivt them u tea, hiini 0 ' и ' " foilndden, to stay I il ι hy Ins fumi, who tiu rat« ned to complain ot liun if In к. ¡it such ırı. ıılaı boms ıs hehad latelv tlom, winch, w s, hi ob¬ seived, a verj bad iMinpl. fui the nstol th« s. l.olais. The Play hou ι ν - uncommonly; un« du', and the Di k. it! ' his su- vnit at ι lilt boni, ıs 1, miu dt d lo tavth Lai. e, «lucii h t,q ι tl to ht a HIV Olli. \, Uu lontliision of lb. I'liy, Loul ΠιΙοη Ii will c u lad, Susanın ı man¬ nei which totill) piiilutlul bei liom seeing anv tiling w huh v s _ mg fou «aul
»aul, slit (luned bun to mou, but iniilteiing soincthui-, ııı ι low tone which she rould not it ill со при lund be still ι onun ml tu obstina ha vie» the Duk. spcihin, unii! nlv to hım, be tinned quicklj iound, and ο ι 'К oppi - silt to lur, L ulv 'uisin lu lu hl a sı, lu whith ilmost t hillui tin lilt blood it lut hi ut í iplim Woo 1 ilit in nummi d, illin Cm ps to iu hh ' ι ul, bui with his elitss in iutl.it di-utlu « tilkin, vou fist to lulu »hu Ι ι «ι» uiulopt d ııı ι lui buil t il Ilı« «. ι siltin» in n ι -th I in ol lhe lul, bn isu u. luun ,1 1 н lo lb It ot Ms ll UI lilit I III till pp« и ance ol Uootlt l' ııl nidon, \ limut lia кип v Iı d r so intii.lt mapmu d bus, „s, s ťn» t'ı »lı Iı ili tie tam belok hu «и uıd ht ι ht ι 1 lill ,, Lb Ι οι Λ
LordDalton'sshoiildcipvliilclJouvuiesit on the othci side of In 1—in ι tieniulous voice She atldiesstd Ins Loidship thus— 1 lalo шс— filem henc ,1 mitst ' 1 beg " 1 oul Dillon, wu had en Itivoiiiid to tonu il thb i,it ııı, si, it noni liei no« patının tint ill his , od n nun d tt- toit In Ibe ι ι n ¡loyal in v un, nost and tillin, tin itse oi Uic p uty, ılı it ha Ladyship btııı 3 uken sudili nly ili «ıs «listions il letuiiiii) , boi« liei, vi uh Su \illiiu s assist ни e tiom the bo\ mio the lobby Tini «uè hac ııtt Ί vii iìouvein «ho j unul them witii ι ıı lıııı D boltié h hul lionoiveel Irom ι luly tu an idjoin- ni„ si it the nc4t object vv huh cu mű¬ tered thi eyes of the unfoitutnto young «Üİ11III
woman was Wo uiville, violently piessing tlnoii h tue ciovvd, wluth had by this timi incoili ρ ıs ed the paity He ap¬ peau 1 quitt intoxicit d aud ıtıshııı 0 up to В uvene, «bowis ııı tin attitude of extending the sal s to« nds bu pushed hnn aw iy, and bulo linn ke p h s dis- tina, as he n ıs determined not to be tuiled wuh tn) longer Tenifii d least her fnend should be ex¬ posed, Miss lunpest, who with the Duke and Mrs Stud unon b id now I lined thtm, entieatctl Ioid Dilton to u move his biother She thai, with Mi \ithin, suppliti d I il) Sus in whilst ıhı D ıkı ι qui siul Μι liouiuit to ^o ııı sı ar« h ol some con- vi \ ince ftl his diu s htei Loid D ilton, mat by muncul ir powu, thin
than by or itone d pcrsmsion, drew iway Ins bioUiei As Mr Bouvene did not return s n Arthui ichnquibhed Ins fui chipt to tin care of I iiiriandhcr nuit, nul went him¬ stlf to look out tol ι tun ige As be «as going t u Mis Jlircoiiii servants enleietl tlie pis ,ι (uhli tint bom liei fnendship with I adv S„su he mijit viului ι tık such i hl f Uv hc nn bul totin eı 1 1 iv nti bulliin them tollo«, sud lie I d found i c teb foi lhe conv cv nu il his ci usui «ho still continued vuv un« Il M hen lhcv gained Uı ι ιιηι,ι th ν lilt Ι t α in but eretlıty vicie m ire ι ľ hu intuition lu tlultil oui ι,ιιη swilt ıs the lıdıtı ııı ıgs fl ıslı, mil ttll ixlendtd ou tlie pavanait Ciptim Woodvillt instantly sping altei ba
her líc h ul been sitting w uting m Mis. Ilaicoiiils «anı uro, «luh b r servilità had been tlisp itched to infoi m bu tlııt it «as u atlv Sii Arthur not b ıvınj mentioned one woid to llie αν ints of I ıs infintimi of cııi|lovHi, th n the) btli Id Lidy Sushi pi ııı d in tin с una, t »ithout spoil in, ι win! supposm, tli it thtir imstitss «ι ι ! 1 t üt» iinmuiittl) W oodvıllı ι us 1 the t Ilın fin one h m th. ,κιιηιί ı ıtt ılı I) li uiville¬ ni, slit wis ι,ιιη ıh ! n tl ι un ige, ıhı min uu ıvııı, il ι U s- v« noi Squii λ ι 1 IMiss lunpest m f η ι m« η , ίι ι! ( .ι с id Mı tuh I i »ul η Ij i U iod ulit Ind now ii si| p u I ι h ι , the tiovvd, Milioni 1 1' ni 1 ivt el any om.
He
Hei Ladyship ïecovered duung the nde, and did all in hu powei to peisuade hei aunt, that her illness had bi tn lca- dental, which the old luly implicitei) be¬ lieved she lm observed nothing of tin bdiiviotu of Woodvillt, sivt his being ι littlt intoxicated, this lattei encum¬ stance m a vult, u man would h ne excit¬ ed liei utmost honoi ind ibhonence, but in a light honoui ibli, slit hid tvei a icady excuse using m lui he trt uıd muı- mıuıngtıonı hu ton e tit Much is Lady'su in hid sutltud fiom the events ot this evenui B she found, on bei ıetuın to hei th unhei, that the wobt of it wis still to tonic Dunns, hci indisposition it the Thea¬ tie hci pocket had In eu picked of the scaled picket, which had betn bint htr by Mr. Stevtns Oviiul dinul
Ov ci whelmed with Charles's strange cindutt, and tin immediate loss she bad sustained—she ceased not from weeping the «hole in,lit, until absolute fatigue put a pen 1 1 lo her sonows, by scaling up her eyes m welcomeslumbei Loid Dilton called before she ictircd and sent hu up a note by Miss Tempest who bau ian into the hall fearing it might be Chulés Woodville, and resolving to pievent lnm fiom scein„ Lady Susan, in Ins pie nt inebri ited condition the noto fiom Dillon men I) couliined these few woids
' DO not make jouiself uneasy ' my de u Sus in about Ch ules, lus con- 1 duet vv is iiiuely the tflect ofhis bung ' in
" in liqnoi, addid to a little spint of na- " turai palousy it stun that handsome " Bouveut sı iti d 1 v v «""ut side, and icn- " dering )oti Ün ıttuıtıons youi situinoli " at the moment dun nulul — I will billig " hım to )Ou tti-uioiiovv, mil be slnll "btg youi paitlon. God bless vou' — " good night' " 'i ouis Allcction itel\, " S)aåo!i."
Ladv Susui «asone of those temjieis, whith in llie bour of «listless ne evei caga togiasp at the least sb do« of com¬ foıt, a id thenfoie ılcııvtd all the toıibo- lation hom this billtt the goidiiattutd «ntt r ι ould luvt w ishul. The
The next топни, e uly ifter breakfist, the Duke, Mrs S« ud miore, and Miss Tempest, went to tin 1 \hibition, at So¬ merset House, leav m. Susin, at bei own request, to ket ρ house, as she had some icason to supp ise from D ilton's note th it (-llallis intended het a visit Jobi out in such a eise would b ivc much afflicted bu, she wis in hopes tint if Chai li s cune, Dibon would have them alone, iud in lint case she iesolvcd to put a period to tin torments she ι minuti bv ont hi ld act if сон 'uitliet Ih t Woodvillt would apologise foi Ins luh intuir she «i d not ι nti ifin a doubt, n I itei thi e\ impli o, clemency she ν is pu panai to ,ινι she f« ll confident tint tht hi utol hei uln η, ι v ould piove upi ıllv gem ions, whin confessing all lııı foımcı finits antl mors, with puu- tence foi tht pist, uıd sıııceıc assurances of
of amendment foi the future, she shoultl throw heiself upon his candour and his mercy. '1 his confession seemed the only hope of peace tint now remained bei seciet vvas grown terrible to her, it un¬ dermined hu health, and preyed iq an her spirits Abotil an houi aftei hci fathei's de- paitmt Sn Altım and Ml. llouvene en¬ teied the room, thty made veiy earnest ciiquniesaitu ba health. Lady Susan sat in the utmost dread of Bouvene stay¬ ing so lon 0 is to mei t with Challes, and vvas much vc\td with Sn Aithur for bimgin, him Altei an houis chat upon subjects (to tht preotcupied minti of Lady Susan) ot the most iniuitucsting nature, Sir Aithui anise, antl coining up to the window in winch -ho » ıs se atı d told her in a low voice
voice, he had brought (iouvcrie to give hci an opportunitv ol liquid Uine tbe debt, isshe wis in possession 11 ibe mont v — Im that knowing tb Duke nul Mis Sentiamolo wcic both ont, uıd Ilınıl ıı B slie »ould ıoıııaııı at bonu be «as ie¬ solvcd to nick tbe oppoitunitv mil take time bv the foie lock then suddenly t \cl umin,, Good bv e Susan ' there s I ionel 1 tiki md, inj old sebo il fellow ' líc buist out ol the room— ilaited down «tup and vanished out at llic street dooi lening it open ш his e igerncss to esc ipt Ilei Ladvslnp ftlt ìeidv tt sink into tlictarth ill her ihou, hts ! id been so totally absorbi d in her uneasiness ou ltd loveis account thateveiv ıeın mbnuce .1
ot hır ρ cum ıı y toucans bad been eras¬ ed fiom hei un nel nul until bu cousm innocenti) ι m nded lui of the dtbt, bei liti au ideni liiil ι se ıpt d bei memori İla in hıhtv tulisi h ır„ı it, io j octimcd with ца η 'i« 1 borioni- to ha niind sh« timifd ılı initily pile ind ud—sit- tııp hi« ι tumbling ciilpnt iu the tl cul ful moment tli it tht it tiling pu) au ni the act of рюш unuiig the stun net 1 1 txistmct or umilul ition Bouvctit iu tin mein tum tiking idvintage it bti tuition wis pounng torrents oi ululitii η on liei di il t u 1 1 nunii, hei insensibilii), lie wis pussing fol au m s« ι r lo bis rh ipsoibtal compliments, and b ııl sı izul btr ilmost Im It ss hind «hin W ofidi d!« t« llovvtd by 1 oul I) titoli « n tu td ihc room Aghast— confuti mli tl—she stntcd iq when terror Hid alaun givi bu at.it iti n fr uu
fume eveiy appeirance of conscious triultiness. Bonum kt pt his sı it on the sofi, re- glldlll ' tilt lit W unlit Is willi a sm u ot txtilt iti m, «bun 11 tin luiiiitid ty«s it Chirk s ippi nul tin conscious tri¬ umph ol ι suuissftil Imu I idv Susui txluiili lhu hind which uisti ul of и jicnii, with th. vi luut Ьь li oth ι expectai hi ,u utlv took uıd with ι suc istu toliin« su n, ı ıtııl it« d h« r ııı ι n h i n он ιν lunn lu ι I ist nights indis,, sitiin II, tii« ıı iskal ba η ha t İlip llllt II W ıs possi ss, d ol mv 111! tllihlc in stiiiin loi ht In alih ol voung I idus. İtini, ,,Ι nmt by Uus ( lliniiiss than slu hul tvu bun In Ion, by his most liti 1,tolls v helli« HCl 1 uly Sus ш tould 'tiieely suppoi t hustli. Charles's huid as
as it liciti beis, non begin to tremblf, and telt cold is ice—bis blows wen ton- tiacted, and his hps quivered. The goodnatiired lord Dilton ıppıc- hensive least Ladv Sus m should hint desirtd tbem to sit down then tinning to Bouvene, asked Ium if lu «ould « ilk he replied— " ΐνο' mylord' 1 tb mk you for voııı intention of picventing mv notitinir vom valiant biothci foi bis imundo —he shews bis coinage gieitly, who affronts a man in tbe picsuiti ol a Inly'" Woodville bit bis lips ts he thundcra! foith. " Sir' this languagt is perfi ctly cousis tant with the rest of vour impudent tonduct'" Bon v cru
Jliiiiveiie staıtıng up desired (lıırhs to follow bun, and «as about to vuit bis indi,nttion by tin most mult nt expres¬ sions, when Su Aľhm nished (s.Hiutui,' out) lietin n them ' Sı p' st. ι Clinii s'— forGodssake stop 1 ilon« un lo binne How, Sn" en d W < и ulli ' Ια ηκ /uss' 1101 «İtil voııı h IS II Ills! usi stlivt to obstina lilt J Is ι silitin ntot ' is iy—nay—Sir Ulliur' pri) leavt MrWoclvilh il mt ' nt duo а js nie of you s — 13ο ναι ntvu ι ti id to follow moi e dan 0 ero ıs inen Uı uı La/ tanı Woodvillt" Lnragetl it bis assurance ( liarles broke from his biothu, and uni. ti a blow with all his ful) it his mt tgonist, but Sir voi n ι Aithui
Arthur rushing forward at the instant, itceivfd it in his own face— retled — groaned—and ft 11 at the fttt of the petii¬ tit d Woodville Horror—shanit—and pity took pos¬ session of the jealous lovers bosom Hie tlnec voung nun «eu unitul in assistiu. Uns gi ni rous victim ot humanitv I adv Susan ν ιοί« ntl) rang tbe bill — tht countenance cľ Conyers vvas dish, in¬ ed with blood—he «ıs nearl) stunned but stou opening his eves, he snub tl in ί harles s fice as ht faintly murmured — " Do not be afflicted my deai Wootl- ville' tin blow has fillen on the nght person don t look so piteously—it cuts ni) heart ' pray be eomfoi ted—1 am not hurt " A servant who attendtd the summons tf
of Lidy Siisin's hill, was ticsind to tell Ilit/tuti ht ι Hint s «omin, to Inste down »nh ι uh br iteti stv pti. , «hub Mis Soniamoli li nidal up ι ι li ι lugt fi- nuli luuhun chis« vlnu I »ountl- ul lin m. κ ι u vv ıs uı ılıtıl »ub it thcy li und i lii,e ut upi ıı his t udu lip. Tin ıvtsol bu dv ilh wai (illi d wuh ti u» it ths si u »huh hi dislud oil with Uu I n it bis lnm! »hi, ladv sus m s .bul i! ml is sh, 1 issi 1 h ι lOllslllS foith. ι I " lhu '" . utd Sn Vitiini " wbo would nn it n 'nus du pim I tul to It ι vvude.l »ub ι kiss fiom , adv Susan 1 " Ihen sh tin, M odt ilk b, the b mil hi th inked in toi bh ding hım, lıu,lı- ııiply subjoining—
^ OU
" Vou must not quarrel with Cosmo Bouvene, nor he with you — Dalton in¬ troduced bun heie yesterday, and it ¿m mtjjanit that he came to day—so if that is not satisfiction enough for vou High Mightiness, give int another knock o' the beadpitce, and then shake hands, for I am positively resolved not to leave ) ou till 1 sei )0U perfectly reconciled " " After my late barbai ity," said M ood- ville " to you, my dear Conyers, 1 can deny ) ou nothmg " Charles then advanced towards Bou¬ vene in the most dignified manner, sa) mg, with an extended hand— " Sir, I am soiry for my warmth " " I am equally so for mme Sır," ıejoın- ed the other, at the same time gracefully
accepting
accepting the proffei ed pledge of return¬ ing peace Sir Arthur then pronosed, as his wountl had ceased from bleethng, to accompany Lord Dalton and Bouvene to the Duke, at the I xhibtion—they consented— Woodville hrst entreating pardon for his ferosity in the most humble terms, which the noble minded bov accorded with 111- expiessible dignity, and said, patting lnm on the side of the beat!— " Now we are even—I have struck you in return, so set your heait at lest, and never mention the sulqect again— good bye' make it up with Susan it you t?«7H." When left to themselves, Captain Woodville and Lady Susan remained silent for a few moments, then advanc¬ ing towards her with great humility, be i i entreated
entreated hei pardon for his late conduct in her piesence " Chailes' Chalks' we have both been wrong, theiefoie both stind in need of toicivtinss foi oui iitltiic.s—1 shall, therefore, ptoposc a mutual act of obli¬ vion—do you agree'" " Will jou think me unreasonable my deal Susan ' it rejecting a piofler (very much peihaps to my own advantage) I solicit foi the hi» ity of asking a few pre¬ vious questions'" " Willi all Ш) heart—ask what ques¬ tions you think tit, ouly, if cu ciniistcuice\ happen to pievent my answenng than ull to joui satisfaction, I must entreat yom caution! in retuin." " lhe conditions aie very unpleasant, yet such is my aflection, that haid as thty
they appeal, 1 feel myself inclined to ac¬ cept thein—will you—will you, my dear Susan, refuse to satisfy my mind con¬ cerning those mysterious letteis you re¬ ceived at my fathers house'" " Thus far l vill satisfy jou CI ailes ene letter was from Mrs. Harcomt, and the other was from—from—an ugly old man—who—vvhat is hi» name—you must allow me to suppiess that; that I am forced to conceal." " Well—well—be it so—only set my mind at rest, by condescending lo say that it did not relate to Bouvene '" " No—upon my honom '" " The next question 1 propose is this, lias not Cosmo taken advantage ot my absence to inticnch upon my lights, and ι 1 made
made jou an offer of his fortune, heart, and hand'" " Wh) really Charles, he may have made me such an offpr this verv morning, but mv thoughts were so much ott upied hy a tatain Dragoon, who like the ugly old man shall be tuuneless, that 1 did not heai a single word he said, as lo Ins heait, —I believe that small article w as left out by Dime Nature in his composition , and bis fortune, —1 fancy tint, (as Doctor Glynne si)S,) is nei her here nor there but he is a man of family, and that accordais to aunt Anne, и a card of recommendation to anv house besides," addtd she arthl), " he is quite an Adonis '' " Now my deal Sus m, if you have any regard for me don't praise Ium ' 1 tan not beai it " " Well—well—I will not but now conns
comes mi/ turn, and I require you to an¬ swer the questions I shall put I will not reproach you for your ji llnusy, as that)OU say you cannot hel/i but how came you, who used to abuse ßcl! 1 lu- court so, to be in a box w ıth ' et last night' I am convinced it «as liei, though she woie a veil, it must have been s me- thing extraordinary which mule it vour first cue to « lit upon urn " Woodvillt paiisid—Jie wa, confusi d —· but at lui 0 th lcjomcd " 1 should not do my dutl as your affi¬ niceli husbind, were 1 to inn« d from vou, that this diti stihli nomin undei tlie mı k of heuilissiitss and giihsh vi- v nit), posscssts ihe minil of t 11 ¡td ' l adi Susan sl iíul nul lixiiig hei ıvcs on lus face v lihotit spt ikilij sei in¬ ul bv lm loi к if a ti iishinuit to »ait ι ι an
an explanation of Ins assemons, with a painful anxiety Iu truth she eipected nothing less than a full discovuy of In ι errois at the gam¬ ing tibie with the ex posili e of the heavy debts those enois had bien the meins lud motives of hei contiactmg Wood ν He proctttlcd— f leccivid an anonymous littu shoitlj afta voui arnval in the Metio pols tendin, to est ite tht most violait rese tmtnt ρ unst («int tht «utu tuinetl) joui publiions tonduct liou vem « ıs nun tl ıs mv suce sslıılııul uni no nu ins Ult ι utned to sinke my opinion of ν ui constuiev Hus lettu, though »nttui ni а h intl pvidaiťy meant to I e (lısşııis d tvis /tun a lidi 1 thought tht latiu palt strongly ι sein¬ bled eh u 1.1 rs l Ind sem befon al thou, b 1 tould not at the moment ι κ- letly
actly tell wheie turning over my port¬ folio 1 found a song given me by von, written on the back of oneof Mrs Uar couits notes ' " Disti acted with rage, I could not help suspecting, that tht intclligeuct convey¬ ed by one who was so clostlv connected with )Oti, must have sonn foundation in tiuth 1 set out instantly foi tow u nevur considenng the piopuetv ot changing ni) unitomi to inolili r dress Clossing to Southmipton in an cptn boat, I lodt past until 1 ι line tl Uounslovv, w hei о litet ssity c impillul me ι tikt somt ïtliishuitnt litistit otl 1) and înmii, aided bv some ιχ α ible «mc, with which ui) host as ι lu ıı siv plied me, op ι iteti in aiutili mt t tlie state ш which v tu othtld in 1 vv n t dm cti) to Mis Parcourt s but I und she wis o ut to the Ihc ti —1 tillovvtd met with, and taxed Ilei as tht vırıltı I tin i o lettet
letter I pioduced She ivovved herself the vvntei, declaim, at the samt time, that nothing lut the rtgard she felt for mt could b ivc induced ber lo expose so шаг uid dnu ι fncntl Shi «niked upon my bewildertd senses until 1 bc- « ame ıs w χ in her h mils, and she had tbc pi wer if moulding me into any form sin might think pioper At that mo- limit my ι yts met ymrs, I saw your lit id fill on my biothers shoulder, but I'ouverie « is also l>v voui side I ftlt tn vour si rpn&i at «eenig me so lmpro- piily situ ited, but llie agonits ol despair ,tlun the in.isltiv «ıvır t erv other per¬ it pimu Ι ι ¡shed do« η sluis the moment 1 bíbeld v 'u boi out ot the box by Lintst and sir \ithur liad Bouvene touched ι ou 1 do lit bevt tint! should h ve sacriliied hım ou the spot—it «as noihin, but my biother's supenor slieii,th in toicin, mc fiom the plac«, «lucii «ould bave prevented in« bom pioecedmg
proceeding to acts of the most unbecom¬ ing violence. When !.*. new me away 1 slipped boni hun in the crowd, antl find¬ ing Mis Harcourt's .amago and servants ready í g >t into the eon h and sent the footinm to desire his mistiess to come to me Conci ive my astonishment when you «trt put in the same vehicle into which I had fled as a rifuge to conceal me from he sight of youi distress' for notwithstanding a'l my inger, the con¬ templation of it harrovted нр my soul. When voti leapetl out, I followed to as¬ sist V.OU, but the first object which pre¬ sented ilself littore me, was the detested foim of Homeric I darted into the midst ol the ciovvd to avoid manifesting the fren/y into which that sight had tino» n me. With a u md thus irritated, cm vou not find some palliation tor my suspicions this moining, «hen 1 found von tete-ti tète «ıth a man 1 had thus hein
been taught to consider as i uvil' can you not pardon me my de ir Susan'" " ludted I don't know wlnt to say to you \V oodvillc—I almost dread ventili ing upon one of so niflnnabk a ttmpei—but 1 will lorgive you this time—it must be upon one condition though " " Name it, and be it what it may, I consent " ' Then promise me to behave to Bou¬ vene as if nothing bad h ippeni d, tor be¬ lieve me, to shew resultinoli t towaids hım would bı a ek,ıa 1 ition to ine, ıs it would t vim e nun ill opinion ot my stability " " 1 с in not Ih ir to beai you pkad toi hım, Susan' but to ι mice my tlioiou„h confidence m you, I will do what you «ıslı but do not eucoiua 0 e hunt) In intimite
intimate hert I bis tell jou' —I will couttss to von Ilı it m addition to ber otlıu m lehin itions, Mrs Harcomt ex¬ cite I nv pi кич ig lust poor \ithur, whom she denotine« d ıs ι toi Ι eınpljycd by Houvuie, «hose biothu is his school filio« dici mng it the sune time tinti vvas the dupe of both you antl bun, in¬ deed my suspicions wen uiiifnincd by Althuis liivin, it fusul to bicorne ι me¬ dium thioii D h which l mi 0 ht obt un a knowledge of youi conduct Mv jialousy pievented me fiom pioptrl) ippi miniatili motives of this geneious iubit )oiih' foi liftisin, tht « mplo) mint 1 had issig ud hun Hull posiisscd mv si nses 1 u, lit to h ive con¬ sidered that t'ıc pıoposıtıon wis ι gii ss insult " " Aithur with all thi imi ıblt umučenie winch is the strong eh u utensile 1 1 iliild- Iiootl
hood, possesses an understanding which graces the more advanced period of in. n- hood, few indeed of that 'tate possesses equal soundness of pidge mnt, Willi pio- poitionable goodness of heart. I owe bim evuy apology for the b> Uahty of my conduit, but the blow so my p«rly aimed in your presence, was not intended for hun." " It is a happy cneumstance, my «leal Charles, that it fell win ι ι did, I ain confiduit ihat Aithur would much ra¬ ther bear his trilling poition of lain, thin that Rouverte should have been struck; for then the most duadru! consequences must have cnsii,·.' — цоо ! loi nolliin·:, as you are. I must h ive In ui ι uly ui -, Kı¬ ble had you been killr ! in .1 duel -die¬ sarne ball woultl have killed uo persons, 1 promise you." " A thousand thanks my 1 harmin, 111,11'
angel' for tnis eiideannq sobutiule—and now you ar α so favourabl. atı mpt ra¬ ture, mav 1 vt ntun . pical Γοι a reduc¬ tion in ti e .urt appointe ι til my proba¬ tion' consent I eutr. ai vou, to my pro¬ posal to oui Clients foi dong awaj iny fathei's eliuse in tin cc» ι "t, and in¬ stead of Cb ¡sinas , ioniisi ne to become my wife on mj bnthilij, which is in August." " No, no, Chillis 1 —there you must excuse mt, and I big of ν on not lo repe.tt «hat you h ivt sontien iu 0 ed in vain." She heie proposed w ilkiug in the Square till the ntuin of the paity from the Lxliibtioii, will ki owing that Wood¬ ville might spu ibly ask her some ques¬ tions, win, b in pite of hu former n- solutions of covi ıhını, she found she had not yet the foiliiudi to answu. СНДРГГ R
■fSsO.li.
CHAPfTIt IV.
jUuRING dinner, the Duke who had attributed Woodvillt 's odd behaviour to the mereVtlt. ts of intoxi. ation thought no more of il , 1 lis Graci askı d hım if he batisten his lıtbıı aud inolila, on bis road to town' Πι ui soine tonlusion .in¬ stituid, tlııt he bul not called, but Ins sister
sistei Hamut, m ι letin, had made mention of his moth ι s di»i Ď u of being in town the nc\t wcik fn the linth- da) " \nil then ' idd« d lu, tinning to his betrothal, "you and Uunot in i) be pits, nted to etli« ι I t« 11 hei she is too young, but mv molhei wishes ha to visit with Louisa " Woodville then infinna! Ium tint he must uium to I pun ut tlu nc\t diy, as be bid only 1 ι ι a! Ie t prieme a limited ieavt on ¡mi,, cul ι ι, i ln tht toms ot ılıt evinin ılıc „«» ıııııtuı- td Dukt pusun d hım » I b ı bı mtıtul uıınıatuıt ot Ins duı,bl ι sıvın,— " My «ι u Uouluüı ' ν ni tlo not moit ud« nilj »ı,h tu etil v« leur witi, thm 1 do fui the penod »hui I nny conluli the il uhm, of mv bent to the
the guidince and protection of a man, who is il. ir to in. is mv own son and fondly is I lov« htr should she ever prove unwoi h) of )ou I shall be the first to censure and eon b u n hu —but should you ibuse this sicnd ttust, niy heait would buik' She is tht only comfort a,e has It It nu ' mv ptior brother is, you knivv, ι c inst ıı t sı uree « f anxietv, uıd nothing lint lintuni Ilow of guid spirits could supt ılın Umiligli the trills which the I ss ot mv own Sus m antl his ill did) осе sı n sh uhi libi bctoiehiin.wbieh is pi >Ь ılık (tb ιιι,ΐι I im not much bis sti ıtır) yi t 1 Inve bend it remarked, that persons lib m mg under mental dei ingé¬ niait hvi loa, ι il ig. therefore Chirles, shoul I be solvivi mi, in addition to mv diu 0 litci,I hivt beque Uhui /»»ι to voııı cut Ι ι nlr. it vou to prevent men ena n. sti. m pi χ in upon the estates which will teconipiii) the title "
Much
Much affected at the Duke's cxtiaor¬ dmary speech, W t dulle eould scaicely sulhi iintly recova limiseli to assure lnm of the B at ful sense he entei t lined of tin confidcnct iep н d in Inni, and to pi unise ι fil d tuıderntss tottaıds the person of lhe ııııhıppj Lord John He wished much ti h ive spoken ou the sub¬ ject of Iı istenin., his main igt but was licicntcdbj Lilv 'stisins ıetuın »ith Miss Temp st md Lini D ıltı u, «ho hid been шми, them »uh his lively sillies Woodville having tike an affectionate leive of Lady Susan, and exicted a pro¬ mise of log dar co icspotidenee lelt town the next d iy No so iner « ıs bei lover gone, and hei mind no» kft it Insure for n flection than the 1 itt I ss of hu money recuned lo
to it, heulituied b) ever) aggravating ciicumst inci Slu liceul Miss Tempest to txeiisi hi i, and vv ithout si) mg i «oid to her unit v bosi opposition she du uled, it¬ ti ni il liv hu foot in in she wint to Mis Willi nns's I liqllHIIlg for Sir \rtblll sin « IS sb u mio lus ionin M ith mini ti irs did in mount ılıt t« mine loss sht hid sus nul ΙΙιυιι,Ιι be sincerely sympa thi I m hi ι distress, In ihou Jit tb it lit ι pit it sufi", ungs nu,lit perhips ifloitl hu ι ntt r 1. ssoii of prudt nei tli an any othu curr ice ( «tutrar) to bis usu ι) ensiöin buit. и instead of с iiiiioriing hu uu. 'iu il milits, hi aide noured toinike s. ildi ol tin ixlait of bei invol me us, ι util lu ι sı bs aud ti irs in¬ tuisi ,, ι cou ' bt ιι tin sı lit of bei upu sh uo loipei, bul bidtlin, hei vv ut till
till heittiiiuttl— snatched up his hat and ran out oi Uu house In about an hour he ıetuın, d 111 .1 bitkniv loiehwith Mr. Stevi ns, who pu si nud hu «ith notes and «I iftst.itlu .uno, int of six hunched pounds nun , piomisiu, hu tin lesidue 011 the 111 xt tl.iv Ilt s ml it « is ι fimtliss attempt to end avcım it ıhı rieovuv ol tin money she hid lost, is, owing to tin huny in «hull he had tollte Ud Ilio noti s, he hid fultd to take diwn thai innubi rs. Her Ladyship, with many thanks, sigili tl ι ρ qui unking beiseli lus debtoi loi sixteen hundred pounds, and left a lecupt for the uni lining foul bundled with in 1 young ι mısın Mı Stevtns hiving takı 11 lus leive, she put up toi 1 bund ul ıntl fifty pounds, the amount ol hır debt to lioiivuie, and sealing
scabngit ι losi, huk Sir Vrtbur take some opporluiuti to give it hun with his own hinds but is il he was ignorant of his commission \s soon as she got home bhe sent th« uni uning pait of the inte¬ iest mon v due to the Jc», meaning whin Mr ^li v uis s.nt the rest to pay ofl all slu t ould She tht n attempted to apologise to Sir Arthur, for the disagre- able cncuinstince which had occurred to hnn, thiough Ins kind inteifercnce m th latt qu irti " О never mention lhat cousin," wis bis íeply, " I would suffer ten times as much for you and Woodville any day, though rcallv he has such a formidable fist,—»hen you come to miny hnn, 1 would advise jou never to fight but since von have mentioned the subject, you may, if jou please, read a letter I wis just writing to bun «ben you came in, seil it, and when jou have studied the
tlıc conti tits, kt your mui put it mto the post ollice, foi 1 must now nm to sı hooi ' As he went out be slipped Ins letter ulto bei bands she opened it and read as follows —
lo the Hannut ab e (I ai les Woodiiîle" ' Di VI «1 OODV I] I L ' Hough I un no gieat judge in these m itti ι,, yet hive 1 a sinew d guess, that wh it 1 un now doing is right. I thought it very natural, tint, upon my tıkın, the blime (if tliere was any) of bungin, Homeric to the vot и e " Duk
' Duke of Montegstlts upon mystlf, " that you might wish to know л little " more of the business I had also ι " suspicion, that in consequence of the " little Ιιψ biotti it was my fortune to " come in for, that you were withheld " by delicacy from asking mc any ques- " tions Perhaps it may not be ught to " interfere between min and wife, but " you ind Susan being as yet, not ex- " actly m that cibinlik predic ıment, I " may probably be pardoned for wishing " to settle some trifling qualms, «Inch I " imagine to be incidental a lu helle (ί paaston " You must ¿now tben, most noble " Captain, that this confounded fellow " Cosmo Bouvene, has a brother who " is my school fellow, and a gieat cioncy 11 of mine and to do Ium justice, I " thought Mr Cosmo highly gifted with " fraternal love, 1 little suspected that " bis
bis visits at good Mrs. Williams's meant neither more not less thau pay¬ ing Ins coin t to your humble servant, not for my o« n sweet sake, but that of ma belle cousine, to be sure, once or twice, when I was going to Giosvenor Square, he olleied to walk with me, butas 1 never asked Ium in, there was no harm dont N ovv that street, mild, and silicei e 'tiend oí Susana, the consci- talions Mis llaicouit, introduced hun, and your «ise bioihei look hım one evening to dine at tin Duke's, I al¬ lude to tbc verv Hi 0 ht von sa« bun at the'lhcdtu , now poor pill-t,.irhc little dreaming that youi honoui wished to seclude your futuie briile from the eyes ot every tolerable baiiiUome man, least she should mike the vast discovery of joui not bang „li pei fiction, com¬ plied with bis iiquist, and took lnm to call upon hu, the mornin vou in¬ teirupted, vv hat (upon my hoi out J was
" aiiieie accidenttl titeó tete —I owe it " to my own justification, to inform you " I had not quitti tl the room five minutes " when )ou came , seeing my old school " fellow Lionel 1 llkhnd fiom the win- " dovv, 1 had just stepped to speak a moment to hıra —you happened to " come down the contrary street, oi you " would have seen me talking to lnm " w ithout my hat, a sure proof that I did " not intend to stay long " I know why Mis Harcour hates me, " she thinks I often prevent my cousm " from going to her parties—I make no " doubt but she has told you I am that " most contemptable of oil wretches—a " go beUeen. I have wntten vou i lon- " ger lettéi than ever I wrote in my life, " to exculpate my de ir Susan from the и charge of inconstancy, or encouraging " that impudent Bouvene, do not I beg " of )Oii then, for the future, make your- " selt
self unhippy vv ithout anv leison God bless )ou' write to mc soon to si) )0ii are satisfied—write to Susan too— " Yours faithfully, " and affectionately, " A. W Covyeus "
Very much pleased with her cousins gooduatuitd explanation of the apparent m)stenes wlncMt>Jot|L involved btr con¬ duct, she sent oft the letter accoidin^ to lus direction. Man) motives prevailed in making her thankful for being exempted from this G a tb >
duty in ber own person, the accusing memoiy of her heavy dt hts vvas not the least of these and tlie name of Bouvene coultl not be by her pro¬ nounced without л trepidation slit was willing to avoid beiore Woodvilli's jta¬ lous tye lady Susan, therefoie, returned homt in tolerable spints, she vv is met in the hill by Liun tempest, whose Λρηΐ fiee contended iu sunke and tears—running to hu, she thn» her aims round her neck as she exclaimed " Wish me joy dear Susan > I have such good news to tell yoti '" " Tell it directly Laura, for no one will more tiuly sympathise m your fcluity She then leading her into the break¬ fast
fast room, infoi med her she had just re ceived a littu, stating to her that the Duke had presented Henry with a living near town, of ¿£ľjOO pei annum and which had been vacant but a very short penod " And now,' added she, " I can with honour icccpt bis generous proposition of participating Ins income with me My good brothei, deal Susan, when he had only an hunched and fifty pounds a year, declined receiving a continuance of pe¬ cuniary favouis from our noble benefac¬ tor, and making the s une proposal to me, offered me the moiety of this scanty pit tance I ti list you will apprecnte the motives that induced me to reject bis wishes but Susan though í hope ever to pieserve a piopei independency of mind, »Inch may prevci t my disgracing the hand that leared my helpless fntancv, I still think Henry's lotions perfectly o t noht
u. ht, It is ccrtamlv moie huniilniitig for a m ui, than ft ι ι wnmtn, tosutisi tupon tin bounty of jiuitli r it ıs ılıt tb lv of my biothu to employ Ins t ılı nts, an 1 bis ixccllcnt edile iti in lo the pulpos ol ob- tainin Însumi uppuit, nul 1 hiiioinid uid 1 ived him the bati r I ir bis t uitlul ottu to me )ct it the pi eust tune ht mitli il, 1 should have btui a burilicn upon hım, .md must hive duply ofliutl- tu)iiu bilovcd uncle, be would Invi attuliuteil my rttreat from the issyluin in w inch lit lud placed me, to an odious pude —to a want of tonsideration foi tbe naiiow extent of а biotheis fortune lhe case is now different, and b) accept- in,, my Huny'» oftei of coin, to live vv ith him, 1 do not make nıystlı in the slight¬ est degree independent of Lord John no'—so help me Heaven'—my motive is not pride '—but no« my brothei can without inconvenience piovide foi me the munificence of his Loidship will find othei
other objects for the exeicise of its bounty." Lady Susan congratulated Laura sin¬ cerely upon a circumstance which appar¬ ently gave her so much pleasuie, but though she adorned her motives, she combated her resolutions of renouncing the liberality of her uncle, because slit knew, that, wlmtevei might be the cause, the effect would deeply wound his 10 mantii disinteiested mind. These arguments were vain, and she left Lauia to the task of wnting to lleuiy and Lord John. She met her f ither on the stairs, «ho gave her the following letter from Woodville, addressed to him¬ self
Go " Toi
" Tor Hts Grace the Duke of Moxtcastle, " Grosvenor Square" " To thank you, my Lord, for the " honoui and confidence you so solemnly " reposed in me, the last time I had the " honour of seeing you, is the purport " of my present address. I will not, my " Lord, descend to protestations, they " aie unworthy of us both the tuist " reposed in me, proves that you do not " expect them, antl you might with jus- " tice mungine, tint if I did not think " my own uotd sufhcient to enforce be- " lief, tjon ought to plact but little faith " m oaths and asscrvations. " I ardently pray for the period, when " 1 may by my attiorn demonstrate the " sense which I entcrtim of youi ines- " timable
" tunable gift, when m the character of " your beloved daughters luisbuul, 1 may " render you the affection, and all the " dutiful attentions of a son llcve- " îeutly, .intl fondly as I love and icspect " my own father, the sitrcd bond of " natuie can alone render him deuei to " mc, than the man, who by bestowing '* upon mc my adoied Siu-.m' ţ,ives me " all lhat cm make btt desìi tille, «ıth ' a niind strongly impicsscd witii.i grovt " ful seuse ot vom eonfidince,! be, your " (.«nice to consiJu mc уош — -alicctıoı " ate, respectlul, and griteftil, " Humble Serv ılıt, ' СнЛИСЕй DltllLS MoonVILLL ' i'S I solicit nen/ /tind ι eutùi anet to mj ·' b /oui/ Susan, iJ.tisc illice tan /ω, " censi la lue in the heal t of hu fi tind ί und aduni eı, fitile the pulse thai а и u mutes it sha/1 etuili tue I, .ılıt atı tilth " /»«ıııı thut юн', , ä.'
She retuined the It tter to her paient and bur tup into an inioluutuv tl ıı d of ti ais, ι iu into the tli living mom whether sh was fullt vu d hy liei talher ' W h) do you weep deal tinid " cried be, ' at suth piools of affit Hon trom bim »hom 1 li ve tilstund to ri pl ice my loss' spe ik ni) dilling hope' my only bless ip' «h it ıs it lhat distresses you ' ' Mie « uld not leeover heiself until the diiatl of txuting hır fithei 's uspıcıons sudili ι Iv jctiunii,, she wiptd aw iv her liais, i I muttu nig sonitthing ptiftctl) miniti 'inibii ibout hci joy, antl ittnbut- mg hci ι motions to its ıtîıets sht kissed tue Dukt s li md aud hastily passing hım, retili ied to her e'ı i itu litre she induced insoiio», aud bitter repentait t ot htr pist iinpruď псе sın. ctııly risolvili, toexu t her itsolutiou, to mike
make herstlf mote vvoitby of the invalu¬ able blessing such a man as Woodville would piove to anv woman ot common prudence 01 understanding. She vvas interrupted in a chain of these pensive ideas by the enhance of Mrs. Scudamore, who came to know whether she would accompany her to chuse а courtdiess tor liei presentation vvhatvvas she to do' here would be tush debts in¬ curred—debts which she could enteitain no hopt of discharging, her whole annual income bung bncly sufficint to defiay tin niiissiiy lcpltnishmeut of her ward¬ robe, and to piy the intenst money now due to tin Jew, now Mis Scudamore wbtiitvu she asktd her assent to any nu asuu, hadno ulta ot its bung taktu li- ttiallyiM a nipicsl, that "-aid woid in her ti insinuou of it, moaning no othei thing than a possitive command 1 nil) Susan tlicicfue, howevei rtlutt.uitl), «as com¬ pelled
pelled to agree, begging Miss Tempest to accompany and assist her with her taste. She chose a plain white crape dress over sarsnet, to be sent untrimmed, but great was her suipnse, when the day be¬ fore the Birthday, it was sent home trim- tned with the most beautiful lillies of the valey, embroydered with silver, and sprig¬ ged with green leaves, and Laura Tem¬ pest entreated her to accept her work as a gift of friendship. Her father piesent- ed her with a beautiful set of pearls, and hei aunt with a diamond aigrette The most valuable of hei presents came from Lord John, she had long solicited her uncle for Ins pietuie, be now sent it her with an afieetionate, though a melau- cboly letter, etitoieing all the duties she was so soon to uudeitake, and begging her still to reserve a corner in her heart for him. When
When she went to pay her respects to the Earl and Countess of Deloraine, upon their arrival in town, she fancied that hrs Lordship regarded her with a scrutinising look, and during her stay, often adverted to gambling and dissipation The Countess eier grand and stately, received her with more kindness than ever yet she felt so much disoidered by Lord Deloiame's looks, that she hastened to take leave, promising to be ready the next day at the hour appointed, to ac¬ company the family to St James's The Lari saw her to her carriage, and as he handed her m, said in a low solemn voice, ' BrwiBL" Her terrors weie inconeeiv ible least be should hive discoveied her miscon¬ duct Now when Chirles appeared in the most amiable li 0 ht, whtn bei dear father and her uncle ardently desired the m trn ige,
marriage, she felt that she could not bear the loss of \\ oodvillc—a loss occasioned too by her own indiscretion. The day after the piesentation, the Duke and Ml Tempest set out for Mar¬ gate, to pay a short visit to Loid John, and to relieve Doctor Ыуппе, who did not think it pioper to trust him solely to the care of Ben. Though this honest tar was unwean- edly zealous in his attentions, ihey were by bis petulant misti r often deemed officious, and he would sometmiis pe¬ remptorily foibid lnm, as his seivant, to appeal in bis presei.ee. On the Sunday aftei (he Biithday Ladv Susan and Mrs Scudamore, with Doctoi Glynne and Miss I unpi st, ac¬ companied Lidy Deloraine and hei daughter to Kensington Gardens, wbeie the)
th \ «ne ji mul by Lord Dalton, Su Anlı ir Conyers, uıd several joung men ol taslnou Thepirtv having stopped to speak to some vonlig ladies in the crowd, Miss Ttmpest was separated from them—she wis soon joined by lord Dalton, wbo entre ned bei to pei use at her leisure a paper which he presented to her, she begged to decline tins request " W bv would v ou refuse me madam'" »aid he, " you must be assured 1 would never oíľei you any thing improper and this resene iccords not with tint title of fi iend, by which you honourcu me so lately " Sir \ ι thur coining up at the moment pieitnttd liei íeply — lus 1 oidship look¬ ed v exed at the Baionets abrupt question, of— ' What
" What aie jou about'" Dalton sharply replyttl " IfSir Ar¬ thur C ony« n unruled liismublis uni Ins tops, it «ould bet inn bun b iti r, than iiiteifeiing in matteis which do not eon eern him " The good nitured youth cist it him a look ofappial, »inch in ι moment dis¬ armed all Ins aspi ι m To discover and confess ι finit, »tie iiioineiituy ictinns with Lord D du n —he bold out his hand, sayını,— " I am lit 11 til v ıslı mied of my bad temper, Arthui—so /up me me'" " V\ ith ill mv he irt my Loid, onlv the next tune 1 pi iy at n ııblesyııu shall play with uu and tin n I oth «ill be even, forjou knot a loitlnij, to tin friend, Mrs ilaiet uit, jou ait trude school boy yourself
yourself Ilut 1 came to ret all you two wanderers, Lady Delmuno ıs tın>d, ьо we are all to return, taking the privilege of not being а young lady I intend to dis¬ obey and n main whae 1 am, for I want to jink a quairel with th it female Madu- avd Mis Harcourt, who 1 lic ir ıs ııı the gardens, with her York Tan husband Ilış Loidship then led Liur.i to the carnapjC, cuti eating, as he left hi ι, to give due consideration to the contents ol his papa, and to give lnm a speedy answer, toi «Inch he would send his serv uit the Tie\t morning. Laura was silent during the nde, and tbe momtnt she got home, ian up stairs to bei room, eager to leain the conti nts of her lettéi she had just toi u it open, and was about to satisfy her cunosity, when Mrs Scudamore tapped at her door, and without waiting for an answer, walk¬ ed
ed in to ask lu < pínii u и h il dress she sbolliti vu u I 11 ι„ ni ι ılı ııı ι immolili anxious, ι, 1) ιι Olviin vv ıs to makt ont ol tht duini ı p ulj it the Laris Very much piovi ktd at this frivolous uitiriupti. n sh. ,ιιι heiself no time for dehbtiation, but coldly lephed— " Л tut ban mad nn " " О then my dear Miss lempest 1 will you grint me a most immense favor 7 ' " Cirtamlv midam any thing in my powei," rt]oinu! I una with her down- waitl evis still fixed on the paper she held iu hei h intl little dul the joung lady divine the test to »Inch hti good humour was about to be txposed, foi Mis. Studamore put-
ting
ting on one of her most gracious smiles said— " Well then, mv dear, you will oblige me infinitely it you will be so good as to pin one on my bead like that you wore yourself yesterday " Laura's minti «asso much absorbed in bei anxiety concerning the contents of Lord Dalton's letter, that the heard not a word vvluth «as saul to her, but when aunt Anne u peated hei stiange request, vvitli as good a giace as she could assume, though not without a stifled sigh or two, she complied She was in the act of head-diessing when Lady Susan ian into the room. Now her Ladyship, though a sweet tem¬ pered young woman, yet was distinguish¬ ed by a few of those fiery particles which
predominated
predominated in the constitution of her uncle, Lord John O'CarroI. The least idea of any one being at all dependent, hurt her, and that they should be made to feel that dependency, grieved her A detrree of pude, which any want of respect to hei own person could not have excited, was ever roused m the be¬ half of any object she thought treated with an insolent familiarity. She was well aware that her aunt was not m possession of these amiable qua¬ lities so requisite to the feelings of per¬ sons in inferior situations of hie The sight which now presented itself to her, was of couise sufficient to rouse every generous tntrgy of her sou), Laura's look of absence and vexation, she attn- buted to the hhert) her unit had taken m requesting her to perforine the office of afille de cìmmbie, but least L iura should
should «ιοί he sensible of this imperti¬ nente she resolved to curb her anger until left v'one with Mis Scudimore, so contented herself with putting an end to what so much distuibed her, by saying— " Well if Liuxton is not the mildest cieature in the w jrld—-this is quite enough to iibke herdeclaie war against you madam —I itlvise Miss Tempest to keep out of her wiv—ind as for you, you will not have utu bead dressed fit to be seen toi these six weeks " " О dear'" said Mrs Scudamore, quite ilisiniyed, "do you think so' I would not put hti out of humom foi the woi Id, tor she nev ıı t ikes p uns when she ıs affronted " ' Λ ou m ιν depend on vvhat I say ma- dun but to takı ill bla ne fiom you I will call liti lien, liuvton ' crud hci 1 itlvslup,
Ladyship, putting L iura aside, and taking her place at Mrs. Seudamore's chair. " Buxton, 1 have been dressing your lady's head, and can mike nothing of it, do lot us see wli it your skill can effect'" The woman gratified at finding that it was Lady Susan, and not Miss Tempest, who had been preferred to her by her mistiess, was in toleiable good humour, and followed Mrs. Scudamore to her room. Ihe niece resolving to make the aunt sensible of the impropriety of her lequest to a young lady situated as Laura was, who was now left in quiet possession of her apartment. She tben diew the letter from her pocket, and opening it, with eager curi osity read as follows —
" To
lo Μι» Lama Ici, »u/ „I /Ы.ш. ih« Duke,,) l/ü /,««/« Ol osti MH ' 11 UIL.
' liv »bit .пик, ι lo «hit tit'. ' am 1 to iddi.ss lur, iq »It tut ' lilt llippill ss (I H V t tül t ч! t nt " tri' ' tiiptii!' um ln . ρ ııı, ι I in, '- tin honom ol < tll.ıı no ι ν nu ' fiumi, thou Ί lii m on, , ,,ΙΙ,- " ti ms moie tını ı vi, ť ι η ι Ι hl , " ΟΙ 1111111 pli V llllll, it I I lllll , mv
" on tint foundation I iest my hope of " fin ill) obt tilling vour love 1 iom the fust moment that my " be ut bee une sensible to fcfnale vntue " and nient, it selected Lauri (the com- " pinion ol mv ilnldish spoits) as the " nudil of ill tint mv jonthlul f mty ' «ould «онеспе of tutlilv pafeclion u Ihc lcfici tion oi in) npei )C us to ope- 1 ııtııı, with the edicts of compulsou, ' ill lauk d to the justific itimi ot my ' picvious opinion " \ou may, peihaps, ппацшс iman jO " volitili is ni) sı If, but little ciknlitid " fin the calm injojiiitnts ot dane stic " life. l'udori me—but the sune " Ilo« of exiibuant spnits, win« b, Alis' " ofttn hunié s mc mto wildniss aud *' cuor, would only stive to untiti nıy " home, not a toııjıııeıntnt, but idtli D ht- " ful
ful 1 ti ,/, ν luu ıs ııı 1 ot nit Înv ııı, uıv nt sl 1 nuc ni v и' iiiil ai- lion mis ι ι u 1 1 ni ill il) giù «t) ti m ııı ' 1 1 t mv intuì il uv ie tv " 1 am belut 111 1 e ul Ч İm İtti sıııjı Iıl 1 lııı t ш 1. iv vır vv. 111 iv dis ıs vv 1 1 I nis не but ρ ı ,,„s,,, I bun s «'„ Utt, a ib. olul p uv . ui n t 11 nu, hills «111 III I I 111.11 t un «anm ι « ι min 1 1 tu η 1(1 kn vv uv ' il u h limy ■ hivi „ell' m ' ııv dim , 1 tıııst ıhıl 1 ι ι / / ııv hu «Ot i t luv I 11 illy oi uıv fl 1 ııl v - 1 1111 111 ,1 , . sia— 1 111 1 ι ι ti n —u ilici lu 11 1 1 1111 I i I 1 M vi
" ian vou Miss 1 ompost who possi ss " tinnì all in th. most aiimnt «l.glec, " conili su nil to Insto» jouiself upon " om «lio lm«. v.r little bc bis pi at - ' Used tinnì, knows how to appicciate " vom good .juiliiiis' " J'irniit mt, I nitri it jou, to solicit " Loul John ОЧ und Io »hom (I eoii- " («ss 1 li« lì. vi) uıv ollu «ill not be " wholly disa,i u ibli Mv own luller " and mollia s ippioliitioii 1 »il! sut lor " niniiediitel) on tlit ucapi ot your
" ^oiinn^ p ilups, b. sui] usul at " my iddrcssiiig you by h tla »ben 1 " Il ivc so ııı uıv oppinluiiities ol spe.ik- " in, to you upon this subii ct but " mucii assın nice is l luvt bun sup- " ]iosed to possess, live Ins mult ι " to» ,u dot nit, 1 was so Inului of bang " h ss
less delie itch respectful than you might expect, tint Umpli but an indili, lent correspon 1 it Ihm thus trespassed upon ılı t time vvluth vou so «ell kuow In» ti employ ti ad¬ venti,! lu inl.nl b m in ι Intui ililt instici to my pi p r u unit mi Midim tin honu .1 s lbs« ubin, mj sı II " Ioni Dcyot tl, ' Humble autln , ' Ht spettini Stiv uil " S)auon ľ
Plcbirn — suipMSL — imi ι tliousind iritis iblc m,\id Linotions ti ι ii « mo muitb took роь bsion oi th iin nti of u J Lama»
/nm Ii rt ι J ilio letter a second
I чим bul u , bien hti l noi ite in ill U 1 il I ι , 1 s Hill S| Us Im ι, sl\ uu 1 r il «ι hustú, he lud ,1« ivs lii Ί » ι s hu Willi , mb ι t li¬ ti ι s— « ι ι oltiitsstli inou umil¬ ii 1 il 111 ι lltlll, Ibli div u comital ι ι ι ! i i li us bov \s (luv gı » li] il \ nut ι ul sild m, vtt ıhı buli ti v t ι t t I ι itli othu tendal Io en- u I n s ι îitiiltt) towards hun C u lus t tl loi w hoin be ftlt no I Uı Ι ι μ ullon tlie ınaııneıs of \) и iui iun nitt ieşim, and tii e og- iii, 11 ili t toi «hom lu feil ι genuine ci utun li ! nınlıı lud tvu bun pi cub uly «1 Itili I 1 tll01l,ll 1 VUI. null of 1 i b 'i I tsl κι uiivtisıll) ıı nul uıd emessiti,
caricsscd, lus m mm rs weie v. id o r t'ie sllghttst tin. tuie ot a ..Uit < u, u ıs qiitntU wuh >ut uu, intuiii n lu и s ti quintil n puit ι Ι ι , ; / < οιιΑ , and tin n,u! Im ,1.1 moinou cliquât
Ilı, '11 ll III i p b n 1 » , : , . t, Ull İv hu İlisin, „j ι ui liv in. tould le 111 IH lillu ns. 1 1 , t tins it! ventili ι us aib in bt Ils , Ot Ί COM l' , , bi ul ılı. un, col li!
li 'it Ιιιοιι,ΙιΙ ι lutti ι ρ in, lo tin s, „si- bit nul suiipuloiislj il 'uile luut ot Luin. Го luve b t mı thi »ıft of Dalton would Ι. ιν ms d hum the sununu of tt- Rsliul leliutv—but no piosjieet however u 1 dazzhiu
d i//liiig «tiuit! m il e bt ι lot ι moment bisiiit, whu puh hi oiijt to pi luu¬ lin h ppm. ss, t huist bis honoui — Ins I «ut now Uh ι In. f H V «lllhlVl StUlIll- II ',11t in Ιι ,¬ Ι. , ttll niobit Ι tm lv, Ititi ι I, n inte ılımı t Illv lllll s VVİIHİI lutı η,.Ι Dilim (toi ıllt ut lo (lu any it t t bu pason il ıt- 1 uns «ι su«— the child ol ıhıııtı, tn ' m, I piitiits who ulusi d to ılın v / bı b ι» ι к, „!· ,ιι¬ ι . ılı. liomu ibi, nonti «huh 1 ,ι,Ι nil 1 ulv Dd il unt bil İnsinin d upon b ι, u Ι n uni ıhını by stalling into ılı, ıı i uı v s Un vale oi Unu sou, the
«' HV tO Ills Ο ρ Ы 1 ).,
Uicliui anıl Γι tını 1 pe « I tiun t\ultin 0 hl Ills'- \ . —Villi lllll b buih nob). oi о1ы m, il lu ııı 11 I n u ! mpt 1 WIS (iillipi 1 I lill 1 . . pilt .lea I f İ10İİOIII Ili I il 'l 1 sit ' Slit titt. iiiiii I < ni qu iiili ι pıt an «ud it on . ıh ' ,ί . I id Dillon bih.vni in t i » ι, tl
ОНИ ρ ινν I to ι «Uh tn inu uni ι uni mt im ılı n, t svv u lo lus I oııl ι
ioni j iur I oiilsliip li isu nfeirul upon ¡ne ılıt uni η! ı un t < t om c ıı ly ul ! ı uu! nn sensi ot vom mint 1 i I ι Ih t n I sud nu st p uii- t ut t li' ι uu» uliv v tu ι ι dtp,, , hvtbi ute ι I h u i \ ι « II I u, n I v ivuv ι ni ι ι I i tu I. ti put
i ' ι 14b с th h u q pi ut ι 1 ! I m vn Inu i iijit to ! t l 1 li t u d ,ιι IV lllll , I I 11 ν ν ιι slu Id tl. I IU 1 un p., , ,1 I) 111 t lit »ishi ľ u ii i u '- ι ι 1 ν no in. ins mv
с nein v h v iu ou ht li ilij ι iii 1 wish ti ıpııss is- mv puleet
sense of gratitude for the bi hest с in pliment which ι in in of si use, em conter upon a worn m of boiioni iud it tht sunt tun to issino youi 1 iitl- slnp, lint the titlt ofyouiliund whiui J am luxions to ι tun, is tin onlv «Ι¬ ν ıııtı, 1 ian ilcim Iı un youi υ ι tint vou may inutvviUioiii vom tquil in nnk f utuni, uıd muit ıs Ilıt s teie wish 1 1 viv I ml, Souri iitlshqisOll, i " ui) lliimbl ς ι in " \£aiiì ι Utin;) ''
u Uı t ie
Dissatisfied «nh hu .insvvoi, and )tt quite ıııı dile lo pie ι hi ısı It betlu, slie piipuu! to uoıııpııi) bu bunds to Loul I). It..... ι s pimini wat ba it- 1 ıı« lo t nu il ılı st « шпионь lo «Inch ιΐ ilt ι ι| s h hul , ıvııı bnth, yit I u ini t.ıı ' to those which agit ıtt tl 1 ulv o ι 'i ink «lm >n u uv, look Iı, .n il ııı t Ul it she itati a «lis u ν ν ι I uu İn ıhı Coııntıss' ι .pu tud t,ipu, m pılv ti »tu li i iul tutl huuiili ited lui (.n i nd unisuun« nudliul hu s,. m u м piu lullt iinph ι int, tint, uu ibi 1 , ι , }> ut İh ıs« 11 sh, uııplıınul , ı In iti uh, nul pu,. sul lUiiimp , „iv ni Листни, Ibis « ν, ι | it pi siut n ν xliemlv iu - ıblt lo 1 un ι, «ho lud m idi ııı ııv tuiit- I ss tfloits lo ι ma imo com u in n to Mis
Mis < , udim ιι« it » ıs ııı t quite so ρ da¬ til Ί, I n sh, h u! ,1.1, nu d Doi toi Umne m ι! n duni tl om, Gibante impe¬ limi i ts ani mid li ıı, Ily u solve to ıc- llliqi! s I h I Olt UH postillili. v' ι hl Ιι ι nn u tii il, as tlıc can lage Wb ıı t ι i nu ull lu slit «mild not uttun .1 dusul hu ti)in 0 the an of tin lul. om 1 1. 1 1 ι !v hip toniplitd —as she stood m il, sn si» 1 tid Olitoli pass on toot— bı ıı,! tul l'l. house — »lllll Susin, iiiiii li nuh t ııl .situ uul .11111.1% mei'ot 1 nn i, pi ρ ι ul o hım to vv tlk bomt »Uli hu nd Mis, I,,„pist obsiivin,, tintili « uh m,h,., iiiiL loi lui .unit Mis '..... lunni bu lin thai Iiy llus an ui,« mt in 'u s, nl I lie h И unui. I, sl¬ id
cd at hei post by Doctor GÌ) nno, warm¬ ly seconded the motion, siy iug— " Susan » il! lie bettei fo, b iving it her own «iv—coiitiadittnin .iliiays niikts her worse " " Yet, Maihin 1 " =Hil Loul Diloiaine sternlv, " though tin и midv is lutici at bbt, it m') notfimllv piove th. 1 sstlb- t icioiis, some p.opk hive too mitili liuti o.ii , in/, bolli t" thtn ""n luppiin ss and fol tint oi til who an concerned with than " 'Hiough Luly Susin 1 ernly ftlt, that he must hav. «nu ni« unn, m lluspiu.- ing icbiike, sh. vtt da ninniti to ıppıı uneoiist mus ol it, thuttoie ,om, upto bun good huninin« div, she s ue,— ·' Good iii.,lit, 1'ара " Tbc
Tlie С unu ss ıı ι lui up ıı liti put¬ to tikt eile el hus ll, m I ,0 1 1 bul eailj Lady I lai not luu linin ts tu both, and e u h of tlum tıkın in ııı ι of Loid Dilt.u tin v sit out No \i I in «ho bid bun ılının, it 11 imps id j mul them a ft w p » s Iı m ıhı do ι I uly Susan took lus uni ι imunitu liu-tnuid to tint otlus Ι ι ul,hip I luv »ut sion Ul GlOsVellOr vqil Ul uld Vis Ul s indis¬ position il IV Ul, v niisin i ilio ııı« in ni he filt husiit inul Iı m the suutiui4ii.ţ ghiu s ol Ioni Ι) Ιι ι, ui, sh. ριορι eil intanı, tiu plinim ııı i t t! s«, ut tılıs ıvııı, tint vv ilkin, il» ι - < ul lur g, I ıs soou ıs then uı ι ns »ne outil III Ullig, Ills loi Islilp ι к d I Ulli if she 1 n! dunt hun tht ho ionul ι id¬ mg Ins littu ' Mint
" Wh it am 1 to hop ' said he with ι
After some h sit it ι in she infuniti! hun that she ///ml it— nul hid piepued an insvvt ι " I f ai llus , .capititi ıı ' «id lus Loidship litui, suitu , id— ttll int' till ine' dt u \1 ss lanpist «ill you acctpi ι lu ut dt v teti to v nt, uıd vou dont '" " I' mic u me mv lul uil he, dii«in, hu Utlu h ли li r [и 1 t 1 luvt put mv ι »u ι ιι pip ι, ш luu »ill iiovvolilipme bv dt, ppiu.uh. sub- jut— pu nut ınlıı m mv bn n I—do not u ul it in mv presun t, I bt n ot vou inv Lord 1 ' lit was in tlu it t fim ıkın, 'be seal, but
1 ut anostei! h\, tins prohibition, 1κ made liti ι n^ptcílul bou, and aibvvtred giavely. " Madun, tour v bhes aie my com¬ mands— I obi v— luit si iti \ou deny me jo n convi ısınını upon llu onlv topic which r in it ]ires nti at d! nitu. sting to ι ie, nul follili mı ıtısfıı n, mv im¬ pit ill ι, in ss t ι I m« up lile— 1 will ti. ι ivi Πι ıhın «uh Miss ¡uii¡ st t P d for¬ vi ml I ıı ki hi ! их t . I ulv Susan anıl Sn Anlını, si im uil ^ imi tune, tint ht wis uni u the пи ъ itv ot leav- ιιι 0 tlum Mn nil u! hım iq „i h s vv mt t f gil- İmi, V ni quimil. Ih h n ш ible post win. h hul bun ι ,η, Ι ι,,,,ι „„I le- quested hewoiilJ bun., his cuinile the next
n xt mou i toce ivev Lain ι and her¬ self lo Mis j I inbi v 's llcglıîlv pituus 1 mil with an ex¬ prtssive Ьо' it li Ijeet of bis alicc- tmns be lo 1 ns! iv , ladv Susan h iv¬ ing picvious < ι mil liun not to min¬ ti η it Dihu n - mit insti id of nn ч- in, h isti sh h ! bun vv ilking ııı the Squue
111 ЛР1 i!, t lint non giicnthrca touch ι! livi ui n, md havt nisuttd tuo h lias « ι it li не hope ina) bt of btivit to s teli ι I ι m U a lus ıs stand in uud t 'iui ılın ııı nekončil the niosl mk« u 1 ι ρ silts ι lining gintle- iiidu ıntl 11 lv « uı inve occasion to «ute, durin, llu v liti tonisi of then Lives We
Wi considtr 1 vt as une о' the sauces ρ ¡iiailis with which «с mían frequently ttt scasi u tm, v uk oi ouis, «с promise, hovviv i ti рл> somt attention to the pihtts 1 1 uth is ue not utt but d ti like the disi, wiU knovviu 0 tut though evuv bod I is nlishul it in then Jiy, ind tint to sune it is pt lo ,ιονι ι little insipid is ι untie le 1st "íves no gieat salisi unon to in Mdeinuu, who has lost all bis povvcis oí digestión
ГНЛРГСП V.
Χ Π Г. tum appointai foi the visit to Maigati «as. umul, and thi whole tube woie bust in pit pai, Uions to- tbc intend¬ ed joui 111). Sır \rtliui (ouve. s had been invited by the Duke ul vloiiti.istle to take a ιοί - ner in 1ns coach, but foi some ica«on winch
which he did not chuso to i\ow, this youth tmde an exeuse of his studies, ind promised to follow the ρ uty in a week. As soon ns thev were all gone he flew to Mrs Miilumss, uid he n ^ed her to histen hei jourin \ to Slii^iU m which pi ice he knew tli it sue intt nded to pass the Westminster \ ic itu n, in hopes of the healthy consequentes ittenehnt on the voyiqe —she Ind pioposed to _,o hy one ot the Uo\s, oi is the} ue moie anted¬ iydi nominated the Гас! ch Ihe 13 iront t kındl> pu posed to carry her in τ post chiibo io driwsend, fiom wluuce she nn_,tit unie (um uıently emhaık, tinn liom tlie luw u u the s une time d(dnin 0 his intuition of ic- cotnpui)ing lier foi t fiolV She hughed it, aud indcavoiiiccl to dissuade
dissu uh lnm fiom his project, telling him sht vvs чп bis guaıdıans the Dukeof Mouttaslf ami Doctoi Glynne, would neter ippi ne of lus tiavellingiii ast)lt so in (insistent «uh his rank. " l'ho! pbo' Mrs Williams' «lon't )ou begin preaching up pride, and ıank, and such a pack of stufi ι 1 might as «ell bond with aunt Anne—now do spaie join h t ture, for I am sure to hive a vvotin.lv long one as soon as I set my eyes on Mrs. Scuciamole, and really a double d. «e is more than 1 can beai, so now mv tmd soul do pack up joui vvcar- abl s ai d be с ti in a crack' ' lb Unn dispatched his man to secine then ¡ι —ig. toi the nextvveik He u. v.r lit tlie gootlnaturcd Mrs Willi mis alone till she was really toset out,
out vvhen she was surprised at seeing the Duke of Montcastle's post chai iot, with four hoises, it tin dm, nil ι which Sir Aithur binelui bei, laughing most heu- tdy at hei asti nisiini, nt Ile timi told ΙιΛΐ, tint tbc Duke ot Monte ıstk vr ıııtcel tn have the cainage dovui with luin at Mug it., aid hul left it un lu lus can his pi m w ıs 1 1 pio¬ ceed with it to (<i vvisuitl vnd llien k t it go «ni with Ins sav mt md biggigc the next d iv, s ι is to irnvc h loie hım Πι ν found the Hoy vuv full on their imv il ini 11 linons ι simili) ot person- i„< en Un ι «ııtı ни ıııtı the cabin. Γΐ t'l I 1 Sui prise, ,1s I ihly s IW ΛΙι uıd Mis il minin, ind Mr md Mrs M« uus with thin sou 'umilei and thai el .lighter Sir
Su Arthui looi ed rithcr blank upon seeing so m mv pusou« with whom he «is leepiiint «i but lit recoveicd limi¬ si If, and el t unuung, according to his usual custi in ι xtrict amusement fiom ■all circumst ι ι s he pud his respects to thein with gie it gaiety ind good humom Mrs Unibili ν assured hım, thit seeing him there ıec ıcıled her in «timi degree to being in sut ίι ι shocking vultur plice ideling, she s uld have nevei come theie had not li l'hysician aılvıstd her to iry sucll an txtuisijii for the bıntfıl of her ncivts " Youi now mv il ai ς ı Altlını "con¬ tinued sill 1 illle|l l( ι sensitive p! mt and tu iv fl i u tins liame s most ex¬ quisitely suscepnh Su Aıtlıur I ıhıl el tm ting himself with
vv th ι reply to such a peet h to one «Ίο appeared с ip ible ol unking ι pt destri m t ıtır til round the kiugd m, instead of loi m on a sofa as she was then d mg with ι bottle of sails to hel nose to pre serve liei delie ite sense lu m the sm II of odious tmeli aud tar and kec| ing an awful distance fiom the rest of the com¬ pany Ml Stevens shaking tbe young Biro net heartily by the band declared thit the pltasure «t seiing hnn «t well woith piynij, diublc pass ige tor " I can t but si) I nn veiy glad to see you sn "said Mr Haubniy (who I a I taken a p ep to see that bis piovisi ıs were sit ) now appita bin, thi m b it as to pav nig double | as ι e lemt córte¬ lo th it bee nise l think t quite in u, h alieni) '
voe и ι Wiy
" Why thon I It tdl yon wlut Sn " síid the puisc pioud Mi Xoţcus, "sup¬ pose jou sta) di the winter, iud then you'd stvt wli it )ou\t spent in the voyage in provisions, 01 if jou Ind come htei m the чмзоп, )ou mi 0 ht have gone for hilf puct, ' líc cone! ude d this somcwlnt impciti ncnt speech, with ibdf ipproving laugh Mr lîınhuıj, whose only fuilt wns avance, nnd who ncvei haibouied îesent ment for ι moment, mide no icply, but entered mto convolution with Mis 'W ('li tins who wis listening to Mis bti\ens s comphmt of the heat, and Miss Stevens's cxpicsbitns of pleısuıe, tint it leut there was somebody come tint çtniui people mitţht converse with She concluditi this last remiik w itli ι side gl шее at the lì nonet, who Inving nolliin.,
nothing moie agreeable to do dimmene ed a flirtation with her Mrs Stevens proposed having the cloth lud and dinnei prepaicd, «Inch sheoffercd to suptiintuid, if the) would go on deck foi a few moments On their leturn to the cabin thev, found Mrs Stevens seated at the top of the table eating a cuist of Inead b) «ay of a dimpa with a very politinotis collition, bcin 0 a coiitubutioii fiom the v nions passengas consisting ot Unti «w Hans, Pige ni ¡nes, nul t lai 0 i disbol/ a uıd liticati for Mı Stevens and his «liughtti, who weit i4titmcly delighted «ub the provident cue which had t outlived ta got this thai fiv ontt dish ьо сари illy cookitl 011 bond Mr Stevens's fust exclamation on scat in,, himstlf, was— 1 2 O'
" О' Lord' lord'—how I do love Mrs Stevens, looking first on the table and ihen on tbe company, «ith all the (omplaeency her heavy countenance was capable of, said in tbe voice of a hackney to ich man ' Wtll, ladles and gentleman, I sup¬ pose you all cry cnpboaid' —Who'll be help't first'" Го which elegant query no one mak¬ ing any íeply, she began piling up plate after plate, of what was next to her, now and then asking if Sam and Dolly had got vvhat thcy liked. " Lord, Ma'—how can you call one such vulgar names'" said Miss, "you know yon promised while we was at Margite to call me Dorothea." " Well,
" Well, my de ir, so I will, but v с ι know wt ai 'nt got thci с jet " Mrs llanbuiy diniig this duli ι cast supercilious glimes it Sir Aithui who b) Ins ν ie uit leaks cunad tint lit bad no inle ntion of jonıııp hu in hu contemjit ot then comp niions In one cornei ot the loom «it an old gentle man, who being 1 ithu indisposed declined a junction with the eating putv and on a couch la) α person so muffled up as to preclude all possibility of disco venng whether it might be ι ladv orgi 11- tlemin, as they had nevei )et sjiokt η no ono could divine who,or what tht) were On 1 sudden they wtre ill imi/m n ly stirtled by the person on the sol 1 b uv bug out with the voice of a Stentor " Oh' my dear' I've just disknei'd tint I hav e Itft the 1 uzishi ins desci iption 1 S at
at home—what shill I do'—I'm mor',1 suk, mil thinks 1 shill the it 1 don't gel sonu doctoi s stull bı fori 1 gits to Mir,it " " Win re did )ou line u hvey 1 " saitl the old m in " Oh' m Üıe ¡ıoı I folio m yom siiu'oie in the little pni m bt hmd llie shop— but don t till, to mi now, toi I means to go to sloep, and vv Ik ii 1 vv ikes 1 means to tike a sup of botgiog tin to do my poor naves good " An univeisal smile, though of vanous inipoit and e\piiosion, pervaded tin corniti nanees of tbe whole dinnel ρ uty As soon ıs thty had cont luded ι most substantul iud plentilul icpast iprcqiosil was slaited of ,oing upon deck ni ordir to have tut tabui cleated Mi
Mı Stevens tl cl u« 1 he intended to stick to tlie bottle as Ion, ь he teul! ' lho wine is cono, lui, '— sul tlie Luonet " C ihouliiiqi Ayı — ant! С nıı-iıı/jim,> too" ninnici! Stev uıs, with ι contemp¬ tuous glance at Mrs I Imbui j «ho bid, as he tanıt d U, shirked " Sam Stev. usean tíloid il," cantinu ed ht, " ind ot't is the time 1 u diank a dozen ateady heads undei tht t ıblt —a bottle of good wme anil a PI iy toi my money, and thou, b 1 cin afluid t) pay box pnce better thin hilt thost who sit in thtm, giv t mt tht pit win u 1 t tu do as 1 pltası , uıd t ilk to pi upli w b. tin ι I know 'up oi not—tint puts lilt 111 mind Ilı membei onu that wis i greit fit woman, and a littli »qui zed up man ι ! hke
like mv fucini Ilmbıırv there— e'ı od just such aiiollur fish' — ind thty would st md bı foie mc— io s-ns [ ij the littlt min sip I—«by viu'ie the ¡tiLilcst fool 1 ıtır si», sus 1—1 nett r sa» su h i fiol m m\ liti t > siniti tiiti »htn von nny sit tl nui sivs 1— »ht sir vou must 1 c i bloikhicul intl tlie little lellu« t nild not dt ny it, mil so he took hiiiisiH ofl «lth the fit woman—tht ν ı tır would Invi found it out tint it «as bit¬ ter to sit th m stand if J h id n I told tin ш 1 al» ιν si un my cibo« s into peoples sides win n I «ant to get ni foi it's nothing it you dont get in with the hist stjuetzc One night there »as Dollv, Sara, and I— Odsbobsi nov I thiuk ou't—I never m tioduced my son to you Sir Arthui, you know it happened to be Sundavs «hen you took pot luck with us at Himpstead, md he always has his Sundays to Immcif hei e Sammy boy '—this is my son—bu Aithur Conyeis my inend—though Sams my
my own boy, you won't see his fellow evtry day 111 the vvtek Sir Arthur, /can tell )ou that '" Sir Uthur, who peifictly coincided 111 Ins latter opituin, composi d his fi ituics as well ıs he vvas ible, md be,an to talk aff ibly to the vouiij, 111111, thou 0 b b) 110 means pleased with this addition to hi icqiianitante The cabin glowing vtrv hot and close the «hole putv now went on d ek with the exu ption ot Mi Stevens w ho iftei his talkın, fit, hid iclnpsid into a si ite of drunken stupidity Ibe dd I id) mt' bu husband sn irul ι 1 nuno ι u th s li wlult their comp niions νναι w alk ing the dt eks Miss Stevais struniţi eveiv nerve «xtinctcomplmient fi ли ус ung (.ouvir iul bi г vul, ni bı« t'ı r chiiiiitd out o, 1 ıı itive
native iitati^aise honte hv superior conde¬ scension, entut unul bun with an ac¬ count ol Ins list visit to Vauxhall, winch had cost ium \pie/li/ pciinij by hiving a luuni m в suit of tloaihs, and a patent Open li.it spoiled by л pelting shower of ι un In tlu middle of a long and ptohx stoiv, wh cb Mrs Stevens was r. lating to Alis \\ ıllıams, the formei ladv bung taken violently ill, began bawling out to liu son Sammy loi assistance. Sir Vitiini, «ho thought the ofier ot his sei- viet s lather too leat a stuteh ot polite- Ш as, affected not to pciceive hei situa¬ tion, andcoii'inued quietly walking »lib Miss, »ho had gıvın sueh broitl hints ol it, bung igiccible, lint be had been «ompelled to oiler bei his uni His tan companion observing her Mama's distiess, turntd suddenly very pale
pale—common gallantry and humanity, mide hım ask if he could procure any tlnug tor her' she told him she was very dehcite and apt to funt, bein, unwilling to own that the letresbmcnts joined to the elements, wis tbe ciuso of bei indis position she begged lnm to proi ure ber ι smelim, bottle J'oie hkclv fetch ι bűiket " «aul oneof tilt s «lois Sı Aıtlıur ıeady to ılıt with linglung it the f Hows picssinn the ıeal eiuse of bei illness, and fetitul ol setuig more ıhın might bt i\ictlv a ice ible r m to Mis Miliums to ρι ι tut sc uic silts, be inquired how she « is О quite well was ¡ici answei but do not ma'< цоо, c f úi bv vou iti utu ns to tint iftected girl the suloin ι fi «ili
will take cue that she wants lor no¬ thing ' Mis Stevens heaung tb it her daughter was indispose 1 eiiquutd what was the matter a f I iw vvitli ι bioad grin up m bis t ice uisvvcied— О noth п·* at all my ladyship—no thin, ill—Miss b is got ι touch of the Imi compii 11 and a sea voyage is the best thing m the woild for that there disorder ' Mrs f lanl ury who had been protest m '- agamst the ν ul,ar jiiebei ins who had, is slit said, | id the jiicper foiftit ftr mv illow in, such ct aist ftod whtn she bad content tl herself «ıth t king little we к bruidv antl water |ust uy «ay of steadying hti naves imagined sh hid s e illy clone the pntecl thing spite of fluse ] itcaulKiis howevu she now be b „in
began to ftel qu ilniish, and calling to her deny t ι li ild hi ι bead, she kept her laige green fan bifore her face in the hopes ot conceding bei lamentable condii ι an Her husband tiking every care not to discompose htf diess, condoliti with her in the most cndeiring e\prt ssions, until at lengtli in one of the paioxysms of her disolder whilst he was cndeavouimg to keep fist bobl of her head, she wngjed it out of bei «ig —Ilanbury extended his aims to catch the flying tn isiire, buta slion 0 gali of wind bore it ovei board Like the Ί risses of Be b η 1 1 m the Даре t f ılı L· ek, it nııelıt luu nm leen а ıııı uisteli itimi- bul fite nu u w itcli- fiilourlh. tilsi unis f Ms limburi, tiun the Sylphs Ini been ova tint t f belindi, lesoli ed to save ber liesses and not by any supi niitin il agtntv—for in
A modern writer, and one who though born in our own times has proved himself a right good one —makes his hero, the quaint but manly Duke Aranza, deliver a maxim, which may be of singular uti¬ lity to any young gentleman on the point of entering into the honourable state of matrimony. The passage alluded to is this :— « ------ , --------- no Coxcomb " Shall buz his fulsome praises in her ear, « And swear she \m in all things (tane himutfj " A most especial taste. No nieiltUiug gossip " (Who, having claw'd or cuddled into bondage " The thiig misnam'd » husband, privately " Instructs less daring spirits (o revolt) " Slfall, from the fund of Iky experience, teach her " When lordly mail cau best be made a fool of; " And how, and when, and where, with most success, " Domestic treaiies, on rtie woman 1 * side, " Are jnode and ratified.— " Ye that would have obediunt wives, tctvare " Of meddling woman'-,- kind offirious care!" The Honev Moon.
This
This is adigression perhaps—but with¬ out digressing, I know not how to mark character, and with a real deference to the sentiments and opinions of others, avow that they are (to me) absolutely necessary for the developement of the subject into which I have entered. I flatter myself, perhaps, when I imagine that what I have said will serve as an index to the disposition of Mrs. Scuda- more. The Earl, therefore, penned an epistle to this lady, in which he paid many high compliments to her taste and understand¬ ing—made her acquainted with the trans¬ action which had lately occurred between his son Lord Dalton, and himself, ex- plained his motives for declining the honour, (as he was pleased to term it) of an alliance with Miss Laura Tempest, on whom he lavished every encomium, and to
somewhat recovered, ofleied to accom¬ pany hei. When they entered thej found Mr Stevens completely th link, and fist asleep He awoke it the noise thty made com¬ ing in md looking thiough his halt shut eyes, his foolish fice lingthened to clou ble its natural dimension lit asked his «ıft when supper would bt ready totally forgetting w beri he « as, and sw earing ¿it- cause his sen ants did not bung bun stmt in« cheese, r idishes, ind bullón onion·, " What's bettin« of Dt liv and Sam'' said be, ' 1 Invai t liten hilf well since )ou've been g ut г — liaty Iıv d that bvtr in bad grt ist —she shill ,o m ¡y toinor low—1 si\ Mrs Stevens «bat in lis von look so utu,, y T luv 1 — «bai bave vou bun liking a Up u the Clem/ bounce I nttii Mi iy «itlOuP— Isa sind up for thit vv nih —| t) α bel w i, es aud
and solid her ι pătimiri ' I'll t« ich her to by liver in bid grease " V ith these word» he began haulmu bis monev from his pockets but iu tht effort be was seized with violent lumps—nal- ed out of Ins chair, and fell flat upon the floor Here Ins wife suffered bun to remain, observing that he woultl get a comfortable nap, then wake and be quite himself agun. Mrs Williams had contrived to pre¬ vent Su Arthur suffering much from his attentions on Miss Dolly during her in¬ disposition, detaining him to walk with bu , to accomplish whit h cud, she had feigned to feci herself indisposed, well knowing that no personal considerations could restrain her charge from fulfilling
the
the calls ol humanít) , howevei disgusting its object She bad piovided ι bed for herself, and one just ovu it foi hci young fuend, a vuy propt г pice nitton, as owing to the number of passengers, be « is the only gentleman »ho could be so accom¬ modated Mr annuii Stevens, aftei attending his inutili r h id jouli d a party of London apprentices utoiijcvs cluks, Lc on the quarta dei 1 ,, liti vv i* ptrstudetl to gri- tify th« in with ι song, not knowing, as they did (by orjttl txpenence) that no¬ thing proniotis the disolder incidental to a sta voy igt, nıoıt han such an exer- eition of tbc linios Receiving the lu 0 hest encomiums and applauses, he cast off his habitu il shy¬ ness, and obh„i d thtm with anothei, in the
tbeinidilltofvvlii.il, as lu w ıs t xaltnig bis vt ıı e lo ι lu, Ii piten, h. pcrceiveil m himstlf some il those symptoms, he bud obseived in hi» Mima, picvious to ha nunc violait efioits—stuping sudden¬ ly sh ut, that lore, he bawled out—" \cs M l'un '"—pn ti nduig hi w ıs tailed, and jumping up atttinpttd to run otl, but w is stoppi d bv so, ıc it m ¿„italioti, that hi mi istinti lus 1« ilgili at tlu ftet ot the gioii ııııuıed H iront t, w Ιι ι at the veiy impcitiiicnt uqiitst ot Mrs Stevens, was come in sc uch of bei son Sn Aithur nlirmcd it bis situation, try cd toi usc hım up, but illness instead ot niollif)ing, only tended to exaggciate tin intuì ıllv sour temper of Sunnit, whith was soltly cone. ıled by ill bred shyness, oi aukvv.trd aflectation tiking Su Vi tlim toi oue of the set who had in- t ced limi to idispltyof his vocal povvcis, he suihly called out— " Let
" Let me alone sır '—I vv ou't get up '— I wish you may be is bad youi self, and then you won't snigger af other folks as hasn't got sin h strong stomachs as you and your clonics '" Sir Arthur not feeling such compas¬ sion for Ium, is he b id tit ne for the other invalids, ami not understanding bis mis¬ take, left 1 nn to go in quest of Miss Sti ν t ns, w honi be found without her bonnit lur bur all over her face, and looking quite ghastly She was supported by an old half drunken tar, who kindly, fearing she might take told, in a damp evening fog, after a sultry dav, without a bat, (her own having fallen into the water) resolv¬ ed to to supply the th fluency, for which purpose he had aukwardly stuck his own dirty red ni n htcap at the back of her head, making use himself of a hrge, speckled, Welsh
Welsh wig, which half concealed his lank grey hans —he was holding a pipe to Ins mouth with one hand, and with a countenince of the gieatest composure, had contentedly tlnown the opjiosite arm round the waist of Mbs Dolly, to binder her from tumbling overboard. The scene which now presented itself to Sir Ai thur's vision was so truly ludi¬ crous, that he was forced to р.ике a few seconds before he could muster sufhcient giavity to address the young lady When hc had first quitted Miss Dolly, in quest of a smelling botile, a spruce tailor, whom she not eroneonsly tot к for a man ot fushion, olfeicd his services: these she eagi rlv mc epred, but vv ben she grew woise, a suiuuthetie, magnetic, or some other philosn| Ini il or poetical powei of attrae ti« ıı, luciti its coopeıat- ıııg eneıgy on tht eorpoit il system ot the Knight
Knight of tbe Needle—who like King Arthur, in the tiagical histoiy of Tom Thumb—knew not— " Whether iE vv ts Love, or Hie Wind cholic ' Which evt r w as the complaint that at¬ tacked bun, the efltct vvas so violent, that he was compelled to quit Ins hold on the fan dims« 1 in distress, whin the old sulor buik Ьь place very quietly be¬ fon Miss lit came at all sensible of this sudden transmutation of lu r beau —she was also ignoiant of the vv irm, though not i.is'uon ible touring vvitli wbichher last swain had decoiatttl her head. When she bíbelj Sn Altlım approach¬ ing, slit assumed an in of maji st) and disdain, peculi iri) tutt testing, and amaz¬ ingly consistent willi htr present diess and situation She stopped all his enquiries, and
antl apologies for havmg quitted her, by saying— " O, pray 'don't trouble yourself any more about it Sir Arthur 1 I dare say you was more agreeably employed, but you was not the only beau on board—this young gentleman here has been taking the gieatest care of me ever since you went, and paying me every attention, so you see 1 w ıs not quite so badly off as you myht think " " How do vou find vourself Sir'" add¬ ed she, foi the first time turning round her head to hu suppoifir, who neither understanding lier spet cli 1 1 the liai onet, noi ht 1 looks ot 1 ige and astonishment at the change «Inch lud bten put upon bei, veiy coolt toi к lus pipe out of his mouth, and kuoekui 0 out the ashes on his elbow, answeied—
1
" I haven't been bettir thtse thirteen years, than I am at this present time, the sea never makes me sick,—I could eat a good slice of Incon antl some fried onions dır ■« tly—they ue lr)ing some now—and it so be as )ou've done with me Miss, I'll go and get a bit. How be )ou now'—to be sure you have been moital hid—and so was the youngster too who «as a holding you—but there he lies, and Ins brand new pea-green coat, as he made himself, quite done for —I supposi vou knows hım' —howsomdever 1 does—bt bt'saLuimuii tailors foreman coming dow n to Maigate for work " It would be quite impossible to de¬ sinile tin rige, astonishiuint ind morti¬ fic ition of Miss Ste vins, at hearing this account of lit ι quond un g illant, so very latdy tht objtct of btr hoisting exulta¬ tion.
The
The coolness with which his historj bad been delivered, likewise, was by no means the least provoking part of the story. Λ1Ι this irritation was heightened by the effect the forgoing oration appear¬ ed to have upon Sir Arthur, who unable any longer to confine his risibility within the boundaries of politeness, gave uncon- trouled vent to his mirth, in a hearty burst of laughtei. The sailor not suspecting he was him¬ self the cause of so much hilarity, looked solemnly round him for the cause of the youths merriment—when lus ej es rest¬ ing on Miss Dolly, he exclaimed— " Why, to be sure, she do look funny enough in that there greasy old red cap o' mine' but though, thinks I, thof I dont' much love her, nor care about her, seeing as how she's as ordinary a young woman as one would wish to set eyes vol n к upon
fipon —peihaps some may Ilke hei, ugly .as she be—so slit shan't catch cold thinks I—so I claps that old rag upon her iound top" Starting up m a rage, Miss tore away the offending llead dress, she new foi the fiist time perceived, and throwing it in the Iellow s face, flew in a fuiy down the cabin stairs There she found no one in a condition to listen to bei piteous tale Her fathei was rolling on the flooi, half diowned by the contents of a bowl of punch, which had fallen from the table, full upon his head. Ilei mothei, Mis. Williams, and the snoung old shopkeepei, weie in bed. The old ladies husband and Mrs Ilan¬ bury had packed themselves upon the sofa like herrings, and by a soit of nasal opeiation of sound, pioved themselves in an enviable state of oblivion. Miss
Miss finding no one to pay any atten¬ tion to her, very quietly ascended one of the upper beds, w berc she would have enjoyed an equal portion of rcfieshing slumber with ber fellow passengers, had she not been somewhat interi upted by the old lady below, occasionally exclaim¬ ing in hei dreams— " Ten-pence halfpenny a pound, a choice spare ub '—fine black puddings'— delicate sausages' &c. All which tended to piove, that the thoughts of this goud housen ite, even in her repose, weie wandeling to the mam chance, for she was by trade α Pork BiutHLR Dunng the hot summer months, when business happened to be at a stand she had indulged herself « ith a j unit to Margate, meaning to sojourn with a distonici, whose debts she saw no к 2 means
means of recovering but by fairly ¡nmg it out wtth liei . Sır Αι thur put halt a crown into the old sailors hand to make him some amends foi the ingratitude of his fair charge, and was then about to go in quest of the bed which his attentive friend had procured for him He was stopped in this expe¬ dition by the sight of poor Sam Stevens, who pale as ashes seemed so totally ex¬ hausted as really to stand in need of assistance. Conyers ever ready to sacrifice perso¬ nal conveniency to the necessities of another, called the saıloı, and they, to¬ gether, carried the now crest fallen, and helpless victim of the tuneful song into the cabin, and placed him ra the bed, notwithstanding all Mrs. Williams's re- monstrances to the contrary, who would fain have resigned her own to her darling The
The Baronet would not hear a word on the subject, but borrowing a large Wrap Rascal of the Captain of the vessel, com¬ posed himself to sleep on a great chest belonging to one of the passengers.
К 3 CHAPTER.
*»=>.«<
еНАРТЕП V 1
XXFTCR a nights lepóse, on his cms r, which youth, lieilth, md fatigue, made <as welcome to hmi as a bed of the soft¬ est do» n could h ive poved — Sır Aithur was presented with a scene perfectly novel The movement of the company leav¬ ing their beds had awakened him. Mrs
Mrs. Williams who still preserved hei composure both of mind body, and ever considerate where her young fnend was concerned, made hnn a proposition of ac¬ companying her on deck, for tbe pmpose of taking some leficshmeiit at bieakfast with more comfoıt. He complied, and left the paity below to the caie ot the indefatigable (»here eating was concerned) Mrs,Stevens, who declaring she loved to b и c her breakfast popped into her mouth the moment she opened bei eyes—sat about her prepara¬ tions for a hearty meal, first insisting on the sailors toasting bei some ied herrings and dried salmon. Miss Dolly, by the help of a pocket glass, endeavouretl to give somewhat of a more elegant appearance to her dress, which had occasioned so much mortifi¬ cation on the pieceding day, deternun- K 4 mc
ing to exert liei most strenuous efforts to make Sir Arthui conscious of the blind¬ ness, which had made lnm overlook so many graces and attr ìctions Mr Stevens who had been awakened by Ins wiles moving the table, could not it first div me the cause, he began swe ir- n]¡, therefore, most vociferous!) at being disturbed bis helpmate, with a sang bold, wluth «vinced that she was very will ırı ustomed to such brutal behavi- < u г, ь ud— Well, Mr Stevens—suppose you „et up ind have a little ium and milk to settle youi-stomach 1 a, will you have some hot buttered tt ist uıd then get into one of the bids to sleep ι little more ' ' \ery politely sending her to the Devil lor her adv ice, he deigned to accept it, nevertheless,
nevertheless, to the great relief of Mrs Hanbury, who was teriiried out of her wits, least he should attack her on the subject of her last nights misfoitune. Sir Arthur, who could enjoy no conve¬ nience when another was deprived of it, ran down into the cabin to invite Mr and Mrs. Hanbury, (in a whisper) tojóin lnm and Mrs. Williams at bieakfast, well knowing that he should oblige, and gratify his pume favorite Laura Tempest, by any attentions he might shew to her friends. As to Samuel Stevens, be concealed bis face, by popping his head undei the bed cloaths, which bad bet n so humanely résignai to h ι ill by tiie youtii lie now dieaded to meet. I he old Pork Butcher lollowed л like pi in, her husbind adhered to a similar conduit, anil was silent and abstemious, looking with suipnse upon к j the
the active employment of Mrs. Stevens, hei diughter and son The day passed much like the previ¬ ous one— Miss Dolly making many over- ttuesfoi a leconcihation, wisely toicsee- nig «hat an acquisition it would be to have a Unionit foi her beau during ber residence at the Sea-side. All these laboiious attempts «ere but eoltllj itceivetl — Su Arthur glad of any opportunity to shake oft so troublesome, and vulgai a companion, cut the connec¬ tion with Ins utmost dextenty. Towaids 'be afternoon tbe sk) became clouded, and a slight stoini .nose, tutling as it vvas, under the piesent tu eumstin¬ ns it piovid sufliuint to cicale a tonsi¬ lla ablt al ıı m in the minds ol the Cock¬ neys Mis Williams, Mr. Ilanburj,and Sn Aithur, being the only three of the passenge! s
passengers who appealed to retain the use of their senses The formei empio) t d herselt by sooth¬ ing the ıc il terioi» of Mis Stevens, and in scolding Miss Dolly ten pla)iii 0 ofl an hysterical fit Sn Aithur accustomed to the niniige- ment of pleasuic barges, boils, ¿s-t ship¬ ped oll bis eoit ind vv usti о it, md with Hi ilieuty, и Inch did lioiioui to Ins feel¬ ings, busied hnusilf in uniting 1ns puso n il ι να tions to those oi the lew uilois on boaid, by these exertions convincing suth as bad been by h ilut oı milin ition reiiduttl supinely nidi luit iu sitttv, md timoioi sly tt ulul unhe mumi nt il ihu¬ ga — Uni t tuie („ш/етап «ill mva slıımk fi un thi most ııksotnt or libell¬ ous txtiti. n ol lus tluu s ι кгшг' ov v ııııly unis, uı that hı^ il Ut i ml , or
fortune, will prove adequate to the defi- cency of honour, courage, and humamty It is true, that his age taken into con¬ sideration, Sir Arthur Conyers was no common youth he could be a boij with òoi/s, and he couľd be а тип with men, he sould tnfle with the ulk —be could aigue with the informed—he had taste without affectation, and be had gallantry without grimace — was he a perfect mon¬ ster' No'—such a eharacter should nevci have found a place in these pages, like some other novelists « e do not wish to shew the deformities of human nature, It is not the object of our intentions to paint all m «hadow—to dtliut ite such passions as would make e'en ingels iveop over the degiaded stite ot in m we would present nature as she is— ami those wbo would shrovvd bei glories with perpetuii clouds, are the authois of libels, and not faithful painters She may have defects, but
but liei general symetry is elegant, and beautiful Sueh a character as Sir Arthur, any young man of sound sense, common hu¬ manity, and competent afluence, can and imiij be—let bim resolve to keep the com¬ mon thesis of his school theme m his mind—the " Parcere sitljectis el debellare superbis Let hım make the actions of his life the examples of this exercise, and he may <7«ji^ become e u enj thing described m the charactei of the young Hero of this tale. Гог two hours thev w ere exposed to some danger, m a stoı m of liait, thunder, and lightening it at length ceased, and ibout eight o'clork in the evening they all ainved safe at Maigate. When
When the vvbh'd for spot appeared in view, Sn \ithur amused Mrs. Williams with a lepttition of the following lines. " When finii went onbcnrtl, lotd I he-mi such ancket, Stichbabblt ig tnlsnclisqtuhbl ng, 'firs-mdjtUlno'lhe paüíet , Tlie limiet ц n tatvlini, lho í tilere >o homi,, 'I ho sinji along tlaebmc,, lhe winds iloft blowing, Some bielc, mil seme .we-iung, some sinking some slmiking, Sails hoisting, lilcitls ntlling, Hie , toIs in 1 boom, en kin b ' ■· Stop the ship " hut ll,e m, ι,ο,ι, m„„hii(, „or no, Го< I. ti« ir eltetet, httclicliIleir(t<iwsLr*,tniIgtinniliii oui faces
The foiegoing verses fiom ľootc will most probably be acknowledged an accu¬ late delineation, of the delights attendant on a trip tc Matt ite in а 1'лскег. Mrs. Williams intended to take up her abode ata bonding house, «uh a lady Who having been a neighboui of hers at Westminster, had гдпон ht! an invitation, bei ap.utnients. being huge and commo¬ dious,
dious and it being liei first year of open¬ ing there «as likely to be room. Sır Altlını determined to see her safe fust, and then to find out the Duke of Montcastle's, and Lord Deloraine's fa¬ mily, meaning to change his cloathes, and get Ins hands dressed having rubbed the skin off both in bis iccent efforts to afioid issistance during tbd storm lhis sight drew tears fiom the eyes of Mrs Williams Conyeis gay as the laik at the fiist lays of the sun in the east—· «uli his coat off «as helping all the ladies totheshoie so stored in his idea «as every thine, ıppert lining to the love¬ lier six tint he did not think even the ancient angel of the l'ori shop beneath his mentions and assist nice when rais¬ ing Ins beul as he »as | ι sing tins heiVy mount »in of beauty ovei a plank he be held Lidy Susan Otano! Loul John the
the Duke, and Mrs. Scudamore, stead¬ fastly (albeit with far different emotions) gazmg upon him. Though they all contemplated him with somewhat of amazement in his new occupation, Lady susan was, to make use of her own literal expression " Beatty to erpue with laughing '" His gallantry and the object of it, equally tending to the excitement of this tttiUatmg sensation Mrs Scudamore was excessively angry and provoked at the jiiedtcuuitnt into which he had brought himself, and wait¬ ed impatientiv for an opportunity of vent¬ ing oil hnn, nil hei nritablhty and vexa¬ tion, with «Inch hei pioud heart was bursting The
Tlıc Duke joined his daughter m her merry laugh, but Lord John., who had been the cause of the party walking out «io soon after the rain (from his old cus toni of always going out in a Stoim) stood tiliniring the youths attention to Ins com¬ panions, fervently exclaiming— ' God eternally bless him ι his is the genuine nobility of heart—superior to all earthly distinctions, and he will meet with his reward from the high King of Kings"' I hen falling into one of his accustom¬ ed reveries, he slowly walked away, ap¬ parently loigetful of the object which hail I itely inspired so pathetic an elo- g'um Accustomed to his oddities, his affec¬ tionate brother heaved a sigh as he de- ptrtetl, but took no further notice Sir
Sn Arthur now landed, and putting on his gicalroat, which the old sailor threw to hım horn the packet, ran up hastily to bis relations, and shook each of them heartily by the hand, saying— " I must go and take care of Mrs. Williams, and »ill then return " As he jumped away he wbispeied in Lady Susan's ear " No» toi a row '" He veiy soon reappeared after having dressed himself in a more seemly style, and lodged Ins kind friend at the board¬ ing house When he mide his enquiry after all friends, the Duke gave hnn but a melan¬ choly act ount ol Ins pooi brother John, who, he said, was worse instead ofbettei. Mis.
Mis Saulam ie having been strongly impoituiiei by her mice to distaili fiom all repioit ptuist the mtertstiug youtii btfort thein preserved ι sullen ind dis¬ dainful silence Lady Susan informed her young cousin, that С ipt un i\ oodvıllı 's legiincut, in sleid of beip stilmiicd it Mirgite and its environs was fixed at С uiterbury, but that thev hid onlv seen him once since then imv il he vv is however, to dine with than the iiixt diy and ac compiny tbem to the liall in the eve¬ ning Sir Arthur tal ing her apait, told her with whom lu bad voyigul, it the same time rcptescnting t bei tbe vulg mty of conduct anilllu m butt) of Mi Stevens, (the mm «İıom in m il uı 0 substi vient lo hu totiviuieuce, she had likewise len- dutd tht dcposnoiy of ι seciet of so much
much importance) She looked alarmed, and demanded whether he had displayed any symptoms of an inclination to reveal, what he had been entrusted with, as she should make a point of confining herself to the house during his residence at Mai- gate, if there appeared any danger of his presuming, on her pecuniary obligations, to treat her with more fimihanty than was proper, iu the strictest sense of the word Young Ct nyers w ho observed that the terror ind agitation ol Ins fair cousin was txtessive, used every effort in his power to comfort and reassure her In order to raise hti spints, he gavt hera humourous detail of all the ciicumstances and occur¬ rence which bad happened to him in his late sea vo) ige During Ins rttital Lord John O'Cartol passtd tlost bv tbem, with his arms fold¬ ed
ed, and Ins bead reclined upon his bosom Sir Aithur altei having first committed Lady Susan to hei fathei, went to Lord John, and gently laying his hand upon Ins arm, said— " We have weathered a bad storm, шу Lord " Lord John, starting fiom his reverie, gazed at him foi some time before he ap¬ peared to know lnm, or to recollect his recent arnval—when he did so, he well- comed him with tears in his eyes Sir Aithur passing his aim through that of his Lordships, walked on with hım m silence, anxiously watching the moment when his malady hiving taken its free scope, might yield to the impres sion of superior reason As
As the bright lamp of day, gradually pierces the gnj mists of the morning, and gives a clic tritìi glow to the counte¬ nance of nature, so did the face of Lord John imperceptibly lighten up, aftei they had wandered for some time, be gazed with affectionate complacency on the visage of his joung companion, as he put the following nil rrogatory to him. " Did Airs Scudamore scold you, my poor hoy' 1 know she is not in one of her best humour* —Ah ' could that woman know half w hat 1 h iv e known—could she feel hilf what I hive felt—she would be bumbled indeed' and as much tempted as I am to exclmn in the words of Solo¬ mon—" All it Vimiii/i" —I feel, dreid- fully feel the nicfhcit ncv of «ealth, ıank, and splendoui, to give ical felicity, let bei with шс siy with the sublimt moralist.
" Yes,
» Ami pure .kvnl.tm to ilio slus щ , u, " ľny Γ«ι «hf Ы. stug nfalpfillil-tlumıl, « OtelioitPoJiotioina л »Игоцщ«! " But I wander.—With all her non¬ sense—all her pompous aflectation, I really hold Anne Scudamore innocent of any real crime. But kind hoy I only af- flect your geneious nature by iny gloomy whining and complaining, youi cares arc noble'—tender'—but no human means can heal my lacerated haul'—Heaven ! Heaven alone can be my eomfoi tei '—to that Heaven, vvbn b «as tlm t bonis since convulsed with storms, tlit pritotvpeof my agonised soul, do 1 look toi peace— inigiatetul that 1 am '—do I mean to say I hope no consolation fiom man' yes, Henry'—Hemy tan with bis persuasive voice, aided by divme truths, pour the balm
THE SON
balm of hope into my torn bosom' and Laura can with a Seraphs smile, beam joy and hope on my benighted min«i , 4" Sir Arthur here affectionately grasped Ins arm· His Lordship returned the friendly pressuie, adding at the same time, m a voice almost choaked by his strong emotions. " TvTorare you, my dear boy ' the least among my worldly comforts—but my brother—the immediate representative of my murdered parent' Ah' God reward him'—but it rends iry heart to look in his face, and read the strong marked characters of our Tather'—every forcible trait of love, piety, and humanity, towards л disobedient wretch' who ought to bear the mark of Cain, the stamp of mui ¬ der on his forehead '— " Sir Aithur very much distressed and shocked
Gİıocked at these wild and incoheient ravings, the conscquencts of his Loid- ships melancholy and despondency, en¬ deavoured to divert tne channel of bis uncles thoughts md direct then to the contemplation ot moie pleising ohiects lie advtitcd to the late Sto;»! кш ving from experience tint the word alone was sufficient to tuest his attention and then proceeded to giu ι Judicious lectin n t of lus ni intime expédition be sucicedid m 'his attempt, aud loul lohn beco nmg more composed follo« etl Su Arthur until thcy reached the iest ot tlie paity They now quitted the Put, uıd v ılked to the house oi the Duke ol Monte ıst'ı about 11 ilf a mile hoin the to» ι Dunn, suppa I ird Ulm app tied m better spnits thm be Intl í vu un since the miv il .t his Ыс tlıoı at Μ ι vlnch ciiciiiiistince, e ntiiliut ι tl
a general cheaifulntss over the whole group At the moment of sepaiation they were surpnsed at a cainage stopping at the door Lord John having, atcording to cus¬ tom, insisted on taking a separate lodg trig, was about to retire to ла opposite cottage, Sn Arthur attended lnm to tbe door, heie he siw Lord Dalton ind Doctor Glynne abgilt fiom the Duke's post chaise, the same Sir Aithur had left at Gravesend, to proceed vuth his servant and luggage The two gentlemen laughed at their amazement, and they returned together to the parloui lhe countenance of Mrs.Scudamore brightened up at the appeaiance of hct joi disant lovei, the Doctor. Supper «as brought
brought (or the travellers, and Lord Dalton then informed tin in tli.at Doctoi Glynne and himself weit . uning down m a hack post chaise and foui, but that near Rochester, they bad ovut ikon lus Grate's carnage, which thty stopped, and questioning Dob, Sir Arthui's set vant weie uifoimed of lus mastas trohe I bey cb inged с image» at Rochester, aud putting Hob on tht b mitiche seat, made use of the inside themselves—Lord Dalton 1 uiglutig heartily at his o» u stol у added— " I knew youi (»iace would think mc welcome, and ïeally it «as lucky wt took possession, for it the lun vve put upal thcy bad horses but no elitists to spaie, so that we shoultl not hive had tbe bo¬ nom of pav m, oui tU vous tune to m,'nt
bad it not been for this fortunate ren¬ contre." ľne Duke assured them thcy were welcome to the loan of bis carriage, and after some time passed in conveisation they parted, Ins Lordship to the Eail of Deloraines, Sir Arthui and Doctor Gl)iinc, takmg up then abode with his Glace. After breakfast the next morning, Lady Susan accompanied the young llaronet to pay his respects to Lord Deloraines family In their excursion thither, Sir Arthui took the opportunity of questioning his fan cousin as to her ptcuniary concerns She told lnm she had been as (Economi¬ cal as possible, and bad desisted fiom play foi some time past, that she intended to
to peiscveie in these laudable resolutions, but that her purse was veiy low. The good natmed youth affectionately assured her it was one ol bis gieatest pleasuies to contiibute to hu tonv em¬ ence, and that lie now luıkılı had it in powei so to tlo—adding и ıth a laugh. " You must know, that since I bave a clttltlto maintain Guaidy has been very liberal indeed, but as 1 told you before, lie thought «bat he allowed ine was quite sufhcient—not knowing 1 kept old Mrs. Davies mto the bargan—but that fair Sybil, for w hat cause, I am sme 1 can¬ not by any means divine, has mj stei lous- ly and suddenly withdraw n heiself from the protection of your humble servant— she no doubt thought me too young and giddy to be enti usted with the guaidian- i í ship
ship ind guidance of sut h templi« f beauty md itti ıclıons " " She Itft Twickenham in а violent huiry skunv—I hive nude the vav stuctest cnqiiiiies among all lit ι neigh¬ bour mil cioines, but the deuce i bitem mv one of them mfoim mc «heie melent ni il im Ьь betilin hi ι self" " lîetore she vanished she sold ill hu botisi hold goods ıntl t h ıttcls to in old ( ihlu, who has til en tin small cottage in «Inch she lived \ou would havt Imghcd reitlv ti kill vouisclf, had you been a viitnc¿ to the ludicrous scent vvlnili this exebangt gave list to" ' I wait to ρ iv the old Gnl hti months allowance is usual in al nine, and not caring to lose any tunc in abght- iii' bom m / hofse, being bv no meins ambitious
imbitiotisota Uh a Itti, ciuci ntion —1 lode up to the window—the ciscniciit happened tj be open—1 isi etl how blu did— sud httle Dick « ts teiv «ell— tnd th it is 1 wis ö me, out ol town I had biou_J.it bei sime e ıslı nid bul hu buy berseli i ııı w gown tnd siulì. petıeoat " " I had lattled on in tins way foi five minutes at least befiic I discoveied that the person I htd been addiessin^ was in old шш in an quon anıl ι red ni 0 httap I was not a little sui pi ised it it inyselt, and he seemed peihetly petuhed it this equivoque \oıı m iy suppose I » is not a little amused tt this bit ot gig Uic man upon enquuy told me the lu Ij bad decamped the daj befoie I asked huu it he knew the reason of her sudden de¡ ir ture' he sud ' но" —she li id inutttied something ibout not likiu a to be iskul L t ımpeı Huent
impertinent questions, and, " that poor folks had is great a right to have their secrets as then betta s " " So you see my deal Susan, being re¬ leased from the expence of bemg obliged to support this f ilse uiigiateful nymph, I have it in my pow er to help you a little— ind a little it is sine enouji—however you must take the will for the deed, and so there it is " Saymg which, he put a twenty pound note into her Ladyship's hand, stoppin,, the professions, and all the grateful ac¬ knowledgements she vvas just beginning to make, with— " No thanks Susan, I'beg' if you make any bolhei about it, now you will bote me to death " " Deai
" Dear Arthur' how hard is the task- of suppressing my emotions—Ah ' bow do 1 sink in my own estimation, at being thus compelled to appropri ite to my own unjust wants, what )oui geneious heart knows so »ell how to bestow on many worthier objects " ' l'ho —pbo' stuff and fiddlestick' — «lo j on think me such a quiz as not to preiei assisting a i/ottiiiţ damsel to help¬ ing an íi/ŕ/onc' indeed 1 am not quite so jushionuble as that comes to yd' — l'i 1 tell you how you shall repay mc " " Ho.ii' —my meiry coz," " Why stop aunt Anne's gab, the ne\t time she begins to let out her picnic taclcs (as the sailois call it) upon me, ai tl then you »ill lay me uncia the gleitest obliga¬ tion. 1 expect a terrible blo^i up for my L 5 v ulgarity
vulgaiity m coming down in tin Hoy — a/nopos, of tint clp.iut marinili —what in tin mum of If« avtu ,m Mı Stevens, ind liisfmiilv Id,,' —nothing but llicni- f/u u . 1 think Ниц .an all ,ιι/ o,l fa, lisnnlics, but th, Dial sluti III, pallu It" ' Loul, Utlun'— whue did yon pu к up th it di gint pinast' ' ' Wistniinstcr tun mv deai—«t all siv so As loi Mis Stevi ns—why slit is likt i iound dumpling with two il mi¬ sons stuck ni the middle bv «ay ol tyes Thi son is tin most toluabk, and /«\ uu gi eat s/iitlu s, as toi tht daughtci, Hogarth himstlf could ncvei do /iti insti« с — «ıth shoit lc,s, and a batk as long as a tuiu- spit «lot,, sin sets up foi α line figuie, and a fine ft, ι,ι ι she ¡s'— ι skin like an old Jew cloaths mans,— а face wdl pıo- poıtıoned to her back, and а pm ot ficice ¿o a glıım
or niL stoiìm goqg/tug blatl eyes «bleb is she lolls them about with is mudi mc mingaba couple ol wash balls she thinks I m, insil¬ ili, itici bulli int Чп told me, she и is Ittkl II l! I 111 l 1 S|Clklll B toiintt- iiiiite — iliii sh could t xpiess stom by the way sb mues hustlt as ugly ıs thi Divil whtn sh mc uıs to bt k Ity— aud iiltlcd tint uc tiwthsl ıııdııı 0 htr ty s s unt tums tspitsstd «hit slit did not ni I vv is ılın st ti ıııptul to tell lui if they di I, shi was vtiy much obliged t > her eyes, 1 n they e\pic«sed n thing but un/ ule „, ititi f, ι ıj ' Ι mı ılı ud tin y «ill bt utlu r no ι blesonıe ıs tht v ilt st m to aun it bun quite intimii Willi nit but wt mint tempoiise iutii Utun ıs «ill ь «t tın, loi vvı ıııı, lit «ıth is tuııılı | ıııdıuıı vv ikt a slu ping hon a tht old ht y wlu ıs ι tuııbk tuık «hui museu — ι peei liv ι o wlu
when he gets fuddled, and I saw enough of the old buck, in the Uoj, to discover that lonpcicncc is not ofttn the order of the day with bun " As young Conyeis was thus convers¬ ing with bib cousin, they arnvcd at Lord Deloraines house, wheie he met with a hearty reception from all his good friends.
CHAPTER VII.
X\S they were conversing a servant announced Doctor Glynne, he appeared somewhat agitated, and affected, when they enquired the cause of the visible perturbation of his mind and spirits, he informed thera, that it was occasioned by the encreasing symptoms of mental de¬ rangement
ungemein m the amiable, but unhappy Loid John O'Cinol " 1 have just been to set hmi," said be, " antl found lnm leading ilteiitively, and bedenmg with tears the book w bieb he wa» perusing, on leaiini, ovei his than, 1 discoveiul the book he was ton- tempi itmg to be Doctoi Johnsons philo¬ sophic il Rommcc ot Hisselais." No one could be a greatei admirei ot the sublime lueiibiatious of the Uainblei, than the Doctoi bimself, Johnson was one of his most favonte authors, he loved his genius, he reveled his piety, but hc thought his works moie adapted to the happy than to the dt jected 'lhe pie- tepts enforced might, lie thought, foi tify prosperity and affluence, against the "slings andai rows of outrageous foitune."
but
but at tin sunt time he thought tbey weietincti "d with ι „enei il stilili ol despenden j, not «ell cali ul ited to anı¬ nı iti hope louse the enctgies, ol uivigo- i ite the évitions I the mental spuug. Uudei the piesent uicuinstaiitts, Hasse Uıs vv ıs a book he eould not bav e wished his patient to pause Ilut happiness was not to bt alt uued in any situttion of lifi vv ıs ι bitta lesson Loid John О Cairo! .was bit too щ i lo leain—be needtd not the counsels of a s ige or a philosopha to unpicss it on bis mind lie asked the Dot toi if he « is an en- tbusitst on the subject of this little vo¬ lume' Glynne deluded Ins sentnutnts with his usual cmdour and pcispieuity but peiceived to his moitificitiou that what his Г oidship hid ι id h id nutated lus nuvis nul q ut tl ι inged tlie legn¬ ili m neli it int. Hutu il ι ιια,ν He
He gazed at Ins friend for some mo¬ ments, with uncertainty in his actions, and borrou r m his eye' lus hair brbtlcd, and lus limbs tiemhled. " Doubt'— fear' —terror'— ind per¬ plexity 1 " said the Doctor, ' vveresofoi- cibly delineated on his fine expressive face, that they gave a more acculate de¬ scription of the passions, than ever were equalled by the drawings of a Livatei, or a Le Brun. After an internal struggle that seemed to wrench his nature with an engines violence, he sti иск his forehead with his hand and excl umed." " Why should I affect to doubt that, which a sage and a philosopher has con¬ fessed'—the dead niinj —yes' they МЛУ return"" A blush cirmsoned his countenance— his
bis hand trembled as be presented me the book, open, wliicli he bad been read¬ ing. In the open place a passage was marked by a pencil in so many places, that I could evidently perceive" said Glynne, " he had made it the subject of long and serious contemplation. It was extracted from that Chapter of Rasselais, where the Prince and his companions visit the Pyramids."* Tbe following paragraphs were those the unhappy Lord had marked in a man¬ ner so emphatical.
' If all your fear be of apparations' ' said the Prince, ' I vvill promise you ' safety
' safety tin ie is no dinger fiom the dead ' he that is once buntil will be seen no * moi e ' ' Ihat the dead an sten no moie,' sud liuku, /will not uudeltako to linintuin ' against the сонет ι cut and unwind te ' tunon ι of ull ti" ? and of ill nation ' lhere is no people ι ade oı Lui ned 1 among wb m u¡ pai , ilions of the denti, ' ire not iclil I ind ¿ lic ul This opi- ' шоп «In.li pi uil·, ρ rh ıps as fu as ' bunian ıı itine ıs ılıflusul could become 1 tintoti s ı/ only by its /ι nth those that ' n va I caid of one „notiţei, would not ' hue«,/ t/in ι tile η Inch nothing but ' ι xii un xci em mike citdib/e That ' it is doubted by single Ca illa s, can ' veiv little vveikcn th. ιζακι al tv idence , ' and some «ho ,1 tu/ it with their tongues ' ioiiJcòì ltbv then j, uıs.'
lhe
The Doctor vv as much sb leked at such ι consti uction bı mg put on this cclcbiat ed passa, с but ci™ei tokanı w hithei lus I oidship meant it to tend he asked liun in the mildest minim to honour lnm with Ins confidence il lit bad anv sciuples in Ins mind «hi h lit wished doni iw ι) oi ny doubts lilioui ing in lus brt ist «luth itii 0 !it be relieved b) communication loial lohn seemed melt tl bv vvhat Glynno hul just sud he gitspul hnn by liie Iı ıntl — cxpicsscd the vvumest ic- 1 no v ltdgtincnts ίοι tl e mani ittcnticns he had been so long in the lnbit ol le t ιν ni fıomlnm uni concluded by siv¬ ii ,ιΐη hívni, the the inipliul ıutlıo- iityoisogi it ι philosopha isthe β un- blu to blunt the point ot ndıtule whith nullit otheiHisc be mucii a, unst hım, be would confess ι terrible'— α piuitul etret ' lhe
The Doctor was all attention. His patient then pioceeded to inforni limi that "once every yen, on the night of ,t paiticular hour, precisely at twelve o'clock the appnation of his fatlier visited bun for two moments He was well aware," be said, "that scepticism would take up all her aims against him, but that facts were stubborn things, be could calculate the time ot the spectres appear¬ ance to a moment," he also added, " and that when he looked at bis watch, the vision appealed to lnm at the piecise se¬ cond that tin minute hand touched the point of Uelie." When the Doctor came to this period ofhis melincholy nairative, surprise and gnef were Itgibly pouitrayed upon tht countenances of his auditors, as they now began to feai, that the wild starts of Lord John
John were about to terminate in a violent confirmed iibanity. Glynne continued his narrative. " Lord John, after this confession, appeared somewhat more at ease, but an awful gloom hovered over his brow—and he w as at intervals seized « ith violent, but invo¬ luntary shudders and trcmois he at length declared that on tin» night he ex¬ pected the solemn annual visit of his de¬ funct paient 1 " The Doctor used every aigument that reason and philosophy could suggest, but all to no purpose. He left the unhappy nobleman, thereiore, in order to consult his relatives on the measures propei to be taken on the occasion, he observed, that if they could divert bis attention for that une night, лпа so occupy Ins mind, as to let the nominated moment of the appeai¬ ance
ance of the imaginary spectre pass by « ithout peiceptioii, the unhappy victim of superstition might recover fiom his dieadful eirur, and one link of the chain which fetteied Ins senses being broken, he might recover bis liberty from the cruel and oppressive tyranny which fancy exercised over her unresisting captive Every body acquiesced in the ţustice of this observation, and it was resolved to get bun to supper, at the Duke of Mont- castles, and by engaging him on such to¬ pics of conversation as they knew weie soothing to his mmd, and interesting to his heart, to beguile him out of all re¬ membrance of the dreaded moment To draw bim into company was thf most difficult part of the business, many plans weie ananged, man) schemes «ere
contemplated
contemplated, but none appeared feasible, 01 easy to etlect. Doctor Glynne at length hinted, that the Duke should send to his brother, stating that he was ill, antl felt Ins spirits so low, that nothing but the piesence of Ins beloved kinsman could itstorc him to comfoıt or tranquility. Uis Giaccvvell knew that lheie was no one tlimg Loul John coultl feci so much difficulty in «pardoning, as any encum¬ stance which boie the semblance of de¬ ceit or dissimulation yet the tanso ap¬ peared so uigent, antl tbe motives, at the same time so amiable and so piopci, that sulluiiig lumselt to be overpowtied by the pctsuasions of Sir Aithur, his daugh¬ tei, and the whole partv, lit sit down to wnte the pioposed leltei, which was dictated
dictated by the Doctor, and conveyed by Sir Aithur. In the wildest paroxysms of his de¬ rangement, one tender chord remained unimpaired in the flame of Lord O'CarroI, when the string of fraternal affection was touched, it ν ibrated in tones of harmony, whilst all its kindred fibres —were jangl¬ ed harsh and out of tune. In the idea of a brothers affliction, all other thoughts were absorbed m the ge¬ nerously sympathetic bosom of Loid John, lie had knoivn too well how ter¬ rible it was to combat with the dæmon of despair, and sink beneath the strife—he was conscious that tliere vt as an actual necessity of resisting, what Shakespear calls, " that surly spuit melancholy'" in its first oust t All habits were fatal— but the ι, dulgence of tins, the most al¬ arming
arming in the black catalogue of human miseries, he knew this by moutniul ex¬ penence, and knowing it, formed a reso¬ lution of lending bis own aid in assisting a beloved brother ш wrestling with that antagonist who had proved too powerful for all his own resistance. Sacrificing his own pnvate feelings, theiefore, to las fraternal anxieties, he repaired to the mansion of the Duke taking care to wind up Ins watch with great caution, that he might not miss the precise second when lie felt conscious that he should receive the annual, but short visit from the awful shadow ofhis departed father. On Ins arrival he found his brother on a couch, with several phials disposed on a table before lnm, and which had beai previously placed theie by Doctor Giv inn voi п. ч I,
to give a greater semblance of reality to this pious fraud. Th« Duke lured Lord John to remain with Ium, by the amiable artifices which his affection suggested, and of which his candid mind could have found an incapa¬ bility of executing under less justifiable circumstances they talked with a ten¬ der delight on many occurrences of their boyish days, his Grace recalling incidents ot their early affection, which are too numerous to be here set down · among others he mentioned one of his falling (Vom the branch of an oak, yet .growing in the Park it was amazingly lofty, and the elder brother had fallen from its summit while playfully dancing on the topmost bough the heroic John, with a wonderful pre¬ sence of mmd, had spread out his arms, and receiving the full weight of his bro¬ ther
ther —falling, ae he embraced hım, with a violent concussion to the ground, he laughed with rapture when he saw that he had saved the object of his cares, nor was the the smile diminished even when he feinted on the grass One of his legs had been entangled as he fell, and the limb was fractured in the most dreadtul manner. The elder brother ran to the house for assistance The noble minded G Carrol reviving, now began to reel for his Mother's agonies alone He was carried to the house on a litter, and as he went he chaunted out his fa¬ vorite air of Äiife Bt itanma, with every tone of unembarrassed hilarity, that she might not imagine he had been any ma¬ terial sufTerer from his accident. During the whole painful process of his m ч cur«
cure, he behaved as if he had been one of those stoical moralists, who stoutly argue, that pain is nothing more than an idea, with this special difference, that these philosophers preached without/innc- tice, and Lord John practised without pi eaching W hen praised for his fortitude, only would be lose his equanimity—at such times he would exclaim with boyish im¬ petuosity — "Ami not to be a sailor' and must not I expect such trifles is these' Do 1 not see many brave fellows whistling and singing, with their arms »nd legs lopptd ofi'—ihey, alas' have no mother to «atch ovei thein—no brother to console them i j et e\ en they can bear it—I should bi ι poor и retch indeed if I couldn't suffer i tutle like this, with t verv thing about ше th it с in comfort and assist me '" With
With such endearing discourses tiny contrived to while away the tune, and amuse the mmd of the unhappy sufferei Arthur telling strneš, and Lady Susan playing his most favourite Sea tunes till evening drew on, when about to take his departure he was assailed by such an affectionne torrent of solicitation from every one present, that fearful of giving them pain, and ashamed of avo« ing his seciet motives of wishing foi solitude, he was compelió 1 to comply with the unile 1 lequests of the whole family, and to coti¬ sent to remain and partake of a slight supper The cloth was laid on the table at eleven o'clock piecisely Τ hough prev ι ous oiders had been given to stop the clock, that its sound mi 0 ht not bring to his mind a circumstance tbey so ea 0 erly desired to b misli from his recollection m flie
The empire of fancy was, however, too dispone to be shaken off by such feeble precautions Lord John grew restless and uneasy—he turned frequently pale, and murmured inarticulate sentences, the purpoit of which no one person was at all capable of comprehending—he dared not look at his watch for as he sat di¬ rectly opposite to the Doctoi, he was aware that Glynne would full) enter into his motives, and his thoughts About a quarter after eleven, Sir Ar Ihuf whispeied Lady Susan, who shortly after taking outlier gold lopeater, begged hci uncle to favour her with his time prece, that she might regulate her own b) it Lord lohn would have denyed this request, but he caught the scrutinising «ve of Glynne at the instant, and with evident emotion yl« Ided up the demand ul object
His symptoms with every increasing moment grew more terrible. Lady Susuu looked at his watth—it wanted three minutes to twelve--he asked the time. " Tell me '—tell me, for God's sake," said he, " to a secondi" " Ten minutes to twelve my dear Lord," conscious that she should con¬ vince Ium of Ins error, by this false state¬ ment she still watched the minute hand, resolved at five moments aftei the stated second, to convince lnm that be had suffered his imagination to delude him The company continued talking to him in a manner that they hoped might keep Inni from thought, by the rapidity of tbeir- mterrogations. The minute hand no« touched the hour of twelve and Lady Susan thought M 4 she
she had effected her purpose, but as it reached the spot, Lord John uttered a yell scarcely human —Ins eyes rolled round the room as if following some gliding object, and then fell into the most dieadful convulsions The peituibation which ensued was universal He came to himself in a few moments, and bitterly upbraiding Doctor Glynne antl Lady Susan, for having so cruelly deceived lnm, left the room in anger, declaring, that if he had been pre¬ pui ed, he could have seen the aweful vi¬ sitor in silence, but as it was, the sudden shock he had expintnced was too much for bun. He left them with great bitterness, nor would he evtn sufftr Sır Aithur to ac- conipiny hnn, solemnly swearing, that if lit resisted this determination, he would nevet either see, or speak to him again,
even should his existence be protracted beyond the common period prescribed mortality Well aware, that m his present turn of mind any opposition might be attended with the most fatal consequences, he was allowed to quit the apartment, without any effort being made for his detention. The Window of the supper room com¬ manding a view of his little cottage, they contented themselves with watching his motions from this observatory. They saw him walk on the sands without hi» hat, for a quarter of an hour —the moon was shining in cloudless splendour—and his streaming hair—wild gestures—and burned step—rendered the scene which pusenttd itself, truly pathetic and terri¬ fic —at one moment he would look to the Heavens, with his hands clasped, in all the agonies ot despan, and at another, thty
they saw him fall upon hm knees with all the fervour of the most pious resignation, and devotion They at length beheld him return home, take out the key, unlock the door of his cottage, and enter it with an air of melancholy, but compantively trait· ¡/utilised state of mmd. Ihey then returned to the table, every one strongly impressed with u sense of terror, grief, and anxiety, at tbe strange events which had just taken place Lady Susan and Mrs Scudamore were terrified almost out of their senses, in¬ deed there was not a person present, with tbe exception of Doctor Glynne, who did uot seem somewhat tinctured with the superstition of the moment. Stories of ghosts, and supernatural ap¬ pearances were related by every one piesent The
The Duke was affected, if not stagger¬ ed , and the shrieks of Lord John at a partitular second appeared to bewilder the suggestions of reason, and baffle the conjectures of rational philosophy. " 'listhifs," said the Doctor, "that tiror is piopagated, we behold effects, hut vve do not examine into causes the circumstance of Lord John is by no means an uncommon one, and the prob¬ lem is far less difficult to solve, than many which may at first sight appear involved in infinitely more dubious per¬ plexity, " Account for his Lordships strength of imagination at a precise period, and that which has long confounded mul¬ titudes, becomes a riddle no moie By long habit, and long txpeitation, he has calculated the duration of an kom¬ mi Iitit is all the mnacle « 6 " By
Iiy an easv computation we may de fine how many sfcjs we take in a given time if vve are accurate in this anth metic we might extend it to a hundred miles and without any intense thought acquire the knowledge without tht aid of reason or atttntion This is precisely the case with Lord John, and has been and w// be the same with all other unhappy personages labouring under similar afflic¬ tions Recollect, that even the power of sleep the next ineit situation after that of death, is constantly suspended by the meanest mechanic, who forms a steady re¬ solution of waking at a stated moment To argue this point in the pomp of philo sophy or the sonorous phraseology of lo gical deduction, would be as childish as the terrours 1 am endeavouring to contend with The seene we have witnessed has been terrible ' and alarming '—the lesson it conveys is a bitter, but to the vounger part of my dear friends, it may prove a useful
useful one' It must evince that happiness is designed by the gieat disposer of all human events, as the rewards of another, and a better stale —had it been attainable in this, Lord John, with talents, fortune, endearing relatives, and social virtues, could not have missed his portion of the blessing. " Let not supeistition, therefore, pot- son your present pleasure by the antici¬ pation of any future calamities " The Doctor here took down a volume of the Spectator, which happened to be lying about, and read the following ex¬ tract from the seventh number to the at¬ tentive group. " Гоя my own part, I should be very " much troubled, were I endutd with " this divining quality, though it should " inform me truly of every thing that " can
" can befal me. I would not anticipate " the relish of any happiness, nor feel the " weight of any misery, before it actually " arrives." " I know but one way of fortifying my " soul against these gloomy presages and " tetrours of mmd and that is by setur- " ing to myself, the friendship and pro- " tection of that being who disposes of " events, and governs futurity. He " sees at one view the whole thread of " my existence, not only that part of it " which I have already passed through, " but that which runs forward into all " the depths of eternity When I lay " me down to sleep I recommend myself " to his care, when I awake I give my- " self up to his direction " Amidst all the euts that threaten " me, 1 will look up to lnm for help, and 14 question not but he «ill either avert " them
" them, or turn them to my advantage. " Though I know neither the time nor " the manner of the death I am lo die, I " am not at all solicitous about it, be- " cause I am sure that be knows them " both, and that he will not fail to com- " fort aHd support me under thein." The grey of the moining now breaking iu at the casement, it was thought expe¬ dient for the party to break up. Lach re¬ tired somewhat comforted by the efforts of Doctor Gly nne, but with minds deeply afflicted at the accumulating miseries of Lord John O'CarroI,
Titã of the Second Volume
