Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The son of the storm: a tale
THE SON
or
THE STORM. CHAPTEK Г
X HE anger of Lord John 0 Cairol was of no short duiation He had a soul in itself incapable of artifice and finesse he could for this reason have forgiven an iijuij with much more readiness than he could have pardoned an imposition He i-or m в slin
shut himsilfiip in lus cottage fot stieral davs rigorously iefii«ing to listen to any ti uns of concilntion or atonement Ile ramni Ibis vmiliitiie principle so far, that he abstained (rom his daily ram¬ bles on the sands, that lit might not iun the hazard of encountering any of the pai ties w ho had th us irritated the sensibi¬ lities ot his natine. The humble and penitential letters of Mr Aithnr Conyeis, at length accom¬ plished a point, which had baffled all the efforts ot his senior relatives. Lord John, who felt it impossible to deny any thing to this facmating youth, was melted at the tender and vehement contrition which breathed a plaintive ai - dour into his epistles, again joined his sorrowing family.
Previous
Previous to this union, however, he ex¬ acted a promise from them, a mered pro¬ mise, of never again haung lecourso to aitifice, or dissimulation they had all been so grievously disappointed at the total failmeofthcirlist project, thatthere ippeaied very little likelihood of their again ι entui ing to hazard so dangerous an experiment. After this amicable adjustment they fell into their usual modes of proceeding, and sveie solicitous of partaking such amuse¬ ments as Margate might be capable of affording. Lady Susan alone shrunk fiom the al¬ lurements of gan ty, and recoiled from the fascinations ot sociely She dieaded, after what Arthur had told her, to en¬ counter tlie ill brctl Mi. Stevens, and Ins vulgar family, bhe nosv began to icap the bıtteı ftuıts of erior and dissimulation η 1 She
Sht felt, Ih it hail it not 11 1 u lu lnr ow n folly sht mi a ht have w ilkid uect nul elated, minnest the most dignified eh ι netlisi» the liutisti nati η th it ospiti Ш1ц1ц Inve waittil ht] t ıisitps ıs sin moved al n, ind chtailiilniss md | İt ι sure sc Uttred roses in Un paths fiili llow bittu was tlu contrast, whtn consuence stirting liom ι me m. ntarj slumber htld the glass ot tiuth be I re hu ejes, and suddenly iivei«ed tinsi giv fliest smiling piosj tets of Idicity' sin could not think ol Woodville— ot hun who i\i*s tobe the future guirdiau ι f liei days, without terroin sht tould m t con- ttmjilatt htrself wilhout ltmorst' sh h id given a low brtd wietili an imp n ous command oui her conduct—tin most ai biti tvi) tyr tuny ovu hti freedom and hei actions beciiti) had bound hei in the most galling ft tteis—had ttnqitid lui to d.eeit —and when smeeiitv was forft ited
torlcited she sbudelli cl to π Ilı et on th« m tibie Irais of ill tht othei vutues Sht now leeused iletterfioin < ipt un Woodville, irqu tinting her svitli nis in¬ tention of с miiig to Margate, tint lit might havt th honour of itti ndnig her it Ihe Ball is hie h wis about to takt place. Ilcrplcisure at this intelligence svis damped bv all tbi before mentioned con¬ siderations I lit drop oí bitternes« folly hid infused into her cup of life poisoned tht draught which happiness ippnently presented to lier hand Making an effoit howevei to chist the sombre cl uds of mel iiehuly liom hu e um u nie —it ut uqtitstof lui luhu she eti iiipiiiud yi ung t insets lo the lionne f 1 u I Dihi η ι with η mutation fum tlu Dııkı t ti η ι whilt ıı 1 muls
familv, to dine with hnn, th it tluy might all pioeced lo the Batlın une p ıcly Hie flotu tppoıııttd (01 dinner was ι 1 Ut e ne to tive ι ipia u W tiotlv illt tlie oppi rttiiniv ul nding fioin ( anterbtni, iftti 1 m o eh tk is he must l e detained ou pu nie duty till tint pel ltd Hit 1 ulnntoi dim n, tint th, } should 1 nut tu nil sittloun to diimpi it tin ap¬ poniti u houi w itti tr Lb ıı 't s dul oi did ıı t unu, give lib coi sent so tills ti¬ rai uncut, not thıısııu to have hi, me¬ tlindi il pn cisión deranged even in the e типику ot ι Inolile sou Ni \ithui „nn j 1 ord Dalton i sly mist hit ι us hol iski il Luni Ieinpest lotivoi hun with 'Iu luuuii oi hu huid J, ι tht tuo inst il uu I s Slu blu nul— I iiuneietl oul somt thing
thing about not knowing w h tuci -'n ivas engaged or not, and lt lakisiid sm ul, in, Ui d— easting a ilcmiivvu I Juin ou the caipct. Sn \itliiu tıttm d as lu said— " Now Lama I'll vıa.ıı wlnt you please, thatyou gctyiim tap Imeli pulled this afternoon." " For what Sn Arthur'" " \\ by, hetausi I know that sly guaidy of mine, the Dottor, has com¬ missioned Dalton to cngd.t vim lm hun. and piay, how can you expect cvui the mild tempei of my grand aunt m put up with a lutto chit like you. tamım, olt her aılmııer' I tell you what— ii Dalton lias any pity for youi head chess, In h id bettei dance with you himself, and say he made a mistake, foi I insist up, u pie- \ enting any trespass on my aunts pino¬ li + t, itim
gative, as sovereign Dulcinea by being уош sttond partner" " lye' fye' Arthur 1 " said the Coun¬ tess, ' I won't have my darling called a tyr uit, tvtn in jesť" 1 О, I am in eurnctt madam ' he is ihe gleitest tyrant in nature, and I shall .nuntani it—unless \ou will bnbi me.* " What is youi /nice'" " VoiirLadysliip'sintercstwith Dottor (■lynne, to Itt me Inve my little Diek down heie ior a ioiliught—Mrs W il- hanis has promised to take care ot him— but Guardy has r (used consent, now I kuow that your Ladjship has gieat in¬ fluente in that quaiter, if jou would only pıomıse to e\eil it." " My dear bov, I give you that pro- uuse
mise with ill ms heirt mel 1 think tlu Doct ι will not le ible to w übst md u» tul/i M шч Ictiipe»-tìi vs enttied (rom lus usu il m ılınıp visit tc l orel John О Cu¬ ro! —he looked i ithu dejected, iud be mg isked the tiust, shook his bead and said his I ordsliip was in one ot ins most abstneted and „I joins fits ind obsti nitcls t liked of returning to 1 ondon— hev hid left hnn on tin belch with lien, md the pi tr old clog He h*t confessed to Henry, that though he hid siutuoly /ι/, ι ci he hid not foi goti и the ılı ci puun which hul Inu so ludi pittisi d n hun-i s unid h ul biuislieeked inddisi reluce! His iflecticiii t) Huny had c\cccdıı! ill biunils when hi lenned tint 1 e s s Hlivu ι outil nid u tht II aïs ıc tien in Uns
This 1119 the cuc for poor Henry at thit time lib nned under ι sh,ht liver, duuni, which uiutl I ttu t iti vu quitted h s 1 1 de luuni ir, silliin, up two whole nights in illection te ¡utenti mep on liei İlintiler Docte r (dj n nt had illuseci the tonte liment of Iht tiaiisattion ílom thtm both fea-ins tint any iniitty for his pitre π ini b ht tend to the augment ition ι ftlit young mans indisposti )n Ihe iccount which Ileniv now biought of tht btloved lhe lamı ut d 1 old lohn threw ι с! imp ι vu tht whole compiili, until tin (unii ss disimi the \oim, people to pripni to go out in oíd l to make seme pencil isloi the evenni, lhe 1 itlies Susui О ( u I ui II ouïs ι Woodville, with Miss li st ti ι ded hv Loul »ilt i nul sn \ ıhın (ııvu , il out ior the u w n 1 idi ll im it re nini, t) Ihı libi ny with Mr luıi|ist,
to pursue htr stu.lv ol the It ıhan tongue, of which lin^uigi hu f it lit r was parti cuhrlv fond [nun lunp st u ult a pi .position ti th. hrlits ol ih, n h пнц her to till upon Mi md Mrs llinlmv mil jo ниц tliem on tlitu utuni I nvvillnu ti lis hu t inpinv lul Dillon ob t ml ihr tim Ind b, tm ill piv tli и iispn (s t, ulier tvuv 01) igniti 1 ) Uns with th s ılı \uptioi t L ulvi ıııısı win vvıılı ill h ı motin s pinii but uitin ut an t qui il uit piu in of sensi to u .ţul it mil щи К it si u! fıstly and pcsitivilv itfustd I uk» tlıaılv I i -ei πι ι hoi ι tuition bttıv. 11, ıh Ι, hu md tl) sbtii nn 1 un I w I'll N \itliui, i .1 liiotUd ι II. ,!,„ u U i,.,, I,,,
house, where Ыг ind Mis Iiinliiiiv sveie lodged I he good people happening nitt. bc it home, the svliole party sliollcd on« nils in pursuance of then w ill, 1 idv Louisi continued pouting and hinging upon Lady Susan's arm, tin I stter making every good tiumoHred effort lodili m lier out of hti sn/Is. As thev left the Milluicis shop, they met Mr Steven«, his son and daughter in the ict of entering u Mr Stesi ns tin clung up to Sir Aithur oňcrul to shale 11 nuls with linn, but the I! roue t putting both his own hinds into hi» pockets brushed i ıtlıeı ııııeeıemonı- otislv by bun, say mg hastily— " IIoiv tic ye— hovs arevei" 1 uly
Latlv Susui gave thtm the distant eourtsey of a \irj slight acquaintance, and follo« etl her cousin Loid Dalton, giddy as the \eriest school boy, took no notice, Miss Ieinpest said nothing, and Lady Louis ι having torn liei gown with hei biotliers spurs, was too busilv employed in grumbling at him for his awkwardness, to observe the stiange looking group which her cousin had acknowledged. Lady Susan excessively embai rassed by this awkward rencounter forced herself to laugh and talk during the remainder of then preambul ıtıoıı, to prtv out hu friends observ mg how mudi she w as c h îgriiied ¡h. voumr ptopli s. parated at Loid Dtloraints, „id hu L ulv slup and Su Anlını proemiti! h mena d Он tin ir v ıy thej met Luu İnini, aml his faith¬ ful
ful dog, svho svas so emaniteli and enfee¬ bled bj Ins alinosi supei nutin al age, that he could scaicely crawlaflei his master. They spoke to Ins Lordship svho madt them no anssvtr, continuing svith down¬ cast eyes, the path which led to his little tenement On entenng the Duke's house, they lound Mis. Scudamore m the highest ex- hderation of spints, from having enjoyed the Doctoi's undivided attention during the whole morning, and whom she had engaged as one of liei whist pirty for the evening. Sit Arthur mentioned the wretched state of Lord John to his ,uaidian Olyuie, upon winch the woiths mm sunt ovei to the cottage, with llu hope of luiin 0 r hun trom his d. |cclion, anil persuading hnn to mike om of the dınneı party. Mrs.
Mre Scudamoie retired to decorate her person, and her niece ind nephew follow¬ ed her example The guests were all assembled, and din¬ ner announced before Doctor Glynne could prevail on the unhappy Lord O'Cirrol to give them Ins company His Grace perceiving the dreadful si¬ tuation ot his brotheis mind, requested Loid and Lady Delorame to excuse his mending them to the Hall, as he wis de- snous oi devoting the evening to Lord John, whom he said he would engige at Chess, a game which seldom f tiled to employ lus mmd and issist hnn in his recov ery Vtcorchng to the piomisc gntn to the methodical iud punctuil Lari of JDt Ιο¬ ί nuc ι vtiv bodv was s iteti tt tht tibie, ıs ılıt dock sii ııtk tin ıppı uittil hour In
In spile oi the ullen cl evers one pre¬ sent the c s e s t poor L ids biisin weie trc- quciiils ducelui te vv uds the window iu ouest«! ι -q ι un V „t dulli , w ho, bifore the soup hid hetn stried iode up to the door in reclinei tils ce vered with dust and his borsi in ι complete ioatu, Haung shaken bands all lound he was about to take his seat by Lady busan, when the hospitable and ever considerate Duke, entieated him to ge ind lefresh himself m his dressing room Woodville svould ssilhngly havt ac¬ cepted this proposition, but the st/stema· iicu/Lirl desui ι' ' im to çıt still siung — Soldicis should not mind such tiiíies, mil tint there was nothing he disliked so much is having ι whole compiny elc- i inerti f л the ıc commodation ol one peison " \ccustc ine \
Accustomed from childhood, to hi» worthy father's particularities, Woodville good natuicdl} complying, began his dinner He appeared more heated and fliimed thm might have been expected, which giving use to many enquiñes, he confess¬ ed that a delay had taken plate, from his servants having been thrown oft Ins horse, about seven mites fiom Canterbury. lie returned with him to see him bled, winch event had caused him to ride fourteen mites exti tt. Lady Susan proposed giving up the Ball as she was sme that Chirles was very unfit foi dinting Woods ilte would not agree to this plan, and told hei, he still thought he should be able to dance till she cned— "hold uiuu^h"— m iking
bei
htr promise not to h ivc any othei partnci till he if« t il ω lord D( loi hik, ibvivs m ·> fidget about timt m mi ci istd -ttoii)mg the young people, until they were se ned m then tirrngLb Mrs Scud unore\ first tutoli hei ar- iivtl wis to stturt ι tomf liable eaid tibi , md to mike up liti whist paity. 1 id Dtloi une asi td Henry lempest to d met with his d lrhng diughter Ilairiot, well knowing Out he would nof piesume to solait su< h an honoui of his own ac¬ colli Ni \rthursuip ol a mort agree¬ able pai tuer ni I mn the next stt olior- cd himself to 1< usa, but hu nu dy Lad\ships ill humours not havin^ Ind sufficient tunc toeviponte sh dtclmtd, anil séittd hustil by tht taid tibie IKrfilhei who appeared to consider the
the \ cry 4iqhl ol one as a to Uammattou, jemimul ш tht. В ill 100m I idy Sus m OCaiiol s the i mıh of the mobt lxiUlU ι ink tht η d uil iii ç, opened the ball uitli VYuodwlle, who sccimd tu bavı thrown oll dl Ins fılı^ııc, ind lud iicvtr m h·, life ipptircd to Ö H iti ι idvìnti^c hc\r the conclusion of tbe fiist set, bei I ndydnp observed Mr Stevens, his sun ind Daughtei, grinning and nodding to evei\ nott ot tbt music İh r pleasure rect ived α sudden check, uid Woodville s ej ι s following the direc¬ tion of heb he w ь suiprised to ohsuve the ovtr diessed youth κίν шекц with hb father towuds this e legni t diiuhter ot f binon to whom tb eldei Чей ns without the It ist lusitUit n md with the most impudent cflronteiv, th» lesi It ot ] D noiince
ignorance md vulgintv, introduced Ins son, and requested the favor of her liant) for the next set Petrified at this assurance, taptain VVoodvilles eyes silently measured both father and son, from head to font—won¬ dering who 01 Mit they possibly could be lidy Susan, whose spirits had been exalted to the highest pitch, and now feeling ι strong protection ill having her loi 11 by h r side forgot all hei ciution, and th dc nts which hid given use to it her cc nnc eves lltermtcly turned on her puseul and her pıopostd putner, the coiti asi sti иск 1er is so tiuly ludicious, tint iiiimnidiul oi tlie precepts of ι late ι c h hi iteti Lail she burst into a violent fit tu lui, liter V\ ι lulle who hid diank ι little wine, and
and whose spirits hid been animated by the rosey draught, felt the full force of symp ithy and converted the loud Solo of Ins iniei ded into as loud ι Duetto Sir Aithur, who witnessed this scene it a distance, sacrificed his own mirthful inclinations to the suggestions of piu- dence, tnd coming up to them clapped Mr Stevens on the bick, by wiy of drawing iside his attention fioin his two giddy friends He enquired iftti his (amity Lady Susan perceiving ıht kind intentions of her cousin immediately recovered her gravity, and apologising tor htr mil a pro pos tittel deci íred thit it had bten ex¬ cited by the recollection of ι vtiy old joke With ι slight couitsey she would lnve pissedon but tlie malicious disposition of
of Mr Stevens feeling her totally in his power, resolvi d that she should be pu¬ nished for the disrespect she h id evmred, thus meanly giatifjmg a low and nilgai pleasure, in Invine; ι voiing worn in of her rank undei oblig ıtıoııs to him—obli¬ gations w Inch he deteimined she should feel he bustled busily and earnestly up lo her, saying— " But vour Ladjship has not said whethei you will d шее the next hop with my Sammy or not " Lacly Susan, "With a stiffness of manner, whicli she hoped vvould awe his boister¬ ous familiarity, leplyed— " I am much obliged by the honom you propose me, but 1 happen to be engaged " " Well, weil," —rejoined the perse- ventiR
vering Stevens, is he followed her, while she moved onwards with the astounded Wooclville " Well, wc II, my Lady, that shall break no squires, the hop after, that will do just as well—Sammy can get a cup of wishy washy with me and Dolly— Dolly a'nt got a partner yet neither—but I'll get her a good un, I warrant you— leave me alone for that " " I am engaged the whole evening, Sir, and never dance with any one to whom I have not been previously intro¬ duced " Stevens here tyed her with glances of the most brutal irony, saying m a provok¬ ing tone " Indeed 1 —you need not be so up¬ pish my Lady—1 know a joke wortli two of that "
He
liethen walked away with his shttp- lsh son, towards the Master of the Cere¬ monies As soon as they were gone, Lady Susan, who began to be alarmed at the old mun muttering, turned towards Woodvillt, who stood lost in amazement at this so truly novel and inexplicable scene. " I have a favour to request of yon my dear Charles." " Command me Susan—I can denv you nothing " " I beg you, then, to ask n.e no ques¬ tions about this piecious family, nor to make any inquiry lespeeting them of othei persons—at a future time 1 may perhaps give you my reasons for this, but I make no promises." Woodville, who was terribly tormenttel with
with that constant companion of jealousy, cmtosit¡i most lit truly ltpented of h iving complied with hu lequtst—howevei lit (with not tin hist giaci iu tin world) li nt w td lus assimilici if not interrogiting her or any ot/iti penon Ί he giddy Lady Susan had \et mrie mortifie ïtious in store for her, tin the mo¬ ment Woodville led hır to j 1111 tin st- rond d шее, Mt Stevi ns, with lus son aciompiuiid bv the Mısteı of the Ce ic- momes, aclchessmg hii with a smilt tiuly sardomt, sud— ' This aentlem m tells me tintiti thi custom heie t n h ιη,ι i ai tnt ι s miv, set and a ladv cm t itfiist one ,entlt m m ai d dante with tını t ht ι so my Lid ıs ľvt nomimi to spoil v, im spoit, hu s iny Simmy laidi) — ι \cuse mt Sn' —will theu mv Lady joii'll pitase to biiii 0 youi- voL ni e o,||
silf toan anchor ind sit dow n, fori won't see ms sou ill used by any body—as fine ıhıl is ss io tvci s en, though I siy it tint should not »ıy it—thou D h I will sas it ılıt is tibes tl is the sty шц«' V! noduli h id hi en sppiking to th M ıstı ι ι 1 ılı (.пни nus ııı onning hım I His situ ilion ш lespeet to the muntr ids ι ι question. Ims modelli Beau N ıslı wilh gioì \ olitene ss, cuık ısnuıtd to ìetoucdc \Iı Чрсрпч to lus itxition His soothing minners Ind liowevti, stis little effect, ihe old gentlemin bung moie letuiteel hy maltei, it bei Lidy ship's slight ic- 1 nowlcdgi mcnt ol him m tlie morning biliösen by ¡nule, which nevutheless loi mcd no inconsiderable poition of Ins pu sent ill humour Su
■sn Altlını, quii к as lightening whci evei the clnins of liiindship ι died It ι his assist шее, and guessing the ι d unso ol the agit ıtıoıı lit peltene il numidi Ueli I ined thrm Ut wis inslintly mast i of the dispute, and clippini, tht İnli diunk, suily old ftllovv on the back . dltcl out— Why man, what have jou ilinewitii \our lovely dm,liter' I ııevcı sıv a I si like hu 1 ıtlıeı in mj hit'— 1 1 th \ ti must Ime betli v j leeioiis hunUom fellow Come li we my f olisti nism to dauet vv ith h i itd coït and mn dua mc to delight t e whet ιυη pam bi dancing with Miss Polli- on m a bmılv is enough in ill n ьип mv ol 11 no, Dehghtid with tli vomii flittuv which w oull Inu dis, Ы tl nj unn whose scull lud bitin i Ics iiiiiloiti ' bli
ble thickness tbc f lolish Stev usnul his cili Inadul son who! It limosi anniln- !"ul In Ih ι upi нощ, ¡Juntes of Wooil- iilli, followed tin lluonet, almost ine- ehuiicilli to llu bun h Πιοιοιιητρ nth mui ol tin hall ι oom hi 1 ti ι m m stillid nv ιν hum the lııck- I s ı)e mthı ι, vvıılı tint sort ol hi nour tin ι m uld Inu tilt it the surht oi a ι il tie nue oi touist she eigeily sn itth- «I it ihe | rolli ltd limit ot tht fascinat¬ ili,' С on} tıs W litu she hul gout down ini' «linci ith liti churning beau, whilst sin wis st induis tinse ti Sn liehui md I filhei, I old De inaine une up lo hnn lo ıtpıove hım len st- 1 nn, so improper a partnci, is fumi lin \ ul, n the ss mel mm ms, he tlıoualıt n Indicted very thoughtlessly m enteı ugnilo sui h in issoeiiliou \
As lus ! orlship iliv ivssp kevuv au¬ dibly when ht dt Im u il ni ι, ini η Ме - vins iiiiliitlu'v ovun. ıı , «h wu la» he intend it Ills ti je- w ν-. ı vır _oo(l, and lus pi. si nt st it. dint \ıı ıtıoıı tın I d to und r Ins il spi silmu dou l\ irnt ilile and шпионит:, Ignorant of his loidship s runk, In strutti d tıp to hini sajín, — " Tli it voiing lidv whom imi aie pleased to ll ink u ι gente 1 1 enon, b lor this liur VOIIII,stll Mini/ı/./ ind let me tell you, 1 1 1 gtııtlu m l t m ,ıve hır ---------- bit I i' nt rh um tni), ıs — every bodv kun ıs tint kn iws ny Unno- at a 1, th it l im om ι y mr imu outs and let mc see vou or mv oi ilse tm n upiiiir noses at hu —nm v tonu up, my d ıty . on in " г 4 I \ccssivelv
İM.ssncly prowl,..! it Ük coaist Icllcms imputi, nt volubilul, tud irat at all ilehjited w uh somt . I lus impi rtiuuit ipithitsthp ! ,1 tliKw such ι j oiti n .1 contemjittmiis h n n u , s , into hbdi'in- hicl tOUlltlllllut i, ht nel — " Sır' it ıs to b. Uinentidth-t >ou do nit tondue ton s. II lo the cuelo vihne ч in < ι ; '// s. t m-, to ! c mu h betici ip puiuţul ıhın it ıs hut " Ihtıı tinning to Sn Altlım he cc il¬ lumed " As vou Ime tn s jgul \ouistlf toliin pnsons d incinti, vi u must finisti tilt set, huti bi, Ьл Aitimi (omns will m lulu« ici Willi a lullt moie ìegard to inn sı 'í ,1ı m to d met with the daughtei of a low tradesman."
" That's
' Ihii'sa/«. S»!" sud the un hunt ιί Sti ıtns riirnsnoff lnsguirdls this ins ι · ll e mit mous 1 ul applied his em ti ţiu pu lii'teriiiei winch n itme h ıı! „n u Nitons byway of ι he ul Hollow vv ıs Iht sound winch e ibucd The eluiuu uti¿i ıı sti ippici oll lus coït nul cip i- ul up to Ins Loidship in ι boxing m- tude Woodville obsuvin, his fithci's ιι,ι talion, nu! Su Althuis eiideivouis to apptise the cinageel disniitiiits tuni up, aud with tilt issisi iute oi ill tht young nun of lisluon in tht issimi Is, fairly elbosseel the loaimg Sttscns out of tht loom. " I am a ssaim ltllosvi" Ile b ui lul t i out
oul ıs h" wis li umili d down stins ai 1 lis t, ι ш к es vv, n sn t\tı ıvıg uit, that an universal shout of lau^hitr fol¬ low td lus exit
СНЛРГЕВ.
W П.! M „
W s pissin 11 'lii M Suni miou ι , t > U il nn oui „fini vv I ist ι it s hid b in πι timbuni ill I Ι ι ι iti ηιρΊ. vv S \ ^ι u w du' 1 t , It, com 1 it s M
Mrs Seuil imot г, whose lov nf cards vv ıs t \rerdi tl by her puut nuil pi ıı pn silj al ni not m tiu h ist suspect ur the ill İni d vul, щц nf hei neu i epi unt in. ι to whose ι. rv nune slu wis a sti in,ei, lcruvril hi ι mili ıs ıııııelı ι . il dist imim md idiliiliti i, sin vvastqn- blı of ill dine buta м, f. u шопи nts siiveil ti dn t lope Mis sttiuis's nil nul m sock tv fui ou tlu Dn. tor tun mg up tin \ct ol ti limps sh. eninf.uttil hn- selt Hiilpulnir by obsuving that— " i line wt s klom míny servants m the hons when ,. ntlifnlks (dinding to the honours) tunt lo thi door thi ni¬ st Ives " Mis Scuciamoli started, but lemamed in -lient stupefaction The lidy amused hi rself witl devour-
,η ι ι ι 1 Μ ıı' ľ su I / Γι Ι II th t 'n ıcııc'u! Pl m. as slu m ι \ nis ( ι i ti η, i ne to her (oei« is — ν itli nou good m· tuie thuı delu lev 'he ofluecl them mix- iti tiktiler, m bei h H pilui ti Ali . Scud mioie, who bursting uitu р -nli in iiiilumtion, durst not trust htr voir tr dulun tht pioiïcreil militi, but bowed With in in of the most lcpulsiu dignity Doctoi (di lint, whose fuling wis si- mil« lo thitot hb be lovtd yomu, vv ud— oidelitet, ι liste ioi the hlillloioiis nul u dicnlous, good intui dly ııı ι pud Mis Steve iis's hon bo ıs, m hopes bv this ehi aı- ful acquiescence to cxtiiet fuiiiin tout ' )i his ninth u el iitijilet 6 "is
Mis. Sli vens, aimed at all the happi- m ss ol vv Inch liei phlegmatic constitution u as suso 'puliit, talked mme than visual, ilicl.uiiig hu elf .1 famous playci, and that Hovle was afoul whcicu ι v/iciamc. On lu r pni tni r (an old stifl lady ot epia- ii'v) plavim, in ace, she called out— (litis t a— li t litem ι fust ioni aces, inni joui кпцЧ and queen's, and then inkli 'nn up with vom knaves, il they'll ч loun к" Willi u, aichlv at the Di elur, fui hai I II, ΙΙΙΙ,Ι ism should III tlllUlVll Л ЛЧ .IJ. upon I 111» t.iilKils ι uiciunsMiiec vvitn'l slu- ι ι ι Jit win. Π nut uss ıhı tomııı ıy with ι ι, unıı ılıl. приши ui h.r m dlh. On tin
lhe Doctor inquiriu!» whether the ladits those tei, sht ıMİumtd — ' Λ}ι 1) cui' let's Inveì pure warm comfoil ible diti 1 — I hate lour /lippij, flippj, d„,dlj stull" M hen it mivel sic grcitlv offended Mis ^ iidainou s d, lie ıı \ b\ s¡ re idilig hu hlllllkenhlif ,11 hu lip idisen intr, th it sht hkcd to t iki hi tei, eoıı f oıt- ttblc listom, slu poured it into her silicu, iud pinul hu nip en tht pick ot tleaii e u ds, not to vv c t tht tillie , w hen slit hul doue this, she put htr ι rusl nito hu r ip (ilesiriiu lhe w ulo lo brui, hır ııı th ι) issuiui „ hei w mt ul tutli ıs the tinse, t ılıt same tune input-, the с nils wilh hei li iiiilkcrchief un lerslniil- iiU tint slie w is to ρ iv ii r these шц le ments of pk .isme, slu lugui ihi n Jing bairam with tin waiter fen two οι tince s] lied
spulni pi I lo ei ιν hom" vu h her; at the s к imu hui шц* t ι· Ί e in vır ku t in hut sı 11,„d Imul ι u I, in hır h .usi, md kıııdlı intiimin" Mis. Scud mı. up of vv lu s, nuk as will ıs lhe otl u lıılv's shi w ıs lot illv ıgnoı.ıııt, «hue slu nıiLiıt tit tlu m tin ap, it ,ι litth ι handle is shop, the misti ess oi w Inch had a son ι waitti at a tavern. Unable to controul her anger, but too IiilJi bitd lo ъ пс it nut in words, her snuggle s to cení-val it, made Mis. Seuda- niou so negligent ol her game, tint she was on the point ot losm, it, whin Miss Stevens fiinoiislv lushed into the room, wilh her hau about lit ι t<ı s, hu passion, added to hei tl uu ng h id ihstiunpustd liei Iliad driss most woi hilly—sht cried in a hall thoaktd volte— " Do come along Mi' for Pa hai pick'' 1
|l i'd 1 quinci— li ik el ip ι u u ,ι ι gom η lun u out ol ih.· room an I t it timo Sm, 1,,s slunkttl avv iv aııü ie.t us ful to takı ι iu of ouiselves" Mis Stevens, whosp ipathv nothing coni I louse, veiy coolly finished liei ц une (ivi i,e hu tin buhul etniğimi kept le is¬ ing her to go) and pocketing tlic money, not ioigctling thi liv ι tunica pietcs, would have ltnewui lu i m conation with the w aiti r, with pioportioinble sine fi oul, Miss nowiovvcd, thu if she did not come along, sue u ould ,o wilhout hti. " Don't von see Mi, lint all the poo· pie aie snig,tung md liiijnn 0 at us." " Will Dolh, non't he so fussey, I ıhıp sav ioni 1 ıtlıeı ıs a lulle iu liquoi." " Λ hult m liquor' why he's dowii- llljlt
right chunk—md in nuli a pasión —I don't know ssh it it is all ibout-but he Ins been fully utt,/<,/ , m of th oom " í ned lins stoical ılı, Jıleı ululi hrr ni un ııı ıs cılmlv j шиш, up he r gown, puttun on lici sh ivv I nd clıaıyng her eltin ni ile ,1οι. s iui i pair of duty yel¬ low ónos then tvmg a colmued silk pocket hi ι U eielutl о ci her head, she nishid the pi tullid Mis htudamote, and the ust oi ıhı p m ι good nı 0 ht, told hei dui blu ^ it w ıs ri ids togo, addın,', ' tint ıs it w ıs nu oııh^ht, she intended tn tiu Ľ it honit " Miss ni atılır ti i' t e suiroiiniling tit¬ te m h s m su ¿ d I ılıl ut liti aim, m I th v m le Ih n exit t ,ι thu liipv vspn si ui Iv out ot ы lit, when í ılı Ni i i h s ip irti d by i i]ıı mı И üv I ml Lidi betonine, с licite'
rntprpd tilerini room mcl in i funt mirt btggtıl hır lo et lo acci nıpınvhor homp, and rc epu sted htr umt to do lier the same f ívom I ulv SiMn O f irmi was reitimly amou„ ıhı de uest objt ets ot Mis s ııılı- more's lili etions ttinflid it liei uita¬ ţi n sit complied sih ntly with her wishes issile telt fe irlul ot asking ques¬ tions in so public ι plice lord Dilton consigning L un ι Гетре st and Lady Louis ι to the cue of bir Ai thur ConyirG escoitul them to their ctrrnge, w inle he with lluiiv Timpest's assistance rimani d to ippeise and per- sinde lcrd De Ici une to retiini home, vheh point was with some ehihctiltv ac- comi hstVel Do. tol t lynne paid ei ci ƒ attention to the ladits
On
On Mis Suıeljtnoıe ind bei meccs le- tiinuiu, homt, Sii \ilhur, without spe vk- ing, rui up stins lo bul, ıslımı d of llu tiouble inilcoiilu ion wluth his fıolı lud given rise to Wiion thos enteied the piiloni the butlu, who Inclined with the hi e Dule ıs ι ılı t, uni confiti nini sumit infuni¬ li! llicm with stiong muks of ilistiiss η his ei nuten inet, 1 oul lohn h id b en so ici} Ind tli it nemim tli it the Dııkı li ul been neu smiling fui the Doctoi, ind ıh it In w s now in the librirj wilh Ins Grace Doctor Glyti ι, cxccssivclv shod cd it this iiiiclli,uiec, oriluoil hım to sınıl a sei v int tol Mr lunpist, ívhosi mihi and Ц1 ntlt m imitis seldom (tiled ol liiv¬ in,, the most s ıhını ν ι fleets upon the muid of Ins uuliipp) beutfictoi Ht
Ле Hent in piopiia pusou ι to tho libi.iiy, and sent tht Dukt to appease tlie ttriour of his ahf ulj agitated daughter, vv ho si eined to have lost all million ot In ι cot n uni asmess antl peiplcMties, in ılıt more povvtifully painful si nst of tin, new talamity. Ifis gì ice then informed theni, that iftti tlitu dtpaiture fiom tht house, bind John eng iging with him at at trame of chess, had apptarcd moie tiancjuil than he oielinaiily was. On a servant bunging m the nenipa· pei, his biothei requested him to read aloud, m hopes oi amusing hnn wub Una htttlc magazine ot uovi kits, antl daily occunenccs ho complied —lit had pist befan an account of a slight convulsion of the eaith m a distant part ol tht king¬ dom, when he was roustd İroni his ot- octupalion
cup ıtıoıı lu a Intuì lustene i! I nitji (и ııı Loıd O'Cdiıııl, who on ılıııı, n tin table, chess boald, inri caiidhs n pi U cdli shunt, il ıs it ııı the exult, ι n e f triumph— exil шиш, — " 'lis well'— 'tıs most pxcpII. ut'—so nny we iWpiiish '- iPcpive me a, uu oh eaith'" Then tinning to thp Duke, with a compusul, muu h, nuble than Ins tonner violence, continued " \\ by is it more difficult for mo to du, (iiorjp, than any bodv else' war famine, muid i, pla,ue, and peslilence, cm mow doun nations, jit 1 am linei the sıvınıl ot Ihe destroying ni gel will not smitt ------ l'—1 shall live'— livt^ei; eier *"
Then
Tinn cx unst d hv Ins (чччсшч, he lha ι η unici I on ι u Л >, ,unl v pl. The D 1,ι> c uden oure d to restore the ipilmuitti some d щи ot oııleı, heilig unwilling to ie neie ι the c\tı liıig nit pi- rowsin, 1 1 his hio he ι ι conni η speet ı- cle t ir thi lnıs\ и nveis um ι ι 1 loeiu ι ı- ous si nants hut the winch d siıtieıer did not I n, remmi m i si m ot cjuie- seence, In e dd nlv si ищ и ι he in¬ sisted upon ,om_ to 11 ιί ι ι iithijuakc, th it ln nn h' tiv iihtlhoi ılım vi ıs room for hım—thuı idilin^ tint his hther «ould univ di ц hım luck to hitelül lde, he ι U| sul into lus I ici щ nies, which comp II d tl Dııkı to ,u union lit n, ind the hutler ti lus ssi tum Hm ıs he hul 'ic, n dn и ti d hv Doc- toi (.lynn. , 11 ι ι ι ι ( mil so gm d in ıııstıuttoı ь / iti »li it he piifoimtd thr
the operation ssitli the preci' m of an artist) while he appi ned totally uncon¬ scious of ıhın opeıılıoııs, tluy ipphed a blısttı also, to tht hick ol his neck He was now on the sofa, ι xptctiug a chaise to cany lum to Loudon, svliither he insisted on going, and w heie to amuse and рае ıfy his minci, they had feigned to agree thai he bhould In a quartel of in houi the servant, ıvlıo had been sent to Mi. lempest, ic¬ tuined with this young ,ι nlltmaii, svho was immediately conducted to Loul lohn, svho wildly ,i¿iug on hnn, as lie offered hım h s haud, asked 'um if he ss ould venture to ulmniister the sacı iment to so gicat a stiinii. Much shocked it such fieqtunt ilecla- tions ol guilt, whith all svho kntsv him fall
lelt convinced wei onlv the nu hncholy vapours insin, fiom his deploi ible ma¬ inly his siiuoiindiug tutiiils svert un- abh to spcik foi some tunc. At h n r th stilting up, lit declared his resolution с f „oing ilthough now pist two o'tloik in the m)iiun D , towilk upon the sands Doctor Glynne svho had ittendtd him since his first rttiuii is a mamut to ins na· tive land, thou a ht nothing moıt likely to compose hun tl an ι compliance^ svith tins wish Ut thou,ht hktwisc tli it the mild breezs limi lhe sti un 0 ht hue a healing ttndenev in eoolm 0 his pool fe¬ vered bum uid tint the txticise of this divusioi w nild piobibly put iside Ins project it , m, to I judon He iccoiihii 3 lj in onipmywith the Duke
Duke and Mi Tempest, attended him to tin heath, lit w liked foi some time in solemn silence, listening to the melau¬ cholv Ii4iimur.il the sullen waves, thin tin nui-, to Ins livciuid joung fmiid, he said— " Is the soul ol a body iins"nrtifieelbj sepulchral rites, belinoli bv the urn ts of youi faith, to be adinittul to thr presence ot bod '" " Surprised at tins question, w hırlı imply41 some doubt distinbing his mmd, Mr. Tempest, with thr most tendi ι Ij soothing gentil ni ss and aile itimi, enti ı- eel into а юпц diss, italien upni tin sub¬ iect, concluding with in ılı iu n on the exilted justıeı, anil llu buundlt *■ mercy of the gnat God of all Loid John heard tum with complăcut v lib
till ht hid lieiily concluded, when stop ping hnn, he said with less impetuosity thin btfne— " Γοι bear Henri' foi bear'—the fun nut of join discourse like hull who 111- spncel it, uid whose worth} sciv mt}Oii ui has beamed ti inijiuhty md pe ice upon my dirkuicd ¿oul —but when you cntiigc upon tint cliviut ımıbuıt of Heaven tin pi tue of the i ıı^hf / — wlnt do ιοί hold out to me'— üespı- ı ıtıoıı Hi it his İn,t blue pyts wuc cist up vv nils to İle nen h s li ınds iv eie ι i ıs| e tl, uu! lus uniscili u md limosi gì, uitu linn tuml led u hIpi ı,ıtıtı ils which tom uls d invili it with toıpoıı il in! ш nul O on} he piesiiited ι unible -ρ I ele 1) the i}t» ol lus Ulu, d i ι η İs 41 Π D Iht
The Duke tot dlv nn ible to c"ndiir° the si lit hi I hisfi t in his hands, whilt sobs luokt with the vi Ii nie et pent up thun¬ ders, lini the b. son (t the sufferer lina, in itn n rould n t pirture a scene mue ην lul it sı e/í — mort afflitiing at any 'nut l'otto! Glvntie ind Mr Tempest,uere in ι whispci tonsultinir how to dial with this bil vu I patn nt —Henry putting up a sikut but feivint pnvti, took him by the mn, md tried— Conn, my Loid, let us g ι home ' 1 Home 1 bomt' —Wheie ıs that' re ptattd 1 old John lhe imitated Duke sobbed out as he ι lisp .1 lum— Ιηγ home, my bother, is the hearts
of
of all who know thee—the poor—thy re¬ lativts —the afflicted '" Deeply affected at tins emotion, 1 ord John dropped ι teai on his cheek, and sighing deeply, said— " Pardon ıtır —forgive me—I am born to be in ob|tct of teiroui and distress to thos for whose hippintss 1 vvould forfeit mv life'—no gieat mitter indeed, fot what is 111 to me' —but come I will, with Gods assisiimé, endeavour to be mort tilm and ! ss troublesome to jou ill but vou must not leave me Hirrv — W//V.//1S111J mintls ,reatest enunv md I wish lutiteli I wish to be less tiouolt- bomt lo my fi ends " Ihn, then vv ill el slowly 1 ome, Lord T)hii\ txpn si . vis bt iming fi item il allietimi m his binthcr's fue, whilst lie gi isprd hnnnrivoiislv bv tin arm i) 2 Dorto-
Doctoi filynnt wuit hist, lupicvint tlie suv nits fiom спиши! шц Lod O'tiiii I, ıs he cui mitin Iı ııısı , lui ην. ιιι 0 tint the most tııllııjjr oei ıııienre w uld sudile to ılı ti ıj ılı sh, ht di oree cf ti ιιιμιιΐιΐν hi hul olu unul, hv, hb lıiotlıcı s,uilli ıppı il tohisliehn,s Huv condili tcd hun lo his di linhri, when hi sil nlly stilinoti hım ell lo be iiiiihissul ml pul lo bed vihne Ilemy took u h ui bj Ins sull, and hy Uoctoi (jluıııı'b intieitis the vviittlieel min Iv is pci-tudid tu iiii'i ivoin it dit lining tint leposi he sn ıııııelı nudi el flis Selicinmu indlul} Susin, do ccivid hy i Imun ible m ssi,e ulucii Ihı ι insulei ile huttu pieti udul lo Imo bio Ujhı hoin the IJuke, li ni ìctnul he loie the put} inull then noetuin il e\- cuibion tu the he ioli
Loid
J onl lohn, b\ tiu ìssistan-e ι f a so poulie drillin, t n oj, d sı vu il boııısıf uııınteırupttclslıtp dıııııiMilmh ΙΙ.ηιι on bis 1 nees îddiesstil lus pions privi is to hım w lux n aloni idimnist, r ıı lu t to the htırıtullı ι In sofllie ıfflırtc cimimi sul viis the reil etion, tint lliaveii's choice bit ssnigf'/í/,»; wis dt ned lo . nobleman who li. p. l.ss ol h ippiness m Inso и peison, n. vei lost sı ht . f an op pOlíUnitV tO coliti lblltP 10 ill. lll||ll!P^S of othus ' Oh ul I U ι 1„ | r „„c uı vu lnımcdııtelv cııvvılmg his 1 ırlshıp revivid i ıs f unu ι olun ni pl ι Ι ι ms lo ! en.' ш lie ippi ι I м ш. uh ι tniiiiiiillis d teihin Ins lm nils lint lit would onlv rt m un ι lew div-, it tht mı tropohs, and tlun ictiiin lo ıhını 11. sttadlastly rtlııs dauv uf tin ıı protk ıs ot o j ıi'onıpmuıı.
accoitip ui}iiig hnn,biittoiisi ntcd toben s 'о ош Ь 'минния lint iiotlniig could defanı hım ем ι pl Jiu, vv hu h nivu İnli tl lo uu, v tt lus disoidii, tht ι at h leiih li¬ lin Unii} eons, nud u, m ııı ničelnim ul me pl m ot his )„miii} lhe Duke's hullu, llrvin, asking lea, i" (but ıs if funii itmişti f) to go to toivuit ıı ¡us fi hu, 1 md luhu, uiisiis- pıcıoı ol íl pi, us fl 111(1 ot lus biml, u, s ici lu would cu v ıht puoi „h! nm I U II lun il,,,, „ Mill ,11 ! ııı „, I, ι ι ıs thev t ou lit Bui Wilson mijii sinul ιί nud ni somt issisi nu m tu t v I 1111)11 ol Ills mitions 1 1 II ι Sır Aithnr ( ııi}u w ıs tn ılıt mı m tını inventisi itiin ivvkw ud pu dua¬ nı ni m whiih lisi, ι, оПш li ul piau d his hunus on ıht jıtcıtdııı, ııı lu and dıcıdııı
dreading to mett tht irrititi 1 Mis Sı nd - morc, ind the all mule el 1 ul, be sidts hiving to encounter the lurs ui tht v iti¬ gli Stevens nul lus ilowds ılın hier ht svıotc ι noti pxplan ttoıy oi lus Imit nid txpitssivt oi lus punti hip to lus indul geut „ıı udi tn Doctoi Civ mit, lu it th suni tune eiriitstly nitri iti d foi ptimis sum to ö o bitk to London 'Uns note he sent bv his sen mt, and uv uitd lhe answei in his in ch imbu A luekv thought miniceli ttelv fl s' ui atlısı m the mind of tho Dot 'οι — ht slıpvvtd Ilıt Itt'ıı to Ioni Jolin — vino smilingly replu d — " I sec DeirGlvnne, sóimul Gu ue an tkti ι inmetl \ slnll not μι ılı ne— wtll, b it so— Aıllıur ш ıy ρ ssibly bt as ín ι
» l· еогьршшп
c impinion fur mc as uiy othei — but maik' he must ittuiii with mı This condition bem,' ino=t che n fu I ly acculili to, the vouthfiil Π noni t t ıkınır, Je ivi ul 1 ulj Su'in, ml Ilıt »икс, lilt hi u spie is .md luve tu ill lus ntlici fnends, md thus lottiin ıltlı ccıpıııg the cheului niltiview with aunt Л11111, he Witti Loid lohn ι uniini need tilt ioni¬ ni ν lo lhe monopoli, inly tlie- nc\l moruni,
С HUM J lì ill
-LYAläS Sem viHiiir hid prepared ία bei own mind a most ihhciou Iv, elo- quuH, and di,nifiid ripuinf, İni ıhı mis¬ chi, vous t nuvels, which she lud ıletu- minul indibvii wilh all due soiunnitv, bv imuni..' luni ln putike biriklist 111 lin dussin, u 0111, ıs sin b/ imini »ns ııibbtd Jiu sen ihsanı lov ι r Do ioríjiuini-
to be ι witness of her oritoncil ability m tht Xmtippe stilt, mil this shi knew must h ivt been the cise if slit took her brtikfast with the fund}, loi the good lidy felt vuy conscious tint liei ingoi it ould lirpik thiougli ill pi udenti il mo¬ tiv t s the momi nt slit stt t} es on her mi¬ hu k\ nephew She h id ıı ul in a hook li ni her by the Doctoi thit Minim Ind thiinn m ıj 1 u liuti when sht -iw (in ι lomitun of tou sı) how mu. h ıhı ix rti ι disponi piseli the svuietl\ ni lui li Uni s sh 1 nI hi twist it id tint ι tut un gie il mm of intiquilv vvishu! lus s'itt tu pic- spnt ι inumi In li ri hun th I lu nu ht hp ılı tmu! Irr u m ι ııı hh 11 n. (lu in Viţiul f,nmıe,s mm u Inch | issi u hicvv his 11 tlllttlillll N n sii thil ni t wish hei livn to lir he vitnes-, tl Ilı, , -continuons Uld 1 I foie
Λι udore, p.uiputlv resolved to exereiso them with onlv on witnc -ь Tot illy ip'ioriiit of tip distressing stems ol tin 'Ы iu,ht, mil the lntcinlnl join in \ to I ondon, lit ivas much sm- pnsidwhcn hu womuuptin icd with a message fiom Si iithin's man, "that bn Atthiu w is ,οηι to lown with ínul John O'Cauol, uid u meti tl not hung able lo ¡ι iv ins tints to hu, iu lueiv tiu honom oi hu cornili mels" Disipoiiited m thu, losiu, the oh| ι olhei di,ph isme, shı u solvici, at k ııı t) gıatıiy hu tınıosıts, bv ((ucslınuııi' the ııııloı lunate Lilly Sibili upon tht οι tui lentis ot ılıt 1 ist ni,ht sht was jiot oveiwhtlmid vvıılı inj excruciating ■sensibilities at tin hi tens v u turbi Madun Vimini, t , hm¿ tht , ılının™ íalu-Uoii tl 1 o d lei ι
Ilia Lincisi ips iv cisión bung most amply lenirne d by ibis iinliblt lıılj,4İıo denounte d hmi for i rudt ııııpolıslııtl sta natti inimii, not fit lor politi sucu ty, and that sht tlıou a lıt lit ought to be ι oıı- fine.l, foi Ins ırızy fils were ttrnfun, to any people ol »a.ii 01 ikln.ua/ mil tint as for his sepiaiulcnng his immense lia¬ tinu upon lvv о joiindhn^ hitita, who i ι ou,ht she I irwi mi 0 ht be forjas elnltl- rtn it w is wlnt she could bv in nn ms appinvi cf—tint ihe Duke cinghi tn pit lint sui h,o,n,s on, but In nivu ton- sullcil lui on tl ι subi il— I hi h 1 1 sin simul 1 ılı minili lincsel hu 1 ut ι nusl ι musine win H w ıs lil t Iv tn ılı puu hır di u Sibiu ot hu ıı, hti il mintii ance — bei nist i ısı th th vvultutd noble Ul Ul « ts li lllll s lilt ι 1 Ilt Ul) blest ıft tt Utann— att whith e\ tils man, ilte l 1 1 ti ve tht biute ıı ıtıoıı 1 ll would hut lun ill tint Iı s I ι ıhtı ind my n ht to clo, il lic hiel tıkıl ι d itoli ible
roinfoitihh annuity upon hım, and taken hi' ail nis into his own custody' as Λω allows m sm h casis. Such a halut of tilinkin,; in aunt Anne, was douhtltss unfeeling and repiehcnsi- blt—it must, howevtr, lit confessed, is somt kind ol apology (or dottnncs so de¬ ti stilile-, tint Mis Scudimuie was no luut ¡tat tj hcr's was all iiipeiluial knovv- led a i i'leinl—bid Umpeictl—the titlest dualitu ui IVu— htr in iste is and go- erntsses lud kepi liei ni humour hy dinimi., her to take pist as ши h ot 'thuı ıı due lions ıs lu pit ıscıl, (wluch w w hut ι sm ill pint, n) while llu v lavished ill tin η ι nts upon 111. tn ) voim, est sisi s L idv (onveis md the Dutt lu ss ol ""onte ıstlı who lo thi ir exquisito l' hiu -, il pusou, ι lincei bwietliess ni ıı nipe ι, and quickness of put plnú, v hieb
Svill I liiste 111 i ini ι' (Ι ,τ ^ ιν to au nn lit Mis \шц , il s ι et ln tht ton¬ ti ul ι i uisti ucti m It mı Jit hivi hun sml 1 v lu r n lends, tint she lud i gt Ι ht ut u ! m the veritabit spint e I cli ıstı in tl) uiti, H ıs to be hoped tint this isstıtıon wis foundid in truth but is tht he ıı t ıs gun r dly to be pulgtd by the actions the point (to speik in the mist nulul, lit minner) re- mams to tins d iv a di puta/ 1 ue She ilwivs, wl en in I ondon went re- gul uly to the ί lupei lioi il bt cuise she thought it decorous to ц> vs hue other people of aiiultl / won hut we cumot think such f u/ionul' tl tton wool I asid much will bun win hulls tl t> priyer ol tht hip h ıy ι u the n st, ind tht piisoiiu in th dun^p n when tlie residue of the diy w is pis 1 1 i с un s mf tb dresses ol tht ι ) Ц1 t n uiti
cismg the ofliciating divine, aud aml z- liig whclhi ι- she had rccuied and paid adutdignc of s dilution mil iltention to hu ttcpa iinUtitt, ui tlic iilioiuing pews She subscnliid to all çcıı/etl public chnHits likewisi but ntvei did Mrs Scuciamole layım, aside her elailing dig- mt\, dpstuid into the obscure cottige ot wretthcdiitss, or search fui a ılışırım o! ject on whom die might besotvv the supi rfliuty of iletilence. Possessed of wealth, more thin she propcriv Kue w how to expend slit sub¬ mitted hi rst Ц 1 1 tin unpht it giiiduit^ of ι mucin u\ eh mesne, who hid bv irtlul llatltrycbi mid such influenti me ι her weikiiund th tt she hi с une Ul ι ıs ν pıev tohiwaitin v om in who despre el hır u к, hee ııı i lie I ш j her butu tlıaıı №> ln u> il VV tU
ft ith all herwoist paeons afloat from the occ urrtiices of the pincctchntr even¬ ni,' she descended into the di nvmg loom. I aelv Susan was ¿one down lo the beach with AVoodville, whom she wished to lu ρ out ol the tv ıy of unking such impune as sho kn. w could not be re¬ soli id to his satisfaction 1 oul Detonine during this penod ic- uivi 1 ι litter intimitiiij the seveie and tl шц on illness of i\ ery near and deal hunii ι ho most tiinestlv itqucsud ti su bun is soon is possible, to consult with hnn i ion Uu serieus altei ilion ot Un tintili ol lus onlv sın The I ail di¬ tim I hls sui us intuitif n of í, »mr to town ail 1ш, lu t lit wis come ti ie ipli t ılı n ıı л ı\ and assistance of Doi toi Í/Kiiiii He did not mnn to с rn
tariv, I.ady De lor une or his fiiiiily with him lhe Duke, Ins spints ailicteil ami de- piessid In his Inutili ι s nient ribpst mt) insinui deri weil Ilı il notlııııa but th necıssıtv rl his ivvntiiu I "tel lohn'» letuin, rouhi induco linn to ıınnııı at Mu.· ılı, iphct »luth stimul to have bun paitiudirlv unpiopiii us to hun — hi ι most of the pit ısın ibli pi ms of hu¬ man hfe, it hid ippi uni fu ши. d. - lujittui m thi pu pietni ılım it hid proved in tin reililv He piomisr.l bonevu to supply the place ot th I ul ш th pul innnitiil cvciv itu nn π in liispjvvu D tin ladies of the Di bunn I muh As soon is llictor (..limn letinuid finn i vill hilutl bun tıkın,' w ith Mr 'luiptst, ht was cnticiid bv tin I ul to
to grint the hui, fit of Ins uluci Triti is sislini с t) his Loidshipa dt tr antl iltlitc- cd luciul AVilh lus ictivp, nul elurictcrisiicil bene loltucc (ilviini unun batel} as- se nled to this pioposil, m whith ht vv is joined 1)} Ilinrv li uipist, who ilso ninth ■w ishul to st ι Ioni lohn whom hi durst not hue iollowed without suth ι pie¬ te n et lord Deloiaine (like evtry one else Vvhokii « ibis nimble voimj mt», wis alw iv h ıppı m lus soi ι tv; at eptul Ina с 'l, r with the strou,cst niaiks ol plati¬ tude lit nrs wis the true ind un illtet, il finn I et tiu lillut 1 11 ıı ι h w ts beti nul nit uh sluhti ,|ш lil I y Olli it wis ílu n in Ih hums ι I I ll ι ty and piosptut}—ui tht hour of ulieisiiy oi
or soi row, rc n ardless of every personil ¡nconve intute, settnu self tot illy aside, Henry Ieinpest hke a niuiistning infiel, hovend over tin couth of tho suftutr, rıhı vul tin tortului lit irt, ind dioppid the m uin t ot tonsolatıoıı on the desart mind Stldom, veiy seldom did his mild and peisiiisiu duetiincs (ail of their ellcct Kelikmu was net, in his lnnd, the flam¬ ing sword th it diove the fiist trans n res- sois out of Hirichse, it was a mild beatón, a innhent lubt, to irinde the wietch from stoims and slnpwietk to the the haven of (ehcity While they wore irniuing the plan of their jouiut, U iodul t nul his f ur com- pimini eııiı n d ıhı ıo„in lhe fonner wis obligi d to relmu ıhı next morning tohisie„ııutııi, it (..mininin hut when tn heaid uf lhe senous illness ol his fi tilers
tin r's fucini, he и tpii stul ti ι I lensi of absinte loi ι I vv dus tint he un.ht person ills itu u I upon the um ıblı mcl ıfflıeled Hor ılın Sı ill, The I ul ivv ue of Sisdh s strong it- ticlnnuit to ( h il s „I In pin, tint he nn,lit lie ibi tu issi t in ι linini, lus cle sp jiiding spints, c uisi iiteil, suliig — " "ies, ms «on —h ulos the elch,ht you will I cl m eciinftiitin nul issisting our puu fri ml s inns u m i me»«/ be¬ ucht funn tl eoiiluupit! i oflussuffei- ftils ol ııı ι ! ¡ην h ul so m шу reasons lo abi ' — »h ului et ııı ıhı ı,oıııts it his ι ist ı | ι dt ıı s Ilı — I tould almost ι ıı^ I ııııs I! ml till to curses' iv nen t vi mı i lııııı s/ , inti potetti) mio ι f utul v Ihı ιν 1 ııı iv bt nine died, bilt it slu ι, 1 ,ί/ f slu lill pl lgllc is IU-
cıınblı ·
rin'lc' fro n snih a rilaiiiity God pic- sun t ! vv io no tie u to ine," ih se vvoiils ian hit n n ilnoiuh the chilled b ι ot, u ι u ıhın st | tuning lady Susui, sin w'i hiu I totuin isidt her heid in ι ι 1 с Ιυ ι onci u th, violence of hei emotion Loid Deliruue lleniv, inil Dicto, Glume, thuı tu, к le ι ι il the (lindy ııı odei lo commun с ι ıtır mtl meh Iv ı\- pedition lhe Duke in tin intention ot d ssipit- lllg tilt loıv III ss oi his spillts , lihnii out his hoise loi ι ilde, pulen η, it to ι cıııııı,, in whith li sliotil 1 h nt tilt loinpelied to solicit tlie lunu ot Mr- Scud inicie s company, οι luoneille et the о! jects ot bei »ıı ısı i mcl spleen this good hely, bung ai tint tum, to mike Use ol one of bu Altlını s puia еь, to ¡¡kult/
ampletcli/ m the dinu/n for added to her other vex ıtıoııs, hei imagined lover Doctor Gly nnc, had now lift M ug ite. Laity Susan who m Charles's into-ţi- citiiijr conversinoli, had almost lost si,lit ot all hi r forniu tumbles, s"ung the stoim gathering in the evts ot umt Aune, prop ısı I to VVodvi!li,in i w I ьр. ι, to ^n- gige the m ulen grntlewomiii at ι game of chess, while she dusse,! im thniiei. Charles who was redly om of those gootin itnred creituits wh ι nivu dt ny any one f nour ni thuı povvır to bis oıv, althoujì bj no mt ms uiripi ir d with his pıopostd putut r luiiiicth ılı ly, u th a smilt be unin τ upon his connu η шее ι li¬ ticatiti Mrs 's. tíllamete lo favour hım with hu eoınpuıv ι lhe il ess Innrei, it the smie unit еы ц ılı pm tutit n of thiowing in a tompliniinl Li ( ni ıı r supi nor skill As
As 1 was inqiossibl. t> nve tint to tu r illti npi г in I ıs yıkın Ine other vo¬ latiles must u ip .rite in u u. til f,00 1 lady, iv. a „ul,» iu I sw ιιΌινιη, her ill liumoisgi itiiuslv < inltsr nil. d to entí r nito a ttu! ot skill w uh Ut vomici, iptim. WoodviHi shortly b ι ıcccıvcd per- missi.in 11 Кин« lu t bint pirimi, that he mı 0 ht ι ai nis itt.nlinns to S mili, the friend of his i illi i, hi irt, fi i which ptii- ]>nsi ht tool an illtiinnitt İt ive of his oivniiuiilv ml lftu ı tının mtuvuvv with lus Sus in si out in ι post chaise for tlu nıetıopohs It will hen be nee essirv io give a short ske tth ul tu llistniv uf I im um Smile ami his la ruly· —·not ılı it wt approvi the usual m ılı ol ι muli u, a ııovıl until it b cuiutš a di / n liuti stuurs eoiuiicted into one, auil puh tp altu all the histoiy of
of the huo ıs the most insignificant in the collection lt is oui opinion, that an episode should lit subscriu nl to the gtneial mă giand dnıgn ofllu work and sueh we trust the follow in, clnpttt will be found to be—as it the story e f jioor Saville and his lady wluc h had m influence in bringing about many cvtnts vvlnth will be found in the concluding pi„es e f this work it will also actouut Ιοί ι ti lit in Loid Dtloraine's charactei which wt hue had Irtqiiuit occisión to ι email,—to wit his iiitipithy to the sight of ι r u d t ible or any oilier object which tended to the piumotion of games of chinte It is now some time sínre wc have in¬ dul,«! ouiselves in tin dirling gritifii i- tnn of appearing upon the senit in ¡10 pıtı ршопа we pioniisi not tildóse n futuri, sui whin nitissity iiquuis il mil
aud issine tint gentle readei, that to m ike a story cle uly uiulerstood through several long volumes is a matter of no oitlni vr> fit ility—if thou b ist any doubts on tins sub] it, thou hast only to с ill for ju n, ink mil jnjiei and m tke the exjie- nmcnt—lftu vvlnth, if thou dost not turn a /W / lute authoi, thtre i» every human [irob ibihty ot thy proving a c andil ult
1 ΙΟΙΛ
71
STOHY
HORATIO SAVILLE.
CHAPTER IV.
J. Hb fallier of limano Saulit iva' descended from along line ol illustnous ancestors, a circumstance which had some u mote influence in the eaily fnendship w Inch had subsisted between Lord De¬ loiaine, and hunselt. " Ilıt
The I .ai 1, though he did not bebei e tint every molai iiilue must he cnugis- tcieil ııı ılır Ilei ilds ОШгс, şet thought high bulli ul the g"ealcst importance, and could unu miline the intimacy or coıı- icisatioii ol -ii* h penons who aíTeeted ι ıtlıeı to tlmi, mitili, lightly ol genealogi- ι al adiam igt -, or In ıedıtarı honours. Sis ille a,ıecıl with İnin m all these paıtıcularıtııs, they had passed tlic hap¬ piest days ot then lives together. In their studies they were associates, m their travels they had been companions—toge¬ ther they had tiavcrscd the snows of Rus¬ sia—tracked the progiess oi Hannibal ov. ι the Alps, and bitatlied th. sighs of ι lassital ngn t at the tomb ot Маю. Ίο make the limatile as concise as p.ıssiDİe, it is onlv neressaij to state, that no tuo souls nue cvci blended togclhc. L '2 vinn
wilh i mort «.fined congeniality of senti ment Cu their letuni hom truel Saville at the earnest request of his fithci, w ia united to a vvomin for vv hoin h hiel nev pi felt those soft ardours ıvhıplı usinlly de termine the fate of youn, men He wis however informed tint the happiness c f the nithor of his being depended upon Ins complniicc, and sicnfieed his own prospects of h ippmess with a sı ö h, but without a mui mm lie mult noluith st Hiding, an txtellent husband \ ytii ifttr bis mtrmge the ycung llontio wis born L)i I Delor unt siooel (,ed I ithu to h bu nd Sivillt m the soothing powtra ol luti dshqi found ι İnlin foi ill tht infuni disquietudes oí lft lhe old Wi Sivillt it this penod met
met with a most fatal end Ht had con¬ nected himself with a crew of fashionable gamesteis, lost his all to these specious sharpers, and not daring to avow his follies to the son he had ruined, put a period to his miseries by laudanum It was not till after the dreadful catas¬ trophe had taken place, that this thunder stroke fell on his unhappy sou Lord Delorame at this moment stepped forivanl, nul m tin most dthcite manner obvi itul the pecumarv embarr issuients of his fnend, by piocurmg limi a luti i- tive place in in olhce undi ι Government a setond blow aw utt tl tlu unlnppy young man hiswift died m htr second labour, and tht nil tut chuub perished with its mothei 1 lib \oung lltntio, and Loid Debraine still aimed him with philosophy to struggle on with life г 3 " The
the I ail it this tunc was on the cieol bun, mimed to Ins pi csuit Coun¬ tess, out of liei rejected suitors, a norih less piofligiti young man of Fish-ion, stun b with fury at the success of his nv al, infamously uttered some disrespectful words concerning the ladv ihis circumstance happening to comt to the knowledge of Saville, hi was in pgonies least Delorame «bould like¬ wise hni of his insolence, and think it neres« ilj to call bun out. That the precious lift of his friend should be risked in a contest with an incendiary, tnd a scoundiel' was an idea too keenly pain¬ ful for the црпеюиэ giatcful minti of Smile. He ι с sob ed at every nsk to pieicnt sueh a lia/nd, md contnvec! to send achalltn 0 e to Ihe libellous defatnti, thei met—it was igiccd that the} should lire at the sunt time—death issued fi om each fatal tube and the two antagonists i i tell
fe 11 wounded on the ground I lie slan¬ derer with his dying breith declaring tint the word« he had uttered hid been tht bisc siggestion of disappointed love Smile lived twelve hours after these hou he piss d in comforting the dis traded Deloi une who accused himself is the uthor cf Ins death —In recom mending Ins soul to Ins creator, and his little Iloiatio to his fnend he died like a u in andachristim Saued wis the de 1 ősit he left behind him Uoı ilio Siville wis deai to the Lirl s oue ofins own ehildim he bied hım ι ρ with lhe liberii allowance of agenţie min ind he vv ıs beloved by the whole familv and bv Chulés in particular, with meist haternal ıfiettıoıı Ilt L rl would never mint lloritio, or he iildresstd bj him under any otner I lie thin that öffnend ι + Sacred
" Sacied to lum who Лет/ for me 1 " he would cry, " I will trinsmit the htdloacil nan с to Ins successor, to the heir of his virtues'" Saville, bv, his incuts, attracted the affections of the lov.ly I lily lausuu Valglovt Ilır fıther elv ing, lelt lus οι Iv duld tollíuatio, with a clover pio- poitionate to tin txpectatioiis of ui 1 ill's diughter. Loul Dtlorainr, it is needless to sav, was delighted at this appiiintkindnc-sof Iui tune, to the merits of his belov ed j oung bund faville w is tin yens oldu than uthu ofili. I m'» ehildi, n, who had lost sevu il btloie tne birth ..f Loid 1 meet, w luth had m idi limi lelj on Iioi mo w Hh adcltd luudut ss, л fondness not at all di¬ minished whtn blcssttl w uh a son who did at last suivivc tho dangeis to whith inlanry is cxpostd Lady
Lidy I in mi svi only seventeen yeirs old whtn miniti] to Snille she ssas young gıy, uutisoine mil good temptred, ind hi ι li tlııııssoi dispisition joined tobei youth, ideit tl ilso lotiie elo gint stile m ss Inch she ha ! formerls lis ed, gue an ur of disiuli ìtsteihi ss to lu i u ceptiiice of Hontio, in puttrenet to se¬ verii moie ss calths ns is, sshich ssas in fict the meie resulto! ι giddiness of ideas svhich piecluded lhe delibi r ıtıoıı thi' ought to be a component pirt in the ths- posıtıoı ofiwell с dutiful voung ssomin, more cspeti illy ii she ь ıht ut to enteı tint hels situiti n win h imperiously eilis f ι ti e most ι ııı r,ı tic exertion m the ilisch irge of fun lie duties. Ior tnc fist t so months of tlieir mai nagt they wue peifectls happy, but Lady I uisin ι soon t e her husband cinse to belies о tint ) eie beanti) in a w ıft ıs bul i sın İv linini ıtıoıı foi tlie i i solid
soliti structure of connubial felicity, no sooner did she become the wife of Saville than she suffered those fliitteiuig gad flits to be buzzing about hei, who whilst she was single dared not openly cxpiess their allumatimi least they should havt been suspected of a propensity to commit tht unfashionable ctime of mat limoni/ οι be come dt mestte but now all such visionary terrors were clone avvav they thought they might with impunity amuse thtm selves in paj ing hei all hose g illant at¬ tentions which to a voiing and niexpcn enced woman, aie et tht most dan D trous tendency. Without one shadow jf jeilousy m Ins composition, lloritio Siville siw all ntr little foibles m the incst luourahli point of ue«—and if such inobservation may bt pirdoned, L id) I ansına vv is un fortun ite in the cirtuinstincc·, of Ьепц the wife of a man, whose lit ut vv ľ toi udik
not I to idillit nnj suspiciins of ι bciu- tifuljoun, wi mm who hid is he ceni¬ ci ived c;iven hım lhe most sclfı ν nient prooi cf lier flection bv selecting/;/« h m illimi hut of idiiiuir« ill ot tliem supen n in point of Untune md is his modest diffidence inn 0 in il m ill ether putie ul irs tu h instil Ihedissipitionsof his wifi however, u I ist onereis d to such ι height, tintile found it risoluteti nicesini to leme usti ite with her she wept like a ehild md reproichul hnn with unkind. ins s —this he cc uld not ben md desist¬ ed m ι hope thai she would jet stop shoit ot invilvin» then fortune which, s| ue of lord Detonine s munificence, insiveied not the enere ism, demands of hu d ulv giowingexti ivt 0 incies llu luuli of ι hi r son vvould, he h >po t ccup\ her ninni ni ni re interest¬ ing
mg, and moie domestic cans, hut ill these anxious expect ıtıoııs «eie put to flight like shadows sht. appt ivcd indeed to doit upon her boy, and to feti in in¬ crease oftuidtrni. ss founds in·, fuller, but she was no soonu released fiom liei confinement, t Inn blooming in liesh bt-iuty, she lim ched with added udom mto tvei) gmcli} and dissipation the fer¬ tile metropolis iílordcd. Her sorrowing husband, again most tenderly entre ited hei lo pursue α line of conduct more contorni ible to hei now united chaiacter of w ite and mother—in¬ stead ot feois, she now answered lum with resentment and contempt, cruelly hurt at such unpio'iusing piognosties in htr with whom he was destined to piss the icmaimng portion of his hfe, he sunk into a mehncholy despondency which lasted him for several jtai«
In
In caressing antl instructing his m- fint Ldward alone, could this too indul¬ gent husband find ι halm fir his toin mind—the ingratitude anıl si lfish dispo¬ sition of Ins wife, hul now complete ly quenched the day star of his hit, and " Darkness, clouds, and slndovv s hover d over it ' Had he only shewn himself resolutt, by a well tuntd exeition of his iiithonty, lie might have obtained th it astendaut over her mind, which wis become abso¬ lutely neeessiry tow irtls efiecting a re¬ formation in the conduct of a young woman, whose giddy brain was tinned with noisy adulation " By the unceising exertions of Ins friend and second puent, Lord Delorame, Saville obtained a diplomatic employ¬ ment
in m n i loiei M ii ( ourt whicli he | ıy fulls » lepted hcping th it a simtion ot place mi Jit work ι e hinge in the chspo. sition of Lads 1 lusnn Agimst this urcumstini с she offered ill the iisislince in her power but svile n Sanili infoimi d her tint if she persisted in her refusil, lord Delornne must he icqiumted with ciremiistinces Ins tc n- elernisslnd hitherto induced hnn to сил ccal she give ι cold reluctant consent There was ι seventy in the minners, of Ins 1 ordsliip which terrified ind mide liirpiy hnn tint respect through fear her love coulu never hive accorded lum She therefore attended her hushind who despnniig of bippmess through her mems, divelle el the hours he could sn ılıh from pollili il avocation , to the eiliinting lus ι nlv hope, his little Lei w ml on whom he tuishid ill (us slight d
cd attentions, and of whom he nullit ha\e srtid with ľolixtm s in tlie V\,i\ of the Winters Tale. ' И wnjeort .mvm.rtl. njmllr ' N .« nn t, i un Ι- ι ni, ini lii n mm liu-mj, " My I'u \sil , my Sol Iter, Sutt-smaii ill "II makes t 1 tly β rl i> sli rt a De тЫ.г, " Ani with hi \jrymgchiUlms n r s n mc " Tingine tlwt wouUI tin ^ m> Ы otl The lapse of nme> ears proud I „idy Lausina no cbangxlin^, stilim hf i pmne still lo\ely; on her return to Lu 0 hmd, she seemed to enter with fiesh spirits and enchased avidity into societies u hieh planted thorns upon the pillow ot Пш alio. He had lost all poťvtr of restraint over 1кг actions, and feaicd he should totalis lose the small poition of affection she v t ìetauied for him, should he \ enture to oppose hci inclinations. tl Ulu ard
Lriuiid Sivillt «ıs m point of lite· ι uy icq mreım ııt \t doven ycırs old, \\ li iL few boys ir< it sixleon or si \ t nt« en, 4) tiue m it, tint thiee months of ι pa louts institutions truly iiiMotis tor ι tlulds imprmcment irt equivalent to as iinny ) eirs of тегсепчту doriiment The ho\snpuhty in the pursuits of htentuie, wis the leist amiable partide in his com¬ position J ndowed with ι mmd oí ex¬ quisite and refined sensibility D ]ilu U I n lloW fant lie siw the cuisc, ami bitterly pır¬ tı ipalcd in the effi its oH fathers sorrows but тЬрпШц Ποι Ню s disposition, tLll- dcilv as he 1 >ved tint tither, bis wis a hcuitwhuh could not Imbour so turbu- ì ut an inmate ts ies( ntmciit He piti¬ ed hbmotheismfitu ilion mdhemoimi- 1 lis lather's ull ini 0 s but little as L uly
Lady Lausuu ineritili such a distribu¬ tion, he loved them etjuu/li/. With the most fascinating counte¬ nance and exquisite symetry of peison, added to a tincture of melancholy, which peivaded his whole demeanoui, he could not fill of becoming an object of interest to all his blends in Lnghnd, and Saville blessed the bounty of Heaven, which had sent hun ι comfoit in affliction, a staffili adı usiti ' Hut ılış' this sohl ну blossom of ti in ¡militi vva, dooirie il to wither in the bud' Iloni n soon siw, with the most brail lending iffliction, tb it the health of his darling, tu r dehtati, now shewed the stimi, est svinptoms ot confirmed con- sunqMion. lie mentioned this tirrtmistanre to I a.ly Lausina— ohe w ıs alamud— ,ı r ıt it¬ eci—
cd— she wept bittcily, and pvcn staid avviyliom ibill.whitli had tuen givtii on I'ti own mount }et nine e usi, uni d tonateli the hov as Ins t ıtlıeı had clone, and suspecting it lo he nu rely a tuck to detain her at home, she grew vvcaiv of ptrfoiuiing the part of a ninse, aud de¬ claring she saw nothing that ailed bun, except his faillir» woriving lum to death ■vith too much study and learning, she retnintd again to tne only amusement winch htr vitiated taste was capable of ending. But the woman whom human agen¬ cy could net ι telamı, was, l>v lhe hand of llu \hiiightv. .ibout to be bumbled to the dus,, anu bv tht loss of a e hild, she tltscuetl not. to be made sensible of the uu stim ible blessing she possessed in her hush md. bunt down by affliction, the un¬ happy
hippy Siviili h ul the inc ik ul ible nih ıj ol he hoidin j tint beiii n ' on whom alone he now depended ten the simllcst puti¬ di of carthlv, conilo«, tormi nted w ith ill¬ ness and infnunties, sinking n; ripid clegieesto sin early gliive In this ngoni of minei hid he vvntlin 10 I onl Ueloiaiue tit Mil. tic, entre iling Ins influence in bringing Doctoi dljime vi ith lum to London "
92
B\ the ulvice ι * this worthy Ph}- sicnn the} cciscel to tiemble tini h ul, \et still lively sh uloiv ι f mon duv with кип this which ıs they e ull nut pio¬ li u, lus ι \ sti net oul} tendili to itiiiltr lus s puni ıı ι woild of sonovv still mort pimi d lho
İhı n itine of Ins tli-soriUr hid ιη¬ ι icistd his statuii ti ι wc liderini h leh', ninth, iddi d to tin c\lrı nu shjilii ss ol his lonu his spiiklin^ t vi uni il ι lud check, nu luni nuni th ıppı u nu of in n cn il uinu t r of _i ici sun on in ei nudul in ev ι in uikuni tlun isoli of filth and dull inoliali!) Giddy is slu ins I ılı I usnn it length ivi iki nul to 1st usi ut the tuiibli puiushi nient vvlnth iliivv ivvllUit hci ul tin intvit ible lossi Пн г tini I bhe now ltteuih 1 hnn is ssiduiusli is slit h id brinuly ntgltcttd hnn. Ihe pool tu u lov wis perfectly scnsibh ut lus n n ìppu ι lung dissolu¬ tion, ind tin uji шпон ul ıs ι new bun il ivi, ht spuit ninth lunt wub Mı tempest, in e une t pi nu lor i hipp} pissc_,c ti eternit}, tud e ıllııı, down lıltbsııı,sou lis i tints — ıtkikiıılcıLıırg w uh
with míny blushes mil ıııııelı reluct inc., tintins mind wis .listnih«! with doubl concerning Ins mother, whose conduit joinul to the unmoderne gnef of his fi- llicr, wis all that a ave hnn pun or nn lutti rei! his list moments Ilo it hi, own lequtst to A le no of all lus fnends and iel Hues and the da\ iítt r, using fiom his bed, and causing him¬ sell to bo rbissul, he solicited to su both his paiuits—who with I ipt un vloodville, LordDiloiiini, Mi 1 impesi, and Dni tor Glvniu, attuided Ins sum¬ mons His weeping inotliu tli claied In lookidsovvtll slu wis si«, h. must U btlter Dm toi СИ) ши 1 ниц th it slu might sulin muie in iteri illv bum ilds. hope thin fiom the mı st ıııtlıııeholv cei t mily ıppı udled to ¡ild itlfnmird bel of tin tiuth but Ldwaid iäisin, hnnsill fiom
fiom tht sofa on winch he was rechinii, bi 'ged to be taken to the window—his fitliti and Lord Utloiaine supported hnn—the iest following — uttu ing t deep sigh lit sud— " It is a truel tisk— but I ought------" then looking it tht sky, lit continued aloud — ' It is a lit oitiful du— pe rhaps tilt lisi th it will tv u shine upon me D» not w t ep dt ir moti« r, l h n ι «meli tu mv and I ftel luvt but httl. tun. to mi/ i/ in ltt mt tlun, mv dt ir I ithti, letuin )ou mv suiti ri tliuks lor tht thous nul' ılı ıısıııd 1 proofs vou bave a ıvtıı m. of join unequalled illtttion I, ritte lint it ıs tit nitd mt to rtpi) the debt bv ι hug hh ol duty and „ι ititudt —but . m·, nm 11 ıı m m 1 hive htud that iii pvittd spints in tllovMiltovv vtth ovtr, mil pint, tt those who vv. к ilt ir to tin iu wh. n living " \s
As the boy prouounci d these winds, lie el isptd Ins hands in the most piou fcivor— conţin lll!l 0 — " Almighty God'—if »udi is the offne of thi hippy eh id—like in« ' Ob' tike mi 1 to tint blessed stiti wbue I miy lendir a suvue to mj btloved jiareuts, infiniti ly inou v iluable than mj 1 could pei form on e nth' ' Ileie his emotnm prevented hnn fioin puicetdiug His hu nils vv mid hm camiti Imn bitk totin soli but ln I tg gid foi penmssion to u ni mi at thi win¬ dow— lu stittthed out lus cniiciiled huni to Dticnr Glume wh st tt u lul c jes ttstified tin emotion with win h lus boseiin w ıs fi lught — ıh inking tin Di c- tor loi lusenes md assidiiitiis lic bule him rcmunbtr him Ut tinn ri com¬ mi mk d thetısk ifitiisohnc, lus afflicted piicnts to (hults Woodville Setin, hım
hım lıııdly alile lo snppnıl limisi If through sununu un lion h iske d hu Insultili— noun I it up nul pi, suil d It tO Itllipcst—■ suil— Vue ρ, tiu- .le u Huns' ıs ı nu- mon. I ,.l „ı„ vvl, „,, ν „„ p,,vus cd • iiil.iilni, nivu luv. m и, h d t ι th. will .1 lu, cu ,ι ι' ι ,, ι,, ,„,,>_ "hun vu s. ui svini up lhe sv mli uuni I mel p. ,ν Ι ,ι n.
Ills ninth. I IV ¡11 lllll! lv— h I I .1 'is t ith. ι wh ! I , isi .„.I ι ' ι 1. u II. ... 1 i u ul ui ,t ml I m hl, 1 ul и ,. p„ , ι,,,,ι.
to hım, den mollin, is юн «ould wish, were you in my situ ıtıoıı ------ i m well —" Uns wis thi hst vv, ,1 h, uitend— for Ins vim hırı lıılul (mn— lus feet , ne ιν iv—his en s ι llul m thuı soc¬ ii ts—nul lus u ms I lithn kıssın, his quin nn, hp ι ui.ht tin list siji hom the inni, nt huilii f I ıs m,, |„ ciulii llu fiitól ıhı ριιΐ,ι esl dl wis now gom full. 1 1 uly I uisnn „ιν mg ι loud sucim f II sensi h ss „n th flotn Doch ι ( .líniu emli ivi ill il Io ılı mie tin pılı ind beiiiiiľiil ι .ipse li mı tli ums tf thi ι onniisi t 1 i h ι, win uliv lepulsiii hun sud with ι ι unti nun с, on w İneli w ıs unpinned ill the I ononis ot du ρ md sitil dil sp ıı . \ с, — >,о' —1 «in-t —I will j ι
luni tin Ibtsid su icd ofines duo tomi lost—lost Ut ısını' ' Ilı thru with tin is-ni u .....I tt ocidnlh w hosi ι motions limosi de¬ pilici! hun ut ill powu 11 ι imu, plinti tin body on ılıt sola I) ıı ln (.İvilin nul Mı Icnıpesi Invili, ı us, d ılıt inutili, m itlin, boi e lu . ıı ol tht umni itti r lu ing Mı d, she W is Ust Ι,ιΙ lillui smst s (.Ij lllll thuı ı unu il t . hu husimul ,t vv linse siluit sıı.l ln w ıs imu ti mue alnın, d, Ihın h lud pııvıouslv İnin bj tin mitnic I I lv I nisin, 1! I nul hun holding ι sui ill gliss I ıhı su ılın, lips of bis I, v Minlv hop m I Ι ι n,lu η it tven v t In totıllv ı\- llli 1 Ine Dortnr gu itlv dlstlissitl, ι uiidliim m tin ι intltst t. ruis that ι > ill
ill Ins i finits vvu, ııı ν un hfe beni, im· com iblv ton Mulli tin n without ri- pluiig I hun lud Л, vm ıht gliss, ind chopí ul rn his I nu чц in uou v ot teus Ilı vv ıs ill ιν ul to ixlmist the toi uut il Ills ,ιι t m ninnoli Mı d silene Ρ At luutii nism. his hi ul he bi „ul ıhı m D ρ in linn in pi ivi rs loi ıhı soul ol his ι lıılıl Win ihn lu the s„|p ol t'u et m h ıhı v ill compilili with Ins ie- qui st Μι ι tins mournful olile t Sudle ıppe m tl moie composed líc din ei lus ens md sud— " lell lhe childless mollin of my de pii tul ín.el, tint when sh, emse the now des hlul Siville, hi isitnU to re¬ ceive hu " Una summons hrou, lit in tin lflliet edl ¡usina uid at the culieityol Hoi ino, I onl
I nul Debraine and tin lest ι I the jnity nut 1 1 suit ν snmbi ineluitholv— a î lemn stt tl el in it iwlul ditei miniti u now pır vılıl the к Hurts of tin childless bib hand I ılv i ansına s tvis win n f with net] ' Ό but wh ıı sit taught the dctcttmncd, then h pun Iı iting ,liutes of bantlı, a pii nts-, ovu spi ι id h ι checks and slu stood sospenditi likt ι in ι Ыс fi, ui tunn tht h nids с I i stulp- tu \fltr a ji inst ol ι Itu mouiinu Mulle ulihessed liti 1 hivt sent f r \oii Milim that mj second pu nt I n I D li r un ind tiu st, m\ id/ in nils nny b witinss 1 1 mv conduit my stutiuitiits Hid mv lesolves " I will not si ock you oi llicm I J a repetition of wh it li is jnsstd bttwt. n lis ι , Hit
'lhe spint of tint ingchcal being 1 now see hovenn, ibou mt heul, would utc ρ in bittcintss should 1 .iicusc his mother. No' I idv 1 nism ι, leseiitnieiit and hope bait iqiull} de»cmd my tom hent. I shall onlv siv, that puliiul ixpiueiue Ins f,iien long and iiieiiiiiiliil pinot, (lut Ht ι innot Ine ni 1ιΐ| piness together. HfiMii knows what sicufices 1 would hive made— о tint is pist— -to et a hem,' ne u me whom 1 lovt —' », hci nicichid —ilissitisfiul— ши м it homp —Ill in, fioratili с ılın enjov ments ul do¬ mestic life, to secties of , ml; and c'issi- pıtımı —this ıs mene Ihm ni} tempii, l'liilosophiealasyou luu ι vu tinned u, ia adequiti io licu " Lv eiy peison pu suit vi is ti niouiided and astonished at the ι aim dignity he had so suddenly issu med, altti sucii МО - lent explosions of sonovv. «ut
But Dottoi Gl} une, who was too well acquainted with physical opeiations, and combinations ot the internal faculties, to be dtceivcd by outwird appeirances, could lead desptir in his hollow eye, even while In» tongue áttetted the ac¬ cents of calmness and resignation. Lady Lausm ι could only bow her head, but for tlie first tune in hei life, she now ctindiscended to evmcp an atti¬ tude of Inumili} , foi tht aiuc! ot alitu - tiun e mediquei tlie most t} lame il spint, t iiiô subdue the mest callous heart. Sa- lille piucectlccl. " lt I know my own tempei, philoso¬ phy Ins nevei aouied 01 hiiduicd it lt tuubt me to en/ot/, not to tlis/nst tin b/ıs- ««,<> of sut ι il lite. It unmans me to reinemhu tlie smiling visions ot f, htity my tani} picanee! when 1 led Lailoina to ι 4 the
thi Mtir md when my lost Γιΐινιιιΐ first opened his lovely i\cs upon the light------ Oh Coti' Ohe ď— lu hun I beheld ι soothnu i"o< '- ll» tlieinl) w ho w is to m iki homi ι he n n to us b ith— ι ehun foimed bv tin hinds of pimi. deliu lo ılı ivv v mu dividid heut to num '— ni} (ııııvs eve |i ited th veil ot lutuntv — ľ u id se t peniti in пц sens s—I theıuht 1 suv ι hi ι tu nin 0 like tin di vi m tin irk hi I I « is pre ptuil to tlisp tht tele t ι! uıcsseıuc ι ι > mvheirtwiih ill i husl nids Ι ю —Nesi po ι ılı lulled ınoılıl tint lws 1 th ıı 0 ht tint happiness would tlun bt nunc io ve in e wu li uti ppe il whe¬ thei οι ,ι, ioni conduct justified such 1 1 opi s " I reared my ope пш, bu 1 in silence, I cultivated his 0 iowui 0 calculs in the sVnilesof sohtny sonow, while you weit revellnij
u idling m the noon tide blue of gaiety mei dissipinoli —His mtelltttual sensi¬ bility would oíte u istite tue D lowiiig spirks ot pittimi ι iptui t m my bosom, but these sscie suddenly extinguished by tilt tens svinili İtil it tht luolleetiou ol Ins mothtis uni ni.lntss to lis both now iny 1 imp is hunit out mil ill is tlaihncss lhusmiuh, Lidy Luisun, 1 hav. been competiţii to siv ni justifie ıtıoıı ot mysell— tht îetolltttioii ol nn J)iiiicr tuuterin ss prevenis mv puss u, hudly on y om i ulings lime Unióst conclud- ed ind l sin» illovv ion injustice, to clisipprovt niş issati nis bunic oui ши - til il hu »ds, aud 1 eeiijiiie them if they eu m pttitutht f to isut tint wtakuesb in i/ohi belliit I know not vvlitthti tht w. «Id nny hi mi' nn Ι ι шу ioiiiier ior beai ιηι ι. luthi ivoitl 1 hive nude u un iul neiti tn b. vv , шу technos md i j шу
Uiy conscience have been my only moni¬ tors " I had long since, Madam, released you from the misery of living with a man whose efforts were in vain to make you happy, but I did not thmk myself autho- tistd to do so, while my Ldwaid lived. 1 knew in the first plac e, that such a cir¬ cumstance would have buist his hitte heart—secondly 1 felt that whatevei may be the pnvate feelings of a parent, he has no tight to violate those of the bemgs he has bought into the woild, and that if all acted on suih pnnciples the bonds ol society would be bioktn, and anarchv, not, aud confusion would distmb that community, to whose pit sei vation we may all contribute by t xamplt " As the fidelity of your person was nei« in the slightest digiti callid in question,
question, 1 felt that I could still live witij you without contempt, and as I could not be cfcí/iistií/vvhile Ldward lived, I was heedless of being blamed. " But the dcir bond which made our union necesito ι/ ıs now dısolv cd In paît- un we shall nytre no one hut ouiselves, and that such a separation has long been tho object of youi wishes, jour conduct has too evidently piovcd. The foitnne 1 received with you, Lady Lausuia, shall be youi s , the goodness of Lord Debíame will moi с than answer all that 1 propose to niyscll in the solitude to which I am about to letirt tilt last sigli of our boy bioke the chain tint basso long oppress* ed you with its gilling wci 0 ht. " Go then—go— unte idoied Lausina' lie is hippy ıs vou ι in' tlie rememb- 1 iute ol oui 1 ilw ml s v n tues, the foitune ь О oi
of your late fatlier will shield >ou from the senous ills of ilio, ind should the memoiy of the man, who once thought e\cry divine blessim, comprised in the n.imr of //oui limbam! uitiiuU itselt ou your recollection, ııı ıy seli-rcpioaclu s «ever injure the health jou enjoy, 01 disappointment cloud the iclicity «ith which you aie suiioundtd " A death-hke silence hod accompani(.d this long address. T\eiy one was in teais save Loid Delorame alone, he had Ion 0 suspected that Lad^ Lausina had not ful¬ filled her conjuiţil duties ns the wife o[ his adopted Sa\ille—foi ie ile eirois he had not an o\crflowing compaasion-— rigid, strict, and punt tual in all his oun concerns ot lite, he expected e\ u y wo man related to him, tocqirøl, ú not ex¬ ceed himscH ш sueh paiticulais
In
ln the bosoms nI thr ust of thi sptc- tatoi s tump issimi mil pliilanthinpy toiin- teibalaiited cvirţ tuninibi une of the failings ofthi bt uitiful antl allhctcil ob|i it who stood aghast and tliundc ıstı mk be¬ fore thtm Itwas a Iniigtiun btloiishe could summon com це lo 11 ply tolni husband, at length a flood ol bitter teais set fiee the imprisoned povvirs of uttei - ance, and she began, not a diluiti but a stlf-toiitlemnatioii, sin ovvili d Ui it she had most eironcouslj abus. d tin goods ni piovidence—tint alie had tiiilul ııv ıy the greatest bltssiii, s lliiv.u was ι ip i- ble of bestowing on tin tlinittst nlijiib nfits caie, and that sin eould only piove hu sinieie penitence by subnntlui, with¬ out a muinim to the haul, but just d. - tree hu husband had pioiioiiutula 0 ainst hu III ι fust l.uliii 0 , she sud, hid been implantul
implanted in hei mmd by issocnting with a ftmalt game st ι uid imon„st her othti seducers the teirifiee! Vţoodnllt beírd hei mention tlie detested inme of I ads Susan's formel fnend Mis lin couit " V\ h it a s ice '" cxclnmcd Lord De¬ loiaine, Stirling from ι icvcne, ' which can thus tuge ι wc mm ot lugli bnth md accomplished tilents to the desertion ol eveiy duly silu li ein j,ise gncc to hu sex, or idd dignity to hci nnk 1 " Charlts shuildc ied it the solemn ener „l with which ilip- appell w ıs nude he r usi d Ins isis lo tinse ui In tither, which sv ut keenly fixed upon lus e unn¬ te ıı ince 1 ıcly Lausui ι lie n fell upon her knees exclaiiiiiii 0 — 1 Oh'
On ' beloved sh idt ot my neglected с luid ' w itticss ίοι the sine с nty ot thy tn ι thtr's lepcntcnce—foi the и solution she here m ike s, to oiler every retnbuti u in her power to in jnjuied linsbuid ioryeirs unspent Adieu'— de ir Siville'— 1 lise you '—I lose y iu by my own f ult bitte ι butu, lite ous doom''—to the shade of se elusion will 1 fly to hide my sh mic —my agonies—Oh' siy, tint ii iftu \eus lnve lolled awiv, you should heir tint 1 ausma has nevu moie tuns^iessed, ion will drop one te u ol foi D ivi ness Io see you igam I do not piesume to lsk— tint you will not uttPily detest my me¬ moiy is all Idut nupi it The sobs of Siville now bei ime so loud tint sht tould proceed n ) I uthei— he knelt beside hu kissed the te us from hu pdhd check, ml hid hu be if eomfoit " I lu»
' Ulis humi Imn, cl. η I nasini ıs moıt Ihm 1 t m I . u vu ne my wifi agun ıı t ıhı pu tiu i t my jO)s, thty art ill biuiid in tht gı iv t of our dtar bel vv uıl — tlie slinu ot my suíltrings —■ you uny still umun ' llicy here cbsped each other with ill the ftrventy of sonovv m ngltd with af¬ fection lemptst hallowed this chant- able reconciliation, with a ttu that drop¬ ped upon the litad ot Saville —saying God punhos the human heart by ifflittion " ' Rijiti" died 1 uisina Oh' most rijit'—lloritio' din lloritio' mme shillbt tht cut to lull thint i„omts ltt us tpiit this noisy tmi n '— m tht t ılın slııles of sc elusion Itt us piss the um¬ il mt ol our d ıy? 1 lıııııl dt u I el« ud' issist
assist us in this pious task'—punned at length, we may wait tul the almighty disposen of events shall bless our hears with cornioli and with patience ." \ tow elajs after tins melancholy scene did this sad couple set ой for a cottage neai Loid Deloi.unc's estates, ahnost buried in surrounding woods. Their friends were much altectetl —as the t liaise lolled aw av, Lotil Ueloiaiue raising his ejes, c\ct umed. —" How many miscnis has tlusvuu aï gaming brought upon all vv ho are dear to me '"
Giunri!.
'IHPTĽU vr.
V\ OODMLI 1 u s 14 much il net m ic illeel d 1 v thi c culi ni] lit n oi lins mı I m heiv seti thuı uıv of the pus n pies m h vuoti most illtet¬ ni, ıı tunt t the tr ms ittioli t 1 i ly '- ι m it \Iıı 0 ılt Sin snuditele I ıs shı ıc id the 1 tin, thei
theit wis a fitil similint} betvvetn hci own circunist uiccs and those of Lidy Luisin i, which could not ful to ilirm hu 1 hey h ul both hei n tht dupes of ľi- shioiiiUc fine lit}—then de ments« cull¬ iti iqiiilli, md she trembled to think tint then fîtes might be similu. the ehfhculli ofcxtnialing hi istifimin the pcrplcMtus m ninth she wis involvid, w ıs now ton ldenblv iiigniiuted insti id olliuii D dcmin.shcd Ч ' И '14" M till i'is, s n ι oftllO I ul il ιΜ unn i ıuııl iiiil ι mug pum ι I ι ι i-l ill llu I íl I si I tisinou il' h ι unst hu mv n/ ι t tl,,, tul¬ ii sl il ulv 4M tint his nun, I vus sutiul, in I Ins lu ut uinui wilh idi. muil Mu I new not lu w to bl un Imn foi his uni inlin, sevelltv the vi ,Ι ,,™««, Iiiii linned tlu loitunes ш Ι ι ¡· piness of those inibi deu to hun ι t n Ii m
fiom cincinniti toženci ıtıoıı it ıppı ir- ed the iock ni w lm h dl lus h p s il hippiness vvue desimeli to bewiicl d llntsli slu ull iv ,νν hei cm umst u es toi mm pie possess el wilh tiis fűin", ippen d in iction which musts puitc her from hu Clinics foi ι vu sh will knew tint ninth is hi 1 ν il— η ιν ι li ι tl hei, hu il pu ty wis min 0 lid with 111 vi ι ν hfe spıı 1,ч of Ins heirt hewculd not, he clued not line my sicrels tomint f ittici, wh m he Ind ilvv us 1 v 1 with the uiiiilJiiI dutv ol i sni, in 1 ni ti il¬ ute teiideinisbof a fin ud (.tuiles intonimi hei in his ι ¡ istle, tillins ilişince tııııı lusi unu , h id lu tn so lon pioti icteil up η 1 1 Siville'» ie nut, tint ho tould not I velli ι ıp- | nuss of ьоеш, liei ι,ιιη ι tıı_ıtı, ıs Ins lite indulgence would u ľ \iet m
imputons.
inipciioiis suiipulusilv to the pu foi m inie cil lus milit uv duties His e\| 1 1 ms vu u huvvcvir 1111 mmd mill mt hi c unti d mumi nb ıs dıvs ml d», ι, vi us, lu sud till Ih loi, ν ι,Ιι 1 tui pııınd shnııl I unic, whin h idilic lu, lul nul Susui to lhe ıhtı, h 1111 lu 'iıl.l the n mu s il İncini mil (mu lu» I 1 lint ut luv 1 Ihı ι um İnilin, s ni u ıs 1 1 In, liitu stilli" li r tn Ih, s.ııl it 1 111 thus —
МЛ I 11 vv In I m I hi ι tol mv mil tl 1, 1 mv, ι ιν ννι,Ι Iıv wlnt hh il li ml I 111 I 1 u I t ион К mıh ι ι Ί tl » ι m 1 uu I inn 1 I kn, ιν ν ıı İlmik Inn Iı ıı h lut ln piiiuth.es 1 Ih s Ι ,, οι 111 Ι il // tue
" tittup, ï mem as f ir as anij préjudices " un ultnit of ι di fi ncc. The satışı u - " tion of mv Inait ıs ind. ed espilisi ι , " whin ( η Ilt tt Unt thuı ıs nothing in " I4ı muníeis oı dısposılıoıı 1 1 tin ' rliirniu s objict of mv ι In ut ulin h " сан it ill militilo ι,ιι ist lus ide ısıl " propui tv, my Susan lus ι soul I о " iiohli to tike mv ph isiin m tiu s. ι " ıslı „ratilu ıtıoııs . I unni, lıblı • she с in nivu iul fie uu I d Iijit win. h uti nils tvin tin sum ss<h1 vo " luv ol so i\ unions i pissi и — lnr " Iit ut ıs loo nabli, hır minti ıs t)ii\ " titul to tıstı pit ısını from so tının d ' ι sinun, mn .ould u posi bl ss hu " owii|illovv,ioiild sho . Ile. ululiti " ,ood loituiit Ind driiuhi d th il ol ι li llow ut ıtıııı with tht t, u ul in 1 ^iiish nid ι i bittu ut ss ' Nu, h ut tht g/t«/ pii|uihcis ol ' loni
" boni Di loi um nul im Susan will " i,iu with hti (.hules ııı припни that 11 tin i His, I lush loud s iv ilk indili, " mıh ippy liimlv jusiilv hnn in the "stiein, indigninoli lu ills u mist " tinsi who sulii lhe puh ,1 unk and " tht iluiiilj ot huni ııı ıı ıtııı·. hv so de¬ list ıblı ui ι lupini ine nt — Ci idpicscrie ' ill di u to us ftoui чо sonhe!, sn un¿e- ' un nis ι tie tui <-, ıs tin pi ιν tr ot her " dusins evtl llleitlointp, ' 1 ti malli coibi ini 1 ( 1) W ou η ν n u "
\ ,η 11 ! ott ln ι lisci eil ' tuni nu mu ıkıl/ıı ai t ι lin tos/ stilli ¿ sal ie" Iht nuh ippy Susui lelt the imce of lhe ibovc
above remuk ш ill its aggrasatcd bıtteı ncss, She svisile tl to lelorin, but yet kntw not hois to set ib mt it I hi sul girStisens mil his low bud ( mills, she sv is will usait vv pit iiiilitpd to tht lugli est eh ,ιι ι by the toute nipt wluth hid so I itely been tlnovvn upon tlıuıı lis hu noble rel Unes In the midst of ι guets ind s ililihts which hicpiuitly houdueil in f isolity, I idv Sus m w ^ possi ssul ol ilisuinn- n ılın, sinsi ulus, ind i thci!ni n h insijit int ι ill the v liions shic'i s of tile hum m e İm ie tu She hul bein mustomul lo osuit Idi ııı ill Us diiTuint Ιηιι,ι,ν nul ıh puııleııcıs she h id re id ι „u it iL·^, md inil ıpph d In r u iihn n ti ıhı in ni¬ neis ol the tunis 1 mui sueh pi un¬ til obscintion sht u ıs tn ılılıd to fum ııııııv
many conclusions on the human charac¬ ter. From these inferences she was well iware, that, those who prize themselves on then money alone, are incapable of exalted perfection, or of gene ions senti¬ ment, tint thev arc tyrannical in their ideas, mean in then opinions, and impla¬ cable in their lesentmeiits —conscious that tiny have but e»ie foundation on whieh they can build their hopes of re¬ spect in consideration fiom their fellow beings, they stand on that one point with the most determined peitinacity Thej expect humility for favours conferred, mel t ill back the memoiy of the obliged person with tenacious minuteness Hie pission of accumuhting riches can make evin talent unjust, callous, and mean, but when it tikes possession of ill-breed¬ ing, the t Ifeets areas shocking is they air deplor ible Io have put huself into Ihe powei ol voi. in ο ι
a man whose in ν nature «as imbued и itli these principles, must have been a shoikm,d\ disgustful thought to any fe- malt of dt lie u ν or susceptibility—the Metmi of Stevens was endowed with both those quihtiis m the superlative degne. ľiom a mind tmctuitd with any poi- tioii of sensibility, some compunttions of meicy and humanity might have been expected, but humanity is the fiuit of learning and application of studies, whoso пате Mi Stevens had never even heard of The divine attribute of mercy may be found m almost eveiy human bosom, Mi. Stevens was, however, an excep¬ tion to the geneial iule, as the bard of nature and of truth, stnngly expresses himself— .'There wis Ho mote mete) lih Ulan a male I iger
1 hese
These conflicting ideas, jostling thoughts, and agitating apprehensions, were too much for hersveak frame, she found berseli in ι libsrinth ttom svhich til the efforts of ie ison wen uudeipiiti to disentin Je her Iler mind Ind been terrified by exiniple—her hent had been melted by penitence—yet still she knew not how to escape 01 to letieat. Uns cleg mt, beiutifiil young woman, ssould to those svho could base read lier he irt oi disec! into hei reflections, have illindee! a Itssou at onte moial and iwtful— ι ss inim, to fera ilts ot the ilu¬ ştrii s, the pei plexitles, the anxious d ıvs, ihefivuisti nights, which like avenging dæmons pursue tht unhappy uçtun who lias heen deluded bs the fiisoloiis and lioilosv allurements ot taslnon, into ι de - sution fiom tilt stiaijit collect line of pi udente mil piopntty —could the pen Ilı it msenbes these lines do justice to its с, Э Mibjtct—
subject—could it delmeite the agonies of this unfortunate votiry of dissipation with the pencil of truth, he would per¬ form a service to society, at which the graver moralist might smile, the satirist might Hugh To exalt a history ot this kind to the level of sermons md sicred writings, would be as ridiculous is piofane—but let the satiricii writer remtmber, that ho who cm warn from general vices without wounding particular feelings, has a retri¬ buting sensation m his own breast, which sucasm howeier wittily pointed, can never attain. The writers ofSitirts fre¬ quently declare, that they are uninfluenc¬ ed by personal rancour, or by private ι II— will — "Ciedai Jiidœm Apella non ego " — We respect the wit though we cannot admire the motive is a great kmg who never shut his ears against the intelli¬ gence of spies and informers, had yet the honestv
honesty to declare, that, though he hied the //«/io« he hated the traitors. A letter from Lord John O'Carrol, about tins period reached the Duke of Montcastle at Margate, another by the same post arrived from Lord Delorame. They were both to the same purpose, namely, that of giving an account of Lord O'Carrol's health. It appeared from these epistles, that in mind, he was better than he had been foi many years, but as a damping equi¬ valent to such joyful mfonnatiuu, it ap- peared that as his mental forces augment¬ ed, the corporeal energies of his frame were pioportionably dpiinnished. lie wa» grown feeble, languid, and tremu¬ lous—his paioxysms vvere less fiequent, but his spints wert worse—a settled, fix¬ ed, steady melancholy peivadtd his looksi his words and his actions. o J llenrv
Ilemy Timpest was the only compa¬ nion with whom lit delimited to hold so¬ cial converse. From him he heard the mild assmsive hngutge of religion, till evil) nulu aiul mort tuibulent passion seemed hushed to sleep. They began the liiblc togi ther as a couise of reading; Lord lohn listened with avvilii ι ipt atten¬ tion '1 he sublime flights of the piophe- tic Isaiah filli cl his languid c\is with all then lomur flies ol inthiisiism, and tho pathetn passages oi the suffeniig Job, ex¬ tracted teais, which seimcd to wake his soul to its long wandueil icason. \t times he would gnsp the amiable, the btloved ilemy b) the hand, ga¿e wistfully in hisiict, mil paust with the attitude ot a man who hid some pint up seciet, which he thirsted to uposc in the bosom ol another, labouung in his own, at such moments he vvould uttei a lew incoherent words, but they vvere so wild, ami
uni so mournful, that they ippened to lliiiry the tdc ets of ι niidady which was still hngtimg about his unhappy patron Doctor Glynne, who had divided his Utenti ins while in I ondon, equilly be¬ tween f οι 1 John uid the afflicted Siville, gave it is his decided opinion, that his Lordship should rem uu in the metre polis, inste id of returmu, to Maigate as had been it fust irti nclei 1 ins ai,iiinents tor this ch mgc wiri cogent Ills p itient, wilh lespeet to и md, hid 1 itely been evidently better, uid if he could eraeh- e ite ıhı mentii dise iele he s ud he telt issiiieil tint the task of ust miig tone nul νι,ο ir to the bod\, would be bv fir the Ic ist diflieult poi Hon of Ins undertak¬ ing In wis ce ni inetti, he iilded, tint Ihe iccustonieil si r ht c f the ocun md lus toiistint ptnuibulnions ly the sei suli tdded fuel to the fl une vv Inch dc mined his health, and preyed upon his (» 4 spints
spints The source of his compiimi whether imaginary or founded on rcihtv, was evidently connected with the ocean and its scenery Could he be kept from objects my way connected with them tliere was much to he hoped I xperi encellad convinced hnn he added, that the evils of nmginati n ire au 0 mented or demolished, by the f it ihty 01 difficili ly which the mind peiceivts of dwelling long upon particular stbjetta Imai, na on len s 1 c d ge о Л 1 pou all ui n cca 11 a t Was all axiom, he continued, founded m telson, and continued by Ins own long priclice md cperitnte He was cinciid enough to avow, tint by this advice, he seemed to countenct hisiounei coimai 1 but Doctor Glynne was an с manient to Ins own truly lit ble ind
ind libenl profession " it w ns fot quicks uid empirics il ше " lu would u\ 'to iubise ι blindfold idhcroini 1 1 dun nos trums the tim phvsunn knows tint li uni in nituic ibchuiEţeabli in itscssciue iud m its \i\\ pnnciples, md i m in of sensi wdl nevu be ashinied tu \ n\ liom wlnt is in itself mutable ind h ible to then ition л Su< h ıcisonın*; w ıs too urgent uid too concltibue, to 1 ivc iu\ tunc к ι doubt or litbititnn in the ilk ι tion ite md fıattr- inl mmd of Montcastle Иь ımmedı- ittly wrote to boid Delorame, intimat¬ ing his intention of st tunc off the m xt di} to join his de n lov d brother ııı the metropolis knowing tint the Carls pie- sence m I ondon was it tins time peni liati) iitixsbiiy fe ι the arrangement of some altwib tf magintudL and import, In betjgid lum not lo suffer his concerns- to¬ bt dboidcnd b\ ι necdltsdjour.uydoftn g » to
to Margate, as he would /umw/ftoke can to bring the ladies of his firmly safely with him to his loidslnps house in tow n. Punctual m business to ι moincnt, and methodically exact in the settlement of tho most minute piper, which at all relat¬ ed to tho ceconomj of his estates, the Eirl wrote a lettti of thanks, and stated his grateful accept nice of the gallant and pohle offer of the Duke. Henry Tempest had by tins time taken a small house, to which he invited Laura, not as a guest, hut as a mistiess. He persevered in his pi in of independence, and reliance on the activity of his own mind, with all that steadiness wt ith is the sine charicteristic of ngoious inte¬ grity. His establishment was ton/iucd in the strictest sense of the word, hut he had enough for the ital wants of life, both for his sister and himself,—of elegance In
he had a refined sense, foi voluptuoiis- niss md supiilhutj hi hid the most in¬ effable contempt bewas in fact one of those old fvshienied incut Us, win could not litio tinnì mg how m inj pooi objitts might be u hivt el fiom the gevv givv ti lppings ol spli ndour unt ι Ml vi i 0 mcc Ht hid txeicisid bimst И m thi 1. »sons oi pm ıtıoıı, Willi ill lhe t\a illudi of \ . ıtızcıı ol Sputi ttmpeiuiie wis next to ιιΐι,ιοη, the text of his hit I It found that luxuri us eating, or rtl ne I I iste m wines wti int ipiblt of 0 ivin, m\ r tl ¿ist to lift oi its pltasuies—mt tint lit was one of those Ιιι,ΐι now η titiots who ut so diluiti lhat thtv ire ash unod of ι Um, al alt md vvould havt it supposid that thty irt so víry loniantii ıs to tli t upon ι — bj no meins — hi lud rta i ( οι tai ι with pliasuii but pnftssid η ι' hnnstll lili, uval ti h s tl supli Ovn ι (ιιι,ιΙ ι ι ist ¡ι imli ft с I ılıt gl ııv of ι ι tuan' fulness
thankfulness to tlie giver of the goods of life, and could rise from the table of in¬ dependence, exhilarated, but not intoxi¬ cated. lo such a home was Laura invited, and she accepted the offer with enthusi¬ asm. She knew that instead of a bur¬ then, she must eventually prove an ac¬ quisition to her brother, she felt that the manly, the soaring mind of Henry, could never attend to the minutine of domestic life, which give grace and dignity to a te¬ male, but detract from both those quali¬ ties in one of the opposite sex. To self- fish menials she ivas unwilling to resign him—an easy plunder she was assured he would fall to the selfish and tlie inte¬ rested—she loved him too well to think his assistance an obligation, and after the fatiguing j'ears she had passed with the Hanbury's, whose gross souls were in¬ capable of any thing like intellectual gra¬ tii ι tio»,
tillcation, it «as natuial, that both hei heart and hei mind ehould expand at the blight prospect whith now pnsinted itself before hti She beheld in a biother the unittd characters, of gu irelian, friend, and parent The Duke according to Ins promise oidered the chaise at tlie door of his house at Margate, and a coach also wait¬ ed for the Delorame family at the same tune. The sensations of Lady Susan dunng the journey were of the most sombre species She had for the present, it was true, got ud of the irksome alarms of meeting Mr. Stevens and his firmly vheiev er she betook her steps, but there was httle doubt of his soon following to the metropolis, and thtre puisuiug her with all the malice of врц1пЬ)1 insi¬ nuation, or what was in ulta still woise, of
of nulling a ducct complaint in persor, or by lettel, of the non-payment of the heavy debt she hid contiacted with hnn. At ill events she resolved to involve herself no fin thei, and to shun the allurements of the caul table, with the same assiduity as she would avoid the tainted atmosphere of a pest house. With these virtuous lesoluticuis did she fortify her heait the event will shew the suc¬ cess of these exertions—let all opinions be till then suspended I ord Dclonme welcomed his family with as much si,umth as he was capable of es uiting I he heart of this nobleman svas by no means callous, though his ex- tcnoi manncis sometimes vvoie the sem- blincc of precision and IngitJ. Many enneunin» inclinisi mees hid prevented his sentimi nts from devellopmg them¬ selves
selves in the full flow of his reali) natural beneficence. His fathei had bei и like himself, of the old school—ouo of tbusc noblemen who looked with av\ful π 4pcct to the dignity of bnth and tbe conse¬ quences of allianre. These ])iinciplcs bo had transmitted to the. piebtiit loid, in whose bosom they had acquired an aug¬ mented vigour He could not assimilate his own minners with those, who ovei- lcapMig his prescribed boundaries could gaily mingle with the \ otarie-, ot the tuif, or circulate the bottle with the champi¬ ons of pugilbtic celebiitv, foi bets ind wagers he had a rooted abhoirenct, an abhorrence which had been confuniLd by the examples of his dcirest fnends tbe Savilles. Under the snow s of apparent pieusion flourished tbe \igoious plants of friend¬ ship, Ьепел ölence, and puernil afíection, he governed his lamilv, it is tiue, b} tbe iules
iules if the most strict method but yet le his never o\ei bearing or ty nimicai íle was pu notu d to w h t he preached he adhered to bis own doctrines, andwu not ever known to infringe on his own laws h sought for splendid alhmce and I ulhant connexion in the peison of his children lie thought th« se advantages mdjspensibly necessaiy to then honour md happiness, as well a-> his own but w t en ηκ un ted on his stitely war horse he never trampled o» his fellow creatures Though a recul ir he was a kind land lcrd and an eisy master his servants icknow ledved Ins affability and his te neniry with one according voice bore witness 1 1 lus humanity I think l ime been desrnbina; a true Id ľubjísh mıhlımın а clurirtcr e\er re pi et ılıl tn f ur country Jf 1 luve omitted an) ir uls in my delineation I lut, the) ini) bt supplied b) my readci
ıs I wish to do every justice to the cha¬ racter of the Lari 1 have described his failings, and 1 should be sorry to withhold the tribute due to his virtues I have often had, and may still have occasion to dwell upon his prejudices it is necessary for the elucidation of many events, but if our piejuehces are to bo ranked in the class of vices, alas' »heie is the man who shall escape severity and censure' The parental feelings of the Earl weie much mused, by the ν ısıl le alteration which had tiken plate since his last short absence, both m the ngme and form of his favorite daughter, Lulj Ilairiot She was grown iniconimonlv thin, and her countenance, formerly brilliant and un clouded, exhibited evident tiaces of a settled melancholy , It cost hnn some sti u 0 glı s to corneal his anxiety at such a thstovtry, as sht deny'el filling hersilf it all ill, he Wb unwilling to oppuss hei wub
with questions Ile enqiiiitd in vain it the Countess und her sistu, lie could get no account of tht'sensible alteration which had taken place in his biluvid child. Lady Louisa, only drawltcl out—' ia l'apa, I don't know—1 tm sme I niur th night whethei Harriot was ill o no,' and then begin plajmg with a tup and ball İhı Countess declared she could not help roiiruning in opinion with tli I ul, Inving miele wilh some u net m ι re- mail similai to thitot lur husband to i\|tuiiil tin mjstuy she coil s d hu¬ si If in uh qu iti, except, slu suspectul tint 11 imot hul iiijuiid hi ısı II by au ι \t issivi itti Шиш to lui stt du s, mcl htr books
СНАГИ E.
CHAPTER VII.
A 1IĽ nusfoitunes oi Iloiatio Sanile, now appealed tlie haihnuus ot tiouble and disipili tudc to the lamily of Lend Delorame. Thty lud lor some yiaispasl enjoyed the conifnils of a hie, glicini" gently onvvaitU with all the plıeıthtv οι an iinruHled stietin lu sonai ınttı- coıuse with the Dukt oi Mouttastlt the i ul
Lirl had indulgid his favorite prtthltc- tions, and in his plans of matrimonial con¬ nection between the two noble families, had found a warm and cheanug soluit, for the now declining day of his life for Charlea he had provided a consort who would add a noble branch to tlie airead} splendid tree Lady Susan O'Cairol, the daughter of a Duke, though not oierburthened with oppulence, made imendshi the lustre of her pcchgiee, for any deficiency in the in¬ fenoi article ot petuniary supeiiont}. His eldest son Lord Dalton, he behev- cd to be wholly unengaged, the wild- iiess of this voung noblcmans manners was ovei looked by his paients, who con- sidtied his ecttntucitits and freedom of elcpoitmenl, as tht sure pltdges of a heilt disengaged from the allure ments of ¡ove, οι tht fise in ıtıoııs ol ıfiettıoıı. lineici
Undor such an impression, the Lait sufleu d the flighty giddv Dalton to take many hbeities which would have hichly shocked mil offendi d hun, m any other person oi his fund} He had at this penod a uaiisiition of business with n Scotch nobleman of consule rable wealth, and what in the eics of Lord Deloiaine, wis of still more consequence and impoi¬ tance—he could piove himself the lineal desee nehmt of the anticnt lungs oft alc- elonia on Ins motheis sule, aud the eineet issue of tlie monarchs ot li eland on tint of his father. Col respondence begat inti¬ macy,md friendship was the consequence ' Ľadun .elle atı/ne emleııı mlk ul iler ' muni Juma annalla est 1 " — sns an an¬ cient author, with all the vig, nous con¬ ciseness of the Homan stih
Tlic
The foice of tins pithi se nit nu wis fullv illustrated in the poisons ol the two noblemen of whom we have been lately treating The Lord Glengannon, durui, his stay m London, was Imitili' evei absent fiom the house of the L iri of De loiaine Hit business was, indeed, ihcplv connected with Ins lnghsh coin-peer—he was in¬ volteti in a hiv suit tntangltd with a great many puplexitits. An lush an- ecstoi of his, had left a will so veil cun- ously woidcd, tint to expound its u il meaning would hive lequuid a consiilei- ably gieatei poition oi pcnetiation tinn lall to the lot of modt in solveis of ptob- lems Tiy int,umi r iblt me nidus it so Inppened that a union with one ol Ins sons to the daughtu of Loid Dcloi une, oı oi one ot his clm,htcis to llic son oi the sue) 1 ,ul, would smooth all these
janiiig ıhllıcııllııs mil pre sent « vŕiď m ('ha/ııuy. For a suit m ( hui.uv ibis uoithcrn noble had no v ist uu hu ilion— and wo believe, ш this | u w ıs hy no încins aso- lıUıy instam i, haun, tibsiiseij, that those persons who ue most ι igeily anxi¬ ous to find empliij ment fol tin lauyeis, geueia'lv fiei a soi t ol coivi ulu e — an in¬ tono! desin of ninnin.: away fumi Ihon allies, whenevei lhe aboi eiiiuitionid ex¬ pedit nt istilliteli at. Loul Gluigannoii, svho hati an oppoi- tumly of seeing Challes \ťoi dulle tur a levs days, opened the allın, lis ıssııımg Loid Deloiaine, that, lit ii It a stiong— an iutei nal conviction, ih it I iptain Woodville was the nuls mau alive capí- ble ot making Ins deal elaiuhtei the Lady Sigismunds ι litui Is happv. Ilus
This was somewhat of a shock to the I ari, who had fixed Ins htm t on a match be¬ tween his eldest hope I'mest, md Lady Glengannon Ile expiessed lunisilf highly honoured by the good opinion his friend had entertained of Woodvillt, but candidly explained the natene of his en¬ gagements with the daughtei of the Duke of Montcastle. Here he unmagmed the lffair would have rested,for as Glengan¬ non had declared Ch irles to be the oull/ man, who could possibly be a suitable match for Sigismunda, be eould only give a sigh over the ruins of the fan edi¬ fice which his hopes hid elected, and submit in patient silence to the disposi¬ tions his fate had orliamoci But Lord Glengannon was of a disjio¬ sition not to be so nsily daunted by an appaient difficulty. He had been accus¬ tomed from his childhood to fight bis way with a straight torn u d steady coolness, thiougli
through tvuv obstatlt which obstructed his piosptcts, ni , lipului lus iiittiist lie wis mcipibli of tommitting any tit w luth could de,i ult lus rink is ι noble man, 01 a gentleman , but lie h ni a U \i bibtj of teinpci ulucii tould v ııv with tunes, and with ci ι cu inst nu ts, aud whii ht tould stu ι to Ins havın with h nom ht ι ind not how often ht tickul iliout ti nun at his point lit now drei mil thin (mc, that since С iptain Woodvillt w is so positivi 1> in, agid, lit tould nit think ol pressing such i mitter any bu¬ lber, but tlbtivtd, tint tin woild wis In, b m itspiusis of loid Diltm, who w is siul tu In a fine will bud livtlv ii,uit toung bitnih uf nihility—in lompaung what ht h id / in It I I uitsis, w ith wlnt he km w of 4 ol siniind Mimpi h eonii uut h lp fhiiikiii, tli it D ılı ι would Iı ıııııelı Ihr tutu hu bind 1 1 Ih two— W t «Kılk s, mil v ml ρ ılıt iss, ]|| uh he ι lm Iv .11 unu— usi ι un m π ¡e
he now found albinism.! и imii vvIiv, tin \ciy mm, In hid ни ниш u s bi h и nouai the unit/ . n. lu to пике· thi llippilll ss. Ihr, d u J .u, vv s, „,, ol tli. mM uı.pıopu ,.,ы„ , ,s „, ıh, woild ι Μ» 'ί l'b * 'Ι'· 'ι ι Nm w 's I oul С lui шиш i 'n in Пню ol tli ull une 1 1 ill ι ,t iet ovei m my, of . ıı 'ln ippiiinlb tullin, ncciiiitii.es 4 in. unions philosophers Inve en .It t onn d 10 hss, n tin b. uitv and the .¡Ui Hv 1 1 İnim ıiıitv indimmi, bv, tltn- i un ι tin mı t di >in II, ..ι il pini ın- i ι pi u tions to tin s, ι, lı.l pim. ipli ol ul ,ı ıtılıt ılı aı '- ıııh ни ıı ue not s« и ι but I udu us ΙιΙκΙΙ,ι·. Io Int. ıhın .1 ,ιιι ıs ν ould Ы „ινιιι, them пни tını , thin ι ıtlıeı then аминь οι tlı.ıı pun piisin, m. nt. luid (ihn, nu ιΐιοιι,ΐι ilne m
e civ iitciv to his own ıııtcıosts was is e ip ib!, (lu lud proved bimse liso m spvt- instiiiees) of m ict ol re il hiu r ihty, ıs most othıı m, n Ile sti until hud to g un Ins point but 1пм1ц unul it, he did not not m success wilh vi niton ipt- lln, to the lflhctions of othus I lis e h incin ıs vieil ıs tinsi of the thu pu onucs oi this worl , mi^ ip pen tulioiislv mingici upon—hi it so— wc ııı n t I otted to our own opinions, this n n li it m iv In n cis4iv lubsciu s un ¡ ı~ n-, in in ι! in 0 t ι h u tetei con is ι n ι sit till thi Inn mu ni i i thi ! ι I l I 1 m s in ι hillu Hid oı ılı uny. ι d—ılı , nn il h ııı ι uv ıs 11 1 nped nul 1.1 nn d I ıhı- n ci шиит utol hicvin wc ııı ıı 1 I ı d loi s ι m mv I mill ss men slus, in 1 suih ι v ııı Iv il disgiislii) 0 ι uu tun silu bt ıı nu κ ι s iul linei to u > infumi
internal dæmons, than hum in creatures. If some witters ρ nut in ılın liters oi light, others ire equally fond of warping all in elouels, fogs, and \ ıpoıııs Slnkisprii who Ins ,ινιη admirable lessons on ill the tonu ms ol human life, Ins ilso а most mil uling ош ior wntcis. ihevvebof ourives ıs "Ы mingled jırn oui " v ices ıvoııl 1 ılı jioiiil vine they not clıtrıslı- ' el by oui v it ies nul our vutues violili! ' nmv])io!iil weie the} not whipped by ош
Now, though sib interest was not so much the ¡и/н;, pnnriple with Lord Dclonme, is with his npithern fnend, he had tint leaven of it in 1ns composition, which as we have before observed is, *.tlh a idi) ft , exceptions, incidental to huma- nifj I lis surprise at the sudden change in
in the sentiments of I oul OİPiıgınııon, ins tlipieloie ,0111c w 1 it ih iteti by the pli ısın, pio ptets ot seeing his htıl} ex¬ tinguished hipes thus iincxptcteill} le¬ vivi el, tnd [u could not help giving a snuhiu ie eotchucc ti tlu upivli stutid opinion, of 1) iltuns Ik n , ι mini sun ible suljet t fin liuslnnd Ihm hiss η Clinks On hem. nn no. mil »he thu I nustivas lilt /, ι ί,ι. dm un ııı ılı uni nul liciti, lhe tuhu i phee), tint, ou thit subjtcl lu filt himself nu uh ι Ц libellons ııı beni, ι η ılıh d to ,ıvt tilt most dialled md siti-1 tc ton niswei He was issttr- cd tint Luu si lud n ici ıııttıııuııd ι putitili} tu anv w min stron. ι ne u,li to indut с hunt, tutei into uıv, |1шц hl с .ι Ultimum ileti ti it—lint on tin con¬ ţii y, lus pi jut ms tuants/ the iiiiptiil sute h id been so mutul, md his expies- sioiisoii the topic so iti} slmili, nul su. tistic, thit h" Ind olten vexed lodi lus y neiiis, uy his open ι idi ult ol, ind de¬ li i udi d
tided avirsion t n ceiunony ot so much sinctitv, nul m luv t tht t umnim ty " He still, itldtil the Ы ' h s so ninth ol dutv mil lficclion in ) is dispo¬ sition, tint n hi u he kumis mv h ippiiitv, ıh pintisi » this n tth I Ini e no ι mht c i lus su lilin- ι piompt ind ι he nini icipii- tse tue e ι nuv sv ishis ' J ud id u innon vv is dili uled — "ii inimi di iti in Us wis t in I it— ti e 1 ul iv ıs p ipi in ills ι ιιη I 1 u шц ovu [i ılı ι - sellit mu I bt ι md Wh il ils In h s liti ıs ι t j 4 n ht w s umilili» t li nt mi] t 1, nul li iti, tlitit i i j vinih не pt d tue Dule ol Monte ısılı s o iei if Inu in, up lus familv honi Mai ılı ıs il he hul hun ell been compiili d to 1,1 1 s i Ion, 1 1 mı n s, it would Invi tıııoisıı ι siimi impedi ment ni the w ıy ol in ill in lu ss ıs tut ie ılım commoııl luxions to .пгпце шс! ь lili
nil I I I tsS bit pioiiipntiiilt 111(1
nu Π iltern w ıs suun txpcctid it lus nil is li uisi but the imputimi I ul li¬ li ι c n ılıt ııııplı it obediente ol I unst t, his p ilei ıı il , 11 unid e ulti not pu ι ıı up u ι hi ην it ll e um il ot th v nu ι ι ! q uil , il busi- m s hi ι im I w i it i ti ıhısın II iiiii milimi tıeıiı - mil hi wished this moment us id ı t ι In ι ni lui ed ıhı etli t it η , h u, b« ι me ι iet ol uu ti , in nu, li ul in to be pu
Iqiiiľv 1 Ι ι!, 1 lv tl s,, . i hl} in Ih puisiin il t ιν ou [liti id idi ι imun sitoutin s . 1 i I ti I uu ι . lus d ι ijil. r lillu ι ι il li th I r nul I el ι ıs d not ι, ι ııı iv iv Il 111 Stillili İt , ıı,un ,1li ll s I 1
ııtlı
Sigismundi he mum, meti th it lit li id only infilimeli hır with a fot tunt hiu ι set of «pitndid jewels, inel Uitn с usun all three to the fust miu lie nn 0 ht think propt r to bestow them on with is httle ctifheuliv oi eucmoiiv is lie would hue puted with itivonte ι ice horse fiom his stud Lord Г) İtin on his in v it in town went inumili dill to ılıt houst of Ins titlul where he wis leceivcd ιν ith ι pc- cuhir tenderness tnd ifftl ililv which soothed his bosom ind liittoni ill his fondest cxptrtatic n hi the η,ΙιΙ lic h id ncvci before sc on I old Dcloi uni in sutli a phciblt, yitlthiu Hue of mmd Ills own he t full of loie ind I u i, w ıs Cisy tO HCl} Uliprissioll li the Pilit! 1 ki id, it wis icce sellili io the delusi ns ι ¡ hope ind t ie se ft nsuniitin^ whispus of f lilt}
¡I
lie was uv не of the generous objec¬ tions ot Miss Гетр st to the union he had pioposed he lelt ι full conviction, that nothing but the tinquilifiid consult of Ins p iri nt eould do ivv ıy the stiong bai that stood between bini and the ac¬ complishment of the most irdent wish oi Ins he u t IheLirl's present lone of mind, his smiles, his embutes, his curtssts—all seemed prosperous fi itteniig omens of his success—he lesolvod not to lost ι mo ment so propitious—but lo sei/e this hap|iy eusjs—to tlnow himself on his knees befoie the Lirl—to confess ι jias Sion founded on the noblest basis oi hu inanity md rcison—mil im »lore his ¡m medlite reception of tin mestini ibi Linn astin vuit oi his son, aud ıs ıhı d mehter ol his own ıllıctıoıis V blus t tums mul hbchcuí when Ui* ıı ι it. oll it
recollected his fonner ısılı! nilhues against the blessings of niitrnnony, and he the il«! lusing thi duts ot lus ridi¬ cule tinned upon himself —hke honest Benedict, however, he ss as piepaied with the same conclusive, pithy aigument oi defence. ' IV/ieii Isaidl „oh/i/ die и Balchi loi, " I did tii^ei think that I should /ue to be " mai ned." Like Shakcspeai's celebiated Consci t too, he svas lesolsed— " lhat a «holt Cul/i ? eof.ul-nioi!ieis " should notjliiut lum out of hts /штат " beated aftei dınneı ss ith the L ul , ss hen esciy one hul letned, Dalton lesolved to opti) his honourable trenches, time was no company tint day, and himsell and iathci were tot illy alone, an oppoitunity ss hu b
n lucii did not Inquinili, oceni, ml of w inch ht ıı li d lo nul limisi It Hf pl ιν ι d vvıılı the win. ,lt s in lu, lıııııl loi sunu Inni wilh tint sert il Insidili iiicsoliitiiin which t v ti y min 1 is lelt it ni pi ıı hI nid und ι som ciiciim- s-t m ıs —η list he b l.llv и sili ul tr ımke ι vuoious ili u imi hi il, th ι il onci Hip fives ve voiuu Ί itmiş nov lead ni thp unn is not ι pi l intoni itila „///"—sud IJıUoıı Thei «linininin! İv cıugııt linn tıp Do jou b in to / /it ! ine -l'— οι know I hue oii n told v ш it mudd com hom 1 1 λ u sumo tl о, с ι i Ihı ι — Win n 1 w i мши, nun things wire veiv dill i nlly ι unul ııı, thctt wis tlitn metli I, onki ml pimctuiliU inong мши, oltu ι is ot noble binli — Ihn wen exiinplis ι. η odu ilion md ut, ıt.ı Int
regularity, not to the army alone, but to each individin! class of society " " Do you mean, my loid, to say thit sve of the piesent diy do not perform oui duties'" " No—God forbid my dear Ernest ' of your courage, of youi loydty or mtegnty I have no doubt—In the piesent aiieful cusís, while Lurope is convulsed, and and History svrites her annals with a pen of iron, such a reflection would be a shocking one indeed 1 —No'—my dcai boy, I look with pude and confidence on the presentstate of our armies and navies, 1 do not believe that a finer set of y oung men were evei enregisteied on the lists of eithei. 1 lear not your attachment to your country, or joui biaveiy in the field of action,—1 feel that you aie able—md 1 am convinced that you esei svill be ade¬ quate to give Lngland a proud pieemi- netitc
nence even amid " the wreck of mittu, and the crash of woild., 1 "—lt is vom bus at honit 1 lear foi, not уош ι \e ilions abı oint — l dıeıcl least constant habits of dissipation should bend you to your giavcs befoie youi countiy с ill your ac¬ tive poucis into exeition—I base no ap- prehension ss hen that is the case—out ancestors considered temperence as a duty to their fellow citizens, as it gase thein health to match ίοι th under the banner of loy alty and freedom, at all sea¬ sons, and at all times." " Yet—do you not suppose, my dear fatlier, that the ancestors of i/oui tnnestois made much the same soit of complaint >— Play iny lord be open in youi reply 7 " This question was a home thrust, the Lail could not tUtuj but that such had bten the eise hum tuni' immcinoii.il, to txalt the past, and deploriate the piesent,
ıs one ot tho strongest pıopensıtıes ot age Lord Delomut paused—hesitated—and then reply 'd with somewhat of an air of triumph " 1 will pidgc you m'y dear Lamest out of youi own mouth— luve you not (ust mule use of the following words 1 " — 1 the lues ,ie i/ouni. fclloiu lead m the ' ' ai nn/ is not a pleasant one aftci all "— " such I thmk wis j„m expression гет- hattm — w as it not'" " It was my loul—but in ttrmmg the life impléis mt, 1 bv nomtins intended to ι ist iny reflection upon th it profession I hu e the honour 10 belong too —1 meant tht phnse toipply mer ly to the immill¬ ati/ pornon —they luve no home—they have no stihihty of pursuit—for meie и uit of somi flung to give a tone to the mentii . nergy—tluy piss then mornings m listless inactivity, and in the evei ing are
are often compelled to fly to pursuits of a Involous, if nota dangerous naturo," " Псу -day Cruesť this doctrine from t/o»i mouth is somewhat astonishing n,deed." " It may probably seem so my deal lord, and I dare say, that }ou and many othei of my fnends will be inclined to laugh at this altciation in my sentiments, but the fear of a laugh ь not to close my senses against reason and conviction. I thought in one way when I was a youth, I ain now a man—my opinions are chang¬ ed—ought I obstinately to stand on my first assertions after my reason tells me they weie founded upon false conclu¬ sions'—is tliere any hann in ι mans con¬ fessing tliat he was mistaken'" " So far fiom it i niest, that such an avowal is the just tutelimi ol a hbcial heart
heart, and a sensible mmd—from this discourse 1 may then concludi 1 that your objections to mai ι ¡age are m some mea¬ suie removtd 1 " " They are entaehj so my lord " " I truly rejoice to heir it—if then a match to your likmg could be offered, you would not hesitate in accepting it'" " So far from it—it would be exactly w hat I w ıslı " " Ho» ^ on lejoice me my dear Ernest, for after this candid nnifitcttd declara tion, 1 will now conitss that to see you married is tht deaiest wish of my heart" The eves of Linest sparlili d with ani¬ mation anil pliasme it this last speech, he caught his father cigeily by the hand, which he kissed with all the ardour of aflpction
affection, and all tlie tenderness of filial piety. " If the cucumstance of my man tage would give happiness to my dear father, I am both leatly and willing to give him evciy proof of iny obedience to Ins wishes m thu particulai." " Ilıt sooner the better my deal Lrnest." " 1 am of your opinion my loid. Knowing join deslíes on this head, 1 have lately been looking out foi such a lem ilt as might be worthy ot calling jou fathn " " And to tell j on the truth Liuest, I have been dnectiiig mj own obseivatious to the same point—a point upon w lutti 1 do not thmk we ait hktly to dißci ."
A
A mutinl mistake had evidently here ansen betu etil lhe fallici md sem. Loni Dt lm une, little suspecting that the afltetions of Dahou wnt liitvocably nu tt. il on ani) putu uln obj.' t, an.l the jotin unn finni his lithcrs lunts, and easy complu ut linnun could not help a ou su laut tonvitu ui 1 1 I In ι iris bav¬ in, ılısın ι el Ins pun ι IV to Laura 1 ıııpısl, mil b шд wil'iii, to fivoiu his nidi s i, u h quille ι, be th his pı¬ lı its lııel 'ılın m ıı'lj ι \| res,ıd ι wish to sı ι hi ıı sı uh tl m Hli и it he flattei. cd Imusi II th we uln sn nm an} pie- liiditfs of thu, ovv.itotht псопц listi¬ nu ntot so ılı s nblt an ol и tt That ho ■•honid no insti au illusiui so fivoiablo lo lus hopt , vv s by no means a matt, ι ol aslımı hım nt. I una was m ο! ρ ι oí ι οι ı'mıra- tioii md ol n uni u st 1 1 I io nuit ol liti fiiuitls ani aupn ι
Lord and Lidy Dcloraine were both possessed of ¡rood «епче, ind a polished mode of txpiession The first had taught them to appicciale, and the second to cunee their admir ıtıoıı of the fine quali¬ ties of Miss lempest—their encomiums hid been imm ind open, md they tnd more thin once dechied, tint they con- si leu d her is Ihe most puh et mo h I foi tlic уоишг lidies of the i чп^ genel ıtıoıı Ilıt hopts ol ρ ilion, thertľoic wuc sh 1 1 of e\tı ıı igiııct, mel m tiuth tool 1 lit hudly ttimtd lomailit —yet, much us tht Lail idmued I inn, lit by no mems tuned his euthususni to such ι hti 9 ht is tier to lnve consuliicd her ι fit object foi the ch ¡ce oi ins eldest son Ihe nticlc of me ney nullit hne bei u outivtighed by the piepo id uuty of virtue, md of t dent, hut how w ıs he to squait such an union svitli Ins moie
ıhın
than lofty ideas of the absolutt necessity of On th and ι aiti ' The pedesrte of the young Tempests was woi se th in thai ol many of whom the actual clifiiicncc s might be ascertained— it was oliscine — aud tbstuie in the very worst sense of the woid —who were tlieir pin nts'—tint they were of any consequence was a wild md chimerical coii|tettue—had the \ held any i mk, or distillinoli iu ılıt tl issts ol sonety, thty must have he ud ol the luminous adver¬ tisements vvlnth I old John had caused 1 1 lit instil d both m the Lnghsh,and all tht I orci, n ntvvspipeis, when he first pi.scivid them fiom the shipwreck 1 hit llu u ι ml ι hfe should bt eminent appealed nnpiobibh, Ihenfoie, in the highest de,ict liut the mil ι dm not rest hen—tin urn I mtes stiong'y plead¬ ed i anısı the veiy ie/mli/ ılı/ ot the Hittslois of the t disuled orphans—they might
might be the offspring of vice and profli¬ gacy. Gitted as they both were with evei y perfection with which lavish nature could adoin lier most selected fivontes, who would not lune pioudly owned them, had not a toiistiousutss of some moral dereliction checked the impulse of paternal fondness' To visit the sins of one generation upon another, was by no mean the nature of Loid Delorame—he was far from being tinctured with any thing like ilhberality, but as he would have ujected all alliance with the first nobleman in tht land, had he laboured under the disadvantageous cncumstances ot a bai in In» coat of arms, he may be the moie easily excused for his picjudice against Lama. When his son named that niteiesting young woman as the object ot Ins tendei legarci —the select wife of Ilia ailections, the
the istonishment of the eldei noblem m miv be ıtmgıııoel, but ill eftııts it my thing like ι descripţiei), would idi so short of its effects, tint we due not len- ture it in itlcmpt ot so difficult ι n itme The edifice of the lite erected hope wluth hul „lovs с d m the bosom of Delo- nine wis iiisliiiliutousls subverted by the in gen no is, bulb ilei istruii oi Ins son foi Dilton hid sowoiclcd his expressions as tc give his t ithu tul! \ to uiulustiuil, thit though lit would ncvci violile his fiini duties by uniisui-, in ducct oppo sition tolht wishesoti punit he should hold Ini isoli hound is ι in in oi honoui not to otici his h uid to iny cilhei woiinn " linpiudint bov'" —pissionitelv ex- ehiined Loid De loi une, — ' hive you thin ι ishly bound yotiisclf by i pıomıse to Miss lempest'" ' bit
" îıı t exitllv mv Ioni ' " λ\1πι Unn the tie w luth with¬ holds )ou tu m peyin-, )o ir idditssts tú Lady Sigbintiiiii ι' ' " To mı mv Ioni thi strongt st of all eaitliltj bon Is— lu u m m.i h ι iiinitv '— duun a my cuter ot ul i im w 11 mire, thit míny of my fi ien Is h ivi ıh untd my eh irai tır light md intonsisUnt — my heait tells mt I lııvt deseıvıd the re- proaih—but mv const un ι tm lull all otlu i fulings to iest »Ini I t [ıııtntt amımıloı within whiih ı quits mt ol my inj uıv t ) a living bun, '— ııv ırıoıs h ut bun my own—1 hui ılı uvi il no om — I hut been fnvolous, but nevn tu¬ min d " ' Dabon I hdcu \ou hid vour f i- thei thiu.,hi)ou so In would ıı t hivt been tin tamı spıctuoı ol ι,υιιι less of tunc —
time,—no, Crnest, no'—I trulv believe youi integrity tobe spotless, heaven grant it may ever continue unsullied 1 " " Amen to that kind prayer my fathei'—and to prescivt that mtcguty you set so high a valut on, it is abso¬ lutely necessaiy for Lacly Sigismund ι to know without delay the sentiments of my heart. To renounce my hiun ia ι sacrifice of the most ptinful natine, hut it is my duty to obey youi loidship, and I submit — another duty now leinuns to be fulfilled—a duty to Lady Glen, union— to you iny lord 1 commit its pciioi mince, assure liei of my sense of the honour her father would have conferred upon mc but 1 should make an ill letum to both did I destroy then futuie felicity, bv coldly pledging a hand vvhuc my beul could nevei accomp iny the iovi 1 should by such in act, become ι tntoi to hei, to myself, and to her filhu — Ιπρ- piness
piiitss m nn own person I tunn tin» div ıenounce, tuit t tiust I shill nivu t istf the bıtteı n, ri t of hi nu ι lohintvrv igent ııı lho unsi rv oi ııı idit ι ' Tht fıthıusofLoıd 1) ıltoıı luu „mv too vehement lui ill Ilıt ι (loris ul Ins ıt- scilittmti , he thu iv hmistlt uitu ι chiu, nid could scarcclv stillt the sub whith uditeti and convtilsid his bosom, lend De loi ime hid evcilim «cus tumid to liuiold the ι uniti nui α lunst bc muu «Uh h slivi ι n li nul in idillici with the smiles 1 1 i ¡i il ılı conti ist und the putin lu ıı ıı ¡ t, - suited moi 11 с tın-, in I ni ι li I heie w ıs h udiv uıv n | mul hl vvlui h hiiiiuu v un li temi ut ¡i -,u t ţ cd white th nih ι «ul ılı will nuli simhud tvuv eni ι it iul 1, own to thi ti ui puhli 1 1 his --ι η un in ι It
Hut tin mister key, «Inch madt incst huniony or discord was touched in the bosom of the I ail md touched with no slight lnnd —to lnve consented to an un on between L urn and his eldtst hope—tlie son who was to tiansmit his dal Im, pedigree to an admniiig posterity, wis an effort beyond his reason and su lienor to his philosophy lie could gladly have sienfìctd ins foitune or his life but the piesent trill convulsed and i e oniscd his 1 ttj spnit almost to fren¿y lie pi¬ tied Ins suffi nng hur —but he tould do no moie Loid Dilton imagined he hid now a duty to ptriorm to laun, bifoie be it lesolved to mike eveiy struggle to ha nish this unhappy pitdilection from his breast he knew that some ungenerous things nii 0 ht bt saul to the prejudice ot a young ladi, tquilly beautifil in peison inel
and exalted in sentiments To prevent the narrow idea of her having spread out any lures for lus affection, he put his own proposal of marriage, with her spirit¬ ed refusal of his application, into the hands of his father, entreating him, as the only return for his obedience to his com¬ mands, to do every justice to the person m question, and rescue her fiom the in¬ sinuations of an ill judging world, Thp Earl took the letters, when he peiused lhat of Laura, several tubutary diops of admiration tell upon the paper— he felt that he dared not give wav to feelings of so soft a tendency, he there¬ fore, retumed the letteis to his son, with a high Pulogmm on the sentiments and conduit of tlie object ot hm dfections. tioth father and son paitetl 111 a mc- lan#holy mood A few hours had îe- 1 3 vused
versed the favorite hopes, tlie project, and pursuits of both. Dilton lost all the gnety of spirits which hut torme ily distin 0 iiished hnn fiom his brother Chilles, uni love which cepi ils ill hu- min bungs, hid thus brou, it their ap¬ pui ntly opposite dispositions lo а /че/ foul Detonine, when lie wis gone, divnl,e il ill tint h id pissed to hi» ( luntiss nut hci diu B htcib 1 ulv Di loi une tl ein cd tint such in unim wis luipossibl —she legieüed that it vv ıs so nul p ul ıvuy homage to tin virtuous ťíťmts in 1 ici omplishment» ot I -ши I adı ! Iar mt wiped away a tin honilin eve—mill idy Louisa give aloudviwu which hr iki the reverie of hu filim ulu pimping ιψιιιι in ι vous muin ι ıskcıl 1 idy Louisi if she wis t letilt Receiving
Receiving a negative, he rind her foi her listlessness and after ι melancholy evening to all parties tluy severally re tired to then respective chambers
13
CHAPTER.
ΓΉΛΓΤΕΗ Λ III.
í HI family of Loid Deloiaint «as thus thrown into a chaos of confusion and ptiplexitj, but the Lai' had jet anothei mortification in stole foi himself—what this mollification . us, may piobably ere (his tune havı struck tin icadus—if so, it would lie supeifluous to tlucidate them any
iny f.uthcr, and il not, it ıs so much foi the authors interest to keep them m the daik as long as possible —that they must toigivc lum if he avails bim«tlf of a fa- scurable circumstance, and declines say¬ ing any moie at present. It is the art of a dramatic sinter lo ex¬ cite supuse by unexpected incidents hut Inslantudt ıs sutlu thin that of the mriator ot a itili met—he mis 1\ац- geratt to a trreitcr dcgite, but truth and mime, (though peihaps equally imperi¬ ously demanded by the sound tntic,) are not so minutely calcul iteti by the pene- rality ot sptttttors, who ss annul with scenes of chstiess, or animated by posi¬ tions mesistiblj comic, give sent to the emotions of tht heart, svnhout a mathe¬ matics pricision m the rules of the understanding, ι -Ί, The
Ihe consequence of lhe di dogue ìelat- cel in the preceding eh qitei between the I ni e f Deloi une and 1 old Dalton gavt use to s ime circumstances ol a delirate md otin is of m nupit isant naturt lhe Lul had hv ed in It ng habits of in tını icy and fnendship with the Duke uf Montcastlo, and his amiable famdj 1 veiy thing conduced to cement a fin nilship ι onimi neid lineter tircumstaii eos so atispi. ι his —High bnth fortune spiniti«! illi шс t ' even cucumstance tended to (litter the nitural prejudices of Delor mu Hi h id sin,ltd out I idv Sus ıı, fi m her,iihshdivs ıs tl e wile of his I neti Chults bv this union In txpicttd to ıaıst his joiin,ist to ι h vel v itli lus eldest son md m Uns hoje cxpictul to iesi 0 ii
resign his declining years to ease and gra¬ tified ambition rhe unlucky passion 1 tad Dalton Ind conceived foi Lima Τ tinpest, thrtati ned to involse thost tong tl iboi iteti plins in dithtulty and doubt bold lohn lo\cd the two orphans with a tutdtiutss ttpud to tint which the fondest J ithcr could conceive toi his own оПаргпц licin ν was tht grand Muidiul, by which lit re gulated all hisitleisot human Hittilet t, ot manly Mitin —1 uni was tpııllj tht objett ol his ıdmıntıoıı he would hive thought the puun, who olitami il tht haml ot tins iiitticstin, i «.attui, more highly 1 1\ -"mud bv fortui , than πι the possession tt \ iin^e ι t injur s Jo tins opinion lus , Pulli l)i ıtlıeı hiti t vi ι hontet \ uh dilti mt md ul ttion ht Ind rcmits.nl 111 ill I ч I lohn OX 111 .s hh. ni ılı pi siti 1 ot lib (οι- I lu 1
tune in then favour by the sicnfice of his own worldly interests, lie h u! prosed the miceiiti) of his intentions That he would take part in all his biotliers feel¬ ings was theiefore eiidcntand palpable Frem all these concurring circumstan¬ ces, Lord Delorame hid moie thin slight grounds for suspecting that a rupture be¬ tween tho two families, would be the pio- bable consequence of the scene whicl) had recently occurred His lcvolving policy, naturally sought for remedies against the threatened evil, in this dis¬ tress it occurred to him, that Mrs. Anne Scudamore was the only person in the family who лэв not attached heirt and soul to the young Tempests Prudence counterbalanced his exact ideas of the rule of right, he felt that he stood m need of an ally , his present situation of affairs required the nil oi some person, and
and ae it ıs a Λ n't observation, that "a " drowning man will catch at a straw, " dunng the eomulsise stuigglc of de- " spair "—so Loid Delciiiuite m his fluc¬ tuations of micei tamis яи <^ doubt, lesolv¬ ed to as ul himsell ol tin iss'stanee of Mrs Scudamore Such a step, under suth uicumstmces. wa» not highly complimentary to the lady, but his lordship's knowledge of the world, and natural penetiation had en¬ abled him to discosei a leading tiait in the character of this elderly maiden— to wit —a vast inclination to be buss Like manv othei females, Mis Scuda¬ more, had much spaie time, ss Inch she, with equil hberalitv anc! profusion, was ever uady to bestow upon her neigh¬ bours , some of vs hom lias mg famihts to regulate — chihhen to attend to — and ι ') other
other frivolous and unfashionable pur¬ suits of the same nature:—were not so grateful for this unbounded generosity, ns the (huor might expert. To be ent- pfoyeűin the business of others, was al¬ ways gratifying to her. She imagined that it gave her a consequence in the eyes of tho world. She made many morning calls, in which she generously .listened to the complaints of wives and daughters, when they happened to have any to make; and when they Itati not — thinking that life has need of being kept in motion by the excitation of the passi¬ ons, she endeavoured to persuade them that they really ¡«re very ill used— lho' poor tame salpili ι features! but for her benevolent .sv^e,v//r,//.i, they would never have suspected what brutes and tyrants they were subject to. ίο these amiable, complacent creatures, the
the misters of families arc indebted for those little bret¿ts and gentle squabbles, which litejuently put the matlune of hfe in play. If asked whether the motives of Mrs. Scudamore (and indeed such a lady may be found in every street) weie founded on any real love of anaichy and mischief, I will exert all the candour such an m- teuogation will admit of—and answer boldly— No' —I do not really think that nine times out of ten any founded de/n n- otttj gives use to their loquacity, but those svho talk much, must talk of othei peoples affans. When tiuth will not lend her pencil, fiction will supply her place, and thus are facts altered, dimi¬ nished, exaggerated, and misrepresented, infinitely to the loss ol the unhappy sufľeici who is thus uiivnttin B ly made the subject of discus,ion Λ
Λ modern writer, and one who though born in our own times has proved himself a right good one —makes his hero, the quaint but manly Duke Aranza, deliver a maxim, which may be of singular uti¬ lity to any young gentleman on lhe point of entering into the honourable state of matnmony. The passage alluded to is this :— ■■ -------- .^ ----- no Coxcomb " Shall buz İni fuUonic ргаьм m ber ear, " Aı«\ sv.Lat чК tus m i\l tl iny, (sa « hiwelf,) " A mo t especial taste No meddling gWMp " (Who, having claw d or cuddled mio bondage " The tlilig mısıtam d ι husband, j nvatcly " Instructs lts4 (bring s¡ ints (о revoll) " S^jill, from ihe fund of hw expérience, teach her » When lordly mail coti bem bc made a fool of, " And how, tutt »htn, imi when, with most success, " Domeitic treines, ontìie v/omaii» side, ' * Are mede aud miß«! — " Ye that «ould Ime - bcdiuU «ive,, Icivatf " Ofmeddhiigw man·, Uni орпш cerc' 7ht Ηολευ Moon
This.
This is a digression perhaps—but with¬ out digiessing, I know not how to mark character, and with a real deference to the sentiments and opinions of others, avow tliat they are (to me) absolutely necessary for the developement of the subject mto which 1 have entered I flatter myself, perhaps, when I imagine tint what I have said will serve as an index to the disposition of Mrs Scuda¬ more. The Eail, therefore, penned m epistle to this lady, m which lie paid many high compliments to her taste and understand¬ ing—made her acquainted with the trans¬ action which had lately occuned between his son Lord Dalton, ond himself, ex¬ plained his motives for dtchning the honour, (as he was pleased to term it) ot an alliante with Miss Laura lempest,on whom he lavı hed evtiy encomium, and lo
to apply more irresistibly to the passions of the person he was addressing, con¬ cluded tins elaborated composition with the following paragraph —
" Knowing the general and undevi- " ating propriety, of tliought and con- " duct, which have marked Mrs Scuda- " more in all the trying and difficult si- " tuations of life, I tiave selected her as " the person to whom 1 am most willing " to pour out my heart A coldness " with the Duke, or his amiable brothei, " Lord John would tie to me a source " of the most lasting regret—of the most " profound mortification I am as sen- " sihle of the worth of Miss Tempest " and hei bi othei, as either of the above 1 mentioned nobluiit n can possibly be, " but
but, I should insult yom understand¬ ing, and their feelings, by entering into a too scrupulous investigation of seve¬ ral motives, which have prompted my denial One cause I may be allowed to state—my fortune though indepen¬ dent, is not very ample —by uniting Dalton to Miss Tempest, I should com¬ mit a viitual act of injustice to your niece, Lady Susan O'Carrol.—I have in truth, had some difficulties in so arranging matters, as to render my son Charles an eligible husband for the niece of Mrs Scudamoie It was only bv the mirna B e of my eldest boy to a 1 ni) ol foi lune, that I could ever flattei nivsilf with the hope of attaining an ol ijttt so desu able. I ti ust I need not expatiate longer on this subject, 1 Iı iv t already taken up too much of joui valuable time, which nom can appi) to bettir puipose than yoursılf. " i
" I have, therefore, to entreat your dis· " criminating judgement in this affair—I " hai e earnestly to requtst you to do " away any idea of disrespect to a most " amiable ı/omu* /adı/, in the minds of the " Duke and his brother Loid John. To " such in experienced pilot have I thus " applied, that 1 in ikt not the least doubt " of bang safe ll, steeud through all the " rocks and shelves of delicacy and diffi- " culty with winch i find myself tn. " virontd. In tlie language ol flattery I " was never an idept, and am now too " far advine eel to commence my studies " anew, thus fal, howevei, I must be " allowtd to sai , that among the numer- " ous, and iimvctsal aelmners of Mrs. ' Stiiiliinore, none tan be more sincere " than he who Ins tic honour to sub- " suıbı himself, " &c «.с. &f. " Deloeaim;." Ihe
The policy of the Earl, if not the pro- pnety, was certainly displayed in this soothing address. The mind of Mrs. Scudamore, as we have somewhere be¬ fore had reason to observe, was already but too well prepared to take any im¬ pressions disadvantageous to the orphan objects of the care of Lord John O'Carrol. Here was, therefore, flesh food for her spleen, antl new mattéi for her invettive. If she lovetl any thing, or any person ш the woi Id it was her nitce, Lady Susan, she had long thought hei ill used by all parties, hut this last event made her coldness use to a species of hatied agamst the unconscious uuoflending Lauta. She had ,ilwa\s thought this young peison (as she was p|. iset! to term htr) tieated with moie defueiice than was due toher situation, and it vexed the piotici heait of aunt Anne exce-sivel), to see htr phced on a kvil, in every particular, with
with her own niece. A marriage with Lord Dalton would, she svell kneiv, make her the equal of Lady Susan, and give the young thing a precedency over her¬ self in drawing rooms and assemblies. " Superiori '-death and torture ' vdiat a curse, " But an infen r nnt dipi ndent — worse ' There hati hitherto been a mild en¬ gaging soit of humility in the conduct of Miss Tempest, that had disarmed malice itself. Her temper was so equal, and her gentleness so unresisting, tint the mind and heart must have been callous indeed which could haie wounded her happiness or hint her sensibility. Even the niit- able Mis. Stilliamole had felt herself softened in the presence of Laura, and had fiequently toigotten how much she and her broth« stood in the way of the interests of hei own favounte niece. But judging
judging fiom het osvn heait, md meisui- ing the sweet girl by the stindard ot her ov* n inoiitilqu ihfie itions, umt Anne wis fearful lb it tht ex ılı ıtıoıı ol 1 mn, woiilj do nny the whole tinudils ol her cha¬ racter, uid tllirt the lespeet tf hu de¬ portment to hei piesent stıpıuois TliQSt sshoait themstlscs enn,iii,and senilt to peisous citi ated ih vi then own sphere of lift, m D inirillj ι ixious to repay thur ow u ih.uits и h it ıs lost, m suth m ut nt hy ııı mei vi multai supenoiilv ovu such unlocks bjittsas hut tbt ill toi tuut to depenei n my sort up ııı then huniotiisoi с ipntcs Mrs Semimin pul, id I uu ι bv the above uhui isuiuuuit S|u li I utd ш ifiitti tisionnuct wnt r ol Iu pustiit centim, tint when the Dei,I nule his visit to the woild, ι few sı us igo he left
left one favourite maxim behind him toi the benelit of mankind— to wit. " When we have attained to riches, power, or honours, by the aid, patronage, or assistance of friends, to turn our backs on those very patrons the moment we have accomplished our purposes by their means." . Mrs. Scudamoie, a perfect Machiavel in worldly politics had admired the deep sagacity of the above axiom, and as she knew that Laura had read the author alluded too, made no doubt but that she would, likewise, well know how to put such a theoru into piaetice To see the late dependent of a noble family, exalted to a rank equal with the proudest of thein, was a bitter draught, and to have Lacly Susan's future income curtailed to gratify any othei person, added accumulated vexation
»exation to the weights of disappointed pride When she read this letter to the Dnke, she felt a conscious certainty that his Grace would enter into all her own feel¬ ings on the subject, and be roused from ţsvhit she hid formerly denominated) his state of apathy, md insensibility, и hen he found thit his own daughter vas to be injured in every partiéul ir, by the ro¬ mantic piejudices of her uncle Insto id of anger, however, the deepest tiaces of concern and melancholy were impressed on the f e itures of the Duke of Monte istle lit was mxioiis tint no¬ thing should ebstructthe harmony of two fimihes about to bt tousoht! itcil into one, by the marmge ot his daughter with the mentorious Lb ules he felt much concern it uiy idt ιοί tolchitss, 01 abena tion
tion with respect to Loid Deloiaine, but his affectionate heart could not weigh the cold dictates of prudenc", in the siine scale, against the more refi, 21Ì energies of fiaternal affection. Polite is the lan¬ guage ol I ord Deloiaine's letti r appealed, there yet seemed enough in it to shock the delicacy, and awaken the irritability of Lord John O'Cauol. Before the time he bad been afthe te d with his dieadful malady, the temper of tins unti ippy nobleman had ihv iys bten violent, quick, and impetuous —I led from the dawn of youth 111 the itmeli school ot naval smcenty, tlic tang u i,e of the heait lis the only out lu hul iver accustomed himself to make usto! Io aitifice and disguise, he was a sli ingcr, and had never digested the intuitili code of politeness, ivhith icdtiecs O ooduil! to a meic jingle of words, and instructs uitn m
111 the arts of doing an unkind act in « speciously plausible manner. The Duke who loved the very errori of his brother, had always rather admired than blamed the open fervor ot his chaiacter he had indeed participated in Ins affection,and attachment to the joung foundlings. Instead, therefoie, of giving vent to any explosions of anger or resentment, he very highly irritated and offended his sistei, by Ins coot manner of exclaiming. "Lverj one mustjudge tor himself'—1 cannot entei into tht feelings of Loid Deloiaine " Mis. Scudamore looking as cold as a Ithiuiiy morning, and bndling heiself up with ineffable starchness, rejoined— vol. m к ' tînt
" But I presume \ oui Gl ire (an put yourself into the Lari a situation " " Τ can, inadım —1 r π likewise sı/m- pattine with it must tiuly— lut at the same lime 1 know nnt how to cast any blau e t u lord D ıltc n as for the sweet 1 aura »he Ins ictccl like an nigtl her с induct must render her lespecttd by tin world and fullv justify ill the partia¬ lity of my brothel " ' Aye aye—that's coming to the point it once my lord—the p n titthtij of youi brothu is the pi mum nobile, as deai Dc ttor Glynne calls it of all the mischief which has lakm pi ice It w as h s par¬ tiality wh ch has already robbed our dear Susan ot htr inheritance, and by his pii- tiahty she is likely to iorfeit a 1 irge jior- tion of wlnt her fatlier in law can give tiu О my conscience, it is wtll we have not many stub nnd fit aks of pii- tnlity,
tiahly, or we should have beggars and vagrants rolling in their carriages, while noblemen and nghtful heirs to fortunes, wert trudging it in the streets. ' Be /usi 'befoie you ure generous' was always a im\im of mme, and I am sine that I have both law and gospel on my side." Instead of pioducing the desired effect, ihis bioad hint at his brothels infirmity, ideied to the oblique sncei on Henry and Lima, tended to tui n the inmost heart of the Duke igainst tlie speaker he smo. thei td Ins indignation, howeier, tinder an appeal ince of cist, and tranquility, but thus disguising Ins senlimeiits, he made her teel the full foice of her impropiiety, is his dissimulated sang froid gave acii- mon\ to his ïepioof, and pungency to his batne. " Vour maxims, madam," sud hu Grace, dull, " aie geneially to he appiè· к 3 ciated
ciated bj a mathematical investigation I know that the virtue of ch inly is, with you, loiiffned in the most rigid lines, the most scmpulous stgmcnts 1 must be allowed a greater latitude in mj pmctice of the cardinal virtues—and being a grcatei sinner than Mrs Anne Scuda¬ more, maj reasonably be allowed to feel a liitit more lenity for the failings of otheis Your philosophy is likewise of a moie stoical kind than inme, you make no distinction of persons I am weak enough to feel a sort ot natuial affection for the beings with whom I have been brought up fiom infancy, and though I own myself hurt, whenevei I hear benevo- lence redieuted, or inhrmity treated with disrespect or irreverence yet have I the courage to confess, that my rt puguance is not at all lessened, because my bi othei happens to be the person calumniated." With these words, and a piofound bow did
did the Duke lei e the mom Mrs. Scmlamoi e's fate v\ s ıs ied aj scarlet. She tinned to Latl\ Susan, and askı d her, what she thought ot suth treatment as tins,—in hei own piesent harrassed, tor¬ tured, and imceitam state of mmd, this sudden scine of perplexity and confu¬ sion, was a cucumstance of the most dis* Messing nature. Not knowing how soon she might have occasion for the affection and kind mteifeieiice of her aunt, she dared not say all she thought of the merits of hu deal fntnd Laura ; and to uttei a woid lo hei prejudice, would have been an act of ticachcry and baseness, of which, with ail its mconsiderateness and folly, the heai t of this d nigliter of fashion and sonovv was incapable She therefore stamincieel out a few exculpatory senten¬ ces, m favoni of her father, in terms as plausible .is the shoi I time allowed for tin ir an ıııgı mcnt, would admit of. к 3 Instead
Instead of appeasing, this ineffectual eflbit only tinde d to louse tlie aheady wakentd icsentmt ntsotilrs Suidamoie, who ait usui liti m a political kind of jaitron,of vvlnth she was uiy loud,—oi deserting htr ally, and binding subsidies to tht tmmy. " I'oi whom but you am I thus an- moiis, Laciv, Susin'" con'iiiiiicl she, "I have no hopts—no wishes of mv own,— I li IVI. 110 piospi its tt) fulfill—no ont to live ¡01 butyoiiiitlf." " Ah' do not sav so"—ansvvued Sushi, (wlio ciltlini^ tin sn,'„tsfiein fieni liei aunt's pulitital mania, nsolviil to plav ой u tısı ıh Iti (¡une, upon ıhı old maiden,) " do not - ıy so, my diai madam'—jou have otlu is besült joui pool 'msan to think oil— otlu ıs who know how to admin your silisi —to va¬ lue your accomplishments' ' By
By in easy ρ issngt of the affections of the mind, win u 1 iv itu uujtlit descube, or Lt lhun cic lintit hut which I nil mt idcquite to cspiess bv words the wunklcs on tht f nun id ,f tuut Anne -.nduillv ,ινοιι n lo tli simpe i ol ex pect ıtıoıı, ml moodiness ul placidity. Thus iftti the crpin his bten agitat¬ ul bv th m шиш, tillovs, ind lho iude elírnia ot 'lit winds it inks toi lind ol „tii'ii undulation while the uiuspti ot sili /pphus il, ne upples the w nt with ılınıp! iu -.ıııtlc tunine} If tlu sundt will ııı t ι tpuss mv uu in m 0 , 1 must intioit tint the un t m ıtıoıı may couq İtli tht uiitiplii Such α pisal., hl VtVll, f 111 liti Цео1Ь vio¬ lenti to placidity tud s 11 p| ıc ι ıtıoıı, wis cutıı ılv 'ıı untest iri uut Anne— who give ι hilf e ood huiiiouritl —-
к 't " ľsha —
" Psha'—psha' child'—what do you mem'—who can you alinde too'" " ЛЬ' invdtai aunt' how injurious is tint ipiestioii to Doctor Glynne '" " Doctor Glynne, Susin 1 —Oh Hea¬ vens' you e innot think that the Doctoi's innocent attentions to mc—mean—mean any thing moie th in----------" " Come, come aunt-—mu must not «eek to blind me tint w n tht attentions whith the Doctei pivs you, ue, I mi sine, itiy innocent, ml vuv bonom ible, a woman like inu m the puun oí life, with a figure uiniiip un tl bv the ι iv i^ts oi tune— amme! stoicei with a knovvhcUt of the best authors — ılı ' in iel un ι in ui of fifty bkt the Dm ι— constimi in ultis —ill literais pursuits uns without any slinder bc siispictcd ol sonu Мши; morc Ilım ι mere platonu, pıssıuıı " ' I
" I vow Lidy Susan —you— vou — quite derange me —I hopt soni tither the Duke hisnottiktn suth i vvl un into his head, if he his, I un sini ll u will he no beating it out of lum i 0 ai ι do w h it I can " " My father, deir unit, is not blind, and the eyes of Doctoi Gly nut m not dumb I htard theni both igiet it Margite, that you woulel linke lhe best wife in the world '" " Did youi fathei siy that'" 1 He did indeed, madam " " Youi fither, Susan is ι man of pe- netntinii—lie his míny excellent cjiuli- ties—1 she uhi be sons tint ms wiiuith of tem|)Pr of mine should o eisi m ι told- n s«—tell lum so my el iryil—tell lum hi ι wise tl it if my cxpiessions hive к tended
tended to displease lum, ot Lord John, I—I— roeret it—h\ llic way, docs the Doctoi dme hei с to day T " " lit does, madam." Mrs Scudamore looked at the class, and obseivmg that Buxton had dress¬ ed hci head tu¿httull>, cordially shook Lady Susan by the hand and left the loom. By tins ai tifico did the pooi ε,πγΙ elude the stoim for the piesent, she knew hci auntb weak side, md h id ihusdexteiously availed huself of the knowledge, to de¬ precate the an»ei of a pusnna^e, who piacticed but 11 that beautiful lesson in the Lord's Piayei, which inculcates the ioigivcnestj ot tiespasbcs, as the stnct condition upon which we alcali to ex¬ pect the remission of oui tiansgicbsions. ко 'Ihe
lhe sul ji rt unitei ol Loid Deloriine's lettéi gm Un Duli vi ıy senous uiiiasi- ucss, ıltlı ıı„lı he did nnt thmk fit to gıvt w iv D th ıllıbuıl ι ıı nielli es of Mis Seminimu ln v s lu lu m bung insensibil to tn di u »u pi lic un tit m uhu h he ms pinul Πι in m fai ther stil!, ht lun mul that tht litt ι vi η ts hul tvei tim jilii ι nul ıh u h hbcial as thi most ot nu η ι in ι illi irt lie had somi ti iv silti li I. li ,,s of w luth the nest of mui ^if tin inniost nussas oí tlitu hurls conili bt ι muhik il) ut not able, totally ·.> niv st I u insili ıs ine inli ι s s if linnsilf ui 1 I muly had cirtaiiily 1 tui İni t iiijuiully Ihe ш- teiltiing Im vo nt ι ol ι botim, to¬ waids thi unlnppy tbjt ts whin hi hid ns utd houi t'u ott in \ll this wis l ithir шит en cut to him but ıhı ri was this tlilltrtiict Lei iv 11 n the brotlıu and tin siatu in mj subjitt u luth did not tx telly
exactly square with their ideas of worldly interest The Lady was oi opinion that the whole world ought to give way to her interest» and tint the mam/ were bound to accommodate one, wherias the gen¬ tlemans small philosophy taught him as things go, somethins must be sicre- ficed to the world, and that an individual could hardly expect tint a collective number of beings, with Acuities equally rational, should sacrifice every thing to the gratifications of a solitary membei of their commurntj. It is reported of the inhabitants of cer¬ tam countries, that when they are offtnd- ed with a particular person, they intoxi¬ cate themselves with opium, till evtiy faculty of sense and feeling is extinguish¬ ed, andın this mattonai condition over 1 throw, maim, wound, and trample on eiery object animate, or inanimate till
the^
they reach the pirticuhr being svho has excited their ttrotity 1 he passions of Mrs Scuditnore acted like opium on her limited nerves, md robbed her of evciy faculty of justice, or disciimimtion, she blended guilt with innocence, and involuntary offences with intended insults Laura, though harm¬ less, excited her indignation and she forgot that the high spirited girl had act¬ ed ι part more svorthy admiration than deserving censure that she could not ivoid the passion svith which she had inspired the brt ist of Dalton Iíutsvhere prejudice daikensthe mmd, the spells oi delusion it svountl iround the human hen t ss Uh tentold s ugnili Ceni nis, me¬ nt talent honom md inte 0 iity, miy spreid their auuiiitiiig rithanct with futile ellons fo is the gi/tr on the lltasens, nul thi 1 ut ι s of η itme svheıı hi contimi ' llLb ,nul '' ul ms ton i" bin tions
limitions thiougli the medium of a san¬ guin slin d nyst il, sees the blaze of the sun dunu [slitti, uiti lhe verdure ot the spuug enibiowiud with the dirk tint of parting antlının so не tbr ıboıe-men- tıoneel viituts converted by the eye of préjudice to enois, faults or failings Ίο have weeded thtse prejudices fiom the mine] of Mis Липе, would have exceed¬ ed the abilities ol theoiator, 01 the jilulo- sophei, they clung to her closely, as the ivy clasps the oak lhe ix of the wood man might level the lofty ttunk to the eaith, but he could not dissevri the tend¬ rils twisting lound it with |>ertuiacious vigoious embrace The Duke, on the other hand, was ι e idy to do eveiy justire to Нищ and to Laun lie knew the lonnei to be oossessul of a soul too iubit too cajia- cious, to be r ip ible of иЬшинц an idea whith could tend, in the most chbtant de¬ gn t,
giee 1 1 the dish noin of tither his patron 01 hunselt I le ould not w ondi r at the pırtı ihly tit Ins bıotheı Ilı ti ok thtm into tht tııcle 111 tion il «insilici ıtıoıı — he pomicici! on their suintions —their mı nts and then cini ıcteıs— he weighed them in tht scile of piştice and they sveit not found wanting Ilış Grice s mediations on these ın- tncatt uid perplt\ing otturrtntts wue interrupttti by the ippeuuice of bir Aithui Conserv The presence cl the youn., Biiontt ssis somtsslnt itceptible to the Duke is thtre w is a cnciimstincc lit pirticulirly dtsned to communicate to lum In tbc huny ninth lud at¬ tendu! the funihts itaviiit Mn, Ut ht hid foigotttn to settlt with lilt landlord of bib bıotheı s httlt cottige for the stipu¬ lated lent being it tint time iincutain whethei he wis hulise lt to lttuin to his i muly or no V hen
When he mentioned this occurrence to his и nd, ılıt Tumble and accommo¬ dating 1 ul instantly exclaimed— " Oh, my dear Duke' now do give me a commission to rattle down to Mar¬ gate and settle this business 7 —I have left my sulille horses there, and should like a roll down to fetch them of all things Isovv do' there's a goodnatured creature—do ask guardy Glynne to let mego, οι," added he, turning to Mrs. Scudamore mil smiling in her fice with the most lisi mating insinuation, " per¬ haps i/oit, my (liar ш id un, will indulge me bj using jour ill powerful interest — come, come aunt—don't shun Abraham, we ail know now matters stand in that quarter, conn—quick—agree—piesto'— and I'll tell you what I will do for jou in return " " What' nephew " " Why
" Why, when the ceremony tikes place—-anil I'll tile the long odds it sso'nt be more thai ι tsselvcmonth , I'll putoim thepirtof ΙΊρι it lhe tutmons, indgive jou way to mv guiichiu—yes' 111 heston youi lui huid i n hun nijself, ıs i ıtvvıııl I n youi good intuir, ind I don't I now but I hive is good ι light to dispost ol sou is my bodv in tht whole world bun 0 soul eklest sisttisonlv son " Iht coloni of unit \niic it this dis- comse issutTicd ι tinge, winch 1 cinnot pxietly compile to the suffusion of the Rose lo ,ive in idt ι ol ihtexcici coloni, 1 must boirow ι simile fiom my very gioii li unci, tht huni ι ins iutilor of Uus¬ in, tht Wind, ι liu r hibl composition, which those win . in uthu su οι nid svuln ut Itelm, ι stum, impulsion ot the iisilili muschs must pi s es 11 ,ι his of ine vi Inc h ıs bs ne mt ı ıs iole ın\ cd Vcotntıy bumpkin lus delivé el in mi- p issiontd
passioned love epistle (by mutake) fiom a young foitiint linntir, toan antiquated spinsttr. Whtn the c ngt ι wnter ιη- qiiius the pliy-icil rlluls which his lit¬ ter has pioibieul on his Ian dulliini, he puts suini int. ι. ,itorns to tht rustic messe ιι,ι ι, and .tining othus the fol¬ lowing — " Ι «φρι с lie blushed hi ι Пои ! Am ' I İl ılh t— iu, likt il' υ Сиплое And tn su th li nth, tin ijniv Unt min¬ ţiţii if th ints nt nunii nt nn Uit стека of Mis Si u' unni, mı, ht bi moie aptly applied lu ıhı pl intui the hilt 'au, ln in com,) nul tu ılıt pu. ui al bud ol ıhı ilt, ч (.tn 'a Mid if« ι all, l'ine ni,. In m mv u om u i lus ui linul to thmk u ι In .pus ni ni n и ,-,ι ι „ind ι ι Ы, im In t ι il ι . ııv flown in tl t u u Id, 1 t pıt s s ıy vv li ılıvit tiny vuil But
But,—" de qusttbus пои dispuftmlitm'" ill plam English,—" thei e ıs no aıguıngoıı tastei" she did blush, let bei blush be compiled to what we will—iud stam¬ mered out— " Atilice' a trute my dear ш phi w' you ıeaty mil on at a most unnici uful rate, tin subject is a delicate—a most imputtanì— sympathetic—but no moie — y ou confound—confuse mt. liiivieitr, as sou stun tt) wish it so very t ııneslly I «.<//ask tin Dottili to оЫцо you. \ou binili ι," continued shi, adihissiug the Duke, "1 pie unu havt no objection, ind 1 vsili tioubV Sır Altlım to pıy the nulluni a little bill iui me whith 1 ioı 0 ııt " lhe sonili diunk lus unity heul at hu, hb hm mli bim .sis nupu, inte ιν il u tillive un md D . uitin hutu itu, ıs lit i Ulle i olit¬ oli,
" Oh' fie' you ,iddj cicituit '-but I pıomıse to do ci u ν thınr· it you only peisu idt gundy ' The Doctoi it lint moment enttiing the ipirtmcnt, he sci/e d him by tlie h md, and without illoismg him tme to piy his devoirs 1 1 my om pusou piesent, led linn up to his u nt, jome I then hinds with the utmost grsvity (while tin Duke inti Ins diujitei weie disile e lies oud meisuit to couinl the ι moti ns silneli tons uisi il their risible or ins) the lîıro¬ net conducted them both to thi hick di using room with the utmost suious- ness ind solemnity mtnly sıyıııg — ' Mv dur Doctoi Glynne, Mrs. Studimoit is it this piiseni moni nt most paiticuliriy me lintel to livour sou with t privite audi uci I wis ditrr- miiltd, theiefoie, to follow the dnnt lilt and chrisli in like piiccpt, ol doing is I would
would be done by, and allosving you the earliest opportunity of piohting by her condescension " He then without iny ceremony, im¬ mediately shut them in together 1 he moment the door w ıs closed, Lady Susan gave vent to her mirth. Sir Aithur placing his finger on his hp, walked to her on tiptoe, and svhispered in her eir " God bless you Susan, don't let the old yrl suspect tint I mi tipping the quii upon hti, sht'd nevei forgive me for such a dead hoax, as long as she lived " Lady Sus m patttd his cheek and give him it the same moment ι nod of afhrmition llu good natured Duke knew not how lo ic t VV ith ill the fault» of his sister she hi 1 sime useful qu ilities which untitled lui in oljtttoi respect to
to him She had lived with hım si Ion· lhat habit aloni had mnde hu an inte testing being to him and though he pi¬ tied her ful nts and contemned the nanowhess of bei general sentiments he did not fiel pitast d at bung madt ι paity concerned in an> thing whicli tend¬ ed to rendir hei openly ridiculous Yet there was somithing so comical in the scene at the present moment, passing before his ι ves thit his se itiments weie croped and divided, and he felt in equal disposition towards laughtci and displea¬ sure While his ideas were in this situation of cquipoiidennte the do r of the luck dnvvin 0 mom was sudd uly ic- openiel and Mrs Same «uh in ince¬ dile self complaît nt smirk ι ıı hi ι tonn¬ ten ince, enti nd followed by tht Dottor Sidling up to hei y mn petitioner who stood wilh a wot ful 1 ngth of counte¬ nance as if fearful of his approaching sentence
sentence, she informed him thit his re¬ quest was eoinphtd with " th ie v/as no irsistmg the com¬ mands ol Mis Sudamore," aaid the gal¬ lant Giyimi. Sir Aithnr, tiansported with |0V, flung his arms round tin nick of Mis Aunt, and gave her a salute somewhat resembl¬ ing the crick of a waggoners whip Stanicei by this novit, and unexpect¬ ed modt of leturning thanks for a favour, Mrs Stud more could stiietly lecovei her equilibuum, so overpowering was the eloquence of the joung lîıronet· affection Ί he gnvity of botti the Duke and the Dottor wi« staggued—thev eyed each othei a moment—when Giyime,
who
who loved a classical allusion to his heari, exclaimed— Δι.»>> St χλαγΓ» yiNT 1 ufyvçloıi Ею t " Tärnble ins ılın clang wluch iti ic I from bis gniden b»w 1 The application Struck Sır Arthur, who now no longer could resist his propensity to laughter. Mrs. Scudamore appearing extremely disti essed, and offended at this liberty, the goodnatured youth immedi¬ ately gave her a translation of the line, which in some degree subdued hei blushes, and appeased bei angrr. Nor was any thing horduiug on the pedant inherent in the charactei of Gljnne—the quotation arose naturally from the circumstance vvlnth had just occuned and if i unn may evei be ex¬ cused foi talking le anı dly before ladies, the opportunity, uid temptation, may offu some apology for the Doctoi Su
Ни Gi ite could resist no longc r, he burst out, ind the hehis hiving lus s mo¬ tion they toincel in ι bcirtv peil ofl iiigh- ter, which rung through ılıt ipirtititnt. Sır Anlını conscious e t tho mirth Ins «ally had creiteli uid be ing one ot those, who, when thev onci Itv lu Id ol ι good thing, aie nevn williii lì lit it drop, tuintd tow nils his lm Juu., guirdnn, with — " Пик m Doctor' don't come the ηιιοοι ovi r mc —ihouji, to hi suit the salute iisin/r/W ι ıtlıeı ıj >nr Λιν tlim mine —but ill ui good time ι ou know. Aunt Vime d nth ιη,,η, —hut pinion me mv bolhi s' upon my soul I didn't intuid the li ist hum " 1 Indeed—indeed Чц Aithurvoii hive quite fluttered imi tot illy disarranged voi πι ι mc,
me, you must really learn to be less boisteious, but you know your power— you know you may take a liberty, which I would not allow from—from— hat dly any other peison." " Hardt γ any other peison—oh' wlnt there ate somt other persons then, that------" Ileie lie looked intrgishly at Glynne, and might have gone too tal, hid not the prudent Doctor pievented him by a tap on tlic head, and—" Aye, aye, young- stei, its .ы.11 lor you that you aio such a favoritt with youi aunt " " And with eveiy one who knows his heait 1 " said tlic Duke, stiokmg the nng. lets fiom his bioad, optn, minly forehead, " Do' do' only be less giddy my dear Althin ' and I shall think you the most pci fet t
perfect ofjoin fellow beintrs—}0u lnve virtues suilicient foi ι tube of modern ν oung men of iasluon " " My de u ' deil Dul c'" said Conyers, icspectlnlly 1 bsing hisOncc's hind, " I know not hoiv I sh ill mike a suitable reply to youi kind, hut 1 tcir unmerited compliment but believe me 1 ein fiel, though I nm шс ip ible of expiessing my sense с I the Inji honoui join good opi¬ nion must coul ι upon me And now good tolls itlieu' lui oil to mouovv, and ι jolly time I'll lnve on t " " Ri nıeırıhtı my hoy "sud tlie Doctoi, " tein only allow jou three days ilişence from town lo ınoırovv is Sittudiy, and Moiidav ι holyd ıy, therefoie, as 1 can¬ not, nid will not allow you to neglect j out own duties, or set an ill example, by iiitiinging the rules of tht Semimiy L 2 to
to which you be Icing, on lucsdiv vou must be it λ\ eslmiusttr by ten it night " " I will sn, mdctd 1 " " ΓιιοιιυΙι — ) on r woid has ilways clue weisţhl wilh ше, w и hout the aid of any additional promises 01 pnte tations I nevei knew you to break it " "Norcvuslnlljou si I uevitlľ— Adımı voıııı, I idus ind i uu I veu le hive pi ett} wl ι n 1 m not here to 1 eep you ill m orde ι With these ν ricMic tori lis dei u ture, ind the mü и m vi ılı 11 1 to alttı I lum, le ft tou u in ι | < sl e li use ¡lid fom horses Little ot mv untei il consiqiiciict occiiiud
occurred el mng the uelc tht young (gentleman m il ing up fol lus tint di}s cul} usni;, bv sh | in, lin lust stiges of hisjoiiiiit} mel sı oıııııl w ıs h s ıc pose tint Hob lifted tum lunu one tli ust to tht othei without gu m, ш\ intcniip- tioii to Ins slumbcis When it I tsl however, he ıhıl louse hunself, his while tinplovinc nt wis lo limi} tilt pist boys nul lun keept ia, is much is if his w hult existente lituall} depended on the icloeil} with whith he w ıs to ι xee utt his pi ι sent expedition About S veu in tht evening ho w is set dow n it thi u 01 ci the inn it M u gite mei Invili, oıılucd his. tinnii ι , md dimmed no veiv smili qu unity of fish, flesh iowl, niti ρ ıstı}, ht stiolled outin south ot some nntisement to (ill up the tunc which now be,in to ht a little ь , heivy
heavy on hım It soon however occurr¬ ed lo his iccolltttion, tint Suncliy wis not the ııı ist pioptr el ıy foi the settle ment of business—he hid now, how¬ ever, leiched the little white Ceti ige, winch hid been oci upu d by the tunable lend lohn —md thinkni, tint the owners mijit cnteitun in unfile untile opinion of then lilt ten mt fioin tht lints nit having been yet pud he n scivcd tc) oveiccme his scruples iud immedutclv adjust the balance. Here he isked w hit w ere the damaçei ' md is lit h id ι consuli ι il le vv i\ to w dk itivis ntar eleven oilick btfoi tic get batk to his inn having stud (οι some tune conversing with tht luidle rel, who appeired to hım i cıvıl shrewd kind ol a fellow — lus sei vant, fiob, whose ittioli mcnt to İnin resulted tıoın ied ¿eil and gratitude, for sever il actsoi kındın as and humanity,
buniaiiity, had been considerably al irmrd at his veiling unisteis staving nut so 1 ite. lìob had txpiessed bis anxirly to every c naturt in th. inn, aud hul finteci the lu,lu st intenst m all then bosoms by the descuption he gaie ol him— " Loid love Ins y oung honoms heart 1 " cried Hob, " u any hai m was to happen to Inni, 1 ι inly think I should nevei know what it vv is to be h ippy a» 1111 —he is good to man, worn in, child, and horse. Why, at his last holidays, when jioor Holl ι ι uu a nail m his foot and w as quite lame, 1 asked hnn it I should send the beast t· the haminei,—no Uob, no— said he, he will be mule a hick-horse, and whipped and spiiired to death, it iv ould break mj hunt lo see it,—so Hob put hnn out to glass—it will only be a few shillings a week, and Rolla will be comfortable for the rest of his life, 1 haie had
hid a good tied of pleasure in nding him, and it would be dtvihsh ungrateful to dtscrt linn now lit is old and lame. " When m j poor sistci was brought to bed of tw ins, 1 asked Ins young hon¬ our leave lo go and visit liei, and as my quaiters wages weie nearly due, 1 macle so hold as to bog him to adı ince it foi me, as I wanted to make Sallı a bit of a present, foi hei husband, though amain honest mill, was of a sickly health, and could only tain his bread as a day woiknig garelcnei. I lis honoui put len glimtas into my baud, and told me to eurv that to iny sistci foi him, and Ilı it I should hive iny wages raised because 1 was such a heaiti fellow. " Ί hat wis not all—loid love him'— only think of his condescension—when Silly's
Sally's month was out he would go to ci hi ι— and think caudle with hır¬ ını! ι hppul lu r two little babies on his kinu, uni ttu re ho plaj ι d with llicm lust as if they linei been tin rliildieu nl any gnat 1 idy of his own acquaint¬ ance—and he would put h s finger into Unir little hands, and kiss and bug them, as liny lay smiling m his face. I don't oftrn crv but 1 ıhıl thin, and so did S illy too—Wc 11, the 1 ul of Ddo- îaine's garm ner m the country, died one cliv, mil mv master g. ts tin place fur Silly's husband, and theie they aie as ni it anil as snu, m ,ι little; ι e llow enti ,ι em thi gummis ' Ihn Im lisi guitldolks, b| ( =s you i-mi lun In, , li to lonk OVU Othlls Ild S) H, billig Silih a sim lu ilf, h, ıs I, llu- ind the chiklii n .tit as insy ıs apiles, .uni as lit
fat as butter—and Sir Arthur gives 'em white docks, and icd shoes, and blue sashes:—and he laughs so when lie sees them waddling and toddling about. For my part 1 oftrn thinks as he can't be a young gentleman, but some angel sent down to make poor folks comfoitablo and happy."
End of the T/tud Volunte.
