Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The nocturnal minstrel; or, The spirit of the wood: a romance
.^JlllJIIIIIIW«^ ÎHE NOCTURNAL MINSTKEL. СНЛР. I Tttl шпт »,ψρ.Ί *—it Ы S à .!> η$ fall ; 0*i, iţ cinse otr my tif lıic th« $wm ^ -*"Sth t Tfial bicarei upon » b»«% öf vtoku» Sîcaùxjï aKti g«ï^ç €нЬш. \Jlï, how enchanting are those n*>t^ ! surely some being from a happier vrorhl-— some spirit, or some heavenly chorister, visits these woods, to charm us w ith celestial minstrelsy ! Listen, Wimfrei!, but do not speak : Oh f what a ¿well was there» and what a cadence !" ¥ °i* i» в Sach
Such were the exclamations uttered at intervals by the Baroness Fitzwalter, as she sat in her oriel, during the twilight hours of a summer eve, listening to the- sounds of some unknown minstrel, which had then lately frequented the woods, covering the hills around the castle- sounds which came floating with bewitch¬ ing sweetness over the waters of the lake which washed the base of the tower in which she sat, and died away in lingering echoes, reverberated from the opposite and rather distant rocks. " Indeed, Lady," said her attendant Winifred, when the music had ceased for awhHe, " the minstrel, whoever he is, is right cunning in his craft." "Have you punctually obeyed my or¬ ders," resumed^ the Baroness ; " bit suffi¬ ciently ^known throughout my domains, 6 that
that I offer a large reward for the discovery of this io visible musician ? that I would gladly give him, could I see him, a thankful* recompence, for the entertainment he has already aiforded ine ? and even, should he be inclined ^ to accept it, a permanent establishment in this castle?" " Yes, Lady, these your orders have been published, but with no effect. Tiiis minstrel is heard, but never seen; from which it is plain, he either cannot or will not shew himsel£" "How! cannot Г u Why, Lady, ifit is a spirit—" "A spirit, Winifred Г " Ifit is* a spirit that haunts the woods, he may not perhaps have the power, even if he had the will, to assume a human shape, or indeed any shape whatever ; for a spirit, they say, is nothing but air; and в 2 if
if he could, he would probably have no mind to m eept jour Ladyships offers to come ami live with ич at the easile.** '* Nor, under such circumstances/ answered the Baioncss, smiling, *' should I desire his presence.—But soft, the music conus again, and seems, or my senses deceive me, to advance still nearer. Go, bid the seneschal step out and meet the stranger, and in courteous guise invite him to enter my walls/* u Hark !" cried Winifred, "did uot jou hear a rustling under yon trees r" Cť I did," answered the Baroness, ** but yet I believe it might be only fancy." ' c And did you not see somebody therer" " I saw what seemed like something; but it was only the moonlight shadow of tlie yew btside the bridge." ·· The
I heard no s tıp —h и \cry >*nnie/ ** M«uc liittu a ** n к hu> с î ||ь.ч1/ ¿ч.Л lhe Bigness '* ^ìiice thi·» my >t entais miîî$îrci imi began bis nightly vainui- ìngs tlíííHigii tbe>e womN; aud jet, m ».. that ilme, though yon assure me the mmt diligent search has been made for hi* dis¬ cover!*, nothing is or can be known: about him. Sometimes when all is hushed, when not a breche rutiles tise lake, or shakes tbe lightest foliage ofthe tree*, the enchanting intlody of that iute has bre.ke upon the silence of the night, in tones oi such extatic sweetness, that all my senses have been wrapt in wonder and deľ.giu ! And I have thought, Winifred, fur at times I could scarcely allow iny&tlf to think the strings of the instrument, whose sweet tones enchanted my ear, and seemed в 3 to
to wrap my soul in a temporary delirium, were touched by mortal hand, I have thought, that in approbation of the reso¬ lution I have long formed of devoting my days to widowhood, and the remembrance ofa husband's love, some benignant—some approving spirit hovers near me, perhapsr that ofmy long-regretted Lord." 44 1 should sooner think, Lady," an¬ swered Winifred, cc supposing the musi· cian to Ье a spirit, the spirit of the noble Baron, he would sooner persuade you* to throw aside your mourning weeds, and elect another happy bridegroom in hi» stead/than advbe you to pine in hopeless griefi as you now do, for a husband whom all your sorrow cannot bring to life agara." " I know, Winifred," cried the Baro¬ ness, 4 * that all roy grief is unavailing; it cannot»
cannot, as you say, bring him back to me." " Why, then, Ladj r , suffer it to take such deep root in your heart? It is now- near thirteen months since the news of üie Baron** death, after an absence of near two years, first reached the castle, and you are still drowned in tears for his loss, as though the event was but of yes¬ terday." ťť Can I weep too long for such a hus» band ? was he not all that my fond heart could wish, noble, generous, and brave?" "He was, my Lady; but he is dead and gone, and out of so many lovers——" " I am unable," interrupted the Baro¬ ness, "to find one, were*I so inclined, that I could even bear to think of as a husband.** " Had T the choice amongst them/* в 4 cried
cried Winifred, " I shoukl not long deli¬ berate : 4he young knight, Sir Reginald Hareland." <ť You are always naming this Sir Regi¬ nald, Winifred," said the Baroness. - " He is surely the handsomest man in England," resumed Winifred, " and the most accomplished 'knight. . He rides distinguished at the 'tournaments, and dances charmingly at the ball" *' He may be all this," cried the Baroness, " and even more, and yet I cannot love him." " Thfe greater your misfortune, Lady, for I am sure he*loves you." " I am somewhat doubtful on this point, Winifred,** pursued the Baroness. "Doubtful i what/when he has declared it over and over again ! when he swears he cannot live without you ! when he is mad
mad almost with extasy at the very sound of your voice, and looks (oh how my heart has ached for him !) as wan as a ghost when you have spoke coldly to him !" " He can sigh, indeed, Winifred," cried the Baroness, " most profoundly, and breathe the language of adoration at the feet of his imaginary idol, as well, or perhaps better, than anj' man in Christen¬ dom. He can look, too, most woe-begone. But these, Winifred, are not always the certain indications of true passion ; all this may be assumed : j^.t supposing he does love me, how can I give him my hand, when he is unable to excite in me tbe same sensations which he himself feels ? would not this be folly?—naj% would it not be madness? I am weary of his com¬ plaints and importunities; his perseverance is intolerable! 5 * в 5 " There
" There is but one way, Lndy,"returned Winifred, " by which you can effectually secure yourself from the solicitations of a love so sincere and so ardent as that of Sir Reginald." " I would know it then," cried the Baroness, " for in troth I am most heartily weary of him, and would give any thing to be rid of such a troublesome suitor." " You must marry him then, Lady." u Ah there, Winifred, you are right; the lover would soon be lost in the husband ; but in that case the remedy would be even more painful than the disease of vhich I complain. As the kinsman of roy late Lord, he has claims upon my re¬ spect; yet of late he has become pre- ^üifiîng —I had almost said impertinent; and I must positively invent some scheme to
to put an end to his present hopes, if he is stiil absurd enough to'entertain anj% and without any absolute rudeness on my part, drive him from my castle." " How, Lady !" exclaimed Winifred, "drive him from your castle! drive Sir Reginald from your castle! surely, my Lady, my dear, my noble, mj* honoured Lady, you cannot mean to be so cruel ! why, he would fall upon his own sword, or throw himself from some frightful pre¬ cipice; and how could you endure tó think of him, all mangled and bloody, от bear to see him, as you perhaps might, should his spirit (holy St. Agatha protect it!) not restin its grave, entering .your chamber in the dead of night, his face pale as ashes, his eyes rolling in anger, wakening you from a blessed sleep to be terrified with the dreadful visioni —and в 6 then
then tempt you bewildered to foîhnv it into some low deep cave in the rocks» or into the darkest recesses of the woods ! Oh horrible, horrible, Lady ! you will not sure drive him to desnair — vou will not allow yourself (I am sure I could not) to have to answer for being the cause of his death í No, no, no, rny Lady." íť Oh, never fear," cried the Baroness л1т1у, i{ he is too much attached to his own dear person, to disfigure it with a mortal wound; nor will he let his grief, at what you call my cruelty, in any degree hurt his health. But 1 cannot live thu$ continually exposed to the importunities of a man, whose beha¬ viour becomes irksome to me; he must therefore, and you, Winifred, may assist me in devising the means, be dismissed from this castle· In this we must, how¬ ever,
ever, proceed wich caution ; for îıe ts powerful ia the number ut Iìh %α&-*α!>, «a*«d in no little favour at court, aiul snìght therefore lie dangerous», if much olì* i«ded/* "Ala>! poor Sir Ktginalil! wha will tell bim? It will be death. Lady, death at once * " No more» Wiuilred* cried the Baro¬ ness ; ** will \ou never have done commi- berating thi> tuolUh knight r" *' Ob, mercy on иь 1 /* cried Winifred, ** His bwiy, as I was sajtiig, cut and mangled» pale, bleeding; his wounds, like so many mout lis, opened to accuse you alone, all alone, by your bedside ; the castle clock striking one ; the sheet that wraps him sprinkled with his blood, half raised at the left arm, to shew the death- wound at his heart—— и " Prithee,
fi Frithee, Winifred, make an end of thy horrible representations/ cried the Baroness, " or with a little of thy ima¬ gination, aided by the lateness and gloominess uf the present hour, I shall imagine 1 see a spectre gliding into some remote corner of my apat tment. Ale- thinks it already waxes late. What a clock is it, Wmified? I feel strangely wearied.** * É It is near twelve, Ladv; tîıe castle clock has already struck the quarters/' ** Leave me then to my repose/* cried the Baroness; ťí peihaps the invisible minstfil —Ah! while I speak, the strain, as usual at tîıe hour of midnight, comes sweetly swelling through the foliage of the woods ! Retire, Winifred, I would be alone—I would feast upon the eloquence of
of those sonl-subduîng sounds. Gøod night, and may the holy aogeit guard tit vou ! Winifred withdrew, and the Baroness retireci to her bed : as she sunk upon her pillow, the mu-ic advanced nearer; it seemed almost to approach her window. The sti ain wm sweet, but %ui ; it became more and more plaintive; and as she listenet! ¡n wrapt nná silent attention» it seemed to come immediately unde lier casement Kot altogether uninfluenced by the late representations of her attend¬ ant, she likened, trembling lest some supernatural object should meet her eye; her heart beat quick ; she trembled as she listened. At length, taking courage, she approached the window. She gazed around, but coukl discern nothing ; for a heavy cloud had enveloped the broad disk of
of the moon, aml not a star twinkled in the skv. She even ventured to call ;— no answer was returned. The music stopped wdien she hatl spoke ; but the strain was quickly resumed : it grew fainter and fainter ; the rounds receded tou ard the woods, diet! away in a sweet, but mournful cadence, and all around was hushed in silence. The Baroness won¬ dered—was astonished; but unable to account for these mysterious sounds, she returned to lier bed, where she long lay lost iu conjecture, and imitated by vanous surmises, till nature at length jieldctl to the stillness of the midnight hour, and she sunk as by necessity to sleep.
ŕ
СНАГ. .
CHAP. İL О mi Fetta»· ft Ш, Cle с*гаЫэ · queste ebe № ГШ1 AttoiTö« Geätrvbe, Baroness Fitzwalter, the occupier and now sole possessor of an an¬ cient but magnificent castle, situate on an extensive demesne, not for from the Scot¬ tish border, between whom and Jier atten¬ dant the conversation we have just related passed, was the widow of Geoffry, Baron Fitzwalter, a nobleman highly diştin« guished ny bis personal qualities, and who, in birth, title, and extensive domains* ranked
rents of the reigning monarch, who, fond of the pride of war, and plowing with military ardour, had offered their services in his purposed invasion of France ; little imagining il;it the shew of a siege at Boulogne was to terminate the achieve¬ ments ofthe boating King; and that avarice, and not glory, was with him the only motive of the expedition. From this period, though the Baron received manv marks of favour and distinction from the poliuc Henry, he began to entertain a secret disgust toward hi$ government. His neglect of the Queen, his cruel policy in respect to War¬ wick, who was then a close prisoner in the Tower, his rigorous treatment of the Queen-mother, the unfortunate widow of Edward the Fourth, his meau avaricious propensities, and the little regard he testi¬ fied
fied f^r the lioiviir and g! ny -f the Euc¬ lidi nation, aii coibpired to с^глис-' l-><s ffom the court, and to pruJucc a tc^ct for having offered аНесмпсе to so un¬ worthy а monarch» His disgust, however» for some lime was no otherwise expressed than in remaining absent from court, ami by inquiring, in common with other malcontents» u hether the pretensions of Simnel, who was now practising his impostures in varioin parts of the kingdom, were founded*in truth» But although the Baron was proof against the machinations and contrivances of the partisans of this pretender, he soon fell into a snare, not less injurious to hi> inte¬ rests and his honour than that he bad escaped. The imposture of Simnel was soon detected ; the real Warwick was produced, and the disappointed spirit of faction
faction again sunk into repose. Perkin Warbeck, concerning whose pretensious historians are not even' yet agreed, ap¬ peared in England, bearing the name and title of Richard, Duke öf York, and soon became a formidable adversary to the unpopular King. Margaret, Duchess of Burgundy, had recognized him as the second son of Edward the Fourth, liaving professed her belief in his declaration, that he had escaped from the Tower, when his brother the fifth Edward was murdered by Tyrrel, at the instigation of the tyrant Richard. This her conviction had obtained for this Duke of York the countenance of the King of France, and the support of the greater part of the English malcontents ; 'for the Duchess had sent her emissaries throughout the kingdom, to invite thither such
such of the English nobility as had been known formerly tc have attached them¬ selves to the interests ofthe York party. Of these, Geoffry, Baron Fitzwalter, was among the most forward in arms; for influenced by the representations of Cliftbrd, Lord Viscount Lovel, and others, who had seen the pretended prince, he went secretly into Flanders. Hewas welcomed by Margaret with every demonstration of joy, and introduced to Warbeck, whom he no sooner beheld. than seduced by the striking resemblance he really bore to the royal Edward, to whom he (the Baron) had been always singularly attached, than he immediately acknowledged him as his rightful sove¬ reign, and prepared to follow the fortunes of this daring adventurer. The
The intrigues and system of espionage practised by the King, anticipated and prevented the serious attacks intended by his adversaries ; and the distracted Baro¬ ness, to whom the real motive of the Baron's expedition to Flanders, and the consequences of it, were yet unknown, heard almost at the same instant of his death, and that an act of attainder had already passed, by which tbe Fitzwalter estates had become forfeit to the crown. Through the solicitations and interfe¬ rence of Lord Broke, the fatlier of the Baroness,' who in every emergency had proved himself a steady and faithful adhe¬ rent to the present monareh, this act of attainder was suspended, and permission granted the Baroness, to hold during her life the free possession of the demesne and
and estates of the bouse of Fifzwaltcr; on her death, they were to lapse to the crown. This was an indulgence which, consi¬ dering the jealous disposition of Henrv, his insatiable avarice, and the decided antipathy he entertained towards the Yorkists, mav appear somewhat extraer* dinary ; bu* it was proved that the Baro¬ ness wa* not accessarj', or in any waj' coneemed in the treason for whieh the Baron was attainted ; and the former ser* vices of her farnih' being taken into con¬ sideration, wdio had all of them been active in the support of the Lancastrian interests, a further grant was passed, seve¬ bil months after the death of the Baron, enabling tiie Baroness, on certain con¬ ditions there specified, to transmit her posesión» to her farnih·. vol, i. ·: i UAP.
ШМ^Ш»ММШШИ»МИИ«МШШИМЕИ»
СНЛР. III. How does he bve me ? W ith adorations, with ferule tears, Wiih groaas that thunder love, w:th sîjţhs of fire. SHAKESPEAR. It was from her father, Lord Broke, that the Baroness first received the melancholv intelligence of the Baron's death ; the particulars of it she had learned from Sir Reginald Hareland, a gentleman nearly related, on the maternal side, to the family of Fitzwalter, who had been long on terms of the most friendly intimacy with the late Baron, and from whom the Baro- 6 ness
ness herself had received many proofs of regard, After tbe death of the Baron, as soun, and indeed sooner, than was consistent with the laws of delicacy and decorum» he became her professed admirer. Out the Baroness, though she had respected him as a friend, and. ow ¡ng tu the con¬ nection wdiich subsisted between the fami¬ lies, and his intimacy with the late Baron, had suffered him to pay her a vbit of condolence a short time after bis death, refused to receive him as a lover ; η ir could he, by any arts ami expressions of tenderness and affection, vanquish or un¬ dermine the steady and inviolable гею- lution she had formed, of rejecting every alliance that might offer, however noble and advantageous. Young, ardent, and cntcrprizing, of a с С disposition
disposition inclined to resist wayward cir¬ cumstances, rather than to yield to them, Sir Reginald could neither determine to abandon the pursuit, or resolve to sur¬ mount the passion he felt for this emi- ψ* nently lovely woman, who, had beauty been her only charm, possessed a suíľicieiit portion ofthis quality, to have enslaved a heart far less susceptible of its blandish¬ ments than was that of Sir Reginald. The Baroness pitied, and then reproved the warmth of a passion sbe determined to discourage ; for she felt herself utterly unable, independent of her resolve of con¬ tinued widowhood, to make any return of affection· To her, indeed, influenced as she was by the remains of attachment for her late lord, the extravagant expressions of love made by Sir Reginald seemed monstrous; nay, its very vehemence led her
her to doubt ¡ts sincerity; and as she quickly percei ved that ît was utterly des¬ titute of that tender interest and deep regard for the object beloved—a disposi¬ tion which constitutes the essence of real love, tbe attentions of Sir Reginald be¬ came displeasing, and even disgusting« Agreeably to these her feelings, she, with dignified calmness, desired him, if his pas¬ sion were indeed sincere, to combat and subdue a love so hopeless. Her represen¬ tations to this effect were frequent, but seemingly ineffectual* She became, at length, uneasy and disturbed. She had urged his departure, as far m politeness would allow ; yet he was still her guest· She frequently confined herself; under various pretences, to her own apartment ; thus obliging him to dine in the hall, with no other company than her own с 3 domestics*
domestics. All this, however, was with¬ out effect. He assumed a consequence in her absence, which ill became a visi¬ tor; and he converted ber absences into a proof of his own gallantry and attach¬ ment; declaring tbe days of attendance were well compensated, by a single sight of an object so beloved, It was during Sir Reginald Ilarcland's visit at the castle, which had been thus unseasonably protracted, that the myste* rious music was first heard in the woods-— a circumstance wliich contributed in some degree to abstract her thoughts from the subject of her present vexatiotf and perplexity; though this event ren¬ dered her by no means insensible to the propriety of Sir Ileginakľs removal from the castle, and she resolved to hasten it. Nothing could be more calculated to intercut
interest tbe attention of the Baroness, than this phenomenon of the musician i and the difficulty of discovery increased her eagerness to inform herself who nr what ii could be that thus haunted the woods. She issued fresh orJers, and a larger reward thau before was offered for the detection of this extraordinary person. No one, however» could be either seen or traced; the sounds were therefore con¬ ceived to be something supernatural» This idea became, at length, so general, that those who had formerly made exer¬ tions for his discovery now abandoned the search, protesting they would have no¬ thing to do with a spirit, and except Motley, the clown, or, as he was usually called, the Baroness's Fool, who, agree¬ able to the custom of the times, formed a part of the establishment at the cattle, no с 4 one
one had courage to pass the wood after a certain hour in the evening, or would even approach within some distance of it, without apprehension, and even terror, from the supposition of its being haunted. Even Father Osborne, the Baroness's confessor, the prior of an adjacent con- vent, was observed to seek another path, the direct one from tîıe monastery leading along the side of the wood, and to cross himself, if, by chance being delayed some- what later than usual at the castle, he caught the sounds of the mysterious music· The Baroness's astonishment every day increased. Her mind was continually engaged and harrassed by the subject which now perpetually engrossed her thoughts; it was at once pleasing and painful to ber soul; alternately it ele¬ vated
vated her mind to enthusiasm, and sunk it into the depths of tender grief« She often spent whole hours alone ia her oriel. Sometimes she would sit, as if engaged in a rumination so profound, as to absorb every faculty of ber «oul— some· times gazing upon the tops of the wood* tbat covered the heights around the castle, and, in one quarter, came almost close to tbe outer ditch, her eye, as it endeavoured to pierce their gloomy masses of shatle, vainly attempting to descry ¿ome form which she might imagine to be that of the mysterious minstrel; then seizing her lute, she would strike, for a moment or two, the chords, then throw it from her, as though every note was dis· cord which vibrated not from the strings of tbat instrument which had so greatly charmed her, that it seemed to have ob- A c S tained
tained tlie power of witchery over her senses. When alone with Winifred, ber com¬ panion and coniidential woman, the course of her conversation could rarely be diverted to any other channel. Winifred, who could not but perceive the strong impression which had been made upon the mind ofthe Baroness by this really extra¬ ordinary circumstance, endeavoured to rouse her from * the melancholy which seemed to be stealing upon her, and which was becoming every day more and more perceptible. The alteration which had taken place in her Ladyship's habit and manners, would probably have occasioned Winifred much anxiety, though the cause was not un¬ known to her, had not her thoughts been occupied by other subjects, by which her own
own mind was as thoroughly engrossed as was tbat of the Baroness. Sir Reginaid Hareland, by his condescension, his flat¬ tery, his-promises, and his presents» in all of whicb, since his arrival at the castle, he bad been wonderfully profuse, bad so ingratiated himself into the aflections of Winifred, tbat she had been extremelv anxious for tbe success of his suit, and hatl all along spoke of him to the Baro¬ ness in terms of tbe highest applause and commendation ; never omitting any op¬ portunity that oftered of representing, in the most glowing colours, the distress in wdiich the entire rejection of his addresses would involve tbe object of her cruelty ; repeatedly declaring, that were she Sit Reginald, she would never relinquish the pursuit while life remained, but endeavour, by a constant course of attention and per- с 6 severance,
severance, to obtain a return of that affection wiiich, while thus unpitied and disregarded, formed his present misery, and might ultimately prove his ruin, and even death. Yet though Winifred had discovered in many instances that she had acquired an extraordinary influence over her Lady, an influence of which she was extremely vain, and which she always sought occasion to secure and increase, she never could so far deceive the Baro¬ ness, as to oblige her to view him with the same impartiality and admiration with which she herself regarded him ; and fail¬ ing in this attempt, her vexation was at least as great as her disappointment. Winifred had resided with the Baroness almost from her infancy. She had accom¬ panied her, when she left the mansion of her father for the arms of an adoring busband,
husband, and was still her chief woman and attendant. It was on the· bosom of Winifred that the Baroness sunk in speechless agony, on the news of the Baron's death ; and that love of retire· ment which the Baroness thenceforth en¬ couraged, contributed to render Winifred still more the object of her regard, by con¬ fiding, in converse with her, those sorrows in which she took so much pleasure to indulge· In consequence of these feelings, and these habits of the Baroness, almost all offices of importance became delegated to Winifred, and she maintained an autho¬ rity at the castle, which all envied and obeyed. Winifred, who, to an under¬ standing by no means contemptible, united much art and cunning, found her· self, by this arrangement, investe^ with almost
almost as much authoritv as the Baroness herself; and she perceived with the gieat¬ est "itisfaction, that her interest and inter« vention were diligently solicited by every petitioner for anv favour or benefit; and l ml * thus, not only in the interna! concerns of the castle, but over the vassals and te¬ nantry of the estates of the late Влгоп, her power was as absolute us her dispo¬ sition was arbitrarv. The only persons at all likely to inter¬ rupt her views, or share her authority, were Genlinson, the Barons steward, whose long series of fidelity had been gratefully acknowledged, and Motley, the clown, with whom the Baroness some¬ times diverted herself, partly on account of his good sense as well as humour, but rather because he bad been the favourite and occasional companion of her late lord, írom
From tbe uneasy* feais and vexations ex- citeil by the former, from the favourable disposition of the Вл mness towards her faithful domestic, Winifred was soon, as sÌìq conceived, happily relieved, The good old steward, who bad grown gr.*y i a the service of the Lord* of Fitzwalter, died a few months after the death of the Baron, of a disorder brought on, as was supposed, by grief fur the loss of bis be¬ loved master, He was succeeded in liis employment by a person appointed by Winifred, a Scotchman c f the name of Maclawney, a man wdio, though he pos¬ sessed a sufficient. share of cunning to deceive the Baroness with a shew of ho¬ nour and honesty, was every way un¬ worthy of the trust reposed in him, his time being chiefly spent in idleness and debauchery. His chief, and indeed only aim,
aim, was to render himself agreeable to Winifred, an attempt in which he was by no means unsuccessful, Dame Winifred, as she was always called, being herself greatly averse to that species of cruelty she had all along reproved in tbe conduct of her Lady, and every way inclined to receive the assiduities of a lover, wiio, besides the advantage of being several years younger than herself, had the meaus in his Lower of acquiring riches and emo¬ luments in which she some time hoped to share. Amongst a train of inferior domestics, was a beautiful girl, called Ethelind, an humble attendant on Winifred. This maiden was the daughter of a mountain cottager, dwelling in the woody heights above the castle. Her mother had died when she was only six years of age; her fatlier
father married again, though not till some years after the death of his wife, a woman by whom Ethelind was treated with so much rigour and cruelty, that she ob¬ tained the kindest interest and compas¬ sion from all who knew her. She long bore with patieuce a series of the severest ill usage ; but at kngth her father died, and the situation of the poor girl became most pitiable* The report of her ill treat¬ ment reached the ears of the Baroness, who, after severely reprimanding the step· mother for her cruelty to a poor unfortu¬ nate little orphan, thus left to her care, leceived her into the castle. Here Ethelind, who, at the period we mention, was not quita fourteen years of age, might have passed a Hfe of ease and happiness, had not Winifred's apprehen* sions suggested, that if suffered to be much
much about the Baroness, she might sup¬ plant her in her affections, and put her upon devising means to estrange her from her Ladv, her onlv friend and benefactress, a circumstance which served to render her situation, if not so irksome as before, exposed to m ny trials and inquietudes. The Baroness, pleased with her beauty, had at first dressed her in a style superior to that of a common domestic. Her voice was extremely harmonious, and she bad desired she should have some instruc¬ tion in music. She was taught also needle* work and embroidery ; and suc¬ ceeded so well in every thing she under¬ took, that the Baroness was at once pleased and gratified. Winifred perceived, with a jealousy which was every instant increasing, the partiality of the Baroness toward her new charge,
charge, and she eagerly sought occasion to ruiu her in her esteem ; and no artifices were unemployed, by w hich this scheme, however cruel and detestable, might be accomplished. She was accused of va¬ rious misdemeanors, which at firsts as they were only of a trilling nature, were but little noticed by the Baroness; but as these were continually multiplying, and the poor girl, when accused by Winifred before her Lady, dared not utter a single word in ber defence/she began by degrees to abate in that confidence and regard she had at first entertained for her ; and in¬ stead of being allowed, as formerly, to sit in her Lady's room, and await her orders, the unfortunate Ethelind was now, through the machinations of an envious favourite, usually confined to an apartment near the servants' hall, called Dame Winified's room,
room, where, except by stealth, none of the domestics were allowed to visit her, and where she usually sat at work til! very late in the evening; unless, as was now and then the case, Mrs. Winifred recol¬ lected some little matter wanted at the castle, which might be had at a neigh¬ bouring village, when Ethelind, with a wicker basket upon her arm, was dis¬ patched to procure it. These moments of liberty were, in¬ deed, to Ethelind moments of delight; for kept close to her work, and severely tasked by Winifred, to be abroad and un* restrained, seemed the height of enjoy¬ ment. The plain, and somewhat unbe¬ coming dress, which Winifred had selected for her, in exchange for that she had first worn, wdiich she had observed to her Lady had been tlie cause of her becoming ex* tremelv
tremely vaîıı aud forward, could ueiilier hide the charms of her face, or the natu¬ ral graces of her figure. Her fine long light hair, as if scorning the restraint of her hat, fell in many a vagrant tress on a bosom of transparent whiteness. Her soft blue eyes beamed with sensibilitv ; her cheeks wore the blushes of the rose ; her lips were tainted with vermilion, and when she spoke or smiled, displayed a sweetness of expression, which hardly painting can reach. Nothing could exceed Etheľmďs de¬ light, when she had Dame Winifred**« per¬ mission to go on an errand into the village, where she was sure to find some¬ thing to amuse and interest her. These indulgences were however rare. The mo¬ ments of liberty and enjoyment soon flitted away, while those of employment, sometimes
sometimes difficult, and always iiksome, wliich succeeded, w T ere at once regular ***ч*1 iti\tnat-tiwl «.» I Д \. I uu^nuvut Another object of Winifred's tyranny, was a young man, of the name of Edgar, the son of one of the Baroness's vassals, who, though uot an inhabitant, was vet a frequent inmate at the castle; from his extreme vivacity when a boy, he had ac¬ quired the character of being wdld; this his vivacity, however, never led him into any considerable faults; and as he ad¬ vanced toward manhood, it became so tempered with prudence, that it was never suffered to proceed beyond the bounds of decorum; and as he wrote a fair hand, and understood arithmetic, even better than the steward, he was often employed to assist Air. Maclawney in the writing Out of his accounts, wdio, as his head was seldom
iddom very elvar, mmii huıuıî Li m vi ry useful, and even neeessary to his oc- casions. Dame Winifred, though ?>hc seldom condcsceuiled to converse with tbc humble Edgar, suffered his attendance; taking care, however, tliat Ethelind ¿houid not be present, k^t, as .»he ofuu оЬ^егмч!, he should till her head with vagaries by telliníí the chit ahc was handsome. Ed* gar, who had been in habits of vi&itmg at the castle when Ethelind was first admit¬ ted, when as children they had played together, had long, unkuown to Dame Winifred, cherished a secret regard for the little orphan, which was now, as he had reached his eighteenth vear, converted О mt * into a strong and tender interest. Ethelind, thus designedly separated from the companion of her youth, seldom see¬ ing
îng him, could not view him, when acci¬ dent threw him in - her way, without emotions of dehght. Edgar, ever upon the watch, let no opportunity escape of seeing or speaking to her: one daj% sud¬ denly entering the castle, and seeing the door of the apartment open i u which sbe usually sat, he ventured to approach, and finding Ethelind alone, and in tears, en¬ tered the room. He eagerly and tenderly enquired what had happened to distress her, and vented so many reproaches upon those who could be the cause of such un« easiness, that Ethelind, whose distress was now converted into alarm, entreated lie would leave her; npr could he for some tiur inform himself of the cause of her tears, till having pressed the subject again and again, he was informed tbat she had been severely treated by Dame Wini- ' frcd
ifcå. for having, as ^he said, spoiled a> bunch of flow ets, she was woikirg i:i a set of chairs, designed for her L*d\ V dressing-room, which ohe had /hic ли ι undone several times with so titile mic· cess, that Dame Winifred had dcclii cd they were every time worse than before ; and had repeatcdlj* assured her she should not be suffered to leave her work, even to go to bed, till she had finished it to her satisfaction, Edgar, wdio was astonished at the beauty and elegance of the flowers, and tbe natural and graceful manner in which they were disposed, and wdio was utterly unable to behold the innocent Ethelind in tears, without experiencing the most affectionate and lively interest in her dis¬ tresses, could not, on an avowal of the cause, restrain his indignation ; and in vol. ι, о the
the expression of it, let ftill some epithets, not very respectful toward Dame Wini¬ fred, who, accidentally hearing Edii ir as lie entered the room in which Ethelind was sitting, concealed herself behind the arras, so as to be unforliniately near enough to overhear the greater part of their discourse. No sooner did her ear catch the sound of these disdainful, and, άα she conceived, highly insulting names, than she bounced from her concealment, and vented alike upon the innocent and guilty, the reproaches ofa resentment too powerful to be either concealed or sup¬ pressed. The consequence of this unlucky inci¬ dent was an encreased severity towards Ethelind, and the discharge of Edgar, who was commanded never more to enter the walls of tlie castle—a sentence which, bowever,
however^ obtained some mitigation, йол\ the interference of Maclawney, the atcw- ard, though owing to the watchfii! polky of Winifred, he could scarcely ever oh* tain a sight of his beloved Ethelind, who was more strictly confined* aid mio: с maliciously treated than ever.
d2 Cil.-U»
: , ". | l ' ".vrr ι,." .." ι L ,, l '„ i i.y¡", "„ ι . 1 CHAP. IV. A Fool, a Fool Î« — I met a Foci ι th' Forest, A motley Fool, a miserable \ atlet: As I do live by food, I met a Fool. SttiXESrEAftE. From the relation of those events wdiich preceded the era at which our history commences, we now return to the Baro¬ ness, in whose mind curiosity and asto¬ nishment surmounted every other feeling and reilection ; and wdio, notwithstand¬ ing the various unsuccessful attempts which had been already made to discover the author of the mysterious minstrelsy, wliH'h was still heard nightly in the wood,
цтч}. was not less eager in her enquiries» or less profuse in her offers, tu tbo-c wdio -houli! bave eonrage to pursue the boum 1 , and trace tlie musician, if indeed moital, to his asjlum or hiding-place. Day after day, and night after night, passed on, and no discovery was made ; the cloivn had indeed been seen in the wood, but, except the clown, no one dared enter it ; and from him nothing could be learnt, as he seldom gave a di¬ rect answer to any question, however important ; and so little was there of me¬ thod in every thing he said or did, that he was scarcelv considerei! as rational. The Bdioiiesb, wb*> had heaitl that the clown bail been ьееп returning from the wood at a late hour in tbc ι «ening, and that he alone of all the domestics had i> J dai ed
dared to visit it about the minstrel hour, summoned him into iier presence. iť I sent for thee, Motley," said she, " to enquire of thee, why thou guest into tliat wood;" ťv Alany, Lady/'* ret umul the clown, " because no one else will." u Does this afford any reason for thy going thither?" resumed the Baroness. "The best I know/* answered the clown, " and the best a man knows, is the best he can give. But reason, which is a quality of the brain, appertaineth not unto fools. You call me fool, yet demand from me that wdiich fools have not. What I have I ean give, but what I have not I cannot give; I cannot give thee my reason, because king myself a fool, ergo without reason, I have it not to be¬ stow.
.stow. So, Lady, if thou trustest te mc for reason, thou must hick reason, arid lacking it, become thyself little better than a true fool." ** Thou art a merry fellow/* cried the Baroness, £i nevertheless, bci.ig licenced to say any thing, art apt to grow imperti¬ nent. Were I less inclined to melmcholy, 1 couid be much diverted with thy jests. But in having first said thou hadst a reason, thou hast either spoiled thine own argument, or proved thou art no fool/* u Verily then should I prove myself a vagabond." tť How so:*' u Why, tb I not live by my fooleries, and losing the capacity of foolishness, would-t thou not take frum me my coat, and reduce mc to a level with those, who, d -i having
having not that capacity, are obliged fo pi act ise from necessitj' upon those that have ?" " I would gladi v have thee lose this capacity, as thou callest it/* cried the Baroness, '-wtre it onlv for a moment. ' ml Prithee, goocl ioo», step out of thy fooleries, and answer me one simple ques¬ tion—why dost thou go into that wood?" " Many, for the same reason that I would not go to court/* " What is that ?" " Because there I meet no bad com¬ pany/' " It were a better reason, hadst thou said thou wentest thither to meet good company—But to the purpose. Hast thou, Motley, I mean after evening, wlien the mantle of night is spread abroad, and
and begins to embrown with horror the shades of yon drear wood, seen aught in it beside thvself ?" »· "Thou questione-t deeply, Lady/ 1 cried the clown. u Yea, I have seen the toad and the adder, tbe bat, the owl, and the fox/ 4 u I speak not of the beasts and reptiles of the earth/* resumed the Baroness. f * I ask thee, Mol ley, wiiether, in thy nightly wanderings through the wood, thou hast seen any humau being, or any thing bear¬ ing a resemblance to the human form ?" * € lruly/* quoth the clown, " I have seen something,** " When ?" " Last night," 41 Where—where, good Motley r'* {t W r ithin the pale of the wood/* " Indeed . what was it?" oá "A fuh
€t A fair and noble figure, of a sweet an íl delicate proportion. Tbe moon shone bright I advanced, it preceded me; I turned, it tumed also ; I bowed, it bowed ; I started, it started; it observed, and copied my every motion." <ť Thou hast then, indeed, seen some¬ thing; speak-—speak, good Motley; what was it that thou sawest? was it a human being, or---------" u It was not a human being/' inter¬ rupted Motley, <ζ but the shadow or re¬ presentation of one ; liaving in itself no substance, though a form.*' t( This answers to a spirit/* cried the Baroness. " Of what size was it ?" 11 About my size, Lady; yet, methinks, - upon recollection, it appeared somewhat taller." ** Bore it any instrument of music ?" ľ No,
" No, Lad j*, none/* " Spirits are said to have tbe power of assuming various shapes and forms : how* did it appear to your" lè In the most pleasing one/" ** Describe it, good Motley/* u Tbe moon described it most aptly, I mean tbe outline; for lacking colours, the moon is but an indifferent painter/* u What did it represent r'* " In the first place, two legs of the most excellent symmetry ; a bodj T , with arms correspondingly graceful; a head erect, surmounted and adorned wdth a cap and bells, singularly ornamented/' * ť I'll be sworn, fool/ ? cried the Baro¬ ness, " thou art describing thine own shadow* Enough of this fooling—speak instantly, and to the purpose, or I will have thee beat for thy ill-timed jestings. 2> о Sawest
Saweát thou aught in the wood besides tbyselt*» and the representation of thyself in thine shadow ? * '* Yes, Lady, I saw——" t{ What didst thou Leer" * c Two turtle doves in a nest They wrere cooing together, and seemed happy. The old mate of the female bird returned, as it seemed after a long absence, and found its nest pre-occupied by a stranger: it raoaned, and went apart. I heard its melancholy cooings, from a tree at some distance from whence I stood. It seemed not to have even entered the nest; but sought to hide itself and its griefs, even from those that had caused it." "Alas, poor, pretty bird!" cried the. Baroness. "Then thou hast seen nothinsr, Motley ; yet that wood, they say, is haunted, and under such circumstances, methinks
methinks thy courage m u м : ¡ ·* m to have entered it» Thou hist heard the mj'sterious music, fool, and yet thou art undaunted. Shouldst thou fear, Motley, wert thou to see a spirit^** " I have seen many, Lady ; but I would not willingly see one without its case/* "True, disembodied, and apart from its earthly tenement, the mind recoils at it," " But as the spirit," resumed Motley, " has never yet appeared in any shape but the shape of the sound of the lute, played by the picture of nobody " " Thou hast yet courage to visit its haunts," cried the Baroness. " Truly, Lady, courage is a good qua¬ lity, and, being a good quality, I would not wear it out; yet not to use it, would be
be to make it fall into disuse, and thereby become rusty, and unfit for service/* "Thou art a wise fellow, after all," encu uic uaruncòs. " neie, i<iive IÍ1IS money, visit nightly tbe wood, and shouldst thou bring with thee any intelli¬ gence which may lead to a discovery of this incident, thy diligence shall be re¬ warded/* " I will receive thy money, Lady ; but although I should not lack wisdom to assist thee, take not from me, I beseech thee, my prerogative of foolishness. Adieu, fair Lacly, adieu ; may the god of mirth dispossess j T ou of your present me¬ lancholy, and make you merrj' as the cricket; and as wise too; for the cricket slinks into bis hole, when attempted to be caught by the hand of impertinence/' Clown
Cioxen sings. From thøte €jef» sn beis of tons. Let »ot swtif the tear-drøp flow ; Time oft wonďroys things dbc1ö$es, Stem, oh'sîenı, this nm of woe, fi Pretty words, and very well sung/* cried the Baroness; " where didst thou learn that stanza ?** t% I learnt it of the god of love, who bade me address it to thy most excellent beauty." u Away—away," said the Baroness, " thou flatterest; take thy money and begone."
CHAP.
СНЛР. v. Line arbosceì cui deti, ? , a siede, Lie\e augei h » che g.mr 0 ci с ч move, Lieve foglia che cín'e о che 4 «¡ente. Di terror doppia il dubbia cor pf ι cote. ARIOS Тик clown had depaited, and the Baro¬ ness had nearly fallen into one of her accustomed fits of melancholy musing, when her attention was engaged by the entrance of Winifred, wdio had brought a letter for the Baroness. On opening it, sbe discovered it to be from Lord Broke her father ; the friend and highly esteemed courtier
courtier of Henrv the Seventh. She re- ceived it with satisfaction and delight ; but ere she had perused the contents, her lips trembled, her cheeks grew pale, and had not a plentiful shower of tears come at that instant to her relief, she would have fainted in the armi of her attendant ** Oh Winifred ľ' exclaimed siie, at length recovering herself, IC I am the most wretched of human beings." ** Fresh troubles—alack, alack !" inter¬ rupted Winifred, " what has happened, Lady? sure the Lord Fitzwalter-—" " To-morrow," resumed the Baroness, 11 the Earl of Ormond, a nobleman ofthe first rank and power, arrives at the castle.** " Well, Lady, and what of tbat ?** " He is sent hither,** continued the Baroness, ** by the king, and comes bearing the royal authority ; by which, as a ward
a ward of state, I may be consigned by marriage, to take possession of me and my domains. Lord Broke, my father, is to accompany him. Oh that I w r ere some simple maiden, such as Ethelind, unin¬ cumbered bv castles and domains, and therefoie an object of state caution ; for then [ might follow my inclinations, for no one would seek my hand, and I might mourn my lost husband with uninter¬ rupted sorrow/' "Ah, Lacly," cried Winifred, "great· ness İ? indeed a plague/' "And yet," continued the Baroness, " perhaps he may not wish to wed a me¬ lancholy mope like me; and from wdiat I jearn by this letter, he is of too noble a nature, to submit his inclinations- iu this particular, even to a monarch's will, and I may escape bis nuptials." " Why,
* i( Why, my Lady, methinks you must not build too much upon that," cried Winifred ; 4t he will not reject you and your domains too. But he has then, it seems, the power of rejecting you, whilst you, Lady, are denied the privilege of refusing him, however disagreeable he may prove." 4i Such, if I understand it, is the im port of this letter," resumed the Baroness. 11 So runs my destiny." u Would to Heaven you had escaped it by marrying Sir Reginald !" exclaimed Winifred. " My situation would then have been even more intolerable/* said the Baroness, il than as the wife of the Earl of Ormond« This Lord, they say, is noble; but how great soever his merit« and deserts, it will be to me the greatest misfortune, and to my
my feelings the most distressing, to re¬ ceive bini, or any one, for a husband. Indeed, Winifred, my heart dwells with the fondest delight on the memory of its first attachment, and the thought is to me most disgusting, wdiich suggests the possi¬ bility of my receiving another lord/* " Oh, Lady I were you less handsome, and les-* powerful." " Wouhl to Heaven," cried the Baro¬ ness, " I were the most deformed ofthe human species, so I might escape my pre¬ sent embarrassments !" " Suppose/' said Winifred, " you were to invent some disguise, or use something wdiich might discolour and conceal the beauty of your face. I have heard that weeds, and the juices of some flowers, applied to the skin, will so change the complexion of it, as to turn fairness into deformity;
deformity: what if we were to procure these juices?" " I would not be averse from any inno¬ cent stratagem/" replied the Baroness, 14 by which the dearest purpose of my heart, that of being allowed to remain in my present state of widowhood, might be secured to me ; but should the Earl be, as be is represented in this letter, a man of peerless virtue and knight!} p honour, would it not be better to throw myself upon his generosity, by an avowal of my real sentiments respecting him, and a de¬ claration of the decided aversion I do and always shall entertain, against a second union, and try to induce him to persuade tbe king not to insist upon my second marriage Γ 14 Ah, Lady, but tf this should fail?" u If it should, his character has been misrepresented ;
misrepresented ; be cannot in that case be a man of honour: I will try, however, this scheme; I will at least make the attempt ; should it not succeed, I have, î think, yet another resource, in the ten¬ derness of a beloved and highly-revered father, whose influence at court, if pro¬ perly exerte'4 jn the cause of his unhappv* daughter, may save me from a grievance so full of evil/* "Well, Lady, with these hopes you will then consent to see the Earl/* " I must see him/* returned the Baro¬ ness, " and he must be received with the honours due to his rank.and character. His appearance here will be favourable to me in one respect; Sir Reginald Hareland, who must have been already impatient of my frequent absences from him, must now, in common decency, depart; let him 6 be
be informed immediately of the intended on ¡val of Earl Ormond ; and further, tliat it is my pleasure he should not await that event.'* "Alas—alas!** cried Winifred, sighing heavily, fl I w-ould fain not be the mes¬ senger of such heart-breaking tidings.*' > 4 * Go this instant/* said the Baroness (t and convev this mv message to the mf mf <J knight. Tell him, as the near kinsman of my Lord, I greeteil him well, but that I now expect bis departure.** Winifred frowned, but was retiring. €i Stop, Winifred,** cried the Baroness; li tell him nof the name of the guest whose arrival here we expect to morrow. Say only it is a nobleman sent hither by the king. He will guess the motive of his coming hither ; if «ot, you may be more explicit, Plead your ignorance as to his
his name, lest, in the heat of his indig¬ nation, he should drop some expressions of an affronting nature, concerning this Earl, before my people, which maj' after» wards be repeated to bis attendants, and thus reach the ear of their Lord. The knight is rash and impetuous; and we cannot be too circumspect, and hardly sufficiently cautious, iu our endeavours to hinder any quarrel which might arise from such imprudence, between two nobles, both, perhaps, highly tenacious, and equally scrupulous, in respect to points of honour." Winifred withdrew, and the Baroness retired to her oriel, wdiere, seated, she marked the dewy-fingered night con¬ tending wdth the summer twilight, which refused to yield to her wanted sway. The lake spread its placid bosom full in view, and
and no sound, safe the sleepy twitter of the martlet from its earth-made nest in the fretwork of the parapet, varied the stillness of the hour. "This scene," cried the Baroness, f * invites to tranquil¬ lity, at least till morning. Be hushed, my alarms and anxieties, I will not ------" At this instant the minstrel of the woods began his minstrelsy. tf Oh Hea-* vens!" exclaimed the Baroness, and again stood wrapt in listening astonishment. The music gradually approached ; it swelled louderand louder: meanwhile the moon rose cloudless in the eastern skv, and threw its silvery gleam upon the rocks and ivy« crusted turrets of the castle ; a thousand stars gemmed the heavens, and all seemed attention to the mvsterious minstrel, wh*u VOL» 1. I. '*At
*' At last a sweet and solemn breathing sound Rose like a steam of rich distill'd perfumes, And stole upon the air, that erai Silence WTas took ere »he was 'ware, and wislťd she might ©eav her nature- and be never rosre- Still to be thus displaced." At this time there was something in the fones of the music, even more affecting than usual. It was of a dirge-like sad¬ ness, yet so soft, so dulcet, that as the Baroness continued to listen, tears streamed involuntarily from ber eyes. It now somewhat varied the measure, and sbe thinking, perhaps it might be the guardian spirit of her deceased Lord, to whom she conceived every sound bore some tender import, perhaps gently re¬ proving her for her want of fidelity in receiving new suitors in his castle, or rather, as it seemed, warning her against some coming danger, seconded with Ş thoughts
thoughts like these, the sounds seemed to have obtained a talismanic power over the bewildered senses of the Baroness. They overpowered her feelings ; a sudden faintness came over her. " Great Heaven Γ exclaimed she in transport; and she sunk almost fainting against the arras. Ere she had time to recollect her scattered senses, and question the reality of what she had heard, the music ceased—it was heard no more. The Baroness, trembling with an agita¬ tion which almost deprived her of the power of motion, retired to her room, and soon afterwards to her bed ; but sleep forsook her pillow, and she arose on the eventful day, which was to introduce her to Earl Ormond, and dismiss Sir Reginald from the castle, without having once tasted the blessing of repose £ 3 CHAR
^^щmщømκ^mÊШÈяkшmышaяmtШÊmím^mmÊяшtш^mШШÊнm
CHAP. VI.
JLearn, cruel! leam, that thb afflicted heart, This heait which Heav*n delights to prove with torture^ Did ie not love, has power and pride to shun you« Zara. Sut Reginald, on receiving the above message from the Baroness, which, though conveyed as a request, was, in eflect, an ord^r for him to quit the castle without delay, and especially on hearing that an¬ other suitor was expected, broke out into all the extravagances of the, most violent frenzy. He positively refused to depart, without first seeing the Baroness. He even
even threatened to arm his vassals, and lay waste her domains, unless tliis was granted bim. This his determination he sent the Baroness, who, uneasy at faifa violence, returned excuses. He declared, on receiving these, he would assault her castle, in revenge for the insult of an abrupt dismission. Al¬ though the Baroness was sensible she might rely for defence on the fidelity of her dependants, and was sure of redress, from the influence of her father at court, yet sbe thought it might be prudent to bend a little, to prevent evil consequences ; and she agreed to receive him in the hall, surrounded by her retinue. To this he could not object, although he would have wished for privacy ; aad he returned a message of thanks to t lit* Baroness for the honour she conceded him. £ 3 The
The Baroness immediatelv ^ave orders for his audience in form, which she inti¬ mated was intended as an honour aue to a visitor and a kinsman, about to take his leave. A chair of state, raised bj- a step in front, was placed on the upper platform of the grand hall, where the family dined on public occasions; and before it were spread carpets of tissued tapestrj*. The seneschal, at the head of twenty halber¬ diers, occupied two stations, one on the right, the other on the left, immediately below the platform ; and all the higher servants, and such of the Baroness's vas¬ sals as the suddenness of tlie business could allow, were arranged in two lines below thefn. Behind the chair stood several of the inmates of the castle, who were either distantly related tothe family« and
and were, on that account, allowed a con¬ stant table, or else were the sons of gentry connected with the familj-, and ictained to serve as pages, and receive, in iet urn, instruction and exercise in all those arts and accomplishments which suited the character of the knight or the courtier. At the doors were stationed parties of the yeomeu of the guard, sup¬ ported by the servants of the buttery and kitchen, habited in their best liveries, aud bearing staves, The porter and his whif- flers, clad also in their liveries of state, took their stations at the gates and va¬ rious entries; and rows of archers and arquebusiers in the court, formed a sort* of line of approach toward the flight of steps leading to the great hall. All things being thus arranged, Sir Reginald, followed by the groom of his e 4 chamber,
chamber, was conducted to audience by tlie steward and two mace-bearers; and presently the Baroness entered from a side door, attended by Winifred and the maidens of her chamber, and seating her¬ self on the prepared seat, received Sir Reginald with that state and dignity which the Barons Fitzwalter always ob¬ served on important occasions, in com¬ mon with others of the same rank with themselves in the realm. Sir Reginald, piqued by all these for¬ malities, which he was sensible boded him no good, appeared with a haughty demea¬ nor and proud look, seeming to acknow¬ ledge these attentions to be his due, although he was ready to receive them with scorn. The conilict of various pas¬ sions, which reigned within him, was evi¬ dently great. lj)fe and wounded pride seemed
seţmed to be struggling for pre-eminence, as he approached the chair on which th® Baroness was seated» The Baroness perceived, and was urt- easy at these emotions; and apprehensive lest the warmth of his passion should hurry him into expressions which might be wounding to her delicacy, resolved to hasten the conclusion of an interview, which exposed those feelings to the ob¬ servation of so many witnesses. From motives, therefore, of the most delicate consideration of the situation of Sir Regi¬ nald, as well as that of herself she addressed him in a speech appropriate to the occasion, in whicii she acknowledged the high opinion 'she had conceived of him, and the strong sense she entertained of the honour be had designed to confer upon ber, iu bis latç proposals of mar,- £ 5 nage;
rîagc; an honour for which she assured him she was not less grateful than if she had consented to accept it. Then hasten¬ ing to take her leave, she added, with great sweetness, " Farewell, Sir Knight, farewell; commend meto your honourable family ; and be assured, though I cannot, tinder the present circumstances of my situation, invite your longer continuance in my castle, it will always afford me pleasure to hear of your welfare." Then, as if anxious to prevent affording liim лу opportunity of reply, she arose, courteously bowing, and was retiring. Sir Reginald, little expecting that the audience he had so urgently requested was to terminate thus abruptly, would have remonstrated, and led the Baroness back to her seat; but she refused to be reconducted thither; and mildly observing she
she had nothing further to add* with¬ drew, attended by her women, through the door by which she had entered; leaving Sir Reginald, notwithstanding the politeness of her address, and the manner in whicii she had expressed her sentiments concerning him, overcome with vexation and disappointment·
вб CHAP.
CHAP. VIL ... ι 'Twas but a dream: But then so terrible, it shakes my soul ; Cold drops of dew hang опту trembling flesh*—— My blood grows chilly,and I freeze with horror! Shakespeare. The Baroness, after having waited about an hour, anxiously expecting the depar¬ ture of Sir Reginald, was informed, at length,»that the knight, having relapsed into one of his accustomed fits of distrac¬ tion and vehemence, had positively re¬ fused to quit the castle, unless the Baro¬ ness should first grant him another inter¬ view,
view, which he now insisted should be a private one. This his declaration and resolve was conveyed to the Baroness by Winifred, who warmly interceded for her Lady's consent to the Knighťs request, as she called it, though from the authori¬ tative terms in which it was dictated, it seemed rather to take the nature of a command· " Oh my Ladj r ľ' said Winifred, "you must indeed see him once again ; you know not wbat may be the consequence of a refusal/* " I have, indeed, every thiug to appre¬ hend from his violence,** replied the Baro¬ ness; " why wili he not remain.satisfied with my determination, and what 1 Lave already granted ? be must, ere this, have known that my resoUitiou is not to be shaken
shaken by any arts or arguments he can use." '* Ah, Lady ! but when he loves so tenderly, and mourns so grievously î Had you butrseen him last night—Oh, never shall I forget him!" (i Last night!'* repeated the* Baroness, " Ah, Ladj T ! long after I took your message, cruelly desiring him to leave the castle this morning, in the middle of the night; I had no sle^ myself, not a wink, ibr I could thmk of nothing but Sir Re¬ ginald ; it was a stormy and very dread¬ ful night; the Wind blew loud, and the raiu beat hard against the windows, and the owls, from the turrets, screamed ,so dismally, that------" " The wind was indeed tempestuous," mterrupted the Baroness; " but what had the
the storm of the night to do with Sir Reginald ?** " You shall hear, Lady/' answered Winifred. t( The wind, as I was saying. howled dismally, and, as it rushed through the galleries, made such strange noises, for I suppose it was nothing but the wind, which, you know, often makes sudden squalls through the passages, that I began,, I don't know how, to be strangely terri¬ fied, and so I got up: you, Ladv, was asleep, I think, though as I made but little noiee, and the wind continued very boisterous, you might not, perhaps, hear me, even if j r ou were awake. Just as I opened my door, I saw Sir Reginald dart¬ ing out of his chamber, pale as t s'ies, with a lamp in his hand, and nothing on but a long loose gown, which reached nearly to his feet ; I asked him what was the
the matter, and where he was going* At first I thought he might be walking in his sleep; but I soon found he was as wide awake as I wus. * Winifred/ said he, with a look of ter эг and amazement, ' have you seen any thing to*night?'—* Seen any thing, Sir Knight/ said I, 'what should I see? I am not superstitious, for all this spirit in the wood, as it never comes into the castle, and keeps, as one may say, at a prop^ r distance; and I hope you are not. Why, surely, you do not think you have seen any thing, do you r*—'I don't know, Winifred/ said he: 'but did you hear nothing ?*—' I heard nothing/ said I, 'but tlie wind, and the dismal hooting of the owls from the buildings. But where are you going, Sir Kuight?' said I, 'and why are you so frightened?'— ť I have had a strange
strange dream, Winifred/ said he, ' if it was a dream/—' A dream ľ said I, * la ! I often dream dismal things mj'setf, and they terrify me for a time ; but when the light of the morning come*?, these fright¬ ful fancies disperse, and I think no more about them—no more will you ; so, pray, Sir Knight, go back to your chamber, lie down in bed, and try to get a little sound sleep/—* The light of tbe morning will not, I fear, dispel the dismal images of the night/ cried Sir Reginald ; * but I will take your advice, Winifred, and endeavour—«—Oh, Winifred, if it were not for your lovely Lady's cruelty ľ Then he sighed deeply, and entered his chamber; and I heard bim pacing about the room for some time. When I thought he was in bed, 1 returned to my own apartment, but I couid not sleep; for bis griefs
griefs and sufferings, which I really thought had affected his head, had so disturbed my mind, that I could not com¬ pose myself to rest. Ob, my Lady I you must, indeed, you must see him. He says, if you will grant him one interview iu private, or with only me being preseut, he will leave the castle immediately." "Says he this," cried the Baroness, " and, upon the honour of a kniglit, may I believe him r if so, upon these condi¬ tions, I consent once more*to see him. Go, tell him this, and that in your pre¬ sence I will instantly give him audience.** Winifred withdrew with this message from the Baroness, and shortly afterwards Sir Reginald entered the Baroness's anti- room, where she usually received her guests. She was reclining upon a crim¬ son velvet settee, superbly ornamented with
with gold, attended by Winifred, when Sir Reginald approached. She afose cm seeing him, and accosted him with the same winning courtesy of address which she always observed in her salutations* Sir Reginald, notwithstanding the per* mission granted to his request, entered with an air of wildness and distraction, that greatly alarmed the Baroness, He seemed to be struggling to speak, but could not; his eyes roved wildly over her figure; he leaned against the arras, and seemed, for a moment or two, to be utterly incapable of speech or motion. " Give me not cause to repent, Sir Reginald,'* cried the Baroness mildly, yet with some emotion, her sweet eyes beaming softness and sensibility, ".that I iiave thus, perhaps against my better judgment, in compliance wdth your im¬ portunities,
portimi ties, your very urgent solicitations, consented to grant you that audience you so earnestly desired before your de¬ parture from my castle. Till your avowal of the sentiments you entertain for me, which, for I have never in anv instance deceived you, you well know not to be reciprocal, I considered and treated you as a friend and kinsman, the kinsman of my highly-revered and most tenderly- regretted hnsbard. Had you not ex¬ ceeded the bounds of that friendship and honourable esteem whieh you at first pro¬ fessed for me, and which, while it did not militate against my principles or my feel¬ ings, I scrupled not to return, my present command, whicli I again repeat, that yoa must immediately quit this place, would have been unnecessary. Could I have doubted the propriety of the measure I am
I am enforcing, your present behavi¬ our. Sir Reginald, would have convinced me of its indispensibility. Let me then save you and myself the trouble of all further altercation on this subject—a sub¬ ject which has been the occasion of much uneasiness and anxiety to both of us, by repeating my most earnest wdshes for your future welfare and happiness, and pronouncing a farewell, which I now ex¬ pect to be final/' "Heaven and earth!" exclaimed Sir Reginald, striking his forehead wdth vehe¬ mence, as if but newly awakened to a full sense and conviction of his present hope¬ less destin y y "is all then over?—am I doomed to be the most wretched, the most scorned of human beings ?" " You cannot long be wretched, Sir Reginald," resumed the Baroness, " but by
by your own fault. Your merits and your rank may readily secure you an alliance with the most honourable fami¬ lies in England; and give you a spouse more fair and worthy of you than the cold affections of the widow of j r our friend. Cease then to disgrace yourself by these unworthy fits of vehemence, so ill becoming a man of your rank ; and may the saints or Heaven give you that happiness which your conduct wdll then deserve !" " How aptly can those reason/* pur¬ sued Sir Reginald, " and apply balms and remedies to the bursting breaking heart, who have never felt the dart of an¬ guish !*' ** I would teach you, by my example," cried the Baroness, " that those who liave felt its keenest arrow, can prescribe cures for
for the inflicted wound; we may suffer, but we ought not therefore to despair. You see before you, Sir Reginald, one who has had many sorrows, the widowed wife of Fitzwalter: vou knew hini well; I need not therefore expatiate upon his virtues; they are registered in the hearts of all that knew him. You are not un¬ acquainted with his misfortunes ; you know too how I revered, how I loved, how I adored !" (i And yet it is not for him I am re¬ jected," cried Sir Reginald, accompany¬ ing this remark with a look of scrutinizing enquiry, and haughty vehemence. " No 1 the image of the departed Fitzwalter is supplanted in that heart, where late it held, you say, an undivided empire, though not by те." " How !" exclaimed the Baroness. " Time
" Time and your tears," resumed Sir "Reginald, "have crazed and washed away the remembhmce of him who was your husband ; and bright, tea less, and beam¬ ing with renovated hop. and promised joy, those eyes now seek another home than that which death has banished from them. Ormond comes forth to meet their willing glances—oh that, basilisk-like, there were death in them !·—he comes, and is accepted." " Ormond !" reiterated the Baroness— then recollecting her injunction to Wini¬ fred, she added, " My woman, I find, Sir Knight, has been more communicative on this subject than I expected ; it were w r ell had she paid more attention to my orders." u What were those orders, Lady?" 41 That she should convey a message, in form in <χ
informing you that a stranger, whose name I bade her conceal, was to arrive this day at the castle, and that í expected and desired your departure shouid precede the approach of the expected guest." 4t Your ,words, Lady, are the very echoes of those conveyed to me by your woman," "Ah ! how then could you know?" "By no humun tongue," said Sir Re¬ ginald, " was I irìformed of the name and quality of the person whose arrival here is expected/' "By no human tongue !" repeated the Baroness; " you must then have had intelligence of it iu writing : is it already so well known that the c EarI of Ormond intends a = visit at my castle ?" " Neither by letter, or verbally by any natural means/' returned Sir Reginald, vot. i. f и have
" liave I been apprized of the Earľs in¬ tention, or the motive of bis coming hither," " Neither bv a written account, or verbally by any natural means?' resumed the B? r oness ; " j T our words are paradoxes, Sir Knight; how then could you obtain \our information r' " Deem me not weaL v superstitious, J^ady, w r hen I declare, I obtained it by means wholly supernatural—by a dream— ■" 44 A dream, Sir Reginald ľ' "By a dream or a vision, I know not whether one or the otiier, in which Baron Fitzwalter, your late husband, and my most dear frieml, appeared to me !" " Ah ! my husband !" exclaimed the Baroness, her hands raised, and clasped together in an attitude of astonishment. "Did I not tell you, Lady," said Wi¬ nifred,
nifred, " how Sir Reginak!, last night, rushed from liis chamber, pale as death, and trembling with agitation, as from some sudden fright, and how he questioned me, whetlier I had see« or heard any thing?*' <ť Was this the dream you spoke of? T * cried the Baroness; " was this the.cause of his alarm?" / 4t Methought I was awake," pursued Sir Reginald; **yet it might be but a dream—a wild and fearful dream !" " What was it?" asked the Baroness, whose curiosity was now greatly excited. " It were imprudent to reveal it, Lady ; the substance might alarm you/* <c No matter, I must hear it/' said the Baroness—" proceed. " iť Do you command, Lady ?" " 1 earnestly entreat to know its im¬ port—haste, and inform me of it/* f 2 <f I would
. u I would be excused/' " Nay, prithee let me hear it/* ťc It may disturb and terrify you much/' " Still let me know it—1 beseech, com- mând— — и u Well then, I røttj/obej\--Lastnight/" resumed Sir Reginald, " it seemed, not long after I had retired to" my bed, the moon shining full iuto my chamber, 1 saw a figure resembling, nay, the exact representation, of the late Raron, moving slowly towards me. The door of the apartment was closed, aud even locked, so that no one could have entered, i watched its motions, in silent astonish¬ ment ; it walked, or rather glided, to my bed-side; the curtains seemed to njpve >■ untouched; arid while the beams of a cloudless moon felľ upon its face ------" "Ob,
·* Oh, Heavens !" exclaimed the Baro¬ ness. " I saw every lineament—it was him¬ self—it was Fitzwalter/* " And seemed it not to be a dream?" cried the Baroness, shuddering. " It seemed to myself/ said Sir Regi¬ nald, "as though I were as much awake as at this instant/* ^ Ah ! and how did it appear to you ?" "In complete armour/* " How looked it?" " Pale, and very sorrowful/* 44 Great Heaven Γ exclaimed the Ba¬ roness, " yet it was but a dream Γ "And did the figure speak to your* asked the Baroness. " Yes ; it was from this airy nothing— tiiis unsubstantial form—this apparition, f 3 that
that I learned of the purposed arrival of Earl Ormond." " Amazing !" exclaimed the Baroness, *' yet it was but a dream : and wdiat said it ofthis Ormond?" " It spoke of him in terms of hatred, expressed, however, rather in respect to his familj- than himself, those of Ormond and Fitzwalter having been long at va¬ riance." "Did any thing else seem to pass?" asked the Baroness impatiently. "-Yes: it declared the spirit of Fitz¬ walter could not rest, while the enemy of his family remained a gyest at this castle; and that------" "What else ?" 44 I have promised to divulge no more/' "Yet
fí Yet speak," reiterated the Baroness; 14 it was, you know, but a dream.'* " Were 1 fully assuied of that," pur¬ sued Sir Reginald; "but no, 1 have sworn " tť I pray you be explicit," ťf 1 must be silent : but let me conjure you, as j ou value the repose of your once honoured Lord, let not Ormond lead you to tîıe altar/* 44 What, in that case, would be the penalty?" Ig There, too, I must be silent. Urge me not, Lady—I have promised—nay, I have sworn." u Said it aught else," cried the Baro· ness, " that, without a breach of promise and good faith, you might divulge?" " Little, till parting; when, with a ŕ* 4 look
look expressive more of sorrow than o$ anger, it breathed a wish------ J ** Ah î what was it ?'' M That you had made a worthier choice than either Ormonds love or wi¬ dowhood/ 5 t€ Amazing î what meant it then r'* f5 It looked at me; and love, and sweet affection, beamed from its sunken eye. It was a noble, but a fearful sight.** tl And most amazing !" pursued the Baroness/' *' but, remember, Sir Knight, it was but a dream; and dreams are fashioned of the remnants of our waking thoughts. Stid it, indeed, Lord Ormond would be here tn night ?** "It did." " This was most strange ! such pre¬ dictions, when verified, savour of super¬ natural
natural agency, even though conveyed in a dream. ' Lord Ormond, indeed, arrives to-night ; and, as the day is wearing fast r Γ conjure you, Sir Reginald, to make cur parting short.'* <É Yes, Lady," rejoined Sir Reginald, as if inspired with a sudden resolution, (i it shall be short. Inexorable in your re¬ solves, I leave you to your fate. Adieu 7 Madam, adieu." " Adieu, Sir Reginald," cried the Ba¬ roness faintly ; then, as if fearful of en¬ creasing his uneasiness by a constrained coldness, she held out her hand, adding, u Though I cannot give you my löveg¬ be assured you possess my esteem ; and aiever, till you shall have violated the laws of honour and decorum, will you lose it. Jlay prosperity attend you throughout w 5 vour
your days, and every earthly felicity be jours!" Sir Reginald seized tbe hand she pre¬ sented, and carried it to his lips, faltered out something he could not express arti¬ culately, and then hastened from the room, and in the course of another hour r publicly left the castle.
СНЛР.
...................,"" ' 'β— · CHAP. VIII. ■ ■ I cannot love him; ľ Vet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble, Of great estate, oí fresh and stainless youth ; In voices well dtvulcfd ; free, learn'd, and valiant; And in dimension, and the shan« of nature, A gracious person j but yet l cannot love him. Shakespeari, The Baroness ruminated upon the sub¬ ject of this extraordinary dream, which, in whatever way she contemplated ir, partook largely of tlie marvellous. Sir Reginald had declared that he had not been informed by Winifred, or any other kuman means, of the expected arrival of v ft Earl
Earl Ormond. She had no reason to doubt his veracity ; nor could she, even for a moment, imagine he would dare to impose upon her with a fiction. The image of the Baron, had then certainly been represented to him in a dream, so like reality, as to leave him, even then, uncertain whether he had not indeed beheld his disembodied spirit. He had, iu faneja if not in reality, both seen and conversed with him. The conversation be had in part revealed, but bound, as it seemed, by a solemn engagement, to pre¬ serve an eternal silence respecting the rest, it remained involved in mystery and obscurity. When struck by an astonish¬ ing connection of incidents and events, rarely imaged in dreams, for the most part wild and disarranged, it appeared* supernatural; and, while the possibility occurred
occurred to her that it might not be^ as she had at first imagined, a mere chimera of the brain, in the absence of reason and reflections but a real appearance, a shud¬ dering sensation seized"her, and the very blood seemed to chill in her veins* With a view of obtaining a more tho· rough knowledge and satisfaction on the subject on which she had before ques¬ tioned Sir Reginald, she addressed en¬ quiries to Winifred; w ? ho,^ without the least hesitation or confusion, repeated the words she had delivered in her message to Sir Reginald ; and thus, could a remain* ing doubt have lingered in her mind, it would now have been wholly dissipated. Winifred, who had been present at the interview between Sir Reginald and the Baroness, expressed an astonishment not inferior
inferior to that which the Baronesa her¬ ielf felt# Anxious, bowever, to calm the mind of her Lady, which she perceived was greatly agitated and disturbed, perhaps morethair she was herself aware of, she prudently discouraged the idea,- that what had been thus forcibly pourtrayed to Sir Reginald's- fancy, whatever appearance of reality it might assume, could be any thing but a dream ; and by the recollection and enu¬ meration of various others * of a like sature, almost equally extraordinary, in which persons, not unknown to her, had seen, or seemed to have seen, their de¬ parted friends, she sought to divert the thoughts of the Baroness from the sub¬ ject of her present agitation and astonish- * ment, and prepare her for an interview witb
with Earl Ormond, whose arrival was now hourly expected. Lord Broke, who had been dispatched by the King on an em¬ bassy to James the Third, who, at tlmt time, filled the throne of Scotland, was to accompany him to the castle; but the nature of his mission requiring expe¬ dition, and not admitting of delay, be was to remain there only the night, and to proceed early on the following day to¬ the Court of Scotland. Never, perhaps, was there a period when the Baroness could be less disposed to meet the approach of an intended suitor, the favourite of a King, wdiose power over females of rank and estate, according to the usages of the realm, was even greater than that of a father, and especially over her, as the widow of the attainted Fitzwalter. One circumstance 5 afforded
. afforded some consolatiou. Lord Broks would be present at the introfluction of Ormond; and eveu should it be impos¬ sible for him to continue his stay at the castle, during the whole of the Earľs ^isit, she hoped to be able to win from him a promise to use his utmost efforts to prevent a marriage, which she could not think of without anguish, or even with¬ out abhorrence. So 1 great, indeed, was her repugnance to every thought of this union, that she resolved, rather than be¬ come the wife of Earl. Ormond/ to dare the vengeance of the offended sovereign* stem and arbitrary as he was known to be ; and, should he so far exert his prero* gative, as to seize her fiefs, and confine her to the most remots^and solitary monastery, to submit to any decree that might be passed against her, rather than sacrifice
her principles and feelings to the uncon¬ trouled sway of kingly power. Winifred, whose mind was not less busied by various plans than that of the Baroness, in endeavouring to suggest means to free her Lady from her present difficulties and embarrassments, wann'y interested herself in her distresses ; even those of Sir Reginald seemed forgotten ; for Winifred, probably from a conviction that all she might urge, or say, in his cause, under the present unfavourable circumstances, would be ineffectual, for^ bore to mention even his name. All rea¬ sonable hopes of persuading the Baroness to this marriage were now at an end ; and she yielded to what she really thought was necessity. She did not doubt, even for a moment, but that the Earl would be enamoured of the Baroness; and that however
however unsuccessful he might finally prove in his attempts to gain her affec¬ tions, he would, on no account, be per¬ suaded to relinquish a prize, which, sup* ported as were bis pretensions by the authority of the king, she but too easily foresaw he had almost the power to com¬ mand. Her Lady's beaurv, of which Winifred had formeily been as vain as if she had her¬ self possessed the lovely fleeting charm, she now contemplated with dissatisfaction, and even with regret ;, for she saw in it one of the greatest obstacles toher own wishes, and those of the Baroness ; and happy, at this moment, would she have been, if possessing the wand of Urgando, she could have metamorphosed beauty into deformity. In vain she endeavoured to» select a drøss* which might conceal or detract
detract from the native graces of her Lady's figure. Art could neither effec¬ tually diminish, nor effectually encrease wdiat nature had so liberally conferred; and she perceived, with regret, that the Baroness, when attired to wait the ex¬ pected approach of Lord Ormond, ap¬ peared even more thau usually brilliant and fascinating. Whatever might be the beauty of the Baroness, it afforded her no pleasure or satisfaction ; nay, her vigorous mind little regarded that, to her, worthless quality. Occupied by the most uneasy presages, she had dismissed her woman, and, meditating alone, endeavoured to arm herself with tbe fortitude necessary to support her with propriety and dignity, under the iiksome visit, and painful suit of her authorized lover. The
The trampling of hoofs, and'the loud 1 tone of the trumpets, echoing 1 through the courts of the castle, seemed to declare the approach' of the expected guestô; and it was soon announced that Lord Viscount Broke, her father; attended by a few of his traili, had preceded the Earl, who, with a long cavalcade of attendants, was then to be seen descending.the hill* opposite to the eminence of the castle. The Baroness, delighted and reassured by the intelligence of her father's arrival; preparatory to the introduction of the Earl, hastened' to receive hirn, as he alighted from his liorse at the great steps leading to the hall. Lord Broke; who tenderly loved hisdaugluer, whom he had not seen for many months, embraced her with the warmest affection. But the overflowings of paternal tenderness were- ^ooit
ЧШ NOCTURNAL ItöNSTREL. 1 U soon converted into sensations of the most poignant solicitude and lively regret, when the Baroness, throwing herself into bis arms, entreated he would save her, if possible, from а destiny so full of misery, as that in which a marriage with Eail Ormond would inevitably involve her. The good old Lord, who had pleased himself with the prospect of this pro¬ jected alliance, which he considered as highly eligible, and to which he foresaw no obstacles, listened to this request with astonishment and distress. It is true, he had heard of his daughter's protest against a second marriage; but he.had regarded it, as men are very apt to do, as the mere effects of grief upon a nini shaken by the first paroxysm of its so. row, for the loss of a tenderly-beloved object ; and, of course, had imagined that time would, e?e now,
«ow, have effected a change in a determi¬ nation, which, as he conceived it to have owed its origin to a sort of derangement of intellect, would die away as the judg¬ ment might resume ¡ts functions. Nor, indeed, could he easily persuade himself that a Lady, beautiful and rich, and as yet hardly three-and-twenty years old, one too, who had once been the orna¬ ment and pride of the English Court, could thus seriously resolve to hide her¬ self from the eye of public admiration, or with a constancy, inconsistent, as he thought, with the character of woman, that she would prefer the solitary state of widowhood, shut up in an ancient gloomy castle, situated among wilds and moun¬ tains, with no other companions than her own vassals and domestics, to a gay and "brilliant court : he, therefore, smiling with
with confidence in the truth of these his persuasions, mentioned t!ur it must be impossible that she could enjoy more hap¬ piness in her present state than in the honours that now awaited her. He tri¬ umphantly expatiated upon the virtues and noble qualities of the approachmg suitor, and bade her obev the commands of the Kiug, and the injunctions of her father, and give him a favourable re¬ ception. In vain, however, was every argument he could use; the Baroness could not listen, she coukl only weep in his arms, and with deep aud suffocating sighs inter¬ cede for his pity, in saving her from the dreaded, hated marriage.' ť< Oh, hear me, hear me !" exclaimed she, u my be¬ loved father, when I solemnly declare, the moment that gives me to Lord Ormond will
will be the last of happiness and comfort I can ever know. And will vou, oh! will you, my father, suffer jour beloved «daughter, your Gertrude, to be doomed to certain and irremediable misery, which it is m your power to prevent?" " I should indeed be a wretch," said Lord Broke, " and utterly unworthy of being honoured by you as a father, were I to barter your peace to any consi¬ derations of worldly polky alone. But, look up, my sweet Gertrude, behold thj r father. Do tbese eyes, moistened bj* womanish tears, beam aught but tender¬ ness and afiection ? Oh, Gertrude, that I might but behold the accomplishment of tbe dearest wish of mj r heart—that I might but see my daughter's children ! and not die mourning the extinction ofa long line of nobles in myself." " Oli '
<% Oh, my father!"* exclaimed the Ваш* Less, bt my dear, dear father !" ζζ Wait but the effects of time, mv Ш love," resumed his Lordship; fi you may yet, impossible as it may seem to you, you may yet love a worthy and honourable husband." " Oh, never, never !" cried the Baro¬ ness. (i Let me entreat you, however, my dear Gertrude," continued he, " to sus¬ pend your resolution, at least for the present ; and let your own judgment decide as to this point. I%have always considered your understanding as excel¬ lent ; I know your feelings are delicately fine ; but I think, with the fortitude you possess, you might so far surmount them, as to be enabled, in a short time,* to think the man whom your sovereign has sc- vol. ι. α léete!
lected for you, may be the one you would yourself have chosen. Nay, look not thus piteously on me, Gertrude; your father would persuade ; he will forego his authority ; he will never command. I will not say that Ormond possesses those courtly graces, by wdiich j-our sex are often gained, and with which the youug and blooming Fitzwalter first lured you to his arms; but let him not, on this ae- ' count, be vour aversion. Nursed on the t и lap of war, and trained to feats of toil and hardihood, even from his cradle, be has not had leisure, during the long con¬ test between the Roses, to acquire those graces and accomplishments, on which many are inciuied to place too high a value. But, trust me, Gertrude, he pos¬ sesses qualities far more noble, and of sterling excellence. Amid the shocks of battles,
battles, be combats with undaunted heart ; he has often fought, often conquered, and served the cause he espoused ; and these are actions of lustre to a Baron's name. Such a one you may expect to find him ; and, dignified; you may expect also, with what in him I know exists in full power, the purest principle of unsullied honour; and this, my daughter, far outweighs, in sterling value, the flimsy qualities of fawning gallantry, and smooth-tongued compliment. Should such a man be pleased to take you, Gertrude, and wdio, seeing yo", ean reject so fair a prize? the H ojal Henry (maik you, what clemency !) ;>ivcs back the kufJtcd lands of Fitz¬ walter, entire, to vou and vours. Should you senni his intimated wibh, dread the disseizure of vour hu^c domains, and withpovcity, perhaps a prison. Such is о lì the
the prerogative of Englands crown. Dare mot, Gertrude, the danger; be not un¬ grateful for offered grace ; nor think your father loves you not, when he urges the suit of the valiant Ormond. Rather doubt his affections, when he forbears to exercise the right of a father, and only prays for that compliance, wdiich he has most assuredlv a right to command/* Though language like this may seem harsh to the ear of a modern female, vet it seemed not so in ancient times of feudal authority. The Baroness, soothed, and even softened to a degree of sensibilitv almost painful, wept her thanks, anil pressed to her lips the hand of him who had thus confirmed her liberty ; wdien now the tucket sounded at the barrier of the outer moat of the castle, and an¬ nounced the approach of the Earl. Lord
Lord Broke instantly hastened to re¬ ceive him at the steps of the great ball; anil the Baroness, wdth aching heart, took- her station at the oriel, and saw the troop of guests enter the court. First, in procession, came six horsemen, with ti umpets and bugles, two and two, followed, in hke fashion, by six more, with pipes and instruments of soft music. Then came a knight, bearing the shield of Ormond, rich in quartering^, and embla¬ zoned, followed by two ancients, bearing peiions of silk and gold. Next, the Earl, on a grey charger, armed iu mail, with thread of gold his beaver up. Then fol¬ lowed two fair pagts, one bearing his lance, the other his shield of battle. Then advanced fifty lances with their esquires, preceding and following twenty grooms, leading twenty sumpter horses g 3 bearing
bearing the Earľs equipage. The whole stood formed in lines when they arrived at the great steps : first, the trumpets and bugles, and next, the pipers, sounded a salute; and then opening before the Earl, he vaulted from his steed, and, fol¬ lowed by his two pages, and six attend¬ ants, he received the salute of Lord Broke in form, and then entered the hall, where the greater part of the castle establishment stockt duly arranged by the steward, in their best array. After a few turns, and while a messenger was sent to the Baroness, Lord Broke and a page went to lead her in. And soon she came, attended by her damsels and pages, ha¬ bited in her robes of ceremony, and handed by her father, who, advancing to the^Earl, said, " Good my Lord, behold my daughter, the Baroness Fitz wal ter; and
and my hope is, that, upon your mutual good-liking, ye shall soon be well ac¬ quainted/* The Earl, higjhly pleased with her modest beauty and grace, courteously bowed, and expressed his sense of the honour he then enjoyed ; and the Baro¬ ness, in reply, gave, with tongue rather faltering, a suitable welcome to her re- ч «owned guest. The nobles then retired, with their principal attendants, into an adjoining apartment, while the tables were covered, and then returned, and dined in the hall, at the chief table; while the knights and esquires of the Earl, and those of the Baroness, and thè other principal part of her establishment, dined on tables beknv, \ on plenty of fish, veniso.n, and fowl, and wine; while the minstrels, from the gal-H g 4 ìerv, >
lery, regaled the ear with dulcet sounds no less than the eye was giutified with the display of rich goblets, eweis, and platters of solid gold, and the taste by the gust ofthe most savoury viands. The Baroness was relieved from the greatest part of the trouble of the enter- tamrnent by the presence of her father, wdio dictated the healths, though, some¬ times, as he declared, at his daughters suggestion. / The Earl, who was seated at berieft liands though lofty in his general de¬ meanor, was greatly charmed with the Baroness, and shewed her every possible attention and courtesy. After a due stay at the table, the Bai o n ess and her attend¬ ants retired, and left the table to their male visitors, who spent the lemainder of the evening in festive hilarity, in which CJ mf * the
the health of their fair hostess was by no means forgotten. When retired to her chamber, the Baro* ness had leisure to contemplate the cha¬ racter of her new lover. He appeared to be between forty and fifty ; his figure, though majestic, was rather athletic than graceful ; his countenance was open, aud strongly expressive ; his eyes were large and dark ; his eye-brows thick, and finely arched ; his complexion was brown, and its original colour somewhat deepened by a long series of military services. Yet, though with a person rather striking than handsome, and a total defection as to all those graces and accomplishments which distinguish the courtier, Lord Ormond, ne¬ vertheless, possessed qualities, which might have recommended him as a lover to al¬ most any other woman than the Baroness. о 5 There
There was, indeed, something in his ap¬ pearance and manner not easy to describe, but which, to the eye of discernment, if not of taste, rendered him even more interesting than if he had really possessed the qualifications above mentioned. The Baroness soon felt easy in his society—she was even pleased with it; she, however, wished only to partake of it in the pre¬ sence of her father, who, to her infinite distress, was obliged to leave her, to pur- sne, early on the following morning, his route toward Scotland, on the business of tîıe embassy from the English court. The Earl was to remain at the castle till the return of Lord Broke,
сил?.
gg ', ί,,Ι J, .,: , , \ Λ СНЛР. IX. S'arnor non e che dunque é quel ch'io ? Ma s'egli é amor per dio che cora e quale ? S*e buona ond* é ľcfľeto aspro mortale ? S"e ria ond'è sì dolce ogni tormento ? Petrarch. The Baroness, amid the various incidents and adventures of the two last days, had not forgotten the mysterious minstrelsy in tlie woods, and in the hope of again hearing it, she waited near au hour in her oi iel. To her surprise, however, and ex¬ treme regret, the music, wliich had been ьо constantly and regularly heard for q 6 several
several successive nights, had ceased to fill the wood with its sweet mysterious melody : she listened, in the hope of catching some faint sounds; imagining, as it was now late, it might have retreated to the more distant woods ; but all was silent ; not even a note was to be caught Disappointed and perplexed, she retired at length to her bed ; but this incident combined with other recent events to prevent the approach of sleep; and having wondered that it came, she now, with an almost equal astouishment, womleied that it came not. A repose she so greatly needed at length stole upon her senses; but owing to the perturbed state of her mind, and the various uneasy circumstances of the clay, it was short and disturbed ; and she awoke, with a terrifying apprehension that she
she had been awakened by a noise resem¬ bling the clattering of some loose pieces of armour, the sound of which seemed to proceed from an adjoining room, the apaitment in which the late Baron had formerly slept. This chamber, whicli was one of the largest in the suit which composed the western front of the castle, had, ever since the demise of the Baron, been almost whollv deserted. The Baro- ness herself had never entered it ; and, except Winifred, who took care some¬ times to open the windows, and, once or twice, to have a fire kindled, in order to keep the fui nit urc from being despoiled by the damp air from the Like, whieh nearly environed the castle, no one had evr visited it. The Baroness, for a moment or two, was so thoroughly persuaded of the rea¬ litv
lity of what she seemed to have heard, that she was no lonsrer surmised that Sir Reginald should entertain the same de¬ gree of doubt and uncertainty' relative to the appearance of the apparition he had described. For the instant, she was so entirely overcome with terror and appre¬ hension, as to be rendered almost inca¬ pable of motion ; the reflection, however, that almost immctliatelv succeeded, ofthe apparent impossibility of her having really heard any sounds, soon restored her to confidence, and slie again sunk into sleep. The returning light of the morning served, in part, to dissipate the fears ís hich night and silence had engendered; ¿till, however, the Baroness could not persuade herself but that she had really been awakened bv a noise, whieh she could
could only compare to the clashing of armour near her bed ; and whicli she seemed distinctly to have heard, even while wide awake. Conceiving, however, it might have been suggested to her fancy bj* some dream, which she had ceased to recollect, she resolved to men¬ tion nothing of this circumstance to Wi¬ nifred, or anj f of hei domestics; and to endeavour to turn her thoughts from a subject, on which it seemed impossible for her to obtain either information or satisfaction, from any thing they coukl say, to one that more nearlj' interested her, the proposed marriage with Luid Ormond. The assurances of her fiither, that he would not iusist upon, or even allow her to be disposed of, contrary to her incli¬ nai ions, if be had the power to prevent 5 it,
it, had greatly reassured and consoled hen One task, one painful task, however* awaited her, that of informing Lord Ormond of her resolution of not entering into a second marriage, and, of course, her rejection of his offers, shoukl she per¬ ceive, bv his manner, he was likelv to make any. The Baroness, although, indépendant of a high degree of beauty, she possessed more requisites for inspiring a strong and ardent passion than, perhaps, ever before fell to the lot ofa single female,, was, nevertheless, so entirely free from vanity, and all consciousness of superiority, either mental or personal, that she believed it possible, and even probable, that the Earl, having seen her, might not greatly desire the connection. It had been proposed to him by the King, whohad intended it as an
an act of favour towards herself, rather than the Earl; who, being directed to seek her alliance, by no particular mo¬ tive of interest or ambition, but merely in compliat.ee with the implied will of his sovereign, would probably, she thought* desire as much as herself, that it never should take place. Whether she should immediately inform him of her resolution of remaining single, whatever might be the penalty of her dis- obedience, or wait till he should have made some disclosure, which might enable her to discover what were liis real senti¬ ments concerning her, remained for soma time а subject for frequent deliberation. At length, she determined to preserve a silence, for the present, respecting her intentions, at least till she shoukl have had another interview with the Earl, when v
when, probably, something might tran¬ spire, which would afford her a further insight into his real motives and designs. Whilst the Baroness was indulging the somewhat improbable si 1 gestion that she might herself prove as much an object of indifference to the Earl аз he was to her, Ormond was revolving in his mind, whe¬ ther it was possible so young and beauti¬ ful a woman as the Baroness might think of him with the partiality he already felt towards her; and whether a disparity of years, and various other circumstances, might not prevent her from experiencing " that strong affection, and tender interest, which he conceived essential tothe happi¬ ness he was come to court. From the idea of forcing the inclina¬ tions of one so lovely, and, apparently, so deserving, as was the Baroness, his soul revolted
revolted with abhorrence and detestation. To have been voluntarily selected by her τ- to have been the object of her heart's choice, would have been bliss—would have been rapture! But could he hope? this was scarcely possible. ťť No, she camiot/' exclaimed he, " she cannot love me! Yet, ashamed as I am, to acknowledge even to myself that I have thus hastily imbibed a passion, I thought, I hoped, at least to have resisted, till I was convinced it was mutual, my happiness, if not my peace, depends upon—■—upon what? a WOman. Oh ! shame, shame, Ormondd a woman thou hast scarcely more than once seen, and in whose averted look, and sor¬ rowing eye, thou hast already read thy sad, sad destiny ; she will not, she cannot lore thee" Jf such were the sensations and reflec¬ tions
tions of the Ľai I on a first and secomi interview, it will not be deemed extraor¬ dinary, on a repetition of them, observing the same symptoms of depression, and tender grief, joined to a behaviour even more distant and constrained, he should have resigned all hopes, if, indeed, he could be said to have entertained any, of making any favourable impression upon the heart of the Baroness, who, nevertheless, preserved in her manners the same courtesy and politeness with which she had at first received him. The conviction that he must not hope for a return of the affection he had already conceived for her, was accompa¬ nied by a degree of sorrow and disappoint¬ ment, which so short an acquaintance seemed scarcely to warrant. Impatience Succeeded to regret; and he now re¬ solved^
solved, by a declaration of his real senti¬ ments concerning her, to put an end to a suspense that was already become painful ; and now again overcome with a timi¬ dity he could not surmount, he deter¬ mined to defer the execution of this design, till be could do it without that awkwardness and embarrassment, which he was sensible would attend an immediate disclosure. The Baroness was not к ss anxious for a developement she at once wished and dreaded ; yet, although both were equally solicitous for explanations, neither had courage to enter upon them ; and Lord Broke had departed, and the Earl been three days at the castle, and several good opportunities had presented themselves, and yet he had never declared the pur¬ pose of his visit, or the reason of bis stay. Of
Ofthe former, she had been informed by her father; and with respect to the latter, her penetration had already made it most obvious, tbat Earl Ormond regarded her with feelings of no common tenderness, such as were likely to be the cause of much embarrassment, and put the strength of her resolution to the utmost test.
I
CIIAP.
СНЛР. χ. 4 Tjs now the very witching time of night, When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out, Contagion to this world. SHAKESPEARU. While the Earl and Baroness were thus the cause of mutual uneasiness to each other, the rest of the inhabitants of the castle were thrown into an universal terror and consternation, by an alarm, spread, as it appeared, by Ethelind, who, having been dispatched by Winifred to fetch some article of furniture out of the cham¬ ber of the late Baron, had declared she had
had seen a figure completely armed, and with the visor down, standing by the side of the bed. Another ofthe servants, on passing along the gallery, in wbich the same apartment opened, had observed a light in the chamber, as ofa taper moving «lowly about the room ; and had distin¬ guished groans, which seemed to proceed from some person or persons in great agony of mind or body. The terror diffused throughout the establishment, by the mention of these extraordinary appearances, however natu¬ ral, was severely reprehended by Winifred, who treated it as a tale calculated to dis¬ turb the familv, insisted that it was no doubt false, and declared that Ethelind should sit up alone, for some hours, on the ensuing night, in order, as she ob¬ served, to be convinced that the bugbear she
she had raised was the creature of her own silly imagination, and to prevent the rest of the domestics from being infected with her foolish fears. Ethelind, who still persisted she had seen something resembling, as she thought, in figure, the late Baron Fitz¬ walter, and who was really herself an object of compassion, whether what she had described was real or imaginary, from the terror she exhibited, could not really believe that Winifred, however vio¬ lent and unfeeling, would execute her threat of confining her in this apartment. Her surprise and distress then may be rather imagined than described, when Winifred, at the hour when the rest of the family were retiring to rest, led, or rather dragged her, to the dreadful cham·* ber*— for so, to Etheliiti, it appeared; vou ι. h where,
^vhere, closing the door upon her, leaving her one solitary lamp, which served •dnly to render " darkness visible/' she bade her repose with the spirit of the Baron, whoift she tauntingly assured her would not fail to visit her, Haviug pro¬ nounced these words, she drew the bolt of the large folding doors, and departed. The poor girl, who had no resource, cither in her prayers or entreaties, against the tyranny of Winifred, was obliged to submit herself to her fate, however hard. A flood of tears had somewhat relieved the overcharged heart of Ethelind, when, throwing herself upon her knees, her innocent hands clasped together, she addressed a prayer to Heaven for her pre¬ servation from .the perils and terrors that seemed to await her in that awful cham¬ ber, which hardly even an angel from Heaven
Heaven could have convinced Ethelind, after what s}ie had either really sten or imagined, was not haunted and disturbed by the spirit of the Baron. She arose from her posture, trembling* yet somewhat reassured by the hope her fervent prayers might be heard, and that no terrifying vision nrjht arise to appal her. Hitherto all was silent. Her lamp burnt dimly in its socket; and the beams of a waning moon threw a melancholy uncer¬ tain gleam athwart the gloom of the chamber. She arose ; and partly opening* the shutter of one of the high gothic windows, looked out upon the surround¬ ing hills. As she gazed, the sky became suddenly overcast ; the clouds flew wildly over the disk of the moon ; the wind rose high ; and the low muttering of distant u & thunder,
tlmnder, accompanied by a few flashes of vivid lightning, which, as it threw a mo¬ mentary radiance throughout the apart¬ ment, seemed to give a horrible sort of animation to the few objects contained iu it, conspired to overwhelm her with new fears and apprehensions. Oppressed by the extreme solitariness of her situation, and the terrors that on every side assailed her, the little fortitude she had been struggling to acquire for¬ sook her ; and, throwing herself upon a large old-fashioned settee, placed nearly opposite the bed, she yielded to the ago¬ nies that oppressed her heart. While, with eyes still streaming with tears, and a bosom throbbing with emo¬ tion, she sat, every moment expecting some dreadful image to appear before her, she heard a gentle noise, which resembled the
Hie creaking ofa door, turning slowly on its rusty hinges, as if opening with great caution. No door, or any apparent pos¬ sible means of access into this melancholy deserted apartment, except the large fold¬ ing doors by which slie had entered, opening into the corridor, was, bowever, to be seen. Hardly had she time for conjecture, when the loose arras, with which the chamber was hung, became suddenly and violently agitated; and the next instant, while almost fainting with her fears, she heard herown name distinctly pronounced» *' Do not be alarmei!, Ethelind/* said the same voice, " it is only me." The voice, she thought, was that of Edgar; but in the next instant, the person who had spoke emerged fr^m behind the arrast which was hung, according to the fashion и 3 of
the times, at some distance from the walls, and she perceived, as she thought, the clown, "Oh ! Mr. Motley/' cried Ethelind, " is it you? it was very kind of you to come hither ; for indeed I am sadly frightened/' " Do you not know me, mj* dear Ethe¬ lind?* returned the same voice, which she was now convinced was that of Edgar. *· Know you ! yes/' repeated Ethelind, with an air of surprise, which was imme¬ diately converted into the most animated delight ; " but wby do I see jou in this disguise ?" " I procured it of Motley/' replied Edgar, " who, after informing me of Dame Winifred's design of confining you in this apartment, a piece of cruelty I conceive to be almost unexampled, agreed to
to change coats with me; so that if Witii- fied shouid enter, wliich I conceive not to be unlikelj', if I cannot escape unob¬ served, I shall lie mistaken for the clow», wbo, you know, may do any thing. I visited this chamber some hours ago with Motley, who was sorry to hear of Wini¬ fred's threat, and revealed to me the secret of the concealed door by which I entered ; which, I believe, not even Wl·· nifred herself is acquainted with, as it has been nailed up for some years, and is so completely covered with the arras, as en¬ tirely to escape observation. We had some difficulty in withdrawing the fasten¬ ings, particularly the large rusty bolts, of which tiiere are no less than four, but nnaily succeeded in opening it, and for¬ tunately without creating any alarm, the h 4 Baroness
Baroness being below with the Earl, and the rest of the family too remote to hear the hammerings and knockings we were obliged to make, before our purpose could he accomplished." (i Oh, Heavens !" exclaimed Ethelind, " what if Dame Winifred should return and find you here ! she said once she would keep me here all night, but I think she cannot surely intend to be so inhuman ; yet if she should—if we should be caught -*-if she should really come back, and see you in this chamber with me------" " Never mind if she does," said Edgar ; "she will certainly not discover me under this disguise. Alas ! vvhat uneasiness has this ill-natured old woman already given us, my dear Ethelind!" rontinued he, (( and how dear to me are these moments, these
these few short moments 1 for even houra will appear but as moments, that I may now spend with you."* " Oh ! but the ghost/* cried Ethelind r ťí the ghost—the ghost !" " I care not for all the ghosts in the infernal world, ' exclaimed Edgar, with energy ; ' f what have we to fear ? we are innocent of any crime; and is not inno¬ cence a shield that will be always found to be impenetrable ?*' " Oh, Edgar !" resumed Ethelind, shuddering at the recollection of her former alarm, " had you seen this dread¬ ful apparition ľ' íť I do not think you have seen any thing, my dear Ethelind/* rejoined Ed¬ gar; " believe me, it was merely the creature of your own fancy, inspired by the melancholy of your feelings, caused и S bvr
by the cruet treatment you receive hcYe; and tlie extreme loneliness of this castle, combined with the ignorance and super·* stition of those vou sometimes converse ' mf ' with. Answer me, Ethelind, was you not first told by some of the inhabitants of this place, that the castle was haunted ? such a report was, I know, in circulation, shortly* after the demise of the Baton, and lias since been revived, owdng, no doubt, in part, to the unaccountable mj'sterious strains of music wdiich haye been lately heard in the woods/* " I have often heard that music, Ed¬ gar/* said Ethelind, " but it was so sweet, that I loved to listen to it, and was never in the least frightened, no, not even ifl were alone." " But you have been told it was played by a spirit?" " Yes;
"Yes; and I have often thought so too ; for, if it was a human being, he would certainly, ere this, have been dis¬ covered ; beside, I think no minstrel but a celestial one, could play so divinely sweet." " This, then, my dear Ethelind," said Edgar, " suggested the idea of a ghost, if not first to you, to some one, who has^ taken pains to impress you with the same opinion they themselves entertain.' The spirit ofthe wood, by an easy transition,, from the credulity of its inhabitants, be¬ comes the ghost ofthe castle: this you have heard, and, it feems, believe." " No, it was 1^— ît was I that first said 1 had seen the ghost," cried Ethelind;, <" and it was for this Dame Winifred resolved to punish me, by confining me in this chamber." 11.6 "And·.
" And what did you see r'* asked Edgar. Ethelind described the apparition in the manner before mentioned. " It is impossible," exclaimed Edgar; " it could not be ľ' " Indeed, Edgar, it was really and indeed a ghost ; I would not tell a story for the world ; I am sure it was a dreadful apparition" " I cannot believe you really saw this figure, Ethelind, though I am sure you thiuk you did. But why, in the name of all the saints at once, should it appear to vou ? ,s ml " I do not know f but I am sure, Ed¬ gar, it did appear to me." *'It is impossible; the spirits of the dead, I am persuaded, are not allowed to revisit the eartii ; and if they were, why should they——'* He
He was interrupted by a loud groan, which seemed to issue from an opposite side of the chamber ; it was repeated, and succeeded almost in an instant, by a noise which seemed like the falling of a coat of mail, or some large piece of armour. Ethelind screamed, and seizing Edgar's arm, wildly exclaimed, " It is coming— it is coming. Oh ! hide me, hide me------" "Hush, hush, my dear Ethelind/" cried Edgar; " do not suffer yourself to be thus alarmed. All this may be no¬ thing " i( Nothing !" exclaimed Ethelind, "no¬ thing ! Oh ! Edgar, let us, I entreat you, kt us leave this place. I shall die if I continue in it any longer. The door you entered will afford us a retreat through the passage to the western corridor; let usgo this instant/* »By
" By no means/ said Edgar; "such an escape would betray us, and subject you, perhaps, my Ethelind, to new insults and persecutions/* " But suppose the ghost should ap* pear ?" " It will not harm us if it does," replied Edgar; " but I do not yet give implicit credit to this strange relation of yours, Ethelind, though I am sure, as I said be¬ fbre, you most religiouslj T believe it." "Oh! do not say so, Edgar, do not say so, even if you do not believe it, or, perhaps, as a punishment for your incre¬ dulity, it will appear to us; and if I were to see it once again«——Oh I Edgar,. whatever may be tbe consequence, let us instantly depart. See how tbe lightning flashes along the chamber ! It grows more and more awful ! and,' hark! wdiat dreadful
dreadful peals of thunder ! Oli ! save me —save me from such a combination of horrors as await me in this chamber !" " If you continue to be thus agitated and alarmed," rejoined Edgar, "you shall go, let the event be what it will. But strive, at least, to combat your fears ; believe me, wdien I say» they may not be so reasonable as you imagine : a partial gleam of light, serving only to throw the remaining space of this chamber into deeper gloom, and the accidental move¬ ment of something shook by the wind, rushing in from a fractured casement, joined to the terror which had previously taken possession of your mind, from the circumstances of your having been obliged to come hither unattended at a late hour in the evening, might altogether have 3 conspired
conspired to suggest to your imagination the fearful spectre you have described/* " Well, but the groans, and that ter¬ rible crash we heard afterwards !" " For these/* pursued Edgar, " I can only account from the winds and storms of the night, in which we are apt to hear noises we cannot always account for. "What we conceived to be a groan, might be a sound caused by pent-up wind strug¬ gling for admission. In respect to the other noise, the place in which the ar¬ moury is disposed, is not, L think, very remote from this chamber; a thunder¬ bolt, or eveu a powerful gust of wind, might have burst open some door, and thus, having free accesa, may have thrown -down, with its violence, one of the helmets or coats of mail, of which
which I know there are several in the casemates/' " But did not the sounds seem to pro¬ ceed almost from this chamht ?" ;aid Ethelind. " They did ; so near indeed as to sur* 'prise me; as 1 beheve the distance be¬ tween this chamber and the armoury is a considerable space ; and the walls are of a stupendous thickness," " It could not then be caused by the wind/' " I think it might, nevertheless. Al¬ though I believe what we have heard may hereafter be accounted for,'* resumed Edgar, " I own, I am yet greatly sur¬ prised, and confess sliould like to discover the mystery that seems to belong to this chamber, as also that of the music nightly heard in these woods. But I would now seize
seize a moment or two to speak of cir¬ cumstances, in which I am more deeply interested, as more nearly concerning my future peace, to tell my Ethelind that her Elgar has no wish so fervent and so sincere, as that whieh he feels for her hap¬ piness, and that he would even die to ensure it. But you are pale, Ethelind, you are still cruelly alarmed ; j r et hear me, a few minutes only, and then, if you desire it, I will release you/' " I do, Edgar," cried Ethelind, " I do hear you/' her cheek before, indeed, very pale, uow flushed wdth crimson, aud her eyes fixed upon the ground. " I am very wretched," resumed Edgar, 4i and on your account ; I.did hope, nay, I still hope, some timet your wished con¬ sent obtained, to call you mine. But I am destined to be unfortunate. My fiither, without
without consulting my inclinations, is about to contract me to one of fhe must opulent of the Baroness's vassals; and I am threatened with his malediction, and even with disinheritance, if I refuse the marriage. To love the woman he has selected for me, is as impossible as it is that I can ever cease to love you, my Ethelind, on whom my whole hopes of future hap¬ piness depend. Our time may be short; I must therefore be explicit. I am те- solved, whatever may be the penalty of my disobedience, not to consent to this alliance; I will still venture to hope my dreams of bliss may be accomplished : could I, my Ethelind, once hear you say you love me, half my griefs would be dis¬ pelled : to urge immediately such a decla¬ ration, might be wounding to your deli¬ cacy ; let me then only entreat, if Edgar is
is not deemed unworthy of its possession, you will reserve your hand for him, till he can claim it without injury to himself or you. Speak—speak, my sweet Ethe¬ lind, may I hope------" " Ifl was convinced such an assurance would indeed give you pleasure," said Ethelind, again blushing violently; " yet if your father------" " Oh, talk not of my father/' rejoined Edgar, "he may relent; besides, I can now think of nothing but the happiness of calling you mine, even though tlie time should be far, very far distant· You will then, my Ethelind, preserve those valued affections for one, who, although lie may first bave to struggle with various difficulties and vexations, may hereafter daini you ?" Tears antl bluslies w r ere Ethelind*s only reply ι
reply ; they were sufficiently eloquent to be understood. Edgar took her hand, and pressed it tenderly to his heart. "And now, Ethelind," said he, " if you will, you shall depart." "Yes; let us go/' cried Ethelind; <( yet, ifit should be discovered that we have been here together——" 4t Motley, perhaps, will befriend us," said Edgar. <ť But I have promised to release you, and if you cannot overcome your fears, Ethelind, I will." While he spoke, they heard footsteps in the corridor. " It is Dame Winifred," cried Ethelind, « fly—fly- -----" Edgar retreated behind the arras; and before Winifred had withdrawn the bolts of the folding doors, which she seemed to do with caution, as if fearful of being overheard,
overheard, had departed through the door by which he had entered. " Well," cried Winifred, who now ap¬ peared, " what have you seen to-night? has the ghost informed you of his reason for visiting this chamber ?" She pro¬ nounced these words in a tone of exulta¬ tion, as if enjoying her triumph over the feelings of a poor, innocent, unprotected girl. Ethelind, who was not insensible to this new insult, calmly replied, " she had seen nothing." " Indeed ľ s " cried Winifred, with a look of affected surprise, and, she thought, of incredulity ; u well, you may come out then ; I shoukl not have released you so soon, if the night had not been so stormy ; you may go to bed then,
then, if you will, and inform the servants to-morrow that you are a poor silly fool, as you have proved yourself full of whims aud vagaries ; and tliat they must nut, fcr the future, credit any thing you say." Ethelind, who had no wish but to quit the chamber, hastily retired, without attempting a reply : Winifred remained behind, to close the doors. As she turned to take a survey of the apart¬ ment, she perceived a tall while figure moving slowly along, at some distance, without the arras. It turned—approach¬ ed—glided by her—and disappeared. Winifred shrieked aloud. At the same moment, a peal of thunder, which seemed to rend the heavens, burs£ aver the castle, and seemed to shake it from its very foundations—the lightning flashed horribly through the chamber, The phantom
phantom crossed her again—and again vanished from her view. Another, and a louder shriek escaped her, and she sun}c senseless on the ground. On recovering, she found herself in tlie arms of Ethelind, and two other female domestics, whom her cries had drawn to her assistance. To the eager and busy enquiries of those who attended her, Winifred replied only with self-aceu- sations the most astonishing, declaring herself to be the most presumptuous and w icked of humau beings. After many questions from her assist¬ ants, which Winifred was, for a long time, in no condition to answer, it appeared that she had seen the ghost, so generally believed to haunt the chamber of the deceased Baron. Dame Winifred, who had been the most incredulous, had seen' it,
it, and the reality of the appearance of this phantom was now ascertained beyond the possibility ofa single doubt. Amongst the general consternation oc¬ casioned by this incident, it will not be supposed that the Baroness could be long ignorant of so extraordinary a circum¬ stance. Sbe had left her bed in much terror and surprise, on hearing tiie shrieks of her woman, to enquire the cause of this disturbance ; and having received all the information that could be given her, from those that attended her, had returned to it, with encreased astonishment and perplexity, More ample intelligence of this extraordinary incident was conveyed to her in the morning, by one of her attendant damsels, which was afterwards confirmed by Winifred, and various others of the domestics; for all who had any vol» i. i pietensions
pretensions to appear in her presence, with earnest manner, and busy tongues, were eager in the relation of it ; as also of whatever could possibly be supposed to bear any relation to the ghost; so that every circumstance of what had really happened, and a great many more, were quickly enumerated—the groans, the clattering of the armour, the appearance of the spirit, at one time armed cap-a-pie, at another wrapped in the dreadful livery of death, a winding-sheet. To these superstitions, apparently so well authenticated, were added others, partaking of the ludicrous* Maclawney, the steward, who generally every even¬ ing enlivened his imagination with the necessary quantity of hippocras, which was a mixture of sack with honey, a draught in whieh Mrs# Winifred often pledged
pledged him, had seen the ghost in as many forms as Proteus himself could assume, or as double-seeing eyes, like his own, could possibly figure. It had ap¬ peared to Peter, tbe butler, in the shape of a butt of drink, in the .cellar, and vanished in the twinkling of an eye ; to Nicholas, the coachman, in those of a blue dog, and a white horse ; by one, it had been detected in the person of an owl, vanishing in an ivy bush ; by an¬ other, in that of a raven, croaking at midnight These birds, ill omened as they are sometimes deemed, indeed haunted the castle; for a number of them having made their nests in the tur¬ rets, or among the neighbouring woods, they were often heard to scream, and flap t^eir wings dismally against the windows. It was observed, from the instant almost ι % that
that the music ceased in the woods, tbe ghost began his nightly rounds in the castle : it was therefore presumed, and at length confidently asserted and pro¬ claimed, that the ghost and the minstrd were the same*
CHAP.
CHAP. XI. Oh, ус eternai Powere Tlì&t guide the world ï why doyou shock our reaaou With acts like these, that lay our thoughts in dust? Lu«, It was now utterly impossible to conceal the circumstance of Ethelind*s confine¬ ment in the chamber, or of her having previously seen the armed figure, no longer doubted to be the late Baron Fitz- waiter, (though this had been Winifred's declared intention) from the Baroness, who severely reprimanded her woman for her cruelty to the poor affrighted girl. ι 3. This
This Winifred endeavoured to excuse, on the plea of her having wholly discre¬ dited Ethelind's assertion, relative to this appearance, and of the seeming necessity of convincing her, and the rest of the domestics, of the absurdity of her wild fancies, for as such, she said, she had at first considered them; though she was now, she added, fully assured that some¬ thing did really haunt that part of the castle, particularly the chamber formerly occupied by the Baron ; although when seen by her, it had assumed au appearance quite different from that which Ethelind had described. From this period, nothing but fright and confusion seemed to reign throughout the castle. Scarcely any of the servants dared go alone, even from one apartment to another, at any time, especially if thty iu
m any way communicated with the haunted chamber; but, at night, they were quite paralyzed to any exertions ; and the business of the butterj', the dairy, the stable, and" the hall, were, in a manner,- neglected. The servants all found reason to believe that the ghost bad visited tbeir department. The pant 1er knew it by the scattering of the bread, and the strange noise he heard one morning, as he hastily unlocked the door. " By our Lady/* said the dairy-maid, " the ghost was last night among the milk-paiïs, for all the cream was gone this morning/* The grooms agreed, the ghost must have been at night in tbe stable, and had been riding the mare; for that wdien they went in iu the morning, the poor creature trembled, and was all in a sweat; and as to the· hall, tbe ghost had made the penonş α 4 wave
ıva\e without wind, the aimour hantiin«* v.p to rattle, and the stag lu^rus to giuan» Into one piare, however, ît ^^л 1 s agiecd ihe glicht had nei er uî been, the cellar: no one ever i erasen to vi*4 that place. Thi;, foibtararce of the spectre inight be o\>ii,^ to t'ıe f..v.:îiî\ v. ith which any oi;c Ьал iny očitou tu vuit that placc, ob¬ tained volunteer attendants, ow ing, it may be presumed, to the privilege Mich adven- urers had acquired, of swigging the tup, to £*ut them into sphits against the spirit. Indeed, the plentiful use of good liquor now formed a very considerable ingredient iu the regimen of every person in the castle, Mr. Maclawney took a double potion of hippocras ; and Dame Winifred was frequently in want of a cordial, to keep her from the vapours. Hence it followed, that? though the ghost did not eat
eat or drink a morsel or a drop, in propria persona, yet it added very much to the consumption of the stores of the castle, and the expences of the family, and w T as of course a very expensive visitant to tha Baroness. The clown alone remained uninfected bv the general contagion. He even spoiled with the fears and tenors of his companions ; and had more than once beca detected, in his attempts to encrease them, for his own wanton amusement, a conduct highly displeasing to the Baro¬ ness, who, lepiehendmg him for his foilv*, insisted upon his desisting, for the futuie^ fiom so unjustifiable a practice. mi Why, Motley," said she» ik dost thou, for thine own sport, thus add to our pre¬ sent calamity, by augmenting the terrors of my people î and w hat ís the reason that ^ i J tliou *
thou art inclined thus to mirth and festi¬ vity, at a time when others are racked with fear and amazement ?" " Again my reason ! again requirest thou my reason?** quoth the fool ; 4 * in troth, a most notable demand ! Prithee, Lady, give me a little of thy ugliness." " My ugliness ľ' " Yea, truly, thy ugliness. *' ' #t Thou talkest madly, fool/· te Not a whit : if thou, having no uglk ness to give, wilt give me thy ugliness, then will I, being a fool, and ergo, with¬ out reason, give thee my reason." " Thy attachment to thy fooleries," resumed the Baroness, *'is even greater* than the state of thy condition requires from thee. Thou art as much afraid of being thought any other than a fool, as the bulk of mankind are of being branded with
with that title : and, in troth, thou canst not better prove thyself to be that which thou shewest, for dost thou not prefer folly to wisdom ?" CI Yea, truly; as much as I prefer riches to poverty, drink to dryness, a good meal to an empty stomach, or a motley coat to a villanous ragged doublet ; verily, I live by my wits, or rather by lacking my wits, which is the better of the two; for, having no wits to lose* I cannot lose my wits, and therefore cair- not be frightened out of my wits by the sight ofthe ghost." "Thou hast indeed the advantage In this," cried the Baroness; " and yet this is but the advantage of a stock or a stone." "-True, "ady, and, in so being, I am î Q the
the stoutest of thy household ; yea; verily, I am like thy castle, which, in troth, I would thou wert ; for, if thou wert like thy castle, thou woukUt be likely to keep thy castle, anu not suffer thyself to bolt from it, like a quarry from a loophole in a turret, aiid let thy¬ self be picked up and run away wdth by any earl or knight of high degree what¬ ever/ 5 is Go to; thj r buffoonery bas been en¬ couraged, tili it borders upon boldness/* ť< Verily, Lady, these things are true, and strong, and bold, and are therefore bold in their outstanding, and le&s sinooth -and courtly than might be wished. But, jìevertheless, since thoa hast a moat beau¬ tiful eye, a saintly smile, nmì a fair and most sweet demeanor, mayst tliou regard them fab iy, smile on them holily, and receive
receive them courteously; and then the saddle would be rightly placed." " Away, fool, thou growest muddy in thy fooleries, and art therefore almost run out to thy dregs. Beside, I am not disposed longer to bear with thee: go then, and'be more discreet foi; the future; let me not again hear that my people have beeu disturbed by thy unseemly and most ill-timed jestings." " Like the bride before the priest, L say, obey, and straight am away ; and may both of us-be fools enough not to fear stalking* ghosts, and staring hob¬ goblins." Not a auy passed at the castle unmarked by some terrifying incident. Such ofthe Baroness's attendants as were obliged to pass through tlie corridor on -their way to their Lady's apartment, which was in the
the same suit as that formerly appropıî- ated to the Baron, never returned with¬ out some fearful account of noises issuing from the haunted chamber, such as loud knockings, groans, aud sometimes the most dismal shrieks. The situation of the Baroness, in the midst of her terrified people, was indeed pitiable. She could not, by any effort of her mind, hy any exertion of her own reason, oppose or resist the universal tor¬ rent of terrors that now burst over her. She had never been taught to doubt the possibility of the supernatural appearances of the ghosts ; on the contrary, she had imbibed tenets calculated to impress her with the conviction that such were really permitted, though she believed only in cases of particular emergency. Nursed and bred on the very bosom of supersti¬ tion^
tion, within the walls of a convent, from whence she had only recently been re** moved at her marriage with the Baron, her mind had acquired somewhat of a romantic cast, which the pageantry and priestcraft of the religion of the age had in no small degree tended to encrease; The ardent affection too, verging upon adoration, which she had conceived and entertained for the Baron during his life, and which, with all her natural enthu¬ siasm, she still cherished for his memory,, had served to nourish ín her mind these opinions. That the nocturnal minstrel, or, as he had been usually called, the spirit of the wood, was some heavenly visitant, sent to watch over her and sooth her griefs, with the powers of celestial harmony, was a sweet entrancing illusion; and when to thia
184 THE NOCTURNAL MINSTREL. this was added the no less enchanting one, that this seeming wanderer of tlie Woods was the spirit of her loved lord, her delight at hearing the music of his min¬ strelsy became altogether rapturous. Widelv different indeed was the state of mt her feelings at the appearance of the spectre, which seemed so alarming as to be marked only with horror. Had she listened only to Ethelind and Winified's account of this extraordinary vision, she might still have denied implicit credit to the relation. But, wdien to these were added the recollection of the strange un¬ accountable noises she had herself heaicl on the nii>ht of the Earľs arrival at the castle, at which time the music had ceased iu the woods, sounds whicri seemed to have issued from the very chainber i u which the armed figure had been setn, as described
described by Ethelind-^when she thought too of Sir Reginald's dream, her appre¬ hensions and distress knew no bouuds. The effect of these perturbations of mind produced an immediate change iu her spirits, and she found it necessary to excuse herself by indisposition, from at¬ tending the Earl. This naturally led him to enquire into .rhe cause, and, of course, the circumstances relative to the ghost were soon made known to him. The Baroness, however, in her messages, made no mention of what had happeued, nor did slie afford him any immediate hopes of seeing her. She was, indeed, at present, wholly unfit to hold any conver¬ sations with her new lover, whose depar¬ ture she now anxiously desired. Her first resolve, on her dismission of the clown, whom she had found.it neces- * sary
sary to correct for his ievuy and folly, was to send for Sir Osborne, her confessor,, with whom she held a long conference in ber oriel. Having first given him a relation of everv incident relative to this extraordi- mf nary appearance, wdth an account of Sir Reginald Ilarcland's dream, and every other circumstance connected with the subject of her present interest and deep concern, she requested his advice and assistance in her present distressing predi¬ cament. The honest old father was overcome with a like astonishment and dread at this very extraordinary intelligence. " My daughter and Lady," said he, " this strange appearance, following the music oí the minstrel of the woods, whom all : ur researches have not been able to dis* cover*
cover, shevveth, most assuredly, the near ap¬ proach of some mighty occurrence, relative to the fortune of the inhabiters of this castle; for the spirits ofthe departed are never permitted to pass the bounds of pur¬ gatory, unless for some weighty purpose; and when there is such a purpose, the holy saints plead for the indulgence of the soli¬ citudes of the wretched spirit, anxious about the welfare of those it has left behind, and obtain permission for them to come forth, and signify their desires. But who is there, Lady, in this castle, of such importance as yourself? and whoso likely to concern themselves about your for¬ tunes as your deceased Lord? It must be be, and he only, wbo assumes these form?, to signify to you either his approbation or his displeasure; nor will his uneasy soul find rest till he has accomplished his design ;
ıksign; and what that is, Lady, you will eftí-'iou know," * The Baroness, terrified beyond measure to hear her own suggestions thus con¬ firmed by her venerable confessor, the depth of whose understanding she erro¬ neously conceived to be equal to his piety, paused for awhde to give vent to the agonizing feelings of her throbbing and oppressed heart. At length interrupting his ghostly con¬ solations—"Instruct me,"said she, cr most venerable and holy father, how to act; and, especially, how to deport myself to¬ ward the Eari, Avho, 1 fear, must be the cause of the distress of this perturbed spirit; is, perhaps, the object ofthe Barena haired; and whose visit and .stav in tiiis castle may afford the reason wdiv his soul cannot taste repose. (ζ Though
*' Though lost to me for ever in this world," continued she. ť{ yet still the image of my Lord is ever present to my mind; the sacred resolve í tiu u made, when the heart-rending tidings of his death first reached my maddening sense, remains, ar><! ever shall remain, unaltered. Oh! hear a.. '* added she, falling upon her knees, " if thou cttnst hear, spirit of the noble Fitzwalter—if thy perturbed soul is indeed sensible to the invocations of thy wretched widow, hear me when I swear, calling on eveiy saint to witness this my vow, that not the acutest pang of misery humanity vvas ever fated to endure, nor death with all its horrors, shall ever compel me to unite myself with him, who directed hither by a sovereign's proud command, now ¿ues for my alliance ; no, 3 were
were he even possessed of all the virtues and manly graces that adorned thee, my Fitzwalter, never will I become the wife of this Ormond." " Sivear ŕ exclaimed a voice from an unknown quarter, and in an authoritative tone. The father started up, aghast and trembling. "I swear!—I swear,"pursued the Baro¬ ness, wdth a desperate kind of energy. "Oh, Heavens!" added she, all her ac¬ quired fortitude suddenly forsaking her, " it was his voice—it w T as Fitzwalter ! Help—help, holy father!*' The monk, ter¬ rified beyond description, regarded her not; but, after some pause, he called aloud for assistance, though rather for bimse., than the Baroness. Winifred, who had heard the voice of Father
Father Osborne, was the first who entered, and in time to save her fainting Lady from falling; other damsels of her cham¬ ber had also heard the call and came, and helped to bear ber to a couch, where she lay in deathlike insensibility ; wdiile they beheld the terrified confessor falling on his knees by her side, in an agony of speechless and bewildered devotion. After some pause, Winifred hastened to employ the proper remedies, and the Baroness began to revive. But, with returning sense, the cause of her alarm returned also, and the words she first uttered were, " / ¿шаг Г She was conveyed soon to bed, and, after a ¿»hower of tears, became somewhat composed ; more so far than Father Osborne, who summoned all the rest of the
the domestics to the immediate per¬ formance of mass, partly to quiet the disturbed spirit, but more to be safer from the alarming voice of the ghost, #mid the circle of society-
СНЛР.
CHAP. XII. Now, generous soldier, as youVe truly noble, Oh ! help me forth, lost in this labyrinth ; Help rac to loose this more than gotdian knot, And make me and yourself for ever happy. Leí. All this extraordinary bustle could not take place without awakening the appre¬ hensions of the family, and it was imme¬ diately whispered among every part of it, that the Baroness and Father Osborne had seen the ghost. So confident were they of this, that each had determined in his own mind, the form, the manner of its vol. ι. к: appearance.
appearance, and the business on which it had come. The Earl, too, was, at length, informed that the Baroness bad experienced some extraordinary alarm ; but as to the parti¬ culars, he had not been able to obtain any satisfactorv information. Πε did not fail to send anxious and respectful enquiries after her health ; and, when he repeated the same in the morning, he was agreeably astonished, by a request for an interview with her in the anti-room of her apart¬ ment. He had scarcely entered, when the Baroness appeared, supported by two of her women, weak, pale, and trembling, habited in a loose robe, indicative of every neglect of form and ceremony ; while yet it displayed the elegance and beauty of - her person, to which, however, she herself seemed
seemed uttuly inattentive, being, to all appearance, wholly occupied by the sense ofhcr own sorrows. Hardly had he began to express the deep and tender interest he felt for her happiness, and his concern at her present distress, from whatever cause it inight arise, when the Baroness was at his feet, conjuring him, in the most urgent and energetic terms, to forego all pretensions to her hand, for that now she was fully assured the spirit of the Baron could not repose in peace, while he continued her guest. The Earl, although he had never enter¬ tained much hope of winning the affec¬ tions of the Baroness, and had determined, with the most honourable delicacy, not to accept her hand, even though it held the wealth of kingdoms, unless voluntarily к 2 given,
given, was equally astonished at tbe ex¬ travagant emotions evinced by the Baro¬ ness, and vexed at the strange cause to which he understood they were owing. But the agitation of his beautiful mistress, now at his feet, rendered reasoning and reflection impossible ; and served to excite in his benevolent beart, a degree of tender¬ ness and compassion, beyond what he had hitherto felt. His first effort was a request to assist to raise her from her posture; but she, per¬ ceiving his purpose, when he caught her hand, exclaimed, with eagerness, "Never, never will I quit the humble attitude of a supplicant, till you, my Lord, all-gene¬ rous as I know you are, free me from a condition so full of misery and terror ! Oh, leave me—leave me; give peace to the perturbed spirit of my Fitzwalter; and
and let ine bless, even with my latest breath, the name of Ormond ľ* " Little would you know of that Or- mond," cried the Earl, with a tender, yet dignified air, '* were vou to believe he would suffer any interested or sellish motive to interfere with the peace of one, to whom iiis heart, even on a first ap¬ proach, paid an involuntary homage. Rise, noble Lady, and hear, while I solemnly assure you of my ready acqui¬ escence in any request you may form, though even at the expence of my own happiness and peace ; but, let me entreat you to explain, wdiat to me appears inex¬ plicable, how my continuance here------" " To you, my Lord, this circumstance must indeed appear singularly Strange," interrupted the Baroness; "but know, this castle, once the abode of quiôt and к 3 uninterrupted,
uninterrupted tranquillity, has, of late, become the scene of wonders, of alarms, of horrors, almost unparalleled 1 But, first, my Loid, let mc thank you, as far as hno'tiao'P mav ŕnnblp mp ťn ŕvnrpu th^ fetlings of my gratitude, for your gene¬ rous, your noble compliance w ith my re* quest; and let me also beg you lo excuse an abrupt address, prompted, as I was, bj r terror and despair, to a violation of the established rules of courtesy and hospita¬ lity, and of that respect most undeniably clue to your character and rank. Hear me also with kindness, oh, my Lord ! w hile with a heart gratefully confiding in your honour and goodness, I freely declare, that were it possible for me to have transferred my affections from my deceased Lord to any living object, and no insuperable ob¬ jection existed why your suit should not : -evail
prevail, I know no one, especially after the proofs you have afforded me, of an unsullied honour and the purest integrity, on whom my choice would have been more readily fixed than yourself.*' ei For this candid and endearing avowal, most revered and beloved Ladv,'* cried m' } the Earl, bowing till his knee touched the ground, tc let me, in my turn, express my warmest acknowledgements. Oh ľ. added he, aftei some pause, and seizing the border of her robe, which he pressed respectfully to his lips, " had it been pos¬ sible !—but no more, (laying his hand upon his breast with an affecting energy, indicative of a painful effort of self-com¬ mand), it must not be—there is no alter-r native. Oh, Gertrude, Gertrude! why— * why so lovely ?*' He stopped, rose respect¬ fully, and recovering himself, after an- K 4 other
other pause, courteously enquired the occasion of her sudden indisposition, and of the violent emotions by which he had just seen her so greatly distressed ; adding, in q manner which rendered it impossible to doubt his sincerity, that she might command; and happy should he be, would the Baroness Fitzwalter accept the services of Ormond, The Baroness, who felt herself much reassured, by the friendly offers and obli¬ ging deportment of the Earl, and was now become more composed and able to converse, gave him a brief detail of the mysterious minstrel ofthe woods; then of the armed phantom seen by her domestics; and, lastly, of the awful words uttered by some supernatural being, iii the hearing of her confessor and herself. When the Baroness had concluded her narration,
narration, the Earl, who had listened to it with much attention, and occasionally made enquiries respecting the particulars, thanked the Baroness for her condescend sion, in indulging bis curiosity; and imme¬ diately observed, that most assuredly the whole of these events must be the tricks of imposture; and that some ill-designing person must have undertaken to excite alarm, for the accomplishment of wicked purposes. " When," said he, " and where is the ghost to be seen ? let me be per¬ mitted to wait its approach, and, perhaps, I may be enabled to render j ? ou, Lady, some valuable service.** The benevolent Baroness, shocked to think that any person should experience any of those horrors she herself had so lately felt, shuddered at the offer, and painted the terrors of supernatural appear¬ ances,
anees, aiid the danger of those mental delusions, which they had the power to produce at will upon the stiongest minds. "Lady/' said the Eail, " a soldier ought not to shrink from anv dan orer, or cherish any fear. As such, I request per¬ mission to undertake the adventure. But recollecting that it is to free you from alarm, trouble, and danger, I must urge my request ; nay, as a knight, I must not be denied, what I may surely claim as such—May I be permitted to see the haunted chamber?" " Most assuredly," replied the Baroness. " My principal woman, and soire others of my domestics, shall attend your Lord¬ ship in your visit, wdiich may probably induce you to alter your intention." " Never/* said the Earl: and himself and his attendants proceeded immediately, each
each wdth very different feelings, to tbe haunted apartment. The first care of the Earl, on his enter¬ ing, was to examine the various doors opening into the passages, and other com¬ munications with the several parts of the castle; the bed uaderwent a sciutiny, as did also the arras, wdiich, as we have before observed, was hung, according to the custom of those times, at some little distance from the wall. " All/' says he, " seems orderly at present; the ghost is certainly not here now; but may perhaps be seen by one wdio may choose to honour him by attending his leisure, aud that must be done to-night/' "To-night í ** repeated the Baroness, to whom the Earl immediately imparted his intention, " to-night Γ "Yes, to-night," replied the Earl; u the
" tfie sooner the truth is know**, the better; and as no man wouhl wibh to encounter too many dangers at once, I have tò request that a fire may be kindled, that I may not be annoyed by tht chill¬ ing* damp of thit room, nhich is by far the most formidable thing to be appre¬ hended there. 1 * The Baroness, finding he was bent upon his purpose, and that no arguments vrere likely to induce him to abandon it, pro¬ posed that he should be attended by one or two of his ovni people. "By no means," said the Earl; " I would watch there alone.'* "Alone, my Lord! Oh, think what may be the consequence !" "I am fearless of all consequences," cried the Earl; " some mystery overhangs this castle, particularly that chamber, which
which 1 am resolved to investigate; and, fiom wdiat I leai¿\, tbe ghost has never appeared to two persons when together ; and would not, in all probability*, appear to me, if attended. Besides, if tlie ghost has really any serious business here, on which becomes, it is probably with me, and me only ; as, from wdiat I can learn, he did not commence his gambols pre¬ vious to mv arrival/' " JMy Lord/* cried Father Osborne, wdio liad entered while the Earl was con¬ versing, " jou ought not to speak thus lightly of things so solemn/* u Your courage, mv Lord/* resumed the Baroness, u is undoubted ; but still, methinks you need not put it to such a test as this ; as it can hardly be sup¬ posed that you are alone the object of its
its visitings; but ifit is seen by you ; you know not how much you may be ter¬ rified/' " I w ill dare the utmost horrors of my ghostly opponent," pursued the Earl; %1 from whom, should he choose to render himself visible, I may hope to obtain some information highly useful/' "Good Heavens! my Lord, you do not surely intend to accos* it?" cried the Baroness. "Indeed I do/ repliée! ihe Earl, calmly. "Holy St. Agatha'/' exclaimed Wini¬ fred, ciossing herself: kt but what if it should decoj 7 your Lordsliip into ьоше horrid place, and there leave you?" " I will follow it, wheiever it may lead/' cried the Earl, α if, by so doing, I can but obtain possession of its purposes/' 3 " Ob,
u Oh, my Lord Γ said the Baroness, <ť let me, if possible, dissuade you from a scheme so rash/' i( I will not only watch one night,** continued the Earl, " but two, or,even three, if I still think there is any proba¬ bility of discovering what the ghost is, aiul what its intentions.'* ζζ My Lord/' replied the Baroness, " I must cease my persuasion ; to oppose you farther, would imply a want of courtesy, unworthy your courage and your rank.'" The Earl bowed ; and again expressei! his hopes that he might be able to render her the service he wished, by quitting her fears and those of her household ; anil then, the Baroness being about to retire, respectfully quitted the room. About the hour of midnight, the Earl, taking the key of the haunted chamber, repaired
repaired to his station, himself clad in ar¬ mour, because he had heard the ghost came so accoutred, and b' ring his trusty sword as his defence ihe rest of the inhabitants of the castle retired at the same hour to their respective apartments; their minds all busily engaged by the sub¬ ject of the Eaiľs enterprize, wbich seemed to them equally rash and extraordinary.
END OP VOL. I.
Lime, Darling, and Co. Leadenhall Street.
