Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Pyrenean banditti: a romance
1 FYHENEAN BANDITTI.
CHAP. L 1 N* that wild tract of country ** h ich se* pao te» Barrége from St. Girono» îıı the little di&îrict of Gascon v called the Con- se m nee, stood» itt the year 1653, the Castle of St. Angouléme, a venerable -лпй lofty pile, for many centuries inha¬ bited by the fimily of that name. ît had been fortified with the care necessary tt> defend it from the incursions of the ene¬ my» when the burning zeal of religious fury broke out, and raged with unabat- vor.. ι, в ing
ing violence, 'under the factious govern¬ ment of Charles the Ninth and Catharine de Medici*; when the Huguenots, driven bj persecution to acts of desperate vio¬ lence, took arms against their fellow- subjects, and involved the whole coun¬ try in civil tumult and desolation. The family of St. Angouléme had at¬ tached itself to the royalist or Catholic party, and till the Iperiod when Henry, Prince,of Navarre, mounted the throne of France, had retained considerable in¬ terest and authority at Court, amid all the political revolutions and intrigues wbich disgrace the annals of that cele¬ brated æra· The disgust which naturally attends the triumph of the opposite party, the coalition of new interests, and a fresh system of state politics, drove the family of
of St. Angouléme from a Court, where its influence had ceased to be felt, and where its interests were no longer court¬ ed : the high posts of honour it had hi¬ therto occupied, were transferred to other families; and the descendants of a once-noble house, reduced by poverty to a situation which scarce enabled thera to maintain an appearance suitable to the rank of the chevaliers, or private gen¬ tlemen of the country. The Castle seemed now to be the only vestige of the former opulence and mag¬ nificence of the family : guarded on one side by the Pyrenees, on the other by ramparts and battlements, which appear¬ ed, but for some breaches which the fury of civil war had made, to have been al¬ most impregnable, stood this venerable remain of antique grandeur. It was в 2 surrounded
up, but hm&d, шпа once êeep ; ia which seveni kinds of water-fowl lived secure and unmolested, жтЫ the reedy grass ind weeds which fringed itt sides, and whose cries were often heard with those of the vulture» which was sten cowering round the neighbouring cliff, or the eagle, as she Mjught her eyrie ζτηύηχ the rocks, which either jutted out into immense crags, or rose in giant masses above the walls of the Castle. A bridge, now seldom drawn up, was the only means of access. The entrance was through a stone arch, to a hall, lofty and extensive, and adorned, like the reu of the apartments, with the heavy mag¬ nificence of former times. Ко alteration had, for several years, taken place in the furniture and decorations of this once- splendid
splendid mansion; nor was it in tî«î power of its present inhabitant to repair the breaches %»liich time and war had msde m it. The Count, at he retained not the opelence, neither aid he possess the vir¬ tues of his ancestors ; these Nature seem¬ ed to have bestnwrd cut îustveîy to €o- rirh the mind of h;* brother* the Cheva¬ lier St» Angouléme» who having, ihrough an advantageous alliance by marriage» and an elegant, not niggardly economv* realized the means of enabling himself to maintain an appearance of splendour and affluence far abo\ e that of the Count, had become the object of his direct ha¬ tred and detestation. Count St, Angouîcme never forgave an injury, or what he conceived to be such. He had loved Madame St. Angou- 8 3 leme,
leme, previous to her marriage with his brother; had offered himself, and was rejected. The loss of the lady he could have borne, but that of her fortune, which was immense, and which was the principal " object of his wishes, was a stroke aš fatal to his interests as it was mortifying to his pride; and when, in a brother, whom he had never loved, he beheld the rival of his hopes, his inte¬ rests, and his ambition, his rage and dis*- appointment knew no bounds. Till the death of Madame St. Angou¬ léme, which happened, to the inexpres¬ sible grief of the Chevalier, about ten years after their marriage, the Count had never seen or wri tien to his brother. He 'bad.been informed by the Chevalier, in b letter dictated in the roost affectionate terms imaginable, of the birth of a daugh¬ ter,
ter, with which Madame had unexpect¬ edly presented him, about five years af¬ ter their marriage ; but the Jetter, after having been coldly received, was thrown aside, though it contained, with the most earnest solicitations, an invitation for the Count to visit Avignon, to perform the office of sponsor to his infant niece, who had already been baptized by the name of .Adelaide. From that period till the death of Ma¬ dame St. Angouléme, nothing passed be¬ tween the two brothers: but as the Che· valier thought it right, notwithstanding his brother's neglect of him, to inform him of this sad event, he again ventured to address him ; and received in return a letter, containing a few common-place condolences, conceived in formal and concise terms, and so little expressive of s 4 friendship
frïeiMbhïp towards him^lf, that it teemed to ìmve been drawn from him rather hy necessity than inchn.ition. Ihe Oust, during several years, had spent much of hk time at Paris, and had mixed occasionally in the dissipation! of that voluptuous city : he had mâúe «eve* imi iiiìsurccs&ful attempts to ally himself to the heiress of some illustrious house, whe^e ample fortune might remrdy the deficiencies of h*^ ov*a, and enable him to support an appeararsce equal to his rank and situaficm. He had reached his fortieth year, v i thou t ha\îng obtained the object of his wishes; he saw with mortification and regret, that he was des¬ titute of those arts of insinuation which are necessary to secure an interest in the heart of a 5 oung and beautiful woman, m richly endowed by fortune as by na· ture ;
ture ; and, after a number of unsuccess¬ ful efforts, resolved at length to make fortune, as it was his first, bis only object of pursuit. Whikt partaking of the amusements of the metropolis, he found means to in¬ troduce himself to the widow of a rich Portuguese merchant, the daughter of a private gentleman in the neighbourhood of Honen, a lady who, though past the bloom of Jifc, possessed a sufficient por¬ tion of beauty to attract admiration» even at Paris: her manners were ami¬ able, her disposition was sweet, her for¬ tune large. The Count made overtures» and was accepted : the marriage was ce¬ lebrated without delay, though not with¬ out some secret dissatisfaction on the part of the Count ; the lady having in¬ sisted that the half of her property should ж 5 remain
rewaîti at her owr disposal, in considera¬ tion of a nephew, who had been kft an orphan to her care, and for whom she had promised to provide. The youth was pursuing his studies at one of the se¬ minaries at Paris, at the time of his aunt's marriage, and was sent for, to join in the festivities usual on such occasions. Theodore St. Leon, for that was his name, was then only seventeen years old : his countenance was prepossessing ; his figure, for his age, tall, and finely proportioned; his address graceful; his disposition frank, ardent, generous, and sincere. The new Countess having had no children by her former marriage, had attached herself to her nephew with the tenderness of a parent; and it was per¬ haps rather in compliance with the ambi¬ tious wishes of her family, than her own 4 inclinations,
inclinations, that she had contented tø inake his happiness in some degree d«* pendent upon the will and power of an¬ other. It was not, however, till several months after her marriage, that she began to feel anxiety for the fate of her nephew. The Count had a** urn ed an appearance of kindness and affection for his aew rela¬ tive, which being only ararøted, it be¬ came difficult for any length of time to support ; he grew indíÄcrent, and at length severe. His lady was accused of an undue partiality to one who, from some traits of character he pretended to observe, would soon prove unworthy of her care : every trifling defect was mag¬ nified into a fault, every excellence con¬ cealed, or repressed; what would have been a virtue in others, was a vice in в d Theodore ;
Theodore; wìm m others would have fete« termed шт error, was ia him a crime. The prejudice which his uncle had conceived to the unfortunate youth, dateless as it appeared, became st length a source of sorrow and regret to the un¬ happy Countess ; it was unjust, and there¬ fore could »ot be removed ; and it was easy to perceive, that any mark of affec¬ tum discovered to him by herself, occa¬ sioned an increased disgust ín the heart of her husband; snà that this disgust < although,, in their now frequent con- ^ersations on the subject of her concern and solicitude, sàe stili continued to practise the utmost gentleness and for¬ bearance in her behaviour to her Lord) was extending rapidly to herself, and threatened to become the cause of much domestic uneasiness, The
The school-vacaoons were no longer welcomed by Theodore aa they haá been formerly ; two Ыа already been spent at the Castle, and one at Paris, when the Con π f ess, with eyes swimming with tear», and a countenance on which the anguish of her heart was faithfully delineated, in¬ formed him, that he must spend the next with a distant relation of hers* in Pro¬ vence ; and tfiat, as he had discovered an early predilection for a military life, she had determined to purchase him a com* mission— " Go, my child/' added she, ** and may Heaven protect and feless у oia ï Alat î I can no longer offer you an asy¬ lum in this cattle : your unele, whom, I mom too late perceive, had no motive in marrying me, but to make a considerable addition to his own fortune, upon ray re¬ fusal tø relinquish that part of my pro¬ perty
perty which I had reserved for you, in- mm that you shall never more enter these doors." Theodore mingled his tears with those of his afîèctionate relative while she ut¬ tered these words, which were frequently interrupted by deep and heavy sighs; he earne&ily conjured her to submit to hk uncle's will, lest, by a steady adherence to her first resolution, she should involve herself in difficulties and distresses, which, he added, would be infinitely more pain¬ ful to him than any loss he could him¬ self sustain— " Allow me not/* said he, " to interfere with the interests of one so dear to me, one to whom I owe a debt of gratitude too vast ever to be repaid; suffer me not, I conjure you, Madam, to be the cause of domestic broil ; sacri/ice what you would for my sake retain ; al¬ low
low me, after what you have so gene¬ rously promised, to depend solely on mine own exertions—let roe seek my fortune in the field of honour ; and may no care or sorrow intervene to disturb, on my account, the peace and happiness of one so dear to me !" " Generous and noble youth !" ex¬ claimed the Countess, again weeping bit¬ terly—" But you are not yet acquainted with half my causes of distress; alas! never again can happiness or peace visit this unhappy bosom !—Your uncle is not onlv avaricious, but necessitous—he is in debt, deeply in debt ; and when last at Paris, lost, I have been since told, considerable sums at play : the resen e I would make is not, therefore, more ne¬ cessary on your account than my own. Oh, why was I ever persuaded, for the ac¬ quisition
qnisition of an empty title, to sacrifice my fortune and my peace !" Theodore now perceived that his aunt had a double motive for persisting in her determination of resisting the persuasions and threats of her Lord : he trembled at the re\ icw of a situation so replete with difficulties and even dangers; he knew not what to advise; for, of the haughty and tyrannical disposition of the Count, he had already had repeated proofs. * ( You, Theodore," resumed the Coun¬ tess, after a pause of some moments, ·* may yet taste the blessings of prospe¬ rity. The estates of your family are considerable, though, as the descendant of a younger branch, your title to them is not immediate. It is not however im¬ probable," added she, " but you way succeed, in a few years, to that of your late
late uncle: the present heir, now about sixfcen years of age, is said to be con¬ sumptive; and has been ordered, as a letter from my friend Madame Boileau has this day informed me» to try the ef¬ fects of a foreign climate. His health may be restored; but on his death, should this happen, your claim to an estate of upwards of twelve thousand а -year is in¬ disputable. 1 shall then behold my The¬ odore elevated to a situation which he is every way calculated to fill with honour and dignity." ** Could J see you happy, Madam," said Theodore, tenderly taking his aunt's hand, " I should have no thought or care for myself. Oh that 1 could indeed in¬ struct you in what way to act î but, alas î in a matter of such moment, I feel my¬ self utterly incompetent to advise. Think only of yourself, and let not your child, your
y our Theodore, occasion you one mo- went of anxiety," The Cmmîtm* tcndrrly embraced her nephew. While slie pretscd hira to her throbbing heart, the agonbing idea pre¬ sented itself that the «r^ht never see bim more : she wept anew î her audible «obs penetrated the heart of Theodore— it was with difficulty that he could re¬ strain the expression «f his grief; a thousand melancholy forebodings com¬ municated to his heart—" Alas!'* said he, " how much uneasiness have ï cost you ! how much may î yet cost you !-— Adieu, my more than mother; may Hea¬ ven reward and bless you !" <f Adieu, my beloved child," feebly ejaculated the Countess; " write to me frequently, my Theodore; and may the holy virgin protect and guard you !" CHAP,
'f'Wi ' ι m »■ «» « ' ■№ »им гыа'Ш
CHAP. IL The Countess retired to her chamber, to give free vent to a sorrow she was afraid openly to express, and which she was utterly unable to restrain. It was near the dinner hour: the Count, who had been absent, returned with a party of guests ; the Countess, unable to compose her mind, or remove the traces of her grief, pleaded indisposition, and dined alone in her anti-chamber. When she again met the Count, she affected to ap¬ pear cheerful ; but the effort was ineffoo tual.
tnaî. He observed the uneasiness she would have concealed ; and knowing she had lately parted with Theodore, was not insensible to its cause—*' I did not know, Madam," said he haughtily, " that when I rereived your hand at the altar, I was to hold but the second place in your heart. It is well, however," added he, " that I am at last effectually rid of that rival in your affections, whose artful in¬ sinuations have been but too successful ín their purpose. But recollect, Madam, though the inconvenience may be mine, the punishment may be yours: except on the conditions I have before men¬ tioned, you see Theodore no more." "No more!" reiterated the Countess —" Ohj my Lord, you will not, you can¬ not be so cruel í " et Sign those papers/' cried the Count authoritatively,
authoritatively, ft and I will instantly issue an order for his return." " Never? said the Countess emphati¬ cally. tf Decide not too hastily," cried the Count— " you may repent. You love the boy ?" " As my life," said the Countess. The Count reddened, and looked con¬ temptuously—" Shall I then send for him back ?" " Never, dear as he is to me, on the conditions you impose." " You have resolved then to see him no more ?" " I have resolved not to see him again at this castle, if, by so doing, I shall greatly offend you," answered the Coun¬ tess mildly, but in a voice extremely agitated ; « I may, however, see him else¬ where." " Hear
" Hear me," cried the Count, hi a ione of voice elevated by passion to such a pitch, that, to the ears of the unhappy lady, it sounded almost tremendous, t( while I swear you shall not; within these walls he shall never come, beyond them you shall never go." " How, my Lord," rejoined the Coun¬ tess tremulously, « am I then to be your prisoner ?" " Till you have consented to obtain your enlargement, by a relinquishment of your daring and obstinate purpose of disobedience fo a husband's will," re¬ turned the Count, " you must be con¬ tented to remain a prisoner in this cabile; this is my determination, Madam, nor is it in your power to alter it." As he said this he withdrew, leaving the Countess in a state of mind too ago¬ nizing to be described. The mournful presentiments
presentiments she had experienced when bhe last parted with Theodore, although since conceived to have been the mere ejľecís of momentary anguish, now seem¬ ed to be realized : the rea of the dayf was devoted by the unhappy Countess to the most melani holy rumin tions on her own fate, and that of her beloved nephew. Shortly after this event, the Count re¬ ceived a letter from his brother, the Che¬ valier St. Angouléme, in which he in¬ formed him that he was then languishing under a nervous disorder, which had been for some time undermining his constitution, and which had hitherto re¬ sisted the effects of medicine. He was advised, he said, to travel ; and had some intention, should it be agreeable to the Count, to spend a few weeks at the Castle, on his way to Barrége. He was anxious,
anxious, he added, to introduce to him his daughter, then about seventeen'years old, who, in case of his demise, wouhb at so early an age, be in want of a pro¬ tector. He then spoke of his affairs; adding, that he had made his will, leaving the Count and Countess, the latter of whom n£:}'et knew onfy by report, joint executors and guardians of his daughter's person and property, till she should be honourably disposed of in marriage, or till she should have attained the age of one-and-twenty : in case of her death, if she died unmarried, or without issue, during the period of her minority, all her property and estates were to devolve to the Count. ' At the conclusion of his letter, he expressed great pleasure in the hopes of seeing his brother, who he hoped, he said, would receive him with as
as much affection as he himself felt ; and should he be restored to his former health, that the most friendly interest and brotherly regard would be revived and established between them. The Count could not but feel this new instance of fraternal regard and affection from a brother whom he had cruelly slighted, if not injured; and conceiving his disorder might possibly prove fatal, although the danger might not be imme¬ diate, he resolved to answer the letter as İt deserved, and invite his brother and irteec to tlie Castle. He communicated the contents of this letter to the Countess, to whom his man¬ ners became, on a sudden, more mild and obliging than they had been of late : Theodore was never mentioned ; and lhe Countess, engaged in the necessary ar- voL- i. с rangements
rangements for the reception of the ex¬ pected guests, seemed to have lost the immediate recollection of her recent bor¬ rows and vexations. The Chevalier no sooner received his brother's letter, than he made prepara¬ tions for his journey ; and attended by Mademoiselle Adelaide, his daughter, and a few of his domestics, set off from Avig¬ non, and performing his route by short and easy stages, arrived at the Castle.
CHAP.
CHAP. III. The Count received the Chevalier and his lovely daughter with every outward expression of affection and regard : he observed the altered appearance of the former, an alteration which seemed to be the effect of long illness and confine¬ ment ; and was much struck with the personal graces of the httcr t who see in¬ ed to him even more lovely thin her mother, when in the full bloom of youth and beauty. The Countess felt an immediate pre- c 2 possession
possession in favour of her lovely visi¬ tant, whose regard she endeavoured to conciliate with the most winning cour¬ tesy and politeness. The admiration which her extreme loveliness, her sweet and engaging manners, first excited, soon ripened into an attachment the most ten¬ der in the heart of the Countess; yet, though animated oy the society of her amiable friends, though beguiled by their conversation, from a review of her own melancholy and forlorn state, the idea of her loved Theodore would sometimes intrude, and with it all her former unea¬ siness and apprehensions concerning him —" How charming would be the society of this Castle," she would sometimes say, ** were he here ! How would the Cheva¬ lier admire a youth possessed of so many virtues and graces as adorn my Theo¬ dore!
dorel —What a charming companion would he be for Mademoiselle Adelaide ! how would they walk, read, and sing to¬ gether 1 what an endless source of de¬ light might they find in each other*s so¬ ciety !" Then reverting to the Count's late cruel prohibition, she would burst into tears. The Count's behaviour to the Coun¬ tess, since the arrival of his brother and niece, had been uniformly polite and at¬ tentive. Her amiable and obliging man¬ ners soon endeared her to the Chevalier, who often spoke of her to his brother in the highest terms of commendation— " Should my illness prove fatal," said he, in one of his conversations with the Count, (( I can desire nothing so much as to put my daughter under the patro¬ nage of your excellent Lady, who, I am с '3 sure,
sure, is every way calculated to take the charge of a young creature situated like Adelaide." " You do the Countess great honour/* cried the Count, affecting to be pleased vsith this new instance of attachment to his wife, though in reality vexed at it. " ï am convinced/' resumed the Che¬ valier, i( she is as amiable as she appears to be." " Or as women usually are," said the Count, smiling, bu* in a tone that seemed to imply a sarcasm. " ï am inclined to consider her as su¬ perior to most of her sex/* returned the Chevalier ; " nor do í believe I overrate her merit/ # The Count bowed, but was silent.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV, Nothing was wanting on the part of the Count, that could contribute to the amusement and satisfaction of his guests* the mornings were usually devoted to rides, or strolls among the mountains, the evenings to the reception of various parties of the Count's friends, in which the Chevalier was allowed either to con¬ tinue or retire. Change of air, of scene, the altered behaviour of his brother, who, he now believed, had buried for ever the remem- c 4 brance
brance of his former vexation and disan* * pointment, conspired to produce the most favourable effects imaginable upon the Chevalier's health, which was now visibly improving. Adelaide, who had hitherto seemed to droop under the melancholy presages of her father's fate, suffered hope again to visit her heart : her features, which had hitherto been overcast with a shade of interesting melancholy, were now ani¬ mated with an expression of the most lively joy ; and Adelaide, to all with whom she conversed, appeared more lovely, more enchanting than ever. It is scarcely possible fo conceive a face and form more touchingly beautiful than were those of Adelaide St. Angouléme : her complexion was of a transparent whiteness, her cheeks glowed with the blushes
blushes of health, her features were re¬ gular, and finely turned ; when she spoke or smiled, a thousand dimples played about her rosy lips: her teeth were like rows of pearls, and the expression of her dark hazel eyes varied every moment to the emotions of a heart full of energy and softness: light-brown locks, inclin¬ ing to yellow, shaded her brow, and de¬ scended in natural ringlets down her waist; these were suffered sometimes fo hang loose, sometimes confined with a golden comb in the Grecian costume, displayed the fine symmetry of her neck: her form was of the most exquisite pro¬ portion — every turn was grace ; the painter might have studied it, and from it the statuary have taken his purest mo¬ del of perfection. Such was our hero¬ ine: but it was not beauty only that с 5 made
made Adelaide St. Angouléme so charm» ing; it was the look that went to the heart, the ease and dignity of her man¬ ners, and an entire unconsciousness of the power of her charms and superiority in attainment over others, that rendered her so lovely and alluring. Every day discovered some new trait of character to endear her to the Coun¬ tess ; but never did she appear so attrac¬ tive, as when attending, with a filial ten¬ derness almost unequalled, her revered and beloved parent. That attendance became at length more and more neces¬ sarv : the Chevalier had taken cold in one of his evening rides about the Castle, and his disorder had returned with more violence than ever; it was attended by hectic symptoms. The best advice was procured ; the disorder became, never¬ theless,
theless, more and more obstinate; and the Chevalier, after languishing some weeks, expired in the arms of his be¬ loved daughter; having previously com¬ mitted her, in the most solemn and im¬ pressive manner, to the care of the Count and Countess St. Angouléme.
с б CHAP.
CHAP. V. Language can but feebly describe the sensations of the unhappy Adelaide, on the death of a parent to whom she was so fondly attached : though prepared, by a long series of indispositions, for this aw¬ ful event, her heart seemed bursting with the excess of its emotions. In vain did the Countess endeavour to inculcate the necessity of fortitude and self-exertion, and the imprudence of yielding to un¬ availing regret ; Adelaide, in the fullness of her grief, could not reason, she could only feel « Think
ťí Think of him, my love/ 1 said the Countess, when the throb of agony had begun to yield to the softer feelings of distress, " think of him as a being trans¬ lated to a happier region—a blessed eter¬ nity of joy. Would you, when the bit¬ terness of death is past, recall him, to suffer again the agonies of his parting moments ? W^uld he have reason to bless his Adelaide, had she the will and power to reanimate his breathless clay with that now beatified soul which has so lately quitted its earthly tenement ?" " He is—yes, I cannot doubt, he is a blessed, accepted spirit/* exclaimed Ade¬ laide, " receiving, at this instant, the re¬ ward of his faith and patience." " He İs the companion of the blessed Virgin and the saints," cried the Coun-> 4 tess ;
tess; " and would you draw him, if you could, from such a heavenly society ?" " Oh no, 1 would not ; I think I would not," said Adelaide : " I would go to my father, buí í hope I do not now wish he should come to me." (t This is the language of a Christian, my dear/* said the Countess; (t and, as such, becomes you. Look up, my sweet Adelaide ; many years of happiness are yet in store for you." " 1 should be in the highest degree ungrateful, Madam," said Adelaide, her eyes meanwhile beaming tenderness and sensibility, " if I could entertain any fears for myself while I am under such a protection as yours." " That protection, while Heaven spares me, you will never lose," rejoined the Countess;
Countess; "at least—at least I hope not. Oh, how much delight and satisfaction do I promise myself in the society of my amiable and beloved Adelaide !" The Count, who was a complete adept at dissimulation, appeared sensibly affect¬ ed by the death of his brother, and spared no pains or efforts to rouse the some¬ times yet deeply depressed »pints of his orphan daughter, to assure her of his en¬ tire affection, and of the deep interest he meant to take in every thing that con¬ cerned her: he instantly perceived the advantage that would accrue to him, as guardian of his niece's property, during a minority of some years, and he resolved to deport himself in such a manner as to win her entire esteem and confidence. To succeed Ín this scheme, it was neces¬ sary
sary to appear to be upon good terms with the Countess, who, he foi\nd f had greatly insinuated herself into the affec¬ tions of his ward : he dropped therefore all mention of the requisition he had for¬ merly made, and even sometimes conde¬ scended to ask concerning Theodore, from whom the Countess frequently heard, and who, he was at length in¬ formed, having entered into a regiment of horse, was shortly to leave France. The Countess, surprised and reassured by these inquiries into the situation of her nephew, assumed courage to solicit permission to see him before he joined his regiment. This, however, the Count opposed, though with less vehemence in his manner than formerly—" You must not," said he, " see him at present; we will
will talk these matters over some other time — t have not now leisure to think of them? f ' Aksl who knows/' said felte, in α mournful tone, " but he may be called toa poat of danger?" " He will have the same chance as others, I suppose," interrupted the Count, The Countess sighed, but made no comment " It may be unnecessary, perhaps inef¬ fectual," continued the Count, " to re¬ mind you, that, in your situation, it will be highly improper for you to acquaint Adelaide with the little altercations we have had on a subject which I do not in¬ tend at present to resume ; certainly not at present, unless provoked to it." <c U would be highly improper, my Lord/*
Lord," rejoined the Countess, (f to in¬ form Mademoiselle St, Angouléme of events nd circumstances which are, or ought to lie, confined to ourselves.'* " You ¡udge very prudently," return¬ ed the Count—*' these are affairs in which bhe can have no concern, and of which she certainly ought to have no know¬ ledge. I am glad to find you seem to have, in one instance, a just idea of what is due to me as your husband." " It İs the duty of a wife, my Lord," resumed the Countess, " to endeavour to conceal every thing in the character of a husband, which can have the least ten¬ dency to injure him in the opinion of his friends, or of those with whom he as¬ sociates." She uttered these words with more spi¬ rit
ni and energy than she usually assumed in her manners towards her Lord. The Count looked angrily, but made no an¬ swer. The Countess withdrew.
CHAP.
CHAP, VI. No visitants had appeared at the Castle, for several wesks after the death of the Chevalier. The room in which he breath¬ ed his last, as also the chapel where his remains were deposited, had been hung with black, and adorned with the hatch¬ ment of the family ; the domestics were habited in the same colour, and a gene¬ ral gloom seemed to have been diffused throughout the mansion. These emblems of woe were at length removed, parties were again admitted, and
and the Count, in honour of his niece's birthday, gave a sumptuous entertain¬ ment at the Castle. Adelaide's grief was vet too recent to allow her to mingle with satisfaction in the festivities of this scene: she thought of her father,"of his joy, had he been there, to witness her attainment of her eighteenth year; and notwithstanding the frequent resolutions she had formed to think of him only as a glorious beatified spirit, removed from a state of trial and infirmity, to one infinite in happiness as in duration, she could not sometimes forbear secretly wishing he was present, or always repress the gushing tear, which the memorial of him often brought to her eyes. The guests were numerous, the assem¬ bly gay and brilliant ; for several of the most
most distinguished families in the neigh¬ bourhood were invited to attend. The Count introduced his niece, for whom he affected an extravagant fond¬ ness, as an heiress of great wealth ; spoke, even in her presence, of the high hopes he had conceived of a future alliance for his ward ; and lamented, again and again, the loss of a brother, for whom he had the confidence to declare he had always entertained an extraordinary regard and affection. Music, feasting, and dancing, by turns succeeded. Adelaide's attractions were generally acknowledged : her beauty, her reported fortune, her fine and various accomplishments, became the theme of ^very tongue; all were eager tp recom¬ mend themselves to one possessed of so many
many charms and endowments, but few could hope to succeed, when the prize was so great. No sooner had she appeared in public, than the Count received various propo¬ sals of marriage, all of which he rejected almost as soon as heard— u I will not," said he, (c bestow such a gem unworthily; she shall never marry beneath her rank, nor even to an equnl in birth, if inferior to her in fortune Adelaide has charms enough ίο command an empire — she shall not dispose of herself, but ίο her own honour and emolument." Careless and unconcerned as to what might be her future destiny in this par¬ ticular (for, though susceptible of the finest emotions of the human heart, love was yet a stranger to her bosom), Ade¬ laide placed her whole satisfaction and delight
delight h conciliating the affections of her uncle and his lady. The latter, she perceived, was unhappy. She thought, too, she discovered an indifference, though untinctured with harshness when she was present, in the behaviour of her guardian towards his amiable, and, as she could not doubt, unoffending wife : she had sometimes caught her in tears; but, on her observation of them, she would endeavour to suppress her grief, and smile away the sadness she could not otherwise conceal. She observed that she never left the Castle for a ride, or even a walk about the ramparts, without the invitation, or implied permission, of her husband; yet no complaint escaped her. The Countess's woman, who attended also upon Adelaide, sometimes gave hints she
she was afraid to hear explained. She felt the impropriety of interrogating her on a subject of this nature, or even of listening to her—" If my aunt withholds her confide ^e," said she, " she has doubt¬ less good reason for such concealment. My uncle may fail in expressions of at¬ tachment to her, yet I think he must love her; for how, kind and obliging as she is to him, can he forbear to love her ? at least,.however, he must esteem her, for her numerous excellencies and virtues/* " it is now near twelve months," said Bertha, which was the name of the Coun¬ tess's woman, as she was one night assist¬ ing Adelaide to undress, " since the young Chevalier Theodore last left the Castle." *' Theodore !" repeated Adelaide; *' is not that the name of the Countess's ne· vol. i. d phew
phew, of whom I have, I think, more than once heard her speak ?" " Yes, Ma'moiselle, İt is the same, sure enough ; and if my poor Lady did not rake it so to heart, she would talk of him oftener: he was a sweet young gentle¬ man indeed; no wonder she cries and frets about him. Holy saints ! when he went, there was not a dry eye in the Castle, except my Lord's, and he was a hunting in the forest : and as to my poor Lady ------" " if your Lady is so much attached to him," said Adelaide, " why does he not revisit the Castle ?" *' Alack, Ma'moiselle ! he is never to come again !" " How 1 never ?" repeated Adelaide. "No; forali he used to be so free and so kind, that every body loved him ; and
and would sing and play upon the music, and might have been such a fine compa¬ nion for my Lord ; making the Castle, which is but a poor lonely place, you know, Ma'moiselle, quite alive; he might never rest, poor dear soul—every thing he did was wrong. Holy Saint Peter ! how often have I cried to see how he was used !—But my Lady knew little about the matter ; for he never told her, lest it should make a difference, I warrant, be¬ tween her and my Lord. Ah, Ma'moi¬ selle ! there must have been some black doings somewhere; for how could he hurt my Lord?" "Had the Count taken up some strange prejudice, which you conceive to have been unreasonable?" demanded Adelaide. " Yes, a strange prejudice, Ma'moi¬ selle, nobody knows how, nor why ; for, p 2 la!
2a ! as to Monsieur Theodore, he would not harm a fly ; and then he is so hand¬ some and so genteel, and speaks so sweet¬ ly, as if he thought himself above no¬ body : but all this is nothing now, for they say he is turned soldier, and gone to the wars to seek his fortune, though, as we all say here, more likely his death; and if he should die, I think verily my poor Lady will die too ; for truly I think ohe likes him better than herself, or even my Lord." Adelaide, who had long perceived the traces of a concealed grief in the coun¬ tenance and manners of her aunt, for which she had been unable to account, now discovered its cause : often, in the midst of an assumed cheerfulness, would she sink into fits of melancholy and ab¬ straction ; and then, as if fearful of ob¬ servation,
servation, suddenly recall her spirits. Yet had she discovered nothing austere in the behaviour of the Count; it was civil, it was sometimes obliging; it was nevertheless unmarked by that endearing tenderness and solicitude which affeciion dictates, and which, from the nature of their connexion, to her young and ami¬ able mind seemed so indispensable, that their absence could handy be atoned for, even by the most scrupulous and rigid attention to the other duties of his si¬ tuation. The Count, unsuspicious of observa¬ tion, however prepared for it, affected a degree of fondness for Adelaide which he was far from feeling, and which he was indeed incapable of experiencing for any object, however amiable and en¬ dearing. The memory of a brother whom d 3 he
PYRENEAN BANDITU. he had never cordially esteemed, was soon erased from his mind—he had never really lamented his loss; and his thoughts were now wholly employed in considering in what way he should act, so as to make the greatest possible advantage of the power with which he had been invested by the will of his late relative, as guar¬ dian of his niece's property and person. bhe could not marry during her mino¬ rity, without his consent; if suffered to go abroad, lur youth, her beauty, her accomplishments, and, most of all, her fortune, would render her an object of almost univerbaì pursuit. The choice of a husband for his fair ward, it is true, remained solely with himself, till she should have accomplished her twenty- first year; but might she not form an at¬ tachment to some person he could not himself
himself approve, aud whom it might be his interest to reject? and was she not, at a prescribed period, to become her own mistress, when his former authority over her would avail nothing, and serve only to add to his own chagrin and vex¬ ation ? It may be supposed, from the Count's eager anxiety to elect a husband for his niece, that he was desirous to fix her in a situation equal to her pretensions and deserts ; and that he was only following the example of many affectionate, but ill-judging parents, who think they are promoting the happiness of their chil¬ dren, by elevating them to stations of wealth and consequence. But the Count, although he was not destitute of ambi¬ tion, nay, though he had more than an ordinary share of it, was not highly soli- D 4 citous
citom thai Adelaide should advance her¬ self by marriage; his intention was to dispose of her in a way better calculated to promote his own interest, and the de¬ sign he had formed of being freed from his present difficulties and necessities; and it was this hope, and the sanguine promises of success which his son ewhat enterprising mind hourly gave him, that determined him to desist, for the present, from that scheme of persecution which he had meditated against the Countess, on her refusal to resign, at his mos/ ear¬ nest solicitations, that portion of her property which she had reserved for The¬ odore. This scheme was not abandoned, it was only superseded by another, which demanded for a time all his energy and ability. The Countess knew enough of the un¬ relenting
relenting temper of her Lord, to be con¬ vinced he had by no means abandoned the hope of acquiring what he had de¬ manded ; nor was she much reassured, by the circumstance of his having lately ceased to trouble her upon a subject which had been the cause of so much uneasiness and perplexity to herself: the calm, she feared, would not be of long- duration—again the tempest would burst over her; and though the native forti¬ tude of her mind, aided by religion and the feelings of conscious rectitude, would have supported her under any difílcultíes she might have to encounter while they affected herself only, she could not bear to reduce to indigence and obscurity a youth she so tenderly loved, and whom she had brought up with expectations of d 5 inheriting
inheriting at least a part of her fortune, and who, except in a reversion depend¬ ing upon the life of another even younger than himself, had not the most distant claim upon any one, even for a bare subsistence. It is true, bhe had pur¬ chased him a cornetcy ; but how, unas¬ sisted by her, could he live upon *his slender supply ?—He might indeed be promoted; but could she bear to blast his foimer hopes, and cloud with care a brow hitherto animated with the genial smile of peace? No; it was impossible— > she could not endure it; and so agoni¬ zing was the thought, that she resolved to brave the utmost efTorrs of the Count's vengeance, rather than sacrifice to his base and selfish \iews, the future pro¬ spects of her beloved nephew. She had heard
heard from Theodore since his regiment had reached its destination ; he had writ¬ ten in high spirits, and expressed himself highly pleased with a military life.
в 6 CHAPj
PYRENEAN BANDITTI.
CHAP. VII. In her letters to the Chevalier Theodore, the Countess blended advice and instruc- tion with the most affectionate expres¬ sions of regard and tenderness: she warned him against the dissipations of which young men in his situation too often largely partake, and to which the warmth of his heart, and the vivacity of his disposition, might too generally in¬ cline him ; she endeavoured, by her re¬ presen tations, to tear off the seductive covering which gives such a bewitching appearance
appearance even to vice itself, and to display it to his eyes in all its native de¬ formity. Many faults, from the peculiar construction of his mind, he was not likely to fall into ; a mean and unworthy action he never could commit, for Theo¬ dore possessed a loftiness of soul which few could emulate : frank, open, and un- designing, he ensured a general affection, and obtained an almost immediate ascen¬ dancy over all who knew him. Yet vice alone is not exposed to the temptations that await us here; virtue too has her irials, and often the most affecting trials. She feared the power of artful beauty over the mind of Theodore, who had a susceptibility of it, when united with the bewitching accompaniments of taste and sentiment, which, while it rendered hiin extremely interesting and fascinating^ 4 exposed
exposed him to no small degree of dan¬ ger, particularly in the station he now held. It was possible, led on by the ex¬ ample of his associates, he might form an attachment dishonourable to himself, and which might serve to embitter all his fu¬ ture days ; she counselled him, therefore, not only against those vices which arc included in, and glossed over, with the general name of gallantry, but against yielding his affections too hastily, and without a thorough knowledge of the person to whom he attached himself— (< Reserve your heart/' said she, " my Theodore, till you shall have found one worthy of your entire esteem and confi¬ dence. Beauty may charm, taste and elegance may delight; but these, uniess united to something more solid, are of little value; they will neither comfort you
you in sorrrow, nor delight you on the bed of sickness. Remember always, that those qualities which, to the eye of youth and inexperience, are the least shining and attractive, arc those to which we must look for real comfort and satisfac¬ tion, amidst the trying and often melan¬ choly vicissitudes of human affairs." Theodore's reply to the anxious en¬ deavours of the Countess to guard him against all the dangers and temptations to which the sanguine and ingenuous mind of youth is too often exposed, was dictated by every sentiment of respect and tenderness to herself, and expressed the most earnest resolution of profiting by the excellent precepts she had given him—" I can never," said he, f< be enough grateful to one who, beholding my situ¬ ation in every point of view, seems de¬ termined
termined if possible to guard me against every evil th3t can assail me. Oh, may I always profit by counsels so sweetly, so affectionately delivered ! May the Coun¬ tess St. Angouléme never blush for her nephew !" At the latter part of his letter, he adds <—" We are to-morrow called into the field. Our regiment occupies a post of danger, but it is a post of honour. Pray for me, my dear aunt, pray for your Theodore ! Think not I am alarmed af the prospect of death ; yet I do not feel that contempt of it which I observe in some of my companions; it is the con¬ tempt of insensibility ; sometimes the effect of intoxication, sometimes of a desperate violence; both equally remo¬ ved from true courage ; yet some of them are brave, and promise to signalize themselves,
themselves, as they have already done, in the field of battle." The Countess perused Theodore's let¬ ter with sensations which partook equal¬ ly of joy and sorrow, mirgled with the most affecting apprehensions as to what might be his fate, thus exposed to all the hazards of his situation. It was the last she received from him ; it had been given to her in the presence of the Count, and she had communicated to him a part of the contents—" Oh, why, why," said she, in agony, " was I not permitted to see him before he left France ?" " Are you surprised," said the Count, (t to find your nephew exposed to the dangers inseparable from a military ca¬ pacity ? Did you imagine he was to bear only the ensigns of his profession, with¬ out partaking of its hardships? You thought,
thought, 1 пирров«, the military tirets becoming—it would set off his handsome figure; his commission, too, would ren¬ der him independent of my authority: you did not imagine, nor does it seem ever to have entered into your politics, that he would be called into actual ser¬ vice." " I did, my Lord, believe he would ; but I did not suppose he would so soon be ordered to the field of combat, to prove that courage which is inherent in hsm, and which, if he survives, will do him so much honour." " He has had great opportunities of proving his courage/' retorted the Count sarcastically, " yes, great opportunities," after a pause, " great opportunities, in his insolent behaviour to me." te To you, my Lord ?" "To
ťr To me> Madam." " When, and on whnt account?" ** î am not to be interrogated by you, Madam ; it is sufficient that 1 sav he was insolent, highly insolent !" " Oh, never, neveri" " This is arrogant indeed!" resumed the Count—" Do you dispute my words? Do you dare ------" He aro.se in anger, and paced the room in sullen thought- fulness. The entrance of Adelaide recalled him from his abstraction : he addressed her with the same appearance of good hu¬ mour which he usually preserved in her presence. The Countess was in tears: she arose, and left the room. Adelaide could not forbear casting a look of gentle reproach at her uncle. He did not notice it. The morning was fine, and he pro¬ posed
posed their walking' together «long the ramparts. Adelaide had always expressed great delight, when viewing the magnificent scenes of nature; and nothing could be more magnificenr, or more striking, than those whici (he Castle co.nmanded; wherever she turned, some new object, either of beauty or sublimity, courted her attention. The eminence on which the Castle was situated, commanded, on one side, a deep and extensive valley, rieb with dark woods, beyond which ap¬ peared forests of pine, mountain tops, and narrow glens opening among the Pyrenees, and retiring from the sight, into regions almost inaccessible; on the other, a wild and desert tract of alternate wood and heath, bounded by rocks of a majestic height, and surrounded, at the edge
edge of the horizon, by mountains of almost Alpine grandeur. The Count amused her, as was his cus¬ tom, by pointing out the various features of the landscape. He was desirous she should be pleased with a residence which, except its situation, had little to recom¬ mend it: he feared that Adelaide would be weary of a retirement, which almost entirely secluded her from the society of young women of her own age and sta¬ tion ; yet, for reasons we have before unfolded, could not prevail upon himself to relax from the resolution he had form¬ ed, of keeping her as much as possible unseen. The Countess herself had but few ac¬ quaintance, and with these she was sel¬ dom allowed to mix : pride prevented the Count from suffering her to associate with
with her inferiors, and the dislike which prevailed against him amongst people of his own rank, a dislike which, for some reason, had of late greatly increased, oc¬ casioned many, who would otherwise have paid their respects to the Countess, to delay, and afterwards forbear their visits. The Count frequently had parties at the Castle ; but, though they were often composed of people nearly of his own class, they were not of the highest re- spertr.bility ; and at these parties, neither the Countess nor Adelaide were present. When, in honour of her birthday, he had introduced the latter to a notice more public than he had since done, the ho¬ mage which had been paid to her had convinced him that she had only to be seen, to be surrounded by admirers, and receive
receive the most brilliant and advanta¬ geous offers. He was in perpetual fear lest, weary of her present situation, which afforded so little novelty and amusement, she would solicit a removal to Paris; for although steadily resolved not to yield to any entreaties or remonstrances which might be employed to this end, he ne¬ vertheless dreaded them, partly because he scarcely knew on what pica to refuse, and partly because he was apprehensive she might penetrate his reasons for wish¬ ing her to remain in the retirement of her present residence.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. The Count, in his conversations with Adelaide, seldom spoke of the Countess; nor did Adelaide dare to inquire the cause of the distress she had witnessed, or revert, however slightly, to the sub¬ ject ; she saw he was anxious to conceal from her his own ill humour and vexa¬ tion, and prevent the observation of his wife's uneasiness. She felt, however, that restraint which his presence, under such circumstances, could not but impose; and when alone with him, hastened to disengage
disengage herself, that she might fly to indulge the compassionate interest she felt for this amiable and neglected wo¬ man : to sooth, to comfort her, without appearing to perceive that attention and consolation were necessary, or that her situation in any way required them, be¬ came the chief aim of her endeavours. The Countess felt the full value of these attentions; they were delightful— they became at length necessary. She was fond of reading and music ; and the frequent absences of the Count left them often at leisure to pursue their favourite studies and amusements. The Countess, having received no new command to the contrary, sometimes ventured from the Castle ; and sometimes, attended by Ade¬ laide, extended her walk to visit the cot tages on the heath, whoso inhabitants re* vol. ι. κ ceived
ΓΥΚΕΝΕΑΝ BANDtTTT. ceived frequent relief from the donations of their benevolent visitors. Several weeks had passed ыпсе the Countess had last heard from Theodore : her anxiety now partook of distress : he had promised, in case of his survival, to write to her after the engagement, which was then immediately to take place. Every day augmented her distress, and encreased the power of her apprehen¬ sions. One night, when Adelaide had retired to her chamber, Bertha suddenly entered the room: her face was pale, and she seemed in great agitation— " La, Ma'moi¬ selle," said she, seating herself, " what do you think ?~jThe saddest news !—Oh, my poor Lady, it will surely break her heart!" « What is the matter ?" asked Adelaide fearfully
fearfully-^" Sauely nothing—" tion>ceTtt- ing Theodore, she wa* about to add. " Oh, it İs ali over !" interrupted Ber-* tha—-*' be is dead ! the ChevaHer Theo¬ dore is dead !—He is killed ! he is killed !·* added she—" Oh, my Lady, who will teil my Lady ? I am sure I cannot—I would not be guilty of such an action for the world ; though my Lord says, either you, Lady, or I, must ; for he mil not tell her himself." ' f Are you sure it is true ?" said Ade¬ laide— u Who has said so ? what authority have you ì May you not have been listen¬ ing to a mere idle report ?" " Oh lack, Majoiselle, no! İt is as true, holy Virgin protect us ! as the gos¬ pel ; for my Lord told me, and Beuoir says he heard one of my Lord's compaaiy talking about it last night, as they were я S playing
playing at cards, and said there was not a doubt, nor the shadow of a doubt ; and so the sooner my Lady knew, the better; and so in truth I think ; for, poor soul, she sits expecting to hear from him, day after day, and no letter comes ; and she will never have one from him again : and when she knows the worst, ifit does not quite break her heart at once, she may look up again, and be as cheerful as she used to be." " Alas!" said Adelaide, " how much will she feel ! how difficult, how melan¬ choly will be the task of unfolding to her this new cause of distress, perhaps the severest she has ever known !" " Had you not better go to my Lady's room, Ma'moiselle, to-night, and try to prepare her for it?" said Bertha. " By no means to-night," answered Adelaide—*
Adelaide—" besides, î would first have the melancholy information confirmed by undoubted testimony : ht us not un¬ necessarily inflict a wound—it is possible he may be yet alive : reports of this kind are often circulated, and afterwards pro¬ ved to have had no foundation in truth." " Ah, Ma'moiselle, you have a good knack at hoping; but, for my own part, alas ! I always thought it would be so. I always said, when he first came to the Castle, quite a youth, he was too clever and too handsome to live; and when they talked of his going to battle, I could not get him out of my head, for I thought of my own words ; and so, in truth, it has fallen out. Oh, you don't know, Ma'moiselle, how he was beloved here ! it would do your heart good to hear how they are all lamenting him in the ser- R $ vants*
vants 1 hall : poor old Ursuline is crying, as if he was her own son; and all the servants are bemoaning him, and blam¬ ing my Lord the Count for not keeping him in.the Castle, instead of sending him to the wars/* " Alas, poor young man !** said Ade¬ laide sighing—" But my aunt, who ttlust tell my aunt ?" " You, Ma'moiselle, because you will tell her so kindly ; for if it should be left to my Lord ------" u I will think about it/' said Adelaide; *' but 1 would first see my Uncle." She then dismissed her attendant, and retired to her bed. She arose at an early hour in the morn¬ ing, for she had slept but indifferently, her mind being entirely engrossed by the tnelancholy subject of the night's ron^ versa tion :
versaťmn: she met the Count in the breakfast-room, of whom «he instantly made imjnrries relative to the report of Theodore's death. His answer lelt her no doubt of its authenticity. 4 * I fear/' said she, " it will be a heavy stroke to the Countess." " I have no doubt it will sensibly affect her," answered the Count ; " but she ought to have considered such an event as probable, and to have prepared for it accordingly. A military profession was, I suppose, his choice; he embraced it with the acquiescence, if not the appro¬ bation of the Countess ; I was not con¬ sulted, í have therefore nothing to re¬ proach myself with. I am sorry the young man is dead; and concerned, if the event of his death is likely to be at¬ tended with any unhappy consequences в 4 to
to my wife, that she did not dispose of him more prudently." He then desired she would, as soon as possible, inform the Countess of her loss] adding, e ' I hope she may bear it better than we expect."
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. It was long before the sympathizing girl could assume courage to enter the apart¬ ment of the Countess; when she did, her countenance, the faithful index of her heart, displayed, in characters the most legible, she had a tale of sorrow to relate. " You are pale, my dear," said the Countess—·" Are you unwell ? or hasany thing happened to discompose you ?" tr My dear Äíadam,'* said Adelaide, taking both the Countess's hands, " I am e 5 indeed
indeed discomposed; but it is on your account only. I have something—some¬ thing that I would unfold to you." " What is it?" said the Countess, in a faint and agitated tone of voice. " Exert all your fortitude, my beloved friend," resumed Adelaide; ef recollect what you once said to me; apply to your own wound that sweet, that healing balm, you once infused into mine. The Chevalier Theodore——" The Countess shrieked — " Oh Hea¬ vens!" exclaimed she, with a look of agonizing wildnees, " he is dead then ! he is killed!—Oh, my Theodore, my Theodore !" « Moderate these transport«, ï conjure you, Madami*' cried Adelaide, wteeping bitterly*—" He is gone indeed ; but re¬ member, he is gone to his Father and 4 your
your Father, to his God and your God* Think of him, as you said to me, when grief for a parent's loss lay heaviest at my heart, think of him as a glorious bea¬ tified spirit; and let no selfish pang prompt you to wish him back again, from among that hearenly society into which he is now joyfully admitted." " I know all you would say, all yotl can say/' cried the Countess, whom á violent gush of tears had now somewhat relieved from the faintness which had al¬ most overwhelmed her; "but oh* first/' clasping her hands in agony, " first I must think of him as a mangled corpse, left amongst heaps of slain, without a friend to close his eyes, or perform for him the last mournful offices of huma* nity ; denied perhaps a grave, or thrown into the rude unhallowed earth, the rites и Q of
f burial unperformed!—Oh, Theodore! it for this I consented to thy too рк ng importunities to fight in thy country s cause ? So soon, so very soon, to end that career of glory thou hadst but begun !" Tears now stopped her utterance : she leaned upon the arm of Adelaide, and continued weeping— ff Just and righte¬ ous Heaven," added she at length, ' f sup¬ port me, I beseech thee, under this, the heaviest of all the afflictions with which thou hast thought fit to try me; and let me not, in the bitterness of my present sorrow, in the midst of an anguish the most exquisite, forget thy manifold, thy abundant mercies;-— Theodore revered thy laws, and he is blessed." A sweet composure, the effect of reli¬ gious hope, and an entire confidence in the
the beneficent dispensations of that Be¬ ing whose very chastisements are mer¬ cies, stole by degrees over the before- agitated features of the Countess. Ade- laido, with the look and accents of an angel, bent over her : she took her hand, she pressed it tenderly to her lips*—" Suf¬ fer me," said she, " to supply the place of him whom you have lost. Oh that I were indeed worthy to supply it !" " Excellent young creature!" ex¬ claimed the Countess—" yes, in those pitying eyes," added she, *' I have long perceived a compassionate interest, above what I was then able to account for—they spoke a language beyond what tongue can utter ; and obeying the overflowing feelings of my now breaking heart, 1 could almost call you daughter." t( Oh, say not almost," cried Adelaide —' f Such
- " Such a mother î once had ; but, alas î I lost her when I was too young to esti¬ mate that loss, and I am now an orphan." " Forget, forget that you are so," said the Countess—" He who was to me in¬ deed a child, is gone, and you only can supply that chasm in my heart which his loss has left in it? u Promise me then," said Adelaide, * f to bear with patience, nay, with forti¬ tude, the present sorrowful event ; rouse yourself from the indulgence of an una¬ vailing grief; it is your Adelaide asks it of you—your daughter, your newly- adopted daughter." The Countess pressed her hand in si¬ lence, while a deep involuntary sigh heaved her breast. Adelaide continued with her, in lier room, throyghout the day. The Count sent
sent a message by the Countess's woman, to inquire after her health, but did not himself appear. " How unkind !" thought Adelaide—" but he is unwilling, perhaps, to witness her distress. He ought, how¬ ever, to make a sacrifice of his own feel¬ ings, to impart comfort to hér —I fear, indeed, he does not love her." For several days after the account of Theodore's death had reached the ears of the Countess, she confined herself to her own- apartment. The Count had Visited her only twice in that interval : he ad¬ dressed her in accents of affected kind¬ ness, but his countenance yet bore traces of that unrelenting sternness it usually exhibited when he condescended to ac¬ cost her. He spoke little, made some general inquiries about herself and Ade¬ laide, bat never once mentioned Theo¬ dore.
dore. Adelaide thought this too unkind ; fc but perhaps," said she mentally, " he is afraid ofŕeviving her grief." So much candour was there in the disposition of Adelaide, that she frequently conceived an action, in itself culpable, might have originated in some amiable or worthy motive. Weeks, and even months, rolled on without any new event, except that the Count, having allowed, as he imagined, a sufficient interval for the Countess's grief to have evaporated, urged anew his former remonstrances, and even threats, to induce her to make the resignation he required. She paused : ruin, perhaps inevitable, awaited her; but it would affect herself only : she deliberated, änd¬ at last consented—" AJas ! what I have relinquished/' said she mournfully, " may retards
retard, but cannot prevent the approach of an evil I have long foreseen—The Count's afl&ira are, even now, desperate/' Whatever prejudice he might be in¬ clined to indulge against his wife, the Count still preserved the same uniform appearance of kindness in his deportment to Adelaide, who hoped, by the power she possessed over him, to attach him to her aunt, who was now, more than ever, the object of her compassion and ten¬ derness.
CHAP.
k t i g ţi gg fi
СИЛР. χ, Т«й Count having thus arbitrarily ob¬ tained possession of the residue of his wife's fortune, now found it necessary to visit Avignon, in order to inspect the estates, and manage the affairs of his de¬ ceased brother. In his absence, he ad¬ dressed a letter to the Countess, in which he informed her, that he had met with an unexpected delay in the business which 'had called him thither, owing to an ex¬ traordinary report which was circulated in that country, deserving, as he believed, of
of little credit, but which had neverthe¬ less occasioned him some concern, and much embarrassment ï fie had, however, he added, little doubt but the amor would terminate fortunately in respect to his ward ; though it was possible some fur¬ ther difficulties might occur, before her affairs in Provence could be finally ar¬ ranged* These, however, he observed, might be more vexatious than important, as he could not suffer himself to doubt Adelaide's right of inheritance, or allow himself to listen, without the fullest evi¬ dence and conviction, to a relation of eventsand circumstances, which appeared highly improbable, and even romantic. On the subject of the nature and im¬ port of the rumour which, according to his account, prevailed in the neighbour¬ hood of Adelaide's former residence, the Count
Count was silent; nor did the letter con¬ tain any explanation, or even hint of what might be its purport or tendency, except what was conveyed in the few succeeding lines; from which it seemed that Adelaide's claim to the property of the late Chevalier St,. Angouléme ap¬ peared to be, in some way or other, ques¬ tioned. Yet -how, since she was his daughter, and only child, could this be possible ? The Countess perused the letter again and again, which appeared so extremely mysterious and perplexing, that it mock¬ ed all her efforts to comprehend it. Her curiosity being thus excited, a curiosity which sometimes partook of apprehen¬ sion, she awaited with some anxiety the return of her Lord; from whose lips, «ince he had graciously condescended to write
write to her (a circumstance which had somewhat surprised her), she hoped for a thorough elucidation and,explanation of that part of his letter which, at pre¬ sent, appeared wholly obscure and inex¬ plicable. Her anxiety was not dissipated, when, on the Count's arrival at the Castle, she learned, in answer to her inquiries, that it' had been rumoured in various parts of Provence, that Adelaide was not, as had been supposed, the daughter of the Che¬ valier and Madame St. Angouléme, but the child of a woman of the name of De Laune, lately deceased; to whose care, immediately on its birth ( Madame St. * Angouléme being then apparently in a dying state), the infant daughter of the Chevalier had been committed, to be fostered with her own child; and by whom
whom the confession had, as was said, recently been'made* The child, which was. also a female, and of the, same age as that to which the poor woman had given birtb, died, ac¬ cording to this confession, when only a few days olá; and the wwna», at the in¬ stigation of her husband, and with a view probably to her future interests .( for thus ran the report), had been persuaded to conceal its death ; and, by a daring imposition upon the parents of the de¬ ceased, placed her own as the future heir, in the family of St. Angouléme. . The Countess, on this intelligence, ea¬ gerly demanded if the Count, bad seen the husband of the woman, by whom, according tø this, report, the deception, had been practised? The Count answer*: ed he had uot the man being found, Upon
upon inquiry, to be in a distant part of France; but as he was inclined to treat the whole of the story as a ridiculous fabrication, he had not given himself much trouble about the matter. The Countess, who felt an almost ma¬ ternal interest in her niece's fortunes, was reassured by the manner in which the Count seemed to treat the subject of her concern ; though she could, not for¬ bear wondering if, disposed to consider it as wholly unworthy of notice, he should have mentioned it at alb particularly to her, to whom his communications, in re¬ spect both to himself and Adelaide, had been always made with so much reserve, that she could hardly be said to have any share İn his confidence«
CHAP.
CHAP. XI. Several weeks passed on, during which no future reference was made, either by the Count or his Lady, to the subject of their former interesting conversation ; when one day, the Count having just re¬ turned from one of his accustomed rides into the forest, was informed that two people, a man and a woman, meanly dressed, and apparently in a very low situation of life, had gained admission into the Castle, and on the plea of some business highly important, had demanded to
to speak with him. They were shewn into a private apartment in the Castle, and remained for some time in close conference with the Count. The Countess, who had gained from her woman some description of the strangers, and had marked an extreme perturbation in the manners of the Count, on the news of their arrival, in¬ stantly concluded that their visit had some relation to Adelaide, and the estates in Provence; and she waited, with an anxiety almost painful, the conclusion of an interview, which would probably throw some light upon a subject which, notwithstanding the apparent indifference and unconcern with which the Count had treated it, appeared to involve circum¬ stances not wholly unimportant. She had remained for some time in Vf )L. ι. ρ anxious
anxious expectation of the departure of the new guests, when she received an order from the Count, to attend him in an anti-room. She started, on her en¬ trance, on finding the strangers were not, as she imagined, departed ; and her surprise was converted into apprehen¬ sion, when the Count, arising from his scat, and putting into her hands a paper signed with the name of De Launé, said *— " I sent for you, Madam, as joint ex¬ ecutor with myself (for so runs the will of my late brother) in the affairs of the person calling herself, and hitherto sup¬ posed to be, the daughter of Julien and Elinor St. Angouléme." " Good Heavens, my Lord!" ejacu¬ lated the Countess, interrupting him, st you do not—you cannot doubt !" 4t That paper, Madam," resumed the Count,
Count, <f contains, as you will find, the deposition and confession of Agnes de Launé; and will, on examination, be found completely satisfactory, on the subject of the birth and claims of the young woman, hitherto considered as the natural and legitimate heir of our deceased and much-regretted brother, Julien St. Angouléme." The Countess, trembling with agita¬ tion, prepared to examine the paper. It contained, as the Count had observed, the confession of a woman called Agnes de Laune, was written in bad French, in manv places misspelled, and ran thus:— ff I, Agnes de Launé, do hereby declare, that, on the seventeenth of May, in the year one thousand six * c ? hundred
hundred and thirty-five, I received from the hrnds of a woman, called Blanche Muncc, the infant daughter of Monsieur and Madame St. Angouléme, of the city of Avignon, in Provence, to be fostered with my own child, a female of the same age, the children being both born on the same day, and nearly at the same hour. The child, which had been sickly from its birth, died in the middle of the night, on the same day that I had undertaken the care of it—my own was alive, and healthy. Twas poor, and friendless: my husband proposed that we should impose our own child upon the parents of the deceased, by which we should obtain a provision for it in future, and the pro¬ mised pay for its support, which I could ill afibrd to lose. I was somewhat fright¬ ened at the proposal, for I dreaded the discovery,
discovery, and the punishment which might follow, should the deception be detected; but my husband persisted that, if we kept but our own counsel, a disco¬ very was impossible ; and held out so many promises and advantages, that 1 at length consented. It passed off without suspicion or inquiry ; the child, on the recovery of its supposed mother, was re- reived into the family of Monsieur St. Angouléme, and nothing further tran¬ spired. u in the year one thousand six hun¬ dred and fifty, I, Agnes de Launé, was attacked with a severe disease, which seemed to threaten my life. In the course of my illness, I often thought of the injustice I had been guilty of towards the Chevalier and his family; as my dis¬ order encreased, f grew more and more f 3 unhappy.
unhappy. Л1у husband endeavoured to quiet my mind, but to no purpose : I told hira I could not die easy, unless I confessed the truth ; for I had been tor¬ mented with dreams and visions, which had greatly disturbed me. He desired I would be quiet, and say nothing about the matter; but I was still restless and unhappy. I could not forbear wishing to do an act of justice before I died ; so one day, feeling myself a little better, I resolved to put the account down in writing; and in a few days growing worse, I made my husband promise to declare the truth .on the death of the Chevalier, who was then said to be dy¬ ing; having been grievously disturbed and afflicted by my own conscience, which never suffered me to rest, and which had raised to me many fearful ap¬ paritions
parîtions. This is the whole account, and last confession of me, fI Agnes de Laune.. " So help me, holy Virgin and the* blessed saints, as I have here spoke the truth, "Avignon, June2S, 1052." The Countess having examined the paper, the man, who now introduced himself to her notice as the husband of the deceased and the father of Adelaide, confirmed, by oath, the intelligence con¬ tained in it, an oath, he said, he was willing to repeat, when called upon, in? any court of judicature in the kingdom. The woman who attended him, now his wife, also entered her deposition, which was committed to writing by the f 4 Count,
Count, and signed by her hand. She could swear, she said, to the hand-writing of the deceased Agnes de Launé. having manv times seen it; and she had more than once, having attended her in her la* t illness, heard her express much un¬ easiness and remorse respecting some de¬ ception which, she said, had been prac¬ tised upon the family of St. Angouléme; and once, her fever running so high as scarcely to allow her to know what she said, she had given her some insight into the business : that, owing to this, some of the rest of the neighbours being pre¬ sent, the report, then prevalent in the neighbourhood, had been circulated; and that her husband and herself had at length resolved fo confess the truth, having been much disturbed and perplexed by its con¬ cealment, and to take back the girl, whom they
they were now willing to receive and ac¬ knowledge as their daughter, and who, as she was now grown up, would be able to get her own living, and, providing she was strong and hearty, assist her parents. <( Never Í" exclaimed the Countess— « Oh, my Lord, you will not, you can¬ not part with Adelaide!" " This affair," rejoined the Count, " must undergo a complete investiga¬ tion ; the deposition of these people must be given in form, and undergo an examination.—Yon are ready, you say," addressing himself to the man, called Gas¬ pard de Launé, rt to confirm, by oatb, what you have asserted relative to this business, wherever it may be required?" " Anywhere, my Lord," returned De Launé. " That, I believe, is quite sufficient," f 5 said
said the Count— ft You may now, Ma¬ dam, if you please," to the Countess, * f retire, and summon Adelaide to attend; her presence will, of course, be neces¬ sary/* " Adelaide, my Lord?—Oh, not so suddenly !" " I would see her immediately/' re¬ sumed the Count. " Let me at least prepare her for an interview that will surprise, and for in¬ telligence that must greatly shock her." "The less preparation, Madam/' said the Count, " the better. Tell her I would see her immediately/' The Countess withdrew, and trembling with an agitation she was utterly unable to suppress, repaired to the room in Which Adelaide was sitting. The traces of astonishment were yet visible upon her features,
features, mingled with a concern so ten* der, as to leave little room to doubt but that something of an equally extraordi¬ nary and affecting nature had occurred^ To her eager inquiries the Countess could make no reply ; but, taking Adelaide's arm, she requested (for, while she spoke, the Count's bell rung violently) that she would immediately accompany her t& the apartment where, by his orders, she had been summoned— " Prepare your¬ self, my dear," said the Countess, * f to hear something that will greatly surprise and affect you ; but remember, you may always rely on my protection, my care: think of me always as a mother, and be assured, nothing shall prevent me from performing the duties of that sacred re» iationship; no, though even death should f Q bc
be the penalty, never, never will I for¬ sake you !" Adelaide had not time to reply, be* fore the Countess, urged by the seeming impatience of the Count, had thrown open the door of the apartment in which the Count and his guests were sitting— " By a paper which has been just submit¬ ted to our inspection," proceeded the Countess, forcefully recalling her spirits, for she feared the effects of such a com¬ munication from any other quarter, " it appears, though it may not yet be fully proved, that you are not, as was sup¬ posed, the daughter of the Chevalier and Madame St. Angouléme, but of the per¬ sons now present: nevertheless, under our protection, yo« will suffer nothing by thw change, but the mere loss of for* tune,
tune, a loss of which you will soon cease to be sensible, for, into a mind like yours, no mercenary or selfish wish can, even for an instant, gain admission." " Adelaide, I hope, can ha\e no doubt of our protection," said the Count, in a low voice, and in no very energetic tone. Adelaide was thunderstruck — " Oh, Heavens, Madam !" she at length ex¬ claimed, " what do I hear?—I not the daughter of St. Angouléme ! How can this be ?—It is not, it cannot be pos¬ sible !" " You are my own daughter, I be¬ lieve, Ma'moiselle," returned the man, " my own flesh and blood ; and she that stands there is your mother—your step¬ mother, I should have said ; fur poor Agnes·—" "IS]
" My father, my mother f" interrupted Adelaide, almost fainting with her emo» tions—" Oh tell me, Madam/' leaning upon the arm of the Countess, fC can this be real? are you not amusing yourself with me?—Yet you are not wont to do- such things. Great and righteous Hea¬ ven ! what can this mean ?" " It means, Ma/moiselle/* replied the man, who appeared thoroughly insen¬ sible of the poor girl's distress, " that you are not, as was supposed, a rich heiress, but the daughter of mean but honest parents, who are willing, if so be it shall please his Honour, to take you home again, and provide for you to the best of their power. You can sew, and work in the vintage ; and if you should like a service better than staying with your parents, who, God knows! have hard
hard work enough to live, I have one in my eye that will suit you to a tittle, and you may be as happy asa little princess." " A service Î" repeated the Countess, in a tone between surprise and contempt* and fixing her eyes upon the man, as she spoke, with an expression which seemed to say, " Can this be the father of my Adelaide?" for never had she witnessed so much apparent insensibility, igno¬ rance, and indifference, united to a face and figure so thoroughly disgusting, as in the object now before her. He was a middle-sized man, thin, and swarthy : his small, sunk, grey eyes, had an expression of cunning approaching to roguery, which was indeed the only character of his countenance : his figure was not only lean, but bent ; his shoulders were high, his
his limbs ill-formed, and extremely dis- proportioned. The woman, who, from her appear¬ ance, seemed to be some years younger than her husband, was scarcely less ugly and disagreeable. She was of a low sta¬ ture, thick-set, and corpulent; her fea ^ tures were harsh and forbidding ; and her large black е\ез, the whites of which were horribly contrasted with the ex¬ treme yellowness of her skin, denoted the vixen, if not the fury. They wore the garb of one of the low ( est orders of peasants : the man was some ; what better dressed than his companion ; but their appearance seemed, upon the whole, to correspond with the account they had given of their own indigence and obscurity, Adelaide
Adelaide shrunk involuntarily from the observation of her newly-discovered pa¬ rents; surprise had so completely over¬ whelmed her, that she was scarce able to comprehend the distressing change in her situation, or bclie\e that change could be real. The air of solemnitv that marked the manners of the Count, while, engaged ¡ n the examination of their claims, he continued to converse alter¬ nately with the man and the woman ; the ill-concealed distress of the Countess, whose eyes, now humid with tears, now lighted up with an expression which seemed to partake of disgust, and almost of horror, as she contemplated the ob¬ jects of her astonishment ; the confìdence perceptible in the manners of the people by whom the claim had been made ; the confession
confession of Agnes De Laune, a con¬ fession wrung from her, as it seemed, by remorse, at the season of approaching death—all these collected, seemed to compose a host of proofs, to confirm the veracitv of the assertion she had been listening to; and Adelaide could no longer doubt. But her parents—could Adelaide love her parents, her parents whom she had never before seen, and who were probably incapable, by their nature, as well as from the effects of time and absence, of experiencing the least particle of affection and tenderness for her whom they now called their daughter? To the conviction that all she had heard was real, not imaginary, the most ago¬ nizing reflections succeeded ; and Ade¬ laide sat drowned in tears of the deepest sorrow.
sorrow. Of these, of her griefs, all, ex¬ cept the Countess, appeared perfectly regardless. Anxious to pour into her bosom all the consolation it was in her power to administer in this truly affecting situa¬ tion, the Countess at length arose, and whispering something to the Count, led Adelaide from the room. As the latter was retiring, she was struck with the impropriety of withdraw¬ ing without first addressing her father—* " If he is my father," said she mentally, " ought I not to ask his blessing ? Let me not forget the duty due to those to whom I owe my being. Oh, St. Angou¬ léme ! were you not, as you seemed^ my father?—To you—to you I was in¬ deed a daughter !" She paused—she would have uttered somethings
something; but the agitated, the embar¬ rassed Adelaide, knew not what to sny ; and she stood confounded and perplexed, " You may go, Ma'moiselle, if you will," said he, with the same air of indif¬ ference with which he had at first accosted her; " you will hear from us again anon." Adelaide bowed, and retiring with the Countess, vented upon her maternal breast that grief she could no longer stifle, a grief which, while it seemed to encrease with reflection, seemed bound¬ less and irremediable. These feelings of affliction were, how¬ ever, converted into those of the most lively gratitude, when the Countess, pouring forth fresh assurances of pro¬ tection, declared she would never part from her, and that she now considered her as more than ever her daughter. The
The power of the Countess, while un¬ der the arbitrary conti oul of her hus- band, was so limited, as to allow of but little hope that she could perform the engagement she had made, without in¬ jury to herself; and Adelaide, however grateful, could not have been fully as- sored of the continuance of this protec¬ tion, had not she, on the departure of her father, after ha\ing been again ad¬ mitted into the presence of the Count, heard from him a repetition oí the same promises and assurances which she had before recei\ ed from the Counte s — <f I cannot,'' said he, ' f think of consigning you to the low connexions c*f the peo¬ ple who now claim you as their daugh¬ ter, and who, it seems, unassisted by your own exertions, are unable to a fiord you even a scanty provision in thcL· fa- mil ν :
nıiîy ; nor can the cîai.a they have made be fully ascertained and established, till it shall have undergone the necessary ex¬ amination before the Parliament of Paris, to the judgment of which Court it will be now speedily referred. That it will stand the investigation of the Parliament, î cannot myself doubt; for would it not be unreasonable to suppose that two people, utter strangers to both of us, in a matter too in which their interests can¬ not be any way concerned, should wil¬ fully assert a falsehood, or that they could indeed have fabricated a story of this kind, a story so circumstantial, both as to time and place, as to bear aJ the fea¬ tures of truth, and narrated with a sim¬ plicity which falsehood cannot assume f Though unconnected with me by the ties of blood, this castle may be still your home ;
"home ; you may still, in every thing but the n:>:ne, be the niece of Count St. An· gouléme." Adelaide gratefully expressed her thanks ; and secure of the protection of her late guardian and his highly revered Lady, began at length to taste again the sweets of that repose which the late ex¬ traordinary events at the Castle had, for some time, banished from her mind. It was the severest of Adelaide's griefs, and indeed the only one which could gain a permanent place in her heart, that she could not love, as she thought she ought to do, her newly-discovered father. All the filial tenderness of which she was capable, had been lavished upon St. An¬ gouléme —with his memory it was still cherished; and if she thought of De Laune, however anxiously she strove to avoid
avoid ît, as a;ı act of undutifulness she conld hardly herself pardon, she could not help comparing him with him she once imagined to be her father; and at these moments, as they arose in affecting contrast to her mind, her saddened heart and tearful eves told how greatly she ve¬ nerated the one, and how little, notwith¬ standing her utmost efforts, she did, or ever could, regard the other.
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. The Count, who, in consequence of the discovery .of the failure of Adelaide's right of inheritance (a matter which, ne¬ vertheless, remained to be proved before the Parliament at Paris, ere he could for¬ mally put in his claim), was the undoubt¬ ed and acknowledged heir to the estates, and other property of the deceased Che¬ valier. Fully satisfied as to the decision of the Parliament, he entered at length into all those gaieties and extravagancies to which he was so. much addicted 1 : his H'.vm,, ι. α parties
parties at the Castle were more frequent than ever, and became less and less se¬ lect ; for they were composed chiefly of people whom he had accidentally met at Paris, in the houses of persons not always respectable, or on occasional visits at Barrége, whither they had fled for the recovery of that health which they had voluntarily and culpably sacrificed at the shrine of luxury and pleasure. The Countess, frpm inclination, and an almost unconquerable disgust to many of the invited guests, had by degrees so en¬ tirely absented* herself from these par¬ ties, that her presence was now always dispensed with ; she was therefore some¬ what surprised, on receiving an invita¬ tion from her Lord, for herself and Ade¬ laide to attend a sumptuous entertain¬ ment he had ordered to be prepared, which
which was to be honoured with the at¬ tendance of two Parisian ladies of high fashion, whom he seemed anxious to in¬ troduce to them, and whom he spoke of in terms of the highest respect and com¬ mendation. One of these was the wife of a Mon¬ sieur le Mousin, a citizen of Paris, a lady more remarkable for the gaiety of her disposition and the levity of her conver¬ sation, than the rectitude of her conduct, or the purity of her manners : the other, who was introduced to the Countess and other guests, to all of whom she was a stranger, by the name of Signora Vio- lanta Sforzo, was an Italian, as her name imports, who had only lately appeared in France, She was the daughter of a famous Roman courtezan, with whom she had resided almost from her birth, o t and
and who had bequeathed to her, on her decease, a fortune large enough to main¬ tain her in affluence, if not in splendour. To the figure of a nymph, and the at¬ tractions of a Grecian Laïs, Violanta, un¬ der the tuition of her mother, united all the blandishments and allurements which are possible to be concentrated in one object; and to render that object com¬ pletely dangerous and delusive, one charm only was wanting, a charm, with¬ out which every other must be defective —the charm of modesty ; and this her instructress had not found necessary to impart to her; indeed she had it not to impart. The accomplishments of this Signora were various and enchanting: she sung, she played, she conversed, with an ease and grace which are scarcely to be ac¬ quired,
quired, and seldom equalled. The Count admired—he was at length fascinated ; for though inferior in beauty to Ade¬ laide, as to real perfection in loveliness, so much was there of attraction in all she said or did, that he seemed unconsciously to have resigned himself to the effects of her charms, and to have been drawn by her enchantments from all consideration of what was due from him to the rest of the assembled guests. A variety of occupations divided the time devoted to the evening's festivities, when a splendid collation was spread ; after which, when the exhilarating wine, which rose high in the sparkling goblet, had been liberally diffused around, the boisterous spirit of inebriation broke forth; and the Countess, who had hitherto с 3 been
been amused by the variety and novelty of a scene in which the accomplished Italian was the principal actor, now ex¬ perienced only sensations of disgust and uneasiness. Violanta and her companion, elated beyond all rules of decorum, be¬ trayed, in their manners, that utter disre¬ gard of it, which can only be found in societies the most depraved and immoral. The night, or rather morning, was far advanced before the company began to separate. The Countess was surprised, and somewhat hurt, on finding the ladies were to continue there the night. The next morning, she was told they were to remain some days at the Castle ; that the Signora, charmed with the romantic scenery of the country, had hired an elegant chateau, at the distance of about half
half a league from the Castle, and was shortly to become resident in the neigh¬ bourhood. The necessary preparations for the re¬ ception of the Signora, and her establish¬ ment at her intended future habitation, were already begun ; the Count and the ladies took frequent excursions about the country ; the Countess, on a plea of ill¬ ness, excused herself from attending; and Adelaide was not invited to accom¬ pany them. The day appointed for their departure at length arrived ; the Count attended his fair guests or» their way to Paris, as far as Thoulouse, and then re¬ turned to the Castle. Shortly after the removal of Signora Violanta and her companion from the Castle, Adelaide was informed by the Countess*« woman, that а тал, whom, g 4 from
from the description she had given of him, Adelaide instantly concluded to be her father, had again visited the Castle,- and had been for several hours closetted with the Count. This intelligence sur» prised her, as the Count, whom she had since seen, had mentioned nothing of the circumstance, though the business upon which they had met must doubt¬ less concern herself; nor was the Coun¬ tess, as she afterwards found, informed of it. The next day, she was told he had been again, and was a second time admitted to a private conference with the Count, Adelaide's astonishment was now greatly encreased—the affair they were engaged in must concern herself principally, if not entirely ; how strange then that the Count should not have informed her of his
his arrival, and the motive and occasion of his visit ! how strange too, if indeed her father, he should not desire to see her! — " How insensible/' cried she, weeping, " must he be to the feelings of parental tenderness !—Yet why do I com¬ plain, when I feel, notwithstanding my ful! sense of the duty I owe to such a relationship, I cannot love him as a father?" Urged by curiosity to know something relative to the business which called him thither, and the nature of these now fre¬ quent conferences, she was more than once tempted to make an inquiry of the Count; but his manners, the alteration in which she could not but remark, though the cause was unknown to her, for he was suddenly become thoughtful and reserved, repelled every effort to с 5 this
this end; nor could she, for she had sometimes attempted it, draw him into a conversation, which might lead, however remotely, to the subject of her present concern and embarrassment. These somewhat mysterious visits, after having been regularly repeated for seve¬ ral successive days, were at length en¬ tirely discontinued ; and Adelaide heard no more of her father, who, she now concluded, had left Gascony, and was on his way to Provence.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII. Several weeks passed on in the usual, routine, when one evening, as Adelaide was passing from the Countess's chamber to he»' own, she was surprised by an un¬ usual bustle below, and the sound of se¬ veral voices... Curiosity detained her for some minutes in the corridor : as she lis¬ tened, she heard the Count give orders for some one to be conveyed to the north tower, a part of the: Castle that was not inhabited, and tbe interior of which she had »ever yet seea. *' Con¬ fi 6 fine
fine him," said he, " in the chamber of the turret, and take care he has no means of escape—1 will see him in the morn¬ ing." As she paused, she heard the clinking of a chain, and a low murmuring sound, too indistinct to be articulate, but which seemed to be the utterings and moanings of distress. Several footsteps then passed aiong thè hall, the great door was opened and closed,' and all was again silent. -She had just entered hér apartment, when she was startled by the'sHidden ap-* pearance j of. ¿Bert ha, whose countenance' expressed terror and amazement. Ade¬ laide, eagerly inquired what had hap¬ pened ? í ,;}·*.' ', '- * о. " < · '■''-'· -* ;„ŕfí Шаг >MöWkelIe," cried -Bertha/ 'f have yføu not heard what a fluster we have,all been in beloW? My Lord the ' í u - Count
Count has been stopped and robbed, or as good as robbed«—he has been fright¬ ened out of his wits; and if he had not been overtaken by two of the servants, who had' followed him from Barrége, and happened not to be far behind, would have been murdered too. Never did I see such an ill·looking dog ! Here he is, Ma'moiselle, at the Castle; for they seized and brought him hither. Holy Saint Peter ! I wonder how they durst touch him !—1 declare, if it was not for being sure he could not come near us (for my Lord has ordered him into the north tower, and has hål him chained from head to foot ), I should hot have a wink of sleep to-night." > The Count, 1 hope 5 ," «aid Adelaide/ " has received no injury from the attacks of this outlaw?", f ^ ; — *"> "Oh
" Oh no, Ma'moiselle — no injury at âli, except being frightened, as I was saying, out of his wits; and so, in faith, well he might/* *' What is to be done with the poor wretch?" said Adelaide—" He is con¬ fined, you say, in the chamber in the north turret ?" " Yes, Ma'moiselle, and a peor com¬ fortless lodging he will have of it; for my Lord has let that side of the Castle go to ruins, for want, they say, of money to put it in repair; and so the stones are all tumbling in ; and if the night should prove stormy, |hey will be all rattling about his ears, and h will be well if he escapes without a broken pate ; thought if he bhould be killed, it won't much sig¬ nify, as he is sure to be either broke on the wheel or sent to the gallies, for stop¬ ping
ping my Lord the Count, and may as well die one death as another." βί Alas, poor soul !" said Adelaide, " how melancholy must be his reflec¬ tions!" " Melancholy indeed, Ma'moiselle," replied Bertha; " and I am sure if they were not, the place he is in would make them so. Holy Saints 1 I had as lief sleep in the haunted Castle as in that turret !" " The haunted Castle Ϊ" repeated Ade¬ laide. " Goodness, Ma'moiselle ! have you never heard of the haunted Castle? Why, it is only about three leagues from this place. La ! ! thought every body in Gascony had heard of the haunt¬ ed Castle!" " Is it so celebrated ?" cried Adelaide 4 — " Pray,
—:·' Pray, where is it? and how has it acquired the reputation of being haunted?" " It was shut up, Ma'moiselle," conti¬ nued Bertha, " for several years; and, though a very fine old place, was suffered to go to ruin ; for the person who owned it lived almost constantly abroad, and never came near it. It fell at last to a new heir, who determined to have it modernized and repaired : well, and so it would have been; a number of men were set to work, but what was done iii the day was always undone at night; and so it never could be finished." " And was the cause of this extraordi¬ nary circumstance never known ?" asked Adelaide. <( Oh yes, Ma'moiselle, it was soon known; several people were set to watch,
watch, àud it was at length' fou lid out that'the Castle was;haunted." " And hovrwas this discovery made ?" demanded Adelaide—" Were the spirits detected in the act of removing the stones?" " Why no, Ma'moiselle; for they never could tell when and how they were removed : but, at the hour of mid¬ night, just when the great clock at the Castle tolled twelve, lights used to ap¬ pear at the windows, and a ghost in a bloody sheet was seen stalking about the apartments. Blessed Virgin defend us ! I would not go near that dreadful Castle, no, hardly for my Lord's estate !" *' And are the same extraordinary ap¬ pearances observed now ?" rejoined Ade¬ laide, with an incredulous smile. " Oh yes, for people used formerly to
go out of curiosity to tee the lights; and many that have been to see them, have never returned, and could never after¬ wards be heard of A cousin of mine, who was travelling amongst the moun¬ tains, says he saw the western side of the building illuminated, as if it was all on fire; and if he had ventured nearer, might have seen the ghost, who always takes hts nightly rounds about the Castle at the hour of twelve." " This must be all delusion," rejoined Adelaide. " No, Ma'moiselle, it is all true. Ask my Lord or my Lady, and they will tell you the same." " Where do you say the Castle is situ¬ ated?" asked Adelaide. " Somewhere amongst the mountains, Ma'moiselle, and not many leagues off. Lai
tu ! I almost tremble to think we are to near it ; though they say the ghosts are never seen out of the Castle; indeed they have a fine range there, and cannot be hampered for want of room." " Well, I shall make some inquiries about it to-morrow," said Adelaide; " for your relation partakes so much of the marvellous, that it will require at least to be authenticated by further testi« monies, before 1 can venture to give cre¬ dit to it." Although disposed to treat the circum¬ stance of the haunted Castle as ridicu¬ lous, Adelaide did not forget to mention what she had heard from Bertha, the next morning to the Countess, who, to her surprise, being somewhat addicted to su* perstition, did not treat it as the mere effects of ignorance and credulity. She had
had heard, she said, some very extraor¬ dinary things relative to the Castle of Ponteville, usually called the Haunted Castle, which never were, and to all ap¬ pearance never could be, accounted for : lights certainly did appear at the win¬ dows, though it was known to be unin¬ habited ; and it had been authenticated, by the corresponding evidences of vari¬ ous respectable persons, who, from mo¬ tives of curiosity, had approached it at the hour of illumination, that a figure* covered over with a bloody sheet, passed and repassed the apartments where the lights were seen. " And has nobody had the courage to venture into the interior of the Castle ?'* asked Adelaide. .· ft Two men? resumed the Countess, u in consideration of a large premium, were
were mad enough to make the attempt ; but they were punished for their teme¬ rity, for they never afterwards appeared, and consequently perished in their rash and fruitless enterprise." " And the ghost has really been seen ?" cried Adelaide. " A figure," rejoined the Countess, " has certainly, and I suppose does at this time regularly appear, at the win¬ dows on one side of the edifice, which is called the western building." " But may not this appearance," ob¬ served Adelaide, " be the effect of an artifice which has hitherto remained un¬ detected ?— Such a circumstance is at least possible." " It is only barely possible," resumed the Countess; " as, had such an artifice been practised, it must have been de¬ tected
tected long ago. The only entrance to the Castle is by a bridge, which, since the unaccountable disappearance of the two meti who had engaged to enter it, has been constantly drawn up; for so strongly has the idea of supernatural ap« pearances and supernatural horrors fas¬ tened upon the public mind, that no person will venture within a certain dis¬ tance from the Castle, where the lights, at the hour of midnight, are always dis¬ cernible, and the shadowy movement of the spectre that haunts its dreary and de¬ serted labyrinths. Screams and dismal yells are also said to proceed from the Castle ; and on the wild heath that sup¬ ports its walls, now crumbling into ruins dismal forms flit before the eyes of the traveller, as he takes his adventurous course through the neighbourhood of this
this scene of horrors, that wraps him, as he goes along, in superstitious dread, and wonderstruck astonishment." €t That the sight of a spectre should conjure up a host of terrible apparitions, and excite in the mind a strange variety of horrible imaginations/' said Adelaide, " is by no means wonderful, or even ex¬ traordinary: the awful appearance of an inhabitant from another world, bursting suddenly, unexpectedly upon the view, must instantly rob the mind of all ra¬ tional perception : I cannot conceive that any thing can excite ideas more horrible, and at the same time more su¬ blime; for it isa horror that must par¬ take more largely of sublimity than the view of such a being as you have de¬ scribed ; and while my very blood chills in my veins at the mention of them, I can
can almost wish myself to bè'a spectator of the scenes you have been delineating." " How!" exclaimed the Countess—· " Have you courage to visit the haunted Castle?" · . " I would view it," said Adelaide, " from the place where it is usually seen, at the hour when the lights appear at the windows of the western building." " You must see it then," resumed the Countess, iC at midnight." " But it is some lencrues from this place/ 1 said Adelaide, . 'f Yes; and the path intricate, lying, for the most part, amongst mountains, and through forests; but, over the lesser range of the Pyrenees, a nearer track may be found. I would not, however, advise you to brave the dangers such a journey would expose τ щ to, however well
well escorted and defended.— But you are not in earnest, Adelaide ?" " Seriously, I am in earnest—I should like to see this Castle." " Not surely at the hour you men¬ tion ?" said the Countess. (t If I could be conveyed thither in safety, I would be there precisely as the great clock of the Castle tolls twelve," answered Adelaide. " You are laughing, I see, at my story," cried the Countess, " and have as much faith, í find, in the now-almost- exploded doctrines of witchcraft, as in the appearance of spirits," <( I should, 1 think, sooner incline to the latter than the former," said Adelaide; f yet, allowing that I admit the possibi¬ lity of one, I see no reason why I should absolutely reject the other." vol. г. к Tlie
The Countess was about to reply, when the Count entered the room; and the conversation turned upon the adventure of the preceding night. The gentle Adelaide^ who could not contemplate distress, however merited by guilt or vice, without experiencing the tenderest feelings of compassion, in¬ quired if the Count had examined the prisoner in the north tower ? The Count hesitated, and at length answered he had. * ť Alarmed as I was," added she, " to hear you had fallen into the power of this outlaw, now I see you safe and unhurt, I cannot forbear wishing the poor creature might escape : perhaps it is the first of¬ fence; perhaps the horrors of his situa¬ tion, the terrors of apprehended punish¬ ment, may have worked in him a resolu¬ tion never to repeat it : who knows," said
said she, laying her hand upon the Count's arm, her sweet entreating eyes fixed earnestly on his face, " who knows but, were an act of mercy extended, were it allowed, in this instance, to supersede tlie higher claims of justice, he might live to be a blessing, instead of a scourge, to his fellow-creatures?—Might yon not at least make the attempt?" *"' I am willing to make it," said the Count, in a low voice. ct Are you—are yon indeed willing ?" reiterated Adelaide, in a tone as animated and expressive of delight as if she had herself obtained a reprieve from con¬ demnation— <( My drar, dear Lord, you know not how happy )ou have made me!" " If I do it," lejoined the Count, his π 2 lounfcname
countenance changing, as he spoke, to an almost ashy paleness, " the last night's adventure in the forest must not be men¬ tioned : I shall be blamed—perhaps called to a strict account: it will be said, I ought to have entered a prosecution ; that, in screening him, I am myself committing an offence against the laws of my coun¬ try. The poor fellow's story has, 1 con¬ fess, interested me İn his behalf: he has been criminal, but his misfortunes have been greater than his crimes. He has promised to abandon the lawless course he pursues, and become an honest, peace¬ ful member of society; and on these pro¬ mises 1 have ordered him to b^ set at liberty." *' How kind!" exclaimed Adelaide— " Oh, my Lord, you know not how happy, how
how vary happy you have made me ! The poor man himself can hardly feel more grateful for your lenity than I do." " Remember, however, Adelaide," cried the Count, rising from his seat, with an agitation he seemed struggling to conceal, " that this affair must be kept strictly secret : I have already given you my reasons." As he spoke, he withdrew. The Countess expressed great satisfac¬ tion on ending the prisoner was released; it was, nevertheless, not unmingled with surprise: that the stern unrelenting dis¬ position of the Count should have been melted into tenderness and pity by the story of a robber, one too who had even attempted his own life, seemed extraor¬ dinary—it was even wonderful ; for she well knew him to he fierce, and even terrible, in his resentments; and though ii 3 so
so great a master of dissimulation that he could assume almost every virtue at dis* cretion, sad experience had convinced her, that his mind was the receptacle of - every vice that can deprave and disgrace the human heart.
CHAP.
ll".",,'!".^ . ' .Wf
CHAP. XIV. Soothed and reassured by the endearing manners of her young friend, who be¬ came every day more and more dear to her, the Countess's spirits, which, since the melancholy intelligence of her be¬ loved Theodore, had been greatly de¬ pressed, were now somewhat revived ; her health had, however, suffered too much from the pressure of grief and anxiety, to be speedily restored ; and Adelaide still spent most of her time in her apartment, η Ί The
The Count was not so often absent ns formerly ; he was observed to be much alone, and he frequently wandered about the Castle, with his arms folded across his breast, in an attitude of deep thoughtful- ness ; his brow sometimes overcast with the gloom of melancholy, sometimes dis¬ torted with an expression which partook of horror. Whatever might be the cause of this alteration in his appearance and habits, and whatever circumstances or feelings had given rise to it, he seemed anxious, when not entirely occupied by his own ruminations and reflections, to elude all observation of it in others. When ad¬ dressed, he would often start, as from a dream, and endeavour to assume an easv ¥ and disengaged deportment, from which he would again almost instantly relapse into
into his former state of silence and ab¬ straction. His attentions to Adelaide had, of late, greatly decreased ; he seem¬ ed no longer either to court or desire her regard. She feared he was displeased with her; yet, when and how could she have offended him ŕ " You stay too much at the Castle,'* said he one evening— " you are become paler and thinner than formerly—you will lose your health, if not your beauty —you must walk abroad/* '•Will you accompany me, my Lord?'* " No ; I have other occupations. You may take your ramble unattended, with¬ in a certain distance from the Castle— You know the path along the mountains. 1 would not, however, have vou venture too far—your own discretion will direct you; but I must not suffer you to be h 5 thus
thus constantly confined. I will attend the Countess in your absence." Adelaide loved to wander alone, and, to enjoy the beauties of the adjacent scenery, had been wont to ascend some of the eminences a little beyond the li¬ mits of the Castle—a gratification she had of late resigned, for the no less plea¬ sing one of soothing and supporting her beloved friend and protectress. But, still delighting in the lonely ramble, and anxi¬ ous to oblige the Count, by an attention to what he had recommended, she gladly availed herself of his promise of remain¬ ing with his Lady in her absence, and took a stroll along one of the dingles near the Castle; and, cheered by the freshness of the air, and eager for an ex¬ tended view, she even crossed one of the mountains. The
The track was lonely ; but as she gra¬ dually wound among the heights, they opened to scenes of such enchanting beauty, that she was led insensibly on, till the sun had sunk low in the west, and a dim purple haze began to spread over the surrounding objects. She now came to one of those streamlets which tumble, in a series of interesting cascades, from the heights, when, seating herself upon a rock overhung with dark beech, she sat admiring its playful waters, till her atten¬ tion to these passed to other thoughts, and soon became wrapped in pensive re- Aerie. These scenes, only a few months ago, she had visited with St. Angouléme, that friend now separated from her by death, but on whom her thoughts, though sooth¬ ed with the sweetest hopes, had never и 6 ceased
eased to dwell, with soft but melancholy ^derness ; fancy recalled his image to mind, while memory, from her trea- su u d store, brought back his words, with every look and gesture that had accom¬ panied them, and tears of tender regret, and affection truly filial, stole to her eyes. From the recollection of St. Angouléme, her supposed father, her thoughts revert¬ ed to him whom she was now taught to consider as her real father—But what a father !—How distressing, how affecting was the comparison ! She was engaged in these reflections, when she was startled by a rustling among the trees which overshadowed the ledge of rock on which she sat, and hastily quitting her seat, ere she had time for apprehension or conjecture, two men, of a ruffian-like appearance, issued from the side
side of the wood. One of them seized her by the arm ; she shrieked, and called loudly for help. " You may as well be quiet, Lady," said the other— " you must go with us." Adelaide, whose presence of mind had at first forsaken her, now conjured them to be merciful— ·" Here is my purse," said she—" I beseech you, release me, and let me go." " No, no, Lady, we know better than that," said one of them : u however, as you offer us your purse so kindly, we will take it; and this pretty bauble/' ob¬ serving a diamond cross in her bosom, (t we will make free with it too : and now, fair Lady, as we have no time to parley, you will please to accompany us." As he spoke, he took her into- his armSj and assisted by his comrade, in 4 spite
spite of her screams and struggles, con¬ veyed her up the mountain. When they had arrived at a turn in the path, still pursuing their way 'along the side of the wood, one of them tied a handkerchief over her mouth, while the other placed her upon a mule, which was fastened to one of the trees. Hav¬ ing bound her feet, to prevent her at¬ tempting an escape, the ruffian who first seized her took his place before her: the other proceeded on foot; and his frequent hallooings seemed to intimate they were at no great distance from some fellow-travellers. Resistance was now found to be in vain; and Adelaide, after a few ineffec¬ tual attempts to interest the compassion of her guides, resigned herself to her fate. They travelled with as much speed as
as the ruggednesä of the road and the encreasing darkness of the hour would permit, sometimes through deep glens overshadowed with lofty trees, sometimes along the sides of precipices, and gene¬ rally along tracks so rugged, that, as it seemed almost impossible far the animal to keep his feet, she expected every mo¬ ment to be thrown, and dashed against the rocky heights, or precipitated and drowned in one of those lakes or tarns, lodged in the hollows of the mountains, and which the torrents, heard, on all sides, brawling down the neighbouring cliffs, seemed abundantly to supply. They had travelled near a league through some of the wildest scenes of the Pyrenees, without meeting a human being, or distinguishing any sound than those of the mountain-stream, and occa¬ sionally
sionaîly the howling of the wolf, when the moon arose, whose confusing light contributed greatly to augment all the terrors which her busy imagination had hitherto formed, and she found them horribly confirmed by the prospect she was now enabled to discover. She per¬ ceived they were beginning to descend into a steep woody valley, extending as far as eye could trace, and which seemed to offer a horrible kind of security to the business of the ruffian and the murderer. Remote from the abode of man ( for no trace of sny human habitation was to be seen), the victim might there in vain call for help, or implore for mercy ; the mi¬ series of woe could not be seen through its drearv masses of shade, the shriek of death would not reach the ear of man across the heights. As they advanced deeper
deeper into the lonely valley, ehe seemed to be familiarized with the thoughts of death; her apprehensions became more and more terrifying—" It is here then," said she to herself, with a sigh of agony, " it is here I am to die." She shuddered, and daring to speak, besought her silent, stern conductor, to tell why she was thus taken, and whither she was to be carried. His answer was— <c You shall see—Be si¬ lent, and be wise." Another league brought them to the opposite borders of the forest, and Ade¬ laide seemed to experience a reprieve from the horrors of a bloody death, when she found they were ascending from the valley; and the moon being now no longer hid by the high tops of the pine woods, she perceived they were approach¬ ing
ing one of the wildest passes of the Py¬ renees. After winding for some time among the frowning cliff», they began to de¬ scend; and she beheld, at some distance in the valley beneath, the towers and walls of one of those fortresses built to guard the communication of France and Spain. On approaching the edifice, she observed it stood on a rocky eminence in the valley ; and the approach was through a narrow defile, cut in the stone. Its structure was massively solid, with only a few loop-holes ; but yet so ruin¬ ous, as scarcely to allow of the possibility of its being inhabited. They entered, over a tottering bridge, through a wicket in the gate, into a court overgrown with weeds and elder-bushes, when
when the ruffian dismounted, and sound¬ ing a whistle, which was instantly re¬ turned by another from some part of the building, two or three men came forth, and Adelaide was assisted to alight from behind her conductor. She trembled, and again conjured him to be merciful ; but her entreaties were no further no¬ ticed by any of them, than by a single assurance that she had now but little fur¬ ther to go. They led her onwards ; and Adelaide, utterly hopeless of being able to move their compassion, or divert them from their purpose, whatever it might be, si¬ lently addressed herself to that Being from whom alone she could hope to ob¬ tain protection or support. The ruffian that led her, as he approached the en¬ trance into the building, chancing to stumble,
stumble, cursed the moon for withdraw¬ ing its beam ; for a cloud was passing over it. They entered a large hall, when one of them struck a light, and Adelaide now, f jî the first time, perceived that her com¬ panions wee both masked. The villain who had first seized her, grasping her arm rudely, as if to prevent her attempt¬ ing an escape, though no means of escape seemed possible, led her into a passage, at the end of which was a door, massive, and strengthened with iron. One who had gene before was busied in the re¬ moval of some stones, and other loose rubbish, lying on a few steps which de¬ scended to it ; and when these were away, by the means of a lever moving in the wall, the gate or portcullis, as it might be called, was drawn up with a grating ßound.
sound, which echoed back from what seemed a vast cavern below. The silence of night, the gleam of the taper borne by the stern conductor, lost in the lofty space, the mysterious reserve of the ruffians, and the horrid dimensions of the prison she was about to enter, which might perhaps be her grave, produced impressions too powerful for female na¬ ture to endure ; she faintly shrieked, and fainted ; nor did she awake to the consci¬ ousness of her situation, till she found herself in a large dismal-looking room, hung with tattered arras, and which con¬ tained only an old bedstead, with a mat- trass, upon which she was laid, a table, and a few broken chairs : all these ob¬ jects she dimly discovered by the light of a lamp, which had been left burning by the side of the bed; and by going to a little
little grated opening, which served as a ■window, she discovered that her apart¬ ment was not, as she expected, a dun¬ geon, but a chamber of one of the tur¬ rets of the Castle ; but by what passages she had arrived at her present abode, was a mystery which the present harassed state of her mind and feelings did not enable her to solve or conjecture. In a few minutes, however, when some¬ what more composed, she recollected the iron gate or portcullis, which she now, with every appearance of probability, supposed to be the entrance into some subterranean passage commtinicatingwith the vaults of the Castle, through which she had been led to her present place of confinement. These conjectures seemed to say, escape was impossible ; yet so na¬ turally, so irresistibly does hope cling to the
the heart, even under circumstances the most adverse and discouraging, so eager¬ ly do wc cherish even its faintest gleam, that she arose with a determination to at¬ tempt an escape, and to meet even death in the eflbrt, rather than idîv await the destiny intended for her by her ruffian conductors, in her present dreary soli¬ tude.
CHAP.
'If ........ "■■ ΊΙ "-'! "T. 1
CHAP. XV. She was engaged in this research, when she was startled by the sound of an ap¬ proaching footstep. Instantly the door opened, and a man, whom she recognised to be one of the ruffians, entered the room. As her eye glanced over his figure, the blood chilled in her veins, and she uttered a faint scream ; but in a moment her fears began to subside, and surprise, not unmingled with hope, succeeded to. the terror his first appearance had ex¬ cited. Instead of the weapon of death, which
which her imagination led her to suppose he carried, he had brought her some cakes and a little wine, which he set down in silence, and was departing, when Ade¬ laide, in a soft and agitated tone of voice, entreated he would inform her where she was, and why she had been brought thi¬ ther. The man, a tall spare figure, clad in a cap and jacket of deer-skin, stopped, and gazed stedfastly in her face, apparently deliberating whether or not to answer her inquiries. u I conjure you," resumed the trem¬ bling prisoner, fi to tell me where I am, and what is this place." The man.still paused; at length he said— " This is the Castle of Ponteville." " Ponteville !" repeated Adelaide, with astonishment. vol. ι. ι " Yes—
" Yes; —do you think I lie ?—it is call* ed the Castle of Ponteville. " " And for what dreadful purpose, oh tell mei" cried Adelaide, with trembling tongue, " have I been conveyed hither?" fc I am not to answer inquiries," re¬ joined he^—'* you will know more anon. In bringing you, I have only obeyed my orders." He then set down the wine and cakes, adding, " You have had a long journey, and miut, to be sure, be in want of refreshment; 50 eat, and be content." He then quitted the room. The door of the apartment, which, to the utter distress of Adelaide, was found to have no inside fastening, was then se¬ cured by a bolt, which, from long disuse, seemed to be drawn with difficulty ; the retiring steps of the stern attendant sounded as though descending down steep
steep and narrow steps, and presently all was silent. " I am then indeed a prisoner!" ex¬ claimed Adelaide, bursting into a flood of tears, " and in the Castle of Ponte¬ ville !—Gracious and merciful Heaven ! for what am I reserved ?—If to murder me be their object, why did they delay the execution of their horrid purpose? why bring me here, to make me die with terrors ?—Would not that forest, those dreary wilds, the mountain-dells, and gloomy caverns of the rocky valleys we have passed, have afforded scenes as se¬ cure for their purpose, nay better, *han even the solitude of this Castle? Per¬ haps then," said she, a gleam of hope beaming upon her mind, " my death h not intended. But why, then, am ï brought to this dreadful place ?—Oh !'* ι U enea
cried she, with a shriek of horror, "surely it cannot be intended that I am to be kept for those brutal purposes for which lawless men sometimes, as I have heard, destine our unprotected sex !—Oh that I had but even in this place, the reassuring presence of the Countess ! or that the arm of the Count could but be raised for my defence !— Eut you, t my beloved friends, know not of my anguish, or of my fate : alas ! while I most need your aid, your affectionate hearts are racked by anxiety on my account. Too well I know the distress you feel for my extraordinary, my unaccountable disappearance : surely you will not think I have fled from you ; no, you will not—you are too good to deem me base : your hearts will vibrate with tender sorrow ; you are now, I am sure, anxious to render me that assistance I so
I so much want." A flood of tears burst from her eves, and somewhat relieved her aching heart. After some pause, her feelings soften¬ ing into the most tender sensations of regret — if Here/' she cried, sighing, ft perhaps I must remain, wretched, dis¬ consolate, and a captive; nor can you, my friends, reach to comfort, to protect me—within these walls you cannot en¬ ter ; nay, there is no clue to lead you to the gates." From the recollection of the Count and Countess, her thoughts wardertd to St. Angouléme — " Oh, could **e know— could he know,'* said she, " the fate of his unhappy child! his beloved, his once- darling Adelaide ! But perhaps, a benig¬ nant spirit, he now hovers over me un¬ seen ; perhaps gently reproving røy want i3 of
of reliance on the great Ruler of human actions, the Director of all mortal events." This thought was peace ; for, soothed and comforted by the refieetion, it seem¬ ed that, in the excess of her terror, she had yielded to a greater degree of despair than her situation, melancholy as it was, could fully justify. She was indeed a prisoner, but it was by no means certain that her captivity would be of long du¬ ration. The circumstances of her con¬ veyance to her present abode were so mysterious, that it was scarcely possible to form any reasonable conjecture con¬ cerning the purpose of her silent con¬ ductors; so little connected did they ap¬ pear with her life and fortune, that she even began to imagine she had been mistaken for some other. Should this really be the case, a speedy deliverance from
fi om her present melancholy abode might perhaps quickly happen. The person who had last quitted her had said—" Soon you will know шэге — I have only obeyed orders." Why then, her conductors belonged not to any of those numerous bands of robbers that in¬ fest the mountain-regions of the Pyre¬ nees, but were men employed upon some other purpose. To muse upon the extraordinary events of the bight, was but to add to a perplexity it was in vain to attempt to unravel : wearied with the endless, useless task, she, with much submission, again recommended herself to the merciful protection of Heaven, and then sunk, overcome with fatigue, upon the mattrass, and fell into a quiet slumber.
1 4 CHAP.
CHAP. XVI. Sue was awakened by a noise near her bed ; sh*: started, and looked wildly round the room, but could discern nothing— * f Good Heavens!" exclaimed she, in terror, as if the reflection had but that instant occurred to her, " this then is the Castle of Ponteville!" wíien, recollect¬ ing the Countess's words—" A mystery hangs over t'tat Castle, which never has, and probably never will be unravelled? she shuddered, a superstitious d^sad crept through her frame, and she lay for some minutes,
minutes, overcome with horror and per¬ plexity. The moon shone full upon the high- grated casement of her window: she raised herself half way from the bed, and looked calmly, but not fearlessly, around the chamber—all was still. It was then nothing but the wind, thought Adelaide, and she again endeavoured to compose herself; but an apprehension of she scarcely knew what prevented the return of sleep, and she arose. The moon still shone bright into her chamber; she advanced towards the win¬ dow, and glanced her eye over the wes¬ tern wing of the building, of which that window commanded a full view. In se¬ veral of the apartments of that wing, she observed lights flitting from window to window, with a meteor-like rapidity : it 1 5 was
was strange—she trembled, and imme¬ diately beihoughi herself o f the relation given by the Countess of this Castle— the moving lights, the supernatural fi¬ gure : a sudden faintness came over her, her limbs tottered, and she leaned against the stone-work of the window-frame for support. While she stood thus terrified and aghast, the great clock of the Castle struck the hour of twelve. Its melan¬ choly and deep-toned sound increased the awe of the preseet circumstances, and harrowed her feelings : she remained motionless and appalled— " At this hour/* exclaimed she tremulously, ** at this h our ------ »» As she spoke, she stole ano¬ ther fearful glance toward the window; but in ân instant retreated, overcome with terror and amazement. Either her ima¬ gination
gination had deceived her, or she had seen the very apparition the Countess had described. A figure resembling the human form, pale, ghastly, and smeared with blood, covered with a sheet, and bearing in its hand a lighted taper, moved, or, to the awe-struck terrified imagination of Adelaide, seemed to move, in one of the apartments in the same side of the edifice where the lights were seen. With a desperate sort of courage, she again turned hér eyes toward the win¬ dow where the apparition had appeared : it was not illusion. She screamed—it beckoned her; she darted, almost flew from her window, and with a loud shriek fell senseless on the ground. Wben recovered to a sense of her si¬ tuation, and the alarming circumstances attending it, she accused herself of pre- i S sumption,
sumption, in having formerly dared to doubt the reality of the appearance of this spectre; and though it was possible that the Castle might contain some inha¬ bitants beside herself and the men who had conveyed her thither, the tenor of her feelings did not immediately allow her to deliberate upon the probability of the figure she had seen being human ra¬ ther than supernatural—"If human," said she at length, " it is some unfortunate being like myself, who has been brought, and left to perish in this gloomy solitude." Apprehensive of encountering further trials of her fortitude, she flung herself upon the mat trass, and with trembling fear endeavoured to hide herself from alarm, by wrapping herself close in her dress. She lay and listened, yet dreaded to Ъещг, for every sound seemed super¬ natural:
natural : she feared to look around, and almost to breathe. Long laid she thus—sleep fled her pil¬ low ; and though weariness brought her to a kind of stupor of repose, yët terror failed not to keep her waking, by pic¬ turing to her fancy new apprehension, as torturing, and scarcely less dreadful, than those she had already suffered. The wind blew high; and as it whistled through the desolate apartment, and shook the loosened hinges of the door, she often started, and sometimes thought she heard shrieking voices in the pauses of the gust. While racked by these alarms, a noise seemed to proceed from thai part of the chamber in which she lay ; it was like the undrawing of a bolt. The lamp was now extinguished, and the beams of the moon afforded
afforded only a dim uncertain light, when, raising her eyes towards the place from whence the sound seemed to issue, she perceived something move in the sha¬ dowy space, and advance slowly towards the bed. Terror again overcame her, and uttering a loud scream, she sunk back upon the mattrass, from which she had partly arisen, and covered her face with her hands, lest her eyes should en¬ counter some other horrible apparition. She lay, and all was silence, except the storm without. After some interval, she assumed courage to uncover her eyes: she gazed around, but could perceive no¬ thing—dreadful was the stillness of the hour, but it did not intimate danger. Again a sudden gust shook the door, and agitated the arras, the figures upon which ( for it represented a number of men at arms
arms of gigantic stature) were strangely exhibited by thè beams of the moon, which shone full upon them. The ap¬ parition, if an apparition she had really seen, was gone; but the sound, and the object she had observed, reminded her that the room might be entered from without; and under her present circum¬ stances, the idea of a spectre could not be more dreadful than that of being in¬ truded upon, thus'unprotected and alone, and in the darkness of night, by ruffians, such as those who had hurried her from her home, to whom deeds of horror were familiar, whose designs were yet un¬ known to her, and who, for aught she knew, might purpose mischiefs more dreadful than death itself. These reflections, and the apprehen¬ sions that had given rise to them, ope- 4 rated
rated so strongly upon her mind, that she did not venture to close her eyes till the light of the morning began to dis¬ perse the glooms and dismal visions of the night ; when, exhausted by the agi¬ tations she had undergone, she fell into a deep sleep.
CHAP.
.«l-„,. : .ť.V- II HL I l'I
CHAP. XVII. S н r was awakened by the entrance of the ruffian who brought her daily supply of food: Adelaide viewed him attentively, almost expecting, harm ; but finding he was about quietly to retire, she resumed the inquiries of the preceding night. At first he seemed resolved not to speak; and was moving toward the door, with¬ out making any reply, when Adelaide, impelled by despair, besought him, with clasped hands and streaming eyes, to pity and to save her. Touched,
Touched, as it seemed, by such ener¬ getic distress, he turned, und looking steadily at her, as before, said, in rather a feigned voice, '· What is it you fear?" " Alas ! I have every thing to dread," rejoined Adelaide, " and, I fear, nothing to hope. Oh release me from the hor¬ rors of this p'ace ; and believe me, when I solemnly declare, I will divulge no¬ thing that it may be your interest to conceal. Oh stop, and hear me, while I swear by the holy Mother, and by every saint, I never will ; let me but without the gates of this Castle, and no ear shall ever learn that I have ever been within its walls/' The man paused ; at length he said— " Fear not—be not perverse, but wise; to-morrow mayhap your fate may be known—all may yet be well," Saying this,
this, he hastened from the room, bolting th« door without, a caution hardly ne¬ cessary to prevent her escape for it was scarcely possible that *he should find her way alone, through the subterranean la¬ byrinths by which she had been carried, in a state of insensibility, to the turret. " To-morrow then/' said Adelaide, as soon as he had withdrawn, ** to-morrow my doom may be fixed. He says fó* morrow —What can this mean ? Merciful Powers ! in what a cloud of mystery am I now involved !— Be not perverse, but ivise —What can he intend by this ?— All mat/ be mil— Why then, according to this declaration, my fate h, in some way or other, dependent upon my own deci¬ sion. But how can this possibly be? Shall I, a wretched, helpless prisoner, become to-morrow the arbitrées of my own
own destiny ?—How shall this be ?—It baffles comprehension. Is then another night to be passed in the gloom and soli¬ tude of this apartment ?" cried Adelaide, recoiling at the thought; "am I again to be exposed to other hours of agony ? am I again to witness scenes of horror, dreadful enough to appal the stoutest mind, and subdue even the most fear* less?" She regretted she had not questioned the man, whom she now considered as keeper, respecting the lights in the wes¬ tern building. That these lights were supernatural,, she scarcely ventured to doubt; that she had seen a spectre, the same the Countess had once described to her, seemed equally certain : she trem¬ bled at the recollection of her last night's watch, and feared that a repetition of such
»uch terrors might overturn her reason, and bring orr madness. Amid these fears and conjectures, the day passed heavily to its close: her masked keeper did not appear—she was not interrupted by any one— " To-mor¬ row, to-morrow," she again repeated, " I am to know my fate ; and oh what may that be, which is so near, and so impor¬ tant ?" She paced repeatedly her prison, or seated herself in the window-seat, large, from the thickness of the walls. Wearied wiih conjecture, she strove fo amuse herself, by gazing upon the dark precipices the wooded knolls, and rocky peaks of the mountains, till the splen¬ dour of the day began to yield to the sobe, tkìts of evening, and the veil of twilight to clothe, in misty garb, the rich and varied objects of the landscape. Though
Though deprived of liberty, a blessing which, Hke many others, we rarely know how to appreciate duly till it is lost, but which Adelaide had now learned to va¬ lue, it was sweet to look, even from her prison-window, upon beautiful nature; to listen to the evening song of the fea¬ thered songster; to mark the dying breeze, as it idly rustled over the tops of the woods, or now varied the thunder of the distant cataract, which was heard tumbling from rock to rock in the higher vale, as it hastened to half encircle with its rapid stream the eminence on which the Castle stood. Scenes like these are calculated to im¬ press, upon the feelings of taste and sen¬ sibility, all the affections of the sublime; but the sublime is seldom pi easing, ex¬ cept to minds exempt from danger, and at
at ease : yet their effect was not lost up¬ on Adelaide—she 1ш1 been * u&ht not to reject the good, bcc? - ^ > rame accom¬ panied with evii i^*nce, th-mgh a cap¬ tive wiihin those wails, those horrid walls, yet still health and a pure conscience en¬ abled her to look out from her window upon these scenes with pleasure, and to fill her mind with admiration of the Au¬ thor of nature, and to feel the liveliest gratitude for his many mercies. She saw the mountain-cliff had been bared of all verdure by the beating of the storm ; yet now all was tranquil ; and an eagle soaring around it, in safety and delight, had fixed there its eyrie, and its home. Lower down, the woods had been stunted in their growth, or bared at top by the winds, which often took their tearing course along the vallies; yet their
their depredations were now forgotten, and the oak and chesnut, firmly rooting in the rock, exhibited vigorous life in their happy verdure. The river, even now, rolled swiftly along its stony chan¬ nel ; and the grey gravelly bank shewed that oftentimes its current was ruinously irresistible. But now the grayling and the trout, leaving their haunts, where, during times of flood, they skulked in precarious safety, gambolled lively in the stream, regardless of dangers past or future, intent wholly on such joys as the present hour afforded. " Let these objects," said Adelaide, as she contemplated them, " teach me to be patient, and wise. I am, at this mo¬ ment, unassailed by any positive suffer¬ ings; I will not then trouble myself with the dread of harms, which may or may not
not come. Let me take consolation from the good even now allowed me, and be thankful I am not bereft of more. I am. a prisoner, İt is true, but not in a dun¬ geon, and in fetters; I have not compa¬ nions, but I am allowed food; I may perhaps expect personal injuries, but I may say, I have not, I think, deserved them. These reflections tell me I am happy, compared with many who might suffer here, nay, compared with many whom the world calls prosperous. I am afflicted, but yet I see I ought to hope ; and I will try, in despite of terrors and dangers, to await, with cheerful patience, mv hour of deliverance." Musings such as these afforded a plea¬ sing relief to her harassed mind; thev even gave delight, for they excited some- \o;„ ι. к thing
thing résemblit^ the »fervour of devo¬ ción ; of ^coitree, she willingly 'indulged them: anďretttaífted 'thus occupied, tiU lier apartment was almost hid in gloom ; when she heard а 'noise oil the other side of the wall, 'the same as had aiarmed her on the;precedirtg night, like the undraw¬ ing of a rusty bolt ; she «hád scarcely time even ! for apprehension, for the arras near the bed was immediately moved aside, and a man entered from behind, end advanced quietly along the chamber. Adelaide instantly perceiving it was not the person who used to bring her food, felt a degree of consternation, which almost deprived her of the power of utterance. " Lo not be alarmed," said he, re¬ spectfully approaching her; "the only motive
motive of this my visit ¡s io $е#ме you. Ľo you wish to be released from your captivity in this Castle?" ** Do I wish it !" reiterated ¡AdelajAerr» " Need the questionne asked?" "Will you accept of my ·.protection ?" " Are you in earnest ?— Bo you .in¬ deed offer it me?" "1 have no hope or device Jt equal to my wish of serving you." " What is it I hear !" exclaimed Ade¬ laide— t{ Have I then a friend where I least expected to find one—in a place surrounded, as I believed, with enemies?" " Soon, very soon/' said the, stranger, tf though, as yet, I know not the time, 1 will convey you beyond the reach of your persecutors, whose power you too justly dread. Will you confide in me ? ж 4 i will
will you commit yourself to my protec¬ tion ?" Adelaide, to whom these words, if sin¬ cere, would indeed be words of comfort, listened, half doubting; then, in a voice rendered tremulous by the emotions of hope and fear, she begged he would in¬ form her who he was, and how an escape might be accomplished ? *' By my means, and mine only, ' re¬ sumed the stranger, " you may avoid the dangers that await you in this Castle. Place yourself under my directions, rely upon me, and fear nothing." Adelaide gazed upon the figure of the person who spoke to her, whose counte¬ nance was obscured by the darkness of the evening hour, with a look of mingled astonishment and joy—" Is it possible !" she
she exclaimed, in an ecstacy of delight— " But inform me," added she, " I conjure you, stranger, to whom I owe this offer of deliverance?" " The offer," he replied, " is wholly mine.- I am one who, like yourself, have been basely seized, and detained a pri¬ soner in this place; where, had I not been able to interest the compassion, or rather the avarice, of my keeper, who has consented, on a promise of an ample recompence, to afford me an opportunity of effecting my enlargement, I might have worn out, in a wretched captivity, a wearisome life. To dwell upon parti¬ culars, might be to endanger our mutual, safety : the villains who conveyed you hither believe I am yet ignorant of your arrival, and consequently are entirely without suspicion of my attempt to libe-, к 3 rate
rate yon; we must not therefore be seen together, nay, I must hasten away,, lesť my keeper should visit my prison, and finding it unoccupied, search for me in this'turret. With the secret of your ar¬ rival, arid the motive of these men, or Tather that of their employer, in bring¬ ing you hither, I was last night informed, by a conversation I overheard between my keeper and his companion; for I had made á discovery of a frap-door opening upon a flight of steps, by which I could descend this f ower, and visit various parts of the Castle." Adelaide, sensible that any such con¬ versation ntust be highly important un¬ der her present circumstances, entreated to be made acquainted with its import. " í will inform you, Lady," said the stranger; ** but I dare not stay here long—
long«— it would endanger the tucce of my. design." " But first/' said Adelaide, " let me ask who is the owner of this Castle ?" ** The present possessor of the estate in which this Castle is situated," rejoined the stranger, " is the Marquis de Ponte¬ ville. It was by this nobleman's orders; you were seized, and brought hither; and if you do aot shortly leave the Castle, you will have no charge of escape from his villainy, or what be may" term his love. " " The Marquis de Po&tçvWe !" ex¬ claimed Adelaide, in amazement— w I kno r him. not—-never, to my knowledge, have I even seen him. My captivity must have been intended for another—it is impossible I can be known to him," " You mistake, Lady; he has seem к 4 you.
you. A deep and deliberate scheme of wickedness has been forsorne time form¬ ing against you. Count St Angou¬ léme ------° " Ah ! what of him ?" interrupted Adelaide, " Has betrayed you into the hands of a villain." '* Impossible !" exclaimed Adelaide— " he could not be so b"se !" " He has; nor need you other as¬ surances than I can give." " Oh be quick then," cried Adelaide, " lest we be interrupted, and discovered." ' r It is now near the hour," continued the tränger, " when my keeper usually visits my prison ; I must therefore hasten back. As soon as he has seen me, and all is safe, I will return to this turret, and afford you the information you so anxi¬ ously
otisly desire. Trust to my honour and exertion, and you will have no cause for fear or apprehension." Adelaide waved her hand, she dared not speak, for a light now gleamed through the chasms of her door ; and in a moment after the bolt was undrawn, and the keeper entered with her supper. The mysterious reserve of this ruffian at¬ tendant did not affect the imprisoned Adelaide as before ; and she was now only anxious for his departure, lest she should not be able to disguise the emo¬ tions of joy and anxiety which the hopes of escape had excited,and which her coun¬ tenance might but too readily betray. The man acted exactly as she could wish ; for, having left her a lamp ready trimmed upon the table, with a dish of some kind of meat stewed with vege- K 5 tables.
tables, he withdrew in silence, of which Adelaide did not now complain, and was by no means disposed to interrupt. That Count St, Angouléme could be the abettor of a schem? of villainy so atrocious as the stranger had described, seemed almost too monstrous to be be¬ lieved ; but every conjecture she could form was perplexed by the busy joy she felt at the prospect of deliverance, and the distressing reflection that, if the de¬ claration of the stranger was really true, she could not return to her former resi¬ dence in the Castle of St. Angouléme ; and consequently that, after her escape, she would be without a place of refuge— à wanderer, and an outcast in the world.
CHAP.
" t " ' ' M '
CHAP. XVIII. She was labouring under the alternate influence of hope, fear, joy, and regret, when an hour having nearly elapsed, she heard the bolt of the concealed door slowly undrawn, and again the stringer appeared—" We are safe/' said he -И' all is favourable to our purpose/* Adelaide trembled, and betrayed symp¬ toms of confusion, as the stranger again entered, and thus spoke ; she was fully sensible of the perplexing and .awkward situation into which ehe was throw«. ж 6 He
He observed heralarm and uneasiness, and earnestly entreated her to place in him that confidence which his conduct would be found to merit—" Let mc," added he, " assure you, that 1 am inca¬ pable of being actuated by any motives inconsistent with your honour and hap¬ piness." " It would be painful to me in the ex¬ treme/' said Adelaide, whom these words had greatly reassured, tf were I to doubt the honour of a man who so generously offers assistance to one so unfortunate and unprotected as myself. For this kind, this noble effort, accept m ƒ most grate¬ ful thanks, which no term I can select will sufficiently express: I will rather say, may that self-approbation, which natu¬ rally results from the performance of ac¬ tions
tions trtiív virtuous and meritorious, be yours !" The stranger was about to reply, but Adelaide proceeded—" May 1 be inform¬ ed," said she, " of the name of the per¬ son to whom I am about to be so signally obliged?" " My name," rejoined the stranger, ' f is Perouse. My father was a native of Paris, where 1 also was born. My story, till the incident which preceded the event of my being captured, and brought a pri¬ soner to this Castle, contains nothing re¬ markable; I shall therefore hasten to those particulars which are more imme¬ diately interesting, as connected with our present meeting. " With the Marquis de Ponteville I have only a mere personal acquaintance. My endeavours to save from dishonour a - * ':* voting < 4 О
young female, a distant relation of mine, whom the Marquis had accidentally seen at Paris, and with whom he became sud¬ denly enamoured, drew upon me the re¬ sentment of this nobleman, who, in or¬ der to prevent any future interference on my part, in the cause of distressed beauty, contrived that I should be way¬ laid on my journey through a part of this forest, and confined within these walls. The whole was managed with so much secresy, that it was some time before I knew even the name of my persecutor ; and longer still, ere I could obtain any certain information of his intentions con¬ cerning me. At first, i had reason to imagine his design was to murder me, or leave me to perish by hunger? after¬ wards, I had sufficient grounds to appre¬ hend that it was intended I should remain a prisoner
a prisoner here for life. My condition seemed now altogether hopeless, for I had been robbed of the little property I had about me by the banditti who had seized me, and had nothing to offer to bribe my keeper and attendant. " Several weeks passed away in various ineffectual contrivances to escape from the gloomy horrors of the room in the great tower where I was confined, when one night, as I was walking in my cham¬ ber, I thought I perceived a board of it shake beneath my steps; and on exa¬ mination found it, as well as two more, were loose and removable, and under them a trap door. Curiosity and the hope of escape determined me to open it, which with some difficulty I effected; beneath was a small dark passage of steps. I closed the door, andreplaced the boards, 4 resolving
resolving to explore.the place that very c\ ening, when my keeper had left me my night's repast. 1 did ьо, and taking my lamp, descended a cpusideiable way down steps, often much broken, which con\inced me my track was not in com¬ mon use. At the bottom, İ found my¬ self in a narrow passage, along which J proceeded with caution, fearing not only lest my lamp might be seen through some of the loop-holes, but lest the dank va¬ pours which curled around should ex¬ tinguish my light* " The passage was of a considerable length, and led to a door, which was fas¬ tened. I placed my lamp at some dis- tance* to avoid the current of air, for I dreaded being left alone in darkness, and tried to open the door: it was bolted on the other side, ij>y£ it was loose ; and after
after some cautious efforts, I was enabled to push back the rusty bolt with my hand, and open it» " I then found myself in a large, square, stone room, with two doors on opposite sides. I was deliberating which of them to open, when I distinguished the sound of voices in the next apart*. ment; and in a few minutes, plainly heard that of my keeper, in conversation with some other person, whom at first I imagined to be the Marquis. Fearing, they might enter the room and discover me, I was about to retreat; but a few words convinced me I was mistaken in supposing either to be the Marquis, and their import rivetted me to the spot. " The substance of what I heard, though it occupied a conversation of some length, may
may be briefly stated. î found that a lady, whom I discovered, by then? description, to be both young and beautiful, and con¬ sequently ycurself, had been betrayed by Count St. Angouhšrae, one of our Gascon nobles, into the power of the Marquis de Ponteville, who, it seems, had not some accident intervened to pre¬ vent the accomplishment of his project, intended, by a pretended rescue of her from the hands of the rumans by whom, on his orders, she had been seized, to convey her, in the character of a deli¬ verer, over the mountains, to a splendid villa he possesses on the banks of the Ebro. The Marquis, ï heard, was now daily expected ; and immediately on his arrival, was to conduct his lovely pri¬ soner from the Castle to the elegant ha¬ bitation
bifatton prepared for her, where she was to be compelled to accept of such pro¬ posals as he might choose to offer, <* Of the Marquis I know enough to be convinced he is capable of any spe¬ cies of villainy, when the gratification of his own passions is the object. The only part of the discourse which seemed to me at all extraordinary, was, ť hat Count St. Angouléme should consent to sacri¬ fice, to the intriguing purposes of the Marquis, a young creature, whom, ac¬ cording to their account, he once sup¬ posed to be his niece, and the heiress of a very considerable property, but who had been since discovered to be a change¬ ling, and the offspring of some peasant near Avignon, of the name of De Latiné. " This, 1 afterwards gathered from the conversation of these men s he was in¬ duced
duced to agree to, in consequence of the Marquis having lost a large sum of money at cards *? ? set of sharpers, with whom the Count was connected. ** On the discovery of this act of per-, fîdy of he Count and his associates, the* Marquis, in the violence of his rage, threatened niem with an exposure; and,, though the sum he had lost was thrice. offered him, would listen to no terms of accommodation but such as he afterwards proposed, and which were at length ac¬ ceded to : these were, that the Count should, by some contrivance, assist in throwing the young lady into his power, whom, though he had seen her only for a moment, and had not even spoken to her, he professed to love with the most violent passion. ie I was now in possession of a secret which
which filled me with the most tender concern : all I had further to learn was the place in which the fair prisoner was confined; this most valuable information was conveyed to me by the conversation which followed, and of this I resolved to make instant use. I returned therefore to my chamber, and waiting till past the hour when I knew my keeper and his comrade would have retired to rest, again descended the trap, determined, if pos¬ sible, to enter the place of your confine¬ ment. íŕ I need not detain you with an ac count of the many difficulties I encoun¬ tered; I will only say, that, after various exertions and much hazard, having en¬ tered this tower, I arrived at a small door, which led to the prison-room of my fair unfortunate fellow-captive;'for 1 heard
I heard a deep sigh within, which con¬ vinced me my search had been crowned with success. tr I waited till the stillness that reigned around convinced me you slept, when I undrew the bolts, and presumed to enter your apartment. As I approached the side of the bed on which you lay, you screamed, and seemed, for the moment, bereft of sense and motion. 1 dreaded lest your cry should have reached the ear of my keeper, whose apartment might too probably be in the same part of the edifice, and therefore I precipitately re¬ treated, satisfied with having discovered your confinement, and pleasing myself with the hope of being able to deliver a sufferer, so fair and so injured, from the mischiefs intended her." The stranger having «proceeded this far,
far, discontinued his narration. Adelaide, for some time after he had ceased to speak, could not otherwise express her feelings for this promised deliverance, than by a copious shower of tears, which now streamed down her cheeks. Her heart beat quick with the emotions of her gratitude : how kind, how generous, seemed his purposed exertion in behalf of an unfortunate unknown, to whom accident had so strangely, yet so provi¬ dentially, introduced him ! hardly could she find terms expressive of her sensa¬ tions—they were too refined for lan¬ guage; yet she strove to render him sen¬ sible of the high sense she entertained of his generosity and benevolence, to which she felt no acknowledgments could be in any degree adequate. " Load me not thus," cried the stran¬ ger,
ger, " with the effusions of your grati¬ tude: in delivering you from the injuries and persecutions preparing for yon, I am but barely performing my duty, both as a man and a Christian." As he spoke, he pressed devoutly to his lips a small ivory crucifix, which hung suspended on his breast; and seemed, by the move¬ ment of his lips, to be engaged in men¬ tal prayer to the Virgin, or some saint. After a pause— tc Let us not," said he, " waste our time in mutual compliments <—these moments are precious; let us think only of the future? lie then has¬ tened to inform Adelaide of the scheme he had suggested for her enlargement ; and gave such directions for her conduct to her keeper, as he conceived necessary to the occasion. While they were engaged in discours-
ing upon their plans, and revolving in their minds the most probable means of escape, as also those by which they might elude the Argus-eyed vigilance of their ruffian attendant, a subject which now wholly occupied the thoughts of the pri¬ soners, they were startled by a deep groan, whieh seemed to issue from an adjacent part of the building : it was re¬ peated—they ga¿cd upon each other, in terrified astonishment. To Adelaide the idea almost instantlv occurred, that there was near them, in that turret, some other unfortunate fel¬ low-captive, whose condition was perhaps far more hopeless than their own. Ere she had time to express the nature of her surmises, the arras on one side of the chamber was gently agitated, and a thin spectre-like figure emerged ft-om behind vol. í. ĺ the
the walls, and gliding along the darken¬ ing space, vanished suddenly from view. Adelaide shrieked— " Great Heaven !" exclaimed she, in agony, " it is here— the figure, the same figure î once saw !— Oh save me ! save me !" She could add no more, but sunk fainting into the arms of Perouse, which were extended to re¬ ceive her sinking, and now lifeless form. On recovering, she found herself upon the bed : she started, and looked fear¬ fully around the chamber. A man was standing by the side of the bed—but it was not Perouse. Scarcely had she awakened from this trance of terror, when a hoarse hollow voice sounded ín her ears, and demanded the cause of this disturbance. " Did you not see it ?" said Adelaide, forgetting, in the agitation of her feel¬ ings,
ings, that the person whom she now dis¬ covered to be her keeper, was not pre¬ sent at the moment when the apparition had appeared. " See it! See what?" reiterated the man angrily. " The ghost !" rejoined the still-terri¬ fied Adelaide, " the ghost !" {t Oh, we have many of 'em in this place," quoth the man calmly» and with¬ out the least appearance of surprise; %< we make no count of 'em here." 11 How!" exclaimed Adelaide— " Can you behold unappalled the spirits of the dead ?" " Aye, marry, can we," rejoined the ruffian—" Why not, have we not less to fear from the dead than the livinar ?" f( Yes: but surely/' cried Adelaide, ĺ '2 -shrinking
PYRENEAN BANDITTI. thrinking with affright, u these visitations are very horrible." " Mayhap so, till people be used to 'em." te Used to them ! Can use reconcile you to such appearances as these r —Oh Heaven, protect me from them !" M You had better be quiet," returned the ruffian, " and hot squall so, or, by our Lady, you'll have all the ghosts in ^he Caslle about your ears, and that'll be a fine posse, I can tell you." Saying this, he went out, leaving Ade¬ laide in astonishment at his extreme in¬ sensibility and audacious stupidity, and more than ever averse from the solitude of her prison, subjected, as she now was, to the most awful alarms and interrup¬ tions; so dreadful seemed the idea of being
being left alone, that even the presence of her stern keeper would, under the present gloomy circumstance of her fate,. have afforded comfort and consolation ; it would even have been deemed a valu¬ able acquisition. He was gone, however; and she waited with impatience, hoping for the return of Perouse; but, to her extreme disappointment, he came not. She feared he had been discovered in her, chamber, when, it was but too probable, his design of releasing her would be suspected ; and she would then have every thing to apprehend from the watch¬ fulness of her guard, who would doubt¬ less exert every effort of his vigilance to. prevent her effecting an escape. The night was now far advanced, and as Perouse did not return, she imagined^ he had retired to his bed, and meant to. L 3 see
see her in the morning. Hopeless of his appearance, she took possession of her mattrassr and after some time spent in the most agonizing conjectures, wearied by her late alarms and the emotions she had suffered, she fell into a fast sleep. She awakened not till her keeper entered with her breakfast, when having taken a small portion of the food he brought, she waited, with renewed anxiety, the arrival of Perouse. Hour after hour rolled on, and still he came not; her heart now beat with ex¬ pectation, now throbbed with agony. He had been detected then in his at¬ tempt to rescue her, and was now pro· bably removed to some dreary dungeon in the vaults beneath, when, of course, every chance of escape would be lost; and she must have to lament, not only her
her own misfortunes, but those of that noble and disinterested friend, whose ab¬ sence she now thus feelingly lamented, and whose sufferings she had perhap? encreased and prolonged.
i4
CHAP.
CHAP. XIX. The day was passed by Adelaide in the most terrifying apprehension for her own fate, and that of her intended deli¬ verer— " Never, alas ! I fear," said she, " but on conditions that 1 tremble even to think of, must I hope to be emanci¬ pated from my confinement within these dreary, these detested walls!" Evening again advanced. What she had before imagined to be probable, now appeared certain; hope no longer enlivened the now-cheerless prospect, and
and seating herself in the recess of her window, she sat immersed in the most melancholy contemplations, till all nature seemed sinking gradually into a state of repose, which the tumultuous emotions of her heart allowed her not to partake. She remained at her window till the dusk of twilight thickened, and the last crim¬ son glow of light receded from the hori¬ zon : she shuddered, as the deepening glooms of the night stole through her chamber ; and recollecting the late awful visitation, the most horrible apprehen¬ sions took possession of her mind.— Hardly durst she venture to snatch a gaze toward that part of her dreary chamber, along which the spectre had seemed to glide; she trembled, as the wind shook the arras—every sound encreased her fears; now, in the pauses of the shrill i.o \ blast,
blast, she thought she distinguished voices, sometimes deep groans, and at others the most dismal shrieks. Involved in uneasy fears and appre¬ hensions, lest their purpose should be prevented till after the arrival of the Marquis, when escape would be imprac¬ ticable, she sat terrified, almost distracted with her surmises, when she heard the bolt of the concealed door hastily with¬ drawn, and Perouse entered the room. The darkness that had gathered around prevented her from observing the expres¬ sion of joy that beamed from his counte¬ nance as he approached ; but who may describe her rapture, when informed that the plan for her deliverance was accom¬ plished, that the keys of the outlets of the Castle were now in the hands of her fellow-cap t ive, and that he was come, 6 e\er
even then, to convey her thence !— " Our keeper," said he, tf is safe m my power; and, once beyond the bounda¬ ries of this Castle, we shall, 1 trust, have nothing to apprehend. The moon will soon afford us some light ; but I fear we shall have to encounter a storm/' Saying this, he took her hand, and conveying her through the door behind the arras, they descended from the turret, and pur¬ suing their way through a number of gal¬ leries and deserted apartments, proceeded down several flights o f stone steps, to the vaults of the Castle. Having traversed • I » the subterranean passage, they arrived at an iron gate ; and Adelaide and her guide / · ' 'l' emerged at length from the gloom, and '' * í entered upon the forest. When they had luescended the emi¬ nence, Adelaide conversed with Perouse L 6 concerning
concerning the lights in the western wing af the building, the figure she had seen at the window, and also of the apparition which had glided through her prison on the preceding night. Perouse did not even affect to deny that the Castle was subjected to these horrible visitations, and began to relate an account of so many dreadful murders, said formerly to have been committed ín it, that Adelaide shuddered, and entreated he would drop the subject. The wind blew high ; it w T as yet dark; and after travelling through a part of the forest, Perouse, having conducted Ade¬ laide to a little retired spot amongst the trees, proposed they should rema* ere till the rising of the moon. AdeL *e, already wearied with the haste she had used in deseen Jing the mountain, assented to
to the plan of her conductor, who, taking his seat beside her, on the trunk of a large tree which had been torn up and thrown aslant by the fury of the winds, being now, as he conceived, in a place of tem¬ porary security, in answer to Adelaide's inquiries how he had obtained the means of escape, he ga\e the following relation.
CHAP.
95
CHAP. XX. " After the conversation I had over* heard between my keeper and his com¬ panion, whom I afterwards learnt was one of the Marquis's servants, I returned to my prison-room, and waited in anxi¬ ous expectation till I thought my atten¬ dant was in bed, when, solicitous to make further discoveries relative to the place I was in, I again ventured from my turret. Having reached the main building, I tra¬ versed, as before, several passages and stone chambers; finding, however, no door
door or outlet by which I could effect an escape, should my keeper, as 1 some¬ times feared, fail in the performance of a promise he had.once made, of restoring n><? to my liberty on the conditions I had ofiered. " Disappointed in my attempt, I was returning pensively to my chamber, when, having crossed a large square room leading into the passage which terminated the flight of steps I had de¬ scended, my foot struck something lying on the floor, and lowering my lamp, I found a dagger: it was rusty, and of little worth ; but it was a weapon which might be useful, and I placed it in my girdle. I returned to my chamber, and closing the trap-door, sat revolving schemes for your deliverance, which I was
was determined to effect at any risque, even ofthat of life itself. " Last night, when my keeper appear¬ ed as usual, I made many inquines about the apartments and offices belonging to the Castle ; to which, though he returned very imperfect and cautious answers, they enabled me to understand as much as was necessary for effecting our escape. Among other inquiries, í asked who they were whom I had heard in conversation in a room below?—He was surprised that I should have heard them, but re¬ plied that some of the Marquis's pages had been there the night before, buí that they were now departed, with others who usually resided in the Castle.— f Then you are the only one remaining here to¬ night ?' said Î. lie answered in the affir¬ mative,
tnativc, but pronounced the word yes with surprise and hesitation.-—* Now then/ said 1, f you may, if you are wil¬ ling, give me my liberty on the terms 1 once proposed—Will you do it?*—He said he had no objection, except from his fears of the Marquis, whose anger he was afraid to incur, I observed, the Marquis had probably now ceased to in¬ terest himself about me, f and you may comply with my request/ said I, f with¬ out any danger/ I then, the more effec¬ tually to overcome his reluctance, pro¬ mised a handsome premium, which I as¬ sured him he should receive as soon as I had obtained my enlargement, and was İn a place of safety. " He paused, and seemed to deliberate upon my offer, when, rushing upon him unawares, and casting him down, I ex¬ claimed—
claimed— ( I will not continue one more night within thcbc accursed walls: either resign to me the ke}s of the doors of the vaulted j assages through which I en¬ tered/ drawing, as 1 spoke, my instru- ment of dea h, ' or I will plunge this «tagger into t y heart/ ". At the sight of it (for he was un¬ armed), he submitted; and lying quietly at my feet, begged loudly for mercy; promising to do whatever I might re¬ quire.— ζ Lead the way then/ said I, € to the place where the keys are deposited ; and, unworthy as you are of the reward I offered you, it shall still be yours/ " He thanked me, and promised to do whatever I desired. 1 bade him give me the keys of the Castle ; this he promised. I ordered him to rise, and holding the dagger ready to strike if necessary, fol¬ lowed
lowed him through a considerable part of the Castle, to a small room contiguous: to the gateway of the inner court. There he reached from the wall a bunch of keys, which he delivered to me, with the assurance that they would enable me to open all the gates I should have occasion ta pass, even that of the barbican, be¬ yond the ditch next the forest. " I told him he must now be my pri¬ soner, to which he did not object ; and desired to be locked up in the room we then were in, for that his bed was in a recess in one side of it ; f and there/ said he, ' I can rest till my companions re¬ turn/ I had mentioned the trap-door : he requested that it might be left open, as it would favour his declaration that I had come through it upon him by sur¬ prise, when left alone in the Castle ; and thus
thus he should be able to escape not only punishment, but censure. " With the rest of the particulars/* continued Perouse, who had now con¬ cluded his narration, " you are already acquainted ; and now, Lady, I am ready to convey you wherever you shall please to direct. It must be unnecessary to ob¬ serve/* added he, ' f that the Castle of St Angouîcme can no longer afford you a secure and honourable asylum ; were you now to return thither, the Count, to escape public obloquy, must immedi¬ ately resign you to the Marquis. But you have perhaps some other friend or relative, within a convenient distance from this place, with whom you may find a secure asylum, and, what is more ne¬ cessary, a powerful protection ?" T j this Adelaide replied only with a deep
deep sigh. Her forlorn and friendless condition never struck her so forcibly as at this moment : Perouse's account, ga¬ thered from the conversation of the two men at the Castle, relative to herself, was too circumstantial to permit her to entertain a single doubt of their vera¬ city ; they seemed acquainted not only with her real name, but all the particu¬ lars of her situation. She knew the Count was fond of play, and that he indulged in it to a very culpable excess; she re¬ membered also the alteration she had re¬ marked in his manners for some weeks past, his melancholy, his abstraction, and the emotions he seemed to undergo from some unknown cause; nor did the till then seemingly unimportant circum¬ stance of his pressing her to walk abroad the evening she was seized and brought to
ïo the Castle in the forest of Ponteville, escape her now busy recollections-all appeared thoroughly consistent. The Countess соиЫ not receive her, without betraying her to the Count— Whither then was she to go ?— Perouse had twice repeated the question, before Adelaide could reply to it. Where in¬ deed was she to go ?—At length she an¬ swered, she had no friend near with whom to seek an asjlum; nor a single relative on earth, except her Dther, whom she had only once seen, and uho resided, she believed, in some part of Provence. " If you have 10 friends," said Pe; rouse, " to whom you слп instantly ap¬ ply for protection, suffer me to convey you to the house of a female'relation of mine, an aunt, who resides in a small vil¬ lage
hge not many miles from hence. I have only to tell her your story, as far as you may allow me to reveal it, to interest her in your favour; and ín the retirement in which she lives, you will have nothing I hope to apprehend from the future schemes of your persecutors." Adelaide, to whom this offer appeared highly eligible, and, in her situation, truly generous, listened to the proposal with trembling delight ; tears of thank* fulness and joy again rushed to her eyes; nor did she fail to express, in the most lively and energetic terms, her high sense of the obligation he was about to confer upon her, in the promised asylum and offered protection of the lady to whom she was to be introduced. It was now quickly resolved, that as soon as the moon should arise, they would
would commence their journey over the mountains, to the little village Perouse had mentioned as the residence of Ma¬ dame St. Clair, his aunt. Their arrange¬ ments thus made, Perouse arose, and re¬ tired from the little embowered spot where he had been sitting, leaving Ade¬ laide, with fresh assurances of protection awd watchful care, to repose on a bed of leaves and grass he had collected for her. She attempted to take that repose for which he had prepared ; but she scarcely slept on her rustic couch, for her mind was occupied with impatient expectation for the ribing of the moon. It arose at length, but İt rose in a lowering and portentous sk} , and her mng ear seemed to distinguish a lo., muttering sound, like the nobe of distant thunder. A ^torm seemed to be gathering around ; but,
buf, to Adelaide, the fury of contending elements offered nothing to her imagi¬ nation which could bear even the most distant comparison with the horrors that had awaited her İn the Castle of Ponte¬ ville. It was now light, though the moon was often hid by passing clouds rolling over it. She waited in eager expectation the return of Perouse, whom she sup¬ posed not far off, whose active benevo¬ lence in the cause of an unhappy stran¬ ger, and seemingly correct, if not po¬ lished manners, had rendered him an ob¬ ject not only of esteem but interest, not¬ withstanding the qualities she admired were combined with an ungraceful figure, and a countenance which, if not absolute¬ ly disagreeable, yet, seen at any other time, and under any other circumstances, vol. u m might
might have excited aversion rather than admiration— t( Surely," said she, shudder¬ ing, as the thought occurred, " nothing can ha\e happened to obstruct our de¬ parture; surely no wild beast—no ruf¬ fian« ----" While she spoke, Perouse entered with a sort of horseman's coat, which he said he had found, and which he desired Ade¬ laide would put on, as it would not only afford her a complete disguise, and thus prevent their being traced, but serve as a defence against the weather, which seemed to threaten a storm. Adelaide, delighted at his return, and sensible that the covering might be use¬ ful, took it without hesitation; and Pe¬ rouse, slouching a large hat over her head, so completely concealed her figure, that, under this disguise, it became im¬ possible
possible to recognise the beautiful Ade¬ laide de Launé. Thus clad, she hastened to accompany her conductor over the remaining part of the forest.
end op vot. i.
Lane, Darling, and Co. Leadenhall-Süeet.
