Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Pyrenean banditti: a romance
a-i—- jgaa, ............,.-,■ ■ ".у —-; PYRENEAN ΒΔΝΟΙΓΠ. CHAP. L ΨΎΆ Χ HE travellers had not proceeded far on their journey, when the storm, which had been long threatening, burst over them. The tones of the thunder became deeper; and the moon, shrouded ία clouds, emitted but a faint uncertain gleam. Adelaide gazed at the porten* tous aspect of the heavens, and often started, and shrunk with an emotion of unmixed awe, as while winding round the base of one of the mountains, she saw the, voi, и« в lightning
lightning flash around her, and hpard the hoarse voice of the thunder reverbe¬ rating amongst the rocks. '* We are safer here," s?aid Perouse, * than in the woods:" but as he gazed a1 the opening sky, and viewed the stieefcs of sulphureous flame darting fff^w among the тзроигош clouds, till tlhc horizon seemed all one constant glow »f vivid Hame, Adelaide thought she perceived an exp**ewkm of alarm on bis countenance» end she eager! ν in¬ quired if there was no place that could aflbrd them shelter ? ** I W ¡eve none " said Perouse ; IJ there is no house or cat*in within jibowt two miles of this mountain, where there h » village, and an inn where we Diay procure horses, and perhaps a car¬ tridge «o convey us to Auboigne, the place
place of our destination. We had there¬ fore better make the best of our way ; for by stopping we do no good, and only augment our danger/' The storm, however, en creased ; the rain began *o pour in forrenn, and they vere obliged to take shelter in the cavern of a rock. The sky was now completelv o\ercast ; the lightning flashed more faintly; the thunder rolled ofľinfro distance ; and no light, except at intervals, appeared to disperse the gloom of the rn^ht, which to Adelaide appeared more terri fvmg, as she distinctly heard the howling of wolves, the sound of which seemed to approach the rock in the cavern of which ihey had found shelter. The dread of being exposed to the в 2 fur)
fury of these animals made her eager to quit the place, though it was far from certain that safety could be found m fi'ghf. Perouse 's apprehensions меге scarcely less sanguine; he resolved, therefore, as soon as the storm should kav" subsided, to ^et forward vriih renew¬ ed ^peed, and reach, as soon as possible, the loun, from whence they мете to procure horses to con\cy them to Au- fcoi^ne. lhe гага at length abated ; the« load% de-perked; and the travellers, eager to resume their route, pursued their ţ\.ty alung the raountams. Having reached the place where they v*ere to ¡лор, Perouse, after roaring him¬ self a'most hoarse with his hulloings to the landlord of the inn, w ho had just fallen into
info a comfortable sleep, procured a cabriola voiţii two mules, and a guide ta dïreu them to Auboigne. As Aiiclaide entered the carriage, s!.e observed that the landlord eyed her at¬ tention, a circumstance which she rea- d'ih attributed to the singularitv of К г appearance ; for she had no fears oí be¬ ing discovered or traced; and felt that emotion of delight which liberty imparts to those uho, like her, have been de¬ prived of its enjoyment, though without a home to receive* or friends to cherish her. Yet by Perouse she had been promised both, at the abode and under the protection of his aunt, of whom he now continued to «peak in the highest strain of eulogium, and for whom he professed the most dutiful esteem and aflľecticn. ш 3 About
About the dawning of day, they arrived aï Λ ubo ig ne, a village so surrou nded by rocks and mountains, that the inhabitants mtprht be considered as secinde:! b;. íhc>c barriers from the rest of the civilized *orld. Pcroui.e, obser\ ing that hU aunt and her family would not be risen ia some hours; proposed that they should re¬ main at the inn, and that at a proper hour in the marring he should сл Π oa Madame St. Clair, and prepare her for the reception of her new gyest. Adelaide, who much needed гераъе, assented rea» diJy to this plan ; bedi were therefore or~ åered for the travellers; and Adelaide, recommended by her escovt to the care of the hostess, was again condemned to 'witness the scrutinizing glances of the people by whom she was surrounded ; but she
she had now íhrowi» oŕľ Ьсг disguise, a circumstance *hk*h however rendered her not less rhan before an object for tbc frying eye of cariosity.
ΐ 4 CHAP,
СНЛР. II. Ат a late hour in the momiriş, the hos¬ te« appeared to inform Adelaide that the gentleman with whom she came had, after an absence of about an hour, re¬ turned to the inn, and was waiting her rising below. Adelaide, who had just awakened from a sound refreshing sleep, instantly arose; and having dressed her¬ self in haste, repaired to the room where Perouse was waiting with a message of welcome from Madame St. Clair, who requested to see her immediately. They
They accordingly left the inn ; and Adelaide proceeded with gleeful steps to the residence of Madame St. Clair, which was about a quarter of a mile distant from the village. Adelaide, who had now leisure to con¬ template the surrounding scenery, was- struck with admiration at the sublime and beautiful objects of mountains, woods, and lakes, which alternately solicited her regard ;. and which viewed under a now cloudless sky, and brilliant* sun, appeared charming. The decorations of the chateau of Madame St. Clair were rather those of na¬ ture than of art. It was small, and had Ηισ appearance only of a beautiful cottage, retired amidscenes of romantic elegance; The pathway, leading up the ascent to a wicket gate, which opened to a rustic в ά lawn,
îawn^ was bordered with groves of al¬ mond and citron trees, intermingled with a glowing provision of flowering shrubs* forming altogether " a wilderness of sweets." At a little distance, almost concealed from the eye by the pine-woods, which here began fo extend themselves, a en¬ cade threw aloft its bright spray, glitten« g in the sunbeam ; while from s lower part of the rock, a brawling torrent was heard coursing its way from cliff to cliff, as it hastened ίο swell the waters of a lake below, whose mirror-like surface and delicious banks, composed a foreground to a picture to which, with the moun¬ tain-wild above, hardly any pencil could do justice« Immediately behind the chateau arose a lofty amphitheatre of hills, green with new
new verdure, and covered with /locks; and' beyond these, the immense outline of that chain of mountains which divides the provinces of France and Spain. Madame St, Clair was sitting in the re¬ cess of an opened window, embowered with clematis, when Adelaide and Pe¬ rouse entered the lawn On seeing thera she arose, and came forward to receive Adelaide, whom she accosted with the freedom of an old acquaintance, and such expressions of welcome, and even marks of joy on seeing her, as made her almost from the instant forget they wei e stran¬ gers. Adelaide's replies were fraught with the genuine sensations of a heart that knew no disguise; and she endeavoured to make Madame St. Clair sensible of the feelings which her friendly reception of в G her
her Ые inspired in her warm and grate¬ ful bosorø. *' Oh talk not of obligations," crieä Madame St Clair г " it is ϊ only who ant obliged ; yon know not ho^r mneh hap¬ piness î promise myself in your society ; ttor could yoUj Pierre ( addressing herself to Pereuse, whom she embraced with alt the ardour of affection), have conferred ©pon roe ж greater favour, than intro- «hieing me to so charming an acquaint* ance; for to speak the truth, î am heartily weary of the loneliness of this îîetirenıent ; and had not something oc*· curred tochange the monotonouscourse cf my life, and produce that variety, with¬ out which life is scarcely worth having, to escape the vexatious feelings of en¬ nui, í should have taken my flight to* Paris." Adelaide.,
Adelaide, who perceived by tits speech, as well as from her appearance, for she was highly rouged, and dressed» although only in a morning dishabille, în the ex¬ treme of tne fashion, that Madame St. Clair was completely a French woman ; yet all things conspired to persuade her, that though possessing ай the Ievfty of her country, it would yet be united with animated feeling and a susceptible heart ; and combined with such an inex¬ haustible fund of vivacity and good hu¬ mour, as would ensure her love and admiration on more intimate acquaint¬ ance. This lady, whom Adelaide already loved by anticipation, appeared to be between forty and fifty. ììer face bore the traces of former beauty ; but there was a fierceness in her eyes, to which she was
was perhaps indebted, in great measure, to the embellishment of her cheek, which imparted to her countenance an expres¬ sion rather striking than agreeable. Her complexion was that of a sallow brunette, her hair of the darkest brown. She was rather above the middle she, and something inclined to what the French call ся km point, though not suffi¬ cienti) so as to appear clumsy. Her ad* dress was easy, yet totally void of ele¬ gance. In her conversation she was fuient, and extremely lively, but not always grammatically correct ; nor had her manners any of that polish French wo¬ men usually possess, but which is per¬ haps not alwavs to be acquired, except by those who are accustomed to move in the public circles of the higher spheres of life. During
During the morning's repast, which was spread on the arrival ot the guests, Madame St. Clair discoursed with her nephew on the subject of his capture and imprisonment in the Castle de Ponteville. In the course of her con¬ versation, it appeared she was not only already acquainted with all the principal incidents concerning him, but even with many parts of Adelaide's hist orv, particu¬ larly what related to Count St. Angou¬ léme and the Marquis. The latter she execrated m a monster disgraceful to human nature, and described as profli¬ gate, unprincipled, and vindictive. Epithets not less expressive of abhor¬ rence were applied by both to the Count, whom, like the Marquis, they af¬ firmed had been instigated by the worst of
of passions to the commission of fhe most barbarous and disgraceful ac* : ons. Madame congratulated Adelaide on her escape from so infamous a combination, renewed the promises of protection Pe¬ rouse had before given her, and declared she would never part with her, while her place of residence should be agree¬ able to her, or till she could be more eligibly settled. " You will guess," said she, " fromr the smallness of my establishment, that F am not rich ; but I have enough for ali 1 the conveniences and comforts of life ; and while I have the means of possessing; these, you, my love, shall never want them." Adelaide made a suitable reply, while Perouse pressed his aunt's hand, in token of the most friendly affection,. After
After breakfast, Adelaide accompanied Madame St. Clair in a little stroll about the grounds. Madame then shewed her the apartment she designed for her ; and conducting her to her wardrobe, present¬ ed her with several changes of dress, which she desired she would accept from her, as a token of her friendship, and al¬ so that she would apply to her for any thing further she might want. Adelaide, though highly grateful for Madame's favours, would have declined the acceptance of these presents ; but she would not be refused ; and Adelaide perceived that by declining them, she would not only hurt, but offend her seemingly highly generous benefactress,
CHAP.
CHAP* Itt. Afte* dinner, Perouse, on the plea of some urgent business, which he had to transact at a village some few miles from thence, set off from the chateau, with % promise of returning to it at an early hour in the morning. As he was departing, Adelaide inquired if he was not afraid of meeting with the Marquis, or some of his people ? » Not at all," said Perouse ; " I have no fears except for you. I shall not travel in the night unarmed or unattend¬ ed ;
ed ; besides, as în aH probability the ob¬ ject of my former quixotism ís become indifferent to him, and he believes me too insignificant to cope with a man of his rank and fortune, I have, I think, no¬ thing further to apprehend from him." When Perouse had departed, Madame burst out into praises of her nephew, which, notwithstanding the signal ser¬ vices he had rendered her, and the es¬ teem she felt in consequence, seemed to Adelaide almost extravagant. She des¬ cribed him as possessing every possible virtue and accomplisnment ; and con¬ cluded with obsen ing, that on the death of an uncle, who was old and sickly» he would be heir to a considerable estate* which, in addition to what he now pos¬ sessed» and what she should herself be¬ queath, for she had made her will in his favour,
favour, would enable him to maintain an appearance equal, and indeed superior, to manv of the nobles of the country. From Perouse, the conversation turn¬ ed upon the subject of the bituaiion of Adelaide, in respect to the family of St. Angouléme. The Countess was to Ade¬ laide an object of the most tender inter¬ est ; at her name her eves swam in tears, and her Ьсьогп heaved with sighs, espe¬ cially as she reflected on the sufferings she would experience on account of her sudden and t 1 ? inordinary disappearance. These reflections were so poignant, that she consulted Madame St. Clair on the propriety of sending a message to inform the Countess of her present situation and safety—a scheme which Madame declared to he highly imprudent, and extremely dangerous ; and she spared no efforts
е Л orts to dissuade her from any such purpose. The arguments used by Ma¬ dame, if not quite decisive, were suffi¬ cient to deter Adelaide from pressing the subject ¡^ny further; and when added to this was the consideration that she could not make any communication to the Countess without criminating the Count, she determined to abandon it entirely. " it is better/' said she, tf tbat the Countess should think í have fallen into the hands of banditti, and am murdered, than know her lord has been guilt\ oí this act of treachery." Perouse did not re í urn arco t ding to his engagement, and Adelaide bet: .n to apprehend that he had been pursuet muI seized by some of the Marquis's pr ipic, and that they were probably even then in the neighbourhood. She communi¬ cated
cated these apprehensions to Madame, who acknowledged them tobe too just; and they both now awaited his arrival with many expressions of solicitude. Their fears and conjectures were at length dissipated by his return, though it was not till a day later than he had appointed. This he ascribed to a trifling yet vexatious occurrence, which he said would require his frequent attendance at a neighbouring town. What might be the nature of the circumstance to which he alluded, he did not declare ; nor did any¬ thing transpire which could afford an explanation, or even the remotest hint upon the subject. Ile rame home, as he had went, unat¬ tended. He rode a mule which he had purchased, as he afterwards declared, on Ыь way, for the convenience of passing and
and repassing the mountains ; and he brought with him a kind of sack, which he himself took from the back of the mule, and carried into his own chamber. As he entered the room were Madame St. Clatr and Adelaide were sitting, they were both full of expressions of satisfac¬ tion at his safe return; and the latter, after the usual civilities were ended, be¬ gan to speak of her father, who as being her nearest, and indeed only relative, ought, she thought, to be made ac¬ quainted with her situation; and she begged to be informed how this might be most conveniently done» *' Your father, Madam," said Perouse, *' is prubably not now in a situation to receive you, 1 think, however, with 3'ou, that he should be informed you are in
in safety ; and ( yet, till we may have sounded his inclinations respecting you, it may perhaps be imprudent to acquaint him where you are Do not think, however, I even suspect that your father can be at all concerned in the schemes of the Count ; I do not—I will not think so vilely of human nature ; but it is necessary that we should first know on what terms he is with^ Count St. Angoutëme,' and whether,he has suf¬ ficient power or discretion to defend you from any fai ther persecutions. This is certainly a matter which must be ordered with much delicacy ; but leave the ma¬ nagement of it to me. I will see your father: the journey is a long one ; ne¬ vertheless I will undertake it—I,will my-, self discover whether he regards you as he
he ought, and is inclined to afford you that protection which you, as his daugh¬ ter, have an undoubted right to claim." Adelaide said a few words expressive of her persuasion both of the inclination and ability of her father to protect her ; and delighted with his proposal of visit¬ ing him, warmly expressed her thanks to Perouse for his friendly exertions in her cause; and received from him a pro¬ mise that he would commence his jour¬ ney to Avignon at an early day on the following week. The better to secure Adelaide from tiie designs of the Marquis during his absence, and till she might be under the protection of her father, he proposed that she should take another name, since she was known by those of St. Angou¬ léme and De Launé, and either might vol. п. с lead
lead to a discovery of the place of her retreat. Adelaide instantly assented to this proposal ; and it was resolved that she should pass for a relation of Ma- dame's, and be called Adelaide St. Clair.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. The next day, Perouse rode from the chateau, as before, on the plea of further business at the neighbouring town ; and Adelaide and Madame St. Clair being again alosie, the latter resuming her fa¬ vourite theme, spoke of her nephew in her former strain of eulogium, describing him as the best and most honourable of men. " Excuse my partiality," said she, " for it is impossible not to speak of him as he deserves. You are silent, my love," c ä added
added she ^ t( perhaps you think I say too much," "If I am-silent," cried Adelaide, (( it is because I feel I cannot say enough. Monsieur Perouse has done me services I can never repay/' " There are ways of returning obliga¬ tions/' observed Madame significantly,, and with an archness in her smile, expres- sive of some latent meaning, " which are always in the power of youth and beauty/' '< I do not understand you, Madame," said Adelaide. " Oh no, I dare say not/' said Madame. " Well then, to be plain with you, my dear, though your own penetration must ere now have discovered it, unless in¬ deed you have much less than I can imagine, or those charming eyes of yours indicate, Monsieur Perouse—may I go on, my love ?" *' Certainly,
" Certainly, Madame," said Adelaide, " if you please." r ' Monsieur Perouse then loves you— loves you most passionately," pursued she ; " and he has asked and obtained my consent to offer you his hand." Adelaide started ; a crimson blush suffused her cheek. " You are mistaken, Madame, I think—I hope," cried she, scarce knowing what she said. " Mistaken, you think, and you hope/' said Madame, who by the emphasis she used, seemed not highly pleased with the concluding words of Adelaide's speech. Cf My dear young friend, my sweet Adelaide, can you deliberate even for a moment upon such an offeras this?" *' Pardon me, Madame," said Adelaide, " when I assure you that nothing could give me more serious concern, than that с 3 Monsieur
Monsieur Perouse should honour mc with a proposal of this nature. I am as yet very young, and at present under circumstances which forbid me to enter¬ tain even a thought of marriage." " The very circumstances to which you allude," said Madame, " suggest the propriety of your securing a legal protector, and recommend an immediate marriage with my nephew. Beside, what objection can you possibly have to him ?" " As a friend, Madame," said Adelaide, " I shall always value him ; as my protec¬ tor, revere him ; but as a lover------" ' 4 Well, well," said Madame, " I will leave you to talk the matter over by yourselves; perhaps I was to blame to mention it; but manyare the fair ones who ·
who would be transported at such an offer, from the amiable, the brave, the ac¬ complished Perouse." Adelaide, who was seriously concern¬ ed, and even hurt, at the idea of having inspired a passion which she felt it impos¬ sible to return, entreated that Madame would interfere to prevent Monsieur Perouse from making his intended decla¬ ration ; adding, it was quite impossible that she could accept his proposals, and she therefore wished to be spared the pain of hearing them. Madame seemed disconcerted and chagrined, but she made no answer ; and Adelaide, fearing she had offended her, hastened to change the sub¬ ject of their conversation. It w¿s not resumed. When Perouse again arrived at the chateau, Adelaide, who went out with с 4 Madame
Madame to meet him, was uneasy and dis¬ pirited, and her distress was increased, when Madame having designedly left the room, Perouse declared his passion for her, and even urged an immediate mar¬ riage, Adelaide received his overtures with politeness, but at the same time firmly declined accepting them. Perouse seemed surprised, and even agitated ; but though he urged his suit with passion and vehemence, Adelaide would not even promise to refer it to a, future consideration. He left the room in much apparent emotion, and did not return to it for several hours. When they next met, his behaviour was composed ; but the traces of disap¬ pointment and even anger, were yet visi¬ ble in his countenance. These, however, were quite removed by the following morning,
morning, when he talked to her as before of her father; and fixed an early day for the commencement of his intended jour¬ ney into Provence. But in this interval he repaired as usual to the town he spoke of; and did not return till after an ab¬ sence of some days. In the meantime, Madame St. Clair, who had seen much of the world, and was an easy and cheerful companion, en¬ deavoured to amuse Adelaide with the most lively anecdotes ; and to engage her in conversations of which Perouse was usually the subject. Of his family, except the uncle to whose estate he was to succeed, she never spoke ; nor did she ever mention a single relative of her own. From these conversations Adelaide could only learn, concerning Madame,. that she was a widow of genteel connex- c 5 ions,
ï.ïTis, related on the maternal side to tiie family of Perouse ; and that after passing several years in the gayest circles of Paris, she had repaired, with a hand¬ some competence, to enjoy the pleasures of retirement in the chateau she now oc¬ cupied. But though such was her pur¬ pose, it was evident to Adelaide that she had no particular penchant for the sub¬ lime and beautiful objects which sur¬ rounded her abode ; and it was equally certain that she had none of those men¬ tal resources which are requisite for the enjoyment of the retirement she had chosen. To one so oppressed with ennui, and so little able to contend with such a dreadful tormentor, a companion like Adelaide, gentle, amiable and obliging, was indeed a valuable acquisition ; and 6 either
either from the wish of retaining her, or from some other motive, she pressed the suit of her nephew with such warmth and earnestness as sometimes to surprise Adelaide, who wondered that on so short an acquaintance she should thus anxiously desire an alliance, which, birth and fortune considered, was certainly much inferior to what Perouse had a right to expect. But whenever Adelaide hinted at this inferiority, Madame, who affected to disregard or scorn every mercenary con¬ sideration, would exclaim, t( My dear¬ est Adelaide, you know not your own worth, or half the power of your charms. If I cannot behold the beauty of your person, and the accomplishments of your mind, without wonder and admira¬ tion, is it possible that Perouse should со be
be insensible to them, or refuse them that homage which is so indisputably their due ?" Observing that Adelaide had a fine voice, and finding she had been well instructed in music, Madame St. Ciair presented her with a lute; she also pro¬ cured for her several volumes of books; and Adelaide, who now often employed herself in reading and music, felt her hours pass agreeably, and even profita¬ bly ; for the books being such as she had herself desired, she was enabled to make an encreasing progress in the study of the belles ìettres. Sometimes, accompanied by Madame, she would stroll amongst the mountains, or along the margin of the lake, whose crystal surface reflected the bold outline of the rocks, and the green recesses that bordered
bordered its waves; and refreshed by the healthful breeze, and enchanted bv the rich scenery through which she passed, she would return with new zest and fresh pleasure to her literary pursuits. One evening, when they had extended their walk for a considerable way from the chateau, Adelaide persuaded Madame to accompany her to the top of a rocky promontory on the lake, for the purpose of enjoying a more extensive view of the rich tints which at that season adorn¬ ed the surrounding objects. Madame, less zealous and less active than her young companion, bade her proceed, and occu¬ py the favourite station, and she would follow at more leisure. As the station was very near, though the approach was steep, Adelaide, after a few friendly ex¬ pressions, hastened onward, and soon gained
gained the point of the rock, when having feasted her eyes for a moment, she turned them toward her friend, when she saw her foot slip, and Madame instantaneously precipitated down the steep side of the rock, where it was several feet perpendicu¬ lar. She was completely stunned by the fall, and lay apparently lifeless. Adelaide, terrified beyond concep¬ tion, uttered a loud scream. Her cry readied the car of a young chevalier in a shooting dress, who, with dogs and a gun, was returning homewards from the pursuit of game, and was descending un¬ observed by Adelaide and Madame from the upper heights. He saw the situation of Madame St. Clair, and the distress of her companion ; and he reached her just as Adelaide had raised Madame St. Clair's head. She opened
opened her eyes ; but it was long before she was able to answer the affectionate inquiries of Adelaide, and to say she was not much hurt. She looked with earnest¬ ness on the stranger, who helped to raise her up ; and finding herself utterly un¬ able to walk without support, was obliged to accept the offer of his arm, which he tendered with looks expressive of the most delicate interest and compassion ; and politely insisted that he should be permitted to support her to her home. When the alarm at Madame St Clair's accident, which at first had entirely en¬ gaged his attention, had subsided, and she had repeatedly assured him that she had not suffered materially from the fall, he turned his observation upon Adelaide ; and while he expressed his satisfaction at being fortunately near to afford some little
little assistance, under an accident so alarming, he fixed his eyes upon her with a look of such earnest admiration, that her cheeks w r ere suffused with blushes. This rendered bjm sensible of the impropri¬ ety of which he was guilty ; and he af¬ forded sensible relief to the embarrassed Adelaide, by his renewed attentions to Madame. • The good lady, although she seemed to walk with difficulty, and even pain, persisted she was not hurt, and would have declined his further attendance j but he insisted on escorting her to her residence, where they now arrived. At the wicket gate opening upon thé lawn, Madame St. Clair politely thanked the chevalier for his assistance, but in a manner which forbade his entrance. This behaviour appeared very extraordinary to
to Adelaide, and occasioned no little vexation to the polite stranger, who did not attempt to proceed farther. But a<j they sepavated, he again rí vetted his eyes upon Adelaide, with the same expression of tender admiration with which he had at first regarded her. He paused, as if un¬ willing to depart ; and leaning over the gate, followed them with his eyes, till they had crossed the lawn ; when Ma* dame turning as she opened the door, as if suddenly awakened from a reverie, he bowed, and departed.
CHAP.
(HAP. V. Madame St. Clair in her fall had sprained her ancle, and the next dav was unable to leave or even walk across her cham¬ ber. Adelaide had just made her mor¬ ning inquiries of Madame, and was des¬ cending the stairs toward the breakfast- parlour, when some one rapped at the door, and a servant attending, she heard the voice of the young stranger they had met with in their walk of the preceeding evening. He politely inquired after the health of Madame St. Ciair, and en¬ tering
tering the hall, was ushered into the room where Adelaide was now sitting. " Excuse me if I have intruded, Ma¬ dame," said he, observing Adelaide look¬ ed surprised. " I have called," with hesi¬ tation, and colouring highly as he spoke, " from an anxiety to be assured that the lady whom I had the happiness of seeing with you yesterday has not sustained any injury from her accident," Adelaide replied that Madame was thee confined to her room, her ancle having been sprained by the fall ; but she had suffered no other inconvenience, and she hoped she would soon be well. " I am glad, Madame," said he, " very glad to hear this-—very happy— (still much embarrassed)—I could not leave the neighbourhood without first informing myself
myself of her situation, and this I hope will excuse my intrusion." Adelaide thanked him for his polite¬ ness, and the chevalier, after a few mi¬ nutes conversation, arose and took his leave. Adelaide hastened to inform Madame that the stranger had been, and to deliver his message, " He has given himself more trouble than 1 think he need to have je," said Madame coldly ; " it certain¬ ly could not be necessary for him to call here. î hope, however, my dear Adelaide, you said enough to satisfy him on all points, and have afforded him no plea for resuming his visits.'" Adelaide related what had passed. " Well, my dear friend," said Madame, " I do not doubt your prudence; I only fear
fear your attractions ; we do not know who this young man may be." " Nor is it of much consequence, I believe, Madame," said Adelaide blush¬ ing, "as I find he is about to leave the neighbourhood, and there is, therefore, but little probability of our seeing him again." At night, when Adelaide had retired to her chamber, Helene, Madame St. Clair's maid, inquired of her if she knew who the chevalier was that had that day called at the chateau ? Adelaide replied that she did not, asby a seemingly strange neglect, he had never once mentioned his name. íť But why," said she, (i Helene, do you ask the question r" " It is no business of mine to be sure," said Helene, " only I thought it a little odd, and so I said I would tell you." " What
" What is ir you mean, Helene?" said Adelaide, " and what have you got to teil me?" " Not much, Ma'moiselle; only the chevalier, if he is a chevalier, for nobody it seems knows who he is, has been mak¬ ing a great many inquiries about you in the village, and of Jacques." '" " About me ! inquiries about me V* said Adelaide; (t what can he want to know about me?" " Why, as who you was, and what was your name, and where you came from, and such like." " And what did Jacques say to him?" asked Adelaide, tremulously. (f He did not tell me, Ma'moiselle, what he said," resumed Helene, " but he told me he had asked a great number of questions about you, and some about my mistress;
mistress; and Jacques says heis sure the chevalier is in love with you, Ma'moi¬ selle, for he saw him watching about the chateau this morning a good while, and leaning over the gate ; and at last he plucked up a spirit, and came in, and, all by way of excuse, asked about my lady ; for he is sure, he says, it was only to see you, Ma'moiselle." i( Jacques is under a strange mistake, I think," said Adelaide smiling, but with some confusion. Helene was about to reply, but hear¬ ing Madame St. Clair's bell, she hastened to attend her mistress; and being to¬ lerably communicative, repeated what she had said to Adelaide relative to the stranger. In the morning when Adelaide, as usual, visited Madame St. Clair in her chamber,
chamber, she evinced much uneasiness and dissatisfaction. " I hope," said she, ff this young man will not think of calling upon us again, and if he docs, that you will refuse to see him ; for you must know, my dear, that I am not without my apprehensions that he may be connected with the Marquis ; and that through him, you may, in some way or other, be made miserable by his artifices. Let me caution you not to go abroad till you are sure he has left the neighbourhood. There is something in his countenance that I do not like. lie looked at you, I thought, very particularly. I would not for the world anything should happen to you here. I wish my nephew was at home, for I really feel very uneasy." " My dear Madame," said Adelaide, ft ' I think you dis!url: vourself without reason.
reason. The chevalier's call here this morning, after the accident at which he was present, had certainly nothing par¬ ticular in it; it was an act of mere com¬ mon politeness. Indeed, I think he could hardly have done otherwise—a person of your appearance." " Yes, but why should he make in¬ quiries about you ?" " This I conceive," said Adelaide, ra¬ ther hesitatingly, " to have been quite accidental." " It may seem so," rejoined Madame, "and so did the circumstance of \ our being seized and carried off from the neighbourhood of your former home, by persons whom you then suspected to be no other than common banditti. What appears to us to have been merely accidental is often the effect of design, vou ii. d und
and sometimes of the deepest treachery. We cannot be too cautious; for should the Marquis once discover you in this place, we, your protectors, as well as yourself, have every thing to dread." íť Heavens !" exclaimed Adelaide, ff is there no security from the power of that wicked nobleman ?" " None, I believe none," said Madame, " unless in the concealment which this retirement seems to promise. How¬ ever, above all things, let me advise you to shun every future opportunity of see¬ ing this stranger. 1 do not, as I told you before— Ido not like his looks. His man¬ ners, his inquiries, his lurking about the chateau, are all circumstances too suspi¬ cious to escape the eye of friendship, and certainly forebode some evil intentions." " I will promise to do anything, Ma¬ dame,"
dame," said Adelaide, " to avoid the dan¬ ger you apprehend; but in this instance, I think your fears, and the generous so¬ licitude you feel for my welfare, may have misled your judgment. The stran* çer who so politely offered assistance—" fc Well, well," interrupted Madame, somewhat pettishly, " I wish I may be mistaken. I ish I may prove myself the foolish woman 1 suppose ϊ am ; but lest I should not, and the danger I appre¬ hend be not merely imaginary, I shall desire Jacques to make inquiries about him in the neighbourhood, and to watch and inform me if he is again seen loitering about my grounds." Thus ended the discomvse upon this subject ; and such orders were accord¬ ingly given to Jacques; but either they were entirely neglected, or but irregu- D 2 lari у
lariy attended to; for he brought no further account respecting the stranger; and as he was not seen about the chateau for several days, the fears of Madame seemed to have subsided ; and she agreed with Adelaide, that he had now in all pro¬ bability left the country.
CHAP.
l 1 .. 1 1'.J^'.JJLİ"
CHAP, VL Adelaide, wearied of confinement, at length resumed her walks about the chateau ; and although she had imbibed none of Madame's suspicions in respect to the stranger, she adopted some of her cautious directions, and did not venture far, and avoided the more public ways, lest she should accidentally meet some of the adherents of the Marquis, who, it was but too probable, would endeavour to discover, and might easily, by the help of this pretended chevalier, (should d 3 he
he prove to be, as Madame suspected, one of his people), trace her to her pre¬ sent place of concealment. Lost in uneasy conjectures respecting her future destiny, beset with evils, and threatened with persecutions, from which she seemed to be only partially, and in¬ deed scarcely at all defended, depen¬ dant too upon the friendship of strangers for her comforts, and upon their bounty for the very means of existence, she sighed with deep regret for the society of the Countess, and bewailed the cruel treachery which separated her from the friend and mother of her early youth. Occupied by the remembrances of the past, and the pains of the present time, she wandered on in mournful rumination, till she had arrived near the borders of the lake, when she seated herself in a little
little shady recess, formed by high trees, embowering a crystal stream, which poured its tributary waters down a small cascade, whose steady dripping sounds were well attuned to the melancholy re¬ flections that now pressed upon her mind. She had not sat many minutes, when! she was startled by the sound of an ap¬ proaching step. She turned her head, and perceiving the chevalier, with a heart palpitating with the emotions of surprise and fear, arose to depart. But as she was obliged, by the nature of the place, to pass by him, he had full oppor¬ tunity to address her with his wonted grace, and renew his inquiries concern¬ ing Madame, who he hoped, he said, was now nearly recovered from the effects of her late accident, if not yet able to go abroad. d i Adelaide
Adelaide curtsied, and returning a ^ene- ral short answer, was proceeding on her way toward the chateau. The chevalier, surprised at her needless reserve, follow¬ ed and overtook her. " Pardon my presumption, Madame," said he, <f if I again venture to intrude upon you, and as ϊ have once had the honour of attend¬ ing you home, allow me again to be your escort; at least let me conduct you within view of your residence." Adelaide, whom this request had greatly embarrassed, knew not what to reply ; for she was well aware that Ma¬ dame would be seriously alarmed, and even highly displeased, should she learn she had been walking with the chevalier. Before the confusion she felt would allow her to frame an excuse, to prevent his offered attendance, he had accompa¬ nied
nied her part of the way along the path ; and ere she could resolve in what man¬ ner to dismiss him, his amiable deport¬ ment, his open intelligent countenance, in which were expressed a happy mix¬ ture of dignity and sweetness, the grace¬ fulness of his figure, the peculiar ele¬ gance of his manners, and the fascina¬ tion of his discourse, had so entirely engaged her mind, that she ceased to re¬ member it was her object to desire him to retire. After a few just and tasteful remarks upon the beauty of the surrounding scenes, he observed, it was his intention to have left the neighbourhood some days since— <f But there is a charm," ad¬ ded he, " ora fatality, 1 know not which, that detains me here, and chains me, as it were, to the place." d 5 " Here
" Here are indeed objects," said Ade¬ laide, ft which might engage and delight the eye oftaste for many months." " Nature here seems resolved to shew the perfection of beauty io every thing," cried the chevalier, "You, I suppose, Ma¬ dame, are a native of this soil ?" ff France is the country of my birth," said Adelaide. As she spoke, he sighed ; and gazing upon her for a moment or two with a look of peculiar earnestness, said*—" Deem me not too bold, or rude, if 1 presume to ask whether you have long been an inhabitant of this province ?" .Adelaide hesitated, and at length an¬ swered she had not. " This place then," resumed he, (t is probably only a temporary residence: do you propose to continue here long ?" " I do not know. Sir," said Adelaide, б more
more and more confused ; for she felt the impropriety of answering these interro¬ gatories from a stranger, particularly un¬ der her present circumstances. " Your home is probably at some distance?" observed the chevalier, with a look that seemed to express more than curiosity. " Yes, Sir, I believe at a great dis¬ tance." fC Your family, may I know the name?*' " Good Heavens !" thought Adelaide, " to what can all this tend?" An uneasy suspicion began to mingle with her sur¬ mises. " The name of my family, Sir,'* added she, blushing from the conscious¬ ness that she was now uttering an untruth, " is St. Clair." i: St. Clair ! Is it possible that you can d б indeed
indeed be a relation of Madame St. Clair's!" He paused. "I fear," added he, íť I must have seemed strangely imper¬ tinent ; but your appearance—your man¬ ners—*' ' c You, Sir, í suppose," said Adelaide, anxious to change the conversation, fc are not a native of these mountains ?" "No; but they are so congenial to my state of mind, so dear to me, from the recollection of objects from whom 1 am now separated, so interesting, as having been the scenes—but why do I talk thus? Excuse me, Madame, excuse me, Ma'moi- selle St. Clair. To-morrow 1 must bid adieu to them, and go hence, in order to accept an invitation from my com¬ mander, the Marquis de Ponteville, to attend him in an excursion through a part of this country." " The
" The Marquis de Ponteville !" faintly reiterated Adelaide. Had the dagger of an assassin at that instant been pointed at the bosom of Adelaide, hardly could it have produced an emotion of terror more exquisite than that she now felt at the name of the Marquis de Ponteville ; and notwithstanding his amiable appear¬ ance, and the partiality she already felt for the young and interesting stranger, the most terrible apprehensions of Ma¬ dame seemed now fully confirmed. Fear so entirely overcame her, as to deprive her of all self-command, and even of the power of reflection. Her limbs seemed palsied ; the blood forsook her cheek ; she leaned against the trunk of a tree, and overwhelmed f with her emo¬ tions, burst into a flood of tears. The chevalier stood petrified and a* ghast.
ghaví. " Уои г re ill, Madam," said he, " I fear very ill. Heaven !" exclaimed he, " what can be the matter ?" f ' Leave me, Sir," said Adelaide, rf I conjure you, leave me. I am not ill—I am only·—" she stopped. " Not ill ! why then so pale," said he, in a tone of the tenderest commiseration, " and wherefore all this seeming agita¬ tion ?Not ill,and not alarmed, and yet—" He looked earnestly and tenderly in her face; the paleness that had over¬ spread it had disappeared, and it was now flushed with vermilion. At that instant, the figure of a man was seen slowly moving amongst the trees. It was Jacques, the servant of Madame St. Clair, who* having been told that Adelaide was from home, had sent him in quest of her. Ön seeing him, she waved
waved her hand in signal for the cheva¬ lier to depart. He obeyed, though with reluctance ; and, as she turned to ob¬ serve if he was gone, she saw him leaning pensively against a tree at some distance. She walked, with hurried pace, across the lawn, to the door of the chateau, and then flew to her chamber, where, throw¬ ing herself into a chair, she exclaimed, u It is true then ; it is but too true ! what else could mean all these inquiries, my name, my family, the place of my former abode, the probable time of my continuance in this place ? Oh, mischief! mischief! And yet it may not follow, that because he is acquainted with the Marquis, he must necessarily be implica¬ ted in the schemes designed by villains against me ! If he is, if he should indeed prove so, let no one ever again depend upon
upon externals, grace, and elegance ; all that is amiable and charming shall appear deformed ; for never before did I behold a countenance so prepossessing, so noble, and full of sweetness; a form so interest¬ ing, or manners so engaging ! Can vice, can falsehood," resumed she, tf wear the semblance of truth and honour so suc¬ cessfully, so effectually to deceive the eye, and baffle the judgment? Yet why, if he had reasons for making inquiries so unexpected, so surprising, and to me so embarrassing, did he not assign them ? But perhaps he was restrained by con¬ siderations not less powerful than those by which 1 was actuated, in withholding from him that confidence he so anxiously seemed to desire." Such were the reflections which the partiality of her admiration urged in favour
favour of the chevalier. Yet reason and recollection soon suggested the fallacy of these sentiments, and assured her of the justness of Madame St. Clair's suspi¬ cions; for he was, it appeared from his own confession, a dependant upon the Marquis. The part she ought to act was now evi¬ dent. It was necessary to her own safety, it was a duty she owed her friend and be¬ nefactress, to acquaint her with the unex- pected intrusion of the chevalier, and the discovery she had made from h-s con- ver..*:on. Го Madame St, Clair, whom she found alone m her chamber, she accordingly gave an undisguised relation of what had passed ; concluding with a resolution of never more venturing abroad, till she was sure the chevaiier had departed, or till the Marquis, who was now more than ever the
the object of her terror, should have left the neighbourhood. The alarm which Madame exhibited, when informed of these circumstances, made Adelaide almost repent the commu¬ nication. She screamed, sobbed, and wept, and wrung her hands in all the agony of distress; and with all the frenzy of despair, insisted that they were be¬ trayed to the Marquis; and should Perouse delay to return, and the house not be properly secured and guarded, the doors might be forced open by a band of mis¬ creants, and her Adelaide, her hope and only joy, would be torn from her, and hurried she knew not whither, to the castle-—to a dungeon—to death—or to sufferings worse than death ! In vain Adelaide assured her, that as she had cautiously concealed her name, and since the person who called himself chevalier
chevalier had before no personal know¬ ledge of her, it was impossible for him to identify her as the object of the Mar¬ quis's pursuit, even if he were base enough, a supposition which, she must add, his appearance seemed to contra¬ dict, to assist in betraying an innocent girl into the hands of a merciless and abandoned libertine. te Alas, my child," said Madame, " you yet know but little of the world, and of the artifices and contrivances of wicked men. lam glad, however, you have had the precaution not to declare your name ; but I fear all we can do will be ineffec¬ tual." if And do you indeed think there is so much danger, Madame ?" said Adelaide. " Danger !" repeated Madame St. Clair, " yes, certainly danger ! and danger
danger which I see but one way for you to avoid, and that is by an immediate marriage with my nephew. Perouse, my sweet Adelaide, bves you—he is worthy of your affections. The services he has rendered you demand some return. Think, my dear, of what he has done for you, and what, but for his generous in¬ terposition in your behalf, would have been your sufferings and situation in respect to the Marquis, The feelings of your pure unsullied heart must, I know, impel you to esteem the good and, in your cause, the brave Perouse; and would you but consent to receive his ad¬ dresses, esteem would soon, in such a mind as yours, become affection. Why then continue to hesitate upon proposals so disinterested, and I may add too, so generous, as those of the man who loves you,
vou, and whose behaviour and exer- ml * tions have been those of a brother, to¬ wards a suffering and beloved sister ? Give him but the legal power of protect¬ ing you, and he will convey you beyond the power of the Marquis, and beyond the reach of his persecutions/' Adelaide, however desperate her situa¬ tion, was never less inclined than at this moment to listen to the renewal of the overtures of Perouse. She coldly re¬ plied, that she could not doubt but that Monsieur Perouse*s proposals were en¬ tirely disinterested; and if he had really the regard for her he professed, she had only to lament, that notwithstanding the esteem and respect she felt for his charac¬ ter, she could never return his kindness as she ought. She must therefore de¬ cline an offer, which, after such a decla¬ ration
ration, it would be ungenerous for a no¬ ble mind to press; nay, even highly dishonourable for a person of nice and proper feelings to accept. Perceiving Madame was somewhat irri¬ tated by thiscandid and ingenuousdeclara- tion,and observing a fierceness in her eyes, and an air of haughtiness in herdemeanor, very different from what she usually as¬ sumed, she took her hand, and assured her, in an affectionate tone, that notwith¬ standing what she had been obliged to declare, as she was accustomed to be in¬ genuous, and feeling herself above the meanness of disguise or artifice, she had the highest sense of the obligation she owed to Monsieur Perouse ; and that she should always think of him with sensa¬ tions of gratitude, as lively and as sincere as those his generom delivery of her from
PYRENEAN BANDITTI. from a dreadful captivity had at first excited. Saying this, she withdrew, und repair¬ ing to her own apartment, placed herself upon the side of the bed, where alone and uninterrupted, she ruminated upon the difficulties and dangers of her situation— dangers to which the representations of Madame, influenced, as it appeared, by the most alarming forebodings for the fate of her charge, had given a colos¬ sal form, and difficulties, which seem¬ ed every instant augmenting, and swell¬ ing to a magnitude most dreadfully· tre¬ mendous. To remain long in the same house with Monsieur Perouse, should he, as she much feared, persevere in his addresses, would, she felt, be distressing to her de¬ licacy, and even contrary to her own ideas
ideas of female decorum ; and she had but too much reason to apprehend, from the altered countenance of Madame, when she persisted in the rejection of his offers, that the continuance of her protection was to be afforded only on the condition that she consented to ac¬ cept them. These reflections and considerations led her anxiously to desire the arrival of her father, an event which she thought would certainly take place as soon as Perouse should apply to ask her hand ; though whether he could or would of¬ fer her an asylum from the dangers that now threatened her, and deliver her from the difficulties with which she was surrounded, appeared to her at present very uncertain. " Yet surely," said she mournfully, " he cannot be wholly in¬ sensible
sensible to the dictates of parental affec¬ tion ; he must know—and knowing, feel that I am his daughter."
▼oi,, ii. в CHAP.
CHAP. VII. The next day passed without any new occurrence. Madame's alarms seemed, however, by no means to have subsid¬ ed. She often spoke to Adelaide of the stranger, and betrayed various symp¬ toms of distress and apprehension. In the evening, Perouse did not return as was expected, and his protracted stay increased the fears both of Madame St. Clair and Adelaide ; the latter of whom, though she could not endure to think of him as a lover, yet reverenced him as a friend,
friend, and esteemed as the only person, except her father, capable of affordbna; her the protection her situation required. Ten, and even eleven o'clock 1 struck,' and still he came not. The conjectures of Madame and Adelaide became .now more various and more painful ; for they again began to apprehend he had fallen a sacrifice to the arts and schemes of the Marquis. Adelaide had retired to her bed, artd, exhausted by the emotions of fear and anxiety, had fallen into a fast sleep, when she was awakened at an earl ν hour b ν a loud knocking at the door of the cha¬ teau. Surprised by a circumstance stí unusual, she arose in haste ; and throw¬ ing on her night-gown, flew to the win¬ dow, when she perceived, by the light of the moon, which trow rose high in the к 2 horizon,
horizon, the figures of two men on horseback. Her terrors immediately sug¬ gested that they were some of the Mar¬ quis's people; and finding they were stationed immediately under her window, she drew back : while she stood in ter¬ rified expectation, the knocking was re¬ peated. Madame St, Clair's bell rang violently ; and soon after she distinguish¬ ed, with delight, the voice of Perouse, calling loudly for Jacques to take the horses. The horsemen alighted, and Adelaide, satisfied that they were not, as she had apprehended, the Marquis's people, re¬ turned to her bed. They remained for some time under her window, unloading, as she conceiv¬ ed, some kind of packages from one of the horses. After a while they came in, and
and went into the room below the cham¬ ber were Adelaide slept. They con¬ tinued there in conversation the greater part of the night. At some times Adelaide could distinguish only a low, murmur¬ ing, indistinct sound; at others they seemed to be talking loud, as if dispu¬ ting, or, at least, in very earnest dis¬ course. At length she heard them ascend the stairs, and enter into their chambers. Jacques soon followed, and all was still» In the morning, Adelaide wa3 awaken¬ ed by the entrance of Madame St. Clair into her chamber, who came to inform her of the arrival of her father, who, it appeared, was one of the two horsemen Adelaide had seen from her window. In answer to her inquiries, Adelaide was informed by Madame, that Perouse, as е 3 he
-he was rcturntng homeward, had stopped at an inn for refreshment, when acci¬ dentally hearing the name of De Launé pronounced by a traveller, wh© was talk¬ ing with him in the stable, he had ques¬ tioned the hostler, and learnt from him such particulars a« served to convince him that the person of whom fe« spoke was the object of his intended search, the i)e Laune of Avignon, and the father of .Adelaide. " And how," said Adelaide, * f did he introduce himself?" ** Why as the friend and deliverer of his daughter, to be sure," rejoined Ma¬ dame, " though at first he says he was re¬ solved not to be too explicit, but mere¬ ly mentioned that he had had the happi¬ ness, or the honour, I don't know which, to extricate a lovely young woman, of the
the same name with himself, and proba* bly a relation of his> from the snares of a libertine and a ν il bin ; and that she was then m a place of safely, but he did not say where ; for, till he should know how he might be disposed towards you, he thought it prudent to conceal the place ef your retreat." " Well, and how did he receive the declaration ?" said Adelaide. " Just, my love, as we could wish," said Madame ; '' so then our dear Perouse told him the whole story." * f And was he much affected with it ?" asked Adelaide, looking earnestly in Ma- dame's face. "Oh, very much, indeed," said Ma¬ dame. " Was he—was he indeed affected ?" reiterated Adelaide : " oh let me go to e 4 him !"
him ! '* hastily throwing on her clothes* * r let me go to my father ! But does Monsieur Perouse indeed think he feels for me ; and oh, still more, does he love me ? alas, except himself, I have no na¬ tural claims upon any one for tenderness and affection ; and once, once I thought he did not love and regard me as a daugh¬ ter." " Depend upon it, my dear/' said Madame, " if we may judge from ap¬ pearances, he has the greatest possible re¬ gard for you. Indeed, I think his affec¬ tion is wonderful, considering you were not brought up in his house, and are yet, in a manner, an utter stranger to him ; for he wept, my nephew says, first for grief, and afterwards for joy ; and em¬ braced him over and over again, for his kindness, and the noble interest he had displayed
displayed for his poor unfortunate girl. He asked a thousand questions about you in a breath ; and said he could not be happy till he had seen you ; that you was to him the most dear of all human beings; and that nothing but your ad* vantage, and the prospect of seeing you a rich heiress, could have induced him to impose you upon another family as their child. As things had fallen out, he could never, he said, love you too much. The sincerity of this declaration was con¬ firmed by a tear trickling down his man¬ ly cheek. He then pressed my nephew's hand, and said he could never do enough for him, and that he was the best friend he had ever had, because he had been such a friend to his dear persecuted little girl. But ia ! my love, we are wasting time, while we are only talking of him, and в 5 yort
you are all over in such a tremble, I see, that you cannot put on your clothes ; ah ! well, I don't wonder at it; and the poor man is as bad ; and so impatient to see you, that if it had not been for me, they would have had you called last night ; but, poor thing, said I, she has had a sad fright, and so have I, about this young fellow; and then 1 told them the story,and what a fidget 1 was in about it, and how I had had him watched, and yet, how, after all, he contrived to »ее you, and walk with you; and how impertinent he was in asking you questions, trying to get every thing out of you ; and to know who you were, and where you came from, and how long you were to stay, and where you were going, and when, and how, and why ------ " And then I told them what I thought of
of him ; and they both agree with me that his coming hither, and following you, has a very Ugly look; and that there is some mischief on foot ; and they fear the Marquis——" " Heaven forbid !" exclaimed Ade¬ laide, " but they have neither of them seen the chevalier." " No, but I have seen him/* rejoined Madame, s ' and it was his appearance that first gave me the suspicion. I told you, as you must remember, that I did not like his looks ; no, and I did not like them. I thought there was some« thing very forward, and bold, and assum¬ ing about him. Compare htm but with my nephew, and observe the difference." *' The difference is certainly very great," said Adelaide, whose gratitude toward the person to whom she owed
her deliverance from the most formidable of all dangers, did not so entirely over¬ rule her judgment, as not to suffer her to perceive that Perouse* both in face and figure, was completely disagreeable ; that his manners were rude and unpolish¬ ed, and even vulgar; and that his looks sometimes expressed an almost savage ferocity, calculated to excite fear rather than affection ; and her sentiments were but too feelingly expressed by the soft sigh that gently and involuntarily heaved her bosom, as the images of Perouse and the young chevalier presented them¬ selves, in affecting contrast, to her mind. " I am glad you think there is so much difference," said Madame, who either did not, or affected not to understand her meaning. f ' I am sure your taste is too nice, and your judgment too good, to ¡suffer
suffer you to mistake in bestowing the preferences' By the time Madame had finished her speech, and made this last remark, which she accompanied with a look of scruti¬ nizing observation, Adelaide was com¬ pletely dressed; and impatient to be¬ hold her father, and receive from him those testimonies of affection which his behaviour, as described by Madame, seemed to promise, she went down, with trembling steps, leaning upon Madame St. Clair's arm, to the room where he was waiting to receive her,
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. Dr Launé and Perouse were sitting to¬ gether at a small table, near the window, in the breakfast-parlour, apparently en¬ gaged in anxious conversation, which oil the entrance of Madame with Adelaide they broke off suddenly. De Launé, on seeing his daughter, arose and came for¬ ward to meet her. He spoke, and she thought kindly. She rushed towards him, and, falling on her knees, faintly exclaimed, " Oh my father !" she could add no more. " Bless
" Bless thee., my girl," said De Launé, gazing upon her with a look expressive rather of curiosity than tenderness, yet of as much kindness as the harsh lines of his countenance were perhaps capable of expressing. " Well, my child/* added he at length, after a pause, during which Adelaide arose, and Madame placed her on a seat between herself and De Laune, ' ť so you have had some strange ups and downs, I iiiid, since I saw you last. Things have not gone on straight with you, notwith¬ standing the fine promises of that smooth¬ faced rogue, the Count, who, between ourselves, is as neat a villain as ever bilk¬ ed the gallies. Come, don't hold your head down, my little girl, but cheer up, and look about you ; we shall get a hus¬ band for you after all. By the mass, yor* were
were in high luck to find your way out of your cage, or out of the fire, as one may sa\, without singeing your pretty wings, or without being a feather the worse for it ; and after all, having got your liberty, to light on so good a com¬ mon as this. A pretty place—a very pretty place î I could not have provided for you so well myself; so be a good girl, and mind what you áre about, and never think you can do enough for Monsieur Perouse, who, though he hears me say it, and I have not known him long, is the worthiest fellow in the world/* *' Monsieur Perouse will never, I hope, find me deficient in gratitude for the great benefits I have received/' rejoined Adelaide, who, observing a significant glance exchanged between Perouse and De Launé, pronounced the last words falteringly,
faîteringly, and with an evident embar¬ rassment, for she thought she discovered that her father was hot unacquainted with Perouse's sentiments in respect to her¬ self, nor yet of the proposals he had made. She imagined also, that she per- » ceived an expression of exultation in the countenance of Madame, and in that of Perouse a degree of confident assur¬ ance, which made her shrink from the ob¬ servation, while at the same time it ex¬ cited apprehensions the most painful; for she had but too much reason to fear that her father would approve his suit, and that he would spare neither argument nor entreaty, nor, perhaps, even force, to drive her to a marriage, which, on an examination of her own heart, she was afraid would entail upon her certain and lasting misery ; for, however highly she
she might respect Perouse, on account of the sen ice he hadrendered her, it was impossible she could ever love him ; and, if pressed to an alliance so repug¬ nant to her inclinations, evcH the sensa* tions of gratitude &he now felt toward him, might, too probably, be superseded by the coldest indifference, and finally be transformed into an unconquerable disgust and aversion. Adelaide had not without reason re¬ ceived the apprehension which now dis¬ turbed and agitated her mind. What she had feared was soon fully confirmed. De Laune, İt seemed, had not only heard, but highly approved, of the proposed al¬ liance, and he sought the earliest oppor¬ tunity of speaking to Adelaide alone, when, after highly congratulating her on the prospect of wealth and affluence, which
which a marriage with Perouse would offer, he desired she would not hesitate about accepting it, lest, as he said, the young fellow, made mad by her refusal of him, should fly off from the bargain, when, as she could not possibly stay at Madame St. Clair's, she would be reduced at once from a comfortable living to a state of downright poverty and naked¬ ness. Adelaide, to whom no condition could appear half so wretched, as that of being the wife of a man for whom she felt it was impossible to entertain the least spark of affection, for his headlong ap¬ plication to her father, at a time when her rejection of his proposals had been so positive, had given her no very high opinion of his delicacy, entreated he would not press her farther on a subject, which
which had already given her much pain and anxietv, but consent to take her home with him, where she would do her utmost, not only to earn a subsistence for herself, but to assist and support him, should his situation in life be such as to require her labours, " Urge me net," said she, " to a mar¬ riage of which the very thought has be¬ come hateful to me, and let not my fa¬ ther think me disobedient and ungrate¬ ful, when I only ask to be allowed the favour of returning to my home, a home I have never yet known, humble, per¬ haps, but not more so than are my vishes, and how humble I care not. Let me, my honoured Sir, strive to earn, by my own industry, my own support, and in some degree also to ease your labours, and contribute, as much as my unwearied at¬ tentions
tentions may, to those comforts which age and increasing infirmities may ere long render acceptable to yoiij and even necessary/* " Poh, poh, nonsense, my girl," inter¬ rupted De Launé, pettishly. " Do you think I am one of those fathers who will sit quietly down to be tea by his children, preferring his own ease to their welfare and advancement ? No such thing, my pretty one, no such thing; I know better; and I think you have too much prudence and good sense, or you are none of mine, to refuse a fine young fellow with a good fortune, a rich aunt, with a will already made in his favour, and a large estate in reversion, for the petty employment of waiting upon a crazy-boned old father, as you seem to think I shall soon be ; though, by St. Jago, I have as tight a set of
of joints as any man in Christendom ; and feel none of those increasing infirmities of age you speak of." " Whatever may be my fate/' said Adelaide, " I beseech you, I intreat you, if you are indeed my father, to permit me to go with you. Deny me not this one request, and assure }our»elf that there is no future act of duty which I will not cheerfully perform, with grati¬ tude and even joy !" " Your duties just now, my pretty one/*replied De Laune, sarcastically, but with an air of affected pleasantry, " lie in a very small compass. You have no¬ thing to do but to take to yourself a good husband, and with him, as much wealth as you can in reason desire. Those little hands were never made for hard labour; this pretty ornament (put¬ ting
ting a ring upon her finger) will be¬ come them better than work. Come, come, take it as a gift from your father; and consent to have another from Pe¬ rouse, who, having obtained my consent and approbation, has no right to wait long before the ceremony be performed." " Never," exclaimed Adelaide, frown- ingly, * r will I be the wife of Perouse !" She cast her eyes upon the ring ; it contained a device woven in hair, and set round with brilliants, and seemed to be a valuable one. Suspecting it to have been sent to her by Perouse, she would have returned it, but De Laune assured her it was a present from himself, and desir¬ ed she would put it on again. Adelaide, astonished to find a man in the situation of De Launé should be pos¬ sessed of a ring set with large diamonds, 6 and
and which must originally have been pur¬ chased at a considerable price, inquired how he obtained it ? He said he had been persuaded to take it in payment of a bad debt ; " and so," says he, t( wear it, and think I wish you well, and don't plague me with questions." *' What this ring may sell for, may some time be of use to us," thought Adelaide, who, having examined, and re¬ placed it upon her finger, renewed her former entreaties that her father would take her with him to Avignon, and re¬ move her from the vexation of Perouse ^ addresses, which, as she had resolved to decline, she was very sensible it was ut¬ terly improper that she should continue longer an inhabitant of Madame St. Clair's house. De Launé affected to believe that she was
was not really in earnest, in her unwilling¬ ness to receive Perouse as a husband, which, he said, was.nothing more than girlish tricks ; while, at the same time, he convinced her by his manner, that no excuse would be accepted, and no en¬ treaties avail, to alter the resolution he had taken of marrying her to Perouse. After listening to her pleading for some time, with a kind of stocks!* indifference, he left the room, without betraying any symptom oranger, but certainly without being at all moved by her eloquence, or softened by her entreaties.
'VOL, lb
r
CHAP.
iw>PM—»»ay— .м>л—ям<.
CHAP. IX. From this behaviour of her father, Ade¬ laide drew some very unfavourable omens, and particularly from his insensibility and indifference to her present distress, on be¬ ing obliged to continue some time lon¬ ger under Madame St Clair's roof, where she would be constantly subjected to the intrusions and solicitations of her lover, who probably, having obtained the sanc¬ tion of her father's approbation, would become more and more troublesome and importunate. She was seriously alarmed, and
and knew not where to apply for relief. h\ Madame, Perouse had a strenuous zd* vocate ; for she was evermore represent¬ ing him as a model of all that was great and excellent in human nature. Of course she would be inclined, as she had always been, to condemn her rejection of him as ridiculously absurd, and as a denial of his merits ; consequently, as an affronting contradiction of those en¬ comiums she never ceased to heap upon him. Any application to her seemed very unlikely to be successful, yet was there uo other person to whom she could un¬ bosom herself; and hopeless as was the attempt, she resolved to make one effort to engage her in her cause. With this view, she sought an interview v*ith Madame In private, which, however, f 2 she,
she, as if aware of her intention, seemed designedly to shun. It was some days before she could catch the opportunity she so anxiously sought ; and when thus far fortunate, the conversation of Ma¬ dame afforded her neither satisfaction nor comfort. " î am concerned," said she, ** Ma'moi¬ selle," in a half angry tone, " that you should remain insensible of the happiness that must await you in a marriage with my nephew." " Can that be happiness," said Ade¬ laide, " which we do not know or feel to besuch?" t( That hereafter may prove to be hap¬ piness, which you now, by a strange per* verseness of understanding, choose to con¬ ceive to be misery/* observed Madame. ** It is impossible, as the wife of Mon¬ sieur
sieur Perouse, that I ever can be happy," resumed Adelaide, " though as a friend I should always have esteemed him ; and had it been in my power to return the obligation he has conferred upon me in any other way, 1 would never have been his debtor. Oh why will he perse¬ vere in addressing me ? why continue to ask what I never will—never can grant him ?" '* Hush," cried Madame ; for at that instant the door slowly opened, and Pe¬ rouse appeared. Seeing Adelaide, he entered ; and Madame St. Clair, disre¬ garding a signal from Adelaide, requesting her stay, hastily departed ; and she was left alone wirb Perouse» Adelaide regarded him as he approach¬ ed with a look of severe displeasure, which Perouse but too readily understood. f3 "Heavens!'
"Heavens!" exclaimed he with pas¬ sion, '* what is it I have done ? Cruel, un¬ grateful girl ! is it thus you treat the man who rescued you from a most horrible captivity, and would have sacrificed in your defence even .life itself? is this the return 1 am to expect ? are those scorn¬ ful glances to repay my faithful affection, which, not satisfied with merely placing yon ina situation where you have enjoy¬ ed every comfort which friendship could administer; seeks to render you mistress of a splendid fortune, and to shower up¬ on you all the blessings which wealth can procure, or beauty like jours desire ?" As he spoke he seized her hand, and would have pressed it to his lips, but with an effort of ofïended pride, she iîoosened it from his grasp, adding, " If you indeed, Sir, wish me to be as sensible as
as I ought of the benefits you have con¬ ferred upon me, and desirethat I sho u Id re¬ tain that warm sensation of gratitude which your former conduct seemed to merit, you must instantly withdraw your suit ; and by reconciling my father to the relinquish¬ ment of your proposals, restore me to the enjoyment of the little comfort and happiness which my lot affords." " Never, by Heaven ! ' exclaimed Pe¬ rouse with energy. " No ; even though you detest—though you abhor me, "you shall be mine. Your hatred may change the tone of my passion, but cannot check or destroy it. Your father has a right to dispose of you ; he has promised ; and he cannot—will not—dare not deny me." *' How !" interrupted Adelaide, " dare not !" « He wiU пои" f 4 " And
" And would you, taking advantage of my unfortunate situation, meanly force me to a compliance with your wishes, when ϊ solemnly assure you my affections are not, nor ever can be yours ?" cried Adelaide, regarding him with a look of abhorrence. tf is this the treatment to be expected from the man who once nobly stept forward to rescue an injured unprotected female, and by a seemingly strict attention to the nicest dictates of honour, and the purest principles of be¬ nevolence, won from me my entire es¬ teem, and caused my bosom to over¬ flow with feelings of gratitude beyond what I had ever before experienced—sen¬ sations to me most delightful, for I then believed they were merited, and thought they might be safely offered ?" 4 * Behold—survey yourself, too beau¬ tiful
ti ful Adelaide," cried Perouse, pointing to a mirror opposite, " and then ask if it is possible to see you, and to love mode* rately ; and loving, not to wish to pos¬ sess. Oh, be not thus cruel ! Drive me not to extremities; but let me owe to your generosity, or even your pity, a return to that affection I have so long and tenderly indulged." tf Seek to deserve the continuance of my esteem," said Adelaide, " by an im¬ mediate compliance with my request ; and let me again think of you as my friend —as my deliverer ; more I cannot." As she spoke she moved towards the door, which Perouse attempted to fasten ; but awed to forbearance by the dignity of her deportment, and the emphatic tone in which she spoke, as she command- f 6 ed
ed him to desist and allow her to retire, he opened it, and she withdrew. She repaired to her chamber, and for a while yielded to the sorrow that oppres¬ sed her heart. But recollecting that la¬ mentations and grief would neither stay the persecutions of her lover, or the ty¬ rannic disposition of her father, she de¬ termined again to have recourse to Ma¬ dame St. Clair, and with more delibera¬ tion than before, to express her resolve never to receive Perouse as a husband. This determination, though it by no means abated that delicacy of manner for which the fair Adelaide was ever dis¬ tinguished, yet it dried up her tears, and diffused a dignified firmness over her fea¬ tures, which/as she entered her room, Madame beheld with a degree of awe* Nor
Nor was this a little increased by the uni¬ on of courage and good sense displayed as she expressed her resolution, at all ha¬ zards, to reject the offers of Perouse. Madame was agitated with alarm, but she answered, in a soothing tone, * r If such, my dear Adelaide, is your determi¬ nation, I will try to persuade your father, and pacify my nephew ; and yet I fear greatly, lest on receiving your positive refusal, he should commit some act of desperate violence, perhaps upon his own person ; or probably, in revenge^ he may betray you to the Marquis, who is certainly in this country ; and every day, while you continue here, we are in danger of having our house beset by his people, coming to take you from us by force. You are determined ; yet surely a marriage with Perouse, even if he is # f 6 not
not the røan whom perhaps your heart would choose, is preferable to a life of infamy, or one exposed to continual alarms and dangers from that Marquis. I cannot indeed bear the thought of com¬ pelling you to accept this alliance ; yet think, my dear Adelaide, of the dangers you have lately escaped from—dangers to which you are still liable, and let your own prudence be your guide : you can only hope for security from the power of the Marquis, by removing to a distance." *' True, Madam," interrupted Adelaide, " and cannot I go to Avignon ?" " Why that, my dear, depends upon your father; will he take you? I am of opinion he will not ; nor indeed would the house of your father offer you any absolute security from the wicked- ne§$
ness of your persecutor. The Marquis, on the discovery of your escape from the Castle, would, I think, most ^certainly apply to Count St, Angouléme, his part¬ ner in intrigue, and not finding you there, both would conclude you had fled to your father's house. They would of course seek you ; and a man in the si¬ tuation of Monsieur De Launé could, you must be sensible, make but a very feeble resistance against the power or artifices of one of the greatest nobles in the country. He must therefore either instantly resign you to the wishes of your wicked lover, or probably be carried off, together with you, to an imprisonment in the very Castle from which you have escaped. *' In fact, my dear, neither your father, nor any reasonable man living, would dare
dare to draw upon himself the resentment of a noble of the realm ; or one whose court interest is so considerable as that of the Marquis De Ponteville." * e But might not my father," rejoined Adelaide, " convey me hence, and place me, if not in Avignon, in some distant province, or even in another country ?" tf Why in this, my-dear," said Madame, " you speak rather more reasonably,* but I fear your father has neither money nor time to spend in remote expeditions of that kind. 1 will hear, however, what he says, and believe me, in every instance in my power, î will prove myself your friend." Adelaide, comforted by these expres¬ sions of kindness, tenderly embraced Ma-* dame, who imprinting a kiss upon her cheek, s*id, ** Do aot flatter yourself too 6 much ;
much; but ϊ am willing to undertake anything, rather than see you thus dis¬ tressed and цппзрру." Adelaide returned the friendly salute ; and Madame, having obtained her pro¬ mise to appear at supper, engaged, al¬ though Perouse and her father were to leave the chaeau on the^morrow at an early hour, and to be absent some days, to signify her determination to both ; and to endeavour to persuade Perouse to be patient, and to prevent the enforcement of any arbitrary measures which a reso¬ lute father might design. " Remember, however," said Madame, as she withdrew, " that my own opinion is unchanged ; I think, nay, am certain, that you cannot take a more effectual me¬ thod to secure your own happiness than that I have before recommended, and »hall
my wish is that nothing may be done without vour consent and concurrence."
CHAP*
mmm
CHAP. X. Adelaide appeared at supper with as much composure as she could assume ; and taking her seat next De Launé, who spoke to her frequently, and with much kindness, she watched with an eager eye the countenance of Madame, who she knew must have had an interview with her father ; but could discover nothing calculated to inspire either hope or ap¬ prehension. As to Perouse, he was more than usually attentive ; and nothing un¬ pleasant occurred. Madame
Madame retired early ; and Adelaide having taken leave of De Launé, and bowed politely to Perouse, though with¬ out speaking, or seeming otherwise to notice him, followed her directly to her chamber, where she anxiously inquired what had passed between herself and her father. s * Why he thinks," said Madame, " you are very wrong, and very obstinate ; and at first was inclined to be extremely an¬ gry with you. He says, and for the rea¬ sons I mentioned to you, that he cannot take you with him to Avignon ; and that if you do not marry my nephew, you will be a great trouble to him." " Oh, then, " said Adelaide, whom a gleam of hope had now somewhat revi¬ ved, " he does not say I shall marry him." " Why he did not positively declare this,
this, though what he said amounted near¬ ly to the same. You ought, he said, to marry him, and there was no other way by which you could ensure your own safety, and prevent the trouble and dan¬ ger which-he must incur on your ac¬ count. But he would think, he added, about what was to be done when he came back, when something must be settled/* " Well," cried Adelaide, eagerly, " and have you seen Monsieur Perouse?" " Yes, I have seen Perouse also," said Madame, sighing heavily. ft Alas ! my poor nephew, the disappointment, if he is disappointed, will be the death of him, and of me too. Oh !—oh that he had ne¬ ver known you !" " Believe me, Madame," said Adelaide, te Monsieur Ferouse's passion is not so violent, or rather so deeply Tooted, as he and
and perhaps you may imagine. Let him be taught to believe the marriage cannot take place, and he will soon cease to desire or even to think about it." " Well I wish it may be so—I wish it may/* said Mat'ame ; " but aïas ! I know him too well ! he will become distracted ; he will never serví ve vour cruel unrea- sonable refusal." " Do not give way to these afflicting fancies, my dear friend," said Adelaide ( for Madame had sunk back in her chair, and covered her face with her handker¬ chief, and was sobbing and weeping bit¬ terly ) ; " the heart, or rather the inclina¬ tion, which so soon became mine, may as soon become another's ; and another object raay approve and gladly reward that affection, which to me is unfortu¬ nately a source of severe distress." " Your
" Your cruelty, unkind, ungrateful girl," cried Madame, still sobbing vio¬ lently, " will certainly break his heart; and then, and when you are in the power of the Marquis, and it is too late to prevent the consequences of your own folly and rashness, you will repent the part you have acted, and wish you had accepted the offer of an honourable and true affection, and saved the life of one who deserved better at your hands." " Trust me, Madame," said Adelaide, " the effects of mv crueltv, as vou term if, will not be what you imagine. With some minds, no property is more easily transferable than what is commonly cal led love ; and if I mistake not, thai of Monsieur Perouse is of the class I mention." Madame shook her head and sighed, but
but made no answer; and Adelaide, pleased that her father had referred her fate to a future consideration, after some further attempts to sooth her, wished her a good night, and retired.
CHAP.
CHAP. XI. The kindness expressed in the behaviour of her father, after he had been informed by Madame St. Clair of her fixed resolu¬ tion in respect to Perouse, which she had feared would have greatly irritated him, was a balm to the wounded feelings of the unhappy Adelaide ; yet the consola¬ tion she derived from this source was ne¬ vertheless embittered by the reflection that she was not only hourly exposed to the most dreadful evils herself, but while she continued, as at present, the object of
of illicit pursuit, must necessarily fv^ose to difficulties, and even dangers, all those with whom she was in any way connected. The apprehensions of what she might have to encounter from the persecutions of the Marquis, should they be continu¬ ed against her, and there seemed no rea¬ son to hope they would not, together with conjectures about the many evils and distresses which seemed likely to at¬ tend her in her passage through life, en¬ gaged her mind in sorrowful rumination, and ke|)t her waking many hours. Wea¬ riness at length overcame her, and she was sinking gradually into a state of re¬ pose, or rather insensibility, when she heard, or thought she heard, the door of Madame St. Clair's room, which was nearly opposite her own, cautiously opened. She perceived also a light gleam- ing
ing through the crevices of the door ; and soon afterwards distinguished the sound of footsteps, pacing slowly and carefully down the stairs. This circumstance surprised her ; for Madame, as on the preceding night, had retired early to her apartment, and was partly undressed, when Adelaide, af¬ ter the conversation we have before re^ lated, withdrew from her chamber, Ma¬ dame having more than once observed that she was extremely wearied, and could siî up no longer. A considerable time had elapsed since she seemed to have retired for the ni^ht : how strange then, thought Adelaide, that she should leave her bed at this hour í Something extraordinary must have hap¬ pened. She listened : all was still. At length, vol. u. g she
she thought she distinguished a distant murmuring, as of the voices of people talking İn one of the lower rooms of the chateau. But the sound was too indistinct to allow her to determine from which of the apartments it issued. She became an¬ xious to ascertain whether Perouse and her father were in their beds; and having lis¬ tened sometime, and not hearing Madame return to her chamber, curiosity almost tempted her to rise, and endeavour to in¬ vestigate what to her appeared now strangely mysterious. But the caution with which the sieps seemed to descend, which she could not doubt were those of Madame St. Clair, convinced her that whatever might be Madame's motive for leaving her cham¬ ber at that hour, it was a secret one ; and an attempt to discover it might subject her
her to her displeasure, and appear, on her part, as the error of a prying curiosity. The surprise of this incident prevented the approach of sleep, till her wearied attention could be kept no longer awake, when she sunk into a gentle slumber.
CHAP.
CHAP. ХИ. When Adelaide arose in the morning, she found Perouse and her father had depart¬ ed, and learnt that they had set off as **ar- ly as daybreak. She inquired of Ma¬ dame if she had been unwell in the night, and whether any thing-had happened to disturb her ? but on observing a confu¬ sion in her air and look, as of that of a person suddenly embarrassed by some perplexing interrogatory, added, u I thought I heard somebody descend the stairs ; but I was probably mistaken." f * Oh,
" Oh, very likely you did, my love," said Madame, as if suddenly recollecting herself; ff I never told you before, and if was perhaps very foolish of me that I did not, as such a circumstance might have alarmed you ; but you must know, my dear, I have an unfortunate habit of walking in my sleep, particularly when any thing has happened in the day to agi¬ tate me ; and no wonder I did last night, after I had suffered so much, in conse¬ quence of the conversation I held yester¬ day with my poor dear Perouse, about yourself. Oh, pray did I come into your room ? I am very apt to make these nightly expeditions; and might have been the cause of much terror to you, who knew not of this infirmity." " And do you always take a candle in your hand, Madame," said Adelaide, с 3 íť for
" for I saw a light I think, through the door ?" 14 Ob, very likely—-yes, I dare say I do." " Surely this must be very dangerous," cried Adelaide. " Why so it seems," rejoined Madame ; " but I believe some guardian spirit is appointed by a particular providence to watch over people who are addicted to this habit ; for we seldom, I think, or never, hear of any accident. La, I could tell you a thousand laughable stories of which I am the heroine. You cannot conceive into what a number of almost unaccountable situations I have been brought by this unfortunate propensity, " I was once ingenious enough, while dreaming of a voyage of wealth and glo-^ ry to the Indies, to find my way into a bag Which hung in my closet, and while I imagined
I imagined I was raising myself up the sides of a splendid galley, in which I was toembark, was near suffering the effects of suffocation, from the tightness of the string by which I drew it round my neck. Nay, I should have been com¬ pletely strangled, had not my groans awakened a part of the family, who came and liberated me from a condition the most wretched that can be endured, or even imagined. Never was so absurd an exhibition ; nor one of which I was more heartily ashamed. My head alone was out of the bag. 1 appeared as though I had been in a pillory. " Another time I was found sitting like the sign of the Jolly Bacchus, upon a wine cask in the cellar. I have prowled like the nightly thief, through every part of my own premise's ; and was once de- G 4 tected
tected in the act of attempting to enter a henroost, dreaming that I was a fox. Oh, it would fill pages, nay, even volumes, to record hilf my adventures!" She concluded this somewhat curious account of her nocturnal perambulations with a hearty burst of laughter, in which Adelaide also joined. She, however, re¬ quested of Madame that she would be more careful for the future, and not suf¬ fer a light to be burnt in her chamber ; or that she would place it in some safe situation ; lest dreaming that she was Eralostratus, about to eternize her name by firing the temple of the Ephesian Di¬ ana, she should chance to burn herself in her own dwelling. As the young chevalier, whose appear¬ ance and somewhat extraordinary inqui¬ ries had excited a strong interest in the mind
mind of Adelaide had not been seen or heard of some days, it was generally con¬ cluded that he had at last really quitted the neighbourhood—an opinion from which Madame seemed to derive much pleasure ; nor was Adelaide without her share of satisfaction, since she seemed to be more secure from the designs of the Marquis. At the recollection of the per¬ sonal charms and graces of this seemingly amiable and highly-accomplished youthy a sigh would sometimes steal involuntari¬ ly from her bosom, and a tear spring in¬ to her eye. " I shall see him no more ! " she would exclaim mentally ; then blush- in g } hastily turn her thoughts from the object, and wonder why he should have so much engaged them. She now again resumed her walks, ge¬ nerally at tended by Madame, and chiefly g 5 amongst
amongst the acclivities that rose high at the back of the chateau, where travellers did not, and indeed scarcely could come. When at home, she amused herself with her lute, or in reading and conversing with Madame St. Clair, who endeavour¬ ed, with all the arts of ingenuity, to recon¬ cile her to the idea of a marriage with her nephew, which she represented not only as prudent, but wholly unavoid¬ able.
CHAP
CHAP. ХШ. Thus passed the time for some days, and Adelaide experienced a suspension of her former distress and anxiety ; for Pe¬ rouse did not return. This calm, how¬ ever, was soon disturbed, and Adelaide was again thrown into a slate of tumult and apprehension, by the intelligence communicated by Madame, with all the symptoms of alarm, that a party of horse¬ men, supposed to belong to the Mar¬ quis, had appeared in the village, and also at the gate of the chateau open trig g С to
to the lawn ; that they had been making a number of inquiries at the inn, of which Adelaide was supposed to be the object, and had certainly gained all the intelli¬ gence which the host could give. €t Oh Heavens ! I am betrayed then ! " exclaimed Adelaide, " and who will pro- teet me? you, Madame, you, alas, cannot!" ·' I am as much alarmed as you can be, my dear/* said Madame ; " but I have taken such precautions as may serve at present to render their pursuit ineffec¬ tual. I have deceived the people at the inn, whose curiosity must naturally have heen much excited by your arrival there at night in the disguise in which you came, with a fictitious account of you, which ϊ (hink will satisfy them, and prevent «hem from directing these men to our habita tic». But lest this should be in¬ sufficient,
sufficient, they are taught to believe you are departed in company with two travel¬ lers, by whom you are to understand I mean your father and Perouse." <ζ And are you sure they are batisfied ?" demanded Adelaide. ff Have they left the village ?" '* No ; they have been seen within this half hour." u And how do the people at the inn know that they are the servants of the Marquis ?'* asked Adelaide. tc They do not know, they only suspect they are." " Perhaps then they may be mistaken." " I fear they are not," said Madame, " I fear they are not. So pray, my dear, don't venture out at present, not even into the lawn ; oh, oh, I am all over of a tremor ! This young man—this young fellow
fellow has betrayed us ; and we are ruin¬ ed and undone for ever !" tc Where are these people ?" asked Adelaide; " can I get a sight of them ?" " A sight of them !" interrupted Ma¬ dame ; " a sight of them ! oh, no, no, no ! not for the world ! for Heaven's sake, child, keep away from the window ; who knows but they may be at the gate? and if they should see you—oh that such a charge should have been left to me ! up¬ on me, a poor, weak, defenceless woman ! If I could but have foreseen—if I could but have known—if I could have dived into futurity, never would I have been left to surfer these agonies of terror, un¬ protected as we are." tf But why not call the'people in the village to our defence, Madame?" said Adelaide ;
Adelaide; " surely ina cause of humani¬ ty such as this, some benevolent being would step forward to give us that protec¬ tion we require ?" " Not a soul·—not a soul," cried Ma¬ dame ; " they are bribed—all bribed to assist in your destruction : nor dare they, if they would, protect you." " Then must we place our dependence upon Heaven only," said Adelaide, "and that innocence which is sure to secure to us its promised mercies." "Innocence !** repeated Madame, with a shudder, which seemed to shake her frame, and with her eyes cast down and fixed; " who is innocent?" The remark drew the attention of Ade¬ laide to the countenance of the person who uttered it ; it seemed momentarily convulsed. She raised her eves, and perceiving
perceiving Adelaide was observing her, roused herself from the temporary reve¬ rie into which she had fallen. (t Can nothing then be done ?" said Adelaide. " 1 believe it has all been done very well," rejoined Madame, with an absent air. " How, my dear Madame ?'asked Ade¬ laide. " The report of the host at the inn may mislead, if it does not effectually deceive," said Madame, tf and serve to direct their pursuit to some other quar¬ ter." tc You think then they are probably already gone ?" said Adelaide, now some¬ what re-assured. " I fear not at present. But instead of troubling ourselves with vain alarms, let ws
us consider how we may contrive to avoid these dangers ; or what we ought to do, should that which We apprehend really approach. For this, it is necessary that you should keep concealed ; for should you be seen, or if it be known by any one that you are still here, you will be discovered, and the consequences must be fatal." i( I will certainly not venture from the chateau, Madame, or even look out from the windows/' said Adelaide, <f if you think my appearance there subjects mc to any hazard." " You canno?, my love, as I have told you before, be too cautious," pursued Madame; " be careful only not to be seen ; and I will go and give some fur¬ ther orders to Jacques, whom I have em¬ ployed to watch the motions of these peo¬ ple,
pie, if they are still, as I fear they may be, loitering about the village." With this she withdrew, leaving Ade¬ laide, although seriously alarmed, more composed than when first informed of their arrival ; for she hoped if she was in¬ deed the object of their search, they had been told she was departed, and had ta¬ ken another route.
CHAP.
CHAP, XIV. The night passed on without any alarm¬ ing incident. In the morning, intellb- gence was brought that the men had left the village, though probably with a de¬ sign of returning, and Adelaide was in consequence still confined to the house, for she had received the most earnest re¬ quest, nay, the strictest orders, from Ma¬ dame, not to stir abroad, till it might be certain the horsemen had left the country. After breakfast, as Adelaide and Ma¬ dame St. Clair were sitting together in the
the parlour, discoursing on the subject of the alarm of yesterday, the conversa¬ tion was interrupted by the entrance of Jacques, on some trifling occasion, who as he left the room looked significantly at Adelaide, and almost beckoned her to follow him. Curiosity, which several late incidents had contributed to excite, rendered her anxious to know what he could mean; and she soon after went into the hall, where she found him loitering. The in¬ stant he saw her, he made a sign for si¬ lence ; and beckoned her into a recess at the farther end of the hall. " Well, Jacques, what is it you would say ?" said Adelaide ; " have the men been seen again in the village ?" " Hush, Ma'amoiselle, for Heaven's «ake, speak lower; for if Madame should hear
hear us, and come out, %ve shall both be as good as murdered !" Adelaide now thought it was of the che¬ valier he was about to speak, and not of the Marquis's servants; for she recollect¬ ed Helene having told her he had inquired and talked about her to Jacques. Hope palpitated at her heart, and she begged him to explain what he meant. " Why, that is what I have been wan¬ ting all morning," said Jacques; " I have watched, and watched, for an opportuni¬ ty of seeing you without Madame ; and when I could not, came with excuses into the parlour, or loitered under the win¬ dow where you sat, tying up the shrubs and flowers/and trying to catch your eye, till I was afraid Madame herself would see me ; and all would not do." "It
<c If you have any thing to say to me," cried Adelaide, " pray be quick." " Yes, Ma'amoiselle ; for if we should be seen talking together, and only a word or two be caught, we shall be all blown up. But I would do any thing to serve you, Ma'amoiselle ; and I could not bear to see so much villany on foot, and not tell you of İt." " For the love of Heaven !" exclaimed Adelaide, " if you know of any danger that threatens me, speak instantly, and to the purpose, or we shall be discovered." " Well, but will you promise, Ma'amoi¬ selle, never to say it was I that told you ?" " Yes, yes, I will promise any thing and every thing, only be quick, or we may be interrupted. Have the Marquis's servants, or the Marquis-— " « Poh,
f( Poh, poh, Ma'amoiselle, the Mar¬ quis ! thaťs all a flam. The Marquis, I dare say, knows no more about you than the man in the moon, and not so much. I know a great deal ; but I can't tell you now, Ma'amoiselle ; for if Ma¬ dame was to find us here—I would not for the world we should be seen to¬ gether. Cannot you come out after dinner, when she is taking her afternoon's nap, and walk in the little shrubbery be¬ hind the chateau, and I'll slip out the back way and meet you ?" Adelaide promised she would walk there ; and begged if Jacques had any¬ thing important to tell her, he would not fail in the appointment. What she had already heard was suffi¬ cient to employ her surmises, and excite an eager curiosity to be acquainted with 6 the
the sequel. She waited, therefore, with impatience till the dinner was over, and the cloth removed, when, as usual, Ala- dame having taken three or four glasses of wine, and one or two of some famous liqueur, of whierr^he was extremely fond, withdrew to take her siesta, or afternoon's nap, in her own apartment.
CHAP.
CHAP. XV. Adelaide repaired anxiously to the shrub¬ bery, where Jacques was already waiting, employed, as he pretended, in his garden- work. " I thought you long, Ma'amoiselle/' said he, " but perhaps, thinks!, Madame has not finished her drams. Aud now you arc come, I'm almost afraid to tell you what 1 know. But as to staving here longer, 1 won't, and that's fìat." " Well, Jacques," said Adelaide, " and what ís it you would ted me 3 " Vol. it. и j ' Ifibb,"
" Hush," cried Jacques, " let us first see whether any body is about. I declare if I an'tin such a fright, even the flusker- ing of a bird throws me all over in a sweat. But I could not bear to see such a fine good young lady—hark ! did not I hear a step ?" " No, no," said Adelaide, te pray pro¬ ceed." r' I could not bear, as I was saying, to see such a sweet young lady—surely, Ma'am¬ oiselle, I saw something moving behind yon tree/' " Oh, do not trifle thus/'said Adelaide ; " if you have any thing to say, tell it me, or we may be observed." " True, Ma'amoiselle; but where was I ? I could not bear to see such a sweet good young lady—I was there, I think." '* Pray go on," said Adelaide, with im¬ patience,
patience ; " you have told me this three times already." " Don't interrupt me so, Ma'amoiselle," said Jacques, *' or I shall never be able to get on ,at all. H grieved me to the heart to see you in so much danger," ad¬ ded he, ,( and so I determined to tell you. But you must be as mum as a maggot, Ma'amoiselle, will you ? or ϊ clurstn't." - (( 'i fear you have determined noi to tell me," said Adelaide, whose patience was now nearly exhausted : " what dan¬ ger is it of which you speak? and if not from the Marquis, from what quarter am I to expect it ?" '< Why from that quarter, í dare say, Ma'amoiselle, between ourselves," said Jacques, t( vou lenst thought of exnect- n 2 ing
l'YliÈNKAN ВДМИТП. f rfğ it : ; for if a child cannot depend upon ils own father, Î, don't know who it can ever thífik io trust unto." " My father!" cried Adelaide; ťf what of my father?" " Why you must know, Ma'ainoiselfe, I've had my thoughts some time; but that's neither here nor there; a man may have his own private thoughts, with¬ out being obliged to speak 'em. But I'd a huge fancy that all things were not as they should be, ever since Madame's ne¬ phew, my master, as I call him, brought von, Ma'amoiselle, to the chateau. For what arguyes, says I, all this hiding, 3nd these nightly confabs, and such winkings, and whisperings, and closetings, and get¬ ting together into corners? if things are going on honestly, why may not they go on openly and above aboard ? says I. Now yon
you knew nothing of ail this, Ma'amoi¬ selle, but I had my eyes and ears about me ; and I saw and heard a great deal more than they thought such a ninny as they took me for could, But what of that ? well then, your father came,, and then there was more of it ; though I thought he looked more cunning than the others, and seemed more upon the nly; but I smoked him, for all that. Well, I found they made a pretence to go to bed, and then came down again in the night, when they thought all the reşfc of us were asleep, and that they sat up drinking and talking many hours* J should not have taken so much notice of this, if the men, had been by themselves, and Madame had not been amongst 'errţ. But this, says ϊ to myself, has an oddish look : so the last night, making a sham it 3 of
òf going to bed with the other servants, knowing your father and my master were to be off in the morning, ϊ came down again too; for I was strangely mistaken if some mischief was not a brewing. If, says I, its all for merri¬ ment, why is not Ma'amoiselle there too amongst 'em ? for Pm sure, ihough she has such sweet looks, and is so good tempered, and speaks so free to us all, like a true lady, she wants something to make her merry as well as the rest of'em ; ■for I saw clear enough you wasn't so easy in your heart as you should be, Ma'amoi¬ selle, or as î thought you deserved. So what does ΐ do, for I came down a little before the others, but pop myself into a closet, where there was a little cranny into the room, where they had been collogu¬ ing the night before. Well, í had not been
been there long, when down they came pod, pod, pod, like so many spirits, one after the other, with candles in their hands, and in their night-gowns. Now, says I, I have you ; so clapping my ear to the chink, I got into all their secrets." " And what did you hear ?" asked Ade¬ laide, who had listened to this account with a trembling solicitude, which was every instant increasing ; " \f the matter concerns me, I pray you be brief, and let me know u." " Concerns you, Ma'amoiselle ! yes, it concerns you sure enough, and badly enough too, I may say, for they are no¬ thing but thieves and murderers after all ; and they want to get you into ïheir gang." " Merciful and gracious powers !'* ex¬ claimed Adelaide, clasping her hands and raising her eyes to Heaven, with a look^of и 4 terrified
-terrified astonishment, while the agony of her feelings almost suppressed her ut¬ terance, " is it, can it be possible ! my father too—my father !" " Well, and so when they were all at their talking, and their revels," pursued Jacques, " they began to say how well they had contrived it, and laughed, and chuckled, and seemed as merry as grigs ; and said the little fool, meaning you, Ma'amoiselle, was caught İn the snare ; and that they had you now as safe as a fox ina bag ; andyou might cry and tossa lit¬ tle, if you would, but could not get away. And then they laughed again, and said the story ok the Marquis was a capital hit ; and one said it was their contrivance, and another theirs; and all seemed so «ager to be thought the first inventor of the scheme, that I thought they would have
you sure/ said the old one>. * she does not suspect the trick? does she believe the Marquis is in pursuit of her at this moment ? for, by jingo, if we doty'r frighten hei*, she'll smoke us before we nail her ; and may fly ott like an arrow from a boWj and then catcbherwho can.*" ' Never fear/said Madame, 'she believe» every thing; but you would have spoilt all, if you had not gone on as hbid you ; for she is as shy as a little chamois; and would have bolted, had you offered what she would call a liberty, or spoke a word- out of place. Poor thing, she will know~ better after a while, or won't fail of it for want of teaching.'— Well but/ said Pe¬ rouse, * what must we do, if, after all,, she should refuse to marry me ?'—' Why force her, to be sure/ cried De bauné;. ir iL '' n t«*
'am not Î her father ?*— ^ But what if she won't repeat her part in the ceremony ?' cried Perouse. — 'Poh, poh, she dare not holá out/ said the other; ť if she does, * wie'H bring some of our comrades to act the part of the Marquis and his servants, and pretend to force her from the cha¬ teau. Ods wounds, d f you think we have so little brave blood, my lad? we who have shed so much in the way of trade, and can't out-bravo a little simpleton ef a wench of eighteen, who knows no more of the world than a child just born, and is as easily bamboozled ?*—' I am a- fraid of nothing but that chevalier/ cried Madame ; ' I wonder who he is.'-—' No matter/ said De Launé, ' we can soon do tor him ; egad, í don't know whether we Ьл\е not paid him already, if what she said
said about him was true; but I did not know who the party were till we had done with 'em. They stood to it bravely, thaťs certain, but we were too many for 'em. ït was a devilish lucky accident, our gang just coming up ar that instant, or they'd have given us no quarter. By the living jingo,! was afraid they Rådnet been near enough to have heard the whistle/ And so then, Ma'amoiselle 1 , they began to talk. of their booty, and the number of travel¬ lers they had left dead, and laughed, and seemed so merry, while I stood trembling, Ma'amoiselle, from head to foot ; for what, thinks I, if they should come round, and find me here ? why they would cut me up into mince-meat. Lord a mercy, thought* I, what will become of me î Ve- EÍ!y, F think my hair stood an end with íright, as well it might ; for I found they u 6 roade
made no more of killing a man than they did of eating their suppers. My knees knocked together, till î almost thought they would have heard 'em. And there I stood, Ma'amoiselle, more dead than alive, for I knew how it would be with me if I was catched, till they had finished their palaver, when they got up, and went away, one after another, pod, pod, just as they csme down. Well now, say* I* I'm safe, and main glad I was to hear 'em go out. I waited till they had got up stairs ; and then came out from my hiding-place, like a fox from his hole ; und when I thought 'they were all asleep, pod, pod, I went too, up the stairs. Holy Saint Dominic ! never was I so glad as- when I got safe to bed, .thinking of the 'ьсаре I had had. And now, says 1, if ufa amoisclk docs not koow what şort of gentry
gentry she is with, she'll be nabbed ; and so, come what will, I'll tell her ; for it will be a sin.and a shame to let so good a young lady be in such danger* and not give her the chance of getting away from 'em, all for want of a Hute warning." Adelaide, whose feelings during this relation of Jacqueses may be more readily conceived than?described, now saw herself in a situation beset with dangers, from whichit was utterly impossible to extricate herself but by instant flight. " And did my father," saidshe^ "join in this iniqui¬ tous scheme against me? my father! then from henceforth I renounce the tie ; no longer am I his daughter. Oh wretch ϊ •—wretch î forgive me, Heaven î a job¬ ber and a murderer ! dy'd deep in blood. Horror on horrors ! my pretended gene- 5 rous
rous benefactress too, and him to whom I owed my seeming deliverance, both— both perfidious and deceitful ϊ bent on my destruction, even while with smiles they seemed to court my affections, and flattered to betray me to my ruin Î" " Well, Ma'amoiselle !" cried Jacques, " but what do you think must be done to cheat 'cm, as one may say, out of their contrivances ? as *o me, Pm bent upon going, if 1 don't get a single farthing of my wages." " What if ϊ should attempt an escape ?" said Adelaide : " would you assist me, Jacques? you are an honest fellow ; and ifit should ever be în my power to recom¬ pense you------" "Why'as to that, Ma'amoiselle," cried Jacques, scratching his head ; (t but where are
are we to go? I'm stout enough, and don't fear but I could shift for myself; but you, lady----- -'* " Assist me but till I can get beyond the reach of my enemies," said Adelaide, ** and I shall then comparatively have nothing to fear/* if Well 1 have been thinking a little bit of a scheme myself," said Jacques ; " for says I to myself, Ma'a m öiselle will be for getting off when she hears how- she's like to be served* and what compa¬ ny she's got into ; for I warrant she thought they were all as good as herself, or she wouldn't have been so contented among 'em, and have spoke so pretty to 'em afô." " And what was you thinking of, Jacques?" cried Adelaide; " be quick, pray, and tell me ; for if Madame should awake,
awake, and come down, and find us here—" " Aye, by our Lady, and that would' be a bad find for us,, I can tell you, Ma V aioiselle ; for she's as cunning as a pickpocket, and not a< whit the honester, or she wouM not have said what she did." " But your scheme, Jacques—you said you had a*scheme ?" " Aye, the scheme, lady." " May I depend upon you, Jacques? will you assist me to escape the destruc¬ tion that awaits me here ? Alas í í have not a friend in the world, if I do not find one in you !" " The more the pity—the more the pity, Ma'amoiselle; for Pm sure vou de- serve one/' " What plan have you ?" said she, per¬ ceiving Jacques was deliberating. " Why
" Why you must know, Ma'amoiselle," rejoined Jacques, " they have left a horse behind em in the stable : a bay jennet black mare, and tail and legs black, all but the near foot behind ; fourteen hands and a half high ; and as nigh as I can g? ess, Ma'amoiselle, for I looked in its mouth yesterday, not much above four years old/* " Never mind the marks, or the age," l· „rrupted Adelaide ; " can we have the horse ?" " Aye, marry can we ; and for the matter of right, I dare be sworn we have as good a right to it as they have ; and that's as good as no right at all/* t( Well, and where shall we go?" said Adelaide ; " have you thought of that ?" "Why, yes; I have been thinking a little about that, too., Ma'amoiselle, if so be
be we have the luck to get clear off with¬ out meeting with any of the troop. I haveagoodold grandmother in Rousillon, please God she be yet alive, for I have not seen her for some years, who, when I shall tell her the story, will bekind to you, and make much of you for my sake ; for she was always main fond of me ; and when I left her to come on my travels—" '* Well then, to-night/' interrupted Adelaide. " To-night,Ma'amoiselle, or never; for as to shilly-shallying, its of no use; and beside, who knows what may turn up to¬ morrow? But how are you to manage with Madame ?" " She is so sure, as she imagines, of the success of her own measures," replied Adelaide, " that she will have no suspi¬ cion of my intention. I will pretend, like
like her, to go to bed, and then conie down again : take you care only to seem to be up the last, that the doors may be left unfastened." " Right, Ma'amoiselle, and I will oil the locks and hinges well too, that we may go out without noise; and that will be only doing what Madame bid me. r Jacques/ says she, 'the doors creak sadly ; do get a little oil, for they make me quite nar— narvus/ I think that was the word ; but I didn't do 'em forali that. Well, so about an hour after bed-time, Ma'amoiselle, do you be ready to steal out from your chamber, and meet me at the bridge on the other side of the krwn; where I will wait for you with the nag. The moon will be up ; and if we meet with nothing to interrupt us, before Ma¬ dame
dame awakes in the morning, we shall be gota good way on our journey ; and with the blessing of the Holy Mother (crossing himself) shall be out of their reach before my master and your father return ; for Madame can't follow us herself, and she has nobody to send after us. Lordra- raercy, how she'll stare when she finds us gone ! I wouldn't be in her shoes when they come homeland hear we are missing, for all the money she's to have for trick¬ ing you, Ma'amoiselle, though I warrant its a fine round sum ; for by our Lady, I believe she'll be half murdered for't." " Kemember your promise, Jacques," said Adelaide, " and let us now part ; you know it may be dangerous toOtir plans if we are ^een together." Jacques assured her he would not fail in
in the performance of his promise at the appointed hour at night, and Adelaide returned to the chateau. On entering one of the rooms, she was soon afterwards joined by Madame, who had but just awakened from her after¬ noon's repose. Aware that the means of her escape might be in an instant prevented by the slightest degree of alarm on the part of Madame, Adelaide carefully avoided every thing that could excite any suspi¬ cion ; and she endeavoured to appear composed, and even cheerful. In this she was so successful that Madame did not perceive the emotions she thus con¬ cealed under the appearance of a ficti¬ tious and painful tranquillity.
CHAP,
CHAP. XVI. Evening, at length, approached. Ade¬ laide watched the dusk of the twilight as it stole over the features of the land¬ scape, gradually deepening into the shades of night. To-morrow night at this hour, thought she, I shall, I trust, be far away. As she gazed upon the outlines of the mountains, which now alone were to be discerned, she thought of the evening when she had walked with Madame and the chevalier. A horrible apprehension ч arose
arose with the «recollection ; for she re^ f > membered De Launé and Perouse 's words, as repeated by Jacques, which seemed to threaten his safety ; or even to imply that they had probably already severely wounded, perhaps killed him in some late rencontre. The perturbation of her mind during her conversation with Jacques, had pre¬ vented her from dwelling upon this cir¬ cumstance ; indeed she then scarcely re¬ marked it. But now it occurred to her with increased force ; and the certainty that he was not what her own fears, and the cunning artifices of Madame, had once taught her to suspect, rendered him now more than ever an object of the most tender interest and lively ad¬ miration. That this interest was of the most tender kind was incontestibly evi¬ dent.
dent. The horrible idea that he might be murdered^- m urd ered in consequence of his attempts to serve her, by deliver¬ ing her from her present situation, oc¬ curred to her imagination. The sensa¬ tions thus occasioned were most painful ; a death-like sickness seized her, and obliged her to retire to her own chamber, to indulge in that sorrow she could no longer suppress. " In him," said she, weeping, " I might have found a friend and deliverer, had I but dared to confide in his zeal and af¬ fection ; and he is now lost to me for ever." She remained agitated by these emotions, and racked by such reflections, till a message came from Madame requir¬ ing her presence at supper. '· Is it the supper hour?" said she with surprsse ; for the time occupied in these tender sor¬ rows
rows had fled quickly ; and assuming as well as she could that appearance of com¬ posure which was so necessary to pre¬ vent suspicion in Madame,, and the in¬ terruption of the escape she was about to attempt, she went down stairs. Madame seemed in high spirits; and Adelaide affected a cheerfulness very fo¬ reign to her heart, and which an atten¬ tive observer might have discovered to be fictitious. She waited with anxiety the hour when Madame would retire for the night; and the restlessness of her feelings led her to imagine it was protrac¬ ted beyond the usual time; and various trifling incidents which retarded what she wished, became the cause of the most teaming vexations. She withdrew, at length, and follow¬ ed by Adelaide with quick and agitated vol. n. τ steps,
steps, repaired to her room, Adelaide, after waiting a few minutes, as usual, in Madame's chamber, took her leave for the night, as she said, but inwardly hoped it might be for ever; and then retired to her own apartment. The hour that was to intervene, ere the time appointed for her departure would arrive, was passed in anxious alternations of hope and fear. The en¬ terprise of that night—that important night, seemed the crisis of her fate. That it might be fortunate was the subject of a prayer not less devout than might be uttered by " the rapt seraph that a- dores and burns." She implored the Father of Mercies, he who pities the fatherless and the wi¬ dow, to look down on her forlorn and destitute condition, and guide her on in safety
safety through that course which could alone deliver her from the worst and most dreaded of all evils. Those who know what it is to address their Father and their God, in the hour of trial and of danger, will not hear with sur¬ prise that she arose from her posture of supplication with a composure of mind fitting her for the most effectual execu¬ tion of her design, and with a secret assur¬ ance that if she could not ensure, she might at least hope for success.
ι "
cuu\
CHAP. XVII. The hour now arrived when Jacques was to meet her at the little bridge beyond the lawn. She cautiously left her room, taking nothing with her except the clothes she had worn on her arrival. Those since received as presents from Madame were left behind ; Adelaide con¬ ceiving it would be dishonourable to make use of them, after a step which the donor would most undoubtedly h ? opposed. As she opened her door, she listened for
for a minute or two, to discover whether all was quiet throughout the house ; not a sound was to be heard ; she descended the stairs, and crossing the hall with quick, but trembling steps, reached the outer door of the chateau. It was unlocked, and stood ajar. She opened it without noise, and went out. A sensation of fear for a moment took possession of her mind, on find ing herself alone in thesilence of the night; but it was only for a mo¬ ment. Hope fluttered at her heart; she tripped lightly over the moonlight lawn, to the wicket-gate at the further end. She went on, and turned down towards the bridge. The figure of a man seen below and advancing towards her, caused her to start and tremble ; but all was well— it was the punctual Jacques. " You are come just in right time, ι 3 Ma'amoiselle/*
Ma'ámoiselle,"saicl he,·" for it is a fine right, and the moon will be up for some hours. 1 hope you won't be tired, Ma'am* öiselle,*' added he, as he lifted her up¬ on the horse, " for we have a main long journey to go ; and what's worse, we must stop nowhere within twenty miles of this town." Adelaide assured him she was not afraid of fatigue, and then inquired if he was well acquainted with their route; and whether he thought there was a pro¬ bability of their being able to prosecute their journey in safety,, till they should have reached their destination ? " Why as to the road, Ma'amoiselle," answ¿..-¿d Jacques, " I believe I know every step of it ; but as to our going safe, it must depend upon meeting any of the troop who are generally abroad at night
night among the mountains. All we have to do is to make the best of our way while the moon's up ; and If we hear 'em coming, to skulk behind the trees, or under the rock, taking care to be neither seen nor heard, till they shall have passed us. Hold you fast by me, Ma'amoiselle, and don't be daunted, for the horse is able enough, and seems to know the road ; so I shall put him on, come what will : only take care, Ma'amoiselle, you don't slip off behind ; for the pillion is but a middling one, though it was the best I could get" Ihey travelled with good spetu over the rugged and generally steep road, so that Adelaide had some difficulty in obey¬ ing that part of her companion's direc- ti'ns, not to slip off behind. But his lively and good-humoured sayings were ι 4 a great
a great comfort to her ; and the prospect ι? of effecting an escape gave strength to her exertions, and courage to her heart. Before the moon had set, they had proceeded several leagues, without any alarm or adventure ; when as they were descending by a path down the side of one of the highest eminences, into a deep valley which fell at its foot, they were alarmed by the approach of horsemen ; and Adelaide, whose fears instantly sug¬ gested they were banditti, trembled so excessively, that it was with difficulty she could keep her seat. ** Thev are here, Ma'amoiselle, for certain,** cried Jacques ; " but we must hold to the right, and get within that thicket ; and then, with the blessing of Saint Dominic, I hope we shall be safe enough. Don't be frightened, Ma'amoi- sclle,"
selle," though while he spoke, Jacques himself trembled like an aspen, " for 'ď you squall out, or make any noise, they'll find us, and we shall have the ЬэШ -of a brace of blunderbusses λ 'lizzing about our ears." Adelaide gave proof of her attention, to the advice of her conductor, by for¬ bearing to make any reply ; and Jacques turned into the thicket·, and waited till the troop should have passed by. As they approached near, the pacing of the horses- seemed to strike upon the heart-strings. of poor Adelaide, and of those of Jacques also ; and they both almost feared to breathe, lest they should be discovered» However, the party passed right onward, and crossing the mountain by the track down which our travellers had come, were soon out of hearing and sight. χ 5. "I am
" I am glad we have met with 'em," said Jacques, whose courage had returned with his security, " now they have gone away so quietly, as we shall now have nothing to fear from 'em ; for it will soon be day-break ; and before to-mor¬ row night we shall be in Rousillon." At the thoughts of being so soon in a place of safety, and, as she hoped, be¬ yond the reach of these outlaws, Ade¬ laide's spirits also revived ; and slie a- mused the tedious journey by inquiring of Jacques concerning Madame St. Clair, of whom, howe v cr, Jacques could give only a very imperfect ncccunt. According to bis report, she had resi¬ ded only ;. few months at Anboigne, and had taken the chateai? ready furnished, as it was only a little time before Ade¬ laide came there with Perouse ; and the teaxi
PYRENEAN BANDITTÍ. term for which she had hired it was al¬ most expired. Who she was, and where she came from, was a subject which had supplied materials for the curiosity and inquiry of all the people in the village, ever since she had arrived. Eut as she made no acquaintance în the place, and seemed scrupulously to avoid all oppor¬ tunities of intimacy, and even inter¬ course, with the inhabitants, they had no- means of satisfy in ff themselves on these points. Various rumours had, however, of late arisen from some intimations made by tuo travellers, who had stopped at the village inn, from which it was believed that s>he had led not long ago a disrepu¬ table life. But it not being quite cer¬ tain that Madame St. Clair was the person whom the travellers said they knew, their ι б declaration»
declarations were not much regarded, and served only to keep alive suspicion. On the arrival of Perouse, who »vas considered as a person of a very suspi¬ cious character, the story of these tra¬ vellers, which had before begun to die away, was revived. It was not generally believed that he was her nephew, though it was impossible to prove that he was not. As Adelaide had accompanied him to the inn, and afterwards to Madame St. Clair's house, it was universally believed that she was of the same description of females to which Madame herself was sup¬ posed to belong. " Though when they talked tò me about you/' said Jacques, " as they often did, and said as how you were no better than you should be, mean- in^, Ma'amoiselle, I suppose, iiot so good, ϊ always told 'em what a sweet kind § c rea t ere
creature you was, and how modest and pretty you behaved ; and bid 'em look to themselves, and mind their own bu¬ siness, and not sit in judgment upon others, but try to look and behave as yon did ; f for/ says I, ( she's a gentlewoman* I know she is, let her be who she will, for she always speaks like one, and knows how to conduct herself like one too, and that's more than every body can/ meaning them 1 spoke to. And then they laughed, and jeered; but what of that, since it argufied nothing but to prove my own words. When Madame first came/' pursued Jacques, "she had no man-servant; but I having lost my in as í er, who died in the neighbouring village, and thinking she must want one, went and offered myself, and was imme¬ diately
diately hired, which might be about a week before you came." ** Then," said Adelaide, " you had seen Monsieur Perouse before his coming with me." " Oh la, yes, Ma'amoiselle, several times, and Monsieur De Launé too ; aml they and Madame had many a confab to¬ gether, I assure you ; and when you came, I thought they must all have been about you ; but that, you know, Ma'amoiselle,. was no business of mine. But when Γ saw my master come home at night* sometimes bv himself, and sometimes with one or two, I did not know who, and carry packages into his chamber, and hide 'em, or lock-'em up, I do not know which, thinks I to myself, it's time to look about me ; for I thought those things.
things could only come from travellers, and muleteers, which I heard were often robbed by a desperate gang of thieves, as they were conveying their commodities over the mountains which separate the two kingdoms." While they were thus engaged in dis¬ course concerning Madame St, Clair and Perouse, Adelaide, whose fears had almost wholly subsided, perceived, with delight, the dawn of day streaking the eastern clouds ; and soon afterwards be¬ held the sun, rising in all its splendour. She hailed with welcome the glorious orb, and felt the cheerfulness its beam diffuses. '* A few hours/' said she, " and I shall be safe from the dreaded power ©f my enemies." The idea inspired gratitude and hope, but succeeding reflections sunk her into thoughtfulness,
thoughtfulness, and spread their sadden» ing influences upon her mind She was again, she recollected, about to be de¬ pendant upon the protection and bounty of strangers, destitute not only of a home, but even of the means of subsis¬ tence· She was without a friend, or any regular connexion. She was doomed also to feel ali the miseries of suspense, andali the tortures of surmise ; for she imagined she had been the occasion of exposing to the fury of her persecutors^ the chevalier who had so benevolently interested himself in her welfare; though her fears had prevented her from allow¬ ing him to render himself actively ser¬ viceable in her cause. These her appre¬ hensions were indeed but too well found¬ ed ; for it was evident, from the declara¬ tion of the cnbal at the chateau, that they designed
designed his death, and that they even thought it likely that he had fallen in the rencontre they had described.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVÎH. Ir was not till some hours after noon, that our travellers, who had stopped only once for refreshment, passed the borders of Gascony, and entered upon the wild and romantic province of Kousillon. Pursuing their way though a country rich * with olive-groves, and abounding with the sublime features of mountain scenery, they arrived at an obscure village, deep¬ ly embosomed in a valley, formed by two ridgy hills, covered in part with wood, and partly rugged with the most gro¬ tesque
tesqtie rocks, and watered by a mountain- stream, which darted clear and rapid dowrr its stony course. The scene as thev advanced became so beautiful, that Adelaide could not restrain the expression of her admiratio«. Of these kind of remarks Jacques took little notice ; his attention was indeed otherwise engaged. At length he ex¬ claimed-—" There it is, Ma'amoiselle, there it is ! And see how merry they are yonder," pointing to a group of peasants dancing on a green between the rivulet and a vineyard. " It is the vintage,Ma'am¬ oiselle, and, now they have done their work for the day, they are footing it away to the sound of the tabor and fla¬ geolet. Ah ! it reminds me of the time ri when I was a lad, Ma'amoiselle, And look there,
there, against that grove, Ma'amoiselle, with the olive-ground below," directing the attention of Adelaide to a fine old gothic chateau, a little without the vil¬ lage, <c there lives my old grandmother, God bless her, if she be yet alive," "Your grandmother!" exclaimed Adelaide; "does your grandmother re¬ side at that chateau ?" *' Yes, Ma'amoiselle/'returned Jacques, " and has done for many years. She lived servant there in her youth, and af¬ terwards, on the death of my grandfather, who died before I can remember, was hired again as housekeeper; and a fine place she had of it, till the family went abroad, when the rest of the servants were discharged, and she was ¡eft in the chateau to take care of it, in order that the
the windows might be opened, and the rooms kept in airing, that the furniture might not be .spoiled by the damps." " And does she continue there alone ?" asked Adelaide. " Yes, Ma'amoiselle, except at night, when a neighbour comes from the village to sleep there, my grandmother thinking it somewhat lonely to lodge in such a great old rambling place by herself." " And have you any other relations in the village, Jacques?" said Adelaide. " Yes, Ma'amoiselle, I've a sister that's married, and lives a little lower down in the valley, in that cottage there, with the smoke curling from the top," pointing to a little rustic habitation, whose sim¬ ple dome-like roof was seen just peep¬ ing from a luxuriant grove of chesnuts: " hut she has a large family," resumed Jacques,
Jacques, " and lives hardy enough« I warrant ; though Pm sure, Ma'amoiselle, when she knows how you have been used, she will be main kind to you, though its I that says it/ Adelaide, aware that if Jacques was al¬ lowed to disclose all the particulars of her story with which he was acquainted, he might involve her in some distressing embarrassments, and this not so much from a fondness for the marvellous, as from ignorance of the real circumstances of her situation, requested he would say nothing amongst his friends about the conversation he had overheard at Madame St. Clair's, and that he would leave her to disclose what she should think proper ; to answer no inquiries concerning her; and above all things, rot to mention that De Launé was her father, or that he was one
<îne of the troop of banditti that infested the mountains, and had been long the scourge and terror Of all Gascony. " However cruel may have been his conduct, however unjustifiable, and even wicked, Jacques," pursued she, " he is still my father; and I must not impli¬ cate him in the villany of which he now stands charged." Jacques promised carefully to follow these injunctions, though evidently not without some reluctance at being denied the pleasure of telling a story which he conceived to be both interesting and ex¬ traordinary. They had by this time arrived at the village, which was extremely neat, but simple, and promised but indifferent ac¬ commodation. Scarcely had they reached the first cottage, when Jacques was ac¬ costed
costed by one or two of his old acquaint¬ ance, who shook him by the hand with such earnestness of regard, that it seemed as though they were unwilling any other of their neighbours should shew him like tokens of friendship and affection. He inquired of his grandmother and sister, and was told they were both alive. Hav¬ ing passed the village, they ascended a gentle acclivity to the chateau, where the old woman whom Jacques had described resided.
CHAP
1 11 1 iii í "ímÊaíéà^mà.**^iàÊmkàdmkèà
CHAP. XIX. They passed through two or three courts, the gates of which were unfastened, to the entrance, when Jacques, after first peeping through two or three of the low¬ er windows, rang the bell at the door. It was opened in a few minutes by an old neat-looking woman. She uttered a loud exclamation of joy on seeing Jaccpies, who leaped from the horse, and ran and embraced her with great affec¬ tion. On seeing Adelaide, she seemed surprised, but assisted her to alight, and vol. п. к conducting
conducting her through a spacious hall to a large parlour at the farther end, re¬ ceived her with a ready warmth of bene» volence, which would have done honour ■4 to a person in a much higher station. Adelaide, who felt *he necessity of ac¬ counting for her appearance, acquainted her with such particulars of her history as might answer that purpose, and then inquired if she could be accommodated with lodgings in that chateau ? ** Aye, that you may, Ma'amoiselle, and welcome," replied the good old Ge¬ nifrede, for that was the name of Jacques's grandmother; if there isa deal of room inthechateau which isofnouse nowbut to make it look more lonesome and desolate; I will air a bed for you directly, Ma'a- moiseîie, r.nd ίο -morr \ ou shall see the rooms. But you must want yoursup- ner.
per, and we will first look to that ;" and immediately she went out with as much expedition as she was capable of, and in a few minutes returned with the materials for an omelet, of which Adelaide, who was almost fainting for want of food, thankfully partook. u I wish I had something better to of¬ fer you, Ma'amoiselle/* said Genifrede ; t( but alack, living here, by myself—there was a time indeed, but that is all over," added she with a sigh, " and now I am old, and must not expect better days. But my poor dear," said she, tc thou lookest tired—thou shalt have another faggot to warm and comfort thee, and by the time that is out, thou shalt go to rest in a good bed. I have kept all things tight and wholesome, but it is many a day, к 2 aye
aye and many a night too, since this house had a guest." Jacques, who had been absent in order to procure some provender for the horse, and serve him properly in the stable, now entered the room, and attacked the por¬ tion of the omelet reserved for him with an appetite pretty keen ; nor did he he¬ sitate at emptying the stoup of them de pais^ which his careful grandmother had prepared for him. Genifrede returned ; and Adelaide, who felt the fatigue of so long a jour¬ ney, performed with such tefe, and with • ь * · little or no intermission, requested to be shewn to her apartment. She was conducted by Genifrede, who talked all the while about the rooms and curiosities she should shew her the ne^t day,
day, to a large old chamber, furnished iff the ancient style, and hung whh tapestry. A fire had been previously lighted, and every thing prepared with so much at¬ tention to her comfort and convenience, that Adelaide felt as though she were al¬ ready under the protection of friends highly interested in her welfare and hap¬ piness, and her heart seemed disburden¬ ed of half its load of wretchedness. She took possession of her bed, which was adorned with drapery once extreme¬ ly magnificent ; but now in many places tattéred, and much faded. The furniture consisted of several old-fashioned, high- backed, stuffed chairs, and low settees, covered, like the bed, with crimson da¬ mask, and decorated with fringe of gold, now tarnished by time, but which seemed к 3 once
once to have been extremely* rich and splendid. The chamber was lofty and spacious, and had the appearance of having been formerly one of the principal rooms of the chateau. It opened into a corridore, which extended through the whole wing of the building, and formed the entrance into a long suite of apartments, with fold¬ ing doors, opening one into another. The fire diffused cheerfulness and warmth ; but the size and dreariness of her apartment, the mournful sighings of the wind, and occasionally the shrill shrieking of the blast, as it howled through the gallery in which her chamber was situated, and sometimes shook a jarring door, excited sensations of melancholy, and even those of superstitious dread ; for
for she thought of the castle of Ponte¬ ville; and while she shuddered at the recollection of the horrible apparition, which had more than once glanced be¬ fore her eyes, she felt a dreadful persua¬ sion that she had been conveyed there, as a punishment for her presumption, for having formerly dared to treat with irreligious levity what she then conceived to he nothing more than a mere idle su¬ perstition, but which she now no longer ventured to doubt, the doctrine of the appearance of spirits after death. " Dreadful murders," said she, tf have been committed probably in that castle, and the ghosts of the dead, for reasons we are not allowed to comprehend, are per¬ mitted to wander at night amid its awful solitudes. But here, surely here I have nothing to fear ; this, too, cannot have к 4 beeiì
been the scene of midnight assagsi^.Jons, and crimes humanity shudders but to think of; within these walls, I may be safe from the horrible intrusions of the nightly phantpm !" The subject of her reflections was 3 dreadful one, and she strove to turn the current of her thoughts, by endeavour¬ ing to suggest to herself some plan of humble independence, to be pursued by her own industry and exertion. Biyt be¬ fore she could propose to herself any¬ thing likely to be productive of the in¬ tended purpose, it was necessary she should consult with Genifrede, by whose advice and assistance she would pr-obably be enabled to put some such plan into execution. These thoughts, for some time, fully 'engaged her mind, but fatigue soon over¬ came
eaiúe them; sleep was not long a stran¬ ger to her eyes ; nor did she awake in' the morning, till her good old hostess had entered with her breakfast: " which," say& she, ' ( my dear Ma'amoiselle, you shall take in bed ; for I'm sure you have not had rest enough yet from the fatigues of yesterday's journey. And, when you* have* had another nap, you- shall get up, Ma'amoiselle, and I will shew you the ehateau." Adelaide took a hasty repast, and soon a f ter wards- ar pse, for the sun shone bright into her wintiow ; and after a little con¬ versation with Genifrede, the good old creature set about the task of whictţ she had scarcely ee^ed ta talk since their ar¬ rival, of shewing th« mansion committed to her care. It consisted of two wings, approached к. 5 by
by long corridores, communicating with ч a large hall in the centre, and leading to numerous suites of rooms, lofty and spacious, but antique. Those on the right were all furnished, though the fur¬ niture was faded and old. The rooms of the left wing were scanty of furniture, and mostly locked up, being entered only occasionally for the purpose of ad¬ mitting the air and sun, to prevent the damp from injuring the floors and de¬ caying the timbers. The whole exhibited proofs of ancient grandeur, and though impaired by time, and discoloured with the dews, bespoke the wealth and conse¬ quence of its former possessors. Of these the family of the Montrois, Adelaide obtained some account ofGeni- frede, who had spent the greater part of her life in their service. ct Aye,
€t Aye, aye/' said she, ťí it was a noble place once, Ma'amoiselle, but for want of being inhabited, is going fast to rack and ruin, and if something be not done to it soon, it will all be in a manner bare walls." tc It is a pity," said Adelaide ; rf but how happened it that the family left it ?" <c Ah, well-a-day," answered Geni- frede, ( * because thev are all dead and gone ! who would have thought I should have outlived 'em all ? The young heir too, that I used to dandle on my knee 1 It was a great grief, Ma'amoiselle, (weep¬ ing,) a great grief; but my years are many, and I cannot expect to live long, to see what more will happen." She then proceeded to info; m Ade¬ laide of further particulars relative f о the family of the Montrois, whose extinction к G she
she thus feelingly lamented. The late heir, it seemed, a young man not then of age, had died of a consumption, during a residence at Nice, whither he had been ordered for the recovery of his health. On his death, the chateau, with the es- tate adjoining, and some others m ano¬ ther province, h.ad devolved to a colla¬ teral branch of the same family. The present heir, who had taken with the es¬ tates of that hoiibe the name of Montroi, although now in France, had not yet vi¬ sited the place, but had sentsome orders by his agent, who had been to inspect the premises, from which it appealed that he had some intention of repairing it. Whoever he might be, he had excited in Genifrede a high opinion oí ids libe¬ rality ; for he had desired that her sti¬ pend should be inci eased, and that she might
mi \t have sufficient to provide her, not only with a bare subsistence, but to sup¬ ply her with such comforts, as her age and circumstances might require. tf And God bless him for it !" said old Genifrede ; *' he is, I am sure, a sprig of the old stock ; tor they were all kind and charitable, and though I have never seen him, he deserves, I will say it, all he has got ; and may he live bug and enjoy it !" " I hope he will," said Adelaide, " both for your sake and his own/' In the зава« suite with the chamber in which Adelaide slept, was a roam with an oriel window, which commanded a beautiful view of the motu« tains, and of the distant waters of the Mediterranean* It contained furniture sufficient to ren¬ der it completely comfortable, and this Genifrede proposed should be Adelaide's apartment..
apartment, " It was my dear lady's morning sitting-room/' said she, " and shall, i r you please, be yours. I will see first, however, that it be well aired, and the dust rubbed off the furniture; and there you may sit, Ma'amoiselle, when you wish to be by yourself, though I fear you will find it very lonesome and solitary." Adelaide admired this apartment, and Genifrede, eager to accommodate her with whatever the chateau afforded, opened a pair of folding doors, leading to a little library, which Adelaide per¬ ceived, with pleasure, contained seve¬ ral volumes of books, some of which were by the best French and Italian authors. These were indeed a treasure; and Adelaide gladly accepted Geni- frede's offer of appropriating this apart¬ ment,
ment, which, for comfort and conve¬ nience, seemed superior to any she had yet seen.
CHAP,
CHAP. XX. In the course of a few hours, Jarmette, Jacques's sister, who had heard of his ar~ rival, came to welcome him, and brought a present of fruit to Adelaide, who, re¬ ceiving every instant fresh testimonies of the kindness and disinterested benevo¬ lence of her new friends, felt a degree of tranquillity she had been long unused to. With her story they were only par¬ tially acquainted. All "they seemed to have undersiood was, that she had been unfortunate, and had fled from persecu- $ tion,
tion, but of what kind they were left to imagine. During her continuance at Madame St. Clair's, Adelaide, as it will be remembered, had changed her name, and taken that of St. Clair. It was now necessary that she should assume another, as by that of St. Clair she might be known and traced to her present place of coib cealment, should De Launé, as was but too probable, attempt to pursue her. She therefore resolved to take that of D'Ainville, the name of the family of Madame St. Angouléme, her supposed mother. She imparted this resolution to Jacques, who had ordere to introduce and speak of her as Mademoiselle D'Ain¬ ville, and preserve the strict silence he had hitherto maintained, relative to her real circumstances and connexions. JĽiery possible attention was paid to Adelaide
Adelaide by the faithful Cenifrede ; and nothing was omitted which could contri¬ bute, however slightly, to her comfort and satisfaction. Her repasts were sim¬ ple, but they were wholesome and neat* ]y prepared, and presented with a wel¬ come so hearty and sincere, as would have rendered even the coarsest meal delight¬ ful. The apartments allotted her were made clean and comfortable, and the furniture so arranged as to be conducive to every purpose of convenience. t( In that set of drawers, Ma'amoiselle," said Genifrede, pointing to a large old cabi¬ net with an escrutoire, in the corner of her chamber, if you may lay your clothes. But where are they, Ma'amoi¬ selle ? for now I think of it, I saw no bundle. But here are some of my poor lady 's
lady*s things, which she left behind her, dear soul, when she went abroad, little thinking she should come back no more, and they will fit you, Ma'amoisellej to a tittle; for she was tall, like you, and had just such a sweet shape. -■* What,* says I to the steward, ' must be done with my lady's clothes ?* ( I don't know, Geni- frede/ answered he ; ' you may keep 'em, or sell 'em, for my master won't inquire about 'em/ * I'll never sell 'em/ says I, * for that won't be shewing res¬ pect to my lady; and as to wearing 'era, how I should look in those rich suits of silk and velvet, and those fine gold and silver trimmings, that my lady used to wear at court !' So you see, Ma'a moi¬ selle, you may use 'em while you are here." f With this she opened the drawers о the
the cabinet, and drew from thence two full-dress suits, one of rich silk brocade, the other of dark green velvet, ornament¬ ed in the manner she had described, with three or four undress suits of plain silk r several changes of linen* and sotfte ©ther articles of dress, which, sh& said, had laid there ever since her lady left the cha A tou, which was now itìore man ten years ago· " Take what you please, Ma'amoi¬ selle," said she, u and wear 'em, for they belong lo nobody, now my poor dear lady's dead and gone, and I am sure y oil are heartily welcome ; and so she would say herself, God hies·» her, if she was here and saw you wanted 'em." There was .a degree of generosity in · this oifer from the humble Genifrede, and in her refusal to dispose of the clothes»
property of her beloved mistress, a re- * finement of attachment, if we may be al¬ lowed the expression, seldom to be met with even among persons of the most ele¬ vated stations, which particularly endear¬ ed her to Adelaide ; and though at first, from motives of delicacy, she objected to accept or wear any part of the clothes, yet the urgent pressure of the occasion, and the repeated earnest solicitations of the good old motherly Genifrede, over¬ came her reluctance ; and she consented to select such articles as might be use¬ ful and necessary to her present conve¬ nience. Amongst other things, was a box of crayons, and a port feuille containing several sketcb.es of landscapes, and some highly-finished drawings, which were executed,
executed, she was told, by Madame Montroi, and proved that she possessed a correct judgment, and a highly-cul¬ tivated taste.
CHAP.
CHAP. XXI. Employed in necessary arrangements, supported by hope, and soothed by the kindness of those around her, Adelaide almost ceased to recollect, that, not¬ withstanding every precaution used by Jacques, it was yet possible they might be pursued, and their asylum discovered, by her father and Perouse, who would, doubtless, employ every means they could devise to acquaint themselves with the place of their retreat. The next day, however, and the next elapsed, and no¬ thing
thing transpired to authorize the appre» hension that the pursuit, if they had pur¬ sued them, was successful. When Jannette again appeared, which she did on the evening of the second day after their arrival, Adelaide was struck with the resemblance she bore to some one whom she had seen, though she could not instantly recall the person to her recollection. tf Have you any more grand-daughters ?" said she to Genifrede, who was prescrit when she had made the remark. " Yes ; I have one more, Ma¬ 'amoiselle," rejoined Genifrede, " but she has got a service in Gascony, in the Consera n ce ; and we have not seen her of a long time. She has a rare place on't, I warrant, and h>e wage« ; for her lady, the Countess St. Angouleme, is a noble lady, and-*-—" "The
u The Countess St. Angouléme!" interrupted Adelaide ; ťí is Bertha, the Countess's chief woman, your grand¬ daughter, and the sister of Jacques?" " Aye, marry, that is she," resumed Genifrede; ff doyou know her, Ma'amoi¬ selle?" *' Yes; and do you ever hear from her ?" eagerly asked Adelaide ; for she hoped to learn something relative to her belov¬ ed friend, *'* Seldom, Ma'amoiselle," cried Geni¬ frede, " very seldom; and now, not for a long time ; for its a great way, and cross roads, and very mountainous. Though 1 says to Jacques, says 1, yester¬ day, * Jacques, what if, now you have taken to travelling, you were to make another towr to see poor Bertha ? I war¬ rant the steed vou have <rot would carrv voi., п. !. you
уои as far. For/ says I, * while you re here, though you may pick up a little matter of work in the vineyards, yet as you're out of place now, and when you get into service again, mayn't be at li¬ berty in a hurry—" * ( And oh ! will he go ?—~will he go ?" interrupted Adelaide. " He Baid, Ma'amoiselle, he'd been thinking a little about it himself; and if so be that you had no objection, and would agree that he might have the horse." " The horse ! oh yes, let him go ! let him take the horse. Where is he ? can¬ not ϊ speak to Jacques ?" ( ' He is somewhere about, Ma'amoi¬ selle," said Genifrede ; and she went in search of him. As soon as she was gone, Adelaide, to whom
whom the idea of Jacques's visiting the Castle of St. Angouléme opened an un¬ expected source of joy and com fort, since, as the brother of Bertha, he might easily gain admission to her lady, resolved to send the Countess a little narrative of her misfortunes, tald ng care, however, in her recital, not to criminate the Count, though she resolved, at the same time, to enjoin sccresy as to the particulars she meant to unfold, since, should the Count be informed, or even suspect, that she had written to his lady, and her present place of asylum be known, the most un¬ happy consequences might ensue; for with all the native candour of her dis¬ position, it was impossible for Adelaide not to believe, that the Count w.is an auxiliary in the horrid scheme which had been devised for her ruin, though vet }. 2 there
there were times when she w r as almost in¬ clined to doubt it. Her next resolve was to dispose of the ring given her by her father, as it would afford a sufficient supply for her present necessities, and serve to defray the expences of Jacques's journey into Gascony. As it was necessary, before he could set out, that the ring should be sold, she consulted with Jacques (who readily undertook to go on the intended mission to the Castle of St. Angouléme), about the manner of disposing of it ; and it was agreed that Jacques should, on the following day, visit Aries, and gain directions to some jeweller who might be likely to purchase it. Jacques set off on his errand with glee, at the thoughts of the expences of his journey being thus borne ; and he used such
Such speed, that he returned in the evening, much sooner than was ex¬ pected. ťí Well, Jacques," said Adelaide, who went out into the court to meet him, " what have you done ? have you suc¬ ceeded ? have you sold the ring ?" "Why no, Ma'amoiselle, not sold it," said Jacques; " not to say sold it." iC Not sold it !" interrupted Adelaide ; ff what then, my good fellow, have you done with it ?" Jacques gave a long and circumstantial account of his journey ; the substance of which was, that on arriving at Aries, he had inquired, and been recommend¬ ed to a jeweller of the greatest respecta¬ bility ; but the master of the shop, for whom he asked, was unluckily from home ; and the person he saw, after exa- L 3 mining
mining it for some time, said he could not buy it till he had shewn it to M. Barreux, who would not be at home for several days. On Jacques's refusing to leave the ring, he offered to lend him a little money upon it ; and after asking a number of questions, which Jacques at first refused to answer, laid down five marks, with a promise that the ring should be valued, and the estimate paid on the return of M. Barrçux, who he dared say, he said, would be glad to pur¬ chase it. " Buí I could not even get him to give me the five marks," resumed Jacques, " though he said it was not a quarter of the value, till I told him your name, and where you lived. When I said you were afe the chateau de Montroi, he said, if you could wait about a month, or so, they
they should have some goods to send that road, and that you should hear from thein; and then he gave rrie a card with an account of things sold in his shop, which he desired me to deliver with Monsieur Barreux's dutiful respects to Ma'amoiselle D'Ainville, who he sup¬ posed, by her living at the chateau, was a relation of the family of the Montrois* and might want something. I wondered, if he believed this, that he should think you would sell the ring ; but 1 thought it was as well he should suppose so, and I did not undeceive him." " You have done your business as well as you could, Jacques," said Adelaide, " and I am much obliged to you. The money you have brought will be suffi¬ cient for our present use ; and when yod return, and we have expended what the ĺ 4 rins:
ring may produce, we will sell the horse, for which we shall then have no further occasion." " True, Ma'amoiselle, and so we may, and I shall easily enough get a chap for that. It would have done your heart good, could you have seen how he was admired yesterday at Aries. Where did you get thathorse ? says one ; a fine horse that is of yours, says another, if it is yours; and then they looked at me and my nag, wondering, I reckon, how I came by it, as well they might ; and then they axed me questions about it, but 1 nodded, and said nothing. A ned, they say, İs as good as a wink to a blind horse." The next day was appointed for Jacques to set out on his journey into Gascony. Adelaide having written to the Countess, gave the letter to his hands,
hands, with orders that he should deli¬ ver it to his sister as soon as he arrived* and that he should give it to her with the utmost secresy, so that nobody but Bertha might know of it. He was cautioned against mentioning her name before any part of the family, except Bertha ; and she desjred him not to tra¬ vel after twilight in the evening, les f he should meet with some of the gang of the banditti. Jacques promised a punctual obser¬ vance of these directions ; and Adelaide having given him money to defray the expence of his journey, bearing with him many presents and good wishes to his sister Bertha, from Genifrede and Jannette, he departed for Gascony.
X.5
CHAP.
· - "™ ľľl ľ —— w—^
CHAP. XXII. Adelaide, who was now assured that if her father had attempted a pursuit, he had certainly mistaken their route, ven¬ tured to ramble from the chateau. She had visited the cottage of Jannette, which exhibited a blooming family of boys and girls, healthy indeed, but not very well clad, who crowded about her, and be¬ ing told she was the lady at the chateau, with an emulation natural to their age, seemed to contend for her notice ; and the
the ready smile, and glowing kiss, repaid their little efforts to please. But her chief amusement was fo in¬ dulge her usual propensity of rambling,, to view the fine scenery of the adjacent country, seldom with any other compan¬ ion than a book ; and indeed the good- humoured civility of the peasantry, to* many öf whom she was known, seemed torender no other companion necessary. She was soon acquainted with all the wild walks of the neighbouring moun¬ tains; and sometimes indulged herself with traversing alone their unfrequented paths> meeting only, now and then, a peasant from the village, or a shepherd with his dog, driving the sheep from the valleys, to graze on the fine herbage of the upper downs. t G Sometimes,
Sometimes, in these quiet excursions, she would seat herself upon a cliff, and meditate on such fancies as past occur¬ rences, or present objects, might suggest; and often would the image of the stran¬ ger she had seen at Auboigne arise in her mind, when tears would start to her eyes, and she would exclaim, u Oh, could I know that he yet lives !" At the chateau, she usually employed herself in reading and drawing, or in as¬ sisting Genifrede in airing and putting in order the apartments. This was an employment of which Adelaide was very fond. She loved to converse with this good-hearted creature, to listen to nar¬ rative old age, and learn the histories of times and persons now no more. Often would she accompany her through
through the gallery where hung the por¬ traits of the family ; and visit the cha¬ pel, where their remains were deposited. In one place, she beheld the blooming knight and beauteous damsel, as re¬ presented by the pencil, in the glow of youth and health ; and in the other the same features, delineated by the statuary, wrought on the monumental marble, fixed and stiffened in death. There, too, the sculptured saints and crucifixes, at which the knee of devotion had so often bowed ; the banner above, in memory of former victories and former valour; the rich escutcheon, the last appendage of expiring pomp ; the painted arch, or crowned with ivy, obtruding through the sh. tered window into the holy edifice, where the bat, forsaking the glare of day, flitted
flitted briskly up and down, what time- the evening cast its sombrous shade, with sublime «oleranity, over the lonely man- lions of 'he dead. Indulging the pensive enthusiasm of her character, she would muse on the melancholy scene, and experience a mournful kind of pleasure in reflecting upon the instability of every human state. * f A few years," said she, ' f a very frw years, and í shall be like one of these, over whose unconscious remains I am now treading. But what may be, ere then, alas ! I know not ! May I in every state adhere to my duty, and submit patiently to the decrees of htm who judges rightly, and being infinite in wisdom as in power, cannot err ! may his law be my guide, and then may 1 trust, and not trust in vain,
vain, that his mercy shall be my protec¬ tion, even through the most mazy and difficult course of life !" The same contemplative turn of mind, and that high sense of religion, which a variety of circumstances had excited in her heart, rendered her peculiarly suscepti¬ ble of whatever was sublime or beautiful in nature, and led her to admire and love the author of nature. Seated in the oriel window of her apartment, she would mark with earnest observation the almost boundless diversity of objects in the prospects before her. Often did she arise to behold the sun emerging from the bosom of the ocean, dispersing the wreathing mists that hung upon the mountain tops, and as often, in rapturous enthusiasm, saw it sink beneath the blue and distant wave«!, to rise and enlighten 5 another
another hemisphere. How beautiful, to behold the rocks tinted with its parting beams, assuming every variety of hue, then fading and softly blending into the uniiorm gloom of night ! Often did she attempt to sketch the scene, and combine tints to express their wonderful and sweet varieties ; and as often resign¬ ed her pencil in despair ; " for who can paint like nature ?"
CHAP r
CHAP. XXIII. One day, while Adelaide was engaged in endeavouring to sketch the contour of a mountain group, whose sublime and .shapeless heights were just emerging from the cloud of mysterious vapour that hung over them, her attention was recal¬ led from the sublimity of the object of her regard, by the sudden entrance of Genifrede, whose looks announced has¬ ty intelligence. Adelaide trembled as she approached, zm\ seated herself, for she thought of her father; the pencil fell from
from her hand, and she faîteringly deman¬ ded whether any one had been at the chateau, or if she had heard anything in the village ? " Oh Ma'amoiselle, the strangest thing ■—the strangest thing has happened ! and yet not very strange neither ; but I am old, and a little thing puts me into a flusker. Been ! yes, somebody has been,- sure enough. Alack, alack, who would have thought of his coming here !" " Has any person been inquiring for me?" resumed Adelaide ; rf if so, oh, let me hide myself/' grasping Genifrede's arm. " Do not, do not say I am here." " Inquiring for you, Ma'amojselle! la, bless you, not a soul ! who should know anything about you ? and as to your hiding yourself, I'm sure there can be no occasion for that, for he's one of the kindest souls alive ! and speaks so prettily
prettily about you, Ma'amoiselle, for I told him you was here." " About me!" echoed Adelaide, in amazement, " about me ! for Heaven's sake, tell me who you are talking about. If it is known I am here, I am undone for ever ! " " La, Ma'amoiselle, why do you put yourself into such a pucker?" cried Ge¬ nifrede. " Undone ! I'm sure he wouldn't hurt a hair of vour head!" " I beseech you," said Adelaide, " be explicit. Torture me not with thjs sus¬ pense ! who is it you have seen ?" " I will tell you, Ma'amoiselle, if yo« will but give me time," said Genifrede ; " but la, how pale you look ! shall I fete you a little water ?" {t Oh no, no, only tell me." ff î wish Monsieur Montroi was here," said
said Genifrede, ír for Vm sure the very sight of him would do von good. Oh, such a shape, and such a leg ! I am old ; but for my own part, never did I see a properer man ! as much like my young master too as he can stare !" " Monsieur Montroi ! ' repeated Ade¬ laide, who now comprehended the pur¬ port of Genifrede's information ; " has. Monsieur Montroi been at the chateau ?" * r La ! have not 1 told you this yet ? Jßecn ! aye ; and he's a gentleman every inch of him, and speaks as free and as pretty to me, as though I were my lady, forsooth !" " But did you tell him I was here?" asked Adelaide; " and will he not think it strangely impertinent in me, who am entirely unknown to him, thus intruding myself beneath his roof? did you expect him,,
hım, Genifrede? for such intelligence would have greatly perplexed me." " Expect him !" continued Genifrede, " no, no more than I expected the man would come out of the moon ! But come he is, that's sure, and what's more, means to stay here some days. And it was up¬ on the upshot of this that I told him you, Ma'amoiselle, was here ; and how it hap¬ pened that you came, as faras í knew, and such like ; .for says I, if he goes prowling about the chateau, and pops upon Ma¬ 'amoiselle, not knowing she's here, it will throw 'em both into a quandary, as she's not a common body ; so after I'd talked to him awhile, I out with it; and so pretty he spoke, hoping you would make what use you pleased of the rooms, and said he was very glad to have it in his power to accommodate you ; and de¬ sired
sired vou would count the chateau as your home, as long as you wished to stay in it. ' Why as to that/ says I, * Ma¬ 'amoiselle wont be at all in your honour's way, for she's for the most part in a room by herself, reading or drawing pic¬ tures, or etse goes wandering amongst the mountains, and is no trouble at all to anybody. W 7 hen I told him who you was, he said he thought he had heard that name ; and then he asked me where you came from. But this I could not tell him ; upon which he looked, I thought, a little surprised, but said no more." " And he ís coming to stay at the cha¬ teau ?" said Adelaide. " Yes : and is to have a bed made up in the suite next yours ; and the stew¬ ard another. GuiJlaume (Jannette's husband Ì
husband) is gone to the market-town for provisions; and Jannette will be here to light the fires, and do a few lit¬ tle matters for me in the evening. Alack- a-day, that he should come in this man¬ ner, and throw us all into heaps !" '* And he is to be here to-night ?" said Adelaide. " Yes, to-night. ' I am come very un¬ expectedly/ said he ; these were his words, ' but 1 want nothing that may not easily be procured.' La bless him ! Said he then, Чата soldier, Genifrede, and have been used to hard fare, and do not, therefore, need delicacies/ and so then he went out, saying he should be back in the evening, when his servant would be with him, who would help to get rea¬ dy his rooms." Adelaide desired Genifrede would con¬ vey
vey a message from herself to Monsieur Montroi, to thank him for his polite oifers of accommodation, which gave her the highest opinion of his benevolence; but desired that Genifrede would not, except on this occasion, even mention her name ; and should he propose to visit the suite of rooms of which hers were a part, she would take an opportu¬ nity to inform her, that she might avoid seeing him. Genifrede, who saw not the propriety of this request, would have persuaded her to alter the resolution she had made of remaining secluded in her own apart¬ ments till Monsieur Montroi should have left the chateau, but she continued steady in her determination; and Genifrcde promised to give her early intelligence, should he intend to visit the rooms. The
The arriva! ot Montroi, who returned according fo his engagement in the even- kig, deprived Adelaide of the liberty she* had hitherto enjoyed. During this her confinement, she received frequent visits from Genifrede, who, delighted with her new master, was always eloqiient in? his praise. His generosity —his manly beauty—and the amîableness of his be¬ haviour, had won her warmest affections ; and she seemed never so happy as when speaking of him. The next day Adelaide was informed that Monsieur Montroi and his steward meant to survey the apartments of the chateau, for the purpose of ascertaining what repairs might be wanting. " I pro¬ mised to tell you, Ma'amoiselle/' said Genifrede ; " but la, if you were once to see him !" vot. ib и ' s That
" That is what I, of all things, wish to avoid," said Adelaide, pensively ; " for how could I see him without accounting for my situation ? and to account for it, under my present unhappy circumstan¬ ces, is impossible." <r Well, Ma'amoiselle, if you will have it so, I will tell you when they are com¬ ing ; but they are to see the other parts of the building first, and Pm to go with them to carry the keys; and this, with riding about the grounds to look over the estale, will take them the best part of the morning." ' f You think, then, they will not be here at present?" resumed Adelaide. * c No, not of several hours; so walk about, Ma'amoiselle, or amuse -self as you can ; they won't see you, «nd 111 P°P
pop up, and tell you wlien I know they are coming." It was not till the evening that Geni¬ frede appeared. " They will be here directly, Ma'amoiselle," said she, is and if you would not be seen, you must go round by the library through the gal¬ lery, and down the back stairs, leading to the servants* hall ; I will meet you there, and let you out at a little door at the end of the passage/* Adelaide hastened to obey these di¬ rections, and Genifrede retired.
END OF VOL. II.
Lane, Darling, & Co. Leadenhall Street.
