Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Barozzi: or, The Venetian sorceress: a romance of the sixteenth century
BAROZZI. ■«»*##^*»#^*^ *****###♦*■** *++*+*+*•+
CHAPTER I. Mysteries. X HE marquis received Marian's billet; the contents at first somewhat shocked him, but he soon recovered Iris spirits, by the reflection tliat she could now no more disturb his peace, if it was pos¬ sible for a heart like his, stained with numerous crimes, to feel peace; but .something hke it dwelt within his breast, vol. ii. b which
which was become impregnable to re¬ morse, and cared for nothing except his riches. He again assumed cheerfulness, mixed witli the gay throng at carnivals and ridottoes, drowning the thoughts of his crimes in large goblets of wine, which he daily quaffed, till hardiness took place of the fears of discovery. Years had now passed away, and no¬ thing occurred to alarm the guilty Augus¬ tino, till having occasion to visit an estate he possessed in a distant province, his carriage broke down in passing through the forest near Pyrano/ Leaving his ser¬ vants at an mn to get it repaired, and by way of beguiling the time, wandering towards the neighbouring valley, its de¬ lightful appearance caused him to survey it with particular attention, and amongst otlier things wMch attracted his notice, was
was the cottage ci De Valmont As he walked to it, he descried among the vines tlie unfortunate noble and his granddaughter. He started; fiar in Ko* salina he thought he beheld the mur¬ dered wife of his brother; and agmn, looking through the hedge which screen¬ ed him from their view, lie was almost eertain, from the wonderful resemblance, that this was the heiress whom he long since thought dead. The pangs of fear once more assailed him, and has¬ tily quitting the valley, he returned to the inn in gTeat perturbation of* mind. Meeting with his hostess (a talkative woman), he asked her if she knew to whom the little white cottage at the end of the valley belonged ? She answered lam, ** Ferrand St Ah iuo." b 2 " How
«* How v long has he lived there ?" He was informal, and found it tallied with the time he had supposed them consumed in the fire. " Is that pretty young lady his' daughter ?" he inquired. u Why, he says so; but when he came here, she was quite an infant But nobody knows who he is, what he is, or from whence he comes. Really I should think him a spy, only that he never has any visitors, or ever receives any letters, for the postman comes to this house, and i always ask if there is any thing for him; for you know, my lord, honest folks ought to be cautious, and upon their guard against suspicious people, and so I always tells my husband; but he, poor silly soul, says as how he thinks him some ruinated gentleman. * Don't tell me,' says I, * about your ruinous gentleman;
gentleman; I know he is no better than he should be;' and I am sure, my lord,* said his loquacious hostess, with a signi¬ ficant nod, " if he was after any good, he need not be always so retired as he is. Howsoever, he is very fond of miss, and teaches her many accomplishments: why, you must know, my lord, that she can play upon the harp Hke any lady; so you may swear they have not always been what they appear to be now." The marquis agreed hi this opinion with his hostess. The carriage was ren¬ dered fit for travelling, and with a dis¬ ordered mind he bade the servant drive back by the road he came, as he should not now prosecute his journey, his mind having changed by the delay he was eompelled to undergo. While on his return, he ruminated on B3 tlie
the wonderful discovery he had made. " Ferhando's child still lives, and should eursed chanfce discover the fotgerj 7 of my letter sent to her mother, she will at last inherit the estates of Barozzi. Con¬ fusion ! I thoifght all the faftrily long since tnnntered With the dust. Are all my stratagem?? proved abortive? slraU niy possessions bfc Wrested from my grasp? Nt>! SdfcrierwfllIinyselfperish. How to |Jri*tefrt it theh ? Why, the sattie braves kill reside in Venice that rid me ©f my hat^d broths it shall be sd; and though all Wiy other measured have failed, their daggers will prove Effective.* Upon his arrival at V^ni^j 1$^ setit to those Wretches tvil© stabbed Per- nando, desiring one of thrift to visit him tliat vfery night, as lit? wished to have some
some private conversation upon a sub¬ ject of importance. His son Rosalva at that time was on a visit at his aunt's, for the better eluding the vengeance of the marchioness Loredo* so he was not fearful of any interruption. Roldon, the chief of the bravoes, came at the close of the evening to the pa¬ lazzo, disguised under the garjb of a gondolier, saying he had business with his excellenza. The porter instantly admitted him, for the marquis had left orders that should any sudi person come he was at leisure. When they were closeted together, Barozzi addressed the bravo as follows: " My brave fellow, you once gave me a proof of your fidelity, in dispatching a man who was become hateful to my B 4 sight;
sight: I now wish to employ you upon a similar occasion. There resides in the valley of Vintagers, near Pyrano, an old man of 1 the name of St. Almo, with his daughter: she. for reasons 1 cannot now explain, I wish you to deprive of life; for while she exists, I never can be hap¬ py, as her offence cannot be forgiven; but you may let the father escape, for 'tis onlv the life of his daughter 1 re- quire; therefore yon need not shed more blood than the necessity of the case jus¬ tifies." " Your lordship is very considerate indeed," said Roldon, at the same time receiving a well-stocked purse, ** and you may depend upon our faithful ser¬ vices, for if her death can afford you any grutificatiou/your lordship may conclude it already done. I swear, when next wc
we meet, my dagger sliall be stained with her life's blood." " Ah," said the marquis, " perform your work, and I wiU double the re¬ ward/' 4 * Your excellenza was ever generous, and I love to be grateful," said the bra* vo. " I will instantly join my comrade Darano; then proceed to the business without delay/' '* Do so, my worthy fellow " return¬ ed the marquis " aud when you have completed it, meet me at the mined ab¬ bey in the forest: send me a billet when you shall be there, and I wiH not fail attending with the additional reward I have promised' Roldon, with a low bow, took lib leave, and joining his iniquitous asso- b3 eiate^.
ciate, they put their hellish purpose in force, as related in the first chapter. After the Villains had escaped from the power of Rosalva* they stopped at the outskirts of the forest, when they thought themselves free from pursuit, for the purpose of consulting how to act, now thev had lost their victim. They at last concluded to meet the marquis, tell him they had fulfilled his orders, receive the remainder of the re¬ ward, and trust to fortune for the rest. They did so, and Barozzi now thought he should be quite secure; but con¬ science, that awful monitor, now began to assail Wm with pangs of horror: his accumulated crimes now rose in terrible army, aild shdok his guilty soul. Ma¬ rian md her infant, his brother, the daughter
daughter of De Valmont, and lastly her child, all flitted before his disordered sight, and loudly thundered in his ear — The hour of retribution must one day arrive. Sleep forsook his couch, or when it did for a moment close liis eyes* hor¬ rid visions presented themselves, from which he would start in agony, and wiping the cold sweat from his trembhng frame, try to sleep again, but in vain: sweet repose never more could be his; remorse and fear alternately smote his guilty soul; that never feeling a mo¬ ment's p£ace, he dreaded to be alone, and scarcely suffered his page ever to be from his presence. At length his spirits were so worn with disquiet days and agonizing nights,. that lie sunk into a profound melan¬ choly. At this time he sent for his. B() SOD
i^on from La Rosa, whose absence lie could no longer bear; yet when he ar¬ rived, Rosalva's society was not welcome as formerly. In tlus perturbed state was the mind of Barozzi when the marcluoncss La Rosa visited him, and brought to tlie palazzo that being he feared more than all the world. His astonishment was on the point of finding vent in words, but he timely checked himself, and upon due con¬ sideration, thouglit he was deceived. His sister sward, RosaFalieri!—"Pshaw! my conjecture was groundless; it is a likeness which first alarmed me, for she <#n never be Rosalina: did not Roldon shew me his dagger stained with her hlood? why, then, am I xveak enough to atart ut a shadow ? Hence all idle,, visionary
visionary fears! my brother^ child no more can blast my sight*' This reflection, added to tive great change in her ap¬ pearance by her dress, silenced his sus¬ picions; yet, when in her presence, they returned with double force, and caused him to regard her with so much scru¬ tiny ; but in spite of all his endeavours to tlie contrary, he still felt the most painful alarm. At length Iris eye, for the first time, caught sight of tlie ring which she continually wore. This cir¬ cumstance confirmed his doubts, for he recognised it on the instant as the late property of Fernando, the initials ot" whose name it bore. Unable to disguise his feelings, he rushed to his chamber, and throwing himself upon a couch, gave way to the following soliloquy ; w Accursed fate! niv
my fears Were not without cause. Tis she! my brother's child still lives. Ro¬ salina St. Almo and Rosa Falieri are bbth one. Damned ruffians, thus to de¬ ceive me! But she must die-^she shall, though my own hand strike the blow— yes, though all the fiends of hell were ____Who's there?" he cried, starting as a footstep sounded near. " Who's. there ?" he repeated. « Tis I, my lord,* said a gentle voice. His favourite page appeared. " Ah, Julio!" said he, catching him by the arm, * how long have you been here ? Did you listen ? Did you over¬ hear me, eh?* '** No, your exeeHenza,'' rephed Julio; *' I heard your lordship's voice, so I thought you eaUed tne * «Indeed!" said the marquis; "I commend
commend your diligence: retire to the antichamber, and rievdr again interrupt my meditations. Wheh I need your attendance, I will summon you hy the bell." Julio bowing, said—" I hope my lord is not offended? if my duty is too hold or officious, impute it to my desire of proving attentive." 44 No, my boy, n replied the marquis, u I am not in the least displeased, for I like your attention, wiiich shall not be unrewarded, but at present I am very ill at ease, therefore leave me." M I obey, my lord," said Julio, with a low bow; u but would your lordship vouchsafe to grant me a favour?" * Name it, Julio." The page continued—" My mother is very ill, and wishes to see me; would your
your excellenza allow me to go tomor¬ row evening, after I Imve attended you, to prepare for the mask 2" " Yes; you may go, and stay------" " How long, my lord ?" eagerly ins- quired Jidio. " Why, three days." ** Oh! thank you, my dear lord!" said Julio, leaving the room, astonished at this permission so easily obtained. In truth, this indulgence did uot proceed from good-nature on the part of the marquis but he thought he woukl get rid of one wii» (though very diligent, Lo^sossed great shrewdness and cunning) lie thought might be an observer of his actions while arranging his plan for th? disposal of Rosalina, and which might be done effectually in the time he al¬ lowed the page to be absent. Barozzi
Barozzi then stroye to disguise his uneasiness between a v$|l of the utmost cheerfulness, and on tlie evening of the mask he was in high spirits, by having recourse to his usual friend, the wine- flask; hy repeated draughts, he grew exhilarated; this caused him to be so full of raillery with Magdalena the sor¬ ceress, but he dared not consent to her proposal. Conscious of his guilt, he felt a degree of awe at her presence, though a moment's reflection proved it ridicu¬ lous to be in dread of a character at a masked ball; and on her departure, he was again all life, having at various times received assistance from the flow¬ ing goblet, as he was seated but at a short distance from Rosalma, on wiiom, at intervals, he cast glances of deep and terrible meaning, though unnoticed by I every
every one, except that all-seeing eye who views and reads the guilty deeds and thoughts of sinful man. When the marquis retired for the night, he revolved on various methods for the seizure and destruction of Rosa¬ lina, but was unable to flit on any ex¬ pedient, for he had no sooner determin¬ ed on one mode as feasible, than it was the next moment rejected as dangerous and uncertain. Agitated with fear, he started up, ex¬ claiming—*" Why should I shed more bldod?—let me desist. Foolish ideal she must inevitably die, or else I have only gained my dearly-purchased ho¬ nours to lose them at last; for that ring may be recognised by others as well as myself, and lead to a discovery of the whble. Accursed thought! must I then behold
beliold my son stripped of title—of wealth—a very beggar? No—sooner will t perish in the attempt of crushing this detestable worm that rises banefully to my sight, and blasts m* %\ ith her pre¬ sence. Ye ministers of hell, aid me to achieve this important act, and for the rest I fear not!" A hollow moan murmured in his ear, and instantly timiing, he beheld at his side the mysterious mask. " Merciful powers! who art thou ?" he cried, in fearful accents. " Thy friend, Barozzi, and tlie gene¬ ral friend of all, who, like thee, are steeped in blood." " All! what meanest thou, stranger? Beware of what you say. Ivnowest thou to whom you speak ?" said tire marquis. " To wiiom! hrt, ha* ha! why, td the marquis
marquis di Barozzi. Is not that one of your titles ?" He tremblingly replied—" It is. n ** Is that the only one which distin¬ guishes you from your fellow-beings? No, you have a superior title, for by it you have a claim to tbe friendship of the sorceress Magdalena!" " Ah! what is that ?" said he. " Why, one that sounds sweeter— oh! sweeter far—that of murderer!" She then seized his hand, and looking in his face with a ghastly smile, while he shrunk back with terror, thundered in his ears—" Homicide! fratricide! these are the titles of Barozzi 3" He sunk trembling into a chair, and with a voice scarcely articulate, said— " Who art thou, mysterious being ? from whence do you come ?" " Have
«' Have I not already told you wiio I am ? did we not meet before to-night in the garden, but you refused to hear me? so I sconied to intrude, therefore waited till I was summoned to your pre¬ sence." " Summoned !" repeated he ; %i by whom ?" " By yourself." " By me! 'tis false!" 4k Nay, Barozzi, you forget yourself; be not ungrateful for my prompt atten¬ tion ; did you not call to your aid the ministers of hell? then behold in me one of those demons you invoked, or, at least, one of their favoured servants." " Oh, Heaven !" said the marquis, ** w T hat will become of me ?" " Nay," said she, "call not on Hea¬ ven ; wretches like thee have nought to' hope
hope for there. If you hope for assis¬ tance, call ever, as you did, on the in- fernals of hell, thy proper deities—nay, fear not, for you are sunk in sin beyond all power of redemption. Then glut on, steep your hands still deeper in blood, and satiate thy sanguinary desires, for nothing now can increase your crimes —Rosalina must die." " Ah!" said he, ** thou knowest my very thoughts." " Aye, and the thoughts of all men; but what say you? Shall Rosalina fall?" " Slie shall, I am resolved," replied the marquis, * b Tis well; then meet me at the ruin in the forest tomorrow, at tlie hour of midnight; there thou shalt behold her. Trust not again to mortals—they Will betray you; seek alliance with higher
*
higher power than bravoes, and all thy wishes shall be accomplished." The marquis said—-" Why at the ruin ? 'tis the retreat of robbers." '* Barozzi, fear not, for Magdalena shall protect thee from all harm; there¬ fore, speak, will you attend?*' said she. « I will," answered the marquis; " and for vour assistance, name wiiatever re- ward you------" " Reward!" said she, interrupting him; " weak man! think you immortals want gold! them I serve and please by this my attention to you. Barozzi, name not rew r ard, but attend." Thus saying she waved her w T and, and passed through the portal, leaving the marquis standing in silent amaze¬ ment. Taking courage, he followed, but he had lost sight of her; and re-
turning, exclaimed*— u 'Tis well! I now" am allied with ministers of hell, wiio will aid me in my schemes: witli such powers can I foil? no. Rosalina dies* and the stem wiiich sprung from the Uee 1 had before crushed shall follow its parent stalk. Barozzi, rejoice! thy vic¬ tory is complete; 1 shall conclude my life, in the world's eye, with honour; and when the grave has enclosed me, I fear not a world to come. Yet the mysterious spirit says there is a hell. If there should be! there must—there is! Oh, Merciful Powers! what will be the wretched Augustino?"' " A fiend T replied a hollow voice. He started with horror; his glazy eye wandered round the apartment, in search of the unknown who had answer¬ ed Irinu Ko traces of a human being met
met his sight, and he endeavoured to persuade himself it was the effect of fan¬ cy. 4i Surely I am not haunted and tortured hy devils in this world! yet it mounded so hollow, so sepulchral, that it alarms my very soul. I would the page were here! I am afraid to be alone. To what a miserable state am I reduced by guilt! Guilt! oh, then, let me not plunge still deeper! Rosalina shall not die. Yet, curse on my waver¬ ing, unstable thoughts, she must. Rouse thee, Barozzi, and let her sink to dust ? Yet she is innocent! but not the less dangerous. Oh, conscience! conscience! why dost thou plead for her strongly— thou who wert silent on the death of her father ? I cannot hope for pardon: I cannot even pray for it. Oh, if I were but once again innocent, I woidd not Am. n. i hotter
barter my soul for the worth of empires! but, alas! 'tis in vain; I cannot return, but must go farther in sin to secure the cursed wealth for which I sold my peace. The sorceress called me * ho¬ micide ! fratricide!' I am, I am! Ma¬ rian—her child—my brother—all, all rise up against me, and curse me as their destroyer! Then why should I pause at one more crime?" Rosalina must fall, and ensure my safety. I will live, and still will be the same in every thing—fearless of the future, and regard¬ less of tlie past"
CHAP-
CH ?TEIt II Horrors oftJte Ruin. After tlie departure of Rosalva, the marchioness and Rosalina entered into a con versation concerning the events that had transpired at Venice, but what most excited their interest was the sub» ject of the mysterious mask. • k Doubtless," said the marchioness, *' that strange being is acquainted with many important circumstances of infi¬ nite concern to you, my child. But .who the foe can be, of whom she bid c 2 you
you beware, I have not the most distant idea. I know not how anv one can be your enemy: surely, if they were ac¬ quainted with the excellence you pos¬ sess, they would forbear their malice, and cease to persecute you," " Ah, marchesa, my kind benefac¬ tress," answered Rosalina, " your good opinion of me I prize beyond the world, and should be alone sufficient to make nie happy; but I am not born for peace; I never ean be at ease, but must ever dread impending danger. Would I w^ere in my grave, free from the inve¬ teracy of those who thirst for my blood! Oh, had I died wiien my poor father fell, I had been freed from this calami¬ tous world, and followed my parents to eternal rest." " IJush, hush! jny child," said the marchioness;
marchioness; " do not repine or mnr- mur at the decrees of Providence; per¬ haps you are reserved to be a blessing to mankind, and triumph over your enemies. My dear girl, did you never hear your father mention or hint that he dreaded the malevolence of any one ? Do you suspect any one ?" ** Ah, madam, I do suspect indeed; but should I be WTong, I never can for¬ give myself; and yet I think——" " Well, wiiom do you imagine ? what is the name of him you suspect ?" said the marchioness, with impatience. " Ah, lady ! if I thought you would not be offended, if I thought you would acquit me of being——" " For Heaven's sake!" said the mar¬ cliioness, trembling without knowing why; " I promise not to be offended; c 3 so
so no longer keep me in suspense, I be* seech you." *' Why, then, my lady, I tliink it is ------1 mean, I doubt——I fear it is the marquis di Barozzi." " Rosalina, wiiat mean you ? my brother ?"' " Pardon me, dear madam; forgive me; but really his looks made me tremble; hideed I know not whv or wherefore, but I always was uneasy in liis presence; hut perhaps I wrong his meaning when he gazed on me with such particular earnestness." ; ~ The marchioness became excessively uneasy; lier pride was aroused by the observations and remarks Rosalina had made upon her relative; yet she could not help thinking the same: again she thought it impossible that Barozzi could have
have any pique against the daugh¬ ter of St. Almo. Various conjectures now succeeded each otlier, but all in vain, for the more she endeavoured to find some reason for his remarkable con¬ duct, the more she was lost in a laby¬ rinth of doubt and surprise. Her reverie was suddenly interrupt¬ ed by one of the servants, who, with a look of fear, said four men in masks were riding towards the carriage, and he supposed them to be banditti, for they w r ere armed with cutlasses and car¬ bines. The marchioness was terribly alarm¬ ed at this intelligence, but not wishing to intimidate others, she attempted to assume a degree of fortitude, and said to the servant—" Fear not, good Carlo; perhaps plunder is their only aim; if c 4 so,
so, we will yield our purses freely, with which, no doubt, they will be satisfied." Rosalina sunk back in a swoon : the dread of more than robbers took from her the power of moving. One of the ruffians advancing towards the driver, put a pistol to his head, and bade him stop, at the peril of his life; an argument so forcible the man thought best to obey. In the meanwhile, another rode up to the window of the carriage, when the marchioness putting forth her hand, pre- sented a well-stocked purse, wiiich the ruffian as readily accepted. She then thought he would have suffered them to proceed, but to her great terror he opened the door, and forcibly seized the person of the almost lifeless Rosalina. The marchioness uttered a loud shriek,
shriek, and bade them forbear—** Afc, villains!" said she, " is it the life of this helpless girl you seek ? oh, spare her! spare her! suffer us to proceed, and I promise to rew r ard you. Tell me who is the wretch that employs you ?" They made her no answer, but in spite of shrieks, tears, threats, and en¬ treaties, they seized the almost inani¬ mate form of Rosalina, which thev placed on a horse, and galloped off with speed towards the forest. The marchesa beheld their departure with agony. The servants, whb were not prepared to act on the defensive against ruffians so well armed, w T ere thunderstruck; and Paulina, who, till this occurrence, had been in a sound sleep, for the pleasures of the fete had prevented her from reposing the pre* c 5 ceding
ceding night, as she thouglit it a pity to close her eyes, and lose the opportunity of beholding so many fine sights, w r ring- ing her hands, rent the air with shrieks; but whether her grief was real or feign¬ ed, we cannot ascertain, as she was well gifted with finesse, which she often practised with great success. Thrice did Carlo ask his lady whether they should proceed, before she w r as capable of replying: at last, to his re¬ peated question, she said—" Return to Venice." *' Return ! did your excellenza say ? r " Yes, return, and drive as fast as pos¬ sible." ♦ 6 We will, your excellenza," said the man, who could not conceive how re¬ turning could do any good; therefore, l^ain approaching the carriage, said— "My * »
" My lady, it is impossible for the horses to perform it without baiting; really they are quite unable: we are not more than a league from the inn wiiere your excellenza proposed to rest for the night; therefore, if I might venture to advise, we had better drive there and procure fresh horses, or let those liave a sufficient bait ere we return/' To this reasonable argument the mar¬ chioness could not object, so bid him proceed to the inn, from whence she was determined to return immediately io Venice, for the purpose of acquaint- in^ the marquis, and observe the changes that might be made in his countenance, or, by other concomitant circumstances* learn if there were any truth in her sus¬ picions. In the mean time, poor Rosalina was c 6 hurried
hurried in a state of insensibility, from wiiich she did not recover till the shades of evening overcast the light day. On opening her eyes, she found she was placed before a rough-looking man on horseback: she gave a loud shriek, on wiiich the ruffian bade her be silent, or it would be worse for her. " Oh Heavens !" said she, . " what will become of me ? what have I done to he thus treated ? where do you in¬ tend to take me? is it to------ *' The marquis Barozzi, she would have said, but the words faltered on her lips. " You will see that anon," sakl ano¬ ther ruffian, that rode near her side; ~* but I promise you no injury sliall be offered to vou, if you will suffer us to •conduct you uninterrupted; but if by screaming, or any other method, you make
make any alarm, to excite a rescue, we will dispatch you on the first attempt; therefore, be silent, and you will not receive the least harm." Rosalina, finding no other alternative. acceded to the bravo's injunction, and suffered herself to be conducted in si¬ lence, while the robbers halted towards the ruin, where they shortly afterwards arrived, and stopping at its entrance. one of them shrilly sounded a whistle. which was answered bv another. Some person then came and gave them admit¬ tance. The first sight of this lonely and de¬ caying fabric caused the heart of our heroine to sink with fear; and wl.er. the gate, which grated on its rusty hinges, closed upon her, she thought she had entered
entered her sepulchre. The ruffians set her down in the hall, and w ithout speak¬ ing a word, departed, leaving her entire¬ ly alone. " Merciful God!" said she to herself, " wherefore am I brought hither ?" A stream of light glimmered through the place. " Ah, here comes my murderer !" She trembled ; her heart heat violently. The door unclosed, when, instead of an assassin, a female entered the place. who, gently taking her hand, led her into an adjoining apartment, and bade. her be of good cheer, for shr had nothing to dread. Rosalina knew not what to make of this reception, wiiich was opposite to what she expected. Falling on her knees, she besought her conductress to inform
inform her of the purpose for which she had so forcibly been dragged to that ru¬ inous place. " For your own good," answered the woman ; " therefore, fear nothing, and be composed; but come, take some re¬ freshment," added she, " and after you have supped, I will shew you to your chamber/' * k My chamber !" said Rosalina. sur¬ veying the place; " I had much rather remain with vou/' " Well," said the woman, at the same time laying some wine aud provisions on a table, " you shall do as you please: but come, cat, for doubtless you are hungry." M I am but little desirous of food," re¬ plied Rosalina, " yet, since you are so kind, I will partake of some," 44 Do,"
" Do," said the woman, " and suffer me to advise you to eat heartily." Rosalina thanked her. but neverthe¬ less ate very sparingly: the agitation of her mind had taken away all appetite. " Come, lady, let me prevail upon you to take a cup of wine; it will greatly relieve your spirits," said the woman, at the same time filling a goblet. Rosalina complied, and drank off a great part of it. The liquor contained a -soporific infusion, the influence of whose lethargic powers was soon felt, for, in spite of all her efforts to the con¬ trary, she sunk into a deep and profound sleep. In this state she was conveyed by the woman to the magic chamber, and it was she whom Rosalva saw extended on the bed. The
The marquis soon after arrived, and was, by the same woman, conducted through several dilapidated apartments to the presence of her mistress, the sor¬ ceress, who, on beholding him, said— " Barozzi has not failed, then ? 'tis well. Come, are you prepared to see Rosalina bleed?" " Why, is she here ?" said he, in surprise; " she left the palazzo this morning early, and I concluded that by tliis time she was near La Rosa." " Shallow mortal! did I not tell you she should be here to-night ? She now lies buried in an enchanted sleep, from wiiich she shall never wake more. Come, marquis," said she, seking his hand, %r draw forth your poniard, and lend it to me, for with that shalt thou see her die." The
TJi£ marquis hesitated, when snatch¬ ing the glittering weapon from his gir¬ dle, she said—" Coward ! what! vou never dare murder but by proxy! Fol¬ low me, then, and see my hand strike the blow—see thy dagger pierce the heart of Rosalina." " Oh, hold l P said he, " I conjure thee hold! I have reflected on the dt^ed, and I must own my conscience revolts at the bare idea." " Conscience! ha, ha, ha! Barozzi's conscience! where was thy conscience wiien you fired the dwelling of her mother ? where, w'hen you assassinated Fernando? wiiere, when you seduced Marian ? where, when vou knew of her poverty, yet relieved it not ? where, when her infant and yours perished with famine mid disease ? and, lastly, wiiere was.
was it wiien the aged De Valmont sunk beneath the dagger of the bravo ? All these crimes of bloody murder are writ¬ ten in characters of fire; and oh, you fiends of hell, who keep the flaming re¬ gister, say you that Barozzi has still a conscience /" A loud laugh, or rather fiendlike yell, finished this enumeration of his offences* wiiile Barozzi stood almost petrified with horror, fear, and remorse; wiien suddenly snatching the dagger from the hand of the hag, he exclaimed— " Though I am guilty of all those crimes, I will not add to tlie black cata¬ logue the murder of Rosalina; there¬ fore give ber to me, and in a convent she shall spend the remainder of her days." " Never," said she. " Consent to this deed*
deed, or beware how you provoke me by a refusal. Beware, I say, for if you re¬ fuse, Rosalina shall to-morrow claim her lawful rights—the titles and honours of Barozzi." ** Damned fiend of hell!" exclaimed the marquis, " wiio thus stands in evi¬ dence of my guilt, if thou art more than mortal, I cannot hurt thee, but if not, why, then, this to thy heart!" Thus saying, he aimed a heavy blow at her breast; but it was of no effect, for it was as impregnable as iron. The dagger instantly fell from his hand, while a horrid yell of triumph and ex¬ ultation burst from the pale livid lips of the hag, who, catching him by the arm, said—" Well, marquis, are you now convinced of my power? nay, tremble not—be not dismayed; I do not
not blame you, for who would not hke you, fear, and wish to extirpate, a being hke myself, who is so well acquainteil with your crimes ?" In a commanding voice, she bade him follow. He, as if compelled by some hidden power, obeyed, leaving the dag¬ ger behind on die place where it had fallen, and where shortly after it was found by Rosalva. The sorceress led him through innumerable cells, and va¬ rious apartments; often stopping, and dancing in mystic circles, with strange gestures, and frequently sent forth hor¬ rid and discordant yells, till she arrived at the door of the magic chamber, when stopping, slie told him he would now behold Rosalina. The marquis again named his wish of immuring her in a convent; but she was inflexible,
inflexible, and entered the room, when the dialogue ensued which was over¬ heard by the wondering and dumb¬ founded Rosalva; when this noble youth, unable to hear more, and forgetting all precaution, heedlessly leaped into the apartment. The feelings of the different par¬ ties may be better imagined than de¬ scribed. The sorceress fixed her eye earnestly upon the intruder—the marquis stood aghast, confounded and dismayed, for there was not a being on earth from whom he would have concealed his crimes more than he would from his son. Turning to the sorceress, he ex¬ claimed—" Damned witch of hell! hast thou conjured up this boy to be a wit¬ ness of his father's infamy ?" The wretched woman answered— « No!
44 No! neither am I acquainted with the means by which he gained admittance; but, rash mortal,* added she, and turn¬ ing to the youth, " if you would avoid my vengeance, instantly be gone." " Never!" said he, impetuously. ** My father, my father, oh God! is he a murderer ? Is my fether a murderer ?" " He is," said the hag, with a ghastly smile, ** a bloody murderer!" " Oh, powers of bliss! do I hear aright? My lord, refute this charge, or again blast my ears with the confession of your guilt." " Presumptuous boy!" said the mar¬ quis, " be gone ! hasten home, and for¬ get what thou hast heard, or I will pu¬ nish thy disobedience." " No!"-replied Rosalva, with manly dignity, « I will not be gone. I will not
not quit this spot till the mysterious conversation I overheard be explained. Who is Rosalina, that you should fear her ? This witch says she will inherit the titles and honours of Barozzi. What are her claims ? oh, tell me, father, I beseech yon, tell me P Tlie marquis's eyes rolled in frenzy; he bit his lips, but replied not. " You called her the daughter of Fer¬ nando! who is this Fernando?" " Your uncle ! your murdered uncle, Fernando di Barozzi!" said the hag, in a hollow tone. •• Oh God! murdered! by wiiom ? name him, and let me be cursed at onee r ft The'marquis advanced towards the hag, in a threatening posture, to forbid her replying. "Nay,
"Nay, speak," said Rosalva; " but you need not—I read it in your looks of horror; and can a wretch hke you— a fiend who so thirsts for the innocent blood of Rosalina, feel pain at the sight of a fratricide?" He shuddered, and supporting himself against tlie bed, said «—" Leave me, marquis; let me not curse a parent; for, oh God ! thy sight is hateful to me; a murderer!—my fa* ther a murderer!" The frenzied marquis darted upon him, and seizing him by the throat, ex¬ claimed—" Villain ! darest thou tax me with iny crimes? darest thou call my actions in question? Thou serpent! twas for thee 1 plunged my soul in sin— for thee 1 became what I am, to procure thee wealth and honours, and thou, base mgrate as thou art. hat est me for it." voi. ii. n Rosalva
Rosalva replied—" Here, my lord, here is your dagger; I found it within the w r alls of this dismal ruin, and which I searched in hopes of rescuing, or to save you from danger, not expecting to find you plotting with fiends of hell against the life of the most innocent and most lovely of beings. Take it, my lord—take it—and if you have pity, plunge it to my heart, for that moment you injure the precious life of Rosalina, I will follow, though my own hand shall strike the blow. Take it, marquis, and bury it my bosom, for I am weary of existence." The marquis quitted his hold, and said—" Well, then, she shall not die, but spend her days in the confines of a monastery." " What! would you imprison her— bury
bury her within a gloomy convent—en¬ tomb her alive ! No! give her to my care, and let me convey her in safety from this infernal dwelling, and I will never name yon more, but quit my native land, to wander in distant climes, an exile never again to return." At this moment Rosalina awoke from her sleep, the somniferous draught having nearly expended its power, to* gether with the disturbance in the apart¬ ment, which contributed in arousing het from lethargy. Starting from the bed, she beheld the surrounding objects with terror and dismay. " Oh, Virgin, save me," she cried, " for I am betrayed, and sold to destruction !" She clung to the sorceress, and in supplicating accents, cried— st Oh, don't kill me! I beseech you, in pity, spare my life!" D 2 The
The hag turned her head, for she eould not look in her innocent face; wiiile Rosalva, almost wild with asto¬ nishment, gazed on this wondrous scene. ** She shall not harm thee, lovely maid," said he, " for I will be thy safeguard, I, Rosalva, who once before had the liappiness of being the instrument of thy preservation, and who now stands forth as thy champion ; therefore, fear not, for no one shall injure a hair of thy head, without feeling the effects of my vengeance. I love yon, lady—fondly love you; no other shall ever be Ro¬ salva's bride, and Rosalina shall possess the honours of Barozzi." " Degenerate boy !" said the marquis, *' what is it I hear ? will you take to your arms a beggar?" 44 You forget yourself, my lord" re¬ turned
turned the youth; " slie is the lawful daughter of your brother—your elder brother. If Rosalina cannot accept my proffercd love, I will become lier advo¬ cate, proclaim her consanguinity to the world, place her in possession of all those honours which are her right by birth and title, regardless of the shame and ignominy that must overwhelm both you and me." " You will! degenerate viper, yon will! but III prevent your heroic in¬ tent," said the marquis, rushing toward* Rosalina, with his hand uplifted, for the purpose of plunging his dagger in her breast, when Rosalva, his body sud¬ denly interposing, received the weapon in his own, which laid him prostrate. The guilty parent staggered, and throwing himself by the hodv of his d 3 son,
son, beat his head against the floor in frantic desperation. The sorceress seizing the hand of Ro¬ salina, dragged her from the room. " Oh, he is dying !" said the wretched girl; " he is dying) and for me! Oh Heaven! till now, I did not know I loved ham,. Oh, Rosalva! dear Rosal¬ va ! thy Rosalina soon wiU follow thee : and you, mysterious woman/' said she to the sorceress, who still dragged her along, " you once warned me of danger, like a friend—ah, was it only to become my betrayer?" " Silence, lady," sakl the hag, in a tone of sympathy, '* i am your friend: fear not, but observe my directions; keep direct along this passage unt'l you find a room on the left. Enter with¬ out dread, for thqre you will find the woman
woman whom you saw before : wait with her until I appear; you then shall be hence in safety, for I swear to be your protectress." Thus \saying, she left her. Rosalina then proceeded according to her directions, but on entering the room, she found not the woman, as she expected. She looked around, and seat¬ ing herself, began to consider whether she should remain, or endeavour to make her escape; when suddenly the door unclosed, and a tall spectnd female figure appeared, hearing in her hand a lamp. Unknowing of what she did, Rosalina rushed past, and pursuing lier way through the passage and different turn¬ ings, had the good fortune to reach the hall, when the welcome light of the moon, just issuing from behind a cloud,. n 4 and
and glimmering through the old decay- c d windows, discovered to her gladden¬ ed sight an aperture in one large enough to admit her body. Of this she imme¬ diately availed herself, and pressing through, in a few moments, to her great joy, she found herself in the forest. With hurried steps she fled along till her wearied limbs could no longer sup¬ port her, and sinking with fatigue be¬ neath a tree, she found herself unable of proceeding farther. In the greatest dread of being discovered, and dragged back to the infernal dwelling, she, with an aching heart, waited for the dawn of morning.
cn AT-
CHAPTER III. Turtures of the Guilty. The marquis, to his great joy, found the wound he had given his son was not mortal, he having only fainted through loss of blood. With a palpitating heart he raised him from the floor, and, to his infinite pleasure, he shortly after opened his eyes. Rosalva, by his writhing and sudden snatching of his breath, seemed to suffer greatly from the pain of his wound, but not so much as beholding the room va- d 5 cated
cated by the beloved object of his souk ~-~" Rosalina! Rosalina! oh, where is my Rosalina?" murmured he; " oh, uive me my Rosalina ! n The hae at this moment entered, and applying something styptic to his wound, 4 she, with a large scarf, bound it up. While this operation was performing. he asked her wiiat she had done with Rosalina ? ** She is safe," answered the hag, and casting an expressive eye at the mar¬ quis. " Then you had best keep her so, for by my hopes of mercy, should either of you injure her, the Inquisition shall have cognizance of the same; but, my father, promise not to kill her, or else this wo¬ man shall not endeavour to prolong my wretched life P 44 Silence,
"Silence, my child!" said the mar¬ quis, " arid let eveiy attention be paid to your wound, which was dealt by my mistaken "hand, and I will promise aU you wish. But can you forgive me, Ro¬ salva ?" " Yes," said the youth, ** for wound¬ ing me; but had your dagger met the breast for which it was intended, my bitter curses against the wicked perpe¬ trator should have rung throughout tlris Infernal habitation, mocking the impre¬ cations of the dreadful fiends wiio here perforin their orgies; and oh, those curses would have been pronounced against a father, the author of my ex¬ istence r He now again sunk exhausted, while the marquis, divested of every fear,. ex¬ cept for his recovery, said—" He faints;: ii 6 my
my son! my son! your death will drive me to despair*~oh, how shall I get him conveyed home, for here he will perish for want of assistance ?" 44 Fear not," said Magdalena; " frame but a palpable story to account for your being here when they arrive, and I pro- mise that you shall quickly have atten¬ dants to lend you aid, in which I will prove to you the potency of my skill." Thus saying, she left the room, while Barozzi remained in anxious expec¬ tation of their appearance. So convin¬ ced w r as he of the hag's power, that he doubted not her w r ord; and she proved herself as potent as he expected; for in less than an hour, Julio, his page, entered the apartment, accompanied by tivo woodmen. " How wonderful!" exclaimed the marquis;
marquis; " Julio, bear up signor Rosal¬ va ; then tell me by what means you knew of my being here ? n " By means most truly strange; but you shall know aU anon," said the page, nodding significantly ; ** let my young lord be carried home, then your excel¬ lenza shaU hear the whole." Barozzi %vas silent, while the wood¬ men, placing Rosalva on a litter brought for that purpose, bore him away. He then followed in company with Julio, to whom he said— 4 * Now, youth, tell me how you knew of our being here, and how you came to be so ready, for I gave you permission to be absent three days ?" " Why, my lord, methought some¬ thing haunted me, and I could not rest easy
easy in the cottage of my mother; so I set out for the purpose of returning to the palazzo. When passing, with this intent, by the edge of the forest, on a sndden a strange woman appeared to me, who said-—' Julio, your young lord lies wounded in the ruin, almost at the point of death; haste, and take with you assistance to bear him to the pa¬ lazzo.' She instantly vanished, while I stood amazed, and unknowing how to act, or whether to credit it or not, for I scarcely could be persuaded but that I was in a dream. At last it struck my thoughts that my not being able to rest at home was a presagement of the evil which had been communicated to- me in so strange and wonderful a man¬ ner ; so I went to a hut and procured those
those two woodmen to come to your assistance, in the hopes of being hand¬ somely rewarded." " They shall," said the marquis, " and you, good Julio, too, shall be recom¬ pensed for your fidelity." " Oh, my dear lord," said the youth, ** name not that, for the pleasure I fed in thinking I have rendered you assis¬ tance is, of itself, more than a sufficient reward: but say, my lord, how came you into this horrid place, and how came my young lord so terribly wound¬ ed?" The marquis felt greatly embarrassed by this inquiry, but endeavouring to put a good face on the matter, said— * fc I and my son having passed out day in the neighbourhood, late in the even¬ ing took a stroll in this forest; but we wandered
wandered so far, and night coming on, we were unable to find oiu* way back. At last we happened to discover this ruin, which we thought was inhabited, and knocking at the gate, for the pur¬ pose of requesting shelter for the night, when we were instantly surrounded by robbers, wiiom we endeavoured to rcxsist, and in the scuffle Rosalva received the wound which you see." " Well, that is good," cried Julio. "What is good?" said the. marquis, surprised at this exclamation. * % Why, did not your lordship say that you and signor Rosalva walked in¬ to this forest ?" *' Yes," answered the marquis; " why do you ask ?" " Because, my lord, yonder, tied to a tree, is the steed which my lord Rosalva ffeneralJv
generally rides; from that, any one would suppose that the signor came alone; but perhaps the witch who sent me with the woodmen, at the same time sent the horse, on purpose to carry my young lord." A sarcastic smile crossed liis features, and a look of meaning glanced from his eye, as he unbound the animal, and led it to the confounded marquis, wiio now had no doubt that this was the method by which Rosalva came to the ruin, though he had before attributed it to the sorcery of Magda¬ lena. He knew not what answer to make to the shrewd youth, who seemed to enjoy and triumph in his confusion ? therefore he avoided replying, and in .silence proceeded till they reached a gondola, which carried them to the pa¬ lazzo, where medical assistnncc being procured.
procured, the w r ound of Rosalva was pronounced not dangerous, provided a fever did not ensue. This was a cordial balsam to the cbV ordered mind of the marquis, who felt more remorse at this sad event than for all the united crimes he had committed in his life. He never quitted the cham¬ ber of his son, even for a moment, hut nightly watched by his side. At last unfavourable symptoms appeared, and in spite of all the physician's efforts to resist it, a fever ensued, attended with a delirium. Rosalva, in his fits of frenzy, would call upon his father, bidding him be¬ ware of shedding more blood; then he would threaten the sorceress with the Inquisition; then he woidd call Rosa¬ lina bv the name of martyred innocent, to
to the great astonishment of the domes- tics, and confusion of the marquis, who, fearing the incoherent expressions of his son might excite suspicion, undertook the office of attending him solely him¬ self, and strictly forbade any one, except the physicians, approaching the cham¬ ber, so great was his precaution. Guess. then, how r terrible must have been his dismay, wiien the marchioness, on her return, without having her arrival an¬ nounced, or the least ceremony what¬ ever, entered directly the patient's apart¬ ment with abruptness, and seeing him wounded, testified her great surprise; then addressing the marquis in a man¬ ner rather stern, said—- JMy lord mar- chcse, what is the meaning of all this, for I cannot comprehend it? indeed, the complicated events which have so recent! v
recently transpired, utterly confound me. Do you know, my lord, that my ward, Rosa, when on our journey, wa£ forced from the carriage by ruffians, employed, without doubt, by some ene¬ my ? Have you heard any tidings of her?" As she put this question to him, she fixed her eye steadily on the marquis, who turning pale with conscious guilt, faltered out—" I—I—heard of her!— what do you mean by asking me ?" " Nay, my lord, be not offended," said she; " I only thought that nimour miglit have brought you some intelli¬ gence ; nothing more; but I have re¬ turned for the purpose of having the matter properly investigated; for I will employ all the officers of justice in Ve¬ nice, so resolved am I to have her dis¬ covered,
covered, in which, ff I am fortunate enough to succeed, the villainous per¬ petrator of the crime shaU meet the con¬ dign punishment of our laws." Barozzi became agitated; the mar¬ chioness perceived it, and w^as resolved, as soon as her nephew became sensible of her presence, to question him con¬ cerning his hurt, of which she had heard a strange meornprehensible account; neither could she lielp thinking but that it was in some measure connected with the fate of Rosalina. When she had retired to her cham¬ ber, (the same which had before been appropriated to her service,) wiiile tlie physicians visited Rosalva, Paulina, who attended, said—" My lady, what does your excellenza think Julio, the page, told Erasmo ? Why, my lady, he said, that
that an enchantress appeared to hint, and bade him hasten to some ruins in tlie forest we passed, for that my lord marchcse and my lord Rosalva were there; tlie latter she said was expiring : so Julio went and procured some wood¬ men to go to their assistance* How* very strange! was it not, my lady ?" " An enchantress !" said the mar¬ chioness, as the strange character which she had seen at the mask recurred to her mind; " I can scarcely believe it; fetch the page hither; I will question him concerning this affair." Paulina departed for that purpose, when quickly returning, she said Julio had fled from the palazzo, and borne away with him some papers belonging to my lord, who was almost distracted at the loss. " He has also taken," said the
the girl, " a small box, originally the property of the late lord Fernando, in which, I fancy, there are deeds and bonds, and I don't know what; but this I know, that the marquis has dispatched servants every w r ay in pursuit, v/ho have orders to bring him back, either dead or alive." " You astonish me," said the mar¬ chioness ; " but indeed I observed, w^hen I first came here, there was something about that youth wiiich I did not hke; he seemed to pry into every body's actions, and used to fix his eyes so ear¬ nestly upon the poor child who is miss¬ ing, that I almost suspect he had some concern in her disappearance; and yet that is impossible, for too surely she is in the power of more potent enemies than Julio." Thus
' Thus did she canvass this strange af¬ fair, till she again sought the chamber of Eosalva, whom, to her great sorrow and surprise, she found raving on the subject of the wonderful occurrences that had so recently transpired; but from Iris un* connected words she could gather no* thing that might serve to develop the mystery, but only increase her amaze¬ ment. The marquis was compelled to leave the chamber of his son, on account of the great alarm he felt at the absence of the page, and the robbery. The box he knew contained letters, deeds, and documents, of great consequence to his late brother, which he feared might lead to a discovery of his marriage, and other circumstances that he could wish were buried in oblivion; indeed he had often
vften been on the point of examinnig the contents, but w r as deterred by con¬ scious guilt, wiiich, wiien he ever esstiyed to open it, palsied his arm; and as he thought it contained no riches, he de¬ sisted from his attempts. That Julio, of all things else, should take a fancy to this, and leave untouched so many va¬ luables, w y hose intrinsic worth were greatly superior, w r as to the marquis an incident of great astonishment, for he placed such reliance on the boy's inte* grity, that he would have confided any thing to his care. Indeed, the way in which ke met with him, the great in» diligence he received, and the youth's consequent ingratitude, raised in the breast of Barozzi much indignation, and had he been taken while this fit lasted, vol, ih e lie
he doubtless would have sacrificed him to his resentment. The marquis .was now the most wretched Of human beings; he every moment dreaded detection, and each step he heard approaching his apartment he feared were the officers of justice coming to apprehend his person, for he knew the servants had noticed the ex¬ pressions of his son, from which, though very incoherent, a sufficiency might be selected, that would authorize them in laying against him an information upon suspicion of murder. Of this he was well aware, which caused him to pass •his time in the greatest state of agony. The servants lurked about him, regard¬ less of Iris orders, eyeing all his actions. An awful dulness reigned throughout the
the palazzo, except when, at intervals, its silence was broken by the shrieks of Rosalva, whose disorder, however, at the expiration of a few more days, took 3 favourable turn, &nd gave hopes to his afflicted aunt and wretched father. Tlie latter had again ventured to the ruin, which he explored in hopes of discover¬ ing Rosalina; but all was desolate and solitary; no human form met his eye; from which he concluded, she must have perished beneath the poniard of the sor¬ ceress. This he would have reioiced at, but he felt at a loss how to appease his son, whom he knew, soon as his "strength allowed, would make every search for her recovery, and no doubt criminate him, as an accessary in her disappearance. Rosalva now slowly recovered,, and e2 one
one day, when he was able to suppor 1 himself in a chair by the side of th( marchioness, he motioned the attendants to withdraw; then, with a feeble, fa! tering voice, he thus addressed her— *' My dear aunt, did you ever know Fernando di Barozzi ?" " Most assuredly I did; the marehese's eldest brother," rephed she; " why do you ask ? and why have you so often uttered his name? he could never have been known to you." " No; but, my dear madam, he is our sweet Rosalina's father." The marchioness gazed on him, and began to think a return of his disorder caused this strange expression. He guessed her thoughts, but pro¬ ceeding, said—" Pray, madam, how did he die?" "He
" He was assassinated in the forest,'* replied she. " Oh God! do I live to hear it ? Know you who was the instigator of this hellish crime?" His eyes rolled wildly as he asked this. The marchioness replied—" Ko, but it was supposed, as he was never kiiown to have any particular attachment for our sex, that it was to revenge some ne¬ glect or offered slight." " Ah, madam, too surely it was not a woman's work, which Rosalina full w r ell know r s to be true." " Rosalina, did you say ? how should she know r it ? and wiiat did you mean by saying she was the daughter of Fer¬ nando ?" Rosalva now imparted to her all that happened at the ruin. e 3 Tlie
The marchesa, during this recital, Was dumb with horror, and at the conclusion slie clasped her hands together, and eja¬ culated—" Oh, the Virgin deliver us from such sin! but how, my dear ne¬ phew, came you to be wounded ?" He was unwilling to criminate his wretched sire, so answered it was in¬ flicted by the hand of the sorceress. " Indeed! and wiiere is the dear girl all this time ?" " Alas P he replied, " I know not, as to the truth; but my father says she is safe within a convent" He sighed, while the tears found way to his eyes, and cried—" Oh, hapless maid! beloved Rosalina! heiress* to the honours of Ba- rozzi! you shall possess your inheritance, though I become a beggar." " A beggar you c#n never be/' said the
e marchioness; " you know I always garded you as my intended heir, which promise you shall be: but, my dear ?phew, there must be some mistake m tis; Fernando was never married, but ways in a state of celibacy; add to lis, she lived with her father when lie villains sought her, beneath whose aggers he met his death; this is a ontradietion to your account. But en- leavour to compose yoiiFself, and if you ;an prevail on the marquis to disclose ;o you the place of her concealment, my consent shall not be wanting to j^our anion, even w r ere she no other than the daughter of a peasant, but that I am pretty well assured she is not. There is a mystery in the fate of that hapless girl which neither you or I can deve- E 4 lop:
lop: but say, Rosalva, would you take her for your wife V " My wife!" a gleam of joy shot across his pallid face, which was instantane¬ ously succeeded hy a look of the deepest despair, as he uttered, in frenzied ac¬ cents—"Oh God! Rosalina can never wed the son of her father's murderer! the sorceress accused him, and I heard him confess the horrid deed. Would I had died long ere that dreadful night, for now my life will ever be most truly miserable!" The marchioness shuddered, and wiien she quitted the apartment, gave to the marquis notice of her intention to leave Venice immediately, which she did, without even seeing him. So great was her disgust towards him, that she never again
again could endure his sight; but she left a billet for Rosalva, entreating hun, as soon as his strength would permit, to follow her to La Rosa, The marquis felt the full force of this slight, which he attributed to its real cause, his becoming the object of her sus¬ picions. His life now was become truly burdensome, and had he possessed worlds, he would have freely given them to re¬ cal his crimes; but, as this was impossi¬ ble, he was determined to meet the issue, let the event be what it woidd, with firmness. Of this he soon stood in need, for in a few davs after he was cited to appear at the bar of justice, to answer to a charge laid against him for committing murder on the person of his brother, Fernando di Barozzi. e$ CHAF.
CHAPTER IV. The Hospitable Shepherds. Rosalina lay in agony, till the rising sun, tinging the tops of the trees with its golden rays, announced the new-born day. She arose, but knew not what course to pursue, or whither to fly for assistance: shcfuld she be even fortunate enough to discover a habitation, she thought her appearance, which was now become Strange and wild, might subject her to insult. Her hair was dishevelled, her robe rent in many places, and her arms torn
torn and scratched by the briars that grew around the Gothic window, wiiich greatly impeded her escape from the ruin ; but so eager was she to quit that dreadful place, that she felt not at the moment the wounds they made. On her quitting Venice, she had about her two or three pieces of gold; she felt n her pocket, and had the good fortune o find them there still, (as the ruffians had not rifled her person,) with the ring on her finger. She took it off, and ty¬ ing it up with her little treasure, se¬ cured them in her garments. Almost parching with tlrirst, she cast her eyes anxiously around, in hopes of beholding some rivulet, and searching strictly, her ears w r erc greeted by a gurg¬ ling steam, wiiich rushing down a gen¬ tle eminence, glided in murmurs along k 6 the
the dechvity, and -gave an appearance truly pleasing, and the most picturesque imaginable. Rosalina proceeded to its brink; she drank from the runnel, which greatly refreshed lier drooping spirits,- and bathed her arms, whose wounds ap¬ peared angry, and festering for want of care; thfen divesting herself of a loose scarf that she wore across her shoulders, while the transparent brook served for her mirror, she bound beneath it her disordered tresses, and dropped upon its glassy surface tears as crystalline and pellucid as itself. After thus- adjusting her dress, she ascended one of the highest steeps, in hopes of descrying some woodman's hut, where she might procure a morsel of bread to appease the attacks of hunger, which now assailed her forcibly; but no such
such place met her longing eye. She descended, and again proceeded, un¬ knowing whither to bend her weary steps. At length, growing sick and faint for want of food, she sunk upon a grassy bank. She had not long remained in this situation, when the sound of soft music wafted along the air attracted her attention. Starting up, she endeavoured to dis¬ cover the source from whence it came- At last, to her great joy, she beheld a youthfiil shepherd playing upon his pipe, regardless of every care, except attendance to his fleecy charge, which was quietly grazing at liis side. Rosalina stopped, in hesitation for a moment whether to advance or recede; ^ hut
but summoning her courage, and stifling her innate delicacy, that would scarcely suffer her to appear in her present garb before a stranger, she went close to him, and in a gentle manner, said—** Friend." The youth instantly snatched the pipe from his mouth, to listen to the su¬ perior melody of her enchanting voice; but when he beheld, he was struck with admiration, and rising, saluted her in a manner the most respectful. Indeed the lad did not at first sight know whether she w r as a mortal, or a nymph of the woods or sky, whom, by his ra¬ vishing notes, he had called down to the earth, and with his cap in his hand, he begged to know her commands. " Friend," said she, while pride and suffering nature combatted within her gentle
gentle breast, " have you any thing in your scrip which you can give me to eat, for I am well nigh famished ?" The youth replied not bv words, but opening his bag of homely fare, spread it before her on the grass, inviting her to feed heartilv. wiiich she did, and un- corking his leathern bottle, poured out a horn of simple wine; this he present¬ ed with great good-nature, at the same time gazing on her most earnestly, to the great confusion of Rosalina, who, to break the preA'ailing silence, asked a few innocent questions, and amongst others, if he could inform her of any cottage where she might repose her weary form, and be sheltered from the heat of the noontide sun ? " Mv father and mother hve hard by," said the shepherd; " if it would please you,
you, lady, to go to them, they will let you have a couch to rest on, and make you welcome to whatever their house contains. I have a sister, too, wiio will render you every assistance in her power, as you are distressed. I beg pardon, lady," said he, confused, " but you seem to me to be in distress." " I am indeed, good youth," answered Rosalina, as the tears started to her eyes; k * I am in great distress." The shepherd boy then called his dog, and gathering up his flock, left the faith¬ ful animal as a safeguard, while he con¬ ducted our poor heroine to his parents' humble cot. The httle family were enjoying a re¬ past of fruits and milk at the tioor, be¬ neath an arbour of twisted jessamine and vine, whose intertwining tendrils and luxuriant
luxuriant foliage served for a canopy; while the purple store, which in clusters hung around, gave pleasure to the sight, and yearly gladdened their hearts by the produce of their luscious beverage. When they beheld Rosalina, all of lhem instantancouslv arose; but she, in a voice of sweetness, bade them resume their seats, wiiich they did, after a little hesitation, gazing alternately at each other and the fair stranger, wiio address¬ ed them as follows:—** Friends, 1 doubt not but my appearance must excite your surprise, for it cannot be very prepos¬ sessing : in escaping from an inveterate foe, my dress became thus disordered, and mv arms thus lacerated: this im- placable enemy, from wiiat cause I know not, still pursues me, and I am compel¬ led to fly for my life. "Will you, for a short
short time, afford me a concealment hi your dwelling, until I can hear from a dear friend near Pyrano, who will re¬ ward your hospitality? indeed I am not absolutely without the means of affording you some recompence my¬ self." Thus saying, she produced one of her pieces of gold, and offered it to the old shepherd, who replied—" When we have served you, 'twill be time to think of a rew r ard; in the meanwhile, make yourself easy, for you are heartily wel¬ come to what our humble cot can afford, for though I am but poor, yet the door of Alberto never was shut against the unfortunate." Rosalina thanked him for his kind¬ ness, while her welcome was repeated by the wife and daughter; the latter a pretty
pretty girl of eighteen, called Marcelina, and the former a good honest housewife, of about forty, who strove, in her plain way, to express her sorrow at the mis¬ fortunes of our heroine, who was soon after conducted to a couch, rather mean, but exceedingly wiiolesome and clean, and nature being almost exhausted, she quietly sunk into a profound, refreshing slumber; while Marco, the youth she had first beheld, returned to his flock, deeply interested in the fate of the fair stranger, whose image? he could not for a moment banish from his mind, but earnestly longed for the evening's approach, that he might again behold her. When Rosalina had withdrawn, the honest cottagers entered into the follow¬ ing dialogue:— " Well," cried Marcelina, *" of all the pretty
pretty creatures I ever saw, this surely is the most so; and when I tucked her up comfortably in bed, she thanked me so kindly, and the tears ran down her cheeks in such a way, that I de¬ clare she made mc cry too. I wonder who or what she is! I really should, of all things, like to know." " I dare say you woidd," replied old Alberto, " for your curiosity is always afloat." * s Ah! and well it may," cried Bea¬ trice ; " 'tis enough to make the child curious, w r hen a person comes from no one know r s wiiere, but springs up, as a body may say, out of the very bowels of the earth; and indeed," added she, with a very important look, *• Marco said as much, for he told me slily, that he never saw from whence she came, hut
but thought she might be a fairy or sprite." " Ha, ha, ha! don't you be so silly, wife. A fairy! egad, I don't know which is the simplest, the boy or you. If she is a fairy, how came those scratches on her arms, to wiiich you applied some of your famous balsam? No, no, she is real flesh and blood, I warrant; bed¬ sides, fairies seldom eat with mortals, and she, I believe, partook of some-of Marco's fare in the forest, and drank some of his sour wine; so, if she is a fairy, she is a veiy condescending one at least. Ha, ha, ha P " Well; wrell, you i>eed not laugh," said Beatrice, somewhat piqued, ** for I am not the first that fairies have visited, indeed, husband; but how T ever, fairy or mortal, she is welcome to what our roof
roof affords, and I only wish, for her sake, it was better; but to such as it is, she is heartily welcome " " That she is, I know," said Alberto, pleased with his wife's liospitahty; and giving her a hearty kiss—" Beatrice had always a heart to feel for the unfortu¬ nate, or else I never should have loved thee so well as I have." This well-timed praise soothed the rather nettled feelings of the super* stitious housewife, who, addressing Mar- celina, said, as the stranger's clothes were tattered almost to pieces, she had better ask her, when she awoke, if she would like to put on some of hers, "for," added she, " your last new gown will, I think, fit her; and your straw hat will look very pretty over her fine dark eyes; though I think your eyes are as hand¬ some
"some as hers, though I should not say it, because I am your mother; yet I do say it, that your face is as pretty as any signora's in Venice." " Silence, wife!" said Alberto; " you'll make the girl so vain, shell not know what to do with herself. Do vou think she can't see ? wiiat do you suppose she looks so often for in the glass, if it wasn't to see her face? It pleases her, no doubt." 44 Ah, and somebody else too," sakl her joyful mother: " Reuben loves her, and this day begged of me that he might have her for his wife. I told him that I would ask you, and, of course, you've no objection, for Reuben is well off in the world, for he has flocks and vine¬ yards, and a cottage too." w Well; 1 rephed Alberto, « if the erirl
t girl loves him, I can have nothing to say against it; what say you, Marcc- iina?" The blushing girl looked on the ground, and said—" You know, father, I love Reuben ever since he sought my kid that strayed a long way in the fo¬ rest ; and when he found it, he brought it to me: then he spoke so kind, and said—' If I had not the good fortune to have found it, vou should have had one from my flock, for I cannot bear to see you weep, dear Marcelina.' Now this was so good, that of course I tendered him my best thanks, and afterwards I—> I—" "Afterwards you loved him?" said her father. The blushing girl replied not, but nodded an affirmation, while her little heart
heart bounded with joy. She then left the room to look out her habiliments, for the purpose of offering them to Ro¬ salina. The latter slept for the space of seve¬ ral hours, and aw r oke greatly refreshed, when looking on the chair, she beheld Marcelina's best attire, placed, as she conjectured, for the service of herself; but not choosing to make too free, she gently knocked, and the young shep¬ herdess appealing, in a gentle voice asked if she could do any thing to serve her ? *• for look, lady," added she, " here are my clothes, if you will put them on, while my mother and myself make yours clean and tidy, fit for your lady¬ ship to wear.'* Marcelina concluded the offer of her services by a low curtsey, of which Ro* vol. il f salina'
salina gladly availed herself; and when slie was arrayed in the russet gow r n, and boddice laced up with blue, recalled to her memory the happy days she had passed with her father in their ow r n lit¬ tle cottage; and while the tears fast rolled down her cheeks, she v. r as half resolved to return to honest Gerrard in the Valley of Vintagers, instead of wait¬ ing to the marchioness. " Good Hea¬ vens !" said she, " what a chequered scene have my days represented since my dear father fell! Was he my fa¬ ther? He was—he must have been my sire, and yet Rosalva said I was heiress of Barozzi, the child of Fer¬ nando, brother to the marquis ! if that indeed be true, there is a wonderful mystery hangs over my early days. Ro¬ salva, dear youth, who twice hast saved me
me from deatli, dost thou still hve ? or hast thou fallen a martyr to thy noble¬ ness of mind? Ah no, for guardian angels, that watch over goodness like thine, will save and protect thee from farther danger; hut I, alas! though I've now escaped, must one day fall be¬ neath the persecutor's hand, unpitied and unknown. No father sliall mourn over my grave, no mother's tears shall moisten the pillow of my deathbed, nor wilt thou, dear Rosalva, ever know that thy Rosalina so tenderly loves. Were I to apply to justice, what could I do? who would believe me ? No one would stand against so powerful an opponent as the marquis ; and though his dagger was raised against my breast, no one witnessed it but Rosalva and the mys¬ terious woman. The former could not r 2 appear
appear to criminate his father, and the latter would not, though she once pro¬ fessed to be my friend; but her conduct afterwards proved her wicked, and that she deals in magic was evident, by her wand and the wonderful chamber. 'Tis ^also plain Barozzi must have had re¬ course to her aid, to get me into his power; but then how the dear youth who stood my champion came into that infernal dwelling, is beyond my pene¬ tration." This soliloquy was interrupted by Marcelina, who came to tell lier their evening's repast w T as almost ready, and that her mother expected her to partake of it; then looking at her dress, ex¬ pressed her admiration at the method in which the body and coat were laced. * Well, lady," said she, " how much it does
does become you! I declare I shall always like it better than ever, now I see how nice it looks upon you; but then your waist is so nice and dim, and your neck so white and fair, while mine is sunburnt* that I never can expect to look so beau¬ tiful in it as you; and I dare say Reu¬ ben will soon perceive the difference be¬ tween ns." A half-smothered sigh escaped her lips as she uttered this, which RosaUna observing, said— u Pray, wiio is Reu¬ ben?" ** Reuben, lady!—oh. Reuben is—is, —Reuben." a So I should suppose," said her in¬ terrogator, smiling at her confusion; •' but why do you think he will make any remarks upon our difference? and what if he were?" v a " Whw
*' Why, lady, because Reuben loves me, and says I am the prettiest girl in all this part of the country. To be sure, there are not many hereabouts, and so, perhaps, what he said might be true; but he had not seen you, and when he does, I fear he will no longer think poor Marcelina handsome." " Fear not," returned Rosalina, " for I may not stay very long with you, and whenever Reuben comes, if you think me so dangerous, I will keep out of his sight." 4< No, no, I don't desire that; but I am sure he, or any one else, must be blind not to see who is the prettiest. Come, lady, and make yourself free with our homely fare." She tripped down the steps, leaving our heroine to follow at her pleasure, who
who mentally exclaimed, as she thought of the foregoing conversation—" So I find the bosom of an obscure forest maid is as susceptible of jealousy as the first lady's who figures in the most elevated sphere." She now descended to the lower apartment, where she found the good folks seated beside a table covered with a clean napkin, on which were placed their wholesome viands, with paft of a kid cheese and brown bread, a plate of fine grapes, and a flask of their best old wine, which had been saved by Alberto for some particular occasion. She w T as invited to join them with a hearty w r elcome, and sitting down, en¬ deavoured to please them, by doing as much honour as possible to the regale, eating with a tolerable appetite, quench- ¥ 4 ing
ing her thirst with some fine milk, which Marcelina served out in a clean earthen bowl. After their frugal meal was ended, they removed into the garden, and re¬ mained in the open air till the shades of evening drew on, when Rosalina strayed into a distant part, to indulge in soli¬ tude those thoughts that would intrude upon her mind, maugre the good inten¬ tions of her host and hostess to dissipate them. She stood leaning on a fence which enclosed the garden, looking at the fine surrounding scenery, when her cogi¬ tation was disturbed by some one, ere she was aware of it, putting his arms round her neck, and giving her a smack¬ ing kiss. She turned round indignantly, and with a voice and look of majesty, which
which petrified the intruder, demanded the cause of such insolence. The man stared for a moment, and then, without answering a word, rushed down tlie nearest avenue that led to the cottage, wlrile Rosalina, dismayed, and wondering at such unpardonable con¬ duct, followed. When she came within sight of the door, she beheld him in earnest conversation with her host and. family, who seemed to laugh very hear¬ tily at what he was saying.. Marcelina seeing her approach, flew to meet her, saying—" Ah, lady, you look angry,, but do forgive poor Reu¬ ben." " Reuben!" said Rosalina. " Yes, lady, 'twas Reuben that kissed you, but I dare say he would not have given, a pin to have done so, only," said r. o; Marcelina*
Marcelina, blushing at her blunder, " lady, he thought it was I, because he saw your back, and knew the gown." Rosalina smiled at the mistake, and holding forth her hand to Marcelina, said—" Tell your lover I am not of¬ fended, now I know the innocent cause." ** Ah but, lady, do tell him so your¬ self; yonder he stands, and he will not rest until you have pronounced his for¬ giveness." Our heroine suffered the shepherdess to lead her to Reuben, who, with a multi¬ tude of bows and apologies, said he hoped she'd pardon the liberty he had taken unintentionally, " for you must know, lady, I came in the back way, and seeing you stand there, I thought to myself this is Marcelina; I will sur¬ prise her; and so I kissed you in her stead;
stead; but when you, turned round, per¬ ceiving the face of a stranger, I verily thought I was bewitched, as I knew the garment and hat to be Marcelina's, for that blue ribband w r as a gift of mine, and the straw of my plaiting—was it not, Marcelina ?" " Ah, that it was, Reuben," said she, smiling; " but you need not say any thing farther about it, for the signora will think no more of it; so she told me." Reuben bowed, and again began a whole string of apologies, till Rosalina, finding he could not be easy in her pre¬ sence, good-naturedly withdrew, to the great joy of Reuben. Alberto having given his consent to their union, fixed that day se'nnight for their marriage. This was communicated f 6 to
to Rosalina hy the intended bride, who said she hoped she'd not go before the arrival of that time, but would grace the ceremony with her presence. Our heroine thanked her, and after indulging the pretty Marcelina, by praising the person and manners of her destined husband, retired to her cham¬ ber to compose a letter, which she in¬ tended to dispatch by the first oppor¬ tunity to the marchioness La Itosa.
CHAP-
CHAPTER V. The Fugitives* Return. Poor Marco, once so anxious tobehold* w T as now forced to avoid her presence, for he found he loved her, and no longer doubting but that she was by birth a lady, could not indulge tlie hope of call¬ ing her his own. After returning from his occupation in the forest, he would take his evening repast, then wander¬ ing in the garden, ruminate on his hope¬ less passion, which he strove to conquer; but
but in vain, for the stranger had taken possession of his heart. His faithful dog no longer received his caresses; his pipe hung by his side neglected; and no¬ thing dwelt in his thoughts but the image of Rosalina, who, endeavouring to make herself as little burthensomc as possible to the honest cottagers, spent her hours in making ornaments for the decoration of Marcelina on her wedding- day. Thus passed the time, till one night a gentle tap at the door gave signal of some one's approach. Alberto opened it, and Rosalina recollected the voice of Julio, who was requesting shelter till the morning: her colour forsook her cheeks, and she w r as near fainting when slie heard her host bid him welcome. She
She sat like the image of death, as she had no doubt but he was searching for her. The youth followed the hospitable shepherd into the cottage, seemingly both w r eak and faint. This Beatrice perceiv¬ ing, offered him her chair, as being the most easy. He thanked her, and then said—" Good people, have you seen a lady, within these two or three days, pass this way, dressed in white ?" The peasants looked confused, and fixed their eyes upon the agitated Rosa¬ lina. The quick glance of the page followed their sight, and in spite of the disguise, instantly recognised her; when startino- up, he exclaimed—" 'Tis she! she lives! she's found! Oh, blessed Virgin, accept my thanks!" He
He sunk on his knees, and raised his hands to Heaven, while Rosalina ex¬ pected every moment to be surrounded, and dragged into the presence of the marquis. Alberto, seeing her alarm, cried put— * Fear not, lady, no one shall harm thee. At your peril, I charge you not to^ touch her; she is under my protection; therefore, abuse not my hospitality while beneath iny roof, for I will not tamely standby to see her delivered into the hands of her enemies." " Her enemies!" said the youth; M her enemies are Julio's. I sought you as a hosom friend, Rosalina; listen to me; you must immediately return to Ve¬ nice !" 44 Return!" said she; w oh, never, ne¬ ver; what! return to Barozzi?" "Fear
44 Fear him not; he can no longer harm you," said Julio, " What, is he dead then T asked she, " No, he still lives; but this is foreign to the purpose. Was the memory of your father ever dear to you ?". '* Was it! oh Heaven, bear me wit¬ ness !" " Then you must appear as tlie accu¬ ser of Barozzi." "What, Rosalva'sfather!" said she; " oh, I cannot!" " Recollect, Rosalina," replied Julio 9 " that he murdered yours; and will you suffer a childish passion that you enter¬ tain for his son to prevent you from pu¬ nishing a homicide—a dealer in sorcery and hellish spells ? If you say you re¬ vere the memory of him to whom you owe
owe your existence, delay not, but ac¬ company me to Venice." " Go with you, Julio! how do I know to the contrary but you may deceive me ? Are not you a confidential servant to the marquis ? Then why attempt to impose upon me by feigning to sympa¬ thize at my misfortunes ?" " If," said the page, seizing her hand, " the aged Ferrand was ever dear to you, or if* you have been taught by him to remember your unfortunate mother, do not skreen from the hand of justice a villain—the worst of villains, who, in cool blood, can murder and destroy! Oh, do not, I conjure you, Rosalina!" *' Strange young man!" said she; " how know you all this ? How can you tell that Ferrand St. Almo was Fernando di Barozzi ?" •• They
" They were not the same," replied he. •• Then how can I be heiress to the honours of the marehese, or wherefore does he fear me?" " Ferrand w r as not your father, but your grandsire," said the page. ** Oh, then I surely am Fernando's child, and kinswoman to Rosalva! Then can I wound his noble heart, by appear¬ ing against his father? Oh, Julio, does he still survive ? does he still exist ?" " He does," replied the page. " The blessed Virgin receive my thanks! Julio, that wound was received in my defence." ** I know it was," replied the page, 44 intended by his guilty father for your breast. Can you then, knowing him to be so vile a wretch, even for a moment hesitate in bringing him to condign pu¬ nishment?
nishment? Will you not, when the morning dawns, suffer me to conduct you to Venice?" 44 Oh," said the wretched girl, " I know not how to act." The page then seizing her hand, in an impassioned manner exclaimed— " Oh, Rosalina! beloved Rosalina!" She started, imagining Julio enter¬ tained a passion for her person, and by stratagem was endeavouring to get her in his power, but, by this unguarded action, had betrayed himself. Under this supposition, she resolved not to en¬ trust herself with him, and rose from her seat, while the confounded youth seemed sinking to the ground, over¬ powered with confusion at Iris precipi¬ tant, unguarded manner. Old Alberto looked on hhn with an eye
eye of anger, and Marco with envy. Beatrice and Marcelina had, from the foregoing conversation, concluded that their guest was at least a marchioness, and with a thousand apologies for their not being able to discover her nobility, entreated her pardon for having used so little ceremony. Our heroine w r as not in the humour to listen to their ill-timed excuses, but turning to the page, in a voice of re¬ sentment, said—" 'Tis well, youth ; 1 now plainly perceive your flimsy arti¬ fice; you are not well skilled in de¬ ception, or prudence would liave kept a guard upon your actions till you had gained me entirely in your power." Thus saying, she retired to her cham¬ ber, in spite of Iris efforts and entreaties to the contrary; but ere long, Marcelina followed,
followed, and gave such a description of his unhappiness at her anger, that she was induced to return, when the offen¬ der addressed her as follows :—" Lady Rosalina, I am exceedingly sorry that you should impute my desire of serving you to a premeditated design of insult, which, Heaven bear me witness, was foreign to my intention. I no longer request you to accompany me to Venice, but that you will suffer this good pea- sant and his son to conduct you; under their escort you need not fear any dan¬ ger. You may procure a carriage in the adjoining valley, and here is a purse containing a sum sufficient to defray the expences. You will pardon this liberty, and if you do not wish the shades of vour departed parents to look down and condemn your improper lenity, fail not to
to attend the pubhc tribunal that is to be held, in two or three days from this period, and declare all you know of the marquis's diabolical conduct towards yourself/' He now assumed a tone of command, and said—" Marehioness di Barozzi, will you follow my injunction?" The half-irresolute Rosalina, struck by his singular method of address, pro¬ mised compliance. Julio now took her hand, and respect¬ fully pressed it to his lips; then turning to his host, begged to be accommodated with a corner to repose in for the night, which the old shepherd showing to him, he retired. Rosalina now began to repent the ex¬ torted promise, but finding she ought to perforin it, she agreed that Alberto should accompany her on the following morning,
morning, and that he should rise early, for the purpose of hiring a carriage. At this arrangement, Marcelina seem¬ ed rather discontented; but on Rosa* lina's promising to return ere the day appointed for her nuptials, she endea¬ voured to set her heart at rest. Our heroine once .more returned to her chamber, but not to sleep. Julio's strange conduct, and his earnest entrca- ties to prevail on her attendance at the ensuing trial—that he Could seem to feel for the wrongs she had suffered, and how he should be acquainted with so many different circumstances of her fate, were enigmas she could not solve; but wiien she reflected on his words—that a parent's death ought to be avenged, she i could not but acknowledge the justice of the observation; and though she had never
never known either of them, she felt that as an injured daughter, she was in duty iiound to prosecute the murderer of her father. Thus determined, she of¬ fered up a fervent prayer to the Virgin, to support her with fortitude under the trial, and then endeavoured to address herself to sleep; but in vain, for with her eyes fixed upon the humble lattice, she waited for the approach of morn. Soon as the ruddy goddess, peeping from her eastern chamber, shed her bright influence o'er the shepherd's cot, Alberto went in quest of a carriage, and soon returning, our heroine, Julio, and himself, (Marco, not being sufficiently reconciled to the idea of losing the be¬ loved object of his soul, pleaded illness as an excuse for not attending,) set forth from tlie cottage, to proceed to the vol. iu g valley,
valley, where the carnage waited for them, and their departure w r as accom¬ panied by the prayers of Beatrice and Marcelina for their success. Soon as they reached the appointed place, they entered the carnage, and the driver giving his whip to the horses, they with all possible speed came in sight of the city. On the outskirts, Julio alighted from the vehicle, giving to Alberto a direction where to proceed to, at tlie same time promising to be with them without fail by the evening. The carriage then went forward, and Rosalina shrunk close behind, to avoid a discovery. At length the driver stopped at the place to which he had been direct¬ ed, where they found their arrival look¬ ed for with anxiety. Our heroine pro¬ cured fresh apparel, as the dress of Mar¬ celina
celina was too rusticated for her to wear in Venice, which was more than usually thronged with nobility, attracted by curiosity to witness the extraordinary trial. In the evening, Julio made his ap¬ pearance, to whom Rosalina said— *' Now, youth, of what importance can my evidence prove ? I never knew my father, therefore what I may alledge against the culprit can be of very little avail." Julio answered—" You must wait till you are called upon; then answer as your truth and honour, or the reverence you owe to the memory of your parents, may dictate." Rosalina admitted the propriety of this procedure, and waited for tlie im- o 2 portant
portant day with a degree of expec¬ tation mingled with dread. In the mean time, Julio endeavoured to rally her spirits, and prevent her from thinking so incessantly on the unhappy youth Rosalva, who, she had no doubt, was nearly distracted at this public dis* grace of his father.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VI. Wonderful Occurrences. The wretched Barozzi, now an object of pity, passed his hours in all the bitter¬ ness of despair and guilt: he dreaded the approaching trial, as he had no doubt of the issue proving against him; neither could he endure to meet the eye of his son, wdio cursed the hour that gave him birth, and wished he had perished be¬ neath the poniard, rather than live to witness such an indelible stain of infamy ta blot a fine of ancestry hitherto so u 3 illustrious.
illustrious. This, added to the fear he entertained for his father's life, nearly drove him to madness. In some of his calm moments, he'd call upon the name of his dear Rosalina, sayings-" Beloved, yet unfortunate maid, surely thou wilt not appear against my parent—my guil¬ ty, but miserable parent!" On the morning of trial he shut him¬ self in his. apartment, and waited the result in a gloomy kind of stupor, with a dagger before him, inw r ardly resolved, if his father's infamy were proved, not to outlive the event, for he could ill brook to be a wretched object for the unfeeling world to treat with scorn. In the mean time, the guilty marehese w r as led to the bar, and his accusation being read, he was called upon to declare what he had to say against this dreadful charge.
charge. In a faltering voice he pleaded innocence. Rosalina sat in an obscure part of the court, where she had been placed by Ju¬ lio, watching all that passed with anxious eye, and a heart throbbing with various sensations. Near her was placed Al¬ berto, who served as her protector. The marquis, attempting to assume a tone of dignity before the vast concourse of nobles there assembled to witness this important scene, haughtily demanded the name of his accuser, Rosalina started and shrunk back, fearing she might be called upon, when the president summoned the evidence to appear in court, and to the amazement and terror of our heroine, she beheld the assassin Roldon, who fixed his eyes on the marquis, wiiile the latter started g 4 aghast
aghast at the sight of this unexpected adversary, and could scarcely withstand the sudden shock. The bravo seemed to enjoy his evident alarm,and exclaimed—"My lords, I am the man wiio struck the first murderous blow aimed at the heart of Fernando di Barozzi*. to which act I was induced, to¬ gether with my comrade, by a rich re¬ ward from his brotlier, wiio now is be-. fore you." " 'Tis false!" said the marquis. " Nay, my lord," replied Roldon, calm¬ ly, " why should I utter falsehood ? I am a prisoner, as well as yourself, and as there is no chance of either of us escap¬ ing, I have confessed my crimes; do you do the same, and, like me, throw yourself upon the mercy of the court." The miserable Augustino gnashed his teeth
teeth on. hearing this, and could scarce contain his fury within the bounds of moderation, by the bravo thus reducing him to a level with himself w r ho was a very outcast of society, and turning to the president, he. cried—" How r , my lord, am I arraigned on the evidence of a wretch hke this? Is this your only proof? 'Tis the first time I ever beheld him." " Then, my lord, as it is weU known Fernando fell beneath the assassin's steel, had you never suspicion of the real of¬ fender ?" said the president; " for though, I am exceeding sorry to observe, in this city crimes of this deep dye are too fre* quent, though, indeed, you are accused of shedding a brother's blood, yet few are so hardened as to murder merely for* amusement; 'tis generally interest or re* o 5 venge
venge directs the blow\ Now, you, marehese, who was so well acquainted with his friends or enemies, as at that time you both dwelt under the same roof, cannot you guess who was on terms of animosity with him, and by that means surmise who might be the perpe¬ trator of this horrid act ?" The marquis faltering replied—" No." " And did you never hear that Fer¬ nando had a wife and child ?" added the president, looking earnestly in his face. The marquis again answered—" No," as his countenance betrayed evident marks of confusion, the paleness of his cheeks quickly changing to a deep crim¬ son* M Then who is Rosalina St. Almo, and on what account have you pursued her with your unceasing hatred? Come, come,
come, my lord, confess; you know she is the heiress of Barozzi, therefore, as some atonement for your great and ma¬ nifold offences, resign to her the inheri¬ tance which is her proper and lawful right." 4 < Never, my lord president,- will I give up the legal titles that I have to the honours of Barozzi. I am my bro¬ ther's heir by law, for I declare he was never married." ** 'Tis false!" exclaimed a loud voice,- and, to Rosaiina's amazement, the sor¬ ceress appeared^ The marquis supported himself on »' gentleman next him, and in tremutous> accents uttered—" Oh Heaven ! this w r oman here! what means she?' Do you, wicked fiend, appear against me, you, vile demon ?—My lords, let that G 6 WTXUaI
wretch be secured; I accuse her as a pro¬ fessor in magic; one who dwells in dark¬ ness, aM at her will can call forth spirits of hell" The president was prevented replying, by a loud voice calling—" Hold! the prisoner is innocent of the crime imputed to his charge!" Rosalina directed her eye to the en¬ trance of the kail, and beheld Rosalva, I Ae and disordered, followed by a man m a Turkish habit Tlie marquis gazed for an instant, then sunk insensibly to the earth, for in the person of this stranger he recognised his long-supposed murdered brother Fer¬ nando. The sorceress uttered a loud shriek, and ere $he could be restrained, rushed from the assembly. An
An awful silence reigned throughout the throng, *vho knew not what to make of the appearance of this stranger, when Fernando, pulling off a large turban, and turning round to the numerous spectators, said, "Hassixteen years of slavery altered my features so much, that no one recol¬ lects, beneath this disguise, Fernando, marchcse di Rarozzi ?" Rosalina started from her seat, in spite of the entreaties of Alberto, and falling at the feet of the speaker, cried, ** Oh, stranger, if you are indeed he, behold in me your child!" He gazed on her for a moment, then said—" You are ray daughter, for I be¬ hold the very lineaments of my beloved Rosalina, my lawful wife: come, niy child, come to my bosom, and receive u father s warm embrace: as for this wretched
Wretched man, my brother, though he iff deserves it, as I still live, oh, join with me, offspring of my beloved Rosalina, in supplication for his pardon! I know the wrongs you* have received from his hands, but if you resemble your samted mother, you wul forgive." She was about to reply, when a loud shriek from Rosalva prevented her, who exclaimed— <fc My father is no more! he is dead! he is dead!" The concourse of people that were ga¬ thered to witness the trial now arose in alarm, but upon examination, it appear¬ ed that Augustino was not dead, though nearly so, occasioned by the shock he so unexpectedly received by the sight of the injured Fernando. He was convey¬ ed home, and placed upon a bed, when medical assistance being procured, he was
was with great difficulty restored to life. Meanwhile Rosalina was embraced by her father, who conducted her to the palazzo, accompanied by her friends. As soon as they were left together, he questioned her on the subject of her past life, which she related to him with great sweetness and simplicity. Their conversation: was interrupted by an attendant saying a woman parti¬ cularly requested an audience with the marquis Fernando. " Admit her instantly," fie replied. The door of the apartment was then thrown back, and to the great terror of RosaUna, the sorceress made her appear¬ ance. " Health to the marquis di Ba¬ rozzi and his beauteous daughter!" said she; " but there wants another who I V could wish to see." " Who
" Wiio is that ?" asked Fernando. amazed at her strange manner and ap¬ pearance. " Yoiu* w r ife, the marchioness Rosa¬ lina." u Woman, forbear!" replied he; " drive me not mad by the remembrance of my loss, for alas! she is dead—she perished in the flames—miserably perished! Oh that she wals still alive, that 1 might once more behold her—she whom I have for years prayed to behold again— for whom I so desired to be released cfrom slavery, that I might once more clasp her to my heart! but, alas! she is now no more." " She still hves," said the sorceress. *• How, my mother"—" My wife"— " still exists!" burst at once from the lips of Fernando and Rosalina. " She
" She lives," repeated the hag. " Ah, bew r are how you trifle with me; do not raise my hopes, to crush them with despair." " I will not," replied the hag; " but have not sixteen years obliterated from your memory the semblance of Rosalina de Valmont ?" " Oh no," answered he; " she will for ever live in my heart; and this child revives her recollection still more, for she is her very counterpart." " She is indeed," said the mysterious woman, " but I can show you a still stronger likeness. Behold it in me," she said, and plucking off the veil of mystic figures and long false hair which half-concealed her face, discovered, in the countenance of the dreaded sorceress, tho
the still lovely bride of his youth, his long-lost Rosalina. Fernando starting, cried—" Oh, do not mock me with illusion ! yet, hold, and let me gaze! Gracious Powers! 'tis she! yes, thou art my wife!" He rushed into her arms, and pressed her to his throbbing heart; then turning to the wondering girl, said—" My child, embrace your mother;" but she stood aloof and replied not; when the mar¬ chioness, as we shall now call her, guess¬ ing her reason, said—" My daughter, my beloved child, come to my bosom; let not the thoughts of the past embitter this blessed hour; for oh, my love, when, joined with the marquis, I appeared most your foe, I was your greatest friend; bound by the strongest ties in nature, 1 hazarded
hazarded my life for the preservation of thine, in assuming the character of a witch, an innocent artifice to gain the confidence of Augustino." " Thou art all a w T onder," said Fernan¬ do : " my wife ! my child ! oh God, ac¬ cept my thanks for these thy bounteous^ blessings!" He clasped them both in his arms-, while tears of joy moistened the cheeks of each. Henri, Rosalva's servant, now r came to inform them that Augustino was re¬ stored to his senses, though dying, and requested to see his brother, to make confession of his crimes, and implore his pardon ere he breathed his last. A tear stood in the eye of the youth as he con- tinued—" 1 fear my master is dying too, for he raves as much as his father did. WiU
Will it please you to go and see them, my lord?" " I'll attend directly," said Fernando, " and try if I cari give ease to *he afflict¬ ed conscience of my wretched brother. Come, my Rosalina, and you, my daugh¬ ter, come, and join me in this laudable intention, for never can I forget how dear this brother once was to me, how we both were reared jn precepts of virtue by our beloved father, and grew like a twin ear of corn upon the same stalk, united hi tlie bonds of fraternal love, till cursed avarice crept into the heart of one, and, like a baneful worm, destroyed the love of years and all our future peace. Avarice, destructive fiend! what misery hast thou caused, not only to me and him, but unto those we love dearest on earth, for if I mistake not, the youth Rosalva is noble
noble and affectionate, and most poig¬ nantly feels the disgrace of his father!" The heart of Rosalina burned at this panegyric on her lover, as she accompa¬ nied her parents towards the apartment where, in bodily torments, and agony of soul, did he the guilty Augustino.
€HAP-
CHAPTER VIL The Repentance* When they reached the antichambcr, Fernando expressed a w r ish that the marchioness would remain there till call¬ ed upon, lest the unexpected sight of her •should prove fatal to his brother. To this she willingly consented, while the marquis and his daughter entered the ^apartment where Augustino laid, writh¬ ing in the pangs of death. At this af¬ fecting sight, Fernando forgot all his wrongs, and gently approaching the bed, took
took hold on the clammy hand of \m brother. The miserable wretch shrunk from his touch, and in convulsive accents cried— " Ah, Fernando, dost thou come to mock me with a show of kindness! if thou wilt pity or give me ease, curse ! oh, curse thy miserable brother, who, like Cain of old, repaid thy kindness by murder—thy brotherly affection and confidence by consuming in flames thy beloved wife! Oh that dreadful pang! Oh fiends ! fiends ! already do I feel you at my heart! There is not—there can¬ not be a hell like this, for oh, my bro¬ ther, if I may be allowed to call you by that tender name, my conscience now re¬ pays your sufferings by pangs unutter¬ able U Your Rosalina died a death most terrific, and oh! her murderer will, like her,
her, meet flames and fire, but not, like her, to rise from them to heaven! endless must be my punishment, nor that ina¬ dequate to the enormity of my crimes!" A loud groan succeeded this exertion, and he sunk exhausted. A tear bedewed the eve of Fernando as he exclaimed—" Oh, my brother, live —live to repentance, for I can adminis¬ ter a cordial to thy wounded heart, by informing thee tliat my wife still exists!'* Rosalva, who sat at a farther part of the room, absorbed in grief, now started up, exclaiming—" Hear that, my father, the marchioness still survives!" but his joy was damped by perceiving his father insensible, and he again relapsed into a fit of frenzy, to the great grief of Rosa¬ lina and his uncle, who already began to love tlie unfortunate youth. They
They both attempted, and at last with success, to restore animation to the wretched Augustino, who, on opening his eyes, cast them wildly round the room, and cried—" Did I dream that you said your wife still lives, or is it really so ?" " It is true," said Fernando, unclosing tjUe door, " and she is here to, pronounce your pardon." As he spoke the marchioness entered. dressed in a rich habit, becoming her dignity and native excellence of person. having divested herself of the robe which she had w'orn when as Magdalena, so that Augustino could not discover the least trace or faint resemblance of tho dreaded sorceress. In a voice of sweet¬ ness, she tendered liim lier forgiveness. adding, that she hoped Heaven would vol. ii. n I anion
pardon him also; and approaching Re salva, greeted him by the title of nc phew. The miserable dying offender put U] his earnest thanks to that gracious Pro vidence wiiich had preserved her life and freed his guilty conscience from one crime more. Then calling to Rosalim and his so*i, he took a hand of each, say ing—« There, my children, live in the bonds of amity and friendship; but you never must expect to be united, for Fer¬ nando cannot wed his daughter to the offspring of a wretch like me." " What," said the marquis, " do they love each other ?" " Yes," replied Augustino, " Rosalva longhaslovedyourdaughter,butIdivided them, and aimed a poniard at her heart, which he received in his breast; therefore, if
if you thmk the blood he shed in her defence can give him a claim to her hand, oh, let them be united, for my son is noble, and inherits none of my vices % but is every w r ay worthy your esteem ! Can you consent to this, my much- injured brother ? and you, marchioness. daughter of the unfortunate De Yal- inont, who, through my means, was un¬ timely cut off? yet, I swear before Hea¬ ven, it was not my intention to destroy him, nor knew I of his death till chance revealed it to me." Our heroine, at the mention of her grandsire, burst into tears. Her parents sought to console her, and both joined in consent to her union with Rosalva. A ray of joy illumined fbr a moment the pallid cheek of Augustino, and catch¬ ing the hand of his brother, he cried— n 2 " Forgive*
tk Forgive, oh forgive!—my son—my Rosalva, come near, and let mc once more clasp you to my heart! Curse not my memory, and avoid my crimes, which damned ambition, and a tlrirst for power, first engendered in my breast: remember this, my beloved child, and pray for thy guilty father!" He then sunk back, and with a loud groan ex¬ pired. Rosalva's grief was now beyond mea¬ sure, and it was with great difficulty he could be prevailed upon to separate from the inanimate corpse. After the first transports of sorrow were somewhat sub¬ sided, he assumed fortitude sufficient to appear tranquil in the presence of the marchesa La Rosa, who shortly after ar¬ rived, for even there rumour had spread the report of Augustino's death in the hall
hall of justice, together with the wonder¬ ful discoveries wiiich had taken place. She condoled with her nenhew, and by her soothing arguments soon weaned him from despondency, for he was not of a disposition to feel long such poignant anguish : by nature lively, his sensations, though always violent, were never last¬ ing. When the marchesa La Rosa was led to the presence of our heroine, they both indulged in the most unfeigned congratulations. Fernando received her with the utmost tenderness, and joined with his lady in expressing their acknow¬ ledgments for her goodness to their daughter, though only known to her as a peasant. She replied—" My lord, I soon per¬ ceived in that peasant an inestimable n 3 jewel,
jewel, which, hke a precious brilliant in its native quarry, had long been buried in obscurity; nor w r as I the only one w T ho beheld this excellence, for my nephew, though he attempted to conceal it by a shew of indifference, soon felt the force of the charms belonging to the rustic cottager;" (Rosalva and his fair relative both blushed at this remark of the mar¬ chesa ;) " and I hope," continued she, " } r our disinterested passion will now be rewarded, for I am well assured the marehese Fernando is too noble to punish the misdeeds of the father hi the son." The marchioness di Barozzi now in¬ formed her of the promise made to the deceased Augustino relative to their union, upon wiiich she congratulated the youthful pair, and expressed her in¬ tention
tention of making her nephew heir to die honours of La Rosa; adding— " Peace to the sad remains of my sister's lord! I would not, by any observation of mine, rouse an unpleasant feeling in either of your breasts, but I must say, my nephew always resembled his mother more than your excellenza's brother, to whom I cannot sufficiently admire your charitable conduct. But, mv dear sister, ,> said she, addressing the marchioness Ba¬ rozzi, " suffer me ,to call you by that title, pray inform me by what means, after so long being supposed dead, did you appear at the moment so truly cri¬ tical? There is a strange story ru¬ moured among the domestics, that no one saw you enter or heard of your arri¬ val—nay, Erasmo says he let in au ugly n 4 being,
being, who wished to speak with the lord Fernando, who was shortly after changed into a beautiful lady; and Paulina tells me, that it is thought you are only a spirit, and will shortly make your exit into the airy regions from whence you came." The marchioness smiling, replied— •* There is some truth in the report, my dear lady, but as soon as the obsequies of the unfortunate Augustino are past, I will recount to you all my sad eventful history." This was what Rosalva much wished to hear, as he had not yet learned how, or by what means, the marchioness had arrived at the palazzo ; and on his aunt's mentioning the metamorphoses that had taken place, a vague idea ran across his mind
mind concerning the sorceress, a charac¬ ter which is ever connected with mys¬ tery. Several days had now elapsed, when Rosalina rinding it impossible to attend the nuptials of the pretty shepherdess, sent for Alberto, who had since remained within the palazzo, and by desire of her father, on being made acquainted with his generous hospitality, presented him with a handsome compensation, and se¬ veral valuables as bridal-gifts to Mar¬ celina, and gave him permission to return home as soon as he might think it con¬ venient, which he being desirous of* did the same day; but previous to his de¬ parture, she spoke with him in private, saying—" Alberto, hast thou ever, since the morning when I first beheld my clear h 5 father,
father, seen the page Julio? has he ever inquired for, or sent to you?" " No," replied Alberto, 4i and it has often raised my wonder, for he certainly was interested in your fate, lady: some¬ times I think he probably may have returned to my cottage till he hears from your excellenza." Rosalina thought the conduct of the page exceedingly strange, hut said no¬ thing, and kindly bidding Alberto adieu, proposed in a short time to pay a visit to the cottage. With this mark of her condescension he departed, after pro¬ mising, that should he see or hear of the page, to dispatch a messenger with the tidings to the palazzo. In due season the body of Augustino was inhumed, with all the funeral pomp becoming
becoming his rank. The noble Fer¬ nando, in attending with Rosalva as one of the chief mourners, proved to the world he had forgot his brother's crimes, and only remembered that he spnmg from the same stock with himself. In a few days all in the palazzo was at peace. The youth Rosalva began to for¬ get his suffering sorrows by the sweet society of his intended bride, wiiom he found endowed with qualities so excel¬ lent, that princes might have disputed with him for her hand. The marchesa La Rosa one evening reminded the mar¬ chioness Ilarozzi of her promise, to relate her eventful story, and turning to Fer¬ nando, said—" Your excellenza has never informed us how you escaped from the forest, where you was left for dead; but I imagine you have communicated to n 6 each
each other all these wonders; but for our benefit, promulge .those miracles, for miracles indeed they are, or else you could not have been preserved and brought together at so important a pe¬ riod." A loud ringing at the gate of the palazzo prevented the marchioness re¬ plying, and the servant announced a lady who wished to pay her respects, up¬ on which she arose, and introduced her as madame De Verencourt, a French lady of distinction. They all saluted her with marks of the greatest respect, and the marchioness continuing, said—" My dear Isabella, you are just come in time to hear the re¬ lation of my story, and as you are some¬ what % concerned in it, perhaps our joint asseverations may convince those inqui¬ sitive
sitive ones of the truth of many events, that on my bare word might not be be¬ lieved." " For shame, marchioness!" said Isa¬ bella ; " this noble company must be w r ell convinced that nothing is impossi¬ ble to the sorceress Magdalena." . Rosalva started—" Magdalena!" cried he. * * e Restrain your impatience, dear youth," said the marchioness, " and you shall hear of things most strange, most wonderful, and yet most true."
CHAP.
CHAPTER VIII. The Marchioness of Barozzi's Narrative. « To you, my beloved lord, I need not describe the keen anguish which rent my bosom on the receipt of that vile forgery, which contained the poisonous intelligence of your falsehood; but thinking you unworthy of my regret, I strove to banish the remembrance of our loves, and think only of your villainy, in which resolution I was aided by the sympathetic condolence of / my
my beloved and affectionate parent. Some time had now elapsed, when one evening, after we had retired to rest, I thought I heard footsteps in the gar¬ den beneath my chamber window; a sulphureous smell seemed to arise, and I fancied I heard a whispering of voices. I started from my couch, and unclosing the casement, I beheld just beneath a heap of straw and other combustible matters, which a man with a torch w T as in the very act of firing, with the base intent of destroying us in the flames. A loud shriek burst from my lips, and 1 instantly shrunk back with affright, when he, I should suppose, thinking he would be discovered, by the assistance of his fellow-ruffian, immediately vaulted in at the window, and seizing me vio¬ lently, placed a bandage over my mouth, at
at the same time commanding me to be quiet, for he wished to save me. " In spite of all my efforts and strug¬ gles to get extricated, he forced me to the casement, through which he thrust me, and the wretch who accompanied him caught me in his arms. * Oh God, my child,' thought I, ' and my father are now perishing in the destructive element!' Urged by desperation, I struck my head repeated blows, and en¬ deavoured to tear off the scarf in which they had muffled me; but they soon stopped my violence, by pinioning my hands, and then placing me on a horse, maugre my despair, I was borne far, far away from my babe, my father, and my home. " Pardon me," said she, wiping away the tears which started from her eyes, " but
" but even at this moment the agony I then felt is fresh in my memory, and causes this unwelcome interruption." Her auditors coidd not refrain from weeping in unison, and it was a consider¬ able time ere she could resume her narra¬ tive, which was as follows: "A happy de¬ privation of my senses succeeded the first transport of grief, and several hours had elapsed ere they returned, when I found myself reclining upon a decent couch, within a gloomy apartment, and the rays of the declining sun, which gleamed through the Gothic casement, served only to render it more dismal, for the ta¬ pestry figures, with which this place was ornamented, seemed by this partial light starting from their situations. My re¬ turning senses brought with them a re¬ collection of the preceding evening's sad events,
events, and a friendly shower of tears coming to my relief, I left the couch, and repaired to one of the windows. A pros¬ pect bleak and dreary met my view. The loud roaring sea dashed its foam¬ ing waves against the dilapidated walls of the ancient fabric in which I was con¬ fined, and by their tremendous noise, seemed to threaten destruction to its decaying foundationo No vessel or friendly fisher's bark appeared upon its agitated surface; my soul sickened at the dismal sight, and I turned to the opposite side of the apartment, where a huge fo¬ rest appeared to my disappointed eyes, in which in vain I endeavoured to distin¬ guish some sign of human habitation, and convinced me I was devoid of hope. " In despair I threw myself upon the couch, and gave way to sorrow. My child,
child, my parent, were pictured to my distempered fancy perishing in the most excruciating torments; and as a shriek of anguish burst from my agonized breast, my senses fled, and for several weeks, as I was afterwards informed, I became a maniac. " On the first dawn of sanity I found myself in the same chamber, on the same- couch, but bound down with cords, as I suppose in my ravings I had been dan¬ gerous, and they had apprehended I might commit some act of desperation. I lay patiently for some length of time, when at last I heard some one open the door, and calling another to follow, A strange thought suddenly occurred, and I closed my eyes as I resumed my situ¬ ation, hoping by this stratagem to hear something relative to myself I was
not deceived, for these intruders ap¬ proached the bed. ' She's asleep,' said the first; * come, this is well. She looks handsome even now; don't she, Rodol- pho ?'—' Ah, that she does,' replied the other, ' and I am glad we have saved her, as our chief has never yet seen one so beautiful; indeed he says so himself, for he came in to look at her when he was last here.' I trembled, and wished that moment was my last, for I now found a fate far worse than death awaited me. " The man then continued— 4 The marquis di Barozzi would be very much displeased if he knew she was alive; but I assured him of all their deaths, wiiich he never once doubted, but gave us our reward, and a handsome one it was, fbr I gained more by this business than any in which I was ever concerned; but I am
am glad I saved this pretty creature, however, for it would have been a pity to let her have fallen, though her ambi¬ tion did soar so high to marry Fernando, the marquis's brother, who was lately assassinated by his order. I suppose he wants to get all the riches of the family within his grasp." At the conclusion of this sentence. Rosalva arose from his seat, and left the room in visible confusion. Rosalina looked at her mother, with an expression that seemed to condemn her enlarging on the crimes of Augustino; but she did not comprehend the mean¬ ing, or else her sufferings had blunted the delicate feeling of her naturally-excellent heart, for she made no apology, but con¬ tinuing, said—"From the foregoing, and other sentences which they let drop, 1 discovered
discovered the whole of the diabolical plans which had been laid for our joint destruction. How I restrained my feel¬ ings, or how I avoided, by any involun¬ tary movement or exclamation, lettmg them know my sleep was only feigned, I cannot tell, but so I did; and after un¬ loosing the cords by which I was bound, thinking, I suppose, that all danger now was past, they departed. I then started from my bed, and sinking on my knees, made a horrid vow of vengeance against my destroyer, should opportunity ever offer, in which attempt I called upon the shades of my murdered child and father to lend me aid. In a few minutes after a woman made her appearance, who see- incrme seated on the side of my couch, with my hands at liberty, would have retired, but with a voice somewhat calm,
calm, I bid her not be afraid, but come nearer. She did so, bearing in her hand a medicine, which she persuaded me to take. I comphed, resolving to dedicate all my future days—do not despise me for the confession—to revenge, and to that end I took the means of prolonging an existence otherwise painful. " The woman finding me thus tract¬ able, entered into a conversation, in wiiich I sought to win her affection, thinking that by making her my friend, it might be one step gained towards emancipation. I thought I had so far succeeded, arid I then assumed an air of cheerfulness, that I might the better de¬ ceive my persecutors, and elude their vigilance; but afresh circumstance caus¬ ed me to relapse into my misery ; this w r as, the expected appearance of the chief for
for whom my wretched person was de¬ signed. At length the unwelcome tid¬ ings of his arrival, and a command for me to prepare for an interview, aroused an energy which long had lain dormant, and assuming an appearance of pride and superiority, I gave consent to his admit¬ tance. ** Never was I so astonished as on his entrance, for instead of the ferocious ban¬ dit I had expected to behold, a mere youth appeared, with an aspect some¬ what pleasing. I descended from my high demeanour, which I changed into condescension, and briefly relating my unhappy story, threw myself 1 upon his clemency. How did his answer delight me, as, with an air of assumed dignity, -he said—* Rinaldo is no ravisher, lady; displeasing must that object be, who is obtained
obtained by force, therefore be not alarmed.* * Then will you give me freedom ?* said I, falling at his feet. * Oh! complete your generosity, by restoring me to the society which best befits my rank and sex!' " He gently raised me up, but frankly said that was impossible, for the interest of his followers was his greatest pride; *and give me leave to add, lady, that, hi appearance,youmustbemine: nay,start * not,' he continued, * but rely upon my honour. I swear never to betray the secret; but if you reject my proposal* a fate more desperate than the realizing tliis project will await you.' " I comprehended his meaning* and finding how impossible it was to escppe, was obliged perforce to consent, trusting vol. il i to
to his integrity; and oh, my Fernando, never did he give me cause to repent this reliance on his virtue. He treated me with all possible respect, and every tiling was at my command, ^xcept the greatest of all earthly blessings, dear liberty. " Years passed on in the same man¬ ner without danger or discord; but at last the numerous depredations />f the band caused the government to take cognizance of them. Troops were ap¬ pointed to watch their motions, and they found they could no longer remain safe in then* retreat, the ancient fabric in which I was imprisoned; but fearing to retire in a body, they divided, and by different routes at last arrived in the adjacent forest, where the ruin proved an admirable receptacle; and I believe they had frequently resorted thither as a place
a place of rendezvous, when separated on their excursions. I was removed by night, and in a manner which prevented the possibility of my escaping, and I found myself immured in a fresh con¬ finement, w r here all hopes of enlarge* ment were as much frustrated as in the first; but fortune afforded me some so* lace imthe society of this lady, madame De Verencourt, who fell into their power by accident, on the particulars of wiiich I shall not dwell, as I know it will renew her sorrows. We mutually condoled each other on our misfor- tunes, and loved like sisters. *' About this period the old woman* wiio was formerly my gaoler, fell sick and died, which to us was a great loss, for we both were obliged to submit to some of the menial offices, in despite i2 of
of the captain's authority, for the men refused to serve us, declaring that wo¬ men were in duty bound to wait on men, their lords and masters. " The worst misfortune which 1 thought could occur, soon after took place; ( this w r as no less than the death of the chief, who was one night brought home dreadfully wounded; and there being no hopes of life, he called me to his bedside, and in the presence of his band, desired that I might inherit Iris share of the riches which had been a long time accumulating. My feelings revolted at the idea of possessing plun¬ der, part of which, perhaps, had been obtained by blood; but 1 did not name my objections, and was accordingly, by the unanimous consent of the band, awarded his heiress to property of con¬ siderable
siderable amount. The unfortunate Ri¬ naldo soon after breathed his last, and was buried with «eivil honours by his faithful followers, wiio revered and loved him for his strong attachment to tlicir interests. " Not many w r eeks after his demi?^, the officers of justice again got Cf ? r / their rendezvous, when finding lu/v no longer afforded them a safe retreat. they one night called a council, to deter¬ mine on the safest method of proceeding, in which it was decided by a majority of votes, that after a fair division of their spoils, the band should separate, and depart to different countries, which they did, leaving us to our fate, first extorting from us an oath not to dis¬ cover ourselves for the space of three months, and then resigning to me a just 13 proportion
proportion of their booty, as left me by the generous Rinaldo. " Thus, you perceive," said she, ad¬ dressing her auditors, " the danger of placing confidence in villains, wiio think no longer of their oaths than while tliey can serve themselves as well as their employers. So it was with the band to which I perforce was many years an as¬ sociate; for finding that Augustino eould render them no further good, they left me to employ my freedom against him as I might think proper, and this I put in practice the first opportunity. * s For some time after their departure, I concerted numerous schemes for gain¬ ing access to his presence, as I well knew applying to justice, unfriended as I was, without witnesses, or even a certificate of my marriage, could be of no avail but that
that I should probably be treated as an impostor, and perhaps a second time fall into the power of my enemy. Unfixed in my aims, I yet retained a thirst for revenge, and having no child or parent to whom I could fly, I resolved to de¬ dicate my life entirely to this darling object, unless by any chance, which I thought impossible, I might procure evidence unquestionable that w ; ould be sufficient to substantiate my claims. My friend at last suggested a plan that appeared feasible, wiiich was to offer myself as a servant to the marquis. This I instantly adopted, and procuring male attire, for the better concealing my per¬ son, I arrayed myself in it, to see if the deception was passable, and had the satisfaction of finding it answer equal to my wish: my appearance being rather i 4 juvenile,
juvenile, I made use of a hquid which gave a florid hue to my complexion, and thus disguised, my friend named me Julio." ** Ah, Julio!" exclaimed Rosalina, unable to contain her emotions. " Yes, my dear child, that identical Julio who offended your delicacy in the cottage of Alberto, forgetting, in the ecstasy of my joy at beholding you again, my boy's disguise, wiiich convey¬ ed with my delight sinister designs on your person. But to proceed*. I now only wanted an opportunity of gaining admittance to Barozzi, and various me¬ thods were devised by myself and friend for that purpose. Often have 1 lingered about the door of the palazzo, with an in¬ tention of addressing him, but at his sight my courage always failed, and I again
again returned dispirited, hopeless of success. At last fortune seemed to favour my design, for one day, as he was mounting a spirited steed which he usu¬ ally rode, the animal growing restive, by a sudden plunge threw him to the ground. I ran to his assistance, and help¬ ed him to rise ere Erasmo, w T hom he dis¬ patched on some message, returned. He thanked me for my aid, and offered me a piece of money, which I refused. Whether he was pleased at my disinte¬ restedness, as he of course thought it, I know not, but he eyed me attentively, and said—* Thou art a strange youth ; who are you ? and what is your name ?' *" I answered that I dwelt in the fo¬ rest with my motlier, and that I was called Julio. i 5 ' Indeed,'
4 Indeed,' said he; ' it is a pity you should live in such obscurity/ •All, your excellenza/ I replied, * willingly would I serve as a page, could I be so fortunate as to procure a situation/ " He looked at me again, and after a httle more conversation, I had the plea¬ sure to be received by him in that capa¬ city. By paying great attention to his wishes, I in a short time became a fa¬ vourite, and he seemed lost without me, wiien by any chance I was absent. " His mind I soon perceived was very miserable, and his unhappiness glad¬ dened my heart, which rankled with the most settled hatred against this, de¬ stroyer of my peace. "Whenever he was out, or engaged with company, 1 used
used to go to the forest, and recount to my dear friend the maimer of my pro¬ ceedings. " Thus passed the time till Rosalva returned from La Rosa, whose adven¬ ture in rescuing Rosalina from the ruf¬ fians, her being adopted by his aunt, and the change in her name, was whis¬ pered amongst the servants, although much precaution had been used to keep it concealed. I knew the api>ellation of Rosalina was common, yet at tlie recital of this incident, there was a strange fluttering at my heart, for winch I could not account; and hearing that the marchesa La Rosa had brought her ward w r ith her to Venice, I was wild with impatience to behold your, my dear child, and, when I did, thouglit I saw my own image, for such was my ap* 16 pearance
.pearance when at your age. But I could not be assured you was my daughter, till I beheld that jewel on your finger, which cm the first glimpse I knew was your father's, and bears the initials of his name, and wiiich convin¬ ced me of your identity. I need not attempt to describe the joy this disced very gave me, which to be known must be felt. " I now watched the conduct of Au¬ gustino more narrowly than usual, and from some expressions which inadver¬ tently escaped his lips, found he still persecuted our unhappy family with un¬ ceasing hatred. So desirous was J of gaining a knowledge of his inmost se¬ crets, that I had nearly betrayed myself one evening by listening too closely, but Bjr a piece of finesse I warded off his suspicion?.
suspicions. Just previous to the mask, a stratagem darted on my imagination, which was to assume that character which struck so much terror to his guil¬ ty conscience; and for the better manage- ment of this artifice, I obtained permis¬ sion of absence for the term of three days; but I then did not know of its being of any advantage, farther than the gratification it would afford me in the tortures he might endure by my taxing him with his numerous crimes: the knowledge of one, I gained by finding a letter in his escrutoir from an unhap¬ py girl in Paris, whom he had seduced, and abandoned to misery. In one of my interviews, I feigned to be his dear¬ est friend, and, my child, your bitterest foe, undertaking the charge of putting a period to your existence. By tliis I hoped
hoped he woidd consign you to my care, when I intended, in company with my friend, to fly to France. To do this effectually, I found it necessary he should suppose you deprived of Ufe, for if he ever doubted it, I well knew he would pursue us to the earth's utmost verge. For the accomplishment of this, I suggested a method which appeared practicable. " After my interview with Augustino on the night of the mask, when he had agreed to meet me at the ruin, I quickly threw off my strange attire, and resumed the page's habit, in which character I procured men to waylay and bring you to the abbey, as the knowledge of your return I had gained by overhearing from a closet adjoining the apartment appropriated for the use of the mar¬ chesa,
chesa, your kind "protectress. I took the precaution to prevent shedding blood, by promising the men who I em¬ ployed an additional reward if they re¬ frained from violence. Your reception is already known, and that of Augustino was conducted in such manner as to give him a high opinion of my power as a sorceress: one convincing proof of my art was his failing in his attempt to pierce his poniard in my breast, which I had fortified, in case of such a circum¬ stance, with a plate of steel concealed under my garment. In his conftision the weapon fell from his hand, which by an artifice I had before endeavoured to obtain, lest, on coming to the mystic apartment, he should indeed attempt to destroy you, which office I wished him to resign to me, hoping he would not have
have the courage to witness it, but leave you to my pretended revenge. For the better prevaihng upon his fluctuating mind, my friend, as had been concerted, at an appointed signal, ascended from a trap habited like a spectre, bearing in her hand a scroll, the purport of which urged him to consent to my wishes. " Every thing seemed to answer my expectation, when the sudden appear¬ ance of Rosalva frustrated all my de¬ signs. He and you, my child, have no- doubt already informed the marchesa of the events which afterwards transpired, and your alarm at beholding tlie fancied supernatural appearance, which was no other than my friend, whom I expected you to find ready in the apartment to receive you; but she delayed casting off her habit, as had been proposed; conjec¬ turing
turing mischief had ensued by the con* fusion she heard, occasioned hy the en¬ trance of Rosalva, who being afterwards wounded, I hastened to a chest left by the robbers, and found a styptic liquid, used by them in similar cases, which I apphed to the bleeding youth. -Then, promising to send Augustino proper as¬ sistance, I retired to an adjoining cham¬ ber, and changing my dress to the page's, immediately went in search *of those woodmen, wiio I procured so quickly, that he still supposed he was indebted to the power of Magdalena, and which I further corroborated by the fabrication of a tale he did not scruple to believe. I then accompanied him to the palazzo, not entertaining the least shadow of a doubt that you, my dear child, was safe in the company of madame De Veren¬ court,
court, therefore was perfectly easy in regard to your security. " Augustino was almost distracted at the danger of his son, from whose cham¬ ber he was seldom absent, leaving the care of his household to my charge. One dpy, when his mind was greatly agitated, he left unlocked one of his pri¬ vate drawers: this w r as a singular cir¬ cumstance, for he w r as at all times ex¬ tremely ^cautious in rendering them se¬ cure, and I never kn?w him before ne¬ glect them. The instant he quitted tire room, I gently drew it open, and in it perceived a small box with the name of Fernando di Barozzi engraven on the lid: my heart gave a sudden bound at this discovery, and I exerted my whole strength to force the lock, hoping to find some documents of our union. After repeated
repeated attempts, I at last effected my purpose; but how shall I describe my joyful feelings, when amongst other pa¬ pers of little consequence, I found some letters of my own writing, and the cer¬ tificate of our marriage! I did not hesi¬ tate a moment, lest I should be deprived of this unlooked-for treasure, but throw¬ ing on my cloak, and passing through the gate of the palazzo, hastened to the president, to whom I unfolded the whole affair, represented my claims, and pro* duced the certificate as an authentic proof of the truth. He was greatly surprised at my communication, and ex¬ pressed his wish to see the daughter I had mentioned, and to this I consented. ** As wc were further discussing the business, a servant came to inform him of the seizure of a notorious assassin, and added,
added, that the prisoner was particularly importunate to see his lordship, as he had something to communicate which w r as of great import. I begged that my affairs might be no obstacle to other business, and the president handed me into an adjacent apartment, while the villain was brought to his presence, who I overheard make confession of being my husband's murderer, having been employed to perpetrate this crime by hi* brother Augustino, whom he would accuse, if permitted, in open court—* Not that I do it in hopes of saving myself,' said he, * for I am well convinced the cause for which I am apprehended me¬ rits death, and since I must fall, why, I will drag down others wiio are as wicked as myself, wiio being rich rogues, are not suspected. He is also guilty of other crimes/
crimes,' 'added the villain,' for he has sought and does still seek the life of Ro¬ salina St. Almo, a peasant girl, which I can irrefragably prove/ " After owning to several other enor¬ mities, he was conducted to prison, and the president calling me forth, proposed that the apprehension of Augustino should immediately take place, upon the charge of murder, and that at the trial I should appear as the sorceress, for I had given him a brief account of all my transactions, conjecturing that the sight of so unexpected a witness would force him tp confession, which otherwise might not be extorted, and he would not be adjudged as guilty upon the evidence of an assassin already a prisoner. It also was necessary my daughter should be interrogated, respecting liis intention of depriving
depiiving her of Hfe, and I repaired to the ruin for the purpose of acquainting you with this; but oh, my child, how shall I express the anguish I felt on learning you had fled! I made a strict search in the forest, and inquired of se¬ veral woodcutters; but no one could give any intelligence of you. I continued my strict endeavours to recover you for several days, but finding all my efforts fruitless, I waited upon the president, to acquaint him with this accident. He informed me that the trial of Augustino would take place in three days at fur¬ thest, the tribunal being already con¬ vened, and it could not be deferred, whether you were found or not. " I was dejected on hearing this, and returned to the ruin in great desponden¬ cy, My friend used all her rhetoric to console
console me, and at last thought you might be at Fvrano. This appeared a likely suggestion, and I immediately set forward to the next village to procure a conveyance for my journeying thither* Passing through the forest with this in¬ tent, I lost my track, and was benighted. Blessed chance at last conducted me to the cottage of Alberto, where, in a mo¬ ment the most unexpected, I discovered the object of my search. What since occurred, you already know. " When my dear long-lost lord ap¬ peared in the court, 'twas with great difficulty I avoided fainting through joy, so much was I overpowered ; but wish¬ ing to prove whether his affection for me vvas unabated, was my reason for disco¬ vering myself in a maner that excited so much amazement. By this you learn tlie
the merciful goodness of Heaven, wiiose decrees, through dark and intricate, are ever wise and just. The prisoner is re¬ stored to freedom, the widow has gained her husband, and the parents their child. So the poor mariner, after encountering the perils of a storm, escapes with life, and returning to the bosom of his family, gazes in ecstasy on those whom his soul holds so dear. Impressed with gratitude for his present happiness, he forgets his past sufferings, and thinks only on his future bliss."
CHAP.
CHAPTER IX. The Marquis qfRarozzfs Narrative. Various were the sensations excited in the breasts of the auditors by this narra¬ tion, and all expressed the gratification they received by its recital, which was an elucidation to those strange occurren¬ ces whose mystery they knew not how to solve. Rosalma returned her grateful thanks to Providence for being restored to the bosoms of her affectionate parents; then addressing her father, begged he would vol. il k recount
recount the manner of his miraculous preservation, to which they all joined * their entreaties; and the marquis, with¬ out further ceremony, thus began :— " On the fatal evening when La Motte, by his subtle wiles, deluded me into the forest, under the pretence of meeting with my beloved wife, two bra¬ voes, rushing from a place of conceal¬ ment, gave me several stabs with a poniard, and then fled, leaving me as dead, for the violence of the blows, and loss of blood, caused me immediately to faint; but fortunately the weapon had not penetrated any vital part, and the cold air checking the flowing of my wounds, I was not long ere I regained my senses, when I found myself on the same spot where I first fell, but all around dark and silent. " Exerting
" Exerting all my remaining strength* E crept upon my hands and kn^es, and endeavoured to explore my way in the best manner I was able towards the path I knew to be most frequented; but missing the proper tmck, I wandered to the cliff that overhangs the sea, from wiiich I fell headlong into the briny deep. Fortunately the water was calm and unruffled, so with a slight motion of my hands, being an able swimmer in my youth, * I contiived to float upon its surface, and w r as drifted by a gentle cur¬ rent to a considerable distance. My whole strength was exhausted, and see¬ ing no hopes of relief, I commended my soul to Heaven, and each moment I ex¬ pected to give up the ghost; but graci¬ ous Providence w T as pleased to prolong my existence, and sent me succour, in K 2 the
the time of peril. A fisherman was coasting about in search of the finny tribe, and hearing something disturb the water, he made towards the place from whence the noise proceeded, and at last perceived me, though very imperfectly. He then demanded w r ho was there, but I w r as unable to reply, and answered him only by a faint struggbng noise. Guessing the cause, he stretched forth his arms at the very moment I was sink¬ ing, and dragging me into the boat, sav¬ ed me from a watery grave. Nature was now at its last gasp, and I was fast yielding "lip my life, when extending me upon a coat, by chafing my temples with some spirits, and applying it to my lips, he recalled that animation which appear¬ ed fled for ever. My eyes, now unclosed, anc^ continuing hk application, I began gradually
gradually to revive. As I grew wann, xhy wounds began to bleed afresh. My kind preserver bound them up, by tear¬ ing up my linen as well as he was able, and cheered me with the hope of being quickly better, and forced some liquor dow T n my throat; but in spite of this ho¬ nest creature's humane efforts, I found life was ebbing, Rnd my dissolution in¬ evitable.' " Perceiving this, he made towards the shore, in hopes of still saving me; but we were several leagues from the place where assistance might be obtain¬ ed ; and ere we could reach the wished- for land, the wind began to veer, which tempestuously increasing, and a contrary tide flowing, he with all his might plyed at the oar, and strained every nerve to stem its force in vain; it soon blew a K 3 hurricane.
^ hurricane, full in our^teeth, and we were driven into the main ocean. Finding it fruitless to resist or combat with its vio¬ lence, he Vas compelled to abandon the vessel to its fate, arid we rode at me mercy of the waves, which bandied us about with great fury. " The Httle skiff was but slightly tim- bered, ill calculated to sustain the bois¬ terous billows, which alternately lifted us mountains high, or sunk lis into a x deep abyss; and to complete our distress, the seams of our shattered vessel were . now starting open by the force of such a heavy sea, andit began to fill .with wa¬ ter. The poor fisherman each instant expected we must perish, and gave all up for lost, as it was impossible the skiff cduld outlive the storm. He sunk upon his knees, and presented to Heaven a humble
% humble petition to preserve us, while I, groaning with the anguish of my pain. lay nearly insensible of our imminent danger, and almost regardless of my fate. '* The honest fisherman at last disco¬ vered a light right a-head; he hailed it, and it proved to be an armed galley. They answered us by a speaking trum¬ pet, and learning our distress, let down one of their boats to our assistance; then grappling with us, my preserver leaped on board them, and assisted in hauling me in. This with difficulty they accom* plished, in the very crisis of danger, for in a few moments after the sides of our * skiff were stove iri, and she went to pieces. Tlie boat's cretfc rowed with all their might to regain their vessel, into which we were at last all safely re* ceived. k 4 * I know
" I know not to what perils we were exposed during the continuance of the tempest, for it was several hours ere my senses were restored, when I beheld my¬ self surrounded by several men of fero¬ cious aspects, and to my great grief found I had escaped one dreadful fate only to be exnosed to another, for the ship on which we were aboard was an Algerine corsair, that had been upon a cruise in search of plunder. Harsh treat¬ ment, and endless slaverv, I now found was to be my lot; however, contrary to my expectations, they used us kindly, administered remedies to my wounds, and promised to set us on shore, when they should reach the land ; but this was only an artifice to prevent my dying with despondency, for the vessel was fast bearing
bearing from the Italian coast to that of Algiers. " As soon as I was able I remonstrated with the captain, a Spanish renegado, whom I besought torelease us, telling him my name and rank; but this, instead of moving his compassion, excited only his avarice, for by detahrinfLme he might hope of gaining an immense ransom for my liberty. I expostulated with him, and promised him a handsome reward to land me; hut the perfidious wretch af¬ fected a pretended sense of honour,saying he would not be seduced from his duty, and if I wished to be released, I must explain it so to his master, AH Ben Hassan, whose slave I now was. Find¬ ing all my rhetoric ineffectual, I desisted from further persuasion, and consoled myself with the hope of being liberated k 5 as
as soon as I could write to Venice for a sufficient sum to purchase my redemp¬ tion. " The vessel, with prosperous gales, continued its course, while all my thoughts were bent upon the idea of my beloved wife, and the pangs she would endure for my absence; but I strove to repress my anguish, by the consolation she would receive from my brother, whose affection I never doubted, much less did I think he was my direst foe. " My wounds were now nearly cured, and in due time we arrived at our des¬ tined port, when I was by the renegado captain conducted to the presence of Ali, whom, by the assistance of an interpreter, I made acquainted with my situation, and bade him name the ransom he ex¬ pected for my emancipation. He eyed me
me sternly, and said he would consider of my request, but he could not consent to it at present, and I had better remain in my present state. " Enraged at this refusal, and forget¬ ting my prudence, I aroused Ins choler,by dignifying him with the epithets of rob¬ ber, and breaker of Heaven's law r s, in seiz¬ ing and making slaves of his unoffend¬ ing fellow-creatures, particularly those whom, by the rights of hospitality, lie ought to protect, for we w r ere not taken in battle, but wounded, and in distress, by wiiich alone we had claims upon his compassion; but humanity was not to be found in the breast of a merciless bar¬ barian. " The natural ferocity of his dispo¬ sition was kindled into passion by my contumelious reproaches, and summon- k (J ing
ing his guards, ordered them to convey me to a dismal dungeon, which he said would kwer my lofty mind, and teach me to pay proper respect to my lord and master. I • was instantly seized, and loaded with heavy manacles and fetters, then rudely thrust into a loathsome cell, where the blessed light of the sun never yet entered. What became of my kind preserver I know not, but I suppose he fell to the renegado's share, who sold him on the bavarambla*. «< In despair I threw myself on the cold damp floor, and gave way to the most poignant anguish, calling upon the dear names of Rosalina and Augustino. Then, being wrought to desperation, I frantically struggled to break my chains; vain - attempt.;! for my strength was nought,
nought, opposed to my vile, disgraceful bonds. My time was spent in fruit¬ less complaining and excruciating tor¬ ments. I never saw a human being ex¬ cept my keeper, a ferocious Mussulman, who every day brought me a scanty share of coarse food and a small jug of water. He seemed, by the expression of his countenance, to enjoy my suffer¬ ings, and as we did not understand each other, I seldom heard the sound of his voice, save when he seemed to execrate me, by pronouncing some phrases, which I since understand were—* Vile unbe¬ liever, Christian dog,' &e. " Three weeks, as near as I could guess, had elapsed since my interview with the cruel Ah, when one night I was alarmed by voices seemingly in earnest conver¬ sation at the portal of my dungeon. I concluded
concluded my executioners were coming to rid me of a hfe become truly burden¬ some, and I waited the event with all possible firmness. The key was apphed tp the lock, the massive bolts drew back, and the heavy-barred door unclosed, when my gaoler entered, followed by a youthful Moor of noble appearance. He pointed to my fetters, to which my surly keeper applied an instrument, and in a few moments I was released from those galling irons which had almost worn me to the bone. I knew not what was to follow tins strange ceremony, when the youth, with an air of dignity, motioned the rough Yusef to depart. This he instantly obeyed, and the stran¬ ger in a silver voice addressed me in my own language—r* Christian, fear not, but rise, and listen to what I shall say.' " I did
"I did so, when my visitor, throwing off a cloak, discovered to my astonished eyes a lady of exquisite beauty. This unexpected sight bereft me of the power of utterance, and she in a voice of melo¬ dy thus continued—' I see thy surprise: know 'tis a friend who addresses you; I am not empowered with the means of giving you liberty, yet I have that of making your bondage lighter, and the heavy hours of solitude rendered less disagreeable, by the administration of those comforts to which no doubt you always have been used.' " She then gave a signal—Yusef ap¬ peared, bearing a mattrass and covering, wiiich he spread in a corner of my cell, and again departing, quickly returned with a basket, containing various de¬ licious
licious viands; then respectfully bend¬ ing his body, retired. " I gazed in wonder at this unexpeet- ed sight and could scarcely credit the evidence of my senses, when the lady, resuming her discourse, said—' 'Tis the reverence I feel for your religion, and love I bear to your countrymen, that excites my compassion. A Venetian, called signor Montaldo, once was fond of poor Selima, and I returned his affec¬ tion with mutual warmth. He was a slave as you are—nay, do not look angry at my using that vile term, for I meant not to offend you.' I bowedV arid she proceeded. ' He was betrayed to wear¬ ing the yoke of ignominy: his placid manners won the hearts of his task-mas¬ ters. I, conjecturing he was not of the common
common stamp, felt an interest in his fate, and feigned to my father a wish of being initiated in tiie rudiments of his language, w r hich granted, he became my tutor. This was a great alleviation to his misery. I need not dwell upon it; suffice it to say, we loved each other; we often met in private. A trusty slave of mine was privy to our passion, and by her means'our interviews were contiived. At length my father became acquainted with our stolen meetings, and one fatal night, just as the unfortunate Montaldo had separated from me, and was passing as usual through the garden, he was by the order of my cruel parent assassi¬ nated.* The tears flowed quickly down the face of the lovely Moor, as she ut¬ tered this. * From that time, the re¬ morseless Ali has persecuted the Vene¬ tians,
tians with mortal hatred, and to that cause may Jbe attributed the greatest part of your sufferings; for had you but been of any other nation, signor, the ransom would have been preferred to your confinement. My father greatly thirsts after riches, yet he is more re¬ vengeful than avaricious : then, since I, though innocently, was the first cause of incensing his implacable hate, it ever shall be my care to ease the sufferings of all who are objects of his resentment. Yusef, your gaoler, has no respect for any tiring belonging to Christianity, but as he is entirely devoted to my will, often suffers me to ease the captive of his gall¬ ing chains; but as for liberty, it is neither in Iris or my power to give; neverthe¬ less, all I can grant you shall command. Signor, farewell, and ere the silver moon's
moon's pale beams have thrice shone up¬ on the castle's turrets, you again shall behold Selima.' . " I tendered this lovely infidel my warmest acknowledgments, who again enveloping herself with her cloak, depart¬ ed ; and the door closing, the ponderous bolts were replaced, and I once more was barred from all human intercourse. " Months passed on, with lazy, leaden strides, as usual, except at proper inter¬ vals, when I received the friendly visits of the beautiful Moor, who so greatly alleviated my sufferings. " At length a slave's habit was brought for me, with orders to equip myself, for I had too long lain in a state of inactivi¬ ty, and must now share the toils and drudgery of my fellow-slaves, by labour¬ ing in tlie Moor's garden, and other ser¬ vile
. vile offices. I own my soul, instead of revolting, felt pleasure at these tidings, for confinement had tamed my indigo tiant spirit, and I panted with desire again to breathe the pure air, and behold the glorious light of heaven, even in that ignominious capacity. I equipped myself in the disgraceful habilhnents with such alacrity, that I perceived it excited astonishment in the eye of the messenger, who,no doubt expected re¬ luctance or opposition. This ceremony performed, I was conducted and placed amongst the herd of miserable wretches who, like myself, were condemned to in¬ glorious servitude, and dreading the scourge of our inhuman masters, were daily compelled, beneath a burning sun, to carry burdens fit only for senseless brutes to bear, or to deck the earthly paradise
soon acquired a sufficiency of the lan¬ guage to comprehend them, and be understood by my yoke-fellows; and years of galling slavery dragged heavily on, till, worn by fatigue, and scorched by the parching heat, my countenance became so changed, that it would have been impossible to have traced in the brown visage of Ali's lowly slave, the features of the unfortunate Fernando 5 Barozzi. 44 The lovely Selima oftentimes passed me while at my labour, and though by language she dared not, yet her sweet pitying countenance fully expressed the sorrow she felt at my bitter fate. About the fifth year of my captivity^ her hand was sought in marriage by a Moorish' general* but she continued stedfast in her
her refusals, and true to the memory of the dece-ased lord of her, heart, the un¬ happy Montaldo. Her rejection exaspe¬ rated the temper of her stern, obdurate father, who, to force her to compliance, had recourse to rigorous methods; and the miserable victitn of his rage at last, being urged by desperation, put a period to her existence by swallowing poison. In her last moments she confessed the deed, and declared her reason for this dreadful act was a wish to preserve her affections pure and unviolated; for she could love none, or ever would wed any of her father's choosing, for her heart was buried in the grave of the unfortu¬ nate Venetian. " Ali, though rough and flinty, ten¬ derly loved his child, and when he found she was lost for ever, he wept, tore his beard,
beard, and raved hke a maniac, vowing to wreak his vengeance on all Christians who were so unlucky as to fail into his power. This oath lie verified, and I severely felt its bitter effects, for upon the most trivial occasion, or slightest neglect, I was most inhumanly scour* ged. Life became truly burdensome, and if it had not been for the friendly aid of hope, I think I should have been wrought also to put a termination to my wretched being, by some violent means; but the sweet idea'of again be¬ ing restored to the dear inestimable blessing of liberty and my native land, gave me fortitude to endure my miser¬ able lot, with a resignation becoming our blessed religion. " One day, as the malignant Moor passed near me, when laboriously toiling in
* £16 BAROZZI. in Iris garden, I rested on my spade, and once riiore ventured to remind him of the ransom I had offered for my eman¬ cipation, which I besought him to ac¬ cept, and suffer me to return to my own country, from whence I had been detain¬ ed against all laws, both divine or hu¬ man ; at the same time mentioned how derogatory it was to the feelings of any man to bend to servile offices, who had been used to hold an exalted situation in life. "He cast upon me a ferocious look, th&i sternly replied—* Vile unbeliever, thinknot of regaining freedom, but toil, and grovel on; and delight my soul by seeing thy proud spirit humbled with the dust, fit employment fbr all of thy persuasion: hy our holy prophet, great Mahomet, I swear I would not barter the
the pleastDre which I feel in witnessing thy degradation, not for the wealth of all Algiers. No, thou Venetian dog, I have sworn eternal enmity to all of Christian race, especially those of thy accursed nation, whom I will persecute with unceasing revenge, for it was one of thy vile countrymen that seduced, by his liellish wiles, the affections of my daughter, whose loss I can never forget, and my sorrows only can be mitigated in beholding the miseries of all those upon whom my power can inflict them; of that number thou art one, and were thy life prolonged till age or infirmity ren¬ der thee incapable of labour, yet, if I should survive, still would I hold thee in bondage." Thus saying, he left me, while sparks of fury flashed indignantly from his fierce black eyes> and munmir- VOL. IL <L jftcv 9
ing torments to me, and all of Christian belief. '"'■Some time after this, another wretched captive was added to the Hum-* ber of miserable slaves, who, like myself proved to be a Venetian; unhappy man ! hard was thy lot to bear" a life of ignomi¬ nious toil beneath the command of cruel barbarians; but he, finding resistance vain, submitted without a murmur. Oftentimes did I observe this man re¬ garding me with an eye of great scru¬ tiny, as if he before had seen me, and I frequently wished to speak with him; hut our inhuman task-masters prevented any intercourse between the miserable captives, during the hours dedicated to labour, and at night we were confined in separate cells. One day, however, passing
passing close by him, when I thought we were unobserved, I said to him— 4 Friend, are you lately from Venice?' " He started at the sound of my voice, and again fixed his eyes upon me most earnestly. * What is it you perceive in my countenance so astonishing ?' I in¬ quired ;' have you ever before seen me ? am I known to you, that you betray such agitation ?*. " He answered—' You greatly resem¬ ble, in person, voice, and countenance, a man I once knew; and if your com¬ plexion was not so embrowned, you woidd bear to him a perfect likeness: do, signor, favour me by pulling off your turban.' *• I immediately complied* when he exclaimed, as if involuntarily—' Merci¬ ful powers, he still exists!' l2 *'I
" I felt greatly moved at this, and said-— 6 Whom do you suppose me ?* "He replied— r * You are Fernando, marehese di Barozzi.'—* I am,' answer¬ ed. I, immediately; * and pray who are you ?'—* One entirely unknown to you, though I am Well acquainted with all your house.'— * Indeed! and know you whether my brother is still alive?' I eagerly inquired.—* He is, or at least he was, a few months ago,' he replied.— * Of course he supposes me dead ?'— 4 Aye, no doubt, and it is a very natu¬ ral supposition too, permit me to say, when he sent two assassins to kill you.' —* How! my brother Augustino hire murderers to deprive me of Hfe? im-r possible! he loved me affectionately.' —* Ah, very likely,' said the man, * but Jhe loved your title and riches much better,
better, I promise you.'—' Good Heavens! can it be ? but my wife, did she not claim the honours of Barozzi ? for were I really defunct, Augustino has no lawful right to my possessions, as long as the marchioness Rosalina, daughter of De Valmont, and her child exists.'—* Ah, but he took care of that, for she was re¬ moved, together with her infant and father.'— € What!' said I, petrified with astonishment; * it cannot be ! 'tis false.' —* You 11 find it true, however,' said he, cahnly, ' if you should ever return to Venice. 5 —* How know you all this ?* I again inquired, still hoping to find him wrong; wiiile the circumstance of my being beset in the forest earned with it a full conviction of its being true, winch, as the cold chill' of death, seemed to creep across my heart, stopping the cur- l 3 rent
^•ent of the vital drops, which froze with horror, grief, and indignation. **■ Her then informed me how he once had belonged to a gang of bravoes, two of whom had been employed toassassinate me, and that shortly after; my wife, child, and her father, were sill together consumed iri their cottage, which no doubt had been set on fire by the order of my unnatural brother. How I hved to hear the end of this dreadful intelli¬ gence I know not, but at its close I sunk insensibly on the earth, apparently dead, and when my senses returned, I found myself stretched on the straw which* served me for my bed. I remained a Considerable while in this state, strug¬ gling with a fever, which succeeded the anguish of my tortured mmd; but my constitution yet remained.good, and ii* despite
despite of my wishes to the contrary, I recovered. "The first tidings communicated to me, on my return to a state of convales¬ cent appearance, was the death of the cruel Moor, who had been suddenly seized with a malignant disorder, which in a few hours carried him off, to the great joy of all my fellow-slaves, as well as myself- His heir came to take pos¬ session of Iris inheritance, and hhn* I had the happiness to find totally opposite to his predecessor, for Hamet was noble, humane, and benevolent: his first step was a mitigation of the hardships im¬ posed upon the w r retched captives, an action truly praiseworthy; and when he heard my unfortunate stoiy, he not only gave me freedom, hut provided me with a passage on board a vessel bound for l 4f this
this country. After thanking him in the best manner possible, I set sail, and by the blessing of Heaven, arrived at Venice at a crisis so truly important; and thus you perceive, that though the hour of retribution was long deferred, it has it last arrived, and after wearing so many years the galling yoke of captivity, I at length am restored to the sw r eet& of liberty and love."
CHAP-
CHAPTER X. The Conclusion. Often did Fernando beguile his audi¬ tors of tears, while recounting, his hap¬ less story, but particularly the marchio¬ ness and his daughter, who felt inex¬ pressible anguish at this relation of his suffering and vile captivity, amidst all of which hehad still retained the affec¬ tion of father and husband, unabated oy time or calamity. On its conclusion, Jtosalinatopk an opportunity of quitting^ tlie apartment in search of Rosalva* h 5. whom
whom slie anxiously sought througliout the palazzo, but in vain... She their strayed into the garden, where slie dis¬ covered the object of her affection in aiv arbour, seated in su cogitating posture. She stepped lightly, and placing her hand upon his shoulder, with a voice of sweetness, said%r-" Rosalva I" He started, and exclaimed—" Ah, my beloved Rosalina, why do you seek out an unhappy wretch like me? 'twere fit you shun me, for have you n6t just heard a recapitulation of* my father's crimes ? then it is impossible you should ever love or esteem one sprung from that guilty mait; therefore leave me, I beseech you, leave me." " Unkhid youth," she replied*, as a ttar started to her eye; ** is tliis your opinion of Rosalina ? Do you think she does
does not estimate you for yourself alone? Ah, dear youth, can I forget when you 'saved me in the forest, or when your breast received the poniard- meant for mine ? Oh, Rosalva* never, never shall the obligatioiis-of the peasant St. Ahnohe forgotten, by the hehess of Barozzi; arid here, by yon azure canopy of heaven, I swear, if you do not partake my for¬ tune, and share those honours, a cottage would be preferable to the 4 gilded pa¬ lazzo, solitude more agreeable than the parade of rank or pageantry.'* "Indeed!" said the enraptured youth; eagerly catching lier hand, " Yes indeed;, dear-Rosalva," she re¬ plied ; " but c«me, suffer me to conduct you to my father and mother; tliey w r ait for* you, and the dear marchioness La ^ l 6 Rosas
Rosa feels not easy at your absence* Come, my love, qome»" She led him to the saloon, but the cloud of sorrow still, hung upon his brow, which being perceived by the marquis, he, with a view of dispelling his melancholy, and diverting his op¬ pressed mind, entered into a conversa¬ tion upon the subject of the intended nuptials, and appeared so free and con¬ vivial, that pleasure and cheerfulness once more assumed their jocund reign within the walls of the palazzo of Ba¬ rozzi ; and for the purpose of beguiling the time till the period proposed for their union, the marchesa La Rosa pro¬ posed paying a visit to the cottage of the good old shepherd Alberto: to this all parties immediately acceded, and the next
next day was fixed on for the commence¬ ment of this excursion. Early on the following morning the carriages w r ere ready at the gate, and every arrangement being prepared, they set forward. In the fint rode the mar¬ quis di Barozzi, his lady, and madame De Verencourt; in the second, Rosalva, RosaUna, and the marchesa La Rosa, with their retinue following in the rear; and after a pleasant ride, they beheld the neat cottage peeping from the foli¬ age with which it w r as surrounded. The situation prevented a near access of carriages; from these they then alighted, and walked the remainder of the way, leaving their horses, which were unharnessed, and cropping the sweet herbage which grew around in great
great abundance, to the care of their at¬ tendants. The noble visitors soon arrived at the humble dwelling, to'the joyful confusion of Beatrice, who was all in aihrtter at the conferring of this honour, and with a thousand curtseys, and as many apo¬ logies, ushered them iir. , Marcelina, who had been tending the flowers in the gaiden, and from tl>e choicest had selected a bouquet for her -Reuben, came in at the back door, chanting a merry, air, unconscious of the presence of so many exalted per¬ sonages, who^ had honoured her roof. She had advanced halfway into the room, with, lier eyesifixed upon the little gift, which she was disposing with great taste, when her-mother, in a. voice * r&- \ ther
ther angry, cried—" Plague on the girl/ what ails her? is this your behaviour to their worshipful honours ?" At this address the pretty cottager looked \ip, and seeing herself surround¬ ed by so much elegance, to their great mirth let fall- the flowers, and began to- stammer nn excuse about Reuben and her father, wiio, she said, had desired her to prepare a nosegay of roses and jessa¬ mine ; " so I thought, as no one was here, why, It—I—-would make it—a& pretty as I could.'* Rosalina, pitying her confusion, ap¬ proached her,.saying—" What! has Mar¬ celina then forgotten me ?"' * Oh, Holy Virgin !" exclaimed the astonished girl; " pardon me, madatn > you are the marcliioness of-—o&—some¬ body—but I forget what that bold youth
youth called your ladyship, though I endeavoured to keep it in my head, and bid Reuben do the same, for he used to have a better memory than I; but somehow or another, since we have been married, his has been so strangely affect¬ ed, that he can remember nothing." " Indeed !" said Rosalva, laughing; «« and pray wiiat, my pretty rustic, has affected your husband's head so sudden¬ ly?" " Oh, joy, my lord," said she, blush- ing still deeper, and dropping a low curtsey: " but look, my lady, here comes Reuben; oh, how glad he will be to see your honourable ladyship, and all their worshipful honours who accom¬ pany you!" Her new-made husband now entered the dwelling, and with a rusticated bow, greeted
greeted the noble visitors of his father- in-law; but perceiving Rosalina, the mis¬ take he had committed on his first be¬ holding her occurred to his memory, and the fault now seemed more terrible than ever, seeing her arrayed in splen¬ did apparel, and surrounded by her friends. The poor youth, while twist¬ ing- his hat about, and turning it back¬ wards and forwards, began making an apology, saying—" I hope your lady¬ ship's goodness 4ias forgot tlie rudeness I committed when I first saw your ho¬ nour ; but indeed, as I then told your la¬ dyship, I took you for Marcelina—I did indeed, your excellenza." " Pray don't mention it any more," said Rosalina, " for, good Reuben, I am perfectly convinced of your innocence." 44 What is it to wiiich the young man
m^n alludes ?" inquired the marquis, no¬ ticing the confusion of his daughter. J 4 Oh, nothing, my lord," said she,." a meretriAeF 44 Oh no, my lord, it was not a trifle; only her ladyship's goodness pleases to call it so, for really it was so great a crime, that I never shall forget it, and so 1*11 tell your lordship all about it." He then rekted the whole affair of his saluting Rosalina so freely, supposing der to be Marcelina. This communi- jation afforded great mirth to the whole party, except her whom it most con¬ cerned. Beatrice, who during this relation Iiad slipped out in quest of Alberto, now ^turned in company with the honest shepherd, who, in a hearty, frank, and fet respectful manner, bade them wel¬ come,.
come, while a repast of the choicest grapes and finest fruits his garden could boast were quickly spread upon his homely board, of which they all pa** took. After this refreshment they retired into an arbour, and sat several hours* tasting, at intervals* their host's best wine, the produce of his own vintage. The marchesa La Rosa and madame De Verencourt weie delighted with the? manners of the unsophisticated cottagers? and on their departure, the former pre¬ sented Marcelina with a well-stocked purse, as a marriage present, and left ano¬ ther for her brother Marco, who was in the fields at a considerable distance, tend¬ ing his flock. The visitors now bade adieu tp their humble entertainers, and departed, al- / most
most overwhelmed with their good be- tiisons, and thanks in profusion, for the gifts which every one had presented to them, as tokens of remembrance. On their return, they beguiled the distance in discoursing of the pleasure they received in witnessing the happi¬ ness, felicity, and domesticated cheerful¬ ness, which reigned throughout the fa¬ mily and inmates of the peaceful cot¬ tage ; and in good time they all reached the palazzo. , The following day, s long-proposed intention of the marcliioness di Barozzi was put in force. She thought she ne* ver could fully know peace, till the re¬ mains of her beloved father, the unfor¬ tunate count De Valmont, were re¬ moved into consecrated ground, a#d in¬ humed in a manner becoming the ex¬ ited
alted dignity of his rank and birth. Therefore, though it was a cause of renewing both her own and daughter's sorrows, she set forth for Pyrano, accom* panied by the marquis and Rosalina^ appointing to meet the marchioness La Rosa and her friend at the castle of the former, together with Rosalva, who could Jiot remain an hour in Venice af¬ ter it was evacuated by the lovely and amiable object of his affections. They performed the journey with¬ out meeting with any accident, and again beheld the once-loved cottage in the Valley of Vintagers, where they were received with great joy and surprise, by honest Gerrard, his son, and daughter. Theferst, with alow bow, inquired if sig¬ nora Rosa was going to increase their hap¬ piness, by again residing amongst them? The
Tlie marquis, in a manner brief as possible, informed them of the strange events that had taken place, and men¬ tioned the marchioness's intention in having her father's ashes conveyod to an adjacent monastery; and interred with due solemnity and funeral rites. The honest peasant, on hearing this j brushed a tear from his eye, and led the way to the garden, and pointing to the humble grave, retired, leaving them un¬ interrupted- T : ' Rosaiina's grief was renewed, and she was forced to be conveyed from the place by her father. In a few days the mournful ceremo¬ ny was performed, and they saw: the last remains of the unfortunate count depo¬ sited hi hallowed ground, and a monu¬ ment raised to his memory. They then proceeded
proceeded to the castle of £*a Rosa, ^fid were cordially received by thfc generous mistress of that hospitable mansion. After ,su£b lapse of time as decency required, tlie long-wished^for union took place between Rosalva and Rosalina. By this tie, tlie ancient family of Ba-. .rozzi again flourished witli its former greatness, benevolence, and honour. Henri and Paulina, by their mutual desire, and consent of their lord and la-. dy, made another happy pair, and spent the rest of their hves in the senicc of their noble employers, Roldon perished on the rack, and soon after his villanous comrade, Barano, was taken and condemned, together with soine q^her bravoes belonging to the same inhuman crew, which had been too often employed by the deceased Augustino. Madame
Madame De Verencourt returned to France, and found her husband, whom she had long supposed dead: they had mutually wept for the loss of each other during their long separation, but now at last, by tlie kind interposition of Pro¬ vidence, were restored to each other's arms, to finish their days in connubial love and harmony. The meretricious marchioness Loredo, after being deserted by her favourite pa¬ ramour, Flodiardo, swallowed poison, and thus wickedly tenrlinated a life of licentiousness and guilt. The marchioness di Barozzi distri¬ buted the wealth awarded her by Ri¬ naldo, chieftain of the band, amongst the peasantry and woodcutters who in- toited.the straggling cottages on the skirts of the forest, as a recompence for ' the
the losses they had sustained by the de¬ predations committed by those unlawful plundering banditti. Rosalva and his fair bride were in due time blessed with a numerous off¬ spring, sweet pledges of wedded love; and while the delighted marchioness listens to their innocent prattle, and views the increasing happiness of her darling child, she blesses the hour when fortune inspired her with the thought to assume, and Providence gave her strength to support, the arduous and dangerous character of the sorceress Magdalena. FINIS. VOL. II. M Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Stfeet, London.
