Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Marchmont: a novel
MARCHMONT.
CHAPTER I.
,i, * w . i ij, ??? ?? ?.;^?? of iïiitci\ dul, Λ f ι. t ,ui v '?? n v ti J — α look to iad 1 \ ι ?????? ??\? 0^. VNOan — ?? w;ld, \ *t m^fV A l" í m <α ?"' ηί\\\ w .»nues ? 11 her cb<"fv } I it· jM'r ?? v ?1 ? — bat ici c u ioon, A*. í hL 'Mf* ^* "l t iKC> <4 i!n· mooi! I pon .om,* \N ^ dci.n , do* d, svtnlv ii v.\ /i- j,i\ Rc f iíc s . ad Sia 'í mon* d w k tí .' hea\ en ■> v.¡di- ? n
ít IHIS poor youni> creatine, Ma¬ dam," faid Mrs. Moftly, ít is a god¬ child of mine,as I .old von. Her mother was a fervant to Mrs. Marchmont, and Vol, II L »í a urcat
α great favourite of every body's—She mai ned \eiy wel·, tiie fon ot one oí the richeft fai mus hereabouts, and they lived with the old people, w hue this poor gul wa-s born. She was well hi ought up; but unfortunately he** fathet and mothei both dnd, and the giandfather met with hca\y loffes and was gtown ■-civ old, io tlm he could not caiu on his bufincfs; and therefoie wa, ionul to gi\e it up to diiothu of his Ions, who was a haid, felfifh kmd of man and did not much «are to be burdened with Phccbv, though, while his fathet livtd, he let her ftay to take care of him. —He died at ? gieat age about fou» \^h ago, and then Phcebe was dohud by bu¬ linele to look out ior ? fei vice.—She w T as taken to ferve f wo fingle laches uho kved at Exeter, who, feeing her a íeníi- ble gill, ufed to make hei read to them, and to work in the room with them ; ίο that ftie learned a little more than com¬ mon fervants generally do. Theíc ladies had
bad a biother, vvho was captain of an India ihip-, and returning home from a "urwgr, he came down to fee them. He had a f. rvant, a young man who had been three voyages abroad, and faved ? little moncv.— He feli in love with Mieche ; and as it was a very good match for her, the ladies did noi oppofe their being married, tliough they were very forry to ??? with her.-—-She went with b.er huíband, Mr. Prior, to London, being then a young creature not eigh¬ teen.·—I don't undei iland hov/ fuch things happen, living known nothing ii) ?? them when f \v >s vour' T , fo thai now I t«nnot nuke ime h out oí vshat people te 1 me ; but it .omehow cr odici canse to pafs the.: Mr. Pi ior, who had hud out the belt part of his money in fomc goods from 1??!>?, loft ihem all bv the wicked docekk ineis of ? friend he had trufted —I heard that, bv reafon of their being fmuggled, they were all f cued by the Cuftom-hoiife officeis-- π -'i and
"They had a tedious voyage by reafoii of contrary winds, but they were within figbt of Englifli ground; and poor Phcebe, when ili e has been able to talk about i^ has told me tliat the very fight of the land did her huiband good, fo that he was getting quite himfelf again for all their being fo long at fea. — Phoebe's few friends living here in the Veft country, ihe wiihed very much to have come to land at Plymouth: but her hufband's fifter lived ii* London; and he hoping to get fome employment there, íhe would not fay any thing about it—To they went on in the ihip that was loaded with fugar and fuch like for to fell at London. ** But a terrible ftorm overtook them a little above here ; and not far from Sid- mouth the fhip was drove albore, and every body in her drowned, but two failors, a boy, and poor Phcebe, who having been itunned by the falling of oue of the raafts as her huihand was try- * ing
ing to take her out in his arms, was fomchow entangled fo among the rigging and ropes, that when the waves wafhed almoft all the reft of the people off the deck ihe was left: fo it was fuppofed, Ïoï nobody could tell exactly how it happened.—Tbe laft thing poor unhappy Phcebe remembers, when her difturbed mind allows her to think of any thing, i?, that Prior took her in his arms up from the cabin, and tried to cheer and encourage her; and when fomebody ad- v i fed him to fave himfelf by leaping in¬ to the fea, as he could fwim very well, he anfwered, that he had rather periih with his wife than get on fliore without her; but that, if fhe could but have courage, they might both be fafe.— < At that moment,· fays Phcebe, * a great foa broke over the fhip; flic ftruck with more force than ever; but Prior ftill held me faft, when on a fudden there was a dreadful ? raffi, and a loud Πι riek fol¬ lowed—I remember no more/------ She ? 4 hai
has told mc though, fometimes, when fhe has had an interval of reafon, that the firil thing fhe afterwards recollects was being on the beach of flones, furrounded by men and women, who, though they faw me was not dead, were taking every thing from her, and that fhe well remem¬ bers their cutting off her wedding ring becaufe her fingers were fwelled.—The fhock this gave her, and a fort of con¬ fufed idea of what had happened, and that Prior was perhaps alive, roufed her to greater fenfibility; but that the people continued to tear off her clothes, and one had juft taken and run off with her pockets, in which was all the money Prior had received for his wages in Ja¬ maica. She had then, fhe fays, ftrength to raife herfelf up, and flic faw two of the menandone bad-looking woman whif- pering together, and is fiirc they were confultiog together to kill her—when a young gentleman on horfeback came haftily towards them, and, afking fomc .. ■ queitions,
qtieftions, leaped down upon the ftones all among the people that were round her, and infilled "on their giving back the clothes they had taken from her, and affording her aífiftance to fave her life, inftead of thinking of robbing her. — The people only a iked what bufinefs it was of his, and went away to feek after more plunder, leaving her with very little t nhes ; and they feemed then very un- w,tling to go. — Phcebe fpoke, and de¬ fired the young gentleman to tell her where her huiband was?—He could not anfwer her; and it was with great di ifi- culty be prevailed upon fome other wo¬ men, who were by this time come down to fee what they could get too, to lead her among them to thenearcft houfe ; where they would not take her in till hc had given them all the money hc had about him; and then hc told the poor diftracl- cd creature he would go try to find her huiband!—Ah! he knew that would be to no purpofe ; for he was furc he had ? 5 fpoken
fpoken to the only three people that, befides Phcebe herfelf, w f ere fa ν ed, and they had told him they faw Prior daihed ofFthe deck by the maft, and were furc he was killed.—But the dear, good voung man fetched a furgeon to the poor diftreíTed creature, who was a humane kind man, and by degrees they made her life fecure; but as ihe grew well enough to think, flie became more and more delirious.—They could not, you know, help her thinking, nor her know¬ ing when ihe did, that Prior was drowned ; fo flie was raving mad for a good while, and confined down in her bed. " Ah! my deareft Mifs, who do you think the noble-hearted gentleman was that faved this poor wretched girl ?—It was no other but my dear young mafter himfelf—It was laft Oclober—juft the firil time he came down to this country to get out of the way—and hc was over¬ taken by the ftorm, and put up for the night
night at a little public-houfe on tbe way- fide about two mile from the fea, —The wind was fo terribly high that he could not clofe his eyes; and before daybreak he heard fome men call up the landlord, and tell him there was a great fhip afhore at a place they named ; and thereupon that man, and two or three more that came in, went away as faft as they could to fee for plunder. My good young mafter, on the contrary, got upon his horfe, and rode down to fee who he could fave. — Dear foul ! he was always from a boy trying to do good to all the world!—I wonder when any body will think of ferving him? " God knows how ill he could afford the money it coft him to have poor Phcebe taken care of. Finding flie was a native of this country, he enquired out her friends, and had her brought to one of them—that uncle of hers that lives in a lone farm about three miles ofl; and though hc was in fuch fad diftrefs himfelf, ? ? Mr.
Mr. Marchmont fet about trying to re¬ cover for her fome little matter that Prior had Ieftin his fifter's hands when he went beyond fea. Eut when that diihoneft perfon, this fifler of Prior's, found that her brother was drowned, and that his wife had lofi her fenfes with grief, flic knew there was nobody that could main¬ tain any demand againft her; fo nothing could be got from her but mere trifles from time to time—and the uncle was fo unwillmg to keep Phcebe, that he got her into a mad-houfe : but they prcfent¬ ly after d ifc ha rged her, faying that flic never would be any better for any thing they could do for her. But, poor thing ! flie hurts nobody, and all her raving is turned into a fort of melancholy wild¬ nefs that breaks one's heart. If it had not been for her having loft her fenfes, the ladies that Πι ? lived with before flie vas married would have taken her again, even although fhe had not been able to do for them as a fervant; but one of
of thofe ladies has very bad health, and is¬ at times afflicted with low fpirits herfelf, fo that it was impoffible for them to have fuch a poor diftra8ed girl in the houfe. But they were ftill very charita¬ ble and kind to her; and they, and fome of their friends, have agreed among them to pay every year as much as fatisfies her uncle for letting her ftay at his houfe. But, poor thing ! they take no manner of care of her ; and as ihe is quite inoiTcnfivc, nobody hinders her wandering about when ihe becomes rcftlefs. But fometimes flie ihuts her¬ felf for ten or twelve days in her room, and never, if ihe can help it, will fee the light or fpeak to any body. Now, fince Spring is coming on, flie is, as the doc¬ tor faid ihc would be, more aifecled.— One of the neighbours told me a few days ago, that poor Phcebe had taken to her rambling again.—Her mind runs upon the notion, that if flic goes to the lba*lidc flic fliall meet Prior—and when that
the wind, and the beating of the rain; puts her in mind of the time flic was wrecked.—Sometimes fhe walks about wringing her hands, and crying out to Prior, her dear Prior, to fave her! and fometimes fhe wants to ruih out of the houfe and go down to the beach—and flic entreats the people about lier to go alfo, in order to fave any poor crea¬ tures who may be ihipwrecked—as Mr. Marchmont did fave her from being killed by the cruel folks that waited up¬ on the more.—Ah ! good God," con¬ tinued Mrs. Mofely, her mind reverting at that moment to the firft fubject of her own concern, <f Mr. Marchmont, far from being able to do fo charitable an office, may now want fomebody to help him in the fame fad condition 1" ·. Althca had been too much affected by the preceding narration to be able to bear this clofb with compofure. Her eyes, that had been half obfeured with tears for the hopelcfs diflrefles of Phcebe
Phcebe Prior, now flreamed afrefh, and fobs which flie could not reprefs choakcd her.—Poor Mrs. Mofely was> frightened, and offered to adminifter fuch remedies as are ufual : but Althea,, ftruggling with the ufelefs weaknefs ihe had indulged, recovered herfelf in a few moments, and, defiring Mrs. Mofe¬ ly to keep poor Phcebe with her for a day or two, and infifting on her taking a guinea to anfwer any additional ex- pence it might occafion to her, faid, that flie would walk homeward, as it was already late.-------And indeed tea always ferving Mrs. Mofely for her dinner, Althea, deeply interefted as flie was in the ftory of the poor maniac, had for¬ gotten the courfe of time, and that flie had not dined herfelf. The evening was clofing as flie walked home, and was even far advanced be¬ fore flie was within fight of Eaftwood¬ leigh; for her languor prevented her walking
heavy - afflictions of fuch an unhappy being as this poor girl; and I ihall, when engaged in fuch offices, be able to fay,. «* If Marchmont could know ray em· ploymcnt, he would citccm mc more·'*
CHAP.
CHAP. IL'
.......Far lefs abhorr'd than thefe Vex'd Scyüa, bathing in the fea that parts Calabria from the hoarle Trinacrian fhore.
LOST in reflection, the increafing ob¬ fcurİty of the evening, occafioned by one of thofe heavy fogs which the peafants call a blight, increafed, without Althéa's remarking it, till fhe could hardly dii— cern the path ihc was in. She quicken¬ ed her pace, and looked about her with fome degree of uneafinefs. There was fomething fearful in the ftilinefs of the evening; for, unlefs it was the flow tread of the cattle ihe heard grazing near her, not a found broke the air, except from a great diftance the dull tinkling pî a team
team with bells, neceffary in narrow hol¬ low ways, fuch as arc frequent in this part of England—How poor a fubftitute for the fongftreii· of the night, which ? ne\er heard m this weitem country — ' Wi'h llqu d nufcb ίο rlof** the t\e oí da\ '" Amid this blank and fillen ftillnef>, chicli feemed like a general paufe of nature, Akhea at length reached the laft field but one next the houfe, which appeared iargci, and frowning in more íublime ruin through the hail- ob feu rí u s mill. There was now only the laft enclo- 4 fure to pafs, which was di\ided fiom that part of the difparked ground ihe was actually in, by the group of old trees remarkable for having ihaded the fame fpot when Edward Marchmont gave up near it the life fo honourably paffed and fo early loft. There was fomething very melan¬ choly in the faint effort of incomplete vegetation
vegetation that appeared on the wild **\\d mofi»-grown blanches that had pufh- ed out from their half-hollow trunks·— it reminded Althea of the lafl ineffectual druggies of their former unfortunate poíleííorb tv) keep up an appearance of affluence when it* n-aluv ex ι fled no longer. She broke off as fhe paffed a fmall branch of almoft unfulded leave* from the old bceih, to the twiited bole of which the gare-poft was fixed— filie ailles and oaks had yet onlv a few weak buds)—and with many melancholy re¬ flections opened the gate, and paffed on; when fuddenly from behind cmc of the trees fta'ted a fturdy ragged man, who in a fort of \ ell aiked, or rather demanded, her charity. His unexpected appearance and rude vociferation almoft deprived her of all prefence of mind. She continued, however, to walk quickly on, at the fame time taking a /hilling from her pocket, which ftie gave the beggar, af¬ furing
furing him, in a tremulous voice, that it was all the relief ihe had in her power to afford him.*—As this was a greater alms than is ufuaDv beftowed, and as fhe was now within the court leading to Wansford's rooms, flie hoped imme¬ diately to efcape from fo ahrming a follower j but the rufhan, now pretending to be as importunate vvith thanks as he had before been *ith prayers purfued her clofelv to the door. Arriving at it, ftie called to Mrs. Wansford to let her in (for. fincc the impudent intrufion of Vampyre, alf the doors of die houfe had been kept fhut4 The door was opened : but her frightful perfecutor ítill ρ re fled clofe to her; and forcing a large ftick between the door and door-poft, be'orc Mrs. Wansford could fhut it, hc haU loo'd ; his voice echoing like the Indian war-whoop round the ruined walls. Inftantly four other figures as terrific as himfelf, though lefs ragged, ap¬ peared; and they all rufhed together into
into Wansford's room, where flood Akhea half dead with terror; while tlie children hearing their mother ftiriek, and feeing the fear Akhea was in, clung fcreaming round them both, crying in vain for their father. Their father was not in the houfe; and the poor woman feemed to be fo petrified with terror, that ftie had no power to afk the men their bufmefs. They did not, however, leave her long in fufpenfe : one of them, taking off his hat, difcovered the diabolical counte¬ nance and diftorted eyes of the villanous attorney, Vampyre. He approached Akhea in his ufual infolent manner; and whfle ihe fhrunk trembling from him, às from the mofl noxious reptile, he told her in his loud, flow, and impudent manner, that he was now armed with proper authority to fearch for " the young 'Squire, who had fo long been playing at hide and feek with his clients—and that he hoped Jht Vol. III. ? had
had now no objection to his examining the houfe/'——Althea hearing this, felt a confufed affemblage of lausiachon and indignation. Her courage, how¬ ever, returned enough to fay, " You feem likely to rrb the houfe, and of your authority I believe nothing." Mrs. Wansford, who really fuppofed from the appearance of the people that they were robbers and murderers, had no power to fpeak, and turned her af¬ frighted looks towards Althea, as d to entreat her not to irritate the ruffians, who now proceeded tt) demand oí her tiie ke) s of all rooms. Keys íhe ailuied them ftie had none—and the attorney, brandifhmg the flick with w hah he guided his fteps, declared that they cou l d do very well without them, for that he ihouid make no fcruple to break open the doors.—" And as for your hiding-places," faid the wretch, <? with which this fine fellow has evaded the juftice of the laws of this land, they will not
not ferve him any longer; for here's an honeft fellow," pointing to an ill-look¬ ing old man who flood near him, " that can give a pretty good account of them fame toques Tcaping-holes—Yes, yes, I fancy we fhall find the noble 'Squire this bout." So laying, the gang departed together, and the infolence of their principal directed them firil into the parlour ufu¬ ally inhabited by Althca—who remained ucmbling with indignation, not un- mingled with terror, though ftie rejoiced in the certainty that the perfecuted object of fearch was far out of the reach of their malignity. Neither Akhea nor Mrs-. Wansford had courage to fpeak much to each other for fome moments. At length the lattei recovered her voice enough to attempt pacifying hei children, who, though in whffpers, ftill expreffed their fear as they hung round hen—" Ah Ι ï wifh your father ??$ come h," faid e 2 flie ;
flie; <ζ I'm fure I cannot think where he is. But if he vas here, what could he do-—he's but one, and lame too — agajnft all thefe fellows, as don't feem to mind how much mifchief they do no more than nothing? Perhaps, if hc went for to contradict them, why they might do him ? hurt, or that filthy old villain might take the law of hiin. — Hark ! don't you hear what ? noife they make?"—" What can they be doing?" faid Althea.—" I believe they are in our ftore-room," replied Mrs. Wans¬ ford; "we've got no great matten s, indeed, but I'm fure they'll take what they can." Althca now recol¬ lected the door in that room, which led into the centre of the houle, and from whence, if once they found it, they could defcend to the place where Marchmont had been fo long concealed, and where there was, probably, ftill evi¬ dence enough of his having refided there. — On fuch a difcovery it was impoffible for
for Althca to reflect without apprehen¬ fions ; for though Marchmont was no longi r bable to futter írom their abule of the laws of the belt governed of all polïbîe communities, >et Vampyre ?\???1 obtain, from what he law, the cei tain knowledge that Maichmont had bv'cn concealed 111 a hini,e of which fhe was the inhabitant. Such a circum- ftance could in no light be feen with¬ out her dreading the blame that might be imputed to her, and from which fhe had no niv-cuis of tleaiing herfelf, fince the truih could not in inch a cafe be explained. When to tlufe reflections w ís added, her iecoîlection of the ftrange difiiké her father had always fhew n to Maichmont, and when fhe remembcied that \'au«p)ie was known to Sir Audley, and bad been employed by him at leaft once m hb proceedings agunft the Marchmont fnmtlv, fhe could not do othciwife than dread the effect the difcovery might have on her ? 3 future
future peace, and good underftanding with her father. Yet her generous unadulterated fpirit felt againft the malignant reptile, Vam¬ pyre, fuch dcteftation and abhorrence, that evils, even greater than thofe ihc fore faw, could not have tempted her to check the fvmptoms of the indignation his detefted character and his prefent conduct excited ; and for the firft time in her life, her heart, good and gentle as it was, fwelled with anget, mingled with fomething like regret, that her feeble fex denied her the privilege of chaftifing, as he deferved, a moniter, who, difgracing the name of man, feemed to be fome fubaitcrn agent of Mammon and Moloch let loofe to blaft all on whom his evil eyes were turned, and commi f- fioned to poifon the happinefi» and bLll the hopes of youth and of honour. Ah ! little did ihe then know the extent to which the laws of thi* country (by fbme breach furely in their con¬ ili net ion.
ürucYion, or fome negligence in their adminiflration) permit fuch wretches to carry the moit ruinous injuftice, the moft fatal opprciiion ! As the helplefs party below remained almoft filent, and anxioufly lidening, they heard the gang of ruffians walking heavily through the great rooms, where the loofe boards and vacant walls re¬ echoed to their fteps. Akhea, amid all her inquietude, re¬ flected with exultation on the difap- poìrumeni of the mifcreant, Vampyre, who íeemed fure of now gratifying his odious third of money and vengeance by dragging Marchmont from his con¬ cealment to ? pr ¡ion. It was between ten and eleven o'clock—Akhea, afraid of leaving the kttie protection Mrs. Wansford af¬ forded, remained with her and her children ; that poor woman, to all the dread of having fuch people in the houfe, now added apprehenfions for ? 4 the
for the fafety of her hufband, who had not for fonie years ftaid out till fo late an hour—fhe feared İhe knew not what. Thefe frightful men looked very like afidilins. it was the general report of the country, that Vampyre, who was known to have been guilty of almoft every other crime, had been the fuborner of murderers—why not the immediate direcior of them, if he could fcreen himfelf from the vengeance of the law in that inftance as he had done in forgery and perjwy ? Mrs. Wansford remembered with terror the rough manner in which her huiband had treated this noxious animal on his firft impudent intrufion into then houle; and flie trembled leil revenge fhould have actuated fo unpiincipled a wietch to do him fome mifchief. Nor was Althea, though íhe did not imagine he could be guilty of fuch atrocity, at all eafier, when ihe re¬ flected on the extraordinary abience of
of Wansford—and that, defencelefs as they were, they had no means of haften¬ ing the departure of the banditti, whofé remaining die night there could not be thought of without terror. The fervant girl, who, though greatly alarmed, had at this moment the moft re¬ collection, reminded her miftrefs how very ftrange it was that the men fhould be wandering about the houfe fo long without light.— Some time after this re¬ mark, Althea was willing to flatter her¬ felf that thefe objects of her dread, weaned by their fiuitiefs fearch, had let themfelves out at the front door, and departed ; but another moment, by at¬ tentively liften ing, flic was convinced they were ftill in the houfe.— Hannah had now the courage to go out into the ruinous court that was between Wanf- forels rooms and the fields. By get¬ ting up on a mais of broken flones, ftie could fee many of the projecting windows of the north front of the houfe, ? β and
and fhe foon came running in breathlefs to fay that there was a light gliding from window to window.—Althea plainly faw by the girls manner, that, added to her fears about the men, flie recollected the ftories that belonged to the houfe, and fuppofed fhe knew not what of imagi¬ nary horrors ; for flic had not the cou¬ rage to go out again, and looked paler than before flie had made this experi¬ ment; while Mrs. Wansford, liftening with an aching heart for fome lignai that might announce her hufband's re¬ turn, fancied ihc heard moanings and complaints—and turned towards Althea looks fo full of diftrefs and terror, that her blood ran chill through her veins, and fhe had never yet experienced fenfa¬ tions of vague dread do complicated and difagreeable. Another long half hour paffed.—The clock ftruck eleven ; and the fears of Mrs. Wansford for her hufband's life became more infupportable, while Al¬ thca
thea herfe'f begui to doubt whether fomething terrible had not befallen him.- — Liftening in this cruel fufpenfe, they at length thought they heard the men coming down the flairs that led from the inhabited part above to that tìi vi fion of the houfe at the termination of a long itone paffagc, in which on one fide was the door to Althéa's parlour, and quite at the end that of the room where they were. To the door of this laft there was a piece of glafs let in to give light to the paffage, becaufe the great window on ihc other extremity had been board*. d up to fave the tax.— Hannah took courage to look through this glafs. She faw the men at the other end of the paffage. One of them had a fmall lanthorn in his hand ; the others flood round him as if in confultation.— When ihe reported this in a whifper, Althea remarked that they had probably ftruck a light. — u I fancy," faid flie, ? 6 < c fuch
u fuch people do not ufually go on thefe expeditions without fuch precau¬ tions, and I dare fay they have alfo fire¬ arms." This obfervation, though Althea was far from meaning to increafe her appre¬ henfions, redoubled the agony of the poor woman, whofe immediate fears of the ruffians now approaching them could hardly prevent her exclaiming with íhrieks and cries that they had murdered her huiband.—Akhea, who had rea- foned herfelf into more refolution, now exerted herfelf to appeafè apprehenfions fo horrible — and repeated, that they w r ere certainly only bailiffs coming as they did before to fearch for Mr. Marchmont, and that they could have no defign agai nit Wansford.—'* Ah, dear Mifs, why does not he return then?" cried the half-diftracted wo¬ man. " He has never once ftaid out in this manner before."—To this Akhea had nothing immediately to reply : nor had
had flie indeed time, for the villanous group now entered the room; — and it was eafy to fee by their countenances that they h.id not found the prize they had taken io much trouble to fecurc. A flout ill-looking fellow, on a fign from Vamp) re, approached the poor woman, .did bellowed out — " Mi ft re í s í vou muft take a litlle ■ι* walk with us, and fhew us a few more of the dog - holes about this d —n'd old place,-—Come, come, good wo¬ man, you know where 'Squire Skulk is hid : we have a little bufmefs with him, and we don't go till we've fpoke to his honour, d — n him." líc then feized her roughly by ihe arm-—and the poor woman and her children uttered a feream of terror ; which was fo far from making the brute defift, that he was dragging her away with bruiifli glee, when Althea, roufed b\ fiich inhumanity, turned couragcoufiy towards Vampyre, and faid, <( Thou wretch ! who by an illegal
illegal ad haft brought thefe people here, at your peril fuffer them to do the leaft injury to any perfon in this houfe. Whoever you feek here (if you are authorifed to feek any body, which I do not believe), you can have no right to a {fault Sir Audlcy Dacres's fervant in his houfe—in my houfe."·—Like the fiend whom he refembled iu malignity, the Satanic agent of abufed law looked aikaunce and fomewhat confounded at Althea, who — " fevere in youthful beauty " — thus checked his daring prcfumption.—His followers, the cow¬ ardice of guilt ftruggling with their accuftomed habits of infult and brutali¬ ty, looked towards him for inftructions whether to proceed or defift.—-The old moniter, with his ufual action of thump¬ ing his flick againft the ground, came nearer to Akhea, rightly imagining per¬ haps that nothing could be more terrific than a view of a face that was ? kbcl on the
the hum m countenance; and in hisde- teflable fonon)ib voice he began— " Madam, I obferve you take great intereft iu the concealment of this fugi¬ tive voung fellow. Sir Audley Dacres, Baronet, your worthy father, who has been a client of mine, 1 having been recommended to him by the late Sir Ralph G uniton. Knight and Baronet, my verv good friend and client, who cntrufted me with his very important affairs, on the occafion of mv being en- gaged for him in the celebrated contefted election, at ? certain time, againft the Honourable John Anthony ------------- .** í ie was proceeding thus, when the report of a piftol without, yet very near the door, put a fudden flop tobis eloquence. Mrs. Wansford now uttered another piercing fhriek, having, as ihe believed, a dreadful confirmation of all fiie dreaded in rcgaid to her huiband. Althea was fo hurried hy the various and fearful apprehenfions that affailed her,
her, as to be unable to fix on any. Little time, however, was allowed for conjecture; a violent blow againft the ouifhic of the cloc· r almoft íhook it from its hinges—and in an inftant five or fix men, fome armed with pitchforks and feches, one with a piftol, and another with a rufl ? hanger, hur¬ ried into the room. Two of them fupported Wamdbid, who, unable as hc appeared to make anv exertion, haftened to difengage himfelf from them, and, approaching Vampyre, took him by the collar, and, twilling him round, g.ive him a kick, which fent him haftily to the door; whence a young labourer that itood near prcfently fent him, by the íamc method, with incon¬ ceivable velocity, into the yard; and in half a iccond his iatcllites, fturdy as they were, were obliged to obey the fame fort of impulfe, and found themfelves all without fide the door, and at liberty to go to fupper with u whai appetite ¿key miglici* CHAR
CHAP. III.
D'uù ν «en ic Mai?
1 HE door was now ftrongly barricaded within fide, and Wansford, foon re¬ covering himfelf, fent his friends to procure for themfelves the refreíhments his wife was by the terror flic had un¬ dergone difqualified to fetch for them. He thon attended Akhea to her room, whei e he briefly related to her, that, having gone, according to his weekly cuftom, late in the afternoon to the Three Horfc-fhocs, a fmall ale-houfe and ninth's ihop, where letters and parcels were left, he had found drinking there a very
very creditable looking man, a ftranger in thofe parts, who laid he was on the road to fee a nephew of hh·, who had married his daughter, and rented a large farm not far from Plymouth, where he was thriving apace.—He was ? hule tired, he fáid, with his two days journey; for he had come the day before from beyond Ringwood in H amplili re, and fo thought to put up at the Three Horfe-ffnoes for the night. " A feemed avail plaufible man," faid Wansford — " and a knew all ihe goings on in l on¬ dón, and concerning the war, and fuch like; and me thought he was a fenfible diffarning fort of a man ; and 1 found a knew abundance of people about Hampihire : and I, you know, Mil's, being ? Hampihire man, liked well enough to talk over the people we both knew in that country; for he might be for age, 1 thought, about my own ftanding.·—At firft we had only a pint of cyder a-picce ; but he laid he would not
not part with an old countryman fo— we would have a tiff of punch—and he muft needs treat mc,—And fo, my dear Madam---------But what ihall w r e fay? — Every man may be overtaken iome- times, —I'm not more like to be free from that there, you know, than another.—- What was the upfliot?—Gads my life, if I don't believe though that the cheating fjy rafcal put fummot in my drink, for after a little---------md yet my head's as ftrong as my neighbours-------—after a little, d'ye fee, I becomed all of a fud- di m as muzzled! as muzzled!---------> and then the villain went away and left me—-and when I woke, landlady told me what o'clock it was, and as how I had been fail affeep ever fo long; but fhe wa'n't willing, ihe faid, to difturb me.—Gads my life, I began to look fharp—for, thinks I, may be this fame ih rogue, with his long ftory, have itole my watch, and my money—though my money was not no gr^ut matters. ilowe\cr,
However, they were both as fafe a's could be.—Eh! thinks I, what a devil did a mean ?—and then I bethought me, that may be 'twas fome trick of that fon of Belzebub himfelf, Vampyre. —Ah! ha! thinks I, mafter of mine, be you thereabouts ?—You're devihih cunning —-but 'twon't do this time.—You muft try again, oldpettifog.—But I bethought me, Mifs, that Pd get two or three honeft fellows to come home with me ; which they were willing enough to leave their beds for to do, for they're all pretty iteen upon the fcent of that rafcally polecat of a lawyer. — So away we comes—and found the carrion crows fure enough.—I beheve they won't come again in ahuiry.—Egad y they've had enough on't.—^But if they've a mind to try again, why let 'urn.—No harm done, you know," continued Wansford, winking figmficantly at Akhea—" no harm at all done—for the bird you know is flown, and I for my part"— (and
(and he reached down an old mufket without a lock from the chimney rack) *· for my part, if they do come—I'd no more mind (hooting that old pillory« faced blood-hound thiough the head, than I would a mad dog—no, nor fo much." Althea now plainly perceived that Wansford had by no means recovered the effects of the ftratagem that had been ufed to di fable him from returning home, and that he was in his own phrafe pot valiant. He was more likely therefore to increafe than to appeafe her anxiety, occafioned by her defire to know whether Vampyre and his fatel- lites had explored the late concealment of Marchmont; and though fhe trembled at the thoughts of being alone, ihe found it ncccifary to difengage herfelf from his loquacity, and to endeavour to calm her fpirits, too much agitated by the circumitances of the day and night. However her reafon endeavoured to 2 comba*
combat fuch an apprehenfion, flie could not help fearing that one of the ruffians might remain lurking in the houfe; and flie now thought herfelf more than ever unprotected, for Wansford was in no condition to hear or fuccour her. Un¬ able to contend with the terrors that poffefled her, it w r as wifer to yield to them, and flie therefore direcled the fervant girl to bring her bed and lay it on the floor in her room—where, after every fearch had been made to affure them that they did not cnclofe a foe, the door was fattened, and Akhea, envying the tranquillity of her companion, who was foon in a profound fleep, endeavour¬ ed to obtain fome repofe. To fleep, however, was impoffible till the morning, when the light that awakens the thoughtlefs and the happy to renew the labours or the pleafures of the day, broke through the long cafe- ment oppofite the feet of her bed ; and while
ubile it feemed to lend her fecurity, her wearied fpirits funk into forgetfulnefs. But in a few hours fhe awoke to the recollection of what had fo much trou¬ bled her ihe preceding evening. The dread that Vampyre, having difcovered the long inhabited retreat of March¬ mont, would relate it to Sir Audley— the terrors of her father's anger appear¬ ed i n fupportable- —and they were aggra¬ vated by every diftrefling idea that her imagination could fuggeft. She was not yet of age, and was therefore wholly in Sir Audley's power. The fieps he had already taken to induce her to confent to give herfelf to Mohun, authorifed her fear that he would not fcruple to adopt others yet more harfli, to compel her to a meafur* tie had fo much at heart, efpe- cially if he fiiould once believe tbat her obftinate refufal was fupported by a predilection in favour of Marchmont, the man whom of all others Sir Aud¬ ley feemed to hate. To
To communicate thefe fears to Wanf- ford, as her reafon for wifhing to vifit the caverns of the houfe, was extreme¬ ly difagreeable to her—-and to penetrate thefe melancholy recedes alone was an undertaking to which her courage was not equal ; yet to reft in her prefent ftate of anxiety feemed to be impof¬ fible. Two days paffed. Wansford, when¬ ever he had an opportunity, continued, though he was become fober, to me¬ nace the impudent intruders, and at length from threatening them with his own vengeance, he declared his refolution to expofe them to that of his mafter, Sir Audley, who would, he faid, certainly fue lawyer Vampyre for a trefpafs upon his premifes. Akhea, who had lately feen more of this man's propenfity to drink, and to prate when he had drank too much, than ihe had ever before had an opportunity of obferving, flirunk more than ever from giving him her confidence,
confidence, and not knowing what ftep to take, flie took none ; fometimes tormenting herfelf with the fears of Sir Audley's knowledge of March¬ monts concealment, and at others flattering herfelf that Vampyre, difap¬ pointed of his prey, would turn his at¬ tention to fome more profitable victims than the unhappy family of Marchmont; and that, as none were likely to pay him for perfecuting her, fhe fliould never hear his detefted name again. Now therefore Althea endeavoured to reafon herfelf into fome degree of tranquillity, that flie might indulge that quiet melancholy, which, when ihe parted with Marchmont, flie had looked forward' to with a fort of fad refigna- tion not unmingled with pleafure. Spring was now fo far advanced that the fcene around her received all the advantages returning verdure could give it, but that fcene was very far from in¬ fpiring her with cheerful ideas. In the Vol. III. d uncid-
uncultivated quarters of the great garden, a few fhrubs, the nipped and half-vege¬ tating fucceffors of thofe that had ihaded and adorned it in happier days, faintly flowered, while tbeir items were grey with mofs ; and what verdure there was, was rather that of neglecl than of culture. The female fern waved its feathery fans among the broken walls, covering them where the knotty and cankered arms of the old fruit-trees were nearly leaflefs. But thefe ruined buttreftes and faplefs trunks afforded a convenient afylum to a great number of birds, wdio were now building nefts, which Althca was very earneft to fave from the ufelefs and wanton depredations of Wansford's chil¬ dren ; infifting at the fame time on his forbearing to ihoot the birds themfelves, as he was, he faid, ufed to do—" for, plagueaipon* thern nafty tuoads! they eat up althi^peafbn.** AÄea now felt, what fhe bad never before allowed herfelf to be fo much overcome
overcome by, that wdiich it had been the principal purpofe of her education to guard againft, the wearînefs which fuch total feclufion could hardly fail of bringing upon any one. During the winter ihe had contended with it by pcrfuading herfelf that fpring would allow her excrcifc, and bring cheerful- nefs, while it enlarged her purfuits ; but fince the terror flic had undergone from the pretended beggar, flie had no longer the courage to extend her walks be¬ yond the walls that furrounded her gloomy refidence; and within their defertcd area feemed to lurk the cruel images of ruin and defolation, threat¬ ening to purfue through life the wretched wandering Marchmont, who, thus cut off as Althca was from c\ery other foci¬ ety, took more and more poffeflion of her imagination. 11er thoughts were often turned towards his mother and his fitters. He had promifed they ftiould write to her, but no intelligence d ? of
of them came. Not having yet reco¬ vered refolution enough to go herfelf to Dame Mofely, ftie was compelled to content herfelf by again fending Hannah with an enquiry after the poor old woman and Phcebe Prior. The former anfwered by promifing to come up to the great houfe the firft day fhe was able ; Phcebe Prior ihe faid was gone, and íhe was afraid w T ould ramble about again. The generous heart of Althea throbbed with pity when fhe thought of this hap- lefs being, whofe forrows fhe could not even ai leviate. Then flie returned to reflect on her own uneafineffes, and from thence on what would relieve her from them. Nothing could afford her the leaft fatisfaction but to hear of Marchmont; and when fhe was likely to do tha-t, the had no means of calcu¬ lation ; for, when he had fo earneftly fo¬ licited permiffion to write to her, he had never told her, and fhe had no cou¬ rage to afk, from whence he propofed to fend
fend his firft letter, or how he was likely to fee u re its convey a nee to Mrs. Mofely, who was to deliver it — though, as the old woman had ne¬ ver mentioned or even hinted at it, fiie doubted whether he had apprized her of his intentions. At all events, it wouid be yet fome time before it was poííible that flic could know whither his deitiny had driven him. It was now many weeks fince Althea had heard of her father, and the laft time was by a cold letter from Lady Dacres, merely informing her that Sir Audley had been confined by the gout, which difabled him from writing. Since that, fiie had written feveral times, with very earneft enquiries, but had re¬ ceived no anfwer. However accuftomed to endure neglect, it feemed very com- fortlefs to be totally f gotten, even by her father, and abfolutely alone in the world, where there was not one being, except Marchmont, now fepa- r> ? rated
rated from her verv orolubk foi evet, that feemed to take ihc ! t )'t intendi in her exiftciKc. Dieidful as wa-» the idea of Sir Audlev *s difcovering March¬ monts ftrange concealment, and luf- peciing her pui tiahty towards him, theie vsas fomething more depreffing i u fuf- pecting that fhe was abfolutely dcfeited. She therefore wrote again to her father, who, aí thib feafon of the year, was al¬ ways in London. Time enough pafled for her to receive an aniwer, but none came. For Althea the world feemed no longer to be progreffive. Without one profpeci for the future but w hat was ov er- cloudcd with doubts, diftreifes, and diffi¬ culties which ihe was afraid to inveiti- gate; for the predeni, bui ied alive, and cut oif not only from general iociety but fiom her oven family, her fpinb funk, ?nd her mind, ftreni/d-cn'.d as its na¬ tural folidity was he reafon and ic- flcction, became henv and eneivated.
She itili comnmed, mechanically, tbe chanties and dunes fh^ had undei taken, but the plcafuie tliat had at fu ft attended their c\ecuti η ? ι gone. She did the little good that hi * was able to do, fiom hum itutv and bom habit; but that chou í dut ^ the ? ink of confuous goodncis, wiihIì fhv. uíed to İeel, ne» lon Λ ι diil^Mt' d tilt luavy gloom that hung ovei lu. Almoil tne onlv thing tl ai ??? «.fluidul lui pk aime was io hiten to the long, but to Ik ι attiattivo ftones, which, when ihc could ice the po >r old krvant, ihc tncouiagcd lici¬ to kil, of what had foimctly palled in tnc Maichmont iamily. Many anecdotes, inch as garrulous old age loves to repeat, which would have appealed tedious and uninteiefting had thev i ? lated to any other pei fons, Althea now {«it to hear, not only with patience but with pie Uure ; ior, though tht v all began widi the honours of Marchmont's anceitois, ???? of whuh n 4 wa>
was adventitious, they generally ended in fimple but affecting proofs of merit andgoodncfs all his own. And ftripped as he was of the decorations of for¬ tune, nothing could have demanded fuch a tribute of praife but ρ heart like that lie poifeffed. Akhcu, in thefe converfations, fre¬ quently attempted to form, from the accounts of Mrs. Mofely, fome idea of the characters of his mother and his fiile rs They ieemed ftrangelv to have fhrunk from her advances. Was it the dejection of forrow or the referve of mortified pride that had can fed them to do fo ? This queftion Akhea con¬ tinually afked herfelf. She had no way of fatisfying it, but by putting repeated queitions to Mrs. Mofely, who, well as flie knew the parties, was but ill quali¬ fied to anfwer her directly. She had been fo habituated to love her miftrefs, that ftie had no idea of the light ihe ap¬ peared Ín to others—to her, fhe ahvays feemed
feemed the heft and moil unfortunate of women. The three young ladies, flie faid, were very handfome—one of them was the verv image of her brother. Althea thought that, whenever flie made an acquaintance with them, this would be her greateft favourite. On îencwmg on this interview with Mis. Mofely her humane enquiiy after Phcebe, the old woman told her, that the unhappy creature had left her.— u Two day\s after you, Madam, had feen hoi atim cot," laid ihc/* her uncle lent his dairy-woman to fetch her back; for the ladic* who keep her had heard of her bein ' wandering about, and were very angry. Alas a-day ! the poor gul was lad.lv unwilling to go; and when ffie found fiie muft, ihe would not fpeak a word even to me—but looked - io ftrangely with her eyes !—-I am afraid, indeed, it will not be long before ihe breaks out again as bad as e\er; and I do think that ftie will come to fomc d 5 untimely
untimely end, if fhe is thwarted and vexed." u Poor Phcebe!" thought Althea to herfelf, " for thy forrows there is no cure ; there is not even any mitiga¬ tion! After the lofs of fuch a huiband, I hardly know if the lofs of reafon be a misfortune!" " How much happier mighteft thou have been," continued Akhea, ftill indulging this train of reflection, *' how much happier had thy poor Prior been, contented with the humble lot to which hc was probably born !—Why did he, in fearch of a higher fortune, go to thofe cli¬ mates where the foil,manured with blood, feems to produce only difeafe and death?" Akhea, as ihe thusmeditatcd, was walk¬ ing homeward, attended by I í umah, for fhe now never ventured alone. As it was noon and the fun very hot, the girl under¬ took to fhew her a way through a lane, w hich,though it led farther about, afford- cd more incite r from the heat. A very mife¬ rable
rable cabin, half formed of rock and roots to which it clung, in a hollow way, was within fight of her path. Three half-naked, half-ftarved children ran from it—one hearing in its feeble arms a fam i fhed infant. They eagerly im¬ plored her charity ; and Althea, ftruck with a fpcildcle of diftrefs which had neve r before crofted her, enquired, while ¡he gave them all the fmall money about her, to whom they belonged?— They were the children of a day la¬ bourer—their father had lately gone for a jollier ; and their mother had been ill and confined to her bed ever fince the birth of the youngeft of the chil¬ dren ; and they lived, if living it might be called, on a parifh allowance, that did not afford them even bread!— Althca could not, on hearing this, con¬ tent herfelf with tranfient charity. Though it was already later than the hour ihe had ventured to remain out fince her alarm, flic haftened into the d 6 cottage,
cottage, or rather hovel ; and the fcene ffie faw there penetrated her heart with fenfations fo painful, that flie had inftantly recourfe to the means moil likely to affift the objeds whofe condi¬ tion had excited it. Having given them fuch immediate relief as was in her power, ftie con¬ tinued her walk, meditating on what flie could afterwards do for them, and on the ftrange inequalities of fortune ; her mind the more deeply impreffed, per¬ haps, becaufe, fince fhe had been fo much alone, and having for want of novelty been driven to a courfe of read¬ ing which fhe had not entered upon be¬ fore, fhe had been reading Rouffeau, and fome other authors not ufually mak¬ ing part of the ftudies of young women ; and thus, tbe accidental eireumftance of being fo long alone in a houfe like Eaft¬ woodleigh, whither Mrs. Trevyllian's library (where there were more than mere books of amufement) had been brought
brought, had given her thoughts a direc¬ tion which in the common intercourfe of the world they would perhaps never have taken. f Gone for a foldier in mere defpair, and to avoid the fight of his family's mifery!'—" Good heaven!" faid Althca as ihe repeated thus to herfelf what the poor woman had told her ; f< and is this the boafted happinefs of our coun¬ try? When I heard the fad ftory of Phcebe Prior, I lamented that her hufband had ever forfaken the labori¬ ous though peaceable life to which I imagined him to have been born, for the advantage offered him in another hemifphere, where he muft have exe¬ cuted a fort of authority over thofe hu¬ man beings that Europeans make llaves, which íeemed, to me, repugnant to all the honeft principles of fuch a man. But if feenes like thefe are to be found in the cabin of the induftrious labourer, wdio can wonder that any man ftiould quit his
his paternal cottage ?-—or how can it be ftrange that our peafantry fly to Ame¬ rica?—I have heard tliat all ideas of equality are vifionary — that they can never be realized—and í believe it. But furely, though there muft be hewers of wood, and drawers of water, they ought to have the abfolute neceflaries of life. It does not feem as if fuch a family as I have juft now fecn can obtain them, even by the moit unremitting laboui of its principal." This train of thought was not eafily exchanged for any other. Althea could not help reflecting, how much difìerence to the poor of a neighbourhood the refidence of fuch a family as March¬ monts once was, muft make.—" While they were here," faid ftie, " I am fure the voice of forrow, that they could relieve, was never heard. How much of evil the ruin of fuch a houfe brings with it! —How fad to think, that the friendly protection the members of this
this family lent to others, they now want for themfelves!"—Nor could other more general rcfleBions efcape her. " I have fomcwhere read," faid fhe, " a calculation, that if only a third or a fourth of the funis yearly raifed from the people of one country, to annoy, by war, the people of another, weic applied to the mitigation of the fufferings ol the aged and infant poor, every labour¬ ing man might then labour for the rich, vet poiieffing himfelf ? certam degree of comfort; the country would become moie populous, and of courfe more powerful to refift all encroachment from nations lefs wife. Yet other fage perfons in ¿hew works tell me, that the glory of this countiy is founded on its conqucfts. A plam underftanding, how¬ ever, naturally enquires why wc ftiould defire to conquer other countries when there is fo much waite land in our own ? And furely a plain underftanding can¬ not help regarding with aftoniíhment ι the
the infatuation of mankind, who, from habit and cuftom (for it never can be the refult of reafon and choice), enter on a manner of life altogether unna¬ tural, where more pcrifli by iicknefs than by the fword, as they are often iranfported, in floating pri fons pregnant with in¬ fection and death, to another region of the globe, to kill if they can, or be killed by, men whofe language they do not underftand, whofe country they have no defire to poffefs, and with whom they cannot have the ffighteft caufe of quarrel. Surely, of all the abfurditics that have been reduced to fyftem, this is one of the greateft." Ah î candid and unadulterated mindi you have learned early to reflect; but take care left this habit, hitherto fo well applied, fhould totally unfit you for fociety. It will ftrew thorns in your path, while other young women of your age feek only ilowers. By
By imagining yourfelf in the place of others, as you now continually do, you will learn to feel for all the un¬ happy, or even for thofe who appear fo ; whereas it might fave a great deal of (for the moft part ufelefs J pain, if you could contrive to feel only for yourfelf. Soon, very foon you are to enter into the world, where a \oung woman, who has re fu fed fuch an ad¬ vancing and profperous man as Mohun, only becaufe ihe could not love him, to give her affections to a poor undone wanderer, like Marchmont, will be look¬ ed upon as one without common un¬ dd ftanding, or perhaps as having loft it by the ftudy of romances ; and of courfe you \wll be pointed out by the old as a earning, and willingly avoided by their daughters, as " a ftrange young woman that nobody underftands. 1 '
CHAP.
CHAP. IV.
She heard tbc doleful tidings of Ills death» Aiul never fmiled again !
I HOUGH fatigued more than ufual by her walk, the fpirics of Althea were too much affected to allow her to fleep. She was not even difpoied to undrefs herfelf at the ufual hour, but fat reading a periodical publication, which, after waiting for many days, Wansford had that evening got from the ncareft town. To one fo long fecludcd, moil of the articles had the attraction of novelty. Her attention, however, was at length wearied. She put by the pamphlet, and began to unpin her clothes, when fhe
íhc heard the clock below ftrike twelve. Every thing was fo perfectly filent, that an involuntary fliudder came over her as flic repeated to herfelf <s 'Tis now the vei) w aching lime of night *' When chiudi-;, ai ¿s ??-?;·. !" The ftories ihe had learned from Mrs. Moilly occurred to her; for that day the old woman had told her fome fhe had never heard before. Afliamed, however, of vague fears, from which her good fenfe revolted, Akhea would have fhaken them off—and hoping to lofe them in fleep, ihc haftened to un¬ drefs herfelf; when, approaching the table on which her glafs flood to dé¬ polit fome part of her drefs, flie again felt chilled by the profound and dead filence around her ; while her fingle candle, in a high, long, old-faihion room, with a dark blue morine bed at the end of it, threw over her own figure, as fhe faw it in the glafs, a dim obfeurity. « I look,"
" I look," faid ihe, hardly trufting her eyes to furvcy it, €< furely I look like a ghoft myfelf!" Hardly had íhc faid fo, when flic heard, or fancied ihe heard, footfteps in the paffagc : but fo foftly and fo lightly did they feem to fall, that the courfe of a dead leaf driven by the wind would ha* ? been almoft as dif- iintt They died away at the otiier end of the paffage.—Was it fancy?—Surely it could be nothing more. Althea liftened, almoft fearing to breathe, while the cold dew hung on her temples. The noife came again—a little louder than before·—at her door it ceafed, and fhe fancied fomebody breathed. Still arguing with herfelf that it could be nothing but imagination, fiie dlmoft ac¬ quired courage enough to open the door, and be fatisfied; but as íhe itood liftening, and reafoni ng herfelf up to this refo¬ lution, a deep-drawn and broken figh was very evidently heard.—Althca re¬ coiled.
coiled, and again waited in trembling expectation. The figh, or rather half- ftiiled groan, was twice more repeated, and then the light footfteps, fainter and fainter, feemed to depart from her door, till all was again as filent as death. Some minutes elapfed before ihe could move—fo entirely had terror overcome her. The weak apprehenfions of fupernatural agency which ftie had indulged, now gdvc way to more fub- ftantial terrors; and the idea of Vam¬ pyre or fome of his fateli ¡tes was fo pre¬ fent to her, that ihe determined to ring a bell (which had been contrived near her bed to reach to the room where Wansford and his family flept). To this fhe now applied herfelf: and it was not long before Wansford, with his wife trembling befide him, appeared at the door; which, on hearing him fpeak, Althea opened, and briefly explained ihe caufe of her alarm. Wansford,
Wansford, who often affected to be very ftout-hearted, now turned pale, and trembled. While he knew Marchmont to be in the houfe, and that his fervant ufed to leave it of a night to procure provifions which were left at Mrs. Mofely's, he had always affecled to treat his wife's fears, occafioned by the noifes ihe heard, with great contempt. But now, that he knew that caufe ex¬ ifted not, his old notions and prejudices were remembered ; and as he was fure that none of Vampyre's people could be about the houfe, and believed his young lady very unlikely to terrify her¬ felf for nothing, all the family of Marchmont feemed, to his frightened imagination, to have left their fcpul- chres to wander round their old habi¬ tation. When the queftion followed i rom Akhea of what was to be done, Wansford hefitated, and fo plainly be¬ trayed his apprehenfion, that as ihe was
4vas determined not to go to her bed tili ihe was affured no living being wa> about the houle, fhe acquired tirrnnefu enough to declare íhc would accom¬ pany him on his fearch, if hc would make it. After fuch a propofal he could not refufe î and they returned al¬ together to his room, where, arming himfelf with an old broad f word which feemed to have ferved in the civil wars, he marched with no very firm ftep be¬ fore Althéa and his wife, who each held a candle in her hand. In this order they defcended the flairs into the room Wansford inhabited be¬ low. There was nothing to be leen but the old fdvoutitc cat watching among the wood embers for a few crickets, that had not yet betaken themfelves to tiv fields. Wanbford, though he looked paler and paler at every ftep he took, pro¬ ceeded to examine the place that ferved them for a wafh-houfe; peeped into another
another in which was a fafe; and having done fo, he declared there was nothing to be feen. Althéa's parlour and a fort of flore room in the fame paffage were next examined. No unufual circumftance appeared; and then, as every part of this fmall inhabited portion of the houfe be¬ low had been explored, it only remained to fearch the flore room above: and in¬ deed it w r as tiiere that Althéa's fears principally pointed — recollecting the fecret avenue by which Marchmont had led her thither from the ruinous and de- ferted buildings beyond. Thither therefore they repaired — Althea by no means the moft courageous of the party—but every thing remained there juft as it had been left the night before. Wansford now aifuming a little courage, ftepped beyond a heap of malt that was fpread near it, and tried the pannel that opened to give a fecret paffage to the body of the houfe. It was fail ; he had fecured it himfelf fome days
days before with redoubled precaution ; and he was convinced that no alteration had fince been made in the fattening«. Nothing therefore refulted from this fearch, but a perfuafion in the minds of thofe who had made it, that either Althea muft have been feized with fome groundlefs panic, or that fhe had been juftly alarmed by a fupernatural caufe —and this laft notion was to the feeble mind of Mrs. Wansford fo pregnant with terror, that, forgetting her accuf¬ tomed prudence, íhe faid, w Ah, well,— this is fomething more than common ; I remember now what Dame Mofely told me only the laft time we had any talk together."— u And what has fhe told you ?" enquired Althea with quicknefs, tv That always, before any of 'Squire Marchmonts family died, or any ill came to them, there was moanings heard about the houfe, and fomething feemed to glide from room to room with deep Vol. III. r %hs,
fighs, and as it were warning them by melancholy noifes........ ** ** And was any evil ever avoided by attending to the information of thefe warning fpirits?" interrupted Althea, half peeviihly. *' Not as í ever heard," replied the terrified woman. "But hufli ! huih ! my dear young lady, fure I heard it again ?" €t No, no," faid Althea, <f there is nothing—but do awaken Hannah, and let her bring her bed into my room, as fhe did forne ι ts ago. Though 1 believe it might, a) ~r all, be only the wind or rats, or my own fancy, yet my fpirits are haraffed, and I cannot remain alone." Hannah, now roufed from her found fleep, was obliged to obey this order; and when the arrangement was fettled according to the directions of Al¬ thea, fhe went to her own bed and tried to compofe herfelf to fleep—but to fleep was for her become more impoffible than ever.—The fuperftitious legend in regard
regard to the Marchmont family, which Mrs. Wansford had fo limply related, haunted her imagination, and gave her more lafting pain than íhe had before felt tranfient terror. It was in vain that all the arguments reafon affords were brought forward againft thefe impreflions, which, if they are indulged, aggravate every prefent evil, but have never yet been found to fave any one from thofe which they are fuppofed to predict in future. The noife Althea was fure íhe had heard ; and ii it could not be accounted for by any pro¬ bable fuppofition that it arofe from a living being, it was difficult to combat the idea of fome fupernatural agency. The morning found her dejected and weary. Want of reft, and the ftrange anxiety fhe felt about Marchmont, gave her the look of a perfon that had juft left a fick bed. Sometimes ilie thought of going to Mrs. Mofely's; yet the dread of converfation that would in- E 2 creafc
creafe inftead of appeafing her appre¬ henfions deterred her. However, as foon as flie could fee Wansford, ihe en¬ deavoured to engage him to fearch the uninhabited part of the houfe. But the man feemed to be ftruck with terror, and, though he ridiculed all fear before, feemed to feel it now to a greater degree than thofe had done at whom hc had laughed for their abfurdity. At length, however, Althea prevailed upon him to make an enquiry, without which flie found it impoflîble to fleep in the houfe. But nothing could induce him to fearch the fubterraneous parlages, all of which he was not fure that he knew, unlefs he took fome other perfon with him; and Althea was very unwil¬ ling that any other, unlefs it was his wife, ihouid be let into the fecret, which probably they muft difcover, of March» monts late and long concealment there. Nor was it on other accounts defirable that any of the neighbouring hinds íhould be
be made acquainted with hiding-places which in the prefent ftate of the houfe might be ufed for many bad purpofes. It was determined then that Wansford and his wife fiiould go together on this exploit; while Akhea, the maid, and Wansford*« chikhen, were to remain about the uninhabited rooms, ready to give the alarm, on the leaft appearance of danger, to two labourers whom Wans¬ ford engaged, as if on his own account, to do an hour*s work for him in his garden. This party then fet out about feven o'clock in the evening; the fun was yet above the horizon, and fhone bright.— Wansford afcertained that the two la¬ bourers were near at hand; and then, Althea and the children accompanying them, he and his wife went to a place quite remote from that which March¬ mont had fhewn to Althea, and entered on his fecret expedition with a candle in his hand, while flie walked backwards e 3 and
and forwards in the great room, and the children ran about where they would, the fervant girl following them. Althea, now on the fame fpot where ftie had firft converfed with Marchmont, was loft for a moment in the recol¬ lection of what he had then faid to her, when the voices of the children having ceafed on a fudden, ihe was feized with the dread of being left alone, and went to the door that opened on the great flair-cafe to look for them. She called, but they did not anfwer her; and fhe was haftily paffing acrofs the wide land¬ ing place to follow them, when, calling her eyes, not without fome degree of undefined fear, towards the long and dark paffage that led to the rooms fo marked in the Marchmont family by misfortune, ihe faw, as if coming from thence, a fiender female figure that fiowly ap¬ proached, yet without feeming to look at her; while, riveted to the placc t fhe had no power to flir. —-The fp cetre, for fuch
fuch it feemed to be, ftill came delibe¬ rately on, and appeared to be of air, for it was not heard to move. Akhea, trem¬ bling like an afpen-leaf, ftepped back into the banqueting-room. 1 he fiiape foon appeared at the door, with one fin¬ ger held to its lips*, as if to enjoin filence. It came quite up to her—it was poor Phcebe Prior! " Gracious Heaven !" exclaimed Al¬ thea, relieved from a fpecies of dread fhe could not long have fupported, "how came you here, Phcebe?" " Softly, foftly, my dear young lady," faid fhe in a whifper, " I fhall find him yet." u Find whom ?" '* Ah, Madam!" fighcd the poor lu¬ natic girl, ic don't fpeak to me as if you too were angry with me. I think I fhall find him ; for this is the time and the place where he bade me look for him—it is his birth-day—the nineteenth of May ! He never deceived me, and fo I fat up E 4 all
all night waiting for the time. But if my uncle comes and finds me here !...... You will not fend for that hard-hearted man; will you, Ma'am? My good friend told me you would not ; and fee, Madam, what í have bought with the money you fent me. I have wiftied for it a great while. A boy picked it up at laft, juft by the fad fpot.—I never will part with it—no never." The unhappy girl then ffiewed a per¬ forated pebble, fuch as are often found on the fhore, through which ihe had paffed a blue tibband, and tied it upon her bofom. By her manner it feemed as if fhe fancied it fome trinket that be¬ longed to her drowned huiband. Weakened as the fpirits of Althea had been before by watching and by terror, the piteous fpedacle now before her af- feded her too much. Initead of beinç able to fpeak foothingly to the wretched wanderer, the tears ftreamed down her cheeks, and ftie fobbed audibly, "Ah !"
<c Ah!" cried Phcebe —" do you cry? you who are happy—and who have a lover faithful» and kind, and good, who adores the very ground you walk upon! He will come foon, and you will be married to him, and yet you cry !—· while you never fee me ihed a tear—I who have loft—Hah!—what?—what have I loll?" Althea, amazed by her ftrange con- jeBure, tet rifted by the wildnefs of her looks, and imagining fhe was about to be feized with a raving fit, ftepped quickly forward, and called for Wans¬ ford; who now emerging from his fearch, which had not been very long, appeared with his wife, and was of courfe much furprifed by the fight of Phcebe—though her appearance feemed to account for the noifes that had occafioned them fo much trouble and apprehenfion. Althea infilled on their treating her with gentlenefs; and as foon as flie had a little recovered from the extreme fear e 5 íhe
fhe had undergone, the poor girl, who fo greatly excited her pity, became the object of her attention. It was necef¬ fary, however, rather to foothe, than to queftion her as to the means by which ilie got into the houfe, and concealed herfelf the preceding evening; for fhe continued to be fo wild and incoherent, ftill talking of the nineteenth of May, and that fhe was come to feek for her poor Harry, that nothing certain could be underftood from her. Aitbea directed her to be taken care of till the morn¬ ing, when fhe hoped Mrs. Mofely might find the means to reafon her into fome degree of tranquillity. Once more retired to her own par¬ lour, Althea endeavoured to collect and compofe her fpirits; but ihe had not been feated five minutes before Mrs, Wamford came in, in even greater emotion than when ftie believed ihe bad to encounter a ghoft, and delivered into
into Althéa's hands a letter, which ihe faid was juft brought by a man on horfeback. The firft thing that ftruck Akhea was, that it was from March¬ mont; flie did not know the hand—and in fuch confufion that ftie hardly com¬ prehended them ftie read thefe words: " Bath, May ¿th, ir Madam, '* I am commanded by Sir Audley to inïorm you, ihat he is very ill at Bath; and my Lady not being well enough to accompany him at prefent, Sir Audlcy defires that, u ??? the re¬ ceipt hereof, you will be pleafed to fet ont, with hib fervant James Eades to attend you, for Bath. Sir Audlcy has the gout in his hands, whereby he is prevented from writing. I am com¬ manded to add, that James has direc¬ tions for ihe journey, and that Mr. Wansford's wife may attend upon you, e ó for
for more fafety, if you choofe.—By Sir Audley's order, from, Madam, " Your moil dutiful fervant " to command, " Nathaniel Welsh." A thoufand uneafy and alarming fen¬ fations now befet Althea. The firft w as, apprehenfions for the life of her father, who muft be very ill thus to ufe ano¬ ther hand, and whofe feelings towards her muft be greatly changed. That Lady Dacres íhould not, on fuch an occa¬ fion, attend him, feemed unaccountable; and that Sir Audley, if ihe was too ill to be with him, fhould think of his de- ferted Althea, feemed very improbable, or at leaft very remote from all that was likely to happen, according to the obfervations fhe had formerly made. There was, however, very little time for conjectures or hefitation; for Wans¬ ford in a few moments followed his wife ι to
to fay, that Mr. Eades had defired him to let Mifs Dacres know, that the poft- chaife that wis ordered from the town at feven miles diftance, and which he had befpoke as he pafled throrgh it, would probably foon be at the houfe. " And do )ou know this James Eades, Wansford ?" enquired Akhea. «' Lord! Yes, Mifs.—Why, he is Sir Audley's head-groom, and have lived there, as near as I can guefs, about five years.—Perhaps you would like to fpeak to him ?" Althea directing the groom to be fent to her, heard, with concern that ab¬ forbed every confideration for herfelf, that Sir Audley had been in what the man called fC a poor way" for two or three months before he was ordered to Bath by his phyficians ; that he had been very unwilling to go, becaufe Lady Dacrcs was near lying-in, and in a bad ftate of health, and one of the children, the third boy, one that they were
were both very fond of, had died of the meafles, and the reft had been very bad—fo chat ficknefs and forrow feemed to have affailed the houfehoid of Sir Audley in various forms. Nor was this all.—On making a few more enquiries, Althea learned that Mr. Dacres, the eldeft of her half-brothers, who being taken from Weftminfter School by the defire of the matters, was with fo many precautions fent to travel, had been not more than three months in Italy before he quitted his tutor, and was loft for fome time; till his want of money com¬ pelling him to apply to his father in¬ directly, it was difcovered that he had returned to England, and concealed himfelf in a very difcreditable neigh¬ bourhood, where he had fold bí¿> watch and fome other valuable trinkets, and from whence Sir Audley, with fome difficulty, extricated him: after which his father was, however, reluctantly forced to confent to his going into the Guards.
Guards. The battalion to which he be¬ longed was ordered abroad ; and the ill¬ nefs of both his parents feemed to have been in a great meafure owing to the uneafinefs his condud firft, and now the dangers to which he was expofed, had given them. The truly tender and affedionate heart of Akhea bled to think what muft have been her father's diftrefs and an- guiffi:—nor did ffie fail to feel for Lady Dacres, who feemed to have laid up for herfelf a bitter ftore of repent¬ ance, by her foolifh indulgence to this unfortunate boy.—" And this young man," faid Akhea, Ki is the pupil of modern education! raifed in the lap of the moil luxurious profperity ! This young man, who at feventeen appears to have run more than hat f way in the career of mature vice ! ------ Ah ! it was not thus that Marchmont is defcribed at that age !—But Marchmont has been the child of ad ver fity !" From
From this natural reflection her mind immediately returned to her father, whom ftie now as anxioufly wiftied to fee as ihe had ever dreaded it. No¬ thing but the affectionate ardour with which fhe defired to difcharge her filial duties could have induced her to fet out at fuch an hour, and fo unpre¬ pared; but as the groom had ftrongly reprefented Sir Audley's earneftnefs to fee her, and the danger he was in, ihe determined not to lofe a moment more than was neceffary to comfort Mrs. Wansford (whofe fervices on the road fhe declined) for her departure, by af¬ furing her it was probable íhe ihouid foon return. She gave her ten guineas as a prefent from herfelf, promifing to take the firft opportunity of recom¬ mending her and her family to the fa¬ vour of Sir Audley, that, if any new arrangements took place in regard to the old houfe, they might be preferred to fome more comfortable fituation.— Then,
Then, her few clothes being packed up, ihe got into the chaife, and, late as it was, determined to drive round to Mrs. Mofely's, at once to relieve herfelf from the anxiety ihe ftiould have about Marchmonts letters, and to recommend to her care the unhappy Phcebe Prior ; whom, as ihe was now quite tranquil, and funk into almoft fpeechlefs ftupor, Althea admitted into the chaife with her, that ftie might be left with the only perfon that appeared to have much influence over her difordered mind. The grief and lamentations of the poor old woman, when fhe learned that Akhea was going, were very diftreffing to her. And indeed this w T as the only deprivation wdiich fhe could now feel : Althea feemed to her like a good angel, fent v/ith the laft ray of light that was to fall on the dreary and comfortlefs clofe of her latter days. This was now to difappear. Akhea, affected by her forrow, wiih difficulty
difficulty prevailed upon her to liften to· what it was fo material fhe fhould per¬ fectly underftand about Marchmont, and it was the moft difficult tafk to her that fhe could poffibly undertake.. Her purfe was almoft emptied into Mrs. Mofely's hands, while, as the only con¬ dition annexed to the prefent, ihe was enjoined to take care, as far as was poffible, of poor Phcebe, and to let her remain at the cottage whenever fhe was eafier there—Althea promifing at the fame time to provide farther for the comfort of them both. The moon affording light enough to prevent much danger from the very indifferent roads fhe was to pafs before fhe reached Exeter, Althea then ftepped into the chaife, and between twelve and one o'clock, attended by her father's groom on horfeback, proceeded on her journey.
CHAP.
CHAP. VL
Thro' many a funlef* day and cheerlefs nighi The unhappy lover, exiled from the light, Each wild viciffitude of paffion proves, Now finks in cold defpair; now hopes, becaufe he love·.
1 HE folitary and agitated traveller, as ihe journeyed by the light of the moon the firft tedious ftage, recalled the ftrange circumitances of the laft twelve hours, as if fhe had been endeavouring to re¬ member and afcertain the confufed traces. of a feveriih dream. Juft before Wansford took leave of her he had called her afide, and with a myfterious air had given her feveral letters,.
letters, or papers which appeared to be fuch. * 4 I found them," faid he, " down be¬ low in a little drawer under an old table, where our poor young gentleman ufed to eat his morfei í —You had better take them, Mifs." Althea received them in filence, and now wiihed to fee what thefe papers were; but as fhe did not get out at the two firft poft-houfes, the morning dawned before fhe had an opportunity of grati¬ fying her curiofity. They contained detached fentences of Italian and French poetry, expreffive of his ftate of mind, who had thus beguiled the hours of folitude and confinement byexercifing his memory; for Althea re¬ collected that Marchmont had told her he had no books, nor the means of get¬ ting any. By his melancholy rufh-light it was that he had written thefe—fometimes to ftrengthen his refolution, at others to indulge
indulge the tafte and talents he had re¬ ceived from nature ; for fome were marked as quotations, while others feem¬ ed to be his own. Akhea fancied, as ftie read them, that flie could diftinguiíh the time when they were written; and the earlieft appeared to have been recorded as incitements to that patience and fortitude which fubfe- quent events had fomewhat leflened the powcf of exerting.—There were fome lines from Metaftafio.------- ♦· Combini ι rigori Dİ forte inconftante Ια vano fcmbiante LiUclb v.rtù." On another paper a fentence from Lord Bacon------ " Certainly virtue bears iimilitude to fomc pre¬ cious odours, which are moil fragrant when ineens'd or cruih'd—for a prosperous for¬ tune difcovcis men's vice», but ao adverfe *»nc their virtue*."
And
And from fome French author— *' Mais au moîni de mon malheur je fus tirer quelque avantage. J'appris à m'cnduicir contre l'adverfité.·* On another paper, which feemed to be more recently written, there were other quotations from different writers, mingled with comments of his own. One of thefe texts was marked as being from Jean Baptifte RouifeaUj, the Poet—— ** Que itai-je pu, ?? vo* plaiiirs éprii, Tendre Amitié, dont je fens tout le prix, Dans une joie, et ii douce ct fi pure, Vivre oublié de toute la nature ?" And Marchmont had written under it— €i But / dare not afpire to happinefs, left I fhould involve others in my cala¬ mities. Oh, weaknefs ! to indulge hopes that never muft be realized! dreams of future pleafure, which ferve but to embitter
embitter the fad realities that furround me waking ! " Yet fuch vifionary hopes I have lately fuifcred to take pofieftion of my mind ! ** Hopes of what ? Ah ! would I, if I could, unite the deftiny of the woman I love with mine? Ought I?—who may fay------ ".,.,.,......... forlorn I rove. Without a crime, oinjuilly baniSlied*!" But furely 1 might go on too with the fianzas that follow : " Sife thy charms with me fhould reft, Hither did thy pity iend thee; Pure the love that fills my breafl, Prom itfeif it would defend thee! Ah ! what ills are mine to bear ! Life's fair morn with clouds o'ercaftmg;
Doom'd the viftim of dcfpatr, Youth's gay bloom pale forrow blaftmg.
Oh ! thou dear hoard of treafur'd love í Tho' thefe fond arms fhould ne'er poffef* thee, Still this fond heart fhall faithful prove, And its hit fighs fhall breathe to blefs thee." The paper on which the following lines were written was torn afunder, as if he had meant to deftroy it. " If I linger here, Ihall I ever con- " quer this unhappy paffion ? Do I not " feed it by thus lurking within a few it paces of its object? Yet whither fly ? * c Amid the flillnefs of the night when " I have left my cavern, and like a <( guilty wretch, lighter only in con- " fcience and in defign, have ftolen " foftly to the door of the chamber where " Althea, fecure in native innocence, ' f calmly fiept —when I have indulged " my fancy by believing I heard her " breathe — when I have really heard " her figh, and fince our interview have " dared
" dared to hope that the recollection of *· the unhappy Marchmont might fome- ft times occafion one of thofe fighs.— * i€ What have I done?—What? but ag- <; gravate certain and unavoidable fuf- " fcrings, by thus feeking food for vi- <c fionary indulgence; and having yicld- €t ed to thefe mockeries of hope, have I '* not awakened under ten-fold anguifli, " when I have allowed reafon to ihew * ( me what I am> and mufl be ? i( Wayward as my deftiny is, and '· while I fee no means of efcaping from u it, íhould I thus fuffer my mind to ct become enervate ? But it is İn vain I Kl know what I ought to do. One glimpfe i( of her I love, as flie w r alks fiowly and " pcnfively down the garden—as I catch ** a tranfient fight of her among the old " laburnums and larches that remain of tc the ihrubbery—or even the echo of " her light fteps, as I liften at the door tf which opens into the paffage near her Voi. Uh f " room;
** room; the diftant found of her en- " chanting voice, fpeaking even to give " a common order, all have their charms tä for me—fuch charms, that I forget ** every thing but the pleafure of being <c near her: and 1 form, in defpite of ** reafon, thofe dreams of felicity, from ·* which, when it regains its power, I " relapfe into more acute pain." ♦ £ SONNET. " Where with incumbent night the forens frown» The care-worn pilgrim feeks his doubtful way; Ί ι'ί weary on the grafs he throws him down, To wan in broken fleep the d. wn of day. Thro' boughs juft waving tn the blent air, With pale capricious light the Summer Moon Chequers his humid couch; while ????? there, That loves to wanton m the night's deep noon, Calls, from the moffy roots, and fountain's edge, Ideal forms of Nymphs that haunt the fhade, And Naiads rifing from the whifpeiing fedge : Then, 'mid the beauteous group, hi¡> dear-lov'd maid Seems beckoning him with fmiles to join the ti ain . Till, flatting from his dream—he feels lus woes again." Such
Such were fome of the contents of the pacquet Althea perufed. The effed they had upon her was that of heighten¬ ing the tendernefs, affedion, and regret with which ffie thought of Marchmont. The knowledge of his having watched near her room as ftie fiept —of having anxioufly waited for a flight vic-v of her as flic paffed among the ftirubs in the garden—and the druggies he had evi¬ dently made to tear himfelf away, that he might not difturb her peace by his unhappy love, gave her certain convic¬ tion of the fincerity and the purity of his regard for her. But having for a while yielded to thefe refledions of mingled pain and pleafure, ihe recolleded whither lbc was going; and trembling left Sir Audlcy's knowledge of their attachment fhould have been one caufè of his fend¬ ing for her, whom he never feemed to wifh near him on any former occafion; Akhea doubted whether, when with her father, fhe fliould be allowed the means F 2 of
of hearing of her wandering and un¬ happy lover —whether fhe fhould ever fee him more. Almoft overcome with anxiety and fatigue flie arrived at Bath. Wclih, her father's fcrvant, who had been waiting for her arrival, came down to receive her; and informed her that Sir Audlcy had been fo very ill the night before, that his life was thought to be in dan¬ ger: the man added, that Sir Audlcy had been very impatient for her arrival, but his fpirits were in fuch a (late that it was neceffary to let him know fhe was in the houfe, fome time before fhe entered his room. Lady Dacrcs had been delivered of a fon that had lived only a few hours; and Sir Audlcy, be¬ tween his anxiety on her account, and fome new vexation that had arifen from the conduci of Mr. Dacres, had loft all his firmnefs of mind, and fluctuated between peeviihnefs and defpondence, equally injurious to his health. As
As foon as he knew Althea was ar- rivtd, he defired to fee her. She en¬ tered the room trembling fo much, that it was with difficulty ihe fupported her¬ felf. But when ihe beheld the very- great alteration that had happened in the countenance and figure of her father, fhe had need of all her refolution to conceal how much fhe was affected.. His voice was as much changed as his perfon :-—feeble and tremulous like that of a very old perfon, it feemed to fail alike from weaknefs as emotion, as, drawing his daughter gently towards him, be faid— " Akhea, my poor girl ! are you wil¬ ling to be my nurfe a little while ? 1 may not want your attendance long. They tell me I am better—I hope I am. It will do me good to have yon near me." lie appeared to recollect how little hc had deferved the tendernefs he now? fo¬ licited from his long-neglected Althea, whofe looks and brc/ken accents fuffi- f 3 cicntly
cicntly evinced how affectionately her heart anfwered this return of regard, and with how much fweetnefs and duty flie was difpofed to repay it. When Sir Audley became more com¬ pofed, he faid, " You have heard, AU thea, of what has happened ? My family afflictions have been heavy. Lady Dacres is hardly now, I fear, out of dan¬ ger. I wifh I were well enough to begin my journey to London—it is dreadful to be abfent at fuch a time !" Althea now exerted herfelf to perfuade Sir Audley that the beft thing he could do would be to compofe his fpirits, which would more than any thing haften his recovery. She aifured him, that if her unremitting attention could afuft in the leaft degree that defirable end, ihe ihouid be happier than flie had ever been before. Her voice failed her as ihc would have gone on; and her father, who feemed to underftand her fenfa¬ tions, while hc tried to reprefs »his own, faid.
faid, t ' You are a dear good girl, Al¬ thea."—They both feemed to think it was better to put an end to the con¬ verfation. Althea from that evening entered on a new tail;, attendance in tlie fick room of her father, where ihe aequUted her¬ felf fo much to his fatisfaction, that it became to her a fource of the moit heartfelt fatisfaction ; while Sir Audley felt like an indigent man who had fuddenly difcovered a mine of gold on his ground that he never dreamed of poffeffing:—he was, however, unwilling to exprefs his prefent fentiments, left they fiiould feem too ftrongly to re¬ proach him with his former haríhnefs and neglect. In being affured, as [he foon was, that Sir Audley knew nothing of what had pafled in regard to Marchmont, ? heavy weight was taken from the mind of his daughter. The greater part of every day was paffed cither in writing r 4 letteri
letters for him on bufine ír ; kí t crs to his wife, with accounts of his health; or in reading political tracts, all on the fide of the queflion to which he was attached—and Sir Audlcy was tho¬ roughly a courtier. Blind fervili ty, wilful mifreprefentation, or the rhodo¬ montade of declamation, of which moil of thefe party pamphlets confiftV J made them alike difguftin^ to her rcaibn and her tafte; but fhe would have executed the taik, which often continued through great part of the night, with more cheer- fuhiefs, had ihe not obferved, as fhe waded through thefe tinfel or fui fome pages with the moil patient affiduity, that, ill as Sir Audley was, his mind was ftill agitated by views that were likely fb foon to vaniih in that awful futurity, on the brink of which* he feemed to be trembling—and that at everv interval of eafe he returned to the fanguine contemplation of p roj ?? s which death would probably prevent his ever
ever executing. Then, having wearied and exhaufted his fpirits, ihe faw him fuddenly fink in mental and bodily an¬ gui f h ; and recoil etting the hel pl e fs fa¬ mily he had to leave, of whom his eldcft ?οη fo little promifed to be a protector, he felt all the futility of the plans he had been forming for himßf, and hardly dared think of the reverfe that might befall them. In all the converfations he had yet held with Althea, Sir Audley had evaded fpeaking much or feriouffy of Mr. Dacres; but fiie faw that be was almoft alwavs the firft fubject of his thoughts. What ihe confidered ftill more extraordinary was, that her father had never mentioned Mohun to her, and feemed to have forgotten, or to wifh to forget, all that had formerly paffed about him.—-Akhea, who never thought of him without fhucldering, confidered this filence on the part of her father as the moit certain indication òf a change f 5 in
in his difpofition in her favour; and when he appeared to gain upon his dif- order, and there were fymptoms of his conquering it, flie ventured to encou¬ rage hopes that flie might be reftored to his tendernefs, and taken into his paternal protection, without being com¬ pelled to facrifice, for thofe advantages, all the happinefs and quiet of her fu¬ ture life. But though Mohun feemed to be out of the queftion, there was no reafon to believe that, to Sir Audley, March¬ mont could ever become acceptable ; and when her thoughts were turned towards him, which always happened the moment ftie was alone, fhe was fometimes compelled to divert them from the painful enquiry of what would be the event of an attachment that had now gained an unconquerable power over her heart—and at other times fhe perfuaded herfelf to believe, that if his merit fhould procure him a marriage with
with fome woman of fortune, who might relieve him from all his embarrraif- mcnts, fhe fhould herfelf rejoice at it; though, certain that it was impoffible to find a man, in her opinion, of equal merit, fhe ihouid never marry herfelf. — if the future, however, looked com- fortlefs, the prefent was wrapped in more difquieting obfcurİty ; it was now fix weeks fmce Marchmont had taken leave of her.—What was become of him? whither was hc gone?—Never, perhaps, might they meet again! Days and weeks paffed on—Sir Aud¬ lcy made but little progrefs towards his recovery, a fortnight after Althéa's arrival, and his phyiicians feemed to doubt whether hc would derive any far¬ ther benefit from the Bath waters: they rather recommended his returning to London, becaufe his abfence from his family feemed to prey upon his mind. It was fettled then that he fhould un¬ dertake the journey :—Althea heard t G with
with mingled concern and fatisfaction, that he had determined ihe ihouid ac¬ company him. Nothing could be more repugnant to her than going to refide with Lady Dacres, whofe temper would probably be irritated by ficknefs and disappoint¬ ment, and certainly would not be fweet- ened when fhe ihouid witnefs the newly- reftored affection of her huiband to his eldeft daughter. In removing fo far from Eaftwoodleigh, the probability of hearing of Marchmont would be lef- fened, and the means of hearing ren¬ dered more difficult. If her father died, ihe fhould be left, perhaps, wholly in Lady Dacres's power: if he recovered, flie might again become a fource of uneafinefs between them. Hut, eafily melted by the kindnefs fhe had been but little accuftomed to, the delight ihe felt in being ufeful to her father, in poffeffing the power to footh his pains, and to render tolerable the
the confinement of a fick room, which it was likely he might long be deftined to undergo, counterbalanced, in the mind of Althea, all the reafons of her diflike—and íhe thought, that if ihe contributed to the re-eftablifhment of a health fo neceffary to her family 7 , Lady Dacres would not fctuple to own her obligations to her, and lofe the paltry jealoufy ihe had before fhewn, in the purfuit of their common intereft in her fathers life. By being in town, Althea thought ihe might obtain an opportunity of feeing Mrs. Marchmont and her daughters who rcfided near it; and with this con¬ trariety of fenfation, all, however, oc- fionally abforbed in folicitude for her father, fhe began her journey. Sir Audley bearing the fatigue better than they had reafon to ?????, he de¬ fired they might proceed to Newbury, as the nearer he approached to London the greater became his anxiety to get thither.
thither. — Akhea faw, wuh fatisfaction, that hc appeared not likely to luffer from the jòui ney, as fhe had feared; he infilled on her leaving him for the night at an cai lier hour than ihe had been accuftomed to do, and bleiled her as he bade her good night. Althca retired to her bed, and had enjoyed, for two or three iiours, un* difturbed repofe, when ihe was fuddenly ftartled by a noife at her door. Some perfon rapped at it violently, but ieemed unable to articulate more than—·** Ma¬ dami Mifs Dacres —Oh! for God's fake, get up."—She arofe m tenor, afk mg in vain vvho was theie, while Ihe haüiiy put on her clothes. Ihe voice had ceafed, and the pei fon feemed to be gone from thence; but others were heaid running about the houfe. The idea of fire was the firft that occurred to Al¬ thea, and her firft impulfe was to run towards her father's room, though fhe wa& not furc fhe could find it. in a moment
moment ihe was dreifed; and taking the candle that was in the room, ihe hur¬ ried, with trembling ílep, along a fort of open gallery : at the top of the flairs ftie met Wei ih ;—he was pale, his lips quivered, and his knees feemed to re¬ fufe to fupport him. " What ii» the matter, Wclfli ?" ex¬ claimed Althea. ' f Ah! Madam, my mailer!" " What of your mailer?—is he ill?" lt Indeed, Madam, he is very ill—fo i¡ I, that·»-----" Akhea, without fpeaking, was run¬ ning towards the room.—Wei ih took her arm, and the miftrefò of the inn, who at tliat moment came up to them, faid—** You had better tell the young Lidy the truth:—it is in vain to attempt deceiving her." " The truth?" cried Althca.—" Gra¬ cious God!·—my father is dead then?" " We are afraid fo, Madam," faid Wei ih. * f Who
fí Who is with him?—who is with him?" afked fhe impatiently—"i will fee him." " It is very ufelefs. Sir," faid Mrs. ******, " to let the lady have the ihock of going into the room—I have left it fmce you have—Sir Audley is certainly de-id. Yon had better go to his room," added flie, fpeak in -? to Wclih, " I will take care of Mils Dacres. Come, Ma¬ dam, let me lead you back to your chamber." Akhea was fo dunned by a blow thus unexpected, that ihc became giddy and fick, and, leaning on the arm of the perion who offert d K r affiftance, was led back to the room fhe had left. She filed no tear, nor utteied a fingle word. It feemed as if ihc was arcui η «τ with herfelf as to the reality of what had juft paffed, and then, as having fomc hope flie might be deceived, fuddenly role, and faid fhe muft go to her father's room. She was, howc\cr, again pre- \??'(?! ;
vented; and in a moment afterwards a medical man, who had been fent for to Sir Audlcy, came to her. He talked very rationally; defired flic would go to bed and take fomething to calm her fpirits; and affured her, that to her father ftie could not now be of ufe, unlefs it w r erc in fo far commanding her¬ felf as to give the neceffary orders.—» To thefe, however, Althea, notwith¬ itanding all attempts to collect fome degree of fortitude, was wholly un¬ equal. She befought the gentleman to fpare her, by taking upon him¬ felf the direction of every thing; and then, that fhe might prevail on the well- meaning but officious people about her to leave her alone, ihe confented to go to bed. Mrs. Trevyllian, among the various excellent leffons fhe had given her be¬ loved Althea, had inculcated none with more frequency and earneft nefs than îhe neceffity of prefence of mind and foi titude»
fortitude. In a moment that brought to her recollection all the anguiíh íhc had fuffered for the lofs of her firft and beft fiiend, the max ; ms ihe had taught forcibly recurred to her, and there was now occafion for her to praciife them. Cold and even unfeeling as had been the conduct of Lady Dacres, the good heart of Althéa bled, when fhe thought of the forrow that would overwhelm her when ihe knew that her children had no longer a father—and the ftate of health in which íhe was reprefemsd to be, added to the poignant concern with which Akhea confidered the fitu? , tion of her ftep-mothcr. How to mi¬ tigate, as much as fhe could, the vio¬ lence of the firft fhock, was now to be confidered—and to determine on fome¬ thing was immediately neceffary, left the fatal news fhould reach Lady Dacies without any precaution at all. Inftead therefore of indulging that depreffion of fpirit which would have depm ed
deprived her of the power oï being ufe¬ ful, Althea. after remaining alone about an hour, fent for the miftrefs of the houfe; and, as ihe could not herfelf fee Sir Audley's fcrvant (who ihe defired would on no account quit tbc remains of his mafter), left an order with her that he íhould put down the names of the friends moft intimate in her father's fa¬ mily, and of the phyfician who ufually attended Lady Dacres. The name of the confidential friend was Mohun.—To him Althea could not refolvc to fend, but determined, by a letter, to inform Dr. B. of what had happened, and to entreat he would go luuifelf to difclofe the melancholy in¬ telligence to Lady Dacrcs.—This let- ter was immediately written, and fent off exprefi» —and Λ?ίΙκα, having fo far executed her duty, began to confider, in this great and material change in the family, what was to become of herfelf. Theie
There was no reafon to believe that the heart of Lady Dacres was foftened towards her; and ihe had often had oc¬ cafion to remark, in late converfations with her father, that he ieemed dif- treffed when it was neceffary to fpeak of her future refidenGe with them, ae if he were afraid of promifing too much as to her reception. Now that her father wa-s no more, it was very un¬ certain whether her mother-in-law would receive her at all, or whether it was right to put her reluctant complaifance to the trial : yet had Althea no other connection on earth, nor any friend whofe protection fhe could claim. To Eaftwoodleigh, indeed, fhe might ftill return : yet it was poffible that even that melancholy afylum might be after a time denied her, lince Lady Dacres had often faid, that it was folly in Sir Audley to keep the houfe in its prefent ftate, though it would be a ilJl greater to
to attempt repairing it; and that the only wife wav of getting rid of fuch an incumbrance would be t » pull it down, and fell the materials, fince there were farm-houfes enough upon the eftate. It was therefore probable that, fuch being Lady Dacres's fentiments, flie would foon difinifs the Icrvaius, and raze the houfe. Akhea, thus compelled to think of her future deftiny, forefaw, not without fomc difmay, that the hour was now at hand, when, totally alone in the world, and flenderly, very flenderly provided for, fhe fiiould, perhaps, have caufe to regret even the lonely feclufion of Eaft- woodleigh, and poffibly to wonder how ilie could ever have been unhappy, when ihe enjoyed, however remotely, the proteGion of a father.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII,
"There is nothing fo afle&ing as the digniiicd fortunei; of a family, who, Mien into indigence, luve ic- courfe for independence ta vntuous mtiufiij."'
ÄT an earlier hour than Akhea ex¬ pected, the phyfician, to whom ihe had written, arrived himfelf; he came poft, and faid that it was Lady Dacres's re¬ queft that Mifs Dacres would return with him to London, after he had given all the neceffary orders for conveying the remains of Sir Audlcy to Capel- ftoke.-— Althea enquired, with tender earncftnefs, after Lady Dacres, and was confoled to hear that ihe was tolerably compofed. Eager to do every thing that
that might contribute to cafe the mind of one who had been dear to her father, flie haftened to obey the fummons thus fent her ; and flattered herfelf that, fince all jealoufy of her favour with Sir Audley muft now be at an end, his widow would forget every former pre¬ judice againft her, and admit her to íhare the cares that would attend the education of the younger part of his family, to whofe fervice ihe propofed, with the trueft filial affection towards his memory» to devote herfelf. At the end of her melancholy journey, which was foon performed, Althea found herfelf under the roof fo latelv hei father's, with very different fenfations from thofe with which flie had left it to attend on her aunt, Indeed the houfe was in every refpect changed.— The fervants, who were then noify, in¬ folent, and prefumptuous, now glided about like fpeclres; and a mournful filence reigned where lately the con¬ tinual
tiimat entrance of company, and fome¬ times the fame fort of buftle that ? kcn at a ftatefmatts levée, ufed to dif¬ turb the ftreet. Lady Dacres fent her woman, with an excufe to Althea for not feeing her, even on the morning of the third day after her arrival. It was not difficult for her to believe, that their meeting might affed her too much ; but ihe could not help thinking it ftrange that her fifters had never appeared.—At length, however, thefe young ladies, after fending a formal notice of their intentions, came to her apartment. The cldeft, now about fixteen, feemed to wipe her eyes; but her demeanour, which was extremely cold and referved, gave no encouragement to the fenfible heart of Althea to confider her as a fifter, or as one deeply interefted in their recent lofs. The other two weie ftill under the direction of a very formal governefs, who entered with them, and fat perpendicular as a ftatue by them, while
while Althea endeavoured to make out fomething like affectionate converfa¬ tion, which, however, ended only in u Yes," or " No l* on their parts. Then, after remaining under this reftraint for a quarter of an hour, the elder fiffer arofe, and took as ceremonious a leave as if it had been of a perfect ftranger, and the governefs, with her two bridling pupils, departed in great form at the fame time. Thi> was too much for poor Althea, who, foriorn as her fituation at Eaft¬ woodleigh had been, never felt herfelf fo totally alone in the world as at this moment. Her heart funk in cold and blank defpondence when ihe confidered, that it was uncertain whether the uni¬ verfe contained one human being that cared whether ftie exifted or no! To write to Mrs. Marchmont flie had not yet refolution, nor was it indeed quite proper fo immediately after her father's death. Living alone in her room, ftie Vol. III. c faw
faw none but fervants, who feemed hardly to confider her as a part of the family. Ön the fifth day, however, a ftranger defired admittance. It was the attorney employed by Sir Audley in his affairs. This man, who feemed to be very well convinced of his own import¬ ance, informed her, after a preface which contained a panegyric on Lady Dacres, that he was direded by her Ladyihip to wait on Mifs Dacres to read to her the will of the late Sir Audley, her father. Althea, totally ignorant of the forms ufually obferved in fuch cafes, and who had hardly yet thought of the difpofition of her father's effects, af- fented to what Mr. G rim worth pro¬ pofed ; who thereupon, in a ridiculous tone, began to read a fcroll he held; by which Althea prcfently underftood that all her expectations of any increafe of fortune from Sir Audley's paternal af¬ fection were at an end. The two thoufand pounds fettled upon her
her on her mother's marriage, and hard¬ ly a thoufand left her by her aunt, was all ftie was ever likely to poffefs: of the latter fhe became miftrefs on attaining the age of twenty-one; the larger fum was in truft, and the intereit only was to be paid her; the truftecs in whofe names it flood being direcled in the will to fee it fettled on her whenever fhe married; which, in another paffage, it was enjoined her not to do without the confent of Lady Dacres—to whom was given every power that her huiband, Sir Audlcy, could beftow upon her: and the pcrfonals of every kind were hers, except a diamond crofs which had be¬ longed to the mother of Althca, and which was now directed to be given htr, with a ring, and fome articles of inferioi value. Lady Dacrcs and Mr. Mohun were executors. To all this Althea, whatever flie thought, had nothing to fay in the pre¬ fence of the confequential perfon who « 2 made
made the communication. As foon as he took his leave, her prefent circum¬ itances, and future profpecb, forcibly took poffelfion of her mind: the con¬ templation was not flattering, yet ilie felt no inclination to blame her father.— The will was made almoft immediately after the death of Mrs. Trevyllian, when her father's difpofition towards her was certainly much lefs affectionate than it had been towards the end of his life. Yet, had he then made another will, to do much in favour of Althea could not have been in his power ; for the far greater part of his fortune had belonged to his fecond wife, who had taken care that no part of it fiiould be alienated.— From her, if any judgement was to be formed from her prefent conduct, Al¬ thea had nothing to expect; and the idea of continuing in the protection of, and in fome meafure dependent on, a perfon who feemed to be little difpofed to treat her with that affection which fprings from
from the heart, was, of all the uneafinefs íhe had yet felt, the moft difficult to endure with fortitude. Ladv Dacres, like all thofe who feel very keenly for their perfonal conve¬ nience, lamented her huiband, becaufe much of her confequence, and no in- con fiderabl e part of their income, was loft with him; but ihe was incapable of really loving any body but herfelf, and her children becaufe they were hers.— Yet confcious, perhaps, how little of real tendernefs and regret was in her heart, fhe obferved the moil minute gradations in the forms of grief. Al¬ thea was, after fome days, admitted to fee her in her hal f-dai kened apartment; but a veiy few words paffed between them, and thofe few were fo coldly de¬ livered, that Althca relipquiíhcd at once every hope that remained of finding ? real friend in the widow of her father. The truth was, that Lady Dacrcs, under the firil furprife and concern on ? 3 the
the unexpected death of her huiband, had confented to the propofal of Dr. B***, who was, at that moment, her ad vi fer, and who juftly remarked, that decency mid affection demanded that Sir.Audley's daughter fhould, at fuch a time, find protection with the reft of his family. But no fooner had the firft tumult of her fpirits fubfided, than fiie faw innumerable objections to Althéa's refiding with her, the chief of which was the expence, though a confideration that had almoß as much w r eight, was the fear (hardly acknowledged even to her¬ felf) of this ftep-daughter's eclipfing her own—for, with all her ridiculous par¬ tiality, ftie was compelled internally to acknowledge the perfonal lovelineis of Althea; though of the mind that ani¬ mated her face, and gave it its peculiar charms, Lady Dacres was wholly in¬ fenfible. Could this narrow-minded woman have contrived to have placed the daugh¬ ter
ter of her huiband as the fuperintendant of her nurfery, and to have kept her in a ftate of abject dependence, ihc would willingly have preferred her to the peopic ili ? now employed : but the fmall independence Althea poffeffed, and the proper pride which fhe had often ihewn, precluded every attempt of that fort ; and if ffie ftaid at all with her mother- in-law, it could only be as Mifs Dacres. Time, however, fiowly moved on ; a fhort conference every day at dinner and tea with Lady Dacres, or a filent airing with the children and their prim governefs, were the only periods at which Akhea left the folitude of her own room. When ffie was admitted to tliat where the afflicted widow fhut herfelf up, their converfation was lan¬ guid, and, on the part of Lady Dacres, under vi fible reftraint.—Akhea was too delicaie to fpeak on what was, however, uppennoft in her thoughts, nor had flie indeed any thing to propofe: the ob- G 4 fervation.
fervation of every day ftrengthened the fuppofition that ihe was not a welcome vifitor where ihe was-—yet, whither could ihe go ?—where find a proper afylum?—Frequently were her thoughts turned towards Mrs. Marchmont and her daughters; and ftie fometimes be¬ lieved that they might gladly receive her as a boarder, becaufe what íhe ftiould pay would probably be of great ufe to them : but how could ihe pro¬ pofe this, or how make farther ad¬ vances towards the acquaintance of a family who had fo ftrangely appeared to recede from thofe íhe had made al¬ ready ? It was now two months unce the de¬ parture of Marchmont—and in all that time he would furely have commenced the correfpondence he had fo earneftly folicited, had not fome new calamity put it out of his power. Perhaps he no longer exifted:—this dreadful idea Jometimes forced itfelf on the mind of Althca,
Althea, but flic repelled it as refolutely as flie could : it was too terrible to be endured. The gay crowds that fo lately in¬ habited that part of the town had now difappeared, and hardly a ftraggling coach paffed through the deferted ftreets. Nothing could be more oppreflìve to the fpirits than the appearance of every thing around her. The windows of the oppofite houfcs were half ihut, and the idle folitary fervants itood loitering away their afternoons at the doors.—. Here and there w/ere feen a group of unemployed chairmen, whofe hoarfe voices, and the cries of the fruit-vend¬ ers, were all the founds heard amidft the fullen defertion of the hot and dufty ftreets. Such was the comfortlefs fituation of Althea, who continually thought of feeking Mrs. Marchmont, without being able to determine on it.—At leng h ?^ refolvcd to write to her—and, waving g 5 every
every other confideration, to think of her only as the mother of Marchmont, and one whofe misfortunes it might be poffible for her to alleviate. A piece of information fhe learned the day fhe had made this rcfolution· quickened its execution. Lady Dacres fent an excufe for not receiving her as ufual—illnefs was the reafon given, as had fometimes hap¬ pened before. The governefs, Mrs. Bentham, and the young ladies, how¬ ever, affembled as ufual ; and it hap¬ pened that the former was fomewhat more communicative than ufual, and from her Althéa learned that Lady Da¬ cres, unable to vifit Capel ftoke this fummer on account of the ftate of her fpirits, had thoughts of going to Mar¬ gate—and Althéa difcovered that it was intended íhe íhould perceive, by the hints Mrs. Bentham dropped, that the great expence, on account of her having fo large a family to remove, had de¬ terred
terred her from yet beginning a journey which was thought to be neceffary to her health, lt was not difficult to per¬ ceive that Lady Dacres wiihed for an opportunity of fliaking her oft; and thought this removal offered one.— There was therefore no time to hefitate; and Althea wrote the letter ihe had meditated to Mrs. Marchmont, who now, as flie believed, refided at Ful¬ ham. It contained merely a requeft of leave to wait upon her ; and, though with E^reat reluclance, the determined not to ípcak to Lady Dacres of quitting her till fhe received Mrs. Marchmonts an¬ fwer, or even to delay it till {he had vifited her, and was enabled to judge whether flic could hope to find, in the mother of Marchmont, the maternal friendihip whieh was become fo necef¬ fary in her defolate and unprotected fituation.—In the interim, whenever ihe faw Lady Dacres, the converfation was invariably turned to the iubjecl of g 6 ceconomv.
ccconomy. Sir Audley had poifeffed a confiderabie fi necure, and participated en croupe a very large (hare of a place which his intereft procured for one of his friends. The lofs of thefe emoluments Lady Dacres failed not to lament, with as many remarks on her extreme ill fortune as if fhe had nothing left. Al¬ thea indeed fometimes thought that, in deploring this diminution of income, fhe forgot the huiband through whofe means ihe had enjoyed it. Avarice was always the leading fea¬ ture in the character of Lady Dacres ; and it is a fault which always increafes with years : but with her it had acquired ftrength from another circumftance, which Althea now difcovered—the ex¬ ceffive extravagance of her eldeft fon, now Sir Gunfton Dacres, whom, during his father's life, flie had privately fup- plied with money, and for whom her ill-judged fondnefs now urged her to amafs it for his future aggrandifement and
and gratification, even at the expence of her other children. Althea, convinced of this, faw an ad¬ ditional reafon for believing, that fhe fhould not long be a gueft with whom Lady Dacres would conftrain herfelf to keep up even the forms of kindnefs. Uncertain how to a6t in a fituation fo diftreffing, and uncertain whither to go, the three days, during which fhe ex¬ pected the anfwer from Mrs. March¬ mont, feemed the longeft and moil pain¬ ful ihe had ever yet paffed. At length a letter was brought to her: fhe opened it trembling : fcarce could the writing of Marchmont himfelf have affected her more than did this, which fhe believed to be from his mother.—The hand¬ writing was remarkably elegant, yet free, and without any of the formality which is hardly to be avoided in ela¬ borate fine writing.—The letter fol¬ lows ------ u Madam,
" Madam, " You will, I hope, allow me, in the abfence of my mother, to thank you for your moil obliging letter; yet in¬ deed, deareft Madam, I never found myfelf fo much at a lofs. I would fain exprefs all I feel of gratitude for re¬ peated kindnefs, to vhich I am fure we muft feem to have very little claim ; for how ftrange muft our condud have appeared to you ! I dare not trouble you with a long explanation in writing ; but, if I am fo happy as to fee you, I will endeavour to convince you that it has been from the moft laudable mo¬ tives that my poor mother has denied herfelf the gratification of becoming known to you.—Ah ! Madam, we ac¬ count ourfelves fo unhappy, that we are afraid left the infetlion of our diftrefs fhould injure thofe who have not thrown us off; and, alas! they are fo few!— Yet to the very fmall number of be¬ nevoli ?
nevolení and feeling minds, who are affected by our fituation without the power of relieving us, my mother has been afraid of adding Mifs Dacres; and this, with fome other reafons which I am fure you would not condemn, have together prevented her from availing herfelf of the generous attempts you have made to give us, what we have heard enough of you to make us highly value, the honour and pleafure of your acquaintance. " But furely, under our prefent cir- cumftances, it is no time to deny our¬ felves the little good that Heaven feems to offer us. I believe, Madam, tha. if I am fo fortunate as to fee you, I fhodd find myfelf utterly unable to fpeak all I have to fay ; I hope, therefore, there will be no impropriety in writing. There are, pei haps, forms which ought to be obferved, yet 1 cannot but believe that Mifs Dacres will forgive me if I break through them, " Indeed
" Indeed our ftruggle, with fome re¬ mains of pride, is fo ineffectual, that we íhould long fmce have given it up, had not my mother ftill lingered in the hope that her own family would render the ftep unneceflary, which they were too proud to allow her to take as iheir re¬ lation. She has a filter, Lady Silchefter, vvho, ever fince our fortunes have been fo deplorably changed, has endeavoured to efcape from the relationihip ; but, as it is too well known, ihe has at laft de¬ clared, that if rny mother does go into bufinefs, ihe will affift her upon no other terms than her changing her name. While my brother was in Eng¬ land, he pofitively refufed to confent to this; nor could he indeed bear to think that his mother and his fifters fhould engage in a manner of life, of which the pride of a very ancient family has, perhaps, given him, andali of us, falfe ideas. His objections, and the languid defpondence
defpondence of my dear mother, have deterred my fifters and myfelf from the undertaking, rather than the felfifh ar¬ rogance of Lady Silchefter. But as we are convinced ftie never will effectually befriend us, nor indeed can we well en¬ dure to be under obligations to her, (which we íhould be made to feel more heavily than any other ftate of depend· ence) we have at length prevailed on my mother to allow us to try what we can do, to procure for her and for our¬ felves a fubfiftence, which furely is not difhonourable. Her tendernefs, how¬ ever, will not permit only us to appear in this, as we were defirous of doing ; ftie thinks we are too young, and that the intention, which ought to command refpcd, will not always fecure us from the malice of the cenforious^ or the im¬ pertinence of the proft igate. She there¬ fore facrifices her own feelings to give us the protection of her appearance in our
our little ihop, and, with my eldeft fifter, is gone down to Margate to begin on this mode of life. A change of air, and pjiuculaily to the fea air, we hope will be of great ufe to her health, which is often in a ftate that makes us tremble for her life—and where ftie is not known, the new tafk, undertaken on motives fo laudable, will, we truft, af¬ fect her lefs. I ftay here for about ten days longer with my younger filter, till we can fini ili fome of the articles whicli are to become part of our dock in tiadej and w r e are then to follow her.·— And can you, Madam, will you con- defcend to vifit us?—1 hardly dare hope it!——-Yet when î re fl eft on your cha¬ racter, fuch as ic ha> been 'cprefeuicd to mc, í cannot but ÍI itter my (elf you will oi\c me an opportuni tv of cx- preffing the gratitude w 1 ? h we owe you, and accounting for the ?????? inPn- iibiht) oï hearts, which inde J, dcuteft t " 1 ι UJiïl,
Madam, are all as confcious oï their obligations, as is that of " Your moft obedient and ** Faithful humble fervant, ? Lucy Marchmont. ,f I would do m) felf the honour of waiting on you ; but í cannot leave my youngeft fifter; and to be ingenuous, the expence, fmall ¿s it is, would be fome object to us juft now." Calm and generally miftrefs of her¬ felf as Althca was, for fome moments {he was fo much affected bv this letter, d$ to be unable to determine what to do—but, as foon as the firft painful, yet pleafu rable emotions fubfided, íhe de¬ termined to haften to theie interefting voting women, who more than ever were become objects of her folicitude and ι egard. Their ptojects of induftry, which were likely to lead them to the veiy fame place whcie Lady Dae t es intended
intended to go, put another difficulty in the wav of what Althea had projected, when ihe thought of offering herfelf as a hoarder in their family; and again file looked around her in uncertainty whi¬ ther to go, while almoft every moment gave ? cafion to fome remark on the conduct of the family where íhe now was a that added to the uneafinefs ihe felt from the neceffity of flaying in it. Her firft purpofe, however, was to vifit Lucy Marchmont, and ihe deter¬ mined to do fo the next day. Another difficulty, however, arofe. Though Lady Dacres h$d hitherto ap¬ peared perfectly indifferent how fiie dif¬ pofed of her time, yet her father's will feemed to put her very much in the power of her mother-in-law ; and Al¬ thca knew that there is in many minds fuch a love of authority, that it is often exerted where the governou have no affection for the governed, or intereft in the actions they wouid control.*— I ad ?
Lady Dacres was aware that Althea had not one acquaintance in or near Lon¬ don: and íhould ihc either borrow one of the carriages, or hire one, to make a vifit in the neighbourhood of the town, it would probably be enquired to whom it was to be made ; and the name of Marchmont was that of all others to which Lady Dacres feemed to inherit from her father, and to have taught to Sir Audley, an averfion, which iheir misfortunes appeared to have in¬ creafed. While Althea was debating with her¬ felf how T to acl, flie was furprifed bya vi (it from Mrs. Glafton, formerly Linda Everfley, with whom her correfpond¬ ence had languifhcd for fome months, but who, as Althea had heard lìnee fhe came to London, was lately married to a man of very large fortune. Her own troubles, and the reluciance with which fuch fort of letters are ufually written, had hitherto prevented her re¬ newing
newing their correfpondence by a con¬ gratulation in form ; and ffie thought of nothing lefs than fuch a vifit when Mrs. Glafton was introduced. Althea ftared in aftoniíhment when fhe faw her, fo entirely was flie changed! It was no longer the fimple, unaffeHed, good-natured Linda Ever¬ fley, who had been the companion of her early youth. She now met a very fine lady, dreffed in the extremity of the faihion, with cheeks very red, and a voice very loud—who affected, how¬ ever, to be extremely glad to fee her, and told her fo in phrafes which were a ftrange mixture between her former Devonfhire dialect and the cant words of the day. Akhea could at any other time have found great amufement in the fantaftic attempts of her friend to imitate fu¬ preme fafhion; but, her mind entirely occupied by the Marchmonts, fhe feized this opportunity to enquire what was known
Icnown of their hiftory, by one who was once the friend of the younger part of the family, and who had lived among thofe by whom, in the days of their profperity, the Marchmonts had been looked up to as the firft people in the neighbourhood.
CHAP.
CLIAP. VIII.
N'écoutant, n'er.v ifa géant, que foi í
X HE new-married lady was much taken up with the idea of her own im¬ portance, and İn deícribing to Althea the fineries of which ftie had become poifeffed, and the fine people fhe lived among.—Nothing is more ridiculous than the confequence of a filly creature, who, by fome unexpected circumftance, is fuddenly placed in a fituation greatly above her former rank of life. The un- ballafted head of Linda Everfley, a girl whom even her own family had been ufed to confider as of fmall account, was quite overfet by it, and ihe feemed to
to have vifitcd Althea lefs in the inten¬ tion of renewing their former acquaint¬ ance, than for the purpofe of exhibiting to her her imaginary importance. Al¬ thea, pitying her weaknefs, heard her for above half an hour with her ufual quiet complaifance ; and at length took occafion, on her flightly naming fome of their former acquaintance, to fay— " But pray, among all your Devonfhire friends, what have you to tell me of the Marchmont family ?" %t The Marchmonts?—Oh! I had loft fight of them fo long!—Poor fouls! I heaid lately, I think, that they were fadly off, and living fomcwhere about Lonnon ; I actually meant tew or three times to have afked about 'em, but fomchew it always went out of my head, and Mr. Glafton talks of our leaving Lonnon fo fcwn, that I fhall hardly liave time. Its vaftly favage in me, though—-don*t you think fo?" Vol. III. ? *« Yes,
" Yes, indeed I do** faid Althea; " I am fure your brodier, who had fo great an affedion for fome part of that fa¬ mily, would think fo too . . . . '* *' My brother!" interrupted the lady. ** Lord, do you know that we vote him quite a quiz! He is fo altered you would not know him—and leads iuch a miferable life ! always mope, mope, mope in the country, talking about gar¬ dening and planting, and wearing one really quite to a thread. As to his hor¬ rible wife, fhe's juft the fame as íhc was ; and I think by degrees, do you know, (he'll make my poor brother like her: for my part, ihe ufed to favage itte fo, when I was forced to be there, that I ihall never go near them any more.** ** 1 cannot blame you," faid Althea, « for efcaping from the lady ; but furely Mr. Everfley's having the misfortune to have fo uphappy a tempered woman for
for his wife, íhould rather ftrengthen than leffen t4ie affeèlion of his family towards him> eípecially as you know he married her on the moft laudable mo¬ tives." " Aye, thats very tme, and I really love my brother vaftly well ; but that •odious pufs of a woman! I'm fure, if I were to fee her, I ihouid downright quarrei with her; and, dear! ,you know one can do him no gued ; and whats the ufe, you know, of making one's felf unhappy by feeing one's friends mife¬ rable, when, after all, one cannot help ihem ?" " And is it," faid Althea, " upon that piinciple that you have fo entirely given up the Marchmonts?" " I don't know that I have given ihem up; but what can one do, you know ?—Mr. Glafton has fuch newme- roos copneclions, and hc expecls me to vifit them all—and then, befides, I really don't know where thofe poor people ? 2 live.
live.—But do you know, my dear, that fomebody was ? -telling me the other day, that young Marchmont was run away for debt, and that his mother and fiflers were going to fet up a ihop ?'' " You cannot have forgotten," faid Althea, whofe cheeks were fuffufed with crimfon when Marchmont was thus named, ci the noble and generous mo¬ tives by .which that refpectable and worthy young man was actuated, when he incurred the debt for which he has fince been fo inhumanly perfecuted ; and furely, if he has been compelled to quit his country that he may efcape from thofe who have fo cruelly purfued him, you fiiould not give his evafion fo harfli a term as that of having run away." « Well," replied Mrs. Glafton coldly, " call it what you will—in faci, you know, it is really running away, though." ** But," enquired Althea, interrupting her, " if it be true that Mrs. March¬ mont
mont and her daughters have taken the refolution to enter into any way oi bu¬ fi neis, furely thev are highly to be re- fpecied for it—and would not all theii former friends, do you think, endea¬ vour to ciKouray.e and affift them.''' " Yes, fure! yes, indeed!—I'm fure, for my part, Ld be very glad to en¬ courage them, poor things! and would recommend them to all my friends.— I dare fay they'll meet with fuccefs, and I'll take care to go to them as foon as I hear they're fet up—but I really don'f know whu to enquire of. I cant ima¬ gine, my dear, how I fliall know when they're fet up." Though Althea was difgufted enough with thefe infolent airs of protection and patronage, from a perfon who was fo lately raifed, as far as money coukl do it, above thofe in every other refpecl fo greatly her fuperiors, ihe debated a moment with herfelf whether flic ftiould not, by faying what ihe knew to ? 3 be
be the Marchmonis* intentions, fecure fuch good offices as Mrs. Glafton could do them, though at the riik of íubjecting them to her childiih impertinence ; and it occurred to her that, bv means of this fooliih woman, ihe might be enabled to make her vifit without any difagree¬ able explanations with Lady Dacres ; though, being fo accompanied, if indeed Mrs. Glafton would deign to vifit people who propofed keeping a ¡hop, would, ihe feared, make her own vilit lefs wel¬ come. Something, however, it was worth while to rifle: ftie therefore related to Mrs, Glafton what fhe knew of the pre¬ fent fituation of the female part of the Marchmont family. During this little narration, tbe cold exclamation of—" Indeed ?—Really ?—- Foor things !—oh ! I think them quite right—" gave to Althca but little hope ol having moved the felfiili intipi dity of her auditor; to whom, however, ilie at length
length ventured to difclofe hei wiih oí vifiting them, and afked if Mrs. Glafton would accompany her. u What, to Fulbíim? Lord, m\ do -?, í am afi aul I can never go fo far to¬ morrow; for we go out of town in lefs than a week, and I have tew thoufand things to do-—-but," added ihe, after a moment's paufe, u if my carriage will be of any ufe to you, you fhall be vaftly welcome to it. Wc have ¿tuu and I can take the coach out to-morrow, if you chufe to have the chariot." Althea, confidering from hew many difficulties this offer would deli\ cr her, accepted it, though ftie was aware that Mrs. Glafton offered it much more fiom orientation than friendfhip. Mrs. Glafton then affured her İt fhould be at the door at ten o4îock the next morning ; and, lifing to go away, laid-— <? You will give tny f e itil ? to the poor giihs, and pray tell them, that though I can't "rt fo far out of ? ? π 4 town,
town, I fhall bc vaftly glad to fee their pretty ingenious works, whenever it lay* in my way; and that I'll recommend them to a great many of my friends who are going to Margate this feafon, if they fet up there. WeU ! good day to you, my dear! I'll try to ice you again befoie 1 go out of town. Good morning to you'.—You are vaftly wel¬ come to the chai iot." To all this, which paffed as Mrs. Glafton defcended the ft airs, Althea an¬ fwered very flightly, and, returning to her own room, almoft repented that fhe had accepted her half-infulting kindnefs; while her vifitor withdrew mightily fa¬ tisfied with herfelf, and with the im¬ preifion of her elegance and importance, which fhe nothing doubted having kft on the mmd of her old acquaintance. Akhea now font ? me ftage to Lady Dacres, to fay Ìli e was going to pay α vifit the next morning, a few miles from London, in Mrs. Chiton's carriage, ,( if lì c r
her Ladyihip had no obje6tion ? "—A cold acquiefcence was immediately re¬ turned. At an early hour then, the following tuoi ning, Althea fc r out on her ftiort journey. As flic w r ent. a thoufand re¬ fledions occupied her mind. She was now, for the firft time, to fee one of Marchmonts family—ihe was to learn, what hitherto had appeared myftenous *o her, the character and temper of his mother, which would probably be dif¬ covered bv the manner of her daughter. Uniìed in thefe conjecture-;, and in re¬ tailing all that had paffed with March¬ mont himfelf the road was hardly dif- torncd, no; was Ahin a routed from her : e ve rie till fhe found herfelf at the door of a imali lodging-houfe, a htt'c diftant from the end of the town, whither flie had been diiected. As Lucy March¬ mont was not apprifed of her arrival, fhe had the precaution to write a card Ik foie the fct out—remembering, that it ? hardiv
hardly any thing is fo uneafy as a firil vifit, where the parties are unknown to each other. Having fent in this note, her anxious expectation did not laft iong; for Lucy Marchmont, whom ihe would almoft any where have known from her refemblance to her brother, came down to receive her. In that fort of breathlefs agitation, which a defire to pleafe particularly, and the fear of not pleafing, give to a young and timid mind, fhe led her vifitor to a fmall fit¬ ting-room on the firft floor, and intro¬ duced her to her youngeft fifter : then, recovering a little from her confufion* Lucy began to exprefs her gratitude to Althea for coming; but, trying to fpeak of her mother and of her brother, her voice failed her, and file burft into tears. By the fenfible mildnefs of Akhea, had ihe been in a condition to have exerted it, her new friend would foorv have been re-affured; but it was fo long fmce
fince fhe had feen any one whom fhe was difpofed to love, and with whom fiie could yield to the tendernefs and affection of her character towards thofe who interefted her, that Althea was unable to help weeping too ; and, in¬ ftead of the firft meeting of two ftrangers, it appeared to be the renewal of fomc long-cheriffled friendihip that had been interrupted by misfortune. As there was great good fenfe on both ildes, without any of that affected fen¬ fibility which is hardly lefs unpleafant ihan cold indifference, they foon re¬ covered their compofure ; and Althea, thouffh flie had never accuftomed her- felf to thofe violent flights of fudden friendfliip which fometimes arc pre¬ tended to be fck at firft fight, yet foon difcovered that, in Lucy Marchmont, ffie had found a perfon capable of awakening her from the lifelefs and joy- lefs ftate in which ffie had lived ever fmce the departure of Marchmont lum¬ ii 6 felf.
felf. And indeed it was fo long fince the voice of kindnefs and real affec¬ tion had met her ear, it was fo long fince her heart had felt any but un¬ pleafant fenfations, that the ftyle of mind and converfation of Lucy ap¬ peared to her doubly attractive; and when, in addition to her perfonal merit, fhe confidered her as the fiffer of March¬ mont, it feemed as if in her was con¬ centred all that could attract and de¬ light her. It was lefs the beauty of this charming girl, that was fo fuddenly feducing, than the mingled fimplicity and vivacity of her manner. Her pleafing voice, her expreffive countenance, and the foul that feemed to animate her eyes; the tender enthufiafm with which fiie men¬ tioned her brother, and the more fe¬ rious affection mingled with fomething like uneafinefs and concern, which Al¬ thea remarked, when ihe fpoke of her mother; the good fenfe and courage that feemed
feemed to enter into all her ideas as to their propofcd plan of life; and that de¬ fire of independence, however humble, in which true and laudable pride really conflits : all thefe traits of character im¬ preffed on the mind of Althea the moft favourable idea of her young friend; ihe feemed to have acquired fomething hke a new exiftence in having found a mind correfponding with her own ; and Marchmont from that moment became dearer to her than ever—fhe loved him for his fifter, and for himfelf. Before Althea fpoke of him, fiie wifhed to know how much of what had nailed during his refidence at Eaftwood- ieigli he had communicated to his fa¬ mily- ------while Lucy Marchmont, who really knew more of his attachment to Althea than the reft, dared not even hint at the knowledge fhe had ; for no¬ thing like hope had ever entered into thofe little fketchcs of the rife and pro¬ grefs of his paflion, with which he had occafionally
occafionally indulged himfelf when he talked to I ucy. Equally ingenuous however, and with minds fo well fuited, they foon under- Itood each other; and Lucy March¬ mont fpoke with very little referve on the affairs of her family, as believing fhe was fpeaking to one generoufly con¬ cerned for what related to them. '· Though I have feen," faid íhe, " but little of the world, indeed nothing of that fort of fociety that is generally called fo, I am not ignorant that young women totally deftitute of fortune as we are have no chance of marrying. Well ! it is very fad, to be fure, to be predeftined old maids: but a million of others, with as many pretenfions as we could have had, had our poor father been more fortunate, live fingle; and I am fure there are fuch who are living happier, and more quietly and comfortably, than many women who have families. But 1 muß not, fays family pride, go into bufincfs,
bufmefs, fori am defcended fom people who were of great confequence two hun¬ dred years ago, and of ftill more in the laft century. Ah, dear! my anceftors will now do nothing for me. Not a citizen, not even a wealthy tradefman s will uke either of us to ennoble his houfe ; for in this country it is very cer¬ tain money is refpeâed the moft, what¬ ever influence rank may have when united to it. What then are we to do? If we could exift without doing fome¬ thing for ourfelves, which ï am con¬ vinced, whatever ftruggles we may make, is utterly impoffible, I declare I think we ihall be happier if we have fome¬ thing to employ us. Two or three for¬ lorn ancient fpinfters, juft creeping through a vegetative fort of life in a cheap country town, has fomething to my apprehenfion moft woefully gloomy and depreifive. Who will care for us ? The people among whom we live will no more refpect. us 9 though our great grandfathers
grandfathers were cavaliers, than they reverence the royal oak itfelf: half the world kno ? nothing about Charles, or his martyrdom; and more than half the reft think the Englifh people on the other fide were in the right, and the cavaliers only obftinate proud fools*— Whereas, if we exert the few faculties we have, we fhall be too bufy to think of the neglect of thofe who were once our equals, or to dread the fupercilious fcorn of people that know no crime fo great as poverty. By degrees our re¬ pugnance will wear away. We fhall be amply repaid for the facrifice. of our pride, by the delight· of obtaining more conveniences and comforts for my mo¬ ther; of having a cheerful borne for our brother, when he returns !" Althea could not ftifle a figh, as her new friend faid this ; for fhe feemed to fpeak doubtfully, and to lay peculiar em- phafis on the word when. Lucy March¬ mont hefi tated a moment, and proceeded. « My
*' My eldeft fitter now feems to be convinced tliatwe cannot do better; and we have together, I hope, conquered the remaining reluctance of my mother her¬ felf—though ihe ftill doubts whether, ??¬ ?? brother's account (at leaft till we have his confent to do fo), we íhould exhibit the name of Marchmont on a ihop-bill. But indeed, my dear Mifs Dacres, this feems to me to be a dif- tinction without a difference; and though I have in general the greateft deference for my mother's opinion, I cannot dif¬ cover that we íhould gain any thing by this laft indulgence of lingering pride, while we íhould certainly lofe confider¬ abie advantages. Befides, I have no notion of humouring 'the arrogance of that Lady Silchefter, who does not choofe forfooth that her relations fhould be ihop-women ! She affecb to fay at the fame time, that, living only on her jointure, fhe cannot do any thing for us. For my part, I declare that if flic could, I íhould
I fliould prefer the humbleft indepen¬ dence to the mifery of exiitmg on the bounty, or, as one may well call it, the chanty, ofthat aunt of mine; and fo far from thinking this a want of pride, it feems to me to be the trueft pride. It is not however furprifing, that my fifter and I ihouid feel and judge differently. She is, you know, two years older than my brother, and of courfe was brought up in aifkience, and looked forward to a life of profperity from her firft recol¬ lection; while ƒ, who -am almoft five years younger, have, İî«ce 1 have been growing up, been witnefs io the diffi¬ culties and Qiftreflesof my family,and m confequence have infenfibly becorncrnoi e prepared to meet them. It is true, that my poor father, who could not endure that my mother ihouid ever fuffer the leaft anxiety, always tried to hide from her and from us the decaying ftate of his fortunes. She affecled to be deceived, becaufe he wiihed to deceive her; but ihe
fhe ufed to weep for hours together as we younger .children were at play round her: and when they did not fufpeCtme of attending to their converfation, I have liftened to many heart-bteaking dialogues between her and Amelia ; while, as foon as he thought røe old enough to be reafonable > my brother ufed to confide to me his fears for his father and all of us, for of himfelf he never feemed to think; and very of tesi, before he wctit laft to France (for it was long before my father would confent to that), he ufed to form fchemes for entenng on the world in iorøe bufmefs or profeifion that might affift us, and retrieve his father's affairs. Perhaps you may have remark¬ ed a part of the grounds that were once the pai ? at Eaftwoodleigh, down beyond where the cafcade then was, there was formerly a long row of walnut and chefnut trees, reaching near half a mile. They are cut down now, and only the mots remain ! it was there, that
that in the fine evenings of the laft two fummersourdearArmyn were accuftomed to walk with me, and that we ufed, as we traverfed the avenue backwards and for¬ wards, to weary ourfelves with hopes and fears,with conjectures and fchemes: and fometimes all my brother's courage did not prevent him from communicating to me anticipations of future calamity, which have, alas ! been too fatally veri¬ fied fince. As he remarked the beauty of the view·', while the fetting-fun illu¬ minating the fea appeared magnificent¬ ly through the branches and boles of thofe fine trees, how often has he faid, that if hc could but fee his father and his dear mother happy in a more humble fituation, he ihouid relinquifh all the beauties of his* native place without a figh; but that to live in it as we then lived, and to fee the ineffectual ft nig¬ gles of his father undermining and de- ftroying his conftitution, was more than he was able to bear. Then, perhaps, when
when evening had ftolen upon us un¬ awares, he faw by the light sin the houfe, that my father was gone up to his bed¬ room, and we haftened in; when ufually my brother took a book and read to him till he went to íieep. —Ah ! I well re¬ member the effort Armyn made to ap¬ pear calm and eafy on thofe occafions. He ufually took care to procure no books of fiction but fuch as were of a cheerful caft; but once, among fome other works of entertainment that he had fent for, was the novel of Julia de Roubigné. We had heard it v praiíèd # and, as my father was pretty well that night, he bade us all come into his room ; when, after he waa in bed, Armyn fat down to read it. But he had not gone farther than that pathetic and natural deferiptioß of the old fervant Le Blancs when he had feen his mafter's favourite horfe neglected by -the owner of the eftate he had loft, than Armyn affected ■not to like the book. My father, however, bidding
bidding him go on, his voice faltered more and more, till at laft he threw it down, and haftened away. Poor Amelia took it up, and put it filently on the table. Nobody offered to go on with it—nobody was able to fpeak. Aht how many fuch feenes recur to my mind as I now fit of an rvening in thefe poor lodgings, and look over the little bit of garden that belongs to them, and the nurfery and kitchen grounds beyond! Ail that then paffed feems prefent to me —but fuch retrofpeel only gives mc pain, and difables me from looking fteadily towards the future, which after all one muft determine to do, if one would not be ufelefs in one's felf, and perhaps burdenfome to otherr." More and more pleafed with the fen¬ fibility and fenfe of this interefting girl, the good heart of Akhea made her en¬ deavour to explain, that herown fitua¬ tion was neither much fuperior in point of fortune, nor at all more enviable İn regard
regard to other circumitances, than that ihe had juft heard defcribed. Every moment increafed her pleafure in the company of Lucy Marchmont, till fhe found it difficult to determine on leaving her. Nothing had yet been faid of the project flic had formed of offering to be¬ come a boarder in the houfe of Mrs. Marchmont, wherever flie might be fixed. If Althea had before thought of this as the mofl defirable phm that could offer itfelf, the prefent interview with Lucy redoubled all her anxiety to adopt it.— At length ihe ventured to fpeak of it; and was inftantly convinced, as the lucid eyes of her young friend fparkled with delight, that by one of the family at leaft her öfter would be joyfully re¬ ceived. Their mutual confidence was now rapid in its progrefs; and before they parted, which Althea delayed till the very laft moment poffible, it was fettled that Lucy Marchmont fliould write to her
her mother; while Akhea on her pai t was to attempt to difcover what were Lady Dacres's intentions; and, ihouid fhe have reafon to believe her Ladyfhip wiihed her to choofe fome other refi¬ dence—in that cafe flie was to endeavour at obtaining her fandion for making her eledion with Mrs. Marchmont. The hope thatthisplan mightfinally fucceed,recon¬ ciled them to the painful ceremony of bidding adieu—when Lucy was left hap¬ pier than ihe had been for fome time,, and Althea returned, with increafed at¬ tachment for the Marchmonts, to her folitude in a faihionable ftrcct in a great city.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX.
.............. . , . In ad ve rfj ty The muid grows tough by buffeting the terapeft.
X HE ufual accompaniments of ? nar- low mind and a felfiili heart, cunning and fufpicion, were ftrongly marked in tiie character of Lady Dacres, Althea, though formerly a fuffercr from both, was little upon her guard againft cither. Artlefs herfelf, it never entered her head to imagine that her mother-in-law hardly s " Dxaak ber tea without a fliatagcm," or that ihe owed even the little forbear¬ ance from rudenefs flie had experienced Vol. III. 1 fince
fince her father's death, and the apart¬ ment and board that were fullcnly af¬ forded her, to a hope entertained by Lady Dacres, that 'her little fortune, which fhe notwithftanding affected to treat with fo much contempt, might, by Althéa's dying unmarried, belong at fome future period to her own children. Somebody had befides hinted lately to this genuine defcendant of Sir Ralph Gunftone, that Althea, and two female coufins whom ihe hardly knew, would be coheireffes to the fortune of Mr. Trevyllian, fhould he, as was not im¬ probable from his manner of life, die without legitimate children. In that cafe Althea might poffefs the third of the vety confiderabie landed property, which being entailed on the heirs of his father, he could not alienate; and though ihe herfelf fcarcely recollected that fuch a man as this relation of hers exifted, Lady Dacrcs, who had received the hint fiom Mohun, failed not occafionally to make
make enquiries after him : and the re¬ ports flie had lately collected, greatly helped to reconcile her to the prefent abode of Althea at her houfe, and even to the idea of her adding another mem¬ ber to the family during their intended abode at Margate------though even this plan had not efficacy enough to take from the manner of Lady Dacres, to¬ wards her daughter-in-law, that un¬ gracious and repulfive coldnefs which always made Althea comfortlefs and un¬ eafy in her prefence; a manner, which, now that it was contrafted bv the ingenuous fimplicity and unaffected warmth of Lucy Marchmont, feemed to become more and more infupport- able. In quitting the apartment of her ftep-mother after the next interview on the evening of the day of vifiting Fulham, fhe had almoft determined to leave her houfc at whatever rifle of incurring blame for imprudence, or even of : h rowing herfelf. un folicited, ι 'i into
infoa family, to the principal of which ftie was ftill a ftranger. On cooler reflection, however, the good fenfe and propriety of mind that Althea in a fuperior degree pofteifed, operated to deter her from any proceed¬ ing that might call her correclnefs of character in queftion, or feem to indi¬ cate the flightcft failure of refpecl to the memory of her father. She faw from the late conduci of Lady Dacres, that her fears of additional expence were for fome reafon or other lefs prevalent,-— She had even named herfelf her inten¬ tion of removing her family to Margate, adding a formal propofal for Akhea to accompany them ; and the governefs feemed to have had orders gradually to unfay all ihe had faid before on this fub- jecl : yet ftill there was a ftyle of treating her, which ihe now found more difficult than ever to fubnrlt, to. After mature deliberation, therefore, Althea deter¬ mined to praciife in this inftance what ihe
flic had been early taught—and to facri¬ fice to prudence, and to the opinion of the world, her own wiikes, which led her to become an inmate with the female part of the Marchmont family, however they might quit the rank of life they had formerly idled. This facrifice of inclination to duty had the greater merit, as ever fince Al¬ thea had feen Lucy Marchmont ftie had indulged herfelf in reflecting with plea¬ fure on the power fhe pofíeffed of affift- ing m the refpectable induitry to which Μ ι?. Marchmont and her daughters had devoted themfelves. The habits ihe had been accuftomed to in early life, had been fuch as took from the ideas of coi incment, and conftant occupation, all their unpleafant circumitances; and her fkill as a milliner, little as it had lately been called into practice, was by no means tnconfiderable. The pafiion of Mrs. Trevyllian for plants had taught her niece, without the affiftance of a 1 3 mafter,
mafter, to delineate them*: by copying attentively the beft botanical plates, and afterwards drawing with minute exact- nefs from nature itfelf, Althea had in this art acquired unufual perfection.—- But during her refidence at Eaftwood¬ leigh, having no longer her maternal friend to gratify, as there were no ve¬ getable novel lies to copy, and ilie had already exhaufted all the printed col- leBion of her aunt, ihe had amufed her¬ felf with another fpecies of drawing, which ilie imagined might now be ap¬ plied to ornamental works for fale, and create for her unfortunate friends an¬ other branch of iheir little trade. On thefe projects, which feemed to originate almoft folely in her friendihip for Lucy Marchmont, but which were, perhaps, «« Stall but lurking love at laft,"
Althea had dwelt till ihe became fo fond of them, that it was only the joint effort of reafon and virtue that could induce her even to poftpone them, to accom¬ pany Lady Dacrcs to Margate (fhould ilie <ro th ither \ and act afterwards as the circumllancei. of her behaviour and the fituation of the Marchmonts might de¬ termine, lt was not, however, without the moil painful anxiety that Althea awaited the anfwer which Lucy ex¬ pected from her mother. It came—but accompanied by fuch a packet from Marchmont himfelf to his fifter, as for a while fufpended every idea but of him ; of the dangers he had incurred, and was ftill liable to; and the cruel apprehen¬ fions it brought with it, that fhe might never fee him more. The following were the contents of his letter to Lucy— it was without name or date ; and from the different colours of the ink, and the manner of the writing, it had evidently 1 4 been
been done by fnatches and ftarts, as the preffure of circumitances allowed. LETTER· " So ftrange, my Lucy, have been the feenes I have paffed through, I look back to them with a mind fo much be¬ wildered by their rapidity and fingulari- ty, as to be almoft unable to trace their progrefs diftiflctly, even if the fituation I am in now would allow me to fend you my eventful hiftory. Ah! how much pain has (I hope) been fa ved to my poor mother, by her not knowing whither her exile was gone! for, had my being at Paris been certain, what ap¬ prehenfions would not the accounts you have feen in the public prints (accounts too well authenticated) have given to her, you my Lucy, and the other dear girls! There, however, I have been; and it is not at a great diftance from that fcene
fcene of phrenfy and of horrors that I now write to you: but I am fafe, and fhall foon be on my way fouthward. " A Swifs fervant travelling with an Engliftiman who has with great difficulty procured a protection by which he can fafeiy return, or at leaft which encou¬ rages him to attempt it, has promifed to put this into the poft-offke at the firft town he reaches in England. " * If Englifhmen then can obtain paff- ports, why docs my brother remain in dangers and in horrors?* u Such is the queition my Lucy feems to afk. But (befides that I arrived here at a moment when 1 was compelled to pafs for a man of another nation, and to affign very different caufes for my coming, which at the prefent moment I cannot explain) wherefore ftiould I re¬ turn to my country ?—- To be a burden to thofe I love ?—to make their little lefs?—and to embitter their hours by fears for my perfonal fafety, whieh at t 5 this
this diftance they cannot feel ? Even the fear of a prifon, in another diviiion of the globe, from which I have efeaped, when many others have been confined in it, is infinitely lefs terrible to my imagination than confinement in my own. " ' In great oppreffions,' fays Lord Bacon, * the fame things that provoke the patience, alfo break the courage.' " I am nocomplainer, my Lucy; but I own that, in regard to the pains and penalties which wait on poverty in my native land, lam a coward—and whence arifes this? Becaufe I was brought up to think fo highly of the government under which I was born, that I believed it faultlefs, incapable of lofing its fpirit of juftice, and impoflîble to be amend¬ ed : yet at the age when I am moft fuf¬ ceptible of pain and pleafure, when I truft my mind is unadulterated by fyf- tems, and my heart untainted by either vice or prejudice—I find myfelf, by the ab ufe
abufe of thofe very laws I fo highly venerated, condemned to become an exile from my country, or to add, in the very prime of my youth, another un¬ happy victim to the numbers condemned to linger out their years in the fqualid mifery of legal confinement. " I have been fuddenly broken in upon, and compelled, though rather on account of others than on my own, to remove; and my Swifs acquaintance has been obliged to difappcar. There is no defcribing the ftrange and fluctuating ftate of eveiy thing here—at leaft till an interval of calm ihall fuffer the mind to iurvey the fucceffion of events with more coolnefs and precifion. Let me turn from them now to what yet makes my own country dear to me. Ah í why even theie muft I implore the affiftance of that fan»uliie aifpofuion that ought not to forfake us at three-and-twenty ? Why muft I try to believe that the dear group are well ? and that I fee in my ι 6 mind's
mind's eye my mother looking lefs like a fine marble ftatue than fhe did when, ftruggling to argue down her acute fen¬ fibility, fhe gave me, with pale lips and eyes incapable of weeping, her farewel blefling, bidding me for her fake pre¬ ferve my liberty, and be careful of my life! It is now many months fince, and very ftrange have been the feenes [ have witneffed—my heart has been feverely torn. Driven by private calamity from England to witnefs more extended mi- fery here, where I had been ufed to hear the voice of joy, and to fee only the moft thoughtlefs gaiety—continually involved in circumitances the moft ex¬ traordinary, and living in a courfe of deception, to which not even felf-pre- fervation would reconcile me if it were not neceffary to fecure my fafety, that I may live for my family, or if it were injurious to any human being here, I fometimes think myfelf in the delirium of a fever 5 and fometimes í feel, as I fee
fee every body elfe âo t in that kind of aftoniíhment that has the effecl of giving a temporary palfy to the mind. " We ceafe, even where it feems fafe, to communicate remarks to each other; but every one looks on his neigh¬ bour, where he yet happens to have one, filently awaiting what is to happen next. te The beginning of Auguft, " I renew my letter, which I have kept by me many days, I am now re¬ moved farther from the crater of the volcano. However, though I have loft the opportunity that feemed to be of¬ fered me, I will continue to write.— One day or other, if not immediately, it may reach you. At leaft I may now have lefs to apprehend from les vißtes domiciliaires , which, where ï have lately been, were likely to involve thofe in fome
fome unpleafmt difficulties, on whom papers were found that could be even conftrued into meanings of difapproba¬ tion. " You will hear from other quaiters of general events, and can perhaps imagine fo much of the feenes of anar¬ chy and wildnefs, that mine fhall be all fketches of the individual. My Lucy will allow me to be an egotift to her. " In this confidence then I leave both accounts of, or remarks on, thofe fb ik- kig events which have harrow T cd up the heart, while they have baffled the cal¬ culation of the coldeft politician, to te¬ late fome of my own feelings, rathei than tlie whole of my adventures. "At a little cabaret, far from any high road, in that part of Fiance that wa> formerly the Bouibonnois, I am writing to you, my Lucy, It is now near a fortnight fince I have left Pans—in lefs than another I hope to ι each the abode of
of Lavergnac, of whom I have no cer¬ tain intelligence. I wifh I could con¬ vey to you a picture of the fimple fcene before me—it forms a ftrange contraft to that I have left ; here all is tranquil, though it is now no longer gay:—my old landlord looks at me inquifitivcly, as he prefents me with the black bicad, in which buck-wheat is often intermixed, but which ripe fruit makes fufficiently palatable. He pouis out with a trem¬ bling hand (for he is in his eighty-fifth year) the weak wine of the country, and afks if I infill on his drinking with me to Vive la Republique ! —I anfwer, that I am not a Fienchman, and hold u wrong to concern myfelf with their po¬ litics.— Comment, Monfieu? Cadidie, (my old friend h a Gafcon) Monßeu n*eß pas Français?—· His grand-children, Ja¬ quette and Louifon, and Henri and Phillippe, come in from the village. They relate what they have feen, and de- pofit the neceflaries they have purchafed. His
His oíd female fervant, Monique, is called to put them away, and Monßeu efcapes to the hill behind the houfe, where a ftream runs through a wild valley—reminding me of the fcene in that drama we have fo often read toge¬ ther, when we projected how we would act " As You Like It" in the wood which was once the fcene of our early happinefs. Ah! how perpetually before me are thofe feenes, and ftill more fo others I have ßnce faffed at Eaftwood- leigh! They feize on my imagination as if they were yet prefent ; I forget, for a time, where I am. Then a group of children, from a neighbouring vine¬ yard, pafs me at a diftance, finging, in their way, patriotic tunes, of the mean¬ ing of which they have no idea ; or a draggling cow, with a bell round her neck, that has been feeking her food near me, is fought for, by her owner, with all that lively clamour fo general among the women of thefe provinces. I ftart
I flart from my dream, and find myfelf— ah! how far from happinefs, and from that country, which, ftep-mother as furely it has proved to me, I ftill con¬ fider as mine ! " But it is not only in this folitary and remote place, inhabited only by pea- fants, that I have had leifure to indulge all that gloomy retrofpection which a continual courfe of painful events has for fome time rendered habitual to me. I had determined to leave Paris, lefs on account of the perfonal danger whicb menaced the Englifh of every defcrip¬ tion, than becaufe my very foul was fick of the wild affemblage of ideotifm and phrenfy which I every day faw; and was eager, at all events, to quit people whofe folly called for my contempt, while their ferocity excited my abhor¬ rence. " The plan of my journey (with the intended arrangement of which it is not neceffary to trouble you) I had con¬ certed
certed fome days before with a French friend, whom I believed to be a very good judge of the ftate of die country ^ and having fettled every thing at my* lodgings, I left the town on foot, and walked to Verfailles, where I was to find a perfon in the park at night-fall who was to be my companion a part of the way. ·* By the time I reached the fpot where we had appointed to find each other, it was four o'clock in the even¬ ing» A heavy gloom hung over every obj ??, and the exceffive heat feemed to have had already the effecl of au¬ tumnal winds on the trees ; for the leaves were in many places faded, and flowly fell on my melancholy path. " I waited iu vain formy friend. It was already paft the hour when he af¬ fured me he would be ready, and I was fure í had not miftaken the place. Another and another hour wore away— the gloom increafed around me—the ufual
ufual noifes of -? town, though Verfailles is now indeed more than half-deferted, became fainter and fainter. It feemed certain that my friend had been pre¬ vented. Perhaps he was arrefted and imprifoned. I became fo uneafy, that I fiiould have fought him at his abode, about a half-mile fiom that part of the park where we had agreed to meet; but I confidered that, if any thing like what I feared had happened, I fhould en¬ danger my own fafety without being at all enabled to contribute to his. Some¬ times I determined to return to Paris; but there I was lefs likely to know what had been his deftiny. I had now for two hours vainly expeded him ; and I no longer believed myfelf fafe where I was, yet was uncertain whither to go, and indeed almoft indifferent. The de¬ fpondence that crept upon me half an¬ nihilated my faculties; but I thought of all I had dear to me in England, and became afhamed of indulging it. You know.
know, my Lucy, that I have tried very earneftly to acquire a certain degree of fortitude, with lefs fuccefs, perhaps, than would have been mine if I had not been vulnerable on the fide of beings for whofe fake only I wifh to live. M It is but a gloomy kind of refigna- tion that we learn from comparing our lot with the fate of others; and never, I own, did it contribute much to reconcile me to my wayward deftiny.— * Why íhould you complain?' have fome of thofe fage friends often faid to me, who, like Sir Peter Teazle, never in their lives re* fufed me their advice. ' Why fhould you complain? Are not Mr. Such-a- one, and Captain Such-a-one, nay, Sir John, and Lord ******, as much under pecuniary difficulties as you are ?'—· Poffibly they may, my good Sirs; but thofe confiderations do not enable mq at all the better to endure the evils that furround me. I am very forry for them, but quite as forry for myfelf, as if
if I fiiw them enjoying the higheft pro- fperity.—' But, my dear Sir/ cry my confolers, * they bear their misfortunes lightly, and even gaily—and yet they brought them all upon themfelves.'-— There, indeed, have I replied, I have the advantage of them. ** Thus, my deareft Lucy, if I could have found at this moment any confola¬ tion in comparifon, the poor wandering individual, alone in a foreign and an boriile country, might have found ob¬ jects of compaffion, in reflecting on the fate of the late poffeffors of the immenfe pile I faw before me ; and I might have faid, The exile, once the owner and heir of Eaftwoodleigh, is lefs wretched than the furviving owners of Vertadles! " Inftead, however, of long indulging thefe or any other fpeculations, it was more to the purpofe to confider what was to be done. My refolutions on this head were quickened by the fudden appearance of a man, who afked me, abruptly
abruptly enough, if I did not wait there for Citoyen D'Albiac, which was the name my friend was known by. I an¬ fwered, with fome hefitation, that I did. The man then put into my hand a fhort note, which I with difficulty read. He conjured me to haften to him at Paris ; adding only, that he could not then affign his reafons for breaking his ap¬ pointment, or for the requeft he made, but that much depended on his feeing me immediately ar the place whither the bearer of his note would conduct me. I agreed to go without hefitation, though I drew no favourable augury from the ftyle of D'Albiac's note, or the manner of my companion, which was hurried, incoherent, and confufed. Anxiety for my friend was not unmingled with fome fufpicions in regard to my own fecurity; but fomething was to be rifqued, and I followed my conductor into one of thofe vehicles for the accommodation of chance paffengers which pafs at al¬ moft
rnoft all hours between Paris and Ver¬ failles. " We got out near the Pont Royal ; and my guide, who had hardly fpoken on the way, becaufe there were other people in the cabriolet, now defired me to follow him. There was an unufual buftle in the ftreets ; and on our reach¬ ing the Place Louis Quinze (the fcene of fo much calamity under its new name) we faw the people all running towards the Thuilleries. Of the few I addreffed, who would give themfelves time to an¬ fwer my queftion—of what is the matter? each gave me a different, and fome very abfurd and impoffible reafons, as the caufe of the crowd they were fo eagerly haftening to increafe. It was fortunate for me that none of them feemed to have the leaft fufpicion of my being an Engliftiman. " On advancing farther, the numbers increafed, and I loft my condudor.— Les gens d'armes on horfeback, and parties of
of armed citizens, were attempting to difperfe the people, and to prevent them from preffing into the garden of the Tbuiiieries. Some fevere coups de fahre fell among tbcm as I paffed, being car¬ ried, by the prefs, acrofs le Pont Tournant. When I found myfelf in the gardens, I looked again around me for the man who was to carry me where P'Atbiac expected me ; but I could neither fee }iim, nor indeed diftinguiíh any longer the faces of the hurrying crowds, who either ran or were driven paft me by the foldiers : but, for whatever reafon, the Terras des Feuillans feemed to be their point de ralliement ι while my only purpofe was, to make my way through the upper gate, and from thence to en¬ deavour to gain fome intelligence of D'Albiac among fome of his former connections. " But frqm what I had by this time collected frora the flying crowd, I found that feveral perfons had been impri- foned,
foned, and there was an order to arreft all the Engliih. I could now hardly doubt but that D'Albiac, whom I believed to have been fome time among the fu fpected, was one of thofe who were confined; and I thought that he had fent for me to give me notice of my danger before his own was fo apparent. " While, doubting what to do, I con¬ cealed myfelf amidft the darkeft iliade of the trees, I found the ih outs of the peopic and the menaces of the foldiers fuddenly ceafe. A ftorm threatening, though it did not fall, had helped the en¬ deavours of the armed p?' ties thus fud¬ denly to clear the gardens. The ora- „ tor, mounted on a ftool, who had been propounding political axioms to the crowd, was gone, with all his audience. But from whatever caufe his eloquence had been fo peremptorily filenced, it was highly probable that whoever was now found attempting to quit this place Vol. III. ? would
would undergo a fìiicì intcrrogatoiy ; and once moie I felt mylelf guilty of licuingan Engl'fh countenance, which difdaincd al*a\s to befiicnd mc as ef¬ fecl ually as mv tongue. However, I went towaids the Pont Ton > ??? t once more : but the guard w as mounted thei e ; ai-dbytheirquickandficice " Qin α? 11 ?" and * ( Point d\ntiee i ??1^?? ? * which I heaid, I was foon convinced that loi¬ met hore was *- pvnt deß,tie" without gi cat hazaid. This certami) deter¬ mined me to remain w hei e I w a'». I thought í might caiily pafs unobícivcd among the firft crowds that fliould enter in the morning, and then gun fomc intelligence of D'Albiac. My clothes were dark, the trees large, and the gloomy evening funk fo entirely into night, that I was no longer m any ap¬ prehenfion of being obferved. (t The murmur of the ftreets was the only noife I heaid—cries of t La Sé¬ ance du Soir/ or, * Des Evénemens non- veaux/
veaux,' fomewhat louder than the reft : even thefe, by degrees, died away, and the hum became fainter and fainter, till 1 heard nothing but the boarfe and fül¬ len voices of the íentinels round the Thuillerics, anfwered by thofe at the Louvre, and the word going folcmnly round from poft to poft. If heavy clouds were for a little broken away, I faw a few faint ftars, as they appealed from time to time, and were loft among the black and billowy vapours; and added to the hideous gloom of all around mc were fenfations of uncertainty, more uneafy than actual fear of fome vifible danger. ï ieft my concealment, and walked up towards the front of the pa¬ lace. All was defolate, filent» dreary— and the idea of what it had been con- trafted ftrongly with what it was! " I had been reading, a few days before, a pompous account of thefe gardens, and of the Chateau fuch as it was in the time of Louis the Kour¬ it 2 tecnth.
teenth. One of the avenues was then called L'Allée des Soupirs. 1 turned to that which I imagined had, at fuch a period, been the haunt of happy lovers. Alas ! it might ftill be .called L'Allée des Soupirs —but from caufes how different! " I have written Co much, my Lucy, of my refledions, that I muft pafs lightly over facls, or the little paper I have here will fail me. Imagine me then, in defpite of my Engliih vifage, efcaping unnoticed, with the firft influx of people, into the garden of the Thuil¬ leries, and my concern to find ïhat ail my fears of the detention of D'Albiac were but too true. Imagine the ne¬ ceffity there was for my immediate de¬ parture, weary as I found myfelf, for I knew I was in the moft imminent danger of arreft. The barriers were ftiut^ but I found means to get through them; and with the pafTport I had procured the day before^ in purfuance of my friend's
friend's plan, I fet forward, and walked about four leagues j when being quite exhaufted, and believing myfelf out of any immediate danger, I took fomc re¬ pofe at a fmall inn, frequented, like this, only by the lower ranks of people. The quiet I found here, and indeed a flight indifpofition from the extreme heat, induced me to prolong my ftay : and there I met with the Swifs fervant, by whom I thought I could have for¬ warded my letter; but I was foon taught how precarious was any reliance ofthat fort. My acquaintance fuddenly dis¬ appeared, without coming for my letter, and I had reafon to believe, that it would be prudent to remove to a greater diftance from Paris, which I forthwith fct about. " Since that, nothing worth noticing has befallen your itinerant brother; but, with redoubled eagernefs, his foul thirfts for news from England.—Ah! my Lucy, ?. 3 befides
befides that dear, dear group, is thei ? a kind, a benevolent heart interefted in the deitiny of Marchmont? I dare not truft myfelf on the fubject, and now haftily I muft bid you adieu!— foran occafion offers of fending my leiter without any hazaid to myfelf, or to him who conveys it.—Let it affure you, my e\er-loved Lacy, of my fafety, and of the tender attachment of " Your " E ------A------ M ----------. " If I am not greatly deceived, I ihall have better opportunities foon of writing to you, and, í hope, news of poor Lavergnac that will be ac¬ ceptable to you —Heaven prefcrvc you alli¬ in breathlefs agitation, Althea hur¬ ried over this letter. Hardly had ihc finifhed it, when Lady Dacres fent to
beg fhe might ípcak with her; and trembling, as if ihe believed what ihe had been reading could be gucfled M, {he locked it up, and unwillingly went down to the driving-room.
? 4 CHAP.
CHAP« Χ.
Xßvy and »varice counteract each other.
WHEN Althea entered the room where Lady Dacres and her family were affembled in their ufual formal circle, fhe found the lady fpeaking to her auditors on the future projects for paff¬ ing all that remained of what is gene¬ rally called fummer. And turning in her cold and folemn way to Althea, fhe faid, <ζ You will not be furprifed, Mifs Dacres, at my having changed my mind as to the place I intended going to. In my
my unhappy fituation it is difficult to decide.— Alas! I íhall carry with me the caufe of fadnefs wherever I go! ts Lady Dacres could not weep, but fhe did her bell to giv* what fhe faid the fame effect as if it had been accom¬ panied by tears. The governefs and the young ladies re-echoed back the deep figh with which the fentence ended.— A dead paufe enfued, for Althea had nothing to reply. Lady Dacres fiowly proceeded: " I find myfelf quite unequal to the fort of buftle which one Tnuft be fub- jecled to in a public place—yet I can¬ not indeed go to Capel ftoke. Heaven only knows whether I fhall ever prevail on myfelf to revifit thaX once favourite fpot !" Another deep figh and another long filence again intervened, during which Althea had time to guefs whither all this prelude tended; and it was not difficult to fee that the fcheme of getting her ? 5 away,
away, which for fome reafon or other had been fufpended, was again refumed. Nothing could be more agreeable to her prefent views, and her heart beat quick leil fhe fhould be miftaken as to her mother-in-law's meaning. Another fen¬ tence, however, ferved to put her out of fufpenfe. u Now," continued fhe, " the thing is this—I have had a letter from my dear friend Mrs. Fordham -----*-an unhappy widow like myfelf, who about a year before 1 loft the beft of men followed good Mr. Fordham to the grave! and has never recovered herfelf fince, poor woman!-—for ihe is of a moil tender and affectionate difpofition. God knows how melancholy a vifit it will be to me, and how unwilling I am to take any young perfons into a houfe, which to be fure muft be very bad, and quite depreffing to their fpirits; though, as to my own, it is quite that fort of place fit for unhappy me! My good and kind friend indeed w i ffied
wifhed me to take Caroline widi me, as her houfe, though fmall, could accom¬ modate us two; and I fliall offervants only have Midgely and Richard; for as to my horfes I ihall fend them to Capel- ftoke.—Now the difficulty is..... *' Here an uncertainty how flie fhould beft word what flie had to fay gave Al¬ thea an opportunity of interpofing: ci If your Ladyihip has any difficulty as to how ƒ fliall difpofe of myfelf, I beg leave immediately to remove it. I wiih very much to vifit the family of....." A confcioufnefs of her partiality for Marchmont, and that it was of his fa¬ mily ftie was fpeaking, made her bluih and hefitate. Lady Dacres looked at her, but it was merely with earneftnefs occafioned by fluduating avarice: for at that moment, on hearing flie had a friend to whom flie wifhed to go, a de¬ bate arofe, whether it would not be more politic to fuffer her daughter-ai-law to remain, at whatever inconvenience, in her ? ? own
» own houfe. While flie deliberated, Al¬ thea made two or three attempts to fpeak; but ffie dreaded left Lady Dacres fhould enquire with whom fhe meant to refide, and that, being compelled to name the Marchmonts, ftie fhould re¬ ceive a prohibition againft going to them. Lady Dacres, however, who could not determine to invite her hear¬ tily to Capel ftoke, faid, " Now, as I was going to fay, the dif¬ ficulty is, that to be fure, Mifs Dacres, Cape I ftoke can in no way be agreeable to you : it is extremely dull at all times; and now that the former dear mafter of it is gone, and my fon not in England, to be fure every thing muft wear a moil gloomy afped; and I was thinking how, unlefs indeed it could be made any ways agreeable to you......" ** I have no apprehenfion of foli¬ tude, Madam," interrupted Althea. " Indeed," added fhe, fmiling, ce after having fo long lived at Eaftwoodleigh,. an
an inhabited houfe like Capel ftoke, were it not for thofe recollections your Lady¬ íhíp fpeaks of, would be comparatively cheerful " Lady Dacrcs made the fort of motion with her lips and eyes, which thofe who were accuftomed to er knew was a certain fymptom of her being difpìeafed. Althca well underftood it ; and forry that any thing ihe had faid might be in¬ terpreted into a reflection on her ftep- mother's former conduci, fhe would have recalled, or palliated her unlucky fpeech ; but it was too late. So great had always been the diilike which lay lurking in the mind of this malignant woman, that a trifle, however unmiend- ed or immaterial, was always enough to raife it into fomething like averfion. Her naturally unpleafìng countenance now fcowled upon Althéa, with an ex¬ preftion that made her tremble : then, a» if checking herfelf by a painful effort,, fhe fcrewed her face into fomething that refembled
refembled fullenly ftiffed revenge; while? toffmg up her head, and fpeaking through her nofe, ftie faid, tI Unhappily, Mifs Dacres, Sir Aud¬ ley found, as indeed has fince been but too evident, the cafe....." " Lear Lady Dacres," faid Althea, dreading whither her fudden ill-humour would carry her " I beg your pardon, if any thing I have madveiteutly iaidbas been improper. I had not the fmalleft intention of recalling pail events—I merely meant to fay, that in confe¬ quence of rny being long, indeed for the greateft part of my life, accuftomed to it, I have no dread of ieclufion of any kind ; and that, whatever may be my own wifhes, if my accompanying to Capel- floke th^ younger part of your Lady¬ ihip^ family would be of any ufe ..." She was proceeding, when the gover¬ nefs, who faw by the manner of the lady of the houfe how far ihe might go, inter¬ rupted Althea, " Of
" Of ufe, Ma'am? I'm fure my Lady will not do me fo little juftice as to be¬ lieve I Ihall want any body's affiftance in the care of my fweet young charges, while her Ladvihip's diftrefled ftate of fpirits compels her to be away from them.— No, indeed ..... if my Lady thinks, as 1 am fure i hope ihe does, that ihe may rely on .... ." Althea now believing this was a con- ? certed plan to quarrel with and get rid of her, and rather rejoicing at than re¬ gretting a circumftance which would, flie hoped, releafc her at once to purfue her plan of refiding with Mrs. March¬ mont, interrupted in her turn the elo¬ quent fpeaker, and faid in a refolutc though calm way to Lady Dacres, " lt is not, Madam, difficult for me to underftand the meaning of all this. I am afraid I have long been thought a burden to your Ladyfhip; I am fure I am confidered as fuch now.—It is time, therefore, to relieve you. Be affured, Madam^
Madam, that in quitting your houfe î leave it with my beft w'fhes for you and your children ..... and íhall confider it as one of the happieft circumitances of my life, if at any future time ï may be allowed to teftify to them my friendihip and regard." Then, fearful that fhe could truft her voice no longer, Althea hurried to her own room—but when íhe ai rived there the tumult of her mind overcame her, and fhe burft into tears. The point was now fhe thought de¬ cided, and decided juft as fhe had wiihed; fo far a* that ftie was left at li¬ berty to go unqueftioned whitbcrfoever fhe would. Yet the rude unfeelingnefs of Lady Dacres, which her imagination already exaggerated, fhocked and mor¬ tified her. Nor was that alone a fource of difqvnet; for, when able to think with more calmnefs, fhe recollected that fhe was thus difmiffed from prefent protec¬ tion, without being fure fhe fiiould find anothei,
another, for whether Mrs. Marchmont would receive her was extremely uncer¬ tain. Her former coldnefs, the diftance fhe had kept by withdrawing continually from her advances, and even the manner of Lucy Marchmont when fhe fpoke of her mother, all immediately returned to the memory of Althea, ferving to torment her with apprehenfions that the afylum fhe fo anxioufly defired to find would be fhut againft her. Determined, however, to remove from the houfe of Lady Dacres, in which íhe thought the very dependents commif- fioned to infult her, fhe determined, if Mrs. Marchmont íhould have any rea¬ fons for not receiving her, to find fome place in the country, where fhe might board in the entire feclufion, which, if fhe could not affociate with the March¬ mont family, was her fole wifh. Of Lady Dacres fhe did not expect to hear again—and unpleafant as had been many fituations of her former life, fhe thought
thought her prefent ftate the moft com¬ fortlefs fhe had yet experienced; for flie fancied that even the trifling fervices of the domeftics were performed with re¬ luctance, and every hour her refidence became more uneafy to her. The mif¬ trefs of it w 7 as preparing for her re¬ moval—the fervants were running about all day on commi fiions, and fcarcely had time to bring into a fmall dreffing-room Althéa's breakfait and dinner; for now the meffage of the morning that ufed to falute her on the firft weeks of her ar¬ rival was again reforted to; and every day it was formally announced, with her Ladyßiip y s compliments^ that htr Ladyfhip was too unwell to dim in company,— ----To which Althea as conftantly anfwered, that if fhe was very forry, and begged leave to dine in the dreffing-room." So paffed three or four days, during which ftie had copied, and returned to Lucy her brother's letter—and waited in great perturbation oï mind for that which
which was to be expeded from Margate. On the laft of thefe days ffie learned from the fervants that the journey of Lady Dacres's family to Capelftoke was fixed for the next, and that flie herfelf and her eldeft daughter were to remain only another day after them. Some¬ thing, therefore, muft be determined upon immediately on the part of Althea, and the filence of Lucy Marchmont be¬ came every moment more diftreffing. At length one of the fervants an¬ nounced " a young lady," and Althea faw her beloved Lucy enter the room. Pleafure lightened up her animated countenance, and in the half-breathlefs agitation of joy flie faid·— <f My dear Mifs Dacres, I am the happieft creature jn the world. We have news of my brother from Toulon, which is, you know, in poffeffion of the Engliih—he is well, and has been of the greateft fervice to the poor old Baron. Neither of them is in danger any longer. I ???«
know not when I have received fo cheerful a letter from my mother as that in which ftie related to me thefe tidings, and in which Amelia enclofed me part of Armyn*s letter—for, as he had an- opportunity of fending it to England by a private hand, and it contained only good news, it was delivered immediately to my mother.------My deareft Mifs Dacres, do not imagine that, amidft the very unufual happinefs that this intelli¬ gence has conferred on us, we are ca· pable of forgetting, for a moment, the kind, the generous, the delightful pro¬ pofal which you ordered me to make to my mother." Althea, happy even beyond what fhe dared to avow, at the fafety of March¬ mont, waited in eager and breathlefs expectation for his mother's anfwer, whofe confent to her propofal was now more neceflary than ever. Lucy was as much agitated, and was obliged to take time, to fit down and compote herfelf a^ moment,
moment, before, drawing her mother's letter from her pocket, fhe read to Al¬ thea the part that related to her. LETTER. " It would be difficult for me, my Lucy, to exprefs to you how much the generous and unexpected propofal of Mifs Dacres delights and diftreifes me. That you are charmed with her, I can eafily believe; for in my mind, (which cannot have been prejudiced by per¬ fonal heauty, fince I never faw her) her character excites a fenfation totally un¬ like what I ever felt for any other per¬ fon. I cannot, however, defcribe this impreifion. You know, where my heart is deeply concerned I âo not readily command either my pen or my words. " Alas! my dear girl, has this ad¬ mirable young woman well confidered what fhe offers, when fhe thinks of be¬ coming an inmate of our houfe, circum- ftanced as we now are? Has fhe weighed the différence between the eafy affluence
affluence in which fhe has hitherto lived, and the ftraitened circumitances with which I and my poor girls muft ftruggle? Confidering her only as a lodger, ought Mifs Dacres to lodge in a fhop? As a friend, ought ffie to af¬ fociate with thofe who are about to keep one? - " She has greatnefs of mind enough to confider us rather as what w T e were, than as what we are—to believe that by an exertion made neceffary by no fault of our own we are not degraded------· But, will the world think fo?—And at her age, has Mifs Dacres, who ought from birth, from accomplifhments, from per¬ fonal perfedions, to have that world at her feet, will ihe be content to brave its opinion ?—I know how much fo exalted a mind as hers is capable of facrificing to friendfliip—but on her friendihip what claims have we?—people hardly known to her longer than yef¬ terday, unlefs it be by name. Why ftiould
fiiould fhe dcfcend from her ftation for us ? Τ cannot bear that, miffed by the enthufiafm of youthful generofity, fhe fhould put herfelf into a fituation ihe may afterwards repent.—-Think not be¬ caufe í fay this, that I am too proud to receive from fuch hands an obligation ; for an obligation I know ftie intends it to be, and an obligation I ftiould af- furedly confider it. No, my Lucy: amidft all the fevere morti hcations 1 have fuffered, amidft all my efforts to fubmit to the fad difference of fortune, of which fo many have made me feel all the bitternefs, I have never fhrunk from the kindnefs of the truly generous. v Why muft I add, that my fubmiffion in this reipect to receive favours has not been put to many proofs?—Ah, my child! thofe who are. like you, fetting out in life, even under the inaufpicious influence of family depreflion, can yet form no idea of the cruel, the accu¬ mulated convictions of the felfiihnefs and
and unfeelingnefs of the world that / have feen, fmce the hour when your dear father's pecuniary circumitances began to decline. Wonder not, there¬ fore, that the unexampled inftance of Mifs Dacres's benevolent wiihes to be¬ come a refident in my family fhould excite my furprife, as well as my ad¬ miration and gratitude. If, after ihe has duly reflected on the great difference íhe muft find between fuch a table, fuch a manner of living as we have adopted, and that to wdiich ihe muft always have been accuftomed ; if fhe can voluntarily defcend from the conveniencies of Lady Dacres's efta¬ bliihment, to two maids, or rather one and a girl—to refide with a family ftrug¬ gling with, I trifft, unmerited adverfity— oh! greatly indeed will it be in her power to alleviate the hardfhips of their fate—lefs from that pecuniary a flirtane e lhe fo generoufly offers, ufeful as it muft be, than from the foothing comfort it will
will afford me, to think that I am con¬ fidered as worthy of a charge fo pre¬ cious; that my Amelia and my Lucy are worthy of fuch a friend ; and that, in addition to their example, my Milli- cente will have before her fuch an ex¬ ample of all that a young perfon ought to be. " Go then, Lucy, to this amiable Mifs Dacres—tell her what I fay, and repre- fcnt our fituation exaÜly as it is; and, if you find her ftill difpofed to make us happy, arrange with her every thing for your immediate journey hither, where I think I ihall ftay till my fon returns to England. The feafon is now fo far advanced, that I know not whether our project can be carried into execution with any profpeci: of fuccefs. My ti¬ midity, the repulfes I have met with, the fuperior advantages of competitors regularly fettled in the bufinefs, and my renewed doubts of Marchmonts cheer¬ ful acquiefcence, have lately concurred Vol. III. l to
to ftiake my refolution. I know T that the irrefolute do nothing well—but how can I be fanguine?—How indeed can I urge my mind to any fteady exertion? There are times when it finks into ab¬ folute imbecility, when I fit whole days unoccupied, unfitted for occupation, and, by dwelling too much on the paft, embitter the prefent, and have no longer any courage to look fteadily towards the future. My poor Amelia partaker-, but too much of my languor—we want your animating pretence, my Lucy, and the innocent cheerfulnefs of my little Milly. If, added to thefe, you can bring to us the fenfe and pokffied fwcet- nefs of your incomparable friend, I ihall furely regain fome portion of tranquil¬ lity; for Armyn is fafe. He hab, in profpect, advantages which, though he does not explain them, promife much, J am fure, from his fanguine manner of fpeaking of them. Perhaps the heavy tide of calamity, that has fo long run againft
ag rinil us, is turning—I may yet fee my children happy, and in peace rejoin their father." The voice of Lucy Marchmont trem¬ bled as flie concluded this part of her m jther's letter: yet it contained, in ge¬ neral, nothing but what gave pleafure to her and to her friend, who was not only delighted and furprifed to find Mrs. Marchmont io different from the idea ihe had formed of her, but, as fhe believed, all her difficulties removed, and herfelf fecure of being joyfully received as a refident in their houfe, by the perfons whom íhe moft defired to confider as her friends—whofe ideas and manners feemed moil accordant to her own» Veiy little time, however, remained for the two young friends to confult on the journey they weie equally eager to undertake; for Lucy Marchmont was to return to Fulham, as ihe had come from thence in a ftage. It was the firft time h 2 in
in her life that fhe had 'ever been in fuch a conveyance alone ; and though na¬ turally fearlefs, and never indulging thofe ridiculous perfonal apprehenfions which the remarkably plain are much more apt to exprefs than the young and hand¬ fome, neither íhe nor Althea could think without fome uneafinefs of her return- ing in a ftage at a late hour. Inftead, therefore, of allowing them¬ felves to difcufs thofe future plans, which now feemed fo flattering to them both, they haftened to agree on that which was immediately neceffary. Al¬ thea, who had no doubt but that it was perfectly indifferent to Lady Dacres whither ihe went provided ihe did go, concluded to fend her Ladyihip a note eaily on the following morning to name her intentions, and requeft her to pay whatever might become due to her to Mr. Booth, a gentleman in London (whom Lucy Marchmont had named as her mother's friend, for Althea herfelf knew
knew tiobody] ; and thatas her clothes, moit of which, on account of her mourn¬ ing, fhe had never unpacked, would be foon ready, ihe would fend them off for the Margate waççon catlv. and be her- felf ready at two o'clock in a poft-chaife to fetch the two Mifs Marchmonts /Vom the houfe oï ?1?. Booth, v, hither they would go by an early ftage ; and from thence they were to proceed to¬ gether on their way to Margate, intend¬ ing to fleep one night on the road. This arrangement made, Lucy March¬ mont rofe to depart : but it was already dufk; and Althca could not bear to think of her walking alone to Piccadilly, where fhe was to find the ftage. She had fo little authority in the houfe of Lady Dacrcs, that ihe could not even direct a footman to follow her—but it occurred to her to order a hackney- coach, for which ñie fent the maid who ufiiaîly waited in her room. But ftill not fatibficd for the fafety of a lovely girl, t 3 whom
whom flic thought too young and pretty not to be liable to many unpleafant ad¬ ventures, íhe determined to go with her hei felf. Together then they went out, and fortunately readied the ftand a moment before the Fulham flage was to fet off'. Althea found thei ? were only w omni in it, and faw her fair friend depart without any fear, and with a gay heart, in expectation of their meeting the next day to part no more. Althca, happier than fhe had ever been fince the death of her aunt, re¬ turned in the hack to Grofvenor-ftreet, and no fooner re-entered her own room, than ilie fat down to write to Lady Da¬ cres the note fhe had meditated; a tafk which was by no means fo eafy as ihe had imagined. Doubb now arofe. whe¬ ther, if fhe named the Maichmont fa¬ mily as that with which ilie meant to fix her refidence, Lady Dacrcs, whofe un¬ accountable averfion to them ihe well knew, might fo eafily acquicfcc as ihe had
hau reaion to believe fhe would, in re¬ gard to almoil auy other perlons with whom íhc might choofe to place herfelf. Yet to give a falfe name, to mifrepre- ient her intention, was what ihe could not hi ino- hei felf to do; fo remote from her difpofition ??? her principles was ever) fpecies of deceit. A middle way, however, ieemed to offer itfelf i and though even to tem¬ pori fe was unpleafant to her, Althea thought that the little confideration ihewn to her by Lady Dacres, de¬ manded lefs candour, on her part, than ftie ought and was willing to fhew towards every being who either really felt, or thought it worth while to teftify, any intereft in her affairs or any to- licituuc for her welfare.—-In purfuance of this idea, (he wrote as follows: *· Mad \m, *' After the intimation received from your Ladyihip, and my knowledge of L j. the
the preparations that are making for your family's immediate removal, I ima¬ gine it will be agreeable to your Lady¬ fhip to know, that I ftiaîi not intrude upon you in Grofvenor-ftreet, or at any other of your refidences, having fettled to go to the houfe of a friend, who is fo good as to receive me as the companion of her daughters: but as the circumitances of the family are not fuch as can authorife my availing myfelf of their friendihip to add to their expence, I truft your Ladyfhip will have the goodnefs to afrange the little money matters I have, in fuch a way as may enable me to pay half-yearly for my board during my ftay. I beg leave at the fame time to affure you, Madam, that fhould it at any future period be in my power to render to my brothers and fifters any fervice, or to your Lady¬ fhip any fatisfaction, I fliall have great pleafure in returning to your houfe, iu every manner to teftify how much I defira
defire to convince your Ladyfhip of the refpcd and good wiihes of, " Madam, " Your molt obedient ** humble fervant, " Althea Dacres. (t G r >fvenor-Streer, í4 Sep', jth." This letter was given to the houfe- maid, wdio waited generally in her chamber, with orders to fend it by Lady Dacres's woman as foon as her Lady arofe in the morning. Though this was never very foon, Akhea was unable to remain in bed after ? very early hour. Her packing ferved to occupy fome part of this te¬ dious interval : the trunks beinff ready, flie directed them, and, ordering a porter, fent them to the waggon, writing on them, u To be left at the W T aie- houfe at Margate till called for."— rhcy had not long been diipatched, be- L 5 fore
fore the maid brought her the follow¬ ing letter : " Madam, " I am, I muft own, rather furprifed at your note, and could have wifhed you had informed me of the name of the perfons you are a-going to put yourfelf under the care of. I can't but fay I think it might have been more proper if you had thought fit to confult me thereon; but I dare to fay it is no intention of yefterday, but intended fome time. At the fame time I am free to fay, I think your conduct in my houfe might have been more prudently regulated. Indeed it is not very dif- creet to receive vifits from one hardly knows who, and to go in hackney- coaches at a late hour of the evening.— In regard to what you mention farther, I muft obferve to you, Mifs Althea, that if it is not agreeable to you to re¬ main yourfelf under my care, the wiM of
of my dear Sir Audlcy has cntrufted me with your fmall fortune, at leaft till fuch time as you arc of age ; wherefore I hold it a point of duty to prevent your placing that at leaft in improper hands. If you have any doubts of my right to do this, you will give me leave to refer you to the other executor, Mr. Mohun, who doubtlefs will, as a lawyer, fatisfy you of the propriety of this. In regard to tlie little fum of money left you by your aunt, I have nothing to fay to that: but. though you have little right to expect advice from me, and I dare ts> fay will not follow 7 it, you will excufe my taking this opportunity to warn you aeaind the artful nefs of that fanìily of the .Marchmonts that vou arc goinff to; for they are entirely beggars, and only intend to make a prey of you. It is pity bnt what you could have made your mind up, to remain in the care your good fatner left you in. However, I have done my duty, and wafli my hands of L 6 the
the affair. Certainly nobody can blame me, if you choofe to throw yourfelf away, and let yourfelf down. I am truly forry, for the fake of thofe that you belonged to, and, on their account, fincerely wifh you may not repent what you are a-going to do, when it will be too late.—1 am fo much indifpofed, that it is very inconvenient to me to be obliged to write fuch long letters.— However, " I am, Madam, ftill " Your weîl-wiiher and fervant, " Mary Dacres." Nothing íhort of an abfolute prohi¬ bition to leave the houie could have «iven Akhea more concern and afto- ? niíhment than this letter. That Lady Dacres ihouid know to whom flie was going, and judge fo hardly of the lovely and innocent Lucy, were equally fub¬ jects of wonder. That ihe ihouid mean, as the letter certainly intimated, to de¬ tain
tain the intereft of her fortune, fave only the part left by her aunt (which did not amount to a thoufand pounds), was a fource of the acuteft concern— for from the intereft of that it was im¬ ponible for her to make to the family fhe was going to refide with, fuch a compenfation as would fatisfy her own liberal fentiment, or be of that ufe to them which was, above all other things, her wifli. Struck with this reflection, and ex¬ tremely diftrefled and fhocked at the reference to Mohun, whofe odious name flie had hardly heard mentioned before fince her father's death, Althea now hefitated as to the immediate execution of the projccl on which ihe had fet her heart ; and endeavoured calmly to con¬ fider, whether to refign it, at leaft for the prefent, and to condemn herfelf to endure life at Capelftoke, rather than irritate the malignant and vindictive woman in whofe power ihe muft yet remain
remain two years, might not be moft conducive to her own eafe, and even to the welfare of the friends for whom ihe was fo anxious* But, on the other hand, fhe confidered that, by yielding thus to the capricious tyianny of her ilep-mo- ther, who firft appeared defirous of dif- miffing her, and then feemed to wifli her ftay only to torment her, ihe was in fact acknowledging her power not only over her fortune but her perfon. The mention of tlie hateful Mohun, who had already been the caufe of fo much uneafinefs, alarmed and terrified her. She thought it poffible tliat there was a defign to expofe her to pecuniary inconveniences, to mortify and oppreis her, that the difcomforts fiie underwent might make the affluence and fpiendour he could offer her more icadily em¬ braced. Yet, if fuch were the plan, it was ftrange that Mohun had never once appeared, and that his name, unlefs by accident, had not been mentioned in her hearing
hearing ever fince her refidence with Lady Dacrcs. The mere idea, how¬ ever, of being under the neceffity of holding any converfe with him, of being in fome meafure in his power, filled her with dread and vexation. This pof¬ fible aggravation of the uneafinefs ihe might experience in being left in the lone folitude of Capelftoke, during the months of autumn too, which would fo forcibly recall the feenes of a pre¬ ceding year—'the formal importance and overbearing impertinence of Mrs. Ben¬ tham the governe fs—and the unintcreft- ing flippancy of her half ii iters, girls of eleven and ten years old, who had been inftrucled not to love her—the fenfation of dependance on Lady Dacres, and of being accounted a ftranger and a bur¬ den in her father's houfc—all were, in her mind, placed in formidable arrays while the other fcheme offered nothing but what was attractive to her imagina¬ tion, and foothing to her feelings. As
As Lady Dacres offered her no plan of future life as an alternative to that ihe oppofed—as fhe had even confeffed her difficulties how to difpofe of her daugh¬ ter-in-law, and now fo fuddenly dif¬ covered that the habitation fhe had chofen was improper, though fhe pro¬ pofed no other—every motive of duty feemed to be out of the queftion, while every motive of comfort and fatisfaction urged her to throw herfelf into the pro¬ tection of Marchmonts mother. She read once more the part of her letter which Lucy had left with her; fhe read over that ihe had copied of March¬ monts ; flie reflected on the pleafure of paffing her life with people whom fhe loved fo much as fhe already loved all fhe knew of his family; and then en¬ deavoured with fanguine hope to be¬ lieve, that when Lady Dacres faw her determined, fhe would not think of de¬ taining fo fmall a fum as her yearly in¬ come, and would be glad to be quietly releafed
releafed from any trouble about, or any reflections on her treatment of, a perfon fhe did not love. With prefent money fhe was well provided, having itili a great part of what fhe had poifeffed at Eaftwoodleigh; and fifty guineas ihe had received fince for mourning, of which ilie had expended very little. This was a fufficient fund for her prefent perfonal expences, and for fuch a compliment as might be ufeful to her friends on her becoming an inmate of their houfe.—- The debate ended in her writing a cold but calm letter to Lady Dacres, in which fhe explained her reafons for leaving her; the principal of which were, that her Ladyihip herfelf had feemed to defire İt, and that from the engagements ihe had made, in confequence of having believed fo, it was now impoffible for her to recede. She added— <{ I am per¬ fuaded your Ladyihip will not think it worth while to detain the fmall intereft of my fortune; and I have only to re¬ peat,
peat, that whenever I am recalled with kindnefs I ihall return to your pro¬ tection with pleafure." Having done this, and left among the fervants fome tokens of her generofity, fhe got into a hackney coach, and foon found herfelf at the place where Lucy and Milly Marchmont were impatiently waiting for her. From thence a poft- chaife conveyed them rapidly on the Kentiih road ; and Althea, notwith¬ itanding her habits of reafoning and reflecting on every circumftance of her life, almoft forgot all her recent uneafi¬ nefs in the delight of feeing the happi¬ nefs ihe beftowed on her companions*
CHAP.
CHAP. XL
Whiihei iboa gocil I ?\? go, and *wli«r; thou loágeft I will lodge,
IF the journey w r as delightful to Al¬ thea from happinefs poifeffed and re¬ flected, its clofe awakened ail her fenfi¬ bility. The meeting of the mother and the daughters, of the eldeft fifter and the two who now rejoined her, was a fcene that drew tears from Althea; but, like thofe of the immediate actors, they were tears of pleafure. The reception Mrs. Marchmont gave to her vifitor was full of dignified gratitude. And fo dif¬ ferent were the perfon and manners of Mrs.
Mrs. Marchmont from thofe which Al¬ théa had imagined, that flie could never ceafe wondering at the falfe ideas flic had formed, nor rejoicing that fui once the reality was infinitely more interefting than the imaginary icmblance. Mrs. Marchmont, who had been re¬ markable for an uncommon ihaic of perfonal beauty, was ftill more than a fine ruin. It is the privilege of fome faces to gain in expreffion what they lofe in bloom. On that of Mrs. Marchmont forrow feemed to have laid its blighting hand; but the traces were fo foftened by refignation and reafon, that, had it been neceffary to perfonify mildnefs and for¬ titude united in one form, ihe might have fat for the pidure. And this ex¬ preffion her countenance feldom loft, unlefs when her fon was in queftion. So paffionaiely fond was fhe of him, and fo much had fhe fuffered from continual fears for his fafety, that, whenever he was named, her feelings became evi¬ dently
clently moft acute. She at prefent be¬ lieved him in fafety î and the apparent tranquillity, which was often a mere effort of rcfolution, was now the effect ofthat perfuafion. In a few days Althea found herfelf perfectly at eafe with her; the little ar¬ rangements of the family were made— and every day fhe faw more reafon to rejoice in having made this choice ; for the tafte, the temper and manners of the mother and the daughters fo exactly coincided with her own, that, having never fince the death of Mrs. Trevyl- lian paffed one hour of fatisfaction, fiie feemed fuddenly to have regained facul¬ ties that had long been reprefled. Her charming talents and her charming tem¬ per occafionally regained their early brilliancy. Yet there was ftill much occafion for fortitude ; for many trials were threatened to the latter by Lady Dacres, to whom, within a month after her being fettled at Margate, fhe again wrote
wrote very rcfpecìfully on the fubjecTt of her intereft money, which would be¬ come due in October, Lady Dacres, as if enraged at Althéa's having taken the very meafure to which flie waj> confcious flie had herfelf driven her, referred her in a very rude letter to her attorney and Mr. Mohun. " She left/' ftie faid, " her part of the bufinefs to the foli- citor employed by her late d^arhuioand, who advifed her againft paying any thing for a purpofe lb contrary to his ivill;" and then, in her ufual hypocritical ftyle, added, " You will excufe me, Mifs Dacres, if J defire you will pleafe to refer yourfelf altogether to him î for, to fay the truth, my fpirits are io much af¬ fected by the indiicreet and improper conduci of a perfon fo nearly related to my dear, ever dear Sir Audley, that care for my own health, not for my own fake indeed, but for that of the precious pledges he has left me, demands of me that
that I decline a correfpondence fo dif- trefting to my fenhbihty." Akhea, though already of fome ex¬ perience, had not yet ïeen du farce of The Worid played long enough to read without a fudden emotion of indignation this fulfome cant, adopted to colour purpofes fo unjuft ¿Mid cruel. From her knowledge of Vampyre, and another wretch of the fame defcription, of whom ihc had occafionally heaid anecdotes, ihe detefted the very name of an attor¬ ney, and ihe could not determine, at leali till the laft moment, to apply to one; itili lefs to addreís herfelf ou any ac¬ count to Mr. Mohun. Akhea. on wei»hin<ï all thefe circum- ftances, thought it more neceftaiy than ever to promote the little plan of in¬ duitry which had been thought of when hi ft ihe made overtures for refiding witb the Marchmonts, but which now feemed to languifh, and to be only partially ex¬ ecuted. Mrs.
Mrs. Marchmont, notwithitanding her acquired fortitude, and the refolution fhe feemed to have wrought herfelf up to, found her firmnefs recoil before the mortifications to which even the flight effay fhe had confented to expofed her. During the very height of the feafon nobody thought much ©f the intimations that were occafionally given by two or three ladies, lovers of the minor branches of the fine arts, that the Mifs March¬ monts, poor things! had fome little ele¬ gant articles of their own ingenious w T orks, which their fituation made it convenient to difpofe of. The raffle of the morning, the public breakfait, the ball, or the play, with the neceffary at¬ tention to changes of drefs, and confu¬ tations on the moil fantaftic way of dif— gulfing the human form, engrofled every woman, from thofe of the waftly genteel famully who hired a glafs coach for a month, to elegant leaders of fafhion, that look down on them with as much fcorn
fcorn as on the importations of the ftages and hoys. But when the concourfe began a little to decline, as was the cafe foon after Althéa's arrivai, it now and then hap¬ pened tbat idîenefs, or curiofity, under the fcmblance of benevolence, procured to the little repofitory vifits, which, fel¬ dom producing any advantage, gave more fenfations of humiliation to Mrs. Marchmont than almoft any advantage could have repaid her for. Amelia Marchmont, naturallv of a refcrved though gentle temper, who had been brought up with the fame ideas that from his family prejudices had influenced the conduci and life of her father, could ill endure the contumely that in her opinion was annexed to that neceifity which now induced her family to avail themfelves of talents acquired for amufe¬ ment, to contribute to their fupport.— She therefore timidly, and yet with feelings half indignant, retired from no- Vol. III. m tice
tice when it was unavoidably attraded, as it fometimes was, by thofe who, with¬ out any feeling for the reduced circum¬ itances of the perfons to whom they fpoke, treated them as they would the tradefpeople they commonly dealt with, or fometimes even with lefs ceremony; at others, mingling in their manner that fort of half kindnefs which is affeded by little minds towards the objects of their charity. Amelia Marchmont, therefore, after a trial or two never appeared ; but Lucy, who had at an earlier period of life learned the neceffity there was for combating the pride of family, fo im¬ portunately uneafy to the poor, who from the quicknefs of her obfervation often faw more to pity than envy in the idle and ignorant children of unenjoyed profperi ty, and who felt all the con¬ fcious fuperiority of talents and under¬ ftanding, fometimes was even amufed with the applications from which her fifter
lifter İhi unk with difguft. The name of Marchmont was little known in a part of England fo remote from the weitem county where it had fo long flourifhed : and of its hiftorical honours few were aware, and none appeared to confider them. They were looked upon merely as the widow and daughters of an indi¬ gent gentleman compelled to defcend from their former ftation in fociety to procure a fubfiftence ; and of fuch fo many examples had occurred within a few years, that the attraction of novelty was not added to the claims of com¬ panion. It foon, however, began to be whif¬ pered, that aifociated with this family, and taking a part in their labours, was a baronet's daughter. This circumftance, firft hinted by the fervants, who found their pride gratified by divulging it, was foon enlarged into a little hiftory, which accumulating anecdotes from every mouth it pafted through, at length m 2 gave
gave a grave detail of u a young lady, the daughter of a titled man, who was extremely beautiful, would be poifeffed of a confiderabie fortune when flie came of age, and was very highly accompliih¬ ed; who had moft unaccountably de¬ termined to quit her own refpectable family, and live with thefe March¬ monts."—It followed, that fome undue arts muft have been ufed on their part to induce a young woman of fafhion to adopt fo ftrange a refolu¬ tion; and the conduci of Mrs, March¬ mont and her daughters began to be canvaffed with all the malignant im¬ pertinence which ignorance, and a de¬ fire to find the unfortunate to blame, generate amidft what is called the fo- ciable parties of a place of public refort. Tbat the purity of female friendihip ftiould have influenced Althea to take fuch a ftep, foon began to be con¬ fidered as extremely improbable; and, on farther enquiry, it was difcovered that
that Mrs. Marchmont had a fon. A day or two afterwards it was known, that this fon had abfconded for debt. The debts were next afterted to have been contracted by his own extrava¬ gance ; and, in a íhort time afterwards, Marchmont was transformed into a gamefter, vho had broken his father's heart—and Althea into an irregular- minded and ungovernable young wo¬ man, who had quitted the matronly pro¬ tection of her father's widow, to af¬ fociate herfelf, on the account of young Marchmont, with the fallen fortunes of his defigning mother and infinuating fifters. Thefe reports, or rather romances, were fo far from deterring the amiable inventors and propagators of them from vifiting the parties, that they raifed great curiofity, and it foon became a fort of fafhion to call at the houfe in the ex¬ pectation of feeing this indifcreet young woman of fafliion ; and though the cu- m 3 riofity
riofity (which Althca was at firft far from fufpeeling) was feldom or never gratified, much continued to be told of ber attractions, and to be invented of ber motives for the extraordinary fa¬ crifice ihe was fuppofed to make. At length íhe was one morning de¬ fired to go down into the parlour to fpeak to a lady, who came, as the maid who delivered the meifage faid, in the fweeteß, mofl genteekß carriage that ever ihe feed, with a pair of dappul grey hofles with iong tails tied up in knots ! Althea, who was not much dazzled by tbis defcription, defired the favour of the Lady's name. It was Mrs. Glaf¬ ton—and Althea went to receive her old friend, metamorphofed into a finer lady than ihe appeared even on their firft meeting after her marriage. When the firft common forms were over—"Lord! my dear!" faid Mrs. Glafton, " vou can't think how ï was furprifed to hear of you here !" " Were
"Were you?" anfwered Althea*—- lt Why fo?" ct Dear! Why, becaufe you know it is fuch an odd thing.—I told the people that talked to mc about it, ihat I wa¿ fure it muft be fome miftake ; but they in lifted upon it, it was you—and then you can't think, my dear friend, what odd things they have got into their heads. Why, do you know? they lay you are in love with young March¬ mont. A likely ftory indeed!—I told them, fays I, to my certain knowledge, that's quite imponible ; for, fays I, / ought to know, who was fo well ac¬ quainted with Mifs Dacres formerly; and I'm fure 'tis no fuch thing. Lord! I dare fay ihe hardly knows the man, fays I ; and you've no notion, befides, what a grave, formal, half-alive fort of a man he is. I'm fure, fays I, I re« member well enough when he was a friend of my brother's ; he ufed to be in our houfe fometimes for a week to- m 4 gether;
gether ; and as to a fmart young man, though he is not ugly, yet foniehow he is juft as ftupid as the picture of his great grandfather walked out of its frame.^—I mean the picture my brother bought at the fale there at the old cathedral place, when all went to pieces ; that great frightful figure, in a ruff and jack boots, enough to fright one into fits, that my brother, from fome ftrange whim, fets fuch prodigious ftore by. But as for being gay and amufîng one, and talking pretty fort of fmall talk, like other men of his age, Marchmont has no more notion of it than the picture itfelf; and therefore I'm fure Mifs Dacres, who I don't be¬ lieve ever faw him twice in her life, is no more in love with him .... than— than . . . . ftic would be with the Pope> or any odd old quiz one can name." Fortunately for Althca, the loqua¬ cious lady was fo occupied by herielf, and had fuch pleafure in hcaung the found
found of her own voice, while fhe contem¬ plated the graceful play of her feathers, as flie law them in an oppofite glafs, that ihe had not either at the beginning or clofe of this harangue looked in the face of the perfon fhe was talking to. Twice the blood had rifen to die betray¬ ing cheeks of Althea; the laft time it had hardly receded back to her pal¬ pitating heart, when Mrs. Glafton, having no more to add, turned towards her, and, obferving fomething very unufual in her look, hardly had fixed her eyes attentively upon her before lire became of a deadly pale. 11 Lord! my dear!" cried the thought¬ lefs creature, Ci I hope I have not been telling lies all this while about you.—· Biefs me ! what is the mattet ?—Why, you don*t know young Marchmont 5 do you? 'Twa'n't upon his account, was it, that you left Lady Dacres, and came here to keep ihop with his mother and fiftcn?" m 5 " Upon
<f Upon his account!" faintly articu¬ lated Althea. Then making an effort to recover the calm feelings of con¬ fcious rectitude, and to recollect of how little confequence were the idle re¬ marks of peopic for whofe opinions fhe felt fo little refpect, ihe foiced a fmile, and faid—·" How can you, dear Mrs. Glafton, liften to, or beftow another thought on, thefe legends ? For Hea¬ ven's fake, what have the people who fay all this to do with me, or I with them ? I came hither becaufe the man¬ ners of this family wer'* agreeable to me ; I afk not the approbation of ftrangers, fince ftrangers cannot judge of my motives; I never interfere in their concerns; would they could be prevailed upon to allow me the ma¬ nagement of my own!" *« Well, but, my dear," cried Mrs. Glafton, returning to the chaige, " you know it is quite impoffible to flop people's tongues—and to be fure I can't help
help thinking it ftrange, you fliould like Mrs. Marchmont. Lord! I remember, when I was quite a child, I ufed to go there to ftay fometimes with grand- mama, and I hated it fo ! Ihe mi fíes, inftead of playing and romping, ufed to be ihewing me books and piclures, and telling ftories about them, efpecially Mifs Marchmont the eldeft; a prim thing—and as for their mother . . . . " w She is one of the beft of women," faid Akhea, who found ftie could not hear without impatience any refleclions on her friends, even from the infigni¬ ficant tongue of folly.—" She is one of the beft of women, and her underftand¬ ing is as good as her heart." ** I am lure I remember that ihe was reckoned very proud though," eagerly interrupted Mrs. Glafton— 4t and that is not, I fuppofe, counted a fign of great fenfe, efpecially where people are fo poor." m 6 " Mrs.
" Mrs. Marchmont was, for a great while, extremely unhappy," replied Al¬ thea; " and it is not eafy for mere vi- fiting acquaintance to diftinguiíh be¬ tween dejc8ion and haughtinefs : but î believe there is little ufe in our dif¬ enili ng, at this time, the opinions of people fix or ïeven years ago, and at two hundred miles diftance from hence." " Perhaps you don4 care, neither, for what the people fay here at this prefent time?" faid Mrs. Glafton, half fpite- fully. " Why, not much, I muft confefs»-—» Thofe who have fenfe and good nature will not judge hardly of me—and for others who have neither why fhould I difturb myfelf ?" " Well, you know beft, Mifs Dacres, Pm fure Pd no motive myfelf but friendfliip in faying any thing at all about it—though, when I came down here.
here, all the world began open-mouthed upon me. But pray," added ffie, look¬ ing fignificantly, " pray what is become of young Marchmont?" " What is become ■ of him ?*— He is abroad." i; Lord!" rejoined Mrs. Glafton, 4i what a number of lies was told about him ! My brother infilled upon making us believe that he was gone to Ireland as a fteward to fome man of for¬ tune ; but there was people that knew better." Althea, who imagined this related to his concealment at Eaftwoodleigh, and who had not courage to enquire how far that circumftance had been known and talked of, now blu ffied deeper than before; but, defirous of turning the dif- courfe, faid drily, " I cannot imagine how it ffiould intereft any body, unlefs indeed thofe who, like Mr. Everfley your brother, were generous enough to try to do him good." " Oh !
" Oh! the world will talk, you know, my dear—but, come, tell me how long do you intend to ftay here ? Do you ever go to the Rooms? It is not true, is it, that you are partner in the March¬ monts' ihop? You'll go back to Lady Dacres in the winter, to be fure ?" Ofthefe queitions Althea, very weary and impatient, anfwered only two.— " I never go to the Rooms—I have, at prefent, no intention of returning to Lady Dacres.*' * c But, blefs me, my dear!—what am I to fay to the folks who aik me quef- tions about you? Do you know, I have been quite diftrefled ever fince I came, with one and the other teafing me fo about you. Dear! I thought, to be fure, what they faid was lies and inven¬ tion from the beginning to the end.—But then Mrs. Iliggenbottom, and her fifter Mifs Carraway, and Lady Buzzard, and her daughter Mifs Marianne, faid all of them, that, for their parts, they knew it
it to be trew; and Lady Buzzard faid fhe knew a lady who had bought a pair of fire-ikreens here, which they knew were your doing." <{ How thefe worthy people fhould know that, I cannot imagine, nor is it indeed very material. For the reft, you are not now, Mrs. Glafton, to learn, that Mrs. Marchmont and her family, whom you fo well knew formerly in a very different fituation of life, have had recourfe to their own work to obtain an increafe of income—an effort of virtue which, /think, is fo far from de¬ bating them, that whoever does think fo, and ftiould therefore flight and defpife them, would fink, in my opinion, into the loweft contempt.------The goffiping remarks of fuch people I never defire to hear: themfelves I never defire to fee." This anfwer, ïo unlike the ufual gen¬ tlenefs of Althea, feemed equally to furprife and offend the perfon to whom it
it was addreffed, who, without afking to fee any of the Marchmont family, rang for her carriage, at the fame mo·» ment that another drove up to the door. The maid, having no orders to the contrary, ufhered into the room a lady whofe face Althea did not recollect; while Mrs. Glafton, without repeating the ufual leave-taking compliments, de¬ parted, and, driving to a milliner's, was foon fo entirely occupied and enchanted by the fight of fome moft elegant new articles from London, that, for fome time, her fpleen 3gainft her old friend was forgotten. Althea, in the mean time, having.de¬ fired her newly-arrived gueft, and the gentleman who attended her, to fit down, enquired whether fhe wiihed to ipeak to Mrs. Marchmont. W hile Althea faid this, the puppy-iooking animal who came with her taking out an opera-glafs-, looked at her a moment ; then, turning on
orr his heel, hummed an Italian air, and went to the window. The lady was not fo filent. " So!" cried ihe, ( - you have quite forgot me, I fee ?" '· I beg your pardon/' anfwered Al¬ thea, who now remembered the voice and affected manner—" I believe I fpeak to Mrs. Polwarth." "Juft fo. —Well! I am glad you remember me: you muft know I hate vaftly to be forgot. Though I fhould not have pardoned even the fufpicion of it, if you had not feen me among fuch a fet at th?tt horrible old houfe of Sir Audlcy's, where my cariffimo fpofo ufed to drag me once a year to mortify with that moft irkfome of all twaddlers^ Lady Dacrcs. Wardy, don't you re¬ member you w ? ere theie widi me once, and helped me to hoax the whole fet ? and a precious fet they were. 'Tis partly my dcteftation of them, and know-
ing how I hated them myfelf, that, added to my amazing good-nature,and my libe¬ ral opinions, that makes me your cham¬ pion; and I declare every where in the fcrewed-up faces of a legion of tabbies, that you have done vaftly right in pleaf¬ ing yourfelf, and that I dote upon your fpirit and refolution—for that I have always done as I pleafed myfelf, and always intend it." Althea not at all gueifing to what pur¬ pofe all this tended, and indeed be¬ lieving it meant nothing, made no re¬ ply. The ilender beau, in his pantaloons reaching to his heels, and fomething like an old great coat on his ihoulders, flood drumming againft the window, and lent no affiftance to the converfa¬ tion. " I fuppofe," refumed the Lady, "that all the world (that is, all of the world that have any fenfe) think juft as I do, though
though not half of them have the courage to avow it. Who would ftay with fuch a tedious felfifh biddy as Lady Dacres? Oh ! I have fought fifty baLtles about you." Althea, very forry to have become the fubject of converfation, and not at all ambitious of fuch an advocate, did not look very grateful. "But come," cried the Lady, "come! let us look, ma petite amie, at fome of the pretty nick-nacks that I hear you and Co. make for fale. I intend that Wardy fhall make me a prefent of fomething." " There is, I believe," anfwered Al¬ thea coldly, ,c nothing at all worth pro¬ ducing for fuch a purpofe; but if there were, Mrs. Marchmont is not at home, and in her abfence I have no authority to difpofe of, or even to fhew, the work." " Well! never mind then; 1*11 make the wretch go with me fome where elfe. But à-propos, Mifs Dacres, 1 want vaftly to
to hear your account of thefe friends oî yours, thefe Marchmonts, that I have heard fo much about. Here is my card —pray call upon me fome morning: I fliall be very glad to fee you—you'll make no ceremony—I am not like any moital elfe you know on this earth, and delight in, adore all fort of eccentricity, and to make honeft matter-of-fad folks flare! If there was any thing I could poffibly dcvife to caufe thofe ftupid boors to open their round owl's eyes wider upon me than they do already, I ftiould certainly fport it." " As my ambitiot^ Madam," faid Ahhea, ftill more drily, ít is not of the fame foaring fort, I merely wiih to know what part of my condud it can poffibly be that has given rife to the malignity, againft wdiich you have been at fo much generous pains to defend me------malig¬ nity, which feems to ha\e been indulged by people among whom I am hardly known even by name." (i Oh!
"Oh! my charming girl! never ap¬ ply to me for fuch a hiflory—rather go afk the old fadges who, perhaps, invent¬ ed half of it. I dare fay there is not an ancient maiden, either native or foreign¬ er, of this place, nor for ten miles round, who would not be delighted to tell it to your face wdth emendations and addi¬ tions : but, for myfelf, I affure you that I am the beft-natured creature in the world; therefore 1*11 tell you nothing of what I hear, only what I fee with my own eyes, which is — You are vaftly handfomer than you ufed to be. 1 don't wonder, indeed, that Lady Prim, your mother-in-law, ufed you as fhe did to get rid of you." tc I have nothing to complain of, Ma¬ dam, in regard to Lady Dacres," faid Althea. " That muft be owing to your pa¬ tience, I am fure, rather than to any good iñ her— a nafty, ill-natured,fpiteful old pufs ! I wifh with all my foul fhe may
may marry her butler.—Well, but fince you won't tell me how you came to mufter refolution enough to acl for your¬ felf, I'll go now, and come another day. I'm in a horrible hurry, and that faith¬ lefs fellow looks as if he longed to leave me to go to my appointment alone.—- Come, you animal," added flie, rifing and taking Wardour (who was ftill her attendant) by the arm, " let us go.'* They then got into the carriage that was waiting, and departed together—to the great relief of Althea, who returned not, however, to the tranquillity ihe had enjoyed before. The ftrange and unpleafant circum¬ ftance of having become the converfa¬ tion of a place where ftie thought herfelf hardly known, the motives which were imputed to her for her refidence with Mrs. Marchmont, the certainty that her attachment to the fon of the family was fufpecled, if not actually known—all ferved to fill her with grief and vexa¬ tion ;
tion : ftie thought that fuch reports could have come only from Lady Dacres; and though the confcioufnefs of the purity of her mind, and the innocence and propriety of her conduct, foon gave her felf- fatisfaction enough to enable her to rife above thefe vague and idle rumours, yet nothing could be more diftreifing than the certainty of Lady Dacres's ma¬ lignity towards her, which could hardly fail of being productive of fo many in¬ conveniences both to her fortune and reputation : and thefe injuries coming from the very hand that ought to have been held forth offering friendihip and protection, feemed doubly cruel, and very difficult calmly to endure. It gave her alfo great pain to reflect, that when all thefe reports became known to Mrs. Marchmont, which fhe knew muft foon happen, the comfort and pleafure they had found in being to¬ gether would be empoifoned, and that (he
ilie ftiould be the caufe of giving un¬ eafinefs to the perfons flie moft loved and efteemed. Alas ! there were but too many caufes of concern already. Mrs. Marchmont, in a continual ftruggle between her dread of the future and the uncertainty how fhe ought to act at prefent, delayed from time to time the decifion which alone could have rendered her propofed plan eligible. This delay ihe imputed to the neceflity of waiting for letters from her fon ; but it was partly owing to the lingering remains of that reluctant pride which often returned to the charge, even when flie thought her fortitude and her reafon had conquered it for ever. The queftion continually recurred to the mother's heart: Ought ihe, for the fake of a trifling pecuniary advantage, to humble her daughters* profpects in life? Who would marry girls from a ihop? —To this Reafon conftantly re¬ plied,
plied, that the man who happening to prefer one of them, fhould on that ac¬ count reject her, muft be apoor-fpirited creature, with whom it was unlikely flie would be happy. Her health, however, gradually de¬ clined in the contcft; and ftie infenfibly to herfelf, yet vifibly to others, loft the advantage flie at firft feemed to derive from fea air, and from having quitted the neighbourhood of London. Akhea was already di ignited with a plan which expofed her to the repetition of fuch impertinence as flie had lately been teaied with; and dreading left, in the month of October now at hand, Lady Dacres fliould refufe to pay even the intereft of Mrs, Trevyllian's legacy, flie funk in defpite of her own refolu¬ tion, and the buoyant fpirits of the happy-tempered Lucy, into frequent fits of defpondence; without, however, avow¬ ing even to herielf, what ihe felt to be Vol. I IL n true,
true, that the long filence of Marchmont, the uncertainly of what was the fituation of the place where he was fuppofed to be, and the deep concern that fome¬ times on his account feemed to bow the fpirit of his mother to the earth, had more influence in imprefling pain on her heart, than any thing that related to her¬ felf or her fituation. To remain with his mother, however, fo long as fhe had the means of making it an object of fome advantage, was her fteady rcfolution; and in avoiding every one like i y to repeat what ihe had already heard with fo much uneafinefs, in footh¬ ing and fweetcning fome of the very bitter hours Mrs. Marchmont paffed in filent folicitude, another fortnight paffed. At the end of that time Mrs. March¬ mont was one day furprifed by a letter, cnclofing from a woman of high rank a Bank note of a hundred pounds. In¬ ftead
ftcad of that gracioufneß which often embitters fuch gifts, the letter explain¬ ing from whom it came was couched in terms fo delicate, fo ttuiy good, that Mrs. Marchmont for once received an obligation without feeling herfelf hum¬ bled by it. The almoft immediate con¬ fequence was, a refolution, in whieh her daughters and Althea warmly concurred, to remove from a public place, rclin¬ quifh their plan for the prefent, and wait for news from Marchmont in ? cottage at a village in Kent, which prccifely at that time happened to be vacant,— Thither they immediately were fettled, and there paffed part of the month of Odober. The whole of November, and midwinter arrived, without their being fenfible of any wifh for a change, and without any new uneafinefs, fave only from the now very long filence of Marchmont. Althea had received her fmall dividend in due courfe, and from fome unaccountable effort of generofity Lady
Lady Dacres had fent an additions! thirty pounds — but without faying on what account, or writing a line of any kind in the blank cover in which it was enclofed.
ENttOF THE THIRD VOLUME
