Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Marchmont: a novel
Ahhea, who, though fhe faid nothing, was by no means the leaft agitated among them, their days would have paffed in more tranquillity and comfort than, after all the former had fuffered, they could ever expeft. But the vague and uncertain reports which continually reached them from that part of the con¬ tinent where they believed Marchmont ftill to be, the hiftories of horror that every day met their eyes in the news¬ papers, and his not having written fince he firft found protection with the Englifh at Toulon, formed together fo much ground for apprehenfion on the part of thofe who loved him, that their days were overclouded by continual anxiety ; they all often, without daring to com¬ municate their fentiments to each other, felt that the dread is often more difficult to fupport than the certainty of an evil, and that it deprived them of every en¬ joyment of life. Althea
Althea watched, with trembling fo¬ licitude, the fading countenance of Mrs. Marchmont, and the eager anxious looks of the animated Lucy ; wdiile Amelia, amidft all her efforts to fpeak comfort, funk into hopeiefs defpondence ; and, while ftie fought to find arguments againft the terrors that preyed on her mother, feemed to feel how well grounded thofe terrors were, and to want herfelf the comfort fhe attempted to beftow. Sometimes, as if afraid of being to¬ gether left the communication of their thoughts fliould increafe their mutual fufferings, Mrs. Marchmont, who was frequently ill, remained alone in her own room, and Amelia fliut herfeif in hers; while Althea, Lucy, and Milly, not daring to fpeak on the fubjed neareft their hearts, and yet unable to enter on any other, fat fad and filent at their work, expecting, with aimoft ago¬ nizing apprehenfions, the newfpaper and ? 2 the
-lhe poft > and trembling at every fcnock ihey heard at the door. Such was the cruel fituation of tbe family, when one morning, in the middle of January, a gentleman rode up to the door of their cottage: he enquired for Mifs Dacres.—Althea, who had only a flight view of him without diftinguifh- ing his face as he rode by the window, imagined it was fome perfon on bufinefs from Lady Dacres.; and however re¬ luctantly, yet fuppofing it to be necef¬ fary, flie CireSed him to be admitted to the parlour, from whence her two young companions went out, to leave her at liberty to fpeak to the ftranger. What was her furprife, and,, after a moment, her alarm, to fee Mr. Ever¬ fley! Not even the -domeftic unhappinefs which Althea well knew had fo long embittered his life, wuld account for the expreffion of his countenance.· It was evidently recent and -, very deep concern
concern that affefted bim. He tried to make the ufual compliments of faluta¬ tion, but failed. He fat down, fetched a deep and tremulous figh, and his lips quivered as he faintly uttered— " How are the ladies?— How is poor Mrs. Marchmont? ...... Will Mils Dacres pardon my intruding on her?— Her fricndfliip for this unfortunate fa¬ mily makes me hope it." " Good God!" exclaimed Althea^ " what new misfortune has befallen them? Ah I Mr. Everfley, forne great evil has overtaken your friend Marchmont—, Lie is, perhaps, no more!"—Then ftruck to the heart by fo terrible a fuppofition, ihe clafped her hands together, and re¬ mained filent and breathlefs. " I hope," faid Mr. Everfley, trying to fpeak with more firmnefs, ".that he is yet alive : but I cannot conceal the truth. He has been—he ftill is, I fear, in the moil imminent danger:—in the •dreadful affair at Toulon he has been ? 3 a fevere
a fevere fufferer. He did not efcape by fea like the reft : his friendfhip' for the Lavergnac family has engaged him in difficulties, from which it is much to be apprehended he wiil find it hard to extricate himfeif, even if the bad effed of all he has endured mould be refifted by his ftrength of conftitution and his youth*·* u He has been ill, then?" articulated Althea faintly. " Ah! Mr. Kverfley, to mt š at leaft, you may difclofe the truth, though I fear it will deftroy his unfortunate mother—Marchmont is dead?" " Mot that I am affured of x " replied Mr. Everfley; " I can only repeat that, from his incoherent letter, his fituation appears to me to be fo precarious, that I thought it my duty,, as aimoft the only remaining friend of the family, and as that letter was addreffed to me, to take fome means of preparing the mind of that admirable woman for a blow that ma)\
may, if it falls fuddenly and unexpeft¬ edly upon her, quite overwhelm her, and leave the poor girls without the proteftion either of their mother or their broth er. ' r " Alas!" faid Althea, " it will be but killing her by Fingering tortures, inftead of one death-ftroke. Yet your precau¬ tion—yet the trouble you have taken is very good—very friendly! What would you advife me, Sir, to do? How ihail I venture to communicate fuch in¬ telligence?—If there is yet hope that your friend may efcape, would it not be better ......?" Althea found it im¬ poffible to proceed—— "I fee," faid Mr. Everfley in a low voice, " how greatly you arc affefted. I aimoft repent of having airlifted you. The painful duty of wounding where I wifh only to heal and to confole, I would not transfer to you, did I not know how tender a hand it requires; and were I not perfuaded that there are ? 4 few
few evils which muft not be greatly al¬ leviated by fympathy fuch as yours.— Alas ! Mifs Dacres, it is I who feel af¬ furedly more than any body, that there arc many, many calamities in life, to the endurance of which early death is in¬ finitely preferable. Good God! how much better to die as Marchmont may, fo beloved, and fo regretted, than to live as......."He checked himfeif, and, leaving the fentence incomplete, added, in a half-ftifled voice—" For¬ give my folly—The wretched arc always egoti ft s —I too naturally, thougii too weakly, recur to myfelf !" " Would it not be better," aiked Al¬ thea, collccling as much firmnefs as İlie could—** would it not be better, fince poor Marchmont's fate is ftill uncertain, to conceal the worft we know, and the ftill worfe we apprehend, from his mo¬ ther, till the final event be aílured? If it be fatal, it will then be time enough to open to her the cruel tidings. Should Providence
Providence interpofe in her favour, and fave her fon, perhaps we fhali, by delay, avoid in Aiding a wound that may be followed by the moft dreadful confe¬ quences." " I believe you arc right, Madam," anfwered Mr. Everfley.—" Goodnefs and wifdom are alike confpicuous in every thing you fay. But, if my being here is known, how fliall I excufe to Mrs. Marchmont my not appearing be¬ fore her?" (t It need not be known—I believe flic has no fervants here who lived with her when flie ufed to fee you. The younger of her daughters, who had a very flight view, of you as you paffed the windows, do not at all, I believe, recoiled you. They imagine it is fome gentleman come to me on the part of Lady Dacres, and the feverity of the weather may excufe concealing your face as you go out. May I, Sir," con¬ tinued Althea, her voice faltering— ? 5 " may
fC may I alk to be entrufted with the letter that infotras you of thé fuffering* and fituation of Marchmont? I will endeavour—fince from the fervice of my friends I will not ihrink, however pain¬ ful it may be to myfelf—I will endea- vo' ro compel myfelf to aft with calm- .icf, and deliberation, and to proceed to;;urds giving or with-holding from my poor unhappy friend the heart¬ breaking intelligence, as circumftances feem to demand/* 9t I have no fcruple,'^ faid Mr. Ever¬ fley, taking the letter from his pocket,. and giving it to her, " to entruft you with it—as I would,, indeed, with all that is, or ought to be^moft precious to my¬ felf.—But how* deareft Madam, if I ihould receive any other communica¬ tion from, our friend, how íhall I tranf¬ mit it to you ?·· Althea, who found herfelf aimoft un¬ able to fupport the converfation, in¬ formed him, that nothing, was more eafy than
than for him to do it by letter; and that all that remained for her was, to affume refolution enough to conceal the fhock fhe might receive, fhould his informa» tion be what they dreaded. Everfley, without faying fo, fignified that he was well aware, from her par¬ tiality to Marchmont, how very difficult this would be— fC But," added he, " there is no elevation of fentiment or conduct to which the fuperior underftanding of Mifs Dacres does not render her equal. Oh, Marchmonts in life or in death, it muft be my lot to envy you !" Althea recollecting what had formerly paffed, when fhe fancied, and with great reafon, that Everfley was more attached to her than merely tbe friendihip be¬ tween their families could authorife, an¬ fwered flightly; and Everfley, as if con¬ fcious of the impropriety and ufelefs- nefs of what he had unguardedly faid, feemed tempted to repeat apologies; till, fuddenly recollecting that he might only ? ? be
be betrayed into a repetition of the of¬ fence, he haftily arofe. " I will wait at the inn at Sitting- bourne," faid he, " to-night, left, after having perufed our friend's letter, you fliould have any commands for me.— Should I hear nothing before twelve o'clock to-morrow, I fhail depart for London, where, according to this ad¬ drefs,** giving Althea a card, " I have taken a houfe for three months—and where I íhall be always ready to obey the commands of Mifs Dacres, or of her friends." Mr. Everfley then haftily departed, taking the precautions Althea had hinted at to conceal his face; while fhe, unable to fpeak to Lucy Marchmont till flic had read the dreadful letter, hurried, hardly knowing what flie did, to her own room, and locked the door. • She then, panting for breath, took it from her pocket, and attempted to read it: but the direction was blotted and confufed ;
confufed; the feal, the hand-writing were all fo many teftimonies of the agitated and wretched conditionin which the writer had been when it w T as dif¬ patched. Althea tried- to read it twice before flic could command compofure enough to fucceed; the letters floated before her eyes ; their charafters were indif¬ tinft ; flie fancied them traced in the blood of the unhappy writer. At length, having drank a glafs of water, and argued herfelf into what fhe hoped would be a fufficicnt degree of refolution to enable her to bear a detail the horrors of which might poffibly be aggravated by their obfcurity, flic read, or rather wiih difficulty dccypbcrcd, as follows : Tú W. LVERSLEY, Efquire* " My very dear Friend, " When you learn that Marchmont, not certainly of a very deiponding tem¬ per,
per. fuppofes that *h'u í$ the laft trouble he fhail ever give you, \ou will believe that hi$ fituation is fuch a» for himfeif he fhould meet, he trufls, with fortitude, were he not dragged back to hfe bv his tendernefs, his fears, his regret-— dul he not think of thofe who have hardlv any fupport, any comfort, any hope hut what is attached to his life.—Oh' my beloved mother, my unprotected fifters—it is for you ï would hve.— There is yet another tie that would bind me to life, but facred is the adored name of her that has formed it. She is fo much of an angel, that perhaps Hea¬ ven ha* direfted it for her prcfervation from greater evils, when I am difmiifed from a world where my misfortunes might have been communicated to her» What can fortify me againft the fear of death like fuch a fuppofition? Yet in¬ deed, my friend, if the moft ardent love, if the tendereft gratitude could have re¬ conciled her to humble fortune, fhe would
would not with me have been un¬ happy f t< ît is pafled!— I sm wotinckd^— thev teli me, mortally·— ?? in ? prifon where I am not confidered as a pri- fjner of war ; and from whence, if the furgeons who have vifited me ihould be mHafcen, í íhall, in aH ptobabihiy, be dífpenfled, only to penfh on a fcaffoîd. * f NU ãefperandum uíed to be my motto—not, however, with too much reafon; for I thmk that from the time when, in perfed poffeffion of my reafon, í dared to lift the veil which my poor father's affectionate hands endeavoured to fpread between me and the dark ihadows that hung over the fortunes of our family, every year has brought an accumulation of evil; which, while I was chained down to its endurance, I was, from combined and unconquerable difficulties, precluded from attempting to remove, by fuch efforts as a man of my age and education, under aimoft any other
i* not. Yet it is certain that I am ver\ weak. But a conftitution hitherto un¬ touched by difeafe may do much for a man in his twenty-fourth year.—Yet what avails my recovery, if the means f«*il me, as they aimoft certainly will, of pre¬ vailing on the committee, to whom my cafe wiil be rcfeired, to believe me an Englifh fubjeft, and to treat me as a prifoner of war ? " lam not able now lo relate the cir¬ cumftances to which this is owing. If I live, you fhail have my fhort eventful hiftory. If I live ï —Ah t how vain to indulge fuch a hope! I probably now fee through the grating of my prifon the wintry fun (which ftill in thie climate i¿ bright) of tbe opening year, the laft I fliall ever behold. " My purpofe in writing to you, Ever¬ fley, is to fecure your good offices in conveying to my unhappy family the intelligence which will in all human probability precede my death. To whofe friendihip
friendihip but to yours emn I entruft this painful tafk ?—and fhould it be executed by u n fkilful hands, how fad may be the confequences! *· I have been mak mg once more a feeble attempt to difcover what chance there is of my being permitted to live» i£ my wound ihould be cured: î per¬ ceive that money, if immediately ap¬ plied, might do much; but money I have none—and it is likely that after a few days it would lofe its efficacy were I to procure it; for the French com- miffioner, who is then expeded, is a man of brutal manners, fanguinary by his nature, and from national prejudice de¬ tecting the very name of an Engiifhman^ fo that it is very probable the efforts I have made to afcertain my being a Britifh fubjed may ferve only to ex¬ pofe me to his ferocity. My only ray of hope, and it is ver) faint, arifes from the kindnefs and humanity of the young furgeon. One of his family was obliged by
by fome family in England during the- laft war: he remembers it with grati¬ tude, and has naturally a liberal tem¬ per and a good heart. But he is a very young man—he is only an affiftant fur¬ geon; and any attempt in which he was not abfolutely fure of fuccefs, would fend me immediately to the fcaíFold, and involve him in mv fate. How then can I prefs him to help me, evén if I were enough recovered to meditate my efcape ? "It is more worthy of thofe principles I have through life endeavoured to cul¬ tivate, to fubmit to an inevitable evil with calmnefs, rather than to involve my friends by attempting to evade it. "Some pangs, fome very fevere pangs· I certainly feel : they are lefs for my¬ felf, cruel a^a violent death is at twenty- four, than for thofe I muft leave. "Everfley ! I confign them perhaps in» my Iaft hours (for the commiílioner is* come)—I confign mý family to your unwearied
unwearied fricndfliip. But remember that, as it never was my wifh, while living, that fuch friendihip fliould cm- bitter your life, you muft not fuffer it to do fo after my death. "And now, my laft, beft friend, adieu! I bid you farewell, in all probability for the laft time.—Should I yet exift 1 , my firfl care will be to greet you. My worthy and friendly Deflormes under¬ takes, and even at fome hazard, to put this letter on its way to England. "God prcferve you, my dear Everfley í Let my memory be dear to you. Ifit -íhould ever be painful, you will think of all your good actions towards me; you will continue fuch friendly offices as you can towards thofe I leave, and you will find a pleafure even in your concern.— Once more farewell ! " E. A. M."
CHAP.
????, IL
Injttåtee, fat ft, ere£t, end nnconrWA, Sweep» tbe wide e»rth, *ad tramplra en msakind, While praytri to heal her wrong« more flowly mov« behind.
WORDS can but inadequately de¬ fcribe the condition of Althéa's mind, when, after a fecond reading, fhe com¬ prehended tbe whole purport of the fore¬ going letter. Again and again ihe read it.—Some¬ times the hopes Marchmont feemed to hold out made her flatter herfelf that he might yet be preferved. But the doubts that had been raifed of his coun¬ try—but the dreadfully ferocious com- miflloner !
miffioner! — As thefe arofe before her, íhe felt it out of her power reafonably to hope, and terror and defpair took poffeffion of her heart. Nothing, however, was fo immediate¬ ly requifite as to compofe herfelf for meeting Mrs. Marchmont at dinner; for after mature deliberation fhe deter¬ mined, if it were poifible, to keep to herfelf all fhe knew, and not to divulge, till it became inevitable, the faial fecret even to Lucy herfelf. This undertaking was terrible to her. Had ihe confidered Marchmont only as a common acquaintance, it would have been very difficult to have concealed her concern from the eyes of a mother fo tremblingly anxious about her fon. As it was, the moft heroic refolution was requifite to ftifle the agonies ihe en¬ dured, rather than unnecefiarily wound a bofom dear to her on account of Marchmont, as well as for itfelf. Let thofe who have ever been called upon for
for fu*, h an cxc rí ¡on of friendihip ima¬ gine how difficult was the part fhe had to act, and what flie muit have fuffered only for the ihort time it was incumbent upon her to go through it* She dreaded the moment of being fummoned to dinner, which, however, fhe could not avoid obeying. Mrs. Marchmont had all the morning con- fined herfclf to her room, for the de- preftkm of her fpirits was fuch a> fhe had that day found it impoffible to con¬ quer. She felt w hat flic fometimes had defcribed in the words ufed by a cele¬ brated French author, who in his laft illnefs faid he felt no pam, only " une difficulté de vivre." This difficulty— thi¿» reluctance to drag on a life where fo much was to be dreaded for the future fate of thofe fhe loved, while little of hope offered itfelf, Mrs. Marchmont, with the good fenfc of a reafoning being, and the firmnefs of a Chriftian, endea¬ voured to refift. She looked at her lovely
lovely daughters.—It was for them flie knew her life, with all its adive powers to be neceffary ; hut when all that might befall them,unportioned and unprotected as they were, became prefent to her mind; when fhe remembered ho. v far their brother was from them, and how uncertain it was whether he would ever be able to appear as their guardian and fiiend; the abfence ofthat dear fon, ever the firft object of his mother's affedions, and the cruel circumftances that had blighted all the fair profpecls of his youth, and marred the promife his talents, his temper, and his perfon had given, feemed to be evils fo real and infup¬ portable, that her fortitude gave way before it; and the refolvcs fhe had made not to increafe, by timid defpondence, evils which only aftive virtue could mi¬ tigate, funk into that cold inert tran¬ quillity which fometimes appears like patience and refignation. Vol. IV. ? In
In fuch a frame of mind, increafed by perfonal indifpofition, wa.s Mrs. Marchmont, when it became the cruel tafk of Althea to put on lome degree of cheerfulnefs, to endeavour to appear a^ ufual, while fhe knew that this unhappy mother was really more w ι etched ihan in her darkeft moments oí diead and defpondence ihe had ever believed her¬ felf. This, however, flie could not fo wel perfot m but that the ftruggle was evi¬ dent ; and that fomething had given Al¬ tlica unufual concern appeared through all her attempts to conceal it. İt was natural enoi.gh for the fanu'y, who fup¬ pofed a gentleman had that morning been with her from í ad y Dac rt s, to impute her evident confufion and dilli efs of mind to fomething that h.id paffed in regard to her pecuniary affairs. The innocent yet queftioning eyer. of Lucy examined thofe of Althea with particular
pai liculdi earneftnefs. The general idea, however, was hers, that Lady Dacies had fent her iome rude or unkind mef¬ fage. Her beau ached for tier beloved friend : but fhe forbore to alk an) dired qucitions, concluding that whatever it was proper for her to know*. Althea would teil her; and Mrs*. Marclnmmt and Amelia remained filent from the fame moti\ es of delicacy. Theii meal was the moft melancholy they had ever eaten together: as foon as it was over they feparated; for to remain long under fuch reit raun, her heart aftually burfting wuh anguiih, Althea found to be hn- poffihL*. Lucy, more alarmed than before, ven¬ tured to take her hand as fhe paffed her to go up flairs : *' My dear friend!" faid flic, in l* low and trembling voice. Althea underftood the appeal—" Fol¬ low me 10 my 100m, Lucy," faid ihe; ? 2 " but
*' r but pray'take no notice of my con¬ cern." They entered the chamber of Althea, who, finding it wholly out of her power to reftrain any longer the angu i fli of her mind, fat down in tears; while Lucy, hanging over her t faid, ** That cruel Lady Dacres is the occafion of giving you more uneafinefs?" Althea, unufed to every fpecies of deceit, and quite incapable of ufing it to a friend whom ihe confidered as more than a fifter, then thought it better to tell her the truth ; for flie believed the good fenfe Lucy Marchmont poffeffed would rather fupport her in the difficult and arduous tafk fhe had undertaken, than weaken the refolution with which flie determined to attempt going through it. Defiring, therefore, in a low voice, that Lucy would ftiut the door, fhe firft endeavoured to arm her wkh calmnefs to
to endure the evil tidings that it was thus her lot to impart, and then put Marchmont's letter into her hand. Whatever were the elevated fpirit and fanguine temper of Lucy, the dreadful uncertainty (an uncertainty that could hardly terminate favourably) feemed, and pcriiaps was, more difficult to bear than any certainty would have been at the inftant; yet a little refledion, and her obferving how deeply Althea was affeded, helped to reftore her to fomq apparent compofure ; and both were foon enabled, by this participation of forrows, to confole and in a certain de¬ gree to reaffurc each other. They were equally aware tbat nothing was mere dear to the poor exile, whofe fate they thus deplored, than the peace and health of his mother; and both had that right fenfc of what they owed the abfent or the dead, to feel that the heft way of teftifying the tender regard they bore him, was to alleviate, as far as to ? 3 alleviate
alleviate was poflible, the diftrefs of thofe their lamented Marchmont loved. Yet fad, heavy, and difficult to be per¬ formed was the taik; and they fo greatly dreaded meeting Mrs. Marchmont at thar fimple fupper, atid were fo afi aid, ihould fhe talk about her fon, that they fliruld betray themfelves, that their very fears aimoft divefted them of the caution they tried to obferve, Lucy, trembling left her mother, Ame¬ lia, or Milly, fhould begin to fpeak of her brother, talked on indifferent matters with a vivacity and per fe- veranee that \i was eafy to fee was forced ; while Althea, incapable of any aftual exertion, fat in aimoft torpid de¬ fpondence—fometimes looking at Mrs. Marchmont with eye» filling with tears; then catching herfeif indulging fo ufeLfs a weaknefs, flie complained of being unwell, of having a cold in her head, and made that an excufe for retiring more early than ufual to her bed. Mt\
Mrs. Marchmont, as well as her elded ,\nd youngeft daughter, obferved that fomething had vexed her; but the idea oí fome unkind mcflage from Lady Dacres piechuled all fai ther enquiry. This artificial and deaily pure haled calm couki not, as Lucy now reeol- lded, laii long; for, not to live cnurely without intelligence of what was going on, yet to avoid the expence of a daily paper, Mrs. Marchmont took one in that was weekly pubiifhed in the county, and carried round every Saturday by an itinerant newfman. In this paper the events that had fo recently happened at Toulon would un¬ doubtedly be detailed, and every diftrefs whicii by the concealment of March¬ mont's letter they hoped to fave the mind of his mother, would thus fud¬ denly be inflicted on it. To know, as flic did, that her ion was at Toulon at the period of fuch general danger, and not to know wheth-r he efcaped with ? 4 the
the Englifh, gave hardly lefs occafion for anguifh and terror than what was already known about him. After fome confideration, therefore, Lucy deter- mined to receive the paper herfclf fiom the man, and to fay to her mother that it had mifled coming, as had foinetimc.s accidentally happened before. This was not attended with much difficulty, and thus was obtained another week of refpite; but it was a week of rather in¬ creafed mifery to Althea and to Lucy, who dreaded left each perfon they faw approach the door ihould prove to be fome one who mig'ht relate the current news as a matter of entertain¬ ment ; and as another Saturday drew near, their uncertainty how to act and their dread of the event increaftd. On the day, however, preceding ihat, the poft brought a letter to Ahhea, who faw, with breathlefs folicitude, that it was directed and fealed by Mr. Ever¬ fley. Totally unable to open it, ihc fat down
down trembling, and bade Lucy, who was but little more capable of doing it than herfelf, break the fcal. Scarce had fhe done fo, when fhe exclaimed— ** There is a letter from my brother!— Thank God!—he is alive then—he has cfcaped !" " For God's fake, look at the date!" faid Ahhea. " Before we rejoice, let us fee at what time and from whence he writes." <; It is dared above ? fortnight later than the laft," exclaimed Lucy: theft running over a few words, fhe added, though aimoft inarticulate with joy— '* Oh í Heaven be prai fed, deareft, deareft Akhea, he has efcaped !—he is not in danger from his wound! —We fliall fee him again —Our brother! the heft, the deareft, kindeft . . . ."—Her voice totally failed ; and Althea, havin* gathered courage from this beginning, collected her agitated fpirits to read as follows: ? 5 LET-
LETTER. " From the contents of my laft letter ? is probable my dear Everfley has given me up. I know what his friendly and affectionate heart will feel in hear¬ ing I am in a place of prefent fafety ; and though it is difficult to fay, in the actual ftate of the continent, when I ihail be fo fortunate as once more to revifit my native land, my friend will be glad to know I do not defpair of it ; he will rejoice to have fuch tidings to communicate to my family, who, if he has imparted to them the fituation in which (with perhaps a too great ten¬ dency to defpond) I defcribed myfelf, will be recalled from the moft wretched fufpenfe, if not anguiih, to hope and life—for it is but too certain, that the life of my mother depends on that of her fon. — Ah! may his be dedicated to» render the reft of it, if not happy (it is
is a word we have no bufinefs with), at leaft comfortable. " But let me equally avoid defpond- ence and prefumption, and avail my¬ felf of this fliort interval of eafe and tranquillity to give you as clear a nar¬ rative as I can of the ftrange things I have feen—of the hair-breadth efcape I have had from a violent death. " If you do not already know the particulars, and have any curiofity to enquire, the little hillory of myfelf (till 1 reached an obicure cabaret in the very centre of the Bourbonnois) is in the hands of my mother. I go on then to relate what happened to mc, when, after having remained there unmolefted fome days, [ again renewed my journey, fometimes on a hired horfe, fometimes taking an occafional affiftance from the vehicles of the peafantry, but ftill oftener on foot, towards the houfe of my venerable relation de Lave.gnac, fituated in a mountainous country, about ? ? three
three leagues weftward of Toulon— fo that I had aimoft half France to traverfe. On my way to that place, I fliall ha\ c to relate lefs what f fuffered than what I thought. My Everfley is not, I think, ofthat defcription of men who meafure the confequence of opinions by the fituation of thofe who offer fuch opi¬ nions ; nor will he wonder if the vi¬ ciffitudes of my life, fliort as it has been, and the knowledge that adverfity has given me of mankind, fhould have taught me a habit of reflefting—a habit which, when once acquired, helps the poffeffor to diveft himfeif of the pre¬ judices (often deftruftive to happinefs, and never, that I can difcover, con¬ tributing to it) which arc with fomuch pain inculcated by rote at the beginning of our lives—as if the only ufe of me¬ mory were to affift mankind in getting rid of their reafon, and to fubRkute in its place fyftems which.the cunning have invented for the fubjection of the weak, « Do
u Do not imagine, however, my dear friend, Lhat I have any intention to plead in favour ofthat univerfal licence, that wild and impracticable fcheme of ge¬ neral equality, which has, within a few years, gained ground from the writings of vifionary fpeculatifts, and from the propenfity oi mankind to run into ex¬ tremes, and to pervert the beft general rules io the moft unworthy private pur¬ pofes. " Surety, my friend, I am not a mif¬ anthrope—Yet I own theit when 1 fee the follies, the wickednefs of the beings v/ith whom I am to aci, J am unavoid¬ ably led to enquire wherefore the great Author of the Univcrfe has peopled this planet with animals fo worthlefs and fo wretched;—creatures who, while their reafon feems to have been wholly in¬ adequate to the purpofe of procuring for them a moderate fnare of content, have mifufed the other lights lent to them,
them, fö as to make them new fources of perfecution and of mifery. You will tell me 1 have read Swift, Vol¬ taire, and Rouifeau, with too much ap¬ probation.—Alas! my dear friend, look at aimoft every man you know, in the decline of life; fee how fad is their ex¬ iftence, and you will be compelled to acknowledge, that when I fay human- creatures are fooliih, wicked, and un¬ happy, my eft imate is but too juft. " But in a world thus peopled, a man, as foon as he emerges from in¬ fancy, finds himfeif without any confent of his own ; and, whether he likes his ftation or no, he muft abide in it.------ It feems therefore to be true wifdom, early to learn to live as eafily as we can, though to hve happily is (as í think we foon difcover) out of the queftion.—In my cafe, for example : fo far from being allowed to live in any way with eafe, I am aimoft denied tha privilege
privilege of living ai all; at leaft, it does not feem that European cardi will per¬ mit me to exift on its furface ! " From my own country, whieh every man, and I think particularly every Englifliman, is taught to love and vene¬ rate as foon as he can lifp its name, from my t natale folum' I am driven by the perfecutions of a miferable wretch whom they call an attorney ;—a fellow ftained by every vice—the difgrace of his fpecies—who lives in the conftant violation of thofe laws which are the boaft and glory of Britons—but which, by fomc ftrange abufe (by all complained of, nay execrated—by none attempted to be remedied), are made the fliield under which robberies are committed, rather than the fword by which they are punifhed. For this glaring deled, oc- cafioning more extended and incalcu¬ lable mifery than any of the fenfelefs perverfions of mankind (except only the madnefs of war), there is, it feems, no remedy !
remedv !— Nonei —for nothing muft ?? changed; and though individuals among the majority of villains w r ho plunder under the mafks of attorneys are now and then punifhed, no radical cure can be adminiflered to the mafs of this cry¬ ing evil—for it m«iy be injurious to the fandity of the laws.-^-----Oh ! never then let fuch laws be boafted of!------If a phy¬ fician were to tell me tbat the medicine he was going to adminifter for the cure of a cold, could only be conveyed through the medium of a poifoned ve¬ hicle, which might fubjcd mc to long years of lingering torture, and deftroy me at laft, fhould I not entreat him to difpenfewith my taking hisprefcription ? Yet this is precifely what happens, when a lucklefs man is advifed, as ihe only means of redrefs againft injuries, to ap¬ ply to the laws of his country. < It is an afllairwhich from the very nature of it ean only be fettled by Chancery/ fays my Counfcllor; ' younuaft apply to that court
court undoubtedly ; yet I own I can hardly advife it, for the cofts and time will be immenicV—' Calculate/ fay I, « the cofts, and the time.'—* Why,' re¬ turns my friend, * as to the cofts, it is not eafy to fay what thev may amount to among fo many parties : and then, as for the eime, it will be at leaft three terms, but more likely^ /ζ,ν, nine, twelve, or fif¬ teen, before your adverfaries will put in their anfwers; and if they are hoftile, why it may be three or Jour years ; and then your bill muft be amended per¬ haps: and then, if any of the parties die among the three-and-twenty indi¬ viduals whom you muft make parties (people of all ages, from the old man of fcventy-five to an infant born laft week), why in that cafe, you know, you will have all the bufinefs to besoin over atrain, * Not knowing, however, what clfe to do, after every other attempt fails which I have made to accommodate the affair, I venture into this labyrinth, and I en- g a S c
gag** a man who calls himfeif a Solicitor in Chancery, to draw up my bill; and a learned Chancery Law) er (a Special Pleader, I believe;, to fettle it. This done, and a heavy charge incurred, I defire in all humility to read it, and find it not only devoid of common íeiú'e, but going in no one point to my meaning, or to the truth ; while the compofition appears to me to be abfolutely nonfenfe. I objeft very much to this, and fay, that where I am to appear before the Chancellor of Great Britain as his orator, I don't at all like to prate like a dri¬ veller—That it feems to me an infult to talk, before the greateft law officer, ftuff that for falfehood and folly would be fcouted in a company of haberdafh- ers and toymen. I am anfV,ered wuh great indignation, that all bills in Chan¬ cery are nonfenfe —That it is the euftom to make them fo, and that they are better underflood. Such a pofition being in- comprehenfible, and adding to the le- pugnancc
pugnance with which I fet out, 1 defire to ftay proceedings. My learned Chan¬ cery Lawyer allows me to do fo, becaufe he begins to fufped that my money and my patience may equally be at an end before I have gone another ftep in this bleffed pilgrimage: hut he fends me in his bill, and, to convince me that in Chancery as well as in ahnoft every thing elfe * e'efi ie premier pas qui coute* he prefents me with a charge of only feventy pounds. It is impoffible for me to pay it—and he detains all the papers he had got into his hands on pre¬ tence of feeking redrefs for me------it being, it feems, a rule for lawyers never to reftore papers till they are paid, though they have volunteered in the caufe, and though the very detention of thefe documents may be in itfelf a greater evil than they undertook to cure, and may prevent its ever being cured at all.------Oh ! my friend, after even this iketch of a cafe which has aãualíy
aftualty happened to me, which I know** happens to thoufands, and is not by many degrees the moil injurious trick of thefe legal banditti — where is the Englifliman (not himfeif a lawyer) who can venture to make the proud boaft that the law in his country is the pal¬ ladium of liberty, and the protc6lor of property ? War, earthquake, peftilence, famine, tempeft, all the calamities of this feeft of all poffible worlds, which we pray againft in the liturgy, do not, I am con¬ vinced, occafion more anguifh to £ the poor creature of the earth,* than thefe îoctifb, which we ourfelves arm with ftings and claws—becaufe it is the euf¬ tom. (< Don't wonder at this long differta- tîon —I ftill fmart under the feftcring feratches of one of thefe fiends; and even in Svvitzeiiand, the loveiieft, once the happieft fpot of Europe, I faw in the \e\y few days I have this time been in it, a poor family literally de¬ fim ν cd
ftroycd by a procureur. The fame ob¬ noxious profeflionai men are accufed by the French nobility of having been the caufe of, and chief gainers hiy the revo¬ lution; u hich in truth T believe, as I think no other fet of * .¿pie could have done Co much mifchief, brought down fuch miferies on a great nation, or turned what might have been comforts and bleffings into plagues and curfes. Of thefe reptiles, therefore, it may be faid, they are like the vifitations of Pharaoh·; and of our own country efpecially, quoting a line of a great modern poet, we may fay, * And the land ftank, fo numerous »vas the fry,* " And now I will for the prefent ceafe to fpeak of thefe authorifed fcalp- ers — thefe difturbers of the living, who prey even upon thofe that are no more— «* Cruel as deatbj »nd hungry a« the grave.' 1 «Ahl
"Ah!" exclaimed Lucy, half fob¬ bing a.s ihe read over Althéa's fhoulder, " how fad were the fenfations, how bit¬ ter the recollections of my poor brother when he wrote thus !" *' Let us, however," faid Althea, from whofe mind the mo it dreadful weight feemed to be removed—'* let us, my Lucy, rejoice that he lived to write it ; and we will try, my dear girl, thank¬ fully to calm our fpirits to follow the reft of a narrative to us fo interefting."
CHAP.
CHAP. IIL
........ la mauvaife fortune avoît dé]a flétri fon coeur; l'ddverluê et le mépris avoicm abattu fon cornas; et fa Herté, changée en depu amer, ne lui montrait que I'nijuitice et la dureté des hommes.
ALTHEA and Lucy proceeded then to read the natrative oí Marchmont: " It was the middle of September when I fet forward alone írom the aiylum I had for fome days found in the Bourborinoîs, but which I dared no longer truft, for three national foldiers from the fouih fuddenly appeared; and though 1 happened to be wandering m the
the fields during their fhort vifit, I found from my hoft, on my return, that they only preceded a company of Mar- feillois who were going to Paris, and I eafily conceived that my ftay was no longer fafe either for the old man or myfclf. I lc r t him not diffatisfied with me; and I knew that, whatever he fuf¬ pefted, it w v as not his intereft, and did not feem to be in his nature, to betray me. " With my haverfack on my back, I fet out at eight o'clock of a warm and mild evening, taking no other precau¬ tion than to avoid the high-roads, by which the perfons I defired to efcape from direfted their march» Though I knew nothing of the country, it was not difficult to do this where there are few incîofures, and the villages are thinly fcattered among the mountainous tracks planted with vineyards, or fhadowed with extenfive woods of fweet chef n ut, affording at once fhelter and food to the
the formerly contented, though poor in¬ habitants. " It was in a deep recefs of one of thefe woods that I flept on the firft night of my pilgrimage; my knapfack forming my pillow, and the fallen leaves of the preceding year my mattrefs.—Were I a foldier, how much worfe might I have fared!—I awaked ¿efreihed with the earlieft dawn of the morning, and fol¬ lowed an obfcure path leading through a yet wilder line of country, which feemed to have been made by the wood¬ cutters, and whicb ï knew muft conduft me to fome habitation. After walking about four miles, Ì found myfelf near a few featteied houfes ; and addreffing my¬ fclf to a vigneron, who was cutting τ * ci fpars at hks door, I aiked for fuch re¬ freihment as his cottage afforded; for which I ? ife red to pay. " The man made none of thofe quef¬ tions which, in a more populous diftrict, might have compelled me to exert my Vol. IV. i> ingenuity
ingenuity at the expence of my veracity·; but bade me walk in, and called his wife to fet before me what flic had, which was chefnut-bread, figs, and eggs. Did I not fare fumptuoufly?—My friendly vigneron appeared to be one of thofe honeft fimple creatures that walk ftraightonwardin their humble path, and preferve their peace by looking neither to the right nor the left.—I fat eating my vegetable meal on the turf feat at his door, fhaded by a great elm older than the cottage, which it aimoft inclofed in its green arms; and faw him reclining at its foot, fhaping, with care, the fpars he had been cutting to anfwer fome purpofe in his vineyard. I re¬ marked his open unthinking forehead, on which the few fcattered locks were mingled with grey, but where care feemed to have nothing to do with the ftrong funburnt lines ; and I enquired of myfelf, if fuch a being was not to be envied?—He, faid I, meditates nothing about
about Revolutions—he hardly under- ftands the term. Under the old go¬ vernment he worked hard;—the new one has made to him (fortunate man!) no fenfible change: he ftill works hard for the daily bFead he eats. He has heard that mafs is abolifhed—that the religion of his country is annihilated ; but his religion confifted merely in one fimple and uniform^routine of the duties neceffary to enable his family to exift from one week to another. It was four leagues from his cabin to the ncarcil chapel, and it was not of late years worth the while of the rich poffeffors of the neighbouring benefices to fend or to come among the inhabitants of thefc five fmall cabins ín the extremity of the Bourbonnois, on the very edge of a mountainous traci of the moun¬ tainous Auvergne. ÍC Is it good then to be fuch a being? When I reflecl on the vice, the folly of cultivated, of poliihcd life, I am ready d 2 to
to anfwer, that it is; but Rofalind's* remark recurs to me.-—« It were then good to be a poft!'-— I hefitate, and confider whether a human being, no more enlightened, rifes as many degrees as he ought to do in the fcale of intel¬ ligent creatures defigned to be « ? ----- on ]y lower thaa the angels;* and finally, whether Ì would exchange my fenfibility, (I hate the worcl, it is fo proftituted) though you have told me, and I have fometimes thought, I pof¬ feffed aimoft a morbid degree of it, for the calm ftupor of ignorance, for the ftagnating content of an animal who in the human form is, in intelledual rank, hardly fuperior to the cattle no drives a-field ! " I decide, that I would not exchange my fenfe of exiftence for his; yet I * Rolalmd in ς As You Like It.' think
think there can be no doubt but that his is the happier. f< Are you tired of my fpeculations ? I hope not ; for I told you rny relation for fome time was rather to be of what I thought than of what I luffered. " I had a fmall map of France with me, I mean as it was, for the divifion into eighty-one departments puzzles and perplexes mc—1 took it out to con¬ fider which way I fhouid turn. " I found, in confequence of the queftions I afked, that there vvere two roads at my option, without purfuing the immediate road to Toulon; one lay eaftward through Auvergne, but it was a great circuit for one who was probably to journey aimoft entirely on foot : the other, which was indeed ftill farther from the fpot where I was, would lead me through a fmall angle of the ci- devant Burgundy into Dauphiné, from whence I might make my way to the> fhore of the Mediterranean eaftward of n 3 Toulon.
·' Toulon. You will not recollect why I was compelled to prefer either of thefe to the ufuai route, unlefs I remind )ou of the ftate of Lyons at that period.— Not only that unhappy town, but eveiy ¿ìaìuk route that lay in a direct com¬ munication, it was abfolutely neceflary for fo equivocal a charafter as I was to avoid. " Having at length made my election, and determined to pafs through Au¬ vergne, I fct out once more alone on foot, and, foon buried among the wild mountains and deep defiles of its eaftern boundary, I travelled for fome days, faring very hardly; for cottages were thinly fcattered, and the only two cha¬ teaux I iaw í forbore to approach.— The weather was now extremely warm, and í found myfelf too much fatigued to proceed in this way much farther ; nor was it dcfirablc to appear entirely like a wandering fugitive. 1 was there¬ fore glad to meet with a fbit oi itineiant merchant
merchant of aimoft every commodity, either of neceffity or finery, to French peafants, who had juft received a cargo of goods, whit h he was now going to fell, againft the clofe of the vintage, among the lotie villages of Auvergne, G uienne, and Provence. His only af¬ fociate was a boy of nine or ten years old; and I found, on talking to him, that, if he could meet a companion he could depend upon, he fhould ^e rather îelievcd by travelling forne .t better guarded againft accidents than he had been the preceding year, when he had been robbed, and narrowly efcaped with bib life, in a foreft of the Limoufin. I know not what prejudiced him in my favour; but after I had been two days with him upon fu ff e ranee, he propofed to me to continue in his company, and to leheve him and the boy in driving their cart occafionally; while at other times I ihould take my turn to be Gon~ ve\ ed in it. d 4 u Though
56* *'????????. " Though I forefaw that this muft oblige me to go fome leagues out of my way, yet the fcheme ( ffercd ίο many, advantages that I dofed with it; telling him, however, that when we came to Lodeve, iu Languedoc, I ihould be compelled to leave him, as I was going to the neighbourhood of Montpelhei. My new friend was, as well as my honeft Vigneron, one of thofe uie fui but un¬ reflecting beings, who, entirely occupied by their own affairs, look no farther. His fole care was, whether the new order of things would, when the government was fettled, affect his trade, et β it Jera toujours également bien fes affair«. — He told me how much money he had gained by his traffic in the fpace of nme yeirs, and delcribed his little menage, the comforts of which had been greatly in¬ terrupted by his eldeft fon, a youth of feventeen, who till then ufed to travel w th him, having been put in requi¬ fition : he was himfeif, he faid, too old f«>.
for a foldier. He did not much under¬ ftand what all ihe tapage was about, for, notwithftanding the pains taken to en¬ lighten the people of the country, mere aie parts ο? it where thb ill u mina mil makes its way very incompletely.— Aus! the tli 'ant flames lend bui a lurid a,id glaring hght, a.id only ferve to fcorch and to dt ftro) İ '' Sue h a man was, however, much better adapted to my purpofes, than a more intelligent or more informed fel¬ low-traveller; and I endeavoured to in- creale the confidence he feemed fo fud¬ denly f ? place m me. I bore mv own expences, which were not very heavy in luch a mode of uavellmff *, and in a week we had proceeded about thirty leagues, every day more and more con¬ tent with each other. He had no fuf¬ picion that I was an Englifliman. Nay, hii notion of what an Englifliman might he was altogether vague and confuied. He only knew that the French and r> ^ Enghih
Englifh were often at war together; that he had a brother and two uncles who were either killed by them, or died in the armies ferving againft them; but where thefe hoftile people lived, or whe¬ ther they were Tuiks or Jews, he was not veiy clear, though he had heard from the prieft who had the care of his confeience and his wife's, ihat they were heretics, and wouid infallibly go to the Devil. He knew, however, that Us faifitent bien leurs affaires ici bas, for he had gained a great deal of money by felling knives, fciffars, watch-chains, buckles, and many other fuch articles, the manufacture of thefe remote people; and he regretted that the new order of ihings had put an entire ftop to his com¬ merce in that line; which, together with his being compelled to take all pay¬ ments in affignats, that eveiy day be¬ came more and more depreciated in their value, gave him a fufpicion, that lhe new order of things was lefs favour¬ able
able to him than the old. His wife, he faid, was furious againft the Patriotes, and that ihe had incurred great riik of being denounced to the Municipality of the diftrict; but her fon\s being forced to the army, and his own authority, who had infifted on her ftifling her opinions, had hitherto kept them unmolefted in their houfe: ' Eu aprh tout, Monfieur,* faid he —* pourquoi nous perdrons nous pour une difference d'opinion? — (¿iCefi-ce que tout eel a me fut, pourvu que je f offe io ????? bun m>'s affaires*?* —I had feen aimoft enough to think as I faid, when I anfwercd— f Mon ami, tu as rai font.* t( If his re ficelions troubled himfeif or me but little, mine were not ίο eafily fubdued.—Alas! how often did they
d 6
return
return towards England, and the dear family I had left there! How often did I afk when, or if ever, I fliould be re¬ ftored to them, and the liberty, which alone I coveted, of b> tattling in peace and fecurity my native air. " We had now traverfed Auvergne, and, continuing on theeaftern boundary of Guienne. Caule f for ίο was my ami du voyage called) had fome debts to re¬ ceive at the town of Se verac, that were likely io detain him a day or iwo; but he was impatient to be ùnjìalle, at Pc- zenas, on a certain day, when there was to be a fair, at which he ufually made confiderable profit. As he could travel on his little bidet mut h quicker than with his caravan, and as he had by this time the moil aflured reliance on my integrity and care, he defired I would go flowly on, accompanied by the boy, with his moveable warehoufe ; and he would himLlf overtake us in a day or two. « We
< c We proceeded, therefore, from Sc- verac to the banks of the Tarn, which î failed not to apoftrophife— * Tarn! how delightful flow thy wil!ow*d wave*!* but I loft the refponfive rhyme, in being compelled to change the next line for— * But, ah! they fruílity a land of—Lunatics.' " At St. Rome, where we refted half a day, I ftrolled into the Church, an old, gloomy, gothic building, the firft 1 had examined fince í left Pans. ** There had been foldicrs quartered in it occafionally, as ihey p »fled through (he town ; and aimoft every part of its fur¬ niture as a íacred edifice had been car¬ ried away. It had alfo been made ufe ufas a fort of workfhop for the women, who were employed, either voluntarily or by requifition, to make tents and military clothing: but now it was quite dcfcried
deferted and empty ; and as by the di- minifhed light of evening I caft my eyes along the arched avenues and dilapi¬ dated choir, now vocal no more, I thought t had never before felt a more painful fenfation than thishalf-demolifhed church impreffed on my mind.—I lif¬ tened to the wind that fighed round the maffy pillars, till I could aimoft have perfuaded myfeif the difturbed fpirits of the dead murmured, from the ruined fe- pulchres on each fide, maledictions againft the barbarous intruders ; and that ' ........... the gloomy aJie«* Black, ptailer'd, and hung round with fhrcds of 'fcutcheons, And tatter'd coats of arms, fent bai. ? the found Laden with heavier airs from the low vaults And manfions of the dead Ì' " Nor could I think without a mix¬ ture of indignation and regret, how often I had fcen fuffering humanity re¬ lieved
Iieved by pouring out its forrows at the foot of thofe altars which were now le¬ velled with the duft; and how many folitary pilgrims, who now dared not enter the violated walls, I ufed to ob¬ ferve aiking, in thefe fanduartes, either the forgivenefs, or the bleffings of Heaven. " It may be urged, that many of the perfons who were formerly to be feen from morning till night, in the churches of Roman Catholic countries, proftrate before the image of a favourite faint, or fitting or kneeling in fome obfcure cor¬ ner, loft to the world and abforbed in penitence and prayer, were guilty of negleding their families, and of a finful wafte of the time which would have clothed and fed them.—This may be true. But, alas! many of thefe poor creatures were of thofe, who en earth had neither relatives nor children to love, nor any focial duties to fulfil.—Ah! who that has ever feit or dreaded that cold atid dreary vacancy of the heart, can
can help lamenting, that in thefe afyhims of penitence and piety the folitary mourner, whom the world deferís, finds no longer a relief by pouring out his forrows before his God, and contem¬ plating the reprefentations given by hu¬ man art of the fufferings of the Saviour of the World, by whofe merits thefe poor and defolate children of affliction look forward to a future ftate of retri¬ bution! " Impreffed with thefe melancholy thoughts, I proceeded on my journey. We paffed the river Sorgue the next day; and as 1 walked flowly on a bye road that was not far fiom the banks of the ftream, I faw a chateau which ex¬ cited my curiofity, becaufe it appeared to be entirely deferted, and becaufe it reminded me of Eaftwoodleigh. I had time enough before me, and approached it. The fituation, on a tiling giound embofomed in trees, and on one fide looking towards high and varied moun¬ tains,
tains, was fingulariy beautiful; but, when I entered the houfe, I found that it was, as í had imagined, quite without in¬ habitants, in many places the croifees had loft their glafs, and no furniture remained. The doors were ail open— fome fallen from their hinges; and no living creature appeared to cxift within its walls, fave a bat or two (which I 'nad probably difturbed by my intrufion at that eaily hour of the morning, for it was before fun-rife) flitting through the high vacant apartments. The dead filence of this forfaken man¬ fion was chilling and depreffive, the beauty of the fite made its defertion feem the more to be regretted ; and though 1 was ignorant even of the names of the former poffeffors of the place, I felt difpofed to lament them as if they had been my friends î * f I wandered into the garden; it had been laid out in the Englifh tafte, or what
what the French confider as fuch, but fo long negieded, that the trees were run into wildnefs, preferable perhaps in point of beauty to their more re¬ gular ftate. Towards the extremity, the cedars, cy prelles, bay and Portugal laurels were grown into an aimoft im¬ penetrable ihade. I made my way among them—till the river broke fud¬ denly upon me, brightening in the fun now juft rifen above the horizon.— Little were the fenfations of my mind refpondent to this burft of brilliancy!— I followed a graffy path that led along the river's edge, half hid by weeping willow. Trout were fpringing from the cryftai waves, which wet e indeed io clear that I could diflmguifh every pebble at the bottom, and every minnow that wandered among them. The path I was in was terminated bv a fort of fummcr-houfe of lattice-work, and the treillage vzith which it was covered wo s the
the paffion ílowcr*, now in luxuriant bloom, fpangling with its large and ra¬ diant ftars the dark pal mated leaves that embowered every part of the lattice, and hung in elegant feftoons from the window*, which looked immediately down ?? the water, while the odorous flowers were * W*i\mg their fweetnefs on the defert aa.' " I fat down in this arbour of fra* granee, and liftened to the rippling of the current. Λ fpot more calculated for the indulgence of the moft delicious vifions can hardly be imagined, and I, alasi am but too prone to indulge them« For awhile the ùd fpirit of pre¬ fentiment yielded to the beauty of the place. E\ils, whether real or appre¬ hended, u hich might well 1 bhede evciy f.owcr, and da·ken every green/
were,
were, for a fhort moment, fufpended. I faw myfelf in fuch a fcene with one, who alone of all the world would make me happy in any, and who would herfelf feel and delight in the beauties of a fpot fo lovely— ' Je la vo)ois partout, entre les fleurs et Sa veidurej* and I was loft in a dream of Elyfium, from which I felt it a fort of outrage to be recalled, as I foon was by the voice of the boy, who was alarmed by my ñay. " Slowly and reludantly I rejoined him; and as it was not eafy to recall my thoughts from the place, I enquired if he knew to whom it had belonged, and why it was deferted. The boy knew nothing ; but at a little cabaret on the edge of a vineyard about a league far¬ ther, 1 heard, on afking the fame quef¬ tion, that it had been the property of a ct-dcvant Duke, but for many years preceding
preceding the Revolution had been rented by Englifh families. " Afterwards^ as I journeyed on, I recolledcd that Sterne, in one of his letters, talks of a houfe he inhabited on the banks of the Sorgue, where, in a pavilion, they might fifh for trout from the windows. This, perhaps, was the very refidence he defcnbed.—Alas! how 7 changed, fince his animated pen de- piOed it, are all but the local charms of this country ! " This change had, fince I entered Guiennc, gradually become more vi¬ fible ; and many forfaken dwellings, as well as that I had left, had brought manv fad recollcdions to my mind. " There was then a time when an Englifliman, diivcn like me from his own country either by his own impro¬ vidence or the wicked perfecution of others, might have found here fuch an afylum as would have left him but little to regret; for who, that was not rooted by
by the moft obftinate prejudices to the foil, would hefitate to prefer this lovely climate, and this lovely country, even though he muft quit all the fociety he has been ufed to (and indeed focietv of all forts), to the fummer verdure and boafted freedom of England—when on the other fide of the account he may fee through the country fogs, bailiffs and attorneys dogging him, and a not very diftant view of a prifon for life ter- minating the profpeft? Whoever has had, as a diftreffed man, much to do with the money-getting and money-faving part of the Britifh nation, will not talk in a very elevated ftrain of its liberal minds and noble fpirits iu e\ r - clufion of all others. That there are many among them who are, though very high in the commercial, as eminent in the moral world, is undoubted; but for the bulk of thofe who have been brought up over account-books to confider mo¬ ney as the firft good, I know not if any country
country has lefs to boaft of as to their genuine liberality and enlargement of mind than England. " it can as little be denied, that no where is he who is ftruggling to rife, or he who has fallen from his rank, kept down with more inveterate malignity, more over-bearing pride, than m Eng¬ land.—There it is, that he who is once able to make a figure, and is efleemed neh, fees all the crimes forgotten by which he became fo. There the pro¬ fligate penfioner, the titled parafite, the plunderer of his own country or of any other, and even the private robber who has addrefs enough to rob within the pale of the law, is not only tolerated but refpefted. Let every man who is compelled to leave his native land re¬ collect all this, and leave behind him prejudices and local attachments that make a great part of the miferies of life. " Oh, Everfley! my imagination, to which you have often told me I too much
much give the reins—my imagination reprefents to me how happy, how fu- premely happy 1 could be in fuch a place as I have juft defcribed, with my family—with.......Ah! dear and cruel remembrance !—It feemed made for the retreat of ihofe who have lefs tafte for the artificial pleafures of the world, than for the fimple unwearying delights that nature fo bountifully offers in a climate like this. Might not the loveiieft and moft elegant of minds have here been content, nay happy, in her favourite purfuits; and have found '........ uch amends For a loil world in folitude and love?* u But I wander wildly indeed from my narrative, to whicii it is more than time tp recall my pen, though I have very little to fay till I reached Lodeve, where I took a reluftant leave of my Marchand de Balle, to whofe accommodation I had
had been obliged for protedion and con¬ veyance during near three weeks, and for a journey of above feventy leagues. We parted, well fatisfied with each other. I had ftill a long and hazardous route before me; and, from the hourly ob¬ fervations I made, 1 found that the ri ík I had already run was nothing in com¬ panion of that I muft probably en¬ counter before I could reach the re¬ fidence of my venerable relation De Lavergnac, of whofe fafety every thing I now heard and faw made me enter¬ tain a thoufand doubts. " Towards the troubled fcene into which, fiom motives of gratitude and affedion, I w r as determined to throw my í elf, I looked not with fear, for to me life feemed every day lefs and lefi> defirable, but with the-fame kind of icludance (though heavier) that I uíed to feel, when I have been compel¬ led to quit the country to attend in London, on bufinefs, the wretches who Vol. IV. e either
either perfecuted my poor father, or pretended, while they were entangling him the ????> to deliver him from per¬ fecution. I remembered how in my early youth I have waited for hours and days in the dark caverns of iniquity, called lawyers* chambers, where the very air feemed to be infected by the poifon of the reptiles who inhabited them, and where the regifters of the viftims they had devoured, or were devouring, were the only furniture of the walls. I remem¬ bered how, while χ? appeared to hften to their jargon, I often failed to compre¬ hend it; while my mind had fled back to the feenes I had left— feenes which I now indeed poffefs in idea only ; for Sir Ralph Gunftone and his emiifaries had touched them, and Robefpierre and his agentó are not more deftruftive and *nore cruel. " To places where thefe latter had earned death and defolation, I however 'bent my courfe; much doubting, as I approached
approached Lavergnac, whether I was not too late to be of the leaft ufe to the poor old Baron, who could hardly, I thought, have remained there unmo- lefted, even if he had fubmitted (whicb I did not believe probable) to temporize with the ruffians he could not refift. " As alone I traverfed a mountainous and woody traft, through which the uver Gardon wanders to meet the Rhone, I felt the cruel contrail between the delicious quiet and independence I feemed here to enjoy, and the miferies that awaited me where my fpecies, and even my countrymen, were collefted in the fad talk of defence againft vio¬ lence, or the wretched one of offence towards others: for, from wdiat I had lately learned on my way, I found Toulon was in poffeffion of the Englifh, and I thought highly probable what 1 afterwards found to be true, that if De Lavergnac yet lived, he had fled thi¬ ther." e 2 \t
At this moment the friends were in¬ terrupted by Amelia Marchmont, who came in exceffive agitation to tell them, that the farmer, of whom her mother rented the houfe, had juft been to re¬ ceive his monthly rent ; and fitting down to profe in the fort of half-intelligent way that fuch men generally taik in, he had told her with ftrange circumftances, which it was difficult to credit, of the evacuation of Toulon, fuch as it had been related in a country paper which he had juft feen. To this man the 'fcene was remote, and the intereft weak ; for he confidered only how it might, by prolonging the war, prolong or increafe the taxes he already grumbled to pay. Of Mrs. Marchmont's fenfations he had no conception; nor could he imagine why, having eagerly feized on the firft word he had uttered about Toulon, flie had liftened in breathlefs filence to the .report he made from the newfpaper, growing pale and paler as he proceeded, till
till fhe fell back lifelefs in her chair. The farmer then rang the bell for help ; and Mrs. Marchmont was but juft re¬ ftored to life when Lucy, and with her Althea, hurried to relieve and confole ber*
* 3 CHAP.
CHAP. IV.
Quel traits me préfentent vo» failes, Impitoyables conquérans? Des vœux outrés, des projets vaftes, Des Rois vaincus par des tyrans; Des murs que la ßamme ravage, Des vainqueurs fumans de carnage.
WHAT happinefs to Althea, as well as to the fifters of Marchmont, to be enabled to reftore his mother to. hope, and indeed to hfe, by fhewing her the letter, which affured, beyond a doubt, his fafety ! As foon as they had gone through the preceding pages of his letter, and by that means convinced Mrs. Marchmont that
that he was, when- he wrote it, in fo much fecurity, as to be able to reflect calai ty on, ?? well· as to relate difijnftly, the circumftances of his paft danger; her owia good fenfe and tblicitude to hear the reft, affifted her to compofe her fpirits, and ihe Ufieoed ???????, though» fik&tiy, to>tbe fe^uei of has letter. Continuation of Marchmont's Letter. ' f Affcçç fomß peril«, and a peat deal of fatigue,, I aurivedat what wa^ ???? the Chateau 4e Lavergnac. ·* You ???? heard me fay h was never a very iaçge ο? fplendid ftructure, for it was built by the fon of that Marchmont who, preferring his loyalty to his coun¬ try, was an exile, or, as we ihould now fay, an emigrant with James the Second ; and who was infinitely more fortunate than moft of the followers of that un- E 4 happy
happy prince by marrying an heirefs of Languedoc, and being in favour with the French monarch ! But though the houfe, lefs magnificent than commodious, rather refembied the old-faihioned but comfortable manfion of an Englifh coun¬ try gentleman of moderate fortune, than the feat of a French nobleman, it was, when I had \ ifited it before, a refidence wbich might have fatisfied any man not extremely faftidious; and the baftide that belonged to it, contained every thing that could create plenty and convenience in a country eftablifhment. The vine¬ yards around it produce wine of a re¬ markably excellent quality; and olives, capers, oranges, and white mulberries, formed the boundaries of the enclo-* fures. " In fome, the great American aloe gave a new and fingular feature to the landfcape, while it formed an admirable fence ; and firs, pines, and chefnuts, fhaded
íhaded and mitigated the glow of the too rich and luxurious fcenery. ·* Such was the place when I laft faw it—What it was now I will leave you to imagine as a proprietor of land, when I tell you it had been feized and fold as a national domain, to one who had formerly been a workman on the eftate. The man, probably becaufe he believed his tenure precarious, had turned every thing into prefent money. The houfe was without furniture—a part of it only was inhabited by a peafant and his fa¬ mily. The grounds which my venera¬ ble and worthy old friend had orna¬ mented and cultivated as much for his pleafure as his profits were now by their mercenary ufurper applied wholly to the latter purpofe. The particulars of this cruel de vaft ation I had no means, nor indeed any heatt, to enquire. It was not without great precaution, and many difficulties, that I learned the fate of the Baron and his family, which, as I believe e 5 you.
you know, confifted of the old Baron, hks only ion, and his grandfon, a young man of two-and-twenty, married in ninety-two to a young Swifs lady. "1 trembled as I at length heard their deftiny. Monfieur de Lavergnac had emigrated at the end of 1793. His fa¬ ther, the old Baron, and his fon, who was called the Chevalier dc Remiremont, remained at Lavergnac. The latter had quitted his regiment, of which a great part had emigrated, and thought he might be allowed to attend on the de¬ clining age of his grandfather, who took no part in public affairs from the mo¬ ment that he faw of how little ufe he could be, and who was fo univerfally beloved in his neighbourhood, that for the firft four years of the convulfions tliat fhook France he had remained re- fpeded and unmolefted. At his exprefs defire the engagement the Chevalier had made with Mademoifelle......., of Laufanne was completed. It had not long
long taken place when the fatai intelli¬ gence reached the Baron of the death of his fon in Germany, and he was in the fame week driven from his houfe. For fome time a faithful fervant, who had grown rich by his bounty, fhekered him; while the Chevalier and his wife endeavoured, at his earneft entreaties, to eft ape into Switzerland, and nothing has fince been heard of them. The Baron, laden with years and forrow, loft no part of his fortitude ; and he feemed to have been preferved by the particu¬ lar inteivention of Providence, till the period when Toulon being İn poffeffion of the Enghih, the venerable fugitive took refuge within its walls; and there he was ftill fuppofed to be when one of his old domett ics, to whom I made my¬ felf known, gave me this account. '' There I determined to feek him— though I dreaded a meeting, for what miiery had we not reciprocally to relate! But I hoped to be of ufc to him; to
fupply to him the fon he had loft, the grandion ^hom his tendernefs for this laft branch of his family had compelled vo confuit his own fafety. I obtained admittance then into the town, and mada myíèlf know r n to the Baron. I cannot defcribe our meeting; but he feemed ftill to encourage hope of better days, which I who was fo much younger dared hardly at that juncture entertain. The refpeft that the virtues and age of De Lavergnac had commanded, even from ferocious republicans, followed him. The Englifh fliewed him every attention their circumftances admitted; and as it was foon known who I was, and what had been my purpofe in paffing at fo great a hazard through France, I was noticed by the ? ri ti fli commanders, and placed in a commiflary's office, where,. if honeft men can rife in fuch employ¬ ments, I might perhaps have rifen to a more profitable poft. It was in fuch a hope I wrote to my mother; and while I flattered
I flattered myfelf that I might become ufeful to her and my family, I had the fatisfaftion of foothing the forrows of the veneiable Baron, and returning a part of thofe obligations I ow l ed him. ** Alas! this power and thefe hopes were but of ihort duration. You know the fatal cataftrophe at Toulon ! I will not attempt to defcribe a fcene, of which language muft fail in conveying an ade¬ quate idea. My grea":ft folicitude was to carry off my poor old friend to the Englifh fhips. In that I fucceeded; and having feen him fafe, I could not bear to remain inattive on board, while danger and death furrounded fo many of mv countrymen, and flill more the wretched inhabitants of the town that had received them. I went off, there¬ fore, again from the man of war to the ihorc with a party of failors, who were employed in delivering the unhappy people from the fury ot the republicans, and, what was ftill worfe, of the galley flaves*
flaves* I had the good fortune to help in faving, at leaft from immediate de- ftrudion, above twenty of thefe lucklefs victims ¡ and I was with the fame fet of active feamen returning a third time to the fliore, when our boat was blown out of the water by the explofion of one of the ihips. You remember that I was always a good fwimmer ; I was not wounded, though fo ftunned, that I think it muft havebeen atinute or two ! ? fore I recolleded myfelf, and made my way by fwimming to the ihorc, where I aimoft inftantly received a piftol fhot, and fell fenfelefs on the beach. The man who fired at me probably believed me dead ; a belief to which I undoubtedly owed my prefervation; for he in all likelihood went to wreak his vengeance in fume other quarter, and I found myfelf alone and bleeding on the fhore. The flames that were raging around, the groans of the dying, the fhrieks of the pri- foners, and the favage íhouts of triumph* recalled
recalled me to a confcioufnefs of my fituation. I tried to get up, though I knew that to efcape was impoffible, and that my death was inevitable; but when I would have arifen, I found myfelf fo weak from lofs of blood, and my clothes fo heavy with the water, that I was quite unable to ftand; I therefore crawl¬ ed towards a broken boat that lay a few yards farther, and, lying down beneath it, prepared, as well as the confufed ftate of my head would let me, for the death that awaited mc." Mrs. Marchmont, as well as her daughters, and Althea who had under¬ taken to read, all found themfelves too much affected at this paflage to be able to proceed for fomc time. The mother could not hear without agony of the danger her fon had been in, though cer¬ tain that he had finally cfcaped it. As foon, however, as they had all a little recovered themfelves, Lucy un¬ dertook
dertook to relieve the faltering, trem¬ bling Althea, and thus went on; Marchmonts Letter continued. * f The pain of my wound prevented my lofing all fenfe of my condition, as I think I fhouid otherwife have done from weaknefs arid lois of blood. 1 faw, amidft horrors which are not to be de¬ fcribed, the morning break, which I concluded was the laft I fhould ever fee. Soon after my fpirits gradually forfook me; I thought with anguifli on what my poor mother and my hilers wouid fuffer, when they fhould know that I was no more. ** One other perfon, and you, my dear long-tried friend, flitted befoie my departing fenfes. I murmured out an eternal adieu, and my laft pra) er was for the happineis of the fi x beings, who only were very dear to me on earth, and for
for whofe fake alone I regretted that ? was now to leave it. " I was unconfeious how long I lay in this ftate of ftupor,- but when I was recalled to fenfe, I found myfelf in a cart with three other bodies, which they were going to bury. I fpoke, or at leaft attempted it. The foldier who drove the cart lifted me up, and allied who I was ? I had not recollection enough to confider what it would be moil conducive tö my fafety to pafs for, and anfwered in a faint voice that I was» an Englifliman. " From nine out of ten among the people into whofe hands ï had fallen, it is certain that this anfwer, far from ferving as a proteciion, would have brought upon me a ftroke of the bayonet, which would have ended my life at once. But it happened that the man to whom I ipoke was an old invalid ; be had been a prifoner to the Englifh in the American war; had been cured of a wound
wound he received ia the adion; well treated, and exchanged as foon as h<a was abie to move. To this circum¬ ftance í owe ray life. The old foldier lememhered his own fituation, and pitied mine. My accent convmced him I was ???? I reprefented; and inftead of de* ftraying me he took ??? ?? a hcaafe* ajaja, ha¡vkig placed me on fome ftraw cm the Soor* and given me fome w ?? ??! water, wbich kemed to revive; røefb as that I could chftindly fpeak, he left me è® tbe care of a woman who did not feem fo humane as he was, and went ta Rnifh his moura futi bufinefs of burying the dead, proraiung to return as foon as he could, aoatd to bring or fend a furgeon. " The pain and weaknefs I endured again became exceflive ; and again I believed myfelf dying, and indeed wifh¬ ed to die rather than to linger, as feemed but too probable, in tortures for many days, only to periih at laft. The un^ common
conmion ftrength ©f my conftitution ftill refifted the complicated mifchiefs that had fallen upon me. It was not till. night that the friendly old foldier re¬ turned : he adminiftered all he could. with the greateft humanity, and himfeif extracted the ballet that was lodged be¬ tween my fhoulder and collar bone : but though it had not penetrated very deep*. his want of fkill put me to inconceivable torture, and the mufcies were fo torn ia tbe operation, that a great part of the danger I was afterwards in arofe from that circumftance. " If you ever received my former letter, you already know tbe imminent peril I was in during my imprifonment; for though I was at firft confidered as. a« Englifliman, one of the peafants who had feen me at Lavergnac when I was in fearch of the Baron, came into the corps that occafionally guarded the pri- foners; and this man depofed, that he knew me to be a relation of the Baron's, and
and a Frenchman. In confequence of which I fliould probably have died on the fcaffold with a number of other wretched viftims, if the young furgeon, of whom I fpoke in that letter, had not added to the friendly care by which he faved my life, the ineftimable bleffing of liberty which he contrived to give me at the utmoft rifle of perifhing in my place. I cannot help remarking, my friend, that while one fet of profeflionai men have occafioned to me all the mife¬ ries of my life (I mean men of the law), from thofe of another profeflion I have received the moil liberal kindnefs, the moil remarkable proofs of difinterefted friendfhip; and it İs to a medical man İ owe the exiftence, which, probably, if ever I reach my native country, the other defcription of men will contrive ftill to embitter» Alas ! dear Everfley, amidft the horrors of a French prifon— amone ftrangers and enemies—I faw no- thing fo hideous to my eyes, fo detefta¬ ble
ble to mv feelings as Vampyre and an¬ other wretch of the fame fpecies : 1 fuf¬ fered nothing fo painful as what their perfecution had in England inflicted ?. C> upon nie, und on thofe whole peace is dearer to mc than my owrn. Reieafed at once írom imprifonment, and the fear of death, and furnifhed by my generous and amiable fnend with money enough for my perilous journey, í implicitly followed Iiis directions, and made my way into Switzerland. A journal of my ftratagems, and hazard^, would make my let'er too long, and fometimes I am willing to hope that we may meet in England, and once more enjoy the de¬ light of confidential friendihip...... . To that time I svili refer a regular hif¬ tory of my wanderings; and you will at the prefent period of my narrative ima¬ gine mc arrived at Bienne in fafety, yet extremely fatigued, and at a feafon when this country is fometimes paffable ■only in the beaten road. However, to ftay
flay at Bieime was impoflible—I there¬ fore merely delivered the letters given me by my friend Defbrmes, whkh pro- 'cnred me a paifport from the magiftrates, and a farther fupply of money, and I determined to proceed to Bafle. " I will check the difpofition I even now feel to defcribe the valley of Mun- fter—to tell you how, in paffing it, I fometimes forgot the rigors of winter, even all I had fuffered, and all I dreaded, and was loft in admiring the wildnefs and fingularity of the fcene. I paffed a night in one of the deepeft excavations of its rocks in fuch perfect repofe, that not a peafant girl came with her iittle offering, or little orifon, to our lady of the cave, a rude image held in great veneration by the people of the country, wiiich is placed in a niche cut in the rock at the farther end, over a ruftic altar table of the fame mate¬ rials. * 4 To
* { To this night's lodging, however, for it was exceífively cold, I owed træ pain I felt the next day in tny ill-healed wound. It u as indeed fo acute, that I doubted for fome time whether any exertion of refolution would enable me to go on. 1 would now have been glad to meet any human being who could have informed me of my way, or have aíliíted my feeble fteps to purfue it ; yet it was long fince I had avoided meeting my own fpecies.—Strange and wretched perverfion of the focial pro- penfittes of our own nature, when the pilgrim is compelled to fly from his fellow man! " I fhould now, at any riik, have fpoken to whomever 1 had met, even a republican foldier of France; but I faw no one as I wal ked, or rather crept along, for about three miles towards the Pierce Pertuis*—then faint with pain, I be-
came unable to continue my route, and wkh little hope of regaining ftrength enough to get to any place of fhelter that night ; in which cafe it was moil likely I fliould periih with cold before morning. I fat down under one of thofe rude cliffs that bound the river Birze, as it häftens through the valley among narrow ftraits formed of incum¬ bent rock. A ftupor ftole faft over my wearied fenfes, and blunted the pain whieh I had felt from the irritation of my w T ound; and I fliould probably have funk wholly from inanition, weaknefs, and that hopeiefs languor that is often the e rieft of bodily pain and fatigue extended beyond the ftrength of the fufferer, had I not towards evening been roufed from this ftate of half annihila¬ tion by a Swifs peafant, who, croffing one of thofe many ruftic bridges thrown over the Birze, faw me, and, approach¬ ing, fpoke to me in the patois of the country. I was unable to anfwer. He fin
lat down by me, and with humanity and "ood fenfe that would have done ho- ? nour to more polifhed life, endeavoured to roufe me to exertion. After fome time he fucceeded; and though he has fince told me he believed me to be a French patriot, which at that period was a name dreaded by many of the Swifs, he generoufly forgot his preju¬ dice or his fear, in confideration of my calamitous fituation ; and putting me upon a fmall horfe, with which he was conveying fome neceffaries for his fa¬ mily from Bienne, he walked by its fide, encouraging me with the moil patient pity to endure the prefent evil in the aifurance of immediate relief.—It was, however, with great difliculty, and at a late hour of the night, that I reached his hofpitable cottage, in the village oi LaufFen· " Here the repofe I enjoyed, and kindnefs I received from thefe honeft people, rare, but I hope not unique, Vol. IV. f fpecimens
fpecimens of ancient Swifs hofpitality and humanity, foon reftored me—not to ^eafe, for rfty wound was ffill extremely painful at times— butto fo much ftrength of mind and body, as enabled me to confider what I eould and ought to do : and the recollection of my mother and my fifters, of the cruel fufpenfe they muft be in, of the addition their fears for my life and fafety muft make to their other forrows, determined me, whatever perfonal inconvenience might ftill awak me in England, to return thither. My mother had continually, in my half- delirious ftate from pain and long want of fleep, been prefent to me. Now more perfectly in poffeffion of my fenfes, all the feenes I had formerly witneffed in England with her returned to my re¬ membrance. Her hardly-acquired for¬ titude when the delicacy of her frame ill fupported the dignity of her mind ; her mild fubmiffion to eviht, heavy be¬ caufe inflifted by men ι her patient de¬ fcent
fcent from the place fhe had been ac¬ cuftomed to, and had fo good a right to fill; and her quiet aequiefeence under every oppreffion but thofe which threat¬ ened to deprive her of her children; and, as thefe impreffions were renewed, the dread of all fhe might have endured in my abfence of pecuniary hardfliip, became almoil i n fupportable. — Ah, my dear Everfley í I fometimes reproach myfelf with cowardice in having ever left her, though at her own earneft en¬ treaty—— * Opp r e'i'ií uy a bafe world, perhaps ihe bends 3cncath the weight of other ills than grief í And, defolate, implores of Pleaven the aid H r fon lhouíd gi\e!' <t Alas! the refolution to return to England was more eafily made than executed. To my generous hoft, how¬ ever, ï owed another kindnefs in ad¬ dition to all thofe he had already fhewn me. When he faw how uneafy I was, and f 2 (already
(already knowing I was Englifh) heard why I defired to return to my native country, he undertook to conduct me himfeif to Fribourg, from wtience he thought I might reach Hanover, and among Englifhmen, whom I fhould un¬ doubtedly find there, obtain with lefs difficulty a conveyance to England. " This plan then, as far as it depended on him, was immediately executed.— After flaying a day or two at Fribourg, I found myfelf well, and ftrong enough to refume my former method of tra¬ velling on foot. I parted with this ho¬ neft and worthy; man with regret, mofl fincerely anxious for the time when I ihould be able to repay him for all his kindnefs, and doubting, as I approached the country, where, fince it was belong¬ ing to the King of England, I expefted to meet many of my countrymen, whe¬ ther I ihould find, even among them, more generous minds, more friendly fpirits, than I'had been fo fortunate as to
tn encounter in DcflormCb, and this man Andié \ r anette. li' I had ever felta dípofmon to indulge that national ar¬ rogance, and national prejudice, with which Knghfh.ncn ? the middling or lowci ranki of hie aie fiom their in¬ fancy impreffed, i ihould furely have divefted myfelf of it in the obfervations I had now occafion to make. But throw n by misfortune from the bofom of my country, I early learned to be a Citizen of the World.—In what ob¬ fcure corner øf it, Everfley, fliall / ever rind a quiet afylum ? " That, my dear friend, is an enquiry which it İs not now a moment to make,^— I haften to conclude the little I have to relate. " Imagine me then among Englifh- men and Germans, nearly conneded with them—myfelf a foi-difant Engliih- man, but without recommendation, with¬ out acquaintance, without any means of afcertaimng what I was, or to whom I r 3 belonged.
belonged. My language indeed might. have anfwered for my country ; but as I fpoke another equally well, and had evidently been rambling about the world ; as I had paffed through France at a time when fuch a trajet feemed impofllble to a man not weft affefted towards the then governors; aa I called myfelf a gentleman, yet none of my connections feemed to countenance me; the perfons to whom I addreffed myfelf (as I hoped, without bafenefs, and cer* tainly without the fhadow of deception) feemed to fufpect me as an Avanturier ; perhaps an Avanturier of a dangerous defcription, with whom it would he un- fafe for them to have any thing to do.— The repuifive coldnefs, the confirained half civility ï was received with, foon taught me that î had but little to expect from the higher in power among thofe, on whom / thought my being an Eng-* lilhman, and of decided loyalty, might have given me fomc fort of claim to what
what î folicited ; which was, to be em¬ ployed either in a civil· or military ca¬ pacity there, till I could, in fome public truft, be fent to England. I had even fancied, that the knowledge I had ac¬ quired of the fituation of France would have been ufeful ; but I found that eyen my having ???? there was a crime, and laid me open to fufpicions either felt or feigned* I fometimes thought that they were the laiter % and affumed merely as 911 exeufe for the refufal it was deter¬ mined I fhould generally experience. For, when once the perjons of confer quence had repulfed me, I found the fame tone affumed by the reit~-aad I was bowed out by tiie fubaUerns witb even lefs civility than I had received from iheir mailers.^Among others whom it was my lot to meet with, wa$ a nephew of Lady Silchefter's deceafed Lord---------1 muft go back a little to relate the circumftance and 'm confe* quence. r 4 u Do
u Do not imagine, my dear Everfley, that, when it appeared neceffary for me to fay who î was, τ ' ad fpoken of my near relationfhip to that foolifh, proud, unfeeling woman, as cither a boaft or a designation; but, when I named myfelf, a fecretary who fat with the great mari I was talking to obferved very coldly, that the late Lord Silchefter had mar¬ ried a lady, whofe other fifter was the wife of a Mr. Marchmont. This man, it feems, was a genealogift, and piqued himfeif upon the knowledge of all the intermarriages of the nobility ; fo that he' might have been a very oracle to thofe who hardly knew they had a grandfather, if to enquire had been their objecV, after they had once fatisfied themfelves by being duly enrolled in the records of thofe 'geoitle hiflorians*,
who dip their pen in nothing but the milk of human kindnefs ; who feek no further for merit than the preamble of a patent, or the infeription qf a tomb ; with whom every man created a Peer, is firfl an hero ready made; who judge of every man* s ca¬ pacity by the offices he has filled — and the more offices the more ability ; with whom every General Officer is a Marlborough ; every Statefman a Burleigh ; every Judge a Murray, or a Y orke ; f 0 that men who alive were laughed at or pitied by all their acquaintance, make as good afigure as the befi of them in ihe pages of Gwillim, Ed¬ mond fin, and Collins.* " To this obfervation of the Corn- mis, Mr. Piatt, relative to Lady Silchef¬ ter, I anfwered, without however filing myfelf at all honoured by the alliance— * That it was true. The lady he fpoke of was my mother's fifter.' " I faw doubt hang on the counte« nances of both the great man and his fecretary, or it was rather perhapsyrtfr, f 5 thai
ibat if I could make out any fuch noble connection, they ihould feel themfelves compelled to do me fomc kindnefs» However that might be, my indignant fpirit, which İ had with difficulty fub¬ dued to the meannefs of folicitation at all, now rofe againft the degradation of being queftioned either by the infolent military man, or his cold-blooded un¬ derling.—1 arofe, and, forbearing with difficulty to exprefs what I thought, quitted the audience, with a refolution to return to it no more. ** I had determined to fet out once again either on foot or by the convey¬ ance afforded hy rivers, to make my way to Hamburgh* and from thence to Eng¬ land ; but fome preliminaries, not *. ry eafy to fettle, were of neceffity to be thought of, before I could, even in this cheap and independent manner of tra¬ velling, begin another journey. ? While I was deliberating how to aé\ I was met in the ftreet hy the great man's
man's fecretary and the nephew of Lad§r Silchefter, together with another young officer. It feemed as if the Commis, who I was fure had regarded me with an evil eye when he had before feen me, was feeking an opportunity tp deteft me as an impoftor j for he immediately iddreffed himfeif to Captain Melin* court, and faid, flightly touching his bat to me—* This, Captain Melincourt, is the Mr. Marchmont I mentioned to you**~~ The military boy, who at firft view ap¬ peared to be a great coxcomb, ftared at me—' I have not the honour to know the gentleman/ faid he, with a coid draw).-—* I believe not/ anfwered I with more fpirit than I fuppofe became my appearance ; * for I do not know that I ever iaw you before.'— ï was turning away, when tbe fecretary» Mr. Piatt, chofe to add—* And yet» Sir, I thought you had given yourfelf out for a relation by marriage to Captain Me¬ lincourt ?'—* I given myfelf out, Sir?— »β If
If you dare to aflert that, I tell you, you utter a falfehood.—What, Sir ! do you imagine that any circumftances eould urge me to fay the thing that h net ? or, if I were fo degraded, that I fhould defcend yet a ftep lower, in try¬ ing to derive any credit from accidental rel ation fhip to contemptible and infig- nirkant beings, only becaufe they bear titles ?'-------1 then walked away, leaving the Commis and the Captain to digeft this brufqtierie as they thought proper. They ftood ftill a moment, as if wonder¬ ing that a poor man, a wanderer as I was, ihould dare to refent an infult; while I returned to my obfcure lodging, not without feeling the neceffity of call¬ ing to my affiftance all my fortitude, or, rather, all thofe refledions that teach it. I compared myfelf the faculties of my own mind, and the power of enduring evil or of rifing above it, with the in- telledual poffeffions cf the two creatures who looked upon me with contempt; and
and I afked myfelf, whether, deftitute wanderer and houfelefs ftranger as ï was, I would, for a moment, exchange fítuations with either of thefe paltry fellows? My heart proudly difdained the queftion; and, without beftowing on them another thought, I was calmly renewing fuch Httle preparations as I could make for my departure, which I meant to take that evening, when I faw enter the third perfon who had been in company with the Commis and Captain Melincourt. Though I had no other idea than that he came with a repetition of infult, I received him as a gentleman ; for he at leaft had not yet offended me, and there was fomething in his counte¬ nance and figure that prejudiced me in his favour. " He was a man about my own age, but appeared, by his diffident yet in¬ genuous manner, to have been but little converfant with the world. He was evidently embarraffed how ta begin the converfatione
converfation, which confirmed me in my idea, that he had íòme meffage to deliver that he kit to be rude and bru¬ tal ; for I did not imagine that the gen¬ tlemen who had fpoken to me con¬ fidered me of fufficient confequence to receive a cartel from men who fancied themfelves of fo much.. '* After fome féconds of hefitation and confufion, my vifitor thus explained himfeif: *■ 4 I do not know, Sir, whether you will accept the apology it is neceffary for a ftranger to make, who comes without any introduction ; but as your countryman, I wait upon you with of¬ fers of fuch fervice as I can render you. The moft fortunate may have occafion for the good offices of a compatriot in a ftrange land. I underftand you are far from your friends, and have efcaped from France. You may be out of mo¬ ney to facilitate your return to Eng¬ land* Allow me to be your banker.— My
My power as a younger brother, and a mere foldier of fortune, is not great; but fuch as it is, I beg you will com¬ mand it with as little fcruple as I truft you would do if we had long been friends.* " Nothing could be fo remote as was this addrefs frorn what I expeded. It would be tedious to relate the whole dialogue that followed. I learned that my new acquaintance was a Captain Forrefter, one of the aides-de-camp to a general officer, and the younger fon of the Earl of Stanwarden : that he was accidentally walking with Mr. Piatt and Captain Melincourt when they met me, and was ihocked at their unprovoked infolence : * í own/ faid he, * I was pleafed with the fpirit you ihewed, and not forry to fee Piatt mortified ; for he is an arrogant and ftupid fellow, pre¬ fuming on the office he fills, whicb, though the meaneft abilities ye adequate to its execution, he fancies gives him gyeat
great dignity, and is a proof of profound wifdom and uncommon genius. He is a folemn coxcomb. If he does but fign a paffport, or an order for forage, ha affumes an air of the greateft import¬ ance, and talks of the laborious bufinefs he is engaged in—the prodigious fatigue of his office—the vaft weight of the affairs that lay on his fhoulders. Over every thing he does, though it be only writing to his gardener in England, whom he pompoufly calls his homme d'affaires, he throws a veil of myftery ι fo that any one who obferved without knowing him, would conclude he was engaged in a correfpondence with Miniftry of the ut¬ moft importance to his country—whereas he is probably only giving direftions about the management of his cucumber beds for an early crop, or regulating the fite of his melon frames; for this fungus is, like moft fuch fort of men, very fond of the table. When he fpeaks of himfeif it is always in the plural— t We of
of the diplomatique corps—Perfons of a certain defcription like us, entrufted by Government—We, the friends of Adrainiftration—To us, who are in the fecret of all that—To efficient men of our department/ Such is the language of this confequential fecretary, who is alfo among thofe who ufed to be called Croakers, but who have of late affumed the more tremendous title of Alarmifts; infomuch that I have fometimes recom¬ mended it to him to recolleft the fable of the boy and the wolf. To prove, however, at once, and exercife his fa¬ gacity, he is continually difcovering plots and confpiracies—French agents, and lurking Jacobins : and it was pro¬ bably fome fuch charafter that he in¬ tended to fix upon you. " * When you left us juft now, I could not help enquiring who you was? Piatt anfwered, that you pretended your name was Marchmont—that it might be fo for aught he knew, but that Captain Melincourt,
Melincourt, whofe uncle had married a near relation of that family, did not know you; and that even if you were the perfon you pretended to be, he thouglit you of a very fufpicious cha-, rafter. Ihere was a young fellow of that name in London/ faid he,, * a yc*r or two ago. He was a writer for the bookfellers; and I was affured (for I have no time to read fuch trifles myfelf), that there were fentences in his books (I have no recollection* of die name of them) that were to be difcouraged. Such neceffitous people running about Europe, writing their remarks, ai)d pro* muîgaîing and propagating their wild and impertinent theories juft at this time, under the name of ¿ravels, or novels, are to be difcouraged and repreffed. ï will have nothing to do with Mr. March¬ mont, or foi-difant tel; and I have ad¬ vifed my Lord nottogive him the fmalleft countenance.· « c You,
" 'You believe him an impoftor then/ faid I, « and, thus impreffei, think yourfelf juftified in withholding from him the protection and affiftance wtiich he does not otherwife feem to have forfeited, and which asan Englifh— man he has an undoubted right to ex* pect ? # '* ' The fecretary,' continued Captain Forrefter, * gave me a look of con¬ tempt; told me I was a young man, but for a man of fafhion had ftrange tra* montane ideas —That he knew no claims but fuch as arofe from fome fer¬ vice to Government—That an Englifli¬ man whofe principles he was not furs of was to him no more than a French¬ man, or a Dutchman—That, in fliort, he did not "ualf like you, and thought the fooner you left this place the bet* ter. Offended/ added my generous defender, ' with the overbearing imper¬ tinence of this official puppy, I deter- mined to fee you myfelf; and from our fhort
fhort converfation I am already per¬ fuaded, that you have the moft undoubt¬ ed claims to credit for all you have faid as to yourfelf, and certainly to every friendly office which the natives of the fame country owe to each other when they meet at a diftance from it.* '* From this moment," faid the con¬ tinuation of Marchmont's letter, <f from this moment the moft friendly and un- referved intimacy originated between me and Captain Forrefter, whom I found to be aman of the moil ingen uou&.'iind, the mofl elegant manners— whidi his referve, and even diffidence among ftrangers, ferve to render yet more pleafing to thofe few whom he efteemsj Thefe the goodnefs of his heart and the fweetnefs of his temper attach to bim moil afFedionately. Brave even to faulty rafhnefs, yet full of tendernefs and humanity, he abhors the cold and cruel policy the views of which he is profeffionally engaged to promote, and not
not unfrequently finds his candour and his good 'nature infuffkient to enable him to obferve the forms of civility with the men with whom he is often obliged to affociate. Bred up, like many other younger fons of the nobility, in the army, he is far from confidering war as right and neceflary becaufe it is his pro¬ feffion; but, as an individual, his bene¬ volence is continually exerted to miti¬ gate its horrors, and to meliorate the condition of the foldicrs under his com¬ mand. His foldicrs of courfe adore him, and yet there is not a company fo well difciplined as his—not one where puniíhment, or even reprimand, is fo little neceffary. " I could write a volume, and yet not exhauft this topic. I referve it, there¬ fore, to the hour of our meeting, my dear Everfley, and proceed to tell you, that after a few days Captain Forrefter, from the confidence that fubfifted be¬ tween us, was perfectly acquainted wdth my
my fituation, and the difficulties that were in the way of my returning to Eng¬ land: but he thought with me that I ought to brave thofe difficulties; and by his affiftance, for from fuch a man I had no fcruple to accept it, I am now on my way to Hamburgh.—Yet from the fituation of public affairs at this mo¬ ment I know not when I fhail arrive there, or when get from thencè. My late experience, dear Everfley, con¬ vîntes me, that mankind are lefs under the influence of education and climate than we are generally taught to believe, To pafs over the demagogues of France r (men who are intoxicated with fudden power, perverted by falfe ambition, or awed by terror), î fpeak only of thofe farther removed from the concuffions of the great volcáho. Of the two French furgeons, for example—one of them feetned glad to pronounce me in danger of dying, as if he thought it a general benefit that there fhould be one Englifli¬ man
man (if I was one), or at leaft one royalift, lefs in the world; while the other relieved and liberated me at his own im¬ minent hazard. Yet thefe two men were both educated in the fame profeffion, and the fame principles, under the fame animating fun : the one was proud, morofe, vindidive, and a bigot to he knew not what chimæras ; while the other was liberal-minded, generous, and humane, confidering nothing but how be might do good to his fellow-men, whatever might be their country, their religion, or their politics. It is true that the latter of thefe was young, the other a man near fifty; and I believe, from ail I have hitherto obferved, that Lord Bacon's obfervation is but too juft—· * Age improveí rather in the power* of the under¬ ftanding» than in the virtues of the will and »ffeclione.*
« Shall
tí Shall I fay nothing of my illuftrious Swifs peafant, André Vanette ? who might indeed be termed * A noble, of Nature's own creation " *' the good Samaritan, who received me fick and a ftranger, who poured oil and wine into my wounds when fo many others would liave * Againft the houfelefs ftranger fliut the door i' " Yes ! I will aflert, that though I truft Nature has fcattered here and there fuch hearts in all climates and countries, I never met with one in that rank of life at all to be compared to him in any part of the world. " Let us, co follow this chain of thought, contemplate the charafters of Captain Melincourt and Captain For¬ refter, two men born with equal perfonal advantages, both of noble families, both younger fons of nearly equal expecta¬ tions,
hons, and both, after the fame courte of education, entering at the age of fixteen huo the army. <; Melincourt ? effeminate, infipid, felfiih, and a< infolent as his indolence will allow him to be. He loves money, becaufe he ??? purchafe with it plea¬ fures, of which hi> vacant mind is alwaj s in fcarch, though nothing has power to roule him long from the apathy of fiuiety. Sick of himfeif, yet loving no¬ thing clfe, he lives in perpetual folici¬ tude, lefs for the aciuai fafety than the want of accommodation for that dear Iwcct pei fon of his; though fo bur- denfome is it, notwithftanding all the moft ftudied indulgences that, like the w ι etched Roman Emperor, he i* aimoft ready to öfter a premium to whoever vould find fomething that might give new intereft to his mawkifli exiftence. " What Forrefter is, tlie traits I have gi\eii you of his character may help you to imagine. If climate, education, or the Vol, IV. a govern-
government under which they have lived, influenced the charaders of men, furely thefe tw T o could never fo radi¬ cally, fo totally di fier. 1 will hope, my friend, lomake Fori efter known to you in England.-------In England f ------Alas! how many events may have happened there, to render ray return thither the moft painful moment of my hfe ! I will not again, however, enter on fuch difqui fi¬ lions: they are ufelefs, and would carry me too far. ** My dear and excellent friend, adieu ! Wherever he is, your happinefs is among the firft wifhes of " E. A. M."
CHAP.
CHAP. V.
<?? neje pi iird\eia Col luo üorita alpctto , Già U ti Uo /effiretto Si„hcr¿a fia l'eibr, e il fioj — ------- Ί οι nan le bondi a 0 'i albera 1 '(.rbctîe al p 1 i f o tornino, S ·>! nun ufoina ï me, I 1 pace dei mio cor
-?1??~~^??1 ------
WHEN the mind of Mrs. M ii4 li¬ moni was ?? much compofed as the na¬ ture of her fituation and the remaining unccitamty would admit, fomc degree of tranquillity, however chailifcd b) fear, was reftored to eveiy bicaft but that oi Althea. For her there was not even ?. И I ill
the femblance of repofe to be found ; for, icleafed from the extreme concern flic had felt for the life of Marchmont, ihe now turned her thoughts to her fu¬ ture conduci in regard to him, and aiked heifclf, whether on his return it would be prudent or confiftent for her to ìe- fidc in the houfe which, whether his per¬ fecutors allowed him always to be theie, or drove him occafionally into conceal¬ ment, couid not but be confidered as his home. Yet how could fhe piopofe quitting Mrs. Marchmont, becaufe her ion was about to return tc her ? Altlica was to this hour ignorant whctKi fi. ? knew of Marchmont's attachment to he; ; for fhe had never once mentioned, or even remotely hinted at it. That Lucy was in poffeffion of her brother's con¬ fidence was certain : but even flie had never fpoken quite plainly to Ahhea, who, from all the obfei vations fhe had made on the mother as well as the daugh¬ ters, thought flie faw, that while they fliould
fhould think of Marchmont as mofl for¬ tunate in becoming tiie huiband of Al¬ thea, they confidered her profpefts, and even her preient fortune, as placing h:r cj.hreiv out of his reach; for the lark ? was not enough to put it in lier power to ?;·, ? even a competent ihare of af¬ fluence to the man ihe fhould prefer, ii he had himfeif nothing, as was literally the cafe with Marchmont; and while the ftyle of life flie had been ufed to, and winch ihe preferred, feemed to affimi- iate their deftinies, Mrs. Marchmont could not bear to have it fuppofed, that fhe wiflied to take advantage of Althéa's partiality to her family, to engage her in an alliance which that of Sir Audley Dacres nvght deem fo unequal on ac¬ count of the indigence and diftrefs to winch Marchmont and his family were reduced; though in point of family an- tiqaity they had the advantage. Such AUhea fancied were the fentiments of her female friends; and if her ideas were ? 3 juft,
juft, flie forefaw that her ftay might be paiafui to the difinterefted delicacy of Mrs. Marchmont; while on the other hand her partial tendernefs for March¬ mont was fo far from having fuffered any abatement, that all flie had thought, ail fhe had heard of him ; every little anecdote expreffive of his heart aud manners in his boyifh days, which acci¬ dentally fell from his fifters; of late, " Thp dangers he Iiad met;" and, above all, his manner of fupporting them—every circumftance contributed to render indelible the impreffion flic had from their earlieft acquaintance con¬ ceived of his merít : whatever worldly wifdom, or prudence in its moft gentle iorm, could fay, Ahhea was on exami¬ nation of her heart convinced, that all that the world could offer of adulation, all it could afford of thofe pleafures which occupy the lives of the rich o» noble.
noble, wrould give to her neither contem nor gratification; and that with March¬ mont, a ictirement in which flie thought her fortune might fuffice for their fup¬ port, would be in her opinion the only fcheme of happinefs. I low much fuch a plan coincided with the fentiments ol Marchmont himfeif, his own lettera fuf¬ ficiently teftified; for, thoiiffh he had too much refpeftful referve to name her to Eveifley, it was eafy to fee to whom many expreffions m his letters alluded. Many days, and even fome weeks pafied, while Althea, occupied in thefe reflections, and debating what fhe ought to do, came to no refolution. Uneafi¬ nefs and doubt again oppreffed Mrs. Marchmont; it feemed certain thatif her fon hadi as he intended, direded his courfe towards England, he muft long before now have arrived there. What then could be the reafon that they had notnow beai d of him formorcthan ten weeks------ Where was he? What could have hap- g 4 pcned
pcned to him ? If his journey had been impeded, could he not have written?— Every day in its progrefs increafed the painful apprehenfions that thefe reflec¬ tions brought with them, and with every Letting fun that hope grew fainter and fainter, by which alone the languid and ill-confirmed fortitude of Mrs. Marchmont was fuftained. Althea more than participated in the pain this cruel fufpenfe inflifted. She now no longer thought of how fhe fliould act when Marchmont arrived. March¬ mont came not! perhaps might never more appear—While flic had been de¬ bating how fhe fliould receive him and aft towards him, he perhaps was already no more—Some fl range miftake, fome unforefcen atid cruel accident had per¬ haps dcftro)ed him after all his former efcapes ; and nothing might now remain of him but a name, and the fond and bitter rcmcmbiance of his virtues and his misfortunes
misfortunes in the breafts of thofe who had loved him. Overwhelmed with thefe tormenting fears, which, though they never gave her a moment's refpite, ihe yet commanded herfclf enough not to communicate to friends made miferable enough by their own, Althea aimoft forgot a circum¬ ftance that would at any other time have given her confiderable difquiet. This was, that the time of her receiving her fmall dividend was paffed, and it had not been fent. During the winter fhe had repeatedly written to Lady Dacres, entreating to have that which arofe from her mother's fortune and fettlement of two thoufand pounds, „-l fhe had re¬ ceived no anfwer from her Ladyfhip herfelf, and but once any notice, when an attorney, a fort of deputy to the manfheintrufted with her affairs, wrote to Althea to this effeft :
g 5 Mifs
Mifs Althea Dacres, " Madam, *' This ferves to let you know, by order of my Lady, that her Ladyfhip hath received yours of the 26th ultimo ; and that as to contents thereof, ihe de¬ fires you will apply to Mr. Serjeant Mo¬ hun on the fame ; her Ladyfhip not being thereon able or willing to ad alone, as may be known, reference being had to the laft will and teftament of Sir Audley Dacres, baronet, de¬ ceafed. " You will pleafe, therefore, on the fubjed matter abovefaid, to apply ac¬ cordingly to the learned Serjeant as above-mentioned — Not doubting but he will give you due information and fatisfadory opinion thereon. By order of
of the Dowager Lady Dacres, I remain, for Anthony Skittem, Efq. ** Madam, "Your humble Servant, fi James Tygerface. ** Holborn-court, Gray*s-ijm." As Althea, however fhe might dread being inconvenienced, could not pre¬ vail on her herfelf to make this enquiry, days, and w 7 eeks, and months paffed on. Again the dividend became due from the two thoufand pounds. There was now upwards of a hundred pounds due to her, but her prefent applications were as fruitiefs as the paft. How flie was to continue to live on fo fiender a ftipend as the intereft of eight hundred pounds, Lady Dacres never deigned to enquire. But though Althea was not now as during her fhort ftay at Margate in the way of hearing it, fhe had reafon to be- ? 6 lieve
lieve that Lady Dacres, more than eve? detefting her whom fhe determined to injure, had been bufy with her fame ; and in fad ihe had contrived, by means ©f the idle, filly, and malignant goffips with whom ihe was now much conneded, to fpread injurious reports of Akhea, where ihe was only known by name, and by being the daughter of Sir Audley, In one of thefe circles it was faid that her temper was fo intolerable, that, had flie not been inveigled away by the fawning adulation of the neceffitous Marchmonts, it would have been im¬ poffible for Lady Dacres long to have endured her,—In another party it was afferted, that ffie was fo extravagant that a inine would not fiiffice Jor her fupport·, and in a third it was whifpered, that " a clandeftine and moft degrading at¬ tachment had put her excellent mothei- in-law under the painful neceffity of conniving at, and indeed of encou¬ raging,
raging, her removal into another fa¬ mily.," There was not one of thefe infinua¬ tions but what gathered fomething from the malevolence or folly of every one who repeated it; and fome of them leached Mr. Everfley during his refi¬ dence in London, to the inconceivable delight of his wife, whofe envy of Al¬ thea neither time nor diftance had weakened. The poor man, whofe health was literally wafting under the hopeiefs mifery inflided by this domeftic plague, never mentioned, ftill lefs defended Al¬ thea, when his wife, on purpofe to tor¬ ment him, began the converfation.—But convinced himfeif of her uncommon vvoith, and her fpotiefs innocence, while of her perfonal attradions he ha.d long been but too fenfible, he contented himfeif with filently doing her all the, fervice in his power, and felt aimoft the only confolation of his life in perform¬ ing ads of friendfhip towards her and Marchmonts
Marchmont. Utterly without hope him¬ feif, he tried to reduce his affection fo/ Althea (which had infenfibly crept on his heart even before the death of Mrs. Trevyilian) into the bounds of friend¬ ihip,—Mingled as it was with fome de¬ gree of pain and regret, it yet afforded him aimoft the only pleafurable fenfa¬ tion his fick heart was fenfible of. The idea of her being one day united to Marchmont had fometimes given him acute uneafinefs; but when he had re¬ folution to reafon about it, he was com¬ pelled to acknowledge that no other man could deferve her—that with no other man was it probable fhe would be happy ; and then, fenfible that he couid have nothing to hope for himfeif, he re¬ folved with fincerity to promote by fuch means as might occur the felicity of his friend. In the mean time, and during the cruel fufpenfe they were in as to what had befallen Marchmont after his laft letter,
letter, Everfley, who had a houfe in town for what is called tbe education of the two fair copies of their mama's per- fedions, ftole twice into Kent to vifit, for a few hours, Althea and the family of his friend : and it was from hints that he dropped in thefe converfations that the former gathered what fhe knew of the malignity with which Lady Dacres defamed and traduced her To him, on the fecond of thefe in¬ terviews, Althea communicated her inereafing uneafinefs at the obftinate filence of Lady Dacres, or the unfeeling reference to Mr. Mohun, which was ftill more irkfome to her. Everfley advifed her to conquer her repugnance, and write to Mohun. She could not determine upon it. So great was the di flike fhe had originally felt towards this man, that, though fhe fuppofed his tranfient inclination for her had long fince been at an end ; though fhe now never heard his name mentioned with her
her own, and indeed hardly at all ín the retirement fhe now lived in; yet her antipathy continued aimoft in its fint force, and flie periuaded herfeif that to write to him w ? ould only be to fol id· con - tumely and affront.------Everfley, who knew little of lum but from his public charader, knew, however, enough to believe the averfion of Althea well- founded ; and at the fame time to fear, that if he himfeif applied to fuch a man on behalf of Althea, it would give frefh food to Lady Dacres's malice, and em¬ broil him anew with his wife, who in¬ fifted upon it in private, and often de¬ clared in her fits of ill humour, even befoie company, that he was in love with Althea. Thefe confiderations would, notwithftanding, have yielded to his ardent wifli of doing her fervice, but he doubted whether that purpofe might not be better anfwered by the application of a lawyer—and he thought he knew, .that rare charader, an honeft one ;
one ; to whom, as he was himfeif little connected with him, he thought he might recommend the bufinefs of Al¬ thea, without its being known that he interfered in it. To this propofal Althea confented— not, however, without reluftance, but as the only means that remained untried, to procure for her what undoubtedly belonged to her; and it was agreed that Mr, Bargrave ihould write to Mr. Mo¬ hun for leave to fee the will of Sir Audley (which Althea had only once heard read in a curfory and confufed manner); that he ihould afterwards in¬ fpeft the marriage fettlement of AU thea's mother, if it could be had, and then fee what was the legality of the refolution Lady Dacres feemed to have formed to diftrefs her, by withholding, at leaft till flie was of age, the fmall income ariiiug from money undoubtedly ber own. Amidit
Amidft thefe uneafy reflections on pecuniary bufinefs, and thofe ft'll more cruelly painful, that were occafioned by theunccitaintv of ?????????'?» fate, time woie he w úy av av; but fpring once more returned— jot lefs to Althea, jcylcLtoher friends! for it ferved only to remind them of the long abfence of him to whom they were all fo paffionately attached; to con¬ vince them that the fcene and feafon, how¬ ever lovelv, ferve only to embitter the angmfh of the unhappy. The months of fpnng have above all others this effeft. The eye weikened by tcMS fupports with pain that brilliant frcflmefs which conveys to the happy fc.fations of gaiety and pleafure ; and vuure in its joyous progreflion feems to infult the fick heart in which hope is dead. Such, however unhapp\ they were, was not precifely the caie with the in¬ habitants of the Kentifli cc trage, —Mis. Marchmont, though her foliutude and linnatien/ '
impatience hourly incrcafed, ftill che- rifhed the hope that her fon would re¬ turn in fafety: yet oppreffed by fears that he might not, and by a fort of anxious and even nervous defpondence, the elfed of former forrows and difap¬ pointments, flic couid not bear the leaft perfonal exertion ; and while fhe en¬ couraged and entreated her daughters and Akhea to walk, and to enjoy as much as they couki tlie refreihing beauty of die advancing year, fhe often remained alone in her room, trying re¬ acquire fortitude to meet with refig¬ nation and calmnefs whatever of forrow might yet be before her: yet often fhrinking frorn the painful effort, fhe involuntarily indulged the natural weak¬ nefs of wifhing to efcape from the world, rather than to hear that her greateft hleflinff had left it. ? What had been the fituation of the object of her fond folicitude, may be fcen by the following account given of himfcll
himfeif by Marchmont to Eveifley, who chofe that medium to communicate it ta ins family. The cosnfot t that family derived fiom feeing the date, may be moie ? alil y imagined thau defcribed. '* Doi J. tefter, A t \u loth. <( Once more from Englifh ground your friend addreffes you; on that foil from whence twelve months fince he was driven to avoid perpetual imprifon* ment. It is impoffible to defcribe to you, my dear Everfley, the fenfations I have felt in revifiting my native country; and particularly thib. place and county, which i have io often pafied through formerly on my way from i .on- don to Eaftwoodleigh. All the ideas of thofe days are again prefent to me.— I am at the fame inn, and fitting in the fame room, where I once met Vamp>re by appointment; when fonie arrange¬ ment of die affairs \sas propofed by vhicli
chicli we hoped to have efcaped the diftreffcs that afterwards overtook us. It was, however, certain, that the pro¬ pofals were only offered by that exe¬ crable wretch to draw us deeper into the fnares he had iaid for us. Even now I fee the old hideous moniler before me, profing and attempting to entrap me; and I ftart up. indigna¬ tion and rage feize me for a moment, till I recolleft the feenes I liave fmce gone through.—My dying father fur¬ rounded by the inhuman fateilites of the law, from whom I eould hardly refcue his poor remains—my mother, pale and filent with terror and anguifli, feem again before me. I fee that countenance fo the expreffion of which it ? impoffible to do juflice; it is turned on me, and feems to forebode all that has fince happened. My fifters are once more weeping round me. I fee the conftevnation of the fervants: fomc only- anxious for their mafter and his family— others
others feffiíhly, yet naturally enough, thinking of themfelves.:------ ' The Wolf that made this fpoil— once more feems prefent; and, like a malignant fiend, enjoying the havock he has made.—I then remember my blafled profpecis*-my ruined hopes.—■ I feel, ah! too acutei) feci, what I might have been, and what I am. Some de¬ privations, and many mortification?, I have learned to endure, and, I think, with manly fortitude, where they relate wholly to myfelf; but there is one lofs that muft follow, that ought to foliow my lofs of fortune !—Yes, Everfley, í know that I ought to fubmit too.—Whv ihould I hefitate to avow a paffion that I ought rather to glory in feeling? It was you, my dear friend, that firft pointed out to me the beauties of that lovely mind, fo admirably aflbrted to a perfon that could not be feen w uh indifference
indifference as the faireft work of heaven; but which, animated as it is with fuch a foul, cannot fail of infpiring the moil ardent paffion. Everfley ! I adore this charming woman. I have al¬ ways adored her from the firft moment I faw her. Does flie ftill bear the fame name as when I left England? Can fo much beamy remain unfought in obfcurity ? Can fo much mildnefs have refilled pa¬ rental authority ? Ah ! no, I cannot, I dare not hope it. Perhaps there is no longer fuch a perfon cxifting as her of whom I think in her fingle fiate; and I return to England only to be convinced diat no place on this earth can afford to me the fhadow of happinefs. Ci Everfley, will you pardon my weak¬ nefs ? I know it is a weaknefs, though I might with a little parade qualify it by the names of precaution and prudence. But I cannot determine to proceed to London till I know what I am to hear there, and in what fituation is my fa¬ mily.
mily. I fhail therefore ?? ait your an¬ fwer at the next village, for this place is too public: 1 fhail go thither pre¬ fently; and if I find there is time before the poft goes out, I will add to this a de¬ tail of all that has befallen me fince my lait letter." <f At Hinton, a vilhge on the road near Do rc heiter. *' I find my letter will not go till to¬ morrow between two and three o'clock : let me, therefore, employ the interval in relating how I fet forward under the aufpic'ès of my new friend Captain For¬ refter, and journeyed in fafety fome leagues. I was then ftopped, not\\ith- ftanding my paifport, bya general order which prevented any one paffing the lines—a circumftance that was lefs pain¬ ful to me, as I imagined a few days would end it; as Forreftcr's name and recommendation procured me kindnefs and accommodation every where, and I learned
learned that his detachment was fent for, and was to join the troops with whom I was. " There is fomething infectious, my friend, in that fenfation of the human mind which we call a thirft of glory. I felt it growing upon me, and often aiked myfelf whether there was not fomething fhabby and unworthy in my creeping back clandeftinely to England, when here I might hew out an honour¬ able fubfiftence with my fword, or find an honourable grave. • Why iliould a man whofe heatt 'u. warm within ' Sn like his grandine on a monument ?' And often, very often I determined, though my foul fickened as I nearly luivevcd tht miferics of war, to enter, a volunteer in any regiment that would receive me. Confideration formy mo¬ ther, who often had expreffed her fears that I fhould take this refolution, was Vol. IV. h the
the only thing that gave me a moment's hefitation —I found arguments to prove that even flie would confent, and con¬ quer ber repugnance, when the matter was no longer in 'debate, and when ihe could calmly confider the reafons 1 had to offer. M v mind bein ç fo far made up, I had written to my mother and to you, and waited for nothing but For- refter's arrival, whofe advice was to de¬ termine me as to the regiment I ffiould engage in. He was to join the next day. Inftead of which, an account came that his party had been met by a detachment of the enemy of three times their num¬ ber, and after an obftinate refiftance, in which many gallant fellows had fallen, Captain Forrefter had been dangeroufly wounded, and taken prifoner. It is im¬ poffible to defcribe to you the general concern felt for this amiable young man; ant mine was as deep and as fincere as thofe who had long known him. One would have imagined that every man who
who fpoke of or came to enquire about him, had themfelves lofi a brother or fome very dear friend. While his fate was uncertain, I could only determine not to leave the place till fome intelli¬ gence was received of him; and fortu¬ nately this came fooner than, from the apprehended ferocity of the enemy, we thought likely. Poor Forrefter lay at a little town in poffeffion of the French; his fervant was miffing, and the princi¬ pal danger he was in was for want of attendance. Having fallen into the hands of a man of decent manners, and who w r as not without thofe generous feelings that foften the horrors of war, he was allowed to write for a furgeon, and for fomc perfon to attend him if his old and faithful fervant could not be found. It was aimoft certain that the poor fellow had been killed when his mafter was taken. To find a fubftitute for him at fuch a time, and at fuch a place, was not eafy, I entreated and ? 2 obtained
obtained leave to go as his friend. I was in no military capacity, and the commanding officcr,very anxious for the life of Forrefler, accepted my offer with pleafure. I found my poor friend in fuch a ftate that only the fkill of his furgeon, applied at the moment it was, would have carried him through. He recovered but very flowly; and I had the comfort of believing what he warmly acknowledged, that he owed his reco¬ very, indeed he thought his life, to my unwearied attendance on him. At length, after a painful interval of ten weeks, during which lime the poor con¬ valescent was compelled to move three times as his captors found it convenient, he was adjudged well enough to be fent to Paris, whither I would have attended him; but this the French would not permit : we were therefore obliged to part. I procured a paifport for Oftend, for the Englifh army were now removed, and, proceeding thither, embarked a fort¬ night
night fince in a fmall Danifli veflel which was on the point of failing the night oí my at rival. Impatient to reach England, I threw myfelf into it without enquiry, and did not fufpeft, till we were fome leagues at fca in a very tem¬ peituous night, fuch as frequently pre¬ cedes or follows the equinox, that there were not hands'enough on board to na¬ vigate the veffel, and that the few that we had were young in their bufinefs, and totally unacquainted with the Eng¬ lifh coaft, on which they had undertaken to land us. t< This intelligence was communicated to me by a paflenger who feemed to fct a higher value on his life than I did on mine, and who was fo very reftlefs and uneafy (and to fay the truth, the ftorm did furioufly increafe), that I was at length induced to go upon deck ; and from the little I knew of the matter I did not think the apprehenfions of my fellow-traveller very ill grounded. The ? 3 wind
wind blew violently from the north-call; and inftead of our makimz Dover or Peal, which indeed ioon became aimoft impoflibic, I thought we weie quite as likely to he driven on fliore on the b^k of the Ifle of Wight, or even farther weft- ward. The night was totally dark, and what was at fiiil a heavy gale became foon a hurricane. Of our three men and a boy, one of the former got drunk and went to fleep with the utmoft com¬ pofure; and I know not by what miracle it was, that inilead of dri\ ing againft the rocks of the Ifle of Wight we kept down Channel, fo that when day broke ve were near Portland. What it was our failors knew not; but I was well ac¬ quainted with the coaft, having often failed along it fiom the weft. 1 defired immediately to be put on fliore. I had paid my Dane at Oil end, and my bag¬ gage confifted only of a fmall portman¬ teau. It was indifferent to thefe men what became of me, and 1 was glad to
to have no farther to go whh fuch rni- ikilful conducìors'. The other paflen¬ ger, notwithftanding his fears, prefcired following his firft deftination; and the veflël not having received much da¬ mage, with a favourable wind (for it had changed at fun-rife to the weft) they returned up Channel; while I, with my portmanteau under my arm, defired and found a temporary ihelter in one of the two little inns, which any where elfe would be called alehoufes, on this bar¬ ren and dreary fpot. " I was exceflively fatigued, and found fome inconvenience from a bruife I had received by having been thrown violent¬ ly down when the veflel had fuddenly pitched during the night. I therefore went to bed, and, after having flept fome hours, awoke with an odd fenfation of wonder, as 1 faid, * Well ! I am once more then on Englifh ground !—I am, where a few hours would convey me to London.—Ha! and what ihail I learn h 4 there?
there? When I go to the bookfeller who ufually receives my letters for me, and with whom I defired my family to leave the diredion where they might be found—how fliall I tremble to afk if they are ali well í And even this enquiry I muft make by fteaith—and I go to hide myfeif in fome obfcure corner of the town, and again have recourfe to the precarious occupation of an author— for, alas! what other means have I of exiftence ? What ! muft I then fubmit to all the miferable expedients I have already been compelled to pradife ? And to efcape from the fangs of that wretch Vampyre muft I undergo ail the incon- vemences that a felon is fubjed to?' " Ah ! mv dear friend, as former feenes arofe to my mind, I aimoft wiflied that í had in France met the fate that menaced me; or that the ftorm of the preceding day had ended my troubles. Accufe me not of weaknefs, or unman¬ ly repining, Everfley ; but think of the courfe
courfe of my life, and own that I have not hitherto ill endured my very fevere deftiny. Thoufands you have fome¬ times told me arc as unfortunate, and tens of thoufands more unfortunate than I am. I am afraid the eftimate, fad as it is, is fhort of the truth; but not one ray of comfort do I derive from fo me¬ lancholy a rcflcclion. * I feel by proof, ♦ That followfhip in pain divides not fmart, 4 Nor lightens aught each man's pamculai load/ "In this difpofition of mind I walk¬ ed out. It was a dull and gloomy evening. The fun had dlfappeared be¬ neath volumes of heavy clouds in the fouth-weft, and this naturally cheerlefs and forlorn fpot of earth, or rather of ftone, never appeared more defolate. It feemed to fuit my fortune as well as my difpofition. A group of half-naked children followed me, offering to fell' fliclls and pieces of ihining ftone, the ? 5 produce
produce of their miferable ifland. I gave them all the fmall money I had, to engage them to leave me to my fad meditations: but a boy, and then a young woman, purfued me—one with fome canes, another with a piece of linen, which they faid had been picked up on the fands, the remains of a wreck tbat had been driven on fhore about a fortnight before. I affured them that I had no occafion for fuch articles, and, madepeevifh by their importunity, while I could confider them as little otherwife than plunderers who lived on the fpoils of the dead, I went on to that fpot of remarkable wildnefs and honor, where the pile of ruin called Bow-and-Arrow, and fometimes known by the name of Rufus's Caftle, hangs on a crag of ftone over the remains of the ancient church, of which fome confiderable detached parts are now ftanding: many bt oken tombs are ftill feen in the rough area that was once the church-yard.—I fat down on one of them ;
them; and as I looked around me and faw another equinoctial ftorm gathering in the fouth-weft, and blunting by ac¬ cumulated clouds the rays of the fun as it funk beyond them, tingeing them with a dull purplifli red, 1 thought I had never been in a place fo adapted to the refidence of defolation and defpair. " You will perhaps think it ftrartge that at fuch a time, with a body fatigued and a mind ill at eafe, I fhould write or indeed think of poetry ; but the faculty of compofing it, though never I think to be commanded, fometimes ferves to mitigate by amufing the hours of pain, of languor, and uneafinefs: not how¬ ever when anxiety is very acute. But I was now in a ftate,of uncertainty as to thofe I moft loved, vshich 1 knew a few hours might terminate at my own choice, and was juft enough prefent to the fcene I was in, which w T as indeed perfeftly in unifon with my feelings,, to defcribe it. " It would be a wafte of time to apo¬ logue farther for fuch a trifle, and I 11 ? know
know you are rather a partial than a fevere critic.
DESCEIPTIVE ODE, Written amotìg the Ruins of the Old Church, on the Weft Side of Porüand , above which are Ruins called Bow-and-Airow, or Rufus's Caftle. CHAOTIC pile, of barren none, That nature's hurrying hand has thrown, Half-finiih'd, from the troubled waves; On whofe rude brow the rifted tow'r ??? fcowi'd through many a ftormy hour On this diear fite of tempe unbeaten graves ' Sure, Defolation loves to fhroud His hideous form within the cioud lhat hovers íouiid thy rugged head, And, ?? through biokeu vaults beneath The future ftornu low muttenng breathe» He feems to hear the murmurs of the dead. Heie marks the Fiend, with eager eyes, Far out at fea the fogs anfe That dimly hide the beacon'd itrand ·, Hence
Hence liftens the portentous roar Of füllen waves, as on the fhore Monotonous they barit, and tell the ftorm at hand. Northward the Demon's eyes arc caft, O'er ) onder bare and ilenle wafte, Where, born to hew and heave the block. ???, loft in ignorance and toil, Becomes aíTocjate to the foil, And in * heart hardens hke his native rock. On the bleak hills, with flvat o'crlpread,- No bloffoms rear the purple head, No fhtub perfumes the Zephyr';» bieath ; But o cr the cold and cheerier dowix Grim Defolation feems to frown, And bkft the ungrateful foil with partial death. Here the fcath'd tiees, with leaves haif-dreft, Shade no foft fou^ftet'$ feciet neft, WhQ j e Sprm¿-notes> loo he the peniive car ; But high the croaking Coimoiant flies, And Mews, and Awks with clamorous cries, Tite the ione echoes of thefe cavcifis drear. Forlorn, among tht le ruins gray, Some vndow d Mourner loves to ftray, Mdiking ihe meUatholy mam ; Whet e once ¿Ur the couid difcern Through the blue waves /m fails return, Who ncverf never now, returns again' Long
Long on thefe tombs, by ftorms uptorn, The hopeiefs wretch will lingering mourn. Till, from the Ocean niing red, The mifty Moon, with tund lay, Lights her reluctant on her way, To fteep ia tears her folitary bed. Here the dire Spirit oft furvevs The fhip, that to th** weftern bats, With favouring gales, purfurs ns courfe ; Then calls the ν pour dark that bhnds Toe pilot ;—calls the felon winds, That heave the billows with refiftlefs force. Commixing with the blotted ikies, High and more high the wild wave& rife; Till, as impetuous torrents urge, Driven on yon fatal bank accuift, The veifel's maffy timbers burft, And the crew links beneath the infuriate farge. There find the weak an parly grave, While youthful flrength the ?? helming wave Repels ; and, labouring for the land, With fhorten'd bieath and uptum'd eyes, Sees the ruu¿h íhore above him rife, Nor dreamatbat upmc meets him on ihe fìrand. And are there then, in human íorrn. Monfters more fa\age than the ftorm, Who from the gaiping fufferer tear The
The dripping weed ?—who dare to reap The inhuman harveíl of the deep From half-drown'd viclims whom the tempefts fpaie? Ah ' yes '—By avarice once poiTeft, No pity moiti the ruftic's breaft : Callous he proves—as thofe who haply wait, Till 1 (a pilgrim weary worn) To mv own native land return, Wuh legal toib to diag me to my ?? !
" You fee, my dear Everfley, how naturally the ideas of the poet return to hi* own bufiiufi and bofom. I filali wait to hear from ) ou before I proceed. You, I know, will not defpife me, while I acknowledge myfelf to be, in all that relates to my family, and to one other perfon, a coward. ** Farewel, my dear friend—I direct this, as my former ones, to your friend in London, lf it fhould travel after you
you into Devonfhire, how many days longer muft I endure this miferable fufpenfe ? « Ε. A. M."
CHAP.
CHAP. VI.
Se poi ritorno ????? al mio bene Torna la fpeme Fugge il timor.
AFTER this letter, which Everfley had thus fent to Mrs. Marchmont with¬ out any referve or alteration, it could be no longer doubted that her fon's paifion for Althea was perfectly under¬ ftood. Althea and Lucy had read the letter together. For awhile, anxiety for the viciffitudes he had palled through, and joy that he was in prefent f'àfety y fufpended every other fentiment; but the moment Althea was left to her re¬ flections
flections all thofe paffages in which fhe was fo unrefervedly fpoken of returned to her recollection, and overwhelmed her with confufion. She now dreaded to meet the eyes of Mrs. Marchmont, mild and dejefted as they were; and more than ever it became neceffary to determine what fhe was to do, fince Marchmont only waited Everfley's an¬ fwer. which was already gone to him, to come to his mother and his family, in this uneafy fituation Afthea fhut herfelf for an hour m her own room to debate the matter witb herfelf; and fhe had never yet been in a predicament where it was fo difficult to decide. Had fhe been poffeffed of her fmall fortune, and could have been fure that Mrs. Marchmont would have de¬ fired as earneftl) as íhe knew her daugh¬ ters did, that flie fhould give her hand to Marchmont, fhe found that what is termed worldly prudence would have had no power to prevent her giving her¬ felf
felf to the only man for whom flie had ever felt the flighteft degree of intereft. Some men of fortune ihe would not, though they were to offer themfelves, accept: many others would not feek her.—Were fuch men as Mohun, as Wardour, as the elegant Captain Melin¬ court defcribed by Marchmont, and fifty others that fhe had feen—were thefe perfons with whom the moft fplendid pecuniary poffeffions would induce her to live?—Certainly not. With any one of thefe, or any that refembied them, fhe was certain flie muft be miferable; with Marchmont, in defpite of any pecuniary inconveniences, and in any rank of life, as fure that fhe muft be happy. It would be yet above twelve months before fhe became of age; and it feemed but too evident that Lady Dacres, in¬ fluenced either by malice, avarice, or both, was determined to keep poffeffion of her little fortune, both intereft and principal,
principal, till then. But thinking fteadily on wha* her aunt ufed to fay, when anx¬ iety for her future fate had occafion¬ ally turned the converfation on matters relative to her fortune, fhe thought fhe had a clear recollection of having heard that this fmall portion was by her mo¬ ther's marriage articles fo fettled, that it was to be paid either on her attain¬ ing her majority, or day of marriage. If this were fo, fhe had it as fhe hoped in her power immediately to give it to Marchmont on becoming his wife. But from the lawyer employed by Mr. Everfley fhe had yet no anfwer, and anxiety and doubt were ftill to cloud the mind of Althea ; anxiety and doubü that never were more painfully felt than at the moment fhe was firft to meet Mrs. M rchmont. They neither of them fpoke: the fifters were equally filent; but when Althea ftole a glance at Mrs. Marchmont, fhe thought there was af¬ fecìion towards her, mingled with the tendernefs
tendernefs and comp'acency that the certainty of her fon's return had thrown into her countenance,—As foon as the dinner was removed, the three girls, as if they had been directed to do i'o > went out of the room. Althea underftood that the moment was arrived when their mother would fpeak to her in regard to hím who was neareft both their hearts; and though hers beat fo much that flie could hardly breathe, ffie determined not to evade a converfation which fhe at once wifhed for and dreaded. Mrs. Marchmont, with more refolu¬ tion, though not with lefs trembling earneftnefs than was fliewn by Akhea herfeif, entered immediately on the little hiftory of her fentiments fince her fon's attachment to Althea had been fufpeded or known ; and Althea was convinced that only motives of the moft diiìnte- refted delicacy had prevented the mo¬ ther's delighted aequiefeence and en¬ couragement.— u Where, my dear Mifs Dacres,"
Dacres/' faid flic, "where couid the m ft ambitious look for birth, for ac- complifhments, temper and pei ion, fu¬ perior to yoiiKs? Believe me, I Lit all their value; and was fure that there was not a woman on earth fo capable of making Marchmont amends for all the misfortunes of his untoward deftinv.— But when I thought of the right all thefe gave j ou to fill the moft elevated rank in fociety ; when í confidered the verv humble condition ίο which we arc re¬ duced, and imagined how much malice wouldhave to fay ii we ieduccd vou ftom happier fortune to fhaie, and, as the world would afleit, to mitigate our indigence ; 1 could nor hear to be ac¬ ceflary to what, while it cit ?? on us the crueieít refledions, might hereafter Le to you a lource of regret and repent¬ ance." ** I am very furc, Madam," faid Al¬ thea in a tremulous voice, " that I fhail ne\er ìepent of ihaiing any condition of
of life with your family."—Then re¬ covering a little more courage, fhe added-— t( I ? ill be above difguife, my clear Mrs. Marchmont, on a fubjeft [o interefting to us both; I will own to you that, almotl from my firfl acquaint¬ ance with your fon, he appeared to me a >oung man of gieat merit, aiid no¬ thing ever hurt me more than my fa¬ thers coldncíò and difltkc towards him, for which í never could account.—- w hcn ? ?????? chance dt ovc røe to Eaftwoodlemh, I heard many anecdotes that confirmed me in my good opinion of him. Vou know," added fhe, blufli¬ ing, u that we met, while the cruel per¬ fecution he underwent confined him within the deferted walls of his paternal houfe: then the partiality I had at an early period entertained for him was confirmed ; and, from the moment I avowed that he was not indifferent to me, I have thought of nothing but re¬ gulating my mind and iny wiflies to that fituation
fituation of life which I determined to fliare with him, whenever it fhould be in my power to fulfil the engagement I had made; a tacit engagement indeed, fince he was too generous to folicit my promife—but, neverthelefs, an engage¬ ment whicii worlds would not tempt me to recede from." It is unneceffary to relate Mrs. Marchmonts anfwer to this generous declaration.—From this moment the mother awaited, with redoubled delight, the hourly-expeded arrival of her fon ; while Althea yielded, for the firft tirne, to her extreme affedion for him, un¬ checked by any of thofe fears with which it had, till then, been chaftifed. Some apprehenfions yet hung over the whole party, which however feemed lighter, fince they were now, without fcruple, difcuffed. It was fo long fince Vampyre had been baffled in his purfuit, that the fanguine fpirits of Lucy per¬ fifted in believing it impoflible he ihould think
think of renewing it; while Mrs. March¬ mont, who had a deeper horror of his inveterate infamy, and Amelia, who had a more trembling dread of him from all flie fo well remembered of her father's fufferings, hardly dared encourage the confidence of his fafety which Althea and Lucy were delighted to cherifh— ihe former indeed, lefs from the hope that the rancorous villain might abate his malice, than from a fecret refolution flie made to facrifice all the fortune that was in her own power to purchafe tbe fafety of Marchmont. While thefe hopes, fears, and projeds took their turn with his female friends and family, the ever-generous and faithful Everfley was better contriving for his immediate fafety. Far from being lulled into fe¬ curity by the length of his abfence, or the apparent tranquillity of his enemies, he was fure that malice and avarice keep no holidays; and he knew that Vampyre, like a blood-hound, would inftantly re- Vol. IV. 1 gain
gain the fcent, and purfue his unhappy viciim even to death,.if he had once the flighteft intimation of his being in Eng¬ land.—Inftantly, therefore, on receiving Marchmont's firft letter, he wrote to him by the earlieft ftage, afluring him of the health of his family, acquainting him with Althéa's refidence among then), and entreating him to quit the weftern road, for him fo full of danger, and without entering London, where he misht the next moment meet onr of Vampyre's emiiïaries, to make the bcft of his way through IJampfhire and Surry, to the neighbourhood of Sitting- bourne. Marchmont, who waited for informa¬ tion from Everfley before he left the little inn from whence his laft letter was dated, no fooner received this welcome news, than all the gloom that had fo lately hung over his mind was diffipated ; his tranfient mifanthropy was forgot, with the uneafinefs that had taught it him; and
and hope feemed, with redoubled fplen¬ dour, to enlighten his path to happinefs. Althea finding a home with his mother— Althea added to the dear group that now fo anxioufly expeded him ! was an image fo delicious, that he could hardly believe it real. A thoufand times he read over that part of Everfley's letter; and fo eager was he to realize the lovely vifion it prefentcd to his eyes, that he wouid hardly have had prudence to at¬ tend implicitly to the advice given it\ the fubfequent part of it, if he had not fou ml. on enquiry, and by confulting an old frnokv map that hunç over the chimney of the alehoufe parlour, that he could make his way rather fooner wuh hired horfes into Kent, by exoh roads, rhan if he had gone round by London.—'Horfes, therefore, he imme¬ diately procured ; for, befides what he had left from the money paid him at Oftend which Forrefter had given him an order for, Everfley had fent him a t -í bank
bank note. Expence, therefore, being lefs an objeft to him at this moment, he took poft-horfes from town to town, which he thought were lefs liable to delays than poft-chaifes, as he could go his own pace. Very different, as he travelled among the tices of the New Foreft, now juft putting forth the tender iliade ,of tir; future fummer, were the fenfations of Marchmont from thofe he had long felt. Every wood fcent that floated in the air, every tree, whofe earlier foliage half-expanded above his head, were, for him, pregnant with delight. He flop¬ ped, as evening approached, at another humble cabin, that hung out its rullic fign o,n the fkirts of the foreft, to reft himfeif and the horfes, before he went on to Winchefter—a plan in which he was fure to have the thorough con« currence of the poftiilion, wiio accom¬ panied him to lead them back; and, leaving him to take care of them and of himfeif
himielf for an iiour, Marchmont wan¬ dered into the wood. Within its wild receffes a thoufand bilds were fingi ng their evening hymu^ to the fun, as his laft rays tinged the' boles and branches with rofy gold.—- Gradually all became filent; but, after a moment's paufe, the nightingale rather' practifed than performed her fuperior ferenade, juft trying her long-fufpended powers, and then becoming mute for a moment, as if to recolleft every link of harmony. This recalled to the memory of Marchmont his reflections and fen¬ fations of the preceding year, when, in making his way to Paris, he had often lingered among the woods, and par¬ ticularly at Fontainebleau;— then, from the flate of his mind, the fame founds that now foothed him, ferved only to merca fe his depreffion. The beautiful fonnet of Petrarch he had then repeated, with particular em¬ phafis on the two lines— ι 3 E tutte
E tutte notte par che m'accompagne E mi rammerne la mia dura forte. Then too he had read, with feelings too exactly coinciding, from Jean Bap- tifte Rouffeau, this apoftrophe to a nightingale— Hélas î que me» trifles penfées M'offrent des maux bien plus cuifansî Vous pleurez des peines paffées, Je pleure mes ennuie préfens ; £t quand la nature attentive Cherche â calmer vos depiaifirs* !t faut même queje me prive De la douceur de mes foupirs ! But now it feemed as if the face of nature had felt as new and rapid a change, within the few days fince March¬ mont had left the Ifle of Portland, as he himfeif had experienced fince he had received Everfley's letter; for in be¬ lieving, as he now did, that Althea would foon be all his own, he feemed to poifefs a renovated exiftence.—While he
he \ieldcd to hopes fo enchanting, thofe fymptoms of the renovation of nature which he i\\\v about him foothed his imagination! and the foliloquy he uttered took aimoft infenfibly the form of verfe, which he wrote down, meaning, if the lines were worth it, to polirli them at fome future time when he fliould be with Althea, to whofe fondnefs for ftowers they had particular reference,
LINES, Written in the New Foreft in eaily Spring.
AS in the woods, where leathery lichen weaves- Its wintiy webj among the fallow leaves, Winch (through cold months in whaling eddic; blown*» Decay beneath the branches once their own, Fiom the brown ilicitei of their foliage fear, Spi mg the young blooms that lead the flmal year : — When, vsak'd by vernal funs, the PUewort* d ¿re s lİKpand her fpottcd leaves, and ihining tlais,
And
And (veins empurpling all her taffels pak) Benas the foh Wmâ-fiower* in the tepià gale* Uncultured bells of azute Jacynths+ blow, And the breeze-fcenting Violet + huks below :-— So views the wanderer, with delighted eyes» Reviving hopes from biank defpondence rife, When, blighted by Adverfity's chill breath, Thofe hopes had felt a temporary death ; Then with gay heart he Jooks to future hours, When Love íhall diefs for him the fummer bowers ! And, as delicious dreams enchant his mind, Forgets his forrows pall, and gives them to the wind,
Marchmont now croffed the heaths of Surry 5 and as from a height he caught a very diftant view of St. Paul's, and faw the atmofphere darkly tinciured by the volume of fmoke that continual¬ ly hovers over London, the charming
\ liions with which he was indulging his fancy were for a moment checked, and two lines of Dr. Johnfon occurred to him :— lue ambufh theie relentlofi villains la> ; Λι.νΙ 1 4ft e the fell Attorney piowls for prey i But all unpleafant retrofped was for¬ gotten, when, looking eaftward, he fi-Turcd to himfeif Althea, his adored ? thea, adding her tender congratula¬ tions to thofe of his family, and all ready to receive the returned wanderer mì h delight '
i 5 CHAP.
CHAP. VIL
L'homme eft vraiment déplorable, Qui, de la fortune amoureux, Se rend lui-même miferable En travaillant pour être heureux.
Description, however laboured, would fail to convey an idea of the meeting of Marchmont with his family. Althea declined being prefent when he arrived; and ?? ?? ?? yet had ihe fo much occafion to colleft that mild fortitude which her early inftruftreis (alarmed for her happinefs when flie faw her trem¬ bling fenfibility) had laboured to make part of her charafter. Between the time when his fafety and arrival in England
England were known and the prefent moment, the thoughts of Althea had been wholly occupied by the idea of feeing him as an accepted lover ; for that he was fuch could not fail to be underftood, nor did ihe mean affeiledly or prudiihly to difavow what her heart dictated, fíat ihe been miftrefs of millions, it was to Marchmont ihe would have given them. PoiTeffing hardly a gentlewoman's fupport, and even part ofthat likely to be difputed or withheld, it was with him flic determined to fliare it; and if this refolution was taken while he was abfent, his prefence, his ardent affecìion for her, were certain to confirm it. On his part, violent as had been the paffion he had conceived for Althea, even from their firfl meeting, and long before it could be encouraged by a ray of hope, it was now 7 fo heightened bv efteem, by gratitude, and by that tender admiration which fuch a mind lodeed I ? in
in fo lovely a form could not fail to excite, that, when to all this her gene¬ rous partiality to him was added, it was perhaps impoffible that an attachment more ardent, or more tender, could in¬ habit a hunian heart. Everfley, always fearful of the ma¬ chinations of fhe fiend Vampyre, whofe perfecution he thought as inveterate and as much to be dreaded as the purfuit of the fecret tribunal in the fifteenth century, had eaneftly entreated March¬ mont not to expofe himfeif to a renewal of all the mifchief this legal monner was capable of doing him, by appearing pub¬ licly, or expofing himfeif carelefsly to the attempts that might ftill be made hy a wretch, who, to the bafeft and moft fordid cupidity of the loweft of his pro¬ feffion, added the defire of perfonal ven¬ geance for the expence he had been put to, or rather which he had put his clients to, in a fruitiefs purfuit, as well as for the buffets he had received. Everfley, there¬ fore^
fore, in his letters to Marchmont, had earneftly enforced the neceffity of pru¬ dence and concealment, till fomething could be done with the clients of Vam¬ pyre to whom he propofed to apply, flattering himfeif that thefe two men were already weary of continuing a per¬ fecution that promifed fo little advan¬ tage, at fuch an expence as he knew Vampyre had put them to already: for Everfley had heard from an acquaintance of one of them, that he complained of having already paid Vampyre three hun¬ dred pounds for what he had done againfl Marchmont, whofe debt to him was originally but nine hundred. The other creditor was not lefs difcontented; but as they were both of that defcription of men who love money better than repu¬ tation, and had not the leaft idea of honour or honefty, they had found Vampyre, who hefitated not at perjury, where he could venture it, or even forgery in the fame cafe, a very ufeful though
though diabolical inftrument in the con¬ trivances which u furers are often obliged to concert with attorneys; and as agreat deal of iniquity had gone on among them, they felt themfelves fo entangled with the infamous inftrument of their peculation, that, even when they faw him purfue a courfe which could do good to nobody but himfeif, they were afraid of flopping his villanous career. Everfley, however, flattering himfeif that they muft at length be tired, and that they would be glad to accept a com- pofition which he propofed to offer, efpecially if they believed Marchmont was ftill out of their reach, again and again exhorted him to remain concealed. The fervants who now lived with his mother did not know him; in the coun¬ try where fhe now refided he was totally a ftranger. " Surely therefore," faid Everfley in his letter to him, Cf furely it is advifable, my dear friend, to keep yourfelf as much as poffible concealed; you
you know the devil, they fay, never fleeps." To this exhortation March¬ mont anfwered, with more fpirit than prudence, in the words of Hotfpur :— f Oh î but I'll fhame the devil ; « Speak truth, and ftiame the devil í* Then continuing more calmly, he added, α If in the ftiort retrofped of my life, my dear Everfley, there is any re¬ colledion that brings with it unpleafura- ble fenfations, it is when I think over the ftratagems I was, or fancied I was, compelled to ufe, when I was trying to efcape from the toils of that poifonous reptile. I feel myfelf degraded when¬ ever I rcprefent myfeif as fearing fa contemptible, fo bafe a mifcreant, and can feel nothing now but indignation and fhame that I ever fubmitted to them— * Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born mané
" I cannot
" I cannot endure that it fhould for the future conimi öne of my actions. Be* fides, my dear Everfley, confider how little thefe precautions; if I could con¬ fent to take them, would avail mc. You fay I am not known to my mother's fervants.—But for whom can I pafs? Is it, do you really think, poffible for me to return to, or to be received by, my family under a borrowed name, in a fictitious charafter? And were it poffi¬ ble, could I in a circumftance fo evi¬ dently humiliating pretend to the favour of Mifs Dacres? She would furely de¬ fpife me; or if her fweetnefs, her ten¬ dernefs of difpofition pleaded for me, ftill I fhould defpife myfelf, and feel a man who ftoops to aft like an impoftor, unworthy of her good opinion. No ; í will take no falfe name—I will ufe no means of concealment; but I will cer¬ tainly not throw myfelf in the way of Vampyre or his employers, and I think it poflible, that, retired as we fliall live in Kent,
Kent, which is a great way from the haunts of thi& peft of fociety, I may re¬ main unnoticed." Everfley was well affured that this hope was ill-founded. However, as he thought himfeif acquitted towards his friend in having offered his opinion, he urged the matter nofartber; but confi¬ dered by what means his application to the two inexorable creditors could be made with the greateft profpect of fuc¬ cefs. In the inftant, however, of his fetting about this friendly office, and only two days after the arrival of Marchmont at the houfe of his mother, Mrs. Everfley, as if me had known how earneftly her hufband wiflied to fee his friend, took it into her head to follow the advice the phyficians had long given her in vain, and to go into Devonihire. This wretched woman, whofe temper alone would have worn out tbe ftrongeft frame, had inherited ? difeafed frame from her paren ts 3
parents, which was one among the many objedions Everfley had againit marry¬ ing her, though it was over-ruled by his father's earneft importunities. And in¬ deed the perfonal infirmities this had' brought upon her, rendered her to the generous mind of Everfley an objeft of pity, and made him often endure with more patience her infufferable ill-hu¬ mour and ftrange fits of caprice, which had the appearance of ftarts of infa- nity» Within the laft two or three years thefe had been more frequent, and it was at laft evident that they were brought on and aggravated by drinking. This vice inflaming her blood, occa¬ fioned her conftitutional complaints to recur with redoubled violence; and flier now thought herfelf, as the phyficians had long thought her, in dinger. Re- linquifhing, therefore, the plan fhe had hitherto infifted upon of paffing the· fpring months in London (a plan for which no reafon could poffibly be given, unic fs
unlefs it was that fhe knew her hufband- preferred being in the country), fhe now haftened to their home; and Everfley, who particularly wifhed to conceal the return of Marchmont from her, was compelled to attend her, flattering him¬ feif that, on pretence of finiíhing fome bufinefs which he really had in London, he fhould be able to return within a month. In this, however, he was mif¬ taken. The lady fuddenly took it into her head that their houfe was expofed to the north winds; that it was cold and damp; and having heard in London of forne fick perfon that had recovered by going to Penzance—thither flie refolved to go. Her unhappy huiband accom¬ panied her, and was thus at a very great diftance from Marchmont; without any confolation for fuch a difappointment, unlefs it was that he endeavoured very fincerely to rejoice at his fri end' s profpeft of happinefs, while he fometimes felt that it was well for his continuance in this
this frame of mind, that he had not too frequent opportunities of comparing nearly the good fortune of Maichmont, as the hufband of Althea, with his own intolerable deftiny. In the mean time Marchmont availed himfeif, at the earneft inftance of Al¬ thea, of the fteps Mr. Everfîey's friend had taken to afcertain her right to her fortune. As this Mr. Bargrave feemed intelligent, and had a very good cha¬ rafter, Marchmont made no fcruple to entruft him with the reafon of his en¬ quiry: but after numberlefs applications, which were always evaded, Mr. Bar- grave had recourfe to Doctors' Com¬ mons, where he found that the portion of Althea was, befides the favings of her aunt, a thoufand pounds, payable on the day of her majority or marriage, the difpofition of which he had no power to change by will ; and one thoufand more fettled Upon her, which, had he lived, he might have retained, but which
it
it did not appear that he had any right to alienate, as he feemed to have in¬ tended, by leaving a fort of right to Lady Dacres to pay or to withhold it, as Althea might or might not confuit or pleafe her in her choice of a hufband. This information Mr. Bargrave ga¬ thered, as well from the marriage ar¬ ticles of Althéa's mother, as from the will of her father. Neither of them were remarkable for clearnefs and precifion ; and the will ieemed to be that of a man who, wiihing to do right, was yet im¬ pelled to aft contrary to his feelings and his confeience, and failed in his attempt to reconcile clafhing interefts. Mr. Bargrave having obtained copies of thefe papers, laid them before a Counfellor of eminence, who declared that the mo¬ ment Althea was married ffie would become poffeffed of all her fortune, in defpite of the claufe in her father's will, or any thing that could be pleaded on any pretence to the contrary. This
This then, with what íhe already pof¬ feffed, would produce an income of about a hundred-and-forty pounds a year.—Mrs. Marchmont had aimoft a hundred ; and on this fum Althea thought they could live all together in fome cheap part of England, which, at a great diftance from the metropolis, it might yet be poflible to fmd. Marchmont fometimes feemed. amidft their moil interefting converfations, to ihrink from the idea of taking advantage of her affection for him, to engage her to ???? his indigence·, and while his love every day increafed, he often ap¬ peared to be ftruggling with his wifhes, and to attempt rather to remain wretched himfeif, than to riik reducing Althea below her rank in life. Ahhea was confcious of all this; but while it increafed her efteem, it alio piqued her generofity. The matter therefore, as to the poffeffion of her fortune on her marriage, being, as they believed, out
■out of doubt, it remained only to be confidered on the part of Marchmont whether he could be happy on fb li¬ mited an income, and whether, refign« ing ever/ project which his birth and his talents might qualify him to fucceed in, he could prefera remote retirement, and a very fmall income, which Althea, now well verfed in all the hiftory of his former life, thought his knowledge in farming might greatly help to increafe ? Now it happened, as was indeed very likely, that this very fame project had taken poffeffion of the mind of March¬ mont himfeif; but his mind as often re¬ coiled, from the idea of owing every thing to Althea, and of being unable to offer any thing to her, on whom he wouid have lavifhed worlds:—when, however, two people arc agreed in a general fen- riment, it is not long before that agree¬ ment becomes known to each other.—- Althea, having once made up her mind that this plan of life would make her happy,
happy, had no hefitation in piopofing it, tbougb notimmediately to Marchmont, to Lucy. Of courfe, it eafily found its way to the perfon moft interefted; and, in the tnext converfation tbey had together, Al¬ thea found means to filence the delicate fcruples of Marchmont, who, no longer attempting at the ftoic ν irtue of refufing the fupreme happinefs in his power, thought only of haftening it. When, however, they talked every circum¬ ftance over, it became his tafk to ob¬ viate objections, for Althea now thought ? would be highly indecorous not to inform Lady Dacres of her intentions ; whereas Marchmont, who knew perfeftly well her Ladyfhip's averfion to him, and her reafons for it, dreaded left flic ihould find fome means to prevent it. He was fure that her confent was not to be ob¬ tained ; and had no doubt but Althéa's acting againft it, if fhe affefted to afk it, would irritate her, and fet her upon trying not only to enforce, but to go beyond
beyond the power given her by the will of her huiband. Befides all this, Marchmont knew that Vampyre, wiio had been one of the agents of Sir Ralph Gunfton, was ftill occafionally em¬ ployed by the heirefs of his property ; and there was fome ftrange juggle about the mortgage given by the elder March¬ mont to Sir Ralph, in which Vampyre had a principal cor crn. Indeed it had alwavs been fufpeded by Everfley, that the iniquity of that tranfadion, and the fear, if Marchmont bad money or fuccefs in the world, that it might be enquired into, were very ftrong mo¬ tives for the malignity of all the parties againft him, and for their perfeverance in haraffmg and diflreffing him, to keep him down. Of all otlier people then, except Vampyre himfeif, Lady Dacres was the laft to whom he wifhed to have Althéa's intentions in his favour com¬ municated:— ít And, after all," faid he, as they difcourfed upon this, " what do Vol. IV. ? you
you owe this woman? a creat m e who not only attempted to effrange from you your father's affcciions, but dared to propofe faci ificing vou for life, merely becaufe fhe could not bear the fight of fupreme excellence and lovelinefs!— Not content wiih fo bafc an attempt, you fee that flie has endeavoured to ufurp a power over you, by inducing your father to make a will conti ary to the fenfe of a former and irrevocable deed ; yet how backward flic continued to give you any proteciion whieh that power ought to have implied, her con- duel towards you, for the three or í 'our months you remained in her houfe, furely is a fufficicnt ipecimen. Can my Akhea, who generally fees objecta with judgment fo true, can fhe really be fo influenced by prejudice as to believe ftie ought to compliment away even one hour of her repofe, to keep up forms of deference and affecìion where they do not exift r 1 *' t< it
t( İt is lef,," anfwcicd Altlica, tf to appear to retain deference towards her, than not to violate the rules that the world has prcfcribed on theie occafions, and the refpect which feems annexed to one who bea»'s my father's name, and to whoie family I am fo nearly related." " And yet," refumed Marchmont, <l Lady Da e res has herfeif been the example of pa\mg very little refpect to the memory of your father ; for ihc af¬ forded \ou neither friendihip nor pro¬ tection, but fullered her malignant envy to counteract every feeling that flie ought to have had towards the daughter of her hufband. As to the world, let me, moft beloved Althea, a ilv you what it L· you undei ftand by tho term ?— 'i here ib, I truft, nobody who is lefs cjlpofed than I am to argue againft that refpect for gen^* \\ opinion, which is a very proper and falutary feeling in a certain degree, and is not unfrequently the guardian of virtue and honour when ? a other
other defences rnight perhaps fail ; bui, believe me, the world, in this cafe, arc quite as likel) to take your-part as that of Lady Dacres, who, certainly, is not generally beloved. Let us, however, in¬ vefligate what wc mean when we talk of the world. I fuppofe what is gene¬ rally underftood by it, is the great mafs of fociety, or, to ufe a formerly faihionable term, les Gens cowme il faut, who have a certain degree of confequence becaufe they have money or refources enough to appear at every faihionable piace in London during the winter; have hand¬ fome houfes in or near fome of the fquares ; and go in the fummer to the places of public refort. I take it for granted, that this is the world.—* Well! and what do they know of my Althea ? She has hardly ever been among them; her beauty has never been fhewn where it might excite the ad¬ miration of the men, or the envy of the women. In fuch a narrow circle as Margate
Mai gate in the declining feafon, the extraordinary refolution you feemed to have taken, and the impertinent talk of ι wo-foolifh women who knew you, ex¬ cited a momentary, and only a mo¬ mentary, curiofity. But in London, where iomethiug new and ftrange, or what plain people may think fo, occurs every two or three days, the remarks that jour marriage with a ruined man would make, would be hardly of an hour's duration. Is this, therefore, the voi id to whom my Ahhea would make the flighteft facrifice of her own opinion? for whom ftie would change one of her intentions?—But, as it has been well obferved, that all perfons are of confe¬ quence to themfekes, and thole who aie the moft ίο form an atmofphere of their own around them, and call that the world, let us examine the woild of Lady Dacres, to which I have no doubt but that flie will make bitter exclama- :ions. You muft know, my Akhea, ? 3 tbat
that during your father's hie (he wa» \ ifited, as fifty other fuch per fon ages are vifited, becaufe ihe kept a card af- lembly, gave good duincis, had a title, and was known to poifefs a great deal of money : but among all the people who left cards at her houfe, or made money by them within it ; among all who talked to her at St. James's when íhe once a year made her courtefy there, or ate the dinners and courted the intereft of Sir Audley, is there one, do you think, who would care a fingle ftraw whether or no they ever faw her again? Affuredly not.— Ner world, therefore, is confined to two or three Dowagers who, like her, love to fave money, and vho meet to wrangle and fay fpiteful things over their card-table, but aie otherwife the beft friends; that is, they talk about their ceconomy, and compare notes; relate the conduct of their fer¬ vants, and the prices they give for the various articles they have occafion to buy \
buy ; lament the dearnefi» of provifion«, and tlie expence of a family; and wonder, d they who have inch handibme in¬ comes ? umot hve, how fuch a one can álcl'b iiCi felf and daughters as fhe does ; and cannot imagine how Mr. Such-a-one lives m he docs, but fuppofe there will be a violem end to fuch dafliing doings. Such," continued Marchmont, " are the beings wh© conftitute the world of Lady Dacres: with them 1 have no cloabt but that we fhail ferve for ex¬ clamation and abufe for a fortnight at kaft: peihaps for three weeks or a month Lady Dacres will complain, and her dear friends will pity—but it feems to me that fuch will be the very worft that can happen —And let me afli. my adoied Althea if n can, if it ou tiu to ínteiíetc with our world, which we ihail find in our own hearts, in each other, and in our family :" It way edidy be believed that Althea ncquiefced m reafoning, which even ? 4 from
from a lefs beloved mouth flic might have heard with convidion. Nothing now remained but for Marchmont to obtain Akhea's confent to name the day when they fliould be united. But here a real difficulty occurred—Akhea was not of age; Lady Dacres was undoubt¬ edly her neareft relation, and ftood, with Mr. Mohun, in place of her father, whofe executors they were. To cele¬ brate the marriage therefore was im¬ poffible, unlefs by going to Scotland, or by banns publiffied in the parifh church. The former plan was too ex- penfive to be thought of, even if Althea had not declared her decided repugnance to it, The Iaft alone remained; and many were the objedions that might be urged againft it : with thefc, however, Marchmont contended as well as he could—ftill enforcing the idea, that they were fo little known in the part of Eng¬ land where they now refided, that it was extremely unlikely the publicity of their intended
intended union fliould reach the know¬ ledge of the perfons from whom they dcii re d to conceal not only the mar¬ riage, but the return of Marchmont to England. Mrs. Marchmont, who at her fon's earneft entreaty undertook to ailiil in conquering the fcruples that again af¬ failed Althea, felt their force increafed by her apprehenfions that the perfecu- iions of Vampyre might be renewed with redoubled vigilance; —apprehenfions which none of the fearlefs arguments of Marchmont had ever appeafed, and w hich ihe now thought would be too certainly realized. However, as the experiment was of neceflity to be made, and as fince Marchmont's return no at¬ tempt whatever feemed to have been thought of on tlie part of his perfecutors to renew their fruitiefs and wanton at¬ tacks on his perfonal freedom, his mo¬ ther, while her heart was ilill-oppreffed with anxiety, endeavoured to put on the ? 5 femblance
femblance of hope fhe was far from feel¬ ing. Certain that he would be mife¬ rable without Althea, and having from fome months obfervation convinced her¬ felf that Althéa's happinefs was equally interefted in her union with him, fhe thought that fhe had no right, merely from thofe fears which depreffion of fpirit from long-continued forrow might perhaps make her weakly and u n ne¬ ceffarily indulge, to raife any obftacles to a marriage evidently advantageous to her fon; while fhe was too fond of him, and too partial to his really uncommon merit, not to think that he deferved any woman, and that with him none could fail of finding happinefs in any ftation of life. Akhea too, when alone, took refoiu- tion fteadily to confider her fituation; and foon convinced herfelf that the ftep fhe was about to take was dictated by reafon as well as by inclination. Alone and unconnected in the wòild, at a pe¬ riod
riod when other young women are guarded by the vigilant affeftion of pa¬ rents or of brothers, fhe was deftitute not only of perfonal protection, but of any defence againft the injuftice of Lady Dacres. She could not doubt, but that the more forlorn and unfriended her condition was, the more oppreffion flie fliould fuffer from the cupidity and ma¬ lice of her mother-in-law, aided, as it piobably would be, by the profeflionai power of Mohun fharpened by pique. Thé fpirit, the firmneis, and the talents of Marchmont;, when he ihould be em¬ powered by his marriage to claim her rights, would, fhe fuppofed, awe thefe two people into doing h er tardy juftice; and in fhe guardianíhip of the man flie loved, flie bei .eved no real evil eould overtake her. Humble fortune ihe did not confider as fuch; and was veiy fure that the moft elevated, without Marchmont, would have been for her only iplendid wretchednefs. ? ? Having
Having by thefe arguments, added to the earneft perfuafions of Lucy and the milder expoftulations of her mother, conquered the reluctance flie had at firfl felt to the public manner in which her marriage was to be announced — íhe confented that it fliould be [o, and five weeks after his return to England the ceremony was performed in the vil¬ lage church, that united Althea for ever to the happy Marchmont. Marchmont, now cfteeming himfeif bleft beyond the ordinary lot of man, was long unwilling to think of any thing that by recalling him to refledions on the future might embitter his prefent feli¬ city. But Mr. Bargrave, the folicitor whom Everfley had employed for htm, reminded him at the end oi three weeks that it was highly neceffary he ihould, as the huiband of Althea, make a formal application to the executors of her fa¬ ther for the payment of her foitune. This he thought ihould be done in per- fõnj.and however unwilling he was to
ςο to London, ? determined not to fhrink from any fervice in which his adored Althea was interefted, he ap¬ pointed a time when Mr. Bargrave w ? as to meet him, and fct out on this un¬ pleafant expedition. Lady Dacres, however, was not in town: but Mohun, who was attending ïhe courts with his ufual affiduity, was to be heard of at his chambers in the Temple; and there Marchmont, accom¬ panied by Mr. Bargrave, procured ad- mi ??? to him. Marchmont could not enter on this conference without feeling a great de¬ gree of curiofity to fee how Mohun, whom he only knew by fight, and by the invidious manner in which he had pof¬ feffed himfeif of the houfe in Surry (which had belonged to his father, and was inhabited by his family), would re¬ ceive a man he had treated with rudenefs already, and who now was to appear before him as a claimant of property which
which the fage counfellor feemed indif¬ pofed to relinquifh, and in the fìlli more obnoxious charafter of a fuccefsful and happy rivah
CHAP.
CHAP. VIIL
li» vain oui plans of happinefd we raife t Fain is our lot, and patience is our piaife.
JVlOHUN, though he was well awai ? whom it was that he faw, and on what occafion he was come, affected the moft complete ignorance. This he did to put Marchmont in the moft difagreeable of all circumftances, that of telling his name, and relating his bufinefs. This, however, Marchmont did in a few words, and with that firmnefs and dignity which a certain degree of con¬ fcious merit ought ? give every man. Mohun, thrown back in his chair, his eyes
eyes half clofed, and his lips drawn in^ heard him aimoft to the end; and then, interrupting him with a. cold and fuper- cilious air, faid, putting out his hand as in the aciion of filencing a perfon, "Well, Sir; well! You need not trou¬ ble yourfelf to fay any more—You are come then to inform me, that you, a man acknowledging yourfelf not worth a fhilling, without a profeffion, without any means of fubfiftence, have contrived to marry the daughter of my late friend Sir Audley Dacres. And what, Sir, do you ????? me to fay to fuch infor¬ mation? What ftiould I fay, but that ? am very forry for it ?" c< It is perfectly indifferent to me," replied Marchmont, " what you fay. I came not here to liften to your remarks, but to know when you· will appoint a day for meeting me to pay or transfer the money which I am entitled to in- right of my wife." ft What money ?" ., Hev
,t Iler fortune, to which you know her to have become entitled." " Oh ! no doubt you took care to inform yourfelf of all that; for indeed, however fmall it is, and under what¬ ever reftridions, it was itili an objed tO^Olí." íf Look'ye, Mr. Mohun," faid March¬ mont impatiently, ce I will not be in¬ fulted. What I afk I have a right to know. From you I fhail infift upon an anfwer — and let me affure you, Sir...... " Good Sir ! " interrupted Mohun contemptuoufly, " don't heat yourfelf. Be affured I am not to be moved by all that. As far as I am empowered to ad under the w 111 of rny late friend, I fliall ccitainly abide by his meaning, whomfo- cver it may difpleafe. If you think, or any of your wife advifers will tell you, that you have a remedy againft me— take it, Sii ! take it; i have no man-» ner
ner of objedkm to meeting you on legal ground." He then called to his clerk, and, bid¬ ding hiim fhew the gentlemen out, rofe from his feat, and marched into another room. Marchmont warmly expoftulafed, and might have done fomething more as he ?????, if Mr. Bargrave had not aimoft by force w inline Id ?? trill ???? dlfappeared, and ihu«t the door with the ær of a man wha held his vifitor too ch^ap to ftVew hira the ufual forms of civility. Indignation and rage poffeffed Mai ch- mo-Flt at being obliged to- fubmit to» fixh treatment without inftantly refenting it : and Bargrave, with fome difficulty, pre¬ vailed upon him- to leave the houfe. His firft emotions led him to go into a coffee-houfe and write ία Mohun; but Bargrave entreated him to give himfeif only one hour's refledion, after which, lie faid, he would no longer oppofe any lin n g
thing he determined upon. Marchmont now miffed the fricndfliip and council of Everflcv—He felt himfeif too much irritated to truft to his own judgment; and of his prefent advifer he knew but little, and had a prejudice againft hini on account of his profefilon. In this turbulent ftate of mind he walked from the Temple towards Charing Crofs, hced- lefs of the furrounding objects, and un¬ certain whither he was going, when he fãw a crowd gather round a waggon in the ftreet, where there was a prefs of coaches, and heard fome women ex¬ claiming againft the horror of the fight, and what a fhame it was that fo many poor fellows fhould fuffer fo.—Roufed by the eagcrnefs of one woman, who was fpeaking and weeping, Marchmont aiked w-nat was the matter. '* Tlie matter!" anfwered the com- plainci ; " Why it is a waggon-load of wounded foldiers from beyond fea — fome without legs, and fome without arms: and,
and, for my part,] could tear my ílefh to fee them ; for Pve loft, my only brother, and a fine lad as ever was feen, in this curfed war!" ** The better was his luck," faid a decent but rough-looking man who ftood near her; " better to die ten times over than be crippled like thofe poor fel¬ lows. However, 'tisnotatythe, no nor a fiftieth hardly, of only the laft cargo ; for moft of them have been fent on by wa¬ ter that they might not be feen, be¬ caufe the people grumble." The man then paffed orr with a fignificant fhrug; and Marchmont, cafting his eyes towards the waggon, was ftruck with the uni¬ form of the regiment in which Captain Forrefter ferved, and aimoft inftantly recognized an old ferjeant who belonged to his company. Marchmont ftepped haftily towards him, and, enquiring after Captain Forrefter, learned, with inex¬ preffible fatisfadion, that he had been exchanged, and either was arrived or would
would very foon be in London.— Having given the honeft veteran a fmall prefent, and promifed to enquire after him, Marchmont now haftened on to¬ wards Curzon-ftreet, where his elder brother had a houfe, at which, when he was in town, Forrefter ufually refided. All this while Bargrave had followed Marchmont, now and then venturing a gentle expoftulation, to which, as he had it not in his nature to be rude to any man unprovoked, Marchmont anfwered as civilly as he could, though without having much attended to the pacific and legal arguments the Solicitor fo feduloufly offered.------Thefe Bargrave renewed with more warmth and fcrtouf« nefs as they got into quieter ftreets, where he hoped to be heard to more advantage: but Marchmont, who had now an objed towards which his imme¬ diate views were direded, walked fafter than ever ; fo that Bargrave, who was a ihort man, not higher than Marchmont's elbow,
■elbow, and immoderateiy fat, couid by no means .keep pace with his enormous strides. The weather was extremely warm; and the poor lawyer, trotting along he knew not whither, yet dread¬ ing that his client was going to execute fome ad of violence, or at leafl to pre¬ pare for one, took off his hat, puffed and blew, and, when he had by great exertion got near enough, feized the arm of his too a6Hve companion, faying, "Mr. Marchmont, Sir!—Confider, Sir! •—For mercy '¿ fake, Sir!"—The word mercy ftruck on the ear of Marchmont. *' Mercy ?" anfwered he.—" My good friend, what have you lawyers to do with Mercy ? Your bufinefs, you know, is only with Juflice:* " Well, but dear Sir., let me fpeak !— Poh ! poh !—Blefs me, it is vaftly hot!—Do, Sir—give mc leave, Sir!— Suppofe we walk a little flower, I hope there is no hurry.—Allow me juft to ftate to you-------" " State
" State what you will/' replied Marchr. mont, " but prithee make hafte, for I fliall be obliged to wiih you a good morning in a minute—I am going to meet one of my bed: friends." This expreffion, and the vehemence Avith whichMavchmontuttered it, ieemed to imply féconds and piitols ; and, im¬ preifed with this idea, Bargia ve began once more to plead for peace, or at leaít only the legal weapons which he was himfeif able to wield. " My dear Sir," faid he, " I only entreat to be attended to for five mi¬ nutes-—for five minutes only. You are unufed to the practice of us lawyers.*— You have nc\ er, perhaps, attended the Courts-— elfe vou would know, that when a great pleader behaves cavalierly, as perhaps Mr. Mohun might do to you to-day, he means nothing in the world, nothing in the whole world, rude to the individual: it is merely, as one may fay, a way, a form, a manners—and any body that
that íhould go for to refent fuch a thing would be reckoned vaftly abfurd.— Xord,*Sir, if you were to hear the ihings the counfel fay to each other ! Why, while they call one another learned bro¬ ther and learned friend, they fometimes, aye veiy often, are fo abufi ve, that you would think, perhaps, they muft fight as foon as they come out of court.—Not at all, Sir—no fuch thing—they are the beft friends in the world." " Ycry likely," replied Marchmont. " í can bave no objection to the gen¬ tlemen's amufing themfelves in that manner; but you muft excufe me if! decline being made the object, out of court or in it either, of Mohun's in¬ folence."—" Why, my dear good Sir/* refumed Bargrave, " what can you do?" " It is not neceffary, I believe, Mr. Bargrave, for you to enquire," cried Marchmont a little peevifhly.—" Good God! Sir^—why, do but confider—why, Sir, v ou cannot challenge Mr. Mohun ?" « Why
u Why not?— Doeshe not call himfeif a gentleman? and is it not all a man can do when infulted as you faw him infult me, to write as I have written?" " Well; but, Sir, Mr. Mohun will not fioht." ? « Very likely not; but if the im¬ pudent braggart will not be com¬ pelled to behave like a gentleman in any way, I will kick him wherever I meet him." " Kick him!" exclaimed the attorney, " kick him! kick Mr. Mohun?—Why, Sir, he'll have a Chief-Juftice's warrant againft you—he will upon my foul . . .'* At that moment Marchmont arrived at the door that, from its number, he knew to belong to the houfe whither Forrefter had direded him. He knocked eagerly at it. A fervant prefently appeared, who, on his earneft enquiry for Captain Forrefter, imagined he knew fomething of his arrival; and, hearing his name, told him that his mailer, Lord Roch- Vol. IV« 1. dale,
dale, was at home, and would be glad to fee him. Marchmont, difappointed at not find¬ ing his friend arrived, yet anxious to converfe with one fo nearly related to him, flightly wiflied Mr. Bargrave a good morning, and walked into the houfe. While Bargrave returned to his chambers in Lincoln's-! nn, not much delighted with his hot walk, nor with the little attention Marchmont feemed to give to his advice-— v< Yes, yes/* muttered he to himfeif, " he will have a Chief-Juftice's warrant after him—let him reckon upon that.'* Marchmont found, in Lord Roch¬ dale, the elder brother of his friend, a young man greatly refembling him in perfon, yet without that generous warmth and aciive fpirit of benevolence which gave fo much intereft to the manner, and fo much energy to the charader, of the younger brother. Lord Rochdale, from
from the meffage his fervant had de¬ livered, imagined Marchmont to be fome officer who came with intelligence of his brother, for whofe return and health he feemed warmly interefted : and when Marchmont explained who he was, Lord Rochdale expreffed himfeif with all the kindnefs and civility it was in his nature to ihe w ; defired to fee him again j enquired where he eould wait upon him; and affured him, that when Lord Stanwarden returned out of the North, he would join with ail the For¬ refter family in teftifyin^ how true a fenfe they had of Mr. Marchmuntá generous and ferviceable friendihip to¬ wards a perfon fo dear to them all. Marchmont, whofe ardent fpirit and ingenuous temper induced him to fpeak highly of his friend and openly of him¬ feif, related the rife of his acquaintance with Captain ????????. Lord Rochdale heard him with attention î and when Marchmont took his leave, he was af- L 2 fu reel,
fured, that as foon as Captain Forrefter arrived, he fhould have notice, by let¬ ter, according to the direftion he left. The moment Marchmont got into the ftreet after this interview, all that had paffed with Mohun recurred to him. The hope of being able to con¬ fuit Forrefter, the fatisfadion of feeing him, as he had expefted to do, returned well to England after fo many perils, had for a while fufpended the pain in¬ flifted by the infults of Mohun, and the pecuniary diftrefs to which injuftice muft expofe the lovely being to whom his fate was united. But now it all rufhed upon his mind at once. He faw that he had for his adverfary aman who, to the natural hardnefs and anogance of his temper and his profeflion, added a perfonal difiiké to him; and he felt himfeif equally unable to bear his af¬ fronts patiently, or to contend againft the advantages his law talents gave him to defend the wrong. Vexed to have fiich
fuch a repulfe to relate to Althea, and altogether uncertain how to aft, he went into a coffee-houfe, and wrote to Ever- fiev an account of what had happened^ He forbore to exprefs any intention of perfonally refenting the infolence of Mohun, which he thought the prudence of Everfley might oppofe; but defired in general his advice, and ftated his fears left chicane and quirk, dreadful weapons in the hands of fuch a man as Mohun, ihould deprive Althea, at leaft for a very long time, of the two thoufand pounds, which previous to his marriage he had, by the moft binding deed Bar- grave could imagine, fettled wholly on her. To a generous and liberal mind there is nothing fo impoffible to fupport as the unblufhing injuftice of men who commit robbery and call it legal; and now, that the very means provided by men in fociety for their mutual pro- L 3 teftion
teftion íhould be converted into thoíe of oppreffion, plunder, and ruin, feemed í uch a defect, fuch a blot in the hiftory of a great nation, that Marchmont could not endure to think of it. Already fuffering from the fatal law entangle¬ ments of his father, which had reduced his family from affiuence to indigence,, he held the whole fraternity in a fort of abhorrence, aimoft forgetting his natural candour when he thought of them.— Yet there are, undoubtedly, in this pro¬ feflion, men of equal integrity and abi¬ lity. It is only to be lamented, that even the raoft eminent ihould adhere to the maxim of undertaking any caufe for which they are engaged, however unjuft may be the pretenfions of the client, and that " To make the worfe appeat the better icafon*' is often the purpofe for which the moil brilliant eloquence is exerted, by men w1h- #
who, m private life, are the models of moral virtue and unfhakcn integrity. Perhaps no man iu any rank or pro¬ feffion had ever fo iittle claim to thefe lait virtues as he in whofe power the little fortune of Althea was placed.—- Profligate, proud, violent and confe¬ quential, totally regardlefs of the feel¬ ings of others, or rather delighting in his power of inflicting pain, Mohun had, in a thoufand i n flan ces, deferved the brief charader given of the tyrant Henry the Eighth. Unprincipled and favage even in his intercourfe with women, he had never been tempted to think of marriage but in the inftance of Althea. Her beauty had made an impreflion on his ferocious heart, which lie could not now iccolled without feeling the mofl diabolical hatred againft the man who had, under all the difadvantages of po¬ verty, fupplcntcd him.—Difdaining, as he generally did, to look back on any circumftances that had difpleafed or 1 4 mortified
mortified him, he however remembered that Marchmont (whom he knew by fight) had been at Capelftoke about the time that Althea, rcfolutely diimiffing him, had preferred the difmal feclufion of Eaftwoodleigh to the opulence and fplendour fhe might have enjoyed as his wife.—Not doubting, therefore, on put¬ ting circumftances together, but that Al¬ thea had even then an attachment to this undone wanderer, and that her refufal of him had been its confequence; he thought with the moft inveterate rancour of the man who had thus been preferred, and dwelt with malignant delight on the power he now poffeffed to opprefs and perfecute thefe unfortunate people :—and it was too certain that he poffeffed this power to a greater degree than they, much as they dreaded him, were aware of. To thefe faculties for hurting them, Marchmonts warmth of temper un¬ happily added another. While he wrote to
to Everfley, he recalled, indignantly re¬ called, every ctrcumftance of the fuper- cilious and initient treatment he had experienced from Mohun. His blood boiled in his veins, as he dwelt on the fcornful, the unworthy manners, towards him, of a man to whom he merely ap¬ plied as a matter of right, and who, even if he were not difpofed to admit his claims, could have no motive, but mean¬ ing diredly to infult him, for forgetting he was a gentleman. Reafon and expe¬ rience had in a great meafure conquered the prejudices which his father (a bigot to family pride, and to what ufed to be called Tory ifm) had taught him to cherifh ; yet the fentiments of the old cavaliers, the blood of an ancient and h ; gh-minded family, ading on the warm and active fpirits of three-and-twenty, were altogether of too inflammable a nature not to filence the voice of pru¬ dence, and fet at nought the pacific ad¬ vice of Bargrave, to which indeed he had L 5 hardly
hardly liftened. He could not bear to think of returning to Althea to relate that he had been treated like a flave, and had tamely endured it; endured it too, when her rights and her pro¬ perty were in queftion. He determined therefore not to faj r , when he arrived at home, what had paffed, and to wait in expeftation of fome farther expla¬ nation from Mohun, which he thought could not fail to be brought on by the following fliort LETTER. u StR, « When I this morning applied to you, I fuppofed I was addreffing myfelf to a profeflionai man and a gentleman. J ? the former charafter you feem de¬ termined not to give me ihe anfwer or the fatisfaction I have a right to demand— I therefor« expect, Sir, if you perfift in Urn ???«&?1, that you wiU think of replying
replying to me in the latter.—I am to be heard of at this place; and, expecting your early notice, " I am, Sir, " Your humble fervant, «* E. A. Marchmont. « Cecil-Street Coffee-Houfe, lt June 22de* Having difpatched this by a porter, Marchmont proceeded to the ftables where he had left the horfe which had brought him out of Kent, and returned to his family. He found Althea and his three fifters waiting at the gate of the court that furrounded their little habitation. As foon as by the light of the moon they were fure it was he, each expreffed her joy at his return; and AUhea, taking his arm as they walked into the houfe, faid— u We have been uneafy at your ftay, Marchmont :—after what you faid yefterday when you left us, we had L 6 hopes
hopes you would return early in the day, and your mother has fo alarmed herfelf that fhe is quite ill." Marchmont adored his mother, and his heart now fhrunk from the idea of the pain fhe would feel did fhe know the truth ; nor was the tender folicitude of Ahhea lefs diftreffing to him. He "made therefore an effort entirely to ftifle his feelings, and conceal the true ftate of his mind ; and though he fomewhat overacted his part, his mother, his wife, and his fifters, were too happy, in feeing him returned, to allow themfelves to make any remarks that might difturb their fatisfaftion. „, The next day, however, the taik that he had impofed upon himfeif be¬ came more difficult. Unufed to diffi- mulation, and with a countenance that expreffed every emotion of his heart, he knew not how to evade either the enquiring looks of Mrs. Marchmont, or the queftions naturally afked by Althea as
as to the event of his application to Mohun. He could only anfwer in ge¬ neral, that he faw Mohun only for a moment, and that he was to go to town again the following Wednefday ; when they were to meet on the bufinefs. Though this account, and the evident wifh to efcape from the converfation^ which Althea remarked, were far from being fatisfaftory, yet fhe forbore to teafe him with any farther que ilions, convinced that to his judgment flie might implicitly truft the management of their affairs, and that whenever he had any thing pleafant to relate flie fhouid cer¬ tainly fcnow it. She affumed,. therefore, an air of cheerfulnefs, in the hope of difpelling the dejeftíon which, in defpite of all her endeavours to conquer it 3 hung over Mrs. Marchmont, as well as a fort of tranfient chagrin that occafion¬ ally feemed to mark the features of Marchmont himfeif, and which flic thought
thought he made efforts (not always fuccefsful) to drive away. Fenchurch, his faithful fervant, who had lived with him from a boy, had at Marchmont's own defire left him, and landed at Plymouth, when he was on his way to France. It was with the utmoft difficulty that he bad been prevailed upon to do this; but not being able to endure the thoughts of entering into any other fervice, he had returned to his father, who was a fmall farmer in the north of Devonfhire, where he entreated his mafter 10 fend to him whenever he fhould mean to take a fervant, in what¬ ever country he might be. Marchmont had a great regard for the man, and held this promife facred: as foon, therefore, as his marriage was certain, and a fer¬ vant became neceffary to him, he had written to this honeft fellow, who in¬ ftantly haftened to refume the fervice of a mafter whom he loved, and he had now been fome time eftabliihed m it. It
It was to him, therefore, that Marché mont gave the charge of going to Lon¬ don, the next day after his interview with Mohun and the letter he had writ¬ ten, to fee if there were any anfwer to it left at the coffee-houfe; charging him, if he found any, not to deliver it on his return in the prefence of his mother, or of his wife or fifters. Fenchurch, ever anxious for his mafter's fafety, obeyed, but not without uneafinefs. He return¬ ed with uncommon expedition. There was no letter from Mohun—Another and another day paffed—The people of the coffee-houfe had then been direded to fend any letters to him, but from Mo¬ hun none arrived. Fenchurch, there¬ fore, was again difpatched to London, with orders to go with a verbal mef¬ fage to Mr. Mohun at his chambers, faying, that he came from Mr. March¬ mont, defiring an anfwer to a let¬ ter left the Saturday before. Fen¬ church returned witb his ufual celerity : he
he had feen the derk at Mr. Mohun's chambers, who told him that he knew nothing of any anfwer—that Mr. Mo¬ hun went out of town on Saurday even¬ ing, and as i erm was now over, would only return for a few days before he left London for the whole fummer. If any thing could add to the affront¬ ing infolence of the reception which Mohun had given to Marchmont, it was this rude and contemptuous manner of declaring that he was beneath any anfwer at all. All the philofophy that Marchmont thought he had acquired in the fchool of adverfity, was infuffi¬ cient to fave him from fuffering the moft violent paroxyfm of rage and indigna¬ tion. Dreading the enquiries and even the looks of his family, left they fliould difcover how much he was difturbed, he walked haftily from the houfe, though it was late in the evening, as if he hoped to appeafe the agitation of his mind by action. Not far from the habitation of his
his mother was the large and well wood¬ ed park of a nobleman, in which fince his return he had taken many delightful evening walks with Althea and his fifters. Towards it, aimoft mechanically, he now direfted his fteps: he croffed a broad green lane that led along under the park paling : the moon, now at full, threw acrofs it the long fhadows of the trees in the park that bounded it, and of the thorns and bruih-wood that grew in a road ίο little frequented ; when proceed¬ ing towards a ftile, Marchmont thought he faw a man haftily pafs from one to another of thefe fhrubby tufts. Had the man, whoever he was, ftill continued his way, he would have concluded it to be a labourer, and would hardly have noticed him ; but, as it was, there was an evident defire of concealment that indi¬ cated fome bad intention» To detect fuch he thought every man's bufinefs; and though he had no weapon in his hand, not even a ftick, yet being of a fearlefs
fearlefs difpofition, he ftepped forward to the place where he believed the man had ikulked among the buihes, but faw nobody. He forced himfeif be¬ tween them — ftopped, liftened, went round on the other fide—Again he ftop¬ ped, and, looking forward under the paling, though* he faw at a confideiable diftance fomething creeping along in the Ihade they and the trees above them made. Marchmont, thoughtlefs of con¬ fequences, darted afer it. The man, for fuch he with difficulty diftinguiihed the figure to be, now rofe to his natural ftaiure, and ran with fpeed towards the high road at about a mile diftance. Marchmont, fwiftoffoot, kept him ftill in fight, and gained upon him: but juft before he reached the road, he unac¬ countably dlfappeared; and Marchmont, after a long fearch, recolleding how far he had been led from the houfe by a circumftance which, fufpicious as it was, he might never get explained; and being
being afraid that he fhould give fome uneafinefs at home by fo iate a walk, returned the neareft way he could, ftill meditating on Mohun.—When he entered the houfe he found, as they all knew his fondnefs for walking by moon¬ light, that they had not been alarmed. Althea and Lucy gently chid him for not making them of the party: he anfwered them in the fame tone, and they all fet down to their fimple fupper. Lucy, full of animation and fpirit, was now engaged in a defctiption of a party who had that day been (to the wonder of the family) to pay a bridal vifit to Althea. It confifted of a widow and her three maiden fifters, all ladies between fifty and fixty, who refided on a very handfome income, the greateft part of the year, at a very good family houfe about four miles off. But having unfortunately nothing to do but to fee that their manfion and gardens were kept in oirîer —that their coach-horfcs looked flecks
fleek, and their fervants were all order¬ ly— bufinefs which, fettled as it had been for years in a regular routine, was in¬ fufficient to occupy any one of them— · they were under the neceffity of turning their talents to the infpeftion of their neighbours' affairs. Even the humble and retired family of Mrs. Marchmont at fuch a diftance could not efcape their curiofity. The farmer of whom flie rented the houfe was a tenant of theirs, and ihe had hardly been fettled a fort¬ night before moft of the particulars of her hiftory were known to thefe four Sybils. Though all that could be heard of Mrs. Marchmont ought to have exc¬ elled only refped, fhe was fo much re¬ duced in circumftances, that fuch rich antiquities would not have thought of cultivating an acquaintance with her, but to gratify their infatiable thirft of knowing every thing that related to everybody. However, as they forefaw that they muft in the courfe of this com¬ mun i cat ion
muntration fend their cordi to fetch the family, an operation to which they and their coachman had an equal averfion, they had hefitated and doubted, till Marchmont's return, and Althéa's mar¬ riage, irritated their defire of informa¬ tion and of remark to fuch a degree, that, as it was fummer, Mrs. Aconite and the three amiable ladies her fifters, the Mrs. Henbanes, had ventured to an afternoon vifit. They had known fome¬ thing of Lady Dacres when fhe was Mifs Gunfton, and longed to fee her daugh¬ ter-in-law, who had been reprefented at Margate, where they paffed fix weeks every year, as fuch a very eccentric young perfon. This firft effay had in a great meafure been difappointed—for Althea was walk¬ ing with Marchmont when they arrived; and though fhe returned to the houfe before they went, fhe did not choofe to appear. Lucy, therefore, was de¬ fcribing thefe their unexpeded and un¬ welcome
welcome vifitors to her brother and Althea. *' They are juft fuch dry fpecimens,** faid flie, alluding to Althéa's botanical colleBion, " as you defcribed Lady Barbara Newmarch to be. The widow lady is rather lefs a curiofity than the reft ; for flie affecis great gravity, which becomes her age—though I am fure flie is the moft malignant and fpiteful of them all. But Mrs. Henbane is a poli¬ tician, fierce as ten furies. She talks of revolutions, till fhe really looks fit fora ftraight waiftcoat; andnopoiffarde of Paris ever hunted an ariftocrat in a fine coat with more fury than flie would fly at any unfortunate wight who fliould venture to fay that any republican might ftill be poffibly a human being. I pro¬ teft fhe frightened me, and counteracted her own ends; for fhe wanted to know of what pdsty ym were, brother, and how you got through France; for fhe had heard, I cannot guefs how, that you have
have been there. As to Mama and Amelia, they had no inclination to an¬ fwer her, nor 1 neither. However, I was going to fdy fomething, when fhe burft out again like a new eruption of Mount V ? fu vi us; and if I had faid a word ihe did not like, I'm fure fhe would have got up and ihaken me. So I let her žave on, and faid nothing.—The next, Mrs. Lydia Henbane, and the youngeft, who is ftill called Mifs De¬ borah, though I'm fure ihe is feventy, both began talking at the fame time, and therefore luckily there was not much occafion for me to fpeak. I cannot tell exadly what they faid ; but I thought Mrs. Lydia prai fed fome publication on the fubject of politics, and Mrs. (cry her mercy ! ) Mifs Deborah fpoke of the laft new fafhtons. I knew no more of one than of the other of thefe topics; and right glad was I to be reieafed from them all, for I fancied myfelf furround¬ ed by Madame Hecate, and Mefde- moifeUes
moifelles Alecto, Tyfiphone, and Mæga- ia, her maids of honour."—Mrs. March¬ mont, though fhe had learned to confi¬ der fuch people with the calmcft indif¬ ference, herfelf could not help fmiling at the vivacity of her daughter; yet ftie was about gently to check that fpirit of fatire which from her gaiety of heart, and acutenefs of perception, Lucy fome¬ times indulged too far, when fhe was fuddenly interrupted by a noife at the front door of the houfe. It feemed like violent blows given by one perfon to another, who cried out and remon- ftrated. Marchmont at the found of diftrefs leaped up ; and though his mo¬ ther, turning pale and trembling, en¬ treated him not to go out, at leaft with¬ out Fenchurch, for whom fhe violently rang the bell, he ran in a moment to the door.—His mother, Althea, and his fifters, ftill endeavouring to detain him, preffed thither alfo; and Fenchurch, with fear and terror in his countenance, rufhed
rufhed after him. It was too late—The moment he put his foot out of the door, he was roughly feized in the King's name by two ill-looking fellows, while four others furrounded him. He was at no lofs to guefs who they were. He defired them to fuffer him to return into the houfe; and approaching his mother, who, unlefs fupported by Althea and Lucy, would have funk on the ground before him, he befought her not to in¬ creafe his diftrefs by her agonies; then turning to Althea, who though pale and trembling feemed to attempt fomething like refolution, his voice faltered, and he could only fay, t% My Althea, my angel !" The men now led him be¬ tween them into the parlour; the four others followed—and while one of the luffians defired Fenchurch to go out, which however he refufed, the others iat down with great familiarity, and he who feemed to be the principal among them thus began : Vol. IV. ? « So
ίΓ So, 'Squire ! we are like to be bet¬ ter acquainted at laft. I was afeard we ihould not have met no more, you and I—but now it's my belief we fliall have time to get thorough good frinds, hah ? Don't be nought, Ma'am," addreffing himfeif to Mrs. Marchmont, to whom her terrified daughters were adminifter¬ ing drops and water; " we won't hurt the young 'Squire. Never you fear neither, young ladies, we'll do un no harm—Nor I never likes, not I, toput ladies, and above all fuch pretty ladies, in any quondary.—We'll not do his Honour the fmalleft harm upon yearth — Only its my believe h e muft take a fmall trip with us to Maidftone; unlefs, per¬ haps, lie can find frinds raore nigher to help fettle tbefe fmall matters here." " What are they ?" faid Marchmont, in a calm tone. « Why, in the firft place I've got two writs againft you, I fancy you guefles the names to um —Eh, Mafter March¬ mont!
mont! — Old ftories, you know—The fame as we ufed to have a few journies about afore you fet off on your travels beyond fca."~There, Sir; there's the ftuff. You fee the names and the fums. Both together are—aye, let me fee— nineteen hundred and ninety -βχ pounds ! I'm fure I hope your Honour will get bail with all ray heart—and then, no doubt, you'll not find it hard to get tother matter fettled—thougii 'tis rather a toughifli job, as one may fay, that there." *· What do you mean?" faid March¬ mont : <f to what do you allude ?" " Why, Mafter, only this—You've a thought proper to fend a challenge." " A challenge!" ts Aye, your Honour—Our gemmen of the law, look ye, are of a peaceful difpofition; and fo Counfellor Mohun thought it right, you fee, to put you un¬ der a little fort of arreft, by order of m 2 my
my Lord Chief Juftice, juft till fuch time as you may cool upon it a bit." Ck Cowardly fcoundrel!** exclaimed Marchmont, tl bafe poltroon!—Well, Sir! and what is to be the confequence of this ?" *' Oh! nothing—nothing in the world, Sir—but that you muft juft be put into cuftody till you find fecurity to keep the peace—But that there bufinefs indeed is no affair of mine. That worthy gem- man yonder has all that in his dippar-* tumment—Come, Bobby, my man, fpeak to his Honour.'* Another of the men then approached Marchmont, and faid he had orders to arreft him under the Chief-Juftice's war¬ rant, which he read; and concluded with faying, that he muft either go into confinement, or be bound himfeif in the penalty of three hundred pounds, and find two fureties in three hundred each, for keeping the peace. Marchmont
Marchmont now faw immediate im¬ pi ifonmen t before him. Far from the only two friends who would come for¬ ward to fave him from it, had it been m their power, either of thefe arrefts was more than fufficient to condemn him to long, if not to peipetual confinement. The cruelty of loading him with thefe double and heavy chains, could, he knew, be owing to nothing but the re¬ folution of his perfecutors to put it out of the reach of any friends he might have to fave him, fince the whole of the fe¬ cundes demanded amounted to three thoufand pounds. He was in a neigh- bourhood where he had not a fingle ac-* quaintance ; and nothing remained for him but to endeavour to explain with calm refolution the miferable truth to his agonifed family, and to foften to them as much as he could the pain of this dreadful feparation. He turned to Althea, who pale as aíhes, but tearlefs and immoveable, fat m 3 by
by him during this fcene. " Althea, my deareft love," faid he, " now is the moment to fhew that prefence of mind, rhat reafonable fortitude, and truly femi¬ nine courage, which I have before had occafion to admire. Do not, my angel, by yielding to this fhock, give me caufe to fear that you repent fharing fo bitter a lot; and if you love me, think lefs of fome trifling prefent inconveniences that 1 may go through, than of preferving the deareft part of me—-yourfelf; while you become the heavenly comforter of my mother." ** Whatever you bid me do," an¬ fwered Althea, trying in vain to com¬ mand her faltering voice^ " whatever you tell me will give you the leaft com¬ fort, lhat I will do. But, remember, Marchmont, we do not part: whither¬ foever you are obliged to go, thither I will accompany you." " Impoflible, my love ! To-night I appiehend
apprehend thefe honeft gentlemen will take me from hence." " Yes, that's pretty near the right of the thing/' laid one of the men, rough¬ ly ; u you muft go to Maidftone to-night, that's for fartin.—You may move your¬ felf up to Banco by babbits coppas as foon a* you will ater-rard." ·' My dear Ahhea 1° refumed March¬ mont, "you fee how it is—Go! my dear girl, to my mother (Mrs. March¬ mont had left the room in an agony not to be defcribed)—try to induce her to bear better this fevere blow—nothing will do it fo effsftually as feeing you calm." ** You will not go then before I re¬ turn ?" faid Althea, as fhe left the room. " Certainly not. But, gentlemen, yotr fee how my family are diftreffed—Could you not let me fpeak a few words to my mother and my wife in another room ?" μ 4 « God
t * God blefs you, my Mafter, how ??? wc do any fuch a thing ?—No, no ! that's quite out of character : you may fay as much as ever you will to the ladies, one and all, but your Honour muft not go out of the fight of fome two of u: upon no account." ** Well, then/' faid Marchmont, meet¬ ing with all the courage he could this bitter foretafte of imprifonment, " 1 fuppofe all I have to do is to prepare, ftill favoured by your attendance, for my removah Tell me how this removal is to be made at fuch an hour, and in a place where a chaife is not to be had in a moment?" " Why, as to that matter, we fhould not to be fure much mind flaying with your Honour here till to-morrow," cried one of thefe authorifed ruffians; " that is upon proper confiderations, and the like ; but then we muft make bold to defire you'll fit up with us ; for as
as Mufter Trickman there fays, who knows all our bufinefs as well as ere a man in Englunt, you mid'nt no how be out of our fight. But I warrant you would not have no objection now to us four; there are but four on us; we've fent tothers to wait withouí; I fay you'd have no objection, I dares for to fay, for my friend Trickman, who is well to do I affure you, a near kinfman of Law¬ yer Vampyre's, and honeft Bob Perkin, and Jemmy Lambeth here, and me, to fit down with youj and bave a little fomething to keep us alive and awake, till fkh time as we cart all be a-jogging in the morning?'* " No," faid Marchmont, " I thank you for your civility, fince I fuppofe you n.ean it as fuch; but my family would only be kept in a greater degree of fuffering by fuch an arrangement, which would anfwer little purpofe—fo if you will tell me how I am to go, I will only ftay to have a few neceffaries M 5 packed
packed up, and wiil be ready to go with you." « k As you choofe, Mufter Machmon," faid the fellow in a very furly manner; * f we never wants to force civility upon nobody; and as for how you be to be conwayedy vy the vay is to fitch a chai from Sittingbone. Here, you—Dick Jenks," calling to one of the gang who waited without, ** ftep and tell the chai ve ordered to be re^y 5 to come quickly." " You took that precaution?" faid Marchmont, " Aye, aye, Mafter, we thought it right," anfwered Trie ? man, " for we were pretty fure of nabbing you. No loop-holes now, Young 'Squire, to crip out on—hah !— Don't you remember the dodgings you gived us at that there hell of an ould place there dou n in the weft ? My kinfman, Lawyer Vampyre, was plaguely out in a's reckoning, hut we made
made furer work on't now. We took caie to be upon fartin grounds/' " I fancy." laid Marchmont, " it was fome oneof this party that paffed me to- nifiht in the lane." " 'Twas Î, 'Squire," faid a tall fierce figure, with a cut over his eye, and a mofl diabolical countenance, ,c I dodged you from the houfe into that lane.·— í did not much like it ; I thought you had Imeh ? ?\^ and had a mind to be off. í don't know what you took me for-— but I'm fure you gaverne a rare breath- \·\σ * * j " "■>* " I do not believe I much miftook your character," faid Marchmont; " but be that as it may, I fuppofe you all ex¬ peft to drink, as I think it is always cuilomary ior you worthy operators of the law to bejoÜy on thefe occafions." He then rang the bell for Fenchurch, who entered looking more dead than alive, and bade him bring fome ftrong beer and brandy, though the whole ftock M ? of
of both in the houfe was very inconfi- derable. Fenchurch obeyed—and the fellows then demanded to eat. All that was in the larder was then fet before them, on which they feil to without ceremony; while Marchmont prepared himfeif for parting with Althea, who now returned into the room. She was apparently calm, but her expreffive countenance teftified what fhe felt.—· Marchmont eagerly enquired after his mother. " She is better," faid Althea, " and wifhes to fee you." <* I cannot go to her," anfwered Marchmont, u that is impoffible. But let Lucy, if my mother can do without her, come to me; and do you, my dear¬ eft love, fit down and compofe yourfelf. Why ihould I difguife the truth, when, after all, it muft be known, it muft be endured ? I am not to be out of thefe men's fight till I am fecured in prifon,— Thither
Thither it is better immediately to go— a chaife is coming to take me thither.'* " And me alfo," faid Althea, with courage : " do not imagine, Marchmont, that any thing ihail divide us. To be where you are not, while fuffering un¬ der circumftances fo cruel, would be to me more intolerable than a thoufand prifons." " Good God, Althea! can 1 bear the thoughts of taking my wife, of taking you to fuch a place? Impoffible—Do not, pray do not diftrefs me by the propofal." " Marchmont," faid Althea/ in an earneft and determined manner, " it is the firft time I have ever made a requeft to you—and will you refufe me? Will you mortify me by making me fufped you think fo poorly of me, as that 2 would ihrink from a few perfonal incon¬ veniences ? Wherever you are it is fit I fliould be." " But/*
" But/' added Marchmont, in a lower voice, " one of thefe men, I am per¬ fuaded, will infift upon going in the chaife with me. Can I fuffer you>to be fo accompanied?** " Send then for another chaife," an¬ fwered Akhea, " for my refolution is fixed—nothing can change it." Marchmont then addreffed himfeif to the men, and enquired ' 4 \hat accom¬ modations he could have where he was going ? Tbey told him he might be in¬ dulged with a room upon paying for it. He then afked if he could be allovv cd to go in the chaife unaccompanied by one of them, as his wife infifted upon going with him. He was anfwered, '* that ail thofe things muft be confidered.—They had horfes in waiting; and if his Honour thought proper for to make a proper prefent for their civility, over and above the
the cuftomary fee, why they'd no ob- jeftion againft obliging him." Marchmont, finding Althea refolute, acceded to every thing fhe demanded. She then haftened to put up fuch ne¬ ceffaries as they had both immediate oc¬ cafion for, and was foon ready, with a ferene though wan countenance, to at¬ tend their rude conductors. To take leave of his mother was the moft dread¬ ful part of what Marchmont had to un¬ dergo: he thought indeed it was far better they fliould not meet; and Lucy undertook in appearance to perfuade her mother not to infift upon it. She kft the room, and returned in a few moments to her brother to fay her mo¬ ther was tolerably tranquil, and ac- quicfced : but the truth was, that after having been a few moments up ftairs, the recoUeftion of all flie had gone through to avoid this evil, and the cruel idea of her fon in perpetual imprifon¬ ment,
ment, had fuch an effeft on her en¬ feebled frame, that fhe had fallen from one fainting fit to another, and when Marchmont and Althea departed was totally infenfible.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX.
■??? L'indigence va flétrir tes beaux jours; tu vaiconaoître les larmes cruelles qu'arrache 1? néceffité«
Something more than fixty pounds, part of it the iaft receipt of Mrs·. Marchmont's annuity, and part of it a loan from Everfley, which he infifted on making, and had remitted in a letter, was the whole ftock of money in pof-. feffion of the Marchmont family at this period. Althea had about fifteen gui¬ neas of her own, the remains of her Lift dividend on her aunt's legacy. This, and ten guineas from the general ftock, was all Marchmont would take. He left
left'the reft with Lucy, entreating her to exert herfelf to confole her mother, and fupport the finking fpirits of Ame¬ lia.—" Remember," faid he, as he took leave of her, " remember, my dear Lucy, that by bearing evils well we deprive them of half the power of hurt¬ ing us ; and that there is no difference between a ftrong and a feeble mind, but their different powers of enduring the calamities of life« There are two ways, my fweet love, of fhewing the extreme concern that I know my fituaiion gives you; but one of thefe ways will mitigate, the other will increafe my diftrefs,— Whkh will my Lucy choofe?" The poor girl, trying to ftifle the an- guifh fhe felt, promifed to exert herfelf; hut when the chaife, fo guai ded, left the door, ail her refolution was infufficient— till the dread of aggravating the agonies of her mother again reftored to her fome degree of fortitude. Al the ? ?
Afthea, for whom a prifon loft its horrors when to footh and confole Marchmont was in queftion, not only bore the firft ihock of entering fuch a difmal abode with an unchanged coun¬ tenance, but affumed a degree of calm cheerfulnefs; whkh, though it coft her fome effort, was beheld by Marchmont with admiration and gratitude, and it left him more at liberty, than if he had at once had to tranquillize her fpirits and provide for her accommodation j while his own heart, accufing him of having brought this adored creature into a fituation fo unworthy of her, was op¬ preffed with a degree of defpondence, which he would never have felt had he had only his own troubles to contend with. With fo little money to command as he poffeffed, and not knowing where, when it was gone, he could obtain a fupply, nothing was more bitter than the neceffity of gratifying the demands of
of the vultures who had dragged him to confinement. Thefe were exorbitant, and preferred with as much audacity as if the ruffians had conferred a favour in executing the writs againft him. It was above all grating to him to be com¬ pelled the moft liberally to pay the prin¬ cipal of them, who called himfeif the kinfman of Vampyre, and boafted of being employed by him at Eaftwood¬ leigh. It is hardly neceffary to fay, that his name, as attorney, was- to the writs for debt; and Mohun had on this occafion alfo employed him. No accommodations were to be pro¬ cured that night—but Marchmont, as he was now in a place of fecurity, was al¬ lowed to be left alone with Althea; and after he had fatisfied the harpies that furrounded him, and difpatched Fen¬ church back to his mother, to affure her thai be and Althea were well, and to bring him an account of thofe for whom be was fo arixious at home, he fat down ??
by Althea, who, notwithftanding her alarm and fatigue, ftill fupported her fpirits. But when Marchmont took her hand, and enquired whether ihe could forgive him for having brought her into fuch ? ????, they both loft their refo¬ lution for a moment, and Marchmont wept as he preffed her to his bofom.— Althea was the firft to recover from this tranfient weaknefs. She aílured him, that with him all places were alike to her; that, under his protection, íhe feared nothing.—" My dear friend/' laid fhe, *< why ihould we, even for a moment, yield to defpondence?—Let fear and defpondence be for the guilty.— We may be unfortunate, but we ihail not be unhappy—for ihali we not be together?—fhail we not ftill enjoy the confcioufnefs of innocence and honour ? Believe me, Marchmont, I am Co far from repenting the ftep I took when I united my deftiny with yours, that, were 1 to-morrow at liberty, í would do
do the fame, even though all that has happened within this laft day were as certain as it now is. The only thing I apprehend in imprifonment is, your lofing your health from confine¬ ment." " And you, my angel, my Althea!" exclaimed Marchmont pafli< nately, " do you fear nothing for yourfelf? Good Godi —that you fhould be the inmate of a place like this!" He was too much moved to proceed, but Althea continued calmly to fpeak.—- " No, Marchmont, I do not fear illnefs fpr myfelf; for I have been more ufed to confinement, and women are con- ftitutionally more fedentary. Give not yourfelf a moment's pain about me, but confider only what meafures are moft immediately neceflary. Let us write to that dear good Everfley—Captain Forrefter is probably, by this time, come to London. Two fuch friends will not, I arø fure, leave any thing unattempted for
for you; and till we can hear from them, let us firft endeavour to recover the fatigue of thts alarming night, and then to make ourfelves as eafy as we can." Marchmont, unwilling to reprcfs thofe fanguine hopes which he eould not imi¬ tate, now entreated her to wrap herfelf in her cloak, and reft her head on his ihoulder, while his arm fupported her, in the hope that ihe might take fome reft, of which he could not bear fhe ihould be during the whole night de<- prived,—Althea, defirous of appeafing his apprehenfions for her health, af¬ fected to fleep; while Marchmont, the firft time the tumult of his fpirits would allow him to do it, began to think over the circumftances of his fituation. Never did an unfortunate prifoner, guiltlefs even of imprudence as he was, look forward to a more hopeiefs pro¬ fpect. Though he knew his friends For¬ rei] e r and Everfley would give the fe¬ curity that the bafe and malignant cowardice
cowardice of Mohun had infifted upon for his keeping the peace, relying on his honour that they fhould incur no riik, yet the debt that had fo long hung over him, fwelled as it now was by ac¬ cumulated intereft, was fuch as he could not dream of aiking them to anfwer.— He knew how Everfley was circum¬ ftanced, and how much of his individual fortune had already been advanced in confequence of his generous friendihip ; the Earl of Stanwarden was not rich ; and though Forrefter was the favourite of his family, yet being only a younger brother, and one of a family of five, he had but a fmall allowance, and had been principally obliged, for any confiderable fupplies of money, to an aunt of his mother's:-fhe had never had a child of her own, and loved him with great af¬ fection, living very much within her jointure that fhe might lay by money for him.—Whatever refource fuch a good dowager was to Forrefter himfeif, it
it did not by any means enable him to affift a friend to fuch an extent as was now neceffary for poor Marchmont.— Other hopes he had none. He him¬ feif poffeffed nothing; and the fortune of Althea, if he had been capable of a wiih to touch it, was not only in¬ fufficient, but fo fecured by his owrn ad before his marriage, that, except the eight hundred pounds that had belonged to Mrs. Trevyilian, and which AUhea had herfelf infifted on having left at li¬ berty, he could not appropriate a penny of the principal to this or any other purpofe. What then was to be his deftiny ?— Imprifonment, perpetual and hopeiefs! " And is this," faid he, as he looked earneftly on Althea, ** is this the lot I have induced this lovely, this incom¬ parable creature to fliare with me ?— Is a place of confinement, tears, and lamentation—the abode of forrow, guilt, and mifery, the bridal houfe, whither, Vol. IV. n after
after three weeks marriage, J conduct my Althea?" The fear of difturbing her tranfient forgetfulnefs, rather than any effort of fortitude, induced him to ^ftifle the groans that fwelled his burfting heart. But as before fhe awoke it was neceflary he fhould determine on fomething that might at leaft look like trying to procure his emancipation, he decided to fend Fenchurch, who was to return at noon, to Mr. Bargrave, and defire his advice how to act. So paffed this miferable night. At an early hour in the morn¬ ing Marchmont wrote his letter to Bar- grave; and poor Fenchurch, retuining foon after with fuch an account of Mrs. Marchmont as her daughters thought would give their brother as little ad¬ ditional uneafinefs as poffible (though it was far from the truth), entreated his mailer to let him go to London with the letter to the lawyer—though, from the exceffive fatigue he had undergone, Marchmont
Marchmont was defirous of finding fome other meffenger. Such arrangements as could be made for their accommodation were then fet about. The gaoler, from the large fum for which Marchmont was in cuftody, fuppofed him to be fome ex¬ travagant young man of fafhion, who would fpend his money freely; he there¬ fore provided him with a fmall chamber well fecured, and a decent woman was appointed to attend on Althea—who now found herfelf reieafed from the ap¬ prehenfion that had been the moil uneafy to her, that flie fliould be com¬ pelled to fee, if not to mingle among, unfortunate or culpable wretches; among thofe whofe calamities fhe could not re¬ lieve, or whofe real or imputed guilt made them at once obj efts of abhor¬ rence and pity.—A prifon, however fhe had mifcalculated its miferies as affect¬ ing her, was ftill very dreadful. The horrid countenances of the men who n 2 had
had charge of the keys ; the expreffion of malignant fatisfaftion which they ap¬ peared to have on thofe countenances, when they were empowered to fe¬ cure fuch a prifoner as Marchmont ; and the precautions that were taken before Fenchurch was admitted to fpeak to his mailer, were circum fiances that all ferved to deprefs the fpirits of Ahhea. But fhe faw how much the for¬ titude of Marchmont depended on fee¬ ing her tranquil ; and whatever were the pangs that affailed her heart on making obfervations on their prefent, or con¬ fidering their future fortune, flie af¬ fumed a fteady and even a cheerful countenance, and made light of any in¬ conveniences that Marchmont feemed to forefee and to dread for her. The fecond day of their fad abode in this fcene of confinement brought them a ftill confoling account of Mrs. Marchmont ; and Lucy, who wrote to her brother, talked of vifiting them on the
the next day bur one.—Althea, how¬ ever, notwithftanding the generally fa¬ ti sfactory purport of this letter, re¬ marked, though flie carefully concealed it from her huiband, that the writing was lefs regular than Lucy's ufually was, and the paper, in two or three places, bliftered with tears. Thefe ob¬ fervations impreffed her with dread, left Mrs. Marchmont was finking under the heavy blow fhe had fuftained; and fuch an apprehenfion, both on her own ac¬ count, and becaufe of the effect it wouid have on her fon, was more dreadful to Althea than any other fear that fhe had yet been compelled filently to fuftain. Towards evening Fenchurch returned with a letter from Mr. Bargrave; in which he civilly reproached Marchmont for his imprudence in provoking Mr. Mohun, expreifed himfeif very forry for the general ftate of his affairs, fpoke with a fort of horror of the ferious mif¬ chief of getting into the hands of the n 3 Chief-Juft ice,
Chief- Juftice, and protefted he knew not how to advife. He concluded how¬ ever with faying, that the firft thing Marchmont had to do, was to move himfeif by habeas corpus to the King'Sv Bench prifon-—the neceffary fteps for which Bai grave faid he had taken, and direded Marchmont what he was himfeif to do. But his whole letter was calculated to difcourage and deprefs the hopes and fpirits of his client; nor were they greatly relieved by the following letter, which Fenchurch had found at the Çoffee-Houfe in Cecil-Street. It was v/ritten in anfwer to Maichmonts letter from thence on the day of his writing to Mohun. LETTER. *' Tenzance, June 27th. u Your letter, my dear Maichmont, gives me the moil acute conc< ro I am capable of feeling, and the moie ίο be¬ caufe
caufe I am at this moment fo circum¬ ftanced, that I cannot haften to you as I would otherwife do ; and I am afraid you never wanted more fuch affiftance as I can give you, though it is far, very far, from being fuch as my heart would offer were I otherwife fituated. No¬ thing, my friend, can be more deplo¬ rable than my fituation. Were it lefs fo, I might ftill be tempted to envy yours; for what are pecuniary diffi¬ culties, what are all thofè evils of life which you have often afferted, and I am fometimes tempted to believe, arife from the abufes of our focial contract, compared to the miferies that fpring from the irrevocable contrae! of an ill-af- forted marriage ? " The unhappy woman, to whom, while hardly yet arrived at the period when the law allows a man a will of his own, I was tied to humour the will of others, is now in fuch a ftate, that, while hu¬ manity foibids my leaving her, my re- N 4 maining
maining with her is the moft horrible puniíhment ! You know what I fuf¬ fered from the violence, the caprice, the malignity of her temper, when every reafonable perfon, who faw her fituation in life, thought fhe had every reafonable means of content. But the tendernefs with which I then treated her, far from engaging her gratitude or her affedion, ferved only to aceuftom her to a more unlicenfed indulgence of a dreadful temper, or, to fpeak more plainly, of a bad heart ; for fuch furely muil be pof¬ feflcd by a woman who, with the moft decided refolution to gratify herfelf, is totally indifferent to the feelings of others.—Brought up to believe money the greateft good, and being heirefs to the ill-acquired wealth of her father, flie fuppofed that every creature around her was to be fubfervient to her. The leaft oppofition threw her into agonies of paffion, and, in proportion as thefe paroxyfms were yielded to, their fre¬ quency
quency and fury increafed. The con¬ fcioufnefs of her being detefled then came to torment her; and though fhe wouid not correct the caufe, the effect fhe would not endure. Indulgence in that degrading vice, that in obfcuring the reafon may tranfiently mitigate the fufferings of the miferable, next fuc¬ ceeded. Her temper and her blood became equally inflamed, and fhe lived in the wretched viciffitudes of rage or ilupefaction till the ftate of her health alarmed her; and then, having fome pur¬ pofe to purfue that related folely to herfelf, ihe fet forth in fcarch of that health which, with fuch a difpofition, it was impoffible to find—and hither I accompanied her, determined to fulfil, to my utmoft, the duty which, having been at firft impofed upon me, has never been fweetened by affection, efteem, friend¬ ihip, or gratitude. Imbecility of in¬ tellect has daily increafed upon this poor unhappy being, without mitigating the n 5 violence
violence of her difpofition. She now throws herfelf into the moft furious rage, if her maid difplaces a pin, or ifa word is uttered which ftie does not approve of, though what fhe likes to-day flie abhors to-morrow : then feeling the im¬ potence of her ridiculous anger, and that it hurts nobody fo much as herfelf, fhe fallí» into tears, and bewails her hard fate, and the cruelty of thofe about her, in terms that would really make a ftranger, for a moment, believe her the moft injured and unfortunate of wo-. men. I think it is very evident that her mind becomes more and more de¬ ranged, but ; n her perfonal health I fee no difference; and probably fhe may remain many years in this wretched ftate, though the pbyfical men who at¬ tend her feem to think not. Imagine, my dear Marchmont, if you can (but indeed it is not eafy to figure to yourfelf feenes of which you have never beheld any refemblance)—imagine what muft be the
the ftate of my houfehold ! what the education, the manners of two girls who have been brought up under fuch a mother! what the fort of fervants arc, who alone will ftay with her î and how much of robbery and infolence I am compelled to be blind to, left flie fhould be deferted even by thefe mercenary and difhoneft creitures! u Sometimes flie declares a refolu¬ tion oi leaving this ¡blace, and returning home, which I moft heartily wiih : then flie afferts her inability to go back to an eftate which her money has been laid out to improve, but which fhe knows will be inhabited, at leaft for my life, by fome one of the people fhe hates the i*oft ; for fhe is fure the moment fhe is dead I fhail marry again, and precifely a perfon who will ufe her poor girls very ill, and rob them of all the furni¬ ture and good things flie has been col¬ lecting. n ? ·* Such
" Such is the converfation I am forced to hear—fuch is the faint but true iketch of my miferable condition, from which I kiiow not how immediately to difengage myfelf foon enough, or long enough, to do you any effeftual good by meeting you in town. Let me, how¬ ever (while I try to accomplifli this), let me entreat you, my dear Marchmont ! to be as cool as you can in regard to Mohun; for any unguarded heat, how¬ ever great the provocation, will only give him an advantage over you. Be¬ ware of Vampyre, and of the unadjufted claims of Meffrs. Spriggins and Scrape- penny—I have a horror of thofe ufu¬ rious fellows, but ftill more of the in¬ ftrument they employ. Their anfwers to me were fo evidently evafive, and they have both fo much of Shylock about them, that my daily dread is of their enforcing their bonds. This ac¬ curfed perfuafion haunts me with more uneafinefs, becaufe my own money mat¬ ters
ters (the money of my wife I make it, you know, a rule never to touch) are fo circumftanced this year by the ne¬ ceffity I am under of making the laft payment of Linda's (I fliould fay Mrs, Glafton's) little fortune, and by the failure of my principal tenant, that I cannot (as I affure you, upon my ho¬ nour, I would otherwife do) come up to the demands of thefe extortioners. " Neverthelefs, my dear friend, I am by no means fo ftraightened, but that I can give you, without the flighteft in¬ convenience, the enclofed order on my banker for fifty pounds. The fum is fmall; but I know you will be better pleafed to receive fuch, which will not even remotely diftrefs me, than a larger diat might juft now have that confe¬ quence* My good friend, when he re¬ collects how little I am likely to affért the mofl inconsequential falfehood^ will not doubt my fincerity, when I tell him, that, robbed as I am of every domeftic comforts
comfort, I can talle no pleafure but what arifes from the iittle ??? er th it is le*t me of doing, what yet I can do, for the two people whom í moft love and efteem. Write to me immediately, Marchmont, and reft affured of the unfailing friendfhip and affeftion of your " W. EVERSLEY." This letter would have convinced Marchmont, if he had not beeu well aware of it before, that even if he couid have endured the thoughts of owing fo much to Everfley's friendfhip, which he had long fince determined never to do, it was not in his power at this time to affift him. Marchmont read a part of this letter to Althea, whofe heart bled to thmk of the unhappy fituation of Everfley, for whom fhe had the moft perfeft efteem.— She took occafion, however, to remark to Marchmont, how little the poffeffion of
of even a great fortune fecured happi- nefí. —" When you feel yourfelf dif¬ pofed, my dear friend," faid flie, " from your tendernefs for me, to lament our prefent fituation, recolleft how much my lot, which indeed I account a happy one, is preferable t^ what I ihould have known if I had married the cruel, arrogant, hateful Mohun; or, efcaping him, if any of the many ob¬ jectionable men I have íeen or heard of had received my promife to 1???, honour, and obey. It might have been my deil iny to hd\e met with the coun¬ terpart of Mrs. Evcifley; for fuch a being (I am afraid more than one) there undoubtedly is in the world. Then, he might not only have contrived to have rendered me wretched by the various ways in which ihc torments her huf¬ band, but, privileged by his fex, he might have diffipated my fortune and his own, and poffibly have beat me, or locked me up, or fold mc if he could have
have met with a purchafer, to give coui fe to his btutal humour, or contribute to his felfiih indulgences. Such people have exifted—do probably exift now ; and what would have become of me had I belonged to one Ρ But are not ue happy, Marchmont, whom fate cannot hurt unlefs it feparate us ? which furely can happen only from death. Yes, my dear love ! believe your Althea, when fhe declares to you, that in this prifon, and without any certainty of quitting it unlefs for another, ihe feels herfelf a thoufand times happier than flie ihould be in the moil brilliant cit cle, bearing about her the value of half a county in jewels, and fimpering at the fad re¬ petition of uninterefting converfation among thofe who are called Great! I faw enough of the Hves of people of the very firft world to be thoroughly con¬ vinced I did not envy them. To hve as we wiih to live, we want nothing but the juftice we ihali furely obtain fooner or
or later—we fhali then have a fmall competence; doubt not but that we fliall find means to increafe it. I have often known the idle make themfelves miferable, merely becaufe they had no¬ thing to do. If, as a celebrated poet fays, to be employed is to be happy, we ihail have another chance of efcaping from all the fancied evils of life at leaft— if the imaginations of thofe who are bleft in each other can indeed be liable to ideal calamities." Marchmont, while every word of con¬ folation, uttered by his adored Althea, heightened the tender admiration with which he regarded her, yet could not fo eafily reconcile himielf to fee in a cheerful licht events which had re- duced her below her rank; and when he reflefted on the machinations of the villanous agent to whom all their pre¬ fent mifery, and that he had for fo many years experienced, were owing, his heart fwelled with unconquerable rage and
and indignation: and when he ceafed to be charmed with the fortitude and foothed with the fweetnefs of Althea, he felt himfeif difpofed to curfe the au¬ thors of his diftrefs—himfeif, the uni- verfe, and all but her and his fuffering family. He took, however, in purfuance of Mr. Bargrave*s advice, meafures to re¬ move to the King's Bench, and the fixth day of his imprifonment was fixed upon for his departure. Lucy, as having the moft refolution and the beft fpirits, was on that day to come over to fee her brother. She came—Marchmont was bufy in another room, and Althea was alone when flic entered ; when, ftruck with her altered appearance, fhe eagerly enquired, as flie embraced her, whether ihe was well''—whether her mother and fifters were well ? ' c My brother is not here," anfwered Lucy in a faint voice; *· but he ? iot confined feparately from ) ou, is he ?—· He
Ile h not fhut up in the common pri¬ fon ?"—Althea having fatisfied her that he was only accidentally abfent, pre¬ paring for his removal, Lucy, fetch¬ ing a deep figh, faid—" I may then tell you, my deareft fifter, what we muft conceal from him. Ever fince the fatal night when he was fo cruelly torn from us, my mother has been in the moft alarming ftate from fainting fits, fo fre¬ quent and fo long, that we have dreaded left every one that has feized her fliould be her Iaft. You have no notion, Al¬ thea, how fadly fhe is altered; Amelia and I have never been inbed for above an hour at a time fince we faw you go ; for we dare not leave her a moment, Mr. Wiikinfon thinking her in great danger. Alas ! what ihail we do?—- What will become of us?" Althea, trembling at this cruel report, and dreading the effed it would have on Marchmont, was hardly able to fiy-— ir For God*s fake, my Lucy, have fome ? l he r
other advice—let fomethinc elfe be ? done ; let fome phyfician be fent for inftantly !" Lucy then told her, in a hurried way, M that Mr. Wilkmfon had himielf pro*- pofed it on the fecond day of his at¬ tendance ; but that her mother had re¬ lapfed on the mention of it, and had fince made them promife they would not engage any phyfician to come— * They can do me no good,' faid fhe, * it is too late. Did you ever hear that a phyfician could cure a broken bearli* No, my dear girls, my complaints are out of the reach of medicine : the onlv cordial would be the fight of \ our bro¬ ther and Aìthea- —your brother at li¬ berty, and unoppreffed — and that i fliall never fee. No; 1 fliall never, never behold my fon again!' —This (contmued Lucy) is the ft) le in which flie talks. But, alas! I knew how fruitiefs would be my applications for my brother to go to her, and I thought if bell to conceal from him
him intelligence that I knew he could not have fupported." Althea, whofe prefence of mind never forfook her in the caufe of thofe fhe loved, then told Lucy, that the only thing to be done was to remove Mrs. Marchmont to London, if flie were able to bear the journey—" i will fecure her fome lodging near the place where our poor Armyn is to be confined," faid flie, " and take care that advice fhail be ready the moment fhe gets thither. Do ) ou and Amelia in the mean-time, my dear Lucy, exert your¬ felves to fupport her; aflure her this ar¬ rangement is made at the exprefs defire of her fon, who can there fee her—I will return to-morrow to affift in taking caie of her to town the day after. My coming will convince her it is March¬ mont's wiih; and when flie is affured ilie fhail fee him, flie will acquire ftrength to undertake the fatigue. Settle every
every thing, in the mean-time, fo that 'fhe may have as little trouble as pof¬ fible, and expect me to-morrow night." Lucy would have expreffed her fears, left fo much fatigue and anxiety fhould affeft Althea herfelf; but Marchmont at that moment coming in, Althea checked her, and the buftle of their departure prevented Marchmont's noticing, as he would otherwife have done, the ill- concealed anguifh of his fifler.— They parted—Lucy for her fad home, and Marchmont and Althea, guarded by feveral retainers of the law, for the King's Bench prifon, where Fenchurch had, with great difficulty, and at a very high price, fecured them a room.— Marchmont had now to undergo the difagreeable ceremony of being fur- rendered to the Marinai of the prifon, and of feeing the precautions ufed to fecure a perfon taken for fuch a fum. —> He had befides fo many fees to pay, and fo
fo many cu florns to fatisfy, that, on exa¬ mining his purfe, he found it reduced within ten guineas. The difpofition in which he betook himfeif to his bed may eafily be imagined.
CHAP.
CHAP. Χ.
Sorrow feems pleafed to dwell with fo much fweetnef»!
ALTHEA, anxious for the fad group ftie had left, and not knowing how to difclofe to Marchmont the truth of their fituation, was unable to fleep—yet ihe concealed her real feelings with admi¬ rable fortitude; and Marchmont, be¬ lieving her compofed, and wearied as he was by the haraffmg events of the preceding day, funk to repofe. Such a tranfient relief was neceifary to enable him to bear, with fome degree of firm¬ nefs, the communication which early the next morning Althea was compelled to
to make, in order to account for a jour¬ ney which flie knew nothing on earth but confideration for his mother would induce him to confent to. Though fhe foftened the cruel truth as much as ihe could, it was impoifible to prevent Marchmont from believing the worft; and as he agreed with Althea in think¬ ing, if flie was able to be removed, it would be better, both on account of advice as well as to be near them, that his mother and fillers iliould remove, he confented ihat AUhea, attended by Fenchurch, fliould fet out to aifift the poor girls in their aiduous tafk, while he endeavoured by means of one of the runners of the prifon to fecure them ?>> comfortable a lodging as could be found within the rules; where he hoped he could fee his mother, and alleviate forne part of the anguifh which his imprifon¬ ment inflifted. Althea was to take leave of him then till the next day, which was the very Vol. IV. ? earlieft
earlieft íhe could poffibly return, though he entreated her molt earneftly, in the pious commiffion ihe had undertaken, not to be carelefs of her own health, on which more than his exiftence depend¬ ed. Thefe charges being given, and Fenchurch iti tdiy enjoined never to lofe fight of the chaife that held his miftrefs, Marchmont took her arm with¬ in his to condud her to the chaife that was waiting for her. It was now that for the firft time Althea formed an idea of the place, where her finking heart told her Marchmont might too probably pafs many of his days. At that early hour of the morning the moft wretched and deftitute inhabitants of this en¬ clofure were juft ifluing from the fad places where they had paffed the night.—Squalid from poverty and con¬ finement, languid defpair was in the countenances of fome, while others ex¬ preffed that fort of unfeeling indifference that arifes from defperation worn down to apathy. The evening before, Al¬ thea,
ihea, attentive only to Marchmont, and knowing that whitherfoever he was going fhe was to remain with him, had heeded lefs the places flie had paffed through, and the people that furrounded her in them ; but now the grim and fierce- looking men who filled the room called the lobby, the great keys they bore, and the precautions which were taken to let only one perfon at a time pafs from that place to or from the prifon, and the fufpicion which two of them who followed clofe to Marchmont expreifed, all ferved to fill her with dread. Marchmont having fpoken to one of them, and given him a fhilling, defired he might go to the door to fee his wife into a chaife. The man was going to -comply with this, when another of apparently more authority ftepped forward, and, putting himielf immediate¬ ly before Marchmont, faid, " Sir, we've pcrtickler orders about you — I can't allow of your going down the fteps." ? a Marchmont
Marchmont felt ihat to be the bittereit moment he had yet paffed—but making an effort to conquer himfeif, that he might not alarm Althea, he replied, calmly, «« Well, then, do vou come with me to the door, that 1 may fee the lady get in." Three or four of them imme¬ diately furrounded him as he advanced towards and flood at the pri ton door, while Althea, who trembled as flie bade him adieu, ftepped into the chaife, which was immediately driven away. The moment flie was out of Marchmont's fight, all her fortitude forfook her, and ilie burft into an agony of tears. The exertion ffie had made had been long and painful, and now that the appear¬ ance of calmnefs was no longer ne¬ ceffary, flie gave way to the anguifli that might otherwife have had fatal confe¬ quences. As ffie proceeded, however, the freih- nefs of the air infenfibly recovered her. It was now the end of June, and a fum¬ mer
mer fhower that had fallen at day- brea ? had given to every blade and leaf new \ erdure and f ? eetnefs. But when Althea, taking her handkerchief from her eyes beheld the beauties which nature every where offers at this fcafon, the image of the poor prifoner fhe had juft left, who might never again enjoy them, arofe to her,* and again her heart fwollen with anguiih felt as if it would break, till another burft of tears relieved her. When, however, fhe arrived at the fir it ftage, the concern expreffed in the countenance of poor Fenchurch, as he waited on her into the houfe, recalled her to fome degree of refoiutionc She endeavoured to reafon herfeif into more apparent compofure, and, before fhe ar¬ rived at the place where the chaife was to be changed a fecond time, had in a certain degree fucceeded. Mnrchmont, in the mean time, who feb himfeif completely wretched in fub- mitting to even this tranfient feparation, ? 3 fliut
fhut himfeif up in his room, where he expefted, in confequence of a letter he had difpatched, that Mr. Bargt a\ e wouid have come to him to confuit upon what fliould be done. But the morning pafied away, and he did not appear. Marchmont fat down without appetite to his dinner % znd hardly fwallowing enough to fatisfy nature, he felt a me¬ lancholy fatisfaction in beftowing the reft on a poor man and woman, who had undertaken to do any little offices for him in the abfence of his fervant, ne¬ ceffarily fhut out of a night. Thefe unhappy people, with two children, in¬ habited a room in the fame paffage, and oppofite to that where Marchmont was fituated. But even this place, not above twelve feet long, and eight wide, was the bed-room of two other poor debtors, who paid fo much a week for fharing it. And during the day it ferved as a kit¬ chen, wben its proprietors could get food; and always as a laundry, for the woman
woman took in wafhing for the prifon- ers. Marchmont, after his dinner, en¬ tered fi r a moment into tins abode oí poverty nnd w reiche Jnefií, and was at «•ncc ihocked and 'tianficd at beholding lne cagtrnefs wit u which this halU famifhed group ate of what he had given them. He withdrew, however, not to interrupt them, bidding the man come to him when he had fim flied his meal. " Good God!" exclaimed March- mont, as he re-confidered the fcene to which he had been witnefs; " is it pofli¬ ble that for a fmall fum, fuch as it is likely fuch people as thefe can owe, their creditor bas a right to fhut them up from the common air, and ufe of their limbs, by which alone there can remain any chance of their payment? Can laws that fuffer and enforce this fenfelefs cruelty, be the very beft that the wifdom and experience of mankind can devife for the government of civil fociety ? Thefe refledions were refumed ? 4 with
with yet more force when the poor man, whofe name was Benfted, related his fad yet common hiftory — t( I am a Staffordfhire man, Sir," faid he, " and was brought up a working cutler. Since the war not having employ at Birming¬ ham where I worked, I was advifed by a relation of mine to come to London, and fet up fhop for myfelf; and though I had only been a journeyman^ yet my Peggy being a pretty good manager, and our girl and boy got a little out of the way, we had fcraped up a fmall matter to begin with; and our coufin, an old bachelor, faid he would lend us thirty pound to help : fo we took a houfe up here at London, and our coufin came to board with us. However, he paid us nothing, by reafon of the money he had lent us, which was to be paid him again this way, as he faid, and as í thought— though there was no writing between us, except my note that 1 gave him for the thirty pound. Trade indeed was but dull,
dull, and I was aimoft forry I had ever come to London; bur, however, the thing was done, and I thought this coufin of ours, who had to be fure begun fo friendly, would leave to my two young ones all he had. He had always charity and fuch-like in his mouth, and ufed to go twice a day to meeting, and made my children go along with him, and my wife too very often—indeed, oftener to my thinking than was good for our bufi¬ nefs and management at home, All of a fudden we heard out of Staffordfhire rhat a farmering man, who was the fame relation to n.y wife as he was to this coufin of hers, had died without a will, and left a freehold of about fifty pound a year behind him. Mr. Drape declared he was the next heir, and away he went to take poffeffion; and I, for my part, fhould have let him have kept it, if a lawyer's clerk, who came juft before to lodge at our houfe, had not, when we were talking about it one day, told me, ? 5 that
that it was my wife and not Drape thai the eftate belonged to; and to be fure he made it ou fc as plain as could be—fo he got counfel's opinion upon it, and that was for us too, and to law we went. After two years and a half the caufe was decided—and it was, that we were to divide the property. But the cofts of the law-fuit came to forty pounds more than our half fold for, and Mr. Drape arrefted me for the thirty pounds he had lent me. So here I am, with expences and all, confined for above an hundred pounds, and am not worth an hundred pence in the world! But then, Sir, there's half the people here in juft the fame cafe-—fo it is not for me to repine ! As to myfelf, 1 am ufed to it now and could bear it; but it is very heart-breaking to me to have my boy and girl brought up in fuch a place. It muft be their ruin, to be fure ! My girl is now almoft thirteen, and what a bad thing for hereto run about here!—But there's
there's no help for it f we have nó friends!" The generous heart of Marchmont felt for this poor fellow, and the more fo, as eff'eftually to relieve him was not in his power. Having, however, affured him of fuch temporary afliftance as he could give, he returned to the contem¬ plation of his own forrows—while gene¬ ral uneafinefs was not unmixed with wonder that Mr. Bargrave never ap¬ pi ared. He learned, however, the next day, in converfation with one of his fellow prifoncrs, that folicitors of a cer¬ tain degree of reputation did not often choofe to vifit their clients in prifon ; that there was fome fort of difcredit annexed to it; and that many perfons there had been compelled to have re¬ courfe to men of the profeffion who practifed in the neighbourhood. This converfation ended in a propofal on the part of the ftranger to introduce Marchmont to one of thefe practition- o ? ers;
ers; but fuch was his dread of the fra¬ ternity, that he declined, at leaft for the prefent, any experiment of that fort; and, returning to his room, wrote again to Bargrave, though as he did it he en¬ quired of himfeif Cut bono ? too certain that, even if his folicitor entered with all poflible zeal into the caufe, little could be done to relieve him from his prefent cruel fituation. But had himfeif alone been in queftion, he would have gone with tranquillity to his bed. It was the thoughts of Althea, of his mother and his fifters, that ftrewed his pillow with thorns, and drove all repofe from him, as he fadly refleded on the juftice of the Spanifh proverb—" Jf a man fleep too much, iet him borrow ihe pillow of a debtor.** The morning of the day after Althéa's departure was pafied, however heavily,. yet without any other adual uneafinefs than her abfence, and the dread of what he might hear on her return, neceffarily occafioned»
occafioned.—But the time foon came when he might expect her, and then his anxiety became aimoft infupportable. Eagerly watching every body that en¬ tered, he continued to walk backwards and forwards before the inner door of the prifon—but the hours wore away, evening was approaching, and Althea came not. The bell rang to announce that all ftrangers within the walls muft depart, which is always done a fliort time before the doors are clofed for the night. Marchmont, therefore, knowing how foon ihat muft now happen, and that Althea would be fliut out, was made half frantic by the apprehenfion, and haftened into the lobby to gain over, if poflible, one of the keepers to favour her, fhould fhe arrive too late for the regular hour of admittance; but tbe man to whom he had been ufed to fpeak, and whofe good-will he had fecured by the prefent of a guinea on his entrance, was not now waiting there. The place feemed
feemed to be in confufion, and March- mont heard that a prifoner in execution for twelve hundred pounds had juft before very nearly effefted his efcape : a circumftance whicii redoubled the vigilance of the keepers, who, when Marchmont fucceeded in making his requeft known, anfwered him with more than ufual brutality, that the thing he afked was impoffible; and that they de¬ fired he would not again come into the lobby. In an agony of mind little fhort of defperation Marchmont then remon- ftrated. It was in va:n, and only ferved to draw upon him accumulated infults, which he could neither efcape from nor punifh. With four or five other perfons he was puflied back into the area of the prifon, and, as if on purpofl to diil raft him, the doors were inftantly fhut— fome minutes before the ufual time. The moft cruel apprehenfions now took pof¬ feflion of his mii.d. Either his mother was dangeroufly ill, perhaps dead; or AUhea
Althea returning would not be admitted; and as fhe had not one acquaintance in London, or any place to go to, what would become of her? whither could ftie refort for protection? Severe as were his fears for his mother, this apprehen¬ fion, which feemed the moft probable, was alfo the mofl intolerable; and it is difficult to fay what ftate of mind March¬ mont might have been in before morn¬ ing, if, in reconfidcring every circum¬ ftance, he had not recollefted that Fen¬ church, who was aftive and intelligent, was with her; and as he knew the lodging that had been fecured in the morning for Mrs. Marchmont, it was poflible, and he hoped probable, that the man might have the prefence of mind to conduft his miftrefs thither. This fuppofition a little mitigated, though it could by no means appeafe the fears that tormented him during the night. At the break of day he was on foot, and, the inftant the doors were open,
open, fent a runner to the lodgings en¬ gaged for his mother—though without much hope, for he concluded Fenchurch would have been with him at the firft moment of admittance, had they been fo near. The man prefently came back to fdy none of the family were there ! A thoufand tormenting conjedures now again affailed the unhappy prifoner. His mother muft, he thought, be dying; for fome fuch urgent caufe could alone have detained his wife.—Yet then furely Fenchurch would have been fent to re¬ leafe bim from conjedures fo painful, even though it were neceffary to reveal fome cruel truth, fmce the truth muft at laft be known. As this fecond day of dreadful fufpenfe paffed away, the agitation of his mind became more ana more intolerable, and he thought every diftrefs he had yet experienced, light in comparifon of the tortures he now underwent. Having no intimate friend in London to whom he
he could fend, and as he had purpofely avoided making any acquaintance where he was, he had nobody either to hear his diffracting apprehenfions, or to coun¬ fel him how to aft. To the mercenaries of the place he applied : fent one to one place, another to another, with enquiries —all returned without any information 5 while Marchmont, who fince ihe depar¬ ture of Althea had taken neither food nor reft, walked about feveriíh from the troubled ftate of bis mind, but giving not the leaft attention either to his perfonal feelings, or to the people round him. They of courfe confidered him, from the agitated ftate he appeared in, as a poor wretch whofe condition was more de¬ plorable than their own, inafmuch as he feemed to be devoid of either the for¬ titude or the indifference that might have enabled him to fupport it as they did. At length Marchmont beheld near the door a female figure, which he thought
thought refembied Ahhea. He ap¿ proached with cagernefs.— It was indeed herfelf, but fo pale, io faint, that every other fear was for a moment foi gotten in the moie dreacîiui one oí m mbling for her fafety. She took Maichmonts arm, but appealed unequal to anfwering at that moment the queftions he eagerly put to her. Afluring him, however^ that ihe was notili, fhe attempted to ap¬ peafe his terrors; but her own returned upon her with a force fo irrefiftible, that in deipite of all her efforts ihe burft into tears. *'Good God!" exclaimed March¬ mont, " my mother is dead ! I am fure of it, Ahhea-—Do not, therefore, ar* tempt to difguife the truth fiom mc, Alas! it io better I fhouid know it at once. She is dead—I (hall nevei fee her more." Althea now found ftrength ίο fpeak— " No, dear Marchmont," f rt idfhe, <c fl· ? is not dead, and you will, I tiuft, Le lei"
her again; but I dare not flatter you that it is likelv ihc will lore live. Since ihe fliock flie received on the night of vour arre ft, ilie has been in a moil dan¬ gerous fbiîe.- —lf the fainting fits into which flie falls, give hei a tianficnt refpite, fhe no fooner recovers a little ftrength than ihe infifts on feeing you; imagines fometimes that flie is pleading to Vampyre for your releafe ; at others, that ilie is herfelf arrefted by him, and fees you in chains attempting to releafe her : then fhrieks and convulfive groans exhauft her, till the long fits of fainting return. Notwithftanding all this, my dear friend, we have brought her to London, though not without fome diffi¬ culty I own, and many terrors. I could not immediately leave heron our arrival, but the moment I could get away I haftened hither." " And now," faid Marchmont, <c you are yourfelf ill.—I am fure of it by your countenance and manner, Wretch that I am !
I am ! it is I who am deftined to be the death of all 1 love !" He then walked about for a moment, while Althea, fum- moning all her fortitude, affured him that flie was no otherwife iil than from fatigue and anxiety, and that a iittle reft, if fhe could once fee him tolerably calm, would reftore her, Marchmont then, fearing to aggravate her fufferings by yielding to his own, fent Benfted for forne refreihment for her—(Fenchurch was not yet come)—and implored her before fhe thought of any thing clfe to endeavour to tranquillize her fpirits and recover her flrength. Althea, who thought little of herfelf where the fervice of thofe fhe loved was in queftion, foon affeded to overcome the accidental indifpofition íhe had felt on her anival, and declared herlelf ready and anxious to go with him to his mother, for u hom, ihe iaid, the fight of him would do more than any cor¬ dial. Fenchurch, who ju.l then arrived, ipoke
fpoke rather favourably of her fituation ; and he was now ch (patched to the Mar¬ illái to aik leave for Evir. Marchmont, attended by one or two men, or under any reftriciions named, to be permitted to fee his mother, only for half an hour, at her abode within the rules.—All the mifery and humiliation of being com¬ pelled to afk thb permiffion ftruck hea- \ ily on the heart of Marchmont: his condition of mind theicfore may be imagined, when Fenchurch, breathlefs himfeif with ruge, returned with a po- íiüve refufal.— u Tell vour mailer," faid the Marília!, " that though 1 have fome¬ times granted this indulgence, I cannot di) it now with any regard to my own fafety ; and that I have befides a ftrid charge from Mr. Vampyre, by which I fhould make myLlf more than ordinarily liable, if any thing happened. I'm forry n is fo, but it is not my fault—I cannot help it." It
It feemed as if Marchmont at tins moment felt, for the firft time, all the difgrace and horrors of imprifonment; his blood feemed to undergo a revul- fion, and then to prefs back on his heart in a torrent that deprived him of breath. He felt for a moment difpofed to daffi himfeif againft the wall, to tear his hair, to commit fome of thofe wild and ufe¬ lefs ads of defperation which intole¬ rable and fudden anguifh excites: but he caft his eyes on Akhea, who, pale as ailles, fat like the figure of patient pity before him, and his fury for a moment fubfided: he burft into a paffion of tears, and, throwing himfeif into a chair, had only power to exclaim—'· My mo¬ ther ! my poor mother ! She is dying, and I am not to fee her ; ihe calls for me to clofe her eyes, and they hold mc from her."—At that cruel image he relapfed into fury, exclaiming-—" The villains! the infamous villains! the hard¬ hearted
hearted inexorable fcouiidrels î- —And fliall I bear it patiently, chained like a felon—like a gaiiey-ffave? Let me go," cried he to Fenchurch, who, im¬ ploring him to be patient, endeavoured to detain him.—** Unhand me, Fen¬ church—dare to prevent me at your perii. No, no ; follow me to the vile inftrument of tyranny that has the in¬ juftice, the barbarity to confine me; at fuch a moment to confine me! 1 will compel his confent, or tear it from his iron heart. In this country of freedom there can be no iaw on his fide.—Hea¬ ven, and earth, and hell fliall hear me!" Breathlefs and exhaufted, he paufed ; and it was fortunate he did, for it gave Althea time to fpeak to him : fhe laid her hand gently on his ihoulder, but uttered only " Marchmont!" Her voice feemed to aci on his inflamed paf¬ fions like a charm. He gazed at her a moment, threw his arms round her, and -again fell into an agony of tears. She led
led him to a chair, and, bidd'ng Fen¬ church wait without the door, fat filently by him, fupporting his throbbing tem¬ ples on her breaft ; on which his fcald- ing tears fell in fhowers. Then, after a moment, flie faid—'* Marchmont, is it thus you fet me an example of fortitude? Is it thus you exprefs your tendernefs forme? Ah! my dear friend, be af¬ fured, if you perfift in yielding to fuch ftarts of paffion, you will not regain your mother, and certainly you will de¬ ftroy your wife." " Angel of heaven !" exclaimed Marchmont, *' beil and loveiieft of be¬ ing»! forgive me—I cannot, 1 ought not to forgive myfelf, if I have cauied one additional pang to ihis dear bofom, fo confoling, fo foothing to me,"------A deep figh fucceeded, and for a while he feemed unable to utter more. Althea took advantage of his filence to repre- fent to him, that true tendernefs was lefs fhewn by lamenting the fufferings of thofe
thofe we love, than in attempting their mitigation.—" Your mother, my dear love," faid flic, " is not, I truft, in fo defperate a ftate as your fears have re¬ prefentcd her—perhaps not fo bad as my report has defcribed her, for I am naturally a coward about ficknefs, and have no experience in its changes. But admitting, my beloved friend, that flie is even worfe than our love and our dread have made us believe—recolleft a moment, how 7 much all her fuflerings would be aggravated, were it poflible flic could know the convulfed ftate of your mind, and that you endanger your perfonal health, and, perhaps, fafety; for recolleft what you told me, that a man was thruft into fomc dungeon for hav¬ ing threatened one of the keepers,"™ Marchmont eould only figh out that he would be more calm, and Althea pro¬ ceeded : il Though you arc at this moment unhappily prevented attending tiie fick- Vol. IV. ρ bed
bed of this dear mother, I am not------ I will go back and aifift Amelia and Lucy in watching her. I hope to find with them the humane and excellent phyfician who attended my aunt, and whofe goodnefs and fluii I fliall never forget. I difpatched a note to him the inftant of our arrival in London, and I cannot but flatter myfeif that he has not forgotten me, and, however far it is from his tour of daily pradice, will come as foon as he knows the ciicum- ftance, which I have briefly explained to him. Now, Marchmont, confider how 1 can venture to prefent myfelf before j ? our mother; how I can anfwer her queftions, if I leave you in this ftate of mind. The anguifli I fliall bear about me it will be impoffible for me to dif¬ guife; and the confequence will be, that, .believing fome dreadful circumftance prevents your being with her, inftead of an objection which I am fure we may find means to remove, her tcirors, and, of
of courfe, her bodily fufferings, will be increafed/' Marchmont, convinced of the juftice of what flie faid, and aihamed of having added to the diftrefs of his admirable Althea by a momentary lofs of fortitude, aflured her he would be calm, and foon regained as much firmnefs of mind as enabled him to fee her depart with courage : but the inftant he had airain loft fight of her, he relapfed into a ftate of mind too terrible to be long fuf¬ tained. Unfit to be feen among the motley multitude, he ran to hide him¬ feif in his own room ; but there his anxiety denied him repofe, and he again defcended to traverfe the area, and watch the intelligence of which he dreaded the arrival. In the mean time Althea, attended by Fenchurch, returned with trembling fteps to the lodging, where flie dared not appear before Mrs, Marchmont till lite had concerted with Amelia and ν ? Lucy
Lucy what it would be beft to fay ίο their mother to account for the non¬ appearance of their brother, which they had all hoped would remove the cruel apprehenfions they laboured under.—* Amelia, wholly depreifed by this ad¬ ditional blow, had no advice tooffer; but Lucy, more fertile in expedients, thought that it would be better to reíate the truth, and fay what Akhea had told her was true alfo ; that the Marffial, or fome other perfon, his reprefentative, to whom Fenchurch had applied, had faid, on a fecond remonftrance from him, that if Mr 0 Marchmont would find any friend to be bound for his re-appear¬ ance in the full fum and penalties for which he was detained, he might then, with an attendant, be fuffered to go to the place he requefted. Lucy hoped, that by affuring her mother Mr. Ever¬ fley was foon expeded, who Ín a matter where the fecurity for his fafety was Marchmonts honour, would, flie knew, anfwer
anfwer for him to any amount, flie might appeafe her fuffering mother with hope, which, perhaps, a few days might realize, and by which they might at leaft gain time to try what could be done. They haftened then to adopt this plan ; Althea, by an effort of exalted heroifm, appearing undoubting, and even cheer¬ ful. Mrs. Marchmont, on whom her looks had a forcible effed, bore the in¬ telligence of delay, thus foftened, better than they had expeded. She feemed to have fuffered lefs than they had feared from the fatigue of her journey, and to be confoled by the idea of being within lefs than a quarter of a mile of Marchmont. This mitigation of adual fuffering was principally the good work of Althea, and flie was amply and in¬ ftantly rewarded by refleding on the comfort flie ihould afford her hufband when flie returned to him. To return flie of courfe became im* patient; but ihe ftill hoped that her me- .ρ 3 dical
dical friend, however late, would find a quarter of an hour to gratify her with his advice—and as he was a ftranger to the reft of the family, fhe determined to wait for him till the hu moment. Having difpatched Fenchurch with a note to Marchmont, accounting for her ftay, AUhea fat by the bed-fide of her mother, while Amelia, Lucy, and Milly bufied themfelves in putting their clothes into drawers, and giving what order and neatnefs they could to an abode which it was moil likely they were long to inhabit. It was feven o'clock before Dr. War¬ rington arrived. Earneftly as Althea had wiflied to fee him, ftie received him with confufion ; and though ihe had briefly ftated to bim in her letter for whom fhe wiflied his affiftance, and the relationfhip in which this friend of hers ftood to her, fhe had need of all her prefence of mind to give verbally a more diftinft account of her prefent fituation, to one who had laii feen her in circumflancei fo different. Dr.
Dr. Warrington, who to the greateft profeflionai fkill added an uncommon g jodnefs of heau and fenfibility, under¬ ftood at once the caufe of her embar- raflment,· and while he was concerned that fhe had made an imprudent mar¬ riage, he haftened to convince her that the regard he had conceived for her, while he faw her in attendance upon her aunt, was not to be fliaken by mere change of fortune. Mc therefore fpoke to her with the mofl fatherly tendernefs; told her how pleafed he was at her re¬ collecting him on this occafion ; and, having fucceeded in re-aifuring her, fol¬ lowed her to the chamber of the patient, Althea, while he was making the ufual enquiries of Mrs. Marchmont, anxioufly watched his countenance, and thought ihe úw in it a confirmation of all ihe dreaded. When his vifit was over, Al¬ thea followed him into a pai lour, where lie defired pen and ink might be brought; but, before he began to ufc them, he p 4 told
told Althea flic muft fit down and com¬ pofe herfelf—" We will have a little converfation together, my fair young friend," faid he; " I am fure that with all the trembling fenfibility that I fee in your face, and know to be in your bofom, you have fenfe and fortitude above your appearance; I make, there¬ fore, no fcruple to tell you the truth. The diforder of the poor lady above ftairs İs be¬ yond the reach of medical aid; fhe is truly and literally dying of a broken heart." Althéa's countenance expreffed what flic had no power to utter.—Dr. War¬ rington faw how much ffie was hurt, and haftened to fay, " But I do not, however, mean decidedly to pronounce, that though a phyfician cannot cure her, ilie is paft all cure: on the contrary, if the dreadful preflure could be removed from her mind, I believe ffie is not fo far gone but that flie might recover. I am now interefted for her, for her own fake as well as for }ours; and one can¬ not
not fee without deep concern thofe three lovely young women, to whofe defence¬ lefs ftate I fuppofe her life to be fo neceflary. Tell me ingenuoufly the condition of your huiband's affairs. For what and by whom is he imprifoned? What are his hopes and his refources ?" Althea, charmed with the benevolent intereft this excellent man took in their deftiny, related as briefly as- fhe couid the hiftory of her firft acquaintance with Marchmont (but without naming the perfon on whofe account fhe had been fent to Eaftwoodleigh) : on the family, and the caufes of its decline, flie en¬ larged more fully, particularly on the nature of the enga gement that had caufed him to be imprifoned. She fpoke par^ ticularly of the refufal of Mohun and Lady Dacres to pay her fortune, and of the cruel and malignant conduct of them both, but efpecially of tbe former, w T ho had provoked Marchmont by unworthy treatment, and then taken fo bafe au ρ 5 advantage
advantage of the anger fuch treatment: could not fail to excite. She concluded by ftating the amount of the whole fums for which Marchmont was in cuftody, and the refufal of the keeper of the prifon to let him, unlefs with fureties, vifit his mother." Akhea, mild and calm as fhe was, was fo certain that nobody could hear a de¬ tail of fuch injuftice without indigna¬ tion, that fhe wondered the Dodor liftened to her with fo fteady a counte¬ nance; expeding that, entering into her feelings, he would have expreffed his de- teftation of Mohun aimoft as warmly as flie felt it. She was, therefore, half repulfed when he faid, ** I know Mr, Mohun very well, and have attended him. He is a violent and pofitive man, but I fhould hardly have thought him capable of ading fo difhonourably.— Perhaps he has been irritated by fome falfehood, or by the arts of that attor¬ ney. I think, if matters could be ex- pi aine d^
plained, or foftened, this complaint of his would be withdrawn, and then it might be feen what could be done about the reft. I am afraid/' added he, paufing, " that at this time of year Mr* Mohun is not in London. However, I will enquire at his houfe, and find out where he is, and you may depend upon my trying what is to be done, and that direBly; for indeed the nervous cordial I am going to order for the fuffering lady above will be utterly ufelefs, un¬ lefs her fon's profpech clear up a little." He then fat down to write the prefcrip- tion; which done, he called for his car¬ riage : and feeing Althea about to' pre¬ fent a fee, while fhe murmured fome¬ thing of the trouble he had taken in coming fo far, he ftopped, and laid, " f will once for all tell you, mydearyoung friend, how I expect to be made amends : put your money in your pocket— I íhall take none of it. The only way you Can gratify me is by letting me fee I do good ρ ? ta
to a perfon of whom I think fo well as I do of you. I had a fincere friendihip for Mrs. Trevyilian—a more excellent woman never exifted; her memory will always be dear to me, and thofe fhe loved it will always be a pleafure to me to befriend» I am not a man of many profeffions, you know; and very likely in the prefent cafe very little may be in my power; but what I can do, I will— Do you keep up your fpirits, and con¬ fider how many miferies there are in the world, infinitely lefs fupportable than thofe you now fhare, bad as they are." He then promifed to let her know what he had done, if he could not fee her the following day, and affured her he would at all events vifit Mrs. Marchmont again whenever fhe fent for him—but that for the prefent nothing could be done but to follow his prefcription, and to keep her as calm and as much in hope as he could. Dr.
Dr. Warrington then departed, and Althea, with a lighter heart than fhe had feit fince the evening of March¬ monts arreft, went firft to his mother, whom ftie left confiderably better in fpirits from the dodor's vifit, and then haftened to her poor prifoner, who wait¬ ed for her in the fevereft fufpenfe. To him fhe appeared indeed a guardian angel : fraud and falfehood feemed to lofe their power before the firm purity of her charader — like Ithuriel, he thought fhe could baffle the fiend Vam¬ pyre himfeif, and at the found of her fweet voice malignity and rancour and avarice muft, he believed, be put to flight. Soothed by thefe fwect illufions, and relieved by fuppofing his mother better, together with the certainty of her now having the beft medical advice that could be obtained, Marchmont tailed this night repofe to which he had long been a ftranger. The next day rather flrength¬ ened
ened his fortitude« and his hopes. He received a letter from Everfley, who told him he had written to Mr. Bargrave, giving him the fulleft powers to make ufe of his credit to any amount within the compafs of his fortune; and affuring him that nothing but the fituation of Mrs. Everfley, which, though not likely to take any decided turn, rendered it impoffible for him to leave her, fhould for a moment prevent his haftening to London himfeif. So friendly a letter, and the difpofition of Dr. Warrington to affift them, offered more confoling profpefts than Marchmont had dared to look for ; and as the exceffive agitation of his mind fubfided, the refignation and fortitude which he had found it eafy to talk of to others, but not always poffible to practife himfeif, was again reftored*
CHAP,
CHAP. XL
a , m . . m , , . . Yield not thy neck To Fortune's yoke ; but let thy dauntlefs mind Still ride m triumph over all mifchance.
JVİR. Bargrave now appeared, and excufed himfeif as well as he could for not having attended Marchmont's firft fummons. He had been out of town on indifpenfable bufinefs, and wifhed to hear from Mr. Everfley before he took any material fteps. He then talked over the affairs, but not very fanguinely* As to what Mr, Everfley had faid in his letter, to what did it amount? For, in ihort, what could be done unlefs to give bail
bail for the whole debt? Such was the tenor of Mr. Bargravc's converfation : and Marchmont acknowledged, that, as far as related to Everfley, his way of feeing the thing accorded with his own opinion ; for he would not for the world have engaged Everfley to anfwer for fo large a fum, which he faw no profpect of ever being able to pay himfeif. So fcrupulous' was he of intruding too much on his generous friendfhip, that he had made no ufe of the order on his banker which Everfley had laft fent him; though fuch had. been the plunder he had fuf¬ fered, and fuch the high prices at which every thing was retailed in the prifon, that his purfe was very much reduced— while that which- Lucy managed for her mother was, from having paid half a year's rent of their cottage,, and the expences of their removal, greatly low¬ ered alfo. Nothing was due to Althea of the dividend on her aunt's legacy till October; and. Marchmont, when Bar- grave
grave had left him, after giving him fiV remote a profpect of being out of im¬ prifonment, began to confider how he was to live in it. The fpeculation was melancholy enough. One only refource was offer¬ ed by what he could do for himfeif, and that lay in his literary talents; but if thefe afforded him but fcanty advan¬ tages while he enjoyed liberty and fome degree of confideration in the world, what could he hope to derive from them now that he had not oppor¬ tunities to mark the manners, or adapt his writings to the tafte, of the pafling day. Or, if he took any line in which that knowledge was not neceffary, he knew how readily, not only bookfellers, but all men in trade regulate their offers of purchafe by the neceffities of the fellers. There was little hope, there¬ fore, that he fhould find his labour re* warded as if he had been in happier circumftances. It was befides very pro-. bable,,
bable, that the principal dealers in lite¬ rary traffic would hefitate at purchafing the work of a prifoner who was likely, befides the difgrace of the ????????, to vent in his writing fome part of the difcontentthatimprifonmentisveryaptto engender.—The paflage from di f conte n t to murmurs againft the oppreffion, real or imaginary, is very Ihort; and mur¬ murs may favour of feditious notions, and feditious notions might carry a man nobody knew whither. What rich and fubilantial vender would hazard any thing like this in thefe times ? March¬ mont, in confidering this over, was aware that purchafers might ftill be found; but from fome his pride recoiled, and from others his prudence. He knew how much the fuccefs of a book depends on the manner in which it is ufhered into public; and that the mere name of the publifher fecures to fome all that fort of recommendation which influences thofe who are to be told how to like or diflikej
difiiké; and in books, asin every thing elfe, that is at leaft half the world. But though this felf-hcld council ended in Marchmont's perfuading him¬ feif that his profits in that line muft be circumfcribed, ftill thofe profits were an objed to him. He was not now to learn how much any purfuitj, and above all one in which a man engages from the influence of duty, elevates while it oc¬ cupies the mind : the only difficulty was to call off his thoughts from the fur¬ rounding circumftances, and obtain com¬ mand enough over ! ' n faculties to exert them; convinced that the very attempt mitigated fomewhat of the evils he fuffer¬ ed, and that it was more like a reafonable being to ftruggle with than helplefsly to lament them. Some days afterwards, in a letter to Everfley, to whom he had expreffed himfeif moft grateful for his unwearied friendihip, and declined every affiftance that might, however remotely, injure
injure his friend, Marchmont wrote thus: " Since I have been eafier on ac¬ count of my mother, and have daily hopes of feeing her, my mind has re¬ gained the force which I am willing to allow it ought rever to have loft. I have even projeded fome literary un¬ dertakings, and am enquiring for a book feller to whom they can be dif¬ pofed of to advantage. I find that I ihould do well enough if I could but withdraw my thoughts altogether from two or three perfons: but when I look round me, confider where I am, and by whofe means—when the dark fcroil of accumulated villany is unrolled by me¬ mory before me—when I confider the cold-blooded malignity with which the r. oft worthlefs of the brutes that dif¬ grace the human race triumph in my diftrefles, while a group of helplefs and amiable women, a mother, a wife, yet indeed
indeed a bride, and three fweet fifters, are their vidims—rage and indignation, not the lefs violent for being impotent, tear my heart to pieces ; and I am forced to fly to Akhea, whofe prefence checks thefe paroxyfms—I haften to hear her voice—I bid her read to me, and the monfters for a moment difappear. I diffolve into tears, and feem fuddenly removed from being tormented by demons to the foothing fociety of an angel. " But I have given up many hours of my wife's time to my mother, and once Lucy and Milly have come to vifit me. This, however, is not a place for them even to enter, and I infifted on my patiently dejeded Amelia's forbear¬ ing to make the experiment. Among fo many perfons of aimoft every rank, there muft be many profligate, daring, and unprincipled.—Suftained in effron¬ tery by numbers, and carelefs of con¬ fequences, becaufe they can hardly be in
, in a worfe fituation; fuch men are not certainly thofe to whofe licentious eyes and remarks ? would expofe my fi ilers; yet among them daily does my Althea pafs. They generally underftand who fhe is: and as, guarded by my arm, flie croffes the area in going or returning, I fee them, Everfley, look npon her with awe. Lovely, uncommonly lovely as flie is, their admiration feems to have fo much reverence mingled with it, that I do not believe, even if flie were unpro¬ tected, one of them, noifyand boifterous as they are, WOuld offer her the flighteft infult. Yet there are times when I can¬ not forgive myfelf for having been the caufe of making her an inmate of fuch a place! and whatever fortitude I acquile for myfelf, I am a coward when for her I furvey the prefent, or look forward to the future. " Did I fuffer alone, I think î fliould not fail in endurance; and after all, my friend, fince 1 muft aceuftom myfelf to imprifonment,
•imprifonment, I ought to confider it philofophically, as it is very likely much of my life is to pafs in it, to diveft it of its horrors. The greateft for me is the fight of mifery it is impoffible for me to relieve—-to fee the progrefs of de¬ fpondence and ill example on the young, whom fome folly of their own, or the villany of others, had brought hither, and the helplefs and gloomy refignation of the old—to mai ? the palficd hands of induftry, which, if not ftruck by the will ering demon of legal oppreffion, might ftill have been bufy in contri¬ buting to the public ftock, and in main¬ taining in comfort and competence thofe who now linger out their lives in fordid wretchednefs, and become unfit for fo¬ ciety ; which having taught them to con¬ fider themfelves as outcafts, who can wonder that they learn to prey upon it? Nothing is more deprefling than to pais through that part of the prifon where the looms of the poorer debtors are fituated.
fituated. Dirt and famine are every where vifible : the obferver of any feel¬ ing is ihocked to fee a thoufand mife¬ rable contrivances to fupport an exift¬ ence which feems fo little worth having; and fhudders to think that half thefe ftratagems go to the acquifition of thofe coarfe and deftructive fpi rits, by which this very exiftence may be forgotten! What I fee around me is only one great ex¬ ample of an evil that pervades the whole kingdom, and of which every county prefents its ihare. I fet about calcu¬ lating the numbers fo confined in this land of freedom! and I enquire whether no remedy can be found againft a cir¬ cumftance that furely is as difgraceful as pernicious. Nay, 1 even venture to afk whether fuch an attempt would not do more honour to our Legifiaiure than their arduous undertakings to pre ferve hares and partridges for the pleafures of the rich. If I had enjoyed my paternal fortune, Everfley, ihould 1 have thought thus ?
thus? Perhaps not. We are certainly, more than we are willing to allow, the creatures of accident; and it is very likely that if I, like many other men of my age, had from my infancy had nothing to do but to enjoy, I might have thought as little as they do of thofe who have nothing to do but to fuffer. You, my friend, who are, or at leaft were, art Optimift, and have often declared for the doctrine of Leibnitz and Pope, will, perhaps, afk me—' Of what ufe is all this reafoning but to make ??? felf more unhappy ? Admitting that all is not right, can you make it otherwife?'— Alasi no.—But it is by reafon only that abufes are gradually removed; and if we dare not ufe this privilege, and apply it here and there as we can, we are indeed funk below the favage, who lives and enjoys his animal exiftence without it. " The man born in a mine, accuftomed to a certain manner of life, and to have Vol. IV. q his
his wants fupplied in hi« gloomy fou- terrain, has no wiih to gaze upon the fun, to inhale the frefh air, to feaft his eyes on the lovely colours of nature, becaufe he knows not what thev are. But let him once afcend to the furface of the earth, let him have the privilege of breathing freely, of feeling the vivify¬ ing influence of the fun—and he muft be a ftupid and worthlefs being if he would voluntarily return to the dark¬ nefs and ftagnation of is former abode, although his actual fubfiftence, and even grofs enjoyments, are there eafily within his reach. Juft fuch a being the man feems to me, who is contented to refign, after having once felt it, his power of inveftigating truth (though he cannot always find it), and content himfeif with fyftems formed for him by others who have an intereft in keeping this reafon¬ ing faculty in fubordination.—I mean the men who fay— 'But
* Out they in footh muft reafon!—Curfes light « On the proud talent!—'Twill at Iaft undo us*/ u Lawyers (you know how I love them, and with how much reafon) have certainly caufe enough to dread its exertion, and, while they affecì to make it the rule of their own profefilon, abfolutely deny the ufc of it to their clients. Indeed thofe who voluntarily have any thing to do with them, have ufually not much to lofe. " My fimile of a mine, and of human beings buried in it, brings me to re¬ mark on the landfcape, or rather the prifon-fcape around me. Even in the fqualid wretchednefs of thefe miferable habitation s , where, though lodgings are given in rotation, the poor fell their right of ihelter to thofe who have ftill fomething left to purchafe it, and are "huddled together in caverns, where a
? 2
man
man of only moderate fortune would not fuffer his hounds to kennel ; even in thefe nofe-offending regions of po¬ verty and puniíhment that inftincìive love of nature prevails, which points out what man ought to be, and marks his place in the creation as a cultivator of the earth; for, even in the dungeon, fome faint memorial of vegetable life is confoling to him—and the wretched woman, who toils from the dawn till the night, and hardly earns enough to keep from periíhing the meagre and ragged infants that furrotmd her, makes even here fome poor attempts at a garden.— t ..... . There the pitcher ftands * A fragment; and the fpoutlefs tea-pot there; * Sad witneffes, how clofe pent man regrets * The Country—with what ardour he contrives * A peep at Nature, whe« he can no moie*é u I too feel a fort of calenture of the mind, and languiíh for the wood walks
and
and downs, which are continually pre¬ fent to my imagination, peopled by my family and my Althea î and í tremble, as- I watch her lovely countenance, and dread left the un wholefome air, which muft be generated in an enclofure like this, in the heats of fummer too, ihould injure her health. I fometimes fancy that her eyes look heavy, and as if ihe had been weeping in fecret. I perfuade myfelf her complexion changes, and there is more of languor about her than ihe is willing to avow ; and then, Everfley, my fortitude again fails, and the moment ihe leaves me, fo as to be no longer afFecied with it, I relapfe into unavailing tranfports of rage and de-» fpair. She returns to me—ihe gives me an account of my mother; holds out fome new hope that ihe has ga¬ thered from Dr. Warrington, who feems indefatigable in our fervice, and the tu¬ mult of my fpirits fubfides, and once more I bluíh at my weaknefs. ç 3 "I believe
* f I believe that women, whom we have proudly called but children of a larger growth, have, when they pof¬ fefs good underftandings, more fortitude than men· Not to recall to obferva¬ tion the heroines of Antiquity, I feel aihamed of my impatience, whenl con¬ template the moft illuftrious woman* of modern times, fitting in her dungeon amidft the molt degraded of the human fpecies, ίο whofe infults ihe was every moment liable. Torn from her only child, and uncertain of the fate of her refpeciable hufband, while her own feemed decided, and the fcaffold ab¬ folutely before her—yet fuch was her firmnefs of mind, that fhe could arrange her miferable apartment, and call off her attention from the prefent horrors that furrounded, and the future that threat¬ ened her, and apply herfelf to botany and to mufic. However the part this
extraordinary woman took in the re¬ publican government of France may have raifed prejudice and hatred againft her, who, that is capable oí feeling tru2 greatnefs of mind, can contemplate without admiration and refpeci fuch fublimity of mind? Who, circumftanced as I am, whatever may be their party or their politics, can read without being fenfible of this elevation the following fentence : *....,.,.,,, Peut-être un jour mes récits ingé¬ nus charmeront les inftans de quelque infortunée cap¬ tive, qui oubliera fon fort en s'attendrifiant fur le înienj peut-être les Philofophes, qui veulent peindre le cceur humain dans la fuite d'un roman ou l*aciion d'un drame s trouveront-ils à l'étudier dans mon hiftoire*/
While feveral days were, amid thefc thoughts and thefe projects, paffed in a fort of fluftuating philofophy by March¬ mont, Althea, appearing before him al¬ ways calm and occafionally cheerful, wa« very far from poffeffing internally the compofure which, by efforts of cou¬ rage and virtue, ihe affumed. The hopes fhe had indulged that Dr. War¬ rington could find means to foften the malignant ferocity of Mohun were gra¬ dually diminifhed ; for though he had done alî, and even more than he pro¬ mifed, he obtained, by his firft enquiry, no other information than that Mr. Mo¬ hun was gone into Lincolnfhire, and his return uncertain. Dr. Warrington then procured a direftion to him there; and, without mentioning his bufinefs, wrote to fay he wifhed to know when he would be in London. The letter followed him to the houfes of fome of his friends in other parts of the county ; İt was after many days longer than the ufual courfe
courfe of the poft would have brought it, that Dr. Warrington received an anfwer from Mohun ; who, imagining he wanted to confuit him profeffionally, condefcended to inform him, that he believed he fliould pafs a few days at his houfe in London, the laft week in Au- guft, on his way to his annual fhooting ex- curfion in Wales; and that then he would fend to the Dodor, and be glad to fee him. This put off any farther efforts for three weeks at îeaft, and then they were fo uncertain of fuccefs in removing not half the fetters by which Marchmont was bound, that Althea looked forward without hope of redrefs; while, on the other hand, Mrs. Marchmont, without any pofitive acceffion of illnefs, feemed daily to decline in ftrength, and to be very far gone in that difeafe whicii is flowly, and aimoft imperceptibly, fatal, ' IKc pining atrophy !'
S5
For
For the fake of Althea, and of her daughters, fhe ftruggled againft the deep defpondence that made her trying to jive appear a taik equally heavy and ufelefs; and even forbore to repeat aloud the defire that preyed on her heart to fee her fbn—internally refolved, if fhe could obtain ftrength enough, to be carried thither, to feek him in his prifon, fince he was not allowed to come to her. Dr. Warrington, who continued to vifit her, faw, with concern, the pro¬ grefs of a malady out of the reach of any fkill to cure ; and when he under¬ ftood that the fmall annuity, on which flie and her family now fubfifted, and which bad been re-purchafed by Mr. Everfley, dropped with her life ; that her daughters would then be entirely deftitute, and without a friend or a proteftor on earth but their imprifoned brother, his humanity urged him to pro- craftinate at leaft, if he could not en¬ tirely avert, the hour wben this unhappy mother
mother was to be torn for ever from her helplefs girls. This, he thought, might be done by procuring her an interview with her fon out of his confinement, for into it he would by no means hear of her going. The Docìor, therefore, of¬ fered himfeif as fecurity ; but there were forms which could not be gone through on the day he took this good-natured rcfolution, and on the next he was under an abfolute promife to vifit one of his patients thirty miles from London, which would inevitably detain him the whole day : this humane prefcription, there¬ fore, was, of neceffity, poftponed till the next. Althea, as fhe took leave of Dr. Warrington, warmly expreifed her gratitude.—" Alasi my dear Madam !'* iaid he, as he held her hand, tc I wouid to God I could do more than this, whicii will be, J fear me, of little ñna\ ufe towards the prefervation of our valuable fnend. I am by no means rich, not- 'Aithflanding my extenfive pracìicc. lia ο β the
the early part of life I had a large fa¬ mily of collateral relations to affift; I married a woman I loved without a fortune, and have now fix children of my own—fo that to pay fuch a fum as three thoufand pounds is not in my power. But fomething or other muft be done for the reliefofall of you; I can¬ not bear to fee fo many worthy and amia¬ ble people fo cruelly circumftanced." Althea, fpeechlefs with gratitude and emotion, faw him depart; and again nourifhed hopes that their troubles might, by fuch a friend, be removed. Some ray of comfort was indeed ab¬ folutely neceffary to fuftain her fainting courage; for circumftances had lately oecurred, which, added to her continual druggie to appear cheerful while an¬ guiih preyed on her heart, neariy over¬ came her. One of thefe was, the impertinence with which ihe had frequently been fpoken to by a young man of genteel thoueh
though carelefs appearance, who was aimoft always in the lobby, and fome¬ times walking in the fpace fhe had to traverfe between the prifon and Mrs. Marchmonts lodgings; and though Fen¬ church was with her till Marchmont himfeif, who always waited for her, gave her his arm, yet neither the uneafinefs his addreffing himfeif to her evidently gave her, nor the fpirited remonftrances of her fervant, feemed to have the leaft effed. His converfation confifted of the moft extravagant compliments on her beauty ; in declaring that a man, wiio had fuch a companion in a prifon, ought to think himfeif in paradife, and other rhodomontade of the fame nature, which, if it terrified and ihocked her at firft, gave her ftill more ferious alarm when it became conftantly repeated ; for the moment ffie was out of fight of March¬ mont, this perfecutor fuddenly appeared, and followed her with his infulting fpeeches
fpeeches till íhe reached the houfe fhe was going to. To fpeak of this to Marchmont would be to caufe a quarrel that might produce the moft dreadful confequences ; yet ihe thought that, if it ever ihould come to his knowledge, he woukl be extremely hurt at her enduring, even for one day, infolence of fuch a nature; She in vain expoftulated with the man, and reprefented how cruel it was to af* front a woman, who, while attending on her imprifoned hufband, could not efcape from him. He protefted that he meant no affront ; that he intended only to fhew his refpedful adoration, and to afiV, moft humbly to afk leave to wait upon her, as the moft devoted of her flaves.— Althea bade Fenchurch enquire who he was, with fome intention of entreating Dr. Warrington to fpeak to him. Fen¬ church learned that he was a young man of family, who, having fpent his owh fortuncj
fortune, and as much of theirs as they would part with, was now confined for a debt of feven or eight thoufand pounds ; and that his family, knowing no way of keeping him from imprifon¬ ment, whither he would certainly plunge again, by his wild extravagance, as fooa as he was reieafed, had determined to let him remain there, and contributed among them, as they were all very rich^ to his fupport : fo that, making up his mind for the prefent, he had taken pof¬ feffion of the rooms called the ftate rooms, where he lived in a conftant courfe of deep drinking, and fuch diffi- pation as was yet within his reach. He failed not to find companions enough, and confoled himfeif for the lofs of better fociety, by being the principal perfon in that he now collefted around him. In confequence of the money he fcattered heedlefsly about, all the turn¬ keys and runners of the prifon were his
his moil humble fervants j and, fecurity having been given to the Maríha^ he had the liberty of the rules. From the intrufion of fuch a man AUhea was utterly at a lofs how to de¬ fend herfelf, without involving March- niont in a quarrel whh him. He was artful enough never to attempt fpeaking to her when her huiband was with her, but had made fome civil advances to¬ wards an acquaintance with Marchmont, which Ahhea had difcouraged, faying, that any acquaintance in their prefent fituation would be diftreifing to her, and would merely break in on the time which ihey could either pafs together quietly» or m confutations upon bufi¬ nefs; and that íuch a man as Mr. Car- Hngbury was reprefented to be, was not a proper perfon to aílociate with his fifters, ihould they ever come to their apartment., Marchmont, to whom fo¬ ciety was not only indifferent but pain¬ ful, had no will but that of Althea, and iliunned
fhunned any connedion either with Mr, Carlingbury, or any other of his fellow- p ri foners. Within the laft week it was not only the infufferable importunity of this per¬ fon, but the ftrange manners of another, that had perplexed and alarmed Althea. She had obferved a man about fixty, plainly and rather coarfely dreffed, and without any thing remarkable in his ap¬ pearance, whom ihe had feveral times paffed near the door of the prifon, and twice or three times within it. He had fixed his eyes upon her with fo fteady, yet fo odd a look, that ffie fhrunk from him involuntarily; but when, affailed by her, daily tormentor, he had met her without the walls, bis countenance had indicated fomething, which, though Al¬ thea did not give herfelf time to invefli¬ gate what it meant, made her tremble.—- Yet, as he had never fpoken to her, ffie had no pretence to complain, though every
every time ihe faw him her terror im- creafed. The interview only for a few moments procured with difficulty between March¬ mont and his mother, by the interven¬ tion of Dr. Warrington, produced a fcene which only ferved to diftrefs them both, while Althea thought ihe perceived Mrs, Marchmont grow worfe after¬ wards jl and Marchmont himfeif, ihocked at the appearance of his mother, was, during the reft of the day, in a ftate of the moft dreadful depreffion. This was, however, fomewhat alleviated by a let¬ ter from Everfley, which, without men¬ tioning particulars^ gave him hopes that this fteady friend would foon be with him; and he faid in a poftfcript, ** Have you heard,that your wife*s coufin, Mr. Trevyilian, the laft male of the family of Hafcombe Court, has been dead fome weeks? His two fifters alfo are dead hmg fince,, and (which I did not know tilL
till lately) of the remaining branches of the family none furvive, but Mrs» Marchmont, your wife, and a Mrs*. Thoreiby. I have always underftood that the landed eftates were fa entailed, that they could not be alienated : I know them to be between five and fix thoufand a year, and Trevyilian, if he could, would not have impaired them* On the contrary, I always heard, and had reafon to believe, he laid up money· I have written to defire Willis, my fteward, would enquire whether he made a will, and who are faid to be his heirs at law. On your fide it might be worth while to make fome enquiry. Employ Bargrave if he can be of any ufe to you. I, on my part, will let you know, ftiould I hear, in the newfpaper phrafe, c of fomething to your advantage.* '· Marchmont had thought fo little of any thing but Althea herfelf,. that any fuch contingencies as the prefent v;cre quite new 7 to him. Althea herfeif hardly knew
knew more of them than he did. She recollefted having gone into mourning for one of her confins, but, as fhe had never feen any of them above once y when fhe was in town for a few days> they had made no impreiion on her memory at ali j whik ail fhe could re* call of Mr. T'svy Uian himfeif wa», that her aunt was flighted by him, and dif- liked him 5 which, together with th$ hurry he was in to have her remove^ from the houfe where her aunt had left her, did not make her feel at all con¬ cerned to hear he was no more; while the hope of poffeffing a fhare of fuch a property, and giving it to Marchmont at this period, made her for tbe firft time in her life eager about an affair of mo¬ ney. Who Mrs. Thorefby was, or how much fhe might have the advantage of her as to nearnefs of kindred, Althea knew not: but the hope of eventually poffeffing enough to liberate and enrich Marchmont was fo flattering to her ima¬ gination*
gination, that ihe wiflied to fet out im¬ mediately herfelf on the enquiry, and propofed going the next morning to Mr, Bargrave, and giving him fuch infor¬ mation as flic was able to recoiled, to guide his enquiry. To this Marchmont confented, though far lefs fanguine as to the event than Althea. He had al¬ ready experienced the difficulty of mak¬ ing out claims, which there was no mo¬ ney to fupport ; and he had reafon to remember his little fuccefs, when a law) ef told him of the ufurious and dif- honeft proceeding of Sir Ralph Gun- fton, in regard to his father's mortgages, by which his advifer thought that fome of them might be fet afide; but who, when he found that Marchmont had no money to carry ön the fuit in Chancery, had declined engaging in it ; talked of tbe uncertainty of the law, and the de¬ lays and expences of a court of equity; and concluded with faying, that the firft lofs was the beft. This man* however, had
had contrived to keep his papers, and ία make a heavy charge againft him, which deprived him of the power of attempting to procure redrefs by means of any other perfon; while, by what he had done, he only irritated the malignity and alarmed the cupidity of Sir Ralph's heirs, and gave a more immediate caufe of hatred to Sir Audley and Lady Da- eres, befides what they naturally bore him, on account of the poverty and de¬ cay of his family, and the injuries they knew he had fuftained, which, as they had the advantage of thofe injuries, they could not forgive. After fuch an ex¬ periment, Marchmont could not venture to natter himfeif that fortune did not again mean to mock him; and Althea doubted while ihe tried to hope. There was, however, a perfon better informed than either of them------ Lady Dae res iiad from her youth been accuftomed to cal¬ culate on contingencies; and when both the fifters of Mr. Trevyilian died within a few
a few months of each other, fhe had bent a keen eye on Althéa's chance of fucceeding to half his eftate. So good did fhe believe this chance to be, that it aimoft influenced Ιιετ to check her ill- humour and avarice, in order to keep AkWa with her, and unmarried : but the perverfe circumftance of her going to the Marchmonts baffled her fchemes; though ftie perfuaded herfelf that while fhe withheld, and made her prefent for¬ tune doubtful, fhe muft ftill remain fingle. Her marriage, therefore, and with Marchmont, of which flie was im¬ mediately apprifed, had extremely vexed and irritated her; while* as if to punifh her by more immediate evils for all fhe had inflifted on Althea, her eldeft fon, who had fold out of the army, and who was not yet nineteen, had entered on fuch a career as threatened to diffipate, even before he came of age, the large property which he was to inherit from the ufurer his grandfather, and the place¬ man
man Sir Audley. He had already taken up confiderable funis of morcy, and, un- affecied cither by duty or gratitude, openly repined at the large income his mother pofieffed, and the fortunes fe¬ cured to Iiis brother and three fifters which prevented his being able to anti¬ cipate to a ftill greater extent his fu¬ ture revenues. Lady Dacres, unwilling to complain of a fon whom flic had al¬ ways fuppofed muft be a miracle oi perfection, had the daily mortification of hearing of exploits, and confequent expences, which flie had no longer the power to check, or even to attempt re¬ straining; for her fon never came near her, and the intelligence ihe gained of him was either from the notoiicty of his, conduci, or from Jews and money¬ lenders, who applied for information whether the ftatement he had given of his future profpecls were j ufi. This fevere mortification did not fwecten the lady's temper; but, miferable herfeif, fhe found
found a fad fatisfacliou in making every one about her as mifeiable as ihe could. 'fhe only fmile that had been íeen on her face for fome months, was obierved there when flie beard that Marchmont was thrown into prifon ; where, from the magnitude of the debt, it was likely he w ould remain for life. She not only re¬ counted this to every body who vifitjd her at Capelftoke, with the utmoft marks of fatisfaction, but gave 10 all that would İtilen to her a lone hiftory of Althéa's liiiibchaviour to hei i':lf. Then making an epifodvi, flic deiuibed the Marchmont family, who were, flie faid, a fei of wretched paupeis; and concluded witb a di flirtation on the challenge, whieh \h * find Marchmont bad had the cftioii- tery to fend to Mr. Mohun, only for his friendly zeal in wiihing to execute the will of her late dear Sir Audley, and for which ihe heartily hoped he might be fevcicly puniihed. Yet notwithftand¬ ing all her Ladyfhip's fagacity and per- Vol. IV. ? fed
fe ¿t information, as to Althea and the family to which fhe now belonged, fhe chofe, on receiving the news of Kir. Trevyllian's death out of the weft, and an enquiry what was become of her daughter-in-law, to anfwer very coldly, that the young lady haying left her for fome time ffie knew nothing about her, and rather believed fhe was gone abroad. Nobody but Everfley was interefted enough about Ahhea to trouble them¬ felves with her claims; and M r Thorefby himfeif brought up a lawyer, and, reol- leding the good old faying, that pof¬ feffion is nine points of the law, was al¬ ready in poffeffion of Mr. Trcv)lliaifs landed property, when Everfley wrote to announce to his friends that the fuc- cefuon was open. Ahhea having called on her way on Mrs. Marchmont, and c< mmunicated the caufe of her preient expedition, and having found her too rather better than fhe had expeded from what flie had obferved the evening before,
before, fet out, with a lighter heart than (he had long felt, attended by Fen¬ church, to walk to Mr. Bargravc's chambers in Lincoln's-inn, which ftie thought flie could eafily accomplifli ; and having never feen fo much of it before, flie purpofed going through the city; but flie had not half achieved the Bo¬ rough, before, difgufted by bad fmclls and difagreeable objects, and hatf ft un«· ned by noife, ihe was glad to follow the advice of Fenchurch, and get into a hackney coach, whieh foon conveyed hev to Mr. Bargravc's chambers. She Lut up Fenchurch to let him know fhe w.is there; but a clerk appeared, who iníormed hc r that, the fummer circuit b ?? begun, ?1?. ? Tg rave was gone to Ì 01k to be pilent at a caufe ihat w'as lo be tried thcr rt of very great import¬ ance to one of his clients; and that as he afterwards intended to make a tour among hii relations, who were ofthat R 2 county,
county, his ftay in the whole might poffibly be of fix or feven. weeks. Vexed at a circumftance which muft not only delay the enquiry about which fhe was fo eager, but cruelly impede all the bufinefs fo material towards March¬ mont's enlargement—fhe was now to return difappointed. As flie had yet time for a walk, fhe ' difcharged the coach, meaning to proceed on foot at îeaft fome part of the way back to Marchmonts fad abode; and remem¬ bered that fhe could take this occafion to purchafe fome coloured papers, and other materials, for Amelia and Lucy ; who ftill, as far as their attendance on their mother would allow, continued their little manufactory. Penfively me¬ ditating on what could now be done to promote an enquiry about Mr. Tre¬ vyllian's property, flie heeded not the noifes around her, till a voice was heard eagerly calling to her, and ordering a carriage to ftop. Althea looked up and faw
faw* Dr. Warrington before her, who taking her hands in his friendly way, but with even more than his u Lial warmth, faid, " I am glad, very glad indeed, to have met you fo unexpected¬ ly; for I íhould not otherwife have [ccn you till the evening, fo indifpenfably is my day engaged. But we have fo little time, that I am happy to fave fo much on your account. Mr. Mohun is in town fome time fooner than he in¬ tended, but only for two days. I have feen him ; and really, from the convcr¬ fation I have had with him, I do be¬ lieve, that if you were yourfelf to fee him, all thefc difagreeable differences might be removed, and the affairs in general, at leaft fo faé as depends on him, fettled to vour fatisfadion." Althea bluihed deeply, utterly at a lofs what to reply. Dr. Warrington appeared not to have the leaft idea of Mohun's former pretenfi ms to her: ffie had avoided mentioning it before, and R 3 now
now it was impoffible to explain it. She remained a moment confufed and hefi- tating.—Dr r Warrington, hurried by his own bufinefs, and eagerly anxious about hers, faid, u Suppofe, as we are not far from his houfe, and I know he is at home, I were to carry you thither? 1 am obliged to go directly into the City myfelf, from whence I muå xeturn to an appointment in Hanover Square at one o'clock ; but I can fet you down in Lincoln's-inn-fields, wkhout going out of my way: and who knows, my dear Madam, but thus by one fuccefsful fally we may carry our ^oint ? Come, come/* added he, ·* you have fo much fenfe as well as fenfibility, that from fuch a caufe I know you will not fhrink, and I am fure it is impoffible for any one to refift fuch a picade^ 0 As he faid this, he led her towards bis chariot. Fenchurch had already let down the ftep ; and Al¬ thea, hardly knowing how fhe got there, was feated in it, while it was rapidly driven
driven the little diftance from Holborn to Lincoln's-inn-fields. Recovering her breath and recollection, and being well allured that Marchmont would greatly difapprove of her going to Moh tin's, whatever advantage misht accrue from it, fhe at length faid, " But, dear Sir! let us confider before I decide to wait on Mr. Mohun; I am not quite fure it is proper—I am afraid that........" w Not proper?" interrupted Dr. War¬ rington, ** my dear Mrs. Marchmont, why not proper ? Can there be any im¬ propriety in your applying, on bufinefs that (o nearly concerns you, to your fa¬ ther's friend, to his executor, to the man to whofe care he in fome decree entrufted you? I am perfuaded there is not a prude in the kingdom that would think fo. I really am very folicitous for the interview, becaufe I know it will do a great deal of good to our poor fuffer¬ ing friends; and fo take courage, my fair and refiftlcfs advocate, and God ? 4 fpeed
. fpeed your endeavours !" Thus fa\ ing, lne coach flopped, the door opened,· and Ahhea was left ftanding before Mr. Mo- h un 's door------ fo undetermined to go i u that flie meditated her efcape the mo¬ ment Dr. Warrington was out of fight: but the quickiK-fs of his footman had prevented her; for, accuftomed to rapi¬ dity by attendance on his mailer, he had thundered at the door before tlie car¬ riage drew up: and now it was opened by Mr. Mohun's fervants, who ad¬ vancing to Althea, who was, they con¬ cluded, the perfon to be admitted, one of them told her that Mr. Mohun was at home, but that moment going out. Althea, gladofan opportunity to efeape, was haftily retreating from the door, when Mohun appeared at it haftily going ©ut. He feemed furprifed at the fight of her, and ftill more when his fervant faid, tc A lady, Sir, defires to fpeak to you." Bowing, he retreated a few ????» into the hall, and, throwing open tlie
the door of a parlour, defired her to walk in. Althea itili hung back, and hefitated : £< I believe, Sir," faid flie, " the prefent is no proper time—" She was unable to finifli the fentence; but already in the room, and hardly able from confufion of mind to fupport her¬ felf, flie fat doA-n. Mohun, whofe eyes eagerly ran over her perfon, placed him¬ feif by her.
r 5
CHAP.
CHAP. XIL
???, di tutto qoaggta gioco infoiente La fève ra fortuna, ? al pianto e forda.
Cofi da lieto ftaìo a vila acerba Ne fofptnge a fua voglia : onde più fermo Contro a cappriccj fuoi non haili fchcrmo Che ripcnfare ognor che fé non ferba £ mirarla d*un vo,tto non curante Qua! femina vagante Di noftri voti indegna, e che tradire Per malvaggia natura; roí volubile torna, ed offerifce Quand attri men la cura.
HAD not all thefe circumftances fol¬ lowed each other with a rapidity that gairc Ahhea no time for recollection, the
the dignity of confcious worth, and the contempt flie felt towards Mohun, might have enabled her to have gone through the fcene with calmnefs, if not with courage; but now too many uneafy fen¬ fations affailed her at once, and fudden¬ ly. She apparently was come to afk a favour of a man, whom fhe had always detefted; and who had been the caufe of the coldnefs and feparation between her and her father. But thefe injuries were light, compared to thofe he had fince inflided on her by the tyran¬ nical attempt to withhold her fortune in conjuncilon with Lady Dacres, and the cowardice and cruelty with which he had firft infulted and then confined Marchmont. Inftead of addreffing her¬ felf to him, fhe wondered how flie had fuffered herfelf, by the fudden and mif¬ taken zeal of Dr. Warrington, to be hurried into the prefence of a man, whofe very fight was odious to her: and when (his countenance exprefling at once r β his
his triumph, and all the hateful paflions he felt) he afked to be favoured with her commands, Ahhea was unable to find words to anfwer him. Mohun, who, whatever other motives he had for dif¬ treffing Marchmont, had never hoped it would throw her into his power, now began to fee that it might very poffibly have that effeft; he therefore foftened his voice, and, dcfinng her to recollect in what he could feive her, rang, and direfted that fome glaffes of ice, and other refrefhments, might inftantly he brought. Akhea found her voice to decline them, and arofe to go; but Mohun was by no means difpofed to let her. lie thought that the confufion ? and diftrefs in which he faw her were occafioned partly by her repentance of the mdifu'eet ftep ihe had taken in marrying, and partly by her wifhing to repair it by regaining his favour. His prefumption, his total want of principi^ and delicacy, carried him fiili farther; - - and
and he believed it poffible, that March¬ mont, weary of poverty and imprifon¬ ment, from which he had no other means of efcaping, had fent his wife asan ad¬ vocate by whofe eloquent beauty his chains would drop off. Exulting in this idea, Mohun could hardly help faying aloud, if Marchmont, thou art a more fenfible fellow than I took thee for!" But the fpecies of fatisfaotion his tongue forbore to utter, was expreifed by his ejes, as, directly fixed on the varying countenance of Althea, he waited for an anfwer to his queftion— i{ What were her commands?" " It was Dr. War¬ rington, Sir," faid flie, " I did not m\ felf think of troubling you .... but the Dodor .... having .... I having met the Dodor, he thought, he fup¬ pofed . . . ." " Whatever or whoever procured mc ihe honour of feeing you in my houfe, Madam, has conferred ???? the gicat- î íl obligation; yu can only add to it by putting
potting it in my power to flie w you how greatly I love the memory of my dear friend, your excellent father; and how happy I ftiould account myfelf, if. .." Hypocrify was always fo deteftable and fo contemptible in the opinion of Althea, that fuch an inftance of it ferved by roufing her indignation to reftore her refolutiom Interrupting therefore this infulting cant, íhe faid, "If you had any regard for my father, Sir, the only way to fhew it, the only way, in¬ deed, to acquit yourfelf with integrity to the world, is to ad juftly as his ex¬ ecutor. If I have indeed any bufinefs wjth you, though I did not voluntarily come hither, it muft be, you are well aware, on the fubjed of my fortune— which you can, I know, have no legal power to detain. He, whofe right it is, you have cruelly, and I will fay bafely, prevented from aflerting his claim.— Though I certainly did not mean to come to this houfe; yet, fince I am here,
here, I beg Mr. Mohun will under* ftand, that I come to make that claim myfelf." " Charming creature!" Mohun long¬ ed to fay, as while fhe fpoke he watched the play of her beautiful countenance, animated as hy anger ^-" Charming creature! and thou art thrown away upon a beggar 1" If he did not fay this, there was fuch an expreifion in his eyes, that Akhea turned from him with terror. He feemed meditating how to model his anfwer to promote the views which now ¿à rofe fo invitingly in his imagination; while Althea, whofe fvvelling heart would, flie thought, betray her into tears, once moie roie from her feat, and, making an effort to conquer the hyfteric fenfation flie felt, faid, " I believe, Sir, the queftion I have to put to you is very eafily anfwered- -Will you or will you not transfer to Mr. Marchmont the two thoufand pounds that become mine on my mairiager 1 " «The
w The queftion, my dear Madam," faid he, offering to take her hand, but ihe turned from him, " the queftion, I do affare you, is not fo eafily anfwered. There are in the fimplcft cafes of this fort rules, forms, precautions of la>v, which......It is quite impoffible for me to explain them to you; but, upon my honour, it is not in my power to acb with the precipitancy, the hatte, and in the unguarded manner which feemed to be expected of me. Befides, my dear Madam, recoiled that I am only one executor; and without the concur¬ rence of Lady Dacres, "who fet her face againft the meafure, which (you will excufe me, 1 fpeak only after her Lady- ftiip] ihe thought as ruinous to you, as contrary to the dired will of Sir Audley------1 fay, Lady Dacres, who in this cafe poffeffes eqtL.l power with myfclf—being averfe, what could I do ?** « You
" You might at leaft," faid Althea, whofe fpirits and prefence of mind were now much reftored, " at leaft have treated like a gentleman the perfon to whom I have given a right to make the demand : you needed not, Sir, have added oppreffion to infult." Mohun faw what turn he could give even to this nefarious tranfaclion. He knew fo little of the mind and heart of Althea, and was fo thoroughly fatisfied of his own mafterly talents, that he fancied he could deceive her even in what was ?? -i evidently againft him.— Aifeding, therefore, to figh deeply, he faid, in an under tone—" It often hap¬ pens, dear Mifs Dacres------»I beg your pardon—it often happens, Madam, that wc arc, in the courfe of irrefiftible events, dragged, compelled, driven, urged, forced to take meafures to which our hearts, feelings, fentiments, and ten¬ dencies, arc utterly averfe. What wouid you
you fay, if you were told, that the mea¬ fure I adopted againft the perfon who on your account ???? could gi ve me a fe¬ cond thought, was intended to prevent greater and raore ferious calamities ?" w I ihould fay," replied Althea, " that of fuch a pretence I did not believe one word/* ,t Aad yet," faid Mohun, advancing his chair a liitle nearer to hers, as he offered her forne ©f the refreåtments that were brought, <c and yet it is pof¬ fible that nothing can be more true.— I dare not, I do not wifh to hint the moft remotely at any faults of temper, or deficiency of prudence, in any of thofe yûu honour with your regard. It is too late indeed now; would to heaven it were not!—but indeed the family of the Marchmonts—why muft I fay it?— the mifconduft of the young man has been too evident. If you had deigned to have confulted your true friends—but I fee
MARCHMONT. 379. I fee you take what I have to fay amifs— yet a moment's patience, I conjure you to hear....." " No, Sir!" cried Althea, rifing an$ haftening towards the door, " 1 have already heard too much. If your former conduft excited my indignation, is fuch converfation calculated to abate it?— No, Sir! it merely adds another fen¬ timent to my abhorrence, and that is— contempt !" The haughty foul of Mohun, inftead of being repulfed and abafhed by the refentment of offended innocence, rofe arrogantly to contemplate the delight it would afford to humble this indignant beauty. He fcorned not, therefore, to ftoop to the meaneft conceflions to ap·* peafe her—befought her to hear him ; and being always of opinion that women, whatever flight difference of charafter may arife from underftanding or educa¬ tion, are really alike in weaknefs and vanity, and to be won by the fame means—■
means—he ventured, after giving Althea' to underftand that the fate of March¬ mont was entirely in his power, to hint, m terms that could not be mifimdcr- flood, that it was hk unconquerable paffion for her that had betrayed him into fuch harih conduft towards the man who had fupplanted him in her favour, and whom he could not bear to fee happy and triumphant. He pleaded that * The faults of love 6y love are j ufi t Tied ì* and imputing Althéa's filence to the combat between vanity and intereft on one fide, againft the dignity and referve fhe thought it neceffary to affeft on the other, he proceeded to the moft un¬ equivocal proff ffions of his paifion for her; and at length added, in terms that could not bemifinterpreted, that March¬ mont's releafe and future profperity de¬ pended altogether on herfelf i and that, on
-on condition of her allowing him to renew his acquaintance as one of the intimate friends of her father, and look¬ ing upon him as the moft devoted and attached of thofe friends, Marchmont fliould be reieafed, and her'fortune be immediately given up—himfeif, how¬ ever, continuing her truftce ; and he added, that his intereft fhould be ufed to procure for Marchmont forne efta- blifhment, that might put h iui into a rank not unworthy of that of the wife it was his fupreme good fortune to pof¬ fefs. If Althea remained filent while her cars were affronted by fuch an harangue, it was not becaufe fhe fuffered it pa¬ tiently, but amazement and terror took from her, for a moment, the power to anfwer. Ill as flie had ever thought of Mohun, fuch a daring and cruel infult exceeded all fhe had believed him ca¬ pable of; and fhe was petrified with horror at the idea that fhe was in this man's
man's houfe, and perhaps might not be allowed to efeape from it. Difdaining to anfwer what flie was ihocked even to lave heard, and recollecting with com¬ fort that Fenchurch waited for her, fhe turned indignantly from Mohun, before he had finiihed the laft fentence, and rang the bell with fuch effed that two of Mohun's footmen, accuftomed to obey inftantly their mafter's fummons, appeared; and Akhea, defiring one of them td fend her fervant up, walked diredly into the hall, and from thence into the ftreet—where, Fenchurch im¬ mediately following her, ihe enquired which was the way to the neareft ftand of coaches. Fenchurch, alarmed by het look and manner, enquired if he fhould call one?—She could only anfwer— <e No, noi — do not leave me!—but fhew me tbe quickeft way to a coach."— This he did; and Ahhea began to walk fo faft, that when they arrived at the fpot ihe was breathlefs, and with dif¬ ficulty
ficulty ftepped into the hack which Fen¬ church beckoned to—direding him to let it be driven over Blackfriars-bridge to the prifon. It had proceeded aimoft halfway, be¬ fore the ftunned fenfes of Althea al¬ lowed her to confider fteadily the fcene fhe had juft gone through: but when fhe became able to refled upon it, fhe faw at once all the difficulties and dangers which the well-meant but ill- judged zeal of Dr. Warruigton had brought her into. To periih in indi¬ gence was her fixed reiolution, rather than ever again apply to Mohun, or fuffer him to be applied to on her be* half as a matter of favour. But how could ihe venture to relate to her huf¬ band the infult fhe had received, when Ihe doubted whether he would not feel himfeif injured and offended by her having unguardedly made the vifit that had brought it on? Yet how to him, from
from whom fhe had never concealed a thought of her heart fince he had been its mafter, how ffiould flie hide the ac¬ cumulated troubles ffie fuffered under ? Still, to difclofe to her hufband the con¬ verfation with which Mohun had dared to entertain her, was to aggravate all his anxieties of mind by impotent anger, and perhaps give him fuch an impreffion of her imprudence as he might never forget. While this point was yet in debate, ffie faw herfelf near the end of her journey ; and, flopping the coach, directed Fenchurch to order it to Mrs. Marchmont's lodgings, determined to confuit Lucy before flie took any rc¬ folution. It occurred to her, that flic muft give Fenchurch a caution not to fay to his mafter where ihe had been ; and even this precaution, though given with no other defign than to fave March¬ mont from pain, was fo unlike the ufual tenor of her condud, and had, ilie thought,
thought, fo odd an appearance, that, as fhe fpoke to him, her voice faltered, and her checks were dyed with blufhes. Lucy flew down to her.— " Well, my dear Althea!" ctied flie eagerly, "you who are always the bearer of comfort and good tidings—my mother has been very impatient for your return, per¬ fuading herfelf that ) ou arc to be every way the guardian angel of her ion : but .... what is the matter, my fwect fifter? You look greatly fatigued!"— Althet then briefly related what had palled; which ihe begged Lucy not to mont'on to any body, and to advife her what it wa, bcft for her to do as to re- \ealingur hiding this difagreeable en- ????? from Marchmont. Lucy heard her with a degree of horror.—Having already conceived a dreadful opinion of this man, as well from his general charafter as from Akhea's and her brother's fufferings, flic now imagined that he had a motive, and cer- Vo*. IV. ? tainly
tainly wanted not will, to complete their ruin. Marchmont, though one of the beft-tempered men in the world, was, wben roufed, extremely paffionate ; and Lucy thought with Althea, that if to the injuries he had already received from Mohun this cruel affront were added, his juft indignation, which, prifoner as he was, he could not fhew to the cowardly wretch who had infulted him, would either break out in fome üart of vio¬ lence injurious to his intereft, or prey upon his temper and his health. Mo¬ hun, it was probable, would go out of town, and think no more of the ca¬ lamities he had inflifted, than to triumph in their continuance. It was poflible that nothing might ever be known of the vifit; and then they were only where they were before, if Ahhea could only affume courage enough to anfwer any queftions Marchmont might afk in a way that rnight give him no reafon to expect any thing extraordinary had hap¬ pened.
pened. Of the circumftances of her morning's walk fhe had only to relate, that Mr. Bargrave was not at hornej and if fhe could not put on her ufually calm and cheerful air, her dejection might eafily pafs for the effect of dif¬ appointment and fatigue. This advice coinciding with Althéa's own opinion, fhe determined to purfue it. She endeavoured to compofe herfelf, and paid a fhort vifit to Mrs. March¬ mont; and Fenchurch being returned from ?? mafter, to whom fhe had fent him, flie went back to the confinement where Marchmont expefted her. He had already learned from his fer¬ vant, that Mr. Bargrave was not to be found ; but when he had put two or three other queftions to him, the poor fellow, unufed to any prevarication with his mafter, appeared fo confufed, and blundered fo rnuch^ that Marchmont was alarmed, though he knew not at what.·—When Althea appeared, whofe s 2 nerves
inerve* were not fteadied hy hp ving mc-t an ber way both the men whofe confiant notice perfecuted her, Marchmont uo fooner faw ber, than he perceived that fomething unufual had occafioned her agitationj while die queftions he put to ber fo much increafed it, that ihe at length felt ber fpirits quite conquered, •nd burft into tear«« Marchmont then reproached himfeif with having fuffcred berto gov—*' I know not," faid he, ·* by what overfight it was that I con¬ fented to your going in fearch of Bar- gnuse; if be had been met with, and had fet about the enquiry with more zeal ihau I expea* little would it indeed avail mc if İ I,were to purchafe it at the expence of one hour of your health. But," added he, " what is tbe matter with Fen- churcbf—The fellow looks as if he had fcen a ghoui, and, inftead of anfwering nry it queftioiuy.gaped and ftared as if be were Jlruggling f to hide fome great Jjccrct. j My mother I faw this morning , τ while
while you were abfent, and ihe is not ftircly fallen fince into a (late whicu you wifli to conceal from me?" Ahhea now affured him, though in faltering and weak accents, that nothing more than unufual fatigue had affected her—added to fome degree of chagrin at the delay in all their bufinefs that Mr» Bargravc's abfence muft occafion. Of this, fince it feemed to hurt Al¬ thea, Marchmont made light; but his fpirits never were in reality more dc- prcfied than they now were for "fome days. The intelligence he expected from Everfley came not ¡ and the pro-; fpeft of Trevyllian's fucceflion feeméd fading into air. Of Forrefter, whom it would have given hint f ? much pleafure to fee, he heard nothing. He had once fent his fervant to enquire at Lord Stan- warden's, but had very little fatisfaftion from the anfwer; and at Lord Roch¬ dale's he was told, that Captain For¬ refter was in England, but very ill, and* S3 by
hy the advice of his phyfician, gone to Bath inftead of coming to London,— If from diftant quarters all feemed a blank, his home view was yet moie gloomy.—Althea vilibly loft that datti— city of mind which had hitherto been the cheerful fupport of them all-—· Marchmont faw that fhe ftruggled againft the dcfpondence that every day became deeper. He obferved fomething par¬ ticipai iy apprehenfive in her manner whenever (he went out, and uncommon anxiety to iiave the fervant with her; and he learned that the walks in the fields ilie had fometimes taken with hi.s fifters were now entirely at an end.— The unpleafantnefs of fuch walks at this feafon of heat and duft, and her wiih to pafs every moment either with him or his mother, were affigned as her rea¬ fons for this alteration; but Marchmont ftill thought he faw fome myftery which lie did not comprehend; and, without any decided objeci, his rcftlcffnefs in¬ creafed,
,5 e realed, and his co ufi tierne nt became more mfupportable. Dr. Wai lington too, after his acci¬ dental inteiview with Althea, feemed» for fome days, to have forfaken them.— He perfuaded himfeif that her feeing Mr. Mohun would do every thing that was effeftual towards the accommoda¬ tion of the affairs ; and that fuch an ar¬ rangement was the only circumftance that could reftore the health of Mrs. Marchmont, for whom the power of medicine could do nothing effeftual: and having been extremely haraffed with bufineis, he look the opportunity of the abfence from London of moft of his patients to enjoy a ftiort intonal at a houle where, during the fummer, his family refided in Hcrtfordfhire.— Every one of tbe friends then, on whom Marchmont and Althea had depended, feemed at once to have forfaken them ; and there had not yet occurred, in the life of the former, any period at which s 4 manly
manly refolution was fo neceffary to enable him. to rife above this accumu¬ lation of evil, and to prevent his for- faking himfeif, òr rather thofe who alone vere obj CO s of his folicitude» With what courage and tranquillity he could, he now fat down to his literary labour. He had found a purchafer who* agreed to give him a liberal price for a work of imagination, if, upon perufing the firft volume, he found it likely to- anfwer his purpofe; and, difcouraging- as this condition was, fince the tafte and judgment of his purchafer might be in¬ fluenced by confiderations that had no¬ thing to do with literary merit, he pro» ceeded as fteadily as was poffible, with-. out accefs to books, - or any hope but of obtaining a fubfiftence in a prifon ! -Althea was his critic and his affiftant; and while ihe fat with him thus occu¬ pied, he obferved her former cheerful¬ nefs ^fometimes return ; but, whenever the hour came that Mrs. Marchmont - a^.-i ;\ expected
cxpeöed her, ihe feemed diftreffed: yer, next to being with him, he well knew that nothing gave her fo much pleafure as alleviating the fufferings of his mo¬ ther. . é> Marchmont one morning, .conduöed Althea to the door, and faw her proceed towards his mother's abode, attended, as ufual, by the fervant. He then re¿ turned to hij room, and fat down to his morning's tafk ;. in which he was deeply engaged when Benfted came breathlefs into the room, and faid—*' Oh, '5ir!— there's Chapman has juft come in, and fays that Mrs. Marchmont has fallen down in a fit under the wall juft with¬ out—and Fenchurch is like a diftraÖed man, and bid fomebody,for God's fake,. run to you." rvjarchmont totally forgetting that.he would not be permitted tö go-out with¬ out fome ceremonies that took up time, and not remembering, .at that cruel mo¬ ment, any! thing, but Althea/ he; ran .? s 5, through-
through the area and into the lobby, the door of which was, at that moment, open; and he was proceeding with equal velocity to go out, when he waj rudely ftopped by two of the turnkeys, who cried— f< Why fo faft, Sir?—Stay a little, if you pleafe."—Rage and tcrroj now combined to rob Marchmont of all pru¬ dence and prefence of mind. He fhug- gled to difengage himfeif from the grafp of the men who held him, now threaten¬ ing, now imploring; while they, win» thought him feized with phrenf\, calk d other affiftance, and forced him out oí the lobby. It is impofllble to defcribe the ai;on\ of frantic defpair he now underwent, or to fay where it would have ended, if an old man of decent appearance had not come up to him ; and, having ob¬ tained a hearing with lome dificult), faid—*· Mr. Marchmont, be calm, be pacified. Your wife is recovered—fhe is well; at leali flic is fafe. I have my¬ felf
h tf fcen her conveyed to her mother**; and have. a> far I could, ehaftiíed the raí cal who has mfultcd her." This addriT recalled the fcattered irnfe> of Marchtmmt. He feiz.d the hand of the perion who had thus brought him intelligence that fnatched him hum the moft mlupportdblc tomunts, but what he laid wa> wild and incolie«ent; an i he ontreau 1, in the urgent terms of il is new-found fneuíl, that he would l î'kurc 1 im tí e nuans i>f feeing ?? wiíe diu ? th, wlerever íhe m glu be. This ti e man, who did not fecni hrti- ídí tu be a pnfofitr, promifed t > eíí<\\, if he would coripnk lumíelf ; ??? March- ni >nt, hirdiV kîiowirg v hat he w as doing, was led back to his room—where when he armed he mfiftcd that he wouid not icuiain but wouid g'>, at whatever ha¬ zini, t) his wife: and fuch were tîie d" idful apprehenfions lhat now agiin afl.tiled him, that he would have relapfed into the undiftinguiihmg wildnefs of s ? furious
furious paffion, in defpite of his friendly counfel lor, if Fenchurch had not that moment appeared.—Marchmont inarti¬ culately demanded news of his miftrefs ; and the man then,, with evident marks of agitation, faid—" Thank God, Sir! Ihe is quite fafe and recovered, and with your mother and the young ladies. They fent me off to fay fo to you, Sir, for I was afraid that I had fent you a meffage that would have made you very uneafy ; and indeed, if it had not been for this gentleman, I do not know what I Ihould have done/* Marchmont then renewed his acknow¬ ledgments for the kindnefs received, though of what nature it was he knew not; but his impatience to go to Althea returning, he aiked his new acquaintance to accompany him when he went to pro¬ cure the humiliating permiffion he was compelled to fubmit to; and bade Fen¬ church, as they went, relate the circum- flances that had fo alarmed his miftrefs. ... - ' ..... "It
w It was owing, Sir," faid he, tf to that Mr. Carlingbury.;. who, for all my lady has kept it to herfelf for fear of fome quarrel,, has behaved extremely. impertinent to her very often :—and my. lady, ever fince that day at Mr. Mo¬ hun's . . . ." " At Mr. Mohun's!" exclaimed Marchmont.—" What do you mean?— When has your miftrefs feen Mr. Mo* bun?" Fenchurch now appeared extremely confufed; but his mafter eagerly, and even angrily, repeating his queftion, he faid—" Why, Sir, my lady charged me never to fpeak of it, becaufe ilie thought you w T ould be difpleafed, fo ill as he has ufed you, that fhe went to his houfe." " To.his houfe U — Althea! my wife!— go to Mohun's houfe? Surely the man dreams.—It is impoffible !— It could never be!" " I am fure, Sir, it ¡strue, though," faid Fenchurch with great fimplicity, u bu t
u but I wîfh I had not mentioned it, for, to be fure, it had nothing to do with what happened to-day: only Γ was going to fay, Sir, that ever fince that time miftrefs has been fo timmerfome, that every thing has frightened her a great deal more than it did before: fo that juft now, when that Mr. Carlingbury came up to her (though he did not, that 1 know of, fay much more impertinent ftuff than he ufed to fay, only he feemed, to be fure¿ more in liquor), my lady turned fo pale, that I. went forward ; and íhe faid, * Fenchurch, I muil take your arm—I am afraid I ihail drop.'—' No, no/ faid that rude impudent fellow, pufhing me on one fide—' I will never fuffer a fervant to have that honour while I am here.·—So he puihed me away, Sir, and I could not bear neither that; nor to fee my lady fo frightened—and then I feized him by the collar, and he ftruck me two or three times. My poor lady ihrieked out, and made back this way ;
way ; and this gentleman then came up to her, and bid her not be frightened, for he would take care of her.— L gave Mr. Carlingbury, who I am fure is no gentleman, a good blow or two—and he offered to ftrip and fight me; for he faid he had learned that fport, and would cure me of being faucy to gentlemen as long as I lived. But my bufinefs, I thought, was to take care of my lady, for there was a crowd got about her. So I left him held by fome of the people that were there, fwearing he would kill me, I believe—and I prefently found that my lady had fallen down infenfible, and this gentleman was taking care of her; and then an empty coach, that had juft put fomebody down here, pafling, he and I lifted her into it, and carried her to Mrs. Marchmonts: and prefently he came back to you, and I ftaid there till Mifs Lucy came out, and faid, my lady was come-to, and wanted to fpeak to me—fo I went into the room. She is
is quite, well again,. Sir, I affure you % and» defired me to come directly to tell you fo~-and* hopes you won't be frightened." Marchmont, diftrafted- by anger at the infolent conduft of Carlingbury, and by furprife at what he had. heard about Mohun, yielded, however^ to the more immediate impreflion ; and was flying to feek Carlingbury, whom it was fortu* nate he did not meet at the moment.— The remonftrances of his new acquaint¬ ance, whofe name was Deiborough, re«. ftored him to a better way of thinking.— " Come, comej" faid the old man with an air as*if he had been ufed to be at¬ tended to, " let us, my good Sir, have none of thefe rafh doings. Of what ufi will it be if you meet this drunken fool, and break his head? I know that he deferves more y than either 1 or your fer- vant t bave, giyen him,.and yet I did my beft-T-bul.1. wiU tell you what harm it will do**;. If any uproar .happens between you,
yon, you will both be confined; and as* he has the moil intereft of the t\\ r o in this place, becaufe, I fuppofe, he is the richeft, you will have the worft of it. Let the poor wretch alone, for a very contemptible wretch, believe me, he b, and think of your wife; who, I can tell you, deferves greater facrifices than that of your anger againft fuch a blockhead as that. Come, I will go with you to fpeak to the worthy gentleman who is to give you leave out; my credit with him- is pretty good, I believe—and perhaps he may truft you with me without any other attendant." " I thank you/* faid Marchmont:— " after all you have done, you have a right to expect I ihould take your ad¬ vice. I am rather furprifed, however, as I thought you were yourfelf a pri¬ foner, becaufe I have fo often feen you." Mr. Deiborough anfwered drily, that he was there frequently ; and, widiout any.
any farther explanation, proceeded wiilr Marchmont to the officer on whom his going out of the prifon walls depended. This, on Mr. Deiborougli faying a few words, was granted ; and they then went together to Mrs. Marchmont's lodgings. Arrived at the door, tb& old' man turned to hiro, and faid— 4< You are in my eußody, you know, and fo you will fee the reliance I have on your integrity by iny leaving, you:, but the name, of > Marchmont is no ftranger to me ; and though chivalry exifts no longer, yet, in a point of real honour, I am fure I may truft to the defcendant of the old ca¬ valiers."—Marchmont looked at him with wonder ; his language and his ap¬ pearance were altogether incongruous.— Í* Do you know me, Sir?" faid he.— ' c Were you acquainted* with my fa¬ ther:?** " Yes,** anfwered the ftranger, " I was once acquainted with your family ; and though, that has been long over, I am
am forry to fee you in fuch a place, and ftill more forry to fee your wife here. Indeed you ftiould never have brought her to a prifon."—' c Pray tell me who you are," cried Marchmont eagerly; " you excite even painful curiofity."— <r No," replied the ftranger—" Go and look after that poor terrified young crea¬ ture, and I will wait for you an hour at 'a coffee-houfe in the Borough, and then call for you again. The intelligence of who I am, will do as well another tíme r perhaps I may fee you ag-iin in ther evening." Marchmont was then hurrying to Al¬ thea, but Fenchurch overtook him on the ftairs.—" Pray, dear Sir/' faid he, " do not mention to my lady what I told you, in my hurry, about Mr. Mo¬ hun. I know ihe is fo unwilling yoa ihould know it, and it would vex her fo, that I am fure it would juft now make her quite ill."—Marchmont,"relapfing into his firft aftoniíhment, haftily faid—" No, no—
no—I fliall fay nothing to diftrefs her;' r and then entered his lifter's room, where Althea was yet unable to fit up. The fight of Marchmont, however,- fccrhed imhiediafely to revive lier; but > before flie would relate-the caufe of her terror, lhe infifted on his* prornifing not to refent h. This'he evaded-doing; yet he appeared fo much calmer than Al¬ thea had expected, that (he ventured to¬ rciate what indeed ihe gueffed he- knew already—the frequent imperti¬ nence of which Carli ngbury had been guilty—" which/' faid ihc, " I never mentioned, becaufe I knew it would occafion a quarrel, and I dread every thing of that fort.··· * u And is thai" faid Marchmont, Iook- mg at her fteadily, " the reafon why you. ihould alfo conceal other alarms that you háve had, Althea r* Althea bluihed from confcioufnefs; yet not fufpeâing that Fenchurch had been To unguarded, ihe only faid, " I had,
Üiad -τιο other alarms here but from an -old gentleman, who appears now to he rather likeiy to proteft than to offend me—for it was he who faved me from the infults of the mob. that furrounded me, while poor Fenchurch was fcuffling with that drunken brute." " And what alarms could he have given you?" enquired Marchmont:— " What did he do?»' " Nothing, perhaps," replied Althea, <f that ought to have alarmed me : but whenever I have met him, which has been aimoft every day, he has fixed his eyes on me in fo fingular a manner, that J have fancied he knew fomething of farther mifchief that might be intended us; for methought he had a look of compaffion—yet it was ilern— and he /eemed to long to fpeak xo me, i.ot as that infolent young man did, but with reproach." This account increafed Marchmont's icuriofity, but it increafed alfo his dif¬ quiet
quiet—·" Who could this man be ? and why did Althea conceal from him her having fcen Mohun ? Why did flic fcek him ? How know where he \\ã^> and how determine to hold with fuch a man even momeé'^ry converfe ?" Such were the enquiries he was filently making, when he was informed that two men were fent bv order of the Marinai to condud him back. He went down t«» fpeak to them, and was told that he muil immediately go with them; for that a new order was come in refpeft to him, as ihey bdicAcd, or that fomething or other had happened, that the commander of the fort refs u as extremely ang r y at rinding he had left it. He was hardh fuffered to go, in the anguifh of his heart, and take leave of AUhea, as he infifted upon her remain¬ ing where fhe was that night, and lharing Lucy's bed. it was with the utmoft difficulty fhe was prevailed upon to confent to this; but fhe was ftill fo faint and
and ill, that fhe was confcious of her unfitncf> even for fo fhort a removal. Marchmont, on her earneft entreaty, promifed he would take no notice tbat day of Carhngbuiy; and then, in inde- fc ìì babl e agony, he bade his mother adieu! doubtinç if ke Ûiouîd ever fee her again, and tore himfeif away. Manv \eiv miferable hours had in tbc c nie of his fhort life been paffed by Maickmont, but none bad ever been ib overwhelming as the remainder of this daw—Whv he wa> to be more clofely confined, he could not learn ; all he couki hear bv bribes and enquiries w as that the iw i\ el-eyed attorney, as the ru ???? tailed Vamp\ re, had been there twice that morning; and Marchmont doubted not but that this additional cruelty was the work of that malignant demon :—and, probably by the order of Mohun, compelled to fubmit to op¬ preffion, which he more than ever de- fpaired cither of efcaping from or aveng¬ ing
you;]:you muft not enàft Alexander ?? OrefleV, organy of your mad heroes.— You -don't want fenfe, I am told, and you don't drink. There are no other excufes that I*know of for a man's be¬ having Hke a fool. Sit ^own quietly, and talk to me—I want-to hear why you are in this place—for what fums—and what you intend to do? Be explicit—I am a plain man, and perhaps you may think not likely to do you any good; but when you have toldmè all, you ihail bear^rtiat I have to fay." -Marchmont then related, in as few *wòrds as would do it juftice, the hiftory of his life previous to the diflrefsful % fituation;.in .which he was left when his father died—his engagements to the two ???? «who had lemployed Vampyre againft him—his acquaintance and mar¬ riage with Althea; and concluded with a relation'of the conduct of Mohun in the>deleníion of Althea** fortune—and its donfeqùences, ¿which had placed another , . ' barrier
barrier againit his freedom.— cí Yes," faid Mr. Deiborough, when he had heard him out, "Mohun is a villain; and as to the monfter he has employed, if ever he fhould come to the gallows (which, well as he deferves it, I am afraid he will have cunning enough to avoid}, I will venture to affért, that a wretch fo ftained with crimes never came under the hands of the executioner ? this or in any other country. I do not except the Robefpicrres or Damons of France, who were, I think, though they had by a ftrange chance the powxr of doing more extenfive mifchief, lefs fyftematical fcoundrels than either of thefe : but let us talk no more of them, but rather of the means of getting you out of their hands." Marchmont anfwered in a tone of deep dejection, that of ever efcaping from them he defpaired. He then made an ingenuous difplay of his hopeiefs fituation. The fortune of Althea, he τ 2 faid,
faid, he held facred; nor could he, even if he would, touch it; and the debt con¬ fiderably exceeded it. While he fpoke of the inviolable regard he fliould hold it in, his auditor nodded approbation : hut, when proceeding to ftate the chance he thought Althea had, unlefs there were any claimants he was unacquainted with, to fucceed to a confiderable pro¬ perty, the old man's eyes brightened with joy-—and he eagerly enquired why it was not looked after, and how fuch a thing came to be negieded. March¬ mont related what had been done, which was indeed all the time allowed ; but added, that he was much afraid nothing would be effeded in fuch a cafe without a fuit in Chancery : ** and for that you know, Sir," faid he, " I have no money." " I have," faid Mr. Defborough: (i I have money enough for fuch a thing as that, and it fliall be yours. I had fome doubts about you, I own; I was afraid you
you had not acted honourably by that charming girl; but I find you are an honeft fellow, and I will be your friend." Marchmont, amazed,and hardly know¬ ing how to truft to profeffions fo fudden and unexpected, thanked him, but it was with hefitation ? * l I fee," faid Mr* Defborough. ** that you are furprifed at thefe fort of offera from an acquaintance of a few hours: but I have known more of your family than you are aware of; for, though I am related to you, I queftion whether you remember having heard my nan 2.'* Marchmont again expreffed his won¬ der and fatisfaftion: Mr. Defborough proceeded thus: " When your grandfather lived irr great fplendour at Eaftwoodleigh, I was the youngeft fon of a clothier in the Weft—a fmart fellow for thofe days: and fo your aunt thought. I made love to her—there was no Marriage Aft then—- and fo we marched oft together, and τ 3 were
were married at the next town. But the old gentleman ne\er forgave its; nor did I ever fee him afterward ?. His daughter had five hundred pounds of her own left her by foree relation, and her father gave her nothing : indeed he had holhing to give—for his fon, your fa¬ ther, was to have all, that he might keep up the old place. Your father, who was a good-natured man, though he had his foibles, and who is without? came to fee us once or iwkc; but we were ib oppofite in our notions, that we had no great delight in one another's company. He was what I called a tory, and he called me .... not a whig, but a re¬ publican. I did nor much quarrel with him for ranking me with fiVh name«; as .Sidney and Hampden, but I hated to fee him, poor man ! mining himfeif for his principles, as he c ilh d tbem, which nobody cared about, or thanked him for. f í »' a gieat many years we had hide ?: ..o communication; I loft my wile,
wife, who left me no children ; and my father having a concern in the Weft Indies it fell at his death to me. I wa* now an unconnected being, neither rich nor poor; and by way of having fome¬ thing to do, I went to look after this property—hut I could not endure to be mafter of flaves. The whole fy ftern of a plantation was repugnant to ail my feelings, and ail my principles. I fold my cane lands, and the unhappy people who worked them, to whom I would have given their liberty if 1 had been allowed to do it. It was a bleffing I could beftow only on a few. I came home, rich for a man that wanted fo little; but I was foon tired of having nothinff to do, and nobody to care for fo I went for fome time rambling about the world—not much pleafed indeed with any thing I faw in it. They fay ?111 a mifanthrope. I may be fo—It is \ery true that I hate fools, and I ani furc one meets with a vaft majority of τ 4 them
them; and more, 1 thmk, now than when* I w ? a young man. But whether î hate or no the bulk of mankind, I try alt I can to do good to individuals; and none move my compaffion more than poor filly fellows, who without any fraud, or any other fault than a httle thought¬ lefs extravagance, have got cooped up in this or any other inch curfed place. 1 have got two or three of thera out lately at little expence; and it was in one of my vifits for that puipofe that about a fortnight ago I firft obferved your wife. I was ftruck with her youth, beauty, and that air of innocence and intelligence which one fo íeldcm fees united, it ieemed to me very ih ance and inconfequcnt that you ihould bring her here; for I foon learned who vou W2S, and I was afraid all was not light. I am now convinced that you deierve I ihould have a better opinion of vou; and though I hate the nonfenheal cant, that «all ? (or the bdi.' and inch, ihift,
when one fees every day that nothing can be much worfe than things in gene¬ ral, yet for once good is come out of evil, perhaps; and I may find a way to get you out of the clutches of thefe bar- pic<. We'll try, however, what is to be done, and fct about it to-morrow: and ???', my dear boy, ??? fliall not fay a word of * thank you/ and all that. I can iuppofe it very well, and have no time to hear it. So God blefs you î I muft be gone: but to-morrow at ten o'clock 1 will be here again; and in the mean¬ time keep yourfelf quiet, and let nothing of all this tranfpiie, even to your pretty wife, I have a mind, perhaps, to fur¬ prife her w r ith a prefent—Wc fliall fee." Air. Defborough then, without waiting for Marchmont's anfwer, arofe and dlf¬ appeared. Marchmont in vain attempted to com¬ pofe his fpirits. All that had paffed ap¬ peared like a dream, from which he feared by inveftigating it to be awaken- - 1. ile fent Fenchurch very early to 1 5 enquire
enquire after Althea, who wrote ίο liim to fay flie found herfclf quite well, and would be with him at his breakfaft: but as he dared not reveal the hopes he had that their troubles would be at an end by the interpofition of this unexpeBed friend, he wrote again, telling her that he had fome people to come to him < u his affairs, which he had reafon to hope would turn out fatbfacioty; and there¬ fore begged ftie would not come before one o'clock, as he thought her being preient when people ilie did not know were d i fco u r fing on bufineis, would bc difagreeable to her. The aflu ranees this note contained, that the perfons whom Marchmont w:h to fee were not unfavourably difpoied, were neceffary to quiet the fpirits of Althea, who, tormented as ftie was by the fear of his relenting the infulting rudenefs of Carlingbury, had yet an¬ other caufe of apprehenfion. In the ??? of { ·.? terror, when the imperti¬ nence
nence of this man had fo ihocked and alarmed her, Vampyre, whom fhe well recolleded, had paffed near her; and could all the fcourges deprecated in the Litany have appeared perfonified be¬ fore her, fhe would h?ve fuffered lefs than the view of this old hideous mon- fler inflided on her. Of his machina¬ tions againft Marchmont, therefore, on whofe account flie funoofed he vifited the prifon, flie had the moil cruel ap¬ prehenfions; and the more fo, as it was too probable the unprincipled Mohun directed this diabolical agent. It was owing to her having feen Vampvrc at the very moment that Carlingbury ipoke to her, that Ahhea had fainted, or very near it; for 111 general her refolution and reafon were fufficicnt to fecure her from fuch accidents. But firmly perfuaded that Marchmont would not deceive her, flic awaited as calmly as ihe could the hour at w huh flic was to iee h i ?. τ 6 Marchmont
Marchmont was not fo tranquil. TiU the period when he expected the man to whom he had within a fhort time been taught to look for his deliverance, he traverfed the area with reftlefs fteps.— The hour paffed, and Mr. Defborough did not appear. Fears and doubts then arofe— Perhaps he was of that defcrip¬ tion of perfons who delight in raifing ex¬ pectations only to difappoint them.— Perhaps he forgot in the morning the benevolent refolutions of the preceding evening. Yet he did not appear to be fuch a man, and the account he had given of himfeif was certainly true; for Marchmont now recolle6ted his name, and alliance to his family ; though, no in¬ timacy having ever fubfifted between tbe brother and filler, he had never feen his aunt, and remembered her only in the catalogue of family pictures that were feized and fold at Eaftwoodleigh, all of which had been carefully marked wth names and dates by his father. An¬ odici
other hour paffed, and ftill his new¬ found friend came not. As he walked backwards and forwards he entered into converfation with a clergyman, with whom he had fometimes talked before. The poor man had been two- years a prifoner at the fuit of a near relation, and feemed to have little hope of ever being reieafed, though his original debt was but a hundred pounds. March¬ mont having feen him once or twice fpeaking to Mr. Deiborough, now en¬ quired vvdiat he knew T of him. " He is what is called a charader," replied his companion : " but to be fure he is humane ; for he has reieafed three perfons who have been confined here for debts, one of them not very fmall, and has compounded with the creditors of two others, and liberated four or five who lingered here merely becaufe they were unable to pay the expences of their releafe. However, he is accounted a very odd eccentric charaftcr." " And
" And not without reafon," faid Marchmont; u for, unhappily, fuch ac¬ tions are very uncommon." *' He is fiiid alfo," continued the other, <f to be of doubtful principles." u Principles!" repeated Marchmont : " Of what fort?" " Both religious and political," replied Mr. Wingrove; t: and indeed I am forry to fay that he has on both fubjefts very heterodox notions. I have taken fome pains to combat his unhappy prepofleffions when we have talked together, but I grieve to think that he is moil obfli¬ nately bigoted to a fet ? .'notions..." " Which cannot, however, be very prejudicial to fociety," interrupted Marchmont, " fince it appears that his life is pailid, and his fortune expended, in doing good." Mr; Wingrove, who had been edu« cated in the ftri6teft of what ufed to be called High-church principles (in the reign of Queen Anne), and had never ventured
ventured to entertain or liften to an idea that favoured of fchifm, either in church or ftate, would now have entered into a long difcourfe, to prove that it was impoffible any body could have com¬ mon fenfe who did; but in the midft of the firft head of his argument, which he divided fermon-wife, Marchmont felt fomebody touch him gently on the fhoul¬ der. He turned, and beheld in deep mourning his friend Everfley. The pleafure which the fight of this eftimableman gave him was not abated by the drefs in which he faw him; fince it af¬ forded reafon to hope, what he found to be true, that Everfley was delivered for ever from the wretched woman who had occafioned all the unhappinefs of his life. They retired immediately to Marchmont's room; where, as foon as they were able tranquilly to difcourfe, Everfley related, that the miferable ftate (which might well be called a degree.of pjbrenfy) in which the laft month of his wife's
wife's fad exiftence had paffed, had pre¬ vented hL· being able to acì in regard to Marchmcmts affairs as he wouid other- wife have done. " But I believed," faid he, ** that it was drawing to a crifis, and thought I ftiould foon be in a fituation erFeciually to affift you. Much as I had caufe on every account to defire that Heaven would refcue me from fuch an intolerable burden as I had long fuftain¬ ed,'while to herfelf the poor woman's exiftence was as little defirable (for fhe was the martyr of intemperance and her own conftitutional failings); yeti could not help being affeded, when the mo¬ ment came, with fenfations of mingled pity and horror. A very little reflec¬ tion, however, reftored me to a fenfe of my releafe, and to the power of en¬ gaging in the duties that I ftill had to execute. I attended the remains of Mrs. Everfley to the place where her parents were buried; and I afterwards went with my two daughters to her aunt, with
wuh whom fhe made me promife that I mould place them. Having fettled all that telated to them, till I can fee far¬ ther what will be moil likely to coun¬ teract, the unhappy education they have hitherto received, I haftened, my dear friend, to you — happy if I can now, however late, give you proofs of the in- terefl I feel in all that relates to you.'* Marchmont now gave Everfley an ac¬ count of all that had lately happened, and ended with the odd circumftance which had occurred the preceding day. He heard with great fatisfadion that another friend was likely to affift him in the re¬ leafe of Marchmont, which he meant at all events to effed.—" Nor," faid he, " in undertaking this alone, my friend, filali I incur a greater rifk than I can very fafely afford, for I fuppofe you cannot doubt your wife's fucceflion to half her coufin's eftate?" Marchmont eageu/ enquired what in¬ telligence he had gained oo that fubjed, and
and Everfley took from his pocket a let¬ ter from Mr. Thorefby, written in the true fpirit of a lawyer; for, with agreat many fentences that founded very fairly, it really meant nothing more than that if Mrs. Armyn Marchmont could make out her claim, of which he knew no¬ thing, it muft be referred to the proper place, there being doubts as to the entail and' other circumftances. This proper place was undoubtedly Chan¬ cery» But Everfley re-affured his friend by faying, ** All this is mce equivoca¬ tion, to elude for the prefent any en¬ quiry. He thinks that it is no bufinefs of mine ; that people are feldom very ftrenuous for others; and that, till a per¬ fon more immediately concerned ap¬ pears, he can baffle enquiry. Ile ha 1 » been told, and from Lady D a ere?, that your wife is abroad, and heartily hopes chance may fo far befriend him, that he may keep poffeffion of the whole eftate. However, I think he will hardi/ do
do that: for Mrs. Thorefby is the daugh¬ ter of one, and your wife of another lifter of the late Mr. Trev\llian\s fa¬ ther ; and of ihcir having exaeily the fame claim there cannot be the fhadow of doubt. I have confulted upon it an old lawyer, who knows all the circum¬ ftances of the eftate of Trevyilian the grandfather perfectly: and he atfures me, that there is not a queftion as to your wife's right; and that, if Mr. Thorefby means any thing but merely to equivo¬ cate from habit, he waits only in the hope that fome advantage may be main¬ tained againft people who were evi¬ dently in no condition to undertake a Chancery fuit. When he finds that only expence and difgrace follow his refiftance, I am convinced you will have no farther trouble." Benfted now entered, to inforni Marchmont a gentleman enquired for him. He of courfe cxpccicd to fee Mr*. Dei boi ou gh—inftead of whom Captait) Forrefter^
Forrefter, fupported hy his fervan i, appeared. Marchmont, though fhocked to fee how ill he looked, expreifed his plea- fure at their meeting» " And I, my dear Marchmont," faid he, "rejoice to fee you, though indeed I had rather have feen you anywhere elfe. Don't fancy however, that I ihould not have found you out m any place, tbe very moment after I could difengage myfeif from my own family. But this wound of mine broke out again, and confined me to my bed for above a month. They carried me to Bath, and I have but juft con¬ trived to crawl about again. I came to Town yefterday ; and to-day I deter¬ mined to fee you, and to know what can be done to fet you at liberty. I think· I need not fay, that ail I can do you may command ; and if that is not enough to be effedually ufeful to you, my family will come forward to oblige ?? in the only favour I am likely to aik of
röf them.** Marchmont warmly expreffed his acknowledgements, tül Everfley, eagerly interrupting him, cried------- ' ; What then, as Captain Forrefter is fo kindly difpofed, what hinders us from going immediately together to give bail, fince two will be required ? And why fhould you ftay another hour in this place?" Forrefter earneftly entreated that not a moment might be loft ; while Marchmont, who thought fecurity for fo large a fum, more than either he or Everfley ought to undertake^ felt him¬ feif at once happy in having two fuch friends, and yet recoiling from obliga¬ tions which it might never be in his power to difcharge. Their debate was fufpended, and indeed concluded, by the entrance of Mr. Deihorough. He fat down with the air of a man vexed and fatigued. tc Well," cried he, " I fuppofe you had given me up ? And I began to think I ftiould not get to you to day. I have never undertaken fuch
fuch a knot of fcouiidrels —they ha\e -given me a good breathing—but cou¬ rage, my dear boy ! you are out of their hands." He then told Marchmont he was at liberty, adding, " But you muft come down to the Marinai -room. You know, or I fuppofe don't know, that there are perfonal ceremonies to go through. If you make hafte, you may chance ftill to find honeft Mr. Vampyre there, who took the trouble to come himfeif to object to my bail, and for other fpeciai purpofes—among wiiich, was to lodge two detainers againft you ; one, 1 think, from Lady Dacres, for your wife's board for fome months, and money which ? feems that worthy dame paid for her." M a roh mont looked amazed. " Nay, my good friend/' faid Mr. Deiborough, " you and thefe two gentlemen look as much aftoniflied as if you had never before heard of or experienced the villany of mankind." " I hope, my dear Sir/' faid March¬ mont,
mont, íf yon have not paid thefe fums?" <( I have paid none of them," replied Defborough ; " but I have given bail for them all with the affiftance of ? friend I brought with me. The iniquity I have difcovered even in fo ftiort a time as I ha\ e employed in it this morn¬ ing is real!) beyond tiie calculation that, mifanthrope as they fay I am, I could have made of the depravity of Vam¬ pyre himfeif. But come, Marchmont, I am impatient to fee you at liberty, and to offer to my fair friend a prefent that I know ihe will thank me for. There is \et more to be done than will take us up an hour, before I can have that pleafare." Everfley now offered to affift this worthy and friendly man in his bene¬ volent work; and Forrefter, overjoyed at fo unexpeded a change in his friend's affairs, retired — fince he was not want¬ ed-— having firft defired Marchmont to let him know where he could fee him the next
next day ; which he promifed as foon as he knew himfeif. It was every way improper to fuffer any fudden news even of this joyful tendency to be car¬ ried to Mrs. Marchmont and Althea. Forrefter would have undertaken any commiffion to them, but he was quite a ftranger. Fenchurch, however, re¬ minding his mafter that his lady was to come at one o'clock, was difpatched with a meffage, which he promifed to deliver with great caution, importing that Mr. Everfley was come, and with his mafter would be with the ladies in an hour ; but he was not to reveal ab¬ ruptly that the imprifonment of the latter was at an end. The poor fellow ran away giddy with tranfport to execute this order, and Marchmont and his two friends repaired to the Marfhal- room, where the attorney employed by Mr. Defborough waited, and where Vampyre had left his clerk. Every pretence by which he had attempted to detain
detain Marchmont being overuled, the fiend, difappointed in his infernal ma¬ lice, had fled: and it was fortunate he bad, as Marchmont might have been unable to check his indignation at the ficht of him. ? Every form being gone through, and every fee, which the fub-executors of our mild and equitable laws are fuf¬ fered to extort from the unfortunate debtor, being paid, Deiborough, whom Marchmont was utterly unable to tfaank, took his leave, appointing a place of meeting in the evening, where he iaid he had fomething to propofe to March¬ inone, and e defired to fee Mr. Everfley with him.— -" Since it will not be quite wife, I believe, to execute my plan ol r urprifmg Mrs. Armyn Marchmont, you fliall only carry her my love, and tell her I ihali have a great deal ίο fay to her when we meet." It would be difficult to defcribe the change from extreme defpondence, to Vol. IV. ? hope
hope and joy, that was diffufed through Marchmont's family, when his libera¬ tion was, vvith precautions* made known to them.—Althea was unable to remain in the room—but retired to give courfe to her tears; while Marchmont went from her to his mother, foothing them alternately, and alternately embracing his three fifters. Everfley, as foon as Mrs. March¬ mont feemed compofed enough to bear it, related to her what had happened to himfeif; and he informed her then of the probability there was of her fon's immediately fucceeding, in right of his wife, to fo confiderable a property. The half-extinguifhed lamp of life feemed to be renewed; but faint, and aimoft ready to doubt whether after fo much mifery a ray of fun-fliine might gleam on her declining days, fhe could not long fup¬ port the converfation, The two friends, at the vhour appointed, met Mr. Def¬ borough; who, when Marchmont would have
have acknowledged as warmly as it de¬ ferved his unexampled kindnefs and friendfhip, fpoke thus: " You arc not at all obliged to me, for what I have done was to pleafe my¬ fclf: not exaftly becaufe you were a re¬ lation of my wife's, for that would have been no recommendation if I had found you an idle, good-for-nothing young fellow—fuch, for example, as that Car¬ lingbury. They fay I am a reformer. They fay wrong : for I have long fince given up any fuch chimerical idea, as that of being able to make men happier who are wicked and miferable by pre¬ fcription. Withdrawing, therefore, from any fuch Utopian and hopeiefs attempt, I believed the bcft thing I couid do was> to relieve, where I could, individual diftrefs, and to lighten the chains that villany often impofes on fimplicity under the name of law. In this I have done fome good, and what elfe ought a man to do on this earth ? It is my re- υ 2 ligion
43 o MARCHMONT. ligion to believe, that I ferve God heft in contributing to the happinefs, or rather in relieving the mifery, of his creatures. Iu this my form of worfhip I have fome¬ times been fubjeft to impofition j I have often been laughed at; oftener reviled— and fometimes I have met with ingra¬ titude : but I perfift, becaufe I expefted no other pleafure than that I have found; and it is not in fuch places that, if I any where fought gratitude, I fhouid hope to fucceed. Now then let us talk of ail this no more. Let us confider how we can the fooneft remove your mother, wife, and fifters, from the bad air of this Borough ; and then we will beftir our¬ felves to find you a houfe of your own to put them in. I fuppofe you have yet fixed on no plan ?" Marchmont anfwered—·" No."—Mr. Deiborough then faid—" I have a houfe Φ on Clapham Common, which I call my home, though I fometimes am abfent from it for three or four months at a time.
marchmont. time. I have a careful old woman there as a houfekeeper, with a cook and a houfeirnid: there is room enough for you alt : the diftance is eafy, and I can order the houfe to be ready to¬ morrow. What do you think of be¬ coming vifitors to me for two or three months ? There is nothing that will oblige me fo much," Marchmont, forbidden to exprefs, could only look his gratitude. This plan, with the perfect coincidence of Mrs. Marchmont, was the next day put in execution. Marchmont did not, how¬ ever, take Hnal leave of the prifon, without undertaking the relief of his un¬ fortunate neighbour, Benfted. Mr. Def- borough compounded his debt—re- leafed, and fent him happy to his own country. Althea and Marchmont now looked- forward only to happinefs, and faw that it was not yet too late to hope that the mother they fo fondly loved would be v 3 fpared
fpared to their prayers ; while new pro¬ fpefts of additional fatisfaction opened to her. Mr. Everfley, who was aimoft every day their vifitor, was impreffed by the mild merit of Amelia: to his merit fhe could not be infenfible ; and it was fettled that, as foon as the ufual forms admitted, the marriage fhould take place, hy which Everfley hoped to forget the miferies of bis firft union. Captain Forrefter, whofe affection for Marchmont induced htm to look with partiality on all his family, needed not this bias to attach him to Lucy. Her beauty, her vivacity, and fweetnefs of temper, foon taught him to overlook her want of fortune; and to her family Lord Stanwarden himfeif could not ob¬ ject. Such had been the fears of his family for the life of Forrefter, that they now dreamed not of oppofing his in¬ clinations. Lord Standarden therefore confented to this marriage, and agreed to make fuch a fettkment on his fon, as, with
with what his female relation engaged to do for him, would enable the young people to live in affluence. Whatever oppofition had been me¬ ditated by Mr. Thoreíby to March¬ mont's claim in right of Althea, he foon gave it up when he found tbat Mr. Def¬ borough fupported thofe claims. In about four months, therefore, the moiety of Mr. Trevyllian's eftate was, as fettled by arbitrators, relinquifhed to Althea* The income of it was feven-and-twenty hundred a year ; and a part of it com¬ pri fed the houfe formerly inhabited by Mrs, Trevyilian, where the happieft days of Althéa's life had paffèd, and where ilie now propofed, and March¬ mont readily confented, to take up their future refidence. Mr. Deiborough had no fooner got that important point adjufted for them, than he began to enquire into the former circumftances of thofe cmbarraffmenls ihat had haftened the death of the elder Marchmont,,
Marchmont, and overclouded, for fi>' many years, the life of his fon. Inde¬ fatigable in his enquiries, and with mo¬ ney to fecond them, he foon traced the fcheme of iniquity in which Vampyre had lo deeply been engaged; and a great part of the eftate, including the houfe at Eaftwoodleigh, was recovered. March¬ mont, without any defign of living there, or yielding to the fatal pride that had ruined his father, vifited the place as f©on as it became his, Mr. and Mrs. Wansford had long fince been difmiifed tiy Lady Dacres, and lived in great po¬ verty in a neighbouring village. March¬ mont removed them to a farai near his intended refidence, and placed with them the old faithful Mrs. Mofe ley, to end her days in comfort and repofe. Phoebe Prior, to whom, as well as to Mrs. Mofcley, Akhea had frequently fent af¬ fiftance, had been dead for fome time, Mohun, after an ineffedual ftruggle, by which he only ihewed the daring in« iufticf* 4*
juftice be thought himfeif capable of maintaining, was compelled to pay Al¬ théa's fortune: but he was too high in his profeffion to care what was faid of him; and Marchmont, at Althea*s earneft prayer, as well as in confequence of Mr, Defborough's remonftrance, forbore to feek him.—Lady Dacres, the moft unhappy of mothers, learned to wiih, in the bitternefs'of her heart, that fhe had never had a fon. Mr. Defborough, who became hourly more fond of Akhea, lived very much witn them. He ftill continued to ex¬ pend a great part of his yearly income in charity : the whole of his fortune, after his death, he has given to March¬ mont and his pofterity. The virtues that Althea fo early pof¬ feffed, and which adverfity had fcrved to improve and ftrengthen, were far from failing under the influence of pro¬ fperity; and the happinefs of her huf¬ band, and of his family, which was her vork\
work (for without her they muft have been loft); the bleffings fhe diffufed around her, as well by her example to the rich, as by her benevolence to the poor, were her earthly reward.—March¬ mont indeed fometimes trembled as he confidered his felicity ; and> believing it too great to fall to the ihare of any human being, he, with awe and gra* titude, endeavoured to deferve its can·* tinuance,
THE END*
