Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Marchmont: a novel
MARCHMONT.
For fhe waj juft, and friend to virtuous lore, And pafs'd much time in truly virtuous deed.
CHAPTER I. A N a beautiful village, near one of the moft populous towns in the weft of England, lived the only unmarried fifter of an ancient family—Mrs. Trevyllian, (for ihe had for fome years ceafed to write herfelf Mifs) was near fifty; ihe had never been handfome, but there was fomething in her countenance more interefting than even the remains of beauty—an expreflion of goodnefs, fenfe, Vol. I. ? and
and candour, which feemed to mark her as the friend oí the unfortunate, and the guide of the innocent—her pei fon was elegant, and l*cr manners remarka¬ bly conciliating ar»d attractive. The fmall houfe fhe inhabited was fitted up with fo much taite, that flie wa*> become a fort of oracle among thofe who wiflied to exhibit elegance m their apartments : flie had an excellent colledion of books, in a room which opened into a İmali. but very pretty garden, filled with the fweeteft fhrubs and flowers. Books and plants fupplied to her the place of fo¬ ciety, which ihe was rarely mixed in; and to the gratification of thefe attach¬ ments fhe applied what others m her utuation ufually beftow on cards and company. Still, however, ihe had al¬ ways a purfe in referve for the neceffi- tous; and her adive fpirit and found judgement often did more fervice than mere pecuniary affiftance- Extremely beloved by her friends, living in a courfe
courfe of cheerful and rational piet) t enjoying tolerable health, and a com¬ petent income, ???. Trevyllian knew no other uneafinefs than that which arofe from her reflections on the future fate of a lovely girl, to whom flie had hern more than a mother, and for whom flie felt aH a mother's tendernefs. Akhea was the child of her favourite fiiter, of whom, though ftie had beci* dead near thirteen vears, Mrs. Trev\ U lun retained the moft affectionate re¬ membrance ; and as Akhea grew nearer to w omanhood, fhe became doubly dear to her aunt, becaufe her features and manners acquired every day a ftronger refemblance to that dear §fter; and while flie read or converfed, this refem¬ blance, and the tones of her voice, brought fo ftrong a recollection of what her mother was at that age, that Mrs. Trevyllian often caught herfelf gazing at ber with tears in her eyes^ while the innocent, unconfcious ????? wondered 8 2 at
at thefe painful emotions; but wdien the caufe of them was explained, fhe would mingle her tears with thofe of her dear aunt; then fmiling as flie wept, fhe tried to win the thoughts of her benefactrefs from the contemplation which caufed them. But the fadnefs which arofe from re¬ collection of the pait was light when compared with the fears which frequent¬ ly affailed the heart of Mrs. Trevyllian as ftie looked forward to the future. Tbe father of Akhea was a younger brother of good family, who being a cornet of horfe quartered in a country town, had fallen violently in love with the fourth daughter of Mr. Trevyllian; and, failing in his attempt to perfuade her to elope with him, had at length prevailed on his family and hers to con¬ fent to their marriage, and to make up a fmall income till his promotion in the army ihould enable him better to fup¬ port the expence of an eftabliíhment; but
but the dependance and reftraint in which this arrangement placed Mr. Dacres, who w T as ambitious, and ad¬ dicted to expence, muft foon have be¬ come fo irkfome to him, that his wife would probably have been made unhap¬ py, had fhe lived long; but ftie died before the end of the fecond year, leav¬ ing only the little Akhea, then about teri months old, whom her aunt Trevyllian immediately took charge of. Mr. Dacres, who had now fold out of the army, was at liberty to avail himfelf of a handfome perfon, and great family intereft, to acquire a more affluent wife. Such a one he foon found in the co- heirefs of a man who had acquired a confiderable fortune in trade, which at his death he left between two daughters, the eldeft of whom was married to a newly-created Inflipeer; andtheyoung- eit divided between her paflion for a title and her tafte for tbe handfome figure of Mr. Dacres, at length fettled the con- B 3 teft
teft between love and ambition, by bar¬ gaining that a certain Ium of her money fhould be appropriated to the purchafc of a baronet's title; and though ihe did not rank fo high as her fifter, íhe con* fobed lierfelf by reflecting, that ihe wae tetevated above moft of her former ac¬ quaintance; and While " Lady Dacres" founded extremely well, ihe had the gratification of having for a huiband nol only a man of faik io ?, but one of the tianèíbmeR men of his time A few yíears brought a numerous fa¬ mily; må Sir Audley, embarked in that poììtkal career which hè thought neceflary to »enable him to provide for them, lenuhe management of thefe chil¬ dren entirely to their mother, while rhe little Aftbea was almoft loft to his recol- 4e8ion. He fekiom faw her, and fel¬ dom thought of 'trer. 'Her aunt, how¬ ever, deeming it unreafonable that he fhould be wholly exempt from expence, regularly fent in an account for Althéa's board,
board, cloathing, and education, though with no other view than to form of the fums íhe thus received a little fund for her beloved ward, which fhe put into the flocks every year, as foon as it was paid. This annual payment, however trifling, was frequently delayed beyond the regular period, and by degrees ex* cufes were made for letting it run far in arrears.—Tenants were not punduai—» eledion expences had been unufually high—or fome improvement at his coun·»» try feat — were occafionally pleaded by Sir Audley; but Mrs. Trevyllian, who was cruelly hurt at evafions which ihc thought were proofs of his want of af¬ fedion for Akhea, failed not after they had been twice or thrice repeated, to fignify that fhe muft infift on more re¬ gular payments, adding fome hints that flie fhould otherwife be under the ne¬ ceffity offending her cfiarge home, and a little more attention was obferved; for Sir Audley had not the leaft wiih to ? 4 enlarge
enlarge ?? family by the return oi his eldeft daughtei. and Lady Dacres had itili lefs inclination to receive her. As Mrs. Trevyllian refided at a great diftance from London, four years had pafled iince Sir Audley had fcçn Akhea : and thefe years, between the age of twelve and fixteen, had made a verv fa- vourable change in her perfon, which was always delicate and interefting.— Mrs. Trevyllian, vvho had promifed to fpend fome months with an old friend in Hcrtfordfliirc, lately become a widow, determined as flie paffed through Lon¬ don to ftay a week or ten days, as well to fee lome of her own family, to whom fhe had been long a ftranger, as to give Akhea an opportunity of paving her duty to her father and Lady Dacies, and to renew with her brothers and fifters the friendfliip which fo long an abfence had almoft obliterated. The \ifit was announced in form, and in form the \ifitams were to be re¬ ceived.
ceived. Sir Audley met them at the drawing-room door, and ialuted Mrs. Trevyllian with his ufual politenefs— then advancing to embrace his daughter, he iiarted, feemed aftoniflicd, and even affected—for he beheld the very image of his once-adored, his once-regretted Akhea. She feemed, after fourteen years, to be again prefent to him. He recovered himielf, however, before any one but the object who had caufed his confufion obferved it; and having kiffed Akhea, whofe eyes were ftreaming with tears, he led her towards Lady Dacres, who, coldly fal u ting her, remarked that 41 Mifs Dacres was very much grown in¬ deed."—Then caflinff a look, which the watchful and obfervant eye of Mrs. Trevyllian did not fail to tranflate into a malignant remark, flic refumed her feat, and entered on indifferent topics, carefully avoiding any fubject ? -hich might lead to farther recollection of the Krn g time that had eiapfed. The dau gb- u ? ters
ters of Lady Dacres, who were of courfe grown in proportion^ made their en¬ trance in great formality with their go- vernefs; and tbe eldeft fon, a rude Weft- minfter boy, now turned of fourteen, who came with a companion older than ihimfelf to :dine. Thefe lads voted the old lady, Mrs. Trevyllian, a very great quiz, and their new fifter a very pretty girl. Young Dacres even venturing to utter acrofs the room in an audible whifper to the eldeft of his fifters—· " Caroline, Caroline, this is a prettier fifter than ever you will be—here is Montford fwears it." Mifs Caroline, who had no great fa¬ tisfadion in refigning even for one day the name of Mifs Dacres, was not put into very good humour by this addrefs. Dinner, however, paffed,,and the wearied Althea, who had been comparing the squiet and rationality of her aunt's houfe with the íridome parade and tedious ceremony of. her father's, fecretly re- jo ; ced
joiced that an engagement for the even¬ ing feparated the party at an early hour. She felt, however, as fhe kiffed her father's hand at parting, that (he was his child ; and though he ftruggled to check fenfations in her favour, he was ftill fen-r. fible of the pleafure of having fuch a daughter. Another dinner party, and two or three morning vifits, paflèd be¬ tween Akhea and her family, before her aunt left London. Though ? was now the gayeft feafon, and though Althea had been much amufed with feeing plays, the opera, and Rimelagh, yet did fhe fincerely rejoice when the day came which conveyed her with her aunt into· Hertford İh i re. The houfe they were expected at was about four and thirty miles from London. They arrived there early in the afternoon; the family had one day's notice of their arrival; and at the gate of a fmall paddock that furrounded the houfe an old butler, who had lived ? β many
many years in the family, waited to re¬ ceive them. The poor man looked very melancholy, which Mrs. Trevyllian im¬ puted to the recent lofs of his mafter; but when the chaife had entered the gate, he beckoned to the poftillion to ftop, and, advancing to the window, faid in a very depreffed tone, " I thought it right, Madam, to let you know the ftate of our houfe before you entered it—My poor miftrefs."------«'Good God!" ex¬ claimed Mrs. Trevyllian, what has hap¬ pened?"—"My poor miftrefs," con-_ tinued the man, " is extremely ill. we 4 have reafon to fear the fever infedious, as it began with a fervant, who is dead, and two others are ill. My good lady, ever attentive and kind, has attended them herfelf againft the advice of the phyfician, who warned her of her danger. She is now given over." He burft into tears, and cbuld not proceed. u And who is with her?" enquired Mrs. Trevyllian. ** Only the houfe- maid»
maid, and a nurfe from the village, for her own maid and the houfekeeper have failed fince yefterday."—" Good Heaven! what a fituation," faid Mrs. Trcvyllian, *' for my poor friend—ever fo ready herfelf to affift her fick friends, ■I yet to be thus deferted. But what can Ido? My dear Althea* I cannot riik your health—I will not even fuffer you to enter the houfe; though, for myfelf, I can as little think of abandoning my friend in her diftrefs. — How can İ act ?" . . . She paufed a moment or two for confideration; and Akhea, who feared only for her aunt, ventured, while this filence lafted, to fay, ** Deareft Madam, if you determine to go, I en¬ treat you not to fpare me ? Why fliould I fear a danger which my dear aunt de¬ termines to encounter? If any ill be¬ fals her, of what confequence would be the life of her Althea?" <£ You are a dear girl," cried Mrs, Trevyllian, kiffing her; *'and I every day
day fee occafion to love you more and more—but I cannot think of your going with me to my poor friend. You are of an age to take infection much more eafily than thofe farther advanced in iife.~~But how to difpofe of you, my fweet girl, I know not. I am unac¬ quainted wkh any perfon in the neigh¬ bourhood feo whom I could entruft you. .....However, we will return to the inn where we changed horfes, and con¬ sider what can be done." Tbe totler was then direÜed to aflure Mrs. Polwarth, her fick friend, that fhe was haftening to her, and as fearful f . her lovely ward as unapprehcnfive for •herfelf, Mrs. Trevyllian fell into a deep reverie as they mturned to the town, which wa& about three miles diftant. This melancholy filence Al ihea at length ??????! to dateirru^t, by afking why none of Mrs. Pølwarih's own family were mâi hex? —** The queftion," re¬ plied Mrs. Trevyilian, *' ds vjtxy «aturai, fince
fmce you have heard that my friend has a family ; but her daughter is gone to the Weft Indies with her huiband, whofe property lies there; her fon is a man of bufinefs, who thinks of little elfe than the political matters in which he is en¬ gaged; and as to his wife, flie is fofine a lady, fuch a compound of vanity, ex¬ travagance, and affedation, that to at¬ tend a fick pareat would never occur to her as a neceffary 4uty. Thus- my poor friend is left totally without tlie foothing offices of affedioru Her three grand¬ children are boys, and not of an age, were they of a fex, to attend her fick chamber. If you knew her, my dear Althea, you would not wonder that my heart bleeds for her—that I wifh to fee her—and if it muft be f©—to receive her laft figh, her dying wiihes. We were friends in our early childhood; and, in ithe happy days of our yoiitfi, we paffed much of our time together. I had. once a iedere and tedious ¿üneís ¿ it
it was at a time when the faireft profpedV were opening, before my friend, then Henrietta Sebright She was on the point of being married to a man, equally her parents' choice and her own; yet, regardlefs of every claim but that of friendihip, fhe hazarded a life, which was likely to be thus happy, to attend on me, through many months of 1am- guor, and greatly contributed to the re¬ storation of my health." Mrs. Tre¬ vyllian paufed a moment, as if to re¬ cover from fome bitter recolledions, and then proceeding in a low voice, faid, €t It is now more than thirty years ago; but is there any period at which a debt of true gratitude may be can¬ celled?" Althea had feldom feen her aunt fo much affeded, and forbore to queftion her farther. They foon arrived at the inn, where Mrs. Trevyllian, enquiring for the miftrefs of the houfe, defired her to prepare a room for her niece, and
and to take particular care of her ac¬ commodation, as flie would remain there that night. Then eagerly afluring Akhea that there was nothing to fear for her own fafety in vifiting her friend, and that flie fhould hear from, or pro¬ bably fee her the next morning, fhe tenderly kifled the weeping girl, and recommending her lo the care of her own woman, whom fhe left at the inn* fhe departed for the houfe of Mrs. Pol¬ warth. Temporary as this feparation w T as likely to be, Althea felt dejected and miferable, a thoufand fears for the health of her beloved guardian affailed her; fhe paifed a fleeplefs night, but was ren¬ dered infinitely more unhappy the next morning, by receiving the following note ; " I found my poor friend very ill, yet fenfible, and rejoiced to fee me. My prefence feems to have revived her ; and while flic bids me leave her, left I ftiould
íhould fuffer by ftaying, I fee that flic believes my prefence neceffary to her reftoration. I cannot therefore quit her, my Althea-—neither can I confent to your coming hither. In this diffi¬ culty I have determined to fend you back to London under the care of Morris, and recommend you for the ihort time of our unavoidable fepara¬ tion to the care of Sir Audley and Lady Dacres. Believe me, deareft Akhea, my heart bleeds at the neceffity of fuffering you to be abfent from me even for a day ; but under the protec¬ tion of your father there can be nothing to fear for you, and I truft that the un¬ divided attention I fhall then be able to give to my poor fick friend will, under Providence, be the means of reftoring her, and that we fliall meet again, my very dear Akhea, in a few days, to rejoice together in her recovery» I fend orders to Morris refpeding your journey, and I write to Sir Audley and Lady Dacres. Heaven
Heaven preferve my deareft girl. This is the inceflant prayer of her affec¬ tionate " Anne Thevyllian." Althéa endeavoured to fubmit to thi« painful neceflity in the wíw leaft likely to give uneafinefs to her aunt s but with a heavy and foreboding heart fhe ftepped into the chaife with Morris» and arrived in Lower Groi venor Street juft as the family were fitting down to dinner with a large party of friends. Althea flopped at the door while the letter fhe had brought was fent in, and the interval was long enough to allow her to feel much pain from doubts flie could not help entertaining of a welcome reception. When one of the footmen, with a meflage from Sir Audley» defired her to walk in, fhe trembled fo as to be hardly able to leave the chaife, and leaning on the arm of her aunt's woman, flowly followed him, not ima¬ gining
gining that Lady Dacres would have fo little confideration as to fuffer her to enter a room full of company ; this·, however, fhe found to be the cafe. Sir Audley got up, and leading her to a chair next himfelf, faid he was forry for Mrs. Pa'warth's iilnefs—fuppofed fhe had not dined, and bade her fit down to table ; while Lady Dacres flightly bowed to her from the top of it, and faid, with cold civility, that flie hoped ihe was well. Ina moment every body feemed to have forgotten fhe was there—and the common converfation that pafles on fuch oecafions was re¬ newed. Poor Akhea, whofe thoughts were wholly with the aunt at Abbotihanger, and who found in this numerous circle not one whofe heart feemed to fympa- thife with hers, felt her fpirits fink, and her eyes every moment ready to over* flow with tears. She fometimes ftole a timid look at her father, in hopes of find¬ ing
ing his turned towards her with a tender welcome ; but after her firft entrance he too feemed to confider her only as one of his guefts. She withdrew when the other ladies followed Lady Dacres to the drawing-room, moft carneftly wiih¬ ing for permiffion to retire to her own—- but Lady Dacres continued to converfe with her friends on the ufual topics, without once addrefling herfelf to, or even noticing Akhea, who being in a travelling drefs, while the lady of the houfe, as well as the company, were more drefl'ed than ufual, ihe felt her fatigue and vexation every moment in¬ creafe, yet flie could not acquire courage to rife amid fo formidable a circle and retire ; neither did flie know whither to go, for the young ladies, her half fifters, had not appeared, they not being, to ufe the common phrafe, " come out yet," and only allowed to dine with Sir Audley and Lady Dacres when alone, or merely a family party. At
At length fome of the company roíc to go, and much was faid as they de¬ parted of a future meeting in the even¬ ing, by which Akhea found that Lady Dacres was going out. Seven or eight perfons yet remained, and iome of the gentlemen, attended by Sir Audley, came up to tea; he feemed on feeing Akhea to be furprifed, as if he had forgotten all that had pafled, and approaching his wife, whifpered fomething, to wdiich flie anfwered in a way that Althea thought almoft peevifli, " Well, well, Sir Aud¬ ley, I muft give orders, I muft fee about it." She then rang the bell, and directing the houfekeeper to attend in her drefling-room, ihe left the room fo? a moment, and returning, faid to Althea» in a very formal manner, " Mifs Dacres, if you chufe to retire, my women have orders in regard to your accommoda¬ tion: you will, perhaps, not find it very convenient, but my houfe is too finali for my family.'* Akhea,, glad on any terms
tenns to efcape from her prefent com-» fortlels fituation, thanked her in words as cold, but rather more civil than her own, and afluied her, fhe ihould be perfectly fatisfied with whatever her Ladyihip had directed, and adding, that ihe was exticmely fatigued, begged leave to retire. She was fhewn by a very fine lady, who was, fhe found, Lady Dacres's woman, to an upper room, which was plainly, but neatly furnifhed. Her trunk was already placed in it; and dejectedly, by the window, fat Morris, wdio no fooner found hei felf at liberty-, than flie faid, with a deep figh, " Ah ! dear me—I truft, Mifs Dacres, we ftiall not have to ftay long in this houfe. I am fure I am weary of it already. But I hope Sir Audley and my lady have madenim welcome ?" Althea, whofe heart was full, burn into tears, and threw herfelf on the bo¬ fom of Morris, who had been as a fofter mother to her, where ihe fobbed aloud ; yet
yet feeling from her innate fenfe of pro¬ priety that it was wrong to encourage the murmurs of her aunt's woman in the houfe of her father, ihe endeavoured, fince flie could not ftifle her concern, to impute it merely to her fears for her aunt, and regret at their fudden fepa¬ ration. " I believe, nay I am fure," faid flie, as foon as fhe recovered her¬ felf a little, *' that my father is glad to fee me; but the fuddennefs of my ar¬ rival, and there being fb much com¬ pany."— M Don't tell me," cried Mor¬ ris, who had been ufed to fpeak her mind—- u I've no notion on't for my part, I'm fure a perfect ftranger would have been gladder to have feen you than Sir Audley was to fee his own child; I know that well enough by what I heard thofe impertinent laced monkies below fay; and as for my Lady, flie is known to begrudge the leaft matter in the world for you.—Then they've fluffed you up into this room, which is not much
much better than a garret—and make a mighty favour of it too."—" Oh! my dear Morris," cried Akhea, " the room does very well—1 hope I ftiall not long Reed it; a palace would make meno amends for being abfent from my aunt, and uneafy for her health as I am now.'' *< They'll take care you fhan't trouble them long, I believe; for Mrs. Midge- ley forfooth took occafion to tell me, when flie fhewed me up here, that in¬ deed her Lady's eldeft fon from Weft- minfter School always fiept in this room, and that if he was to come home to ftav, as he did every now and then, flie did not know how her Lady would do- Such a fufs indeed with her Lady, dná her Lady—I took care to tell her, that í thought my ladies of quite as much confequence as hers, though they had not titles —and I hinted to her, that if these was any fuch great matter of in¬ convenience in your flaying here, I was fure you had a good houfe at Voi. L i home,
home, and that my Lady would not fuf¬ fer you to be troubíefome to her Lady, or to any body elfe, but would fend you home, and that I could take care of you well enough till fuch time as my Lady could come down herfelf."— The honeft zeal and mortified pride of Morris combined to give the greateft pain to Akhea.—Sen fible as flie was of the former, fhe knew not how to reprefs the latter; yet flie forefaw that her ftay, of whatever duration it might be, would be rendered doubly uneafy by thefe heartburnings, and that Lady Dacres, while flie confidered her as a burden, would look upon Morris as a fpy.—. Probably the little affection her father had for her would be diminifhed by the complaints this would occafion, and in whatever view flie regarded this un¬ lucky vifit, it promifed only unhappi- nefs. Her greateft confolation was, that it could not be long ; for, in the con¬ verfation of the evening, Lady Dacres had
had taken occafion to tell her company, that they propofed going into the coun¬ try in about a month ; and had dwelt much on this circumftance in conver¬ fation, as if on purpofe to iet Althea underftand that her ftay could not be prolonged beyond that time. All the poor Althea could now do was to endeavour to appeafe the irri¬ table fpirit of her aunt's woman ; for Morris did not eafily confent to give up the indignation which fome real or imaginary affront had raifed—and at lait went murmuring away, leaving Al¬ inea to indulge reflexions the moft pain- 41 ftie had ever fek.
CHAP.
CHAP. IL
........ loud, vain, pvefumptuons, Ptûud of hb power of tongue, the braggait ????.
1VİRS. Trevyllian was not eafier at Abbotihanger than Althea was in Lon¬ don; yet more accuftomed to the vi- c Ufi tudes and vexations of life, and being of a firm and fteady fpirit, flie would have blamed her niece for in¬ dulging anxiety, could ihe have known it—and ftill more her woman for yield¬ ing to querulous difcontent while fhe was engaged in a fcene where the real evils of life were furrounding her. Her unfortunate friend was fick both in body and mind; Mrs. Trevyllian had however the confolation of feeing that her fociety foothed
foothed her fpirits, while her care feemed to have fnatched her from the grave; for flie was already out of dan¬ ger, but fo extremely weak, that her final recovery was very doubtful.— ??? fou negietlcd her; and her daughter, whole abfence was a continual fource of pain, was not only far from her, but fubjed to the greateft inconvenience and danger, from the fituation of the coun¬ try to which flie was gone—and the afflicted mother dared hardly look after news; yet, when flie forbore all inquiry, flie found her conjectures even more dreadful than the truth. Mrs. Trevyllian was inceffantly em¬ ployed in the difficult tafk of calming thefe apprehenfions, which fhe felt were generally too well grounded. Several days eiapfed while ftrength returned fo flowly to the enfeebled frame of Mrs. Polwarth, that fhe exifted, but could hardly be faid to live--while Mrs. Trev ) ???, without any new caufe, felt ? 3 her
her own fpirits gradually declining—and at the end of about ten days it w r as too evident to the medical attendants that fhe was feized with the fever from wdiich her unwearied care had greatly contri¬ buted to recover her friend. Suf pett¬ ing this herfelf, flie preffed them to avow the truth ; and when fhe had with diffi¬ culty extorted it from them, fhe infifled upon their promifing to give her notice of the degree of danger ihe might be in.—*- 4 * I do not fear death," faid flie; 4Í and for my few worldly concerns, they have long fince been fettled—but I have a dear child who is almoft entirely de- pendant on me, and I would ufe the laft hours of my life in making fuch a provifion as I can for her againft the inconveniences tliat muft follow my lofs ; and therefore it is, Gentlemen, that I wifh to hear the truth in every ftage of the diforder which has feized me." If this fortitude of mind rrade the talk eafier to the Gentlemen with re- fp'4 ι
fbe£t to Mrs. Trevyllian, it became ex- tremcly difficult to acquit themfelves towards Mrs. Polwarth, who could not bear to hear the moft remote hint that her friend was in danger, and threw hei felf into agonies that endangered her own life.—Fortunately the fever was milder than thev had at fit ft reafon to fear,- and in a few days there was little Vo apprel end but fiom the extreme de¬ bility it left. As the danger had never been imminent, the iilnefs of her aunt had been carefully concealed from Al¬ thea, who could not but wonder flie did not hear from her as ufual, and that fliort and incoherent notes from Mrs. Polwarth fupplied the place ol thofe in- fìrutthe and affectionate letters which ihc had received during the firft days of their feparation.—At length Mrs. Trevyllian exerted herfelf to conceal her trembling hand, and, unatt the pre¬ tence of head-ach, excufed the ihort- nefs of her letter, vhich appeafed tht e 4 cruel
cruel alarms Akhea had begun to feci— and, by the returning poft, ihc wrote the following anfwer : ** It is impoflible to exprefs to you, my dear, dear aunt, the delight vvith wdiich your Akhea read a letter written with your own hand. It has removed many apprehenfions that 1 was tormented with : for, notwithftanding Mrs. Pol- waruVs kind letters, I feared you were very ill ; and had it not been that I am determined never to difobey you, I ihould have furprifed you at Abbots- hanger.—Have you not been ill?—Oh! yes, I ftill fear that is the truth—but my dear aunt would never deceive me ; and as fhe aflures her Akhea fhe is well, and that we fliall foon meet, I wdll be¬ lieve her, and appeafe my apprehen¬ fions. I cannot however promife to be as happy as you bid me—for if it were poflible for me to feel pleafure where you are abfent, indeed it could not be here. You bill me relate what pafles <i\\d
and flatter me that it amu fes you to hear my fimple narrative.—Alas! I am not like Mifs Byron—my journal will not contain an account of the fine things that are faid to me, and the approbation I meet with, for I am a mere cypher— or what is worfe, I feem to be felected by that odious Mr. Mohun as an object of ridicule—it were better to remain in infignificance. u You have never feen this very dif¬ agreeable man, my dear aunt, or you would not, I am iute, however you may diilikc any tendency to fluire, think J reprefented him in colours too un- pleafing.—I cannot tell why he fingles me out as an object of attention, which I am fure is far from being flattering, and I heartily wifli my father w/ould not encourage him in addrefling himfelf to me. — Why he fliould do it, I cannot imagine, as he feems at the fame time to confider me as a child and a mere country girl, and impertinently affects ? 5 to
to be mightily amu fed with mv Mm- plicity. But there is no judging how hateful he is, unlefs I defcribe the fort of man.—He is a tall, awkward, raw- bone figure—with a countenance it is impoflible to look at without difguft, for it has the moft difagreeable expreflion I ever faw:·—when he fpeaks, which is always more than any body in the room, it reminds me of the voice and mannei of the man whom I heard plead againft thofe poor creatures who were prifoiiers at Exeter, the only time you ever took me into a Court of Law, fo that I fup¬ pofe it is the ufual manner of lawyers, and that Mr. Mohun cannot diveft him¬ felf of it in private company· Whatever he fays, however, he fays as if it were imponible he could be wrong j and in¬ deed nobody ever ventures to diílent from him. If any unfortunate being has temerity enough to attempt it, Mr. Mohun flies at him like an enraged hornet, and will contrive to fling before he
he has done with himt for there ie no¬ thing rude and brutal he will not fay, totally regardlefs of the pain he may inflict. I have once or twice heard him make fuch very infoleht reflections that I have been aftoniíhed he has not ex¬ cited the refentment of the people to whom he addrefled himfelf: but it feems as if other men, who have probably as much fpiiitas he has, are thunderftruck and amazed at his exceffive aflu ran ce. — Kor are his manners towards women at all pleafant—Lady Dacres, with whom he appears to be a great favourite, and who is in general remarkably nice and rorreft, only laughs at him when he tells long ftories of pleadings about di¬ vorces, and I know not what fcandalous ftories, which 1 am lure Lady Dacres would not fuffer from any other perfon. fier partiality to this man is aftonifhing, but my father's ftill more fo, for it is impoflìble any two people can be more unlike each other. They are Members ? 6 of
of Pai karnem, İt feems, for the fame bo¬ rough, and Sk Audley has fome obliga¬ tions to him—fo he told me this morn¬ ing—and he bade me never again behave rudely to him. You will naturally afli, my dear aunt, if hdid behave rudely Ρ¬ Ι wil! tell you what pafled, and you fhall judge for me yourielf. This Mr. Mo¬ hun, who lives here. I think, had dined with my father as ufual, and there was to be a fmall card party in the evening. The weather is dreadfully hot in this difagreeable London-—and í cannot ima¬ gine how any human beings can ihut 'themfelves up in a room, and fit down to thofe everlafting carck. I found my own room, which has windows to the Weft, fo very warm, that, though I generally flay there as long as i can, I <ame down into the wdthdrawing rooms <r ailier than ufual, and long before the company were affembled, or Lady Da¬ cres hericlf had appeared.—Three other gentlemen dined with my father, and I cont hided
concluded they would be long engaged over their wine ; I took my work there¬ fore, and placed myfelf near a window in the great drawing-room. A few coaches paifed with people going to Kenfington Gardens—I felt my con¬ finement uneafy, without however en¬ vying them.—I wiflied not to join any of thefe parties—it was with you 1 longed to be—a thoufand uneafy conjectures aflai led me, (for I had not then re¬ ceived your dear letter) and I was more difpofed to weep than to go o r th my work, when the door of the anti-room fuddenly opened, and Mr. Mohun, who feemed to be much affected with the wine he had drank, ftaggered into that where I was fitting, and, approaching me with fome of ihofe difagreeable fpeeches which he often makes, very confidently fat himfelf down on the fame feat; and putting his arm round my waift, he ftared at me, and faid, I w^as the
the molt divine little dear he had ever feen. " I fprang from him in an inftant, more terrified than I ever was in my hie, for never had I been fubject to iuch im¬ pertinence before.—He befought me to ftop ; but I flew up to my own room, determined not to leave it till Lady Dacres's company were affembled—nor then unlefs I was fent for.—Alas! my dear aunt, how every incident concai , to increafe my regret at our feparation, and wuh what ardent wifhes 1 look for¬ ward to our leturn into Devonshire Ι¬ Ι w T âs in fome hopes that, mconfequen- tial as í am, I might have been for¬ gotten, and have been allowed to re main alone for the reft of the evening, as I never take a place at a card table. and of courfe could not be wanted.—* Ah ! no—I was not fo fortunate. I received an order from my father to attend Lady Dacres, and reluctantly I obeyed. « When
a When I enteied the room every body was at caids but my father and Mr. Mohun, who were in deep conference at one end of it. I went up to the table where Lady Dacres was at play, and faid one of the nothings wdiich one is in a habit of laying io Mifs Corn- walks, who was of her party: by a fide glance I faw that my father and his friend were talking of me, and that Mohun held his opera glafs to his eye— an impertinence he is frequently guilty of, as if to furvey me the better.—A moment afterwards Sir Audley called me to hirr ; and, what is very unufual with him, beçan to talk to me with fome dcgiec of inteieft and affedion. So buie has your poor Althea been accuf¬ tomed to liften to the voice of tender¬ nefs fiom a parent, that the flendereft mai ? of my father's regard alw ? ays af- fects me,-—He law that I was affeded, and ieemed pleaicd ; then, as if fome one had beckoned to him from the other fide
fide of the room, he fuddenly left me, ftanding near Mohun, who, throwing fomething into his manner which I fup¬ pofe he thought was foftnefs, took my hand, and, i believe, was beginning an apology: but I flung from him, and, on his following me to a card-table, whi¬ ther I had fled for refuge, hurried out of the room, determined rather to incur my father's difpleafure than fu fie r for a moment the renewal of fuch i n fole nt familiarity. " I found he ftaid fupper, and there¬ fore excufed myfelf from going down. 1 hoped indeed that I fliould have heard no more about him—but this morning, when the poft came in, I could not for¬ bear going down; and anxioufly in¬ quiring of the porter if there was not a letter for me, I faw that hand-writing which gives me the greateft pleafure of any in the world; and, unable to reftrain my impatience, had eagerly torn open my letter as I returned up ftairs, when my
my father came out of his ftudy, and ordered me to come to him there. I obeyed—not without trembling, becaufe he fpoke fo fternly. He fhut the door, and laid in a tone of voice which did not ferve to quiet my beating heart— * Aklica, I am much difpleafed with you ; and I muft tell you, that, if you ftay with me, I expect very different behaviour/—Unconfcious of what I had done, I afked, in a faltering voice, how I had been fo unfortunate as to offend him ?—He anfwered—* You be¬ have with rudcncfs, and in a manner veiy unbecoming a young woman, cir- cumftanced as you are, to my beft friends.—Come, come—you muft not afted to mifunderftand me, Akhea.— You know perfecily well that I mean Mr. Mohun. He conde fcends to take notice of\ ou- —winch, I aflure you, is an honour half the women of the higheft confequcpee in town would be flattered :>v, and \ ou give yourfelf airs of flip¬ pancy
pancy and contempt. If it were pof¬ fible that fuch a man as my friend Mo- hun, who will undoubtedly be Chan¬ cellor, could think ferioufly of fuch a girl, be aflured, Akhea, it would bc the moft fortunate circumftance of your life.—That, unhappily, is not at all likely. In the mean time í muft infift upon your behaving to him, whenever he addreffes himfelf to you, with the refpect that is due to his condition, his fortune, and, abovr all, to \our father's friend. You now know my fentiments; I expect; to have no oc¬ cafion to repeat them. Go, Akhea, I will hear no reply,'—Indeed, my dear aunt, I had no inclination to an¬ fwer. I was too much amazed at the purport of what my father fpoke, and his peremptory manner, which was fo much more than the occafion feemed to demand, that I fhould not have had voice or courage to have replied, had I not been thus forbidden. î huiiied io
zr v
my own room; and, to teli you the truth, my deareft and beft friend, though I began my letter with tolerable compo¬ fure, I have hardly yet recovered from my uneafy aftoniíhment. Yet my fa¬ ther certainly could not mean more than he faid·—Oh! my dear, dear aunt, let your poor Althea return to you, where- ever you are. Ten thoufand fevers are not half fo dreadful, in my opinion, as this one Mr, Mohun. If he fliould have taken it into his head......but, no—I will not torment myfelf with fuch ufelefs conjectures, but repeat, moft ^arneflly repeat—let your Althea return to you directly—Oh ! fend me permiffion by the return of the poft. —Believe me, though her Ladyfhip is juft civil to me, U is with evident effort, and Lady Da¬ cres will be much relieved by my ab¬ fence—while to embrace my deareft aunt, never again to quit her, is the firft wifli of her Akhea Dacics." The
The recovciy of Mrs. Trevyllian was not at all promoted by thri letter, which gave occaiion to many uneafy conjec¬ tures!—She knew that Sir Audley, with high notions of the power of parents over their children, had long ünce con¬ quered thofe fentiments which had, in ihe early part of life, induced him to facrifice every other confideration to m* love. He was now quite a convert to the neceflity of prudence and difcretion, and thought money and power two things wdiich every man of fenfe fhould make it the bufinefs of his life to ob¬ tain. Mrs. Trcvyllian forefaw there¬ fore that, if the facrifice of Akhea could be made fubfervient to theie purpofes, Sir Audley would not fe ruple to infift upon it; and that as to hericlf, though fhe might aflift the refiftance of her niece, the rejection of lier father's friend would inevitably difoblige him, and render her future life uncomfortable.— Thefe thoughts prefled ???? painfully Oil
tm hcr mind, becaufe flie felt her health fo much impaired that ihe thought the time was probably near when flie muft leave this beloved girl to the proteftion of her father, or leave her totally un- protcBed.— What might, in either cafe, be her deftiny, Mrs. Trevyllian could not think of without lofing much of that fortitude which no other contem¬ plation on the future had power to fli ake. To a young woman, fituated as Al¬ thea was likely to be in cafe of her death, nothing could bc fo defirable as an honourable and affluent marriage— but Mrs. Trcvyllian knew her too well to believe that any advantage could en¬ gage her to accept fuch a man as Mr. Mohun ; and that her young and in¬ genuous heart, though without any pre¬ pofleflion in favour of another, would flirink from his arrogant pretenfions, and fuffer every degree of inconveni¬ ence rather than hazard the mifery of pafling
pafling her life with a man fhe could not love. Of the wretcliednefs of fuch an union Mrs. Trevyllian was too well aware to think for a moment of promoting it; but flie forefaw fo much paki and uneafinefs likely to arife from the inftances of Sir Audley, that to remove Akhea from the fight of this unwelcome admirer feemed to be immediately neceflary—and this flie determined to do, though at the riik of her health, which was by no means in a ftate that enabled her to tra\ el with fafety; but to bring Akhea to Abbots- hanger would have been fo imprudent, that fhe wrote merely to bid her fend Morris to accompany her to London, as fhe purpofed being there on the fol¬ lowing Friday. She wrote alfo to Sii Audley, informing him of her intentions, and requefted that her niece might bc ready to receive her at her lodgings. Akhea received this news with un~ allayed tranfport : it confirmed what íhe had
had before fome doubts about, that her aunt was well; and it removed her from a /cene where, amidft an unceafing round of company and apparent gaiety, flic had never tafted a moment's content or pleafure. Lady Dacres heard of the immediate departure of her vifitor with fatiòfariion, which flic gave herfelf very little trouble to conceal, and Sir Audley with indifference; for whatever projects were floating in his mind in regard to Mr. Mohun, he thought they would rather be forwarded than retarded by the influence of a woman who knew fo much of the world as Mrs. Trevyllian. Akhea having difpatched Morris, who had never received fo welcome a com¬ miflion, began to count the hours till that fixed for her aunt's arrival. Her clothes were packed up and fent away,, and fhe fat down to anticipate the de¬ light flie fliould have in again embracing,, after this painful abfence, her firft and beft friend.—As it was now the end of June,
June, flie fuppofed Mrs. Trevyllian would foon return into Devonfhire; Al¬ thea therefore, who loved and ianguifhcd for the country, figured to hei felf the agreeable exchange ihe fliould make of the uncomfoi table magnificence of Grof- venor Street for the quiet elegance of her aunts vdlage-houie, with its plea¬ fant garden, and the romantic fcenery around it. At length the time fixed for Mrs. Trevyllian's arrival came—Akhea went two hours before to the lodsinss m Wclbeck Street—faw that every thing was in order; that the beds weie aired, and the dinner fuch as her aunt would like. She then fat at the dining-room window, watching every carriage wdiich came by, and in every poft-chaife ihe eagerly hoped to fee tbat which con¬ veyed her friend. At length it itopped at the houfe—Atthea flew down, and was in at the door of the poft-chaife before the fervant could open it. But, at
at the firft view of her benefadrefs, all the hopes of happinefs flie had been cherifhing vaniíhed. So changed, fo emaciated appeared that face on which Althea had been ufed to gaze with hope and delight, and fo great and fudden was the fhock, that Akhea, unable to command her emotion, could not aflift in carrying her aunt into the parlour, but followed, pale, trembling, and ama¬ zed; and, when ihe faw her feated their, inftead of approaching to embrace her, flie fat down, and bui ft into tears. Mis. Ttevylkan could not at fit ft olleet fliength enough to fpeak; but as f >on a.s ihc became a little reftoied flie held out her hand, with a faint fmile, md, in a voice hardly audible, faid— '· How İs this, my dear Althea?—At uhat are you alarmed?—Come to me, my beft love !"-------Althea obeyed; but, a 1 iáid of farther giving way to the emo¬ tion fhe felt, fhe only kifled the hand her aunt gave her, while her tears fell Vol. Ι. n jp
in ihowers upon it.—** You did not know I had nöt been quite well," con¬ tinued that admirable woman, fummon¬ ing all her ftrength; "and you are therefore furprifed to fee me fo pale and thin. But, my precious Althea, con¬ fider that I am now a little fatigued with my journev: a few days of reft, the fight of my beloved girl, and fome good advice, which I intend to fend for } will foon reftore mc." * £ Ah!" cried Althea, who now firft found her voice, " you came fooner than you ought to have done on my account; it was I that made you uneafy with my foolifli letter—but whither fliall I fend for this advice? Oh! do not let a moment be loft; fuffer me to write di¬ redly to a phyfician." " Do you know," faid Mrs. Trevyl¬ lian, ** that all this folicitude, my love, would be very wrong if I were apt to have deprefled fpirits ? Compofe your¬ felf; and be affured, my Althea, that I fhall
ihall take care of my health, if it be only to fpare you pain."—She gave her diredions to write to Dr. R ------, rc¬ qucfting him to fee her in the morning, Mid then defired to be taken up ftairs and put to bed, where fhe wiflied to be left quiet for the remainder of the day. Morris was no fooner difmiffed than fhe gave an unreftrained courfe to thofe fad apprehenfions which had diftrefled her ever fince flie faw her miftrefs, and which even her confideration for the terrified Althea could no longer reftrain. " Ah! Mifs Dacres," faid fhe, " do not let us flatter ourfelves. My Lady, my dear Lady ! it is impoffible, I am fure it is that fhe fliould ever recover. 1 fee too well what the end of all this w ill be.—Oh, my poor miftrefs! would to God we had never made that accurfed journey to Hertfordfliire. Oh! would Ihe were well, and we were all happv again at home !"—To thefe expreflions of apprehenfion which Althea felt to be
n ^
!Oo
too juftly founded, flie could only an¬ fwer with her tears. Alas! the next day confirmed all their fears. Dr.. R— acknowledged to Althea that he thought his patient in a very precarious ftate ; and flie fancied that, to fpare her, he fpoke even more favourably than he thought. He told her that he had re¬ commended it to Mrs. Trevyllian to go, by flow journies, to Briftol Hot Wells, and to let out as foon as poffible, for that he ftill had hopes from that air, from perfect quiet, and, added he, fmi¬ ling as cheerfully as he could, " from the good nurfing and fweet attentions which I know my excellent friend will receive from her loveiy niece."—Al¬ thea, from all that this worthy man in¬ tended as comfort, extracted only for¬ row, and, unable to anfwer, haftened to her own room, that ihe might recover herfelf fufficiently to appear with cheer¬ fulnefs before her aunt, who herfelf con¬ tinued to make light of an iilnefs of which
which Althea faw the almoft hourly per¬ ceptible ravages with terror. She now no longer thought of Mr. Mohun, but to blame herfelf for having ever mentioned his name to her aunt.— Lady Dacres and Sir Audley made theit feparate vifits—Mrs. Trevyllian thanked the former for her attention to Akhea, as if íhe had bee» a ftranger without claim upon her kindnefs. Sir Audley was aione with heî for near halfan hour : when he left feer fhe appeared to be much afíeôed, and ordered Morris to leave her till ihe rang her bell, in about a quarter of an hour fhe gave this fummons ; and Althea, on entering her room, found her as compofed. así ufual í but nothing was faid of what had paffed with Sir Audley. Preparations were now made for the journey, and it was at length under¬ taken. By very ihort flages they ar¬ rived—Mrs. Trevyllian not vifibly woifej yet Althea, who moft anxioufly d 3 watched
watched every turn of her countenance, and liftened with an aching heart to eveiy expreflion, thought fhe couid per¬ ceive from both, that this dear woman felt an internal convidion that her re¬ covery was impoflible—yet fubmitted to try every remedy ordered for her, and really wiflied to live on account of Akhea, though not afraid ? aie on her own. This was but too true an eftimâte of what really paffed in the mind of Mrs* Trevy ???. Nor could fhe always com¬ mand fuch a íhare of the admirable for¬ titude fhe poffeffed as to avoid fome-. times expreffing in her countenance the pain flue felt in refleding on the lofs fhe muft be to this child of her heart.— Akhea was not indeed an orphan; and when Mrs. Trevyllian faw Sir Audley m town, fhe had recommended his daughter to him in the ftrongeft ternis and had endeavoured to awaken 1?? tenderneb m her favour, by recalling to
his memory the fond attachment he once had for the mother of this beloved girl. Time and other connections had not fo far obliterated the remembrance of that mother, but that Sir Audley felt the force of what Mrs. Trcv\Uian faid to him, and aflured her, with more maik- of being rt ally affecied than ihe thought he could have fliewn, that, in eafe of the unhappy circumftance of her death, Akhea ihould be received into his houie, and that no difference ihould be made between her and the daughters of the prefent Lady Dacres.—* Allow me, however, to obferve, my dear Madam," faid Sir Audley in tin's conference— *' that the moft fortunate thing which could happen to our dear Akhea, whofe portion muft be very fmall, would be to find the protection, and fliare the affluence of fome man of family and fortune. There are fuch, I dare be-* heve, who might be attracted by her perfonal merit, and wave the confidera- » 4 tion
tion of fortune in favour of that merit, and of her highly refpeftable connec¬ tions. Should you have any conver¬ íation with her on this fubject, it might have great weight, were you to prefs this; and, I am fure, to your prudence and fagacity a hint is enough." " 1rs. Trevyllian thought this an op- p tunity to inquire, without naming hirø, what were the pretenfions of Mr. Mohun. She therefore aiked Sir Aud¬ ley, if what he faid alluded to any par¬ ticular perfon?—Either from his doubts of her approbation, or from his really being uncertain of the intentions of his friend, he evaded the queftion; and having recourfe to general terms to efcape from fpeaking plainer,,he merely repeated what he had before laid, and foon·after took his leave. Mrs. Tre* vyllian therefore did not think herfelf authorifed merely on the information fee had received frprn what Althea had faid^ to name Mr. Mohun to him; and as
as he had never made any attempt to fee her niece fince her return, it feemed probable that whatever imprelfioli ihe might have made was flight, and that when he no longer faw her, he would think of her no more. Althea, wholly occupied by her anxiety, was almoft unconfcious of the objects around her: fhe fometimes tried to believe that the cruel blow fhe fo dreaded would be fpared her ; but dif¬ couraging fymptoms continually arofe to deftroy her hopes. Change of air by no means mitigated thefe fymptoms ; and as the impoflibility of her recovery was confirmed to Mrs. Trevyllian her¬ felf, ihe thought it time to fortify the mind of Althea againft an inevitable evil, and determined to employ her fmall remains of ftrength in returning to her own horne, that ; íhe might not only fettle every thing there in the beft manner, but fave Akhea the additional uneafinefs of being left among ftrangers, n 5 and
fe and the fatigue of a long journey in the fiift moments of poignant grief. Having ???? laken this refolution, flic fuffered no remonftrances to divert her from it. The weak hope of lingering a litde longer had no power to detach her from the confideration of that duty which fhe owed to the only object: who was very dear to her on earth ; and this generous fortitude did not feem materially to in¬ creafe her weaknefs. She not only bore the journey, though above ninety miles y without fuffering much fatigue, but after her arrival at her own houfe continued nearly in the fame ftate for fome weeks. As too fanguine hopes would ferve only to embitter the inevitable moment of feparation, Mrs. Trevyllian gradually accuftomed Althea to hear her talk of what fliould be done after her death, wdth as much calmnefs as if fhe was only fetting out on a long journey.— '* Do not, my dear child," faid this ad¬ mirable woman, ** do not now give me pain,
pain, for the firft time in your life, by indulging this immoderate forrow. Let me leave the world in the perfuafion that vour fenfe and firmnefs of mind will enable you to conduct yourfelf well through it. Why fhould you thus gi\e yourfelf lip to extravagant grief?—Did you imagine I was immortal, my Al¬ thea ? or did you never confider that, according to the courfe of nature, I muft go before you ?^~Ah! carry your mind to a more improbable, but not impoffible circumftance. Imagine what might have been my fituation, had I, by iniviwng you, found myfelf at an ad¬ vanced period of life alone> and a ftranger in the world—for what have I ? attach me to it, unlefs it be my Al¬ thea ? The reft of my family are my relations indeed, but they are fo far from being my friends, that the greater pan of tbem are hardly my acquaint¬ ance. How fad w T ould have been my clofe of life, had I found myfelf a bur- » G cleri
den among them, when the powers of amufing myfelf might have been loft in the cheerlefs hours of folitude and fick¬ nefs, when none would take the trouble to fupply them Ì for you know, my love, that I have nothing with which to repay the afEduity of relations whofe kindnefs is to be purchafed by the hopes of le¬ gacies, and that this houfe and my little income revert, at my death, to the pof- feffor of the family eftate.'* Althea, far from confidering all this in the philofophical light in which Mrs. Trevyllian wiihed to reprefent it, could anfwer only by her tears. f< Ah, my dear love!" re-affumed this admirable woman, after a íhort paufe, which her weaknefs made neceffary— " Ah, my Althea! what is there in a continuation of the moft fortunate life that a reafonable being ihould very ardently covet it ? After the gay and fanguine hours of youth are paffed t and hope no longer gilds the fcene—after re¬ peated
peated convidions of their fallacy have taught us to eftimate truly the value of every worldly objed—how gloomy and how fad do the remaining profpeds ap¬ pear, when we either live on with in¬ difference, or are forced to call in to our aid artificial helps to animate our exiftence! for I am convinced w that the fick heart would ftill refufe, but dares not.' " I lived fome years ago in the circles of the high-born and affluent; and I have feen that half their lives are paffed in contrivances to get rid of the other half, and that it was not amid fuch fo¬ cieties that content (for to talk of hap¬ pinefs is a mere abufe of terms) is ever found. This conviction, my deareft girl, has reconciled me to that humble ftate, with refped to fortune, in which I muft leave you. It is not indeed adequate to your birth ; but if your fa¬ ther intends you fhould move in the fphere in which that has placed you, he will
wil! provide for you better than by your mother's little fortune, and what I have been able to lay by for you : thefe funis together do not exceed fe- ventecn hundred pound*?. This how¬ ever, my love, with fome addition which Sir Audley will make for you, and with your habits and temper, will, 1 truft, be enough for the comforts of life : and all beyond is unneceffary, if not bur¬ denfome. Many are thofe within my own obfervation, whom, though deemed objeds of envy and admiration, I have known to be the moft unhappy beings under their fplendid roofs. Often I have known the fineries gazed after with murmuring comparifons by the mul¬ titude as too glaring proofs of the in¬ equality of fortune, cover aching hearts, and fpirits fickening in the dull round of unvaried profperity. if happinefs, Althea, and why fhould I difcourage you from the purfuit? is any where found, it is in that condition of life that * oilt^
< gives neither poverty nor riches;*— that encourages a firm reliance on the goodnefs of God—a fteady performance of moral duties—a regulation of our wiihes—and a conftant employment of our time. All this, my precious Al¬ théa, will alwavs be irt your power, how¬ ever limited your fortune, or however unpleafant the furrounding circumftan¬ ces of your life." Altlica, overwhelmed with forrow, which choaked her utterance, tried to ex¬ prefs her fears that in her father's family even her time would not be her own.— ** Ah! how different," faid fhe, u is that fa¬ mily from yours, my deareft, beft friend? and how much, if ever that fad hour comes, that tears you from me, muft vour poor Akhea be íenfible of the dif¬ ference!"— u To local circumftances we muft fubmit, my child," anfwered her aunt. " But I hope and believe you will find them lefs unpleafant in the houfe of Lady Dacres, if you fhcaild be fettled
fettled in it as an inmate, than from the íhort experience you had—-you have accuftomed yourfelf to imagine. You were then only a \ ifitor ; you will here¬ after be a part of the family."—(The tears and fobs of Akhea redoubled) ** Do not thus diftrefs me, Althea," continued her aunt—" you, who never in youi life gave me pain before, will you em¬ bitter thefe my laft moments? I am perfuaded you will find in your father, in your natural protector, a tender and affectionate friend. I aflure myfelf he will remember his promifes, that he will reftore you to his affection, if abfence has weakened it. Yes, Akhea, from all he faid to me I have no doubt but that you will be as dear to him as the chil¬ dren of Lady Dacres. The fight of you muft continually recall to his re¬ colleclion your mother, whom he once fo paífionately loved, and whofe image, lovely as it was when configned to an eaily grase, \ou too much refemble, no*
not to have, even from that likeness alone, a ftrong claim on his lieaa.— This claim will daily acquire ftrength— I know it will, from the fweetnefs, the gentlenefs, the innumerable merits of my Akhea.
CHAP.
CHAP. III.
...... ílov. many ftand 'Vrouncî the ikath-bí-d of tiif^r dtarcft fiieutl» And paint tbe ¡íiiiuig anguiih.
IN thefe melancholy conference?, whicit happened very frequently during the lait fortnight of Mrs. Trevyllian's life, Akhea had only once the courage to mention Mohun— tf í reproach myfelf," faid flic, " continually do I reproarh myfelf for having ever named that man. It haftened your journey to London; you came before your ftrength was fuf¬ ficiently cftabliihed, and it was my folly that induced you to do it. Pcihap*, after all, it was my weaknefs, my va¬ nity 5 , which imputed to Mr. Mohun pio-
/ t
jects he never thought of."—" You have nothing on that head to regret, deareft Althea," replied her aunt; " my coming to town was not injurious to me; on the contrary, it was neceffary for adwee, which, though I believed it to be ufelefs, I was yet willing for youi fake to try. As to Mr. Mohun, I know nothing of him but from public fame— that indeed befpeaks him to be a man whom Althea could never approve, and to whom, whatever ι ^ay be his fortune, I never could wiih to fee her united. From the account you gave me, and from his general character, I think it very poffible that youth and beauty may have ftrong attraitions for him, and thai your father might have encouraged his, perhaps, iranfient expreflions of admira¬ tion, in the hope of forming ?? alliance, which, in his eyes, was an advantageous one. But as in our convcrfations in London he never named Mr. Mohun, Τ truft vou will not be troubled with
his importunity : if, however, I ihould be miftaken, a calm and fteady refufal will difengage you from the neceffity of liftening to him ; and your father never can prefs you to marry againft your in¬ clination." With fudi arguments Mrs. Trevyl¬ lian endeavoured to footh the mind of her unhappy niece, and to arm it with fortitude for the future. But poor Al¬ thea, though ihe made every effort to ftifle before her aunt the anguiih of her heart, yet felt it increafe in proportion as the fad moment approached thai was to tear from her the guardian of her youth, her more than mother. But it was inevitable.—The awful hour came : and Althea, more dead than alive, was taken from the bed-iide of her dying friend. The violence of the ihock, which was not the lefi» feverely felt for having been fo long expected, deprived Al¬ thea, for fome houis, oi recolledİon. — Yet
Yet flie was but too foon awakened to the fenfe of her irreparable lofs. She looked around her. The world ap¬ peared a defert, in which fhe ftood aione ; for in her aunt fhe had loft the only friend who took an intereft in her. Mrs. Trevyllian had regulated every thing with fo much calmnefs and pre¬ fence of mind fome time before her death, that Morris had orly to follow die orders flie had given, and Akhea was fpared every painful tafk but that of writing to her father, and to her coufin Mr. Trevyllian, who was now be¬ come proprietor of the houfe in which her aunt had refided, and to whom the annuity, on which fhe had fubfifted, re - verted alfo. Tbe next day, therefore, fhe fat dowrn to this tafk ; but her hand trembled, and the words, as fhe wrote them, were almoft obliterated by her tears. She had hardly finifhed her let¬ ters, when flie received the following note from a neighbouring gentleman, whofe
whofe mother, the moft intimate friend in that country of Mrs. Trevyllian, was abfent with one of her married daugh¬ ters. u In the abfence of my mother, dear 4 ' Mifs Dacres, Mrs. Everiiey, Linda, and myfelf, confider ourfelves as her repre¬ fentatives; and, being w T ell affured how fhe would ad if fhe were here, we muft entreat of you to leave the fad fcene you are in, and come to Valecombe, where you fhall remain alone in your own apartment, or where Linda will be gratified in being allowed to attend you; but indeed you muft oblige us. My fifter now waits for y T ou in the carriage, and will ftay your own time, or return again whenever you fhall appoint.— Mrs. Everfley unites in entreating you to make Valecombe your home, with, dear Madam, your moft obedient fer¬ vant, * t Francis Eversley." This
This attention, though coming from a man for whom Althea had a very high efteem, was extremely diftreffing to her. She could not bear the thoughts of leaving the houfe wdiile the remains of her lamented friend continued in it.-— To hide herfelf in folitude was now her only wifh ; fhe dreaded the fight of every body but Morris, nor could flie even fpeak to her without yielding anew to the violence of forrow. To repulfe coldly the intended kindnefs of her friends was, however, not in her na¬ ture ; but unable to fee Mifs Everiiey, who waited for her, flie was about to write her apology, when Morris came in and gave her a paper, in which, among many other diredions of the fame nature, was written, in Mrs. Trevyl¬ lian's hand-—" I wiih my dear Althea to quit the houfe as foon as fhe is able after my eyes are ciofed. Our good Mrs. Everfley will receive her; and fome of that friendly family will return with
with her here, whenever it is neceffary, to regulate the removal of thofe effeds which will belong to her, before Mr. Trevyllian takes pofleflion of the houfe. In the prefence of the Everfley family, as the friends of my niece, I would have my will opened. Mr. Trevyllian will either come, or fend, and Sir Audley Dacres will of courfe have notice." This memorandum decided the weep¬ ing Althea. She bade Morris, to whom every thing was of courfe entrufted, fend up a fervant to aflift in preparing for her departure. It was done in a few moments; and the unhappy mourner flowly, and with faltering fteps, de¬ fcended the ftairs. At the door of her aunt's room ihe ftopped. A tiioufand painful and tender ideas preffed on her heart. The laft founds ihe had heard there vibrated in her ears ; the laft look from thofe eyes which had ever beamed benevolence and fondnefs on her, was again prefent to her. She felt, at that moment,
moment, a wifli to take a final farewel of all that now remained of her beit friend; but, as fhe would have opened the door, the violence of her grief over¬ came her : flic leaned for fupport on the fervant who led her; and Morris, who had been detained above, now fol¬ lowing her, took'her other arm, and led her down. She fuffered them to put her into the chaife where Mifs Ever¬ fley was feated, who prefled her hand, but faid nothing. On their arrival at Valecombe, Akhea retired to the loom that had been prepared for her, and, at her ow n requeft, was left alone. In this folitude, or only feeing Mifi> E\ ci (ley for a few moments at a time, ihe remained for two days, when ihc received from Mr. Trevyllian the following letter: " Dear Madam, ** My attorney fends, according to my orders, a proper perfon to be pre- Vol. I. e fent
fent at opening the will of my late aunt, as a matter of form, and at your re¬ queft; otherwife I apprehend it need¬ lefs. You are welcome to remain in the houfe till you can conveniently remove the perfonals—fhould bc forry to hurry you. Wifhing you health, &c. I am, dear coufin, your obedient hum¬ ble fervant, " W. Trevyllian." u Otterbourne Park, * f Sept. tythy 1794." Though this relation of Althéa's lived only twenty-five miles from the place where fhe had refided with her aunt ever fince fhe was four yeais old, ftie had never feen him above once or twice, and he was then a boy at Eton School. He was now about fivc-and- twenty, and had been fome years in pofleflion of his very large eftate, which came to him with a confiderable fum of ready money faved during a long mi¬ nority.
nori t y. Left early his own mafter, Mr. Trevyllian had indulged his prevailing takes without reftraint; which having lain wholly in the kennel and the liable, his ideas and his expences had gradually centred in them—and he had now no notion of any enjoyment beyond thofe afforded by the one or the other, or a debauch among the connoiffeurs and attendants of each. His guardians had attempted to engage him to marry a young woman of faihion, who might have kept up fonie degree of that family refpectability which he feemed fo likely to iofe: but he foon convinced them that be was not to be didated to, and coolly declined the propofals they made him ; aliening, that women of faihion were good for nothing but to ruin their huibands, and bring him children which perhaps might not belong to him—that he liked living in the country, and never would be dragged to London tied to any fine lady's apron-ftring— E 2 nor
nor would he be put out of his way to become the huiband of a duchefs. The friends of his father, who had no wiili but for his credit and advantage, foon withdrew from all farther remonftrance. His two fifters were taken by their ma¬ ternal aunt, as foon as they left fchool, the houfe of their brother being ex¬ tremely improper for them ; and Mr, Trevyllian had no longer any one to interfere with his plan of life, fie had two or three packs of the beft hounds in the country; almoft as many pointers and fpanicls ; feveral ftables well filled with hunters of all prices, and of all forts, in which he became a fort of dealer, as he took care ofhis money.— He had a great deal of low pride, and fought not to affociate with his equals or his fuperiors ; but never failed to find companions that fuited his tafte much better, among hvery ftable-keepers, dealers in horfes, younger brothers who were unfitted by idlenefis for any pro¬ feifion,
teífion, bankrupt tradefiiien who by their ikill in horfe-flcfli had found their way into the Gazette—or poor curates, who preferred the conveniences of au oecafional refidence in fuch a houfe to the lofs of iheir field fports.—fuch weie the men who felt content to live at his table (which, as he loved eating himfelf, was always a good one), and be mounted from his ftud : and none of them had feeling enough to bc hurt at the price they were expeded to pay for thefe indulgences; for they were the butts of his very coarfe wit, and often treated with lefi refped than his upper ícr- vants. Notwithftanding his averfion to matrimony, Mr. Trevyllian had en¬ tangled himfelf with a vulgar woman, the fifter of one of his retainers, who, though extremely ugly, and at leaft twenty years older than himfelf, had acquired fuch an afcendency over him, that fhe governed with the moft defpotic fway, and had fo eftabliflied herfelf in ? 3 his
his houfe that, from that moment, he ceafed to be the mafter. This is fo common a character that it would be hardly worth defcribing, but to account for the hafte he was in, though he did not abfolutely exprefs it, for Akhea to quit tlie houfe, now fallen to him by the death of his father's After. It happened that, a few months before, he had made an acquaintance with a perfon who in youth only was fuperior to his reigning Sultana, but for whom he had taken fuch a fancy, that he would willingly have put her in the place of that amiable perfonage, but had not courage to make the attempt. The lady, however, in¬ fifted on an eftablifiimcnt : and nothing could be more à-propos than the vacancy which now happened; the houfe being not only moft elegant and convenient for its fize, but admirably fituated for field fports, and at fuch a convenieiu diftance, that Trevyllian might eafily divide his week between that and his manfion
manfion at Otterbourne, while it was too diftant to hazard difagreeable rencontics between the Roxána and Statira who fhared his heart. But even the little time winch, as hhs note fignificd, he was Wilkiig to allow for the removal of tbe eftects, he gave with reludance: but Mr. Peters, his attorney, who had often feen Althea, and who had great influence with Trcvyllian, affured him, that in decency he could not do otherwife, adding— ci And, 'faith, Sir, your coufin is fo pretty ? girl, that, if flie were in a houfe of mine, 1 fliould not have the heart to fend her out of it at all." Airs. Trevyllian had never willingly named her nephew, or fuffered any con¬ veriation about him to pafs in hei pre¬ fence; and Akhea knew nothing more of him than that he was profligate, and addided to low company : flie was not forry, therefore, that he fent another to hear her aunt's will read ; and flie hoped that Sir Audley would himfelf come e 4 down
down to proted and aflift her through 'a fcene which her grief and her little knowledge of the world made formidable, though no difpute or difficulty could arife. In this, however, fhe was deceived.-— Her father, in anfwer to the letter which announced her lofs, replied, that his prefence was by no means neceffary; that it would be fufficient if Mr. Ever¬ fley were prefent ; and that it was im¬ poffible for him then to take fo long a journey without the greateft inconve¬ nience.—He added in a poitfcript— u When ¿he affairs are fcUled i which, how¬ ever, cannot be for fome itine, you will come to us ; we ftiall remain at Capelftoke fix ???> longer , and will ftnd io meet you lia f -way. I under/}and it to be Lady Vacies's xvifii> and therefore of courfe ii η mine, that you contrive to accommodate yourfelf with one of ihe rjomen fervane now in my houfe, who fiali be du died to attend you. Lady Lacre: has an ohjuLai
to ihe reception of tke elderly perfrn who attended you on your laß vifit." Over this letter the unhappy Akhea fhed many tears. Cold and reluctant as it certainly was, it appeared to her much more fo; and tbe poitfcript feemed above all to be needlefsly cruel.—" No kind mention of fatisfaction in receiving mc," faid fhe, as fhe read it for the third time—- if None of the affection of a father foothing my fick foul for the lofs of my more than mother. No paternal ad\ ice how to conduct myfelf. No afluranccs of a kind reception at what muft now be my home.—Alas! my fa¬ ther need not haye repeated Lady Da¬ cres's orders, and have given them force by adding that they were his. / have no pretenfions to keep a fervant at all. Ifl had, it could not be the elderly perfon who has given fo much offence to her Ladyihip; for Morris, who is richer than I am, and retained in fer¬ vice only by her affection to my aunt, e 5 will
will now retire among her relations, where her reception will be far other than what I ihall meet with. They are people in humble competence, and are not loft to all fenfe of family affedion. Mine are people in high life. Mine— ah! I have only one—only a father, and he is eftranged from me !" By fuch fad re fled ions the dejeded fpirits of Althea were but little prepared for the diftreffing ceremony of hearing the will of Mrs. Trevyllian read: this was now to be done in prefence of Mr. Everfley, who attended at the requeft of Sir Audley; the agent of Mr, Peters, an attorney of a neighbouring town, on behalf of Mr. Trevyllian; and Mrs» Morris, who had been entrufted with the will. It contained little of which Althea was not before apprized. The furniture, books, fome curious plants which Mrs. Trevyllian had cultivated with great delight; the mufical inftru- ments, plate, linen, and a few pidures* which
which formed the principal part of her property, were given to Althea, with a requeft that fhe would herfelf attend to the removal of them, and not part with any of the books, inftruments, or pic¬ tures. The fmall lav ings from her own fortune, added to what flie had accu¬ mulated from the allowance Sir Audley gave his daughter, together with what flic direded to be fold, might, flie thought, increafe this little fund to fome¬ thing more than one thoufand pounds. This Mrs. Trevyllian gave in truft to Sir Audley for his daughter, with di¬ redions that it fliould be paid on her marriage, or on her majority. It might indeed be confidered as her all, at leaft for many years to come ; for the thou¬ fand pounds which was her mother's fmall portion, belonged to Sir Audley during his life. The will alio contained a requeft to Mr. Everfley, to confider Akhea in fome degree as his ward, and to aflift her with his advice and fupport E ? tül
till fhe fhould be under the protedion of her father. This diftreffing ceremony over, and the perfons who prefided at it departed, Althea retired to her owrn room to calm her agitated fpirits, and en¬ deavour to conquer the dread flie felt at returning to the houfe where her happieft days had paifed, but the fight of which muft now tear her heart to pieces. It was the command of her la¬ mented benefacirefs ; and fhe deter¬ mined, whatever it coft her, moft punc¬ tually to fulfil it. Morris however, who was called to the confukation as foon as fhe had a little recovered her¬ felf, defired her to ftay a few days longer at Valecombe; and Althea was not forry that this fevere trial was to be delayed, though fhe dreaded the reftraint which awaited her at the houfe of Mr. Ever- flev, where it would now be expected the fhould appear with the family; as a longer feclufion would certainly be deemed affeä ation by Mrs. Everfley, who
who not having the leaft fenfibility her¬ felf, knew not how to make allowance for that of others. This woman could not but be dif¬ agreeable to Althea ; for fhe was igno¬ rant, vain, and arrogant—fond of mo¬ ney, and of admiration—of courfe defpifing every one who had not the former, and detefting all thofe who at¬ tracted the latter, to which fhe had her¬ felf very ilender pretenfions ; for, with a very ihort, ill-made, heavy perfon, fhe had coarfe-dubbed features—a long upper lip, and two great prominent un¬ meaning eyes, which, as they were very full, flie fancied were very fine, and, as they were a dim flate colour, flie valued herfelf upon, as i% azure of heaven's own tint:"—her coarfe light hair, which had no fmall tendency to red, flie really- fancied was the moft beautiful of all the fhades of brown, her eye-brows: which had a ftill ftronger propenfity to the colour of flame, fhe had picked till not enough
enough remained to betray the unlucky iliade, fupply ing tir* deficiency with fome delicate ftrokes of black lead.— Her eye-Lihes could not well undergo the fame operation ; but they were fhort, and lefs diftinguifhable becaufe of a pink-coloured line which encircled her eyes, Her fkin was thick and freckled, and her voice hoarfe and difagreeable. But fhe had near fifty thoufand pounds ; and the father of Mr. Everfley, who was her guardian, had contrived to pre¬ vail on his fon to marry her while they were both under age—and in confe¬ quence of this, poor Everfley, who was a fenfible and an amiable man, was now, at eight-and-twenty, very rich, and very miferable. As Akhea was much admired for her beauty, and had precedence as a Ba¬ ronet's daughter, fhe excited, in a par¬ ticular degree, the fpleen and indigna¬ tion of Mrs. Everfley. But, on this occafion, confidering the long intimacy of
of the families, and the truft Mrs. Tre¬ vyllian had placed in her hufband, flic could not well refufe the requeft he made her. She complied, perhaps, with lefs reludance, becaufe fhe enjoyed the thoughts of feeing Akhea humiliated, and defcending to a ftate of dependance for fo it was underftood fhe muft be, in confequence of the death of her aunt, her father's eftrangement from her, and the fmall fortune fhe was likely to pof- fefs—for, in the opinion of Mrs. Ever¬ iiey, a young woman who had no more than a thoufand or two thoufand pounds ought to go to fervice—an opinion with which fhe often infulted her huiband's fifters, who ihe well knew had not fo much. This cruel inclination to infult, with affected pity and arrogant fuperiority, the innocent dejeded Althea could not be gratified while fhe remained in her own apartment. No fooner therefore was her mourning arrived, and the firft week
week over, than Mrs, Everfley began to talk to Linda of affectation, and hypocrify—>and to enquire how long Mifs Dacres was to keep her ftate in afl the paraphernalia of forrow.— Linda, who was one of thofe common characters which are formed by a \ery moderate underftanding, cultivated only by fuch reading as a country circu¬ lating library can fupply, or fuch fo¬ ciety as is to be found in country towns, failed not to repeat to Akhea all the farcafms of her fifter-in-iaw, whom ihe hated. Akhea, of courie, haftened to join the family at dinner, however unpleafant it was to her—and wrote to Morris to haften fuch pre¬ parations for the fale, in the melan¬ choly and tranfient abode to which ihe muft return, as would fave her fome painful hours of hopelefs regret.— Too many ihe knew muft be paffed, in defpite of thefe precautions»
CHAP.
CHAP. IV.
lhe vcRomou» cUmouri of a jcatou* wom,<îi Fui fou mor« deadly than a mid dog's tooth.
İF the lady of the houfe was unfeeling and infolent the mafter of it was all goodnefs, humanity, and confideration. His foftnefs of temper, which had been the caufe of his confenting to make him¬ felf miferable, now induced him to bear wdth calmnefs the humours and caprices of a woman he could neither love nor efteem, but who, having given him her foitune, he thought entitled to his gra¬ titude, and, having put herfelf into his power, to his complaifance. As the flighteft contradidion produced paf- fionate retort, tears, and reproaches, he
he feldom contradided her at all ; but when they totally differed in their ideas, he went quietly his ow r n way, and avoided the pain of altercation by not confulting her. This method, however, was not without its inconveniences; for flie always fufpeded that he was engaged in fomething which flie was not to know, and fometimes artfully difcovered that he had aflifted a friend by a loan, or forgiven his rent to a tenant in diftrefs. On thefe oecafions fhe failed not to de¬ claim, with great energy, againft the cruelty and injuftice. of Mr. Everfley, who had, flie faid, no more honour than honefty to give away hers, and her children's property—for fhe had two girls, both amiable copies of their mamma. It happened that one of thefe unfortunate difcoveries had been made on the day when Althea was firft to appear at the table of her hoft. Mrs. Everfley, who had feen her only once before, received her with a fcowling countenance,
countenance, and hardly fpoke to her. She looked indeed very lovely in her deep mourning; a circumftance which was aione fufficient to excite the dif¬ pleafure of Mrs. Eveiiley, and to this caufe her hufband imputed the unufual degree of ill-humour with which íhe feemed difpofed to entertain him and his guefts. He affected, however, to take no notice of it, but, with his ufual eafy good-humour, endeavoured to carry on the common table converfa¬ tion with a gentleman who chanced to be prefent; occafionally addrefling him¬ felf to Akhea, but oftener to his wife. The lady fometimes anfwered with a fullen monofyllable, fometimes not at all ; while her anger becoming more un¬ governable, from the fort of neceifity to reftrain it which flie thought her hufband had purpofely impofed upon her by the prefence of another ftranger, flie fat fwelling, and fanning herfelf with great violence. The day w r as a remarkably
remarkably warm one, in the beginning of September, and the ftranger, who was but little acquainted with the family hiftory, obferved that it was unufually hot; adding, very innocently, '- I am afraid, Ma'am, you find youi felf very much incommoded."—- ,c That í do, in¬ deed, Sir—I am incommoded;—and í am aftonifhed how I bear things as I do—I am fure it is a mercy that I have ftrength to go through it."— ( - My dear Rebecca," faid Mr. Everfley mildly, and afleding to mifunderftand her, ** I am very forry you are unwell ; but do not let us trouble our friends with our maladies— í hope you will foon be better." " You hope!" repeated the lady fu- percilioufly—" You hope! —So it icems indeed!—Xo, Sir; if you cared about me, or my family, you would not take pleafure in itripping us of our own to enrich a parcel of fwindlers and íharp- crs."~" Good God' Mrs. Everiiey," ext lakned
e\cla:mcd her huiband in uneafy amaze¬ ment— tt For Heaven's lake lei us not enter on thefe diicuiiions" now.'* " Χ.'ζυ ? as well as any other time, Sir,'' replied the lad)—" 1 mayn't have another opportunity of fpeaking; and for my pau í wiih all the world was here— ld not ieruple to fay that, when we are ail mined, the fault ought to be Lud to the right perfon.—Hundreds at a time iquandered away, and upon folks that but ι 'other day held up their heads fo high, and were too proud to return one's viiits! —Any body nujb ί?τ 'mk il verv grating to one—to have one's own (hildren lobbed of tiieir juft due, and for people-——" " What people?" cned Everfley im¬ patiently»— iv on whom, have I iquan¬ dered hundreds y However unwilling I am to enter into altercation with you, Mis. Everfley, I beg, fince you have faid fo much, that you will fay more; name
name the people for whofe fake t ha\e injured you, and your family .'" il For the Take of thofe March- monts,'' replied flic, " You know that, though they were deep in your debt before, you lately lent the old man another fum of money ; and what good did it do?—He is dead, and every body fays infolvent ; and that, when his af¬ fairs come to be wound up, he won't pay his creditors half a crown in the pound." The diftrefs of Mr. Everfley ap¬ peared to be redoubled.—-He tried to aifume compofure enough to anfwer without paflion; but finding indignation and refentment conquering his natuial equality of temper, he faid haftily to the friend at his table— if Mr. Marflon, 1 believe we fhould do well to finifli our wine by and by—perhaps you will now oblige me with your opinion of the plantations I was fpeaking of before dinner?'*
dinner?"—Mr. Martion, extremely glad to comply, immediately arofe, and they left the room together; while poor Al¬ thea, who dared not go, though flie trembled at the thoughts of ftaying with this unhappy and ungovernable woman, endeavoured, but in vain, to appear un¬ concerned, and to enter into indifferent converfation with Mifs Everiiey, who, very little at her eafe, was afraid even of making an attempt to deprecate the ftorm, which flic knew muft burft fome¬ where. Though Mrs, Everfley had no longer her huiband to torment, flic eould not help continuing her harangue againft his ridiculous whims, and extravagant friendfhips ; and faid fo many rude things, which Althea thought imme¬ diately pointed at her, that flie deter¬ mined to quit the houfe the next day.—· That fuch a temper as Mrs. Everfley pofleffcd exifted, fhe had before no idea; and now wondered how it was poffible '
poffible for a man of Mr. Everfley's manners and underftanding to live with her. Determining never again to fub¬ jed herfelf to her ill humours, Althea begged to be excufed going down to tea, under pretence of a flight indif¬ poiition ; but her friend, the fiiter of Everfley, dared not abfent herfelf. Al¬ thea therefore being alone, and be¬ lieving flie ihould be in no danger of meeting the hateful miftrefs of the uoufe, who never walked of an evening, and that her flight falfehood was in no danger of being deteded, went down into a flirubbery, which led from the garden to the edge of a heath, where Everiiey was making more extenfive plantations. The trees in the flirubbery afforded an agreeable ihade againft a September fun; and, though no longer in bloom, they whifpered refreihingly to her fatigued fenfes. The uneafy fcene fhe had juft witneffed was already forgotten; and her mind reverted, as it ever did the mo¬ ment
tuent fhe was alone, to her late irre¬ parable lofs. She gathered a branch of acacia, that waved its feathery foliage over the walk fhe was in, and, fighing, remembered how much her aunt ufed to admire thofe trees, and how fond flie was of two of them, which fhe had her¬ felf planted at the end of the lawn when fhe iirft took poffeffion of her cottage. Other tender recollections followed thefe, and flie wandered on, without much attention, to the path fhe w T as taking; when, at a fudden (urn, flic was met by Mr. Everiiey, and another per¬ fon, whom flie took for the gentleman who had dined with them, till flic ob¬ len ed that he was in deep mourning, and Eveiflcy intioduced him by the name of Mr. Marchmont. Akhea, ap¬ prehending that íhe might be an in¬ truder, and recolleciing what had paifed after dinner, became confufed ; and, haully venturing to look at the ftranger, walked on—but fhe faw, in the tranfient Vol J. ; iti ance
glance flie had of him, that he was a young man of genteel appearance, with a very dejected countenance. He was unhappy, and fhe pitied him ; while her efteem for Mr. Everfley was increafed by her knowledge of his attempts to ferve the family of his friend. She continued her walk round the grounds; but, before fhe quitted the wood near the houfe, flie again met Everfley, who was now alone. Though he muft have come in fearch of her, he feemed confufed when he met her ; but, recovering himfelf immediately, faid— *' My dear Mifs Dacres, will you allow me a few moments the honour of con¬ verfing with you ? If you are not fa¬ tigued, you will, perhaps, be fo good as to take another turn round the fliady part of the walks?" Althea, fignifying her aflent, turned back; and Everfley, walking flowly by her fide, remained for fome time filent, as if uncertain how to begin. At length he faid dejectedly* « I am
u 1 am afraid, my dear Mifs Dacres, the fcene you witneíTed to-day has given you pain. Poor Mrs. Everfley, having been an only child, was fpoiled by her father, and is unfortunately too prone to indulge unwarrantable fallies of ili- humour and fufpicion. Having been taught to confider money as the firft good, flie is always apprehenfive of its wafte, and has never learned the plea¬ fure of befriending the unhappy. I cannot vindicate, though I fincerels' pity her; but to you, Mifs Dacres, I would, w T ere it poffible, at once apologize for her and for myfelf. I fliould be forry to be thought capable of fquan- dering the fortune flie brought me on unworthy objects. The unhappy fa¬ mily of whom flie fpoke I have indeed attempted, vainly attempted, to fave from ruin -j ruin brought upon them rather by misfortune than fault. The father of that family was the friend of my father, and early in life rendered him fome f 2 very
very important fervices. With the fon, though he is younger than I am, I have for many years been in habits of friend¬ fliip. I never met with any man who united, in fo great a degree, the virtues of a warm heart and a clear head. He is indeed a young man whom any one might be proud of ferving—but the little that has been in my power, which I aflure you I fpared from my own for¬ tune, has been indeed inadequate to enable him to refift the torrent of ill fortune which feems rapidly to purlue him. Mrs. Everfley's invedives ihall never deter me from executing the of¬ fices of friendihip, fo far as my own moderate means will allow. But you fee I was compelled to hold a confer¬ ence with him in my garden, without telling him why, fince he WOuld have been liable to rudenefs and infult, had Mrs. Everfley ???? of his vifit ; and Ihe contrives to know every thing by the
the unworthy expedient of bribing my fervants.'* A deep figh, that feemed to arife from the fenfe of incurable unhappinefs, here broke the fentence; but, foon recovering himfelf, he went on : " I mean not, however, to trouble you, Madam, with ufelefs lamentations my lot ? caí!, and í muft endure it.— For my friend 1 may truly fay, th.u a more generous manly fpirit never in¬ habited a human breaft; and had he, poor fellow 1 the leaft fufpicion of the uneafinefs I have fuffered on his ac¬ count, nothing would induce him to accept of the very tiiliin^ fervices I can yet do him. My heart bleeds for him, his mother, and his ii.lcr«. I feci in¬ deed, on my own account, that the un¬ worthy part ! am condemned to att —" " I entreat you, Mr. Everfley," faid Althea, " never to think of the un¬ pleafant fcene of to-day again ; at h-aft on im account: bc affured I filali never r 3 name
name it—and 1 moft fincerely hope your friend will never know, what cannot fail of being painful to him. To-morrow."" added ihe, fighing, '· to-morrow I fliall return to my late home, there to exe¬ cute the laft commands of my deceafed parent; and afterwards to take leave of it for ever! Allow me to aflure you, Sir, that I depart with a lafting fenfe of the kindnefs you have fhewn me ; and that, in bidding a final adieu to this country, Mr. Everfley, his mother, and my dear Linda, are among thofe whom I fliall fincerely regret." *' You go to-morrow then, Mifs Da¬ cres?—Ah! I did flatter myfelf that Linda and I might yet have had your company for a day or two longer : but I fee it cannot be ; I know I ought not to expect it." Akhea now thought he had nothing more to fay—and, complaining of fa¬ tigue, turned towards the houfe. Many reflections indeed occurred, which made a Ion iter
a longer continuance of this conference uneafy to her. There was fomething in the manner of Mr, Everfley more foiemn and earneft than the fubject. de¬ manded, and he appeared more affected than his wife's behaviour, however dif¬ agreeable, feemed likely to occafion, lince fuch conduct was probably but too ufual. There was an appearance of he¬ fitation and confufion; he looked as if he wiihed to fay more, while confcious that he had faid enough ; and his manner, rather than his wroids conveyed to Al¬ thea ? notion that it was wrong to pro¬ long their converfation. Efteem for his general character, pity for his unhappi- nefs, and refpect for that generofity of mind which he had exerted towards the family ofhis friend, were mingled with this dread of impropriety, and with fome fear left Mrs. Everfley might fee them together, which would increafe her ill- humour and fufpicion. f 4 Everfley
Everfley heard Althéa's refolution ter depart wdth evident regret, but attempted not to diffuade her. Early the next morning, therefore, the chaife ihe had ordered was at the door. As Mrs. Everiiey was not an early rifer, theie was but little probability of feeing her before flie went; and as the ladv had been informed by Linda of her going the preceding evening, ihe thought little more ceremony w T as neceffary than to leave a card of thanks. But from her unhappy hoft ihe could not fo eafily efcape. He came into the parlour where fhe fat, while her little baggage was placing on the chaife: his counte¬ nance betrayed the extreme concern which he felt, but which he appeared defirous of concealing, however vain his attempts: he hefitated, fighed, and at laft faid— ft Though I am unforiunatc enough îo lofe you, Mifs Dacres, fo foon, I truft you will ftill allow me to tl.um
claim the honourable, though tranfitory right with wdiich our late lamented friend has inverted me. You will have much, and I fear fome unpleafant bufinefs to do before you quit this country. To be of tlie leaft ufe to you will give me fo much pleafure!"....... c * You are very good," faid Althea, interrupting him—" I hope I fhall get through the little I have to arrange, without troubling you:—all fuch ar¬ rangements muft bc painful ; but, as my friends cannot alleviate that uneafinefs, why ihould I diftrefs them with the fight *»f it ? Be aflured, however, that ihould 1 have occafion to aik your afliftance, 1 fliall not hefitate: and uow, Sir," added ihe, rifing, 4 ' allow me to thank you for your hofpitable kiiulncis, and to wiih you much happinefs till I fee you again." •'Happinefs!" whifpered he, as he led her to the chaife—« Happinefs for me!—Ah! Mifs Dacres, if I did not r 5 know
know the goodnefs of your heart, I fhould think fuch an expreflion an infult on my mifery." He was now too near the fervants who attended to fay more; and Althea, haftening to be releafed from fuch pain¬ ful and ufelefs converfation, ftepped quickly into the chaife, and was foon on her way to the place wdiich had fo long been her pleafant home, but which fhe now dreaded to enter. The fad va¬ cancy fhe fhould feel —her folitary ?nd mournful fituation, forcibly recurred to her, and all that had juft pafled was for¬ gotten. The nearer ftie approached to the houfe, the more cruel became her reflections ; and when the chaife flopped at the gate of the fmall lawn that fur¬ rounded it, and fhe faw Morris waiting there to receive her, fhe was fo over¬ whelmed with forrow, that it was with difficulty flic got out, and, leaning on the faithful participater of her grief, flowly entered the houfe. Althéa's
Althéa's removal to Mr. Everfley*s, the reftraint fhe was under there, her anxiety to hear from her father, and the coldnefs of his letter when it arrived, had occafioned a fort of paufe in her grief, which now feemed to return more poignantly than ever. She wandered from room to room as if flie expecìed to find her loft friend—but into the,dref- fing-room, where they had ufually fat together, or into her aunt's bed cham¬ ber, flie could not acquire refolution to enter. From the folitary houfe fhe fought the deferted garden, where every tree and every flower brought to her memory her who ufed to be delighted with them, and they now feemed to droop as if confcious that they were re¬ garded no longer. Twelve or fourteen years had paifed fince the fhrubs, which lhaded this little domain, had been planted under the direction of Mrs. Trcvyllian; with Althéa they had grown up, and her eyes ftreamed with tears as r ? flie
ihe viewed the lightly interwoven roof of half-faded verdure, which fome of the moft luxuriant formed above her head ; but her fpirits were ftill more affected by the annual flowers which yet lingered ' in bloom. She had affifted her aunt to fow the feeds of thefe before their un¬ fortunate journey to London. The fcene was prefent to her; flic again fancied flie heard the well-known voice to which fhe had fo often liftened in thefe walks—it repeated the name of Althea.—She flopped, and looked trem¬ blingly around her, as if her fancy bad really created a found. It was the hollow wind of evening fobbing among the trees. She ihuddered, and returned to the houfe.—Unable to ftay alone, flie defired Morris to fit with her. The good woman, diftrefled to fee her fo deeply affected, tried to fpeak cheer¬ fully; but, after a fervice of almoft thirty years, Morris had no ideas that did not belong to her deceafed miftrefs. Of the pail
paft therefore flie could not talk, without renewing the forrow flie wiflied to ap¬ peafe ; yet of the future what could fhe fay ?—To her the houfe of Sir Audley, where Althea was now to refide, was, of all other places, the moft hateful—and fo much did flie refent the treatment fhe had received there, that fhe could hardly prevail upon herfelf to fpeak of any part of the family with patience. Her converfation, therefore, was little likely to relieve the opprefled heart of Althea; nor did the neceffity of exertion roufc her. People came to make out inventories of the furniture and plants that were to be fold.—The fight of thefe men was infupportable; and Althea, amidft the diftrefs of mind fuch prepa¬ rations for her removal 'inflicted on her, almoft wiflied herfelf again at the com¬ fortlefs abode of Mr. Everfley. Nothing indeed could have induced her to have undergone thefe afflicting feenes but the commands of her aunt ; nor
nor could fhe have fupported herfelf by any other refleBions than thofe which arofe from the remembrance of the con¬ ferences held, during that iilnefs, with her excellent parent, who had laboured to fortify her mind againft the inevitable evil that had overtaken her. " 1 will endeavour," faid flie, " dear íhade of the beft of women! Your poor Althea will endeavour not to dif¬ grace, by feeblenefs of mind, the ex¬ cellent leffons you gave her. But where ihall I find courage to live a life fo un¬ like that to which your indulgence ac¬ cuftomed me ?—Ah ! how different to me will appear the perfons with whom I muft affociate, and how little intereft will they take in my fate!" .... Her recol¬ lection now glanced towards the recep¬ tion fhe ihould meet with at the houfe of her father. All that had been un¬ pleafant to her, during her fhort ftay there, recurred to her ; and the detefted idea of Mohun failed not, in defpite of reafon >
reafon, to prefent itfelf. —" Yet why," confidered fhe, * c why fhould 1 think of this Mohun?—Have I not real affliction enough without bewildering my thoughts with future poffibilities?—My father can never encourage fuch a man to perfe¬ cute me—but if he fhould !—What if he fhould ?"'-—She dared truft herfelf no longer with the contemplation of what inight follow 7 , and flie fled to the firft occupation that offered itfelf to efcape from forebodings fo painful and ufelefs. Never was a more melancholy hour paifed than that which Althea employed in feeing the books her aunt had given her taken from their fhelves, and put into boxes, where they were to remain under the care of the elder ? .??. Ever- fley until fhe had a home of her own to receive them.—-There was hardly one of thefe volumes which did not awaken fome tender recollection, or that did not draw tears from her eyes. She con¬ tinued, however, her mournful employ¬ ment,
ment, with the help of Morris, and had got about half way through it, when, owing to the ignorance of a country fervant, Mr. Everfley, followed by his friend Marchmont, entered the room without any previous notice. The eyes of Althea, in which the tears ftill trembled, were red with weeping ; and furprifed by fo unexpected a vifit, amidft a room ftrewn with books, and in which there was hardly a chair un¬ occupied, flie received them with fome embarraffment in her manner. Soon, however, regaining her natural eafe, flic was able to thank Mr. Everfley for the offers of fervice which he came to make, to enquire after his family, and to enter on fuch common topics as ufually offer in a ihort morning vifit.—But, as if it had heen infectious, her flight confíilion on their entrance feemed now to be transferred to her vifitors. Everfley was evidently perplexed and melancholy : and when fhe addrefled herfelf to Mr. Marchmont,
Marchmont, his anfwers were by no means fuch as the intelligence of his countenance promifed; for it feemed as if he was only awakened, by the found of her voice fpeaking to him, from the contemplation of fome incurable forrow; and his eyes were fo expreflive of the diftrefs of his mind, that Akhea, whofe tears had been with difficulty reftrained on their entrance, felt them again ready to ftream, as flie repeated to herfelf— if Here, at leaft, is a being as unhappy as I am !" Though neither Everfley nor March¬ mont was difpofed for converfation, neither of them feemed willing to go ; they faw indeed that Althea had been bufily employed, and Everfley muttered fomething about his fear of interrupting her, and once afked if they might not be permitted to aflift her,—But the hour of dinner was near; and his watch, which he failed not to confult, had twice told him it was time to depart, before he couJd
could determine to rife, or to utter what he had long meditated.- <( From all thefe preparations, Mifs Dacres, I fup¬ pofe this neighbourhood is foon to lofe you. Your aunt's confidence in me gives me fome right to make an enquiry, which might otherwife be impertinent ; When do you go from hence?—Wben are we to lofe you ?" " My bufinefs here," anfwered Al¬ thea, fighing deeply, " is nearly finifhed. I muft then inform my father that I am ready to obey him, and await his orders for my removal." " Sir Audley is, I fuppofe, in the country at this time of the year?" en¬ quired Everfley. " At Capelftoke, in Dorfetfhire." "Alas, Mifs Dacres! you will foon forget your more Weitem friends ; but pray forgive me—(he faw fhe was much affeded)—and tell me, may I be per¬ mitted to bring Linda to take leave of a friend fhe fo much loves?" « I fliall
" I fliall always be happy," anfwered Akhea, " to fee my dear Linda—but to take leave is very painful—painful in proportion to the love we have for thofe to whom we are compelled to bid adieu !" " Ah! I feel that to be but too true," faid Everfley, as he left the room.— Marchmont only bowed; but Althea, without knowing why, felt more con¬ cern for his dejedion than for that of her old acquaintance.—" Poor young man," faid fhe, " I wiih I had intereft enough to do him any good. Oh î if, like Sir Audley, I could intercede for the deftitute and unhappy, with thofe who have favours to beftow, furely it would be for a family like this!"—A few day s were yet to be paffed before her departure—at leaft fo İhe had cal¬ culated from the time of her laft wri¬ ting to her father. She hoped Linda would not come—for to what purpofe thefe fad adieus?—Her heart would be heavy
heavy enough, and it could hardly bear any addition to the forrow that would opprefs her, when it became neceffary to bid farewel for ever to the fcene of her early pleafures, to fo many me¬ morials of its ever dear inhabitant—to part too from the faithful Morris, with little probability of ever feeing her again! But this painful period ai rived even fooner than flie had expected.— Early the next morning a letter was delivered to her from Sir Audley. It only laid, that as he imagined ihe had now fettled her bufinefs, Lady Dacres had been fo obliging as to fend her own woman to conduct her to Capel¬ itoke, for which place he defired her immediately to begin her journey.— Short as the notice was, Akhea deter¬ mined to obey, and the hurry in which flie fet out feemed to prevent much of that anguifli fhe had dreaded.— Enough however ι emained. Speechlefs and drowned in teais, íhe could only wring
wring the hand of Morris; and covering her face with her handkerchief, fhe took a final leave of a place which fo many fubfequent hours of life gave her reafon ro remember with regret.
CHAP.
?? ? ?. V.
Now this is worfíiipful fociety!
öíLENT and fad, Akhea proceeded on the way to Capelitoke. Her road lay along the coaft of Devon {hire and Dorfetfhire, and through a country va¬ rious and rich ; but Althea heeded it not. Every objeot that had once at¬ tracted her attention was now paifed by unregarded. She faw nothing but the figure of the friend fhe deplored; flie heard nothing but her laft accents. If, calling off her mind a moment from this theme of hopelefs regret, fhe car¬ ried it forward to the future, the cold and repulfive looks of Lady Dacres, and tbc
the conftrained kindnefs of Sir Audley, were before her. In a family where flic knew the miftrcfs of it confidered her as an unwelcome addition, how little of real aih'dion and of foothing friend¬ fliip had ihe to expect!—Her fpirits, agitated by thefe reuVcìions, funk in proportion as her journey fhortened— and when the chaife drove through the new-binit Lodge, about half a mile from the houfe, ihe was io totally deprefled, that, notwithftanding ail her endeavours, flie was hardly able, when it arrived at the door of the houfe, to get out, and follow the footman into a parlour.— The man, as if he neither knew her, nor had received any orders for her recep¬ tion, aiked if her baggage was to be taken from the chaife,* then ordering the poftillion to drive round to the fide of the offices, he went away. Mrs. Midgely, Lady Dacres's woman, a per¬ fon of infinite delicacy, had already left her,
her, on pretence of being greatly fa¬ tigued. Altlica, finding herfelf alone, looked around with difmay ; the loom m wiiich fhe was, though huge, and magnificently fitted up, had an air of melancholy and filent gloom, which was but ill coin- penfated by the fplendour of the fui- nituie. How difFcicnt was the recep* tion fiom that fhe wa.s wont to receive at her former home, where, after the fhorteft abfence, Mrs. Trevvlhan ukd to welcome her with Andes of delight, and fondly preis to lier heart its ín ft de¬ light!- —Now, the only figure that met her eyes was her own, refiecied fiom a verv large French glafs whith reached from the ceiling to the floor.—She ftarted as ihe approached it, then ti' π ^d away and went to one of the windows. Com¬ paring this ftrange reception (for it feemed as if none intended to notice her being in the houfe) with that ihe had formeriv
. .η ? '???1) met in London, when îh^ wxu paired into .ι room where a number oí ii rangers were affembled. She thought both very unkind; but this, however humiliating, wws the leaft unpleaiant. As Althea had been two days on the road, it w T as early evening when fhe ar¬ rived, Perhaps Sir Audley and Ladv Dacres were walking, or were engaged with company whom they could not leave to receive her. She wiihed the unci wew over—-but time paifed on, and nobody «'ppcafcd. After waiting iome time, a heavy ftep washtaid. She fuppofed it to be her faihei —her heart beat quit k—but when the dooi opened a poitK gentlewoman appealed at it, whom Althea had never ken bcloie. A round, broad face, and two black buíhy eye-brows fliading her ?????] eyes; with a fnub noie, fortunate lountcrpait to a neble chin; and a mouth, the leal dimenfions of which flie ieemed to evade difcovering, rendered Voi,. L g her
her no very amiable figure. —Her dicb was in the moft goigeous ftyle of the Lcond table — and fhe ieemed pcriedly confcious of the re fpe table appearance fhe made, when, advancing in due itale, fhe informed Aklica, that fhe had the honour to fei ve Lady Dacres as houie- keeper at Capelftoke.— u And my lady, Ma'am, and Sir Audley being muf- Jidced to dine and fup out to-day with a laige party of ladies and gcnt'eincn vvho are now ftaying at our houle, a pai ¡tikelin fr ind having given a ball and fupper on his daughter^ birth-day ; my lady directed me, if in cafe you, Ma'am, fliould come, though ihe didn't much exped you till to-morrow, that I ihould fee you had every thing you pleafed to ordei. Would you like fome tea, Ma'am, or fhall I get you an early fup¬ per?— and would you pleafe to have the cloth laid in the dining-room, or the fmall liberty where my lady has a fire o' nights when we haven't company." Akhea
Althea replied, that being a good deal laíJQ-ued, flie rather wifhed to retire to hei room, where ihe would have fome tea, and go to bed as foon as poffible.—- " Oh, to be fure, Ma'am/' anfwered Mrs. Grimfby, " to be fure!- —You muft be fatigued, no doabt-—So, Ma'am, I'll lend the houfe-maid to ihew you your apartment, which is quite ready.** <f And f ih ill be obliged to you to order me a fire," And Akhea. " Though the day has been hot, î find myfelf e lulled this e\ ening." — -Sne then enqirred after the )ouuger part of the family, and heard that the two eldeft ladies were gone with their mamma to the ball.— *' Sweet deais!" exclaimed this keeper of confections— lt they are both vaftly Ane young ladies!—and they were fo Iiappy ! As to the gentlemen, they are at lehool, except Mafter Frederic and Mafter Edmund, and them two and Mifs Juhe are in the nurfery."—Having thus received anfwers to the que (lions ? 2, ili e
flie thought herfelf obliged to afk, Al¬ thea gladly retired to her apartment, under the guidance of Mrs. Hetty, one of the houfe-maids. It was a room on the fecond floor, plainly but conveni¬ ently furniihed, with a large clofet ad¬ joining. While Hetty aflifted in placing fome of her things, Akhea enquired the names of the prefent' vifitors at Capel¬ itoke, and heard among them, with in¬ conceivable chagrin, that of Μο'?ιη.— Some other of the pci Ions who were mentioned Akhea recollected to have feen in London, but there was not one flie remembered with pleafure; and never did a deferted wretch, who finds himfelf cut off from all human fociety, and left in an uninhabited ifiand, feel more defolate or more miferable than did Althea in the fplendid houfe of her father, furrounded by the luxuries of life, and amid every elegance of poliihed fociety. She
She haftened early to bed, in hopes of lofing her regret of the paft, and her fad prefentiment of the future, in fteep.— Fatigue aflifted her to forget herfelf; but the moment her eyes were unclofed the fenfe of her forrows returned, and with it the confcioufnefs that fhe muft difguife them, or hazard becoming doubly unacceptable to thofe on whom ihe was to depend. It was yet fo early that none of the fervants were up. Al¬ thea opened the fliutters, and looked into the park. Grey mifts hung upon the half-faded groups of trees, and lin¬ gered yet more heavily over the diftant water which divided a part of the park fiom the adjoining eftate.—About eight years ago Althea had vifitcd Capelitoke with her aunt. It no longer feemed the fame place.—" Ah!" thouglit ihe, " how little was 1 then confcious of my own felicity ! how little aware that the hap¬ pieft moments of my life were pafling!—■ I felt not my father's coldnefs—I knew G 3 Ilot
not that Lady Dacres looked upon me with unkindncfs—but, fecure of the ap¬ probation of my dear benefadrefs, 1 was content with the prefent, and thought not of the future.— ? that I could now look forward with equal indifference, or that the profped before me were more cheerful!" She now began to turn her eyes round her apartment, and then to examine the long light clofet wdiich ferved as a fort of d re fling-room:—the wails of this latter were covered with pidures, which feem¬ ed to have been removed out of other rooms to give place to more modem ornaments. Some of them appeared to be family portraits belonging to the former poflcflbrs of the houfe (which Sir Audley had purchafed foon after his fecond marriage): they were injured by time, and want of care ; and it was dif¬ ficult to diftinguifli what fort of beings many of them had been intended to rc- prefent. Akhea fighed, as a refledion aiolo
arofe in her mind on the inefficacy of art to {ave from oblivion the evaneicent forms of beauty or worth. Thus mournfully moralizing, ihe turned to the other fide of the clofet, where íhe was ftruck with a whole-length figure of a young and beautiful woman, appa¬ rently painted at a much later period than the reft. The features and air of her mother, fuch as fhe had feen in her pitture carefully preferved by Mrs. Tre¬ vyllian, immediately occurred to her; and ihe dilfolvcd into tears as (he read at the edge of the canvas—" Akhea Dacres, 1773."—It was the year-after her marriage, and preceding the birth of Akhea.—" Oh, my mother!" cried the weeping girl, f -you. at leaft, feem to welcome \our unhappy child!—1 am obliged to whoever placed here this re¬ prefentation of what you once were. It is the only pleafure ï fliall perhaps tafte in this houfe: yet when it was put here, my gratification was not, 1 imagine, ? \ thouglit
thought of.— -No— t ady Dacres could allow it no other place.—1 wonder in¬ deed it was brought to this houfe at all.— Alas! how could Sir Audley review thoíe features, and not nourifh continual regret ?" Such melancholy contemplations oc¬ cupied Akhea for fome time. She was never weary of looking at the pidure.— On a farther examination of the clofet, fhe began to il atter herfelf that her fa¬ ther had thought more of her accom¬ modation than fhe at firft imagined—for there were a few books, in fome of which, on opening them, ihe found her mother's name—and they were placed over a little inlaid cabinet, which formed a commodious writing-deik : this aifo had belonged to her mother, for her cypher was inlaid in the centre of the deik.— <f Here then at leaft," fighed Al¬ thea, ' f here I fliall not be unhappy.— When my full heart is unable to bear the uninterefting and defultory conver¬ iation
fation of mixed company, I may retire hither to weep for both my parents—for Uiofe beloved fifters who will here feem prefent to me, and whofe benign fpirits may perhaps hover over their poor Al¬ thea." A miniature of her aunt, painted when fhe was in middle life, was her conftant companion. On this fhe now fixed her eyes filled with tears; but the entrance of Hetty, wdio came to afk whether flie chofe to have her breakfaft in her own room, or to take it below 7 , put an end to her forrowful foliloquy.— Diftrefled by the thoughts of the firft interview with her father and Lady Dacres, yet wiihing it over, ihe enquired whether all the party who were in the houfe ufually affembled together in the break- faft-room—and whether Sir Audley and Lady Dacres had any rule in regard to their vifitors. The maid replied, that fome of the ladies had breakfaft in their own apartments ; that the reft of the g 5 paity
party affembled inthe b rea ? fa ft-room; but that Lady Dacres feldom attended, and Sir Audley never.-—To enter among a n umber of ftrangers, or, w hat was worfe, to appear in a company where the only perfon flie knew was the perfon in the world the moft difagreeable to her, was eertainly to be avoided. She defired therefore to remain where flie was; and hardly knew whether to be moft hurt or pleafed, that fhe appeared likely to be treated with the fame civil indifference as the ufual vifitors at the houfe. As far as fuch conduci would leave her more at liberty, flie rejoiced at it ; but fhe could not help feeling a cold and comfortleis fenfation, when fhe reflected that the perfon by whom fhe w r as thus put on the footing of an ordinary acquaintance was her father—nor could fhe fail to re¬ collect that fhe had now been many hours in his houfe without being en¬ quired after. ín
In endeavouring to conquer thefe dc- prcifing thoughts, the time pafled till an hour at which Althea thought it impof¬ fible but that the mafter and miftrefs of the houfe muft be vifible to their guefts; and at length ihe was informed by ä footman that Lady Dacres defired to fee bei. —Akhea now h ped that íhe ihould meet her father and Lady Dacres alone: but flie was difappointed; flie was fliew^n into the breakfaft-room, where a large cuele was aflembled— íome ftiíl at their moining íepaft; fome of the gentlemen in {hooting drefles, and preparing to go out, and others talking in fmall parties. Aniong the lall was Sir Audley, who, when Akhea appealed at the door, left the perfons he was converfing with (one of w nom ñie immediately faw was Mo¬ hun), and, taking her hand, led her to his wife —Lady Dacres half rofe from her chair, while with a forced fmile, and in a low voice, flie bade her welcome to Capelitoke.—Sir Audley then prefented g 6 the
the bluihing and half-weeping Althea to two ladies who were next Lady Dacres. " Lady Barbara," faid he, " give me leave to prefent to you my daughter Althea."—Lady Barbara made ? cold bow, and furveyed her from head to foot without fpeaking. He then turned to the other—-" My dear Mrs. Polwarth, allow me to make known to you my daughter."-—Mrs. Polwarth, rifing from her feat, faid one of the fomethings ufual on fuch oecafions ; and then whifpered Sir Audley loud enough to be heard— "Oh! fhe is divinely handfome."«—A frown from Lady Dacres checked the continuance of this audible whifper— but not the impertinent looks with which this ftrange woman continued to ga¿e on Akhea, whofe heart, already op¬ preffed, could not hear the name of Polwarth without being cruelly affected; for it was impoflible for her to forget that to Mrs. Trevyllian's friendfliip fot¬ tbe mother of Mr. Polwarth (who was alic*
¡ufo prefent) fhe owed the lufs of that dear and much-regretted friend.—By this time, however, the ceremony of general introduction was over. Two young women of fafhion, of the name of Kewmarch, whom Akhea had met in town, were alio of the party; and to them it feemed as if Lady Dacres was willing to configli her, confideiing them probably under the gcneial clafs of miifei., and not without hopes that their fupeiioîity in point of fortune, know¬ ledge of the world, and reputed beauty, would fink Akhea at once into the in- fignificance in which flic wiflied to fee her.—They were at a window together, when Lady Dacres, calling to them, begged to introduce Mifs Dacres once more to their acquaintance. Altlica gladly quitted Mohun, who was talking to her in a cold and carelefs manner, which greatly abated the terror fhe had conceived at meeting 1 im, and began a fort of converfation with the eldeft Mifi> Newmarch ;
Newmarch; while Mohun, inftead of going out to fhoot as feemed by his drefs to have been his intention, ftood tn a lounging way, furveying Akhea with the fort of look that a iagacious jockey puts on when he is about to pur- chafe a horfe—and thofe who had taken the trouble to examine his coun¬ tenance might have feen his ap¬ probation.—The mourning Akhea wore, which was as deep as for a pa¬ rent, particularly became hen—The confufion of her mind had added to her complexion the rofes it fome¬ times wanted; and Mohun thought her infinitely handfomer than when he b.ad feen her in London. Sir Audley, who was interefted in his opinion of her, failed not to remark this with fatis¬ fadion ; but Lady Dacres, by no means delighted with the general approbation with which every man İn the room feemed to confider Althea, broke up the party by faying, " Lady Barbara, is your
your ladyihip difpofed to adjourn to my di effing-room ?—Mrs. Polwarth, how do you difpofe of yourfelf?—You ladies, I fuppofe, will walk;" fpeaking to the Mifs Newmarches, " and Mifs Dacres will doubtlefs attend you."—" I fliall be of their party, dear Madam," cried Mrs. Polwarth ; '* I am not difpofed to be fedentary this morning; I feel ex- ( tremcly young."— tí Mrs. Polwarth is alwa\ s young," whifpered a young man, whofe drefs might have ferved for the repieientative of the moft outre man of the day in the moft outré comedy; " Mrs. Polwarth is always young—ai¬ ways delightful—always the envy of her own fex, and the admiration of ours." —** Oh, flattering cieature!" cried the lady to whom this was addrefled, " you know you think no fuch thing—Or, if you dj, you wicked animal," added fhe, nfing, and in a half whifper, " if yon do—Oh Heavens ! keep it to yourfelf, or I fhall have poifon put into my cup by
by the mifles." She now walked to¬ wards Akhea and her companions; Mr. Wardour ftill following, and whifpering to her. Akhea gazed at and liftened to this woman with aftoniíhment foon mingled with difguft—which, however, Mrs. Polwarth was fo unconfcious of, that ihe thus addrefled her : " My dear fweet girl, I have been dying to make an acquaintance with you. I dote upon beauty—there is nothing I delight in half fo much. Pol¬ warth tells me fometimes that I am vaftly impolitic—but he is the beft huf¬ band in the worid—is he not. Wardour?" " Who could be otherwife to fuch peifedion?'' anfwered Mr, Wardour, with an expreflion of countenance that gave this anfwer very much the air of a fneer. " Ah ! who could be otherwife to fuch a woman ?—But, alas ! there is but one in the univerfe fuch as Mrs. Pol¬ warth."—." Now, my dear Jack," re¬ plied the lady, (t what a common-place compliment
compliment is that ! Befides, you know it is juit the re verfe, ior there are a thoufand women in the little univerfe of London like me ; and a million there would be, if they dared to be as honeft as I am, and own, as I do, that they dote upon flirting. I like always to have halfa dozen young fellows round me, and care neither for the envy of the mifles, nor the malignity of their mammas and maiden aunts. Oh! War- dour, fince you are the only tolerable wretch here, do find fomething new to fay to me. Come, I will give you a ftudy—you fliall be my gallant round the park." So faying, flie took his arm, and marched out of the room, to the won Jet of Akhea, who looked at Mr. loi w ait h to fee if fuch ftrange beha¬ viour paifed unnoticed. He talked of politics with Sir Audley on the oppofite fide of the room, and was totally re¬ gardlefs of this fally of his wife's. It ieemed not new indeed to any of the few
few who remained. Lady Dacres and her friend were gone; and no one but Mifs Newmarch took notice of Mrs. Polw»arth, who, as ihe pafled the window, hanging on the arm of Wardour, ex¬ claimed, ** What a woman !" Akhea then accompanied Mifs Newmarch in a walk which her fifter declined. A filence of fome moments enfued, which Mifs Newmarch, whoie character was that of haughty indifference, feemed not dif¬ pofed to break; and Akhea, who feared her father's country refidence was not likely to bc more pleaiant to her than that in London, funk in cold defpond¬ ence. Her companion at length broke filence. " You arc not acquainted with Mrs. Polwarth, Mifs Dacres?"— c · No, Madam, I never faw her before."—" I muft own," continued the lady, with a very fignificant tofs of her head, cc that I was furprifed to find hei here; and my aunt Lady Barbara was not lefs amazed. It will certainly fhorten our viíit. Mrs. Pol w ait h
Polwarth is by no means a perfon with whom we fliall be fuffered to affo¬ ciate." Althea, who cared nothing about Mrs. Polwarth, had neither fpirits nor inclination to enquire into the particu¬ lars of her character ; but Mifs New* march could not refift the malignant pleafure of giving her hiftory. And fhe was in the midft of thefe fcandalous anecdotes, to which Althea could not prevail upon herfelf to attend, though flie appeared to liften, when they met the fubject of thcir converfation with her attendant. As they paffed, and flightly fpoke, the countenance of Mifs Newmarch fufficiently explained the caufe of her peculiar inveteracy, which a very few fubfequent obfervations con¬ firmed. Mr. Wardour was one of thofe very fine men for whom half the fafhion¬ able girls in London were juft then dying—one of thofe irrefiftibles, who are always feen lounging in St. James's Street,
Street, or riding in Hyde-park—who ihew themfelves for a moment at half a dozen different places—affect to have engagements every where, and to attend to none of them—imagine fome ridicu¬ lous fingularity of drefs, and enjoy the paltry pleafure of feeing it adopted firft by all who are emulous of being in the world of fafhion, and then watch its progrefs defcending among the frequent¬ ers of the lobbies, the weekly vifitors in Kenfington Gardens, lawyers* and bank¬ ers* clerks, brokers, the fecond in the firm, and the Philpots of the day. Mifs Newmarch, who made a mighty parade of the ftrictnefs of the education ihc had received, and fancied that it gave fome fingularity to her character, had not however learned to defpife this fpecies of coxcomb. She had feen Wardour in London with very partial eyes, and they had told him that neither prudence nor prudery could withftand his attractions. It was by chance they met at Sir Aud¬ ley's,
lev's, when Mr. and Mrs. Polwarth were there for a week on thcir way into the Weft. Mrs. Polwarth delighting to fhew her power, immediately threw out her lure for Wardour; who profeffing to be worn to death with the infipidity of mifles, and to find agreat deal of amufe¬ ment in the extravagant coquetry of the married lady, paid his court openly to Mrs. Polwarth, and affeded to forget that he had ever feen Mifs Newmarch before. Lady Dacres either did not or would not fee how very much the condud of her vifitor was out of rule, and Lady Barbara fneered and talked at her in vain. This good lady, the unmarried daughter of an Irifh Earl, was near fixty—tall, thin, upright, and formal : flie feemed as if her ihape had been imagined by fome joiner no adept in grace, on purpofe to ferve as a layman for the clothes fhe wore. Lady Barbara was a fort of oracle among a certain fet
fet of ancient maiden* of fmall fortune, or clnldlefs widows of moderate join¬ tures, who formed a litde fociety in the ftreets immediately around the fquare where fhe refided in London. Not having many titled acquaintance, thefe ladies confidered Lady Barbara as their head and patronefs. Her name was ever folicited firft on the lift of fub- fcriptions, and to fuch charities as were made public fhe had no objection to contribute. She was fuppofed to have a predilection in favour of Methodifm, was an adept in medicine, and had faith in the fcience of the illumines. Above all, her ftrict and unbending prudence was a fource of continual eulogium. Yet is there were thofe who gave her no other credit for this extraordinary portion of rigid aufterity, than what arofe from her never having had in the younger part of her life any temptation to feek that ad¬ miration, or mix in that general fociety, which, though not inconfiftent with real purity
parity of character, often gives occafion to doubt it. Plain and difagreeable in her perfon, flie had been ncglcded by the men; chilling and fevere in her manneis, flic was detefted by the women. Her rank alone had refcued her from entire ncgled—her 1 dations vifited her as a matter of form ; and on the death of one of her fifters, the Mifs New- marches, her two daughters, had fallen under her care. But thefe vouivt wo- men, wdio had been educated in a very different ftyle of life, could ill brook the formal dulncfs of Lady Barbara's houfe and fociety, and impatiently expeded the time when their majority fliould re¬ leafe them from her control. Nothing could affort lefs than Akhea and thefe two young women: Mrs. Pol¬ warth was ftill moie difagreeable to her; and the fociety of the elder ladies, Lady Barbara and Lady Dacres, was the fub¬ jed of her dread ; for while the latter confidered her as the rival of her daugh¬ ters,
ters, the eldeft of whom was now juft coming out in the world, the other feemed to look upon her as a proper ob¬ ject on which to exercife her fatirical fagacity. She criticifed, even before her face, her manners, her air, and her figure—difcovered faults which Althea had never before heard of; yet, " merely as her friend," advifed her to confider how difficult it was in thefe times for young women of very fmall fortune, and good family, to procure proper eftablifh- ments—and exhorted her by a moft pru¬ dent and circumfpect behaviour to do honour to " the memory of her dear deceafed aunt." Althea, who had not the leaft incli¬ nation to deviate from prudence, and faw no temptation to do fo if ihe had, was for fome days ignorant whither all thefe leiTons tended: at length, how¬ ever, ihe difcovered that Lady Barbara was engaged to forward the views of her father and Lady Dacres, and to prepare her
her for what they were endeavouring to bring about, a paifive acceptance of thofe attentions from Mr. Mohun, which had given her fo much difquiet in Lon¬ don, and wdiich he now was evidently difpofed to renew. Mrs. Polwarth, her huiband who had not three ideas out of the routine of the office in which he was employed, and the envied irrefiftible Mr. Wardour, de¬ parted in a few days; and the party was reduced to Lady Barbara, her two nieces, and Mr. Mohun, with two or three de¬ pendants of Sir Audley's, who were frequently at the houfe. The evenings were become long, and many were the hours, when Althea was condemned to fit in this dull and uninterefting circle, or to walk round a card table, while Mohun, feating himfelf at whift, fome¬ times followed her with his eyes, and fometimes attended to his game, and feemed internally to refolve on not taking much trouble about a filly girl, Vol. Ι. h who
CHAP. VL
My parks, my "walks, my manors that ï bad, Even now forfake me, and of ail roy lands ïs nothing; left me '
SlR AUDLEY had watched Althéa's manners towards his friend, and was at no lofs to underftand what they meant; but he was fo fure ihc had no other at¬ tachment, that he could not help flutter¬ ing himfelf the profpects of fplendour and affluence which Mohun could offer her, would have their weight; and ac¬ cordingly prepared to exert all the power of parental authority to conquer any fcruples that his daughter might have, and to haften the conclufion of 2 the
the marriage before they returned to London for the winter. The active timidity of Althea baffled for a few days the intentions of Mohun to addrefs her alone. Her father faw ibe avoided him ; and fearful that his exceffive pride would be hurt if flie pofitively refufed him, he determined to ipeak to her before the interview took place, and to prevent the probability of fuch a repulfe by his pofitive com· mands. Poor Akhea, whofe only tolerable hours were thofe which fhe pafled alone in the early part of the morning, was as ufual enjoying her folitary walk in the park, when a footman informed her Sir Audley defired to fpeak with her in his ftudy.—Trembling and breathlefs, for ike guefled but too well what ike was to ht a», íhe followed him to her father's zoom, where he waited for her. "Akhea," cried Sir Audley, as foon as ihe was feated, " 1 have but a few ? 3 words
words to fay to you ; but I expeft that you will attend to them, and confider them as decifive. You cannot be really ignorant of my friend Mr. Mohun's partiality for you. It has furvived thofe girliffi and ridiculous airs which would have difgufted a leis fenfible and dif- cerning man ; but he fees that you have a good underftanding, and he knows how to make allowances for extreme youth, inexperience, and perhaps fome romantic and fookih notions which you T (iave picked up in the courfe of a retired and country education. He ftill does you the honour to confider you in the moft favourable light; a circumftance mat gives the trueft pleafure to Lady Dacres, and to me. I know you can have no other attachment—fuch an idea is impoffible. Mr. Mohun offers every advantage that can fatisfy a ïeafonable woman; nay, all that can gratify the moft ambitious. He will fpeak to you himfelf; andlexpíd, Akhea, that you icceive
receive him as a man who is my friend, and who is to be your huiband." It was fortunate for Akhea that the length of thus harangue gave her time to recoiled herielf: young as fhe was, and hitherto without having had any occa¬ fion to ad for herfelf, her good fenfe fupported her in this trying moment, and gave her courage to ad from the impulfe of her unadulterated heart.— Free from every preference, and unin¬ fluenced by every motive but nati\^ integrity, her foul revoked at the idea of fid ling herielf to any man; and Mo¬ hun was in his perfon, manners, and motáis, equally difagreeable to her.-— However a\ crfe to difoblige her father, fhe was yet more unwilling to let him for a moment fuppofe her capable of making fuch a facrifice of principle; and it was better to declare her refolu¬ tion at once, than to encourage expec¬ tations fhe never could fulfiL CoL leding all her courage therefore, yet h 4 trembling
trembling fo that íhe couid hardly arti¬ culate her words, fhe declared to her father, that however forry flie was, not to comply with his and Lady Dacres's wifh, yet that her difiiké to Mr. Mohun was not to be conquered—that fhe had no ambition, nor any wifh to leave his protection, fo long as he would afford it her. Sir Audley could hardly hear her with patience. Unufed to have his will oppofed, he could not endure to find oppofition where he thought he had a right to implicit obedience; and having by this marriage, in imagination, feen an end to all his folicitude, and to the un¬ eafinefs which he forefaw between Lady Dacres and Akhea, the refufal of his daughter, which counteraded thefe hopes, feemed the moft unpardonable ofience that ever was committed againft him. He difdained, however, to argue where he thought he had a right to com¬ mand; and therefore in very angry and peremptory
peremptory terms declared to her, that though he had at firft condefcended to fpeak to her rather as a friend than as her father, flie ihould find that he would be obeyed. €i I have received you," faid he, t( at the rifk of my domeftic quiet, into my houfe, becaufe it appear¬ ed to be my duty to do fo; but do not imagine, Althea, do not imagine that in performing my duty I fliall fuffer you to forget yours. I declare to you, and my refolutions are not eafily fhaken, that if you do not receive Mr. Mohun's propoidls, as if you finally meant to ac-· cept them, I fliall no longer confider you as my daughter." " The alternative is a very dreadful one," replied Akhea; " my father will then abandon his child—for indeed, Sir, indeed I cannot marry Mr. Mohun." <· Go, Madam," faid Sir Audley fternly ; " you know my final determi¬ nation—I argue no longer." ? 5 At
At this moment a fervant entered the room, and told Sir Audley that Mr. Marchmont was in the parlour, and begged to fpeak to him. "Mr. Marchmont!'* exclaimed Sir Audley, angrily ; " and what does he want ? Who let him in ? Have I not given orders to be denied to him Ρ Why did you fay I was at home ?'* " it was not I, Sir,'* faid the foot¬ man; " it was Robert who met him at the ftables. He had been enquiring for Mr. Addingreve j who not being at home, or expecied thefe two days 3 he defired, Sir, to fee you as a matter of great confequence." u What are his matters of confe¬ quence to me?" cried Sir Audley, in a Jlill more angry tone; "thofe March- monts think one has nothing elfe to do but to attend to them. I never faw more troubíefome people.—Go, Mifs Dacres," added he, turning to Althéa; " and do you, John, let Mr. Marchmont know—"
know—" Althea, glad tobe di írni ned, now left the room, when in the veiti¬ buie fhe met the fam« young man who had been fo oddly, and, as fhe thought, improperly introduced to her fey Mr. Everfley. He ftood in a hefitating way, as if anxioufty waiting for Sir Audley's orders of admiffion. He was paler, thinner, and appeared more dejected than when Althea had before feen him. When he faw her he ftarted, but feemed unceitain whether he ought at fuch a moment to renew the flight acquaintance he had with her. Akhea, whofe eyes and manner betrayed the agitation fhe had been in, bluflied at once fiom the recollection of their former meeting, and from the confcioufnefs of her pre¬ fent appearance ; and unable to decide whether fhe ought to fpeak to bim ov no, fhe courtefied and paffed on, while Marchmont- ftepped forward into the library. Akhea involuntarily paufed, to learn the reception^ her father gave ii ? him :
him·, ftie heard only, " Well, Sir, fince I muft be thus troubled"—uttered in the fame angry tone which had fo lately been ufed to herfelf. The door was then ihut ; and with a heart oppreffed by her own forrows, yet feeling for thofe of this unfortunate ftranger, fhe flowly re¬ turned to her own room. For a moment fhe relieved herfelf by ihedding tears, which terror had in fome meafure reftrained while in the prefence of her exafperated father. Some cruel refledions which he had thrown out againft Mrs. Trevyllian, and the preju¬ dices flie had imbibed, hurt Akhea as much as his menaces in regard to Mo¬ hun; and when flie began to refled on the power he poffeffed, and his apparent determination to ufe it, all the bitternefs of her lofs recurred to her with ten-fold force. "If my father perfifts," faid fhe, " whither fhall I go, or what will become of me? I have not a friend in the world; formy mother's relations are all
eftranged from me : and who will en¬ courage a child in difobedience to a father, in a cafe too where fo many people would think him right in ufing the authority that nature has given him ? But I never will, I never can give my¬ felf to that man. Servitude—daily la¬ bour would be preferable to the moft brilliant fituation which I fliould owe to him." The violence of her fenfations occafioned ficknefs and languor; and ftie determined, as it was yet early, to take the walk her father's fummons had delayed. Yet dreading left fhe fhould meet Mohun, flie rang for Betty; and queftioning her how the people in the houfe had difpofed of themfelves that morning, fhe heard that Mr. Mohun, with others, was çone out on a fhootinsr '? ? party. Affured, therefore, that he could not crofs her way, fhe put on her hat, and haftened to a confiderable diftance from the houfe, where a long row of Spaniih chefnut trees joined on one fide
fide to a coppice, and on the other to a toad which led through the park from a neighbouring town to a fea-port at the diftance of eleven miles. The trees yet afforded a fhade againft the morning fun, though their leaves began flow ly- to fall; and Althea, foothed by the fighing of the autumnal wind among their branches, and by the perfed foli¬ tude of the place, feemed as if ihe was for a moment at liberty to breathe more freely ; and leaning againft a hunting- gate that opened into the coppice, fhe began, with that fad difpofition to in¬ creafe mental anguiih which fo fre¬ quently hangs about the unhappy, to carry her memory back to the fame feafon in the preceding year, when fhe was bleffed with the tendernefs and pro¬ tedion of her aunt, without a wifh un¬ gratified, and to compare it with the cruel reverfe which had now fallen upon her I The found of an approaching paffenger interrupted her reverie. She
She looked towards the end of the chefnut walk, and faw Mr. Marchmont on horfeback, but riding fo flowly that his horfe, which feemed to be a hired hack, hardly put one foot before the other: the bridle was laid on the neck of the animal, and Marchmont held one hand to his forehead and eyes, as if fuffering pain: the horfe, however, on feeing Akhea, flopped, and then went on a more irregular pace; and his rider, roufed from his fe veri ih dream, looked up and faw her. He pulled off his hat, and, checking the horfe, laid in a low and dejeded voice, '* I believe I have the honour of ieeing Mifs Dacres ; I hope ihe is well." Akhea would have anfwered fo common an enquiry in its ufual indifference, had not her good¬ nefs of heart urged her to be more than ufually civil to a man who fhe knew was unhappy, and vvho had, flie feared, been harfli 1 y ufed by Sir Audley. She there¬ fore aiked when he laft faw Mr. Ever¬ fley's
íley's family ? If he knew whether the elder Mrs. Everfley was returned ? and fuch other queftions as led to a conver¬ fation. Thus encouraged, Marchmont feemed for a moment to forget his de¬ fpondence, and, difmounting, appeared extremely gratified in being acknow¬ ledged as an acquaintance. He talked of the Everfley family, and evidently wifhed to prolong the pleafure he had thus fo unexpeciedly been indulged in; while Althea, anxious to know the bufi¬ nefs which her father had received with fo much ill-humour, made an effort to fatisfy what may be called benevolent curiofity; for though fhe had no in¬ fluence with Sir Audley, fhe thought it not impoffible but that Addingreve, the old fteward, might be induced by her foliei tations to grant a fmall favour, which was all fhe fuppofed Mr. March¬ mont likely to folicit. Under this idea íhe ventured to fay, " I fear, Sir, you have had the trouble of a long journey without
without meeting Addingreve, with whom I underftand you had bufinefs at home ? Sir Audley perhaps, who leaves almoft every thing to him, could not equally tranfad it?" The expreflive counte¬ nance of Marchmont, before lighted up with a tranfient ray of pleafure, changed at once; he caft a melancholy look on Akhea, and faid, * £ You arc very good, Mifs Dacres, to beftow a thought on fo lucklefs a being as I am. I had indeed bufinefs wdth Mr. Addingreve; and miffing him, as the affair was of import¬ ance to my mother, I ventured to fo¬ licit an audience of Sir Audley Dacres. 1 hoped he might have obliged me, even without the intervention ofhis fteward; but he has refufed me.—-Perhaps my in¬ trufion was wrong: but when my mo¬ ther and my fifters are in queftion, 1 prefs forward without regai d to confe¬ quences ; nor is it indeed always in my power to forget, that the diflance was formerly not fo great between me and thofe
thofe from whom it is now my abject fortune to folicit favours—and forbear¬ ance." A deep and indignant figh, which he yet wiflied to íupptefs, butit fiom the heart of Marchmont, as he finiihed this fentence. At die word forbearance. Al¬ thea was ftr-ick wkIi an idea that the family oi Marchmont was fomehow in¬ debted to her father—and fhe was at once fhocked and mortified to think he was an inexorable creditor. After paufing a moment, Akhea faid in a low voice— ít I lament, Sir, a cir¬ cumftance which feems to give you pain; I lament it the more, becaule I have not the leaft influence with my fa¬ ther, and dare not ventine to ipeak to him on bufi ne is. I ihould hope, how¬ ever, if it were known to Lady Dacres, that your requeft, relating to the accom¬ modation of your mother, might, through her Ladyíhip's interceffion, be liftened to." "Ah!
" Ah! Mifs Dacres," repked March¬ mont with increafed emotion, " that in¬ genuous countenance is an index to a mind as ingenuous, to a heart which, generoufly feeling for the unhappy, be¬ lieves that others are equally tender and confiderate.—Lady Dacres* who, as co- heirefs of the late Sir Ralph Gunfton, became entitled to the mortgages my fa¬ ther had made on his eftates in Devon¬ fhire, and others, has direded thofe mortgages to be foreclofed; and her La- dyfhip's agents have been fome time in pofleffion of Eaftwoodleigh, a very an¬ cient houfe of my anceftors, but which indeed the cmbarrafled ftate of my poor father's affairs has not allowed us to re¬ fide at fince his death. Of this pro¬ ceeding i have no right to complain—- it was but juft, and I fubmit without murmuring; but as Lady Dacres's pro¬ perty is for the greater part fecure and out of queftion, I had hoped that Sir Audley would have allowed my mother and
and my fifters to have remained, during this winter, at the fmall houfe which was alfo mortgaged to Sir Ralph, near Dork¬ ing in Surry. This was the requeft I had to make—the requeft that I have been refufed!—I fliould not however have made it," continued he, " but that my mother is in a fad ftate of health ; and I fear''—(the tears, in defpite ofhis endeavours to reprefs them, filled his eyes)— (i 1 fear that the comforts of fuch an abode as I can now procure for her will be io inadequate to what her prefent ftate demands, that the confequence of her removal will be fuch as I tremble to think of."— i( Gracious Heaven!" exclaimed Akhea, " and is it poffible Sir Audfey and Lady Dacres can have the cruelty to deny you fo fmall a fa¬ vour? What reafon can be alleged for refufing what furely it would give any human being pleafure to grant ?" <f The reafon," anfwered Marchmont dejectedly, tf is, that a friend of Sir Audley's,
Audley's, who lives in that neighbour¬ hood, has offered to take a very long leafe of the houfe, to give a great rent for it, and to make I know not what alterations and improvements. With this propofal your father has ciofed; and the intended tenant, who is fome man of fortune and high in the law, has already fent down furvcyors to examine the houfe. — As the ieafon is now approach¬ ing when nothing can be done, I hoped the indulgence I aiked might have been obtained for my poor mother—-I now repent that I have made the attempt------- But I forget myfelf ftrangely------Mifs Dacres/' continued Marchmont, ob¬ ferving that Akhea was extremely af¬ feded, " I have no right in the world to intrude upon you, and indeed I hardly know how I have been betrayed into it. 1 beg your pardon, and will detain you no longer." " Do not, however, go, Mr. March¬ mont," faid Akhea eagerly; <( do not g°
go till I know whether you think there is not fome means by which I may be of ufe to your mother."—The mention of a lawyer from London as the future tenant of the houfe made her think of Mohun—to whom it was highly pro¬ bable it wa« promifed ; and though his name was hateful to her, flie felt at this moment as if fhe could almoft afk a fa¬ vour even of him to relieve Marchmont from the anguifli which feemed to op¬ prefs his heart. From fuck an experi¬ ment, however, her heart recoiled ; but itili ihe could not bear to relinquifh wholly the hope of ferving a family for whom fhe felt herfelf unufually inte¬ refted. While Althea filently debated this with herfelf, Marchmont gazed at her without the power of anfwering her queftion. At length he faid—*' I can¬ not again folicit—-I have been degraded too much by it already ; neither can I afk you, Mifs Dacres, to undertake for me
mc a tafk fo painful to a generous mind, becaufe it would probably be fo fruit¬ lefs. I am forry, indeed I am, that my accidentally meeting you here has given to fuch a mind the pain of hearing of diftrefs it cannot relieve. May guardian angels watch over your happinefs, Ma¬ dam—and may Heaven reward your hu¬ mane and generous wiihes!"—At this moment the park-gate, from which they were not far diftant, ihut with confide¬ rable noife, and the approach of fome perfons was announced by vçices, and whiffling to dogs.—Althea hardly know¬ ing why, nor venturing to afli herfelf, was yet confcious that fhe would not be ken talking to Marchmont; and March¬ mont, equally uneafy, made no effort to detain her; when fpringing fuddenly from him, flie opened the hunting-gate, and was in a moment rendered invifible by the thick underwood of the coppice; while Marchmont, leading his horfe, flowly ??? tinued his way. Near the great
greatgate of the park, Mohun andanotnei gentleman, with their fervants and dogs, paffed him. The former ftared at him, but noticed him not ; and the unhappy young man, miferable every way, and feeling his mifery increafed by the ten¬ der admiration which this interview with Althea had created in his breaft, re¬ luctant and mournful, took the road to a neighbouring town, from whence he had hired his horfe. Marchmont was the only fon of a gentleman who was heir to a very an¬ cient family, and to fuch parts of their o^ce great property as had not been diffipated or forfeited in the civil war which defolated England in the middle of the laft century. Mr. Marchmont, the father, had entered life with a for¬ tune of above three thoufand a year, though it was nominally five. All the habits of his anceftors, their family oftentation, as well as their old hof¬ pitable cuftoms, clung about him, and about
about his domains ; on the principal of which w r as an old manfion-houfe that had been twice befieged by Cromwell's army, and rendered the fcene of ex¬ ploits on which hereditary honour or hereditary pride delighted to dwell. Mr. Marchmont could never endure the thought either of felling or letting this houfe, though he could not afford to repair, or to live in it with any degree of comfortable i ufficiency for years before ?? death. Could he have had the refolution, when he came to his eftates, to have fold half of them to pay off the mortgages on the reft, he would have enjoyed, and have tranfinitted to his fon, a hand¬ fome and competent fortune:—but, from the ftrange prejudices he had imbibed in his youth, he never could bc per¬ fuaded to think fo; and the mortgages (the intereft of which his want of ceco¬ nomy never allowed him regularly to pay) by degrees devoured the eftates Voi. J. ι themfelves.
themfelves. Mr. Marchmont married a very lovely woman without any for¬ tune, by whom he had three daughters and an only fon — a fon who promifed to do honour to the line on which the father's pride fo anxioufly refted. When therefore the opening merits of this be¬ loved boy rendered the father ftill more anxious not to difmember his eftates, he entered into projeds to retrieve them, which unhappily failing, ferved only to precipitate the ruin of his family ; and fome public events accelerating this, March¬ mont died of a broken heart a very fhort time before Althea had feen his fon at Mr. Everfley's.------The younger Marchrnont, to fave his mother from the preffure of fuch inconveniences as im¬ mediately threatened her, made bimfelf airrfwerable for his father's debts: it was foön difcovered that he had died in-* folvent; and thus, at the age of twenty- three, his fön found himfelf, without a profeffion, ftripped of his paternal pro¬ perty,
perty, and not only liable to be purfued for debts he had no means of fatkfying, but charged with the fupport of a mo¬ ther, whofe body and mind equally un¬ fitted her to contend with adverfity, and three fitters, whofe beauty and helplefs indigence rendered them the objects of his conftant folicitude and anxiety. The education of this young man had fitted him, in point of knowledge, for active life: yet his heart, unadulterated by his knowledge of the ways of men, was full of candour and generofity. The fame fpirit of loyalty which had attached his more remote anceftors to the caufe of monarchy under Charles the Firft, had devoted their fucceffors to the party of his infatuated and un¬ fortunate fon James the Second ; in confequence of which another confider¬ able portion of their property had been loft ; and a brother of Marchmont's grandfather fettling in France, his de- fcendants had there become naturalized; 1 2 vet,
yet, continuing to remember his Englifh origin, the Baron de Lavergnac (which was the name now affumed by ihe head of that branch of the family) had re¬ ceived his great nephew into his houfe, which was fituated near Toulon, when bis father, waving all falfe pride, had fent him to France with a view of placing him in trade. The increafing embarraffment of his father's affairs, and finally the Revolution, which thieatcned to put an end to all commercial pro- jeds, had occafioned his return to Eng¬ land about twelve months before he be¬ came acquainted with Althea.
CHAP*
CHAP. VIL ι== τ Ha! -"Bamíhment ? It coince not ill—1 hate not to tre baniíhfd!
1 HIS conference with Marchmont, though it had for awhile fufpended thofe anxious thoughts with which Althéa had begun her walk, now ferved only to ihew her that there were others even more miferable than herfelf, and that the very perfons who threatened to be the caufes of her lafting unhappjnefs, unfeelingly added to the weight of for¬ row that oppreffed a man who appeared to deferve a better fate. A comparifon could hardly fail to be made between this man and the fortunate, arrogant, eloquent Mohun—but how little to the 1 3 advantage
advantage of the latter! Not merely becaufe fhe thought one was the hand- fomeft, and the other the uglicft of their fpecies (for Akhea did not allow herfelf to believe that perfonal beauty had any influence whatever on her mind), but, in proportion as the characìer of March¬ mont appeared amiable and excellent, Mohun rofe as a fiend deftined to per¬ fecute her, and to opprefs him ; and if any thing could have been added to ftrengthen her refolution of fuffering every extremity rather than become his wife, this new acquaintance was exaclïy calculated for the purpofe. Her fortitude was foon to bc put to a fevere trial. Sir Audley ftill feared that the difdainful and pofitive manner in which he thought Althea would re- pulfe Mohun, might put an end at once to a plan which he had every hour moie and more at heart: Lady Dacres par¬ ticipated his fears, and determined at every event to difengagc herfelf from the
the neceflity of taking to town with her a daughter-in-law whom flie fo much difliked. They determined to fpeak fe- parately to Althea, before Mohun's au¬ dience. The one was to foothe, the other to threaten ; and if thefe methods failed to induce her to give Mohun a patient hearing, they were then jointly to declare that fhe muft either deter* mine to go to London the wife of Mr. Mohun, or remc.n in the country—not at Capelftoke as the daughter of Sir Audley Dacres, but to board in fome cheap retirement, and live on the in¬ tereft of the fmall fum her aunt had left her. It feemed, in the opinion of Lady Dacres, impoflible but that, when thefe two lots were fet before her, Althea muft choofe that which would fecure to her affluence and elegance, in preference to obfcurity and a bare fubfiftence. So Lady Dacres would have aded herfelf, fo would have aded all the women of 1 4 her
her acquaintance; and it therefore never < ntercd her head, that Akhea could make any other election- Sir Audley, after he had fettled this matter with his wife, and was proceed¬ ing to the converiation he had agreed to hold with his daughter, felt fomething veiy like a qualm of confcience, which reproached him for the part he was act¬ ing. He could not entirely flifie the recollection oi' what he had himfelf been, when, at a more advanced age than Al¬ théa's, he facrificed every profpect of fortune, and braved every oppofition from his friends, to mairy her mother. He reafoned. or rather fubdued this im¬ pertinent fcnfa:ion by reflecting, fnft, that Akhea had no predilection in fa¬ vour of any other perion —fecondly, that fhe was too young to have any judgement as to what would make her happy—and laftly, that when, in con¬ fulting the peace of his family, he in¬ cluded a plan fo'evidently advantageous, In
to hefitate about enforcing it would be injurious both to her and to himfelf.— As t) Lady Dacres, ihe was fo little ac¬ cuftomed to trouble herfelf about the feelings of others, when the gratifying herfelf was in queftion, that fhe never thought about the cruelty of compelling Althea to make hei felf a wretch for life, when her caprice and ill humour were to he fpared having before them an object whofe merit fhe could not but internally acknowledge ; although flie I 4ed her ?? the rival of her children, a\id as one who claimed, on too juft giounds, a ihare of her hufband's af¬ fection.—-The characters of women in general have been faid to be nothing — ' ( Matter too foft α lafting form .0 beai." Perhaps very young women have no ftriking traits of characìer to diftinguiih them, till ? aie circumftance in thcir lives either calls.forth their underftand- 1 5 ?1
ing, or decides that they have none,— What appears difcriminating, like the colours of cultivated flowers, is often an accidental variety; tbe fhades and tints are different, the fpecies remains the fame. It has been faid that Shake- fpeare, the great delineator of human charaBer, has failed in diftinguifhing his principal women—and that fuch as he meant to be amiable are all equally gentle and good. How difficult then is it for a îiovelift to give to one ofhis heroines any very marked feature which fhall not disfigure her í Too much rea¬ fon and felf-command deftroy the in¬ tereft w r e take in her diitreffes. It has been even obferved, that Clarifia is fo equal to every trial as to diminiíh our pity. Other virtues than gentlenefs, pity, filial obedience, or faithful attach¬ ment, hardly belong to the fex, and are certainly called forth only by unufual occurrences. Such was undoubtedly the lot of Althea, and they formed her character ^
charader ; for in the hard fchool of ad-» verfity fhe acquired that fortitude and ftrength of mind which gave energy to an underftanding, naturally of the firft clafs. It now enabled her to refift alike the unjuft commands of her father, the art¬ ful cajoleries of Lady Dacres, and the long ledures of Lady Barbara. For the firft, ihe would have made any other facrifice but this—which her rea¬ fon told her he had no right to afk. When, after two days, her refolution remained unfhaken, another confuka¬ tion was held, and another expedient deviled, which Lady Dacres thought ihe could fuccefsfully manage herfelf. Althea therefore was fent for, on the following morning, at an earlier hout than Lady Dacres ufually admitted any body into her d re fling-room. She was alone, and feemed defirous that Althea fhould remark that flie had been in tears, Akhea knew that» among all her ? ? mother-
mother-in-law's virtues, fincerity was not the moft eminent. She had re¬ marked, that when Lady Dacres had any point to carry flic could produce tears as eafily as remonftrances, and it re¬ quired all Althéa's candour to believe that flie couid flied unaffected tears over the vidim whom fhe was thus volun¬ tarily endeavouring to facrifice. Preparing, however, to hear her wddi great calmnefs, Akhea fat filent, till, after fome deep fighs, and fundry ap¬ plications of her handkerchief to her eyes, Lady Dacres thus began— i( I know not, my dear Mifs Dacres, whether, as 1 fear you are not free from the too common prejudices againft mo¬ thers-in-law—1 know not, I k¡v, whether what I am going to tell you may be well received, but 1 am fure that 1 could not feel more concern were one of my own children in queftion." Althea, by a flight motion of her head, feemed to fignify that fhe was obliged to
to her ; but remaining filent, Lady Da¬ cres proceeded ; ít I have been trying to perfuade Si r Audley to recede from his refolution of infilling on your immediate anfwer as to Mr. Mohun. I have been almoft im¬ ploring him on my knees to confider that our likings and averfions are not always under the control of our rea¬ fon—and I have taken upon me to an¬ fwer for you, Mifs Dacres, that if he will give you a little more time, if he will only allow the merits of Mr. Mo¬ hun to be more known to you, you wilt fee his propofals in a very different light." " I am forry your Ladyfhip has done fo," faid Akhea wdth more courage than flie had ever exerted before, " becaufe I can never releafe you from the en¬ gagement you have thus made in my behalf, being well affured, that the more I know of Mr. Mohun the more my averfion to him will be confirmed.". « Well,
" Well, Mifs Dacres," replied the lady, " fince you are fo peremptory, all that remains for me is the very dif¬ agreeable talk of communicating a, re¬ folution, from which I heartily wiih you may have influence enough to divert Sir Audley—fori, alas! lament that I have tried in vain to do it." ** I am prepared, Madam," faid Al¬ thea, " for whatever rigour my father choofes to inflict; and howfoever it may be his pleafure to puniih me, I fhall only be grieved at his anger, and on his account alone deplore his unkind- nefs." " Since you think of the matter fo philofophically, Madam/' refumed the lady, vifibly piqued, ** I may venture to tell you, that my moft earneft perfua- fions cannot prevail on Sir Audley to let you even remain in this houfe when we quit it: he declares, that your re¬ fufal to accept fuch an offer—an offer fo unexceptionable, fo proper, fo agree¬ able
able to him—diflblves, in his opinion, every other duty beyond tbat of af¬ fording you a bare maintenance, and far removed from him-— fmce, were you to inhabit this houfe, you would ftill ap¬ pear to have more of his confideration than, in his opinion, you deferve." " I believe, Madam, I heard this be¬ fore. Mere place is to me a matter of perfect indifference. Since death has deprived me of my only friend, and of the comfortable and cheerful home her kindnefs afforded me, I aflure your La¬ dyihip that I have no choice between the houfe of Capelitoke and the ha¬ bitation of the humbleft labourer on its domain." " As you pleafe, Mifs Dacres ; but I do not imagine it is Sir Audley's in¬ tention that you ihould refide on any of the eftates to which he occafionally goes." ** I am certainly at my father's difpofal, Madam, as to a place of re¬ fidence." "He
" ?? obj eö s, too, to a country town. He thinks you may there be liable to make improper acquaintance." ** I have never yet fought fuch, Ma¬ dam : but indeed I have not yet been in the unprotecied ftate into which it is now my father's pleafure to throw mc." Si I really think, Mifs Dacres, it would be as proper were you not to condemn your father. You diiclaim his care— you throw off hi- protection." The tender recollection of Mrs. Tre* vyllian had fo nearly overcome the pre¬ fent fortitude of Akhea, that flie dared not truft her voice with any reply ; and Lady Dacres, finding her filent, pro¬ ceeded with additional folemnity : ,c Sir Audley, juftly incenfed as he is, is yet unwilling to expofe you to the acquaintance of the fort of people who live on narrow incomes in petty towns t befides, he knows no town, however obfcure and inconfiderable, where you could in any creditable way lodge and board
board on fo veiy finali an income as yours; to which, I am truly concerned to fay, he re fufes, notwithftanding all my perfuafions, to make any addition." Akhea looked incredulous as to her perfuafions, and began to wonder whither alh this preamble tended, unlefs it were to terrify her with the idea of an italian or Spanifh convent : thofe of France and Flanders were no longer open.—■ This, however, was a menace which brought no terror with it. Without any local attaehment, without any friend whom flie particularly wdihed to be near, ihe had not the leaft repugnance either to change of place or country r , or to renounce the little portion of li¬ berty ihe could in her prefent fituation enjoy. She waited therefore, without any vi¬ fible emotion, for the farther explana¬ tion of a plan which, it was very evi¬ dent, was opened with fo much cere¬ mony only to alarm her wdth the pro¬ filed
fpeét of fome mode of life to which it was fuppofed fhe would never have courage to fubmit. Lady Dacres thus proceeded : " A mortgage my late father Sir Ralph had in Devonfhire. near the fea coaft, has been fome time foreclofed, and, in my right, Sir Audley is become pof¬ feffed of an old manfion-houfe be¬ longing to that unfortunate family, the Marchmonts; by whom, after all, we are likely to be great lofers."—At the name of Marchmont Althea bluflied deeply : yet fhe knew not why fhe bluflied, nor why fhe liftened with trem¬ bling anxiety for what was to follow. " You remember," continued the lady, " a houfe-keeper who lived in the family before I became Sir Audley's wife : fhe married Wansford, the butler, who had been his valet, and was after¬ wards much in truft with him." Althea perfectly recollected this per¬ fon, who had been her mother's maid, and
and had, with her huiband, been dif¬ miffed by ? prefent Lady Dacres for no other reafon, as was then believed, but becaufe they were too much at¬ tached to the memory of their firft mif¬ trefs. " Sir Audley," added Lady Dacres, tc who was really at that time enough to fpoil the beft fervants in the world, had indulged thefe two people till they were unfit for their nations: he obliged me by difmiifing them, but he ftocked a farm for them, and they went on for fome years well enough. I don't know, however, how they contrived it, they laid up nothing ; indeed their family was large, and Wansford loft money by a brother for whom he \vas bound—-* and laft year, by endeavouring to fave fome cattle in the marfiles, he caught cold, and loft the ufe of his limbs : fo that, as every thing was going to ruin on the farm, Addingreve advifed Sir Audley to take it into his own hands ; and
and this houfe at Eaftwoodleigh being juft then delivered up to us, Wansford and his wife were fent to look after it. I really believe, from the account I have had of it, that the wifeft thing Sir Audley could do would be to pull it down, and fell the materials: but he fays that they will not even pay the expence, fince in that country nobody would purchafc them. However, till he can determine what to do with it, thefe people live in that part of it which is habitable; but a great deal of it, I am told, is a mere heap of ruins. Sir Audley, I aflure you Mils Dacres, has talked very feriouily of your going thither to refide, nor have I yet been able to difluade him, from it." " I thank you for your endeavours, Madam," faid Akhea coldly, " fince I dare fay they were kindly meant ; but fhould my father be pleaicd to renew the converfation, I ihall be obliged to your Ladyihip to infoi m hmi that I hav e
have not the leaft objection to the plan— and will prepare myfelf to depart when¬ ever he pleafes to fend me from him." " Upon my word, Mifs Dacres! You have then no dread of being ihut up in this remote and gloomy old manfion, and being buried in fuch an obfcure folitude ?' " I never had the leaft fear of fo¬ litude—and I declare to you, Madam, that had my father the power and the will to banifti mc to Siberia, I would cheerfully go thither, rather than marry Mr. Mohun." " Young ladies in love,'' faid Lady Dacres, fneeringly, tf and great readers of romances, have, I know, thefe vio¬ lent flights." " But I aflure your Ladyfhip," re¬ plied Althea, refuming all the courage ihe had muttered at the beginning of the dialogue, " that I am neither the one nor the other; yet I moft willingly accept what my father propofes, and have
have no favour whatever tò aik of him, but that he will allow me, fince I have now made my election, to be releafed for ever from all perfecution about Mr. Mohun, and that he will not part with me in anger." tr Indeed I cannot anfwer for that—■ I am fure that he will not be pleafed." And as fhe faid this, Lady Dacres fuf¬ ficiently expreifed by her countenance how little flie was fo herfelf. <k I fuppofe there is hardly a tolerable apartment in this horrid old place," con¬ tinued fhe.—* £ It will be fome expence, I dare fay, to keep out the wind and water. The ridiculous vanity of thofe Marchmonts made them perfift in keep¬ ing of it, becaufe I don't know what ftrange things happened there in the civil wars.—But never were fuch a fet of proud beggars ! N ot withfianding they had two or three executions, which de¬ prived them of every thing but lumber which was not worth their carrying ι away,
away, old Marchmont was abfurd enough to betake him to one corner of the houfe, and thought, I fuppofe, that fome of his anceftors, wdio the country people fay ftill walk there, would be kind enough to difcover to this poor defce ridant fome of the money and jewels which they had concealed in their troubles. But the dead were no çiviler to him than the living; not a ghoft rummaged out a guinea for him—nor any thing elfe, unlefs it w ? as an old- faihioncd gold watch, that was found at the root of a great walnut-tree that grew in the court-yard—and this circumftance made the foolifli people believe more than ever that there was treafure hid about the houfe. So that, when firft our people took poffeffion of it, Sir Audley was forced to huff them out of the folly of pafling their time in pulling down the old wainfcoting, and digging wherever their filly fancy made them fuppofe there was any thing hid. But nothing was ever found
found afterwards—not even a rat or a moufe; for the Marchmonts were latterly fo poor, that the very refidents of the wainfcots had been ftarved out. Wanf- ford, however, complains bitterly that they have returned now to their old quarters, fo that he is half devoured with them; and that they make fuch intole¬ rable noifes in this great old rambling ruin of a houfe, that his wife and chil¬ dren are fometimes quite feared by them." Akhea felt, with all the contempt it deferved, that this account, though given in a carelefs way, was yet meant to im¬ prefs on her mind fuch an idea of the place as might make her afraid oj going to it, and compel her, through terror, to adopt any expedient that might releafe her from the dread of paffing her life in fo dreary an abode.—She anfwered therefore dryly, that as flie had no fears herfelf, ihe fliould not bc an unwelcome addition to thefe poor timid people.— " I am
'· I am glad," added flie, " Wansford's cnildren are there—a houfe is always cheerful where one hears the voices of children—and as I ihall have but little elfe to do, I will affift their poor mother in working for them." Lady Dacres now found flic had en¬ tirely mi fled her aim, at leaft fo far as it was intended to obtain conceffions from Akhea in favour of Mohun's pre¬ tentions. On the other hand, as flic x*as dcteimined at all events to get ná oí her, flic was rejoiced to find ihe had now a fair oppoitunity of fending her «?? her own confent to a place whcie nei influence over Sir Audlcv would be no more dreaded. Lady Dacres often fancied he loved her better than he dai ed avow, and fometimes believed he uaeed 111 her fcatuics the refemblance of her mother, which ihc could not think *f with patience.— Iler bufinefs now was to aggravate Sir Audley by her »«■»port, and make him pei híí in ihe fen- Vo -. î. tence
tence of banifhment : and this fhe pre¬ pared to do the fame day; while Al¬ thea, feeling an unaccountable fatisfaction in a plan which was intended to affect her fo differently, feared nothing but that her father might be diverted from it ; and ftudied only how to avoid any particular converfation with Mohun, till the day which was to deliver her from his perfecution, though the alter¬ native was a refidence, perhaps for life, in dreary folitude and perfect feclufion.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII.
If weak the pleafure that from thefe can fpring, The fear to want them is as weak a thing. ? 4 W ?* WHEN returned to her room, Al¬ thea began to reflect on what had juft paffed. She faw that there was a deter¬ mined plan, of which Lady Dacres was the principal contriver, to terrify her into an immediate marriage with Mohun; or, if that did not fucceed, to make her refufal a pretence for difmiffing her from a refidence in her father's family, which, though lefs fatisfactory to Sir Audley himfelf, would be the next moft defi¬ rable circumftance to Lady Dacres. Far, however, from fhrinking from the dreary profpect which had been held ? 2 out
out to her, fhe confidered it till it be¬ came in her opinion eligible. The com¬ mon comforts and neceffaries of life flie doubted not but that her father would order her to be fupplied with ; and in renouncing fociety fo little to her tafte as that íhe had hitherto feen, either in London or at Capelitoke, ihc thought there was nothing to regret. " How," faid ihe, as ihe recollected the figures which had paffed before her like the diftorted and tawdry images exhibited by a magic lanthorn, " how is it to be regretted, that 1 fliall no more be in¬ fulted by the pride and felf-confequencc of the Mifs Ncwmarchcs; or that I am relieved from the formal pedantry and prudifh malignity of their infufferable aunt? However ruftic the manners, or uncultivated the mind*, of the people among whom 1 may be thrown, it is im¬ poffible the groffeft ignorance can be half fo offenfive as the infolent mifconduQ of Mrs. Polwarth, who feems to glory in
in fhewing how far the affluence and po¬ litical fervility of her hufband can bear her out, when flie ventures to violate all the common rules of behaviour in civil fociety. How can I helptcjoicing at being releafed from the neceifity of hearing perpetual harangues upon coun» ty politics, or the minuter fquabbles c T contending interefts in a paltry country village called a borough, where every malignant paflion of the human heart is called into activity, and the bafenefs of the contending characters is not hid by the greatnefs of the objeci for which they contend, as it fometimes is in high¬ er ranks of life ? At this folitary houfe, whither I am to be fent, I fliall hear no more orations from Mr. Mohun, the great dictator of the party that frequents my father's table in London. No more ofhis axioms in politics will offend the feelings of common honefty and plain fenfe—nor his moral decifions fet de¬ cency and humanity at defiance. If ? 3 thefe
thefe graver perfonage« will never be thought of but that I may rejoice I ihall fee them no more, little otherwife fhall I feel in remembering the infipid and wearifome famenefs of the tables where I ufed to be placed, with giggling mifles enjoying their own little jokes amidft a general eagernefs for the pool.—No : there is not one fcene in which I was engaged either bit winter or fince my lucklefs deftiny has brought me to Capelitoke, not one party that I recol¬ lect with pleafure, or in which I ever wiih to make one again. But if Lady Dacres's houfe ottered, together with all the elegances and luxuries of life, fociety I enjoyed, and even friends I loved, it would be impoflible to lament quitting it, when thofe advantages are to be purchafed only by being con¬ tinually fubjected to the arrogant pre¬ tenfions of Mohun, who feems thorough¬ ly perfuaded that his political confe¬ quence, his legal celebrity, and bis in- c rea fi no;
ereafing fortune, give him a right to difregard and infult the feelings of the reft of the world. If then ï fhall re¬ joice at quitting the circle that furround my father, and cannot conciliate his favour by remaining in it, I ihall furely accommodate my mind to any fituation^ however lonely, without catting one lin¬ gering look back on what I leave, or feeling any dread left the recollection of them fliould embitter one of my foli¬ tary moments. " The intent of fuch an education as my beloved and lamented inftructrefs gave me, was lefs to qualify me to fhine in the world than to teach me to refign it. Wherever I may be, I ihall find fome place where I may depofit and en¬ joy the books fhe left me—where I can once more fit among them, recollect: thofe flie moft delighted in, and ftrength¬ en my failing fortitude by meditating on the paffages marked by her hand. There I fhall ftill feem to hear her advice—fhe ? 4 will
will once more feem to fuperintend my adions —I fhall meet her benign fpirit m my lonely walks, and I fliall at leaft wander at liberty over a country to which the returning fpring will reftore many of thofe objects which fhe taught me to contemplate with fo much plea¬ fure.—A place, which to Lady Dacres would appear defedate and hideous, will probably to me feem beautiful and ro¬ mantic ; for objeds certainly offer them¬ felves to her and to me in very different 4 lights. Some degree of pleafure, though of a melancholy kind, I may perhaps derive from tracing, among the ruins of the deferted manfion, memorials of its former poffeffors ; veneration for the unfortunate loyalift of the laft century will mingle with the pity I feel for their unhappy defcendants; and as the March¬ mont family are probably well known where they have refided fo long, my abode there may perhaps afford mc the means of being ufeful to the ladies of a famdv
family for whom it is impoffible to help feeling particular ^????? 4 .*' The thought with which this foliloquy of Althea con¬ cluded, was one which had often re¬ curred to her fince flie had heard that the long-deferted manfion of the Marchmonts was to be her abode. Hardly confcious of it herfelf, the un¬ fortunate heir of that family had made an impreffion on her mind; though fhe would have ftarted had fhe been told that flie thought with particular favour of a young man whom flie had feen only twice : yet imperceptibly his idea be¬ came continually prefent to her, while fhe fancied fhe was trying to reconcile her mind to the fituation fhe was going to. However uneafy Akhea f¿ft at the impoflibility of obeying her father, yet now that fhe had come to a final refo¬ lution, and knew the worft that was to happen, ihe felt her fpirits relieved; and believing herfelf fure of efcaping fremi ? 5 the
the perfecution of Mohun, fhe came down, after her conference with Lady Dacres, with a compofed if not a cheer* ful countenance. Sir Audley appeared unufually gloomy, and it was evident that fomething had extremely difturbed him. Lady Dacres affeded that mild refignation to his will, of which flie knew perfectly well how to affume the fern blance. Lady Barbara was fevere and fententious; and her two nieces, who had long fince ceafed to trouble themfelves about Althea, (whom they confidered as a perfon quite out of their way) were bufied in making re¬ marks on their company; which was, however, very little calculated to amufe them, unlefs as it afforded food for fatire. It confuted, befides the ufual company in the houfe, of a miscellaneous group— officers from the neighbouring barracks; attorniesfrom the next borough; efquires of moderate fortune, vvho were not rich enough to perform an annual vifit to London ;
London ; and what are not improperly termed Squiriferous Parfons, young men in orders, who ihoot, hunt, attend racés and cricket matches, and " but on Sunday hear no belli,'* As the military men who this day attended Sir Audley's table happened to be an old adjutant, and two Scottiih fubalterns who were without fortune or pretenfions, there was not any objed in the whole affemblage on whom the Mifs Newmarches condefcended to look with the flighteft degree of favour, or whom they deigned even to fpeak to with civility. The men of law, and the men of the church, they confidered and called Hottentots, Vandals, and Caribs : and the awkward attempts at elegant gal¬ lantry, which fome of them made, were to thefe ladies fources of merriment, which they took very little trouble to difguife. Althea looked at the circle with very different fentiments —ihe had never been accuftomed to confider every ? ? fingle
finale man according tobis foitune, or to ridietde thofe < f inferior defcription becaufe they had none. But, her mind thus tota'dy difcngiged, flie liftened with¬ out reftraint to the "infinite deal of nothing" which was talked; flie again congratulated herfelf that ihc fliould fo foon enjoy her fimple íepaft in the filent folitude of Eaftwoodleioh. Mohun had a rude and infolent man¬ ner of flaring, which was cruelly dif¬ treffing to Althea; and ftie never felt it more fo than now, when, as fhe was placed near her father at the bottom of the table, Mohun had contrived topiace himfelf exadly oppofite to her. To efeape as much as poflible from meeting his eyes, flie bufied herfelf in little civi¬ lities to ihe perfons near her; and foon by her eafy and interefting manners, mingled with fo much condefcending fweetnefs, attraded the particular at¬ tention of the old ibldier, who himfelf, the father of a family, thought, he might ι without
whout any îndecoium, expieis the re- ipcvtful admnatiou with which Al¬ thea mfpiicdhim: but whik flic ? αη - verít d with hun on fuch topics as the defultoiy dialogue of a table allowed, bei cai s weie iuddenly ftruck by the name of Mauhmont lepcatedly utien. d vu th gì cal eamcílne^ between hei father and Mohun. Amid tbc nun mui s of a lai ge comp my, and the 1 ättling of knives, forks and plates, ihe could only now and then catch a word of their dii- COU1ÍC —but fhe collected that they agiecd 111 kveicly ?????? young Marchmont ior iome ftep he had lately taken, of which they appealed to have iecci\ed information from a grrm-vi- i'aged figure fitting between them.—This tiger-looking man, who was, as fhe foon difcovered, an Attorney, had a piercing fhaip voice, and a fiiapping manner of fpeaking, which conveyed what he faid chftindly, though diiagrceably, to the ear»
ear. The following fentence therefore could not be miftaken : "Why yes, Sir—Yes!—your re¬ mark is perfectly juft, Sir—perfectly juft indeed.-—True, Sir Audley, true!— As you fay, Sir Audley, there are people fo wrong-headed, and fo·— lo —io— in fliort, io conceitedly bewitched to their own opinion, that they never do themfelves good, Sir Audley ; and this young man, to be fure, is one of that fort. Yes, yes, he is to be fure an un¬ happy obftinate young fellow, Sir Aud¬ ley. That, none of his friends can pre¬ tend for to deny—nor the friends of his family neither." " As to friends," faid Mohun with a malicious laugh, if I never heard he had any; and for thofe ofhis father, the old man difperfed them all long before his death, by attempting to borrow money of them which he knew he could never repay." " And
" And with fome," faid Sir Audley fternly, " he fucceeded but too well.— I am told that Mr. Everfley has found fufficient reafon to repent of his im¬ prudent loans to him." The Attorney, Mr. Lumbard, looked very fignificantly, and replied—" Why, Sir, as to that------Mr. Everfley, Sir Audley, is no client of mine-—I know but little ofhis affairs. His wife, to be fure, had a capital fortune; but then he has laid out a great deal of money, and made very expenfive improvements—and then his lady, it feems, has been in a deal of alarm, upon account of this here affair of Mr. Marchmont ; for they fay that upon the upßwt it appears, Sir Audley, that he was deeper in for it with old Marchmont than any body thought for. I am forry for it; for Mr. Everfley has the name of being a good fort of man : and as to any hope of the Marchmonts' affairs being fettled and made up fo that the creditors may have their
»heir own, and the like, why, blefs my foul! it is a matter quite out of the quef¬ tion—for where, Sir Audley Dacres, I fay, where is it to come fiom?" " Where indeed !'* anfwered Sir Aud¬ ley: " and therefore, Mr. Lumbard, we will unalterably abide by the refolution whicb I mentioned to you before din¬ ner ; and Mr. Marchmont muft be po¬ fitively given to underftand, that ..." The converfation was now carried on in a lower tone; and Althea could onlv diftinguiih that it was inimical to poor Marchmont, whofe poverty, however incurred, feemed in the opinion of all thefe gentlemen to bc a crime, which fhould throw him at a diftance from all human fociety.—The ladies foon after leaving the eating-room, Althea efcaped to her own, where flie found herfelf in a difpofition to flied tears for the fate of this unfortunate ftranger—tears which her own diftreifes had not lately drawn from her. His animated countenance and
and handfome figure undoubtedly added conBderably to the intereft with which Althea dwelt on the particulars of their laft, indeed their only converfation; for when íhe had [cen him with Mr. Ever¬ fley fhe had hardly fpoken to him.— The fortitude he feemed to exert in a fituation fo diiterent from that wherein he had been born, the tendernefs with which he fpoke of his mother and his fifters, and the noble refolution he fhewed in facrificing, to the hope of being ferviceable to them, his own feel¬ ings, acute as they certainly were, could hardly fail of recommending him to fuch a heart as inhabited the bofom of Al¬ thea.—Of all the men flie had ever been acquainted with, he feemed the moft deferving; yet unwilling to acknow 7 - ledge, even to herfelf, how frequently fhe thought of him, fhe endeavoured to perfuade herfelf that it was his virtues and his misfortunes alone that had awakened thefe lively emotions in her mind,
mind, and that any other perfon, equally meritorious and equally unhappy, would be as often the fubjed of her thoughts. Thus palliating anxiety, for which no apology would have been neceflary, had íhe not fufpeded her own heart, a day or two paffed without her hearing any thing more of her departure, though preparations were making for the return of the family to London. Lady Bar¬ bara and he* nieces had left Capelftoke, and the departure of Mohun had been named as foon to take place. He made, however, no attempt to fpeak to her alone—and feemed to fee with pride and refentment that flie avoided giving him any opportunity to do fo.—He now again affeded an air of haughty difdain; which Althea rejoiced to fee, and began to flatter herfelf that, by his defitti ng from his odious pretenfions, the hazard of incurring her father's anger would be at an end. But flie entirely miftook the motives ofhis condud. Reludant as he knew:
knew her to be, and mortified as his pride was to know it, he yet had fo great an inclination for her perfon, that he by no means relinquifhed the defigns which he had begun to form the preceding fpring. He had fo thorough a contempt for the underftandings of women, that he thought her mind not worth con¬ ciliating; a girl who could not know her own wifliCvS, or be any judge of his merit, was too infignificant to give him the trouble of an afliduous courtfhip; and he remained fatisfied, as flie had no^ other prepofleflion, that her father's com¬ mands were fufficient to compel her to confent to be his wife ; after which he trufted to his own fuperiority of in¬ tellect, and the authority he fliould then have, to make her all he wiflied to fee her—for he now, contrary to the cuftom of other lovers, found a thoufand faults witli her, and continually told Lady Dacres what a pity it was fhe had re¬ ceived fo ftrange an education, and how much
much forming fbe would require when fhe firft entered the world. To this gothic education, and the romantic and uncouth ideas wbieh he believed fhe had imbibed under a formal old maiden aunt, he imputed much of her referved and cold manner; but as he had come to a peifc-t undei ftanding with Sir Audley, he began to think it time for him to fpeak more decidedly to the object of what he was pleafed to call his love. The momentthis happened, Lady Dacres knew an explanation would take place which would deftroy every chance of Althéa's being difpofed of to Mr. Mohun—and Sir Audley, who had the fame apprehenfion, was willing to make ufe of every art, before he put ail his hopes on the iílue of a conference between Mohun and Akhea. Both Sir Audley and Lady Dacres theiefore had aflifted her to avoid him, inftead of throwing her in his way; but Sir Audley faw r with anger and indignation that ?? L heme
fcheme of terror had not only totally failed, but that Akhea was even more cheerful than before flie was acquainted with the fpecies of imprifonment with which he defigned to punifh her refufal. As Mohun was to go in a few days to attend on the multiplicity of bufinefs that awaited him the enfuing term (which was now near its commencement), it was impoflible to put off a final eclair- eiffement much longer, and Sir Audley faw that he muft give up the hope of an alliance wdiich he had more reafons for defiring to complete than even Lady Dacres was acquainted with.—Unable to command the rage and vexation wdiich he felt when he reflected on the pro¬ voking obftinacy of Altkea, he had not fpoken to her for many days; but time now prefled—and Mohun defired to have aifurances before he departed for London, that foon after the arrival of Sir Audley's family the marriage ihould be concluded. — Sir Audley was but too well
well convinced, that noi even com¬ pulfion of the moft violent nature, if it had been in his power to ufe it, could now bring this about. However, he de¬ termined to make one effort more.— He knew the timid temper of Akhea when the happinefs of any one ihe loved was in queftion ; and though he could not in his confcience call himfelf a good father, yet that he was her fa¬ ther, he thought fufficient to give him fuch influence over her, as ihould make her yield to his entreaties the concef¬ fions fhe denied to his threats.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX.
Che ìngiufto rigore! Che fiero coniiglio ! Scordarli l'amore D'una mifera figlia D'una figlia infelice Che colpa non hai
1 HE poor perfecuted Althéa there¬ fore was fummoned to another for¬ midable conference. Sir Audley en¬ deavoured to fmooth his brow, and be¬ gan rather by perfuafion than authority. He reprefented to her the fmallnefs of the fortune to which fhe would be entitled even in cafe of his death—that ihe had, at prefent, only the intereft of the fmall fum left her by her aunt Tre- 2 vyllian.
vyllian. — - u If you wilfully difoblige me, Akhea," faid he— 4< if you refufe a match fo perfectly unexceptionable—if you fly from happinefs, and embrace obfcurity and ruin, how can you think that you will obtain any indulgence from me?—- Can 1 fuffer fo bad an example to the reft of my family to go unpunifhed?— What ihould 1 expect—what fliould 1 deierve if I did?—That they too fliould defpife my advice, and defy my autho¬ rity."— " There is no danger, I hope, ofthat, Sir," faid Althea in a tremulou* voice. " The family of Lad) Dacrc* have been accuftomed to more fplendid feenes of life than I have ever been among—it is fit they fliould follow fuch paths as lead to riches and honours ; but why fliould /do fo?—1, who am accui- tomed to obfcurity and retirement, ha\ e no wiih for fplendour, and defire only of my dear father that he would not, for the fake of what cannot make mc happy, compel
compel me to marry a man who would inevitably render me miferable." Sir Audley bit his lips, and threw down, in evident difpleafure, a pen he had held in his hand: but making an effort to command himfelf, he was filent ; and Althea, hoping that this might be her ■iaft converfation on fo hateful a fubje6t, acquired courage to proceed, " Lady Dacres, Sir, has communi¬ cated to me your refolution as to my future manner of life—if I do not con¬ fent (which indeed I never can) to be¬ come the wife of Mr. Mohun. Dear Sir ! believe your poor Althea, when fhe aflures you, that the only wiih fhe now forms is to be fuffered to remain near you, and to fhew you, by her at¬ tentive duty, how much, in every other inftance but this, it is her defire, and it ihall be her ftudy, to oblige you." <f Cant not to ?»f," cried Sir Audley in a loud and angry manner—" You cannot impofe upon me, Althea Dacres, Vol. L i. by
by this ihallow hypocrify. You fay you have been apprized by my wife of the refolution 1 have taken. If you perfift in rejecting my friend, [ fwear, by all that's facred, that nothing upon earth fliall ever make me recede from that refolu¬ tion ; and that, while I retain a father's juit power over you, you never ihall leave the place whither I have deter¬ mined to lend you, but as the wife of Mr. Mohun." " Then, Sir," faid Althea firmly, « I muft prepare myfelf to die there. As long as my dear father lives, I ihall never confider myfelf as exempted from his authority, even although the laws of my country may give me liberty to att without confulting him. But though I never will offend hirn by quitting the place he afligns me, wherever that may be, I never will fell myfelf to a man I abhor—1 never will take an oath to love and honour a being I loath and de¬ ten." " Your
tr Your w r ords are very ftrong, young lady," cried Sir Audley. " If fuch is your refolution, you know mine —but let me never hear the words duty or af- fedion for me profaned by fo worthlefs an hypocrite. Prepare yourfelf to leave this houfe in a few days—I have already indeed given directions for the old fer¬ vant who lives at Eaftwoodleigh to come hither for you, as I cannot fpare any of mine or Lady Dacres's people. Per¬ haps fhe may he here to-morrow T ; but, be that as it may, you will rememberj wretched infatuated girl ! that when once y ou quit this houfe, I fhall confider you no longer as my child."—Akhea, now drowned in tears, and finding her cou¬ rage begin to yield before her father's wrath, only faid, with a deep figh— t; Ahl Sir, however cruel you may be to me, I fhall itili love and refpect you.—Alas! if my father forfakes and cafts mc off, what other friend have I upon earth?" Then fancying that by the expreflion of ι 2 hh
his features he was a little foftened in her favour, fhe ventured to throw her¬ felf upon her knees before him ; and, taking his hand, fhe kiffed it, as fhe fobbing faid—" My father!—if I muft go—I fubmit patiently to your difpofal of me. Poor and deferted as 1 fhall be, fuch a remote fituation as Lady Dacres has defcribed to me, may beft become my defolate fortune. I only afli that my father will not part with me in anger, wdll not load me with his dif¬ pleafure!" The idea was terrible ; and, her for¬ titude failing under it, flic could arti¬ culate no more. Sir Audley, who was greatly affeded, flruggled againft the emotions of his heart ; and flattering himfelf that the dread ofhis anger might now operate on the foft mind of his daughter, and produce the change he fo ardently wifhed in her refolution, he affeded even greater anger than he felt, and, throwing himfelf from her, left her
her kncehng and weeping before the chair he had quitted. But when he reached the door he turned towards her; and fternly repeating his firm refolution that flie ftiould never quit the dreary folitude flie was going to but as the wife of Mohun, he left the room, and the houfe—while Althea, abforbed in anguiih, yet unfhaken in her deter¬ mination, continued to weep for fome moments in the attitude her father had left her in; then recolleding how fruit¬ lefs her tears were, and not without fome apprehenfions that Mohun might find her there, flie tried to recover her¬ felf, and went to her own apartment.— As flie paifed by the window of the ftair-cafe, fhe faw that Mohun had joined her father in the garden—and that they were in deep conference.—Her fate was now, fhe thought, decided; and when fhe looked at Mohun flie could neither repent of her determination, nor of the courage with which flie had fuftained l 3 this
this laft dreadful conflid —but rejoicing that it was over, and trufting to thofe remains of tendernefs which ihe flattered herfelf would ftill prevent her father's driving rfls child from him in anger, fhe endeavoured to compofe her mind, and prepare her few effeds for a journey which fhe knew Lady Dacres would not fuffer to be long delayed, and which fhe felt no reludance to begin. The party below were more affeded than flie was—for over their fpirits thofe paflions had painful influence, to which the innocent and unadulterated mind of Althea was a ftranger. As to Mr. Mohun, his confcience never gave him much trouble : having been educated to plead as well againft as for it, he feemed to think it a monitor which a man of fenfe might eafily bribe to filence, if not entirely diveft himfelf of the weaknefs of attending to it ; though he thought it might be a bugbear very propei to terrify the vulgar, who could not be kept too
too much in awe. It was long fince he had met with contradidion of any kind ; for it was long fince he had been rich, and accounted infallible. Born with a hard, feifiili, and unfeeling heart, all the defects of his charader had been aggra¬ vated by lm profeflional fuccefs; arms have been proverbially faid ** to make bad men worfe." The remark may with much more truth be applied to the law. Attached to thofe whom he called his friends, only in proportion as they could ferve his views, or promote his intereft, he feemed to think he had a right to aggrandize or to gratify himielf by every means, and by all means, not even regarding the opinion of the world, becaufe he was certain that his abilities and his influence would always procure him outward refped, and he troubled himfelf very little to obtain private efteem. He had a iovereign contempt for the bulk of mankind, which might indeed be excufed by the facility with t 4 which
which he faw they were impofed uporï by cuftom, and enflaved by precedent. A libertine with regard to women, he thought the young and handfome highly honoured in being allowed to become objecis ofhis notice and favour; and as to thofe who had (on whatever preten¬ fions) acquired the name of fenfible women, he vehemently declared them to be his averfion ; and if ever he fpoke of or to them, it was with no other de¬ fign than to exprefs his conviction of the futility of their imderftandings, and en¬ force the arrogant fupcrionty of hi* own. To fuch a man Althéa's refufal muft of courfe give all that indignant pain which is inOicied by mortified pude. Sir Audley knew, that if once he fc It this acrimonious fenfation in all its ex¬ tent, it would be fo infupportable, that rhe paflion he now dignified with the name of love would probably be de¬ ftroyed by it; and her father had fo muck
much hope, that the obftinate refiftance of Althea would be conquered by a fliort probation in the melancholy feclu¬ fion of Eaftwoodleigh, that he deter¬ mined to try it before he acknowledged to the haughty fuitor that his applica¬ tion muft be wholly fruitlefs. Sir Aud¬ ley, however, was not very dexterous in difguhlng a fact fo obvious as Althéa's averfion : in hopes, therefore, of Lady Dacres's managing it better, he left it to her, and betook himfelf to his own reflections. Thefe were by no means pleafant. All the worldly fophiftry he could call to his aid was infufficient to fatisfy him that he was juftified in treat¬ ing his daughter fo harftily. He en¬ deavoured to perfuade himfelf that, in compelling her to accept of an offer which was in point of fortune fo advan¬ tageous, he only confulted the good of his daughter; but his heart and his con¬ fcience gave the he to his politics. Vet too obftinate to acknowledge himfelf m l 5 the
the wrong, and fo circ urn ftanced in re¬ gard to his domeftic arrangements, that it was hardly poifible for him to recede, he felt pangs which he could not ap¬ peafe, and heard internal remonftrances that he could not ftifle. As to his wife, whofe intellects, not originally ftrong, had been weakened by conftant indul¬ gence—fhe had very few fcruples about requiring any facrifice from others when her own pleafure or convenience was to be confulted. Accuftomed by the example of a purfe-proud father, and the fervile example of dependants, to value every one according to their pro¬ perty or their rank, fhe had infenfibly acquired a habit of forgetting that thofe who had neither were beings of the fame fpecies; while her refpect for affluence had reconciled her to the extravagant conduct of Mrs. Polwarth, though fhe was herfelf a prude, and to the dull profing harangues, and the tedious med¬ ley of fatire and fcience, which ihe eter» nalìy
nally heard from Lady Barbara —though fhe detefted fuch fort of converfation, and had no tafte for any other fociety than that which was colleded round a card-table. Every little narrow paifion of this fekifh woman was engaged againft poor Akhea, whofe beauty ihe faw univei fally admired—which might render lefs ftrik¬ ing that of her own daughters; and her avarice ftill protefted more vehemently againft the expence which would be in¬ curred by Althéa's appearing a* Mifs Dacres—an expence which the fbnder income at pi\ fent her own could by no means anfwer. The refped which the fervants feemed difpofed to pay her (for on them the gcntlenefs and reafon which always appeared towaids them could not fail of hav mg its inílue»»ce) was a continual vexation to then pi oud and ftately miltieL, vv ho miftook h uighii- nefs for dignity. But much more mor¬ tify ing was the fufpicion that Sir Audley L 6 himfelf
himfelf really loved his daughter, and was reftrained only by his fear of do¬ meftic contention from expreffing to¬ wards her the affedion he felt. Thus, if Sir Audley fpoke to her, Lady Dacres fancied there was parti¬ cular tendernefs in his voice; and ihe perfuaded herfelf that fhe had often caught him looking at Akhea vvith min¬ gled concern and fondnefs, when he be¬ lieved himfelf unobferved. To render this notion ftill more uneafy, it occurred to her, that as Althea extremely refem¬ bled her mother, he was in thefe inter¬ vals of fiolen indulgence tracing in the countenance of her daughter the ftill regretted remembrance of Akhea Tre¬ vyllian ; a fufpicion which never failed to occafion tears, fulle nnefs, and fome¬ times remonftrances: fo that Sir Audley was haraffed with complaints, importu¬ nities, and ill-humour; and whatever were his internal yearnings towards Al- ??? ? his peace obliged him to fupprefs· them >
them, fince he found it impoffible for her to live in the fame houfe with his wife, without fubjeding himfelf to the moft painful contentions. However different had been the charader of Siv Audley Dacres in more early life, he was now become a convert to thofe maxims, and had thoroughly adopted thofe meafures, which lead to the pof¬ feflion of power and fortune. The por¬ tion he originally had of the latter was fo fmall, that, after an indifcreet mar¬ riage of love, he owed his prefent flourifhing circumftances entirely to his more prudent choice of a fecond wife, and on the advantages he derived from it all his profpects of power and place were founded. He poffeffed two bo¬ roughs in right of Lady Dacres : and having thus acquired a nomination of three voices, together wdth his own, in parliament, he of courfe became aman of confequence in the political world ; and though he had yet no oftenfible poft*
poft, it was believed that he had ample compenfation for the expences of the fort of open houfe he kept, as well in London as at Capelitoke, for the ac¬ commodation and refort of that party which adhered to the e χι fling powers in administration. This arrangement, what¬ ever it was, had the vifible eifect of en¬ gaging him to receive all forts of people who could be made ufeful in the exißing circuvi fiance s. No man's abilities in political wrangling were more highly in repute than thofe of Mr. Mohun; no point, therefore, was more folieitoufly purfued by Sir Audley, and his employ¬ ers, than to attach him firmly to his party. He had, therefore, not only private but political reafons for wiihing to unite him to his family, and to relin- quifh all hopes of effecting this was one of the fevereft mortifications he ever was expofed to. Still unwilling however wholly to re¬ fign it, he endeavoured to prevent Mo- hun's
bun's being convinced of Althéa's de¬ cided averfion, flattering himfelf that a very fliort abode at Eaftwoodleigh would conquer this unfortunate obftinacy, and that flie would confent to be reftored to the comforts and pleafures of fociety on whatever conditions. in the mean time Althea received a note from her father, which told her in very harih terms that, after all that had paffed, flie could not be admitted to his prefence. She was directed, therefore, to keep her room; where, on the fol¬ lowing day, Mrs. Grimfby, the confe¬ quential and confidential houfekeeper, herfelf attended with her dinner; when, probably in confequence of diredions fhe had received, the portly gentlewo¬ man (who was compared by Akhea to Mrs. Heidclburgh aded by a ftroller) thus began : *' Lord, Mifs ! I'm quite forry indeed for this here fad affair—I declare it goes to my very heart to fee my good lady in
in fuch affliction; and foi cetani no¬ body can be more confai ¡wd io ι fuch famully troubles than I am." " 1 thank you for youi concern, Ma¬ dam," faid Althea, coldly, " and am forry to have been the caufe of any affliction to your lady ; but as I am going from hence immediately, the cauíc ol her ladvfliip's a^hüion, and your con¬ cern, vviil fortunately bc removed to¬ gether 5 — * Why now that is the very thing, Mib," whined the houiekccpei : ** ?? youi going as 'twei^. in Iuch a iad way ' and to hieb a place too.—I de- date, Mils, that from ail I've beai d about'it, and Thomas Jackíon, and Ro¬ heit the helper, they have loth onem been there; I declaie, that iho' mi f or* tins have obligated me to go to iarvb as a oufkeeper, I voud not go ior to live there, no not though Sir Audley voud make me ά prefuni of the land and ous, hout and bout ; why, I ihould die with the unkctnefs of the place." L l· m*
ír As I do not know what that is," l'aìri Akhea, fomewhat impatiently, " I tt ii ft it is not an evd wuh which I fliall be greatly affecied." " Loid, Mifs! why unkctnefs means dull, and fohntaiy, and moì\oncoììy y and fuch-hke. Befides, I've been told by them as knows that country parfitly well, that the famully as it laft belong'd too was faiilv drived out of tiie ous." " They certainly were," faid Akhea with a figli, " di tven out of the houfe— but whether fauly, 1 iather doubt." " Vv r c!l, then, Mifs—Blefs me! only thmk, after that would \ ou go to fuch a difmal kind of a place, and to live theie, as one may fay, all alone? Why, 1 put teit I'm all of a creep when I thinks of it." " Do not thmk of it then, Mrs. Grimfby," faid Akhea, duly. " W iti, Mii*, you know beft perhaps; but for my Ami e I own I can't but wonder, that inch a fine young lady, and
and one who might háve as 'twere all the world at her feet, fliould think of burying herfelf alive." 41 It is my father's pleafure," faid Al¬ thea; * ( audit is my duty to fubmit." " Ah! dear, dear!" cried the houfe¬ keeper, fliaking her curled head, " Sir Audley I'll be bound for it has no pleafure in it; and as for my lady, in all the time I have lived with her lad) ihip, 1 have never feen her ladyihip fo much caft down." " And did your lady order you, Mrs. Grimfby, to fay all this to me?" " No, indeed, Ma'am; my lady never opened her lips with any fuch order.— But it is impojfdbul for good upper far- vants in fuch ά famully as ours, not to know jumvnd of what is going forward ; and Mr. Addingreve and 1 have been a- thinking for fome time what a fad thing it was; but we was in good hope that you would have thought better of it. For to be fure nobody could fuppofe, when
when it came to the upfkotm that you would go for good and all to live among fpirits and ghofts, for they fay that it fwarms with 'cm," " í have never Ïnen any," faid Al¬ théa with a Anile, " nor heard of any body who has; and I like to make new acquaintance." " Well, for my fhare," replied Mrs. Grimfby, " if I did make new acquaint¬ ance, I am fure it fhould be among fleih and blood. However, Mifs Al¬ théa, I hope there is no harm done, Ma'am, in my jull fpeaking; iam fure I could not mean no other than your good; and as the old man's wife that lives in the houfe came here about an hour ago to fetch you, I thought per¬ haps it middent be too late—though to be Aire, as Counfellor Mohun is gone, it is likely that there is entirely an end of the matter." * f Is he gone?" laid Althéa, her eyes fparkling
fparkling with pleafure; " is he really gone ?" " Lord, yes, Mifs; I íhould hardly fay fo if he wasn't. I aflure you he went aw T ay this morning, almoft as foon as brack fu ft was done, and I heard that all talk of your being to be the Coun- fellor's lady was over. 1 am fure I am forry for it; for Mr. Addingreve fays, that he is fuch a clever man, that there's not one of all the great lawyers to be compared to him; and that as fure as can be, thofe who live long enough will fee him Lord High Chancellor of Eng¬ land." " I wifli he may," faid Akhea, "with all f my heart; and I am really obliged to you, Mrs. Grimfby, for informing me that he is gone, and that Mi>. Wansford is come to fetch me. Pu- haps you can tell me alfo what time my father has fixed for my d. pai ture from home?" "Why,
* t Why, as to that, Ma'am, to be fure I did hear fay, that the day after to¬ morrow was the very longeft Sir Audley thought proper for your ftay; but I was in hopes—·"— " There is no occafion," interrupted Akhea, *· for any delay.— My refolution will not change, nor will Sir Audley relent. I am ready, there¬ fore, to fet out to-morrow morning, if he directs it; for the child who is un¬ worthy of being admitted to the pre¬ fence of her father, cannot too foon re¬ lieve him by feeking the exile he con¬ demns her to." Althea faid this in a way which evi¬ dently tcftified fo much impatience, that Mrs. Grimfby, no longer hoping to make any impreflion, or to execute to any purpoie the orders fhe had received from her lady, withdrew with " Dear, dear, dear! Alas! how forry I am !" And Althea, who longed to fee Mrs. Wans¬ ford, who had been fo long the fervant of her mother, ventured to write a re¬ queft
queft ¿o Lady Dacres, that fhe might fpeak to her; and expreffing her ex¬ treme concern for having incurred the difpleafure of her father, fhe profeffed her readinefs to obey his orders—only moft earneftly entreated that he would not fend her from him in anger—but that before flie left his houfe he would fee her, and forgive an involuntary fault —the only one he fhould, through life, have occafion to reproach her with. The ftyle in which this billet was written probably gave to Sir Audley and Lady Dacres fome hope that flie might yet be brought to their purpofe, from the fear of offending her father beyond all hopes of forgivenefs, for it produced the following anfwer : " I am extremely forry, dear Akhea, that I cannot prevail on Sir Audley to fee you on terms of affection before you go. But he is fo irritated, that I dare no farther prefs it. He allows you to fee Mrs. Wansford. Why am I under ι the
the very difagreeable neceflity of adding, that he wiflies you to fet out with her to-morrow morning at a very early hour, unlefs you can determine to re¬ main a member of our iamily on terms which are advantageous to yourfelf, and therefore fo neceflary to the happinefs of your father ? i am, dear Mifs Dacres, " Moft truly yours, t( Eliza Dacres," To this Althea, with very little he¬ fitation, anfwered: " Since it will not be permitted me, dear Madam, to have the pleafure of fpeaking to you, nor the confolation of throwing myfelf at my father's feet, un¬ lefs on conditions with which it is im¬ poflible for me ever to comply, I can only teftify my fubmiffion to his will by acceding to the cruel alternative he has put before me. Be aflured, Madam, that were the facrifice of my life only in queftion, I would make it with pleafure; I would
1 would willingly die to oblige my fa¬ ther, but I cannot live miferably; I can¬ not become the wife of Mr. Mohun. " I thank your ladyihip for allowing me to fee Mrs. Wansford; and will pre¬ pare for my departure with her to¬ morrow. Dear Lady Dacres, intercede with my father to fend me his bleffing and his forgivenefs in writing, if he is indeed determined to drive me from him without allowing the coniolation of one affedionate word to his unhappy Al¬ thea." In a fhort time after having fent this billet, fome perion tapped at her door, and, on being bid to come in, Mrs. Wansford entered. This old fervant was fo much chanced fince Akhea had feen her fix or feven years before, that fhe would hardly have known her. The troubles and difap- pointments which had fo long purfued her, had changed her appearance more than time, and the heavy traces of care were
were deeply indented on her pale fea¬ tures. Althea, who loved her from re¬ collection as the faithful attendant of her mother, now confidered her as one who was to be almoft her only friend. She icceived her with tears, which, how¬ ever, flie immediately reprefled when flie Found the poor woman affeBed even to agony. It was fome time before Althea could prc\ail on her to bc more calm, and iome time longer before Mrs. Wans¬ ford could be prevailed upon to believe 'hat fhe confented even cheerfully to ,jt eompiny hc r to Eaftwoodleigh«
Vol, J,
CIIAP
CHAP. Χ.
Strange things, the neighbours fay, have happened here.
1 HE defcription which Mrs. Wans¬ ford gave Akhea of her future abode was not very flattering.—" Ah ! my dear young lady," faid fhe vvith a deep figh, * c You who have always lived in fo much comfort, and had all fo pretty and gen¬ teel about you with your dear aunt, will find it, I am afraid, a fad hardfhip to live at fuch a place as Eaftwoodleigh is now. To be fure ¡η times paft it was a houfe of great note, and they fay that the greateft Lords in all that coun¬ try did not afford fuch good houfe-keep- îng as there was at it j but, to my think¬ ing,
ing, all that makes the difmal ftate it is now in, a great deal more fad^—and in¬ deed, dear Mifs Althea, if I and my poor Wansford had not met with fuch loffes in the world as he has done, fo that we had no home for ourfelves and our children—befides being fo depen¬ dent on Sir Audley's good favour—we ihould have been very forry indeed to have gone to fuch a place------" " Oh! be not concerned, my good friend," replied Althea, tf on my ac¬ count, about the place—I fuppoíè there are rooms that keep out wind and wea¬ ther—and in the day-time I can aiways amufe myfelf. I intend to be fchool- miftrefs to your little girls, for I am afraid you have not much time to attend to them—it will ferve to divert me, you know, and will be doing them good." " That is fo like my late dear lady," interrupted the poor woman.—" Ah ! Mifs Dacres, how times are altered—I was going to fay, in this houfe !—But, m 2 however.
however, it was not here, tobe fure —nor yet in fo large nor fo fine a place; but I queftion whether Sir Audley, if he was to own the honeft truth, has ever been fo happy fince." " That is exatìly," faid Akhea, willing to turn the difcourfe upon her future abode, *' exactly, Wansford, what í have been faying, or at îeaft meaning to fay— that happinefs does not depend fo much upon where we are, as upon the manner in which we employ oui felves."—Mrs. Wansford anfwered only by ihaking her head, as if to fay, " You are yet young, my dear lady."—But Akhea, in no way difcouraged by the gloomy profpeet held out to her, was oppteifed only by the cruel reflection" that ihe ihould leave hei father's houfe without being allowed to fee him, and to exprefs that affection which flie really felt for him. One attempt more flie determined to make, and therefore wrote again to Lady Dacres, entreating her to intercede with Sir
Sir Audley that he would fee her before fhe went: but either this commiflion was more than the lady had power to execute, or ffie feared that Sir Audley rmght be too much foftened by his daughter's tears and diftrefs; for Akhea received no other anfwer, than that flic already knew her father's determinai i^« 1 , and that, though Lady Dae t es was ex¬ tremely forry to announce fuch unplea¬ fant intelligence, ihe had found it im¬ poffible to pievail upon him to relax, in the fmalleft degree, from the pofitive refolution he had taken. To Mrs. Wansford it was at the fame time fiVnified. that it was Sir Audley's pleafure fhe ihould be ready to depait as foon as it was light the next morn¬ ing—and with this cruel and pcremp- toiy order, Akhea, with a heart made moie wretched by her fathci's anger than by any apprehenfions as to her futuie abode, prepared to comply. m 3 Mrs.
Mrs. Wansford affifted in packing up her clothes, which were to be fent after her; and Althea, looking round her pre¬ fent apartment, where fhe liad now paffed ???? fix weeks without having tafted one moments pleafure, found nothing to regret in leaving it, but the picture of her mother (before which fhe had fo often fried tears), and the little inlaid deik which had belonged to her. She wiflied that her father would have in¬ dulged her with thefe two memorials of her loft parent ; they would have gra¬ tified her beyond any gift he could be¬ ftow. But fhe dared not venture to folicit for them ; and with the earlieft dawn of the morning flie took leave of thefe inanimate objects, as if they had been two friends whom flie was to fee no more ; and ftepping, with ftreaming eyes and a half-broken heart, into the chaife which waited for her, bade a long,, perhaps a laft adieu to Capelitoke. It
It was now the middle of Novem¬ ber; and the dark and gloomy morn¬ ing, heavy with fogs, which feemed to wrap every obj ?? in cold obfcurity, was well fuited to the beginning of fuch a journey, and to the difpofition of mind in which poor Althea undertook it. As the chaife drove round the fweep to get into the high road through the park, it paffed within fight of the win¬ dows of Sir Audley's apartment.—Al¬ thea looked up towards them, flattering herfelf that he would in fome way notice her departure; but the fliutters w r ere ciofed. Her father was probably deep funk in fleep, and thought not of his banifhed child. Cold and blank feemed every object to the dcfolate Althea; but this idea was the moft cruel of any—-and fo feverely did flie fuffer in believing that he thus caft her off, that it would have fubdued the dread of any lefs ir¬ remediable misfortune than that of being the wife of Mohun. When, however, m 4 flie
fhe reflected on the miferable fate that muft then await her, her fpirits became more compofed; though ftill to be thus» thrown from her father's arms, and ren¬ dered more deftitute than an orphan^ fince he who fhould protect her became her perfecutor, appeared fo fad, that her heart funk in defpondence, and her eyes ovei flowed with tears. The poor woman, her companion, naturally of a defponding temper, and funk flill more by misfortune and dif¬ appointment, fometimes wept with her, and fometimes made a fuccefslefs at¬ tempt to confole her.—-Their melan¬ choly journey was unmaiked by any incident. They remained the firft even¬ ing at Sidmouth, and the next morning, at an early hour, proceeded by Exeter to the place of thcir deftination. Between three and four in the even¬ ing they had reached an extenfive com¬ mon, which Mrs. Wansford told Akhea had once belonged to Eaftwoodleigh eftate,
cítate, and was not far from the houfe. The road, w inch was rough and much broken, led in an unfrequented track over the fteep inequalities of the ground, coveted with brown heath and tawny fern, with a few fcattered thorns, and faint remains, in other places, of neglect¬ ed plantations—and through the gloom of an evening fky in November the fea, though not above a mile and a half diftant, was not to be diftinguiflicd.' From this w T afte they entered an en- cloied ground between two maffes of broken wall, which were, Mrs. Wans- f>rd faid, the remains of a lodge once f rv ing as an entrance to the park, the fields they were now crofting being then the park itfelf. Mrs. Wansford pointed out to Al¬ thea three or four doddered oaks and pollard aih, venerable in decay.— " There," faid flie, " are the marks of feveral bullets, and one may ftill fee the great nails remaining which fattened to m 5 it
η a fquare plate of lead. The íhepherd boys have torn it down to make the things they play with on the turf; but it once contained a fort of epitaph, or account of one of the family of March¬ mont, who was killed near this place in the great rebellion—and thofe holes in the trees were made by the fame balls~ They faythat while old Mr. Marchmont ìived, he made a great point of the pre¬ fervation of thofe trees ; and they were even fpared when his neeefluies com¬ pelled him to cut down almoft all the fine timber on his grounds. The coun¬ try people have a notion," added fhe,, ** that the young man who was killed here appears near the place continually; and ît is not an eafy matter to get the men that work about the farm to come by this way of a night."—Althea, ort whofe ear the name of Marchmont never fell unheeded, had attentively liftened to this little narrative.—" I fuppofe," åaid fhe, whea Mrs. Wansford ceafed t fpeaking^
fpeaking, " that there are a hundred ftories of the fame kind told about the houfe itfelf; for Mrs. Grimfby, Lady Dacres's houfekeeper, attempted to im¬ prefs on my mind I know not what fears of ghofts and hobgoblins." " Ah! yes, Madam, there are ftrange ftories enough, to be fure, told of this place, as indeed there are about all fuch old 'lone houfes in the country—and certainly there are not many places more likely to give fuch notions than Eaft¬ woodleigh. But you may now judge for yourfelf, Mifs Dacres ; there is the houfe before us." " The houfe !" cried Althea—" Good Heavens! it feems like die ruins of an immenfe caftle.'' " Yes," replied Mrs. Wansford—" it is altogether very large ftill ; yet fome parts of it are quite fallen, and others are grown over with grafs and ivy, having never been rebuilt fince they were battered down in the civil wara." m ? Althea
Althea now Iooked earntftly towards tlie % r encrable pile they were approaching; and her companion, fuddenly ceafing her narrative, exclaimed eagerly—'* Ah ! there are Lucy and Nanny : they hear the chaife, and are come out to meet me—and there is my poor Ned leading little Fanny."—The mother's heart thus flown out to meet her children, Akhea was for a moment left to her reflections; while the chaife flopping, and the chil¬ dren approaching it, Mrs, Wansford aflted them many queftions about their father, who was, they faid, fo ill with the gout, that he could not come to help the lady out of the carriage, but that he had fent down to the farm-yard for one of the men. Akhea, however, wanted no help, and entreated Mrs. Wansford not to mind her, but to attend to her children, who came round her, each with its little hiftory of what had happened in her abfence, The
The good woman, with an apology for taking Akhea into what might bc called the kitchen end of the houfe, becaufe what was properly the great door had not been opened for fome time, now paffed before to fhew her the way—which was, except where the little communication of the houfe had worn a path, over-run vvith nettles and weeds, the growth of three or four fummers, which had eiapfed fince the Marchmont family were driven from the dwelling. This path led under a maffy gate¬ way, part of which was boarded up, into a court, round which the high and pon- deious wails of the moft entire part of the buildaig frowned in mournful gran¬ deur. By the uncertain light of even¬ ing, the buttreffes, with long ftone- framed windows between them, pre¬ fented altogetker fuch an image of a prifon, that Althea ihuddered as flie went on. Through a large and high- vaulted paffage, an old worn door let them
them into the room that ferved the pre¬ fent inhabitants for every purpofe but fleeping. A fcreen of boards, which were put up to intercept the winds that gathered in thefe paffages, prevented Althéa's immediately feeing the poor invalid fervant to whom Sir Audley here afforded an afyium.—His wife was already hanging over him with anxious folicitude, hearing how fadly helpiefs^ his lamenefs had made him in her ab¬ fence, and how well his Nanny and Lucy had acquitted themfelves in help¬ ing him, when Althea approaching, he tried to nie, and welcome her to Eaft¬ woodleigh; but a fenfe of his own in¬ firmities, and of the fad contrail be¬ tween his fituation now, as well as that of his young miftrefs fince they tait met, ftruck fo forcibly on his mind, that, inftead of fpeaking, he burft into tears. Althea* though her heart funk heavily, ????? cheerfully to him; forbade him to attempt Handing* and faid ihe was glad to
to fee him looking well, though he was fo infirm. "Ah! my dear young lady,*^ faid Wansford, " thb is a fad place for you to come to : indeed I could never have thought hh honour, Sir Audley, would have fent you hither !—But we will do the beft we can for you—for both my poor woman and I would lay down our lives to ferve you." ίζ I fliall do well enough, my good friend," anfwered Althea— u be in no concern about me.— Come, I (hall take poifer&on of a chair by your fire.—Make no ceremony with me," continued fhe, perceiving that Wansford felt awkward at fitting before one on whom he had been ufed to wait; " I am not now your young lady, Wansford, but your lodger." The poor man, unwilling to truA his voice with an anfwer, remained filent % and Althea, but little difpofed for con~ verfation, furveyed the room where he £at, If
it had once been a fervant's ball, and was fo hrge and high, that its tcimina- tion and its ceiling were now alike ob¬ fcure—for the only light in the room was fiom a fire of wood and peat in the chimney ; a cavity of fuch dimenfions, that it feemed able to contain a modern country villa, fuch as fpring up in rows near London.—The great beams of darkened wood that furrounded it were coaifely carved, and in the centre were the arms of Marchmont—of little better w T orkmanihip : they had once been painted and gilt; but fmoke and time had lon¿ fmce obliterated their luftre.— lhe ftone pavement was biokcn *n va¬ rious places, and repaned with bricks? a great oak table, fupported by legs which might well be called timber, was placed along two fides oi the room, and ferved for depofiting the vai ious houie- hold utenfils of the family.—Akhea did not fimfh her furvey without being fen¬ fible that, if the reft of the houfe corie- fponded
fponded with this part of it in difmal- nefs and magnitude, it would require all the reaion ihe poifefied, and all the for¬ titude fhe had collected, to make up her mind to her dediny. In a few moments Mrs. Wansford came, and faying that there was now a better toom leady to receive her; that there was a good fue, and that her tea was ready; Akhea, though flie was really more difpofed to remain where flie was, followed her hoftefs, who did not, as fhe feared, lead her far from the general abode of the family j but merely along a paííage which led by a carved door into a parlour—not very large in pro¬ portion to the hall flie had left. One end of it was entuely occupied by an itmncnfe window; but there was a cur- ram of old-fdfhioncd Decca work that drew round the lower part of it : the wainicot was in thofe httle iquares which aie ftill not unfrequently leen in old- faftaoncd houles; and all along the fide, opp ohto
oppofite the chimney,, feeraed to be preffes, though the wainfcot was the fame as the reft. An old plan of the eftate and houfe painted on vellum, but almoft effaced by time, hung over the fire ; and in another part was a genea¬ logical tree of the Marchmont family. Upon the* whole, the appearance of this room* though far from being cheerful, was much lefs difmal than Akhea ex¬ pected. There was a lively fire, and candles on a fmall table near it. A clean country girl was waiting.—Akhea obferved that ihe looked at her as if greatly furprifed to fee her there.—· Being difmiffed, Akhea defired Mrs. Wansford and her children to partake ofherrepaft; while relieved from the appreheniion of having been fent to a place even lefs comfortlefs than had been reprefented, fhe became eafier, and once more looked forward without defpond¬ ence. That
That part of the houfe, however, which ftie was to go through to reach her bed-chamber was lefs flattering-— fo large was the gallery-like paffage that led to the ftairs flie was to afcend, that flie feared to carry her eye to the end of them. This ftair-cafe, which was not the principal one, led to an apart¬ ment, which Mrs. Wansford affured her was one of the moft comfortable in the houfe; it was, however, fufficiently large and gloomy, and the little furniture that was in it was a ftrange mixture of rem¬ nants of former magnificence, and the plaineft articles in modern ufe, fuch as the common labourer would purchafc; the gilding and carving in feveral parts of the room witneffed the expence that had once been laviihed on it; but very com¬ mon paper had now taken the place of the tapeftry or damafk hangings, and a piece of the former fupplied the place of a carpet. Altheai
Akhea furveyed the room widi a look w hieii Mrs, Wan-íoid could not inter¬ pret into ? look of approbation.—■" I am aiiaid, ? ? d\irett Mil ," h.id fhe, (i that you thmk vour at ? nmiod uions very uncou^foitable heic: but I afluie you it was { ^o 1 i j ft I eould do for vou; and 1 have Î4Î.II ctmtii\ing a». d tonun iiig e\u" hnee f firft heaid oí ^ our coming hither, and whatever theie was left about this unfoitunatc oil pi iee 1 col¬ lected together, and took the beft of it for this room.— 'Tis, to be fine, but pooi 1 v furnifhed itili for \ou ; and 1 am an aid \ou will find it ddmal cold—but, lowevcr vour bed is aired, for I've made my two little gii L lie upon it, and here has been a fire in the room thefe three or four days: î heaitdy wiih, how - ????, that things were better." Akhea, fony to iee the good woman thus concerned, endeavoured to appear leis ib hericlf-—and afluí ed her the ι oom was
vas even better than flic expected.— ** 1 have only one wifh about it," faid Althea; " 1 hope it is not at a very great diftance from that where you and your hufband fteep ; for though I have in ge¬ neral no fears, it is impoflible to tell what fooliih fancies may enter one's head of a night in a ftrange place, and efpe¬ cially fuch a place as this, in almoft everv lumie there are noifes either fiom wind or from vermin, wdiich, when once a pei ion is ufed to, or can account for, give no alarm—but to a ftranger they are unpleafant; and if 1 fliould be made uncomfortable by them, î fliould not be forry to know where to find fome living creature." Mrs. Wansford allured Akhea, that the room where fhe, her huiband and children fiept was only the third door down the paffage, on the oppofite fide. Akhea defired it might be pointed out to her ; and being fatisfied that flie was not very far removed from them, flie returned
returned to her allotted apartment for the night, and in that confidence which innocence always gives ftie recom¬ mended herfelf to Heaven ; and, re¬ tiring to her bed, foon forgot the vexa¬ tions which had lately worn her fpirits, and flept undifturbed till morning.
CHAP.
CHAP. XL Sunk, arc thy bowers in ihapclefs luin all, Asid the long; grafs o'ertops the mouldering wall; While trembling, fhrinking, from the fpoilcr's hand, Far, lar away, thy children leave the land.
1 HE girl, who was now taken into the houfe to affift Mrs. Wansford, awakened Althea in the morning by coming in to make her fire.—Roufed to a fenfe of her new fituation, íhe felt content with having paffed a tranquil night ? and arofe in a difpofition to fee every objed around her, however dreary they might be, in the moft favourable light.—The fadf- fadion which her honeft hoft and hoftefs expreffed at feeing her look well and cheerful, and the grateful delight they took
took in talking to her of thofe happy days when they lived with her mother, ferved to ftrengthen Akbea's fanguine difpofition.—-She looked around the in¬ habited part of her abode—it was me¬ lancholy enough, but the faces of the inhabitants were the faces of friends — of people really interefted for her wel¬ fare, and fuch as flie had not, for a very long time, been accuftomed to fee.—- The morning was leis gloomy than i? ufual fo late in the year—and Althéa, looking from the Gothic windows, en¬ deavoured to picture to herfelf what the landfcape before her would be, when its prefent mournful hue was exchanged for the verdure of fpring. The country around indeed would have been Angu¬ larly beautiful, if the unfeeling rapacity of the creditors had not long fmce ftripped all the land that formerly be¬ longed to the Marchmont family of its ancient woods, and even of the trees in the hedge-rows that were fit for fale. — The
The iron ploughíhare of oppreflìon, ín the form of law, feemed every where to have pafled over the domain—and Al¬ thea could not but recollect with a figh, that the heir to this once rieh and ex¬ tenfive property was now an unhappy dependant, without having even the moft moderate portion of it left for his fup¬ port.—From this reflection it was a na¬ tural tranfition to wifh fhe could know what w r as become of this unfortunate young man—but it was a wifli flie had no means of fatbfying. The people of the houfe knew the family of March¬ mont only by name ; they were pro¬ bably more known in the village about three miles diftant, which their hofpi¬ tality and expenditure had formerly fup¬ ported, and which, fince they had quitted the neighbourhood, was falling to de¬ cay. But thither Althea could not well go abruptly to make enquiries; and flie knew nobody but the family of Ever- Voi. L n fley
fley wha were acquainted with that of Marchmont. Whatever injuftice and tyranny there had been in Sir Audley's treatment of her, Althea had fo proper a priele, as well as fo juft a fenfe of the duty flie ftill owed her father, that fhe had never complained to the very few corre« fpondents fhe had—nor had fhe, as moft girls fo fituated would have done, in¬ formed Linda Everfley, "journal wife," of her calamitiesr—but had fimply told her, that it being neither Lady Dacres's wifh nor her own fhe fhould accompany the family to London, fhe was to re¬ main at Eaftwoodleigh for fome time.— Cabals againft her father would, fhe knew, have been extremely blamed by her dear and ever lamented friend.— She had therefore avoided writing any letters but thofe of mere civility; and if flie murmured, it was in filence, or in an apoftrophe to the fpirit of that friend,— Many
Many and dreary were the hours to wiiich Akhea was to look forward, before the return of fine weather was likely to afford her even fuch variety as might be obtained by vifiting the neareft vil¬ lages, wandering among the copfes, or towards the fea, which fhe faw at a dif¬ tance—and though ihe felt an intereft excited by the interior of her antique prifon, which could have happened in no other place, ihe had been two days in it before fhe could acquire refolution enough to enquire about the uninhabited apartments of the houfe; to every one of which Mrs. Wansford told her a ftory belonged.— <t Though, for my part, Madam," faid fhe, '« you know I am but a ftranger in this country, and I cannot fay I have had much curiofity even to afk about this old caftle-like houfe, which, till you came, I am fure I thought the difmalleft unket place that ever I fet my foot into; and God knows, nothing but the want of a home, and n 2 our
our fear of difobliging Sir Audley, would have made Wansford and I think of coming to live here. If 1 had been fearful and timorous as many people are s it would have been a harder matter to have reconciled me to it ; but, fo*" my part, I think, that if one has never done any harm, one may fleep quiet in one's bed, let what will be the ftories that go about. I believe it is nothing but the nonfenfical notions of the people about here; for, excepting the wind, which does make ftrange howling« and whiff¬ ling round the buildings (but fo it does round all old houfes), I declare I never heard any thing I could not very well account for; though I cannot but fay, that when I firft heard you were to come here, I thought it a ftrange thing indeed for Sir Audley to fend you. Madam, to fuch a forlorn place!—Ah! well-a-day! if my dear lady had lived, how happy we fliould all have been!"—Althea, who was foftened by this expreffion of regret for
for her mother, and her fpirits depreffed by the very means Mrs. Wansford had taken to raife them, had btu little cou¬ rage to continue the converfation: turn¬ ing it however once more on the hiftory of Eaftwoodleigh Houfe, fhe told her, that the firft fine day fhe would go all over it. " Indeed, my dear Mifs," anfwered Mrs. Wansford, " it will be no fmall undertaking, for it is a great deal bigger than it appears to be—and, for my part, I don't know half the ways about it.— There is an old woman who lives in a fmall cottage on the edge of the com¬ mon, next the grounds that they call the old park—a cottage that they fay was made partly out of one of the lodges, where the family formerly kept her very well out of gratitude for her paft fer¬ vices; butfir.ee they have been in trouble themfelves, the parifli officers have talked of obliging her to go into the woik- houfe, though I never beai d íhe was n 3 chargeable
chargeable to them yet. So fhe has lately, poor creature! kept very clofe. But, when firft we came here, it was cuftomary for travellers who had cu¬ riofity about this houfe, becaufe of its being a famous place in the civil wars, to have old Mary Mofely fhew them about the place ; for, having been a fer¬ vant in the family I don't know how many years, flie knew all the old ftories that belong to the houfe."—Akhea, who felt more curiofity than flie was willing to avow for every anecdote of the Marchmont family, and who thought there would be a melancholy pleafure in converfing wdth this their humble and ancient hiftorian, defired that Mrs. Wansford would engage this old fer¬ vant to come up to the houfe to rcfume once more her long-negleded narrative, and the next fair day was fixed for this purpofe. Althea, however, in making this requeft, did not think only of the gratification of her curiofity : the hoped that,
that, finali as her power was, it might be enough to give fome little relief to thb poor folitary creature, who, fince her former benefactors were no longer able to fupport her, feemed to be expofed to the complicated miferies of poverty, age, and neglect ; or, what was yet worfe, to the unfeeling tyranny of pariih officers, more grievous to the defolate victims of extreme indigence, than that want which their interference is intended by the law to remedy. In the mean time Althea, who had fent for the collection of books left her by her aunt, and which had been de¬ pofited in their cafes in the houfe of the elder Mrs. Everfley, was bufied in con¬ triving how they might be placed, and in making fuch other arrangements as would make her abode the moft cheer¬ ful and comfortable.—Wansford, lame as he was, undertook to be the chief manager of all thefe operations ; and wiiile Akhea was telling him how fhe n 4 would
would have the fhelves, or giving him any other dire&ion, he would ftop in the midft of his proceedings to fay, in faltering accents, and with tears rifing m his eyes, that in voice, in manner, in look, flie was fo much the image of his dear lady, her mother, that he fome¬ times could not help fancying that it was her very felf !— The weather, wdiich during the firft week of Althéa's arrival had been only a fucceffion of ftorms, now became more tolerable.—Mrs. Mofely, having had previous notice, was fummoned to her taik —and Wansford was fent round the houfe to open the doors, fome of which had not been un¬ locked fince every piece of furniture that was worth taking had been torn away by the rapacity of thofe who had judgements againft the elder March¬ mont, and little but fome pieces of antique and ufelefs lumber, and fome old piduies and maps on vellum, was left
left with the difmantled houfe for the ???1??<???. The appearance of Mrs. Mofely im¬ mediately interefted Akhea in her fa¬ vour Poor as flie was, flie was re¬ markably neat; her ilender figure was bent with age, and, as it feemed, with trouble—and the little hair, that ap¬ peared under her clean plaited cap, was quite white.—The only remnant ofthat drefs which had been allowed her in the affluent iervitude of better days, was a black velvet cloak, ftill quite frefth—- And though the 1 ? it did not anfwer to tii i-s piece of once expenfive apparel, ihv.ro was fomething about her fo re- fpecuble, that Abdica could haidly hi Ip fancying ftie was one of the family, re¬ ferved amid the general wreck as the. authentic chronicle of its buried merit. If her looks thus excited reverence, her manner ferved to confirm it.—Theie was nothing about her of the vulgar goffipping old woman.—Almoft every n 5 paflion
paifion feemed to be fubdued in her heart, except affeBion for the family fhe had fo long ferved.—Inured to difap- pointments and forrows, fhe bore what related merely to herfelf with the calmeft refignation, and was never heard to complain of her foilorn and comfortlefs fituation. But when the ruin of her mailer's houfe became, as it too often did, the fubject of vulgar triumph, and among the very tenants who had grown rich by his indulgence, but who now paid their court to Sir Audley Dacres, the poor woman for a moment forgot her moderation and mildnefs, and could hardly refrain from the bittereit re¬ proaches, however prejudicial they were to her, who was greatly in the power of the renters of the panfh, in which flie was reluctantly fuffered to linger out the few fad years that remained. This fort of conduct, and her making always a cleaner and better appearance than her ilender means were fuppofed 2 able
able to afford, together with her having very little communication with any one, except when a fick neighbour wanted her afliftance, had raifed fundry ftrange reports and opinions about her in the neighbouring country. The lower clafs of peafantry were not without fome fuf¬ picions of her being a witch, though whenever they faw her at all it was in the exercife of charity and kindnefs.— Some of the farmers, and full more their wives, had taken up a notion, that among the viciffitudes to which the houfe at Eaftwoodleigh had been expofed du¬ ring the civil war, feveral fums of money had been hidden in it, or buried in the adjoining grounds; and that Mrs. Mofely was in the fecre*, and fupplied herfelf in this manner with comforts, which to keep concealed, ihe ihut herfelf up from all intercourfe with her neigh¬ bours, and affeded poverty fhe was far from really fuffering. ? ? Impreffed
Imprefled with this idea, fome of the honeft and fapient leaders at the veftry had more than once threatened to re¬ move her to the workhoufe, under pre¬ tence of their fearing flie would become helplefs and burdenfome ; and though till fhe actually was fo, and folicited re¬ lief, they had no legal right to difturb her, yet as ihe was a folitary and helplefs being, they ventured to harafs her with menaces, in hopes that in her eagernefs. to remain where flie was they might extort the fecret from her: at all events, their malignity was gratified in having the power to torment and terrify one, who, humbled as fhe was, and never above the rank of an upper fervant, feemed to confider thefe thriving men, their wives and daughters, as inferior people. Thofe who have imagined that at a gieat diftance from London there reigns Arcadian fimplicity, and that envy, de- i traction,
traction, and malice, only inhabit great cities, have been ftrangely miiled by ro¬ mantic defcription. Every bad paflion of the human heart thrives as luxuriantly under the roof of the old-fafliioned farm-houfe, two hundred miles from the metropolis, as in that hot-bed itfelf; and iome are even more flourifhing —Igno- lancc is a powerful auxiliai y to feandal, and a thoufand exaggerations are added by the illiterate to the talc of ill-nature—· abjed poverty is no defence. The very wretch who fubfifts on cafual alms is fometimes the objed of hatred and ca¬ lumny to thofe who believe they have a better right to the charity on which he lives; and fo many inftances of this de¬ pravity occur, that one wiflies what the poet fays was ftridly and invariably truer-
Heaven's Sovereign faves all bcuigs but himfelf That hideous fight : a naked human heart. YOU.NC.
When
When an ancient family is gone to de¬ cay, and the opulent creditor feizes on the eftate, the few fervants that remain attached to their reduced mafter are ufually the avowed though impotent enemies of thofe that come into pof¬ feffion of what he has loft. Mrs. Mofe¬ ly, on this principle, detefted the very names of Sir Audley and Lady Dacres; and had ihey fent for her to give an ac¬ count of the antiquities of Eaftwood¬ leigh, flie certainly would have refufed to have attended, however fhe might have wanted fhe half-crown, which, on fuch oecafions, was her ufual fee : but when ihe had heard as much of Althéa's hiftory as Mrs. Wansford chofe to tell her, and underftood that fhe was fent from her father's houfe by the cruelty of her mother-in-law, fhe hefitated not a moment, but offered her poor and trifling fervices with an earneftnefs and a fimplicity that entirely won the heart of Althea. So
So feldom had this poor woman an opportunity of talking over thofe paf¬ fages of her paft life which dwelt the moft forcibly on her memory, that fhe feemed relieved and gratified by having found, in Althea, one who not only pa¬ tiently liftened, but by many queftions relative to the Marchmont family en¬ gaged her to continue her narratives.— Mrs. Wansford had left them to go about her domeftic concerns ; and poor old Mrs. Mofely, already forgetting that fhe was to fhew the houfe, was telling at length the hiftory of its former pof- feffors. " A moft worthy and brave race of noble gentlemen they were," faid fhe; " and though their loyalty and all the blood they loft, and the great fortune they laid out in the King's fervice, never got them a title, I have heard it was becaufe they never would accept of one.—1 have thought fometimes, Ma¬ dam, that this was a great pity, as things have
have turne out ; for I have heard that Lords and great men who have titles, let their family be ever fo much re¬ duced and poor, are always taken care of by the King. But there's our poor dear young man—a gentleman, Madam, who, if you were to fee him, you would fay w r as fecond to none of the firit noblemen in the land, yet nothing is done for him—though his family have been undone by their attachment to the Royal caufe. I am fure, whenever I think of him—when I remember, at the time he was born wdiat rejoicings were made, and how my dear old mafter, with tears in his eyes, thanked my Lady for the precious prefent flie had made him—how they both doted upon him as he grew up—and how my poor mafter, even latterly, while he tried in vain to fliut his eyes againft the ruin that was coming upon him, lamented it chiefly on account of this dear fon, and yet was ftill willing to flatter himfelf that he was fo
foaccompliíhed, fo clever, that he would repair all by hisown merit:—ah! Ma'am, when all this comes acrofs me—-(and I think of it, God knows, every day of my fad life)—and when I know how different things are with my dear young mafter—how little his parents thought ofhis being a poor wanderer, as I may fay he is now, without a home, and without friends—my heart aches fo, that I am fain to wiih I could lay me down and die at once, if it pleafed God!-— that I might know no more about it, nor hear what cruel cutting things are faid of this dear good young man by thofe who are not worthy even to look at him!" Sad remembrance, mingled with wounded pride and affedion, here over¬ came that catmnefs which time and ha¬ bitual fuffering had taught her. The aged ihed not many tears, but her voice failed, and ihc fobbed aloud. Akhea could fay nothing likely to mi¬ tigate
rigate concern fo juft —and at once pained by the recital, yet defiring to hear more of Marchmont, fhe continued filent, till Mrs. Mofely, having a little recovered herfelf, went on : "Ah, Madam! what ftrange changes a few years make in families!—When I came, then a young girl, to wait on my dear lady—it is indeed almoft five-and- forty years fince, before fbe was mar¬ ried, though ? feems but like yefterday— there was not a family within twenty miles of this place that were looked upon like them. My lady too was of a good family in Dorfeiihire, but flie had no fortune—my mafìer married her for her beauty—and beautiful as the day to be fure fhe was!—As tall as you are, Ma'am, and much of your fize. There were five fifters of them, and they were called the Dorfetfhire Angels; but Mrs, Marchmont was allowed to be the hand¬ fome ft of them all. There were two of thofe ladies, her fifters, tbat married no¬ blemen*
bîemen, and their children are now great people. But they take no notice at all of their near relations, becaufe they are poor!—Yet how they can harden their hearts againft fuch a relation as my young mafter—a man that a king might be proud to own—I have no notion of------And then if they did but look in his face ! He is fo like his mother, Madam!— Jult her mild open counte¬ nance, and fine eyes—one would think every body would have a pride to ferve hkn, and to own him as their relation.'* Akhea couid hardly reprefs a me¬ lancholy fmile at the ideas this poor woman had formed of the force of kindred aniong the great ; and at the amazement ihe expreifed that none of his affluent relations efpoufed the in¬ tereft of a young man whom, as he was poor, they probably did not know even by name ! " But it is not merely, Madam, his fine and noble perfori," proceeded Mrs. Mofely,
Mofely, " but his being fuch a young man at all forts of learning, that he might do any thing, I am ve* y certain,. if he had but friends to help him for¬ ward at firft. And then there rever was fuch a good temper, nor fuch a generous heart—ah! too much fo! Even to the laft, Ma'am, he and his dear mother and lifters have fent me what they hardly had enough of themfelves; and to this xery hour it is to my good young matter that........" She flopped—as if confcious that her gratitude had nearly conquered her pru¬ dence, or perhaps betrayed her into a breach of promife.—Akhea, however, from what flie had faid, gueffed that the fupport fhe had, and which Mrs. Wans¬ ford had faid occafioned fo much won¬ der, and fo many difadvantageous con¬ jectures, really came from the generous pity of Marchmont towards the old fer¬ vant of bio family. Theie needed not this trait ofhis character to intereft her iu
in his favour. Yet fhe felt all its force. The loquacity of her new acquaintance, far from being exhaufted, feemed to ac¬ quire new fpirif, although chaftifed by many cruel recolledions, as flie led her over the houfe—once the fcene of hof¬ pitality—" Now to the duft gone down.*'
CHAP.
CHAP. XII.
Ye towers fubííme, deferted now, and drear* Ye woods deep fighing to the hollow blaft* The mufing wanderer loves to linger here While Hiftory point» to all your glory paft.
ALTHEA followed her condudrefs into a high and vaulted room, of which the greater part was in ruins, for the coppers and other fixed utenfils of an¬ cient hofpitality had been torn away and fold; and as the kitchen was no longer ufed, no care had been taken to replace the bricks, or repair the walls. Be¬ yond it was the buttery — and Mrs, Mofely bade her remark how the hatch was worn------ « There,"
" There," faid ihe, " I have ofte^ though it was not indeed ????? my bufinefs, given away the weekly dole to folks who then wanted it bad enough, but who fmce have got up in the world, fo that it makes one feem dreaming as it were to think of it.—Yes! the very man who has bought all the bwer woodland farm, and built that fine itdriiïg great houfe, that you might fee as you came along on the hill, a little beyond Shard- brook corner, that very man was a little ragged dirty boy, who has many a time come for his family's dinner to this very wicket. My good mafter took pity upon him, and fent him to fchool— when he was big enough, he made him a fort of clerk, and took him into the fteward's room to learn to keep ac¬ counts, and after that got him fent out to the Indies; and about five years ago he came home worth fuch a mint of money, that they fay he could biiy out half the gentry of the country. Well ! I have
I have heard, that when things sot f ? bad here, my miftrefs, though fhe could not prevail on my mafter to do it, yet wrote herfelf to this Sowden, to defire he would let them have a loan of three thoufand pounds, which flie thought, poor lady! would have put things to rights; but he had the bafenefs, the in¬ gratitude to fend her a rude denial.— He! that little dirty boy, that owed his all to Mr. Marchmont's bounty ! and now he has had the impudence to buy part of that eftate that was fold by the aifignees!" Young as Akhea was, there was no¬ thing new to her in examples of the worthleflnefs and ingratitude of man¬ kind. Her veteran Ciceroni, who had feen fo much more of the world, yet feemed fo keenly to feel this inftance of it, that Althea, forry to perceive her emotion, wiihed to turn her mind from the indulgence of fentiments fo bitter; and therefore, complaining that the place thev
they ftood in was very cold, fhe defired her to pafs on. Before they went, however, Mrs. Mofely bade her obferve a place in the lofty ceiling, wdiich flic faid was a fort of trap door, communicating with the private clofet that belonged f ? the apartments of the lady of the houfe; who, in days when vigilant ceconomy fuperintended the foiemn and regulated hofpitality of an ancient Englifli kitchen, was accuftomed to overlook from thence the proceedings of her domeftics. Re¬ flecting on the different ufages and man¬ ners of the prefent time, Akhea followed her infirm guide through thofe parts of the houfe ihe had been ufed to, to others which fhe had never yet vifited. The way was through a long paffage, now nearly dark ; for the great window at the end of it was boarded, and the door that led from it to the principal part of the houfe bricked up : this had been done, that the range of uninhabited Vol. L ? rooms
rooms might be confidered as a feparate houfe, and might not be liable to be taxed for the windows ; the fame prudent precaution, to avoid the window tax, had nearly darkened the part of it inhabited by Wansford. But on the oppofite fide a door opened to the once-walled court, and from thence they went round to the porch, or great door, which, long unac¬ cuftomed to turn on its maffy hinges, had been opened by Wansford for their reception. Althea now found herfelf in an immenfe hall—" Here," faid her conducirefs, " at thefe long tables, wdiich though of oak are now fo much de¬ cayed, were daily affembled, during the great Rebellion, above three hundred armed men ; they were difciplined, clothed, and fed by Sir Armyn March¬ mont, who was knighted in the field by King Charles the Firft ; and from hence were led the fifty horfe, who juft before the battle of Braddock Down went out againft a party of Cromwell's army that approached
approached the houfe; and the brave Edward Marchmont, the fecond fon of the family, fell in his father's park. His mother, who doted upon him, died broken-hearted a few months after¬ wards; and from that time they fay Sir Army n himfelf never feemed to enjoy life, though he lingered on for three or four years, and continued to the laft to defend this place, and keep it as a gar¬ rifon for the King." Althea, while flie liftened to this de¬ tail, compared the paft vvith the prefent ftate of the place in which fhe ftood. No loyal and bufy crowds now wore the ftone pavement : it was hidden vvith mofs. Ihe two windows, which at one end reached from the ceiling to within three feet of the floor, were partly boarded up; the fame glafs yet remain¬ ed ; bin through the broken panes the ivy, which luxuriantly mantled the ex¬ terior of the building, had made its way, and was advancing to line the <> 2 broken
broken walls. The chimney, over which there was again a carving in oak of the arms of the Marchmoms, was larae, even in proportion to the room. But inftead of blazing now with hofpitable fires, it was a receptacle for the fiore of turf and billets which Wansford had provided for the end of winter; and in feveral other parts of this great room there were piles of peat put there to dry, and of bavins and brufh wood. No¬ thing could give a ftronger idea of de¬ folation than this gloomy apartment; vith it, however, the adjoining rooms, into which it opened, perfecily corre- fponded. "Thelafteîfthefe/Mrs. Mofely faid, <( was once called the council-room ; a name," added fhe, "which it ftill retain¬ ed in my late honoured mailer's time, who ufed to relate with pride and plea¬ fure, that here were held thofe delibera¬ tions by the fuccefs of which the Queen Henrietta Maria efcaped from Exeter, and got fafely into France. And above is
is the room where her majefty flept for three nights. This houfe too had the honour of receiving the Prince of Wales ; when, after the battle of Nafeby, he was forced to fly to concealment in the Scilly iflands, beyond the coaft of Cornwall. That flight was planned, in this council-room, by my mailer's an¬ ce ftor and fome more of his faithful fervants." Nothing now remained in this cham¬ ber but a very old heavy worm-eaten oak table; filence and folitude had long poífeíled it : and as Althea followed Mrs. Mofely up the great ftaircafe, and the loofe oak boards feemed to tremble under their feet, the found ran along thefe empty apartments, and was re¬ turned in dull murmurs by the bare and mouldering walls. Oppofite the top of the ftaircafe ap¬ peared a large folding door, with a heavy pediment of wood-work over it. 03 It
Jt gave entrance into a room not very inferior in its dimenfions to the hall. « This," faid Mrs. Mofely, as flic tidied towards Akhea with fomething of increafed dejection in her counte¬ nance, *' this was ufed to be called the banqueting room. I do not indeed know why; for in my time the family never ate in this room; but it was here that they ufed to receive their company; for once it was very richly furnifhed, though indeed the furniture was even then very old fafliioned." Althea caft her eyes around this fcene of former gaiety and fplendour, now dreary and deferted. The ceiling had once been curioufly íluccoed in large copartments; but the fwallows had at prefent a colony among the cornices, and great projecting rofes. The room was wainfeoted, and orna¬ mented with carving and gilding; now much defaced and broken. Around the chimney had been rich andmafly fcftoons, of
of which enough was left to íhew that they had originally been fplendid and expenfive. Of the furniture little re¬ mained : in one corner fome heavy picture frames were piled together; and in a fingle frame which ftood againft the wall was a damaged picture, repre¬ fenting a lady in the coftume of the court of Charles the Second. The coun¬ tenance was remarkably pleafing, but penfive, and even dejeBed. " It is the picture," faid Mrs. Mofely, ** of the grandmother of my late mafter, who was a great beauty in her time; and it was done by fome famous painter of that day, as I have heard : but my me¬ mory is not fo good as it was—-I have forgotren his name. It was going with the reft of the pictures ; but the men who took them down tore it, fo that the dealer from London who bought them left it behind. If troubles had not come fo faft on the family," added ihe, ·· my dear young mafter meant to have fent ? 4 the
the man the value of it, and to have had it mended. — But now!—Ah! no!— there is no likelihood that he ihould ever have a houfe large enough to hang up fuch a picture. He would have been very glad, dear foul ! to have purchafed the reft of the family pieces, and fome others, that every body fet a great value upon, particularly two fmall oval pic¬ tures, one of Lord Falkland, and an¬ other of Sir Charles Lucas, both famous men, and one of them the bofom friend of Sir Armyn Marchmont : but when my poor young mafter talked of re¬ ferving of them—Oh! Madam, if you had feen the brutalitv with which that auc- tioneer man treated him !—But fo it is ! Such upftart creatures may be rich, but they are never gentlemen—nor know how to behave as fuch." To this natural remark Akhea very heartily aflented; and having gazed a moment on the faded reprefentation of forgotten beauty, íhe turned to follow her
MARCHMONT. her guide through the long fuite of un¬ explored rooms. In the firft, a fmall anti-room, were the broken remains of a large theorbo, which was former¬ ly a fafhionable inftrument: the other rooms, originally bed-rooms, were en¬ tirely deftitute of even the remains of furniture, fdve only that a fragment of tapeftry yet hung againft the walls of one of them, and reprefented a- group of grim and ghaftly heads. Mrs. Mofely related, that many of the rooms had been ornamented with curious hangings, woven with hiftory pieces; u and it was," faid fhe, " fuch old-fafhioned it uff, that it was not worth the taking by the vultures that plundered every thing elfe: but after the iamily went away, the farmer that took to the farm for Sir Audley Dacres came to live for a while in the houfe ; and he chofe, for¬ footh ! to pull down all the arras to make horfc-cloihsof, and to hang againft the fiable windows." ? 5 Akhea
Althea thought there was lefs to re¬ gret in this than in any other inftance of the dilapidations the houfe had fuf¬ fered; and as only naked walls and difmantled window fliutters prefented themfelves, fhe thought her examination of this half-ruined edifice neariy finifh¬ ed : but two of the wings were yet to be furveyed.—I n one of them, with a fort of mournful pride, Mrs Mofely pointed out the room which had once afforded a tempora t y flieker to fugitive royalty : a circumftance that feemed to create great reverence for that apaitment :n the mmd of the old feivant, but u had not now even the remains of fur¬ niture. Ihe impreffion the whole iur- vey had made on the mind of Althea was io melancholy, that ftie wiihed it over; but her conduct refs, moving flowly back through the apaitments flie had already travei ícd ) led the way aerois the top of the ftair-cafc, towards what might radier be culled a narrow gallery than 2 a paííage ,
a paffage, into which feveral rooms opened. " Here," faid flie, entering one of them, " here languiihcd, and at laft died ofhis wounds, the only brother of Sir Armyn, who was ihot through the ihoul¬ der at the battle of Stratton. All the range of rooms on this fide were inha¬ bited by the family. That at the end has been nailed up for many many years, till it was opened by the bailiffs with their execution. 1 wonder they were not afliamed of themfelves ! But it was all one to them! Down came the bed, the flowered damafk hangings, and all, all the furniture—though it could be worth hardly any thing, becaufe the room was fo damp from having been fo long unopened." " And why was it locked up?" faid« Akhea. " Only, Madam, becaufe it had been reckoned unlucky to the family time out of mind almoft; and my lady ufed ? ? to
to fay, that there were rooms enough in the houfe, and fhe did not like to be the firft to open this. This apartment was that belonging to the only daughter of Sir Armyn; one of the fineft young ladies that could be feen. Pier father, her mother, and her three brothers, al¬ moft worfhipped the ground flie trod upon ! She had lovers enough ; and if ihe was like her pidure, which was among thofe that were carried away, fhe muit have been quite an angel. When ihe was about feventeen, juft before the breaking out of the troubles, fhe was engaged to be married to a young gen¬ tleman, one Mr. Eftcourt; he was the only fon of a rich family, now all gone and difperfed. That houfe all fo new and flaring at Hooper's common is built upon a part of their ground, but the old manfion has been pulled down a long while. The young lady and he loved one another very truly; when, alas! the Rebellion broke out, and this gentleman's father,
father, himfelf, and all his relations took part wdth the parliament againft the king; whereupon Sir Armyn command¬ ed his daughter to think no more of her lover. But, poor foul! that was, as they fay, eafier faid than clone. She wrote a letter to him, and entreated him, if he would not break her heart, to quit the party of thofe wicked men—but he fent her word he would die with pleafure for her, but could not confent to lofe his honour, or to ferve a tyrant; for fo he had learned to call his rightful king. This letter, as ili-fortune would have it, fell into the hands of the lady's father, who thereby came to know that his daughter had written to her lover. He was more angry than ever, and declared to the poor girl that he never would for¬ give her if ever flic attempted to fend a line to him again. She promifed flie would not, and kept her word ; but from that time flic became quite dejected, and feldom fpoke to any body, unlefs it was
was to her favourite brother Edward, he who was killed in the park. That very morning before he went out, the poor young lady, as if flie had forefcen what was to happen, hung about him weeping for many minutes, indeed the enemy were fo near, that there was reafon enough to be frightened: but ihe, unhappy girl ! knew that Mr. Eftcourts houfe was a garrifon for the parliament troops, as this was for the king; and that very likely her lover was among the foldiers her brother was going out to metu Her brother, though he loved her very dearly, would not feem to un¬ derftand, that, as well as fhe dared, fhe begged him to fpare Eftcourt if he met him : but fhe was as much afraid of Eft- court's killing her brother as of her brother's killing him. She neither fpoke or ate that whole day; but when the dead body of Mr. Edward was brought home, ihe infifted upon having it carried into her room, where, as it was foon known
known that he was quite gone (for a bullet had paffed through his heart), fhe fat by him till he was buried, taking no more nourifhment than juft enough to keep her alive; and then, without a murmur, or a complaint, fhe took to her bed in the fame room, and grew worfe and worfe, till in about a fortnight flie died. They fay, that when her father knew that flie was in fuch danger, he re¬ pented that he had been fo harfh, and offered to fend to Mr. Eftcourt, who had not it feems been in the attack where M*. Edward Marchmont was killed; but the poor young creature faid it was then too late, and that flie would not have the unfortunate youth come only to fee her die. After he knew fhe was dead he became quite diftraded ; and, feeking to die alfo, he fell covered with a hundred wounds at the fight of Landf- down. His father, whofe only fon he was, did not outlive him long, and the whole houfe and family went to decay. So
So the fervants that lived here, and the country folks, fancied that the fpirits of all th fe unfortunate people ufed to meet in that room on certain evenings of the year, there to lament themfelves; and I have heard fome of thefe notions were caufed by the Cavaliers-, who, when their party was quite ruined, were hid about in different places till ttiey could make their efcape out of the kingdom. How r - ever that was, from one thing to an¬ other fuch ftories got about, that one would not inhabit the room, and an¬ other would not, till at laft it was quite deferted and fliut up." Akhea, whofe heart funk as this fad narrative was concluded, felt no incli¬ nation to violate again this abode of traditionary forrow, but followed her condudrefs into another room, which Mrs. Mofely told her had been the bed¬ chamber of the late Mr. Marchmont. " Here," faid flie, " I attended him in that long iilnefs, which, though İt did not
«ot end in his death then, yet he never knew an hour's health afterwards. Ah ! how well I remember the look, the voice ofhis excellent fon, who ufed to remain by him whole hours trying to raife his fpirits and comfort him ! Then, when the fad profpect was too much for him¬ felf, and he could not hide his fears that his father would be dragged away, fick as he was, to prifon, he would go, Ma¬ dam, into this clofet to conceal his tears, and bade me to tell his father he was writing to this friend and that friend, who he was fure would aflift them; but he was fometimes quite loft and bewil¬ dered, as it were, iu thinking of all the diificukies and troubles that furrounded his family. He would lay down his pen, and, crofting his arms upon an old wal¬ nut-tree writing deik that ftood juit here, would remain quite like a ftatue, till he thought his father might want him; tben try to recover ? m felf, would go again
again to the bed-fide with a cheerful countenance," The figure of Marchmont was at this moment fo prefent to the memory of Althea, that fhe thought fhe really faw him leaning dejectedly on his deik. The place feemed fanciified by the for¬ titude and filial piety of its former inha¬ bitant; and not deterred by the duft and cobwebs with which they were covered 9 ihe (looped and took up one of the five or fix torn and mouldy books that lay- in a corner. One was a Greek tefta- ment, which from the date and name had evidently ferved Marchmont at fchool. Another was part of a dictionary that appeared alfo to have been of that juve¬ nile party; and the laft, a manufcript book, with fome trauflatious and ien- tences from the French, Latin, and Ita¬ lian, which feemed to be in the fame hand-writing as the name written in the book. The reft were only old acts of palliamene
parliament, and a few leaves of the Likon Bafilike. Akhea felt an irrefiftible defire to poflefs herfelf of thefe books, 'and eager¬ ly enquired whether flie might not take them to her apartment. "Aye, fure!" replied Mrs. Mofely; u but they are fad dufty old things, and good for nothing, I fuppofe, or they would not bc left here : and they are in fome foreign tongue. But perhaps, Ma'am, you can underftand them." Akhea, without accounting even to herfelf for the motives which made them appear fo defirable an acquifition, col¬ lected them in her lap, and expreifed a wiih to end her view of the houfe here. Indeed there was nothing more to fee, if there had been lioht for her fai ther ex- ? animation; for though the inilitary man and the antiquary might have found in many of the iow f cr rooms fubject s for their enquiry, Akhea had heard nearly all that moft interefted her; and the little mournful
mournful narrative of the unfortunate Eftcourt and his intended wife, fimply as it was told, was to hep more affecting than any relations oF the progreA of a fìege, or a plan of defence. Warlike details always exciting fomething of a terror mingled with difguft; but the name of Marchmont earned with it par¬ ticular intereft. Every memoiial round the houfe was a proof of honourable refiftance of his anceftors again ft what they confidered as the ufurped power of rebellious demagogues. To theie, there¬ fore, Akhea liftened with untn ed atten¬ tion; though flie v\ould on any other oc- fion have ihrunk fiom detail·» of hoftile operations, which, however difguiícd by circumftances or motives, are itili but details of horror. During her incomplete furvey, howr¬ ever, the attention ihe had fhewn, and her fweet and eafy manners, had quite engaged the affections of her new ac¬ quaintance Mrs. Mofely, to whom flie
gave every ref¡ cih ment ibe would accept* and made her a prefent much above her expectation;». It then became time to take her leave; but the poor old woman could haidly prcv ad upon herfelf to de¬ pait. İt wdi long fince ihe had heard the voice of kindiKİs —it was long fince a being retembliiig diole ihe had been ufed to fee had liftened to her iorrows, and relieved her wants; and to her Akhea appeared rather an angel than a human creatine, when with the moft humane confideration ihe aflured her, that the next fan ??? ihe would vifit her fob tai y cottage; and that while fhe was in that neighbourhood it fliould want none of thofe fmall comfoits which, far as flic wds from being affluent, flie had yet the power to beftow.
FN0 OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
