Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The confessional of valombre: a romance
TUK Ciwfessio/iu/ of Vaíomhre. t/ CHAP. I. iho α ο:ι ν ης men dotlHscıkm- tur revenge. SUAHLM»£ARï İT was at the close of the festival of St. Fabian, when the last sonorous tone of the organ had ceased, and the pale glim¬ mer of the tapers had expired, when na¬ ture had sealed the eves of fanaticism, and even the viini virsiin had ceased to о о watch, that a stranger paused at the gate of the convent of Valombre. The stilly gloom of the hour, the hollow moaning VOL. Ι» В Of
of the blast, the darkened concave of the heavens, from which no star, no casual reflection of light was emitted, recalled to mind the object of his embassy. He started—he drew from beneath his cloak a dagger; and as he grasped the hilt, as carefully he replaced the folds of his habit, burying under their dark disguise the burden his left ггт supported, a fiendlike smile distorted his visage : he cast a scowling glance around ; his mind seemed pregnant with some weighty mat¬ ter ; he looked the slave of impulse—he felt the man of blood. "Pity is transient/' he muttered ; " down, down, damned weakness ! memory, be thou the goading spur of action; revenge, be thou eternal/* Again the dagger was replaced in its sheath—again he listened, fearful of detection. The rolling waves of the
the Garonne sullenly bubbled o'er their pebbled bed, and the wind whistling among the leafy branches of the cy¬ press, lentous, and cork-trees, bent their tall heads to the flood. He pressed his spread hand upon his forehead ; he passed in review the deeds of other years ; fancy peopled the gloom, and imagination iired his brain to frenxv. cť Pardon/* he articulated— ** can the victim of prejudice—can the bleeding slave of oppression—-can the injured Лире of power plead mercy ? No, no, blood shall avenge the deed—blood/' dropping on his knee, and again unsheath¬ ing the dagger—·" blood, by the awful powers of eternal wrath ! blood shall ap¬ pease the memory of Ermissende ! Yes, in his heart I will seek the secret—What if he hesitate ?" stardng; "then—then в 2 be
be Ermissende the ransom of life. Na¬ ture, I disclaim thee—Nature------" and every power of his mind seemed awaken¬ ed ; love, hatred, revenge, horror, des¬ pair, alternately racked, alternately sub¬ dued. One moment the tear of com¬ miseration dried upon the burning cheek of rage ; the next beheld it chased by some new start of pasjon. Again he rose ; again, with breathless haste,he approached the gate; hegrasped the bell—Firnissende flitted before him ; his eyes closed against the self-created phantom : but the calm of death was brok¬ en ; the hollow peal echoed to the vigo¬ rous pull, and theturretted towers of fhe monastery returned the deep vibration. Again he paused, but short was the reign of suspense; he traced the faint gleam of a light descending the opposite tower; he heard
heard the sound of approaching foosteps, and an instant after a voice addressed him. •'Who art tho:ir" demanded the monk, 41 that at an hour so unsalutjry, thou d stürbest ïhe deep repose of our holy d »veiling ? f * " A wanderer and a sinner," replied the stranger: iť a* the n\>,t, I claim a sanctuary ; as the second, ï would sue the blessed privilege of confession* Fa¬ ther, í have travelled far; sorely laden with the burden of sin, a lowly penitent, I approach the hallowed shrine of Va¬ lombre : contrite, subdued, there would 1 pour into the ear of the holy abbot of this fraternity the long-smothered tale of a black, a foul transaction/* * f The abbot slumbers/* rejoined the в 3 monk·
monk. < ( Welcome, my son, within the sacred pale of religion's sanctuary ; but till the morning dawns o'er the eastern hills ------" "The morning," interrupted the stran¬ ger. u Father, you know not what you say; father, ere yon ebon clouds------" He paused, shuddered, then quickly re¬ sumed—" Man of God, this nicht, this close of the festival of St. Fabian, 1 тич be heard; this night the slumbers of tlie abbot St. Theodore must be breken ; this night, or never, the taie of horror must be told.'* " This night ?" repeated the monk, " Forbear, my son , nature demands re¬ pose. Scarce an hour has elapsed, ere closing the rites of our order, we quitted the chapel. The slumbers of exhausted street h
strength are heavy—^the slumbers of the abbot St. Theodore must not be dis¬ turbed/' **' Then the tale of murder shall be smothered/* exclaimedthestranger, ^nei¬ ther shall the injured be appealed/* He retreated a fev pares; he seemed to commune within himself—then suddenly returning, artfully said— iC To seize the enemy of faith, to silence the sacrilegi¬ ous blasphemer of religion, to quell the doubts of scepticism, to enfranchise the \ictims of error, surely a follower ot Christianity, a monk, a disciple of pri- nicva! purity, may exert the influence of ze;/, may embrace the powers of oppor¬ tunity. Father, now is the hour to un- tloa'c hypocrisy ; father, ere the clock strikes two, the avenged and the avenger shall be at rest : father, lead me to St· u 4 Theodore—
Theodore —breathe but the name of Er- mis&ende—shew him thisrin^jr—Tell him — nay, stay, sta) —tell him," gasping, and almost breathless, i( I bring with me a claim, indisputable, irresistible ; tell him *tis mercy, 'ti> justice which impels this interview ; tell him, this night alone the life of innocence can be spared/' " Peace/' rejoined the monk, u your looks are wild, your words incoherent. Alas ! my son, calamity has tinged the colour of your ideas, and jaundiced every thought with horror." t( Calamity !" muttered the stranger, with a convulsive laugh ; " true, call it calamity ; but lead me to St. Theodore. The air is cold, the night is comfortless -^-father, I crave shelter—charity in the type of faith, and yet am I shivering beneath the walls of Valombre/' Ί he
The dour was unbtrred ; the stranger sprung forward ; he followed the monk air oss the court-yard, nor, till he reached the entrance of the сЬдре!, did he for a moment pause: then firmly grasping the cloak of his gui le— * ť Not one step fur¬ ther,** ho c4ciaimed, t{ no, not one. Fa¬ ttier, 1 have made a vow ; father, my oath is deep, is irre verüble. 1 have sworn tuner tí) rest beneath the conse¬ crated roof of religion until mv con¬ science is unburdened—father, the weight is heavy, the forfeiture к death. This night—this festival of St. Fabian, 1 will await the abbot. Go, s»o : mv soul sickens; bring him to the confessional, for the moment for action advances." (< I will attend you to the confessional/' replied father Betsolin; t€ ¡ f my son, will в э listen
listen to the tale of sin ; I will explain the promises of salvation ; I will------" "You!" interrupted the stranger; " oh no ! mine is no common crime— mine is no casual trespass of morta li tv : no venal fault craves the light penance of absolution, or fades before the offer¬ ing of prayer. Tis deep—'tis hidden— 'tis in the heart it must be deposited—'tis on the heart it must be impressed/* The monk pointed to the confessi¬ onal. The stranger moved towards it-— (( I will away to the cell of the abbot/* said the monk; " yet," returning, and again approaching the mysterious intru¬ der, (t what language shall I use ? what plea shall I educe?" " This ring," said the stranger, ex¬ tending one towards him; "this ring. will
will speak a language not to be miscon¬ strued. Shew him this ring, and tell him> the burdened soul of the owner pines foT absohïîîon. Yet stay," reading doubt and hesitation in the strongly-marked features of the rettgiettr: "when the ab¬ bot St. Theodore looks at this ring, tell him the Anger upon which it once spark¬ led—tell him, Frmbsende—tell him the eHicidation is mine/* The monk quitted the chape!, and the stranger cagerh ascended the steps of the confessional. He pausedon the summit; he listened to the gradual retreat of the father, and when the last faint echo sank in silence, a mingled smile of irony and triumph succeeded. cť Some say, man is the slave of circumstances, the sport of accident, the creature of chance," he muttered— (f no } no, it is not accident, it в 6 is
is not chance which has brought me to Valombre; it is love—it is that predis¬ posing power which governs all my ac¬ tions, which colours all my hopes." A faint light flashed on the opposite wall ; a side door opened, and the abbot St. Theodore entered the chapel. His step was agitated.; the dignified firmness of resignation was fled ; his head was un¬ covered, and İn the place of his habitual smile of benignity, might be traced anx¬ iety and amazement. In one hand he held a taper ; the other grasped the ring delivered to him by the father Betsoiin. The stranger, wrapping himself in his cloak, shrunk within the darkened shadow of the confessional. The abbot approach¬ ed— " Ermissende !" he faltered—" mer¬ ciful Heaven ! ah, guard my heart against the coming trial í Ermissende ! lost, wretched
wretched Ľrmissende ľ* lie paused; trembling he clung to the railing» for the quick, short breathing of the stran¬ ger bespoke interest bordering on ago¬ ny. Animated by a new and instantane¬ ous hope of elucidating at once all that he desired to know, the abbot sprung forward—he reached the summit of the atairs—he stood before the stranger : si¬ lence and darkness remained, for the door of the confessional was closed.
CHAP,
CHAR IL Can such things he, And «percome u= } like a ?ui:m:,' r\ cha.a. Wiiliout utu >pecbi %%on*lť-rr SltAbE^l'ÍAIií'. " Infancy, the miniic îfîi;v;ery of nut tire, ГЬе r^ili'ctucuiurui «if the iiiiiiOït bout, ï*ti ps forth, ut;J itíU'Üy "j'c.tk- the at?iibat(-s nn;;Mi." Long had the confessional been closed ; Ion<i had the abbot St. Theodore been elesetted with the stranger* an hour and an hour rolled away, and the deep si¬ lence in the chapel was unbroken. rf, Tisstrange î" said the monk Betsoiin, as stealing from his cell he hurried down the passage, The broad glare of day burst through the storied windows: he looked towards the east; he saw the sun's golden splendour tinging the purple bo¬ som
som of the clouds, and dissipating the murky vapours of night's departing rei^n ; he saw the pendant dewdrops hanging on the rich blossoms of the pomegranate, and sparkling with a thou¬ sand variegated reilections : he heard the warden's embowering clusters echoing the wild noies of grateful nature; and ^w mvriads of rhe feathered race per¬ ched amonit its leafv branches. Yet did О J he proceed, for (he stranger and the con¬ fessional was the spur of action, as the lon^ and mvsterious conference filled him with dismay. lie looked at the clock : it was on the stroke of two when he disturbed the repose of the abbot St. Theodore; and now r , twice had its re¬ volving hand noted the hour's limitation. The brethren were already stirring, and the monotonous tinkling of the matin- beli
bell echoed the call of devotion. c< Holy ¥ Mary!" aspirated the monk, as, crossing himself, he entered the chapel : he stop¬ ped irresolute, for a faint cry reached his ear. He listened—it seemed like the moaning of infancy—-it proceeded from the confessional. He trembled aslie ap¬ proached the steps; again he paused, for the fathers of Valombre now* entered the chapel. 'Tis true, the abbot vSt. Theo¬ dore was absent ; but vet the orbativi- ¥ О bra ted the hymn of praise : as its loud full tones, dying to the softest, sweetest modulations, gradually ceased to breathe, and the chaunting accompaniment of the monks closed in the sacred calm of de¬ votion, a second cry, more loud, more piercing than the former, filled every heart with pity—every face with wonder. Intuitively several of the monks rushed towards
towards the confessional ; but the father Betsoiin had already mounted the steps, had already opened the door. Horror and dismay succeeded—murder had profaned the holy ordination—the stranger had Hen —the abbot St.Theodore, pale, sib?, ghastly, lay stretched upon the floor, and on his bosom, smeared with blood,andclingingas though for succour, they beheld an infant boy. A shriek of imploring earnestness burst from the lips of the little sufferer, as his tender hands grasped the coarse serge of the abbot's garment, Father Betsoiin raised him in his arms : but short was the moment of caressing fondness: the infant stranger was resigned to the care of a lay-brother; and all thoughts, all assiduities, all exer¬ tions, reverted to the lifeless superior. Alas ! no feeble pulsation of the heart fluttered
fluttered beneath the pressure of anxious affection—no sigh passed hi'* lips—no faint indication of lingering existence. Deep and vital was the wound : still was the bright blade of the dngger sheathed in his breast ; and his hand, though mar¬ bled in death, grasped the mysterious memento of recognition. long numbed, as it were, by the overwhelming influence of horror, a deep languor, a supine inactivity, pre¬ vailed among the brethren of Valom- bre : au-e-struck, the v razed at each ' J Ö other, though each alike v»· a s incap¬ able of exertion ; and not tii! the sun had reached its meridian height was the murderer thought of, was the murderer sought after. instantly a new pursuit prevailed : hope for the réanimation of the abbot had expired, and zeal, not to colour
colour devotion with the mortal passion of revenge, spurred on to seize the sa¬ crilegious hypocrite, who, under the guise of piety, in the very precincts of immaculate faith, had crushed the plead¬ ings of Christian charity, and martyred the officiating servant of Heaven. But vain proved every exertion : though each corner of the monastery, though each woodv sien, though each rockv de- file was diligently examined, night clos¬ ed on the researches of the fathers, with¬ out one ray of light beaming on the path of the proscribed. Dav after dav alike 1 J rose in exertion, alike closed in disap¬ pointment; and the sad remains of the murdered abbot St. Theodore were con¬ veyed to the last silent receptacle of mortality, pitied, deplored, but una¬ venged. Time, which assuages the pangs of anguish.
anguish, which blunts the arrows of affliction, which wipes even from the widowed cheek the burning tears of cor¬ roding woe, and in the aching heart of orphaned sorrow implants resignation and acquiescence—time restored to the calm current of devotional exercise the holy brotherhood of Valombre. But the boy ? my readers inquire—The boy was the bequest of Heaven—the boy was the charge of the father Betsoiin. A foundling, and unknown, deserted, friendless, destitute, at the baptismal font the name of Theodore was revived, and given by Christian sponsors to a new and innocent candidate for Christian hope. Nurtured beneath the monastic roof, ele¬ vated, even in infancy,to the divine wor¬ ship of religion, hb hopes and his wishes, his joys and his anticipations, reached not beyond the prescribed limits of the con¬ vent
vent walls—reached not beyond the pi¬ ous praise of the virtuous father Betsolin'. By him, the warm, the glowing energies of sensibility were awakened; for he had catched the first smile of pleading helplessness; he had coloured the first tint of dawning grat itu de. But though examples of divine resigna¬ tion, of patient endurance, of sublime sa¬ crifices, of heroic virtue, were constantly set before his eyes; though the depravity, the ingratitude of man, was talkedof with¬ out resentment; though the meek humili¬ ty of the sai r. t prescribed patience under injury/gentleness and fortitude, even under suffering, shame, and death, yet at times would the nature of Theodore, would his warm and ardent feelings, be¬ tray an impatience, which threatened even the overthrow of monkish controul, and
and which resisted the erudite dogmas ot monkish reasoning. Then alone the heart mii4 be assailed to quench the glow of passion ; ami then alone the efferves¬ cing gust would pass away, hushed upon the parental bosom of father Betsolin — would lose its aim, nav, its very betnir— would become the meek and vieldinsr convert to obedience and conviction. Conscious that the delineation of the hero is the darling theme of an author's panegyric, yet will 1 not seek to deci¬ pher the internal movements of Theo¬ dore s soul, lib; character was scarce formed, because his character had ne\er been called into being ; it wanted but the animating hand of opportunity, to stamp it great, magnanimous ; it wanted but incident and circumstance to arouse its energies, to give it all the fortitude, all
aH the sentiment, all the substance of cqutfv, moderation, and virtue. Kre ten revolving masses hadstamped the \ early commemoration of the abbot St. Theodore's murder, an incident, if not worth) of being recorded, at Íea -Л suffx- cicni to evince that no common soul ac¬ tuated the mind and conduct of the found¬ ling, occurred at Valombre. At the extremity of a serpentine walk, cut through the close intwin¬ ing branches οΐ sombre evergieen^» in the nhdst of a grove of e\ pres**, weep- 1пц birch, and cedars of Lebanus, was scited a small building, originally а watch-tower, to command the rocky passes to the monastery, but now, un¬ der the inspection of the father supe¬ rior, converted into a chapel sacred to his own meditations. The contrast to his predecessor,
predecessor, a commanding and imperi¬ ous demeanour guised an innate worthi- ness of heart ; and the abbot Augustin frequently incurred the smothered mur¬ murs οι .he community, because he waa too proud to relax from the dignity of his situation: fear, not love, consequent¬ ly actuated the conduct of the monks; and respect, not confidence, duty, not inclination, enforced the claims of au¬ thority. ¥ Within this chapel, thus dedicated to pråser and self-scrutiny, the play¬ ful foot of vouth was forbid to filter: Theodore had explored with scrutinizing eve the deep intricacy of the grove ; but Theodore, on pain of deprivation and disgrace, was interdicted crossing the threshold. As he was one day reclining upon a bank of moss, immediately be¬ neath
neath the walls of the chapel, wondering at the restriction, which pride held sacred, but which curiosity strongly urged him to violate, he perceived not the captious approach of Nicholi the gardener. Smil¬ ing at the apparent abstraction of his young favourite, the old man plucked an apple from a neighbouring branch, and incautiouslv flung it, not with the intent * iß * of alarming, but of arousing him. The unfortunate apple, winged by the very god of mischief, shivered the storied window directly over the altar-piece, and fell into the chapel. Theodore started. Old Nicholi turned pale. ťí Ho!y saints!'* he ejaculated, <ς I have sinned beyond pardon—I shall be driven with disgrace and shame from Valombre." " Do not fear," whispered Theodore; "' ï will not betray you/* ▼ol. и с Nicholi
Nicholi fled, for the opening of the chapel-door succeeded. Theodore shrunk not within the sheltering umbrage of the grove, but stood undaunted, though in the presence of the angry abbot. ť * Pro¬ fane, sacrilegious boy!*' exclaimed the superior, holding forth the luckless in¬ truder, " know you this apple?" (e Yes, holy father," mildly replied Theodore, "it grew, a few minutes ago, upon yonder tree." if And your unhallowed hand/' sternly rejoined the monk, " aimed it at the very altar of my devoticns." (ί Not my hand, father in God," said Theodore, " but the sport of accident." "Accident!" incredulously repeated the superior, sternly viewing a firmness which appeared to him the effects of ef¬ frontery. " Fie, fie, Theodore! seek not
not by subterfuge to hide your wilful and malicious intentions; nor, to screen a fault, fly to the mean, the sinful expedi¬ ent of falsehood." <c Falsehood!" echoed the youth, his proud heart swelling, and his cheek flush¬ ing the crimson of indignant anger— " Falsehood! Father, had I been capable of the charge, I might, by flight, have evaded voursuspicion—Falsehood !-------" t4 Who then hurled the apple t'* inter- ι up fed the abbot. 1 have answered you/' replied Theo- doi e. *· Goto your cell, and learn respect/* angrily exclaimed the abbot. (i Bov, you have defaced the chapels consecrated al¬ tar, and shivered the holy image of a martyred saint—go to your cell, I com¬ mand you, and there await the punish* г - -ment
ment my justly-offended clemency may award." Without the slightest appearance of fear, with a countenance firm from prin¬ ciple, not the too common bravado of spirit, Theodore quitted the grove. Re¬ gret for the anger of the abbot had given place to indignation for the suspicions he had breathed : his blood boiled ; his heart felt too big for his bosom ; he longed to stand forth arrayed İn all the native innocence of his character; yet to screen old Nicholi, he determined to brave even an apparent de\iation from truth ; he determined to persevere in si¬ lence, to endure punishment without a murmur ; for he felt that oppression is bearable, when the soul is incapable of dishonour. While Theodore was buried in the solitude
solitude of his little chamber, the talc of his supposed aggression was told and retold amonit the brethren, and his ob- stinacy and artifice discussed and con¬ demned. His judges were stern, because being themselves dead to venal trespasses they knew not how to excuse an error which bigotry swelled into sin. The consecrated window of the chapel was broken., and playfulness and inadverten¬ cy were poor pleas for a result so inau¬ spicious; nay, even father Betsoiin, blinded by appearances, mournfully ac¬ quiesced in the condemnation. The little culprit was summoned : no tear bedewed his cheek ; no relaxing ìndica- tion of contrition : he looked a hero, as boldly he stood before his accuser. The story was again repeated, and his perse¬ vering firmness again displayed. He с 3 spoke
spoke not in defence: numbers and cir¬ cumstances were against him: he looked at father Betsoiin, but no approving smile animated his features: once the monk whispered, u Theodore, acknowledge your fault;" but Theodore's reply was a glance of proud superiority. The trial was closed; the sentence was decided ; for a whole week, Theodore was to be banished the societv of the fathers—for a whole week, Theodore was to know no relaxation from study. " Why are you so undaunted ?° in¬ quired father Betsoiin, tracing no change in the countenance of his young charge. €( Because I am innocent/' firmly re¬ plied Theodore, The monk shook his head, and the boy retreated towards the door. u Stop, stop," exclaimed old Nicholi, who,
who,, entering at the instant, forcibly re¬ conducted him to tbe abbot. " 'Twas I who threw the apple—'twas I who broke the chapel-window;" and then panegyrizing the persevering ge¬ nerosity of the youth, he recapitulated the incident. Father Betsoiin snatched Theodore to his bosom, and Theodore burst into tears. f( Why do you weep ?** demanded the delighted monk. " Because," sobbed Theodore, ' f old Nicholi thinks I cannot bear punish¬ ment/·
с 4
CHAP.
CHAP. ÏIÏ. What I am U bin thy gift: make what thou canst of ıtır , Secure of no repube, Dry d ι ν* « Öİı ! be huah'd, Ve dictates of my ever-torturing v e¿uson : Let me not think. Haywood. Abstruse and unceasing were the studies of the young Theodore: no compulsion, no argument was necessary to point out the tract to knowledge : blessed with a judg¬ ment which wanted but experience to stamp it erudite ; blessed with a heart stored with every emulous, every noble qualification, he would kiss the chasten¬ ing hand of affection ; he would thank the lips of discriminating error. 'Tis true, at times, the playful frolic of youth would relax the native pensiveness of thought ;
thought; yet had custom tinged every idea with gloomy seriousness; and what gained birth in example, soon strength¬ ened into confirmed habit. His chief amusement consisted in the culture of his little garden, in the conversation of fa¬ ther Betsoiin, and in exploring the clois¬ tered maxes of the monastery. His eyes never vvearied in perusing the moulder¬ ing monuments of departed worth; his heart never sickened at the calls of de¬ votion ; neither did his mind wander, in sanguine impatience, beyond walls, which from infancy had been his boundary, and which, though familiar, created not dis¬ gust. Excluded the benefits of enlightened society, shut out from social change and polite intercourse, confined solely to the converse of men, who, from misfortune, с 5 from
from caprice, or from misanthropy, had forsworn all the incitements of pleasure -—all the claims of consan&uinitv- —all the allurements of friendship—all the delusions of love—Theodore, with the softened sadness of melancholy, had im¬ bibed a deep, a propelling tincture of romance, which coloured every action of his future life; which left his heart open to impression, and his mind alive to quick and dangerous susceptibility. Sometimes life offered no charms be¬ yond the cowl's negative existence ; sometimes fhe awe of devotional rites, the thrilling ecstacies of enthusiastic wor¬ ship, conquered every sensation, and ele¬ vated him to the highest pinnacle of di¬ vine rapture : then again, Nature, strug¬ gling against the usurpation, would re¬ deem her empire, and something more than
than religion would colour the sigh which wafted from his soul. Alas! he had yet to learn the force of passion, the tyranny οΐ love ! Alas ! he had yet to learn the sleepless nights, the tear- bedewed pillow of hopeless fascination— he had \et to feel the pleasing pangs of infant inthraiment, and smile at a bon¬ dage, which for life would he not forego ! God of nature ! he had yet to learn, that nan's boasted prerogative of reason is but a feather in the scale of preposses- Γιοη ! Ever pliant to the calls of affection, »ver grateful to the thrill of tenderness, fheodore would fly, with pleasing name- ess attention, to the melancholv haunts >f father Betsoiin, whose countenance, nd whobe pursuits, evinced more than a ommon distaste for the world—would с б tìy,
fly, in the hours assigned to amusement and recreation, to support the steps of his valued preceptor—to awaken a smile —to rob corrosive sorrow of one fester¬ ing pang. The monk, grateful for the rich har¬ vest of his own unceasing toil—grateful fora heart, throbbing, as it were, under his own formation, acknowledged him a solace—accepted him a companion- nominated him a friend. It was at the close of day, that Theo¬ dore, glowing with a new-formed pro¬ ject, hastened in search of father Betso¬ iin, to pour into his bosom the confi¬ dence of a romantic decision. He found him beneath the cypress grove, which waved over the no longer interdicted chapel. " Father," he articulated, and then paused, for a momentary damp crushed
crushed the ardour of his feelings, on tracing the early lineaments of sorrow- on the furrowed cheeks of his compa¬ nion. s< Proceed, my son/* said the monk. fi Alas! you ha\e been weeping/* ob¬ served Theodore : and then, in accents half-sorrowful, half-reproach ful, conti¬ nued— ff Why do you court this uncon¬ genial solitude ? why fly to haunts, which even from the brow of cheerfulness must snatch the ready smile, and contract it with the gloom of thought ?** " Because it is necessary to my being/* replied the monk. tf Be!ie\e me, my young friend, it is our actions^ not our situations, which stamp the colour of our reflections/' " Then/' eagerly rejoined Theodore, " must the reflective hue be brilliant. Father,
Father, a soul like yours, breathing the pure essence of philanthropy, versed in every Christian attribute, existing, 1 inseri n u: on earth, but to bless and to instruct •—soothing, comforting, redressing— Ah!------" " Forbear, my son/' interrupted fa¬ ther Betsoiin : i( elevate me not beyond this mortal calling : though dead to the world, though the energies of emula¬ tion have long been frozen, \ct does the pleasing praise of affection whisper that the weakness of humanity still prevails/' " I would tread in your footsteps/* eagerly exclaimed Theodore, reverting in a moment to his original purpose ; " I too would die to the world ; I too would crush the energies of emulation. Father, give me but an approving smile, and to¬ morrow I prostrate myself at the feet of the
the abbot—to-morrow 1 offer the volun¬ tary sacrifice of an inspired soul." " You, Theodore!" said the astonished monk—" you become a brother of Va¬ lombre!— vou wed vour beiniî to for- bearance and deprhation! Fir.>t speak your reasons; iirst expbin the grounds of your decision. 'Tis no momentary burst of enlhtbLbrn—^tls no premature birth of zeal—*tn no expatriated hope, or capricious fancy, which warrants the renunciation." t( Father," rejoined Theodore, tf tell me one blessing I have ever enjoyed be¬ yond these walls, and then talk of re¬ nunciation." " When these walls become for life a limitation/' said the monk ; " when na¬ ture and when feeling pine for emanci¬ pation ;
pation ; when maturity sickens at the decision of youth, and revels in the rich anticipations of forbidden pleasure, then, boy—then, Theodore, will the question be resolved/' " And yet you fled the world/* ex¬ claimed our hero—" you sought content within the narrow boundary of a religi- ous cell— you curbed the wild wishes of your heart ; and one calm unvarying line of duty has been the tract of your life/* " True/' observed father Betsoiin : tf but mark the difference of our motives — ï took the cowl, because the world had nothing more to offer ; because sorrow had dried every sluice of consolation, and nature and futurity were barren— I took the cowl because all hope of peace was
was exterminated; because death had severed the dear ties of connubial confi¬ dence and love------ '* ' f Love," interrupted the ardent Theo¬ dore— u oh, father î that is an enigma which perception cannot solve/' fC It is an enigma which the heart co¬ vets/* rejoined the monk, gazing on the glowing energies of soul which spoke in every feature of the youth, as the bright rays of the moon shone full upon his face, and the light breeze of evening parted the ebon locks floating on his forehead. st But you interrupt me—I took the cowl, because an insatiate world demanded exertions which my broken spirit could not make; because hope pictured no expectations for time to re¬ alize, and memory harrowed the pro¬ tracted pilgrimage of existence^—I took the
the cowl, because the seraph-form of Keligion, like the rays of the sun, pene¬ trating the mists of darkness, shot through my benighted brain, and presented an anchor of reliance. I yielded to the sweet consoler—I trod the path marked out by Heaven—1 became a humble can¬ didate for favour; and beneath the roof of Valombre, regained that peace I thought for ever fled. But you, Theo¬ dore, you can educe no plea to embrace the sacred covenant ; you can hold forth no substantial argument, to silence the fresh-springing obstacles of tickle fancy. Your years are not the years of discre¬ tion ; your decisions are not the deci- sionsof maturedeliberation—you have no contrasting woes to lighten the lingering flight of time; for your sorrows are not the legitimate offspring of misfortune· Though
Though a monk, ï would not force the vow of celibacy on the unguarded ; though a monk, í would not bind the youthful heart in the chains of thraldom; for I am no candidate for Heaven, through the offering of an inexperienced sacri¬ fice ------" ff Ah no ! it is no inexperienced sacri¬ fice," interrupted Theodore. Father Betsoiin smiled— 4i Name but the experience which eighteen years, passed within this convent, can have gleaned, and I am silenced/* The youth hesitated, then replied : " The perpetual calm—the unclouded content—the unvaried prayers of the holy brothers, surely, father, offer an un¬ questionable precedence." (t No, my son," rejoined the monk, " your own weapon is the foil by which I would
I would convict you. The prospects of age, and the prospects of youth, are seen through different mediun. »: the one closes the world ; the other opens on the world : the one points to the coming glory of eternity ; the other fans the an¬ ticipations of bliss, and rcveb in the lux¬ ury of thought. Firat obliterate the years which must intervene ere you reach the age of those examples you would point out, and then speak with t!ie confidence of security. I have traced your heart—I have formed its every wish, its every sensation : the unvarying calm of devotion will not satisfy it; the supine inactivity, the negative calm of profession, will freeze and corrode it to * chilling stagnant insensibility. Aias ! the pent-up sigh will rise, the repining tear will flow, when death shall be the sole passport
passport to emancipation—when slum¬ ber's bright visions shall mock the goal reality whispers can never be passed. Youth must not shrink from the busy scenes of life—scenes which the Creator ornature ordains and commands—scenes which unfolds the energies of action, and stamps the temperament, the virtue, the character of man." <r Scenes which destiny forbids me to enter!" exclaimed Theodore, <e or why, alone and solitary, am I stationed be- neath the roof of Valombre ? why ba¬ nished the claims of kindred ? why ba¬ nished the shelter of a parent's arms? Father/' and eagerly he grasped the arm of the monk, st I have heard the abbot— I have heard the holy brothers call me foundling—I have heard them speak of mystery—I have heard them whisper murder.
murder. Father—but you are pale—say then is it true ? Ah ! you shudder—you turn away your face. Once, in the chapel, í heard them talk of sacrilege, of profa¬ nation, of blood, of a dagger, of a ring¬ and when they beheld me, they cried— f Wronged, injured Theodore Î' Why did they call me wronged ? why did they call me injured ? Father, tell me the in¬ juries f should redress? tell me the being who has deprived me of nature*s inhe¬ ritance—a parent's blessing: and through the world, yes," with proud, with digni¬ fied superiority, " even to the grave will I pursue him.** " The type of Christian faith is for¬ giveness of injury/' reproachfully ob¬ served father Betsoiin, tc is meekness un¬ der suffering, is endurance, fortitude, submission—ah, then, Theodore ! how can
can vou offer yourself a candidate for •r' J profession ? Even in the world, these bursts of impetuosity would be danger¬ ous ; invested with the sacred habit of reliiiion, thev become criminal." О J j i( You do not tell me the tale—you do not elucidate the mystery," almost breathless, articulated Theodore, who, jielding to his own incongruous ideas, had lost every syllable of the monk's ex¬ ordium. f( Point out the tract of blood that I may trace it. Tell me why I am here, unknown, unclaimed, unacknow¬ ledged ? tell me what direful foe has blasted the early spring of promise ?—oh, fa¬ ther ! tell me the guessed-at secret, and by yon chaste luminary/' raising his clasped hands to the cloudless moon, " 1 swear------" " Forbear! forbear! breathe not the frantic
frrnticasseveration/'interrııptedtheshud- derîng monk. <f Rash boy! the aveng¬ ing wrath of Heaven rest on the offender : far be it for us to delegate the power of Omnipotence." <€ Pardon me, friend ! counsellor ! benefactor! do not chide me: even now my penMip bosom feels a weight threat¬ ening suffocation. Ahj God ! it is not the injuries of self?— no, no; it is a fa¬ ther's—it is a mother's, wrongs I would avenge." te A father! a mother !" said the monk. u Theodore, you rave : what wild sur¬ mise, what groundless supposition, erec¬ ted the baseless fabric of delusive hope?" « No wild surmise, no groundless suppo¬ sition" replied Theodore ; " 'tis the un¬ erring voice of Heaven ; 'tis the presen¬ timent of nature ; I feel I am not an orphan—
orphan—Father, my heart is proud—I feel it owns no ignoble lineage." "And yet,'* said father Betsoiin, {i you would sacrifice its ardent hopes, itsglow- in*r attributes, on the dull cold altar of devotion ; vou would take the cowl, and waste all the energies of thought, all the play of action, in the midnight vigil ; you would------" (( No, not now, father, not now,'* eagerly rejoined the youth. f( Convic¬ tion breaks noon my mind like a rav from heaven : it seems to inspire me» î w ül not ñy the world—I will not court the supine inactivity of conventual soli¬ tude—I will fulfil the aim of my being —I will uncloak the scene of horror, and drag the cruel perpetrator of a parent's wrongs to justice, to condemnation—oh î give me but a clue to guide my search ; you и о direct
direct me through the maze of darkness; tell me why the holy brothers called me wronged, injured Tht odore; and I will íly, in endless persevering scrutiny, o'er land, o*er ocean. Yes, by the all-wise, all-omniscient Creator of earth, of hea¬ ven, to the globe's furthest boundary will 1 roam, to------" " Boy/' interrupted the monk, in ac¬ cents of stern reproof, u know you the import of your rash and irreligious fer¬ vour ? True heroism is meek, is lowly ; not vaunting in idle words, in boasting phrases, in noisy asseverations. You would be a hero ; first become a man : you would be an avenger ; change it, and become a Christian." Theodore sighed ; he bowed in acqui¬ escence to the monk's reproof; but stilt his eves flashed fire, and the heightened flush
flush upon his cheek betrayed the fever of the mind. i( "Tis strange/' pursued father Betso¬ iin, " that an ideal cause, an imagined injury, can thus lay %vaste the noble im¬ pulse of mercy ! If the hydra-headed shadow of self-created wrongs can thus overthrow the lomr. the arduous!v-erect- ed tinn ness of the mind, where exists security, even for virtue, even for hon¬ our, vvhen assailed by temptation ? The«· odore, 1 would have you live free from the ties of the church, because ï would have \ou !i\e to fulfil the claims society has on the young and the happy ; not to sacrifice the calm dignity of modera· tion to inordinate passion, not to pro¬ fane the fair face of mercy by the frenzy of revenge. 5 * (i What ties can society boast/Memanded η ţ> Theodore,
Theodore, (( which possess not a kindred claim within your own bosom? Father, *tts true, lam young—but, ahi not hap¬ py. Eighteen years ago, nay longer/* fixing his dark eyes on the countenance of the monk, " possibly you might boast of both." The monk started; he raised his spread hand to his forehead. ir Touch not ihat string, Theodore," he articulated ; **'tis grief, 'tis torture. Eighteen years ago-— ah, God of omnipotence î eighteen vears ago, I was writhing beneath a stroke ...... " He paused, then pi с г sly drop¬ ping the beads of his rosarv, and casting on Heaven a look of assured confidence, concluded—*' Pardon and peace to all !" (i Forrive me/* faltered Theodore, all consideration \ieiding to the sorrows of his friend. íť Alas ! my heart bleeds, for hav in ţ* о
having incautiously awakened the pangs of memory." ff You have not awakened them, my son/' he replied, foicing a faint smile. *· io.·, i»i truth, they never slumber. Kven tu ihr very altar, the shade of murdered peace pursues me ; in my cell's solitude, when wearied by long watching, the re¬ pose of nature weighs down mv eye- K is, then—then does fancy conjure up a dchïshe train, and mock me with buried b!i s. Theodore, dear, mistaken boy î believe nie, eighteen years ago, there ex¬ isted no similarity between us," ¥ / Let us wave a discussion which fans but the flame of melancholy," said the youth, in imploring accents: " father, dear father, say no more; for already docs my heart smite me with ingratitude and presumption." d 3 The
The monk rested his hand on theshoul der of Theodore. " 'Tis your reason not your heart, I would claim convert/ he mildly observed. <( Were vou to take the cowl, you would be flying from ima¬ gined difficulties to negative peace ; yon would leave a station which God enjoin¬ ed, and man was born to fill. With me Tis different : my conscience acquits me of having slighted any command, of hav¬ ing shrunk from any duty ; for whether I drop into the grave amidst the bustle of the world, or whether I quietly sink to sleep beneath the roof of Valombre, is immaterial. It was not misanthropy, neither was it guilt which drove me from the haunts of my fellow-creatures: it was affliction ; it was woe, deep, heartfelt. I have been a husband—I have been a father," struggling with the rising sob, and
tmi dashing from his cheek the impulsive car of memory— ŕí You too may become ι husband—you too may become a fa¬ ther—you too may live------ "' *'I! M interrupted Theodore, and a new and delightful emotion throbbed in every vein— " J become a hus» band!—/ become a father!—God of na¬ ture! 0 raising his ardent eyes to the cloudless concave of heaven, li what dreams of bliss—what visions of deli-ht о flit o'er my brain ! I alleviate, soften, sooth the cares of affection !— I catch the lisping accents of tender infancy!—/ breathe the proud, the grateful prayer of praise, for growing virtues, for bud¬ ding promises, for parental transports!— I, when the winter of age steals o'er mv being, freezing my youthful ardour, / d 4 retrace
retrace that ardour, re-acted, re-existing İn -------" ** Boy," interrupted the monk, start¬ ing almost in frenzy, " who delineated the delusive vision ? who lingered o'er the perishable shadows of biiblunary hope ?" "Nature," replied Theodore, his cheek glowing, and his whole soul irradiating his features— te Nature,, father, portrays the blissful prospect—Nature conveys the eyes beyond the vale of present beings and fixes on cloudless, endless joys." " Nature, aided by Fancy guiding the pencil of enthusiasm, isa seductive, trea¬ cherous artist!" mournfully observed the monk : " methinks, in your picture, Theodore, she has sketched the ocean, calm, smiling, undulating; not swollen with
with angry tempests, and death-fraught rocks—Alas! she has sketched it such as it once appeared to me, when the «lowing sun of anticipation spread o*er its lengthened surface the yellow beams of glorioiH splendour and transcendant brightness. But í lived to see it changed, transformed. Spirit of mercy ! it rose* not with coming blackness, not with gra¬ dual swell—it rose, it overwhelmed, it destroyed.'* The monk sobbed ; he chin«: to the arm of Theodore; his whole frame shook in palsied agitation ; he paused for a moment, then wildly articulated— tf Bov, tl if you would know peace, seek it in the grave; vet there, c\en there it mav mock you. Misery led me to its brink: des¬ pair, deep, subtle, irremediable, conceal¬ ed the current of hope, and existence я 5 pined
pined for annihilation : but when I ex¬ tended my arms to court the Lethe of sorrow, the spectre iled, death eluded my embrace, and though disease had bent me almost to its tempting oblivion, vet nature snatched me back, resen in£ me to envy, not to share i ís slumbers» Theodore, my soul sickens, my spirit dies—Theodore, ungrateful, dissatisfied boy î what do you know of mkery ?" r< Not to you, father; no, not to you" exclaimed the distressed youth : * f grati¬ tude is the very essence of my being; call me dissatisfied, but, in justice, in pity, call me not ungrateful" " *Tis to Heaven, not to me, dear, adopted son of my affection !'* rejoined the monk, folding his almost sobbing pupil to his bosom. " Surely health, quiet, repose, youth, activity, enjoy¬ ment.
ment, merit praise—merit thankful ado¬ ration," Theodore, crossing his hands upon his bosom, moved silently by the side of the monk. Their path was darkened by the thick entwining foliage interrupting the moonbeams, save, ever and anon, when. the softened breeze gently fanned amle the branches, and then the lengthened shadows reflected a thousand fantastic images. Theodore started : involuntarily he grasped the arm of his companion ; for, as his eyes rested on the ivy-crc wned arch of the chapel, he saw a figure glide across the path, and shrink within its -helter. t( Did you see it?'* he eagerly demanded. ** See what ?" questioned the monk. 4< As Heaven shall judge me," exclaim* d 6 ed
ed Theodore, " I lost a human figure be¬ neath yonder arch !** The monk smiled. u Twas the coin¬ age of your own brain, my son, or per¬ haps one of the holy brethren,'* Theodore paused for a moment, then thoughtfully replied—" No, father, it wore not the garb of the order/* ίζ Then has it trained birth in fancv/" concluded father Betsoiin. Theodore replied not : he traced in¬ credulity in the speaking features of his friend : he could not produce proof, but on his own mind the evidence of his eyes stamped conviction. Absorbed in the varying wishes,theun- formed character, the quick, the ground¬ less projects of his pupil, father Betsoiin forgot, in the review of his romantic hopes
hopes and wishes, the sudden intrusion of the ligure; and, with a sigh of bitter tendency, exclaimed— " Were I to doubt your affection, were I to doubt the fer- \our of your sincerity, justly, Theodore, might you accuse me of ingratitude. Dear and deserted child î when first your helpless pleadings assailed my heart—> when first, in the language of nature, vou spoke desertion and misery—when iirst, in the sweet, the irresistible yearn¬ ings of compassion, I raised you in my arms, though stained with the blood of the murdered-------" He paused abruptly, for the anxious, searching, horror-struck expression of Theodore's countenance recalled him to himself. " At that fearful period," he hesitatingly pursued, fi my heart was al¬ most broken ; I was drooping, hopeless, cheerless ;
cheerless; sinking beneath a stroke.. which had Ü itch ted all the enerdes of natme. The smiles of infant piny fulness colored a smile even from affliction—I became your debtor, for you gave a charm to existence/ 1 Theodore pressed the hand of his friend. " Father/* he articulated, in the full tide of grateful tenderness, " your deeds, your actions are registered on the foundling's soul : and he you cherished, he who, deserted bv natuie's ties, was cast upon your bounty, in the pious of¬ fice of devotion, in the secret incense of the spirit, breathes your eulogy to Hea- ven/ " Your arm, my son/* said the monk, softened a'most to tears. " Now is the moment for confidence, for silence and solitude are ours : the step of intrusion, the
the tongue of interruption theatens not the sweet participation of sympathy. Mv story can boast no grand achieve¬ ment, no heroic feat ; my story is a sim¬ ple trial of th? heart, in a series of suf¬ ferings; but it ¡s sufficient to proclaim, that the privilege with which I wooed this habit was not İdeal." " Ah ! spare yourself the recital," im¬ plored Theodore— if To feelings like vours, father, the relation of past sor¬ rows must be agony." '* No, boy, the sacrifice will be trifling, can it, for a moment, impress on the murmuring soul the bliss of content. Theodore, î would teach you» not by pre¬ cept, but by example : 1 would be no stern mentor ; I vvould be an indulgent friend. My story will convince you, that caprice led me not to this dwelling; that,
that, estranged from society, flying the ties of kindred, my heart courted prayer as its only hope. Theodore, a spirit like yours requires more than mere warning; it needs conviction." " But not at the expencc of one so dear, so indulgent/' urged the \outh, <f Father, behold me the meek disciple of your principles, the convert to \our arguments. Disclose the mysterious tale of m ν first admission vsithin these walls, but spare your mind the torture of re¬ capitulating woes, which defies even the alleviating power of time to efface." <( Think you I have curbed the angry burst of passion, again to excite its fury? Ko, my son/* mildly oKerved father Betsoiin, ťť 1 would soften, not irritate ; I would behold you patient and submis¬ sive, not again convulsed with man's deadlv,
deadly, baleful curse of revenge. My story ----- -** The monk paused abruptly, for the vesper bell chimed the call of devotion, and with pious haste he turned to Va¬ lombre, "When th« evening dííív ii accomplished, when the hour of prayer is passed," he said, pausing at the en* trance of the chapel, f * remember, my son, in the solitude of mv cell f shall await you,"
CHAP.
СИЛР. IV. h comfort'Fo Le toaiul in üuııkiııg then? Olì no ! my mimt bas run/d ironi thought to thought From } lace to j>luce, tu teck it—but in vain. What h rhie wtnkl ? Thy *<.hu>l. c»h minify í Our onty IcïHtih is to learn to suffer; And be who knows not that, was bom for nothing. Yoixc On quitting the chapel, Theodore repair¬ ed to the cell оГ father Betsoiin : prayer had calmed the agitation of the good man's mind, and he welcomed his young favourite, with a smile of the sweetest benignity. Every discordant passion slumbered, for peace and hope appeared alike to calm the present, and to gild the future. " You wonder," said the monk, seat¬ ing himself by the side of the attentive Theodore,
Theodore, " that a being, as f have de¬ scribed myself, the sport of calamity, with a heart still bleeding beneath the inflic¬ tions of fortune, should so strenuously oppose the decision of inexperience, and argue against the irreparable step of self-immolation. Theodore, your reason» not your heart, shall be my judge; the lapse of years shall be renewed; and what, from mere curiosity I would with¬ hold, becomes a voluntary tribute to in¬ struction, " Cradled in camps, and bred to warlike feats, my early youth was pass¬ ed in tending the rough ventures of a soldier's fortune. Midst the loud dirt of war my father reared me ; and ere my infant hand could grasp the sword, my heart, with glowing fervour, panted at
at the martial clang of dumb and trum¬ pets.** iC Ah, to be born a hero !" exclaimed Theodore, imbibing the infection of he¬ roism, and gazing on the latent fire which, e'en beneath the cowl, betrayed a soldier's feelings. The monk smiled : he traced a new character in the animated eyes of Theo¬ dore, whose every action spoke a mind open to each succeeding impulse. cf I too was an enthusiast, 1 ' continued father Betsoiin; " ar.d when maturer vears stamped nature's mellowed cast, 1 grasped my sovereign's banner, and became a candidate for future fame. Leagued with the forces of Spain, wc met the hos¬ tile bands of warring Infidels, and in reli¬ gion's cause, deluged with human gore a devoted
devoted land. Oh, fatal influence of misjudging power, to seize the shield of fiith, and 'neath the cause of universi peace, to martyr nature! E f en now my soul ι с volts at the sad scenes of woe and desolation, for war, with chilling sway, marbles the hearts of men, and stamps them deaf to the soft pleadings of hu¬ manity/* The monk paused in momentary irre¬ solution ; Lis lip quhered, and a tear rolled from his e\e: piously he raided the cross which pended from his girdle ; and as he steadfastly seized upon ¡t, the influence of faith recalled the reign of fortitude, for in accents of restored com¬ posure, he resumed— i( 'Twas at the head of an adventurous band, 1 pierced the smoking ruins of a scattered \illage, to which the firebrand of enthusiastic zeal had
had fatally been applied. My heart, alive e'en to the misery of these denoun¬ ced Infidels, and panting to save the vic¬ tims of mistaken bigotry, shrunk not at danger ; aud though the shrieks of op¬ pression sounded from the ruined pile of desolation, still mercy gave me strength and perseverance. Guided by the sound, I mounted a flight of Parian steps, and beheld, in a small temple, dismantled and defaced, an aged Moor, still combat¬ ing, with bleeding wounds and unsub¬ dued courage, the bold attack of a re¬ lentless Spaniard. Twas the last elfort nature could essa v —the sad, the frantic stretch of paternal fondness—for at the instant that ï rushed to succour, the ci- meter dropped powerless, and blood and tears commingled on the soft bosom of an angel child. The Moor, exhausted, dying,
dying, still glanced defiance, still grasp¬ ed the hand of his beloved charge—then whispered Alia—and died. Thrown on my care by nature and by Heaven, I rais¬ ed the weeping Cassima ; and as I led her from the contemplation of her woes, I swore, by the great Author of my being, to iniard her with the tender caution of a brother—But ah! how dangerous was gratitude from lips like Cassima s ! í had sworn to act, but could not feel a brothers part—Love, tyrannic Love! as- rumed his sway, and bound me the resist¬ less slave of hopes and wishes/* Again the monk paused, for he marked, in the countenance of his youthful audi¬ tor, a variation of expression. " Love!" faltered Theodore— Cf ah, fa¬ ther ! J tremble for you;" and then, with
with shuddering horror, he concluded, " an Infidel ! an apostate to the faith !" " An angel ľ' eagerly rejoined father Betsoiin. *' Mistaken boy! Cassima, my Cassima was more than woman ï Con¬ viction wrought the change : and when, in the divine spirit of Christianity, she owned the God I worshipped, then did the bright, the heavenly spark of pure undying piety, denote the deep conver¬ sion of her inward soul." " Ah, you have wrought salvation !** exclaimed the enthusiastic youth; fC you »..... ч "Cassima lived—Cassima died a Chris¬ tian !*' interrupted the monk. (i Cassima is in heaven!" again burst from the lips of Theodore. The monk bowed in acquiescence ; his
his hands were clasped ; and his tear- frrught eyes forbad each effort to speak· it was long ere sorrow yielded to com¬ posure, for a thousan I tender recollec¬ tions crowded upon memory, and revived the bitter trials of the past. * r To enu- merate the tender virtues, the excellen¬ cies of the gentle Moor," at length re¬ sumed father Betsoiin, {t would be to swell my sad recital, without unfolding the gradual progress of my sorrows: be it enough to °ay, that love, omnipotent viid eternal, engrossed mv soul. Le S J O J captivated v/th the external beauty, than with the simplicity, the innocer.ee, the ..rtlesb ¿ra* cs of calima, í considered her the most precious gift of лгу Crea¬ tor; and received her at the altar of my Lath, as the worshipped bride, the tender partner of my existence. Week-, months %" ν τ.ι. в of
of unclouded bliss became my own. Peace smiled upon mv native pLins, and I returned to the bosom of my country, loving and beloved. Ah ! how little can the soul, unalHed, uninfluenced by sym¬ pathy, concede the pure delights, the unalloyed transports of mutual love, and mutual confidence ľ * Thought meeting thought, and will preventing will/ How little ------" t( It must be a foretaste of Heaven !" interrupted Theodore, his cheeks glow¬ ing with the fervour of his ideas— te ah, father ! it must be as the pure award of beatified spirits !" The monk echoed a responsive sigh, then, forcing a smile of melancholv birth, pursued— " In the sweet retreat I had chosen, Heaven and nature augmented my blessings : my Caserna made me a father,
father, and rapturous were the sensations that novel tie awakened! Wrapt, as it were, within m v comforts, the world va- nished as a cloud before my sight : I felt elevated beyond the reach of affliction: the possibility of change damped not my ardour ; and even my love became more fervent, more exalted. Often as I ga/ed on this new, this innocent candidate for protection—often, as 1 whispered the thanksgiving of a grateful heart, did I pit/ the being, who, unfixed, estranged, isw^Aì'z no care but $ЛГ, ne'er traced the smile of euîi/ recognition—ne'er clasped i!u· pbd/;e of *ui lowed love. Alas! fain would í ünıre-r a'?? the hour* of feliciu ! filn forget the chiüing' blast of rude ca¬ lamity ! fain blot from the faithful regis¬ ter of memory the coming contrast, which from woe chimed not one mo- v - mentarv
mentary suspension ! ah, yes/' and he raised his eves in reverence to Heaven» " fain would I revise the blissful epoch when Cassima and our child claimed every thought, every action of my life ' it was a period the soul will dwell on, whilst yet the corporeal frame remains accessible to soft impression." The monk paused for a few moments, then, with a shuddering sigh, proceeded —" The blast of war again sounded, and honour called me from the bosom of m\ familv : the elow of heroism was re- kindled, was refelt; the slumbering trance of valour roused at the charge, and each impulsive hope betrayed a soldier's feel* in<>s. Behold me then, tearing mvscli from the intwining arms of Cassima, and exchanging, for the blissful calm of love, the perils, the incertitudes of war. Qihck w us
was the chance; from tears of tender sor- row ίο the necessary exertions of per¬ sonal valour ; for scarce had we lost bis>ht of the rockv diííš of our native land, scarce had we ploughed thc : waves of unobstructed space, when a corsair, bearing down upon us, boarded, and, af¬ ter a desperate resistance, captured our vessel. I was senseless—I was lost to the consciousness of our calamity ; for in the early part of the engagement, a deep and anguished wound had checked alike sensation and exertion. Ah, Theodore!" continued father Betsoiin, " long, ray-* less was the blank of time which inter¬ vened ! heavy the hours of sufferance f When I awoke to life, when I awoke to recollection, I found myself a captives without one ray of hope to lighten my prison's gloom. 'Twas then the pang of в 3 absence
A L O F VAIO M S Г: К, ai ence became more bitter; 'twas then my Cassima, and our babe, arose to me¬ mory, and sharpened the torture of des¬ pair. Father of Iieaxeu ï had death-— ah no.! Pardon, omnipotent liuler of the Universe, pardon the weak arra ignei* of thy decrees ! Had prosperity shone upon my path, had happiness been my lot, this cowl ЬаЛ not been w urn, the Hpc of resignation and unmurmuring piety.*' * ( To woes 'ike yours/' said the sun- path i¿\ ng Theodore, " where, but in the balm of religion, can the soul fiad com¬ fort ?" u True, my son," resumed the monk, numbering the beads of his rosary ; u 'tis a source which never fails ; when man for¬ sakes, when health, when fortune disap¬ pears, 'tis a rock of adamantine strength, the staff of ages, and the prop of worlds. Ľven
Тлсп at this period of time/' regaining the ihread of his narrative, ts the recol¬ lection of the pangs which accompa¬ nied restored sanity rouses every faculty of action. Alas î excess of misery serves but to animate the torpid mind, exerting ¿t to fortitude, and renovating the nearly- exhausted thread of existence. ** Landed at Tunis, mv health scarce re- stored, when the price of my liberty was paid by a rich renegado, and my proud and struggling spirit compelled to sub¬ mit to all the degradations of slavery. Al- Zahel, the tyrant I was destined to serve, possessed a wife—that iiend—that wife— ah, give me pause !" and father Betsoiin grasped the hand of his pupil, and clung for support to his shoulder. Theodore spoke not ; he traced the torture of ex- к 4 cessive
cessive feeling, yet he felt incapable of giving comfort. At length, with a heavy siuh, he con¬ tinued— <f ît \.ns pabt sim^rf. long after my fellow-slaves had retired from the scene of their labours that dwelling on the cherished imi^c of m; ab-.ent Cassi¬ ma, I lingered in the gardrns of the ha¬ rem—I had thrown mysel r beneath t!ic spreading luxuriance of a ro?e*bu Ík my eyes fixed on the partial reflections of glory which still mellowed the purple- tinted bosom of the west. In idea, I *\as- happy: the dire doom of slavery was forgotten : I seemed transported to the blissful calm of my little domain—Cassi¬ ma returned my caresses, and the smile of innocence sported o'er the downy fea¬ tures of my boy. I know not how long this
this trance of thought continued ; sud¬ denly it vanished ; suddenly a new dan¬ ger rushed athwart my brain, a fear which registered the inconsistency of nature; for I bereaved of every comfort, en slaved, degraded, lost, existing in toil, and labouring in misery, I clung to the vile possession, life, and trembled for the consequence of my temerity. Al¬ ready the cimetcr seemed upraised—al¬ ready the awakened jealousy of Al-Zahel seemed to award the blow, for I had war¬ red against forgiveness—I h^.d intruded within the sacred limits of harem. Though my labour was in the culture of this garden, still at a given signal, the wearied slaves retired, and the rich scene of toil changed to the softer haunts of ycuth and beauty. Too late to fiy, my eyes, with timid caution, rested on the π 5 form
form which barred my passage—fear va¬ nished at the glance—hope, fallacious hope, fluttered around my heart, for saint-like was the smile which dimpled the peerless features of Cale-Cairi 1 * Stranger/ she softly whispered, ( know you the price of your temerity?' I bent my knee before her; I placed my spread hand upon my heart ; I articulated, 'Life*' — c Fear not/ she replied ; and then a hand, wh¿re as the new-fallen snow, was extended it token of assurance—1 took that hand—I felt it tremble as 1 held it—I saw a radiant blush suffuse a cheek which nature gifted with external beau¬ ty; yet might the pure, the angel bosom of my Cassima, have read each passing thought, without one doubtful sigh. * Christian/ she resumed, and then she paused, and glanced around with timid caution,
caution, c unseen I have marked your labours, and your sorrows—Al-Zahel is vour tyrant— Cale-Cairi is your friend/ I read pity in the tender thrill of her ac¬ cent, and my heart, long dead to the soft offering, believed each treacherous sound. Warm were the expressions of my gratitude, impulsive the dictates of my feelings ; I could have worshipped her, not with the glowing energy of love, but as a being worthy to be adored* Checking me with a smile, she said— e I will lighten the chains of slavery ; 1 will give case to the tortured heart/-— f And will you—will you/ I demanded,, again sinking on my knee, ( will you, gener¬ ous, angelic being î will you open the pass to freedom ?—will you restore me the blessings I have lost ? — * Hope all ä 6 from
from my influence/ she murmured, as she pointed to the gate ; and then she bid me fly, and bury the adventure in my own breast. " Trembling for the safety of my be¬ nefactress, î quitted the garden, and, un- perceived, mingled with my companions in misery. Sweet were the hours ofthat night ! balmy the slumbers of repose î Alas ! in life, how often, how swift is the transition from despair to hope î Actu¬ ated by each passing incident, man, the dupe to his feelings, imbibes from local circumstances the evanescent ray of bliss. The three succeeding days I heard not from Cale-Cairi; but on the morning of the fourth, as 1 laboured beneath the me¬ ridian beams of a burning sun, a boy, beauteous as the god of love, lingering under
under the pretence of culling a bouquet of sweets, approached, dropped a folded paper at my feet, and tied. *< Fearing the Argus-eye of suspicion, I carefully concealed my imagined trea¬ sure, and not till in safety I could peruse the contents, did í break the seal. * Mv heart slumbers not in the cause of the unfortunate/ wrote the artful Cale-Cairi. * Stranger, this night, when the sun has set, linger near the gate of the garden, and fear not to follow my faithful Nirza.* " Eager to fulrìl the appointment, free¬ dom thespur, and Cassima the reward, I watched each lagging moment, with an impatience which mocked the controul of reason. At length the sun sunk be¬ neath its vapoury curtain, and the grey eye of evening, eclipsing each vivifying rav, left me at liberty for action, I hasten- ed
ed to the appointed spot ; the gate was open ; and Nirza, the infant bearer of the billet, with an expressive gesture im¬ porting silence, led me forward. We proceeded across the garden, and enter¬ ing an avenue, soon approached a Parian temple. Brilliant was the blaze of light, which issuing from the interior, illttmi- ned the surrounding gloom. I paused involuntarily; not suspicion, but sur¬ prise assailed me; and turning to ques¬ tion my guide, found that he had tied. Perseverance could alone ensure solu¬ tion : carefully approaching the temple, I gazed through the close intwining lux¬ uriance of the scarlet blossoming pome¬ granate, and party-coloured passion¬ flower, which mantled its marble pillars» and beheld the siren form of Cale-Cairi, reclining on a low couch of rose-colourr ed
ed taiìeta. The interior of the tempie was decorated in all the voluptuous splen¬ dour of the east, and every embellish¬ ment which art could devise heightened the charms of the captivating Moor. Studded with the gems of Golconda, flowed the raven ringlets of her glossy hair; and the contrasting whiteness of her skin shamed e'en the costly pearls of Ormittz. ff Starting from the couch, Cale-Cairi gently chided my delay ; and murmured, in accents not to be misconstrued, that she had watched the envious sunbeams, even to the last faint streak of its reful¬ gence. God of heaven! how did the scene change! in one instant, how in¬ conceivable the revolution in my ideas ! The philanthropy of virtue vanished ; vice dropped the angel garb of assumed compassion :
compassion: the asp, long coiling with¬ in the dewy fragrance of the rose, put forth its sting, and honour and convic¬ tion gave speed to my retreat/* " Ah ! surely, even in youth, you were a philosopher," interrupted Theo¬ dore. The monk smiled— ei No, mv vounr friend, I was a husband, and the wor¬ shipped image of my Cassima was before my eyes." iS Does the sacred nam** of husband ever chain the wandering fancy?" de¬ manded the youth. et Father, does ca¬ price ne'er sway, and duty totter?" <( in the world, the hearts of men be¬ come contaminated," replied father Bet¬ soiin, " and, as the exterior, differ—in the world, circumstances of various and contrasting stamps shackle the hand, of¬ ten
ten when the scul mingles not in the flection." "Then in the world/' eagerly observed the youth, "happinessyicldstointerest/' "Or else/' rejoined the monk, "men would not so often, and so ungratefuMy burden Heaven with complaints, and fate viih in j ust Ice/' íf Surely the world must alter the p ?, y- blcal system/* said Theodore ; if surely the contagion of pleasure, and the ione of example, must stagnate the genial current of the soul, and subvert the or¬ dinations of nature ; or love, the pure essence of our being, love, father, could not be sacrificed at the shrine of sordid avarice, or mad ambition/* (( Love/' answered father Betsoiin, "of ali the passions winch sway the lieart of nan, is the most often, and the most fa- tallv at
tally profaned. Felt when least talkei of, treasured when most opposed, ib sa¬ cred name covers oft the gust of pre¬ sión, and the surreptitious colouring of design. Ah ! my son, 'tis when the mind enchains the kindred mind—when hope, when joy, when sorrow, all alike can claim a sympathetic partner—when can¬ dour and when confidence become the rule of action, and the sway of thought, that love alone can boa^t the original stamp which marked its pristine purity/' (t And does it ever boast------** inter¬ rogated Theodore. t( Yet stav/* check- ing himself, ίζ your pardon, father, nor judge that interest slumbers, from the wild innovation of inquiry. Quitting the garden of the harem, you fled the Circean spell of Cale-Cairi s witchery/* u Тгие д my son/* said the monk. €t f ilea
Bed with horror and dismay, my hopes destroyed, mv expectations blasted. Hob >!·^»η! I lied with desixiir, with distrae- tion in mv brain, and e\erv mental power abstracted, bewildered in the wild chaos of ideas. Lav% and restless were the hours destined to repose: with the dawn of day í arose to labour; and at its clo^e, freed from toil, 1 again courted the me¬ lancholy of reflection. For a whole week, bleep closed not my eves, or reno r vated the languor of fatigue ; for a whole week, the enervating lassitude of disease threatened, and then subdued. My spirit broken, my ¡»treng t h destroyed, I sank unresisting on my miserable pallet, and hailed the wished-for moment of en¬ largement. Alas! it came not; death» when most coveted, eludes our call, and 1 wa* spared for further woes, for further sufferings.
suílerings. Burninir under the ravages ufa fever, my brain frenzied, and sanity dUlodged; insensible to external cir¬ cumstances, and lost to the pampering luxuries of persevering tenderness, í knew not the perlidious wife of Ai-Za- hel, by short and stolen visits, watched my slumbers, and ministered to my com¬ fort. Blessed saints! never shall 1 forget the moment, when reason and grati tu Ie stamped me a debtor to Cale-Cairi 's care—when I felt her warm tear upon mv hand, and heard the si ц -h of interest flutter on her lip. Enfeebled, sub¬ dued, I could not breathe reproach— î could not breathe invective : 1 could only articulate the cherished name of j Cassima» and weep at the perversity of fortune. My health, my strength re¬ turne J, but not the task of labour; Cale- Cairi ^
Vairi's interest lightened the chain of slavery; and I was placed to tend the per¬ son of Al-Zahel. Kitter was the change- endless the perseverance of the Moor : dark and ambiguous were her hints; deep and mysterious her design. Unschooled in a heart so black, fatally fancying na¬ ture cloaked not devil in an angels sem¬ blance, pity palliated the soft effusion winch supposed sensibility inspired— which habit authorized. She ^ooke of liberty, pointed out the path as easy, decked it in the unfading roses of bliss, then murmured—* Courage and perse¬ verance Г~~ с í u J y, I have both/ I ex¬ claimed, yielding to the>angi»i«ïe enthu¬ siasm of hope, and aire ulv retracing the л erdant plains oí my n;;ù ve province. She drew a dagger from her girdle— sne held it, with a siren-smile, towards me. * This орем
opens the pass/ she articulated, and then she paused. I trembled, yet 1 grasped the hilt. 'lady, point out the barrier?' steadfastly fixing my eyes on the beaute¬ ous features of the tempter. ζ Al-Zahel. * —* Your husband!' I exclaimed,dropping the dagger.— f JWy tyrant!' she replied, snatching it from the earth, and calmly holding it towards me. (t Horror :.nd dismay, palsying every faculty, iced the warm stream in m ν ¥ * veins: transfixed, as though by Heaven's thunder, I felt incapable of exertion, in¬ capable of speech. . Cale-Cairi smiled; ¿he attributed my agitation to indeci.don; and, as a further incentive, sank at my feet, and threw her ivorv arms around ¥ me. I broke from the restraint; I darted from the chamber : annihilation was m the touch ; no fury,, black from Tarta- rus,
rus, e'er teemed with mischief so death- fraught, * No, no, my Cavsima/ 1 arti¬ culated, 'better t<^ resign tiice, than sink the tool of a perlidious woman/ "Л blank of inaction succeeded; Cale- Cairi ceased to persecute, and 1 ceased to hope. A life of unvarying sla\ cry spread itself before me,and every transient ray of expectation, every intruding stretch of possibility, closed in the impulsive shud¬ der of despair. 1 thought her ^\\а? had coi î quered e'en her tenderne^-— alas ! ï guessed not of what the heñían heart is capable, when virtue is dethroned, and vice tiiumphs—1 forgot that vice rivers the most despotic chains which art can forge. Weeks, months, succeeded ; but though Al-Zahel smiled upon my servi¬ ces, he breathed no distant hope of my enlargement : rioting in the indulgence - г ш
of excessive luxury, he thought not of the contrasting «loom which fate had spread upon our fortunes ; he thought that nature bent the Christian to the yoke, for Mussehnen to order. (< It was n ig iit, and I was musing o'er the remembrance of former joys; every agonizing pang had yielded to the soft encroachment of melancholy, and Cassi¬ ma and our boy were recalled with a Hood of tender regret : 1 sat insensible to the (light of time, gazing on the cloudless moon, whose silver radiam ro mantled the verdant bosom of errati г., í verv faculty absorbed in the halo voa moments of the past, and hope, the \..Л spark of bliss, fanning the possibility of enlargement, (t Suddenly my mind was recalled from røy home and my comforts, by the open-
hg of tny door, and turning, 1 beheld the little Nirza, the trusted messenger of Caie-Cairi. My heart shrunk at his ap¬ proach ; suspicion and dread alternately assailed me; and when he smiled, when he tendered a billet, I seized it with that desperation which dares the threat of death. f Fear not to trust me,* WTote the artful Moor, c nor spurn the boon of liberty, because Cale-Cairi is the bestow- cr.'— { Liberty!* I exclaimed; * Holy Hca\en !* and then 1 grasped the hand of Ni:/a, and implored an explanation; but the 4u\ deep taught, was, or pleaded, щ- :unViììt. lie whispered me to follow ; he placed his hanďttpon his heart, in token t;f coníldence, then pointed to the dis- i.:nt ocean, and pronounced, ( Freedom '/ I Jr cîric was the wild thrill of pleasure. * Lead on ! lead on !' 1 implored, living: *ül.. î. г with
•with breathless eagerness towards the door. Nirza followed: he passed, he beckoned me; and proceeding down the gallery, we descended into the garden. Cale-Cai ri awaited me in the temple, not, as heretofore, guised İn the siren garb of soft voluptuousness, but in a new, in a character more dangerous to a heart like mine, sanguine and confiding—in a cha- racter which artifice had framed, which seeming nature too fatally supported. She approached me with timid caution, her dark eyes bent upon the earth, and her faultless features irradiated with the borrowed smile of conciliating frankness. ' Christian,* she exclaimed, * though re¬ jected and despised, yet shall you own Cale-Cairi has a heart which scorns re¬ venge. If from her hands the gift of li- berty may be offered, prepare, this night, to
to flv the authorîtv of Al-Zahul—to de- part from Tunis.' Ah ! just God ! 'tis for the being, whose sad and wretched pilgrimage has, like mine, been dashed with woe, and shadowed with the clouds of calamity; the being whose heart has ceased to throb with hope's sweet fer¬ vour, and to whom the lingering hours of existence have closed the blank of slavery —'tis for that being alone to conceive the wild, the tumultuous emotions which agita í ed my ьои1, and checked almost the powers of expression. î knelt at the feet i;i Calc'Cairi— î beheld her a?, mv guar- dian genius, as my guide to liberty—I ÙA'^ot thea she would have tempted me io dishonour, would have instigated me to murder—1 forgot all that militated against my lì opes—that warred against Ì4V felicity, ' Stranger/ she articulated ' i' ^ checking
checking my eager exclamations, ( nol in words must gratitude be shewn/ í started. ť Fear not/ she continued. 'Cale-Cairi forswears all interest—but friendship. The youth who guides vou hence must share vour fortune/—'N ir- za?' interrupting her. f No, not Nir/a, but one who fain, like you, would fly the iron swav of ΛΙ -Zaheľs tyranny-—a vouth whose life ne'er knew misfortune—ne'er met the threat of difficulty.^—* Then why encounter both r* I demanded. ť Lady, the perils of the ocean, to one thus schooled------'— ť Do you retract ? do you reject the charge?' interrupting me; and I traced an expression, a fire in her eye, which filled me with alarm and doubt. f No, lady, no, 1 would but name the danger/—'Then you will be his guar¬ dian/ with eager importunity, f you will be
be his protector r' — f I will be both. lie shall share my hotne ; he shall be as my brother/—* Poor Aladdin!' murmured Cale-Cairi, and a soft blush mantled her cheeks. * Christian, he is young ; he has been cradled in luxury ; but he is faith¬ ful, he is passive, he is obedient. Cràin his heart by kindness, and he will repay you with diligence.' Alas ! I dreamt not the charge I had undertaken : and when I quitted the temple to prepare for my flight, little did I conceive the design working to my undoing. 1 will pass over the transition from despair to bliss, the wild exultation of my spirits, and the im¬ patience with which I awaited the ex¬ pected signal. It was given. Unsuspec¬ ted I fled the power of Al-Zahel, and under the pilotage of my new charge, embarked in a vessel, which Cale-Cairi's f 5 interest
interest had procured. Prosperous was the bree?e which wafted me to the loved shores of my native land ! blissful the gay flights of imagination ! 'Tis true, I smiled on the attentions of the youthful Aladdin ; but my heart, wrapped in the contemplation of my own hopes, had no room even for gratitude : a wife and child were the only objects in creation it could infold; and when their names hung upon my lips, tears registered the ar¬ dour of my feelings. We landed at Mar¬ seilles, and from thence, with unwearied haste, proceeded into Gascony. Every impeding obstacle augmented my impa¬ tience, and the rapidity of my reflections gav -е a seeming tardiness to our progress —I could think—I could speak but of my Cassima : my heart pictured the changes of a three-years' absence, but never, ne¬ ver
ver harboured a suspicion of her faith. Rapturous was the moment of our meet¬ ing î Cassima, my angel wife ! with all the fervour of unimpaired affection, wel¬ comed her wanderer; and my boy—my blooming cherub!—Theodore, giverne pause—Blessed Mary î e'en now the re¬ membrance mocks the powers of faith, and the meek submission of piety.—Alad¬ din—the perfidious Aladdin !" and the monk, burying his face in his cowl, sought in vain to check his convulsive sobs. if Ah ! little did I suspect/* he at length resumed, " the serpent I was cherishing! Aladdin smiled upon the advances of friendship : he conciliated the esteem, the confidence of Cassima ; he caressed, he fondled our little Eugene ; he betray¬ ed no start of pride, no indication of 1 4 hatred;
hatred ; he seemed, with the meekness of the deve, to possess that grateful sense of favour, which forbad suspicion, which defied disguise. Ah God! how could I dive into the inflexibility—into w' the baseness of a heart devoid of human feeling —a heart lost to honour and phi¬ lanthropy—a heart watching, with fiend¬ like diligence, to blast the liappiness it could not share ! Months wore away, and felicity knew no change: gratitude, in our orisons, singled our benefactress ; and even ihc lips of the little Eugene lisped the name of Cale-Cairi, Tranced iu security, the augmentation of my blessîngs awaited but the ripening hand of time, for Cassima was about to give a * second candidate to my arms. Dearer than existence, I watched her, with that unceasing regard which speaks the ado¬ ration
ration of a heart devoted, of a mind which owns no change. Once, as her head reclined upon my bosom, and Eu¬ gene sported at our feet, I saw the eyes of Aladdin fixed upon us: quick he withdrew them ; and then he rose to quit the room, but trembling, gasping, clung for support, even to the weak shoulder of our bov. Alarmed I flew to aid him ; ¥ * he snatched away his hand ; he shudder¬ ed, then murmured, ( Faintness/ and fled from the chamber. My Cassima follow¬ ed : in a few moments she returned— Aladdin was in tears; and on her ap¬ proach, had hurried into the garden. I instantly repaired thither; but carefully he evaded my search—I saw him mount a rocky pass which projected over the bed of a river ; softly I stole behind him. f One step, and all is over/ he exclaimed. ь' 5 I shuddered—
1 shuddered—I grasped his arm ; he ut¬ tered a loud shriek, and then he struggled for freedom. 'Boy! Aladdin! what mad, what destructive passion, thus wars against reason—thus dare oppose the sa¬ cred mandate of Heaven ? Think------* Again he shrieked; again he struggled ; but still my firmer arm restrained him. He sank at my feet —he fixed his eyes upon me—and horror, unknown, impul¬ sive, froze my blood. c Christian ľ— Holy Heaven ! that accent, that well-re¬ membered accent. He tore off his dis¬ guise—he dashed the borrowed tresses on lhe earth—and I beheld the raven locks of Cale-Cairi floating on her snow- white forehead. Scarce crediting the evidence of thy senses, I gazed upon her, my heart marbled, my whole form para- i)icd. * Christian/ she again uttered, ' 'tis
"tis I— 'tis Cale-Cairi, scorned, rejected — 'tis I who have pursued—*tis I who have triumphed.*—* You—you/ I mur¬ mured—' unhappy woman ľ A demo¬ niac smile played on her features, ( Yes, I, ungrateful/ interrupting me. * My love despised, I lived fur vengeance— your wife—your Cassima—your boy-— your Eugene/— r Proceed/ interrupting her; ť fiend ! traitress î your fury could not harm them/ She lowered her voice *o a whisper; she fixed her dark eyea upon me. 'AH human aid is vain : in their breasts the seeds of death lie hid— 'Tis I who gave the draught'—I heard no more— ï rushed down the rocky steep —but ere I reached the base, I saw the guilty, the wretched Cale-Cairi, spring from the summit, and olunge into the ' АО flood. Humanity was iobt in the im- f G pulse
puke of desperation—I beheld her but as the murderer of my joys—Cassima expiring, Cassima racked, torn with the agonizing throes of death, swam before mv sight, and fanned m v bratn to mad- ness. "On reaching our dwelling,every fear was confirmed ; my wife, my child, were alike seized—were alike powerless—were alike racked by sharp and convulsive spasms. In vain every art, every anti¬ dote was essayed—in one short night/' and father Betsolins tears flowed at the remembrance, tť I became a widower—I became childless. Vain, vain would 1 pourtray the anguish of my feelings; my mind, e'en now, retains but a confused idea of weeks, of months which succeed¬ ed : every tie in life was severed; the world was a barren waste, and man the hein «r
being ï would shun. On the grave of tny Cassima, I swore to live but for her memory, but for the exercise of devo¬ tion—on the grave of my Cassima, I swore never to know another love—Ah, Theodore ! true love is immortal ! those who have loved in purity—those hearts will love for ever. Bidding a last adieu to the quiet tomb which enshrined my treasures, with a heart desponding, droop¬ ing, I repaired to Valombre. The holy fraternity received me with compassion, with kindness ; and here have î breathed those vows, which have wedded me to religion, and which I have studied to fulfil, with all the exactitude which the frailty of human nature will admit/*
CHAP.
СНЛР. V. This man's brow, like to a title-leaf, Foretell» the nature of a tragic volume ! So looks the «trami, whereon th' iinperious flt»od Hath lett a witness'd usurpation. StlAKE k i»l.AKE, The clock tolled one, as Theodore quit¬ ted the cell of the monk : a drooping sadness hung upon his spirit—a sadness, beyond what the powers of sympathy could have awakened—a sadness, which absorbed every feeling of his mind, and rendered him unmindful of outward ob¬ jects. Incapable of wooing the sanative influence of sleep, he descended from the dormitory, and wandered, without aim or object, through the cloisters. No vi¬ sionary scheme of coming bliss lighten¬ ed the dreary path of his pilgrimage ; no vivid
vivid offspring of fancy played around the darkened pile of melancholy abstrac¬ tion ; wrapt in the wild chaos of gloom and despondence, courting the semblance, woe, though, in fact, a stranger to cala¬ mity, he moved mechanically forward : no sound " grew on the stillness of night;" nor did he pause, till the long- lingering echo of his own sigh dissipated reflection. He started, for he found himself in the nave of the chapel; and as he looked around, the refulgent moon¬ beams, peering through the high and par¬ ty-stained glass of the casements, shone full upon the marble tablet of the abbot St. Theodore*s monument. It was a spot -—an hour to awaken thought; for who can tread oer the hallowed dust of the dead, and not sigh at the shallow tenure of existence? who can visit the last re¬ ceptacle
ceptacle of humanity, and not reflect on the thousand, thousand casualties which checks the breath of life; which bends the young, the gay, the prosperous, the happy, to the still cold grave ? Tremble, thou sceptic, for the boast of profana¬ tion may be thy last ; a breath, an atom, one step—one little step, and eternity is thine í tremble, thou, who in the vain conceit of self-created knowledge, dare cavil at the supremacy of power—dare blend the term of chance with the wis¬ dom of omnipotence ! tremble, weak worm, for earth—sea—air—heaven—or¬ der;—nature—creation, speaks " God in all, and good in every thing !" Impul¬ sively his knee bent at the base of the tablet; he knew not why, yet he perused the commemoration of the departed ab¬ bot's virtues, with tear-fraught eyes; and though
though on cither side the uncarvol sîonc more humbly marked the eternai sleep of Valombre s brotherhood, yet his attention and his interest dwelt on i\ * other objet —it was sympathy—it was nature—it wa* that predisposing power which governs the mind of mart—whu!i tends the sensime heart irrcsLub!) — which awakens gratitude, where know¬ ledge, where conviction are wanting. Little did he think, that the hour of his admission was the hour of the abbots hue í-— litilc did he think, that the bein^ who yielded him to the protection, the guidance of the \irtuous father Be*soiin, had plunged in the bosom of devoted worth the ruthless steel of murder î — little did he think that the shrouded form, upon whose cold bosom the mar¬ ble tablet pressed, had baptized him, not with
with water, but with blood—had opened to him a name, by yielding up his own i Theodore, in silent meditation, continu¬ ed to kneel by the side of the grave, his arm supporting his head, and his elbow resting against the outer rail. The suf¬ ferings of father Betsoiin recurred in full force to his memory; and as he dwelt on the disappointments, on the miseries, on the blighted hopes of the unfortunate re¬ cluse, the disquietude he had himself en¬ couraged, the murmurs he had himself dared to breathe, rose in the mental lan¬ guage of reproof, and whispered, by comparison, the weakness, the folly, the irreligion of self-created evils, of waking dreams of misery. Un Tortu- 'nate Theodore! those dreams were to be realized—Fate, pregnant with events, awaited but the coming moment, to try the
the energies of nature, the impulsive feeling of soul. Suddenly he started ; suddenly reflec¬ tion was dissipated; thought, memory, all were subdued, all alike gave place to surprise and horror, for a hand, cold and deathlike, grasped the one which hung inactive by his side. He looked up ; he saw a tall gigantic figure, habited as a monk of Valombre; but the countenance defied his scrutiny, for muffled in the folds of his cowl, not an outline of fea¬ ture could be distinguished. ť ' God of mercy ľ* ejaculated the youth, recoiling from his touch ; but the intruder relinquished not his hand. tC Theodore," he whispered, fS arise. Weak boy, banish these idle terrors, and snap at once the deceptive influence of superstition and prejudice/' fi Who
u Who are you ?** eagerlv demandei Theodore, starting from his knees, and recovering the powers of exertion. " Your habit speaks you an inmate ol these Walls, but your voice and yom figure deny the conclusion. Declare for what hidden end the garb of reli¬ gion is profaned, and myself marked as the pliant tool of your machinations?'* if Fate is in my hands/' pronounced the stranger, in low but terror-striking ac¬ cents; "question not my motives, but yield vourself to m ν ц u id a η ce. Theo- ¥ .1 .О dore, life ebbs or flows at my will. Mark me," drawing aside his cloak, and dis¬ covering the sparkling blade of a dagger, <c blood once stained von emblem of ¥ mans weakness," pointing to the con¬ fessional; "another monk may be oííered up a sacrifice to Heaven/' " Mother
"Mother of God!* 1 ejaculated the youth. "Peace, boy, peace!" resumed the intruder, Cl Time íYw% and piety must oive place to actirn. Follow me, and at the foot of yon altar, repeat the oath Ï require/' c ' An or.tl·.," echoed Theodore. ť * No hesitation," stern*v pursued the stranger; *'an oath which bihds you to sccrecv and obedience, or a resistance which at once decides the Ĺ\te of the monk BctbOÎin." Theodore sprung towards she altar ; it was the safety of his friend wb.Ľh im¬ pelled him fóru -Л ; it wjs gratitude, it was almost ГМл\ iove. t: Man of mys¬ tery! 0 he exclaimed, shuddering, pant¬ ing, ťŕ name but the sacrifice to ensure the safet v of my preceptor, and in the bight
sight of that Being who readest the rec¬ titude of my intentions, here, at the fool of his consecrated altar, erected for wor¬ ship and adoration, 1 swear to preserve the condition !" " Kneel," said the stranger, ci and call for condemnation, call for perdition, when you break your vow." Theodore hesitated; his soul sickened in horror, for he knew not the com¬ pact he was about to close. The stranger frowned; he extended the dairecr. "Look M the point, 0 he e\ claimed; "rend there lhe na;r;e of />\/ sulin; resist the desired oath, raid ti λ- night, yes, ere the morn :,h:dl dav.-n, thv glittering polish of this tempered SU4I shall be dimmed in in. bluod." Theodore groaned ; he sank u рог, Lk knees; he raised hi* clasped. Ь-^нь to 1<е:л< п.
heaven. "Father! Father!" he wildly aspirated, ff guide me ! direct me î save me!" "Time fli cs," urged the stranger. "Boy, throw off this idle mockery: the cant of priests has hoodwinked your senses, and poisoned the current of reason. Become at once the free agent of your own ac¬ tions, and scoíľat the restraints of autho¬ rity/· Theodore's reply was a look of horrors of proud, ofdlgnihVd contempt. '* $ а У»'" pursue« 1 vhe stranger, * accept you í he conditions or must tiìe soul o;* the hoarv hvoocrite------" * f Fiend !*' interrupted Theodore, t: his body may be exposed to treachery, but his son! is beyond your threat." * f I care not for the soul," muttered the intruder, again displaying the terror* striking
striking dagger; " be the body my \io- tim/' ť - Hold ! hold !" arîirulaied the youth, grasping, with imploring earnestness, the cloak of the threatener ; " spare but the life of mv instructor ; snare but the ílrsf. the early friend of mv helplessness, and command at once my obedience and my ¡j-ratitudc/' ťí Take tlie oath then," answered t ?, o stranger, e< and the life of the monk si\.i' Le sacred/' ťí íí is for thee, doar ond rc\cve.l ; >< ceptor/' murmured Τ', со.!* re, η, 'Г . knee again bent on the ч^- ( i »!.e с.лиг (f it i-; for thee that the /..'■? , t'^· к. - terious compact is seakd. Yet." t ] v , d o u b t f u 11 y, f ' d oe/ ! r ι ! ι u .: 4 n : : » y soul's quiet ? for, if it lí.o-/' v/.*\ . ¡м ¿rv, '·'the pious, the j«. '. : : · л^.Ло. ■ ,г 1 í *
father Betsoiin, will smile at the fiat, will welcome the decree which adjudges death, sooner than blast my hopes with the deadly mildew of guilt. Yet, stran¬ ger, does no spark of mercy glow within vour breast ?—does no relenting softness speak compassion ? Oh 1 if you are hu¬ man, yield to my entreaties; not for the threatened victim, but for the assassin. Think of the crime of murder—think of the condemnation of the Eternal—think of the days, the hours of penitence, when memory shall swim upon a sea of blood ; when conscience, with corroding pang, shall blast the hope of pardon. Oh think и ■■■ţfiii пни et No more," interrupted the stranger, (t Boy, your zeal is lost ; keep it forthose who shrink at shadows ; not for one vol« i· g whom
CONCESSIONAL OF VALOMBRE.' whom substance cannot frighten. Come, 5 * Λνίίΐι a smile of irony, "be nobly disin¬ terested ; and for the salvation of my soul, as well as the monk's body, take the desired oath. It is but silence and secrecy required." " Nothing further ?" eagerly demand¬ ed Theodore. " Say, mysterious being, does no deep crime, no subtle policy lurk beneath the mask? does no ser¬ pent's sting lie hid within the smiling folds of offered moderation ? Is silence and secrecy the required redemption for father Betsolin's existence ?" ·*' Silence, as to the occurrences of this night," rejoined the stranger, "secrecy, as to the future; and an unconditional communication with me whenever cir¬ cumstances and opportunity favour« Remember,
Remember, the slightest infringement of this oath is death to the friend you would save." "Where can we meet? 1 ' questioned Theodore—" How can this communica¬ tion be observed ?" <c I am now in the chapel of Valom¬ bre/* exultingly exclaimed the stranger: * c mark me, boy, the father abbot, nay, nor the whole fraternity, cannot bar my passage. My will is absolute. I could force you hence ; í could convey you beyond these walls, and then laugh at their threats and denunciations: but I would be your friend, not your tyrant/* <( Friend!" despondingly echoed The¬ odore. " Yes, friend/' rejoined the stranger» in accents of angry decision ; <e reject not the offering, for my enmity is bale- c 2 fuK
ful. Theodore, your hopes, your pros¬ pects, your being, are in my hands: I could now unfold the page of your des¬ tiny, and freeze the current of your blood ; I could tell you who you are, and why ------" He paused, for the youth, full of new-fraught hope, was at bis feet, imploring, soliciting, kneeling. €t Assuage this agony," he faltered, u dark, inexplicable being ! breathe but the secret of my birth—breathe but the name of my parents. Say, do they live? Have they been wronged ? Know they of their son ? Shall I see—shall I rescue •ч -shall I comfort them ? Oh, Father of omnipotence ! nature strikes at my heart, and misery, danger, death, all alike are despised/* Buried in abstraction, the stranger pressed his hand upon his forehead, then suddenly
suddenly starting, "The oath—the oath," he repeated: cf avaxrnt, weak boy! these woman's tears disgrace you ; 'tis courage, 'tis fortitude I claim; tears are a coward's weapon.'* " Oh no, no, no!" interrupted Theo¬ dore, tc tears disgrace not the eyes of a hero ; tears, father Betsoiin says, is the heart*s soft pledge of mercy, and mercy ft Idiot! prattler! bigot!" muttered the stranger, grasping his arm, and rudely impelling to the altar. " Now, boy— now, Theodore, take the oath, or never : to-morrow will be too late; to-morrow the TifeVblood of the hoary dotard ------" Theodore shuddered. " Monster ! barbarian ! fiend !" burst from his qui¬ vering lips, as the mists of delusive plea- G 3 sure
sure vanished, and horror superseded the fresh glowing traces of filial love. " This war of words, this vaunting passion, is puerile," coldly resumed the stranger ; " 'tis action, not energy, 'tis decision, not impulse, I would have you practise." " Cede the life of the holy Betsoiin, cede the knowledge of my parents/* ar¬ ticulated Theodore; " then hear me swear ------ '* " What if they live ?" interrupted the intruder. "Live!" repeated the youth, with a burst of wild, of almost frenzied joy—- "live!** and instantly, in imagination, th? chapel and the stranger vanished ; in¬ sta >ilj the warm embrace of parental ferv our seemed to encircle him, and the reviving
reviving bliss of a parent's benediction echoed in his ear. All was hope—all was concord—every pulse beat to the magic thrill, and not till the stranger rudely severed the thread of his reverie, did he start, as it were, into being. " The mystery may be solved, the tale may be told," said the intruder, in reply to the new solicitations of the youth : 4( be guided by me, Theodore, and the dream of a parent's blessing may be re¬ alized. Father Betsoiin knows yon the child of mystery—I know you such as you really are/* Theodore no longer hesitated ; inno¬ cence was not the price of acquiescence; it was only silence—it was only secrecy —it was only a casual intercourse with a being, who might, who could elucidate с 4 his
his fate—who might, who could restore him to his natural protectors. Guided at once by the sanguine infe¬ rences of youth, he knelt upon the step of the altar, and in the sight and in the name of that Being who readeth the in¬ tricate movements of the heart, bound himself by an oath the most solemn, nay, denounced upon his own head, misery, disgrace, ruin, death, in case of its slight¬ est infringement. (( Yes/' he exclaim¬ ed, in the fervour of the moment, " it is for thee, dear, exemplary friend, pious, excellent father Betsoiin, it is for thee the zeal of faith, the sacrifice of feeling is offered; and may the God of mercy bless or curse me, as I preserve or violate the compact !" Solemn was the pause which ensued ; with
with the moment vanished the heroic fervour of exertion, and a damp cold chill, a presaging horror pierced the heart of our hero. Upon his lips the oath still trembled, and his knees still bent upon the consecrated pavement : the stranger stood by his side, apparently wrapt in abstraction ; his arms were folded upon his breast; his cowl was thrown back; and as the cloudless moonbeams played o'er his features, the smile of exulting triumph relaxed their stern expression. The clock tolled four—the stranger start¬ ed. " Perhaps 'tis guilt," thought Theo¬ dore, casting on him a hurried look : the impulse and the action were one, for in¬ voluntarily he placed his spread hand be¬ fore his eyes, as though in antipathy, as though in horror. The stranger retreated towards thedoor, о 5 for
for a tinkling bell proclaimed the waking fervour of religion. " Remember your oath" he whispered, then paused, and beckoned towards the garden. Theodore hesitated; the mysterious in¬ truder approached him. " Boy," he ar¬ ticulated, in smothered but authoritative accents, " follow me : obedience is the ťest of faith." He led through the cloisters, and into the garden. The lagging clouds of dark¬ ness were dispersing ; the misty empire of night yielding to the reins of coming- day ; streaks of glory dappled the grey bosom of the east, and the chirping ma¬ tin of the feathered race spoke the awakening gratitude of creation. The stranger led to the once interdic¬ ted chapel, nor paused till he reached a low arch immediately at the base of the belfry»
helfry. The spot was desolate, for the weeping birch, the gloomy cypress, and perennial laurel, entwining their som¬ bre branches, met o'er the tottering ruins of the tower, whose time-encrusted walls, mantled with ivy, briony, wild chirvil, and moss-wort, stood the fragile monuments of man's imbecility» " Mark me, Theodore/' he exclaimed; (e re¬ member I order, not request." The youth started—the glowing flush of pride passed quickly o'er his cheek; but instantly recollecting his oath, he bowed submissive. » " Each month, when the moon, full' and resplendent, rides majestic through the heavens, mark me," impatiently re¬ peated the stranger, <c it must be the night which completes that circular orb, leaving to the human eye no vacant ť б space—
space—then, when the brethren of Va* lombre shall have retired to their narrow cells, repair you to this ruin—tarry be¬ neath this arch—attend—listen* Should the sound of ahorn reach your ear, then thrice knock upon this tablet; if the signal be repeated, quit at once the ruin, and in the grove await my appearance : but should the echo of your blows die in silence, then raise the tablet, and be¬ neath it you will find a letter. Remember the full moon—remember three knocks on the tablet—remember secrecy—re¬ member submission—and now, Theo¬ dore, return to your cell/' tc Should the monks—should father Betsoiin behold me/' hesitatingly de¬ manded the youth, (t how can 1 evade their inquiries?" ct Pshaw, boy! by a thousand ways. Say,
Say, tempted by the beauty of the night, and unable to sleep, you quitted------" t( A falsehood !" interrupted Theodore, with a burst of indignation ; <f man, you have yet to know me. Though fettered by a deadly oath, my soul spurns even the shadow of subterfuge—how then can I acquiesce in falsehood ? 'Tis for you to remember, ere I bound myself the slave of your secret, its preservation was in no way to militate against my inno¬ cence/' The stranger smiled ironically. t( I have pointed out/' he replied, st and you reject my precaution; become at once the guide of your own actions; but know, the moment that absolves your oath, absolves my promise relative to the life of the monk Betsoiin. Go, deluded sophist, even through the chapel, even through
through the assembled brotherhood ; go, and should the spiritual mentors ques¬ tion yon, let the sharpened point of my dagger be before vour eves—let the o'er- hanging threat of murder gh e colour to vour answers," ¥ . i ....................' ι . ■ ..... Д. CHAP. VI. W hut m\btiť ıuivÜe imk> bene.it lì tiıy word", W lia ίι îimu n y uia*4 ччт njivMlnng h>t\¡>;t -·>.*' * ť N<»t bť-cutiM' tiif" UK nfjMfíu^ "unii ^ ^' \( ,'d by tbe bhtM ¡ifuuuk it, '•h^ 'Ut rVL'ii · к -Mt.'O to murmur. I* t» lU.t уЧ Л bu »k lie «.гланд KM(L Tlie j чем ut hour Iit ?u ii — у. to ii ŕee> tåi« tutuu·. '' TnKODORF, for the first time in existence, dreaded to encounter the pious inmate? of the monastery ; nay, above all, dread¬ ed
ed to encounter the beloved being, who till now had read every secret impulse of his soul· He fled, as though the slave of guilt, through the garden, and when in the cloisters, paused and listened, \фл\\ almost breathless trepidation, for each corniti g sound, the fall of a leaf, the whistling of the wind, paralyzed the pow¬ ers of action, and stamped him the sport of fancy. lr I am innocent/* he mentally big hed, (i and yet I tremble. Holy Hea¬ ven î what means this strange perturba¬ tion, this revolution in mv feelings? *Tis to save a life I am become a slave—■ a slave/* shuddering— ff a slave, and to whom ?** Unable to answer the question, he bu¬ ried his face in his spread hands, and remained, forgetful of his dread of ob¬ servation,
servation, abandoned to each start of imagination—to each fugitive impres¬ sion of soul. * f Theodore/' articulated the alarmed voice of father Betsoiin, " beloved son of my affection !" The youth started from his absorption ; he gazed for a moment on the anxious countenance of his friend, then, with a spring of almost frenzied swiftness, bounded through the cloisters, and rush¬ ed to his cell. Trembling for the health, nay almost for the sanity of his pupil, the good monk, exerting the feeble remnant of exhausted strength, hurried after him. Pausing to recover breath, he pushed open the door of the little dormitory, and beheld the youth upon his knees be¬ fore
fore a crucifiK, his eyes resľmg on the emblem of immaculate suffering, una hi$ hands clasped in prayer, f< God of omnipotence !" he ejaculated, " guide me through the labyrinth I am doomed to tread." The monk was at his side ; his staff fell to the ground, as his arms enfolded his pupil, "What labyrinth.-" he eagerly demanded. c< Say, dear, enigmatical boy, what new labvrinth entangles v our feet ?** Theodore could no longer shrink from the scrutiny ; he shuddered—he almost gasped for breath ; then burying his face in the dark folds of the monk's habit, faltered out, "Life" Father Betsolin arose; with amaze¬ ment he beheld the palpable emotion which dappled the flushed cheek of the youth, and extending to his voice, almost deprived
deprived him of the powers of articula* tion. ''Theodore/' he exclaimed, "some mystery lurks beneath your words-—some romantic project fills every avenue of your comprehensive mind, and stagnates the current of communication. Last night when we parted------" " Last night—last night," quickly re¬ peated Theodore. " Jesu Maria 1 last night------" but recovering himself— * s last night, father, you told me the story of your sufferings—last night, fa¬ ther, I could not rest." " Was it the story of my sufferings which frightened sleep?" interrogated the monk. " Was it sympathy for my past years of misery which led you to the cloisters ?'' Theodore hung his head in silence. " Say," pursued his inquisitor, "was it
it to muse o*er my wrongs—was it to glean strength by my example, that you quitted the scene of your slumbers?" ff Cruel ! cruel !*' murmured Theo¬ dore, and large and scalding tears stream¬ ed down his cheeks. The monk wept with him, " Holy saints !" he aspirated, iC how is the child of my hopes changed !—how, in one short night, have the genuine feelings of nature become annihilated!" " Hear me^ father," exclaimed Theo¬ dore, in all the energy of innocence—in all the enthusiastic ardour of his charac¬ ter. ťí í am not changed, but bound------ ** He paused—he shuddered—the blood forsook his cheeks; his lips quivered, for his "mind's eye" pointed to the heart of the holy Betsoiin the murderous po¬ niard of the stranger. He shrunk from the
the arms of his preceptor—he sank on his knees before him. " Father," he im¬ plored, « leave me ; 1 dare not be my* self. There is a tie—there is a vow re¬ gistered—oh deep, deep ! Leave me¿ father, leave me/' " Leave you/* reproachfully repeated the monk, " thus the sport of delirium, thus actuated by the wild fever of frenzy. Theodore,, know you what you ask ? Poor boy!" gating on him with aching fondness, " leave you : day and night, sleeping or waking, here will I take my station/' Theodore wept as he grasped the hands of the father: his heart felt grateful· for so much kindness, yet could he not repay it by confidence· (t Dearest of friends! best òf human beings !" he articulated, * f it is not delirium, it is not fever which causes
causes this agitation ; it is the spirits, not the health ; it is the mind, not the body. I wOuld but pass an hour in prayer—it is a cordial, father/* forcing a smile, '"which the sick soul covets. I feel my days of inactivity arc passed ; and now that fate calls upon me to fulfil a more лigoroıïs part, I would implore Ileavca to inspire me with strength and forti¬ tude, sufficient to acquit myself in the trial." As he spoke, the mild beams of conscious rectitude o f erspread his fea¬ tures ; his eyes regained their animation* and his smile was the smile of hope. ff Tis enough," said the monk, curio¬ sity yielding to astonishment—" í leave you, Theodore, not idly to guess at your secret, but to strengthen its preservation ; gratitude shall no longer torture your feeling mind, or endanger the prescribed limits
limits of honour. Boy !—son !—friend! •—become the guide of your own ac¬ tions. Humble yourself ever thus before your Maker; persevere in the brave, the undaunted elevation of your own prin- clples, and never will the blush of shame paint your cheeks, never stigmatize your actions/* Theodore stretched forth his arms, but lhe monk had fled ; his little cell was de¬ serted; and unobserved he could now revise the past, and plan for the future— The past extended not beyond the visit of the mysterious stranger ; the future 3 all concentrated in the links so strongly forged by Nature, in the anticipated hope of yet beholding the authors of his being. His mind, always alive to some darling passion, always buoyed by some reigning impulse, now felt all the glowing attri¬ butes
butes of filial love—now panted for the warm reciprocity of parental fervour. To be known— to be acknowledged—to be blessed by the endearing appellation of son, was a reverie of exquisite delight; a reverie, which in the noonday beams, hi the darkness of night, in the refectory, in the chapel, alike pursued, alike ab¬ sorbed every faculty. Yes, the devoted soul of the cowl's most bigoted convert, the zealous candidate for devotional re¬ strictions, even at the foot of the altar, even when the vaulted roof echoed the solemnity of holiness, dipt not the bur¬ nished pinions of fancy, but suffered them to waft him beyond the walls of Valombre. Day succeeded day, and Theodore matched the gradual increase of the moon, with an ardour not to be controuled: the
the letter, the anxiously looked-for, the promised letter, imagination pictured as the solution of every mystery—imagina¬ tion deposited in his hands glowing with the names οι father and of motlier. At length the night arrived; the moon, round as a burnished shield, shone re* splendent in the heavens. Theodore, with a palpitating heart, stationed at the window, watched the retiring footsteps of the monks: his thoughts were compli¬ cated, one moment fanned into joy, the next subdued even to despondence. Akst the solemn oath of concealment was the poisoning mildew of peace ; the necessity for reserve, a draught upon^his gratitude, and a violence to his feelings. The mild voice of father Betsoiin seemed to reproach him, seemed to discard him ; the compact of friendship, the bond of confidence
confidence was severed, and he felt an alien, even beneath the roof of his infan¬ cy. A slave to the sensibility of the heart, to the propelling force of feeling, Лгт in moments of difficulty, capable of the most heroic efforts, yet in an instant, by a word, by a look, by a thought, bent to the very verge of feminine weakness, Theodore hung his head upon his breast, and his heart swelled almost to su fioca* í ion ; rears of bitterness streamed from his eyes ; virions of despairing sadness iii tied o'er his brain : the lapse of time was forgotten, and not until the deep reverberating clock tolled the hour of midnight, did he start, as it were, into being. <f I am called upon/* he articu¬ lated; " 'tis the moment for action; the moment when guilt stalks upon the world.'* He shuddered—he ga/,ed upon φ VOL, J. \i ţ| ie
the calm stillness of creation. " I am not guilty/* he concluded, with a grief- fraught sigh, tf and yet destiny com¬ mands me.'* He quitted the window ; he humbled himself before the prototype of faith ; and elevating his every thought to the divine throne of grace, passed many minutes in silent but fervent praver. Calmed, strengthened, inspired, he arose, his spirits and his fortitude restor¬ ed, his mind invigorated, and feeling- capable of combating against even more than imaginary evils. Yes, sweet-e\ ed Fietv ! when man forsakes, when sorrows· multiply, beneath thy guardian wing, the broken heart finds covert: thine be tha healin«» balm of sublunarv woe; thtnt be the gentle monitor of reason : from the.eye of affliction, 'tis thou who wjp(*t the cankering tear; in the tar of the cantrip
contrite, 'tisico« who whisperest pardon; Ín the soul of the desponding, 'tis ihou who establishest the renovating reliance of futurity ! Theodore paused in the passage open¬ ing from the dormitories of the monks; he Iihîcned, but the reign of deep silence was undisturbed; the inmate of each narrow cell was sunk in repose ; even ïhe restless spirit of long watching was Liuhedj for nature seemed to mourn fhe Jvath of sound. Swiftly he descended ihe sialic; swiftly he passed through the tjotters . the n u lit-breeze was cold a;ul damp : he wrapt his serge cloak around ilim, and hu iled thron »h the sardciu Л gloomy bh:»dow hung o'er crofted m* иге; the dense vapcin-s of n igln ¡m* pended from the tree*; and the moon, shrouded bv velumes of dark and passing TÉT ·' *' '.',4.» Ì
clouds, but partially emitted her rays. Theodore was in that mood for contem¬ plation which suffers not the most trivial circumstance to pass unnoticed: a bush caught his cloak ; he paused to disentan¬ gle himself; his eyes filled with tears, for it was the thorns of a rose-free, which he himself had planted, to commemorate the spot where a once-cherished favourite lay buried. <ζ Poor Mignon !*' he arti¬ culated, and then, ashamed of his own weakness, he struggled to force a smile; but the effort died in the birth. Mignon was a little sportive squirrel, the gift of father Betsoiin : Mignon had fallen an early victim to the thoughtless¬ ness of youth ; for Theodore had forgot¬ ten to shelter him in a cold night, and the succeeding morning he had died in his bosom. " Poor favourite ľ' he sigh¬ ed,
ed, " thy pangs were past when mine be<nm : surelv if an involuntary act, if a j j an omission causes such acute sensations, what must the wretch endure, whose ac¬ tions mark premeditated cruelty—whose days are passed ¡n intentional guilt '/* líe forgot, that as the cast of the human countenance, so does the properties of the soul vary; he forgot, that what would torture the nerves of refined sensibility, would but excite the smile of the volup] tuary, would but awaken the derision of the man of the world. Theodore was no casuist: until the mvsterious introduction of the stranger* he had judged mankind by the in.nates of Valombre ; he hid thought all alike harmless, all alike guileless ; nay, even now, his inexperienced mind pictured, и 3 that
that as on the sun's bright disk there are sombre spots, which, if visible to the eye, would by contrast increase its dazzling lustre, so here and there, amidst the va¬ riegated productions of nature, beings of monstrous enormity burdened the earth, making the actions of the virtuous more resplendent. Blissful are the flights of imagination !—-w T onderful the soat ing ge¬ nius of fancy ! in one short moment, the days of long-departed mirth were re¬ vived ; in one short moment, each nook, each corner, recalled to the ductile mirni of our hero the infantine sports of childhood. He stood beside the little garden he had assiduously cultivated, his eyes bent upon the seat of his toil and his recreation, now overgrown by the fra¬ grant shrubs his hands had planted. (t God of
of compassion!** he aspirated, "am I, like these flowers, to blossom and to die on the self-same spot ? Am I------" The abbey clock struck one : he start¬ ed : the present, like an overwhelming ilood, effaced the past ; his oath, his compact, was alone remembered, and with unceasing speed he iled towards the chapel. Scarce had he shrunk beneath the darkened shadow of the archway, when a blast, shrill and piercing, echoed through the ruin. He knew the signal, yet did hi¿> heart fee! pirahzed. Again the horn reverberated. Short were his struggles; feeling gave way to action, and thrice he strut к his hand upon the tablet. No sound was returned. He listened, but deep and unvaried was the stillness which prevailed ; no footstep, no single indication of a human being. tf 4 Anxious,
Anxious, yet unable to solve the mystery, he carefully raised the tablet, and press¬ ing his hand into the aperture, grasped a folded paper. His heart exulted as though he had found a treasure; and hastily re¬ placing the stone, he hurried from the ruin, nor paused till he had gained the se¬ curity of his cell. The faint and unsteady flame of his taper stiil threw a sickly gleam around—still decked the melan¬ choly mementoes of mortality with a saffron hue—the crucifix, the death'shead., and the hour-glass. The last sand was run ; Theodore turned it, and sighed. Night after night, hour after hour, had it trembled in the hands of its late possessor. tf Calm be the graves quiet ! Poor fa¬ ther Théophile, peaceful the slumbers of thv soul !" he articulated, as imagination, reverting to the sad close of the monk's earthly
earthly pilgrimage, effaced even the re¬ collection of his own difficulties. " Poor father Théophile ! the earth which pil¬ lows thy head, the stone which presses on thy bosom------" if But the letter?** inquires the inqui¬ sitive peruser of these pages. Be pa¬ tient, gentle lady, and the letter shall yet be unfolded. The letter was grasped by the hand of fheodore, yet did the ge¬ nial sympathy of his nature wander to the awful scene of dissolution, hang upon the melancholy rites of the monk's ob¬ sequies. Every eye in the choir beamed the soul-softening language of commise¬ ration ; every heart throbbed with the magic impulse of feeling : the organ was touched with a tremulous hand, and the Libala Mei Was' sobbed rather than chaunted. ^ & Father
Father Theophile had died in the ser¬ vice of benevolence—had died in the discharge of a duty, from which even monachal courage had shrunk. Flying to the seclusion of Valombre, not be¬ cause he would shun misfortune—not because he would renounce the haunts of men—not because he wanted fortitude to stem the torrent of persecution—but because his pious mind would pray for peace and pardon on his persecutors, he there enriched the hallowed altar of faith with the pure thanksgiving of a spotless soul. Exer awake to the calls of true holiness, ever a candidate for the com¬ fortless offices of restriction and self- mortification, the humble mind of the devotee gradually became jaundiced with the bigotry of zeal ; for man, born to imperfection, man, the slave of opinion, dives
dives not through the hyperbole of sci¬ ence, but follows too readily, and too frequently, its occult practices. The path to salvation lay through the suffer¬ ings of the spirit, and the nights of father Théophile were broken and disturbed, because nature pined for rest. Enthu¬ siasm stamped e'en weakness virtue, and credulity glowed beneath the term faith. Such was the dark era of unpurified zeal —But I wander : I too am lost in a laby¬ rinth, whose voluminous clue here for¬ bids delineation—I forget that my hero» with the letter in his hand, yielding to the light tissue of imagination, now stands in his ceil, recalling the Libera Mei chaunted at the monk's obsequies. Shall I, here, following the straight-for¬ ward tract of my history, unfold the let¬ te } or shall J, yielding to the sensitive u 6 impulse
impulse of the heart, explain why every eye wept the fall of fafher Theophie ? The laws of historic delineation should not be violated ; true, but the heart is ııncontrouîable. The long gathering storm broke İn re¬ verberating echoes, as father Théophile, and three of his brethren, returning from a visit of charity, bent their steps towards Valombre. Dreadful wasthe din of electric matter: theearth rocked beneath the howl- in*r blast : the hard ν trees of the forest bow- ed their tall heads; and the rapid waves of the Garonne, swollen and dark, threw high their feathered surf. Agitated with nameless dread, with awful terror, the monks would have fled foi shelter—Father Théophile alone stood firm and undaunted ; what was the wreck of worlds to him ? he had gained a con¬ quest
quest which heroes cannot boast—aeon- quest over his own heart, a subjugation of his feelings; at least he thought so—· Nature is eternal : man may arrogantly boast, but circumstances will recall the lambent flame, stamping the die irrever¬ sible. Suddenly his cheek became bleach¬ ed ; suddenly hts arms were extended ; suddenly his eyes, in expectant horror, rested on a jutting rock, which bulged o'er the bed of the river. Wild were the shrieks %\hich filled the pauses of the blast—a child, an adventurous peasant child, had climbed the highest peak, to rob the cur¬ lew's nest, and now implored for suc¬ cour. One—one step further, and the little trembler would be ingulphed; one —one step further, and the efforts of ex¬ ertion would be useless. The monks shrunk in dismay : all save ^ father
father Theophile recoursed to prayer: father Theophile was pious—but father Theophile felt himself called to action. He darted up the side of the rock; re¬ gardless of his own safety, he thought but of the infant sufferer ; yet could he not reach the point. The child shrieked louder, as the storm became more furi¬ ous. The wind had blown back the hood of the monk's scapular, and his shorn head was exposed to the rude peltingsof the tempest. His staff dropped from his hands—he raised them with frenzied fer¬ vour to Heaven. u Blessed saints, aid thy servant !" he ejaculated, and then, with an elfort more than mortal, sprung upon the point. One hand grasped the child—one hand threw him on the plain above, whilst with the other he clung to the o'erhanging shrubs. The child was safe—
safe—was rescued· He saw his danger : —a prayer quivered on his bloodless lips -—the treacherous hold gave way, and father Theophile sank amidst the angry waves of the Garonne. Dreadful was the conflict passing in the breasts of the brethren ! dreadful the shrieks of anguish, the exclamations of despair! The ill-fated monk was rescued from the waves—was conveyed to Va- lombre. He spoke not, but his eyes un¬ closed—he moved not,but still he breath¬ ed At night, when the storm was hushed, and the winds of heaven scarcely mur¬ mured, his eyes closed forever—at night, when the lightnings ceased to play, and the thunder no longer rumbled, he breathed no more. For the first time, doubt and incon¬ gruity pervaded the young mind of The¬ odore:
odore: till then he had pictured a life of devoted sanctify the peculiar charge of Providence; till then he had pictured the love, the prayers of father Théophile, a safeguard even to others. " A death so violent," he articulated, as, with the monk Betsoiin, he watched by the cold eorse; tf his piety and his faith, his precepts and his example, his restric¬ tions and his zeal—Oh, father, me- thought Heaven's angels would have guarded a life so precious! Father------" The monk looked fearfully towards him* ft Wherefore should man renounce the pleasures of the world,'* pursued Theo¬ dore, regardless of the deep scrutiny of his companion ; " wherefore should man shrink from the enjoymentsof life, if------" " Boy, what is it I hear?" interrupted the shuddering devotee. " Banish the inroads
inroads of scepticism ; 'tis a poison which corrodes every moral duty, which can¬ kers every virtue of the soul." Cf I am no sceptic, father/' mildly re¬ plied Theodore. Cf I would but ask, why a being so immaculate, so pure, so per¬ fect, should be snatched from the wor¬ ship of Heaven, in rescuing a child, whose future days may be darkened with guilt—whose future actions may be in¬ stigated by evil ?" The monk raised his eyes to Heaven, murmured a credo, then turning to the youth— <f Vain bov," he said, <ζ vou would dive whither the blind and mis¬ judging eye of humanity is forbidden. It is not because God spares the guilty, and strikes the innocent, that the mind of man should waver: faith is the tenet of our holy worship ; and in meek humility, ♦ without
without daring to question, without dar¬ ing to repine, 'lis the Christian's duty to bow to his decrees." Theodore, crossing his bosom, bent his head in token of conviction. Piety sub¬ verted the rising mists of error ; the doc¬ trines of zeal were conclusive; and our hero, more effectually to impress on me¬ mory the record of father Theophile's virtues, petitioned of the abbot the in¬ dulgence of inhibiting the same ceil, in the hope of treading the inspired steps of his predecessor. The request, decked in the language of piety, and pleaded with the warm ardour of enthusiasm, was accorded ; and the night which witnessed the transient lapse of established forti¬ tude—which sprinkled the cold limits of nature's sanctuary with the almost frozen tears of long devotional apathy—which softened,
Softened, (о sobbing weakness, the voices of the holv choir, and filled with enan- guished pauses the sacred strains of the Libera Mei, beheld Theodore reclining on the hard pallet of father Théophile, his eyes fixed on the hour-irhibS. and his
CIIAI\
CHAP. VII. J í» Godlike ntacnatiiiuitv to keep ~— ^, ------,-----Q ur ¡ b . s41 raim and tltitr. And execute her will, ťromu btiutig мч^е Ui "what ι·* rsgJi·-. Т»ьмм%\" . é . ·,.. . * Sttfet R^t.-· ıtioîi bnn-'d, w but doth etiïae. Ji .t II' >dvUild tlmili M^î.-llı h »Iv, KiUMuaii to í, ι un ai. d comfortlo^b dtsjı.or; And at ht- г lu. Ль a hug* 1 ¡utecia.wh î.< чр Ofpaíedittempcnuiirv*-, and io« s to hû ? .^ВЛК i-s! £\Γ.Ι As Theodore started from his deep ab¬ straction, the prolcngthened chain of fancy vanished, and the mental visions of never-slumbering imagination gave place to the mysterious incident of the past hour—to the coming difficulties of the future. With a trembling hand be broke the seal of the letter; with a palpi rating- heart
heart he perused its contents. " He- member absolution cannot cleanse a per¬ jured soul," was the appalling line of its commencement ; lC remember the vow of eternal denunciation is registered deeper than on my memory. Theodore, you have bound your very being to my guidance—you have yielded yourself a slave to my controul." Theodore shuddered ; he grasped the paper with the energy of passion; his cheek flushed crimson, and t lie lire of defiance sparkled in his eyes. " Vain boaster!" burst from his burning lips, and then a heavy sigh checked utterance, for the chape ί scene, and the solemn te¬ nor of his oath, crowded upon his brain. <£ A slave/' he emphatically murmured *—" a slave—and to whom ?" Again his eyes
eyes sought the paper, and again indig¬ nation banished every other feeling. f< Mine is no common stretch of au* thority, neither is it the coercion of self- created power—it is absolute—it is un- controulabîe. Theodore, the breath of life hangs on my dagger's point, and dis« obedience paves the way to murder* Mark me, when next I write, the languor of inactivity, the lassitudes of indulgence must yield to exertion— must, bov, for the puerile pursuits of Valombre a £ breth« ren mh not the magnitude οι a new and glorious enterprise. Theodore, the whin¬ ing hum of prayer must give place to the elang of arms-*—Theodore, your hand must drop the rosary,and gn;sp the sword, Manhood must efthce the recreant ртч mim of youth« far blood «lone тя Ini«
tiate the heart to valour. Remember your oath ; be secret, and be silent/* Theodore read and re-read the letter : every passion of his soul was roused into being; pride, grief, horror, amazement, indignation, dismay, alternately agitated, alternately glowed in every feature. Un- decided, unadvised, left to the guidance of his own inexperience, fettered by a vow of faial and mysterious import, b$ knew not how to act, he knew not how to elude the approaching trial. How did his lieart sicken for the joy of communi* caiion !—how did bis heart siçke-n for th$ assuaging aid of confidence, for tha ne** ver«· fai Ung balm of sympathy! But ho dared not tiy to its alleviating power»-«« he dared not whisper the udo to the ear of friendship : once he tottered—oncd he flew to the door of hi* cell : he paw·
ed, his hand placed upon the lock. "The oath was compulsatory," he mused ; " it was not the free-will offering of the soul. Surely the interposition of prayer will plead with Heaven for forgiveness ; sure¬ ly atoning penance will restore my be* wildered steps to the paths of peace; surelv, beneath this holv sanctuary, mer- су will obliterate involuntary trespass, and guide me to the bosom of my God. M All was harmony, all was concord; his heart fluttered with coming joy, with new-born expectation. ΐ{ Yes, in thv arms, dear and revered father Betsoiin— in thy ear------" His eyes glanced on the paper which his hand stiil grasped, glan¬ ced on the words, disobtdknce faxes the ycag to murder, and a shuddering sensa¬ tion of horror palsied his whole frame, His cheeks were pale, his lips colourless; cold,
cold, fearful drops hung on his forehead; and, as his heart felt swollen almost to suffocation, every thought, every idea was lost in the bleeding form of his pre¬ ceptor. " Not for myself, blessed saints, not for myself do I tremble—I would ¥ blunt the dagger's point—I would shield the precious life of my friend!" He sank on his pallet, subdued, overcome, raid for many moments yielded to the weakness of tears. Feeling the necessity of exertion, he again read the paper, and tearing a leaf from his tablet, wrote— fi Strange beinsr. whoe'er thou art, who thus arrogantly assumes the controul of my actions, know that the restriction, as well as the oath, is registered on my memorv ; know that I can brave death rather than dishonour. 0 He fled to the garden, deposited the note vol* ι, ι beneath
beneath the ruined archway, and with spirits somewhat calmed, returned un¬ seen to his cell. In vain he wooed the calm of slumber; broken and unquiet were the transient moments of forgetful- ne&s. The gigantic form of the stranger was the appalling subject of his visions; sometimes grasping a dagger steeped in the blood of the monk, but offener, with demoniac lauuh, exclaiming—^ Ihon ait inine'* From this pri iod, t!:e ^r\V\ and the health of Theodore applied to dot ľm? ; no smile gladdened his featiws, no -por« tive ην of wHirhfu! vivacity l с .»med from his meiancholy eyes ; he looked as though the weight of wori.U proved up¬ on his heart ; he felt as though the euri·* »ies of life weie biastotl. ¡n vain i¿:hn· Betsoiin t^sa) ed to decyphev the i%ttn»e id'
of his dejection, in vain the studied en¬ dearments of friendship sought to steal the treasured secret ; Theodore, with a perseverance till now unknown, baffled every argument, refuted every supposi¬ tion. But though Ids lips breathed not the tale, his countenance spoke corrod- ¡η~ ¿ ; ;:\ιοίν, :\nd deep-rooted care; his rour.îenaıue, the intelligent index of his •r.i'id, ьроке a heart aching with buried χ·.*'}?*, л m -'a d. iöîMrod wit!* anxious a:»*i- î ι. ι. / ν 'л r...vj ν, ce 1 nu ĺ ce ed ed, and other ; 'iu-;* ì'!:.Ud the pO!\-e\er:ng inìcrfer* c ž: .j ìì*. í!·*/ .sb';n: -;ei' ; t\j: a a!!ke ivas i.^.thlNi ui ΙΠ>Λ>ϋι»»1£ trnr¿ of .nithoiiïy -t л» ι*. .İi4i" iri ìiiVi i the coercion of лг- I'-.. ·-.! p^^.'vľť. iiíCvido.-e pïc^erwd ;ì.v Л', ас ι ,;з a s'^üíímiío of his own sh^ t. ,'·»>.;· Ли Ь-'й а лц г г expbiuîiou uf τ > ι î
his conduct, should circumstances, ab¬ solving his oath, enable him to appear before the brethren of Valombre in all bis genuine candour. Reared by the fos- С? ¥ tering hand of kiiidness, loved for the grateful energies of his nature, a favou¬ rite from the father abbot to the porter at the gate, he had to stem a persevering, a geneial tenderness, winch convened to his feeling heart a sensation of painful yet pleasing emotion ; painful, because it embittered the pang of concealment—■ pleasing, because it whispered, that the bier of the foundling would be watered with the tears of affection. Sometimes the raging whirlwind of passion, sometimes the sensibility of na¬ ture, were by the monks alternately des- canîedj alternately rejected. That the passions should r^ge within the conse¬ crated
crated walte of religion, seemed a mock¬ ery to true holiness; but that seductive love should steal one thought from Hea- ven, should enslave a soul once eager for profession, appeared to the cold and rigid disciples of exterminated feeling an outrage aïike to sense and to probabi¬ lity. Besides, where could the eyes of the once-devoted saint gaze upon the attractions of female loveliness?—where inhale the halcyon joys of forbidden bliss ? Tis true, upon charitable offices he had sometimes visited the cottages of the peasantry ; but could a mind fraught with intellectual worth, could a soul alive to all the tremulous vibrations of feeling, to all the sublime, the enthusiastic im¬ pulses of piety, stoop to the degrading, the mortal bias of sensuality ? Oh no ! the very suggestion was an insult to rea- ι 3 son,
mn, a violation to virtue; ar.d Theodore was arraigned and acquitted in the self- ьние breath. It was then the canker of disease which sapped the vital stream of e\istenre—it was a slow coiisuming fe¬ ver which threatened his saniiV and his life. Such were the conclusions of the brethren, all save father Betsoiin; he had studied the character οΐ his pupil, he nad read with horror and dismay that the fe¬ ter was on the mind. It was Ions: a ft erTheodore Ira J retired fom evening worship, that the monk,as a last effort, repaired to his ceil, armed with all the argu ments of tenderness, with all the soul-stealing susceptibility of entreaty. The youth, subdued by lassitude, had sunk upon his pallet, where nature, wearied by intense thought, was snatching from sleep a momentary oblivion. The monk, with
with noiseless step, advanced, reclosed the door, and watched his slumbers. PaU Ud was his cheek ; no varied hue of dappled health blushed o'er his features; yet was his respiration calm, for the la¬ bouring start of passion betrayed not the torture of imagination. Father Betsulin hung over him ; the days of his infancy were revised, the hours of his past confi¬ dence reacted : 'tis true, the monk was dead to the world, but the sensibility of the heart still lingered; 'tis true, with the cowl he had outwardly embraced the freezing dogmas of established custom; but the cowl, no, nor the cowľs initiators, cannot efface the attributes of nature. Sighs of uncontrolled emotion agitated hib bosom, tears of unsuppressed tjiuler- ncss streamed from his eves; they fell upon the cheek of the unconscious The- i 1 odore ;
odore; the monk, with cautious hand» essayed to displace them, but the attempt roused the sleeper. He started ; he look¬ ed up ; impulsive was the feeling of al· faction, was the glow of sympathy ; he threw 'us arms around the neck of iatlier Betsoiin, and wept upon his bosom, " My he! о \ ed boy!'* fai t с red the monk., tf valued as would have been the ehcrioh- ed offspring of mv sainted Caserna í Theodore, dear mssterious Theodore, your health dcclincs,yourspi:ii>hiigubh : the sallow hue of sickness overspreads your cheeks: your feet seek e\cr the melancholy haunts of unfrequented sad¬ ness; and though no complaint escapes your lips, 'tis evident you pine beneath borne secret aOliction. Am I not your friend? Say, cruel and unkind one. could the fondest counsels, the most endearing efforts
efforts of paternal solicitude have sur¬ passed my anxious, eager interest ?— * could------ ■" " Father/' interrupted the agitated, the almost-convulsed Theodore, " have compassion—have mercy/' ťť I would but steal your sorrows/* re¬ plied the monk ; ťí I would but lighten the weisdit of vour secret woes. I have О ¥ been young—I can look back to the days of temptation. Telime, if imprudence — if guilt—Ah, Theodore î the passions war against the soul ; the passions often break down the barrier of reason, and render dissolute the------ *' ei Oh no, no !" sobbed the youth, and gasping for breath, he buried hu face m his hands. ťí I will soften, I will sooth/* mourn¬ fully resumed father Betsoiin. thinking io be
he had at once traced the long-smothered clue of concealment. " Unhappy boy, point out the fatal lapse, and to the throne of grace my prayers shall ascend for pardon ! Speak; in mercy to your¬ self, in mercy to your soul's eternal peace, reveal this long-preserved secret, this smothered pang, which bends you to an untimely grave, and robs me of life's chief blessing—vour confidence and af- fection. No power do I arrogate, no duty do í urge — Bov —Theodore—child -—beloved child ! say, confess what black, What deadlv crime, shrinks with such seeming horror from a friendly eve?" " Bitter is the hour of trial !" mur¬ mured the accused youth, his heart swell¬ ing in all the native pride of greatness. " Yet, father/* and deep and solemn was his'tone, "by the meek and hallowed spirits
spirits of eternal bliss ! no pang of guilt pervades my soul, or clouds my actions. Forgive the apparent obstinacy of per¬ severance—oh forgive, acquit, pity a wretched being, who loves—who vene¬ rates—who knows no peace, no joy on earth, banished your confidence, hurled from vour affection !" For a moment j he paused, gazed with aching agitation on the features of the monk, then conti¬ nued— ff My nature scorns suspicion ; yet, father, necessity—compulsion-—in¬ truding recollection------" "Scorns suspicion?" reiterated the monk, grasping the cold hand of Theo¬ dore, and looking imploringly in his face; (C oh ! then explain the mvsterv, silence intruding doubts, snatch aside the veil of prejudice, and reveal the spring of ac¬ tion?" ι 6 " I cannot
" I cannot—I dare not," faltered The¬ odore—" Father------" " Dare not!'* interrupted the monk, in accents of stern severity—" dare not! what new and sacrilegious tie supersedes the call of duty ?" " Humanity, gratitude," wildly arti¬ culated the youth, " all—all conspire against me. No more—no more—father, no more. The eye of Heaven reads my secret—sanctions my perseverance." " Then you admit a secret?" question¬ ed father Betsoiin, and apprehension gave way to amazement; " you admit some deep and hidden cause stagnates the spring of youth, and poisons the current of existence?" " Yes, yes, there is a cause—I must, I do admit it—a cause, holy saints ! how deep ! how imperious ï Urge me no fur¬ ther—
ther —I am bound—tied—an oath—" Theodore gasped for breath ; Theodore shuddered, as though in the convulsions of death. " Father—father, 4is profa¬ nation—murder." The monk raised his clasped hands to Heaven. " Mother of God, forefend our sanctuary!" he aspirated—" Profana- tion! Murder!" " Yes," with almost frenzied eager¬ ness, pursued the youth, " blood marks the violated oath, and damns the per¬ jured soul. Not prayer or penance, not contrition or reparation, can rouse the sleep of death. Mark me, father, the breath that tells the tale, blasts the sweet spring of life. Shun me—shun me—'tis gall—'tis wormwood—poison." "Saints of mercy!" ejaculated the monk, numbering the beads of his rosary, " calm
(( calm the fell horrors of his maddened brain, and give him peace and rest !** tf Father, I am not mad," said Theo¬ dore, forcing a smile ; " no fever rava¬ ges my brain, or desolates my senses. Memory is keen, is aerurate~; her pow¬ ers are not impaired— Ì know the debt í owe to Heaven, and, next to Heaven, to you/' t( To Heaven be all the praise У meek¬ ly observed the father. "To Heaven, and Heaven's just ser¬ vant!" grateful 1 v concluded Theodore. The monk crossed his bosom, breathed a heavy sigh, and moved towards the door. The youth sprung forward, and seized his hand. "Father/* he exclaimed, "you knew the bent of my nature ere I knew myself; you traced the growth of prin¬ ciple,
ci pie, ere reason and conviction had gain¬ ed their bias : say, then, can your heart acquit me?—can your judgment, admit¬ ting me the child of mystery, believe my actions the result of honour ?" tr May Heaven speed me," solemnly replied the monk, iť as my soul disclaims the inroads of suspicion ! Impelled by some unknown influence, I believe rec¬ titude the incentive even of y our silence/* It was nearly dark; evening's gloomy shadows veiled the features of Theodore; vet the warm tears which fell uoon the hand of father Betsoiin, and the fervent pressure which marked the grateful adieu of his pupil, betrayed his feelings. "I will go pray for you, my son/' faltered the monk, pausing yet a moment longer. *' Theodore, at the sacred altar of divine worship, I will petition Heaven to shield you
yon from temptation and sin, to inspire you with strength and perseverance for exertion, with patience and endurance, under those evils the lapse of time may unfold. Theodore/* and he placed his hand with tender piety on the head of the youth, " my blessing and my hopes rest on you !" * f Amen," trembled on the lips of Theodore ; and as the last echo of the monk's footsteps died on the solitude of his cell, " may thy hopes be built upon a rock," he enthusiastically exclaimed; tc a rock, which the surges of the world, which the breakers of the passions can¬ not sap, or render desolate !" Convinced that the gloomy abstraction of his young favourite proceeded from some hidden vision, some mockery of the senses, inculcated by his pursuits and his doctrines,
doctrines, father Betsolin, whose mind had imbibed the infatuation of bigotry and superstition, whose mind, in a mo¬ ment, comprised his mysterious entrance into the monastery, the murder of the j ' late abbot, with the disappearance of the stranger, commended his persever¬ ance, gloried in his zeal of faith, and hailed the canonization of an hereafter saint. It must be remembered, that father Ijetsolin lived in an era when the blessed rapture of divine inspiration was admit¬ ted and believed ; in an era, when the casual coincidence of circumstances awak¬ ened wonder, and the slightest colouring of improbability was magnified into por¬ tentous omens. Convinced his penetration had disco¬ vered
vered the treasured secret, and trembling lest health should fall the wreck of ima¬ gined duty, the monk hastened to the celi of the father superior. The broken sentences, the excessive agitation of the youth, was minutely recited, and credit- Jify was scon swelled bva new prosélyte« " it must be so/' said the abbot, devout¬ ly crossing himself. ť< Reserved forsorne great calling, this \ ouih is «iven to our О О ' j о holv care." fí To Heaven be the praise!" mur¬ mured the monk, ff to us the charge." u True, my son," rcjoineJ the superi¬ or, " from the baleful sin of arrogated wisdom, blessed Mary, defend thy ser¬ vants !" The monk bowed in acquiescence, and the abbot continued— (C Shall !, invested bv
hy my sacred au thority, absolve the ac¬ knowledged oath, and claim his soul's confession ?*' " No, father," eagerly exclaimed fhe monk, <f authority and tenderness com- 1 ¥ bin ed could not wre^t the treasured se¬ cret, else into my ear had it been pour¬ ed. He loves me, reverenct falber," and a transient glow parsed o'er the sallow cheek of the religiuu* ; (i with all the energy of his grateful nature loves me, for what he terms the beneficence of charity, what I term the bare impulse of duty, Alas, poor Theodore ! he pos¬ sesses feelings much too strong for the trials of the world------" "If he lives," interrupted the abbot. s< Ah î there exists my «rreatest dread," said father Betsoiin— tf Mother of God ! tľí leaven should chum him for its own, every
every sorrow cf my past life will be re¬ acted.'* f4 We are told," said the superior, in accents of reprehension, ir to fix our hearts upon things above." The monk meekly crossed his hands upon his bosom. if To preach resignation with our lips/* pursued the abbot, (i when our hearts are alive to anxiety and apprehension, is mockery to our sacred calling 1, —is an of- fence against the ruling principle of our order. Nature must die ; 'tis the spirit, not the flesh, should actuate the inmates of these walls/' Father Betsoiin bowed in submission, not in conviction, for he felt that the flesh, often rebelling against the sacred dictates of the spirit, would struggle for jwe-eminence, in spite of the mandate of apathy,
apathy, in spite of the boasted influence of zeal. <( Yet, father in God," he meek¬ ly demanded, (i surely the laws of true holiness forbid not the preservation of the body's health. Theodore, young, and a slave to feeling, droops under some hidden secret, which the monotony of his life each moment must recall, in change of scene the impression might become fainter, the ideas might lose their malign force/' cf in change of scene," repeated the abbot, for the monk, pausing, .looked expectantly towards him; ζζ proceed, my son ; 1 would hear the wishes prudence and affection dictates/' fi In change of scene/' resumed father B-MsoJin, c ' the energici; of his mind would become invigorated, his strength restor¬ ed, his health established; and he might return
return to Valombre, armed against the weakness of imagined evììs, and braced fur the exertions of an hereafter call- mg, ^Change of scene/ 4 again ргог.оиа· tied the abbot. "And would you, my roţi, to czcdpe one evil encounter a ihuv. vi'id í*·- would you expose lù, inexperi* t-nce to the* subţiîty of t!ie worlds ίο ί!^ ^part-s or ('но designing ? Ah! remen* i ť r the weakneví oť human f if\—rem«-t \χ bvf thí* dieadeil inlíuenee u ľ th<* pvb>:Oi -s, nor í o pj-olong lire, /i*K i he ^ahai^n ¡)ϊ '"· Поа\еп forfiH^nd ľ' ^spìrat-4Ì v>$ ìuoek: ■ l \\i}v\ú U'At цепи htm wh^ro d.iti^cr can n jt threaten, χ.' here templu·.. ц ť t uinot enter, ťather^ the- period forth»» ir^aíion \o ihc most holy mo.ther ьн^> f -ш;· αϊ JWöu C4»pitt e|HìrQrtLÌ№Sj Vvh;-{
4 enn threaten the äouIs qiiici of the ρκηκ m iasionrr\ ?" The abbot nubtd for a moment, tiun starting—** Vou think, my *on, thohcalih of the youth require* change ;'* ff Ì do, holy iatiier/* fv/rîuiîv lepile! the monk, vr mid unites tini ch· т л с К* quick, 1 iliink if Via «*\ aii but !it:ïw '* "'Uu: λ í 11 ; ï : ΐ SCCa íhC retini'. İv o' ^.,ţ* itìieìiUOib/* fc*»d í ÎR* aMxi», ik».vÌìì; !. : 4 boísí-m ч \п\ hon, be и e\Uî ?-- )^ч w.-J ţî % pıiTi/ Г lhe \OUïh OÍ Ouf iU'í'.d^tUcr ; ^u ι when ο·:γ blessed s-4 t íí>.-\ γ,οϊ,.ιι^ι M'îıAîo hi.u, when лЬч1' hi* j<jur»if*>*. »я*г И. e hiitdmeiıi о four iru s ï, ^^ χ*ιί' i>"<j- np ι ht-- p r n\c:^ ot рдм\ i'»»* ímí pieLîi* t ţ. tun« , ne »Λΐ : ί p, a ttt!tm íbe ^ч:·*, ann' n M ţ··· 1}Гмо μ t»:ntî huo with îhe sínt Í-J &^ M»h 4 tO intuii» îutn, ¡ι i-fííe*<e, î.i4«-or,ı.ınbnatvd
lamb, to the parental guidance of ош holy flock." The intelligence of the father superi¬ or *s intentions, the sirred trust he was nominated to fulfil, at first awakened not a smile in the pensive countenance of Theodore ; he rather shrunk from an of¬ fice which required exertion and perse¬ verance—an office which called him from the contemplation of his own peculiar cares, and roused him at once from the listless languor cf conven tuai seclusion· But gradually ïhe d»íľ!culties lightened as the play oí expectation returned. A new world wild about to binvt upon him, a world oft rådyret! bv rhe imagery of fancy—a world which contained the au¬ thors of 'pis being, and which, from that inference, became dear. fi Yes, we shall n î cet/*
mecí," he exclaimed, and the frolic ray of hope, of sanguine expectation, fanned his warm heart, and glowed upon his cheek—" we shall meet in bliss, in joy, in sympathy; the yearning voice of na* ture will proclaim the blest tie of con¬ sanguinity, and parental hope and filial duty will arise.** Suddenly the new scenes of anticipated rapture faded; suddenly all alike gave place to the image of the mysterious stranger, which, like an evil genius, mock· ed aH his plans, and blighted his expec¬ tations. Each instant did the bond be¬ come more galling; each instant did his free-born spirit spurn at a restraint which necessity enjoined. He dared not quit Valombre ; he dared not fulfil the sacred mssion of the father abbot, without first consulting, and apprizing the being, who, *o!. ι.. к strengthened
strengthened by the authority of a com* puhatory oath, awed him by threats, and guided him by credulity. He breathed not the slightest shadow of perplexity to father Betsoiin, lest he should call forth inquiries he could not resolve ; but watched the approaching period of com¬ munication with the stranger, with an impatience he could scarcely controul. The swelling moon, gradually encreas- ing, wanted but one day to complete her round and perfect disk; but one itoy, to fulfil the signal for the stranger's remem¬ brance—the signal, when memory was fanned by threats and adjurations. Theodore, impatient of controul, pant¬ ing for liberty to attend the call of duty, yet dreading to meet some dire obstacle to his wishes, deposited beneath the ruin¬ ed archway a leaf of his tablet, not so- ÎÎCÏtiiÎïX
beiting (permission, not owning autho¬ rity, but mie to his word, simply hinting the approaching legation, which was about to call him fram Valombre. His conclusion, that the hand which placed beneath the stone the letter for his in¬ spection would see and remove his own, was accurate. On the succeeding night, when the hollow-toned clock had sounded the hour of midnight, and the eyes of observation ьеге fasl closed in sleep, Theodore agaia í. ent ills steps to the garden—again pass- ŕd beneath the shadow of the archwas- * .. ;ain Parted, although in expectation of rajini! Ькы oí the hom —again struck disband upon the tablet—again listened mì \i\h\ for i he signal of the strangers «si.nrxKuh: then lifted the stone, sdıtHİ » * я "i the
the deposited paper, and returned hastily to bis celí. -.β* " The hour for action is not yet arri¬ ved/* ran the consents of the paper— " Theodore, you ¿ may fulfil the mission to Bena Copia. The present is the sea¬ son for prayer, for fasting, and for pe¬ nance ; the next, infatuated boy 1 will be a calling more glorious." Theodore smiled incredulous—-"What tailing can be more glorious than the office of religion ?'* he thought ; ťt what calling can be more glorious than the sa¬ cred discharge of gratitude ? n The stranger and the contents of the paper alike faded from imagination— alike ga\e place to the varied scenes of anticipation, which conjuring the al¬ most shapeless images of an unknown world,
world, decked it in colours so gay and so resplendent, as almost to dazzte the eyes of the sanguine visionary. Tis true, the heart of my hero had once sighed for profession—had once pictured peace, as alone to be found within the walls of Valombre ; 'tis true, he had pe¬ titioned to be inaugurated a member of its sacred order; but 'tis also true, that one little hour had convinced him, that reason and conviction are the best guides of our actions. His heart, as I have be¬ fore expressed, was ever swayed by mo¬ mentary impulse—his heart possessed a rich store, which time and circumstances alone could awaken into beinsr. Thus delineated, surely the most contradictory extremes may be admitted ; surely the bewildering struggles of hope and fear, of pain and pleasure, may t^Sjpd to rage with equal strength. к 3 CHAP.
CHAP. VUL in í.dittomtien «arm, ( f Ù did If CiVU'îoîl '(uursi е.лЬ мп tl.;i f ν *·! { ν Uset« liælæart. 1Ччл\ uïLLb Kmìì ì^ìì Cïh a u.R. 11 >wet îïo-pitahtv ! tir, j.·, nr, î r.ty, Vtdfij.ticd v\nh sciìti, o- li'-tii'd ί« η , Mildt* tradir lit- iowiy hauilta í»f ìuUuu'bNiii*, and títcks TîiO husiid oť poveri v with incense biand. Aí íluw» trom courtly stute." " Bene vertat Deus!*' murmured the ab¬ bot, placing his spread hand on the head of the kneeling Theodore, who, at the first early peep of day, ere yet the lag¬ ging vapours of night had dissipated» re¬ paired to the cell of the superior, to receive, with the credentials of his em¬ bassy, the paternal benediction. G lowing ¡ft Ae warm ardour of ex¬ pectant yoiitlb-Enthttsiasm painting her softened
softened die upon his cheek, and kindling in his sloe-black eyes the renovating fire of hope, he bounded, enriched and grate¬ ful, to the little dormitory of father Bet¬ soiin. The monk had already risen ; hi> hard pallet yielded not repose, for fancy, fanning the powers of imagination, had pictured to his bosom's charge the threat of danger. A thousand unknown fears oppressed him, fears, owing birth to the creative brain, vet fearssufncient to mag- nify improbability into certainty. It was not for his honour—it was not for his probity that the good man trembled ; neither was it for his affection or his ста- о titude; those,conviction whispered, would stand the test of allurements—those were established on too firm a basis to be stag- gered by a casual insight into the world: it was for his inexperience ; it was for к 4 that
that sensitive emotion of soul, which, as a feather before the wind, constitutes it fhe slave of every new and propelling impulse. The monk smiled at his own conclu¬ sions. "Alas!" he mentally asked, tf what j j of the world, ρ,η be distinguished, in a lone pilgrimage from Valombre to the con\ent of Bena Copia ?'' His fears were appeased but for a mo¬ ment ;, his courage, his heart drooped, when he traced the power of enthusiasm —the new and delightful sensations of nature, in the now-flushed cheek, and animated eye of his pupil. " Alas ! my son," he articulated, u I see you depart, with a mind fort boding woe—a mind full of dark presages-—a mind------" "Father," interrupted Theodore,bend¬ ing o'er the hand of his sage instructor, " why
u why need you fear? Youth ^ ^ - mount the trials of the journ:*\ £ţî Ί even now, courage smiles at iti da.i ? * . and piety lightens õn to the pursuit," '* But what will surmount the trials of the heart r'* questioned the monk, h.s thoughts momentarily"reverting to his o j ~ own early years of existing pasťion. (i Say, what will ward the shafts of ьеп /ìb . «y ?— what will blunt the feelings of nature ?" " Father, what mean \o,i У asked the astonished Theodore. Ci Sensibility is ¥ that sweet attribute of Heaven, which binds us to each other ; is that trembling impulse of soul, which drops on aiiliction the balmy tear of sympathy: and Na¬ ture," raising his dark eyes, with ener¬ getic ardour, to the face of his attentive auditor, " is the noble, rhe irresistible, the godlike produce of a hand divine ľ* к 5 The
The monk sighed— " Often/' he said, meekly bending his eyes to the earth, tf the very gifts of Heaven are, in the blind guidance of unthinking man, the instruments of condemnation ; or why do we see the energies of an exalted soul tainted, polluted, debased by the world ? Alas ! my son, unless checked by the rein of reason; unless under the controul of moderation, nature isas a ship without a rudder, the sport of every revolving blast, outstrip])!ng the barrier of discre¬ tion, and plunging her warm votarist into the mazes of error," " But Nature," artlessly observed The¬ odore, <ť in our solitude need fear no assailments; she needs no controul, be¬ cause her attributes are innocent." " In one short hour," solemnly re¬ joined the monk, " this solitude will be shut
shut from your eyes—in one short hour, wandering beyond the peaceful walls of Valombre, you may be exposed to temp¬ tation, exposed to artifice, perhaps ex¬ posed to guilt." " And must I wander far to meet the fiend of man ?" demanded Theodore, Si Ah, father! guilt once found entrance even within this holy community/' The monk shuddered ; for a moment he stood irresolute, then exclaimed, f< Yes, dear and cherished orphan, mur¬ der crimsoned the hallowed limits of Va- lombre's confessional, and blood sprink¬ led the bleeding form of a newly-found Theodore " « f —1_» faltered the youth. (t Yes, you, my son, The moment o£ your entrance within these walls was the moment of fate to Valombre*s superior !" к Q andi
and then, in accents of horror and com¬ miseration, he disclosed the fearful par¬ ticulars, which nineteen years had not expunged from recollection. The youth was alľected to tears. <f Di¬ vine Ruler of heaven and earth !" he eja¬ culated, yielding to the warm fervour of a heart replete with grateful adoration, Ic I thank thee for snatching me from contagion and vice ! I thank thee for an a^lum, which has preserved my youth from temptation, my mind from error ! and oh t 1 thank thee, doubly, doubly thank thee/' grasping the hand of the monk, i( for this, my instructor—my guide—mv father!'* CS J The good man snatched him to his bo¬ som. " But the ring, father/' eagerly inter¬ rogated Theodore, as gratefully he re¬ turned
turned the pressure of aifection— tf my birth—my parents-------" "Are alike unknown/' rejoined father Betsoiin— u are alike involved in mvs¬ terv—are alike registered on the inserii- ¥ О table page of fate. The ring, the dag¬ ger, and the bloody garments of the mar¬ tyred St. Theodore, are preserved in the sacristy of our convent ; are preserved for a double purpose—the first, should Heaven will it so, to convict the mur¬ derer ; the last, to elucidate the claims and prospects of the foundling." Theodore bowed his head in silence. "Time," continued the monk, "and a firm reliance on the interposing mercy of Providence, mav vet change the heart ' J J о off;uilt —may yet humble it to repen¬ tance. Oiler up your orisons, my son, for the conversion of the sinner, and in the
the redemption of a soul, generously forget your own injuries/* 1 Theodore approached the door; he turned ; he beheld the eyes of his aged friend surcharged with tears. He paused —his heart failed him, whibt his own glittered with the sweet dew of sym¬ pathy. With momentary exertion the monk advanced; fortitude pronounced adieu, but affection retained the hand extended: and when again he pressed him to his bosom, İt was with a warmth, with a fer¬ vour, which mocked the cowľs boasted conquest over feeling. Musin<r o'er the relation of father Bet- solin, Theodore passed through the outer gate of the convent. Not the wide extent of country, diversified with a thousand grand and picturesque objects; not
not the swiftlv-stealing waves of the Ga- rönne, nor the gigantic outline of moun¬ tain-scenery, which burst in bold per¬ spective before him, could rouse him from the enanguished revisai of past oc- eurrcnces. The bleeding form of the abbot—the mysterious flight of the stran¬ ger—his own unknown, his own isolated prospects, alternately succeeded, alter¬ nately crushed the buds of hope, and coloured the spontaneous sigh. His mission to Bena Copia, and the new and sanguine anticipations of youth, arising in a transient enlargement from conven¬ tual seclusion, became expunged, blasted, not with the mildew of disappointment, but by a refinement of sentiment, which conjured a thousand visions of torture. He started—he shuddered^—for the mur¬ derer, and the author of his being, ap¬ peared
peared one. The most dark, the most corroding images crowded upon memo¬ ry, and every warm hope, every glowing anticipation closed in despair. He paus¬ ed on the summit of a jutting rock which commanded the precincts of Valombre, his eyes mechanically resting on the asy¬ lum of his infancy, upon which the bright reflection of the sun, sparkling in reful¬ gence, emblazoned the stained casements with a variegated brightness, which ex¬ tending o'er the whole mass of building, gave, to its gothic pillars, its towers, and its steeples, a rich and dazzling lustre. Alas! how many pleasing—how many painful—how many indescribable sensa¬ tions had gained birth within those wails í There the gradual swell of reason had ripened into being ; there the genial energies of nature had yielded to in¬ struction
síruction and to piety ; there, alas ! the compact of secrecy had been closed; and there, to redeem the threatened life of his preceptor, his actions had become amen¬ able to a mvsterious instigator. The knowledge of his slavery—-the struggles of pride, of wounded feeling, alike suc¬ ceeded. *' Righteous are my motives" he articulated, dashing the truant tear from his eye χ "sweet saints of mercy, witness for me, that no unhallowed cause impels my conduct V* We turned from Valombre ; he pursu¬ ed his route ; and when again he paused —when again his eyes wandered in the direction of irs towers, he sighed, for dis¬ tance had closed them from his sight. The rich sketches of scenery which spread in mossy verdure before him, the inter¬ spersed windings cf the Garonne, the waw j
wavy profusion of variegated foliage, mellowing the gently sweeping sides of the mountain, but, above all, the pictu¬ resque dwellings of industry, peering amidst mingled beauties of cultivation and nature, stole his thoughts from their usual bent—his own perplexities, and fixed them in a contemplation more con¬ genial—the blessings of his fellow-crea¬ tures. In every cottage, his imagination created an ideal paradise ; fancy pene¬ trated the mud-built w:Jls, and e tţţ h ust¬ asın gave zest to each character—the husband—the father reigned conspicu¬ ous: Nature's glowing pencil coloured each flight, while Love, süly lurking in his bosom, laughed at the usurpation- Love was a power Theodore had dared to brave ; nay, ignorant of the ardour oí his own feelings, a novice to the hearts soft
soft wanderings, he fancied judgment and reason could ever stem, could ever sub¬ vert a passion, whose very birth, inex¬ perience pictured to have been the heat¬ ed exuberance of the poet's, brain. He admitted the claims of consanguinity, of social intercourse ; all, save the sympa¬ thy of resistless prepossession ; and that, because he had never felt, he almost doubted the possibility of feeling. At night, herested withina hermit's soli¬ tary dwelling, and with the morning's sun, imigorated, refreshed, guidød by the directions of the devotee, again set for¬ ward on his mission. That day, as the one preceding, passed in persevering toil, and silent meditation. More lone, more solitary, more deserted, seldom dié his eye mark the haunts of man ; seldoiii did hU car catch the buz of animated nature. 'VU 4* А 1»Ъ
The face of the country wore a more gigantic outline, rocks and barren steeps frowned in awful grandeur, and the agi¬ tated waves of the Garonne, no longer sparkling ajnidst vineyards and olive- grounds, roiled, impetuous of restraint, down steep and shelving declivities. The heavens themselves lowered in porten¬ tous gloom : the sun was obscured ; no golden ray penetrated the vapoury clouds which dimmed its splendour; thick, shapeless, they rolled their dark columns overhead,, decking day in the sombre li¬ very of twilight. Theodore in vain look¬ ed around for shelter : the rain began to fall, and the roar of distant thunder re¬ verberated in deep and hollow echoes. Stillalo thatch gladdened his searching eye, jifid the high branches of the cork¬ trees promised but partial security. As
As he stood deliberating how to act, a shrill whistle mocked the picture of soli¬ tary desertion his imagination had sketch¬ ed ; another succeeded ; and then a peal of t hunder deadened every lesser sound. Theodore loudly hallooed, but echo alone responded. He quitted the um¬ brageous shadow of the tree$|fcttd with difficulty ascended an almost inaccessible steep ; but alas ! the smiling prospect of shelter crowned not his toils ; a valley spread itself at the base of the mountain ; but that valley held forth no indication of inhabitants, Dispirited, he was descending, when a third whistle, sounding nearer, convin* eed him some hu^an being wandered like himself; fţtfţfcaps a signai for suc¬ cour—perhaps a^raveller, overtaken by the storm, in these inhospitable wilds, • The
The possibility was a goading spur to ex¬ ertion·—Theodore sprung upon the high¬ est pinnacle of the rock ; and in a pause of the storm, in loud haliooings, flung his voice to the farthest echo—that echo died away**-a still calm succeeded ; and then a nétçonsíve voice again called forth its reverberations. The hoarse barking of a dog marked some retreat of domes¬ tic intercourse; and a few momentsafter he discovered a hind driving some goats dowivthe green slope of the mountain, (ζ The saints guard us," exclaimed tho cottager, as, with an agile bound, Theo* dore advanced towards him, "what a tempest is this for man to weather ! By the mass î my heart acttød for yon poor beasts; and though mjå mother prayed me to stay with her, I could not leave ihewr exposed to its pelting«*" f ' From
t( From a soul so feelingly alive to compassion," said Theodore, ee surely I shall not in vain crave shelter.** €f In vain; no, no, monsieur; where Providence showers blessings, man should extend them to his fellow-creatures* Though our dwelling is small, our hearts are content ; and if we labour hard, why our rest is the sweeter." (i I have found one happy being," thought Theodore, as„ with a smile of complacence, he viewed the sunburnt features of his conductor. '* Father Bet¬ soiin is right; the world, no doubt, can boast many specimens of felicity" Yet eager to substantiate his own hypothesis that love was not the ripening sun of bliss— u You live alone with your mo¬ ther? "he demanded; "you labour hardfor m
her maintenance, and yet you are con¬ tent?" An arch smile marked the countenance of Antoine; he would have replied, but his goats had straggled from the path à besides the cottage held forth a shelter. The rain fell with increased violence, and his aged mother awaited him at the door. " I have brought you home a stranger, mother/ 1 said Antoine, as the dame eyed our hero. <f it was a mercy we met ! Had Î not gone in search of my goafs., he might have died upon the mountain/* u It was a mercy to me," observed The¬ odore, following the dame into the cot¬ tage : and then he would have expressed his grateful sense of kindness; but Au¬ toine iled to pen up his goats, and the dJme silenced him by saying, * f The heart was ever the best recompence/* and then
then she questioned him as to the bent of his journey, and listened to the un¬ varnished tale of his mission, with un¬ broken attention. if So young, yet en¬ trusted with so sacred an office/'* she ex¬ claimed, eyeing him with amazement : t( 'm truth, monsieur, some miracle must have been wrought in your favour, or the holy fathers could never have relied on your inexperience. At your age, there are so many temptations and so many snares/' u What, upon these mountains?"ques¬ tioned Theodore. ir No, no," she rejoined, ζ( in the heart, more than on these mountains/* Theodore smiled incredulous. if The heart, guided by reason, defended by principle/' he answered, ί( mans, with a shield of adamant, the incursions, of evil? 1 vol. и u WÜI
€i Will reason, will principle defend к from the incursions of love?" asked the dame. " It ill do more," eagerly rejoined Theodore ; *' it will subvert, it will defy the frivolous reign of imagined prepos¬ session—Love is but a self-created pas¬ sion, an infatuation of the senses, a weak¬ ness of the brain, which judgment and conviction must condemn/' u The saints guard us !" exclaimed the dame, "but you argue as coldly as though the cowl had enforced forbearance. Why, monsieur, can man change his nature ?" ťí Not absolutely his nat ure/* replied our voung philosopher, <c but he can check the exuberance of inclination, and curb the wild flights of passion : the sub¬ limest work of his Creator—man, can maintain the pre-eminence of wisdom." ' You
" You must be a saint," observed the dame. Theodore smiled—but not with a saint's humility, for exultation and gratified pride were the true incentives of that smile. The thunder and the lightning ceased, but the rain still pelted, and night closed upon our hero, beneath the shel¬ tering hospitality of the wood-cutter's dwelling. Led bv the dame to an inner chamber, he again gave birth to the grate¬ ful feelings of his heart, and again was checked in the soft effusion. "You speak/* said the dame, "as though you had been unaccus*omed to kindness; or/' smiling, ť< as though kindness was confined to your convent." iC Pardon me, good mother/* replied r i heodore, k< 1 would but evince kindness is not lavished on ¿m ingrate. Heaven L· 2 knows,
knows, from the earliest years of exis¬ tence, I have been indebted, even for the privilege to breathe, to the philanthropy of strangers." The dame was softened ; a tear trem¬ bled in her eye. iC The Virgin guard your slumbers ľ' she articulated, as she quitted the chamber. Theodore, left to his own reflections, blessed the fortunate chance which had befriended his meeting Antoine on the mountains, who good-naturedly promis¬ ed, on the morrow, tobe hisguide to the convent of Bena Copia, situated scarce half a league from the valley. Wrapt in the balm of a contented mind, at peace with the world, and thank¬ ful for his blessings, he stretched his weary limbs upon the humble paliet of repose, and soon sought health and strength
strength în the invigorating trance of forgetful ness· о
СИЛР. IX. i/o evrbj A.'s greetİN evos, lii» t buist у ъои!, Drank gorging m the «İcar delie тиь poican. The morning sun, peering through the windows of the cottage, aroused Theo¬ dore from his d own y slumbers. His thoughts were peace, for he had dreamt of the pious inhabitants of Valombre; he had heard the blessing of father Betsolin ; he had felt the warm pressure of the monk's embrace ; and when he rose from his humble couch, a smile of the sweetest benignity played upon his features. He threw open the little lattice—he gazed ĺ 3 upon
upon the vivid picture of creation. What a transition, to when, wet and com¬ fortless, he had descended into the valley ! It seemed the rich seat of vegetation, sheltered by protecting rocks, watered by a gently-swelling lake : then, rough, defaced; then, agitated by boisterous elements ; then, reflecting the quick suc¬ ceeding flash of electric lire : now, undu¬ lating beneath the freshness of the morn¬ ing air, balmy with the sweet fragrance of a thousand blossoms sweeping o'er its blue surface, and gently bending the spicy shrubs which fringed its borders. Theodore quitted the cottage ; he as¬ cended the verdant side of the moun¬ tain ; he reached the summit ; he gazed on the calm and peaceful \alley at its base, and saw the curling smoke of the wood-cutter's dwelling, dissolving amid the
the rich tints of embosoming woods. He turned to view the opposite side : the contrast was striking—Nature, as though in sport, was there in her wildest garb delineated, for rock rose above rock, and mountain towered bevond mountain. ■i The path was steep, and almost inaccessi¬ ble, yet did the spirit of enterprise guide the light foot of Theodore. Not the loud cataract, rf tumbling through rocks abrupt, and sounding far/* daunted his ardour ; his was the genius of romance, and the threat of danger, and the shadow of fear, were alike unthought of. Often he paused, for chasms, formed by the at¬ trition of rushing springs obstructed his passage ; often he stooped to cull the bulbocodium, or to tear from its genial stalk the blossoming orpine. Refreshed, invigorated, he returned to the rustic ĺ 4 habitation
habitation of the humble Antoine, and at the door, met his host, laden with the spoils of his labour. " Let me lighten your burthen, my honest friend/' said Theodore : " 'th a bitter task to groan beneath a weight so heavy." The wood-cutter smiled—"In truth," lie exclaimed, "my task would be much more bitter, were I to come home emp¬ ty handed. I work hard, but, the Virgin be praised ! I have health and strength to meet the office; aye, and resolution abo : and if my days are days of labour, my nights are nights of rest." " Then you are happy/' said Theo¬ dore, breathing an involuntary sigh. " Happy," repeated Antoine, " yes, monsieur, I am happy as a prince ! The good father Baptist absolves my offences, limits
limits my penances, and commends my piety. Every sabbath, and every holyday, I attend my mother to the chapel of Be¬ na Copia ; there I repeat my credo and my paternoster: and then I bring my aged mother home ; and then, oh ! then, monsieur, my reward begins; for then I fly to yon little cottage, at the further end of the lake," throwing down his bur¬ den, and directing the glance of his hear¬ er. " Do you see it, monsieur ? looks but a white speck from here, for is almost buried in yon grove of cork«* trees/* " I cannot distinguish a cottage/* re¬ plied Theodore. (t 'Tis strange," resumed Antoine; " I can see the very lattice that opens from Javotte's chamber; nay, I can see the ĺ 5 pretty
pretty bower of rose-bushes we planted together." t( Fancy sometimes pierces the limits of probability/' observed Theodore : ** but who is Javotte ? and why is yon little cottage the seat of your happi¬ ness ?" f< Javotte," exclaimed Antoine, and hi« ruddy cheek flushed a deeper tint, (C is the prettiest girl in Gascony ; and yon cottage is where she lives with her pa¬ rents. She is so good, and so gentle, and so kind, and so affectionate ! oh, if you was to hear her sing, you would ne¬ ver forget İt ! Sometimes, for whole hours, she sits at the door, chanting the vesper-hymn, and sometimes warbling little dirties she learns at the convent. Father Baptist says, we should not marry because
because we are poor ; but industry will give us bread, and love will give us com¬ fort : besides, the Virgin is good to her votaries, and Javotte and I never miss offering up our prayers/' " It seems then," said Theodore, "that all your joys centre in devotion and Ja¬ votte." " Where else should they centre?" questioned Antoine. " Nay," rejoined Theodore, smiling, ff devotion is a firm security, but love is a subtle one/* " Ah ! but not Javotte/* concluded the ardent rustic. • f Perhaps not," said Theodore—" Ja¬ votte possesses the innocence of unviti- ated nature, and knows not a wish be¬ yond her cottage-walls." "There you are wrong, monsieur/* ĺ & rejoined
rejoined Antoine; (t Javotte's wishes have nothing to do with her cottage walls —if you had said they pointed to these walls/' glancing with exulting security to his own little dwelling, " in truth, you would have been nearer the mark. My cabin is mud-built, monsieur, but it has stood many a winter's blast—I was born in it ; aye, and, the Virgin grant! shall die in it also/' , " Pardon me," resumed Theodore, *' I meant, that your pretty Javotte, never bavins wandered from this valley, could form no pictures of happiness beyond it." " Not beyond this valley," repeated Antoine; tf why, monsieur, scarce a day passes but Javotte visits the convent of Bena Copia, and that is on the other side of von hill : besides, she has twice been to
to the fair at Tramesaigne. If you had seen her then, in her little green jacket, and her gipsy-hat, and her rose-coloured ribbons, and her cheeks almost as red, tripping light as any fairy, you would say Antoine was a happy fellow !" " 1 do say Antoine isa happy fellow !" exclaimed Theodore, ,f No, not happy either," resumed An¬ toine, and a cloud of momentary thought saddened his features, fC not happy, mon¬ sieur, for 1 want to marry Javotte directly, and her mother, guided by that cross old father Baptist, wont give consent till she is eighteen. Tis strange; my Javotte was born before dame Per ri η was eich- teen, and father Baptist himself used to tell us>to tread in our parents* steps." ft Tis a blessed guide to go by," said Theodore, sighing at his own orphan state. "So
ft So I tell my Javotte," replied An¬ toine, t{ hut she laughs at all my argu¬ ments, and vows, if I was as old as the monk himself, my reasoning would not convince her." * f Perhaps not," archly observed Theo¬ dore. ťť In the present case, my honest friend, patience seems tlie only resource." Antoine replaced the load on his shoulder, and moved towards the cot¬ tage. The morning's homely meal was no sooner passed, than Theodore requested Antoine to become his guide to Bena Copia. He longed to fulfil the wishes of the superior of Valombre, and to de¬ posit into the hands of the lady abbess the documents entrusted to his cace. " Holy St. Ursula! 'tis no use,to go to-day," exclaimed Antoine. " î had forgotten,
forgotten, the lady abbess can give no time to strangers." <( Why not to-day ?" demanded Theo¬ dore. if Because/* replied the cottager, u to¬ day is the profession of a novice, and all the sisters will be eii£a«red : and there will be such crowds in the chanci — Idare swear all the inhabitants, of Tramcsaiinie will be present/* <( I never witnessed the inauguration of a nun/' said Theodore, musing ; <£ I should like to mingle in the crowd/' "That you may do, monsieur/' rejoin¬ ed Antoine. tc I will direct you within sight of the convent-gate, but no fur¬ ther: I never saw but one sacrifice, and, by the mass! I cried all night. Tis a me¬ lancholy sight í If my Javotte was to become a nun, Ido think I should die." " Boy,
" Bov, vou talk like an unbeliever," j j · * exclaimed the dame, who, seated in the chimney-corner, had been a silent hearer of the conversation. <f Biessed Mary í thousands had better become nuns than wives." " I query, mother," archly observed Antoine, (( if vou would have liked to have made one of the thousand.'' ťť ît would have saved me many a tear," articulated the dame, unmindful of the remark. "Ah ! but it would have cost you many a sigh," concluded her son. t( 'Tis a true saying, that in this world there is little else than mourning and woe," said the dame, devoutly crossing herself. " When I followed your poor fafher to the grave------" *' Hush, dear mother !" interrupted Antoine,
Antoine, " you always get upon that theme.*' <( I wonder/' concluded the dame, wiping a tear from her cheek, fi what nun would have exchanged her veil for my widow's hood.'* ct Ah, mother'/* said the wood-cutte»*, and his humid eve marked the force of nature and of sympathy, "before you became a widow, vou would not, to have been the lady abbess of Bena Copia her¬ self, have given up your cottage and your comforts." " No," eagerly exclaimed the dame, gazing on him with looks of maternal love, "nor after, must I have given up mv cottage and m v bov/' "God of nature/* ejaculated Theo¬ dore, ŕí wise are thy ordinations ! every state can boast its blessings. Surely man ought
ought to be grateful for the distribu¬ tion, without envying the limitation of others !" " Ah, but man never was!" resumed the dame. " Often and often do I tell mv foolish bov, when the husband of Ja- votte, he will have something to sigh for. You are younger than Antoine, mon¬ sieur, and yet you reason, and decide, as though gifted with experience." Theodore smiled— r< M v experience is gleaned from theory, not practice, good mother/* he replied : fr to the warning counsels of others am I indebt¬ ed for caution and foresight/" Poor Theodore ! rather hadst thou said, f< Am I indebted for the powers of argument/* Alas ! a few flitting moments alone re¬ mained for thee to boast of caution and foresight !
«¿ÖNTESS foresight! Guided by the charm of no¬ velty, that never-failing incentive in the vouthful mind— еацег to behold the ce- remony of the new initiation, Theodore, attended by Antoine, quitted the colt^^e } and bent his steps to the convent. The lake's pellucid bosom, catching from the azure sky a bright reflection, swelled, with seeming pride, beneath the sparkling splendour of the sunbeams; and morning's soft zeph\ r, sh>hin<ľ amid the thick intwinin¿r foliaire of \ivid crea- tion, came laden with rich and delicious odours. Calm was the sight of Javotte's cot¬ tage; half-way climbing up a steep, clothed with vines, olives, capers, mul¬ berries, and chesnuîs. Л little garden led to the porch, m which the varied blossoms
blossoms of a thousand flowers flou risk¬ ed in sweet harmony. Theodore paused for a moment; in¬ dustry and peace seemed there enshrined^, and love, in the speaking eyes of the wood-cutter, to hail it paradise. Lingering behind, tç Monsieur/* he exclaimed, f< yon path leads to the top of the hill ; when you have gained it, the spires of Bena Copia lie before you/' Theodore smiled, and proceeded, for Antoine, opening the little wicket, flew through the garden, and entered the cot¬ tage. " This İs love," mused the youth¬ ful missionary; te this is the boasted pre¬ rogative of nature ; this is the master- pa sion, which subdues man's lordly mind, and binds him in the chains of fas¬ cination. Poor Antoine! ignorance alone be
be your privilege : yes," with fancied security, Si o'er weak and puerile minds love may tyrannize ; but the force of reason, the powers of conviction, defy his inroads." On reaching the summit of the hill, Theodore beheld before him the black and time-encrusted walls of the monas¬ tery. He gazed on its rocky site with awe and wonder, for, as an eagle's nest, il seemed to hang amidst crags and broken fissures, beetling o'er the yawning brink of a perpendicular precipice. To the left rolled the deeply-sounding waves of the Garonne; ίο the right, a dark forest of pines blackened the dreary waste. The rock upon which the monastery bulged looked barren and desolate; stratas of bituminous earth alune relieved the din¬ gy bamencss of its colour, savçj here and tlwe,
there, where clumps of sun-scorched heath, thinly diversified by the stunted blossoms of the golden-tinted saffron, rose the fragile emblems of nature*s sport. A flight of steps, cut in its solid bosom, led, with winding and difficult ascent, to the gate, which, guarded by two watch- towers, frowned in awful security. Theodore paused involuntarily ; a smile of nameless birth played o'er his features, as his eyes, for the first time, traced the busy throng of approach¬ ing numbers. A troop of peasants were descending the sloping side of the mountain; the girls habited in the light fantastic garb of rustic simplicity, the young men in their holyday suits. He saw the sportive gesture of youthful fro¬ lic ; he heard the playful echo of youth¬ ful laughter, unchecked by the freezing etiquette
etiquette of worldly form; for artless in¬ nocence marked each incursion of free¬ dom, as blushing modesty*s light carna¬ tion recorded the transgression. Theodore's heart beat to the throbbing pulse of ecstacy ; his cheeks glowed with animating fervour, as his dark eyes, in the impassioned impulse of his feel¬ ings, were raised to heaven. "Mother of God !" he aspirated, is why from an inter¬ course so congenial am 1 for ever exclud- ed?" For a moment, the brethren of Valom* bre had ceased to be ; for a moment, every local claim yielded to the propell¬ ing language of nature—Alas! he forgot that life teems with variegated pictures; he forgot, that to witness the mournful profession of a self-devoted vnetim, the objects of his envy had assembled. Pressing
Pressing forward, he reached the gate in time to swell the rustic train, and, without speaking, proceeded with them into the chapel. The commencement of the ceremony was marked by the soft modulations of the огяап, and the concordant har- mony of the nuns, chanting a hymn of praise, suited to the living death of the professed. Every eye was raised in de¬ votion—every knee was bent in submis¬ sion—for <4 The poisonous charms Of baltfU superhtitioijj guuies tU«; Леи rt Of servile numbers»" Tears.streamed down the checks of the missionary—tears of compassion—tears of sympathy : he gassed upon the altar, sparkling in all the rich gems of the sa¬ cristy, and beheld the approach of the novice,
novice, with sensitive trepidation— (t Ah, no, no !" he mentally sighed, *' the heart covets bliss in the social circles of com¬ munication/' and then he shuddered at the film which had once clouded his own discernment. Suddenly he bent forward—suddenly admiration and surprise rivetfed his at¬ tention ; he could scarcely breathe : the altar, the profession, the abbess, the nuns, .ill—all vanished : one object alone re¬ mained ; one object, which, in the glance of j moment, absorbed his whole being, ;-.nd filled him with painful melancholv, \ c í delightful emotions ; that object was (he aerial form of the novice's attendant—? ί\ι?Λ object was the youthful model of îV.'oale loveliness. Her features were shadowed by the flowing drapery of her veil; but the symmetry of her perfect vol, ι, m form
form defied the scrutiny of sculptured exactness. On reaching the step of the altar, that envious veil was thrown back, and the face, revealed, realized the warm anticipations of sanguine youth. Daz¬ zling as the snow-crowned summit of the mountain was her polished forehead ; dark as the ebon tint of the Ethiopian, her animated eyes; yet might be traced an expression, which softening into lan¬ guor, spoke its birth in feeling ; every feature %vas alike impressive, was alike the master-stamp of nature; and the glowing tint upon her cheek rivalled the roses her ivorv hand scattered. Love, jealous of the boasted powers of reason, scofling at the pretended confi« dence of inexperienced youth, enger to assert the omnipotence of his authority, and to punish the rebel who had darsd to
to doubt his pre-eminence, hurled at the devoted heart of the missionary the sharpest arrow in his quiver. The poi¬ son was baleful, but it was pleasing; and Theodore, the slave of impulse, the crea¬ ture of sentiment, yielded to natures soft passion, and forged in one short mo¬ ment the rosy fetters of eternal bondage. He watched the light movements of the maid—he saw her eyes surcharged with tears—he saw her heaving bosom swell vtiih the sigh of coivjuuseration—he saw her kneel on the step of the altar, and pour forth the fervent oiìerings ofpïetv» Again the arched roof reverberated the filli choir, and then the seraph voice of the "AiÁVi^çr breathed the tones of ma<nc »ţweetn^s. Theodore was all c ar -all eyes, l'ivJïiî were the \îsion$ı which flitted o'er hi* brain; an·! when the ceremoni closed m '3 ^wheu
—when fate had sealed the irrevocable vow of the newly-initiated sister—when the nuns had deserted the chapel, he stood, with folded arms, gazing on the door, through which he had lost sight of the so-latc-discovered object of his ado¬ ration. With what different sensationsto what he had entered, did he re-cross the threshold ! Then, guided by curiosity ; then, defying the controul of passion : now, bearing in his heart a thorn, whose rankling gangrene threatened future peace. He shuddered as the gale closed after him ; and slow and lagging were the steps with which he descended the rocky steep. Many a wistful look did he cant towards the monastery ; many and oft times did he pause, and with his eyes measure the high and cheerless wails. At length he reached the summit of the hill,
hill, at whose base stretched the rich val¬ ley, in which was the peaceful dwelling of the wood-cuiter. Scenes of delight, opening to his view, tranced in bliss the light tissue of imagination, as he gazed upon the curling smoke, ascending from the chimney of Javotte's cottage. Plen¬ ty smiled in the olive-grounds by which it was surrounded ; and Health, the off¬ spring of Labour—Content, the daughter of Moderation, seemed there to have fix¬ ed their abode. To know himself the owner of that cottage—to know his cares lightened by the tender gentleness of participation-— to know his griefs, and his anxieties, his pains, and his troubles, hushed, solaced by sympathetic affection, was a new, but ац exquisite reverie—a reverie which ab¬ sorbed his whole soul, which tinged every m 3. impulse
impulse of his nature. Yes, that cottage . had become t! o Elysium of ideal beati- tude, and the nsci natine bcimr he had seen at Bena Copia its ministering angel. Brusİıi ng, with hasty steps, o'er the thv îr. у sward, his checks flushed with the liveliest carnation, his eyes swimming in tears, and his hands clasped in rapture, he approached the cottage-garden, without perceiving that Javotte and her lover were stationed at the çate. "By St. Mary! I said so/* exclaimed Antoine. Theodore started—he looked up—Ja¬ votte dropped a curtsey. " I said/* pursued the rustic, ff 'îwas a grievous sio ht \ \ warrant, monsieur, you wouldn't volunteer it a second time/' "A second time," repeated the enthu¬ siastic Theodore, thinking alone of the lovely
lovely stranger— u oh yes, Ì would \o~ lunteer it for ever !" " For ever, Mother of God V' ejacu¬ lated the astonished Javottc— rf 'tis so- so unnatural— ""tis so^—so/' and then she paused, blushed, and her dark eyes sought the ground. <f And vet vou shed tears, monsieur," remarked Antoine ; " vours is a strange taste, methinks. Give me a life of joy, not sorrow.'* ' f There are tears of joy as well as sor¬ row/' said Theodore. fi Surely/' exclaimed Javotte, cc tears of joy cannot mark the profession of poor sister Monique." i( Do you know the sister? do you know the inmates of Bena Copia?" ea¬ gerly interrogated Theodore. " Yes, that I do/* replied Javotte, m 4 « from
" from the lady abbess, to the portress at the gate. 1 was there at sunrKe this morning, and helped to, gather the roses for the lady Juliette to scatter.*' " The lady Juliette!" reiterated Theo¬ dore—"" was the angelic being, who strewed roses in the path of the novice^ the lady Juliette ?" ft Yes/' said Javotte, eager to pane¬ gyrise the virtues of her benefactress ; ( ' and she is the sweetest, gentlest, best lady in the province ! When my mother was ill, she came herself to our poor cot¬ tage, and administered, with her own hands, the simples father Baptist prescrib¬ ed; she------ ** "Sweet angel of compassion У inter¬ rupted Theodore. íť But how could she pass the bounds of the monastery?" íf Oh i she is only a boarder, monsieur. Her
Her father is a great lord, and she is at Bena Copia for education/* ťf Then she is not destined to be a mm," exclaimed Theodore, his eyes sparkling with new-born hope. " A nun/' repeated Javotte ; <f oh no, monsieur, her destinv is far more bril¬ liant ! I have heard sister Lucille sav, when she leaves the convent, she is to be married to a duke." Theodore's heart died within him ; his cheek turned pale, as fearfully he gazed upon the speaker, s< Marry a duke," exclaimed Antoine, ff and visit your cottage, Javotte. By the mass, she can have no more pride than if she had been born in our valley!" " Pride, oh no ! she knows not what pride is/' replied the artless girl: "she «alks to me just as if I were her equal : м л nay,
nay, she promises to be my friend, and has oflered to take me to her fathers beautiful castle/* "And will you go with her ?" fear¬ fully questioned Antoine. " Javotte, wilt you leave your cottage, your mother, and ------" (t Your lover," he would have con¬ cluded, but Javotte, extending her hand, eagerly interrupted him with, ' e No, no, Antoine, nor if she would give me the castle. I told her my heart lay in this valley ; and then she sweetly smiled, and said the heart should ever be the guide of our actions." Theodore started from abstraction ; hope flushed his cheek, and joy sparkled in his eyes. " Did she—did the lady Ju¬ liette give to the heart's guidance the reins of action ?" he interrogated, and then
then he paused^ and smiled at his own energy. tc She says the heart is the surest pass¬ port to bliss/* rejoined Javotte, " and I ara sure she thinks so ; for she looks grievous sad, when she talks of the great duke her father intends her to marry/* " Then this proposed union is not her bosom's choice ?" questioned Theodore. " Oh no, monsieur!'* replied the lo¬ quacious girl. * c The saints aid her ! she would rather take the veil, and live and die a sister of Lena Copia. I have heard the nuns say, the duke is almost as old as the marquis, her father; how then can it be her bosom's choice ?'* " Surely, surely/' exclaimed Theo¬ dore, <f parental authority can never vi¬ olate the feelings of the heart/* m 6 « The
"The marquis is very proud/* said Javotte, " and pride, monsieur, scoffs at fine feelings." "Ah! but not at a child's prayers/' rejoined our hero. *' I have heard say/' resumed Ja¬ votte, with a look of importance, íť that the great world values love no more than we do splendour ; and as for sympathy and sentiment, they say 'tis quite ideal." " I thought so once," murmured The¬ odore, with a sigh so deep, that Javotte and her lover started. te Y^et you never mixed with the great world, monsieur," said Antoine. " When the lady Juliette quits Bena Copia," interrogated Theodore, regard¬ less of the observation, (t tell me whither her father's power will convey her?" " When
(< When the lady Juliette quits Bena Copia," replied Javo îte, Sť she is going - into Roussiilon.*' ff Does her father reside in Roussiî- lon ?" (t Yes, monsieur, near Perpignan." ie And there," concluded Theodore, in accents of dejection, "there she will be married/' " Oh no ! she will go first to Paris, and then------But hark, my mother calls;" and with a rustic curtsey, she tripped into the cottage. Theodore wandered along the flowery borders of the lake, lost, absorbed. New and delicious visions flitted o'er his brain, colouring every idea of his romantic fan¬ cy : in one moment, in one transient glance, the boasted powers of reason, the imagined basis of forbearance^ were anni¬ hilated;
hilafed; the prescribed limits of action, the long-contested groundwork of opi¬ nion, totally overthrown. lie knew himself subdued, yet the sen¬ sation was entrancing ; he felt himself hurried away by the tide of his feelings, yet not for a moment did he struggle to redeem his peace—Theodore, till now the slave of his own doctrine—till now the arrogant controuler of nature—till now, swayed by the frigid rule of con¬ ventual austerity, weighing each exube¬ rant flight of passion in the scale of weak¬ ness, and condemning indiscriminately the lapse of thought as of action—Theo¬ dore, the same Theodore, yielded to the omnipotence of prepossession, and sunk a ready, a submissive captive to love.
CHAP.
CHAP. Χ. Oh ьоЛ Komeutbraiîce î niry spirit, Thou -ocjiHİ İ..V * 'bliss ami pain; })\<ì\ ¡tv seilte oí keen deiigbt, \S ii i _л -t our Iťt lings back agai». Гох. The three succeeding davs of our vouth- ful missionary's sojournment at the cot¬ tage, he Msited, with ceaseless persever¬ ance, the grate of Bena Copia ; but not once did his eyes glance out the object of his eager search ; not once did they behold the beauteous vision, on whom fancy so faithfully lingered. He had been admitted into the parlour of the convent —he had conversed with the mother su¬ perior—he had deposited the documents into her hands, and now could claim no further plea to linger. Yet another day wore away, and still • «r' was
was he indebted to the hospitality of the wood-cutter ; still did he fearfully pro¬ tract the hour of his departure. Heretofore his mind had been the seat of harmony—heretofore no discordant passion had arisen : night had brought re¬ pose ; day had beamed rich with the smil¬ ing sunshine of coment : now he was un¬ happy—now he was agitated; sighs swel¬ led his bosom ; and each succeeding mo¬ mentgave birth to new corroding thought. If he slept, imagination mocked him with scenes of bliss—scenes of transporting beatitude—scenes, which to awaken was to dissipate, for then reality confirmed the truth of his enthralment, without portraying one lingering hope of future comfort. The last night—the last visit to Bena Copia arrived—his heart drooped as he traversed
traversed the valley ; his eyes rested on the cottage of Javottc, and the glowing picture of prosperous love stamped, with a deeper shade, his own solitary destiny. Kc passed swiftly on ; he ascended the green slope of the mountain ; he reached the summit of the rocky height, and then pausing, gazed on the lake's blue ex¬ panse which watered the valley, it was imrufïled ; it was, as a mirror, reflecting the azure canopy of heaven ; soft was the breeze which sported o'er its surface, for scarce did vegetation bow to its light pressure. The sun had long since sunk beneath the horizon, which now faintly glowed with the expiring tint of its lare splendour; for O'er hill aml dule, with mystic stride, the gio nn Oťni^ht mh ance-I, clothing earth, air, and heaven, in one un vary ing shadow. Theodore
Theodore approached the grate of the convent ; he gazed upon the high and cheerless walls ; his heart throbbed ; his cheeks glowed; a smile lightened up his features, for fancy, piercing the barrier, conjured the syïphid form of his ideal worship. He sprung forward ; impulsive was his action, light was his step, for the thymy sward scarce yielded to his tread. It was not fancy— ât was no illusive start —it was the lady Juliette he beheld î Her arm supported the steps of a sister of Bena Copia, whose age and whose in¬ firmities contrasted the Hebe graces of her companion. Theodore felt transfixed; his eves were rivet ted on the maid ; and the quick re¬ volving motion of his heart checked al¬ most the powers of respiration. She lin¬ gered but foran instant—she passed away —she disappeared through an opposite archway-—
archway—yet Theodore was happy : ho had seen her, though but for a moment ; л et that flitting moment paid him for past disappointment. Alas! mistaken Theodore, rather did that moment aug¬ ment the bane of future peace! The moon, unclouded, sailed through the heavens, mellowing the picturesque bo^om of creation with a thousand sha¬ llows: still was the deep repose of na¬ ture; no obtrusive sound stole upon the ear. The gigantic outline of the pros¬ pect, rich in the variegated contrasts of rocksand forests, boldly spread in unim* peded space, towering in wild order, courting the eve of poetic fancy, luring the pencil of genuine taste. But I heo¬ dore saw it not—he felt it not-—his soul was dead to the inspiration of genius: love had cramped every energy but Ins own;
own ; love had bound every impulse of nature in the magic spell of fascination. To exist on the same mountain, to in¬ hale the same atmosphere, to ga:se on the same objects, was ail that the new co¬ lour of his hopes pictured—all to which the impassioned energy of feeling aspired. " To be torn hence," he articulated, as Valombre, darkening into a prison's gloom, arose to imagination— <e to be severed from a spot so dear—to bear but in memory an image so beloved—to drag the lengthening chain of impression, e'en to devotion's aliar, unknown, un- cheered, unpitied—to watch the waning hours of night, and sigh in protracted misery for death's calm slumber—Oh, God of nature, sh ten a destiny so hope¬ less ! Avert a doom so woe-fraught !" Still he lingered near the grate; stiil did
did his heart throb in sentiment; still were his eyes suffused in sensibility ; still did his lips murmur a petition for her re¬ appearance : but that petition was un¬ heard ; she came not, and desponding he retraced hu steps to the valley. The calm slumbers of content were fled; Theodore pressed his humble couch, but Theodore closed not his eyes in for¬ getfulness. The live-long night he mus¬ ed on the mysterious energy of passion, sometimes combating, but oftoner yield« ¡ng to the force of prepossession ; one moment arguing with his feelings, the next borne by their sway; now smilin^ at the erroneous principles of past ere* dence, and now revelling in the imoxi eating delusions of fancy. Though trembling on the wing of ideal bliss, though hurried away by the softer ieeliiisia.
feelings of the soul, yet, ever and anon, would the deep despairing anticipations of coming evil clip the light fabric of air-built hope, and crumble the sandy foundation; ever and anon would епМль biasm yield to reality, and the briliiant prospects of the lady Juliette darken the isolated contrast of his own. if ïn dis* tâ nee í shall sigh forth her name/' he sr- tieulatcd-*—' f in distance I bhai! cherish her i-nrige. A stranger to my woes, a ntrsnger to my presumption, her life will be an unvaried scene of splendid bibs : irsine*"*- 1 ' ho paused-wthsn wirb ц *»!gU concluded, - c Vt*s, in my heart-»-iu tny pool, 1 will entomb a p^sion, ¡rremedi* oble, etørnaj/* genrep [tad A:\y4 r^fulgcr]t bf -аф^; dh*.U pitted |**e rn urky vapours of flight, scafo^ <sjd tbo ppndťoi dewdťupa reibet iho
sun's bright lustre, when Theodore, un- refreshed and dispirited, quitted the val¬ ley, ' Toilsome was his journey, for every step conveyed him further from Beim Copia ; every step tolled the ideal knell of hope. He mused o*er the apathy of former credence—he smiled at the false philosophy of former scepticism. íf J did but deceive myself/' he exclaimed ; %i because passion slumbered, I thought ¿t dead ; because nature was cramped by the pressure of circumstances, f conclud¬ ed her the slave of reason ; the сощщц> nication of worldly intercourse 1 judged derogatory to true w ¡¿dom; and love's rcfibiie^ fascination, í voted а щгь IndU (pation of a puerik: mind, Y^ thou art UVenge/b--my biUT.iitg Ы'Ъ'щ vou fesses \ţ *^ngçí i— worøun ! îhou h.îiţ taught щ$ iL·
the true value of existence; thou hast taught me the negative, the imperfect colouring of my former being ; thou hast infused into me a new soul—from an apostate, thou hast made me a bigot." The long day through, Theodore paus¬ ed but to partake of the humble farewith which he was provided, but to slacken his thirst at the pellucid brook; not once to snatch the slumber of fatigue, or in¬ dul gre the wandering eve with the wild diversified scenes of nature. Juüeítc was the only being visible to his miiidU eye: in every copse he beheld her fairy form, The tempting irmi, and írom оЬсча. ;:<.«< Кц'Ч! The -titer oť mankind. Sometimes buried in profound medi- tstioiij sometimes hurried away by hia fí-elings,
feelings, it was not till the rapid strides of night called for exertion, that Theo¬ dore perceived he had long since deviat¬ ed from the right path. In vain he strove to retrace his foot¬ steps ; his efforts more deeply perplex¬ ed him ; he found himself bewildered amid the intricate passes of the Pyrenees, without a single clue to unravel his dif- íicultics. Wild and inauspicious was the wilderness; rocks bulged in fantastic di- \crbity—yawning abysses opened at his feet—stupendous mountains darkened overhead—cataracts roared in proleng¬ thened echoes—thickets of cork-trees, ilex, mulberry, and oak, hung tottering o'er the depths profound. The sward was bedecked with flowers of vivid hues, and wild and delicious fruits, tempting the parched pallet, hung in ruby clus« vol. i» n te?- .
ters: but no haunt of a fellow-creature could he discern ; no smiling emblem of man's industry: nature stamped every feature of the landscape* nor claimed from art one soft embellishment. Unwilling to pass the night upon the mountain, and yet at a loss what plan to pursue, Theodore, with difficulty, crawl¬ ed up a rugged steep, and gazed on the far-stretched prospect on the opposite side. The summit upon which he stood was of gigantic height ; it seemed, as the pillar of Hercules, to touch the skies ; clouds gathered beneath his feet, and the setting sun's resplendent red reflected o'er his head a partií 1 glory. Brown and unfruitful was the peak; scorched moss thinly dotted its flinty bo¬ som ; and here and there, bending to the blast, sprung a vagrant harebell, a hum¬ ble
ble emblem of vegetation. Yet did the scenes below, in rich contrast, mock its barrenness; bright was their verdure, and picturesque the alternate sketches of wood and water; flowers luxuriantly blossoming amid rocks, and fruits glow¬ ing on the sites of clifïs and precipices. A long range of mountains, whose sides were clad in pine-forests, closed the per¬ spective, piercing the horizon, and ming¬ ling earth and heaven in one wild con¬ fusion. Ah ! with what joy would our youthful missionary have exchanged creation's awe-striking sublimity for the warm shel¬ ter of Antoine's humble thatch !—how would his heart have hailed the trace of human footsteps !—how would his ears have greeted the accents of a human voice ! n 2 Calm
Calm and unbroken was the stillness; no sound obtruded, save the monoto¬ nous echo of the distant cataract. Theodore felt composed, because an elevation of sentiment, an inspiration of piety, ñlíed his whole soul ; the pang of love for a moment ceased to embitter— the God of nature glowed in every vivid tint, which the illusions of vision so hap¬ pily and so harmoniously blended. But short was the trance of passion— short the torpid inanity of his feelings: the sun sank behind his misty curtain: the fantastic touches of light and shade vanished, and starting into reality, Theo¬ dore found himself a solitary sojourner on the mountain· Compelled to choose his bed, heaven his canopy, and earth his pillow, he de¬ termined to descend into the valley, and within
within the darle shelter of the nearest pine-forest, to await the return of morn¬ ing ; but the perpendicular steepness mocked his efforts, and reluctantly he sought a tract of less hazard. The new declivity he was about to de¬ scend, from its transverse direction, com¬ manded a different view of the opposite ρ ine- forest. Theodore paused involuntarily at its brink—Hope spurred him on to exer¬ tion, for the quickening breeze, sweep¬ ing o'er the dark heads of the pines, re¬ vealed to his searching eye a range of gothic turrets. 'Twas evident some build¬ ing rose embosomed in the woods ; pos¬ sibly some religious sanctuary, where men with God commune ; shrinking from the contagion of affection, and weaned from the social intercourse of society; for > a 'lie
'Tis most true, That musing melancholy most affects The pensive secrecy of desert cell, Far from the cheerful haunts of men and herds. It was long ere Theodore reached the opposite side of the valley. In the casual survey he had taken from tlie summit of the mountain, he pictured the distance inconsiderable, and the beacon of rest easy to be attained : but now he found it long and toilsome ; nay, in the jaundiced eye of restless fatigue, the valley seemed to stretch prolengthened, and the som¬ bre shadow of the trees to recede as he advanced. At length he reached the dark oufskict of the forest : the trees were thickly stud¬ ded, and the distances choked with long grass, weeds, and underwood. Theodore paused—his heart beat quick —he
—he feared not banditti, for he possessed no lure to tempt their avarice; but yet his spirits drooped in dire foreboding, and every impulse of his mind seemed to shrink with unknown dread. Ko path, no human footsteps could be discern ; all alike conveyed the stamp of desolation, all alike wore the melancholy vestige of nedect. Yet short was his hesitation, transient his fears ; almost in the moment of birth did they expire ; for he felt that precious elixir to the soul, the internal confidence of rectitude, and with a heroism which innocence canalone bestow, plunged into the deepening sha¬ dow of the forest. The trees, entwining their knotty branches, seemed to shut out the rays of heaven; yet might be traced a unifor¬ mity in the distances, which denoted not the
the exuberant sport of chance, which de¬ noted that taste and cultivation had ori¬ ginally decorated a spot now so forlorn and so neglected. Though fatigued by the exertions of the day, still the spirit of perseverance strengthened the researches of Theodore ; and he continued to advance, in spite of the thick entwining branches which rude¬ ly obstructed his passage. Frequently he paused, hoping to catch the echo of a distant sound; but so drear and so profound was the silence, that he seemed to standalone in the creation. Almost despairing, concluding that his eyes had mistaken some protuberance of rock for the imagined seat of hospitality, he threw himself upon the grass, in the determination of there awaiting the com¬ ing rays of morning, and by its mild aid regaining
regaining the path from which he had so unfortunately strayed. The influence of fatigue, even in a so¬ litude so drear, was imperceptibly steal¬ ing o'er his senses, and he was resigning himself to the calm forgetfulness of slum¬ ber, when the harsh clanking of a chain aroused him to recollection and to ac¬ tion. He started from the earth—he listened: the sound was repeated—it pro¬ ceeded from the left. The direction was hardly discernible, for the light of hea¬ ven could scarce penetrate the pines' en¬ twining branches; yet did he not hesi¬ tate ; with persevering courage he com¬ bated every difficulty ; nor again paused, till emerging from the gloomy shadow of the forest, he beheld, in an open space, a building of vast extent and magnitude, END OF VOL. I. Printed by Lane, Dai ling, * Co. Leadenhall^treet, London.
