Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The nun of Santa Maria di Tindaro: a tale
ТИЕ
NUN «F SANTA МАША DI TINDARO.
CHAPTER I. xT is midnight —I hear the deep and measured toll of the chapel clock ! Why do 1 tremble ? wdiy do I shrmk at the gloomy solitude of my cell ? why do I close my ej r es, as tbough to shut out the shadowy forms which fancy conjures? Is it fear ?—No, no ! it cannot be fear, for in this hour, and in this spot, often have I knelt, and prayed to see those whom in life I loved so fondly ! De Beaufort? my fatlier! my mother! why are you not here ? Is it all mockery ? is the vi- voL. hi. в sitation
sitation from the world of spirits nought but a dream of fancy—nought but the frenzied coinage of superstition ? Mid¬ night and the grave not more still í yet am I alone, alone to the communion of my own heart! Abs! it is full of crimes, full of errors, but thy chastening mercy spares it: wrapt in sackcloth, kneeling on the cold stone, I pour forth the re¬ morse of a tortured contrite spirit ľ Re¬ pentance cannot expiate ; yet we are told it is not unnoted, not unheard! Oh, blot out the transgressions of my youth, smd gire me the will and the power to stay the slippery footing of inexperience I Beyond these walls let my fearful story spread, tbat the perversion of my prin¬ ciples, and the errors of my judgment, be not recorded in vain. The temporary suspension of my fa¬ culties шоп passed away, and I revived to recollection and to wretchedness. I started &&m the couch—1 gazed fearful¬ ly around ; but though I had lost sight of
of ïhs letter, the countenance erf madaraié Angerville told me it was no dream« In vain she preached on resignation and fortitude ; m vain she besought acquies¬ cence and composure: inspired with a courage almost beyond credence, I push¬ ed aside the restoratives ^he offered, and firmly demanded a further perusal of tiie letter.—" Fear me not !" I exclaimed ; " the season of weakness is passed away; resolution and strength nerve me to the trial !" I took the letter from ber trembling band, and though tiie characters burnt like fire before my eyes, not a tear e& caped me* It was from Angerville.— <ť Alas !" he wrote, " heavy is tbe task im¬ posed on friendship: my motlier, how will you reveal to the hapless Helena the total annihilation of all her Impes ? De Beaufort is a prisoner, hi» life for¬ feited by the new code of revolutionary France. Holy Heaven I how my heart bleeds for her suiferings ! An afiection R 2 so
so pure, so transcendent ! how ean she ever become reconciled to the fearful blank whieh must follow ? Would that I could purehase his freedom with my life ! would that I could redeem her peace with my own hearťs blood ! For¬ give my distraction, but images of des¬ pair and death encompass me ! The pic¬ ture is too horrible, the tax upon my for¬ titude too severe ! A protraction of the sentence is all that can be obtained. Check not the wishes of Helena, should they even point to the dungeon of mj r unfortunate fiiend. The fidelity of La- ♦Y^ipe, the tried messenger I dispatch, may be reliad on, and Heaven will de¬ fend and support the mourner. " Ah, my mother ! the tale is too long ; my eyes fill with tears—they blind me, they stream upon the paper: Lavergne knows all; he will conduct Helena to the prison of De Beaufort, or he will bear tlie last written adieu of affection." " 1 will go," I exclaimed, springing from
from the eoueh ; if they have hearts I will reach them: I will kneel^—I wffl bathe their feet in my tears ! Ifl should soften them, if I should save the life of De Beaufort------ Blessed Mary ! give me power—give me eloquence—give me strength !" " Aks·!: you know not the hardened wretches you would supplicate!" ex¬ claimed madame Angerville ; " j r ou know not the feroeitj\ the cruelty of hearts despoiled of justice and honour.*' " Are they not men ?" I demanded ; " have they net feelings and passions like our own? No, no, they cannot spum a wretched heart-broken woman ! I will sink at their feet, I will die at their feet, unless they give me comfort. Where is Lavergne ? where is the guide to De Beaufort's prison ? Let me fly to him—let me share his sorrows—let me pillow his dear cheek upon my bo¬ som ! Oh, grant me but a eorner in his dungeon, that I may see him, may pray В 3 for
THK NUN ОТ
for him, may comfort him f Tremble not for me, weep not forme/' I continu¬ ed, for she turned aside her head to veil her tears : " every lingering weakness vanishes ; nothing can reach me farther." " Alas ! you are too much the hero¬ ine," sobbed madame A «pendile: " bit- ter, I fear, will be the pang when this fevered enthusiasm fails." " I believe a few tears ivould relieve me," I exclaimed, pressing my hand to m v burning forehead : " but no matter, perhaps I may iveep on my journey. Only summon Lavergne, and let us de¬ part. If I should be too late," starting with a wild horror, which thrilled through my whole frame, " then—then indeed, madness wdll be rneny " The entrance of Lavergne chased the vital stream from mj r cheeks and from mj T lips ; I supported myself against the arm of the soía, and as my eyes rested on his face, my limbs shook wdth palsied agitation. si ΛΓν
** Ъ1у son refers me to you for an ex¬ planation of this fatal capture," said ma- dame Angerville ; " tell us, my friend, what room have we for hope ?" The man replied not ; he glanced on me a look of sympathy which pierced mv soul, a look whieh seemed to say— *' My information will annihilate her— how, in tbe presence of the wife of De Beaufort, can I reveal his fate ?" *' Speak Í" I faltered ; " I have no tears, yet m y heart does not break : fear me not ; De Beaufort is a prisoner—what heavier pang can betide me ?" ťí Where is the count de Beaufort ?" asked madame Angerville; %t how did he become the prize of his enemies ?" " The count de Beaufort fell entangled in the close-wrought web of treaeherj'," replied Lavergne ; 4i hemmed in on every side, his arm was powerless ; wounded, bleeding------" He paused, for loud and piercing was в 4 the
the shriek of my despair: fancy pic¬ tured the life of my life expiring, and again did the vital tide recede from my heart. " How little is she formed for the trial!" sighed madame Angerville, as feebly I raised my head from her bosom ; " reared in the lap of gentleness and peace, how can she bmve the storm ?" " Heavy has it fallen on the head of my love!" I articulated. "Oh, De Beau¬ fort, De Beaufort!" then eagerly snatch¬ ing the arm of Lavergne, " tell me all," I continued, " leave me nothing to guess í Does he j r et Uve? or has violence^and murder completed its work ?" " He lives, lady, he lives !" exclaimed Lavergne ; " friendship has stanched his wounds, and chased the mists of death from before his eyes." " Friendship !" I repeated, " hallowed godlike friendship!" and for the first time a burst of tears relieved the pent up
up anguish of mj r feelings. " May Hea¬ ven visit it sevenfold on the head of Angerville !" I sobbed, " fbr none but Angerville could sooth and aid in a mo¬ ment so lost.—Now, my fiiend, speak out," yielding to a momentary thrill cf hope; " my heart tells me Angerville ΛνϋΙ again give life to my Eugenius." " Alas, lady !" rejoined Lavergne,. " how r can I shape to jou r ears the scenes of horror my eyes have wdtnessed ? how dwell on devastation and death? Yet how else picture our campaign, and our triumphs ?" " Triumphs!" Γ echoed,- turning so death-sick at the sound, that I could al¬ most have hailed the parting struggle of dissolving nature ; " triumphs ! Mother of God ! how can triumph float on sei;s of blood ! Oh, call it devastation, woe, the scourge of human kind—but call it not triumph." " The traitors to loyalty, the myrmi¬ dons of rebellion, fled before us/* resum- б ő ed
ed Lavergne ; ίβ at Nerwinde, and on the heights of Corbeck and Sellenberg, the brigands of the regicides bit the dust. 1 * ·* Heaven be praised !" ejaculated ma- dame Angerville. " The saints and all good angels aid our cause ! But be brief, Lavergne, the heart of madame de Beau¬ fort dwells on her lord ; we glory in the brilliant success of our allies, but do¬ mestic interest droops in suspense and sorrow." " If my lord the count had fallen in the field of battle," resumed Lavergne, in an accent of sadness, " his end had been glorious, and his sufferings short ; but tó be ensnared in the moment of se¬ curity, to be shackled like a culprit, to be condemned bv his vitiated countrv- men, is a bitter aggravation to his suf¬ ferings/' * 4 Bitter indeed!'* groaned madame Angerville: 4t proceed, proceed, La¬ vergne," hailing as a happy omen the hysteric
hysteric sobs and scalding tears which now escaped me. " The chevalier Angerville told me it was a letter wdiich drew the count de Beaufort from the security of the camp," resumed Lavergne ; " that, little dream¬ ing of treacheiy, he went alone to the place appointed ; and that when he saw himself hemmed in, and caught in the toil, when numbers pressing upon him left no possibility of escape, he drew his sword r stretched two of his opponents dead at his feet, and mortalty wounded a third, ere, bleeding and overpowered, his arms ivere wrested froni him. Ah ! I warrant he fought bravely," continued Lavergne, " and sold his liberty at a dear and weighty price : in the field tlie spirit of true bravery ever nerved his arm ; true to his cause, his steel drank deep the blood of traitors." " Blessed Mother of God !" I aspira¬ ted, dropping on my knees, and raising 3 6 my
my clasped hands, " avenge on the head of his betrayer the wrongs and the suf¬ ferings of De Beaufort !" " Know you not the secret enemy," demanded madame Angerville, " the fell fiend, who, trampling on every law of honour and humanity, thus lured him to destruction ?" " Alas, no!" replied Lavergne; " the wounded ruffian died in his removal to the camp, and all that the chevalier Angerville could obtain was, that the count de Beaufort had been basely tre¬ panned, and conveyed a prisoner to St. Arnaud." " Let us go!" I eagerly exclaimed, clinging to the arm of Lavergne ; " my De Beaufort, needs comfort and consola¬ tion—why then do I tarry ? Conduct ще to St. Amand—guide me to the pri¬ son of my love, and the blessing of Hea¬ ven be upon you !" " You journey to St. Amand !" ex¬ claimed the trembling madame An¬ gerville ;
gerville; " how without danger, how without the threat of destruction, can you brave the power of insatiate foes? No, no, you must not go ; for even the weak defencelessness of your sex would be no hostage for your safety: when man ceases to be merciful, when he loses sight of honour and justice, what are the sureties to ward insult and out¬ rage ? The arm of Lavergne will be lift¬ ed in vain, for he too will be exposed to denouncement and death: rather stay, unfortunate Helena, and relinquishing the rash project, fulfil the last wishes of De Beaufort, in living to protect his child." "Oh, stay me not!" I implored: ** though every arm pointed a sword at my breast, yet would I go, and share the fallen fortune of De Beaufort, his prison, and his grave !" I sobbed, and then again I yielded to a burst of tears. "And your child?" asked madame Angerville :
Angerville: "mistaken Helena, forget you the ties of nature? what will be¬ come of your child ?" " God will protect the innocent !" I articulated. " Then fear not," solemnly pronoun¬ ced madame Angerville, " for the stamp of Heaven i& upon you." I staggered—I fell at her feet; her words pierced me ; the retributive pang of conscience gnawed into my soul. " These conflicts will kill her," said madame Angerville, sinking on her knees beside rrie. " No, no, no," I faltered, raising my death-pale face, and gazing mournfully upon her, "it takes more to kill: this heart will not break, even on the scaffold of De Beaufort Yirgin Mother ! give me strength to support that last trials and then take me in mercy to thyself!" ** Your child! your poor bereaved child!" sobbed madame Angerville, striv¬ ing to awaken some interest in life, I raised
I raised myself upon my knees—I clasped her hands in mine—-"Hear me, excellent, exemplary woman !" I ex- claimedi " and give to my tortured heart all the consolation this world can offer. Should I return no more— sliould the same stroke dissolve our mor¬ tal struggles—should the same cold bed yield us a resting-place, swear to protect our orphan í Angerville will be her guar¬ dian ; be you her parent—weB do you know the charge Ì Tell her, her father died in the cause of honour—tell her r her mother loved, and could not survive him." " May Heaven prosper me as I fulfil the trust Π pronounced madame Anger¬ ville : " yet, my friend* my poor friend, consider ------" 44 Affection cannot consider—affection can only act !" interrupting her.—"Now," turning to Lavergne, who had stood a weeping witness of the scene, ** counsel me how t© proceed; I ccmld wiah the most
most security, and the least delay; for the prison of De Beaufort is the only haven my soul pines after." " Tbe persevering friendship of the chevalier Angerville has provided for all/' replied Lavergne: " eşince the fatal hour of detention, he has neither slum¬ bered or slept ; spite of every menace, he ventured, disguised, to St Amand ; and wlien he found my lord the count was marched farther into the country, he would heve ťbäôwed, but policy with¬ held 1 htm. hbfurmep days, before amv- ehy t feftd Witíed brother against brother, he had known the prefect : w ith the con- riding zeal of true bravery, he sought him out, foUowed him to the security oi* his own apartment, witii desperate hope threw off his disguise, acknowledged his ei&ijrtSiy, and besought bj$ assistance." «^Heroic; ПеЫе-пнщЫ Charles L" broke from the heart, from the ligs qf his exulting mother. I spoke not, but I felt withhi that which
which almost bent my knee in adora¬ tion of his virtues. " The prefect, though the officer of re¬ bellion, possessed the feelings of a man," pursued Lavergne ; " he betrayed not the confidence entrusted ; and though he could not open the door to freedom, he promised to ligliten the chains of capti¬ vity, and to second tiie warm offices of friendship—naj% he bound himself to protract the fulfilment of the sentence, and he furnished the chevalier wdth the necessary passports to ensure the safety of madame De Beaufort, should inclina¬ tion or despair point to the dungeon of her lord ; he------" " I too will visit the prefect," inter¬ rupting him, with a wild burst of joy : " yes, if he be human—if tears, ifa break¬ ing heart can speak, I wdll kneel, and ob¬ tain at his hands the precious life of my Eugenius." " I tremble at the trial, ladv," resum*. ed Lavergne; "firm in his mistaken principles
principles of duty, hurried away by s false glare of patriotism, he would cede no more to the prayers, and tears, and zealous representations of the chevalier." " What are the praj r ers, and tears, and zealous representations of friendship, compared to the force and irresistible pathos of nature ?" I exclaimed. " Di¬ rect, only direct me to the feet of the prefect, and I will soften him or perish ! Has he a wife? has he children?— Speak ! If he be a husband, if he be a father, if his heart be not of stone, it must plead with me." * He is a husband," replied Lavergne, " and ministers to the drooping health of bis lady, with a tenderness wdiich speaks him to have a heart." " Heaven be praised !" I ejaculated,, " he is not dead to others' ivoe ! I will kneel to him then, until, wdth the hand of true charity, he stanch the tears of my affliction." 44 The Virgin grant it !" aspirated ma- dame
dame Angerville ; " my prayers will be with you, poor mourner; and even should oiir hopes be wrecked, the remembrance of this last painful effort of duty will be a balm to your tortured spirit. May saints and all good angels speed you, and may you return in happiness to re¬ claim your child !" I bow r ed my head to the benison: alas ! I could not speak, for a sinking, a dying at heart, seemed to whisper, I was born for sorrow. Ah ! how prophetic ivas the feeling ! The die was indeed cast—the season of trial dawning; long and dreary were the destined years ofmy existence, without one bright ray to so¬ lace and to cheer ! " Where now is my son?" asked ma- dame Angerville; " wdiat can detain him ? How is it that he commits the care of madame de Beaufort to any other hand ?" " I know not," replied Lavergne; « the chevalier discoursed not bej^ond the
the errand which brought me hither; doubtless he is labouring^for the enlarge¬ ment of his friend, for his wdiole form shook, and his face Was bleached with anxiety and horror, when he spoke of the apprehension ofthe count." " The blessing of Heaven be upon him !" I gratefully articulated, " and in the hour of need, reward him with a friend as benevolent and as disinterest¬ ed Ρ "Dear, dear Charles !" murmured mar- dame Angerville, as the glow of mater¬ nal exultation burnt upon her cheek ; " prosperous be thy efforts and thy hopes ! reward rest in thy own bosom ! for the recollection of a good action is a mine of peace to the soul. And now, my young friend, raHy your spirits, call every vestige of fortitude to your aid, and pre¬ pare for the care-worn track of toil and peril. I will seek no more to curb the darings of enthusiastic affection : ho¬ nouring the warm sentiment of connu¬ bial
bìal love, I will pray for your success, and watch over the tender treasure you commit to my keeping." " You will be a mother to my cherub!" I exclaimed, snatching her band and rais¬ ing it to my lips; " should Heaven with¬ hold her own, you will rear her in vir¬ tue and honour, and breathe into her listening ear the sad tale of her parenťs sorrow" " Yes, j r es !" solemnly pronounced ma- dame Angerville ; " my home shall be ber home—my bosom her shelter of rest; I will guard the immaculate innocence of your child, and live true to my trust— so help me, Heaven ! Charles, too, will love her for her parents' sake, and his strong arm will be a staff for both our iveakness. Go in peace, afflicted motber, and think but on the duty of your pre¬ sent calling." Soft as the dew upon the scorched and burning bosom of creation, ber words stole into my heart, allaying the wild tu¬ mult
mult of despair, and bending to submit sion and to reason* With a composure* a mild reliance, far beyond my hopes, I looked up to Heaven for succour; and submitting the necessary arrangements fm departure to Lavergne, hastened to røy own chamber to assort my wardrobe, and bid adieu to my angel child. Unconscious how fer the aid of bri* bery might be requisite, I carefully collected tlie* few valuables I possessed, and buried in my bosom, as a last re¬ source, the ^brilliant-studded miniature ofmy fefcber. Mournful, humbling were my reflections; tbe consciousness of in* gratitude pressed upon me, and the pun¬ gent pang of remorse goaded into my inmost soul ; not a remembrance dawn¬ ed to cheer and to encourage ; alone, in a dark and troubled worid, my path was close set with thorns, and my prospect cloudy and ungenial : the being in whom every hope centered, who lived the wor- shipped idol ofmy weak and doting heart, was
was the close prisoner of sanguinary fac¬ tion ; and I, trusting to the guidance of a stranger, was about visiting a country teeming with fate and death. 4i And what is death?" I exclaimed, raising my streaming eyes to heaven; "what but a passport from trial and from mi* ocry? Give me death! give me in¬ stant, sudden, oblivious death ! or, with life, give me De Beaufort !" Trembling, shuddering at my own impiety, at my own hardihood, I sunk prostrate upon the earth ; I bowed my head in conviction and in shame: my crimes marshalled in array before me; my eyes closed, as though the abyss of condemnation yawned at my feet ; my life was young in years, but it had waxen grey in sin. In the first bloom of sum¬ mer, disobedience and rebellion had blighted my father's hopes; and now, a rank incendiary, a profaner of the sacred ordinations of Heaven itself, I dared in¬ voke the unerring shaft of death to es¬ cape
eesß tbe puny judgment of this worW . Well might I kneel, well might I crawl in the dust for mercy and for pardon. Ob, grant me life ! grant me long, long life, that I may expiate Ae past, and, through remorse and penance, attain soine hope ofraerey on tiie future ! Tbe peridd of departure approached, and I hung over my cherub in an agony baffling description; my bosom heaved avitti suffocating sobs— my tears flowed with unrestrained violence: again and again did I yield ber to theisolicitations of madame Angerville, and again and again did 1 stíatch her to my arms with frenzied fervour. " Nothing earthly but tbis røestroke could have torn me from thee!" I exclaimed, kissing away the tea^s which streamed upon her features. * 4 Dearer part of myself, my child, my darling child l Öh God I protect and bless this innocent I whatever be the fate of* her wretched psu^nts, i4ew'híer with теЩ and pity !" L "Fear
" Fear not for her," sobbed the sym¬ pathizing madame Angerville ; " not once shall my eyes lose sight of her un¬ til I see her nestling again in your bo¬ som : at night she shall sleep upon my pillow ; in the day I will w r atch her as a sacred, a precious trust. Fear not for her, my afflicted friend ; would that at this moment your heart was alike hap- РУ!" " Happy !" I echoed, with a hysteric sob ; " happiness and I have parted for ever: you know not the load which presses upon my stricken heart—you know not the festering thorn which has long, and must ever rankle ! Oh, ami¬ able, exemplary woman! should I die, should I sink beneath the trial, should I be sprinkled with the life's blood of De Beaufort—whatever you may hereafter learn, whatever report maj r hereafter whisper, forsake not our offspring !" " Never, as I crave for mercy in hea- voL. hi. c ven !"
^ий! Γ fervently exclaimed madame An- garville. 4iL Qo, Hetøta/' gently removing the child from my wild embrace; "yield not too much to hope, yet suffer not despair to crush your spirit; temporize with youf feelings ; curb tiie acute sensibility of your soul, and rely on that Almighty Power who shapeth tbe back to the bur¬ then« nor suffereth a sparrow to fall un¬ heeded to the ground Г The pause was solemn ; grief chained niy tongue, yet did hope and fear agi¬ tate by turns; one moment my heart throbbed violently, the next it felt to stop, as though its vital stream receded. " Would that Charles were here to be your consort f pursued madame Anger¬ ville: " yet doubtless he awaits you on tbe road, perhaps to bring good tidings. Ah ! if he be the messenger of peace, may Heaven spéèd bini f " Amen Ρ I faltered, agam turning to kiss
kiss my in&nt, asid batbing her angel features in my tears. " This one, and then no more," said madame Angerville, gently withholding her : " spare your heart these bitter con¬ flicts; leave us, my young fiiend; the spirit of inspiration whispers we sball meet again in peace." Holy saints! that spirit of inspiration was indeed prophetic! In peace? yes, we shall meet again in peace ! In tbis worfdthereisnope**; war,andtmseiy, and outrage, and guilt, bave murdered peace; man has desolated every hope, and ravaged every promise. In this im¬ measurable expanse, in this wide world, not one pillow of peace lulls the head to forgetfulness: in heaven, in heaven alone tbere is peace ! There then, my murdered friend—there, my Eugenia, must we seek it Innocence and troe holiness have wafted tby sprits to tiie Throne of Grace! Pray forme» pray for tbe contrite mourner, pray for the heart- c 2 broken
broken penitent, who pictures peace but in eternity !
CHAPTER II.
Oppressed with a grief almost too great for endurance, I entered the vehicle wait¬ ing to convey me from my child. My eyes turned towards the dwelling which contained her, till it was no longer vi¬ sible: every feeling was racked, every pulse in my frame throbbed in mortal anguish ; and but for the cheerless dun¬ geon of De Beaufort, but for his threat¬ ened life beckoning to exertion, I could have blessed the hand whicb, even in violence, opened the pass to eternal rest. My bereaved heart sought in vain for comfort ; horror, and despair, and death, encompassed me. In vain I recalled the parting words of madame Anger¬ ville,
ville, her fiiendship, her promises, her maternal care of my child: I felt to have parted from her for ever—to have blessed her for the last time—to have imprinted the last kiss. Tears came to my relief, and long was it ere the prison and chains of De Beaufort effaced tbe picture : in every shape despair tugged at my heartstrings, for hope and peace seemed to have taken a long—long flight from this dark world. How different were the remonstran¬ ces of Lavergne to the pious counsels of the saint-like madame Angerville ! The one urged submission to the iron law of necessity, as beyond appeal; the otber dwelt on the consolations of rehgion, on those sacred duties which alone adminis¬ ter comfort in affliction, inspiring reli¬ ance even when all that is visible sea¬ sons of despair ! Again and again did I listen to the fatal treacbery which had trammelled the liberty of De Beaufort; fency could not trace the deadly foe, CS in
bi the history of his short life, I had heard of no oppressor ; and since fate had given us to each other, no private en¬ mity had scowled upon our hopes. How then could I expound a mystery so com¬ plicated? — how resolve the doubts which crowded upon my mind ? Some¬ times I thought mistake had wove the web of deception ; but ever did I turn in ccmfidence to the known friendship of Angerville, as though his exertions were to file the bars of detention. Hailing his approach as a beam from heaven, craving at bis hands the life and the liber¬ ty of Eugenius, his very name awakened veneration, and mingling in my orisons, became almost hallowed. So short¬ sighted is human nature ! so duped by external circumstances and plausible in¬ sinuations I The deepening shades of night com¬ pelled me to yield to the persuasions of my guide, and in a lone and solitary inn I numbered the long hours of darkness, and
and anxiously watched tbe russet grey of morning, as the invigorating lamp to lighten me on my journey. 1 prayed for my absent child, and her persecuted father—for fortitude and resolution; and a thousand blessings did I fervently in¬ voke on the head of Angerville. Tranquillized and calm, I arose fremi my knees, and hurrying on my clothes, listened for some indication of awaken¬ ing industry ; butali was still—no busy foot proclaimed returning animation; rapt in the embrace of death's twin-sis¬ ter, I alone was alive to watchfulness and care. Sublime and beautiful was the ex¬ panding glow of day : the vapoury veil which shrouded the cone tops of the mountains, gradually fled before its effulgence ; and as the picturesque out¬ line became more clear as the sun stole from his bed of mist, his saffron beams dappled the face of creation with a thou¬ sand dazzling gems ; all was calm and с 4 peaceful
peaceful—all was glorious and sublime I Herds broused upon the rich pastures, birds carolled on the blossomed sprays ! " Alas !" I sighed, as my eye measured the far-spreading scenery, " 'tis man who destroys the picture of perfect loveliness —'tis his perturbed passions which scat¬ ter waste, and devastation, and woe ; he abuses the bounty of indulgent Heaven ; he defaces the perfect works of his Crea¬ tor.* My head rested on my hand ; my thoughts took wing beyond the narrow confines ofthis world, nor, till the voice of Lavergne dissipated the waking vi¬ sion, did I feel the trammels of incerti¬ tude and grief; then again did the same heavy load press upon my heart, and I resumed my journey, with a spirit bow¬ ed down and oppressed. As we approached the scene of devas¬ tation and war, the whole aspect varied : black and scorched was the late verdant garb of nature ; whole forests were fell¬ ed, whole villages dismantled; the sword of
of rapine had saturated the sacked eartii in blood; the hand of violence had levelled the palace and the cottage, in¬ volving all alike in one promiscuous ruin ! The deep, the unbroken silence of the tomb, had succeeded the deafening din of tumult; nota breath was stirring —nought around but solitude and woe ! * c War, horrid war !" I articulated, as my eyes closed against the external ruin, ** rutldess and unpitying, how many hearts dost thou make desolate! how many widows, how many orphans, rue thy annihilating sway !" ** Aind yet," said Lavergne, " the death of the brave is gloriou»— the deeds ofthe hero a monument which never fads!" I turned, I looked with astonishment upon the hard and time-worn features of my companion : be smiled. ** My father, lady," he continued, " and my grandfather» both died in the field of honour ; a sword was my only c ô inheritance ;
inheritance; wonder not then at the death I covet." î replied not, but I mused on the words of the gallant veteran. Heroism then was no fever of the brain, was no ignisfatuus, luring the ambitious spi¬ rit, and pointing to the dizzy pinnacle of renown and signalization ; it dwelt in the bosom which pictured no ennoble¬ ment—-it nerved the arm of unknown and unlettered mediocrity. Another night was passed upon the road; and though I awoke to my last day's journey, my spirits were sunk be¬ yond all power to rally. Angerville came not, yet I had not courage to ques¬ tion ; my thoughts, my whole soul hung upon De Beaufort; even my absent child seemed dead to memory, for dark and prophetic fears paralyzed every hope. The day was ungenial ; the sun was obscured; heavy clouds flitted before the wind, and the hoarse peal of distant thun¬ der spoke an approaching tempest. La¬ vergne
vergnegazedonmewitbpity: he would have sought a place of shelter, but I urg¬ ed him to proceed ; I had no terrors for the storm—alas ! it was calm and still to that which raged within. I saw the por¬ tentous gloom of the sky unmoved ; I saw the teeming clouds bursting witb lurid Ughtning, and yet I shrunk not. The thunder roared in deafening peais» and tbe rain descended in sucb torrents as to bear down aU before it. " How luckless !* exclaimed Lavergne, as the driver stopped, and declared he could proceed no farther. " Only half a league beyond, just on the brow ofthe next forest, and our jour¬ ney ends." " Only haff a league !" I shrieked. " Oh, merciful Heaven ! only balf a league betwixt me and De Beaufort !" and then, with desperate earnestness, I besought the postillion to proceed, tempt¬ ing bim with rewards, and declaring I с 6 would
would rather alight and face the storm than waste another hour. " I impossible Γ surlily muttered tbe man ; ** the poor beasts tremble, and I am almost blinded by the lightning." 44 And yet," I vehemently urged, "the same danger threatens here, the same pe¬ ril attends us: for the love of mercy, if you ere felt for anotheťs woe, convey me but half a league farther, and I will kneel and bless you ! Ob, Father of the deso¬ late !" I continued, as the man remount¬ ing slowly proceeded, "soften his heart ! have compassion on thy wretched crea¬ ture, and suffer me to live until I reach the prison of Eugenius ! Only half a league further! only half a league!" I shrieked out, as the man again paused, and turned his face from the biting gust. ** Though barely haff a league from our place of destination/' said Lavergne, " the fortress in which the count de Beaufort is confined lies still further." " Blessed
*· Blessed martyrs!" I feltered, as the deathlike sickness of disappointment stole over me, ** whither would you take me ? No shelter do I crave beyond the dungeon ofmy love!" " You may visit the count de Beau¬ fort, madam," rejoined Lavergne ; "but the active friend of the chevalier Anger¬ ville has been zealous for your comfort, even in the melancholy office to wbich you are called.** " Heaven reward him !" I exclaimed, bursting into an agony of tears : " but I need no comfort, I will partake of no comfort of wbich my hearťs friend is de¬ barred : I will share his dungeon and his chains, his sufferings and his ignominy ; not a pang, not a degradation which hu¬ man cruelty can devise, will I shrink frora—not a privation, not a trial will excite a single murmur, or provoke the shadow of regret. No, no/* wringing my hands in despair, w they know not the powers of my mind, they know not the
tiie unalterable devotion of my attach¬ ment! I would live, I would die сях tbe hard stone which pillows the head of De Beaufort Ρ A tremendous crash, as though the annihilation of earth was predoomed, checked all: further discourse ; the horses plunged in wild terror, the restraining rein was unheeded, the vehicle was up¬ set, and stunned, and nearly dying, I was precipitated to the earth. Lost to all whieh succeeded, on reviving I found myself supported in the arms of La¬ vergne: he was watching over me with fearful commiseration; and when the feeble throbbing at my heart assured him life still lingered, he blessed the saints with grateful transport, and besought me to rouse myself to exertion. " We must proceed on foot,' 5 he ex¬ claimed; "the carriage is shattered, and tbe horses have broken from the detain¬ ing hand oftheir driver." " I am ready/ I feltered, rallying every
every power of my maŕly*exhausted strength; yet, when ï attempted to stand, my trelnbling limbs refused their office, and with á heavy groan I clung to the firm arm of my companion. " Fear not Γ he implored ; ** it is very dark, and very cheerless, but I know the road : I was born in yon village, and every foot of ground is borne to me;" I pressed bis hand in silence—I strug¬ gled against thé suffocating sobs which swelled my bosom ; and upheld, almost lifted by his strong arm, we quitted the close shelter of the trees, and advanced on our track of peril. The path was slippery—the rain still pelted·—the wind blew in hollow gusts—the thunder broke in measured peals—and the lightning, in vast and vivid sheets, piercing the ebon clouds, scathed our sight with its brightness. 44 Courage, dear lady !" whispered La¬ vergne, when first he descried the cheer¬ ing beacon to security and shelter.— It
It was a light gleaming through a dis¬ tant window. He would have snatch¬ ed me up from the wet earth and carried me forward, but I resisted the effort.— ** Fear not for me," I mournfully ex¬ claimed, " I have strength, and can walk ; to a wretch so desolate, the storm has no terrors. Alas ! 'tis when the mind is at ease, tbat the fragility of the body is felt, fc» the war within bars the incon¬ venience of situations and seasons.** My garments were dripping with rain —my hair, soaked and heavy, hung upon my shoulders—a numbing chill crept tbrough my bosom, and as it felt to ice the life's blood at my heart, I paus¬ ed, and gasping for breath—" Now— now," I faltered, " I can go no farther." Lavergne raised me half fainting in his arms, and hurrying forward, stopped not until he had Obtained a shelter for his wretched charge. Leudly he called for assistance, and wringing the water from mý bair, and chafing my cold hands and
and forehead, he tried to woo my flitting senses back to fife. Long were bis ef¬ forts vain; I moved not—I breathed not—scarce a pulse fluttered at my heart ; nor, until he had forced a cordial down my throat, did I evince tbe slightest in¬ dication of existence: long did I revive to animation ere I revived to memory ; my rayless eyes wandered unconsciously around, and even when I met the anxi¬ ous gaze of Lavergne, neither inquiry or remonstrance followed ; lost to every thing like sanity, the past, the present, and the future, were forgotten—eold and torpid, I seemed as one dead to the sor¬ rows of the world, as one whom the vi¬ cissitudes of fortune no more could agi¬ tate. I suffered the mistress ofthe dwell¬ ing to lead me into an inner chamber, to take off my dripping garments, to smooth the pillow for my aching head. I swallowed the cordial draught her kind hand administered, and without a mur¬ mur, without a struggle, lost to every grief
grief aiid «very care-fraught solicitude, forgetful ofmy child, and of the threaten¬ ed doom of De Beaufort, I soon sank into a calm and deep repose.
CHAPTER HL t s Тег dazzling splendour of a cloudless sun, rising as though to contrast the hor¬ rors of the last night's tempest, broke tlie leadened trammels of sleep: I started from my pillow ; scarcely conscious of where I was, I gazed around ; and when my eyes feB upon the watchful form of my hostess, tbe past, like the fearful va¬ pours of a horrid dream, flitted upon memory—the journey, the storm, the solicitude of Lavergne, and then follow¬ ed the treacherous seizure of De Beau¬ fort, and in accents of terror, regardless of her inquiries for my health, I de¬ manded
manded how far we were from the pri¬ son? " Blessed saints ! what can you have to do with the prison ?" questioned the young woman. " You have friends, and powerful friends, who are anxious but for your safety/* " Mother of God, I thank thee Γ I ejaculated; * 4 my De Beaufort then wiB be freed!" and with a beart throbbing with new-awakened joy, I sprung fiora, the bed, <and hurried on my clothes.-— " Now lead me to Lavergne," I continu¬ ed ; "be quick, my kind consoler, for every moment seems an age until I fly to the relief of my husband" " Husband !" echoed the woman, with the look and the start of amazement; " so young, and the wife ofa prisoner ! Keep up your spirits, sweet lady» for if interest avaifeth aught, the fife of your husband will be ransomed." I grasped the hand of the speaker, and as Angerville glowed on memory, I raised
raised my tear-fraught eyes tű Heaven. — ** Power Supreme!* I articulated, f * reward my generous friend, and teach mè how best to evince my gratitude ! Oh, bittd the bleeding wounds of his heart, and vouchsafe to hirn the happi¬ ness he dispenses !" Lavérgnê met me at the door of the chamber; I held forth my hand—I breath¬ ed acknowledgment—" And now/' I pursued, ** pilot me tò my haven of rest ; see, the sun smiles upon our path : let us go—I would counsel with De Beau¬ fort ere I bend my knee at the footstool of power.** ** My order extends no farther/* said Lavergne, tLoughtfull y , " Safe deposit¬ ed in the shel· prepared, I return to my station.** ** Ywr order — your station ŕ I eager¬ ly repeated. " What mean you?" and an unknown fear palsied my frame. „" I mean,** resumed Lavergne, " that I possess no power to open the gate of the
the count de Beaufort's prison ; but the fiiend, lady, who commiserates your suf¬ ferings will doubtless provide a gráde." " Ah, leave me not!" I implored, clinging to his arm, as the only protec¬ tion my wrecked fortune had spared me ; " I know not what dire foreboding assails my heart, but if you quit me, Lavergne, alone will I wander, nor pause till I gain Ae prison of De Beaufort." Compassion spoke in the glistening eye of bavergne—* I would be true to my duty," be exclaimed, " and yet I can¬ not be deaf to humanity : tarry yet a few moments, lady, and I will return, and conduct you hence.*' He waited not my reply, but hurry¬ ing from the chamber, left me a prey to conjecture and torturing doubt My confiding heart read and blessed the hand of Angerville' in every alleviation. Yet why this mystery? wby these strange and persevering cautions ? The deadly contention of power wa» tbe only solution
solution I could trace, and tbe zeal of our absent friend, in the active agent be had chosen, pfesently dissipated the seeming ingratitude of suspicion. The return erf Lavergne filled me with new confidence î hope revived in my bosom, every obstacle seemed surmount¬ ed, and witb eager thanks I resigned myself to bis guidance. " What a con¬ trast to the pitiless peltings of last night!" I exclaimed, inhaling the soft breeze which scarce shook the dew from the blossoms. " Alas! tbe vicissitudes of life are not less varied; now we slumber in the fep of peace, now we are wrecked on the rough breakers of calamity." Lavergne turned his eyes upon me with feeling earnestness; be seemed to deplore the misfortunes he oould not avert, and when I continued—** Oh, be the evening of my life alike unclouded !" Ы raised bis band to dash away tiie pendent tear. Our nearest path lay through a thick -- clustering
clustering wood; and though my clothes were torn by the brambles, mã my foot- ж ing obstructed and perplexed by thistles and underwood, I hurried on, impatient of delay, my eyes straning tò catch the first outline of a building, and ever and anon questioning my guide as to the dis¬ tance we had to traverse. On emerging from the dose shelter of the trees, a huge fortress rose on the plain before us. " Yonder stands the prison," said Lavergne. A fearful shriek escaped me : I drop¬ ped his arm, and buried my face in my hands, as though to shut out those very walls for wbich I had so long and so im¬ patiently sougbt. Alas! De Beaufort groaned within them, and the very glance paralyzed my heart. * Vhgm Motber, give me strength!" I aspirated; " call me not hence until I rendi bis presence ! let me live, that his hands may close my eyes, that bis affection may sooth my flitting spirit!" Drooping,
Drooping, sick at heart, struggling against an anguish almost mortal, I stood for a moment gazing on the heavy walls whicli frowned defiance : it was but for a moment ; tbe strength of desperation urged me forward, and snatching the arm of Lavergne, I resolutely advanced. The ponderous gate, as İt slowly grated on its hinges, froze every lingering spring of hope ; I shrunk from the guard as the emissaries of tyranny, and ivhen I tra¬ versed the long passages, and descended the stone stairs, I felt as though enter¬ ing the cold and cheerless receptacle of death. Not a tear, not a word escaped me ; my faee was bleached as monumen¬ tal marble—my heart feebly fluttered; and when the tenacious sentinel hesitated to unbar the door of the dungeon, anni¬ hilation would have been mercy, I leant against the damp wall—I fixed my eyes imploringly upon him—I folded my hands upon my chilled bosom : still be delayed. Lavergne whispered in his ear;
oar ; he took a written credential from bis pocket, and instantly were tbe bolts withdrawn. Saints and martyrs! how can I describe the feelings of that mo¬ ment ! Even now, in years so distant, it quickens the lagging pulse of life ! The door opened ; an irrepressible shriek spoke my entrance: the clank of chains succeeded; I heard no more—a thick film obscured external objects, and, cold and stiff, I fell upon the floor! The ardent clasp, the agonized groans of De Beau¬ fort, called me back to life. I looked up ; I lay upon his bosom; his pale cheek rested upon mine, and his lips were press¬ ed to my death-cold forehead. " Helena ! my own Helena ! blessed idol of my hopes !" he wdiispered. " Is it no delusion of the senses ? do I live ? do I indeed fold to mj r heart tlie angel who governs its emotions ?" I raised my head ; I clasped his dear hands in mine; I tried to speak, but I could not; I gazed upon his altered vol. in. d cheek,
r cheek, upou his heayy chains, and the iron felt to eat into my soul. A passion of tears succeeded — he fanned them with the breath of gentleness ; his own streamed upon my face ; he clasped me closer to his bosom, and when he spoke of our absent darling, when he asked of the child of his love, his sobs rose almost to suffocation. Alas ! how quick did those moments of fond communion pass ! Supported in the arms of the being in whose existence mj r own felt blended, I seemed to lay down the burthen of m j r griefs ; I seem¬ ed to forget the barbarous denunciation, which threatened to tear him from me and life together! Bitter, bitter was the pang, when the high-wrought dream of enthusiasmfaded—when awakening to reality, his dungeon and his chains mock¬ ed every anticipation, and shrouded the future in despair—when I beheld him as he was, enslaved by treacheiy, the vic¬ tim ofa merciless and sanguinary repub¬ lic,
lie, I clasped my hands, wdth such a look of wild horror, that he turned heart- struck from the glance. " Be patient, Helena," he implored, " and dissipate not the blessed calm j T our presence has already produced. Tell me how I see you here, that I may pray for the friend ivho robs death of his sharp¬ est sting?" " Oh, talk not of death !" I murmur¬ ed, dropping my head upon his bosom. " If justice lives, if merev be not a mere mockery, your life, your liberty, will be ceded to mj r prayers. A Ve have friends, my Eugenius, active, zealous friends f and then I told him how Angerville, through the prefect, had dispatched La¬ vergne to conduct me hither. He listen¬ ed in amazement ; but wdien I tried to inspire him with my own hopes, he shook his head, exclaiming—" Angerville can¬ not reach me here; he may, he has alle¬ viated, but he cannot save." " Say not so," I implored; "a friend- d 2 ship
ship like his w ill not slumber. I too will kneel at the feet of the prefect. Oh, En- genius, shall I not supplicate for more than life? Mercy cannot have flown the heart of man ! Heaven then will soften him to my prayers, and the fond and dear liopes which buoy me up in an hour like this must be realized" " Helena," said De Beaufort, with a solemnity which iced my blood, " suffer not your mind to dwell too implicitly on what injustice and inhumanity may crush : too w r ell do I know the vile and arbitrarj r despots who now tyrannize over France. Treachery led me hither; but though my hidden foe worketh in secret, though his power may deprive me of life it extends no farther : my mind is nerved to the last trial : 1 wdll not shrink; for has not the scaffold been already sprinkled with the sacred blood of ma¬ jesty ? Yes, I wdll die," he exclaimed, and a momentary fire lighted up his countenance, " with that heroism which stamps
stamps the true cause ! Bear up, Hele¬ na ! Angerville will protect you : let me see you resigned, and the deadly rancour of my enemy will be stingless." " What enemy have you armed ?" I eagerly questioned ; " tell me, De Beau¬ fort, how have j u excited such envj*, sueh malevolence ? Alas ! it can be no common cause which spurs a persecution even unto death !" " Heaven alone knows !" he replied, " for the cause is deep hid. Disgust¬ ed with state policy and petty in¬ trigues, I was preparing for my return to Schafhausen. Dwelling on the charm of love, pining to hush every care on your bosom, I pictured no world beyond ; convinced, by sad experience, ef the in- effieacj r of resistance, I resolved to bid adieu to camps and tumults, to leave to time and a Higher Power the retribu¬ tive scourge of crimes and wrongs, to fly a country bleeding beneath the iniquity of her sons, and in some more hospitable d Я realm,
realm, to devote the remnant of my days to the only reparation I could make you, tenderness and devotion. Ah, Helena! the picture glowed in my heart and in my brain—but treachery and misfortune fades it, and leaves us nought but sub¬ mission." He turned from me ; he tried to hide the tear whieh started in his eye—he tried to inspire resignation, even when his own feelings shrunk in the trial. " Tell me of this enemy, Eugenius," I implored ; " tell me of the ground on wliich I may erect my hopes ? Have you declaimed against the existing go¬ vernment? have j t ou ivarred against power, and dared the malevolence of nar¬ row minds ?" " JSo, no, my Helena !" mournfully re¬ plied De Beaufort ; " the crime, as the enemy, is unknown. It was a letter, penned in ambiguity, w T hich led me from the camp. It spoke of my mother, of Hyacinthe, of my visit to Sicily» of my apostaey
apostacj r to my vow ; it told ine that my secret was known, that my mother was drooping, almost unto death ; and then it besought me, if compassion, if af¬ fection lingered in mj T bosom, to meet the writer at the close of evening. Re¬ gardless of danger, heedless of design, I read and re-read the paper. I sought for Angerville in vain—he was nowhere to be found ; and, before his return, the hour of appointment dawned. Musing on what I had to learn, and on the singu¬ larity of the occurrence, I quitted the camp: the spot was solitarv, but not onee did I pause in distrust or fear. A shrill wdiistle ivas the first indication of danger: in an instanti was surrounded; and though, from numbers, resistance w r as vain, still I sold my liberty at a heavy price : two of the ruffians bit the dust ere my arms were wrested from me, and then, powerless and subdued, I was hur¬ ried beyond the reach of rescue, and at lengtii plunged into this cold and ivretch- D 4 ed
cd dungeon. Here, day and night, have I groaned, without redress or hope' Tour affiix'tion, your helplesNness, was my bitterest sting : the heavy crime of mistaken love warred against my quiet, and tlie pangs of hell itself preyed upon my soul. When I muse upon the ruin my ungoverned passions have wrought, ivhen I reflect upon the perils and mi¬ sery into which I have plunged j t ou, upon the innocence I have rifled, upon the confidence I have abused, mj' reason almost totters, and my remorse unmans and chases fortitude. Helena/' sinking on his knees before me, "can you forgive the wretch who has lived for nought but self? who, neglectful of eveiy noble feel¬ ing, deceived j r our trust, and triumph¬ ed о cr jour fame ?" "Can I forgiver I sobbed out. "Oh, De Beaufort ! De Beaufort ! wound ше not w 1th the bare question ! Tell me the moment when reproach beamed in шу look, or dwelt upon my tongue ? If love
love be a crime, if adoration be culpable, then let us kneel and supplicate together the clemency of Heaven. We have both erred, Eugenius ; we have both re¬ belled against probity and honour ; we have outraged law ; we have dared the reproaches of our own hearts. Let us kneel, my friend—let us swear atone¬ ment and restitution. Should long life be ours, the holy walls of religion be my harbour—the peace of Hyacinthe vour------ "* ml "Rather give me death !" interrupted De Beaufort, snatching me to his bosom. " Know you what you say ? Resign you ! renounce you ! Tlie task is too great for man ! No, no, Helena! I will cling to my treasure, even though I pe¬ rish Г Sobs and tears succeeded; his head reclined on my shoulder—his arms were folded round my waist ; I supported him in silence; I could not speak—I could D3 not
not urge what my feehngs told me would be mortal. " Helena," he faltered, raising his head, and gazing reproachfully on me, "could you forswear our blissful union? —could you exchange it for a rehgious cell, and live ?—could vou tear me from mf your heart ?—could you, with holy com¬ posure, fulfil your duties ?" I sobbed—I buried my face in my hands. " Tell me, tell me, my angel-friend !" he urged, " could you live in absence, in silence, in estrangement ?" " No, Eugenius/' I articulated ; " but I could die ! I could praj r for j r ou in the last struggle of dissolving nature! If you could be happj T , if you could be resign¬ ed, I w T ould offer myself the bleeding sacrifice for past transgression—even my child I would relinquish to ensure you peace !" " Glorious, matchless woman !" he ex¬ claimed,.
claimed, raising his streaming eyes to heaven. " Blessed Mary ! what a saint have I ravished from thy altar ! what a heart, what a mind have I fraudulently seduced—have I plunged in woe ! Oh ! be the crime my own—be the sting of a parent's curse mine, and only mine !" Was it indeed that curse, that fatal curse, ivhich pursued and blistered all our hopes? Was it the bitter anathema of my father, whieh bent us almost to the grave? Oh no! not his curse: it was our own inordinate passions ! it was the penalty guilt ever entails ! it ivas the deep, still voice of conscience, wdiich, for ever and for e ver whispers, "peace dwells not wdth the vicious !" Harrowing w T as the train whieh the sad reference to a father's curse awakened : the earty tale of sorrow revived to memory, and awed even to superstitious credence. I wrung my hands m despair, I felt as though hope had fled for ever, as though this D 6 dark
dark and gloomy world teemed with mi¬ sery and care. " Helena," implored De Beaufort, reading the wild tumult within, " pro¬ mise me to banish this romantic flight of heroism, to calm the agitation of jour feelings, and, ere you go------" "Go!" with a palsied start; "fear not, Eugenius— nor power nor art sliall draw me hence ! I will cling to jou even in death ! I will share your sufferings and your grave ! This dungeon can hold us both, my friend, and yon mildewed straw furnish us a resting-place !" " How wildly you talk !" said De Beaufort ; " compose yourself, Helena ; life holds forth many promises: think of our child, think------ n He paused : the heavy bars were withdrawn, and the door groaned on its hinges. A sentinel stood at the en¬ trance» " Two hours have elapsed/' exclaim¬ ed
ed the soldier, " and the latitude of in¬ dulgence ceases. Lady, the guard is about to be exchanged ; I must conduct jou hence." " Never, never !" I slirieked out, throwing myself into the arms of De Beaufort ; " I will live, I wdll die in this dungeon !" In vain the man urged submission—I clung tighter to the bosom of my lover ; I vowed no human power should part us ! The man frowned. " Resistance is vain," he muttered ; ** our orders are despotic, lady ; if you are forced hence, you will be admitted no more." The threat iced my blood ; I turned death-sick, yet still I relinquished not my hold. "Have pity on her sorrows!" im¬ plored De Beaufort ; and then he whis¬ pered in my ear—"The prefect the friend of Angerville : submit, my He¬ lena; at night we shall meet again." " Xo,
" No, not at night,** gruffly observed the soldier ; " the lady must not be ex¬ posed to the night air." " In the morning then," dejectedly resumed De Beaufort The man answered not ; and with an exertion of strength, of which I thought myself incapable, I tore myself from the haven of my rest, and suffered him to conduct me from the dungeon.
CHAPTER IV.
A CARRIAGE waited to convey me from the prison. I started ; I turned inquisi¬ tively to my conductor. The soldier read my doubts. " Where is Lavergne ? w I demanded. " Gone to his former station." "Gone!" I echoed; and shrinking haek, I trembled with terror and suspi¬ cion. 44 You
" You have nothing to fear/' said the man ; " your comfort is the charge of all." "My comfort!" I repeated. "Ob, my friend, restore me then to De Beaufort ; give me but room in his dungeon, and I will bless your clemency !" " No, lad y, the habitation is too rough ; our orders are far different" Again I fixed my eyes upon him, as though to dive amid his meaning, but he baffled all my scrutinj'. " Why this study for my safety ?" I inquired, as the man called to the postil¬ lion ; " what am I to learn ? Alas > is everj r care expended upon me ?" " It is the order of the prefect," said the soldier—*- "The friend of Angerville," whispered my throbbing heart, and without hesita¬ tion I entered the carriage* Giddy with conjecture, each outvying the former in confusion, I found myself àt the door of my lodging. I alighted ; a strange ser¬ vant attended me to my chamber. I gazed
gazed with amazement around ; it seem¬ ed as though the wandof enchantment had waved over the dwelling, as though the necromantic art of sorcery had redawm- ed : the floor was spread with the richest carpeting ; luxury and 'comfort lured to forgetfulness. I started—I gazed doubt¬ fully upon the woman ; she smiled. "Torturerne not!" I implored; "ex¬ plain the meaning of what I see." " The sole meaning is a study for your comfort, lady, and an assurance that friendship never slumbers." Again I thought on Angerville, and again did myheart throb with the convic¬ tion of De Beauforťs pardon. But whilst the capricious sport of fortune scattered splendour in my path, whilst she loaded me with benefits, and tempted my weari¬ ed limbs with a couch of down, the dark dungeon of my love was uncheered, his sufferings and his wrongs unredressed. Alas ! how could Hope explain the seem¬ ing inconsistency? how resolve the strange
strange contrast 'twixt zeal and neglect? Yet she did resolve it; and the necessary caution of policy silenced all my doubts. I knew full well the arbitrary despots who had seized the helm of power ; 1 judged that indulgence to an aristocrat would be deemed treason to the state, nnd that a premature clemency would overthrow the long-studied efforts for his enlargement. Fallacious dream of secu¬ rity ! fatal, vain reliance ! how sopn did the delusion fade! how quick did the fe\ ered ray of expectation close in de¬ spair ! " I cannot rest here," I exclaim¬ ed ; " these luxuries, this prodigality 7 of comforts, convey reproach to my feelings. Holy Heaven ! how mistaken is the watchfulness of fiiendship ! Rather would I partake of the hard fare of De Beau¬ fort, rather would I rest on the flinty stone wdiich pillows his head, than share the regal splendour of a diadem !'* Drueille ej*ed me with amazement— " Is there aught wanting ?" she demand¬ ed;
ed; "speak, for your comfort is die stu¬ dy of citizen— " She paused abruptly, as though fearful of betraying her trust ; whilst I, regard¬ less of her confusion, lost to every thing but my own peculiar feelings, replied—* " Yes, every thing is wanting, for nei¬ ther peace or comfort can be mine whilst De Beaufort groans in captivity. I will myself seek the prefect, and supplicate his humanity and his justice." <4 The prefect is gone to Paris," said Drueille ; " besides, he dare not annul the laws of the convention." " Who then opposes my return to the prison of my friend?" I interrogated; " ivho, with mistaken kindness, chains me here, when my heart and my duty would lead me to share his trials?" 44 One, lady," she answered, " who possesses both the will and the pow r er to wipe every tear from your eye—one who ------" and then she paused. I turned in disgust from the arch smile whieh
which played upon her features ; it seem¬ ed to mock my sorrows, to insult the tor¬ turing anxiety of affection.—" Alas!" I exclaimed, clasping my hands in despair, " what fearful mystery is here ? what am I to learn, what am I to suspect ?" " I know of no mystery," resumed the woman : " the prefect is gone to Paris ; at his return, perhaps, his power to aid maj r be greater." " Who then is this citizen, this being who can wipe the tears from my eyes, who can give me more than life?" I ea¬ gerly questioned. She looked confused ; she shrunk from my searching glance. "The prefect knows all," she faltered ; " I am here to obey, and to serve you." " The prefect knows all !" I mentally repeated, and a thousand vague conjec¬ tures floated in my brain. I walked to the window ; I stood with my arms folded upon my bosom.^—" Would that I knew the divelling of the* prefect !" I exclaimed,
exclaimed, gazin -anxiously around*, and then my heart felt to droop wdthin me, for my eyes rested on the dark wood which intercepted the gloomy walk of De Beaufort's prison. " Yonder, to the right, I can see the chimney tops," said Drueille, pointing over my shoulder. " The prefect is gom to Paris; but his lady is confined there wdth mortal illness." " Does he love her ?" I eagerly ques¬ tioned—" does he commiserate her suf¬ ferings ?-¿-does he tremble at her dan¬ ger?" " Yes, he is fond, and kind, and anx¬ ious," said Drueille. " Heaven be praised !" I ejaculated. She turned inquisitively towards me. 44 You are sure he mourns her afflic¬ tions ?" I pursued ; " you are certain his heart cherishes her in the season of pain ?" 44 Yes, he must love, and dearly lovelier," observed Drueille, " for he hangs over her
her couch for hours together, and weeps when he thinks she cannot hear him : I have heard Denise say, her life is a scene of trial, that she is worn quite to the bone, and is but the shadow of what she once was." " Who is Denise?" I asked. " One," replied Drueille, "who has lived for years with the poor sick ladj-, and who attends and watches over her like a daughter." " Can I see Denise ?" " Oh no, madam : she never quits the couch of her mistress ; she never ------" " Her la«, y possesses a pious mind ?" Interrupting 'ier; "she submits to her sufferings without a murmur ?" " Y ¿s, she is very pious, and very cha¬ ritable/ replied Drueille; "her heart is alive to the w T oes of others, and her study on eartii, beneficence and good-will to men." I raised my clasped hands in gratitude to heaven. This universal philanthro¬ pist
pist--«this gentle Sauţaritan, breathed peace to my harassed spirit ! If I could see her, if I could speak to her, if I could unburden my tale of sorrow, she would become a mediator, she would espouse the cause of oppression and misery ! I betrayed ib not, but my determination was fixed as fete itself. I resolved afone to repair to the dwelling of the prefect, and by bribery, or even by artifice, to force myself to the feet of his wife: her character was my surety for success—*the preservatipn of De Beaufort a spur which gave me courage for every enter¬ prize. A soul.like hers,could not be deaf tQ; the wild pleadings of my despair, she lived a blessing щ m age of slaugh¬ ter i Perhaps her prayers and her tears had stayed the doom of death—had, ere nçw, stanched the bloody tide of .murder apd violence! She lived in an age of crime and blasphemy—an 4ge of deformity and barefaced atheism ! I had not to leam the refinements of cruelty, the barbarous, the
the diabolical strides, which, expunging every social virtue, affixed to republican France the die of irremediable disgrace. Alas ! how many thousands had power and outrage despoiled of every posses¬ sion ! How many, cursing the disorga¬ nizing blast of false philosophy, groaned amid the wreck of everj 1 - former joy ! This woman, this saint, tottering on the brink of eternity, even in a land so lost, shone forth a beam to cling to ; my heart grasped at it, as a ray from heaven ! I stood measuring the distance with my eyes, andpantingforthe moment when, alone and unguessed at, I could com¬ mence my stolen enterprize—" Is it dis¬ ease?" I inquired, " or has calamity bent her in sorrow to the earth ?" " Disease and calamity united," repli¬ ed Drueille ; " doubtless, the one hasten¬ ed by the pressure of the other ; for De¬ nise says, long before she purchased life by espousing the prefect, her eyes were dimmed with tears, and the bloom of her cheeks
cheeks was faded—perhaps, like many others, her dearest ties have bled on the scaffold. These are fearful times," lower¬ ing her voice to a whisper: " Denise knows all, though she says but little." Every word I heard sank deeper and deeper into mj T soul : who, like the vic¬ tim of calamity, could feel for calamity? —who, like the mourning, drooping slave of oppression, could feei for the op¬ pressed ? Her own heavy sufferings were as hostages for m ν success : she had drank deep of the cup of sorrow ; she then, iu charity, would dash the bitter chalice from my lips ! Impatient of delay, my eyes resting on the distant chimnies, and my heart throb- ing with mingled fear and hope, I await¬ ed the departure of Drueille. She lin¬ gered, and my feelings amounted to ago¬ ny—she quitted the chamber, yet still was I root-bound to the spot. Whole hours wore away in that delirium of the senses whieh defies delineation : one mo¬ ment
nient my ideas indistinct, my mind be¬ wildered b\ r intense thought ; the next, starting at every sound, and tremblingly alive to the slightest danger: all my hopes rested upon this one application. Often did I approach the door—often did I ad¬ vanee to the veiy top ofthe staircase, and then shrink back like a coward, unequal to tbe trial. I knelt down, I kissed the precious symbol of mj' faith.—" Saviour ofthe world, give me strength !" I aspi¬ rated—"graciously support me in this hour of woe !" I rose— Τ recalled the last despairing look of Do Beaufort, and my courage and my resolution revived. It was for his enlargement that I laboured—it was for his life I was about to plead—Yes, even 1, who had sunk so deep in sin, felt the grace of holiness!—even I, who had outraged laws both moral and divine, dared breathe a praj r cr for peace !—I, who could not recall the past without shuddering—I, who in every voi., in. ľ page
page of my short life beheld the appal¬ ling blot of self-reproach ! Religion, blessed balm, ineffable and pure! how often, stilling the raging tempest of de¬ spair, hast thou inspired consolation! wdien everj' earthly reliance failed, hast thou been the towering rock of my de¬ pendence ! Supported and impressed, I wrapped my cloak around me ; unobserved I de¬ scended the stairs, and stealing like a midnight thief through the garden, fled in the direction mj r heart and mj' eyes pointed.
CHAPTER V. The sun smiled upon my enterprize : it decked m j path wdth brightness, it gild¬ ed ev iv scene of nature ! My spirits revived : i hailed it as a happy omen ; I gazed around with something like confi¬ dence,
dence, for mj f inexperienced heart told me, man could not die to pity. The breeze was mild and hal mj' ; the birds carolled in mid-air, and the dappled em¬ blems of spring glowed in the opening foliage : mj' feet scarce pressed the her¬ bage ; mj f errand was the liberty of De Beaufort—mj T hopes of promise, quickly to snatch him from his foetid dungeon. Light, joyous was the dream ; dis¬ tance was unfelt, disappointment un¬ thought of: the sufferings, the sorrows, tlie benevolence of her I sought, crowd¬ ing upon fancy, chased every vestige of i\\\r ; the tears she had shed, the sighs she had heaved, would jilead for me; she would become my auxiliary—she would soften the harder heart of her husband ; she lived but to aid oppression—and where was a being half so oppressed ? Buoyed by this sweet, this seductive vision, I perceived not my near approach to the house ; and when, through a sud- e 2 den
den opening ofthe trees, Ifound rayseif before it, I paused, and pauted for breath. It was some moments ere my hand could pull the bell ; all courage vanished, and fear reviving, triumphed over all: my powers felt paralyzed, m j r tongue cleaved to the roof of my mouth, the truant blood receded from my cheek, and though full ofa project encompassing more than life, when the servant inquired my er¬ rand, I could only cling to the rail for support, and fix my eyes on him with an expression of almost mortal sufferance. " Whom ào you seek ?" demanded the man. " What do you require ?" " Your lad j'—1 would speak to j r our lsdyV' I at length faltered ; " give me entrance, ar.d to the latest hour of ex¬ istence will I bless you !" The man hesitated ; I read compassion in bis look—I snatched his arm with terrifying vehemence—" Tell her 'tis a wretch, whom nought but Heaven and her
her can save !—tell her——" I paused —I gasped in agoni 7 . " My lady is very ill," said tlie servant, " too ill to be disturbed ; her own suffer¬ ings are heavy, and------" " Then will her heart be open to the plaint of misery," interrupting him. " What are the sufferings of the bodj r to the mind ? If you have mercy," and I dropped on my knees before him, " if, in the awful hour of death, j r ou would crave the blessing and the prayers of the wretched, procure me admission to your lady." There was a solemnity, an energy in my appeal, which struck to his heart; he invited me into tbe hall, and point¬ ing to a seat, left me a prej T to fevered hope and treacherous anticipation. A whole half-hour elapsed,and stiil was I tortured with suspense and apprehen¬ sion : listening for the return of the ser¬ vant, I scarce dared to breathe ; I threw back my bonnet—I pressed my hand r. 3 upon
upon my heart, as though its quickened pulsation impeded other sounds. Holy saints ! what an age of misery was that half-hour ! Wildly I gazed around the stuccoed walls—I saw nought but luxu¬ ry and splendour. The windows opened on the lawn ; the gay bedecked partenes dazzled the eye with vivid beauty—the sim glittered on the undulating streams —the birds on airy wing carolled over¬ head; all nature smiled, as though un¬ conscious there ivere wretches in the cre¬ ation, destined to pass their lives in woe. i closed my ejes against the seductive picture ; I recalled the cold damp dun¬ geon of Eugenius, and groaned in the bitterness of anguish, his chains, his suf¬ ferings, his threatened death !—I started from the chair—I paced the hall wdth frantic haste, and when the servant stood before me, I turned from him, almost un¬ conscious of what I did. " I have spoken for you," said the man ; " but my lady is too ill ; the slightest agitation
agitation might be fatal: perhaps to¬ morrow------" " To-morrow !" wildly interrupting him, " who dare depend on to-morrow ? To-morrow may be too late ! this day— this hour, I must speak to her or die !" I felt for my purse—I had left it in mj T chamber. The man still hesitated. Fager to bribe him to my interest, I snatched the brilliant-studded miniature of my fiither from my bosom, and press¬ ing it into his hand—" Take it—take it," I implored ; " only lei -Л me to the feet of the wife of the prefect, and my blessing will accompany the gift." He replied not; but again quitting the hall, he left the door half open, and I saw him ascend the staircase. Alive but to the impulse of feeling, I sprang after him, and wdth the noiseless swift¬ ness of a ghost, shadowed his footsteps. He paused at a distant door ; he gently knocked; it was opened, and a female spoke in a whisper : she took the minia- E 4 ture
ture from his hand, then bidding him tarry, retreated with it into the chamber. Scarce had I time for breath, when a shriek, loud and piercing, echoed through the passage. Oh, such a shriek ! it iced the life's blood in my veins—it pierced throngh my brain and through my heart ! yet did it give me wing, and springing forward, spite of resistance, I burst open the door, and rushed into the apartment. Stretched upon a low couch, apparently in the convulsive struggles of death, lay the heing I had sought—the wife of the prefect—she who was to have given free¬ dom to Eugenius, hope and life to me. The miniature of my father had fallen on the floor, and the attendant, with a eeuntenance nearly as bleached as her own, was vainly striving to administer restoratives. I took the withered hand of the sufferer, I bent over her wdth a sympathy almost prophetic. The fea¬ tures seemed impressed upon my me¬ mory, and though I trembled, and couid seai eel j-
scarcely stand, yet could I not turn from the form, from the face before me. She snatched her hand from me; slie started erect upon the couch—*lier eyes fell upon the miniature, and again the most pite¬ ous shrieks succeeded. In vain I stoop* ed to conceal it ; madly she threw her¬ self upon the floor, and catching it rude¬ ly from me, groaned forth the name of " Montcalm í" and fell cold and lifeless at my feet. We lifted her to the couch, and whilst Denise chafed her livid tem¬ ples, I tried to force from her stiffened grasp the fatal basilisk which threatened destruction. Vain, alas ? were my efforts : her fin¬ gers relaxed not their hold—marbled and cold, they clenched the picture ; and when again her eyes unclosed, with never-to-be-forgotten expression, they turned upon the pencilled features.— " Frown not so fearfully!" she articu¬ lated ; " look into my heart, Montcalm! see how it is bleeding—how it is sub- fi 5 dtieJ !
dued ! the faithful record of perfidy and crime, it would yet sue the absolving balm of thy pity. Oh, if you could know its sorrows and its trials! oh, if you could read its remorse, and its despair ! Mark you not the furrows on my cheeks? it is guilt, not age! guilt—guilt and ivoe !" She pressed her hand upon her fore^ head—she raised her dark eyes to Hea¬ ven ; I started—I bent forward. \Vhat wild, what fearful conjectures crowded uppn each other ! Who but my mother could thus call upon Montcalm ? " My mother !" and sinking on my knees, I raised my clasped hands, and fixed my eyes upon her face. Could it be my mother ? What havoc then had a few years produced! how had remorse and anguish withered the bloom of beauty j how had the envenomed sting of guilt preyed on the once-perfect model of symmetry ! She turned quickly towards me,— " What
w What seek you ? who are you ?" she demanded. " The wretched daughter of Mont¬ calm—the wretched wdfe of De Beau¬ fort/' I exclaimed, " supplicating at your feet the life ofa husband !" She spoke not—she could not speak, yet did her arms expand ; but when I sprung to her embrace they closed against me. Sighs and groans burst from her bosom, but not one single tear cooled the burning fever of her brain ; the sluices of sorrow were dried up—the healing springs of misery exhausted. Suddenly she rose from the couch; she turned her face from me—she tried to totter to the door, but overpowered by the convulsive struggles within, she fell gasping on the floor; I flew towards her—1 threw myself at her side : con¬ vinced that she was my mother—my heart-broken, suffering, penitent mother, 1 heeded not her feeble resistance; I π 6 folded 1
folded her in щу arms—I deluged her pale cheek with my tears. Holy saiuts I what a moment was tbat ! how, even now, does roy heart sicken in the revisai ! My mother expiring on my bosom! my Eugenius groaning in bis cheerless dungeon ! Alarmed for the safety of the sufferer, Denise fled for assistance, whilst 1 con* tinued supporting on my knees the heavy head of my ilUfeted parent. For a mo* ment the ray of reason was restored; she fixed her eyes mournfully on mine— she grasped my hand with the last pres¬ sure of strength.—" Child of Montcalm !" she murmured—" offspring of the best, tbe most injured of men ! curse not the memory of one, who, in the dust, would kneel for his and your forgiveness! Montcalm ! Montcalm !—avenging God ! my child !—my Helena !" Convulsively she pressed me to her feebly-throbbing heart ; her lips touched mine :
mine: alasi the effort expired in the birth—she sunk back—-she spoke, she breathed no more. Believing she had fainted, I filled the air ivith my shrieks ; I supplicated as* sistance, and bent over her with that aching solicitude which concentrates every care in one. The return of Denise fanned die feint embers of hope ; eagerly I aided in every application which could recall the lag* ging pulse of life : I pressed my hand upon her heart—I bent my ear to eateb the slightest sound of respiration; a whole hour succeeded—the limbs became stiff and cold—the efforts of art useless. With real and deep sorrow Denise rnouïîned over the body ; my sorrow too* Heaven knows, was real and deep; but I could not weep^—my faculties seemed numbed, or rather calamity had become so familiar, that it ceased to extort a tear. Alas! even now I cannot analyze the then
then state of my feelings, the maddem ing chaos which raged within. I would be methodical—I would minute the quick succession of events whieh follow¬ ed so close upon each other, but my brain, I believe; was unsettled, and the injuries and imprisonment of De Beaufort the only spur to action: it was that alone which hurried me from the cold corse of my mother, and bent me a heart-broken pteaderatthefeet ofa stern and relentless sentinel. I know not how I got tothe pri¬ son, yet, pale and trembling, I stood be* neath the walls : the soldier heeded not my distraction, and when I knelt at his feet, he brutally ridiculed my prayers— rudely he thrust me back from the gate, swearing I wias too handsome for an aristocïat, and scoffing àt agonies almost too great for endurance. The timely appearance of Drueille saved' me from further insult ; she had missed, and sought me whither de- * * spnir
spair and affection pointed ; and powers- less and unresisting, I was conveyed back to my lodging. A night of misery succeeded—a night of undefinable, unutterable woe. Images of horror crowded upon each other ; hope died with my mother, and the scaffold and the mortal pang of De Beaufort mocked every effort of reason. Drueille watched by my side; sometimes she tried to sooth, sometimes to remonstrate. Deaf alike to all, I mused on the strange concatenation of events—on tb« fatality which marked my footsteps—»on the corroding mildew which blighted me in a father's curse—on the flight of my mother, her strange discovery, her con¬ vulsive struggles, her seeming* peni¬ tence, her death—aU, all foUowed so rapidly, that bewildered with amazement and horror, a heavy stupor, a morbid insensibility succeeded, and for whole hours chained up every faculty. Jf I spoke, it was as the incoherent start of delirium ;
delirium ; if I listened to the solicitai tions of Drueille, it was with that vacant stare, that terrifying inanity, which be¬ trays mental suspension. Towards daybreak, scarcely conscious ef what I did, I threw myself on the bed, and worn out by exhaustion and long-suffering, sunk into a heavy sleep. When I awoke, when I saw the broad gì®re of morning beaming through the casement, I started from my pillow; I recalled the sad events of the past daj T , and felt as though in slumber I had ne- gleeted my duty ; the corse of my mo¬ tber seemed to reproach me, the melan¬ choly glance öf De Beaufort to freeze the life's blood at my heart : akis ! wdiat could í do? where could I turn ? The prefect was absent, and the fallacious hope to whicb I bad clung had perished witb bis ill-starred partner. ï pressed my bands upon my throbbing temples, I tried to collect my ideas—J felt that every thing depended upon exertion and fortitude ;
fortitude; j r et the giddy whirl in my brain sunk me almost to infant weak¬ ness, I tottered—I could scarcely stand : upheld by the arın of Drueille, I moved to the opened window, and inhaling the freshening breeze, and fixing my eyes on the distant chimneys rising o'er my mother's corse, despair gradually yielded, and I softened into tears. The hour at lengtii arrived for my visit to the prison, and with the same persevering care for my comfort, I was conveyed from my lodging. Alas ! that care was but mockery ; my health was studied, but my internal feelings racked ; for, like the murderer closing his eyes against the blood of his victim, pretend¬ ed compassion glossed over the fiend-like purposes of policj r . As my trembling form gladdened the anxious eyes of De Beaufort, a raj' of joy glowed on his pale cheek ; ; his arms were expanded, and for a moment mis* fortune was forgotten. He listened to the
the melaneholy detail of my trials—he mingled his tears with mine—he shook his head in sad forebodence when h¿ saw that hope still clung to the prefect— 44 Harbour it not, Helena—harbour it not !" he exclaimed ; " rather nerve your mind to the arbitrary stretch of vengeance and of power. The hand of fate is upon me ! the seal of condemna¬ tion passed ! But for you, my gentle friend, the passport would be welcome ! but for j f ou, I would brave the blow í dauntless I would meet the assassins of my king, and tell them that in death I gloried in my principles ! Oh ! but for you, deceived, betrayed, abandoned— but for you, this firm heart wonld spurn at weakness, and nature's nearest ties would be as nought !—Helena," and he sunk his head upon mj r shoulder, and yielded unresisting to his tears, " last night, in the aw r ful consciousness of ap¬ proaching dissolution, I analyzed tbe in¬ ward feelings of niy bosom—I revised the
the secret crimes, the hidden imperfec¬ tions of my youth ; you, you alone rose in judgment against me—your image, ever so soft, and so seductive, agonized and upbraided ! 1 saw you the victim of a guilty headlong passion, bereaved, heart-stricken !—and your father—his curse descends to the tomb ! Alas ! it ivas a moment of madness and despair f I paced the dungeon ; I dashed mj head against the flinty walls ; I execrated the fatal soph is try ofthe world, the dangerous precedence of custom, the liberality of opinion ! Helena, if I could have recall¬ ed the past—if I could have restored j r ou in innocence to your father—if I could have regained the path of honour, the blessed calm of unspotted rectitude, I would have repaired my dereliction with my life. Bitter, bitter is the tax of re¬ morse to the heart not depraved, to the feelings not vitiated ! It is a tax which guilt ever entails—which, treading on the heels of passion, like the deadly ve¬ nom
»om of the asp, admits not of antidote. Ohi unfortunate, injured victim of mis¬ taken love ! in the reflection of what you have lost, of what you have endured^ of what you must endure, can you pro¬ nounce my pardon ?—can you pray for the apostate, who, contaminating your principles, has blotted the fair temple of your fame? Helena," gazing mourn¬ fully on me, "can you forgive the wretch who has brought you here? will you pray for his spirit when the power of reparation shall be over ?" I threw my arms wildly around him, I strained him with* a fervour almost maddened ; speech was lost, for my sobs were suffocating. Dreadful was the pang within : injuries, honour, life itself was nought; the world was a barren waste without him, and to breathe and tc*Jive in widowhood seemed impossible. " Be composed, Helena !" he implor¬ ed;?" in mercy yield not to these wild, these terrifying paroxysms! Alas! rather breathe
breathe peace to my spirit, and teach me something like resignation! I could wish to speak upon serious subjects, to devote one short hour to future arrange¬ ments ; I could wish»- ....." " Speak of life, speak of years to come!" interrupting him ; " fear not, droop not, Eugenius ! The prefect, the husband of my unburied mother, cannot be deaf to my distraction ! No, no, no ! I will hear of no arrangements—I will tell him all our story ; I will drag him to the cold corse of her so loved in life ; and when the tear starts, when remembrance softens, I will kneel and invoke his compassion !" " True, Helena," mildly observed De Beaufort ; " j r et should the mind be armed with fortitude. In this world, every thing is uncertain, and tlie favour of man fickle as the wind : how can I ex¬ pect mercy, where the fever of prejudice rages, wdiere justice is profaned, and loy¬ alty the only crime too black for pardon? Deceived, and treacherously inveigled hither
hither, the secret enemy who dared so much forbids all chance of rescue." " No, not all chance, De Beaufort ; the hand of friendship is upon us : Anger¬ ville will seek us here." " Not unless he brave the threat of death," repfied Eugenius ; å " denounced like his wretched countrymen, he comes but to perish with me." " Has not his interest relaxed the ri¬ gour ofthe prefect?" I eagerly demanded; " and does not the strange discovery of my motlier giverne some claim upon his feelings? Even now my heart revives to hope; imbibe it, encourage it, my friend, for despondence now would kill me." " There is a mystery—there is some strange concealment," thoughtfully re¬ joined^ De Beaufort, " which Heaven and time can alone unravel. I fear, I doubt------" The door opened, and the sentinel urged røy dep^tureŕ '* I tumed from him—
hhn —I grasped the fettered hand of my friend. " Why should I be torn hence?" I eagerly demanded; " why must we be separated ? Here is room for both ; deny us not the consolation of suffering together." " I am but an agent here, lady," said tlie soldier : " at this hour my orders are to clear the prison of all intruders, and my orders must be obeyed." " Go, my Helena," whispered De Beaufort, gently withdrawing from my arms, " go, submit calmly to fate—and may Heaven's angels guard you !" I wrung my hands in despair; the sol dier hurried me forward; we passed through the stone passages, and when again bej^ond the walls of the prison, when restored to the care of Drueille, groans, and tears, and suffocating sobs, succeeded. # * * * * * * « Here must I pause—here resign the thread of my eventful story. Memory! sickens
sLekens at the past, nature claims a tran¬ sient respite. Holy saints! how does the revisai of sorrow torture the heart ! and such sorrows ! such trials ! But the scourge of Hea ven was upon me, and the retributive sting of guilt gnawed into røy inmost soul ! All was night—all was darkness ! despair, and passion, and death encompassed me ! consolation w r as fled ! hope had eeased to cozen ! The world was as a frightful desert ; emptiness and horror reigned around ; I seemed a bleed¬ ing victim on the altar of retributive justice, without one ray of consolation, one beckoning shadow of expectancy : no home to turn to, no single friend to comfort and uphold ! Blessed Father of the destitute! what a season, what & prospect was there ! Yet in the midst of ruin and woe, Thou didst dawn in mercy ! I called upon Thee, and quickly broke a gleam upon the night ! Though Г had warred against щу duty, yet was I not cast out !—though, like the prodi¬ gai
gal, I had wandered into wide and for¬ bidden tracks, yet was I recalled with the smile of favour ! I^C ^^* ffC ^P ^n ^r ^^ Stranger ! fellow-sojourner ! be Piety thy staff, be Religion thy healing balm, be Faith thy breastplate! and though af¬ fliction, though adversity be thy portion, safe mayst thou steer amid the breakers of the world ! Wafted by the breath of pure holiness, upheld by the conscious¬ ness of integrity, thou mayst stem the torrent, nor fear what man may w r age against thee !
CHAÎNER VI. +****тр*#тТ+т*Фт+тТт*тГт*тГтТ StiLX madly clinging to the interposi¬ tion of the prefect, I sat watching the fast-fading streaks of day—now musing on the sufferings of De Beaufort, now vol. in. F dwelling
dwelling on the shrouded corse of rny mother, now raising my eyes to the saf¬ fron-tinted clouds, and now praying for fortitude and patience. Drueille had quitted the chamber, and nought but my own sobs broke the stillness. It was an awful epoch in my life—it was the eve of the moment when hope felt to wither, be¬ yond aU power to renovate. Hour after hour wore away, ai*d the pale star of evening glittered in glowing brightness ; the fiüptest ray of the glorious sun had vanished, and the deep and deathlike gloom concorded with my inward feel¬ ings. Suddenly the sounds of wild dis¬ tress broke the stillness ; I sprung to the window—I saw a femak form glide through the garden ; she paused not till she reached the door ; with desperate vio¬ lence she seized the bell, and the next moment behetdber powerless on the step. Jaundiced by uiisfortune, alive to shapeless fear and fi»iej% my heart took the alarm ; I felt as though some new calamity
Calamity threatened, as though the lotig- gathering clouds of fate were burstmg in vengeance upon me: I heard my name pronounced below—I heard sobs and lamentations, and yet, statue-like, I Stood, unable to move—unable to make one single inquiry. The sounds ap¬ proached, the door flew open—pale, pant¬ ing, breathless, the faithful attendant of my departed mother, the nearly-frantic Denise, sank at my feet. 1 stooped to raise her, but she baffled all my efforts ; she burst into an agony of tears r she clung madly to my knees—" Oh, ladj' P she sobbed out—" the—the—the con¬ vention—the—the— gendarme —tliepre- fect — the—the guillotine—the—tbe— tbe sacred body of my mistress!" and then her sobs and tears redoubling, fir- bade all further solution.* * Alas ! no solution could have reached me ; stunned^ annihilated^ crushed in every hope and feeling, my senses fled, and I lay on the floor, 4 almost as lifeless μ F 2 as
as the mistress she deplored. Cruel was the kindness ivhich lured me back to ex¬ istence ; fbr with motion memory reviv¬ ed, and the dreadful certainty which b r rst upon me threatened the seat of reason. I saw nought but the scaffold of De Beaufort—I heard nought but his death-groan and his struggles! Every earthly dependence failed, and cold and morbid despair froze all my faculties. I ¿ould not praj r —I could not look into my heart and seek fbr »consolation—all there condemned me ; for the conscious¬ ness of merited suffering is the bitterest sting with which fate am assail, or jus¬ tice punish ! The night passed in pangs unutter¬ able, and the morning dawned ere I had courage to question. Denise watched over me, and Drueille, softened to pity, mourned the woes she could not avert. Not once did sleep, stealing upon my faculties, wrap me in the gentle balm of oblivion—not once did intense thought find
find a respite ; fevered and agonized, I lay on my pillow, now invoking the freed spirit of my mother, and now sup¬ plicating death to rid me of mj r sorrows. " Your mother, lady/' whispered De¬ nise, " was patient under affliction ; she bowed her head to the stroke, assured that the power to inflict and to heal came from the same hand." I looked inquisitively towards her— " Tell me of my mother !" I implored ; and, for the first time, tears forced a pas¬ sage ; they fell as rain upon the scorched earth—they saved me from frenzy ; fbr, till then, my brain was burning and my ideas wdld. " Your mother/ pursued Denise, " sunk a martyr to feeling, yet not onee did she, in the long years of her pilgrim¬ age, breathe a murmur, or cavil at the ordinations of Providence. Had fhe lived to this hour, she would have bowed the fiat—she would have given to her child an example qf resignation ! I have f 3 seen
seen her, when racked by memory, she has rejected every offered consolation— when bowed down by affliction, she has shunned the voice of comfort ; but never did she accuse fate, or burden Heaven with injustice ! Sometimes she has charg¬ ed herself of what the practices of her life refuted—ingratitude and crime. But why speak of the mere flights of deli¬ rium? her eharhty, her excellence, her known worth, her----- p-" " You knew not the §iory ofmy mo¬ ther/' interrupting her; "you guessed not the sorrows of her youth !" " No," replied Denise, " I only knew her sufferings. Here," drawing from her bosom a sealed packet, whieh she had carefully concealed, ** is the written tes¬ timony of her trials, addressed to Helena Montcalm 9 residing in the Piano Di Brolo, in the island of Sicily. Often has she wasted the midnight oil in pen¬ ning these memoirs—often has she steep¬ ed them in her tears, yet never, until the fatal
fatal hour of her dissolution, did I know lhat Helena Montcalm ivas her daugh¬ ter." I took the packet—I pressed it to my heart and to my lips ; my hand trembled as I held it, yet not once did I attempt to break the seal ; it was saered—it was the last bequest of a repentant mother— " Peace to her spirit !*' I aspirated— ** Saints of mercy ! accept the propitia¬ tion for transgression !—accept------" I paused. Was it for me to expose the frailties of her to whom I owed my being—to tear aside the slender veil of concealment—to hold her up to the pity, to the comments of her who had served htr with reverence, had known her in respect and love? Oh no, no! my heart forbade disclosure, and the un¬ finished sentence died upon my tongue. " Often has my angel mistress implor*. ed røe, after her death, to see that packet safely transmitted to Sicily," rejoined Denise —"often has she told me, the r 4 peace
peace of her last moments depended on my faith—that her prayers and her bless¬ ing awaited the fulfilment of my trust —that her spirit, hovering on the con¬ fines of eternity, could know no glad¬ ness but in my assurance !—often ------" " And yon breathed that assurance ?" eagerly interrupting her; "you light¬ ened her doubts and her struggles—you imparted consolation to her soul?" " I promised every effort which po¬ verty and weakness could encompass," replied Denise —"to be myself the bearer of the packet, rather than leave her wish unfulfilled. Ah ! little did she dream that in such an hour, under such cir¬ cumstances, oppressed with grief and terror, I should hide the precious relic in my bosom, and flying from her unbu¬ ried corse, resign it in this land of vio¬ lence and blood !—Little did she dream that, an alien and a wanderer, torn from the peaceful home of her nativity, He¬ lena, the daughter of her trust, lived, like
like herself, the victim of injustice and fraud !" " Fraud !" I repeated, starting and shuddering, as the treachery of De Beau¬ fort's capture rose to view ; " fraud the most deadly, the most relentless ! Whi¬ ther now ean I turn for succour? the prefect was my dependence, and with him every hope dies Γ " Alas ! alas !" sobbed Denise, " the prefect is murdered ! Denounced by some secret enemy, he bled upon the scaf¬ fold, and the seal of confiscation is set upon all he possessed ! Oh God ! mys¬ terious and just are thy ordinations ! Had my mistiness lived to have seen this daj r , perhaps bereft of eveiy comfort, she too might have sunk an innocent victim to rapacity and crime. I care not even if I die for saying it," continued Denise,- ** but the heaviest curse whieh Heaven's wrath can pour upon the earth, is the uncurbed indulgence of man's turbulent F ¿У passions !
passions ! Liberty becomes but a mad frenzy, and equalitj r ------" " Be wary !" interrupted Drueille ; " less than that has furnished work for the executioner." Denise raised her eyes in mild appeal to Heaven—" Thy will be done Γ she murmured, and then she besought me to be patient ; and spoke so eloquently and so feelingly upon the trials of this life—upon the necessity for resignation and fortitude—upon the quick-shifting scenes which progressively lead us to the destined goal, tlmt my heart insensibly imbibed her reasoning, and I felt to look forward to a better and a surer resting- place. Short Jived was the calm. I wished to pour my griefs into the bosom of De Beaufort—to tell him of my disappoint¬ ment, of the fatal catastrophe which had befallen the prefect—I wished to seek the only consolation now on earth, his assu-
ranees
ranees and his presence*—to remain with him to the last, to soften the terrors of captivity—together to humble our hearts in prayer—to supplicate pardon for the past, and grace for the future. Oh ! was it too much to petition to share bis pains and his sorrows—to lighten the few short days be liad to sojourn in this drear world —to " explain the thought, explore the asking eye ?"—was it too much to de¬ mand of his murderer only to share his prison—only to rest upon the self-same stone?—-to fan reviving virtue in his soul—to unburden conscience—to dwell on religion, mid on death—to recall the early lessons of father Christian, and to attain, by pious faith, that peace whieh 14 passeth show?" I did petition, but it was denied me ! I prayed to man, but - my praj T er was unheard i I would have bent to the footstool of power, but I knew not my enemy—my eye could not see, my mind could not guess Jiim : hid beneath the guise of service, bis aim f 6 was
Ш$ at the Heart; his movements dark f his vengeance dire ! Father of the uni· verséi avert the "vial of thy wrath" in the hour of dissolution» when the cheat¬ ing vapours of this world fade away— when conscience upholds the reflecting mirror of former deeds—wben remorse chases the long^wooed Lethe erf forget* fulness*—when vice pafls upon the sense, and reality stalks unbidden to the view, then blunt tlie arrow of retributive jus¬ tice, and soften the callous-hearted sin¬ ner to the grace of penitence ! Ob, spare him time to weigh the deeds of his life ! that w r ashing in tears the die of foul transgression, bending beneath the con¬ sciousness of guilt, the saving ray of meek confiding piety may be awaken¬ ed! Yes, even for the murderer of m v hopes do I bend my knee in supplica¬ tion! even for the relentless persecutor of De Beaufort no I sue hereafter mer¬ cy I How am I changed ! how has re¬ ligion softened the fiery gusts of passion and
and of vengeance ! Does the prayer on my lips indeed spring from my heart ? can I recall the anguish of that period, freed from the rancour of malignity and the curse of hatred ? Father of heaven ! I thank Thee that my feelings are thus tempered, my mind thus purified from former guile ! Pour but tiiy spirit upon me, aid but the weak efforts of thy ser¬ vant, and, like gold in the crucible, my heart will bend to the new die ! Loud was the burst of my reproaches, when Drueille told me my visits to the dungeon of De Beaufort were forbidden —that the gate was barred against me— that the indulgence of personal inter¬ course was prohibited : she softened the intelligence with something like feehng; «he implored submissfon, and enlarged on the power to punish. I sbrieked, I tore my hair, I execrated tbe cold-hearted mandate! and invoked the curse of Heaven on the bbad-stained nation ? Refusing all sustenance, all comfort,
comfort, I yielded to despair : m y nights passed without, rest/ my days in lamen¬ tation and tears : I called upon death as røy only friend;* sometimes I would sit for whole hours in morbid melancholj% statue-like, motionless,, deaf to the plead¬ ings of interest, to the voice of reason : even Denise was disregarded—even the mention of my motlier failed to soften ; revenge and bitterness coloured all my feelings, and froze eveiy impulse of niy beings 1 Dreadful, rayless was that memorable era, that fatal trance in which every no¬ ble attribute was suspended, every Chris¬ tian tenet lost—when distorting passion raged unbridled, wben the whirlwind in my soul tbreatened dissolution. Oh ! if I had died then, if the maddened pe¬ titions of a frenzied spirit had been hearcU—if, involved in guilt, laden with sin and woe, the burthen of lifehad been cast off without penitence, without re¬ morse! Weak, and frail, and insuffi¬ cient
cient is human judgment-—then I had call¬ ed it mercy, forgetful that a long life of sufferance is as a speck in the aggregate of eternity ! Health, too closely connected with mental feelings to resist such mor¬ tal conflicts, soon yielded to the struggle; and, stretched upon the bed of sickness, torn from my child, banished from the dear partner of my hopes and my crimes, I felt alone in the world, desolate, aban¬ doned, lost : 'twas then I turned my despairing eyes into my inmost soul— 'twas then I saw the foul, the rank weeds which had choked up its virtues, and ana¬ lyzing the guilty feelings of my nature, prayed for a new spirit, for coming grace. In the dead of night, often did the wildest, the most desperate resolu¬ tions rise to tempt me: I would fly, I would steal from my chamber, I would drag my feeble limbs, and seek a grave beneath the heavy walls of De Beaufort's prison ; then the remembrance of my ab¬ sent cherub would hold me back to life, and
and avert the gloomy purposes of de¬ spair. In moments of anguish, how dear is the sigh of sym pathy ! how precious those tears which embalm the source of w r oe ! The heart receives them y the me¬ mory registers them ! gratitude cements the ehain, and the link of amity becomes rivetted beyond the weakening powers of time or circumstances ! Such was the tie wdiich bound me to the tried friend, the mourner of mj r mo¬ ther—such the draft Denise held upon my feelings ; gentle, pious, compassion¬ ate, she wept my sorrows, she curbed the flights of passion, she led me back to rea¬ son and to peace. She spoke of an here¬ after world ; she expatiated on the bleed¬ ing wounds, the crying wrongs of thou¬ sands ; she pointed to a reliance beyond the reach of man, to that resting-place whicb guilt cannot wreck, or tempests ravage ! She pictured life as " a vapour that appeareth a little time, and then va- nisheth
nisheth away," as a mere dream, a bub¬ ble on the wave, which the passing gust destroys ! From the humble, the un¬ marked grave ofmy mother, she return¬ ed to succour and to aid ; she saw the mournful close, unhallowed by a single p/ay er ; for atheism had spread through¬ out the land, and profanation and fiend- like turpitude usurped the prevalenee of faith, and the solemnity of worship! Abolished bj r the revolutionary code, re¬ ligion and virtue had faded before the mad rites of paganism ! reason was hal¬ lowed as a divinity, and liberty and equality, instituted by the regenerating system of philosophj% trampled on the outraged spoils of churches, and of shrines ! Sueh were the sacrilegious excesses of an enlightened era! —such the exploits of a great nation, cursed by Providence in the unchecked career of tiieir own hearts' lust ! May the example ever live registered in the annals of our day !— mav mt
may it become a warning to hereafter ages, that, reading, men may shun the dangerous snares of scepticism, may ab¬ jure apostaey as the deadly bane to ho¬ nour ! I wept as I listened to the detail of Denise ; my mothers corse was inshrin- ed in earth witteut a stone to mark her resting-place—the eye of affection could alone direct to the spot ; siie slept in her kindred dust, unsanctified by tlie ritual of her faitb! " She restsin heaven !" exclaimed De¬ nise, mingling her tears wdth mine. " Removed from the reach of perseciK tion and sorrow, in the bosom of her God, she pray,«,alike for the oppressor and the oppressed ! Oh, may she pour upon us the balm of holiness ! maj r she inspire us wdth patience and resignation !" " Unconsecrated, unblessed," I falter¬ ed, wringing my hands in anguish—" oh* my mother. ! mj r early lost, my unhappy mother !" " Uncen-
" Unconsecrated, but not unblessed Γ resumed Denise, in accents of reproof; ťt the eye of Heaven smiled upon her, for the sun shone upon her bier, as slowly we moved to the last sanctuary ! What avail the prayers of man?—what the mere ceremony of sanctification? God rejecteth not the pious spirit, whether the offering be made on the altar of holiness, or hi a land of degene¬ racy and vice ! Her soul exults with angels î —her body moulders beneath the lime-tree on yonder plain, within sight of that monument of despotism," point¬ ing in the direction of the prisou, " as peacefully as though priests had chanted her requiem, and the mitred hand had sprinkled the absolving water of conse¬ cration ! Ah, mourn not her fate ! bless¬ ed is it, tlirice blessed to those who sojourn here in toil, persecution, and woe !" It was not the unmarked grave of my mother—it was the sad presentiment of the
tbe fate, and the grave awaiting DeBeair- fort, which struck like an ice-bolt on my heart I rose from my chair, I paced the chamber wdth unequal steps; my limbs shook with palsied agitation, for atas ! I could not anticipate the annihila¬ tion of earthly hope without pangs al¬ most mortal : my mind was not nerved for the trial, and tbough I prayed Hea¬ ven to forgive, and inspire me with for* titude to combat a passion so destructive to peace and honour, still my thoughts and my feelings, madly clinging to my betrayer, defied every effort ofmy reason. The entrance of Drueille checked the pray ers and the exordiums of Denise : she held a folded paper in her hand, upon which my eyes fell wdth eager inquiry, for every incident appeared connected with De Beaufort ; and when she pre- sented it to me, I snatched it as the drowning wretch snatches at tho slight¬ est twig,! Ί Cruel, accursed snare, to torture and betray í
betray ! Oh, stranger ! when tliou häst dived thus fer in my ill-starred story, if thou livest to the thrill of sensibility, if thou hast a sigh for the destitute, and a tear for the mourner, read the insidious note, and pity the mingled tide of hope and joy, wbich, rushing on my late de¬ spairing heart, stretched me, in strug¬ gling convulsive hysterics, on the bosom of Denise :— 44 Droop not, fair mourner, though the convention has decreed, and the prefect has suffered the penalty of the law— though every earthly'trust appears to fail, and calamity and misfortune threat¬ en, a friend more powerful than the prefect lives to pity and to succour, lives to aid j t ou in the hour of danger, to shel¬ ter you in the season of peril. Submit to the guidance of Drueille; turn not your steps to the dungeon of De Beau¬ fort : the sun will yet break from the clouds whicli lower; his brightness will dazzle, his rays will wann to felicity ; again
aga;m luring to tbe Rhine's stupendous 1аЦ% sliajl you mark his beams dancing on the rough eddies-regain view with admiration the insulated cliffs, the rocky heights of Switzerland. Fear not, droop not, if happiness and hope be dear ! Be th§ little Eugenia a candidate for exer¬ tion ! Recall the hour of parting, recall her caresses, her smiles, her helplessness. Take comfort to your bosom, assured t)iat the never-slumbering efforts of in¬ tegest wdll yet be rewarded !"
CHAPTER VII.
Forgetful of every promised expia¬ tion, dwelling but on the contents of the letter, hope revived in my bosom, life glowed with new temptations. Each timfe that I perused it, my hold upon fe¬ licity seemed to strengthen í and wdiat else could I peruse? whàfr else r coulè i dwell
dwell upon ? It lived in my hand, it sunk into my heart ; my eyes pored over it until they ached with intense- ness—until every feeling rose buoyant, almost beyond the possible teach of dis¬ appointment. A fnend more poxverftd than the prefect lives to pity and to sue- cour. What friend? If Angerville, why thus cloak himself in mystery ?— why hide himself from me ? Anger¬ ville! Olmo! how could Angerville be powerful in -a land wbere loyalty, ho¬ nour, and virtue ivere denounced ? and if not Angerville, who else could know mj r little Eugenia-^- wdio could lead my thoughts back to tlie falls of the Rhine, to the picturesque shores of Switzerland? Turn not your steps to the dungeon of De Beaufort. Why this restriction ?— wdiy this cruel privation ? I raised my eyes to the fácepf Denise ; I read doubt and suspicion in every featured" Tell me your thoughts, ' I implored; u tell me what passes within ?" Sorroiv
Sorrow marked her glance; teani streamed down ber cheeks; axe shook her head, but she spoke not. My eyes again returned to the paper. Submit to the guidance qf Drueille. I started from my seat—" I will seek Dru·* сШе," I exclaimed ; " this very instant I will dare my fate." Denise snatched my arm; she forcibly withheld me.—" Stay," she whispered* ** Drueille, or much I mistake, is a vile, weak agent : rouse your fortitude, nerve your resolutfon ; the moment of trial approaches, offspring of my mistress! ehild of my sainted friend! -----" She paused ; sobs checked utterance ; she dropped on her knees at my feet. " To you I dedicate the remnant of my life," she fettered out; " you—you -—you are all (Hi earth which is left me ; my father, my mother, perished on the guillotine!—my two brothers fell when tbe Hessians besieged Frankfort on the Maine! Daughterofher I mourn, spurn not
not the counsel ofa mind made ivary. by experience !" "Alas ! what mean you ?" I demand¬ ed, trembhng at the solemn energy* of her manner. " I mean that that paper is a snare," replied Denise, " and that the writer of that paper," and she glanced timidly round the room, and her lips almost touched my ear, " is a villain : he would murder the helpless count De Beaufort, and, with acts of seeming courtesy, ravish the heart and honour of his wife." Struck, as though by Heaven's bolt, 1 could neither move or speak—I could only r gaze upon her, mj r blood curdling, mj T hak rising erect. " Black are the fiend-like purposes of his soul," pursued Denise ; " lust is the spur to action ; he would lurk beneath the covering of friendship, 4 And witli necessity, Tlie tyranťb pleo, excuse his devilish deed*/ voju ut. o Know
Know you not the man, who, lured by j'our beauty, resigns all claim to honour? In your visits to the prison, whom have you met—who has blistered jrour ear with the sigh of passion ?" " No sigh has reached my ear but the sigh of misery," I replied ; " you deceive yourself, Denise —your fears magnify the danger. Once it might have been so, but now my faded cheeks, my wasted form^my hollow eyes, are sure securities." " Last night," resumed Denise, " I saw a man hovering around this dwell¬ ing ; he ivas carefully wrapt in a horse¬ man's coat, and his face was hid by the slouch of his hat ; he entered the garden, and he lingered beneath this window, until joined by a ivoman, ivho, or n uch my eyes deceived me, was Drueille. I listened, but I heard no raptures— 'ťs true they spoke in a whisper, but the ac¬ cents of love cannot be misconstrued : besides, Drueille has passed the bloom of youth,
youth, and even in youth her features lacked attraction." " Why not a father—why not a bro¬ ther, Denise? —Why connect my miser¬ able destiny with the night visitor of Drueille ?" * 4 Drueille has no father," replied De¬ nise, " and Lavergne, her only brother, is far distant." " Lavergne the brother of Drueille !" I eagerly exclaimed; " holy Heaven! why this concealment? why this mys¬ tery? Lavergne conducted me from Schaffhausen, but I knew not I sojourn¬ ed in the divelling of his sister." " There is indeed a mysterj r —there is indeed a concealment," thoughtfully ob¬ served Denise. " Last night, when I saw the stranger in the garden, when he lurked like a thief beneath this window, I suspected some deep-laid project." «· Why not question Drueille?" I asked—" why not name our doubts, and seek for explanation ?" g 2 " What,
" What, and betray suspicion, and arm the wary caution of design?" re¬ joined Denise. " Alas! you are un¬ taught in the arts and usages of the world—you are Uttle framed for the com¬ bat—you guess not the surreptitious colouring, which mocking even the eye of experience, triumphs over justice and honour : a stranger in this land of vio¬ lence and blood, the dreadful latitude of crime is unknown, else would you read deceit in every offer, and shrink even from the shadow which darkens j4>ur path." " Alas! upon wdiom can suspicion light ?" I demanded. " No being have I seen since I quitted the dwelling ot madame Angerville, save Lavergne and the sentinels at the prison-gate." " Yet may the eye of unlicenced pas¬ sion have gazed upon you," resumed Denise, " have marked you for its prey ; grief, care, and fatigue have faded, but not nipped the rose of beauty; over¬ whelmed
whelmed in affliction, how know jou that your interviews with the count De Beaufort were unmarked ?" " I WOuld fain judge human nature better," I exclaimed, " nor picture the mind of man so debased as to triumph over misery." " Weak is the dependence which rests on human nature !" mournfully rejoined Denise: " left to its own guidance, what can be traced but crime and blas¬ phemy ? studied cruelty and unslum- bering suspicion, excluding compassion and justice, scoff at wretchedness, and aggravate oppression. Holy saints ! in our day what do we not see—what do we not hear ! Neither age nor sex are spared ; in the blood of innocence the standard of Freneh liberty is steeped, for the partisans of French liberty, under the designation of patriots, are but assas¬ sins and butchers. Be wary, I implore you, of Drueille : a thousand fears press upon me, too vague, alas ! for form ; yet 0 3, my
my mind presages treachery; and the 4 fiend who lured you hither------" "Angerville!" interrupting her; "you know him not-^couple not his name with treachery : no, no, Denise! existence may be pledged upon his honour—twice has he saved the life of De Beaufort— Oh, doubt him not—'tis necessity alone which withholds him from his friend !" " Grant Heaven it prove so!" said Denise, thoughtfully ; " yet much my heart misgives me—why prohibit the natural right of visiting the count ? why withhold from a husband's arms, when calamity and woe endear communion ? why——" " Oh God!" I shrieked out, " perhaps 'tis past, perhaps ------- The horror of that perhaps checked further utterance; and when Drueille entered the room, the wild anguish, the marble paleness of røy features, pro¬ claimed the raging war of feeling. ** What fresh fears—what new trial ? w she
she inquired, taking røy hand, with an expression of kindness; " dear lady, these ernotions destroy you ; I left you calm—why do I find you thus ?" I sunk on my knees before her.— " Deceive me not !" I solemnly exclaim¬ ed : " tell me, Drueille, and tell me, as your soul craves the pardon of Hea¬ ven, am I widowed? have they mur¬ dered my husband ?" " No, by my hopes of mercy !" replied Drueille: " tbe count De Beaufort is convicted, but interest protracts the ful¬ filment ofthe sentence." " Why then are w r e separated?" Γ eagerly questioned, " why does power destroy under the semblance of compas¬ sion ? If you know the hidden friend who thus deals out favour, tell him sus¬ pense is poison to the soul; tell him the, beart, the mind labouring with incerti¬ tude, is a penance too great for mortal strength ; tell him------ w 44 Be pacified/* again interrupting me; G 4 44 allay
" allay this perturbation—rely on tite offices of friendship, and all yet majr be well." "No, no!" I sobbed out, reading in her evasions the confirmation ofmy woe ; ** you know not the mortal angu İslı at my heart, the pangs whieh almost anni¬ hilate reason: give me conviction—give me one flitting momenťs interview; if murder has not been busy, let me see De Beaufort, even through the grating of his prison ; whilst yet he sleeps, let me hear him breathe—let me see life, warm life, upon his cheek, and these doubts and this frenzy will vanish." Drueille remained silent, yet did her eyes beam compassion.—" If you have influence," I pursued, eagerly snatching her hand, " curb not the pleadings in j r our bosom ; gain me an entrance to his dungeon, soften the misery of awakened suspense, and my gratitude and mj' ρ raj" ers will be lasting as my existence/' " By all that is, or ought tu be bind-
ing," said Drueille, solemnly, " the count учшг husband lives! Be comforted, be patient, and even at the risk of displea¬ sure, this night I will give you the con¬ viction vou ask. Doubt me not, un- m' fortunate lady ! my heart bleeds at your trials, but my powers to aid are small. If I could give liberty to the prisoner— if I could------if I dared------" She hesitated—she shrunk from me,. and as though fearful of being betrayed by her feelings fled from the chamber. " Whose displeasure ean threaten ?" I demanded, turning inquisitively to Denise. " Alas! what dire influence is this, wdiich freezes the genial spring of. humanity ?" " The monster who would secure j t ou to himself," whispered Denise —" who, yielding to his own guilty passions, en¬ vies his victim the sacred rights he would subvert. You shudder—alas! I. speak not myown dark surmises; when I gaze on your form and face, wdien I recall the ii 5 iniatfe
image of your mother, her sufferings and her struggles, I can picture nought but the same scenes of persecution and temptation. She married the prefect to save Ufe ; almost at the foot of the scaf¬ fold she purchased the privilege to breathe, by the sacrifice of herself." " Holy Mary !" I ejaculated, " was life so precious ? Did she—did my mother— did—did ------" I paused—I feared to proceed. " Your mother was too lovely to escape the eye of the voluptuary," pursued De¬ nise ; " torn from retirement, robbed of every possession, thrown into a loathsome prison, she attracted one who, trampling on every moral and divine law r , mount¬ ing on the min of his countrymen, in¬ toxicated with success and triumph, knelt at the feet of the fair aristocrat, and submitted the reins of power to her guidance. Long, and nearly fatal, was the struggle wdthin ; at first she spurned the disgraceful offers by whieh he sought. to
to woo her to his arms, and alike despis¬ ing his threats and his promises, resigned herself to death r but courage and resolu¬ tion tottered, a thousand terrors rose to torture, and fearfully she shrunk from the gulph which j'awned before her. The prefect promised reformation ; cloak¬ ing his cruelties under the head of zeal, he began with an act of mercy: the long list of prisoners destined to suffer was presented to your unhappy mother ; she read it with shuddering horror, and with one single stroke of her pen res¬ cued hundreds from the axe of the guil¬ lotine. Their gratitude and their thanks restored her to something like peace : she pictured a life of philanthropy ac¬ ceptable to her Creator ; and in yieldiug to the wdshes of the prefect, and submit¬ ting to a republican marriage, she de¬ voted her influence and her life to the exercise of universal benevolence.." " Ill-fated parent !" I articulated, los¬ ing every thought of self hxthe sad re* g 6 citai
citai — 4 *№ow, bitter naust have been ţhy reflections! how heavy f thy struggles!" " Heavy indeed," resumed Denise, " bitter almost unto death : long was it ere she could resign herself to her des¬ tiny, ere she could subdue the repug¬ nance of her feelings. Alas! it was a season of conflict almost too fierce for mortal endurance: a loyalist in heart, she execrated the power to wrhich fate compelled her to yield—she detested the principles which bad deluged France in blood, and, annihilating morality and re¬ ligion, had doomed her king to the scaf¬ fold. For days, for weeks, her eyes were never free from tears, nor her bosom from those heart-rending, those pungent pangs, wdiich defy delineation : long and frequent convulsions racked her frame, and often did I expect, as she lay struggling before me, to see the vi¬ tal spark expire. Though pale, worn, and almost shadowy, the prefect relaxed not in his pursuit ; he loved my suffer¬ ing
ing mistress as much as a dissolute heart can love v he resorted to every expedient which could sootb and win ; and such is the inconsistency of man, that he prac¬ tised humanity until he shuddered at the excesses into which example, profligacy, and success had hurled him ; he submit¬ ted to her mild control, and even her per¬ severing melanehofy, her morbid dejec¬ tion, shook not the strength of his affec* tion; he------" " Oh that he had been spared!" I ex¬ claimed—" oh that he had been here to succour and to counsel !" Denise was silent for a moment ; she looked at me with a mournful smile.— " Perhaps," she observed, " the interfe¬ rence of the prefect might be dreaded by this mysterious friend : in times like these, 'tis only to denounce, and justice colours the blow of the assassin !" "Virgin Mother!" I ejaculated, "what a dark, what an iniquitous plot would you
you decipher!—Why awaken doubts which mock probability ?" " I lived with your mother—I suffer¬ ed with your mother, when the prefect first marked her for his own," replied Denise. " Had a hundred lives inter¬ fered, artfully exciting the jealousy of the convention, he would have annihi¬ lated them all ! Wonder not then that I, who have witnessed so much, suspect, beneath the mask ofthis pretendedfriend, a mind as interested and as persevering as the prefect. Once, like yourself, I should have judged human nature bet¬ ter ; but woeful has been my experience, fatal my conviction, that there is no crime, however black, of which the vitiated heart of man is incapable ! At first, with timid caution, he yields to vice, till bold¬ ly hazardous, he spurns restraint, and gives the reins to passion." " Lost, lost wretch !" I faltered, wring¬ ing my hands in despair. " Oh, Denise l· caution me how to act—advise me where to fly !" "Flight
44 Flight is impossible," she resumed ; " it is a painful, a degrading necessity, but art must cope with art, else will your own honour and tbe count de Beaufort's life be sacrificed. You must betray no suspicion ; apparently relying on Dru¬ eille, you must tarry until this hiSden friend reveals himself; and then, with the aid of Heaven, we will hope to ward off the mischief. If I am spared, if I am not discovered and dragged to death/ I will cling to you in every trial, and share every sorrow, for my fife is of va¬ lue but as it may be serviceable to the daughter of my mistress !" I snatched her hand—I raised it with gratitude to my lips.—" God, God re-* ward you !" I sobbed out, " and bless you, as I am now blessed, with a fiiend' in the hour of need !" "We musthe politic," whispered De¬ nise, mingling her tears with mine. "To¬ night I will hide myself in the garden,, and watch for the approach of this stran¬ ger:
ger : should he appear, should Drueille again give hira the meeting, wdth a little caution I may perhaps gain tiieir secret, or at least catch some clue to direct us further." " Should he not appear—should the same blank incertitude continue," I fearfully interrogated, " then—then, De¬ nise, where must we look for succour?" " Where faith never supplicates in vain!" solemnly replied Denise —"wbere sorrow finds a never-failing balm !—to that Almighty Being, who holds forth an haven of rest to the persecuted and sore- laden!—who breatheth hope into the sick soul· and giveth life, even for ever and ever !" " Would that you could inspire me with your hopes and your resignation !" I articulated—" ivould that I too could view tbis world as the mere passage to eternit j'—that, weaned from its promises and its delusions, ceasing to cling to. its subtle
subtle pilgrimage, I could, with submis¬ sion, encounter the quicksands and dan¬ gers by ivhich it is beset !" " Pray," said Denise, meekly crossing her bosom, " pray for strength—pray fervently and deeply, and the God of all good will uphold you, even in the mo¬ ment of heaviest ill ! 'Tis true, the mad depravity of man has profaned our altars and demolished our temples; but he can¬ not deface the pure offering of a pious spirit—he cannot curb the genial aspira¬ tions of a confiding soul : be may wound us here, he may persecute us unto death r beyond, the arrow reacheth not, for evil, and malice, and revenge, and cruelty, have their verge. Dark and inscrutable are the wonder-working wavs of Provi- dence ! Salutary is the storm wdiich ra¬ vages our fields, and wrecks our hopes ! Be acquiescence then our province, nor let the heart ever cavil at what the judg¬ ment is too weak to encompass !" Whole volumes could I fill, were 1 to
to transcribe the counsels and moral ex¬ ordiums ofthis humble, this inestimable companion of my lost mother : her soul was rich in human excellence, her mind fraught with pious and religious lore ; surrounded by the dissolute and the abandoned, in a season and in a coun¬ try tolerating irreligion and vice, she triumphed over example—she shrunk from the poison of infection—she conti¬ nued steady in the early-instilled virtues of her youth; shrinking from the deadly curse which had long deluged in blood the land of her nativity, she prayed Hea¬ ven to suspend its wrath, and once again to aw r aken the minds of men to reason and to justice. Strengthened and upheld by the argu¬ ments of this inestimable friend, I be¬ held the reappearance of Drueille with a calmness, of w hich I thought m y r self in¬ capable ; and even when she enlarged on the indulgence of power, and dwelt on the promised conviction I liad so feel¬ ingly
ingly implored, I betrayed neither hope nor fear, neither did I evince one single symptom of impatience ; my mind feít framed for everv trial ; and I heard the succeeding uight named for the visit to the dungeon of De Beaufort wdth a com¬ posure almost amounting to apathjr. Alas! how soon did that composure %anish f —how soon did that seeming apa¬ thy jdeld to struggling death-fraught ρ an gs ! T h at η igl 11 , tl ι at dreadf u 1 ι ii gh t ------ Oh ! that night of horror !— Is røy pen dipped in blood, or is it fancy ?—Do I see forms and shadows flit around my cell?—Do I hear groans and shiieks? or ------ # ♦ ♦ it # ж i(fr I must pause in my task. There are points on wdiich the brain, weakened as mine has been weakened, refuses to rest—on whieh the far-stretch¬ ed nerve of sensibility vibrates to mad¬ ness !—There are points, there are re¬ membrances, wdiich have more than onee bound
bound me a wretched, ¿struggling luna¬ tic, screaming, raving, supplicating for help, till every vestige of strength was exhausted ! Oh, fearful were those blanks ! and, when I did revive—when reason, by- slow degrees, resumed her empire, tran¬ sient were her glimpses, and often were those glimpses succeeded by long and sullen fits of melancholy ! ***** # * Yes, I must pause. I must not dare the fearful threat of madness, the whips, the cords, the racks of coercion ! Fancy al¬ ready teems with strange forms and strange signs : I must away to the j T ew r - tree shade—there court tbe blast, there bare mj r bosom to the night dew r s, until, chilled and cold, the buruing fire within becomes extinguished !
СНЛР-
CHAPTER VIH. +**·*■*■ m.** m** m**** Г*** Persuaded, by the ready acquiescence to mj r wish, that my unfortunate De Beaufort still groaned within the walls oťhis prison—that perverted justice had not yet enforced the eruel sentence de¬ nounced against loj r alty, I passed the day in temporizing with my feelings, and iu striving to curb those bursts of sensi¬ bility wdiich ever, in moments of trial, endanger without aiding—in bringing m j' mind to that state of fortitude and acquiescence, so necessary to a situation almost dead to the soul-soothing rays of hope : 'tis true, nature struggled within me, but the whispers of Denise conquer¬ ed, and, for a little season, the world, stripped of all its allurements, its flowery visions, its beguiling sophistry, its poi¬ soned
soned lures, faded from before my sight: the few j-ears allotted us here seemed a speck in tlie universe, and the silent grave, to which we were all hastening. as the only absolving balm to woe—life was a fevered dream, happiness an ignis f at uus, gleaming amidst the breakers of disappointment. As the daj r declined, Denise watched me with aching solicitude ; and when the last streak of day faded from the ho¬ rizon's limit, she pressed my hand with an emotion which seemed prophetic. " Would to Heaven I might aecom- panj' you !" she said, " but Drueille is to be vour attendant, and I must linger mV Č** here in sad suspense : be wary, be reso¬ lute, unfortunate ladv, for the trial, 1 fear, will be heavy." " What trial?" I eagerly demanded, "He lives! he lives, Denise!" and my eyes beamed an expression of wildness, whieh made her shudder, " True, the count Beaufort lives," she resumed.
resumed, in the same low and cautious tone; " but this visit, this ready acqui¬ escence to your wish—Alas ! I cannot mould mj r fears—this friend of Drucille's —this mysterious—this——" She paused, for a low ivhispering sounded on the stairs, and the next in¬ stant Drueille entered the chamber. *· Do your wishes still point to the dungeon of the prisoner ?" she question¬ ed, easting on Denise a glance of suspi¬ cious jealousy. " M j- wdshes have never once swerved from the gloomj- cell in wdiich they have confined my husband," I reproachfully answered ; " it is compulsion alone which banishes me wdiat I most covet in life— the participation in his harsh and cruel fortune." * % His fortune may vet be prosperous," said Drueille ; " power is active, and all depends upon the mind's strength and energy. Much do I risk in the indul¬ gence you covet ; but a friend, a citizen, one
one of the national guard, guarantees Our safety—he pities the sufferings I have portrayed, and insures us a safe passport to the dungeon of the prisoner. Fear not to trust me/' reading doubt in my countenance—"" I will be no spy upon your interview ; I will quit you in the passage, and leave you undisturbed, un¬ til the change of the guard bids us pro¬ vide for our own safety." I tried to appear grateful, but my feel¬ ings, poisoned by the suspicions of De¬ nise, were mixed with bitterness; more than was wished to appear seemed to lurk beneath the surface; my heart shrunk with unknown dread, and spite ofthe promised meeting with De Beau¬ fort, the chilling mildew of calamity hung like a blast upon my hopes. " As soon as darkness favours the enterprize, will you be prepared to de¬ part?" questioned Drueille : " much cau¬ tion must be practised, for were this breach of duty discovered, life might be the for¬ feit:
feit* my friend will await us at a low postern, on the north side of the prison, and in silence and secrecy convey us through the passages. Have you cou¬ rage to brave the trial and the dangers of such a place, at such an hour ?" " Yes, yes," I eagerly replied ; " there is no trial, no danger whicb can daunt, the courage of devoted love ! The female heart, upheld by real affection, scoffs at threats and difficulties—forgetful of na¬ tive helplessness, it braves calamity and fate; cold,sickness, hunger,privation,en¬ durance—all, all fade, all vanish in the presence of the man beloved İ Heaven knows," yielding to the enthusiasm of my reelings, " there is no sorrow I would not endure, no sacrifice I would not make, to give him back to freedom !" " Then will the cliain be loosened, and tiie gate unbarred," rejoined Drueille. " Fear not, lady ; the countDe Beaufort is safe; your words preserve him—your-—" " My words!" interrupting her, "name vol. ui. и then
then the sacrifice, tell The the penalty ? Be quick, Drueille ! goad not suspense, •for peace is not half so precious as his safety !" ái If it depended on me," said Dru¬ eille, thoughtfully, " this very night, ivithout tax, without restriction, woidd I close the season of persecution ; but, alas ! I am but an humble instrument, and pa¬ tience must yet be exerted. Necessity is a cruel and iron law r giver ; it often tj r - rannizes over feeling, it often ------" She paused, fearful of betraying too much; then, approaching the door, pursued— " In another hour, ivhen night shall have chased the dhigy grey of twilight, fear¬ less, and unmarked, we may journey to the prison. Banish every doubt from your mmd—on mylife,I may betrusted. "Would tliat my power were as boundless as my inclination! but circumstances are imperious, and—and——* Again she paused, and, with agfewing cheek, shrunk back into the passage. , Denise
Penise and myself gazed on each other in silence, fearful of giving wordsytoour thoughts, yet trembhng at the visionary dread wbich pressed upon our feelings. " Heaven grant the danger be mag¬ nified 1" at length articulated Denise. I spoke not~I could only raise my eyes in silent appeal, and cross m j r hands upon my bosom in evident despondence. " They fear the keen glance of my ob¬ servation," she pursued, " else would they trust me as j T our companion : con¬ scious that their deeds are evil, they cloak themselves in< mystery and caution. Be wary, 1 beseech you—suffer not your quick and harrowed feelings to betray you into any promise, any snare mili¬ tating against your future peace ! Bear in mind the impotence of h u man power, tho verge on whicb all persecution fails ! The threat of death ! What is it to her v> ho has lived in innocence-—who wears within« ber. own clear breast the consci¬ ousness of rectitude —who looks to tho h 2 past
past without reproach, to the future with confidence ? Weak are their powers to wound; they cannot daunt the upright mind—they cannot bereave conscience of that sunshine wbich pierces even the valley of tlie shadow of death, which up¬ holds in the bitterest moments of sorrow and of danger í Why do you turn away ? why do you bury your face upon your bosorø? *Tis true, human nature is weak, but faith inspires resolution and forti¬ tude ! Oh, fear not, tremble not at the stroke ! Your mother—peace be to her spirit ! bartered happiness for life—she purchased the privilege to breathe with the surrender of her person ; yet to the iast gasp of vital strength, did she mourn the sacrifice, ши! execrate the subtilty ! Be warned by her example—be j4>ur eyes open to her sorrows—be resolute— be firm, nor doom the coming years of existence to a lot so cheerless !" " How strangely, how wildly you talk ľ I exclaimed ; " where exists the parallel
parallel betwixt my mother and myself? She was alone in the universe, unpro¬ tected, unclaimed ; I, living in the life of De Beaufort, am hemmed in by mighty, by insurmountable obstacles." " Yet are you young and lovely," whispered Denise ; " remember there are new laws, and new 7 lawgivers, the power to divorce, and------" " Hold!" interrupting her; " torture me not ! The mind of man cannot har¬ bour such monstrous deformity !" " The mind of man," pursued Denise, ί4 biassed by passion, iš capable of every outrage imagination ean conjure! Ini¬ tiated by slow and almost imperceptible gradations, he yields tbe reins, and soon stalks a finished fiend upon the eartii í Remember my words, when the last cloud of disguise shall have passed away ! —Remember that republican fanaticism owns no curb—that under the false guise of reform and amelioration, it annihilates morality and religion, disseminating и S alike
alike wretchedness and guilt !— Rémaiii- ber that the accomplices and tools of faction, yielding to the unhallowed lati¬ tude of sensuality, hardened by impu¬ mi j, and desperate with the triumphs of success, are dead to compassion, study¬ ing dike to aggravate misery, and to' augment oppression !" Ycs\ well do I remember those words' 1 lave í not cause to remember them— to mourn them ? Written with a pen of fire on mv brain, breathed in the true spirit of prophecy, they will remain re¬ gistered whilst life and memory shall hang together ! Dark and heavy clouds shrouded the faee of the heavens when, accompanied bv Drueille, 1 entered the vehicle wait¬ ing to convey me to the prison : not a star glittered in the vast expanse^—not one single raj' of light beamed on the beaten causeway ; the wind howled in hollow blasts, and the rain pelted mourn¬ fully
fully against the windows: but what were external objects to a mind so de¬ pressed and so bew ilclered ? I folded my сюак upon my chilled bosom, and sat in awful expectancy, as though the hour of fate was dawning. Not onee did I speak during our short ride, my thoughts bad taken wing to the dungeon of my love ; ima forgetful even of treachery, I pined for the moment of meeting—I felt as tiiough hastening to- the harbour of my hopes—as though the arms of De Beau¬ fort were the sure haven from sorroiv. ** Heaven be praised!" exclaimed Dru¬ eille, "yonder is the prison; our ap¬ proach is expectei, for already does the light gleam from the northern postern." I bent forward—I gazed eagerly from the window ; the close mantle of univer¬ sal darknes* enshrouding every feature, veiled the harsh outline ofthe building; yet did a broad glare stream from the fastness, and throwdng its rays askance the gloomy scene, act as a beacon, n 4 The
The carriage stopped beneath the walls, but ere the step was let down, tiie light vanished .from the postern. I shrunk back—^Drueille urged me forward— " Fear not," she whispered ; " silence and caution must be ours." No other word was uttered, no sound heard. I re¬ pulsed not the offer of assistance, nor did I struggle when the firm arms of a man lifted me from the carriage. With a heart drooping with agitation and horror, I was borne through tlie arch¬ way ; ^nd wlien in the passage, when chilled by the sepulchral gloom» I clung to the arm of the stranger for support and protection. He trembled as he up¬ held me ; and once, when the distant light beamed fainter, I heard a struggling sigh, and I felt his warm breath upon mj r cheek. Starting, I rivetted my eyes upon him ; but had the sun's meridian raysglaredinbrightness,hisdisguisemust have baffled scrutiny : a loose cfoajk hung around his figure; his fece was half bib ried
ried ih theföHsöf his neckcloth, and his forehead and one eye were completely hid beneath a broad black bandage. We paused on the summit of the stairs leading to the dungeons befow. The stranger whispered in the ear of Drueille, and then he fled, but quickly returned with a dark lanthorn : the light feebly gleamed upon our path; be supported me down the stairs, and in silence we threaded the тагу passages* Holy Hea¬ ven! why do I linger in the detail?— why prolengthen a torture which the rack cannot equal? A low rumbling sound approached—I hear it now. Oh I now, now, does it grate upon fancy í In my ears, on my heart will it grate, until the grave silences all f* It wa» like the rustling, the dragging of a weight upon the flinty pathway, и sudden angle in the passage, and almost face to face we encountered three men—three demons. One bore a gferíng torch ; tlie others were trailing a heavy burthen. Root- H 5 bound
bound we stood ; my blood curdled, mý hair felt to rise on end. The soldiers shouted. 44 What bear you hence?" hoarsely interrogated my conductor. ťí An aristocrat," replied one of the men, ** who, dying in his dungeon, has cheated the executioner of his office." As he spoke, he snatched aside the co¬ vering from the body—the broad glare of die torch fell upon the livid features. Saints and martyrs! how did I "urvive that bitterest moment in my wretched existence ? It was my father ! my dear injured father !—dead !—mangled !—out¬ raged ! The shrieks of frenzy sounded through the prison. I can remember that I threw myself upon the corse—that I strained it in my arms—that I called it father! but, alas! I can remember no further ! ******* More than a week elapsed ere I re- \ivcd
vived to recollection—better had recol¬ lection vanished for ever ! I found my¬ self ih my own chamber, yet still did the images of death flit around me : I elosed my eyes—I pressed my bands tightly against my burning temples, but! could not shutout the dreadful scene;: the pale corse of my father, his gashed; his still bloody wounds, swam before me, and agonized groans and dismal shrieks were all that I could utter* Days of despair and torture wore away ; no friend ivas nigh, no aid, no solace— even the mild voice of Denise was silent ; she came not—she breathed not sym¬ pathy or resignation! Drueille main¬ tained her staţionat my side; andwdicn» ï asked, for my mother's tried and faith¬ ful friend, her absence ivas explained with plausibility, orrathermy mind and feelings were so weakened,- as to leave no room for any new suspicion. Alas ! every link in the great cluin of nature teemed fast dissolving ; there needed but H б oi;e
one Uow more to wean me from the world, to render Ught and life alike hate¬ ful, to make me curse my fellow-beings* and envy every atom devoid cŕ sensation: the fatal sentence denounced against De Beaufort was that blow : inflicted—what ivas I? a miserable, care-worn, hopeless wretch, unconnected, unclaimed, rooted like a blasted tree in the earth, on which the sunshine and the renovating dews of heaven are poured forth in vain. Some- iimes the remembered smile of my ab¬ sent cherub whispered there was still a ray in the dark night of my fate ; she might live to pour oil into my wounds, to relumine once more the magic pharos of anticipation. Alas! how distant was the haven ! what shoals, what rocks, what quicksands might intervene ! Oftener did my heart droop within me—oftener did my conscience proclaim the crime of disobedience a crying erime, for, living in the memory, it reeoileth sevenfold upon the, tranşa gressor.
gressor. Youth, and strength, and na¬ ture, struggling against the tide of cala¬ mity, held me back to life; I rejected? not the offices of Drucille—I could evert talk to her of my father, and question her of his sufferings and his death. From her I learnt, that in a late en¬ gagement he had fallen into the hands ofthe enemy, and that though smart¬ ing under the anguish of his wounds, he had been dragged to this fortress, and plunged into one of its deep and unwholesome dungeons : that belong¬ ing to that proscribed class the noblesse, he had been tried before a revolutionary tribunal, and being judged guilty of the double crime of federalism and aristocra¬ cy, had been doomed to suffer the death of a traitor ; that the sentence had been delayed in consequence of his weakness and his sufferings, and that the very hour in which it was destined to have been fulfilled, when the myrmidons of injus¬ tice, armed with fate and with hatred, sought
sought the defenceless victim of-their malice», he was beyond the reach of fur¬ ther pei$eCution-~Heaven in mercy had reclaimed his spirit, and his livid clay,? stretched in the deep trance of death, de¬ fied alike their power and tiieir ven¬ geance. I wept as I listened to the sad, sad de¬ tail ; every thrill of tenderness revived— the early years· of my childhood, his in¬ dulgence, his fondness.—-" Just God!" Ь exclaimed, my heart swelling with* mingled regret and tenderness, " why sleeps the thunder in thy hand ?—-why permittest theu------ v I started—I trembled at my own te¬ merity.—" Forgive, oh forgive," I falter- edr " the daring flights of a-disturbed- brain ! Thy wisdom * is ail-sufficient !·— Tby chastening^rod the award of mercy ! Tell me of my father,Drueille!" turning mournfully towards her— 44 tell me, where have they laid his hallowed corse? ? ^ There too has the hand of interest been
been busy," replied Drueille : " οψχ*Φ& as your father, the body was ctørefully pi^eserved ; for thè friend wdio so anxi¬ ously strives for the enlargement, of the count De Beaufort, eager to appease and to comfort* withheld the sacred dust from outrage." " Heaven bless him !—Heaven reward him !" I articulated. " Oh, take me* hence!—let me kneel by his shrouded form !—let me gaze upon features so dear m\d so remembered !" t " More than a week has elapsed since our last fatal visit to the prison/' repfied Drueille: " how then can you ask—can you wish—ca» you—-" *' " Γ know what you would say," inter-. rupting her, and wiping awaythe cold dew of disappointment and dismay: *· the mortal form *ef my* father is no longer visible; returned to its .native earth, I can only see the spot which en¬ tombs him ! A whole week elapsed-^a. whole week since that night·—tiiat dread¬ ful
ful night V . and^Ipressed ţwy hand tc^my forehead, and tried t& collect my ideas. f( Where then к Denise? * Why is she withheld when he? presence might com¬ fort ? Sherøtotøct never to forsake me : 'tis íbľce alone which can have dragged her hence." ** Illness, not force/ said Drncille ; u for four whole nights Denise never left your pillow ; her strength failed her, and now she is incapable of the charge. In tenderness and submission I would fill her place : tell me, lady, in what do you miss her ?" ** You are veiy, тегу kind," I mur¬ mured, pressing her hand in token of gra¬ titude, and believing all she uttered. For the moment I wept fbr Denise; but my trials and my cares were so va¬ ried, that my mind, still unsettled, clung to the iast overwhelming blow, as though ii surmounted every other: the dead, not the living, usurped my faculties ; and eveis De Beaufort, even røy darling ehild,
child, yielded to the impression. In vain Drueille tried to vary the subject; ima* gination clung to tbe awful encounter in tlie vaults of the prison—clung to the ghastly eorseof my father, until my start and ray agony threatened a renewal of delirium. A night of fever and horror succeeded, and the day dawned in wakefulness and woe. I raised my head from the pillow —I heard the deep-breathing of Dru¬ eille; worn out with watching, sbe slum¬ bered in her chair, and stealing from my bed, I approached the window unob¬ served. The heavy vapours of night floated before the growdng orb of radiance ; no sound was heard save the light breeze sighing through the foliage : gradually the outline burst from its misty curtain ; the huge battlements of the prison, ^bo¬ somed high in tufted tree$V~the far- spreading plain—the peering chirruúçA of
of-the dwelling of the bte prefect Ι· thought of my mother -Л thought of ray father ; tears of regret streamed down my cheeks, my feelings became soften*- ed, and the violent agitation of the pre¬ ceding night subsided. I prostrated my¬ self upon the eartii—I raised my clasped hands in meek devotion ; my heart as¬ cended in fervent appeal to that Being, whose ear turneth not from the cry of penitence and misery! I reflected on the remission of sins promised to the tru¬ ly contrite, and a gleam of comfort stole into my bosom—Yes, with the poet I could have excìr : med — " il*"ìpy i- Í, f iCÍľU)t —the г 11-.? ρ Or deat !» is υα them, aud t hit/ are ici pence ;'* whilst I, condemned to live, must mourn for them—mourn for myself ! The voice of Drueille recalled me to exertion ; I rose from my knees.—" Fear not," I exclaimed, " 1 am still here, I am still your prisoner. Alas ! if even. beyond
beyond these Walls, where could I seek α place of shelter ?" " You wŤong ns^yoti wrong me, 5 * hesi¬ tatingly pronounced Drueille. " £»ady, you are nó prisoner ; I Would study for your safetj r , but the winds of heaven are not more free." " And j r et/' I rejoined, in an accent of bitterness, " my wishes are thwarted, and mv movements watched ; I ask no home but the dungeon of my husband : lead me to that shelter, Drncille, and no more wilt I doubt your sincerity." " Would jou indeed brave a repeti¬ tion of horrors ?" asked Drueille ; " would
" I have no father left to murder," in¬ terrupting her, in a voice of anguish; " what then ean I fear ?" *' Your fiither died a natural death," she reproachfully rejoined; " had he been in his own home, surrounded by affection, and watched with tenderness, tlie
tbe hour of fete could not have been» protracted,? * " Oh, say not so!" I implored: "'tis trne, my father died by tbe slow ravages of misery ; but to suffer without aid, to groan without alleviation, is a refine¬ ment of torture—is murder tfae most deadly !" " Be it so, lady, and be his blood on the beads of his murderers ! But his ago¬ nies are past—his trials are over; 'tis the living who claim our care—'tis to rescue from death that exertion should be awakened." " De Beaufort! my De Beaufort!" I exclaimed, snatching her arm and gazing wildly in her face. " The count de Beaufort droops, and languishes /for the light of day," she re¬ joined, attentively watching me ; " the sallow bue of sickness, steals upon his cheek, his eyes are spiritless and sunken, and nature, oppressed and overburdened, must soon yield the combat." « Virgin
» ** Virgin Mother!" I éjacuktfeår A thifik fllm obstructed ¡ m$№¿*ñf earn rang with hollow raurintös*—å Stag¬ gered—I must have fallen, btft fi»· 3ier supporting arm. ' " Tis exertíon, not feeling^ required," she continued, leading me to a chairs—* " Lady," in accents low but emphatic, " rouse every energy of your mind, for in j r our hands rests the fiat of life or death." I shrieked—I threw myself upon thé floor before her; I grasped her knees with frantic violence.—" Explain ! ex¬ plain !" I implored ; " name the price of rescue, and all, save my immortal soul, shall be pledged !" " There is a priee^—tiiere is a sacrifice —there is an exertion, which will redeem all !" exclaimed Drueille : " it pomteth not bejpond tiiis world, yet will it give life, and liberty, and joy," " Explain! explain* P 1 was all wbichf burst from my bloodless lips. " This
" Tbiş very day all shaU be explained," pursued Drueille, endeavouring to with¬ draw berself from my restraining grasp. Bpt stal I clung to her-^tilL I madlj r supplicated explanation. " Not yet—not yet/' she repeated, still jstruggling to free herself; " the hour is not yet come : live to hope-^live to an* ticipation—-be calm—be pacified: nay more, assure j*ourself the power to save is jOiirs ; for the life and liberty of the count de Beaufort depend on your ex¬ ertion." She burst from me—she paused a mo¬ ment at the door. " Bear in miiuV' she con tinued, " the misery of captivity—the bitter trial of the law's fulfilment ; dwell not on the price, but on the redemption !" She quitted the chamber; she »slam¬ med to tlie door ; I darted after her ; 1 shrieked out her jpame; I would have dragged her backj ,bujt she had descend¬ ed the stairs, ^nd weakftess withheld me from
,from following. Half-fainting, I clung to the balustrade—I gasped for breath, and the deadly sickness which iced every limb seemed as the harbinger of approach¬ ing dissolution ; every hold on life ap¬ peared to fail me, for even the prayer which still burst from my heart, my lips had not power to utter.
CHAPTER IX. тГ*+*-т.+ ** + т*+ *.0++ + Houn succeeded hour in solitude and reflection ; the shades of death, which so long seemed to encompass, faded away; and life, life of which I was so weary, quickened the lagging pulse at my heart. Drncille came but to administer to my necessities; at her entreaty, I sparingly partook of the early meal of morning, and when ï urged explanation, when again I sought a renewal of the subject upon
upon whieh every thought and every hope rested, she maintained the most determined silence: deaf alike to my prayers and my tears, she would turn coldly from me; and if for a moment she trusted herself to speak, it was to re¬ commend philosophy and acquiescence. Stung at an obduracy so heartless, I saw the door close after her with gratitude ; for the prejudices which my poor Denise had fanned almost into hatred now rose beyond all power to conquer ; mingled fear and hope flitted upon fancy; the life of De Beaufort was in my keeping •-^tiie ransom unnamed: what ransom could be too great? what sacrifice wdiich affection would not offer? " None, none!" I exclaimed, yielding to the ar¬ dour of my feelings; " though they should doom my head to the block, though my blood sbould flow an offer¬ ing for thine, cheerfuHy, thankfully, will I bow to the mandate. De Beaufort, the early, the only idol of my enthusi-, astic
tistie soul, the fest, the first image of my sleeping, of my waking meditations. Yes, thou shalt live—I will snatch thee from tlie grasp of fate ! Perish every trace of the weak and trembling woman ! all nerve, all fire, I will act the heroine to rescue tliee !" Ah ! how r little did my ivords and my looks agree, when a gentle tap at the door announced an intruder ! I trembled, and the warm glow of my enthusiasm faded to a deathlike hue, A stranger entered : he paused for a moment, for lie read terror and anguish in my pale and quivering features ; and drawing a folded paper from his pocket, he held it in silence towards me, I snatched it from his hand: with an effort of desperation I broke the seal—1 felt as though it teemed with fete—as though I grasped the life or deatii war¬ rant of De Beaufort; and though so many years have elapsed, though such an age of sorrow has intervened, so in- vol. in. ι delibly
delibly are the contents impressed upon my mind, that I can recall them with little variation. " The hour for exertion is arrived! Your hand, Helena, can alone loosen the bars of De Beaufort's dungeon ; you can give him life, and restore him to the du¬ ties he has long neglected." 1 paused ; I raised my streaming eyes to heaven ; I kissed the letter with grate¬ ful transport.—" Live ! live, De Beau¬ fort!" I articulated: but the wdld cur- - rent of my joy quickly turned to despair, as I continued the perusal—" Let morali¬ ty and virtue enforce the sacrifice fate irn- . poses. Hyacinthe mourns the absence of her husband ; restore tlmt husband to her prayers, relinquish all hold upon his affections, give j^ourself to the being who has seen but to worship you, who awaits you at the altar, who loves you with a passion lasting as existence, whose hand is free, wdio, above the meanness of dis¬ guise, mocks not Heaven with an ím¬ hol ν mf
holy ceremony ! Swear to relinquish De Beaufort, to become this night the ivife of De Beaufort's preserver, and the order for acquittal shall be signed " Wild, shrieking, I dropped tlie fetal paper ; I called on Heaven to hear, and to avenge me; I wrung my hands—I tore my hair—I paced the chamber with a precipitancy which betraj r ed me tlie sport of frenzy. Two whole hours passed, and the de¬ liverer of the accursed letter again stood before me. " Your answer, lacty ?" ho demanded. I turned fiercely towards him, and ¡matching the paper, tore it to atoms, and scattering it on the floor, trampled it under my feet.-—" Go to your employer," I exclaimed, " and tell hira Helena has not yet learned to tamper wdth honour/* " Alas, madam !" said the man, " you know not the power you dare—you know not the vengeance whicli threa¬ tens." ι 2 " It
" It reacheth not beyond life," I re¬ joined. " Go, go—tbe power to torture will soon be past." I really fancied my end approaching ; my breath was laboured—my arms drop¬ ped powerless, and light and life seemed quick receding. When I revived, I found rnj'self on the bed, the chamber darken¬ ed, and a form in watchful tenderness bending over me. My thoughts, my whole soul flew to De Beaufort: who else could weep the fate of the wretched Helena? who, in a moment so forlorn, could aid and bless her ? My eyes were scarce unclosed, scarce were the misty sliadows of suspended life dissipated, yet my lips murmured— " Love," and " Eugenius." The stranger darted from mj r side, and when, with momentary strength, I snatched back tiie curtain, the door closed him from my view r . I shrieked out the name of " De Beaufort," and throwing myself from the bed, tried to force the door :
door: it resisted my efforts, it w r as se¬ cured on the outside; I was indeed a prisoner, and bursting into tears, I sunk robbing on tbe floor. Oh, moment of torture ! moment of despair and woe ! even now, in the bare recital, my blood curdles, and every pulse of life appears to droop! The letter, the fetal letter burnt like fire on my brain ; mj r babe in distance seemed to mourn desertion— m j' De Beaufort, chained in his dungeon, to call on me to save him ! Gladly with life would I have purchased his : but to renounce him, to behold him no more, to live in the arms of another ! madness w r as İn the sound.—" Angerville ! An¬ gerville !" I exclaimed, in the wild agony of the moment, " where art thou now ? w r hy does thy friendship slumber ?" I heard a groan in the passage ; I heard sobs, w hich, like my own, appeared the sobs of woe. Again all was silent: I listened — I held my breath; I could even hear the heavy throbbings of my ι # heart,
heart, so deep, so deathlike was the pause. * The day passed away in tortures in¬ explicable, one moment lost in frenzy, the next bathed in tears. Towards even¬ ing the door of the chamber was un¬ locked, and the same messenger of evil stood before me : I closed mj r eyes in disgust and horror; I motioned him back with my hand, for I could not speak. " Be not too rash," said the man ; " reflect ere you decide; even now the offer is repeated, and the prefect, forget¬ ful of injury, and generously indulgent; renews his proposal." " You already know mj/ answer." " Then the sentence may be enforced," pursued the man, with fiendlike apathj r : * fi and the prisoner led to his fete ?" " Stay, stay, murderer ! cold-blooded murderer!" I shrieked out, for he had approached the door, and stood with it half open in his hand.—" Is there no al¬ ternative?
ternative? no blessed medium? Let me see this judge, tbis prefect, this cruel arbiter of niy destiny !" " At the altar you will see bim," said the man ; " this very night he would plight his vows." Irresolute, goaded almost bej'ond en¬ ei ui anee, I stood with my clasped bands pressed upon my forehead, musing wdth¬ ou t the consciousness. The murmur of voices proceeded from below : a door opened, and distinctly I heard—" I have gone too far to retract : life is a hell without her ; I will purchase her by the annihilation of half the world !" I started; the accent was familiar. With the bound of desperation, I darted past the man, and descended the stairs: I paused not for thought ; I heard the fast-gaining footstep of my pursuer, and sprung into the opposite apartment wdth a noiseless ghost-like tread. Father of Heaven ! wdiat were the f eel- J 1 ings.
ings, the wild, the maddened feelings of that înoment í It wasr no phantom of the brain—it was no deception of vision ; it was Angerville my eyes encountered ! AngerviHe standing by the side of Dru¬ eille ! My heart flew towards him ; my feelings glowed with boundless confi¬ dence ; I seemed no longer alone in the world—no longer the sport of persecu¬ tion and sorrow.—Angerville, the bo¬ korn friend of De Beaufort ! Angerville, upon whom I had so often, so despairing¬ ly called ! I saw not, I could not see the lowering^gioom of his countenance. Ah no! how could I dream that hu¬ man nature was so black ? how could I picture treachery so base—man so de¬ moniac ? ** Save me ! save me !" I shrieked out, extending my arms towards him : * and when he upheld me, whert he whispered protection, when he hemmed me in from the near approach ofthe ruflian, my bo¬ som
som throbbed with gratitude^ my head drooped upon his shoulder, and I burst into tears. Alas ! from this fatal moment» afflic¬ tion crowded so quick upon affliction, that my story seems a mere catalogue of wrongs and endurance. Scarce one sin¬ gle ray gleamed on the dark horizon of my fate—scarce one deceptive lure cheat¬ ed me into peace : the mask of decep¬ tion dropped, and Angerville, the late trusted, honoured Angerville, stood forth a fiend of depravity—a monster so de¬ formed, so black, that nature sickened in the contemplation. Bitter was the pang with which I saw, with which I mourned the failure of my hopes, the dreadful wreck of all my expectations ; watched, surrounded by the satellites of despotism, my soul again became the prey of despair, aud I sunk into tbat state of mind which, viewing na brightening promise in futurity, die* to hope, and only struggles to endure. î 5 I shrunk
ï shrunk ever from the approach of my persecutor, and when he forced himself into my presence, I beheld him with an eye which .wanted but the power to deal destruction. " Have you no pity, Helena ?" he would exclaim ; ťť no dawning of com¬ passion ?" Heaven and earth! what a raging war of hatred and of passion did those words awaken.*—" Monster ! murderer ! away—blast not my sight!" shrieking, shrinking from his touch. " If you have pity, if you have compassion, take the life on which you have shed the poison of eternul grief; sheath your dagger here in the breast of jour victim, for death at your hands will be mercy !" ** Helena/' said the hardened, the im¬ penetrable Angerville, " be calm, and bsten to reason. I am no monster, no murderer : I love you, and I would save the life; øf my friend: disguise is idle- Nay, stay/' checkbig my effort to speak, ·* reproach
* reproach me not, stir not the hell within me, for it is you who have made me what I am ! you------ " 44 Hear, hear the blasphemer !" inter¬ rupting him : " avenging God ! hast thou no lightning?" «* You injure me, Helena," he resum¬ ed, forcing the ready tear ; " prejudice chases reason^ and passion spurns all ex«· planation, else would you give me ear ; for surely confidence and friendship can«- not thus quickly change to* hatred." I clasped my bands in mute attention ; I tried to be calm, spite of the shudder^ ing pangs of agonized sensibility^ " The retrospect is long and painful," pursued Angerville, " but memory must be taxed, and feeling outraged. Kemem¬ ber, my appeal is to the judgment, not the heart. I will lay open every error of niy own*—in rise, in progress, all shall be explained—the conflicts long sustained by honour—the temptations whicb hu¬ man feeling coidd not combat; yes, ι $ 'from
from tile moment in which I first be¬ held you» near the posthouse at Eglis- sure ; when cold and pafe you lay upon the earth, apparently in the final strug¬ gle of dissolution, even then my beart felt you, Helena, felt you üi it had never felt woman! Had De Beaufort been your husband, I might have saved my¬ self by flying the snare, but I knew hirø already married, and the tie which bound you was no barrier to my growing pas¬ sion. Forgive me, if taking you for the mere wanton of an hour, I gazed with unhallowed latitude ой vour beauty. I thought you tbe fairest of God's crea¬ tures, and 1 envied De Beaufort a pos¬ sesion whieh I would have purchased with iny life. Quickly did my ideas eliange—your society and your senti¬ mente gave place to reverence and adora¬ tion. Exquisite Were tbe enjoyment« of that flitting period : I grew in your e$teem**~I possessed yom* friendship, ñná !fenciedmy$elfcontent; yctwasthere a vacuum
vacuum—a gnawing care. De Beaufort told me your story, and that story ex* alted you a saint worthy of worship. Love sapped the foundation stone ef friendship—-the wdiole fabric fell; I hated De Beaufort, even at the moment I prot fered my interest and my services. Start not : if you know the human heart, tell me how r could it be otherwise ? He pos¬ sessed the treasure I sighed for, and jea¬ lousy and envy nestled a serpent swarm in my bosom. I felt it was danger, madness to be near you, and j r et I lived but in your presence : sometimes, yield¬ ing to the counsels of reason, and strug¬ gling agamst the mortili flame wbich consumed me, I fled—I wandered in solitude and in woe : but the eflbrt was vain; I «ould not shut out tbe image which warmed existence; in the darlu ness of night, in the noonday beam, you, and you alone, coloured the irisions of fency ; in tbe din of battle, in the wild fury of contention, when rushing into the.
the thickest ofthe fight, I sought to for¬ get, to yield you and life together, tbe balls whizzed harmless by, and the strokes which severed the thread of a thousand lives fell pow r erless on me. Helena! Helena ! I have loved you wdth a pas¬ sion meriting something like gratitude— a passion which has become the dearer part of myself: I have purchased you with a price from which weaker souls would shrink—purchased you with the outrage of every duty ; renounced my allegiance, betrayed my trubt, leagued myself with the demons of anarchy, and trampled alike on nature and religion ! Yes, I have paid the price, the dreadful price! and mine you are—mine you must be." " Never—never—never!" I groaned forth, in the wild horror of my feelings. " Think of De Beaufort !" he exclaim¬ ed, grasping mj r arm with giant strength, .and bending on me a look of dreadful meaning. I struggled
I struggled for freedom—I madly shrieked for help. Alas ! help came not, and still was I compelled to listen to this devil in human mould. He attempt¬ ed to sooth, to palliate all past artifice ; he even strove to place on the side of virtue his efforts to withdraw me from the illicit love of his deceived friend ; he judged that the letter placed so ingeni¬ ously within mj r reach, by rudely snatch¬ ing aside the veil of deception, would frighten confidence, and rousing the pride of outraged imiocer.ee, annihilate all ties, and give me back to freedcfrn : be was mistaken—he credited me with more strength than I possessed, or rather he be¬ lieved his own wishes, and when his de¬ pendence failed, he changed his plans to play a deeper part. Strange inconsisten¬ cy ! which twice gave life to the man he hated ! the man he called his friend I But there lingered then some compunc¬ tion in his heart—he had not then attained the acme of guilt and hardihood, for, alas ! when
when we plunge into sui, we tarrj r not long on the same step ; there are grada¬ tions—there are fatal strides ; vice sears and indurates the feelings, and imper¬ ceptibly does the mind become familiar¬ ized to deeds from which it once fearful¬ ly shrunk. But why do I thus digress? rather let me hasten tlie hateful explanation, whieh sheddmg light on the past transactions ofmy eventful story, uncloaked the fiend I had so long and so implicitly trusted. To be brief then, honour and patriot¬ ism, and eVery great and noble feeling, faded beneath the influence of passion ; Angerville resigned himself to its guid¬ ance : wild and murderous projects rilled his brain ; he became the emissary of a demoniac crew, leagued himself with the assassins of his king—tlie destroyers of his country ; wore the mask of loj r alty to betray; entrapped the unsuspecting De Beaufort, and lured me from the protection and shelter of his maternal roof»
roof, more effectually to secure to him¬ self a victim, for wdiose attainment he had bartered his hopes of peace. Bless¬ ed saints ! how faint is language to ex¬ press the abhorrence—tbe disgust—the mortal hatred, which grew as he advan¬ ced in the narration ! Impelled oy policy, he had curbed in¬ clination—he had carefully veiled him¬ self from the possibility of recognition— he had acted under the seeming influence of another, and when the prefect ivas no longer useful, when his power threatened opposition, he ivas by letter denounced ; and Robespiere, the regicide, the exe¬ crable, the blood-thirsty monster who swayed the legislature, alive to jealousy and distrust, by a summary trial con¬ demned him to the axe ofthe guillotine. Without a blush, without hesitation, Angerville recounted his enormities, perhaps to intimidate, perhaps to para¬ lyze all power of resistance. The mask was to have been retained until threats and
and anguish had extorted compliance; nor, till I had thus ransomed the life of De Beaufort, till past all possibility of change, was I to have known the ty¬ rant to wdiom, by fate and necessity, I was assigned. Such was the purport of the long and cruel explanation I was compelled to hear, mingled with profane oaths and loath¬ some flattery ; and when again he urged the impetuosity of passion, when he tried to soften crimes so black, and imputed every defalcation to the omnipotence of love, when he talked of the re-union of De Beaufort and Hj^acinthe, of virtue in the renunciation whieh would restore them to each other, my feelings, too long tried, burst every bond of prudence. I spurned him from me—I loaded him wdth the bitter execrations of despair, and vow r ed that death was more wel¬ come than his presence. He tried to palliate^—to assuage.— " Think of the past hours of confidence," he
he articulated ; " think how long I have loved, passionately loved you ! At Eg- lissure the spark ivas kindled—at Sehaf¬ hausen it became a raging flame. Think of your child, Helena ! I wdll be a father to that child, a watchful, tender guardian of her safety and her peace------" " You ! you !" interrupting him ; " wretch ! abandoned by Heaven ! you her father!—you her guardian! Bid the tiger herd with the lamb—bid the eagle nestle the dove ! Begone !—leave me—your look is poison—j T our presence maddens my brain i" " Think of my power, think of my in¬ fluence here !" rejoined Angerville, in low but energetic accents.—" Think of wdiat I have done—what I may do ; dare me not, Helena, for the yawning gulf of perdition cannot daunt me now r !" " Merciful Cod ! merciful Heaven !" I aspirated, clasping my hands in wild horror, " oh, shorten this struggle ! oh, take nie in innocence to thyself! Leave me,
me, leave me, Angerville ; give me time, give me reflection; goad me not beyond endurance, lest nature fail, and death re¬ lease me from the trial !" " You shall have time—you shall have aliyou wish," he replied, somewhat soft- i ned; "none save Drueille shall intrude upon your solitude ; she alone------" " Έσ, no, not Drueille," interrupting him ; " if my senses are worth preserv¬ ing, keep her hence ! I WOuld be alone —I would commune wdth my owrn heart, unmarked by. the prying ej r e of observa¬ tion." " You shall be alone," resumed An¬ gerville ; " you shall have no spy, no observer : alone to the full play of your own excellent judgment, weigh well each circumstance ; and should prejudice yield to reason, should humanity give life and freedom to De Beaufort, not a wish, not a fancy which power and wealth can encompass, shall remain unfulfilled ! I wdll be—But no more," reading dis¬ gust
gust and horror in my countenance: "I leave you, Helena, to reflection and to decision." He did leave meto the anguish ofmy oivn mind, to a misery so pungent as to mock the force of language. The hour of bitterest trial was indeed come ; hope faded from the scene, and despair urged to exertion.—" De Beaufort ! De Beau¬ fort !" I exclaimed, " father of my child ! life of mj' life ! is there no alternative, no other means to save thee ? Must I violate vow r s so fondly plighted—must I plant thorns to rankle unto death ? Oh ! what a price ! wdiat a dreadful, dreadful price !" The weight at my heart was almost suffocating ; I sobbed, I gasped, but I could not move it thence; Angerville had placed on it a bar of lead, and where- e'er I turned, misery and woe encompas¬ sed ; alone, neglected, lost, deatii threaten¬ ing the dearer part of myself, and disho¬ nour the sad, the only medium to avert the
the stroke. I thought of Denise, her af¬ fection, her counsels.—^·" Prayer," she would exclaim, " stilleth the raging storm !" I sank on my knees—I Taisetl my clasped hands—I supplicated forti¬ tude—I fervently besought grace and strength, and resignation ! Piety gra¬ dually enwrapped me ! Religion infused its healing balm into mj/ spirit ! I arose with composure, I endured without fren- жу, and when I turned my ej/es, as it wero into myself, I acknowledged affliction salutary, and confidently rested my cause in the hands of a High and an Almighty Disposer !
CHAPTER X. +т.*ФтГ+тГФ+ + тТ+тГ+*+*· StfRANGE and wonderful are now the rapid successions in my sad story: so crowded, so wild, so unexpected, so in¬ congruous
congruous, that reality wears the garb of fiction, and more than mortal interposi¬ tion appears to have prevailed. Unconscious of the rapid strides of night, I remained the solitary tenant of my little chamber; musing on the suf¬ ferings of De Beaufort, and weighing the heavy purchase of his life and free¬ dom—courting a thousand schemes, and harbouring a thousand projects; now cheated into momentary anticipation, now chilled with the conviction that deatii alone coiud release me from the grasp of Angerville. Some loose sand hurled at the window broke the thread of my reverie. I started—I listened ; it was repeated. With a noiseless step I stole across the floor—I drew aside the curtain; all without was involved in darkness—not a star trembled in the fir¬ mament ; I softly opened the casement —I strained my eyes, but I could distinguish no object. Disappointed, heart-struck, I drew back; I thought fancy
fancy had deceived me, and my spirits drooped, almost to weeping. Chilled with the night ak, I extended my hand to reclose the casement ; at the instant a ball was thrown into the room ; strik¬ ing against the cmuain, it fell at my feet. 44 Holy Powers ! how ean 1 paint the transition in my feelings, the grateful transport with which I unfolded, wdth which I read the paper which enwrapped it!— " In tlie dead of night, when sleep shall lie heavy on your persecutors, be prepared to escape : a rope-ladder will se¬ cure your descent from the window, and a trust-worthy friend await you below. Let the silence of the grave seal y r our lips*—hope all tliat the wildest flight of romance can encompass. Extinguish your light at the usual hour, and blind, caiefully bUnd the vigilance of Drueille." J read and re-read the paper; L viewed it as Tsa^nts view holy relies—I pressed it to my lips-r-I bathed it in my tears— Л hid
hid it next my heart, and mused o'er its contents with thankfulness and rapture ! Carefully reclosing the window, and placing all as before, I seated myself in apparent absorption; and when supper was spread befoie me, I scarcely raised my head to note the intruder. 44 1 fear you are ill," said the well- known voice of Drncille. I turned mournfully towards her—I shuddered with disgust, and j T et I con¬ quered tbe impulse — "Of bodily in¬ disposition," I exclaimed, ** I have no reason to complain." She tried to pursue the conversation, but I made no further reply. I appeared labouring witb a weight of care, and in a low and tremulous accent pronounced tlie parting " good-night." Blessed Maty! bow grateful was I w r hen the door closed her from my view, when I beard her descend the stairs, лпа felt secure from further interruption! Again was the paper unfolded, again did vol. in. к I steep
I steep it in my tears. Hope all that the wildest flight qf romance can encom¬ pass. That hope sealed the walls, filed the fetters of De Beaufort—that hope gave him to freedom, and snatched me safe and unpolluted from the power of Angerville ! I knelt—I bowed my head in gratitude to Heaven ; my whole soid ascended in praise, and I rose with a con¬ fidence whieh imparted strength and re¬ solution for the coming enterprize. Securing the door of the chamber, at the usual hour I extinguished the light ; and though I threw myself on the bed, not for a single instant did 1 neglect the charge of listening watchfulness. INight waned, and darkness and death¬ like stillness reigned throughout: how long, how lagging seemed the minutes ! laden, as tbough with fate, they lingered, and ever and anon did the loud throb¬ bing of my own pulse, and the quicken¬ ed powers of respiration, chill me with visionary terrors. At
A t length the samesignal was given, and sweeter than dulcimer or harp sounded the sand against the window, I arose, nerv¬ ed for danger or for death ; my woman's heart rallied its slender stock of courage, and I opened the casement wdth a firm¬ ness wdiich even now awakens wonder. The misty moon momentarily emerg¬ ing from the black bosom ofa cloud, lent her grey light ; j r et was it so feint, so pale, so transient, as scarcely to express the outline of the figure below : my eye nought him but to mark the rope as my hand snatched at this promised pass to freedom ; quick as thought a grappling- hook secured it to the window, and ere 1 had half descended the twisted footway, the face of heaven and earth was again involved in darkness. Attentive to the written injunction I bad received, no sound escaped my lips, even though I felt the hand tremble which grasped mine : I too trembled, but it was with awe* with wonder, with gra¬ is % titude
titude—with a thousand crowding emo¬ tions, tew complex to be analyzed. Quick¬ ly/ was the ladder dislodged, and as quick¬ ly did we fly beyond the limits of the garden: yet even then we paused not, neither did my companion trust himself to speak ; drawing my arm through his, and almost lifting me from the earth, he hurried me towards the wood which skirted the prison. The moon again pierced the shadowy vapours, and darted an askance ray of brightness; it fell upon our path, j r et not once did I raise mj- eyes to his coun¬ tenance ; fear left no room for curiosity, and the possibility of discovery and pur¬ suit gave spur to exertion. We pressed onward, we dived into the thickest of tlie wood. For a whole liour, insensible to fatigue or difficulty, now lifted over brake and barrier, now snatched above the trea¬ cherous footing of the deep morass, soundless and swift we continued our progress, the moon alternately emerging, and
and eclipsed by the dark vapours skud- ding over her disk. Damp and cold blew tbe breeze ; it was a night of cloud and sadness, wdien swimming on the dusky wind, "far distant, in the dark silence, the feeble voices of death are faintly heard :" the drizzly rain began to fall, and nature seemed to w r ar in fatal presage. We had nearly reached the deep sha¬ dow of a huge and shapeless ruin, scowl¬ ing o'er the scene, when the trampling of footsteps, and the mingled voices of numbers, broke the stillness. My guide grasped my arm more firm¬ ly, and as he strained me to his bosom, I felt tbe fluttering of his heart, as though it would force a passage. The intruders approached : it was a moment teeming wdth fate and death ! " Life hangs upon silence," he wdiispered, in a tone so low, that I felt as it were the accents upon my cheek. He raised me in his arms—he darted towards the ruin ; and as he ííí 3 shrunk
shrunk within the dark recess of an over¬ hanging archway, part of the wall, loos¬ ened from its basis, fell with a loud crash. A shout marked the advance of the party—" Be it ghost, or be it devil, I will dislodge it," said a voice. At the instant a shot was discharged ; I felt the deathlike shudder of my com¬ panion: he dropped upon one knee; then, quick as thought recovering himself, folded mè closer, and pressed deeper into the shadow. " Fool, I tell you it is but the wdnd, or perhaps a poor harmless owl sheltered in the ruins." " Or," observed another voice, " the ghost of one ofthe late fraternity. Like witches, ghosts ride upon the wind, and why not return to their old haunts? When the massacre of the priests------" " Hush ! hush !" interposed tbe first speaker ; " we'll talk of tlmt by broad dajdight, or when seated by the guardfire : 1 was
I was present when the fanatics died : let them moulder, and let us away." A loud laugh succeeded, and their re¬ ceding footsteps soon died in distance. IVithout speaking, almost without breathing, I had sunk from the relaxing- arms which had supported me ; and now that the immediate pressure of danger was past, I rose from tlie earth, and turning to my deliverer whispered— " Safety." He spoke not, he moved not. Alarmed, I took his hand ; its damp chill passed into my heart, withering every 1юре and every promise. Merciful God! wdiat a situation was mine ! alone in a spot so desolate, so drear, my friend, my protector, he who had risked life for my preservation, faint¬ ing, perhaps dead at my side ! I sunk on my knees—I raised his heavy head from the w r et stone, and rested it on my bosom—I chafed his temples and his hands, and wept over him, as though my burning tears could thaw the stagnant к 4 stream
stream of life. I tore open his vest—I tried to drag him from the deep shadow of the archway, trusting that the bleak w ind would fan him back to existence : still, still he lay motionless and cold. Driven to desperation, unmindful of self-safety, thinking but of the being be¬ fore me, I shrieked out for help : my voice pierced the furthest corners of the ruin ; it died in echo, but quickly w T as it followed by the sound of an ap¬ proaching footfall. A faint light gleam¬ ed in distance ; now it advanced, and now it disappeared : again and again I shrieked. I strained mj r eyes to catch the outline of the figure, and though I beheld a man in the uniform of the na¬ tional guard, I ceased uot my prayers fbr succour. He sprung to my side, and as he turned the light upon us, he breathed a heayy groan. Holy Heaven! that light, that fetal discovery! that dreadful, dreadful mo¬ ment of despair and anguish ! It was the Hieles*
lifeless form of De Beaufort which lay upon my bosom ! The light glared upon his marbled cheek, upon his blood-stain¬ ed figure; it marked me too, steeped in the same crimson tide, whieh still oozed from his death-wound ! I did not faint —I did not once lose my senses ; the necessity for exertion seemed to buoy me up, the season of weakness to vanish : wdth more than woman's strength, I aid¬ ed in lifting him from the earth, and be¬ tween us we bore him through the black¬ ened and dismantled passages. We paused, for alow sound spoke the faint flutter of life; motion had relumin- ed the nearly-exhausted spark ; and as again I supported him in my arms, the soldier drew a small phial from his pocket, and forced a few drops of the elixir down his throat. The cordial balm revived him, his eyes unclosed, he turned them mournfully on me ; a smile of grateful transport lighted up his features, and jrøftly he pronounced—" Helena." It к 5 was
was the last and only effort : again his head drooped, and again and for ever he ceased to breathe ! 44 My De Beaufort ! my love ! my hearťs own friend!" I articulated, re¬ clining my cheek upon his cold one.— " He breathes not ! he faints!" shrieking and turning wildly to the soldier—" Aid him ! aid him, Heaven !" I heard sobs, I felt tears upon my hand, yet I moved not; I hung in agonized suspense over the cold clay of mj r Euge¬ nius, listening for the next breath, watch¬ ing for the slightest indication of return¬ ing life. " Poor mourner P murmured the sol¬ dier; "unhappy, marked victim of cala¬ mity ! yet Providence burthens us not beyond our strength ; for as the dew de¬ scends upon the parched earth, so is in¬ fused its genial mercy !" I looked up; tlie helmet had fallen from the head of the speaker, and in the pale
pale and agitated countenance, I recog¬ nized the features of Denise. Alas ! surprise and joy had alike lost their influence : I spoke not—I moved not; still fondly dinging to hope, I hung over my stiffening charge, incredulous to my loss, and striving to warm his cold hands in my bosom. " It is tbe will of Heaven !" sobbed Denise: "as mortals we mourn— as- Christians let us submit." I turned wildly tow r ards her, yet still my arms were folded round the body* still did I cling to it as my treasured hoard. " Day must not find us here," she pursued ; " our tears, our efforts cannot aid ; if your De Beaufort could speak, be would say—* fly, Helena, from the snares of AngervUb !—fly, and preserve that honour he seeks to destroyJ-r^flyr-r" iC What, and leave this dear, tbis .pre¬ cious r#lic ?" reproachfully interiaipting ber—*' leave it to be outraged, to be pro-. к 6 fened?
fenşd? Never ? never, Denise Ì if they drag him henee, they shall trample ирсш ray bosom ; I will cling to him-«J will lie down by his cold side^— I wül know no other resting-place, no other grave !" " Then we will die together," said Denise, throwing herself on the flinty eartii : " here, without a struggle, wiU we selfishly throw down life; and your babe—your orphan—yenr deserted Eu¬ genia !" " Oh God ! oh God !" I ejaculated, rajising my face from the clay-cold fore¬ head of De Beaufort. " Think tliat he speaks !" pursued De¬ nise ; " think tliat he pleads ibr his ab¬ sent child !" "My child!" I groaned forth, and tears, for tbe first time, distilled from my eyes; they fett in torrejatH—they saved my brain " Тим t to my guidance," pursued De- nUe, taking my bend, and pressing it m íirmpatlmk térért»««; " I will not toa
deeply probeyour heart, I will 'strivebut for your safety.?' " I cannot, cannot leave him," I sob¬ bed out. "Yqu shall not leave him," she re¬ sumed, in a voice of gentleness, " at least not until the consecrated mould of tbis defaced house of God be heaped upon him !—not until we have placed his ho¬ noured remains beyond the reach of pro¬ fanation !" " What, now—now ?" I asked in ac¬ cents of dismay and horror; " scarce dead—scarce cold—perhaps even now he faints ! Oh, Denise ! is there no aid, no succour ?** " Not in this world," she solemnly re¬ plied: "the spark has fled; tbe freed soul, redeemed from life's bondage, yields itself to ímraortatíty— to Heaven P The pause was agonizing. Denise checked not my tears j she sufflWed^me to weep* without interruption, until the gradually expanding light of day, pier¬ cing
cing the fretted aisles.and darkened pas¬ sages, roused her to the necessity of ex¬ ertion. \< 'H * / * »ι , ι * " We must bear the body to a place of sďety"í she whispered ; " here* will it be exposed to the unholy ribaldry of cold-hearted guilt: have you power— Imve you strength to aid me in theoffice? Morning advances; the golden-tinted east already glows with brightness; should we be discovered, shoidd we be forced from the sacred clay, ueithfcr de¬ cency or humanity will jdeld it a resting- place î exulting barbarity will drag it hence, and-*——*' " Yes, yes—I have strength, I have power,** I exclaimed, interrupting her, and shuddering at tiie picture fancy sketched: I sprung from tlie stone floor, my arm still supporting the dear head of my murdered love**-" Lietus away, De- nise-U4et us delvetheearth^-far, far from the haunts of men, amidst the beasts of the field, *in the tiger's den, let us seek, let
let us crave shelter from our fellow-crea¬ tures !" Denise hung the lanthorn upon her arm ; and raising all that was mortal of De Beaufort, we silently and sorrowfully bore it through the winding interstices of the ruin. Soon did we lose sight of the swelling rays of the sun—soon did we exchange it for utter darkness : the yellow flare of the lanthorn emitted a sickly ray, and noiseless as the form we supported, we descended into the vaults of the abbey : through a trap-door, open¬ ing with a secret spring, we passed down a narrow staircase; nor did we pause until we reached a square vault, feebly lighted by a lamp impending from the arched roof. We placed the body upon a bed of fern and dried leaves ; and then, alike subdued and awe-struck, diopped on our knees before it. My sobs rose with suffocating violence— Denise waa tranced in meditation. m « # * ·' * . #
In this vault, in this living charnel- house, days wore away : the voice of De· nise sometimes broke in upon my lonely watch, yet often, for w r hole hours, did I weep by the cold clay of De Beaufort. In vain she sought to call me to myself, to awaken new springs for thought and action : she laboured for my eomfoit— she studied for my health—she braved the threat of discovery and death, in eagerness to mark the fit season for en¬ largement : the self-awarded partner of all my calamities, she shared eveiy dan¬ ger, and lured my attention by holy and religious argument ; she spoke of the heavy trial beneath which I writhed as the immediate dispensation of Provi¬ dence !—4>f sorrow as the inevitable 'mì e- ritance of manV?—-of fortitude as the surest proof of resignation to the Supreme wi8! She wept over roe as a mother weepeth óver ber child; she mourned the dire necessity, yet urged the powers of mv mind to meet and aid in the last mã offices. Alas f
Alas ! that necessity soon woefully ex¬ ited; for even afiection such as mine shrunk at the petrifying change of frail humanity. That figure, late so faultless, those features, late so animated, now livid* rajdess, disgusting ! Oh, death ! death ! what a fessoti dobt thou convey to the young, and the proud, and the vain! The soul, the viviiyiug spark, the warm, the ethereal essence fled, and nature loathes the very form on which her do¬ tage hung ! ♦ ##*##* In an adjoining vault, within a deep and arched excavation, wrapped in a large serge, provided by Denise for a fer dif* ferent purpose, with no otber requjein, than our щА?$ $ no other service than our„ prayers, sleeps the uneoffined mould of De Beaufort I A flat stone closes the mouth ofthe sepulchre ; a cross, rudely carved, found among the smoke black ruins of tiie abbey, lies upon its surface ! Hest tbee! re$t thee, Dt Beaufort; Age*
Ages may pass away, empires and states may perish—calm as in the cenotaph of princes, thy dust will moulder ! embalm¬ ed in the tears of real regret, enshrined in the heart of true affection f ****** í* Why linger over the dull and cheer¬ less days which marked our sojournment within the eath's dark bowels, which shut us from the light of heaven ? rather let me hasten the progress of my ill-star¬ red storv, andin the words of Denise ex- plain the mystery of my deliverance. " Recall that memorable night," she exclaimed, seating herself beside me, "in which, under the promise of visiting the unfortunate count De Beaufort, you sub¬ mitted yourself to the guidance of the perfidious Drueille------" " Ah, deeply is it registered !" inter¬ rupting her: " that night, that fatal night, in whieh I knew myself an orphan, in wliicli, midst the dark passages of the prison, I -encountered the blood-stained corse
eorse of my father ! Well do I remem¬ ber that night !" shuddering, and vainly striving to check my tears. " Proceed, my friend : never ean that night be for¬ gotten !" " Scarce had yon lost sight of the dwelling," continued Denise, " when surrounded bj T the emissaries of power, I was arrested in the name of the conven¬ tion, and dragged from its shelter : know¬ ing the summary adjudgment of death, I pictured my fate inevitable, and pray r - ed to Heaven for fortitude in the last struggle ! I prayed too fbr my wretched country ; and musing on the noble blood whieh had already deluged the bosom of devoted France, prayed, fervently pray¬ ed, that mine might be the last offering ! —That night, and the two succeeding, I passed in confinement. On the third day I was visited by the police commis¬ sary, and was offered life and liberty, on the single condition of quitting the neigh¬ bourhood, and returning to it no more. I mused
I mused for an instant, the scheme for your enlargement darting like a ray from heaven on my brain." *Do you hesitate?' asked the com- missaiy. ' Oh no, no : yet what is liberty with¬ out the means of support ? If I imd any pro vision—if-—i f —'—' ť Resist, and the guillotine will be your provision/ interrupted the man. * The prefect wishes not to shed your blood, he only wdshes your absence.' 4 If for my lover-—if for myself 1 coukl obtain free passports into Switzerland/ I resumed, ' never, never more would we return to France.' ' Your lover I and who is your lover ?' asked the oommissary. 6 A young conscript/ I replied, * very sick, and very destitute; and yet per¬ haps the air of his native mountains might revive him.' * What is his name ľ к 4 Jaques Vinoni/
" He took out his book, * And your own ?' 4 Denise Farbe.' " Where is your lover?' ť At Valenciennes.' ' Should I obtain these passports, you will immediately remove to Valen¬ ciennes, and from thenee proceed, with all possible dispatch, to Switzerland ?' ť Oh yes/ eagerly ; ť at daylight to Valenciennes, and from Valenciennes as soon as strength permits my friend.' "The commissary left me; and, buoyed by a thousand wild hopes, I threw mj r - self on my knees, not only to petition pardon for the subterfuge I had already practised, but to pray for future success and protection. I thought of you, suf¬ fering and alone, yet I clung to the san¬ guine promise of your safety and your . enlargement. " Towards evening I was again sum¬ moned before the commissary ; he put a directorial pass into my hand, securing the
the persons of Jaques Vinoni and Denise Farbe ; and then again he w r arned me, on pain ofinstant death, to quit the neigh¬ bourhood. "Rising with the lark, day's harbinger, and hiding the precious pass in mj^ bo¬ som, behold me on the road to Valen¬ ciennes—my feelings light, my heart be- j r ond description grateful, planning a thousand schemes, and fanned by a thou¬ sand anticipations ; yet strength coped not with exertion, and exhausted bj r the scorching rays of a meridian sun, I enter¬ ed a lone inn on the road side. " Sorrow marked tlie features of tlie host¬ ess ; her eyes swam in tears, even at the moment her lips pronounced a greeting. An only son, drawn as a conscript, and compelled to serve in the national guard, in his close duty in the prison of------, had fallen a prey to disease, and had re¬ turned home to die. fi The prison of------!' I repeated, clasping my hands in transport. " The
"The bereaved mother viewed me with dismay ; my heart bled at her griefs, yet it jojed in the new field which opened to my view. I threw myself on m\ r knees before heiv— I besought her, by the being she mourned, by her hopes of hea¬ ven, to bestow on me the martial garb of that son, and to enrich me with her bless¬ ing. My prayer w T as heard; the 'wi¬ dow's mite' was myrrh and frankin- cense tome! I severed my hair; and disguising myself beyond all power of cognition, retraced mj r footsteps, "Mingling with the solcliery,and blind¬ ing with plausible tales and fresh inven¬ tions, 1 gained a ready access to the pri¬ son : I marked each nook, each corner ; and whilst digesting my deep-laid pro¬ ject, whilst watching the favourable mo¬ ment for its completion, by stealth, and sheltered by the cover of night, I suc¬ ceeded in removing to this vault such comforts as would be necessary in a tem¬ porary sojournment. 44 The
" The existence of this dark, vet blessed asjdum, together with the secret spring sealing up its entrance, had been reveal¬ ed to me by the late prefect, an ex-bro¬ ther ofthe order, who, conscious, by ex¬ perience, of the turbulence of the times, and the perishable reign of revolution¬ ary factions, imparted the knowledge as a safe shelter tor his suffering wife, should she survive the dream of his power. " Alreadj' may we trace good out of evil !" exclaimed the energetic Denise, raising her clasped hands to heaven ; " but for the self-sacrifice of my angel mistress, wberenow had been her child ?" I spoke not—I bent my head upon my bosom : alas ! my heart was too full of my lost De Beaufort tojóin in the ac¬ knowledgment. " At length the night dawned destin¬ ed to seal or crush my hopes," pursued Denise. "By letter I bad apprized tbe count De Beaufort of the project; I had furnished
furnished him with a file to free him from bondage, with a military cloak to veil him from recognition : in case of emer¬ gency, I had imparted to him the sign and countersign; and midnight, the hour for my tour of duty, which was to sta¬ tion me a sentinel in the avenue leading to a low postern, opening beneath the rampart, was the period named for the hazardous enterprise. During the te¬ dious decline of that eventful evening, I hid the ball, wrapped in the written inti¬ mation, in my bosom, and hovered around your dwelling. I joyed İn the quick ad¬ vance of darkness, for the pitchy black¬ ness of the heavens augured favour and success : without fear, beneath some loose rubbish bj r the garden wicket, I depo¬ sited the rope-ladder, the pass for your deliverance, and shoeless, and almost breathless* stole through a gap in the hedge: watehing the most favourable mp r ment, the grains of sand were hurled at your window ; the ball passed saiely from vol. in. i, my
my hand into yours, and, swift as an ar¬ row from the bow% with the same sound¬ less caution I retreated. Alone, in the long-coveted station, pacing the stone- arched passages, the last exertion ivas soon accomplished : the count De Beau¬ fort fled unsuspected from the dungeon ; and, by the aid of a false key, passing through the postern, regained his free¬ dom." She paused; sobs swelled her bosom - - tears of bitterness streamed down her cheeks. " Would that he had submitted to my guidance Î" she at length resumed — " would that alone he had sought tbe ruined abbey, and left the accomplish¬ ment of j r our deliverance to me ! But Heaven's wdll be done ! Youtli and love spurned all caution ; and yielding to the vehemence of his entreaties, I furnished bim ivith every necessary instruction, and promised, soon after the exchange of the guard, to join him in the ruin. Alas ! alas !
«las ! jou know the rest. Had the count de Beaufort lived, after the close and im¬ mediate search had terminated, as Jaques Vinoni and Denise Farbe, this passport would have guaranteed your safe flight into Switzerland. As it is------" " And jou —j r ou ?" throwing my arms round her neck, my heart swelling with painful, grateful admiration — " you¬ you, Denise?" " Trust me/' forcing a smile, " I would have laboured for mj r own,safety ; and if discovered, if condemned, joyfully ivould I have encountered death in a cause so precious." Heroic, exemplarjr woman! matchless, matchless friend ! Yet what eulogy can be so great as the unvarnished recital of thy own actions ?
1 2 CHAP-
CHAPTER XI. Three long weeks hadDe Beaufort been numbered wdth those who have been, and still did we inhabit his sepulchral vault —still, drooping and heart-struck, did I nightly visit the last bed of his rest, and shed on the precious symbol of our faith the tears of sorrowing widowhood : there, with religious awe, did I unfold the written memoir ofmy mother, the little packet so long and so carefulty treasured in the faithful bosom of Denise : kneel¬ ing by the sickly lamp, communing, as it were, wdth the dead, did I imbibe the counsels and cherish the warning of her example. " Woefully, w r oefully can I testify, sin bears its own sting ! guilt, however ho¬ neyed its allurements, engenders the cer¬ tain poison of destruction !" Such
Such were the words of my mother— such the voice which seemed to speak from the tomb. " The veil of sophistrj^ is withdrawn," she wrote. " Helena, innocent, desert¬ ed child! should your hand ever grasp this paper, close not your eyes against the catalogue of a mother's guilt ! If re¬ morse can atone for crime, I am cleai.s- ed !—if misery, if tears wrung from the heart's core, can expunge transgression, I may meekly hope for pardon ! My nights have been nights of bitterness, my days have been days of wailing; I have looked inward, and shuddered at tbe in¬ spection—shuddered at the leper spots of sin ! Think that the spirit of your mother cautions—think that her voice pierces from the grave ! Be wary, and be saved ! mistrust ever the incitements of the heart, and reason will npt slumber ! Remember that the free indulgence of the will, the uncurbed latitude of the passions, the fatal sophistry of delusive h 3 opinion,
opinion, the mad zeal of unbridled en¬ thusiasm, are gilded toils to f cateh the slumbering soul—are nets and snares spread in the footpaths of youth, to be¬ wilder and mislead ! Prudence, mode¬ ration, and virtue, ean alone guide to happiness: for aş sure as misery is the offspring of vice, so sure is bliss the legi¬ timate inheritance of rectitude! Am¬ bition made me a wife—passion made me an alien to gratitude and to honour. I slumbered o'er my duties—I neglected my ehild—I dishonoured my husband— I deceived the trusting heart of confi¬ dence, and fled and slumbered in the arms of mj r sedueer ! Oh ! short, short was that slumber !—Conscience awoke : her scorpion sting was deep and deadly ! it darted through my soul—it poisoned the current of enjoyment—it turned all to doubt, dismay, and horror \ for— * Remorse» ьЫ ne er forsakes us— Slie tracks our rapid step, Announcing all * Of wrat It, ¡Hid woe, ancf punishment that bufes us/ " Though
44 Though endless be my penance, my story is short. The marquis de Chateau- roux saw me—loved me—raised me from indigence—hugged to his bosom the des¬ tined punishment of his own disobedi¬ ence; for İn leading me exulting to the altar, he braved the penalty of his pa¬ rent's curse! Alarmed at the wrath of a father dreadful in power, trembling lest the dear-purchased prize should be wrested from his arms, he changed his name, and sought an Eden of his oivn. You know the rest, my daughter-—the fell destroyer of his hopes—the fatal lure which blistered peace and honour!— Why then should I pollute your car with the detail of art and ingratitude? —why paint your innocent cheek with the blush of shame ?—why pang your chaste heart by lingering o'er a mother's crime ? We fled to France. At Peze¬ nas, in Languedoc, the retributive voice of conscience spoke in the shaft of fate; De Beaufort drooped; * death came like L 4 a blast
a blast from the desert, and laid his head low.' Appalled, stunned with the dou¬ ble pressure of remorse and woe, whilst mourning the only worldly stay my guilt had left me, I was summoned to the aid of a fainting stranger : it was the son of the De Beaufort I mourned, eome on the errand of virtuous affection, to plead in a father's ear the eause ofa sor¬ rowing, deserted mother." I paused—my hand dropped the pa¬ per ; painful agonizing recollections re¬ vived ; I drooped my head on the cold stone whicli covered that son, that early champion in the cause of honour; and as I fearfully sickened at the world's fatal con¬ tamination, as I traced the strange coin¬ cidence, blotting alike the feme of each De Beaufort, I felt the inefficacy of hu¬ man strength—I trembled at the mag¬ nitude of human presumption í Forget¬ ful that the longest life is as a dream, a mere episode in the page of eternity, man dares the mandates of Omnipotence, and labour
labours out the means of his own de¬ struction ! Sympathizing in woes so si¬ milar to my own, I struggled against the rising tide of feeling, and chasing away my blinding tears, resumed the memoir: " Consigned to the last receptacle of frail humanity, De Beaufort slept wdtb his forefathers; and I, bereaved of the only charm whieh had stayed the voice of conscience, left to solitude and thought, mourned, too late, the lapse of honour. " The mist faded ; not one single lure remained to cheat me—sleep forsook my piliow, remorse preyed upon ray life; the wrongs of my husband spoke in thunder, and you—you, my child—Holy saints ! your remembered endearments, your smiles, your caresses, were as scorpion stings to peace. I could not fly from myself, I could not shut out the appall¬ ing phantoms—my past actions were my scourge, and health yielded to the con¬ flict. " Witb distraction flashing from my h 5 eyes,
eyes', and fever lurking in my veins, I fled from Pezenas—I journeyed without aim, and without hope : peace was the beacon which beckoned me onward— Alas ! ľ forgöt that I bad murdered peace, that I carried its bane in m v own bo- m/ som. A wretched wanderer, I traversed Savoy, and from thence pierced into the very heart of France. 44 Near the little town of Etampes Heaven gave me succour in the form of Denise. Fainting, almost dying, my servants lifted me from the carriage, and bore me to á cottage on the road-side. It was the lowly dwelling of the virt li¬ ons Farbes. Denise watched over me; she soothed mj T pangs—she lightened the season of merited trial—she became my attendant, my companion, and nty friend. If you should ever behold h^r, Helena— if by her hand j*ou receive this transcript ofmy woes—if, after d^h, my frailties find pardon in j r our bosom, accept her —support her—treasure her virtues in the
the deepest recess of jour heart ; for, like sterling ore, she has passed the world's fiery ordeal, uncontaminated, undefiled! " Years wore away in sameness and dejection ; and not till seized by the in¬ satiate fanatics of Frencli liberty—not till stripped of evtrj r possession, and cast with the common herd into a loathsome prison, did I feel how guilt strengthens the hold on life. My innocent Denise, resigned and submissive, yielded her fate unmurmuring to Heuvenl I, racked with a thousand tortures, trembled at the threat of death. Ah ! bear with me, my ehild ! curse not my memoiy Γ I parley¬ ed with the destroyer, and purchased a few flitting j r ears with the surrender of myself. "My crimes, Helena, are laid bare be- fore you—my heart probed to its very core. Oh, treasure the fatal lesson, and guard your thoughts from wavering! View life as it is, divest it of the world's fallacious colouring, tamper not a mo- h 6 ment
ment with its temptations* abjure its pro¬ mises, and distruşi, yourself. Happiness, my daughter, the philosopher's sterne, the universal search of nature, dwells but with innocence 1 It is no illusive plian¬ tom, no offspring of the brain; shunning the vitiated må the gay, it harbours in the contented mind, it glows hi the ex¬ ercise of philanthropj', it speaks in the pure and pious heart ! Tottering on the brink of eternity, seeing w ith the eyes of truth, and weighing with the balance of experience, ah! surely, surely, though my youth has been a youth of folly, my age an age of shame, the counsel of my lips may be heeded, the warning of my example may be efficient. Adieu, my child! Sorrow saps my life—my eyes grow dim—my feeble handshakes! —Think t>f me*—pray for me ! I dare not appeal to your fethet*— yet he bas a heart full of gentleness and mercy : oh, should he peruse these lines, sbould he learn that my bleeding bosom «raves na rest
rest but the tomb, perhaps, even to a wreteh like me, his compassion may be extended : perhaps a tear may embalm the memory of happier hours. Blessed, blessed hope! it imparts comfort—it lightens the approach of death—it min¬ gles with those pious, those soothing in¬ spirations, which the world cannot give or take aw r ay ! " Helena, child of my love ! adieu for ever ! Ponder o'er my story—wear it in j'our soul—be my fell your security— my example your shield ! I dare not add a name^—Pray fervently—-pray for your heartbroken mother !" " There is joy in heaven over the sin¬ ner who repenteth," whispered Denise, taking the packet, and replacing it in her bosom. I rose from røy knees*—I threw my¬ self into her ainns.— - 4i Friend, comforter of my mother I" I faltered, ** dear pre¬ cious bequest! already bast thou been to me a treasure above dil price, a sup¬ porter
porter in the hour of trial. Oh, my mo¬ ther ! if thou hadst lived to this hour— if thou hadst known—if thou hadst seen— if-*-*-» " She is in heaven !" interrupted De¬ nise, mingling her tears with mine. 44 Peace be with their spirits !" I aspi¬ rated, " both—both in heaven !" and again I sunk trembling on the sepulchre. Denise moved slowly to my side; she took my hand—*' lf jour friend, if your supporter," she said, " still submit to my guidance." I turned doubtfully towards her. "Resolution must be exerted," she con¬ tinued, " and the effort for escape made.*' " Alas ! I would Uve, I would die in this vault," interrupting her, " You would yield to inertness—you would relinquish life without a struggle/' jresuraed Denise; " here iu this vault you would weep away your youth, for¬ getful that though Heaven has claimed the staff of your strength, it has leftji sciou
scion tó ding to—j r our child, j r our Eugenia." " We will fly to Schafhausen !" I ex¬ claimed, my eyes kindling with the mo¬ mentary fire of expectation. " This night, this very night," said Denise, " let us steal from tbese ruins: already has the search relaxed ; disguis¬ ed, and sheltered in darkness, our trust in Heaven, and upheld in the conscious¬ ness of a just cause, we will brave the danger, and seek our deliverance." " This night!" I fearfully repeated, mj r eyes intuitively sinking on the grave of De Beaufort She read what passed within.—*· Why defer it till to-morrow ?" she asked; "the pang will be as bitter." And then again she spoke of my child, and appealed to the feelings of the mo¬ ther, until she inspired ameiítluisiaám almost as ardent as her own. Denise still trusted in the security of her military garb; and I, wrapped in the
the long, cloak which had aided my De Beaufort's flight from the prison, trem¬ bled as the hour advanced. Still, and serene was that night, yet it shed no kindly influence on my bosom, nor imparted calmness to its sensations. Dreadful was the pang, when, for the last time, I knelt on the grave of my Eugenius ; my cheek was colourless as the stone, and not one tear distilling from my chilled heart—every wound of memory torn open—every pang re¬ doubled in tlie fearful conflict. My child ! my lost angel ! what a price didst thou ask—what a sacrifice didst tliou re¬ quire! I would have lived, I would have died by tlie side of thy Either, that together our bones miglit liave moulder¬ ed, and the same stone have pressed upon our bosoms: yes, without air, shut out from the light of heaven, i would have braved a living death; but for thee nur ture struggled—for thee, my Eugenia, thee, the last støy of my existence,, the last
last prop ofmy hopes. Oh, those hopes ! those struggles ! in my brain tbey live ; I feel them now, even now, gnawing like vultures, burning like fire, searing up every healthful spring of recollection, leaving nought but bitterness, despair, and woe. Curses rise to my tongue, hatred festers in my heart. Angerville, thou hast turned all to rancour! in thy death-groan mayst thou * * * * I have blotted out the curse, Anger¬ ville! Angerville! how can I sue mercy of Heaven, and withhold it from thee ? My mind is oppressed, my senses wandering. Father, forgive the frailty of tby crea¬ ture ! At tby shrine I have poured out my transgressions, and thou hast deigned to inspire me with hope. Withhold not tby grace—make me meek, and lowly, and forgiving—soften the bitterness of my feelings, and teach me to bless, even as I am blessed ! ****** I resume my pen— ï hasten the con¬ clusion
dusion of this tale of sorrow, this series of woe.—Without taxing my jaundiced mind with a retrospective view of past horrors — without lingering amid the ruins of the abbey, and commenting on the heart-pangs with which I tore my¬ self from a sanctualy so dear and so pre- cious-r-my child living in fancy, her voice sounding in the breeze, and her form mingling with each external object, be¬ hold me clinging to the firm support of Denise, and flyingas the pretended mis¬ tress of Jaques Vinoni» through a country bleeding at every pore—a country defa¬ ced and fellen, deprived erf its laws and of its altora, the only barriers to guilt, the only consolations to misfortune—now shuddering at the scenes of devastation and outrage, mow exposed to the scruti¬ ny and the taunts of wretches liardened by crime, and desperate in the triumphs of impiety, atheism, and rebellion. Sweet was the dream of maternal hope. as nearer and nearer we approached Seliafhausen ;
Sehafhausen; my eyes swam in tears, but they were tears of tenderness, tears of transport : I felt the soft breath of my child upon my cheek—already did she nestle in my bosom, already did she ex¬ punge the bitterest pangs of tbe past. Too acute, too exquisite for words, I hug¬ ged the sensations in my heart—I grasp¬ ed more firmly the hand of Denise ; but I chided not the slow progress of our ve¬ hicle, although my thoughts, flying on the wings of the wind, far, far outstripped its tardy movements, and pierced within the quiet home of madame Angerville. My pulse quickened as we advanced; and when the boundary of former walks, when the romantic pathways bordering the translucent Ubine met my eyes» my bosom heaved with mmgled and inde* scribable feelings. All the mother rising in my heart,* I bent forward to eateb tbe first glance of the house wbich contained my treasure. A sharp and sudden angle in tlie road **гшЫЫе*1
annihilated all hope and all sensation : God of nature ! how could I behold the ruins, the smoking ruins of that house, and live? Yet was the trance which stretched me in the arms of Denise but the mere semblance of death, for I re¬ vived to suffering and to madness» ***** é For months all was night-time spoke not of $rief, of joy, or of woe: mental imbecility' succeeded the heavy connects in my feelings : without notice I saw, without attention I heard, for that era of existence was a blank, unchequered by øne single ray of recollection, * * * ψ m * Waking as from a trance, the first feint ťtesh of reason found me on the ocean's feathered wave, in a small cabin, reclining on a bed, my ever-faithful, my ever-kind Denise bending over ше. A perfedt chaos, a wild confusion of ideas rushed upon my brain ; I tried to range tbem into order, to marshal my trials and my
my sorrows, but the fetal revisai frighten¬ ed sanity: I called upon my child-— upon De Beaufort—upon my father— upon my mother : I raved myself into exhaustion, and then I relapsed from in¬ sensibility into gloom. ******* In the Piano di Brolo, in the home of my infancy, recollection again redawned : touched as though by the fairy wand of magic, the morbid clouds of inanity dissipated—1 saw, I recognized, I found myself in the little study of my father! his l»ooks, his cscritoir, his table, his sofa, ail remaining as on the night when, for the last time, I knelt for his benison, w hen lingering in adieu, be pressed me with more than usual fervour to his bo¬ som. Wandering from object to object, my eyes fell on tbe weeping Claudine, on tbe venerable form of father Christian. A piercing shriek escaped me; I turn¬ ed, and throwing my arms around Denise —" Take
*—" Take me henœ —take me hence !" I -implored; " I cannot bear this house— I cannot bear these faces : take mc hence. or murder me !" " Daughter of misfortune ! daughter of sorrow !" pronounced the deep and well-remembered voice of father Chris¬ tian. Again I shrieked; and throwing my¬ self at his feet, bent my head to the earth. '* Wretched, irremediably wretched am I ; j r et, father, have mercy," 1 exclaimed, '* nor denounce the curse of Heaven upon me! I know misery, contamina¬ tion isin my touch—I know I have been the bane of all who have ever loved me ; yet, father, liave mercy ! have mercy !" " Poor mourner !" resumed the man of God, " Heaven's blessing be upon thee, for the contrite and the sore laden sue it not in vain í llcfleetion, and time, and tenderness, can best extract the festering thorn of calamity : prayer, my ehild, is the only sure antidote to the
the ills of life; acceptable to the God ivho created us are the sacrifices of a humble, penitent, contrite spirit. He eravcth but the free-will offering of the soul, for in the midst of judgment he remembereth mercy !" Such were the precepts, such the gen¬ tle, tlie encouraging admonitions with which this pious saint wooed the stray sheep to the fold. He infused peace— he inspired confidence—he strengthened faith. For hours eaeh day did he pray by my side—did he teach me the pure doctrine of Christian love, extracting irom my heart tbe jarring principles of hatred and malevolence. M j' feelings gradually relaxed; tears cooled the fever in my brain ; I could weep on the bosom of Denise —I could even dwell on my losses as on a past agonizing dream, and question, and lis¬ ten to the sad catastrophe which had be¬ reaved me of my last earthly hope, with¬ out the start of madness. Heaven for¬ give
give me ifl wrong him ! but to the machi¬ nations of Angerville do I ascribe the fetal conflagration. Wretched, wretched man ! how has passion and misapplied talent heaped on thy own head the burning, the unquenchable fire of re¬ morse ! But two days previous to our return to Sehafhausen, in the dead of night, wdien all was wrapt in security and sleep, the lone house of шЫате Angerville was beset by an armed banditti : no eye noted the besiegers—no ear caught the fearful echo of their tread ; the approach and the death-stroke were one ! Smoke and flames spoke the devastation—groans and shrieks, and lamentations, filled the breeze ; yet ere succour arrived, silence and gloom prevailed—like the deep calm succeeding the war of elements, all was tranced in stillness. One wretched female was dragged alive from the ruin. Denise visited her ; she saw her in her last agonies ; she heard a confirmation
confirmation of every fear. That night, fhat dreadful night, my Eugenia retired in the bosom of madame Angerville. Alas ! the coming day dawned cmi their smoking bier! the bodies were sought for in vain ; yet how could their fate be averted ? ****** With feelings harrowed and perplex¬ ed, Denise listened to the dying sufferer : betwixt the low moanings of anguish slie heard of an eager inquiry—ofa close search ; she heard enough to fill her with dread—to convince her that I was the being pursued—to make lier grateful for our long sojournment in the vaults of the abbej r —to renervc every eflbrt for my preservation ! She fled with precipi¬ tancy : she returned, not to weep, but to act ; in every step she fancied a pur¬ suer—in every face she pictured an emis¬ sary of Angerville's ; nor did her anxi¬ ous heart know rest, or her mind the bliss of security, till, by the side of her vol. ш. m senseless
senseless and unresisting charge, she traced the receding shore, and beheld nought but the heavens and the ocean. Then the burst of praise trembled on her lips ; then the fire of devotion ani¬ mated her features ; then, snatched be- j r ond the reach of the persecuting fiend who had dealt such wide, sueh deep des¬ truction, she bent her meek head in grate¬ ful security. ***** # What had I to do with the world ? what had I to do with the haunts of men ? Wounded, sick almost unto death, health broken» and peace destroyed, all my thoughts took wing to heaven ; a life of profession, of penance, and of praj'er, was all which offered consolation : in the season of confidence, of romance, and youthful security, I had shrunk from the vocation, I had scoffed at ** The barren sister, Chaunting faint hvmns to the cold fruitless raoon :"
now
now my stricken heart hailed the knowm wdshes of my buried father, and turned to the garb of Santa Maria cli Tindaro, as to the last shroud of its rest. Calmed by the precepts of the hoty Christian, viewing with indifference all sublunary things, soon ivere my claims on tlie remnant of my father's wealth consigned to charitable purposes, and Denise and myself to the cold shelter of a religious cell. Together we commen¬ ced our noviciate—together we assumed the veil of profession—together ive pray¬ ed for past transgressions, and performed frequent masses for the repose of the dead : but, alas ! misfortune had not yet expended her last arrow ; still did a link remain in the once-long chain of social interest to sooth my wretched being. In less than a year, father Christian was called to reap the harvest of a youtii de¬ voted to integrity and usefulness, of an age spent in prayer. Five years after, Denise, my tried M 2 companion,
companion, the dear, dear friend of my soul—-she too sickened, and in my arms she died : I saw her placed in her last narrow bed—I saw the earth close over her, and I felt isolated and alone. Whole nights waned in meditation and in self- scrutinj r . I tried to pluck out the rank weeds which sprung up in my heart, and to engraft in their stead piety, faith, and submission ; but, alas ! I had lost my prop, my counsellor, my controller, and all within grew wild and desolate. ****** At first the nuns fled me in terror— now they judge me harmless, but still they call me mad! They call me mad because I shun, the comforts of my cell, and pass the fearful hours of midnight in the aisles, in the cloisters, and oo the grave of my friend !— they call me mad because I trace my cherub in tlie clouds, and hail her on the moonbeams—be¬ cause I commune aloud with my own heart, and brood on De Beaufort, on my
my father, and on my mother, till fency conjures their shadows ! ******* Stranger! fellow-sojourner ! I am not mad ! I am alive to the past, and zealous for the future ! I bow in penance, I hum¬ ble my contrite head to the dust, I pray the aid of an Almighty Comforter—I pray, I fervently pray for " the time of my fading, fbr the blast that shall scatter my leaves! for that morrow when the traveller shall come—when his eye shall search the field, but shall find me no more '"' " Peace be to thy spirit !" I articu¬ lated, closing the sad record of suffer¬ ance, " misguided, erring, wretched Helena ! victim ofa too-confiding heart, of an enthusiasm dangerous and destruc¬ tive—of a sensibility, the nightshade of peace, the bane of promise ! Deep may M 3 the
the lesson stok \ wide ntay the lesson spread ! may it .stay tiie step of folly t may it season the intemperance of youth ! may it instil the virtue of obedience, and strengthen tbe slippery footing of inde¬ cision! Bewildered in the mazes of ro¬ mance, the tempter stole unsuspected - r imagination seized the reins, and tranced in tbe beguiling dream, forgetful of the parent caution, thou didst adventure in the labyrinths of deceit ! Fatal lapse, dire hardihood ľ how stealing is the progress of error ! crime crowds upon crime, one evil thougbt engenders another, one un¬ warrantable practice springs from an¬ other: little did thy weak judgment foresee the remorse thou wert heaping on thy own head—the years of penance, the years of misery, thy disobedience in¬ sured ! Alas ! true is it, that out ofthe heart proceedeth all that is evil, all that warps
warps and mildews the page of life ! It is the heart then we should suspect, the heart we should control, the heart which waylays reason, overwhelming principle, and misleading action ! Dreadful is that age when youth holds forth no consola¬ tory reminiscence—when anxiety ob¬ structs, and sorrow and regret arise—*· when dread shadows the pass to eternity» and guilt pulls back to? sufferance and to life ! Yet, even then, through repentances Heaven holds forth a peace-offering—re¬ ligion casts decair far behind—and though j^outh be wasted, and strength passed, reformation is never hopeless* contrition never unaided ! The wanderer may lay down his burthen—he may re¬ turn to the track he has forsaken ; the ab* solving balm will be administered, aad faith and hope make straight the way before him ! Glorious
Glorious was the morning whieh suc¬ ceeded the elemental strife; nature seemed hushed in tranquillity; the breeze came laden with a thousand odours, and when madame D'Albamar and myself emerged from the heavy walls of Santa Maria di Tindaro, the broad expanse of ocean undulated in pro¬ found calm. " Ah ! how different are the storms of life!" 1 mournfully articulated, musing o'er the sorrow T s of the hapless nun. " In creation they arise, they ravage, thej r pass away, and the sun again shines upon all that is lovely !—In life, fate's threatening clouds gather—they burst, and heavy is the wreck which memory records ! Hap¬ less sister of Santa Maria di Tindaro ! may thy story live in my brain í —may thy example, taking root in my heart, check the incitements of passion !—may 1 dwell
I dwell on the invariable penalty of sin, until its vivid flowers fade—until the mists of sophistry, parting like vapours before the orb of day, disclose the pier¬ cing thorns w T hich lurk beneath its co¬ louring ! " Sorrowing mourner, now ' esky'd and sainted !' blessed be the storm which drove me to the grave of thy rest ! that, profiting by the awful lesson transmit¬ ted in penance and in tears, I may re¬ turn to the world, to the duties of my calling, strengthened in the right, upheld in the path of honour—truth the standard of my actions—virtue, eternity before my eyes ! that treasuring the recollec¬ tion of tby temptations, and thy early fall, I may mistrust the corruptions of inv own nature, the incitements of mv own heart!—that bearing thv trials on the
the faithful tablet of my memory, I may ever, in the language of the poet, exclaim— " Teach my best reason reason, My best will teach rectitude.**
FINIS.
Printed by J, Darting, Leadenhall-Street, London.
